projects/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: " Projects"
---

# Current  

- [Six Degrees of Francis Bacon](http://sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com). Oversaw site redesign as part of the SDFB Team at CMU.
- Print and Probability. Part of an interdisciplinary team of literature scholars, statisticians, and computer scientists at CMU who are using optical character recognition to identify printers of early modern books based on broken type.
- [Early Modern Digital Agendas Network](https://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/75a522aecd79d10778fd5d8d31b1d1a5). Created a network visualization of the three EMDA seminars at the Folger Shakespeare Library for a [blog post](https://collation.folger.edu/2017/10/report-network-analysis/)
- [Detecting meter in early modern verse](https://github.com/jrladd/scansion)
- Dedication networks in EEBO-TCP texts (coming soon)

<br/>

# Past  

- [University Miscellany Network](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/2f97fe222cfd7e66c655). Bipartite graph representing participants in university collections during the 1650s and 1660s.
- [Endless Monument][bot]. A Twitter bot for Spenser's Epithalamion ([more information here][post]).
- [Spenser's Color Wheel](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/e0a9612c16d4ede17221a1af4d1ce0d9). Data visualization and deformance project exploring Spenser's use of color terms in *The Faerie Queene*. Allows users to rearrange Spenser's color lines into unique poems. [[source](https://github.com/jrladd/colorwheel)]
- [Marvel Network](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/c76799aa63efd7176bd9006f403e854d). A demonstration of NetworkX and D3 Force-Directed graphs for digital humanities applications, using sample data from Marvel comics. [[source](https://github.com/jrladd/marvel_network)]


[bot]: http://twitter.com/endlessmonument
[post]: /endless-monument.html

Commit message:

update project page with network navigator, images

projects/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: " Projects"
---

- *[Six Degrees of Francis Bacon](http://sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com)*. Oversaw site redesign as part of the SDFB Team at CMU.

![](/images/gallery/sixdegrees.png)

- [Network Navigator](http://dh-web.hss.cmu.edu/network_navigator/). Web-based tool for network analysis, focus on quantitative network metrics.

![](/images/navigator.png)

- Print and Probability. Part of an interdisciplinary team of literature scholars, statisticians, and computer scientists at CMU who are using optical character recognition to identify printers of early modern books based on broken type.

- [*Early Modern Digital Agendas* Network](https://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/75a522aecd79d10778fd5d8d31b1d1a5). Created a network visualization of the three EMDA seminars at the Folger Shakespeare Library for a [blog post](https://collation.folger.edu/2017/10/report-network-analysis/)

![](/images/gallery/emda.png)

- [Detecting meter in early modern verse](https://github.com/jrladd/scansion)

- Dedication networks in EEBO-TCP texts (coming soon)

![](/images/dedication.png)

- [University Miscellany Network](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/2f97fe222cfd7e66c655). Bipartite graph representing participants in university collections during the 1650s and 1660s.

![](/images/miscellany.png)

- [Endless Monument][bot]. A Twitter bot for Spenser's Epithalamion ([more information here][post]).

![](/images/spenser.png)

- [Spenser's Color Wheel](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/e0a9612c16d4ede17221a1af4d1ce0d9). Data visualization and deformance project exploring Spenser's use of color terms in *The Faerie Queene*. Allows users to rearrange Spenser's color lines into unique poems. [[source](https://github.com/jrladd/colorwheel)]

![](/images/gallery/colorwheel.png)

- [Marvel Network](http://bl.ocks.org/jrladd/c76799aa63efd7176bd9006f403e854d). A demonstration of NetworkX and D3 Force-Directed graphs for digital humanities applications, using sample data from Marvel comics. [[source](https://github.com/jrladd/marvel_network)]

![](/images/marvel.png)


[bot]: http://twitter.com/endlessmonument
[post]: /endless-monument.html
