---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# An account of the taking John Penruddock, Esq, Mr. Hugh Grove, and others,
at Southmolton in the County of Devon, March 15. 1654. by Col. Unton Crokes
troop of horse. : And the true state of the pretended articles of Mr.
Penruddock, &c.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. An Account of the taking John Penruddock, Eſq Mr. Hugh Grove, and others, at Southmolton in the County of Devon, March 15.1654. by Col.Ʋnton Crokes Troop of Horſe. And the true ſtate of the pretended Articles of Mr. Penruddock, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=172438&page=1)

## 1\. An Account of the taking John Penruddock, Eſq Mr. Hugh Grove, and
others, at Southmolton in the County of Devon, March 15.1654. by Col.Ʋnton
Crokes Troop of Horſe.  
And the true ſtate of the pretended Articles of Mr. Penruddock, &c.

MR. Penruddock, Mr. Grove, with the Commander in Chief and others, had taken
up their Quarters at the Falcon Inne, and about ten a clock at night the
Collonel poſſeſſed the Town with his Forces, and divided his Souldiers to
ſeverall ſtations, and with a party aflaulted the Falcon Inne, where for a
time a hot diſpute was made, from the Houſe, but at length they ſallyed forth
and skumiſhed, and cryed Quarter, and ſome were hurt, and Mr. Grove was taken
priſoner, and others endeavoured to eſcape, and afterwards Mr. Penruddock upon
ſearch in the houſe was taken Priſoner, and convey­ed a Priſoner to the Guard,
the Collonel all this while not ſpeaking with them.

Afterwards, the Col. being buſie in reducing the Forces in the George Inne,
word being brought unto him, that Mr. Penruddock was ta­ken, the Col. ſent for
him from the Guard, and told him that hee heard that hee was a Commander, and
wiſhed him to uſe his power with them in the George, to yeeld without effuſion
of any more blood, telling him, that if they would yeeld, hee would give them
Quarter, and intercede to the Protector for their lives.

And ſoon after, the Collonel and Mr. Penruddock went to the George Inne, where
all that Mr. Penruddock could ſay or do, prevailed nothing, they within
reviling him, telling him hee had betrayed them, and ſaid that they abhorred
his motion, and fired upon him for a farewell.

The Col. afterwards proceeded by force to the reducement of the Inne, and ſent
to the Mayor of the Town for his aſſiſtance, and re­ſolved to try the utmoſt
extremity by fire and Sword: And all things were prepared and ready for
execution, and they from the houſe diſcharged a volley of ſhot, which did ſome
execution, Mr. Mayor being ſhot in the buttocks, and went home. And this was
all that came upon Mr. Penruddocks endeavours.

After ſome farther procedure, made by the Col. They in the George Inne being
reduced to all extremity, they in the Inne deſired a par­ley, and that
granted, they deſired Life, Liberty and Eſtate, and to keep their monies. The
Col. anſwered, that thoſe conditions were Paramount his power, but that if
they would immediately yeeld themſelves priſoners, and come forth in the
ſtreet, he would ſo inter­cede to the Protector, that they ſhould not bee
injured by any power under Heaven, either in Life, Liberty or Eſtate. Here
were the only conditions, and made with thoſe in the George Inne only, nothing
at all relating to Mr. Penruddock or Mr. Grove, who were priſo­ners long
before.

Hereupon 5. perſons, viz. Mr. Wake, two of the Mr. Colliers, and two others
came out of the George to the Col. and undertooke that 28. men horſe and armes
would immediately follow them, and ſo many in the George ſhould be delivered
up; and the Col. appoint­ing ſome of his own men to take an account of the men
at the door the 5. perſons only came forth, the reſt came not to the Col. to
the door, but took an opportunity, and eſcaped out at the back doores: or hid
themſelves in hay mowes or other places.

The Collonel thus abuſed, and ſo free of all treaty; and yet conceiving and
finding thoſe 5. perſons to bee men of worth and valour, would not take any
advantage againſt them; but continued his reſolution to intercede to the
Protector for them, which hee did as ef­fectually as hee could, and ſaved
their Lives and Eſtates, although they were condemned unto death, the Col.
uſing his utmoſt en­deavours to have had them ſet at Liberty alſo, but could
not prevail, although his Importunities were great and many on their behalf,
as is evident and known.

When Mr. Penruddock heard of this ſucceſs at the George Inne, and that the
Collonel had promiſed to intercede for the Lives of thoſe 5. Gentlemen: Hee
told the Col. that hee ought to be included, becauſe hee had uſed his
endeavour to reduce them, although it took no effect. The Col. replied, that
there were no Articles given, only a promiſe to intercede for thoſe 5 perſons,
and that as for the reſt in the Inne after the ſaid 5 perſons came out, they
would not ſtay the reſult, but had made their eſcape, and left the ſaid 5
perſons to mercy.

Mr. Penruddock inſiſted ſtill, to have had formal Articles made in writing,
for his own advantage, after hee was a Priſoner, never pretending to any
before, or to any afterwards, but for uſing his endeavour to perſwade the ſaid
ſurrender, which took no effect. And yet the Col. uſed all the means hee could
to have ſaved his Life alſo as a Gent. of great hopes and fortune. But could
never bee drawne by him to betray his truſt, though tempted with 500. 1. then
with a 1000. 1. then with his whole Eſtate, too mean conſiderations to weigh
down truth and honeſty.

And whereas it hath been by ſome alleaged, that the Collonel ſhould ſay, to
ſome of the Priſoners, that if their General Wagſtaffe had been there, hee
ſhould have been uſed as they were, but that now hee was likely to fare worſe.
It was ſpoken only to this purpoſe, that had hee been with them, hee ſhould
have had air Quarter as a ſouldier, but being eſcaped, hee might bee abuſed,
or miſcarry by other hands.

And whereas alſo it hath been reported, that the Protector ſhould ſay; that
had the Col. gave Articles, hee would have allowed them; The Protector never
ſaid any ſuch thing to the Col. but on the contrary, wrote under his hand,
that hee would not ſpare Mr. Penruddock upon any conſideration whatſoever, But
a ful diſcovery of the whole deſign.

Theſe things the Col. can make appear, by the intercourſe of Letters betwixt
the Protector, Mr. Penruddock and himſelf, and by ſuf­ficient witneſſes, and
Appeals to the Honorable Lords, whether theſe Interloquatory paſſages in
furore belli, and dark night, can in the leaſt amount to Articles, or whether
upon theſe ſurmiſes, the Col. ought in the leaſt to bee clouded or blemiſhed;
Hee proteſting in the ſight of God, that he never ſigned or ſealed any
Articles whatſoever, or ever made any promiſe, than as to thoſe 5. perſons as
aforeſaid.

A more full and exact account of all that paſſed, hee hopes ſhortly to preſent
to the view of the world, for the full cleer­ing of his injured innocence, if
hee may bee ſo permitted to do.

[Home](/)

Date: 1654  

