---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A sermon preached at VVhite-hall, on the 24. of March, 1621 Beeing the day
of the beginning of his Maiesties most gracious reigne. By the Bishop of S.
Dauids.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=1)

A SERMON PREACHED at White-Hall, on the 24. of March, 1621.

Beeing the day of the beginning of his MAIESTIES most gracious Reigne.

By the Bishop of S. Dauids.

LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON, and IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Maiestie. 1622.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. PSAL. 21. 6,7. For thou hast set him as Blessings for euer: thou hast made him glad with the ioy of thy countenance. Because the King trusteth in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most High hee shall not miscary. 

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=2)

## 1\. PSAL. 21. 6,7. For thou hast set him as Blessings for euer:Or, giuen
him. thou hast made him glad with the ioy of thy countenance. Because the King
trusteth in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most High hee shall not miscary.
Or, not be mooued.

MY Text begins, where eue­ry good man should end; that is, in Blessing. Not an
Esau; but he cryes, when the Blessing is gone, Genes. 27.Gen. 27.34. This
Psalme is a Thankesgiuing for Dauid; for the King. In Thankesgiuing, two
Bles­sings: One, in which God blesseth vs; and 1 for that wee giue thankes:
The other, by 2 which we blesse God: For he that praiseth him, and giues him
thanks, is said to blesse him. Exod. 18.Exod. 18.10.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=3)Now wee can
no sooner meet Blessing in the Text, but we presently find two Au­thors of it,
God and the King: For there is God Blessing the King; and the King Bles­sing
the people. And a King is euery way in the Text: For Dauid the King set the
Psalme for the People; and the People, they sing the Psalme reioycing for the
King. And all this is, that the King may re­ioyce in thy strength, O Lord, v.
1.Verse 1. And when this Psalme is sung in Harmonie, between the King and the
People, then there is Blessing.

This Psalme was sung in Ierusalem; But the Musicke of it is as good in the
Church of Christ, as in their Temple. Nor did the spi­rit of Prophecie in
Dauid, so fit this Psalme to him, as that it should Honour none but
himselfe:S. Hieron. S. August. Iansen. Calu. Lorin. ibid. No; For in this the
learned a­gree; That the letter of the Psalme, reads Dauid; that the Spirit of
the Psalme, eyes Christ: that the Analogie in the Psalme is for euery good
King, that makes Dauid his ex­ample, and Christ his God.

The Psalme in generall is a Thankesgi­uing [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=3) for the happy
estate of the King. In particular, it is thought a fit Psalme to be recited
when the King hath recouered health; or when a gracious King begins his
Reigne: Because these times are Times of blessing from the King: And these
are, or ought to be, times of Thankesgiuing from the people. My Text then is
in part for the day: For I hoped well it would haue been Tempus
restaurationis, a time of perfect re­storing for the Kings health, and thankes
were due for that: And it is Dies creationis, the Anniuersary day of his
Crowne; and thankes is due for that. And there is great reason, if you will
receiue the Blessing, that you giue the Thankes.

The Text it selfe is a reason of that which is found v. 5.Verse 5. There it is
said, that God hath layd great dignitie and honour vpon the King. And here is
the Meanes by which, and the Reason why hee hath layd it there. So three parts
wil diuide the Text, and giue vs order in proceeding. The first is the 1
Meanes, by which God layes honour vpon the King. Not honour onely, which they
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=4) all haue as
Kings: but that great honour in his saluation, which attends good and gracious
Kings. And the Meanes are two-fold 1 in the Text: Dando & Laetificando, By
Giuing, and by Ioying. By giuing the King as a Blessing to the people; Thou
hast giuen 2 him, or set him as Blessings for euer. And by Ioying the King for
blessing the people: Thou hast made him glad with the ioy of thy 2
Countenance. The second is the Reason both of the Honour and the Meanes of
laying it vpon the King: And that is, Quia sperat; Because the King puts his
trust in the Lord. 3 The third is the Successe, which his Ho­nour shall haue
by his Hope, That in the mercy of the most High he shall not bee mooued, he
shall not miscarie.

1 I beginne at the first: The Meanes by which God adds Honour euen to the
Maie­iestie of Princes. And because that doubles in the Text, I will take the
first in order, which is, Dando: Thou layest great Ho­nour vpon the King, by
giuing or setting him, as Blessings for euer. In which Meanes of laying
Honour, the circumstances are three.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=4)And the first
of the three tells vs what a 1 King is; and that's worth the knowing: And
marke the Holy Ghost, how he begins. He describes not a King by any of his
Hu­mane infirmities, such as all men haue: And no meane ones are registred of
Dauid, the particular King spoken of: No, that had beene the way to dishonour
the King; which is no part of Gods intention. But hee begins at that which
crownes the Crowne it selfe. He is Benedictio, a Blessing, and no lesse, to
the people. And therefore in all things, and by all men, is to bee spo­ken of,
and vsed as a Blessing.

Now it is one thing for a King to bee blessed in himselfe, and another thing
to be giuen or set vp, as a Publike Blessing to other men. Dauid was both, and
he speakes of both. A King then is a Blessing to, or in himselfe (as the
Septuagint and Tremellius giue the words: Dedisti illi benedictiones; Thou
hast giuen blessings to him) when by Gods grace hee is Particeps
sanctificationis, Partaker of Gods hallowing Spirit. For no man, King or
Subiect, can be blessed in [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=5) his soule without
Religion and Holinesse. And if these bee counterfeites, such also is his
Blessednesse.

But a King is giuen as a Blessing to o­thers, when in the riches of Gods grace
vpon him, he is made Diuinae Bonitatis fons medius, A mediate fountaine of
Gods goodnesse and bounty streaming to the people; When he turnes the graces
which God hath giuen him, to the benefite of them which are committed to him.
For marke the Heauens, and the Earth will learne. God did not place the Sunne
in the heauens onely for heighth, but that it might haue power to Blesse the
inferiour world, with Beames, & Light, and Warmth, and Motion. Dauid was thus,
and thus was Christ, and such is euery King in his pro­portion, that sets vp
these for his example. It is not easie to match Dauid; but a better example
then Christ cannot be found. And therefore when Clem. Alex. had described a
King indeed,Lib. 1. stro. One that is Beatus & Bene­dicens, a blessed and a
blessing King; Or, if you will, as it is here in the Abstract, Ipsa
be­nedictio, [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=5)
Blessing it selfe, He is  [...]t Cumsmodi est Dominus: Such as is Christ.
There, the perfect example of Blessing.

Now while the King is said to bee a Blessing, let me put you in mind that
there is a double Benediction. Descendens vna; Al­tera ascendens, One
descending, and another ascending. That which Descends, is the Blessing of
Benefit; That is the Kings bles­sing. He aboue, and this drops from him. In
this, like God, whose immediate Vicege­rent he is. For Gods Blessings also are
said to come downe and descend.Iaco. 1.17. S. Iacob 1\. The Blessing which
Ascends, is that of Praise, and Thankes, and faire interpretation of Princes
Actions: And this is the peoples Blessing. And they are both in Scripture
together.3\. Reg. 8. 3\. Reg. 8\. For there,Vers. 55. ver. 55. Solo­mons
blessing comes downe vpon the peo­ple;Vers. 66. and ver. 66. the peoples
blessing goes vp backe againe, to Solomon.

Betweene these two is the happy com­merce that a Prince hath with his people:
when they striue to out-blesse one another. When the King labours the Peoples
good: [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=6) that
is his blessing descending vpon them. And the people labour his honour: that
is their blessing reaching vp to him. And in this sence also as well as the
former, a King is said, Poni in benedictionem, to be set vp as a Blessing,
that is, for one whom the people ought to blesse. For Gods ordinance, Ho­nour
the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. 1\. S. Pet. 2\. doth as much, if not more, require the
people to blesse, that is, to honour the King, then it doth the King to
blesse, that is, to doe good to his peo­ple. And there is no good diuision
be­tweene a King and his people, but this one; That in parting of this great
good of a gra­cious gouernement; The Kings part be the Honour: The peoples
part may be the Bene­fit: and both meete againe in the Blessing. And it is so
in my Text; For, Ar. Mont. ren­ders the Originall by Pones eum. There the King
blesses the people: And the Septua­gint and Tremel: by Posuisti ei: There God
promises that he will, or rather saith he al­ready hath: and ties the people
that they doe Blesse the King.

And you may obserue too, that while a [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=6) King keepes to the
two great examples of the Text, Dauid and Christ; He is not one­ly a Blessing,
but he comes as hee writes, Plurall. And so it is in the Text. Benedicti­ones;
not one, but many Blessings. And indeed the Blessings which descend from a
King vpon a people, seldome come sin­gle and alone: and in this, Kings keepe
their honour, that they blesse by number. Esau could not beleeue that his
father Isaac (who was farre lesse then a King to Blesse) had but one Blessing
in his store. Gen. 27.Gen. 27.38.

But be the Blessings neuer so many, ne­uer so great: Be the Assistants which a
King hath, neuer so deseruing: (And Dauid had his Worthies you know.1\. Chro.
11.10. 1\. Chron. 11.10.) yet none of them may share with him in his honour of
Blessing the people, nor none ought to steale away the hearts of his peo­ple
vpon any popular pretences whatsoe­uer. For these wheeles, of what compasse
soeuer they be, mooue all in his strength, and therefore ought to mooue to the
con­seruation of his Honour.

And this is in the Text too: for Dauid, no [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=7) question, had a
wise and a prouident Coun­cell, Nobles of great worth; and these wan­ted not
their deserued Honours: (God for­bid they should:) And yet when it came to
blessing the people, that great meanes of specialtie of Honour to a King;
there Da­uid stands alone without a sharer. Dedisti, yea but whom? not eos,
but Eum: not them, but Him, as Blessings to the people.Ezek 1.15. The vision
which Ezechiel saw. c. 1\. seemes to me an expression of this; It was a vision
of Wheeles: the Wheeles were many: the mo­tion vniforme; one wheele within
ano­ther, the lesse within the greater: yet in the apparition, these vnder-
wheeles haue no name, but only the great compassing wheele, Rota ecce vna: One
wheele appeared. And in this case, euery man is bound to bee in the seruice,
but the best may not looke to share in the Honour.

And seldome meane they well to Princes, that against the phrase of the holy
Ghost in this place, Dedisti Eum, thou hast giuen Him as Blessings, will
needes bee thought Blessers of the People: For such [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=7) men do but fish,
and baite troubled waters to their owne aduantage: yet these men speaking
oftentimes with more freedome, then either Trueth, or Temper, so long as they
finde fault with the present gouern­ment, neuer want (saith Hooker) Attentiue
and fauourable hearers. Lib. 1. verbis primis. Neuer: for my part I will keepe
to the words of my Text: And if there be a Blessing (as who sees not but there
is?) vnder God, I will goe to Dedisti Eum, Him whom God hath giuen.

If you thinke I haue stayed too long in this circumstance, I hope you will
pardon me: You should be as loth as I, to go from amidst the Blessings: but I
must proceede.

Secondly then, a King, a Blessing; yea,2 but how long continues he so? My Text
answeres, It is for Euer. For Euer: And so Christ and Dauid are both in the
Letter, Christ a Blessing for euer; & that simply: for of his Kingdom no
end.Luk. 1.33. S. Luc. 1.33. Dauid a blessing for euer: but that not in
himselfe, but as Christ was to descend from him, as he was Radix Iesse. Esai.
11.1. Esai. 11\. from whence did spring Christ the Blessing for euer. [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=8) And Christian
Kings in their generations, a blessing for euer too: but that limited; as they
professe Christ, and as they imitate Dauid.

Now Dauid is obseru'd, to haue Blessed the people vnder him three wayes; and
to these three generals, all the Blessings of a 1 King are reducible. These
three are, The true worship of the true God, that is the first: 2 The second
is, Preseruation from forraine 3 Enemies: And the third is, Life and vigor of
Iustice and iudgement among the people. The closer a King keepes to these
three, the larger his Blessings: but if he fall short in any of these, so much
doeth hee lessen his Blessings vpon the people.

1 For if hee mainteine not true Religion among them, then his Blessings are
not for Euer, but end in the Peace and Plenty of 2 this life. If he preserue
them not from for­raine violence; then his Blessings reach not so farre as to
the Euer of this life, but are hewen downe by the sword of the Enemie. If hee
doe keepe out forraine force, yet if Iustice and Iudgement, bee not in life
and in blood at home, his best Blessings will bee [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=8) abused, euen by
them which are trusted with dispensing them, and that for Euer.

Now this In perpetuum, for euer, was ab­solute in Christ: but in Dauid and
other Kings, bee they neuer so eminent in their times, it is but respectiuely
for euer. That is, not for the Euer of eternity: no nor for the Euer of time:
But onely for the Euer of per­petuity of their owne Reigne, in their allotted
time. And this is a large for euer. For you can haue no longer Blessings from
the best King, then God giues him time to blesse in: for hee is constant in
Blessing, that giues it not ouer but with life, and this was Iosiahs honour.
4. Reg. 23.4\. Reg. 23.25.

And yet I may not forget, that some times this for euer extends the blessings
of Kings beyond their life. Namely, when they blesse their people with a
Blessing suc­cessor: for the Septuagint read it heere,Iansen. & Copp. ibid.
[...] and that implyes Succession: So it is a Present, and an after blessing.
A bles­sing in himselfe, and a blessing in his feede. In his person, and in
his posterity a Blessing. And the Text fitted Dauid home. In him­selfe, [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=9) all his life: and
in Solomon after his life, a blessing for euer. And in this the Text ap­plies
it selfe, and so will doe, I hope, for e­uer: and I will euer pray, that the
King may be a Blessing long, and his Solomon af­ter him, to his people, euen
in seculum secu­li, age after age in an Euer of succession, and so proceed.

3 Thirdly then, the King is a Blessing to his people, and that for euer: but
who makes him so? yea, now wee are come to the great Father of blessings God
himselfe: for if you marke, the Text begins at Tu de­disti, or Tu posuisti;
Thou Lord hast giuen him, thou hast set him for blessings: And God as in
other, so in this particular, very gracious: for no people can merit this at
Gods hand, that their King should bee a Blessing to them, & continue so. No,
you see Tu dedisti, thou hast giuen him, makes him Donum, a meere gift, no
purchase.

Againe, no King can promise and per­forme this out of his owne strength, that
he will bee a Blessing to his people, and that for euer. No, you see Tu
posuisti, thou [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=9) hast set him,
keepes him at his disposing, leaues him not to his owne. And indeed in this, a
Kings felicitie is borne as Christs was, by an ouershadowing power. And you
cannot, no not with a curious eye, search all the Reasons, how hee is set for
Blessings: because God in disposing it, hath hid Lumen intra vmbram, and
thick­ned the vaile that is drawne ouer it.

There is much, I confesse, in the King, to compasse the Affections of his
People: and there is much in the people, not to distaste the heart of their
King for trifles, not to vrge him with indignities. But when all is done, and
the blessing stands be­tweene the King and the People, ready to descend from
the One to the other; yet you must goe to Tu dabis, Thou Lord shalt giue it:
For if he giue it not, it will not be had: There will be a rub where it is not
looked for, and a stop in the Blessing. For is there conquest ouer enemies, or
rest from them? why that is Tua gratia, Gods fauour. So S. Basil. S. Basil.
Ib. Is a King, or a State, famous for the ordering of it? why there is
auxilium à te, [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=10) All helpe from
God. So Theodor. Theodor. Ib. And God sells neither his helpe, nor his fauour:
It is all at Tu dedisti, his gift, his free gift, where ere it is.

There is a great Errour in the world, I pray God it bee not as Common as
Great: And it is, to thinke that this blessing can be brought about by Policie
onely. Policie is ne­cessary; and I denie nothing but the Onely. And they
which maintaine that, leaue no roome for Tu dabis, Thou shalt giue the
blessing: But will carrie the world before them whether God will or no:
Whereas there is more in Tu dabis, in Gods gift, then in all the Policies of
the world. And it must needes be so: For all Policie is but a piece of Gods
gift, a branch of Gods wise­dome: Therfore not so great as the whole. And no
Policie can promise it selfe suc­cesse; there it must needes waite and stay,
for Tu dabis: Therefore not so great as that vpon which it attends. And when
misera­ble euents dogge the wisest proiects, then Achitophel himselfe will
confesse this;2\. Reg. 17. though perhaps not till hee goe home to [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=10) hang himselfe. 2.
Reg. 17.

With this Politicke errour, went another of Destinie. The former leaues Gods
Altar, and the sacrifice is to their owne net. Hab. 1.Haba. 1.16. This other
hampers God in the net; and makes both his Blessings vpon Kings, and his
Blessings from Kings to the People, to be all fatall. And this was too common
a­mong the Heathen. So Flau. Vopiscus. Fato Remp. regi satis constat:Flau.
Vop. in vita Cari. It is euident enough that Kingdomes are gouerned by fate.
And then, where is Tu dedisti? Thou hast giuen him, if hee and his Blessings
must be whether God will or not?

But these blinde men had Blessings, and knew not whence they came, vnlesse
per­haps they vnderstood Prouidence by Fate: (And Minut. Foel. is not much
against it.M. Feel. in Octau. p. 96.) And if they did, then Prouidence, and Tu
dabis, are all one. For God neuer giues a blessing to a King and his people,
but hee giues it, and orders it by Prouidence. Yet here the wisest of the
Heathen are vnexcu­sable, in that they enioyed the gift, and would not serue
the giuer, Rom. 1.Rom. 1.21. Looke right [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=11) therefore vpon
The Author of Blessings. And where it is, Tu dedisti, Thou hast gi­uen him as
Blessings (as it is with vs) there know, it is worth Thanks both from Prince
and people. And where it is, Tu dabis, Thou shalt giue (and my Text is read
both wayes) there know, it is worth the asking, both for Prince and people;
that God will giue their King vnto them as blessings for euer.

And as it is, Tu dedisti, Thou hast giuen; So that is not all, but, Tu dedisti
priùs, Thou hast giuen first. God is first in the worke, where euer a gracious
King is a blessing to his people. For that which is simply a gift in the Text,
is a preuention, ver. 3.Ver. 3. And, Praeuenis eum, preuents the King with
bles­sings first, that he after may blesse the peo­ple: So that in this common
blessing God is the prime moouer, aswell as in grace giuen to particular men.
And it is true of both, which S. Augustine deliuers but of one:Lib. 1. con.
duas epist. Pelag. c. 9. A­uertat Deus hanc amentiam, God turne away this
phrensie from vs, that in his owne gifts (And here it is, Tu dedisti) we
should place [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=11) our selues first,
& set him after. No; where euer comes, Tu dedisti, Thou hast giuen: God is
euermore first in the worke to be­ginne it, yea, and last in the worke to
per­fect it, or else no blessing.

And therefore marke the Text, and yee shall finde, that wheresoeuer there is,
Tu dedisti, Thou hast giuen, there is still, Po­suisti, and disposuisti, Thou
hast set him, and disposed him to be so. And these two per­fect the gift: For,
Tu pones, Ar. Mon. that sets and settles the King to be Blessings. And there
is his Constancie: Not a Blessing to day, and none to morrow. And, Dispones
eum, (for so Tremellius will haue it) that disposes and orders the King in his
blessings. And there is his wisedome, to sit and steare his Pas­sengers; That
he may make all things suite with the opportunities, and fit the varie­ties of
the people: For they, doe the Go­uernour neuer so worthily, will not thinke
themselues blessed, if they bee not fitted. And a Commonwealth, when the
humors of the people feele a spring, and are swel­ling,Flau. Vopis. in Caro.
(as it was once said of that of Rome) [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=12) suffers almost
all those various motions, Quae patitur in homine vno mortalitas, which
mortalitie it selfe suffers in a particular man.

And it should not bee passed ouer nei­ther, for whose mouthes Dauid fits this
1 passage. And first there is no question, but that Dauid speakes it for
himselfe: And there is the King acknowledging Tu dedisti, Gods gift in making
him all the 2 Blessings that hee is to his people. Next I finde, Pij
loquuntur; they are the faithfull that speake it: Not a religious and a good
subiect, but hee is at Tu dabis, that God would blesse his King, and make him
a Blessing for euer.

And therefore when God giues, and the King blesses, and the people take no
notice of it, it is grosse ingratitude: when they haue a blessing and know it
not, it is a dangerous slumber: when they may haue a blessing and will not, it
is a sullen pet, and shewes they haue no minde to bee thankefull, either to
God or the King for Blessing them.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=12)Against
this: say, The blessings are not per­fect. Well, suppose that, what then? Are
not the best actions of the best men mixed? Shall we refuse degrees of
happinesse, be­cause they are not Heauen? No sure: for An­gels dwel not in
bodies of men. And in the very Text it is not simply, Thou hast giuen
blessings; But the words are, Dedisti Eum: thou hast giuen Him as blessings.
There­fore the Blessings here spoken of, come not immediately from God to the
people, that they should bee thought euery way perfect. But they are strain'd
Per eum, through him, through the Man, and there­fore must relish a little of
the Strainer, Him and his Mortality: And there cannot bee a greater wrong done
vnto Princes, in the mid'st of their care for the people, then for men to
thinke they are not Blessed by them, vpon supposall that some things may be
imperfect.Hook. Lib. 1. Ecc. Pol. §. 1 Prin. For the secret lets, and
difficulties in publike proceedings, and in the manageing of great State
affaires, are both innumerable, and ineuitable: and this euery discreete man
should consider.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=13) 2 And now
I am come to the second meanes, of Gods laying Honour vpon the King. The
first, ye see, was by giuing him as blessings: And this second is
Laetificando, by making him glad with the ioy of his countenance. The Text
goes on cheereful­ly, (and so I hope doe you in hearing it:) from blessing to
Ioy; And here againe the circumstances are three.

1 And first, God layes Honour vpon the King, Laetificando, by ioying him,
while he blesses the people: And the Ioy which God giues cannot but be great;
and there­fore the Septuagint expresses it by two words,  [...]. Thou shalt
Ioy him with Ioy: that is, thou shalt make him excee­ding glad: and it is
requisit a King should haue Ioy, great Ioy, for he cannot sit at the stearne,
without a great deale of Care: And therefore it is fit hee should bee
re­warded with a great deale of Ioy.

Now if a King will not faile of this Ioy, he must goe to the right Owner of
it, God himselfe, that both hath and giues aboun­dantly. If hee seeke it in
Himselfe, if in the [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=13) very People which
he blesses; it will not euer there bee found. For when a King Blesses his
people, if the blessing bee as discreetly taken, as it is graciously ment;
then there is Ioy, great Ioy, of al hands. But when a people hath furfetted
long vpon Peace and Plenty, it is hard to please them with blessing it selfe:
and euery little thing is a burden to thē, that in long time haue felt the
waight of none: And in such times, Malecontents are stirring. And there want
not in all States, those that are D [...]cti in perturbanda Reipub. pace, very
learned in disturbing the Peace of the Common-wealth: And the factious aime of
such men, is either to hinder and diuert the blessings which are readie, and
vpon the point of descending from the King vpon the People: or else in
misinterpreting, or extenuating Blessings already come downe. And these (let
the world doat on them while they will) are the hinderers of mutuall Ioy
betweene the Prince and the People.

Therefore, if the King will looke to the preseruation of his owne Ioy, he must
seeke [[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=14) it
where these cannot hinder it, at Tu laetifi­casti, Thou Lord hast Ioy'd him.
And the word in my Text is  [...] which signifies a Ioy that is inward, and
referred to the mind. And Tu laetificasti, is euer at this Ioy; Let the
Intentions be right and honorable, and Ioy will follow them. It was Dauids
case: I wil forbeare to tell you how scorn­fully, how vnworthily, he was vsed
by the basest of the people: but God kept close to him, Tu laetificasti, and
made him Ioyfull.

2 Secondly, where you find Tu laetificasti, God ioying Dauid, there the Ioy is
not like Lightning, a flash and gone, but a true and a permanent Ioy: True in
regard of the Author of it, God; for here is another Tu de­disti, God gaue
this also; and true in re­gard of the Obiect of it vpon which it set­tles,
which is God too; God, & the light of his countenance. And how can it be other
then true Ioy, that hath God at both ends of it, as this hath? For it begins
at God the Author; and it continues, and ends, in God the Obiect.

God; but not simply so expressed in the [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=14) Text, but God and
his countenance, expressing after the maner of men: For a man is Ioyed at the
countenance hee loues; And yet not simply so neither, not his Countenance
one­ly, but the Ioy of his Countenance. And a man would not see sadnesse in
the face he loues; Ioy there, reioyces him. But no counte­nance like to Gods;
an eye vpon the Beauty of his Countenance fill's with ioy.

Now Vultus Dei, Gods Countenance heere, signifies Gods presence. Bellarm.
ibid. So Bellarm. It is true; yet not his presence onely, but his Fauour and
his Loue too: So Theodor. Theodor. ibid. It is true; yet not empty Loue only,
but succour and protection too: So Euthym. Euthy. ibid. It is true, yet is it
not these alone, but all these and more.

And this consider'd, it is no great matter how you reade my Text; A, or Cum,
or Iuxta, or Apud vultum: For the King needs all, and God giues all. For when
hee is once come to Tu laetificasti; this ioy begins at à vultu, from his
Countenance: It goes on cum vultu, in company with his Countenance; It
enlarges it selfe Iuxta vultum, when it comes neere his Countenance; And at
the [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=15) last
it shall bee made perfect apud vul­tum, when it comes to his Countenance, to
vision.

And as Dauids cares were great, so God would answere them with degrees of Ioy.
For had God any more Faces then one (as Ar. Mont. renders the Original Cum
faciebus eius) he would hide none of them from Dauid. If any were more
comfortable then other, he shall see that. And indeed though the Countenance
of God be but one and the same, yet it doth not looke Ioy vpon all men. But
his Aspects to the creature are Planetary (as it were) & various. And Dauid is
happy, that in the midst of all these various turnes of Gods Countenance, A,
and Cum, and Iuxta, and Apud, wee finde not (nor I hope neuer shall) that
disasterous Aspect of opposition, which is contra, against: For then all Ioy
were gone. For if it should bee Rex con­tra vultum Dei, then it were all
sinne. And if it should bee vultus Dei contra Regem, (both which God forbid)
then it were all punishment; In neither Ioy, in neither Bles­sing. It is farre
better in my Text, if wee [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=15) take care to hold
it there, Cum vultu, with, or in, the fauour of his Countenance.

Thirdly, this ioy begins at the King,3 Laetificasti eum; Thou hast made him
glad. He must haue the greatest care, and there­fore the Ioy must bee first or
chiefest in him: and if you will take a view of my Text, you will find Him
excellently seated for the purpose: for I find Eum, that is Da­uid, that is
the King, standing betweene Laetificasti and Gaudium, as if God would haue the
Kings place knowne, by Ioy on the right hand, and Ioy on the left, heere God
places the King: this is his ordi­nance to season his cares: therefore if any
attempt to displace him, to plunge him into griefe, to make him struggle with
difficul­ties; it is a kinde of Deposing him. The care of Gouernement should
be eased, not discomfited: else doubtlesse God would neuer haue placed Dauid
betweene Laeti­ficasti & gaudium, Ioy and Ioy.

And it is fit for the people, especially the greater, in their families, to
looke to this, that Dauid may keepe Inter Laetificasti & [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=16) gaudium, the
place where God hath set him: for when all is done, and the braine weary of
thinking, this will be found true; They cannot holde their places in gaudio,
in ioy, if Dauid sit not sure in his: and it is an excellent obseruation made
by Cassi­dore, Lib. 12. Epist. 19. (a Senator he was, and Secretary of State
to Theodoricus, and after a most strict and deuoted Christian.) He makes all
sad that endeauours not the Kings Ioy: Et omnes affligit, qui Regi aliquid
necessarium subtrahit: And hee afflicts all men, that withholds neces­saries
from the King. And certainely it is the glory of a State, to keep Dauid
vpright where God sets him: and that you see is, Inter laetificasti & gaudium,
betweene Ioy and Ioy, where God euer keepe Him, and His.

2 And now I am come to the second ge­nerall of the Text, the Reason both of
the Thing, and the Meanes: of the Honour, and the Manner of Gods laying it
vpon Kings. And the Reason is, Quia sperat, because the King puts his trust in
the Lord: In which, may it please you to obserue three circumstances.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=16)The first
of these is the Vertue it selfe,1 which God first gaue the Prophet, and for
which hee after gaue him a Blessing to the People, and Ioy in himselfe. The
Vertue is Hope; That Hope, in the Lord. Now Hope followes the nature of Faith:
And such as the Faith is, such is the Hope: Both must bee in Domino, in the
Lord, or neither can bee true.

And it is in a sort, with the deniall of Hope in any Creature, That the Hope
which is founded vpon God alone (I say alone as the prime Author) may be
firme, and not diuided. Nulli hominum fidens, tru­sting vpon no man, is
Theodoret. Theodor. ib. Not in ar­mies, nor in riches, nor in any strength of
man, is Euthymius. Euthym. ib. Not in sword, nor speare, nor shield, but in
the Name of the Lord of hostes, is Dauid himselfe, 1\. Reg. 17.45. 1\. Reg.
17. And Dauid could not lay better hold any where. For since before, all lies
vpon God, Tu dedisti, and, Tu laetificasti, Thou hast giuen, and, Thou hast
made glad: where could any man fasten better? And indeed the words [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=17) are a reciprocall
proofe, either to other: For because God giues, Dauid hopes: And because Dauid
hopes, God giues more a­bundantly, Honour, Blessing, and Ioy. It is in the
Text, Quia sperat, euen because hee trusts.

2 Secondly, Is trust then, and relying vp­on God, a matter of such
consequence, that it alone stands as a cause of these? Yes, Hope and Trust
rightly layde vpon God, haue euer beene in his children, Loco me­riti, in
stead of merit. And what euer may bee thought of this Hope, it is a Kings
ver­tue in this place.Lib. 2. de E­rudit. prin. cap. 6. And Thomas prooues it;
That Hope is necessary for all men, but e­specially for Princes. And the more
trust in God, Honoratior Princeps, the more ho­nour hath the King, as
Apollinarius obserues it.Ibid. And therefore Hope is not here a naked
expectation of somewhat to come: But it is Hope, and the ground of Hope,
Faith, as some later Diuines thinke not amisse.Calu. Musc. Tremell. Moller.
ibid. And Faith embraces the Veritie of God, as well as the Promises made vpon
it: And [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=17)
this was right: For so God promised, and so Dauid beleeu'd, he would performe,
2 Reg. 7.29.2\. Reg. 7.29.

And since wee haue found Faith and Hope in this action of Trusting God (as our
English well expresses it) let vs neuer seeke to shut out Charity; And if
Faith, Hope and Charitie bee together, as they loue to goe, then you may
vnderstand the Text, Quia sperat, because he Hopes, De toto cultu, of the
entire worship of God. Lib. 8. Orig. cap. 2. For (as S. I­sidor obserues) in
all inward worship, which is the heart of Religion, are these three, Faith,
Hope, and Charitie. And in the most vsu­all phrase of Scripture, (though not
euer) scarce one of these is named but all are vn­derstood to be present: and
if so, then, because he trusts, is as much as Quia colit, be­cause he
worships. So at last we are come to the cause indeed, why God set Dauid for
such a Blessing to his people: why he fil­led him with such ioy of his
countenance. And all was, Quia culto [...], because he was such a religious
worshipper.

It is in the Text then, that a Kings Re­ligion [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=18) is a great cause
of his happinesse. The greatest Politicians that are, haue con­fessed thus
farre: that some Religion is ne­cessary, to make a King a Blessing to his
People, and a common-wealth happy: But the matter is not great with them,
whether it bee a true, or a false Religion, so it be one. But they are heere
in a mise­rable error: for since they suppose a Re­ligion necessary (as they
must) my Text will turne all the rest vpon them; that true Religion is most
apt, and most able, to Blesse and Honour both King and People.

1 For first, Trueth is stronger then false­hood, and will so prooue it selfe,
where­soeuer it is not preuented or abused: 2 and therefore it is more able.
Next, true Religion breeds euer true Faith, and true Hope in God; which no
false Religion 3 can: therefore it is more apt. Then, true Hope and Faith haue
heere the promise of God, for the Kings Ioy, & the Peoples Bles­sing, euen
Quia sperat, because he trusts: whereas the rest haue onely his permission.
Therefore it is both: both more apt, and [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=18) more able, to
blesse King and Common-wealth, then any false Religion, or supersti­tion, is,
or can be.

It was but a scoffe of Lucian, to describe Christians, simple and easie to be
abused:In morte Pe­regri. or if any in his time were such, the weake­nesse of
the men, must not be charged vp­on their Religion: for Christ himselfe the
founder of Religion, though he did vnsting the Serpent in all his charge to
his Apo­stles, yet he left his vertue vncheck'd: nay he commanded that. Be
innocent, but yet as wise as Serpents. Mat. 10.16.Mat. 10.16. And this
Wisedome and Prudence is the most abso­lute vertue for a Common-wealth. So
that till Christians forsake Christs rule, Lucians scoffe takes no hold of
them.

Thirdly, Since Quia sperat, the Faith and 3 Religion of a King, is that which
brings God to giue him as a Blessing; It must not be forgotten, that Trust in
God, is inter fun­damenta Regum, amidst the very founda­tions of Kings. And
spes is quasi pes, Hope (sayth Isidore) is the foot,Lib. 8. Orig. cap. 2. and
the resting place. Now no building can stand, if the [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=19) foundation be
diggd from vnder it. The Buildings, are the Blessings of a State. A prime
foundation of them, is the Kings trust in God. Take away the trueth of this
Hope, Faith and Religion, and I cannot pro­mise the Blessings to stand: For
then there is neuer another Quia, or cause in the Text, to mooue God to giue.
But if the cause stand (as Theodor. and Euthym. here make it) all is
well.Theodor. & Euthym. ib.

And here it were sacriledge for me, and no lesse, to passe by his Maiestie,
without thankes both to God and Him. To Him, for, Quia sperat, because hee
trusteth: For no Prince hath euer kept more firme to Religion. And it is
sperans in the present in my Text; hee continueth it and will continue it.Ar.
Mont. And to God, for, Quia dedit, be­cause in mercy hee hath giuen Him this
Blessing so to Trust, and by this trust in him, to be this, and many other
Blessings to vs.

3 And so I come to the last part of my Text, which is the happy Successe which
Dauid shall haue for trusting in the Lord. [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=19) It is a Reward,
and Rewards come last. And it is, That in this trust, he shall not sli [...]e,
he shall not miscarry. And here (to make all parts euen) are three
circumstances too.

The first of these, is the Successe or Re­ward 1 it selfe: And it is a great
one: Non commouebitur, He shall not be mooued; or at least not remooued, not
miscarry. And this is a great Successe, To haue to doe with the greatest
mooueables in the world, the peo­ple, and not miscarry. So that trust in the
Lord, makes a King in the midst of a mightie people, Petram in mari turbido, A
Rocke in a working Sea: Ebbe, and flow, and swell, yet insolent waues dash
them­selues in pieces of all sides the Rocke, and the King is at Non
commouebitur, Hee shall not be mooued.

Secondly, This great Successe doeth not 2 attend on Kings, for either their
wisdome, or their power, or any thing else that is simply theirs? No, wee must
fall backe to spes in Domino, their trust in the Lord: yea and this trust too,
is not simply vpon the Lord; but vpon his Mercy. And indeed to [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=20) speake properly,
Man hath no ground of his Hope but Mercy; no stay vpon the slip­pery, but
Mercy. For if he looke vpon God, and consider him in Iustice; If hee looke
vpon himselfe, and weigh his soule by me­rit; it is impossible for a man to
Hope, or in Hope not to miscarry. And therefore the Prophet heere, though hee
promise Non commouebitur, that the King shall not mis­cary; yet he dares
promise it no where els then In misericordia, in Mercy.

3 Thirdly, I wil not omit the Expression, whose Mercy it is that giues
successe to Princes; and that is Altissimi, the mercie of the most high, which
is one of Gods vsu­all Names in Scripture. Now Sperat & non commouebitur; The
Kings Hope and his Successe, doe both meete in the Highest mercie. It is true,
Hope stands below, and out of sight: For, Hope that is seene is no hope,Rom.
8.24. Rom. 8\. yet as lowe as it stands it con­templates God qua Altissimus,
as hee is at highest. And this shewes the strength of this vertue of Hope: For
as Hope con­sidered in nature is in men that are warme [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=20) and spirited, so
is it also considered as a vertue. And therefore giue it but due foo­ting,
which is vpon Mercy, and in the strength of that, it will clime to God, were
it possible hee should bee Higher then hee is.

The footing of Hope is lowe: therefore it seekes mercie: And the Kings hope
keepes the foote of the hill; Rex humili corde sperat:Ibid. (so S. August.)
And the best hope beginnes lowest; not at merit, but at mercie. But then marke
how it soares: For the same hope that beares the soule of man company vpon
earth, mounts till it comes ad Altissimum, to the most High in heauen.

Now in this Mercie-seate it is obserua­ble, three Grandies are met together;
Bles­sing, Ioy, and Hope; and yet there is no strife for precedencie: For
Blessing goes first; Ioy comes after, for no man so ioyfull as hee that is
blessed; and then Hope, to supplie the defects of both, because nor Blessings
nor Ioy, can be perfect in this life.

And they haue chosen to themselues an [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=21) excellent and a
safe place in the Mercie of 1 the most High. An excellent place, and all
receiue vertue from it. For, that Dauid is able to be a Blessing to the
people; that he can Ioy in the Blessing; that his Hope can support him through
the cares in ordering the Blessing ere hee can come to the Ioy: All is from
Mercie.

2 And a safe place it is: For there are in all times, and in all States,
Conatus impio­  [...]n, endeuours of wicked men. And the labour of these is,
to turne Blessing it selfe into a curse: To ouercloude Ioy with sorrow at
least, if not Desolati­on: To crush Hope, or rather, Decollare, to behead it.
No place safe from these at­tempts, but that which is high, and out of reach.
And no place so high, as Sinus Al­tissani, the bosome of the Highest, which is
his Mercy.

The reason then why Dauid shall not miscarry, nay, not so much as Nutare,
[...] (as Ar. Mont. renders  [...]:) why the scepter in his hand shall not bee
[...]. A shaken reed, S. Matt. 11\. (And that [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=21) is the word heere
in the Septuagint, S. Matt. 11.7. [...]) is the Mercy of the Highest. And when
his feet are got vpon this, hee shall not slide. And Apollinaris calls the
feete of the King,Ibidem. while they rest vpon Gods Mercy, [...], bold and
confident feete, that dare venture, and can stand firme any where. And so no
question they can, that are vp­held by Mercy.

And now to reach downe some of the Mercies of the Highest vpon our selues: For
when I reade Dauid, at Rex sperat, The King trust's in the Lord; and heare him
speaking in the third person, as of another King: mee thinkes the prophecie is
worth the bringing home to our most gracious Soueraigne. For, his constancie
in Reli­gion is knowen to the world: And the freedome of his life, argues his
trust in the Lord: And the assurance of his Hope shall not vanish. For, let
him keepe to the mercy of the Highest, and there hee shall not miscarry.

And giue mee leaue to speake a little out of my Spes in Domino, my trust in
the Lord; [[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=22)
mee thinkes I see, Non commouebitur, Hee shall not miscarrie, three wayes
doubling 1 vpon him. First, for his Priuate; I haue two great inducements
among many in another Kingdome, to thinke that hee is so firme in the mercies
of God, that hee cannot miscarry. The one is as old as No­uemb. 5\. 1605. The
powder was ready then, but the Fire could not kindle. The other is as young as
Ianuary last, the 9\. The water was too ready then, and hee fell into it.
Neither of these Elements haue any mer­cy: but the mercy of the Highest was
His Acquittance from both. In the first, hee learned, that when desperate men
haue sa­cramented themselues to destroy, God can preuent and deliuer, Act.
24.Act. 24. 12 Psal. 33. [...]5. In the second he learn'd, that a Horse is but
a vaine thing to saue a man; but God can take vp, take out, and deliuer. And
in the very Psalmes for that day, Morning prayer, thus I reade,Psal. 46. 1.
Psal. 46\. God is our helpe and strength, a very present helpe in trouble. And
I know not what better vse hee can make of this, then that which followes in
the next verse;Verse. 2. I [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=22) will not feare,
(nor distrust God) though the earth be mooued.

Next, me thinkes, I haue a Non commo­uebitur, 2 hee shall not miscarry, for,
or in his publike affaires. Prophet I am none, but my Heart is full, that the
mercy of the Highest, which hath preserued Him in great sickenesses, and from
great dangers, hath more worke for him, yet to doe: the Peace of Christendome
is yet to settle. Will God honour this Iland in him, and by his wisedome, to
order the Peace, and settle the distracted State of Christendome, and edge the
sword vpon the common Enemie of Christ? Why should there not be trust in God,
that in the mercy of the Highest, he shall not miscarry?

Thirdly, For that which is greater then 3 both these to him, the Eternall
safetie of his Soule; here is a Non commouebitur, hee shall not miscarry for
this neither: For so some read, and some expound the word of my Text:Tremel.
vers. Angli. vet. Appollinar. Ibid. Thou shalt giue him Euerlasting
feli­citie. Therefore, let him be strong and of a good courage, for in the
mercy of the [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=23) most High there
is no miscarrying.

Thus you haue seene the Kings blessing, the Kings Ioy, the Kings Hope, and the
1 Kings Assurance. In the first you haue seene, that the King is a Blessing to
his People: that a gracious King (such as God hath giuen vs) is a Blessing for
Euer. That he is so, Quia tu dedisti, because God hath giuen, and set him to
bee so: from 2 Blessing to Ioy. And there you haue seene, that the Ioy which
followes a Blessed go­uerment, is a great Ioy, a true and a per­manent Ioy, a
Ioy that is either first, or 3 chiefest in the King. Now Blessing and Ioy, are
both grounded vpon Hope: this Hope in the Lord, this Hope includes, Faith, and
Religion, and so this Hope stands a­midst 4 the foundations of Kings. The
Successe assured vnto him is Non commoue­bitur, hee shall not miscary, not so
long as hee rests on Mercie; that Mercie of the Highest.

Non commouebitur: driue wind and tide, he shall not miscarry. Shall not? what?
is it absolute then, for Dauid, or for any King? [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=23) No, I say not so
neither. There is a double condition in the Text, if Dauid will not miscary:
the one is Ex parte Dauidis, on 1 Dauids side: and that is at Sperat, a
religi­ous heart to God that cannot but trust in him. The other is Ex parte
Dei, on Gods 2 side, and that is at Misericordia, a mercifull prouidence ouer
the King, which knowes not how to forsake, till it be forsaken, if it doe
then. Let vs call in the Prophet for witnesse,Psal. 94.18. Psal. 94\. When I
said, My foot hath slipped, thy mercie, O Lord, held mee vp. Now the foote of
a man slips from the conditi­on, from the trust, (as Cassian obserues)
Mobilitate Arbitrij, Collat. 3. c. 12. by the changings of the will, which is
too free to sinne, and breach of trust: the Holder vp in the slip is Mer­cie,
therefore it is safest relying vpon the condition which is on Gods side, that
is Mercy, for that holds firme, when men breake.

And marke my Text, Hope goes be­fore, and Non commouebitur, hee shall not
miscary, followes after: but yet it followes not, till the Mercy of the
Highest bee come [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=24) in betweene. And
indeed to speake pro­perly, all those things which the Scripture attributes to
the Faith and Hope of man, are due onely Misericordiae Altissimi, to the Mercy
of the Highest, which both giues and rewards them.

And yet for all this, the Hope of the Beleeuer, and the mercie of God in whom
hee trust's, are happily ioyned in my Text. Because the Hope of Faith can
obtaine no­thing without the Mercie of the Highest: And that Mercie & goodnes
will not pro­fit any man, that doth not beleeue & trust in it. And Hope, and
Mercie are not better fitted to secure Dauid, then Mercie and the Highest are,
to make him apprehensiue of his assurance. For Goodnesse and Mercie are
inualid without Power: Now that is supplied by Altissimus the Highest. And
power is full of terrour when it stands a­part from goodnesse: and that is
supplied by Mercie: When both meete, the Hope of man is full. So Dauid cannot
but see all firme on Gods side; And sure hee is not to miscarry, if hee looke
to performance [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=24) of his owne. And
though it be safeste­lying vpon God, yet it is neuer safe to disioyne them
whom God hath put to­gether: And therefore as hee is mercifull, so man must
bee faithfull; Hee must trust.

And now to end at home Dauid is gone long since to his Hope, the Mercy of the
Highest: But a King, a gracious King, is li­uing ouer vs in Peace, and
Happinesse, as our eyes see this day.

I know Hee remembers why God set Him ouer this great and numerous peo­ple:
that is, in Benedictionem, euen to blesse them: And that he hath beene a
Blessing vnto them, malice it selfe cannot deny. And I make no question, but
hee will goe on with the Text, and be Blessings to them for euer: For euer
through his whole time: and for euer in his generous Posteritie. Tu dedisti,
Gods gift is through all this; and I will euer pray, that it may neuer faile.

He hath giuen this people all His time, the Blessing of Peace: And the sweete
Peace of the people,Cassiod. lib. 5. epist. 39. is Praeconium Regnan­tium,
[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=25) the Glory
of Kings. And Gods gift is in this too: For though it be the King that
Blesses, yet it is God that giues Blessing to Blessing it selfe. And suppose
Peace end in Warre, Tu dedisti; Gods gift reaches thi­ther too:1\. Reg. 17.47.
For the Battell is the Lords. 1\. Reg. 17. The Battell, yes, and the Victory.
For (sayth S. Basil) Dextera victrix, S. Basil. ib. Whosoe­uer be the Enemie,
the right hand that conquers him is the Lords.

Now for his Blessing, it is fit hee should receiue Ioy: But if hee will haue
that true and permanent, (and no other is worth the hauing) he must looke it
in vultu Dei, in Gods countenance. If hee looke it any where else, especially
where the Ioy of his countenance shines not, there will be but false
representations of Ioy that is not.

This day, the Anniuersarie of his Crowne, is to all his louing Subiects, Dies
Gaudij, and Dies Spei, A day of Ioy, and a day of Hope. A day of Ioy: For what
can be grea­ter, then to see a Iust, and a gracious King multiplying his
yeres? And, a day of Hope; And what can be fitter, then to put him in [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=25) minde euen this
day, that a Kings strength is at sperat in Domino, His trust in the Lord, the
preseruer of men.Iob 7  [...] Iob 7\. That as God vpon this day did settle His
Hope, and His Right to this Kingdome vpon Him; So vpon this day, (which in
this yeeres reuo­lution prooues His day too, Dies Domini, the Lords day as
well as His) hee would continue the setling of his Hope on him, by whom all
the Kings of the Earth beare rule. Prou. 8.Prou. 8.15.

I say, Settle vpon Him, and his Mercie: that is the last. The very feete of
Kings stand High. And in high places slippes are dangerous. Nothing so fit, so
able to stand by them, as Misericordia Altissimi, the Mercy of the Highest. In
the good­nesse and the power of this Mercy he hath stood a King now almost
fiue and fiftie yeeres: nay a King Hee was, before Hee could stand. Through
many dangers the Mercy of the Highest hath brought Him safe. Let Him not goe
from vnder it, and it followes my Text,Vers. 8. v. 8\. His right hand shall
finde out all that hate Him: And for  [...] [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=26) [...] [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=26) [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=27) himselfe, Non
commouebitur, Hee shall not be mooued, not miscarry.

And so wee offer vp our Euening sacri­fice vnto God, for Him, and for our
selues, that God will euer giue, and he may euer bee a Blessing to his People:
That His yeeres may multiply, and yet not outliue His Ioy: That this day may
come about often, and yet neuer returne, but In Gau­dio vultus Dei, in the Ioy
of Gods counte­nance vpon the King: and, In Gaudio vul­tus Regis, in the Ioy
of the Kings counte­nance vpon the People: That the mercy of the most High may
giue Him hope in the Lord, and strengthen it: That His Hope may rest vpon the
Mercy that gaue it: that in all His businesses, as great as His place, His
Successe may be, Non com­moueri, not to miscarry: That Hee may goe on a
straight course from Blessing o­thers in this life, to bee Blessed Himselfe in
Heauen: And that all of vs may enioy Temporall Blessings vnder Him, and
AE­ternall with Him for euermore. And this CHRIST IESVS for his infinite
me­rit [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2042&page=27) and
mercie sake graunt vnto vs: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spi­rit,
three persons and one God, bee ascri­bed all might, Maiestie, and Domi­nion
this day, and for e­uer, AMEN.

## Appendix A

LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXII.

[Home](/)

Laud, William, 1573-1645.. Date: 1622  

