---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Verses by the University of Oxford on the death of the most noble and right
valiant Sir Bevill Grenvill, alias Granvill, Kt. who was slain by the rebells
at the battle on Lansdown-Hill near Bathe, July the 5, 1643.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=1)

Anglorum Magnanimus BEVILLIVS GRANVIL Cornubiensis, Eques Auratus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=1)

VERSES BY The Univerſity of OXFORD.

On the Death of the Moſt Noble, and Right Valiant Sir Bevill Grenvill, alias
Granvill, Kt.

Who was Slain by the Rebells at the Battle on Lanſdown-Hill, near Bathe, July
the 5. 1643.

Aut ſpoliis ego jam raptis laudabor opimis,

Aut Letho inſigni.—

Virg. Aeneid.

Printed at Oxford in the Year of our Lord, 1643. and now Reprinted at London,
1684.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=2)

## To the Right Honourable John Earl of BATHE, Viſcount of Lanſdown, Baron
Granvill of Granvill, Bideford, and Kilkhamp­ton, Lord-Lieutenant and High-
Steward of the Dutchy of Cornwal, Lord-Warden of the Stanneries, Governour of
Plymouth, Groom of the Stole to his Majeſty, Firſt Gen­tleman of his Majeſties
Bed-Chamber▪ and One of the Lords of his Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy-
Councill.

THeſe Verſes were an Epicedium of the Muſes of Oxford, made to adorn the Herſe
of your Noble Father, who Dy'd ſo Gloriouſly at Lans­down, in Defence of his
Prince and Country. It is Apparent what a Publique loſs his Death was, that
one of the firſt Univerſities of Europe ſhould think fit to Lament it; A
Reſpect, it may be, never done before to any but to the Royal Family. But as
there [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=3) are few
Perſons (my Lord) ſo Deſerving to be Ce­lebrated as your Father; ſo are there
few Families, which have had that Military Glory in them. Not to go back ſo
far as your great Anceſtor Hamon Dentatus Earl of Corboil, deſcended from the
Warlike Rollo Duke of Normandy; Nor to Men­tion his two Renowned Sons, Robert
Fitzhamon, and Sr Richard de Granvill, who came over with William the
Conqueror, and Ayded him at the Battle of Haſtings, to Wyn the Crown of
England, and afterward in the Conqueſt of Wales; there are late Inſtances of
other of your Progenitors who have Illuſtrated your Race by their valiant
Actions. In the War with France, betwixt Henry the 8th. and Francis the firſt,
Sir Roger Granvil loſt his life at Sea: And his Son Sir Richard Granvil, when
he was very Young went a Volen­tier into Hungary to ſerve the Emperour
Ferdi­nand againſt the Turk, and after that was with Don John of Auſtria at
the Battle of Lepanto, the greateſt Day that ever was at Sea ſince that of
Actium. At his Return home, applying himſelf to the Sea, he became an Expert
Captain and Admirall, & after Several Voyages into the Weſt-Indies, and
elſewhere, & Services done his Coun­try, with much Honour and Succeſſe, he was
at laſt Slayn at the Azores Iſlands, having with one of the Queen's Ships
alone, being unhappily Sepe­rated
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=3) from the reſt
of the Fleet, whereof he was Vice-Admiral, Suſtain'd a fight againſt the whole
Naval power of Spain; never yeilding, though his Guns were diſmounted, his men
almoſt all hurt or kill'd, himſelf Mortally Wounded, and his Decks blown up,
that there was no place left to fight upon; ſo that his Enemies were
Aſto­niſhed at his valour, and Concern'd to ſave him, as if he had been of
their own Nation: but his Wounds being too Mortall to be cured, he Expi­red in
a Few Hours, and was Buried in the Ocean, which had been the Theatre of his
Glory.

I cannot forget another Sir Richard Granvill your Lordſhips Uncle, who having
done his Ap­prentice-ſhip in Arms in the Low-Countrys and German-Wars, ſerv'd
his late Majeſty in the Nor­thern Expeditions, and then in the Wars of
Ire­land; and at length coming to command one of the Kings Armies in the West,
kept that Country in his Majeſties Obedience, till the Reſt of England was
loſt, & the fortune of the Parliament prevail'd every where: A ſevere Obſerver
of Military Diſci­pline; and my Lord General the Old Duke of Al­bemarle was
wont to ſay, one of the beſt Captains we had in all the War of England and
Ireland. As the Name and fortune of your Anceſtors are Deſcended to your
Lordſhip, ſo is their Virtue too, which appeared ſo early in you, that before
you [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=4) were
Seaventeen years Old, you enter'd into your Fathers Command; and after you had
ſerv'd the King upon ſeveral Engagements in the Army, and particularly in
Cornwall, at the Defeat of the Earl of Eſſex, you brought thoſe Valiant
Companies, in the Head of which your Father was ſlain at Lanſ­down, to fight
for his Majeſty at the Second Battel of Newbery, where you were like to have
under­gone your Fathers fate, as well as Imitated his Vir­tue, for being
Engaged in the Thickeſt of the Enemies, and having receiv'd ſeverall wounds,
and one moſt Dangerous One in the Head, with the blow of a Halberd, which beat
you to the Ground, you lay for ſome time without Senſe or Motion, 'till a Body
of the Kings Horſe Charging the Enemy a-freſh, beat them off the ground upon
which you fought, where you were found amongſt the Dead, Cover'd with Duſt and
Blood; and being known, were carried into that place of the Field, where the
King & Prince of Wales (his now Preſent Majeſty) were, who ſent you to
Dennington Caſtle to be treated for your Wounds. It could not My Lord but be
matter of great Contentment to you, to have his Majeſty himſelf a witneſs of
the Blood you had loſt for him, and a Spectator of that Loy­alty and Courage,
which are the Hereditary Qua­lities of your Family.

No ſooner were the Armies drawn off from the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=4) Field of
Newbery, but you were preſently Beſieged in▪ Dennington, where for ſome time
you lay in Extream Danger of your life, not only by thoſe Deſperate Wounds you
had got in the late Battel, but in the hazzard you were in, of Receiving new
ones from the Enemy, the Bullets flying continu­ally through the Room where
you lay under Cure, 'till you were Releived by the Victorious Forces of his
Majeſty at the Third Battel of Newbery: Nor have you only Serv'd the King with
your Sword in the Field, but been another way a Chief Inſtrument of the
Greateſt good that ever came to England, I mean the Reſtauration of his
Majeſty, and of the Laws and Liberty of your Oppreſſed Country. This my Lord
was brought to paſs by your Prudent and Succeſsfull Negotiation with my Lord
General Monck, you having a particular Com­miſſion from the King to treat with
him; with whom when you had Conſerted all things for his Majeſties Return, and
that without Impoſing the leaſt Condition upon him, you Poſted away to
Bruxells to give him an Account of it: In which Journey as well as in the Reſt
of your Conduct in this Affair, you expoſed your ſelf to no Ordinary Danger,
and moſt certainly ſerv'd the King your Maſter more Effectually, then if you
had won more then One Battel for him.

My Lord General who ſeem'd to be Inſpir'd in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=5) the Carrying-
on of this Great Buſineſs, was ſo Cir­cumſpect, that he would not write to the
King by your Lordſhip, for fear you might be Searched upon the Way, and what
you carried Intercepted, and his Great Deſign Diſcover'd before it was Ripe,
and therefore left all to your Care and Pru­dent Management; But at your
Return, he wrote a Letter to his Majeſty, wherein he confirmed to him under
his Hand what he had Promiſed and A­greed in his Treaty with your Lordſhip,
viz. That he would Employ all the Power he had to ſet the King upon his
Throne, and that without Conditi­ons. This Letter was delivered to his Majeſty
at Breda by your Noble Brother Mr Bernard Gran­vill: If ever Letter were
wellcome to a Prince, this had Reaſon to be ſo, ſince it contained no leſs
then a humane Aſſurance that his Majeſties Tra­vels were at an End, and that
the time was come that Allmighty God would Reſtore him to his Crowns &
Kingdoms, from which his Majeſty was ſo long & ſo Unjuſtly kept by moſt Bloody
Uſurpers.

Your Lordſhip is not only happy in the Con­ſcience of your own Actions, and
Virtuous Ex­amples of thoſe who are gone before you, but in the moſt hopefull
Proſpect you have of your Deſcendents. For my Lord Landſdown treading in the
Steps of his Brave Anceſtors, hath been already Courting Honour in the Wars of
Hungary, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=5)
where he hath diſtinctly ſignalized himſelf in all thoſe great Occaſions,
particularly at Kornenberch, where the Duke of Loraine Defeated Twelve
Thouſand Spahyes in a raſe Campagne at the Releiving of Vienna, which was
Beſieged by an Army of Two Hundred Thouſand Combattants; At the Battel of
Baracan, where the King of Poland, & his whole Army had been Certainly loſt,
if the Duke of Loraine, with whom my Lord Lanſdown then was, had not come in,
& turn'd the Day at the very inſtant that fortune was Declaring for the
Infi­dels; & laſtly, at the taking of Gran, the Second Ci­ty of the Kingdom:
and now he is retnrn'd Home with Laurells, & a laſting Monument of his
A­chievements, being Dignified with the Quality of Count of the Empire, and
Honoured to bear his Paternal Coat of Arms upon the Roman Eagle.

But it is an Epiſtle (My Lord) that I am wri­ting, and not a Hiſtory, and
therefore I will Con­clude, humbly Intreating your Lordſhip to give your
Patronage to theſe Verſes, which I Conceive I have ſome Right to Diſpoſe of,
ſince by the fate of Survivorſhip they belong to me, who am the only man
Living of All thoſe Names you find here; Except one▪ Right Reverend Lord,
whoſe Obliging conſent is Obtain'd to this Edition. And therefore I cauſe them
to be Reprinted, and Con­ſecrated to the Immortall Memory of your moſt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=6) Noble Father,
as the greateſt Teſtimony I am able to give your Lordſhip of the Honour I have
for you, & your Family; Deſiring further your Lord­ſhips Pardon for Preſuming
to Reprint and Bind in One Volume together with the ſaid Verſes, a Letter from
his Late Majeſty, the Royal Martyr, to Sr Bevill Granvill, your ſaid Noble
Father; and another with his ſaid Majeſties moſt Gracious Pa­rent to the
County of Cornwall; with his Preſent Majeſties Warrant, given to your Lordſhip
at Bruſſells, for your Signal Services, (already Printed in the Hiſtory of his
Majeſties Reſtauration,) and a particular account of his ſaid Majeſties Grace
and Favour to the Loyal Towns & Burroughs within the Dutchy of Cornwall, upon
your Lordſhips Favourable Mediation for your Country-men: Together with the
relation of that Famous Sea­fight of your aforeſaid Great Grandfather Sir
Richard Granvill, Written by the incomparable Sir Walter Raleigh.

I am,

From the Inner-Tem­ple, Nov. 1. 1684.

My Lord,

Your Lordſhips moſt Humbly Devoted. Servant, Henry Birkhead.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Honourable John Earl of BATHE, Viſcount of Lanſdown, Baron Granvill of Granvill, Bideford, and Kilkhampton, Lord-Lieutenant and High-Steward of the Dutchy of Cornwal, Lord-Warden of the Stanneries, Governour of Plymouth, Groom of the Stole to his Majeſty, Firſt Gentleman of his Majeſties Bed-Chamber▪ and One of the Lords of his Majeſties moſt Honourable Privy-Councill.

## 1\.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=6)

### 1.1. TO THE MEMORY of Sir BEVILL GRANVILL.

IT is not He. I'le not believe mine Eye.

He that could never Fear, can never Dye.

Duſt, Sweat, and Bloud, mixt in that Face, conſpire

To ſay 'tis GRANVILL. Truſt 'em not. The Fire,

That warm'd his Breſt, was Veſtall, Star born Light,

Flame, that no Ocean, Day that fear'd no Night.

It is not He. But weeping Truth ſays, 'Tis:

That Corps of Glory can be None's but His.

So hovers Valour o're that Brow; ſo yet

(As, after Tempeſts, empty'd Clouds ſtill Threat)

Terror leaps from thoſe Eyes, and Rebells Run;

The Souldier lives ſtill, though the Man be gone.

The Man! Courage ſaid More. But Honour, ſitting

With Fame in Councell, found it far more fitting

The World ſhould know him Mortall; that he Fought

On equall terms; that to the Field He brought

Nothing Impenetrable, but his Mind;

Knew Danger and deſpis'd it: Since, we find,

Cowards, Secur'd, Act Valour. All elſe than

Speaking Him more, Death was to prove Him Man.

Then; when, as a Deſtroying Angell, ſent

To Mow a Guilty Nation down, He lent

Blow's like to Whirl winds LANDS-DOWN ſaw Him Stand

Not with a Pike, but Thunder-bolt in's hand.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=7) GRANVILL
againſt an Army. He being one;

Cannon, Horſe, Foot Himſelf. So Fixt, and grown

Unto the Hill H'had Gain'd, and now made good,

That like another Hill, or Rock, He ſtood;

Fort to Himſelf and Us; Stronger then all

Cow'rds Love & Looſe, Steep Mountain, Wood, & Wall,

Whence His Sword Chas'd them once; his Blood do's ſtill,

Sprinkling the Ground, and Hollowing the Hill;

Where, ſince Drops ſhed from ſuch a Loyall Vein,

Rebellion ne're ſhall dare ſet Foot again.

Thomas Maſters.

### 1.2.

IS GRANVILL dead, or Valour? is it He

Hath left this World, or is it Loyalty?

Alas! both Dye with Him, both leave us; how?

Shall none ſurvive but Traitorous Cowards now?

Good Heav'ns forbid, by them the knot's unty'd:

Both by his Patern Live, both in his Perſon Dy'd.

Robert Grave.

### 1.3.

COuld I report, Great GRANVILL, or repeat

Thy famous Actions in thine own ſtout Heat,

Could I write as Thou fought'ſt, the World might ſee

Perhaps ſome Picture of thy Deeds, and Thee,

And, thus inſpir'd from thy bold flame, my Verſe

At once would come forth rapture, and reherſe.

But as thoſe raviſh't Prophets, who of old

Sick of their God, and much too frail to hold

Their ſtrong Inſpirer, firſt felt trance, then ſpoke,

And utter'd Anſwers, which from Labours broke;

So meeting Things too high to be expreſt.

I find my ſelf▪ whileſt I deſcribe, oppreſt.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=7) Thou doſt
at once poſſeſs, and hinder; ſtill

Riſeſt, and multiplieſt between my Quill.

Still bring'ſt new, various, Matter to my Dreſs,

Which ſtill begins▪ and ſtill ſhows Endleſneſs.

So Homer ſtrove with his Achilles, who

Should bravelier write, or who ſhould bravelier do.

So what at firſt He meant an Ode, and Song,

Swell'd to a Work, and Story ten years long.

And what at firſt was deſtin'd to one Shade,

Spread in the Writing, and prov'd Iliade.

Had'ſt Thou, like Others, fought by Rule, and Line,

Who call it Valour Wiſely to decline

Aſſaults, and Dangers, and maintain that there

Can be no Fortitude, where is no Fear;

Hadſt thou beleev'd that They, who do ingage

Themſelves beyond relief, fight not, but rage;

Or that, when men beyond a mean do ſtray,

Their Fury's only Valiant, not They;

We on thy Temples now had planted Bays,

And Thou had'ſt liv'd to hear and feel thy Prayſe.

But Thou did'ſt ſcorn ſuch Rules, and call'dſt ſuch Laws,

Arts how to blemiſh, and deſert a Cauſe.

Countedſt thoſe falſe, whom Others do count wiſe,

And their diſcreet Fear, order'd Cowardice.

Far above all cold precepts, which do preach

Eſcapes, retreats, and fallings back, and teach

Advantages of Time, and place, and thus

Learnedly make Men Puſillanimous;

Or at moſt, valiant to a Point, and all

Their Courage meerly Philoſophicall,

Thou thought'ſt it ſtill Ignobler to retire

With flegme, and coldneſs, then to fall with fire.

Still call'dſt retreating, looſing of the Day,

Still thoughtſt that to be ſafe was to betray.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=8) And where
the Cauſe requir'd it, not to dye,

That 'twas as great a baſeneſs, as to fly.

Thus meeting Dangers in their ſterneſt ſhape,

Thy Arts were ſtill t'encounter, not to ſcape.

Still reckoned'ſt it a Souldiers Stain, and blot,

To be ſecure, not by his Sword, but Plot.

Methinks I ſee Thee ſhaking thy bold ſpear

Againſt a numerous Hoſt, without their fear

Who did beſet Thee, and the ſpacious plain

Before Thee ſtrow'd with Slain fal'n on thy ſlain.

Whilſt all our other Troops, diſcharg'd from fight,

Wonder'd to ſee the War turn'd to a Sight,

Where one encounter'd many, and deſcried

A Siege on theirs, a Duel on our Side.

Great Soul! who didſt contract the Battel to

Thy Solatary ſelf; and there didſt do

Things, which made all our other Forces be

Idle ſpectators of their Victory;

While'ſt ſafer by thy Side, then at their home,

Their buſineſs was to ſee, and overcome.

O what a Terrour iſſued from thy Look,

Which fought as well as Thou, and Priſoners took

By th'eye, as by the Hand; which but beheld

Made the firſt Skirmiſh, and at diſtance quell'd;

Thy unarm'd face ſhew'd dreadful as our Lances,

The foe felt new Artilleries from thy Glances;

Which ſtill, like Native Engines, from Thee flew,

And at once routed, chas'd, and overthrew.

Thus, then, ſecur'd by thy Great ſelf, at once

To us a Bulwark, to thy ſelf a Sconce,

As in a Circle 'bout Thee drawn by the charms

Of thine own Courage, which did arm thy Arms,

How didſt thou dare the numerous Foe? ſtill mock

Their furious Onſets with a ſhook for ſhook?

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=8) Still
'gainſt their Iron Men, and men of Steel,

Like One inchanted all parts but the Heel,

(If We may credit what ſome do report)

Did'ſt hold fight from thy ſelf, as from a Fort;

Impregnable, untoucht? ſtill did it repair

The Faintings of thoſe who about thee were?

Still did'ſt recrute our Loſſes? We did ſee

New Squadrons, as ſome fell, ſtill rais'd from Thee;

Whoſe Valour ran ſupplys; and We from thence

Saw Thee new Troops, new Regiments diſpence,

Still unexhauſted. We can now unfold

Th' ambiguous rumour, and report, which told,

And ſpoke of our Increaſe i'th Weſt, that there,

Two Camps, two Armies for us did appear.

The Corniſhmen made One, the Other Fame,

Which reckon'd Thee Stout Granville, and thy Name,

Still as our other Camp; from whence We drew

Freſh Legions ſtill, and thus from handfulls grew.

Here, ſome would chide thy Valour, whoſe bold Heat

Joyn'd thine own to the Enemies defeat;

And ſay 'twas raſhneſs in Thee to expoſe

Thy ſelf a Pikeman againſt Horſemen Foes;

As if to fall had been thy Plot, and aym,

And Thou had'ſt ſome Ambition to be ſlain.

'Tis true, indeed, our Conqueſt had been more,

Had'ſt Thou liv'd to behold it, with the Store

Of Worthies who eſcap'd; Since, loſing Thee,

We did not Win, but change a Victory.

Yet if to Dye with Honour be a Grace;

If to fall, and to conſecrate the place

On which Thou fell'ſt, and make it ſhcred Ground

To all thoſe who ſurviv'd Thee, and ſtood round,

Be Nobler then to live; Thoſe Books, which tell

Of ancient Herp's, who devoted fell,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=9) And
yielding up their ſtout, and Warlike Ghoſts,

With their brave ruine did preſerve their Hoſts,

Will always, be thy Chronicle; whom Death

Snatcht like a Decius hence; whoſe hallowed Breath

Flew from Thee like an Offering; who dyed'ſt twice,

Our Souldier once, and once our Sacrifice.

Jaſper Main.

### 1.4.

NOt to be wrought by Malice, Gain, or Pride,

To a Compliance with the Thriving Side;

Not to take Arms for love of Change, or Spight,

But only to maintain Afflicted Right;

Not to dye vainly in purſuit of Fame,

Perverſely ſeeking after Voice and Name;

Is to Reſolve, Fight, Dye, as Martyrs do:

And thus did He, Souldier, and Martyr too.

He might (like ſome Reſerved Men of State,

Who look not to the Cauſe; but to its Fate)

Have ſtood aloof, engag'd on Neither Side,

Prepar'd at laſt to ſtrike in with the Tyde.

But well-weigh'd Reaſon told him, that when Law

Either is Renounc'd, or Miſapply'd by th'awe

Of falſe-nam'd Common-wealths men; when the Right

Of King, and Subject, is ſuppreſ'd by Might;

When all Religion either is Refus'd

As meer Pretence, or meerly, as That us'd;

When thus the Fury of Ambition Swells,

Who is not Active, Modeſtly Rebells.

Whence, in a juſt eſteem, to Church and Crown

He offred All, and nothing thought His own.

This thruſt Him into Action, Whole, and Free;

Knowing no Intereſt but Loyalty;

Not loving Arms as Arms, or Strife for Strife;

Nor Waſtfull, nor yet Sparing of his Life;

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=9) A great
Exactor of Himſelf, and then

By fair Commands, no leſs of Other men;

Courage, and Judgment had their equall part,

Councell was added to a Generous Heart;

Affairs were juſtly tim'd; nor did he catch

At an Affected Fame of Quick Diſpatch;

Things were Prepar'd; Debated, and then Done,

Nor raſhly Brook, nor vainly Over-ſpun;

Falſe Periods no where by Deſign were made,

As are by thoſe, who make the Warr their Trade;

The Building ſtill was ſuited to the Ground,

Whence every Action iſſu'd Full and Round.

We know who blind their Men with ſpecious Lyes,

With Revelations, and with Prophecies.

Who promiſe Two things to obtain a Third,

And are themſelves by the like Motives ſtirr'd:

By no ſuch Engines He His Souldiers draws;

He knew no Arts, but Courage and the Cauſe;

With theſe he brought them on, as well-train'd men,

And with theſe too he brought them off agen.

I ſhould, I know, track Him through all the Courſe

Of his great Actions, ſhew their Worth and Force:

But, although all are Handſom, yet we caſt

A more intentive Eye ſtill on the laſt.

When now th'incenſed Rebell proudly came

Down, like a Torrent without Bank, or Damm,

When Undeſerv'd Succeſs urg'd on their force,

That Thunder muſt come down to ſtop their Courſe,

Or Granville muſt ſtep in: Then Granville ſtood,

And with Himſelf oppos'd, and checkt the Flood.

Conqueſt, or Death, was all His Thought. So fire

Either Orecomes, or doth it ſelf expire.

His Courage work't like Flames, caſt heat about,

Here, there, on this, on that ſide; None gave out;

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=10) Not any
Pike in that Renowned Stand,

But took new Force from His Inſpired Hand;

Souldier encourag'd Souldier, Man urg'd Man,

And He urg'd All: ſo much Example can.

Hurt upon Hurt, Wound upon Wound did call,

He was the But, the Mark, the Aim of All:

His Soul this while retir'd from Cell to Cell,

At laſt flew up from all, and then He fell:

But the Devoted Stand, enraged more

From that his Fate, ply'd hotter then before,

And Proud to fall with Him, ſworn not to yield,

Each ſought an Honour'd Grave, and gain'd the Field.

Thus, He being fall'n, his Action fought a new:

And the Dead conquer'd, whiles the Living ſlew.

This was not Natures Courage▪ nor that thing

We Valour call, which Time and Reaſon bring;

But a Diviner Fury, Fierce, and High,

Valour tranſported into Extaſie,

Which Angells, looking on Us from above,

Uſe to conveigh into the Souls they love.

You now that boaſt the Spirit, and its ſway,

Shew Us his Second, and we'l give the Day.

We know your Politique Axiom—Lurk, or Fly.

Ye cannot Conquer, 'cauſe ye dare not Dye.

And though you thank God, that you loſt none there,

Becauſe Th'were ſuch, who Liv'd not when they were;

Yet your great Generall (who doth Riſe and Fall,

As this Succeſſes do; whom you dare call,

As fame unto you doth Reports diſpenſe,

Either a Traytor, or His Excellence)

How e'ere he reigns now by unheard of Laws,

Could wiſh His Fate together with his Cauſe.

And Thou (Bleſt Soul) whoſe Clear Compacted Fame,

As Amber Bodies Keeps, preſerves thy Name,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=10) Whoſe Life
affords what doth content Both Eyes,

Glory for People, Subſtance for the Wiſe;

Go laden up with Spoyles, poſſeſs That Seat

To which the Valiant, when th'have done retreat:

And when Thou ſeeſt an happy Period ſent

To theſe Diſtructions, and the Storm quite ſpent;

Look down, and ſay; I have my ſhare in All,

Much Good grew from my Life, Much from my Fall.

William Cartwright.

### 1.5.

WHat We have Loſt in Thee, We need not write,

Thine Enemies will do't; and in meer Spite

Commend Thy Valour, that the World may know,

In Granvill's Fall, the Greatneſs of Our Blow;

Let them alone to give Thee thy whole Due;

We only need Believe They can ſpeak True.

Nor is it fit we ſhould with Tears lament

That Bloud thy Self thought'ſt honourably ſpent;

And ſcorned'ſt at their Alms to draw a Breath,

From whoſe Gift nothing's Noble but a Death;

Lets rather Weep for them, by whom 'twas Spilt,

Whoſe Beſt of Courage was but worſt of Guilt;

Who had been Cowards had they Got the Day,

And ſhew'd Beſt Spirits when they Ran away;

Thoſe pittied things yield matter for a Tear:

But Thy great Worth moves in a higher Sphear.

He only Mourns That right, that Fights like Thee,

And a fierce Charge is a good Elegie.

Brave Soul! me thinks I ſee how thou did'ſt ſtand

Directing Victory to the Right Hand,

How Thou did'ſt ſet Her in again, that Day,

Who, but for Thee, had almoſt loſt her Way.

That little ſpark (dropt from Eternity)

Dilated by its ſelf, and Loyalty.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=11) How it
Forgat its Bound, the narrow Span

Of Fleſh and Blood that meaſures out a man;

And ſtoutly durſt adventure to oppoſe

Thy Equall Self againſt whole Troops of Foes!

May Honour Dwell upon thy Tomb, and keep

Thy Glories waking, while thy Duſt doth ſleep:

And may that fart'ned Turf, whence Pregnant Fame▪

Yet Brooding Hovers to keep warm the ſame,

Grow fruitfull from thy Blood, untill it bring,

A Flower, from whence a ſecond Mars may Spring.

William Barker.

### 1.6.

THou Name of Valour! Heir of all that Worth,

Which Fates with conſtant Bounty have powr'd forth

On Granvills honour'd Race? In whom did dye

More then their Army, more then Victory

Could recompenſe, which to that gallant Stand

We owe, from ruine ſnatcht by thy brave Hand.

Oh I could curſe the villains odds! For when

We hazzard Gold, They, but the droſs of men.

Bate me the price of ſin, the City-pay,

And what they ſteal, in order to obey

The Houſes Vote, more then one Regiment

Ile name, wherein not ten are worth what's ſpent

Barely in feeding muskets; we've oft loſt

Powder; to kill ſuch Rogues doth not quit coſt.

And yet 'tis nobly fought, ſince conſcience

Alone begets thoſe flames, not any ſenſe

Of Triumph; for what honour is't to tell

That here a Sergeant-Major-Cobler fell,

There a Mechanick-Colonell dropt down,

Not fit to ſerve in any honeſt Town.

Our Conqueſt is unpleaſant; we muſt grieve;

And wiſh the puniſht Rebells did ſtill live,

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=11) Reſerv'd
for more ignoble fall; ſince here

Juſtice (though ſacred name) was bought too dear.

Sad Victory! the Frontleſs faction now

Thank, yet not mock God for their overthrow.

Since gladly they would ſacrifice a floud

Out of the Commons veins, for this one bloud.

A thouſand lives, and thouſand Souls to boot

They'l give; it coſts them naught, let th'fools look to't.

Guilty and wretched Commons! tell me, why

Only in order to your miſery

You will be Perjur'd Rebells? whence doth flow

This frantick pleaſure, from your ſin, or woe?

Did you improve your ſafety, did your ground,

Like your deceivers malice, being drown'd

In bloud, more fruitfull grow, you then did ſell

Your Souls for ſomething; but to purchaſe Hell

With Poverty, and dangers, that you may

Be ſooner dead, yet whil'ſt you live, a prey,

Is ſo rare Phrenſy, that you only can

Be thought to differ in the ſhape of man

From wildeſt beaſts. But you are forc't to fight,

You love your King, and wiſh He had His Right;

Yet aw'd take arms againſt him, money ſtill

Contribute, Traytors are againſt your will.

Unworthy, vain excuſe! why ſhould you fear

Thoſe few ſeducers? Terrible they were

By your abuſed Strength; if you withdraw

Your Aids they fall, to the long injur'd Law

Juſt Sacrifices; ſhould they carry hence

Your wealth, they'd leave behind your innocence;

Leave you return'd to Duty, and to Peace;

Hating theſe certain Pledges of increaſe.

Dudley Diggs.

### 1.7.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=12) THe
Villains now are ripe, let's pay our Vow,

See Granvills blood ſtands texted on their brow!

If their courſe Veyns an Ocean ſhould disburſe

'Twould not appeaſe, becauſe the more the worſe;

Behold great Bartue, Stuart, Compton, now,

Sage Pierpont,, and freſh bleeding Cav'endiſh too!

Names that e're long ſhall ſtrike this perjur'd Crowd,

And ſhoot down Vengeance from that Bow ith'Clowd,

Which ſhall conſume theſe weeds that Truth may grow,

Granvill hath pawn'd his blood it ſhall be ſo.

Great valliant Saint! Loving and lov'd agen,

(For he that conquers Fear may conquer Men)

Thy choice was juſt and early, not adjourn'd

'Till the great ſcale at Keinton field was turn'd:

See, GRANVILL's up (the mighty Corniſh crys)

Which (like a Beacon fir'd) made them All riſe,

Thus rouz'd, thou arm'd their inſide day by day,

Dealt flame and Spirit to them as their pay,

Clear'd and advanc'd their blood, caſt them a new,

'Till in an inſtant they ſtout Gyants grew;

Then led by Thee, they made vaſt Devon quake,

So as looſe Stamford frighted left the ſtake,

Whoſe Fort, Ditch, Bulwark, did but raiſe thy heart,

Valour no more is borke then made by Art;

Nay when (thy Powder gone, compell'd to ceaſe)

That thou muſt bleed, or veeld to what ſhould pleaſe

The two new families of Parliament;

Though Ammunition, Courage was not ſpent,

Then, then thy ſteel made them out-run their wheels,

Leave All, and take nought with them but their heels;

Thus Bodmin, Stratton felt thy influence,

Great BEVILL's Sword return'd not empty thence.

But when the Rowt (as th'hill it ſelf) came down

He graſp'd a ſpear and underpropt the Crown,

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=12) Plac'd
like the flaming Cherubim, laid about,

Stood Guardian there to keep th'Apoſtates out,

Rear'd up like Sampſon, took firm hold o'th' Beam,

Then pull'd all down, Himſelf, the Houſe and Them,

His bleeding corps then on the Mount he hurl'd,

And fought it out with them in th'other World,

Till they gave off, letting their Matches burn.

To light his conquering Aſhes to his Urn.

Had thy Godolphin ſtaid to help us here,

His Pen had now took meaſure of thy ſpear,

'T had made thee Emperor of the Weſt and All,

We blind with tears, ſee nothing but thy fall,

Which now doth bleed again, and doubly pierce,

To looſe both Granvills ſword, and Sidneys verſe.

Cornwall (that glorious Dukedom) hence ſhall be

Ador'd, Eternall by Prince CHARLES and Thee,

Let their cheap Legions live (unfit to dye)

Who like their weapons ſtrike they know not why,

Give our juſt Swords more ſatisfying duſt,

Thread all the bold Committee at one thruſt,

Scatter the Plot, till all the ill-built frame

Fall down as tribute to Great BEVILL's Name,

That Name (which ſhames Their malice and our wit)

Shall laſt as long as They conſpir'd to ſit.

John Birkinhead.

### 1.8.

THey, that give Thanks for Overthrows, had ne're

Fairer Pretence to God, then they had here.

Mark't you not'midſt our latter Triumphs one

Intruding Sigh? Heard you not one ſad Groan?

'Twas for the valliant Granvill: which one Croſs

Allay'd our Victory, and made it Loſs.

Granvill, whoſe very Name the Rebells found

Dealing Revenge, and Death in every wound.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=13) While in
the fierce Aſſault, they did not know,

Whether they ſhould wiſh Thee alive, or no▪

How many trembling Ghoſts did we enlarge

To cry Thee mercy in the Second Charge:

When the inraged Corniſh, fierce upon

Revenge of Thee, cry'd Granvill, and kill'd on.

Treaſure of Valour! in thy bold Deſigns

That Country glories more, then in her Mines.

Thus fell the mighty Scaeva, while the Foe

Trembled, and fear'd the very Overthrow.

Thus in the North our brave New-caſtle ſtood,

With more Succeſs, with Honour no man cou'd,

Henceforch the Pike we doubly honour'd call,

From that One Triumph Fam'd, from this one Fall.

Robert Maſters.

### 1.9.

HAllow my temples, let my thoughts be dreſt

In ſuch attire as fits a Poet-Prieſt.

That no rude accent may Profane thy name,

But all things be as ſpotleſs as thy Fame;

That Fame ſo great, that none but Granvills can

In the next age believe it of a Man.

Granvill! The Corniſh Paean it ſhall be,

And only heard in Songs of Victory!

Th'Eternall Theam of Poets! which ſhall give

Strength to their Lines, and make their Verſes live.

Thou that in thoſe black times dard'ſt to be good,

When Treaſon was beſt Virtue, when none cou'd

Be ſafe and honeſt; that almoſt alone

Dard'ſt love the King, when a whole Nation

Was growing one great Rebell; haſt firm ſtood,

And gave the firſt great ſtop to th' growing flood;

Thou Deſtiny of our new moulded State,

That firſt did'ſt make it's greatneſs ſhrink; whom Fate

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=13) Prepar'd
to ſave a Kingdom; and did give

Thee Virtue great enough to make it live;

How will the Ghoſts of thoſe ſlain Rebells ſhake

To ſee thy Shade? How Brooke and Hampden quake

To find themſelves not ſafe, and that to dye

Ha's only chang'd the Scene of Victory?

How will their Guilt grow double, when they ſee

Thy Shine; twice frighted by themſelves and Thee?

That glorious Shine, that ſhews the difference

Of Dying truly in the KINGS defence;

That though both fall together, and the bloud

Of Traytors and a Patriots, make one floud;

They in the Shambles, He at the Altar dies,

They fall as Beaſts, and He a Sacrifice.

Now may thoſe Rebells one Thankſgiving make

And not Blaſpheme, nor fair Truth Scandal take.

Thy death makes honeſt all their thick-skin'd Lyes,

From which alone all their feigned Victories

Grow truths. How had We loſt in that one ſtroke

A Kingdom, had not ſuch brave Vertue broke

From thy Example, as did ſtrike a flame

Into thy Followers, great as was thy Name.

Yet, let them boaſt their Conqueſt if they can,

Wee'have gained an Army, and have loſt a Man.

And let them preach Thee ſlain, ſince from thy Death

A Thouſand allmoſt Granvilles gather breath.

So when the Sun's forc'd hence by Sable Night,

Myrtads of Stars ſpring from his falling light.

William Creed.

### 1.10.

YEt boaſt not Senate, know Hee could not Dy;

Untill he had obtain'd the Victory:

Death waited for that minute, that her ſtate

Might riſe more glorious through his nobler Fate.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=14) Methinks
I now behold Him as Hee ſtood,

(Undaunted Spirit!) when that ſtately wood

Of Pikes march'd up; when like a Captain Oake

He led that underwood, and took that ſtroake

Which ſhould have fell'd the Grove: I ſee him ſtand

Diſpenſing Valour by his brave Command,

And braver Actions, the Souldiers ſwords

Being whetted by's Example, and his Words.

Would this were reall; but our fancies move

Not guided by our knowledge, but our Love.

I could lament His Death, but that I know

All accents of our grief are far below

His vaſter merit: rather let my Steel

Revenge his Death, and make their Conqueror feel

The anger of his Ghoſt; who ſlyly fled

From Granville but a Ghoſt from Granville dead.

Go weep for Cowards; he who bravely Dyes

Ought to have Muſique at his Obſequies.

You happy ſouls who have the ſacred truſt

Of his dead aſhes; ſee no Coward duſt

Come near his Urne; 'tis fit his aſhes lye

Where there is none but Valiant Company.

Near Lindſey's, Denby's, or Northampton's ſide,

(Who Conquer'd dying) raiſe his Pyramide:

Which may reſtore him to the World agen,

A Conquerer of Time, as well as Men.

Peter Mew.

### 1.11.

WIſdom directs, when Juſtice dictates right,

And Courage (if provok't) then bids men fight:

Wiſdom to Granville ſaid, thy Corniſh friends

Are mates enough to work thy noble ends;

Tis fit (ſpake Juſtice) to defend a Crown:

Then fight (ſaid Courage) gain thee brave renown,

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=14) And Fame
ſaid to him, if thou dy'ſt, then I

Will keep thy Everlaſting memory;

Fate only frown'd; Granville obeys; commands

While Fate contriv'd his Death by Rebells hands;

Yet Friends, and Country do conſerve his Name,

With Wiſdom, Juſtice, Fortitude, and Fame.

Henry Love.

### 1.12.

HEroic Martyr, whoſe Immortal death

Inliven'd here, giving our Realm new breath,

(For when the Sun ſetts bloody in the Weſt,

The day ſtill riſes brighter in the Eaſt)

How Loyal wert Thou, when the general ring

Was heard No Biſhops, while they meant No King;

And only to wrong Charles was to be true,

As robbing of the Church pay'd Heav'n it's due:

When too much Liberty did us enthrall,

And all Religions turn'd to none at all;

Whilſt Rebel Members 'gainſt their Head aim'd darts,

Voting Him none, by Whom they all are parts;

And their Militia fought Him, for his ayd,

To make Him Great, when Public Faith is paid!

'Mong theſe Self-contradictours You prov'd ſtil

Faithfull; and free to die, as they to Kill:

Like Decius, a Devoted Sacrifice,

Moſt ſure to fall, yet by thy fall to riſe:

Whoſe Brittiſh acts did Pompey's words retrive,

Wee needs muſt Stand, wee muſt not needs Survive.

When on the Mount Himſelf a Mount withſtood

For th'Iron age too ſuitable a Brood,

(Who were Achilles like, as far as Steel

And Styx could doe't, all proof, but in the Heel)

Courage was all his Shield, his Gorgon's head,

Striking with blowes, and with amazement dead;

While from his wounds what valiant blood did poſt,

Moſt animated Him, when bravely loſt;

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=15) Seeming
ſome Martial Deity to his Foe,

'Cauſe they had fear enough to make Him ſo:

They that fled ſtronger, than Hee took the field,

Worſe Cowards when they fight, than when they yield:

Like timorous Hare-Knights at each ſhot they ſtart;

Or Rome's fam'd Ox, of metal void, and heart.

But this ſtout Champion triumph't in his fall,

And when Hee was moſt conquer'd, conquer'd all;

As lofty Caſtles, when they ſink, dilate

The ruine round about, and ſcatter fate.

Nay his loſs routed, whilſt his Army thriv'd,

Heirs to freſh Spirit through his death deriv'd;

Which by a Tranſmigration, as it ran

In one before, dwell't then in every man.

His Anceſtours t'our Norman King ally'd,

Who fought belowe Covictors by his ſide,

Him from above their glory ſaw, and ſhame;

They living won, his Careaſs overcame:

Which, that it ſelf a plain reward might have,

Obtein'd a poſthume Earldom in the grave.

Thus Codrus fell, yet all his Dignitys

Sunk with Himſelf: but whilſt our Offering dies,

His Of ſpring here growe Peers, Hee in the Skys.

Henry Birkhead.

### 1.13. THE CLOSE.

THus ſlain thy Valiant Anceſtor did lye,

When His One Bark a Navy did defie;

When now encompaſs'd round, He Victor ſtood,

And bath'd His Pinnace in his Conquering Bloud;

'Till all His Purple Current dry'd, and ſpent,

He fell, and made the Waves his Monument.

Where ſhall th'next famous Granvills Aſhes ſtand?

Thy Grandfiere fills the Seas, and Thou the Land.

Martin L Lewellin.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=15)

### 1.14. His Majeſties Letter to Sr Bevill Granvill, after the great Victory
Obtained over the Rebels, at the Battel of Strarton.

To Our Right Truſty and Well-beloved Sir Bevill Granvill, at Our Army in
Cornwall.

CHARLES R.

RIght Truſty and Well-beloved, Wee greet you Well.

Wee have ſeen your Letter to Endymion Porter Our Servant: But your whole
Conduct of Our Affairs in the Weſt, doth ſpeak your Zeal to Our Service and
the Pub­lick Good in ſo full a Meaſure, as Wee Reſt abundantly ſatisfy'd with
the Teſtimony thereof. Your Labours and your Expences Wee are graciouſly
Senſible of: And Our Royall Care hath been to eaſe you in all that Wee could.
What hath fallen ſhort of Our Princely Purpoſes, and your Expectations, Wee
know you will attribute to the great malignity of the Rebellion Wee had, and
have here to wreſtle withall: And Wee know well, how effectuall a diverſion of
that miſchievous ſtrength you have made from us at your own great hazzards.
Wee aſſure you Wee have all tender ſence of the hardneſs you have endured, and
the State wherein you ſtand: Wee ſhall not fail to procure you what ſpeedy
relief may be: In the mean ſpace Wee ſend you Our moſt hearty Thanks for ſome
encouragement, and aſſurances in the Word of a Gracious Prince, that (God
enabling Us) Wee ſhall ſo re­flect upon your faithfull Services, as you and
yours ſhall have cauſe to acknowledge Our Bounty and Favour: And ſo Wee bid
you heartily farewell. Given at Our Court at Oxford the 24th of March,
1642-43.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=16)

### 1.15. His Majeſties Gracious Letter to the County of Cornwall, after the
Death of Sir Bevill Granvill, and thoſe other Eminent perſons Slain in his
Majeſties Service, Namely, Arundall, Mohun, Slaning, Trevanion, Godolphin, &c.

CHARLES R.

WE are ſo highly ſenſible of the extraordinary Merit of Our County of Cornwal,
of their Zeal for the De­fence of Our Perſon, and the Juſt Rights of Our
Crown, (in a time, when We could contribute ſo little to Our Own Defence, or
to their Aſſiſtance; in a time, when not, only no Reward appeared, but great
and probable Dangers were threatned to Obedience and Loyalty;) of their great
and eminent Courage and Patience in their in­defatigable Proſecution of their
great Work againſt ſo potent an Enemy, backed with ſo Strong, Rich, and
Po­pulous Cities, and ſo plentifully furniſhed and ſupplied with Men, Arms,
Money, Ammunition, and Proviſion of all kinds; and of the wonderfull ſucceſs,
with which it hath pleaſed Almighty God (though with the loſs of ſome moſt
eminent Perſons, who ſhall never be forgotten by Us) to reward their Loyalty
and Patience by many ſtrange Victories over their and Our Enemies, in deſpight
of all humane probability, and all imaginable diſadvan­tages; That as We
cannot be forgetfull of ſo great De­ſerts, ſo We cannot▪ but deſire to publiſh
to all the World, and perpetuate to all Time, the Memory of theſe their
Merits, and of Our Acceptance of the ſame. And to that end, We do hereby
render Our Royal Thanks to that Our County, in the moſt Publick and moſt
Laſting manner We can deviſe, Commanding Copies hereof to be Printed and
Publiſhed; and one of them to be read in every Church and Chappel therein, and
to be kept for ever as a Record in the ſame, That as long as the [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=16) Hiſtory of theſe
Times, and of this Nation ſhall con­tinue, the memory of how much that County
hath merited from Us and Our Crown, may be derived with it to Poſterity. Given
at Our Camp at SUDELEY Caſtle the Tenth of September. 1643.

### 1.16. The Gracious Patent of his Majeſty King Charles the Firſt to the
County of Cornwall.

CHARLES By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, &c. To all to whom theſe Preſents ſhall come, Greeting▪
know Yee, that Wee out of Our Princely Contemplation of of the many and
extraordinary faithfull Services to Us of late performed, by Our County of
Cornwall, And for their better Incouragement to proceed in their Duty and
Alle­geance to Our Perſon, and Crown of England, and for di­vers other Good
Cauſes and Conſiderations Us thereunto eſpecially moving, Have out of Our
Special Grace, certain Knowledge, and meer Motion, Given and Granted, and by
theſe Preſents, for Us Our Heirs and Succeſſors, do Give and Grant unto all
and every the Men and Inhabi­tants, Our Leige-Subjects of Our Kingdom of
England, within the ſaid County of Cornwall, now being, or here­after to be;
That they and every of them by themſelves, or any of them, their or any of
their Factors, Agents, or Servants, ſhall and may have Liberty and Freedom
from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, to Trade, Traffick,
and Commerce with their Ships and other Veſ­ſels, and their Goods and
Merchandize unto and from the Havens, Towns, and all Ports and places within
the Do­minion of the King of Denmarke, and Great Duke of Muſ­covye. And all
Ports and Places within the Levant Seas. And unto all and from all and every
of them whilſt reſpe­ctively [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=17) they, or any of
them, are or ſhall be in Amity with Us, Our Heirs or Succeſſors, whether he
Merchants of Our Eaſt Land Ruſſia, & Turkey Companie of London, & the
Merchants of the Company of Merchant-Adventurers of London, or of any, or
either of them, do, or may Trade, and into and from all other Ports and places
whatſoever beyond the Seas, for the time being in Amity, with Us, Our Heirs
and Succeſſors; whether any of the Subjects for the time being of Us, Our
Heirs and Succeſſors, for ſuch time or times, do or may Trade, Traffick, or
Com­merce; in as full, ample and beneficial manner, as Wee Can grant the ſame;
Saving allways to Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors from the ſaid Men and
Inhabitants of Our ſaid County of Cornwall, their Factors and Agents to be
duly paid unto Us, Our Heirs, and Succeſſors, to Our and their Uſe, All ſuch
Cuſtoms and other Duties and Pay­ments upon, and for their Merchandizes and
Goods to be Exported and Imported, as ſhall from time to time become due and
payable to Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors in that reſpect. Likewiſe ſaving all
Rights, Duties, or Payments any way belonging too or in reſpect of the Dutchy
of Cornwall; Yielding and Paying thereof unto Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors the
Sum of Four Shillings of Law­full Engliſh Money, to be paid unto the hands of
the Sheriff of the County of Cornwall, at the Feaſt of All Saints Yearly: And
hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors, Willing and Commanding; that all the
Officers and every the Miniſters of what Nature, Condition, or Degree ſo­ever,
and all other the Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors whom theſe ſhall or
may any ways concern, to take Special notice to all intents and purpoſes as
they and every of them ſhall reſpectively anſwer the contrary at their
perills. And Wee do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Succeſſors, further Promiſe
and Grant, unto the [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=17) aforeſaid Men
and Inhabitants of our ſaid County of Cornwall as well preſent as to come;
that if, and as often as any doubts or queſtions ſhall happen to ariſe for,
touching, or concerning, the Validity of theſe Our Letters-Patents; That then,
and ſo often upon the Humble Petition of the foreſaid Men & Inhabitants of Our
ſaid County of Cornwall to Us, Our Heirs, & Succeſſors, exhibited, orupon
Notice or Certificate to Us, Our Heirs, and Succeſſors, by the Learned of
Councel, of the aforeſaid Men and Inhabitants of Our ſaid County of Cornwall,
touching any Defeet re­quiſite to be Amended; We, Our Heirs, and Succeſſors,
will Graciouſly Grant Other Letters-Patents unto the ſaid Men and Inhabitants
of Our ſaid County of Cornwall, with ſuch and ſo many Amendments,
Explications, Amplifica­tions, and Additions, as by the ſaid Council of the
afore­ſaid Men and Inhabitants of Our ſaid County of Cornwall ſhall be
adviſed, and thought fit; And which any way may tend to the Confirmation of
Theſe Our Letters-Pa­tents, or to the Perfection of Our Intention before, in
theſe Preſents, any way appearing. And Wee further Will, And by theſe Preſents
for Us, Our Heirs, and Succeſſors, do Grant unto the a foreſaid Men and
Inhabitants of Our ſaid County of Cornwall, as well Preſent as to Come, that
theſe Our Letters Patents, or the Inrolement thereof ſhall be in all things
Firm, Valid, Good, and Sufficient, and Effectual, in the Law, againſt Us, Our
Heirs, and Succeſ­ſors, as well in all Courts as elſewhere, within Our Kingdom
of England, without any Confirmation, Liceneſe, or Toleration, from Us, Our
Heirs, or Succeſſors, any way hereafter to be procured or obtained;
Notwith­ſtanding the not finding of Office, or Offices, Inquiſition or
Inquiſitions, by which Our Title, in the Placit ought to be found, before the
making of theſe Our Let­ters-Patents. And Notwithſtanding that the aforeſaid
Men [[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=18) &
Inhabitants of Our County of Cornwall, in Conſtitution of Law be not reputed a
Corporation or Body-Politick, nor Capable in Law to hold the Priviledge of
theſe Pre­ſents Granted; any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Proclam' or Proviſion
heretofore Had, Made, Enacted, Ordained, or Provided, or any other Thing, C
[...]e or Matter ſoever to the Contrary hereof, in any wiſe Notwithſtanding.
In Witneſs whereof Wee have cauſed theſe our Letters to be made Patents,
Witneſs Our ſelf at Oxford the Twenty Sixth day of January in the Nineteenth
Year of Our Reign.

> Per bre' de Privato Sigillo.

### 1.17. A True Account of His Majeſties Particular Grace and Favour to the
Loyal Towns & Burroughs within the Dutchy of Cornwall, by the Mediation of the
Right Honourable John Earl of Bathe, Lord Lieutenant & High Steward of the
ſaid Dutchy, and Lord-Warden of the Stanneries, &c.  
Whitchall, December 12. 1684.

THe Right Honourable the Earl of Bathe being lately at His Government of
Plymouth, to Settle by His Ma­jeſties Command the Affairs of that Gariſon, and
the Militia of Cornwal under His Lieutenancy, the ſeveral Towns and Burroughs
within the Dutchy of Cornwal, who had Uuanimouſly and with great Chearfulneſs
re­ſolved to Surrender their Charters and Franchiſes to His Majeſty, made
their Applications to His Lordſhip as their Lieutenant, to Intercede with His
Majeſty, that they might, by reaſon of the great diſtance, be excuſed from
their Perſonal Attendance with their Surrenders and Charters: To which His
Majeſty being pleaſed to Con­deſcend, the ſaid Corporations delivered their
Surrenders [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=18) to His Lordſhip
for His Majeſties Uſe; humbly praying Him to lay them at His Majeſties Feet:
Which His Lord­ſhip at His return hither having done accordingly, with a
Petition on their behalf, His Majeſty was pleaſed Gra­ciouſly to accept of
them, and to Command His Lordſhip to aſſure the ſaid Corporations, That He
very well re­membred the Duty and Loyalty of that County in the worſt Times of
Rebellion; and was well pleaſed with this freſh Demonſtration of it by them.

Which above-mentioned Signification of His Majeſties Pleaſure, was by His
Majeſties Command Ordered to be Printed in the Gazette, and which was done
accordingly.

### 1.18. To the King's Moſt Excellent Majeſty.  
The Humble Petition of John Earl of Bathe, Your Maje­ſties Lieutenant of
Cornwal, and Lord Warden of Your Majeſties Stanneries, &c.

Sheweth,

THat the Mayors and Burgeſſes of the ſeveral Towns and Burroughs within Your
Majeſties Dutchy of Cornwal, againſt whom Writs of Quo Warranto were lately
Iſſued, have Unanimouſly with great Chearfulneſs, and ſome Emulation who
ſhould be moſt forward, (excepting only one ſmall incon­ſiderable Burrough)
expreſſed an entire Submiſſion and De­ference to Your Royal Pleaſure; and have
Deſired and En­truſted Your Petitioner to lay the reſpective surrenders of
their Franchiſes and Privileges, and the Charters by which they claim the
ſame, with their cuſtoms and Preſcriptions, at Your Majeſties Royal Feet;
Humbly beſeeching Your Majeſty to Grant and Confirm their Ancient Franchiſes
and Privileges, with ſuch Additions, Alterations and Reſervations as Your
Majeſty in Your Great and Royal Wiſdom ſhall think fit.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=19) The ſmall
Revenues of the greateſt part of the ſaid Bur­roughs, and the ſignal Loyalty
and Sufferings of them all, and of all Cornwal in general, with the great
diſtance of their Habita­tions from Your Royal Palace, gives Your ſaid
Petitioner Con­fidence moſt humbly to pray in their Behalfs, That Your Majeſty
will be Graciouſly pleaſed to excuſe their Perſonal Attendance with their ſaid
Surrenders and Charters, and to receive them from the Hands of Your ſaid
Petitioner; and that their ſeve­ral and reſpective new Charters may paſs the
Great Seal, and other Offices without Fees, or other Charges. Which Royal
Bounty will greatly Encourage Them, and all Your Majeſties other Loyal
Subjects within Your ſaid Dutchy, in that Duty and Loyalty which they on this
Occaſion, as their Anceſtors with moſt of their Countrymen in the worſt Times
of Re­bellion, to the ruine of their Eſtates, and loſs of their neareſt and
deareſt Relations, have according to their Duty moſt readily and faithfully
expreſſed.

And Your Petitioner ſhall ever Pray, &c.

BATHE.

### 1.19. Unto which ſaid Petition, His Majeſty was Pleaſed to return this
Gracious Anſwer following, by the Right Honourable the Earl of Sunderland, His
Majeſties Prin­cipal Secretary of State.

WHereas the ſeveral Towns and Burroughs within the Counties of Cornwal and
Devon, mentioned in the Liſt hereunto annexed, have voluntarily ſurren­dred
unto His Majeſty by the Hands of the Right Honou­rable the Earl of Bathe,
their Lord Lieutenant, all their Charters, with their Franchiſes and
Priviledges, which [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=19) they hold either
by Antient Cuſtom, Preſcription or o­therwiſe, humbly beſeeching His Majeſty
to Regrant them new Charters, with ſuch Alterations, Additions and
Reſervations as His Majeſty ſhall think fit; His Ma­jeſty having taken the
ſame into His Conſideration, and alſo the humble Petition of the ſaid Earl of
Bathe, repre­ſenting the many Eminent and Signal Services, Loyalty and great
Sufferings of the ſaid Towns and Country, in general, during the worſt Times
of Rebellion, which His Majeſty himſelf well remembers, and being therefore
Graciouſly pleaſed to accept of the ſaid Surrenders from the Hands of the ſaid
Earl, excuſing their Perſonal At­tendance, His Majeſty is pleaſed to Command
Me to ſig­nifie His Pleaſure, That the ſeveral New Charters which ſhall be
Granted to the ſaid Towns and Burroughs, paſs the reſpective Offices and Seals
without Paying Fees; Whereof all Perſons whom it may concern are to take
Notice.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the 10th Day of De­cember, 1684.

Sunderland.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=20)

### 1.20. A Liſt of tbe ſeveral Surrenders of the Towns and Burroughs within
the Dutchy of Cornwal, Preſented to His Maje­ſty by the Right Honourable the
Earl of Bathe.

CORNWAL.

  * LAnceſton.
  * Truro.
  * Loſtwithial.
  * Bodman.
  * Liſcard.
  * Penryn by the Mayor and Magiſtrates.
  * Penryn by the Portreave and Burgeſſes.
  * Metchell alias Midſholl, by Sir John Arundell, Lord of the Mannor.
  * Metchell alias Midſholl, by the Mayor, Portreave and Burgeſſes.
  * St. Ives by the Mayor, Por­treave and Burgeſſes.
  * St. Mawes by Sir Joſeph Tredinham, Lord of the Mannor.
  * St. Mawes by the Mayor and Burgeſſes.
  * Callington by Samuel Rolle Eſq; Lord of the Mannor.
  * Callington by the Mayor, Portreave and Burgeſſes.
  * Foy by the Mayor, Por­treave and Burgeſſes.
  * Grampond.
  * Tregony.
  * Eaſt Loe.
  * Weſt Loe.
  * Camelford.
  * Boſſing alias Tintagell.
  * St. Germans by Mr. Elliot Lord of the Mannor.
  * St. Germans by the Por­treave and Burgeſſes.
  * Helſton
  * Saltaſh 
    * Surrendred before, and New Charters accor­ding to His Majeſties preſent Regulation.

DEVONSHIRE.

  * PLympton.
  * Aſhburton.
  * Bideford.
  * Bradnitch.
  * Plymouth
  * Taveſtocke 
    * Surrendred before, & New Charters accor­ding to his Majeſties preſent Regulation.

Bathe.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=20)

### 1.21. A REPORT of the Truth of the Fight about the Iſles of Azores, the
Laſt of Auguſt 1591. Betwixt the Revenge, One of her Majeſties Ships Commanded
by Sir Richard Granvill, commonly called Grenvill, Vice-Admiral, and an Armada
of the King of Spain; Penned by the Honourable Sir Water Ralegh, Knight.

BEcauſe the Rumours are diverſly ſpred, as well in England, as in the Low
Countrys, and elſewhere, of this late encounter between her Majeſties Ships
and the Armada of Spain; and that the Spaniards accord­ing to their uſuall
manner, fill the world with their vain­glorious vanity, making great
appearance of victories, when on the contrary, themſelves are moſt commonly
and ſhamefully beaten and diſhonoured; thereby hoping to poſſeſs the ignorant
multitude by anticipating & fore­running falſe reports: It is agreeable with
all good rea­ſon, for manifeſtation of the truth, to overcome falſhood and
untruth; that the beginning, continuance and Suc­ceſs of this late Honourable
Encounter of Sr Richard Gran­vil, and other her Majeſties Captains, with the
Armada of Spain; ſhould be truly ſet down and publiſhed with­out partiality or
falſe imaginations. And it is no marvel, than the Spainard ſhould ſeek by
falſe and Slanderous Pamphlets, adviſoes and Letters, to cover their own loſs,
and to derogate from others their due Honour, eſpecial­ly in this Fight, being
performed far off: Seeing they were not aſhamed in the year 1588. when they
purpoſed the Invaſion of this Land, to publiſh in Sundry Langua­ges in Print,
great victories in words, which they plead­ed to have obtained againſt this
Realm; and ſpread the [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=21) ſame in a moſt
falſe ſort over all parts of France, Italy, and elſewhere. When ſhortly after
it was happily manifeſt­ed in very deed to all Nations, how their Navy which
they termed invincible, conſiſting of 140 Sail of Ships, not only of their own
Kingdom, but ſtrengthened with the greateſt Argoſies, Portugal Caracks,
Florentines, & huge hulks of other Countrys, were by 30. of her Majeſties
Ships of War, and a few of our own Merchants, by the Wife, Valiant, and
advantagious Conduct of the Lord Charles Howard, High-Admirall of England,
beaten and ſhuffled together; even from the Lizard in Cornwall, firſt to
Portland, where they ſhamefully le [...]t Don, Pedro de Valdes, with his
mighty Ship; from Portland to Cales where they loſt Hugo de Moncado, with the
Gallias, of which he was Captain, & from Cales driven with Squibs from their
Anchors, were chaſed out of the ſight of Eng­land, round about Scotland and
Ireland. Where for the Sympathy of their barbarous Religion, hoping to find
Succour and aſſiſtance, a great part of them were cruſht againſt the Rocks,
and thoſe other that landed, being ve­ry many in number, were notwithſtanding
broken, ſlain, and taken, and ſo ſent from Village to Village coupled in
halters, to be ſhipped into England: Where her Majeſty of her Princely and
Invincible diſpoſition, diſdaining to put them to death, and ſcorning either
to retain or en­tertain them; they were all ſent back again to their Countrys,
to witneſs and recount the worthy Achieve­ments of their Invincible and
Dreadfull Navy: Of which the number of Souldiers, the fearfull burthen of
their Ships, the Commanders names of every Squadron, with all other their
Magazines of proviſions, were put in Print, as an Army and Navy unreſiſtable,
and diſdain­ing prevention. With all which ſo great and terrible an
oſtentation, they did not in all their Sailing round a­bout [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=21) England, ſo much
as Sink or take one Ship, Bark, Pinneſſe or Cock-boat of ours; Or ever burnt
ſo much as one Sheepcote of this Land; Whereas on the contra­ry, Sir Francis
Drake with only 800. Souldiers not long before, landed in their Indies, and
forced Sant Iago, Santo Domingo, Cartagena, and the fort of Florida.

And after that, Sr John Norris marched from Peniche in Portugall, with a
handfull of Souldiers, to the gate of Lisbone, being about 40 Engliſh miles.
Where the Earl of Eſſex himſelf, and other valiant Gentlemen braved the City
of Lisbone, encamped at the very gate; from whence, after many days abode,
finding neither pro­miſed party, nor proviſion to batter; they made retrait by
Land, in deſpight of all their Garriſons, both of Horſe and Foot. In this ſort
I have a little digreſſed from my firſt purpoſe; only by the neceſſary
compariſon of theirs and our actions: The one covetous of honour with­out
vaunt of oſtentation; the other ſo greedy to purchaſe the opinion of their own
affairs, and by falſe Rumors to reſiſt the bluſt of their own diſhonours, as
they will not only not bluſh to ſpread all manner of Untruths: But even for
the leaſt advantage, be it but for the talring of one poor Adventurer of the
Engliſh, will celebrate the Victory with Bonfires in every Town, always
ſpending more in Faggors, then the purchaſe was worth they obtained. When as
we never thought it worth the conſumption of two Billets, when we have ta­ken
Eight or Ten of their Indian Ships at one time, and Twenty of the Braſill
Fleet: Such is the difference between true Valour, and Oſtentation: and
between Honourable Actions and frivolous Vain glorious vaunts. But now to
return to my purpoſe.

The Lord Thomas Howard with Six of her Majeſties Ships, Six Victualers of
London, the Bark Ralegh, and [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=22) two or three
other Pinnaces riding at Anchor near unto Flores, one of the Weſterly Iſlands
of the Azores, the Laſt of Auguſt in the afternoon, had intelligence by one
Captain Middleton of the approach of the Spa­niſh Armada Which Middleton being
in a very good Sailer, had kept them Company three days before, of good
purpoſe, both to diſcover their Forces the more, as alſo to give advice to my
Lord Thomas of their approach. He had no ſooner delivered the news but the
Fleet was in ſight many of our Ships Com­panys were on Shore in the Iſland;
ſome providing ba­laſt for their Ships; others filling of Water, and
refreſh­ing themſelves from the Land, with ſuch things as they could either
for Money, or by Force recover. By reaſon whereof our Ships being all peſtered
and ro­maging every thing out of order, very light for want of balaſt, and
that which was moſt to our diſadvan­tage the one half part of the men of every
Ship ſick, and utterly unſerviceable: For in the Revenge there were Ninety
diſeaſes: in the Bonaventure, not ſo many in health as could handle her Main-
Sail. For had not Twenty men been taken out of a Bark of Sr George Ca­reys,
his being commanded to be ſunk, and thoſe ap­pointed to her, ſhe had hardly
ever recovered England. The reſt, for the moſt part, were in little better
State. The Names of her Majeſties Ships were theſe as fol­loweth, the
Defiance, which was Admiral, the Revenge Vice-Admiral, the Bonaventure
commanded by Captain Croſſe, the Lion by George Fenner, the Foreſight by Mr
Thomas Vavaſour, and the Crane by Duffild, the Foreſight and the Crane being
but ſmall Ships▪ only the other were of the middle ſize; the reſt beſides the
Bark Ra­legh, commanded by Captain Thin, were Victuallers, and of ſmall force
or none. The Spaniſh Fleet having [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=22) ſhrouded their
approach by reaſon of the Iſland; were now ſo ſoon at hand, as our Ships had
ſcarce time to weigh their Anchors, but ſome of them were driven to let ſlip
their Cables and ſet ſail. Sr Richard Gran­vill was the laſt that weighed, to
recover the men that were upon the Iſland, which otherwiſe had been loſt. The
Lord Thomas, with the reſt very hardly reco­vered the Wind, which Sr Richard
Granvill not being able to do, was perſuaded by the Maſter, and others, to cut
his Main Sail, and caſt about, and to truſt to the Sailing of the Ship; for
the Squadron of Sivil were on his Weather-Bow. But Sr Richard utterly refuſed
to trun from the Enemies, alledging that he would ra­ther chooſe to dye, then
to dishonour himſelf, his Coun­try, and her Majeſties Ship, perſuading his
Company that he would paſs through the two Squadrons, in de­ſpight of them,
and enforce thoſe of Sivil to give him way. Which he performed upon divers of
the formoſt, who, as the Mariners term it, ſprang their Luff, and fell under
the Lee of the Revenge. But the other courſe had been the better, and might
right well have been anſwered, in ſo great an impoſſibility of Prevailing.
Notwithſtanding, out of the greatneſs of his mind, he could not be perſuaded.
In the mean while as he at­tended thoſe which were neareſt him, the great San
Philip being in the Wind of him, and coming towards him, becalmed his Sails in
ſuch ſort, as the Ship could neither make way, nor feel the Helm: ſo huge and
high-carged was the Spaniſh Ship, being of a Thouſand and Five Hundred Tuns,
who after laid the Revenge abord. When he was thus bereft of his Sails, the
Ships that were under his lee luffing up, alſo laid him abord: of which the
next was the Admiral of the Biſcaines, a very mighty and puiſſant Ship
commanded by Brittan­dona, [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=23) the ſaid Philip
carried three tire of Ordinance on a ſide, and eleven Pieces in every tire.
She ſhot Eight forth-right out of her Chaſe, beſides thoſe of her Stern-Ports.

After the Revenge was entangled with this Philip. four other boorded her; two
on her Larboord, and two on her Starboord. The Fight thus beginning at three
of the Clock in the Afternoon, continued very terrible all that Evening. But
the great San Philip having re­ceived the Lower Tire of the Revenge,
Diſcharged with Croſs-bar ſhot, Shirted her ſelf with all diligence from her
ſides, utterly miſliking her firſt entertainment. Some ſay that the Ship
Foundred but we cannot report it for truth, unleſs we were aſſured. The
Spaniſh Ships were filled with Companys of Souldiers, in ſome Two Hundred,
beſides the Mariners, in ſome Five, in others Eight Hundred. In ours there
were none at all beſides the Mariners but the Servants of the Commanders, and
ſome few Voluntary Gentlemen only. After many en­terchanged Vollies of Great
Ordinance and Small Shot, the Spaniards deliberated to enter the Revenge, and
made divers attempts, hoping to force her by the Mul­titudes of their Armed
Souldiers and Musketters, but were ſtill repulſed again and again, and at all
times beaten back into their own Ships, or into the Seas. In the beginning of
the Fight, the George Noble of London, having received ſome Shot thorow her by
the Armadas, fell under the Lee of the Revenge, and asked Sr Richard what he
would Command him, being but one of the Victualers and of ſmall force: Sr
Richard bid him ſave himſelf, and leave him to his fortune. After the Fight
had thus, without intermiſſion conti­nued while the Day laſted, and ſome hours
of the Night, many of our Men were ſlain and hurt, and one of [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=23) the great
Gallions of the Armada, and the Admiral of the Hulks both Sunk, and in many
other of the Spaniſh Ships great Slaughter was made. Some write that Sir
Richard was very dangerouſly hurt almoſt in the beginning of the Fight, and
lay Speechleſs for a time e're he Recovered; But two of the Revenges own
company, brought home in a Ship of Lime from the Iſlands, Examined by ſome of
the Lords, and Others, affirmed that he was never ſo Wounded as that he
forſook the Upper Deck, 'till an hour before Midnight; and then being ſhot
into the Body with a Musket, as he was a dreſſing, was again ſhot into the
Head, and withall, his Chirurgion wounded to death. This agreeth alſo with an
Examination taken by Sr Francis Godolphin, of four other Mariners of the ſame
Ship being returned, which Examination, the ſaid Sr Francis ſent unto Maſter
William Killegrue, of her Majeſties Privy Chamber.

But to return to the Fight, The Spaniſh Ships which attempted to boord the
Revenge, as they were wounded and beaten off, ſo allways others came in their
places, ſhe having never leſs then two mighty Gallions by by her ſides, and
aboard her: So that e'ere the Morn­ing, from Three of the Clock the day
before, there had Fifteen ſeverall Armadas aſſailed her, and all ſo ill
approved their entertainment, as they were by the break of day, far more
willing to hearken to a Com­poſition, then haſtily to make any more Aſſaults
or Entries. But as the day encreaſed, ſo our men decreaſed: and as the light
grew more and more, by ſo much more grew our diſcomforts. For none appeared in
fight but enemies, ſaving one ſmall Ship called the Pilgrim, commanded by
Jacob Whiddon, who hovered all night to ſee the Succeſs: but in the morning
bearing with the Revenge, was hunted like a Hare a­mongſt [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=24) many ravenous
Hounds, but eſcaped.

All the Powder of the Revenge to the laſt Barrell was now ſpent, all her Pikes
broken, Forty of her beſt men ſlain, and the moſt part of the reſt hurt. In
the be­ginning of the Fight ſhe had but one hundred free from Sickneſs, and
fourſcore and ten Sick, laid in Hold upon the Ballaſt. A ſmall Troup to man
ſuch a Ship, and a weak Garriſon to reſiſt ſo mighty an Army. By thoſe hundred
all was ſuſtained, the volleis, boordings, and entrings of fifteen Ships of
War, beſides thoſe which beat her at large. On the contrary, the Spaniſh were
always ſupplied with Souldiers brought from every Squadron: all-manner of Arms
and Powder at will. Unto ours there remained no comfort at all, no hope, no
ſupply either of Ships, Men, or Weapons; the Ma­ſters all beaten over-bord,
all her tackle cut aſunder, her upper work altogether raſed, and in effect
evened ſhe was with the water, but the very foundation or bottom of a Ship,
nothing being left over-head either for flight or defence. Sir Richard finding
himſelf in this diſtreſs, and unable any longer to make reſiſtance, having
endured in this fifteen hours Fight, the Aſſault of fifteen ſeverall Armadas,
all by turns aboord him, and by eſtimation eight hundred Shot of great
Ar­tillery, beſides many Aſſaults and Entries: and that Himſelf and the Ship
muſt needs be poſſeſſed by the Enemy, who were now all caſt in a ring round
about him (the Revenge not able to move one way or other, but as ſhe was moved
with the waves and billow of the Sea) commanded the Maſter Gunner, whom he
knew to be a moſt reſolute man, to ſplit and ſink the Ship, that thereby
nothing might remain of Glory or Victory to the Spaniards: Seeing in ſo many
hours fight, and with ſo great a Navy they were [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=24) not able to take
her, having had Fifteen hours time, above ten Thouſand Men, and Fifty and
three Sail of Men of War to perform it withall:The Spaniſh 53. Sail. and
perſwaded the Company, or as many as hee could induce, to yeild them­ſelves
unto God, and to the mercy of none elſe: but as they had, like Valiant
Reſolute Men, repulſed ſo many Enemies, they ſhould not now ſhorten the Honour
of their Nation, by prolonging their own Lives for a few Hours, or a few Days.
The Maſter Gunner readily con­deſended and divers others; but the Captain and
the Maſter were of another opinion, and beſought Sr Richard to have care of
them; alledging that the Spaniards would be as ready to entertain a
Compoſition, as they were willing to offer the ſame; and that there being
divers ſufficient and Valiant Men yet living, and whoſe Wounds were not
Mortall, they might do their Coun­try and Prince acceptable Service hereafter.
And where­as, Sir Richard had alledged that the Spaniards ſhould never Glory
to have taken one Ship of her Majeſty, ſeeing they had ſo long and ſo notably
defended them­ſelves; they anſwered, that the Ship had Six-foot Water in hold,
Three ſhot under Water, which were ſo weakly ſtopped, as with the firſt
working of the Sea, ſhe muſt needs Sink, and was beſides ſo Cruſht and
Bruiſed, as ſhe could never be removed out of the Place.

And as the matter was thus in diſpute, and Sr Richard refuſing to hearken to
any of thoſe reaſons; the Maſter of the Revenge (while the Captain wan unto
him the greater Party) was conveyed aboard the General Don Alfonſo Bazan. Who
(finding none over-haſty to enter the Revenge again, doubting leaſt Sr Richard
would have Blown them up and himſelf, and perceiving by the Report of the
Maſter of the Revenge his dangerous [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=25) diſpoſition)
yielded that all their Lives ſhould be ſaved, the Company ſent for England,
and the better ſort to pay ſuch reaſonable Ranſom as their Eſtate would bear,
and in the mean Seaſon to be free from Gally, or Impriſon­ment. To this he ſo
much the rather condeſcended as well, as I have ſaid, for fear of further leſs
and miſchief to themſelves, as alſo for the deſire he had to recover Sir
Richard Granvill, whom for his notable valour he ſeemed greatly to Honour and
Admire.

When this anſwer was returned, and that ſafety of Life was promiſed, the
Common ſort being now at the end of their Perill, the moſt drew back from Sir
Richard, and the Maſter Gunner; being no hard matter to diſſwade men from
Death to Life. The Maſter Gunner finding himſelf and Sir Richard thus
prevented and Maſtered by the greater number, would have ſlain himſelf with a
Sword, had he not been by force with­held and locked into his Cabbin. Then the
Generall ſent many Boats aboard the Revenge, and divers of our men fearing Sir
Richards diſpoſition, Stole away aboard the General and other Ships; Sir
Richard thus over-matched was ſent unto by Alfonſo Bazan to remove out of the
Revenge, the Ship being Marvellous unſa­vory, filled with Blood and Bodies of
Dead, and Wound­ed men like a Slaughter houſe. Sir Richard anſwered, that he
might do with his Body what he liſt, for he eſteemed it not, and as he was
carried out of the Ship he Sounded, and Reviving again deſired the Company to
pray for him. The General uſed Sir Richard with all Humanity, and left nothing
unattempted that tended to his Recovery, highly commending his Valour and
worthineſs, and greatly bewailing the danger wherein he was, being unto them a
Rare Spectacle, and a Re­ſolution ſeldom approved, to ſee one Ship turn
towards [[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=25)
ſo many Enemies, to endure the charge and boording of ſo many huge Armadas,
and to reſiſt and repell the aſſaults and entries of ſo many Souldiers. All
which and more is confirmed by a Spaniſh Captain of the ſame Armada, and a
preſent actor in the fight, who being ſevered from the Reſt in a Storm, was by
the Lion of London, a ſmall Ship, taken, & is now Priſoner in London.

The General Commander of the Armada, was Don Alphonſo Bazan, Brother to the
Marqueſs of Santa Cruz. The Admiral of the Biſcaine Squadron, was Britandona,
of the Squadron of Sivil the Marqueſs of Arumburch. The Hulks and Flyboats
were Commanded by Luis Coutinho. There were Slain and Drowned in this fight,
well near One Thouſand of the Enemies, and Two ſpecial Commanders Don Luis de
Sant John, and Don George de Prunaria de Mallaga, as the Spaniſh Captain
confeſſeth, beſides divers others of ſpecial account, whereof as yet report is
not made.

The Admiral of the Hulks and the Aſcenſion of Sivil were both Sunk by the ſide
of the Revenge; one other recovered the Rode of Saint Michael, and ſunk alſo
there; a fourth ran her ſelf with the Shore to ſave her men. Sir Richard died,
as it is ſaid, the Second or Third day aboard the General, & was by them
greatly bewailed. What became of his body, whether it were buried in the Sea
or on the Land we know not: the comfort that remaineth to his Friends is, that
he hath ended his Life honourably, in reſpect of the reputation won to his
Nation and Country, and of the ſame to his Poſterity, and that being dead, he
hath not out-lived his own honour.

For the reſt of her Majeſties Ships that entred not ſo far into the Fight as
the Revenge, the reaſons and cauſes were theſe. There were of them but ſix in
all [[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=26)
whereof two but ſmall Ships; the Revenge ingaged paſt recovery: The Iſland of
Flores was on the one ſide, 53 Sail of the Spaniſh, divided into Squadrons on
the other, all as full filled with Souldiers as they could contain: Almoſt the
one half of our men ſick and not able to ſerve: The Ships grown foul,
unromaged, and ſcarcely able to bear any Sail for want of Balaſt, having been
ſix months at the Sea before. If all the reſt had entred, all had been loſt:
for the very hugeneſs of the Spaniſh Fleet, if no other Violence had been
offered, would have cruſht them between them into Shivers. Of which the
diſhonour and loſs to the Queen had been far greater then the ſpoil or harm
that the Ene­my could any way have received. Notwithſtanding it is very true,
that the Lord Thomas would have entred between the Squadrons, but the reſt
would not con­deſcend, and the Maſter of his own Ship offred to leap into the
Sea, rather then to conduct that her Ma­jeſties Ship, and the reſt, to be a
prey to the Enemy, where there was no hope nor Poſſibility either of De­fence
or Victory. Which alſo in my opinion had ill ſorted or anſwered the diſcretion
and truſt of a Ge­nerall, to commit himſelf and his charge to an aſſured
deſtruction, without hope, or any likelyhood of pre­vailing: thereby to
diminiſh the Strength of her Ma­jeſties Navy, and to enrich the pride and
glory of the Enemy. The Foreſight of the Queens commanded by Mr Thomas Vaviſor
performed a very great Fight, and ſtaid two hours as near the Revenge as as
the Weather would permit him, not forſaking the Fight, 'till he was like to be
encompaſſed by the Squadrons, and with great difficulty cleared himſelf. The
reſt gave divers volleis of Shot, and entred as far as the place permitted,
and their own neceſſities, to keep the weather­gage [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=26) of the Enemy,
untill they were parted by night. A few days after the Fight was ended, and
the Engliſh Priſoners diſperſed into the Spaniſh and Indie Ships, there aroſe
ſo great a Storm from the Weſt and North-Weſt, that all the Fleet was
diſperſed, as well the Indian Fleet which were then come unto them, as the
reſt of the Armada that attended their arrival, of which 14 Sail, together
with the Revenge and in her 200 Spaniards, were caſt away upon the Iſle of St
Michael So it pleaſed them to honour the burial of that renowned Ship the
Revenge, not ſuffering her to periſh alone, for the great honour ſhe atchieved
in her life time. On the reſt of the Iſlands there were caſt away in this
Storm 15 or 16 more of the Ships of War: and of an hun­dred and odd Sail of
the Indie Fleet, expected this year in Spain: What in this Tempeſt, and what
before in the Bay of Mexico, and about the Bermudas, there were 70 and odd
conſumed and loſt, with thoſe ta­ken by our Ships of London, beſides one very
rich In­dian Ship, which ſet her ſelf on fire, being boarded by the Pilgrim,
and five other taken by Maſter Wats his Ship of London, between the Havana and
Cape S. Antonio. The fourth of this Month of November we received Letters from
the Tercera, affirming that there are 3000 bodies of men remaining in that
Iſland, ſaved out of the periſhed Ships, and that by the Spaniards own
confeſſion, there are 10000 caſt away in this Storm, beſides thoſe that are
periſhed between the Iſlands and the Main. Thus it hath pleaſed God to fight
for us, and to defend the Juſtice of our Cauſe, againſt the ambitious and
bloody pretences of the Spaniard, who ſeeking to devour all Nations, are
Themſelves devoured. A manifeſt teſtimony how injuſt and diſ­pleaſing, their
attempts are in the ſight of God, who [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=27) hath pleaſed to
witneſs by the ſucceſs of their affairs his miſlike of their bloody and
injurious deſigns pur­poſed and practiſed againſt all Chriſtian Princes, over
whom they ſeek unlawfull and ungodly Rule and Empery.

One day or two before this Wrack happened to the Spaniſh Fleet, when as ſome
of our Priſoners deſired to be ſet on ſhore upon the Iſlands, hoping to be
from thence tranſported into England, which liberty was formerly by the
General promiſed: One Morice Fitz. John, Son of Old John of Deſmond, a notable
Tray­tor, Couſin German to the late Earl of Deſmond, was ſent to the Engliſh
from Ship to Ship, to perſwade them to ſerve the King of Spain, the arguments
he uſed to induce them were theſe. The increaſe of Pay which he promiſed to be
trebled: advancement to the better ſort: and the exerciſe of the True
Catholique Religion, and ſafety of their Souls to all. For the firſt, even the
beggerly and unnatural behaviour of thoſe Engliſh and Iriſh Rebells, that
ſerv'd the King in that preſent action, was ſufficient to anſwer that firſt
ar­gument of rich Pay. For ſo poor and beggerly they were, as for want of
Apparell they ſtripped their poor Country-men Priſoners out of their ragged
Garments worn to nothing by ſix Months ſervice, and ſpared not to deſpoil them
even of their bloody Shirts, from their wounded bodies, and the very Shooes
from their feet; A notable teſtimony of their rich entertainment and great
Wages. The ſecond reaſon was hope of ad­vancement if they ſerved well, and
would continue faithfull to the King. But what man can be ſo block­iſhly
ignorant ever to expect place or honour from a forrain King, having no other
argument or perſwa­ſion [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=27) then his own
diſloyalty; to be unnatural to his own Countrey that bred him; to his Parents
that be­gat him; and rebellious to his true Prince, to whoſe obedience he is
bound by Oath, by Nature, and by Religion: No, they are only aſſured to be
imployed in all deſperate enterpriſes, to be held in ſcorn and diſdain ever
among thoſe whom they ſerve. And that ever Traytor was either truſted or
advanced I could never yet reade, neither can I at this time remember any
example. And no man could have leſs becommed the place of an Orator for ſuch a
purpoſe, then this Morice of Deſmond. For the Earl his Couſin being one of the
greateſt Subjects in that Kingdom of Ireland, having almoſt whole Countries in
his poſſeſſion; ſo ma­ny goodly Mannors, Caſtles, and Lordſhips; the Count
Palatine of Kerry five hundred Gentlemen of his own name and family to follow
him, beſides others (all which he poſſeſſed in peace for three or four hundred
years) was in leſs then three years after his adhering to the Spaniards and
Rebellion, beaten from all his holds, not ſo many as ten Gentlemen of his name
left living, himſelf taken and beheaded by a Souldier of his own Nation, and
his Land given by a Parliament to her Majeſty, and poſſeſſed by the Engliſh:
His o­ther Couſin Sir John of Deſmond taken by Maſter John Zouch, and his body
hanged over the Gates of his na­tive City to be devoured by Ravens: the third
Bro­ther Sr James hanged, drawn, and quartered in the ſame place. If he had
withall vaunted of his ſucceſs of his own houſe, no doubt the Argument would
have moved much, and wrought great effect; which be­cauſe he for that preſent
forgot, I thought it good to remember in his behalf. For matter of Religion it
would [[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=28)
require a particular Volume, if I ſhould ſet down how irreligiouſly they cover
their greedy and ambitious pre­tences, with that veil of Piety. But ſure I am,
that there is no Kingdom or Common-wealth in all Europe▪ but if they be
reformed, they then Invade it for Religion ſake, if it be, as they term
Catholique, they pretend Title; as if the Kings of Caſtile were the naturall
heirs of all the world: and ſo between both, no Kingdom is unſought. Where
they dare not with their own forces to invade, they baſely entertain the
Traytors and Vagabonds of all Nations: ſeeking by thoſe and by their runnagate
Jeſuits to win parts, and have by that means ruined many noble Houſes & others
in this Land, & have extinguiſhed both their Lives and Families. What good,
honour, or fortune ever Man yet by them atchieved, is yet unheard of, or
un­written. And if our Engliſh Papiſts do but look into Portu­gall, againſt
which they have no pretence of Religion, how the Nobility are put to death,
impriſoned, their rich men made a Prey, & all ſorts of People Captiv'd; they
ſhall find that the Obedience even of the Turks is eaſy and a Li­berty, in
reſpect of the Slavery and Tyranny of Spain. What have they done in Sicill, in
Naples, Millaine, and in the Low-Countries; who hath there been ſpared for
Religion at all? And it cometh to my remembrance of a certain Burger of
Antwerpe, whoſe Houſe being entred by a Company of Spaniſh Souldiers, when
they firſt Sacked the City, he beſought them to ſpare him and his Goods, being
a Good Catholique, and one of their own Party and Faction; The Spaniards
anſwered, that they knew him to be of a good Conſcience for himſelf; but his
Money, Plate, Jewels, and Goods, were all Heretical, and therefore good prize.
So they abuſed and tormented the Fooliſh Fleming, who hoped that an Agnus Dei
had been a ſufficient target againſt [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=28) all force of
that Holy and Charitable Nation. Neither have they at any time as they
proteſt, invaded the King­doms of the Indies and Peru, and elſewhere, but only
led thereunto, rather to reduce the People to Chriſti­anity, then for either
Gold or Empery; whenas in one only Iſland called Hiſpaniola, they have Waſted
Thirty Hundred Thouſand of the Naturall People▪ be­ſides many Millions elſe in
other places of the Indies: A poor and harmleſs people Created of God, and
might have been wonn to his knowledge, as many of them were; and almoſt as
many as ever were perſuaded there unto: The Story whereof is at large, Written
by a Biſhop of their own Nation, called Bartholomew de las Caſas, and
Tranſlated into Engliſh, and many other Languages, intituled, The Spaniſh
Cruelties. Who would therefore repoſe truſt in ſuch a Nation of Ravenous
Strangers, and eſpecially in thoſe Spaniards, which more greedily thirſt after
Engliſh Blood, then after the lives of any other people of Europe, for the
many overthrows and Diſhonours they have received at our hands, whoſe Weakneſs
we have diſcovered to the World, and whoſe forces at home, abroad, in Europe,
in India, by Sea and Land, we have even with hand­fulls of men and Ships,
Overthrown and Diſhonoured. Let not therefore any Engliſhman, of what Religion
ſoever, have other opinion of the Spaniards, but that thoſe whom he ſeeketh to
winn of our Nation, he eſteemeth baſe and Traiterous, unworthy perſons, or
unconſtant fools; and that he uſeth his pretence of Religion, for no other
purpoſe but to bewitch us from the Obedience of our Naturall Prince; thereby
hoping in time to bring us to Slavery and Subjection, and then none ſhall be
unto them ſo odious and diſdained as the Traytors themſelves, who have ſold
their Coun­trey [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=29) to a Stranger,
and forſaken their faith and Obe­dience contrary to Nature and Religion; and
con­trary to that humane and generall honour, not only of Chriſtians, but of
Heathen and Irreligious Nations; who have always ſuſtained what labour ſoever,
and em­braced even Death it ſelf, for their Country, Prince, or Common wealth.
To conclude, it hath ever to this day pleaſed God to proſper and defend her
Majeſty, to break the purpoſes of Malicious Enemies, of forſworn Tray­tors,
and of unjuſt Practices and Invaſions. She hath ever been Honoured of the
Worthieſt Kings, Served by faithfull Subjects, and ſhall by the favour of God,
Reſiſt, Repell and Confound all whatſoever attempts againſt her Sacred Perſon
or Kingdom. In the mean time, Let the Spaniard and Traytor vaunt of their
Succeſs, and we her true and obedient Vaſſals, guided by the ſhining light of
of her Vertues, ſhall always love her, ſerve her, and obey her to the End of
our Lives.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=29)

### 1.22. His Majeſties Royall Warrant to the Earl of Bathe, then Sr. John
Granvill, at Bruſſels, immediately before his Reſtauration.

CHARLES R.

IN conſideration of the many Services done us by our Right Truſty and Well-
beloved Servant Sr. John Gran­vill (one of the Gentlemen of our Bed-Chamber)
and his Father, the moſt Valiant and Loyal Sir Bevill Granvill, who moſt
Honourably loſt his Life at the Battel of Landſ­down, in the Defence and
Service of the Crown, againſt the Rebells, after he had performed many other
great and ſignal Services.

But more eſpecially in conſideration of the late most ex­traordinary Services
(never to be forgotten by us or our Poſterity) which the ſaid Sr. John
Granvill hath lately rendred us in his Perſon, in his ſecret, prudent and moſt
faithfull Tranſactions and Negotiations, in concluding that moſt happy Treaty
which he had lately, by our ſpecial Com­mand and Commiſſion, with our Famous
and Renowned General Monk; and wherein he alone (and no other) was intruſted
by Us, concerning the ſaid Treaty, about thoſe moſt important Affairs for our
Reſtauration; which he has moſt faithfully performed with great prudence,
care, ſecreſy and advantage for our Service, without any conditions im­poſed
upon us beyond our expectation, and the Commiſſion we gave him; whereof we
doubt not, but by Gods bleſſing, we ſhall ſpeedily ſee the effects of our ſaid
happy Reſtauration. We are graciouſly pleaſed to promiſe, upon the Word of a
King, that as ſoon as we are arrived in England, and it ſhall pleaſe God to
reſtore us to our Crown of that King­dom; We will confer upon our ſaid right
Truſty and well-beloved Servant Sir John Granvill the place and office of
[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=30) Groom of
our Stole, and Firſt Gentlemen of our Bed-Chamber (with all Fees, Penſions,
and Perquiſites thereunto belonging) together with the Title and Dignity of an
Earl of our Kingdom of England: And the better to ſupport the ſaid Title of
Honour, and to reward as we ought thoſe many great ſervices, and to recompence
the loſſes and ſuf­ferings of him and his Family; We are further graciouſly
pleaſed to promiſe upon our ſaid Royal Word, to pay all the Debts that he the
ſaid Sir John Granvill, or his Fa­ther have contracted in the late Wars, in
our ſervice, or in our Royal Fathers of Bleſſed Memory; and alſo to beſtow and
ſettle, in good Land in England, an Eſtate of In­heritance to the value of at
leaſt 3000 l. per annum, upon him the ſaid Sir John Granvill, and his Heirs
for ever; to remain as a perpetual acknowledgement for his ſaid ſer­vices; and
as a Teſtimony of our Grace and Favour towards, him, and that Ancient and
Loyal Family of the Granvills, unto all Poſterity. Given at our Court at
Bruſſels, the 2d of April, in the 12th year of our Reign 1660.

By his Majeſties Command

Edw. Nicholas.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=30)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=31)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=31)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=32)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=32)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=33)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=33)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=34)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=34)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=35)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=35)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=36)

[...]

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=36)

[...]

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=37)

[...]

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=37)

[...]

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=38)

[...]

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=38)

[...]

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=39)

[...]

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=39)

[...]

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=40)

[...]

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=40)

[...]

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=41)

[...]

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=41)

[...]

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=42)

[...]

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=42)

[...]

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=43)

[...]

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=43)

[...]

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=44)

[...]

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=44)

[...]

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=45)

[...]

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=45)

[...]

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=46)

[...]

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=46)

[...]

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=47)

[...]

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=47)

[...]

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=48)

[...]

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=48)

[...]

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=49)

[...]

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=49)

[...]

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=50)

[...]

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=50)

[...]

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=51)

[...]

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=51)

[...]

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=52)

[...]

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=52)

[...]

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=53)

[...]

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=53)

[...]

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=54)

[...]

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=54)

[...]

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=55)

[...]

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=55)

[...]

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=56)

[...]

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=56)

[...]

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=57)

[...]

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=57)

[...]

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=58)

[...]

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=58)

[...]

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=59)

[...]

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=59)

[...]

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=60)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98226&page=60)

[...]

[Home](/)

University of Oxford.. Date: 1684  

