---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Miscellany poems upon several occasions consisting of original poems / by
the late Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Cowly, Mr. Milton, Mr. Prior, Mrs. Behn, Mr.
Tho. Brown, &c. ; and the translations from Horace, Persius, Petronius
Arbiter, &c. ; with an essay upon satyr, by the famous M. Dacier.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=1)

MISCELLANY POEMS UPON Several Occasions: Consisting of Original Poems, BY The
late Duke of Buckingham, Mr Cowly, Mr. Milton, Mr. Prior, Mrs. Behn, Mr. Tho.
Brown, &c.

And the Translations from Horace, Persius, Petronius Arbiter, &c.

WITH An Essay upon Satyr, By the Famous M. DACIER.

Licens'd May 21\. 1692.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Buck, at the Sign of the Temple, near Temple-Bar, in
Fleetstreet. 1692.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=2)

## The Epistle Dedicatory, TO Mr. CARDELL GOODMAN.

SIR,

THere are a sort of Spleenatic, Ill na­turd Gentlemen in the World, who are so
very Critical upon Dedicati­ons, that if they find the Author touch­ing never
so lightly on the just Praise of his Pa­tron, they presently condemn him of
Flattery, as if 'twere impossible that any Man of THIS Age cou'd deserve a
good Word. Among this number, I am sorry to find the Ingenious Sir George
Mackenzie in his Epistle to Mr. Boyle, because I am confident if he had
consulted Reason (the sub­ject of his Book) he must at least have mollify'd
the severity of his Opinion, as I hope will appear from what I have here to
say. This great Name
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=3) has serv'd
many of the smaller Critics, who build their Judgment, and Reputation on
Authority, as a safe Retreat against the Onsets of Reason, with which the
Majority of them are at mortal odds. These Misanthropes are arriv'd to that
ex­tremity now, that they will not give a Man leave to discover his own
private Knowledg of an other, if to his Advantage, under the unpleasant
Penal­ty of being receiv'd as a servile, nauseous Sy­cophant.

This Hazard, Sir, I must run, if I will de­clare in Public what I know of
those excellent Ac­complishments, which render you so dear to all that are
acquainted wi [...]h you. Your WIT, and your Courage are things not to be
mention'd, much less your GENEROSITY, that being a Vertue that never resides
alone. There are some Vertues that are Solitary, and like Hermits dwell in
Deserts, over-run with the Wilds of every vicious Deformity in Nature: But
GENE­ROSITY is the King of Vertues, and never goes unattended, which makes me
sometimes fancy, 'tis the Result of all other Vertues, when they meet
together; The Harmony, which proceeds from the Active Agreement of all the
rest. This I am sure,—'tis the noblest Emotion of the Soul, and that which
gives the most finishing, and visible Stroaks to the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=3) Image of our
Maker. Therefore these morose Gentlemen would never forgive me, if I should
tell the World, that you are Generous almost to a Fault (if 'twere possible
that could be criminal in Man, for which alone all the World does, and ever
has worship'd a Deity) tho' I know it to be true to the utmost Extent; because
that will make the considering part of Mankind conclude you adorn'd with all
other Vertues, inseparable Com­panions of this. They will never consider the
Reasons I have to aver this, viz. my own Know­ledg, and the Experience of
several others And tho' I urge, that I have found you Generous be­yond the
extravagance of Hopes, when the Bonds of Nature, the Laws of Humanity, and of
God himself, could not obtain the least regard from those, who had not a
little Reputation in the World for better Principles: Yet will they cry out I
am a FLATTERER, if I express my Gratitude to you in Print. Strange effects of
a profligate Age, when ill Nature and profess'd Scandal, dress'd in a Politer
sort of Bilingsgate, shall be sufficient to establish a Man's Fame (spite of
all the most monstrous absurdities of the con­texture) as a Wit: And the most
deserv'd Praise enough to stigmatize the Writer with inde­leble Infamy. For if
any Bold Man dare ce­lebrate the Vertues of any one, they gaze upon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=4) him, and
shake their Heads as if it were an im­pudent Imposture, or at best a Prodigy
as incredi­ble as a circular Rainbow, or any other unusual Phaenomenon, that
there should be any thing Ver­tuous and Brave in OUR Age.

Not that I am so very fond of this Opinion, that Vertues are in being at this
time, and in the Practice of Men, as to take every appearance for a Reality.
Nor do I admit a great many that pass for mighty Lovers of Vertue, into that
number; in particular, none of those, that are fam'd for a noisy Zeal in the
controverted Points of Religion, which prompts an inconsidering Generation to
cut one another's Throats, because they can't agree in what themselves allow
uncer­tain. Nor those, who with a Precise Behaviour, make an Ostentatious Shew
of being the most in­timate Friends of God Almighty in Public, but shake Hands
with the Devil in a corner with no little Ardor. Nor shall I grace with the
noble Title of VERTVE, those sorts of Religious Charities, that have not the
Equitable good of Mankind for their end, but only vain Glory in particular
Reputation. I could name some, that are very forward in contributing largely
to the Building any public Structure, which may commend their Names to
Posterity, as well as to the present time, but are inexorable to the nearest
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=4) Relations who
seek for a private Assistance, tho' a Trifle would save a whole Family. That
which affects the view of the World, is the Child of Pride, and is not at all
to be valu'd by any consi­dering Man; the other is the Off-spring of Ver­tue,
having nothing but the good of another for its end, and yet it obtains
generally a more last­ing Fame, and especially if it meet with Ability and
Gratitude to commend it to Posterity, in a nobler way, than in dead Piles of
Building.

Tho' I deny all this to be Vertue, yet I can ne­ver be of their Mind, who
exclude it intirely from Human Race, since I am sensible 'tis to be found in a
great many at this day, particularly in your self. I am therefore of a much
contrary Opinion, to those Man-haters I have mention'd those Devotes to Satyr
(as they call it) for I have always thought it a far nobler Task to be
conversant with the Vertues of Mankind, than with the Vices; and if Fiction
must be made use of (as 'tis every day by our Prose-Satyrists) I am sure 'tis
more reasonable to admire an Angel of our own forming, than to combat a Devil
of ones own conjuring up; one gives us a greater, and juster Idea of the
noblest of God's Works, the other flyes in the face of Providence, and wou'd
render that Being ridiculous, and contemptible, that was made by the Power and
Wisdom of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=5)
INFINITY, and which God seems more than once to take no small Pleasure in.

The greatest Patrons of Satyr, I am sure, can­not prove that it answers the
End, they pretend, 'twas design'd for, viz. the Reformation of Vice,
especially that Satyr, which names Men, and tends to a personal abuse. For
instead of Reforming Vice it only gratifies the ill-nature of most, and that
Criminal delight they have in hearing an o­ther abus'd, without any influence
on the Manners of those it aims to Correct; unless it be to return the
Author's with a Satyr of dry Bastinade. The Minds of all men have something,
that is with more Modesty conceal'd, than expos'd to view, as well as the
Body; which Satyr is continual­ly setting before the Eyes of the World; whilst
Panegyric draws a decent Veil over it. Pa­negyric paints Vertue, in its most
taking Co­lours, and shews the more Beautiful parts of Man­kind, whilst Satyr
is continually raking in the Au­gean Stable of its Follies, and Vices.
Panegyric gives a Noble, and taking prospect of Virtue, stir­ring up
Emulation, in others, and a Caution in him that is Prais'd, not to be guilty
of any thing contrary to the character the World has of him, that he may be
thought really to deserve it. Nor can I ever believe, but that Virgils Aeneids
have contributed more to the Progress of Vertue, than
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=5) Horace's
Satyrs: The first forming Noble images in the Mind, making it in Love with
Honor, the last, at best exposing but the deformity of some Vice, or folly,
which when we avoid we ramble so in the dark by their directions, that we can
never find out Vertue, and so may well fall into the contrary ex­tream; Satyr
only giving negative definitions of Virtue, like Mr. Cowlys of Wit: But in
Epic posie and Panegyric all goes in the clear, and e­vident affirmative,
presenting so exact a portrai­ture of Vertue, that you can't mistake, or not
know it at first sight.

But that which is most of all, Panegyric has the effectual force Satyr
pretends to, in chacing away Vice and Folly, by discovering the Proper­ties,
and Beauties of their contraries; and if it be plac'd on an undeserving
Subject, it carries as se­vere a Sting: For who is it that reads those Ver­ses
of Lucan upon Nero, but thinks them a severe Satyr, tho they bear the Face of
Praise—for having reckond up the Mischiefs of Civil War, he cries out—

Quod si non aliam venturo fata Neroni

Invenere viam, magno (que) aeterna parantur

Regna deis, coelum (que) suo servire Tonanti

Non nisi saevorum potuit post bella Gigantum:

Jam nihil o superi querimur, scelera ipsa, nefas (que)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=6)Hac mercede
placent, &c—

'Twould be to tedious too quote the rest.

This I am sure was the safest way of abusing that Prince. An extravagant
Praise of one, that merits nothing, is the most effectual of Satyrs.
Pa­negyric is like a Lawful, and Mild Prince, that wins obedience by Love:
Whilst Satyr like a Tyrant would force it by threats and servile fear; the
first is the Noblest, as well as the surest way. The Custom of the
Lacedemonians of making their Slaves drunk, to represent to their Youth the
Folly and Odiousness of that Vice, as it was proportion'd to the grossness of
their Genius so it seems to have a likeness to Satyr, which pretends to put
Vice out of Countenance, by exposing it, which it generally does in such
terms, that it only pleases the vitiated Appetites of some with the lively
descriptions of what they delight in. But Panegyric, like the Wiser State of
Athens, gives us Examples, and descriptions of Vertue, justly imagining, that,
where those Attractives, are no man can be drawn from Beauty to Deformity.
'Twoud be too tedi­ous to run this consideration of the Preheminence of
Panegyrick to Satyr any farther, having said enough already (I hope) to
satisfie any sensible man of the truth of what I assert.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=6)Having thus
vindicated Panegyric from the Odium it lies under, and plac'd it in its due
rank, nothing could hinder me from attempting one on you, Sir, who so e'ry way
deserve it, but my Inabili­ties, which perswade me to say nothing of that
Ex­cellence I value, since I am Conscious that I can­not say enough, nor
perform that Task with the Wit and Eloquence it requires.

As to the Book Sir, I present you with▪ I am extreamly satisfy'd to know, that
it is a Present worth your acceptance; for I may say that there has scarce
been a Collection which visited the World, with fewer trifling Verses in it. I
except my own, which I had the more encouragement to print now, since I had so
good an opportunity of making so large an Attonement, with the Wit of others
for my own Dulness, and that I hope will chiefly ex­cuse them to you, as well
as convince the World of the real Value I have for you, when it sees me prefix
your Name to no Vulgar Book, of my own Composing, but to one that ows its
excellence to the generous contribution of my Friends of undoubted Wit.
Statius in his Epistle dedicatory to Stella, seems to put his Sylvae in
balance with his The­baidos, for their being the productions of a suddain
Heat, or Inspiration, the same is applicable to these; All, or most of them
being writ when the Soul was in tune, and not by a Mercenary End, forc'd upon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=7) a task, it
was not at all dispos'd to. Besides which, they have most had the advantage of
good Iudg­ments to prune the Luxuriancy of a flowing Fancy, which Statius
would not give himself the trouble of. This Book I may therefore say (without
any self-esteem) will (if any thing in Poetry have perpe­tuity) convey your
Name to posterity, and with it the Testimony—how great a value I put upon your
Worth, and how much I am Sir, without re­serve,

Your humble Servant Charles Gildon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=7)

## AN Essay upon Satyr, FROM M. DACIER.

EXpecting several Satyrs for this Colle­ction more than I met with, I
design­ed an Essay upon Satyr, as to its Etymology, Progress, and Vertues,
with a short Examen of what we have had publish'd in English, in that Nature,
and finally a Collation of that with the Ancient; be­lieving a Discourse on
that Subject would not be ungrateful to the Ingenious, as being both New, and
Curious; which made me promise
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=8) my Bookseller
to attempt it: But finding my self disappointed in my Expectations, I was of
Opinion such an Essay would not be altogether so proper: But to make the
Book­seller a large Amends (and to gratify the Town with an agreeable
Entertainment) I got, of a very Ingenious Friend of Mine, this Preface of M.
Dacier, to the sixth Tome of Horace, which tho it be not of that extent, as to
take in all the Points I design'd to treat of, yet Horace being now in that
just Esteem he deserves, I thought I could not better gratify his Admirers,
than to let our English World see those hidden Beauties of this great Poet,
discover'd by M. Dacier, with no less Wit, than Judgment.

## The Preface of M. Dacier.

HOrace entitles his two Books of Satyrs indifferently, Sermones, and Satyrae;
And since these two Names give different Ideas; for certain Reasons it is
necessary to explain what the Latins understood by the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=8) Word Satyr.
The Learned Casaubon is the first, and only Man that has with Success
at­tempted to shew what was the Satyrical Poesie of the Greeks, and the Satyr
of the Romans. His Book is an inestimable Treasure, and I con­fess I have had
great Helps from it; which is the use we ought to make of the Works of those
extraordinary Men, who have only gone before us to be our Guides, and serve us
as Torches in the thick Darkness of Antiquity. But you must not have your Eyes
so continually fixt on them, as not to regard whither they lead you; for they
deviate sometimes into Paths, where you cannot safely follow them. This Rule I
my self have observ'd, in forsaking my Guides, and past that Way which no Body
before me has done, as the following Dis­course will convince you.

Satyr is a kind of Poesie, only known to the Romans, being not at all related
to the Satyrical Poesie of the Greeks, as some learned Men have pretended.
Quintilian leaves us no Doubt up­on this Point, when he writes in Chap. 10.
Satira quidem tota nostra est. The same Reason makes Horace call it in the
last Satyr of Book 1. Graecis intactum Carmen. The Natural and true Etymology
is this: The Latins called it SATVR, quasi plenum, to which there was
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=9) nothing
wanting for its Perfection. Thus Satur color, when the Wool has taken a good
Dye, and nothing can be added to the Per­fection of it. From Satur they have
made Satura, which they wrote sometimes with an i, Satira; They used in other
Words, the same Variation of the Letter u into i, as in Maxumus, Maximus,
optumus, optimus. Satura, is an Adjective, which has reference to a
Sub­stantive understood; for the Ancient Romans said Saturam, understanding
Lancem. And Satura Lanx, was properly a Bason fill'd with all sorts of Fruit,
which they offer'd every Year to Ceres, and Bacchus, as the First Fruits of
all they had gathered. These Offerings of different things mixt together, were
not un­known to the Greeks, who call'd 'em  [...], a Sacrifice of all sorts of
Fruit,  [...] & [...], an Offering of all sorts of Grain, when they offer'd
Potherbs. The Grammarian Diomedes has perfectly describ'd both the Cu­stom of
the Romans, and the Word Satura, in this Passage Lanx referta variis multis
(que) primi­tiis, sacris Cereris inferebatur, & a copia & Saturitate rei,
Satura vocabatur: cujus generis lancium & Virgilius in Georgicis meminit, cum
hoc modo dicit, ‘Lancibus & pandis fumantia reddimus exta▪ and—lances (que) &
liba feremus.’
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=9) From thence
the Word Satura was apply'd to many other Mixtures, as in Festus: Satira cibi
genus, ex variis rebus conditum. From hence it past to the Works of the Mind;
for they call'd some Laws Leges Saturas, which con­tain'd many Heads, or
Titles, as the Iulian, Papian and Popean Laws, which were called Miscellas,
which is of the same Signification with Satura: From hence arose this Phrase,
Per Saturam legem ferre, when the Senate made a Law, without gathering, and
counting the Votes in haste, and confusedly all together, which was properly
call'd, Per Saturam sen­tentias exquirere, as Salust has it after Lelius. But
they rested not here, but gave this Name to certain Books, as Pescennius
Festus, whose Histories were call'd Saturas, or per Saturam. From all these
Examples, 'tis not hard to sup­pose, that these Works of Horace took from
hence their Name, and that they were call'd, Saturae quia multis & variis
rebus hoc carmen re­fertum est, because these Poems are full of a great many
different Things, as Porphyrius says, which is partly true. But it must not be
thought it is immediately from thence; for this Name had been used before for
other things, which bore a nearer resemblance to the Satyrs of Horace; in
explanation of which a Method is to be follow'd, which Casaubon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=10) himself
never thought of, and which will put things in so clear a Light, that there
can be no Place left for Doubt.

The Romans having been almost four hun­dred Years without any Scenical Plays,
Chance and Debauchery made them find in one of their Feasts the Saturnian, and
Fescennine Verses, which for six score Years they had instead of Dramatic
Pieces. But these Verses were rude, and almost without any Numbers, as being
made extempore, and by a People, as yet but barbarous, who had little other
Skill, than what flow'd from their Joy, and the Fumes of Wine. They were
filled with the grossest sort of Rai­leries, and attended with Gestures and
Dances. To have a livelier Idea of this, you need but reflect upon the honest
Peasants ▪ whose clown­ish Dances are attended with extempore Verses, in
which, in a wretched manner they jeer one another, with all they know. To this
Horace re­fers in the first Epistle of his second Book,

Fescennina per hunc inventa licentia morem,

Versibus alt ernis opprobia rustica fudit.

This Licentious and Irregular Verse, was succeeded by a sort more correct,
filled with a pleasant Railery, without the Mixture of any thing scurrilous,
and these obtain'd the Name of Satyrs, by reason of their Variety, and had
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=10) regulated
Forms, that is, regular Dances, and Music, but undecent Postures were
banish'd. Titus Livius has it in his seventh Book. Ver­naculis artificibus,
quia Hister Tusco verbo Lu­dio vocabatur, nomen Histrionibus inditum, qui non
sicut ante Fescennino versu similem compositum temere, ac rudem alternis
jaciebant; sed imple­tas modis Satiras, descripto jam ad Tibicinem cantu,
motus (que) congruenti peragebant. These Satyrs were properly honest Farces,
in which the Spectators and Actors were rallied without Distinction.

Livius Andronicus found things in this po­sture, when he first undertook to
make Come­dies, and Tragedies in Imitation of the Gre­cians. This Diversion
appearing more noble, and perfect, they run to it in Multitudes, neglecting
the Satyrs for some time, though they receiv'd them a little after; and some
model'd them into a purpos'd Form to act at the end of their Comedies, as the
French act their Farces now. And then they alter'd their Name of Satyrs for
that of Exodia, which they preserve to this day. This was the first and most
ancient kind of Roman Satyr. There are two other sorts, which tho' very
different from this first, yet both owe their Birth to this, and are, as it
were, Branches of it. This I shall prove the most succinctly I can.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=11)A Year after
Livius Andronicus had caus'd his first Efforts to be Acted, Italy gave birth
to Ennius, who being grown up, and having all the leisure in the World to
observe the eager Satisfaction with which the Romans re­ceiv'd the Satyrs, of
which I have already spoke, was of Opinion, that Poems, tho' not adapted to
the Theatre, yet preserving the Gaul the Railings and Pleasantness, which made
these Satyrs take with so much Ap­plause, would not fail of being well
receiv'd; he therefore ventur'd at it, and compos'd se­veral Discourses to
which he retain'd the name of Satyrs. These Discourses were entirely like
those of Horace, both for the Matter and the Variety. The only essential
difference, that is observable, is that Ennius, in Imita­tion of some Greeks,
and of Homer himself, took the liberty of mixing several kinds of Verses
together, as Hexameters, Iambics, Tri­meters, with Tetrimeters, Trochaics or
Square Verse; as it appears from the Fragments which are left us. These
following Verses are of the Square kind, which Aullus Gellius has preserv'd
us, and which very well merit a place here for the Beauty they contain:

Hoc erit tibi Argumentum semper in prom­ptu situm,

Ne quid expectes Amicos, quod tute agere possies.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=11)I attribute
also to these Satyrs of Ennius these other kinds of Verses, which are of a
Beauty, and Elegance, much above the Age in which they were made; nor will the
sight of 'em here be unpleasant.

Non habeo deni (que) nauci Marsum Augurem,

Non vicanos aruspices, non de Cicro Astrologos,

Non Isiacos Conjectores, non Interpretes Ho­minum:

Non enim sunt ij aut Scientia, aut Arte Divini;

Sed Superstitiosi vates, Impudentes (que) harioli,

Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas Im­perat:

Qui sui questus caussa fictas suscitant sententias,

Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam,

Quibus devitias pollicentur, ab ijs Drachmam petunt,

De devitijs deducant Drachmam, reddant caetera.

Horace has borrow'd several things from these Satyrs. After Ennius came
Pacuvius, who also writ Satyrs in Imitation of his Uncle Ennius.

Lucilius was born in the time when Pacuvi­us was in most Reputation. He also
wrote Satyrs. But he gave 'm a new turn, and en­deavoured to imitate, as near
as he could, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=12)
the Character of the old Greek Comedy, of which we had but a very imperfect
Idea in the ancient Roman Satyr, and such, as one might find in a Poem, which
Nature alone had di­ctated before the Romans had thought of imi­tating the
Grecians, and enriching them­selves with their Spoils. 'Tis thus you must
understand this Passage of the first Satyr of the second Book of Horace,

—Quid, cum est Lucilius ausis,

Primus in hunc operis componere carmina morem?

Horace never intended by this to say, That there were no Satyrs before
Lucilius, because Ennius and Pacuvius were before him, whose Example he
fol­lowed: He only would have it understood, That Lucilius having given a new
Turn to this Poem, and embellished it, ought by way of Excellence to be
esteemed the first Author. Quintilian had the same Thought, when he writ, in
the first Chap­ther of the tenth Book Satira quidem tota nostra est, in qua
primus insignem laudem adeptus est Lucilius. You must not therefore be of the
Opinion of Casaubon, who building on the Judgment of Diomedes, thought that
the Satyr of Ennius, and that of Lucilius were entirely different: These are
the very Words of this Grammarian, which have deceived this Judici­ous
Critick. Satira est Carmen apud Romanos, non quidem apud Graecos maledicum, ad
carpenda homi­num vitia, Archaeae Comoediae charactere compositum, quale
scripserunt Lucilius & Horatius, & Persius. Sed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=12) olim Carmen
quod ex variis Poematibus constabat, Satira dicebatur, quale scripserunt
Pacuvius & Ennius. You may see plainly that Diomedes distinguishes the Satyr
of Lu­cilius, from that of Ennius, and Pacuvius; the reason which he gives for
this Distinction, is ridiculous, and absolutely false: The good Man had not
examin'd the Nature and Origin of these two Satyrs, which were entirely like
one another, both in Matter and Form, for Lucilius added to it only a little
Politeness, and more Salt, almost without changing any thing: And if he did
not put together several Sorts of Verse in the same Piece, as Ennius has done,
yet he made se­veral Pieces, of which some were entirely Hexame­ters, others
entirely Iambics, and others Trochaic's, as is evident from his Fragments. In
short, if the Satyrs of Lucilius differ from these of Ennius, be­cause the
former has added much to the Endeavours of the latter, as Casaubon has
pretended, it will follow from thence, that those of Horace, and those of
Lucilius, are also entirely different, for Horace has no less refin'd on the
Satyrs of Lucilius, than he on those of Ennius, and Pacuvius. This Passage of
Diomedes has also deceiv'd Dousa the Son. I say not this to expose some Light
Faults of these great Men, but only to shew, with what Exactness, and with
what Caution their Works must be read, when they treat of any thing so
Obscure, and so ancient.

I have made appear what was the Ancient Satyr, that was made for the Theatre;
I have shewn, That that gave the Idea of the Satyr of Ennius: And, in fine, I
have sufficiently prov'd, that the Satyrs of Ennius, and Pacuvius; of
Lucilius, and Horace, are but one kind of Poem, which has received its
Perfe­ction from the last. 'Tis Time now to speak of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=13) second kind
of Satyr, which I promised to explain, and which is also derived from the
Ancient Satyr; 'tis that which we call Varronian, or the Satyr of Menippus,
the Cinic Philosopher.

This Satyr was not only composed of several forts of Verse, but Varro added
Prose to it, and made a Mixture of Greek and Latin. Quintilian, af­ter he had
spoke of the Satyr of Lucilius, adds, Al­terum illud est, & prius Satirae
genus, quod non sola Car­minum varietate mistum condidit Terentius Varro, vir
Romanorum Eruditissimus. The only Difficulty of this Passage is, that
Quintilian assures us, that this Satyr of Varro was the first, for how could
that be, since Varro was a great while after Lucilius? Quintilian meant not
that the Satyr of Varro was the first in Order of Time, for he knew well
enough, that in that respect he was the last: But he would give us to
understand, that this kind of Satyr, so mixt, was more like the Satyr of
Ennius, and Pacu­vius, who gave themselves a greater Liberty in this
Composition, than Lucilius, who was more severe, and correct.

We have now only some Fragments left of the Satyr of Varro, and those
generally very imperfect; the Titles, which are most commonly double, shew the
great Variety of Subjects, of which Varro treated.

Seneca's Book on the Death of Claudius, Boetius, his Consolation of
Philosophy, and that of Petronius Arbiter, are Satyrs entirely like those of
Varro.

This is what I have in general to say on Satyr; nor is it necessary I insist
any more on this Subject. This the Reader may observe, that the Name of Satyr
in Latin▪ is not less proper for Discourses,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=13) that
recommend Vertue, than to those which are design'd against Vice. It had
nothing so formidable in it, as it has now, when a bare Mention of Satyr makes
them tremble, who would fain seem what they are not, for Satyr, with us,
signifies the same thing, as exposing, or lashing of some thing, or Person:
Yet this different Acceptation alters not the Word, which is always the same;
but the Latins in the Titles of their Books, have often had regard only to the
Word, in the extent of its Signification, found­ed on its Etymology, whereas
we have had respect only to the first, and general Use, which has been made of
it in the beginning to mock, and deride; yet this Word ought always to be writ
in Latin with an (u) or (i) Satura, or Satira, and in English by an (i) those
who have wrote it with a (y) thought with Scaliger, Heinsius, and a great many
others, that the Divinities of the Groves, which the Grecians call'd Satyrs,
the Romans Fawns, gave their Names to these Pieces; and that of the Word
Satyrus they had made Satyra, and that these Satyrs had a great affi­nity with
the Satyric Pieces of the Greeks, which is absolutely false, as Casaubon has
very well prov'd it, in making it appear, That of the Word Satyrus they could
never make Satyra, but Satyrica: And in shewing the Difference betwixt the
Satyric Poems of the Greeks, and the Roman Satyrs. Mr. Spanheim, in his fine
Preface to the Caesars, concerning the Emperor Iulian, has added new
Reflections to those which this Judicious Critic had advanced; and he has
establish'd, with a great deal of Judgment, five, or six essential
Differences, between those two Poems, which you may find in his Book. The
Greeks had never any thing that came near this Ro­man
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=14) Satyr, but
their Silli [ [...]] which were also biting Poems, as they may easily be
perceived to be yet, by some Fragments of the Silli of Timon. There was
however this Difference, That the Silli of the Greeks were Parodious, from one
End to the other, which cannot be said of the Roman Satyrs; where, if
sometimes you find some Parodia's, you may plainly see that the Poet did not
design to affect it, and by consequence the Parodia's do not make the Essence
of a Satyr, as they do the Essence of the Silli.

Having explain'd the Nature, Origin and Pro­gress of Satyr, I'll now say a
Word, or two of Horace in particular.

There cannot be a more just Idea given of this part of his Works, than in
comparing them to the Statues of the Sileni, to which Alcibiades in the
Ban­quet, compares Socrates. They were Figures, that without had nothing
agreeable, or beautiful, but when you took the Pains to open them, you found
the Figures of all the Gods. In the manner that Horace presents himself to us
in his Satyrs, we dis­cover nothing of him at first, that deserves our
At­tachment. He seems to be fitter to amuse Chil­dren than to employ the
Thoughts of Men; but when we remove that, which hides him from our Eyes, and
view him even to the Bottom, we find in him all the Gods together; that is to
say, all those Vertues, which ought to be the continual Practice of such as
seriously endeavour to forsake their Vices.

Hitherto we have been content to see only his out-side, and 'tis a strange
thing, that Satyrs, which have been read so long, have been so little
under­stood, or explain'd: They have made a Halt at the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=14) out-side,
and were wholly busi'd in giving the Interpretation of Words. They have
commented upon him like Grammarians, not Philosophers; as if Horace had writ
meerly to have his Language un­derstood, and rather to divert, than instruct
us. That is not the End of this Work of his. The end of any Discourse is the
Action for which that Dis­course is compos'd; when it produces no Action, 'tis
only a vain amusement, which idly tickles the Ear, without ever reaching the
Heart.

In these two Books of his Satyrs, Horace would teach us, to conquer our Vices,
to rule our Passions, to follow Nature, to limit our Desires, to distinguish
True from False, and Ideas from Things, to forsake Prejudice, to know
throughly the Principles, and Motives of all our Actions, and to shun that
Folly which is in all Men, who are bi­gotted to the Opinions they have imbibed
under their Teachers, which they keep obstinately without examining whether
they are well-grounded. In a Word, he en­deavours to make us happy for our
selves, agreeable, and faithful to our Friends, easie, discreet, and honest to
all, with whom we are oblig'd to live. To make us under­stand the Terms he
uses, to explain the Figures he employs, and to conduct the Reader safely
through the Labyrinth of a difficult Expression, or obscure Parenthesis, is no
great matter to perform: And as Epictetus says, there is nothing in that
Beautiful, or truly worthy a wise Man. The principal, and most important
Business, is to shew the Rise, the Reason, and the Proof of his Precepts, to
demon­strate that those, who do not endeavour to correct themselvs by so
beautiful a Model, are just like sick Men, who having a Book full of Receipts,
proper to their Distempers, content themselves to read 'em,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=15) without
comprehending them, or so much as know­ing the Advantage of them.

I urge not this because I have my self omitted any thing in these Annotations,
which was the incum­bent Duty of a Grammarian to observe; this, I hope the
World will be sensible of, and that there remains no more Difficulty in the
Text. But that which has been my chief Care, is, to give an insight into the
very matter, that Horace treats of, to shew the solidity of his Reasons, to
discover the Turns he makes use of to prove what he aims at, and to refute or
illude that which is opposed to him, to confirm, the Truth of his Decisions,
to make the Delicacy of his Sentiments perceiv'd, to expose to open Day the
Folly he finds in what he condemns. This is what none have done before me. On
the contrary, as Horace is a true Proteus, that takes a thousand different
Forms, they have often lost him, and not knowing where to find him, have
grapled him as well as they could; they have palm'd upon him in several
Places, not only Opinions, which he had not, but even those which he directly
refutes: I don't say this to blame those who have taken Pains before me on the
Works of this great Poet, I com­mend their Endeavours, they have open'd me the
way; and if it be granted, that I have some little Advantage over them, I ow
it wholly to the great Men of Antiquity, whom I have read with more Care, and
without doubt with more Leisure. I speak of Homer, of Plato, and Aristotle,
and of some other Greek and Latin Authors, which I study con­tinually, that I
may form my taste on theirs, and draw out of their Writings, the justness of
Wit, good Sense and Reason.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=15)I know very
well, that there are now adays some Authors, who laugh at these great Names,
who dis­allow the Acclamations, which they have receiv'd from all Ages, and
who would deprive them of the Crowns, which they have so well deserv'd, and
which they have got before such August Tribunals. But for fear of falling into
Admiration, which they look upon as the Child of Ignorance, they do not
perceive that they go from that Admiration, which Plato calls the Mother of
Wisdom, and which was the first that opened Mens Eyes. I do not wonder that
the Celestial Beauties, which we find in the Writing of these incomparable
Men, lose with them all their Attractives, and Charms, because they have not
the Strength to keep their Eyes long enough upon them. Besides, it is much
easier to despise than understand them. As for my self, I declare, that I am
full of Admiration, and Veneration for their Divine Geniusses: I have them
always before my Eyes, as Venerable and Incorruptible Judges; before whom I
take pleasure to fancy, That I ought to give an account of my Writings. At the
same Time I have a great Respect for Posterity, and I always think with more
Fear, than Confidence, on the Judgment that will pass on my Works, if they are
happy enough to reach it. All this does not hinder me from esteeming the great
Men that live now. I acknowledge that there are a great many who are an Honour
to our Age, and who wou'd have adorn'd the Ages pass'd. But amongst these
great Men, I speak of, I do not know one, and there cannot be one, who does
not esteem, and honour the Ancients, who is not of their taste, and who
follows not their Rules. If you go never so little from them, you
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=16) go at the
same time from Nature and Truth; and I shall not be affraid to affirm, that it
wou'd not be more difficult to see without Eyes, or Light, than 'tis
impossible to acquire a solid Merit, and to form the Understanding by other
means, than by those, that the Greeks, and Romans have trac'd for us. Whether
it be that we follow them by the only force of Natural Happiness, or Instinct,
or that Art, and Study have conducted us thither. As for those who thus blame
Antiquity, without knowing of it, once for all I'll undeceive them, and make
it appear, that in giving all the advantage to our Age, they take the direct
Course to dishonour it; for what greater Proofs can be of the Rudeness, or
rather Barbarity of an Age, than in it, to hear Ho­mer called dull, and heavy,
Plato tiresome, and tedi­ous, Aristotle ignorant, Demosthenes and Cicero,
vul­gar Orators, Virgil a Poet without either Grace, or Beauty, and Horace an
Author unpolished, languid, and without force? The Barbarians who ravag'd
Greece, and Italy, and who laboured with so much fury to destroy all things
that were fine and noble, have never done any thing so horrible as this. But I
hope that the false taste of some particular Men with­out Authority, will not
be imputed to the whole Age, nor give the least Blemish to the Ancients. 'Twas
to no purpose that a certain Emperor de­clar'd himself an Enemy to Homer,
Virgil and Titus Livius. All his Efforts were ineffectual, and the Oppsition
he made to Works so perfect, serv'd on­ly to augment in his History the number
of his Follies, and render him more odious to all Po­sterity.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=16)

## The INDEX.

  * A Letter from Mr. Prior, to Mr. Fleetwood Sheppard. page. 1.
  * Horace, Lib. 2. Ode 14\. Imitated by Mr. Con­greve. 12
  * An Ode in imitation of Horace, Ode 9. lib. 1. by the same. 17
  * Horace Ode 27. Book 1. imitated. 22
  * On a Lady who deny'd him entrance into her Closet. 24
  * King Charles the First Lot at Sortes Virgilianae, Translated by Mr. Cowly. 26
  * The Deists Plea Answer'd by the Honourable Robert Boyl Esq 27
  * Iulii Mazarini Cardinalis Epitaphium, Authore Joh. Milton. 29
  * In Urbanum VIII. P. M. 33
  * Epitaph on Felton by the Duke of Buckingham, Ibid.
  * Vpon a Ladies Singing, by Mr. Congreve. 35
  * Advice about Marriage, in imitation of a French Satyr, by Mr. Tho. Brown. 40
  * Part of a Panegyric upon Colonel Walker of Lon­donderry, by the same. 43
  * Carolo Martyri Sacrum, Authore Tho. Brown. 44
  * Catch by Mr. Taverner. 45
  * The Beaux, by Mr. Brown. Ibid,
  * The Repenting Husband, or a Satyr upon Marriage, by S. W. 47
  * Vpon the Duke of Buckingham's Retirement, by Ma­dam Wharton. 54
  * Petronius Arbiter. Qui Pelago Credit. 60
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=17)Song by Henry Cromwel, Esq 61
  * Vpon the Art of Love, a Book presented to a Lady, by the same. 62
  * A Song by the same. 63
  * The Decay a Song, by Mr. W. C. 64
  * Song by Mr. S. 65
  * By the same a Song. 66
  * Song by Tho. Ch— Esq 68
  * Song by the same. 69
  * The Message a Song, by W. C. 71
  * By Henry Cromwel, Esq Martial. Epi. de morte Festi. 72
  * A Catch. 74
  * A Letter from Hen. Cr— Esq to Tho. Ch.— Esq for Women against Wine. 75
  * An Answer to the foregoing Letter, by Tho. Ch— Esq for Wine. 77
  * Song by Henry Cromwel, Esq 82
  * An Invitation to the Music Meeting, by the same. 83
  * On a Conventicle, by Mrs. Behn. 84
  * Verses design'd by Mrs. Behn to be sent to a fair La­dy, &c. 85
  * Venus and Cupid, by the same. 86
  * The old Man's Complaint, by Mr. Wells. 90
  * Vpon Marriage, by Dr. N. 92
  * A Song by Mr. J. S. of the Middle Temple. 93.
  * To Sylvia a Song, by C. G. 94
  * To Sylvia the Meeting, by the same. 96
  * The beginning of the first Satyr of Persius Imitated, by the same. 99
  * On Affairs abroad, and King William's Expedition, by Mr. Durfey. 107
  * On my Lord Fairfax, by the late Duke of Bucking­ham. 109

## Table of contents

  * The Epistle Dedicatory, TO Mr. CARDELL GOODMAN.
  * AN Essay upon Satyr, FROM M. DACIER.
  * The Preface of M. Dacier.
  * The INDEX.
  * 1\. POEMS, &c.
    * 1.1. A Letter from Mr. Prior, to Mr. Fleetwood Sheppard.
    * 1.2. HORACE, Lib. II. Ode 14. Imitated by Mr. Congreve.
    * 1.3. An ODE, In imitation of HORACE, Ode IX. Lib. 1.
    * 1.4. Horace Ode 27, Book 1. imitated.
    * 1.5. To a Lady, who deny'd him Entrance into her Closet.
    * 1.6. King Charles I. at Oxford, being at a Sport called Sortes Virgilianae, drew for his Lott some part of the 4th Eneid, abut Verse 615. and had six Verses translated by Mr. Cowley.
      * 1.6.1. The Latine Verses.
    * 1.7. The Deist's Plea, answered by the Honourable, Robert Boyle, Esq.
      * 1.7.1. The Deist's Plea.
      * 1.7.2. The Christian's Plea.
    * 1.8. Iulii Mazirini, Cardinalis, Epitaphium: Authore Ioh. Milton.
    * 1.9. In Vrbanum viii. P. M.
    * 1.10. EPITAPH upon Felton, by his Grace the late D. of Buckingham.
    * 1.11. Upon a Lady's Singing PINDARICK ODE,
    * 1.12. Advice about Marriage: An Imitation of a French Satyr; by Mr. Tho. Brown.
    * 1.13. Part of a Panegyrick upon the Famous Colonel Walker, Governour of Londonderry; by Mr. Tho. Brown.
    * 1.14. CAROLO Martyri Sacrum: Autore Thoma Brown.
    * 1.15. A Catch, by Mr. Taverner.
    * 1.16. The Beaux, an Ephigram, by Mr. Tho. Brown.
    * 1.17. The Repenting Husband: Or a Satyr upon Marriage: By Mr. S. W.
    * 1.18. Vpon the D. of Buckingham's Retirement: By Madam Wharton, Jan. 1683.
    * 1.19. To Damon, the most Inconstant and Faithless of his Sex: Being the first Copy of Verses made by a fair Lady, who is since dead.
    * 1.20. Pet. Arbiter. Qui Pelago credit, magno se foenere tollit, &c.
    * 1.21. A SONG: By Henry Cromwel, Esq;.
    * 1.22. Vpon the Art of Love, a Book, sent to a Lady: By the same.
    * 1.23. A SONG: By the same.
    * 1.24. The DECAY, A SONG: By W. C.
    * 1.25. A SONG:
    * 1.26. By the same.
    * 1.27. SONG:
    * 1.28. SONG: By the same.
    * 1.29. The Message, a SONG:
    * 1.30. By Henry Cromwel, Esq Martial. Epigram. De morte Festi, lib. 1. epig. 67.
    * 1.31. A CATCH.
    * 1.32. A Letter from Hen. Cr. Esq. to Tho. Ch. Esq. For Women and against Wine.
    * 1.33. An Answer to the foregoing Letter, by Tho. Ch. Esq. for Wine.
    * 1.34. A SONG, By Henry Cromwel, Esq.
    * 1.35. An Invitation to the Musick Meeting: By the same.
    * 1.36. VERSES by Madam Behn, never before printed. On a CONVENTICLE.
    * 1.37. VERSES design'd by Mrs. A. Behn, to be sent to a fair Lady, that desir'd she would absent herself, to cure her Love. Left unfinish'd.
    * 1.38. VENUS and CUPID.
    * 1.39. The Old Man's Complaint: By Mr. Wells.
    * 1.40. The Maid's Answer.
    * 1.41. Vpon MARRIAGE: An Epigram: By Dr. N.
    * 1.42. A SONG: By Mr. J. S. of the Middle Temple.
    * 1.43. To SYLVIA, a SONG:
    * 1.44. To SYLVIA, the Meeting: By the same.
    * 1.45. The beginning of the First Satyr of Persius imitated.
      * 1.45.1. The Prologue, to Dr. M—dly.
      * 1.45.2. The beginning of the First Satyr of Persius imitated.
    * 1.46. On Affairs abroad, and K. William's Expedition: By Mr. Durfey.
    * 1.47. On my Lord Fairfax: By the late Duke of Buckingham.
      * 1.47.1. EPITAPH.
      * 1.47.2. ELEGY.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=17)

## 1\. POEMS, &c.

### 1.1. A Letter from Mr. Prior, to Mr. Fleetwood Sheppard.

SIR,

AS once a Twelve month to the Priest,

Whom some call Pope, some Antichrist,

The Spanish Monarch sends a Gennet,

To shew his Love, that's all that's in it:

For if his Holiness would thump

His Rev'rend Bum 'gainst Horses Rump,

He might be 'quip'd from his own Stable

With one more White, and eke more able.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=18)Or as with
Gondola's and Men, his

Good Excellence the Duke of Venice,

(I wish for Rhime 'thad been the King)

Sails out, and gives the Sea a Ring:

Which Trick of State he wisely maintains,

Keeps Kindness up 'twixt old Acquaintance;

For else, in honest Truth, the Sea

Has much less need of Gold than he.

Or, not to rove and pump ones Fancy,

For Popish Similies beyond Sea;

As Folks from Mud-wall'd Tenement

Bring Land-Lords Pepper-Corn for Rent,

Present a Turkey or a Hen

To those might better spare them Ten:

Ev'n so, with all Submission, I

(For first Men instance, than apply)

Send you each Year a homely Letter,

Who may return me much a better.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=18)Then take
it, Sir, as it was writ,

To pay Respect, and not show Wit:

Nor look askew at what it saith,

There's no Petition in it—Faith.

Here some would scratch their Heads and try

What they should write, and how, and why;

But I conceive such Folks are quite in

Mistakes, in Theory of Writing:

If once for Principles 'tis laid

That Thought is Trouble to the Head;

I argue thus, the World agrees,

That he writes well, who writes with Ease;

Then he, by Sequel Logical,

Writes best, who never thinks at all.

Verse comes from Heav'n, like Inward Light,

Meer Human Pains can ne're come by it.

The God, not we, the Poem makes,

We only tell Folks what he Speaks.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=19)Hence when
Anatomists discourse

How like Brutes Organs are to ours;

They grant, if higher Powers think fit,

A Bear might soon be made a Wit:

And that, for any thing in Nature,

Pigs might squeak Love-Odes, Dogs bark Satyr.

Memnon, tho' Stone, was counted Vocal,

But 'twas the God, mean while, that spoke all.

Rome oft' has heard a Cross haranguing,

With prompting Priest behind the Hanging;

The Wooden Head resolv'd the Question,

Whilst you and Pettys help'd the Jest on.

Your crabbed Rogues that read Lucretius,

Are against Gods, you know, and teach us,

The God makes not the Poet, but

The Thesis vice versa put

Should Hebrew-wise be understood,

And means the Poet makes the God.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=19) Egyptian
Gard'ners thus are said to

Have set the Leeks they after pray'd to:

And Romish Bakers praise the Deity

They chip'd, whilst yet in it's Paniety.

That when you Poets Swear and Cry

The God Inspires, I rave, I die;

If inward Wind does truly swell ye,

'Tmust be the Colick in the Belly.

That Writing is but just like Dice,

And lucky Mains make People Wise:

That jumbled Words, If Fortune throw 'em,

Can well as Dryden form a Poem;

Or make a Speech correct and witty,

As you know who—at the Committee:

So Atoms dancing round the Centre,

They urge, form'd all things at a venture.

But granting Matters should be spoke

By Method rather than by Luck,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=20)This may
confine their younger Styles,

Whom Dr—n pedagogues at Wills:

But never could be meant to tye

Authentick Wits, like you and I:

For as young Children who are try'd in

Go Carts to keep their Steps from Sliding;

When Members knit, and Legs grow stronger,

Make use of such Machine no longer,

But leap, pro libitu, and scout

On Horse call'd Hobby, or without:

So when at School we first declaim,

Old Busby walks us in a Theme,

Whose Props support our Infant Vein,

And help the Rickets in the Brain:

But when our Souls their Force dilate,

And Thoughts grow up to Wits Estate,

In Verse or Prose we Write or Chat,

Not Six Pence Matter upon what.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=20)'Tis not
how well a Writer says,

But 'tis how much that gathers Praise:

T—n, who is himself a Wit,

Counts Authors Merits by the Sheet;

Thus each should down with all he thinks,

As Boys eat Bread to fill up Chinks.

Kind Sir, I should be glad to see you,

I hope you're well, so God be with y',

Was all at first I thought to write,

But Things since that are alter'd quite;

Fancies flow in, and Muse flies high,

So God knows when my Clack will lie;

I must, Sir, prattle on as afore,

And beg your Pardon yet this half Hour.

So, where I've with my Gran'am gone,

At Sacred Barne of pure Noncon—

When Lobb has sifted all his Text,

And I well hop'd the Pudding next,

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=21)The Rogue
has cough'd up to'ther Hour,

And to apply has plagu'd me more

Than all his Villain Stuff before.

For your Religion, then, I hear

A very good Account of her;

They say she's honest as your Claret,

Not sowr'd with Cant, nor stum'd with Merit,

Your Chamber is the sole retreat

Of Chaplains ev'ry Sunday-Night,

Of Grace no Doubt a certain Sign,

When Lay-Man herds with Man Divine;

For if their Fame be justly high, who

Would never treat the Pope's Nuncio,

That his is higher, we must grant,

Who will treat Nuncio's Protestant.

In Politicks, I hear, you'r stanch,

Directly bent against the French,

Deny to have your free-born Toe

Dragoon'd into a Wooden Shoe,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=21)Are in no
Plots, but fairly drive at

The Publick Welfare in your Private,

And will for England's Glory try

Turks, Iews and Iesuits, to defie,

And keep your Places till you die.

For me, whom wand'ring Fortune threw

From what I lov'd, the Town and you,

Let me just tell you how my Time is

Past in a Country-Life—Imprimis.

As soon as Phaebus's Rays inspect Us,

I rise to Read, perhaps to Breakfast,

So on till 'foresaid God does Set,

I sometimes Study, sometimes Eat;

Thus of your Heroes and Brave Boys,

With whom Old Homer makes such Noise,

The greatest Actions I can find,

Are, that they did their Work and Din'd.

The Books of which I'm chiefly fond,

Are such as you have whilom con'd,

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=22)That Treat
of China's Civil-Law,

And Subjects Rights in Golconda:

Of High-way Elephants at Ceylan,

That Rob in Clans, like Men o'th' High Land.

Of Apes that Storm or Keep a Town

Better, perhaps, than Count Lausune:

Of Unicorns and Alligators,

Elks, Mermaids, Mummies, Witches, Satyrs,

And Twenty other stranger Matters:

Which, tho' they'r things I've no concern in,

Make all our Grooms admire my Learning.

Criticks I Read on other Men,

And Hypers upon them again,

From whose Remarks I give Opinion

On Twenty Books, yet ne'r look in One:

Then all your Wits that fleer and Sham,

Down from Don Quixot to Tom Tram;

From whom I Jeasts and Puns Purloin,

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=22)And slily
put 'em off for Mine.

Fond to be thought a Country-Wit,

The rest when Fate and You think fit.

Sometimes I climb my Mare, and kick her,

To Bottled Ale, and Neighb'ring Vicar;

Sometimes at Stamford take a Quart,

'Squire Sheppard's Health with all my Heart.

Thus far from Pleasure, Sir, or Grief,

I fool away an Idle Life,

Till Mr. Maidwell cease to Teach,

Then I'll Jerk Youth, and say Inspeech;

Or Shadwell from the Town retires,

Choak'd up with Fame and Sea-Coal-Fires,

To bless the Woods with Peaceful Lyric,

Then hey! for Praise and Panegyric;

Justice restord, and Nations free'd,

And Wreaths round William's Glorious Head.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=23)

### 1.2. HORACE, Lib. II. Ode 14. Imitated by Mr. Congreve.

‘Eheu Fugaces, Posthume, Posthume, Labuntur Anni, &c.’

I.

AH! No, 'tis all in vain, believe me 'tis

'This Pious Artifice.

Not all these Prayers and Alms, can Buy

One Moment tow'rd Eternity.

Eternity! that boundless Race,

Which, Time himself can never run:

(Swift, as he flies, with an unweari'd pace,)

Which, when Ten Thousand, Thousand Years are done,

Is still the same, and still to be begun.

Fix'd are those Limits, which prescribe

A short Extent to the most lasting Breath,

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=23)And though
thou couldst for Sacrifice, lay down

Millions of other Lives to save thine own;

'Twere fruitless all; not all would Bribe

One Supernumerary Gasp from Death.

II.

In vain's thy Inexhausted Store

Of Wealth, in vain thy Pow'r,

Thy Honours, Titles; all must fail,

Where Piety it self does nought avail.

The Rich, the Great, the Innocent and Just,

Must all be huddl'd to the Grave,

With the most Vile and Ignominious Slave,

And undistinguish'd lie in Dust.

In vain, the Fearful, flies Alarms,

In vain, he is secure, from wounds of Arms,

In vain, avoids the Faithless Seas,

And is confin'd to Home and Ease,

Bounding his Knowledg, to extend his Days.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=24)In vain,
are all those Arts we try,

All our Evasions, and Regret to Die:

From the Contagion of Mortality,

No Clime is pure, no Air is free:

And no Retreat

Is so Obscure, as to be hid from Fate.

III.

Thou must, alas! thou must my Friend;

(The very Hour thou now dost spend

In studying to avoid, brings on thine end,)

Thou must forego the dearest Joys of Life;

Leave the warm Bosome of thy tender Wife,

And all the much lov'd Offspring of her Womb,

To molder in the Cold Embraces of a Tomb.

All must be left, and all be lost;

Thy House, whose stately Structure so much cost,

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=24)Shall not
afford

Room for the stinking Carkass of its Lord.

Of all thy pleasant Gardens, Grots, and Bowers,

Thy Costly Fruits, thy far-fetch'd Plants and Flow'rs:

Nought shalt thou save;

Unless a Sprig of Rosemary thou have,

To wither with thee in the Grave:

The rest shall live and flourish, to upbraid

Their Transitory Master Dead.

IV.

Then shall thy long-expecting Heir,

A Joyful Mourning wear:

And Riot in the waste of that Estate

Which thou hast taken so much pains to get.

All thy hid Stores he shall unsold,

And set at large thy Captiv'd Gold.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=25)That
precious Wine, condemn'd by thee

To Vaults and Prisons, shall again be free:

Buried alive, tho' now it lies,

Again't shall rise,

Again its sparkling Surface show,

And free as Element, profusely flow.

With such choice Food he shall set forth his Feasts,

That Cardinals shall wish to be his Guests;

And pamper'd Prelates see

Themselves out-done in Luxury.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=25)

### 1.3. An ODE, In imitation of HORACE, Ode IX. Lib. 1.

By Mr. CONGREVE.

‘Vides ut alta, &c.—’

I.

BLess me, 'tis cold! how chill the Air?

How naked does the World appear!

But see (big with the Off-spring of the North)

The teeming Clouds bring forth.

A Show'r of soft and fleecy Rain,

Falls, to new-cloath the Earth again.

Behold the Mountain-Tops, around,

As if with Fur of Ermins crown'd:

And lo! how by degrees

The universal Mantle hides the Trees,

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=26)In hoary
Flakes, which downward fly,

As if it were the Autumn of the Sky;

Whose Fall of Leaf would theirs supply:

Trembling, the Groves sustain the Weight, and bow

Like aged Limbs, which feebly go

Beneath a venerable Head of Snow.

II.

Diffusive Cold does the whole Earth invade,

Like a Disease, through all its Veins 'tis spread,

And each late living Stream, is num'd and dead;

Lets melt the frozen Hours, make warm the Air.

Let cheerful Fires Sol's feeble Beams repair;

Fill the large Bowl with sparkling Wine;

Let's drink, till our own Faces shine,

Till we like Suns appear,

To light and warm the Hemisphere.

Wine can dispence to all both Light and Heat,

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=26)They are
with Wine incorporate:

That pow'rful Juice, with which no Cold dares mix,

Which still is fluid, and no Frost can fix:

Let that but in abundance flow,

And let it storm and thunder, hail and snow,

'Tis Heav'ns Concern; and let it be

The Care of Heaven still for me:

These Winds, which rend the Oaks and plough the Seas;

Great Iove can, if he please,

With one commanding Nod appease.

III.

Seek not to know to Morrows Doom;

That is not ours, which is to come.

The present Moment's all our Store:

The next, should Heav'n allow,

Then this will be no more:

So all our Life is but one instant Now.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=27)Look on
each Day you've past

To be a mighty Treasure won:

And lay each Moment out in haste;

We're sure to live too fast,

And cannot live too soon.

Youth does a thousand Pleasures bring,

Which from decrepid Age will fly;

Sweets that wanton ith' Bosome of the Spring,

In Winter's cold Embraces dye.

IV.

Now Love, that everlasting Boy, invites

To revel while you may, in soft Delights:

Now the kind Nymph yields all her Charms,

Nor yields in vain to youthful Arms.

Slowly she promises at Night to meet,

But eagerly prevents the Hour with swifter Feet.

To gloomy Groves and obscure Shades she flies,

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=27)There
vails the bright Confession of her Eyes.

Unwillingly she stays,

VVould more unwillingly depart,

And in soft Sighs conveys

The Whispers of her Heart.

Still she invites and still denies,

And vows she'll leave you if y'are rude;

Then from her Ravisher she flies,

But flies to be pursu'd:

If from his Sight she does herself convey,

VVith a feign'd Laugh she will herself betray,

And cunningly instruct him in the way.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=28)

### 1.4. Horace Ode 27, Book 1. imitated.

‘Natis in usum laetitiae Scyphis, &c.’

WHat Boys, are ye mad? is the Dutch Devil in ye?

Must your Quarrels as long as your Glasses con­tinue?

Give it o're, ye dull Sots! let the dull-pated Boors,

Snic or snee, at their Punch-Bowls, or slash for their Whores,

We'll be merry and wise, but for Bloodshed we bar it,

No Red shall be seen here but your Port and good Claret.

What a P— should we fight for? No Bayonets here

But the Sconces all round & the Bottles appear.

Look, the Wine blushes for us! while it gent­ly disgraces

Our unnatural Freaks and our mortifi'd Faces.

Come let's do what we came for! let the Brim­mers be crown'd,

And a Health to all quiet Good-fellows go round!

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=28)

Must I take off my Glass too? then Iack prethee tell us

Thy new Mistresses Name: What a Mischief art Jealous?

Must her Name be a Secret? Alons then I've done,

Hang the greedy Curmudgeon that will eat all alone.

Come discover you Block-head! I'm sure I mistook ye,

Or else in these Amours Iack was us'd to be lucky

Well, but whisper it then! I'll keep Counsel, ne'r fear it,

Is it she? the damn'd Jilt! Gad let no Body hear it;

Why, Faith Iack thou'rt undone then, 'twas some Witchcraft I'm sure

Could betray thee to th' Arms of a Pockified Whore.

Well, 'tis vain to repine Boy; let us drink away Sorrow,

Use thy freedom to Night Man, let the Punk reign to Morrow.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=29)

### 1.5. To a Lady, who deny'd him Entrance into her Closet.

PArdon at least it merits, if not Praise,

To this high Wish, our bold Desires to raise.

For what Place more our longing Eyes can bless,

Than that where you alone your self possess,

Where in a calm and undisturb'd Retreat

All your mild tender Thoughts together meet,

And Love and Innocence each other greet?

Here some unhappy Virgin's Fate you read,

And your soft Soul with her sad Story feed:

Admire the Truth which she, tho' injur'd, bears,

And praise the mournful Beauty of her Tears;

Such charming Tears as those alone excel,

Which from your Eyes for lov'd Pamela fell:

There, with concern of Heroes past you read;

How do we envy then the happier dead!

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=29)But oh!
what Hopes can living Lovers find,

If they alone take up your gentle Mind!

To this blest Place are all our Wishes bound,

Where no unhallow'd Feet e're toucht the ground:

Hither w'approach not so profane or rude,

As without your Permission to intrude:

Nor can we of this mighty Grace despair,

From the bright Nymph that's gentle as she's fair,

In whom we Nature's noblest Strife may find,

Which should excel, her Beauty or her Mind;

In the warm Snow of whose soft tender Breast,

Mildness and gentlest Pity build their Nest;

And Virtue, stronglier, noblier fortify'd

By easie Freedom than disdainful Pride.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=30)

### 1.6. King Charles I. at Oxford, being at a Sport called Sortes
Virgilianae, drew for his Lott some part of the 4th Eneid, abut Verse 615. and
had six Verses translated by Mr. Cowley.

BY a bold People's stubborn Arms opprest,

Forc'd to forsake the Land which he possest,

Torn from his dearest Son, let him in vain

Beg help, and see his Friends unjustly slain:

Let him to bold unequal Terms submit,

In hopes to save his Crown; yet lose both it

And Life at once: Untimely let him dye,

And on an open Stage unburied lye.

#### 1.6.1. The Latine Verses.

AT bello audacis populi vexatus & armis,

Finibus extorris, complexu avulsus Iuli

Auxilium imploret, videat (que) indigna suorum

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=30)Funera,
nec cum se sub leges pacis iniquae

Tradiderit, regno aut optata lace fruatur,

Sed cadat ante diem, media (que) inhumatus arena.

### 1.7. The Deist's Plea, answered by the Honourable, Robert Boyle, Esq.

#### 1.7.1. The Deist's Plea.

NAtural Religion, easie first and Plain;

Tales made it Mystery, Offerings made it gain;

Sacrifices and Feasts were at length prepar'd▪

The Priests eat roast Meat, and the People star'd.

#### 1.7.2. The Christian's Plea.

NAtural Religion does indeed display

The Duty of serving God, but not the way:

Man of himself roving, perverse and blind,

A Precipice sooner than that way would find,

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=31)What
Worship God will like: Himself must teach,

And so he did, by those he sent to preach;

Who Doctrins worthy to be thought Divine,

Confirm'd by Miracles, where his Power did shine:

Who by those Wonders, Instances did give

Of things, as strange as they bid us believe;

Who promis'd endless Joys, and Lives requir'd

Worthy of those, that to such Joys aspir'd,

Who what they taught so much believ'd and pris'd

That, for its sake, they all things else despis'd:

And both by its strict Rules their Lives did guide,

And to attest its Truth most gladly dy'd;

And without Arms subdu'd the World, save those

Whom Vice, not Wit, engag'd clear Truths t'oppose.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=31)

### 1.8. Iulii Mazirini, Cardinalis, Epita­phium: Authore Ioh. Milton.

HIC jacet Iulius Mazirinus,

Galliae Rex, Italus

Ecclesiae Praesul Laicus,

Europae praedo purpuratus,

Fortunam omnem ambiit omnem corrupit;

Aerarium administravit, & exhausit;

Civile bellum compressit, sed commovit;

Regni jura tuitus est, & invasit;

Beneficia possedit, & vendidit;

Pacem dedit aliquando, sed distulit,

Hostes cladibus, cives oneribus afflixit,

Arrisit paucis, irrisit plurimos,

Omnibus nocuit.

Negotiator in Templo, Tyrannus in Regno,

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=32)Praedo in
Ministerio,

Vulpes in Consilio,

Grassator in Bello,

Solus nobis in Pace Hostis.

Fortunam olim adversam, aut elusit aut vicit:

E nostro seculo vidimus

Adorari fugitivum,

Imperare Civibus Exulem,

Regnare proscriptum.

Quid deinde egerit, rogas? Paucis accipe.

Lusit, fefellit, rapuit;

Ferreum nobis seculum induxit, sibi ex auro nostro

Aureum fecit.

Quorundam capiti nullius fortunis pepercit,

Homo crudeliter clemens;

Pluribus tandem morbis elanguit,

Plures ei mortes coelo irrogante,

Cui Senatus olim unam decreverat:

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=32)Vincenni
se arcibus inclusit moriturus;

Id quidem apte

Quaesivit carcerem;

Diu laedentem animam retinuit, aegre reddidit,

Sic retinere omnia didicerat,

Nil sua sponte reddere,

Constanter tamen visurus est mori, quid mirum?

Vt vixit, sic obiit dissimulans,

Ne morbum quidem novere qui curabant.

Hac una fraude nobis profuit,

Fefellit Medicos;

Mortuus est tamen, ni fallimur, & moriens

Regem regno, Regnum Regi restituit;

Reliquit▪

Praesulibus pessima exempla,

Aulicis infida consilia,

Adoptivo amplissima spolia,

Paupertatem populis;

[[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=33)Successoribus
suis omnes praedandi artes,

Sed praedam nullam.

Immensas tamen opes licet profuderit,

Id unum habuit ex suo quod daret,

Nomen suum.

Pectus ejus, post mortem apertum est,

Tunc primum patuit vafrum cor

Mazirini

Quod nec precibus, nec lacrymis, nec injuriis moveretur.

Diu quaesivimus, invenere medici

Cor Lapideum.

Quod mortuus adhuc omnia moveat & administret ne mireris:

Stipendia in hunc annum accepit,

Nec fraudat post Mortem bonae fidei:

Quo tandem evaserit forsitan, rogas?

Coelum (si rapitur) tenet, si datur meritis longe abest.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=33)Sed abi
Viator, & cave;

Nam hic Tumulus

Est Specus Latronis.

### 1.9. In Vrbanum viii. P. M.

EST ne Papa Christianus?

Immo vero, Christianissimus.

Estne verus Petri Successor?

Immo verissimus:

Quotiescunque enim Gallus Cantat,

Dominum abnegat.

### 1.10. EPITAPH upon Felton, by his Grace the late D. of Buckingham.

HEre uninter'd suspends (tho not to save

Surviving Friends th'Expences of a Grave)

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=34) Felton's
dead Earth, which to the World must be,

His own sad Monument, His Elegy,

As large as Fame, but whether bad, or good,

I say not, by himself 'twas writ in Blood.

Having his Body thus entomb'd in Air,

Arch'd ore with Heaven, and set with many a fair

And glorious Diamond-Star; a Sepulchre

Which Time can't ruinate, and where

The impartial Worm, which is not brib'd to spare

Princes, when wrapt in Marble, cannot share

His Flesh, which oft the charitable Skies

Embalm with Tears, doing those Obsequies

Belong to Men, until the pitying Fowl,

Contend to reach his Body to his Soul.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=34)

### 1.11. Upon a Lady's Singing PINDARICK ODE,

By Mr. CONGREVE.

I.

LEt all be husht, each softest Motion cease,

Be every loud tumultuous Thought at Peace,

And ev'ry ruder Gasp of Breath

Be calm, as in the Arms of Death.

And thou most fickle, most uneasie Part,

Thou restless Wanderer, my Heart,

Be still; gently, ah gently, leave,

Thou busie, idle thing, to heave.

Stir not a Pulse; and let my Blood,

That turbulent, unruly Flood,

Be softly staid:

Let me be all, but my Attention, dead.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=35)Go, rest,
y'unnecessary Springs of Life,

Leave your officious Toil and Strife;

For I would hear this Voice, and try

If it be possible to dye.

II.

Come all ye Love-sick Maids and wounded Swains,

And listen to her Healing Strains.

A wondrous Balm, between her Lips she wears,

Of Sov'reign Force to soften Cares;

'Tis piercing as your Thoughts, and melting as your Tears:

And this, through ev'ry Ear she does impart,

(By tuneful Breath diffus'd) to ev'ry Heart.

Swiftly the gentle Charmer Flies,

And to the tender Grief soft Air applies,

Which, warbling Mystick Sounds,

Cements the bleeding Panter's Wounds.

But ah! beware of clam'rous Moan:

Let no unpleasing Murmur or harsh Groan,

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=35)Your
slighted Loves declare:

Your very tend'rest moving Sighs forbear,

For even they will be too boistrous here.

Hither let nought but Sacred Silence come,

And let all sawcy Praise be dumb.

III.

And lo! Silence himself is here;

Methinks I see the Midnight God appear,

In all his downy Pomp aray'd,

Behold the rev'rend Shade:

An ancient Sigh he sits upon,

Whose Memory of Sound is long since gone,

And purposely annihilated for his Throne:

Beneath two soft transparent Clouds do meet,

In which he seems to sink his softer Feet.

A melancholy Thought, condens'd to Air,

Stol'n from a Lover in Despair,

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=36)Like a
thin Mantle, serves to wrap

In Fluid Folds, his visionary Shape.

A wreath of Darkness round his Head he wears,

Where curling Mists supply the want of Hairs:

While the still Vapors, which from Poppies rise,

Bedew his hoary Face and lull his Eyes.

IV.

But hark! the heav'nly Sphere turns round,

And Silence now is drown'd

In Ectasy of Sound.

How on a suddain the still Air is charm'd,

As if all Harmony were just alarm'd!

And ev'ry Soul with Transport fill'd,

Alternately is thaw'd and Chill'd.

See how the Heavenly Choir

Come flocking, to admire,

And with what Speed and Care,

Descending Angels cull the thinnest Air!

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=36)Haste
then, come all th'immortal Throng,

And listen to her Song;

Leave your lov'd Mansions, in the Sky,

And hither, quickly hither fly;

Your Loss of Heav'n, nor shall you need to fear,

While she sings 'tis Heav'n here.

V.

See how they crowd, see how the little Che­rubs skip!

While others sit around her Mouth, and sip

Sweet Hellelujahs from her Lip.

Those Lips, where in Surprise of Bliss they rove;

For ne'r before were Angels blest

With such a luscious Feast

Of Musick and of Love.

Prepare then, ye immortal Choir

Each sacred Minstrel tune his  [...]

And with her Voice in Choru [...]

Her Voice, which next to yours i [...] [...]st divine.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=37)Bless the
glad Earth with heavenly Lays,

And to that Pitch th'eternal Accents raise,

Which only Breath inspir'd can reach,

To Notes, which only she can learn, and you can teach:

While we, charm'd with the lov'd Excess,

Are wrapt in sweet Forgetfulness

Of all, of all, but of the present Happiness:

Wishing, for ever in that State to lie,

For ever to be dying so, yet never die.

### 1.12. Advice about Marriage: An Imi­tation of a French Satyr; by Mr. Tho.
Brown.

THE Husband's the Pilot, the Wife is the Ocean,

He always in Danger, she always in Motion,

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=37)And he
that in Wedlock twice hazards his Carcass

Twice ventures a drowning; and Faith that's a hard Case.

Even at our own Weapons the Females defeat us,

And Death, only Death, can sign our Quietus.

Not to tell you sad Stories of Liberty lost,

How our Mirth is all pall'd, and our Pleasures all crost:

This Pagan Confinement, this damnable Station

Suits no order, nor age, nor degree in the Nation.

The Levite it keeps from Parochial Duty,

For who can at once mind Religion and Beauty?

The Rich it alarms with Expences and Trouble,

And a poor Beast, you know, can scarce carry double.

'Twas invented, they'll tell you, to keep us from falling,

Oh the Virtue and Grace of a shrill Catter-wawling!

But it pales in your Game— Ay, but how do you know Sir,

How often your Neighbour breaks up your Enclosure?

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=38)For this
is the principal Comfort of Marriage,

You must eat, tho' an hundred have spit in your Porrige,

If at Night you're unactive and fail of per­forming,

Enter Thunder and Lightning, and Bloodshed next Morning:

Cries the Bone of your Side, "Thanks dear Mr. Horner,

"This comes of your sinning with Crape in a Corner.

Then, to make up the Breach, all your Strength you must rally,

And labour and sweat like a Slave at the Gally:

But still you must charge, oh blessed Condition!

Tho' you know to your Cost you've no more Ammunition;

Till at last my dear mortified Tool of a Man,

You're not able to make a poor Flash in the Pan.

Fire, Female and Flood begin with a Letter,

And the World's for'em all scarce a Farthing the better,

Your Flood soon is gone, and your Fire you may humble,

If into the Flames store of Water you tumble:

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=38)But to
cool the damn'd Heat of your Wive's Titillation,

You may use half the Engines and Pumps in the Nation,

But may piss out as well the last Conflagra­tion.

Thus Sir, I have sent you my Thoughts of the Matter,

Judge you, as you please, but I scorn to flatter.

### 1.13. Part of a Panegyrick upon the Fa­mous Colonel Walker, Governour of
Londonderry; by Mr. Tho. Brown.

A Town he kept in spite of Fate,

The Irish he confounded:

For this he got five thousand Pound,

Oh Hero most renown'd!

More of his valiant Deeds and Worth,

What need we then to cry-a,

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=39)Since
Walker George has made amends

For Walker Obadiah.

### 1.14. CAROLO Martyri Sacrum: Autore Thoma Brown.

CArole Gentis Honos, sate Carole sanguine Divum,

Qui major magnis annumeraris Avis,

Relligio accepit, quo Principe, nostra Coronam,

Quo vivente decus, quo moriente fidem.

Haec damus ultrici damnata volumina Flammae

Manibus inferias, sancte Monarcha, tuis.

Seu tulerint Batavae funesta venena paludes,

Seu dederit saevam Scotia dira luem.

Sic semper pereat quaecunque lacessere Charta

Vel Reges ausa est, vel tetigisse Deos.

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=39)

### 1.15. A Catch, by Mr. Taverner.

PAle Faces stand off, and our bright ones adore,

We look like our Claret, they worse than our Score;

Then light up your Pimples, all Art we'l out­shine,

When the plump God does paint, each Stroke is divine.

Clean Glasses our Pencils, our Claret is Oil,

He that sits for his Picture must sit a good while

### 1.16. The Beaux, an Ephigram, by Mr. Tho. Brown.

TEll me, Sage Will, thou, that the Town around

For Wit, and Tea and Coffee art renown'd;

Tell me, for as the common Rumor goes,

Thy House is cramm'd eternally with Beaux,

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=40)How shall
I that strange Animal define,

What are his Marks, his Virtues or his Sign?

So may'st thou still keep in the Wits good Graces,

And never lose a Farthing more at Races.

Thus I enquir'd, when streight Sage Will re­replyed,

His Nutmeg, Spoon, and Grater laid aside;

"He that like M— Sings, like S— writes,

"Dresses like R—, like T— Fights,

"Like H— in a no ingagement swears,

"Chatters like D—, Squints like W— at Prayers;

"Dams every thing besides his own dull Jest,

"That thing's a Beau: Why then that Beau's a Beast.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=40)

### 1.17. The Repenting Husband: Or a Satyr upon Marriage: By Mr. S. W.

Beaugard.

IT can't be he. Courtine! the brisk, the gay!

What Hag has stoln the Friend and Man away?

What Monster is he metamorphos'd to?

How all unlike the Iolly Thing we knew?

Such Vnderwoods have over-run the Coast,

In his Beard's Thicket all his Face is lost;

That hanging Look sad Ghesses does invite,

And on his wrinkled Forehead Husband write.

Courtine.

For thy unseasonable Mirth a Curse,

As heavy as that Fiend, that haunts me thus:

That Constellation of Plagues be thine

Which spightful Heaven has doom'd with Sylvia, mine:

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=41)Be thou
condemn'd to lug an endless Life,

The Gally-slave to an Eternal Wife.

Beaugard.

A friendly Wish! But Partners would destroy

That Bliss, which none but one can well enjoy:

Lucky Courtine, how ev'n in spight of me

Does thy good Fortune make me envy thee?

How like the neat Sir Davy, Sage and wise,

New Aldermen sit Budding in her Eyes!

A Face so fair as Sylvia's sure might move,

Spight of his Hymns, a bloodless Angel's Love;

And then what dull Platonick can behold

The Beauty, and the Virtue of her Gold?

The Atheist thinks a merry Life does well,

Bartering short Pleasant Toys for a long future Hell.

To Lovers thus the happy Night alone

For a whole Age of Torments might attone,

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=41)After a
Day of Eating, which might vie

With the Lord Mayors or Shreeval Luxury:

See where a Drove of envious wishing Freinds

Around thy Bed, the Bower of Bliss Attends;

Each squinting Gallant prays thy Place were his

And by Delays excel the coming Blyss:

Sack-posset then, while each green Virgin throws

Prophetic Stocken, at thy patient Nose.

Sack-posset still, and when they that remove;

Next—enter the sweet Sillabub of LOVE.

Soft Music then thy Laziness must chide,

And give a fair Excuse to leave the Bride;

Not wooing Puss can louder Songs compose,

Nor more diversity of Airs than those

Harmonious City-Music; such a Bliss;

'Twere worth the while to marry but for this.

Nor must you think the Joys should end so soon,

There's yet a live-long-heavenly-hony-moon

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=42)In
Wedlocks pleasing Team, with equal Law,

Thy courteous Yoke-fellow must ever draw,

While Pictures of thy kind laborious Bride

Shall still run softly bellowing by thy Side.

Courtine.

Since my fair Pack so wondrously does please,

Thy Shoulders lend, and be an Hercules:

I feel a Load, a heavy Hell above,

For the expected gaudy Heaven of Love:

How thin would you those Tinsel Pleasures find

With which sly jilting Nature bribes Mankind?

SATED FRVITION does the Bliss destroy,

And the next Moment knows not the Tumultu­ous Ioy.

Who can reflect without just Rage and Fright,

And deep regret on such a mean Delight!

Ye Gods, if these Loves highest Banquets be,

Brutes can love more, and better far than we:

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=42)This knew
sly Iove, who when he left the Skies,

Chose rather any other Beast's Disguise,

The Bull, nay th'improportionable Swan,

Much more the lusty Ass▪ can rival Man,

Who all their Pleasure in Possession find,

Without the curst Allay, and Sting behind;

As Nature prompts, promiscuously they rove,

And hunt free Ioys, through ev'ry Field and grove,

But in a Pound, what Brute wou'd e'n make Love?

Man, Man alone is damn'd to grinding still,

And in the Prison of his Cage must Bill;

Like a blind Stallion ever drudges on,

And gets new Slaves for Wives to ride upon;

Night-mar'd, like me, whom gastly Sights persue

And scare with her lean Ghost, whom once I knew.

That Sylvia's now no more, who big with Charms,

Dropt a whole Dow'r of Charms within your Arms;

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=43)Loose
hangs the Flower, lately so fresh and gay,

And every Tempest bears new Leaves away:

Unlovely now it flags, and overblown,

And ev'ry Grace, and ev'ry Charm is gone;

Her Tenderness is fond and awkward grows,

And all her Female Art affected shews

True Hag all o're: Ugly she grows, and old,

And knowing this, turns Jealous and a Scold;

Fletcher's Wife-tamer durst not dare to love her,

Xantippe was a Patient Grizel to her;

Each Look, each Step I tread's by her sur­vey'd;

She haunts me like my Conscience, or my shade,

Expects t'a Statue, I should constant prove,

And daily damns my unperforming Love;

When e'r for Quiets-sake she hooks me in,

What Mummy looks so dreadful as her Face!

Heavens, how she ruffles in her Buckrum Skin,

And frights my Soul away from the Imbrace!

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=43)So when
from Gibbets and the Common-shore

Th'Officious Devil has pimp'd, and brought his Friend a Whore,

So shrieks the Wretch, when he next Morn has spy'd

A ghastly Carcass rotting by his Side.

Just such a Lot is mine; I drudg my Life

Worse than, with Legion far, possess'd with WIFE;

Wou'd Fate and Hell some higher ill provide,

And club for any other Plague beside,

I soon should easy and contented grow,

In spight of Bolts above and Flames below:

No—such luxurious Ease I ask in vain,

And like poor Adam must alive remain,

Whom vengeful Fate did to curs'd Woman chain,

In Judgment gave him an unkind Reprieve,

And damn'd him to ten thousand Hells in Eve.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=44)

### 1.18. Vpon the D. of Buckingham's Re­tirement: By Madam Wharton, Jan.
1683.

IF darkest Shades could cloud so bright a Mind,

Or universal Knowledg be confin'd,

Then should I fear what vainly you persue,

Exiling the offending World from you:

Permit this Phrase, for their's the loss would be,

To you, 'twere Gain of Ease and Liberty:

For them alas! what is't I would not fear?

If banished the rich World of Learning here,

Within your Breast, where Knowledg is retir'd

By vain Pursuits and false Explainers tir'd;

Others bring dazling Light, and leave us more

Opprest with Blindness than we were before:

But gently by degrees, like dawning Day,

The Mists that cloud the Mind you drive away.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=44)If you
retire, what Damps of black Despair

Must cloud the World (no longer made your Care?)

Who could alas deep Mysteries unfold?

Who could Instruct the Young or Chear the Old?

Who could like you in lively Colours paint

Death's gastly Face to each expiring Saint?

'Tis you and only you can paint him fair,

To those who Life & Pleasure make their Care.

'Tis you make Ease less lovely seem than Pain

'Tis you bring Heaven down to dying Men,

And raise the drooping Minds to Heaven again;

You chose Heaven's Saints, for still the mount­ing Soul

Is crown'd above whom you on Earth enrol.

Quit not the World, because that Monarch's Brow

So smooth to all, seems clouded o'r to you:

His Anger, like the Wrath of Heaven, is slow,

And all his Actions his Compassion shew:

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=45)Unjustice
never can his Temper sute,

Love, gentle Love, is his blest Attribute:

A Soul enclin'd to such a peaceful Charm,

No fear of Danger could his Soul alarm:

Plot upon Plot intended or devis'd,

He smil'd to see, look'd over and despis'd.

When every Subject at his Danger shook,

His Thoughts flow'd easily as a Summers Brook:

He pardon'd still, and when unruly, they

Forc'd him the Sword of Justice to display,

Unwillingly he punish'd, to obey:

I say, t'obey, for might he still command,

Garlands of Peace would grow within his Hand;

Then Love and Wit, in which he does excel,

With Peace and Plenty, here would ever dwell.

But now, alas, he rules a giddy Crowd,

Who slight their Joys and tell their Grief aloud;

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=45)As fond of
Troubles as he is of Peace,

So factious Slaves and constant Foes to ease,

Still forcing Fears unnatural and base;

At home distracted, and abroad despis'd,

The Grief of Fools, and laughter of the Wise.

But hold! too far, I have mistook my way,

I would return, and yet what can I say?

The Subject is so vast to which I'm brought,

That I am lost in the Abyss of Thought;

I would persuade, and yet I know not how

To make that Theam to my weak Numbers bow,

Exalt my humble Notions to your height,

I'll plainly tell my Thoughts, raise you their Flight.

Leave not the World, but near that Monarch rest,

Who all that's just still harbours in his Breast,

And when that Head so fill'd with boundless Thought

To his enlarged Heart is nearer brought,

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=46)What
Wonders may we not expect should spring

From such a Subject, and from such a King!

### 1.19. To Damon, the most Inconstant and Faithless of his Sex: Being the
first Copy of Verses made by a fair Lady, who is since dead.

HAppy was I, O Love, when Innocent,

And knew not what thy lawless Pow­er meant!

But since from Damon's Eyes thou'st shot thy Dart,

Wing'd with his faithless Vows, into my Heart;

Alas! away my happy Hours are flown,

And I too plainly find I am undone!

For by his Prayers and numerous Oaths be­tray'd

Too easie, I thought all was true he said;

So piteously he look'd, and sigh'd much more,

And with such wondrous feeling ardor swore!

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=46)But like
the rest of his false, perjur'd Kind,

He soon discover'd his base fickle Mind.

Wilst Young Enjoyment, was all brisk and gay,

How often didst thou, perjur'd Damon, say,

That, had Alcmena, had such melting Charms,

The happy Thunderer ne'r had left her Arms,

But had prolong'd the pleasing, blisful Night,

Till darken'd Mankind had forgot the Light.

But thou art false, and therefore shouldst be scorn'd,

And not with fruitless Tears and Sorrows mourn'd:

But now my Scorn, alas! would please thee more

Than all the Favours I bestow'd before:

Then let some other Pride thy Soul Torment,

And make thee feel what I too late repent,

The hopeless Pangs of a despairing Love,

And all the Racks the restless guilty prove.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=47)

### 1.20. Pet. Arbiter. Qui Pelago credit, magno se foenere tollit, &c.

THe ventring Merchant in his mighty Gains

Meets a Reward for his past Toil & Pains;

The hardy Soldier who delights in Wars,

Ventures for Plunder whilst he ventures Scars;

The servile cringing Flatterer, we see

Triumphant in his purple Luxury;

The Cuckold-maker spends his Blood and Health

In toilsome Pleasure to procure him Wealth;

Discarded Eloquence alone does wait,

Shivering with Cold, and ragged, out of Date;

And whilst admired Baseness upwards flies,

Worth unregarded and neglected Lyes.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=47)

### 1.21. A SONG: By Henry Cromwel, Esq;.

I.

A Beauteous Face, fine Shape, engaging Air,

With all the Graces that adorn the Fair,

If these cou'd fail their so accustom'd Parts,

And not secure the Conquest of our Hearts:

Sylvia has yet a vast reserve in store;

At Sight we love, but hearing must adore.

II.

There falls continual Musick from her Tongue,

The Wit of Sappho, with her artful Song;

From Syrens thus we lose the Power to fly,

We listen to the Charm, and stay to dy:

Ah! lovely Nymph, I yield, I am undone,

Your Voice has finisht what your Eyes begun.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=48)

### 1.22. Vpon the Art of Love, a Book, sent to a Lady: By the same.

I.

IS Sylvia then to learn the Art of Love,

Who with that Passion every Breast inspires?

What pity 'tis she only should not prove

What mighty Charms there are in soft Desires?

Let her pursue the Dictates of her Heart,

Nature's a Mistress better far than Art:

II.

But if by some unknown Indifference

Her Eyes neglect the Conquests they have won,

And whilst all yield to Love, without Defence,

Sylvia can be insensible alone:

Try then, my little Book, thy utmost Art,

To make the Passage easy to her Heart.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=48)

### 1.23. A SONG: By the same.

I.

HOw! mortal Hate! for what Offence?

For too much Love or Negligence?

The first, who is it that denies?

The Fault of your Victorious Eyes,

As 'tis of your severer Arms,

I pay no more my Tribute to your Charms.

II.

Yet I in Silence still admire,

Have gaz'd till I have stole a Fire;

A mighty Crime in one you hate;

Yet who can see and shun the Fate?

Ah! let it then not mortal prove,

Not but I'd die to shew how much I love.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=49)

### 1.24. The DECAY, A SONG: By W. C.

I.

SAy not Olinda, I despise

the faded Glories of your Face,

The languish'd Vigour, of your Eyes,

and that once, only lov'd Embrace.

II.

In vain, in vain, my constant Heart,

on aged Wings, attempts to meet

With wonted speed, those Flames you dart,

it faints and flutters at your feet.

III.

I blame not your decay of Pow'r,

you may have pointed Beauties still,

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=49)Though me
alas, they wound no more,

You cannot hurt what cannot feel.

IV.

On youthful Climes your Beams display,

There, you may cherish with your Heat,

And rise the Sun to guild their Day,

To me benighted, when you set.

### 1.25. A SONG:

By Mr. S —.

I.

NO more proud Woman boast

Your Empire over Men,

For all your Pow'r now you have lost,

And they're restor'd unto themselves again.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=50)

II.

They plainly now discern

Those Tricks and all those Arts

With which your Face and Eyes you arm,

To Catch unguarded Hearts.

III.

And rather than submit

To such Deceits, as these,

They'l for a Mistress chuse a Man o'Wit,

Who better knows to please.

### 1.26. By the same.

I.

THis proves, Clymene, what I said,

Our Hearts o'th' hardest Rocks were made,

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=50)Since
mine, unweary'd still has born

Your killing Rigour and your Scorn;

Yet yours nothing could melt, or move,

Not all my Tears, nor all the force o'Love.

II.

Long with my hourly Pains I strove,

Pains which I fear will endless prove,

Never more vainly to urge to you

This Truth, for my repose too true;

I am a Rock in Constancy,

As you are one in Cruelty.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=51)

### 1.27. SONG:

By Tho. Ch—. Esq.

I.

LOve's a Dream of mighty Treasure,

Which in Fancy we possess;

In the Folly lies the Pleasure,

Wisdom ever makes it less:

When we think, by Passion heated,

We a Goddess have in Chase,

Like Ixion we are cheated,

And a gawdy Cloud embrace.

II.

Only happy is the Lover,

Whom his Mistress well deceives,

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=51)Seeking
nothing to discover,

He contented lives at ease:

But the Wretch that would be knowing

What the fair one would disguise,

Labors for his own undoing,

Changing Happy to be wise.

### 1.28. SONG: By the same.

I.

LEt other Beauties boast in vain,

How they a Heart ensnare,

Which they by artful means obtain,

And but preserve with Care:

Whilst Cloe, with restless Pow'r,

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=52)Does all
Mankind subdue,

As are her Conquests ev'ry Hour,

So are her Charms still new.

II.

Yet she for whom so many dye,

Neglecting does surprize,

As loath the utmost Force to try

Of her victorious Eyes.

Her Influence she does moderate,

And some in Pity spare,

That Beauties of a Lower Rate

May have a little Share.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=52)

### 1.29. The Message, a SONG:

By W. C.

GO, thou unhappy Victim, go

Thou poor distracted Heart,

Oppress'd with all thy mighty woe,

Thy endless Love, and Smart;

Go to Aminta, tell thy Grief;

Go to Aminta, beg Relief;

Pray to that Cruel Fair,

And let, oh let her hear

The various Cries of thy Despair.

In bleeding Wounds, and trembling Fears,

In moving Sighs and melting Tears,

Pant to her Eyes, and pierce her Ears.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=53)Ah! sure
she cannot see,

A Heart, so clad in Misery,

And yet no Pity have;

Oh no—she cannot—sure she will

In tender Mercy save,

Or else in rigid Mercy kill.

### 1.30. By Henry Cromwel, Esq Martial. Epigram. De morte Festi, lib. 1.
epig. 67.

‘Indignas premeret pestis cum tabida fauces, &c.’

NO sooner had the dire Disease began,

But o'r his Face the spreading Mischief ran;

Around him his lamenting Friends did ly,

All Eyes were bath'd in Tears—but his were dry;

Firm in his Soul he was, and well resolv'd to die:

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=53)Yet does
he mean inglorious ways disdain,

By Famin scorns to linger out in Pain,

Or with vile poisonous Dregs his manly Visage stain:

But, as he ever Honour's Course did run,

In Death to finish what his Life begun,

With Roman Courage did his Fate obey,

Which ever led to Death the noblest way:

By falling thus he has acquir'd a Name,

Out-vying Cato's in the List of Fame,

For fear of Caesar forc'd to such an end;

But thus he dy'd, and yet was Caesar's Friend.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=54)

### 1.31. A CATCH.

I.

LET the Woman be damn'd (a moderate Fate)

Or dye an old Maid, as grey as a Cat,

That her Lover refuses for want of Estate.

II.

Let her, that sets Man, like a Beast to be sold,

And above mettle'd Flesh loves a Lump of dead Gold,

Look green when she's young, and be poxt when she's old.

III.

But let those, that are wise contemn the dull Store,

Wives chose by their Weight, will be weighty no more,

If for Gold they will wed, for the same they will whore.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=54)

### 1.32. A Letter from Hen. Cr. Esq. to Tho. Ch. Esq. For Women and against
Wine.

MY lovely Ch—, that takes Delight,

To spend the silent Hours of Night

With sparkling Wine, and sprightly Jest,

And hates the lazy Thoughts of Rest,

Unbending then with ease thy Cares,

When drudging Cit to Shop repairs,

Of thy weak Friend some Pity take,

Who has not learnt the Art to wake,

Unskill'd in offring at the Shrine

Of thy dear Jovial God of Wine:

Let him enjoy his little Punk,

Be Clapt for Sin, but not be drunk:

The Wretch that runs at ev'ry Whore

Is often poxt, but can't give o're,

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=55)May well
be thought a Slave to Passion,

But yet he acts by Inclination,

And Pleasures in one Moment gains

To countervail an Age of Pains.

Why should I by your Method live?

Against my Genius vainly strive?

This ev'n common Sense destroys;

This the wise Eunuch well disproves,

Is't fit that I, who know no Joys,

Should die, ye Gods, because she loves?

Let Venus be at distance drawn,

To make the nauseous Draught go down,

As when I drank for red-hair'd Wench

Substantial Bowles of lusty Punch.

Or was there Interest in the Case,

It might go down without Grimace,

As lusty Stallion, who for Hire,

Oblig'd to quench some Awker'd Fire,

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=55)Forces
himself against Desire,

And robs from Nature to supply her.

No more will I pursue your Fashion,

Nor ever drink by Obligation,

But seek a softer Recreation.

Thus though a different way we move,

Your Passion Wine, mine for Love,

Yet may we, as we change our Sphere,

Like the Twin-Gods, meet once a Year.

### 1.33. An Answer to the foregoing Letter, by Tho. Ch. Esq. for Wine.

WHen lately with some special Friends,

For Fops, and Fools to make amends,

In Bow-street, at a certain House,

We drank a notable Carouse;

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=56)And whilst
Mirth, and good Humor lasted,

The Nights in Joys sublime we wasted;

Against good Wine cou'd I imagine,

That you a Satyr wou'd engage in?

Good Wine, that raises us above

The most transporting Thoughts of Love,

Inspires us with great Wit and Sense;

When Love does ever drain from thence.

When by indulging over Night

Much Wine has cloid the Appetite,

Next Day a Bumper will restore,

Correct the Faults o'th Day before,

But, by Experience taught, I find,

It ne'r was so with Womankind:

Yet, Sir, I am not in defyance

With the soft Sex, but in compliance,

Wou'd kindly take Commiseration

On her that had for me a Passion;

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=56)But like a
Beau to fawn, and wait,

Is that of all Things, that I hate.

I use a Woman at my Leisure,

Not make a Business of a Pleasure:

But you, whom Female Chains can fetter,

I never heard was treated better.

Or may be of an Amorous League,

You cannot bear the grand fatigue;

Something of that I am afraid,

I'll tell you what the World has said;

My Dear, it's credibly reported,

You want strong Vigor when you sport it:

In vain you say soft things and tender,

When 'tis a stiff thing, that must bend her:

But yours is such a modest Devil,

It is afraid to be uncivil;

And when she wishes for the Blessing,

You idly stand and praise her Dressing,

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=57)The pretty
Cornets on her Head,

When you should throw her on the Bed,

The fancied Colours of a Knot,

When you should be upon the Spot:

Then with her Fan, perhaps, you play,

When you should cool her t'other way.

These are the Reasons, as I ghess,

That makes you have such ill Success;

But if by chance you have the Fortune

To win the Lady you importune,

'Tis one you pick up at Hypolito's,

Whom for a Month or two you follow close,

And though enjoy'd by half the Town,

Keeps you at Distance with a Frown,

Till by persuasive Presents gain'd,

The mighty Victory's obtain'd;

And when you think your self most happy,

'Tis ten to one, the Jade will Clap you.

[[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=57)Successively my
Pleasures move,

From Love to Wine, from Wine to Love:

Kindly each other they relieve,

And Change does double Pleasure give:

Then against Wine be not inveterate,

Because the other you are better at;

But use them both, and the Delight

Will prove your Friend is in the Right.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=58)

### 1.34. A SONG, By Henry Cromwel, Esq.

I.

NO, no, I ne'r shall love thee less,

For all thy fierce Disdain,

So fast thy blooming Charms increase,

Thy sparkling Eyes my Heart oppress,

Each Glance renews my Pain.

II.

Yet must I, (Fate!) like busie Flies,

Still to thy Brightness turn;

Pursue thee with my restless Eyes,

Till, as each flaming Blush does rise,

Insensibly I burn.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=58)

### 1.35. An Invitation to the Musick Meet­ing: By the same.

I.

REturn, ah charming Nymphs! return

To your once-lov'd forsaken Plains;

Let us no more your Absence mourn,

But soon resume our pleasing Strains;

O'r all our useless Instruments unstrung,

No more your shining Beauties shall be sung:

II.

Come all ye Shepheards to our Groves;

'Tis here a Glance with ease imparts,

To the fair Object of your Loves,

The moving Stories of your Hearts;

Our Songs and Strings shall favour the Design,

And every Breast to Tenderness incline.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=59)

### 1.36. VERSES by Madam Behn, never before printed.  
On a CONVENTICLE.

BEhold that Race, whence England's Woes proceed,

The Viper's Nest, where all our Mischiefs breed,

There, guided, by Inspiration, Treason speaks,

And through the Holy Bag-pipe Legion squeaks.

The Nation's Curse, Religion's ridicule,

The Rabble's God, the Politicians Tool,

Scorn of the Wise, and Scandal of the Just,

The Villain's Refuge, and the Womens Lust.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=59)

### 1.37. VERSES design'd by Mrs. A. Behn, to be sent to a fair Lady, that
desir'd she would absent her­self, to cure her Love. Left unfinish'd.

IN vain to Woods and Deserts I retire,

To shun the lovely Charmer I admire,

Where the soft Breezes do but fann my Fire!

In vain in Grotto's dark unseen I lie,

Love pierces where the Sun could never spy.

No place, no Art his Godhead can exclude,

The Dear Distemper reigns in Solitude:

Distance, alas, contributes to my Grief;

No more, of what fond Lovers call, Relief

Than to the wounded Hind does sudden Flight

From the chast Goddesses pursuing Sight:

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=60)When in
the Heart the fatal Shaft remains,

And darts the Venom through our bleeding Veins.

If I resolve no longer to submit

My self a wretched Conquest to your Wit,

More swift than fleeting Shades, ten thousand Charms

From your bright Eyes that Rebel Thought disarms:

The more I strugl'd, to my Grief I found

My self in Cupid's Chains more surely bound:

Like Birds in Nets, the more I strive, I find

My self the faster in the Snare confin'd.

### 1.38. VENUS and CUPID.

VENVS.

CVpid, my darling Cupid and my Joy,

Thy Mother Venus calls come away, come away.

CVPID.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=60)

Alas! I cannot, I am at Play.

VENVS.

Fond Boy, I do command thee, haste;

Thy precious Hours no longer waste:

In Groves and Cottages you make abode,

Too mean a Condescention for a God!

On barren Mountains idly play,

For shame thou Wanton come away, come away!

All useless lies thy Bow and Darts,

That should be wounding heedless Hearts:

The Swain that guards his Drove,

Alas! no Leisure has for Love:

His Flocks and Heards are all his Joy,

Then leave the Shades and come away, come away.

CVPID.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=61)

Alas, what would you have me do?

Command and I'll Obedience shew.

VENVS.

Hye then to Cities and to Court,

Where all the Young and Fair resort;

There try thy Power, let fly thy Darts,

And bring me in some noble Hearts,

Worthy to be by thee undone,

For here's no Glory to be won.

CVPID.

Mistaken Queen, look down and see,

What Trophies are prepar'd for thee,

What glorious Slaves are destin'd me.

VENVS.

Now, by my self, a Noble Throng;

How Fair the Nymphs, the Swains how Young!

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=61)No wonder
if my little Loves

Delight and play in Shades and Groves.

CVPID.

Then, Mother, here I'll bend my Bow,

And bring you wounded Hearts enough.

VENVS.

My pretty Charming Wanton do.

Chorus.

'Tis thus we over Mortals reign,

And thus we adoration gain

From the proud Monarch to the humble Swain.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=62)

### 1.39. The Old Man's Complaint: By Mr. Wells.

AH, pity Love where e'r it grows!

See how in me it overflows,

In dripping Eyes and dropping Nose.

So strange a thing is seldom seen;

My Age is dull, my Love is keen;

Above I'm grey, but elswhere green.

Aloof, perhaps I court and prate;

But something near I would be at,

Tho' I'm so old I scarce know what.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=62)

### 1.40. The Maid's Answer.

For Shame your Green-wood Fires then smother,

You drop at one End, burn at t'other,

You'd have a Wife to spoil a Mother.

I pity much your Eyes o'rflowing;

But sure the World must needs be going,

When Rheums and Rottenness run a woeing.

Then let Age make you cease your chat;

And since you have forgot what's what;

Old Rats love Cheese, go construe that.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=63)

### 1.41. Vpon MARRIAGE: An Epigram: By Dr. N.

UNhappy State! to thee, poor Man does owe

The loss of Innocence and Being too.

Marriage alone brought in the Tempter Eve,

It was the Serpent Woman did deceive:

The Mischief still continues she began,

For every Woman is an Eve to Man.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=63)

### 1.42. A SONG: By Mr. J. S. of the Middle Temple.

ALL Thoughts of Freedom are too late,

Not any new fair Lady's Art,

Nor both the India's Wealth nor Fate

Itself can disengage my Heart.

Not, which kind Heaven forbid, your Hate

And that which follows, proud Disdain

My Passion could at all abate,

But only make it last with Pain.

Thus all my Quiet does depend

On Hopes t'obtain a Smile from you;

That so my Love, that knows no end,

May last with equal Pleasure too.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=64)

### 1.43. To SYLVIA, a SONG:

By C. G.

I.

SYlvia, could your Eyes but see

The Wounds your killing Beauties give;

A Lover you might read in me,

Who, if you frown, disdains to live.

II.

But oh! the Artless fair ones know

No more, than Tongues or Eyes persuade:

Tongues that deceive, and Eyes that shew

Too often Love an Art is made,

III.

For a sincere and tender Passion:

Ah! how severe and hard a Fate!

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=64)That
Faith's not known from Oaths for fashion,

Nor naked Truth from gay Deceit.

IV.

Soft as your balmy Breath's my Flame,

When strugling Love breaks out in Sighs;

Immortal, as I'll make your Name,

And as bewitching as your Eyes.

V.

But hold, fond Swain! Ah! tell no more!

For Heav'n and the heav'nly fair

Their Favours on the Happy show'r,

Leaving the Wretch still to Despair.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=65)

### 1.44. To SYLVIA, the Meeting: By the same.

I.

GOds! when we meet how dull was I▪

My Tongue, that us'd to move

So glibly on the Theme of Love,

Now, when 'twas real, lay motionless and still;

Nor wou'd it to fair Sylvia tell,

The eager Pangs and Torments of my Mind:

But like a false deceitful Friend,

Officious in my Sun shine Day,

Profering his Service and his Coin,

(When he was here I wanted none)

But when I needed most, he prov'd most shy,

Leaving me Speechless, when I'd most to say.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=65)My very
Fancy, and my Thoughts were flown,

So wholly was I lost in unexpected Joy.

II.

All extream Joy in Silence reigns;

As Grief, when in excess

A fluent Tale proves either less,

The lighter Wounds of Fortune are made known

In formal Words, and mournful Tone:

But when she deeper strikes her Dart,

'Tis mute, and festers in the Heart.

So lesser Joy is noisy, brisk, and gay,

Flows in full Tides of Laugh, and Talk,

Admits no silent Check or Balk:

But when so great as mine, the Sense it chains.

Imperfect Words! a Sigh! a soft Caress!

A trembling Body, and a ravish'd Kiss,

Was all the wondrous Language of m'unruly Joy.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=66)

III.

Ah! if your only Presence give

Such elevated Bliss,

What Raptures and what Extasies

Have you, bright Sylvia, yet in store,

For the blest Man you love!

Too mighty sure for Man's frail Sense to bear,

Or to enjoy and live!

If but a gentle Touch such Transports move,

What must Divine Fruition prove!

Encircl'd in those tender Arms,

Dissolving with those melting Charms;

And oh!— on that soft panting Bosome lye!

Sylvia that Death, grant Heaven and you, I dye.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=66)

### 1.45. The beginning of the First Satyr of Persius imitated.

#### 1.45.1. The Prologue, to Dr. M—dly.

'TIs true, nor is it worth denial,

My Verse has never yet stood Tryal

Of Poetick-Smiths, that meet still,

At Vrwin Toms, or Vrwin Will's;

(For thus, Sir, Modern Revolution

Has split the Wits, t'avoid Confusion,

And set up Brother against Brother,

That they mayn't clapper-claw each other.)

That I should think my self a Poet,

And vainly dare in Print to shew it:

I, who have never pass'd as yet

The Test of the mis-judging Pit,

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=67)Nor ith'
Galleries tickl'd Crowd,

'Till they have clap'd and laugh'd aloud:

Nor from the tender Boxes e'r

Yet have drawn one pitying Tear:

Nor with Sir Courtly, Roundelays

Have made to garnish out new Plays:

Nor Virgil's great majestick Lines

Melted into enervate Rhimes:

Nor witty Horace, e'r did venture

To burlesque into modern Banter:

Nor gentle Ovid e'r did force

To zounds a River for a Horse:

Nor sharp Iuvenal's stronger Verse,

Perverted into Dogrel Farce:

Nor ever durst as yet presume

To venture on a meer Lampoon:

Nor, in short, few Words being best,

Ne'r yet could make a bawdy Jest.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=67)I'll tell
you then, since you'l needs know it,

Why I set up now for a Poet:

'Tis not for what most of Vs write,

To fill my Purse, or shew my Wit;

But purely out of Affection,

To fill up my Friend's Collection.

Therefore, sweet Sir, in haste, adieu t'ye,

For I'll adjourn now to my Duty.

#### 1.45.2. The beginning of the First Satyr of Persius imitated.

Poet.

OH the prepostrous Cares of Human kind!

Which in each Action and each Wish we find!

Friend.

Prithee that Cant give o'r, or who will read?

You preach as solemnly, as 'twere your Trade.

P.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=68)

Speak you to me?

F.

To thee sayst? yes egad —

Why surely, Iack, thou 'rt absolutely mad,

For none will on such formal Verses look,

But damn the Author, and despise the Book.

P.

None, say you Sir?

F.

Or one or two at most;

And is't not hard to've All your Labour lost?

To have your Works on Bulks all dusty lye,

And all your Thoughts for want of Readers dye?

Your precious Lines serv'd up to Nocks, or Pye?

P.

Mistake not, Friend, I chase not empty Fame,

Nor write to please the Town, or get a Name.

Let the Vain Herd of noisy Wits, and Beaux,

To whom they please their worthless Praise dispose,

It ne'r one Moment shall break my Repose.

Or what care I, if th'undiscerning Town

Prefer dull A—to me, or Perter Br—n;

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=68)Let his
tagg'd Nonsense, t'others Wilds of Wit,

With Cits, and Boys still fond Applauses get:

But you, my Friend, steer a securer Course,

And by the common Judgment ne'r form yours.

Most Men, by publick Vogue condemn or praise,

And never weigh the Merits of the Cause:

Let not that balance you to either Side,

By Wisdom's Nobler Rule your Sentence guide.

Oh! that I could, spight of my beardless Youth,

With a prevailing Force, now urge the Truth!

Fr.

Stay but a while, till Reverend Age comes on,

(Thy fleeting Years of Youth will soon be gone)

Then will grey Hairs on all thou say'st print Aw,

Authority with all thy Precepts go.

A dictatorial Youth does Envy draw,

Tho' from his Pen the noblest Truths do flow.

P.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=69)

Oh! that's too long, I must before that Time

Lash the vile Town with my Satyric Rhime.

F.

That must not be—pray take a Friend's Advice.

P.

Prithee no more, indeed thou'rt over-nice.

I can no longer hold, nor silent, see

Such numerous Pamphlets on each quarter fly,

Some in Prose, and some in mightier Verse,

Which each will daily to his Friends re­hearse.

Here a Pert Sot, with six Months Pains brings forth

A strange, mishapen, and ridiculous Birth:

A glimps of Human Stamp it has, the rest

Is Serpent, Fish, and Bird, but larger Beast:

In that odd Monster Horace once design'd,

We may some Method and some meaning find,

Tho' diffring Parts, yet distinct Parts it had,

Tail of Fish, Horses Neck, a Human Head.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=69)Nor Head,
nor Tail, nor any Part is here,

Through the whole Lump no certain Forms appear:

'Tis Chaos all—Mark how the jarring Seed

Of ill agreeing things, perpetual Discord breed!

Together huddled, now this, now that prevails,

HOT Simile now, now COLD Winters Tales!

More pondrous GHESS, with lighter BANTER meets,

With clashing Fury each the other greets;

MOIST spreading Scandal, with DRY Dulness fights.

But oh! 't requires, this Mortal Strife to end,

A stronger Judgment, a diviner Mind,

Than his; for whatsoe'r the World may think,

Pudding's his Food, and drowsy Mum his drink:

For read his Trifles, and scarce in one Line

You'll find him guilty of the least Design.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=70)By the
thick Fogs, which from his Diet rise,

His Sense is smother'd, and his Judgment dyes.

Well has he then the seven Sleepers grac'd

By yearly Sacrifice, and annual Feast,

For sure his Studies are but Sleep at best:

And all the Town must needs be in a Dream,

When such wild Ramblings got him some poor Fame.

But quitting now this poor Prose Pam­phleteer,

To mightier Verse, I must my Vessel steer.

But here the Chiming Fops so numerous grow,

And in such various Follies dress'd they go,

'Twould be an endless Task to lash'em all,

And now I find my Muse grows some­thing dull.

F.

Enough for one time, sure is one such Fool.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=70)

### 1.46. On Affairs abroad, and K. William's Expedition: By Mr. Durfey.

CHurch-Scruples, and Jars,

Plunge all Europe in Wars,

English Caesar espouses our Quarrel,

Predestin'd to stand,

Against Lewis le Grand,

And wear his now flourishing Laurel.

The Cause that is best

Now comes to the Test,

For Heav'n will no longer stand neuter,

But pronounce the grand Doom,

For old Luther, or Rome,

And prevent all our Doubts for the future.

'Twould turn a wise Brain

To consider what Pain

Fools take to become Politicians;

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=71)Fops,
Bullies and Cits,

All set up for Wits,

And ingeniously hatch new Divisions:

Some shew their hot Zeal

For a new Common Weal,

And some for a new Restauration;

Thus we cavil and brawl,

Till the Monsieur gets all,

And best proves the Wit of the Nation:

Though we Medcines apply,

Yet the Fever swells high,

First caused by a Catholick Riot,

Which no Cure can gain,

Till the breathing a Vein

Corrects the mad Pulse into quiet.

Yet what e'r disease on our Country may chance

Let's drink to its healing condition,

And rather wish Will. were Victor in France,

Than Lewis were England's Physician.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=71)

### 1.47. On my Lord Fairfax: By the late Duke of Buckingham.

#### 1.47.1. EPITAPH.

Vnder this Stone doth lye,

One born for Victory.

#### 1.47.2. ELEGY.

FAirfax the valiant, and the only he,

Who e'r for that alone a Conqueror would be;

Both Sexes Vertues were in him combin'd,

He had the fierceness of the manliest Mind,

And all the meekness too of Womankind:

He never knew what Envy was, or Hate;

His Soul was fill'd with Worth, and Honesty,

And with another thing besides, quite out of date

Call'd Modesty.

He ne'r seem'd impudent but in the Field, a place

Where Impudence it self dares seldom shew its Face,

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=72)Had any
Stranger Spied him in a Room,

With some of those whom he had overcome,

And had not heard their Talk, but only seen

Their Gesture and their Meen,

They would have swore he had the vanquish'd been;

For as they brag'd, and dreadful would appear,

Whilst they their own ill luck in war repeated;

His Modesty still made him blush to hear,

How often he had them defeated.

II.

Through his whole Life the part he bore

Was wonderful and great;

And yet it so appear'd in nothing more

Than in his private last Retreat;

For 'tis a stranger thing to find,

One Man of such a glorious Mind,

As can despise the Power he hath got;

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=72)Than
Millions of those Polls and Braves,

Those despicable Fools and Knaves,

Who such a poother make,

Through Dulness and Mistake,

In seeking after Power, and get it not.

III.

When all the Nation he had won,

And with Expence of Blood had bought

Store great enough he thought,

Of Fame and of Renown,

He then his Arms laid down,

With full as little Pride,

As if he had been on the Enemies Side.

He neither Wealth nor Places sought,

For others (not himself) he fought,

He was content to know;

For he had found it so,

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=73)That when
he pleas'd, to conquer he was able,

And left the Spoil and Plunder to the Rabble.

IV.

He might have been a King,

But that he understood,

How much it is a meaner thing

To be unjustly Great than honourably Good.

This from the World did Admiration draw,

And from his Friends both Love and Awe,

Remembring what he did in Fight before.

Nay, his Foes lov'd him too,

As they were bound to do,

Because he was resolv'd to fight no more.

So blest of all he dy'd, but far more blest were we,

If we were sure to live till we could see

A Man so great in War, in Peace so just as he.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55621&page=73)

[Home](/)

Date: 1692  

