---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robin's true character of a scold, or, The shrews looking-glass
dedicated to all domineering dames, wives rampant, cuckolds couohant, and hen-
peckt sneaks, in city or country.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=1)

Poor Robin's TRUE CHARACTER OF A SCOLD: OR, THE SHREWS Looking-glaſs.
DEDICATED To all

  * DOMINEERING DAMES,
  * WIVES RAMPANT,
  * CUCKOLDS COUCHANT, and
  * HEN-PECKT SNEAKS,

In City or Country. With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor Robin's True Character of a SCOLD.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=2)

## 1\. Poor Robin's True Character of a SCOLD.

A Rank SCOLD is a Devil of the Feminine gender; a Serpent, per­petually
hiſſing, and ſpitting of Ve­nom; a Compoſition of Ill-nature and Clamour. You
may call her a­nimated Gun-powder, a walking Mount Aetna that is always
belching forth flames of Sulphur, or a Real Purgatory, more to be dreaded in
this world, than the Popes Imaginary Hot-houſe in the next. A Burr about the
Moon, is not half ſo certain a Preſage of a Tempeſt at Sea, as her Brow is of
a Storm on Land. And though Laurel, Haw-thorn, and Seal-skin are held
Preſervatives againſt Thun­der, Magick has not yet been able to finde any
Amulet ſo Sovereign as to ſtill her Ravings: for, like Oyl pour'd on Flames,
Good words do but make her Rage the faſter; and when once her [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=3) Flag of Defiance,
the Tippet, is unfurl'd, ſhe cares not a ſtraw for Conſtable nor Cucking-
ſtool.

Her Tongue is the Clapper of the Devil's Saints-bell, that rings all-in to
Confuſion: It runs round-like a Wheel, one ſpoak after another, and makes more
Noiſe and Jangling, than Country-Steeples on the Fifth of November. She is
never leſs at eaſe, than when ſhe is quiet; never quiet, but when ſhe is
ſleeping; nor then neither: for either ſhe talks in her Dream, or awakes the
whole houſe with a terrible fit of Snoring. She makes ſuch a Pattering with
her Lips when ſhe walks the ſtreets, as if ſhe were poſſest; ſo indeed ſhe is,
with the ſpirit of Contention. The Dog-days, with her, continue all the year
round; nor can ſhe poſſibly take Cold: for ſhe is ever in an Heat, and holds
neither Pox nor Plague ſo grievous a Diſeaſe, as being Tongue-ty'd.

She makes an Aſs of Ariſtotle, and demonſtrates, That though every man be, yet
many a woman is not, A ſociable Creature: for there is no Good humour can
charm her to be Civil or Agreeable; no Company, how affable or compaiſant
ſoever, that can long content her. She ſeeks occaſions for Railing, as eagerly
as a Common Barretor does to go to Law. If you will not anger her, ſhe will be
angry with you for thus neglecting her: and you cannot vex her worſe, than to
be ſilent, unleſs you ſing or whiſtle at her Folly. She in­terprets [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=3) all ſhe hears in
the worſt ſenſe, and ſup­plies the defect of real Affronts with jealous
ſus­pitions. She is more captious, than capable of Offence; and all her
Neighbours bleſs themſelves from her, wiſhing this Quotidian Feaver of her
Tongue cur'd with a Razor. Yet is not that her onely weapon; for ſhe has Hands
to Clap with, and Nails to Scratch with, and Teeth to Bite with, and much more
Furniture for War; ſo that being lookt upon as Invincible, her bad humour gets
her a Priviledge: for where-ever ſhe comes, ſhe may be ſure to have the Room
to her ſelf; nor needs long Conteſt for priority of Walk, or pre­cedency at
Table, or opinion in Argument: for the proudeſt Goſſip will quit Pretenſions,
rather than ſtand the ſhock of her well-known Rhe­torick.

If ſhe be of the preciſer Caſt, ſhe abuſes Sa­cred Language in her Railing, as
Conjurers do in their Charms; calls her Neighbours Heathen E­domites, her
Huſband, Reprobate, or Son of Belial, and will not cudgel her Maid without a
Text for't. But now I ſpeak of Huſband, methinks I ſee the creeping ſnail
ſhivering in an Ague fit when he comes in her preſence. She is worſe than Cow-
itch in his Bed, and as good as a Cha­fing-diſh at Board: but has either quite
forgot his Name, or elſe ſhe likes it not; which makes her Rebaptize him with
more noble Titles, as White-liver'd Raskal, Drunken Sot, Sneaking [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=4) Ninkompoop, or
pitiful lowſy Tom Farthing, Thus ſhe worries him out of his ſenſes at home,
and then ferrets his Haunts abroad worſe than a needy Bawd does a decay'd
Bully's. Taverns and Ale-houſes dread her ſingle Alarm, more than the joynt
Attaques of the Conſtable and Watch; and his Companions are content to pay his
Club and diſmiſs him, on news of her approach, rather than be at the charge of
ſo many Glaſſes and Bottles as ſhe will quickly ſalute his Coxcomb with. A
full Glaſs ſeaſonably offered, may ſome­times pacifie her for a moment; but
immediately the Ill ſpirit returns, and ſhe can be quiet onely juſt ſo long as
ſhe is drinking. Thus ſhe clamours at him ſo long without occaſion, that at
laſt he gives her enough; and rails at him for keeping Ill Company, till ſhe
forces him to it; being a­ſham'd to go into any Good Society, or they a­ſham'd
of him; which makes him ſeek blinde Bubbing-ſchools to hide himſelf in from
her fury, and reſolve to ſtay out all Night, rather than en­dure a double
Rally.

In a word, (for I perceive our Character begins to be infected with the
contagious Talkativeneſs of its ſubject) a virulent Scold is her Neighbours
perpetual Diſquiet, her Families Evil Genius, her Huſbands Ruine, and her own
dayly Tormentor: And that you may the better know her Pedigree, I'll give you
a ſerious Account of the Receipt or Method made uſe of for her Production into
the [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=4) world,
lately found in a long-concealed Manuſcript of Theophraſtus Bombaſtus
Paracelſus, as follows: viz.

That Nature long ſince finding many of her Sons oft-times bewitcht to their
own Ruine by the Charms of Women, for their puniſhment con­triv'd this Monſter
call'd A Scold: To form which,

She firſt took of the Tongues and Galls of Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Magpies,
Parrets, Cuckows, and Nightingales, of each a like number: The Tongues and
Tails of Vipers, Adders, Snakes and Lizards, Seven apiece: Aurum Fulminans,
Aqua Fortis and Gun-powder, of each one pound: The Clap­pers of Nineteen
Bells, and the Peſtles of a dozen Apothecaries Mortars. Which being all mixt,
ſhe calcin'd in Mount Strombelo, and diſſolv'd the Aſhes in a water diſtill'd
juſt under London-bridge at three quarters Flood, and filtrated it through the
leaves of Calepines Dictionary, to render the Operation more verbal. After
which, ſhe diſtill'd it again through a Speaking-Trumpet, and cloſed up the
remaining Spirits in the mouth of a Cannon. Then ſhe open'd the Graves of all
new-deceaſed Pettifoggers, Mountebanks, Barbers, Coffee-news-mongers, and
Fiſh-wives; and with the ſkin of their Tongues, made a Bladder cover'd o're
with Drum-heads, and fill'd with Storms, Tempeſts, Whirlwinds, Thunders,
Lightnings, &c. Theſe, for better Incorporation, ſhe ſet ſeven years in a
rough Sea to ferment, and then mixing them with [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95637&page=5) the reſt,
rectified the whole three times a day for a Twelve month in a Balneo of Quick-
ſilver. Laſtly, to irrabiate the whole Elixir, and make it more Churliſh, ſhe
cut a vein under the Tongue of the Dog-ſtar, drawing thence a pound of the
moſt Cholerick blood; from which ſublimating the Spirits, ſhe mixt them with
the Foam of a mad Dog: and then putting all together in the forementioned
Bladder, ſtitcht it up with the Nerves of Socrates's Wife.

Out of this noble Preparation, and a Crooked Rib (Emblem of future Croſneſs)
Dame Nature firſt compoſed a SHREW, whoſe Poſterity (as is frequent with
noxious Animals) has ſince ſo over-ſpread the world, that ſcarce an Alley or
Village is free from ſome of her Lineage.

But that you may ſee her End as well as Be­ginning, be pleaſed to peruſe this

EPITAPH.

After ſome Threeſcore years of Catterwauling,

Here lies A SCOLD, ſtopt from above-ground Bawling.

Though Ill ſhe liv'd, I dare not read her Doom;

But fure, go where ſhe will, ſhe's Troubleſome.

I wiſh her, in Revenge, amongſt he Bleſt:

For ſhe'd as lief be Damn'd, as be at Reſt.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1678  

