---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The case of Mr. Robinson and Mr. Thompson, truly stated. In answer to the
complaint of Mr. Woolaston, for a pretended breach of privilege.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Caſe of Mr. Robinſon and Mr. Thompſon, truly Stated. In Anſwer to the Complaint of Mr. Woolaſton, for a pretended Breach of Privilege.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=175489&page=1)

## 1\. The Caſe of Mr. Robinſon and Mr. Thompſon, truly Stated. In Anſwer to
the Complaint of Mr. Woola­ſton, for a pretended Breach of Privilege.

MR. Woolaſton complain'd to this Honourable Houſe againſt Mr. Ro­binſon, Mr.
Thompſon, and others, for a Breach of Privilege; pre­tending, That he had been
for ſeveral Months in the quiet Poſſeſ­ſion of Woodhall Houſe and Park; and
that the ſaid Mr. Robinſon and Mr. Thompſon, with ſeveral others, in a Riotous
and violent manner, du­ring the laſt Seſſions of Parliament, entred upon the
ſame, and turn'd the ſaid Mr. Woolaſton's Servants out of Poſſeſſion.

The Truth of the Fact is ſhortly thus, (viz.)

Mr. Thompſon was Tenant of the Premiſes by virtue of an Order of the Court of
Chancery, and obliged not to aſſign to any Perſon, without Order from that
Court; (The Premiſes being part of the Eſtate of Philip Boteler, Eſq an
Infant, now, and for ſome years paſt under my Lord Chancellor's Guardianſhip):
And Mr. Woolaſton deſiring to take the Eſtate, Mr. Thompſon told him he could
not aſſign him the Poſſeſſion, without Leave of the Court; nevertheleſs the
ſaid Mr. Thompſon was willing to permit the ſaid Mr. Woola­ſton and his
Friends to be in the Houſe, and to hunt in the Park, whilſt Mr. Thompſon was
in London; and thereupon in the preſence of Mr. Woolaſton writ to his Keeper,
then and ever ſince in Poſſeſſion, this Order following, viz.

Mr. Crane,

October the 26th. 1697.

MY Affairs not permitting me to come into the Country this Winter but very
little, and Mr. Woolaſton having deſired that he and ſome Friends of his may
have the Liberty of the Park and the Houſe, untill I come down; Th [...] fore
this is to acquaint you, That I would have you to obſerve all Mr. Woolaſton
Orders and Directions in my Abſence, as much as if you had my Ord [...] for
any thing he deſires; and kill what Deer and Rabbits Mr. Woolaſton orders▪ and
diſpoſe of them as he directs; and this ſhall be your Authority.

Yours, Robert Thompſon.

This is further to let you know, That I expect you kill no Deer, without Mr.
Woola­ſton 's Order.

Which the ſaid Mr. Woolaſton delivered to the ſaid Keeper, and only by virtue
thereof had the uſe of the Houſe, and liberty to hunt in the Park for about 6
Months. But the Court of Chancery ordering that Mr. Robinſon ſhould ſucceed
Tenant to Mr. Thompſon; and the ſaid Mr. Thompſon juſtly fearing that the ſaid
Mr. Woolaſton would (upon being diſappointed of ſucceeding him) uſe too great
a Liberty, (for which Mr. Thompſon muſt have been anſwerable to the Court;) he
did thereupon turn ſuch out of the Houſe as he had per­mitted to be there with
his Keeper; and did then order his Keeper no longer to permit the ſaid Mr.
Woolaſton or any of his Friends to hunt in the Park.

Now foraſmuch as the ſaid Mr. Woolaſton was never in Poſſeſſion of the
Pre­miſes, but there only by the Permiſſion aforeſaid: It's humbly hop'd the
Honourable Committee will not adjudge the ſaid Mr. Thompſon guilty of a Breach
of Privilege, only for turning ſome out of his own Houſe; of which himſelf (by
his Keeper) Then had, and ſtill doth keep the Poſſeſſion.

> SIR, This Complaint is to be heard before the Committee on

>

> Friday the 6th of this Inſtant;

>

> when you are deſired to be preſent.

[Home](/)

Date: 1698  

