---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Choice observations of all the kings of England from the Saxons to the death
of King Charles the First collected out of the best Latine and English
writers, who have treated of that argument / by Edward Leigh ...

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=1)

CHOICE OBSERVATIONS OF ALL THE KINGS OF ENGLAND FROM THE SAXONS To the Death
of KING CHARLES the First. COLLECTED Out of the best Latine and Eng­lish
VVriters, who have Treated of that Argument.

By EDVVARD LEIGH Esquire, and Master of Arts of Magdalen Hall in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Ioseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Gun in St. Pauls
Church-yard. 1661.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=2)

## TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the Second, King of Great-B [...]ittain,
France and Ireland.

Most Gracious Soveraigne;

I Hope this Dedication of these my Collections con­cerning all the Kings of
England to your Sacred Majesty, from the first of them (of whom there is any
thing credible in story) to the decease of your Royall Father, will not be
interpreted either a fruit of ambition or over-bold presumption. I have had
the honour for­merly to dedicate Books to very eminent Societies and Persons,
but never to any so signally eminent and publike a Person as your Majesty. And
should not have taken the confidence to have begun now, but that (in regard of
the Argument I treat of) I thought there was an obligation upon me; and that
of right such a Work was to be presented onely to Him, who is the just
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=3) and
unquestionable Successour to all those Kings I here mention.Beda to King
Ceolwolph. Speed his Hi­story of Great­brittain to King Iames. I finde it
usuall with those who either wrote Chronicles in ge­nerall, or the reigns of
some particular Prin­ces, to inscribe the Name of the King or Prince then
living to their Works.Howe his An­nals, or Conti­nuation of Stow and Ba­cons
Henry the 7th to your Father when Prince. I wish my Observations were as
choice, as the subject is sutable. Since Cadwallader, the last King of the
Britains, there was none born Prince of Great-Britain but your Majesty.
Hactenus Anglorum nulli was there­fore the Motto on the Medals made in me­mory
of your Birth-day the 29th of May 1630, with three Laurels upon them
be­tokening three Kingdoms. May your raign be as prosperous and happy, as your
birth was glorious andIt was illu­strious both in respect of the bright Star
which then appeared at high-noon in the presence and sight of all, (See Stella
meridiana) & also in respect of your near alliance to the greatest
[...]rin­ces of Chri­stendom. illustrious; your deli­verance by Sea at your
entrance into Scot­land, and your escape by Land at Worcester-fight, and after
in England; and your hap­py restitution to your Kingdom, was won­derfull and
conspicuous. Kings have their regal Titles and Ornaments. To the Kings of
Spain from the time of Alphonsus King of Castile, about 800 years agoe, for
expelling the Arians, was given the Title of Catholike, as Michael Ritius a
Neapoli­tan writeth. To the French King the Title
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=3) of most
Christian from the time of Philip the Emperour, about 400 years since,Doway
Notes on Iosh. 3\. 8. as recordeth Nicol, Gillius. To our King Henry the 8th
of England for his Book of the Sacraments against Luther, Pope Leo the 10th
gave the Title, Defender of the FaithSee Dr Basire of Sacriledge., which his
Successors have since enjoyed, though in another sense than it was first
intended. Henry the 5th reigning amongst us, his Subjects gave him the Ti­tle
ofMontacu [...]ii Antidiatribae ad Diat. 1. Bulengeri. Grace. Under Henry the
Saint, the 6th, Excellent was added to Grace: Under Henry the 8th the
acclamation of Majesty began; a little after excellent Majesty, most
excellent, and at last Sacred Majesty, which now is generally used.

Hookers Ec­clesiasticall Policy. l. 8\. It is by di­vers Charters granted to
the Church of Westminster, to be locus Coro­nationis Regis, & repositorium
Regalium. Li­ber Regalis. The Sword presents the Princes pow­er, the Crown
their glory. B. Bilson in his Sermon be­fore K. Iames at his Coro­nation.
Kings are crowned, enthronized, and anointed; the Crown was a sign of a
Mili­tary dominion; the Throne of sedentary or judiciall; the Oyl of Religious
and sa­cred power.

A King by vertue of his Kingly Office hath two things to perform;

  * 1\. To govern,
  * 2\. To defend.

His Governing also divideth it self into two branches;

  * First, To direct,
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=4) Secondly, To recompence.

He directeth, by appointing what shall be done and forborn of all his subjects
in his Jurisdiction.

He recompenceth or requiteth, by pu­nishing those which disobey the Laws, with
such punishments as himself thinketh good to appoint, and to signifie to them
in his penalties by which he ratifieth his Laws; and by rewarding those which
keep the Laws, with such rewards as he seeth fit to specifie in his Statutes,
and in generall, by making them partakers of the wealth, peace, quietness and
happiness of his go­vernment.

He defendeth his subjects against the hostility of open enemies, and the
injuries of their fellow-subjects.

It was an excellent speech of Henry the Great, King of France, your Grand-
father by the Mothers side; When I was born there were a thousand other souls
more born, what have I done for God more than they? Learn­ed King Iames your
Grand-father by the Father, in his Book dedicated to Prince Henry, would have
him to remember, that he differed not in stuff, but in use, from the rest of
the people; and that by Gods Or­dinance.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=4) Kings as well
as others are bound to read the Scriptures,See the  [...] of Worcester [...]
Sermon at the Coronation. Deut. 17\. 18, 19, 20. and some think that Book of
the Kings and Chronicles especially worthy their di­ligent perusall: others
would have them study well the 101 Psalm. Next the Scri­ptures,
Ecclesiasticall History is to be pre­ferred;King Iames comm [...]ndeth Caesar
above all pro [...]e Writers, both for the sweet slowing of th [...] style,
and the worthiness of the maner it self. some highly commend Polybius as
usefull for Kings to read; and Causabon dedicating it to Henry the 4th King of
France, much magnifieth that Book, and likewise the reading of History in
gene­rall. The Chronicles and Annals of their own Predecessors, surely must
needs be both delightfull and profitable for them. Your Majesty may observe
many things in them well worthy imitation: in Learn­ed and valiant Alfred, how
thriftily he spent his time, how he encouraged Learn­ing and Learned men; in
little Edgar, great Canutus; William the Conquerour; the many worthy Henries
andHenry the first, the fifth, the seventh, the eighth. Edward the first, the
third, the sixth, e­specially, who first began our happy Reformation in
Religion. Edwards; your own wise Grand-father and Father of happy memory. Yet
in the whole se­ries of the Kings and Queens of England (as others have made
severall parallels of some of our English Kings) I have not found a fitter
parallel in every respect for
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=5) your Majesty
than Queen Elizabeth. I will not speak of her skill in the modern Lan­guages,
and how she often answered Em­bassadors her self, nor how gracious and gentle
a Princess she was to her very ene­mies; wherein your Majesty is not un­like
to Her. What troubles and hazards did she undergo, before she came to the
Crown? with what joyfull and generall acclamations was she received into this
Me­tropolis? I need not apply this to your Majesty, its sufficiently obvious
to every vulgar capacity how you agree herein. Af­ter her Coronation,At the
Coro­nation of King Ioash, the High-Priest delivered him the Testimo­ny, not
only that he might know and do it himself, but take care (as much as lie in
him) that it might be known and observed by the people. Dr Hardy his
Apostolicall Ly­turgy revived, on 2 King. 11\. 12. Read the Scriptures
di­ligently, and with an hum­ble spirit, and in it observe what is plain, and
believe & live according­ly. Dr Ier. Tay­lors Letter to a person newly
converted to the Church. being presented with a Bible, as she passed by the
little Con­duit in Cheapside, she received the same with both her hands, and
kissing it said; That it had ever been her chief delight, and should be the
rule by which she meant to frame her Government. Your Majesty in your entring
into the City, at the presentment of the Bible to you by the Reverend London
Ministers, used this speech, worthy to be written in Gold; I thank you for
this Book above all other gifts, and assure you, I shall make it my first care
to set up Gods Worship and service; this is the Book must guide us all; and I
will make [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=5) it
the rule of my Life and reign. Queen Eli­zabeth was a couragious and stout
spirited Princess. In 88, when the Spaniard was coming, she went to the Army
at Tilbury-Camp, riding with a Truncheon or baston in her hand to the severall
Companies, and by her presence and speech encouraged both Commanders and
souldiers, saying to them as I have heard; If her brother Philip came, she
would give fire to the first Piece against him: I might alledge the testi­mony
of your greatest enemy, in confirma­tion of your Majesties valour at
Worcester-battle.

Kings bear a double image of God, as they are men and as they are Magistrates.
The Scripture saith;2 Sam. 23. 3. Those which rule over men should be just,
ruling in the fear of God. OneMolinier in his Essay [...]. saith; They should
labour to be more religious and pious toward God than ordinary persons,
because of the great need they have of his illumination in their counsels, of
his conduct in their en­terprises, of his force in their executions, and of
his provident care in their va­rious occurrents, dangers & difficulties. The
Kings seat was so set in the Temple, that all might see him there, Ezek. 46\.
10. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=6) 2 Chron.
6\. 12, 13.All that we beg at the hands of our Superiors, is a liberty to
wor­ship God ac­cording to his word, that we may have no thing imposed upon
us, but what we may be directed in our compli­ance with, by the rule of
Scripture; we desire that men may not command where God is silent. The
Ex­aminat. of Dr Heylins History of the Refor­mar. of the Church of Eng­land.
Those of the Presbyterian judgement, that out of a reall tenderness cannot
comply in all particulars, will beyond doubt receive from his Majesty such
savour and indulgence, as may abundantly suffice to their relief. Mr
L'estrange his Holy Cheat. p. 78. of the 2d Edition. 2 King. 11\. 14. & 23\.
3. that by his example the devotion of his people might be stirred up. God
ha­ving done such great things both abroad and at home for your Majesty,
ex­pecteth great things from you. I shall humbly implore the Almighty, that he
would so guide you in all your wayes, that you may make his Interest your
great interest, by reforming what is a­miss in Court and Kingdom, by
pro­moting his pure worship, encouraging the power of godliness, and all such
as walk according to Scripture-rule, are peace­able, and hold the
Fundamentals; by discountenancing Atheisme, errour, and profaneness, the
fruits of abused peace and prosperity, altering the old speech for the better,

—Exeat aula

Qui vult esse pius; into impius.

So shall White-Hall answer its name, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=6) your Majesty
approve your self to be, what your Father desired, Charles the Good, which is
the earnest prayer of

Your Majesties most humbly devoted and Loyall subject Edward Leigh

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=7)

## TO THE CURTEOUS AND CANDID READER.

Reader:

I Here present thee with Choice Ob­servations of all the Kings of Eng­land. I
suppose the Subject will not be unpleasing to an Englishman, if the work be
answerable to the Title. I have excerped my Materials out of the best La­tine
Writers; the Monks (to whom we are especi­ally beholding for the History of
our Kings of England) and chiefest English Chroniclers and Annalists, and such
as have written of a few, or any one of our English Princes. Bedes Historia
Gentis Anglorum, set out by Wheelock, of whom Petavius in his History of the
world, lib. 8. cap. 4\. saith thus, Bede made his Brittain famous with no
lesse Godlinesse and Learning than History, who even unto the year 735 hath
concluded the Christian beginnings of that Nation. Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores
post Bedam praecipui, See Mr Wheare De Method [...] le­gendi Historias, pag.
52. in Latine in folio, set out by Sr Henry Savill, con­taining the History of
Gulielmus Malmesburien­sis, Henry Huntington, Roger Hoveden and others.
Anglica, Normannica, Hibernica, Cam­brica,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=7) a veteribus
Scripta, in Latine also in Folio, put out by Camden. Matthew Paris his Works,
set out by Dr Watts, who is a faithfull Historian, and hath written the Reigns
of the first seven Kings after the Conquest.Daniel doth very well so far as he
goes, He is conti­nued by Trus­sell. Of the English Chroniclers, Speed,
Martin, and Baker seem to be the best. Voluminous Hollingshead, Stow and How
are not much esteemed by the Learned. Sr John Hayward hath written well of the
three Norman Kings, and Edward the sixth, he hath written briefly also of
Henry the eourth. Godwin of Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Queen
Mary, and also of the Bishops of Eng­land, in Latine and English. Sr Robert
Cot­ton of Henry the third, Habington of Edward the fourth, Sr Thomas More of
Richard the third, both in Latine and English, and Buck, my Lord Bacon
excellently of Henry the seventh, my Lord Herbert of Henry the eighth, Camden
Annals of Queen Elizabeth, and Dr Heylin (as is said) of King Charles the
first.Historia est te­stis temporum, lux veritatis, vita memoriae, magistra
vitae, nuncia ve­tustatis, Cicero l. 2. De Oratore History is both pleasing
and profitable, especially the memorable things of all our own Kings and
Governours, who have for so many years Raigned amongst us. Examples of
Superiours especially are very prevalent, which of the Rulers believed in
himRegis ad ex­emplum totus componitur or­bis. OneAschams Schoolema­ster, l.
1. p. 20. saith, if King Edward the sixth had lived a little longer, his on­ly
example had bred such a Race of worthy learn­ed Gentlemen, as this Realm never
yet did afford. Here are examples of all sorts, good and bad, to be followed
and eschewed. Some loose, vain, and licentious; others learned, wise, valiant,
minding [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=8) the
publick welfare of the Nation. The Pope could but little prevaile here in
England, during the Raign of King Edward the third, and Richard the second.
Henry the eighth cast him out then, when he had too great power and command
over other Princes. As he cast out the Pope, so did his children Edward It was
a ve­ry pious care, and of singu­lar example in so young a Prince, to in­tend
& endea­vour the refor­mation of Reli­gion, and the Church within his Realms.
For which even at this day we have cause to acknowledge the good pro­vidence
of Al­mighty God in  [...]aising him up to become so blessed an in­strument of
his glory and our good. BP San­dersons Episco­pacy not pre­judicial to Re­gall
Power. In the time of King Edward there was more I suppose, than what one
calls it, a wambling toward the Ge­nevah Discipline; but neither very earnest,
nor very popular. the sixth, and Queen Eliza­beth cast out Popery out of
England, and so freed us from his spirituall bondage, as the other did from
his Temporall May their memory be there­fore still precious amongst us, as the
Reformation we enjoy chiefly by their means, is a singular bles­sing. Let Him
be accounted our English Josias, and Her our English Deborah, on whom those
Verses were made, Spains Rod, Romes Ruine, Netherlands Relief: Earths Joy,
Englands Gem, Worlds Wonder, Natures chief.

Prince Henry likewise, eldest Son to King James, was a virtuous and hopefull
Prince, had he not been taken away in the flower of his youth, he would (its
thought) have much opposed the Pope and Spaniard. I have read somewhere of
him, that he would not swear, no, not at his Sports and Recreation; and being
demanded the reason t [...]ereof, he said, they were not of that weight, as to
draw an oath from him. I hope therefore this Nation, having had such worthy
Princes, and not being ignorant of the slavery they formerly in­dured, when
the Pope called England his Ass, will
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=8) never be so
foolish, as to turn back again into E­gypt. As long as Mr Foxe his Martyrology
is so common to be read, eighty eight, and the fifth of November are so fresh
in our remembrance, let us valew the losse of Rome here amongst us, no more
than that Emperour Honorius did, of whom Zonaras Annal Tom [...] [...]. p. 33.
writes, that he had a Hen called Ro­ma, and it being told him Rome was last,
he was troubled, and said, She was here even now, yea said the other, the Hen
is here, but the City is lost, he was then well pleased. Our Countriman Beda
hath prophetically expounded that Roman S. P. Q. R. of our Englishmen
travelling to Rome, Stul [...]us Populus Quaerit Roman. Though perhaps in some
Whereas the Papists unjust­ly charge the Protestant Churches with Schism for
de­parting from their Commu­nion: it could not but be a great scandall to
them, to confirm them in that their uncharitable opinion of us, if we should
ut­terly condemn any thing as unlawfull, be­cause it had been used in the
times of Po­pery, or abused by the Papists. B. Sanders. Epise. not
pre­judiciall to Re­gall Power.cases, one may go too far from Rome; yet since
some of our Bishops formerly have written well against Antichrist, and others
have made the Pope to be Antichrist; and since also the Iesuites are still
busie amongst us, I wish there may be no unwar­rantable compliance either with
the Romish Do­ctrine or Rites.

Thomas Lever (who Preached before King Edward the sixth, and escaped the fury
of Queen Maries dayes) is commended by Bullinger, in his Epistle to Hooper. He
was the first setled constant Preacher at the Temple,As Father Gilpin, and
Fa­ther Latimer. Father Lever, for so by my Father and others, I alwayes heard
him stiled. Mr Gatakers Discourse Apologeticall against Li­lie. I have two
Sermons of his, Preached in the same year at Pauls 1550, one in Pauls Church,
the other at the Cross, St Thomas Chaloner was ordi­nary Embassadour from
Queen Elizabeth into
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=9) Spain almost
four years,Annal. Rerum Anglicarum parte prima. p. 101, 102. Ubi (saith
Camden) de Republica Ang [...]icana instauranda terso & eru­dito Carmine
quinque libros composuit, dum ut ille dixit, hieme in furno aestate in horreo
de­geret; which is thus Englished by one Darcie, who first (after a fashion)
Translated Camden into English, though it be better rendred since. St Tho.
Chaloner wrote a Book whilst he was in Spain, which he Entitled, Hieme in
furno aestate in hor­reo, not so jolly an Inscription, as that Libell
Intituled, The Arraignment of Persecution, &c. Printed for Bartholmew Bang-
Priest, Mr Lyfords Conscience Informed touching our late Thanks­givings. and
are to be sold at his Shop in Tolleration-street, at the Sign of the Subjects
Liberty, right opposite to Per­secution Court, 1645\. I remember I have heard
a story of a valiant man, that thus answered one inquiring after his name and
lodging: My name is Dangerfiel'd, I lye at the Sign of the Sword and Buckler,
over against the Bleeding-Heart, in Gunpowder Allie: But too much of this. I
hope this Book with the other already out, will give some light to the
knowledge both of the Kings and Kingdome of England, in confidence where­of, I
rest

Thy hearty well-wisher Edward Leigh.

## Table of contents

  * TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the Second, King of Great-B•ittain, France and Ireland.
  * TO THE CURTEOUS AND CANDID READER.
  * 1\. Choice Observations OF ALL THE KINGS of ENGLAND, FROM THE SAXONS, To the Death of King CHARLES I. CHAP. I.
  * 2\. CHAP. II. Hengist.
  * 3\. CHAP. III.
    * 3.1. ELLA.
    * 3.2. Cherdik.
    * 3.3. Kenrik.
    * 3.4. Cheuline.
    * 3.5. Ethelbert.
    * 3.6. Redwald.
    * 3.7. Edwine.
    * 3.8. Oswald.
    * 3.9. Oswy.
    * 3.10. Wulphere.
    * 3.11. Ethelred.
    * 3.12. Kenred.
    * 3.13. Chelred.
    * 3.14. Ethelbald.
    * 3.15. Offa.
    * 3.16. Egfrid.
    * 3.17. Kenwolfe.
  * 4\. CHAP. IV.
    * 4.1. Egbert.
    * 4.2. Ethelwulfe.
    * 4.3. Ethelbald.
    * 4.4. Ethelbert.
    * 4.5. Ethelred.
  * 5\. CHAP. V. Alfred, Aelfred, or Alvred.
  * 6\. CHAP. VI.
    * 6.1. EDWARD the elder.
    * 6.2. Ethelstan or Adelstan.
    * 6.3. Edmund.
    * 6.4. Edred.
    * 6.5. Edwin or Edwy.
  * 7\. CHAP. VII. EDGAR.
  * 8\. CHAP. VIII.
    * 8.1. ETHELRED.
    * 8.2. Edmund, sirnamed Ironside.
  * 9\. CHAP. IX. The Danes Monarchs. 
    * 9.1. CANUTUS.
    * 9.2. Harold.
    * 9.3. Harde-Canute.
  * 10\. CHAP. X. Edward the Confessor.
    * 10.1. Harold.
  * 11\. CHAP. XI. WILLIAM the first, sirnamed the Conqueror.
  * 12\. CHAP. XII. K. William the second, sirnamed Rufus; or the Red.
  * 13\. CHAP. XIII. King Henry the first, sirnamed Beauclerke.
  * 14\. CHAP. XIV.
    * 14.1. King STEPHEN.
    * 14.2. Henry the second.
  * 15\. CHAP. XV. RICHARD the first.
  * 16\. CHAP. XVI.
    * 16.1. King Iohn.
    * 16.2. King HENRY the third.
  * 17\. CHAP. XVII.
    * 17.1. King EDWARD the first.
    * 17.2. EDWARD the second.
    * 17.3. EDWARD the third.
  * 18\. CHAP. XVIII.
    * 18.1. RICHARD the second.
    * 18.2. HENRY the fourth.
  * 19\. CHAP. XIX.
    * 19.1. HENRY the fifth.
    * 19.2. HENRY the sixth.
    * 19.3. EDWARD the fourth.
    * 19.4. EDWARD the fifth.
    * 19.5. RICHARD the third.
  * 20\. CHAP. XIX.
    * 20.1. HENRY the seventh.
    * 20.2. HENRY the eighth.
    * 20.3. EDWARD the sixth.
    * 20.4. Queen IANE.
    * 20.5. Queen MARY.
    * 20.6. Queen ELIZABETH.
  * 21\. CHAP. XX.
    * 21.1. IAMES the first King of Great Brittain.
    * 21.2. CHARLES the First, the second Monarch of Great Brittain.
  * 22\. Errata.
  * Appendix A An Alphabeticall Table, expressing or pointing to the chief things contained in this Treatise.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=9)

## 1\. Choice Observations OF ALL THE KINGS of ENGLAND, FROM THE SAXONS, To
the Death of King CHARLES I.  
CHAP. I.

ENgland was five times pla­gued by other Nations: First,Fox his Acts and
Monumen [...] vol. 1. By the Romans: Then by the Scots and Picts: Thirdly, By
the Saxons: Fourthly, By the Danes: Fifthly, By the Normans.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=10) The Nation
of the Saxons was generally most warlike and martiall.Cambd Brit. Engl [...]sh
Sax­ons. Saxons e [...]oient tous extreme­  [...]ent belli queux & comme es
[...]rit Zosine, l [...] plus vaillants & re­nommez de tous les Germanis, en
grandeur de Courage, en for­ces de  [...]ps, & en patience au  [...]ravail
Histoi­re D [...] Angle­terre Par An­dre Da Ches­ne. l. 6. p. 1 [...]6. They
gave unto those Saxons their first original, who now inhabite the Dukedome of
Saxony.

They left very few Cities, Towns, Vil­lages, Rivers, Woods, Fields, Hils or
Dales in Brittain, which they gave not new names unto.

As the name of Oxford, or Oxenford, on the River of Thames, after the Town of
like name in Germany, situated on the River of Oder.

Our Hereford near unto Wales, after Her [...]ord in Westphalia.

And so in like manner may be said of Stafford, Swinford, Bradford, Norden,
New­arke, Bentham, Oxenbridge, Buchurst, Sconethorp, Holt, Mansfield,
Swinefield, Hamsteed, Rad­cliffe, Rosendale, and many more. After that these
Nations had now gotten sure sooting in the possession of Brit­tain, Verstigans
An­tiq they divided it into seven Kingdoms, [...] tamen in  [...] dominium, &
Hexa [...]ch [...] ab  [...] Anglorum  [...] primordi­is  [...] dictum) co
[...]rcebantur. Sold. Analect. Anglo [...]bris. l. 2.  [...] ▪ 4. and
established an Heptarchy; in which notwithstanding the Prince which had the
greatest power, was called King of the En­glish Nation: So that in this very
Heptar­chy there was alwayes Monarchy.

The Saxon Government is usually divi­ded into the Heptarchy, Monarchy.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=10) In the
Heptarchy are these seven petty Kingdomes:

  * 1\. Kent.
  * 2\. Sussex.
  * 3\. East Sax.
  * 4\. East Angles.
  * 5\. Mercia.
  * 6\. Northumberland.
  * 7\. West Sax.

In Kent with Hengist the first Invader, seventeen or eighteen are said to
raign.

South Sax from Ello to Adhamus had a­bout ten Kings, of which Adlewolf was
first Christened.

East Sax from Er [...]hwin to Swithred had thirteen Kings, whereof Sigby the
third was first baptized.

The East Angles had fourteen Kings.

Mercia twenty Kings.

Christianity was first received by Penda, that founded Peterborough, as
Ethebald did the Monastery of Crowland, and Ossa of St. Albans.

Northumberland about twenty foure Kings.

West Saxon nineteen Kings.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=11)

## 2\. CHAP. II.  
Hengist.

VVHen he first arrived in England, The first King of Kent became the first
Mo­narch of the English men. he was a goodly young Gentleman, under the age of
thirty yeares, and of an excellent wit: He was brought up in the service of
the Emperour Valentinian the third, and last of that name. Verstegan.

He deserveth to be reputed the first Mo­narch of the English Nation.

Non minus acer ingenio, quam alacer in praelio. Malmesburiensis de Gestis
Regum An­glorum.

He sailed out of Holland into Brittain; he built the Castle of Leiden in
Holland.

The Saxons had only the Isle of Thanet first given them,Cam [...]. B [...]it
English Saxons. where they first landed.

Hengist after obtained of King Vortiger, the property of so much ground, as he
could enclose with a Buls Hide: which cutting into thongs, he there built the
Castle called Thong-Castle,Histoire  [...] An­g [...]t re lar  [...]
[...]Ches­  [...]e. l 6. p. 1 [...].  [...] Brit English Sax­ons. by
Sittingbou­rine in Kent.

Why our first Progenitors Hengist and Horsa took their names of an Horse (for
both their names in the Saxon tongue do signifie an Horse) surely I know not,
un­less [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=11) it
were for a fore-token of their warlick prowess,Hengist signifieth  [...]
stoned Horse. according to that Verse of Virgil.

Bello armantur equi,Equus bellicoso­rum Saxoniae principum anti­quissimum
insig­ne, pugna [...]it [...]is, celeretatis, & immoderati im­petus symbolum.
Spelmanni A­spilogia. bella haec armenta minantur. l. 3. Aineid.

Hengist and Horsus, Brittains harmes,

Their Ens [...]gnes signing both their names,

The Saxon Horse their Armes,

Brave Warriours hither came.

Slatyers Palae-Albion Ode 7. p. 157.

Krantzius in hist. Saxon. l. 2\. telleth us, that the Saxon-Princes in Germany
before they became Christians, gave a black Horse for their Escutcheon; but
being baptized, a white Horse; with reference haply to Rev. 6\. 2.

The Saxons to the number of nine thou­sand, came in certain long Vessels they
called Keeles, with their leaders, two Bro­thers, Hengist and Horsa, nobly
descended; whose Ensign, as it was an usuall and ho­nourable device of
antiquity, alluding to their names, their Banner being a white or silver
Horse, in a Field Gules; Arms which the noblest Families of Saxons, and others
thence descended, have born.

They were not all one people, but con­sisted of three severall Nations, viz.
the Angles, the Iutes, and the Saxons; but they were all the inhabitants of
some part, [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=12)
or other of Denmarke. Ays [...]u.

He raigned thirty four yeares.

## 3\. CHAP. III.

### 3.1. ELLA.

THe first King of the South-Saxons, and second Monarch of the English men.

He raigned six yeares.

### 3.2. Cherdik.

The first King of the West-Saxons, and third Monarch of the English men.

He raigned twenty one yeares.

### 3.3. Kenrik.

The second King of the West-Saxons, and fourth of the English men.

He raigned twenty six yeares

### 3.4. Cheuline.

The third King of the West-Saxons, and fifth Monarch of the English men.C
[...]aulini specta­tissimum in prae­li [...]s robar anna­les ad invidiam
esserunt, quippe qui fuis Anglis stupori, Brittonibus odio,  [...]trisque
exitio. Mal [...]esburiensis de Gest is Anglorum. l. 1. c. 2.

He raigned thirty one yeares.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=12)

### 3.5. Ethelbert.

The fifth and first Christian King of Kent, and the sixth Monarch of the
English men.

He was eminent for first receiving the Christian faith, brought from Rome by
Austin, and for converting  [...]ebert King of the East-Angles to
Christianity, and as­sisting him in building St. Pauls in London, and St.
Peters in Westminster.

That the Christian Religion was here in Brittain before the coming of Austin
the Monk, may be proved out of Beda, who maketh mention of Brittish Bishops,
but nameth none of them. Hist. Ang. l. 2\. c. 2

Eusibius in vità Constantini l. 3. c. 18\. saith that this Country was
Christian three hundred yeares before.

Mr Saller in his Rights of the Kingdome, saith, The first times of Christian
Religion here, were much higher then Austin the Father, who might have been
great Grand­father to Austin the Monk.

He brought the Lawes of his Country into their own mother-tongue, and left
nothing unattempted, which might ad­vance the glorious Gospel of Christ.

He built St. Augustines, a goodly Church in Canterbury. He built also St.
Pauls Church in London: and St. Andrews in Rochester.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=13) He died in
the three and twentieth year of his Monarchy, and the fifty sixth of his
Kingdome of Kent.

### 3.6. Redwald.

The third King of the East-Angles, and seventh Monarch of the English men.

Of this Redwald Cambden reporteth out of Bede, that he was baptized; and that
(to make sure, as he thought, of the right way of worship) he had in the same
Tem­ple one Altar for Christian Religion, and another for sacrifice to Devils.

He raigned eight yeares, and was King of the East-Angles thirty one.

### 3.7. Edwine.

The Great King of Northumberland, and the eighth sole Monarch of the English
men.

He was slain in Battell by Penda and Cadwallo the seventh year of his
Monarchy,Polydor Virgil. Ang. hist. l. 4 p. 80\. relates the manner of the
Battell. the seventeenth of his Kingdome.

He lived fourty eight yeares.

### 3.8. Oswald.

King of Northumberland, and the ninth Monarch of the English men.

He was a religiou [...] King,Oswaldus fi­de quam ferro instruct [...]or. and
took such care for the co [...]version and salvation of his Subject [...],
that he sent into Scotland for aid, and a Christian Bishop to instruct his
Nor­thumbrians [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=13) in the Gospel of
truth.

Mira fuit in homine sanctitas,H [...]jus regis laudes historia Bedae
panegyri­co prosequitur stylo. Malmes­buriensis de Gestin Regum Anglorum. l 1.
c. 3. vide plura ibid. mirum pie­tatis studium, nulli unquam malum pro malo
reddidit, sed Christi regis summi exemplum imitatus, ijs etiam bene
precabatur, beneque voleba [...], à quib [...]s accepisset injurias. Polyd.
Virg. Ang. Hist. l. 4. p. 82.

He left the name to Oswalster in Shrop­shire.

Of this Oswald (as also of Stephan King of Hungary) it is storied,Inclytus
ille & plurimis animi virtutibus (aa pietate pr [...]eser­tim in Deum)
Princeps meri­to celeberrimus, Osuualdus, cum Northum­brorum regno anno
salutis 634 fuisset potitus. God w. de Pra [...] ­sul. Angl. that their right
hands though dead, never putrified, be­cause they had been much exercised in
almes-deeds. Bed. hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 6\. Bonsinius.

Quis suit Alcides? quis Caesar Julius, aut quit

Magnus Alexander? Alcides se superasse

Fertur, Alexander mundum, sed Julius hostem.

Se simul Osuualdus, & mundum vicit, & hostem.

He died in the 23. year of his Monar­chy, and the 56. of his Kingdome of Kent.

### 3.9. Oswy.

King of Northumberland, and the tenth Monarch of the English men.

He was Brother to Edwin and Oswald.

He founded the Cathedrall Church [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=14) in Litchfield,
for a Bishops See.

Upon an occasion Oswin humble  [...] himself before the holyman Adrian, Beda.
who upon sight thereof wept, and gave this reason of his weeping, I know this
King will not live long; and this reason of his reason, for I never before
this saw an humble King.

He lived fifty seven yeares, and raign­ed the space of twenty ei [...]ht
yeares.

### 3.10. Wulphere.

The sixth King of the Mercians, and the eleventh Monarch of the Engl [...]
men.wulpherus, ne spem civium falleret, edulò satagere, magnis & animi &
corporis viribus utilem se princi­pem ostentare; denique Christi­anitatenst
vix in regno suo palpi­tantem, & per fratrem initiatam favore suo enixissime
suvit. Maimesburiensis de Gestis Regum Anglorum l  [...]. c. 4.

He becoming a  [...]hristian destroyed all those Tem [...]les, wherein his
Heathen Gods had been worshipped, converting them all into Christian Churches,
and religious Monasteries.

He raigned King over the Mercians se­venteen yeares, and Monarch of the
En­glish fuily four.

### 3.11. Ethelred.

The seventh King of Mercia, Ethelredus ani­mi religione, quam pugnandi
exercitatione ce­lebrtor▪ Malm. de Gestis Re­gum Angl. l. 1. c. 4. and twelfth
Monarch of the English.

A modest Prince, which loved better to preserve then to encrease his power by
Arms.

He raigned above thirty yeares.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=14)

### 3.12. Kenred.

The eighth King of Mercia, Quipietate in Deum, probitat [...] in patriam
per­insignis, magna morum sincerita­te vitam cucur­rit, quintoque anno regni
Romam ire per­geus, reliquum temporis illic rel [...]giosè com­plevit. Malmes.
de Gestis Re­gum Angl. l. 1. c. 4. and the thirteenth Monarch of the English
men.

He raigned in peace four yeares; then weary of Government, and desirous of
contemplation, be sought a more private and religious life; and thereupon
appoint­ing  [...]helred his Cosen-germane to rule in his place, in the fifth
year of his Raign, aban­doned his Kingdome and Country, and departed to Rome,
and in a Monastery in that City was made Monk.

### 3.13. Chelred.

The ninth King of the Mercians, Celredus im­matura morte miscrabilis;
si­quidem non ultra octo annos regno satisfaci­ens Liceselda conditus est.
Malmes. de gestis Regum Ang. l. 1. c. 4. and the fourteenth Monarch of the
English.

He had got as great reputation of milita­ry valour, as any Prince of his time,
if he had not died so soon.

He raigned only seven yeares.

### 3.14. Ethelbald.

The tenth King of the Mercians, and the fifteentth Monarch of the English.

A peaceable Prince, but was over amo­rous.

Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz, an Englishman by Nation, sent an Epistle to
him.

This is one passage in it.

Quapropter,  [...]li charissime, paeniteat te & [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=15) memora quam
turpe sit, ut tu, qui multis gen­tihus dono D [...] dominaris, al injuriam
ejus sis libidinis servus.

The Epistle is full of good counsell to be seen in Malmesbury. Lib. 1. c. 4.

He ruled forty two yeares.

### 3.15. Offa.

The eleventh King of the Mercians, and the sixteenth Monarch of the English
men.

He was a warlike Prince, and for the most part fortunate.

He built a Church in Warwickeshire, where the adjoyning Town from it and him,
beareth the name Off-Church, and caused a great Ditch to be made, large and
deep from Sea to Sea, betwixt his King­dome and Wales, whereby he might the
better defend his Country from the incursi­ons of the Welsh men. And this
Ditch is to be seen in many places as yet, and is called Offas Ditch at this
day. Lords History of Wales.

The Ditch began at the River Dee by Bassing-werke, between Che [...]ter and
Ruthlan, and ran along the hils sides to the South-Sea a little from Bristow,
reaching above a hundreth miles in length. Id. the descripti­on of Wales.

He first gave the Peter-pence to Rome, and was himself at the length shorne a
Monk.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=15) He
raigned thirty nine yeares.Or Elfrid.

### 3.16. Egfrid.

The twelfth King of the Mercians, and the seventeenth Monarch of the English.

He re-establisht the priviledges and li­berties of all the Churches which his
Father had supprest.

He raigned only four moneths; he was taken away by sudden death in the
hun­dreth fourty first day after his Fathers de­cease.

### 3.17. Kenwolfe.

The thirteenth King of the Mercians, Kenul [...]hus magnus vir & virtutibus
fa­mam supergre­dicus, nihil quod livor digne car­peret unquam admisit, domi
Religiosus, in bello victoriosus vir, cujus meritò laudes  [...]itentur in
altum, quam­diu aeq nus arbi­ter in Angliâ invenietur; lau­dandue tum reg­ni
sublimitas, tum mentis humilitate, qua cuisuit amplissime, Malmesb. de gest is
Reg. Angl. l. 1. c. 4. and the eighteenth Monarch of the English men.

At home he was an example of piety, peace, justice, and Religion: abroad
tem­perate, humble, and courteous, without vain ostentation, or ambitious
conceits. In Warres he was stout and victorious; in peace studious to enrich
his Subjects: he carried himself so at all times, that envy could not touch
him with her tongue.

Bede dedicateth his Ecclesiasticall History to him.

He raigned twenty two yeares.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=16)

## 4\. CHAP. IV.

OF the Saxons that reigned sole Kings of this Island.Anglorum Reges, postquam
in Monarchiam septem regna coaluerunt, Egbertus. Aethelwal­phus.

  * 1\. Egbert raigned thirty seven years.
  * 2\. Ethelwulf (the son of Egbert) twenty years.
  * 3\. Ethelbald (the eldest son of Ethelwulf) five years.
  * 4.

Aethelbaldus. Aethelb [...]us. Aetheltedus. Alfredus, Edvardus sen,
Aethelstanus, Edmundus. Edredus. Edwinus. Edgarus. Edwardus martyr.
Ethelredus. Edmundus. ferrcum l [...]tus. Canutus. Haroldus. Harde-Canu­tus.
Edwardus Con­fessor. Haroldus, Boxhornij Me­tamorphosis Anglorum.

Ethelbert (the second son of Ethel­wulf five years.

  * 5\. Ethelred (the third son of Ethelwulf) five years.
  * 6\. Alfred (the youngest son of Ethel­wulf) five years.
  * 7\. Edward (sirnamed the elder) twenty three years.
  * 8\. Aethelstane (the eldest son of Ed­ward) sixteen years.
  * 9\. Edmund (the second son of Edward) six years.
  * 10\. Edred (the youngest son of Edward) nine years.
  * 11\. Edwin (the elder son of Edmund) four years.
  * 12\. Edgar (the younger son of Edmund) sixteen years.
  * 13\. Edward: (the elder son of Edgar) forty years.
  * [[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=16) 14\. Ethelred (the younger son of Edgar) thirty seven years.
  * 15\. Edmund (the son of Ethelred) in whose time the Danes possessed the greatest part of England.

### 4.1. Egbert.

The eighteenth King of the West-Saxons, Regnavit inde Egbertus, cò autem
faeliciue quod Alcuinum viderit, omni (quae aetas illa tulerit) litera­tum
genere do­ctissimum cu [...]us quidem operain Parisicus [...] Aca­demia
instituen­da Carolus Magnus usus est. Seldeni A­nalect. Anglo­brit l. 2. c. 2.
the nineteenth, but first sole and absolute Monarch of the English men.

Upon report of the death of Britic, he with great speed returned out of
France, where (during the time of his abode) he had served with good
commendation in the Warres, under Charles the Great; by meanes whereof (his
reputation encreasing among his own Country-men) he was thought worthy of the
Government, before he obtained it.

He first gave this Kingdom the name of England. Egbertus con­scendit Thronum
avitum omnibus ante se regibus meritò praese­rendus. Mulm. de rebus gestis
Angl.  [...] l. 1. c. 2.

He ordained by publick Edict, that the Heptarchy possessed by the Saxons,
should be called thence forward the Land of the English, whence the Latines
took also their name Anglia, and the French that d' Angle­terre.

There were three hundred years from King Egbert unto William the Conquerour.

He raigned over the West-Saxons thirty six years and seven moneths,Thirty
seven saith Mr. Foxe. and Monarch of the whole Island seventeen.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=17)

### 4.2. Ethelwulfe.

The nineteenth King of the West-Saxons, Anno Dom. 837 Ethelwulphus (quem
quidam Athulphumvo­cant) filius Eg­berthi regnum sortitus regnavit viginti
annis, & quinque mensibus, natura le­uis, & quisub quiete degere, quam multis
provincijs imperitare mallet. Mal­mesb, de gestis Regum Anglorum l. 2. c. 2.
Omnis Anglia hoc tempore istuc vectigal pietatis & Religionis causa, Romano
pontifici pendit domestica­tim collatum, & nominum illi argentei vocantur
vulgo denarij divi Petri, quos pontifici quaestor exigit qui publicò bonas
artes prositerentur, quô multi do­ctrina clari constuxerunt, docend [...]
gratia. Nos hanc olim quaesturam aliquot per annos gessimus, ejus (que) muner
[...] obeundi causa, primum iu Angliam veni­mus. Polyd. Virg. Aug. hist. l. 4.
and the twentieth Monarch of the English men.

He being once himself nuzled in that or­der,Quis facile cre­diderit
Aethel­wulfum Regem decimam par­tem non solùm bonorum & fa­cultatum, sed &
mansionum prae­diorumque toti­us Eccle­siae contulisset Spelm. Epist. Dedicat.
ad lib. de Concil. was alwayes good and devout to reli­gious orders.

He was so well learned and so devout, that the Clerks of the Church of
Winchester did choose him in his youth to be their Bi­shop, which function he
took upon him, and was Bishop of Winchester for seven years before he was
King. The History of Cambria by Lhoyd, augmented by Doctor Powell p. 32.

A Monk, a Deacon, and a Bishop, yet elected King, because they could not finde
a fitter person for the Crown. Necessitate cogente factus est Rex, Roger
Hoveden.

He ordained that Tythes and Church-Lands should be free from all taxes and
Regall services.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=17)
Ethelwolphus Rex omnium historicorum consensu & fide praestantissimus, nec
pietatis magis quàm rerumoptimé gestarum laude cele­bri [...] & illustris.
Anti Sanderus Dialogo se­cundo.

Polyd. Virgil in the fifth Book of his En­glish History saith of King Alfred:

Atqui Neotum inprimis monas [...]icae profes­sionis virum sanctissimum, ob
eximiam erudi­tionem, miro amore complexus est, quo hortan­te, Oxonij
gymnasium instituit, proposita mer­cede omnibus.

His second son by his Queen Iudith, daughter of Charles the bald Emperour,
King of France, Neote, was much addicted to learning, and was one of the first
Divi­nity readers in the University of Oxford.

He was interred in the County of Hun­tington, St. Needes in Huntington­shire
why so called. at a place then called Arnulphsbury, and afterwards in regard
of his interment St. Neots, and now St. Needes.

This King was famous for having four sons,Ethelbald Ethelbert and Ethelred
successively raigned, and dying left the Kingdome distracted by continu­all
conflicts with the Danes; and Alfred having faithfully served his Brothers, as
Viceroy in each of their severall Raigns, survived, and in the twenty second
year of his age succeeded in his Kingdome. Powells life of Alfred. who all of
them were Kings of this Land successively.

He raigned twenty years, one moneth, and nine dayes.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=18)

### 4.3. Ethelbald.

The twentieth King of the West-Saxons, Anno Dom. 857 duo silij Ethelwulphi
regnum pater­num partientes, Ethelbaldus in West-Saxo­nia, Ethelber­tus in
Cant [...]a regnaverunt. Ethelbaldus ignavus & perfidus patris ejus thorum
polluit, in conjugium Judith n [...]ver [...]ae post  [...]ar [...]ntis obi
[...]m devolutus; sed post quinquennium eo de­functo, & Schireburniae co
[...]dito, totum regnum ad alterum derivatum est Malmesb. de gestis Regum
Angl. l. 2. c. 3. and the twenty first Monarch of the English men.

He took Iudith his stepmother to be his wife; this prodigious incest was soone
punished by his untimely death.

He raigned five years.

### 4.4. Ethelbert.

The one and twentieth King of the West-Saxons, and the two and twentieth
Mo­narch of the English men.

The first Christned Prince of all the Sax­on Nation.Primus ille, no­dum
Cantii, praeter Nor­thumbriam totius Angliae Rex, sacro font [...] ab
Augustino Monacho An­glorum, ut a [...]unt Apostolo, tin­ctus. Selden­janus
Anglo­rum.

Omnium Anglo-Saxonum regum Christi nominis primus hospes. Twini Comment. de
rebus Brittanicis.

His name signifieth nobly-conceited or advised, or of noble conceit or
advisement. Verstegan.

He raigned over the Kentish-South, and East-Saxons ten years, and was Monarch
of the whole only five.

### 4.5. Ethelred.

The two and twentieth King of the West-Saxons, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=18) and the twenty
third Monarch of the English men.

Great was the valour of this King;Regnum pater­num obtinuit  [...]odem numero,
annorum quo fratres misera­bili prorsus & dolenda sorte, ut immatura omnes
occumberent morte, nisi quod tantis matis obstrepentibus regij pueri magis
optarem honestum exitum quam acerbum imperium, Malm. de gestis Regum Angl l.
2. c. 3. for in his short time of Raign, as Malmesbury and other Writers
record, he fought no less than nine set Battels against the Danes in one year,
in most of them victorious.

At Wintburne in Darset-shire there is this Epitaph written on his Tomb.

In hoc loro quiescit corpus S. Ethelredi Re­gis West-Saxonum Martyris, qui
anno Do­mini DCCCLXXII. XXIII. Aprilis per manus Danorum Pag [...]norum occu
[...]uit.

He raigned in great trouble five years,Six saith A [...] ­dre Du Chesne. saith
Malmesbury.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=19)

## 5\. CHAP. V.  
Alfred, Aelfred, or Alvred.

THe twenty third King of the West-Sax­ons, Alfridus, qui & Ae [...]fredus, &
Alvredus de bellavit Danos, & unicus sui sae [...]ust Maecenas fuit. Lelandi
[...]omment in Cygn [...]am Cantionem. Insignem hunc Regem Saxo-nes passim, &
ipsus semet, Aelfredum nominant, nonnulli Alfre [...]um & [...]lfridum:
recentiores (lite­ra [f]  [...]u [v] consonantem versa) Alvredum. Filius erat
Regis Ethel­wulplhi pihntissimi,  [...]atu certè minimus, è virtute autem &
rebus gestis, mag­nus ab  [...]horibus appellatus Pu [...]rum adhuc à patre
Romam delegatum, Leo Pap [...] [...]0\. Prophetico velut ductus  [...]piritu
in Anglorum futurum aliq tando Regem  [...]xit, dum [...]tres sui fratres
omnes, qui paterno priùs fruebantur diade­mate, superstites  [...],  [...] &
insolumes Reg [...]are capit anno Christi 872. des [...]it anno 901. cum annos
28 v [...]l 29 reg [...]minis tenuisset gubernaculum, multas in­terea
utriusque fortunae expertus vi [...]ssitudines. Spelm. de Concil. p. 378. Hic
octarum Saxo [...]corum [...], in Dei servitto vigilantissimus, & in
exequendis jud [...]ii [...] erat discretissimus. Hoved. Annal pars prior. and
twenty fourth Monarch of the English men.

He was the first annointed King of Eng­land, Erat Rex ille in exequendis
judiciis, sicut in caeteris al [...]is om­nibus rebus discretissimus
in­dagator▪ Asse­rius Men [...]ven­sis. as glorious for his most excellent
Laws, transcendent Justice and Civil Go­vernment, as for his martiall
exploits, vi­ctories, and for his incomparable piety and extraordinary bounty
to the Clergy and learned men.

Of his great memory when he was young,Vide Asserium de Alfredi re­bus g
[...]tis. vide Asserium de Aelfredi rebus gestis.

He was accounted a good Grammarian, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=19) Rhetorician,
Philosopher, Musician, and Poet.

His Raign began with troubles and Warres,Nec verò des [...] ­erunt dulcissimi
Jovis [...] Mer­curii bene po­sitorum influx­us; nec Musae (Rex enim. fae­lix
seculum ve­rè philosophaba­tur) ne [...]leg [...] in­ter arma  [...]. Sel
[...]en [...] Analect. An­glo brit. l. 2. c. 5. in defence of the Land which
the Pagan-Danes intended to destroy; and though his powers were small, yet was
he forced into the field within one moneth af­ter his Coronation.

He fought no less than forty six bloudy Battels (saith Spelman) with the Danes
by Land and Sea, for his Countries liberties.

Vir in bell [...] per omnia strenuissimus. Asserius.

He was once brought to that extremity, that he was forced to leave his
Companies, and lurk in Somerset-shire Marshes.

The solitary place of his most residency, was an Island inclosed with two
Rivers Thane and Parret, at their meetings in the County of Somerset, commonly
called Ede­ling se [...], where he in very poor attire dis­guised, was
entertained into a Cow-heards service, where on a time as he sate by the fire
in trimming of his Bow and sha [...]ts, a Cake of dough baking on the hearth
before him, chanced to burn; the Cowheardess coming in, and seeing him minde
his Bow more than his bread, in a great  [...]ury cast a­way both his Bow and
arrowes, and check­ing him said, Thou fellow dost thou see the bread burn
before thy face, and wilt not turn it, and yet art thou glad to eat it before
it be half baked?

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=20) Of the
naturall dayes twenty four hours, eight he allotted for devotion and
contemplation, eight for refection and re­creation, and the eight remaining
for mat­ters of the Commonwealth.

Iulius Caesar having spent the whole day in the field about his military
affairs,Vide Asserium Menevensem de Aelfredi rebus gestis. p. 9. divi­ded the
night also for three severall uses, one part for his sleep, a second for the
Commonwealth and publike business, the third for his studies. Peacham.

He translated Gregories Pastorals,And also Pau­lu [...] Orosius his History. B
[...]les History, and Boethius de Consolatione Phi­losophiae into the Saxon
tongue, and began to do the like with Davids Psalmes.

In divinis libris & sacra lectione tam assidu­us erat, quod Davidicum
Psalterium, vel a­liquem alium librum aedisic [...]torium in sinu suo semper
ferret;Vide Malm. de gestis Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 4\. To furnish i [...] with
able Scholars, he drew thither out of France Grimbald and Scotus, and out of
Wales Asser, (who  [...] his life) whose Lectures he honoured often with his
own presence. & viros literatissim [...]s de terris exteris ad se accersens,
aliquandiu in Palatio suo secum pro sacris literis addiscendis retentos, demum
diversis praelatiis & dignitatibus pre­moveret. Ingulphi Historia p. 870. vide
plura ibid. & p. 871.

He restored the decayed University of Oxford, by fixing therein a Colledge,
(now bearing the name of Vniversity-Colledge) and annexed ample maintenance
unto it.

He divided his Kingdome into Shires, Hundreds and Tithings, for the better
or­dering and administring of justice, and for the abandoning of theeves,
which had [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=20)
formerly encreased by the meanes of long Warres; whereby notwithstanding the
multitude of Souldiers continually imploy­ed, it is reported that a Virgin *
might tra­vell alone in his dayes through all his Do­minions, without any
violence offered; and that Bracelets of gold were hanged in the high
wayes,Quin & pro­vincialibus graudem amo­rem studtiorunt in [...]u [...]it,
hos prae­miis, illos injuri­is hortando; ne­minem illitera­tum ad quamli­bet
Curiae dig­nitatem aspirare perinittens. Malmesh de gestis Regum Auglorum, l.
2. c. 4. and no man so hardy as to take them away.

William the first so well provided for exe­cution of Justice upon offenders,
that a young maiden well charged with gold, might travell in any part of the
Realm, without any offer of injury unto her. Hayw.

He permitted none in office in Court, or elsewhere, unless he were learned,
which incited his Nobles to the earnest pursuit of learned Arts, and to train
up their children in good letters.

He caused all former Lawes to be sur­veyed,Aluredu [...] à Decalogo suas leges
piè auspi­catur Vide La­nibardum de priscis  [...]nglo­rum legibus. and made
choice of the best, which he translated into the English tongue.

He begins his Lawes with a religious Majesty, Loquutus est Dominus ad Mosem
hos sermones, &c. and cites all the Deca­logue.

Abbot Ethelred gives this encomium of his Lawes, Leges Christianissimas &
scripsit, & promulgavit, in quibus fides ejus & devotio in Deum, sollicitudo
in subditos, misericordia in pauperes, justitia circa omnes cunctis legenti­
[...]us patet.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=21) He had so
great a love to learning, that he made a Law, that all Freemen of the
Kingdome, possessing two Hides of Land, should bring up their sons in
learning, till they were fifteen years of age at least, that so they might be
trained to know God, to be men of understanding, and to live happily.

He bestowed the sixth part of his riches and Rents,Dum gesta ejus commemoro
mi­litaria, miror unquam cum cogitasse civilia. Dum civilium ejus intueor
mo­lestiarum cumu­los; miror utique quod in aciem prodiit. Dum ve­rò religio
[...]em, pietatem, & ar­dorem rerum c [...]lestium con­templatus sum, vixisse
Mona­chus visus est & regularis; hoc solo infaelix, quòd inter gentes barbares
sub fae­dissimo litera­rum deliquio. f [...]loruit & inte­riit circiter an.
Dom. 900 Spel­manni Glossa­rium Vid [...] ejus Epist. Dedicat. ad Lib. de
Consil. upon the poor strangers of the Countrey, and sent every year little
less to forraign Churches without the Realm. Dalechamps Christian hospitality.
c. 3.

He was very learned, a quality rare in his time; and as Solomon, Alexander the
Great, Iulius Caesar, Augustus, and our Charlemagne, (saith Andre Du Chesne)
he joyned learning and valour, and was cle­ment, liberall, pious and devout,
and adorned with all royall vertues and en­dowments. I may in some respects
com­pare him with Almansor, the learned and vi­ctorious King that conquered
Spain.

He was at fifteen years so skilfull in the seven liberall Sciences, that they
who were the most learned in them, spake of them in his presence with much
fear and bashfulness; for at every other word he corrected the imperfections
which proceeded out of their ignorance. At the five and twentieth year of his
age, he spake eleven languages, read­ing and writing them as perfectly as the
ve­ry Naturals themselves. He divided the [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=21) dayes of the
week after this manner. The Friday for matters of his Religion, in which he
was very devout. The Saturday for matters of Justice. The Sunday for mat­ters
of Warre. The Munday for the go­vernment of his Kingdomes. The Tues­day and
Wednesday for his recreations and private affairs. And the Thursday for
mat­ters of learning.

He chastised theeves so severely, that none durst take any thing from other,
nei­ther in City, nor in Countrey; as well in deserts, as in peopled place
[...]. And in so great awe they were of him, that if any one had lost ought in
the street, or Market-place, none durst meddle therewith, other­wise than to
leave it at the next Shop, and cause it to be cryed, till the owner were
found, to whom it was to be restored.

None ever  [...]ought for alms or succour at his hands, whether he were Moor,
Christi­an, or Jew, that went away unrelieved.

He was worthily called the Conquerour, being never overcome. He won eighty six
Battels by Sea and by Land; and took five Kings, subdued three parts of the
world, Asia, Africke, and Europe. His life and death by Ashley.

Alfred's Arms are to be seen in the pub­like Hall of University-Colledge in
Oxford.

The Archdeacon of Huntington speaking of the continuall travail he had during
his [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=22)
Raign, relates these Verses of him.

Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem,

His Epitaph.

Armipotens Aelfrede dedit, probitasque laborem;

Perpetuumque labor nomen, cui mixta dolori

Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.

Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,

Si modo victus eras, ad crastin [...] bella parabas:

Cui ve [...]tes sudore jugi, cui  [...]eca cruore

Tincla jugi, qu [...]ntum s [...]t onus regnare, probarunt.

Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,

Cui tot in adversis vel respirare liceret,

Nec tamen aut ferro contritus, poncre ferrum,

Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.

Iam post transactos vitae, regnique dolores

Christus ei sit vera quies, sceptrumque perenne.

He raigned twenty seven years say some;Anno dominicae incarnationis 872,
Elfredus filius Ethel [...] wulphi junior regnum accepit, & 28\. & semis annos
laboriosissime, & fortissime  [...]enuit. Malmesb. l. 2. c. 4 Some say above
29. years. So Rog. de Hoveden annal part 1. twenty eight saith Powell, the
writer of his life. Ingulphus saith he died in the twenty ninth year of his
Raign.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=22)

## 6\. CHAP. VI.

### 6.1. EDWARD the elder.

THe twenty fourth King of the West-Sax­ons, Dictus senior, eo quod post il­lum
plures ejus­dem nominis regnaverunt, quorum omnium ipse primus erat. Literarum
sci­entia multum inferior patre, sed regni po­testate incompa­rabiliter
glorio­sior. Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2 c. 5. and twenty fifth Monarch
of the English men.

Fuit Edwardus forma eximia, ac per omnes aetatis gradus decentissima. Polyd.
Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.

Before the conquest of the Normans, there were in England three Edwards, 1\.
This Edward the elder; 2. Edward the Martyr; 3. Edward the Confessor.

We have had more Kings of England of this name, than of any other; nine in
all,Idem ferè ha­bet Ingulphus. Edwardus, Cognomento senior, litera­rum cultu
patre inferior, sed dig­nitate, potentia pariter & glo­ria superior. three
before the conquest, and six after it. Verstegans Etymology of our Saxon
proper names.

Henry, the name of seven Emperours of Germany; eight Kings of England, four
Kings of France, four Kings of Castile. Phil­lips his new world of English
words.

He was heir apparent to his Father Al­freds valour and vertues,Nam multo
la­tius, quam pater fines regni, sui dilatavi [...]. Rog. de Hove­den. Annal.
part. 1. p. 421- [...] as well as to his Crown.

Some say he was the great Iustinian of our Nation.

Our Laws being suppressed by the Da­nish [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=23) Kings, were
revived and reinforced in the time of Edward the Confessor; whence they had
the name of Edward the Confessors Laws.

He raigned in great Warres and honour the space of twenty four years.23\.
saith Malmesb. So Henri­cus Huntingdoniensis saith,24\. Polyd Virg. Paternum
regnum tenuit 24. annis. 34\. saith Roger de Hoveden.

### 6.2. Ethelstan or Adelstan.

The twenty fifth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty sixth Monarch of the
En­glish men.

He was crowned at that Kingly Town Kingston. In Regia villa, in Regem levatur.
Rog. de Hoveden.

He began his Kingdome with War, and ended in peace and tranquillity.

He was the worthiest Prince (saith Lhoyd) of Saxon bloud, that ever raigned.

Being seduced by the bad Counsell, and false suggestions of one of his
favourites, he banished his Brother Edwin unjustly,Malmesb. de gestis Regum
Ang. l. 1\. c. 6\. A young En­glish Gentle­man in a sally forth at Ostend had
one of his arms shot off with a Canon, which taking up he brought back with
him into the Town unto the Chyrurgion, and coming into his lodging, shewed it,
saying, Behold the arm which but at dinner did help its fellow. This he did,
and endured without the least fainting, or so much as re­posing upon  [...]
bed. Dr. Dillingham Veres Commentaries in the con­tin [...]ation of the siege
of Ostend. com­manding him to be sent to Sea, with only one servant, and in a
Boat without Oar or Sail, wherein he perished.

His Cup-bearer after in his service upon festivall, stumbled with the one
foot, and [[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=23)
recovering himself with the other, pleasant­ly said, You see how one Brother
helpeth ano­ther; upon which speech, the King with grief and touch of heart,
called to mind the death of his innocent Brother, occasioned by his wicked
Counsell, and forthwith commanded execution to be done on him the procurer;
and himself was ever after more tender and carefull toward his other Brethren.

Leyland in his new years gift to King Henry the eighth, reckons him amongst
o­ther learned men of the Kings Progeni­tors.

The chiefest of his works for the service of God, and good of his Subjects,
was the translation of the Bible into the Saxon tongue, (which was then the
mother­tongue of the Land) out of the He­brew.

Of this work Leyland also speaks in the work before-mentioned.

His Laws are mentioned by Lambard in his Saxon Laws.

He raigned in great honour the space of fifteen years,16\. years saith
Malmesbury. and odd moneths.

### 6.3. Edmund.

The twenty sixth King of the West Sax­ons, and twenty seventh Monarch of the
English men.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=24) The good
Laws he made are extant in Saxon and Latine, by the industry of Mr Willi­am
Lambard.

He had by his Queen Elgina two sons, Edwin and Edgarus, sirnamed Pacificus,
which both raigned after him.

By him were expelled the Danes, Scots, Normans, and all forraign enemies out
of the Land.

He raigned six years and a half.

At his Mannor of Puclekerkes in the County of Glocester, Tenuit regnum anuis
6. & se­mis. Malmesb. l. 2. c 6. whilest he interposed himself between his
Sewer and one Leof, to part a fray,See Milles his Catalogue of honour, and Mr.
Prynne his seasonable, legall, and hy­storicall vin­dication of the
fundamentall Liberties, Rights, and Laws of Eng­land. p. 106. he was with a
thrust through the body wounded to death, when he had prosperously raigned the
space of five years and seven moneths. Rogerus de Hoveden annal part 1.
Malmesbury l. 2. c. 7. and others, say this Leof was a thief, which the King
espying at a festivall, he pulled him by the hair, and cast him to the ground;
but he drawing out his weapon, stabbed the King. Vide Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist.
l. 6.

### 6.4. Edred.

The twenty seventh King of the West Sax­ons, and twenty eighth Monarch of the
English men.

He suffered his body to be chastised at the will and direction of Dunstan
Abbot of Glassenbury; unto whose custody he also committed the greatest part
of his treasure [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=24) and richest
Jewels, to be lockt in his chests, and under the keys of this Monastery, where
it remained, till the King fell sick of his last sickness; at which time it
was demanded, but never restored; for Dunstan being on his journey with the
same to the King, a voice from heaven spake unto him, and said, Be­hold King
Edred is now departed in peace; at the hearing of which words,Anno Dominicae
incar [...]ationis 946. Edredus tertius ex filiis Edwardi regnum suscipi­ens,
rexit annis 9, & dimidio. Malmesb. l. 2. c. 7. his horse im­mediately fell
down and died▪ Where­upon he returned again to his Monastery; and though he
lost his horse, yet was he recompenced thereby with the gain of the Kings
treasure and Jewels.

He raigned in great honour nine years and odd moneths.

### 6.5. Edwin or Edwy.

The twenty eighth King of the West Sax­ons, Anno Domini­c [...]e incar
[...]ationis 955. Ed [...]inus regno potitus tenuit annis quatuor, petulans
adoles [...]ens, & qui speciositate corporis i [...] libi­dinibus abutere­tur.
Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l 2. c. 7. Ea tempestate facies Mona­chorum saeda
& miserabi [...]is  [...]rat. Caeterum longè horret nostra memoria, quam
immanis fu [...]rit in reliqua caenobia. & propter aetatis lubricum, & propter
pellicis consilium, qua [...] tenerum jugiter obside [...]at animum Malmesb.
de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2. Vide plura ibid. & Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6. and
twenty ninth Monarch of the En­glish men.

He was but thirteen years old when he began to raign.

He was Nephew to Edred.

He favoured not the Monkes, which made them write so scandalously of him. He
thrust them out of Malmesbury and Glassenbury, placing married Priests in
their [[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=25)
room; and banished Dunstan their great Champion into Flanders.

The true causes of his banishing him, ejecting the Monkes, and seizing their
lands and treasures, was, that Dunstan had so bewitched Edmund, Edward,
Aethelstan, and Aedred his predecessours, with the love of Monkery, as they
not only took violently from married Priests their livings, to erect
Monasteries, but also lavishly wasted much of their own royall treasures,
lands, and revenues upon them, which they should rather have imployed in
resist­ing the common enemies of God and their Countrey, the Danes.

Ioscelin the Author of Antiq. Brit. Bi­shop Godwin, Speed, and others
conceive, that the true cause why the Mercians and Northumbrians, (and those
only, not the rest of his Subjects and Kingdome) rejected him, and set up his
Brother Edgar, (whose vices were more exorbitant in some de­grees than Edwins)
was the malice of Dun­stan and Odo (the pillars and Oracles of the Monkish
Clergy) who stirred up the Merci­ans, and seditious rebellious Northumbri­ans
against him, to set up Edgar in his stead, who was totally devoted to them and
Dun­stan, by whose counsels he was afterwards wholly guided, and built no less
than forty seven new Monasteries for the Monks; be­sides all those he
repaired, intending to [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=25) build three more
had he lived, to make them fifty compleat.

He raigned but four years.

## 7\. CHAP. VII.  
EDGAR.

THe thirtieth Monarch of the English men.

The Raign of this King is said to have been altogether in a calm
tranquillity,He was sirna­med Etheling, after the signi­fication of the Saxon
speech, Outlaw, because he was a ba­nished man in the former time of his life,
through the cruelty of the Danes. Laci [...]s Nobi­lity. and therefore he was
sirnamed Pacificus, the Peaceable. His vertues were many, and vices not a few;
the one gloriously aug­mented, and the other fairly excused, by those Monkish
writers, unto whose profes­sions he was most favourable.

Tunc ordo Monasticus jamjudum lapsus p [...]a­cipuè caput erexit.Although in
his younger dayes he was subject to ma­ny vices, and committed some in urious
tyrannicall acts, recorded by Malmesbury, Fox, Speed, and others; yet
repenting of these his youthfull, lustfull vices, he proved such a just and
prudent King, that our Histori­ans of elder and later ages, give large
encomiums of his justice, prudence, vertues, and politick Government, worthy
perpetuall memory and imita­tion. Mr.  [...]ryn's seasonable, legall, and
historicall vindication of the fundamentall Liberties, Rights. Laws of
England, p. 126, 127 Vir & ani­mi virtute, & corporis ro [...]ore longè
princeps. Polyd. Virg. Ang▪ hist. l. 6. Malmesb. l. 2. c. 8.

He unravelling the web his Brother had weaved, recalled Dunstan out of
banish­ment, and made him Archbishop of Can­terbury.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=26) His
Summer progresses, and yearly chief pastimes, were the sayling round abou
[...] this whole Isle of Albion, guarded with his grand Navy of four thousand
sail at the least, parted into four equall parts, of pet­ty Navies, each being
of a thousand Ships. Dee's Brittish Monarchy, p. 56, 57. he calls him there
that Saxonicall Alexander. See more there; and p. 55, 58, 59, 60.

He appointed the Prince of North-Wales to bring him yearly three hundred skins
of Wolves,Malmesb. l. 2. c. 8. for a tribute, which continued for three years
space, but in the fourth was not a Wolf to be found; and so the tribute
ceased.

Upon the River Dee he had seven petty Kings to row his Barge, to shew his
great­ness.

He was very lascivious.Id. ibid.

Leges apprimè utiles tulit, quas vetustas in oblivionem fermè adduxit.

Of his Laws,Polyd Virg. Ang hist. l.  [...]. vide Lambardum de pris­  [...]is
Anglorum legibus.

It is sure enough there have not been more famous men,Dr. Barwick's life of B.
Mor­ton. than some of no great stature, as the instance of King Pipin in the
French History, and this King in our own, will make manifest.

In the time that the Saxons had this Realm in subjection, he had subdued all
the other Kings Saxons, and made them his Tributaries. On a time he had t
[...]all [[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=26)
all with him at dinner;Licet, ut fer­tur, staturae fue­rit. & corpulen­tiae
perexilis; tantas vires in illo corpusculo dignatio naturae incluserat, ut
ultro ad congre­diendum laces­ceret quemcun­que audacem nosset; hoc max­ime
timeus ne  [...] tali colludio ti­meretur. Mal­mesb. de gest is Regum
Anglo­rum. l. 2. c. 8. and after it was shewed him, that Rynaud King of Scots
had said, that he wondered how it should hap­pen, that he and other Kings,
that were tall and great personages, would suffer themselves to be subdued by
so little a bo­dy, as Edgar was; Edgar dissembled, and answered nothing, but
faining to go on hunting, took with him the Scottish King in his company, and
purposely withdrew him from them that were with him, cau­sing by a secret
servant, two swords to be conveyed into a place in the forrest, by him
appointed. As soon as he came thither, he took the one sword, and delivered
the other to Rynaud, Vide plura ibid. Malcome  [...] King of Sco [...]s
hearing of a conspiracy plotted to mur­ther him, whereof one was author, he
dissembled the knowing of it, till being a­broad one day a hunting, he took
the fellow apart from the company, and being alone, said unto him, Here is now
a fit time and place to do that manfully, which you have intended to do
treacherously. Draw your weapon▪ and if you kill me, none being present, you
can incur no danger. With which speech of the King, the fellow was so daunted,
that presently he  [...] down at his feet, confessed his fault, humbly asked
forgiveness, and be­ing granted him, was ever after serviceable and faithfull
to him. Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England in William the
2d Sir Thomas E­lyo [...]'s Gover­n [...]ur, out of Malmesb. In h [...]norem
Christi ejusque divini nominis cultum, quadra­gin [...]a caen [...]bia ve á
fundamen­  [...]is  [...]x [...]ruxit, vel pa [...]um sarta t [...]cta  [...]
de reb. Brit.  [...] paci­ficus,  [...]a [...]ria & Monosticae dis­ci [...]li
[...] propug­nator ard [...]n  [...]ssi­m [...]s qui sem [...]t  [...]
[...]achorum caet [...], Reg [...]nem  [...] [...]alium pras [...]t guber­
[...]res S [...]elm. d [...] Concil p 489.  [...] au­norum 16. bidding him to
prove his strength, and to essay whether his deeds would ratifie his words.
Turpe est enim Regi in convivio esse dicaculum, nec esse in prae­lio
promptulum. Whereat the Scottish King being abashed, beholding the noble
con­rage of Edg [...]r, with an horrible fear con­fessed his errour, desiring
pardon, which he (with most humble submission) at the last obtained.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=27) For his
excellent vertues and prosperou [...] Raign, he was called Honor & deliciae
An­glorum. Malmesbury. Or as Ingulphus ter meth him, Honor & Rosa Regum.

In his time all Ecclesiasticall Orders flourished; learned and vertuous men
were highly esteemed; all Civil and forrign Warres ceased; and he was called
the King of Albion, being no less power­full by Sea, than by Land. Mexia's
Trea­sury of time. vol. 2. l. 7. c. 1.

He was Angliciorbis flos & decus, n [...]n mi­nus mem [...]rabilis
[...]nglis, quam Cyrus Persis; Romulus Romanis: Alexander Macedoni­bus;
Arsaces Parthis▪ Carolus Magnus Fran­cis; as Malmesbury, Abbot Ethelred,
Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dunelmensis, Henry Huntingdon, Matthew
Westminster, R [...]ger de Hoveden, and others record of him.

Immediately after his death, Res & spes Anglorum retro sublapsae sunt, totius
Regni status est per [...]urbatus; & post tempus laetitiae quod illius tempore
vigebat pacified, caepit tri­bulatio undique advenire; as Malmesbury,
Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, Regnim adipis  [...]ns c [...]dem
nu­m [...]ro  [...] de gestis Reg. Aug. l. 2. c. 8. and Bromton observe. Such
an incompa­rable loss was the death of so just, pious, and prudent a King to
the whole Nation, Qui  [...] viti [...], pos [...]e [...] [...] virtutibus
de­levi [...], when most others do quite contrary.

He raigned sixteen yeares and two moneths, in great tranquillity and honour,
[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=27) and died
in the 37th year of his age.

After Edgar's death,The three con­quests of Eng­land by the Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, proceeded from the sins of the Princes, or of the peo­ple, or both.
Mexia's Trea­sury of time. vol. 2. l 7. c. 1 [...]. the Danes so plagued this
Realm, that there was nothing setled in it, either in Church or State, till
finally they obtained the Kingdome.

The Danes raigned in England 25\. years.

But Speed saith they molested England for two hundred eighteen years. See
Ayscu his Declaration of the first Inhabitants of this Island.

The Danes by strength caused Husband­men to ear and sow the land,Dani
populati­onibus,  [...]caelibus & incen [...]iis mi­seram Anglianm multos per
annos adeo affl [...]x [...]runt, ut Clades [...] Romanis, Scotis,
[...]ictis, & Sax [...]nibus jam an [...]ca, postea [...]; deinde à Normannis
huic Insulae illatae, si aerumnis & calamita ibus quibus isti p [...]triam
hanc no­stram affecerunt conferantur, quasi ludus quidam & tragadia scenica
poss [...]t aestimari. Nam bellum nobiscum gesserunt temporis long inquitate
diuturnum, omni crudelitatis genere immanissimum, & belli ge [...]endi ratione
difficilimum. Godw. de Praesul Ang. Comment. p. 67. vide plura ibid. & p
[...]9. and to do all other vile labour that belonged unto Hus­bandry; and the
Dane held his wise at pleasure, with daughter and servant. When the Husbandman
came home, he should scantly have of his own, as his ser­vants had; so that
the Dane had all at his commandement, and did eat and drink his fill of the
best, when the owner had scant his fill of the worst.

Besides this the common people were so oppressed by them,Vide Reg de Hoved.
part 1. p [...]t 2\. See Ver­st [...]g [...] of our names of con­tempt. p. 33
[...] that for fear and dread they called them in every such house as they had
rule of, L [...]rd Dane. But in process of time, after the Danes were voided
the Land, this word Lord Dane was in derision [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=28) and despight of
the Danes, The Danes used when the English drank, to stab them, or cut their
throats; to a­void which vil­lany, the party then drinking requested▪ some of
the next fitters to be his surety or pledge, whilest he paid nature her due,
and hence have we our s [...]all custome of pledging one another. turned by
En­glish men into a name of reproach, called Lurdane, which yet is not
forgotten; for if one English man will rebuke another, he will say, Thou art
but a Lurdane. Grafton.

Edward, sirnamed the Martyr.

The thirty first Monarch of the English men.

He began his Raign at twelve years of age.

Adolescens summae sanctitatis & frugi,Infestabant illi­us maxime im­perium
Clericos inter & Monachos de sacerdo  [...]um celibatu schismata, Seldeni
Analect. Anglobrit. l. 2. c. 6. ea modestia regnare caepit, ut omnibus
charissimus esse [...], quippe qui paternas virtutes gnaviter imi­tabatur.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.

The end of this young King was lamen­table, being stabbed (by his Stepmothers
treachery) when he was drinking a cup of wine on Horseback, when he in
kindness came to visit her;Died in the 16 [...] year of his age. Tribus annis
& dimidio potesta­  [...]e  [...]otitus est. Malmesb de gest [...]s Reg Ang l
2. c. [...]. through which wound fainting and falling from his Horse, he was
dragged to death by his foot intangled in the stirrop.

He raigned three years, and six (some say eight) moneths.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=28)

## 8\. CHAP. VIII.

### 8.1. ETHELRED.

FOx calls him Egelred or Elred.

The two and thirtieth Monarch of the English men.

He was a man neither for ward in action nor fortunate in proceedings, and
therefore, commonly called the unready.

He defiled the Font at his Baptism with his ordure;Cùm infans pri­mum s
[...]cro ad­motus esset fonti, alimon [...]ae excre­mento Baptiste­rium (unde
Constantinum etiam pessimum Imperatorem  [...]opronymum dictum fuisse
scribunt) faede [...] inquinavit; ex­clamavit exinde subito Danstans, Per
sanctam Mariam pu [...]r [...]iste ignavu [...] homo  [...]rit. Seldeni
Analect. Anglob [...]it. l. 2. c. 6\. Vide Malmesb. de gest [...] Reg. Aug. l.
2. c. 10. & Hunting. hist. l. 5. whereupon Dunstan being troubled in his mind,
by the Lord (said he) and his blessed mother, this childe shall prove a
sloathfull person.

He was half Brother to King Edward, who was treacherously murdered, and so
much lamented his Brothers murder, (saith Malmesbury l. 2. c. 10.) being then
but a childe of ten years old, and so detest­ed it, that his Mother Elfrida
falling there­with in a rage, took wax Candles (ha­ving nothing else at hand)
wherewith she scourged him so sore (well near till he swouned) that after the
same he could ne­ver [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=29) abide any wax
Candles to but [...] befor him.Ejus vitae cursus saev [...]s, in princi­pio,
miser in me­dio, turpis in ex­itu asseritur. Malm. l. 2. c. 10.

Of his Laws vide Lambardum de priscis Anglorum legibus.

The Danes grew upon him so fiercely,Ea nox par [...]ulo temporis mo­mento
vetustam Danorum do­minationem, diu (que) majorum virtute elabora­tum finivit
im­perium. Sed ne­que id postera nostris fortuna restituit. Ita Anglia
dominandi ju [...]ignavia perd [...]tum scelere recuperavit. Saxo-Grammat.
hist. Dan l. 10. Krantzi [...] hist. D n. l. 4. that he was forced to purchase
his peace from them, with great summes of money, to the undoing of his poor
Kingdome.

To put a period to this insufferable vass [...] ­lage, a bloudy massacre was
executed up­on them, by the Kings secret Commission on St Brices day; but such
bruitish courses never find a wished close.

He most unfortunately raigned thirty seven years and nine dayes.

### 8.2. Edmund, sirnamed Ironside.

The thirty third Monarch of the English men, and the third son to Ethelred.

He was of personage tall;Magni roboris & animo & corpore, & pr [...]p­ter hoc
ferreum  [...]atus nuncupa­tus Malmesb. de gestis Reg Aug. l. 2 c. 10. Pal
[...]d Vi [...]g. Ang hist. l 7. for courage, hardy; strong of limmes, and
well could endure the travels of Warre; whence some conceive that sirname was
given him; not for that he used to go alwayes in armour, as some would have
it.

He fought with Cnute a royall single du­  [...]ll, first on horseback, then on
[...]oot, in the Isle of Olerenge, or Olney (near Glocester) [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=29) in the midst of
Severn, in the view of both their Armies, with extraordinary courage, and
equall success,Vide Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2. c. 10. & Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 7. p. 132. till they were both quite tired, but neither of them
vanquished. At last upon Cnu [...]es motion they began to par­ly in a friendly
manner, and divided the Realm between them; Edmund enjoy­ing that part which
lay coasted upon France, and Canutus entred upon the rest.

But Ironside enjoyed not long his part; for Duke Edrick a very compound of
trea­sons, contrived the end of renowned Ed­mund, who being retired to a place
for na­tures necessity, he thrust from under the draught a sharp spear into
his body; and having thus murthered him, he cut off his head, presenting it to
Canutus, with this  [...]awning salutation, All hail▪ thou now sole Monarch of
England, for her [...] behold the head of thy Co-partner, which for thy sake I
have adventured to cut off.

Canutus though ambitious enough of So­veraignty, yet abhorring in his heart so
detestable a murther, and knowing that he who was faithless to his naturall
Sove­raign, would never be faithfull to him a stranger; commanded his head to
be di­vided from his shoulders, and placed upon the highest gate in London.

Mors hujus Principis sanè miserabilis fuit,Polyd. Virg. Ang hist. l. 7. tum
quod florem ejus aetatis rapuerit, tum quod totum regnum in praeceps dederit.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=30) His Raign
continued only seven moneths,Some say one year, and a few moneths. in which
time he fought seven or eight Bat­tels, in defence of his Countrey, People,
and their Liberties. By his untimely death, the English Saxon [...]Monarchy
was devolved to the Danes.

## 9\. CHAP. IX.  
The Danes Monarchs.

### 9.1. CANUTUS.

THe first Danish King raigning in Eng­land, and the thirty fourth Monarch of
the English men.

He is more truly called Cnute, Cui ex magnitudine rerum gestarum magni nomen
ac­cessit. Krantzii hist. Daniae l. 4.

A valiant and prudent Prince.

This Invader of Edmund Ironside's King­dome (the better to secure his Empire
a­gainst Prince Alfred and Edward, Edmunds Brothers) married Emma his Queen.

After this marriage, to establish his Mo­narchy over England, he endeavoured
by all means to reconcile the English to him.

1\. By advancing some of the English Nobility to places of honour and trust.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=30) 2\. By
granting to the English equall rights and priviledges with his Danes, in
con­sessu, in consilio, in praelio, and advancing them both alike.

3\. By favouring and inriching the En­glish Clergy, and Church-men, and
ma­nifesting extraordinary piety, devotion, bounty, in repairing, building,
endowing Monasteries and Churches throughout the Realm.

4\. By easing them of his Danish Forces.

5\. By ratifying all their former good old fundamentall Laws, rights,
liberties, privi­ledges, which they used, enjoyed under their Saxon Kings, by
enacting other good wholsome Laws, repealing all unjust Laws, and redressing
all exactions and grie­vances.

A company of flatterers which extolled his greatness and power to be
unmatchable,Vide Polyd. Virg. hist. Ang. l. 8. p. 135. Scians omnes habitantes
or­  [...]em, vanam & frivola [...] regum esse potentiam. Hunting. hist. l. 6.
he caused to place him in a chair, where the Sea ebbs and flowes at South-
hampton, that by the disobedience of the Tide, that would not stop at his
command, but pre­sumed to dash his royall garments, they might learn how low
man is at the highest, and not to applaud his fortune, but fear his fall.

He acknowledged God alone to be King of this great Element, because the Sea is
his, and he made it.

The flatterers of Alexander the great, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=31) made him believe
that he was the son of Iupiter; Erat Dominus totius Daciae, totius Angliae,
totius Norwa­giae, simul & Scotiae. Hun­ting. hist. l 6. Ea fuit optimi Regis
diligentia, ut optimis legi­bus patriam, ci­ves, milites, intra honestatis
prae­scriptum conti­neret. Tulit le­gem de singulis rebus, omni [...]q [...]e
praevi [...]it quae ab optimo legum latore sunt pro­videnda. Et quum inter
alia homicidio quoque paenam decreviss [...]t, accidit ut ip­sae  [...], is
praevaricator, occiso milite inve [...]iretur. Qu [...]mqu factum majesta­
[...]is reverentia  [...]u [...]ripot  [...]isset, militari se animadversiou
[...] substravit. Kran [...]zii hist▪ Dani [...] l. 4. Vide plura ibid. Leges
Canuti poste [...]ati tam gratae fuerunt sibiqu [...]am satutares Angl [...]
semper dux [...]runt, ut ad eas sirmite [...] observandas sub nomine Edward
[...] Regis (non quod ill [...] st [...]tu [...]rit, sed quod observaverit)
Principes reg [...]o inaugur [...]dos solio sepius, obstrinxerint juramento.
Seldeni Anal [...]ct. Anglobrit l. 2 c. 6. Ex Malmes [...]. l 2. c. 11. Nou
refero confessoris has leges ad certum regni cjus anuum aliquem, quod non ab
eo institutas c [...]ns [...]o [...]sed ex Antecossorum suoru [...] legth
[...]s (praesertim Regis Canuti▪ ut animadvertit Malm [...]sburius) ducta
plerunqu [...] essent & promulga [...]a. Innuit hoc idem ipsa­rum titulus in
quo decitur, Iucipiunt lege [...] S. Edward [...] Regis, quas in Anglia [...].
Id est observavit Non quas tulit, hoc est instituit. Spelman. de Concil. p 625
l. [...]ide Lambardum de priscis Anglorum legibus. but being one day sore
hurt, and seeing the blood gush out of his wounds, What think you of this?
(said he unto them) Is not this blood of a lively red hew, and meerly humane?

He was the greatest Prince of power that ever before him raigned over the
English people.

England, Denmarke, Norway, (some adde also part of Sweden) together with
Scotland, were wholly subject unto him.

Filiam suam Imperatori Romano cum ineffa­bilibus divitiis maritavit. Hunting.
hist. l. 6.

In a Parliament at Oxford he made good Laws, whereof these were some that
con­cern Religion.

First, For the celebration of divine ser­vice, it was ordained, that all
Ceremo­nies tending to the increase of reverence [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=31) and devotion,
should be used as need re­quired.

Secondly, That upon the Sabbath day, all publick Fairs, Markets, Synods,
Hunt­ings, and all secular actions, should be for­born, unless some urgent
necessity should require it.

Thirdly, That every Christian should thrice in the year receive the blessed
Sacra­ment of the Lords Supper.

Fourthly, That a married woman con­vict of adultery, should have her nose and
ears cut off.

Krantzius much extols him as the most famous of the Kings of Denmarke. Quo
nemo Da­mcorum Re­gum (tam e [...]si piura alii victor tis illustrave­rint)
splendidi [...]r fuit. Equidem sanctitate ac fortitudine in­st [...]ctiss
[...]mus, non minus reli­gionem quam r [...]gnum proferre curae h [...]huit.
Cra [...]zii hist. Daniae. l 4.

He was a just Prince in all, saving his tyranny against the two young Princes,
the sons of Edmond.

The lustre of this new erected Monarchy, had no sooner displayed its beams in
Canu­tus, but like an unthrifty Taper it began to glimmer in Harold, and
absolutely expired in Hard knute, who dying issueless, the current of royalty
ran back again into the channell of the Saxon bloud, which flow­ed in the
veins [...] of Edward, sirnamed the Con [...]essor. Philpot's Preface to his
Villare Cantianum.

After he had in great glory reigned about nineteen years,Some say twenty. he
deceased at Shafiesbury in the County of Dorset, St [...]. and was buried in
the Church of the old Monastery at Win­chester, [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=32) where Queen Emma
made her a­bode ever after.

### 9.2. Harold.

The second Danish King raigning in Eng­land, and the thirty fifth Monarch of
the Land.

He was called Hare-foot, by reason of his swiftness. Canutus had him by a
Concu­bine, a Shoomakers daughter.

This base son of Cnute, dispossessed his legitimate son Harde-Cnute of the
Crown of England, contrary to Cnutes will and con­tract; banished and spoiled
Queen Emma of her treasure and Jewels; oppressed the people with taxes; and
was soon cut off by death, without any issue.

He was an oppresser of his people, and vitious.

He raigned four years and four moneths.

He was neither in Warres so hardy,Malme [...]b. nor in Government so
prosperous, as his Fa­ther Canutus before him had been.

### 9.3. Harde-Canute.

The third Danish King that raigned in England, and the thirty sixth Monarch of
the English men.

For his noble courage he was called Har­de-Canutus.

(The first great Prince of the house of Bur­gundy, was Philip, sirnamed the
Hardy.)

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=32) His
recalling his Mother Emma, and half Brother Edward, and entertaining them
respectively, deserves commendation.

His Epicurism left an ill custome to all posterity.Dani (ut patria pace
loquar) s [...]e­candis certatim calicibus assue­ti Saxo-Gram. Hic tributum
in­ex [...]rabile & im­portabile An­gliae imposuit, ut classiariis su [...]
pers ingulas na­ves viginti mar­cas ex pollicit [...] pensitaret. Malm. l. 2
c, 12. Four times a day his Table must be covered, to invite men to
intempe­rancy; through which at a marriage, he is thought to have choaked
himself at Lam­beth, most rejoycing to be rid of him; in memory whereof Hock-
tide, a Feast of scorning or triumphing, was a long time continued after.

The English men learned of him their excessive gormandizing, and unmeasura­ble
filling of themselves with meates and drinkes.

At the death of this King, died all rule of the Danes in this Land, after they
had miserably afflicted the Kingdome for the space of two hundred and forty
yeares, though in Regall government, but only six and twenty, under these
three last Kings.

He raigned two yeares, lacking ten dayes.

The Danes ruled in this Land almost thirty yeares, and raged (without all
rule) about three hundred and fifty. Lam­berts Perambulation of Kent.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=33)

## 10\. CHAP. X.  
Edward the Confessor.

THe son of King Ethelred, Edwardus Cognomento, ob p [...]etatem Confessor.
Selden. Ianus Ang. the thirty se­venth Monarch of the English men.

He was born at Islip near unto Oxford, and tenderly educated by Queen Emma his
Mother, and after his Fathers death, for safety sent into France.

He was the last King of the Saxon race.

Such was the opinion conceived of his holiness of life, as that shortly after
his de­cease, he was canonized amongst the Saints, and named Edward the
Confes­sour.

To gain the more love of his Subjects at his first entrance,It was imposed by
his Father, and payed for forty years continuance, cut of the lands of all,
except only the Clergy. Danegeldum s [...]u Danagel­dum▪  [...]d est,
Tri­butum Dani­cum dicebatur. Selden. Mar [...] clausum.  [...] [...] c. 11.
vid plura. [...] Ibid. he remitted the taxe of forty thousand pounds, yearly
gathered by the name of Dane-gilt, so grevous to the Commons.

Fertur Edwardus Confessor (teste Ingul­pho) cùm se daemonem vidisse, super
dcervo Daingeldi exultantem protestatus esset, aspectuni­que exhorruisset;
collecium illico restitui jus­s [...]sse, & retento ne iota uno, feram
exactionem perpetuum relaxasse. Spelmanni Glossarium Danegaldi redditio
propter pyratas primitus sta­tuta est. Hoved. dnnal. pars posrerior▪ p. 603.
vide plura ibid.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=33) He
collected the Laws of his predecessors into a body, for the administration of
justice, which some say are the ground of our Common-Law, though the pleading
be altered, since the Norman conquest.

He found the Realm governed by three different Laws; the West-Saxon Law; the
Mereian Law; and the Dane Law. Out of these three Lawes, partly moderated, and
partly supplied, he composed one body of Law, commonly called St Ed­wards
Laws, which were of so great equi­ty, that when they were abrogated by the
Conquerour,A Treatise of union of the two Realms of England and Scotland▪ c.
[...]. and the Crown fell into con­troversie between Maud the Empress, and
King Stephen, the people alwayes inclined to favour that part, who put them in
fairest hope of restitution of those Laws. And afterwards in many Civil
dissensions, the greatest demand of the people appeareth to have been the
restitution of King Edwards Laws.

These Laws are partly Ecclesiasticall; partly Civill.

Lambard de priseis Anglorum legibus, mentions Leges boni Regis Edwardi, quas
Gulielmus Bastardus postea confirmavit.

In these Laws it is observable;

1\. That all capitall, corporall, pecuniaty punishments; fines for criminall
offence [...] ▪  [...] all reliefs, services, and duties to the King, are
reduced to a certainty, not le [...]t [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=34) arbitrary to the
King, his Justices, or o­ther Officers, for the Subjects greater liber­ty,
ease and security.

2\. That they protect, preserve the pos­sessions, priviledges, persons of the
Church and Clergy, from all invasion, injury, vio­lence, and disturbance.

The Raign of this King was very peace­able.

He first used the broad Seal.

His Wife was named Editha, the ver­tuous Daughter of an infamous Father, Earl
Godwin.

Sicut spina Rosam, genuit Godwinus Editham.

His unnaturall dealing with his good Mother Emma, and vertuous Wife Editha, in
whose breast there was a School of all li­berall Sciences, saith William
Malmesbury, cannot be excused. For upon a poor sur­mise of Incontinency, with
Alwin Bishop of Winchester, his Mother in his presence was put to theE
[...]ymon ipsius habe primum nominis Op  [...] priva­tiva est particula d
[...]el pars sonat, totum, expers quasi criminis. Purgationis autem sive
Ordalii g [...]us duplex, i [...]ncum & aqu [...]um. Dupl [...]i etiam forma
ign [...],  [...]simul [...]tus cum quis criminis aut nuda man [...] s
[...]rrum gestabat, aut pedibua m [...] ­dus ig [...]i [...]o [...] ve
[...]res premebit. Distinguebant porro juxta ferr [...] magnitudinem, quod si
uni [...]s esset pondo, simplex; si trium, triplex Ordalium nominabant. Seld.
Analect Auglebrit. l 2. c. 8. Vide ejus Janum Anglorum. l 2. p 253, 254, 255,
256. Vedesis Glossarium annexum legibus Henrici primi apud Lam­ba [...] lu
[...] de pr [...]s [...] Anglorum legibus. See Dr. Hackwels Apology of Gods p
[...]vidence in the government of the world. l. 4. c. 2. Sect. 5 against the
Ordeal Laws. Ordalium, to pass blind­folded [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=34) between nine
glowing Coulters, which she did without hurt.

His refusing carnall copulation with his Queen,Sr Iohn Hay­ward alleadg­eth
two other causes, impo­tency of na­ture, and suspi­cion against her. either
out of a vowed virginity, as most Historians conclude; or out of a
de­testation of Earl Godwins trayterous race, quod Rex religiosus de genere
proditoris, haere­des, qui sibi succederent, corrupto semine regio, noluerit p
[...]r [...]ari, as Ingulphus, Matthew Westminster, and others record; whereby
he exposed the Kingdome for a prey, to the ambitious pretenders aspiring after
it.

The King after this craved mercy and pardon from his Mother, for the infamy
and injury done unto her, for which he was disciplined and whipped by his
Mo­ther, and all the Bishops there present.

The first curing the Kings Evil, is refer­red to him, and thence to have
continued to his successors.

Solebat Rex Edwardus divinitus solo tactu sanare strumosos, hoc est, strumam
patientes. Est enim srruma morbus, quem Itali scrophula [...] vulgo vocant, à
scrophis, quae ea mala scabie afflictantur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 8.

Struma gutturis vitium, quod nonnulli scro­phulam dicunt, solo tactu in quam
plurimis sa­nasse dicitur. Lil. Ang. Reg. Chronicon.

He raigned twenty three years, and six moneths, and died in the Painted
Chamber at Westminster.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=35) He built
St Peters Church in Westminster, Ediderat à  [...]un­damentis Ba [...]di­cam
seu Ecclesi­a [...] S. Petri Westmonasterii, supra modum saeculi augustissim
[...]m; qua nostra­tibus etiam exemplum dedit condendi Ecclesias in formam
Crucis Christi pas­sioualis, id est, productiore radio inferiori. Spelm. de
Concil p.  [...]36. and was there buried.

In hoc Rege linea Regum Angliae defecit,Matth. Paris. hist. Ang. p. 2. quae à
Cerdicio primo Westsaxonum Rege, ex Anglis, quingentis & septuaginta uno
annis, non legitur interrupta, praeter paucos Danos, qui peccatis exigentibus
gentis Anglorum, ali­quandiu regnaverunt.

### 10.1. Harold.

The second of that name,Earl Godwin Father to King Harold, having procu­red
the un­timely death of Alfred Bro­ther to King Edward the Confessor, deni­ed
is continu­ally with so­lemn oathes; and especially once when he dined with
the King. At what time occasion being offered to speak of that matter, he took
a piec [...] of broad, and prayed to God that the same might be his last, if
he were any way consenting or privy thereto; and so eating the bread, was
choaked therewith, and died there in the Kings presence. Henry Hunting hist.
l. 6. Ingulphus hist. Ang. 153. Polyd. Virg Ang. hist the thirty eighth
Monarch of the English men.

Son of Earl Goodwin, a man of excel­lent parts, and approved valour.

He driven by tempest into Normandy, was affianced to Adelizi, the Dukes fifth
Daughter. He covenanted with the Duke to make him successor to Edward, in the
Kingdome of England.

Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments vol. 1\. Mr. Cambden in his Brittannia;
Holinshed; Sir Iohn Hayward; Sir Richard Baker incline to this opinion, that
Harold by his might, power, craft, policy, usurped and invaded [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=35) the Crown
without any right, against his Oath.

After Edwards death, the Duke sent to him to put him in mind of his Covenant
and Oath; but Harold replied, that this Oath being constrained, did no way
binde. The Duke William landing in Sussex, to cut off all occasion of return,
he fired his own Fleet, and upon the shore erected a fortress, to be if need
were a retiring place for his Souldiers.

Harold and he fighting seven miles from Hastings in Sussex, The Archers of the
Nor­mans send forth their ar­rows on every side as thick as hail; which kind
of fight, as it was unto the Engl [...]sh m [...]n strange, so it was unto
them no less terrible. Milles. Harold was slain, and his Army vanquished. His
overthrow was a just punishment of God upon him, for his perjury.

He raigned but nine moneths, and nine dayes.

In him was compleated the period of the Saxons Empire in Brittain, after they
had continued from their first erected Kingdome by Hengis [...] in Kent, the
space of six hun­dred and ten years, without any interrup­tion, saving the
small inter-Raigns of three Danish Kings.

The Normans were a mi [...] people of Nor­vegians, Walsingham History is
cal­led Hypodigma Neustriae. Suevians, and Danes. That Pro­vince in France was
then called Neustria, and now Normandy, of the name Norman, given unto
them,Ayscis. because they came out of the North parts.

The Normans laboured by all means to [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=36) supplant the
English, Haec gen [...] á Da­cia oriunda, fe­rox statim tanto reg [...]o
potita mo­res optimos, leges sanctissimas di­vina humanaque vertere, ac
deni­que genus ipsum A [...]g [...]icum per­dere conata est. Polyd. Virg. Aug.
hist. Proaem. in l. 9. and to plant their own language amongst us; and for
that purpose, they both gave us the Lawes, and all manner of pastimes, in the
French tongue; as he that will peruse the Laws of the Conquerour, and consider
the terms of Hawking, Hunting, Tenice, Dice-play, and other disports, shall
easily perceive. Lamb's Perambulation of Kent.

## 11\. CHAP. XI.  
WILLIAM the first, sirnamed the Conqueror.

RObert Duke of Normandy, the sixth in descent from Rollo, riding through
Falais a Town in Normandy, espied certain young persons dancing near the way.
And as he stayed to view a while the manner of their disport, he fixed his eye
especially up­on a certain Damsell named Arlotte; of mean birth, a Skinners
Daughter, who there danced among the rest. The frame and comely carriage of
her body; the na­turall beauty and graces of her counte­nance; the simplicity
of her rurall both [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=36) behaviour and
attire, pleased him so well, that the same night he procured her to be brought
to his lodging, where he begat of her a Son, who afterward was named Wil­liam.
The English afterwards adding an aspiration to her name, (according to the
naturall manner of their pronouncing) termed every unchast Woman, Harlot.

He seized the Crown of England, Erat sapiens, sed astutus; lo­cuples, sed
cupi­dus; gloriosas, sed famae dedi­tus; eras humilis, Deo servienti­bus;
durus, sibi resist [...]ntibus. Huntington. hist. l 6. Alu [...] non habebat
Gallia, qui talis praelicaretur e­ques & arma tus. Spectaculum erat
delectabile simul ac terribile, eum cernere fr [...]ua mode­rantem, ense
decorum, clypeo sulgentem, & galea teloque minitantem. Gesta Gulielmi Ducis
Normannorum à Gulielmo [...]ctaviensi Lexoviorum Archidiacono. not as
conquered, but by pretence of gift or adop­tion, aided and confirmed by
nearness of bloud; and so the Saxon Laws formerly in force, could not but
continue; and such of them as are now abrogated, were not at all abrogated by
his conquest; but either by the Parliaments, or Ordinances of his time, and of
his successours; or else by non-usage, or contrary custome. Mr. Sel­dens
review of his History of Tythes, c. 8\. see more there.

He never made the least pretence,Mr. Pryns sea­sonable, legall, and
historicall vindication of the fundamen­tall Liberties, Rights, Laws of
England, p. 382, 383. See more there. claim, or title to the Crown and Realm
of England, only as an absolute Conquerour of the Na­tion; but meerly by
title, as their true and lawfull King, by designation, adoption, and
cognation, seconded with the Nobles, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=37) Prelates,See Sir
Iohn Hayward in the life of King William the first, p.  [...]9, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36▪ and Master Bacons first part of his hi­storicall dis­course of the
uniformity of the Govern­ment of Eng­land, c. 44, 45, 46▪ 55, 56, and
Carpenters Geog. l. 2. c. 14. p. 238. Verste­g [...]ns Antiquities, c. 6. p.
171, 172. Clergy, and peoples unanimous election. And although it be true,
that this Duke ejected Harold, and got actuall possession of the Throne and
Kingdome from him by the sword; as did Au [...]elius Ambrosius; and others
before; and King Henry the fourth; Edward the fourth; and Henry the seventh;
yet that neither did, nor could make him a King by conquest only, no more than
these other Princes; seeing the end of this Warre was not against the whole
English Nation, the greatest part whereof abetted his interest; but only
a­gainst the unjust usurper and intruder, King Harold, and his adherents.

Although the Laws of this Kingdome,It was a gene­rall custome at that time in
France, that Bastards did succeed, even in dignities of highest condi
[...]ion, no otherwise than children lawfully begotten. Sir Iohn Hayward in
the life of William the first, p. 4 5. He hath seven examples there of
Bastards lawfull succession It is probable (saith the same Hayward) that this
u [...]e was grounded upon often experience, that Bastards (as begotten in the
highest heat and strength of affection, have many times been men of ex­cellent
proof, both in courage, and in understanding.  [...]his was verified in
Hercules, Alexander the great, Romulus,  [...], King Arthur; in Ho­mer,
Demosthenes, Bartholus, Gratian,  [...] Peter Comestor. See Peacham▪ compleat
Gentleman c. 1. p 9.  [...] al [...]cubi le [...]sse, pris [...]os
septentrionales populos etiam spurios  [...] in succession [...]m; nec ill
[...]us igitur tituli, gloriosum Angliae subactorem [...] Normann [...]m pu
[...]sse videtur, qui Epistolam (ut alias plur [...]s) ad Alanum Brittaniae
min [...]ris comitem, sic orditur Ego Wilielmus Cog [...]n [...]m [...]nto
Bastardus. Henrici Spelmanni Glossarium. and of all other Civill States at
this day, ex­clude [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=37) Bastards
(without a subsequent legi­timation) from inheritance; yet by the Laws of
Norway, a Princes Son gotten on a Concubine bond or free, was equally
inhe­ritable, as any other born in wedlock; which was I believe no small
reason, why he stood at first so much for the Laws of Norway to have been
generally received in this Kingdome. And some stories also say, that Arlet, or
Arlee, (as she is sometimes written) was to him a good while vice ux­or is. If
she were so his Concubine (be­tween whom and a wife, the old Imperia­lists
make no other difference but honour and dignity; and by them also some kind of
inheritance is allowed to such Bastards, as are naturales liberi, that is
gotten on Con­cubines) it was much more reasonable that her son should be
reputed as legitimate, than that the son of every single woman, bond or free,
whether Concubine or no, should be so, as those of Norway allow. Mr. Seldens
review of his History of Tythes.Vide Polyd. Virg. Aug. hist. l. 8.

First landing at Pems [...]y in Sussex, he fell down, stumbling as he came out
of his Ship.Sir Iohn Hay­ward in the life of William the first, re­ports this
jest somewhat o­therwise, though he a­gree in the substance. O Dux Angliam
tenes (said one of his Knights) Rex futurus, (so Matthew Paris) and espying
that he had brought up sand and earth in his hand, added, Yea and you have
taken Livery and Seisin of the Conu­trey. Seldens Titles of honour in 4. to p.
34.

When he had landed his Forces, he for­tified [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=38) a piece of
ground with strong trench­es, and caused all his Ships to be set on fire,
leaving to his Souldiers no hope to save themselves, but only by victory.

After this he published the causes of his coming in Arms; to challenge the
King­dome of England, given to him by his Cou­sin King Edward, the last
lawfull possessor at that time thereof. And to revenge the death of his Cousin
Alfred, Brother to the same King Edward, cruelly and deceitfully slain by Earl
Goodwin, and his adherents.

In the Battell between King Harold and him,The arrow was first brought into
this Land by the Normans. Hollinshed and Sir Iohn Hay­ward in Willi­am the
first. at the last Hareld was struck with an arrow through the left eye into
his brains, of which wound he presently died.

He was buried by his Mother at Walsham Cross, within the Monastery which he
had founded.

Ibi Gulielmus perblandé ac perbenigné locu­tus,As long Bows were the wea­pons
with which this King conque­red Eng­land; so they were the wea­pons with which
England under after-Kings con­quered France; as if it were not enough for us
to beat them, unless we did beat them with their own weapons. Sir Richard
Baker. Subjectis humilis apparebat & facilis, inexorabilis erat rebellibus.
Matth. Paris hist. Ang. simulque magnifica pollicitus, ab omnibus, quanquam
non pari alacritate, diem festum celebrantibus, rex declaratur. Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 9.

Where this Battell was fought, the Con­querour after founded Battail-Abbey.

He was crowned at Westminster, by Al­dred Archbishop of Yorke, anno Dom. 1066.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=38) His
strength was such,Daniels Histo­ry. that few men could draw his Bow; and being
about fifty of his age, when he subdued this King­dome, it seems by his
continuall actions, he felt not the weight of years upon him, till his last
year.

He enclosed new-Forrest in Hamshire, Vide Henrici Spelmanni Glossarium. p▪
287. for which he dispeopled Villages and Towns, about the space of thirty
miles, to make a desert for Beasts of chase; in which place afterward two of
his sons, Richard and William, ended their lives; Richard by a fall from his
Horse; and William by the stroke of an arrow. The Kings great de­light in
hunting was made the pretence of this Forrest; but the true end was rather to
make a free place of footing for his Nor­mans, and other friends out of
France, in case any great revolt should be made.

One Herlowin a Nobleman in Normandy, married his Mother Arlotte, and had by
her a son named Hugh Lupus, to whom he gave the Earldome of Chester, to hold
of him as freely by his sword, as himself held England by his Crown; by vertue
of which Cran [...], the said Hugh ordained under him four Barons; such an
honour, as no Sub­ject before or since, ever enjoyed the like.

Because conspiracies are commonly con­trived in the night, he commanded that
in all Towns and Villages, a Bell should be rung in the evening, at eight of
the Clock, [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=39) called Curfu-
Bell;Curfu, aliter Corerfu, à Gal. Couvrir, tege re; feu ignis La­tine,
Ignitagi­um. Spelmanni Glossartum. Vt ferociam po­puli ad otiumper-ducere
[...], omnibus  [...] ademit, statuit que ut quisque pater familias vesperi▪
circiter horam octavam, post meri­diem, tecto ciueribus igne, dormitum tret; &
ad ad signum vicat [...]m dari voluit, per campanas, it quot etiam nunc
servatur, & Normannice vulgo dicitur, Coverfu. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist l. 9.
and that in every house they should then put forth their fire and lights, and
go to bed; which custome of ringing a Bell at that hour, in many places is
still observed.

William the first, whom pride, craft, profit swayd, Did England, but his
conscience first invade. Dr. Holiday his Survey of the world. Book 9.

By the counsell of Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury; and of Eglesme Abbot of
St. Au­gustines, (who at that time were chief go­verners of Kent) as the King
was riding towards Dover, at Swanescombe, two miles from Graveseud, the
Kentish men came to­wards him armed; and bearing boughs in ther hands, as if
it had been a moving wood, they enclosed him upon the sudden, and with a firm
countenance, but words well tempered with modesty and res [...]ect, they
demanded of him the use of their ancient Liberties and Laws; that in other
matters they would yeeld obedience to him; that without this they desired not
to live. The King yeelded to them for the present; know­ing right well, that
the generall Customes and Laws of the residue of the Realm, would in short
time overflow these particular pla­ces. [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=39) So pledges being
given on both sides, they conducted him to Rochester, and yeelded the County
of Kent, and the Castle of Dover into his power.

He took the review and account of all the Towns and land in England. Lamberts
Ar­cheion. p. 24. Monumentum totius Britran­niae, non dico antiquissimum, sed
absque con­troversia augu­stissimum, duo­bus magnis vo­luminibus, An­gliae
descriptio­nem continens. This Book was called the Roll of Winton, be­cause it
was kept in the City of Winchester. By the English it was called Doomes-day
Book; either by reason of the generality thereof; or else corruptly instead of
Domus Dei Book, because it was layed in the Church of Winchester, in a place
called Do­mus Dei.

According to this Roll taxations were imposed;Aliàs Liber ju­diciarius; aliàs
censuali [...] An­gliae; aliàs An­gliae noticia, & lustratio; inter­dum
Rotulus Regis & (à si­militudine anti­quioris) Rotu­lus Wintoniae, & Liber
Win­toniae nuncupa­tum Spelmanni Glossarium. Vi­de plura ibid. & [...]
praefat. ad Eadmeri hi­storiam. sometimes two shillings, and sometimes six
shillings upon every Hide of land, (a Hide containing twenty Acres) besides
ordinary provision for his house. Vide Seldeni Analecta Anglobrit, l. 2. c.
4\. & Spelmanni Glossarium, p. 352.

He was too covetous.

Sola est do qua merito culpetur pecuniae cupi­ditas, quam undecunque captatis
occasionibus, nihil unquam pensi habuit, quin corroderet, faceret, diceret
nonnulla, & pene omnia, tan­ta majestate indigniora, ubi spes nummi
efful­sisset. Malmesb. de Wilielmo primo. l. 3.

He would often swear by Gods resur­rection,Sir Iohn Hay­ward in his life. p.
23. & [...]14. and his brightness.

Talia per resurrectionem, & splendor [...] Dei pronuncians, quod solere [...]
ex industria [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=40) talia sacramenta
facere, quae ipso habitu oris terrificum quiddam auditorum memibus
inso­narent. Malmesb. de Wilielmo primo.

He bare such reverence to Lanfrancke, Archbishop of Canterbury, that he seemed
to stand at his directions.

Malmesbury l. 4. de Wilielmo secundo, saith, Diu dubitavit mundus, quo tandem
vergeret, quo se inclinaret indoles ejus. Inter initia vivente Lanfranco
Archiepiscopo ab om­ni crimine abhorrebat, ut unicum fore Regum speculum
speraretur. Quo defuncto aliquan­diu varium se praestitit aequali lance
vitiorum atque virtutum.

He respected Aldred Archbishop of York, by whom he had been crowned King of
England, as his Father. At a time upon the repulse of a certain suit, the
Archbi­shop brake forth into discontentment, ex­postulated sharply against the
King, and in a humorous heat offered to depart.Sir Iohn Hay­ward. But the King
stayed him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised satisfaction
in the best manner▪ that he could. The Nobility which were present, put the
Archbishop in minde, that he should cause the King to arise; nay (answered the
Archbishop) let him alone; let him still abide at St. Peters feet. So with
much ado he was appeased, and entreated to accept his suit.

By reason of sickness he kept his chamber [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=40) a long time;
whereat the French King scof­fing, said, The King of England lyeth long in
Childbed. Cardinal Per­ron the learned French man, was a fat cor­pulent man,
and had a great belly. A French Lady to quip him, said thus to him, Mouasieur
qua [...]d vous vous accoucherez? To whom he replyed, Quand vou [...] s
[...]ras sage femme. Which when it was reported unto King William, he
answered, When I am Churched, there shall be a thousand lights in France,
(alluding to the lights that Wo­men used to bear, when they were Church­ed)
and that he performed within few dayes after, wasting the French Frontiers
with fire and sword. Malmesb. de Wili­elmo primo. l. 4.

Some of the Earls conspiring against him; he perceiving his estate to be now
brought into no small danger, and loath to put all upon the hazard and fortune
of a Battell, against men so well provided, and with desperation armed, as a
man perplexed, entred into consultation with L [...]nfrancke, then Archbishop
of Canterbury, what course were now best for him to take, for the ap­peasing
of these so great and dangerous troubles. By whose advice he came to a parl
with the English Nobility, where after much reasoning and debating of the
matter, a peace was at length concluded and agreed upon; so that the English
men laying down their Arms, the Conquerour in the presence of the Archbishop
Lanfrancke, and others, took a solemn Oath upon the holy Evangelists, and all
the reliques of the Churches of St. Albans, from thence forth to observe and
keep the good and ancient [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=41) Laws of the
Realm, which the noble Kings of England his Predecessors had before made and
ordained; but especially those of St. Edwar [...], of all others supposed to
be most equall and indifferent, for the gene [...]all good of the people.

He courteously received, and honoura­bly maintained Edgar Etheling in his
Court, allowing him a pound weight of silver eve­ry day to spend; a rare
example of a vi­ctorious Conqueror, shewed upon a man so unconstant,Speed.
(who twice had broken his Oath of fidelity) and dangerous to be so near unto
his person, being as he was, a competitor of his Crown.

During all his Raign,Silent l [...]gos in­ter arma. either the sword was not
put up into the scabbard;Lambards Ar­  [...]tion▪ or if it were, the hand was
alwayes upon the hilt, ready to draw it. So unwilling on the one part were the
English men to bear the yoke; and so haughty on the other part were the Norman
Conquerors, that to be called an English man, was in their eyes a great
con­cumely; insomuch as it made some of the more light-conceited of the
English, to seek to better their esteem, by imitating the Normans both in
apparrell and language; which among the graver sort bred the
Pro­verb,Verstegans Antiq. c. 6. p. 182. that Jack would be a Gentleman, if he
could speak French.

He favoured learned men, and drew out of Italy, Lanfrancke, Anselme, Durand,
[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=41) Trahern,
Pueritiam a [...] spem regui lite­ris municbat, subinde patre quoque audiento
jactare Prover­bium solitus; Rex illitera­tus, Asinus co­ronatus. Mal­mesb. de
Hen­rico primo. l 5. and divers others famous at that time, for learning and
piety.

'Tis better with William Hunter, than with William the Conqueror. 'Tis better
to have a name in the Book of Martyrs, than in the Book of Chronicles. Mr.
Nor­tons life of Mr. Iohn Cotton.

Perceiving his own defects in some points for want of learning, he did exhort
his children oftentimes to learning with this saying, An unlearned Prince is a
crown­ed Ass; which speech took great impression in his son Henry.

This is one speciall honour attributed unto him, that from him we begin the
Computation of our Kings of England.

From the Normans, bearing of Armes began amongst us.

Ab eo posteriores series Regum inchoavere, perinde acsi de integro ille regnum
ipsum institu [...] ­isset, Regesque qui se [...]uti sunt, usi similiter sunt,
ut nunc utuntur, insignibus Regiis, quae dedisset. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l.
9.

Nostrates, priusquam in Angliam penetras­set Wilielmus primus, hunc armorum
cul­tum à Normannis videntur accepisse. Spel­manni Aspilegia. p. 40. Vide
etiam p. 44.

He ended his life upon the ninth day of September, One and twenty years and
one moneth saith Fox. Seventy four saith Po­lyd. Virgil. full both of honour
and of age, when he had raigned twenty years, eight moneths, and sixteen
dayes, in the three­score and fourth year of his age.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=42) His dead
body was not only abandoned,Qua enim con­ditio sortis hu­manae non mone­at ad
pictatem, cùm auditum su [...]rit Regem istum qui tantae potentiae in vitâ suâ
extitit, ut in tota Anglia, in tota Normannia, in tota Cinomanensi patria, ne
[...]o contra imperium ejus ma­num movere auderet. Mox ut in terram spiritum
exhalaturus, positus est, ab om­ni homine, sicut accepimus, uno solo duntaxat
serviente excepto, derelictum cada­ver ejus sine omni pompa per Sequanam na
[...]cella delatum, & cum scpeliri debe­ret, ipsam terram sepulturae illius à
quodam rustico calumniatam, qui eam he­reditario jure reclamans, conquestus
est illam sibi jam olim ab codem injuria fuisse ablatam. E [...]dmeri historia
novorum. Vi [...] Ma [...]mesb. & Polyd. Virg. de Wilielmo primo. but left
almost naked upon the ground.

Being conveyed from Roan (where he died) to Cane, one Fitz Arthur denied the
King buriall in the Abbey-Church, (as ground which was wrongfully taken by the
King from his Father) till he had a hundred pounds paid him for it.

Mr. Ienkyn in his Exposition of the E­pistle of Iude, vers. 4. p. 351. saith,
Of our twenty five Monarchs since the Conquest, thirteen (taking in three who
are thought to be poysoned) are said to have had vio­lent and untimely deaths.

## 12\. CHAP. XII.  
K. William the second, sir­named Rufus; or the Red.

KIng William the first took to wife Ma­tilde, daughter to Baldwin, Earl of
[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=42) Flanders,
a man for his wisdome and pow­er, both reverenced and feared even of Kings;
but because she was his Cousin-germane, he was for his marriage excom­municate
by his own Uncle Mauger, Arch­bishop of Roan. Hereupon he sued to Pope Victor,
and obtained of him a dispensation; and afterwards so wrought, that by a
pro­vinciall Counsell his Uncle Mauger▪ was de­prived of his dignity.

This King had by his Wife four sons, Robert, Richard, William and Henry.

Robert his eldest son, sirnamed Court­cuise Or Courthos [...], of his short
Hose, or Br [...]eches. Or Courtois, of his courteous be­haviour. Sir Iobn
Hay­wards Lives of the three Nor­man Kings of England, p. 125. & 222., by
reason of the shortness of his thighs, succeeded him in the Duchy of
Nor­mandy. He was a man of exceeding ho­nourable courage and spirit, for which
cause he was so esteemed by the Christian Princes, in the great Warre against
the Sa­racens, that when they had subdued the Ci­ty and Territory of
Hierusalem, they offer­ed the Kingdome thereof first unto him.

The King of England to whom the Schola Salernitana was dedicated,See Renasus
Morean in his Prol [...]gomena to his learned A­nimadversions, by which he
hath illustrated that work. was this Robert, eldest son of the Duke of
Normandy, which begins thus, Anglorum Regi scribit▪ Schola tota Salerni; and
it seems to be written, when this Robert returned out of Palestina into
Apulia; and by reason of a Fistula from his poysoned wound, he had consulted
with the School of Salerne concerning it, and preserving his health. Neither
doth [[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=43) that
hinder that this Book is written to the King of England; Vossius de
Philosophia. c. 12. (but Robert never raigned here) for the Kingdome of right
belonged to him,Joannes de Me [...]iolano me­dicus nomine  [...]oll [...]gii
Scholae Salernitanae conscrip [...]i li­brum cui titulus Schola Salerni­tana.
Id ibid. which his younger Brother William Rufus possessed in his absence, and
for re­covering of that he warred with his Bro­ther, but was overcome by him.

Richard had raised the good expectation of many, as well by his comely
counte­nance and behaviour, as by his lively and generous spirit. But he died
young by mis­adventure,By a fall from his Horse. as he was hunting within the
New-Forrest, before he had made experi­ment of his worth. He was buried at
Win­chester, with this inscription, Hic jacet Ri­chardus, filius Wilielmi
senioris, Berniae Dux.

To Henry the King gave at the time of his death, five thousand pounds out of
his treasure; but gave him neither dignity nor Lands, foretelling that he
should enjoy the honour of both his Brothers in time, and far excell them both
in dominion and pow­er. He succeeded his Brother William in the Kingdome of
England, and wrested Nor­mandy out of the possession of Robert.

When William the first drew near his end,De [...]raudaverat Gulielmus pa­ter
Robertum regno Angliae, partim non oblitus ejus in se impietatis &
contumaciae, partim veritus, si ille id obtineret, ne ejus facilitas qua
praeditus erat, ad defectionem paratiores non redderet Anglos, quos ipse
laeserat; quapropter rem tutiore loco fore putàvit, si Rufo, cujus jampridem
morum pariter acerbitatem atque imma­nitatem naturae cognitam habucrat,
committeretur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 10. he commended the Kingdome of
Eng­land [[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=43)
to his second son William, with many blessings, admonitions, and prayers for
his prosperous success. He dispatched him un­to England, with Letters under
his own Seal, to Lan [...]rancke then Archbishop of Can­terbury, whose
authority was great with the Clergy, and people of the Realm.Sir Iohn
Hay­ward. It was conjectured by some, that the King was guided in this choice,
no less by his judgment, then by his affection, because he esteemed the fierce
disposition of his son William, more fit to govern a people not well setled in
subjection, then the flexible and mild nature of his eldest son Robert.

Cambden Brittarnia in Glocester-shire. See more there of him. saith he was
berest of the Kingdome of England, because he was born before his Father was
King.

Milles gives two reasons,He seems to have followed the example of Iacob, who
gave to his younger son Ioseph the land which he had taken with his Sword and
his Bow. Besides in the rebellion of his son Ro­bert, this son stood firmly
for him, and in his quarrell hazarded his life. Sir Richard Baker. why the
Con­querour preferred his younger son unto the Kingdome, before his eldest.

Partly for his disloyalty and disobedi­ence; and partly doubting lest through
the facility of his nature, he should give oc­casion unto the English men, to
take heart unto them, and to rebell against him; whereas William his younger
Brother was a man of more rough and harsh nature, and therefore fitter (as his
Father thought) to bear rule and command over a warlike and new conquered
people.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=44) Sir Iohn
Hayward in the life of William the second, discusseth that controversie,
whe­ther Kings may prefer younger sons, and quite disinherit elder sons of the
Kingdome, and resolves it negatively.

The Glossographer upon the Decrees no­teth, that the son of a King may be
called King during the life of his Father,Robert was then absent in Germany.
as wanting nothing but administration.

A little before his Fathers death William journeyed toward England,
Incomparabilis proculdubio nostro tempore princeps; si non  [...]um magnitudo
patris obru [...]re [...], nec ejus juventu­tem fata praeci­pitassent, ne per
[...] maturio­rem aboleret  [...]r­rores  [...]centia po­testatis, & im­petus
juvenili contractos Mal­mesb. de Wili­elmo secundo. l. 4. and quickly arrived
at the Port called Whitesand, where he received the first report of his
Fathers death. Hereupon with all speed he posted to Lanfrancke, delivered his
Fathers Let­ters, and forthwith was declared King; and not long after was
crowned at West­minster.

His hair was deeply yellow; by reason whereof he was called Rufus, say Polyd.
Vir­gil, and others.

He doubted of some points of Religion then professed, namely, of praying to
Saints, worshipping of reliques, and such like.

He endeavoured to abate the tumorous greatness of the Clergy at that time,He
is therefore ill spoken of by Clergy men. He claimed the investitute of
Prelates to be his right. He forbad appeals to Rome. and attributed not so
much to the See of Rome, as divers Kings before him had done.

He restrained his Subjects from going to Rome, and withheld the annuall
payment of Peter-pence, and was often heard to say, [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=44) that they follow
not the trace of St. Peter; they greedily gape after gifts and rewards, they
re­tain not his power, whose piety▪ they do not imi­tate.

Albeit he promised to the English, whilest his first fears and jealousies
continu­ed, that they should enjoy free liberty of hunting; yet did he
afterwards so severely restrain it, that the penalty for killing a Deer was
death.

During Lanfranckes life, he so lived, that he might have been a mirrour of
Princes; though afterwards he gave himself to sen­suall lust and covetousness.
Matthew Paris condemns him much.

It is reported, that when his Chamber­lain upon a certain morning, brought him
a new pair of Hose, the King demanded what they cost; and the Chamberlain
an­swered, three shillings; hereat the King grew impatient, and said, What
heavy beast? dost thou take these to be convenient Hose for a King? Away
beggar, Malmesb. and bring me other of a better price. Then the Chamberlain
de­parted, and brought a far worse pair of Hose, (for a better could not at
that time be found) and told the King that they cost a mark. The King not only
allowed them for fine enough, but commended them al­so as exceeding fit.

He walled the City of London, and built the great Hall at Westminster, which
is two [[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=45)
hundred seventy foot in length,Vnum adificium & ipsum per maximum do­mum in
Londoniâ i [...]c [...]pit, & perfecit, non parcens expensis dummodo
libera­litatis suae magnificentiam exhiberet. Malmesb. and seven­ty four foot
in breadth.

He set forth a Proclamation, that none should go out of the Realm without his
li­cense, by which he drew much money from many. From thence the custome or
Law of Ne exeas Regno, seems to have ta­ken its beginning.

His usuall Oath was by St. Lukes face. Malmesb.

Coming to imbarque at Dartmouth, the Mariners told him the weather was rough,
and there was no passing without imminent danger. Tush, Daniels Histo­ry. said
he, set forward, I ne­ver yet heard of King that was drowned.

Answerable to that of Iulius Caesar, Malmesb. which enforced a poor Pilot in
the like case to launch forth, and in the rage of the storm comforted him with
saying, Caesarem & Caesaris fortunam ve [...]is.

Charles the fifth, in the Battell of Tunis, when he was advised by the
Marquess of Guasto to retire his person, when the great Ordnance began to
play, said, Marquess, thou never heardst that an Emperour was slain with a
great shot.

Sir Walter Tyrell aiming at the Deer (where the King was hunting, within the
New-Forrest) with an Arrow; and loose­ing [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=45) his Bow, either
too carelesly at the Deer,Veterum pleri­que traditur transsossum fuis­se Regem
sagit­ta, quam in fera­rum vivario, quod novam Forestam dici­mus, jactu
infoe­lici collimara [...] Gualterus Ty­rellus, Gallus, idque est
receptissimum. Scd accuratius multo quam caeteri, singularia omnia, quae
miseram Regis caedem & Tyrelli jactum fatalem attinent, narrat Ordericus
Vitalis in hist. Eccles l. 10. p. 783. Seldeni notae ad Eadmerum. Vide
Malmesb, de Wilielmo secundo. l 4. or too steadily at the king, saith Polydore
Virgil, struck him therewith full upon the brest. The King having so re­ceived
the wound, gave forth a heavy groan, and presently fell down dead. So much of
the Arrow as was without his bo­dy, was found broken, whether with his hand,
or by his fall, it is not certainly known.

He raigned in great variety of opinion with his Subjects, (some applauding his
vertues, others aggravating his vices) twelve yeares, eleven moneths, wanting
eight dayes, and was at his death forty and three years old. Sir Iohn Hayward
in his life. p. 219.

## 13\. CHAP. XIII.  
King Henry the first, sirna­med Beauclerke.

HE apprehending the opportunity of Duke Roberts absence, did forthwith [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=46) seize upon the
treasure of the King,Henricus ob singularem, quae pro regio fuit no­mine,
eruditio­nem Bellocleri­cus dictus. Sel­deni Ianu [...] An­glorum. Vide e­jus
dissert. ad c.  [...]. Henricus Rex urbanitate, comitate, affabi­litate,
lenitate, justitia, & for­titudine, omnes sui temporis Principes anteire
putabatur. and thereby also upon his State, and so was crowned at Westminster,
by Maurice Bishop of London, because Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury was then
in exile.

For his learning he was called Beauclerke, fair Clerk, or fine Scholar,
brought up in the study of the liberall Arts at Cam­bridge.

He was sirnamed Leo justitiae in all Sto­ries; one of the most noble Princes
that e­ver raigned in this Realm. Sir Thomas E­liots Governour.

Cambden urgeth this against him,Huc etiam acces sit, quod o [...] ni
li­terarum genere Cantabridgiae, Lutetiaeque instructus à pu­eritia ita
profe­cit,  [...]ut Wiliel­mus ejus pater eum Episcopali mu [...]ri aptum
censuerit. Qui doct [...]nae praesidio & saluberrim [...]s multas le­ges ipse
condidit, & Papales technas saepe offecit, & ca [...]è vitavit, ut si [...]cam
op­portunitatem, quam Henricus octavus nactus fuisset, & Papalem
jurisdictionem exterminasset, & praefractum, ac à Papa concitatum in se
clerum, in officio tenuis­set. Josc [...]lini Antiq. Brit. p. 124. Infans cum
omnium votis conspirantibus edu­catus egregie, qui solus omnium filiorum
Wilielmi natus esset regi [...], & [...]i regnum videretur competere. Itaque
tyrocinium rudimentorum in scholis egi [...] li­beralibus, & literarum mella
adeo avidus medullis indidit, ut nihil postea bello­rum tumultus, nulli
curarum mot [...]s eas excutere illustri animo possent. Mal­mesb. de Henrico
primo. l. 5. as if his▪ justice was by the common people deemed cruelty.
Cambd. Rem.

He was excellent in wit, eloquent in speech, and fortunate in Battell, and for
these three, he had three notable vices; covetousness, cruelty and lechery.
Stowes Chron.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=46) By his
example, the young Nobility of the Realm, began to affect a praise for
learning: insomuch as at a certain inter­view, between the King and Pope
Innocent the second, the sons of Robert Earl of Mel­lent, maintained open
disputations against divers Cardinals and Chaplains of the Pope. Sir Iohn
Hayward.

To purchase the favour of the Clergy, he called Anselme out of exile, and
restored him both to the dignity and revenues of the See of Canterbury.

He committed Radulph (alias Ranulph) Bishop of Durham to prison, who had been
both author and agent to King William, in most of his distrustfull actions
against the Clergy.

To make the Clergy the more assured, the King renounced the right which his
An­cestours used in giving Investitures, and acknowledged the same to
appertain to the Pope.

The Clergy did much favour him, by reason of his liberall leave, either to
erect, or to enlarge, or else to enrich religious buildings. For to these
works the King was so ready to give, not only way, but encouragement and help,
that in no Prin­ces time, they did more within this Realm either flourish or
encrease.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=47) Sir Iohn
Hayward numbers twenty five religious buildings, either done, or helped
forward, or permitted and allowed by the King.

This King being born in England, and the Queen of English bloud-royall, raised
the depressed English Nation again unto ho­nour and credit.

He restored them to the use of fire and candle,Nocturnas fa­ces, quas primus
Gulielmus ve­tuerat, restituit, quippe cui jam firmato regno minus formida
[...] ­das. Seldeni Ia­nus Anglorum. l 2. after eight of the Clock at night,
which his Father had most straitly forbid­den.

He being a wise Prince, and well know­ing that an Empire gotten by force,
could no longer remain, then that force continu­ed, sent into Scotland, and
took to Wife Maud, the daughter of Queen Margaret, sister to Edgar Etheling,
None of our Kings married with Scotland but he. (who was now dead, and left no
issue) whereby this Maud was the heir of the Saxon line; and in her brought
back again to us the ancient English blood-royall, before it had descend­ed
beyond one generation from the Con­querour,Flemings Stem­ma sacrum. in whose
line it continueth unto this day.

She was adorned with all royall vertues, principally with piety and humility.
These Verses were made in her commendation.

Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem, Aspera risus ei, prospera
terror erant.

Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam, Sola potens humilis, sola
pudica decens.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=47) She being
married against her will, see­ing she must violate the vow of her virgini­ty,
she cursed her of-spring, if any came of her; which was not altogether vain
saith Polyd. Virgil, in regard they were all after­ward drowned.

He reduced Normandy to England.

He built therein many Castles, and plant­ed Garrisons,Habitus est cru­delis
praes [...]r [...]im propter Robe [...] ­tum germanum fratrem, quem in carcero
sinem vi­tae facere coegit. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 11. and with no less
wisdome as­sured that State, then with valour he had won it.

He brought with him his Brother Robert into England, and committed him to safe
custody in the Castle of Cardiffe.

He striving to escape, was taken again, committed to close prison, his eyes
put out, and a sure guard set upon him. Thus he remained in desolate darkness,
neither re­verenced by any for his former greatness, nor pitied for his
present distress. Thus he continued about twenty seven years, in a life far
more grievous then death, even un­till the year before the death of King
Henry. So long was he a suitor in wooing of death. So long did the one Brother
overlive his good fortune, the other his good nature and disposition;
esteeming it a fair favour, that the uttermost extremity was not in­flicted.

He gave his daughter Maud the Empress, in second marriage to the Earl of
Anjou, and his Sister Elix (as some Chronicles [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=48) call her) to
Steven, Stubb [...] his dis­covery of a gaping gulf whereinto England is like
to be swallow­ed, by another French marri­age. He shews there also in Henry
the se­cond, Richard the first, King Iohn, Henry the third, Edward the second,
Richard the second, the inconveniences to this Nation, by their marriages with
the French. Hinc cognoscere licet, pri [...]s Aethiopem posse mutare pellem,
uti dicitur, quàm qui terram incolunt Galliam, valde multum diligere Anglos.
Polyd. Virg. Ang hist. l. 23. p. 483. Earl of Bloys. Thence sprang the loss of
this Kingdome to Maud, during her life, by being so far out of the land in
another Countrey, when she should have accepted it here. Therof sprang the
per­juries of Steven King of England, enticed to a Kingdome through the
commodity of his near place. And thence came the Civill miseries to the
people, who through the in­certainty of a Governour, were in field and Arms
one against another.

His daughter Maud, It was said of Charles Earl of Valois, that he was the son
of a King, brother to a King, un­cle to a King, father to a King, and yet no
King. as well as that La­cedemonian Lady Lampedo, whom Pliny maketh mention
of, was a Kings daugh­terCambdens Brittannia in Barkshire., a Kings wife, and
a Kings mother. Daughter of this Henry the first, King of England; wife of
Henry the fourth, Empe­rour of Germany; and mother to Henry the second, King
of England. Concerning which matter, there is this Distick engraven on her
Tomb.

Magna ortu, majórque viro, sed maxima partu, Hîc jacet Henrici filia, sponsa,
parens.

The daughter, wife, the mother eke, of Hen­ry lieth here;

Much blest by birth, by marriage more, but most by issue dear.

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=48) He was a
great administrer of justice,Mi [...]ses. Henrico ad­scribunt nonnulli legem,
quam curtoise d' Angleterre dicunt I. C. ti. Hac vir suscepta prole co
[...]jugis demortuae baered [...]s sruitur, in humanis dum  [...]g [...]rit.
Seldeni Ianus Anglorum. l. 2. and the first that ordained that theeves should
be hanged.

He ordained that counterfeiters of mo­ney, should lose both their
eyes,Hayward. and be deprived of their privy parts,

He took away the deceit which had been occasioned by variety of measures, and
made measure by the length of his own arm,The antiquity of a yard. which hath
been commonly used e­ver since, by the name of a yard.

He is yet alive in his Laws.

See his Laws in Lambard de priscis Anglo­rum legibus.

His expences were chiefly in his Warres, and his many and great fortifications
in Normandy. His buildings were the Abbey of Reading, the Castle of Warwicke,
of Bri­stoll, the Mannour of Woodstocke, [...]anicls Hist [...] ­ry, and
Hay­ward. and the great inclosure of that Park, with a stone Wall seven miles
about.

There was a singular and most remarka­ble example of Gods justice upon his
chil­dren. For when the King both by force, crast, and cruelty,Sir Walter
Rawleigh his Preface to his History of the world. had dispossest, over­reacht,
and lastly made blind, and destroy­ed his elder Brother, Duke of Normandy, to
make his own sons Lords of his Land; God cast them all, male and female,
Nephews [[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=49)
and Neeces (Maud excepted) into the bottome of the Sea,See Sir Iohn Hayward in
the life of King Henry the first p. 267, 2 [...]8, 269, 270. with above a
hundred and fifty others that attended them, where­of a great many were noble,
and of the King dearly beloved.

Evasit unus & ille agrestis, qui tota nocte ma­lo supernatans, mane totius
tragediae actum ex­pressit. Malmesb. de Henrico primo. l. 5. Vide Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 11. p. 191.

Nulla unquam navis fuit Angl [...]ae tantae mi­seriae, nulla toto orbi tam
patulae famae.

His usuall Oath was By our Lords death; and so was Queen Elizabeths.

He first instituted the form of the High-Court of Parliament,Prudentum
con­gressus in An­glia vocatur & magna comitia. Mutuato denium à Gallis
Parli­amentorum no­mine quae ante Henricum perraro scribit Polydorus l. 11.
habita. Seldeni Ianus Anglo­rum. l. 2. as now it is in use. The first
Parliament was held at Salisbury, upon the nineteenth day of April, in the
sixteenth year of his Raign. See Lamberts Archeion. p. 240, 241, 242, 243.

When Matilde his daughter was given in marriage,A Hide of land contains 20.
Acres, saith Hayward in the life of William the first. p. 99. A 100. Acres
saith Lambert. to Henry the fifth Emperour, he took three shillings of every
Hide of land throughout the Realm: which being followed by succeeding Kings,
did grow to a custome of receiving aid, whensoever they gave their daughters
in marriage.

About this time the marriage of Priests was forbidden in England; but the King
for money permitted them to retain their [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=49) wives, and in
the end set an imposition in that respect upon every Church through­out the
Realm. It availed not any man to say, that he had no purpose to keep a wife;
he must pay for a faculty to keep a wife, if he would.

Quymund his Chaplain (observing that unworthy men for the most part were
ad­vanced to the best dignities of the Church) as he celebrated divine service
before him, and was to read these words out of St Iames 5\. 17. (It rained not
upon the earth three years and six moneths) he did read it thus, (It rained
not upon the earth one, one years, and five, one, moneths.) The King observed
this reading, and afterwards rebuked his Chap­lain for it. But Quymund
answered, that he did it of purpose, because such readers were soonest
preferred by the King. The King smiled, and in short time after pre­ferred him
to the government of St. Frides­wides in Oxford.

He died in the sixty seventh year of his age, when he had raigned thirty five
years, and four moneths, wanting one day. He was buried at Reading, which he
had found­ed.

In him ended the line of the Norman Kings, as concerning their heirs males,
af­ter whom came in the French men, by the title of the heirs generall.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=50)

## 14\. CHAP. XIV.

### 14.1. King STEPHEN.

VIr solertis ingenii, & militaris artis peri­tissimus. Polyd. Virg.

He was of a comely stature; of a good complexion; and of body strong; very
skilfull in martiall affairs, gentle, courte­ous, and exceeding bountifull;
not noted for any speciall vice, but that upon an am­bitious desire to raign,
he brake his Oath which he had made with Maud the Em­press.

He was a most worthy Souldier, and wanted nothing to have made him an
excellent King, but a just title. And therefore hee was driven (per­force) to
defend his usurped Authority by the sword, which must needs procure him the
hatred of many.

He was crowned at Westminster upon Saint▪ Stephens day, in presence of but
three Bi­shops, few of the Nobility, and not one Abbot, by William Archbishop
of Canterbu­ry, with great solemnity.

Having his sword continually out,Daniels Histo­ry. and so many defections and
rebellions against him, he never put any great man to death.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=50) Of Roger
Bishop of Salisbury in this Kings Raign, it is reported, that he was so
pres­sed with the miseries of a long imprison­ment, Vt vivere nol [...]erit,
mori nesci [...]rit, That live he would not, die he could not.

In his dayes flourished divers famous learned men, but especially
Historiogra­phers, viz. William of Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Simon of
Durham, Gessrey of Munmouth, and others.

Though his Raign were rough and tem­pestuous, by reason of his perpetuall
de­bates and contests with Maud the Empress, and her Son, concerning the
title; yet were there more religious Convents erect­ed in his time, then
either before or after.

Although he had continuall Warres, yet he required few or no tributes from the
people.

He raigned almost nineteen years, lived forty nine, and was buried in the
Abbey of Feversham in Kent, which he had founded.

The Normans thus expiring,The famous Family of Plantagenets, which stored the
Crown of England well nigh the space of four hun­dred years; from whence have
issued one Emperour, fifteen Kings, and ten Queens, twelve Princes, twenty
four Dukes, and sixty Earls, took its name of a  [...]lant. Fern. Glor.
Generos. give way to the Dynasty of the Plantagenets.

Before the division of the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster, there run on evenly
in an un­questionable line, eight Kings in this manner.

  * [[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=51)1\. Henry the second.
  * 2\. Richard the first.
  * 3\. Iohn.
  * 4\. Henry the third.
  * 5\. Edward the first.
  * 6\. Edward the second.
  * 7\. Edward the third.
  * 8\. Richard the second.

### 14.2. Henry the second.

The first King of this Island,Galfredus Plantaginett [...], cujus absque
du­bio à Planta­gine herba, quemadmodum elim ap [...]d Ro­manos multa­rum
nobilssimo­rum  [...] ab herbis & frugibus dedu­ctum  [...]omen est, Matildam
Henrici primi Anglorum regis; filiam, viduam duxit in uxo­rem. Henricus
secundus in regiam familiam nobilissimum illud Plantaginet­tarum cognomen
insinuavit. Hoc mirum in modum postea prolis numerositate incrcvit; a leo ut
exea gente quatuordecim reges▪ quanquam desultoria quadam successionis lege
aliquando, con [...]inuata tamen seric, regnum administrarunt. T wini Comment,
de rebus Britanuicis. sirnamed Plantagenet, from Plantagenista, so called (as
some say) for wearing a slip or stalk of Broom in his Cap or Hat, toward his
lat­ter dayes, in penance and contrition for his past sins. He undertook to go
to the holy Sepulchre, in the poor and despised habit of a Broom-man, and to
signifie himself so, bore a Broom-stalk in his Cap. Others say it was because
he scourged himself with the stalks of Broom, which grew upon the Plains,
where once the holy City stood. Bucks Preface to his great Plantagenet.

Henry Duke of Anjou by his Father Geffe­ry Plantagenet, Prince douè de
plusicurs vertus vrayement dig­ne, d' un Roy [...]mais aussi suict à quelques
vices encores plus indignes d' un Prin­ce [...] hrestein. Histoire d'
Angleterre par Andre Du Chesne. l. 12. succeeded Stephen in the [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=51) Kingdome of
England by agreement, whom he preceded by right, as being son and heir of
Maud, sole daughter and heir of King Henry the first, and was crowned at
Westminster, by Theobald Archbishop of Can­terbury, and was a greater Prince
then any of his Ancestors.

He was sirnamed Court-mantle, because he was the first that brought short
Cloaks out of Anjou into England.

He was wise and learned. He never ware Glove, except he bare a Hawk on his
fist; and never sate but at his meat; and delighted in hawking, hunting,
riding, and in all honest exercises.

Our English Chronicles do blame him,Fox. p 228. Col. 2. for refusing to take
the protection and de­fence of the distressed Christians in Ierusa­lem,
offered unto him by Heraclins the Pa­triark; the troubles that befell him at
home, are ascribed to that cause.

In his time there were eleven hundred and fifteen Castles in England.
Hollinsh. in K. Stephen. Cambd. Britan­nia in Nor­thumberland.

He caused them to be demolished.

He first kept Lions, and made of the Arms of Normandy, viz. the two Leopards;
and of the single Lion Aquitain, one Coat so Arms for England, as it is yet
worn.

He associated his son Henry in the Go­vernment; an act without example in this
Kingdome.

The young King shewed shortly after, [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=52) That a Crown was
no State to be made over in trust.

At the Feast of his solemnity, the King to honour his son, would needs carry
up the first dish to his Table. Roger Archbi­shop of Yorke standing by, and
saying mer­rily▪ to the new King, Gaude, optime filio non est enim alter in
toto orbe Princeps, qui talem habeat in mensa administrum. What an honour is
this to you, to have such a waiter at your Table! At pater Hen­ricus haec
audi­ens, ingenti af­fectus dolore, an­tistiti submissa voce ait, Paenitets
inquam, paenitet extulisse homi­nem. Polyd. Virg. Mon­taigne in his second
Book of Essayes▪ c▪ 8. commends the Emperour Charles the fifth, for resigning
his means, his greatness, and Kingdome to his son, at what time he found his
former undaunted resolution to de­cay, and force to conduct his affairs to
droop in himself, together with the glory he had thereby acquired. Robert, son
to Hugh Capet, was crown­ed King in his fathers life time, of whom it is sajd,
He was a son without frowardness, a companion without jealousie, a King
without ambition. Du Serres History of France. Why (saith he) what great
matter is it for him that was but the son of a Duke, to do service to me, that
am the son of a King and Queen? Which the old King hearing, began to repent
him, now it was too late, of that he had done.

He loved women too much, especially one Rosamond, the fair daughter of Walter
Lord Clifford. This his Concubine was a very beautifull young Lady, of
unparalleld wit. He usually termed her the Rose of the world; his Rose.

The true Etymology of her name is Rose­mouth, Verstegans Ety­mology of our
Saxon proper names. and seemeth to have been given, in regard of her sweetness
or colour of the lips; [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=52) or it may have
been in recommendation of sweetness, and eloquence of speech.

King Henry had made for her a Labyrinth at Woodstoc [...], so that no man or
woman might come to her, but he that was in­structed by the King, or such as
were right secret with him. It was com­monly said, that at last Queen Elenor
came to her by a Clew of Thread,Poysoned her, as was thought. or Silk, and so
dealt with her, that she lived not long after. But when she was dead, she was
bu­ried at Godstow, in an house of Nunnes be­side Oxford.

In whose Epitaph,Verstegan ubisupra. a Latin Poet not un­derstanding the true
Etymology of the name, makes Mund▪ which here is mouth, to be Mundus, and so
calls her the Rose of the world.

Hic jacet in tumba, Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda; Non redolet, sedolet, quae
redolere solet.

Being much incensed against Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, he once
cried out, Me miserum, non possum in meo regno pacem cum uno sacerdote habere?
nec quis­quam meorum omnium est, qui me hac molestia liberare velit. Which
words were so inter­preted by some, that it occasioned his death.

Stapleton a Jesuit put forth a Book, enti­tuled Tres Thomae; St. Thomas the
Apostle, Thomas of Becket, and Sir Thomas More. [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=53) He canonizeth
the two last, and writes far more of them, then of the first.

For the death of Thomas Becket Archbi­shop of Canterbury, he was scourged with
rods by the Monks of Canterbury, and had eighty lashes.

Geffery Archbishop of Yorke, and base son to King Henry the second, used
proudly to protest by his faith, Gualterus Mappaeus de nugis Curialium. and
the Royalty of the King his father. To whom one said, You may sometimes, Sir,
as well remember what was the honesty of your mother.

Petrus Blesensis was Archdeacon of Bath under him.

There was a very strange presage of his death,Polyd. Virg. Ang hist. Hollinsh
by a Meer or Pool in Normandy; for all the Fishes therein leapt forth on land
in the night time, and fought together with such a dreadfull noise, that men
came in great numbers to behold the wonder, and not one Fish could be found
alive in the Pool.

Other strange accidents are also report­ed.

When he died,Polyd. Virg. there were found in his Coffers, nine hundred
thousand pounds, besides Plate and Jewels.

His youngest son was called Iohn Lack­land, because he had no land assigned
him in his fathers time.

Titles he lacked none; for his father had made him Earl of Cornwall, Dan hist.
Dorset, Sommer­set, [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=53) Nottingham,
Derby, and Lancaster.

He raigned thirty four yeares, seven moneths, and five dayes.

## 15\. CHAP. XV.  
RICHARD the first.

HE was for his valour sirnamed Coeur de Lion, Statura corporis fuit justa,
lata & bonesta facie, in qua multum gratiae, gravitatuque incrat; sed quò
pulchrior corpore, hoc animi altitudine praestantior, undo non immeritò
cognomen invenit, qui cor Leonis vo­catus est. Polyd. Virg. Ang hist l. 14.
Illud innuere videtur Richardum in­ter Angliae Reges primum usum fuisse
Leonino gestamine, quod ei prae caeteris cognomen inderetur. Cor Leonis à
pictura [...] clypei (ni vana conjectura) deriva­tum. Nam é clypeis &
armaturis nomina saepe acceperunt tum antiqui, tum re­centiores. Spelman
[...]i Aspilogia. p 46, 47. or the Lions heart.

Hugh Nevill a Gentleman of noble li­nage, one of King Richards speciall
famili­ars, is recorded to have slain a Lion in the holy land,Weevers anci­ent
Funerall-Monuments. driving first an Arrow into his brest, and then running
him through with his Sword. Whereupon this Hexameter was made.

Viribus Hugonis vires periere Leonis. The strength of Hugh a Lion slew.

Which atchievment belike was trans­ferred from the man to the Master, and the
Story applied to the King, by name of King [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=54) Richard, Coeur
de Lion. But this is only Weevers opinion.

He was crowned at Westminster, by Bald­win Archbishop of Canterbury.

He being at dinner in his Hall of Westmin­ster, hearing the French King
besieged Ver­noy [...]e, he swore that he would never turn his face, till he
had fought with him, if he did abide, and caused the wall to be broken before
him, and so passed to Normandy; and receiving his brother Iohn to mercy,
raised the siege; for the French King fled as soon as he heard of Kings
Richards com­ing.

A Prince of a most haughty mind, and full of resolution, born for the Weal of
Christendome,Cambdens Brittannia in Oxfordshire. the honour of England, and
the terrour of Infidels.

With the beams of his victories atchiev­ed in Cypres and Syria, Id. ib. in
Bark­shire. he made our Coun­trey of England most famous, and renown­ed
through the world.

He had trained up in his Court a Rymer or Minstrell, called Blondell de Neste,
who being so long without the sight of his Lord, his life seemed wearisome to
him. It was known that he came back from the holy land, but none could tell in
what Coun­trey he arrived. Whereupon this Blondell resolving to make search
for him in many Countries,Histoire d' An­gleterre Par Andre Du Chesne. l. 1
[...]. but he would hear some news of him; after expence of divers dayes in
[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=54) travell,
he came to a Town (by good hap) near to the Castle where his Master King
Richard was kept.Theater of honour. Book 5. c. 1 [...] Of his Host he
demand­ed to whom the Castle appertained, and the Host told him it belonged to
the Duke of Austria. Then he enquired whether any prisoner was there detained
or no, for alwayes he made such secret questionings, wheresoever he came; and
the Host an­swered, that there was one only prisoner, but he knew not what he
was, and yet he had been detained there more then the space of a year. When
Blondell heard this, he used such meanes, that he became ac­quainted with them
of the Castle, as Min­strels do easily win acquaintance any where; but see the
King he could not, neither un­derstand that it was he. One day he sate
directly before a window of the Castle, where King Richard was kept prisoner,
and began to sing a song in French, which King Richard and Blondell had
sometime compo­sed together. When King Richard heard the song, he knew it was
Blondell that sung it; and when Blondell paused at half of the song, the King
entreated him to sing the rest. Thus Blondell won knowledge of the King his
Master, and returning home into England, made the Barons of the Countrey
acquainted where the King was.

Whereas before his time,Sheriffs and Maiors of Lon­don first or­dained. the
City of London was governed by Portgraves, he [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=55) granted them to
be governed by two She­riffs and a Maior, as now it is.

Iohn the Kings brother making an incur­sion up to Beauvois, where the Bishop
being also an Earl of the royall bloud, and the eleventh Peer of France,
valiantly fighting, was taken in the skirmish, armed at all points, and
bravely mounted; on whose behalf the Pope (upon the Bishops hum­ble suit,
pleading the Clergies immunity) wrote somewhat earnestly to King Richard, to
set his very dear son, for so he called the Bishop, at liberty. The King in a
kind of pleasant earnestness,Alluding to that Gen. 37\. 33. caused the
Habergeon and Curaces of the Bishop, to be presented to the Pope, with this
question, Vide an tu­nica filii tui sit an non. Whereupon the Pope
replied,Hollinsh. and Speeds Chron. That he was neither his son, nor the son
of the Church; and therefore should be ransomed at the Kings will, because he
was ra­ther judged to be a servitor of Mars, then a souldier of Christ.

In his time were those famous Out-laws, called Robin-hood and Little Iohn.

He was wounded in the arm, by an Ar­row shot at him out of a Cross-bow, by
Pe­ter Bisile, of which wound he died within four dayes after.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=55)

## 16\. CHAP. XVI.

### 16.1. King Iohn.

WHose Raign had it not fallen in the time of so turbulent a Pope, so ambitious
neighbour-Princes, so disloyall Subjects,Speed. nor his Story into the hands
of ex­asperated Writers, he had appeared a King of as great renown, as
misfortunes.

His overhasty undertakings brought in those broyls of the Barons Wars.

Before this Kings time we seek in vain for any great Councel. He first as may
be gathered (though darkly by the Record) used their Councels and Assents in
the sixth year of his Raign.C [...]ttoni Post­huma.

He had by his Wife▪ Isabel a son Henry, who succeeded him in the Kingdome.

In his voyage towards Ireland, Powell on Lhoyds Histo­ry of Wales. p. 261. out
of Matthew Paris. as he was in his journey in the borders of Wales, there was
one taken and brought before him, who had killed a Priest. The Offi­cer
desired to understand the Kings plea­sure, what he would have done to him. Let
him go (saith the King) for he hath slain mine enemy.

Seeing one cut up a very fat Stag in his presence, (said he) How easily and
happily [[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=56)
hath this creature lived, yet he never heard Mass. Hist. d'Angle­terre Par
An­dre Du Ches­ne l. 12.

Mr.Acts and Mo. vol. 1. Fox seems to approve of this speech, as deriding the
Mass; though others say it was an Atheisticall speech.

In his Raign the Citizens of London first obtained of the King, to choose
yearly a Maior.Fox. In whose time also the Bridge of London was first builded
of stone, which be­fore was of wood.

Most Writers testifie, that he was poy­soned by a Monk of Swinsted-Abbey in
Lin­colnshire, Foxes Acts and Mon vol. 1\. There are va­rious reports of his
death. See Hollinsh. Chron. who to poyson him, wittingly and willingly
poysoned himself.

Eighteen years, five moneths, and four dayes, saith Matthew Paris. He died in
the year of his age fifty and one, and after he had raigned seventeen
years,One writes that he was poysoned at Swinsted with a dish of Pears. Others
there in a cup of Wine. Some, that he died at Newarke of the Flux. A fourth,
by the distemperature of Peaches eaten in his fit of an Ague. Browns
Britannias Pastorals. six moneths, and twenty seven dayes.

He lieth buried at Worcester-Colledge, in the Quire there.

### 16.2. King HENRY the third.

He was happy in his Uncle, the Earl of Pembroke, the guide of his infancy; and
no less for thirty years, whilest De Burgo the last servant of his Fathers
against the French, both in Normandy and England, with Bigot Earl of Norfolke,
and others of like gravity [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=56) and experience
did manage the affairs. The Author of the troublesome life and Raign of King
Henry the third.

He was of a middle stature.

Robustus viribus, sed praeceps in factis. Mat­thew Paris.

He was crowned at Glocester, by Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Iosceline
Bishop of Bath, in the presence of Walo the Popes Le­gate, Octob. 28\. 1216.
And after peace con­cluded with the Barons, by Stephen Lang­ton Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Westminster, on Whitsunday an. 1219.

In his Raign the Popes authority in Eng­land was at the highest.

He heard three Masses a day.

In a solemn conference between him and St. Lewis, Contigit ali­quando S.
Lu­dovicum Fran­corum Regem cum eo super hoc conferentem dicere quod non
semper missis, sed frequentius sermonibus au­diendis esse va­candum. Cui
fa­ceta urbanitate respondens, ait, se malle amicum suum saepius videre, quam
de [...] oquentem, licet bona dicentem aud [...]re. Matth. Paris, & Walsingh.
King of France, the only devout Kings of that age▪ when the French King said
he had rather hear Sermons then Mas­ses; our King replied, that he had rather
see his loving friend, (meaning Christs re­all presence in the Sacraments)
then to hear never so much good of him, by others in Sermons.

He had a son by Elenor his wife, whom he named Edward, for the memory of
Ed­ward the Confessor, who raigned a little before that the Normans vanquished
Eng­land. [[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=57)
At whose birth appeared a Star of great magnitude, for some dayes before the
Sun rising, which moved swiftly, one while making a shew of fire, another
while leaving smoak behind it; by which prodi­gy (saith Polydore Virgil) the
future ampli­tude of Edward the father, and the smalness and vanity of his son
which he begat after­wards, was declared as it were by an O­racle.

He had another son Edmund Crouchbacke, so called, not because he was crooked
or deformed, but because he wore the Cross upon his back, or on his Buckler,
which he wore constantly at his back, to shew that he had vowed to go to
Ierusalem, to recover the holy Sepulchre.

In the year 41 of his Raign, the King held a Parliament at Oxford, which was
called Insanum Parliamentum, that is to say, the mad Parliament. For in this
Parliament were made many Acts against the Kings prerogative and pleasure, for
the reformation of the state of the Land, which after turned to the confusion
and hurt of the Land,Gration. Hollinsh. and the death and destruction of many
noble men; so that by occasion thereof, began that hatefull strife, called at
this day the Barons War, whereof ensued much trouble and mischief.

He was pressed by his Nobles, Bishops▪ and others,Magna Charta. to pass the
great Charter, in [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=57) the ninth year
of his Raign. His son Ed­ward the first in the twenty fifth of his Raign,
confirmed the great Charter.

The great Charter of England passed from this King, for which the English men
had no less striven, than the Trojans for their Helena. Lambards Ar­cheion.
Lambard saith, he may call that great Charter of the Liberties of Eng­land,
the first Letters of manumission of the people of this Realm,Id. ib. out of
the Norman servitude.

Matthew Paris the learned Monk of Saint: Albans lived in his time, and was
highly esteemed by him.Matth. Paris. hist. Ang. Hen. 3. p. 945. p. 783. Et cum
esset cum ipso continue in mensa, in palatio, & in thalamo, qui haec scripsit,
direxit scribentis calamum satis diligenter & amicahiliter.

In another place he speaks of his bold re­proving the King.

Verstegan sayes the Sidneys are of a French extraction; that they came over
in­to England in Henry the thirds dayes.

Arms as honourary dignities and gene­rous distinctions between family and
fami­ly,There will be little reason to be over­confident in matters of
Pedigree and Arms, much beyond 400 years. and person and person, have been
un­doubtedly born from his time; since which there is sufficient proof of
them; and though long before that many Families might be rich, potent and
noble, yet some of them either had no Arms, as many yet in Ireland have not,
or else kept no con­stant Coat, [...]d. ibid. but gave sometimes their
pa­ternall, [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=58) otherwhiles
their maternall or a­adopted Coats. Mr. Waterhouse his dis­course of Arms and
Armory.

He raigned fifty six yeares and twenty dayes,Matth. Paris. the longest number
of years that e­ver any King of England raigned.Cooke 2d part of Instit. c.
11.

## 17\. CHAP. XVII.

### 17.1. King EDWARD the first.

HE was absent in the holy Land when his father died.The names of the first
Rich­ard, the first Edward were as terrible to Infidels, as William to the
Saxons, and as much renown­ed among all Christian Princes. Sir Francis W
[...]rtly his Characters. Rodericus To­letanus l. 1\. breaks forth into this
ex­clamation; Quid igitur hujus mulieris fide rarius audiri! quid mirabilius
esse potest, ut ux­oris lingua fide & dilectione maritali peruncta, vencua à
dilecto marito expule­rit quae electo medico trahi non valuerunt: & quod
plurima exquistiáque non ef­fecerunt medicamenta, una uxoris pietas explevit.

At his first coming to the holy Land, he rescued the great City of Acon, from
be­ing surrendred to the Sultan, after which, out of envy to his valour, one
Anzazim a desperate Saracen, who had often been employed to him from their
Generall, be­ing one time, upon pretence of some se­cret message, admitted
alone into his chamber, with a poysoned knife gave him three wounds in the
body, two in the arm, and one in the armpit, which had been mortall, if out of
unspeakable love, the Lady Elenor his wife had not suckt out the [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=58) poison of his
wounds with her mouth, and licked them with her tongue, and thereby effected a
cure, which otherwise had been incurable. So soveraign a medicine (saith
Speed) is a womans tongue annointed with the vertue of loving affection.

Leaving Garrisons in fit places for de­fence of the Countrey, he with his wife
E­lenor takes his journey homewards, and first passing by Sicilie, was there
most kindly received by Charles King of that Island, where he first heard of
his fathers death; which he took more heavily far, then he had taken the death
of his young son Henry, whereof he had heard a little before; at which when
King Charles mar­velled,Iactura filio­rum facilis est, cùm quotidie
multiplicentur; pareutum verò mors irremedia­bilis est, quia nequeunt
restau­rari. Chronica [...] Thomae. Walsingham. he answered that other sons
might be had, but another father could never be had.

He was protected by the divine hand from his Childhood being young, and
playing one time at Chess with a friend, in the midst of his game, without any
appa­rent occasion, he removed himself from the place where he sate, when
suddenly there fell from the roof of the house a great stone, which if he had
stayed in the place but never so little, had beaten out his brains.

The like is recorded of Luther, that as he was sitting in a certain place upon
his stool, a great stone there was in the Vault [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=59) over his head
where he sate; which being stayed miraculously so long as he was sit­ting, as
soon as he was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sate, able to have
crushed him in pieces. Fox Marty­rolog.

Having prepared a great Fleet of Ships for a journey into Flanders, and being
at Winchelsey where the Ships were to meet, it happened that riding about the
Harbour, his Horse frighted with the noise of a Wind­mill, which the wind
drove violently a­bout, scrambled up and leapt over the mud-wall of the Town,
so as neither the King nor Horse was to be seen, but every one judged the King
could not choose but be thrown and killed; yet such was the di­vine providence
over him, that the Horse lighted upon his feet, and the King keep­ing the
Saddle returned safe.

He was crowned at Westminster, toge­ther with his wife Queen Elenor, by Robert
Kilwarthy, Archbishop of Canterbury.

He ingeniously surprized the Welch into subjection,Mr. Fullers good thoughts
in worst times. Occasi­on. Meditat. 9. See Dr. Pow [...]is Preface to the
History of Wales, and his Notes on  [...]hoyds History of Wales, p. 376, 377,
and Judge Dederidges Principality of Wales, p. 4, 5, 6. proffering them such a
Prince as should be

  * 1\. The son of a King.
  * 2\. Born in their own Countrey.
  * 3\. Whom none could taxe for any fault.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=59) The
Welch accepted the conditions, and the King tendered them his son Edward, an
Infant, newly born in the Castle of Car­narva [...].

Wales was united to the Crown of Eng­land in the eleventh year of his Raign;
who thereupon established the Government thereof according to the Lawes of
Eng­land.

A wise,Cambdens Britannia in Yorkeshire.  [...]aletudine usus est satis presp
[...]ra, animo magno; cui cunque enim rei operam dabat, eam facil [...] imbi
[...]bat, pruden­tia summa, religionis studiosissimus, insolentiae sacerdotum
inimicus acerrimus, quam ex opibus cum primis prosicisci putabat [...] quam ob
[...]rem legem ad manu­mortuam perpetuasse fertur, at ita corum luxurie [...]
coerc [...]retur. Polyd. V [...]rg. Ang hist l. 18. a just, and fortunate
Prince, who in regard of his Princely vertues deserveth to be ranged among the
principall and best Kings that ever were.

A right noble and worthy Prince,Cambdens Britannia in Cumberland. Fuit prudens
in gerendis negoti­is, ab adolescen­tia armorum de­d [...]us exercitio, quo in
diversts regionibus eam famam militiae acquifierat, quà totius orbis
Christiani sui temporis principes singulariter transcendebat. Elegantis erat
formae, staturae pro­cer [...]e, qua humero & supra communi populo prae
[...]minebat. Chronica Thom [...] Walsingham. He was called Edward Long-shank
[...]. to whom God proportioned a most princely presence and personage, a
right worthy seat to entertain so heroicall a mind. For he not only in regard
of fortitude and wis­dome, but also for a beautifull and perso­nall presence
was in all points answerable to the height of royall Majesty, whom fortune
also in the very prime and flower of his age, inured to many a Warre, and
exercised in most dangerous troubles of the [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=60) State, whilest
she framed and fitted him for the Empire of Brittain: which he being once
crowned King, managed and govern­ed in such wise, that having subdued the
Welch and vanquished the Scots, he may justly be counted the second ornament
of Great Brittain.

No Realm but did resound first Edwards praise,

No praise was ever won with more deserts.

And no deserts (though great) could coun­terpoise

Much less out-balance his heroick parts.

Mars taught him Arms, the Muses taught him Arts,

Whereby so great he grew, that might there be

A love on earth, that earthly love was he.

Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.

In the long Warres he had with Robert King of Scotland, having by triall found
how greatly his presence advantaged the success of his affairs, and how he was
ever victorious in any enterprise he undertook in his own person, when he
died, he bound his son by solemn oath, that being dead he should cause his
body to be boiled, un­till the flesh fell from the bones, which he should
cause to be interred, and carefully keeping the bones, ever carry them about
[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=60) him,
whensoever he should happen to have Warres with the Scots, as if destiny had
fatally annexed the victory unto his limmes. Mountaigne his Essayes. l. 1. c.
3.

Baliol King of Scotland came to Newcastle upon Tine, where King Edward then
lay; and there with many of his Nobles, swears fealty, and doth homage to him,
as his So­veraign Lord.

Afterward there grew a great dissention between him and the King, and the two
Nations, which consumed much Christian bloud, and continued almost three
hun­dred years. King Edward entered Scotland with a great Army, King Baliol
was taken prisoner.

The marble Chair in which the Kings of Scotland used to be crowned,Ne
vestigium majestatis regia [...] desid [...]rii ullum apud populum remaneret,
sedem lap [...]deam in qua insidentes Re­ges coronari sa­lebant, ex Sco­tia
deferendam Londinum cu­ravit, quae eti [...]am nunc ad Westmonast  [...]rium
servatur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 1 [...] was also brought thence to
Westminster, and placed there amongst the Monuments, where it still continues.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum

Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.

Except old sawes do fain,

And Wizards wits be blind,

The Scots in place shall raign,

Where they this stone shall find.

Of his Warres with the Scotch, and his victories over them, see Aysc [...] his
Histo­ry of the Warres, Treaties, Marriages, and [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=61) other
occurrents between England and Scot­land, from King William the Conquerour,
untill the union of them both in King Iames.

In his twelfth year the Justices Itinerants began.

In his time Iohn Baliol King of Scots, builded Baliol-Colledge in Oxford.
Walter Merton Lord Chancellour of England, and after Bishop of Rochester,
founded Merton-Colledge in Oxford.

One made this Epitaph of him.

Dum viguit, Rex, & valuit tua magna potestas

Frau [...] latuit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas.

He raigned thirty four yeares, seven moneths, one and twenty dayes, and li­ved
sixty eight years, and twenty dayes.

### 17.2. EDWARD the second.

He degenerated wholly from his fathers vertues, and esteemed not the good
ad­vertisements and precepts which he gave him before his death.

He granted the Charter to London, to elect yearly one of the City at their own
pleasure to be their Maior.

He was the first of the King of Englands children which bore the title and
quality of the Prince of Wales. Since whose time, the eldest sons of the Kings
of England were called Princes of Wales, as the eldest sons [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=61) of the Kings of
Fran [...]e are called Dolphins,Initio sui prin­cipatus, cisi ad lenitatem
suaptò natura pr [...]pensus  [...]rat, quorundam tamen suorum consiltariorum
co [...]rcitus moni­tis, ut bonam in­dolem ostentaret, gravitatem,
pro­bitatem,  [...]no­destiam praes [...] [...]crre caepit: ve­ri [...]n baud
omni­no potuit ita co­erceri, quin bre­vi tempore petu­lantiam ac vani­tatem
sensim quidem primò & occultè velut juvenili errore complexus sue­rit, &c.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 18. and of Spain, Infants.

He was called Edward of Carnarvan; for the Welch men after Leolines death,
were earnest with the King for a Prince of their own Countrymen; the King told
them they should have a Prince there born that could speak no English, which
they being contented with, he named his Infant son; (who was born there) the
Queen being brought to Carnarvan.

He divided Wales incorporated into England, into Shires and Hundreds.

His great affection to Pierce Gaveston, and Spenser his Favourites, was a
means of stir­ring up the Barons against him.

It is thy sad disaster which I sing Carnarvan▪ Edward; second of that name,
Thy Minions pride, thy States ill managing, Thy Peers revolt, the sequell of
the same; Thy life, thy death I sing, thy sin, thy shame; And how thou wert
deprived of thy Crown, In highest fortunes, cast by fortune down. Sir Francis
Huberts History of Edward the second.

Nine Kings had raigned since the conquest here,

Whom I succeeded in a rightfull line,

My father (all domestick tumults clear)

Did warre, and win in fruitfull Palestine.

This Northern Sun even to the East did shine.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=62) The
French were fearfull hearing but his name,

French, Scots, and Turks aeternized his fame.

He married Isabel, daughter to King Philip, sirnamed le Bean the fair, and
heir to France, all her brothers being dead with­out issue.

Gourney most barbarously caused the mi­serable King to sit on a Mole-hill,
whilest the Barber shaved him, and to take cold water out of a ditch to wash
him withall, which the patient King seeing,Sir. Thomas More. told them, That
in despight of them he would have warm water at his Barbing, and there withall
shed abundance of tears.

Being deposed from his Kingdome through the crafty complotting and practi­sing
of his wife,Cu [...] Isabella R [...]gina Oxo­ni [...] esset, una cum  [...],
mag­no exercitu sti­pa [...] Episcopas concionem habu­it, in qua thema­te
assumpto Do­let mihi caput, o [...]endere cona­tus est, caput in­sanum, nec
adhi­bitis opportunis remediis conva­lesce [...]s corpori dominari non debere.
Godw. de praesul. A [...]g. Vide plura ibid. Speed. he was made away in B
[...]rk­ley-Castle in Glocestershire, by the wicked sub­tilty of the Bishop of
Hereford, who wrote unto his Keepers these few words without points between
them, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est; that by reason of the divers
sense and construction, both they might commit the murder, and he also cleanly
excuse himself. Cambdens Britannia in Glocestershire. Vide Gatakeri
Adversaria. miscel, c. 16.

Never was the fallacy of pointings, or ambiguity of phrase more mischievously
used to the destruction of a King, or the defence of the contrivers, then in
this hai­nous parricide.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=62)

To shed King Edwards bloud

Refuse to fear I count it good.

Where the Comma or pause being put af­ter nolite, bid them not to make him
away, but after timere insinuates a plain encou­ragement to the fact.

The Sphinx who is said to be the Au­thor of this ambiguous riddle,Queen
Isabel, being to re­pass from Zeland into England with an Army, in favour of
her son against her husband, had utterly been cast a­way, had she come unto
the Port intended, being there expected by her enemies: but fortune, against
her will, brought her to another place, where she safely landed. Mon­taigne
his Es­sayes. l. 1. c. 33\. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 19. p. 382\. com­mends
her. sent by the Lord Mortimer, was Adam de Tarleton, who utterly denied any
such intention, when the murderers for their own justification, produced the
writing it self under Queen Isabels Seal, and the Seals of the other
con­spirators.

To which effect came Letters from the Court written by Tarleton, at the Queens
command,

In such a cloudy, and ambiguous sort,

That divers wayes, one might them under­stand

By pointing them; that if they should be scann'd,

He and his Letters might be free from blame,

And they Delinquents, that abus'd the same.

The words were these: (Kill Edward do not feare

'Tis good) which being comma'd diversly

As pleas'd the Reader, double sense may bear.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=63) O Art!
Thou art the earths chief treasury

But being imploy'd to practise villany,

What monstrous births from thy fair womb do spring,

So Grammar here is made to kill a King.

Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.

There was such a terrible famine in his reign, that horse, dogs, yea men and
chil­dren were stolen for food, and (which is horrible to think) the theeves
newly brought into the Gaol, were torn in pieces, and eaten presently half
alive by such as had been longer there.

There was in the Castle of Nottingham, (and at this day is) a certain secret
way or mine cut through a rock, upon which the said Castle is built, an issue
whereof o­peneth toward the River of Trent, which runs under it, and the other
venteth it self far within upon the surface, and is (at this present) called
Mortimers hole; through this the young King Edward the third well armed and
strongly seconded, was con­ducted with drawn swords, by some of his trusty and
sworn servants up to the Queens chamber, whose door (so fear­less is blinde
affection) was unshut, and with her was Mortimer (the Kings master as the
rumour spread him) ready to go to bed, whom with the slaughter of a Knight
[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=63) and one
or two that resisted,Speed. they laid hold upon. This was not reputed a
slender en­terprise, in regard that in Mortimers re­tinue were not fewer (they
say) then one hundred and fourscore Knights, besides Esquires and Gentlemen.
He was after hanged at Tyburn.

K. Edward the second favoured learning,Hollinsh. as by the erection of Orial-
Colledge in Ox­ford, and St. Maries Hall, which were of his foundation, it may
well be gathered.

He was stifled in his bed, and a red hot iron thrust up into his Fundament.Quo
genere moriis Edwar­dus interierit, non facile con­stat: fama exit in vulgus,
illum dum ventrem purgaret, fuisse veru transfixum per clu [...]es. Polyd
Virg. Ang hist l. 18.

He lived forty three years, and raigned nineteen.

### 17.3. EDWARD the third.

He was upon his fathers resignation proclaimed King of England. Fuerat nempè
Rex iste inter  [...]mnes Reges orbis & Principes gloriosus, benignus,
clemens, & magnificus, Belliger suit insignis & fortunatus, qui de cunctis
congressibus in terr [...] & in mari, semper triumphali gloria victoriam
reportavit. Walsingh Hist. Ang. Ed­wardus tertius regnum saelicissimum & rebus
maximis à se gestis gloriofissimum ad annum secundum supra quinquagesimum
produ [...]it. Godw. de praesul. Ang. comment p. 119. Huic regi absque
caeteris naturae ornamentis, cum primis for­mae dignitas suffragabatur,
ingenium providum, perspicax ac mite, nihilporr [...] non sapienter, non con
[...]ideratè agebat, & homo permodestus & frugi, illos sum­mè diligebat,
honoribusque ornabat ac amplificabat, qui probitate, modestia, at­que vitae
innocentia allos antecederent. Militaris disciplinae apprimè sc [...]ens fuit,
ut res ab co gestae testimonio sunt. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 19.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=64) He was
not fifteen years old when he be­gan to raign.Il gaigna deux memorables
batailles en France, prist la ville de Calais, & deux grands Roys
prisonni­ers, & rendit son nom re­doutable à tous ses Voi­sins, Histoire
d'Angleterre Par du Chesne. Floruere faeli­cia arma Edo­vardi tertii Regis,
qui de Iohanne Gallo­rum Rege capto, speciocissi­mè triumpha­vit. Ab hoc
Edo­vardo Garcite­nii equestris or­dinis ceremo­niam institu­tam ferunt. Pauli
Iovii Britanniae de­scriptio. Hic est ille Edovar­dus qui Cale­tum urbem in
continenti Galliae, plures men­ses obsessum at (que) expugna­tum, Philipp
[...] Galliae Regi abhinc ducentis ser nè annis ademit. Id. ib.

He was of an exceeding comely perso­nage, of a pregnant wit, courteous,
gentle, of great temperance.

If we respect either valour, prowess, length of Raign, acts of Chivalry, or
the multitude of famous Princes his children left behind him, he was one of
the noblest Kings that ever England had. Dolemans Conference touching
Succession to the Crown. part. 1. c. 3.

Cambden in his Britannia in Northumber­land calls him our Hector.

He was the greatest scourge to the Nati­on of Scotland of any King of England
either before or after him. Ayscu.

He saith there also, that if this King had a while longer pursued the conquest
of Scot­land, he had easily brought the same under his soveraignty; and that
he esteemed (in regard of the difficulty of holding long his possessions
within the French dominions) the Realm of Scotland a more convenient and fit
member of the Crown of England, then the one half of France, how farre soe­ver
exceeding the other in wealth and magnificence.

He brought Cloathing first into this Island, transporting some families of
Ar­tificers from Gaunt hither.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=64) Upon the
grievances of his people peste­red with the doublings of Lawyers, he commanded
that Pleas should from thence­forth be made in English, Speed. not in French.

He placed Richard his Grandchild, and next heir apparent, in his solemn feast
at Christmas, at his Table next unto himself, above all his Uncles, being the
sons of that King, and men much renowned for their prowess and vertue. Judge D
[...]dridges Epist. Dedicat. to the Principality of Wales. Id. ib.

The Law of Magna Charta was about a dozen severall times confirmed by this
King, during the years of his Raign.It was con­firmed by thir­ty Parliaments
in the successi­on of eight Kings.

In the fiftieth year of Edward the third, all the Lords appeared in Parliament
in person,This was the first Parlia­ment we read of. and not one by Proxy. At
which Parliament, as appears in the Parliament-Roll, so many excellent things
were done, as it was called bonum Parliamentum, Sir Edward Cooks 4th part of
Institutes. the good Parliament.

He disposed of Ecclesiasticall dignities, received homage and fealty from his
Pre­lates, who writ that so much admired Let­ter to the Pope, for the
Liberties of the En­glish Church, Cui pro tunc Papa aut Cardina­les
rationabiliter respondere nescicbant. Wal­sing. an. 1343.

The house of Valois triumphantly raign­ed in France ever since the Raign of
Edward the third, at which time it was then but an Earldome, and descended
from a second [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=65) brother, was of
meer purpose by the French advanced to the throne, under pretences of the
[...]alique Law, made by Pharamond, on­ly to suppress the immediate right and
title of King Edward the third,Stow. who was descend­ed of the French Kings
eldest daughter and heir;He quartered the Arms of France with England. whereby
he justly claimed the Crown of France, Speed. though that very Law made King
Edwards title the stronger (as himself truly pleaded) he being the male,Gersey
and Gernsey parcels of Normandy, belong to the King of Eng­land. albeit his
right descended by the female.

Rex sum regnorum bina rati [...]ne duorum,

Anglorum regno sum Rex ego jure paterno,

Matris jure quidem Francorum nuncupor idem,

Hinc est armorum variatio facta meorum.

The date of this title of France was in the year 1337, the which Enlgand holds
to this day, and our Kings the Realm in effect, saith Iohn de Serres.

At the great battell of Cressy in France, the Commanders about the Prince sent
to King Edward to come up with his power to aid them, the King asked the
messenger, whether his son were slain or hurt, the mes­senger answered no, but
he was like to be overlaid: Well then said the King, return, and tell them who
sent you, That so long at my son is alive, Pro [...]ssards Chron. c. 130. Da
[...]. hist. they send no more to me what­ever happen, for I will that the
honour of the day be his. Speed. And so at last the English obtained the
greatest victory they ever yet had a­gainst the French. Iohn de Serres.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=65) There
were there found the dead bodies of eleven great Princes,The King of Bohemia
was there slain, whose plume of Ostridge feathers won then by the black
Prince, hath ever since been the cog­nizance of the  [...]rinces of Wales. His
eldest son sirnamed the Black Prince the mirrour of Chivalry, not for his
colour, but dreaded in Battels. He at the Battell of C [...]essy which bare
two thirds of 8500 men, fought with little less then 90000, and not many years
after, be­ing fewer by three fourths. The Welch his enemies, in the Battell of
Poi­cticrs he took King Iohn of France prisoner, invironed by all the Princes
& Nobility of that Kingdome. A young Prince twice a Conquerour, having
vanquished his enemy, both by valour and courtesie.  [...] Serres French Hist
o [...] Iohn King of France. and of Barons, Knights and men of Arms, above one
thou­sand and five hundred, of the Commons above thirty thousand.

Not one man of honour or note slain upon the English side.

King Edward after the Battell aftectio­nately embracing and kissing his
victorious son, said; Fair son, God send you good perseve­rance to so
prosperous beg innings, you have nobly acquit your self, and are well worthy
to have the governance of a Kingdome entrusted to you for your valour.

Sir Eustace Rihamant in the encounter at Calis-Gate, (between Sir Walter Manny
and the Lord Charney) met with King Ed­ward, (who disguising himself in
com­mon armour, served under the banner of Sir Walter Manny) and fought so
stoutly with him, that he stroke the King twice down on his knees, but in the
end the King took him prisoner, and then he yeelded his Sword to the King, but
knowing what he was, said thus, Sir Knight, I yeeld me as your prisoner: upon
which cause, the King came after supper to him, and with a merry countenance,
said thus to the Knight: (Sir Eustace) you are the Knight in the [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=66) world that I
have seen most valiant, either in assault of enemies, or defence of himself. I
never  [...]ound Knight that gave so much ado, body to body, as ye have done
this day, whe [...]efore I give you the prize above all the Knights of my
Court, by right sen­tence, and herewithall the King being bare­headed (having
a Chaplet of fine pearls that he ware on his head) took the same Chaplet from
off his head, being fair, good­ly and rich, and said to the Knight: I give you
this Chaplet for the best doer in Arms in this journey past, of either party,
and I desire you to bear it this year for the love of me. I know well, you be
fresh and amo­rous, and oftentimes are among doubty Knights and fair Ladies,
yet say wheresoe­ver ye come, that the King of England did give it you: and I
quite your prison and ransome, depart to morrow if it please you: whereupon
the Knight did not only wear the same Chaplet, in remembrance of so gracious a
benevolence of so worthy a Prince, but also did bear after in his Arms three
Chaplets garnished of pearls. Fern his Glory of Generosity. p. 210, 211.

Mr. Wren in his Monarchy asserted p. 125. saith, The successes of the English
in France alwayes followed the person of the Prince: with us Edward the third,
and Hen­ry the fifth wise and valiant Princes gain­ing, Richard the second and
Henry the sixth [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=66) weak Princes
losing; with them Iohn and Charles the sixth men of no ability losing, Charles
the fifth and Charles the seventh brave Princes recovering.

Edward the black Prince of Wales (who so long governed our Countrey of
Guienne, a man whose conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable
parts of worth and magnanimity) having been grievously offended by the
Limosins, Lho [...]d in his History of  [...]ales calls him the  [...] of
Chivalry of all Europe, a Prince (saith he) of such ex­cellent demea­nour, so
vali­ant, wise and politick in his doings, that a perfect repre­sentation of
Knighthood appeared most live [...] in his person. Se [...] more there. p.
384, 385. though he by main force took and entered their Ci­ty, could by no
means be appeased, nor by the wailfull out-cries of all sorts of people, (as
of men, women, and children) be mo­ved to any pitty, they prostrating
them­selves to the common slaughter, crying for mercy, and humbly submitting
them­selves at his feet, untill such time as in tri­umphant manner passing
through their Ci­ty, he perceived three French Gentlemen, who alone with an
incredible and undaunt­ed boldness gainstood the enraged vio­lence, and made
head against the fury of his victorious▪ Army. The consideration and respect
of so notable a vertue, did first abate the dint of his wrath, and from these
three began he to relent, and shew mercy to all the other inhabitants of the
Town. Mi­chael Lord of Montaigne his Essayes. l. 1. c. 1.

Having had great victories against the French, and other neighbouring Nations,
he instituted the Order of the Garter, and con­secrated [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=67) it to St.
George. He appointed a Garter to be the Ensign of this Order, wrought richly
with gold and precious stones which should circle the leg beneath the knee,In
the year 1 [...]49\.  [...] instituit Garterium ordi­nem, cui  [...]auius
deinde accessit honor,  [...] maxi­mos quosque Reges non pen [...]tuc [...]rit
in id ventre Collegium.  [...]o­lyd. Vng. hist. l. 19. Vide plura ibi [...] &
[...] hist. Belg.  [...] 24\. p. 285, 286. and on it to have these words
ap­parently discerned, Honi Soit Qui Mal Y  [...]ense. Shame to him which evil
thinks.

The number of these Knights, are twen­ty six, whereof the King himself is the
chief.

These Knights wear the Ensign of Saint George (fighting with a Dragon)
fastened to a rich Chain or Collar which weighed and was worth eighty pounds
of English mo­ney. See Montaigne his Essayes. l. 2. c. 7\. of the words of
honour.

About this time the famous Dr. Iohn Wicklef, a man of sharp wit, profound
learning, and of great judgement, did in the University of Oxford publickly
main­tain sundry Propositions and dogmaticall points against the Church of
Rome.

His followers were in the phrase of those dark dayes, called Lollards, whereas
in truth they endeavoured to extirpate all per­nicious weeds which through
time, sloath, and fraud, had crept into the field of Gods Church.

Such was this Kings courtesie & friendly behaviour toward the two captive
Kings of France and Scotland, while they remained together in England, as that
hereby he won [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=67) their love and
favour for ever after, as ap­peared by their repair hither to visit the King
and Queen, and to recreate and so­lace themselves in their company. Thus it
came to pass, that their captivity here, turned more to their own advantage,
and the peaceable enjoying of their estates after the same, then if it had
never hapned unto them.

Mr. Thomas May wrote his victorious Raign in Verse in seven Books.

He raigned almost one and fifty yeares, and lived about sixty five, who of all
the Kings of the Realm (saith Mr. F [...]x) un­to Henry the eight, was the
greatest bridler of the Popes usurped power, whereby Iohn Wicklef was
maintained with aid suffici­ent.

## 18\. CHAP. XVIII.

### 18.1. RICHARD the second.

HE descended from four Edwards, of which the first three were succeeding
Kings; the fourth Prince of Wales sirnamed the black Prince, who dying before
his fa­ther Edward the third, did not attain the Crown. The Civil Warres of
England by Sir▪ Francis B [...]ondi an Italian.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=68) He was
crowned in the eleventh year of his age,In Richardo fuit forme gra­tia, animus
non vilis, quem con­sociorum perver­sitas improbitas, insulsitas, ex­tiuxit
[...] fuit item summa infelici­tas, qui in talent cal [...]itatem in [...]
cidit ut in maxi­mi beneficii perten [...] accepe­  [...]it, abdicare se
imperio, pro quo,  [...]ortaies soleant  [...] omnia pro [...]icere. Po­lyd
Virg. Ang. hist. l 21. and sufficiently shewed the misera­ble condition of
such States as are governed by an Infant King.

He was the goodliest personage of all the Kings that had been since the
conquest.

The beautifull picture of a King sighing, crowned in a Chair of Estate, at the
upper end of the Quire in St. Peters at Westminster, is said to be of him,
which witnesseth how goodly a creature he was il [...] outward linea­ments.
Speed.

He had nothing worthy his great for­tunes but his great birth.

When he had with full hand bestowed upon Sim [...] Montford Earl of Leicester,
all the benefits he could, yea and given his own sister i [...] marriage,He
may be compared to Lewis the tenth of France, cal­led Hu [...], which
signifies mutiny, because of his  [...]arbulent dis­position. he raised a most
dangerous War, and spoiled shamefully a great part of England, under pretence
of restoring the Commonwealth and main­taining liberty: neither left he any
thing undone, to bring, the King under, to change the State & of a M [...]rchy
to bring in an Oli­garchy. But in the  [...], after that fortune had for a
good while favourably smiled upon him,this Montford gave the King  [...] Dan.
hist. f [...]l. 172. Cambd. Brit [...] Worcester­shire. he was slain at Evesh
[...]m in Worcestershire, with many other of the Barons his Com­plices, by the
prowess of Prince Edward.

[...]

[...]

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=68) Although
the Kingdome endured great Crosses in the affairs of State under this King,
yet some have thought, that it found as great a blessing in matters of
Religion, which in those dayes took so deep root in this our Land by the
preaching of Iohn Wickliffe, that the branches thereof did spread themselves
even over the Seas. Speeds Chronicle.

He was the onely Son of that famous Cheiftain, the black Prince of Wales: (a
renowned son of a renowned father) but (as a plant transplanted into a savage
soyl) in degree and disposition wholly dege­nerate, retained a tincture of the
light in­constancy of his Mother,Mr. Bacons Uniform Go­vernment of England,
part 2. c. 1. and the luxuri­ousness of his great Grandfather, Edward the
second, and running his course, came to his end.

He had in his Court a thousand per­sons in ordinary allowance of diet, three
hundred servitors in his Kitchin,Sir Iohn Arun­del had two and fifty new suits
of Apparel of cloath  [...] gold or tissue Hollinsh. above three hundred
Ladies Chamberers, and Landerers. His Apparel was sumptu­ous, and so was it
generally in his time: he had one Coat of gold and stone va­lued at thirty
thousand Marks. One in­terview with the French King at Ards, Chron. in Rich.
the second. Daniels third Book of Civil Wars. when his Wife Isabel was
delivered un­to him, cost three hundred thousand Mark [...].

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=69) Queen
Anne his Wife, Daughter to the Emperour Charles the fourth, first taught
English women the manner of sitting on horseback, [...]ambd. Bri­  [...]annia
in Sur­  [...]ey. which now is used: whereas before-time, they rode very
unseemly astride, like as men do.

The Civil Wars in England, had their beginning from his bad Government,Bellum
Baroni­  [...]um. Henry the fourth did first commence them, and Henry the
fifth suspended them, but they again brake forth under Henry the sixth.

Wat Tyler the Master of the Kentish Re­bels, was slain with a Dagger by
William Walworth Mayor of London, close by the Kings side, in the Kings
defence, who was therefore Knighted, and the City since giveth for Arms the
Dagger.

He was first deposed, then slain. Men are easily emboldened (saith
Guicciardine c. 3\. of his History of Italy) against a Prince that is fallen
into contempt.

The most current report at that time went, that he was Princely served every
day at the Table with abundance of costly meats, according to the order
prescribed by Parliament, but was not suffered to taste or touch any one of
them, and so perished of famine.

Mr. Fox saith he was at Pamfret Castle famished to death.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=69) Sir
Pierce of Extone at last killed him,Haywards life and Raign of Henry the
fourth. though he with an Axe wrested out of one of their hands, first killed
four of those which came with him to murther him.

At the point of his death he groaned forth these words. My great Grandfather
King Edward the second was in this manner de­posed, imprisoned and murthered:
by which means my Grandfather King Edward the third obtained possession of the
Crown; and now is the punishment of that injury powred upon his next
successor. Well this is right for me to suffer, but not for you to do; your
King for a time may joy at my death, and enjoy his desire; but let him
qualifie his pleasures with the expectation of the like justice: for God who
measureth all our actions by the malice of our minds, will not suffer this
violence unrevenged.

He lived three and thirty years, raign­ed two and twenty and three moneths.

Thus far the Plantagenets, have continued in an unquestionable right line; now
follows the division of the houses of Lancaster & York, three of each
succeeding in their order.

  * Of Lancaster,
  * Henry the fourth sirnamed Bulling brook.
  * Henry the fifth of Monmouth.
  * Henry the sixth of Windsor.

Of Yorke three others succeeded upon a better title.

  * 1\. Edward the fourth.
  * 2\. Edward the fifth.
  * 3\. Richard the third.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=70)

### 18.2. HENRY the fourth.

He was son to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lan­caster, from the loyn [...] of whom
the greatest number of the Kings of England, Spain & Por­tugall, since his
time, as also several other per­sons of eminent dignity are descended. Mr.
Dugdal [...]s History of St. Pauls Cathedrall.

He was annointed with an oyl which a certain religious man gave unto Henry the
first Duke of Lancaster (Grandfather to the King by the mothers side) when he
served in the Wars of King Edward the third,Haywards life and Raign of K.
Henry the fourth. be­yond the seas; together with this Prophe­sie, that the
Kings which should be an­nointed therewith, should be the Champi­ons of the
Church.

There was a great contest then between the white and red Rose,Inter flores
re­gia dignitas pe­nes Rosam est. Apud Anglos regia Rosa ru­bra stirpis
Ebo­racensis, alba Lancast [...]ensis. Spelm. Aspilo­gia. the houses of Yorke
and Lancaster. Speed. The red Rose prevailed now, he being the first renowned
King of the house of Lancaster.

He first studied a popular party as need­ing all to support his titles.

There was in his Raign a Parliament held at Coventry, called Parliamentum
in­doctorum, the lack-learning Parliament, ei­ther for the unlearnedness of
the persons, or for their malice to learned men

During the time of this Kings Raign exe­cution by fire was first put in
practice with­in this Realm,Trussels life and Raign of Richard the second. for
controversies in points of Religion.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=70) He shed
the bloud of Gods Saints, and raigned neither long nor h [...]p [...]ily.

Mr. Fox [...]aith his time was full of trou­ble, bloud and misery. He was the
first of the Kings of England (saith he) that put out his hand to the shedding
of the bloud of the Saints, since the conquest.

Humphrey his son was by his brother King Henry the fifth created Duke of
Glo­cester, Humfridus fi­lius Henrici quarit, s [...]ater Henrici quinti,
patruus Henri­ci sexti Regum Angliae, excolu­it tum juvenis, tum etiam senex
virtutem ut qui maximo. Hinc clarus domi militiae (que) & bonis omnibus
gratiss [...]mus. Amavit praeter caetera politas literas, quibus etiam
impendio invigi­lavit. Vidi ego libellum de rebus astronomicis ab eo non
infaeliciter scriptum Mecaenas ille quidem doctorum omnium, quos illis
temporibus, vel Anglia, vel Gail [...]a, vel Italia protulii. Testes
exemplaria antiquissima quidem illa numero 1296, quae Academiae ad Isidis vi
[...]um▪ fitae inchoata ibidem longè pulcherrim [...] operis Bibliotheca
liberaliter contulit. Lel. comment in Cygn. Cant. Vide ejus l. 3. de vtris
illustribus. he was Protector of the Kingdome of England for twenty five years
in the time of King Henry the sixth. He was a man, who nobly deserved of the
Commonwealth and of learning, as being himself very learn­ed, and a
magnificent Patron and bene­factor of the University of Oxford, where he had
been educated, and was generally called the good Duke. Speed.

This Duke Humphrey purchased a won­derfull number of Books, in all Sciences,
whereof he freely gave to a Library in Ox­ford, a hundred and twenty nine fair
Vo­lumes. Bales Conclusion to Leylands New years gift to King Henry the eight.

One saith, all the Henries of the house of [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=71) Lancaster (even
to Henry the seventh) were most eminent for great vertues. Henry the fourth
for his behaviour and courtesie. Hen­ry the fifth for his valour and
magnanimi­ty. Henry the sixth for his justice and piety.

The renowned Prince King Henry the fifth during the life of his father,He took
de­light to lie lurking in high wayes, to steal from himself: for ob­serving
the times that his Tenants were to bring home his rents, he would set up­on
them, yea sometimes to the danger of his life; making them make good in their
accounts as much as had been stolen from them: neither could they defraud him;
for he himself knew best how much they had lost. And if they chanced to hurt
or evil treat him, he liked them the better. Sir Francis Biondi of the Civil
Warres of England. was noted to be fierce and of wanton courage. One of his
servants whom he favoured, was for felony by him committed, arraigned at the
Kings Bench, whereof the Prince being advertised, and incensed by light
persons about him, in furious rage came hastily to the Barre where his servant
stood as priso­ner, and commanded him to be ungived and set at liberty.
William Gascoigne the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, exhorted the Prince to
be ordered according to the ancient Laws of the Realm, or if he would have him
saved from the rigour of the Laws, that he should obtain if he might of the
King his father his gracious pardon, whereby no Law or justice should be
im­peached. With which answer the Prince being more inflamed, endeavoured
him­self to take away his servant. The Judge considering the perillous example
and in­convenience [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=71) that might
thereby ensue,The Prince impatient of contradiction, and who was naturally
gi­ven to blows, insomuch as he would disguise himself to seek occasi­on for
them, gave the Judge such a Cuffe on the ear, as would have stunned any one
who had been less resolute then he: but the Judge neither frighted with the
blow, nor losing his for­mer gravity, said unto him, that the injury done unto
him sitting on that seat, was an of­fence done un­to the King, to whom, and to
whose Laws, he the Prince was doubly obliged; as a Subject, and as a son, Sir
Francis Biondi of the Civil Warres of England. with a valiant courage and
spirit commanded the Prince upon his allegiance to leave the prisoner, and to
depart his way: with which commandement the Prince being set all in a fury, in
a terrible manner came up to the place of judgement, some thinking that he
would have slain the Judge, or have done him some hurt, but the Judge sitting
still without moving, declaring the majesty of the Kings place of judgement,
and with an assured bold countenance, spake thus to the Prince: Sir remember
your self, I keep here the place of the King your soveraign Lord and Father,
to whom you owe double obeysance, wherefore in his name I charge you desist
from your wilful­ness and unlawfull enterprise, and from henceforth give good
example to those which after shall be your proper Subjects  [...] and now for
your contempt and disobedience, go you to the prison of the Kings Bench,
whereto I commit you, and remaine you there prisoner, untill the pleasure of
the King your Father be further known. With which wordes being abashed, and
also wondering at the marvellous gravi­ty of that worshipfull Justice, the
Prince laying his weapon apart, doing re­verence, [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=72) departed, and
went to the Kings Bench as he was commanded, whereat his servants disdaining,
came and shewed to the King all the whole affair. He a while studying, after,
as a man all ravished with gladness, holding his hands and eyes to­wards
heaven cried out with a loud voice: O mercifull God how much am I bound to thy
infinite goodness,  [...]ff [...]ecially, for that thou hast given me a Iudge
who feareth not to minister justice, and also a sin, who can suffer semblably;
and obey justice.

Sir Thomas Eliot in his Governour,p. 102, 103. saith, here a man may behold
three persons wor­thy memory:

First a Judge, who being a Subject, fear­ed not to execute justice on the
eldest son of his soveraign Lord, and by order of nature his successor.

Also a Prince, son and heir of the King in the midst of his folly, more
considered his evil example, and the Judges consci­ence in justice, then his
own estate, and wilfull appetito.

Thirdly a noble King, and wise father, who contrary to the custome of parents,
re­joyced to see his son and the heir of his Crown, to be for his disobedience
by his Subject corrected.

The Oath ex officio (it should rather be called in officiosum) was brought
into the Church under him. The Prelates requi­ring [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=72) it to discover
those which that age e­steemed Hereticks, and especially, those which they
called Lollards, which Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments calls a bloudy
Law.

In his admonition to his son at his death, he said, Of English men, so long as
they have wealth and riches, so long shalt thou have obey­sance, but when they
be poor, they are alwayes ready to make insurrection at every motion.

All the time of his sickness, his will was to have his Crown set upon his
Bolster by him, and one of his fits being so strong up­on him, that all men
thought him direct­ly dead; the Prince coming in, took away the Crown:Sir
Francis Bi­ondi of the Ci­vil Wars of England. when suddenly the King
reco­vering his senses, missed his Crown; and asking for it, was told, the
Prince had ta­ken it: whereupon the Prince being called, came back with the
Crown,Sir Richard Bakers Chro­nicle. and kneeling down, said: Sir to all our
judgements, and to all our griefs, you seemed directly dead, and therefore I
took the Crown as being my right: but seeing to all our comforts you live, I
here deliver it much more joyfully then I took it, and pray God you may long
live to wear it your self.

In his time were the two famous Poets Chaucer and Gower.

None of the sons of Henry the fourth did degenerate: a thing not usuall in so
large a family. Henry the fifth died gloriously in [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=73) the pursuit of
his conquests, the Duke of Clarence valiantly fighting, and though of a
naturall death and Glocester of a violent, yet died they not with less fame
then did the others. Biondi his History of the Civil Warres of England, l. 5\.
in Henry the sixth.

The Duke of Bedfords death is to be num­bred among the chiefest causes of the
loss of France. He was a prudent Prince, of long experience in Arms and
Government, o­beyed by his own, feared by his enemies. Id. ibid.

Fourth Henry was by some blind Bard fore­told,

That he should never die, till he had seen

Ierusalem: fourth Henry will be old,

Ierusalem for him shall be unseen:

No, he shall see it, when he least doth ween.

He swouns at prayers, and by religious men

Is straight convey'd unto Ierusalem.

Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.

The like Prophesie we read of Pope Syl­vester the second, to whom being
inquisi­tive for the time and place where he should die, it was answered that
he should die in Ierusalem, who then saying Mass in a Chappell (called
likewise Ierusalem.) per­ceived his end there to be near, and died.

In this Kings time Guild-Hall in London was built.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=73) Gower
being very gracious with him, carried the name of the only Poet in his time.

He and Chaucer were Knights.

Grasion. Hollinsh.

The King died in Ierusalem-Chamber in minster in the year of his age forty
six.

He raigned thirteen years and a half, wanting five dayes. Fourteen years say
others.

## 19\. CHAP. XIX.

### 19.1. HENRY the fifth.

HE was just, wise, magnanimous, vali­ant.

To this noble Prince (by an assent of the Parliament) all the Estates of the
Realm after three dayes,Quod benevo­lentiae officium nulli antea pri­usquam
Rex re­nunciatus esset, praestitum con­stat: adeo Hen­ricus ab incu [...]ta
aetate; spem om­nibus optinae in­dolis fecit. Po­lyd. Virg. Ang. hist. offered
to do feal­ty before he was crowned, or had solem­nized his Oath, well and
justly to govern the Commonweal, which offer before, was never found to be
made to any Prince of England. Stowes Chron.

His young years were spent in literature in the Academy of Oxford, where in
Queens-Colledge he was a Student under the tuition of his Uncle Henry
Beauford, Speed. Chancellour of that University.

When he came to be King, he made [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=74) Thomas Rodban a
famous Astronomer in those dayes, Bishop of St. Davids, and Iohn Carpenter a
learned Divine, Bishop of Worcester, having known them both, whi­lest he lived
in the University. The Ci­vil Wars of England by Sir Francis Biondi.

Presently after his Coronation he called before him all his old companions,Hic
vir, hic fuit, qui à primo do­cuit honores, ut est in Prover­bio, debere
mu­tare mores, &c. Polyd Virg ib. who had been disorderly with him, strictly
charging them, not to presume to come within ten miles of his Court, untill
such time as they had given good proof of their amendment in manners, and left
any of them should pretend want of maintenance to be any cause of their taking
ill courses, he gave to every one of them a competent means whereby to
subsist, and in stead of them he received the gravest men into his
familiarity, in whom he conceived there was the greatest prudence to take
counsell, and faith to give it, that he might be help­ed by their counsels,
admonitions, and pru­dence.

He kept his Lent in the Castle of Kenel­worth, and whilest he lay there,
messen­gers came to him from the Dolphin of France named Charles, with a
present of Paris-Balls for him to play withall, but the King wrote to him,
that he should shortly send to him London-Balls, with which he would throw
down Paris Walls. And to make good his promise he raised a [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=74) great Army, and
hastened to France, and landed at Caen in Normandy. Charles the sixth then
King of France raised also a mighty Army, and sent a King of Arms to defie
him. King Henry desirous to know the numbers of the French, sent forth Captain
Game for discovery; who brought word that there were of them enough to kill,
and enough to take, and enough to run away. The French were so confident of
victory, that they sent to King Henry to know what ransome he would give; but
he obtained a great victory over them.

He was sirnamed commonly the Alex­ander of England, Dolem. Confer, touching
Suc­cess. part. 1. c. 3. He was so de­vout and ser­viceable to the Pope and
his Chaplains, that he was called of many the Prince of Priests. Fox his Acts
and Monum. v. l. 1. because as Alexander the Great conquered the most part of
Asia in the space of nine or ten years, so did this Henry conquer France in
less then the like time.

The second ornament of the English Nation.

By force of Arms and military prowess maugre the French, he conquered France,
and brought Charles the sixth King of France to that extremity, that after a
sort he surrendred up his Crown unto him.Cambd. Bri­tannia in Mon­mouthshire.

Fuit statura corporis quae justam excederet, corpore gracili, membris
aequalibus ac validis, facie decorâ, collo oblongo, artis militaris
pe­ritissimus; ac ejus gloriâ illustrissimus. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. 22.

Within the term of five or six years, he [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=75) brought the
better part of France under his obedience.

Avaunt proud Rome and brag not of thy men,

Nor thy aetheriall Caesars Wars declare:

Cease peerless Plutarch with thy sacred pen,

The worlds arch-Monarchs aptly to com­pare,

Reason doth urge, and this alleadge I dare,

That Englands Homer pourtrayd hath his War,

Which doth excell the worthiest Caesars Star.

William Herberts Prophesie of Cadwallader.

He was of marvellous great strength, and passing swift in running, insomuch
that he with two other of his Lords with­out Hound, Bow, or other engine,
would take a wild Buck or Doe in a large Park.

He ordained the King of Heralds over the English, which is called Garter.

Never lived English King with more true glory,Speed. nor ever died any in a
more unseasonable time, nor more lamented.V. debatur Deo­rum hominiem (que)
consensus & conspiratio esse in Anglicam fortnnam: cùm ecce subitò in pejus
om­nia labi, cunctà (que) retrò ferri. Henricus, ille Regum, flos; illud belli
fulmen, & su­orum delicium, in medio victoriae cursu, fatis ostensus tantùm,
moritur; infante regni bellì (que) haerede relicto. Forstneri omissorum libe
[...] ad l. 1. Annal Taciti.

It was said of him, that he had some­thing in him of Caesar, which Alexander
the Great had not, that he would not be [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=75) drunk, and
something of Alexander the Great,Constantius Chlo­rus father unto the Emperour
Constantine the Great, having commanded, that all such Christians, as would
not ado [...] his Gods, should depart from his service: did nevertheless is
banish all tho [...]e that denied their faith, and retained the others in his
service and favour; where [...] he gave this reason, That those who had so
little conscience as to be false unto their God, could not be true to him.
Treasury of time [...]. l 9 c. 6. which Caesar had not, that he would not be
flattered.

The King being certified of his son Hen­ries birth, gave God thanks, for
sending him a son, which might succeed in his Crown and Scepter. But when he
heard reported the place of his nativity,Hollinsh. he said unto the Lord Fitz
Hugh his trusty Cham­berlain these words: My Lord, I Henry born at Monmouth,
shall reign a while, As Henry the fifth prophesi­eth here of his son Henry, so
Henry the sixth, afterward pro­phesied likewise of his son Henry. Matth. Paris
hist. Ang Henr. 1. p 62\. mentions also a prophesie of William the Conquerour
concerning his son Henry the first. Aequanimis esto sili, & comfortare in
Domino pacifi [...]è susti­  [...]e, ut fratres tui majores te praecedant, tu
autem tempore tuo honorem totum, quem adquisivi, habebis, & fratribus tuis
divitiis & potcstate praec [...]lles. and much get, and Henry born at Windsor,
shall long raign, and all lose: but as God will, so be it.

The burthen of those Wars lay upon the English mens shoulders, who were at
that time rich and mighty, and had a wise, goodly, and valiant King called
Henry, ac­companied with sage, hardy, and expert Captains, viz. the Earl of
Salisbury, Talbot, and others. When God meant to with­draw [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=76) his goodness
from the English men, this wise King died at Bois de Vincennes, and his son
who proved but a simple man, was crowned King of France and England, and at
Paris. Phil. de Commines.

The Duke of Bedford, Dux Bedfor­diae, vir tam pace optimus, quam bello for
tissimus Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l 23. Vide plura ibid. third son to King,
Henry the fourth, Regent for the English in France fourteen years, having
crowned his master Henry the sixth in Paris, died, leaving behind him an
honourable witness, even from his enemies, That he was a brave Commander, a
true Patriot, and a faithfull servant to his Lord and brother Henry the fifth,
Bacons uniform Government of England. part. 2. c. 13. and to his son Henry the
sixth.

He was Regent of France, Duke of Bed­ford, Alanson, and An [...]u, Earl of
Main, Richmond, and Kendall, and Constable of England.

King Henry died in France in the ninth year of his Raign 1422.He lived thirry
six years. He left to succeed him his only child Prince Henry, about as many
moneths old as his father had raign­ed years.

### 19.2. HENRY the sixth.

He was proclaimed King when he was about eight moneths old, his mother brought
him to the Parliament in London in her bosome.

He was crowned on the ninth year of his age.

His infancy was mightily supported, by [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=76) the notable
valour and policy of his two Uncles, Humphrey Duke of Glocester, and Iohn Duke
of Bedford, to the one was com­mitted the protection of his person and
Kingdome, to the other the managing of the War continued in France.

He was a very simple man, and almost an innocent. Philde Commines. l. 3. c. 7.

He was of a seemly stature,His innocency gave him ho­liness. Sir Francis
Bacon. of a slender body, and of a beautifull face: in whose best of fortune
it was never to prossess more then the name of a King.

What Prophet could have picked out of Mars and Saturn, the manifold mishaps
which befell that Prince of blessed memo­ry, King Henry the sixth, sometimes
sleep­ing in a port of honour, sometime floting in the surges of mishap,
sometime posses­sing forraign Crowns, sometimes spoiled and deprived of his
own, sometime a Prince, sometime a prisoner, sometime in plight to give
succour to the miserable, sometime a fugitive among the desperate? Howards
Defensative against the poyson of supposed Prophesies. c. 14.

History shews us not an example of a Prince,Habingtons Hi­story of Edw. the
fourth. who in so many vicissitudes, ne­ver met with one fully to his
advantage.

He was four times taken prisoner, and in the end despoiled both of his
Kingdome and life.Cambd. Brit. in Yorkeshire.

He was crowned King of France in Nostre Biondi. [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=77) Dame in Paris,
Trussells conti­nuat. of Dan-Hist. receiving the homage and fealty of all the
Nobility of France present, and all the Citizens and Inhabitants of that City,
and the places adjacent.

He was so continent,Erat Henricus vir miti, simpli­cì (que) ingenio, qui pacem
bello, qui requietem solicitudini, qui honestum utili,  [...] curis
anteponebat, & quodemum nihil castius, nibil probius, nihil sanctius: in eo
pudor, modestia, integritas, patientia summa, qui humanos casus, aerum [...]as
omnia id ge­nus vitae tormenta perinde aequo animo ferebat, ac si ipsius culpa
contracta essent; continebat se, ut facilè quibus praecrat contincret, non
inhiabat opes, firtebat honores, at animae tantum saluti studebat, qua sola
sapienter quidem bona, ejùs (que) amissione mala metiebatur ac desiniebat.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist c. 23 p. 492. that at Christide having a shew of young
women presented to him bare breasted, he immediately de­parted with these
words;

Fie, fie, fie for shame,

Forsooth you be too blame.

He willingly pardoned many great of­fences.In weighty matters his affirmation
was forsooth and forsooth. A Ruffian striking him on the face, he only said,
Forsooth you are too blame to strike me your annointed King.

He was never observed dejected upon the report of any sad accident: but
enter­tained all afflictions as sent from the Al­mighty, and absolutely
resigned his will to that of heaven.

He founded Eaton-School and Kings Fuit Henricus animo liberali, qui bonarum
artium studia mirabatur, & e [...]s diligebat, in qui­bus eas esse videret:
quare suos ipse quoque juvit, ut doctrina crudirentur: Condi­dit euim Scholam
magnificam ad Hetonam pagum proximum Vindesoram, in quo collocavit Collegium
sacerdotum pucrorùmque magno numero, qui ibi n [...] ­  [...]rirentur,
docerentque Grammaticam gratuito. Idem Cantabridgiae autor fuit Collegiircgii,
quod bodie ita disciplinarum eultu floret, ut facile omnium Colle­giorum sit
[...] Princeps. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 24. p. 532. [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=77) Colledge, the
Chappell of which last shew­ed the magnificence that the whole should have
been of, had their sounder raigned to have finished them himself.

At Towton about four miles from Yorke, the Armies of Edward the fourth and
King Henry the sixth met,Daniels eighth Book of Civil Warres. where was fought
the greatest Battell our Stories mention in all these Civil Wars, where both
the Armies consisted of above a hundred thousand men, and all of our own
Nation.

One day when he was washing his hands at a great Feast,His Propheti­call
speech. and cast his eye upon his son Henry, then a young youth, he said, This
is the Lad, that shall possess quietly that we now strive for. Caeterùm illud
infortunium a­pud vulgus pre­digio creditur esse demonstra­tum: quandoqui­dem
ferunt, cùm ipse Henricus paulò antè in Se­natu ornatus re­gio habitu
con­sideret, subitò coronam è capi­te in terram ce­cidisse. Polyd. Virg. Ang.
hist. l. 23. This shewed a very pro­pheticall spirit to have been in King
Henry, that could so long before foretell a thing so unlikely to happen. For
this was he that was afterward King Henry the seventh, before whom at that
time there were many lives in being, of both the houses of Yorke and
Lancaster; so some: but my Lord How­ard in his Defensative against the poyson
of supposed Prophesies c. 4\. seems not wholly to ascribe it to that.

King Henry the seventh after laboured his Canonization with the Pope;Ob
pictatem vir babitus sanctissimus, ob inertiam tamen inter pessi [...]nos
Reges numerandus, nam Galliam à patresubactam amisit turpiter, ac postea
deinde Angliae etiam regno excidit. Godw. de Praesul. Angl. but that
suc­ceeded not: for however the world was as­sured [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=78) of hisPhilip
the third King of Spain was wholly addict­ed to exercises of piety, al­wayes
finger­ing his Beads; he sympathi­zed much in nature with this King, but was
not so un­fortunate: for he preserved what his father left him, whereas Henry
the sixth lost France where he had been crowned King in his cradle. Howel his
Hi­story of Naples. piety, there was much question of his Government.

So Habington a Papist in his History of King Edward the fourth.

Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 24. p. 532\. saith thus, Sed morte post statim
obita, id officium praestare nequivit.

Cambden in his Britannia in Surrey saith it was Pope Iulius, and that the
reason why this took no effect was the Popes covetous­ness, who demanded too
great a summe of money for a Kings Canonization, as they term it, so that he
might seem ready to grant those kind of honours not for the Princes holiness
sake, but for gold.

Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the seventh relates it thus, About
this time the King became suitor to Pope Iulius the second, to canonize King
Henry the sixth for a Saint; the rather in respect of that his famous
prediction of the Kings own as­sumption to the Crown. The Pope refer­red the
matter (as the manner is) to cer­tain Cardinals, to take the verification of
his holy acts and miracles; but it died un­der the reference. The generall
opinion was, that Pope Iulius was too dear, and that the King would not come
to his rates. But it is more probable, that the Pope (who was extreamly
jealous of the dignity of the See of Rome, and of the Acts thereof) knowing
that King Henry the sixth was [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=78) reputed in the
world abroad but for a sim­ple man, was afraid it would but diminish the
estimation of that kind of honour, if there were not a distance kept between
In­nocents and Saints.

William Alnwicke Bishop of Lincoln was his Confessor.Gulielmus Alnwick
Epis­copus Lincol­niensis homo propter doctri­nam & morum sanctitatem tant
celebris, ut pris­corum Regum sanctissimus Henricus sex­tus in confessio­nem
cum sibi as­civerit. Godw. de Praes. Ang. Stubbs his dis­course against Q
Eliz. French match.

Dr. Litchfield in his Raign preached 3083 Sermons.

Never any came to be King so soon after his birth, nor left to be King so long
before his death; for he came to be King at eight moneths old, and he left to
be King twelve years before his death.

Holy King Henry, as they call him, was crowned in Paris: yet he lost all on
that side before he was a man, as I remember, or soon after, and before his
unhappy death he lost this land also, which loss of both came by striving for
both.

Richard Duke of Glocester killed him, that thereby Edward the fourth his
brother might be freed from all hostile fear. So Polyd. Virg. and others.

He successively ruled this Land the space of thirty eight years, six moneths,
and four dayes.

### 19.3. EDWARD the fourth.

He came unto the Kingdome, not by power or justice, but by the peoples
incli­nation. Biondi.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=79) He
raigned thirty eight yeares, six moneths, and odde dayes, and after his
redemption of the Crown,Hollinsh. six moneths. He lived two and fifty years,
having by his wife one only so [...], called Edward, Prince of Wales.

He was the goodliest Gentleman (saith Commines l. 4. c. 10.) that ever I set
mine eye on;Fuit Edwardus corpore proce [...]o, ac eminents, quippe qui inter
omnes ex [...]ellcret statura, honesta facie, laetis ocu­lis, patenti
pecto­re, ingenio acri, animo magno, memoria tena­cissima. Polyd. Virg. and l.
3. c. 5\. the beautifullest Prince that lived in his time; but after he grew
gross and corpulent, giving himself wholly to pleasures.

He was a fortunate Prince in the field: for he wan at least nine great
Battels, fight­ing himself on foot in every one of them. Phil. de Com. in his
Hist. Book l. 3. c. 4\. and 6. p. 188\. saith, that King Ed­ward himself told
me, that in all Battels that he wan, so soon as he had obtained victory, he
used to mount on Horseback, and cry to save the people, and kill the Nobles:
for of them few or none escaped. Id. l. 3. c. 5.

In his fourth Book c. 10\. he speaks of an interview between King Edward and
Lewis the eleventh King of France; Lib 2. c. 8\. he shews that an interview
be­tween two great Princes for treaty of their affairs, hurteth more then
profiteth. the French King after some discourse, said pleasantly, That he
should come to Paris to solace himself there with the Ladies, and that he
would give him the Cardinall of Bourbon for his Confessor, who would easily
assoil him of sin, if any were committed. The King of England took great
pleasure in this talk, and answered with a [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=79) merry
countenance: for he knew the Car­dinall to be a good fellow.

Never lived Prince whom adversity did more harden to action; and prosperity
more soften to voluptuousness.Habingtons Hist. of Edw. the fourth. So
im­provident was his memory, that he forgat the greatest injuries, and resumed
the Arch­bishop of Yorke into favour, not bearing so much as a watchfull eye
over a reconciled enemy.

The so fatall division between the house of Yorke and Lancaster, The title and
claim of the house of Lan­caster was but faigned. See Lamberts Per­ambul. of
Kent. with him in a man­ner had both their birth and growth.

I sing the Civil Wars, tumultuous broils,

And bloudy factions of a mighty Land:

Whose people haughty, proud with for­raign spoils,

Upon themselves turn back their conquer­ing hand;

Whilest kin their kin, brother the brother foils,

Like Ensigns all against like Ensigns band;

Bowes against Bowes, the Crown against the Crown,

Whilest all pretending right, all right's thrown down.

Our English Luean, Daniel of the Civil Wars.

The first fortnight of his Raign was died, I will not say stained, with the
bloud of Walter Walker a Grocer, who keeping Shop [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=80) at the Sign of
the Crown in Cheapside, said,Alexander the Great sayling on a time in Tygris
with di­vers Princes, and great Lords, it chan­ced, his Royall Diadem fell
from his head into the River, where being in danger to be lost, a Sailer that
could swim, cast him­self into the water, and not­withstanding the fierceness
of that stream, adventured his life, to save his Soveraigns Diadem: and having
recovered it, and not being able to bring it in his hand, being of necessity
to use both hands to save His life, he held it in his teeth: but being to
work▪  [...]nd strive against the stream, he pu [...] it upon his head; and
so, with much perill of life, recovered the Ship, and presented the Emperour
with his Diadem. This loyall and brave adven­ture of his, was most bountifully
and Princely rewarded; and moreover he had leave, and time given him, to
dispose, and bestow his reward to whom he would; but was judged to forfeir
that head upon which he had presumed to put the Ensign of Majesty. The justice
of the sentence is a­greeable to the grounds of true policy, which in no case
can admit a Sub­ject to make himself a soveraign, no not for an hour. Crashams
Rates of the Popes Custome-house. c. 13. He would make his son heir to the
Crown: a bold jest broke in an evil time: yet do I not side with them, who
taxe the King of severity in this execution; unless I could clear this man
from being particularly facti­ous for the house of Lancaster; or know that
those words were uttered in innocent mirth, without any scorn to King Ed­wards
title.

And however perhaps the extraordinary punishment of such saucy language, was
not then unnecessary to beget authority, and make men cautious to dispute the
de­scent of Princes, when the question was so nice, and arguments not
improbable on either side. Habingtons History of Edward the fourth.

Speed saith his words intended no trea­son,Mr. Fox saith he meant by those
words, his own house. (the Grocer not once dreaming to touch King Edwards
title) yet the time [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=80) being when the
Crown lay at stake, the Law made them his death.

He hearing of a certain prophesie, that G. should dispossess his children of
the Crown, was consenting to his death; in­terpreting G. to be George Duke of
Clarence, which fell out to be Glocester, to whose tyranny he left them by
this ungodly means.

He vanquished in nine Battels, himself being present.

The Scene of his fortune had more chan­ges then any King of England yet,
except his Competitor.

Lust was reputed his bosome-sin; God severely punisht him in his sons, who
were both dispossest of their Kingdome and their lives, by their unnaturall
Uncle: there be­ing so much appearance of right by their fathers incontinency;
that even an Act of Parliament was made to bastardize them.

He was the first of our Kings since the Conquest that married his Subject.

His usuall Oath was By Gods blessed Lady.

He sate on the Kings Bench in open Court three dayes together, in Michael­mas
Term, anno [...] of his Raign, to under­stand how his Laws were executed.

Have we not seen the late King of Eng­land, Edward the fourth of that name,
heir of the house of Yorke, utterly destroy the [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=81) house of
Lancaster, under the which both his father and he had lived many yeares?
Farther, the said King Edward having done homage to King Henry the sixth,
be­ing of the house of Lancaster, did he not afterward hold him prisoner many
years in the Tower of London, the chief City of the Realm, where in the end he
was put to death? Phil. de Commines. hist. l. 5. c. 18.

He saith that their King Lewis the ele­venth of France, in wisdome and sense
far surmounted King Edward.

Lib. 6. c. 2\. and l. 5. c. 13\. he saith of Lewis, undoubtedly he was one of
the wisest and subtilest Princes that lived in his time.

That very day wherein an honourable peace was concluded between Edward the
fourth and King Lewis the eleventh, upon subscribed Articles; it chanced a
white Dove, as Commines writes, to repose her self upon King Edwards pavilion,
whereup­on though many gathered an argument, yet since she sate not equally
between both the Kings, I like much better of a Gascoines observation, who
having been present at the sight, reported unto Philipde Commines, as himself
records, that the Dove repaired to King Edwards Tent, only to this intent, to
refresh and prune her self after a great rain, because the Sun was warmest
there. Howards Defensative c. 24.

Richard Nevill Earl of Warwicke was a [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=81) man of an
undaunted courage, but waver­ing and untrusty, the very Tennice-Ball in some
sort, of fortune; who although he were no King,That whip-King, as some termed
him. was above Kings, as who deposed King Henry the sixth, (a most bountifull
Price to him) from his royall dignity, placed Edward the fourth in the royall
Throne, and afterwards put him down too;Cambd. Brit. in Warwickeshire.
restored Henry the sixth again to the Kingdome, enwrapped England within the
most wofull and lamentable flames of Civill War, which himself at the length
hardly quenched with his own bloud.

In his spirit, birth, marriage and reve­nue,Habington. he was mighty: which
raised his thoughts above proportion.Yet Henry of Bullenbrook son to Iohn of
Gaunt was more power­full. See Dr. Heylins Ani­madversions on the Church-Hist.
of Brittain. l. 4. p. 78, 79.

The greatest and busiest Subject our la­ter age hath brought forth.

That make-King Warwick having the En­glish Crown

Pinn'd on his sleeve, to place where he thought best,

Who set up Princes, and did pull them down,

How did he toyl the Land with his un­rest?

How did his Sword rip up his mothers brests:

Whose greatness, and his popularity,

Wrought both his own, and others tragedy. Sir Francis Huberts History of
Edward the second.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=82) Cecil
Dutchess of Yorke, Sir Francis Ba­cons Hist. of K. Henry the 7th. his mother
lived in Henry the sevenths Raign, and died at her Castle of Barkhamsted,
being of extream years; who had lived to see three Princes of her body
crowned, and four mur­thered.

He being near his death, told his friends, that if he could as well have
foreseen things, as now to his pain he proved them, he would never have worn
the courtesie of mens knees, with the loss of so many heads.

He raigned two and twenty yeares, one moneth, and five dayes.

### 19.4. EDWARD the fifth.

He was scarce eleven years old when his father died,He is by gene­rall consent
numbered a­mongst the Kings, and na­med Edward the fifth, al­though he ne­ver
wore the Crown, nor took any Oath, nor exercised any Authority. The Crown is
but a Cere­mony, to make the King known to his people. and succeeded him in
the Kingdome, but not in the Crown; for he was proclaimed King, but never
crowned: and indeed it may not so properly be called the Raign of Edward the
fifth, as the tyran­ny of Richard the third.

He hearing that his Uncle had left the name of Protector, and taken upon him
the title of King, and was with full con­senting of the Lords to be crowned
within a few dayes following, with the same Crown and in the like Estate as
had been provided for his solemnity; the dejected Innocent sighed and said,
Alass, I would my Vncle would let me enjoy my life yet, though I [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=82) lose both my
Kingdome and Crown.

He and his brother Richard were mur­thered in the Tower.

T [...]win brethren in their deaths; what had they done?

O, Richard sees a fault that they were in;

It is not actuall, but a mortall one,

They Princes were, 'twas their original sin.

Why should so sweet a pair of Princes lack,

Their Innocents-day in th' English Almanack.

Aleyns History of Henry the seventh.

### 19.5. RICHARD the third.

He was king in fact only, but Tyrant both in title and regiment.

He was ill featured of limmes, crook-backed; hard favoured of visage,
malici­ous, wrathfull, envious. It is for truth re­ported, that the Dutchess
his mother had so much ado in her travail, that she could not be delivered of
him uncut: and that he came into the world with the feet forward,Sir Thomas
Mores Hist. of K. Richard the third. and (as the same runneth) also not
un­toothed, whether men of hatred, report above the truth, or else that nature
changed her course in his beginning, which in the course of his life committed
many things unnaturally. Buck (that writes his Raign) writes favourably of
him, but the Chroni­clers generally condemn him.

He was brother to King Edward the [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=83) fourth; and
having most wickedly mur­thered his Nephews,Cambd. Brit. in Glocestershire.
usurped the King­dome by the name of King Richard the third: and after two
years lost both it and his life in a pitched field.

He slew with his own hands King Henry the sixth, being prisoner in the Tower,
as men constantly said, and that without commandement or knowledge of King
Ed­ward the fourth,Speed. who undoubtedly if he had intended his death, would
have appointed that Butcherly office to some other then his own brother.

He slew also that Kings son in the presence of Edward the fourth. Was the
contriver of the death of the Duke of Cla­rence his brother.

He bare a white Bore for his Cognisance.

The Lord Lovell, Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby were chief
rulers un­der him: of the which persons was made a seditious Rime, and
fastened upon the Cross in Cheapside, and other places of the City. It was
this,

The Cat, the Rat, and Lovell the Dog,

Rule all England under a Hog.

For which one Colingborne was executed.

A Prince who deserved to be ranked a­mong the worst men,Cambd. Brit. in Dors
[...]tshire. and the best Kings.

Yet Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the seventh saith, that his good
Laws [[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=83)
were but the brocage of an usurper, thereby to win the hearts of the people,
as being conscious to himself that the true obligati­ons of Soveraignty in him
failed.

He put to death Hastings.

A greater judgement of God then this upon Hastings, Sir Walter Rau­leighs
Preface to his History of the world. Is u [...]us fuit ex percussoribus
Edovardi Prin­cipis sexti Hen­rici [...]ilii qui de­mum pari est affectus
caede. Ita Hastingius suo ad extremum periculo didicit, illam naturae legem
secundum Evangelicum verbum, omnia quae vultis, ut vobis faciant homines, sic
& vos facite illis, impunè violari non posse Polyd Virg Ang hist. l. 25. I
have never observed in any Story. For the self same day that the Earl Riners,
Grey, and others, were (without triall of Law, or ostence given) by Ha­stings
advice executed at Ponfret: I say Ha­stings himself in the same day, and (as I
take it) in the same hour, in the same Lawless manner, had his head stricken
off in the Tower of London.

He had little quiet after the murther of his two Nephews in the Tower of
London. Sir Iohn Beaumont hath well described Bos­worth-field in Verse.

The night before he was slain, he dream­ed that he saw divers images of
Devils,Verum id credo, non fu [...]t somni­um, sed consci­entia scelerum,
conscientia, in­quam, cò gravi­or, quò culpa ma­jor, &c. Polyd. Virg. Aug.
hist. lib. 25. pag. 562. which pulled and haled him, not suffering him to take
any rest, the which vision stroke him into such a troubled mind, that he began
to doubt what after came to pass.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=84) Charles
the ninth King of France, after the massacre in Paris, and divers other
Ci­ties, (wherein were slaughtered about thirty thousand) never saw good day,
but his eyes rolled often, uncertainly in the day with fear and suspition; and
his sleep was usually interrupted in the night with dismall dreams and
apparitions.

He being near his end,Iohn Du Scrres Hist. of France. vomited out bloud
pittifully by all the conduits of his bo­dy, as a just judgement for him that
barba­rously shed it, throughout all the Provin­ces of the Realm.

He raigned two yeares,He and Q. Ma­ry raigned the shortest while of any since
the Conquest. See Psal. 55\. 23. two moneths, and one day.

## 20\. CHAP. XIX.

### 20.1. HENRY the seventh.

THe fourteen Plantagenets thus expiring with Richard the third, five Tudors
take their turns in this manner.

  * Henry the seventh.
  * Henry the eighth.
  * Edward the sixth.
  * Queen Mary.
  * Queen Elizabeth.

They are called Tudors, because Henry the fifth his widow being a French
woman, [[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=84)
married Owen Tudor, from whom Henry the seventh did lineally descend.

In this Nation, how hath the Crown walked, (even since Christs birth) from
Britains to Saxons, Danes, Normans, Plan­tagenets, Tudors, Stuarts. Mrs Shawes
Tomb-stone.

This King pretended a six-fold title to the Crown: By Conquest, Military
electi­on of Souldiers in the fields near Bos­worth, by Parliament, by Birth,
by Do­nation, and Marriage. He did never stand upon his marriage with the
right heir as the foundation of his right unto the Crown; for he knew well
enough, that if that had been his best and only title, though it might make
the power good unto his children, yet while she was living, he must hold the
Crown in her right, not in his own, and if she died before him, it was lost.

Because he was crowned in the field with King Richards Crown,Primus omnium
Angliae Regum stip [...]tore [...] corpo­ris▪ habere caepit, quod à Francis
Principibus sumpsisse fertur [...] Polyd. Virg. found in an Haw­thorn-Bush, he
bare the Hawthorn-Bush with the Crown in it.

He was crowned the thirtieth day of Octo­ber in the year of our Lord 1485, by
Tho­mas Bourehier Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinall.The Kings Guard when
first instituted. Sir Franck Ba­cons Hist. of Henry the 7th. At which day, he
did institute for the better security of his person, a Band of fifty Archers
under a Captain to attend him, by the name of Yeomen of his Guard; and yet
that it might be thought to be ra­ther [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=85) a matter of
dignity, after the imitati­on of that he had known abroad, then any matter of
diffidence appropriate to his own case;Speed. he made it to be understood for
an Or­dinance not temporary,Hollinsh. Chron. but to hold in suc­cession for
ever after.

Through whose care, vigilancy, policy, and forecasting wisdome for times to
come,Vide Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 26 p. 616. the State and Commonwealth of
England hath to this day stood established and invin­cible. Camdens Britannia
in Surrey.

A politick Prince he was, if ever there were any,Sir Walter Rau­leighs Preface
to his History of the world. who by the engine of his wis­dome, beat down and
overturned as ma­ny strong oppositions both before and after he wore the
Crown, as ever King of Eng­land did.

Whose worthy renown like the Sun in the midst of his sphere, shineth, and ever
shall shine in mens remembrance!Sir Thomas E­liots Gover­nour. Henricus noster
septimus, cùm omnes regni rectè admini­strandi artes cal­leret, sic his
or­namentis instructus venit, ut cum pacem exu­lantem exul, ex­torrem (que)
extor­ris concomitatus esset, reducem quo (que) redux apportaret. Twin. Com.
de reb Brit. What incomparable circumspection was in him alwayes found, that
notwithstanding his long absence out of this Realm, the distur­bance of the
same by sundry seditions a­mong the Nobility, Civil Warres and Bat­tels,
wherein infinite people were slain, yet by his most excellent wit, he in few
years, not only brought this Realm in good order and under due obedience,
revived the Laws, advanced justice, refurnished his do­minions, [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=85) and repaired
his mannours,He was a wise man and an excellent King. but also with such
circumspection treated with other Princes and Realms,Sir Francis Ba­cons
Epist. De­dicat. to his hist. He cals him in his hist this Salomon of England,
not only for his actions, but wisdome. of leagues, of alliance, and amities,
that during the most part of his Raign, he was little or nothing disquieted
with War hostile or martiall business. And yet all other Princes either feared
him or had him in fatherly reve­rence.

He could never endure any mediation in rewarding his servants,Sir Walter
Rauleighs Pre­face to his hist. The story of England from the uniting of the
Roses to the uniting of the King­domes is a space of time, which in my
judgement contains more variety of rare events, then in like number of
successions ever was known in an Heredi­tary Kingdome. Sir Francis Bacons
Advancement of learning. l. 2. c. 7\. See more there. There have died in
England in these Civil Warres, since my remembrance, above fourscore person,
of the bloud Royall. Phil. dem Comin. l 1. c. 2. p. 22. Quae exsurrexere
factiones magnae Romanam Rempublicam pe [...] ­sum dedere. Duae quadraetae P
Rempublicam illam  [...]vertere, patritia, & plebeia factio. Duae hic
turbarunt grandes R. Rosae duae, quae in unam arctissimè mixtae, per ipsam
veram mixtionem commixtae sanguinis, placarunt omnia. Albericus Gentilis de
unione Regnorum isput. 2 It happened that there was fallen in communication of
the story of Ioseph, how his master Potiphars wife, would have pulled him to
her bed, and he  [...]led away. Now Master Maior quoth the King, you are a
tall strong man on the one side, and a cunning Doctor on the other, what would
you have done if you had not been Joseph, but in Jo­sephs stead. By my troth
(quoth he) and it like your Grace, I cannot tell what I would have done, but I
can tell what I should have done. The King replied, He answered well. Sir
Thomas Mores Dialogue. l. 1. and therein exceed­ing wise: for whatsoever
himself gave, he himself received back the thanks and the love; on the
contrary, in whatsoever he grieved his Subjects, he wisely put it off on
those, that he found fit ministers for such actions.

By his happy marriage (being next heir [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=86) to the house of
Lancaster) with Elizabeth daughter and heir to Edward the fourth of the house
of Yorke, the white and red Ro­ses were conjoyned. Sir Francis Bacon saith of
Iohn Morton Archbishop of Canter­bury, Chancellor of England and Cardinal. He
deserveth a most happy memory in that he was the principall means of joyning
the two Roses.

From the twenty eighth year of Henry the sixth unto the fifteenth of Henry the
se­venth, the Civil War between Lancaster and Y [...]ke continued, wherein, as
they reckoned, there were thirteen fields fought, three Kings of England, one
Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one M [...]rquesse, eighteen Earles, with one
Vicount and twenty three Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen lost their
lives. Cambd. Brit. in Warwickeshire.

Sir Francis Bacons Hist of Henry the 7th. Tempore fami geratissimi istius
Arthuri, de quo tam incredibilia narrantur à no­stris, ut  [...]a [...]sa
intermixta, veris fidem derogantia, meritissima laude defraudarint v [...]rum
hand dubie insignem & aeterna memoria dignissimum. Godw. de praesul. Ang. Hic
est Arthurus de quo Brittonum nugae bodie (que) delirant: dignus pla­ne quem
non fallaces som [...]iarent fabulae, sed veraces praedicarent historiae,
quippe qui labantem patriam diu sustinuerit, infractas (que) civi [...]m
mentes ad bellum acue­rit. Malme [...]b. de gestis Regum Anglorum l. 1. c. 1.
Regem illum inclitissimum Arthurum legimus duos  [...]racones in suis armis
portasse. Pater suus Vter, qui Pen-dragon vocabatur, habuit magnum corpus &
longum, cum capite multum parvo ad fimilitudinem Draconis, qua de cause Pen-
dragon, i. e. caput Draconi [...] vocabatur. Et sic dictus Rex Arthur portavit
arma paterna, propter habitudinem corporis patris sui assumpta. Bissaei notae
in Upto [...]um. Vide Twini Comment. de rebus `Britannicis. p. 124, 125, 161.
The King (in honour of the Brittish race, of which himself was) named his
first son Arthur, according to the name of that an­cient [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=86) worthy King of
the Brittains; in whose acts there is truth enough to make him famous, besides
that which is fabu­lous.

King Arthur fought twelve Battels with the Saxons and overthrew them.
Hollinsh.

Arthurus belliger illis temporibus dux mili­tum & Regum Brittanniae contra
Saxones in­victissimè pugnabat, duodecies dux belli fuit, duodecies victor
bellatorum. Hunting. hist. l. 2.

That Arthur was one of the nine Wor­thies. There were three Jewes, Ioshua,
David, Iudas Maccabaeus; three Gentiles, Hector of Troy, Alexander the Great,
and Iulius Caesar; three Christians, Arthur of Britain, Charlemain of France,
and Godfrey of Bullen.

Arthur ursum significat, quasi ursinum diceres. Burhillus in MS.

The Prince Arthur died before his fa­ther, and lieth buried in the Quire of
the Cathedrall Church at Worcester.

After was born to the King at Greenwich the Lord Henry his second son, which
was created Duke of Yorke, and after Prince of Wales, who succeeded his father
in govern­ance of this Realm, by the name of Henry the eighth.

His time did excell for good Common­wealths Laws;Sir Francis Ba­cons hist. of
Henry the seventh. so as he may justly be ce­lebrated for the best Law-giver
to this Na­tion, [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=87) after King
Edward the first. For his Laws (who so marks them well) are deep, and not
vulgar: not made upon the Spur of a particular occasion for the present; but
out of providence of the future, to make the estate of his people still more
and more happy; after the manner of the Legisla­tors in ancient and heroicall
times.

The Tax (called Benevolence) was devised by Edward the fourth, for which he
sustained much envy. It was abolished by Richard the third by Act of
Parliament, to ingratiate himself with the people; and it was revived by this
King,Id. ib. but with con­sent of Parliament, for so it was not in the time of
King Edward the fourth.

It is observed as a rule in Politicks, By some An­timonarchicall Writers, whom
I will not un­dertake to ju­stifie.that Dominium sequitur terram, those that
are the greatest proprietaries, have the chief power, as in Turkie, because
none there holds any land but during his life; there­fore the great Turk hath
such unlimited power, and so the Barons were able (they say) to ma [...]e War
with their Prince, be­cause the land was most in their and their Tenants
possession. Henry the seventh therefore being raised by the Nobles,
con­ceiving, that those which exalted him might cast him down, did abate their
pow­er, and made Statutes against Retainers. But Henry the eighth demolishing
the Ab­bies, distributed the lands among the peo­ple, [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=87) and so they
again gained great power by that meanes.

He made a composition with Philip, fa­ther to the Emperour Charles the fifth,
be­ing here in England, that he should deliver into his hands, the Duke of
Suffolke, his mortall enemy, who was fled out of Eng­land, and saved himself
in the Low Countries, alwayes provided that the King should at­tempt nothing
against the Dukes life; which promise notwithstanding, being ner his end, he
expresly by will and testament commanded his succeeding son, that im­mediately
after his decease, he should cause him to be put to death. Montaigne his
Es­sayes. l. 1. c. 7.

There scarce passed any Parliament in this time, without a Law against Riot
and Re­tainers, the King having an eye to might and multitude.

The King was on a time entertained by the Earl of Oxford (that was his
princi­pall servant, both for war and peace) no­bly and sumptuously, at his
Castle at Hen­ninghom. At the Kings going away, the Earls servants stood (in a
seemly manner) in their Livery Coats, with cognizances, ranged on both sides,
and made the King a Lane. The King called the Earl to him, and said; My Lord,
I have heard much of your hospitality, but I see it is greater then the
speech. These handsome Gentlemen and Yeo­men, [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=88) which I see on
both sides of me, are sure your meniall servants. The Earl smiled, and said;
It may please your Grace, that were not for mine ease. They are most of them
my Re­tainers, they are come to do me service at such time as this, and
chiefly to see your Grace. The King started a little, and said; By my faith
(my Lord) I thanke you for my good chear, but I may not endure to have my
Lawes broken in my sight. My Atturney must speake with you. The Earl after
compounded for a thousand marks.

His disposition to crush treasure out of his Subjects purses, by forfeitures
upon pe­nall Lawes, proved the blot of his time.

When among many Articles exhibited by the Irish against the Earl of Kildare,
the last was: All Ireland cannot rule this Earl. Then (quoth the King) shall
this Earl rule all Ireland; and shortly after he made him Deputy thereof.

Iames the fourth King of Scotland married with the Lady Margaret, Sir Francis
Ba­cons hist. of Henry the se­venth. the Kings eldest daughter. During the
Treaty, it is re­ported, that the King remitted the matter to his Counsell.
And that some of the Ta­ble in the Freedome of Counsellors (the King being
present) did put the case; that if God should take the Kings two sons with­out
issue, that then the Kingdome of Eng­land would fall to the King of Scotland,
[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=88) which
might prejudice the Monarchy of England. Whereunto the King himself re­plied;
That if that should be, Scotland would be but an accession to England, and not
England to Scotland, for that the great­er would draw the less: and that it
was a safer union for England, then that of France.

This was the ninth time,Nulli Regum antca cúm in [...] numerato tum in
moventibus rebus major ve­nerat haereditas. Polyd. Vi [...]g. hist. l. 28. de
Hen [...]ico 8 [...]. that since the Conquest, the Scottish Kings have married
with the English Nation. Ayscu.

He left at his death most of it in secret places, under his own Key and
keeping, at Richmond, the summe of near eighteen hundred thousand pounds
sterling; a huge mass of money, even for these times.

His son Henry the eight by his pleasures, by unprofitable Wars exhausted all
that trea­sure in a few of the first years of his Raign.

He died at his Palace at Richmond which himself had built,Anno Dom. 1509.
having lived two and fifty years, and raigned three and twenty years, and
eight moneths.

He died, and in memoriall of his name,

Built that fair Chappell, where he now takes rest;

A rich foundation of a curious frame,

The fairest monument lest unsupprest,

Passing all temples of the gorgeous East:

O strew his Hearse with Roses red & white,

For he both stemmes did in one unite.

Stor [...]rs Wolseius aspirans.

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=89)

### 20.2. HENRY the eighth.

Seven is a number fatall from the heavens. But eight King Henry passing all
the sevens. Storers Wolseius aspirans.

Of personage he was tall and mighty,He overthrew Sir William Kingstone both
horse and man before three Queens. and in his latter years somewhat gross, in
wit and memory excellent, such majesty and humanity as was comely in such a
Prince.

Cui natura fortuna (que) supra Regium nomen, incomparabilis formae Herberts
hist. of Henry the 8th. & maxime praestantis in­genii accumulata dona
contulerunt: nemo enim è tota Anglica juventute, vel staturae dignitate, vel
venustate oris, vel nervorum firmitate Re­gem aequavit. Paul. Jov. Britanniae
descript.

Huic erat à teneris annis ars bellica cordis

Ut reliquas dotes, condignas principe tanto,

Corporis at (que) animi non sit memor are necesse.

Quod fortis, clemens, humeris quod & alitor ibat

Omnibus, egregia facie vultu (que) decoro.

Oclandi Anglorum praelia.

It hath been observed by Historians, of Tiberius Emperour of Rome; of Mahomet
the Great, Emperour of the Turks; and of Henry the eight, King of England;
that there was no security in their love, but that such as were highest in
their favour, were nearest to ruine.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=89) He
brought unto the block two Queens two noble Ladies, one Cardinall declared; of
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and the sons of Earls, no fewer then twelve; Lords
and Knights eighteen of Abbots and Priors thirteen; Monks, and religious
persons, about seventy seven, and many more of both Religions, to a very great
number.Having a de­sire to marry within degrees unlawfull, he set his learned
men on work to prove it law­full, and again after a while (being cloy'd and
desiring change) set them again on work to prove the former marriage
un­lawfull. He ne­ver spared m [...]n in his anger, nor woman in his lust. Sir
Ro­bert Naunton's Frag. Regal. in Q. E. Dr. Heylins Ecclesia Restaurata.

That is a tart expression of Sir Walter Rau­leigh in his Preface to his
History of the world. If all the pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince
were lost in the world, they might all again be painted to life out of the
Story of this King. How many wives did he cut off, and cast off, as his fancy
and affection changed.

When he was ready to give accompt to God for the abun [...]ance of bloud
already spilt, and knew he was no longer able to live, he imprisoned the Duke
of Norfolk the father, signed a Warrant for the execution of the Earl of
Surrey his son, within nine dayes after he himself expired.

Unto a stately great outlandish Dame,

A messenger from our King Henry came

(Henry of famous memory the eight.)

To treat with her in matter of great weight;

As namely, how the King did seek her marriage,

Because of her great vertue and go [...]d car­riage.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=90) She
(that had heard the King lov'd change of pasture)

Repli'd, I humbly thank the King, your master,

And would, (such love his same in me hath bred)

My body venter so, but not my head.

Sir Iohn Harringtons Epigrams.

Maximilian the Emperour was retained by him as his souldier.

He not only wore the Cross of St. George, but received his pay duely, viz. a
hundred Crowns per diem. L. Herbert in Hen. the 8ths life.

Sub Rege Anglorum magnus meret Induperator,

Germani (que) truces, duro gens strenua bello.

Oclandi Anglorum praelia.

The Raign of this King continued with great nobleness and fame the space of
thirty eight years. During whose time and Raign was great alteration of
things, as well to the Civil State of the Realm, as especially to the State
Ecclesiasticall, and matters to the Church appertaining. For by him was exiled
and abolished out of the Realm, the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
idolatry and supersti­tion somewhat repressed, images defaced, Abbeys and
Monasteries pulled down, sects of Religion rooted out, Scriptures reduced to
the knowledge of the vulgar tongues, [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=90) and the state
of the Church and Religion redressed. Fox his Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p.
63\. See B. Bedells Examinat. of Wadsworths motives c. 10.

He was much addicted to the reading of Thomas Aquinas, Accuratè vacábat
literis, vaca­bat animi gra­tia musicae, lege­bat studiosè li­bros divi
Tho­mae Aquinatis, & hoc agebat hortatu Volsaei, qui totus erat Thomisticus.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 27\. Mr. Seldens Ti­tles of honour. part. 1. c. 4.
and was therefore (as some think) called by Luther Thomisticus, acerrimus
ingeniorum aestimator. Had. Jun. Epist. D. Dilso.

He wrote a volume against Luther in de­fence of Pardons, the Papacy, and the
sup­posed seven Sacraments. Of this Work the original is yet remaining in the
Vati­can at Rome, and with his own hand, thus inscrib'd;

Anglorum Rex Henricus Leoni 10. mittit hoc opus & fidei testem & amicitiae
Where­upon saith Sleidan, Pontifex honorisicum Re­gi cognomen tribuit, Titulus
iste Co­thurnus est, & cuilibet pedi, cuilibet fidei ap­tari potest, non minus
Papae qui  [...]edit, quàm vestrae. Dido­clav. praefat. ad Altare Damas­cenum.
Defensorem appellans Ecclesiae, which is the same with Defender of the faith.
This title was given him a­bout the twelfth year of his Raign. Vide Polyd.
Virg. Ang. hist. l. 27. p. 664.

His fool coming unto the Court, and finding the King transported with an
unu­suall joy, boldly asked him the cause thereof, To whom the King answered,
It was because the Pope honoured him with a stile more eminent then any of his
Ancestors; Good Harry (quoth he) let thou and I de­fend one another, and let
the faith alone to de­fend it self.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=91) Fisher
was not the Author of King Henry his Book against Luther (as Sanders Lib. 1.
de schismate An­glicano. and Bellarmine will have it) nor Sir Thomas More (as
others say) though I doubt not but they might both revise it by the Kings
favour,My Lord Her­berts life of Henry the 8th and where it was needfull also
in­terpose their judgement.

Many thought that was compiled by Sir Thomas More, some by the Bishop of
Ro­chester, and others (not without cause) suspected it to be the work of some
other great Scholar. Godwins Annals of Eng­land.

The Pope excommunicating him, he fell off from the Pope.

Luther in an Epistle to the King saith thus, Verum etiam quód fide dignis
testibue di­dici, libellum sub majestatis tuae nomine in me editum, non esse
Regis Angliae, ut videri vole­bant subdoli sophistae, qui majestatis tuae
titulo abusi, non senserunt quantum sibi ipsis pericu­lum in Regia ignominia
pararent: praesertim illud monstrum, & publicum odium Dei & hominum Cardinalis
Eboracensis, pestis illa regni tui. The King in his Answer to this Epistle
affirms it to be his. Iam quantumvi [...] te fingas credere, editum à me
libellum, non esse meum, sed meo nomine subornatum à so­phistis subdolis,
tamen & meum esse multi majori fide digni, quàm sunt tuâ illi fide digni
testes cognoscunt: & ego quanto tibi minus pla­cet, tanto magis libenter
agnosco.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=91) He
caused to be put into the Liturgy, Neque Roma­nam Ecclesiam ab Anglia
ex­pulisset Henri­cum, nisi prior clemens Henri­cus à Romana e­jecisset
Ecclesia. Barclasi vind. p [...]o Regibus ad­vers R. Bellarm. Sanderus de
schism ate An­glicano l. 1. Ab Episcopi Romani tyrannide & detestandis
enormitatibius, libera nos Domine, heroica ani­mi magnitudine imbelles
pontificum bullas, & instatas execrationibus buccas despicatui habuit.
Renigerus de Pii quinti & Gregorii decimi tertii Romanorum pontificum
furoribus.

He thrust out the Popes Supremacy, that he might be revenged of the Pope, who
would not allow of his divorce from his first wife, but he continued much of
the Popish Religion, and made six Arti­cles called a whip with six strings,Dii
bo [...]i! quo­modo hic vivunt gentes? which were the death of many godly
men,Lever saith he did more then any Prince in Christendome before him e­ver
did, the Pope being then so great. Lever in his history of the Defender of the
Catholick faith, speaks much of the suppressing of Abbeys. And Iura Cleric. 3.
More. being perswaded thereto by Bishop Gardiner.

There is a story of one, who seeing then both Papists hanged for traytors,
because they opposed the Kings Supremacy, and Protestants burned for
hereticks, in regard they denied the six Articles, cried out, What Religion is
there here in England? where­upon one asked him, What Religion he was of; he
answered, He was of the Kings Re­ligion.

Nor was that boysterous King so much to blame in dissolving materiall Temples
or houses (rather abused then consecrated to superstition) as he was, after
this Re­formation (if so it may be called) in de­stroying so many living
Temples of God,See the Pre­face to Sir H. Spelmans Book De non teme­rand [...]
Ecclesi [...] which sought not the dissolution of his Kingdome, nor any other
Reformation [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=92) of him and his
people, save only the clear­ing and purifying of their hearts and brests,
(which had been consecrated unto Gods service) from the infection of Romish
super­stition and idolatry. Dr. Iacksons Com­mentary on the Creed, l. 11. c.
38.

He was counted the common Umpire of Christendome.

He exceeded all his Progenitors in setting up sumptuous houses.

He confirmed Christ-Church in Oxford, and erected Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge.

The professors of the Hebrew and Greek tongues were first instituted by him in
both the Universities. Sit Rich. Bakers Chron.

In running at Tilt and such exercises, he overcame the rest.

Cum lectissimi equites Cataphracti in lud [...] ­cro spectaculo infestis
hastis concurrerent, tanta arte id bellici vigoris munus implebat, ut ei
pro­posita victoribus pr [...]mia integra populi judicio, saepissimé
deferrentur. Paul. Jov. Brit. de­script.

He could not only sing his part, but of himself compose a Service of four five
and six parts. Eras. in farrag. in Epist.

An old Priest  [...]lwayes read Mumpsimus De­mine for Sump­simus: whereof when
he was admonished, he said, That he had now used Mumpsimus thirty years, and
would not leave his old Mump­simus for their new Sumpsimus. Pacaeus de fru­ctu
qui ex doctri­na percipitur. Finding fault with the disagreement of Preachers,
he would often say, Some are too stiffe in their old Mumpsimus, and others too
bu­sie and curious in their new Sumpsimus.

King Ine out of his devotion to the See of Rome, enjoyned every one of his
Sub­jects, [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=92) that possessed
in his house of any one kind of goods to the value of nineteen penes,Cum ab
Iuae tempore ad hanc (inquit Sleida­nus Comment. l. 9.) atatem us (que)
Britannia Romanis Episco­pis eam pecuni­am dependisset, Henricus (sci­licet
8.) omnium primus inhibuit eam amplius per­solvi. Selden. Analect. Anglo.
brit. l. 2. c. 4. Vide Spelman. de Consil. p. 312, 374. to pay yearly upon
Lammas day, one peny to the Pope, which at first was contributed under the
name of the Kings alms, but af­terwards was paid by the name of Peter-pence.

The Pope of Rome had out of every Chim­ney of England, Ireland, and Scotland,
Wales, and Cornwall, a penny a year, for five hun­dred years together.

Omnis qui habet triginta denariatas vivae pecuniae in domo sua de proprio suo
Anglorum lege dabit denarium sancti Petri. Hoved. An­nal. pars posterior. p.
603.

King Henry first forbad this to be paid to the Pope.

There preached one before him whose Sermon the King liked not, as there was
reason; the King willed Sir Thomas More then being Lord Chancellor, to give
the Preacher thanks worthy such a Sermon. He being a man of a pleasant wit,
spake a­loud to the Preacher, that the King might hear, and said, The Kings
Majesty thanketh you for your notable Sermon: which when the King heard, he
called Sir Thomas to him, and said, What mean you my Lord to give such thanks
in our name? If it like you, quoth he, there be some things notable evil.

It is a note worthy to be remembred, that Thursday hath been a fatall day to
[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=93) King
Henry the eight,Stowes Chron. in the life and Raign of Q. Eliz. and all his
posterity; for himself died on Thursday the twenty eighth of Ianuary; King
Edward on Thurs­day the sixth of Iuly; Queen Mary on Thursday the seventeenth
of November; and Queen Elizabeth on Thursday the twenty fourth of March.

After Dr. Collets Sermon preached to him, and long communication with him by
occasion thereof, he dismissed him with these words, Lot every one have his
Doctor as he liketh, this shall be my Doctor.

Being necessitous, he was offered by the House of Commons in a Parliament
toward his latter end, all the lands and houses of the two famous
Universities, to be confiscated to his Exchequer, by a most mechanick
prostitution of the learning, the honour, and the piety of the Nation: but he
told them not without a just scorn, that he had too much of a Scholar in him,
to destroy two such Universities as the world had not the like.

His purpose was (if he had lived) to have made a perfect Reformation of
Religi­on saith Mr. Fox in his second Volume of his Acts and Monuments o [...]
the Church. p. 647\. and he gives there two reasons of his opini­on. But the
secret working (saith he) of Gods holy providence, which disposeth all things
after his own wisdome and pur­pose, thought it good rather by taking the
[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=93) King
away,He prepared the way to Reformation, as his own power and pro­fit was
con­cerned in it. He excluded the Popes Au­thority, and caused him­self to be
decla­red supreme head of the Church of Ireland. to reserve the accomplishment
of this Reformation of his Church to the peaceable time of his son Edward, and
Eli­zabeth his daughter, whose hands were yet undefiled with any bloud, and
life unspot­ted with any violence or cruelty.

Cardinal Woolsey, and after him Arch­bishop Cranmer were in great favour with
him, Sir Thomas Moor and the Lord Crom­well were also highly esteemed by him.

Francis King of France after the death of King Henry the eight, was much
disposed to melancholy, whether for that he being some years the younger, was
by his death admonished of the like approaching fate. They were also of so
conspiring a simili­tude of disposition and nature,Lever in his history of the
defenders of the Catholick Faith, com­pares him with Frederick Barbarossa the
Emperour of Germany. that you shall hardly find the like between any two
Princes of whatever different times. He cele­brated the Funerals of King Henry
in the Cathedrall at Paris, though excommuni­cated by the Pope.

Many learned men lived in his dayes, Iohn Collet Dean of Pauls, and founder of
the School there; William Lilly the first Schoolmaster of Pauls School, after
it was erected; Thomas Linacer or rather Linaker, a learned Physician, and
well seen in the tongues; Richard Pace a good Linguist; Iohn Fisher Bishop of
Rochester; Sir Thomas More an excellent Scholar; Iohn Frith and William
Tindall, Robert Barnes Martyrs; [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=94) Robert
Wakefield a good Linguist; Sir Thomas Eliot; Edward Lee Archbishop of Yorke;
Iohn Leland a great Antiquary; William Gro­cin very expert in Greek and
Latine; Hugh Latimer Bishop and Martyr, who hath put out an elegant Oration in
Latine, thus en­tituled, Hugonis Latimeri Anglicani ponti­ficis Oratio, apud
totum Ecclesiasticum Conven­tum, antequam consultatio publica iniretur, de
Regni statu per Evangelium reformando, Regni invictissimi Regis Henrici 8•, 6•
anno vi­gessimo octavo habita; where he speaks of ma­ny things fit then to be
reformed; and well concludes, Si nihil est emendandum in com­muni, saltem
emendemus nos ipsos singuli.

He raigned thirty seven years, and nine moneths, and died in the six and
fiftieth year of his life, leaving behind him three children, Edward, Mary,
and Elizabeth, all which also raigned after him.

### 20.3. EDWARD the sixth.

Next after the death of King Henry, suc­ceeded King Edward his son, being of
the age of nine years. A Prince although but tender in years, yet for his sage
and mature ripeness in wit and all Princely ornaments, as I see but few to
whom he may not be e­quall, so again I see not many to whom he may not justly
be preferred. Fox▪ his Acts & Monuments of the Church. vol. 2. p. 65 2. He
fitly compares him there to good Iosias. Fa­vour [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=94) and love (saith
he) of Religion was in him from his childhood; such an Organ given of God to
the Church of England he was, as England had never better. Id. ib.

All King Henries issue for themselves in their severall kinds,Sir Walter
Rauleighs Pre­face to his hist. of the world. were Princes of emi­nent vertue.

As Henry the eighth with Solomon was blame-worthy for women, so he left but
one son and two daughters. Solomon had Rehoboam, a fool and unfortunate: his
daughters but obscure, and both of them Subjects. But Henry was more happy in
Edward his son, another Iosiah; and his sisters both Soveraignes of an
Imperiall Crown. Speed.

Lever compares him to Iosiah in severall respects.

He was born at Hampton-Court, on the twelfth day of October anno 1537, being
the only surviving son of King Henry the eight, by Iane his third wife,
daughter to Sir Iohn Seymer Knight.

It hath been commonly reported, and no less generally believed, that Prince
Ed­ward being come unto the birth, and there wanting naturall strength to be
delivered, his mothers body was ripped open, to give him a passage into the
world, and that she died of the Incision in a short time after.

Whence this Epitaph was made upon her. [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=95) Phoenix Jana
jacet, He spake French perfect­ly, could de­claim in Latin ex tempore and that
with­out any stick­ing or stamme­ring; he under­stood Greek, Spanish, and
I­talian▪ a flowing kind of elo­quence he had, yet grave and polite, such as
became a Prince, alwayes measuring his words by the thing he spake of. Dr.
Hack­wels Apology of Gods provi­dence in the government of the world. l. 1. c.
11. Sect. 12\. See more there. nato Phoenice: dolendum Saecula Phaenices nulla
tulisse duos.

Alluding to the Crest of her father, a Phenix in flames within a Crown.

Yet Dr. Heylin in his Ecclesia restaurata saith, there are many reasons to
evince the contrary, that he was not so born.

The other was not more poetically then truely written, he being, considering
his years, an admirable President for all ages, of piety, learning, clemency,
magnanimity, wisdome and care in governing his people.

As Iulius Caesar in the midst of his great­est actions, wrote an exact and
curious Commentary of his notable enterprises by Arms: so King Edward during
all the time of his Raign, but most especially towards the end, kept a most
judicious Journall of all the most principall passages of the affairs of his
estate.

Inclytus Edvardus formatus ab ubere matris

Confestim doctis à praeceptoribus artes

Ingenuas omnes didicit, qui Graeca Latinis

Adjungens studio, paucis profecerat annis,

Ut foret inferior nulli quem terra Britanna

Protulerat, claro magnorum ex stemmate Regum.

Nullus adaequari posset, si flexilis  [...]tas

In puero egresso nondum tria lustra duos (que)

Annos, ingenii aut praecox spectetur acumen:

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=95) Quantum
ad doctrinas virtutes (que) attinet almas

Ille erat Europae Phoenix, quem funere acerbo,

(Ut flos vere novo viridanti carpitur horto)

Sustulit ante diem, mors immatura Britannis,

Invidet haec terris pietatem & jura colentes.

Oclandi Anglorum praelia.

In his childhood, being about to take down something, which seemed to be above
his reach, one of his fellowes offered him a bossed plated Bible to stand
upon, and heighten him for taking that which he desi­red. But he perceiving it
to be a Bible, with holy indignation resused it, and sharply reproved him that
made the offer. A strong assurance of that dear esteem and veneration, in
which he held that sacred Book in his riper years. Dr. Heylins Histo­ry of
Edward the sixth.

He hath this observation in his Diary,A piis atque eruditis praecep­toribus D.
Coxo. & Jo­hanne Checo Graecis Lati­nis (que) literis in­stitutus, tum sa
[...]a Religione ad praescriptam divini verbi normam imbutus aetatem longe
suam doctrinae virtute (que) superavit. Anglicanam Ecclesiam rudem adhuc &
informem tam accuratè sincera Reli­gious perpolivit, omnes (que) faces
pontificias expurgavit, ut à piis omnib [...] alter Josias merito dictus fit.
Josc. Antiq. Brit. Magno miraculo humanarum rerum tanti ingenii & tantae
expectationis p [...]r educabatur, &c. Hier Card. de Edv. 6\. Rege. Dr. Cox
was  [...] utor also to Q Eliz. who recalled him from beyond seas, restored
him to many Church-dignities, and appointed him to preach, that day she went
to her first Parliament. Engl. Eliz. the originall of which is in the hands of
Sir Thomas Cotton.

At the sixth year of my age, I was brought up in learning by Dr. Coxe, who was
after my Almner, and John Cheek Master of Arts, two well learned men, who
sought to bring me [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=96) up in learning
of tongues, of the Scripture, of Philosophy, and all liberall Sciences. Also
John Belmain French man, did teach me the French tongue.

He was annointed King at Westminster, by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canter­bury, being of the age of nine years.

A Prince of great devotion, constancy of mind,Had he lived, he would no doubt
have made a full Reformation of those foul corruptions that remained, and yet
remain to this day, and would have reduced all the Church­es in his Do­minio
[...]s, unto the Primitive and Apostoli­call Order and Discipline, as Bucer in
his Book De Reg­no Christi writ­ten to him ear­nestly desired. Whetenhall of
the abuse, now in questi­on in the Church of Christ. love of the truth, and
incredibly studious. Godwins Annals of England.

He knew all the principall Ports in Eng­land, Scotland, Ireland, France, and
other Countries not far distant, how they lay, when the tide served, what
vessels of bur­den they could receive, and what winds served for entrance.

He reformed Religion.

He caused Images and all monuments of Idolatry to be destroyed, and a great
Bible in English to be set up in every Church.

He was in body beautifull, of a sweet aspect, and specially in his eyes, which
seemed to have a starry liveliness and lustre in them. He would answer
Embassadors sometime upon the suddain, either in French or Latin. He could
call all Gentlemen of account through his Kingdome by their names.

When Ioan Butcher (a blasphemous Heretick) was to be burned; all the Coun­sell
could not procure him to set his hand to the Warrant. Wherefore they employed
[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=96) Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, to deal privily with him for his
subscription. But the King remained firm both in reason and resolution,
affirming, that he would not drive her headlong to the Devil: but because
Hereticks for the most part have a strain of madness,Haywards life and Raign
of Edward the sixth. he thought it best to ap­ply her with some corporall
chastisements, which with respite of time might happily reduce her to good
order. The Archbishop was violent both by perswasions and en­treaties, and
when with meer importunity he had prevailed, the King in subscribing his name,
said, that he would lay all the charge thereof upon the Archbishop before God.
Of all the Pa­pists in his Raign, there was not one man lost his life. To the
godly there was no dan­ger, unless it were by wealth and prosperity. Fox his
Act. and Mon. A. D. 11 [...]0. Not many years passed, but this Archbishop also
felt the smart of the fire, and it may be, that by his importunity for bloud,
he did offend, for a good thing is not good, if it be immoderately desired.

A Miller who had been busie in rebellion against the King, knowing the danger,
willed his man to take the name of the master, if any enquired after him. Sir
An­thony Kingston Provost Martiall came to the Mill, and calling for the
master, the man in his name presented himself, who strait commanded him to the
Gallows; the ser­vant then seeing the danger of death,Speed. con­fessed he was
not the master, but the man. Well, said the Knight, thou canst never do thy
master better service, then to hang for him, [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=97) and thereupon
trusted him up in the next tree

The Lord Protector in his dayes marcht with a powerfull Army into Scotland, to
demand their Queen Mary in marriage to our King, according their promises. The
Scots refusing to do it, were beaten by the English in Musleborough fight. One
de­manding of a Scotch Lord taken prisoner, Now Sir, how do you like our Kings
marriage with your Queen? I alwayes (quoth he) did like the marriage, but I do
not like the wooing, that you should fetch a Bride with fire and sword.

The Kings Uncles, Edward-Duke of So­merset, Protector of his person, Realms
and Dominions, and Thomas Lord Seymour Baron of  [...]udley the younger, high
Admi­rall of England, were both beheaded. Strife between their wives about
place and prece­dency, caused the death of their husbands, and the death of
the young King followed speedily after.Vide Humfre­dum de Nobi­litate. l. 2.
p. 232, 233. Sir Thomas Seymour Admi­rall, and the younger brother, married
the Queen Dowager, whose hap it was of all the rest to survive her husband.
She contested with her sister in law for priority of place: both were
privately encouraged; neither would give way to the other. The one claimed it
as she had been once Queen, the other challenged it as she was the present
wife of the Protector. The wives set their [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=97) husbands at
oddes, and their enemies took hold of this advantage. The Admirall was shortly
questioned for treason, by con­sent of his brother condemned in Parlia­ment,
and lost his head. In the same moneth was the Protector committed to the Tower
by the Lords of the Counsell, and after beheaded.

In this Kings dayes, when Bonner was kept in prison, reverend Ridley having
his Bishoprick of London, Fox Martyr. vol. 3. p. 431. would  [...]ever go to
dinner at Fulham, without the company of Bonners mother and sister; the former
al­wayes sitting in a Chair at the upper end of the Table. These guests were
as constant as Bread and Salt to the Board, no meal could be made without
them.

He died in the seventh year of his Princely Government,Ipse Rex  [...]orum or
efid o nudi­tus, aut Sitiosorum immannati ex positus, imma [...] ­rè (morbo an
ve­neno incertum) praeripitur; incredibili ob eximias supra aetatem virtutes
deside­rio apud populum relicto. Apparatus ad Cambd [...]i Annales. in the
sixth of Iuly, anno 1553\. Some write that he was poy­soned.

The death of this Prince was lamented of all the godly within Europe, for the
gra­ces given unto him of God, as well of na­ture, as of erudition and
godliness, passed the measure that accustomably is used to be given to other
Princes in their greatest per­fection, and yet exceeded he not sixteen years
of age. Knoxe his Ecclesiasticall Hist. [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=98) of Scotland. l.
1. p. 97\. I wonder that Do­ctor Heylin in his Epistle before his Ecclesia
Restaurata should say therefore, Whose death I cannot reckon for an infelicity
to the Church of England.

Cardan made this Epitaph of him.

Flete nefas magnum sed toto flebitis orbe

Mortales; vester corruit omnis honos.

Nam Regum decus & juvenum flos; spes (que) bono­rum

Deliciae saecli, & gloria gentis erat.

Dignus Apollineis lachrymis, &c.

It is to this day a question both how this King died, and where he was
[...]ried.

### 20.4. Queen IANE.

The Lady Iane Gray, whom King Ed­ward had declared for his next Successour,
was eldest daughter of Henry Lord Gray, Duke of Suffolke, Her mother was the
La­dy France's daughter; and in fine, one of the co-heirs of Charles Brandon,
the late Duke of Suffolke, by Mary his wife, Queen Dowager to Lewis the
twelfth of France, and youngest daughter of King Henry the se­venth,
Grandfather to King Edward now deceased.

She spake the Latin and Greek tongues, with as sweet a fluency, as if they had
been naturall, and native to her; exactly skil­led in the liberall Sciences,
and perfectly [[Page
179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=98) well studied
both kinds of Philosophy.

She was most zealously affected to the true Protestant Religion, then by Law
esta­blished.

She was urged by her near friends to ac­cept of the Crown.Queen Mary caused
[...]et to be beheaded.

Her Raign was but nine dayes: her life not twice so many years, as she raigned
dayes.

Ascham, Ann [...] Maria Schurman, Master Fox, and others, speak of her rare
accom­plishments.

### 20.5. Queen MARY.

It is a question much agitated, of the rule of women,  [...], An licita?
Bo­dius on Ephes. 5\. 22. dislikes it. Bodin de Republica l. 6. c. 5. &
method. Hist. c. 6\. much opposeth it.She was mar­ried to Philip the second
King of Spain, who was long, but well pro­portioned. Some of her Coin was
cal­led Philip and Mary. He lames us for suffer­ing Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth to raign, and saith, we violated therein not only the Law of God,
but the law of na­ture and Nations.

knoxe also writes against it.

Danaeus a French man in his Book de H [...]mine c. 33\. saith, It is lawfull.
He quotes A [...]. 8. 27. 1 King. 10\. and com­mends the Raign of Zen [...]b
[...]ia Queen of the Arabians, a [...]d Elizabeth Queen of England, and Ioan
Queen of Navarr, as happy and lasting.

There is a choice Manuscript in Arch. [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=99) in Oxford
Library stiled, A dutifull defence of the lawfull regiment of women, written
by my Lord Howard.

The Suffolk men first resorted to her, promising her their aid and help, so
that she would not attempt the alteration of Religi­on established by her
brother, which she a­greed unto, but broke her promise, and that Diocess
tasted the sharpest persecution under her Raign.

So well inclined was she of her self, that had not the zeal of her Religion,
and the authority of Church men overswayed her own disposition,Speed. the
flames of their consu­ming fires had not mounted so high.Non natura sed
pontificiorum arte ferox. Id. ib. Lever com­pares her to the Queen mother of
France, Ka­therine de Me­dicis.

She was crowned by Steven Gardiner Bi­shop of Winchester, the Archbishops of
Can­terbury and Yorke being then prisoners in the Tower.

Within the compasse of less then four years continuance, there died for the
testi­moniall of their conscience in this case, two hundred seventy and seven
persons, without regard of degree,The suffering in her dayes did more set­tle
and enlarge the bounds of the Gospel, then all the preaching did in King
Ed­ward the sixth his Raign. Dr. Ames. sex, or age. In the heat of whose
flames were consumed five Bishops, one and twenty Divines, eight Gentlemen,
eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen, servants, and labourers,
twenty six wives, twenty wid­dowes, nine virgins, two boyes, and two Infants.

There being consultation at the Counsel-board [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=99) what to do with
the Lady Elizabeth, Gardiner said, My Lords, we have but all th [...] while
been  [...] ripping off the leaves, and now and then lopped a branch; but till
such time as we strike at the root of heresie (meaning the Lady Elizabeth)
nothing to, purpose can be ef­fected. God forbid (replied the Spaniards) that
our King and Master should once conceive a thought to consent unto such a
mischief. They thence solicited the King on her behalf, and he favoured her,
and set her free at last.

The worst that can be said of her, is this,Mr. Baco [...] Uniform Go­vernment
of England. part. 2 c. 34. that she was ill principled, and the best, that she
acted according to her principles.

Judge Morgan who in her Raign gave sentence of death against the Lady Iane
Gray, Whose Raign was polluted with the bloud of so many Martyrs, un­fortunate
by the frequent insurrections, and made inglorious by the loss of Calais.
Nullus toto terra­rum orbe angulus est, quo non percrebuit admirabilis tua,
praeter invictam animo­sitatem & pictatem cruditio, tam Latinè disertae, ut
exterorum Regum legati, docti inprimis homines, velut attoniti obstupescant, &
quasi haerente in faucibus voce obinutes [...]nt, re auditâ Had. Jun. Epist.
Mariae Angliae Reginae. presently after her death fell mad, and in his ravings
continually cried, Take away the Lady Jane from me, and in that horrour
shortly ended his life.

She was learned.

Ludovicus Vives A Spaniard was some­times her Teacher. He came to England with
Queen Kahterine her mother.

She lost Calais, which had been a long time before in the possession of the
Engllish; Two hundred and eleven years. [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=100) and said if
she were opened,It was lost in less then eight dayes. It was  [...] won by
Edward the third, being the eleventh King from William the Conque [...]our,
and lost by her the eleventh from Edward. they would find that next her heart:
pray it was that a paltry Town should lye where Christ should should have
lain.

At the loss of Calai when a proud French man tauntingly demanded,Capto summa
celeritate Cal [...] ­to, (quem por­tum Galliae portam a [...]p [...]llare
consueverant Angliae Reges: quo quamdiu po­tirentur, tamdiu g [...]stare se
[...] cin­gulo claves Gal­liae dictitahant) quicquid Gallis creptum ducen­tos
per annos Angli f [...]li [...]iter obtinuer ant in­continenti paucorum
die­rum spatio, Galliae regno restituere, atque ad veteres terminos intra
occanum se recipere co­acti sunt. Stradae de bello Belgic. Dec. 1. l. 1. When
will ye fetch Calais again? An English Captain gravely answered, Qu [...]ndo
peccata vestra e­runt nostris g [...]vior [...], When your sins shall weigh
down ours.

The Lord Cor [...]s Governour of Picardy under the French King said, That he
would be content to lie in Hell seven years, so he might win Calais from the
English. The keeping of it indeed was chargeable to the English, but yet it
was very advantagious to them. While they kept it they had a door open in­to
France upon all occasions, and therefore it is commonly said, That they
carried the keyes of France at their Girdles.

Of all since the Conquest her Raign was the shortest,Though many persecutions
have lasted longer, yet none since Di­  [...]esians time  [...]age [...] so
terri­bly. Dr. Heylius Eccles restaur. See more there. only excepting that of
Richard the Tyrant, but much more bloudy then was his.

She raigned five years, and four moneths, wanting two dayes only.

She lieth buried in Westminster without [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=100) any Monument
or remembrance at all.

### 20.6. Queen ELIZABETH.

She was born at Greenwich on the seventh of September 15 [...]3\. Her father
was Henry the eighth King of England, her mother Anne Bulloin, whose love to
the pure Reli­gion cost her her life.

Amabat Regina puram veràm (que) Religionem, & haec illi res odium, nox necem
peperit. Adol­phi à Dans vita Elizabethae.

The Archbishop Cranmer her Godfa­ther was every where chary and tender o­ver
her, as one that at the Font had took charge upon him to see her educated in
all vertue and piety.

What Prince was ever more sage in her Counsell, or more solemn in her
Government, or more advised in her favours and f [...]owns? Dr. Gaudens
Eccles. Anglie. Suspi­ria l. 4. c. 22.

Before the age of seventeen years she was skilled in Latine, French, Italian,
and in the Greek indifferent well. Neither did she neglect musick, both
singing and playing on instruments very sweetly and artificially, for so much
as became a Prince. With Roger Ascham who governed her studies, she read over
Melancthons common places, Ci­cero entire, a great part of Livies History▪
some select Orations of Isocrates (whereof two she translated into Latine)
Sophocles [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=101) Tragedies,Dr
Hackwel [...] Apol. of Gods providence in the Govern­ment of the world. l. 4.
c 11. Sect. 12\. Se [...] more there▪ Vide Cambde ni etiam A [...]a­rat ad
Annales. and the New Testament in Greeke, by which means she both furnished
her speech with elegant language, and her mind with wholsome precepts,
referring her learning rather to practice and conver­sation, then ostentation
and pomp, yet was she in a manner for learning a miracle a­mong the Princes of
her age.

In one and the same day she answered three Embassadors of great Princes, the
one in Latine, the other in French, and the third in Italian.

I have seen a Book (which is in Sion-Colledge) wherein divers sentences were
turned out of English into Latine and Italian, and some translated out of
French by Queen Elizabeth, and written with her own hand, in the life time of
her father, and sent to her brother Prince Edward for a new years gift, she
being at that time not above thirteen years of age.

Abraham Hartwell in his Regina literata written in Verse, speaks of Queen
Eliza­beths coming and doings at Cambridge.

She was honourably received in Kings Colledge, where she lay during her
continuance there.

At the breaking up of the Divinity Act there,The Or [...]tion is in H [...]k
[...]nsh. Chron.  [...]de Saviii▪ Orat. corom Reg [...]na El [...]z. Oxon.
[...]habi [...]a. she made within St. Maries Church a notable Oration in
Latine, beginning thus, Etsi faeminilis iste  [...] us pudor, &c. See Dr.
Heylins Ecclesia restaurata. p. 163, 164. [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=101) Vide Hadriani
Juni [...] Epist. Elizabethae An­gliae Reginae inter Epistolas suas. p. 544.

She was of personage tall, of hair and complexion fair, and therewith well
fa­voured, but high nosed, of limbs and fea­ture neat, and which added to the
lustre of those exteriour graces, of stately and ma­jestick com [...]ortment.

She was crowned in St. Peters Church in Westminster, by Dr. Oglethorp Bishop
of Car­lisle, according to the Order of the Roman Pontificall.

There was great speech of a match be­tween her and a French Mounsieur the Duke
of Alencon, of which he had great hopes, being ignorant (as Bernardine Mendoza
wrote from London to the Prince of Parma) Reginam singulis annis sponsam esse,
Stradae de bello Belgic. Decas 2. l. 1. p. 11. nunquam vero nuptam, That the
Queen was every year a Spouse, but never married.

The silencing and ejection of Ministers in her dayes, Reformation being newly
be­gun,Vide Parkerum de Politcia Ec­clesiast. Christi. l. 2. c. 38. and the
enemies to it many, the friends and those that faithfully engaged few: was
looked upon by the godly pru­dent of that age, as very unseasonable, be­cause
of the scarcity of preachers at that time. Beams of former Light. c. 7.

She had so great a command over her appetite, that her brother Edward usually
called her by no other name, but his sweet sister Temperance*.There was
be­tween these two Princes  [...] concurrence and sympathy in their natures
and affections; together with the celestiall bond (confor­mity in Reli­gion)
which made them one, and friends; for the King ever cal­led her his sweetest
and dearest sister. Sir Robert Nauntons Frag­menta Reg. Cambdens Britannia in
Surrey. C [...]mb. Brit. in Wil [...]shire. She was so far from [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=102) pressing her
Subjects with Impositions, that when the Parliament once offered her a great
summe of money, she refused a great part thereof, giving them thanks, and
adding withall, that the money was as sure in her Subjects Co [...]ers as her
own.

A Prince above her sexe of a manly cou­rage and high conceit, who lively
resem­bled as well the royall qualities of her Grandfather, as she did his
princely pre­sence and countenance, the worlds love and joy of Brittain. A
Virgin for the space of fourty four years so ruled the royall Scep­ter, as
that her Subjects loved her, ene­mies feared her, and every one with
admi­ration honoured her.

She was about seventy years old when she died.

A most gracious and excellent Prince, worthy of superlative praise for her
most wise and politick government of the Com­monwealth, and for her heroick
vertues far above that sexe.

In Queen Elizabeth, besides her sexe, there was nothing woman-like or weak.
Sclater. Yet S [...]nders calleth her Lupam Anglicanam; Gainsfords Glory of
Eng­land. l. [...]. c. 2\.  [...] Bi [...]dulphs Travels. p. 25, 26. Rhiston
Leaenam nostram, om­nes Athalias, Maachas, Jezabeles, Hero­diades superantem.

The very Heathen and Mahumetans, the Persians and Idolaters, the Aethiopians
and [[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=102)
Muscovites do name her with reverence.

Balsac in his second Book of Letters,Her name fil­ed the Christi­an, Turkish,
Persian, Ameri­can, Indian parts. Purchas p [...]grimage. 1. l. 3. c. 1. Sect.
1\. See ibid. c. 3. Sect. 3. Let­ter 1. to my Lord Cecil saith, Even he that
excommunicated her, spake of herwith honour.

Some think my Lord of Essex his death, and the long concealing of the message
he sent to her, when discovered, occasioned a deep melancholy first, and after
her death. Osborn in his Miscellanies saith, No act of hers was registred so
contrary to the grain of her own people, as the death of the Earl. Others
say,If she were a Catholick, she might be ac­counted the mirrour of the world,
saith a secular Priest. Meteranus Rer. Belg. hist. l. 23\. much com­mends her.
the death of the Queen of Scots.

In her time the pure interest of England was the protection of Protestants,
and War with Spain.

For her mercifull returning home cer­tain Italians, which were taken prisoners
in the eighty eight Invasion, she was term­ed Saint Elizabeth by some at
Venice. One told the Lord Carleton being there Embassa­dour,That great
E­lizabeth of Eng­land, nurse of God, Church, God hath e­stablished her seat
with justice and goodness, hath made her the terrour of all enemies of Christ,
and the beauty of Eu­rope.  [...]olynes of the Civil Wars of France. that
although he were a Papist, yet he would never pray to any other Saint, but the
Saint Elizabeth. Mr. Trap on Ezra [...]c. 1.

My Lord Howard in his Manuscript in Oxford Library (a learned piece worthy to
be published) stiled, A dutifull defence of the lawfull regiment of women,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, quotes divers Papists commending her.

In his Defensative against the poyson of supposed Prophesies, c. 16\. he saith
thus, [[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=103)
When divers (upon greater scrupulosity then cause) went about to disswade her
Majesty (ly­ing then at Richmond) from looking on the Comet which appeared
last; with a courage an­swerable to the greatness of her state, she caused the
window to be set open, and cast out this word, Jacta est alea, The Dice are
thrown. Affirming that her stedfast hope and confidence was too firmly planted
in the providence of God, to be blasted, or affirighted with those beames,
which either had a ground in nature whereupon to rise, or at least no warrant
out of Scripture to pretend the mi [...]haps of Princes.

She equalled the best of her Predecessors,Bacons Uni­form Govern­ment of
Eng­land. part. 2\. c. 34. and in learned endowments excelled them all. A wise
man that was an eye witness of many of her actions, and of those which
succeeded her, many times hath said, That a Courtier might make a better meal
of one good looke from her, then of a good gift from some other King.

The Parliament having been a moneth, Queen Elizabeth sent for Mr. Popham, the
Speaker of the House, and asked him, What past since they sate? He answered,
Iust twen­ty eight dayes.

Much might be said of her prospe­rity.

1\. She was advanced to the Regall Throne, from a private and adverse
for­tune.

The more happy was her Government, [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=103) because it
ensued upon the stormy times of Queen Mary. She came as a fresh Spring after a
sharp Winter, and brought the Ship of England from a troublous and
tempestu­ous Sea, to a safe and quiet harbour.

Though the Author of Ierusalem and Babel saith, she profest her self a
Catholick during the Raign of her sister, and speaks of the Duke of Feria's
Letter to King Philip yet to be seen; wherein is certified that the Queen had
given him such assurance of her belief, and in particular concerning the point
of reall presence, that for his part he could not believe, she intended any
great alteration in Religion; yet I suppose he wrongs her therein, as he doth
Dr. Reynolds likewise, in saying, that he framed that combate which he
published between him­self and Mr. Hart, at his own pleasure.

Anti-Sanderus in his second Dialogue saith thus, Non solum nobilium
potentissimos, sed & Episcopos omnes, à quorum aliquo juxta priscam Angliae
consuetudinem ungi & corona­ri debuit, factio Pontificia sic abripuerat, ut
cam, quod Lutherano dogmate tingi credere­tur, solennitatibus illis usitatis
decorare ad tem­pus procacissimè recusaverint. Vide plura ibid. p. 179. Tot
magnatibus in Anglia tempore Reginae Mariae deficientibus, animosè perstitere
Elizabetha postea Regina, & Johanna Graia. Voet. Sel. Theol. Disputat. part.
3.

Her time produced a world of refined [[Page
190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=104) wits and
excellent spirits, who honoured Poesie with their pens and practice, Edua
[...]d Earl of Oxford, the Lord  [...] H [...]nry Lord Pa [...]et, our Phaenix
the No le S [...] Ph [...]ip Sidney, Mr. Edward Dyer, Mr. E [...]m [...]nd
Spenser, Mr. Samuel Daniel, with sundry others. Peach [...]ms compleat
Gentleman. c. 10.

Those were the ablest, and most accom­plished, that were tutored by both
for­tunes. Such was with us, King Henry the seventh; and with the French,
Lewis the twelfth,She wrote then Tanquam ovis, as a sheep to the slaughter. He
was a bold Preacher who afterwards told her, she was now Tanquam indomita
juven­ca. This was Mr. De [...]ring. They present­ing to her the Bible in
En­glish at the lit­tle Conduit in Cheap [...]ide, she answered, I thank the
City for this gift a­bove all the rest, it is a Book which I will of­ten and
often read over. the former of which excelled in prudence, the other in
justice During the Raign of her brother, her estate was most prosperous and
flourishing; during the Raign of her sister, very tempestuous and full of
hazard.

2\. She was indeed the Queen of Hearts, beloved by her Subjects at home, and
ho­noured by forraign Princes. She came to the Crown with the love of her
Subjects, and while she possessed it, they continued their love to her. She
was received very lovingly by the City of London the day be­fore her
Coronation, as appeared by the Assembly, prayers, wishes, welcomings, cryes,
and all other signs, which argue a wonderfull earnest love of most obedient
Subjects toward their Soveraign.

In her short progresses what flocking would there be of all sorts of people to
see [[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=104)
her?She delighted much in the love of her people. What gentle lan­guage would
she use to them? What cordiall pray­ers would she make for them? and what
hearty acclamations would they utter to her, God save the Queen Eliza­beth.

It is a sign of a happy Raign, (saith Iohn de Serres in Henry the fourth) when
the Subject rejoyceth to see his King.

She would usually reply, God bless you my people all. Her speech to the
children of Christs Hospitall as she rode through Fleet-street was, We are
Orphans all, Let me enjoy your prayers, and you shall be sure of my
assist­ance. Engl. Elizab. p. 186.

In her speech to her last Parliament the third of November 1601, she hath this
passage.

To be a King, and wear a Crown, is a thing more glorious to them that see it,
then it is pleasant to them that bear it. Though you have had and may have
many mightier and wiser Princes sitting in this Seat, yet you never had nor
shall have any that will love you better. See more there.

She had an extraordinary Majesty of aspect, joyned with a sweetness, a most
happy and constant healthfulness of body.

Illud sane non indignum memoratu, quod tota vitae tempore valuit pancraticè.
Adolphi à Dans vita Elizabethae.

She was, and was so reputed by stran­gers of all the Princes of her
time,Speeds Chron. the most exact observer (both for action and cere­mony) of
true Regall deportment and magnificence.

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=105) She was
pious and constant in Religion.Surely, Surely, a Prince so high in the favour
of God, and so mighty with men, so blessed with dayes, and prosperous in her
Raign, so beloved at home, and so dread abroad, so absolute for blessings, and
so admired for Government, was never seen in England. William Leighs Queen
Elizabeth paraleld, second Sermon. He paralels he there in her princely
vertues with David, Ioshua, and Hezekiah. 1\. With David in her afflictions to
build the Church. First Serm  [...]. 2. With Io­shua in her puis [...]nce, to
p [...]otect the Church. Second Sermon. 3. With He­zekiah in her piety, to
reform the Church. Third Sermon.

She was very frequent in the reading of the Scriptures, and writings of the
Fathers, especially of St. Augustine. She compo­sed certain prayers her self
upon emergent occasions. Whensoever she named God, though it were in common
discourse, she would for the most part adde the title of Maker, saying, God my
Maker, and com­pose both her eyes and countenance to a sub­misness and
reverence.

Although she found the Romish Religion confirmed in her sisters dayes,Her
Motto was Semper ea­dem by Act of Parliament, and established by all strong
and potent meanes that could be devised,It Plutarch were alive to write lives
by paralels, it would trouble him both for vertue and fortune, to find for her
a para­lel amongst women. Sir Francis Bacon the Lord Chancellour Elsmere. She
was the happy instrment of God to promote the Protestant Religion in all
parts. May his History of the Par­liament of England. l. 1. c. 1\. See more
there. and that all those which had any Authori­ty, or bare Office in the
State, had sub­scribed to it; yet because she saw it was not agreeable to the
Word of God, nor to the Primitive purity, nor to her own con­science, she did
with a great deal of cou­rage, and with the assistance of very few▪ persons,
quite expell, and abolish it.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=105) Within
the compass of one year, she did so establish and settle all matters belonging
to the Church, as she departed not one hairs breadth from them, to the end of
her life.

In the years of her life she went beyond all her predecessors since the
Conquest, and in the length of her Raign, she exceeded all but only two, Henry
the third, and Ed­ward the third.

There was almost no memorable Act in Christendome, for the space of forty
years of her time, wherein she had not some part of Princely deserving. Levers
Histo­ry of the Defenders of the Catholick faith.

Rare, in all ages, hath been the Raign of a woman: more rare the felicity of a
woman, in her Raign: but most rare, a permanency and lasting, joyned with that
felicity.

A great French Lady (mother to the Duke of Guise) said, that Elizabeth of
Eng­land was the most glorious and happy wo­man, that ever swayed Scepter.

Her days are not to be passed over slight­ly, without one touch upon that
string which so many years sounded so sweetly in our ears, without one sigh
breathed forth in her sacred memory.

She was wonderfully preserved from twenty conspiracies at home; and forraign
invasions.

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=106) She was
happy in the abilities of her ser­vants,Robert Cecil, Robert Dudley Earl of
Lei­cester, the Lord Howard, Ad­m [...]ral [...], Walsing­ham. What fa­mous
Captains were Generall  [...]Norris, Cap­tain Williams, Morgan, the noble Earl
of Essex, and o­thers in land af [...]airs? Who more renown­ed than Captain
Drake, Frobisher, Hawkins, Can­dish, with the  [...]est in Sea tra­vails? Sir
Phi­lip Sidney was her great fa­vourite. many grave Counsellors, and mar­tiall
Commanders.

The Coyn was pure in her dayes, and Religion was in great purity.

She was admirable in expressing her mind both by speech and writing: and if
collection could be made of her Apoph­thegmes and extemporall Orations, it
would certainly excell any thing extant in that kind.

King Henry the fourth of France in a Letter to Mounsieur de Rosny, Duke of
Sully, commends her

In imitation of her Father Henry the eight, she did admit none about her for
Pensioners, Privy-Chamber-men, Squires of the body, Carvers, Cup-Bearers,
Sew­ers, but persons of stature, strength, and birth. Her Guard, Ushers,
Porters, and all attending below stairs, were of no less extraordinary size,
than activity for shoot­ing,Sir Richard Ba­kers Chron. Bishop Iewel was the
glory of her Raign for learning. throwing the Barre, weight, wrestl­ing.

Elizabeth was tempered to inherit her Grandsires wisdome, and her fathers
spi­rit. Dr. Holiday his Survey of the world, Book eighth.

Paulet Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer, having served then four
Prin­ces in a various and changeable season, that time nor any age hath
yeelded the like [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=106) president;
this man being noted to grow high in her favour (as his place and experi­ence
required) was questioned by an inti­mate friend of his, how he stood up for
thirty years together amidst the changes and Raigns of so many Chancellours,
and great Personages? Why (quoth the Marquess) Ortus sum ex salice, non ex
quercu, I was made of the pliable Willow, not of the stubborn Oak. Sir Robert
Nauntons Fragm. Reg.

Her clemency also was singular.

Though she was harshly used by Sir Hen­ry Beningfield, when she was prisoner
at Woodstocke, yet when she came to the possession of the Crown,Grafton in Q.
Mary. she never proceed­ed further, then to discharge him of the Court, which
many thought was the thing that pleased him best.Cette vivacité d' esprit,
ferme­tè de jugement, generuse resolu­tion aux baute [...] enterprises,
es­quelles excelloit vostre Royale & Loyale soeur là brave Eliza­beth d'
Angle­terre. Memoi­res de Sully. At whose departure from her presence, she
used only these words, God forgive you that is past, and we do, and if we have
any prisoner whom we will have hardly handled, and straightly kept, then we
will send for you.

Whilest she was in her vigorous years, if at any time she were moved to
declare her Successour, she would make answer, That she would never endure to
see her winding sheet before her eyes.

She behaved her self so warily, as not to come within the danger of the Laws,
for acting any thing in opposition unto that [[Page
196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=107) Religion which
was then established. Con­cerning which there goes a Story, that when a Popish
Priest had urged her very ear­nestly to declare her judgement touching the
presence of Christ in the blessed Sacra­ment; she very cautelously resolved
the point in these following Verses:

'Twas God the Word that spake it,

He took the bread and brake it,

And what the Word did make it,

That I believe and take it.

But all this Caution notwithstanding, her aversness from the Church of Rome,
was known sufficiently not to be altered while she lived. Dr. Heylins History
of Queen Elizabeth.

At her entrance to her Raign, she sent to her Agent in the Court of Spain, to
repre­sent unto King Philip the second, the dear remembrance which she kept of
those many humanities received from him in the time of her troubles.

Yet afterward, some of our own and some forraign W [...]iters taxe her of too
much unkindness toward King Philp, to whom she had been so much obliged.

The ground of his Invasion in eighty eight, was the divers indignities he
recei­ved from Queen Elizabeth, though ever since the death of Queen Mary, he
forbore to do any thing that might displease her. [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=107) During his
abode in England, Multa Regis Phi [...]pi secun­di indignatio­nem s [...]m
[...] adversus  [...] Reginam, tant [...] quidem  [...] sensu,  [...]uanto pro
bene­fi [...]is proque vi­  [...]a i [...]sa, quam et bis  [...]t (que)
de­disse rev Rex affir­mab [...]t, dum con­spirationum in­simulatam è
[...]ar­cere, capitali (que) judicio liberave­rat pro b [...]s aliis que prom
[...]ritis alias super alias accepisse se inde­sinenter inju [...]ias
agnoscebat. Vi­derat statim ab initio Principem Orangium. as Belgarum
po­pulos, consilio, pecunia, milite, ad defectionem ab illa concita­to [...] ▪
I [...]di [...]rum provincias à Draco à Conditio, ab aliis ejus emissarlis v
[...]xatas ac direptas  [...] regiam pecuniam interversam▪ ac naves in Anglia
r [...]t [...]tas:  [...]lencon [...]am sp [...]ruptiarum ia Angliam allectum,
at (que) inde in Belgium ad capiendam Brabantiae coronam instructum. Stradae
de bello Belgico Decas 2. l. 9. he had done her such signall and high savours,
as to pre­serve her head from the Scaffold, to have her allowance enlarged, to
divert her Sister from a design she had to send her beyond Sea to be a  [...],
and at his departure from England, he desired not to carry with him but one
Ring of a hundred pound price.

He shewed no small love also in compre­hending the su [...]rend [...]y of
Calais to the En­glish, in his Treaty of peace with France.

The Queen assisted Don Antonio the Ba­stard against him, about the title of
Portu­gall, fomented his own naturall Subjects against him, in the revolt of
the confede­rate Provinces, so far as to send a Gover­nour of her own amongst
them. She gave Commissions to rob him in the Indies. She intercepted some of
his treasure in her own Seas going to Flanders, and wronged some of the Hans
Towns, who were under his protection. These with sundry incite­ments more,
caused Philip to prepare this powerfull Fleet, to be quit with her at once for
all scores. Howels History of Naples.

But it may be said in her defence, that th [...]e King of Spain did stir up
the Irish against [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=108) her, and did
also encourage such Traytors, as conspired against her in England.

Sir Francis Drake (who was Captain of the Iudith with Sir Iohn Hawkins, Vide
Cambde­  [...]l Annales. in the voyage of Guiny 1567) received together with
him considerable dammage and inju­ries from the Spaniard, in the Port of St
Iohn D' Vll [...]a of the West Indies, contrary to pro­mise and agreement with
him, and there­fore what he did against the Spaniards, was to repair himself.

At the beginning of the Netherlanders troubles, she imparted unto the King of
Spain sincere advice, not to hold a heavy hand over that people, which he
rejected and contemned. Her Majesty nevertheless gave not over her honourable
resolution, which was, if it were possible, to reduce and reconcile those
Countryes unto the obedience of the King of Spain; if not, yet to preserve
them from alienating themselves to a forraign Lord: and so continued to
mediate unto the King for some just and honourable capitulations of grace and
ac­cord. Which course she held untill the death of the Duke of Anjou, at which
time the enemy pressing them, the united Pro­vinces were received into her
Majesties pro­tection: which was after the King of Spain had discovered
himself an unplacable Lord to them: and also a professed enemy unto her
Majesty, having already actually in­vaded [[Page
199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=108) Ireland, and
designed also the invasi­on and conquest of England. Gabriel Pow­ell his
refutation of an Epistle apologetically written by a Puritan Papist, to
perswade the permission of the promiscuous use and profession of all sects and
heresies. c. 9. p. 98.

Trading was much promoted in her time.See Purchas Pilgrim part 3, 4 c. 9
[...]ct.  [...]. Reginam  [...]um vixit ut sororem diligentissimè observavit.
An­glos (que) pariter caeteros eximi [...] dilexit. Camd. Annal.

By her intercession the Turk gave way to the English trading in Turkie, whence
the Company of Turkish Merchants.

The Great Duke of Russia also much re­spected her, and the English for her
sake.

England was much adorned with build­ing in her time. Plures & nobilium &
pri­vatorum villae, elegantia, laxitate, & cultu conspicuae, jam passim in
Anglia surgere caep [...] ­runt, quàm alio quovis seculo, magno sanè regni
ornamento, verùm hospitalis gloriae detri­mento. Camd. Annal.

She was very sparing in bestowing Ho­nours, for in twelve years she made but
four Barons.

She made Westminster Abbey (famous for the Coronation and sepulture of our
Kings of England, and for the keeping of the Insignia Regalia) a Collegiate
Church, where there is a Dean, twelve prebends, a Schoolmaster and Usher,
forty Scholars called Kings Scholars, (out of which some are chosen yearly to
both Universities) Servants, Choristers, and twelve Almes­men; [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=109) as Camden in
his Annals shews.

Being near her end,An uncharita­ble Jesuit in a scandalous Li­bell, spread
a­broad and pub­lished some years after Q. Elizabeths death, saith, that she
died without sense or feeling of Gods mercies, and that she wished she might
after her death hang a while in the air, to see what striving there would be
for her King [...]dome. Camd. Eliz. transl. Preface. she declared Iames King
of Scotland to be her Successor, so Camden and Du Chesne, and Iohnston in his
Historia Britannica.

Sir Francis Walsingham her Secretary died poor; he left only one daughter
which marri­ed Sir Philip Sidney, and after the Earl of Essex.

When she was near death, Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury came to her, and
spoke much of the redemption of mankind, of the resurrection of the body, and
im­mortality of the soul; to whom she an­swered with great tranquility and
constan­cy, that she desired to be soon dissolved, and to be with Christ.

She having setled her Dominions in peace, died in the year 1602, the twenty
fourth of March, the sixty ninth of her age, and of her Raign the forty
fourth.

## 21\. CHAP. XX.

### 21.1. IAMES the first King of Great Brittain.

THe Tudors breathing out their last in excellent Elizabeth, Stuarts take their
turn by an unquestionable title.

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=109) 1\.
Iames the first of England, but sixth of Scotland.

2\. Charles the first of England.

It may seemIta repugnan­te n [...]ine, Sco­tiae Rex An­gliae possessio­nem
[...], pri­m [...]s (que) intra omnem annalium memoriam Bri­tanniae totam
Insulam uno im­perio complexus est. Groti hist. Belg. wonderfull, that there
was no commotion at all upon the Queens de­cease, that he came to the Crown
here so peaceably, without any opposition.

He caused himself to be stiled King of Great Brittain, to prevent difference
be­tween the two Nations, one of which else would have preferred England in
his title,One that writes Ruino­rum conspiratio, saith, Quinqus Reges ex
hono­ratissima. S [...]u­artorum fami­lia, etiam eodem omnes praenomi­ne,
continu [...]ase­rie invicem suc­cedentes, in ips [...] aetatis ant flore, aut
vigore ex­tinctos accepe­rant: relictis semper regni haeredibus pueris aut
impuneribus, qui per atatem gerendis rebus non sufficerent. and the other
Scotland. The name of Brit­tain continued to be the name generally of the
whole Island, but more specially of the parts of England and Wales, ever since
before the invasion of the Romans. King Alfred was entituled, Governour of the
Christians of all Brittain. King Edgar was stiled Monarch of all Brittain;
King Hen­ry the second was entituled King of all Brit­tain. King Iohn had his
Coyn stamped with this Inscription, Iohannes Rex Brito­num.

Walter sirnamed Banguho (according as his father was) returning into Scotland,
fought valiantly for his King, against the Islands, Rebels, and the Savages of
Scot­land. In recompence of his extraordinary vertue, he was made Great
Provost and Treasurer of the houshold Royall, which the Scots signifie by the
name of Stuart or Steward. He so faithfully discharged the [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=110) trust reposed
in him,Favins Thea­ter of Honour. l. 5. c. [...]. without the least reproach
or wasting of the Kings Moneys, that the sirname of Stuart was imposed on
him,See Dr. Heylins Geog. of the Brittish Isle. and given also to his
posterity. This was the original of the Illustrious Family of Stuart. From
this Walter descended that Robert Steward, who was after in right of his wife
King of Scotland, See Mr. Went­worths Book before quoted. since which time
there have been successively nine Soveraigns of that name in Scotand.

Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry the seventh,This Margaret was
Grandmo­ther to King Iames, by his father and mo­ther. and Elizabeth his
Queen, was twice married in Scot­land, first to King Iames the fourth, then to
Archibald Douglas Earl of Angis; her son by the King was King Iames the fifth,
our King Iames his mothers father, her daughter by the Earl was Margaret
Coun­tess of Lennox, our King Iames his fathers mother.

David Bruse King of Scotland being dead without issue of his body, Ro­bert
Steward his sisters son, by the gene­rall consent of all the Estates, was
crown­ed King of Scotland, in the year of our Lord 1370. This family hath ever
since born the Crown of Scotland, even unto this day.Grotii  [...]ist. Belg.

King Iames united both the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, and testified
this con­junction in the Money that was coined, [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=110) both silver
and gold with these words, Quae Deus conjuxit, nemo separet, and also, Tueatur
unita Deus. The twenty shillings pieces had this Inscription, Faciam eos in
gentem unam; other golden Coines had these words, Henricus rosas, regna
Iacobus.

He was born in the Palace of Edinbo­rough on the nineteenth of Iuly, anno
1566, and solemnly crowned King of the Scots on the same day of the Moneth,
anno 1567, and joyfully received to the Crown of England on the fourteenth of
March 1602.

He had a great dexterity in discovering an imposture,See Osborn [...]
Miscellanies of Es [...]ayes, Paradoxes. p. 6, 7, 8, 9. and a marvellous
sagacity to discuss natural things.

He detected the forgery of Richard Hay­dock a Physitian, pretending to preach
at night in his sleep, who acknowledged his forgery to the King.

It was his custome to discourse during Meals with one or more Divines,
con­cerning some point of controversie in Phi­losophy.

There was a Conference or Disputation at Hampton Court before him.Dr. Reynolds
at its first com­ing out, being shewed it, read it over, and bought it,
say­ing, he was concerned and wronged in it.

Some of our Divines taxe Dr. Barlow Dean of Chester, for a partial Penman of
that Conference. See Mr. Ley his Discourse of Disputat. concerning matters of
Religi­on, c. 4. p. 46.

[[Page 204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=111) Besides
the relieving by Pensions all the poorer sort,Sir Walter Rauleigh his Hist. of
the World, part. 1. l. 5. c. 6. Sect. 2\. See more there. he hath honoured
more Mar­tial men, than all the Kings of England have done for this hundred
years.

Had his Apothegmes or wise speeches (and also Queen Elizabeths) been
col­lected by a skilfull hand, I suppose they would have been very usefull to
the pub­lick.

There is one that hath written a Book in Latine of Favourites, where I think
my Lord Car the Earle of Somerset, & the Duke of Buckingham are reckoned for
the English Favourites, the later of which was in great favour both with the
Father, and Son, King Iames, and King Charles. Vossius in his Preface to his
Book de Arte Grammatica (if I forget not) much commends King Iames. Isaac
Causabone that famous Schol­lar, was much respected and encouraged by him.

He was both a wise and learned Prince of disposition merciful and gracious, a
great seeker of peace, according to that Motto which he ever used, Beati
paci­fici.

In the stile of the Court he went for Great Britains Solomon; Vide Idaeam
Rosae sive de Jacobi (Regis) virtutibus  [...]ar­rationem. nor is it any
ex­cursion beyond the precincts of verity to say, that neither Britain nor any
other Kingdome whatsoever, could ever since [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=111) Solomons dayes
glory in a King (for recon­dite learning and abstruse knowledge) so near a
match to Solomon as he,Quis hodie  [...] vere amans, non optet ex animo,
mag­nae Britanniae magnum illuns Regem, ob exi­mias doctrina [...] dotes
quibus tanti neminis Majesta [...]i sempi­ternam famam circumfudit, in
universals refor­matarum Ecclesiarum Concilio, ad modum magni illius
Constantini, Episcopis & Pastoribus, non modo ad externi ordinio
conservationem, ve [...]ùm etiam ad con­troversiarum, quae hodieagiantur
definitionem, aliquando pra [...]sidere. Gers. Buc. Dissert▪ de Gubernat.
Eccles. p. 115. Mr. Rush­worths Historicall Collections. 23. Iacobi. p. 161.

He was compared to Solomon in severall respects, by Bishop Williams in his
Funerall Sermon on 1 King. 11\. 41, 42, 43.

Archbishop Spotswood saith, he was the Solomon of this age, admired for his
know­ledge of all manner of learning. Hist. of Scotland. l. 7.

His Works shew his great learning, espe­cially hisLiber à Rege ad fillum
con­scriptus, in quo optimus Princeps omnibus  [...]umcris absolutua
elegantissimè depin­gitur.  [...]acre. ibtle est, quot homi [...]um animos &
studis inde sibi conciliarit, & quartum sui expectationem cum admiratione apud
omnes concitarit. Camdeni Annal. rerum Anglie part 4. p. 171. Basilicon Doron,
or Kingly gift.

It cannot be said, how well it was ac­cepted in England, and what admiration
it raised in all mens hearts of him, and of his piety and wisdome. Certain it
is, that all the Discourses which came forth that time, for maintaining his
right to the Crown of England, prevailed nothing so much as did that Treatise.
Spotsw. Hist. of the Church of Scotland. l. 6.

Iustinians Institutes, Caesars Commenta­ries, [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=112) [...], and
[...], are prized for their Authors, as well as matter.

He had such a promptness in expr [...]ssing his mind, that his extemporall s
[...]eeches were little inferiour to his premeditated writings.

His invention was as quick as his first thoughts, and his words as ready as
his invention.

I' advouois franchement de n' avoir Iamais veu Prince dont la sincerité, la
prudence & l' equaunimité meritast plus de gloire & de louan­ges. Que l' ayant
tonsiours trouné d' un cou­rage urayement Royal & tout genereux & d' un esprit
plus intelligent, plus vif, plus penetrant & plus judicieux que nul de son
Conseil, I' avois aussi tonsiours passionnement desiré de terminer & conclurre
avec luy les affaires & non avec eux. Memoires de Mounsier de Rosny. Duc de
Sully. Tom. 2. p. 141.

He was a good Poet.

A very good Horseman.

He had such a fashion in riding, that it could not so properly be said he rid,
as that his Horse carried him, for he made but lit­tle use of his bridle, and
would say, a Horse never stumbled, but when he was reined.

He was a great lover of quiet, and much given to hunting, and to his Book, and
wholly fixt in Warring by writings with the Church. Bentivoglio his History of
[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=112)
Flanders part 3. l. 8\. See his Relation of the united Provinces of Flanders
c. 3.

In his apparrell and civill garb, he seem­ed naturally to affect a majestick
careles­ness, in his pecuniary dispensations to his favourites, he was
excessive liberall.

King Iames being invited in a hunting journey, to dine with Sir Thomas I. of
Bark­shire, turning short at the corner of a Com­mon, happened near to a
Countryman, sitting by the heels in the stocks, who cryed Hosanna unto his
Majesty, which invited him to ask the reason of his restraint? Sir Thomas
said, It was for stealing a Goose from the Common. The fellow replyed, I
beseech your Majesty be judge who is the greater thief, I for stealing Geese
from the Common, or his Worship for robbing the Common from the Geese? By my
sale Sir (said the King to Sir Thomas) I'le not dine to day on your dishes,
till you re­store the Common for the poor to feed their flocks. Which was
forthwith granted to them, and the witty fellow set free.

He spake broad in the Scottish tone and dialect.

Sir Kenelme Digby (in his Discourse touching the cure of wounds by the powder
of Sympathy) saith, he had a strange an­tipathy to a naked sword, of which he
there ascribes the cause.

He alleadged this reason to an English Divine, wherefore the Scottish Church
was [[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=113)
never troubled with heresie; for if (said he) it sprang up in a Purish, there
was an El­dership ito [...] suppress it; if it had escaped them, the
Presbytery was ready to crush it; if the Presbytery should be negligent, than
the Synod would oppose [...]it; if it had not been by them sup­pressed, the
Generall Assembly would take strict order concerning it.

Philip de Mornay Lord of Plessis often complained,S [...]vent je l' oioi
plaindre, que S. M. d' Angle­terre trop arreste a quelques peti­tes
dissensiones entre les siens,  [...]' avoitpas asses de soin de la guerison de
plus profondes playes qui sont en l' Eglise. La vie de M. du Plessis l. 2.
that the King of England was too much taken up with some petty diffe­rences
amongst his own, but was not care­full enough to heal the deep wounds and
breaches which were in the Church. Yet his sending certain select and worthy
Di­vines to the Synod of Dort, to compose the unhappy differences then in the
Law Coun­tries, and his causing the Bible to be tran­slated into English by
judicious Divines, and set forth more exactly than formerly it had been done,
were noble works.

He had two sons, Prince Henry, and King Charles, and one daughter that lived,
the Lady Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia.

The order of Knight Baronets was insti­tuted by him, they must be Gentlemen of
three descents, and should be worth a thousand pounds per annum, the number to
be installed was not to exceed two hundred.

I may for his learning, and respect to the learned, his eloquence, and his
profound questions at meals, compare him to Charles [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=113) the Great, of
whom Eginhardus de vita & gestis Caroli Magni. Inter caenandum aut aliquod
acroamia, aut lectorem audiebat. Le­gebantur ei historiae, & antiquorum Regum
gesta. Delectabatur & libris S. Augustini, pr [...]cipuè iis quos de civitate
Dei inscripsit. Erat eloquentia copiosiu & exuberans, poterát (que), quicquid
vellet apertissimè exprimere. Artes liberales studio sissimè coluit, earúm
(que) doctores plurimum veneratus, magnis afficiebat honori­bus. Vide plura
ibid.

The Moneth of November is memorable,The 29 of May is famous for our present
Kings birth and return to London. for the seventeenth 1558, the initiation of
Queen Elizabeth, in which the purity of the Gospel brake forth; and fifth in
King Iames his Raign, in which the treachery of the Gospels enemies brake out.

Dr. Heylin in his Historia Quinqu-Arti­cularis c. 22\. saith, it was an usuall
practice with him in the whole course of his Go­vernment, to ballance one
extream by the other, countenancing the Papists against the Puritan See Mr.
Ga­takers Vindi­cation of the Annotat. of Ier. 10\. 20. against Lilly. p. 75.,
and the Puritan sometimes against the Papist, that betwixt both, the true
Religion and professors of it might be kept in safety. But in the Epistle of
his Book to his Son, he shews what he means by Pu­ritan.

He died at Theohalds in the year 1625,Of a Feavor. the twenty seventh of
March, the fifty ninth year of his age, having raigned over all Great Brittain
twenty two years compleat.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=114)

### 21.2. CHARLES the First, the second Monarch of Great Brittain.

He was born November the nineteenth,His birth. anno Dom. 16 [...]0, at Dun-
fermling in Scot­land.

He was the third son of Iames the sixth King of the Scots, and of Anne his
wife, daughter of Frederick the second, and sister of Christian the fourth,
Kings of Den­marke.

He was comely of person, very active, temperate, chaste, mercifull.

He was thought to be the best mark­man, and the most comely manager of a great
Horse, of any one in all the three Kingdomes.

Of his lawfull descent to his Crown and Kingdomes, from all the Kings of this
Nation, See Flemings Royall Progeny.

He was crowned on the second of Febru­ary at Westminster, Being about the age
of twenty five years. God so loosed his tongue at his triall. that he spoke
with­out the least stammering or hesitation. in the year 1626, by Dr. Abbot
Archbishop of Canterbury.

He was rather slow than fluent in his words, as well by grace, as a naturall
im­perfection; yet he was pithy, pathetick, and sententiou in his expressions.

What the Brittains lost to the Saxons, they to the Danes, and the Norman got
from [[Page 211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=114)
both, was his birth-right,Sir Franck Wortley his Character besides the
King­domes of Scotland and Ireland, and Princi­pality of Wales, additions to
the Normans Conquest.

Shortly after his Coronation he was mar­ried to the Lady Henrietta Maria,
younger Daughter to Henry the fourth King of France, by whom he had seven
Children, four Sons, and three Daughters.

He improved himself much by his tra­vels, and was generally liked in Spain.

When he was there, Archee the fool came boldly to King Iames, as he found him
once in a good humour, and told him that he was come to change Caps with him.
Why, said the King? Marry, sayes Archee, because thou hast sent the Prince
into Spain, from whence he is never like to return. But said the King, What
wilt thou say when thou seest him come back again? Marry, sayes Archee, I will
then take off the fools Cap which I put up­on thy head, for sending him
thither, and put it on the King of Spains, for letting him return. At which
words, it is reported, that the King became exceeding pensive, never be­fore
so much apprehending the danger of that adventure,Dr. Gaud [...]n in his
Eccles. Aug. Suspiria. l. 3. c. 22\. saith, he was stedfast and able in his
judgement against Popery. as then and afterward he did.

For his being a Papist, though it be charged by some of his enemies, yet I
suppose there is little ground for it, as his manifesto at the be­ginning of
the English and Scotch Presbytery [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=115) shews.
Therefore Mr. Baxter in his Key for Catholicks c. 45\. hath vindicated him
from this aspersion.

His own Letters to the Queen taken at Naseby Letter 20. to the Queen, speaking
of Religion, he saith, It is no thank to me to trust thee in any thing else
but in this, which is the only thing of difference in o­pinion betwixt
[...]., and his counsell to the Duke of Glocester, to obey the Queen his
mother in all, but what related to Religion, suffici­ently confute this
calumny.

In the year 1618, King Iames published a Declaration, tolerating sports on the
Lords day. It was so much disliked, as it was soon after called in. It was
after revived and ratified by King Charles. L'estrange saith,See M. Gata­kers
Apologe­ticall Dis­course aginst Lillie. Harvei excreit. 64. de generat.
animal. there was not any one Royall Edict, during all King Charles his Raign,
resented with equall regret.

It was his custome in his youth, for re­freshing his mind, and the confirming
of his health, almost every week to hunt the Harts and Does. In the three
summer moneths he hunted the males, being fat and pleasant to eat; in the like
space of time he hunted the females.

There was one Robert Par of Shropshire, aged 152,He as well as the Countess of
Desmond (so much spoken of for her great age) is said to have lived in the
Raign of Ed­ward the fourth. who lived in the Raign of ten Kings, and being
brought up to London by the procurement of the Earl of Arundell, di­ed here,
and lyes buried in Westminster Abbey.

Constat▪ quot generationes Carolingorum Johannes de Temporibus trisecli-senex
supera­vit: & ille nuper Anglus sub▪ Edoardo 4. natus, [[Page
213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=115) sub Carolo
denatus qui novem vel decem Regi­bus  [...] fuit. Hornii Dissertatio de
aeta­te mundi c. 6.

Never was there in this Isle a Scene of Justice more magnificent reared for
any Subject, than that for the Earl of Strafford. Scaffolds were erected on
either side of Westminster Hall,H. L'estrange. there the Commons sate
uncovered, and in the midst of the lower ascent the Peers; behind, but raised
above them, there was placed a Chair and Cloth of State for the King, on
either side where­of was a close Gallery for the King, Queen, and Prince to be
private, sutable to the an­cient mode.

Which triall of his, if we consider all things, the high nature of the Charge
a­gainst him, the pompous Circumstances, and stately manner of the triall it
self, the time that it lasted, and lastly, of what mo­ment and consequence the
success of it must prove, I may safely say, that no Subject in England, and
probably in Europe, ever had the like. Mr. May his History of the Parliament
of England l. 1. c. 8\. See more there.

Sir Thomas Roe was Chancellor of the most noble Order of the Garter, and of
King Charles his Privy Councel, and severall years Embassador to the Great
Mogor, Great Turk, King of Sweden, and lastly, to the Princes of the
Protestant Union in Germany.

[[Page 214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=116) Iohn de
Montreul a Parisian, was he, that thinking thereby to do some good office to
the King of England, The History of the French Academy p. 220. negotiated that
he might be put into the hands of the Scots. This unfortunate Prince (of whom
he hath since given this testimony, that he never saw a man of greater spirit
and more vertue) delighted often to discourse with him, and expressed a great
deal of affection to him.

I learned from a friend of mine, to whom he told it himself, that he made use
of a secret, which the King of England had taught him in the long conferences
which they sometimes had together.Id. ib p. 221. 'Twas a certain powder, very
rare, which being cast on the paper, made that which was be­fore-hand written
there with a white li­quor, to appear, which without that, was wholly
imperceptible.

His Majesty had a fine stroke with his pen,Boxhornius in his Metamor­phosis
Anglo­rum, hath col­lected Apoph­thegmata Caro­lina. 1. Theolo­gica. 2.
Moralia. 3. Politica. The Author of the Chara­cter of him mentions his
severall vertues. which he practised at all times of lea­sure. By which means
he became Master of a pure and elegant stile, as both his inter­cepted
Letters, and those to Mr. Henderson at Newcastle in the point of Episcopacy,
and his Book entituled  [...], or the Pourtraiture of his Sacred Majesty in
his soli­tudes and sufferings, do most clearly evi­dence. Which Book is put
into Latine by Dr Earle.

At King Iames his Funerall, he attended the Herse, as the chiefest mourner▪ an
[[Page 215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=116) action
laudable, and deserving better in­terpretation than some make of it.

He shewed great patience in his suffer­ings.

It argued a charitable temper in him, in pardoning his enemies when he died,
and praying for them, and charging the Prince his eldest son to pardon them
also.

He was the hundred and tenth Monarch of that line, that swayed the Scepter of
Scot­land successively. Bishop Bramhall his An­swer to Militiere his Epistle.

His Works are all in two Volumes,King Iames his Works are all in one volume in
Folio, both in Latine and English. Reliquiae Carolinae, and Bibliotheca
Carolina.

The Arsenals, Store-houses, and Ship-docks erected by him, are so magnificent
and universally usefull, that they are be­come a principall pillar of the
Nations sup­port, so far as they relate to the Navall de­fence of it, and
affords variety of imploy­ment, by the manufacture of Cordage,Mr. Philpots
Kent surveyed and illustrated. as also by the car [...]ening and building of
Ships.

The latter end of his life (by reason of the Civil broyls) was troublesome and
painfull, as the Book stiled Iter Carolinum shews.

Lewis the thirteenth, the last King of France, spoke ofttimes of the troubles
of Great Brittain in his sickness, and once he was over heard to say, that it
was a just judgement, because his brother of England [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=117) would have
assisted his Subjects once against him. Mr. Howels Corollary to the life of
Lewis the thirteenth.

In his March after Essex to the West, it hap­pened that one of his Carriages
brake in a long narrow Lane, which they were to pass, and gave his Majesty a
stop, at a time of a great showr of rain, which fell upon him. Some of his
Courtiers and others which were near about him, offered to hew him out a way
through the hedges with their swords, that he might get shelter in some of the
Villages adjoyning, but he resol­ved not to forsake his Canon upon any
occa­sion: At which when some about him seem­ed to admire & marvel at the
patience which he shewed in that extremity, his Majesty lift­ing up his Hat
made answer, That as God had given him affliction to exercise his patience, so
he had given him patience to  [...]ear his afflictions. Mr. Fords Panegyrick
on King Charles the first.

Let his Conference with the Marquess of Worcester, See M. S.  [...]ords Loyall
[...]ub­jects Indigna­tion for his R [...]vall S [...]ve­ra [...]gn [...] D
[...]col  [...]. the Papers which passed betwixt his Majesty and Master
Henderson, and those others with the Ministers in the Isle of Weight, testifie
how great a Master he was of reason, how well read in the Fathers, the
Councels Ecclesiasticall History, and the customes of the Church in all ages.
Id. ib.

He made an admirable Anagram of him­self, the day before his death, Carolus
Rex; Cras ero lux. Id. ib.

[[Page 217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=117) His
death (saith the Author of the Addi­tions to Bakers Chronicle) was strange and
unparalleld.Primus Refor­matus à Refor­matis, & à suis subjectis. Sal­maqi ad
milito­rum responsio. We may read (saith he) of many Kings who came to violent
ends, but never any that was so formally and solemnly first tryed for his
life, and then judicial­ly executed in publick by his own Sub­jects.

Mr. Love in his Vindication of the Lon­don-Ministers,D. Cornelius Burgess
preach­ed against it on Amos 5\. 13. Dr. Gauden protested also against it. I
have heard that four French Divines, Bo­chart, Amyraut, Vincent, and de La
[...]gly, have written against the Kings death, of which some I have seen.
against Price his Clerico-Clas­sicum, pag. 36\. gives good reasons against
putting the King to death, and saith, He was the first Protestant King in the
world, so put to death by his own Subjects. pag. 55. he saith, He could
produce multitudes of Protestant Di­vines, against the cutting off the Head of
our King in particular, as the Ministers beyond the Seas, the Ministers of
Scotland, the Mini­sters of Essex and Lancashire, and of many other places of
the Kingdome, besides the Lon­don-Ministers, who unanimously declared their
abhorrency of that horrid fact, of taking away the life of the King. pag. 59\.
he saith, That there is no president in all the Scripture, The Princess of
Tureine, Da­illé, Gachens, and Grelin [...]court, have also written against
it. that the Sanhedrim of the Jewes, or Rulers of Israel, did ever judicially
arraign and put to death any of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, though many of
them were most gross Idolaters, and tyrannous Princes, who shed much innocent
blood, and o [...] ­pressed the people sundry wayes.

This notwithstanding, another Divine of our own hath presumed to publish a
Defence [[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=118)
of the Sentence passed upon the late King.

He quotes Gen. 9. 6. Exod. 21. 12. Lev. 24\. 17. Numb. 35. 30, 31, 33. Prov.
28\. 17. and Mat. 26\. 52. to prove the lawfulness of it.

That private person which sheddeth mans bloud wilfully, by man, that is, by
theEffundi volo e­jus sanguinem per Magistra­tum scilicet vo­lo in cum
ani­madverti, & e­um capito plecti lege talionis. Mercer. Vide Paul. Fag. col.
lat. Translat. in loc. Magistrate (whose power is here stablished, saith
Ains­worth, for killing all wilfull murtherers) shall his bloud be shed.

And this (saith Ainsworth there) ac­cordeth with the Law, Numb. 35. 29, 30.
but private men may not use the sword, Mat. 26. 52. Rom. 13\. 4.

I have read that place Matth. 26\. 52. strongly urged by some, against
Subjects taking up Arms against their Princes, but never this way before.
These Scriptures (though he think them of so express a te­nour, of such a
pregnant import) I con­ceive make little for the purpose he alleadg­eth them.

When I consider with my self how many of note this Divine hath written
against, and what paradoxall (if not heterodoxall) tenets he hath often
laboured to maintain, sometimes against the determinations of a Parliament
rightly so called, I wonder at that passage of his near the conclusion of his
Novice-Presbyter instructed.

The great knower of hearts, and search­er of the reins, in whose presence I
write, knoweth, that if himself would be pleased [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=118) to discharge
me of the service of contra­dicting and opposing men, and dispose of me in a
way of retirement, were it never so private and obscure, where I might only
contest with my own weakness and errors, he should give me one of the first-
born de­sires of my soul in the things of this life, in­to my bosome.

He may do well to weigh those places, Exod. 22. 28. 1 Sam. 26. 9. Prov. 24\.
21. Eccles. 10\. 20.

The Greek word for King, [...] quasi  [...]. notes him that is the stay or
foundation of the people.

He is called 1 Pet. 2\. 13. the Supreme, or Superiour. The Greek word
signifies one that hath above others, in matter of Autho­rity and Supremacy.

The Generals Commission, the Cove­nant, the Parliaments Declarations and
Engagements both to the King and Scots, were for the preservation of the Kings
person.

Even Mr. Goodwin in his Anticavallie­rism [...], and Mr. Burroughs in his Lord
of Hosts, though they justified the Warre; yet they shewed their dislike of
any injury to the Kings person.

I may justly vindicate the Parliament of England, from having any hand in this
a­bominable action. Nunquam in te peccavit Britannia tua, sed nec in Parentem:
sola col­luvies illa de formis nefariorum t [...]nebrionum haec [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=119) cuncta
execranda procudit. D. Creyghtoni Dedic [...]t. hist. Concilii Tridentini.

Some object, that every Monarch hath his power from the consent of the whole
body▪ Vide Grotium de jure belli & pacis l. 1. c. 3, 4. & Camero­nem ad Rom.
c. 13. v. 3. Imperii sinis u­nicus populi uti­litas. Jun. Brut. vind. contra
Ty­ranui. therefore the whole body hath a power above the power of the
Monarch; and to this purpose they alleadge that Max­ime,Quod asseve­rant cum à
quo aliquis constitu­itur esse superio­rem constituto, verum duntaxat est in
ea consti­tutione, cujus ef­fectus perpetuò pender à volun­tate
constituen­tis, non etiam in e [...] quae ab initio est voluntatis, postea
vero ef­fectum habet ne­cessitatis. Gro­tius de jure bel­li & pacis l. 1. c.
3. Vide plura ibid. Quicquid efficit tale est magis tale, (All Government
(they say) is for the good of the governed; and Salus populi suprema lex.)
That Maxime even in naturall causes is subject to divers restrictions, and it
holds not in this particular; The Guardian is for his sake that is under age,
yet he hath pow­er over him. Of the right interpretation of the other Maxime,
Salus populi suprema lex, See Dr. Sanderson de Obligat. Consc. Prae­lect. 9, &
10\. Not that Prince which is most potent over his Subjects, but that Prince
which is most potent in his Subjects, is truly potent, witness that
incomparable Princess of happy memory, Queen Eliza­beth. It was also our King
Charles his own Golden Maxime, The peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings
Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples Li­berty.

Let us leave the Doctrine of King-killing to Mariana the Iesuite to defend,
and the perpetration of such a horrid act, to Ravil­liac, and such monsters of
men. Of Maria­nas Doctrine, and of the Iesuites opinion of [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=119) the lawfulness
of deposing Princes that are hereticall, See in Dr. Taylors collection of
Polemicall and Morall Discourses, his Ser­mon preached upon the fifth of
November on Luke 9\. 54.

I shall close up all with Davids patheti­call speech, 2 Sam. 1. 20. Tell it
not in Gath; publish it not in the streets of Askelo [...]: lest the daughters
of the Philistims rejoyce, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

As I have severall times in the Parlia­ment, so I thought sit here, to give in
my testimony against that unsound opinion, and abominable practice. Had I been
sooner freed out of the Kings-head in the Strand, (where I with many other
worthy Secluded Members, were confined for not going along with the rest of
the House, in their intended evill designe,) I had published a Treatise
a­gainst King-killing, (which I had formerly composed) before that Fatall
stroake. Finis.

## 22\. Errata.

PAge a line 15. read Hervord. p. 3. l. 22\. Ethelbald. p. 4\. margin, Histoire
d' Angleterre. p. 9 l. penult. & ult. r. Aidan & p. 10. l. 4. p. 9. l. 9. r.
Oswalstre. p. 16. marg. l. 10. r. nami illi argentei. & l. 11. r. pontificius
quaestor. l. 11, & 12\. dele qui publicé bonas artes profiterentur, quô multi
doctrina clari confluérunt, docendi gratta. p. 20. marg. dele Vid Asser, &c.
p. 29. l. 9. r. sica. p. 28. l. penult. r. upon a. p. 34. l. e 30. r. this. l
31. r. all. p. 44. marg. l. 20, 21. r. ipse suae. p. 51. l. 4. r. He refused.
p. 61. l. 36. r. cotraderet. p. 68. marg. l. 20. dele non. p. 73. marg. l. 1.
r. plerisqué. p. 81 l. 15. r. one, one, one, &c. p. 85. l. 29. r. of. p. 90.
l. 21. r. Cyrus. p. 95. marg. l. ult. r. loquentem. p. 106. marg. l. 8. r.
Episcopus. p. 116. m. l. 11. r. Polyd. p. 111. l. 14. r. Civilis. p. 129. l.
6. r. Westminster.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=120)

## Appendix A An Alphabeticall Table, expressing or pointing to the chief
things contained in this Treatise.

A

  * ALfred his severall Names page 20
  * The first annointed King of England, ibid.
  * His Vertues, p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26
  * Arthur King and Prince, p. 154, 155

B

  * Bastards many of them fa­mous, p. 56
  * Benevolence by whom that Tax was devised, p. 156
  * Black Prince a valiant per­son why so called, p. 113, 115
  * Bush: Why Henry the 7th bore the Hawthorn-Bush with the Crown in it, p. 151

C

  * Canutus, p. 42, 43, 44, 45
  * Magna Charta often con­firmed, p. 111
  * City of London gives the Dagger for its Arms, and why, p. 100

D

  * Danes long molested Eng­land, p. 37, 38, 47

E

  * Edgar, p. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38
  * Edward the elder, p. 27
  * More Kings of England of that name than of any other name, p. 27
  * Edward the Confessor, p. 48, 49, 50, 51.
  * Edward the first, p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104
  * Edward the second, p. 104, to 109
  * Edward the third, p. 109, to 117
  * Edward the fourth, p. 136, to 146
  * Edward the fifth, p. 146, 147
  * Edward the sixth, from p. 170, to 178
  * Egbert, p. 15, 16
  * England five times plagued by other Nations, p. 14
  * Called so first by Ethelbald, p. 11, & 18
  * Ethelbert, p. 7, & 18
  * Ethelred, p. 10, 18, 19
  * Ethelwolfe, p. 16, 17
  * Ethelston, p. 28

G

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=120)The order of the Garter insti­tuted by King Edward the third, p. 115, 116
  * The King of Heralds called Garter, ordained by Henry the fifth, p. 132
  * Guild-Hall in London in what Kings raign erected, p. 128

H

  * L. Hastings a speciall judg­ment on him, p. 149
  * Harlos, whence, p. 55
  * Hengist, why so called, the first Monarch of the English, p. 4, 5
  * The Heptarchy of the Sax­ons, p. 2, 3
  * Henry the first, p. 73, to 81
  * Henry the second, p. 84, to 86
  * Henry the third, p. 94, to 98
  * Henry the fourth, p. 122, to 129
  * Henry the fifth, p. 129, to 134
  * Henry the sixth, 134, to 139
  * Henry the seventh, p. 150, to 160
  * Henry the eighth, p. 160, to 170
  * Humble King rare, p. 10
  * Humphrey Duke of Gloce­ster, learned himself and was a great Benefactor to the V­niversity of Oxford, p. 123

I

  * Queen Jane, p. 178, 179
  * Jests, witty and merry speech­es, p. 21, 29, 35, 81, 92, 158, 163, 165, 166, 167, 175, 176, 185, 188, 207, 211
  * King John, p. 93, 94
  * Ironside, why so called, p. 40
  * A stout Judge, p. 124, 125, 126

K

  * Kings-Evil when first cured in England, p. 51
  * King of Heralds ordained by whom, p. 132

L

  * Laws, the best made in the time of Richard the second and Henry the seventh, p. 148, 155, 956

M

  * Queen Mary, p. 179, to 183
  * Murder punished remarkably, p. 149, 150

N

  * Neote, me of the first Divini­ty-Readers in Oxford, p. 17
  * Normans what, p. 53\. We re­received
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=61841&page=121) our Laws and names of sports from them, ib. p. 54

O

  * Offa first gave the Peter-pence to Rome, p. 12
  * Offas Church, aud Offas Ditch. ib.
  * Oswald, p. 9
  * Oswy, ib. p. 9, 10

P

  * Parliament, the first in the raign of Edward the third, p. 111
  * Parliamentum bonum, ib. Parlia­mentum indoctorum, p. 122\. Insa­num Parliamentum, p. 96
  * Plantagenet, whence, p. 84

Q

  * Vertuous Queens, p. 98, 178, 179, 183, to 200

R

  * Richard the first, p. 89\. 90, 91, 92
  * Richard the second, p. 117, to 122
  * Richard the third, p. 146, to 150
  * Rosamand what it signifies, p. 86, 87
  * The comely riding of women when it began in England, p. 120

S

  * Saxons a warlike people, p. 12\. They gave names to many Cities, Towns, Rivers, Woods, Fields in Engl. ib. Why Saxon Princes had their Name from a Horse, and gave a Horse for their Escucheon, p. 4, 5
  * Schola Salernitana, dedicated to Robert Son to William the Con­queror, p. 67, 68
  * Stephen, p. 82, 83
  * Stuart, whence, p. 200

T

  * Thong Castle, why so called, p. 4
  * Tudors why so called, p. 150, 151

V

  * Great Victory of the English over the French, p 112, 113
  * University Colledge in Oxford, founded by King Alfred, p. 22.
  * There are his Armes in the Hall, p. 25

W

  * Earle of Warwick, a person of great power in Edward the fourths reign. p. 200
  * Women, whether the Rule of Wo­men be lawfull, p 179
  * William the first, p. 54, to 66
  * William the second, p. 66, to 73
  * Wolves how destroyed in England, p. 34.
  * Wicklef in the Reign of Edw. the third, p. 116

Y

  * Yeomen of the Guard instituted by Henry the seventh, p. 151

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Leigh, Edward, 1602-1671.. Date: 1661  

