---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Part of the harmony of King Dauids harp Conteining the first XXI. Psalmes of
King Dauid. Briefly & learnedly expounded by the Reuerend D. Victorinus
Strigelius Professor of Diuinitie in the Vniuersity of Lypsia in Germanie.
Newly translated into English by Rich. Robinson. Briefe contentes of these 21.
Psalmes. ... — Hypomnēmata in omnes Psalmos Davidis. Psalm 1-21. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=1)

PART OF THE HARMONY OF KING DAVIDS HARP.

Conteining the firſt XXI. Pſalmes of King Dauid.

Briefly & learnedly expounded by the Reuerend D. Victo­rinus Strigelius
Profeſſor of Diuinitie in the V­niuerſitie of Lypſia in Germanie.

Newly tranſlated into Engliſh by Rich. Robinſon.

Briefe contentes of theſe 21. Pſalmes.

  * Of Doctrine. Pſal. 1\. & 14.
  * Of Prophefies. Pſal. 2\. 8. 16. 19. 21.
  * Of Conſolation. Pſal. 4\. & 12.
  * Of Thankeſgeuing. Pſal. 9\. & 18.
  * Of Prayer. Pſal. 3\. 5. 6. 7. 10. 11. 13. 17. 20.
  * Of Obedience. Pſal. 15.

Zachar. 12. I will power vpon the houſe of Dauid, my Spirite of Grace & of
Prayer.

VBIQVE FLORESCIT.

LONDON. Imprinted by John wolfe. 1582.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=2)

## G. C. To the Tranſlator.

Firme frendſhip feares no feeb le foes, faith triumphes ouer all:

It may be toſt and wrapt in woes, but downe it cannot fall,

Did Chriſt diſdaine for frendes to die, their fatall doomes to pay?

Euen God for man, iuſt for vniuſt, his ſoule to pledge did laye

Looke then on frendſhips force, to foes, and ſee it more abound:

In his triumphes we victors were, and riches great haue found,

Some captaines of his hoaſt, and ſome his guides and prophetes are:

And ſome Apoſtles for to plant, of watring ſome haue care.

Muſe not therefore, that Prophets ſpeake darke ſpeeches which be wiſe:

In huſkes moſt tart, and ſhelles moſt hard, the pleaſant kernell lies.

Could greater ſecretes be conceiude, then lurke in Dauids ſonges?

Vnknowen to purblinde Iewes, to whom of right the law belongs.

S trigelius tels them plaine, to thoſe that latine language knowes:

Deep myſteries in termes moſt plaine, to ſtudious heads he ſhowes.

Euen he the huſke and ſhel hath broke, to kernell you may come.

I know his ſpeech all cannot reach, he ſpeaketh but to ſome.

Exchangde for engliſh pleaſant phraſe, he hath his romiſh ſtile.

Sincerely Robinſon hath dealt, the vulgar ſpeech to file.

Therefore praiſe God as author chiefe, for to reueale the ſame.

Eſteeme the Princelie Scribe, whoſe pen theſe ſuered ſonges did frame.

Thanke Strigell for the light he gaue to darkeſome ſpeech of Harpe

Count Robinſons indeuours ſuch, as M [...]us may not carpe

How great a ſigne is this to thee, the frend of God to be:

Reuealing of his ſecrete will, and giftes beſtowed on thee,

If ſeruantes may not know the will, and maſters treaſure great:

Sure frendes and ſonnes enioy them both, they feede on daintieſt meate.

Thus haſt thou treaſure, lock and key, at will to take and chuſe:

In wretched ſtate thou art enthralde, if thou ſuch giftes refuſe.

F Frend Robinſon thou haſt a frend, if thou like faithfull be:

E Euen God and Chriſt thee to defend, gainſt all loquacitie,

A All tinckling Cymbals ceaſe your ſounde [...], vaine heads & mindes to
pleaſe

R Reſt curious workemen of vaine artes, your ſalue helps no diſeaſe.

E Egs of the Cockatrice you lay, and weaue the Spiders cloth:

G Goodly to view, no gayne to vſe, but ſhame and poyſon both

O Only Gods will to know and teach, is wiſdome, ioy and bliſſe

D Down with vayne toyes, exalt all hands, and hearts that brings vs this.

G G [...]ch not good will, its vertues me ede, let labouring bees be fed:

C [...] the drones that ſpende yt ſwete, that toyling bees haue bred.

FINIS,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=2)

## To the Right Honourable and Vertuous Lord, AMBROSH DVDLEY, Earle of
Warwicke, Baron Liſle, Maſter of her Maieſties Or­dinaunce, Knight of the moſt
noble Order of the Garter, and one of her Highnes moſt Ho­nourable Priuie
Counſell, Grace mercie and peace in the Sacred Trinitie.

IN Extolling Religiouſly the conſo­nante vnitie of the Trinitie, as the ſacred
harmonie of the heauenlye deitie (Righte Honourable Eatle) Aurelius Auguſtinus
that aunciente Orthodoxus, meriteth Chriſtian cō ­mendation and memorie not
onely for thoſe his ſix bookes De Trinitate greatly edifying the church of
God, in faith vnited, and in concord eſta­bliſhed, but alſo for that his
learned trauell in Libro de Incarnatione Domini, contra Iudaeos: Ende­uouring
to win the way ward Iewes, vnto God, and his church: as by that ſimilitude
eſpecially where he ſaith, Iudaee cytheram re­ſpice vt muſicum melos ſoniſue
dulcibus reddat: Tria pariter adeſſe videntur. &c. Allegory of the Deitie in
Trim [...] For, as he biddes the Jew behold the Harpe, what muſicall melodie
it hath, and in ſweete tunes, by thoſe three ce­currentes, videlicet, Ars
dictans, Manus tangens, and Chorda reſo­nans (which altogether working make
conſonant concord in Mu­ſicke:) So, thereby allegorically figuring
Monochordium Deitatis in Trinitate perſonarum, as The vnitie of Trinitie in
Deitie, One God, and one Church. He mea­neth none other thing, but to di
[...]wade the Iewe from ignorance of God, to the knowledge of him, from
incredulitie to beleefe, and of an enemie vnto God and his church to become an
embracer of him and a member of his miſticall bodie whereof S. Paule true­ly
reporteth, as in I. Cor. 12. True worſhip­ping of God. There is one God which
worketh all in all. &c. And againe Rom. 10. One God ouer all, rich towardes
all, that call vpon him, (whether they be Iewes or Gentiles,) none which
beleue in him ſhall be aſhamed &c. Alſo as in the 12. Rom. and in 4. Epheſians
the liuely members and benefites of his churche are at large de­ſcribed. Theſe
things then thus framing, what more ſacred ſub­ſtantiall Inſtrument, then The
Eſſence of God, as in his holy word
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=3) reuealed, and
of vs acknowledged? videlicet John 1. There are thre vvhich beare vvitneſse in
heauen: The Father, The Worde, and The Ho­ly Ghoſt, and they three are one.
One God of diuine eſſence, ſpiritual eternall and omnipotente: (ſayth Dauid
Chytr [...]us) in regula vitae. And what more ſacred conſonancy of heauenly
harmony in Dei­tie, then The vvill of God, as in his word reuealed & of vs
acknow­ledged, in a three folde benefite towardes mankinde? videlicet,

1 Touching our Creation. Gen. 1. Let vs make man after our ovvne ſimilitude
and likenes. 2 Touching our Redemption. Epheſ. 1. By Chriſt vve haue
redemption in his bloud, and forgeuenes of our ſinnes, according to the riches
of his grace. And 3 Touchinge our Sanctification. E­pheſ. 1. VVe are ſealed
vvith the holy Spirite of promiſe vvhich is the pledge of our Inheritance.
Which Eſſence and Will of God as the heauenly inſtrument and ſweete ſound in
his benefites is onely apparant by his ſacred worde publiſhed to the
Patriarkes, Princes, and Prophets, and in the Goſpoll of Chriſt Jeſus, and
doctrine of the Apoſtles: Concorde of Chriſt and his Church.Like as our
Sauiour himſel [...] concludeth the ſame conſonant concord of God and his
church, when on this manner he prayed vnto his father for the ſame. John 17.
That all vvhich beleeued in him, might be as one: That they might be one, like
as his father and he vvas one: I in them, and thou in me (ſaith he) that they
may be made perfecte in one. This verely is that du [...]cer Harpe whoſe
conſonante con­corde S. Auguſtine ſo highly cōmending would haue the Jewes to
be hearers of this muſicke in the church of God, by faith, fol­lowers in
vnitie of Religion, and fullfillers in life and conuerſa­tion: Accordingly
alſo as that Princely Prophet Dauid ſwete­ly played vpon and ſong to his Harpe
this diuine Harmonicum Hemyſtichion. Pſal. 68. A God making men to be of one
mind in an houſe. verſ 6. And againe as that wiſe ſonne of Dauid, King Salomon
hath it in his Canticles of the true vnitie and louing concord be­twene Chriſt
the ſpouſe and his church, the ſpouſes ſinging. One is my Doue, one is my
Darlinge. Cantica canticorum. cap. 6. Gene. 1. 1. Iohn 1.Thus then (and in
this church, the glory of God and his ineſtimable bene­fites ſounding towardes
men) what more dulce & delectable De­cacorda Cithera, what more profound
Fidicula, then whoſe firſte ſtring is the eternall Woord of God. The Ten
ſtrin­ged Harpe of the true church of God. Secondly, what better cor­ner ſtone
then Chriſt Jeſus? Ephe. 2. Thirdly what better opera­tion then the Holy
Ghoſt? Eph. 4. Fourthly, what better builders then Patriarkes, Prophets,
Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, 1\. Cor. 12. Fiftly, what better building then Faith
in the promiſes of God? Matt 16. Sixtly, what better churche, then Worſhippers
in Spi­rite and Trueth? 4 Ioh. Seauenthly, what profounder pillers, then True
Religious Princes, & True Godly Paſtors? Apoc. 3. Eightly, what brighter
lights, then Sincere godly liuers? 1\. The. 5 Ninthlye, what heauenlier vertue
then louinge concorde in the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=3) Trueth?
Epheſ. 4. Tenthly and laſtly, what greater ioye, then Life and Bleſſednes
euerlaſting? John 16. But contrary wiſe as our Sauiour Chriſt Jeſus himſelfe
found the ignoraunt, incre­dulous, iarring and indurate Jewes a figure of
Sathans Sy­nagogue, miſvnderſtanding his wordes. John 6. The iarringe Harpe of
the Iewiſh Syna­gogue. Murmuringe againſt him and his miracles. John 7. 9.
Malignantly minded to miſchiefe, cap. 10. & 12\. Becauſe obſeruing the Lawes
of Mo­ſes, vsing ſuperſticious circumciſion of the fleſh and worſhipping
abhominable Idols, (as Eſay cap. 6. ſaith) They had their harts har­dened,
their eares ſtopped and their eyes ſhut vp: So euen theſe 1. Honou­ring Moyſes
and hating the Meſsias, 2. Louing the Law and l [...]athing the Goſpell, 3.
Following the fleſh, defying the Spirite, 4. Addicted to darkenes, leauing the
light, and 5. Fancying fi­gures not affyinge in the trueth, 6. Bondage
embracinge more then freedome, 7. Death more then life, and 8. Tranſitorie
plea­ſures more then ioyes eternall. No maruell it was if this godly father S.
Auguſtine (findinge the Jewes in his time, of like iar­ringe incredulitie,
ignoraunce and induracy) Iudaee Cythe­ram reſpice vt muſicum melos ſonifue
&c. Laboured to bringe home the loſte ſheepe vnto Chriſtes folde with the
fatherly aduer­tiſement of this ſo Grande Doricum: not as Mutus but Muſicus
Hypparchyon thus ſoundinge vnto them. And as thus theſe iar­ring Jewes, like
vnto Cainites haue beene rather worſe & worſeMalignan [...] Church. after
admoniſhment ſo in al ages the members of the malignant church of Rome, as
Tirantes, Hipocrites, Epicures, Sophi­ſters, Papiſtes, Atheiſtes,
Anabaptiſtes, Jeſuites, Sectaries, and Sciſiatickes, are thoſe Jewes and
Judaſites, touchinge whome the holy Doctor S. Ambroſe ſuper Lucam 15. cap.
ſayth: Dominus impios quaeſiuit, qui eum non quaeſiuerunt. And this hee doth
of his great goodnes and merry towards ſinneful mankind to the greater
encreaſe of his church, kingdome, and glory: But contrary wiſe like ſubtill
ſerpents they ſtop their eares, as deafe worke he neuer ſo worthely by his
wiſedome and wonders vnto them: approuing this proueth true in themſelues.
Aſini Lyrae au­ſcultatores, Whereby very well appeareth in them this ſentence
of S. Ambroſe alſo in lib. De Abel & Cain. Nihil grauius quam er­rantem a Deo
deſeri vt ſe reuocare non poſsit. Whiche thinge no doubt as it encreaſeth the
kingdome and churche of God, by the decay of the kingdome or Synagogue of
Sathan, ſo with toothe and nayle he laboureth to holde faſte, that he fall
not, accordinge to that ſaying in the Reuelation 12. Therefore reioyce ye
heauens and ye vvhich dvvell in them: VVo he vnto the Inhabitantes of the
earth and of the Sea, becauſe Sathan is come dovvne vnto you hauing greate
vvrath, Knovvinge that he hath but a ſmall time. And therfore of late this
Ninus of Babi­lon as hee ſtill not onely confirmeth at Rome abhominable
ido­latry [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=4)
bringing foorth Beel, Baal and Beelzebub (ſaith Nicolaus Lyra. in 14.
Sap.)Antichriſt and his whelpes. his whelps of the ſame bloudy brood: but alſo
di­ſperieth them into ſondry kingdomes and countries to diſturbe the ſweete
concord of the church and Goſpel, and altogether hin­dering the conuerſion of
others like themſelues, doe ſeeke their owne and others vtter ſubuertion. To
be ſhorte (how ſecretly ſ [...] euer ſome of thoſe he [...]lhoundes arriuing
in englande haue hiddeEnemies intent hath euil euent. themſelues) and how
ſubtilly ſoeuer like ſci [...]natiekes they pur­poſed by entent to build
Thebes with Orpheus: yet the euent fal­leth out that they rather practiſed
with Thales to ſowe diſcord a­mongſt the Lacedemonians: But as the Lord
neither ſlombereth nor ſle­p [...]th vvhich keepeth Iſraell, Pſal. 121. verſ.
4. ſo it is hee whiche turneth their miſchiefe vpon their owne pates, and it
is his Sonne Chriſte Jeſus our Mediatour, which (againſt the ſiftinges of
theſe Sciſm [...]tickes)Luke 22. hath prayed vnto his father for vs, That our
Fayth ſhould not faile vs. Making milde Moſes to ouermatch the Muſitians
daunſinge about the Calfe. Exod. 32. Zealous Phineas to find out the
Ma­dianiti [...]h fornicators, Num. 25. Godly Iudith to behead the Phi­liſtian
Holophern [...]s. Judith. 13. Good Helyas to reproue the wan­dring people and
alſo to be reuenged vpon Baals prieſts. 3. Reg. 18. Faithfull Paul and
Barnabas to reproue the falſe Prophet Ba­riehu ſubuerting the Lordes wayes.
Act. 13. Godly learned Am­broſe and painefull Prudentius by diuine aſsiſtaunce
to confute theſe blaſphemies and ſciſines. Finally, and neither yet wil
iuſtTrue Prayer  [...]ictorious. Iacob leaue wraſtling with the Angell, vntil
by prayer he obtaine the victory and beare away the bleſsing. Geneſ. 32. With
which Harpe and harmony of Prayers (annexing therunto Confeſsion and
Thankeſgeuing) as the threefold ſacrifice moſte acceptable to the eyes and
moſt delectable to the eares of the heauenly Ieho­uah. (Right Honourable) As
thoſe ſame xxiiij. Elders worſhip­ping the Lambe with their Harpes and golden
Vyals in the v­niuerſall, true, Catholicke, Propheticall and Apoſtolicall
Mili­tant and Triumphant Church of God, from the firſt age of the world
hetherto allwayes Haue honoured the Lambe as moſt vvoor [...]hy of Povver, and
Riches, of VViſdome, Fortitude, Honour, Glorye, and Bleſ [...]inge
euerlaſting. Reuel.  [...]. So likewiſe (as members of the ſame vniuerſal
church and heyres of the kingdome of Heauen in this latter age) mani­fold
cauſes haue the Churches of England and Irelande (conſi­dering the time of
their bleſſed viſitation, vnder the gracious pea­ceable and proſperou [...]
gouernement of our moſt honorable He­ſter. Vertuous Iudith and diuine Debora,
Queene ELIZABETH) with that Princely Prophet, Sacred Pſalmograph,
Incom­perable Captaine and Inuincible Conquerour King Dauid (the choſen
Inſtrument of Gods Mercy and Trueth euerlaſtinge,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=4) To rule ouer
Iſraell and Ieruſalem, 1\. Reg. 16. To feede Iacob his ſeru [...]unt & Iſraell
his Inheritance. Pſal 78. verſ. 71. To ſhine in his throne as the Sunne in the
Lordes ſight, and the Moone perfect for euer. 2\. King. 7. Yea and be a
faith­full vv [...]eſ [...]e in heauen for euer. Pſal. 89. verſ. 38.) Euery
one continually confeſ­ſing our infirmities and the manifold mercies of God:
To prayſe the Lorde vvith the Harpe and voyce of Pſalmes. Pſalm 98. And ſo
vvith the Tribes of the Lord to goe vp to Hieruſalem, To pray for her peace
and pr [...]ſperitie. Pſal. 122. Yea for the collection of her outcaſtes, And
the healing of their  [...]riefes. Pſa. 147. And finally (with thankeful Dauid
as thankefull Iſraelites) to laude the Lord before his arke all the dayes of
our life in holynes1\. Sam.  [...]. and righteouſnes according to his good
pleaſure and meaſure of his grace beſtowed vpon vs. Where amongſt manye farre
more meete members for this purpoſe, in acknowledginge my ſelfe to be Little
Laodocus in arte magna, not any thing like count [...]uailea­ble to
Nicoſtratus in re parua magnus: yet putting to my preſt beſt good will.
Amongſt thoſe I ſay (Quos Muſicen docet amor & ſi ſint indocti prius.) Whome
Zeale teacheth knovvledge: though they be vn­learned before. Which loue well
learning and haue but little them­ſelues, which tender the wellfare of Gods
Church, and yet are no diuines. Whiche labour for▪ learninge and lacke
liuinge: And which imitate other mens workes to inſtruct themſelues. So in
experience of tranſlatinge (as my Summum Singulare & Specia­le Bonum, Animi,
Corporis & Fortunae donum, to profite my ſelfe and others) I chauneed lately
vpon theſe Expo [...]itary Sch [...]lia of the Godly Learned and Reuerend D.
Victorinus Strigelius a ſinguler Profeſſor of diuinitie in theſe our dayes yet
liuing: very briefly, godly, learnedly and profoundly expounding the whole
booke o [...] King Dauids Pſalmes. Out of whiche whole volume (contey­ning two
Coines) I haue tran [...]la [...]ed onely▪ The firſte one and twentie Pſalmes
and expoſitions thereof: but ſpecially the verſe ac­cording to the Latine
Exemplar, being of the Geneua tranſla­tion, after the Hebrue ſence, and (ſo
neere as I could imitate the authors meaninge therein) nothinge diſſonante
from our vulgar and vſuall tranſlation dayly read in the Churche of Englande:
Not without the helpe of a rare well diſpoſed diuine and learned Achates
(ſcintillas graecas ob [...]curioreſue theologicas locutiones ex­cudens) as
Virgill ſaith: Of  [...]home (being ſometime my Schole­fellow vnder the
Reuerend M. Robert Ba [...]ter Schoolemaſter euen then of Ne [...] arke,
deceaſed) as I maye nowe ſaye wyth Plutarck, Plus Didimus hab [...]it, Plus
Philomelus habet, recomp [...]ing what I then was, and what hee nowe is. I
heere haue by Gods helpe and his, perfourmed (perhaps Velut demulſor minor in
re magna) my not v [...]poliſhed altogether, nor yet vnprofitable tran­ſlation
as I truſt in God. Accordinge to my humble and hartye
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=5) prayer
beſeeching the moſt beneficiall goodnes of God to tourne and tranſpoſe the
ſame to good purpoſe of publike vtilitie in his choſen church, as ſeemeth beſt
to his glory, my Princes honour, and commoditie of my natiue countrey.
Whereas, eſpecially in the Royall Court of her Princely Maieſty God by his
gratious prouidence hath of longe time proſperouſly planted and replent­ſhed
your honourable good Lordſhippe with rare and excellent in­dumentes of body
and minde as true godlines, perfecte vertue, graue wiſdome wholeſome counſell,
conſtant fidelitie and noble magnanimitie, with a ſincere ſupportant
[...]eale to true Religion, godlines, vertue, and good letters to the
aduauncemente of her Maieſties Royall Regiment, and profite of the weale
publike in her Highnes dominions. So on my poore behalfe, In teſtimony of a
Chriſtian weale to Gods glory, loyall harte to my Princes honour, earneſt good
wil to the weale publike of my natiue coun­trey, but ſpecially of true harted
Synteriſin & Proeriſin towardes the heauenly country of the hieſt Iehouah,
that celeſtiall Hieruſa­lem. I haue withall humble and duetiful regard
adreſſed this my poore trauell vnto your Honors moſte noble patronage, as one
whoſe Heroicall vertues in patrociny counterpoyſable to the Princely
protection of the firſt noble patrone that Honourable Auguſtus High Marſhal of
the moſt ſacred Empire that now is. Your Honor aſſuredly ſhall by Gods grace,
of your godly  [...]eale adorne both patrones & expoſitors godly purpoſes,
aduaunce the honor of God, your Prince, and country: not a little adu
[...]bra­ting by your accuſtomed clemency the true and vnfayned good­will of
me the Tranſlator. Who humbly beſeechinge your Ho­norable Lordſhip to accept
in good woorth the ſame my good wil and duetifull endeuour in this reſpecte,
doe reſt continually and faithfully, prayinge vnto the Almightie and immortall
God to preſerue your Honor with the Honourable Lady and Counte [...]e your
louing Spouſes, wt long life proſperous health, encreaſe of honor and
perpetual fruition of life and bleſſednes euerlaſting, in, the eternall
kingdome of God and his Sonne Chriſt, that Roote and of ſpring of Dauid the
bright ſhining day starre, Apoc. 22. To whom with the Holy Ghoſt, three in
perſon and one eternall God be all do­minion, power, prayſe, honor and glory
for euer and euer. Amen

Your Honorable good Lordſhips moſt humble and duetyfull Oratour in the Lord.
Rich. Robinſon, citizen of London.

## Table of contents

  * G. C. To the Tranſlator.
  * To the Right Honourable and Vertuous Lord, AMBROSH DVDLEY, Earle of Warwicke, Baron Liſle, Maſter of her Maieſties Ordinaunce, Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Garter, and one of her Highnes moſt Honourable Priuie Counſell, Grace mercie and peace in the Sacred Trinitie.

## 1\.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=5)

### 1.1. ❧ The Expoſition vpon the firſt Pſalme.  
Beatus vir, qui non abijt in couſilio.

#### 1.1.1. THE ARGVMENT.

NO greater beatitude there is, then to bee a Citizen of the Countrey moſt
praiſeworthy of all, (The Church) that is, of that congregation vnto whom God
hath made himſelfe kno­wen by his worde, and excel­lent teſtimonies, for whom
he created all thinges, whom he redeemed with the bloud of his Sonne, and
ſanctifi­ed with the holie Ghoſt, whoſe head and captaine is the Sonne of God,
vnto whome the Angels ſhew themſelues Miniſters. Finallie, in which God ſhalbe
for euer and for euer all in all.

This beatitude doth the firſt Pſalme deſcribe, alſo teaching which and what
maner a one, and where the true Church of God is, and who be liuely mem­bers
of this Congregation. For what ſo is ſaide as touching the whole bodie, the
ſame in like maner may be ſpoken touching euery particuler member. Therefore
it clerelie and manifeſtly affirmeth, that Congregation to be the church of
God, which hea­reth, learneth, and embraceth the Goſpell, all fanati­call
opinions and worſhippings of God, deuyſed by mans boldnes, being vtterlie
reiected and forſaken. For the pure voice of the Goſpel is the proper token
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=6) and
infalible badge of the church, which being pro­nounced from the boſome of the
eternall father, the ſonne of God through his manifolde goodnes hath made
knowen vnto mankinde: As it is ſaide in the 10. chapter of Iohn. My ſheepe
heare my voice. And in the 14. of S. Iohns goſpell, If any man loue me, he
will keepe my commandement. And to keepe his commaun­demente, is to embrace
the true doctrine with faith and good conſcience, and the ſame to profeſſe and
ſet forwardes. Therefore this Pſalme containeth doctrine chieflie neceſſarie,
and moſt ſweete conſo­lation. It teacheth, as I ſaide, that thoſe are the
mem­bers of the church, which imbrace and loue the true doctrine, and not the
enemies or contemners of the doctrine.

Moreouer, it addeth a peculiar promis of the true Church. The Church ſhall be
like vnto a Palme tree, neuer wanting fruite, and it ſhall haue proſperous
ſucceſſe, yea though the gates of hell grudge and repugne a­gainſt it. Alſo
let vs perſwade ourſelues that this moſt ſweete ſermon pertaineth vnto vs, and
let vs in­clude our ſelues into this ſaying. Let vs know that wee alſo are
floriſhing and fruitfull palmes, if wee be faithfull hearers and keepers of
the doctrine of the goſpell. In the ende he compareth the true Church with the
multitude of the enemies of the goſpel, and of hipocrites, by a contrarietie
oppoſite, and vnto this vngodlie multitude (at continuall enmitie with the
true church) doeth hee denounce in felicitie of their counſels and euentes,
and an vniuerſall ouer­throwe and deſtruction. For the true Church ſtan­deth
vnmoueable, as the verie Rockes in the ſea.

Vt pelagirupes, magno veniente fragore,

Quae ſeſe multis circumlatrantibus vndis

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=6)Mole tenet,
ſcop [...]li nequicquam & ſpumeae circum

Saxafremunt, lateri (que) illiſa refunditur alga.

As Rock or huge ſea banke (which ſouſing tide

With roaring waues ruſh on) doth firme abide.

Nor rock nor foming ſtones do fret or fume

But flag or reede itoſt toth'ſhore, conſume.

Contrariwiſe, the vngodlie enemies of the church are like vnto graſſe on the
houſe ſides, which before it be plucked vp withereth away, as it is ſaide 129.
Pſalme. And in 58. pſalme, the vaine enterpriſes of the vngodly are deſcribed
in fiue ſimilitudes. 1. They ſhall paſſe away ſwiftlie as the water. 2. They
ſhall ſhoote their ſhaftes and not hurt. 3. They ſhall waxe drie as ſnailes in
the ſhelles 4. They ſhall die, as the vntimelie borne fruite. 5. They ſhall be
taken away as young thornes, before they be growen. Or as the texte ſaith.
Before that your thornes become ſharpe prick­ing, That is, ere tender thornes
become greate and ſharpe. But the whole meaning of this Pſalme is
paraphraſticallie expounded, & excellently ſet forth in the 119. Pſalme.
Therfore let the godly confer this brief example with that more ample
explicati­on there ſet forth, that they may ſee what difference there is
betweene a little running riuer, and a mayne flood: That is, betweene
Dialectica, which is to bee thought as a briefe and ſtricte eloquence, and
that ſame right eloquence which they take to be Dialecti­ca dilatata, or
inlarged maner of diſputing.

#### 1.1.2. ‘Verſe. 1. Bleſſed is the man which hath not walked in the
counſell of the vngodlie, nor ſtoode in the way of ſinners, nor ſit in the
ſeate of ſcorners.’ ‘Verſe 2 But whoſe delite is in the law of the Lorde, and
in his law will exerciſe himſelfe day and night.’

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=7) IT is an
vſuall thing, in definitions which are more ample and elegant, not onelye to
contein the affirmatiue ſentence, declaring what the thing is, but alſo the
negatiue re­mouing from the ſubiecte thinges oppoſite and contrarie. So in
this place, this pſalme deſcribeth ne­gatiuelie and affirmatiuelie the true
members of the Church, that the ſpeeche might be more full, and large. They
(ſaith he) are Citizens of the true Church, and the dwelling places and
temples of God, whiche fall not into the furies of Epicures, or into other
fana­ticall errours, neither eſtabliſhe Idolatrie, nor further the crueltie of
the enemies of the Goſpell, but with all their heart abhorring the ſocietie or
companie of the contemners, and enemies of the doctrine, deliuered from God,
doe heare the pure worde of the goſpell, and embrace the ſame with faith, and
good conſcience, and the ſame doe profeſſe and aduaunce. Then are not the
Saduces, Phariſes, Biſhops of Rome, and their cham­pyons, members of the
church of God, yea though they beare a Title and ſway in the world, which doe
defende prophane and idolatrous furies: ſuch as are, prayer vnto the dead, a
manifolde prophanation of the Supper of the Lord in their maſſes, and the
Percian pompe: wherein the bread is carryed about, againſt vſuall maner, and
is worſhipped contrarie vnto the vſe of the Sacrament: The law of ſingle life,
which is the originall of greateſt miſchiefes, and which S. Paul calleth
plainly, The Do­ctrine of deuils: Perpetuall doubting of remiſſion of ſinnes:
Wicked foule errours of contrition, confeſſion, and ſatiſfaction: Pardons for
money: The fable of pur­gatorie: The ſnares of mans traditions: Finallie, the
cruell ſalaughter of honeſt perſons, whom they kill and ſlay, onely for that
they diſalowe theſe foule and manifeſt errours, and doe proſeſſe the trueth.
Theſe being cleane [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=7) contrarie vnto the
eternall and vnmoueable rules of Gods worde: Thou ſhalt haue none other Gods
but me. Exod. 20. Gal. 1. Alſo, Eſchew Idolatrie. Againe, If any man teach any
other doctrine, let him be holden accurſed. It is plaine, that the defenders
of thoſe are not the members of the Church of our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, but the
inſtru­mentes of the diuell, and veſſelles of wrath, as Paule cal­leth them.
But becauſe in other wrytinges the whole place touching the church, is
plentifully expounded, I will now be content to admoniſhe, That the beginning
of this Pſalme is to be adioyned vnto the other deſcri­ptions, which are euery
where recyted in the ſcripture.

#### 1.1.3. ‘Verſe 3. And hee ſhall be like the tree planted by the Riuer
ſide, which ſhall bring foorth her fruite in due ſeaſon: and his leafe ſhall
not wither away, but all thinges that hee ſhall doe, ſhall haue proſperous
ſucceſſe.’

HItherto hath he deliuered doctrine touching the greateſt matter of all,
namely, which, what maner a one, and where the true Church of God is. Now doth
he effectually comfort vs, agaynſt all temptations, and tryals which all the
godly ones do ſuffer. We ſée the bar­barous crueltie of the Turkes dayly
further to ſpread. We ſee hurly burlyes to ariſe betwixt Chriſtian Prin­ces
amongſt them ſelues, hurtfull vnto the Church. The matter itſelfe doth
declare, that the maynteiners of Po­piſh Idolatrie do burne with moſt bitter
hatred agaynſt the godly, becauſe they forbid the Goſpell to be publi­ſhed,
and cruelly kill and ſlaye many honeſt perſons. What other thing in theſe
ſhewes may mans reaſon conceiue, but that ſhortly both the true doctrine it
ſelfe, and the ſtudies of the ſame ſhould vtterly periſhe? But agaynſt this
humane reaſoning, let vs oppoſe the moſte ſweete conſolation, which affirmeth,
That there ſhall [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=8) ſhall alwayes ſome
true Church remayne, yea though the Diuell labour to extinguiſh the ſame. And
that the Sonne of God ſhal raigne for euer, and that the labours of ſuche as
teache and learne ſhall not be in vayne. As elſewhere S. Paule maynely crieth
out, Your labour ſhal not be fruſtrate, in the Lorde. Which things ſith they
ſo1\. Cor. 15. be, let euery man diligently trauell in his vocation, nei­ther
let him caſt it of for any terrours, hatred, imuries, nor dangers. But let him
with fayth looke for helpe of God, and hope for proſperous euentes, according
to the moſt ſweete promiſe in this place deliuered, He ſhall be like a tree
planted by the riuer ſide, which ſhall bring foorth her fruite in due ſeaſon.
For where as the circumſtances in this verſe declare that Dauid alludeth vnto
the na­ture of a Palme tree, to the which in the 92. Pſalme the Church is
compared, The iuſt ſhall floriſhe as the Palme tree. verſ. 12. I will repeate
a fewe wordes (out of the 13. booke of Plinie) concerning the nature of the
Palme tree, and I will apply the ſame vnto the Image of the Church. The Palme
(ſayth he) groweth not, but in the warme countrie: and it is not fruitfull in
any place, but in the hotte countrie. It increaſeth in a lighte and grauelly
grounde, and for the moſt part in a ſaltie ground. It alſo de­lighteth in a
wateriſh or moyſt ground, and all the yere long loueth to ſucke humiditie.
Alſo ſome thinke that doung is hurtfull vnto it. We haue ſayde, that ſaltilhe
ground is brooked well of this Palme tree. Therefore where no ſuche ſoyle is,
they ſprinkle ſalte, not at the rootes, but a litle from it, &c. Theſe after
the ſame maner maye be ſpoken concerning fayth, and the Church. Fayth
ſprin­geth in the grauelly and ſaltiſh ground, that is, in a con­trite or
broken heart through acknowledging of ſinne, and as the Palme trees haue neede
of warmth and moyſture, ſo ſayth is kindled by the holy Ghoſt, and is watered
by the ryuers of the Goſpell. And it is hurte of [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=8) doung, that is, by
corruption of doctrine, & the woundes of the conſcience. Furthermore as the
Palme tree is fruitfull, ſo fayth is not fruitles, but effectuall by loue. And
as the Palme tree beareth waighte of any thing layde vpon her, & the more ſhe
is borne downe, ſo muche more hyer ſhe ryſeth agayne: ſo fayth is the
vanquiſher of ſorowes, & amidſt afflictions ſpecially ſhineth. Final­ly, the
leaues of the Palme tree neuer fall of, ſo the fruits of the teachers are
euerlaſting, as in the 15. chapter of John it is moſt comfortably ſayd: In
this is my father glo­rified, if ye be made my diſciples, and that you beare
muche fruite, and that your fruite do continue.

#### 1.1.4. ‘Verſe 4 So ſhall not the vngodly do, but as the chaffe ſhall they
be, which the winde driues to and fro.’ ‘Verſe 5 Therefore ſhall not the
vngodly abide in iudge­ment, neither ſhall ſinners ſtande in the congregation
of the righteous.’

EVen as he compareth the godly ones, which are the members of the true Church,
vnto the flouriſhing and fruitefull Palme tree: So doth he compare the
vn­godly contemners or enimies of the Goſpel, vnto a moſt light and vile
thing, namely chaffe which is toſſed with the winde. But as the firſt figure
is full of conſolation, ſo this other is fearefull. And were not the multitude
of the vngodly ones more ſturdie then the rockes ſtanding in the ſea, and not
perſwaded in any age, although they are beaten vpon with continuall waues,
vndoubtedly beholding this heauy and ſorowfull figure, they woulde earneſtly
quake for feare. But the prophane ſecuritie of the vngodly is ſignified in the
48. chapter of Geneſis: Thy ſinne ſhall lye or reſt till it be reuealed. For
the vn­godly feele not fearefulnes and humbling of themſelues, till beeing
ſuppreſſed with plagues, they fall headlong [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=9) into eternall
deſtruction, and as it were vayne chaffe, ſhall be caſt into neuer ending
tormentes. As Saule, Pompeius, Craſſus, Cato, Nero, Iulianus, and others
innumerable, had tragical endes: and death is vnto them a waye vnto eternall
miſerie. What can be imagined more dolefull then this Image? And yet
notwithſtan­ding vayne chaffe do beare ſway, and carry ſtately coun­tenaunces,
vntill that they be throwne headlong from the toppe of their glory into
preſent and euerduring cala­mities. But although Origen (beeing deceiued with
the ſubtiltie of this figuratiue ſpeache, Therefore ſhall not the vngodly
ſtande in iudgement, wreſted theſe words of the Pſalme vnto a ſtraunge and
falſe opinion touching the particuler reſurrection of the dead in the
vniuerſal iudge­ment:) Yet we omitting to confute Origen heare, (which we
purpoſe in another place to do) will recite a ſimple and naturall
interpretation of this fifth litle verſe. Certaine it is that the name of
iudgement is often times taken for a function or office. This is therfore the
ſenſe, that the vngodly ones, as Annas, Caiphas, and others which beare a ſway
in the world as Phariſees and Sa­duces (euer warring with God, and holding
battell with the true Churche, yea although they ſeeme no­tably to be ſenſed
with princely powers agaynſt all chaunces of fortune) yet they ſhall be caſt
out of their ſtations, and ſhall be ſeperated from the true Churche, as thoſe
which are accurſed of God. And although nowe and then puniſhments are
deferred, and God doth not by and by execute this iudgement: yet as it is
ſayd, Sera tamen tacitis, paena venit pedibus. Although late, yet puniſhment
ſtealeth on. For God doth at length iudge betweene the conflictes of the true
Churche, and hypo­crites, the blaſphemous part extinguiſhed: as the here­tikes
of all ages are ſubuerted, the Churche remayning unmoueable, not ſhrinking out
of place, nor yet out of [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=9) order. For the
peculier glory of the Church, is the preſer­uation of the whole body, yea
though in ſome part or member ſhe be afflicted, or perſecuted.

#### 1.1.5. ‘Verſe 6 Becauſe the Lord knoweth the way of the righ­teous, but
the way of the vngodly ſhall periſhe.’

MAny Pſalmes are like vnto Epigrams, wherein ſome ſentence beeing propounded,
afterwards fol­lowe amplifications, and laſtly is added the concluſion. So in
this ſhort Pſalme after a determinate propoſition (which, and what maner, &
where the true Church is) do folow two amplifications; A ſimilitude of the
fruites, and ſucceſſe of the true Church: and an Antitheſis of the difference
betweene the true Church, and that furious multitude which the diuels ſtirre
vp againſt the Church Therfore in the ende is added the concluſion conteining
the effect of the whole Pſalme, The Lorde knoweth &c. Philip. 2. That is, he
not onely approueth, but alſo helpeth and aydeth the vocations of the godly
ones, according to that ſaying of S. Paule, God worketh in you to will, and to
per­forme. That is, he draweth your willes, and then not on­ly helpeth
forwards thoſe deſires, but alſo gouerneth the euentes, and giueth ſucceſſe
therevnto. So did he ſtirre vp in Samuel good motions, and after that helpeth
the ſame, and therewith in his harde gouernment, gaue vnto him force and
ſtrength, that he might endure thoſe trauels, and gaue him proſperous
ſucceſſe. Contrari­wiſe, Achas and other hypocrites not crauing nor loo­king
for helpe from God, are vnhappy, and are ouer­whelmed in their courſe, before
they coulde ſee or at­tayne the hauen. This is the ſumme of this firſte
Pſalme, whiche conteineth a deſcription of the true Church, and of all the
godly. But that our affection may accorde with Dauids harpe, I will annexe
vnto this Pſalme, in ſteade of a concluſion, this prayer.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=10)

#### 1.1.6. A prayer conſonant with Dauids verſe.

I Giue thee thanks, O eternall Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that thou
haſt brought me ſilly ſinner out of the kingdome of darknes, into the kingdome
of the light of the ſunne, and haſt ſeperated me from the company of
Idolaters, and manquellers, whiche night and day meditate and practiſe this
one thing, to ſubuert the trueth, and the godly miniſters of the Goſpell, and
deſtroy Princes which nouriſh the god­ly ſtudies of true doctrine. Graunt that
hencefoorth for euermore I may eſchew the infection of impietie and crueltie
of the enimies of the Goſpell, and that I may ſaie with Dauid, I will not
ſitte in company with the wicked. I will waſhe my handes amongſt the innocent,
and will walke about thine altar. O Lorde, doe not deſtroye my ſoule with the
vngodly. Pſal. 26. verſ. 6. verſ. 9. Make me, O Lord, a flouriſhing and
fruitefull Palme tree in thy Orcharde. Make me a veſſell of thy mercie, and an
inſtrument acceptable and profitable for thee, & not onlie for thy Church, but
alſo for my owne ſoule. Neither caſt me awaie amongſt the veſſels of wrath, or
chaffe ordeined for eternall fire. Finallie, ſuffer not the light of thy
do­ctrine to be extinguiſhed, but inflame in our minds and manie others, true
inuocation and praier: and for thy glorie ſake in thy moſt iuſt wrath deſtroie
all Epicures, and ſuche like, which count it wiſedome to ſcorne and deride the
worde of the Goſpell, as it were a fable. Suche furies, O God eternall Father
of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, creator of man­kind and of thy Church, vouchſafe I
praie thee, euerie where vtterlie to ſubuert and deſtroy. Amen.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=10)

### 1.2. OF THE II. PSALM. The ſeconde Pſalme, and the ex­poſition thereof.  
Quare fremuerunt Gentes &c.

#### 1.2.1. THE ARGVMENT

THis is lyfe eternall (ſaith the Sonne of God) that they acknowledge thee the
true God, and Ieſus Ioh. 17. Chriſt, whome thou haſt ſent. But the true
know­ledge of God conſiſteth in acknowledgement of the Eſſens, and will of
God. For ſo as touching the Eſſens of God, let this doctrine be alwayes before
vs, which ſaith that there is one Diuine Eſſens and three perſons: The eternal
Father, the Sonne, which is the word and Image of the eternal Father, and the
holy Ghoſt. Secondly touching the will of God, let vs aſſuredly hold that that
is the only will of God concerninge our ſaluation, which the Sonne hath
declared out of the boſome of the eternall Father, and ſhewed in his expreſſe
word, and that there are not contrarie willes of God. The promiſe is
vniuerſall, which witneſſeth,Iohn. 6. that All which flee vnto the Mediator,
are receiued. This is the will of my father which ſent me, that euery one
which ſeeth the ſonne, and beleeueth in him, might haue life euerlaſting, and
I will rayſe him vp at the laſte daye. Wee muſte not therefore imagine, as
concerning the will of God, that pardon is outwardly offred vnto all men, but
that there is inwardly an other vvill included, vvhich vvil not receiue ſome
fleeing vnto the Mediator. But true acknovvledgement of Chriſt comprehendeth
two articles, one of the perſon, an other of the office. Touching the perſon,
vve muſt moſt firmely hold ac­cording [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=11) to the heauenly
reuelations receiued in the vvritings of the Prophets and Apoſtles. That in
this ſonne of God, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, borne of the Virgin, for vs
crucified and rayſed againe, there are tvvo natures of the deitie & humanitie.
The Diuine nature is the ſonne coeternall and conſubſtantiall to the eternall
Father, vvhich is called, The vvorde and expreſſe image of the eternall
father. This ſonne was interceſſor for mankinde, and is ordeined a Media­tor,
and at the time appointed tooke vpon him na­ture of man, in the Virgin Mary.
And theſe two na­tures are ſo vnited that they are one perſon. The names of
his offices are, Mediator, Redeemer, Sauiour, King, Prieſt, Paſtor, &c. Let vs
therefore acknowledge a Mediator, Redeemer, Sauiour, King, and Prieſt, this
Chriſt, God and man, and let vs giue thanks to God for this infinite benefite,
that he would his ſonne to take on him mans nature, and vvould this ſonne God
and man ſhould be the Redeemer, Sauiour, and heade of the Church, which perfi
[...]th all things. Of his wiſdome whiche is life eternall, in this ſeconde
Pſalme cleare and famous teſtimonies are expoun­ded. For concerning the vnitie
of the eſſens in the Father and the ſonne, it is ſaide: Againſt the Lord, and
againſt his Chriſt. For as he that honoureth the ſonne, honoureth the father:
So he that deſpiſeth the ſonne, deſpiſeth th'eternall father. Moreouer theſe
words do euidently diſtinguiſh betweene the father and the ſonne, The Lorde
ſaide to me, Thou art my ſonne, this daie haue I begot thee. I (ſaith he) this
daie, that is, from euerlaſting haue begot thee, to ſaie, in a true generation
of my ſubſtance. Beſides this, touching the will of God, this Pſalme doth
euidentlie, and not obſcurelie preach vnto vs, Bleſſed are all they which pur
their truſt in him: it clearlie affirmeth that this is the [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=11) will of God,
that all which beleeue in the Sonne ſhould haue life euerlaſting.

Furthermore of the diuine nature in Chriſt, moſt aſſured and moſt excellent
teſtimonies may be taken out of this pſalme. For, firſt the pſalme maketh
Chriſt thus ſpeake: I will preache of the decree which the Lorde ſaide vnto
me, Thou art my Sonne, this day haue I begotten thee. This verſe doth the
Epiſtle to the Hebrewes in the firſt and laſt chapters plainlie expound: Vnto
Hebr. 1. which of the Angels ſaide God at any time? Thou arte my ſonne, this
day haue I begotten thee. Agayne, Ieſus Chriſte Hebr. 13. yeſterday, and to
day, and for euer. Natural birth is one thing, and adoption is another thing.
For the ſonne which is adopted, and not begotten of the father, is taken into
the right of the familie: But he which is begotten by the father is naturall.
Neither woulde the Prophet heare teache anie other thing, then him vnto whom
the Lorde ſpake to be his ſonne, but in farre other maner then the other
ſaintes. For others vvhether Angelles or men, are made the ſonnes of God by
grace and fauour. But this is his ſonne by birth. Therefore is he ſometime
called of S. Iohn, The onely begotten. Moreouer the eternal father vrgethIoh.
1. & 3. his onlie begotten ſonne in this ſpeech, Aske of me, and I will giue
thee nations for thine inheritaunce, and the endes of the earth for thy
poſſeſſion. And he ſaith in the prophet Eſaie, I will not giue my glorie vnto
another. Ther­foreEſai. 42. the imparting of this glorie or kingdome, is a
firme and excellent teſtimonie of the ſame ſubſtance betweene the father and
the ſonne. Thirdlie, the Pſalme addeth, Serue the Lorde in feare, and reioyce
to him with trembling. Here he aſcribeth to the Meſsias a name, which is
proper vnto God, and commandeth that woorſhip be giuen to him, whereof it is
ſaide in the 6. of Deuter. Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy God, [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=12) and him onlie
ſhalt thou ſerue. Finallie a concluſion isMat. 4. annexed: Bleſſed are all
they which truſt in him. For the ſaying of Ieremie is true, Accurſed is euery
one whiche truſteth in man, and maketh fleshe  [...]me. Bleſſed is the Cap.
35. man which putteth his truſt in the Lorde, and vvhoſe confi­dence, is the
Lord. Seeing therefore this Pſalme diſtin­guiſheth the Meſsias from the
children of adoption, and giueth vnto him ſocietie of the kingdome and name of
God, and wiſelie requireth, that all men ſhould worſhip this Lorde in true
feare and faith: vndoubtedlie we muſt confeſſe, that the Meſsias is by nature
God, and begotten of the ſubſtaunce of the father.

But the humane nature is ſignified in theſe words, I haue eſtablished my king
ouer Sion. That is, I will haue Chriſt to be the head of the Church. Herevpon
in the Epiſtle to the Hebr▪ the 2. Chap. he doth learnedlie diſpute, that,
Chriſt is not onelie God, but alſo man. Hee which  [...], and they which are
ſanctified are all of one. For the which cauſe he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, ſaying: I will declare thy name vnto my brethren. And a­gaine, Iohn.
17. I and my children which God hath giuen me. Be­cauſe therefore children are
partakers of fieſhe and bloud, he alſo himſelfe is made partaker of the ſame,
that in al things he might be like vnto his brethren.

Laſtlie, not onelie the offices of this perſon are de­ſcribed in the names of
King, Prieſt, and Paſtor, but alſo the doctrine of faith is recited, which
transfer­reth and applieth vnto vs the benefites of this Lord. He is wiſelie
called King, by the voice of theternall father. I haue appointed my king, &c.
The office of his prieſthood is ſignified, when he ſaith, I will preache of
the Commaundement. For to teache is a parte of the prieſt. What, that he is
alſo called a ſhepheard. Thou ſhalt feede them with an yronrodde. Finallie of
faith, ap­plying [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=12) vnto vs the
benefits of the Meſsias, this pſalm crieth out, Bleſſed are all they that
truſt in him. There are therefore in this pſalme excellent teſtimonies of the
Eſſence & wil of God, of the perſon and benefits of the Meſsias, and of faith
wherby the good things of the newe teſtament muſte be receiued. And yet
neither nakedlie, nor without figures are theſe ſet foorth, but there are
intertexed rebukings of the e­nemies & deſpiſers of Chriſt, threatnings of
puniſh­ments, whereby God puniſheth the contempt of his ſonne, and
exhortations to thende al men may ſerue & obey the ſonne. This is the ſumme of
the pſalme, agreeing with the ſaying of Chriſt, whiche I haue recited in the
beginning.

#### 1.2.2. ‘Verſe 1 Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vaine
thinges.’ ‘Verſe 2 Kinges of the earth ſtoode vp, and Princes came together,
againſt the Lord, and againſt his Chriſt.’

ALwayes when we interprete, lot vs hold this rule, that the Scripture of the
new Teſtament is a ſpeciall light of the Pro­phets: Neither in the expoſition
of Moy­ſes, of the Prophetes, and the Pſalmes, ought wee anye thinge to
decline from that purpoſe or meaning, which euen the ſame ſonne of God, or the
A­poſtles doe ſhew vs, becauſe the ſame ſpirite ſpake by the Prophets and
Apoſtles, and it is the Sonne which expoundeth vnto vs. For as the Lawmaker is
the beſt Interpreter of his owne Law. So the Sonne of God, which is  [...] the
worde, can moſt rightlie expoun [...]e his oracles or ſpeeches. Then,
following this rule ſee (if it pleaſe you) with what reaſon the Apoſtles Act.
Cap. 4. doe interpret this Pſalme. For ſo wryteth Saint [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=13) Luke in the ſame
place. O Lord thou God, which haſt made heauen and earth, the ſea, and al
things which are in them, which through the holie Ghoſt, by the mouth of our
father Dauid thy ſeruant haſt ſaide, Why did the Gentiles rage, &c. For in
deede, they gathered themſelues together in this Citie, againſte thy holie
childe Ieſus, whom thou haſt annointed. Herode and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and people of Iſrael to doe whatſoeuer thine hand and counſell had
determined to be done. &c. It appea­reth plainly that the beginning of this
Pſalme is pro­perly and principallie to be referred vnto the hiſtory of the
paſſion of Chriſt. For in déede the Jewes and Gen­tiles defyled themſelues by
ioyning together in the mur­thering of Chriſt, and in their cruell counſels.
Neyther is there any one of vs, which (as Eſay in Cap. 53. at large declareth)
hath not added ſomewhat vnto the paſſion of Chriſt.

But although this is the proper and naturall mea­ning of this Exordium, yet
notwithſtanding, it is not abſurdlie applyed vnto the dangers of the Church in
all ages. Becauſe Chriſt and his Church by a certaine affi­nitie and likenes
of ſuffering, are ioyned together accor­ding to that ſaying, Rom. 8. Whom he
hath choſen, them will he haue to be like vnto the image of his Sonne.
Ther­fore as in a ſodaine caſualtie of fire, or in a Citie ſurpry­ſed, there
is great feare: ſo kinges and their counſellers when the voice or the doctrine
of the Goſpel is heard, doe tremble for feare, and doe mortally hate the ſame
as the firebrande of ſedition in a common welth, and as the louſnes of
diſcipline. The ſlaunders of Celſus, Iulianus, and others are well knowen,
which haue written that the Goſpell doth take away Magiſtrates, Diſcipline,
Lawes: Finallie, all the ſinewes of ciuill ſocietie, and that it doth graunt
infinite libertie vnto all miſchiefes. [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=13) But why doe I
repeate the ſlaunders of olde time, when as our age yealdeth examples too
many, which decla­reth how great the  [...]ltie of hatred of many and migh­tie
kinges and  [...]ainſt the reformed dectrine of the goſpell, by th [...]e of
the reuerent Father D. Martyn Luther. Neither in déede would politike per­ſons
be ſo extreme cruell and furious againſt the Lorde, and againſt his Chriſt,
but that they are ſet on fire of ob­ſtinat hipocrits, which with tooth & nayle
holde faſt their errors, leaſt their opinion ſhould go to wrack, or leaſte it
ſhould any thing impaire their aduantag. To thend ther­fore, that we being
diſcouraged with fear of their hatreds and of dangers, ſhould not caſt away
from vs the profeſ­ſion of the true doctrine, this Pſalme doth comforte vs,
affirming that al the indeuour of the enemies, ſo farre as toucheth the effect
of the matter, ſhall be in vaine, and to be ſcorned. For although Diocleſian
and his fellowes doe cruellie rage, and ſeeme to deuoure the vniuerſall
Church: yet notwithſtanding in midſt of their race, their crueltie is
reſtrayned, and the Church is deliuered.

#### 1.2.3. ‘Verſe 3. Let vs burſt in ſunder their bondes, and caſt away their
cordes from vs.’

IN this verſe the holy Ghoſt explaneth before our eyes the effecte of all the
Counſels or purpoſes which the e­nemies of the Goſpell put in practiſe. For as
Archers do ayme their arrowes vnto a certaine marke, ſo the ene­mies of the
Goſpell bende and beſtow all their indeuour vnto the ſubuerſion of the true
doctrine, and of the true Church of God. But thinke with your ſelues (I pray
you) how great a madnes it is, to call the moſt ſwéete ſentences of the
Goſpel, ſuch as theſe are. (Come vnto me all ye that labour, and are laden,
and I wil refreſh you: Mat. 11 Again, So God loued the world, that he ſent,
&c. John. 3.) Bondes and [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=14) cordes: But as
they that are grieued with ſome diſeaſe in their eyes, ſee not in deede thoſe
things which are be­fore their feete: ſo the enemies  [...]ſpell being vexed
with ſcorching flames of f [...]nde and bo­die, doe not any thing con
[...]ſtande how great good thinges are expreſſed  [...]pell, namely, true
inuocation vpon Bod, & firme conſolation to their mindes, and a rule of life:
which thinges are not to be re­puted amongſt bondes or fetters, but amongſt
the chiefe bleſſinges and benefites of God. Wherefore it is doubt­full whether
this madnes of the enemies of the Goſpell be more worthy of hatred or
bewayling.

#### 1.2.4. ‘Verſe 4. He that dwelleth in the heauens, ſhall laugh at them,
and the Lord ſhall make them as mo [...]king ſtocks.’

DOubtfull it is not, but the mindes of the godly, in ſuch rage of the enemies
doe ſorowfully ſéeke where the Church ſhal be, and where the light of the
doctrine, and puritie and voyce of the miniſterie ſhall remaine. Wherefore we
ſhall remember this moſt ſweet conſolation, let vs knowe that God laugheth to
ſcorne ye pract [...]ſes of the enimies, (which thus farre tend, that the
church, and light of the true doctrine might be extin­guiſht): and that the
miniſterie of the Goſpell ſhall ſtill continew, yea though the worlde ſhould
be chruſhed to­gether. For ſeinge The gates of hell ſhall not be able to
ouer­throw the Rocke, Math. 16. whereupon the Churche leaneth as v­pon his
foundacion; they ſhall neuer bringe to paſſe that which hye prieſts and kings
wickedly indeuour, whoſe chaunge is more eaſie, then of the flye that moſt
ſwiftly flyeth. And whome the holie Ghoſt in other pſalms com­pare vnto
chaffe, droſſe, ſmoake, yong thornes and haye on the houſe toppes, then which
things there is nothing more fraile and momentany. It liketh mee to recyte in
[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=14) this
place the verſes of Heſiodus, which teach, that he plaies a fooliſh part, who
ſtriueth againſt a more migh­tier perſon then him ſelfe, when as he can
neyther bee the better, and yet addeth vnto his owne miſerie deriſion and
mockerie. Imprudens vero quicunque velit cum poteutioribus contendere,
victoriaque priua­tur, atque pudorem doloris patitur.

#### 1.2.5. ‘Verſe 5. Then ſhall he ſpeake vnto them in his wrath, and in his
furie he ſhall deſtroy them.’

A Horrible threatning denouncing puniſhment to theſe enemies of the Goſpell
which are vncurable. God will not for euer deride the moſt fooliſh practyſes
of frogges and miſe which aſſaile the Church: But ſhortlie after like a Storke
or Curlewe, hee ſhall deuoure theſe little frogges and miſe, turning vpſide
down their com­mon welthes and kingdomes. But the efficacie of the wordes in
this threatning muſt be diligently waied of vs. He ſhall ſpeake vnto them in
his wrath. Compare here the wrath of man, be he neuer ſo mightie, with the
wrath of God. For mans wrath we may eſcape, eyther by flée­ing away, or by
ſéeking refuge, or by death it ſelfe. But Gods moſt iuſt and moſt ſeuere
wrath, no man can e­ſcape. Firſt, becauſe God is euery where, as it is ſaid in
the 139. Pſalme, ver. 7. Whether ſhall I goe from thy Spi­rite, or whether
ſhall I flee from thy preſence? If I clime vp to the heauen, thou art there,
If I make my cowche in hell, loe th [...] art there alſo. If I take vnto mee
the morning winges, and ſhall dwell in the fartheſt partes of the ſea, yea
there alſo ſhall thy handes guide me, and thy right hand ſhal holde mee faſt.
Moreouer, ſith God is light, there can no darknes take vs away from his eyes,
according to the ſaying in the ſame pſalme. verſe. II. And I ſaid perhapes the
darknes [[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=15)
ſhall couer me, and the night was as the day light about me. Becauſe darknes
are no darknes to thee. But the night ſhineth as the day, and darknes is all
one with thee as the light? Fi­nally, becauſe this Lord is the iudge of the
quicke▪ and the deade, not death in deede it ſelfe is any remedie for vs
againſt the wrath of God. Which things ſith they are ſo, it becometh all
creatures thorowly to tremble in thin­king on the wrath of God, and to feare
the iudgement of God which is a fire conſuming al fleſh as it were graſſe, and
all the glory thereof as the litle flower of the field. But leaſt that any man
do thinke the wrath of God to be vaine, and ſhould with gyantlike boldnes
ſcoffe at all threatnings of God, as vaine bugges to feare vs with, and as
fables eyther deuyſed by painters or Poetes. Let him call to mind the
hiſtories of all ages, which are plen­tifull witneſſes, that the threatnings
of God are ratefied, and that mans contumacy in moſt miſcheuous and hay­nous
treſpaſſes is always reuenged with moſt horrible puniſhments. For who knoweth
not the hyſtory of Pha­rao, Senacherib, Nero, Maximinus, Iulianus, and o­thers
innumerable, whiche procured vnto them ſelues and to their common welthes
plage and diſtruction, by theire vngodlye practiſes in oppreſſinge the church
of God. For the worde of God is not a vaniſhinge voyce, but in deede and ſ
[...]quell is confirmed, as it is writtenPſal. 32 Hee spake the word, and they
were made, hee commaunded, and they were created. Although therfore ſome
ſitting in the threnes of humane happines, do moſt proudly con­temne theſe
thunderclapes of the voyce of God: yet a litle after they ſhall often haue in
theire mouth thie verſe. Diſcite iuſtitiam moniti & non temnere Diuos. Learne
yee iuſtice being admoniſhed, and not to diſpiſeVirgil. the Gods.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=15)

#### 1.2.6. ‘Verſe 6. But I haue anoynted my kinge ouer Syon my holy hill.’

THe narration foloweth the exordium, wherein firſt of all the perſons are to
be conſidered. The eternall Father cryeth of his Sonne, I haue annoynted or
appoynted my Sonne to be kinge ouer Syon. That is of the church ga­thered of
the Jews and Gentils. For although the Jews haue this prerogatiue, that,
Chriſt of the ſeed of Abra­ham, and of Dauid, was borne according to the
fleſh, and in Iudea both taught and wrought miracles; Yet notwithſtanding by
this bleſſed ſeede of Abraham and of Dauid not onely the Jewes but alſo the
Gentiles are bleſſed, ſeing the ſame is Lord of all, and rich towards all that
call vpon him. Rom. 10 But ſeeing the Sonne is appoynted of the Father to be
king and heade of the church, and the wil of God is eternal and immoueable,
according to that in the 46. of Eſay. My counſaile ſhall ſtand. and my will
ſhalbe donne. &c. can we doubt, but this king with his kingdome together with
all the power thereof ſhall en­dure for all eternitie? Let vs ſtrengthen our
ſelus with this moſt ſweete conſolation, and let vs belieue that the church of
God ſhall endure not onely amongeſt the de­cayes of kingdomes, but alſo (if
the world ſhould come to an end.) And in this confidence, let vs defend and
pro­pagate the ſcriptures and doctrine delyuered vs from God. Which
whereſoeuer it is rightly preached let vs knowe that there is the church of
God in déede: and let vs expreſſe true inuocation and other godlie dueties.
And although mans helpe ſhalbe wanting, yet notwithſtan­ding, let vs craue and
looke for helpe and defence from God the eternall Father of our lord Jeſus
Chriſt, which hath conſtituted the kingdome of his ſonne, which allow­eth and
defendeth it, and which hath made knowne him ſelfe vnto mākinde by publiſhing
ſo many promiſes, con­cerninge [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=16) the preſeruation
of his Church. But here let vs remember the godly & profitable admonition
which is geuen vs by D. Martin Luther, in this expoſition vp­on theſe laſt
wordes of Dauides. If anie man vnderſtand this, that he doe ſee in the
writinges of the Prophets, whereas anie one perſon of the Godhead ſpeaketh of
the other, or vnto the other, that is to ſay, So as not one perſon onely, but
moe are ſignifyed: To him now ſhall it be eaſie to diſcerne, which in thoſe
places is the perſon of the Eternall Father, and which is the perſon of the
Coeternall Sonne. Now, wheras of theſe two perſons mention is diſtinctlie
made, there alſo is the third perſon ſignified of the holie Ghoſt, ſpeaking
namely by the ſcri­ptures, as it is ſaide in the Creede. This iudgement of the
difference of the three perſons in Godhead, being thus concluded, let vs way
as in equall ballance, the waight of the wordes in this verſe. The kingdome of
Chriſt is the gouernmente of Chriſt, collecting vnto him his Church by the
Miniſterie of the Goſpel in all ages of the world, and delyuering the ſame
from ſinne and eternall death, & ſanctifying the ſame in geuing his h [...]ly
ſpirit, that it may bé his euerlaſting inheritance, and defending and
gouerning ye ſame marueilouſly in this life, that it would truely call vpon
him, and acknowledge prayers hearde through him, and to worſhip God, rayſing
from death to life, and eternall glorye. Let vs therefore not onely diſcern
the perſon of this king from Cyrus, Alexander, Auguſtus and ſuch like: but
alſo the kingdome of Chriſt from all Common wealthes and Gouernmentes. For
although it be certaine that mightie Princes (by whoſe wiſdome and vertue
kingdomes are ordered) be ſtyrred vp and helped by God, as Herodotus rightly
ſpeaketh of the Perſian kinge, That the kingdome of Perſia increaſed vnder the
gouernment of God, and the kings them­ſelues redilie folowing him. Yet Cyrus,
Alexander▪ Au­guſtus and ſuch like, were miſerable men, ſubiecte vnto [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=16) ſinne and
[...]eath, neither did the Godhead mingle it ſelſe with their naturs. But we
which are inſtructed in the Church by teſtimonies of Gods worde, doe beleeue
in Chriſt, not onely that he is mans Nature, but that he is the diuine nature
of the Sonne of God, whom S. Iohn Iohn. 1. calleth The Worde, and who is the
expreſſe Image of the eternall Father.

Now conſider how great a benefite it is, and how euident  [...] teſtimonie of
his great lone towardes vs, that the Eternall God hath ſent vnto vs the
Coeternal Son his Image, taking vpon him the nature of man, wherin wholy
ſhineth God the Sonne, in a league immutable. But alack, too frozen harted are
we in cōſidering ſo great matters. Therefore we muſt pray vnto God that hée
would ſtirre vp in vs (through his holy Spirit) motions by all meanes
agréeable vnto ſo great a gifte: Namely, Faith, Thankeſgiuing, Confeſſion and
ſuch like. Thus farre I haue ſpoken a few thinges, touching the diffe­rence
betwixt Chriſt and other kinges: Now let vs di­ſtinguiſh ye kingdomes of
Chriſt from other kingdomes by euident boundes, as it is in the Law of
gouerning territortes. For they differ in forme of gouernment, in be­nefites
and ſtabilitie. For other kingdomes are fortifyed with riches and armies, and
dee puniſh offenders with the ſworde or with corporall force: but Chriſtes
king­dome is gouerned by the voice of the goſpell, by yt which God is
effectuall, and doth regenerate many vnto life e­uerlaſting. Moreouer, in
other kingdomes the chiefe thinges are peace of body, and externall
diſcipline. But the treaſures or riches of this kingdome, are remiſſion of
ſinnes, the h [...]ly ghoſt, and life euerlaſting.

Finally, other kingdomes haue their fatall periodes, as Plato in the 8. booke
of his common wealth diſputeth That, Common weales are changed for Celeſtiall
cauſes, which make certaine interchanges of States in Cities and
go­uernmentes: [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=17) And the
Scriptures oftentimes cryeth out, that ye fal of Empires is cauſed by the
[...] of men, & that there are puniſhmentes for haynous offences, as it is
written in Syrach, cap. 10. The kingdome is tranſla­ted from nation to nation,
for the iniquities and deceites of men. But no limite or ſpace of time can
conteyne the kingdome of Chriſt, for as much as it is ſpirituall and heauenly,
as the Angell ſaith profoundly in the 1. Chap. of S. Luke, Hee ſhall raigne in
the houſe of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome there ſhall be none ende.

But although ſome diſpute why the hill Sion is called holy: yet the anſwere is
ſimple & plaine, that the church is ſanctifyed of Chriſt the king, who is
geuen of God to be our Wiſdome, Righteouſnes, Holines, and Redemption: 1, Cor.
1. And Chriſt ſanctifyeth his Church with his worde, his bloud, and with the
holy Ghoſt, as it is writ­ten Iohn 17. Father ſanctifie them in thy trueth,
thy word [...] is the truth. And againe. Heb. 13. Ieſus ſuffered without the
gate to ſanctifie the people by his blood. Epheſ. 5. Chriſt loued his church,
and gaue himſelfe for it, that he might ſanctifie it, waſhing it with the
fountaine of water in his worde. Ioel. 2. I will power out my Spirit vpon all
fleſh. &c.

#### 1.2.7. ‘Verſe. 7. I will preach of thy commaundement, the Lord ſaid vnto
me, thou art my ſonne, this day haue I begot­ten thee.’

THe Sonne of God affirmeth in this verſe, that he will preach and ſet forth
the doctrine beſide the lawe namely this ſentence. The Lorde ſaide vnto me,
thou art my Sonne this day haue. I begotten thee, aſke of me and I will geue
the Nations for thine inheritance. Therfore ſhall hee obſerue the miniſterie
of teaching the ſcriptures and ſtu­dyes therein, and doth approue theſe
ſtudies in thoſe which learne the Goſpell. For this verſe comprehendeth [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=17) the whole effect
of the Goſpell, as: D. Mart. Luther, in­terpreting vpon the 3. cap. of Iohel
ſayth, For what other thinge doth the Goſpell teach, then that Jeſus was borne
of the virgin Mary, is the Sonne of the eternall Father, and came in this
fleſhe, that he might firſt teach vs concerning the merci­full will of his
father. Secondly, that he might make ſatiſfacti­on for our ſinnes, vpon the
croſſe, and geue his holie spirit and euerlaſtinge ſaluation. With this
doctrine are our mindes (through the holie Ghoſt) enflamed, that firſt they
might trulie loue God: for we ſee him to burne in ſo great loue to­wardes vs,
that for our ſaluation, he ſpared not his owne onely Sonne. Moreouer, that our
mindes might embrace the ſonne as a ſufficient ſacrifice for our ſinnes,
wherewith onely the Fa­ther would be pacified. By this faith we obtaine
remiſſion of all our ſinnes, and willingly obey our Redeemer, calling vs vnto
Baptiſme, vnto his worde, vnto his ſupper, and exhortinge vs vnto loue. And we
are aſſiſted by the holy spirit, that our harts being chaunged, do beginne to
hate ſinne, and not to nowriſh ſinne anie more, or be therewith delighted as
before time, and with all induſtrie might beſtowe theire whole life in the
true obedience of God. So are we by faith in Chriſt iu­ſtified before God, and
we receyue the holie Ghoſt which be­ginneth obedience in vs towards God. But
although this be neuer perfecte in the fleſh, by reaſon of the remnant of
ſinne, in vs, yet notwithſtanding whatſoeuer blemiſh is therin, the ſame by
faith in Chriſt is vtterlie wiped away. Thus farre D. Luther. And this verſe
containeth alſo euident teſti­monie touching the perſon of the Meſſias, and
teacheth that this king and prieſt of the church is the Sonne of the eternall
Father, begotten of him, and the Creator of all things with the eternall
Father, and the holy Ghoſt, wi [...]ly ſaith the eternall Father, Thou art my
Sonne, This day haue I begotten thee. In theſe words is ſignified a na­turall
birth and not the adoption, for the ſonne which is adopted, not begotten of
the Father is grafted into the [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=18) milie, but he
which is begotten of his Father is his na­turall Sonne, and theſe are declared
before  [...] the argu­ment. But ſome man perhaps would  [...] in this place,
whether the deume nature be alone in  [...], or no? I anſwere, ther are many
cauſes why the Mediator is god and man, whereof I will nowe recyte ſome. The
Medi­ator is God, to thend he may delyuer our prayers and worſhippings vnto
the Father and enter into the ſecret counſell or the godheade. For God as
touchinge his ma­ieſtie,1\. Tim. 6. dwelleth in a light vnaprochable, and is a
conſuming fire. The ſame Mediator is man, to the end he might talke with vs
familierly, and ſhewe vs the Father, be­cauſe we are not able to abide him
ſpeaking in his ma­ieſtie. Furthermore this Mediator is man, by reaſon of the
conflict and paſſion which he ſuffered, and he is God by reaſon of the
victorie and tryumphe in his reſurrecti­on and aſcention. For the alone nature
diuine can not ſuffer nor dye. Alſo the alone nature humaine is not the ouer
commer of the world, that is, of ſinne, death and the deuil. Finally the
Mediator is man, to the end he may do the office of a prieſt, which perteyneth
vnto the doctrine and ſacrifice. The ſame mediator is God, to the end hee may
do the offices of prieſthood touchinge interceſſion, and of a kinge, touching
victorie triumphes, gyftes, and gouernment of the church. And although theſe
caſes can­not throughly be ſeene, and are more nearer beholden in that ſame
lyfe eternall: yet notwithſtanding it is need­full that in this lyfe we thinke
vpon the beginninges of this wiſdome, (that the admiration and deſire after
the felowſhip with God) might be inflamed in vs, and that as thankful vnto him
we ſhould praiſe him in theſe great benefites that the onely begotten Sonne of
the eternall Father tooke vpon him nature of man, to ouercome death, and
reſtore to vs lyfe, and gather together his e­ternall Church and be an
interceſſor for vs.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=18)

#### 1.2.8. ‘Verſe. 8. Aske of me and I will geue the Nations for thine
inheritance, and the coſtes of the carth for thy poſſeſ­ſions.’

SO greate plentie and abundance of doctrine is there in this pſalme, that it
cannot be comprehended in many volumes of comentaries. Therfore I ſhalbe
con­tented to entreate vpon the ſpeciall places. And there are in this verſe
three chiefe and notable places. The firſt a Teſtimonie of the deuine nature
of the Meſſias. The ſe­cond a doctrine of the callinge of the Gentiles. And
the thirde a difference of the kingdome of Chriſt, and other kingdomes
touching theſe places, I will be briefe, leaſt that my comment growe too
greate.

Therefore like as the Epiſtle of S. Paule. Hebr. 1. Heb. 1. et 1 [...] doth
excellently vrge the efficacie of thoſe wordes in the next verſe, to confirme
the diumitie of Chriſt. To which of the Angels ſaid God at any time, Thou art
my ſonne, this day haue I begotten thee? So we both may and ought to apply
this verſe to confirme our ſelues, and confute the Arrians, To which of the
Angelles ſaide God at any time? Aske of me, and I will giue thee nations for
thine inheritance, and the coſtes of the earth for thy poſſeſſion. For in
deede the Angels are not Lords ouer mankinde, but are created for the ſeruice
of God and his Church. But this Lorde is heire of all things, becauſe by him,
and for him, all things were created. Let vs therefore remember this
te­ſtimonie, and let vs adioyne the ſame vnto the other ſentences, which
confirme the diuinitie of Chriſt, and confute blaſphemers. Moreouer ſo ofte as
we ſpeake of the calling of the Gentiles, let theſe three things be chie­fly
conſidered: Firſt, how great the force of the mercy of God is, gathering his
Church of the miſerable maſſe or heape of Heatheniſh men, which are Idolaters,
defiled with wicked ſlaughters, luſtes, theft, lyings, periuries, [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=19) and finally,
with ſuch filthines, as my tong both trem­bleth and eſcheweth to ſpeake of.
And it is profitable in theſe hiſtories to conſider the greatnes of the mercy
of God. We vſe to maruell leſſe, that God reuealed this Goſpell vnto the
Jewiſh people, amongſt whom had remayned ſome doctrine touching God, and with
whom there was ſome honeſt diſcipline. But let vs compare Rome in Neros time,
vnto Nazareth. Firſt, the true God was altogether vnknowne at Rome, moſte men
euery where were Athe [...]ſts or godleſſe men: the reſidue wickedly
worſhipped idols. Secondly, the whole Citie was full of moſt filthie luſtes,
which were thought to be pleaſures, permitted, not worthy of puniſhment.
Thirdly, money, bribing, and vſuries, were had in price of prayſe. Laſtly, no
reuerence towards God, no ſhame­faſtneſſe, neither regarde of any trueth and
iuſtice. And yet God commaundes his Church to be gathered vnto him euen in
ſuch a Citie, and ſuch then were the maners almoſt throughout all the world.
In this example is the greatnes of Gods mercy ſeene, that vnto ſuche perſons
where as diſcipline was ſo vtterly extinguiſht, euen the worde of God doth
[...]ounde, calling them vnto repen­taunce, and offering them ſaluation. And
at firſt it was thought a matter vnworthy amongſt the Jewes, that the Goſpell
ſhould be preached and diſperſed amongſt thoſe curſed people, which liued in
great filthines, with­out all diſcipline or good order. Here vpon happened
thoſe conflictes of Paule, when he affirmed that the Goſpell pertayned to the
Gentiles, and that free remiſſion of ſinnes, for Chriſte [...] ſake, was
offered vnto all them which did repent. A great and wholeſome conſolation is
it vnto the godly, to thinke vppon this greatnes of Gods mercy, which is
ſpecially ſeene when we conſider how God diſperſeth his Goſpell amongſt th
[...]ſe monſters of men, as then were the heathen, and as now are ma­ny.
[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=19) Let vs
knowe that this mercy of God is taught vn­to vs, ſo often as mētion is made
of gathering a Church, from among the Gentiles.

Secondly, the calling of the Gentiles is an excellent Teſtimony touching the
whole effect of the Goſpell, which conſiſteth in the vniuerſall preaching of
repen­taunce, and in an vniuerſall promiſe of grace. For, as God calleth all
men vnto repentaunce, ſo vnto all which repent, and beleeue in his ſonne, doth
he aſſuredly giue remiſſion of ſinnes, and requireth of vs that we beleeue
this voyce of the goſpell, and call vpon him, in this fayth.

Thirdly, the calling of the Gentiles teacheth vs the abrogation of the lawe,
and confuteth the opinion of the Phariſees, which imagineth that men are iuſt,
through the lawe, and the ceremonies of Moſes: But there is no diſcourſe
equall vnto the greatnes of things which the doctrine touching calling of the
Gentiles comprehendeth. Therefore I am nowe more briefe, and do procéede vn­to
the third place.

I haue declared before, that the kingdome of Chriſte differeth from other
kingdomes, in forme of gouerne­ment, in benefites, and in ſtabilitie. Now (if
it pleaſe you) let vs adde the fourth difference, which is taken as of the
endes. For in déede other kingdomes haue their limites and boundes, as the
kingdome of Rome in the time of Auguſtus ſtretched vnto Euphrates. For the
Romanes neuer had any ſucceſſe in their warres with the Perſians and
Parthians, and other people of the Eaſt partes, as the Hiſtories of Craſsius
and Iulia­nus, and others do witneſſe. And yet although the Ro­miſh Monarchy
contayned many Prouinces, yet was ſhe not the Lady of all Nations. But this
our king hath moſt ample boundes, becauſe he ruleth from ſea to ſea, and from
the floode vnto the ende of the world, as it is written in the Pſalme 72. But
to what ende is al this [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=20) recitall of the
boundes of the kingdome of Chriſt? For­ſooth to this purpoſe, that we maye
vnderſtande, that the Church is not as a common wealth tyed vnto cer­tayne
kingdomes, and compriſed within certayne li­mittes. But all perſons whatſoeuer
they be, which call vpon God in faith and in true acknowledgemente of Chriſt,
and doe flee from idolatrie, are the members of Gods Church. Then are not the
olde, neither yet the la­ter Donatiſtes to be heard, which compriſe the Church
within narrow limites or bondes. For as Donatus and they which procéeded from
him, haue preſcribed ye church within the onely boundes of Aphrica, So the
Pontifi­call Doctors cry out, that the Church is bound vnto an ordinarie
ſucceſſion of Biſhoppes, and that there is no true members of the Church out
of their Pontificall go­uernement. But let vs ſo ſurely perſwade our ſelues,
that the Church is a congregation of the godly ones, diſ­perſed throughout the
whole world, which are tied to the worde deliuered by the Apoſtles, and that
there are the members of the Church, whereſoeuer any doe embrace the pure
doctrine of the goſpell. So at this day vnder the Turkes gouernment, and vnder
the gouernment of other kinges and biſhops, enemies to the pure doctrine of
the goſpel, there are ſome godly perſons diſperſed eue­ry where. But
peraduenture ſome man would ſay, that all nations are not the heritage of
Chriſt. Neither that Chriſt doth holde all men vnder the yoke of his
gouern­ment. There is nothing that wee can ſo eaſilie abſolue. For Chriſt is
either Lord and Ruler of the gentiles in this reſpecte, that he might reſtore
vnto them righteouſ­nes and life, eyther els is he the fearefull iudge of the
wicked and diſobedyent. Therefore, they which wil not imbrace Chriſt as a
Sauiour, ought to feare Chriſt as the Iudge ouer quick and dead. But it is now
time that we come vnto the Expoſition of thoſe verſes which re­mayne.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=20)

#### 1.2.9. ‘Verſe 9. He ſhall bruiſe them with an iron rod, and hee ſhall
breake them in peeces like a Potters veſſell.’

ALthough this verſe may by a ſubtile reaſon▪ bee ap­plyed vnto the miniſtery
of the goſpel, wherof Chriſt ſpeaketh. Iohn 16. Cap. The holy Ghoſt ſhall
rebuke the worlde of ſin becauſe they beleue not in me: and of righteouſ­nes,
becauſe I goe vnto my Father, &c. Yet notwithſtan­ding, the meaning of this
verſe is playne, that all the ene­mies and contemners of the goſpel are like
vnto an ear­then veſſell, which hitting vpon an iron hammer is bro­ken and
daſhed in peeces. For as the holy ghoſt compa­red in the firſt Pſalme the
wicked vnto moſt light chaffe ſo in this place he compareth the ſame with a
moſt fraile and brittle veſſell of all others. And as the winde by his blaſtes
ſcattereth the chaffe, ſo is iron the confuſion and deſtruction of any Veſſel,
of glaſſe, or of earth. This Si­militude, as alſo many others, Eſaias in his
30, Chapter borroweth of Dauid, when he ſayth: Becauſe ſ [...]deulie, when he
looketh not for it, ſhall his confuſion come vpon him, and he ſhall be ſhaken
in peeces, as the Potters veſſell is bro­ken with a mightie ſtrike, and there
ſhall not one ſhearde bee found of his fragments, wherin ſo much as a litle
fire may bee carried out of the Fornace, or a litle water out of the Springe.
This Similitude not only paynteth out the frailty and brittle power of the
enemies of the goſpel, and alſo the ſtrength and ſtabilitie of the kingdome of
Chriſt: but al­ſo it afterwardes ſhe weſh how reprobate vnto euerye good worke
the enemies of the goſpell are, as it is writ­ten 1\. Tit. So the Iewes being
broken, & bruyſed with this Iron mallet, haue none vſe neyther publiquely nor
priuately, and are veſſels of Gods wrath. But would to God that our
aduerſaries would looke well into this ex­ample, which ſtifly ſtrengthen
Idoles, & that they would learne Jſtice being admoniſhed, and not to deſpiſe
the [[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=21) gods,
as it is ſayd by Virgill.

#### 1.2.10. ‘Verſe 13. Now O ye kings, vnderſtand theſe things, be wiſe ye
that iudge the earth.’

HEtherto hath the Prophet full of the holy Ghoſt, deſcrybed the king Chriſt
and his kingdome: now he maketh a Sermon commendatorie, wherein hee ex­horteth
all kinges and gouerners to acknowledge and reuerence the perſon and office of
this king Chriſt, and not as bewitched with the loue of their owne wiſdome and
power, they doe not deſpiſe this king anoynted and appointed of the Eternall
Father. For this king is the king of kinges, and Lord of Lordes: and not that
only, but alſo is a Teacher, and Maſter, whoſe hearers & diſciples we ought to
be, and not as controlers or Judges. But how few kinges and Princes haue heard
this Teacher S. Paule, with a ſorowful complaint, 1. Rom. 1. ſheweth in theſe
wordes. Take heede vnto your vocation Brethren, becauſe not many wiſe men,
after the fleſh, not many mightye perſonages, not many noble men, but the
fooliſh thinges of this world, haih God choſen, &c.

#### 1.2.11. ‘Verſe 11. Serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce in him with
trembling.’

THe chiefeſt effectes or ſtinges which the preachings of the goſpel leaueth in
the hearts of the hearers, are feare and faith. For as feare is oppoſed
againſt the ſecu­ritie which contemneth Gods iudgement: ſo faith is the
ouercommer of doubting and deſperation. Wherefore if a man will comprehende
the effecte of a chriſtian life, let him ſo define the ſame, that feare of God
may be ioy­ned with faith, which amids feares reuyueth and com­forteth our
minde, draweth neare vnto God, and aſketh, [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=21) and receaueth
forgeuenes of ſinnes. This deſcription is euident, and may be vnderſtoode in
our dayly exerci­ſes. Contrition without faith, is an horrible feare and
ſorrowe of the minde, flying away from God, as in Saule and Iudas. Wherefore
it is not a good worke. But con­trition with faith, is a feare and ſorrow of
the minde, not flying away from God, but acknowledging ye iuſt wrath of God,
and truely gréeued that it hath neglected or con­temned God, and yet
approcheth vnto God, and craueth pardon. Such a ſorowe is a good worke, and a
ſacri­fice, as the Pſalme ſaith. The Lord is well pleaſed in thoſe that feare
him, and in thoſe which truſt in his mercie. When this faith firſt ſhineth
out, new obedience (is begun in the gouerning of our priuate life and
vocation) and in ſorrowes, which pleaſeth God for Chriſtes ſake, and is a
worſhip of God: that is, a worke wherin God déemeth himſelfe to be honoured of
vs.

#### 1.2.12. ‘Verſe 12. Kiſſe the Sonne, leaſt he be angrie, and you peariſhe
in the way. Becauſe ſodenlie ſhall his anger waxe whote, but, bleſſed are all
they that put their truſt in him.’

THis laſt verſe vſeth a moſt ſweete worde, wherin hée commandeth his Sonne to
be heard. Kiſſe (ſaith he) the Sonne, that is, he ſhal come vnto you and ſhal
louing­ly and ſwéetely embrace you, geuing you a kiſſe, and an embracing,
Reconciliation, and life Eternall. He loueth vn­faynedly, which geueth a
ſweete kiſſe from his hearte. Therefore the Sonne of God loueth vs, proferinge
vs a ſwéete kiſſe from his heart. The Eternal Father loueth vs, whiles he will
haue vs ſwéetely to kiſſe the lippes of his Sonne. But in this place we muſt
conſider a con­trarietie. The vngodly are not delighted with the kis of
Chriſt, but ſpit vpon him, and with all maner of crueltie defile the face of
Chriſt. Vnto theſe doeth this Pſalme [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=22) threaten
puniſhment. But as touching the others which are delited with his kiſſe, he
ſaith, Bleſſed are al they which put their truſt in him. Theſe wordes doe
teach what kis is here requyred: Forſooth, fayth, or confidence calling vpon
God for Chriſtes ſake. This faith, (when we ſhal with inuocation or prayer,
exerciſe) then ſhal this pſalme be more manifeſt approoued in vs, and we ſhal
finde that this promiſe is not in vaine, but that it is thus truelye kept.
Bleſſed are all they which truſt in the Lord.

#### 1.2.13. The Prayer of the Apoſtles repeated out of this Pſalme, and
needfull to be exerciſed in theſe our dayes.

O Lord thou God, which haſt made heauen and earth, the ſea, and all that is in
them, whichAct. cap. 4. through thy holy Spirite, haſt ſaide by the mouth of
our father Dauid thy ſeruant, Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people
imagine vaine thinges. Kings of the earth ſtood vp, and the Princes came
together againſt the Lord, and againſt his Sonne Chriſt. For in deede they
gathered themſelues together in this ci­tie againſt thy holie childe Ieſus,
whom thou haſt a­nointed: Herode and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
people of Iſrael, to doe that which thy hande and Counſell haue decreed to be
done. And now O Lord, beholde their threatninges, and ſtrengthen thy ſeruantes
with all confidence in thee, to preach thy word. Graunt this, O Lord, we
beſeech thee, to the honor & glory of thy holy name, Amen.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=22)

### 1.3. The thirde Pſalme.  
Domine quid multiplicati ſunt. &c.

#### 1.3.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe rule (which Hilary ſetteth downe in his bookes of the Trinitie) doth well
like me, That wee muſte from the cauſes of ſpeakinge, borowe the
vnderſtandinge of thinges ſpoaken. But the Title ſufficientlie declareth what
oc­caſion conſtrained Dauid, to write this Pſalme. For although it greeued
Dauid, to be throwne out of his kingdome, and to haue ſedicion ſtirred vp by
his Sonne, whome he greatlie loued, and himſelfe bereaued of that glorie of
wiſdome & iuſtice which he had: yet notwithſtanding, theſe were not his chiefe
greefes. An other far more great vexed him: in that he ſawe his owne ſinne was
the cauſe o [...] ſo great miſchiefes and tranſgreſſions, wherein manie which
were holie periſhed. Herein he iudgeth him­ſelfe to be the plague of the
Church and of Gods people, and did feele ſuch a huge burden of his ſins, that
he acknowledged him ſelfe, not able to beare the ſame. Therfore he feared,
leaſt that God had vt­terlie caſt him away, as Saule, and other Tyrantes,
which were the veſſels of Gods wrath. With this feare and ſorowe had hee no
doubte bene vtterlie quailed, but that he did inculcate into him ſelfe the
words of forgiuenes which he had heard of the Pro­phet 2\. Reg. 12. Nathan.
viz. The Lord hath taken away thy ſinnes. In this voice of God ſetling his
harte at reſt, he re­uyued, and began to call vpon God. Therefore al­though he
wraſtled with the tentation of caſting a­vvay: [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=23) yet by faith he
ſtrengthned him ſelfe, and ouer­came both all doubtfulnes, and diſpaire. Which
things ſith they ſo be. Let euerie one of vs which re­pent vs of our ſinnes,
returne vnto God with con­fidence of reconciliacion for Chriſts ſake. Neither
let vs diſpaire by the greatnes of our fall, but let vs holde that the mightie
power of the Sonne of God is to be preferred before the ſinnes of all men:
ney­ther to our other offences, let vs alſo adde blaſphe­mie, which accuſeth
God of Lyinge, and denyeth forgeuenes of ſinnes, let theſe ſuffice, to be
brieflie ſpoken of the Argument of this third pſalme, which ſetteth downe
neceſſarie conſolation, that God will not haue vs diſpaire although wee haue
horriblie fallen and offended. Becauſe when, Dauid was an a­dulterer and a
murtherer, and repented him & fled vnto God, he not onelie receiued him into
fauoure and grace, but alſo reſtored him afterwardes vnto his kingdome, as in
the rightfull recouerie of that, which before he had loſt.

#### 1.3.2. ‘Verſe 1. LOrd, how are they increaſed which trou­ble me, many
riſe vp againſt me.’

HE beginneth this Pſalme, from a ſo­rowful complaint, wherin he bewai­leth the
greate force of his troubles, and, the concourſe of his calamities, For who is
able to expreſſe in words with how great floodes and ſtormes of ſorows, Dauid
was toſſed by rea­ſon of his adulterie. Firſt was his daughter deflowred,
after that folowed the ſlaughter of his ſonne. afterward ſedition being moued
by his ſonne, their wiues was de­filed, the Citzens were ſlaine, and the
father put to flight [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=23) and it was a
leſſe thing for Dauid to be thus ſpoiled of his kingdome, then to be bereaued
of the great glorie of the power, and fauour of God. Amongſt ſo great
miſe­ries and ſorowes, hee truely felt, Inward feares, outward fyghtinges. 2\.
Cor. 7. Yt is ſome help when ſinne meeteth not with miſchiefes. That is truely
ſaid: for ſorow increaſeth, when we acknowledge that we procure our ſelues
ca­lamitie through our owne tranſgreſſion, and when for grieuous ſinnes, we
feele the wrath of God.

#### 1.3.3. ‘Verſe. 2. Many ſay vnto my Soule, there is no ſal­uation for him
in God.’

THis voyce ſignifieth no light griefe. But of one wraſtling with temptation of
caſting away. I la­ment not for my baniſhment and loſſe of my kingdome, but
for an other farre more lamentable miſchiefe, be­cauſe I feele the wrath of
God, and acknowledge that I haue geuen the cauſe therof by ſo many my ſinnes
and offences which haue folowed my fall. For my ſake (ſaith he) God being
angry with me, hath ſuffered ſedition to be ſtirred vp, euen of my owne Sonne.
After the ſedicion folowed the defyling of my wyues, and much ſlaughter
through out my whole kingdome, and many other miſ­chiefes which accompany
ciuill diſcordes, and innume­rable ſoules oppreſſed with eternall wrath of God
by meanes of the ſedicion. Many of the ſaintes becauſe of offences dyed for
ſorowe, and alſo many of the ſaints through contagion of ſedicion haue ſhaken
of the holy Ghoſt and are oppreſſed with the eternal wrath of God. Neyther is
it doubtfull but ſome of my wyues are euen dead for very ſorow. Thus I
beholding ſo huge a mul­titude of euils, (ſaith Dauid) do thinke my ſelfe to
be the plague of Gods Church, & a veſſell of his wrath, and peraduenture am
for euer caſt from Gods fauoure.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=24)

#### 1.3.4. ‘Verſe. 3. But thou O Lorde art my defender, my glo­ry, and the
lifter vp of my heade.’

EVen as in the nature of thinges, there are chaun­ges as of the day and of the
night, of ſommer, and winter. So in the breſts of the Godly ones ther is great
interchaunge of temptations and conſolations. Where­fore as the next verſe
diſcribed a moſt ſorowfull temp­tation: So this verſe painteth out faithe,
wherein he aſſureth himſelfe, he was not forſaken of God. But truly receyued,
hearde, and ſhall féele helpe, mitigation and deliuerance from God. And
although not onely mine e­nimies cry out, that I am forſaken and caſt awaye of
God, but alſo my conſcience accuſeth me by the Law: Yet notwitſtanding I do
not ſwerue away from thee, but I flee vnto thee, crauing and expecting
delyuerance or ſurely mitigation. For I knowe, that prayer made in faith of
the Sonne of God, is not in vayne, as Epi­cures do thinke: for as much as thou
haſt both geuen vs commaundementes of prayer, and a promiſe of hea­ringe.

#### 1.3.5. ‘Verſe. 4. I cryed vnto the Lorde with my voyce, and he heard me
out of his holie hill.’ ‘Verſe. 5. I ſlept, and ſlombered, and awaked again
becauſe the Lord did comforte me.’

A Conſolation taken from the verie deed. Thou haſt often times preſerued mee
callings vpon thee. Therefore I nothinge doubt but henceforth thou wilt ſaue
me, calling vpon thee. And with this verſe agreeth that ſaying of S. Paule. 2.
Cor. 1. Wee haue receyued in vs the anſwere of death, to the end we ſhould not
put confi­dence in our ſelues, but in God which raiſeth vp the dead, which
hath taken vs out of ſo great daungers, whereupon alſo [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=24) we do conceyue
hope that it ſhall come to paſſe, that he will hereafter deliuer vs also.
Therefore being confirmed with theſe examples of deliuerances, let vs be more
feruent in praying, and let vs cr [...]ue that our determinatiōs and the
euentes thereof may be gouerned by God. For asRom. 10. ſaith S. Paule. He is
the ſame Lorde ouer al, and rich to­wardes al, that call vpon him. For as
without reſpecte of any perſonne, he is angry with ſinne in all men, ſo he
re­ceyueth all men equally which flee vnto his Sonne the Mediator.

#### 1.3.6. ‘Verſe. 6. I ſhall not feare many thowſandes of people which
encompaſſe me rownde about.’

IN the whole Booke of Pſalmes, this order is to be obſerued. He being tempted,
Prayeth: Praying he is delyuered: and being delyuered he geueth thankes. So in
this place Dauid being delyuered from feares (which are the feelinges of Gods
wrath) doth now with a cher­full voyce geue thankes vnto God for his
conſolation and victorie, & witneſſeth that faith is not an idle know­ledge,
but a confidence ſetled in God, and from an hye diſpyſing the furtes of the
worlde and of the deuill, accor­ding to that ſaying. 1\. Iohn. 5. This is the
victorie that o­uercometh the worlde, euen our faith.

#### 1.3.7. ‘Verſe. 7. Ariſe O Lorde, ſaue me my God: becauſe thou haſt
ſmitten all mine enimies vpon the iawe bone, thou haſt broken the teeth of the
vngodlie.’

HE mixeth a prayer with thankes geuing, as S. Paule knitteth theſe together in
the 1\. Theſſal. 5. without ceaſinge praye, in all thinges geue thankes.
Neyther in deed is it obſcure, why God requireth thanks geuing. For firſt he
will haue vs aſſure our ſelues that good [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=25) thinges are not
geuen vs by chaunce, but that God doth truly care for vs, and that he heareth
oure prayers, and that we are helped of God. Moreouer he will haue this our
confeſſion, to be a witneſſe before other men, of his prouidence, and he will
that others ſhoulde be confir­med, that they may truely belieue that God hath
care ouer mans affaires, and that the prayers of the Church are heard of him.

#### 1.3.8. ‘Verſe. 8 With the Lorde there is ſaluation and, thy bleſſing is
vpon all thy people.’

IN concluſion he prayſeth God that this name is not a vaine thing, that he
doth not neglecte men, but tru­lye heareth ſuch as vnfainedlye praye vnto him
in the church, and kepeth his promiſes. He diſcribeth alſo his church from
other nations which blaſpheme Chriſt, af­firming his bleſſing, (that is to
ſay) promiſe of the for­geuenes of ſinnes, and of lyfe euerlaſting is no where
to be founde but in his church. With this conſolation or comforte, let vs
confirme our ſelues againſt the thun­der boltes of the Popes vniuſt
excommunication, and let vs beleue, that God bleſſeth, when our enimies
vniuſtlye curſe vs.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=25)

### 1.4. ❧ The fourth Pſalme.  
Cum inuocarem exaudiuit me Dominus.

#### 1.4.1. THE ARGVMENT.

SEeing there be many things which can diſturbe the godlie minde from his quyet
ſtate: Then euen ſpeciallie doth that tentation trouble vs, when we conſider
our own miſeries, & the pro­ſperitie of the vngodlie. For the thing it ſelfe,
& the euent thereof ſheweth, that the Church, and all the godlie ones are
burdened with greater multitude of calamities, then the other filthy ſkome of
mankind. And contrariwiſe, wee may ſee the vngodlie puffed vp with fortunes
fauour, and deſpiſing a farre of, the miſerable and ſorrowfull ſocieties,
obſeruers of the heauenly doctrine. Theſe ſorrowful ſpectacles doe often moue
the godlie ones, to thinke that in vaine they beſtow ſo great ſtudie and
diligence in expoun­ding and defending the doctrine deliuered from God, & that
they are much wiſer, which follow plea­ſures & whatſoeuer pertaineth therunto,
with al care and trauaile. For they which ſingularlie loue the ſtudies of
heauenlie doctrine, not onely neglecte worldlie matters, but alſo are proudlie
derided and troden vnder foote by the wicked, and are caſte out to all
tormentes of Tirantes and Heretickes. But vnto this no light ſtumblinge block
is oppoſed a ſtrong concluſion, drawen from a compariſon bee­tweene benefites
ſpiritual & corporal. And though riches and honoures are the giftes of God,
yet they onelie ſerue but to the vſe of this mortall and fickle life, neither
are they that principall good thing, to [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=26) the which mans
nature is ſpeciallie ordeined: For what is more vncertaine then wealth. Cum
Irus ſit ſubito, qui modo Craeſſus erat? When he is ſoone made a poore. Irus,
which was erewhile a riche Creſlus. What is more vaine then honour, when it is
either fayned, or not of continuance. When the vngodlie therfore haue loſt
their ſlender and tranſitorie good thinges, they lie in their miſeries without
God, without con­ſolation, without calling vpon God, neither ſee they in their
minde anie remedie for theſe euils. Pompey fleeing from out of the hoaſte at
Pharſalia, was not onelie forſaken of his friendes, but alſo was ſlaine by the
commandement of the Egyptian king. In this ſo great calamitie, no riches, no
pleaſures could af­ſwage Pompeis ſorrow, but this mighty perſonage be­ing
deſtitute of al comfort, periſhed euen like a ſillie poore Sparrowe. So Cato
and Brutus being vtterlie broken with greatnes of calamities, and with the
ſodaine change of their former good fortune, killed themſelues. But the godly
ones acknowledge Gods will in calamities, and ſubmitte themſelues to God,
after a certaine ſorte, when he puniſheth them, but yet they craue of him
mitigation of puniſhmentes, and they finde that their prayers are heard, and
they truelie feele in their hearts a ioy ouercomming ſor­rowes. Theſe good
thinges are proper vnto the Church onelie, and doe farre excell all victories
and triumphes of Pompey or Julius Ceſar. Let vs therfore learne to applie this
Pſalme vnto our vfe, and the good thinges which the goſpell bringeth vnto vs,
(ſeeing they are permanent and eternal,) to prefer them before the ſhadowes of
pleaſures and other commodities, wherewith thoſe abound, vvhich are vntruelie
thought to be bleſſed. But hovv harde a matter it is to vvithdravve the minde
from theſe [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=26) ſhadovves, vnto
the true good thinges, and in them to ſettle our heartes, (vvhether vve haue
or lack cor­porall commodities) it may bee knovven by expe­rience.

#### 1.4.2. ‘Verſe 1. WHen I called, the Lord of my righ­teouſnes heard me.’

GReat is this benefit which the church enioyeth, and (as the Grecians ſay) The
beſt poſſeſſion, in that it retay­neth a certaine order how to call vpon God,
and hath his promiſe to be heard. For other Nations know not after what ſorte
God is to bee called vpon, and they ſtande in doubt whether they be heard,
becauſe they haue not the promiſes of God vnderſtoode nor kno­wen, neither
know they the Mediator, who delyuereth our prayers vnto God. Let vs therefore
geue God thankes, ſo much as our ſoules can conceiue, for that hée hath made
him ſelf knowen in his Church by publiſhing his promiſe touching the
Mediatour, that we may aſſu­redly holde, why and wherefore (mannes nature
offen­ding) may be receiued into Gods fauour, and be hearde of him. And many
were wonte to aſke of vs, why Da­uid ſpake thus. God, my righteouſnes.

Wee muſt borrowe the declaration of this particle, from that place wherein the
doctrine touching Juſtifica­tion is ſincerely expounded, God is our
righteouſnes, not as Oſiander declaimeth (dwelling in vs effectually
ac­cording to his diuinitie, and working or mouinge vs to doe iuſtly.) But
iuſtifying vs, that is, forgeuing vs our ſinnes, and imputing vnto vs
righteouſnes: (and if wée ſhall ſpeake more amply) receiuing vs, and
reconcyling [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=27) to him ſelfe for
his Sonnes ſake our Mediator, crucified for vs, and rayſed from death to life.
For, although we denie not that God dwelleth in vs, and that he is alſo
ef­fectuall in our hearts: Yet notwithſtanding, not in ſuch maner is he our
righteouſnes, and ſo called (whereby he dwelleth in vs as it were in temples:)
but ſo farre foorth as he abſolueth vs from our ſinnes for his Sonnes ſake. As
in another place it is more amply ſayde, and as hée pronounceth vs iuſt, and
coadopteth vs into the ſocietie of his euerlaſting bleſſednes. But omitting to
refute Oſiander (which to doe is not our purpoſe now) let vs ſhew why the
Pſalme maketh mention of the Righte­ouſnes of God. Neither is there any thing
in déede that we can ſo eaſily manifeſt▪ For, as Danyel in his 9. cap.
prayeth, We come vnto thee, not in confidence of our owne righteouſnes, but of
thy great mercie, heare vs for the Lordes ſake. So Dauid teacheth vs by his
example, how wee may come vnto God, and craue benefites of him, ſithens it is
euident that we are defiled, vnworthy, and diuers wayes guilty: and ſurely the
bitter remembrance of this vnworthynes in vs, is a greate impediment vnto our
prayer. I crie vnto thee (ſaith he) and beléeue that I am heard, not for my
righteouſnes, which is eyther none at all, or ſurely vnpure: but for thy
righteouſnes ſake pro­myſed in the goſpell. For I beleeue that when I flée
vn­to the Mediator, I am iuſt: that is, I obteyne remiſſion of ſinnes, alſo
reconciliation and acceptation to the lyfe eternall. Here is to be repeated
the whole doctrine of Juſtification, which is delyuered els where more at
large.

#### 1.4.3. ‘Verſe 2 Thou haſt ſet me at libertie, when I was in trouble.’

Another good benefite of God geuen to his church, is Firme Conſolation, which
not onely healeth vp the [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=27) ſcarres, but
alſo the woundes. For what are the com­fortes of Philoſophers? but  [...] or
delectations in time of aduerſitie as Virgil ſaith of Aeneas: Dictis moerentia
pectora mulcer. He comforteth ſorowfull hartes with wordes. For neyther doth
phyloſophie ſhew the benefite wherein our mindes before toſſed with ſtormes of
calamities, might as it were in a quyet ha­uē be ſetled at reſt. But the
Goſpel ſheweth vs the wil of God, not caſting away his church becauſe of
calamities, but exercyſing her in this wraſtling, leſt that the light of faith
& of inuocatiō ſhould be extinguiſht in idlenes. For it promiſeth the helpe
of God delyuering vs, or ſurely mitigation of calamitie, to the end we may be
able throughly to abide the ſame. But here we can not at ful ſpeake concerning
difference of the places of philoſophi­call and chriſtian conſolations which
is els where of­tentimes expounded of vs.

Alſo let the yonger ſorte conſider the moſt ſweete fi­gures, which Dauid vſed
in diſcribing both his ſorowes, and conſolations. Zar. ſignifieth with the
Hebrewes. A ſeege laid to any place. To which is compared the perſecution of
the Church. For there can no Citie be ſo ſharply aſſaulted, as the Church is
aſſaulted of Deuiles & their inſtruments. For, tyrantes with open vyolence
endeuoure to extinguiſhe the Church: and heretyks with vngodly diſſimulation
and craft vndermine the founda­cion of doctrine: yea what offences and
confuſions is there in the Church it ſelfe. Finally moſt true is the ſay­inge
of S. Paule touching the vniuerſall Church, and of2 Cor. 7. all the godly
ones. Inwarde feares outward feightinge. Rachab ſignyfieth an enlarging, to
the which rightlye and worthely is compared conſolation and deliuerance. For
as when a ſeege is broken vp, they which latelye were in great diſtreſſe, and
were ſhut vp as in a priſon, do afterwardes walke abrode at libertie and ruſhe
out [[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=28) that
way which is next vnto them: So the Church per­ceyueth and feeleth the ſorowes
of her harte to be well ealed and aſſwaged, ſo often as ſhe is eyther
conforted with inwarde conſolation, eyther elles feeleth delyue­rance redy
preſt before her eyes.

#### 1.4.4. ‘Verſe. 3 Haue mercy vpon me, and heare my prayer.’

LYke as in other affaires the minde which is fer­uēt in affaires, oftentimes
rehearſ [...]th one ſentence by garniſhing of the ſame, ſo Dauid, in chaunging
the wordes, doth repeate the ſame thinge in the end of his verſe which he had
ſaid in the beginning. A litle before he cra [...]ed to be heard for the
righteouſnes of God, tou­ching the which righteouſnes the Goſpel doth at large
intreate. Here he prayeth to be heard, by the mercy of God. But although the
lawe diſcerneth Gods righte­ouſnes from his mercy, yet by the phraiſe of the
Goſpell, righteouſnes and mercy are both one thing in God. For God iuſtifieth
vs by mercy promiſed for his ſonnes ſake and for the righteouſnes or obedience
of his Sonne through his great mercy receyueth vs. Wherefore, there is no
difference betwene theſe two formes of ſpeakinge, viz. Heare me oh God of my r
[...]ghteouſnes: And Hake mer­cy vpon me, and heare me.

#### 1.4.5. ‘Verſe. 4. Oh, ye Sonnes of men, how longe will ye diſpyſe my
glory?’

THis firſt part of the third verſe grieueouſly rebu­keth the vngodlyones ſ
[...]ing and ſubuerting the ſtudyes of heauenly doctrine, For we may ſee many
ſo light of diſpoſit ō and ſo boldly bragging, that they doutt not to compare
the sayinges of the prophetes and of the apoſtles with Democritus his diſputa
[...]yons. Who (as [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=28) Cicero ſaythe)
taught with greate Authority, greateſt vanityes or tryfles. And Bembus who was
after wards made Cardenall, when hee came vnto Sadoletus, and had perceyued
that he beſtowed ſome trauell in expoun­ding Paules epiſtie vnto the Romanes.
Leaue of (ſayth hee) theſe toyes, ſuche fooliſh tryfles are vnfitting for
ſuche a graue perſon as you are. Italy is full of ſuch lyke Judgments, where,
when ſome doe enter into theyre Churches, they ſay they come vnto a common
erroure. Others although they iudge not of the Goſpell, as of a vaine tale,
yet they abhor the natiue meaning or effecte thereof, as it were a firebrand
of ſeditions and the con­fuſion of policies. Some beinge bewitched with lewde
opinions, doe curſe the wiſdome of the Goſpell, as the corruption of good
maners, and the louſnes of diſcipline. Theſe vngodly and prophane iudgements
doth Dauid with a graue ſpeeche reprehend, calling the Goſpel his glory, like
as S. Paule ſaith: I am not aſhamed of the Goſpel which is the power of God
vnto ſaluation, to euery one that be­leueth. And in Iohn. 15. In this is my
father gloryfied, if you be mademy Diſciples, and that you beare much fruite
The wiſdome of the Lawe is a certaine magnificent and glo­rious thing whereby
common welthes are gouerned, and this humaine ſocyetie is kept in good order.
But a more neceſſarie and wholſome matter is the true ac­knowledgement of the
Mediator, which is vnderſtoode by the Goſpell, and which is the right way
leading vnto life euerlaſting. Let vs therefore learne to magnify this glory,
and to prefer the ſame before all humain matters. Yea although we be proudlye
deryded of Epicures, poli­tike men and of hypocrites.

#### 1.4.6. ‘Verſe. 5. You loue vanities and ſeeke after leaſinge.’

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=29)THis
particle of the ſecond verſe may rightly be ap­plyed vnto the doctrine and
lyfe of the vngodly ones. For what are the opinions of other nations touchinge
God, but ſclaunders, tryfling toyes, and fables. That I may vſe Paules wordes.
And neyther are they onely ſo, but many are the open erroures in ſuch as
worſhip I­doles, as the examples of Ethnikes, Turkes, and Pa­piſtes do ſhewe,
which ſith they be knowne vnto all men, I thinke them not nedfull for me to
remember thē. And I tremble in eche parte of my body ſo oft as I think vpon
the multitude of the gods which the Ethnikes haue, with ſuch madnes imagined,
of theire maner in ſa­crefyſing of men, of the wicked and damnable confuſion
of theire luſtes. But I beſeech God to repreſſe the ray­ginge deuil and not to
ſuffer ſuch furies to be ſene in the Church. And if a man turne him with minde
and conſi­deration to behold the lyfe of the vngodly ones, he ſhall finde al
thinges full of vanities and fooliſhnes. The vn­godly ſéeke after pleaſures
and ſuch like thinges thereto pertayning.. But howe much vanitie there is in
theſe thinges, what wiſe man vnderſtandeth not? For, mans bodye is weake, his
beauty fraile, his health vncerteine, his lyfe ſhort, his hououre vaine,
pleaſure corrupte, wiſ­dome ſmale, vertue ſeeble, and his affections
boyſterous. Finally all theſe faide away quickly like flowers, and theire
chaunge is more eaſie, then of the ſwifteſt flee that flyeth: wherefore it is
euident that not onely the doctrine of other nations, but alſo the lyfe of the
vngodly is moſt full of vanity and fooliſhnes.

#### 1.4.7. ‘Verſe. 6. Knowe ye that the Lord doth deale wonder­fully with his
holy one.’

IN the third verſe, he beginneth a conſolation which is to be oppoſed againſt
ſorowes, which the godly en­dure. [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=29) But heare, as I
conſider this verſe, I remem­ber the elegant and learned Paraphraſis,
wherewith Eobanus Heſſus, openeth this ſame verſe.

Mirificas Domini tandem cognoſcite leges

In quibus exercet quos amat ipſe ſuos.

Depremit vt releuet, premit vt ſolatia preſtet

Enecat vt poſsint viuere & eſſe ſuper.

The Lorde his marueilous Lawes at length knowe ye,

Wherein thoſe whom he loueth, he doth traine:

He bringeth lowe, vnto the ende that he,

May them comforte, and eke relieue againe.

He geueth griefe, and ſolace ſendeth ofte

He killes that they may liue, and dwell aloft.

But peradueneure ſame man will ſay, It goeth well with the Juſt. Iohn Baptiſt,
S. Paule, and ſuch like are Juſt and holy, therefore it muſt néedes be well
with them. This Pſalme meeteth with this obiection, and anſwereth orderly vnto
the propoſitions. Although (ſaith it) the Maior be true, That it ought to be
well with the Juſt, and after this life all good thinges ſhall bee geuen and
beſtowed vpon them: yet not withſtanding, God in his ſecrete and wonderfull
counſell, deferreth re­wardes and puniſhmentes in this life, and more ſtraitly
exerciſeth the chiefe members of his church, then others. The cauſes of this
his connſel are manifolde, wherof ſome are recyted in the doctrine of the
Church. For the calamities of ye godly are eyther  [...] That is,
pu­niſhmentes for certaine offences, as the baniſhment of Dauid was the
puninſhmēt for his adultrie. Either els they are  [...] trials or exerciſes
of their faith, as the impriſonmēt of Ioſeph, or els they ar  [...] that is,
notable and euident teſtimonies of the kinde of do­ctrine, [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=30) and of iudgement
to come. Furthermore, tou­ching the Minor, he anſwereth, The holy ones in this
life are Iuſt, through Imputation, for the Sonne of God his ſake, and ſome
obedience is begun in them. But as yet they are not indued with ſincere newnes
of life, and agréeable ſtrength touching the Law of God, where­with they
ſhalbe adorned after death.

Wherefore, while as yet in the immortall bodie they carry about with them many
ſinnes repugnant vnto the Law of God, as for example, ſecuritie, pride,
diſtruſt, impatience, and diuers wandering motions: it is neede­full that the
fleſh be mortifyed, and that the old leauen be purged out, which can not
otherwiſe more fitly be done, then by death, and other great miſeries which
are the ad­moniſhers and rebukers of ſinne, and of Gods wrath, and doe
repreſſe lewde and vitious deſires. The mea­ning of Dauid this worde (chaſed)
doth witneſſe, which ſignifyeth as not without fault, or without ſorrow, but
ſanctifyed and iuſtifyed by grace.

#### 1.4.8. ‘Verſe 7. The Lord heareth my prayer, when I crie vnto him.’

HE maketh not mention ſo oftentimes in vaine of prayer, and hearing, but with
great aduiſe doth he repeate theſe. For Dauid after his example will haue the
Church to teach, that prayer or Inuocation is the moderator of dangers in this
life, and moſt ſpeciall defence in this miſerie of mankinde. Like as it is
written in the 18\. chap. Prouerbes: The name of the Lorde is a ſtronge Tower,
vnto this ſhall the righteous flee, and be deliuered. And it is commanded vs
in Pſal. 49. Call vpon me in the day of thy trouble, &c. Moreouer, this
ſentence witneſ­ſeth, that prayer is not a vain ſounding or noyſe: but that it
is aſſuredly heard, and that it obteyneth delyueraunce, [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=30) or mitigation
agreeable with the will of God, touchinge the which thing, els where in the
Church it is declared.

#### 1.4.9. ‘verſe 8 Be angrie, and ſinne not, commune with your heartes in
your chambers, and be ſtill.’

VNto the former conſolation now addeth he a pre­cepte touching chriſtian
patience, which is, to obey God, in tollerating calamities, according to our
vocati­on: ſo that we ſwerue not away from God, or be angrie with him, or
contrarie to his commandementes dee any thing, when we are broken with ſorrow,
but that wee ſhould moderate our ſorrowe with acknowledgemente of the will of
God, and with hope of his deuine helpe. Concerning this vertue, there are ſet
downe many ſen­tences euery where. As 1\. Peter 5. Humble your ſelues vnder
the mightie hand of God, that hee may exalte you in time conuenient. And in
the 46\. Pſalme, Prooue and ſee becauſe I am the Lord: That is, Séeke not
vnlawfull remedies in time of your calamities. As Saule before his laſt battel
(fled for helpe and remedie vnto the witch) But ſettle your heartes in God,
whoſe hand is able and  [...] both to debaſe and exalte. Think with your
ſelues that the Church is not ordeyned for idlenes & pleaſures, but  [...] a
ſharpe and fierce warfare, which can not be en­dute [...] but with greate
vertue. Call vnto youre mind the Sonne of God, who ſith by aſſured prouitence
of God he ſuffered moſt bitter calamities, it were a thinge con­trarie vnto
all right, and vnequall, that we ſhould couet ſuch pleaſant idlenes,
eſpecially when through our offen­ces, the wrath of God is prouoked. Set
before our eyes the examples of mightie perſonages in the Churche: which were
in greateſt miſeries, yea behold well the whole creation of thinges which is
horribly profaned of the vngodly, and ſuffereth this abuſe holding this
aſſu­red [[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=31)
perſwaſion, the day will come, that after a while, it ſhall be together with
the children of God delyuered from theſe moleſtations. Conſidering theſe and
many o­ther in your mindes, be ſtill, and bridle your affections, that they
burſt not out beyond their bonndes, and ſeing it is a moſt difficult matter to
performe this obedience, Craue of God that he would geue you his holy ſpirit
the gouernour of youre mind, will and hart, according to his promiſe. Howe
much more ſhal your heauenly Father geue you his holy ſpirit, when you aſke it
of him. Mat. 7. Thus farre haue I briefly and ſimply recyted the meaning of
the fourth verſe, agreeing with the whole ſubſtance of this pſalme. It
foloweth that I nowe ſpeake of that r [...]ea­ning or ſence, whereunto S.
Paule hath rightly & fine­ly applyed this verſe in 4\. cap. Epheſians. For
Paule geuinge admonition touching moderation of angre, and pardoning iniuries,
alledgeth this verſe. Be angry (ſaith he) and ſinne not. And ſtraight waye, he
addeth. Let not the Sonne go downe vpon your wrath: Geue no place vnto the
deuill. But although it ſeemed vnto many in times paſt, that Paule recyted
this verſe abuſyuely, yet let vs kepe ſtil the rule delyuered vs by Chriſt.
The ſecond com­maundement touching loue, is like vnto the firſt, for the
vertues conteyned in both tables are nedeful by neceſſi­ty of the
commaundement, and of the dutie: and are the worſhip due to God, that is,
workes whereby God iud­geth him ſelfe to be honoured, when they are donne in
acknowledgment of the Mediator. Finally, the obedienc conteyned in both tables
beholdeth the ſame principall obiect, namly, God. Wherefore, there is no
abſurditie in that, whereas S. Paule applyeth this precept touchinge ſuffering
iniuries amōgſt men. For although the obictes are externall in great
diuerſitie, about the which that excellent vertue, patience is exercyſed, as
there is one obiect in the puniſhment of Paule, another in the exile­ment
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=31) of Dauid,
before Saules death: yet notwithſtan­dinge there is one and the ſame obiect
inward, or princi­pall, whereupon is repoſed this moderation of ſorowe. Let
theſe ſuffice to be ſpoken of vs here concerninge the place cited by S. Paule,
leaſt any man ſwerue into that opinion that he thinke Paule vnlearnedly vſed
te­ſtimonies of the ſcriptures, as ſome men cauell at the worthie commendation
of that teſtimonie out of Gen. viz. Abraham belieued God. &c. Concerning which
weRom. 4. will ſpeaks of els where,

Now let vs deale with that which is in hand, and ſee if we can gather remidies
of immoderate angre, out of the worde of God, and the wrytinges of
Philoſophers. For what a miſchiefe vnbrydled angre is, and howe hard a matter
for an angry man to reſtraine him ſelfe that he therby paſſe not meaſure, the
ſainges and examples, (whereof the nomber weary me to ſpeake) ſufficiently
[...]o ſhowe. Pindarus ſaith, Anger ſo troubleth wiſe men, that they ſinne.
And Iuuenal ſaith, But reuēgemēt is a com­moditie more ſweete then life it
ſelfe. in the Prouerbes it is ſaid, Mans wrath worketh miſchiefe. with theſe
ſentences do agree very many examples. But we for breuitie ſake wil be content
with a few. Theodoſius the Emperour, when he was by nature very furious,
commaunded a multitude of ye baſe people at Theſſalonica, (their cauſe not
heard) to be put to death, by reaſon a fewe ſouldi­ers were ſlaine in an
vproare. Hierom the eccleſiaſtical writer, by reaſon of the fond contentions
touching O­rigen, ſo poured out all libertie of anger, that he all to bad,
reproched his frend, Ruffinus, with whom he had liued very frendly for thirtie
yeres ſpare, and ſet forth bookes of bitter ſpeeches, which are yet extant
againſt that man of a right opinion touching the effect of contro­uerſie.

And although priuate men liuing in idlenes and vani­tie [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=32) can gallantly
diſpute of courteſie and humilitie, (yet the gouernment of them ſelues (be it
great or ſmall) ſhe­weth what euery one is, and openeth, and manifeſteth the
very deepe ſecretes of mans heart, which is couered with many ſubtilties, and
as it were kepte cloſe vnder certaine coueringes of diſſimulation. For they
liuing in the face of the common weale, are not onely ſharply aſſaulted of
theire enimies, but are often times prouoked of theire ſociates and fellowes,
that they may gratifie theire vngratfull affections of anger. Here is
required, courage to caſt the golden raine of Pallaces bridle vpon the necke
of vntamed Pegaſus: & by Medeas medicine made with the bloode of Prometheus,
to caſt the fierie fominge Serpent in a ſleepe, and as I may ſaye in one
worde. To caſt Sibels med [...]inall ſoppe vnto ba [...] kinge Cer­berus.

And there are ſixe cauſes, why anger muſt be modera­ted▪ leaſt that ſhe do any
thing againſt iuſtice, or other vertues. The firſt is, the commaundement of
God. which moſt ſeuerely commendeth vs to this moderati­on, as in this place.
Be angry and ſinne not. It is naturall in man to conceyue hote flames of
anger, where the hart is ſo framed, that it fleeth and feareth and ſtriueth to
de­priue euil thinges: But it is the propertie of the deuill to burne with
deſire of reuenge, and to cary about vnap­peaſeable hatred againſt a citiʒē
of the ſamecontrie. The ſecond cauſe is, for that reuenge is the honour due to
god aboue, according to that ſaying. Mine is reuenge, and I will rewarde.
[...] 32. For the lawe is more ruler ouer our goods, then we ourſelues are.
The third cauſe, is the acknow­ledgement of our owne frailtie, and of our owne
filthi­nes, for it is properly a pointe of fooliſhnes, to ſee other mens
faultes, and to forgete her owne. Whereas if we would conſider how great our
owne faults are, & what filthines we our ſelues yet beare about vs, we ſhould
[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=32) eaſilie
beare with other mens infirmities, and very well tolerate them which are not
puniſhed by the lawes: as Seneca ſaith, He eaſily pardoneth other men, who
hath nede of pardon himſelfe. The fourth cauſe, is the remembrance of Gods
pardon and forgiuenes, touching the which our dayly prayer admoniſheth vs.
Forgive vs our treſpaſſes, as we forgeue them that trespas againſt vs. And the
moſt ſeuere parable is well knowne in the 18. of Math. of the two ſeruants.
Vnto which parable this Epiphonema or concluſion is added. So ſhall your
heauenly Father do vnto you, if you do not euery one of you forgeue his
brother, from the bottome of your hart. For although free remiſſion of ſinnes
conſiſteth not in the nature of anye worke, yet God ſo earneſtly requyreth our
forgeueneſſe, that hee denyeth our ſinnes ſhall be forgeuen vs, except that we
alſo bee confirme the forgetfulnes of euils done vnto vs. The fifte cauſe is,
that true Inuocation or prayer vnto God be not thereby hindered. Therefore S.
Paule ad­moniſheth vs, 1\. Tim. 2. Pray without wrath or doubting. For when
hatreds encreaſe in the deſire of reuenge, the Spirite of grace and of prayer
is ſhaken of, without the which there can be made no true prayer. And what
greater wretchednes may be imagined, then man liuing without God, to be caſt
out to all the dartes of the deuill? Wherefore, if there were no cauſe of
priuate forgeuenes yet this alone is both able, and alſo ought to bende good
mindes to the moderation of anger. The ſixte cauſe, is longeſt of all, which
S. Paule recyteth in theſe woordes:Epheſ. 4. Geue no place vnto the deuill▪
For through priuate conten­tions, the doctrine which we profeſſe, is euill
reported of, the Church is troubled, many godly me [...], by this occaſi­on
are intangled with deſires of factions, others are hurt by our example, and
finally, other affaires more neceſſa­ry are hindered▪ All theſe euils doth S.
Paul comprehend when he ſaith, Geue no place vnto the deuill. So Dauid, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=33) when he might by
great right ſlay Saule that lay in wait for him, yet he ſpared him, leaſt hee
ſhoulde blemiſh his profeſſion, or trouble the church by mouing matters
vn­neceſſarie, or ſhould be the author of an euil example vn­to the people of
God, in killing or ſlaying of kinges. Af­ter the ſame maner let euery one
reframe them ſelues, thinking ſurely that the deuill, ſpinneth a long webbe of
ſinnes and puniſhmentes, and through one offence, a great ruine of the church
or common wealth may enſue. Vnto theſe heauenly remedies, let certaine
ſayinges of the Philoſophers be annexed, which doe grauely admo­niſh vs to
moderate anger.

Xenophon Lib. 5. de reb. Graecis, hereupon ſaith: Theſe miſeries (ſo farre as
I am able to iudge) ought to be ad­moniſhers, and exhorters vnto vs,
concerning moderation of anger. For if the houſholder himſelfe ſo long as his
anger is whote, ought not to puniſh his familie: when as it is euindent, that
angry maſters haue often times procured themſelues more hurte therby, then
they haue done vnto others, may we doubte whether we may encounter with our
enemie, not by the inſti­gation of anger, but with counſell or aduiſement? For
anger is a certaine blinds and raſh thing. But reaſon not onely appli­eth her
ſelfe vnto this purpoſe, that ſhee hurteth the enemie, but taketh greater care
and heede, that ſhee hurte not her­ſelfe.

Seneca in lib. 3. de Ira, ſaith: Whileſt wee are a­mongſt men, let vs imbrace
humanitie, let vs not be a terrour nor a danger vnto anie man. Let vs deſpiſe
detriments, iniu­ries, raylinges and backbitinges, and with a valeant courage,
let vs beare diſcommodities. Becauſe, while wee looke about (as they ſay) and
buſie our ſelues, immortalitie is at hande. But let vs now come to the
expoſitions of the verſes fol­lowing.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=33)

#### 1.4.10. ‘Verſe 9 Offer vnto God the ſacrifice of righteouſnes, and put
your truſt in the Lord.’

THis verſe is a moſt pleaſant expoſition or garniſhing of the former precept
as touching ſuffering calami­ties. For he beautifieth this vertue with a moſt
ample dignitie, calling it the ſacrifice, that is a worke enioyned by God,
wherewith the Lord iudgeth himſelfe to be ho­noured, when it is referred vnto
this end, that we obey him. Morouer it diſtinguiſheth Philoſophical from
chri­ſtian patience, by two tokens, whereof one is borowed of the obiect, the
other is taken from hope of Gods helpe. Socrates gaue place vnto reaſon in
ſufferinge his cala­mities, and neither craued, nor truſted for helpe from
God. Dauid being exiled, obeyeth the will of God, and yet aſked of God
mitigation or deliuerance. This diffe­rence is euidently & not obſcurely
delyuered in the ſaid verſe. Offer vnto God the Sacrifice of righteouſnes, and
put your truſt in the Lord.

#### 1.4.11. ‘Verſe. 10. Many there be that ſaye, who ſhall ſhewe vs any good
thinges? But thou O Lord ſhew vs the light of thy countenance.’

OF all thinges which learned men diſpute of, vn­doubtedly, there is nothing
more excellent, then how plainly to vnderſtand, what good thinges men ought
ſpecially to deſire. This queſtiō cannot philoſophy ſufficiently expound, by
reaſon of ye darknes of the mind. But ſhe doubteth of the end of good things,
and leaueth others in doubtfullnes. Seing therefore Philoſophy doth confeſſe
her darknes, it is nedefull that kinde of doctrine be embraced which God
himſelfe delyuered, which doth make manifeſt ſo great matters. For there are
three chief and ſpeciall good thinges of man, which [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=34) are ſhewed in
this heauenly doctrine. The firſt is, True acknowledgment and calling vpon
God. The ſecond. Firme conſolation in calamitics. The third is. The order of
our life. Theſe good giftes doth this pſalme comprehend, when it ſayeth. But
thou O Lord ſhewe vs the light of thy countenance. That is, ſ [...]ing that
mans reaſon is ignorant of God, and of true inuocation, neither hath in her
ſelfe a­ny firme conſolation, and is much more ſeeble, then that ſhee can
direct her life and vocation (amongſt ſo many ſnares of the deuil, and in ſo
great a heape of buyſines and daungers) I beſeech thee our Lord, that with the
Goſpell, and with the holy Spirit, thou wouldeſt illumi­nate in vs that
wiſdome, which truly knoweth God and calleth vpon him a right, & that thou
wouldeſt ſtrengh­then our hartes with firme conſolation, and gouerne the whole
courſe of our life, and vocation, vnto the glory of thy holy name, and
ſaluation of the Church vniuerſall.

#### 1.4.12. ‘Verſe. 11. Thou haſt made me to reioyce in my hart, whiles they
haue plentie of wine and Corne.’

THis verſe ſetteth out the degrees of good thinges, although ſaith he: The
benefits pertaining vnto this▪ lyfe are the bleſſinges of God, and are to be
craued of God, yet notwithſtanding both when other earthly be­nefits riſe and
fall too and from vs, we haue an inwarde conſolation worthely fixed and
eſtabliſhed in vs an o­ther way, and we preferre this conſolation  [...]a
[...] beyond al. ſwete pleaſures of this ſl [...]tting and vaniſhing life
wher­in all thinges as it were hang by a  [...]ale thrid, Ethings which haue
bene of force, by ſoden chaunge come to naught. So in the 45. Pſalme it is
ſaid. All the glory of the kinges daughter is within. &c. (that is to ſay) the
pro­per beautie of the Church, is ioy of the holy ghoſt kindled in the heart
of the faithfull, ouercomminge all feares of [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=34) death, and
daungers of hell, and beginninge in vs eter­nall life.

#### 1.4.13. ‘Verſe. 12. I will therfore lye downe in peace, and take my
reſt.’

PEace in this place and in other places often ſigni­fieth tranqu [...]itie of
hart, ſpringing of faith, hope, and good conſcience. For, faith holdeth not
onely that a man is acceptable vnto God through the Mediator, but alſo that
obedience newe begonne pleaſeth God, through this hye Prieſt, bringing our
worſhippinges vnto his Father. Hope looketh for delyuerance in time to come,
according to Gods prouidence, whether it chaunge in this life, eyther els
after the reſurrection from death. For although wee obtaine not alwayes
corporall delyue­rance, yet we ſurely knowe that there ſhall folow an
v­niuerſal delyuerance of the Church after the reſurrection wherein God ſhall
wipe away all teares from the eyes of the Godly. Conſcience ſetteth her ſelfe
at reſt in goodnes of the cauſe, whereof God is the author, approuer, and
de­fender, as Teucer [...]aith in Sophocles. In a good cauſe, it becometh vs
to haue a good courage. Theſe three, namely Faith, hope, aud good conſcience,
are the cauſes of peace, touching the which this laſt verſe mencioneth. I will
therefore lye down in peace and take my reſt. Becauſe thou only oh Lord haſt
made me to put my truſt in thee.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=35)

### 1.5. ❧ The fifte Pſalme.  
Verba mea auribus percipe Domine.

#### 1.5.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe fift pſalme is a feruent prayer againſt vn­godlie teachers, whoſe mindes
are defiled with madde worſhippinge of Idolles, theire tongue with
blaſphemies, their handes em­brewed with the blood of the godly, and their
other mēbers ſtained with wicked luſtes. Theſe teachers (as furies ſent out
of hel to trouble the church) prayeth to be deſtroyed, and that the puritie of
doctrine and therewith his churche alſo, might be preſerued and defended:
There may alſo be obſerued in this pſalm a manifeſt figure of the vngodlie
doctrine, and of the vngodlie councels, which tend hereunto, that true
inuocation & prayer vſed in the church might vtterlie be extinguiſht. And
becauſe euerie prayer conceyued by the holie ghoſt hath effecte of promiſe,
let vs not doubt, but God will helpe vs, to the end the vngodlie may be
confuted, which ſay. where is now theire God. Pſal. 114. Ver. 9.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=35)

#### 1.5.2. ‘Verſe. 1. INcline thine eares O Lorde vnto my wordes, conſider my
meditation.’ ‘Verſe. 2. Hearken vnto the voice of my prayer, my kinge and my
God, becauſe I will praie vnto thee.’

THere are two differences of true and falſe Inuocation, viz. whereof me muſt
continually conſider in reading of the Pſalmes. The one is, touching the
eſſence of God. The other touching the will of God. So often as a man begins
his prayer, let him conſider with himſelfe what he calleth vpō and what God
he is, which he calleth vpon, or pray­eth vnto. After that alſo, the Will muſt
be conſidered, what maner God he is, and why he doeth heare vs. So in this
place Dauid diſcerneth by the ſame Inuocation or prayer, the true God, from
counterfet and falſe gods. For, Iehoua is a peculiar name, whereby the Church
a­lone of the fathers, and the Iſraelites called vpon God. And there is a
great Emphaſis or force in the wordes. My king and my God. As if he ſayde,
Thou which true­ly beholdeſt and cureſt my griefe, thou which truely
re­ceiueſt and heareſt me, for thy Sonnes ſake the Media­tor, which is the
king of the Church.

This admonition of the difference of true and falſe in­uocation, is in another
place largely delyuered, which in déede ought to be conſidered vpon in all our
Inuocation and thankeſgeuing. Alſo, let that be conſidered, that true
Inuocation is of two ſorts. The one, which worketh by cogitation of the minde,
and with confidencies illumi­nated or enlightened in the will fleeing vnto
God, in­wardly crauing and expecting Gods benefites. The o­ther, which with
the voice or tongue expreſſeth thoſe mo­tions of the heart, and conſenteth
with the heart. Be­cauſe god requyreth the expreſſe voice alſo, and that
o­thers [[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=36)
may be inſtructed and confirmed, yea to the ende that the very deuils, when
they heare the true god called vpon, might tremble for feare and flee away.
Finally, let there be obſerued ardent affections of wordes, wherin he
earneſtly vrgeth to be heard, as thus: Heare me, con­ſider me, And Geue eare
vnto me.

#### 1.5.3. ‘Verſe 3 O Lorde, thou ſhalt heare my prayer, betimes I will
ſtande before thee earlie in thy Courte, and in thy Con­gregation.’

ALthough God is not tyed to any places or times, and alwayes heareth them that
call vpon him, (in­lightned with acknowledgement and faith in the ſonne of
God,) yet notwithſtanding the morning ſeaſon is dée­med moſt méeteſt for
meditation and prayer, when oure bodies are neither ouercharged with meate,
nor with fumes of ſtomack, and a moſt earneſt intention may be in an emptie
ſtomack. And it is not amiſſe ſayde of a certaine auncyent wryter, That,
Praier is a moſt harde worke, becauſe not onelie the intention or earneſt
minde is re­quired, But alſo, a conſideration of the reuelations or
teſti­monies of God, and a difference from heatheniſh inuocation, as alſo a
thinking vpon Gods promiſes, and faith. Therefore Dauid vſeth here notable
Metaphores, (I will ſtande in thy Court, and in thy Congregation,) to ſignifie
vnto vs, that it is no ſlender or baſe work to pray vnto God. For there is a
difficulte attention in recyting the prayer, and it is needeful that there
come together a true cogitation of God, and motions of the heart towardes him.
And there is enflamed a ſharpe conflicte in all earneſt prayer, or inuocation,
when we reaſon in our mindes, whether, and why we are receaued vnto God, and
our ſighinges, and prayers are heard. Our ſinnes accuſe vs, and our trembling
and amazed mindes flée from God: but in this [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=36) doubtfulnes and
flight, muſt we not ceaſe from praying. Wherefore, againſt this accuſation we
muſt oppoſe the wordes of the goſpel, which affirmeth, that although we are
ſinfull, yet we ſhall be accepted vnto god freely, for his ſonnes ſake. But
concerning this conflict, I haue bene more briefe, leaſt my expoſition ſhould
be too long.

#### 1.5.4. ‘Verſe 4 Becauſe thou art the God, not pleaſed with anie
wickedneſſe, and the euill man ſhall not dwell with thee.’

I Sayd a little before, that in euery our prayers wee muſt conſider well, who,
and what a one god is. He therefore teacheth in this verſe, what maner a one
god is, Namely, Wiſe, Bountifull, luſt, True, a Iudge ſincere, Free, and
Mercifull. For, god is ſuch a one as he expreſ­ſeth him ſelfe to be in the
Lawe, nothing delited in mur­thering, wandering luſtes, thefte, lyinges, and
other miſ­chiefes: but rather puniſheth theſe euils which are repu­gnant vnto
his law. For god oftentimes affirmeth that he neither will, nor doth allow
ſinne, as in the 8\. Chap. of Zacharias, it is expreſly ſaide of ſinnes. Theſe
are the thinges that I hate, ſaith the Lord. Seeing then god is true, we muſt
moſt firmely beleeue that god is not the effectuall cauſe of ſinne in men.

#### 1.5.5. ‘Verſe. 5. The proude furious fooles ſhall not ſtande in thy
preſence, thou haſt hated all thoſe that woorke ini­quitie.’

WIth this verſe agreeth that notable ſentence which is extant in the booke of
Iob, chap. 13. Hipocrites ſhall not enter before his preſence. For, god hateth
and deteſteth nothing more then the arrogancie of hypo­crites, which challenge
vnto themſelues prayſe of righ­teouſnes, and extoll themſelues aboue other
ſinners. So [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=37) is it written in
the 16\. of Luke. Whatſoeuer is glorious in the worlde, is abhominable in the
ſight of God. (That is,) whatſoeuer is gloryous without the acknowledgemente
of god, and feare of god, that is confounded. Therefore happens ſo great
ruines of mightie perſons, which not onely excelled in worldlie power, but
alſo in proweſſe.

#### 1.5.6. ‘Verſe 6. Thou ſhalt deſtroye them that ſpeake lea­ſinges: The
Lord abhorreth both the bloodthirſtie, and the deceitfull man.’

VVE muſt deligently conſider the efficacy of the word, wherewith the Pſalme
reprooueth bloodſucking Sophiſters, when as it ſo ſaith, The Lorde abhorreth
both the bloodthirſtie, and the deceitfull man. For, the worde (abhorreth)
ſignifyeth not onely a plaine reie­ction of the perſōs, but alſo a grieuous
diſpleaſure to light vpon them, mixed with ſome ſorow. Let the grieuouſ­nes of
this worde terrifie vs, not onely from wrongfull murthers, but frō euerie
Sophiſtical, ſubtile, or deceiue­able doctrine, when as falſhode and leaſinges
are more dangerous (vnder the coloure of trueth) then thoſe be which are
manifeſt. For as the deuill is both a lyer, and a murtherer, ſo vngodly
teachers are not onely the crafts maſters of plauſible lyinges, and of
corruptions of the true doctrine, but alſo are the prouokers of kinges and
Princes vnto crueltie: As a certaine Monke in a pub­lique Sermon in the
hearing of the Emperour Charles the fifte, ſaide: That God would not be
mercifull vnto him, except the Emperour did firſt waſh his whole arme with the
blood of the Lutheranes. I quake to mention this ſaying, ſo cruell to heare:
For was there euer ſo ſauage barba­rouſnes at any time, wherein was ſo great
crueltie, and ſo great thirſt after ciuill bloodſhed, as there is in theſe
Hipocrites, for none other cauſe, but that we agrée not [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=37) with them in
theire opinions, but, this litle verſe admo­niſheth vs, that we be not
polluted with theire compa­ny, which ſtriue by might and maine againſt the
truth, and moſt cruelly kill the godly ones, for proſeſſinge the true
doctrine. For, it threateneth vnto thoſe ſophiſters and parricides, a
tragicall diſtruction ſaying. Thou ſhalt deſtroy them that ſpeake leaſinges.
&c.

#### 1.5.7. ‘Verſe. 7. And I in the multitude of thy mercie, will enter into
thy houſe, and will worſhippe thee in thy holie place, in thy feare.’

ALwayes when we pray this moſt grieuous obiec­tion troubleth vs, that no
ſinner is heard of God. Iohn. 9. God heareth not ſinners. All men in this our
vile nature, are ſinners. Ergo no men are heard. This ob­iection is not to be
expounded as a thinge ſclender, ney­ther yet of ſmale effect, leaſt that it do
diſcourage vs from inuocation or prayer. Therfore we muſt firſt anſwere vnto
the maior, by diſtinction: Some are ſinners which earneſtly repent them,
others are ſinners not repenting. Albeit therefore, the maior is true, if it
be vnderſtood of thoſe which do not repent. Yet it is falſe, if it be
vnder­ſtood of thoſe which repent thē, or turne vnto God. More­ouer the minor
is alſo to be diſtinguiſht. All men in this our vile nature, are ſinners, but
after a diuers maner. Some are without repentance, theſe are not heard. Some
are conuerted vnto God. For euen in the conuer­ted there yet remaine vices, or
leude affectes, or flames of luſtes, which they reſiſt notwithſtanding, which
are called veniall ſinnes, or ſinnes pardonable. But there­with they retaine
not the purpoſe of ſinning: and it is ſure, that theſe are receyued into Gods
fauour, and are heard of him. Vnto this reſolution, doth this vii. verſe
allude, naming fear and confidence in the mercy of God. [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=38) For, feare
ſignifyeth a true contrition or ſorowe, and a good purpoſe in obeying God. But
ſo often as mention is made of the mercy of God, faith is to be vnderſtoode by
relation, whereby we beleue that mercy happeneth vnto vs. Therefore the
meaning of this litle verſe, agre­eth in all p [...]tes, with that prayer of
Dauid. cap. 9. To thee O Lord belongeth Righteouſnes, but vnto vs confu­ſion
and ſhame: wherefore not in our righteouſnes do we poure out our prayers
before thy preſence, but in thy manifould mer­cies, heare vs for the Lordes
ſake.

#### 1.5.8. ‘Verſe. 8. O Lord direct me in thy righteouſnes, be­cauſe of mine
enimies, make ſtreight thy way before me.’

THe expreſſe petition of diuine gouernement which is oppoſed againſt that
heathniſh verſicle, Fortune, not wiſdome gouerneth life of man. Wherefore
ſuffer vs not O God, to be drawne away of the deuill, vnto vngodly­nes and
other miſchiefes, Defend vs againſt the ſnares of the deuill, gouerne vs with
thy light, and with thy counceles, ſuffer vs not to fall as deceyued in our
er­roures, or as driuen thereunto by  [...]becilitie of the fleſh. Greate and
meruelouſe was the wiſdome and vertue of Dauid: and yet we ſee, that he was
nowe and then driuen of the deuill, and other whiles by humaine er­roure
deceyued: as when he commaunded the people of Iſraell to be nombred. Seing
therefore, that the in­firmitie is great in all men, vouchſafe thou, O
eternall God Father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. gouerne vs, and geue vnto vs
wholſome councels for performance of priuat, and publike affaires, and
confirme our hartes with thy holy ſpirit that they may obey thee that we be
not inſtrumentes of wrath, but inſtrumentes of mercy and profitable to thy
Church.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=38)

#### 1.5.9. ‘Verſe. 9 For there is no truth in theire mouth theire hartes
practiſe miſchiefe, their throte is an open ſepulcre, and they flatter with
theire tongues.’

THis notable diſcription of vngodly teachers muſt we diligently conſider. For
there are foure proper tokens diſcerninge godly teachers from the vngodly
ones. For the godly miniſters of the church do cure the woundes of the
conſciences, that is, of doubt, and of diſ­paire. But the falſe prophetes do
both doubt themſelues of Gods will, and also leaue theire auditory in
doubting, as the Areopagites in the councell of Trident, do bidde all men to
abide in doubtfullnes, and do wipe out all this article in the Simbole or
Creede. viz. I beleue in the forgeuenes of Sinnes. yea (say they) beleue thou
not, but doubt thou. And this doubtfulnes which is not vanqui­ſhed by faith,
bringeth forth heauie raginges againſt God, and alſo diſperation. Moreouer
godly teachers are not the trumpetes of ſeditions, and fyerbrandes of ciuill
broyles but with a ſound and ſincere religion, both loue and nouriſh peace, as
much as in them may be done. Contrarie wiſe falſe prophetes, exaſperate
crueltie in Princes, and ſtudie to kindle ciuil ſedicions, and to haue ſuch
and ſo  [...]any motions diſtroyed ſo many honeſt Ma­trones and ſo many
infantes ſlaine, and an euerlaſting ſpoyle and deuaſtacion of churches. Men
ſay, there is no­thing more cruell then Panthers or Tygres, and yet
notwithſtanding we reade that Panthers haue often times ſpared euen the holy
ones in a ſtreete, as it were with a certaine reuerence. The rage of the
vngodly tea­chers doth farre paſſe theſe, which ſo ſpare no ſex nor age of
perſon that they had rather bringe Heauen and earth together, and defile there
contrie with ciuill blood­ſhed, then to loſe theire opinion, honour, pleaſures
and riches. And that theſe are true, the hiſtory of this our age [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=39) from the yeare
1517. vntill this preſent time euidently ſheweth. Which becauſe it is knowne
vnto all men, I ſhall not néede to make any rehereſall thereof. Thirdly, Godly
teachers do render a reaſon of theire faith, with all mildnes and feare. as S.
Peter ſaith, and ſpeake thoſe thinges which are true, ſtanding with grauitie,
and which are Juſt, ſincere, frendly, and laudable, according to that rule
delyuered by S. Paule. Philippians. 4. But contrariwiſe, the throte of the
vngodly is an open ſepul­cre, brething out blaſphemies againſt God, and
filthie raylinges againſt honeſt men, ſlaunders and moſt im­pudent lyes. As
Eaius with a moſt filthy mouth diſa­loweth mariage of Prieſtes, and calleth ſo
many honeſt and godly matrons, as are miniſters wiues, ſhe wolues. So
Piggliras durſt be ſo bould as to vtter this moſt fil­thy ſpeech, which is
extant in his writings. That Prieſt (ſaith he) leſſe ſinneth which polluteth
himſelfe with whor­dome, then he: that marieth a wife. Theſe ſpeeches do
ſuffi­ciently declare with what ſpirit the Sycophantes and Pharaſites of the
Court of Rome are poſſeſſed.

Finally, the ſpeeche of truth is plaine. But an euil cauſe hath néede of
counterfete colowred medicins, which S. Paule calleth in 16\. Romaines. Sweete
and flattering wordes, deceyuing the hartes of the innocentes. For vngodly
doctors do imagine colluſions, and fained or coloured méetinges, where vnto
many geue good li [...]ing. But Sy­cophantes flatter themſelues too much, if
they thinke that they can ſo dally in the Church, and ſcape ſcotte frée. To
wrappe vp the truth trimly, and gloſe vp theire erroures cunningly. Let them
looke for the ſame end that Iudas had, whome they imitate. For as he betrayed
the Sonne of God with a kiſſe: So theſe endeuoure to extinguiſh the Goſpell
with a certaine deceyuable outwarde ſhow of holines.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=39)

#### 1.5.10. ‘Verſe 10. Make them a deſtruction vnto themſelues, O God,
deſtroy their deuiſes, confound them for their mani­folde iniquities, becauſe
they haue prouoked thee.’

HOw much God hateth lewd corrupting of the hea­uenly doctrine, this precepte
teacheth: Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine. And God
threatneth both elſwhere oftentimes, and alſo in this place, that he will
puniſh blaſphemies againſt his name, and alſo reproches againſt his true
doctrine. Therefore let vs thinke it is a great felicitie, that we are
deliuered from thoſe counſels of the Biſhops of Rome, and from the league of
the deuill, which as it blaſphemeth God, to the ende it may deſtroy very many,
ſo it inflameth thoſe biſhops, and ſtirreth vp Tirantes to eſtabliſh mad
wor­ſhippings of Images, and other miſchiefes. Nothing can more grieuous be
ſpoken, then that which S. Paule ſaith: If any man teach anie other Goſpell,
let him be holden accurſed. All bitter curſes doth hee comprehende in the word
Anathema, which ſignifyeth a matter wherewith God is angrie without any
pacifying, and which is or­deyned for death and deſtruction. Therefore ſo
doeth Paule and Dauid in this place bid vs to be perſwaded as touching the
enemies of the goſpell. And in the ex­hortations of the Prophetes oftentimes
this threatning is repeated, as in Eſay cap. 5. Woe be vnto them, which count
euill good, and good euill: darckneſſe light, and light darckneſſe.

#### 1.5.11. ‘Verſe 11 And let them all be glad, which put theire truſt in
thee, they ſhall ſing praiſe vnto thee for euer, and thou ſhalt defende them,
and they ſhall reioice in thee, which doe loue thy name,’ ‘[[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=40) Verſe 12 Becauſe
thou, O Lord, ſhalt bleſſe the righte­ous: as with a ſhield ſhalt thou defend
him, and erowne him with louing fauour.’

I Haue oftentimes ſaide that the Pſalmes haue moſt excellent lightes of
Figures, which it is not inough for vs once to haue ſeene, but wherein the
Reader may dwell, and neuer be able to fill his minde with looking vpon them.
He ſaide briefly in the third Pſalme: With thee Lord there is ſaluation, and
thy bleſsing is vpon the peo­ple. Now doeth he adorne the ſame ſentence, and
diuerſ­lie beautify it, with copie of ſpeech, and with excellencie of matter.
For, what can be more finely ſaide, then that he compareth the bleſſing and
helpe of God, vnto a Ta­bernacle couering vs againſt the force of ſtormes and
tempeſtes: and, vnto a ſhield, defending vs from the aſ­ſaultes of our
enemies. Theſe moſt excellent Figures muſt we ſomewhat diligently peruſe and
explane. The firſt Figure is taken out of the hiſtorie which declareth how the
people of Iſraell wandering in the wildernes, dwelt in Tabernacles, and was by
gods prouidence preſerued. So let the godly ones alwayes knowe that they are
defended, and preſerued, not by mans helpe or ſauegarde, but by god: as it is
ſaide in Oſeas chap. 1. I will ſaue them, not in ſtrength of bowe nor ſworde,
but in the Lorde God.

The other Figure is taken of warfare. The chiefe defence of a Soldyer is a
Shield or Buckler, which bea­reth back the enemies weapons. So Faith in time
of Spirituall conflicte repelleth the deuils weapons, or in­ſtrumentes. For
faith enuyroneth vs with the preſence of Chriſt, who helpeth vs, that the
enemie is not able to ſubdue vs, euen when we are greatly ouerlayed, and
re­pelleth the inſulting enemye. As the deuill layde ſore at [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=40) Dauid, and went
about to ſubdue him, as he did Saule, but Dauid ſtoode to him, not in his owne
ſtrength, but in faith: (that is) in confidence of gods preſence, of whom he
was ſtrengthned, leaſt he would haue fallen. And hee beléeued that he was not
de [...]late, nor caſt from out of gods fauour, nor forſaken of god: but that
he was recea­ued and preſerued vnder gods defence, and that he ſhould be
deliuered from all euil, and enioy the ſocyetie of gods Electe in the life
eternall. And neither was he ſatiſfy­ed with the names of Tabernacle and
Shielde, but he addeth moreouer the Metaphore of Coronation, or Crowning,
becauſe he would ſignifie that God both hel­peth them which fight in a good
cauſe, and alſo geueth them the victory, whoſe badge is a Crowne, according to
that ſaying: No man is crowned, but hee which ſtriueth  [...]awfullie.

Furthermore, what force the bleſſing of God hath, and what ioyfull gladnes the
acknowledgement of the preſence and helpe of God ſtirreth vp in the hearts of
the godly ones, the heape of wordes after a certaine ſort de­clareth. They are
(ſaith he) glad, and they ſhaell ſing, &c. Finally, they triumph as
Conquerors, deuyding riche ſpoyles: but the peace and ioy which the holy ghoſt
ſtirreth vp in thē, cannot be expreſſed in words Therefore I am more bréefe
as here, and for a conclu­ſion, I ad herunto a prayer agréeable vnto this
fifte Pſalme.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=41)

#### 1.5.12. The Prayer.

ALthough thou, O eternall God, Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which art
iuſt, and ſeuerelye puniſheſt ſinners, yet notwithſtanding in confidence of
thy great mercie promiſed for thy ſonnes ſake Ie­ſus Chriſt our Mediator, I
flee vnto thee as a peti­tioner. And craue of thee with feruent prayers, and
with my whole heart, that thou wouldeſt mer­cifullie take compaſſion vpon me,
and gouerne mee with thy holie Spirit, that I ſwerue not from the rule of thy
holie worde. Deliuer thy vniuerſal Church, and me ſillie ſinner, from the
manifeſt violence of Tirantes, and vngodly ſubtilties of Sophiſters, which
bende and practiſe all induſtrie and force of theire kingdome, vnto our
deſtruction. Be vnto vs a ſtrong Forte and Shielde againſt all cruell
enterpriſes and aſſaultes of the enemies of thy Goſpell, and vn­to vs
(enuironed with thy fauour as with a Crowne) grant and geue the victory,
through thy onelie Son our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, our Mediator, our
Propitia­tor, & our hie Prieſt, Amen.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=41)

### 1.6. ❧ The ſixte Pſalme.  
Domine ne in furore, &c.

#### 1.6.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis Pſalme is ful of doctrine concerning grea­teſt matters, as, of ſinne, of
the wrath of God, of puniſhment, of repentance, and of faith im­bracing
forgeuenes of ſinnes, and mitigations of puniſhmentes. For the Prophet
acknowledge­eth his imperfection and deformitie, and feeleth the wrath of God
againſt ſinne, and feareth eternall ab­iection. This tentation in the godly
ones, is much more ſharper then death it ſelfe. Neither in deede is it proper
vnto a vaine and careles minde, to enter into reaſoninge with it ſelfe
touchinge the great­nes of ſinne, the wrath of God, and faith embracing
forgeuenes of ſinnes. But this is the proper and ſecrete wiſdome of the Church
of God, neither is it learned, but in an vnfayned conflicte, and true
wraſt­ling of the minde, and in true Inuocation vpon god. And as in euery
conuerſion there are two motions, Mortification, (that is) Contrition: and
Viuification, (that is) Conſolation, which is wrought by faith: So in this
Pſalme there are not onely moſt bitter com­plaintes, and feelinges of the
wrath of God: but alſo Comfortes, wherein the Spirite with inexpreſſible
ſorrowe craueth helpe, and wraſtleth thorowlie. Theſe are all and ſingular the
conflictes of the godly ones, wherein themſelues diſcerne the greatnes of
their ſinne, are in great feares and tremblings, which no tongue of man can
expreſſe at full. But leaſt they ſhould vtterlie quaile with ſorrowe, they are
againe [[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=42)
rayſed vp with Faith and Inuocation, whereby they craue Gods fauourable
mitigation of afflictions, & doe praie for the vniuerſall end and Conſummation
of the ſame: Whoſe examples are proponed in the deluge, in the burning of
Sodome, in the deſtruction ofGen. 7. Gen. 19. Exod. 14. & 15\. Num. 21. Num.
14. & 26. Aegypte, and in the ſubuerſion of the Cananites. So  [...]aith
Hieromie in his 10. Chap. Correcte mee, O Lorde, but yet in thy iudgement, not
in thy furie, leaſt I be conſumed, and brought vnto nothing. And Abacuck. cap.
3. Lorde, when thou art angrie, remember thy mercie, &c. With ſuch like
ſayinges doe the Prophetes craue mitigation of puniſhmentes, and doe alſo
witnes that their ſinnes deſerue greater puniſhment. But that God doeth ſpare
and beare with our infirmitie, which cannot a­bide ſo great indignation or
wrath. Which things ſith they ſo be, let vs not without ſorowe, (nor with­out
feare of Gods horrible wrath.) Looke vpon our ſinnes, which publiquelie and
priuatelie doe a­bound in mankinde, but let vs thinke to feele ſmart
therefore, and let vs craue mitigation thereof. For there is no doubt, but
through true repentance, and ardent prayer, both publique and priuate
puniſh­mentes are mitigated.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=42)

#### 1.6.2. ‘Verſe. 1. LOrde rebuke me not in thy furie, nor chaſtize me in
thine anger.’

THis moſt ſorowful prayer ſpringeth not in the mouth of the ſecure or
careleſſe perſō, neglecting or deſpyſing the wrath of God, but in the godly
hearte, which conſidereth how great a thing ſinne is, how great a thing the
wrath of God is, and ſo vnfaynedly ſorrowing and trembling, when hee feeleth
himſelfe accuſed by the Law, and taſteth y• wrath of God againſt ſinne. Such a
heart vnfaynedly craueth forgeuenes of ſinnes, conioyned with mitigation of
pu­niſhmentes. For he knoweth that in God there is good­neſſe ſurpaſſing,
which aſſwageth and mitigateth al iuſt diſpleaſure, as he himſelfe ſaith in
the 11\. of Oſe. I will not execute the fiercenes of my wrath, becauſe I am
God, and not a man. That is, albeit I am horribly angrie with ſinnes, and doe
threaten grieuous puniſhmentes vnto the diſobedyent, yet I lenifie with
immenſe goodneſſe, this great diſpleaſure, and I aſſwage the puniſhmentes vnto
ſuch as truely repent them, becauſe I will not that my creature ſhould vtterly
peariſh, and the knowledge of my name to be vtterly extinguyſhed vpon earth:
but it is my good pleaſure that my Church haue her counte­nance, and that
there become many fitte and neceſſarie perſons for the vocations of this life,
and of the Church. I will therfore ſpare a multitude, to the end they may b
[...] able to endure this warfare. Theſe ſentences and ſuch like, let vs
daylie ſet before vs in praying, when as wee are to fall in reckning of
publique and priuate puniſh­mentes for ſinne, and mitigation of the ſame is to
bee craued of vs. Let vs therfore crie with Dauid, and with the whole Church:
Lorde rebuke mee not in thy furye, nor &c.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=43)

#### 1.6.3. ‘Verſe. 2. Haue mercie vpon me, O Lord, becauſe I am weake, Heale
mee, O Lorde, becauſe my boones are bruyſed.’

THe firſt reaſon of the Propoſition is taken of our in­firmitie, which is the
cauſe obiectiue. No father is ſo greeuouſly ſorrowfull when he ſeeth the great
calami­tie of his louing Childe, as God doth earneſtly ſorrowe when he
beholdeth our euils and miſeries: which thing ſurely many teſtimonies doe
teach vs, which are recyted in the Propheticall hiſtories: as in the 11\. of
Oſe. it is ſayde: My heart is changed within me, my repentinges are kindled
within me, &c. We are perſwaded hereby that we may more willingly flee vnto
God, when we beleue that he is mooued with our ſorrow. And ſeeing then this
féeble nature of man is not able to beare the greatnes of Gods wrath, if it
ſhould ſo burne as our ſinnes doe de­ſerue. The Prophets doe craue ſome
mitigation thereof, leaſt that our infirmitie ſhould vtterly quayle vs. As in
the 64\. of Eſay it is ſaide. And now O Lord, thou art our Father, but we are
clay: and thou art our Creator, and we all are the workes of thy handes. Be
not ouer angrie with vs, O Lorde, neither remember our iniquities. Beholde,
looke vpon vs, we all are thy people, &c. Let there alſo an Anti­theſis be
conſidered in this place. Mans comforte can­not in great and vnfayned ſorrowes
refreſhe or ioy our mindes, as it is written in the 5\. of Oſe. Hee coulde not
helpe you, nor caſe you of your paine. But the goſpel ſhew­eth effectuall
remedyes, which truely heale the ſorrowes of our heartes, as the ſame Prophet
ſaiih Cap. 6. Becauſe he hath ſmitten vs, and he ſhall heale vs: Hee hath
wounded vs, and he ſhall binde vs vp againe. Let vs therefore ac­knowledge our
infirmitie, and let vs craue of God for Chriſtes ſake, to haue our ſores
healed.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=43)

#### 1.6.4. ‘Verſe. 3. And my ſoule is ſore troubled, but thou O Lord howe
long?’

THis repetition of the complainte ſheweth after a ſorte the greatnes of his
ſorow, and ſubmiſſion. But although the force of theſe affectes can not be
deſcribed in wordes: yet notwithſtanding this ſeemeth to be the mea­ning of
the third verſe, ſeinge thou oh true and liuinge God art faithfull, and
ſuffereſt no man to be tempted be­yond theire ſtrength, graunt that without
longer delaye I may feele thy preſence with me, thy helpe alſo, mitiga­tion
and delyuerance from alll euils. Bis dat qui cito dat. He geueth twiſe that
giueth quickly. Seneca. Therefore leaſt I faint in ſuch infirmitie and be
vanquiſhed of the cruell enimy, come thou to me with ſpeede, come ſtrengthen
me thus weakened and that with ſpeede. For it is eui­dent that many haue bene
broken and bruſed with con­tinuance of calamities. Here are applyed thoſe
ſentences in the pſalmes, which with the counſellers at lawe we may call
peremptory citacio nes. Lorde make haſt to helpe me. &c.

#### 1.6.5. ‘Verſe. 4. Turne the oh Lord, and delyuer my Soule, ſaue me for
thy mercy ſake.’

AN other reaſon is borowed from the cauſe impul­ſiue, which is the mercy of
God promiſed for chriſts ſake. as if he ſaid. I bringe not vnto thee, deſerts
of mine, but confeſſion of my faulte, and as a peticioner I flée for ſuccour
vnto thy mercy: neyther doubte I, but accor­ding to the rule of thy promiſe
thou wilt receyue me. For ſo is it ſaide in the 2\. cap. of Ioel. Be ye turned
vnto the Lorde your God, becauſe he is gracious and mercifull and mitigating
puniſhment. And in Nahum. 1. The Lord is gratious and a ſtronge holde in time
of trouble, and knoweth [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=44) thoſe that truſt
in him. But becauſe touching this matter many things are ſpoken in an other
place, I now doe paſſe on to the other verſes.

#### 1.6.6. ‘Verſe. 5. Becauſe in death no man remembreth thee, and in hell,
who will geue thankes vnto thee?’

THe third reaſon is brought from the cauſe finall, (as if he ſaid) therfore
delyuer me, to the end I may be a ſetter forwarde, and a witneſſe of thy
doctrine, and that I may ſpread thy worthy praiſe. For in aſmuch as they which
are brought vnto nothing can not worſhip God, it may be eaſily vnderſtode,
that life is needfull, yea and ſuch a lyfe wherein are not euer during
ſorowes, which may hinder the worſhippinge of God. So in an otherPſal. 88.
ver. 11. & 12. Pſalme he ſaith. The deade ſhall not praiſe thee oh Lorde, nor
all they which goe downe into the neathermoſt pitte. And in euery place by
readinge the propheticalldoctrine, we meetewith like prayers which do craue
delyuerance for the glory of God.

#### 1.6.7. ‘Verſe 6. I haue laboured with groning, all the night longe haue I
waſhed my bed, and watered my couch, with teares.’ ‘Verſe. 7. My courage
fainteth for heauines, and is ſore chaunged, while they all trouble me.’

DAuid here with moſt choyſe wordes and moſt graue ſentences both Retoricallye
enlargeth and adorneth the former motion of conuerſion, which moſt vſually is
called contrition or Mortification. For he againe feeleth in himſelfe three
ſignes of true and not fained ſorowe, namely vnſpeakable ſyghes, plentie of
teares, and ſaintnes of courage in the face. As ſaith the Poet. Expletur.
lacrimis egeriturue dolor. For it [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=44) is true, that
with ſyghes and teares the ſorowes of mennes hartes are eaſed. Alſo that is
manifeſt true, the like chaunge or reſolution and faintnes of courage is the
companyon of ingent heauines, ſo as all lyuely vigor be­inge conſumed, the
ſkinne ſcarce cleaueth to the bones. Pauſanias mencioneth in Phocaice that at
Delphos there was an image of Hyppocrates like vnto a pined or conſumed body
wherein the (fleſh being dryed vp and conſumed) the lyneamentes of the benes
being ſo coue­red or ſkinned with a very thinne ſkinne, did euidently appeare
through the ſame. Very neare vnto the ſimili­tude of this image aproche thoſe
perſons, which wraſtle with tryall of obiection, and thinke them ſelues to be
forſaken of God and damned. Let this ſuffice to haue put you in minde of this
verſe. For no affections, ſpeci­ally more vehement for the greatnes may be
diſcribed in the wordes. Like as the example of Timanthus which Plinius
recyteth in his 35. boke and 10\. cap. Timanthus was euen a man of very much
wiſdome. For his hiſtory of Iphigenia, is greatly commended of Orators, who
ſtanding before the aulter readie to pe­riſhe when ſhe had painted all of
ſorowfull geſture, but ſpecially her father in lawe, and ſo had full finiſhed
all ſhow of ſadnes, then did ſhe vncouer her fathers face which worthely ſhe
could not manifeſt.

#### 1.6.8. ‘Verſe. 8. Departe from me all ye that worke wic­kednes, becauſe
the Lord hath heard the voyce of my weping.’ ‘Verſe. 9. The Lorde hath heard
my complainte, the Lord hath receyued my prayer.’ ‘Verſe. 10. Let them be
aſhamed and mightely con­founded all mine Enimies Let them be ſore aſhamed and
confounded quickly.’

NOw recoueringe him ſelfe from out of a vehement and grieuous plonge, whereas
no ſorow may be [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=45) compared, he
begins to render thankes to God for that he hath heard his prayer. For theſe
wordes teſtifie that theſe former ſorowes and ſythes proceede from a minde
praying vnto God, and in time of prayer reſiſtinge the deuill which went about
to diſtroy Dauid, as he had de­ſtroyed Saule. But when as faith like a ſheeld
is appoſed againſt the weapons of the deuill, they are repulſed, be­cauſe
faith taketh hold vpon Gods promiſes and verily beleueth, that we are cared
for, are heard, and preſerued of God. and affirmeth that we are gouerned by
the hand of the Sonne of God preſent with vs, like as by the hand of God.
Moyſes was led through the ſtanding waters, as ſaith Eſayas. cap. 63. And as
the former verſes di­ſcribe mortification: So the laſt verſes largely expreſſe
Viuification. that is, Conſolation which is wrought by faith. For in euery
ſound conuertion of man, God mor­tifyeth and reuyueth, he leadeth downe vnto
hell, and bringeth back from thence, as the example of Ionas de­clareth.Ionas.
1. & 2 For although Ionas was ſwalowed in the de­uouring belly of the whale,
he came yet to that conſide­ration, as, that he was forſaken of God, and caſt
out of his fauour: notwithſtanding he was within three dayes by a wonderfull
meanes delyuered, and ſafe recouered from periſhing. This is the ſcholehouſe
of Gods power, and the wraſtling place wherein the holyones are exer­ciſed,
taſting both death and lyfe, hell, and heauenly pa­radiſe. But theſe ſo greate
matters are not learned with a vaine knowledge or inſight, but with true and
feruent conflictes of the conſcience ſtruglinge with the wrath of God, with
the lawe, ſinne, death, the deuill, and hell. But (as the Apoſtle ſaith)
Thankes be vnto God which geueth vs victory againſt our enimies, through Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord. [...]. Cor. 15. For although bitter cogitations come into the
mindes of men, wherewith the deuill turneth out and plucketh away many from
God: yet as the Prophet [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=45) ſaith He that is
in vs, is ſtronger then he that raigneth in the worlde with force and fraude.
So that we may well ſay with S. Iohn 1. &c. This is the victorie that
ouerco­meth the worlde, euen our faith. And ſo verily with the Apoſtle. S.
Paule. Rom. 8. If God be with vs who ſhall be againſt vs?

### 1.7. The ſeauenth Pſalme.  
Domine Deus meus &c.

#### 1.7.1. THE TITLE.

The ignorance of Dauid, which he ſonge vnto the Lorde, becauſe of the wordes
ſpoken againſt him, by that Aethiopian, the ſonne of Ieminus.

HE calleth it Ignorance, which the Graecians call A­pologian or defence of
innocencie, and truth. This Pſalme is a learned and graue defence oppoſed
againſt the ſlaunders of Semeus. For it is farre vnlike, that Dauid would
ſtaine himſelfe with ſuch wicked miſchiefes, as are laide againſt him by
Semeus, which he neuer once conceyued in his minde. But with what wordes
Semeus the Sonne of Ie­minus went about to blemiſh or deface Dauid being in
ex­ile, the hiſtorie teacheth in the 16\. cap. of the ſecond booke of Kinges.
So ſpake Semeus, when he reproched the kinge. Come forth, Come forth thou
blood ſucker and childe of Beliall. The Lord hath reuenged vpon thee all the
blood of the houſe of Saule, becauſe thou haſt inuaded the kingdome. &c.
Therefore it was a two foulde ſlaunder which Semeus ſpake. The one that Dauid
was the cauſer of the deſtruction of Saules familie. The o­ther, that he
poſſeſſed by tyrannical and ſeditious meanes the [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=46) kingdome taken
from Saule. But both theſe were notorius falſe, and neede not longe
refutation. For Dauid had ſuffered manie and greate iniuries done by Saule,
who gaue his wife vnto an other man, and violently droue both him and his
fa­ther and mother out of his contrie, and for his ſake ſlewe the Prieſtes and
with a greate hoſte purſued him, to take awaye his life from him. But although
Dauid wanted none occaſi­ons, to deſtroye Saule, and might iuſt lie haue
diſpatched both the enſnarer and his enimie: yet he ſpared him, leaſt he
ſhould amongeſt the people of God be author of the example to put kinges to
death, which thinge others afterwardes through ambition would haue imitated.
And as touchinge the other ſclaunder, it was manifeſtly knowne amongeſt all
men, that Dauid poſſeſſed not his kingdom by ſiniſter menes or ſleights. but
that he was called by God, beyond all hope of mans coun­ſell and deuiſes vnto
the kingdome of Gods people. But ſo great is the impudencie of the deuil and
of all ſclaunderouſe per­ſons, that they doubt not to call, Light darknes, and
darknes light. Wherefore there is no remedie againſt the ſtinging of a
Sycophant, but that God himſelfe with horrible plagues doth ſtopp and ſh
[...]te vp the mouthes of ſclaunderers▪ And to the end that God would
adminiſter this remedie vnto the moſt vyle diſeaſes, we muſt not onelie vſe an
Apo­logy which conteyneth a teſtimonie of our innocencie, but much more muſt
we be earneſt in prayer, wherein we may craue, that God for his glory ſake and
doctrine, would vtterly vanquiſh and diſtroy ſuch Sycophantes.

#### 1.7.2. THE ARGVMENT

ALthough the title declare the argument: yet before we interpret the pſalm we
muſt ſpeak of the apt applying thereof, & we muſt con­fute certaine
obiections. The enimies of the Goſpell at this day accuſe vs moſt cruellie and
lay [[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=46) in
our diſh the moſt deteſtable crimes of all others, as of mouing ſeditions in
the Church and hereſies, and call vs both ſciſmatikes and heretikes, neither
may it be expreſſed with wordes how much the ho­neſt perſon is vexed with
theſe railinges who will not be ſeene as the plague and diſtruction of
man­kind. Yet it were more eaſie for many to ſuffer moſt bitter tormentes of
bodie, and to be bereaued of life, then to heare theſe ſclaunderous ſpeeches.
But leaſt that theſe rumors ſhould breake our hartes or diſmay vs from
profeſſion of the truthe, we muſt hould ſtill true and not ſophiſticall
cauſes, becauſe it is needfull that wee differ in our doinges from the
defenders of vniuſt crueltie and erroures. Let vs alſo (againſt theſe
ſclaunders) recyte this pſalme, which containeth a two foulde anſwere there
vnto. Namlie vtter denyall and prayer for deliuerance. But here the ruder
ſorte diſpute or reaſon touchinge patient ſuffering and alledge the ſaying of
Chriſt. If any man ſmite thee vpon the right cheeke, turne thou alſo the left
vnto him. This (ſaie they) doth not Dauid obſerue, becauſe he ſpeketh not in
ſilence, but reaſoneth the matter with Semeus the ſclaunderer. This
cauillation will I refute, becauſe of the ruder ſorte: both vertues is
preſcribed, confeſsion and patience. For as it is nede full to defend a
truecauſe, ſpeciallie of doctrine, by a cleare confeſsion, ſo therewith ought
we to be pre­pared in minde to ſuffer violence, if the Magiſtrate be either
negligent or cruell in doing his office. Neither in deede is it patience to be
ſilent, and as it were to confirme the aduerſaries falſe and wrongful cauſe
with keeping ſilence. Nay rather confeſsion of doctrine ought to be
perſpicuous or cleare, as it is written. He that confeſſeth me before men. &c.
So Da­uid performeth them both. Hee affirmeth that he is [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=47) not guiltie of
the crimes which were obiected by Se­meus, and ſuffereth grieuous reproches,
without de­ſire of reuenge. As in the 2. lib. Reg. cap. 16. it is written. Let
him goe, that he may curſe. &c. For the Lord hath commaunded him to curſe
Dauid. O wonderfull pa­tience which was perſwaded that not by happe, we are
afflicted, but by the knowledge and ſufferance of God. And although
afflictions come of the deuill, or from the crueltie of men, yet this patience
know­eth that they are ſuffered by ſome determination of God, & that there is
preſcribed them theire limites, beyonde the which neither can the malice of
the deuill nor of men rage in crueltie. This example in manie affaires of our
life, it is profitable to folowe. If anie man hurt or hin [...]er thy good
name▪ it is not neceſſarie for thee to keepe ſilence, but thou maieſt
innocentlie excuſe thy ſelf, and refute thine aduerſa­rie. If he geue no place
being refuted, neither the arbitrators or iudges defend thee, as they ought,
Dauid, by his example doth comforte thee, that thou maieſt know why thou muſt
haue patience, and after what maner it pleaſeth God. I doe alſo vnder­ſtand
howe it is by Dauid reaſoned in the 8. verſe thus. Iudge me O Lord, according
to thy righteouſnes. But the application of this ſaying with other ſentences
is eaſie and familier vnto him which vnderſtandeth the boundes of humilitie
and of glorie. Glorie is the teſtimonie of our owne conſcience iudginge
o­thers rightlie, and of other mens iudging vs rightly. Humilitie, is a vertue
wherewith acknowledginge our owne infirmitie, we geue God the Glorie, and in
our vocation lyue obedient with confidence in Gods helpe, and in time of
puniſhment, confeſſe that we are iuſtly puniſhed. Euen as therefore hu­militie
hath commendacion ſo often as we eyther [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=47) haue to doe with
God, with our ſelnes, or with our frendes: So glorie, whereof I ſpake before,
is to be oppoſed as a Gorgon againſt the ſlaunders of our ad­uerſaries. So
Dauid rightly, and without arrogan­cie, declared that hee tooke not the
kingdome and Iuriſdiction vpon him perforce, but was obedient vnto the calling
of God, and that hee exerciſed not priuate deſires in ruling, when as Semeus
obiected, that Dauid for gouernment ſake, both violated the Law, and godlines.
This alſo may be anſwered, that we muſt make a difference betweene the
righteouſ­nes of the perſon, and the righteouſnes of the cauſe. For albeit
that the perſon (before god) is iuſt by faith alone, yet in the reconciled
ones, righteouſneſſe of good conſcience is neceſſarie, both for other cauſes,
and ſpecially for this, that we may therein reſt and ſettle our ſelues as in a
ſafe hauen, when ſurginge ſtormes in the troubleſome ſea appeare: that is, in
time of ſlaunder and reproche, which indeuour not onelie to ſtaine our perſon,
but alſo to blemiſh and contaminate our doctrine. In ſuch a chaunce, moſt true
is that ſaying of Horace: Hic murus ahaeneus eſto, nil nonſcire ſibi, nulla
paleſcere culpa. That is, As bra­ſen wall impregnable ſtande here: (If
guiltleſſe thou) let no blame chaunge thy cheare. But hetherto haue we ſpoken
ſuffi­ciently of the Title and Argu­ment. Now let vs come to the Pſalme.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=48)

#### 1.7.3. ‘Verſe 1. O Lorde my God, in thee haue I truſted ſaue me out of
the handes of all them that perſecute me, and deliuer me.’ ‘Verſe 2. Leaſt as
a Lyon he greedelie catch my ſoule, and deuoure her, and there be none to
deliuer me.’

HE cryeth not out as the tyrant in the Tragedie: I louinge ſolitarines, doe
pe­riſh in despaire: But as forſaken of frendes, and deſtitute of viſible
defen­ces, yet hee craueth helpe of the true God, which made himſelfe knowen
vnto the people of Iſrael, nether once againe ſuffereth he him ſelfe to be
diſmayed from pray­er, as one guiltie by euident tokens, wherewith he was by
Gods will beſet round about. For he knoweth, and by all meanes holdes it for
aſſured, that God alone is his firme and faithfull frend, and moſt ſure
defence in all ca­lamities, according to that ſaying: My Father and Mo­ther
forſooke me, but the Lord tooke me to his tuition. Pſal. 27. verſe 9. With
this example then being admoni­ſhed, let vs learne to flee vnto God, and craue
benefites of him, yea though creatures forſake vs, & ſtriue againſte vs. But
how harde it is for vs to retaine the light of Faith in ſuch force of ſtormes,
and concourſe of calami­ties, experience teacheth vs. All men (ſo long as they
can) ſeeke for viſible helpes and preſeruations. When they deceiue them, many
are broken in mind and receiue no comforte. But let vs (ſith all thinges
humane riſe and fall) haue all our confidence of ſafetie repoſed in God alone:
and let vs crie out with Iob: Yea if he ſhall kil me, I will yet truſt in him,
and he ſhall be my Sauiour. That is, Though I loſe all thinges in this life,
and this ſame cor­porall life alſo, yet I know it is the will of God, that I
ſhould keepe ſtill this Faith, that I ſhould haue care of [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=48) my ſelfe, that I
am receyued into gods fauour, that I am an heire of eternall ſaluation, and in
this faith and hope dee I comfort my ſelfe. I know that calamities are not the
tokens of reiections, neither doe I iudge of the will of God, as of my
miſeries, but as of his promiſes. For al­though I acknowledge my ſelfe to be a
ſinner, and guil­tie in the iudgement of God yet hauing confidence in his
promiſe and mercie, I beleeue that hee will bee my Sauiour.

The ſeconde verſe admoniſheth vs of dangers which are moe and greater then
that they may be comprehen­ded in wordes. The Church alwayes ſo liueth, as
Da­niel ſitting amongſt the Lions. The deuils are alwaies laying ſnares for
vs, and afterwardes oft times deſtroy many. Vngodly perſons alwayes threaten
cruell at­temptes againſt the Church: Againſt ſo great dangers let vs with
great diligence, and prayer vnto Chriſt our preſeruer, more carefully ſeeke
our defence.

#### 1.7.4. ‘Verſe 3 O Lorde my God, if I haue done this, if there be
iniquitie in my handes.’ ‘Verſe 4 If I haue rendered euill vnto him that hath
done me good, If I haue ſpoyled mine enemie without cauſes’ ‘Verſe. 5. Let the
enemie perſecute my ſoule, and lay holde vpon me, and take away my life vpon
earth, & lay mine honour in the duſt.’

ALthough (ſaith hee) by reaſon of other offences, I beare about with me the
manifeſt tokens of guyl­tines, and confeſſe that I am iuſtly puniſhed: yet as
tou­ching the ſlaunder of Semeus, I know my ſelfe to be al­together innocent,
and vnworthie of reproche, and doe conſtantly ſet againſt them the teſtimonie
of a good con­ſcience, neither thinke I to the contrarie, but I ſhoulde both
be accurſed of God and man, if I be ſuch a one, as [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=49) this moſt
impudent Sicophant would haue me accoun­ted to be. For all the whole multitude
of the people of Iſrael wel know, that I haue beene fauourable vnto Saule, and
for a publique peace ſake haue forgeuen pri­uate iniuries, and thereupon haue
taken great ſorrwe without ſimulation, when worde was brought me of the
miſerable death of Saule. But if theſe things be true, which are reported by
Semeus, I wiſh and deſire, yea, I pray vnfaynedly and not diſſemblingly, that
the ene­mies hoaſt which purſueth the charge and ſafecondite of my ſonne, may
not onely take me, and carry me away captiue, with triumphe ouer me: but alſo
take awaye my life from me, and ſpoyle me of all the glorie of thoſe thinges
which I haue done for the welfare of gods peo­ple. For the ſorow which the
loſſe of his glorie brought vnto Dauid, was far ſharper vnto him then death it
ſelf. So Athanaſius when he was often ſlaundered with gréeuous crimes, ſo
acquyted himſelfe, that he not onely perſwaded the Iudges, but alſo ſhewed
them and decla­red his innocencie, as it were before their eyes. For in déede
ſo many enemies as Athanaſius had, and ſo migh­tie, coulde not proue any one
diſhoneſt poynte by him. For as the froath of the ſea daſhing vpon the rockes,
doth againe fall of, when the Rocks themſelues ſtande im­moueable: So is
trueth the vanquiſher of all calami­ties, and cannot be vtterly oppreſſed.

#### 1.7.5. ‘Verſe 6. Ariſe O Lorde in thine anger, and exalte thy ſelfe
againſt the furies of mine enemies, and reſtore vnto me iudgement which thou
haſt appointed.’ ‘Verſe 7. That the Congregation of the people may flocke
about thee, and for this cauſe aſcende thou on hie.’

HEtherto doth he anſwere Semeus by way of deny­all. Now becauſe prayer is the
ſpeciall defence of [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=49) a godly minde,
in ſo great ſorrowes of this common life. He craueth of God with vnfayned
ſorrow, that he may be defended againſt the furies of his enemies, and to be
reſtored into his kingdome, not for vanitie and pleaſure ſake, but for his
Church ſake. (To whom he knew) his gouernment was acceptable. For in déede ſo
Dauid warred againſt his enemies, as, that boyes and gyrles at home, in the
Church, and in ſchooles, might be perfect in learning, might reade the Law in
Moyſes, and here the Interpreters of the Law and of the promiſes, wherein God
had made himſelfe knowen. Vnto this rue doe few Gouernours bende their
indeuour. Iulius Ceſar warred becauſe he would not be ſpoiled of his dignitie
by the enuyous. Anthonius warred to the ende he might deuoure that which
another had gotten. But in the Church of God, all godly gouernors ought to
foreſée that good ende and purpoſe, how the pollicies therof ought to be car
[...] for, defended, and preſerued, that in them the knowledge of God might be
aduaunced. For in déede to that ende are men created vnto ſocietie, that in
this their often aſſ [...]n [...]blie the knowledge of God might ſhine ſoorth
amongſt them, and that God might be honoured and called vpon, and that ſome by
others might be edify­ed in that doctrine which plainly openeth the way vnto
eternall ioy and fellowſhip with god. Vnto this ſpeciall work, namely (the
aduauncement of the doctrine) ought all pollicies and degrees of life to
ſerue. For as a Lan­thorne without a light in it, ſerueth to no vſe in
darknes: So Cities (wherein the knowledge of God, and doctrine of his
benefites is extincte) are vnprofitable monumēts. Neither in déede are theſe
wordes to be ſo read by the way, as if that the Sinagogue of the people ſhould
flock about a man. But let che conflict in Dauid, euen with his owne
affections, be conſidered of vs. For not with­out great motion of the minde
was this finall cauſe of [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=50) his reduction or
recouerie of Gods fauour, pronounced. He prayeth that he may be reduced, and
is therwith pre­pared vnto obedience. He is willing to obey gods will, yea
though he be not reduced, and yet doeth he not caſt a­way faith touching
ſorgeuenes of his ſinnes, neither pre­ſcribeth he any maner of time. Yea, he
wiſheth not to be reduced againe, if he might deliuer his ſonne from eter­nall
damnation: rather then ſo reduced, that thereby he ſhould for euer and for
euer deſtroy his ſon, and a great multitude of his Citizens.

This maner of deliuerance grieued Dauid more then the loſſe of his kingdome.
But he knew that when God brought him back again, he muſt obay his wil, and
that through zeale towardes God and his Church, our affections muſt needes be
vanquiſhed. So Religion in vs, and pietie towardes God and his Church,
vanquy­ſheth other motions of the minde. But where he ſpea­keth (of the
aſcending of God on high) that may be vnder­ſtoode by relation, and not
abſolutely ſo in deede. For then is God exalted in our ſight, when he is
knowen of vs aright, called vpon, and worſhipped according to his worde
deliuered, and when we reiect all falſe opinions, and worſhippinges which are
wide from the rule of his deuine Inſtitution. Wherefore, ſeeing that ſtudies
af­ter the heauenly doctrine, in tune of tumultes wax more fainte, and the due
honour of God might ſo be hindered, Dauid, being very carefull for theſe
ſpeciall benefites, with a godly zeal craued reſtitution into his kingdome,
not to ſeek after vanitie and pleaſures, but that he might againe gather
together and reſtore the Schooles & Chur­ches ſcattered and defaced with ciuil
warres. So Atha­nafius being dryuen into exile by the faction of thoſe
Ar­rians, prayed to God to be reſtored into his ſtate againe for the Churches
ſake.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=50)

#### 1.7.6. ‘Verſe 8 The Lorde iudgeth nations. Iudge me [...] [...]h Lorde
according to my righteouſnes, and according to mine Innocencie.’

THe ſentence of nature and of the Law written, is knowen, which forbiddeth him
to geue iudgement, who defendeth the contrarie parte of the controuerſie.1\.
Tim. 1. Wherfore Dauid neither arrogateth vnto himſelfe au­thoritie of iudging
in this controuerſie, neither yet gran­teth he the ſame vnto his enemies, but
he appealeth vn­to the Iudge in whom there is no reſpect of perſons, and which
beholdeth thorowly the deepe ſecretes of mannes heart. But he, in this Court,
alleadgeth the righteouſ­nes, not in deede of the perſon, but of the cauſe,
and ſet­teth againſt thoſe falſe forged ſlaunders, the teſtimonie of a good
Conſcience, as a Gorgon or Shield to terrifie his enemies withall.
Furthermore, many are the cau­ſes which exhort vs to defend the integritie of
our Con­ſcience.

The firſt, is the commaundement of God, 1\. Tim. 1 Fight the good fight,
keeping faith and good Conſcience. Alſo, The ende of the commandement is loue
from a pure hart, and good conſcience, and faith vnfayned. Let theſe ſayinges
be fixed in our mindes, and guide vs, that we doe not a­ny thing againſt
conſcience. (That is) that we witting­ly breake not the law of God.

The ſecond cauſe is, that faith may be retayned: for there are two
contradictorie or gainſaying affectes. To doe willingly and wittingly againſt
Gods commaunde­mentes: and to haue a deſire to repent, without which, faith
cannot be. An euil conſcience, therefore, and faith cannot be in the heart
both at once.

The thirde cauſe, That true prayer might be per­fourmed of vs. For he that
hath ſtill an euill purpoſe of minde, calleth vpon God in vaine: Nay, he
cannot pray [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=51) at all, becauſe
he commeth vnto God without repentāce and faith. Now let a man conſider what
a wretched­nes it is to liue careleſſe of God, (that is) not to bee able to
craue and hope for the help of God, but to be forſaken of God, and enthralled
of the deuill.

The fourth cauſe is, Confidence in the helpe and protection of God. This cauſe
ryſeth of the former cau­ſes. For hee that with a good conſcience endeuoureth
himſelfe, hath euer a good confidence, which is the ſwéete Nurſe of olde age.

The fifth cauſe is, Tranquillitie of minde▪ Tou­ching this cauſe, let vs holde
faſt that moſt ſwéete ſaying of Gre. Nazianzen. No thing ſo much reioyceth vs,
as a pure conſcience, and a good hope.

The ſiſte cauſe is, The mitigation and deliuerance in calamities. For ſurely
ſome help it is, when ſinne and miſchiefes meete not together. For theſe
cauſes and ſuch like, wee muſt endeuour our ſelues that our conſcience in all
actions agree with the worde of God, neither that we doe or allowe of any
thing againſt con­ſcience: And when we retaine ſuch integritie of conſci­ence,
the minde is at quyet, it holdeth faſt faith, and re­mayneth in fauour with
God and man.

#### 1.7.7. ‘Verſe 9 Let the wickednes of ſinners (I pray thee) come to an
ende, and ſaue thou the iuſt, O God, that ſearcheſt heartes and raynes.’
‘Verſe 10 My help commeth of the Lord: which pre­ſerueth them that be true of
heart.’ ‘Verſe 11 God is a iuſt Judge, and a God which is angrie euerie day.’

GOd will be acknowledged and diſcerned from all o­ther natures by certaine
properties, becauſe we can not feele or embrace him in our corporall armes.
And [[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=51) theſe
properties in euery our prayer muſt we thinke vp­on, that we may diſcerne the
true God from all natures and falſe gods. For it is needfull a man know to
whom he ſpeaketh, where god hath here made him ſelfe know­en what maner of God
he is, whether and why he hea­reth vs. In this place Dauid recyteth while hee
is in praying, three notable and cléere properties. Whereof the firſt is
Omnipotencie. For it is onely proper vn­to the Omnipotent nature to looke into
all mens harts, and to diſcerne true ſorrowes from diſſembling ſorows. And
ſeeing this propertie may not be attributed vnto a­ny creature, it muſt needes
be a cleere thing, that wee ought not to make our prayers vnto men that are
dead.

The ſecond propertie in this place recyted, is The Righteouſnes of God, who is
angrie againſt al ſinnes and wickedneſſe which are opp [...]gnant to his law.
Of this propertie we haue ſpoken more in the fifte Pſalme.

The third propertie is The goodnes of God, which helpeth thoſe that are true
of heart. (That is) truely cal­ling vpon him in Spirite and trueth without any
other cauſes incident, So happened it with Adam and Eue after their fall, when
they could not be helped by angels, nor by their own pollicies, neither yet by
any other crea­ture. Then comes God from his ſecrete throane, and receiued
ſinners to his fauor, and geues them life. Let our minde therefore behold this
true God, which made himſelfe knowen by ſending his ſonne, publiſhing wit­nes
of him, by rayſing from death to life, and other mira­cles done. And let our
minde therewith thinke that this is the true Creator and helper, which is
wiſe, which hea­reth vs, and is both true, bountifull, Juſt and ſincere,
pu­niſhing alſo wickednes and ſinnes which are contrarie vnto his
righteouſnes.

#### 1.7.8. ‘Verſe 12. If the wicked wil not be conuerted, he hath [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=52) ſharpned his
Sworde, hee hath bent his Bowe, and prepared the ſame.’ ‘Verſe 13. And he hath
made redy for them, wea­pons of death, and he hath prepared for them whot
burninge arrowes.’

THe godly Reader (without any Expoſitor) well vn­derſtandethHypotepoſis. how
gallant a Deſcription this is, and how fearefull vnto the vngodly multitude.
For hee paynteth out as in a Table, how God is armed with his Sworde,
purpoſely prepared, and with his Bow, not vnbent, but redy bente, whoſe
Arrowes miſſe not the marke, but hit home ſurelie, and caſt downe whatſoeuer
they are leuelled at. Beholding this Similitude, let vs acknowledge the moſt
iuſt wrath of God, & let vs craue with vn ayned repentance for his Sonnes
ſake, that hee would aſſwage the ſame. Vndoubtedly, if wee were not of heartes
as harde as Iron, this heauie ſight would thorowlie moue vs, and would leaue
the prickes of re­pentance in our heartes. But we are too froſen hearted to
thinke vpon ſo great matters: Wherefore let vs crie  [...]ut and ſay with
Hieremie Cap. 2. Turne mee O Lorde, and I ſhall be turned: Correct me O Lorde
in thy iudgement not in thy furie, leaſt I be brought vnto nothing.

Let vs alſo learne the difference of chaſtiſement to­wardes the godly, and of
puniſhment towardes the wic­ked. For of the godly it is ſaide in another
Pſalme: I will viſite their ſinnes with the rod. This Fatherly cha­ſtiſement
is not a token of reiection, but an exerciſe of godlines. And vnto this tryall
of faith may thoſe little verſes of Mantuan be rightly applyed,

Sit licet in Natos facies auſtera parentum,

Aequa tamen ſemper mens eſt, & amica voluntas.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=52)

Though Parentes caſt their countenance ſterne

vpon their children, yet

An equall minde and friendly will

alwayes they vſe moſt fitte.

But of the vngodly ones Amos recyteth a heauye ſentence. All ſinners ſhall die
with the Sworde. (That is) ſhall fall out of preſent puniſhmentes in this
life, vnto eternall tormentes. Which thinges (ſith ſo they be) let vs with
Dauid earneſtly pray for their deſtruction vni­uerſallie. (And for the godly)
Lord reprooue mee not in thy wrath. (That is) cha [...]en vs as a Father, not
with a Sworde, but with a Rodde, which within a little while after is caſt
into the fire.

#### 1.7.9. ‘Verſe 14 Behold, he hath conceaued vnrighteouſnes, and is greate
with ſorrow, and bringeth foorth vanitie.’ ‘Verſe 15 He diggeth a pit and
delueth the ſame, and is fallen into the pit which he made.’ ‘Verſe 16 His
labour ſhall bee turned vpon his owne head, and his iniquitie ſhall rebound
vpon his owne pate.’

HEre are notable deſcriptions of the vanitie of ſuch deuiſes as are put in vre
by the enemies againſte the godly ones, which truely call vpon God. For though
the vngodly bende and practiſe all their counſels to the ſubuerſion of the
Church, yet (ſo much as to the effecte of the purpoſe pertaineth) they bring
foorth vanitie, and fall into the ſame pit which they digged for the godly.

Finally, the [...] miſchieuous practiſes (whereby they endeuour to ſubuert and
deſtroy the godly ones) red [...]ūd vpon their owne pates. The hiſtories of
Senacherib, Iulianus, and others, are knowen, which in middeſt of their race
haue bene ouerthrowen by the hande of God, and could not goe thorow with the
web that they began [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=53) to ſpinne. Vnto
theſe Hiſtories I will annexe an E­pigram of Abſalon, hanging vpon the Dake.

Degener immerito rapuiſti ſceptra parenti

O Iuuenis Patriae peſtis acerba tuae.

Digna tuis ceptis ſed pena ſecuta vagantem

Frondibus Arboreis implicuere comae.

Haſta Ioab maduit forti vibrata lacerto.

Sanguine, tranſfixo pectore tincta tuo.

Has ſcelerum penas pulſo dedit ille parente

I nunc et patrijs inſidiare bonis.

Cauſles haſt thou, O Childe degenerate

and Impe, deſtruction (of thie countreie) dire

Depriued thie Parentes of their roiall ſtate

but (fleeing thou) foundſt guerdone due for hire.

When Oa [...]en bowes thie buſhie haire faſt held

and Ioab in thie blood imbrued his lance

Thie bodie through: For Parentes ſo exilde

goe now and worke thie Countreies hinderance.

#### 1.7.10. ‘verſe 17 I will magnifie thee O Lorde accordinge to thie right
[...]onſneſſe: and I will ſing vnto the name of the moſt high.’

THe laſt verſe is a thankſgeuing for deliuerance. But ſéeing in other places I
haue oftentimes ſpoken of this vertue, I am now more briefe. And I hartely
be­ſéech God, that he would vouchſafe to conſute theſe ſlaū ­ders and
ſicophancies of the enemies of the Goſpell, as he confounded thoſe in the
Deluge, in the burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, in theGen. 19. Exod. 14. & 15.
deſtruction of Aegypt, and in the ſub­uerſion of the Cana­nites.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=53)

### 1.8. The eight Pſalme.  
Domine dominus▪ &c.

#### 1.8.1. THE TITLE

THe Learned ſorte do reaſon what may be ſignified by the worde Githith. Which
if we will folowe the true ſignification, we ſhall finde that this worde
importeth the ſame that Torcular, or a vaine preſſe, doth, But ſeing the
proper ſignificacion thereof litle purporteth the meaning of the pſalm, let vs
be content with the opinion of them, which ſuppoſe the word [...] Githith, to
be borowed of a muſicall inſtrument, re­ſembling ſome ſimilitude of a wine
preſſe. For in ſuch reaſo­ninges or diſputations, this notable ſaying of
Varroncayrbe commended. It is the parte of a Good Gramarian, to be ignorant of
certaine thinges.

#### 1.8.2. THE ARGVMENT.

THere is one proper and principall meaning of the ſcripture, which the common
order of the phraſe or ſpeeche, and ſcope of matters or argument bringeth
forth, neither muſtwe imagine that the ſcripture is like vnto ſofte waxe:
which ſome time repreſenteth the figure of Mars, ſomtime of chaſte Minerua,
Now, Venus, & nowe Cupide. For that ſpeech which hath not one ſimple meaninge,
teacheth no certaine matter: and this reaſon or methode of Interpreting,
(which ſeperateth out the Oracles of God, into diuers meaninges) weakeneth the
autho­ritie of the ſcripture. Which thinges ſithe ſo they be, we will not
applie this pſalme vnto our creation and to the knowledge of God, vvhich we
gather by the [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=54) workmanſhip or
creation of the vvorlde: but vve will follovve the right courſe and propheſies
of the Sonne of God, vvho in the 21. of Mat. interpre­teth this Pſalme as
touching his kingdome. Of the ſame effecte or meaning is the Aucthor of the
epiſtle to the Hebrues. 2. cap. Therefore is this 8. pſalme a prophecie of the
kingdome of Chriſt gathering vn­to him an euerlaſtinge Church, out of all
mankinde by the miniſtrie of the Goſpell, and delyuering her from the tirannie
of the deuill, and from eternall death, and ſanctifyinge her vvith his holie
ſpirite. Finallie raiſing the ſame from death vnto the glorie and life
euerlaſting. But as the beſt monies are not eſteemed by theire greatnes or
quantitie but by theire maſſines and weight: So this pſalm in a mer­uelouſe
breuitie conteyneth manie notable places. As in reſpect of the worde of God,
of the publiſhing thereof, of the ſending of the Sonne of God into the worlde,
of the calling of the Gentiles, of the efficacy of the Goſpel, of the paſsion
and reſurrection of Chriſt, of the glorie of Chriſt, and of the eternall
Church. Concer­ning theſe ſo greate matters, I wil ſpeake, not ſo much as I
ought by dutie, but ſo much as I vnderſtand, and ſhalbe able to do.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=54)

#### 1.8.3. ‘Verſe. 1. OH Lord which art our Lord, Howe meruelous is thy name
ouer all the earth: which haſt ſet thy Glorie aboue the Heauens.’

THe beginning is taken from an Ad­miration. I ſaith he, as aſtonyſhed, do much
muſe, thinking of the vn­ſpeakable. Fatherly loue of God to mankind, which
thinge he would not for euer haue hidden in an vnknowne light, vnto all
exeatures. But com­mingeforth of his Heauenly throne, made him ſelfe knowne
not onely by making all thinges of nothinge, but by ſending his Sonne,
beſtowing vpon mankinde his Goſpell, by which the holy Ghoſt is made
effectuall, and regenerateth many from amongeſt the Jewes and Gentiles, vnto
life euerlaſting. For the worde (Name) here ſignifieth, the knowledge or
acknowledgment, and the worſhippe and inuocation vpon the name of God. For by
right who would not maruel that by the diſper­ſed voyce of the Goſpell the
kingdome of God ſhoulde be begonne in many men, and that the kingdome of
Sa­than horribly raiging in mankinde, ſhould be vtterly deſtroyed? Certaine I
am more moued with conſidera­tion of this wonderfull worke, then with that
ſame cre­ation of all thinges. For thinke ye well, what a matter it is, when
Ethnickes or Heathen people polluted with worſhipping Idolles, with ſacrifice
of mans fleſhe, yea with vile confuſion of luſtes and other furies, are called
vnto the acknowledgment and worſhipping of God. But becauſe, as touching the
calling of the Gentiles. I do ſeeme to ſpeake ſufficient largely in the 11.
pſalme. I come now to the verſe followinge.

#### 1.8.4. ‘Verſe. 2. Out of the mouth of infantes and ſucklinges [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=55) haſt thou
faſtened thy ſtrength, hy reaſon of thine enimies, that thou mayeſt ouercome
the enimy and the auenger.’

WHat ſeemeth more abſurde, then that a fewe feeble perſons furniſhed with no
power, as it were wanderers, ſome running one way ſome an other throughout the
whole worlde, ſhould eſtabliſh mutation of religion, and ſhould promis men
eternall benefittes, when as themſelues are in greateſt miſeries diſtreſſed?
This obiection touching the abſurditie and difficulty of ſo greate prouidence,
doth our preſent pſalme beforehand deale with: commaunding that the Apoſtles
and other doctors do folowe theire captaine Chriſt, and ſurely truſt that this
Lord will encline the peoples mindes, to en­large the Goſpell, and that he
will bridle the crueltie of tyrantes. God (ſaith this pſalme) ſtirreth vp baſe
and feeble perſons, to preach the Goſpell, yea though tyrants withſtand the
ſame and great rulers of the worlde. In this ſaying there is ſet down a double
conſolation. For firſt we are admoniſhed, that being moued with the
im­becillitie of theſe teachers, we do not contempne the goſ­pell, nay leſt
our owne weaknes moue vs to forſake the miniſtery of the Goſpell. Againe, here
is helpe promiſed. When it is ſaid, That God maketh perfect his praiſe. For
God helpeth theſe teachers, as it is ſaid in the▪ 51\. cap. of Eſay. I haue
put my worde in thy mouth, and the ſhadowe of my handes ſhall protect thee,
that I may plant the heauens. &c. Great are theſe premiſes which far exceede
all hu­man deuiſes and all the ſtrengthes of men. Therfore are they deryded
beyonde meaſure of the vngodlye wyſe wordlinges. But let vs in the Church of
God knowe that this true conſolation of neceſſitie ought to be incul­cate into
euerie one of vs, that our mindes might be confirmed in priuate and publique
lyfe againſt hazardes or daungers in profeſſing of the Goſpell.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=55)And
although the importance of thinges which this verſe conteyneth can not be
conceyued, yet notwithſtan­ding let vs diligently conſider the efficacy of the
wordes. For when he ſaith (Out of the mouth) he diſcerneth the principall
Cauſe from the inſtrumentall cauſe, as if he ſaide, Chriſt is of power able
and effectuall by the mi­niſterie of the Goſpell. The miniſters are onely,
Earthen veſſels wherein is caried about great treaſure, that it may be the
power of God, and not oures 2\. Cor. 4. For hee which planteth is nothing,
neither is he any thing that watereth, but it is God which geueth the
encreaſe. 1\. Cor. 3. And Chriſt ſaith: It is not you which ſpeake, but the
Spirit of your father which ſpeaketh in you. Mat▪ 10. Hether vnto pertayneth
that moſt pleaſant ſaying of Nazianzen. Nos linguam commodato damus Spiritui
ſancto. That is, We geue our tongue to the holy Ghoſt beſtowed vpon vs.

But after that he hath ſhewed the difference of the cauſe principall and
inſtrumentall, he declareth plainly, not obſcurely, what maner inſtrumentes
they be which God vſeth in gathering of his Church together. God hath choſen
(ſaith Ludouicus Viues in his 2. booke of Chriſtian doctrine) vnto ſo great
and wonderfull work the Apoſtles, priuate men, baſe, feeble, vnſkilfull, and
In­fantes, then whom none could ſéeme to be leſſe fitte for the purpoſe. But
he choſe the weakelinges of the worlde (as S. Paule ſaith) to confound the
mightie ones. 1\. Cor. 1. It is the pointe of a moſt ſkilfull and moſt expert
Artifi­cer, to worke that in a bad and ſimple inſtrument, which another man
can ſcarcely doe in a moſt apte and moſt likely for the purpoſe. Like as men
ſay Apelles with a cole taken out of the fire, did ſo liuely paint out him, of
whom he was bidden to Ptholomeus his dinner, that all men there acknowledged
the ſame gueſtesbidder e­uen at the firſt ſhadowing. But it is not to be
maruei­led, that God perfourmeth what pleaſeth him, in likelye [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=56) and fitte
inſtrumentes, who needeth none inſtruments at all, whatſoeuer he purpoſeth to
make. Therefore ſent he a very few vnto very many, the rude to the ſkilful, he
ſent children vnto moſt exquiſite and moſt eloquent per­ſons, he ſent the
ſimple to the ſubtile ones, the vnarmed to the armed, the weaklinges to the
warriors, and the pore he ſent to the rule and domination ouer the people of
Rome. For it was conuenient that at the beginning ſuch a lowly and baſe ſtate
ſhould be in the founders of this building, leaſt they ſhould attribute any
thing vnto humane ſtrength and cunninge, or repoſe any truſt or confidence in
them, but vtterly diſtruſting their own in­firmities, ſhould depend wholie
vpon the helpe and ſaue­garde of God. Both leaſt any man might attribute any
thing of thoſe thinges which were wrought, vnto mans power: and alſo, leaſt
that the ſame Apoſtles might con­temne or deſpiſe any humilitie or baſe eſtate
of others, being mindful of their owne. Thus farre Viues.

But as touching that which I haue ſpoken of the Apoſtles, the ſame may in like
maner be ſaide of all tea­chers in the Church, For ſo Paule cryeth out: For
theſe thinges who is fitte or meeter? Namelie, to expound the do­ctrine, to
iudge and decyde greateſt controuerſies, and to beare rule in the Church.

But what doe theſe infantes and ſucklinges bringe to paſſe? Are they onely
infeebled with vaine contenti­on, which neither profiteth themſelues nor
other? No (ſaith he) the labors of the godly Miniſters in the church doe not
onely profite men a ſhort time, but the fruytes are euerlaſting of them which
teach, who doe gather vn­to God an eternall church, and are themſelues
enriched with eternall rewardes. This Conſolation, is moſt of­tentimes
repeated, as Paule ſaith 1\. Cor. 15. Your labor ſhall not be fruſtrate in the
Lord. And in the 1\. Rom. The Goſpel is the power of God vnto ſaluation to ſo
many as beleue. [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=56) That thing alſo
is moſt worthy of admiration, that the Apoſtles perſwaded both the learned and
vnlearned of their time, in ſo profound matters, and farre paſſing the vigor
of mans wit, when as Philoſophers could hardly perſwade others in morall
thinges, more hardly in natu­rall thinges, being furniſhed and prepared with
know­ledge, eloquence and vſe. But that the kingdome of God (as Paule
[...]aith) conſiſteth not in wordes, but in power. 1\. Cor. 4. The hiſtory of
moſt worthy memory ſheweth which is recyted of Ruffinus in the 10. booke of
the Ec­cleſiaſticall Hiſtory. A certaine olde man in the Councel of Nicene,
ſmally learned, and of little knowledge, but a conſtant confeſſor of Chriſt,
was not afrayde to encoun­ter with an eloquent and wittie Philoſopher, and
with him to diſpute as touching the veritie of faith. Neither in deede
alleadged he deluſions of ſubtile & craftie ſpéeche, but an euident and plaine
meaning of truth. Heare nie (ſaith he) Philoſopher, There is one God, the
Creator of heauen and earth, and of all thinges as well viſible as inuiſible,
who created all thinges with the efficacie of his worde, and with his holy
Spirite eſtabliſhed the ſame. Therefore this Worde, whome wee call the Sonne
of God, being merciful towardes mankind, which led their life in errors like
vnto bruite beaſtes, was content to be borne of a woman, to be conuerſant
amongeſt men, and for them vouchſafed to die: and he ſhall come agayne to
iudge of all thoſe thinges which haue bene done by euery one in this life.
That th [...]ſe thinges are and ſhalbe thus, for a truth we beleeue, neither
inquire we cur [...]ouſlye vp­on any part. Doe not thou therefore weary thy
ſelfe in vaine with ſearching for reaſons and demonſtrations of thoſe thinges
whoſe protection is faith: or with buſie que­ſtioning by what maner or meanes,
any one of theſe thinges may either ſeeme poſſible to be brought to paſſe, or
not brought to paſſe: But anſwere me demaunding [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=57) thee, beleeueſt
thou theſe thinges? The Philoſopher being thorowly touched to the quick,
ſayde, hee beleeued him, and reioyced to ſee himſelf conquered, profeſſed and
held the ſame opinion in thoſe thinges, as the olde man did, and perſwaded
others that they would be of the ſame minde with him, proteſting ſolemnly that
this was done by Gods prouidence, to the ende he might be conuerted to embrace
the Chriſtian Religion. For ſo long (ſayth he) as by wordes the matter was
handled with me, I an­ſwered againe wordes for wordes, and what ſo was ſpo­ken
with cunning of ſpeech, I laboured to confute. But when for wordes, vertue
proceeded out of the ſpeakers mouth: words could not withſtand vertue, neither
could man withſtand God.

The vniuerſall church is full of hiſtories of ſuch like examples, which
declare that God, when we are weake doth vſe courage and ſtrength for vs.
Omitting there­fore longer recytall of examples, touching the latter part of
the ſecond verſe viz. That thou mayſt deſtroy both the e­nemie, and the
auenger, I wil now ſpeake a few wordes.

We beare about with vs a doctrine hated of the world and we ſeeme not any
thing able therein to doe good, be­cauſe mightie kinges are againſt our
proceedinges, and there are many impedimentes, as pouertie, famine, and feare
of moſt cruel puniſhmentes. Amidſt theſe miſ­chiefes, let vs thinke vpon the
promiſe ſet down in this Pſalme. That thou mayſt deſtroy both the enemie, and
the Auenger. And let vs truſt not onely to finde defence, but alſo felicitie
in gathering the church of God. So did God vnto Abraham promiſe defence,
rewards, and good ſucceſſe, ſaying, I am thy Protector, and thy reward is
great. Gen. 14. and 16. For the enemies of the goſpel are re­ſtrayned, eyther
by ſound conuerſion vnto Chriſt, eyther els by vniuerſall coufuſion, as in
this age ſome be, when they reade Luthers works, not in déede with zeal of
god­lines, [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=57) but to catch
matter, wherein buſilie ſtirring, they beſtow their infamous ſpeeches: but
being vanquyſhed with the euidencie of trueth, they haue yealded vp the
vi­ctory vnto Chriſt, and of very enemies are become moſt vehement and earneſt
defenders of the doctrine of the goſpel. But Iulianus and other Tirantes
vnrecoue­rable, are like little cloudes cleane vaniſhed away by Chriſt,
ſitting at the right hand of his Father. Theſe thinges ſith they ſo be, let vs
euery one of vs more zea­louſly and feruently in his vocation learne and teach
the goſpell, and let vs daylie adioyn our prayers to this end. Let vs call and
crye vnto God by the Mediator our lord Jeſus Chriſt, that he would gouerne,
defende and, pre­ſerue vs, and eyther call back the enemies of the goſpell,
vnto ſincere doctrine, or els vtterlie to confound and de­ſtroy them.

#### 1.8.5. ‘Verſe. 3. Becauſe I ſhall ſee the heauens, the workes of thine
handes, the Moone and the Starres which thou haſt framed.’

IN reading the Prophets, we muſt diligently conſider what ſayinges are ſpoken
touching the accompliſh­ment thereof. Therefore as the next verſe before
ſpeci­fyeth of the originall beginning and preaching of the goſ­pel: by which
the church is congregate: So this verſe de­ſcrybeth the accompliſhment which
ſhal be brought to paſſe in the whole church, when as raiſed from death, ſhe
ſhall poſſeſſe eternall life: The example whereof in déed, the Apoſtles ſaw in
the chiefe head, and in the members therof, when they were beholders of the
reſurrection and aſcention of Chriſt. For therein ſaw they mortalitie quite
aboliſhed, they ſaw a new nature ſhining in the light of heauen, yea, a new
righteouſnes and a new life. So doth Eſay deſcribe the kingdome of Chriſt, in
his 65. [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=58)
Chap. For, ſpeaking of the originall and frée preaching thereof, he ſayth:
Beholde I goe vnto a nation which know me not. And of the fulfilling of this
kingdome hee ſayeth moreouer: Behold, I make a new heauen and a new earth,
cap. eod. Reuel. Ioh. 21.

#### 1.8.6. ‘Verſe 4. What is man, that thou art ſo mindefull of him? Or the
Sonne of man whom thou ſo regardeſt?’ ‘Verſe. 5. Thou haſt made him not much
inferior vn­to God, and with glorie and honor wilt thou crowne him.’

THe fourth and fifte verſes deſcribe the calamitie and delyuerance of Chriſt.
A great and vnſpeakeable mi­ſerie it is which is ſet downe in the 8\. Chap. of
Mathew Foxes haue hoales, and birdes of the ayre haue neſtes, but the Sonne of
man hath not whereon to lay his head. And it is ſayde in the 53\. of Eſay: He
was deſpiſed and abhorred of men, he was ſuch a man as had good experience of
ſorrowes and troubles. But a farre greater miſerie is it to be ſéene forſaking
of God, as it is ſayd in this verſe of Tyrt.

Non Exul curae ducitur eſſe Deo.

The Exile is not thought

Of God, to be cared for ought.

Chriſt féeling this miſerie, ſpake that moſt ſorrowfull ſentence which is
extant in the 22\. Pſalme. My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? As if he
had ſayde, I la­ment not for the rending of my bodie in péeces, or for the
death that. I ſuffer, but for another far greater miſchiefe, that thou
forſakeſt me, becauſe I féele no ioy at my hart, which other holy ones doe
féele, whom thou comforteſt Nay, I féele that thou art horribly angry with the
ſinne. of mankind, by reaſon wherof I am now condemned is [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=58) this death
before thy preſence, I ſay before thee. It were no bitter torment vnto me to
be cruelly handled by the iudgement of the world. But to feele thy diſpleaſure
is a heauie caſe.

And although it is true, and the church hath always ſo taught, that the nature
deuine neither departed from the body nor from the ſoule of Chriſt, no not
after death. Yet the nature diuine vnited to the bodie and the ſoule (by a
wonderfull and vnſpeakeable meanes) ceaſed: So as nature of man in him might
both ſuf­fer and die, Like as Ireneus ſaith: (That is) He did not put forth
all his ſtrength, but obeyed vnto his eternall Father in this humilitie.

This ſecrete wiſdome ſhall be learned of vs in the life euerlaſting. Now (as
it is delyuered vs in the word) we muſt embrace it by fayth, neyther can it be
compre­hended in mans cogitation, or expreſſed in wordes. But as the Sonne of
God before the glory of the future Sab­both, reſted in death, and in the
graue: So the whole Church hath her beginning from the like reſt or
ſurcea­ſing, that is, from death: Wherein albeit we ſéeme to be forſaken, yet
we ſhall aſſuredly bee rayſed agayne from death vnto eternal life: Wherein we
ſhall ſee God in his preſence, and haue the fruition of his wonderfull great
wiſdome.

Thou wilt crowne him with glorie and honour.

Hetherto hath hee expreſly declared the wonderfull and inſpeakeable humilitie
which Chriſt perfourmed in ſuffering the wrath of God, as if he had beene
polluted with mine, thine, and the ſinnes of all men. Now fol­loweth a
deſcription of the glory of Chriſt in his reſur­rection and aſcention. This
Lord remayned not in death and in the graue: but being ryſen from death to
lyfe, aſcended vp into heauen, that he might geue giftes vnto thoſe which call
vpon him: Namelye, the holye [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=59) Ghoſt, and life
euerlaſting. But who can expreſſe the greatnes of this glory, whereas vnto
Chriſte God and Man, all power is geuen in heauen and in earth▪ Wher­by in
deede he ouercommeth death, deſtroyeth ſinne, ge­ueth righteouſnes, rayſeth
from death to life, geueth his holy Spirite and life euerlaſting to all
beléeuers. This glorie (Paule in 2. Philip. deſcribing) ſayth: God hath
ex­alted him, and geuen him a name which ſurpaſſeth all names: that in the
name of Ieſus euerie knee ſhall bowe, in heauen, earth, and hell. And all
tongues ſhall confeſſe that Jeſus Chriſt our Lord is in the glorie of his
Father.

#### 1.8.7. ‘Verſe 6. Thou haſt ordeined him aboue the wo [...]kes of thy
handes, all thinges haſt thou laide vnder his feete.’

A Notable Expolition or pulliſhing of the meaning of Chriſtes glorie,
proponinge both doctrine and conſolation. For it teacheth that Chriſt is the
kinge of Kinges and Lord of Lordes, Judge ouer quicke and dead, vanquyſher of
ſinne and death, and the Roſtorer of righteouſnes and life. And the
reſtriction or Limita­tion added by Paule vnto this vniuerſall poynte, is well
knowen as he ſaith 1\. Cor. 15. Hee hath made all thinges ſubiect vnder his
feete. And where he ſaith he hath made all thinges ſubiect vnder his féete, no
doubt beſides him, who hath made all thinges obedyent vnto him.

Moreouer, he comforteth vs and byddeth vs by faith to craue and looke for
helpe of Chriſt, who not onely wit but alſo can helpe thoſe that flée vnto
him, for as much as he hath all thinges in his power. Whether therefore,
feares within vs, or fright without vexe vs, let vs alwayes depende of this
Lord, and let vs repoſe all our hope of ſaluation in him, which hope truely
ſhall not diſapoynté them that ſo truſt in him.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=59)

#### 1.8.8. ‘Verſe. 7. All Sheepe and Oxen, yea the beaſtes of the field,
Birdes of the aire, and Fiſh of the Sea, which walk in the pathes of the Sea.’

THat which a litle before hee ſpake vniuerſally, now doth he amplifie by
partes. For euen as in Adams fal we loſt the Lord ouer all liuing Creatures:
So in Chriſt we receiue our loſt inheritance, for we are par­takers of all the
benefites of Chriſt. This place alſo teacheth, that good giftes corporall are
to be craued by vs of Chriſt, in as much as all thinges are in his power.
Finally, he confirmeth chriſtian liberty in vſe of meates, For as Paule 1.
Cor. 10. out of that ſaying in 24\. pſalme. (The Earth is the Lordes, and the
fulnes thereof) learnedly groundeth this ſentence, viz. Whatſoeuer is ſolde in
the Shambles, that eate yee, queſtioning nothing for Conſcience ſake. So we
may apply the ſame conſequence out of theſe verſes.

There is mentioned a certaine Hiſtorie worthy of memorye in Lib, 1. of the
hiſtories Tripartite, and 10\. Cap. Of Spiridion a Biſhoppe of Cyprus, vnto
whom when a Gueſt came vpon a faſting day, and that accu­ſtomed prouiſion of
meate could not ſuch a day be vpon a ſodayne made, he commaunded the
fleſhmeate which he had in his houſe dreſſed, to be ſet vpon the table. The
Gueſt ſeeing this, ſayde: I will not this day eate any of this meate, for I am
a Chriſtian. Then ſayde Spiri­dion, And euen for this cauſe it is meete that
thou eate, becauſe thou art a Chriſtian. For euery Creature of God is good,
and not to be reiected, which with thankeſ­geuing is receyued. The Gueſte
yealded to his pur­poſe, and gaue God thankes, conſidering vpon the liber­tie
geuen vs from our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, by meanes whereof we are not onely freed
from the Lawes or Li­mittes of theſe meates, but much more from other farre
[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=60) greeuous
bondes, and faſtened the Law vnto his per­ſecution, becauſe he would not
condemne vs.

#### 1.8.9. ‘Verſe. 8. O Lorde which art our Lord, how maruei­lous is thy name
ouer all the earth.’

THis laſt verſe is a repetition of the firſt, putting vs in minde that the
proper worſhipping of God in his Church, is Confeſſion of our ſinnes,
Thankeſgeuing [...] of his benefites, and the preaching of the goſpell,
wherein the glorye of God, and of his Son our Lorde Jeſus Chriſt, is
aduaunced, and the life euerlaſting illumina­ted in many perſons.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=60)

### 1.9. ❧ The ix. Pſalme.  
Exaltabo te Domine. &c.

#### 1.9.1. THE TITLE.

A Great obſcuritie or darckneſſe is there in the Titles of the Pſalmes.
Wherefore, if we cannot in all pla­ces touch the truth, let vs yet be content
with that which abhorreth not from the trueth. I knowe that certaine
Interpreters applie the worde Almuth, vnto that phraſe which they commonlie
call Baſsium, as in my Grammer explication is ſet downe of the fifte Pſalme.
But becauſe it is the moſt bolde and conſtant way, (as the Greci­ans ſay) I
will enter here the beaten way, and I will vn­derſtande Almuth Laben to bee
ſignified of the Church, which is a beautifull and floriſhing youth, and yet
in ſecrete maner, (That is) not in vtter apparance to the eies of the
vn­godlie, who iudge this Congregation to be a companie of olde wiues, telling
tales at their diſtaffe.

#### 1.9.2. THE ARGVMENT.

THe ſtate or condition of this pſalme, is to ſhew foorth the vniuerſall
woorkes of God, perſecution and deliuerance of his Church, and preſeruation of
the bodie thereof, yea, although in ſome parte ſhe be cruellie dealte with:
and alſo either the Conuerſion, or els the Subuerſi­on of the enemies of the
goſpell. All wiſe men mar­uell, why the Church is in this life ſubiecte vnto
ſo great miſeries, and they doe reaſon what maner of counſels or
determinations thoſe are which God, [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=61) vſeth in
gouerning his church.

Againe, whether the Church ſhall (amiddes the ruines of kingdomes) haue any
being, or no. Con­cerning theſe ſecrete and marueylous matters, doth this
nienth pſalme admoniſh vs, and teacheth the principall lightes of the Church
how to ſuffer great calamities, by the aſſured prouidence of God, and that
this Church (which publiſheth the worde of true doctrine) ſhall not altogether
be oppreſſed at any time, albeit euerie member thereof be exerciſed with
diuers calamities.

Finallie, it ſheweth that the cruelties of the vn­godly (which now and then
rage againſt the church) are by notable examples puniſhed: Like as Pharao, the
Cananites, Iewes and Aethnickes, whoſe crueltie was great. Let vs alſo
thankfully with Dauid cele­brate or ſolemnize this euerlaſting conſeruation of
Gods Church, and let vs fixe in our minds the wordes of his promiſe, viz. Let
them all truſt in thee, which know thy name, becauſe thou forſakeſt not them
which ſeeke for thee.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=61)

#### 1.9.3. ‘Verſe 1. I Will geue thankes vnto thee O Lord with my whole
heart, I will declare all thy won­derous workes.’ ‘Verſe 2 I will be glad and
reioyce in thee, I will ſinge vnto thy name, O moſt High.’

TO geue thankes with all the hearte, (ſayth D. Luther) is neither to boaſt of
your ſelfe in proſperitie, neyther yet grutch againſt God in aduerſitie: but
in both ſtates to thanke God, with like true, and not famed praiſe. Which
thing to doe, how harde and diffyculte it is, experience ſufficiently ſheweth.
For albeit in proſperitie commonly the wordes of thankeſ­geuing be vſual with
vs: yet in aduerſitie ſeldome times are ſuch ſpeeches heard of vs. The Lord
hath geuen, the Lord hath taken away, bleſſed be the name of the Lorde. Iob.
1. & 3▪ But how feruent Dauides minde is here in ſuch geuing of thankes, the
circumſtance of the wordes declareth e­uidently and not obſcurely. I will geue
thankes (ſayth he) I will declare, I will be glad, I will reioyce, I will
ſinge. Q. D.

Hereby, not only the minde and tongue doe worſhip God, but alſo the other
members doe ſhewe a token of thankefulnes. And although the workes of God
cannot be expounded in wordes, yet in the godly ones there is ſuch a feruencie
and earneſt deſire to worſhip God, that this ſaying of Virgill may be borrowed
well, touchinge them. Poſſunt, quia poſſe videntur. They can, becauſe they
ſeeme to be able.

This may alſo be ſpoken excluſiuely in ſuch maner, that the vniuerſall parte
may be reduced vnto a certaine likenes, and of others the excluſiue ſignifyed
Q. D. as thus, I will declare nothing but thy marueilous workes. [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=62) That is, thy
marueylous gouernment and defence of the Church againſt Tyrantes, fanaticall
reachers, and other their miſchieuous mates. For in déede, a great miracle is
the conſeruation perpetuall of the Church a­midſt ſo great downfals and
deuaſtations of Imperies: As in the Deluge, all other opinions and ſectes were
o­uerwhelmed (Noah and his Familie onely preſerued) and that euen by Gods
manifeſt helpe in déede.

#### 1.9.4. ‘Verſe 3 Becauſe thou haſt turned mine enemies back­wardes, they
ſhall fall, and peariſh from thy face.’

AS if he ſayde, great and weyghtie is the cauſe, why I ſhould with heart and
mouth render thankes vn­to thee. For that thou ſubdueſt and ſubuerteſt the
ene­mies of thy Church, and not onely preſerueſt ſome pri­uately, which know
thee aright, but alſo ſafegardeſt o­ther congregations publiquelie, and the
miniſterie of thy Goſpell, and ſome habitations for exerciſe of godly
ſtu­dyes. But this ſpeech (They ſhall periſh from before thy face) ſeemeth to
be borrowed out of the hiſtorie which is recyted in the 14. of Exodus, viz.
And now approached the Morning watch, and beholde, the Lord looking vpon the
Tentes of the Aegyptians, through the fierie and clowdie Piller, ſlew the
hoaſt of them, and ouerthrew their Chariots, and they were throwen into the
Sea. For the face or behol­ding of the Lord, ſignifyeth a deuine terror, by
meanes whereof, in their amaſed mindes they fled when no man purſued them.

This terror is called a deuine inward feare, whoſe notable example Iouianus
Pontanus recyteth in his  [...]. Booke of Fortune, cap. 15. When Theodoſius
Au­guſtus with a very ſmall power of Soldiars, waged battle with Arbogaſtus,
Francus, and Engenius, a [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=62) ſtorme ſodenly
ſent from heauen, gaue helpe vnto him and his. For, ſuch a vehement whirlinge
winde bet vp­on the backes and faces of his enemies, that their owne weapons
ſent from them, rebounded vyolently vpon themſelues, and their ſtrokes were
quyte aueyded, and enforced them cowardly to retyre back againe. This matter
Claudianus remembring, ſaith.

O nimium dilecte Deo cui fundit ab antris

Aeolus armatas acies, cui militat aether,

Et coniurati veniunt ad claſſica venti.

Oh thou ſo much beloued of God,

whom Aeolus from caues

Whole armed hoaſtes ſendes foorth,

and in diſtreſſe thine honor ſaues.

With whom when Firmament doth fight

in battle force amaine:

The buſtling windes to win thy weale,

their Trumpets ſound againe.

So then Theodoſius ouercame his ſeditious ene­mies in a mightie battle: of
whome the one Arbogaſtus Francas (with his hoaſt ſcattered) procured his owne
death in the ſlight like vnto Saule. The other, being Eu­genius was commaunded
to be ſlaine, and to dye for it according to the Lawes.

#### 1.9.5. ‘Verſe 4. Becauſe thou haſt perfourmed Judgemente vnto me, and my
cauſe: Thou haſt ſitte vpon thy throane, O Iudge of righteouſnes.’

THe conflicts of the Church cannot be ended by men in Princely authoritie, nor
by the pollicie of Magi­ſtrates, as other publique controuerſies touching
Ciuill [[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=63)
affaires are ended and taken vp. For the peruerſe and blaſphemous Papiſtes doe
not yealde, though they bee conuicte by their owne, and by the immoueable
Teſti­monies of Gods worde. Therefore doth God at length confute the wilfull
obſtinacie of the vngodly by ſome no­table example, vtterly confounding all
the whole faction and pack of them, as he confounded Pharao, Ieruſalem after
the preaching of the Apoſtles: the Manycheis, the Arrians and others.

Furthermore, God alone is a iuſt Judge, becauſe hée ſeeth the deepe ſecretes
of mans heart, and is equall in dealing with vs, not vſing partialitie, and
hath ſtrengthe or power againſt the vngodly. But men eyther ſinne in their
iudgemente by error, or els bee partial in iud­ging, eyther els are not able
to execute puniſhment, be­ing deſtitute of ſtrength and power. Wherefore,
Ma­giſtrates muſt be forgeuen offences which are not noto­rious. Like as Iaſon
Phereus ſayth: That he which altogether looketh after righteouſnes, doth in
the meane time committee many vniuſt thinges in ſmal­ler matters, which are to
be forgeuen him that de­fendeth the ſtate of gouernment, and preſerueth the
rule of the common weale, with the iudgemente and lawes thereof. And Euripidis
ſaith vnto this purpoſe: that it is profitable to beare with ignorances of
great men in authoritie.

#### 1.9.6. ‘Verſe 5. Thou haſt rebuked the Nations, thou haſt deſtroyed the
vngodlie: Thou haſt extinguiſhed their name for euer and euer.’

GOd by ſundry and diuers meanes, rebuketh Nati­ons. For, firſt, by preaching
the Lawe and the Goſpell, he accuſeth the ſinne of all mankinde, as Paule
[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=63) ſaith,
Rom. 1. The wrath of God is reuealed from heauen, &c. Moreouer, God reprooueth
ſinne, with horrible and grieuous puniſhmentes publique and priuat, which are
(as it were) the voyce of the Law ſhewing vs of the wrath of God. But (whome
with the voyce of the Miniſterie preaching the Law and the Goſpell, neyther
with ſignes or tokens of their guyltines, ſhe cannot en­cline to acknowledge
their ſinne) them doeth hee nowe and then ſhake with vnſpeakeable terrors,
wherein the wrath of God is ſurely ſet. Aegeſippus in his firſt booke and 8\.
Cha. Decla-reth how Ariſtobulus king of the Jewes, through ſorrow for that he
had ſlayne his own Brother, fell into ſo great a ſicknes, that hee caſte out
blood from himſelfe, which (as yet but a Childe) when the Kinges Page earyinge
away, and vnwittinglye poured vpon the bloud of the kinges brother ſlayne, an
horrible feare came vppon Ariſtobulus, which both increaſed his griefe, and
toke away his life. O tra­gicall example in déede, which declareth that God ſo
ſtri­keth mens heartes with féeling of his wrath, and ſo rebu­keth the vngodly
which are vncurable, that they fall vt­terly into euerlaſting deſtruction. But
ſome man will in this place obiecte, that the name of the vngodly is ne­uer
raſed out of the memory of men, when as in hiſto­ries euery where it is
mentioned of Tyrantes and o­thers which haue alſo ſtayned themſelues with
vngodly and miſchieuous wickednes. I anſwere: It is one thing to ſpeake with
commendation, and another to keepe in memory, which all wiſe men haue hated
and deteſted. The Sodomites were ſo deſtroyed, that not onely their bodyes and
ſoules were eternally damned, but alſo the name and fame of them euermore
hatefull to all men. For who is not horribly afrayde to heare Sodome ſpo­ken
of? So Iudas, Pilatus, Herod, Nero, and Iu­lianus, like Cattes taking their
heeles, haue lefte an c­uill [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=64) ſmell after
them, as I maye ſo ſaye with Ariſto­phanes.

#### 1.9.7. ‘Verſe 6. The ſtrength of the Enemie is fallen away for euer: thou
haſt deſtroyed their Cities, the memory of them is alſo vvith them ſelues
periſhed.’

THe euentes of thinges which are read in Hiſtories, be witneſſes of this
Pſalme. The perſecution of the Church by the Babylonians, ſtinted when Babylon
was taken of Cyrus, and Balthaſar was ſlayne, as Xe­nophon wryteth in his 7.
booke of the education of Cy­rus, Yea, the Citie and whole Empire of Babilon
(as Plinie in his 6. booke and 26\. Chap. witneſſeth) beinge the head of all
the Caldean Nations, became a deſolate place or wildernes, when that in deede
it had before con­teyned in length threeſcore thouſande paces within the
walles, which were in heyght two hundreth feete, and in breadth fiftie feete.
But what ſo as touching the Mo­narchie of Babylon, I haue here ſayde, the ſame
let vs ſuppoſe may alſo bee implyed concerninge other king­domes.

#### 1.9.8. ‘Verſe 7. And the Lord ſhall raigne for euer, prepa­ring his ſeate
for iudgement.’ ‘Verſe 8. And hee ſhall iudge the vvorlde in righte­ouſnes:
And ſhall geue ſentence vpon all Nations vvith e­quitie.’

IN the Pſalmes there is an vſuall conference of mans infirmitie, and of the
power of God. Wherefore, as in the Verſe before going, he ſayde, that the
change of hu­mane ſtate is more redy, then of the moſt ſwifteſt flying flee:
Now he adioyneth the contrarie parte, as an Anti­theſis, The Lorde (ſaith he)
together with his worde [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=64) and Church
cannot by any force be wakened, nor moo­ued out of place. More ſafer is it
therefore, and far bet­ter it is to truſt in God onely, then to put confidence
in a thouſand Princes amongſt mortall men, whoſe mind, or pleaſure, or
fortune, or life may be changed. And what ſo are here ſpoken touching the
iudgementes of God, the ſame may be reſer [...]ed, firſt in déede vnto the
mi­niſterie of the worde, wherein the holy Ghoſt rebuketh the world of ſinne,
of righteouſnes, and of iudgement. After wardes they may be applyed vnto the
final iudge­mente, wherein the ſecretes of all mens heartes ſhall be brought
foorth to light, and the damned ſinners ſhall bee throwen into eternall
tormentes. Of this iudgement (are teſtimonies) naturall knowledges, which
witneſſe that there is a God, and what maner of God, and that he will iudge
the worlde. For in vayne had God made a difference betwéene honeſt, and filthy
cogitations in mēs mindes, were it not but that afterwardes ſollowed a
puniſhment of the ſame difference confuſed.

Moreouer, impoſſible it is, (ſeeing there is a God) that there ſhould be no
prouidence, and no difference be­tweene the wicked, and the godly. The wicked
floriſh here, the good are oppreſſed: Ergo, Needefull it is that there doe
another life remayne, wherein the difference ſhall be. For, in ſo much as God
declared that he had care ouer Abel, Ionathas, Eſaias, and Ieremias before
their death, if he afterwards did neglect them, that ſhould not in déede
ſtande with prouidence and righteouſneſſe. It is manyfeſt therefore, that they
which deny there re­mayneth any other iudgement after death, doe derogate from
God both prouidence and righteouſnes, touching a great parte of mankinde, yea,
euen of them which here excell in righteouſnes. For, if God both now neglecte
his ſeruantes, and afterwards no immortalitie remayn, ſurely I ſcarcely
vnderſtande, how eyther prouidence or [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=65) righteouſnes
might be attributed vnto God. But theſe thinges are in another place, more
largely declared at full.

#### 1.9.9. ‘Verſe 9 And the Lorde ſhall deliuer the oppreſſed: Yea, in time
conuenient will hee deliuer, and in Tribu­lation.’ ‘Verſe 10. And let all that
knowe thy name, put their truſt in thee: Becauſe thou forſakeſt not them that
ſeek thee, Oh Lorde.’

THis moſt ſweete promiſe and conſolation let vs of­tentimes conſider vpon, and
let vs know that it is not geuen vs in vayne. God aſſirmeth that he wil ne­uer
forſake his Church, which truely acknowledgeth, in­uocateth, and worſhippeth
him. He alſo ſheweth what maner of Congregation the true Church is, Namelye, a
poore and feeble congregation, and which truſteth in the name of the Lorde (as
Soph [...]nias in his 3\. Chap. ſaith) Neyther in deede doth this Pſalme
vainly interpoſe the clauſe of helpe and deliuerance, vnto this promiſe, viz.
(in times conuenyent) but with great prouidence ſpeaketh to this purpoſe. It
lyeth not in vs to preſcribe God a meane and time, but theſe are altogether to
be commen­ded vnto his Prouidence, becauſe God (after another maner, and at
other time delyuereth, then eyther we in this our imperfection doe thinke or
wiſh for. Of this rule there is extant a notable example in the hiſtorie of
Iudith. Cap. 8. When Iudith had knowledge that the Prieſt had appointed God
the ſpace of fiue dayes, (She chy­ding the Prieſt) ſaide, Who be you that thus
tempte God? This ſpeech prouoketh more the wrath of God, you haue ſet God a
time to helpe vs, being ignorant both of meanes and time to helpe our ſelues,
therefore let vs haue God before our eyes, and of him craue acceptable euent
in ſilence and hope. [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=65) And that I may
let paſſe other examples, which declare that God is both preſent with his
Church, and doth vn­fayuedly heare the ſighinges and prayers of the godlye
ones. Yea certainly, euen in our tune, God preſerued in ſafetie the noble
Prince Iohn Fridericke, Dutie ofAn. 1534. Sarony, both in his warres and in
his captiuitie, and alſo afterwardes reſtored him to liue proſperouſlye with
his wife and children.

#### 1.9.10. ‘Verſe 10. Sing vnto the Lord which dwelleth in Sion, Shew foorth
his louing kindneſſes vnto the Nations.’

HE clearely affirmeth, that there is the Churche and Houſe of God, and there
doth God dwel, where the promiſe of grace, and life euerlaſting is preached,
which God hath reuealed peculyarlye: For the Ethnickes doe know the Law after
a ſorte, but for this are they not the children of God. But that congregation
is the Church of God, wherein ſoundeth the voyce of the Goſpell, as I haue
often ſayde els where. But after we haue lear­ned which is the true Church,
let vs know the comman­dement of God is, with minde, will, prayer, and
confeſſi­on, we adioyne our ſelues vnto that Congregation, whereſoeuer it be.
Which when we doe, we are then the children of God, ſociates of the true
Church, and cal­lers vpon God in confidence of his Sonne our Mediator, we are
vnfaynedly heard, gouerned, and preſerued of God. With this doctrine touching
the Church we be­ing confirmed, doe ſeeke refuge in the ſame Tabernacle of
God, as the Pſalme witneſſeth in another place, and (as it were) haue hid vs
by the Aul [...]ar. Let vs knowe alſo there is diuers calamities ſet before
our eyes, but in theſe, let vs craue and looke for helpe from God. For (that
the Church is burthened with great calamities) by the verſe following it may
be vnderſtoode, where it is [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=66) ſayde, that god
wil haus an account made him touching the blood of the godly ones.

#### 1.9.11. ‘Verſe 12. Becauſe he vvill haue an account of theire bloud, Hee
hath remembred it, and forgetteth not the cry­inge of the poore.’

HYtherto hath he recyted doctrine of the iudgemente of God, and concerning his
church, and what ma­ner a one it is: Now makes he mention of the perſecu­tion
of the holy ones, which is a Teſtimony of the future iudgement. For,
impoſſible it is that God will then neglecte thoſe, whom he before ſhewed
himſelfe carefull of, by notable teſtimonies: As that Iohn Baptiſte and Paule
did pleaſe God, manifeſt teſtimonies doe ſhew. Needeful is it therfore, that
there follow another iudge­ment, wherein God will make a difference betweene
Iohn Baptiſt and Herode, betweene Paule and Nero. With this conſideration of
the death of the holy ones, let vs fully confirme our ſelues touching the
exaltation in the life to come, and let vs aſſure our ſelues that the god­ly
ones are not created for theſe miſeries onely. For, although (when as the
Sonne of God ſhal againe open­ly ſhew himſelfe vnto mankinde,) the vndoubted
and open puniſhments of all the vngodly ſhall ſhall be ſeene in their effecte:
Yet notwithſtanding, euen in this life, are their examples ſet before all men.
Herode, who put Iohn Baptiſt to death, not onely receiued a great o­uerthrowe
by the hoaſt of Areta, king of the Arabians, but alſo was carryed away captiue
into perpetuall ex­ilement vnto Lyons in Frannce. This miſery happe­ned vnto
him almoſt ten yeares after he had beheaded Iohn Baptiſt. So Herode Agrippa
(as S. Luke tel­leth in 12. chap. Actes) After very great griefes in his
inwarde partes, dying the fitte day, was worthely puni­ſhed [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=66) for his
crueltie wherewith hee raged againſte the firſt Church in Chriſtes time. But
it were long to re­kon vp al examples, which declare that God wil haue
ac­count of the bloud of the godly ones, yea euen in thisPſalme. 116 verſe.
15. life, and that Precious in the ſight of the Lord is the death of his
Saintes. Vnto this hiſtorie let vs a [...]ex the para­ble of the ſ [...]ow
Iudge, and of the Widow, Luke. 18. Wil not God be aduenged for his choſens
ſake, which crie vnto him night and day, and will he be patient in their
miſeries? No, I ſay vnto you, he will ſpeedelie be reucnged on their behalfe.

#### 1.9.12. ‘Verſe 13. Haue mercie vpon me, beholde my affli­ction by reafon
of mine enemie, thou that lifteſt mee vp from the gates of death.’ ‘Verſe 14.
That I may ſhew forth thy prayſes in the gates of the daughter of Sion. I wil
reioyce in thy ſaluation.’

MAny are the cauſes why God hath burdened his Church with perſecution, but the
ſpecyall cauſe is, for that he will haue his preſence euidently ſeene, when as
he either preſerueth or reſtoreth them which are de­ſtitute of ſeconde cauſes.
As in 2\. Cor. 1. it is ſayde: Wee haue receaued in our ſelues the anſwere of
death, leaſt wee ſhould put confidence in our owne ſtrength, but rather in
God, who reuiueth the dead, which hath taken vs out of ſo greate daungers,
that thanks might be rendered vnto him not of ma­nie mens mouthes.

And a notable teſtimonie is there in the firſt exam­ple, of Adam and Eue,
which manifeſtly teacheth, that God doth onely helpe mankinde, without any
ſeconde cauſes or other meanes. Adam and Eue coulde not after their fall be
helped neither by Angels, nor by their owne d [...]uyſes. Here commeth God
foorth of his ſecret Throane, receiueth tranſgreſſors into fauor, and geueth
them life: So after the example of Adam and Eue, fol­low [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=67) innumerable
examples of Gods benefites (beſides ordinarie meanes in helping mankinde. As
when God preſerued Noah in the Deluge, when he preſerued Io­ſeph, Gen. 7. whom
his brethrene purpoſed to kill, Gen. 37. When he made a way for the Iſraelites
through the red Sea, Exod. 14. So defended he Dauid againſt Goliah, and
others, 4\. Reg. 17. So preſerued he Daniel amongſt the Lyons, Dan. 6. and
14\. Ionas in the Whales belly, Ion. 1. and 2. and in our time,1534. that
noble Prince Iohn Friderike Duke of Saxonie and Elector, in his warres and in
his captiuitie. And all men which rightly call vpon God, may repeate ſome of
their deliuerance, wher­as they are manifeſtly preſerued by God without ſecond
cauſes or other meanes. And therefore doth God heare our prayers, gouerne and
preſerue vs, that wee agayne ſhould duelye worſhip him in his power, goodnes,
and mercie, and with worde and wryting magnifie the ſame. What els beſides is
there, which wee can render vnto God? Wherefore let vs inculcate or beate into
oure mindes the benefites of God, and commemorate them amongſt others. Let vs
publiſh it abroade when we are helped and deliuered, that others alſo may be
inuyted vn­to the acknowledgement,  [...]ocotion, and confidence vp­on God.

#### 1.9.13. ‘Verſe 15. The Nations are ſunke into the pit, which they made,
In the net which they priuelie laide, is their feete taken.’ ‘Verſe 16. The
Lorde is knowen to haue done iudge­mentes, In the workes of his handes is the
vngodlie man ta­ken, with meditation, Sela:’

HE alludeth vnto the Hiſtorie in the 15. of Exod. where it is written that the
Egyptians were ſunk downe in the Sea like Leade. For it is a Verſe
prouer­biall, [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=67) agréeing with
the moſt elegant figures borowed in the ſeuenth Pſalme. Alſo, it hath beene
vſed in this place to be queſtioned of, what might be coniectured of the
Particle Higgaion. There be which déeme this ſaying to be as much effectuall,
as the worde Sela, and that it is the ſigne of a certaine great and rare
affecte or motion, as the Poet ſaith.

Non vidiſſe ſemel ſatis ſit, iuuat vſque tueri,

In hijs here, in his habita, haec meditare▪

Its not inough this once to ſee, it vayles we vew it ſtill:

In theſe ſtande, in theſe abide, and-minde theſe with goodwill.

Other wryters (amongeſt whom is the Reuerende Doctor Luther) doe vnderſtande
it, touching the exerciſe of th miniſterie of the worde, wherby, as with the
ſword of the Spirite, greate matters are accompliſhed in the Church. For vnto
vs are weapons geuen, not braſen péeces, but The worde of God, and Prayer. By
the word, we geue the Deuill the foyle, as Chriſte gaue him the foyle, when he
oppoſed this worde againſt him: Auoide Sathan, It is written, Thou ſhalt
worſhippe the Lord thy God and him onely ſhalt thou ſerue. Mat. 4. So, with
the Teſtimonie of Gods worde, doe we refute Heretickes, and other vn­godly
ſectes. And with Prayer doe we confounde the violency of Tyrantes. When Moyſes
prayed, the Hoaſte of the Iſraelites got the vpper hand. Exod. 17. When we
teache and preach the Goſpell, both Deuils and Tyrantes are ouer­throwen, that
they are not able to wage battell againſte vs, nor make horrible ſpoyles,
(which to bringe to paſſe) they enforce themſelues with a certayne outrage of
theires.

#### 1.9.14. ‘Verſe 17 Let the vngodly be turned downe into Hel, yea all
Nations which forget God.’

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=68)VNto the
diſcourſe as touching the Church, he mix­eth a rebuke, wherein he reprehendeth
this great miſchieſe and ſinne, that a great parte of men eyther know not God,
or deſpiſe him: And inuenteth opinions touching God and worſhippinge of him,
after mannes beaſtly boldnes. This ſinne (which is the fountayne of all other
ſinnes, and which (where it abydeth) no ver­tues are acceptable vnto God)
doeth the holy Ghoſt re­buke by Dauid, when he ſayth: Let the Nations peariſhe
which thinke not vpon God. And in déede with a greate zeale are theſe wordes
pronounced of the glorie of God, For, what is more vile then man (who is
created to the ende he ſhould know and worſhippe God indoctrine and obedyence)
eyther altogether to be ignorant of God, and diuine matters, or els with
Gyantlike or Cyclopicall barbarouſnes to ſcorne the true Religion? But the
fil­thynes of this ſo great a miſchiefe, is more then eyther the tongues of
Angels, or els of men may poſſibly vtter. Therfore I am briefe in this, and
with the like bre­uitie of wordes, I paſſe thorow the reſidue of the Verſes
folowing in this Pſalme.

#### 1.9.15. ‘Verſe. 18. Becauſe the poore man for euer ſhall not be
forgotten, The hope of the poore ſhall not peariſh for euer.’

VNto extreame diſeaſes (ſayth Hypocrates) muſt we lay extreame remedyes. So
the holy Ghoſt, vnto the furie of Epicures and Academicall dubitations doth
oppoſe a cléere affirmation of the doctrine of Gods prouidence. For although
by a certaine ſecrete deter­mination, God deferreth and prolongeth delyuerance
of his Church, from theſe enemies: Yet, as I may ſo ſay with S. Hierom. Hee
withdraweth not his helpe, ſo there be any to embrace or abide it. To the ſame
purpoſe pertaine the ſayings which are read each where [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=68) as in the 55\.
pſalme. The Lord will not ſuffer the iuſt man to peariſh for euer. And in the
49. of Eſay. Can a mother for­get her owne Childe? Though ſhe forget the ſame,
yet will not I forget thee. Againe in the Prophet Abacuc. 2. cap. If the Lord
tarie anie time, waite and looke thou for him, be­cauſe when he commeth, he
commeth ſpeedelie, and will not linger.

#### 1.9.16. ‘Verſe. 19. Ariſe O Lorde, let not man haue the vpper hande, Let
the Nations be iudged in thy ſight.’ ‘Verſe 20. Appointe thou an vmpier vnto
them, O Lord, that the Nations may know they are but men.’

A True ſaying it is, whereas not God, but ſome mortal man bereth rule, there
can be no eſcape from miſchiefes and miſeries. Moſt wiſely, and moſt truely
are theſe ſpoken of Plato. Hiſtoryes of all ages geue vs hereof examples. When
Auguſtus raigned, the worlde was ſweetely and peaceably gouerned: Becauſe God
would for a ſeaſon haue peace, lawes and diſcipline reſtored, and therefore he
aſſiſted Auguſtus. Vnder Auguſtulus, or the young Auguſtus, and ſuch other
Princes raigning, there aroſe newe ſcateringes or di­uiſions, and infinite
heapes of miſeries. Let vs not ther­fore be ſo Cyclopicall blinde, as that we
thinke this mi­ſerable life may be ordered in ſo great darkenes, and in in ſo
great infirmitie of our ſtrengthe, without a gouer­noure or ſcholemaſter, that
is, without the holy Ghoſt,Hierem. 10. like as Hieremie ſaith: I know O Lorde,
that mans way lyeth not in him to diſpoſe. That is, in ſo great weake­neſſe of
mans nature, and in ſo great daungers where­in we liue, in ſo great
difficultie of accompliſhinge af­fayres, in ſo great deceits of the Deuill,
mans ſtrength is not able without the holy Ghoſt, to order or gouerne his
vocation and maner of life.

[[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=69)Therefore, ſo
oftentimes cryeth Dauid, Pſalme 119. Verſe 34. Geue me vnderſtanding. And
againe, pſalme 119. Verſe 124. Deale with thy Seruante ac­cordinge vnto thy
mercie, and teache me thy righteouſnes. Let vs therefore acknowledge our
imbecillitie, and let vs remember that we are men, and with all our hearts let
vs craue that the holy Ghoſt would vouchſafe to be preſent with vs as our
Gouernour and Helper, which thing when we ſhall doe, experience ſhall teach,
that we are vndoubtedly gouerned and helped of the holy Ghoſt, Amen

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=69)

### 1.10. The tenth Pſalme.  
Vt quid Domine, &c.

#### 1.10.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THere are two partes of this tenth Pſalme. The firſt is a notable portrature
of Antichriſte, who (as Paule ſaith 2. Theſt. 2.) is the man of ſinne, and
Sonne of perdition, extolling him ſelfe aboue all that is called God, or
godlineſſe. Yea, placing him ſelfe as a God, in the Church of God, and
boaſtinge himſelfe that hee is a God. This ſame terrible picture of
An­tichriſt, let the Reader more diligentlie looke vpon, and afterwardes caſte
about his eyes vpon that con­gregation, which is called the Church of God, and
let him conſider ſpeciallie, where hee findeth ſuch confuſion of doctrine, of
Religion, and of manners. Certes (I looking vpon this image) ſuppoſe, that no
confuſion, man of ſinne, nor tirannie, more like reſembleth the ſame, then the
Iuriſdiction of the Biſhoppe of Rome, whoſe minde is polluted with madde
worſhippinge of Images, whoſe tongue with blaſphemies, whoſe handes with
cru­ell bloudſhedde of the holy ones, and whoſe o­ther members are defiled
with filthie luſtes.

The ſeconde parte of this pſalme, is a feruente prayer, wherein the Church
with vnfayned ſighes and teares prayeth, that God for his glorie ſake, woulde
deſtroy all Idolatrie, all popiſh erroures, [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=70) and
abhominations, and in many mennes mindes enflame the lighte of the Goſpell,
and true Inuo­cation vpon God, and that hee woulde frame our heartes vnto true
obedience, that we may thank­fullie honoure and worſhippe him in all
eternitie. In theſe two places, or partes, conſiſteth the effecte of this
pſalme.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=70)

#### 1.10.2. ‘Verſe. 1. WHy ſtandeſt thou a farre of, Oh Lorde? thou hydeſt
thy ſelfe in time of trouble.’ ‘Verſe. 2. The poore man ſmarteth in the pride
of the vngodlie Let them bee taken in the deuiſes which they haue purpoſed.’

THe beginninge is a ſorrowfull com­plainte of the Church, ſtruglinge with
temptation or tryall of abiection. For the Church (ſéeing the ſlender number
of her flock, with the miſeries and de­formities therein. Againe, the power
and horrible fury of Antichriſt, which endeuoureth all wayes, as partly by
open crueltie, part­ly by priuie ſleightes and deceites, to oppreſſe the
puritie of their doctrine) oftentimes falleth into this cogitation, that ſhe
thinketh God hath both forgotten her, and for­ſaken her. In ſuch a ſtrugling
(vnto which no ſorrow may be compared) doth Dauid crie out: Oh Lorde, why
ſtandeſt thou a farre of? And as the Prophet Eſay in his 63\. Chap. ſayth: How
is it that thy ielouſie, thy ſtrength, the multitude of thy mercies, and thy
louing kindneſſe, will not be intreated of vs?

Like complainte doth Abacuck make in the firſte Chap. How long, Lorde, ſhall I
crie, and thou wilt not heare, euen crie out vnto thee, for violence, and thou
wilt not helpe?

Theſe and ſuch like complaintes, by ſome meanes, ſhew the greatneſſe of gréefe
which the Church beareth about her, by reaſon of the idolatrie, and
blaſphemous errours of Antichriſt, againſt God, and hurtfull vnto mens mindes.
But although the godly which diſagrée with Popiſh tyrannie, are layde foorth
as open prayes for al chaunces of ſodaine dangers: Yet moſt true is that
ſentence of the holy Ghoſt, touching the vngodly ones: [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=71) They are caught
in their owne deuyſes which they practiſed. That is, The miſchieuous
enterpriſes which they ſub­tillie and craftelie prepared for the deſtruction
of the Church, reboundeth back vpon their owne pates. For conſider what a
downefall of the Popedome followed after the martyrdome of Iohn Huſle, and
agayne after the vniuſt condemnation of D. Luther? But becauſe theſe
Hiſtoricall matters are knowen vnto all men, for me to make further mention of
them, they are not neceſſarie.

#### 1.10.3. ‘Verſe 3. Becauſe the vngodlye man boaſteth in the deſires of his
ſoule: And the couetous man bleſsing him ſelfe blaſphemeth the Lord.’

HEre the holy Ghoſt beginnes a large deſcription of Antichriſt, whoſe markes
and tokens are all e­uidently ſeene in the Popes Iuriſdiction, and ſway. The
firſt marke is Impietie, by which name are com­pryſed worſhipping of Idolles,
and hereſies. Manyfeſte erroures are there in the Popes doctrine, quite
contrary to the foundation of Gods wo [...]de, as els where ofte I de­clare.
There are alſo in this Iuriſdiction, moſt grie­uous ſuperſtitions, worſhipping
of Saintes, prayer vnto the dead, and a manifolde prophanation of the Supper
of the Lord. Theſe apparant furyes doth the Biſhoppe of Rome confirme as
cruell as euer Nero was againſte honeſt and godly perſons.

The ſecond marke is Couetouſnes, which as the roote of all miſchiefe, raging
in the worlde, ſpreadeth vn­reuenged in the dominion of Antichriſt. For the
Bi­ſhoppes of Rome fight not for maintenance of Religion, but for mens wealth
or riches. That is, with vnſatia­ble co  [...]eteouſnes hunt after dignitie,
wealth, and plea­ſures, and ſupport falſe opinions, becauſe they are the
[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=71)
ſtrengthes and maintenance of wealth.

The thirde proper marke of Antichriſt, is Blaſphe­mie, For as his minde is
polluted with idolatrie, ſo is his tongue defyled with blaſphemie. Of this
Marke, Daniel in his 11\. Chap. ſaith: He ſhall extoll himſelfe a­boue all
Gods, and he ſhall ſpeake marueylous thinges againſte the God of Gods. For, no
man is ignoraunte with how great impudencie, the Pope placeth himſelfe aboue
all authoritie of Canonicall Scriptures of the Churche of God, of Sinodes, and
finally, of all iudgements; where­as in déede God alone is.

I let paſſe here theſe other blaſphemies, which my tongue both ſhunneth, and
ſhiuereth with horror to name.

#### 1.10.4. ‘Verse 4. The vngodlie in reſpecte of the pride of his wrath,
careth not: There is no God (thinketh he) alwayes in his heart.’

THe fourth marke of Antichriſte, is his deteſtable Pride, which is accompanyed
with vnbrideled Wrath. Chriſt in humilitie and meekenes, ſurmoun­teth all
Angels and men, as it is ſayde Mat. 11. Learne ye of me, becauſe I am meeke
and humble of heart. But the aduerſary of Chriſt, farre paſſeth all deuils in
pride and greedye deſire of reuenge. That this Affirmation by proofe is moſt
true, the Hiſtories of Emperours doe witneſſe: Of whom, ſome euen for trifling
matters were excommunicate, others troden vnder foote, and others moſt
vnworthely handled by the Biſhops of Rome.

The fifte Marke which declareth Antichriſt, is Epi­curiall Contempt of God.
For it is manifeſt true, that the Court of Rome is nothing els, but a Schoole
of Epicuriſme: wherein al honeſt opinions touching God, his prouidence, the
iudgement of God following after this

[...]

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=72)

#### 1.10.5. ‘Verſe 9 He lieth lurking in ſecrete places, like a Lion in his
denne, That he may catch the poore, whiles he ſnare him in his grinne.’ ‘Verſe
10. And hee humbleth himſelfe, and crow­cheth downe craftelie, that in his
ſtrength hee may caſte downe the poore.’

THe nienth and laſt Marke of Antichriſt, is his Ne­rolike crueltie. For, as
the Deuill the Father of Antichriſt, is both a Lyer and a Murtherer: So the
ſon followeth the Fathers example: who ſyth he is the ene­mie of the true
doctrine, is bent to al occaſions of hurting them which teach a right. And
where he can ouercome with manyfeſt vyolence, he ſlayeth many, but where hee
cannot vſe his violence, he doth moſt ſubtilely lay ſnares for the godly, and
prouoketh Princes to hatred. Now let a man conſider what a monſter Antichriſt
is, puffed vp with theſe vices & miſchiefes, viz. By reaſon of his
vn­godlyneſſe, Coueteouſneſſe, Blaſphemy, Pride, Deſire of Reuenge, Reſtles
buſines, Prophane ſecurity, So­phiſtrie and crueltie.

#### 1.10.6. ‘Verſe 11. For hee hath ſaide in his hearte, God hath forgotten
all: Hee hides his Face, and will not ſee for euer.’

ALl beaſtly crueltie of Antichriſt ryſeth of a Giant­like and Cyclopical
barbarouſnes, which ſtādeth in no feare of the heauenly God, but conſecrateth
his ſacri­fice vnto the greateſt Belly God. For, wherein this per­ſwaſion
reſteth, that God is nothing, that there is no prouidence, that all Religions
are forged and friuolous. In theſe appeareth a deuilliſh confuſion of all
wickedneſſe, and miſchiefes. O god vouchſafe to  [...]uerte this plague farre
from vs.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=72)

#### 1.10.7. ‘Verſe 12. Ariſe, O Lorde God, and let thy hand be exalted, Doe
not thou forget the poore.’

THe ſeconde pare of this Pſalme is a Prayer, where­in the Church craueth of
God that ſhee may be dely­uered from the tirannie of Antichriſt. For neyther
is there any more grieuous Monſter, nor any plague more cruell, neyther furie
which more prouoketh Gods wrath in the flooddes of hell, then the Popes
tirannie, full of ſnares, guyle, vyolence, and Epicuriall ſecuritie. And
becauſe euerie our prayer receyued from the holy Ghoſt, hath effecte of
promiſe and of propheſie, let vs confer the euente with the foretokening
thereof. For in this laſt age of the world, D. Luther, being by God inſpyred,
re­uealsd Antichriſt, and refourmed the doctrine, and called back the Church
in his time vnto the fountaines of veri­tie: He ſhewed the difference betweene
the Lawe and the Goſpell. He made manifeſt the righteouſnes of faith. Toke
away errors touching the doctrine of repentance. Diſtinguyſhed the true
worſhipping of God, from the hipocriſie of mans traditions, and ſhewed the vſe
of the Sacramentes, which are by God inſtituted. (Touching which matter well
conſidering,) it becommeth all the godly throughout the world, to ioyn
together their pray­ers and ſighes, and to craue with feruent heartes, that
GOD woulde vouchſafe to confirme this that hee hath wrought in vs for his holy
temple ſake.

#### 1.10.8. ‘Verſe 13. Wherefore ſhall the vngodlie blaſpheme God? For hee
hath ſaide in his hearte, Tuſh, thou wilt take none account.’

THe reaſon of his prayer is taken from the cauſe final. As if he thus ſayde.
Defende and delyuer thy church and repreſſe the furies of the enemies of the
goſpell, that [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=73) their
blaſphemies may be refuted, and that all men may know there is a God in deede,
vpon whome the Church of Chriſt cryeth and calleth. It lyketh me in this place
to repeate a ſhorte fourme of Prayer, which D. Luther preſcrybed in his booke
of the Turkiſh warre: Looke vpon vs O God our Father, and geue vs remedie.
For, the Deuill, the Biſhoppe of Rome, and the Turke, are more thine
aduerſaries then oures, when they ſcourge vs, they alſo ſcourge thée. For the
doctrine which we preache, is thine, and not oures. But Sathan cannot abide
this, and will be worſhipped in thy place, and thruſtinge thy worde out of
place, he practyſeth vyolently to thruſt vp­on vs falſe doctrine and lyes.

Awake therefore Oh my God, and thy holye name which they pollute and defile,
thou thy ſelfe reuenge, and ſuffer not this imurie to be wrought any longer by
thē, which puniſh not our offences and ſinnes: But ende­uoure to extinguiſh
thy worde in vs, and ſo farre bende their force that thou ſhouldeſt not raigne
at all, neyther that thou ſhouldeſt haue any people which might wor­ſhippe and
honour thée.

#### 1.10.9. ‘Verſe 14 But thou ſeeſt this, becauſe thou conſidereſt his
labour & ſorow, that he may be deliuered into thy hands: Vnto thee is the
poore man lefte, Thou art the helper of the Orphane.’

VNto the reſt of his petition are added promyſes, which are oppoſed vnto the
Judgemente of Epi­tures, and affirme that God will iudge and puniſhe the
vngodly: and will preſerue and delyuer the godly, yea though a ſeaſon they
ſeeme to bee as forſaken and Or­phanes. Thou (ſaith he) conſidereſt my
trauell, & my payne. For as the father taketh pittie vpō his Children: So the
Lorde is mercifull vnto thoſe that feare him. And [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=73) ſurely the holy
ones being confirmed in former benefits receaued, doe whollie depend vpon God,
and yeald them ſelues, and all that is theirs, by faith, into the mightie
handes of God. For vnto thee is the poore man lefte, and thou art the helper
of the Orphan. That is, (They which being deſtitute of ſecond cauſes or
ordinarie meanes) call vpon thee. And it is profitable that we haue in
redy­neſſe many ſayinges, which affirme, that God will then vnfaynedly helpe
vs, when wee are forſaken of mortall Creatures, as the verſe in the 72.
Pſalme: My Father and Mother haue forſaken me, but the Lord hath taken me vp.
Let vs alſo ſet before vs examples, and not f [...]rren only, but of our own
countrey and Inhabitations. Now often hath God driuen away, or els mitigated
great miſ­chiefes from thee, me, and euery one of vs, which by mans helpe
cannot be tollerate? Therefore all deliue­rances be they others which we reade
of, or our owne, which our ſelues finde experience of, let vs know that they
are examples of Gods promyſes, and being admo­niſhed both with promyſes and
with examples, let vs learne to call vpon God, to craue and looke for helpe of
him, and let our faith and confidence become by litle and litle, ſtronger. Let
our heartes be ſetled in hope and in expecting Gods helpe. So by vſe ſhall we
learne this verſe, Vnto thee is the poore lefte, Thou art a helpe vnto the
Orphane.

#### 1.10.10. ‘Verſe 15. Breake the arme of the vngodlie and E­uill man, his
vngodlines ſhalbe ſought for, and it ſhall not be founde.’

WE must both in this place, and alſo in others, oftentimes diſcern the
beginning of the matter from the ending. Antichriſt ſurely is ſlayne with the
Spirite of Chriſtes mouth. (That is) with the ſincéere [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=74) miniſterie of
the Goſpell. But he ſhall be altogether then aboliſhed, when the Son of God
ſhal come vnto vs againe to iudge the quick and the dead as Paule witneſ­ſeth
2\. Theſſ. 2. Then ſhall that man of ſinne be reuealed, whom the Lord Ieſus
ſhall ſlea with the Spirite of his mouth, and ſhall deſtroy with the
foreknowledge of his comminge. And as touching the throwing downe of that
Antichriſt, into the place and countrey of dainned ſoules, no doubt) it is)
Iohn ſpeaketh of it Apoc. 19. And the Beaſt was taken, and with her the falſe
Prophet, and theſe two were ſent aliue into the lake that burneth with fire
and brimſtone, where they are tormented day and night worlde without end.
Apoc. 20

#### 1.10.11. ‘Verſe 16. The Lorde ſhall raigne for euer and world without
ende: The Nations ſhall peariſh out of his Lande.’

A Conſolation taken of the Concluſion. The thing will ſhew it ſelfe that
Chriſt ſhall raigne, when all the Enemies, Gog, the Beaſt, and the falſe
Prophete ſhall peariſh. With this hope of future redemption let vs comforte
our ſelues againſt the power and furyes of the Enemyes. For although Tirantes,
Fanaticall teachers, and their Champions, now and then preſum­tuouſlye doe
beare ſway, and carrie ſtately ſtomackes, as if they were Lordes and Rulers,
called of their owneſt le: Yet after a while, this Soile or Poſſeſſion ſhall
be taken from them, as from vnthankefull Vaſſales? For, The Earth is the
Lordes, and alithe fulneſſe thereof. Pſalme 24, verſe 1. And againe it is
ſayde Leuit. 25. The Earth is mine, you are but Straungers, and my
Huſ­bandmen.

#### 1.10.12. ‘Verſe. 17. Lorde thou haſt heard the petition of the poore,
thou wilt confirme their heart, thine eare will bee preſt.’ ‘[[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=74) Verſe. 18. To
iudge the Orphane and oppreſſed, that thencefoorth man rage no more vpon
earth.’

IN the ende of this Pſalme is repeated The Promiſe and Finall cauſe of
delyuerance. For this cauſe ſpe­ciallie is the Church delyuered, that the
moſte holye name of God be not for euer polluted, neyther that his Doctrine be
extinguiſht, but that alwayes there ſhoulde remayne vpon earth both Teachers
and Schollers, ce­lebrating the benefites of God in his Church, or
Schole­houſe, and to be therein true witneſſes of his Doctrine. This cauſe is
oftentimes inculcate to our eares, as in the 79\. Pſalme. Helpe vs O Lorde our
Sauiour, for the glorie of thy names ſake and deliuer vs, and be mercifull
vnto our ſinnes, for thy names ſake, leaſt they ſay amonge the Nations, Where
is now their God?

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=75)

### 1.11. The eleuenth Pſalme.  
In Domino confido. &c.

#### 1.11.1. THE ARGVMENT

I Am not ignorante that certaine Deuines of ex­cellent wittes, and excquiſite
learning, haue in­terpreted this pſalme Allegoricallie, as tou­ching
corruptions in Doctrine: which are the enuenomed dartes, wherewith the hearts
of the ſim­ple ſorte are wounded. And althoughe I miſlike not this
Interpretation: Yet I doe better allowe of the ſimple meaning and effecte,
which the proprie­tie of the phraſe bringes foorth. Therefore this Pſalme
conteineth a Figure of the Church, which is like vnto a ſillie birde caſt out
of her neſte, and laide foorth for all maner perilles and daungers of death.
For in very deede, the Church liueth as an exile in this world, and ſetleth
her abode in trobleſome do­minions, as it were in Medeas boſome. And nei­ther
liues ſhe in exilement, and wandereth without any certaine reſting place, but
is as an open pray vn­to all hazardes of ſodaine dangers. For ſhe is part­lie
oppugned by manifeſt violence, and partlie by guilefull ſnares, ſubtillie
deuiſed of the enemies. But perhaps, ſome man would aſke the queſtion,
where­hence comes ſuch and ſo greate bitter hatred, into the mindes of the
vngodlie ones againſt the church, which keepeth and retayneth the heauenlie
Do­ctrine? This queſtion doth this pſalme in one verſe at full reſolue. The
foundations are deſtroyed, what hath the Righteous done? As if he ſaide, The
Church ſuf­fereth not this beaſtlie crueltie of the enemies ha­tred, [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=75) by reaſon of
their grieuous ſinnes, troubling the Ciuill ſocietie of men, but for the
Confeſsion of the true doctrine, which is ioyned with iuſt and ne­ceſſarie
reprehenſions of Errors, Idolatrie, and Ab­hominations, which ſtriue with the
Foundation. For neither can it be, but that the Church which ſetteth foorth
the true meaning concerning the eſſence and will of God, ſhould therewith alſo
reprehende the Confuſion of Opinions and Worſhippinges, which with a
malignante countenance, (that is) by all euill ſhew are repugnant to the
manifeſted will of God. For God hath called his Church vnto this function, to
the ende we ſhoulde builde vp and firmelie plant thoſe thinges that are true,
and vtterly deſtroy, and roote out ſuch thinges as are vnto them contrarie.
When, therefore, the Deuill, enemie to God and his Church, cannot abide the
building vp of his works, he enforceth Tirantes and their Champions to
pre­pare and practiſe all the induſtrie of his kingdome, vnto the deſtruction
of the true Church, and of the Doctrine which ſhe profeſseth. Of this
perpetuall warfare, was God the Vmpier in paradiſe, ſaying, I will ſet enmitie
betweene thee and the woman &c. AndGen.  [...]. all the Children of God in
their Baptiſme, doe de­nounce a perpetuall warfare vnto the Deuill. In
certaine wordes conceiued they promiſe, that they will neuer walke into the
tentes of the enemie, but to doe all thinges which perteineth vnto the
deſtru­ction of the kingdome of darcknes. By reaſonwher­of, it is euident
plain, what the cauſe is that moueth the Deuill and his Inſtrumentes to ſtriue
againſt the Church. But although the Church bee exerciſed in ſo many and great
dangers, yet ſhe is not diſcou­raged in minde, but comforteth her, ſelfe in
the confidence of Gods preſence and helpe, and doub­teth▪ [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=76) not but that
the wicked enemies ſhall after a while fall headlong into eternall
deſtruction. For, (that God both careth for, and regardeth that So­cietie
which retaineth the Doctrine by him deliue­red) that ſame thing doeth his
promiſe in this pſalm cleerelie teſtifie. Truely, as touchinge the puniſh­ment
of the enemies he ſaith: It ſhall raine ſnares, Fire, and Brimſtone vpon the
wicked, &c. Let vs therefore, learne to applie the meaning of this pſalme,
vnto the vſe of the matter, And in ſo great varietie of dan­gers, which hang
ouer our heads nightes and daies. Let vs craue and looke for defence (from
theſe E­nemies) of the Eternall Father of Chriſt Ieſus oure Redeemer. Hetherto
haue I expounded the Argu­ment of this xi. pſalme. Now (if it pleaſe you) let
vs more diligentlie looke vpon euerie Verſe.

#### 1.11.2. ‘Verſe 1. IN the Lord I put my truſte: why then ſay ye vnto my
Soule, Flie hence vnto the Hilles, like a Birde?’

THe beginning conſiſtes in an Enthy­mem, or Silogiſme, whoſe Antece­dent is
the voice of Faith: The Con­ſequent is a reiection of that Clamor, and
Commination which the wicked ones vſe. He ſaith: In the Lord put I my truſt.
As if he annexed, Who hath in this firſt Commandement made a League with me,
that he will take care ouer me, and looke vpon me, yea, helpe me, heare me,
and both in this life, and after this life preſerue me. Seeing therefore I am
fortiffed with ſuch defence and ſauegarde, why doe you threaten and [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=76) denounce vnto
me baniſhment and puniſhment? Know ye not That there are manie Manſions, or
dwellinges in my Fathers houſe? For although I muſt here in this life ſuffer
exilementes, great calamities, and diuers deathes, yet notwithſtanding, I know
that I ſhal in heauē haue euerlaſting life, ioy and gladnes, yea, euerduring
glorie, with the vniuerfall Church.

With this moſt ſwéete and moſt ſtrong comfort, do I ſtrengthen my ſelfe
againſt the outcryinges of the ene­mies, and I beare about with mee, both in
hearte and mouth, the ſaying of the Apoſtle S. paule Rom. 8. If God be with
vs, who can be againſte vs? Sure I am that neither baniſhment, nor puniſhment,
neither anie thinge els hath ſuch effecte and force, that it can plucke me
away from the Fatherlie loue of God in deede. This thy aboundante knowledge, O
God, we beſeech thee ſeale in our hearts, with thy holy Spirite, ſo that wee
may be able to obey thée in ſuffering calamities, which daylie fall vpon vs
for the confeſſion of thy ſincere Doctrine.

#### 1.11.3. ‘Verſe 2. For beholde, the vngodlie haue bended theire Bowe, They
haue prepared their Arrowes vpon theire ſtringe, that they may priuelie ſhoote
at them which are vp­right of heart.’

As Tirteus the Muſition ſayth:

Eſt miſerum, patria amiſsa laribuſue vagari

Mendicum & timida voce rogare, cibos

Cum natiſue errare tuis, & coniuge meſta,

Et cum matre pia, cumue parente ſene.

A wretched caſe, thy Countrey lefte,

to wander coaſtes vnknowen.

With trembling tongue & craue thy foode,

not hauing of thine owne.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=77)And with
thy children wander ſo,

and with thy woefull wife:

With good olde Sire and Matrone milde

All leading Exiles life.

BVt much more heauyer a caſe is it to be nights and dayes conuerſant among the
dartes of the enemies, & euery moment to loke for preſent death▪ And ſuch
alto­ther is the ſtate of the church in this life. For as Aeneas ſpeaketh of
him ſelfe: That he a Stranger and in miſe­rie, being driuen out of Europa and
Aſia, wandered through the deſertes of Libia. The ſame may much more be ſaide
of the Church exiled in this world. For, how often are the great multitudes of
godly old men & Matrones with their Children and ſeruants, dryuen out of their
natiue Cities, and for them troupes of horſemen ſent in, which haue troden
vnder foote the multitudes of miſerable diſtreſſed ſoules. Surely, Maximinus
(that I may omitte other examples of crueltie) made his de­crées to be grauen
in braſen Tables, whereby the Chri­ſtians were caſt out of all Townes and
Villages. Ney­ther in deede are the members of the Church only perſe­cuted
with baniſhmentes, but alſo are with moſt cruell tormentes taken out of this
life. Vpon theſe dangers of the Church (the Reader now looking) ſhall more
eaſilie perceiue that ſhe is a Figure or repreſentation of a  [...]illy birde
ſhaken out of her poore neſt, and flyinge amongeſt the dartes of her enemies.

#### 1.11.4. ‘Verſe 3. Becauſe the foundations are deſtroyed, what hath the
righteous done:’

THe thirde Verſe expoundeth the cauſe why the church is d [...]ſtr [...]ed
with ſo huge a multitude of calamities. For although ſhe be like the Doue
which hath no gall, [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=77) hurtes not with
her bill, and hath harmeles dees: Yet for this cauſe is ſhe hated of the
world, for that ſhe truely and ſimplie publiſheth the worde of God, and
ſharply re­prehendeth lewde opinions and prophane worſhipings of God, which ſ
[...] to ouerthrow and vtterly to deface the foundation l [...]y God. The
Church warreth not for riches, ſhe ſeekes not for promotion by mouinge
ſeditions, ſhe rageth not in ſlaughters & other miſchi [...]es, which trouble
the ſocieties of men: But ſhe gathers to­gether the pure graynes of ſound
Doctrine, and plucketh vp the tares out of the field. This Extyrhation cannot
the worlde away withall, being bewitched with loue of his owne wiſdome and
righteouſnes. Therefore draw­eth he his Sworde againſt the Church, therefore
bluſte­reth he out fire and lightning againſt her, as hiſtories of all ages
declare the ſame.

#### 1.11.5. ‘Verſe 4. The Lorde is in his holie Temple: The Lord hath his
ſeate in heauen. His eies doe beholde all things, and his eye liddes ſhal trie
the ſonnes of men.’

THe fourth Verſe oppoſeth againſt theſe furies of the enemies, the promiſe of
God, which aſſureth the god ly ones of protection and ſauegard. We are (no
doubt) deſtitute of mans help and defence, neither ſeemes there here to remain
any State of Churches and Schooles, which is by Gods benefite now ſtabliſhed,
wherein the light of the Goſpell is reſtored: But ſuch a State ſhall remayne
yet, yea though the worlde and the deuill with­ſtande the ſame, as Chriſt
himſelf ſaith in another place, The gates of Hell ſhall not preuaile againſt
the Churche. Mat. 16. And becauſe many are the impediments ther­of, the Pſalme
in this Conſolation, plamly ſheweth who he is that ſhall helpe this Church. It
affirmeth that God will be preſent when we pray, and that hee will [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=78) heare vs,
gouerne, helpe, defende and delyuer vs. Ther­fore let vs not be diſcouraged,
that wee at any time for­ſake our profeſſion, no although many there bee which
are againſt vs, and many impedimentes chaunce vn­to vs.

#### 1.11.6. ‘Verſe 5. The Lorde alloweth well the iuſt mannes doinges: But
the vngodlie man and his ſpeedie violence doth his ſoule abhorre.’

HE amplifyeth the Conſolation, with an Antithe­ſis or contrarietie of the true
Church, and the reſt of the ſkimme of Mankinde. God (ſayth he) by mani­feſt
teſtimonies ſheweth that hee fauoureth the true Church, becauſe hee calleth
her, and geueth his worde vnto her. This notable teſtimonie of the loue of
God, towardes his Church, doth the 147. Pſalme foreſhewe in this maner: Verſe
19. Which gaue his worde vnto Iacob, and his righteouſnes and iudgementes vnto
Iſrael. Verſe 20. He hath not dealt ſo with euerie Nation, nor hath not made
knowen his ſtatutes vnto them. For as the Princes beneuolence towardes a baſe
and meane per­ſon, ſhyneth not. nor is more apparante in any thinge, then in
familiar communication together: So the loue of God towardes vs, may chiefly
by this teſtunonie bee eſteemed, whereas he comming from his ſecrete throne,
ſpeaketh familiarlie vnto his Church, and geueth her his aſſured and expreſſe
worde.

But the other multitude of Mankinde (which heareth not this worde, but
defendeth vngodlye opini­ons, and vngodlye worſhippinges with too too open
crueltie,) doth God moſt bitterly hate, and moſt ſpe­cially abhorre, as aboue
in the fifte Pſalme he ſayth, Verſe 5. Thou art not a God that deliteth in
wickednes, For as Lucilius ſayth, (if I ſo may vſe his wordes,)

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=78)

A vertue tis to geue honor that to hee is due,

As enemie eke the enemies, and euil men to puiſue.

Againe defender for to be:

Of good men, and manners godlie.

#### 1.11.7. ‘Verſe 6. It ſhall raine ſnares, Fire and Brimſtone, vpon the
vngodlie: And whirlewindes ſhall be the portion of their cuppe.’

THe ſentence of this moſt ſorrowfull Commination, is not obſcure, if we
conſider the examples. In the Hiſtorie of the burning of Sodome, it is
expreſly ſayde: The Lord raineth Fire and Brimſtone from the Lord.

Here is mention made, both of the eternall Father, and of his Sonne, So as all
the Poſteritie might con­ſider ſo great a matter to be done by the ſingular
deter­mination of God, and not by any caſualtie, and that we ſhould know, al
men, and all Nations in the world are warned by this example. Without al doubt
great is the wrath, when the ſelfe Sonne of God, is the Mi­niſter or Officer
to execute this horrible puniſhmente. So in the 16 of Numeri it is ſayde of
the puniſhinge of thoſe ſeditions perſons. There went a Fire from the Lord, it
ſlew two hundreth and fiftie perſons.

But why doe I collecte Examples of preſente pu­niſhmentes in this worlde, when
as in the 20. Chapter of the Reuelation of Sainte Iohn, it is moſt euident­lie
ſayde concerning the euerduringe puniſhentes for that ſame Antichriſt and the
Turkes, ordeyned: And a Fire came downe from God out of the Heauens, and
deſtroyed them, and the Deuil which ſeduced them, was caſt into the lake of
Fire and Brimſtone, where the Beaſt, and the falſe Prophet are tormen­ted day
and night, worlde without ende.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=79)

#### 1.11.8. ‘Verſe 7. Becauſe the Lorde is iuſt, and hath loued
Righteouſneſſe: The countenances of them hane ſeene his equitie.’

THis laſt little Verſe D. Luther expoundeth thus, They are not broaken or
ſquaſhed with perſecu­tion, but perſiſte conſtantly looking for the promi­ſes
of Righteouſneſſe: Therefore doe they finde by experience, that God lo­ueth
righteouſnes.

### 1.12. The xij. Pſalme.  
Miſerere mei Domine. &c.

#### 1.12.1. THE ARGVMENT.

ALthough this pitifull moane is (touching the ſmall number of the godlie ones)
applyed vn­to the ſtate of all ages: Yet doeth it chieflie pertaine vnto the
laſt olde age of the world, wherein Antichriſt bearing ſway, greater is the
con­fuſion of opinions, of worſhippinges, and of mens liues or conuerſations.
For touching this doting olde age of the worlde, Chriſt ſaith Luke 18. Thinke
ye when the Sonne of man commeth, that he ſhall finde faith vpon Earth? And in
the 24. of Mathew. Becauſe iniquitie then aboundinge, Charitie of manie ſhall
waxe colde. For, faith towardes God being extinguiſhed, and loue alſo towardes
our neighboure, what godlineſſe can there be, what holines, or what equitie?
But be­cauſe [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=79) it is needful
that in mankinde there be alwaies a Church remayning, God affirmeth, that hee
as yet doth raigne, and that he will be aduenged vpon the tyrannie of
Antichriſt, in the behalfe of his cho­ſen ones, by ſtirring vp godlie
Teachers, which ſhal both reprehende Idolàtrie, & publiſh true doctrine, and
conſolation vnto the Church. When as there­fore great were the darcke clowdes
in the Churche not manie yeares ſince, and that the lighte of the Goſpell lay
oppreſſed with the Sophiſticall labe­rinthes of Sentenciaries with the
ſuperſtitiō of Cha­nons, and Monkes, and ſundrie worſhippinges of I­doles:
Luther being by God inſpired, and illumi­nate reformed the ſtate of doctrine,
and called agai [...] the church vnto her fountain, ſhewed the differēce of
the Law & of the Goſpel, made knowen Iuſtification of Faith, toke away
erroures in Doctrine of Repen­tance, diſtinguiſhed true worſhippings of God,
from hipocriſie of mennes traditions, and ſhewed the vſe of both Sacramentes
which God hath inſtituted. For this ſo greate a benefite, let vs geue thankes
vn­to God the Eternall Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and with feruent
hearts let vs craue of him, that he woulde confirme that which he hath begun
in vs. Pſal. 68. ver. 29.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=80)

#### 1.12.2. ‘Verſe. 1. HElpe me O Lorde, becauſe the holie man peariſheth,
becauſe the Faith­full are miniſhed from amonge the Sonnes of men.’

THe firſt Verſe deſcrybeth an vnſpeak­able moane or Lamentation of the Church,
oppreſſed with Tyrannicall Rule of Antichriſt. For as Moiſes, when he was
brought back into the Straites of the hilles, and of the redde Sea, cryeth
not, but groaneth, and with his heauy moane filleth the eares of God, So the
remnante of the godlye ones in the laſte olde age of the worlde, toyne
together theyr prayers and groaninges for delyuerance from the kingdome of
Antichriſt, and for wholeſome reformation of Doctrine, and worſhippinges of
God. Thou feeſt (ſay they) Oh God, what and how great a confuſion there is of
their wicked opinions and Idolatryes. Reſtore thou therefore the true kinde of
Doctrine, and true worſhipping of God.

This moſt feruent Prayer of the Church, was not made in vaine, but obtayned of
God the Reformation of the ſame doctrine, through the Miniſterie of the
Reue­rende D. Martin Luther, which againe caſt out▪ from the Euangelicall
Fountaines, the filthy dregges and poyſons of popiſh doctrine, and reſtored
pure and ſincere Doctrine vnto the Church.

#### 1.12.3. ‘Verſe 2. They haue ſpoken vanitie euerie one vnto his
Neighboure: They doe but flatter with their lippes, and diſſemble with their
double heart.’

THe ſeconde verſe may be vnderſtoode as concerning doctrine and manners. For
firſt of all, the Clyents [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=80) of Antichriſt,
ſophiſtically excuſe manyfeſt Idolatry, and with a certayne flattering faire
ſhew, endeuour to extin­guiſh the Goſpell. The Oblation which is made in the
Maſſe (ſay they) is not meritorious to forgeue and redéeme ſinners, but an
Application. Where  [...]re, whereas it is read in the Canon of the Maſſe,
that Sa­crifices are offered to redéeme ſoules, let vs vnderſtande that they
are not now offered vp of vs, but that God is called vpon of vs, ſo as (for
the Sacrifice which of the Hie Prieſt himſelfe, Chriſt being offered then
redéemeth Soules) he would heare vs. So, when very hardlye they would forgo
Satiſfactions, they moderate the name and they will haue them to be called
Chaſtiſementes v­ſed in the Church.

With ſuch toyes endeuoure they to ſet foorth abſurde opinions, neyther doe
they that to the endo they would reforme errors, and heale the diſeaſes in the
Church, but vnder new pretences to retayne ſtill the ſtrength of their faultie
and lewde worſhippinges of God, and vnder a plauſible outwarde ſhew of
holynes, commend the cor­ruptions of their doctrine vnto the people. Moreouer,
(with how many wilye ſleightes of diſſimulations the lyues and conuerſations
of the Enemies of the Goſpell is couered) the Examples of Faber and Alphonſus
Dia­ſius doe ſhew. For as Iudas betrayed the ſon of God with a kiſſe: So theſe
ſuckblood Sophiſters with a flat­teringe ſhew of friendſhip ſéeke to enſnare
the liues of godly perſons.

In the Conuention at Spire, which was in the yeare 1529. one Grimeus, after
his comming from the Vni­uerſitie of Heidelberge, by fortune made his abode
for a time with D. Philip Melancthon. There when he had heard Faber Biſhop of
Vienna, defende in his ſermon certaine filthie erroures, he followed him
goinge out of the Church, and reuerently ſaluted him. Afterwardes, [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=81) hee ſheweth him
that he is not moued vpon any mala­pe [...]rtnes, but of a good zeale, to
ſpeake two or thrée wordes with him. Faber delayed not to heare his talke.
Then Gryneus ſayde, He was ſorie, that he be­ing a man ſo well learned, and of
ſo great authoritye, ſhould openly confirme blaſphemous erroures againſte God,
and which it is moſt euident, that they might bee refuted with manifeſt
teſtimonies of Eccleſiaſticall an­tiquitie. Faber againe anſwereth him, that
he would yet ſay moe thinges, and aſked him his name. Hee nothing at all
diſſembleth, but friendly confeſſeth that he is called Gryneus. Faber was (as
many men know) one wonderous fearefull to enter into diſputati­ons with
learned men. Wherefore, in ſo much as hee now feared the learning and
eloquence of Gryneus, he made him beleeue that the king had called for him,
and that as then he had no leyſure to goe through with that diſputation. He
beareth Gryneus in hande that he is very deſirous to be acquaynted with him,
and to haue longer conference: and that both for his owne ſake, and the
Common-weale ſake, he begins to requeſt him the next day to come agayne vnto
him, he ſheweth him his lodging, and ſets him the hower certain. Gryneus
thinking theſe words to be ſpoken in good faith, grutch­eth not to promiſe him
his deſire. But Faber, (to let paſſe other matters) accuſeth Gryneus vnto the
Kinge, and at the Kinges commaundement, ſendeth foorth Pur­ſeuantes to bring
Gryneus into pryſon. And of trueth, ſuch was the expedition of the
Purſeuantes, that had not Gryneus beene ſh [...]elded and ſuccoured of Gods
Angels he had neuer beene able to eſcape their handes.

This Hiſtorie D. Philippe Melancthon faithfully teſtifyeth in his Commentarie
vpon Daniell the 10\. Chap. The other hiſtorie of Alphonſus Diaſius, a
Murtherer of his owne brother, who ſo will, may reade [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=81) in the 17.
Booke of Iohn Sleydones Commentaries.

#### 1.12.4. ‘Verſe 3. The Lorde ſhal deſtroie the lippes of al Flatterers,
And the tongue that ſpeaketh proude thinges.’

SEing God is a louer of moſt ſimple trueth, he hateth & puniſheth lyes, whoſe
Author the Deuill is. For he will haue a loue of the trueth, and hatred of
falſehoode to be confirmed in the mindes of the godly ones, to the end we may
conſider and diſcerne him (what manner a one he is) from thoſe deuils. As
therefore Andromacha bitterly curſed thoſe craftie Juglars, ſaying: O ye
Spar­tanes, moſt worthie of hatred, and of all men to bee accurſed, ye falſe
frendes, Craftes maſters of lienge, and falſifiing, ye guilefull wretches,
which can plaie Iacke on both ſides, ſpeaking one thinge, and thin­king
another, euill maie ye fare. So in this place doth the holy Ghoſt threaten
puniſhmentes vnto theſe ſub­tile Sophiſters, and ſayth with Eſaie, Cap. 5. Woe
be vn­to them, which count good, euil, and darkenes for light. Theſe
Thunderclappes doe thorowlie moue vs vnto the loue of trueth, and that we may
beware the enemyes ſophiſtry. Let vs with greater care applye our ſelues vnto
the ſtu­dyes of true doctrine, and let vs beforehand inſtruct and fortefie our
mindes with ſound opinions.

#### 1.12.5. ‘Verſe 4 Which haue ſaide, we will extol our tongues, our lippes
are our owne, who ſhall be Lorde ouer vs?’

HOw truely Daniel hath ſpoken of Antichriſt (that he ſhall extoll and magnifie
himſelfe aboue all thinges) the moſt impudent forgeries of the Pope doe wel
ſhew, which are extant in his decrees and decretalles. For in deede, filthely
and wickedly, with moſt great raſhnes and impudencie, doth he preferre his
owne authority be­fore [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=82) the Canonicall
Scripture, before the church of god, all Synodes, yea and finally, all ſounde
iudgementes. But for ſo much as in a certaine other place, I haue ſet downe
theſe paltrie petegrees of Antichriſtes arrogan­cie, from thence, or rather
from the ſelfe ſame decrees, and Decretalles, who ſo liſte, may take for his
purpoſe.

#### 1.12.6. ‘Verſe. 5. Becauſe of the ſpoile of the helples, and the
outcrying of the poore, Now will I riſe ſaith the Lorde, and will ſende him
helpe that ſhall breathe vpon him.’

THe hauock and miſerie of the poore, may not onelye be vnderſtoode as touching
the enthraldome of their bodies, but much more of the butcherie of their
conſcien­ces, which in the popes Juriſdiction is very rife and bea­reth rule.
For, who knoweth not the bloudy crueltye of Popiſh penance, wherein is
requyred ſufficient Con­trition, and a ſcrupulous numbring vp of ſinnes, and
ſa­tiſfaction to bee made for ſinnes by certaine workes of men.

Furthermore, who knoweth not what manner ſnares to mens conſciences hath beene
hidden in theyre Doctrine, which biddeth men alwayes to ſtand in doubt of Gods
fauour, as alſo their fable of Purgatorie & theyr law of ſingle life? With
ſight and beholding of theſe miſ­chiefes, God doth in this verſe affirme that
hee is vehe­mently diſpleaſed, and promyſeth his medicine to be layd vnto the
moſt grieuous diſeaſes, namely, the inſtaurati­on or reſtoring of the
Miniſtery, which ſhall accuſe and condemne lewde opinions, and ſhall ſhew the
ſafe Ha­uen and refuge vnto perplexed conſciences. But (what doth this maner
of phraſe ſignifie? Inſufflabit ei) I doubt not, but by the worde breathing or
blowing, may be [...]ſig­nifyed the efficacie of the Miniſterie. For, as the
winds haue greate force in blowing vp trees by the rootes, So [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=82) the Miniſterie
mightely deſtroyeth the workes of the de­uill and of Antichriſt, and pluckes
them vp by the rootes, out of the mindes of the godly ones. And ceries me
thinkes Paule in 2\. Theſt: 2. hath reſpect vnto this place, when he ſaith:
And then ſhall Antichriſt be reuealed, whom the Lord Ieſus ſhal ſlea with the
breath of his mouth. &c. As if he ſayde: The renuing of the Goſpell in the
latter age ſhall not be a ſound heard in vayne, but it ſhal be ſo effectuall,
that it ſhal deſtroy idolatries, and the ab­hominations of Antechriſt in many
mens heartes, and gather an euerlaſting Heritage vnto the ſonne of God. But
becauſe I haue eftſoones elſwhere ſpoken to thys effecte, I am now more briefe
here, and doe procéede vn­to the verſe following.

#### 1.12.7. ‘Verſe 6. The wordes of God are pure, like the ſiluer tryed in
the earthen Veſſell, and purified ſeuen times.’

THis verſe may be vnderſtode after a twofolde man­ner. Firſt in deede, in the
reſpecte of God, and af­terwardes in reſpecte of our ſelues. For it is
manifeſt plaine, that amongeſt all the Godly ones, Gods promy­ſes and
threatninges are ratifyed and moſt aſſured.

Moreoner, the thing if ſelfe ſheweth that the light of faith encreaſeth in the
exerciſes of repentance, in feares, in perſecution, and in Conſolations.
Neither is it an ob­ſcure compariſon, taken of the nature of ſiluer. For as
when leade by the Fire melting, vaniſheth quite away: and the ſiluer
remayneth, and the more often it is melted ſo much more pure it is: ſo in
temptation or tryal, mans traditions fall away, neyther can they comforte the
minde at all. But faith which climeth vnto the worde of God, is the vanquiſher
of all feares and doubtes, and as the Pummiſe ſtone being cut with harde
Hatchettes doth from the Iron take his bitternes and value.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=83)

#### 1.12.8. ‘Verſe. 7. Thou ſhalt preſerue them, O Lord, and ſhalt keepe vs
ſafe from this Generation for euer.’

HEre is a moſte ſweete promiſe, which witneſſeth that the Church of God ſhall
remaine not onely amongſt the ruines of kingdomes, but euen if the world
ſhould vtterly come to an ende. Let vs therefore com­forte our ſelues with
this conſolation, and in this hope let vs maintaine and propagate the
ſcriptures and doctrine geuen vs from God.

#### 1.12.9. ‘Verſe. 8. The vngodlie walke euerie where, when euen ſo vile,
they are exalted amongeſt the ſonnes of men.’

THis laſt verſe amplyfieth the promiſe with an Anti­theſis or contrarietie.
For where God preſerueth not the Miniſterie, nor eftſoones refourmeth the
Doctrine, there doe infinite errors créepe in by ſtealth: As when the
Ethnickes had loſt the doctrine touching true wor­ſhipping of God, they
afterwardes deuiſed monſtruous opinions without end. The ſame thinge happeneth
vn­to Heretickes, Mahometiſtes and Papiſtes, which goe about to take away mens
ſinnes by Maſſes, require help of dead perſons, &c. So in all the whole race
of mankind, there would vninerſall darke miſtes appeare, were it not but God
now and then dryueth away ſome part of them, by preſeruing and reſtoring the
mini­ſtery of the Goſpell, whereby God is effectuall worker, and cal­leth and
ſanctifyeth men vnto eternall ſal­uation.

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=83)

### 1.13. The xiij. Pſalme  
Vſquequo Domine in aeternum?

#### 1.13.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THere is in the Churche a twofolde kinde of temptation or triall, as Paule
ſaith, Within feares, without ſtrife. The externall temptati­ons oppugne mens
bodies and worldlie habi­lities. As when the godlie ones are berefte of the
benefites which pertaine vnto this life, are caſt into priſon, are driuen into
exilement, and ſuffer puniſhe­ment. Theſe temptations, or rather exerciſes of
faith though they be not ſlender (yet when wee feele an inwarde ioie in our
heart, by reaſon of the preſence and fauour of God) we are then the leſſe
vexed with thoſe externe ſorrovves. For the ioifulnes of the heart ouer
commeth that fearefulnes: In that it perſvvadeth vs that it is acceptable vnto
God, and beholdeth eternall life, and doubteth not but that ſhe ſhall paſſe
vnto the preſence of God, and to the felowſhippe of Chriſt and all the holie
ones. Here­hence crieth Paule: I deſire to be diſſolued and to bee with
Chriſt. 1\. Phil. 1. And Steuen reioyced when hee ſaw Ieſus ſtanding at the
right hand of God. Act. 8. But there are either temptations or trials, inwarde
and ſpiri­tuall, wherin is perceiued the wrath of God againſt ſinne, and our
heartes conceaue moſt heauie cogi­tations, as if vve vvere forſaken of God,
and caſt a­vvaie from him. Vnto the bitternes of this ſorow, no puniſhment nor
yet anie vexations be they neuer ſo horrible, may be compared. For how much
the force or ſtrength of mind, is greater then of bodie, [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=84) ſo much more
grieuous are felt the paſsions of the minde, then of the bodie. As therefore
the eleuenth pſalme deſcribeth the outward perſecutions of the Church, to
witte, baniſhmentes and puniſhmentes. So in this pſalme doth Dauid expres
horrible feares of the minde wraſtling with triall of abiection. For although
we are then wonte to be ſtedfaſt & ſtrong, what time the Spirit triumpheth
ouer the Fleſh: Yet notwithſtanding, when incredulitie aſſaulteth oure
heartes, we ſtraightway waxe fainte, and ſcarcelie do we reteine one ſparke of
Faith, which Paule calleth An vnſpeakeable ſythinge of the holie Ghoſt.
Neither in deede are feares onelie or amazednes of minde here deſcribed, but
alſo conſolations of the minde, which vvraſtleth at full by reaſon of the
waues and ſtormes of temptations, and ſolemniſeth the victorie of faith
againſt deſperation. And therefore are theſe things put in writinge, that by
the example of the vniuer­ſall Church, vve might be comforted ſo ofte as oure
minde is drenched or vvhelmed into like temptati­ons. For like as Dauid, Iob,
Ezechias and other ho­lie ones, by meanes of their great plunges of
cala­mities, ſavve and enioyed the Porte of quietnes and tranquilitie. So no
doubte, euen vve shal (by gods helpe) be conquerours ouer Sathan Death and
Hell, as Saint Paule ſaith: Thankes be to God, which hath geeuen vs victo­rye
through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. 1\. Cor. 15.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=84)

#### 1.13.2. ‘Verſe▪ 1. HOw long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me, for euer? How
long wilt thou hide thy face from me?’ ‘Verſe. 2. How longe ſhall I looke for
help in my ſoule? How long ſhall mine enemie reioyce ouer me?’

THe Complainte ſo oftentimes repea­ted, ſheweth the bitterneſſe of his
ſor­row, and the difficultie of his conflicte. And as the order of man is in
thréefold maner. The firſt towardes God, the ſecond towards himſelfe, and the
third towardes others, eyther frendes or e­nemies: ſo he deſcrybeth thrée moſt
fierte conflictes. In the firſt of which thrée, he ſorroweth that he is
neglected and caſt away of God: For in deede the moſt ſure ſignes or tokens of
neglection and indignation, are forgetful­nes and turning of the face another
way. And ſo often as Conſolation & deliuerance is deferred, we fall down in­to
this opinion, that we thinke we are forſaken of God, and caſt away from him.

After this he wraſtleth with him ſelfe, purpoſinge diuers matters in his
minde, wherewith yet he can nei­ther be helped nor relieued. For the woundes
of the heart cannot be healed, but by the helpe of God.

Laſt of all he encountreth with his enemie the deuill, which caſteth ſuch
illuſions before his eyes, that hee ſée­meth ſtraightway to eſcape his daunger
which wraſte­leth with him, and to tryumph ouer him. But I will make no longer
diſcourſe of this matter. But let the godly ones in time of their ſorrowes,
and when they reade the Pſalmes, and propheticall Hiſtorie, conſider well
theſe moſt ſpeciall matters, whereas the deſcripti­ons of ſuch ſorrowes are
extante to teache and com­forte vs.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=85)

#### 1.13.3. ‘Verſe 3. Looke vpon me, and heare me, O Lorde my God: Illuminate
thou mine eyes, leaſte I ſleepe in death.’ ‘Verſe 4. Leaſt mine enemie ſay,
that I haue preuay­led againſt him, And they that trouble mee will reioyce, if
I ſhall faile.’

TRue Inuocation or Prayer is the chiefeſt ſauegard of a godly minde in ſuch
ſorrowes which elſwhere are named, the ſorrowes of death and daungers of hell.
Therefore (vnto this moſt ſtrong Tower, flyinge) he ſayth: Looke vpon me, and
heare me. Illumine thou mine eyes, &c. Leaſt mine enemie ſay, &c. But let the
Rea­der in this place conſider how aptly euery remedy is ge­uen for euery
diſeaſe. He ſayde before, that God was eſtranged from him: Now, ouercomming
the heauy and ſorrowful temptation, he perſwades himſelfe that with Gods
fauourable countenance, he is looked vpon, and is moſt aſſuredlye heard of
him. Whereby we learne what maner enterchanges of tryalles and Conſolati­ons
there are in the godly ones. He addeth moreouer, Illumine thou mine eyes.
Theſe wordes are oppoſed vn­to the little clauſe: How long ſhall I looke for
helpe in my ſoule? For the light of the phraſe in this Scripture ſig­nifyeth
Conſolation and gladneſſe, which is the ouer­commer of death: As if he ſaide:
With mannes coun­celles and comfortable helpes could I not be helped, but when
thou ſhewedſt me remedies for my ſorrowes, I haue felt delyuerance, and in thy
goodneſſe haue I found reſt. Finallye, he craueth victorie agaynſt the Deuill,
which is wonte gloriouſly to tryumph euer ſillie ſoules, plucked away from
God: Neyther is it obſcure in what reſpecte theſe thinges be ſpoken.

#### 1.13.4. ‘Verſe 5 But I haue truſted in thy mercies, My heart [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=85) ſhal reioyce in
thy ſaluation, I wil ſinge vnto the Lord, becauſe he hath done me good.’

LIke as they which get the victorye, doe ſinge Paea­na, or ſonge of ſolemne
prayſe to God: So the godly ones, feeling the deſtruction of the workes of the
Deuill, and the vtter ouerthrow of Sathan vnder their feete, haue theſe wordes
alwayes in mouth and minde. We render thankes vnto thee, Eternall, liuinge,
and moſt true God, that thou ſuffereſt not the iuſt man to peariſh for euer,
nor art delited in our deſtruction, but geueſt vs at length after ſorrowes,
gladnes: and graunteſt vs the victorie through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. With
theſe teſtimo­nies of heauenly deliuerances, we being confirmed, do
acknow­ledge & honour thy mer­cy & thy preſence in thy Church. &c.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=86)

### 1.14. The xiiij. Pſalme.  
Dixit Inſipiens corde ſuo.

#### 1.14.1. THE ARGVMENT

THis pſalme is a ſorrowfull Sermon, accuſinge, and bewailing the lamentable
corruption of mankinde: That is, the darkenes of mannes minde and his will,
ſliding awaie from the wil of God, and the contumacie of his heart, in that he
is neither made obedient, nor can bee made obedi­ent vnto the law of God. For
the thinge ſheweth, that this weake and wretched nature of man, conti­nuallie
carrieth about with her, darkenes & doub­tinges of God: Securitie, not
regarding God: Di­ſtruſt, flying awaie from God: And Inclinations, whereupon
manie wandering motions of the minde ariſe contrarie to the Law of God. But
God will haue theſe greate miſchiefes to be alwaies perceiued and
acknowledged, that men may know theie can­not ſatiſfie the Law of God, neither
by diſcipline are iuſt before God. But let them ſeeke for remiſsion of their
ſinnes by the Me­diator. Therfore in the ende of the Pſalme is added a praier
touching deliuerance of the church, by the Meſsias:

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=86)

#### 1.14.2. ‘Verſe. 1. THe fooliſh man hath ſaide in his hart▪ There is no
God.’ ‘Verſe 2. They are become corrupte, and abhominable in their cogitation,
there is not one which doth good.’

GHe Roote of all euils is the obſcuritie if mans minde. For as a ſincere and
[...]irme acknowledgement of God brin­geth forth Feare, Faith, and Loue
to­wardes God: So the lack of this kno­  [...]edge in mans minde, bringes
foorth  [...]oubtinges of God, and of his preui­dence, and a blinde ſecuritie,
whereby it comes to paſſe, that men doe not feare the iudgement and wrath of
god: as alſo loue of our ſelues, whereby we ſerue more oure own pleaſure &
glory, then the glory of God. For in déede al men are not altogether godles
perſons and Epicures. But yet ouen they alſo which liue moſt modeſtlye of
o­thers, retaine ſtill doubtinges in their minde. As who ſay, Will God take
care ouer vs, will he puniſh vs, wil he receiue vs into fauour, will he heare
vs, will he helpe vs, wil he geue vs life euerlaſting, and eternal bleſſings?
Theſe doubtinges are no ſlender miſchiefes, but are the fountaines of lewde
Inclynations in the will and heart of man.

#### 1.14.3. ‘Verſe 3. The Lord from heauen beholdeth the ſonnes of men, to
ſee if there be any which vnderſtandeth or ſeeketh after God.’

THis perſpicuous or cleare affirmation is oppoſed to to the firſt Verſe. The
vngodly ones denye that there is a God, or in deede doubt of the ſame: But the
worde of God cryeth, God from heauen beholdeth the ſons of men. He is truely a
God, yea he is the Creator, the [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=87) Searcher, and
Judge of mankinde. For, to looke vpon, ſignifieth not at all a vayne beholder,
but him that ma­keth him ſelfe knowen by his worde, and teſtimonies, and which
inſtituteth the miniſterie of teachinge in the Church, and one that by
manifeſt examples puniſheth all grieuous ſinnes.

#### 1.14.4. ‘Verſe. 3 They haue all gone out of the way, they are altogether
become vnprofitable and vile, there is not one that doth good, no not one.’

CErtaine ſubtile perſons do altogether trifle with the vniuerſal meaning, and
ſay it is the figure Sinech­doche: that is (part interpreted for the whole)
All haue gone out of the way, (that is) many in all orders or decrees. But in
the meane time they contend that others are not to be accuſed which liue
honeſtly. This Sinech­doche is a filthie and horrible lye wherein the
ſeueritie of Gods iudgement, and the greatnes of his mercy are obſcured. For
it is needfull that there be a difference ſéene betwene the lawe of God and
politique lawes. The lawe of God accuſeth not onelye externall ſinnes but alſo
lewde diſpoſicions in the hart. But the Lawes politique are in maner of a
bridle whereby externall di­ſcipline is gouerned, and they onely accuſe
externall of­fences. Alſo by the corrupt doctrine are phariſaicall opi­nions
touching righteouſnes confirmed which imagine that men are iuſt by diſcipline.
Therefore that Sinech­doehe muſt be reiected, ſo as the Pſalme it ſelfe
refuteth it, by the vniuerſal parte ſo often times repeated and put into our
heades, but the efficacy of the wordes muſt be conſidered. There is not one
that vnderſtandeth nor ſeeketh after God, they haue all gone &c. That is, all
perſons ca­ry about with them in theire mindes filthie erroures touching God,
they feare not God truely, they loue him [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=87) not truely,
neither rightly call they vpon him, neither truſt they in Gods helpe, but haue
many flames of lewd deſires in them. Theſe euils are not onely in epicures
which profeſſe themſelues before all men to beprophane perſons, but in others
alſo which liue honeſtly. It folow­eth in the text. They are become
vnprofitable. That is, they are corrupted and become ſinners: as if he ſaide,
the light and integritie of nature is loſt. Nowe are there darknes and
erroures in mens mindes and the will and hart of man haue in them vicious
deſires without mea­ſure and end, by courſe of nature runninge headlong
a­gainſt Gods will.

#### 1.14.5. ‘Verſe. 5. Do not all workers of iniquitie knowe this which
deuoure my people eating them vp as bread and haue not called vpon the Lord?’

HEtherto with greate ſeueritie of wordes, hath hee deſcribed the welſpring and
roote of al euils, name­ly originall ſinne. Nowe deſcribeth he the litle
floodes and fruites thereof: That by conſidering vpon the wrath of God againſt
both miſchiefes we ſhould trem­ble for feare and ſeeke for reconſiliation
through the me­diator. Moſt heauie ſighes and ſhowes are there in man­kinde,
to ſee horrible examples of wiſe men and thoſe in vertue excelling, (which
being moued by the deuil) be­come the practizioners of huge miſchiefes, they
eſtabliſhe idolatrie and exerciſe Crueltie vpon the church, as Pha­rao,
Diocletian, Iulian, and innumerable others. Tou­ching all theſe, he ſayth:
They haue not called vpon the Lorde. That is, they deuiſe themſelues opinions
and re­ligions after their own iudgement: They retayne not the worde of God:
And this impietie of their heartes, bringes foorth vngodly counſels and
crueltie, which  [...] exerciſe in killing and ſlaying the holy ones.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=88)

#### 1.14.6. ‘Verſe. 6 There trembled they with feare, but the Lord is in the
generation of the iuſt.’

THis litle verſe doe I vnderſtand as concerning pu­niſhmentes due to the
vngodlie. For it ſignifieth, that the wicked ones at length ſhalbe payed home
with horrible puniſhmentes, ſhall be deſtitute of al good haps and ſhall be
faſt ſnared with inextricable miſchteſes, like as Pharao, Saule, and the
Jewes, after they had cruei­fied Chriſt were ouer whelmed in great miſchtefs
wher­in they found no ſuccoure nor conſolation. Therefore peariſhed their
ſoules into eternall deſperation, and eter­nall tormentes. So did their
puniſhmentes in this life heape ſinne vpon ſinne, which thing hapneth ſo
often, as men without light of the Goſpel, are ouerwhelmed with puniſhmentes.
But why addeth he the little clauſe The Lorde is in the generation of the
Iuſt? Becauſe hee would diſcerne the Church from the reſt of the multitude of
mankinde, which heapeth vp Idolatrous ſeruinges of God, and manifeſt fancies.
For that the whole huge multitude of mankind ſhould not be damned altogether.
God hath choſen out ſome part of ſaluation, namely, the members of the true
Church. Theſe doe truely wor­ſhip God, they retayne the doctrine of the
Goſpell, call vpon him in fayth, geue thankes vnto him, obey him, and in all
eternitie worſhip him. Vnto the ſame mea­ning pertayne the wordes which
ſtrayght way followe. The Lorde is his truſt and confidence. That is, The true
Church, though it haue not mannes ſauegardes or de­fences, yet ſhe hath
repoſed all hope of her ſaluation in God, and is marueylouſlye preſerued and
defended by God.

#### 1.14.7. ‘Verſe. 7. You haue made a mocke at the councell of the po [...]t
the Lord is his truſt.’

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=88) THe
councell of the needie and poore congregation, and yet putting theire truſt in
the Lord (that I may ſo ſaye with Sophonie.) No doubt he calleth the word of
God as in the 119. Pſalme. Thy teſtimonies are my ioy, and my counſellers.
This wiſdome of God (ſaith he) is con­temned of prophane perſons as if the
ſame were dreames of them which dote. Of politique worldlinges as if it were
the firebrand of ſedicions, and finally of the hipocri­ticall crewe, as the
corrupt doctrine of good manners, and the euill libertie of diſcipline.
Concerning theſe wic­ked iudgements where with the worde of the Goſpell is
condemned, ſeing els where I haue oftentimes ſpoken my minde. I am nowe more
briefe, and come to the laſt verſe of this Pſalme.

#### 1.14.8. ‘Verſe. 8. Who ſhall giue ſaluation out of Syon vnto Iſraell,
when the Lord ſhall turne away the captiuitie of his people, Iacob ſhall
reioyce and Iſraell ſhalbe glad.’

IN the end he addeth a promis of the Meſſias which ſhall come, and of
publiſhing the Goſpel from out of Sion, to the end he would ſhew by whom this
lewdnes of nature muſt be taken away & the captiuitie of ſinne, and of death
aboliſhed or adnihilated. But ſome man would perhaps ſay: why do you
tranſforme or chaunge the prayer into a promis or propheſie. The rule is
knowne, moſt worthy of marking. Euery prayer of the holy ghoſt hath effect of
promis. Becauſe the holy ghoſt asketh things congruent with the will of God,
as paule in 8. Rom. witneſſeth. But in that he vnderſtandeth by ſaluation, to
be the Meſſias. It is not obſcure vnto any man reading that verſe of Symeons
ſonge, which ſaith. Becauſe mine eyes haue ſeene thy ſaluation, which thou
haſt prepared before the face of all people. Furthermore what the name of the
Sauioure, or of Jeſus foreſheweth▪ Saint [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=89) Matthewe in his
firſte Chapter teacheth. viz. His name ſhalbe called Ieſus becauſe hee ſhall
ſaue his people from theire ſinnes. But he ſaueth after a twofolde maner.
Firſt by paying the randſome for our ſinnes. After that by diſtroying ſinne
and death, and reſtoring vs to righ­teouſnes and to lyfe euerlaſting. The
which thinge is in this life begonne, by the gifte of the holy ghoſt, and
ſhalbe fully and wholy finiſhed in the reſurrection of the dead: For then
(being delyuered from ſinne and death, and being adorned with new and perfecte
light and righteouſnes) ſhal we reioyce and be glad: as the Pſalme in this
place ſaith.

### 1.15. The XV. Pſalme  
Domine quis. &c.

#### 1.15.1. THE ARGVMENT.

IN all ages there is an accuſtomed Hypocriſie which arrogateth vnto her ſelfe
praiſe of righte­ouſnes, by reaſon of her profeſsion and ceremo­nies: as the
Iewes would ſeeme to be holie men becauſe they were skilfull in the lawe, and
obſerued certaine ceremonies. So now manie kings and prin­ces thinke they
pleaſe God by meanes of their pro­feſsion, when they heare maſſe and obſerue
certaine ceremonies, and by this diligence (thinke they) do they deſerue
remiſsion of ſinnes. This eroure moſt deeplie rooted in the mindes of
Hipocrites, doeth [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=89) this XV. Pſalme
reprehende, and ſetteth forth true religion. For it leadeth the Reader not
vnto cere­monies, but vnto morall obedience, and affirmeth that this pleaſeth
god, by this foundation laid, (that is) acknowledging the the Mediator and
that for his ſake remiſsiō of our ſins & reconſiliatiō with God is
purchaſed. For works without faith acknowledging the mediator (and whereby for
his ſake wee receyue forgeuenes of ſinnes) are, as the Grecians ſay.

&c. And the Latines. Hoſtium do­na non ſunt dona, & non ſunt vtilia. That is
in ingliſh: The giftes of enimyes, no giftes at all be, and nothing auaile our
ſtate or degrée. Scipio was in deede a man iuſt and vpright in gouernement and
a man of chaſte life a­mongſt his friendes and cuntrie men: But becauſe he had
not the true opinion or knowledge of God, but was ignorant alſo of the
Mediator, neither did his perſon pleaſe God neither yet his morall vertue of
obedience to mans lawes. But after that we are freelie receyued of God for the
Mediator ſake, and reputed iuſt, euen then and therefore alſo (the obeydience
begunne in vs) pleaſeth God, although manie dregges of ſinne are in vs
remaining, as els where more copiouſlie is ſaid of the ſame.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=90)

#### 1.15.2. ‘Verſe 1. LOrd who ſhall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who ſhall
reſt in thy holie hill?’ ‘Verſe 2. Euen he that entreth without ſpot, and
wor­keth righteouſnes, and ſpeaketh the trueth from his heart.’

HE begins his diſcourſe touchinge good workes, from a moſt weightie queſti­on,
which and what maner a one the true Church is, which ſhall worſhippe god in an
euerlaſting ſocietie and glad­nes, and vnto whom hee himſelfe will communicate
his light, wiſdome, and Righteouſnes in all eternitie. Touching this queſtion
he anſwereth, That Congregation is the true Churche, which publiſheth the
Goſpel, and word of God deliuered vnto the Prophets and Apoſtles, and
worſhippeth the Father in ſpirite and trueth, (that is) in true motions of
repentance, of feare, faith, & confidence, beholding Chriſt, and finally,
perfourmeth morall obedience, according to the Decalogue or Table of Gods
commaundents, to the ende it might declare thankefulnes vnto God, and ſhew the
will of God vnto others. The ſame deſcription of the Church is in the 119.
Pſalme. Bleſſed are the vnde­filed in the way. (That is) which are not
polluted with a­ny error of Doctrine, or vngodly Religion. Such are not
Hipocrites, but for the moſt parte fauour idolatries, and errours, repugnant
vnto the goſpell, and vſe coun­terfette worſhippinges of God, which Paule
calleth Vo­luntary ſeruing of God, preferring them before ye works by God
commaunded. But although ſome profes the true religion, and be not polluted
with externall Idoles, yet in their heartes they are ſecure and without
repen­tance, without feare of God, and without true faith, and doe more loue
their owne ſenſualities and wealth, then God. Such a great multitude is there
alwayes in the [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=90) church, yea
where the true doctrine is preached, like as the Parable of the ſeede ſowen
ſignifieth. Therefore let the worde Thamyra be referred vnto puritie of
doctrine, and religion, but let the worde trueth vnto affections not fayned,
which agrée with the Law of God.

#### 1.15.3. ‘Verſe 3. Which with his tongue hath ſpoke no guile, nor done
euill vnto his Neighbour: Nor hath not ſlaunde­red his next Neighbour,’ ‘Verſe
4. In whoſe ſight the malignant perſon is deſpi­ſed: But maketh much of them
that feare the Lorde, Which promiſeth his neighbour, and diſapointeth him
not.’ ‘Verſe 5 He which hath not lent his money vpon vſurie, And hath not
receiued rewardes to deceiue the Innocent.’

LIke as the ſeconde Verſe infreateth of workes per­tayning to the firſt Table.
So the reſt of the ver­ſes conteyne the neceſſarie vertues pertayning to the
ſe­cond Table.

And in deede the firſt vertue is Trueth, which of right and deſeruingly, is
called the foundation of other Vertues. And it is a certaine firmenes in the
will of man, or a ſtedfaſt ſounde purpoſe of well doing, perfour­ming
congruence in opinions, in wordes, and vtter ap­pearance with effect, neither
through error, malapertnes, deſire of hurtinge any man, to thinke one thing
and ſay another.

The ſeconde vertue is Juſtice particular, which for biddeth hurting of other
mens bodyes, wyues, gooddes, and good fame.

The thirde vertue is Juſtice diſtributiue, which at trybuteth vnto all perſons
conuenyent reuerence. Like as Lucilius ſaith, whoſe verſes touching this
vertue are knowen, viz.

A vertue tis to geue to honor [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=91) that to her is
due: As aduerſarie and enemie eke, euil men to purſue. Contrariwiſe, good men
and eke good maners e­uery where: (Next to their Countreies weale) alwaies to
deeme as thinges moſt deare.

The fourth vertue is the religion, or profound miſtery of taking an othe. For
an oth taken is an affirmatiō of a thing poſſible & lawful, made with
inuocatiō of the true God, wherin we craue yt he be witnes of ſuch things as
are ſpoken, & that he would puniſh the parties breaking their promiſe by oth
made, & we binde our ſelues vnto ye puniſhment, God himſelf witneſſing the
ſame according vnto his threat [...]ing, as if we reproued him of vntrueth, if
he puniſh not ye breakers of their oth made, like as in ye 3\. precept he
ſaith, The lord wil not hold him guiltles, who­ſoeuer taketh his name in
vaine. This definition ſheweth how terrible a bond an oth is, & what a
miſchief is ye vio­lation or breaking of ye ſame, becauſe ye violatiō by
mani­fold wa [...]es is reprochful vnto god, ſeing he is called vpon to be
witnes & reuenger. The violatiō deni [...]th him to be a true witnes,
deſpiſeth his reuēge, & reproueth him of vn trueth. Such reproches doth ye
true & iuſt god ſharply pu­niſh, & in expres words hath deliuered his ſentēce
touch­ing puniſhment due to thē, & confirmeth ye ſame daily by horrible
exāples: & it augmenteth ye grieuouſnes of yt of­fence, for ſo much as we
bind our ſelues by oth vnto ye puniſhment. Theſe muſt be ofttimes conſidered
of vs, not only to ye end we ſhould not break our othes, but alſothat we
ſhould not be light or vnaduiſed in taking our othes. Like as that lightnes is
reprehended in the 5. of S. Mat.

The 5. vertue in this place commanded, is Juſtice in bying & ſelling, which in
making of bargaines kéepeth e­qualitie, & eſchueth vſuries, & other vniuſt
meanes of getting mony. And yt it is a thing vniuſt to aſke & receiue v­ſury,
the law of god witneſſeth in the 25. of Leuit. Thou ſhalt not take vſury of
thy brother, nor more thē thou haſt ge­uen. And Chriſt ſaith. Lend ye one to
another, not hoping for any thing therfore. That is, not aſking again aboue
mea­sure. [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=91) Let vs embrace
& put in practiſe theſe diuine teſti­monies, & let vs know y• vſuries do
indéed diſpleaſe God, neither let vs ſeeke cauillatiōs to excuſe manifeſt
vſuries as many men doe And let vs obſerue y• ſaying of Ariſt. who in ye 1\.
booke of his Pol. condemneth vſuries in theſe words. Vſury is iuſtly hated,
becauſe money is vſed, for a marchandiſe, & out of that (which nature maketh
not profitable) taketh profit. But money is made for bying & ſelling, it is
then eſpeciallie againſt nature, that money is made a marchandiſe.

The laſt vertue wherof mentiō is here made, is cōſtan  [...]ie. (That is) a
perſeuerāce in true purpoſe, which is nei­ther vanquiſhed wt hope of
cōmodity, nor broken wt fear. This vertue did Thucidides aſcribe vnto
Perycles in his 2▪ booke, where he ſaith: Pericles was indued with ſuch faith,
that he ſeemed impoſsible to be corrupted with money. But how hard a thing it
is for ſuch a mā to be born, which wt hands féet & mind is by all meanes
faithful & vncorrupted, ye ſaying of Simonid. techeth, which Plato in Prot.
reciteth.

#### 1.15.4. ‘Verſe 6. He that doth theſe things ſhal not faile for euer.’

A Perſpicuous ſentēce it is, which for good works promiſeth not only corporal
& ſpiritual rewards in this life, but alſo in ye life to come. After the ſame
manner tou­ching rewards in both liues, doth ye ſon of God pronoūce in ye
10\. cap. of Mark. He that forſaketh houſe for my ſake, & for the goſpel, ſhal
receiue an hundred folde now in this life, with perſecution, & in the world to
come life euerlaſting. And in the 1\. Epiſt. vnto Tim. cap. 4. it is ſaid.
Godlines is pro­fitable vnto al things, hauing promiſes of this life preſent,
& of the life to come. But in the ſaying of Chriſt, it is expreſlye added,
with perſecutiō, to the end we may know yt both of theſe promiſes are true,
yt rewardes ſhal for good workes here, be geuē, and that ye church in this
life for many cau­ſes (of which we wil in their due place intreate) is ſubiect
vnto perſecution. How theſe doe agree in trueth (they which are inſtructed
aright in the doctrine of the goſpell, may rightly iudge.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=92)

### 1.16. The xvj. Pſalme.  
Conſeruame. &c

#### 1.16.1. THE ARGVMENT.

LIke as gold excelleth all other mettals, not on­lie in brightnes but alſo in
effecte, ſeing it both giueth courage vnto the hart, and enfeebleth the
beginninges of leprie that they can not ſpread further: ſo in the whole booke
of Pſalmes there are excellent Pſalmes which containe prophe­cies of the
paſsions and reſurrection, and of the e­ternall kingdome of Chriſt. For the
whole ſcripture prophetical and apoſtolical is chieflie directed vnto this
bounde or limit. That we ſhoulde beleue that Ieſus is Chriſt the Sonne of God
and that we ſo beliuing might in his name haue life. For it is ſaide. Iohn.
20. If anie man in the reading of the ſcripture do not ſeeke Chriſt crucified.
&c. riſen from death to life and nowe raigning at the right hand of God the
father, this man muſt needes be in a greate erroure, and in the ignorant of
the chiefeſt matters, as the Prophet Eſaie ſpeaketh of the blindnes of the
Jewes. Chap. 29. And the viſion of all the Prophetes is become vnto you as the
words of a booke that is ſealed vp which men deli­uer to one that is learned
ſaying, Reade thou in it, and he ſaith I can not, for it is ſealed, and the
booke is giuen to him that is not learned, ſaying reade thou in it, and he
ſaith I am not learned. Wherefore ſeinge this Pſalme en­treateth of the death
reſurrection and euerlaſtinge kingdome of Chriſt, it is not vainelie nor
vnadui­ſedlie called a golden gift. And leaſt anie man doubt of this meaning
of the Pſalme let him heare the di­ſcourſes of the Apoſtles which are extant
in the 2. [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=92) and 13. Chap.
of the Actes, For ſo Peter full of the holy Ghoſt, cyting the teſtimonie of
this 16. Pſalme, ſayth: Men and Brethren, may I boldlie ſpeake vnto you of the
Pa­triarke Dauid, becauſe he is dead and buried, and his Sepul­chre is with vs
vntill this day. Therefore ſeeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had
ſworne vnto him by an oth that fruit of his loynes ſhould ſitte vpon his
ſeate, he with fore­knowledge ſpake of the reſurrection of Chriſt, becauſe he
was not lefte in the graue, neither ſhal his fleſh ſee any corruption. And S.
Paule in the 13\. of the Actes ſayth: Dauid in his generation when he had
ſerued his time, by the will of God, ſlepte, and was laide vnto his Fathers,
and ſaw corruption. But he whom God rayſed from the death, ſaw no corruption.

After that it is determined vpō, what perſon ſpea­keth in this pſalme: Let vs
conſider the parts of this pſalme, which are two. The former is a feruent
pray­er, wherin Chriſt feeling not only the ſcourgings, & tormentes of his
bodie, but alſo inſpeakable feares and aſtoniſhmentes of the minde: prayeth
that the wrath proceeding from his Eternall Father, might, (being pacified by
this his obedience) ſatiſfie the righteouſnes of God: and that his Sonne might
riſe from death to life, and raigne in eternal felowſhippe with his Father
Eternall, and there to geue vnto his heritage euerlaſting life and ſaluation.

The other parte of this pſalme is a thankeſgeuing of Chriſt riſen from death
to life, & glorified: wherin he honoureth the preſente helpe of God, and his
marueylous deliueraunce. This ſumme of the Pſalme is firſt to be conſidered:
after­wards let the partes or mem­bers thereof be loo­ked vpon.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=93)

#### 1.16.2. ‘Verſe 1 SAue me O Lorde, becauſe I haue tru­ſted in thee: I haue
ſaide vnto the Lord: Thou art my God, for thy ſake it is not well with me.’

SVffer me not to peariſhe in this moſte great agony of all, the like wherof
ne­uer any man hath nor ſhall ſuffer: but helpe me wraſtlinge with death, and
delyuer me, and reſtore mee into that glory which I had with thee in the
be­ginning, before the world was made. But ſome men perhaps aſke the queſtion,
Why doth Chriſt make this requeſte, when hee ſayeth in another place, that he
will yealde vp his life, and take the ſame agayne, Why doth he aſke that which
is in his owne power? Againe, when he knoweth the euente hereof, why faynteth
he, as in a doubtfull matter? Theſe que­ſtions vnwillingly I doe but touch by
the way: for they riſe but from vayne and prophane mindes. But I wil anſwere
briefly. Firſt, the times muſt be diſcerned in the Hiſtory touching Chriſt. At
this time of his paſſion, the deuine nature ceaſed in him, as Ireneus
ſpeaketh, and he unfaynedly ſuffered not onely naturall feare of death, but
alſo another farre greater and more vnſpeak­able ſorowe. For that in deede hee
felte the wrath of God agaynſt the ſinnes of mankind, which was poured vpon
him, euen as if hee had defiled him ſelfe with the ſinnes of all men. Theſe
although they be vnſpeakable griefes, yet are they ſignifyed, when it is
ſayde: For thy ſake it is not well with me. (That is) by reaſon of thy
marueylous and ſecrete prouidence of redéeminge man­kinde, not for any ſinnes
of mine. Vnto the ſecond que­ſtion we may more eaſily anſwere. Although
Chriſte knoweth the euent of this matter, yet he knoweth hys [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=93) infirmitye: and
the greater his wiſdome is, ſo much the more vnderſtandeth he, what a thing
the wrath of God is, and knoweth how the ſame may not be borne with­out the
helpe of God. Therefore craueth he both helpe and delyuerance of his Father.

#### 1.16.3. ‘Verſe 2 All my delight is among thy Saintes: & with them that
excell in vertue vpon Earth.’

HEre followeth the finall cauſe, why hee requyred helpe and delyuerance. This
agony of minde (ſayth he) is therfore by thee ordayned, that this my
obe­dyence might ſatifiſe thy righteouſnes, that thy moſt hea­uy wrath myght
be pacyfied, ſinne might bee extinguy­ſhed: alſo a great part of mankinde
reſtored vnto righte­ouſnes and glory euerlaſting, and that God might haue an
eternall Church or Congregation, of whom he might be acknowledged and
worſhipped. For, let vs alwayes remember theſe wordes, that we rightly
beleeue, that the Sonne of God was alſo made a ſacrifice for vs, and made
interceſſion for vs, and alſo applyed his ſacrifice for our ſaluation in theſe
wordes. Among thy Saintes is all my delight, &c. That is, theſe thinges ſuffer
I for the holy ones ſake, and them doe I loue vnfaynedlye. But let vs here
vnderſtande and know, touching thys application, that it muſt be taken of vs
by fayth. Chriſt applyeth hys Sacrifice vnto all perſons, but namely hée
ſayth, (Vnto the Saintes.) That is (as Iohn interpreteth the ſame) to all true
beleeuers. For ſo will he haue his ſa­cryfice to profit thee, if thou by fayth
beleeueſt the fruyte of thys Sacrifice pertayne vnto thee, if thou beleeueſt,
by reaſon of the ſame ſacryfice, the wrath of God is ſure­ly pacyfyed for
thee, and that thou art certaynly receyued into grace or fauor, art hearde in
thy Prayer, and ſaued by his meanes. Therfore ſayth S. Paule Rom. 3. We [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=94) are iuſtified
freely through his grace, by redemption which is in Chriſt Ieſus, whom God
hath appointed our Mediatour, by faith in his bloud. So is he (ſaith he) thy
Propitiator, when thou beleeueſt, that becauſe of his death, God is pa­cyfyed
with thée. This doctrine of Applycation let vs alwayes and with ſpeciall care
remember, and let vs conſider both poyntes, namely, where Chriſt hath apply­ed
for his Sacrifice, and how all men ought to apply the vtility or fruyte of the
Sacrifice vnto themſelues.

#### 1.16.4. ‘Verſe 3 But they that runne after another God, ſhall haue great
trouble.’ ‘Verſe 4 I will not offer vp their ſacrifices of bloud, nei­ther
will I take the name of them in my lippes.’

AFter that he hath ſpoken of the Application and of the true Church, he addeth
an Antitheſis of the difference of the true Church, and of other Sectes, which
heape vp Gods wrath by deſpiſing this ſo great a bene­fite, namely, the
Sacrifice of the Sonne of God. Chriſt loueth his Church onely which embraceth
the Goſpel, he loueth not other ſectes, machometiſtes and heretickes. Likewiſe
againe the Church acknowledgeth Chriſt her onely Mediator, and embraceth his
doctrine onely: ney­ther hath ſhe defiled her ſelfe with the opinions or
cere­monies of other ſectes. As therefore he ſaide a litle be­fore: In the
holie ones which are vpon earth, and with them that excel invertue, is al my
delighte, &c. That is, the con­gregation which heareth me. For their ſakes in
this my paſſion doe I beſtow all theſe my labours: All my fun­ctions are to
this end ordeined, that I may helpe them. For this congregation am I careful,
for this do I labor, and make interceſſion, the ſame doe I gouerne, defende,
and preſerue:) So now addeth he, That hee condemneth the ſacrifices and
Prayers of them which will not heare him. [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=94) I vvill not
(ſayth he) offer vp their ſacrifices, neither will I take their name in my
lippes. That is, I will not make mention of them, I will not make interceſſion
for them vnto the Father.

Theſe ſayinges and ſuch like diſcerninge the true Church from other Nations,
and true Prayer, from hi­pocriſie, Let euery one of vs diligently meditate in
our mindes. For they both in godly maner inſtructe oure mindes of thinges
neceſſarie, and they illuminate in vs faith and inuocation. For the firſt part
of this pſalme, agreeth with the Prayer of Chriſt, which in the 17. of S.
Iohns Goſpell is recited. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for
thoſe whome thou haſt giuen me becauſe they are thine. Finally, the
Interpretation of them no­thing offendeth me, which accommodate or applye the
Antitheſis vnto the abrogation of Leuiticall Ceremony, and the reiection of
the people of Iſrael not acknowled­ging the time of their viſitation.

#### 1.16.5. ‘Verſe 5. The Lorde is the portion of mine Heritage and of my
cuppe: It is thou which ſupporteſt mine inhery­tance.’ ‘Verſe 6 My lotte hath
fallen vnto me in a pleaſant place: For in deede I haue an excellent
heritage.’

HE returneth vnto the deſcriptiō of the true church, which he calleth his
Heritage. For what can be thought more ſweete a thing, then that the church,
gathe­red from amongeſte mankinde: is called an excellente and ſingular
Heritage of the Sonne of God? For al­though the Sonne be made heyre of all
thinges vni­uerſally (as the Epiſtle of S, Paule Chap. 1. witneſſeth) yet hath
hee redeemed no parte of his Herytage with his bloud, but the Church, amongeſt
mankind.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=95)Therefore
let vs not doubt but that the loue of Chriſt towardes vs is true and feruent,
like as S. Paule in the 5\. Epheſ. witneſſeth thus. Chriſt loued his Church,
and gaue himſelfe for her, that he might ſanctifie her. &c. Alſo that particle
is to be obſerued, where he ſaith, that the Church ſhalbe ſupported by the
eternall father, amongſt ſo great ruins of kingdomes and ſo gréeuous
confuſions of opinions, religions, and maners of men. Let vs alſo ſet before
vs this conſolation in this our age wherein ſo many mightie Kinges do threaten
that they will vtterly deſtroye the true miniſterie of the Goſpell and the
true church.

#### 1.16.6. ‘Verſe. 7 I will magnify the Lord which hath proui­ded for me,
yea moreouer in the night ſeaſon ſhall my raynes teach me.’

THis verſe which is the beginning of thanks giuing doth the epiſtle of S.
Paule to the Hebrewes. cap. 5. very well interprete in this maner. who in the
dayes of his humanitie offering vp his prayers and ſupplications with a
mightie clamoure and with teares, vnto him which hath power to ſaue from
death, was (by reaſon of the true o­bedience and humilitie of his minde) heard
of his father: And ſurely ſeing he was the Sonne of God, yet by thoſe
tri­bulations whiche ſuffered, did he learne obedience and was made perfect.
&c. This clearely affirmeth that Chriſt powred forth his prayers with a
feruent ſoule, and was heard of his father by reaſon of his obedience &
receyued great fruite of his miſeries, euen the ſame obeydience wherewith God
reioyceth more and is more delighted then with ſacrifice. For like as when we
are tempted, we praye, and render thanks for delyuerance according to that.
Call vpon me in the day of tribulation and I will de­lyuer thee, and thou
ſhalt glorifie me. So Chriſt being by [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=95) all meanes
tryed, like as we are tryed (ſinne alwayes I except) called vpon his father,
and rendered thankes to him for that he heard his prayer as in this place he
ſaith. I will magnifie the Lord which hath prouided for me. And as we learne
many thinges in time of calamities. So (Chriſt being taught euen in his
pasſion) learned to beare with our infirmities as in the 4. cap. to the
Hebrewes. is written.

#### 1.16.7. ‘Verſe 8 I haue ſet the Lord in my ſight for euer▪ be­cauſe he is
on my right hand, that I ſhall not faile.’ ‘Verſe 9 For this cauſe is my hart
glad, and my tongue hath reioyced, yea and moreouer my fleſh ſhall reſt in
hope.’

HE recyteth two good giftes (where into lookinge) he comforteth and confirmeth
him ſelfe. The one is the will of God. The other is hope of a newe glorie in
his reſurrection. The ſonne of God knewe that he was made a ſacrifice by the
ſingular and vnſpeakable proui­dence of God, and that this his ſacrifice was
the rand­ſome for all mankinde. After this he looked for or hoped after a
reſurrection and tryumphe ouer ſinne, death, and hell, and with this hope did
he mitigate his diſtreſſed ſtate. But let vs remember this example, that we
alſo in calamities may performe obedience, and learne partly with
acknowledgment of Gods will, and partly with hope of delyuerance to lenifie
and mitigate the greatnes of our ſorowes

#### 1.16.8. ‘Verſe. 10 Becauſe thou wilt not leaue my ſoule in hell neither
wilt thou ſuffer the holie one to ſee corruption.’

NOtably ſaith S. Auguſtine. Maior eſt huius ſcrip­turae authoritas, quam
totius humani ingenij capacitas. That is, Greater is the authoritie of this
ſcrip­ture, [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=96) then the
captiuitie of all the wiſdome of men. For here men do inquire of the article
how Chriſt diſcended vnto hell, what that diſcending may be? Firſt ſome men
vnderſtande that before his death his diſcending vnto hell was ſignified in
that agony of his death wherein Chriſt felt the horrible taſte of Gods wrath
againſt our ſinnes: Some againe vnderſtands the ſame his death and buriall to
be his diſcending into hell. But let vs ſimply beleue, that Chriſt in deede
raiſed the fa­thers from death to life (asPeter ſaith) He preached vnto the
ſoules which were in miſerie. This maner of viſitinge the fathers after Peters
ſaying do I vnderſtand to be his diſcending into hell, neither will I
curiouſly diſpute vpon the matters, but let the modeſt and godly perſons
conſider certaine ſecrete miſteries of the death and re­ſurrrection of Chriſt
(which the fathers that were raiſed from death to life hoped after) to be
ſignifyed in Peters ſaying which are more playner recyted in any place. Let
the reader ſéeke for a larger expoſicion of this litle verſe in the
commentarie of D. Martin Luther where he ex­poundeth the 42\. cap. of Geneſis.

#### 1.16.9. ‘Verſe 11 Thou haſt made knowne the wayes of life vnto me,
filling my countenance with gladnes, there is plea­ſure at thy right hand for
euer.’

THe laſt verſe by notable limites diſtinguiſheth this ſhort and fraile life
from that which is onely to be called a life in deede. For what is this life
but a continual Conſumption and paſſage vnto death as in the verſe of
Ma­nilius it is ſaide, Naſcentes morimus finiſque ab ori­gine pendet. That is,
New borne into this world we dye, our death from firſt day of life drawes nye.
Moreouer in this life God alwayes nere vnto one good happe diſtributeth two
euill, neyther is there any delectation or gladnes of our minde ſo perfecte or
ſounde but it is corrupted or [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=96) ſowred with
ſome bitter ſorrow. But that life where­unto after a while we ſhalbe rayſed vp
and reuiued, ſhall be the true and not fayling life, but moſt plentiful of ioy
and gladnes, which we ſhal receiue by the ſight and preſence of God, and his
euerlaſting ioy, wher­of in déed (that the eternal father would together with
his Sonne and holy Ghoſt make vs partakers) let vs al with our whole hearts
continually pray. Amen.

### 1.17. The xvij. Pſalme  
Exaudime Domine iuſtitiam. &c.

#### 1.17.1. THE ARGVMENT.

SO often as we thinke in our minds vpon filthy opinions, which with horrible
boldnes, Here­tikes and Fanaticall teachers in all ages, haue ſpread abroad
touching God, it cannot be but we muſt with all our hearts abhor the ſame, &
make our prayers, that the Sonne of God would with his light, gouerne our
mindes, and with his holie ſpirite illuminate and confirme in vs true
acknowledge­mente of God. And truelie, me ſeemeth no doubt it is, but that
Dauid (recyting theſe wordes of praiet Directe thou my goinges that my
footeſteppes faile not) ga­thered in his minde the furies of all ages, which
the deuill hath diſperſed in mankinde, becauſe hee ſee­keth [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=97) all meanes he
can to blaſpheme God, and ſith he is one that reioyceth in miſchiefe, is
delighted with the horrible miſerie of men, after he hath for­ciblie deſtroyed
them whom he hath plucked away from God, and ſnared in his errors. Let vs
therefore (thinking of theſe furies) continuallie recite this pſalme, and with
feruent prayers let vs beſeech God that for his Sonnes ſake, he would with his
holie ſpi­rite, illuminate in our mindes the Doctrine manife­ſted from him,
and alſo true Inuocation or prayer, Neither that he woulde ſuffer vs to goe
aſtray from him, but that for his glorie ſake he would gouern vs ſo as we may
truelie acknowledge, and cal vpon him: which, that he may effectually worke in
vs, with my whole heart, I beſeeche him, Amen.

#### 1.17.2. ‘Verſe 1. HEare, O Lorde my righteouſnes, geue eare vnto my
petition: With thine eares receiue my prayer, proceeding not from deceitfull
lippes.’

LIke as the Shippe with proſperous winde is ſpedely carryed in her courſe, ſo
our prayer is more profounde, and is better heard when the minde is fer­uent
with ſome deſire, as in the verſe it is ſaide: Dole tantum, ſponte di­ſertus
eris. That is: Onlie ſorrowfull if thou be: thou art diſtreſſed willinglie.
Nec Lachrimis tantum exple­tur, ſed etiam verbis egeritur dolor. Neither with
teares is ſorrow expleate: But alſo with words becomes more great. Wherefore
ſeeing Dauid thrice repeateth one [[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=97) and the ſame
prayer, it is cleere, what ardent motions the moſt ſacred breaſt of the
Prophet did feele. For, not a more ſharper ſorrow is felte in the mindes of
the godly ones, then that which is conceyued by the corrup­tions of doctrine,
which doe blaſpheme God, and bringe plague and deſtruction vnto the Church.

And before in the eyght pſalme I ſaide, there is a two folde maner of
righteouſnes, the one of the perſon, the o­ther of the cauſe. He therefore in
this place craueth not that his righteouſnes, but that the righteouſnes of his
cauſe might be heard, as if he ſayde: For thy names ſake euen for thine owne
names ſake, doe thou this that blaſ­phemers may be confounded. This argument
doth hée vſe in many Pſalmes. For we muſt pray for our defence for the glory
of Gods ſake eſpecially: But why addeth he (Not in de [...]eiptfull lippes?)
becauſe he would diſcerne hipocriſie from true prayer which is made in ſpirite
and trueth. I doe not trifle it (ſaith he) with deluſions of wordes, I doe not
with cunninge ſieightes, and merye toyes, caſt a maſe before thine eyes, of
that which is im­poſſible to be done. But (thy ſelfe being witnes, which ſeeſt
the ſecretes of mans hart) I truely, and without diſ­ſimulation pray thee,
that the puritie of doctrine may be preſerued, and that opinions and
worſhippinges dely­uered without the worde of God, may be vtterly taken away.

#### 1.17.3. ‘Verſe 2. Let my iudgement come before thy face, let thine eyes
beholde the thing that is right.’

THe Church is in this world as a widowe, and as an Orphane, and hath no Judge
but onely God. Ney­ther the controuerſies touching religiō, are not by mans
authoritie ended or taken vp, becauſe the vngodly aduer­ſaries wil not ſeem to
be conuinced by the teſtimonyes of [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=98) Gods word.
Needefull it is then that the conflictes of the Church ſhould be adiudged and
decyded by God, to the vtter extinction of blaſphemies. The greater part of
the princes and people of the Iewes would neuer al­lowe of the Apoſtles
doctrine: and therefore God refuted or vanquiſhed them by deſtroying their
common wealth, And with this execution (as I may ſo ſay) of his iudge­ment,
made he an ende of that diſcention. But in the meane ſeaſon, the Apoſtles were
ſlaine by the Princes of the Iewes: So let vs waite for the iudgement of God,
and in the meane time let vs know that we ſhall endure the enemies crueltie.

#### 1.17.4. ‘Verſe 3. Thou haſt prooued my heart, and viſited me in the night
ſeaſon: Thou haſt tried me with fire, and haſt founde none euill in me: I haue
determined that my mouth ſhall not offende’

HEe amplifieth the litle clauſe of the firſt Verſe (not from deceiptfull
lippes.) Thou ſeeſt, & altogether haſt approoued the ſame, that my heart
agreeth with thy word For, as the heart is enflamed with light & loue of God,
ſo the tongue manifeſteth the deuine motions of ye heart. Falſe therefore is
the rebuke of my aduerſaries, which crie out, that I not for the glorie of God
and ſoules helth, but for a certaine curioſitie, or ſome lewd deſire, or blind
wilfull frowardnes, doe retaine and propagate a kind of doctrine manifeſted
from God, yet the thing it ſelfe pur­geth me. For I coulde haue liued in
worldly vanitie with promotion, if I had beene free from this cauſe: but now
for that with great labour and great danger of life, I profeſſe the true
doctrine, and preferre the ſame before life, it appeareth ſufficientlye, that
I ſeeke no riches or worldly dignitie. So are both theſe matters perceiued in
Paules miſeries, that namely, he bare about with him [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=98) the Goſpell for
profitte and pleaſure ſake becauſe he for the doctrine which he taught
ſuſteyned greate miſeries when he otherwiſe amongſt his contry men in greate
reputation might peaceably haue liued. Moreouer, that Dauid in trueth and
earneſtly beleueth this doctrine is true, he confirmeth it by that, becauſe he
had rather ſuf­fer death, then to caſt away his profeſſion of the Goſpell.

#### 1.17.5. ‘Verſe 4 From the workes of men, in the worde of thy lippes, haue
I marked the wayes of the murderer.’

THis litle verſe ſheweth clearly, for what purpoſe this Pſalme was made. For
it diſcribeth the con­flictes of the church with heretikes & fanaticall
teachers which are in very deede théeues and mnrderers like as Chriſt in the
10. of S. Iohns Goſpel ſaith. All they which came before mee, are theeues and
murderers. That is, all thoſe which came without my Goſpell, ſpred abroade
falſe doctrines, and eſtabliſhed diuers maners of wor­ſhipping idols. Theſe
workes of men haue I marked and eſchewed (ſaith he) not with mans wiſdome, but
with the wiſdome of God which in his worde is delyue­red. Let vs therefore
loue and reuerence the exerciſes of his heauenly doctrine that we may rightly
acknowledge and call vpon God, and be able to eſchewe the confuſion of fonde
opinions and traditions of men. For they which refuſe and deſpiſe theſe
exerciſes, are like reedes, toſſed hether and thether with euery winde of
doctrine, as in the 4. of S. Paule. Epheſ. is written.

#### 1.17.6. ‘Verſe 5 Direct thou my goings in thy pathes, that my foote
ſteppes faile me not.’

SVffer vs not to be drawne away by the deuill vnto impietie and other
miſchiefes, defend vs againſt the [[Page
190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=99) deceiptes of
the deuill, gouerne vs with thy light, and with thy coūcels, ſuffer vs not to
periſh, deceyued by our owne erroures, or moued by the imbecillity of the
fleſhe. Great was the wiſdome and vertue in Aharon chiefe prieſte ouer the
people of God: and yet we ſee this man was moued by the deuill to make and
ſette vp a golden calfe to be worſhipped. Seing therefore great is the
in­firmitie of all men, vouchſafe thou O eternall God, Fa­ther of our Lord
Jeſus Chriſt to gouerne vs, and ſhewe vs thy wholeſome councels in priuate and
publique af­faires, and with thy holy ſpirit confirme our hartes that they may
obey thy will, that we be not inſtrumentes of wrath but inſtrumentes of mercy
and profitable mem­bers of thy church.

#### 1.17.7. ‘Verſe 6 I haue cryed vnto thee, becauſe thou wilt heare me,
incline thine eare vnto me, and heare my wordes.’

HE repeateth the prayer, to ſhewe that he did not coldly but with an ingent
motion of minde, craue of God the preſeruation of ſincere doctrine and
ſubuer­tion of idolatrie. Neither in deede (any thing doubtinge of being
heard) prayeth he, but without all diſtruſt be­leneth his praiers are receyued
and heard. So Paule. 1. Tim. 2. biddes vs to pray without wrath, and without
doubting. Let vs therefore withſtand all doubtfulnes, and vanquiſhe the ſame
by faith that we may come vnto Godand call vpon him. For this ſpeciall worſhip
of God horribly hindered, when and ſo oft as our mindes are toſſed and ſhaken
with waues of doubtfulnes, as expe­rience teacheth, whereby it is euident why
it is need­full that the decrée made in the councell of Trent ſhould be
refuted, which confirmeth erroure touching doubtful­nes in praying.

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=99)

#### 1.17.8. ‘Verſe 7 Deale wonderfully in thy mercies, which pre­ſerueſt
thoſe, truſting in thee from them that reſiſt thy right hande.’

AL the godly ones haue néede of ſpirituall wiſdome interpreting the promiſſes
of God: God perfur­meth his promiſes, but other wiſe, then mans reaſonne
thinketh. Moyſes did not thinke that he ſhould wander fourtie yeares in the
wildernes: howe many in meane time deſpaired, and curſed Moyſes as a deceyuer
of the people yea as a ſeditious and tyrannicall perſon? And yet God at the
length performed, that which Moyſes promiſed them, and had begon by his
decrée. So was the preſeruation of the church promiſed vnto the Apoſtels, they
and theire auditories were put to the ſworde: and yet in meane time the Church
was furdered and more & more floriſhed. Theſe matters are to be learned of vs
that we may prefer the worde of God before all euents, yea all our owne
counſels and cogitations. Dauid there­fore craueth that God would (by
wonderfull meanes not comprehended in mans reaſon) preſerue the church, a
[...]de his cauſe, and with his mightie right hande defend him againſt the
furies of his enimies.

#### 1.17.9. ‘Verſe 8. Keepe me as the aple of thine eye, hyde me vnder the
ſhadowe of thy winges.’

HE doth moſt pleſantly painte out the defence of the church ſetting before his
eyes the ſi [...]litudes of the eye, and of a henne. But although theſe
compari­ſones are moſt eaſilie vnderſtoode, nor do require longe circumſtance:
yet I will ſet downe the wordes of Ci­cero (touching the eye l [...]ddes,)
which are extant in his ſecond booke De natura Deorum. For what worke­man
beſides nature (then whome nothing can be more [[Page
192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=100) ſubtile,)
could performe ſuch perfecte arte in the ſences? Who firſt hath couerd and
fenſed the eyes with moſt tender ſkinnes, which ſkinnes ſhe firſt framed
lightſome that we might ſee by them, and of ſtrength that they might ndure.
But nature made the eyes to rowle and to ſtir, that they might readely
diſcerne if any thing did hurt thē, and alſo might eaſely turne theire ſight
whither they would, and the light it ſelfe of the eye, whereby we ſee (which
is called the aple) is ſo ſmale, that ſhe eaſely eſcheweth thoſe thinges which
may hurt her. And the eye liddes which are the coueringes of the eyes, are
moſt ſofte and moſt fitlie framed, leaſt they (with touchinge the ſame) ſhould
hurt the eye ſight, and are made to ſhut and open vpon the aples of the eyes
that nothing ſhould fall into the eyes, and is circumſpecte that the ſame may
often times be donne with greate celeritie. And the eye liddes are beſette as
with a valley of litle haires by which (the eyes being open) anie thinge that
might fall into them, is put awaye: and theſe ſhutting together when we
ſléepe, when we haue no neede to ſee, that they as it were roulled vp ſhould
reſt. For firſt the vpper partes being couered with the eye bréees, do kéepe
of the ſweate running downe from the heade and the forheade. More­ouer the
corners of the eyes beinge belowe are defen­ded from thy nethermore parte: And
the noſe is ſo placed as if it ſéemed to be a walle ſetled betwene both the
eyes. Thus far haue we heard Cicero philoſophi­cally reaſoning vpon the firſt
ſimilitude. Now if it pleaſe you let vs heare the ſame man touching the
ſecond. For ſo in his ſecond booke De natura Deorum he ſaith: Now hennes and
other birdes both require reſt, and place wherein they may hatch theire yonge
ones and buyld theire byding places and neſtes & the ſame make they ſo ſoft
vnder them as they can poſſible, that theire egges may with eaſe be ſaued: out
of which when they [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=100) haue hatched
theire yong ones, they ſo kéepe them as with theire winges they may foſter
them, that they be not hurt with colde, and if there be heate of the ſunne,
they oppoſe them ſelues to ſhadowe the ſame. But whē theire chickinges or
yong ones can vſe theire winges, then theire dammes folowing theire flight,
are delyue­red of  [...]urther care. By this commemoration, are the moſt
ſwéete reſemblances (of Dauid here proponed) ea­ſely thus vnderſtoode.

#### 1.17.10. ‘Verſe 9 From the face of the vngodlie, which haue afflicted me,
and of mine enimies which haue encompaſſed my ſoule rounde about.’ ‘Verſe 10
Theire fatlinges haue concluded amonge thē ſelues, theire mouth hath ſpoken
proudlie.’ ‘Verſe 11 In our wayes haue they now encompaſſed me, they haue bent
theire eyes ſo, that they may caſt vs gr [...] ­ueling vpon the earth.’ ‘verſe
12 Like vnto the lyon prepared to his pray, and like the lyons whelpe lurking
in ſecret places.’

THe foure verſes folowing conteyne a deſcription of the wylie deceiptes which
vngodly teachers laye for the ſubuerſion of the true church. For as the deuill
is the ſame lyon which ſeeketh whome he may deuoure. So the1\. Pet. 5.
inſtrumentes of the deuill are the whelps of the lyon, and ſéeke all occaſions
how to deuoure and diſtroy the godly teachers in the true church. Neither is
the mea­ning of theſe verſes obſcure vnto him which conſidereth the daungers
wherein both of olde time and at this day the church hath bene and is
exerciſed.

#### 1.17.11. ‘Verſe 13 Ariſe Lord preuent him and caſt him downe, delyuer
(from the vngodlie man) my ſoule, which is thy darlinge’

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=101)I Do not
know whether this verſe may better in any thing be verifyed then in the
hiſtorie of Alexander biſhop of Conſtantinople, who when both by reporte and
hereſay, he vnderſtoode it woulde come to paſſe, that Arius (contrarie to his
will) ſhould be brought into the church and iurisdiction, Beſéeched God, that
eyther he would call him out of this world, that while he liued his church
might not be infected with the poyſoned doc­trine of Arius: eyther els that
from the omnipotencie of God he might finde ſome remedie for this ſo great
miſ­chiefe. After this maner crauing helpe, and aide in a true confidence of
the ſonne of God, when he had watched & called vpon God a whole night longe,
and beſoughte Chriſt of his protection and ſauegard, in the morninge he knew
what had happened vnto Arius comming the­ther at midnight. For the gréedie
faction of this man, troubled the church that or euer the day light was
eſpied, he went forwarde in that which they had purpoſed to bringe to paſſe.
But beholde as Arius was going to thē he beganne to fainte and ſat him downe
vpon the nexte ſiege or priute to eaſe his bellie of that burden, in what
place he dyed wret [...]hedly, and therevpon ſo dead was caried home. Theſe
doth Athanaſius in his firſt orati­on againſt the Arians playnly declare.
Auguſtinus lib. de heret.

#### 1.17.12. ‘Verſe 14 From the man of thy handes oh Lord from the men of
this worlde, theire felicitie is in this life, thou filleſt theire bellies
with treaſures, they haue increaſe of children, and the reſt of theire
ſubſtance leaue they vnto theire Chil­dren.’

MEn of the handes of God are they, which ſeinge they feare no iudgementes of
man, at length are caught by the mightie hand of God, to due puniſhment:
[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=101) like as
Antiochus, Herode, Iulian, Arius, and many biſhops ruling the roſte in kinges
courtes. Children of this world are called they which ſéeke nothing but
plea­ſures and theire exerciſes, he therefore craueth not only delyuerance
from the tyrannie of ſuch men, but alſo ſe­quettration from the opinions &
affections of theſe cor­rupt nature which loueth more riches and pleaſure,
thē God, as that fellowe (whereof Plautus mencioneth) ſat­eth. I had rather,
that the woman loued me then God. This plague (O God) we pray thee auerte from
vs. Suerly riches and children are the giftes of God: but when the vngodly
ones are like ſwine in theire liues and conuer­ſation, theſe benefits are
geuen them as for acornes wherewith they do but fill theire bellies, till they
be kil­led. We therefore beholdinge this figure, let vs with our whole hart
abhor theire conuerſation and let vs beſéeche of God, That he would geue vnto
vs the beſt part, which Marie did chuſe & which may in no age at anie time be
ta­ken away from vs. Luc. 11.

#### 1.17.13. ‘Verſe 15 But I in thy righteouſnes ſhall ſee thy face when I
ſhall awake I ſhall be ſatiſfyed with thy preſence.’

THe hope of eternal life is a conſolation principal which aſſwageth al other
miſeries & is together cō ­teyned in al other conſolations. S. Paule endured
great unſeries & vexations beholding the end, which he knew was laid vp in the
life euerlaſting. But in meane time he ſuffered calamities & puniſhments
becauſe he ſhould o­bey God. So we although we are diſpiſed of Epicures, &
made as open prayes vnto the practiſes of tirants, yet in hope of life
euerlaſting (wherein we ſhal be adorned with a newe light and righteouſnes)
let vs ſuffer the ſhort & fraile calamities of this life. For as S. Paule
ſaith. A ſmale time of tribulatiō bringeth great treaſure of glory
euerlaſting. 2\. Cor. 4. Amen.

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=102)

### 1.18. The xviij. Pſalme.  
Diligam te Domine. &c▪

#### 1.18.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe argument of this Pſalme is moſt euident partlie by the title, partlie by
the ſcoape of the hiſtorie, for both the title declareth that Dauid rendered
God thankes for de­fence againſt the violence & fraude of his enimies: and
alſo the order of the hiſtorie ſufficientlie ſhew­eth that this Pſalme is
Dauids ſwannes ſonge, a litle after called vnto the ende of his life. For like
as ſwannes do ſinge when they dye: So Dauid and all the godlie ones before the
flitting out of this life, do worſhippe God, with prayer, thankeſgeuing, and
confeſsion. And that the readinge of this Pſalme is more ſweeter and ſhorter,
let the godlie ones conſi­der with what varietie Dauids enimies behaued thē
ſelues. For firſt he was more ſharplie aſſaulted in battle by Saule who burned
with ambition, and ſo­rowed ſore to ſee his ſeruant Dauid to be aduanced
before him and that valiant warriar his ſonne Iona­thas. So that burning with
deſire of reuenge he not onely laide ſubtile ſnares for Dauid but alſo ſheweth
prieſtes which gaue entertainement vnto Dauid, & all theire retinew alſo.
Therefore in purpoſe and euent did he comprobate the ſentence of Polinices the
tyrant which Seneca maketh mention of. Proreg­no velim Patriam, parentes
coniungem flammis dare impe­ria precio quolibet conſtātbene. In ingliſh thus:
So I may rule: both country, parentes, wife and all would I, burne and
deſtroye. To rule (oh braue) no price too [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=102) deare can buy.
Moreouer continuall battels were ſought by Dauid with the nations lying neere
him: as with the Paleſtines, Syrians, Edomites, Amalechites, Ammonites and
Moabites: as afterwardes in the 60. pſalme he writeth the Nations by name,
which were enemies vnto the people of God. Thirdlie, he felt the domeſticall
wound made by his ſonne Abſolon, then which nothing could be thought more
bitter: as So­phocles ſaith: Nullum atrocius vulnus eſt quam defectio a­mici.
No wound more gréeuous nor more great: Then when a frend doth frendſhippe
breake. Finallie, hee found by proofe, the falſifying of Cebas faith, and of
others moſt trobleſome Citizens, touching whom it is written in the 2. Reg.
cap. 20. Therefore who marueileth by right, that Dauid coulde amongeſt ſo many
and ſo great impedimentes, gouerne his king­dome for that fortie yeares. But
he was (as D. Lu­ther vſed to ſay) A kinge after faith in God, and the promis
of God towardes him. That is, with the worde of God, and with faith he
ouercame the deuil and the world For as ſaith S. Iohn 1\. epiſt. 5\. cap. This
is the victorie that ouercommeth the world, euen our faith. But although this
accōmodation of the pſalme no doubt is moſt true, touching the hiſtorie of
Dauids battels and his de­liuerance: yet becauſe betweene the head & the
o­ther members in man there is great difference. The interpretation hath no
abſurditie, which applyeth the meaning of this Pſalme vnto Chriſt. Therefore
was Chriſt and his church aſſaulted of the Iewes, ti­rantes, heretikes and
falſe brethren, and yet are they not vtterlie ouerthrowen: but thy Chriſt, and
his church ſhall remaine for all Eternitie, as it is writ­ten: The gates of
hell ſhall not preuaile againſt the moſt ſtrong rocke, whereupon the
foundations of the church is builte.

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=103)

#### 1.18.2. ‘Verſe 1 I Will loue thee, O God my Fortitude.’ ‘Verſe 2 The Lord
is my defence, my Caſtle, and deliuerer: My God and my Rocke.’ ‘Verſe 3 My
Shield, yea the throne of my ſaluation is he, and my Exalter.’

THis number of Epithets or names of God, is a lightſome Paraphraſe of the
firſt precept, Exod. 20. I am the Lord thy God, &c. That is, truely receauing
thee, and caring for thee, geuing thee, not only benefites in this preſent
life, but alſo righteouſnes, and life euerla­ſting for thy Mediator ſake. Ego
ſum [...] tuum, I am thy keeper & thy defence. I bring thee wealth and health
when thou art forſaken of all Creatures. But no diſcourſe of wordes is like
the effi­cacte of thoſe matters which the doctrine of the firſt pre­cept
conteyneth. Therfore I am now bréefer, and doe procéede vnto the verſes
following.

#### 1.18.3. ‘Verſe 4. I will call vpon the Lord who is praiſed, and I ſhall
be ſafe from mine enemies.’

LIke as the complete harneſſe nothing profiteth the Soldyar, except he put it
vpon him, and vſe his ar­moure indeede for the defence of his owne bodie, and
his weapons to foyle therewith his enemies: So the pro­m [...]ſe of the firſt
precept is not auayleable to the hearer, except by faith he embrace the ſame,
and apply the ſame vnto vſe in prayer, and petition for preſent and eternall
benefites. He therefore affirme [...]h that by faith he will cal vpon God,
whome he hath hetherto prayſed, and ma­gnified him with ſo great copie of moſt
ſwéete appella [...] ­ons, or Epithetes, that he might obtaine defence of his
[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=103) life
preſent, and alſo the benefites of eternall life. Let e­uery one follow this
example, ſeing in déede it is ſet forth to be followed, and let them not doubt
that they ſhall re­ceiue both neceſſarie and wholeſome benefites.

#### 1.18.4. ‘Verſe. 5 The cordes of death encompaſſed me: And the flouddes of
Beliall ſore troubled me.’ ‘Verſe. 6 The cordes of hel encompaſſed me: the
ſnares of death preuented me.’

A Declaration of ingent feares and ſorrowes, which cannot be deſcrybed  [...]
wordes, for when (as Saint Paule ſaith) there is, within vs. feares, without
ſtrife con­curring: It cannot beſaide, what burning heate the hart of man
feeleth and abydeth. But becauſe in the thirtenth Pſalme I haue ſomewhat
ſpoken as touchinge theſe a­ſtoniſhmentes, I will not ſo oftentimes whet the
edge of my hatchet.

#### 1.18.5. ‘Verſe 7 In my trouble did I call vpon the Lorde, and cryed vnto
my God, and he heard me out of his holy place, and in his ſight, entred into
his eares.’

IN the fiftie Pſalme there is a precept geuen vs, tou­ching Inuocation or
Prayer, whereunto is adioyned a moſt ſweete promiſe of God, that he will heare
vs. Of the ſame rule in this place is an example ſet downe. For he ſheweth
cleerely by what meanes, and why he is de­lyuered: Namely, calling vpon the
Lord. But I wil not ſtay longer in this ſo euident & playne a ſentence, which
oftentimes elſwhere is repeated.

#### 1.18.6. ‘Verſe 8 The earth was mooued, and quaked with feare: And the
founda ions of the hilles were troubled, and did ſhrinke, becauſe he was
angrie therewith.’ ‘[[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=104) Verſe 9 There
aroſe a ſmoke in his wrath, and a fire from before his face burned: And coales
were kindled thereat.’ ‘Verſe 10 He bowed the heauens and came down, and a
darkenes was vnder his feete:’ ‘Verſe 11 And he was caried vpon the Cherubins,
and did flie vpon the winges of the winde.’ ‘Verſe 12 And he made darkenes his
ſecrete place in the compas of his Tabernacle: A darke water and thicke
Clowdes.’ ‘Verſe 13 From lightning in his ſight, there paſſed a­way his
cloudes: Haile and coales of fire.’ ‘Verſe 14 And the Lord thundered from
heauen, and the moſt higheſt gaue foorth his voice, haile and coales of fire.’
‘Verſe 15 And he ſent his arrowes, and ſcattered them▪ He increaſed
lightninge, and troubled them.’ ‘Verſe 16 And the welſpringes of waters
opened, a [...] the foundations of the whole world were diſcloſed, at thy
re­buke, O Lord, at the blaſt of the breath of thy wrath.’

THeſe  [...]yne verſes which follow, conteyne a Figu­ratiue deſcription of an
horrible tempeſt, ſuch as is that whereof Virgill ſpeaketh 1\. Georg.

Ipse pater media nymborum in nocte, coruſca

Fulmina inolitur dextra, quo maxima motu

Terra tremit, fugere ferae & mortalia corda

Per gentes, humilis ſtrauit pauor. &c.

This Father then in ſtormie midnight late

With his right hand gaue foorth fierce flaſhing fire

Whereby the earth did tremble ſore and quake

Wilde beaſtes away faſt runne and eke retire

Mens heartes were mazed through nations far & nier.

But when Dauid expreſly ſaith (He ſent his arrowes [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=104) and ſcattered
them) it appeareth ſufficientlye vnto what ende this manifeſt deſcription may
bee referred. For without all doubt he ſignifyeth thereby the maieſtie of God,
whereat the enemies of Dauid were ſtricken with a ſodaine terror. And if we
may be ſo bold as with ſa­cred hiſtories to confer prophane matters, not
vnlike vnto this caſe, ſeemeth the hiſtorie of Anniball and the Romanes, which
Liuius ſpeaketh of in his ſixte booke and 3. Decade, on this maner. In the 8.
yeare of the ſecond battell fought at Carthage, Anniball remooued his Tentes
vnto the flood Anien, three mile from the ſayde citie. Laſtly, paſſing ouer
the Riuer Anien, hee ſet all his hoſtes in battell aray. Neither did Flaccus
and the Conſuls prolong time from fight. When both their hoaſtes were redely
prepared for the purpoſe (vnto that hazarde of handſtrokes, wherein the citie
of Rome might become due ſalarie vnto the Conquerors) a great ſhower of rayne
mixed with hayle, ſo troubled both the hoaſtes, that ſcarcely could they
betake them into their Tentes, with their armour and weapons in ſafetye,
no­thing leſſe then with feare of hoſtilitie. And the next day euen in the
ſame place, this ſame tempeſt ſcattered thoſe hoſtes once more prepared. Who
when they had go [...] to themſelues againe into their Tentes, there aroſe a
mar­ueyleus cléerenes of wether, with a calmenes. The mat­ter amongeſt them of
Carthage was turned into an O­racle or Propheſie, and it was noyſed, that
Anniball ſhould himſelfe ſay, ſometime his owne minde diſcoura­ged hi [...] ▪
and ſometime his fortune fayled him to con­quere the citie of Rome.

But what doe I recite examples of the Ethnikes, when as the eccleſiaſticall
hiſtorie ſetteth down vnto vs like deliuerances? For ſo Euſebius in his 5.
booke wry­teth. In the dayes of Antonius the Emperor, hiſto­ries doe recorde,
that his brother Marcus Aurelius go­ing [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=105) to warres
againſt Caeſar, the Germanes & Sarma­tyans, when as with drought and exceeding
heate, his hoaſt was welneere periſhed, being in doubt, and ſéeking what way
was needefull to worke, they found in a cer­taine bande of men Chriſtian
Souldiers, who (as it is alſo our vſe) bowing their knees, and praying, God
did vnfaynedly heare their petitions, and ſodenlye, contrary to all their
hope, poured downe moſt large ſhowers of raine, ſo that the hoaſte which in
deede was neere pery­ſhing, and for whom the Chriſtians prayed) had their
drought refreſhed or allayed: But the enemies which ap­proched vpon them with
deadly foade, were put to flight by lighteninges and fearefull flaſhinge
flames of fire, of­ten times ſent from the heauens. But touchinge the
Earthquake, although Phiſitions doe ſay, that vehement ſpirites of winde
blowing in the earth, are the cauſe: yet the heauenlie doctrine of Gods worde
addeth another cauſe, for it ſaith: That by Gods working therein, this windie
ſpirite, Inflation, and ſhaking of the earth, are ſo wrought, that they may
ſignifie the puniſhmentes in the world to come. Therefore it is notably ſaide
of Plinius in his 2. lib. 48. cap. And it is not ſimplie an euill, nei­ther in
the mouing it ſelfe is there ſo great daunger, but it ſignifieth a like or
greater wonder ſhortlie en­ſuing. The citie of Rome neuer quaked, that it did
not foreſhew ſome ſtrange thing would follow. So although Phiſitions doe ſay,
that the windie inflations of the earth, when they wrap themſelues within a
darke cloude, and when they haue got into euery moſt thinne parte thereof, doe
deuide and burſt in ſunder the ſame, and that very often and vehemently ſo
they doe: Then cauſe they both lightning and thunder. But if out of the ra
[...]nge of the clowdes, an expreſſe heate doe iſſue, that is the thunderbolt.
Yet vnto theſe Phiſicall cauſes, the Scripture adioyneth God, geuing both
thunder and ligh­tening, [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=105) ſeeing it
ſtandeth not with reaſon that ſuch great matters are brought to paſſe by the
alone force of Na­ture.

#### 1.18.7. ‘Verſe 17. He ſent from an high and receiued me, and tooke me
from out of many waters.’ ‘Verſe 18. He tooke me away from my ſtrongeſt
ene­mies, and from them which hated me: Becauſe they were too mightie for me.’
‘Verſe 19 They preuented me in the day of mine affli­ction: And the Lord
became my Protector.’ ‘Verſe 20. And he brought me foorth at large: And ſaued
me, becauſe he had a fauour vnto me.’

THeſe Verſes deſcribe gods mightie deliuerance, wher­by Dauid was taken out of
the handes of Saule: For ſo is it written in the 23. Chapter and 2. Booke of
the Kinges. Saule ſought after Dauid all his life time, but the Lord deliuered
him not into his handes.

#### 1.18.8. ‘Verſe 21. And the Lord ſhall rewarde me according to my
righteouſneſſe: And after the puritie of my handes, ſhall the Lord doe vnto
me.’

OF the twofolde kinde of righteouſnes I ſuppoſe I haue ſpoken ſufficiently in
the 8. Pſalme.

#### 1.18.9. ‘Verſe 22. Becauſe I haue kept the wayes of the Lord: And haue
not beene wicked vnto my God.’ ‘Verſe 23 Becauſe all his iudgementes are in my
ſight: And I haue not repulſed his righteouſnes from me.’ ‘Verſe 24 And I
ſhall therewith be vndefiled, and will keepe me from mine iniquitie.’ ‘verſe
25 And the Lorde ſhall rewarde me after my righteouſnes: and according to the
integrity of my hands in the ſight of his eyes.’

[[Page 204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=106)THe
perfecte pulliſhing of the next verſe before, is in theſe 4. verſes, declaring
what righteouſnes hee will foreſhew. For hee ſaith that Saule hated him for
this cauſe, and therefore was he beſet with the practiſes of his enemies,
becauſe with a ſimple faith he obayed, God cal­ling him. For the worde Via, or
way, moſt commonlye ſignifyeth a vocation. Therefore is there in this place a
neceſſary and moſt profitable admonition ſet downe.

Firſt that we ſhould not follow our owne imaginati­ons or deuiſes. But in all
maner of our delyueraunce from dangers, we ſhould conſider the commaundement
and calling of God

Secondly, becauſe if we heare the commaundemente and calling of God, and that
our will obſerueth his will, and ſtudyeth to perfourme obedyence vnto God,
then are we not idle nor contemptuous.

Thirdly, let vs require help of him euen for this cauſe, for that wee endure
the labours enioyned vs of God, which are pertayning vnto his glorie. This
admoni­tion reprehendeth both thoſe vices, that is, our idleneſſe, and the
confidence in our ſelues: and commaundeth vs that our diligence be ſet
forward, and that therewith in true faith and hope we ſhould craue and looke
for prote­ction, helpe, and good ſucceſſe from God in all our affairs

#### 1.18.10. ‘Verſe 26 With the holie thou ſhalt be holie: and with the
Innocent perſon thou ſhalt be innocent.’ ‘Verſe 27 With the choſen thou ſhalt
be choſen: and with the froward thou ſhalt be froward.’

HEre is the reaſon of Dauids deliuerance, becauſe in God there is wiſdom,
diſcerning both right and wrong: And agayne, a will in him, deſiring that
which is right and forbidding the contrarie: alſo with an vnfai­ned
indignation, both repelling and deſtroying the ſame. [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=106) But whereas it
is here obiected, God ſeeing he is iuſt and good, can not be peruerted, that
may eaſely be re­futed, for ſuch a one God is as we are, (not in déede
touching eſſence) but touching effecte and applicacion. For as he rewardeth
the godly with good thinges and with his ſtrong hand preſerueth them in
daungers. So the diſobedient and contumacious in haynous offences and ſuch as
contemne his worde, doth he hale perforce vnto puniſhment by wonderful meanes.
But God pre­ſerued Dauid here, according to that ſaying: The Lorde knoweth
howe to take his holie ones out of trouble. And con­trary wiſe he deſtroyed
Saule in his laſt battle with tra­gicall calamities. Let vs learne therefore
to feare God, whoſe hande is ſtronge for eyther effecte, both to dely­uer and
alſo to diſtroy.

#### 1.18.11. ‘Verſe 28 Becauſe thou ſhalt ſaue the people which are brought
lowe, and thou ſhalt deſtroy the eyes of the proude.’ ‘Verſe 29 Becauſe thou
lighteſt my candle, O Lorde my God, lighten thou my darknes.’

HEtherto hath Dauid ſpoken of his defence from God againſt Saule. Now doth he
commemorate his glorious victories whereby the pride and inſoleny of the
nacions neare vnto him, was tamed and ſubdued. Reade the hiſtorie in the 2\.
lib. and 8\. cap. of the kinges, concerning the Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites,
Pa­leſtines, and Amalachites whome he conquered.

#### 1.18.12. ‘Verſe 30 Becauſe in thee ſhall I burſt thorowe a huge hoſte of
enemies, and through my God I ſhall leape ouer a wall.’ ‘Verſe 31 From the
vndefiled way, the wordes of the Lord are tryed with fire, he is the defender
of all them that put theire truſt in him.’ ‘[[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=107) Verſe 32 For,
who is God, beſides the Lord? or who is ſtronge but onlie our God?’ ‘Verſe 33
God hath girdid me with power, and hath made my way vndefiled.’ ‘Verſe 34 Who
hath made my feete ſwifte, as the feete of harts, and ſetting me vp on hie.’
‘Verſe 35 Who teacheth my handes tofeight, and mine armes, that I may breake
euen a bowe of ſteele.’

THeſe ſixe verſes which folowe require no longe ex­poſition. But are eaſelie
to be vnderſtoode by a compariſon betwene the heathen or ethnickes war [...]
­oures and ſouldioures of Dauid. Mightie and profitable peſonages to theire
countrie were Fabius and Scipio, but howe much more excellent had they bene if
in thoſe theire ſo greate exploytes they had called vpon God, and beléeued
that he had bene theire preſent protector and guyde in ſo great battels. Alſo
if they had exployed their victories to ſette forth the doctrine of God, of
prayer vn­to God and of eternall life. By right therefore do we ex­toll Dauid
as farre incomparable aboue theſe warriers, whe well knewe that he was by Gods
inſpiration ar­med with his valiencie, and in thoſe his warres called v­pon
God, and fought his battels for defence of true re­ligion.

#### 1.18.13. ‘Verſe 36 And thou haſt geuen me a ſheelde of my ſaluation, and
thy right hand comforteth me, and with thy meeknes doeſt magnifie me.’ ‘Verſe
37 Thou haſt enlarged my goinges vnder me, and my foote ſteppes, are not
weakened.’ ‘Verſe 38 I will perſecute mine enimies, and I will o­uertake them.
And I will not returne till I ſhall deſtroye thē.’ ‘Verſe 39 I will bruiſe
them, that they ſhall not be able to ſtand, they ſhall falle vnder my feete.’
‘[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=107) Verſe
40 Aad thou haſt foregirded me with ſtrength vnto battle, and thou haſt
ouerthrowne them that riſe againſt me, vnder me.’ ‘Verſe 41 And thou haſt made
mine enimies to turne theire backes vnto me, and haſt ſcatered them that hate
me.’ ‘Verſe 42 They cryed, and there was none to ſaue them, euen to the Lord,
but he heard them not.’ ‘Verſe 43 And I will beate them to peeces, like the
duſt before the face of the winde, as the claye in the ſtreetes will I diſtroy
them.’

SAule being ſlaine and Dauid nowe hauing peace with the nacions adiacent there
aroſe a domeſticall fire kindled by his ſonne Abſolon, whereby Dauid him ſelfe
and almoſt his whole kingdome were in greate  [...]eo­perdie. For that ſaying
of Pindarus is moſt true. Facile eſt ciuitatem mouere etiam deterrimis, ſed
iterum in ſua ſede eam collocare difficile eſt, niſi deus adſit principibus
gubernator. It is an eaſie thing to moue diſ­corde in a citie euen amonge the
worſt perſons but to ſetle the ſame againe in her former quyet it is a harde
thing except God as cheefe ruler be preſent with princes. Therefore Da­uid
boaſteth not as Timotheus the Son of Conon did: who in a certaine ſpeach
vauntingly ſaide▪ This haue I donne and not fortune. But he aſcribeth vnto God
the re­ſtoring of his kingdome into her priſtine peace and tranquilitie.

#### 1.18.14. ‘Verſe 44 Thou ſhalt delyuer me from the gaineſayinge of the
people, thou ſhalt ſet me in authoritie ouer nations, a people whome I haue
not knowne ſhall ſerue me.’ ‘Verſe 45 With attentiūe eare ſhall they obey me,
ſtraunge Children haue diſſembled with me.’ ‘Verſe 46 Straunge children are
worne away, and they haue trembled in theire aduerſities.’

[[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=108)LIke as
Paule oftentimes repeateth a complainte of falſe brethren which openly can
flatter, but ſecretly (if at any time occaſion ſerue them) can power out
theire poyſon. So Dauid here applyeth the like complainte touching his
factious Citizens, ſuch as were Seba and many others. But he foreſheweth that
theſe were not onely diſcomfited, but that he had ſuche a tryumphante victorie
as in ſteade of vngodly and falſe foreſworne ci­tizens afterwardes nations
themſelues yelded vnto him and began zealouſly to obey him. Neither in deede
is it a matter difficill to apply the meaning of this litle verſe vnto Chriſt,
whome the hye préeſtes, princes and greate multitude of peoples in his
countrie with horrible fu­rie perſecuted and practiſed to put to death. But
for theſe falſe citizens the church was gathered and ioyned vnto him from
amonge the gentiles. And he is truely the chéefe heade of the nations, that is
of the churche vniuer­ſall gathered from out of the ſéede of Abraham and the
gentiles geuing life euerlaſting vnto the ſame, which Dauid could not by any
meanes do.

#### 1.18.15. ‘Verſe 47 The Lord liueth, and bleſſed be my ſtronge God, and
let the God of my ſaluation be magnified.’ ‘Verſe 48 It is God that reuengeth
my cauſe, & brin­geth people in ſubiection vnder me.’ ‘Verſe 49 Thou art my
deliuerer from mine enimies, and from them that riſe againſt me, ſhalt thou
exalt me, and deliuer me from the vngodlie perſon.’ ‘Verſe 50 For this cauſe
will I magnifie thee, amonge the nations, oh Lord, and will ſinge a Pſalme
vnto thy name.’ ‘Verſe 51 Thou that exalteſt the welfare of the kinge, and
performeſt mercies vnto Dauid thine anoynted, and vn­to his ſeede euen for
euer and euer.’

IN concluſion he affirmeth he wil render this thanks, [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=108) that he will
celebrate or ſolemniſhe theſe benefits to the ende the preſence and glory of
God may be in his church acknowledged, and that many may learne to feare God &
call vpon him. For vnto this end ſpecially are thankes geuings to be referred,
that others being encouraged by our teſtimonies touching the benefittes of God
might be in the ſame faith confirmed towards him, and truely beleue that God
is preſent in his church, that he puniſheth deſpiſers of his heaueuly doctrine
and worde, and that he vnfainedly heareth, receyueth, and helpeth which
conuerte vnto him, and call vpon him.

### 1.19. The xix. Pſalme.  
Ceeli enarrant gloriam. &c.

#### 1.19.1. THE ARGVMENT.

EVen as the xvilj. Pſalme may be interpreated two wayes, firſt in deede
hiſtoricallie touching Dauid, and ſecondlie allegatorie touchinge Chriſt. So
the firſt parte of this Pſalme may either be expounded concerning the glorie
of God which ſhineth and is perceyued in the workman­ſhippe of the world,
either els of that true glorie, which the doctrine of the goſpell ſheweth for:
both meaninges are true and haue in them verie muche erudition. But if anie
man had rather embrace that meaning which is referred vnto the onelie
aduance­ment [[Page
210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=109) of the Goſpell
I will not anie waies be againſt him. The ſecond part without doubting
entreateth of the efficacie of the goſpel, and diſcerneth the ſame not onelie
from philoſophie, but alſo from the law which commaundeth that which is right,
and for­biddeth that which is wronge. For philoſophie can not heale the
woundes of the conſcience nor call backe mens ſoules from hell, ſeeing it
teacheth no certaine thing touching the will of God, nor our ſaluation. Bee it
much leſſe to purpoſe then that the lawe may be a hauen or ſuccoure for our
conſcience ſtrugling with ſinne and death, when it wonderfulie encreaſeth our
feares and aſtoniſhmentes with her threatning thunderbolts. Therefore the
alone prea­ching of the goſpell hath force and efficacie that it may raiſe vp
or comforte and confirme our conſci­ences ſo wraſtling, and as it were to call
them backe from death to life. The third parte is a prayer agree­ing with
doctrine of the goſpell. For as the prea­ching of the goſpell diſcribeth the
mercie whereby God receyueth and preſerueth wretched mankinde flying vnto the
Mediator: So in fine it craueth for­forgeuenes of ſinnes, and clearly
diſcerneth ſinnes of ignorance & negligence not wil­fullie performed, from
tranſgreſsi­ons againſt good conſcience. Concerning this diffe­rence (as I am
inex­pounding) I will ſaye more.

[[Page 211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=109)

#### 1.19.2. ‘Verſe 1 THe heauens declare the glorie of God and the firmament
ſheweth his handie worke.’

GOD hath manye properties, (con­tayned in the phraſe of glory) which do ſhine
in the workmanſhippe of the worlde. The order of the bodies in the worlde, in
the heauens, in the elementes, in thinges growing and in the ſame mind of man
as a diffe­rence betwene good thinges and euill doth ſhewe the wiſdome of God:
For ſeing it is impoſible that this bewtifull order of thinges may by chaunce
or happe ap­peare or remaine, needfull it is that a ſkilfull workmai­ſter muſt
then be the principall cauſe of the worldes cre­ation. Moreouer the power of
God is plainly ſeene in the greatnes of the heauenly bodies and ſwiftnes of
theire mouing. For who is not amaſed at the conſideration of the Sunne, which
not without cauſe is of Plato called Oculus mundi, the eye of the worlde. For
although the Sunne (as the Mathematiſtes affirme) is a hundreth ſixtie and
ſixe times greater, then the circuit of the whole earth, yet this greate bodie
dayly from the ryſing vnto the ſetting thereof (by the moſt mightie hand of
God is caried aboute, when as in deede if he ſhould take his courſe on earth,
he paſſeth in his circuit euery hower 225. Germain miles. And the goodnes of
God towards mankinde is here perceyued, becauſe all thinges which are in this
world are made and ordayned for mans ſake. I will not adde mo arguments to
confirme this ſentēce, becauſe the whole nature of thinges is a notable
teſti­monie touching God the workman, and his wiſdome, his power and goodnes.
I might rather adde a complaint and that the blindnes in many Athiſtes is to
be lamen­ted, [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=110) which contend
that all bodies aboue and belowe are of meates as it were ſo wrought and made,
and that all things are ſuffered of vs by chaunce. Notably there­fore ſaith
Cicero 2. lib. de natura deorum. All this diſcription of the Skyes, & this ſo
greate beautie of the heauēs may they ſéeme vnto any wiſe man to be made of
bodies running hether and thether by chaunce and without aduiſment? or coulde
any other nature hauing witte and reaſon bringe theſe thinges to paſſe, which
not onlye that they might be brought to effect haue wanted reaſon, but without
great reaſon can not be vnderſtoode what maner thinges they are? Againe: for
who would ſay that he were a man who when he ſawe ſo vnfained mo­uinges of the
heauens, ſo firme orders of the ſkyes, and all thinges ſo connexed and fitly
framed would deny any reaſon to be in theſe, and would ſay theſe are donne by
chaunce, which by how much prouidence they are done, ſo by no capacitie can we
attaine the ſame? For al­though that nature be wholy created, to make
teſtimo­ny of God, that he is wiſe, mightie, bountifull, and a friēd vnto
mankinde: yet full and perfecte glory can not be geuē vnto God, without
acknowledgement of the ſonne of God. And then it is attributed vnto God, when
we learne the worde of his goſpell, and by faith do acknow­ledge the ſonne. It
is néedfull then that there be other heauens, that is Prophetes and Apoſtles
to preach this worde. Glory be to God on hye: that is, God is not only iuſt,
horrible puniſhing ſinnes and wickednes, but alſo good and mercifull, and
preſeruing all them which flee vnto the Mediator. Wherefore let the glory
(touching which the diſpoſitions of the heanenes moſt conſtantly working
yerely alterations, with greate welfare and preſeruation vnto all thinges,
doth beare witneſſe) be deſcerned from that glorie, touching which, Angels and
all godly teachers in the Church do ioyfully ſinge, and [[Page
213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=110) let the
knowledge of God, illuminated by the voyce of the Goſpell, be preferred farre
before Phiſicall wiſdome, which is borrowed out of the workemanſhippe of the
worlde.

#### 1.19.3. ‘Verſe 2. Day vnto day vttereth out ſpeech, and night vnto night
openeth knowledge.’

I Sayde that the firſt part of this pſalme may not only be with a ſound
Analogie or rule of ſaith inter­preted deuinely, but alſo philoſophicallie. I
will there­fore recite both the meanings, and I will refer the iudgement vnto
the Reader. As for that which appertey­neth vnto the knowledge of philoſophy,
Cicero ſayth notably in his 2. booke d [...] natura Deorum: But what is mans
reaſon? Hath it not pearced vp to the heuens? For of other liuing creatures we
onely know the riſing, courſe and falling of the Starres. From mankinde is the
day limitted, the month and yeare. By whom the Eclipſes of the Sunne and Moone
alſo are knowen and foreſhewed vnto all poſteritie, what maner ones, how
great, and when they ſhall happen. Which thinges (the minde beholding)
receyueth from theſe the know­ledge of God, whereupon ryſeth godlynes, vnto
which is Juſtice ioyned, and the other vertues, whereby appea­reth a bleſſed
life.

I will alſo ſet down the words of Ptolomeus, which are extant in the I. booke
of his Mathematicall Inſtru­ction. The conſideration (ſaith he) of the
heauenly mo­tions doth very much profit the manners of men. Be­cauſe it
ſheweth in thinges deuine, perpetuall likeneſſe, excellent order, proper
aptnes, and obedyence without contumacie: This maketh vs more circumſpect, and
ſtir­reth vp a zeale or good will in vs to imitate that diuine excellencie,
and inureth our inflamed mindes, to mode­rate [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=111) our actions
after a right order. But touching the Theologicall meaning of this verſe, it
is thus: Day vn­to day vttereth ſpeech, and night &c. That is, in all a­ges
euen vnto the laſt day of the world, ſhall the Goſpell he publiſhed and
aduaunced, neither in any age of the heauens. That is, (of the Apoſtles, and
others teachinge in the Church) ſhall the voyce or ſound thereof ceaſe, but
ſhall gather vnto God an euerlaſting Church.

#### 1.19.4. ‘Verſe 3. There are no ſpeeches nor languages, whoſe voices
cannot be heard.’ ‘Verſe 4. Their ſound went foorth into euerie Lande: and
their wordes into the coaſtes of the whole world.’

LIke as he ſpake a litle before touching time, ſo now prophecyeth he touching
circumſtance of place, not onely in all ages of the world, but alſo through
all partes of the world ſhal the voyce of the Goſpell be ſpred, inuy­ting all
ſortes of men vnto that ſame great ſupper, That is, vnto the felowſhippe of
the life  [...]cleſtiall, and full of bleſſednes. And with this propheſie
agreeth the ſaying of Chriſt in effecte and euent approoued, Mat. 24. This
Goſpell ſhall be preached throughout all the world, as a teſti­monie vnto all
Nations, and then ſhall the ende come. For the Apoſtles went about preachinge
the Goſpell in the moſt famous Prouinces of the Eaſt, Weſt, and South: but now
by the excéeding goodnes of God, the pure word of the goſpel is publiſhed in
the Prouinces lying North­wardes. Pigris vbi rara campis, Arbor aeſtiua
recrea­tur vmbra: Quod latus mundi nebulae, maluſque Iupiter vrget. In engliſh
thus: Where the tree ſel­dome is refreſht with ſummer ſhadow in ſlowe growing
woods, becauſe the ende of the world, the clowdes, and the euill planet holdes
it downe. Let vs therefore render thankes vnto the eternal, liuing, and moſt
true God, father of our Lord [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=111) Jeſus Chriſt,
that he illuminateth the light of his Goſpel amongſt vs, and gathereth vnto
him his Church from a­mong theſe nations, and let vs pray feruentlye with all
our heartes that he would confirme this worke begun in vs. But yet if a man
wil apply thoſe verſes vnto phi­loſophical knowledge, the application ſhal not
be harde. For ther is no nation, neyther any ſo vnciuil nor ſo bru­tiſh, which
heareth not the ſounde of the heauenly bodies and motions bearing witnes of
God. And becauſe I haue now & then in this Pſalme vſed Ciceroes words, it
ſhall not gréeue mee to repeate one notable place for this purpoſe, Ex prima
Tuſculanorum diſputatione, of the ſame Author.

When we ſee the beautie and firſt cleerenes of Firmament, after that, ſo great
ſwiftnes of the vani­ſhing thereof, as how much we are not able to con­ceiue.
Alſo, the Interchaunges of dayes & of nights, the fourefold alterations of
times or ſeaſons in the yeare to ripen the fruites of the earth, and
[...]itte for the tempera­ture of our bodies: And when we ſee that the Sunne
is the Moderator and Comforter of al theſe: And the moone by increaſe and
decreaſe of light as it were noting and ſi­gnifying the dayes appointed for
ſeuerall effectes. Again, in the ſame heauens diſtinguyſhed in 12. partes,
that there are alſo 5. Starres caryed, moſt conſtantly keping the ſame courſes
with vnequall or ſeuerall mouinges, and the nightly beauty of the heauens with
Starry ſkies euery where garniſhed. Theſe therefore and other in­numerable
when we behold, may we doubt yea or no? but that there is ſome one Creator and
Cauſer of theſe? If (as Plato ſuppoſeth) theſe be naturall. (Or if as
Ari­ſtotle ſaith they be continuall) but that there is a Mode­rator, Guyder,
or Ruler of ſo great a werk and benefite.

Finally, let vs obſerue or marke here a pleaſant Me­taphore borrowed of the
arte of buylding. For like as [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=112) Carpenters
when they buylde an houſe doe vſe a ſmall line to meaſure the platte and frame
of their buyldinge withall: So the Apoſtles and other doctors, teachers &c.
building the Church of God, directe and leuell all theire doinges by the rule
and line of the Goſpel (Chriſt Jeſus being the head corner ſtorie) as it is
ſaide in the 2. Ephe­ſians. The ſame Metaphore excellently deſcrybeth the
efficacie of thoſe heauenly bodies. For as Ariſtole in 1. Meteoris, ſaith: Of
neceſſitie is this world con­tinuallie inferior vnto the heauenlie motions, ſo
as all her powers are gouerned from aboue. For that thing which is the
principle, or originall of mouing, the ſame is alſo vnto others the cauſe of
theyr mo­uinges.

#### 1.19.5. ‘Verſe 5. Hee hath ſet in them a Tabernacle for the Sunne.’
‘Verſe 6. And he himſelfe like a Bridegroome com­ming out of his chamber:
Reioyceth as a valiant Captaine to runne his courſe.’ ‘Verſe 7. His courſe is
from the high heauens, and his recourſe vnto the vtmoſt endes thereof: Neither
is there any can hide them from his heate.’

CIcero in his 2. Booke de natura Deorum, recyteth a Philoſophicall ſentence of
the Sun, in theſe words. The Sunne (through whoſe hugenes by many parts, the
earth is ouerſpread, fetcheth his compas about the ſame, and he riſing and
falling diſtinguiſheth the day from the night. Alſo he now comming towards vs,
and afterwardes goinge from vs, maketh euerie yeare two contrarie returnes
from the ende of the worlde, by whoſe diſtance, he both as it were with a
certaine ſadnes maketh the earth heauie, and alſo a­gaine maketh her glad, as
when ſhe ſeemeth to bee [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=112) comforted by
the bright heauens. And what is more excellent then to compare Chriſt vnto the
Sunne, vnto a bridegrome or a huſband, & vnto a valiant Captaine. Touching
theſe compariſons I wil ſpeake a few words for the inſtruction of the Reader.

Like as the Sunne with his light beneficially com­forteth all the world: So
the Sonne of God reacheth his benefites vnto all men, ſo that they will
receiue them thankfully, and not refuſe them diſobedyently. Morre­uer, as the
ſun is the welſpring of liuely power: ſo Chriſt geueth life euelaſting vnto
all beleeuers.

Thirdly, as the ſunne when he ryſeth obſcureth the light of the ſkyes, and
diſmiſſeth them, ſo the righteouſ­nes of faith, which for Chriſtes ſake is
imputed vnto vs, doth vanquiſh the darkenes, and as it were dryueth a­way the
night of the glorie of mennes workes.

Fourthly, as the ſun when in the midſt of the day he is moſt higheſt, is then
moſt whoteſt: so perſecution is the companion of ye pure & vncorrupt Religion
of Chriſt.

Fiftly, as the ſun with his brigh [...]nes dryueth away clowdes and foggie
miſtes: ſo the Sonne of God ſittinge at the right hand of his Father, is the
conqueror of Ty­rantes and heretikes.

Sixtly, as the ſunne in winter when he is moſt far theſt of from the Pole, is
moſt neareſt the earth: ſo the ſonne of God is moſt neere vnto the godly ones
in miſe­rie, and geueth them helpe and ſaluation. But it were too long to goe
through with all partes of this compary­ſon, I doe therefore make ſpeede to
the expoſition of the other Similitudes.

Like as the Bridegroome or huſband beareth a ſer­uent loue vnto his ſpouſe or
wife: ſo is there in Chriſt true loue, not fayned towardes his Church, which
is te­ſtifyed in that he tooke vpon him nature of man. For ſéeing he hath
coupled this nature vnto him by that ſecrete [[Page
218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=113) and marueylous
league. Let vs not doubt but he doth loue the like nature of mankind
vnfaynedly.

Secondly, as the huſband loueth his wife only, and wandreth not out of the
boundes of wedlock: ſo Chriſt loueth his Church only which imbraceth the
Goſpel, and loueth not other ſectes Mahoinetical nor hereticall.

Thirdly, as the huſband with a franke heart com­municateth all maner benefites
vnto his wife: ſo Chriſt beſtoweth vpon his church his righteouſnes & life:
tur­ning vnto himſelfe the ſorrowes of his Church, and be­came a ſacrifice for
our ſinnes.

Fourthly, as it is the huſbandes parte to maintayn the welfare of his wife: ſo
Chriſt euermore defendeth his church, repreſſing deuils, tirants, and
heretikes.

Fiftly, Chriſt geueth his worde and holy Spirite, whereby from time to time
new members are begotten into the Church. But this is done in the miniſterie
of the Church, who as a mother, foſtereth and bringeth vp her children. This
conference to thinke vpon is profitable, becauſe not in vaine ſaide S. Paule
Marriage was a great miſterie. Namely, a figure of the League which is
betweene Chriſt and his Church. 3.

Laſtly, Chriſt is compared vnto a valyant captain, which cheerefully finiſheth
the race that hee runneth in armes. But this comparyſon ſeemeth to be
[...]aken out of Geneſis, whereas the Meſſias is called Schylo: That is,
Fortunate, vnto whom all thinges doe yeald, and all thinges obey. For this
Lord was not only prompt and ready to the battell, but alſo with a marueylous
and hea­uenly felicitie ouercame our enemie the Deuill, and de­ſtroyed the
workes of ſinne, and death it ſelfe. Vnto the conſideration of this Figure
doth the Son of God bring vs, Luke. 11. When a ſtrong man armed keepeth his
houſe, thoſe things which he hath, he poſſeſſeth in peace: But when a ſtronger
then he commeth vpon him: he ouercommeth him, he­taketh [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=113) away all his
weapons wherein he truſted, and diſtri­buteth his ſpoyles vnto his own
ſouldiers.

Furthermore what a promptitude was in Chriſt to finiſh the courſe of our
ſaluation (the wordes by himſelfe recyted) in the 14. of S. Iohns Goſpell doe
well declare. viz. The Prince of this world commeth, and hath nothing in me:
But that the world may know that I loue the Father, and as the Father
commaunded me, ſo I doe, Ariſe, let vs goe hence.

Therefore all our life longe let vs remember, that Chriſt is the ſhining ſunne
of righteouſnes, alſo the huſ­bande of his Church, and the inuincible
Captayne: So that we may craue and hope for of him, preſent and eter­nall
benefites.

#### 1.19.6. The ſecond parte of this Pſalme.

##### 1.19.6.1. ‘Verſe 8. The Law of the Lord is perfecte: Comfor­ting
ſoules.’

ALthough the former parte of this Pſalme may be expounded two wayes: yet of
this parte there is one and that a ſimple meaning, which conteineth a
commendation of the Goſpell, borrowed of the ſame forme of doctrine, and from
the effectes thereof▪ But this true and not diſſembling prayſe, is oppoſed
againſt the iudgementes of the world. The world cryeth out wickedly that the
Goſpell is a vayne  [...]able, and the fire­brand of publike diſcorde. Yea,
ſome men cry out that the doctrine of the Goſpell is the corruption of good
man­ners, and the looſeneſſe of diſcipline. Theſe vngodly udgementes of
Epicures, politike perſons, & hipocrites, doth Dauid with a conſtant
affirmation refute, when he [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=114) ſaith: The Law
of the Lord (That is) the doctrine of the Goſpel is perfecte wiſ [...]ome, far
excelling the diſputations of all Philoſophers touching God. For althoughe the
more ſounder Philoſophers ſo beleeued, and ſo reaſoned that God was an
eternall minde, and the cauſe of good­nes in Nature: Yet they neither know the
eſſence, or being of God diſtincte in thrée perſons (The eternall Father, the
eternall Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt:) neyther yet the will of God touching
forgeuenes of ſinnes, but liued in miſerable & lamentable ignorance of theſe
moſt ſpeciall and miſticall matters. But we in the church, which doe heare the
Goſpell preached and taught, doe learne the perfecte doctrine concerning the
eſſence & will of God, Vnknowen vnto mans reaſon, and all other creatures,
vntill that it was publiſhed from the ſecret boſome of the Eternall Father, by
his Sonne. We know not only what difference there is in the perſons of the
di­uinitie: but alſo the will of God touching forgeuenes of ſinnes to be
graunted vs for the Sonnes ſake our Me­diatour. Of good right therfore, and by
good cauſe, is the Phiſicall knowledge of God called both lame and dumme: But
the Goſpell named the ſound and perfecte wiſdome. But as the firſt Epithet or
name is taken from the ſame kinde of doctrine: So the other is taken from
effecte in working. And this indeede enterchange of their proper names muſt
alſo be obſerued in the other Verſes.

Moſt truely ſayde it is, that the Goſpell refreſheth, and comforteth our
ſoules: But Philoſophie is onely a meditation of death. But the Lawe is the
power of ſinne, That is, ſinne were not ſo cruell, were it not ar­med with the
Law. For by the Law ſin is made ſinne mightely. Seeing therefore remedies for
our ſorrowes can neither be requyred of Philoſophy, nor yet of ye Law we muſt
confeſſe that the only doctrine of the goſpel doth [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=114) effectually
heale the wounds of the ſore, as in the 6\. cap. of Eſay. Chriſt ſaith. The
ſpirite of the Lord is vpon me, therefore hath he anoynted me, that I may
heale the broken or contrite harte. &c. For as it is alſo ſaid Of them which
being readie to dye of the Apoplepy are ſaued and as it were brought out of
the iawes of death when as they hold the iuyce of wormwood vnto theire
noſeſtrilles. So theſe moſt ſweete conſolations. (So god loued the world. &c.
Iohn. 3. And againe, Come vnto me all ye that laboure. &c. with ma­ny mo ſuch
like, are the vanquiſhers of death and of de­ſperations. Dauid when he liued
in exile & by his ſonne Abſolon was driuen out of his kingdome felte this
ef­fecte of the Goſpell working in himſelfe, and with re­membrance of his owne
ſinnes was not a litle tormen­ted. The ſame felte alſo the conuerted théefe.
Finally no doubt euen all the godlyones fynde by experience that they can
enioy no comforte in any place but in the Goſpell, which is the miniſterie of
the Spirite and of life.

##### 1.19.6.2. ‘Verſe. 9. The teſtimonie of the Lord is faithfull, geuing
wiſdome vnto the ſimple.’

THe thirde Epithet or name of the Goſpell, agréeth with yt ſaying of Chriſt.
Sanctifie them in thy trueth, thy word is the truth Iohn. 17. That is, the
only doctrine delyuered by the Sonne of God, by the Prophetes and Apoſtles is
the trueth touching God. Beſides this the doctrine of all ſectes touching God
are deuiliſh furies, they do not publiſh God, nor ſanctifie mens mindes. This
ſaying therefore deſcerns the Church from all o­ther ſectes, and condemneth
all ſtraunge opinions tou­ching God which are contrarie to the goſpell.

The fourth Epithet may be vnderſtoode in the ſenten­ces of Chriſt and of S.
Paule, conſidered of vs. For ſo [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=115) Chriſt in the
11. of Matt. ſaith. I thanke thee O Father of heauen and of earth, that thou
haſt hidden theſe thinges frō the wiſe, and haſt reuealed them vnto the
ſimple ones. And a­gaine S. Paule. 1. cor. 1. Not many wiſe men after the
fleſhe. &c. But the foliſhe things, of this world hath God choſen. &c. But
they are the ſimple ones, which haue no vaine oſtentation or truſt in theire
owne wiſdome and righteouſnes, but acknowledge theire owne infirmitie and
theire corruptions, and carefully ſéeke to put reme­dies vnto the woundes of
theire conſcience. In ſuch per­ſons is the voyce of the goſpell effectuall,
leauing in them the pearcing perſwaſions of that wiſdome and righte­ouſnes
which pleaſeth God: but others ſwelling or puf­fed vp with pride or loue of
theire owne righteouſnes & wiſdome remayne in extreme erroures and blindnes
yea and in the ignorance of greateſt matters.

##### 1.19.6.3. ‘Verſe 10 The precepts of the Lorde are righteous re­ioycing
the hart, the commaundement of the Lord is pure, ge­uing light to the eyes.’

THe fift Epithet is referred vnto the equallitie of the goſpell, becauſe it
accuſeth all men without reſpecte of perſons, and againe promiſeth and
bringeth the grace or fauour of God vnto all them that flee vnto the
Medi­ator. For both phraſes of the effecte of the goſpell are v­niuerſalll
viz. The preaching of repentance: And the promis of grace. But of this
ſentence els where it is ofte ſpoken.

The ſixt Epithet agréeth with the ſecond, & requires no longe expoſicion
becauſe the godly knowe, that The kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but
peace and ioye in the holy ghoſt. Rom. 14.

The ſeuenth, is oppoſed againſt corrupt doctrine of true inuocation, for no
nation nor ſectes (forſaking this worde delyuered by the ſonne of God, the
prophetes and [[Page
223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=115) Apoſtles) hath
pure doctrine of god and inuocacion of the true God.

The eight, let it be vnderſtoode by an Antitheſis. The whole nature of men is
blinde, becauſe ſhe carrieth about her darknes, namely, doubtfulnes of God,
carnall ſecuritie, diſtruſt, falſe inuocation of the minde, doubting and
fleeinge from god, and other innumerable motions ſtraying away from the lawe
of God. But this blindnes doth not the world vnderſtand. No he is in loue with
him ſelfe and extolleth himſelfe by reaſone of his ſmall ſhadowe of externall
diſcipline. But the church being by the worde of the goſpell admoniſhed of
ſinne, acknow­ledgeth and bewaileth her miſhaps, and craueth of god new light,
righteouſnes and lyfe.

##### 1.19.6.4. ‘Verſe 11 The feare of the Lorde is pure abyding for euer: The
iudgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.’

THere riſeth in deede by the lawe, a feare but not ſin­cere, that is a ſeruile
feare without faith, which fléeth from God, and doth not attribut prayſe vnto
god when man is iuſtly puniſhed: but by the goſpel ryſeth a ſunne­like feare
ioyned with faith, which amonge ſorowes re­uyueth and camforteth the minde,
and draweth nere vn­to God, yea beſéecheth and receaueth of him remiſſion of
ſinne. This faith maketh a notable difference be­twene a ſeruile and a
ſunnelike feare.

##### 1.19.6.5. ‘Verſe 12 More to be deſired are then gold, and farre aboue
pearle or precious ſtone and more ſweeter then hony or the hony combe.’

VNgodly perſons ſéeke after riches and pleaſures, and yet notwithſtanding in
great aboundance of [[Page
224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=116) riches and
pleaſures are they pore and wreched, becauſe theſe good thinges at length
forſake them. As when Pompey was ouercome, no pleaſures did aſſwage his
ſorrowe. But Dauid being driuen into exilement and deſtitute of all humane
helpes retaineth this firme con­ſolation. He knewe that he had his ſinnes
forgeuen, he knewe that he had a mercifull god, and he reſted in god, he knewe
he ſhould not vtterly periſh. This conſolati­on taken out of gods word is more
excellent then golde and ſweeter then any hony. I will adde here for
decla­ration of the Antitheſis, the verſicles of Solon. For what ſo he ſaid
touching vertue, this more truely may be applyed vnto the worde of God.

Multi improbi ſunt diuites

Et boni exiguas opes habent,

Sed nos non mutabimus cum ipſis

Virtutis poſſeſsionemque ſola firma eſt,

Nam opes ſubinde mutant Dominum.

Many euill men, of welth haue ſtore,

And good men, they are very poore.

But we with them no charnge will make,

Of vertues poſſeſt, nor them forſake:

Which vertue alone kydes firme with men,

For riches theire Lord chaunge now and then.

##### 1.19.6.6. ‘Verſe 13 Yea thy ſeruant is admoniſhed by them, in keeping
them, there is greate rewarde.’

MAnifolde profit is there in gods worde. For it not onely teacheth, but alſo
admoniſheth, it ruleth & helpeth vs with counſell, it gouerneth the laboures
of our vocation, and ſanctifieth vs vnto life euerlaſting. But the effectes
are largly expounded in the 119. pſalm and are eaſely vnderſtoode of the
godly, which knowe [[Page
225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=116) the exerciſes
of faith, and inuocation.

##### 1.19.6.7. ‘Verſe 14 Who can compriſe his faultes: Clenſe me from all
ſecrete ſinnes.’

THe laſt part of this Pſalme, is a prayer, wherein there is a plaine petition
for remiſſion of ſinnes. He ſaith not as hypocrits do who hath ſinnes or
treſpaſſes, but he aſketh what man is he which conſidereth the burden of
ſinnes ſticking in the nature of man. But this verſe is rightly oppoſed
againſt the counterfet cere­mony of Monckes touching ſcrupulous numbering vp
of ſinnes, which is neither commaunded by god, nei­ther is poſſible to do, but
leadeth godly mindes into doubtfulnes, and enfeebleth theire faith.

##### 1.19.6.8. ‘Verſe 15 And from preſumptuous ſinnes keepe thy ſeruant, that
they haue no power ouer me, ſo ſhall I be vndefi­led, and ſhalbe clenſed from
the greateſt ſinne.’

MOſt rightly out of this place is borowed the diffe­rence of ſinne raigning &
not raigning. Sinne not raigning is the originall euill and motion ſtryuinge
with the lawe of God, which mans will notwithſtan­ding reſiſteth being helped
of the holy ghoſt that we ſhould not obey that wicked motion, againſt all
conſciēce and this will, (by faith) craueth and beleueth that this infirmitie
is forgeuen vs for the Sonne of Gods ſake making interceſſion for vs. Vnto
this degrée and ſteppe pertaine negligences and ignorances not wilfully
per­formed. Sin raigning in the fall after conuerſion is the breaking of Gods
lawe againſt conſcience (which ta­king place) the perſon is made guiltie of
eteruall puniſh­ment, except againe in conuerſation forgeuenes be had. And in
this degrée or ſtep, we comprehend ſinnes of wil­full [[Page
226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=117) negligence,
that is, wilfull negligence in duetie and wilfull ignorance.

##### 1.19.6.9. ‘Verſe 16 And the wordes of my mouth ſhalbe ſuche that they
ſhall pleaſe thee, and the meditation of my hart is in thy ſight, oh Lord my
helper and my redeemer.’

THe holy ghoſt is not in vaine called the ſpirite of grace and of prayer. For
as he beareth witneſſe with our ſpirite that we are the children of god, ſo
doth he ſtirre vp and prouoke our hartes vnto prayer. So Dauid, when he had
aſked of God forgeuenes of his ſinnes, made humble pentions that god woulde
re­ceyue his prayer, confeſſion, and thankeſgeuing as a reaſonable ſeruing of
god, ſéeing ther is nothing els which we are able to render vnto God, for his
greate benefites.

### 1.20. The XX. Pſalme.  
Exaudiat te Dominus. &c.

#### 1.20.1. THE ARGVMENT.

PRayers of the church are moſt worthie of di­ligent conſideration, not onlie
becauſe they aske thinges neceſſarie and wholſome, of god, but alſo becauſe
they inſtruct vs of great mat­ters. So this Pſalme ſithe it prayeth for the
Prince or cheefe magiſtrate, teacheth the reader as touching politique order,
verie profitably. For firſt it plucketh [[Page
227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=117) out of mens
mindes an vniuſt imagination, which diſcerneth not betwene gouernement and
ſpoiles, like as that Pyrate ſaide to Alexander. Why is it more lawfull for
thee to ſpoyle vpon the land, then for me vpon the ſeat? For ſeeing the
ſcripture ſo often commandeth prayers to be made for the magiſtrate that
gouern­ment may remaine vnharmed and be eſtabliſhed, needfull it is that thing
bee good and acceptable vnto god, and not anie ſinne, becauſe we muſt not pray
that ſinnes ſhould be eſtabliſhed. But of this praying there are precepts
extant in the 24. of Iere­my. Pray ye for the kingdome of Babilon becauſe in
the peace thereof, you may alſo haue peace. He biddes them praye for the
empire which at that time was the harboure or ſuccour of the church. And in 1.
Tim. 2\. Is deliue­red a precept full of erudition. I exhort you that pray­ers
and thankes geuinges be made for all men, For kinges & all which are in
authoritie vnder them, that we may lyue a quiet and peacable life, in all
godlynes and honeſtie. Here­upon it is cleare what difference there is betwene
ruling and robbing. For rulinges or gouernements are the ordinance of god, and
theſe muſt we obey for gods cauſe, who is the author of this ordenance. But
robbings or ſpoilings are the deſtructions of gods ordinance, and the furies
of the deuill where­with God is horriblie angrie. Secondlie this pſalme
teacheth, that gouernments are not preſerued by fortune or by the counſels of
men onlie, but by god who is not onelie ſo the author of politique order, that
he alloweth of lawful gouernments but alſo by this meanes. Becauſe like as
both by his proui­dence he ordeyned the courſe and mouinges of the ſtarres,
and alſo by his power preſerueth the ſame. So alſo politique order is the
worke of God, and howe much ſoeuer of this ordinaunce abideth in [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=118) the confuſed
ſtate of humaine nature, is by God truelie and effectuallie preſerued. For the
deuill woulde altogether deſtroie honeſt ſocietie, but that God repreſſeth his
furies and did protecte parte of mankinde. And that God is the preſeruer of
this ordniance, the puniſhments of ſeditious and rebel­lious perſons do not
onlie ſhewe, but alſo that ſame burden of affaires and daungers which mans
wiſ­dome (without God) is not able to endure. Moſt truelie therefore is it
ſaide of Plato lib. 4. de legibus. whereasnot God, but ſome mortall man
beareth rule, there is none eſcape from miſchiefes and miſeries.

Finallie he reprehendeth the pride of mans minde, which imagineth that greate
matters and profitable thinges are gouerned by our wiſdome and vertue. Like as
Timotheus the ſonne of Conon, ſaide of a matter happelie exploieted. This did
I and not fortune. And Aiax in Sophocles ſaide. Da­ſterds and ſ [...]uggards
had need of Gods helpe, but he euen without God was able to ouercome. Let this
therefore be in vs perſwaded, and let vs altogether holde it approued, that
mans alone diligence is not ſuffici­ent for the weightie charge of gouernement
as in the hiſtorie ſette downe by Herodotus lib. 7\. Xerxes rightlie ſaide.
That the kingdome of Perſia increaſed vnder the gouernement of God, and the
kinges themſelues redily folowing him. For a weightie and hard matter it is
the gouernement of a common welth, neither can it be ruled by the alone
diligence of man, the which thing theſe heauenlie ſayinges do teache, Ieremy.
10\. I knowe O Lorde, that mans way is not his, neither is it in man to direct
his owne footeſteppes. A­gaine. Pſalme. 127\. Except the Lord do keepe the
Ci­tie he watcheth in vayne that keepeth the ſame. Which thinges (ſith they ſo
be) let vs feruentlie beſeech of [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=118) God, that God
woulde gouerne the counſels, and ſucceſſe of godly Princes, or Magiſtrates,
which geue ſuccour vnto the Church, and vnto learning: and which alſo are the
ob­ſeruers of the workes of God, as of the Law of righte­ouſneſſe, and of
peace.

#### 1.20.2. The diſpoſition of the partes of the Pſalme.

THere are three partes of this Pſalme. The firſt is a feruent prayer for
proſperitie of the Coun­ſels, and ſucceſſe in gouernments, which are the
ſuc­coures of the Church. The ſecond part is a Thankſ­geuing for preſeruation
and defence of the proſ­perous eſtate of gouernmentes. The third parte
conteineth doctrine of faith, whereunto is adioyned a reprehenſion of
confidence in humaine helpes.

#### 1.20.3. ‘Verſe 1. THe Lorde heare thee in the day of tro­ble: The God of
Iacob be thy defence.’

THe Church is not conuerſant in king­domes, as an vnthankfull Gueſt: but
rendereth moſt ample thankes vnto her Nourſes. For, ſhee prayeth for thoſe
Magiſtrates of whom ſhe is che­riſhed and nouriſhed, as Abraham prayed for
Abimelech the king. And [[Page
230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=119) Iacob bleſſed
Pharao, king of Egipt who receaued from Ioſeph the doctrine of true prayer
vnto God. But al­though the vngodly doe deride theſe gratulatorie bene­fites:
Yet is there nothing more effectuall towardes re­tayning the mean eſtate of
pollicie, then the prayers and ſolemne petitions of the godly. For, that
riches, whole hoaſtes of men, and leagues, are weake preſeruations of
gouernoures, not onely the ſacred hiſtories but alſo wiſe men, liuing without
the Church, doe witneſſe. The ſaying of Cicero In 9. Epiſtolarum is knowen.
Thou vnderſtandeſt how that Gneius Pompeius was not pre­ſerued neither by the
glorie of his name, nor of his exploites, neither yet by the ſuites and
ſeruices of kinges and nations, whereof he was wonte to boaſt.

The name of God then (as Salomon ſaith) Is a ſtrong defence, Pro. 18. That is,
Inuocation vpon the Lord. To this who ſo fleeth, findeth help and deliuerance.
But therefore he wiſely ſaith in this verſe: In the day of  [...] ­ble. That
he might ſignifie the burthen of bu [...]es, and daungers which good Princes
endure in time of peace and warre. For the deuill is enemie vnto proſperous
gouernment, and by manifolde wayes hindereth the ſame, by ſeditions mooued,
making warres, and wor­king other meanes. Vpon this horrible hatred, and fury
of the Deuill (we thinking) let vs crie out with Io­ſaphat the king of Iuda:
Surelie there is not ſo great▪ for­titude in vs, that we are able to ſtriue
againſt this multitude which ruſhe [...]h vpon vs with ſo great aſſault. But
when wee know not what to doe, that is remayning vnto vs, euen to caſt our
eyes vnto thee, O God alone. Wherefore, when as our Princes are exerciſed in
greateſt hazard and danger for their godly proſeſſion, wee muſt craue with
moſt ar­dent prayer, that God would vtterly ſubuerte the furies of the deuill
and of Tirantes, and preſerue our weake Churches and families, publiſhing the
voice of the Goſ­pell, [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=119) and flying
vnto him for defence.

#### 1.20.4. ‘Verſe 2. Sende thee helpe from his holie hill: And out of Sion
geue thee defence.’

THe Church repeateth the ſame ſorowes and pray­ers, to ſhew that ſhe with all
her heart prayeth for kinges, and all thoſe in aucthoritie vnder them. For,
ſhe is not ignorant, how greate, and how many impedi­mentes there be vnto
proſperous gouernment: name­ly, infirmitie growing in vs, the ſnares of the
deull, who is delighted in deſtruction of Gods handieworkes, in mankinde, and
that ſame burthen of buſines and daun­gers, wherein many ſodeyne and
inextricable euils (con­trarie to their minde) are offered vnto Gouernors:
Like as Dauid did not foreſée the ſedition of his Sonne. Vn­to theſe
impediments doth he not oppoſe engins of war, but the hearing of his prayers
by God, yea his defence, helpe, and heauenly fortitude.

#### 1.20.5. ‘Verſe 3. That he may remember all thy Sacrifices, & make fatte
thy peace offeringe,’

HEtherto hath the Church commended vnto God, the perſonages of godly
Gouernours: Now doeth he commend vnto God their laboures and counſels. And yet
in déede let this verſe be vnderſtoode, as touchinge Gods acceptation not
only, but alſo of the meaning and experience of his acceptation, as if Dauid
ſayde: Geue proſperitie in peaceable gouernment, and victories in battle, ſo
as Magiſtrates may haue experience in y• thing it ſelfe, that thou art the
Champion, and getteſt the chiefe honour of pollicies: and that prayers made
for them, is not a vaine liplabour. Let alſo their labours, and care­full
ſorrowes, reaſonable ſeruinges of God: and let them [[Page
232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=120) be referred
vnto this ende, that the doctrine of true Reli­gion may be aduaunced, that
Schooles may be maintey­ned, and tender youth inſtructed, Neither let the
Church be vtterly diſperſed, nor the young plantes of thy Church be hurt or
hindered Alſo that mens liues and manners may with honeſt diſcipline bee
gouerned. Let them looke vpon theſe concluſions ſo oft as eyther they
exer­ciſe iudgementes at home, either els warres abroade. Such a gouernment
(pinguis eſt) That is, both pleaſeth God, and alſo is profitable for his
Church.

#### 1.20.6. ‘Verſe 4. And geue vnto thee thy hartes deſire: And fulfill all
thy minde.’

THis verſe agreeth with the former, for it aſketh of God proſperitie in
counſels and affaires, of gouern­ment at home in peace, and abroade in warres.
Moſt true is the ſaying, extant in the 16. Prouerb. A man deuiſeth a way in
his hearte: But it is the Lor that ordereth his goinges. This ſentence
teacheth, that it is the beſt, and moſt excellent thing in déede for mans
heart to hope well, but the happy and proſperous euentes, are in the handes of
the Lorde: We muſt therfore beſeech of god, that he will guyde and gouerne the
euentes, and geue them proſperous ſucceſſe. But let the vniuerſall parti­cle
be vnderſtoode without cauillation. For man ſome­time erreth in conſultation:
like as Ioſias erred, ſuppo­ſing that hee made iuſt and neceſſarie battle
againſt the king of Egypt. And it is no doubt, but the whole pſalme ought to
be applyed touching godly Gouernours, which are the nouriſhers of the Church.
For in déede of the vngodly Eſaias in his 8. chapter, ſayth: Take your counſel
together, yet ſhall your counſell come vnto nought. And Da­uid 2. kinges 15.
ſaith: O Lorde turne the counſell of A­chitophell into fooliſhnes.

[[Page 233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=120)

#### 1.20.7. ‘Verſe 5 We ſhalbe glad in thy ſaluation, and in the name of God
ſhall we tryumphe: The Lord fulfill all thy petitions.’

THis thanks geuing for victory had Dauid in mouth and minde ſo often as hee
brought foorth his Hoaſte into the fielde, ſo often as he ſet them in battell
aray and ſo often as he gaue onſet vpon the enemies hoſt: I will ouercome and
put to fooyle mine enemies, not with my armies, but with the helpe of the
Lord, and I will carye them captiues in tryumphe ouer them not through the
valiancy of my ſouldiers, but as armed with the preſence of God. But although
it ſéeme a fooliſh thing, To tryumph before the conqueſt, yet faith is the
certaine knowledge of things not appearing, and the confidence of things to be
hoped for. In matters of phiſike, truly, feeling goeth before faith, as a man
beleeueth that water is warme when he hath theirein dipt his finger, &
experience hath ſo taught that it is warm: ſo in nature after experience
foloweth beliefe, but in embracing the promis of God, a contrary thing
happeneth. Beliefe, that is, faith goeth before deli­uerāce, like as in the
2\. Paral. 20. Ioſaphat moſt ſwet­ly ſayeth Put your truſt in the Lord your G
[...]d, and ye ſhall be ſafe, beleue his Prophetes and al things ſhall go well
with you. Dauid here alſo repeateth his prayer: The Lord fulfill all thy
petitions: to teach that God helping vs, we ſhall haue both a ioyfull
beginning and alſo a proſperous ending.

#### 1.20.8. ‘Verſe 6 Now know I that the Lord hath preſerued his anoynted:
The Lord heare him from his holy heauen, his right handſaueth mightelie.’

HE addeth vnto the prayer, a thanks geuing which ſpringeth of the good purpoſe
of faith beleuinge [[Page
234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=121) that God hath
care ouer vs, and that we are helped by God. But here, the doctrine of
Papiſtes concerninge doubting muſt we mightely reprehend which with a
malignant vizour ſtriueth againſt faith and plungeth men eyther into a
contempt of God, or els into deſpera­tion For who would not of right maruell
that Papiſtes (beleuing that God affirmeth any thing touching effects by paſt
and to come, ſhould themſelues doubte of his be­nefites, which in this preſent
lyfe he geueth vnto men? I beleue ther is no man in the popiſh congregation
lyuing which would doubt that all things are made of nothing, and of the
rayſing of the deade to lyfe, which ſhall folow after this lyfe. What then
ſhould let them, that they leſſe embrace by the ſame beleefe the article of
remiſſi­on of ſinnes, and therein be ſetled in conſcience ſéeinge the ſame God
is the Author of all the articles of the faith, and requyreth no leſſe glory
of trueth to be geuen him, touching remiſſion of ſinnes (which for his ſonnes
ſake is graunted) then he requireth touching other matters proponed to be
beleued? It is manifeſt plaine therefore that papiſtes lyue in great erroure,
and in the ignorance of chéefeſt matters. But we will ſtand againſt this
di­ſtruſt & doubting, and with moſt firme beleefe perſwade our ſelues that we
are fréely receyued and heard of God, for his ſonnes ſake the Mediator, if ſo
be that we repent vs of our ſinne, and by faith flée vnto the throne of grace.
But theſe things are in an other place with mo wordes expounded.

#### 1.20.9. ‘Verſe 7 Some in Charyotes, and others in horſes do truſt, but we
will thinke vpon the name of the Lord our God:’ ‘Verſe 8 They are caſt downe
and fallen to the earth, but we are riſen, and are exalted.’

[[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=121)NOw
followeth the third part of the Pſalme: which is a moſt graue reprehenſion of
confidence in mās helpe or defence, as if he ſaide: What are chariotes and
horſes if they be compared vnto Gods power? Nothing ſurely: But as the vile
dongue compared vnto ye bright ſunne, and as one drop of water compared vnto
the main Sea. Who ſo is wiſe therefore, had rather truſt in the Lord, then
truſt that he can by mans power ouercome. For, If God be on our ſide, who can
be againſt vs? Exam­ples doe notably verify this ſaying. In 2. Paralipp. 13.
King Abia before he went to battell againſt Iero­boam, ſayde: In our hoaſt is
God preſent as our Captaine, and his prieſtes, which ſound out their trumpets,
and crie out againſt you, And behold when they cryed, God fearfullye amaſed
Jeroboam and all Iſrael, which ſtoode in armes againſt Abia and Iuda, and the
children of Iſrael fiedde vnto Juda, and God gaue them into their handes. Abia
then ſmote them, & ſo did his people with a great ſtroke, and there dyed
wounded among the Iſraelites, fiue hundred thouſand of ſtrong men. And the
Children of Iſ­rael at that time were diſcouraged, and the children of Juda
were moſt mightely comforted, becauſe they did put their truſt in the Lord the
God of their Fathers.

Alſo in ye 2\. Paralipom. 14. King Aſa being readye to fight with mightie
armies of Ethiopians, called vpon the Lord, ſaying: O Lord there is with thee
no difference, whe­ther thou helpeſt in few or in many. Helpe vs O Lord our
god For we truſting in thee and in thy name, doe goe againſt this multitude. O
Lord thou art our God, let not man preuaile againſt thee. Therefore the Lord
brought a feare vpon the Ethiopians, in the preſence of Aſa, and of Juda, and
they fled away, that there was not one left aliue, becauſe when the Lord ſmote
them, and his hoaſt fought againſt them, they were altogether confounded.

Again in 2. Paral. 16. The Prophet Hananias re­prehending [[Page
236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=122) the vngodly
confidence which king Aſa re­poſed in the king of Siria, ſaide: Becauſe thou
haſt tru­ſted in the king of Siria, and not in the Lord thy God, therefore
hath the hoaſt of the king of Siria eſcaped out of thy handes. Were not the
Ethiopians and Libians farre moe in number with their chariotes and horſemen
and excéeding multitude, whom, when thou beléeuedſt in the Lord, he deliuered
into thy handes? For the eyes of the Lord behold all the whole earth, and geue
ſtrength vnto them which with a true heart beleue in him. Ther­fore thou haſt
done fooliſhly: and euen for this cauſe only at this preſent doe theſe warres
ariſe againſt thee.

In the 2. Paral. 32. Ezechias the king made this Oration vnto the people, when
as Sennacherib was be­ſieging of Hieruſalem. Stande to it manfullie and bee of
good courage, feare not, nor be not diſmaide at the king of the Aſſyrians, nor
all his multitude of men, which is with him, for with vs are many moe then
with him: For with hym is tyere an arme of fleſh, but with vs is the Lord our
God, and he fighteth for vs, &c. Theſe examples and others which are
innumerable, doe greatly ſet foorth the Antitheſis of con­fidence in God, and
of truſting in the help of man.

#### 1.20.10. ‘Verſe 9 O Lord ſaue the Queene, and hear vs when ſoeuer we
ſhall call vpon thee.’

PRayer is not ſo oftentimes repeated in vaine, becauſe the deuil holdeth
continuall warre with the Church, and bendeth and practiſeth all the indeuoure
of his kingdome, to the deſtruction of the Church. Wherefore we muſt
continually fight a­gainſt this enemy with prayer, which confoundeth, and
enfeebleth his power. Amen

[[Page 237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=122)

### 1.21. The xxj. Pſalme.  
Domine in virtute tua. &c.

#### 1.21.1. THE ARGVMENT.

IAm not ignorant that certaine Diuines of excel­lent wittes, and exquiſite
learning, haue interpre­ted this pſalme, as concerning the politike
ma­giſtrate, and applie it vnto that purpoſe, that it may be a thankeſgeuing
for victorie againſt the ene­mies, which the former pſalme required of God.
But although I take not ſo much vpō me, as to find fault with their purpoſe:
yet I am moued with the weigh­tines of the words to be perſwaded that this
pſalme muſt be vnderſtood, concerning Chriſt the eternall King and Prieſte,
and of the tragicall puniſhments due to the Iewiſh people. For firſt is an
often menti­on made of the eternitie, which agreeth more vnto the kingdome of
Chriſt, then vnto tranſitorie ſtates of regiment. Secondlie the phraſe of
bleſsing ſo of­ten times repeated, without doubt pointeth the fin­ger vnto the
promis which was delyuered to Abra­ham. In thy ſeede ſhall al nations be
bleſſed. Laſt of al there is ſuch an extreame rigour, in threatning of
puniſh­mentes, that I ſuppoſe the ſame can not be cōſtrued concerning other
nation, then of the people of the Iewes. This ground of our purpoſe thus
framed, let vs after this ſpeake touching the argument of this Pſalme. No
doubt it is that the firſt pare of the pſalme is a plentifull & notable
deſcription of glo­rie which Chriſt had in his reſurrection, & triumph, and
ſitting at the right hand of God, for euer, ſhall haue. For as in his paſsion
he was brought low and [[Page
238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=123) debaſed, worſe
then Angels and men: ſo riſing frō death to life & triūphing, he was placed
in high dig­nitie of glorie as in the 2. Philip. it is ſaide. Therefore hath
God exalted him & geuen him a name which is aboue all names. &c. This glorie
did the Apoſtles beholde whole 40. dayes together. For there ſaw they,
mor­talitie to be fullie & wholie aboliſhed in chriſt: they ſawe a new nature
ſhining in the light of heauen, in a new righteouſnes and life. And ſeeing it
properlie appertaineth vnto the prieſt to bleſſe, not only the kingdome of
Chriſt, but alſo the prieſthoode of this Lord is here deſcribed. Let vs
therfore hold ſtill (the definition of the high prieſt in the church) that the
difference betwene Chriſt and other prieſtes may be perceaued. The hye prieſt
is a perſon immediat­lie ſent from God, to the publiſhing of the goſpell, to
pacefie by his ſacrifice the wrath of god, & to pray for vs hauing witnes,
that he ſhall be heard, and by which perſon, benefites promiſed in the newe
teſta­ment, are beſtowed vpon vs. By this difinition it is cleare, what
difference there is betwene the prieſt­hoode of Chriſt and the miniſteries of
the teachers in the church. For, he is the fountaine of doctrine, which being
pronounced from the boſome of the e­ternal father, he hath made knowne. Other
teachers onlie receaue the benefites mencioned, from this maſter. Secondlie he
onelie with his ſacrifice and in­terceſsion pacifieth the wrath of his
eternall father. But the miſeries or calamities of other miniſters are not
ſacrifices for the ſinne of mankind, but eyther puniſhmentes for certaine
proper offences, eyther els tryals or exerciſes of faith diſcerning true faith
from hipocriſie, eyther els teſtimonies of the doc­trine of immortalitie which
they profeſſe, and are ſignes & tokens nothing failing cōcerning the
iudg­ments [[Page
239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=123) that ſhalbe.
Laſt of al the high prieſt, by his merit & efficacie geueth ſpritual bleſsing,
that is, de­lyuerance from the curſe of the law & frō the wrath of God,
forgeuenes of ſins, the holie ghoſt & life e­uerlaſting, as in the 1. of Iohn,
is written. Out of his fulnes, we al haue receyued grace for grace. Other
teachers are onlie miniſters of the worde of the goſpel, & of the ſacraments,
by the which the ſonne of god is ef­fectuall. Let this high prieſt therefore
be diſcerned from Prophetes, Apoſtles and other teachers in the church, as
Iohn baptiſt ſaith. I baptiſe you with water, but he baptiſeth with the
ſpirit. Mat. 3. cap.

The ſecond parte of the Pſalme is a tragical ſermō concerning puniſhmēts of
the Iewes, who with moſt cruel kindes of death perſecuted Chriſt and his
A­poſtles: for vnto theſe denounceth he deſtruction of theire regiment; and of
theire church, and alſo per­petual baniſhment, & thraldome. This comminatiō
or threatning can no man read without great feare of minde, ſpeciallie ſeing
the thing ſheweth that the regiment of the Iewes was ſo diſtroyed that it
could neuer be reſtored, & that the Iewes were puniſhed with perpetuall
baniſhment. Alſo let that come into our conſideration, which Paule Rom. 11\.
ſettes be­fore the reader. If God haue not ſpared the naturall bran­ches, much
leſſe ſhall he ſpare the wilde or vnnaturall bran­ches. That is if the Iewes
were deſtroyed with ſo hor­rible puniſhmentes for theire vnthankfulnes and
contempt of the goſpell, out of whome Chriſt was borne, after the fleſh, let
vs feare like puniſhmentes of contempt in greeuous offences, ſithence the ſame
God is iudge both of Iewes and Gentiles. But now let vs proceede to the
expoſition of the Pſalme.

[[Page 240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=124)

#### 1.21.2. ‘ſVere 1 O Lord in thy ſtrrngth ſhall the king be glad: And in
thy ſauing helth▪ how exceedinglie ſhall he reioye?’

THis Pean, or ſolemne ſonge, is a moſt ioyfull victorie of Chriſt rayſed from
death to life, and making glorious try­umph ouer ſinne, death, the deuill and
hell. For as by reaſon of our ſinnes, he was weake and mortall, and cryed
aloude vpon the croſſe: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? So being
exalted by the right hand of God, for our righteouſnes he ſpoyled his
e­nemies, and caryed them captiues in his triumphes, be­reaued of all power.
As in the 2. to the Coloſſ. and in the 68. Pſalme is written.

Men ſay that Epaminudas Prince of Thebes, in ac­compliſhing his greateſt
exploytes, ſaide: that he reaped this ſpeciall profite or fruite of his
enterpriſes, in that he had his parentes the beholders of his glorie: So there
is no doubt, but the ſonne of God reioyceth in the iudge­ment and teſtimonie
of his eternall father, approouinge and helping forwardes his victorie againſt
the deuil and his champions. Being fully repleate with this inſpeke­able ioy,
he affirmeth that he is well apayd, and reioyceth and that hee can neither by
wordes or outwarde appa­rance ſufficiently declare the greatnes of his
affecte. But ſeeing this his victorie is alſo oures, let vs with ioy em­brace
the ſame, and let vs lay foorth the ſame as a Gorgon or Shield of Pallas
before the kingdome of the deuill, crying aloude with Paule 1\. Cor. 15. Death
where is thy ſtinge? Hell where is thy victorie? Thankes be to God which hath
geuen vs victorie, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.

Vndoubtedly, if with perpetuall minde and conſi­deration we were conuerted
vnto the image of Chriſt, [[Page
241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=124) thus rayſes
from death, and aſcending vp into heauen, we ſhould more eaſelye beare the
ſorrowes of this moſt ſhort and moſt tranſitorie life, and we would leſſe be
a­frayde in the middeſt of death. But our hearts are too colde in conſidering
vpon the promiſes of Chriſt: Be ye of good cheare, I haue ouercome the world.
Iohn. Againe, I liue, and you ſhall liue. Let vs therefore craue of God, that
he would with his holy ſpirite illuminate in vs the conſideration of theſe
ſpeciall matters, and alſo woulde geue vs ioy and confidence, which is the
vanquiſher of feares and doubtinges.

#### 1.21.3. ‘Verſe 2▪ Thou haſt geuen vnto him his heartes deſire, And haſt
not denied him the prayer of his lippes.’

I Haue before now and then ſaide: That prayer is af­ter a twofolde manner: The
one which proceedeth from cogitation of minde, and a confidence illuminated in
the will of God, and fleeing vnto God, inwardly cra­uing and expecting good
thinges. The other, which is made with the tongue, expreſſing thoſe motions of
the heart, and the heart therewith ag [...]ing. And God re­quyreth an expreſſe
veice, that others may be inſtructed, & confirmed: Yea, that euen the deuils,
when true prayer vnto God is heard, may tremble for feare, and flée away.

Therefore it teſtifieth that both ſortes of prayer is heard of God. For, what
can the bountifull hande of God deny vnto his onely begotten and beloued
Sonne? But ſeeing the Sonne hath promiſe that he is heard, as Paule in the 5\.
Heb. ſaith. He is heard by reaſon of his humilitie. There is no doubt, but
they which call vpon God in confidence of his Sonne, are receiued and heard.
For God loueth vs for his beloued Sons ſake, vnto whō he hath geuen al
things. And what thinges the Sonne of God with ſorrow of heart, and with
tongue, hath aſked [[Page
242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=125) of his
eternall father, the Verſes following plainly will teach vs.

#### 1.21.4. ‘Verſe 3. Becauſe thou haſt preuented him with graci­ous
bleſsinges: Thou haſt put a Crowne of golde vpon his head.’ ‘Verſe 4. He aſked
life of thee, and thou gaueſt him a long life: Yea a life that laſteth for
euer.’ ‘Verſe 5. Great is his glorie in thy ſaluation: Thou ſhalt indue him
with glorie and great honour.’

ALl theſe thinges are moſt eaſilie vnderſtoode, in conſidering an Antitheſis
of the paſſion and reſurrection of Chriſt. For Chriſt in his paſſion was
curſed: becauſe the curſe was turned vpon him, whereunto mankinde was
ſubiecte. And he himſelfe ſuffered the due puniſh­ment of Gods iuſtice, and ſo
payed for vs the raunſome, But what a heauie ſpeach is this, to bee called
curſed of God, that cannot be expreſſed in wordes, but let vs with a godly
meditation learne, when we beholde our ſinnes after a ſorte, and tremble,
fearinge that wee are in déede caſt away into euerlaſting damnation.

But now after his reſurrection, God is not onelie bleſ­ſed for euer, but alſo
the fountaine of heauenly bleſſing, concerning which I wil anone ſay more. And
that he was preuented (ſaith he) with bleſsing, that ſéemeth Paule to
interpret Coloſſ. 1. when he ſaith: Chriſt is the firſte begotten of them
which die, that he may holde the principali­tie in all thinges. Alſo 1. Cor.
15. Chriſt is riſen from death the firſt fruites of them which die. Let this
prerogatiue of Chriſt be vnderſtoode as touching the circumſtance of time, and
efficacie of Chriſtes reſurrection. For (as vnto the time pertayneth) no man
was euer ſo rayſed from death before Chriſtes time, that he yealded not again
vn­to mightie death. But Chriſt ryſing againe from death, af­ter [[Page
243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=125) that dyeth
not, neither hath death any more power ouer him. Moreouer, the reſurrection of
the Lord is ſo effe­ctuall, that euen in vs alſo it ouercommeth death, and may
make vs partakers of the moſt ioyfull reſurrection of the Saintes. We ſhall
therefore liue by the merite and efficacie of Chriſt, according to that
ſaying, I liue, & you ſhall liue.

Secondly, moſt ſorrowfull was the appearance of Chriſt, when he was brought
foorth arrayed in purple, & crowned with thornes: But now he beareth a crown
of golde ſet vpon his head: wherein is written, King of kinges, and Lord of
lordes. Alſo, Vnto mee ſhall euerie knee bowe, Apoc. 19. 1. Tim. 6. Phil. 2.
Theſe precious ſtones and pearles are imboſſed in the crowne of Chriſt.

Thirdly, to his death and buryall is oppoſed life, not in deede a tranſitorie
and a frayle life, but a permanent and euerlaſting life. In this Antitheſis
let the example be conſidered, which the ſaying of paul, Ephe. 3. notably
ſetteth downe: God is able more aboundantlie to perfourme all thinges, then we
dare aske or looke for. Chriſt aſked of his eternall father life, and obteyned
life, which no Li­mitte of time compryſeth, and which alone is to bee
ac­counted for a life.

Fourthly, Vnto the reproches of Chriſt crucifyed, is oppoſed glorie, which is,
that by himſelfe, hauing cleanſed vs from our ſinnes, He ſitteth at the right
hand of ma­ieſtie, being ordeined in the Heauens as Heire of all thinges, And
Lord ouer all principalitie, power, ſtrength, & domini­on, is made of God vnto
vs righteouſneſſe, ſanctification, and redemption. Heb. 1. Coloſſ. 1. 1. Cor.
1.

#### 1.21.5. ‘Verſe 6 Becauſe thou ſhalt power vpon him bleſſinge for euer
Thou ſhalt make him glad with the ioy of thy coun­tenance.’

[[Page 244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=126)HEtherto
hath he diſcribed Chriſt the king adorned with bleſſinge, with a crowne, with
life and with glorie. Now diſcribeth he him as prieſte, and attributeth vnto
him the office of bleſſing his people, therewith in­terpreting the promiſe
delyuered vnto vnto Abraham. In thy ſeede ſhall all nations be bleſſed. For,
becauſe he na­meth an euerlaſting bleſſing, it is needefull the ſame be
vnderſtood, not of a politique kingdome, as the Jewes dreame, but as touching
forgeunes of ſinues, and of the frée gifte of his holie ſpirite, & of life
euerlaſting. After the ſame maner doth Paule. Ephe. 1. intreate vpon the
bleſ­ſing of the Meſſias. Bleſſed be God and the father of our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt, which hath bleſſed vs with his spirituall bleſſing in heauenly giftes,
in Chriſt in whome we haue re­demption (through his blood) and alſo remiſſion
of ſinnes. &c. Let therefore the dreames of the Jewes be ſuppreſſed, who not
conſidering the miſchéefes wherein mankinde is ouerwhelmto, do aſke of the
meſſias, and loke for of him, riches and wordly dominions. But let vs
vnder­ſtand, that Chriſt was ſent of God, to the end he might diſtroy ſinne
and death, and reſtore vnto vs righteouſ­neſſe and life euerlaſting.

#### 1.21.6. ‘Verſe 7 Becauſe the kinge truſteth in the Lorde, and in the
mercy of the moſt hygheſt ſhall be neuer faile.’

WHen as no kingdome can be firme and ſtable without neceſſary defences or
ſafegards. Dauid ſheweth here, what the defences or ſafegardes of Chriſts
kingdome are, namely, not riches, not hoaſtes of men, not braſen péeces, but
the mercy of the moſt higheſt, which can not be weakened by any force or
ſtrength, neyther yet at any time can be remoued out of place, as in the 54.
of Eſai. moſt ſwéetly is ſaid. The hilles ſhal be moued, & the litle hilles
ſhall tremble. But my mercy ſhall not [[Page
245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=126) departe from
thee, neyther ſhall the couenant of my peace be moued, ſaith the Lord thy
mercifull God. Let vs therefore hope, that the church ſhall continewe ſtill,
yea though kingdomes quayle amongſt them ſelues, and the whole world ſhould
vtterly be fruſhed together.

#### 1.21.7. ‘Verſe 8 Thy hand ſhall finde out al thine enimies, thy right
hande ſhall finde out them that hate thee.’

ALthough theſe moſt ſorowfull ſpéeches, (in thin­king whereof it is needfull
that all the godly do trē ­ble in eche parte) may be vnderſtood of all
Chriſts ene­mies and of his church: yet not abſurdly are theſe by ex­ception
referred vnto the Jewes. But there are two cau­ſes for which the horrible
puniſhmentes of the Jewiſh people were before ſpokē of by God. Firſt that we
may knowe it is the worke of Gods iuſtice that the vngodly ſinnes &
miſchieuous wickednes of the Jewes ſhould be puniſhed with ſo great
calamities. Secondly that we may knowe euen theſe calamities are the voyce of
God admoniſhing vs touching repentance. When as therfore we conſider the
tragicall puniſhments of this people, let vs be ſtirred vp vnto repentance and
let vs craue with true and feruent prayers that we may be gouerned of God,
that we fall not into like dotage and fury. Now let vs way the effectuall
ſubſtance of the words as by a ba­lance. He profoundly calleth the aduerſaries
of Chriſt, the aduerſaries and ememies of God. For, He which honoureth not the
ſonne, honoureth not the father. So it is ſaide in Zachar. 12. touching the
enemies of the church. He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye.
Then do not the Turkes and tirannicall biſhops holde wares with vs onely, but
againſt God him ſelfe do they fight, which thing ſithe ſo it is, let vs hope
for victorie not in bewe and ſworde, but in the Lord our God. [[Page
246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=127) But why doth
he ſo often repeats the worde (finde out) becauſe he would rebuke the
ſecuritie of the enemies, which truſting to theire power thinke they ſhall
ſcape  [...]ot frée. They ſhal not (ſaith he) be with any power ſuf­ficiently
fenced againſt the Lords inquiſicion: no darke d [...]ngeons ſhalbe able to
hyde them, as in the firſt of So­phonie moſt elegantly is written. I will
ſeeke Ieruſalem with lanthornes, and I will viſite thoſe men which ſticke faſt
in theire filthines, which ſay in theire harts: The Lord will not do well, &
he will not do euill. And theire great ſtrēgth ſhall be theire owne
deſtruction, and theire houſe ſhalbe laide waſtie. Finally he ſetteth downe,
an vniuerſall note, as if he had ſaide, God is not addicted to haue any
reſpecte of perſons in puniſhing man, but he catcheth both greate and ſmale
vnto puniſhment, neither is theire any man which can eſcape the mighty hand of
God.

#### 1.21.8. ‘Verſe 9 Make them like a fierie ouen, in time of thy wrath, the
Lord in his furie ſhall ſwallow them vp, & the fyer ſhall deuoure them.’
‘Verſe 10 Thou ſhalt deſtroy theire laboure, vpon the earth and the ſeede of
them from amonge the ſonnes of men.’

THeſe verſes do I vnderſtand touching the laſt de­ſtructiō of Jeruſalem whoſe
hiſtory is by Ioſephus and certaine others ſufficiently well & largely
deſcribed: And that I may omit other thinges which to remember my minde
abhorreth and with ſorowe againe ſhunneth. The citie being by the enemies
beſéeged, began to be op­preſſed with horrible famine, after which enſued ſo
filthy a diſtruction, that 1100000. perſons are ſaide in time of that ſéege to
haue bene deſtroyed by famine and peſti­lence. A greate multitude was ſlaine
of ſeditiouſe per­ſons, with dayly ſlaughter within the walles whiles the
batle laſted. Afterwardes by the enemies weapons in [[Page
247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=127) beating downe
the wals when the citie was taken and burned, certayne thouſandes periſhed: In
time of  [...]e feight there were taken to the number of 97000. who being
partly ſoulde, and partly diſperſed into great cities of the dominions nere
vnto them, at the feaſt dayes were caſt forth to be deuoured of wilde beaſtes,
others one ſtriking one another with wounds in a ſtraight after the maner of
enemies feighting were compelled to ſlaye thē ſelues, & others were ſent
bound to digge at the ſtréetes of Peloponeſus. With theſe moſt heauie examples
of Gods horrible wrath againſt the contemners of Chriſt & his doctrine of the
goſpell, all that motion was almoſt wholy deſtroyed, when as it was ſo done by
Gods pro­uidence that euen vpon the feaſt day of ſweete breade wherein all the
Jewes were accuſtomed to meete toge­ther from Jewry at Jeruſalem, the citie
ſhould then be beſéeged.

#### 1.21.9. ‘Verſe 11 Becauſe they practized miſchiefe againſt thee they
purpoſed things which they coulde not bringe to paſſe.’

I Wil repeate in this place the expoſition of an vſual ar­gument: A will
agréeing with the wil of God, is good. The Jewes will or minde agréeed with
Gods will, be­cauſe God woulde that his Sonne ſhould dye, and the Jewes had a
will to put Chriſt to death. Therefore the will or minde of the Jewes was
good: I anſwere the maior, ſo againe is true, when our will agréeth with Gods
will accordinge vnto all cauſes. Falſe is the mi­nor, therefore becauſe the
wil of the Jewes did not accor­ding vnto all cauſes agree with the will of
God. For cauſes impulſiue, formall and ſmall do very greatly dif­fer: which
make diuerſities of deedes, without end. In the Jewes was the cauſe impulſiue,
burning hatred a­gainſt theire teacher who rebuked theire ſinnes & lewde
[[Page 248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=128)
[...]nions. The formall cauſe was as (they had a will euen in his paſſion,)
the ſame torments and rending of him, which they would to be eternall. The
finall cauſes were that this teacher might ſo be taken away that he ſhould not
haue life againe, and to the end this libertie of theire miſchéefe might be
confirmed. But the impulſiue cauſe mouing god, is the great mercy towards
mankind and the ſame interceſſion of his ſonne, who offered vp himſelfe vnto
puniſhment for vs. The formall which god would worke in his paſſion, is not
cheefly the tor­ments, but the obedence of his ſonue. The finall cauſes are,
that wrath being pacified by this obediēce, he might ſatiſfie the
righteouſnes of God, and that the ſame ſonne might haue life againe, and
raigne in eternall felowſhip with the father eternall, and might there reſtore
lyfe & e­uerlaſting ſaluation vnto his Heritage. It is manifeſt then that the
cauſes agrée not in God and in the Jewes alike, although they runne both into
one obiecte, like as the ſurgeon & the manqueller incur both one obiecte, and
both do ſomwhat ſmyte, but after a contrarie maner & by contrary cauſes. By
this reſolution it is cleare, what the Jewes purpoſed in theire mindes,
carying Chriſt vnto his cruell death, and that the ſequel of gods proui­dence
diſapoynted the vngodly hope of theire Jewiſh enterpriſes. And what ſo is
ſpoken concerning the head the ſame alſo is true concerning the bodie. For God
by meruelous meanes deludeth the enterpriſes & practiſes of the enemies of his
church, that they are not able to ac­compliſh the webbe that they began to
ſpinne.

#### 1.21.10. ‘Verſe 12 But thou ſhalt ſet them as a marke, and a­gainſt
theire face, ſhalt thou chardge thy howſtring ſpeedely.’

IT is euident, that the Jewes after Titus his dayes now and then put in
practiſe to reſtore the ſtate of [[Page
249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=128) their
Regiment. In the time of Adrian the Empe [...] as Euſebius in lib. 4. cap. 6.
mentioneth, The Jewes moued an horrible ſeditiō, gathering an hoſt of 300000.
perſons from among the fugitiues, & ſeditious Jewes. Captaine of this
multitude was a furious man, who ſpecially vpon the chriſtians exerciſed great
cruel [...]e, who named himſelfe Bē Cochab, that is, Filius Stellae, the ſon
of Light. For to the ende he might increaſe his authori­tie, he wreſted a
Propheſie vnto him ſelfe: There ſhal a­riſe a Starre out of Jacob. But in
déede afterwardes, the heauie iſſue declared that he was a deceiuer, he is
cal­led of wryters Ben Cosbe. that is, Filius mendacij, The ſonne of
leaſinges. But when this ſeditious multitude of Jewes had peopled Paleſtine,
and the contrey of Sy­ria adioyning, Adrian the Emperor, with a few
ſkirmi­ſhes ſcattered them, afterwardes the remnant of them fled into the
towne of Bithera, or Betheron, which is ſci­tuate in the Limitte of the
countrey of Ephraim, The Captaine being ſhut vp into that Towne with part of
his hoſtes, indured the ſiege for three yeares and ſixe monethes ſpace. At
length hauing conſumed his hoſte part­ly in eruptions, partly with plague and
famin, the town was raced to the ground, and the Captaine ſlew himſelfe and
they which were lefte, were ſlaine. This was the ende of the moſt cruell
Tyrant, which made his vaunts that he was the Starre whereof the prophecy
ſpeaketh: There ſhal ariſe a Star out of Iacob.

Afterwardes Iulianus in hafred of the Chriſtian name, graunted vnto the Jewes
againe to builde theyre Citie and Temple. The worke was begun, a greate maſſe
of money was gathered, but with a Whirle wind an Earthquake, and with balles
of wilde fire, the buyl­ding was hindered, and a great multitude of men was
ouerthrowen with ſtones and rubbiſh, ſhaken from the buildinges. Alſo
Theodoretus in his 3. boke, and 20.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=129) [...]ap.
declareth. That in all places there was imprinted vpon the garmentes of the
people figures of the croſſe in wonderfull maner. The Jewes then being with
theſe ſignes from heauen terrified, lefte of their worke begun, becauſe God
had determined that the gouernment of the Jewes ſhould not againe be reſtored.
For he will haue the example of his wrath to be diſcerned of all nations,
becauſe he puniſheth the contempte of his Sonne, with horrible puniſhmentes:
Hee will alſo haue the Law of Moyſes to lie in ſcilence, leaſt opinion
touching ceremo­nies be confirmed: that men are made iuſt by the Law, or with
ceremonies.

And leaſt any man doubt of the hiſtoricall faith in Theodoretus, I will ſet
downe moreouer the words of Ammanus Marcellinus, who in his 21. booke, ſaith
concerning Iulianus, in this maner: What time buſy­ing him ſelfe with the
labourſome toyle of his workes, to ſet foorth the memorie of his gouernment,
he in times paſt purpoſed to buyld vp with immoderate charges, a ſumptuous and
ſtately Temple at Hieruſalem, which after many and deadly broyles in time of
Vaſpaſians ſiege, afterwardes was fiercely defaced by Titus. And he enioyned
Alipius. of Antioch (who ſometime had charge of gouernment in Brittayne) to
the expedition of theſe affaires. When as then Alippius couragiouſlye plyed
this buſines, and as Ruler of the Prouince helped Iulian, beholde, terrible
balles of fire, with often thumps burſting foorth neare vnto the foundations,
made the place inacceſſible, new and then burninge vp the verye workemen. And
by this meanes, the element or fire more forceably repulſing them, their
enterpryſe ceaſed.

Theſe doth Marcellinus verifie, who vnder Iulianus payde the wages to the
workemen, and bare offyce, en­dowed with chiefe martiall dignities. But we
conſi­dering vpon the ineſtimable wrath of God againſt the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=129) contempt of
his Sonne, and of the word by him publi­ſhed, let vs take heede leaſt that
with deſire of oppreſ­ſing the true doctrine, or of obſcuring the ſame with
falſe imaginations of men, either els by contempt of the ſame Sonne and his
worde, and libertie of our ſinnes, we procure vnto vs like calamities.

#### 1.21.11. ‘Verſe 13. Bee thou, O Lord, therfore exalted in thy ſtrength:
Wee will ſing and magnifie thy power, for euer, Amen.’

A Concluſion gratulatorie of this Pſalme. Rule thou, and raigne ſtill, and
inlarge the Limites of thy kingdomes, yea though thine enemies burſt
them­ſelues: For vnto thee is all power geuen, in heauen, and in earth: To
preſerue thoſe that beleeue in thee, and alſo to confound and deſtroy thine
and their enemies, Amen.

❧ Horum xxj. Pſalmorum, Ex­plicationis, Tranſlationisue FINIS.

## Appendix A

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=130)

Page 67 for ſte [...]t [...], ſtraight 64 for Eatius, Ectius eadem for
Piggliras, Pighius 8; for nonſci­re, conſcire 89 for rue, rule 97 for
Varoncayrbe, Varro may be 138 for mecum, metum 173 the words truthbe added
[...] [...] 196\. for ſhew­eth Prieſtes,  [...]ew the Pri [...]es 191 for
coniungem coniugem▪ 1 [...]8 for thro [...], horne 209. for hel­peth which,
reade helpeth them which eadem for a­legatory, alegarically 212 for meates,
meats 247 for ſtréetes of Polo [...]oneſus, reade ſtraightes of. &c. 223. ver.
12 are  [...] are they then 247 for motion, nation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18500&page=130)

[Home](/)

Strigel, Victorinus, 1524-1569.. Date: 1582  

