---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# An appendix to Mr. Perkins his six principles of Christian religion by Mr.
Iohn Robinson.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=1)

AN APPENDIX, TO Mr. PERKINS his Six Principles of Christian Religion. BY Mr.
IOHN ROBINSON.

Printed in the yeere

ANNO 1641.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. AN APPENDIX, TO Mr. PERKINS his Six Principles of Christian Religion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=2)

## 1\. AN APPENDIX, TO Mr. PERKINS his Six Principles of Christian Religion.

VNto the former Principles published by that Reverend mā Mr. William Perkins,
fully containing what every Chri­stian is  [...] beleeve touching God and
himselfe, I have thought it fit for the good, especially of those over whom I
am set, (the younger sort of whom I have formerly catechised in private
according to the same Principles) to annex a few other, touching the more
solemne fel­lowship of Christians, the Church of God; as being a divine
institution, the spirituall Paradijse, and Temple of the living God; in Rev.
1. 7. 2. Cor. 6. 1 [...] Rom. 9. 4. Math. 1 [...]. 2.Cor. 6. which his most
solemne Services are to bee per­formed: and to which he addeth daily such as
shall be saved: promising to dwell in the middest of them by his most
powerfull and gracious presence.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=3) Question.

WHat is the Church?

A. A company of faithfull and holy people (with their seed) called by the word
of God into publicke covenant with Christ, & amongst themselves for mutuall
fellowship in the use of all the meanes of Gods glory and their salvation.

Q. Of what sort or number of people must this company consist?

A. It is all one whether they be high or low, few or many, so as they exceed
not such  [...]al. 3. 28. Math. 28. 17. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 17. 18. 20. & 14\. 23.
Act. 10. 7. a number, as may ordinarily meet together in one place for the
worshipping of God, and san­ctification of the Lords day.

Q. What are the reasons why the Church must consist of faithfull and holy
persons?

A. 1\. The Levit. 20. 16. Rom. 1. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 1. 10. vers. 9.
Scriptures every where so teach.

2 The Eph. 1. 22. Col. 1. 13. Church is the body of Christ, all whose members
therefore should be confor­mable in some measure to him their head.

3 Onely such worshippers please God, & are accepted of him, Ioh. 4. 25. Prov.
15. 5, Hob. 8. 8. 10. &c. & have right to the cove­nant of grace, and seales
thereof.

Q. But are not hypocrites mingled with the faithfull in the Church?

A. None ought to be by the word of God: and where such are, they are not truly
added by the Lord to the Church, but doe Iudge ver. 2. Ezek. 44. 7. creepe in
through their owne hipocrisie, and not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=3) without the
Churches sin also, if they may be discerned to be such. Math. 28. 15 Act. 1.
14. &c cap. 11. 19. 21 Rom. 1. 5. 1. Cor. 15. 1. Act. 1. 41. 47 cap. 8. 37.
and 18.

Q. By what meanes is the Church gathered?

A. By the word preached, and by faith re­ceived of them that heare it.

Q. Is every beleever a member of the visible Church?

A No: but he must also by his personall & publick profession adioyne himselfe
to some particular fellowship and societie of Saints.

Q. How prove you the seed of the faithfull to be of the Church with them?

A. By the covenant which God made Gen. 17. 7. &c Gal.  [...]. 8. 16. 17 Rom.
4. 11. with Abraham and his seed: which was the co­venant of the Gospell, and
confirmed in Christ, the seale there of circumcision, being the seale of the
righteousnesse of saith.

Q. What are the essentiall markes of the Church?

A. Faith and Order, as the Church in Col. 2. 5. 6. them may be seene and
beheld to walke in Christ Iesus whom she hath received: Faith professed in
word and deed, shewing the matter to be true: and Order in the holy things of
God, shewing the forme to be true, which are the two essentiall parts of the
Church.

Q. Are not the preaching of the word, and administring of the Sacraments
certaine marks of the Church?

A. No: for the word may (and that right­ly) be preached to assemblies of
unbeleevers Math. 18. 19. Act. 14. 7. 14. 1 [...] 17\. 22. &c. for their
conversion: as may the sacraments also (though uniustly) bee administred unto
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=4) them, and so
be made lying signes. Besides the true Church may for a time want the use Gen.
34. 24. 1. King. 17. 25. ctc. Hol. 1. 9. of divers ordinances of God, but hath
al­wayes right unto them: as may also the false Church usurpe and abuse them,
but without right.

Q. What are the meanes in and by which Christ and the Church have fellowship
toge­ther?

A. 1\. In the gifts of the Spirit of Christ. 1\. Cor. 12. 3. 4. 5. 6. 2, In
the Offices of Ministery given to the church. 3. In the Workes done in and by
those gifts and Offices.

Q. Wherein standeth this communion of the Spirit?

A. In the in dwelling & operation of the gifts & graces thereof conveyed from
Christ Eph. 2. 22. and cap. 4. 15. 19. as the head, unto the Church as his
body, and members one of another: Whence ariseth that most streight and divine
conjunction, by which as by the civill bond of mariage, the man and wife are
one flesh: so they who are thus iojned 1\. Cor. 6. 17 to Christ are one
spirit.

Q. How many are the offices of ministery in the Church?

A. Five besides the extraordinary offices of Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, for the first planting of the Churches, which are cea­sed, with
their extraordinarie gifts.

Q. How is that proved?

A. Partly by the Scriptures, which both mention them expresly, & describe them
by their principall gifts and workes: and partly by reason, agreable to the
Scriptures,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=4) Q. Shew me
which those officers be, with their answerable gifts and workes.

A. 1\. The Pastor, to whom is given the spirit of wisedome for exhortation, 2.
The Eph. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 12. 8. Rom. 12. 8. 1. Tim. 5. 2 6. 1. Tim, 3.  [...]
and cap. 1. 10 Rom. 16. 1. Teacher to whom is given the gift of know­ledge for
doctrine. 3. The governing Elder, who is to rule with diligence. 4. The
Dea­con, who is to administer the holy trea­sure with simplicie. 5. The Widow,
or Deaconnesse, who is to attend the sick and impotent, with compassion and
cheereful­nesse.

Q. What is the reason for the proving of these ministeries?

A. Because all these are necessary, & these alone sufficient for the Church:
as being the most perfect societie and bodie of Christ, which neither faileth
in that which is ne­cessary, nor exceedeth in any thing super­fluous.

Q. Whence ariseth the necessity & sufficiencie of these ministeries in the
Church?

A, From the condition partly of the soules. and partly of the bodies of the
members.

Q. How doth that appeare?

A: 1: In the soule is the facultie of under­standing, about which the Teacher
is to be exercised for information, by doctrine. 2. The will and affections,
upon which the Pastor is especially to work by exhortation and com­fort. 3.
For that doctrine and exhortation without obedience, are unprofitable, the
dili­gence of the ruling Elder is requisite for that purpose.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=5) Q How are the
other two Ministeries to be ex­cised?

A. As the Church consisteth of men, and they of soules and bodies, so are the
Deacons our of the Churches treasure & contribution to provide for the common
uses of the Church, reliefe of the poore, & maintenance of the officers: as
are the widowes to afford unto the sick and impotent in body (not able
otherwise to helpe themselves) their cheere­full and comfortable service.

Q. Wherefore call you those offices by the name of Ministeries, or Services?

A. For two causes: 1. For that they are no Lordships, but meere services of
Christ, and Math. 20. 25. 26. 27. 2. Cor. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 4. 1. and cap. 3. 21.
22. 23. of the Church.

2\. Because they consist in administring one­ly of those things which are
Christs, and the Churches under him.

Q. By whom are these Officers to have their outward calling?

A. By the Church whereof they are mem­bers for the present, and to which they
are to administer.

Q. How doth that appeare?

A. 1\. The apostles who taught onely Christs Commandements, so directed the
Act. 1. 15. 23. and cap. 6. 1.  [...]. 3. 5. and cap. 14. 23. Act. 1. 11. and
6. 3. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4. 5. Churches.

2, The people amongst whom they have been conversant can best iudge of their
fit­nesse, both in respect of their persons and fa­milies.

3\. It furthereth much the diligence and faithfulnes of the Minister, that
they whose [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=5)
Minister he is, have freely chosen him as unto whom under Christ, they commit
the most precious treasure of their soule: as also it bindes the people to
greater love and conscience of obedience of him & his ministery, whom thē
­selves have made choice of.

4 The Church being a most free Corpora­tion spirituall under Christ the Lord,
is in all reason and equity to chuse her ministers and servants under him,
unto whom also she is to 1\. Tim. 5. 17.  [...] give wages for their service
and labour.

Q. Is this outward calling of simple necessity for a true Church officer?

A. Yea, as for the magistrate in the city Heb. 5. 4. 5. and common wealth, or
steward in the fami­ly: without which they usurp their places, how excellent
soever, whether in their gifts, or workes.

Q. What is the officer bee found unfaithfull in his place?

A. He is by the Church to bee warned to take heede to his ministery he hath
received, Col. 4. 17. to fullfill it; which if he neglect to doe, by the same
power which set him up, hee is to be put downe and deposed.

Q. What are the outward workes of the Chur­ches communion with Christ?

A. These six: 1. Praier 2. the reading and opening of the Word. 3. the
Sacraments, 4. singing of Psalmes. 5. Censures. 6. Contribu­tion to the
necessity of the Saints.

Q. Wherefore put you prayer in the first place?

A. Because by it all the rest are sanctified 1\. Tim. 2. 1.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=6) to the
faithfull. For prayer see the end of the fifth Principle, with the exposition:
onely adde this, that in the act of our speaking unto God by prayer, we are
not to use the help of any booke, beads, crucifixes, or the like, to Iude
verse 10. Zach. 12. 10. Rom. 8. 15. 16. reach or provoke us, but onely the
helpe of the spirit of adoption, and prayer, working in our hearts
effectually, and teaching us both what and how to pray as we ought.

Q. What beleeve you touching the word?

A. Besides the things observed in the fifth Principle and Exposition: that the
whole writ­ten Word, and it alone is to be read and ope­ned in the Church.

Q. Wherefore are the whole Scriptures to be read and opened?

A. Because the whole Word of God is Prov. 30. 5. Rom. 15. 4. 2 Tim. 3. 16.
Deut. 4. 2. Rev. 21. 19. pure, written for our learning and comfort, given by
divine inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, reproofe, correction and
instru­ction, and from which nothing may be dimi­nished.

Q. How prove you that the Scriptures, onely are to bee read, and opened in the
Church?

A. Because they alone are sufficient for faith, and the obedience which is of
faith, & Rom. 16. 17. Heb. 11. 6. Ioh. 10. 31. 2 Tim. 3. 16. 17. Prov. 30. 6.
Deut. 4. 2. Rev. 11. 19. able to make the man of God perfect, through­ly
furnished unto all good workes, and un­to which nothing may be added.

Q. Who are to open and apply the Scriptures in the Church?

A. Principally the Bishops or Elders, who by the Word of life are to feed the
flocke, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=6) both
in teaching and governement. Secondly such as are out of office, in the
exercise of Act. 10. 28. Prophesie.

Q. How is that exercise proved in the Scriptures?

A. By Luke 1. 4. 1. 47. and cap. 17. 18. Act. 8. 4. and 11. 19. 10. 2 cap. 13.
14. 1 and cap. 18. 1 26. examples in the Iewish Church, where men though in no
office, either in Temple or Synagogue, had libertly publikely to use their
gifts.

2 Luke 9. 1. cap: 10. 1. Rom. 12. 9. 1. Pet. 4. 10. 1. Cor. 14. 1 By the
Commandement of Christ & his Apostles.

3\. By the prohibiting of 1\.  [...] Tim. 2. 1. Cor. 14. 3 1 1. Pet. 4. 1
[...] 1\. Thess. 5. 1 1. Tim. 3. 2. 1. Cor. 14. 3 Act. 2. 42. Luk. 4. 22. 1
women (not ex­traordinarily inspired) to teach in the church, herein liberty
being given unto men their hus­bands, or others.

4\. By the excellent ends, which by this meanes are to be obtained: as 1. The
glorie of God in the manifestation of his manifold graces. 2. That the gifts
of the spirit in men be not quenched. 3. For the fitting and try­all of men
for the Ministery, 4. For the pre­serving pure of the doctrine of the Church,
which is more endangered, if some one or two alone may onely be heard, and
speake. 5. For debaring and satisfying of doubts, if any doe arise. 6. For the
edifying of the Church, and conversion of others.

Q. Who is a Prophet in this sence?

A. He that hath a gift of the spirit to speak unto edification, exhortation
and comfort.

Q. What is the order of this exercise.

A. That it be performed after the publike Ministery by the teachers, and under
their direction and moderation: whose duty it is,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=7) if any thing
be obscure to open it: if doubt­full to cleare it: if unsound to refute it: if
un­perfect to supply what is wanting, as they 1\. Cor. 14. 4. 24. 25. 1. Cor.
14. 3. Act. 13. 15. are able.

Q. What beleeve you touching the Sacraments further then is observed in the
former Principles?

A. That they are to be dispensed according to the tenure of the covenant of
grace, where­of they are seales: in respect both of the per­sons to whom, and
of the ends for which they are to be administred.

Q. Which are those persons?

A. The faithfull and their seed.

Q.May all the faithfull partake in the Sa­craments?

A. No, except they be also added to some particular Congregation, unto which
the Gen. 17. 1. Cor. 7. 14. Act. 2. 41. 42. 47. publike ordinances and
ministery doth ap­pertaine.

Q. Which are the ends and uses of the Sacraments?

A. The first is from God to the Church, opened in the exposition of the fifth
Prin­ciple, where it is shewed what a Sacra­ment is. The second is from the
Church to God, in which it testifieth the acceptance of Gen. 17. 9. 10. the
Covenant, & bindeth it selfe to the per­formance of the conditions. The third
is in respect of the members themselves mutually, 2\. Cor. 12. 13. Iudg. 14.
4. as being badges of their association. The fourth in respect of all other
assemblies, be­tween whom & the Churches, they are notes of distinction.

Q. What is required touching singing of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=7) Psalmes in
the Church?

A. That they bee such as are parts of the Mat. 26. 30. Eph. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
word of God, formed by the holy Ghost into Psalmes or Songs, which many may
conve­niently sing together, exhorting and admoni­shing themselves mutually
with grace in their heart.

Q. What beleeve you touching the censure of excommunication?

A, That it is to be used by every par­ticular Church, according to the rules
of Christ.

Q.How prove you this power to bee in every particular Congregation?

A, 1\. By the donation and gift of Christ Math. 18. 19. 11 19. 1. Cor. 5. the
Lord. 2. The particular Church of Corinth had this power, for the neglect
wher­of it is reproved by the Apostle. 3. Every particular Church hath right
to the Word Sa­craments, and praier, within it selfe, which are greater, and
therefore to this which is lesser then they.

Q. What are the rules of Christ for excom­munication?

A, 1\. The sin thus to be censured must be scandalous, and the person
obstinate after due conviction, and patience used.

2 The Church excommunicating must bee Math. 18. 14. 1. Cor. 4. 11. Math. 18.
15. 17. 19. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 5. 1 that particular congregation gathered toge­ther
in the name of Christ, whereof the sinner is a member.

Q. How prove you that by the Church Math. 18. is not meant the Bishop, or
pres­bytery representing the body?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=8) A 1\. One man
cannot be a Church, which as Christ teacheth, verse 19, 20, must bee a
company, how small soever, gathered toge­ther in his Name.

2, The word there used, never signifieth in the Scriptures, an officer or
officers, exclu­ding the people.

3\. The Apostle 1 Cor. 5. expounds Christs meaning to bee of the whole body
come to­gether.

4\. The Elders being publicke officers, are to exercise the solemne workes of
their office; and particularly the worke of rebuking them that sinne, openly
and before the Church, both that others may feare, and the Church of Faith
consent to the excommunication: and therefore cannot represent the Church 1
Tim. 5. 20. being actually present.

5\. A representative Church in a case of Faith and conscience without the
consent of the represented in the particular decree, esta­blisheth the popish
doctrine of implicite Faith.

Q. What is the order of proceeding in this Cen­sure?

A. That a brother offending privately be admonished privately, and after
(without his repentance) with a witnesse or two, who may give testimony both
of the offence and admonition: and lastly, that by the brother admonishing,
with his witnesses, the sinner (remaining obstinate,) complaint bee made to
the Church: which last complaint alone is sufficient in publike offences.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=8) Q. What order
is to bee observed after com­plaint thus made?

A. The officers as the governours of the Church, are by the Scriptures
clearely to convince, and seriously to admonish and ex­hort the offender: and
upon his impeniten­cy (with due conviction and patience) to de­cree against
him the sentence of Excommu­nication: and lastly, with the peoples free
consent, to pronounce and execute the same.

Q. How appeareth the necessity of this ordi­nation?

A. Many waies. 1. By the commandement Math. 18. 1. Cor. 5. Rom. 1. 24. of
Christ, and practice of the Apostolicall Churches.

2\. For the glory of Christ, which is much impeached by the prophanesse of
those who professe his service.

3\. For the humbling of the sinner, and for the salvation of his Soule.

4 To prevent the infection of others.

5\. That by zeale and holinesse of the 1\. Cor. 5. 1. Church they without may
be gained to the Gospell. Heb. 11. 15.

Q. How is the Church to walke towards a person excommunicated?

A. So as they may make him ashamed by withdrawing from him in all spirituall
Com­munion, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and civill familiarity also, so farre as may be,
without the violation of any natu­rall or civill bond.

Q. What is to be observed for the Churches contribution.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=9) A. That in
their publike meeting they contribute, as God hath prospered them to 1 Cor.
11. 6. the publicke treasury, by the Deacons to be received and distributed,
as there is need to the releefe of the poore, maintenance of the Ministerie,
and other necessary uses of the Church, first, and after of others also, as
need Act. 5. Gal. 6. 10. requireth,

### 1.1.

And whosoever will walke according to this rule, peace be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Galath. 6. 16.

> Amen.

I. ROBINSON.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63717&page=9)

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1641  

