---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Whereas Robert Robinson late of Clanculgg, in the county of Fermanagh,
yeoman, John Irwin alias John Irwin Powshane of the same in the same county
yeoman, Archibald Noble junior late of Lisnaskea in the same county yeoman,
[and 19 others] have of late committed several burglaries, roberies and
stealths, in several parts within this kingdom, besides divers other outrages
... by the Lord Deputy and Council, Arran.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. [Figure]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=104910&page=1)

## 1\.

Figure 1. DIEV ET MON DROIT▪

Figure 1. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

##  
BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.

ARRAN▪

WHEREAS Robert Robinſon late of Clanculgg, in the County of Fermanagh Yeoman,
John Irwin a­lias John Irwin Bowſhane of the ſame in the ſame County Yeoman,
Archibald Noble Junior late of Liſnaskea in the ſame County Yeoman, Arthur
No­ble late of the ſame in the ſame County Yeoman, Tirlagh Oge Mac Shane Mac
Guire of Deſternan in the ſame County yeoman▪ Kuogher Mac Shane Mac Guire of
the ſame yeoman, Robert Graham of Legin in the ſame County yeoman, Arthur
Graham of the ſame yeomam, Hubert Terr [...]l late of Ballane­nagh in the
County of Cavan yeoman, Walter Bourk late of the ſame yeoman, William
Armſtrong alias Neddies Will, late of the ſame yeo­man, Rory Duff Mac Guire of
Bally Mac Illchony in the County of Fermanagh yeoman, Cahill Mac Rory Oge Mac
Guire of the ſame yeoman, Donn Mac Guire of the ſame yeoman, Phelemy Mac
Gawran of Carne in the ſame County Yeoman, Tirlagh Mac Hugh of the ſame
yeoman, Flertagh Mac Guire late of Garriſon in the ſaid County yeoman, Rory
Keigh Mac Gowan late of Sleiveroſiell in the ſaid County yeo­man, Donoghy Mac
[...]igea late of the ſame yeoman, Laughlin Mac Murry late of the ſame yeoman,
Lodowig Irwin alias Lodewick Irwin of Liſnaskea in the County of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=104910&page=2) Fermanagh
yeomen, Cormuck Mac Cormuck late of the ſame yeoman, and John Je­miſon of the
ſame yeoman, have of late Committed ſeveral Burglaries, Robe­ries and
Stealths, in ſeveral parts within this Kingdom, beſides divers other Outrages,
to the terror and annoyance of His Majeſties loyall and good Sub­jects, and to
the diſturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom, upon which miſdemea­nors and
Crimes, being purſued by ſome of his Majeſties good Subjects, they the
aforeſaid perſons, are fled to the Woods and Mountaines, where they ſtand upon
their keeping, ſo as they are not anſwerable or ameaſnable to Law, but wilfull
contemners of the ſame; And for aſmuch as the Actors of theſe diſ­orders and
offences, cannot as yet be apprehended whereby they may be puniſh­ed by the
Ordinary courſe of Law, whence We may juſtly be moved according to the former
Vſage and Cuſtome in this Kingdom, in caſes of like nature, to cauſe them to
be forthwith Proclaimed Revels and Traytors, yet in mercy to them we think fit
hereby to Charge and Command t [...]m upon  [...] Duty and Allegiance to His
Majeſty, that they and every of them  [...] the Firſt day of Auguſt next,
render their perſons to any of His Majeſti [...]s Iuſtices of the Peace, and
Submit themſelves to His Majeſties Iuſtice, to be Tryed for their Offences
according to the Laws of the Land, wherein if they or any of them do fail, we
do hereby publiſh and declare▪ That he or they ſo failing are from, and
immediatly after the ſaid firſt day of Auguſt next to be called, reputed and
taken for Notorious Rebels and Traytors againſt his Majeſty, and ac­cordingly
to be proſecuted by all his Majeſties Loving and good Subjects in all Hoſtile
manner, And we declare farther that whatſoever perſon or perſons ſhall comfort
relieve or Abet them, or any of them, they are and ſhall be reputed, deemed
and adjudged Traytors in like degree with the fore named Rebells and Traytors
themſelves, and to be proceeded againſt according to Law; And we do in his
Majeſties Name ſtraightly Charge and Command all His Majeſties Loyal Subjects
upon their Duty of Allegiance to His Majeſty, not only to forbear to receive
or relieve the perſons aforeſaid or any of them, but alſo to make diligent
ſearch and enquiry, in what place or places the ſaid perſons ſhall from time
to time lurk or be relieved, and by all means poſſible to proſecute,
ap­prehend and take the Bodies of them, and them to bring or cauſe to be
brought under ſafe cuſtody unto the high Sheriffs of the reſpective Counties
where a­ny of them ſhall be apprehended, to be by ſuch Sheriffs kept in ſtrict
and ſafe cuſtody till we upon notice thereof, ſhall give further direction
concerning them or reſiſting or refuſing to be taken to Kill them or any of
them. And we  [...]o hereby declare that whoſoever ſhall after the ſaid firſt
day of Auguſt next b [...]ing unto any Sheriff the Body of the ſaid Robert
Robinſon John Irwin alias John Irwin Bowſhane, Archibald Noble Junior, Arthur
Noble, Tirlagh Oge Mac Shan Mac Guire, Knogher Mac Shane Mac Guire, Robert
Graham, Arthur Graham, Hubert Terrill, Walter Bourk William Armſtrong alias
Neddies Will, Rory Duff mac Guire, Cahill Mac Rory Oge Mac Guire, Donn Mac
Guire, Phelemy Mac Gawran, Tirlagh Mac Hugh Flertagh mac Gaire, Rory Teigh mac
Gowan, Donoghy mac Ligea, Laughlin mac Murry, Lodowick Irwin alias Lodowick
Irwin of Liſnaskea, Cormuck mac Cormuck and John J [...] ­miſon, or any of
them alive, or kill any of them and bring his head to the Sheriff of the
County where he ſhall be Killed, to be by ſuch Sheriff ſet up in ſome publick
place in that County, ſhall have for his reward for each perſon ſo brought in
or his head, Ten pounds, for payment whereof we will give warrant as occaſion
ſhall require, and whoſoever of the ſaid Proclaimed perſons or any other ſhall
after the ſaid firſt day of Auguſt next▪ Apprehend and being unto the High
Sheriff of the County where ſuch perſon ſhall be apprehended, or reſiſting
ſhall Kill any of the ſaid Rebells and Traytors particularly named as
afore­ſaid, he ſhall together with his ſaid reward, receive his pardon And
towards the ſpeedy effecting of this ſervice, all Commanders of horſe and
foot, and all other his Majeſties Officers and Loving Subjects are to be
aiding and aſiſting as they and every of them will anſwer the contrary at
their perils,

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the ſecond day of July 1683.

  * Grenard:
  * Longford: 
  * Laneſborough▪
  * Ed: Brabazon: 
  * Ol: St: George.
  * John Keating,
  * He: Hene.
  * Ric▪ Reynells,
  * Theo. Iones.

God Save The King

## Appendix A

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook Printers to the Kings moſt
Excellent Majeſty and are to be ſold by Mary Crook and Andrew Crook at His
Majeſties Printing-Houſe one Ormond-Key, 1683.

[Home](/)

Ireland. Lord Deputy.. Date: 1683  

