---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The golden fleece diuided into three parts, vnder which are discouered the
errours of religion, the vices and decayes of the kingdome, and lastly the
wayes to get wealth, and to restore trading so much complayned of. Transported
from Cambrioll Colchos, out of the southermost part of the iland, commonly
called the Newfoundland, by Orpheus Iunior, for the generall and perpetuall
good of Great Britaine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=1)

NEWFOVND LAND

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=1) THE GOLDEN
FLEECE Diuided into three Parts, Under which are discouered the Errours of
Religion, the Uices and Decayes of the King­dome, and lastly the wayes to get
wealth, and to restore Trading so much com­playned of.

TRANSPORTED FROM Cambrioll Colchos, out of the Southermost Part of the Iland,
commonly called the NEWFOVNDLAND, By Orpheus Iunior, For the generall and
perpetuall Good of Great BRITAINE.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Williams, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the
signe of the Globe, ouer against the Royall Exchange, 1626.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=2)

### THE MUSES AND THE GRACES, BY THE hands of Orpheus Iunior, doe here present
this Treatise of the Golden Fleece at the Feet of the most Noble, Mightie, and
hopefull King of Great Britaine.

GReat Monarch, though You with Apollo's lore,

And with your Fathers rules are polisht more:

Though You of riper Iudgements doe not want

Proiectours rare, and full as elegant;

Disdaine not yet to marke what we entend,

And to Your Grace by Orpheus recommend.

Though we no Gold, nor Precious Stones present,

The value notwithstanding here is sent;

King Gyges Ring to see the Cause of harmes,

A New-found Fleece to rayse both Arts and Armes.

Christ was wel pleas'd with the poore widowes mite;

No lesse a Larke excels the greatest Kite.

A little Part a wise King will preferre

Of Practick Art before all Dreames, that erre.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=3) An Emperour,
one of Your Name the fift

Commines Bookes held as a peerelesse Gift.

So did King Phillips valiant Sonne account

Poore Homers Workes rich Iewels to surmount.

This no Eutopia is, nor Common-wealth

Which Plato faign'd. Wee bring Your Kingdomes health

By true Receits; which You will rellish well,

If Humours ranke by Physicke You expell.

In pithy fresh Conceits Your mind may ioy,

When sundry Troupes of weightie Cares annoy.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=3)

### Musae & Charites hoc Opus de Aureo Uellere Orphei Iunioris manibus
tradi­tum ad Pedes Potentissimi & maximae spei Magnae BRITANNIAE Regis
humillimè sub­mittunt.

Magne Monarcha, licet scriptis ab Apolline magno

A Patre Praeceptis perpoliare tuo.

Nec Polypragmatici pollentes munere fandi,

Nec tibi deficiant Cognitione graues.

Ne de digneris tamen haec Documen [...]aprobare,

Quae tibi nunc Orphei mittimus hausta manu.

Non Aurum Gemmas (que) tibi sed ditius Auro

Et gemmis dignum Principe portat Opus.

Vota Preces (que) Deo, viduae Munuscula Christo

Regibus egregijs & placuere Libri.

Carolus Historiam Cominaei Quintus amabat,

Sub Ceruicali deposuit (que) su [...].

Nec minus Iliados Proles animosa Philippi

Inter bellandum saepe legebat Opus.

Non hîc Eutopiam, non hic Phantasma Platonis,

Regi nil praeter materiale damus.

Dulce reale tibi, cuius Mens obruta Curis

Multiplici rerum mole vacare neguit.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=4)

## To the indifferent Readers.

IVdicious Readers, in this busie time I know you will won­der, how I dare
bring forth new Proiects shadowed vn­der a glorious Title to re­forme Errours,
and to re­store Trading, when men of farre greater vnderstanding doe find
themselues puzled, grauelled, and almost at their wits end, accounting the
taske to exceed all the labours of Hercules. The presumption, I con­fesse, is
great. Yet when I had called to mind that Action of Diogenes, how he tumbled
vp and downe his Tub very laboriously at such time, when all his Neighbours
prepared themselues for Armes, I re­solued likewise to do somewhat, and by
toffing too and fro the barrell of my Conceits, albeit barren and inferiour
vnto many thousands in this King­dome, to encourage others to lend their hands
vn­to the Publicke prop, if not perpetually to secure it, yet for a time to
stay it, vntill their wisdomes had concluded on stronger meanes. Among many
Re­medies, which I haue heere produced, perhaps they may light on some not to
bee contemned. At the least those which are Thriftie, will con mee thankes for
reprehending of multiplicities of Law Suits and Prodigality: Both which do
keep our State in an vn­der ballance. The one vice disunites our hearts from
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=4) the harmony
of Concord; making vs vnworthy of the Communion of Saints, and consequently of
the Lords Table, and the other disperseth our substance, that wee cannot yeeld
sufficient supplies to saue the honour of our Countrey. What a masse of
treasure doe we yeerely spend in forreigne Com­modities? What abundance of
Silkes doe we con­sume on our backes? What a deale of Gold and Siluer lace?
while the wary Spaniard, who hath the Indies in possession, contents himselfe
with his owne Fashion and lesser moderation both in Apparell and Diet. The
Dutch they follow no ex­trauagant Attires. Euery man is distinguished in his
Ranke: some by wearing a Copper Chaine, o­thers a Siluer; and the Nobler of
Gold. In France the meaner sort of women weare Hoods of Taffa­ta, other of
Satten, and the better of Veluet. No man intrudes into anothers vocation. But
with vs, Ioane is as good as my Lady, Citizens Wiues are of late growne
Gallants. The Yeoman doth gentilize it. The Gentleman scornes to be behind the
Noble­man. Yea, many are not ashamed to goe as braue as the King. And if a
Wiseman chance to taxe them for their prodigall humour: They will an­swere,
that it is for the credit of the Kingdome; which indeed is a most weake
excuse: for what re­dounds to the publike damage, and losse ought not to be
termed honourable, as not safe nor wor­thy for a discreet Inhabitant to vaunt
of. Such gau­die sights neuer last aboue a nine dayes wonder, nay, sometimes
one only day, like your Pageants,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=5) and then the
memory becomes stale, their Silkes out of fashion. But the example, like a
Leprosie, is transferred from the Court to the Citie, from the Citie to the
Countrey. Of these and many other abuses, which our State had need to looke
into, I purpose in this Treatise to discourse, submitting the necessitie of
their Reformation to the Higher Powers consideration, as is meete and
conuenient. In the first Part I will endeuour to remoue the Er­rours of
Religion, in the Second the Diseases of the Common-wealth: And in the Third
Part I will discouer the certainty of the Golden Fleece, which shall restore
vs to all worldly Happi­nesse.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=5)

## To the vncharitable Readers or Deriders of our GOL­DEN FLEECE.

MY Masters, You that slight the first Lesson of the Psalmes, you that plot at
home, like craftie Crowders, torcape the fruits of all painfull Trades without
wet­ting your Cats feet, though the Fish bee neuer so dearely prized, you I
say, who repos [...] your chiefest Felicitie in playing on the Violl of Fraud,
and in ido­lizing a painted Strumpet, come not at Colchos, nor presume yee
once, more then Tantalus, to touch the Golden Apples of our Hesperides. There
lies a Couple of Dragons in the way. Pinge duos Angues, sacer est locus. The
Place is not for you. They that labour not with sweate, shall not taste of our
Sweete. Keepe yee then at home, like Clinicall Apes to your Clogges. As a
blacke Sheepe among some of you is accounted a perillous beast; no lesse
offensiue is the grimme Porter of the Golden Ile. Yea and the Ramme, which
beares the precious Fleece, hath
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=6) Hornes more
piercing then Pikes to assault the assay­lant Lozell. It is good sleeping in a
whole Skin. Fol­low the example of Gryllus, who liked so well of his Epicurean
and Swinish shape, that when the wise V­lysses had wrought the meanes for all
his Companions to resame their manly formes from their sensuall and beastly
shapes, into which the Witches of this en­chanting World had metamorphosed
them, he vtterly refused to returne into a reasonable Creature, saying, that
of all formes, hee best agreed with the Hogges, Epicurus de grege Porci.

It is pittie therefore to reforme and reclaime any against their wills. If
wallowing in mire doe so de­light you, returne to your dunghils, vntill you
grow fit for fat Bacon. Or else you may petition to Circe and Calypso to
conferre on you the shape of Gan­ders, and to hisse brauely vntill the Foxes
steale vpon you. O imprudent Readers! Will you still lull in the bosome of
carelesse Securitie? Will you neuer leaue your carping at vertuous Proiects?

When the Raine raineth, & the Goose winketh,

Little knowes the Gander, what the Goose thin­keth.

Little know you what your Wiues and children are like to suffer after these
stormes. Little know you, or at least your hearts, like Pharaohes, are so
hardned that you seeme not to know it, that the chiefest Cause of our Decay of
Trading proceeds by Prodigality & the multiplicities of Law Suites nourished
for some [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=6)
priuat mens aduantage. Veritas non quaerit angulos. The way of Truth is plaine
without indirect turnings. This is the effect and euent of your
vncharitablenesse. I write not in passion, that our indicious Senatours should
esteeme my words, like the fortune of Cassan­dra, who was said to haue the
Gift of true Prophesie, but withall such ill lucke, that none would belieue
whatsoeuer shee prophesied. Now the Impost [...]me is ripened, and Time the
Discouerer of deceits hath made it manifest, that nothing hinders neighbourly
loue, and the vnion of mindes for the execution of Noble Actions, as much as
malicious rancour and ciuill discord at home.

It is in vaine for mee to diswade you from enuying and inueighing at our
Golden Fleece, seeing our Preachers with their more Diuine admonitions haue
missed to conuert you. Hisse then and spare not. Con­tinue still in your
customary courses of scoffing and scorning, vntill you smart at last for your
Sardoni­call Spleenes and ominous laughter.

But what a preposterous thing is it, That the Member which Nature formed to
vtter the glory of the Creatour, to serue like a Golden Trumpet, or sweet
sounding clapper in the Bell of Gods Temple to con­uert Sinners, to comfort
the sorrowfull should degene­rate from the proper Office, for which it was
ordained? and now to become so much peruerted, as to flout at all good
endeuours? Eyther leaue off your mocking, or make the World partaker of a
better worke.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=7)

Cum tus non aedas, carpis mea Opuscula, Mome;

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel aede tua.

Thou putst not out thy works, yet carpst at mine;

Leaue off to carpe at mine, or put out thine.

In the meane space, as long as like Mules you cla [...] one another, I assure
your wise Masterships, that you shall but minister matter to Buffones of
rederision, as some of your alliance sometimes felt from the mouth of
Tarleton, who being vpon the Stage in a Towne where he expected for ciuill
attention to his Prologue, and seeing no end of their hissing, hee brake forth
at last into this Sarcasmicall taunt:

I liu'd not in that Golden Age,

When Iason wonne the Fleece:

But now I am on Gotams Stage,

Where Fooles doe hisse like G [...]ese.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=7)

## In Commendation of the Golden Fleece produced by Orpheus lunior.

VVE need not now cōplaine for want of Tra [...]e

Sith frō the West we golden wares may lade;

Which Orpheus shewes in this his Golden Fleece,

A Trade more rich, then Iason brought to Greece

From Cotchos Land; if by our slouthfull ease

And wanton Peace we lose not the encrease.

What I first chalkt two yeeres at Cuperts Cone,

New Cambriols Planter sprung from golden-groue,

Old Cambriaes Soile, vp to the Skies doth rayse.

For which let Fame crown him with sacred Bayes.

IOHN GVY.

## An Epigram vpon the Golden Fleece, moralized by the Authour for the good of
Great BRITAINE.

ORpheus but late our Woods did make to ring,

Cambrens, Ca­roleia.

And to his Harp great Charles his Carols sing.

Since that he toucht vpon th' Italian shore,

The New sound Politicke.

Whence Boccalinies Newes of State he bore.

But Orpheus now for saking Easterne Greece,

From Westerne Colchos brings the Golden Fleece;

Which no Eutopia is, nor Fairy-land,

Yet Colchos in Elisian Fields doth stand.

Three luckie Births his Braine makes to appeare,

Whereas most Creatures breed but once a yeare.

Men Hercules among the Starres did put,

'Cause Hydraes triple Head He off had cut.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=8) Vnto the
Spheare shall He aduanced bee?

And our new Orpheus haue no high degree?

Three Monsters Heads that lops off at one blow,

Errour, Vice, Want, which in our Country grow?

The One foule mouthed Cerberus did quell,

And chayning fast, him dragged about Hell:

The Other Errour, which in Hell was bred,

Hath by strong Reasons bound and Captiueled.

The Augean Stables He of filth did cleanse:

The Other Men, of vice and foule Offence.

Th' Hesperian Apples He by waking got:

But Orpheus greater Gaine doth vs allot.

For which let Paris iudge, who now shall haue

The Golden Apple, which the World doth craue?

STEPHEN BERRIER.

## In Honour of the Golden Fleece described by Orpheus Iunior.

O How my heart doth leape with Ioy to heare,

Our New-found Ile by Britaines prized deare!

That hopefull Land, which Winters sixe I tri'd,

And for our Profit meet, at full descri'd.

If Hope of Fame, of quiet Life, or Gaine

May kindle Flames within our minds againe:

Then let vs ioyne to seeke this Golden Fleece,

The like ne're came from Colchos into Greece.

Orphens remoues all Errours from the way,

And how this Land shall thriue, he doth bewray.

Thus ships & coine increase, whē least we thought,

For Fish and Traines Exchange, and all vnbought,

IOHN MASON.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Part of the Golden Fleece.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=8)THe occasion of this Treatise, called the Golden Fleece. And the Reasons which moued the Au­thour to intermingle merrie and light conceits among matters of consequence. Page 1.
  * CHAP. I.

The great care, which Apollo takes for the Mo­narchy of Great Britaine.

The singular and respectiue loue, which hee beares towards the hopefull and
magnanimous King Charles.

And how by his Proclamation, he caused Mariana the Iesuite to bee apprehended
for animating Subiects against their naturall Prince. pag. 18.

  * CHAP. II.

The Conuiction of Mariana the Iesuite by the Te­stimonies of the Scriptures,
and of the Ancient Fa­thers.

Apollo condemnes Mariana the Iesuite, to be tor­tured in Ph [...]laris his
Brazen Bull, and banisheth the pernicious Sect of Iesuites out of the
Territories of Parnassus. pag. 30.

  * CHAP. III.

How Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford, espying in a Church at Athens, a Franciscan
Frier a kissing of a Maidof Honour belonging to the Princesse Thalia, brought
S. Frances to surprize them, who of meere idiotisme applaudes the Fall. pag.
38.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=9) CHAP. IV.

Doctor Wicliffe connents Saint Frances and the kissing Frier before Apollo.

Saint Frances defendeth the cause, and discouereth seuen sorts of kisses.

Apollo refuteth his defence, condemnes the Frier, and abolisheth all
Monasticall Orders. pag. 39.

  * CHAP. V.

Apollo censureth Thalia and her Gentlewoman for their lasciuious prankes; and
reformeth the Co­micall Court. pag. 50.

  * CHAP. VI.

The Author of the Nuns discouery at Lisbon exhi­bits a complaint to Apollo
against Father Foster the Frier, Confessor to the English Nunnery at Lisbon,
for committing carnall copulation with sundry of them.

Apollo makes a discourse of Auticular Confession, adiudgeth Foster to Ixions
Wheele, and suppresseth all Nunneries. pag. 59.

  * CHAP. VII.

Thomas Becket of Canterbury, accuseth before Apollo Walter de Mapes Archdeacon
of Oxford in King Henry the Seconds time, for defending the Marriage of
Priests against the Pope of Romes Decree. pag. 65.

  * CHAP. VIII.

Walter de Mapes is commanded by Apollo to de­fend his Positions against the
Pope and Becket, who accordingly obeyeth, and prooues the lawfulnesse of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=9) Clergie-mens
Marriage, both by the Testimony of the Scripture, and of the Ancient Fathers.
pag. 68.

Apollo reuerseth the Popes Canon made against the Marriage of the Clergie, and
to that purpose sends out a Proclamation. pag. 73.

  * CHAP. IX.

Apollo vpon Information giuen him by the Greek Church of Images, erected by
the Pope in the We­sterne Churches, and of Inuocations on Saints confu­teth
these Idolatrous Traditions, both by the Testimo­nie of the Scripture, and by
the Positions of the Pri­mitiue Church. pag. 74.

  * CHAP. X.

Martine Luther arriuing at Parnassus, shewes to Apollo, how the Popes vnder
colour of redeeming mens Soules out of Purgatorie, vsed to conicatch
Christians by the sale of Pardons.

Apollo condemnes both the Fable of Purgatorie, and the vse of Popish Pardons.
pag. 81.

  * CHAP. XI.

Gratian the Canonist conuents the Waldenses and Albigienses before Apollo for
celebrating diuine ser­vice in their Country Language, and not according to
the Rites of the Romish Church.

Zuinglius defends their cause by the Authoritie of the Scriptures and of the
Primitie Church.

Apollo pronounceth a definitiue Sentence against the Pope, on the behalfe of
the Waldenses and Al­bigienses. pag. 85.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=10) CHAP. XII.

Berengarius reneweth his opinion of the Lords Supper, and proues both by the
Scriptures and by the Authoritie of the most ancient Fathers of the Primi­tiue
Church, that the same is to be taken after a spiri­tuall manner, and in
commemoration of the Lords death. pag. 91.

  * CHAP. XIII.

The Romish Church accuseth the Church of Ae­thiopia, for denying to
acknowledge her to be the Mo­ther and Catholike Church.

The Patriarch of Alexandria challengeth the Pr [...] ­macie ouer that Church,
and proues the Pope of Rome to be an Intruder, and to haue no Right at all
ouer the Church of Ae [...]hiopia.

Apollo determineth the difference by discouering the wayes how the Pope got
the Supremacy ouer the Westerne Churches, and how both he and the generall
Councels erre in matters of Faith. pag. 96.

  * CHAP. XIV.

Scotus the Master of subtill Questions conuents Sir Geffrey Chaucer for
calling the Pope Antichrist, and comparing the Romish Church to the griping
Griffon, and the true Church to the tender Pellican. pag. 110.

  * CHAP. XV.

Sir Geffrey Chaucer being prouoked by Scotus to defend his Cause, proues the
Pope to bee the great and uniuersall Antichrist prophesied in the Scriptures.
pag. 121.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=10) CHAP. XVI.

Apolloes iudgement of Chaucers Apologie con­cluding that the Pope is the great
Antichrist. pag. 131

  * CHAP. XVII.

Apolloes sentence promulgated for the Impurity of the Church Militant.

Doctor Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, complaines against Cartwright,
Browne, and other Puritane Separists, for inuaighing against their
Su­periours.

Apollo condemnes this Sect, exhorting them to vnitie and to return to the
bosome of their Mother Church. pag. 133

  * CHAP. XVIII.

The memorable Synod of Dott accuseth Armi­nius before Apollo, for broaching
out of new Opini­ons in the Church to trouble the braines of the weaker.

Apollo confutes Arminius, and sheweth what a so­ber minded Christian ought to
conceiue of deepe My­steries.

Arminius is commanded to recant. pag. 137

  * The conclusion of the first Part. pag. 146.

The Contents of the Chapters of the Second part of the Golden Fleece.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=11) CHAP. I.

MAlines and Misselden, two Merchants of Great Brittaine, doe seuerally declare
their Opinions touching the Decay of Trade, and the Causes of the vnder-
ballance of their Natiue Commodities with the Forraigne, which were brought
into that Kingdome.

Apollo bewaileth their miserie, and commands a further enquirie to be made of
the Causes. pag. 1.

  * CHAP. II.

Apollo causeth a Iury to bee impanelled out of the Vniuersities of Oxford,
Cambridge, S. Andrewes, Aberdine, and the Colledge at Dublin, to finde out
these persons which sold Ecclesiasticall Linings.

The Presentours discouering some, bring them be­fore Apollo.

His Maiesties censure, with his discourse of the Right of Tithes. pag. 6.

  * CHAP. III.

Vpon a Bill of Complaint exhibited by Aeschines and Papinian, against Rewards
vnequally conferred on persons of meane desert and descent, Apollo
pro­nounceth a peremptorie Doome. pag. 15.

  * CHAP. IIII.

Hugh Broughton vpon some discontentment taken in seeing his inferiours
promoted to eminent places be­fore himselfe, complaineth vnto Apollo, that
Florio, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=11)
Deane of Thaliaes Chappell, prophaned the sacred name of the Letany, by
singing the same intermixt with triuiall toyes.

Apollo causeth Florio to repeat his Letany. pa. 18.

  * CHAP. V.

Apollo, after some shew of distate against Florio, for his new morall Letany,
at the last giues him leaue to defend it.

Florio in a briefe Oration declares the reasons, why bee innented such a
strange forme of Letany.

Apollo pronounceth his Censure. pag. 26

  * CHAP. VI.

Apollo asketh the Author of the Golden Fleece wherefore his Countreymen of
Wales, hauing the commodionsnesse of the Sea with a large scope of land, are
notwithstanding very much impouerished of late.

The Author imputes the cause vnto the multitude of Law Suites. pag. 29.

  * CHAP. VII.

Orpheus Iunior exhibits a Petition vnto Apollo to diminish the number of
Lawyers, and to punish their offences.

Apolloes Answer, shewing how they may bee re­strained and punished. pag. 36.

  * CHAP. VIII.

Bartolus and Plowden, by the instigation of the Iesuiticall Faction, doe
appeach Orpheus Iunior be­fore Apollo, for certaine Offences supposed to bee
com­mitted by him. pag. 40.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=12) CHAP. IX.

Apollo commanding Orpheus Iunior to answer the Accusation of Bartolus and
Plowden, who obey­ing extoilesh Charitie, taxeth Conicatching and Hatred, and
commends the Lawes.

Apollo smiled to see the impudencie of these Law­yers, yet not to seeme
partiall in his Seruants cause, he commanded Orpheus to defend himselfe, who
thus began. pag. 44.

  * CHAP. X.

The learned Vniuersities of Great Brittaine do find themselues agrieued, that
Popish Physicians are per­mitted to practice Physick in this Kingdome.

Apollo remedies their grienances; and decreeth that the Popish presume not to
minister Physicke to any Protestant, but to them of their owne Sect. p. 54.

  * CHAP. XI.

The Nobilitie of Parnassus do complaine, that their Inferiours with their
Wines do weare richer Apparell then themselues, shewing likewise, that they
haue en­croached on other Priuiledges of theirs to bee hurried in Coaches, by
which presumptions many other cor­ruptions are lately crept into Apolloes
Court. p. 57.

  * CHAP. XII.

Apollo commands certaine of his Attendants to prescribe remedies, how Husbands
should liue with their Wines chastly, and without iealousie to be Cuc­kolded,
as also how men should contemne the baites of beautifull Women. pag. 62.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=12) CHAP. XIII.

A Corollary or an epitomized Censure of Apollo pronounced after the aforesaid
Opinions deliuered. touching the Election of Wiues and their vsage. p. 72

  * CHAP. XIV.

Cato the Censour of good manners hauing arrested certaine Persons a drinking
more then the Lawes prescribed them, brings them before Apollo.

His Maiestie reproues them for their Drunken­nesse, and banisheth them for
euer out of the precincts of Parnassus. pag. 73.

  * CHAP. XV.

The Authour of this Treatise called the Golden Fleece, exhibits a Bill of
Complaint against the To­bacconists of Great Britaine.

Apollo condemnes the immoderate vse of Tobac­co, and recommends the care of
the extermination thereof to the Clergie and to the Temporall Magistrate. pag.
78.

  * CHAP. XVI.

Traiano Boccalini the Authour of the Booke called the New-found Politicke
complayneth to A­pollo, that the Seuen Wisemen of Greece, who were put in
trust to reforme the World, did deceiue his Maiesties expectation; and that
the World was worse then euer it was.

Apollo retires himselfe in discontent; but at length by the Fraternitie of the
Rosie Crosse, he is comfor­ted and walks along with them in Procession. pag.
83.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=13) CHAP. XVII.

The foure Patrones or Patriarches of Great Bri­taine doe sing in Procession
the ensuing Rithmes.

Apollo pronounceth a conclusiue Oracle to reme­die all Abuses, preparing the
way to the Golden Fleece. pag. 87.

  * CHAP. XVIII.

Orpheus Iunior sheweth that one of the chiefest causes of the Decay of Trading
in Great Britaine, proceeded by the rash Aduentures of the Westerne Merchants
in passing the Straits of Gibrakar, and i [...] fishing on the Coast of New
foundland, without wasting ships to defend them from Pirats. pag. 102.

The Contents of the Chapters of the third Part of the Golden Fleece.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=13)CHAP. I.

Orpheus Iunior is required by Apollo to discouer where the Golden Fleece lyes.

Orpheus performes his Maiesties commandement, shewes that there bee sundry
kindes of the Golden Fleece, all which, after an allusion to the English
na­tures, he reduceth into one mayne Trade, to the Plan­tation and Fishing in
the New foundland. The gene­rall cause, which moued Orpheus to regard this
Gol­den Fleece. Page 1.

  * CHAP. II.

Orpheus Iunior particularizeth the manifold be­nefits of the Golden Fleece,
which might serue to repaire the decay of Trade, lately complained of in Great
Britaine, and to restore that Monarchie to all Earthly happinesse. pag. 11.

  * CHAP. III.

Apollo calls an Assembly of the Companie, for the Plantation of Newfoundland,
where Master Slany, Master Guy, and others, meeting by his Ma­iesties
commandement, Captaine Iohn Mason is wil­led to disclose, whether the Golden
Fleece bee there, where Orpheus Iunior alledged it to be. Captaine Mason a
[...]erreth it to bee in the same Iland more a­bundantly then in any other
place. pag. 19.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=14) CHAP. IV.

Apollo commands Iohn Guy, Alderman of Bri­stow, to sh [...]w how the
Plantations in the Newfound­land might bee established and secured from the
cold vapours, and foggie mists which in the Spring are supposed to molest that
Country. pag. 26.

  * CHAP. V.

Sir Ferdinando Gorge is accused by the Westerne Fishermen of England, for
hindering them of their stages, to dry their Fish in New England, and from
trading with the Sauages for Furres and other com­modities. Ferdinando Gorge
his answere. Apollo reconcileth their differences. pag. 30.

  * CHAP. VI.

Apollo mooued to pitie vpon a Petition preferred vnto him by certaine Saylers
Widowes, whose Hus­bands perished in the Voyages vnder the East Indies
Company, causeth foure famous Knights of Great Britaine, Sir Francis Drake,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button, to signifie
their opinions, where about the best passage to the East Indies did lie. pag.
39.

  * CHAP. VII.

Apolloes censure of Sir Thomas Buttons Voy­age to the Northwest Passage.

His directions for the preseruation of health in frostie seasons, and for the
preuenting of the Scuruy.

An Elegie in their commendations which aduen­tured
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=14) their
persons for the discouerie of the aforesaid Passage. pag. 46.

  * CHAP. VIII.

The Merchants of Lisbone doe complaine on the English and Hollanders, for
trading into the East Indies for Spices, Drugges, and other Commodities.
Apollo reiecteth their complaints, and aduiseth how they may saile thither
with lesser inconueniences, then heretofore. pag. 51.

  * CHAP. IX.

Apollo sends for some of the Merchants Aduen­turers of euery seuerall Company
out of Great Bri­taine, graceth them with his countenance, and promi­seth them
the continuance of his Fauours. pag. 58.

  * CHAP. X.

Apollo to make the Golden Fleece a complete Ca­tholike Restoratine to the
State of Great Britaine, commands the seuen Wisemen of Greece to declare out
of their experience, some more meanes for the inriching of that State: which
they seuerally per­forme. pag. 59.

  * CHAP. XI.

Apollo not throughly contented with the proiects of the seuen wisemen of
Greece, commands others, viz. Cornelius Tacitus, Comminaeus, the Lord
Cromwell, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Secretary Wal­singham, Sir Thomas Smith, and
William Lord Burleigh, who were knowne to be farre more Politick Statesmen, to
deliuer their opinions, how Great Bri­taine might be inriched. pag. 71.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=15) CHAP. XII.

The Order, which Apollo Tooke for the setling of the Golden Fleece, before his
late Progresse into the Tro­picke of Cancer, recommending the same to the care
of the Fraternitie of the Rosie Crosse, the foure Pa­trons of Great Britaine.

The consultation of the foure Patrons for the good of Great Britaine. The copy
of Saint Dauids Sonnet, which he pronounced in the Amphitheater  [...]t
Parnassus, in honour of the King of Great Bri­taines Mariage and Coronation.
pag. 81.

  * CHAP. XIII.

Vpon an Information preferred before the Ladie Pallas against Scoggin and
Skelton, for interrupting of Saint Dauid in his Sonnet, Shee vtters some
Ob­seruations on the behalfe of the Learned, and thereby takes an Occasion to
banish all Scoffing Companions from Parnassus, and from becomming at any time
af­ter partakers of the Golden Fleece, discouered in this Treatise. pag. 93.

  * The Conclusion of Orpheus Iunior to his Soue­reigne, the King of Great Britaine. pag. 95.

## Table of contents

  * To the indifferent Readers.
  * To the vncharitable Readers or Deriders of our GOLDEN FLEECE.
  * In Commendation of the Golden Fleece produced by Orpheus lunior.
  * An Epigram vpon the Golden Fleece, moralized by the Authour for the good of Great BRITAINE.
  * In Honour of the Golden Fleece described by Orpheus Iunior.
  * 1\. OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE: THE FIRST PART.
    * 1.1. THE FIRST PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE, Discouering the Errours of Religion with the remedies. CHAP. 1.
    * 1.2. CHAP. II.
    * 1.3. CHAP. III.
    * 1.4. CHAP. IIII.
    * 1.5. CHAP. V.
    * 1.6. CHAP. VI.
    * 1.7. CHAP. VII.
    * 1.8. CHAP. VIII.
    * 1.9. CHAP. IX.
    * 1.10. CHAP. X.
    * 1.11. CHAP. XI.
    * 1.12. CHAP. XII.
    * 1.13. CHAP. XIII.
    * 1.14. CHAP. XIIII.
    * 1.15. CHAP. XV.
    * 1.16. CHAP. XVI.
    * 1.17. CHAP. XVII.
    * 1.18. CHAP. XVIII.
    * 1.19. The Conclusion of the First Part
  * 2\. THE SECOND PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.
    * 2.1. CHAP. 1.
    * 2.2. CHAP. 2.
    * 2.3. CHAP. 3.
    * 2.4. CHAP. 4.
    * 2.5. CHAP. 5.
    * 2.6. CHAP. 6.
    * 2.7. CHAP. VII.
    * 2.8. CHAP. VIII.
    * 2.9. CHAP. IX.
    * 2.10. CHAP. XII.
    * 2.11. CHAP. XI.
    * 2.12. CHAP. XII.
    * 2.13. CHAP. XIII.
    * 2.14. CHAP. XIIII.
    * 2.15. CHAP. XV.
    * 2.16. CHAP. XVI.
    * 2.17. CHAP. XVII.
    * 2.18. CHAP. XVIII.
  * 3\. THE THIRD PART OF The Golden Fleece.
    * 3.1. CHAP. I.
    * 3.2. CHAP. 2.
    * 3.3. CHAP. 3.
    * 3.4. CHAP. 4.
    * 3.5. CHAP. 5.
    * 3.6. CHAP. 6.
    * 3.7. CHAP. 7.
    * 3.8. CHAP. 8.
    * 3.9. CHAP. 9.
    * 3.10. CHAP. 10.
    * 3.11. CHAP. 11.
    * 3.12. CHAP. 12.
    * 3.13. CHAP. 13.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=15)

## 1\. OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE: THE FIRST PART.

The occasion of this Treatise, called the Golden Fleece. And the Reasons which
moued the Author to inter­mingle merrie and light conceites among matters of
Consequence.

IN the Moneth when the Celestiall Ram famous for the Grecians Golden Fleece
had renewed the last Spring 1626\. with an equall Proportion of Dayes and
Nights; the one presiguring Ioy for the Second Yeeres Raigne of our Rising
Sunne, and the other Sorrow for our crying and presumptuous sinnes; while I
attended at Court to know his Royall Pleasure about our Fishing Fleets and
Plātations of the Iland commonly called the Newfound­land, [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=16) in the latter
whereof, I haue for these ten yeeres together, engaged both my selfe and a
great part of my fortunes: it was my good hap among other Noble Courtiers, to
become acquainted with Sir William A­lexander Master of the Requests, and
Secretarie for Scot­land. After some formall Complements, it pleased him and
my ancient Friend Master William Elueston, sometimes Secretary to the most
Excellent Princesse Elizabeth, and now Cupbearer to his Maiestie, to ap­point
a Meeting at the Chamber of Sir William Alex­ander; where all three of vs
being met together, this learned Knight with a ioyfull countenance and
alacrity of mind, taking me by the hand thus began: I haue oftentimes wisht to
conferre with you, but vntill this present, I could not find the opportunitie.
It is neces­sary, and this necessitie iumps with the sympathy of our
constellations (for I thinke wee were borne both vnder the same Horoscope)
that wee aduise and deuise some Proiect for the proceedings and successefull
ma­naging of our Plantations. As you obtayned a Patent of the Southermost part
of Newfoundland, and transplanted thither some of your countrimen of Wales,
baptizing the same by the name of Cambrioll: so haue I got a Patent of the
neighbouring Country vnto yours West ward beyond Cape Briton, Christning it
New Scotland. You haue spent much, and so haue I in aduancing these hopefull
Aduentures. But as yet neither of vs arriued at the Hauen of our expectations.
Onely, like a wary Politician, you suspend your breath for a time, vntill you
can repaire your losses sustained by some of Sir Walter Raleighs company in
their returne from Guiana, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=16) while your
Neighbours the Right Honourable the Lord Viscount Falkland, and my Lord
Baltimore, to whom you assigned the Northerly part of your Grant, doe
vn­dergoe the whole burthen, supporting it with a brane resolution, and a
great deale of expence, which other­wise you were obliged to performe. The
like inconue­niences I haue felt, euen in the insancie of my Attempt, whether
the defects proceeded through the late season of the yeare, when wee set out
the Colony, or by the slownesse of our People, who wearied in their passage at
Sea, by reason of contrarie winds rested themselues too long at Saint Iohns
Harbour, and at my Lord of Bal­timores Plantation, I know not; but sure I am,
it cost me and my friends very deare, and brought vs into much decrements; and
hath wel-nigh disheartned my poore countrymen, if at my humble Suit, our most
Noble and Generous King Charles had not out of his Royall magnificence and
respectiue care to vs and our Poste­rities restored and reuiued our courages
by conferring such monies as might arise by the creation of Knight Ba­ronets
in Scotland, towards the erecting of this new fabricke and heroicall Action.
And yet I feare all this will not suffice and defray the charge. In such
abun­dance doth my natiue Countrie of Scotland, ouer­swarme with people, that
if new habitations bee not suddenly prouided for them, as Hiues for Bees, they
must either miscarie of want, or turne Droanes vnpro­fitable to the Owner, as
you well remembred in your Poeticall workes, which you termed Cambrensium
Ca­roleia.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=17) Si noua
non apibus condas, Rex, aluea, Fuci Ignani fient, nec tibi lucra ferent.

Wee need not complaine with our Sauiour in the Gospell, that the Haruest is
great, and the Labourers few; for we haue many Labourers, which would
willingly manure this maiden Soile, and with the painfull sweate of their
browes reape what they sow. But the charge of transporting them with such
implements and domesticall cattell, as must be had now at the first, cannot
but grow to an excessiue cost. To expect more helpes then it pleased our most
bountifull King al­ready to bestow vpon vs will bee in vaine, I doubt,
considering the scarcity of mony in these dayes, which not only Scotland, but
likewise all his Maiesties Domi­nions doe affirme to be true. The natiue and
genuine salt of the earth, which fructified our Corne fields with so many
infinite ploughings of our Ancestors and ours is spent; nor will Lime or Marle
euer recouer them to the pristine and ancient vigour and fertilitie. English
Cloth, which heretofore was dignified with the Title of the Golden Fleece,
growes out of request, yea (and with inward griefe I speake it) in contempt
also among the Owners and Inhabitants themselues. Our Tinne, Lead, and Coale-
mines begin to faile. Our Woods, which Nature produced, and our Fathers left
vs for firing, for reparations of decayed Houses, Ploughes, and Ship­ping, is
lately wasted by the Couetousnesse of a few Ironmasters. What then remaines in
this famous Ile? Except we relieue our wants by Nauigation, and these [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=17) must bee by
Fishing, by hooke or by crooke, by Letters of Mart, by way of reprizals or
reuenge, or else by Traffique and Commerce with other Nations besides
Spaniards. I would we could inuent and hit vpon some profitable meanes for the
setling of these glorious workes, whereto it seemes the diuine Prouidence hath
elected vs as instruments vnder our Earthly Soue­raigne.

Heere Sir William Alexander stopt. To whom I re­turned this answere: Much
honoured Sir, I grant the setting forwards of Plantations, with all needfull
appur­tenances, requires the purse of rich Spencer, or of weal­thy Sutton, in
regard of the many difficulties and di­sturbances, which either Malice, Enuie,
causelesse di­struct, casualties vnlookt for, or the carelesnesse of vn­expert
Agents may procure now at the beginning to blast our hopes in the blossome.
Neuerthelesse, inuitâ Inuidiâ, in despite of Enuie, and of all malicious
An­gels, which by their inuisible wheeling about the brains of Castawayes, doe
vse to seduce their phantasies to crosse the very best Designes, whereof no
man li­uing hath more cause then my selfe to complaine: wee ought to perseuere
in constancie, and to out-dare For­tune vnder the Almighties Banner. What
incumbran­ces did the Israelites feele, before they conquered the Land of
Canaan? How many Persecutions did the Church endure, before the true Christian
Faith was planted? None enters into Heauen without Crosses and fierie tryals
composed of briers and brambles, which the Romanes termed the vnluckie Woods.
There­fore let vs lay aside all scrupulous doubts. Let vs cut [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=18) our Coats
according to the cloath, taking care thrif­tily to husband the meanes allotted
to our Plantations; which we shall the more easily accomplish, if we haue not
passionate Superiours to controll vs, nor Coadin­tors in counsell to condemne
vs. Commonly where many Directors are, the Directions prooue confused: which
is the cause, that priuate houses be better built, & with lesser charge then
publicke edifices of the like proportion. Yea and we shall doe more in these
places, where we haue eleuated our cogitations, and leuelled our ends for a
thousand pounds, then others haue in Virginia or the Summer Ilands for forty
thousand, so that wee transport for the space of the first two or three yeeres
none but Fishermen and Labourers. By these we shall performe miracles, and
returne yeerely into Great Brittaine a surer Gaine, then Iasons Golden Fleece
from Colchos; euen with sixe moneths prouision and Nets, three men in one Boat
shall reape a Golden Haruest, and get worth ten pound a weeke in Fish being
brought into Europe or exchanged there in the Coun­trey; which besides the
increase of Shipping and Mari­ners will propagate our Plantations in a short
time. Only heere lyes the Gordian knot to vndoe, a Rich man will not forgoe
his natiue smoke, nor are poore men of abilitie now at first to get thither.
For although we haue his Maiesties countenance propitious vnto these
profitable Enterprizes, specially you of New-Scotland, yet all our wits cannot
worke that impres­sion in Misers heads to lend their helping hands to this
goodly Proiect. We sue for no Lottries, wee beg for no Bene [...]olences, as
others in the like cases haue done. [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=18) And if we should,
men are now-adaies so Penny-wise and Pound foolish, they will sooner bestow
fortie pounds vpon a glorious suit of apparell, then fortie shillings to
better their brethren. Although these Golden hopes doe shine as cleere as the
noonetide Sunne, yet will not they enlighten muddie apprehensions, nor
quick­en earth-creeping wits, vnlesse we could more firmely build vp and
restore the Office of Assurance, which the Moorish Pirats haue lately
endamaged. After I had en­ded my Answer, Master Elueston thus addressed his
speech vnto vs: In my iudgement you are both too suspicious and distrustfull
of our noble Countrymen. For some particulars you must not taxe the generall.
Although some rake to themselues, neglecting the fruits of their Christian
Faith: yet many loue their Neighbours as themselues, and will straine the
vtter­most of their powers to succour the poore members of Christ. There bee
Heauenly bodies aswell as Earthly Bodies. Me thinkes, you beeing both
iudicious and Publishers of Bookes might so combine and contriue your studies
together, that the World, were it as blind as Beetles, might see with Lynceus
eyes the certaintie of the Commodities, the conueniencie of the Trade, and the
infinite benefits which may arise by these heroicall enterprizes, which you
Sir William Alexander for your part haue alreadie chalked out, and delineated
in Print. And I doubt not but this Gentleman euen by a vertu­ous emulation,
may if he please, second you with some pleasing Motiues of substance and
spirit able to insinu­ate into the minds of the dullest Creatures, the sweete
fruition of the Golden Fleece, and like another Iason [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=19) with a braue
Companie of Argonauticks, stirre vp the most stonie-hearted to relent and
relieue their distressed Brethren, which now grone, and in a manner saint
vn­der their penurious state. What will not patheticall perswasions worke?
Orpheus, as Poets faigned, with his harmonious Harpe, drew a farre more hard-
hear­ted Nation to follow his tune, and to dance after his motions.

To this Sir William Alexander replied, wee liue not now, Master Elueston, in
such simplicitie and candour of mind, as those people of the Golden Age. Men
for the most part are now become peruerse Pigmeyes in re­spect of their
generous Ancestours. They are better fed then taught, faire without, and foule
within, if not rotten like that Spaniards apple:

—Como la Mancana

De dentro podrida, y de fuera galana.

They are more heauie-spirited, dull-headed, and al­most growne out of kind. He
had need of a choise con­ceit, of a quaint and transcendent wit, which will
at­tract the minds of Earthlings to these braue Flames. An Ape will be an Ape
though you clothe him in pur­ple; and a Hog will wallow in mire, though you
feed him neuer so daintily. Doe not we find by experience that the Bookes of
many rare Diuines lye on the Statio­ners hands, as it were moth-eaten, or
inuerted to base Offices, and solde for wast leaues to Apothecaries, to
Glouers, Cookes, and Bakers?

Nay said Master Elueston, I dare assume, Sir Willi­am Alexander, that your
Bookes shall neuer bee put to such vile and seruile vses; nor any liuely
monument, [[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=19)
which issues from a well tempered braine, like an old bough full ripe with
bark, vt ra [...]ale vetus. No Worke lights on that fatall period, but some
frothie and abor­tiue Birth, which the Muses disdayned to inspire; or some
melancholy grosse burthen, which Lucina that skilfull Midwife condemned for a
Monster; or else some Booke which wants the true symmetry and pro­portion of
Seasoning, it being not composed accor­ding to the capacitie of the Reader.
Heere consists the magisteriall secret, the mysterie discouered and pra­ctised
by few Writers in our dayes. And I pray what mysticall Receit might that be,
quoth Sir William Alex­ander. which may heale the Lethargie of our moderne
Readers, or inflame the slow Spirits of the multitude? Haue not Bookes their
Destinies as well as Common-wealths? Must not all things vnder the Sunne wax
old, fraile, and faile at last? Senescente mundo consenescunt omnia. The
neerer we are to the end of the world, the more childish and doting is the
iudgement of the wi­sest man. How much more then must wee beare with the
Common sort, whose wils change with the weather­cocke? If great Schollers,
whose liues Learning ought to purifie, doe feele their fancies tossed with
strange Chy [...] [...]nes, with many capricious temptations; why apply we not
our selues a little to temporize with them who are yet children in wit?

St [...]ltiti [...] st [...]lare loco Prudentia summa est.

It is no lesse prudence to dally and put on the Fooles coat sometimes, as to
seeme an anstere Cat [...] at some other times. Doe not wee see Pamphlets,
Ballads, and Play-bookes sooner sold, then elegant Sermons [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=20) and Bookes of
Pietie? The most part are disposed to fopperies and worldly vanities,
insomuch, that ma­ny worthy Preachers are saine to conceale their talent, and
to couer their admonitions vnder a cunning me­thod, according to the times
importunitie, and to the nature of their Chamelion Flockes. Yea, and these
profound Teachers doe oftentimes curtall their sacred Lessons, or else their
Auditours ouer-cloyed with graue Doctrine will either despise them, or fall
asleepe during their Sermons. Therefore vnlesse a Booke con­taine light
matters aswell as serious, it cannot flourish nor liue Iouially, but like
leaden Saturne stand still in the stall, or languish like a bedred Creature.

At this discourse of Sir William Alexanders, Ma­ster Elueston as a man
rauished with admiration, went forward in the like Proposition. Now, quoth he,
in­deed you haue traced my meaning, and happily conie­ctured at that, which
renders grace to the wise and e­ternall Muses. Whosoeuer will commit to Presse
that mixture, which sauours of some trifling fragments and historicall
figments enterlaced among waightie and se­rious matters shall please the
Iudicious and the Simple. Now adayes it is wisdom for a Writer to produce
wis­dome vnder a disguised stile, and so to weane the nurce­lings of his
braine, that the Common People may bee edified by a discreet kinde of Folly.
Let vs follow the example of Saint Paul, who ministred milke only vn­to Babes;
and not meat of too solid and hard digesti­on. The Bible comprehends pleasing
Relations, as­well as profound mysteries, gellies for the Sicke, and venison
for the strong; where likewise a Lamb may [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=20) wade and an
Elephant swimme. To this end doe wee vse Oliues, Capers, Oranges, and Limonds
for sauceto tender stomackes, when as men of abler Constitutions can feede on
meat without such prouocations. Excellent in this Art of Cookerie were those
Spaniards, which wrot the life of Guz­man the Rogue, and the Aduentures of Don
Quixot de la Mancha, the former seruing to withdraw a licentious young man
from Prodigalitie, Whore­dome, and Deceit; and the latter to reclaime a
riotous running wit from taking delight in those prodigious, idle, and time-
wasting Bookes, cal­led the Mirrour of Knighthood, the Knights of the Round
Table, Palmerin de Oliua, and the like rabblement, deuised no doubt by the
Deuill to con­firme soules in the knowledge of euill, Honest Mirth I like, but
if it bee accompanied with Scur­rilitie, Baudrie, notorious lyes, or with
prophane and too friuolous fopperies, I vtterly dislike all such pretended
recreations. As the former is necessarie for the prolonging of health and
life: so likewise it is for the sale and approbation of a Booke, wherein
triuiall toyes and tales shall bee intermixt among matters of importance, that
they may breede a longing desire in the Hearers to haue such nouelties
repeated againe and againe. Foras Marsilius Ficinus writes concerning a
Heauenly body heere on earth What Old man soeuer will renue his age, and
re­duce his bodie to a youthfull temper, hee must lay aside his grauitie, and
be a child in mind. Oportet prius, vt repuerascat animo.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=21) This
Discourse of Master Elueston did highly sa­tisfie Sir William Alexander, and
confirme him in his resolution of applauding Bookes of this stampe and
miscellaneous humour: so that conuerting his speech to me who attentiuely
listned to their com­munication, he said: Noble Friend, by our caue­ats you
may obserue what course you must take to winne the good will of our Ilanders;
for except you season your Anisoes with some light passages with wits, fits, &
fancies, like ballads & bables to refresh the capacities of your Auditours, as
Aesop the Phry­gian vnder Fables couched and shadowed Policies of great
moment, they will hardly yeeld due at­tention to your Counsels, be they neuer
so impor­tant, and consequently neuer assist vs for the get­ting of the Golden
Fleece, so requisite for the sup­plies of this Monarchie, that in all
likelihood it can­not long subsist without this maine and speciall Trade,
which rightly may be termed the Nurcerie of Mariners, the propagation of
shipping, Great Brittaines Indies, Corn [...]copia Amalthea. You shall doe a
worke of Charitie, yea and of Liberalitie, for this free-hearted vertue
consists in distributing good Counsell aswell as of money, to animate our
carelesse Countrymen. The Planets delight in mo­tion; and by so much the
neerer doe our Spirits ap­proach to these superiour bodies, when with a
re­solution vndaunted, wee vndertake noble enter­prises, tending to the
publick good as to our owne particular. Goe on then, deare Friend, hauing
vertue for thy Guide. What will it auaile a Scholler [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=21) to reserue his
knowledge to himselfe, to hide his Candle vnder a bushell, or to vaunt: Wee
write to our selues and to the Sonnes of Art? Who will take notice of such a
Mystery?

Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc seiat alter.

After these and the like Discourses were ended, we departed, they to the
Court, and I to my studie; where I began to rouze vp my thoughts, and
tho­rowly to ruminate on some Plot, which might in­uite our Worldlings for
their present and future Good to embrace those fortunes, which with open armes
this Sister-land offers vnto vs. For the ac­complishing whereof, vnder a
Poeticall stile not too much degenerating from the Euangelicall grauitie, I
haue resolued to vse the name of the great Apollo, not Heathenish, but
Christian, after the example of Traiane Boccalini, who vnder that Title
brought forth most plausible Raggualioes, and by mee now of late communicated
to our English Readers: or rather  [...]imitation of the ancient Romish
Church, which beautified their Temples with painted Ba­bles, as baits in
worldly policie to allure the barba­rous Gothes, and the wauering-minded
Romanes of thosetimes to repaire thither from their more Superstitious Idols,
lest otherwise the Religion, which they had planted, might haue falne to
con­tempt, like the Sanctum Sanct [...]rum of the Iewes Temple, which when the
Romanes vnder Titus at the destruction of Ierusalem had obserued to bee [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=22) bare without any
grauen Images, or other outward garnishing, they despised the same as a
Monument of no value, and at length consumed it with fire. For the like cause
Apothecaries doe sometimes gild ouer their vgly and bitter Pills to please the
Sicke mans view, which to other Patients for want of such deceitfull daubing,
haue beene so fastidious and lothsome, that euen at the very sight of the
Pils, their Imaginations preuayling so powerfully ouer their bodies, their
stomackes wambled, and they haue fal [...]e into as violent a Purge, as if
they had al­readie swallowed them downe. So nice and tender is many a mans
nature, whereof wee cannot ascribe any other reason, then the depraued
Phantasie, and the sundrie mixtures of the Spirits partaking of the Elementall
Qualities corrupted, which cause vs to delight in faire outward shewes and
varieties, but commonly of the daintiest taste, of the newest Cooking.

To which I adde this one Accident more, as a speciall motiue to my Apologie,
for inserting vul­gar Toyes among matters of Consequence,

Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis.

As A [...]sonius writes in his Catoes Morals. Since the Conference I had with
those iudicious Gentle­men aforespecified, it was my chance to be present at a
Booksellers shop, where I saw the Writings of the learned Bullinger, one of
the chiefe Pillars of our Reformed Religion, and the Workes of that [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=22) curious
Schooleman, whom the Romists terme the Angelicall Doctor, sold for wast Paper,
euen for two pence a quire. Which when I beheld to my great wonder, I thus
expostulated with my selfe: what then shall become of my Bookes, which I haue
al­readie published to the World with so many houres paines and vigilant
cares? Or of those, which hereafter vpon vrgent occasions I may wrest from my
indulgent Minerua, seeing that Bookes of a higher Genius, of a more sublime
nature proue thus vnfortunate, and vilified? Shall I write or betake my Muse
to Melancholy? On the one side the Iniquitie of the times terrifies me from
further writing. On the otherside, the care of my Coun­tries welfare
sollicits, nay, exacteth my present helpe, at the least some lenitiue
Medicines towards her recouerie, which now pants with a difficult breathing,
whether the Infirmitie proceeds ex an­gustia praecordiorum, from some
straightnesse in the midriffes; or of a bastard Plurisie, which requires
bloud-letting; or of some abstruse and secret cause in the lungs; or of some
superfluous humour in­gendred in the braine, where the Intellectuall
Fa­culties ought to reside, and to direct the inferiour Functions. How soeuer,
the Cure is not impossible: yet perhaps a thanklesse Office for a man vncalled
to take in hand. This last is the cause, and none but this, which makes mee
the more sparing of my re­medies. In this confusion of thoughts fearing to
play with Iupiters beard, or to dally with Saints and [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=23) higher Powers,
who might misconster my Good­will, I thought once to be silent, left in
lending my hand to saue others, of tender charitie and com­passion, I might
fal my selfe into the Whirle-poole, and there sinke or swimme, I should rather
be laug­hed at then pitied.

Sic aliquis nanti dextram dum porrigit, ipse

Incidit in liquidas non bene cautus aquat.

For this cause I minded to lay afide my Melodie, one of my chiefest Receits,
to restore mad men to their wits, in respect of these thanklesse times; and
thus to lament my doubtfull disaster, as Sir Walter Raleigh did to our late
Queene Anne of happy memory:

My broken pipes shall on the willow hang,

Like those, which on the Babylonian bankes,

These ioyes foredone, their present sorrow sang;

These times to worth yeelding but frozen thankes.

At last, the Cloudie sable vaile of iealous doubts being remoued, which for a
while had interposed themselues betwixt the Light of my vnderstanding and the
other attributes of my Soule: I valiantly resolued on this Treatise of the
Golden Fleece, and in regard of the fraikies, which the greatest part of my
fellow-subiects doe, as it were, by some vnlue­kie influence of the Starres,
participate, I haue pre­pared [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=23) sundry kinds of
arti [...]ce; so that if some proue distastfull and nau [...]eati [...]e, yet
others may sort out well according to my expectation.

I will therefore diuide this Worke into three Parts. In the first, I will
refute the Errours of Re­ligion, preparing the way to V [...]ilie. In the
second I will endeuour to remoue the Diseases of our King­dome, that
Contraries may be cured by Contraries.

And lastly, I will lay downe those Helps, which may repaire the ruines of our
State, as the surest Elixir, and Restoratiue, which my poore Experience hath
attained vnto.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=24)

### 1.1. THE FIRST PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE, Discouering the Errours of
Religion with the remedies.  
CHAP. 1.

The greatest care, which Apollo takes for the Mo­narchy of Great Britaine.

The singular and respectiue loue, which hee beares towards the hopefull &
magnanimous King Charles.

And how by his Proclamation, he caused Mariana the Iesuite to be apprehended
for animating Subiects against their naturall Prince.

ABoue all the magnificent courts, which the sun beholds from East to West, and
from the one Pole to the other, It is noted that Apollo, as it were by
Sympathy of some Heauenly Influence beares particular affection to the [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=24) Regall Court of
Great Brittaine, and tenders the welfare thereof as of his owne Parnassus:
Insomuch that his Imperiall Maiestie, foreseeing that G [...]y Faux and his
damned Confederates would haue blowne vp the Parliament house, with the King
and Estates there assembled vpon the fift day of Nouember in the yeere 1605\.
and that they afterwards inten­ded to set vp their Romish Religion, hee first
caused one of the Aeriall Spirits to insinuate into Tressams braine, and by
often nibling on his imagination to procure from him that Aenigmaticall Letter
vnto his brother in Law the Lord Mounteagle. Then out of his diuine loue
towards this Monarchy, he assisted the Genius of the learned and most noble
King Iames to discouer the whole plot, by vnlocking with the key of Prophesie
the Mysterie of that in­tricate Letter more intricate and darke then Sphinx
his Riddle. So odious appeared this Butcherly and Diabolicall Treason vnto his
Sacred Spirit, That no Scrutinies of Triall, nor legall Consultations were by
him omitted to know the hidden motiues and quintessence of this bloudie and
vnnaturall practice, so much degenerating from mans nature, as with the Giants
of old time to scale the Heauens, and to assault the Authour of nature, by
whom they liued, moued, and had their being. But for all his Examinations and
vigilant cares Apollo could by no meanes ferret out the Fox; for the Deuill
had transformed the beast into an Angell of light, vntill Ra [...]illiac that
monster of Mankind had massacred [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=25) the great
Hercules of France King Henry the fourth. Vpon which Accident one Peter Ramus
a learned Parisian, whom the Papists sometimes nicknamed the Hugenotes
Champion, informed Apollo, that the said Rauilliac, the very morning of the
same day when he committed this lamentable murther, was heard to maintaine
that Paradoxe, how iustifiable and glorious an Act it were for a Subiect to
kill a Tyrannicall or Hereticall Prince. For the verifying and approuing of
which position, he quoted down certaine leaues of Mariana the Iesuites Booke
de Rege & Reg. Instit. cap. 6\. whereby hee subiects all Powers and Dominions
to the becke and dispose of his earthly God my Lord the Pope, and frees them
from their alleageance to their natiue Prince, if his Holinesse storme, or
themselues doe imagine him to become an Apostata, or to fauour Apostasie or
Heresie. Apolloes griefe, conceiued by this Assas­sinate and Tragicall euent
became somewhat as­swaged, when he knew the cause of this inhumane butchery
proceeded through the Kings owne cre­dulitie and tendernesse of heart in
admitting the Iesuits into France, against the will of his judicious
Sorbonists, and afterwards sostering them like Aesopes Snake in the Louvre his
Regall Palace: whose common Maxime he knew to bee: One God in Heauen, one God
on Earth, and one Catholike King. Yet notwithstanding to let his vertuous
fol­lowers vnderstand how heynous crying sinnes, and the treacherous shedding
of humane bloud, seemed [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=25) in his vnspotted
presence, Apollo commanded Ro­bert Earle of Essex, Lord High Marshall of his
Em­pire, and Sir I hilip Sidney the Prouost Marshall of his Court, to make
diligent search and inquirie within the Precincts of his Territories for the
bodie of Mariana, and him to apprehend, and in sure and safe manner to bring
before his Imperiall Highnes. These Noble Gentlemen endeuoured to performe the
contents of his command, but in no wise could they light on Mariana's person.
For while the war­rant was a writing by the Clarke of the Counsell, it chanced
that Pererius, Tolet, Posseuinus, Bellarmine, & Cotton of Paris ouer-heard the
charge and tenour thereof. And it is to bee suspected, that they gaue him
notice, for the repute and credit of their Socie­tie to hide himselfe, for
indeed the Varlet fled be­fore the Warrant was signed. Apollo perceiuing that
his Marshals had taken exceeding great paines, and yet in vaine, for his
attaching hee caused a publike Proclamation to be fixed on the Gate of his
Palace at Parnassus, that what persons soeuer could bring this fugitiue
Iesuite before him, his Maiestie would preferre him to some Office or place
about his Court. For all this, no man could finde out his haunt or tracke. So
wary and carefull were these subtill Iesuits to preserue their wicked brood,
ac­cording to the old saying: Birds of a feather will cling together.

Euery yeere continually for these sixteene yeres space this Proclamation was
renued. Now about the first of Aprill last according to the antient stile
[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=26) after
many yeeres inquirie and busie search, it was Mariana's fatall luck to bee
discouered and appre­hended. And because the manner, meanes, and persons,
whereby this egregious and notable ad­uenture came to light, may bee knowne to
after a­ges for the honour of Great Brittaines Court, I will lay downe my
knowledge. When swift winged Fame by sound of Trumpet had published at
Par­nassus, what great contentment and pleasing com­fort the wise and
couragious Prince Charles Mo­narch of Great Brittaine, tooke in reading the
Rag­ualioes and Auisoes of this high and transcendent Court, written by
Boccalini in Italian, and with kind and gracious acceptation receiued them
Eng­lished at the hands of one Vaughan a Cambrobritain together with certaine
presents called Cambren­sium Caroleia, which were sent from the Muses and the
Graces by the said Messenger, and withall, that his Highnesse had deuoted
himselfe and his King­domes to bee perpetually gouerned by the Lawes,
Charters, and Prescriptions of Apolloes Court, be­ing fully resolued to settle
Charitie in his Subiects mindes, to cut off multiplicities of wrangling suits,
Extortions, Heresies, Arminianisme, Excesse of Apparell, Tobacco,
Drunkennesse, and Gluttony and other vaine expences which in these moderne
times, haue well-nigh beggered the most part of his Ilanders. Vpon the
Relation of these Reformati­ons, deliberated by this Thrice famous Prince
there shined in all mens hearts (the Papists and some Lawyers excepted) such
lightsome gratulations and [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=26) apparant
demonstrations of ioyes, that Apollo him­selfe not able to conceale the
exorbitant pleasure he conceiued at this gladsome newes, caused all the Bells
of Parnassus, Del [...]s, Pindus, Libethrum, and of all his other Temples to
be rung for three dayes together, and bonfires to be made of Iuniper,
Ci­presse, Aloes, Storax, Frankincense, and other Aromaticall Gumms abundantly
strewed & burnt. And because the said Vaughan, whom his Maiestie graced with
the title of Orpheus Iunior, and one De­mocritus Iunior, which published the
Anatomie of Melancholie, and one Iohn Florio a learned Italian were the first
messengers which blazed and repor­ted these ioyfull tidings, Apollo admitted
them all three into his Palace, as extraordinarie Waiters. Where when Orpheus
Iunior had attended a while, and obserued the small pittance he was like to
bee fed withall, drinking only of the liquor of the pale Pirene, while
Prodigals, Papists, and Idolaters were glutted with Ambrosia and Nectar (for
indeed the Learned of all Religions were fauoured at Parnas­sus, so that they
behaued themselues morally ho­nest) meeting one day with his friends
Democritus, a new commer as himselfe, and with Iohn Florio aforenamed,
sometimes seruant to the vertuous Queene Anne, hee brake forth into these
speeches? How long shall wee suffer our selues to be dallied with hopes of
preferment in this Learned Court? Wee are heere daily besprinkled with holy
water, tired with complements, and welcommed with many ceremonious
salutations, without any pro­fit [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=27) at all, so that
wee spend our precious times in attendance, which auaileth as much, as if we
prick [...] flies with Domitian? And we are like as I see, after a few Summers
spent in tedious and toylesome ex­pectation, to starue with cold in the first
hard win­ter. How happie should our wiues and children haue beene if we had
betaken our selues to some base mechanicall trade, and so by cogging and
ly­ing to aduance our fortunes? If we had studied Di­uinity, we might haue had
some fat benifice. If wee had spared but two houres or three in a weeke from
our more serious imployments, in the Lawes which they terme Common, though
sometimes wrested according to priuat fancies, by this time wee had heaped
together whole pyles of treasure by the ru­ines of such Clients as runne
headlong, like tame Woodcocks, into knowne nets. If wee had pra­ctised
Physicks, by the death of some few Patients, wee might haue scraped together a
better estate, then thus to consume our fruitlesse laboursin awai­ting for
Offices, which no sooner become vacant, but others doe step before vs, like
the sicke at the Poole of Bethesda. For my part, except I find my worth better
respected and requited, Ile retire my selfe from Court, and bend my fortunes
to the New­foundland, whereby Ciuilizing the Satyres and ma­nuring that Maiden
earth, I may like the Gracian Orpheus, leaue this memoriall to posteritie,
that a Cambrobritain hath founded a new Cambrioll, where he made the deafe to
heare, and the woods to mo [...]e. To this Democritus Iunior answered: My
noble friend, [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=27) I must confesse,
that true and solid Learning is al­most downe the wind in this decrepit age of
the world, by reason of the multitude of scambling Schollers and riotous
Writers, who like emptie barrels yeeld a hollow sound without substantiall
fruit. Your many swarmes of ouer-swaying Law­yers lend their greedie hands to
pull downe this fa­mous fabrick:

Since hired double Tongues grew in request,

Nor Armes nor Arts could take their wonted Rest.

In regard of the many emulous concurrents for places here in Court, which
importunately prosse vpon his Maiestie for promotion, it is difficult and in a
manner impossible for such modest persons, as wee are, who out of our
magnanimitie of spirit scorne to fawne like spaniells, to climbe into any high
vocation. There bee two kinds of Factions heere, the Papists and the Lawyers,
who although their number be but few in this vertuous Court, yet powerfull
enough to suppresse and supplant a grea­ter man then you, if they ioyne
together and ban­die against you. The one you haue exasperated and angred in
your Bookes, specially in your Golden Groue, and your Circles called the
Spirit of detracti­on coniured and conuicted. And the Lawyers vow to bee
reuenged on you for seeking to diminish their Gaine (as Luther did the bellies
of the Monkes) in your late Cambrensium Caroleia. And if that sen­tence of
Politick Philosophie bee true, that it is no hard matter to discouer ones gui
[...]ie mind by his countenance;

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=28) O quam
difficile est vultu non prodere crimen.

Me thinkes I read in Robert Parsons lookes yester­day last, when he eyed you
so intentiuely and wist­lie, this reuengefull threat: I owe you an ill turne.
But, said Flori [...], if you will be both ruled by mee wee shall not onely
wind our selues into Apolloes better liking, but winne eternall honour, and
tri­umph at length ouer our enuious aduersaries. Yee see what a strict
Proclamation there is yonder fixt vpon the Gate of his Maiesties Palace, for
the arre­sting of Mariana the Iesuite. Now if by our indu­strie this seditious
Sectarie may bee brought before Apollo, doubtlesse we shal both receiue
condigne re­compence and conuenient satisfaction. To this re­plied Orpheus
Iunior, and doe you beleeue that it is possible to hood winke the Serpent, and
to goe be­yond the Iesuites the cunningest race of all man­kind? I assure you,
it is easier to plough vp Godwins sands and to make them habitable, then to
find out Marianaes hole; except you haue the Spirit of Eli­za the Prophet. But
I guesse at a readie way indeed how we may come by this hidden Traitor, and
that is this: I haue lately reteyned into my seruice old Argus, whom the Poets
faigne to see with an hun­dred eyes, because of his watchfulnesse and
inde­satigable cares about any matter committed to his trust, hee sees by
night aswell as by day, and neuer goes without a perspectiue glasse, through
which hee will discouer aboue thirtie miles off. Euer since his misfortune in
loosing his sweet charge, The [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=28) most beautifull
lō, hee wandred vp and downe the world very melancholick and deiected in
mind, as one much ashamed, that hauing so many eyes in his noddle he could not
keepe one creature in sa [...]e­custodie. Yet many noble Personages haue
offered him large Stipends to looke vnto their wiues and daughters, which he
would neuer more vndertake by reason of the losse of lō, whom he made full
ac­count to guard against the cra [...]tiest soliciter of the world. For as he
saith, let a man looke vnto a wo­man neuer so narrowly, nay, let him lock her
vp in a close chamber after the Italian manner: her owne free heart cannot say
nay, if she be wantonly dis [...]osed, and meetes with an earnest Suiter. This
old Lad will I imploy sentinell or scout about the Iesuites houses, in one of
the which he resides with­out question. In the meane time repaire you to your
friend Master Secretarie Walsingham, & get of him a warrant dormant, and let
him alone to act the rest. At these words they departed. And the next day
meeting together againe, Orpheus Iunior acquainted them, that Argus had spied
about an houre before day a man with long locks, like a swaggering Gallant,
disguised in a light coloured suit of apparell, entring into Claudius
Aquauiuaes house, the Generall of the Iesuits, and by all likeli­hood it could
be no other then Mariana, whereto Florio all rauished with ioy said: O happie
man borne vnder a luckie constellation, and reserued by destinie for great
enterprizes. It is not for nought that thy surging seas refused to swallow the
honest [[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=29)
corpse, when in a violent storme thou didst fall ouerboord the ship. It is not
for small or ignoble effects, that thou wert saued, as a firebrand taken out
of the flames, in that fatall accident, when thy house was battered about thy
eares with thunder and lightning, those fearefull artilleries of GODs glorie.
My mind giues me, it can be no other then Mariana: And here is a straight
warrant for his ap­prehension. Let vs immediatly get some Pegasean horses, for
delayes breed danger. And so without more words they procured post horses for
them­selues and a dozen more of their friends, in whom they reposed most
confidence, and about the daw­ning of the day the next morning they arriued
neere Claudius Aquauiuaes house, which lay about tenne leagues distant from
his Maiesties Court at Parnassus, where finding Argus very circumspect and
watchfull, they certainly vnderstood of him, that the partie was still within
without the least mi­strust or alteration. Whereupon, as soone as the
Ie­suites meniall seruants had opened the Gates, they suddenly rushed in, not
omitting to leaue Argus and a competent companie without doores, for feare of
an escape at the Posterne. After some search they found Mariana closely cubd
vp in Aquauiuaes Librarie, with a new begun Treatise before him, wherein these
Questions of maine consequence were to be decided: Whether it were more
commo­dious for his Catholick Maiestie to bend his forces a­gainst his
Neighbours the Moores, or against the Lu­therans? The other Question was,
whether it were [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=29) expediens for
the better maintenance of Saint Peters Chaire, and for the propagation of the
societie of Ie­sus (at whose name all Creatures were to bow) to seize vpon the
reuenues and liuings of all other inferiou [...] orders whatsoeuer, and to
conuert the same to nobler v­ses, the one moytie betwixt his Holinesse and the
Catho­lick Princes, and the other to the most worthie? In his Maiesties name
both Mariana and Aquauiua were arrested, and presently set vpon a couple of
Pega­sean S [...]eeds, who no sooner mounted and placed in the saddle, but the
horses began furiously to winch and fling like mad creatures, and the Riders
were most violently cast downe from their backs, so that if the standers by
had not rescued them from the furie of these incensed horses, doubtlesse they
had there breathed their last with their Braines about their Eares. For the
nature of these kind of Horses, which are bred in Hellicon and alwaies watered
at Bellerophons Well, is to hate, kicke, and trample vn­der their feete all
factious, proud, and presumptu­ous spirits; As on the contrarie to shew
themselues, as obedient as Bucephalus to Alexander, very tract­able, and
milder then Lambes vnto the learned Ri­ders, who acknowledge their owne
infirmities, with a lowly conceit of their braines capacities and vertues,
though neuer so much extolled by others. These new Officers informed by Argus
of the Hor­ses disposition, would no longer contend against nature, nor worke
against Antipathie, but made my two graue Gentlemen for all their bruises
verie orderly to march a foote, vntill they came to Par­nassus, [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=30) where being
returned about foure in the night they deliuered them ouer to the Lieutenant
criminall at the Tower ergastulare, who immediat­ly committed them to Sysiphus
his rowling mount, which the Poets called the Roome of little Ease.

### 1.2. CHAP. II.

The Conuiction of Mariana the Iesuite by the Te­stimonies of the Scriptures,
and of the Ancient Fa­thers.

Apollo condemnes Mariana the Iesuite, to be tor­tured in Phalaris his Brazen
Bull, and banisheth the pernicious Sect of Iesuits out of the Territories of
Parnassus.

APollo being informed by his Marshals, That both the Iesuites were now in safe
custodie, as­sembled all his Estates vpon the fifth of Nouember last, 1625\.
in the great Senate House at Parnassus, and caused Mariana and Claudius
Aquauina to be brought forth: Vnto whom his Maiestie spake in this manner: How
long, O disloyall Ignatians, haue yee tempted our Patience in broaching out
your virulent doctrine, for the dethroning and destroy­ing of Princes, whom
the Eternall Mouer and King of Kings had ordayned out of his inscrutable
pro­uidence, to be his Deputies here on earth, for sweet or for sowre, as a
blessing or a plague? Could not their awfull state and Maiesticall Authoritie
dazle [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=30)
your corporall eyes, and astonish your inward sen­ses from scribling such
prodigious positions, as did animate subiects against their Natiue Kings, euen
to seeke their dearest bloud? Could not the exam­ple of Machiauell, whom yee
knew to bee bani­shed from our peaceable Court, terrifie your turbu­lent
spirits from putting Dogges teeth in Sheepes mouthes, to the apparant danger
of their Sheep­heards, and the vnspeakable discommoditie of all humane kinde,
who must now defend themselues from these profitable beasts, as from rauenous
Wolues? By your meanes Garnet and many o­thers lost their liues, who might
haue succoured and relieued your owne Sect, if relying on these cruell teeth
of yours, they had not sought vtterly to vndoe, and to deuoure both their
Pastors and quiet Owners; yee professe your selues to bee Ie­suits, that is,
Sauiours, O Iesu esto mihi Iesu, but yet meant nothing lesse. If yee did, why
followed yee not the Lanthorne of your Sauiours life: Hee paid tribute to
Caesar, though an Infidell; when hee was smitten he opened not his mouth, but
stood silent, like a Lambe before the Shearer. When Peter strooke of Malchus
eare, hee rebuked the Act and mira­culously set it on againe: his Kingdome was
not of this World. His chiefest and last command was loue and not Reuenge,
Charitie and not debate, peace and not dissention. This loue, as an accident
inse­parable, his Apostle Saint Iohn recommends; And this not onely in one to
another, but towards all the World, whether they bee Iewes or Gentiles, as
[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=31) Saint
Paul confirmes: haue peace with all men, as much as in you lyeth. This peace
haue yee most traiterously and feloniously infringed in plotting to blow vp
the King and Estates of great Brittaine; This sacred bond haue ye cancelled,
when Rauilliac that deuill of men, by the instigation of your sedi­tious
Booke, did massacre the Prince of his natiue soyle Victorious Henry the
vnderminer of that Catholicke Monarchie, which the Spaniards drea­med of. This
Chaine of Charitie haue yee viola­ted and torne asunder, when at sundry times
yee whetted on simple Creatures more silly then Sheep to take armes against
their Natiue Prince. Heere Apollo paused. And then asked of Mariana, and of
Aquauiua, what they could alledge in their De­fence? Mariana answered, that he
published that Doctrine for no ill intent or trecherous plot, which he euer
minded to put in execution against Princes, but because he hoped by humouring
the Pope, hee might enioy the happinesse to become one day in­uested with a
Cardinals Robes and the red Hat. But for the Doctrine it selfe, said Aquauiua,
howsoeuer our tender Consciences serue not to act, yet the same must needs
remaine authenticke, vntill a ge­nerall Councell shall mediate and interpose
their opinions betwixt his Holinesse and Kings, how farre one anothers powers
shall extend, and for what occasions hee may pronounce the dismal Sentence
against them.

Apollo much incensed at these obstinate positions replyed. And must my
vertuous Princes liue in [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=31) continuall
iealousies in the interim? What if my Lord the Pope doe neuer call a Councell,
shall I en­dure to see these bloudie Plots and Practices acted in my presence?
Know then, O yee vertuous of Par­nassus, among whom I reckon not these
Caitiues, that by the will of God all Kings doe raigne; that the most High
beareth rule ouer the Kingdomes of men, Prouerb. cap.  [...] Daniel cap. 4.
and giueth them to whom he will. It was out of the Apostles Commission to
meddle with earthly Pow­ers, but with Heauenly, whereof they had the keyes to
open the entry vnto the Penitent. It was out of their element to dispose of
Soueraignties. Did Saint Peter, Saint Iohn, or Saint Paul, suborne Traitours
by word or deed against the Caesars, who persecuted them and their new Church?
Nay, so obedient were the Christians of the Primitiue Church vnto those
tyrannous Emperours, that they prayed for their prosperitie, health and life;
as we may reade in Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. Many of them ser­ued
Souldiers in M. Aurelius Campe, and by their Prayers caused Raine to descend
in a great drouth, when the Riuer of Danubius scarce yeelded water Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 30. to beare a Boate.

The Donatists first sought to exempt themselues from the Emperour in
Spirituall matters. Where­vpon a learned Father of that Age accounted Do­natus
a mad man for that his foolish Opinion. Do­natus, saith hee, inflamed with his
wonted madnesse, Optat. con [...]. Par­men, lib. 3. burst out into these
wordes: Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesiâ? What hath the Emperour to doe with the
Church?

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=32) To shut
vp my Iesuits mouthes for the Empe­rours superioritie ouer the Pope himselfe,
let them consider of these following Examples. First, of Donatus lately
specified, who accusing Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage to Constantine the
Emperour: His Imperiall Maiestie commanded Caecilianus to re­paire at a
prefixed time to Rome, and by his Com­mission, Euseb. l. 10\. c. 5. the Copie
whereof is extant in Eusebius, authorized Miltiades Bishop of Rome, with some
o­thers ioyned with him to heare and determine the Complaint. These
Commissioners examined the matter, and finding Caecilianus innocent, they
con­demned the Accuser Donatus and his Complices. Whereupon he and they
appealed to the Emperour himselfe after the example of Saint Paul, who
ap­pealed to Caesar from Festus and Agrippa, as his Act. Apo. cap. supreme
Iudge on Earth. Which Appeale the Em­perour Constantine accepted, and ordred
the diffe­rence. The Eight first Councels were appointed by the Emperours,
which no learned Papists can deny. Insomuch that Leo Bishop of Rome, made
earnest suite to Theodosius the yonger, that the Councell which afterwards was
kept at Calcedō, might be held in Italy, the which the Emperour by no mean
[...]s would assent vnto. For all that, the Bishop of Rome continued his
supplications by the Princesse Pul­  [...]heria, an earnest Mediatrix for him,
and also by sundry Noble Courtiers, who interceded likewise. But all of them
missing to preuaile, the Councell was kept at Calcedon. And afterwards the
Bishop of Rome to testifie his obedience to the Emperour, that [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=32) had thus
slighted his supplications, he with the o­ther Bishops of his Iurisdiction and
limitation subscribed to the Canons agreed vpon in that Councell, as himselfe
records in these words: Be­cause Leo. Epist. 59. I must shew my selfe obedient
to your Religious and sacred will, I haue laid downe my consent vnto those
constitutions.

The like obedience Gregory another famous Bishop of Rome about fiue hundred
yeeres after Christ shewed, as his Predecessours had done, and caused a Law,
which himselfe much disliked to be published throughout his limits, returning
this Certificate to the Emperour: I being subiect vnto your commandement haue
caused the same Law to be sent into diuers parts.

What more euidence will my Ignatians require? Heere they may see three
seuerall Bishops of Rome obedient to the Emperours as their Supreame Head,
yea, for Ecclesiasticall matters, much more in Temporall Iurisdictions. If
these Examples cannot satisfie their turbulent fantasies, let them yet
remember these further speeches of Gregorie Bishop of Rome, wherein hee
frankly confesseth the Emperours Superioritie, and cals him his Lord: Gregor.
Epist. 2. vnto my Lords pietie is giuen power ouer all men from Heauen: which
likewise a more ancient Fa­ther iustifieth in these words: Aboue the Emperour
there is none but God, which made the Emperour. Optatus con [...]ra Parm. lib.
3.

Aeneas Siluius, who was afterwards Pope by the name of Pius the Second,
expounding that place of Saint Paul, Let euery soule bee subiect to [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=33) the higher
powers, confesseth this Superioritie. Nei­ther, saith he, doth hee except the
Soule of the Pope Aeneas Siluius, l. 1\. de Basiliens. Concil. himselfe.

Reuerend Bede interpreting that place in Samuel, where Dauids heart smote
within him, because hee did but cut the lap of Sauls garment, vtterly
con­demneth these Regicides, and dethroners of Kings in these words: This
Action of Dauid doth morally teach vs, that wee must not smite our Princes
with the sword of our Lips, though they wrong vs, nor that we teare the hemme
of their superfluous deeds. Beda lib. 4\. Ex­posit. in Samuel.

If wee approoue not the holinesst of their liues, let vs applaud the holinesse
of their Vnctions.

In the English Chronicles, euen when the Pope was at the highest staire of
worldly triumph, it is re­gistred, that Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, in
some difference betwixt him and King William Rufus, would haue appealed to the
Pope: And that the King and the Bishops withstood it.

In the Raigne of King Henry the Second, a Law was made on paine of Treason,
not to appeale out of the Kingdome of England.

Thus from time to time, it is manifest that the Popes power hath beene
inferiour and subiect to Earthly Princes. And therefore to broach out such
damnable Paradoxes for the iustification of mur­ther, and the warranting of
priuate men to conspire against their Soueraignes, is a Doctrine, which God
hates. Somtimes men are plagued by the immediate hand of God, sometimes by
mediate and secondary means for their sins. Sometimes men are forced to [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=33) endure
extraordinary stormes, tempests, famine, warres, and also crosses at their
very friends hands. Sometimes their women are deliuered of abortiues or
mishapen Creatures. All which they must pa­tiently brooke: Much more must they
beare with the spots of Princes, who haue long Eares and long hands.

It is not safe or vertuous to meddle with liti­gious wares, nor to trouble the
braine with these kind of Problemes. For if men liue in a Monarchy, which is
hereditary, the Fault is the greater. If in other Kingdomes, the fundamentall
Lawes must be regarded by the publike States, and not by pri­uate persons; If
the Kingdome be Electiue as Po­land, let the Chancelor looke to it. If in
Germanie it belongs to the Electors to decide the quarrell be­twixt the
Emperour and the Subiects.

Wee doe therefore vtterly detest these Iesuites, for maintayning of these
bloudy Tragedies; and from henceforth wee banish that pestilent Race of
Sectaries out of our Iurisdiction of Parnassus. Ma­riana heere we doe order to
bee perpetually tortu­red in Phalaris his Brazen Bull, and his Bookes also to
be burnt, and the ashes to be scattered in the Ri­uer of Lethe.

### 1.3. CHAP. III.

Now Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford, espying in a Church at Athens, a Franciscan
Frier a kissing of a [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=34) Maide of Honour
belonging to the Princesse Thalia brought Saint Frances to surprize them, who
of meere Idiotisme applaudes the Fact.

IN May last, when all liuing Creatures followed their naturall motions and
kinds, Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford who in King Richard the Seconds time, by the
countenance of Iohn of Gaunt and the Lon­doners opposed himselfe against the
Romish Cler­gie, as hee was entring into the Temple of the vn­knowne God at
Athens, espied a Franciscan Frier very heartily kissing a Gentlewoman, which
in that jouiall and merrie time, had made choise of that lustie Frier to
confesse her, whereupon Doctor Wi­cliffe being euer held to be of an
vnblemisht beha­uiour, and as chaste as Origen, but that he had not gelt
himselfe as Origen did, burned with Zeale, and like another Phinehes, thought
once to haue runne vpon them both, to haue scratcht their eyes out, for
weapons he had none to offend with (such was the Law of Apolloes Court) But
remembring him­selfe of a place in Homer, how Achilles, as he inten­ded to
draw out his Sword against Agamemnon, was preuented by the Ladie Pallas, who
inuisibly restrai­ned his hand from that reprochfull Act, he reculed backe
vnseene by the youthfull Couple, whose lips were so fastned together, that, as
if they had beene in a trance, the Church might haue falne by piece-meales
about their eares, before they would been parted from their sugred kisses, and
like an Ar­row out of a Bow hee rushed into Saint Frances [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=34) cloyster, where
meeting with the Old man a mum­bling on his Orisons and Rosaries, he desired
him in all haste to come and visit the Corpse of one of his Friers, which was
strooke dead by the Planet Venus, together with a Maide of Honour, belonging
to the Princesse Thalia. At these words Saint Fran­ces flung away his deuout
Offices, and went a long with Doctor Wicliffe to the place, where he found the
Frier and the gentlewoman a kissing. After that Saint Frances had
considerately noted, how lo [...]ing­ly the Frier lay, as it were in an
extasie, with his lips as close as Iuy to an Elme, vnto the Maides lips: the
good man fell downe vpon his knees, and thanked God, that he had seene so much
Loue and Charitie in the World, which before hee doubted had forsaken all
humane race.

### 1.4. CHAP. IIII.

Doctor Wicliffe connents Saint Frances and the kissing Frier before Apollo.

Saint Frances defendeth the cause, and discouereth seuen sorts of kisses.

Apollo refuteth his Defence, condemnes the Frier, and abolisheth all
Monasticall Orders.

DWicliffe the next day after this aduenture, loth to be accessary to such
baudy deeds, made the matter knowne vnto Apolloes Maiestie, who immediately
sent Mercury for both the Friers. And [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=35) vpon the Friday
after appointed a speciall Conuo­cation for the ordering of this lasciuious
Cause. About nine a clocke in the morning vpon the pre­fixed day, both the
Friers being brought before the Lords of the Connocations, Apollo spake in
this wise to Saint Frances: The first time that you were ini­tiated in morall
Precepts, and sithence matricula­ted in our Court, you vndertooke aswell for
your Monasticall Order as your selfe to liue chast, and not to minister
occasion of scandall to the married So­cietie, to suspect the least token of
incontinencie in your carriages. But we find that you are flesh and bloud,
subiect to concupiscence as well as others. Saint Paul therefore aduiseth you
rather to marrie then to burne. But you on the contrary doe forbid your Clergy
to marry at all, although in your con­sciences you know it a most grieuous
yoke, the which our Sauiour Christ said that no man can beare, vnlesse as a
speciall Gift some few receiue it from Heauen. And therefore Saint Paul tels
you, It is the doctrine of deuils to forbid Marriage. Why then haue you
imposed such a burthen, such a vow on these silly Nouices of your Fraternitie,
which they can neuer keep without hinneying and lusting after the Female Sexe?
Haue not you heard that a certaine Hermite cockolded the chiefest Nobles of a
Princes Court, whose Wiues vsed to repaire to his Cell for Spirituall
Physicke, as if he had beene ano­ther Baptist? Endeauour yee neuer so
violently to expell the affections of nature, they will breake in­to your
thoughts and bodies doe what yee can, as [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=35) on a time
another Hermit, but more holy of life ex­perimented in a Nephew of his, who
notwithstan­ding that hee had brought him vp euen from his cradle in his
hermitage shut vp from the sight of all Women-kinde, and afterwards by chance
following his Ghostly Father to a Towne when he had looked on the Sexe of
women, and askt his Father what creatures those prettie things were, to whom
though the old man answered, that they were a kind of Goslings, yet the yong
Religious man could not rest so satisfied, but he would needes haue one of
those Goslings home with him for his recreation. There is a Record yet to bee
seene in England of a Grant made by an Abb [...]t of certaine lands, vpon
condition the Tenant would prouide a pretty yong wench once a moneth for my
Lord Abbot ad pur­gandos renes, to purge his reines. Many other exam­ples may
be produced to proue the impossibility of fulfilling your monasticall vowes.
Why then doe you tollerate with vnlawfull lust, with billing and bussing like
Owles, while yee may goe neately a­bout it without any disparage, and marrie
in the open face of the Church. To this Saint Francis an­swered, that hee
measured other mens dispositions by his owne; and for his poore brother, if he
erred, he erred not of any malicious thought, but of pure Loue, which is the
Soueraignest blessing required in all honest men, to root out the contrarie,
which is Hatred. Likewise, hee shewed out of profound Schoolemen, that there
were seuen kinds of Kissing. The first a charitable kisse, a kisse of
charitie, which [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=36) the Patriarkes
and the Saints in old time vsed one to another, as also in the Scripture is
implied by our Sauiour: Kisse the Sonne least he be angry. And againe, Let him
kisse me with the kisses of his mouth. Psal 2. Cant [...]c. cap. 1.

This sacred kisse did his louing Brother substan­tially engraue on the lips of
his sweet Sister. And because the memoriall of his vertuous Loue might sticke
there, he infused it with a long temporizing breath of halfe an houre
together, as with a deepe Seale and Character not to bee forgotten by her,
which kisse being so imprinted could not but argue an entire vnion in their
Soules by a pleasing har­monie, and a honeyed participation of excellent
Charitie. As for Doctor Wicliffe impeachment, hee hoped that an Hereticks
supercilious taxation was not of force to condemne an act of Charitie, being a
man euer reputed euen among his own Sect too rigorous & austere, whose teeth
might perhaps water at such a daintie obiect, because hee had not met with the
like happinesse himselfe. And if the said Doctor Wicliffe did misconster their
true in­tent, he retorted that embleme, which the Knights of the Noble Order
of the Garter, by the Institution of Edward the third King of England, vsed
for many yeeres to embellize: Honte soit qui maly pensoit. Shame to him that
euill thinketh. The second sort of Kissing is called a Complementall Kisse,
which the English allow by way of Complement and friend­ly ceremonie, to
salute their friends wiues withall, or any of the Feminine kind, often-times
giuing it with a smacke to rellish the better. This is a harm­lesse [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=36) Kisse,
iustifiable both at comming and parting. But more then two Kisses at one
meeting, a seuere Lord President of Wales could not endure.

The third kind of Kissing is a naturall token of Loue among the married
couples, whereof let them discourse whom the Church hath so conioyned in the
Honourable state of Matrimonie.

The fourth degree of Kissing is called a Leche­rous kisse, vsed vnlawfully
among them that shunne the light, or in the Stewes, to despite their Angell
Guardians, and to call the Sunne as a witnesse of their obstinate standing out
against their Great Creatour.

The fift sort of Kissing is termed an unnaturall kisse of man with man, a
minion-kisse, such as Iupiter vsed to Ganymede his Cup-bearer, and which I am
sorrie to heare of, such as some of our Italians doe practize to the obloquie
of our Catholicke Romish Church. This kind of kissing, Pygmalion falling in
loue with an Image of his owne caruing, often vsed:

It seem'd a virgin full of liuing flame,

Master Sands in O [...]ids Meta lib. 10.

That would haue mou'd, if not with-held by shame

So Art it selfe conceald. His Art admires.

From th' Image drawes imaginarie fires,

And often feeles it with his hands to try,

If 'twere a Bodie or cold Iuorie.

Nor could resolue. Who kissing thought it kist.

He courts, embraces, wrings it by the wrist.

There is a sixt kind of Kissing called a Iudas kisse, where with he bearing
honey in his mouth, and gall [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=37) in his heart,
mel in ore, fel in corde, did most treache­rously betray his Master Christ,
such a kisse like­wise as Ioab gaue to Amasa at the instant, when hee killed
him, being compared to the salutation of the antient Irish, who when they
purposed to doe an ill turne, laughed and smiled, thereby to make the innocent
stranger secure and carelesse of his safetie.

The seuenth sort of Kissing is stiled the kisse of Grace, or Honour, which
Potentates and great Princes haue vsed to conferre on inferiour Persons by
reaching their hands or feet to be kissed by them

This last of the Foot doth properly belong to my Lord the Pope, to countenance
and fauour Empe­rours and Kings, like the Sunne, which lends the beautie of
his rayes to the Moone and lesser Starres though in very deede they are no
more worthy (being worldly-minded creatures) to kisse his holy and sanctified
Foot, then Saint Iohn Baptist to ap­proach vnto Christ, whose shooe latchet
hee con­fessed that hee was no way worthy to vndoe. I know Doctor Raynolds in
his workes de Romana I­dololatria mislikes this, as a marke of Antichri­stian
Pride not accepted by Saint Peter, though a meaner man then an Emperour would
haue done that vassalage vnto his Holinesse. But Heretickes know not the
reason of Saint Peters refusall. Let them therefore vnderstand, that the
Triple Crowne was not at that time settled on Peters head; and withall, that
Saint Peters deniall, saying, My selfe am also a man, sauoured not so much of
modestie, as of a Courtly putting by the vrgent presumption [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=37) of such an
inferiour Person, as Cornelius was. For perhaps if the Roman Emperour himselfe
would haue sued for that Honour with teares and humi­litie, he might haue had
the grace to kisse his Foot. When a subiect sues to a King for some
extraordi­narie Gift, which he is not willing to bestow, hee will not daunt
him with a rigorous repulse, but answeres him, that he will consider of it, Le
Roy se auisera. Of these sixe last kisses I dare cleere my good Franciscan. He
is as harmelesse as my selfe I can assure your Maiestie, being of my owne
educa­tion, and like me in conditions.

And a very Ideot then replied Apollo. But the young Fellow lookes as if he had
more wit then his Tutour, more Knaue then Foole. You haue discoursed of
sundrie kindes of Kisses. Yet for all your simplicitie you haue learnt that
magisteriall trick of State, for the credit of your Order propter bonestatem
domus to couer the sinfull pollutions of your Brood, because they are sweet
veniall sinnes. But if a Lay man had committed such a crime in the Church, it
had beene exorbitant, worthy of fire and faggot. Old Couper of Westminster
found no such fauor nor Aduocate to defend his innocen­cie for one poore kisse
which hee vnwittingly gaue to a Lady Abbesse in Siuil. For when this honest
man at the time when K. Philip of Castile by his marriage with Q Mary was also
K. of England, & by that occa­sion freedome of Commerce betwixt both Nations
allowed, he being Factor for certaine Merchants of London, arriued at Siuill,
where hearing that an Ab­besse [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=38) would buy some
of his butter, hee went with his Broker and others to compound for the price
with her. Couper, the chamber being somewhat darke, thinking after the manner
of England, that the Broker and the rest that bare him company, & he the
hindermost, had saluted the Ladie Abbesse on the mouth, whereas they kissed
but her vesture, he as his course came, popt a swinging kisse on her bare
lips. Whereupon, as a woman rauished, not with ioy, but of her personall
honestie, she exclay­med; O Vellaco, Lutherano, Perro. Villaine, Luthe­ran,
Dog. No excuses could serue his turne, but all the Merchants goods and ship
vnder his charge were confiscated to the Holy House, together with his Person,
where after much intreatie hee got the fauour at last, only with the forfeit
of the ship and goods, to doe a yeeres penance there in the Inqui­sition house
with wearing a Iackanapes Coat of ma ny colours, which they call Saint Benets
hood or Sanbenita, euery Holy-day during the time of Masse for one whole
yeare. I like very well of your distin­ction of kisses. To these you might
likewise adioyne the Fatall or Pocky kisse, which some Gallants vse to infuse
with their contagious breath, as a signe of their seruice to their Mistresses,
in imitation of that East-Indian King, whose breath being tainted with the
often vse of poysons, neuer kissed any of his Concubines, but they dyed within
foure and twen­tie houres after his kissing. But your approbation of kissing
the Popes foot, as if he were no mortall man, subiect to Peters infirmities,
but an Angelicall [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=38) Creature, I
vtterly abhorre with that Noble Eng­lish Gentleman, who bearing Charles the
fift compa­nie, as one of his neerest attendants to kisse his Ho­linesse Foot,
assoone as hee saw the Emperour fall downe on his maribones, and to kisse that
contem­tible place, he ranne out with great speed, which the Emperour much
wondred at. After these Cere­monies were ended, hee called for the Gentleman,
and askt him why hee forsooke him so rudely, and staid not for the happinesse
to kisse his Holinesse Foot? To whom he answered, that when hee saw so great a
Prince stoope to receiue a kisse at that vn­worthy place, he verily thought,
that in regard hee was but a priuate person, the Pope would not haue done him
that Imperiall grace, but that hee would haue turned his back-side vnto him to
bee kist.

If a Kisse proceedes from a Superiour to a mea­ner Person, not of Pompe and
Pride, but of a sweet tempered nature to honour precious worth, it is like a
showre of raine in a drie Summer, and may cause the partie that receiues it to
encrease in ver­tue. Sometimes a Kisse may be vnexpectedly wre­sted from a
Superiour, as lately fell out by a Gen­tleman of the Innes at Court, who
trauelling home­wards with some of his Cameradoes, layd a wager that by
drawing lots one of them should kisse the the first Ladie they met. The lot
arriuing to this Gentleman, it chanced that a great Countesse passed by, which
somewhat amazed the Gentleman: yet loth to pay the wager and remembring the
old say­ing: Faint heart neuer kist faire Ladie, hee boldly [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=39) repaired to the
Countesse, & related the occurrence. The Noble Lady vnderstanding his demand,
bid him thence forwards to take heede how he laid any such rash wagers. And
with that askt to see his knife, which he drew out, and humbly presented the
same vnto her. The Countesse after that she well lookt on it, returned it
backe saying, that because he had kept his knife so neat and cleane, he seemed
to bee a spruce Gentleman, and therefore deserued a kisse, which she presently
gaue him. The like fa­uour Queene Anne of France the wife of Lewis the
twelfth, voluntarily imparted, in her loue to lear­ning, vnto Allen Chartier.
This Queene passing on a time from her lodging towards the Kings side, saw in
a gallerie Allen Chartier a famous Scholler, lea­ning on a tables end fast
asleepe, which this Prin­cesse espying, shee stooped downe to kisse him,
vt­tering these words in all their hearing: Wee may not of Princely courtesie
passe by and not honour with our kisse the mouth from whence so many golden
Poems haue issued. All these examples can­not excuse your Pupils long breathd
kisse. For if Cat [...] the Censour banished a Senatour of Rome for kissing
his owne wife in presence of his daughter, how much more to blame is a
Religious man, which vowes Chastitie, and vnder colour of auricular confession
layes an ambush for his Patient?

Oscula qui sumpsit, si non & coetera sumpsit,

Haec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erat.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=39) He which
kisses once receiu'd,

Faint-hearted Gull is foule deceiu'd,

If after fauours such he misse,

To crop the flowre and rightly kisse.

This is the end of most of your Confessions, like vnto Boccalini his Whelpes,
who at first did no­thing but snarle, bawle, and barke aloose. Then they fell
to gamboling, to play, and to tosse one a­nother vpon their backes, vntill at
last they round­ly rode and mounted vpon each others backe.

In regard of these grosse abuses wee decree, that all your Orders of Monkes
and Friers shall from henceforth cease, and if any Spirituall person finde in
himselfe those prickes in the Flesh, that without too much striuing and
strugling with nature, he can­not liue continently, wee counsell him to marry
in the Name of God. Or if his conscience permit him not so to doe, lest his
Wife, as Salomons, draw him from the contemplation of Spirituall matters, let
him imitate the Monkes of the Primitiue Church, conioyning bodily labours to
his mentall. Saint Paul was a Tent-maker, Many of the Apostles Fi­shermen. The
Monkes of Bangor liued on their handy-workes, that thereby contiguous
busines­ses might weare out phantastick and idle thoughts, the procurers of
succeeding Acts. What stratagems will not a Souldier of Cupids Campe worke for
the fruition of his sweete conceiued pleasures & beau­teous booties, as those
ancient Verses insinuate:

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=40)

Non audet Daemon facinus tentare, quod audent

Effroenis Monachus plena (que) Fraudis anus.

The deuill himselfe dares not attempt that fact,

Which the vnbridled Monke and Baud dare act.

To conclude our Sentence is that this lusty Fran­ciscan Frier for prophaning
our sacred Temple bee had to the House of Correction called of the Spa­niards
Tescuto, and there by inter changeable cour­ses to assist Sysiphus in rowling
the painfull stone; for it is fit, Compulsory labour should bee imposed on
them, who of their owne accord would not fall to it to preuent the baites of
Asmodeus the lustfull Spirit.

Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus.

This Sentence pronounced, his Imperiall Maie­stie caused the Clerke of the
Crowne to publish it.

### 1.5. CHAP. V.

Apollo censureth Thalia and her Gentlewoman for their lasciuious prankes; and
reformeth the Co­micall Court.

IN the afternoone of the said Friday Apollo fate againe with a full intent to
reforme the World, specially, the Christian World, of such venerëous stolne
pleasures, which by the Prohibition of Mar­riage [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=40) to the Clergie,
were continually fo [...]ered in in hugger mugger. And for this cause his
Maiestie had willed the Comicke Princesse Thalia with her Maide of Honour,
whom Doctor Wicliffe had sur­prized with the Franciscan in their kissing
sport, to be present. Where the Parties being come, Apollo demanded of the
Maide, whether she was not asha­med of her late kissing. Whereto she answered
that none but the faulty ought to bee ashamed. Shee af­firmed, it was a sinne
in the Frier by reason of his vow to kisse, and to entice her to such game-
some­nesse, who might very well haue beene without it, or receiued the like
pleasure from another as good as hee. But for her part, as long as she
attended on the Comedian Lady, she hoped, that she might enioy the like
contentment, which her Fellowes partaked off. That she was tutoured by the
famous Anacr [...]on and Catullus, two of the principall Fauourites in her
Ladies Court, and euer since she attayned to a doozen yeeres of age, shee had
learned this concei­ted Lesson of her said Tutours, To looke amiably, to
speake merrily, to write wantonly, and to kisse kindly. That to doe these
parts was no dishonour to the vertuous Corporation; as long as she kept her
selfe from a great belly. That shee was skilled in Poetrie, which could not
bee exquisite without some loose straines, as her Master Catullus had
pro­claimed in these Verses:

Nam castum esse decet pi [...]m Poetam:

Ipsos versicul [...]s nihil necesse est;

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=41) Tunc
verum retinent salem & leporem,

Si sint molliculi ac parum pudici.

A Poet by Vertues education,

Must chaste be in life and conuersation.

But if his Verses light and wanton proue,

They rellish best of Salt and gracefull loue.

Apollo much incensed at this shamelesse Apo­logie found great fault with the
Princesse Thalia, for not teaching more Ciuilitie to her Maid. Thalia toucht
to the quicke, fearing least this frowning of the Emperour might eclipse the
honour of her Pa­lace, and cause contempt to her Followers, whereby Beare-
bayting, hawking, and hunting might per­haps grow in more request then Stage-
playes, and lazinesse, which shee patronized; and not out of hope yet to salue
her reputation, she begged leaue of Apollo to speake for her selfe; which
being gran­ted vnto her, shee thus began: It is no maruell, Re­nowmed
Soueraigne, if women, whose sexe is accoun­ted the weaker vessell, not enabled
with the No­ble courage of a man hath obtayned the preroga­tiue and toleration
at the Husbands hand to speake what they list, yea, and otherwhiles for
matters of profit to scold and play the Shrewes, so that they fooled them not
afterwards by Satyres Garlands, by Antique Dances, or by graffing Actaeons
badge on their manly foreheads. For indeed all our power lies in our Tongues.
Giue mee leaue, then Noble Prince, while others fawne and wag their tailes, to
wag this little member of mine in my Maides De­fence. [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=41) Haue I
flourished and liued vncontrouled for many hundred yeeres, euen before Pla
[...]tus, Te­rence, Roscius, and Martiall published their workes, inspiring
Poeticall wits to vent most rare conceits, and am I now questioned after so
many ages for my Gentlewomens gamesome behauiour? Where­fore haue not I beene
traduced in former times for the like petulance. If it bee a fault to kisse,
it is a greater fault to doe worse. If your Maiestie had an Opticke Glasse to
see into all the Ladies and Gentlewomens hearts attending on this vertuous
Court, the very palest of them would quickly change their hew into a Scarlet
die. Let her which is innocent of these raging flames fling the first stone at
my Gentlewoman, who erred (If it bee an er­rour) not of beastly lust, but of
harmelesse igno­rance, following the custome of my Court, who euer allowed
clipping and kissing, the more the sweeter. My Maid did but that which her
Mistris hath done a thousand times before her. Such a destinie was read at my
Birth:

Comica lasciuo ga [...]det sermone Thalia.

The Comick Muse in wanton speech delights.

Heere Thalia ended. His Maiestie perceiuing that most of the wanton abuses
incident to the wilfull vnmaried Romish Clergy, to Comedies, and Court­ly
Dames, yea and to many Citizens wiues and their daughters proceeded from the
mistaking of Thaliaes Desteny, he out of hand sent for the Prin­cesse [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=42) Minerua and the
Ladie Mnemosyne Thaliaes Mother to know the certaintie. Presently the No­ble
Ladies appeared as it were in the twinkling of an eye; whom Apollo caused to
sit in two stately Thrones richer then the King of Chinaes golden chaire, the
great Queene Minerua on his right hand, and the Lady Mnemosyne the Princesse
of Memo­rie on his left hand, to whom he related the whole passage of the
businesse, how a certaine Sect pre­tending themselues to be Christians, but
far remote from their Masters Doctrine, had troubled the So­cietie of Mankind
by a counterfeit abstinence from the Nuptiall bed, because they would seeme
more holy then God made them; and all this, because they might cloke their
sequestration from marriage and their foolish vowes vnder the Lady Thaliaes
licentious birth-right; that the Fates had ordained her and all her Attendants
to delight in wanton dalliance and Confession in corners, by which meanes the
men sounded not onely into the Se­crets of his Court, but also into the Ladies
inward dispositions, so that after amorous conference they fell roundly to
kissing: a thing prodigious and in­tolerable in his vertuous Court. Therefore
hee now desired them to declare there openly, whether the Destenies had
prescribed such a baudie sentence at the birth of Thalia, that she should ioy
in lasciuious Discourses, the fore-runners of beastly acts. To this the Lady
Mnemosyne answered, that at the birth of Thalia, shee had gotten a sodaine
cold, which produced a thicknesse in her hearing, where­by [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=42) shee did not
perfectly vnderstand, whether shee was alloted to wantonnesse, or to a
harmelesse pleasing solace: for the Lady Venus contended, that the Fates had
predestinated her for wanton­nesse, but the rest of the Gossip-Goddesses
conte­sted otherwise. Whereupon Apollo askt the Prin­cesse Minerua, what she
knew of that matter; The very troth is, said this prudent Goddesse that this &
no other sentence did I heare, and I thinke that my hearing was as perfect as
anothers:

Comica festiuo gaudet sermone Thalia.

The Comicke Muse in pleasant speech delights.

That the Generation of mankind euer addicted to the worse, had peruerted the
sense, and inserted lasciuo for festiuo, wanton for pleasant, or gracefull.

Apollo thus informed of the truth, conuerted his speech to the Comicke
Princesse; Madame, said he, such hath beene the disorders of your Court, that
the stinking smell of them is ascended vp vnto the Heauens, & the infamy heere
on earth so exorbi­tant, that your selfe for not reforming the depraued liues
of your Dependants haue had your Pallace enstiled the Baudie-court, as bad as
Messalinaes or Queene Iones of Naples, who for their strange lusts were
commonly called the Salt-bitches. The Nun­neries by your inspiration cannot
saue their credit. Yea, the Pope himselfe by your conuinence, or ra­ther by
your allowance doth openly tolerate Courtezans and Stewes in his Holy Citie,
and by [[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=43)
them reapes a yeerely Tribute, which I may no longer endure in any, which
pretend themselues free of my Court. And whereas you claime pre­scription of
time, and many hundred of yeeres to warrant these enormities, you may aswell
alledge, that the wearing of Codpieces, which men vsed in ancient times, ought
still to be continued. Because the World before Linus and Orpheus conuerted
them, did eate Acornes like Sauages, will you haue men to returne to their old
vomits? This is like the Iewes Opinion. They will not belieue Christian
Religion, because the Law of Moses was the more ancient. The Papists in all
their Disputations relye vpon Antiquitie, for all that Paul tels them, that
there must be an Apostasie and a generall departure from the Faith, before the
Sonne of Perdition bee made knowne. Speake no more of Antiquitie, for without
Truth and the Scripture, it is but an old doting Sinne. Nunquam sera est ad
bonos mores via. The way to good manners is neuer too late. Re­pent of your
light-heeld trickes, for perhaps there is mercie in store. You heare, what a
mistaking fell out at the reading of your Desteny. Let Apelles in steed of
that idle Verse engraue these regenera­ted lines on the forefront of your
Pallace:

The Comicke Muse makes this report,

Shee loues no more dishonest sport.

For now she finds, that at her birth,

She was ordain'd for harmelesse mirth.

If hereafter I heare of any lasciuious prankes [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=43) practized by
your countenance in your Palace, I will discard you from my Court, and accept
of the chast Lady Sapho in your place. The Sabboth Day, which the very Iewes
and Turkes doe obserue holy and reuerently sacred, you haue hitherto profaned
in licensing your women debauchedly to daunce the Cushion kissing Daunce, with
Roysters and Ruffians, yea, and with Hob, Dick, and Hick, vn­till the vertuous
and magnanimous Prince Charles of Great Brittaine made a late Statute at
Oxford to restraine such vnlawfull sport, on that Sancti­fied Day.

How many Religious persons vnder colour of your wanton Genius infused into
their changeable phantasies, haue plaid the parts of rutting Bucks? How many
of them haue taken sacred Orders, and made Vowes impossible to be kept in
their thoughts, (for if a mans wandring fancy longs after his neigh­bours Wife
it is Adulterie, though hee neuer per­forme the deed) and these pollutions
onely they co­uer vnder your Maske of holy wantonnesse? It is not long agoe,
that a Protestant being to marrie with a Papists Daughter, the Parents liked
so well of the Match in regard of neighbourhood, and the vniting of their
Mannors, which bounded neere to the other, that the parties should be
Contracted. The Maide desired first that she might consult with a Frier her
Confessor, who was instantly sent for. With him shee went into the Garden, and
hauing declared the agreement, the Frier made a difficult matter of it, in
respect of their dinersities of Religi­on. [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=44) But the
Conclusion was, that her Wombe must be first sanctified by his deuout person,
which she contradicting, he pronounced her a lost sheepe out of the Catholicke
Flocke. Vpon which words of his shee departed from him, and grew in such
detestation of that hypocriticall dangerous Reli­gion, that she became a
reformed Christian, and by opening the cause to her Parents, shee likewise
wonne them to be conuerted. But these Examples are rare. Where one such
sadgeth, wee finde many on the contrary seduced by this secret whispering, and
diuing into the affections of the simpler sort, so that your Comicall
beginnings end in Melpome­nes Tragedies. How many idle Comedies haue you
permitted vnder your name, to entrap ingenu­ous and soft natured people?
Knauery once disco­uered, you will say, may be euer after the more ea­sily
auoyded, as the burnt-child will take  [...]eed of the fire. But you know
Lady, euerie one is not an in­dustrious Bee to sucke the choisest floure, and
to make vse of what they find. Most men are enclined to embrace the worst. A
wittie Comedie, I con­fesse, represents the liuely Actions of fraile persons,
if the Lookers on were endued with the like equall discretion to discerne true
Gold from Alchymie. Those Caueats I wish you to imprint in your flexi­ble
braine, and not to suffer your giddie-headed Gi [...]les to gad abroad without
some staid person to ouer-see and curbe their naturall disposition.

After Apollo had thus ended his Discourse, to the intent that some good effect
should ensue after [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=44) his admonitions,
and knowing how exemplary and vsefull the presence of gra [...]e Personages
serued to reclayme lewd people, hee cashiered Catullus, and in his rome
appointed Iohn Flori [...] Deane of the Prin­cesse Thaliaes Chappell, as a
Reward for his care and paines in the apprehension of Mariana.

### 1.6. CHAP. VI.

The Author of the Nunnes discouery at Lisbon ex­hibites a complaint to Apollo
against Father Foster the Frier, Confessor to the English Nunnery at Lis­bone,
for committing carnall copulation with sundry of them.

Apollo makes a Discourse of Auricular Confessi­on, adiudgeth Foster to Ixions
wheele, and suppres­seth all Nunneries.

AT the second Sessions of Parliament holden at Parnassus in Lent last, 1626.
according to the antient stile, the said Informer framed a hey­nous Accusation
against Frier Foster Confessour of the Nunnarie at Lisbone, that he being an
old man almost destitute of natures heat, had vnder colour of sanctifying
them, deflowred some of them. To this the Frier answered, that for all his old
age hee might haue a Colts tooth in his head; that yet not­withstanding he
entred not into these venereous en­counters of doting lust, but as a
considerate Con­fessour, supplying the place of a Master of a Family [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=45) and of a
Physician, to purge those Nunnes of their superfluous and depraued humours,
who were so full of the Greene Sicknes, that he feared an incurable
Melancholie or Lunacie, as bad as Sauls might pos­sesse them, if hee had not
taken some paines in his owne proper person to helpe their indispositions, or
acting at fit times these deedes of Charitie in meere pittie and
commiseration.

Apollo hauing heard the Accusation, and the weake defense of Frier Foster, to
let the wauering-minded Christians of his Court vnderstand the true vse of
Auricular Confession discoursed, as followeth

There is no Discipline nor Tradition inuented by man, but may bee corrupted
for some sinister respect or other, to the end that the Elect of God may know,
how all things deuised by worldlings, shall perish with the world, and that no
Law nor Cu­stome, though for a time it seeme neuer so vsefull can long stand,
except it bee firmely grounded on the Scripture. Witnesse this Tradition of
the Con­fession in the Eare, an excellent Policie of the Church to force
obedience vnto the Clergie, and to worke regeneration in the milde spirited.
But be­cause it was not soundly grounded on the Word of God, it growes
contemptible, and worthy to bee suppressed for the monstrous abuses which we
find in these times to flow by the indirect vse thereof.

In the Apostles time it was no other then an hum­ble acknowledging of one
Neighbours Infirmitie to the other, and an asking of forgiuenesse
recipro­cally at their hands, whom they had offended, in [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=45) remembrance of
that clause in the Lords Prayer: as wee forgiue them which trespasse against
vs, that thereby they might the more confidently receiue the Communion. This
the Apostle aduiseth in these words: Confesse your sinnes one to another, and
pray yee one for another. Which Confession they vsed Iames cap  [...].
publikely and priuately: Publikely before all the Congregation, if the Sinne
were great, as that of the Incestuous person in Saint Paul, that Shame might
worke the fruits of repentance in the Offen­dors Corinth. heart; Priuately, as
Saint Iames aduised by way of Charitie, to succor one anothers conscience.

Afterwards Confession became farre more priuat, and their mindes being puft vp
with Pride, or asha­med to let many know their dissimulations, they repayred
to some one of the Elders of the Church, as Patients to a Physician to bee
cured, or to receiue Counsell for their Soules health. At last, the Cler­gie
noting the simplicitie of the vnlettered people in those dayes, they got them
in lieu of Penance to disburse pence & pounds, sometimes to the Poore,
sometimes to build Churches, Chappels, Monaste­ries, and to offer presents to
the honour of their Pa­rish Saints, as the Heathen in those dayes did to their
Idols. All this while there was no great fault, sa­uing that they began to
make it somewhat merito­rious. But when the Popes had forbidden Marri­ages, &
in time had barred the Clergie of their Con­cubines, which was for a long time
dispensed with, then this laudable Order of Confession began to be grossely
abused, and womens Chastities suffered [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=46) shipw [...]ack
[...]. For themselues being to continue for euer vnmarried, they burned in
lust, and left no trick vnattempted to beguile wiues and maides. But among all
their sleights, they preuayled aboue all, when they drew men to build Nu
[...]eries, that they might allure prettie wenches thither, with whom they
might ioyne the more freely to coole their raging lusts. Insomuch, that the
wariest of them seeing some of their sweet hearts too fruitfull, they studied
Physicke, and gaue them drenches to destroy their Fruit; or if that wrought
not the ef­fect, for the credit of their V [...]taries they held it no great
sinne to murther it, assoone as euer it came to light: which Diuelish Acts of
theirs since the prea­ching of the Gospell are daily discouered in Ponds and
other hidden places, where the skuls of many Infants haue beene lately found.

What mad men are they, which will commit their daughters to a Confessors
charge, as lambes to wolues, knowing that flaxe will flame, if it bee too
neere the fire? Lust by degrees corrupts. The wi­sest man liues not without
some touch of folly. Shall wee then thinke, that Flesh and Bloud can waxe
cold, finding sweet opportunitie and solitari­nesse to warme sensible nature?
At first, they look babies in their eyes, they wring or kisse their lil­lyed
hands, and induce them to read their Loue­sonnets, Madrigalls, and other Poems
of Cupids baites. Then, they fall to a neerer forme, the pre­ambles and fore-
runners of beastly pleasure, they obtaine the gracelesse grace to play with
their iuory [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=46) breasts, and to
endure  [...] [...] writes that vn­mannerly Grobi [...]:

Tange eti [...] partes qu [...] g [...]t F [...]mina t [...]gi. Arriued to
this happinesse, they must needs sanctifi [...] their lips with Nectarean
kisses, vowing that they would not for all the King of Spaines I [...]dies
proceed to a further Act.

So meane perhaps, but Time brings alteration,

And a faire woman is a shrewd Temptation.

As George Withers notes. Hauing thus seduced these weaker vessels to
condiscend to the elements of Loue, they teach them the baudie A. B. C.
in­stead of Aue Maria.

Were I disdainfull or vnkind,

Or coy to learne, or dull of mind.

But no such thing remaines in me

To let mee learne my A. B. C.

At last, they winne the precious Fort, which once they doubted to bee inexp
[...]gnable. The whole building is razed; and these poore Soules pend in this
pound of bo [...]dage, forsaken of their friends, find no other ease for this
disease, but to sang this dolefull Di [...]tie, to the t [...]e of too late
Repeatance:

Which shall I doe? or weepe, or sing?

Neither of them will helpe mourning.

The Treasure's stolne, the Thiefe is fled,

And I lye bleeding in my bed.

If it were not for these  [...], Confussion [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=47) in the Eare
would much benefit a diseased Consci­ence, and the whole Common-wealth of the
Chri­stian Corporation. And we could wish it still in vse: yet with this
limitation, that no Papist presume to confesse any woman vnder 50. yeares of
age, except he be first soundly gelded.

And for your part, Frier Foster, who claime the prerogatiue to haue a seare
top with a green root, to mingle a dead coarse with a liuing body, after the
example of Maxentius the Tyrant, without regard had to your old age and
decayed nature, wee Order you to bee tortured on Ixions wheele, because you
haue profaned the vestall house, Ixion henceforth to bee set at libertie for
his petulant attempt against Iuno, and all Nunneries to bee dissolued, which
af­ter the imitation of the Gentiles, you procured to be built more for your
lecherous interest, then for the honour of your Sauiour. Whereby I let you all
good Catholickes to vnderstand, that we suppresse them for the same reason, as
Hezechias supplanted the Brazen Serpent, good of it selfe and of the first
erecting, being a figure of Christs sauing Office and healing vertue, but
since, a cause of Idolatrie, as the Crosse also which the Reformed Churches by
reason of the fottish misvsage haue lately put downe, to take away the
occasions of Idolatrie.

### 1.7. CHAP. VII.

Thomas Becket of Canterburie, accuseth before [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=47) Apollo Walter de
Mapes Arch-deacon of Oxford in King Henry the Seconds time, for defending the
Marriage of Priests against the Pope of Romes Decree.

THomas Becket of Canterburie, that opposed himselfe so obstinatly against his
anointed King heere in England, about some liuings which he pre­tended to
belong to the Sea of his Archbishoprick appealing to the Pope from his
Countryes Censure, exhibited an Information before Apollo, against his antient
Friend Walter de Mapes Arch-deacon of Ox­ford, for withstanding the Popes
Legat, that came to London with a strict Decree to command all the Clergie men
in England to put away their wiues. Walter de Mapes was sent for, at whose
comming Th. Becket hauing license to make good his Informa­tion, spake as
followeth: Most Puissant Emperour, Our Holy Father the Pope, the visible Head
of the Roman Church, Saint Peters famous Successor, whe­ther by Reuelation
from Heauen, or by the Spirit of Saint Peter, points not to bee questioned by
Earthly men, or else by the motion of his owne Transcendent and neuer erring
Braine wee know not, nor matters it much to speake off (for Ipse dixit his
Godhead will haue it) in his reuerend regard vnto these remote Flocks of his,
sent ouer his Ho­ly Legat to me and my Brother of Yorke, to prohi­bit all
Religious Persons, of what qualitie soeuer, from thenceforth to defile their
sacred bodies with those imperfect animals called Women, aswell be­cause
[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=48) they
might follow their bookes the better, not caring for the vanities of this
transitorie world as also lest like New Fues they might tempt vs to taste what
God had forbidden, that is, Iealousie, Anger, Deceit, Simony, and Pride to
compasse meanes for their haughtie minds. After much diffi­cultie we executed
his Holinesse good will and plea­sure. Neuerthelesse, this Seditious Sectarie,
not onely openly with opprobrious words, but with an infamous Libell hee
presumed to taxe our Holy Father of Errour (or Heresie if hee durst) for this
Diuine Ordinance. The Contents of his Libell are these: That it was a grieuous
torment for a Priest to put away his wife, because shee was his darling,
affirming that the Bishop of Rome made an il Decree, and wisht him to beware
hee dyed not in so great a Sinne. That his Holinesse forbad that pleasure now
in his old age, which he loued in his youth. That Mapes defended his Errour by
the authoritie of the Old and New Testament, citing Zacharie the Priest to be
the Father of Saint Iohn Baptist, and that S. Paul allowed a Clergie man to be
the Husband of one Wife: That it became a Priest better to marrie then to
borrow or deflowre his Neighbours daughter, Niece, or Wife. And in Conclusion,
hee was so impudent as to require all Priests to bestow toge­ther with their
Sweet Hearts a Pater noster a piece for this his goodly Apish Apologie.

His Maiestie smiled to heare the Conceit. And thereupon caused the Pronotarie
to reade the Libell as Walter de Mapes had framed it, who with an au­dible
voice did recite as followeth

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=48) O quam d
[...]l [...]r anxius, quam tormentum gra [...]e

Nobis dimittere, quoniam suaue.

O Romane Pontifex, stat [...]isti pra [...]e

Ne in ta [...]t [...] crimine moriaris, caue.

Non est innocentius imo nocens verè,

Qui quid facto d [...]cuit, studet abolere.

Et quod olim luuenis voluit habere,

Modo vetus Pontifex studet prohibere.

Giguere nos praecipit vetus Testamentum,

Vbi Nouum prohibet nusquam est inuentum.

Praesul qui contrarium donat Documentum,

Nullum necessarium his dat Argumentum.

Dedit enim Dominus maledictionem

Viro, qui non fecerit generationem:

Ergo tibi consulo per hanc rationem

Gignere, vt habea [...] Benedictionem.

Nonne de Militibus Milites procedunt,

Et Reges à Regibus qui sibi succedunt.

Per Locum à Simili, Omnes Iura laedunt,

Clericos qui gignere crimen esse credunt,

Zacharias habuit prolem & vxorem;

Per virum quem genuit adeptus honorem,

Baptizauit enim nostrum Saluatorem.

Pereat qui te [...]eat nouum hunc Errorem.

Paulus Coelos rapitur ad superiores,

Vbi multas didicit res secretiores,

Ad nos tandem rediens, i [...]struens (que) mores,

Suas, inquit, habeat quilibet vxores.

Propter haec & alia Dogmata Doctorum,

Reor esse meliu [...], & magis decorum

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=49) Quisque
suam habeat, & non proximorum,

Ne incurrat odium & iram eorum.

Proximorum Foeminas, Filias, & Neptes

Violare nefas est. Quare nil disceptes.

Verè tuam habeas, & in hac delectes,

Diem vt sic vltimum tutius expectes.

Ecce iam pro Clericis multum allegani,

Nec non pro Presbyteris plura comprobaui.

Pater Noster nunc pro me quoniam peccaui,

Dicat quis (que) Presbiter cum sua Suaui.

### 1.8. CHAP. VIII.

Walter de Mapes is commanded by Apollo to de­fend his Positions against the
Pope, and Becket who accordingly obeyeth, and prooues the lawfulnesse of
Clergie-mens Marriage, both by the Testimonie of the Scripture, and of the
Ancient Fathers.

AFter the Pronotarie had ended, Apollo com­manded Walter de Mapes to defend
his cause who thus began: I am glad, Most Noble Emperour, that my Aduersarie
hath cited mee to defend my Cause in this judicious Court; where Bribes,
blind­nesse of Affection, and Passion cannot wrest the infallible reasons of
Truth, as oftentimes wee see fall out in worldly Iudgements. Heere I need not
feare the Popes Thunderbolt of Excommunicati­on. And therefore with a resolued
countenance and [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=49) a minde
vndaunted, I will proue out of the Holy Scriptures, and by the authoritie of
the Primitiue Church, that wee Clergie-men may and ought to marrie as well as
others.

By the Old Testament, it is euident, that the Le­uits, as Aaron, Phinehes,
Eleazar, Zadock, Samuel, and Zachary were married men. Saint Peter him­selfe,
as we reade in the New Testament was like­wise married, for our Sauiour Christ
cured his Wiues Mother of an Ague. Saint Paul aduiseth a Bishop to be the
Husband of one onely wife, and in another place auoucheth, that it is better
to marrie then to burne. Yea and Christ himselfe a­uoucheth it to be a very
hard matter for any man whatsoeuer to continue chast, except it were giuen him
from heauen as a special gift (as rare a Miracle, as a blacke Swan or a white
Crow.) And shall we expect such miraculous and rare sightes in these
tempestuous times, when the Church it selfe hath much adoe to steale out of
Babylon? When the purest of vs all doe feele tumultuous Hurliburlies in our
members striuing and strugling to ouer-ma­ster the faculties of our Soules? As
we are men we know our vnresistable frailties. We must acknow­ledge our
naturall Infirmities; or else we are Liers, and the Truth dwels not in vs. How
much better then were it for vs to ioyne in lawfull Marriage, then to stay as
stale Batchelers, and hypocritically to take vpon vs that taske, which our
weake Ta­bernacles cannot support? Sometimes wee saue those Soules by
Marriage, which perhaps might [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=50) proue lost, were
they not our wiues. By these wee beget children, whom we traine vp and graffe
into Christ. We enioy this happinesse oftentimes in our wiues and children,
that by our examples and so­cietie they shine as Starres heere on Earth,
giuing light to them that sit in darknesse, we encrease the Kingdome of
Heauen; and heere in this World wee leaue no scandall behind vs, as the
vnmarried Ro­mists doe by their Stewes, and stolne pleasures. Haue not we
power to lead about a Sister, aswell as the rest of 1\. Cor. cap. 9. the
Apostles. This Tertullian one of the first Latine Fathers auerreth in these
words: It was lawfull for In Exh [...]r. ad Cast. the Apostles to marrie, and
to lead their Wiues about with them in their iournies. What plainer instance
can there be, then Saint Pauls aduise to Bishops and Deacons to content
themselues with one Wife a­piece, hauing children in subiection. For if a man
T [...]tas 1. knowes not how to rule his owne house, how shall hee care for
the Church of God. Thus in admonishing the Clergie to satisfie themselues with
one wife, the Apostle leaues the Temporall to their choise, who accounted it
in those times one of their chiefest fe­licities to haue many children. And
therefore in re­gard of their Custome, of their hot Climate, being farre more
vnfit for procreation, of children then the cold Countries, as also for that
their wiues were busied in giuing sucke themselues two or three yeeres vnto
their little Ones, Saint Paul meddles onely with the Clergy-mens marriage,
which lau­dable custome none contradicted, vntill the Mani­chees and Ebienites
first beganne to taxe them for [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=50) Marriage. So we
reade, that Saint Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen had a Sonne called Gregorie, who
succeeded him in his Bishopricke. Saint Ierome a Bi­shop of Africke had a
Daughter called Leonti [...], who was martyred by the Arrians. Saint
Athanasius writing to Dragontius saith, that he knew many Bi­shops vnmarried,
and Monkes married; as also hee saw Bishops married, and many Monkes
single­men. The sixt generall Councell kept at Trulla did In Can.  [...]3 much
detest this Antichristian Policie against Priests Marriage; and therefore made
this Consti­tution.

For as much as we are informed, that a Canon hath beene lately enacted by the
Romane Church, that no Priest or Deacon shall haue to doe with a Wife: Wee
following the Apostles Orders and Discipline doe order that the lawfull
Marriage of Priests be for euer vsefull and auaileable. And a little after
they yeeld the rea­son why they did it: lest, say they, we bee compelled to
dishonour Marriage, which was first instituted by God, and sanctified by his
presence.

What greater euidence will my friend Becket ex­pect then these Primitiue
Lights. If these will not satisfie his curious Iudgement, but that he yet
re­lies on the Decree of the Romish Church, let him belieue the Deuill
himselfe out of the heard of Swine confessing the Truth of my allegations;
euen your famous Canonist Cardinall Panormitane; conti­nencie, Panormit [...]d
Cler. coning. ca [...]. comoli [...]. saith hee, in clericis Secularibus, in
Secular Clergy-men is not of the substance of their Order, nor of the Law
diuine, because otherwise the Greeke [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=51) Church should
sinne, nor could their custome excuse them. It followes, and I doe not onely
belieue, that the Church hath power to make such a Law: but I like­wise
belieue, that such a Statute were expedient for the health of their Soules,
that all that were willing might marrie; seeing that Experience teacheth, how
a con­trary effect ensues out of that Law of Continencie, seeing they liue not
spiritually, nor are they cleane, but defiled with vnlawfull copulation to
their most grie­uous sinning; whereas they might liue chastly with their owne
wiues. If this mans authoritie, who was one of your principall Darlings,
seemes but a Conceit in your Saint-like vnderstanding; yet, me thinkes, my
Lord the Pope, vpon your discreet mo­tion might mitigate his rigour, and
tolerate with vs to marrie, as well as hee tolerates the Iewes and Stewes at
Rome. What stirres and tumults haue lately ensued vpon this Edict in the
Church of Saint Dauid in Wales, our friend Giraldus Cambrensis, who is our
Coaetaneus with many honest Clergy­men can assure you. For when you sent this
Canon vnder colour of your Metropolitane Visitation, that whole Diocesse
withstood not onely this Canon, but also your owne Prerogatiue pretended from
the Romish Church, clayming themselues, as heere­tofore for the keeping of
their Easter, to liue accor­ding to the Rites of the Greeke Church, at
Constan­tinople, to which place, as the Seat of the Romane Empire appointed by
Constantine, they appealed for the deciding of all doubts. Insomuch that our
King Henry the Second, was faine to intreate for aide [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=51) from the Lord
Rice Prince of South Wales, to bring in your Visitation of Canterbury. If
these cloudes of witnesses serue not to confirme the truth of my Poeme, which
you terme a Libell, let vs then bee dispenced withall to keepe prettie Wenches
in cor­ners, and these to be dignified with the old Titles, The Lords
Concubine, the Priests Leman, and the Kna [...]es Whore.

Apollo reuerseth the Popes Canon made against the Marriage of the Clergie, and
to that pur­pose sends out a Proclamation.

APollo well noting the speeches of Walter de Mapes, and the great
inconuenience, which the Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergie, had wrought
in the Christian Church, with the Consent of al his Parliament assembled at
Parnassus, reuersed that Canon, whereof Saint Paul had prophesied, that it was
the doctrine of deuils to forbid Marriage, and withall caused this
Proclamation to bee fixed in all places subiect to his populous Iurisdiction.

Of late there rose a Sect of Caiphas kind,

Which great renowme with Pen & tongue assign'd

To Wedlock-bands, and with a large extent

Confirm'd the same to be a Sacrament:

Yet ne'rethelesse by quirks and tricks they push,

As if they found a knot within a rush,

Forbidding it to all the Clergy-men:

A doctrine sure come from the Deuils de [...].

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=52) But whats
the fruit? Their bodies Lust inflames,

That they doe burne, as scorcht in Aetnaes flames.

Enamoured they wish for cruell death

To end their watchfull cares, and wearied breath.

Their mind runnes all on Loue. Loue moues the braine

To muse vpon sweet Beauty dy'd in graine.

This is the vpshot of their rash made vowes,

Vnlesse the Baudy-house, which Rome allowes,

Like to a lakes, doe ease their pampred reines,

Or like a Horse-leach suck their puft vp veines.

Returne then, Marriage to thy free estate.

Repent, yee Shauelings, ere it be too late.

Vse lawfull meanes, and leaue of stolne pleasure,

Account of Marriage as the Churches treasure.

Christs easie yoke (yee need not stand in awe)

Dissolues old vowes, and for Dianaes Law.

Christs easie yoke yeelds Priests a freer life,

That one man be the Husband of one wife.

### 1.9. CHAP. IX.

Apollo vpon Information giuen him by the Greek Church of Images, erected by
the Pope in the We­sterne Churches, and of Inuocations on Saints confu­teth
these Idolatrous Traditions, both by the Testimo­ny of the Scripture, and by
the Positions of the Pri­mitiue Church.

THe Greeke Church, seeing that by no perswa­sions the Pope would condiscend to
abolish Idols & grauen Images out of the Romane Church, [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=52) but that still
he suffered euen in the chiefe Temples at Rome, the Pictures of the Virgin
Mary, and of many other Saints to bee worshiped and called vp­on with Prayers
and Oblations, they resorted to Parnassus on Good Friday last, shewing to
Apollo that the Popes not satisfied by their cunning practi­ses and treasons
to defeat them of the Primacie be­longing to Constantinople, as to the Head
Citie of New Rome, but likewise they set vp Charles of France, about the yeere
801. to inuest himselfe in the Empire of the West, and so by their
Confedera­cie to compel all Christendome to wander after the strange Beast of
the seuen hilled Citie, which now grew to such a height, that his voice stood
peremp­tory as a Law, & Idolatry he accounted the Mother of Deuotion. The
Romish Church were summoned to answere these Accusations, who made choice of
Thomas Aquinas the famous Schooleman for their Aduocate, and him they sent to
patronize their Cause before his Maiestie vpon the first of Aprill last
according to the ancient stile 1626. this Doctor appeared in the Delphick Hall
before Apollo, and said, that he came thither on the behalfe of the La­tine
Church to maintaine the lawfulnesse of Images in their Church. Apollo bad him
proceed, and shew what hee could in their Defence, Aquinas then be­gan in this
manner: Most sacred Prince, farre be it from vs to adore any grauen Images.
Wee that are learned know it is damnable. But when your Ma­iestie shall
vnderstand the reasons why wee tolerate them in our Churches, we shall not be
found much [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=53) in fault. For
herein wee follow the counsell of the famous Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome.
This Grgor. Sereno. lib. 7\. Epist. 109. learned Father hearing that Serenus
his fellow Bi­shop had defaced and broken all the Images in his Church, he
commended his Zeale therein. But af­terwards wished him to permit them in
Churches, to the intent that the vnlettered might bee edified by their view on
the wals, seeing they could not reade them in Bookes. Yet with a prouiso, that
those ignorant people should bee admonished not to worship them. The like
aduice doe wee giue to our vnlearned people, that they adore not Idols, but
onely that they inuocate and honour the Saints which those Idols doe
represent. We worship not the Images of Christ or of the Virgin Mary be­cause
it is Idolatry so to doe. But we worship Christ and his Mother before their
Images, because their Images doe allure vs to loue them. For mine owne part, I
confesse it were good to abolish them, but we are constrained to tolerate
them, to the end the simple sort of people might be won by the sight of them
to giue the more reuerence to holy mysteries.

Apollo hauing heard this glozing Apologie an­swered: By your subtill speech
you would make the Learned belieue, that you worship not these Images at all,
but onely that you offer your seruice vnto them, like a Courtier. Yet
neuerthelesse you bow your bodies and kneele vnto them; you begge for their
fauours to be intercessors for you. Saint Anthony must helpe you for the Poxe,
Saint Mar­garet must come from Heauen to assist women in [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=53) Child-bed: Saint
Vitus must learne you to dance. Saint Iames must defend you in your
Pilgrimage. The Pagan Poets neuer had so many houshold Gods Lares & D [...]s
Tutelares, as your Superstitious Reli­gion allowes you to haue. O foolish men!
will ye still repaire to muddie pooles, neglecting the Foun­taine of liuing
waters? God is a spirit, and they Ioh. cap. 4. which worship him must worship
him in Spirit and Truth. He is inuisible to mortall eyes, so that no man
should presume to mould his likenesse into Gold or Siluer Plates. His Saints
are at rest, and must not bee raised vp, like Samuel, by any Endor Witches.
The Virgin Mary liues in eternall ioyes, not to bee disturbed with the
clamorous inuocations of worldly Creatures. This was the Heresie of the
Collyridians, as our vertuous Epiphanius, who flou­rished within foure hundred
yeares after Christ, quotes downe to the memoriall of all Posterities Whose
Arguments with the Cause I will not re­peat vnto you, because all yee which
goe vnder the naked name of Catholickes, may leaue off to ten­der your seruice
to the Creatures, iniuring your Creator, who will not communicate his glory to
any whatsoeuer Saint, Angell, or Principality, ac­cording to our Sauiours
speech: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue.
Matth. cap. 4

In Arabia certaine women vsed vpon some Holy-dayes in the yeare to beare about
a foure squa­red Table with a cloth spred, and Bread thereon laid, which they
offered to the name of the Virgin Marie.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=54)
Epiphanius confutes this Heresie, saying, that Epiphan. in He­res. 79. this
was meere madnes, & a Sicknes of Eue now a­gaine deceiued, nay, of the
Serpent, which abused Eue. His Arguments are these. First, No women euer
sacrificed in the Old Testament. Secondly, If any women, it had beene a
regular Custome in the Church, that Mary her selfe did sacrifice in the New
Testament, which wee neuer read of. Thirdly, Nor was the Sacrament of Baptisme
euer committed to Mary. Or else her Sonne would haue made choise of her and
not of Iohn. The Gospell was committed to the care of the Apostles, and not to
any woman. Fourthly, The Daughters of Philip did prophecie, but neuer medled
with those mysteries which be­long to men, who onely executed the Priestly
office. Fistly, Women were forbidden to speake in the Church.

Out of these Propositions he proues, that the Virgin Mary is not to be
worshipped. First, Because he is a Deuill, which making a God of a mortall
na­ture in the eyes of men, doth expresse by the varie­ties of Art any carued
Images, which represent the shape of man. Secondly, Because the minde com­mits
adulterie, which falls from the euer-liuing God to honour the Images of the
Dead, like to a Whore, which forgoes the lawfull vse of a Husband to lye with
others. Thirdly, Because Mary was not giuen vs to be worshipped, but that her
selfe should wor­ship her Sonne. Fourthly, For that these words in the Gospel
doth warne vs to take heed: Woman, what haue I to doe with thee? That by these
words wee [[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=54)
might note in calling her Woman, that others might not admire her, as a Virgin
too holy and sacred. Fiftly, Because in the Scriptures wee doe not find, that
any of the Prophets euer commanded vs to worship any man, much lesse a woman.
Sixtly, God allowes vs not to worship Angels. Therefore hee will not haue vs
to worship Mary. Shee may bee mentioned with honour. But Worship and
Ado­ration is a mysterie due onely vnto God. The grea­test Angels receiue not
that Glorification. These bee the reasons which Epiphanius exhibited against
the Collyridians.

There was a Sect called Caianes, which Epipha­nius noted likewise to call vpon
the Angels. The which also Saint Augustine ascribed to those He­retickes which
were termed Angelici. The same Augustine mentioneth another sort of Heretickes
called the Carpocratians, which worshipped the I­mages of Iesus and Saint
Paul. Saint Ambrose auer­reth Augustin n. He­res 71. Ambros. de Obi­tu.  [...]
beodos. Ierem. cap. 17\. Epiphan. in Epist. ad Iohan. Epis [...]op. Hieros. it
an Heathenish I dolatrie for any man to wor­ship the Crosse, whereon Christ
suffered. The Pro­phet also denounceth him accursed, which reposeth hope in
man, saying, Cursed is the man which put­teth his trust in man. Singular is
that Example of Epiphanius, who on a time beholding a vaile in a Church
painted with the Image of Christ thereon, hanging on the doores contrarie to
the Authoritie of the Scriptures, hee tore it downe, and deliuered it so
defaced to the Wardens, bidding them to be­stow it for a shrowd on the next
poore body, that died. And when the Churchwardens murmured, [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=55) saying, that
seeing he had tore it, he ought to haue bought a new one, or not to haue rent
it so much as he did; Epiphanius promised to send them ano­ther vaile to bee
hanged vp in lieu thereof, which afterwards he performed, & in a letter to
that effect to Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem, hee recommends the said vaile,
charging him to beware how he permit­ted any such Idolatrous things to bee set
vp in any place within his Iurisdiction.

To conclude, let it suffice, that Christians honor the memorie of the blessed
Saints vpon those Daies which the Church haue allotted for that purpose. Let
them glorifie God for vouchsafing to send those Seruants of his as the chiefe
Elders and Pillars vn­der their Sauiour Christ the Head of their corpora­tion.
But in no wise let them pray vnto them for feare of that Iealous Eare, which
heareth euery word No man can come to the Father but by the Sonne. Nor can any
man come to the Sonne, except the Father who sent the Sonne, doe draw him. Our
Sauiour by his Godhead knowes the secrets of our hearts, Hee alone is enabled
with power to helpe vs. He alone is the Master of Gods Court of Requests. Come
vnto him all yee which are heauie laden, and he will re­fresh you without
suing vnto any other Mediatour whatsoeuer. Remember the words of Saint Paul,
that Iesus Christ alone is our Aduocate with the Fa­ther. One God, one
Mediatour.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=55)

### 1.10. CHAP. X.

Martine Luther arriuing at Parnassus, shewes to Apollo, how the Popes vnder
colour of redeeming mens Soules out of Purgatorie, vsed to conicatch
Christians by the sale of Pardons.

Apollo condemnes both the Fable of Purgatorie, and the vse of Popish Pardons.

MArtine Luther a famous Diuine of Germany, whom some of his Countrymen call
the se­cond Elias, for his bold and constant asseueration of the Truth against
the Ahabs of his time, came in great pompe to Parnassus on Tuesday in the
Ea­ster weeke last, 1626. associated with Er [...]smus, Me­lancton, Bucer, and
many other valiant Champions of the Protestant Religion. And hauing lighted
off their Pegasean horses, they entred into the Parlia­ment house, where they
attended vntill Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and other
Prince­ly Courtiers of his Maiesties traine, were seated in their classicke
ranks. Assoone as they saw the Ce­remonies ended, Martin Luther made this
Oration Most noble Emperour, It is now aboue an hundred yeares since I first
preached against the inualiditie of Popish Pardons grounded on those dreames
of Purgatorie (for the life of these Pardons is deriued from this Acheron) and
as farre as I see, notwith­standing all my vigilant cares and toilesome
labors, matters are like to issue to their first elements and [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=56) former confused
Chaos, except some course bee so­dainly taken to banish these Indulgences and
do­ting Pardons into the abisme of Lethe, neuer more to be remembred. What a
shamefull thing is it for the Pope to vsurpe a higher prerogatiue then our
Sauiour himselfe euer affirmed that his Almightie Father left vnto him? Hee
knew not the Day of Doome, nor did hee seeke to know more then be­came the
Sonne of Man to know. And yet the Pope in worldly craft to bring more sacks to
his mill, and a concourse of trading to his Babilon, hath granted a Pardon of
6000. yeares to come, vnto all such as shall resort to the Church of Saint
Iohn de Late­rane in Rome, and also an absolute Pardon of eight and twentie
thousand yeares, with plenary remissi­on of their Sinnes, to as many people as
shall re­payre thither vpon the Feast day of Saint Iohn the Euangelist: when
as the Elect of God doe surely be­lieue that this world cannot last so long,
but that the Sunne of Righteousnesse shall shine before that time, and descend
from the Heauens to iudge all the Sonnes of Adam. Many of my poore Coun­trymen
of late since the Conquest of the Palatinate haue beene forced to shift their
Religion, and to ac­cept of these idle Pardons against their consciences. Our
humble motions now are to your Imperiall Highnesse, that you will curb this
Man of Sinne in making frustrate histricks of Legerdemaine. Let Purgatorie
fables bee taken away, these Indulgen­ces and Pardons will cease. And if they
cease, the Reuenues which support his Pride will become a­bated. [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=56) But as long as
this Gulph doth lie open, the Christian World shall neuer enioy peace in
bo­die or mind.

Apollo at these speeches of Luther seemed much to bewaile the condition of the
times. And to fir­ret out the better the Originall of Purgatory, and of the
Popish Pardons he asked Peter Lumbard Ma­ster of the Sentences, who flourished
about fiue hundred yeeres agoe, whether in his time the world did belieue,
there was any such place as Purgatory. Peter Lumbard answered, that there was
not the least thought of such a place in his time. Nor doe the Greekes to this
houre (said hee) credit any such matter. And shall I sleepe still, replied
Apollo, while this Enchanter beguiles with his false lure the ares of simple
Soules? The Poets had their Elisian fields, as this Fellow his Fable of
Purgatory. They deuised theirs of pleasure. But He inuented his of base
couetousnesse to rake to his Treasury what o­thers got with infinite troubles.
Hence arose that Prouerbe, that the Pope can neuer want money, as long as he
hath a hand to hold a pen. While euerie Chimney in England paid the taxation
called Pe­ter-pence, they wanted not sanctified wares, like amulets and
charmed scrowles, to defend their soules from Belsebub Princes of Deuils. They
wan­ted no Pardons to ransome them from the iawes of Cerberus. But if they
slighted them, as scar-crowes, no peny no Pater noster, sinke or swimme, they
were abandoned and left to the fatall Ferriman.

O childish Popelines, shall papers thus bewitch [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=57) you? Shall
Pedlers deceiue you with false trinkets? Shall Iugglers and Mountebankes
circumuent your vnderstanding with trifles and nifles in a bag, or with a
pigge in a poke? Here in this World is your Purgatory, your place of triall,
where the Righ­teous, which liues by Faith, which loues his fellow Christian,
shall possesse Heauen for his Reward, as on the contrary; Hell, if hee bee
ouer worldly min­ded, and cares for no man but himselfe and his own Family.
Dust returnes, as the Prophet testified, into Eccles. cap. 12. dust from
whence it came, and his soule returnes to God, from whence it came. Saint
Cyprian makes no doubt of any other place. When men (saith he) are once Cypr.
contra De­  [...]netrium. departed out of this life, then there is no place of
Repen­tance left. There is no more effect of any satisfaction. Heere in this
World euerlasting life is either lost or gi­uen. Saint Augustine who liued
aboue a hundred yeeres after Saint Cyprian, writes that some in his time began
to mooue the question, whether there were any such third place after this
life? Yet for his owne part, he positiuely concludes vpon those two, of Heauen
and Hell: But, quoth he, of a third place Aug. in Hipo­gnost. contra Pe­lag
lib. 5. we know not. Neither doe we find any such in the ho­ly Scriptures.

Therefore let no man trust to the moon-shine in the water by other mens
merits, his Sauiour excep­ted, to redeeme his soule from the place where God
appoints it. Dauid when hee vnderstood that his child got on Bethsabe was
dead, left off his lamen­tation and comforted himselfe. It is in vaine and too
late for a man to seeke the reuersing of the di­uine [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=57) Iudgement, when
he hath not the Grace to goe to the Physician, before he fall sicke. It is a
sacri­legious sinne in the Pope to make men belieue, that it lieth in his
power to redeeme any mans soule from the place where the Almightie hath seated
it seeing that hee cannot adde one yeere more to his owne life, then is
allotted him by the course of na­ture, nor borrow one minute of an houre to
allay the pangs of his owne death. The very Best haue enough to doe to saue
their owne soules without presuming to vndergoe a fruitlesse labour for
ano­ther man. Yea, though these three men were among them, Noah, Daniel, and
Iob, they should deliuer Ezeth. cap. 14. but their owne soules by their
righteousnesse, saith the Lord God. Seeing that Iesus Christ by his death and
Passion hath satisfied his Fathers Iustice, and makes continuall intercession
for the Penitent, let none despaire, nor trust any other besides this
powerfull Mediatour.

### 1.11. CHAP. XI.

Gratian the Canonist conuents the Waldenses and Albigenses before Apollo for
celebrating diuine Seruice in their Country Language, and not according to the
Rites of the Romish Church.

Zuinglius defends their cause by the Authoritie of the Scriptures and of the
Primitiue Church.

Apollo pronounceth a definitiue Sentence against [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=58) the Pope, on the
behalfe of the Waldenses and Al­bigienses.

NO sooner had Apollo refelled the vse of Po­pish Pardons inuented of purpose
to make good the old saying, that Purgatory is a very pick-parse, but Gratian
the Canonist framed a supplicatiō against the Waldenses and Albigienses,
wherein he shewed, that whereas Ignorance was the Mother of Deuo­tion, and
thereupon the Church of Rome to retaine true hearted simplicitie in the bowels
of her chil­dren, had like a politicke Mother, forbidden the reading of the
Scripture in their Countries lan­guage, to the intent that green-headed
people, sow­gelders, and base Mechanickes should not dispute of diuine
Mysteries, which surpassed their vulgar capacities: yet those rude
mountanists, Montanae belluae presumed to vnlocke the cabinet of the Bi­ble,
and to reade Gods Seruice in their barbarous Tongue. Whereby much euill,
contentions, and continuall bangling arose of late yeeres among Christians,
which otherwise might haue lyen co­uered, as fire vnder ashes.

Zuinglius a notable Diuine of Suitzzerland, being deputed by the Waldenses &
Albigienses to defend their cause stood vp and said: with what face can you, O
Gratian, blame these honest men for seeking the surest meanes of Saluation?
Who will still stand groping in the darke, that may enioy the free light of
the Sunne? Haue not they soules to looke vnto aswell as the Pope himselfe and
his Cardinals? In [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=58) reading the Word
of God, Faith increaseth. And the Gifts of the Holy Ghost multiplyeth in
relen­  [...]ing hearts. So that Peace, Vnitie and Loue as a  [...]uster of
Grapes doe spring vp together, and beare downe the wrangling opposites.
Neither is it any new Religion which they professe. For all your Chronicles
can testifie, that these people haue de­parted from the Romish Church, and
proclaymed the Pope to be Antichrist aboue three hundred yeers before Luther
was borne. And for the reading of diuine Seruice in a more familiar language,
they haue the Scriptures for their warrant and the Pri­mitiue Church for a
patterne.

The Prophet Dauid pronounceth that man bles­sed, Psalme 1▪ which studies the
Lawes of the Lord, and there­in exerciseth himselfe day and night. Saint Iohn
re­commends them to the weaker sexe and children, as appeares by his Epistle
written to the Elect Lady, and her children. Saint Paul protesteth, that hee
had rather speake fiue words to bee vnderstood, then ten thousand in a strange
language. And in another place he prayseth Timothy, that hee knew the Holy
Scriptures of a child. Saint Basill in his infancie was 2\. Tim. 13. 1 [...].
Basil. Epist. 74. instructed in the Bible by his Nurse Macrina. Saint Ierome
extols Paula a learned Matron for teaching her Maides to vnderstand the
Scripture. Theodoret speaking of the ancient Christians in his time; You
shall, saith he, see euery where the chiefe points of our Theod de Cu­rand.
Graecor. Assect. lib. 5. Faith read and vnderstood not onely of our Doctors,
but also of shoo-makers, Smiths, and weauers, and of all kind of Artificers:
not onely of our learned women, [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=59) but likewise of
them which get their liuing by their Needles, and of M [...]id seruants not
onely of citizens, but also of Husbandmen, insomuch that you shall be  [...]
among us ditchers and Heardsmen arguing of  [...] Trinitie, of the Worlds
creation, and of other deep [...] points of diuinitie. Saint Chrysostome
called for his Eloquence the Golden mouthed Doctour, exhorteth all men to
reade the Scriptures. Heare me all yee Laymen, get yee Bibles, which are
Physicke for the Soule, Or at least wise prouide your selues of the New
Testament. Saint Paul prophesied, that Antichrist In hom. 9\. in Coloss. 1\.
pist. 2\. Thess. cap. should bee consumed with the Spirit of the Lords mouth.
What is the meaning of this, but that hee must bee condemned by the Word of
God, declared in the Canonicall Scripture? Euen by this Testimo­ny, the Sword
of the Spirit, at the bright brandi­shing whereof the Romish Clerkes runne
away like Cowards, and flye from them as if they were their mortall Enemies,
relying in stead of God Spirit, vpon the Spirit of man, which speaking without
such immediate Reuelations cannot but Erre, and grossely Erre. The
consideration of this weightie point enforced Doctor Fisher Bishop of R
[...]chester in Rossens. Artic. 37\. aduer. Luth. Apocalyps. cap his Booke
against Luther, to wish for some other meanes to put downe the Protestants,
then the Ho­ly Scriptures. Therefore (quoth he) when Hereticks contend with
vs, we must defend our cause by some other helpes, then by the sacred
Scripture. In this they verifie the effects of that wonderfull Booke, which
Saint Iohn in the Reuelation auerred to be as sweet as Honey in the mouth, but
afterwards bitter in [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=59) the belly, that
is to say, sweet to read, because it promised euerlasting life, but for all
that bitter in the stomacke when Crosses came to bee digested, when they were
to forsake the pomps and vanities of this seducing world, and specially, when
that counsell of our Sauiour came to be put in execution Sell all that which
thou hast and come and follow mee. No wonder then, that the Pope and his
Cardinalls delighting in temporall glorie, cannot abide to try their
Controuersies by the euidence thereof, but with the hazard of some poore
Schollers liues, they send them abroad as Frogs out of the Dragons mouth, to
croke and crake of Antiquitie and Tra­ditions, Ibid but in no wise to contend
with vs by the Bibles Testimonie. This Booke proues indeed very bitter to
their stomacks, who hunt after worldly Preferments. While the Bodies of the
two Testa­ments lay despised, moth eaten, and shut vp in their libraries, the
Great Men of the world after their massacring in the Cities of spirituall
Sodome and Apoc. cap. Aegypt, sent Gifts and Presents, the one to the other in
token of gladnesse. So iocond were worldlings, as long as they might do [...]
what they list, and at the last obtaine for a little money full remission of
all their Sinnes, mortall as veniall. But now that the Spirit of life is
entred into their Carcasses, and they Ibid. stand vpon their feet, according
to Saint Iohns Pro­phecie, Feare seizeth on them, they waxe amazed, shunning
their glorious Light. They reele to and fro, Psalme: and stagger like drunken
men.

Apollo liked exceeding well of Z [...]ing lius his zea­lous [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=60) speech. And
further adioyned this Admoni­tion to Gratian and the rest of the Popes
Fauorites; Not without a profound mysterie did Saint Iohn in the Reuelation
compare the Romishh Curch to Spi­rituall Aegypt. For euen as the Children of
Israell were for many yeares kept in Bondage vnder the yoke of Pharaoh: so the
Soules of Christians in the times of the generall Apostasie and departure from
the true Faith were miserably subiected vnder the Popes Tyrannicall Command:
insomuch that they were prohibited to haue Seruice in any other lan­guage saue
in the Romane, whose chiefe Citie the Tyrant himselfe vsurped, and in subtile
policie would admit of no other Tongue then of his own Latine, which some hold
to comprehend the my­sticall name of the Beast, who possesseth that seuen
hilled Citie. We doe therefore ordaine, that it shall bee lawfull for euer
hereafter to euery Kingdome and Prouince to celebrate Diuine Seruice, and to
read the Scripture in the Mother tongue, following the examples of the
Primitiue Church. And euen as the Greeke Church, the Georgians in Armenia, the
Abis [...]ines in Aethiopia vnder Precious Iohn, and other Christians in the
East, haue from the first time of their Conuersions vsed their Godly
sacrifices, prayers, and thanksgiuing, euery Nation in their owne language: so
now wee doe here allow, ratifie, and decree, that the Waldenses and
Albigienses shall honour and glorifie their Creator in Vnitie and Tri­nitie
after the same manner in their owne knowne Tongue, as they haue accustomed for
these fiue [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=60) hundred yeres
last past. And if any person be so har­die as to bring in a Bull of
Excommunication from the Pope against them for so doing, we doe by these
Presents pronounce the same to bee void, siustrate, and of no effect; and that
the Publishers of that thundring Libell, bee laesa Maiestatis reus, guiltie
for wounding our Royall Maiestie, and to suff [...] the Punishment due for
Capitall Treason.

### 1.12. CHAP. XII.

Berengarius reneweth his opinion of the Lords supper, and proues both by the
Scriptures and by the Authoritie of the most antient Fathers of the Pri­mitiue
Church, that the same is to bee taken after a spirituall manner, and in
commemoration of the Lords death.

VVIcklisse vnderstanding that his old Master This Berengari­us was famous
about 260. yeeres past. Berengarius had for feare of Death recan­ted his
notable Demonstration of the vse of the Lords Supper, which in his flourishing
yeares hee had maintayned against the Pope and all the Romish Clergie, caused
him to bee cited into his Maiesties Court at Parnassus to shew the reasons of
his Re­cantation, and whether hee did the same in good earnest, or else out of
the frailtie of flesh and bloud. Berengarius appeared, and being asked of
Apollo, wherefore hee made that attestation contrary to his Conscience?
Berengarius trembling with teares confessed, that the Pope extorted that
Recantation [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=61) from him with
menaces and threats; but that like to Hippolitus in Euripides hee kept a mind
vnsworne: and that hee still perseuered in the truth of the Do­ctrine which he
formerly had taught, that the Body and bloud of Christ ought to be taken
spiritually and not really. Apollo obseruing his contrition and in­ward
sorrow, freely forgaue him vpon condition, that hee would yeeld sound proofes
out of the Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers of the Primitiue Church to
conuince the Papists, wherby they might be thenceforth toungtied, and fully
satisfied touch­ing that materiall point of Faith. Berengarius glad of his
Maiesties pardon, promised to declare his full knowledge, and out of hand drew
out of his pocket this schedule, which Apollo presently caused Saint Bernard
to read before all his learned Cour­tiers. Saint Bernard obeyed his
Soueraignes com­mand, and publikely read the Contents, as follow: Euen as by
the Law of Moses there were two Sacra­ments ordayned to bee kept vntill the
comming of Christ that great Prophet, whom God promised to raise vp like vnto
Moses, viz. Circumcision and the Passeouer, or the sacrifice of the Lamb at
Easter, the one seruing to bridle their carnall affections, the other to
prefigure the eternall Lamb, which was to be crucified: so in the New
Testament two Sacra­ments were instituted to Christians in their stead.
Baptisme and the Lords Supper, the one supplying the vse of Circumcision, the
other of the Lamb at Easter, both to testifie our admittance and
incor­poration into the Christian Church, as ou [...]ward vi­sible [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=61) markes, signes,
or badges of our Faith onely in Christ. To these the Pope added fine
Sacraments more in worldly policie to gaine money, Confirma­tion, Penance,
Orders, Extreme vnction, and Mar­riage, which last his Holinesse debarres his
Clergie of, because Gods Elect might suspect the rest as hu­mane Traditions.
These fiue sometimes may bee necessarie, as other Diuine vertues, Loue,
Humi­litie, Sobrietie, and such like, but not properly to be called
Sacraments. Which Saint Augustine very plainely affirmeth in these words:
Christ and his Disciples deliuered vnto vs a few Sacraments instead August.
lib. 3. de Doctrina Christ. cap, 9. of many, Baptisme and the Lords Supper.
Neither was the Pope content onely so to adde more yokes of bondage to the
free Church of Christ, but like­wise for his further condemnation hee
peruerted with those old Heretickes the Capernaites, the true sense of those
words, This is my Body, saying, they must be taken literally, and really,
which a sober minded Christian lothes to heare asmuch as Auer­roes the Moore,
who detested Christian Religion for nothing more then for that they did eate
their God with their teeth, and sought to hale their Sauiour from the Right
hand of God, where his Father had placed him vntill the Day of Iudgement.
After the Consecration of the Bread and Wine we confesse that there is an
alteration in respect of the End and vse of this mysticall Sacrament, to put
vs in minde of the Lords death, vntill hee comes to iudge the world, but we
vtterly deny that there is any altera­tion at all in the substance of the
Bread and Wine, [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=62) which remaines
as it did before, and enters into our Bodies to be digested and concocted,
like vnto other naturall and corruptible Food. Yet most sig­nificantly they
may bee called Sacramentall Bread and Sacramentall Wine, representing the Body
and Bloud of Christ, if they bee taken with a spirituall mouth and a deuout
mind, that is, by Faith, and not receaued with a carnall mouth and bodily
ap­petite. For, as Saint Paul wrot, haue not wee hou­ses for that purpose? As
a bodily mouth requires bodily meat, so a spirituall mouth must haue
spiri­tuall Food to refresh and nourish the Soule. And this manner of Eating
Christs Body did himselfe ex­pound, when some grew displeased, saying, that it
was a hard speech for a man to eat his Body, and to drinke his Bloud, by
adioyning these words after­wards: It is the Spirit which quickneth, the Flesh
pro­fiteth Ioh. cap. 6. nothing. The words which I speake vnto y [...]n are
spirit and life. What plainer sense will any man looke for, then the speech it
selfe? This is my Body, that is, this very Bread is my Body; which bread he
broke into pieces before he suffred on the Crosse and gaue it in commemoration
and remembrance of his after-passion. The Papists will not allow, that the
bread is broken, but that it is transubstantiated and changed into his very
Body, which the Apo­stle vtterly conuinceth, saying, the bread which wee
breake is the Communion of the Body of Christ. And in another place he writes,
that it is to bee taken in 1 Cor. cap. 10. remembrance of the Lords death
vntill he comes. To which manner of taking it, all the antient Fathers of
[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=62) the
Primitiue Church subscribe with one consent. Iustine Martyr, who liued within
one hundred and In Tri [...]on. p. 2\. Propos. 3\.  [...] 6. fiftie yeares
after Christ, protesteth, that the Lords Supper is  [...] recordatio a
remembrance of the Incarnation and Passion, which Christ sustai­ned for
penitent sinners. Irenaus who liued about the same time calls it Res terre
[...]as earthly things. Clemens Alexandrinus, who liued about ninescore yeares
after our Sauiour, saith, that it is the Body and Bloud of Christ allegorice
allegorically, or by Lib. 2\. Ta [...]ageg. an obscure Figure. Origen which
flourished with­in two hundred yeares after Christ, writes, that it is the
Image of Spirituall things, and words fee­ding the Soule. Tertullian the first
Latine Father, which wrot about two hundred yeares after Christ, Contra Mar
[...] 4 termes it the Figure of the Body and Bloud of Christ. Dionysius
Areopagita saith, that the Bread and Wine at the Communion were sensible
images and apparell symbolically put about our Sauiour Di [...]n [...]s. l. de
Ecclesia  [...]. Hic­  [...]a ch ap. 1. Chrysost. ad Caesar  [...] Ho­  [...]
15\.  [...] Mat. Christ. [...]. Bishop Chrysostome that was called the Golden-
mouthed Father, makes this protestation of it: The Bread after that is
sanctified, is worthily termed the Lords Body, although the nature of Bread
doe still remaine in it. Of this beliefe was Saint Augustine. To eat the flesh
of a man (saith he) and to drinke his bloud, one would thinke it were a
heynous matter. Therefore it is a figure which August de Doct. Christian. lib.
3\. cap. 16. our Sauiour vsed, commanding vs to communicate his Passion, and
in our memories profitably to lay vp, that his flesh was crucified and wounded
for vs.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=63)

### 1.13. CHAP. XIII.

The Romish Church accuseth the Church of Ae­thiopia, for denying to
acknowledge her to be the Mo­ther and Catholike Church.

The Patriarch of Alexandria challengeth the pri­macie ouer that Church, and
proues the Pope of Rome to be an Intruder, and to haue no Right at all ouer
the Church of Aethiopia.

Apollo determineth the Difference by discouering the wayes how the Pope got
the Supremacie ouer the Westerne Churches, and how both he and the Gene­rall
Councels erre in matters of Faith.

THe Church of Rome seeing that by the helpe of Printing, the Spirits of the
Westerne Empire were illuminated with the bright Rayes of the Go­spell, and
thereby had shaken her Foundations, Su­perstitions, and Traditions, which shee
had inuen­ted to inueigle mens Soules, and to maintayne her temporall
Ambition, by diuing into their secrets and treasurie, and that which was was
the greatest Corrosiue to her heart, shee had found Apollo and the most part
of his learned Troope, ardently bent to crosse her proceedings by trying her
impostures and suggestions on the Touch-stone of the sacred Scriptures, shee
vtterly despayring of repayring her credit in that Part of the world, before
her last mo­tion to enter into the herd of Swine, with the vn­cleane spirits
in the Gospel, made intercession vnto Apollo, by some neutrall Papists, and
luke warme [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=63) Lutheranes, that
shee might haue some Soueraign­tie ouer those Countryes, which lay remote from
his Maiesties Court at Par [...]ssus. Apollo not accu­stomed to grant any
Charters, Monopolies, nor o­ther appendants to the state of his Empire, which
might preiudice either the Reuenues of his Crown, or the weale of his
Subiects, without the aduise of his Parliament, willed her to preferre her
Suit on the sixteenth day of Iune next after 1626. at the first Sessions of
the Parliament to be held at Parnassus. The Romish Church failed not to motion
vpon the said day, and signified, that whereas she had liued in infinite
glorie and pompe for the space of eight hundred yeeres, and that now in her
old Age like to the decrepit Lyon in Aesops Fables, euery beast had a fling at
her, euen the veriest Asse and coward­ly Hare began to contemne her commands,
to vi­lifie her Iurisdiction, and to esteeme no otherwise of her thundring
Buls, then if they were the windie brauadoes of a Braggadochian, or the
bellowings of the Buls of Basan. The consideration whereof did now prick her
to intreat a Boone at his Maie­sties hands, that it might be lawfull for her
to exact the same obedience of the Christians in Aethiopia, vnder Precious
Iohns Scepter, which sometimes she had extorted from the Christians of Great
Brittaine, Germanie, and other Prouinces in Europe; whereby she might liue in
some reputation as yet in her anci­ent yeares.

The Patriarke of Alexandria netled with this request, and fearing les [...] by
the suffrages of those [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=64) luke-warme
Ecclesiasticks, which like Iacks on both sides, stood as it were betwixt
Heauen and Hell, this Imperious Lady might preuayle and depriue him of the
Primacie which he and his Predecessors had successiuely enioyed from the
Apostles time, opposed her with this Oration: Was it not enough for you, O
Ambitious Dame, to tyrannize in your youth, to prostitute your body for gaine
to all com­mers, but now you must bee like another Romane Flora, after your
abominable whoredomes adored for a Goddesse? and triumph ouer those innocents,
which the scorching Sunne hath diuided by the Aequinoctia [...] line from the
Meridian of Rome? what interest? what colour of Title can you prescribe to
haue in those places where your Constantine, your Phocas, and your Charles of
France neuer trod, nor euer any of the Roman Legions? These People were first
conuerted to the Christian Faith by the Eunuch in the Acts of the Apostles,
Seruant to the Queene Candace, not without a singular mysterie, that there
shee might soiourne during the time of the Great Apostasie, when Faith was
departed according to Saint Pauls prophesie, and the Bible represented by the
two Witnesses in the Reuelation of Saint Iohn did lye worme-eaten in the
Sodomites Libraries. Saint Matthew confirmed them afterwards in the Truth; And
from his time vntill this present, we the Patri­arkes of Alexandria haue had
the Prerogatiue to in­stall their Bishops, to institute their Priests, and to
order their controuersies. Nor did you, proud La­dy heare of the manner of
their Liturgie and Ec­clesiasticall [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=64) policie, but
within these seuenscore yeares. It is true you sent your flying Spirits
thi­ther of late sundrie times to peruert them and to kindle a combustion in
their Religion, but all in vaine, for they smelt out your drift, and banished
your Iesuites to requite some part of your hospita­litie to strangers, in that
for the space of a whole yeere and better you restrayned their Embassadour at
Lisbone from entring into your Hypocriticall Church. And as he wrot to
Damianus a Goes, such was your insolencie, that by no meanes you would admit
them to communicate nor keepe companie with you, as if they were the arrantest
Heretickes of the world. The Romish Church much agrieued that the Patriarke of
Alexandria had preuented her in a Suit, which shee had cunningly canuased, and
almost brought to perfection, pleaded, that all the world ought to be vnder
her Gouernment. For our Sauiour Christ after his Passion said, that all Power
was giuen vnto him in Heauen and Earth. And this Power with the keyes did Hee
before his Ascension into Heauen commit vnto Peter. Which Soue­raigne
Authoritie after Peters death, rested, like the Spirit of Elias on Eliza the
Prophet, vpon the Suc­cessors of Peter. For proofe of which Princely
pre­heminence, shee alledged the testimonie of Pope Gregorie the ninth, who
flourished in the yeare 1225. how God made two great Lights in the firma­ment
of Heauen, that is to say, of the Catholicke Church, the which two Lights are
the Pontificall Au­thoritie, Greg. 9\. lib. 1\. Decret. tit. 33. and the
Regall Power whereby men might [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=65) know, that
there is as much difference betwixt Popes and Kings, as betwixt the Sunne and
the Moone. At these words the Patriarke reioynd, and said, these arrogant
words of yours, pronounced now in your drooping and declining Age, doe
decipher you to be like an old Bawd and gracelesse Strumpet. Was not the cure
of Soules sufficient for you, but you must also domineere ouer their bodies,
and more ouer their Purses? This last is the cause of your discontent. How
doth the Spirit of Saint Peter rest on you more then the Spirit of Saint
Matthew or Saint Philip rest on mee or my Aethiopian Clergie? By that
similitude Caiphas might vaunt, that he had the spirit of Aaron. But their
Glorie ought not to countenance our Infirmities. Neither, as Saint
Chry­sostome said, is the Place able to sanctifie the Succes­sor, nor can the
Chaire make a Priest. Saint Peter was Chrysost. dist. 40. of a higher Function
then a Pope, an Apostle to trauell from one place to the other, hauing the
charge of the Circumcision, as Saint Paul of the Gen­tiles. Hee was not tied
to any one peculiar City. O I would, that both of vs were able to follow his
godly steps, and to labour vp and downe the world in conuerting of Idolaters,
and to preach nothing but Christ crucified, without collaterall Mediators and
worldly respects of Dignities, Pompes, or in hunting for Superioritie, Gaine
and fat Benefices. Saint Peter had no Gold nor Siluer to giue, as him­selfe
Act. cap. 3. told the Creeple in Salomons Porch. Hee wore no Triple Crowne,
but reioyced in the Crowne, in his Masters thornie Crowne, the Crowne of
Mar­tyrdome. [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=65) Hee wore no
filuer Crucifixe, but in his heart hee bore the contemplation of the bloudie
Crosse, which day and night hee earnestly beheld. He taught his conuerted
Flock to bee subiect vnto Kings. The Pope exalts himselfe aboue all Kings, 1\.
Pet. cap. 2. aboue the Generall Councels. Saint Peter would not suffer
Cornelius to kneele vnto him. The Pope expecteth that euen the mightiest
Monarchs should kisse his Feet. Et mihi & Petro. Saint Peter willingly endured
reproofe at the hands of Paul. But who dares rebuke the Pope and tell him of
his faults? Galat. cap. 2. Saint Peter acknowledged the rest of the Apostles
for his Brethren and Fellowes. The Pope allowes of no Patriarch, nor Bishop to
be his equall, nor of any Clergie man to be made but by his Authoritie. Saint
Peter and Saint Paul preached that Christ was the Head of the Church, as the
Husband of the Wife, and for that end hee sent the Holy Ghost as his Vicar
generall to direct the Soules of the Elect in spirituall mysteries during his
residence in Heauen, without apointing any Earthly Potentate or visible Head
to execute that high Office, and left their bo­dies to the Gods of the Earth,
to bee tried, as Gold in the fornace. It is the Soule, the noblest part of
man, which hee takes most care of. Why should He then ordaine a visible Head,
an ambitious Pope to domineere, nay to tyrannize ouer that I [...]uisible
Part? What neede any other Head as ministeriall ouer our Consciences? He that
ouerlookt the seuen Golden Candlestickes, that is, the seuen Churches in the
Reuelation, and further promised the presence of his [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=66) God-head, I am
with you to the Worlds end, no Math. cap. 18. doubt, but hee will supply the
place of a spirituall Head, and infuse both spirituall nourishment into our
Soules, as also afford food and necessaries to our bodies, though not
according to the vaine de­sires of flesh and bloud, which gape after
superflui­ties, yet enough to content nature. O miserable state of Rome! In
what danger lyes thy Soule? Saint Bernard long agoe reprehended this aspiring
humour of the Romish Clergie. And yet such is the force of tempting Gaine,
dolosinummi, that if Mo­ses himselfe and the Prophets arose from the dead,
they would not heare them as long as they spake against their worldly profit.
At first you beganne saith he, to vsurpe as Lords ouer the Clergie, contrary
to Saint Peters admonition, and within awhile after a­gainst Be [...]. Epist.
230 Saint Pauls counsell, who was Peters fellow A­postle, yee got the rule
ouer the Faith of men. Nor yet doe yee stay heere, but yee haue gone further
and obtai­ned a peremptorie dominion ouer Religion it selfe. What remaines
now, but that yee climbe on high to bring in­to subiection the very Angels of
Heauen?

Apollo very well approued the Catriarkes re­proofe of the Romish Church, and
fell into such de­testation of her intolerable ambition, that he made this
speech against her: Three things haue wrought this absurditie in the Religion
of the Westerne Chri­stians, the one hapned by the Opinion of the Popes
extraordinarie Power imprinted in mens minds by their Ghostly Fathers, that
his Holinesse, as Saint Peters Successour cannot erre in matters of Faith. The
second, and most craftie, that all men whatso­euer, [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=66) who beleeue not
in the Catholick Church, which you must perswade your selfe to bee onely the
Romish, are vndoubtedly in the state of Damna­tion. The third are the lyes of
Purgatorie, the which being at his dispose as Iudge & Iayler, made euery man,
specially the melancholick, to take heed of angring him or any of his tribe,
as on the contra­rie to appease his humour with Gifts and the buy­ing of his
idle Pardons. But now, my Beloued of Par nassus, the vaile is taken from his
painted face, and you shall see and read in his eyes the affections of his
heart. And least some of you bee not so quicke sighted as others, I will
briefely runne ouer the two first causes of his Greatnesse.

After our Sauiours death for the space welnigh of three hundred yeeres, the
Christian Religion was so persecuted by the Romane Emperours, specially, at
Rome it selfe, and in the neerest places adioyning vnto Rome, that no
Ecclesiasticall Policie could stand on foote, nor erect publicke Churches, and
consequently no Mitred Bishops, to solemnize or order the affaires of that
spiritual Common-wealth in any complete forme, no more then at this day we see
in France, a few places onely by their Ciuill Warres tolerated: Specially in
Paris the chiefe Ci­tie, they of the Reformed Religion cannot haue any, but by
permission about two leagues from the Ci­tie they are allowed their Diuine
Seruice. The like, though not so openly, those ancient Christians were
tolerated to enioy priuately in their Houses, as in hugger-mugger at Rome, the
Capitall Seate of that Empire. In processe of time Constantine the Great
[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=67) attained
to the Empire, who for some causes, and principally because he would bee a
neerer Neigh­bour to the Northerne Nations, and also to the Persians, who
infested his State with sundry inrodes and hostile inuasions, he was
constrained to remoue the Imperiall Seate to Constantinople, leauing the
Bishop of Rome some power at old Rome, whereby in his absence hee might, as a
Reuerend Prelate with his graue and Christianly exhortations retaine the
Citizens in their Alleageance. In this sort these good Bishops continued
loyall to their Prince and subiect to their Command and to their Successours
in the Empire, vntill the yeere of our Lord, 606\. a­bout which time after a
great contention for the Primacie betwixt them and the Patriarch of
Con­stantinople, which then was called New Rome, Pho­cas by the murther of his
Lord and Master Maurice the Emperour, hauing gotten the Soueraigntie made
Boniface the Third Supreme Bishop aboue all other Bishops, and to that end
sent forth a Decree, that all the Churches in his Empire should obey him as
their Soueraigne Bishop, which Iurisdiction he held onely Naucler. in
Spiritull matters. After this the Emperour Iustine Iustinians Sonne raigned;
who sent Longinus as his Deputy into Italy, to settle the confused state
there­of after the expulsion of the Gothes, who altered the forme of
Gouernment in Rome, and abrogated the Senate and Consulary Dignities, which
till that time continued and carried with it a glimpse of the ancient Maiestie
of the Romane State, and in steed of them appointed one Principall Gouernour,
whom [[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=67) he
called an Exarch or Viceroy. This innouation ministred an occasion to the
Lumbards to enter into Italie. And then the Citie of Rome felt new trou­bles.
But at last, Theodoricus King of the Goths by the Popes Counsell remoued from
Rome, and e­rected Rauenna to be the Head Citie of his King­dome, and there
keeping his Royall Court gaue room to the Popes to flourish in Rome. Sometimes
they tooke part with the Emperour, some other times with the Lumbards,
accommodating their fortunes warily to the strongest parties liking. Thus they
continued vntill the Emperour Heraclius his time, who being oppressed by the
Persians, Saracens, and Arabians vnder Mahomet, was so farre from loo­king
into the affaires of Italy, and into the Popes as­piring designes, that he
found much adoe to defend his neerer territories from those bloudy Enemies and
Infidels. The Popes watchfull to take aduan­tage partly by their Religious
carriage among the common people, and partly by Rewards got them­selues to be
equall in Power with the Kings of the Lumbards. And then Pope Gregorie finding
him­selfe reasonable strong, assaulted Ra [...]enna the chiefe Citie of Italie
and tooke it. But being presently expulsed out of it by Astulfus King of the
Lum­bards, hee was reseized thereof againe by succours sent vnto him from
Pipin King of France. After A­stulfus death the Pope falling at ods with
Desiderius the sonne of Astulfus, hee sent for aide to Charles the Great King
Pipins Sonne, who in proper person came into Italie, tooke Desiderius
Prisoner, aug­mented [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=68) the Popes
Dominion, and at his motion crowned himselfe Emperour of the West at Rome. At
which time he againe to requite his good will ena­cted, that from thenceforth
the Bishop of Rome as Christs Vicar should neuer more bee subiect to any
Earthly Potentate. And whereas before that time they were themselues confirmed
Bishops by the Emperour at Constantinople, now by this new Em­perour of the
West, they began to be of themselues, and by their wits got the Emperours to
be inuested at their hands. This Pope was Leo the third. And this notable
Accident and alteration fell out about 801. yeares after Christ. After Leo his
decease, Pope Paschale after the example of his Predecessour Leo; who had
wrested the nomination of the Pope from the people of Rome, and also the
confirmation from the Emperour at Constantinople, caused those Priests of the
Citie, who had elected him as the next neigh­bours to be enobled with a
glorious Title, and to be called Cardinalls. Thus in lesse then two hundred
yeares after their Supremacie, obtayned from Pho­cas in spirituall matters,
the Popes aspired to a Su­premacie in temporall affaires, not so much for
their hypocriticall holinesse, as indeed for the Dig­nitie and repute of the
Place and Seat, their Citie of Rome hauing beene the Lady of the world, and
the eyes of all men being fixt on that Place, brought at length most Princes
of Christendome, as Factions grew betwixt them, to make profitable vse of
their friendship, either to appease their Aduerfaries, or vnder colour of
their Excommunications and Saint [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=68) Peters keyes to
oppresse one another. Yea, and that which was most strange, as Machiauell
obserues in his Florentine Historie, King Iohn of England vpon the dissention
betweene him and his Subiects yeel­ded himselfe at the Popes dispose, when hee
dur [...] not shew his face in Rome, by reason of the Facti­ons of the Orsini
and Columneses, and of the Gu [...]ses and the Gibellines, but was faine to
translate the Papacie to A [...]inion in France. Whereby our Politi­cians may
gather this remarkable Rule, that things which seeme to bee and are not such
in very de [...]d, are more feared or regarded afarre off, then at home by
reason of the vncertaine knowledge, which strangers haue of other mens states.
Thus may all good Christians note by what meanes the Church of Rome arriued to
her Greatnesse, and how like a Foxe by little and little the Pope crept vp to
the double Supremacie, which Saint Peter and the bles­sed Apostles neuer once
dreamed, nor would our Sauiour Christ by any meanes accept of the Tem­porall
Sword. For hee vtterly defied the Deuill, when hee motioned vnto him of an
Earthly King­dome. And when some purposed afterwards to make him King, he
forsooke that Coast. To con­clude this point of the Popes Supremacie, Pope
Hil­debrand, whom some call Gregory the seuenth, after much contestation with
the Emperour and his Gi­bellines was the first which triumphed ouer him a­bout
one thousand yeeres after Christ. Of whom an ancient Historiographer thus
testifieth: To this man only doth the Latin Church ascribe, that she is [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=69) free, and
pluckt out of the Emperours hands. By his meanes she stands enriched with so
much wealth Onuph. in vit [...] Greg. 7. and Temporall Power. By his meanes
shee stands inriched with so much wealth and temporall Pow­er. By his meanes
shee got the Soueraigntie ouer all Emperours, Kings, and Christian Princes;
where­as before shee was kept vnder like a base maid ser­uant not only by the
Emperour, but by any Prince assisted by the Emperour.

To returne now to the other cause, which aug­mented the Popes Greatnesse, that
he cannot erre in matters of Faith, and therefore men are perswaded to beleeue
in his Church, as the onely Catholick in the world, or indeed as if shee were
equall vnto Christ in Puritie, and therefore partaker of our Creede. But the
Truth auoucheth otherwise, that all men are Lyers and full of Sinne, euen from
the beginning. The most Righteous man sinnes euery day in the weeke. The
Apostles in Christs time contended for Dignitie. After his death Peter and
Paul varied in opinion. Paul and Barnabas could not agree. Liberius Bishop of
Rome subscribed to the Arrian Heresie. Honorius Bishop of Rome was a
Monothelite, and condemned for the same Heresie by the Generall Councell held
at Constantinople. Saint Augustine mentions of the Errour maintayned by
Innocent Bishop of Rome, that Innocents could not be saued, except they
receiued the Communion. And as Popes erred thus in matters of Faith: so did
Generall Councels themselues most grossely erre. The Councell of Arimine
established the Arria [...] Here­sie. [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=69) The Councell of
Nice decreed the Soules of An­gels and men had bodily shapes. The Councell of
Ephes [...]s enacted Canons on the behalfe of the Ne­storian Heresie. The
consideration of which Errors, whereto all mortall Creatures are subiect while
they soiourne in their earthly tabernacles, moued holy Augustine to reiect the
authoritie of a Gene­rall Aug co [...]t. Ma [...] lib. 3\. cap 4. Councell,
which Maximinus alledged against him. Neither ought I, said he, to be tyed to
try my cause by the Councell of Nice, or the Councell of Ari­mine, to better
or preiudice one anothers cause, but to decide the Question to the Holy
Scriptures Testimonie which are indifferent to both of vs, and not partially
bound to either of vs. And indeed there may bee yeelded a reason of Policie
for not standing to any Humane Positions. In a Generall meeting all men are
not of the same mind, nor of the same opinion but euery particular man as hee
hath his voice, so hee hath his seuerall will.

Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vinitur vno.

Commonly where many meet, some are selfe o­pinionated, some factious, others
ouer-swayed by the most voices; so that the Godliest being the few­est are
abandoned; and then the Canons doe passe according to mens affections, and
very oftentimes in fauour of the Pope and his Cardinals in hope of worldly
preferments, dispensations, or for feare of angring their Superiors in
Authoritie, which the Holy Ghost obseruing, he withdrawes his powerfull
presence from their Consciences, and leaues them [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=70) puris
naturalibus, to their owne naturall endow­ments, and consequently to bee
seduced by the world. Which of the ancient Fathers liued free from Errours?
Iustine Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertul­lian held the Millenarian Heresie. Saint
Cyprian er­red in his iudgement of Rebaptization.

Why then doth the Church of Rome arrogate to her selfe such Holinesse as to
condemne all other Churches, because they conforme not themselues with her
Doctrine and Traditions? It is one thing to belieue that there is a Catholicke
Church, and another thing though blasphemous, to beleeue in the Catholick
Church. And now for the concluding of this present difference betwixt the
Church of Rome and the Aethiopian, whereof the Patriarch of Alexandria
challengeth the Primacie, wee doe or­der that euery Nation be allowed their
seuerall Iu­risdictions. As in like manner hath heeretofore beene enacted by
the Councell of Nice, in the yeere 325. Let the ancient custome bee still in
vse, that the Concil. Nicen. Canon. 6. Bishop of Alexandria haue the
Iurisdiction ouer Ae­gypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, euen as the Bishop of Rome
enioyeth the like libertie in his Parts. And so let the Churches of Antioch,
and of other Prouinces haue their preheminences maintained as informer times.

### 1.14. CHAP. XIIII.

Scotus the Master of Subtile Questions connents Sir Geffrey Chaucer for
calling the Pope Antichrist, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=70) and comparing
the Romish Church to the griping Griffon and the true Church to the tender
Pel­lican.

SCotus that famous Schooleman for subtile qui [...]ks and quiddities hauing
watched for these two hundred and sixtie yeeres, opportunitie to insinu­ate
himselfe into his Maiesties fauour by some no­table exploit, and  [...]ow
seeing that the Church of Rome began to totter, he repayred to the Delphick
Hall vpon the sixteenth of Iune last 1626. Where after an eloquent Oration
against the Lutherans, hee complayned of Sir Geffrey Chaucer the English Poet,
that he about the latter end of King Edward the thirds Raigne, had published
in his Plo [...]-mans Tale most abhominable Doctrine, which infected not only
diuers rare wits of that Age, but likewise wrought so much alteration in
succeeding times, that Iohn Wickliffe, Iohn Husse, Ierome of Prague, Luther,
and others now stiling themselues Prote­stants, had quite abandoned their
Mother Church of Rome, which had flourished in stately Pompe and
Pontificalibus for many hundred of yeares be­fore. And particularly hee
charged Chaucer for calling the Pope Antichrist, and for comparing his
Followers to the Griffon, and the pretended Reformed Church to the Pellican.

Apollo willing now vtterly to abolish those Pa­trons of Equiuocations, lyes,
and deceits, was glad of this occasion, which so fairely presented it selfe
vnto him.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=71) And to
that end iudicially to proceed against them, he caused the chiefe points of
the said Ploughmans Tale to bee openly read by the Pronotarie of the Court,
who with a loud voice thus repeated the same.

Euen as I wandred in a wro,

In a Wood beside a wall,

Two Fowles saw I sit th [...].

The falser foule mought him befall.

That one did plead on the Popes side

A Griffon of a grimme stature,

A Pellican withouten pride

To these Lollers laid his lure:

Hee mused his matter in measure:

To counsell Christ euer gan he call.

The Griffon shewed as sharpe as fire.

But falshood foule mought him befall.

The Pellican began to preach

Both of mercie, and of meeknesse.

And said Christ so gan vs teach,

And  [...]eeke and mercifull gan blesse.

The Euangelists doe beare witnesse,

A Lambe he likeneth Christ ouer all,

In tokening that he meekest was:

Sith pride was out of Heauen fall.

And so should euery Christian be

Priests, Peters Successours

Both humble and of low degree.

And  [...]sen none earthly honours,

Neither Crowne nor curious couetours,

Nor Pillour, nor other proud Pall.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=71) Nor
ought to coffren vp great treasures,

For falshood foule mought them befall,

Priests should for no cattell pleade,

But chasten them in charitee.

Nor vnto battell should men leade,

For enhaunsing of their owne degree.

Not wilne sittings in high Sea,

Nor Soueraig [...]tie, in house, nor hall.

All worldly worship defie and flee.

For who so willeth Highnesse foule shall fall.

Alas who may such Saints call,

That wil [...]eth weld earthly honour.

As low as Lucifer such shall fall,

In balefull blacknesse ybuilden their bowre,

That eggeth the people to Errour.

And maketh them to them thrall:

To Christ I hold such one Traytour.

As low as Lucifer shall fall.

That willeth to be Kings Peeres,

And higher then the Emperour.

Some that were but poore Freeres,

Now wolden waxe a Warriour.

God is not their Gouernour,

That holdeth no man his Permagall.

While Couetise is their Counsellour,

All such falshood mo [...]ght need fall.

With Pride they punish the poore,

And some they sustaine with sale,

Of holy Church making a Wh [...]re.

And glut their bellies with Wine and Ale,

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=72) With
Money they fill many a male:

And chaffren Churches when they fall,

And tellen the people a lewd tale.

Such false faitours foule them befall.

And Mitres more then one or two,

Y perled as the Queenes head.

A staffe of Gold and pirrie too,

As heauie as it were made of lead:

VVith Cloth of Gold both new and red:

VVith glitter and Gold, as greene as gall.

By doome they damne men to dead.

All such faitours foule them befall.

And Christs people proudly curse

VVith broad Booke and braying Bell.

To put pennies in their purse,

They will sell both Heauen and Hell.

And in their sentence thou wilt dwell:

They willen gesse in their gay hall.

And though the sooth thou of them tell,

In great cursings shalt thou fall.

Christs Ministers clepen they beene,

And rulen all in robbery;

But Antichrist they seruen cleane.

Attired all in Tyranny:

VVitnesse of Iohns Prophesie,

That Anticrist is their Admirall,

Tiffelers attired in Treacherie.

All such faitours foule them fall.

VVho saith that some of them may sinne,

He shall be doomed to be dead.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=72) Some of
them would gladly winne,

Against that which God forbad.

All Holy they clepen their Head,

That of their Rule is Regall.

Alas, that euer they eaten bread,

For all such falshood will foule fall.

Their Head loueth all Honour,

And to be worshipped in word and deed.

Kings must to him kneele and cour,

To the Apostles which Christ forbad.

To Popes Hests, such taken more heed,

Then to keepe Christs Commandement.

Of Gold and Siluer be their weed,

Who hold him whole Omnipotent.

He ordaineth by his Ordinance

To Parish Priests a power.

To another a greater aduaunce.

A greater point to his mystery.

But for he is Highest in Earth heere,

To him reserueth he many a point.

But to Christ, that hath no Peere,

Reserueth he neither rib nor ioynt.

So seemeth He aboue all,

And Christ aboue him nothing,

When he sitteth in his stall,

Damneth and saueth, as him thinke.

Such pride before God doth stinke.

An Angell bad Iohn to him not kneele,

But onely to God doe his bowing.

Such willers of worship must needs fall.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=73) There
was more mercy in Maximian,

And in Nero, which neuer was good,

Then is now in some of them,

VVhen he hath on his furred Hood,

They follow Christ, which shead his bloud,

To Heauen, as Bucket to the wall.

Such wretches be worse then wood,

And all such faitours foule them fall.

They maken Parsons for the penny,

And of Canons their Cardinals.

And Y scarce amongst them all is any,

That hath not glozed the Gospell false.

For Christ did neuer make Cathedrals

Nor yet with him was Cardinall

VVith a Red Hat, as vsen Minstrels:

But falshood foule mought it befall.

That say that Peter had the Key

Of Heauen and Hell to haue and hold.

I trow Peter tooke no Money

For any mens Sinnes, which he sold.

Such Successours be too bold,

In winning all their wit they wrall.

Their Conscience is waxen cold,

And all such faitours foule them fall.

Peter was neuer so great a foole,

To leaue his Key with such a Lorrell,

Or to take such a cursed toole:

He was aduised nothing well.

I trow they haue the Key of Hell,

Their Master is of that place Marshall.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=73) For
there they dresse [...] them to dwell,

And with false Lucifer there to fall.

Christ had twelue Apostles heere;

Now, say they, there may be but one

That may not erre in no manner.

Who loueth not this be lost each one.

Peter erred: so did not Iohn:

Why then is he clept the principall?

Christ clept him Peter; but him selfe the Stone,

All false faitours foule them befall.

VVhat is Antichrist to say?

But euen Christs Aduersary?

Such hath now beene many a day,

To Christs bidding full contrary,

That from the Truth cleane vary.

Out of the way they beene quite wend,

And Christs people vntruly cary.

God of his pittie it amend.

They liue contrary to Christs life,

In high pride against meeknesse.

Against patience they vsen strife,

And anger against sobern [...]sse,

Against wisdome wilfulnesse.

To Christs words they little tend,

Against measure outragiousnesse.

But when God will it may amend.

A token of Antichrists they be;

His charactes now beene wide yknow.

Receiued to preach shall no man be

VVithout token of him I trow.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=74) Ech
Christen Priest to preaching ow,

From God aboue to them been send

The Word, to all folk for to show,

Sinfull man their sinnes to amend.

Christ sent the poore for to preach,

The Royall Rich he did not so.

Now dare no poore the people teach,

For Antichrist is all their Foe.

Among the people he must goe,

Whom he hath bid; But such suspend,

Some hath he hent, and thinks yet mo.

But all this God may well amend.

The Emperour gaue the Pope sometime

So high Lordship him about;

That at the last the seely kime

The proud Pope did pull him out.

So of this Realme is in great doubt

But, Lords beware, and them defend,

For now these folk be wondrous stout.

The King and Lords now this amend,

Antichrist they seruen all:

Who I pray you can say nay?

With Antichrist such shall fall.

They fellow him in deed and fay,

They seruen him in rich array:

To serue Christ they falsly faine.

Why? at the dreadfull doomes-day

Shall they not fellow him to paine?

Popes, Bishops, and Cardinals,

Chanons, Parsons, and Vicar

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=74) In Gods
Seruice I trow been false,

That Sacraments selle [...] heere;

And been as proud as Lucifere.

Ech man looke whether that I lie.

Who so speaketh against their power

It shall be holden Heresie.

The Griffon said, th [...] canst no good

Thou neuer camst of Gentle kind

Eyther I trow thou waxest wood,

Or else thou hast lost thy mind.

And the Pope were purely poore,

Needy and nothing he had:

He should be driuen from doore to doore,

The wicked of him would not be dread:

Of such a Head men would be sad.

If the Pope and Prelates would

So beg, and bid, bow, and borrow:

Holy Church should stand full cold,

Her seruants sit, and sup sorrow.

The Pellican cast a huge cry,

And said: Alas, why sayest thou so?

Christ is our Head, that sits on high.

Heads ought we not for to haue m [...],

We be his members both also.

And Father he taught vs to cal him als,

Masters to be called defended he tho.

All other Maisters be wicked and false,

That doe take maistry in his name

Ghostly, all for earthly good.

Kings and Lords should Lordships ha [...],

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=75) And rule
the people with mild moode

Christ, for vs that shead his blo [...]d,

Bad his Priests no Mastership haue,

Nor to carke for cloth, or for food.

From euery mischiefe he would them saue.

Their Clothing should be Righteousnesse,

Their Treasure pure life should be.

Charity should be their Riches:

Their Lordship should be vnitee.

Hope in God their Honestie:

Their vessell cleane Conscience.

Poore in spirit, and Humilitie

Should be Holy Churches defence.

The Griffon said, thou shalt abie,

Thou shalt be burnt in balefull fire;

And all thy Sect I shall destry.

You shall be hanged by the swire.

Ile cause you soone to hang and draw.

VVho giueth you leaue for to preach:

Or thus to speake against Gods Law?

And the people thus false to teach?

Thou shalt be cursed with Booke and Bell,

And disseuer'd from Holy Church,

And cleane ydamned into Hell,

Otherwise but you will worke.

The Pellican said, I doe not dread.

Your Cursing is of little value;

Of God I hope to have my meed,

For it is falshood, which you shew.

For you beene out of Charity,

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=75) And
would doe vengeance, as did Nero.

To suffer I will ready be,

I dread not that, what thou ca [...]st doe.

### 1.15. CHAP. XV.

Sir Geffrey Chaucer being pro [...]oked by Scotus to defend his Cause, proues
the Pope to bee the great and vniuersall Antichrist prophesied in the
Scrip­tures.

AFter that the Pronotarie had read that Part of the Plowmans Tale, which Sir
Geffrey Chaucer had published against the Pope & the Romish Church hee was
commanded by Apollo to defend his Do­ctrine. Sir Geffrey Chaucer obeyed, and
framed this extemporary Oration: Most high and redoubted Em­perour, I am glad
that Scotus hath prouoked mee this day to open that Secret; which by the craft
of our Arch sorcerer of the Christian Church hath beene concealed from the
vulgars knowledge vn­till this fulnesse of Time, which the Holy Ghost hath
appointed for his Discouerie. The Waldenses, Albi­gienses, and many others
long before my time haue done their endeauors in other Countryes to re­ueale
him: but here in England Abbot Ioachim ex­cepted, who in K. Rich. the firsts
dayes proclaymed the Pope Antichrist, no man durst for feare of his formidable
Tyrannie disclose what they knew in their Consciences to bee apparantly true.
This Il­lumination [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=76) and Gift of
discerning Spirits was indeed kept from the Common people, by that execrable
Policie of with-holding the Bible from our English translation, so that these
two Witnesses, which lay martyred and yet vnburied in the streets of
Spiri­tuall Sodome and Aegypt, could not performe their proper offices. Now
that it hath pleased God to re­moue that palpable Darknesse, they begin to
re­uiue and to stand vpon their feet to the amazement of the Carnall
Beholders. By their sacred motion the eyes of my vnderstanding are likewise
opened: and I doubt not but all your Maiesties Court shall know out of my
mouth this day, that the Pope and none but he is that Antichrist, which was so
long agoe prophesied to come and seduce the Christian Church with lyes,
Equiuocations, and the wonders of Sathan. For the manifestation of which
damna­ble practices, inspire my heart, O fierie Comforter; Inflame my mind
with true Zeale, the seale of thy sacred Spirit, that I may soare vp, like an
Eagle, to the Sunne of thy Grace with feruencie founded on Diuine Discretion,
for Feruencie is but foolish fu­rie without Diuine Discretion.

The first marke of Antichrist I gather from our Sauiour himselfe, who
prophefied, many shall come Matth. cap. 24. in my name, and shall say, I am
Christ, vnder this Ti­tle the Pope doth most blasphemously co [...]er his
Temporall Power. For what signifies the word Christ but Anointed? Insomuch,
that whensoeuer any of his Clergie hath offended, the Temporall sword must not
punish them; but for their protection his [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=76) Holinesse
wardeth them with that saying of the Pro­phet Dauid, Touch not mine Anointed:
Meddle not Psalme 105. with my Christs. Though they be taken fighting in the
Field with Armour on their backs, hee termes them his Sons, the Conqueror must
leaue them to depart in peace. Which made a Prince sometime to returne him
this Answer: I haue sent your Holi­nesse your Sonnes Coat, the Armour, in
which I found your Bishop fighting, when I tooke him Pri­soner. And if you be
as quick-sighted as Iacob, let me know, whether this be your Iosephs Coat?
vntill King Edward the first his time, Clergie men were the Lawyers in
England, as an Ancient Writer testified: Nullus Clericus nisi Causidicus. They
sate as supreme Iudges in Temporall Causes. But when their King should
chastize them for their briberies and extor­tions, then they shrowded
themselues vnder the Spirituall keyes, and appealing to the Pope they freed
themselues from all Accusations. Thus did Errors play vpon the preheminence of
Kings, vntill they were beaten out from their Law, and at the last from their
chiefest holds by the valour of King Henry the Eight; and well worthy, seeing
that they presumed to make vse of the name of Christ to cloke their falsehoods
and lewd tricks.

The second Mark of Antichrist I collect out of Saint Paul, that in the last
dayes men should bee high­minded, 2\. Tim. cap 3. louers of pleasures more
then louers of God, hauing a shew of godlines, but denying the power there­of.
All these are verified in the Pope and his Clergie Hee exalteth himselfe aboue
Emperours and Kings, [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=77) comparing
himselfe to the Sunne, and them to the Moone and lesser starres. Yea, he
ranketh his Court­ly Cardinals with Kings. Which ambition moued Cardinall
Wolsey to place himselfe aboue his King: Ego & Rex meus.

What greater pleasure can worldly men enioy more then the Pope and his
Hierarchie doe? They haue a large command of Cities, and huge Territories.
Besides Rome, Romania, Bolonia, Ferrara, Auinion, the Pope is like to possesse
very shortly the Dutchie of Vrbin. Nor doth his Am­bition cease in these
pleasant places, many other Episcopall Seates out of Italie doth hee dispose
of. In Humilitie farre from Christs life, yet pretending sanctimonie, and a
vertuous life, but denying the effects thereof, as his tolleration of the
Iewes and Stewes, his seruing of Idols, his vnlawfull Dispen­sations, and
monstrous Pardons doe plainly de­monstrate.

The third marke of Antichrist is deriued from another place of Saint Paul, Now
the spirit speaketh euidently, that some should fall from the Faith, gi­uing
heede to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Deuils, speaking lyes in
hypocrifie, forbidding Marriage and Meates. 2\. Tim, cap. 4.

Now what Church is the same which for­biddeth Marriage and the eating of flesh
at pre­fixed times? Is it not the Romish? The Greeke Church, whom for
Antiquitie none can deny but they stand parraleld and equall with the Romane,
[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=77) doe
prohibit no such things. Their Clergie, as the Abissines in Aethiopia haue
alwayes continued marriage. Therefore let this Marke serue for one to conuince
the Pope of the Doctrine of Deuils, as Saint Paul calls it. And for their
prohibition of meates, who doe insist more strongly then the Pope and his
Clergie? To eate Flesh vpon some dayes is a mortall sinne, vnlesse it bee with
their speciall dis­pensation, as the Castilians haue bought out their freedome
vpon some forbidden dayes.

To abstaine from Flesh they account it meri­torious, and yet to eat Fish,
Caueare, Almonds, Figs, and other lustfull viands they professe it law­full.

Our Sauiour notwithstanding warrants vs to eate Flesh, saying, that which
goeth into the mouth defileth not a man. And this hee proues by a for­cible
reason: because that whatsoeuer entreth into Matth. cap. 15. the mouth goeth
into the belly, and is cast out.

I condemne not the true vse of Fasting with bread and water, in them, who
finde their bodies carnally bent, or so full of grosse humours, that they
breathe vp into their heads, like cloudie and foggie vapours, to ecclipse and
darken their vnderstanding, wills, and memories, those noble Organs of the
Soule, if they cannot otherwise without such mortification subdue their
fleshly longing desires, and fall to fer­uent Prayers. Likewise I commend
Fasting to all the vnmarried and lazie Persons, who haue [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=78) liued without
much exercise, faring well and lying in downie beds. Such indeed haue reason
aboue o­thers to embrace Abstinence as a Iewell, least their Gluttonic with
ease should fill their veines with too much blood, least their spleene grow to
a bigger proportion then is fitting, least through oppilati­ons and
obstructions, feuers, the small poxe, the plurisie, the greene sicknesse, the
consumption, and chefly the Scuruie, that vnsuspected Guest, and hardly
discerned Traitouresse at the first approch to the wisest Physician, doe seize
vpon them as their slaues, neuer to bee redeemed.

But to make it a point of Religion, and to per­swade men, that Fasting can
satisfie Gods iustice, or appease his wrath iustly conceiued against vs for
sinne, is the Doctrine of Diuels, and a marke of An­tichrist. To the cleane
all things are cleane, as the Apostle said. And the Elders of the Church ought
Tit. cap. 1. not to clog and burthen the consciences of their yonger brethren,
with such yokes of mens inuen­tions and Traditions, as Touch not, taste not,
handle not, which as Saint Paul againe saith, bee things of no value, sith
they belong to the filling of the Flesh. For it is the soule and not the
Flesh, which good Colos. cap. 2. Christians ought to keep pure and vndefiled.
Which moued that ancient Father Tertullian, who liued Tertul. contra Psych.
cap. 2. within lesse then two hundred yeares after Christ to auerre: that the
Apostles imposed no burthen of set and solemne Fasting, but left it to our
libertie, as euery man saw his occasion.

The fourth marke of Antichrist is manifested [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=78) that he must be
a mysterie, the mysterie of Iniquitie; hee must sit in the Temple of God. For
the expoun­ding 2 Thes. cap. 2 of which place Saint Chrysostome deliuers a
notable Commentarie: Antichrist saith bee, being seated in the Church, and
possessing the chiefest places of the Church, is to hold all that in shew,
which the Chr [...]in Oper. imper [...]n Matth. 49: true Church of Christ
holds in truth, that is, hee shall haue Churches, Scriptures, Bishops,
Priests, Baptisme, and the Communion, &c. Hee is a mysterie, that is close and
hidden, vntill the Prophesie be winded to the bottome. For as Saint Paul wrot,
before the time of his reueali [...]g must come, their must needes fall out a
departure from the Faith, and then that Man of Sinne should bee knowne, which
had abu­sed the world with lying signes and deceits.

The fist marke is expressed out of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn, where
Antichrist is termed the Where of Babilon, the Beast, the false Prophet, all
signifying the same, hauing his power from the Spirituall Dragon, which fought
with Michael and his An­gels. By the name of Whore wee must note, that none is
called by that name, but one which had beene once an honest woman. The Church
of Rome was once pure, but afterwards by pride and ambi­tion grew to be
impure, as now wee see her domi­neering Head sitting in the great Citie on the
seuen Hills, adored aboue all, which is called God. As on the Triumphall Arch
engrauen in Lions 1555\. was proclaymed:

Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,

Et merito in terris diceris esse Deu [...].

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=79) By thy
Tongues mightie Oracle

The World thou gouern'st all.

On Earth thee without obstacle

Of right a God wee call.

The sixt marke of Antichrist is taken out of Saint Paul, that he began
mystically to worke in his time: But that which then with-held and let his
reuealing, did let and hinder vntill the splendour and glorie thereof, that
is, the Maiestic of the Roman Empire was taken out of the way, which
afterwards in fulnesse of time came to passe, when the Impe­riall Seat was
translated from Old Rome to New Rome, which Constantine called after his own
name Constantinople. In Saint Pauls time hee o [...]ept on his feet and hands
like an Infant, about three hun­dred yeares after hee grew to his stripling
age. But about the yeere 666. which is the number assigned in the Re
[...]elation, hee was in his strength, and euer since vntill my time he shewed
himselfe in his owne colours, a mightie Potentate, with a Triple Crowne and
vnder colour of Saint Peters keyes he arrogates to himselfe a higher Power
then Nabuchadonozor, the Caesars, or the great Turke euer presumed to haue
heere on Earth. As long as the Roman Empe­rors liued in the great Citie, the
Bishops stood inawe and followed their bookes, not carking for the va­nities
of the world. But when the Place by the Em­perours absence became an
habitation for his Ho­linesse, then that Barre which with-held his
disco­uerie, was also taken out of the way, so that now [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=79) all men of
Iudgement may clearely see the mysterie of I [...]iquitie manifestly
discouered.

The seuenth marke of Antichrist is the great wonder and maruell, which Saint
Iohn had, when Apoc. cap. 17. he saw this vnlookt for alteration, which he
would not haue confessed, if in his vision he had beheld an Heathen Antichrist
or any Infidell Tyrants. For hee had sufficient triall of their Tyrannies. But
when he saw in the Temple of God a Reuerend Prelate attired in Purple and
Scarlet with Imperiall Ornaments and Princely Authoritie, which Christ
forewarned his Apostles to take heede of, hee could not choose but wonder.

The eight marke of the Antichrist is, that his Sect shall magnifie him with
one consent and with one mind. In this they glorie, and in all their
com­munications you shall heare them brag of Catho­licke Antiquitie, and of
the Popes succession, neuer heeding Saint Pauls prophecie, that before the
dis­couerie of Antichrist, a generall defection of the Faith was necessarily
to come, nor yet giuing cre­dit to Saint Iohn, that the Church was to flye
into a Desert. This very ostentasion passed of the Iewes that they crucified
the Lord of life, and persecuted the Apostles as the Founders of a new
Religion. Vpon this did the Romane Idolators insist, and by Antiquitie
defended their idle Opinions.

The ninth marke of Antichrist is apparantly deciphered by his vaunting of
Miracles, a token which our Sauiour deliuers, that there should arise false
Christs, and false Prophets, which should doe [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=80) great wonders
and signes, so that if it were possible, they should deceiue the very Elect,
if it were possible. Matth. cap. 24. The like admonition Saint Paul giues vs,
that in the Church vnder Antichrist, there should bee working of Sat [...]n
with all Power, Signes, and lying 2\. Thes. cap. 2. Apoc. cap. 16. wonders.
The like doth Saint Iohn prophesie of Spirits of Deuils working wonders. In
the Primi­tiue Church, when the Gospell was setled, Miracles ceased. Which
made Saint Chrysostome to answer their curiositie, which looked for such rare
signes in this wise: There be some, saith he, that aske why men now ada
[...]es doe not worke Miracles, as the Apo­stles did? If thou beleeuest
Christ, as thou oughtest, thou hast no neede of Miracles, for these were giuen
Chrys. in Iohan. cap. 2. to vnbeleeuers, and not to beleeuers. Sometimes God
permits men with iugling trickes and legerdemaine or by the Deuils deuises to
deceiue them, either to  [...]rie the soundnesse of their Faith, or to
confirme them in their Errors. As heretofore he suffered the Israelites to bee
deluded with Baals Priests and the Golden Calfe, who assuredly produced the
like Mi­racles, as the Iesuites boast of.

The tenth marke of Antichrist, whom Saint Iohn calls the Wh [...]re of
Babilon, the mother of Har­lots and abhominations of the Earth, is that shee
shall be drunken with the bloud of the Saints and the Mar­tyrs of Christ
Iesus. Of whom may this bee more significantly spoken, then of the Pope? How
many thousands haue beene murthered in France, in the Low Countryes, and other
places of Christendome by his procurement, euen those which acknowledge [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=80) Christ Ies
[...] for their onely Mediatour with the Fa­ther, which confesse the euer-
liuing God in Vnitie and Trinitie, hath hee caused to bee burnt for
He­reticks, or made to row as slaues in Spaines Gallies. O bloudy Tyrannie! O
poisonous Imposture! which vnder the colour of the Catholicke Faith doth shed
the bloud of Innocents, like mercilesse H [...]r [...]d, not sticking to wound
Christ anew through his seruants sides!

### 1.16. CHAP. XVI.

Apolloes iudgement of Chau [...]ers Apologie con­cluding that the Pope is the
great A [...]tichrist.

AFter that Sir Geffrey Chaucer had ended his speech, Apollo gaue his
definitiue sentence in this wise: Euen as all the lesser sicknesses in mans
bodie doth grow and descend into the Plague, when contagion raignes: And as by
reason of op­pilations, the shutting vp of the spirits passages, and their
want of transpiration through the veynes, all other inferiour diseases fall
into the miserable Se [...]r­  [...]y, and principally for want of the Sunnes
presence in the winter: So for want of the Holy Spirits illu­mination caused
through the corruptions of mens depraued wills, by little and little the
Antichrist in­creased, and grew as it were with an inundation in­to one great
Sea, the Romish Sea. Euen as Mahomet composed his Alcoran of many Sects, so
the Romish [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=81) Religion by the
policie of the Pope, is stuffed and stored with many Heresies, which all
meeting to­gether in his ambitious spirit, and transferred to his successours,
doe make him that great Antichrist. From Elixay the Heretick hee borrowed his
Do­ctrine of celebrating Diuine seruice in an vnknown language. For such was
his Heresie. From Monta­n [...]s [...]pipb Heres. 14 Euse [...]. l 5\. c. 18\.
Aug. Heres. 71. the Heretick he learned to prescribe his rules of Fasts. For
hee first limited times of Fasting. From the Collyridians he was inspired to
worship the Vir­gin Marie: From the Caianes to inuocate on Angels From the
Carpocratians to adore the Image of le­sus and Saint Paul. From the Manichees
and the Aebionites he got that damnable precept, to prohi­bit Marriage vnto
the Clergie.

Euen as all true Christians haue a relation vnto Christ their Head, being
through Faith his ingraf­fed members, like as also the Patriarkes and
Pro­phets vntill Christ, had a dependance vpon that great, Prophet, whom God
promised to raise vp like vnto Aloses: so on the other side all the lesser
Heretickes depend vpon Antichrist, through whose lying mouth they oppose the
Truth and the Apo­stles Humilitie: And as Machiauellian members they ioyne
with one consent to aduance his Maie­sticall power, though many of them in
their consci­ences are fully perswaded, that such state and pomp in a Clergie
man, cannot but displease the Author of Humilitie, who pronounced them
blessed, which are poore in spirit.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=81)

### 1.17. CHAP. XVII.

Apolloes sentence promulgated for the Impurity of the Church Militant.

D. Whitgift Arch bishop of Canterbury complaines against Cartwright, Browne,
and other Puritane Separists, for inuaighing against their Superiours.

Apollo condemnes th [...] Sect, exhorting them to vnitie & to return to the
bosom of their Mother Church.

AFter Apollo had condemned the Arch-hereticks of the Christian Church, he
caused that saying of that Ancient Father to bee retorted against the like
erroneous seducers: Ecclesia non di [...] post Apo­stolorum tempora mansit
virgo. That the Church Eusebius. after the Apostles time continued not long a
Virgin. And this his Maiestie did to the end all mouthes should bee stopt,
which arrogate to themselues ex­traordinarie Holinesse, as the Popes doe, who
as his Courtly Cardinalls affirme, cannot erre; or which ascribe to themselues
a degree of greater puritie, in calling and conuersation then others of their
Brethren in Christ, forgetting his neuer fayling pro­phesie: All men are
liers. Another cause, why his Ma­iestie aduised his Religious Christians to
remember that saying, was to the end that they should not become amazed nor
troubled, when any hot-spurs and busie braind people doe maintaine new
opini­ons differing from the old; but rather to call into their memories▪ that
many false Christs, ma­ny fraudulent Sects must from time to time spring vp in
the Church like taxes among the good seede, to shewe likewise that no
Creatures [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=82) can bee long
pure without some spots or taint, and that God alone, who created them, is
only pure.

No sooner had Apollo ended these reasons for the Churches Impuritie, but the
graue and learned Whitgift Archbishop of Canterburie informed his Maiestie,
that one Cartwright, Browne, and others stiling themselues Puritans,
Precisians, and holy ly Separists, inueighed against him and his fellow
Bishops with Libels and defamations, worse then O [...]id against Ibis, or any
woman scold put in a Cuckinstoole; because hee gaue order in his visita­tions
to present refractaries and stubborne minded persons, disobedient to
Authoritie, and kicking against things indifferent, triuiall, and indeed very
bables in respect of Faith, Humilitie, Charitie, and Diuine Gifts, which they
had now more cause to pray for, then to spend their precious times in rai­ling
and withstanding those outward things, ten­ding only to distinguish the Leuits
from the Tem­porall Tribes, to the view of the outward man, whose fancie must
bee stirred by outward obiects aswell as inward.

Apollo at the report of these selfe-opinions like to breake into a schismatick
combustion, became mightily perplext. Yet like himselfe recollecting his
spirituall tempers, and resuming his wonted Maiestie, hee said to Cartwright,
Browne, and the rest of the P [...]rit [...]icall Sect: How long will you
persist by your peenish positions to minister scan­dall vnto your Christian
Corporation? I haue long since heard of your rash and turbulent oppositions
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=82) against
your Churches Canons. But I hoped, that the calme dew, which awaites on the
[...]iluer and staid age of Maturitie, had by this time cooled your ouer
feruent humours, and  [...]amed your win­ching tricks. Saint Paul became a Iew
among the Iewes, a Gentile among the Gentiles in his outward and ceremonious
habits. The like the subtile Iesu­ites, who take vpon them to bee Puritane
Papists haue lately imitated him like Apes, in disguizing themselues, not like
ruffians, as sometimes they doe in England, but in the Priestly attires of the
Chinensian Bunzies, because they might either con­uert soules in China, or in
default of such meritori­ous workes search into the nature of their State
af­faires, because they would not bee said to come home emptie. But you striue
not altogether for ap­parell; you would haue an equalitie, as in Sir Tho­mas
Moore Eutopia of Degrees and Liuings, vnder pretext of the Apostles paritie,
that none of them should be greater then the other, euery one would be a Pope
in his Parish. But I must put you in mind that this paritie and good order
ceased at the Apo­stles death. They were endued with equall autho­ritie to
worke Miracles, to conuert vnbeleeuers, to lay the foundation of the Churches.
After their death, Miracles ceased, which were but to confirme the
Euangelicall Doctrine, to be heauenly and not humane. And then men hauing no
such extraordi­narie callings, apparant Gifts of discerning Spirits no visible
and suddaine illumination of the Holy Ghost, they returned in worldly
businesses to their [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=83) old bl [...]s,
and left off their rare and Angelicall Com­munion, in hauing goods in common,
in liuing by their handie workes, and in their mutuall Charitie.

Yet not withstanding, euen in the Apostles time, Bishops, Deacons, and Elders
began to beare sway aboue others, being appointed to those offices, by
impositions, of hands and benedictions of their Elders, as also by the
suffrages of the Paro­chians themselues. Their charge was to keepe good order
to represse the proud young people, to re­buke sinne, and to suppresse the
fierie comm [...]tions of vnexperienced persons, who breaking the bonds of
Vnitie might broach innouations. Therefore obey your Elders, wherin your
mother Church hath ordayned Tutors ouer you, seeke not to crucifie your
Sauiour againe, by seperating your selues from the Communion of your fellow
members: for in so doing, you diuide his bodie into parcels, who ought to bee
respected entirely one, and identified in your soules, without the least rent
or scandall. Submit your bodies in ciuill policie, and in mat­ters
indifferent, Apocryphall, or Temporall to the Gods of the Earth. Offer vp your
Soules vnto God by Faith as an holy Priesthood, and a spirituall sacri­fice
1\. Pet, cap. 2. in Christ Iesus. And for your Puritie, seeing that Peter
confessed himselfe for all his Apostleship to be chiefe among Sinners, vsurpe
not the name of a Puritane. For the Angels are faine to become vai­led before
the Maiestie of God, who alone is p [...]re and vndefiled. Let the worme of
Conscience sa­tisfie your ouer-weening imaginations, that all [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=83) your  [...]
consiste rather in the  [...] of your Sinnes by the spirituall apprehension
of, Christ crucified, then in the Puritie of any vertue [...] whatsoeuer.

### 1.18. CHAP. XVIII.

The memorable Synod of Dort accuseth Arminius before Apollo, for broaching out
of new Opinions in the Church to trouble the braines of the weaker.

Apollo confutes Arminius, and sheweth what a sober minded Christian ought to
conceiue of deepe My­steries.

Arminius is commanded to recant.

ABout a moneth after that Apollo had establish­ed concord and vnitie in the
hearts of sober­minded Christians, when all the members of the Church Militant
thought that they were restored againe to the earthly paradise, and there
should sit ouery man vnder his vine and Fig-trees, as in the Golden Age of
Peace, vpon wednesday in the Easter weeke, 1626\. the famous Synod of Dort,
exhi­bited the names of sundry persons, who relying on Arminius his idolized
Patronage for some new paradoxes in Diuinitie, had refused vpon Easter day to
communicate with them and others their fellow Christians. Apollo asked
Arminius what moued him to breed and hatch new conceits, and those to [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=84) scatter abroad
for the offending of tender consci­ences. Arminius answered, that the Opinion
which hee maintayned, was not new, but grounded on the Scriptures. And hee
hoped that all Positions which did not diameter wise and flatly oppugne the
Word of God, might still be held and questioned if for no other end, then for
the triall and exercising of one anothers wits, which might like Iron, waxe
rustie without some vse or furbushing. And what might your quaint Question
bee, replyed Apollo, which tends now at this sacred time to refine wits, when
men should ioyne together in commemora­tion of the Lords last Supper, to
sanctifie and purifie their humane wills? Most dread Soueraigne, said
Arminius, It is not vnknowne vnto your blessed Maiestie, how many Communicants
doe yeerely resort vnto the Lords Table, more fit to bee whipt at a Carts
tayle, or to be thrust into the Spanish in­quisition, then to keepe companie
with regenerated persons at the celebration of the holy Sacrifice, which
whosoeuer presumes to touch vnworthily being vnprepared, eates his owne
Damnation, or in the mildest censure he deserues to be made an vgly Leper with
King Vzziah. The zealous considera­tion of this imminent danger, which might
ensue to my sicke Brethren, moued mee to take care for their Soules health,
and to require them to try their Spirits, whether they were in the state of
Grace or back-sliders? whether they feit an alternate moti­on, not often
subiect to alteration in the bottome of their hearts, pricking them forwards
to doe [[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=84)
good workes. If they did, I told them that the Spirit of God cooperating with
those sweet moti­ons of theirs, would frame an harmonious sym­phonie in their
Soules, which so contuned and con­tinued would likewise sympathize with
Heauenly Mysteries. But if they found their wills depraued, led with the least
concupiscence, they should not aduenture like Iudas to come neere their
Sauiour, or partake in the Eucharist at this Feast of Easter. Now because I
catechized them in this manner, ad­ding further for their greater terrour from
sinne, and that they might repent in time, that though they were elected and
iustified by Grace, according to the purpose of God, yet they might totally
and finally fall, vnlesse their owne free will did worke with the will and
Grace of the fierie Comforter.

Apollo hearing this protestation of Arminius told him, that hee was like a
skittish Cow, which giues a good pailefull of milke, and afterwards flings it
downe with her foot. And moreouer ad­ioyned this paraneticall counsell, I
liked very well of your whole narration, vntill you arriued at the period of
your Apologie. If you did it in terrorem tantúm, to scare them from sinne, and
to prepare their minds to Repentance, you shewed your selfe a cunning Merchant
in the spirituall Trade, or ra­ther a politicke Statesman; both which agree
not with Christs candour, with the Holy Spirits ingenu­itie. Plaine dealing is
euer best in matters of Con­science. For whatsoeuer proceedes not from Faith,
is Sinne. You did very ill thus to offend the weake [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=85) constitution of
their braines, who without such ter­rors might walke on simply and sincerely
towards the Feast of the Lamb. But this is not the first Ea­ster, which you
haue disturbed. For the common voice goes, that your Sect vnder your name haue
alienated one Neighbours loue from the other, and done more harme in the Low
Countryes, then all their warres with Spaine. Which inconuenience Affricke
sometimes felt, as an ancient Writer te­stified, plus incommodi capiebat
Africa ex Secta Arriana, qua insecti erant Vandali, quam ab auaritiâ corundem,
vel crudelitate ijs innata, Africke recei­ued greater hurt from the Arrian
Sect, wherewith the Vandals were infected, then by their griping
co­uetousnesse, or crueltie, though the same were na­turall vnto them.

In alledging that mans free will must aide and cooperate with the Grace of
God, you cannot but ascribe glorie vnto flesh and bloud, which is fraile and
honour vnto Nature, which the Serpent woun­ded with a mortall sting. For what
is Free will but an Electiue power to deliberate and determine what it
pleaseth. In naturall things, as to eate and drinke, to sit or walke, to sing
or play, I allow of such a Free will in humane affections. But in hea­uenly
matters it is sacriledge worse then Prometheus his flealth, whom the Poets
fabled feloniously to conuey away some of Iupiters fire. It is indeed
trai­torous impietie to rob God of his Prerogatiue. Grace is only his to
conferre on his vessell of honor  [...]nto men shame only belongeth, as the
Prophet pro­tested. [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=85) And as another
confirmeth of more anci­ent writ: The way of man is not in himselfe, neither
Ier [...]. cap. 6. is it man to walke and to direct his steps, meaning any
power to make vse of in Godly Actions. Man plan­teth, Apollo watereth, but
when all comes to the vp­shot, it is God which giues the increase, as Saint
Paul confesseth. How dare yee, O bewitched Arminians, attribute the least
glorie to a putrifide carcasse? How dare yee auouch that a man being called
and iustified according to Gods purpose, which neuer changeth, may fall away
from Grace, wholy and finally? To bring in a Decree respectiuely argues you
are better seene in Tautologie then in Theo­logie, in Sophistrie then in the
Doctrine of Prede­stination. This is to ecclipse Gods Sunne-shine of Grace,
and to set vp Phacton, to pull downe his power and to set a beggar a
horsebacke. For in af­fording such excellencie to a man, you must needes
ascribe somewhat to his worth and merit, which can bee no other then
Damnation.

Though man hath Faith, Loue and Charitie, hee cannot say, that God made choice
of him for one of his Elect number, because hee foresaw that man was able to
take hold of these Diuine Gifts, for these are not the causes but the effects
of his calling, but onely because of his owne absolute pleasure, it see­med
good vnto his wisdom to choose him without any such cause of merit, foreseene
in man, though afterwards, when he had called him, hee bestowed vpon him these
Heauenly gifts at the intercession of his Sonne, who was to bee incarnate for
mans salua­tion. [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=86) By this meanes
and for this cause were sinfull men elected, called, iustified, and glorified
before the world began, euen for his owne honour and for our Redeemers sake,
by whom and in whom we were to bee incorporated and ingraffed as bastard­slips
quite salne from the state of innocencie by A­dams succeeding fall, which his
all-seeing Maiestie saw as in a liuely Map alreadie come to passe, as
afterwards Adam and his whole Progenie sensi­bly perceiued. And there by the
way I signifie vn­to you, O heedlesse Arm [...]nians, that your too much
regard of naturall causes and effects, your humane calculating and intentiue
computation of Time, ac­cording to the errors of the outward man, hath beene
the prime cause of this absurditie. For God seeth not as man seeth. His
foresight is eternall, that  [...]. Sam. cap. 16. is, alwaies present. There
is no Time past nor fu­ture tense declined by his euerlasting Grammar; though
mortall race in respect of their limited ca­pacities vse this manner of
calculation, A thousand yeares in his fight are but as yesterday: Hee is Alpha
& Omega, the beginning and last, vncircumscribed, Psalme. 90. infinite, and
without end. So that hee which sear­cheth, and diueth ouercuriously into this
depth of Predestination, hee may fall into the Gulfe of Scil­la by seeking to
auoide the danger of Charybdis.

Therefore the safest way for man is with Saint Paul, to reioyce in his
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in him. His Grace is
sufficient for him, for his power is made perfect through mans weak­nesse. Let
not your eyes gaze too long vpon the [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=86) Sunnes beames,
lest they become dazeled or blin­ded with the glorious Maiestie thereof.
Content your selues with such nourishment as serues fittest for your tender
constitutions, and for the reach of your humane capacities. I say, as the
Apostle said, through the grace that is giuen vnto me, I say to eue­ry one
that is among you, that no man presume to vn­derstand Rom. cap. 12. aboue
that, which is meet to bee vnderstood; but that hee vnderstand according to
Sobri [...]tie. Leaue off your curious inquisitions, and doe your best
en­deauours to let the world know that you are of Gods elected number by your
Faith, Loue, Cha­ritie, and Humilitie.

And for you, Arminius, wee take it in ill part, that you without acquainting
vs with your theori­call Proiect, would diuulge abroad your Theses and
Problemes to confound the Intelligence of your yonger brethren. How much
better and safer had it beene for you to smother your profound doubts then to
work confusion by the publishing of them, vnlesse you thought by this
improuident dispersing of the notions of your braine, to goe beyond
Ero­stratus, who fired Dianaes Temple at Ephesus, for no other intent, then to
be spoken of in after ages to haue done some Act worthy to bee recorded in the
Chronicles; as likewise Guy Faukes attempted in England to blow vp the
Parliament house. Wee doe now order, that you for these presumptions do openly
before our Congregation, to bee held at Li­bethrum, vpon the M [...]nday
following after Trinity Sunday next, make a full recantation of your
scru­pulous [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=87) Paradoxe, and
there penitently confesse that God called and elected sinfull man out of his
owne free, secret, and vnquestionable pléasure, without hauing any respect at
all to ma [...]s ensuing merit, or free will, but onely to his owne attribute
of Mercie to the absolute power which his Deity hath ouer the workmanship of
his hands, as the Potter ouer his vessels, and to the righteousnesse of his
Sonne, the vndefiled Lamb, which redeemed Sinners out of the Deuils iawes. And
also you shall here pro­test, that all men whatsoeuer, though they were as
iust as Henoch, as faithfull as Abraham, as meck as Moses, as zealous as
Phinehes, as patient as lob, as penitent as Dauid, as constant as Elias, as
wise as Daniel, as godly as Saint Iohn Baptist, who wasmore then a Prophet;
yet all these notwithstanding were predestinated to bee saued, not for any
deseruing vertues, which God foresaw in their owne humane wils, able to
iustifie them, but because they were clothed with their Redeemers merits, and
through Faith and Gods mercie from the beginning of the world, promised and
prophesied by him, ingraffed into this mysticall Head, who bruised that of the
Serpents, and consequently repayred the breach be­tweene the Angels and them,
healing also the lepro­sie of Sinne, deriued from Adams bloud into all his
Posteritie, for in him all men liued, and from him all men are equally
descended. Besides, you shall acknowledge, that those whom God hath elected he
iustifieth, and whom he iustifieth hee glorifieth; And that whomsoeuer hee
once hath elected, hee [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=87) euer loueth,
and in despite of all temp [...]lous  [...]ee will leade them safely to their
Redeemer, who con­tinually makes intercession for them at the right hand of
his Father, according to the Diuine agree­ment made in Heauen for their
reconciliation and fortunate attonement. Lastly, you shall protest, that as
God predestinated some to damnation for their Sinnes, which Hee foresaw,
leauing them in the corrupted lump, with the other vessels of dis­honour: so
hee predestinated some to Saluation for his Sonnes sake, not in regard of any
Goodnesse at all which hee fo [...]saw in them, or because that they were any
whit better then the rest, but to the end that hee might make them better; For
as I said be­fore, mortall men can haueno more goodnesse, then it pleaseth him
out of his superabundant grace freely to infuse into them. The Creatour is the
Authour and Cooperator of all the vertues which are in the Creatures,
according to that saying of Dionysius Areopagita: Euery good thing springs
from God, and Lib. 1\. de Hier. Coelest. cap. 1. the same returnes againe to
him, as to the Soueraigne Cause and last end. It is a foule shame for men of
the Reformed Church to shew themselues worse then the Iesuites in this
profound mysterie, who of late being conuinced with a Cloud of Witnesses, haue
beene like Balaam and Caiphas, enforced to enrank their Opinions with ours in
this Question; as Bel­larmine confesseth in these words: Non elegit Deus
[...]. 2\. de  [...]. A. bit. cap.  [...]. homines, quia vidit ipsos boni
operis fructum allaturos & in b [...]no per seueraturos, sed elegit vt faciat
bene ope­ra [...]tes [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=88) & in b [...]
persenerantes. God chose not men because they should bring forth the fruits of
good workes, and perseuer in those workes, but he chose them because hee might
make them doers of good workes, and so in them to perseuer.

### 1.19. The Conclusion of the First Part

SInce the Discouerie of these Errors at Parnassus, which I quoted downe of
purpose to remoue the stoniest rubbes, which might stand betwixt vs and
Felicitie, the true scope and end of the Golden Fleece, I was informed, that
some pettish Monitors doe vpbraid mee for writing of serious matters in an
extraordinarie forme, disguized vnder the name of Apollo. To you that are
Iudicious I neede not yeeld any satisfaction in this point. But lest Errour
play vpon mee too violently, by mistaking my meaning, and the true sense of
the morall, let the Ignorant know, that this worke alludes to a Poeti­call
rapture, wherein the names of Apollo, of Pal­las, the Muses, the Graces, and
of Parnassus are ta­ken for Wisedome, and the Court of wisedome ey­ther Diuine
or Humane. If they regard the Cele­stiall Globe, the precisest Criticks shall
find the name of Apollo or Phoebus still in vse. The seuen dayes of [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=88) the weeke haue
their denomination from the Pa­gan Gods, among whom Apollo [...] re­ceiues the
appellation, as the Prince of  [...]. That Diuine Poet Salust Lord of Bartas
in  [...] parts of his Books vseth this name for the  [...] as he doth also
Minerua and the Muses for Lear­ning, Mars and Beliona for warre, Bacchus for
wine, Ceres for Corne, V [...]lcan for fire, Venus for lust, Diana for
chastitie, Neptune for the sea,  [...] ­olus for the windes, Styx and Ach
[...]ron for hell. It is not the bare name but the inward sense, which a
discreet Reader should pry into. Saint Paul ex­pounded the Heathens vnknowne
God at Athens according to his owne beliefe of the true God. Because those
fond people at Ephesus, preferred the worship of Diana, Great is Diana of
Ephesus, before Saint Pauls Doctrine, it were great folly in a Minister to
refuse the Christning of a childe by that name, though neuer so Idolatrous in
those times of darknesse. While men of vnder­standing know the moralized
sense, they will not mislike this course. They which haue read the workes of
the Nominalists and the Realists, can distinguish betwixt substance and
shadowes. They will respect matter more then forme, and the Spirit of Euidence
and power more then the enticing words of mens wisedome. By either of which
kinds, who so hath the happinesse to edi­fie the Church of Christ, to reforme
Errors, or to restore decaied Trading to his languishing Coun [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=89) trey, hee ought
not to bee accused, whether hee  [...] the part of tickling Horace, or of
carping I [...]all, of an Oratour, or of a Poet; whether  [...] puts on the
large Surplice of a reuerend  [...]inister, or the curtalld gowne of a crabbed
Stoick. For it is not the Outside, but the preci­ous Inside, which the Eye of
wisedome lookes in­to. And I haue seene more pride vnder a course cloth
garment, then vnder a silken Robe.

To satisfie further their Obiections, I haue couched the subiect of my
Discourse vnder the Titles of Apollo, Walter de Mapes, Sir Geffrey Chaucer,
Berengarius, Wicliffe, and other famous persons, which flourished many yeares
before Luther was borne, euen by the selfe same Autho­ritie, as Vigilantius
the Martyr confuted the He­reticks of his time. In his fift booke against
Eu­tyches, this antient Writer testifieth, that he pub­lished workes in
Athanasius his name against Sabellius, Photinus, and Arrius, to the end that
they being present, he might seeme to treat with the present, vt cum
praesentibus videretur agere.

If these reasons cannot preuaile, but that still they will mutter, and seeke a
hole where none is, I must referre them to the reading of Sir Thomas Moores
Eutopia, and to Plat [...]s imaginarie Com­mon-wealth, on which as
[...]hymerizing notions or Ayrie Castles let their Phantasies pore, while I
runne ouer those reall and actuall vices, which lately haue gotten the vpper
hand ouer their [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=89) mindes, and
bodies to the scandall of their Chri­stian Profession, and the decay of their
worldly fortunes.

And if for all that my curious Masters will not desist, but menace mee with
more violent animad­uersions, euen to fire and fagot, or rather to a milder
punishment of Banishment, I shall much more con­tentedly embrace this last
with Boetius, then to con­tinue in their Neighbourhood, like a lazie Drone,
and to consume the fruits of the Earth, which the industrious Bees haue
laboured for, thereby to ve­rifie that saying of the Poet: fruges
consumerenatus; And so at last to hazard the late Grace, which I re­ceiued in
the Court of Wisedome: where at my ma­triculation I vowed to disclose all such
enormities which might preiudice the mysterie of the Golden Fleece, and to
liue vpon mine owne without extor­ting from others.

To conclude, if notwithstanding all my allega­tions, these B [...]sie-bodies
will play the clamorous Stentors, and refuse to allow, either the forme,
mat­ter, or Decrees set out in this Treatise, let them lay them by, as vnripe
fruit, or Orders fitter for me to diuulge in the Newfoundland, and there to
see them executed among my owne Tenants.

The end of the First Part.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=90)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=90)

## 2\. THE SECOND PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.

### 2.1. CHAP. 1.

Malines and Misselden, two Marchants of Great Brit­taine, do seuerally declare
their Opinions touching the Decay of Trade, and the Causes of the
vnder­ballance of their Natiue Commodities with the Forraigne, which were
brought into that King­dome.

Apollo bewrayeth their misery, and commands a fur­ther enquiry to be made of
the Causes.

APon a grieuous Complaint made before his sacred Maiesty, as he deliberated
with some grand Statesmen of England for the restoring of decayed Trade,
certaine Marchants experimented in the Art of Commerce, offered their seruice
to discouer those se­crets, which they vnderstood of in that kind. Apollo
commended them for their respectiue care and du­ty, in tendring themselues so
voluntarily like honest Patri [...]ts to succour their diseased Countrey; And
bade them seuerally to deliuer their knowledge. [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=91) Gerrard de
Malines first related his Opinion: That the wealth of a Kingdome could not
decrease but by three manner of wa [...]es, viz. 1. by the transportation of
ready money, or bullich out of the same. 2. by sel­ling their owne Commodities
too good cheap. 3. or The Canker of Englands Common­wealth. by buying
forraigne Commodities at too deare a rate, and that in the inequality of one
of these consi­sted the one ouerballācing of Trade, like the fortune of an
House-holder, whose ruine and downfall may befor [...]seene and foretold if he
continually buyeth at the dearest rate and neuer sels. As contrariwise he is
obserued to thriue, if hee sels, and seldome buyes. Then he shewed, that
Money, which ought to bee the square or measure of a Kingdome to set a price
vnto euery thing, and therefore in permutation and Exchange among Marchants it
was termed Par, yet lately this Regina Pecunia, this Queene of the Re­publick,
was vnnaturally sold to be deflowrd by some of her neerest kinsfolkes; who not
looking into her beauty, nor regarding the finenesse & waight of her metall,
as politicke Exchangers ought to doe, but al­together carelesse of their
Countries good, they bar­gained by bils of Exchange to pay or receiue  [...]
for Commodities, as the Money is valued in other parts transmarine. If the
price of Exchange bee there high, where generally our Marchants are the
deli­uerers of money, then they must giue much to haue their Moneyes made
ouer, whereby the gaine of their Commodities being formerly sold, is clipped.
And yet most commonly they giue no more then the value of our money is; for
the money, which they deliuer there, is according to the toleration by them
[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=91) receiued
at high rates fatre aboue the value, and in the same manner payed out. But
when the Exchange goes high, our Marchants buy Forraigne Commo­dities, or
barter theirs for the same. Wherein they lose, in taking these at their
forraigners owne Pri­ces; and their natiue Countrey suffers for it at their
returne together with the Marchants, the one in sel­ling deare, the other in
buying deare. So that our home Commodities are abated foure manner of waies by
the abuse of this Exchange. 1\. by searcity of Mo­ney, which maketh things
good cheape, occasioned by the Exchange. Secondly, by the gaine sought vp­on
Money, which otherwise would be sought vpon the commodities. Thirdly, by a
high Exchange with vs, which causeth men to deliuer that money by Ex­change in
nature of Trade, which otherwise might be employed by some vpon the
Commodities; as likewise by a low Exchange, which causeth expor­tation of our
Money. Fourthly, by the rash sale of our Commodities by young Marchants, or
Factors, that  [...]driuen to pay Mony taken vp by Exchange [...] in England,
thereby spoyling the Market of others. In like manner to make this probably
seem true, Malines manifested, that Forraigne Commo­dities were raised and
enhansed foure manner of waies. First, by plenty of moneyes out of our own
store transported into other Countries. Secondly, by a high Exchange beyond
the Seas. Thirdly, by the toleration of moneyes beyond the Seaes, to goe
cur­rant farre aboue their value. For by the alteration of moneyes, the price
of Commodities doth alter also. Fourthly, for that the principall Commodities
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=92) Veluets,
Silkes, Fustians, &c. are ingrossed by the Bankers that sell them at their
pleasure, our immo­derate vse giuing them the greater cause. By this meanes
hapens an ouerballancing of outlandish Commodities with those of our owne
Countrey, which also carries away out of this Kingdome fiue hundred thousand
pounds a yeere at the least, when wee are thus enforced to giue both money and
our home Commodities for Forraigne wares at a most excessiue rate.

Edward Misselden a learned Marchant vtterly mis­liked. Malines Par in
Exchange, saying that there were two manner of Exchanges, the one Personall,
The Circle of Commerce. the other Prouinciall, & that it was not possible that
the Personall, which respected only the Contracts made betwixt priuate men, or
party & party, should so much preiudice the Common-wealth, vnlesse there were
an inequality in the Prouincial Exchange betweene our Kingdome and other
Neighbouring Kingdomes or States. The losses whereof, as also of the
Personall, could not be known, vntil the returnes thereof be made, that is,
vntill the Forraigne Com­modities were brought in for the natiue Commodi­ties
carried out, and then both cast into the ballance of Trade, to be waighed and
tried the one against the other. For if the home Commodities carried out of
the Kingdome, doe downe-waigh and exceed in va­lue the Forraigne Cōmodities
imported & brought into the Kingdome, it is a signe, that the Kingdome growes
rich and prospers, because the ouerplus must needs come in in treasure. But if
the cōtrary chance, that the Forraigne Commodities brought in, doe ex­ceed
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=92) the Natiue
in value, it is most certaine that the Stocke of the Kingdome wasteth, and
that Treasure goes out of the Land. To discerne this, there is no surer way
then by the Customes, where in the goods of this Land exported & imported,
being multipli­ed by twenty, will appeare; for of euery pound there is twelue
pence for Custome. As for example, wee find to our great griefe, that there
were brought in­to this Land of Forraigne goods by the Customes for the same
payd, and thus multiplied by 20. for one whole yeere from Christmas Anno.
1621\. to Christ­mas 1622\. The totall Summe of 2619315l. 00 00.

The totall Summe of goods carried out of the Kingdome, frō the said Christmas
1621\. vntill Christ­mas 1622\. amounted to 2320436l. 12s. 10d. which
la­mentable president sheweth, that there was more that yeere brought in of
Forraigne goods, then carried out of the home Commodities by the Sum of
298878l. 7s. 2d.

By this positiue forme of a Ballance truely made and taken out of the Custome-
houses, our State may see how we are falne into a great vnder-ballance of
Trade with other Nations, & that it is high time now or neuer to looke about,
before wee bee driuen to a narrower pinch. The causes, in two words, of this o
­uer-ballancing, is Prodigality and Pouerty. The one brings in by Excesse of
Forraigne goods into the Kingdome an ouerballancing. The other by the Defect
and hauing too little from their partiall Mo­ther, keeps our Trading backe in
vnder ballance.

Apollo sighed at the relation; and all his Court which fauoured the Protestant
Religion, both [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=93) outwardly and
inwardly demonstrated great heaui­nes for this Decay of Trade in Great
Brittaine, that in the dayes of peace vnder a Religious King, this vn­der-
ballance should happen, and openly protested, that Peace consumed more men and
goods in that Kingdom, then all their Warres with Spaine and Ty­rone.
Likewise, his Maiesty said, that if the Noble King Iames had not betimes
raised the Iacobus piece to twenty two shillings, and his other Gold to the
like proportion, other Nations had by this time at­tracted all the treasure of
this land vnto themselues, and that the riotous flaunting in Apparell with
their prodigall Feasts, did helpe to vnder-ballance their Trading, which
together with many other abuses crept into that State. hee wished some of the
Inhabi­tants, if they had any feeling of their Countreyes smart, should
present without delay or partiality.

### 2.2. CHAP. 2.

Apollo causeth a Iury to be impanelled out of the Vni­uersities of Oxford,
Cambridge S•. A [...]drews, Aberdine, and the Colledge at Dubin, to find out
those persons which sold Ecclesiasticall Li­uings.

The Pres [...]ntours discouering some, bring them before Apollo.

His Maiesties, censure, with his discourse of the Right of Tithes.

APollo perceiuing, that one of the chiefest causes of the miseries which
perplexed Great Brittain, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=93) proceeded from Si
[...]ny, and the enforced Periury of some Ministers, who being driuen by meete
neces­sity, were faine to accommodate themselues to the iniquity of the times,
caused about Whitsontide last. 1626\. a Iury to be impanelled of the precisest
Prea­chers in that Monarchy, viz. sixe out of the Vni­uersit [...] of Oxford,
sixe out of Cambridge, sixe out of St. Andrewes, sixe out of Aberdine, and the
like number out of the Colledge at Dublin in Ireland. 30\. in all, integros
vitae sceleris (que) puros, men of vnattainted liues, and pure from notorious
vices. These his Imperiall Maiesty appointed to enquire of such Patrons as
presumed directly or indirectly to play the Mar­chants, and sell those worldly
meanes, which God himselfe had allotted to his earthly Angels, towards their
maintenance and wages, in labouring to reduce his astrayed flocke to their
true Shepheard. Ou [...]r this impanelled ranke he placed D. Raynolds, a man
of very austere Conuersation, so temperate in his af­fections, that hee made
choise rather to bee Head  [...] Corpus Christs Colledge in Oxford, then to
become a Bishop, which the famous Queene Elizabeth offere [...] vnto him.
About ten dayes after, the Inquisitors re­turned and presented the names of
40. Patrons, and so many Ministers, which had truckt and bargai­ned for
Benefices. Likewise they presented that 6. Widdowes, whose Husbands had coped
and giuen 4. yeers purchase for Benefices, were ready to starue, some of them
hauing seuen or eight children lying on their hands: And that before the first
fruits were satisfied, without receiuing one penny for their pur­chase, their
poore Husbands died.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=94) Apollo moued
to Commiseration, to see the wretched estate of the Church brought to this
wo­full plight, said, that it was no maruell all things went to wrack and
ruine in that Noble Iland, when the Patrimony of the Church became a prey and
pillage to Marchandizing Greedy-guts. For how, (quoth he) can vertue harbour
in their hearts, when the Rewards of vertue are rauished, embezeled, and
turned topsy turuy? This inequality compelled many braue Spirits, desperately
to runne into the gulfe of discontentment. This made Campian, Par­sons,
Harding, Stapleton, Creswell, Dallison, Garnet, and infinite others to forgo
their natiue Countrey, and betake themselues to the Seminary Colledges in
Doway, in Valladolide, Ciuill, Rome, and other Po­pish places. After these
speeches, his Maiesty ask't the delinquent Patrons, what infernall fury
possessed them to wrong the Ministers the selected seruants of their Heauenly
Father? Why they forced them to buy their owne Right and due? The Patrons
an­swered, that they held a hand ouer the Aduowsons and Ecclesiasticall
liuings in their gifts, aswell as o­uer the impropriate Tithes. Both which
being wre­sted and extorted by the Clergy-men themselues heretofore in time of
Popery, towards the Religious houses, belonged as a lawfull spoile vnto them
for ridding the Land of such Lazy Lordanes & Abbey-lubbers. Likewise, they
alleged, that they could not support their magnifique Port and pompe, without
making sale of such Benefices, as were in their do­nations. To this Apollo
replied: Though yee haue beene tolerated to detaine the impropriate Ti
[...]hes, [[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=94)
dare ye aduenture to take money for those Spirituall Liuings, which appertaine
not vnto you?  [...] [...] yee againe deuoure the forbidden Fruit? Could not
the many examples of them, which felt the Stroke of Diuine vengeance for
purloyning of forbidden Wares, terrify your mercenary minds? Ach [...]n, for
the wedge of Gold and the Baby [...]o [...]ish [...]ayment, was stoned to
death. Gehezi, for receiuing the two Ta­lents and the change of garments from
Naaman, was strucken with Leprosie. No ill gotten goods can long thriue with
any man. Male parta, male dilabun­tur, which yee might obserue by the Crane in
the  [...] Embleme, which hauing a wrongfull prey, could not digest it. As in
like manner it befell to an Eagle, which snatching a Coale from the Altar,
fired her nest therewith. Famous are the destructions of sacri­legious persons
in all ages. Of Heliodorus, who was scourged by an Angell, for seeking to rob
the treasure of the Templeat Ierusalem: of Pompey, which tooke away the Golden
Table out of that sanctified place; of the Galles, which spoyled the Delphicke
Church; of C [...]pi [...], who robbed the Church of Toloza, that gaue an
occasion to the Prouerb, Aurum Toloza­num, which proued fatall to the takers.
Although these two last serue not so fit for our turne, because they were
Heathenish yet in as much as they por­tend fatal success, Mal [...]omē to the
rakers of Church goods, let men feare to share in Sacred things, or in any
Commodity annexed to the Spiritualty.

But now-a-dayes yee are not content onely to exact of the poore Ministers such
vnreasonable prizes, but yee must get some by humane reasons [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=95) and
vnwarrantable authority to iustifie your Acts, training their ouerfluent wits,
to proue the Word of God, to become mutable in matters of Tithe; for the
[...]onfounding of which leprous opinion, I will now onuert my speech vnto
you, my learned Courtiers: Be it knowne vnto you, that Tithes are due to the
Clergy Iure Diuino, before the Law, by the Law of Moses, and vnder the
Gospell. Before the Law Abra­ham payed Tithes to Melchised [...]ch, euen the
tenth Gen. Cap. 14. Heb. Cap. 7. part of all which he had, as the Authour to
the He­brewes explayned. Hee payd Tithes as a temporall Prince to a spirituall
Prince. But now vice versa, con­trariwise the spirituall person is constrayned
to pay Tithes to the temporall Parsons. The Patriarke Iacob made a vow vnto
God, that if hee would bee with him and keep him in the way which he should
go, giuing him bread to eat, and rayment to put on, he would surely gi [...]e
the Tenth vnto him. Whereby Gen. Cap. 28. it appeares, that the Tenth is still
reserued by the Law of Nature, imprinted by the Diuine character in mens
hearts before the Law, as a certaine and vn­changeable portion to the
instruments of Gods glo­ry, his sacred Ministers. Likewise by the Ceremonial
Law, All the Tithe of the Land, whether of the seed of Leu. Cap. 27. the Land,
or of the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords, it is holy vnto the Lord. And the
like Tenth was alotted of their flockes of Cattell. All which God bestowed
vpon the Tribe of Leui for their paines, care, and N [...]m. Cap. 18.
maintenance in attending his seruice. The detay­ning of these Tithes
afterwards from the lawfull Owners, procured the curse of God vpon the Land of
Iewry, as the Prophet protested: Yee haue robbed Mal. 3. 8, &c. [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=95) God. But ye say,
Wherein haue we robbed thee? In tithes and offring. Yee are cursed with a
Curse, for yet haue robbed me, euen this whole Nation. Bring then all the
Tithes into the S [...]rchouses, that there may bee meat in my House, and
proue me herewith, saith the Lord of Hostes, if I will not open the windowes
of Hea [...]en, and powre you out a Blessing, that there shall not bee roome
[...]nough to receiue it. By the Morall Law vnder the Gospell, where our
Sauiour reproued the Pharises Hypocrisie, it appeares how iniurious a deed it
is, to keepe the Tithes from the rightfull Prop [...]ieta [...]ies; when the
Pharise iustifieth himselfe with this point, which the English Patrons would
countermaund, I Luk Cap.  [...]. pay Tithe of all that I h [...]e. The which
the Diuine Wisdom liked, as he had told the Pharises before, that those things
ought to be done, and not to leaue the other vndone. Neither let them colour
their Prome­thean thefts, as  [...], as theeues of the Godhead, by abr
[...]gating all the Lawes of Moses, as if they were all void at the comming of
Christ. For those onely were  [...], which  [...]ood for types and figures of
his  [...], Passon, and Resurrection; as Cir­cumcisio [...] for Baptisme, and
the Feast of the Passeouer, for the Feast at Easter. Some other petty things
appropriated to that Nation, in regard of their hot Climate and natures, are
also abolished. But for the lawfulnesse of Tithes payable to the reuerend
Clergy, it was neuer questioned for these 5000. yeers and vpwards: yea, so
powerfull a respect did the Frimitiue Church attribute vnto the Lawes of
Moses, that Ele [...]therius Bishop of Rome, at such time as Lu­cius King of
Great Brittaine, or as others think, Vice­roy [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=96) vnder the Romane
Emperour, sent vnto him for some good and wholsome Lawes, this holy Prelate
wrote vnto him, that hee should collect out of the Diuine Lawes, what he
thought most agreeable and conuenient.

If this will not satisfie their couetous apprehen­sions, let them beleeue the
Apostle S [...]. Paul, who confirmed the paying of Tythes after the abolishing
of the Ceremoniall Law. [...]eb. Cap. 7.

In former times Priests would take the fattest of the meat, but now-a-daies
Phinehes and Samuel must catch at the crummes which fall from their Patrons
tables. In those purer times the Children of Israel offered so plentifully,
that Moses was faine to re­straine their bounties. Yea the women offered their
Bracelets, Iewels, and Looking-glasses, in which they tooke much delight. But
now temporall per­sons must haue a large summe of Aaron and Eleazar, for
Presentations, to buy their wiues Iewels and stately Looking-glasses, to view
the picture of Pride and the face of Simon Magus. In time of Popery there was
a Law enacted of Mortmaine, to keepe backe and cu [...]be the charity of
deuout persons, for feare lest all the reuenewes of the Land might in time be
conferred on the Church. So freely did men in those dayes dispose of their
temporall meanes to aduance the House of Prayer, and the Master of that house,
that they thought all which they possessed, to be too little to pleasure their
Ghostly Father. The Galatians would haue pulled out their eyes to haue done
Paul good. But now some are so farre from doing any good to their Ministers,
that they would [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=96) put out their
eyes, if they durst. Let any of the poore Ministers shew himselfe neuer so
vpright [...], zealous, painefull in his vocation, if his purse, grauity, and
precise carriage sure not with the Patr [...] humour roundly come off, hee
will sooner accept of a brutish Dunce, that scarce knowes the Canonicall
Scriptures from the Apocrypha, then of this Elect Seruant of God. Nor yet
perhaps will he dismisse him so clean, but at his departure and after, he will
besmeare his coat with the filthiest lees of oyle, & lay an aspersion on his
good name and fame, that he is a peevish Pu­rita [...]e, vnworthy of his
presentation. Thus do those Patrons, like the Ammonites, curtall the skirts of
Dauids Embassadours garments, playing the Barbers with their Beards, vntill
God sends his Nemesis, his three-stringed whip of Famine, the Pestilence, and
the Sword, to afflict them for their gree­dinesse.

The Poet Mantuan bewayled the state of the Ro­mish Clergy, that all things
belōging to the Church, were Simoniously exposed to sale, as at Mart or
Market; Venalia Romae Iura, sacerdotes, al­taria, &c. Lawes, Priest-hoods,
Masses, what you will, for money; For money giuen, all sinnes forgiuen, as the
Popes Pardoner proclaimes. From hence arose that prouerbe against a Simoniack
Pope, who had sold much Church-liuings.

Vendere iure potest, e [...]erat ille priùs.

By right he sels what he had bought before.

It is a farre greater fault to purchase a Bishoprick, then for a poore
Minister to buy a benefice. For the one doth it of an ambitious mind to beare
rule [[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=97) ouer
his brethren, I meane him that gets in by Sim [...] ­ny: and the other is
meerely compelled and driuen, as iron, by the Patrons heart of Adamant to giue
all the temporall meanes hee hath, and perhaps more then his owne, if his
credit serues him to borrow. The one might liue contentedly, without aspiring
to Lordly superiority, except he be called gratis, or deemed worthy of that
Reuerend place. But he that inioyes nothing after all his watch fulnes, study,
spen­ding his spirits, impayring his health, and wasting all his heritage, or
meanes in food, apparell, and bookes, after 20. 30. or 40. yeeres attendance,
but is enforced, poore man, vnfortunate man, to compound by some sinister
contract with him, which makes no conscience to see another periured, though
him­selfe thinke, that by a tricke of wit he may auoid it. I could willingly
pardon him, yea and reward him well for discou [...]ring the necessity of his
for­tunes, and the rauening pillage of the Patron. Vntill this cloud be
remoued, Faith, loue, and charity can­no [...] set [...]le in me [...]s h
[...]arts. What wr [...]ught the ruine of the Romish Church, but the Bishops
[...]iming vp to the highest place by the golden Ladder? About the y [...]re
605. he obtained the spirituall supr [...]y at the hands of the Tyrant Phoc
[...] and in the yeere 801, he got his Temporall power ouer all things that
may be called God. And the most part of these popes, which sithence haue beene
elated to that eminent seat, came in by indirect wayes, and for Money, as
Platina and other Papists haue obserued: so that if the succession of the
keyes were bequeathed to Rome, Simony hath made that place vacant aboue 800.
[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=97) yeeres
agoe: We doe therefore order and decree, that if any Clergy-man doe buy a
Bishoprick, hee shall lose it, and be vtterly banished out of our
Iurisdicti­on. If any Patron receiue the least gratuity of a Mi­nister, hee
shall for euer forfeit that Presentation to the Bishop. And now, for these
poore widdowe [...], wee adiudge that the Patrons shall restore such moneyes,
as their Husbands gaue for their Benehces, twice so much of currant English
money.

### 2.3. CHAP. 3.

Vpon a Bill of Complaint exhibited by Aeschines and [...]apinian, a [...]aiust
Rewards v [...]equally c [...]fer­re o [...] persons of meane desert and
escent, A­pollo pro [...]ounceth a pere [...]ptory Doo [...]ne.

AT the great Assembly held at Parnassus, on the fourth of  [...]une last 1626.
the [...]e was exhibited a Bill of Complaint by Aechine, Deane of the Lycea
Colledge at A [...]hens, & by Pa [...]in [...]an the famous Law­yer, Aduocate
to the Lady Thermis on the behalfe of the Students of the Empire of Greece,
That wheras Re­wards ought to be confe [...]red on the vertuous, which wore
out many nights in cares and thoughts, how they might increase Trade lately
decaied, how they might cut off superfluous suits of L [...]w, whereby
Cha­rity might heat mens hearts, as in the Golden Age, and Iustice flourish
without the least pollution now to their great grief they foūd many Offices
bestowed on one man, which might serue sundry more suf­ficient persons, and
which worke some of those of [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=98) the meanest
ranke, to sit in the supremest places, whilest that many generous Spirits of
Noble descent and of brauer flames, adorned with multiplicities of knowledge,
whom, as Scaliger wrote of Picus Miran­dula, the Muses themselues would
pronounce to be of that immortall race, adiudged from Heauen to passe for
great and wonderfull Sp [...]sits, whiles these lay con­temned, without any
preferment at all. For which cause they humbly begged at his Maiesties hands,
that some course might be taken, whereby Rewards should bee thenceforth
conferred more equally on men of good desert and of Noble descent. Apollo at
these ominous tidings, as it were with Commotion of mind, estranged some what
from that sweet com­position of gracious manners which he was wont to deliuer,
with a voice more fearefull then ordinary, sounded out these Verses following,
which argue, that his Maiesty tooke great indig [...]tion at the con­tents of
the Bill exhibited.

Why keepes one man three Offices alone,

Another yet deseruing more, hath none?

Eyther the Starres shoot out some crooked rayes,

On this low world, or Fortune on it playes.

Or else the Ayry Prince this busines guides:

For surely God more equally diuides.

More Offices then one, 'tis great pitty.

That any in Countrey hold or Citty.

One Charge, and yet I am no puritan,

Will serue one man, and that a carefull man.

Graces and Muses twelue in number are;

Which for their Troupes looke equally to share.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=98) A Prince
had need to marke, and well to know,

On whom he doth great Offices bestow.

In Horses race men looke into the Si [...]es.

Like Crow like Egge. The gracious Grace inspires.

Heere Apollo stopt, and about halfe a quarter of an houre after renewed his
speech in this manner:

Sith with the Parents seed their manners slow,

And in the Sonnes deriu'd by Birth doe grow,

Why doe some Lawyers prey on Labours hires,

This Lesson they haue conu'd from Clownish Sires.

Those Clowns their Sires, which hating Heauēl [...] right,

Them from their Birth defil'd with Earths delight.

Whereby their Sonnes so trained vp at first,

By natures kinde commit that act accurst.

Tis seldome seene, that one of Noble Race,

Peruerts Tribunall Seates by trickes so base.

Tis seldome seene that one of Noble bloud,

B trayes his King, or sels his Countries good.

If one among a thousand such you finde,

Some Treacher him se [...]uced of Clownish kind.

If any Lawyers play the Tyrants part,

Thundring out fines, to make the vertuous smart,

Or proue notorious for deceit and bribes,

They are descended of base Clownish Tribes.

Nothing more base then is the Ruling Clowne,

Not Antichrist for fraud can put him downe.

No change of manners, though he change his weed,

He what his father wore, doth neuer heed.

Whiles that such Moles in nought but Earth delight,

They snort in ease, and snatch at others right.

Nobles like Planets mo [...]e with noble thought.

A Royall Virgin forth our Sauiour brought.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=99) The
Commons should be ruled, the Nobles rule,

Lawes rule them both, as Bits the Horse and  [...]ule.

Peeres plac't in Office, by their peerelesse King,

Are iust, least blots they to their Honour bring.

The vulgar Sort fit for Mechanick Trade,

May helpe their country with the Plough and Spade.

### 2.4. CHAP. 4.

Hugh Broughton vpon some discontentment taken in seeing his inferiours
promoted to e [...] ine [...]t places be­fore himselfe, complaineth vnto
Apollo, that Florio, Deane of Thaliaes Chappell, prophaned the sacred name of
the Letany, by singing the same in­termixt with triuiall toyes.

Apollo causeth Florio to repeat his Letany.

HVgh Broughton, a very learned Diuine, and an admirable Linguist, specially in
the Hebrew and Chaldaick tongues, hauing for a long time awaited in Apolloes
Court for some place of preferment, and seeing many persons, whom he thought
to be farre beneath him in knowledge, or at least, that his penny was as good
siluer as theirs, exalted to promotion, grew about this time of the Moone
maruellously discontent; and chiefly for that Signior Florio, a new commer
into Parnassus, had beene lately promoted to be Deane of the Lady Thaliaes
Chappell, a place of honour more fit for a Cabalisticall Rabbine, as him­selfe
was, then for a Nouelist Italian; hee fumed, he fietted to see the world thus
runne on wheeles, veri­fying [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=99) those words of
Seneca, that there was neuer as yet any great wit, without som touch of madnes
o [...] folly. Hugh Broughton thus pe [...]plext, less his swoh [...]e
con­ceits, like the embotteled ane for want of vent, might burst their bodily
instruments, repayred o [...] the  [...]f teenth of May last 1626. vnto
Apollo, complayning that Fiorio, Deane of Thal [...]aes Chappell, had  [...]
is Princes Birth day sung a strange morall Letany, more agreeable to a
Sceltonical Dogrell Rimer, which shootes verses at  [...]andome, then to the
reuerend Pre­late of the Comicall Court. Which fault of  [...] he aggrauated,
by fetching the Genealogy of the word Letan, not onely from the Greeke s
[...]u [...]r [...]d Dialects of the Atti [...]kes, the Dorickes, the Ion
[...]kes, the Aeolickes and other exotick pronunciations, but also from the
misticall Thalmuds of the Iewes, wherein he surpasled most of the Phoebean
Academy; Apollo wōdred much a [...] this sar-fetcht Etymology, and sublimated
pedegree, and therefore willed Flo­rio to repeat in his presence that morall
Letany, which ministred such an occasion to this high-spi­rited Scholler, so
to traduce the memoriall of it with such curious aggrauations. Florio obeyed,
and with a mild-composed gesture reiterated his Letany.

FRom blaspheming of Gods name,

From recanting words with shame,

From Damnation eternall,

From a sicke Soule internall,

From a Sinner will not mend,

From a friend, that will not lend,

From all moderne abuses,

From much things to no vses,

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=100) From
Ignatians cursed swords,

From an Alchymists faire words,

From those Friers, which Cloakes vse,

As from such that haunt the Stewes,

From such Sins as doe delight vs,

As from dreames which doe affright vs,

From Parasites, that stroake vs,

From morsels, that will choake vs,

From false Sycophants, that sooth vs,

As from those in Sinne doe smooth vs,

From all profane Discourses,

From all vngodly Courses,

Sweet Angell free, deliuer me.

From Craggy hils and mountaines,

From mire and muddy Fountaines,

From touching Toades and Spiders,

From Shooters hill ranke Riders,

From th' Exchequer Promooters,

From prying Spies and Tooters,

From Baylifes & Informers,

That faigne to be Reformers,

Frō Cutthroat City Catchpoles,

That care not how they vexe soules,

From Bridewell and from Newgate,

From deare wit, that's bought too late,

From the Law of Halifaxe,

From the loane of the Tower axe,

From fraies & causelesse battell,

From murren in our Cattell,

From one thats euer prating,

From Entortion & grating,

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=100) From S
[...]Nicholas Clarkes at night,

From such crue, as shun the light,

Sweet Angel free, deliuer me.

From flowtes, which friendship sunder,

From Lightning, Stormes, and thunder,

From Nouelists coind rumours,

From all Phantasticke humours,

From such scolds as bite and scratch,

From a causelesse masticke patch,

From all such as purses cut,

From a filthy durty slut,

From an old man luxurious,

From a yong man litigious,

From a riggish wanton Trul,

That her Louer seekes to gull,

From Setters, Canters, Cheaters,

No better then men-eaters,

From an ill name and bad fame,

From much need and open shame,

From stolne Goods receauers,

From closesly Deceauers,

From a wanton that will rig,

And delight to daunce a lig,

Sweet Angell free, deliuer me.

From a Priest that will mumble,

From a Nuune that will iumble,

From rude Knaues that Mai [...]s tumble,

From Cattes and Rattes, which rumble,

From seruants, that will grumble,

From a Iade, that will stumble,

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=101) From
Drunkennes and Lechery,

From scarcity and Penury,

From excesse of meat as drinke,

From Tobaccoes no [...]some s [...]nke,

From opinions of Doctors,

From busines with Proctors,

From conuersing with wranglers,

From the patience of Anglers,

From Lawyers visitation,

From waste and desolation,

From one that delights in Law,

From a Lions bloudy claw,

From bawdy Court [...] Citations,

From Excommunications,

From a State full of factions,

From all vngodly Actions,

Sweet Angell free deliuer me.

From all hard-hearted Masters,

Which vse not words, but wasier,

From a new O [...]st, proud and poore:

From a stale and gracelesse whore,

From bold Bayards downe right blowes,

From sly pe [...]kings of night-crowes,

From Musicians Phantasticke,

From Tradesmen growne scholasticke,

From any Bonds to marchants,

From acquaintance with Serieants,

From the mercy of [...]aylors,

From the long Bils of Taylors,

From Bankrouts too latewishes,

From all vnwholsome dishes,

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=101) From
conuersation with Clownes,

Which wil sel both Verbes & Nownes,

From a Castellian drugger,

That poyson sels for Suger,

From the Sicilian vesper,

From bits more hard then I [...]sper,

Sweet Angell free deliuer me.

From men with Murthe [...] tainted,

From women which are painted,

From all far fetcht New fangles,

From him that euer wrangles,

From euery [...]arlot-mo [...]ger,

From heat, cold, thirst and hunger,

From a rough-handed Barber,

As from an Irish Caruer,

From o [...]e that is brow branded,

From him that is left handed,

From a feast without some wine,

B [...] to Supper or to dine,

From drinking much cold water,

From a coozening false Cater,

From po [...]dred Beefe sans mustard,

From a thin and s [...]wre Custard,

From rotten Chee [...]e and addle Eggs,

From broken Shins and gowty Legs,

From a decrepit Capon,

From stinking fish and Bacon,

From stale and filthy Sturgeon,

A [...] from a foolish Surgeon,

From a Pudding hath no end,

From a Bow that will not bend,

Sweet Angell free, deliuer me.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=102)

From straggling on a strange heath,

Which once had neere wrought my death,

From bribing and vile Trafficke,

From Monsters bred in Affrik,

From daily Contributions,

From partiall distributions,

From a Cooke that is a slut.

From a knife, that will not cut,

From a short-heeld skittish wife,

Worse then any Cut-purse knife,

From men too rash and testy,

As from wild Iades or resty,

From Essex stiles, and Norfolke wiles,

From Yorke miles & theeues night files,

From Shopmen that will palter,

As Knaues deserue a halter,

From a bribing Consiable,

From the winds of Dunstable,

From a young Iustice of Peace,

That from prating doth not cease.

From his Fellow that ne're speakes

A wise word, but Currat Lex,

Sweet Angell free, deliuer me.

From men cleane voyd of Reason,

From dishes out of season,

From men too nice and curious,

From men too rash & furious,

From Courtiers honey-spoken,

From Marchants that be broken,

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=102) From
Chanceries Iniunctions,

From dearely bought Presumptions,

From any rash Intrusions,

From purchased Pollutions,

From strong Beere and heady Ale,

From a long and tedious Tale,

From a Sophistick Bruer,

Then whom the Diuell is truer,

From anguish, griefe, and sorrow,

From any need to borrow,

From the Counter or the Fleet,

From doing Penance in a sheet,

From all straight and pinching shooes,

From all Cornes on Feet or Toes,

From a light and Pennilesse Purse,

As from a sore and dismall Curse,

From Suites by Friends procurmēts,

From all the worlds allurements,

Sweet Angell free, deliuer me.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=103)

### 2.5. CHAP. 5.

Apollo, after som shew of distaste against Florio, for his new morall Letany,
at the last giues him leaue to defend it.

Florio in a briefe Oration declares the reasons, why hee inuented such a
strange forme of Letany.

Apollo pronounceth his Censure.

APollo hauing heard this kind of Letany, more for the appeasing of Hugh
Broughtons precisi­an humour, then for any dislike, which his wisedome found
in it, seemed to frowne at Florio, for vttering in such a forme and vnusuall
tune the sacred Letany. Florio doubting lest his Maiesty had in good ear­nest
controuled his merry-conceited Letany, which as a new Liturgy he deuised of
purpose to insinuate himselfe into the good grace of his Princesse, whom he
knew was naturally affected with mirth and iolli­ty, desired of Apollo, that
he might speake what hee could in his defence. His Maiesty gaue him leaue. And
presently without further premeditation, Florio made this Apology: It is not
vnknowne, most il­lustrious Prince, both to your matchlesse prudence, and to
all discreet Politicks, that a new broome sweepes cleane, that euery Seruant
at his first entertainement into a great Ladies Court, must sute his
affections to hers, as neere as possibly he can with conueniency, and study by
all meanes of solace to giue her con­tent [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=103) in some degree
or other. To this end I inuented this new Letany, knowing that my gracious
Mi­stresse liked pleasant raptures, better then the graue and austere rules of
the Stoicks. As for the pro [...]a [...]ing of the name of Letany, while vnder
the shadow thereof I couch matters of some moment, I hope, it redounds not so
preiudicially infamous to your ver­tuous Court, as for a Papist to be called a
Catholicke, or for a smatterer in Logick, to be termed a Sophi­ster, or for a
peeuish Diuine, to be stiled a Puritane. If my Letany be throughly scanned,
vnder that title M [...]. Broughton shall meet with as much substance to
edifie the common sort of people, as with his Hebrew Genealogies to enrich the
learned. It is not a Cowle or hood which makes a Monke: Cucullus non facit
Monachum. nor is it a shauen or bald Crown which makes a Priest: for a man may
lose his haire with the Poxe, or for want of radicall moisture in that part of
the head, as chanced to the Poet Aeschylus, on whose bald pate an high soaring
Eagle did let fall a shel­fish, with intent to breake it, as on a stone. Nor
doth along beard make a man aiudicious Socrates.

bar batum hoc crede Magistrum

Dicere, sorbitio quem tollit dira Cicutae.

Pers. Sat. 4.

whom a forc't draught of Hemblocks iuyce did kill.

We see the Goat stalking with a long beard. Yet who will take him for a
religious beast, that climbes vp to the Altar, and feedes on the sacred
flowers?

Barbatus, li  [...] Caper, tamen esse negamus

Hunc recta et purâ Relligione pecus.

It is not the ba [...]e outside, the vsurping of a naked [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=104) name, which can
disgrace an honest Action. If vnder the name of Letany, I haue alluded to any
lewd passage, whereby youth may be corrupted, or the state of Parnassus
defamed, I appeale to Caesar, to your Maiesties iudgement.

Apollo, after that Florio had thus defended his cause, yeelded his censure in
these few words: Whosoeuer goes about to depriue men of all kinde of pleasure,
seekes to depriue them of freedome and of a cheerefull nature, which God
preferres before a sullen crabbed mind, as was that of Cains. Beeing tempred,
it consorts well in an ingenuous Scholler. For thereby hee shall auoid the
name of a laughing Democritus, with his tickling spleene, and also of a
weeping Heraclitus, with his melancholy passion. The title of Letany,
derogates not frō grauity, while it tends not to base scurrility, but rather
to a vertu­ous morality. There is a time to teach, to exhort, and there is a
time to fling stones against the wind.

There is a time of earnest things to write,

A time to talke of matters small & light,

A time to walk, to run, to ride, or praunce,

A time to sit and laugh, or lead a Daunce.

There is a time for men to fast and pray,

And so a time to sing like Birds in May.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=104)

### 2.6. CHAP. 6.

Apollo asketh the Author of the Golden Fleece, wherefore his Countreymen of
Wales, hauing the commodiousnesse of the Sea with a large scope of land, are
notwithstanding very much impouerished of late.

The Author imputes the cause vnto the multitude of Law Suites.

Vpon Thursday in the Easter weeke 1626 while the rest of his Maiesties
Subiects of Great Brittaine consulted how they might repaire the decay of
Trade, lately hapned by Prodigality, Ex­cesse of Aparrell, Tobacco, and other
enormities in this Iland fostred and cherished, besides our losses a broad by
the M [...]rish Pirates, and now of late by the Dunkirkes, it was my good
fortune to be present at Apolloes Court in Parnassus: Where likewise his
Imperiall Maiesty sate in Councell, about the same af­faires, because there
might bee a perpetuall corre­spondency betwixt his diuine Court & our humane
actions.

As soone as Apollo saw Orpheus Iunior, it plea­sed him to demaund of him the
resolution of  [...] Questions, which he presently proposed. Whereof the
former was, wherefore his natiue Cou [...] [...] [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=105) Wales being a
Peninsula, almost an Iland, compassed about with the Sea, in forme of an
horse-shoo, like little Brittaine in France, from the riuer Dee and Chester,
round about to Glocester, hauing aboue 100. Riuers running out into the Sea,
beside Seuerne, and Dee: yet for all this large Tract & commodiousnesse, they
had not ten Ships; whereas Deuo [...]shire alone our neighbour vpon Seuerne,
not contayning the tenth part of land, flourished with 150. ships. The other
Question was, wherefore their enclosed lands, as also their mountaines and
Commons lay desolate, not halfe stockt, and their Corne fields in most places
so bare of Corne, that a stranger would thinke, eyther that the earth produced
such graine naturally wild, or else that the Locusts of Aethiopia had wasted
and harried the same?

Vnto these demands hee craued an houres respit to answer. At the end whereof
he returned his reso­lutions in this wise: I could haue wisht that these
Questions had been askt of some iudicious Gentle­men of these parts, whom p
[...]tly by familiar ac­quaintance, and partly by fame, I know to be far
bet­ter experienced; and consequently more sufficient to yeeld your Highnesse
satisfaction in these demands of import. But seeing (most vertuous Emperour)
the Fates, that is, your incuitable pleasure, allotted this charge vnto my
weake capacity, I will not spare to display the causes, according to that
measure and ta­lēt which God hath giuē me. In the entrance where­of, a Story
comes into my mind, out of an old Spanish Booke printed at Salamanca, aboue
one hundred thirty yeeres past, entituled, The causes of the pouerty of Spain,
[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=105)
dedicated to F [...]rdinand [...] and Isabella, before the con­quest of
Granata, and the discouery of the West In­dies by Columbus. Among other
reasons the Author imputes the breeding of Asses, and the vse of barren Mules,
in stead of B [...]ls and Oxen, to be the prime and waightiest cause of their
necessities. For whereas in Hercules time the goodliest Kine of the world were
found with Gerion and Cacus in that Countrey, since the rearing of those
vnprofitable Beasts, and the Golden Mines of Bebellio in the P [...]renean
Moun­taines, and the graines of Gold in Tagus Sands were exhaust [...]d dry,
Spaine became the most miserable Region of Europe.

Now, my Countrey of Wales appeares, in my iudgement, to haue some resemblance
with Spaine, as it stood in those dayes, being like vnto it for si­tuat
[...]n, and the vneuen  [...]esse of ground, vp hill, and downe hill; yet
enriched with faire vallies, and a boue all, with the benefit of the Sea, as
your Maiesty hath well obserued.

But our grieuance is, that in stead of plentifull droues of Cattell, which
heretofore serued vs, as­well for our sustentation, as to supply our
necessi­ties abroad, wee haue studied that fabulous Booke of Ouids
Metamorphosis so much, that our stocke is decayed, and now-a dayes we reare vp
two-leg­ged Asses, which doe nothing but wrangle in Law the one with the
other.

By this meanes wee consume our precious time not to bee redeemed.

By this vngracious brood wee become so impo­uerished, that our Neighbours of
Deuo [...]shire, not­withstanding [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=106) our large
Circuit of the Sea, and our infinite extent of land, goe farre beyond vs in
ship­ping and necessary Trading.

Apollo informed of this heynous abuse, replied, No man proues vnfortunate, but
by his owne pro­curement.

In whom lies this fault, but in your selues?

Who can redresse this grosse absurdity better then your owne selues?

Pardon mee, most Noble Prince, said Orpheus Iu­nior.

It consists not in our powers to withstand what Heauen hath decreed, as a
punishment for our An­cest ours sinnes and ours.

The meanes for our Education, are farre short in espect of the wise English
Nation.

In times of Superstition, most of our Church­liuings, by our too much
simplicity became a pr [...]y to Religious houses.

Which being dissolued in King Henry the Eights dayes, and by Act of Parliament
confiscate to the Crowne as Impropriations, our Curates stand, as be­fore, but
reasonably prouided for, not able scarce to haue Whay to themselues, much
lesse to feed their weanelings with milke, as Saint Paul ad­uiseth.

I know many Parishes, whereof the Tithes of euery one amount to two hundred
pound a yere, and yet the poore Ministers receiue not ten pounds a piece, yea,
and some of them but twenty nobles: out of which they pay Tenths, Subsidies,
and o­ther impositions.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=106) So that
for want of maintenance both Shep­heards and Flockes doe oftentimes miscarrie;
and wee two-legged Asses can hardly recouer true hu­mane shapes. Nor is this
the onely cause of our Pouertie. We are subiect to more inconueniences then
the English Nation; for we stand in feare (and our feares are not in vaine)
continually without in­termission to be sued at the Courts of Westminster, at
the Counsell of the Marches, at the Spirituall Courts at home and in London,
notwithstanding that wee haue the Courts of Assize of double the terme, then
they haue in England, besides our Quarterly Sessions of the Peace, our Countie
and Stewards Courts. Nor yet haue I ended all the af­flictions of poore Wales.
Within these two and twentie yeeres, the number of Clerkes and Solli­citours,
at the Counsell of the Marches, haue encrea­sed so exorbitantly, if not
prodigiously, that where­as I knew not aboue one or two of these Clerkes in a
Shire, now I can point at a doozen and more in most Shires, whereof many of
them haue three or foure Foot-posts, which they call Cursitors be­longing vnto
euery of them, whose Office is con­tinually to runne for Processes: insomuch
that one of these Clerkes sent for a hundred and fortie Pro­cesses, against
one of their times called the Appea­rance, for they sit ofner then
Westminster, the most part of them for matter not appertaining to the
Iu­risdiction of that Court. I haue knowne men sued for a shilling and vnder,
to that remote place. I will speake all I know: for the reuerence I beare to
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=107)
Authoritie, and to the Seate of Iustice, which ought to be sacred. But I could
wish all Courts to liue within their Precincts, and not to goe one inch from
their Instructions; to take away the occasions of debate, and not as our late
King Iames of blessed memory noted, to seeke more moulture to their Mill, then
of right belongs. In former times they neuer vsed to direct binding Processes,
but against Fugitiues. They neuer sent Pursuiuants nor Ser­ieants at Armes in
matters of Debt betwixt Partie and Party, but onely in Criminall and high
natu­red Causes, where the King was immediately in­teressed. They seldome vsed
to fine the Plaintiffe for charitable yeelding to an attonement at home, or if
they did, it was but small in the nature of a mild amercement. They endeuoured
by all meanes to establish Loue and Charity among Neighbours, and were glad to
heare those good newes of their Conuersions, though their Gaine came in the
lesse. They often vsed to repeate that Prouerbe of Salo­mon, euen at their
meales: Better it is to sup a messe of Pottage with quietnesse of minde, then
to haue a whole Oxe with strife. They trembled and made a conscience to take
money of any fellow Christian, though due vnto them for sentence or verdict,
if the same came like so many drops of life-bloud from his heart. They cared
more for the Defendant, then for the Plaintiffe, vnlesse the Cause were too
abho­minable.

Why then I see, said Apollo, if some of your Courts were abolished, you might
quickly grow [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=107) wealthy both by
Sea and Land. For if the Occa­sions of Suites were taken away, men would
follow their Husbandry diligently at home, fall to enclo­sures, plant
Orchards, marle their Lands, and not scratch the Earth with weake Heyfers or
Steeres. They might then keepe strong Oxen to plough withall, which now they
are enforced to sell for their Lawiers vse. The Sea might be aswell
frequen­ted by you, as by the Deuonshire men. Surely, if the Noble King of
great Britaine would release you from the Courts of London, or else discharge
the Court in the Marches, I see no reason but you might fall to industrious
courses, aswell as others. Dcuon­shire and Cornwall are a great deale further
from London, then the remotest Part of Wales and their Termes of Assizes
shorter by halfe then yours. And yet they liue in good securitie one Neighbour
with the other, and doe all ioyne in honest Trading both at home and in the
Newfoundland, augmenting their fortunes, and breeding store of Mariners and
ship­ping. Your Court at the Marches was first instituted to suppresse
rebellious Attempts, and Traitours, specially Owen Glyndowrdie, who was so
called for taking part with King Richard the Second. But now, me thinkes, it
might very well be spared, see­ing that those stormes bee long sithence, by
King Henry the Seuenth, comming to the English Crowne quite vanished, and that
now-adayes a man may trauell in Wales, as safely as in any other Part of the
Kingdome. The consideration of the Premisses we doe neuerthelesse referre to
your Prudent and gene­rous [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=108) King. And I
belieue, there is neuer a poore man worth fortie shillings but will contribute
som­what with all his heart towards the Wars, or for a gratefull Beneuolence
to his Prince, to be acquited of some of these Courts. For indeed I heard that
a Knight of Staffordshire, who dwelt but three miles distant from the
Iurisdiction of the Marches, should say, that he would not for a 1000. Markes
his house had stood those three miles further towards Wales, by reason of
those troubles which they were sub­iect vnto more then his Countrey.

### 2.7. CHAP. VII.

Orpheus Iunior exhibits a Petition vnto Apollo to diminish the number of
Lawyers, and to punish their offences.

Apolloes Answere, shewing how they may be restrai­ned and punished.

ORpheus Iunior vnderstanding that Apollo bur­ned with Zeale and Charitie, to
reforme the superfluiries of Law-suits, which were not the least causes of the
Decay of Trades in great Brittaine, and fearing that in time to come, their
sufferance and continuance might yet worke a greater impedi­ment to his
Proiect of the Golden Fleece, which with infinite care, paines, and some
charge he hath for many yeeres managed, and almost now brought to perfection,
vpon the abouesaid Thursday in the [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=108) after-noone, he
exhibited this Petition vnto his Ma­iestie, as he came out of the Delphick
garden. The contents as follow.

Magnus honos extra pacem componere, maior

Discordes animos conciliare domi.

Erga viciuos Amor incipit. Ard [...]a quaero,

Eripe  [...]os odijs viscera chara Dei.

Membra licet collisa sumus: Rex vniat aequus,

Subdola si studeat subdere bella Fori.

Rabula Bella mouet plusquam Cinilia Legum

Pratextu: liber nullus, Auarus eget.

Tis honour great abroad to settle peace,

But greater farre our countries broyles t'appease.

Towards the Next true Loue must first begin.

High things I begge. From iars defend Gods Kin.

Though mangled we, you may vnite vs all,

If you reforme the subtill pleading Hall.

The Lawyer maskt with Law on vs doth feed.

Few men escape. The Niggard stands in need.

Apollo after he had perused the Petition, deliuered it to Doctor Haddon one of
the Masters of Requests, charging him to remember the redeliuery thereof vnto
him backe at the first sitting of the next Court, which was about two dayes
after. At the time and place limited, Doctor Haddon fayled not to restore the
Petition to his Maiestie, who instantly made a full demonstration of the
effects, that it was high time to bridle the insolencies of those fellowes,
which studied more to driue the Holy Ghost with [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=109) his Heauenly
Gifts, of Loue, Charitie, and Humi­litie out of their owne and Neigbours
hearts, then to informe their Clients of the truth of their cause. First,
therefore he enacted, that euery man should lay downe his matter in the
briefest manner. Se­condly, that no Aduocate should defend a wrong­full Cause.
Thirdly, that the Aduocate must pay his Client all his money backe againe with
arbitra­rie dammage by Apolloes prescription, if the Cause by his Counsell
went forwards, and afterwards chanced to be ordred against him. Fourthly, that
no Attourney nor Aduocate must delay or lose the benefit of one houre in
aduancing to a hearing their Clients Suite. Fiftly, that the Iudges, as in
Den­marke, follow the Reports and Iudgements for­merly put downe in Bookes,
without adding or al­tering any new Opinions out of their own, though more
solid, heads. Sixtly, that no man presume to become a Iudge in the
Newfoundland, which euer receiued a Bribe; or which tooke a Fee within the
space of seuen yeeres, before he enter there; for that Countrey being as yet
pure, wee will suffer no im­pure hands to touch her, nor impure lips to Court
her. Seuenthly, that whosoeuer takes a Bribe in the Newfoundland directly or
indirectly, or tolerates with any Gehezi to receiue it, hee shalbe conuicted
of Rape, for polluting that blessed Nymph, with a­dulterous iniustice, & to be
punished more Maiorum, as the Senate of Rome had adiudged Nero; or to be vsed
as a Blasphemer against Saint Marke at Venice. Eightly, That no Lawyer nor
Officer should exact [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=109) more fees, then
were appointed in those Tables, which hee caused to be publickly engrauen and
set forth vpon paine to forfeit his Eares.

After the promulging of these Ordinances, which his Maiestie willed to be
engrauen on Cedar-boords, and to bee inuiolably obserued like the Lawes of the
Medes and Persians; for the further rooting out of Extortions, Bribes, and
Exactions of Lawyers, Apollo with a loud voice, which made all the Earth to
tremble, pronounced this Oracle:

Crimina non potuit Rex extirpare Iohannes

Strata Lutherana quae modò cernis ope.

Et Coelum Pelagus (que) suo discrimine distant:

Vt variant mundi Climata Tempus crit;

Cum Themidos pariles noua Constellatio libras

Reddet, &, vt Daniae, singula nota libris.

Arcanam proprio Cabalam nec pectore seruent

Vt semel optasti, Diue Iacobe, tuis.

Iuridicus peccans non coram Iudice Sectae

Eiusdem poenas supplicium (que) luat.

Nobilis, aut gratis conuincat Episcopus illum

Pro repetundarum crimine, Fraude, mora.

Altervtras Partes non Conciliarius audax

Fulmine fucato, seu reticendo iuuet.

Dic mihi, quid differt multos tolerare Tyrannos,

Radere Caufidicos aut aliena pati?

His domit is: Martis Seruorum millia multa

Sustineas Auro, quod modò praeda Midis.

King Iohn his Crowne did to the Pope expose,

Which, as you saw, poore Luther durst oppose.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=110) Both
Skie [...] and Seas with sundry motions rage;

Yet now is come Astreaes Golden Age.

A King of Denmarks Bloud Lawes out of ioyns,

As there in written Bookes here shall appoint.

None then shal wrest, as would K. Iames ordaine,

A secret Law hatcht in one Lawyers braine.

If he offend for Bribes, Fraud, or Delay,

Twere fit that Noblemen or Bishops may

Iudge him, where he shal not preuaile with gold,

With Friendship, quirks, Demurres, nor facing

What differs it to see a Tyrant rule?

Or a rau [...]nous Iudge riding on his Mule?

A King may keepe his daring Foes in awe,

With lesser charge then men doe spend in Law.

### 2.8. CHAP. VIII.

Bartolus and Plowden, by the instigation of the Ie­suiticall Faction, doe
appeach Orpheus Iunior be­fore Apollo, for certaine Offences supposed to bee
committed by him.

LOng did Robert Parsons, Father Cotton, Cardi­nall Bellarmine, and others of
the turbulent Ig­natian Sect consult together, how they might bee reuenged on
Orpheus Iunior, for his discouery of Mariana, and the publike shame, which all
their Societie had incurred euer since their restraint, after the said
Marianes conuiction. But finding, that Orpheus had smelt out their drift, and
for that cause [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=110) kept himselfe
continually at the Wel head, neere to his Maiesties Court, and commonly in
Court, they deferred the shooting of their enuenomed arrowes at a person of
that eminencie, whom not onely A­pollo graced with more then ordinary fauours
and familiaritie for frequenting the sacred Cloysters of the Muses, but
likewise all the Noble Spirits of Par­nassus, loued and respected him for his
care, paines, and charge in aduancing forwards the Golden Fleece, and the
Plantation of the New found Ile. But at last these Hamans sate in Counsell,
and deuised together, how they might cunningly wound the honour of this
carefull Mardocheus, who had dis­couered the treacheries, falshoods and
knauish trickes of many persons, who had sometimes liued gloriously in
Parnassus; as the other Mardocheus had reuealed to the Persian King, the
Treasons of his Seruants. They wonne Bartolus and Plowden, two notable
Lawyers, who were also grieuously offen­ded for the Petition he preferred
against the multi­plicities of Suites to take their parts, and by some
scandalous surmises to lay an ambush for the sur­prizal of his rising Fame.
For the intrapping where­of they heaped together Articles of sundry natures,
which going currant this day, they would them­selues condemne the next day.
Neuerthelesse, being egged on by the Iesuites, they tooke heart at grasse, and
at length with two tedious Orations more bit­ter and violent then the
Phillipica, which Cic [...]ro fra­med against Marcus Anthonius, they inueighed
in their Preambles, most sharply and Satyrically a­gainst [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=111) Orphens Iuniors
Booke, called Cambrensium Caroleia, saying, that hee had openly discouered
with Cham Noahs nakednesse, hee had polluted his fathers ashes, and ragingly
snatcht at Iupiters golden Beard in disclosing the mysticall secrets. Of the
Cabalisticall Science, whereon as the Mercurian Grinder, the wits of many
Proficients in the Lawes, were so finely whe [...]ed, that some would gaine
whole Manours with a shrill whyning voice, yea, and they held one another a
begger, vnlesse a Kite could  [...]lie about their Purchases in one day.
Others with a Stertorean roaring throat vsed to astonish the Auditours, as if
Thunder had come out of the Cloudes sodainly to destroy them. The Report of
which noyse, like a Canon or Basilic [...] did so terrifie some faint-hearted
Meacocks, that they fled out of the Countrie into the Iles of Creete, Lesbos,
and the Rhodes, perpetually abandoning all their Right, Title, and interest in
such Lands hereditarie, or pur­chased, which they had or might haue in time to
come within the Territories of Parnassus, & quite clayming the same vnto those
terrible Roaters. So powerfull, said they, was the red clapper, before these
Mysteries were made manifest by this Cam­br [...]-Britaine, like Greene the
Detectour of Coni­catching, that a Lawyers Tongue could doe many feats, trot,
or amble, gallop or halt, saue or slay, chide or charme, with more prettie and
proper con­ditions then the Sorcerers of Aegypt could vaunt in the presence of
Pharaoh. The Delphicke Sword, which did cut, file, saw, and shaue, came not
neere [[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=111) in
operation to this pleading member, which all the vertuous applauded, Orpheus
excepted; and must stil domineere it in the World, as long as the e [...]
­mity shal last betwixt the womans seed & the Serpent.

They further alledged, that this Authour of the Golden Fleece had vsurped the
name of Orphens Iu­nior, which he ought not to haue done, vnlesse hee could
draw life out of the Rockes, and by melo­dious straines enduce the greatest
Oake in this Kingdome to dance the Canaries.

Likwise, they found fault with him for disswading men from going to law, like
an Anabaptist, for spea­king against their Profit, for seeking to lessen their
numbers, and to debarre them, like Charles the Fift, from dwelling in the West
Indies, and conse­quently, in the Newfoundland, where they hoped one day to
get a good bootie among the simple Fi­shermen, if the Monyed Queene chanced
hereafter to withdraw the sweet influence of her Countenance from them in this
flourishing Kingdome.

Finally, they charged him particularly with these Verses by him published in
his said Booke, tending to discourage men from spending their meanes in Law;
so that this Corporation might put vp their pipes, and in time fall into
disgrace to the great scandall of the Lady Themis, their Soueraigne; if such a
Toy should take men in the heads to liue at home quietly, and not to pay their
quarterly rents. No peny, no Pater noster, was the Song of some Di­uines
heretofore. But for Lawyers rents, it was ne­uer questioned since Demosthenes
his time till now. [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=112) Therefore as a
Libeller against the sacred persons of Lawyers they desired Apollo to censure
him, which presumed to set out these vnluckie Verses:

Fulmina Iuris huic, Fauor illi, casus at idem:

Explicitus (que) rigor, implicitus (que) d [...]lus.

Omnes venantur questum qui lura sequuntur

Nummus vbi tinnit, candida lura silent.

Spem tibi vox nutrit, Mens dāna. Colūba fit Aspis,

Mel Fel. Conueniunt quam malè Lis & Amor!

One's thunder strooke, Another's grac't amaine.

The cause the same. Such is the force of Gaine.

Without deare coine, the Lawyer sayes but mum:

Yet when it sounds, the lawes thēselues are dūbe.

The tongue vowes hope, his mind losse. Doues turn'd Aspes.

Sweet hony gall. How ill Loue Hatred claspes!

### 2.9. CHAP. IX.

Apollo commands Orpheus Iunior to answere the Accusation of Bartolus and
Plowden, who obey­ing extolleth Charitie, taxeth Conicatching and Hatred, and
commends the Lawes.

Apollo smiled to see the impudencie of these Law­yers, yet not to seeme
partiall in his Seruants cause, he commanded Orpheus to defend himselfe, who
thus began.

BRight Light of Loue, which knowest the Origi­nals,

And Principles of Supernaturals,

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=112) Which
measur'st Globes, & the 7. wādring Spheares,

Inspire my heart. Let not subrustick Feares,

Nor bashfulnesse of Virgins crimson hew

Astonish me from speaking what is true;

But that with free and lofty voice I sound

Sweet Peace, which may strife, and not Lawes, con­found.

Doues build in holes of Rockes: but thou, my Doue,

In holes of bloudied Rocke must build thy Loue.

My Soule, like to a Doue with siluer wings,

Flies to Christ's wounds for feare of Vipers stings.

He is my Rocke, my Sauiour, and Defence,

While I stand cloth'd in Robes of innocence.

Hee knowes my aime is faire, jarres to sub due

And Charitie in Lawyers to renew.

Some thinke it a hard taske, impossible;

But vnto God all things are possible.

Others subiect mens fraile intelligence,

And Reformations to Starres Influence:

As though Errours waite on Reuolutions,

Bald times pleasure, or Constellations.

First, let thē learne; although the Suns cleere beames

With his pale Sister, Lady of the streames,

Doe rule the World, and worke in Trees and Flowers,

Yet can they not controule Diuiner Powers,

Such as our Spirits be, nor yet our wits,

Which Policie refines with sacred Writs.

Who can deny, but Craft's the cause of Euill?

As Truth will shame Promooters and the Deuill?

As Vnicie and Iustice I adore,

So these turn'd topsie turuy I deplore.

Of Old it was not so. Then, no Surmizes

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=113) Could
wrest Lawes, nor Pleas m [...]k [...] in disguises.

Few Sentences then serued to vnfold

Great matters. Then they pleaded not for Gold;

But eu'ry man in person to the Iudge,

As vnto God, his Case shew'd without grudge.

This made them quiet, and stor'd with Treasure,

Where we spend, attending Misers leasure.

We spend our Thrift, our Braines, and precious times

By lewd mens counsels fild with heynous crimes

In needlesse Suits, whom they hold for Clients,

Or Tenants, like greedy Leaches Patients.

Through thicke and thinne vp to the eares and chin,

They make vs drudge to bring them mony in.

But what's the end? Their Heires do seldom thriue.

Although in Pomps their aged Starlings liue,

And sucking Pidgeons bloud turne Cormorants:

Yet neuer Apes will grow to Elephants;

Nor will God suffer an Impostors Race

To flourish long, nor wisdome, to embrace.

Some Nations He plagues for their Drunkennesse

With bloudy warres; some for their Beastlinesse

With Famine of his Word. But vs He smites

By letting double Tongues, vse base despites.

Then friske like Foxes brisk, and fqueak like Rats;

Or barke like Curres, or caterwaule like Cats.

Feare no thornes, lift vp your hornes; each Brother,

Like juggling Gypsies, deceiue another.

This man rake, him to the stake; hold your owne.

Cheat kindly, my Maisters; There's Gold in Towne.

By Hook or by Crook, by Right or by Wrong

Cramme Purses with Curses. O dismall Song!

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=113) All's
Fish that comes to Net in Sea or Brooke.

No surer angling then the Golden Hooke.

Glad is false Iudas of his siluer pouch;

Glad is fond Midas of his golden Touch,

As Whales doe play vpon the lesser Fish,

Till Harping-irons spoyle their latest wish;

So These wound Christ againe through Neighbours sides,

Till Earth denoures her due, their hideous hides.

O curuae in terras Animae Coelestium inanes!

O stooping Soules to Earthly trumperies,

And quite deuoid of Heauenly Mysteries!

Shall I sleepe on both eares, as the Prouerbe saith, while these indignities
range abroad vnpunished, or conniued at among the learned Societie of
Par­nassus? No, mighty Monarch, I feele an inward mo­tion in my Soule pricking
me, like a spurre, to run as at a deified Deuill, against the defied foes of
Cha­ritie; And now the rather, being heere enforced in your Maiesties Court of
Parliament, the transcen­dent Light of all worldly Actions. Take away the
chaine of Charitie, take away the Communion of Saints established on the
eternall vnion of the Sonne of God, who left vs at his departure this last
Com­mandent: Loue one another. And doe we loue one another, if we liue in
hatred, and watch opportunitie to hurt the members of Christ? Decretum pro­fer
Apollo. I appeale to this high Tribunall. How can we say, that God is in vs,
if our Soules and Bo­dies bee not his Temple? The Ground-worke of [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=114) this Temple is
Faith, as Saint Paul writes, Faith is the ground of things hoped for. The
walles are the Gifts of Hope, without which, wee of all men were most
miserable. And what is the perfection of the Heb. cap. 11. 1. Cor. cap. 15.
Roofe, which couers this Temple, but Charitie? This is the fruit of all our
Actions both immanent and transient. This brightsome vertue extends to God and
man, to Heauen and Earth. It lifts it selfe vp to God, as the prime Mouer of
our wils, to the Angels, as our Guardians, and to the triumphant Saints for
their participation and spirituall fellow­ship with our Soules in the
harmonious concent and agreement of Holy Workes, expecting our hu­mane minds,
to ioyne with them in their vniuersall Alleluiahs without iarres, discord, or
disproportio­ned tunes. O Angelicall Concord, which requirest this
Contemplation and Practice of all such, which are predestinated to be saued! O
the depth of Gods scope, which exacteth this obedience of the true Catholike
Church, to loue our Neigbours, as wee would haue him to loue vs, to doe euill
to no man, to wish well to all the World, like vnto the Sunne, which not onely
casts his beames vpon all, but re­fresheth the very earth, which beareth
weeds!

In what a miserable case then stand those Law­yers, which polish their wits,
and with hired tongues goe about to defeat O [...]phans, Widowes, and other
innocents, by desending wrong-doers? Cursed be yee, which speake good of
euill, and euill of Esay cap. 5. good, saith the Prophet. Which likewise the
Wise­man testified: He that iustifieth the wicked, and he Prou. cap. 17.
[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=114) that
condemneth the Iust, they both are abhominable vnto God. What auailes it a man
to gather wealth for a small time, when hee knowes hee must leaue them behind
him and answere for euery idle word and sentence, which he produced to
disgrace or hin­der his Neighbour, whom he was bound to tender and loue as
himselfe? What profit shal he get by his golden fees, when Death dogges him at
the heeles? When his pulses shall faintly beat, his senses faile, and his eye-
lids shut, neuer more to open, vntill they see the gates of New Ierusalem shut
fast against their wretched Master? No doubt, but some of our Lawyers doe
happily thinke vpon this fatall stroke, but (alas) that weake thought for want
of Zeale quickly perisheth, like those seedes, which were sowne by the
Husbandman, and afterwards for want of care suffered to be ouergrowne with
weeds and choaked with auarice. The want of employ­ments in some other
Professions or Trades which might benefit them in their worldly thoughts and
dreaming conceits of priuate lucre doe constraine many great Spirits to fall
to this wrangling course of life, who otherwise would proue more notable
members for their Countries Good. But seeing no other way then this to arriue
without danger of a bloudie nose to a great estate, they forgoe those braue
flames, which Nature had kindled in them, and in their steed doe harbour
earthy and slimy co­gitations, like the Serpent, whom God cursed, and
destinated to creepe vpon his belly, and to licke the dust of the earth. All
their mind runnes on Gaine. [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=115) Gaine is their
God, the God which deliuers them out of the Land of bondage, out of the iawes
of Pouertie. Gaine is the golden Angell, which leades them out of the
Wildernesse into the Land of Ca­naan. Gaine is their Iosuah, that gouernes
their bat­tels, and giues them superioritie and victory, not ouer the
vncircumcised Philistines, but ouer their owne Brethren, the heires of
Saluation in the world to come. What faire protestations, and goodly hopes
will they not faile to promise at the first ope­ning of their Clients Cause?
yet when the matter by their vnluckie Counsell succeeds not, as they
pro­mised, they will shamelesly stand vnto it, that their Clients had not
throughly informed them, or else with admiration and eyes lift vp towards
Heauen, they will ioyne to lay an aspersion on the Iudge, whereas themselues
were the chiefe Procurers of the Suite. About twenty yeeres past it was my
for­tune to bee present in a Counsellers Chamber at the Counsell of the
Marches, where a Gentleman of Wor­cestershire bitterly complained, that the
Counsell had ordred him to pay seuenscore pounds, which hee might haue
compounded for fiftie pounds. And that this rigorous sentence proceeded by his
rely­ing altogether vpon his Opinion, that the Counsell would not deale in
matters aboue fiftie pounds, be­ing limited by their Instructions from the
King. To which the Lawyer answered, that he had hard mea­sure offered him,
that the Counsell reduced his Cause from a Common Law businesse to bee a
matter of Conscience, wherein the King had left vnto them [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=115) the determining
at large without tying their pow­ers to a certaine Summe. That hee was sory to
see such extreme seueritie. Yet notwithstanding some­what glad, that the
matter hauing beene so charge­able and trouble some for a long time he might
now enioy the continuall company of his wife and chil­dren at home, which
before he could not doe. That Peace was a blessed thing, and Patience an
excellent vertue. Which the Gentleman hearing, and hauing no comfort else for
his great expence, paines, and troubles, he brake forth into Passion, saying,
what doe you tell me of Peace and Patience, and going home to haue the company
of my wife and chil­dren? All this I had before I met with your vnfor­tunate
Counsell, and but for you I might haue had more meanes to doe for them, then
now I haue. Which Answere of his cals backe into my memo­ry Captaine Eliots
Tragedie, which about fiue and twentie yeeres agoe he related vnto me at
Paris. In Queene Elizabeths dayes being enticed by a Iesuite heere in England
this Captaine Eliot went to Lis­bone, with a Pinnasse of the Queenes, which
hee purposed thence forwards to employ for his New Masters seruice the King of
Spaine. And for this cause, with his commendatory Letters from a Ie­suite in
England, to his brother Iesuite Robert Par­sons at Madrid, he posted thither
in hope of high preferment. In the meane time his men, which hee left a ship-
boord finding themselues betrayed by Captaine Eliot, and destitute of
necessaries to re­lieue their wants, they complotted to steale the Pin­nasse
[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=116) away.
But the matter casually discouered, some of them were hanged, and the rest
made Gal­ly-slaues, which comming to the eares of Captaine Eliot at Madrid,
and hearing, that his Brother, whom he had left to ouer-see the Pinnasse, had
like­wise tasted of this Spanish Courtesie, hee repayred in this male-content
to Father Parsons, pittifully complayning of his cruell fortune, and this
bloudie course extended toward his people, which hee brought of purpose to
serue the King of Spaine, ho­ping of reward rather then to bee so inhumanely
dealtwith. Father Parsons at that time being more in a moode of deuotion, then
willing to shew himselfe a Statesman, began to reade a Lecture to Captaine
Eliot of Patience, Humilitie, and of Mortification. The which hee for a while
gaue eare vnto; but at last perceiuing that his speeches tended to defeate him
of his Ship, and to get him into a Cloyster: he brake into these impatient
termes: What doe you preach vnto mee of Patience and Mortification? Can flesh
and bloud rest satisfied with this vsage? Can I be patient, when I see my
brother and my friends executed, and the rest of my men condem­ned to the
Gallies? Had it not beene for the aduise which your friend and brother Iesuit
gaue me to be­tray the Q Pinnasse, I might haue liued in my own Countrie a
happy man, far from this barbarous end.

Surely it were fitting that those which vndertake for money to direct their
Clients, should requite them for their charges, if by following their
sini­ster Counsell the matter goes against them. If a [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=116) Smith hauing
but a penny for his paines, vnwitting ly chance to prick a horse to the quick,
whereby the horse is the worse for it, there lyes an Action of the [...]. d
[...]na [...] r.  [...]eu. Case against the Smith. How much more then ought a
poore Country fellow altogether without the ru­diments of Law haue remedie
against a learned Master of the Lawes, which takes vpon him to know the whole
proceedings of Iustice, aswell as the wi­sest Iudge of the Kingdome? O I would
that men would become more charitable the one to the other that I might heare
from time to time the like com­plaints as Lawyers made at the end of
Michaelmus Terme last, 1625. They bewailed their misfor­tune, that whereas
some one of them vsed to haue sixtie Clients, hee had scarce eight at that
Redding Terme, which complaints moued mee no more to pittie, then to see a
Goose goe bare foot. I rather reioyced to heare the tidings, that Suites of
Law were not become eternall; And presently I mini­stred this Pill vnto them:
My Masters, said I, you seeme for all the world to bee like the Sextons and
Diggers of Graues now of late in London, who when any askt them how they did;
they answered with you, Neuer worse. It is a hard time. For where­as one of vs
haue receiued fees for ringing and ope­ning of foure hundred graues a weeke,
now the Plague being abated, wee receiue not money for eight graues. A
pitifull Case.

To end this my Apologie against Doctor Barto­lus and Master Plowden, for my
vsurping of Orpheus Iuniors Title, I doe it, permissu Superiorum by your
[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=117)
Maiesties command, emboldned by the examples of those, which in the like
matters borrowed the like Titles, as Terentius Christianus and Democri­tus
Iunior lately haue done to their great honour and the Readers satisfaction;
euen as Ausonius be­fore them had imposed the name of Cato to his lit­tle
Booke of Manners. Nor can any man much blame me, if hee compare the Aduentures
of our New­foundland with the Argona [...]ticks Golden Fleece, though more
sweetly sounded by the elder Orpheus

Apollo after this Apologie seemed highly to ex­toll it. And further to let the
world know his fuller resolution, hee vttered these words: God forbid, that
Vice should raigne without controulement. If my Attendants shall bee tongue
tied, when such vncharitablenesse possesseth mortall men, it is to be feared
that men wil sooner glory in euill, then turne to good; nay more, it is to be
suspected, the whole world but for our peales of Charitie and sounding
retraits from Hatred will fall vnder a generall Ex­communication from the
presence of God. Take away the abuse, which is meerely accidentall; and let
the substance of Law remaine still. Long may Iustice flourish without ecclipse
or stormie opposi­tions.

Florescat viuat, vigeat, celebretur, ametur.

### 2.10. CHAP. XII.

The learned Vniuersities of Great Brittaine doe finde [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=117) themselues
agrieued, that Popish Physicians are permitted to practice Physick in this
Kingdome.

Apollo remedies their grieuances; and decreeth that the Popish presume not to
minister Physick to any Protestant, but to them of their owne Sect.

VPpon the Wednesday after Low Easter Sunday, there arriued at Parnassus
certaine Deputies sent from the Learned Vniuersities of Great Brit­taine,
pitifully complaining, that whereas sundrie honest Persons of wonderfull rare
Spirits, and sin­gular dexteritie, had spent the most part of their time in
ruminating & reuoluing the workes of Hip­pocrates, Cornelius Celsus, Galen,
and also had read the volumes of other Physicians, aswell Arabian as
Paracelsian, Antient as moderne, there crept not­withstanding some false
Brethren, seruants to the Mysticall Whore, as Drones, which vnder a
counter­feit maske of more pregnant knowledge, had in­grossed the Gaine and
Rewards due vnto them, as the laborious Bees of their Country, and wrought so
effectually with some of the Greater sort, that by their example others
repaired to them for helps in their Bodily Infirmities, forsaking them being
of the same Religion, and no way inferiour vnto these Romish Physicians. The
danger both emi­nent and imminent which by this conniuence might happen, they
submitted to his Maiesties good will and pleasure. Apollo nettled at this
complaint cal­led for the Romish Physicians, and caused some Pati­ents which
had lately taken Physick at their hands [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=118) to be brought
before him to whom he said: O yee of little Faith, what a lunacie and
distemper of the Braine hath peruerted your vnderstanding, as to moue you to
abandon the medicinable waters of Silo and Bethesdae, and to haue recourse
vnto mud­die Pooles not deriued from the Rocke of liuing wa­ters? Is it
because there is not a God in Israel, that yee goe to the God of Ekron to
enquire and looke counsell. Did the example of Lopez the Portugall, who by
warrant from the great Dispencer of Murthers poy­soned some Noble Personages
of your Countrie, no­thing terrifie your mutable phantasies, but ye must
resort for cure vnto your knowne Foes, the Foes of Christ? Is it possible,
that my Remedies shall worke their proper effect, which are ministred by
profane hands? but rather the contrary, being ac­cursed like the Fig-tree in
the Gospell? It was a sinne in Asa King of Iuda, for putting his trust in
Physici­ans of his owne Religion. How much more had it beene, if he had relied
on succour from the vncir­cumcised? If God blesse not the Physicke it proues
ominously vnluckie, and perhaps to the ruine of the Patient; though for a time
it may seeme to ease. Doe we not often see, that many men rise vp
mira­culously, as it were from death to life like Hezechias when all earthly
helpes proue vaine and fruitlesse, euen by Kitchen Physicke? So all blessings
with Faith must concurre together with the Medecine, or commonly it ill
succeeds.

In tender consideration of these ensuing perils, and in commiseration to the
states of your Soules [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=118) and Bodies,
which may suffer for want of mature Discretion to discerne Friends from Foes,
We Or­der, that no Papisticall Physician minister Counsell, nor Receit in
Physicke to any Protestant from this day forward: but that euery Patient do
repaire to some of their owne Religion, to whom Rewards belong, and whom God
hath ordained for a vertuous pur­pose. We do also order that these Verses of
Orphcus Iuniors, be annexed to this Decree.

Misso pecunifices volo te Medicosque cauere,

Caedere Magnates quos Mariana, docet, &c.

Beware of Physicke mixt by Romish brood,

Whom Mariane taught to let great Princes bloud.

By Lopez learne by poyson hir'd to kill,

What mind those haue a Christians bloud to spill.

Tobacco, late which men haue brought frō Spain,

Is thought to taint the bloud, heart, lungs, & brain.

The Iesuits this teach, as a point of merit,

To murther some, and Heauen to inherit.

Lust creepes and Theft by opportunitie.

Then cheere not Aesops Snake with iollitie.

### 2.11. CHAP. XI.

The Nobilitie of Parnassus doe complaine, that their Inferiours with their
Wiues doe weare richer Ap­parell then themselues, shewing likewise, that they
haue encroached on other Priuiledges of theirs to be hurried in Coaches, by
which presumptions [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=119) many other
Corruptions are lately crept into Apol­loes Court.

VPon Thursday in the Easter-weeke last 1626. the Noble Families of the
Fabricy, and Len­  [...]ul [...], and others aswell of the Romanes, as of the
an­cient Bloud of the Argines, complayned vnto his Maiestie shewing, that one
of the chiefest Causes of the decay of Trading and of the want of Money in
these Times proceeded through the proud affe­ctation of men of Inferiour
Rankes, who con­trary to the Prescriptions of Ciuill Gouernment, following the
Example of Lucifer the Prince of Pride, had perked vp so high, that they wore
gorgeous Garments, more glorious then Princes. And not so content, they
pestered the streets of Parnassus, with needlesse Coaches, so that Carters and
Wainmen could hardly passe to and fro with necessary prouision and commodities
for the Cour­tiers and Citizens vse. Apollo informed of these in­dignities
sent for the Lords Reformers before him, and askt how this Excesse got into
his Imperiall Ci­tie, which ought to bee the mirrour and sountaine of
moralitie. They answered that the World as it grew in Age, so it multiplied in
Infirmities. That the Prince of this World perceiuing the state of Re­ligion
to become better purified then in former times, whereby he lost many Soules,
had infected a great number of his Maiesties Subiects with the poyson of
Toades, to make them swell with Ambiti­on, to the end they might burst, and
that he by [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=119) that meanes
might repaire his great losses, which the Protestant Religion had caused to
his Infernall Kingdome; And that for the further setling of his poysonous
power, hee had employed Asmodeus the Spirit of Lust, and other petty Agents of
his to sow Tares in the night season after the Dinine Prea­chers had in the
day time plowed and sowed pure seed in mens hearts. That likewise he had
seduced their embosomed second selues, whom they terme the Night-crowes, to
insin [...]ate on his behalfe the Pompes and vaine glory of humane loftinesse
into their Husbands Heads, and neuer to cease pecking, vntill they preuailed
of their purpose to expell his mortall Enemie the Spirit of Humilitic, which
the Holy Ghost had placed for his Deputie Guardian in their minds. The
Reformers also declared that the Deuill had so strongly possessed some of them
both men and women, that to continue their brauery of Apparell and charge of
Coaches, they mutually a­greed sometimes to horne the other, but yet so slily
and politickly, that they might take off their Hornes at set times, and lay
them in their pockets to keepe, for feare of too grieuous a head-ach. To this
end they vsed this Song the one to the other:

It matters not so much to weare the Horne,

If that it might be free from others scorne.

Hornes haue no cure, but when thy selfe art sped,

To graffe those Hornes vpon anothers head.

If the Wife want embroydered Peticoates and [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=120) Wastcoates, if
her Husbands meanes and credit extend not to furnish her with Iewels
equiualent to the greatest Countesse, or if shee cannot honestly deuise how to
maintaine her Caroach, the debau­ched Gallant will in this distresse and
exigent lay that which shee can spare, euen Honestie it selfe to pawne. In the
meane time my Cuckoldly Gentle­man winkes for his profit. Non omnibus dormio,
sed Mecenati solum. He will not dissemble sleeping for any mans pleasure, but
onely for hope of treasure. And if any of vs your Maiesties Officers should
chance to cry out vpon it, or to say with that inno­cent King Henry the Sixt,
Forsooth you are to blame, when he beheld certaine Ladies, with their breasts
nakedly discouered, with their haire cut like a Tomboy, one of these horned
ranke will retort no other counterplea, then Tarletons:

Woe to thee, Tarleton, that euer thou wert borne,

Thy Wife hath made thee a Cuckold, and thou must weare the Horne,

What and if she hath? Am I a whit the worse?

She keeps me like a Gentleman with mony in my Purse.

Hope of Gaine to supply immoderate expenses extorteth a thousand complements &
ceremonious seruices; so that it is not Lust alone (for indeed To­bacco hath
almost mortified that motion) which causeth many to Court their Mistresses, or
these to entertaine Seruants, but the in finite charge of New Fashions of
Apparell, one while with the Spanish, [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=120) another while
Frenchified, doth make Clownes to weare Gownes, to polish their dul wits, and
of Car­terly dispositions to become Courtly Musicians and Poeticall Courtiers:
As that English Satyrist obserued:

O those faire starlike eyes of thine, one sayes,

[...]thers in his Sa [...]y [...].

When to my seeming she hath look [...] nine wayes.

And that sweet breath, when I thinke out vpon it

It would blast a flowre, if she breathed on it.

But bee she neuer so well qualified in affections, neuer so full of vertuous
qualities, Maide, Widow, or Wife, vnlesse shee haue sufficient to defray this
endlesse cost of prodigalitie, she may stand long e­nough without courting,
euen vntill mosse grow to the soles of her feet.

Apollo hauing bewayled with teares the mise­rable Condition of his vertuous
Followers seduced now of late to regard the out-side more then the precious
in-side, which of old was reputed for the Temple of the Holy Ghost: and so to
respect gay Clothing and pompous Formalities, that euen his chiefe Dependants
for Diuinitie with Aarons siluer Bell in their mouthes beganne to be polluted
with this enormitie to ruffle in rich Robes, and to flaunt with silken Sailes,
he first commanded the English­mans Picture standing like a Taylour with a
paire of Sheares in one hand, and Stuffe in the other hand to apply himselfe
to any New Fashion, to be presently defaced; and one proper comely Fashion, to
bee ac­comodated to euery seuerall Nation specially, to [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=121) the English, of
whom there was a Prouerbe, that no sooner sprung vp a Fashion among the
Lackies at Paris, but the Gallants in London would like Apes take it vp as a
patterne. Item, that all persons, which attired themselues in time to come,
contrary to this Edict, should bee branded with Infamy, and to we are Saint
Bene [...]s Hood of Red, Greene, Blew, and Yellow Colours, which the Spanish
Inquisition haue ordayned for their Heretickes conuerted vpon eue­ry
[...]estiuall Day for the space of one whole yeere next after the Offence
committed. Item, that no Nation should hereafter presume to weare Ray­ments of
any other stuffe, then was wrought with­in their natiue Countrey, the
Nobilitie onely ex­cepted. Item, that none should goe vp and downe hurried in
Coaches to trouble the Carters and Pas­sengers, vnlesse they would giue a
thousand pounds towards the Plantations in America, the Nobilitie alwayes
excepted. And lastly, his Maiestie know­ing that without seuere Executioners,
this De­cree of his could not bee kept inuiolably sacred, but that some would
escape vnpunished by some Protection, or potent meane, like the Spiders
Cob­web, where the lesser Flies were entangled, and the Greater did easily &
robustuously breake through, hee charged Cato the Censor to see the due
perfor­mance without partialitie.

### 2.12. CHAP. XII.

Apollo commands certaine of his Attendants to pre­scribe [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=121) remedies, how
Husbands should liue with their Wiues chastly, and without iea [...]sie to bee
Cuckolded, as also how men should contemne the baits of Beautifull Women.

APollo hauing obserued, that many Women cuc­kolded their Husbands, and by
their cunning pretenses had so gulled them, as to forsake their se­cure
Demaynes in the Countrey, and to compa [...]le Offices in the populous Citie
of Parnassus, where they might enioy their vnlawfull pleasures, caused the
Noble Knight Sir Philip Sidney, together with Sir Iohn Harrington the
Translatour of Orlando, the Satyrist Master Whatley the Preacher of Ban­bury
and Orpheus Iunior to set downe some whole­some remedies for married men to
gouerne their Wiues, that they horne them not; and also that themselues might
not be surprized with the subtil­ties, or outward seeming beautie of strange
women. Whereto they all obeyed, and Sir Philip Sydney thus beganne:

Who doth desire that chast his Wife should be,

Sir Philip S [...]d­ney.

First, be he true, for Truth doth Truth deserue.

Then be he such as she his worth may see,

And one man still credit with her preserue.

Not toying kind, nor toy [...]shly vnkind:

Not stirring thoughts, nor yet denying right:

Nor spying faults, nor in plaine Errours blind:

Neuer hard hand, nor euer reines too light:

As farre from want, as farre from vaine expence:

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=122) The one
doth force, the latter doth entice.

Allow good Company, but keepe from thence,

All fil [...]hy mouthes, that glory in their vice.

This done thou hast no more, but leaue the rest

Vnto thy Fortune, time, and womans brest.

Concerning wiues take this a certaine Rule,

That if at first you let her haue the rule,

Sir Iohn Har­  [...]g [...]on.

Your selfe at length with her shall beare no rule,

Except you let her euer more to rule.

Yet in the house, as busie as a Bee,

I am content my Wife sting all but me.

O rather let me loue, then be in loue;

So let me chuse as Wife and Friend to find.

Sir Thomas Ouer [...]ery.

Let me forget her Sexe, when I approue.

Beasts liknesse lies in shape, but ours in mind.

Our Soules no Sexes haue. Their Loue is cleane.

No Sexe, both in the better part are men.

Domestick Charge doth best that Sex besit

Contiguous businesse so to fixe the mind.

That leasure space for fancies not admit.

Their leisure tis corrupteth woman-kind

Else being plast from many vices free,

They had to Heau'n a shorter cut then we.

Womens behauiour is a surer barre,

Then is their No. That fairely doth deny

Without denying; thereby kept they are

Safe eu'n from hope. In part too blame is shee

Which hath without Consent beene onely tride.

He comes too neere that comes to be denide.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=122) Like a
true Turtle with thine owne Doue stay,

Else others twixt thy sheets may falsly play.

If thou wilt haue her loue and honour thee,

A [...]i [...]s [...].

First, let her thine Affections largely see.

What shee doth for thee kindly that respect,

And shew how thou her loue dost well affect.

Remember she is neighbour to thy heart,

And not thy slaue: shee is thy better part.

Thinke tis enough that her thou mighst command:

Whilest she in Marriage bonds doth loyall stand,

Although thy power thou neuer doe approue,

For thats the way to make her leaue to loue.

To goe to Feasts and Weddings' mongst the Best,

Tis not amisse: for their suspect is least.

Nor is it meet that shee the Church refraine,

Sith there is vertue, and her Noble Traine.

You haue accutely runne ouer, O immortall Spirits, said Master Whately of
Banburie, the duties of man and wife reciprocally, as they ought to beare the
one to the other if they liued vertuously; But what if the wife exceed in
wilfull repugnancie or rather rebellion against her Husband, who is her Lord
and Head, as Christ is the Head and Crowne of the Husband according to S.
Paul, and as I haue punctually proued in my Worke called the Bride­bush, shall
the Man degenerate from his virilitie and Christian vigour, as to suffer his
Subiect and vnder­ling to waxe proud and to weare the Breeches? Shall he like
Sardanapalus, or effeminated Hercules sit spinning in a Petticoate among her
Maides, [[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=123)
whiles shee flaunts it, like an vntamed Gallant, and iadishly kicks vp her
heeles with a knaue, making her Lord accessarie to capitall baudry? This were
an argument of base stupiditie in the Husband. Vp­on such an occasion, or the
like intollerable misde­meanure, as causelesse scolding, or for fooling her
selfe and her Head before companie by nicknaming him, or wantonly detracting
from his reuerend au­thoritie, with the abbreuiated words of Iack, Tom, or
Dick, he must shew his manly prerogatiue, and rebuke her for such ridiculous
carriage. Yea, and if there because hee must like a wise Surgeon, vse
Cauteries and sharpe medecines. Hee must let her know the wise mans sentence,
that a Rod becomes the back of a Foole.

Orpheus Iunior here interrupted Master Whatley. You neede not cite Scripture
for beating a woman for thats her hearts desire, to verifie the prophane
Prouerbe, that an Asse, a Nut, and a Woman will neuer be good without beating.
And at Constanti­nople our Merchants report, that where a Turke hath three or
foure wiues, that wife esteemes her selfe happy and best beloued of her
husband, whom he most often graceth with correction. The Mosco­uites doe
commonly practice this kinde of Bencuo­lence on their wiues skinnes. But
whether our wo­mens hides can brooke such fauours, I doe much doubt. For the
truth is, their skinnes in Moscouie are thicker, tougher, and buffe leather in
compari­son of our soft skind Creatures; as also in all such cold Countryes,
Nature hath armed the very [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=123) Fowle and
Beasts with strong thick out sides, to weather out and endure the blustring
blastes, and penetrable ioye cold the better. Whereas in our Climate, and from
thence to the Tropickes the wo­mens skinnes are tender, and silken, which
makes mee somewhat to mislike that course, except her Husband bee well assured
by some skilfull Tanner that his Wiues skinne is as hard as the Serpents both
in the temper and the superficiall toughnesse. For then hee may beelabour her
coat soundly without danger. But if hee feeles her more smoothe then Beuer, or
softer then the Lambs, let him suspend his passion, and referre his lambs skin
to his arbitre­ment, that other whiles is forced to hold the Wolfe by the
eares. Neither yet am I so obsequious a Ser­uant to the Femal Sex, nor care I
to become an Ido­list of a painted shrine (for whatsoeuer earthly thing a man
doth too much magnifie, or to speake more significantly, what hee dotes vpon,
is to commit Idolatrie with that thing) but that I wish the Hus­band to
esteeme Discretion more then debate, In­struction more then Discipline, and to
doe as hee would bee done vnto. Aboue all things I aduise him which lothes the
brand of a Cuckold, not on­ly to looke into his wiues inward disposition with
the warie eyes of Discretion, and to obserue what companie shee affecteth: but
likewise that him­selfe beware how hee glance and gad abroad after strange
flesh. Which because hee may the more easily performe, let him fixe this rule
in his imagi­nation, that his Soule combined with his wiues [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=124) makes an
harmonious vnion; that all women, spe­cially other mens wiues haue many foule
defects. And if for all this, his iudgement bee so crackt, that another woman
becomes his amorous Saint, the onely Shee in the world, and the very Paragon
of Beautie, with her haire, as Democritus Iunior writes, more yellow then
Gold, with black eyes, a little D. Barton in his Anat. of Mclancholy. mouth,
white teeth, of a pure sanguine complexi­on, soft and plump; an absolute
piece, her head from Prague, her paps from Austria, her belly from France, her
back from Brabant, her hands out of England, her feet from Rhine, her
buttockes from Switzerland, with the Spanish gate, the Venetian Tire, Italian
complements and endowments, let him neuerthelesse remember the continuall
casu­alties of humane natures, how that a little Sicknes, a Feuer, the small
poxe, a scarre, losse of an eye or limme, excessiue heat or cold, child-
bearing, en­crease of Age will riuell, marre, and dis-figure her all on a
sodaine; insomuch, that he himselfe would scarce know her, whom hee before did
adore and admire.

Whereto let a man adde her wanton face, and varieties of longing fits after
those things which will alter farre stronger bodies then hers, as sweete
wines, strong drinke, spiced caudells, slibber sau­ces, Suckets, Aqua vit
[...], Balme, or wormewood water, being perswaded by idle-headed Midwiues and
tattling Gossips, that they are wholesome for the Bodie, whereas indeed they
destroy the true heat of life, so that by the vse of these vnnecessarie [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=124) drugs and
liquors, wherewith they glut themselues in corners, you shall not finde one
among a thou­sand women, specially after Marriage, but shee is diseased,
either with vnnaturall heat, a stinking breath, rotten teeth, a withered face,
with a windie mattrie stomack, casting vp whole gobbets of snot­tie flegme,
like rotten oysters, with the dropsie, or lothsome issue in her legs; or else
shee is inwardly possessed by reason of those inflammations, with intollerable
peeuishnesse, haughtinesse of mind, or with such rayling scolding moodes, that
shee is fit­ter to be cubd vp in Bedlem, then to cohabit with a ciuill
Gentleman. I say nothing of the disease cal­led Pi [...]a, breaking out to the
Greene Sicknesse in the vnmarried, and in both sorts to a monstrous
stupendious lusting after such offensiues to nature, that I blush to name
them, being fully assured by him that wrot the Treatise of the passion of the
mind, that a woman of a temperate sparing dyet wil hard­ly bee ouertaken with
this Infirmitie. What if this Goddesse of his bee not such beautie in very
deede, as hee beleeues, but so fashioned by Art, perhaps her face is painted,
done ouer with some curious lick, as few of them are without it. Or else it is
her gaudie clothes, that set her out, so to beguile his eyes. There be other
circumstances, which an vn­derstanding man will muse vpon, before hee yeeld
himselfe a slaue to an vnconstant woman.

A puling Female Creature, which hath smiles

Like Sirens Songs, and teares like Crocodiles.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=125) As
Withers exclaimes in his Satyres. I haue spoken the more pathetically of this
abuse, because I know it is one of the chiefe Causes, which makes our
Gentlemen to linger at home degenerating from their Ancestors, while the
industrious Spaniard ho­uers abroad, and takes vp the principall Harbours of
the Newfound World.

To conclude, It is not Force, Feare, faire words, Gifts, nor deeds of due
beneuolence can keepe a woman honest, if she bee borne and bred of a skit­tish
Mother. For Cat after kind, shee will follow nature, doe what you can. To
verifie this, let Man and Wife looke on this Glasse of faire Susannaes
education; and by the modell of her nurture, let man learne a Mate to chuse:

Vita piae Matris Susannae regula morum

Ex Aglaiâ in Cambrens. Ca­rol. Ad M [...]riam Reginam.

Qualis erat Mater, Filia talis erat.

A cunis odit Miracula ficta Baalis

Polluit indignânec simulachra prece.

Non Abrahae, Mosi, Samueli, vota nec vlli

Sanctorum, soli fudit at ista Deo.

Vt scopulos fugit consortia vana malor [...]m,

Nunquam suspectos passa venire proc [...]s.

Quando rebellantes, quos rarò, sentijt astus

Hos ieiunandicum precemulsit aquâ.

Debita pensa suiper soluens muneris aequè,

Multiplici formâ lintea pinxit acu.

Mollia filatrahens, fusis praestabat Arachnen

Siue nouum tenui pectine finxit opus.

Nablia laeta sonis, operis pertaesa Dauidis

Increpat, & te [...]ero pollice filatrahit.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=125) Psalmata
saepe iu [...]at modulari voce recenset

Gesta Creatoris, Plasmata viua Dei.

Nunc canit Aegypti Miracula, Praeli [...], Mannam;

Nunc sonat Haebraei rudera clara soli.

Inter dum Diuina legit, mox scribere tentat;

Ipsa quod exarat scribere tentat Opus,

Ne testudo domi videatur tetrica custos

Alterna visit rura paterna vice.

Interbum cum Matre piâloca publica visit,

Nec sine Teste foris contulit illa gradum.

As Mothers are, so will the Daughters be:

Chast was Susannaes Mother, chaste was she.

Baals Miracles she from her Cradle knew,

As how vaines Tombes with Idols to eschew,

She honour'd Abram, Moses, and the Saints;

But vnto God she framed her Complaints.

Bad Company she shunn'd, as Rockie shelues,

And fear'd suspected Suiters worse then Elues.

If Flesh and Bloud in her began to tickle,

She mortified her thoughts, that were so fickle.

She fasted oft, but oftner vs'd to pray;

To which she ioyn'd some labour eu'ry day.

No Day without a Line. She daily wrought,

Somtimes on Needle, when she fitting thought.

Or spunne by Distaffe, or the Wheele she rowld,

Somtimes on Loome, her skil she would vnfold.

At times she stirr'd more busie then the Bee,

And was well pleas'd the Maids to ouer-see.

Tir'd with houshold busines on Harp she playes

Or Violl, which she tunes to Dauids Layes.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=126) One
while she sings for her recreation

Of Noahs Arke, and the first Creation.

Another whiles of Aegypts Miracles,

Her Nation blest with Sinaes Oracles;

Their wandring forty yeeres with Manna fed,

And in the Desert by an Angell led.

Now of their Wars she tels with warbling voice,

Anon of Iewries fall with dolefull noyse.

One while she reades, another while she writes;

She writes those rules, which she herself endites.

Some other time, to draw the Countries Aire,

She went abroad, but neuer to a Faire.

Least, Tortoiselike cub'd vp, shee might take harme,

She goes abroad to see her Fathers Farme.

The Fields shee likes, but more the Garden walkes,

To note Gods workes in seedes, herbes, flowres, and stalkes,

Yea, & though seldome, she the Towne suruayes

With her deere Mother witnesse of her wayes.

### 2.13. CHAP. XIII.

A Corollary or an epitomized Censure of Apollo pronounced after the aforesaid
Opinions deliuered touching the Election of Wines and their vsage.

AFter these Gentlemen had deliuered their seue­rall Iudgements how men should
not onely chuse their wines, and conforme them to their wils [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=126) but like wise
take away all the Occasions of vnlaw­full Loue, ie pleased his Imperiall
Maiestie to adde these few Admonitions: Well haue yee, O my ver­tnous Minions,
discoursed of the affections of the  [...] Female Sexe. And I doe approoue and
confirme your positions, with this Caueat to the Man, that he make choise of a
Wise by the Eares, and not by the Eyes. And to the woman, I aduise her not to
pre­sume on her owne Conceit, either of her honestie, wit, or loue of Company,
as to giue way vnto fl [...]t­tering and idle speeches of any Man whatsoeuer,
but at the first touch with a braue, yet modest dis­daine to bid Sathan a
[...]oid, though hee speake in an Angels shape, lest otherwise shee bee
misconstrued loose. For it is enough for a Man, because hee is a Man to bee
honest, though hee doth but seeme so. But for a woman, because shee is a
woman, it is not enough to be chaste, if shee bee not knowne to bee chaste;
yea and apparantly knowne, in despite of the Deuill and all his Followers.

### 2.14. CHAP. XIIII.

Cato the Censour of good manners hauing arrested certaine Persons a drinking
more then the Lawes prescribed them, brings them before Apollo.

His Maiestie reproues them for their Drunkennesse, and banisheth them for euer
out of the precincts of Parnassus.

VPon the tenth of Iune last, 1626. Cato the diligent Inquisitour and Censour
of good [[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=127)
manners hauing apprehended foure persons in a Wine-tauerne, which had drunke
ten quarts of strong wine at a sitting, brought them before Apol­lo to be
censured, and humbly desired his Maiestie that he would shew some exemplarie
punishment on those bestiall persons, who albeit they dranke more then a
dozen, yet could they not performe the deeds of two able men, either in the
bodies Actions, or in the Spirits functions. Apollo asked them what tempted
them to lade their bodies with so much strong Liquor? They answered, that it
was not the loue of the wine, but of the Compa­nie, which drew them to carowse
so many pots. And further they alledged, that their natures be­ing accustomed
to drinke, they bare it out well without the least giddinesse in the head,
reeling, or staggering, which as long as they could so doe, they hoped no man
might taxe them of Drunkennesse. To this Apollo replied, that by the late
Statutes of England no Trauellers might drinke aboue one q [...]rt of Ale or
Beere at a penny the quart, vpon one  [...]itting or meale: so that to drinke
more then that measure prescribed by Law, ought to bee con­strued
Drunkennesse, because the wise Law-makers of that State foresaw, that so much
would serue any reasonable Creature. But to exceed that quan­titie in a
stronger kind of liquor, in Corsicke, Greeke or Falerne wines could not but
redound to Drun­kennesse in the superlatiue degree. And whereas (said he) yee
would couer your Drunkennesse with the ablenesse of your braine, I must tell
you, that [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=127) he is to bee
termed a reall Drunkard which surpas­seth the set stint of his Countryes
Lawes, or if hee enters after his bibbing into any vnseemely passion or
borrowes the gesture of a raging Lion, of the toyish Ape, of the sensuall Hog,
or of the lasciui­ous Goat, pratling or acting any feates more then are
decent, or more then he vsed at other times, he may be branded with the note
of a Drunkard, then which nothing is more odious in the sight of our vertuous
Societie. Bring a horse to the water, all the world cannot vrge him to drinke
more then sufficeth nature at that time. And yet man a Creature enriched with
free will in naturall things, wil proue himselfe worse then the Beasts which
haue no vn­derstanding. Most honourable be those Masters of Families, which
hate and curb this wanton excesse of Drinking in their Seruants. And worthy of
ap­plause in our Court is that Nobleman, who seeing no admonitions nor change
of Butlers could restraine his vnruly Seruants from this Swinish vice, caused
his seller to bee remoued, by building one within his Parlour, whereby shame,
his Eye being vpon them, might bridle their inordinate affections, free­ly
protesting, that hee would haue nothing spent which might be honestly spared,
nor any thing spa­red which might be honestly spent; that it was not the
expence, but ciuill gouernment to settle sobrie­tie in his house, which made
him to take so strict a course. In this he imitated that Learned Emperour
Antonius Pius, which banished all the Wine­tauernes in Rome, because hee saw
his Subiects be­gin [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=128) to turne
Drunkards, and that none but Apo­thecaries should presume to sell any wine;
and that, as Phy sick to the sick and weake. Heeretofore a King of England
noting that by the Companie of the Daues all his Subiects were infected with
this Sinne, he imposed a fit and limited measure for eue­ry man to drinke by.
Within these fiftie yeeres Drunkennesse was scarce knowne in England. At such
time as the Low Countrey warres began, the souldiers at their returne by the
Diuels temptations brought it thither to impouerish their natiue Coun­try. And
vntill a set s [...]int bee prouided for pledging and carowsing with a Law to
make the misdoers infamous and vncapable of promotion, it wil hard­ly be
rooted out. What a preposterous thing is it, that one man should drinke more
then might satis­fie soure honester men then himselfe? What a shame is it that
the Ilanders of Great Brittaine should wast in wine, malt, and hops more then
would serue to maintaine fortie thousand men in the Field?

How simple is that excuse of yours, O yee chil­dren of Bacchus, that yee care
more for the compa­nie then for the liquor? Doe not yee know, that hee which
toucheth pitch shall become defiled therewith? In Holy writ it is registred:
Thou shalt not follow a maltitude to doe euill. And againe, haue Exod. cap.
23. no fellowship with the Instruments of Sathan, but re­ther reproue them.
Which likewise King Salomon Ephes. cap. 5. long before admonished to take heed
of. Bee not (saith hee) of the number of them, which are bibbers P [...]ou.
cap. 23. [[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=128)
of wine, for the Drinker and the Feaster shall become poore. In like manner
the Prophet rouzeth them vp with an alarme: Awake, yee Drunkards, weepe and
howle. And in another place, the Wise man denoun­ceth a woe vnto them which
rise vp early to follow locl. cap. 1. Prou. cap. 5. Drunkards. If the feare of
Gods Iudgements work not in your heedlesse wills, yet the daily tortures,
wherein ye see before your eyes thousands afflected ought, to imprint some
sensible motion in you to beware by others harmes of drunken Companie. The
Apoplexie, the Gout, Dropsie, Ague, spring out of this enchanting fountaine.

In regard of these grosse abuses, wee doe vtterly banish these present
Drunkards out of our Territo­ries of Parnassus; And we doe also enact that
none of this infamous rout presume heereafter to touch our sacred two topt
Mount. Prouided neuerthelesse and be it excepted out of the Premises, that it
shall be lawfull at the end of euery meale for any honest man, without
impeachment of Drunkennesse to pledge and carowse one draught of good liquor
to their gracious Aduersaries, as a token of reconcili­ation, as the cup of
Charitie, poculum Charitat is, which the Founder of Trinitie Colledge in
Oxford decreed for euer among his Fellowes and Schollers, or poculum boni
Genij, the cup of good fellowship to the health of their cheerefull nature,
which the Romans practised at their Feasts. And because the Coel. R [...]odigi
[...]. lib. 28\. cap. 6. representation of this vgly vice may appeare in mens
imaginations with some more feeling dint, we require our Pronotarie to publish
these verses:

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=129) What at
this day doe Brittaines Tongues bewray?

That by strong liquor some haue gone astray.

Faiths Temple they pollute with Cup and Can,

In Duties fayling towards God and Man.

They spend their wealth, spoile their health, mar their wits

By drinking more then sober men befits.

Thus haue our bordring Dutehmen lately swill'd,

Vntill their Pots with Neighbours bloud are fill'd,

Repent, be wise in time by others harmes;

Flie witching Cups for feare of after-harmes.

If not: your King your Tauernes must destroy,

Least suffring Sinne himselfe doe feele annoy.

Curtua vox titubat, mea magna Britannia? Baccho

Dederis, & Templum contemerare Dei.

Euphrosine in Cam [...]rens. Caro.

Ebrietate scatet Germania; pocula vindex

Replet at humano plena cruore Deus.

Tolle moras, iubet ipse Deus, resipisce, Tabernas

Effuge Circ [...]as: Luxuriare caue.

Qui mala non prohibet, cum possit, conscius esto:

Has potes infames, Rex, prohibere domos.

### 2.15. CHAP. XV.

The Author of this Treatise called the Golden Fleece exhibits a Bill of
Complaint against the Tobacco­nists of Great Brittaine.

Apollo condemnes the immoderate vse of Tobacco, and recommends the care of the
extermination [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=129) thereof to the
Clerg [...]e and the Temporall Magi­strate.

THe Author and Publisher of this present Trea­tise, seeing the beastly vice of
Drunkennes like to be quite cashierd out of his natiue Country, with a streit
commandement from his Maiestie to the Coustables of euery seuerall Diuision,
to con­ueigh the Offenders, from Parish to Parish towards the Sea-side, where
they should take shipping for the Low Countries or Germanie, from whence they
first had it: hee like wise burned with zeale to haue the common Takers of
Tobacco sent after them. For, as he informed Apollo, it was not possible
vt­terly to banish Drunkennesse out of the Land, as long as the shooinhorne
sta [...]d behinde, that Tobac­co-taking of late yeeres supplied the vse of
Prepa­ratiues, Leaders, or drawers on of drinke, such as Caueare and salt
meates were vsed among the Si­barites. To this Apollo answered, that it were
fit Physicians should cause some skilfull Surgeons to let them bloud, in vena
cephalica, in the head veine, or to purge them with black Hellebore, for
surely men beganne to grow mad and crazed in the brain in that they would
aduenture to suck the smoke of a weed, nay if it were neuer so Catholick
Medecin, at all times, feasting and fasting, in health aswell as sicknesse,
without regard had to the persons, ages, sexes, times, temperatures, moist or
dry, hot or cold. All this hath beene sundrie times repeated vnto them by many
zealous Physicians of the [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=130) Soule and
Bodie, replyed the Complaynant. And for my poore Talent, albeit neither Diuine
nor Physician I haue not buried the same, but in most of my workes I haue
rebuked the excessiue taking of Tobacco, and chiefly, in my Booke entituled
Directions for Health, I haue canuased this abomi­nable vice, I freely shewed,
that by the inordinate taking of it, the course of Nature was peruerted, the
state of the bodie turned topsie turuie, when the Nose, like a Chimney, did
vent out vnnaturall smokes, which ought to exhale and breathe with naturall
Aire, when the mouth ordained by nature to receiue in sustenance for the whole
body is now become a priuy hole to spet, to spew, to spatter, and bel [...]h
without need, yea and to cast vp whole gob­bets of most necessary fleame, like
stinking Oy­sters: when the stomack the bodies Kitchin, which ought to bee
kept sweete, must harbour lothsome dampes, filthy excrements, and bad smels
worse then the snuffe of a Candle, which otherwise would quickly passe through
the guts to the sinke of the bodie.

Apollo at this relation demonstrated apparant tokens of sorrow, and commanded
all the deuout Preachers of Parnassus to ioyne their heads toge­ther to beate
the inconueniences into their Audi­tours consciences, and vnder paine of the
Thun­derbolt of Excommunication to will them to de­sist from making that
crooked, which God had made straight, from defiling the house where the Holy
Spirit ought to reside as a sanctified seate. [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=130) Whereto the
sacred Ministers made answere, that they had employed the vttermost of their
endea­uours to clense that pure place, but by reason of sundry inuisible
spirits, which the Deuill sent to tempt their Flockes, they contemned their
whol­some counsels. And for the other point of Excons­munication, that wrought
lesse effect, by reason that that spirituall power in these dayes degenerated
from the proper vse, being too commonly wrested and fulminated against men,
euen for not paying of some pettie Fees due to the Officers of the Court.

Well then, said Apollo, if Saint Peters Keyes can­not prenayle, let Saint
Pauls Sword, or rather that of Saint Peters, where with he strooke off Malchus
Eare, serue to cut off this superfluous member. And to this end I require the
Politicke Magistrates for their Countries good to punish all such common
Tobacco-takers; and because they may doe it with our warrantable authoritie,
let them proclaime these rules in euery place within their Iurisdictions.

Regna Britanna libras ter centum mille quotannè

Expendunt morbos accelerando nouos.

Non opus Helleboro: iam quis (que) Tobaccon ab Aula

Principi [...] ad caulam pauperis vs (que) bibit.

Vnde duplex vacuum sentit Respublica, Nummi

Et Cerebri: vacuo gaudet vtro (que) Satan.

Cur tuba tardescit? Cur non taratantara Martis

Horrida crudeli vis nec ab hoste venit?

Corporis & Belli neruos Gens Anglica per dit;

Deficit Argentum, deficit humor alens.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=131) Qui fumo
gaudet, pereat caligine fumi;

Pectoris arctati nec bene purgat aquam.

Hecticus hinc morbus crassis (que) mephitibus auctus,

Qui Climacterico tempore finit opus:

Finit opus Fatale; facit quo (que) Prolis abortum.

Ah nimium Veneris perfidus hostis Odor!

Eius at Hyssopi substantia mixta liquore

Conferat Asthmaticis vt medicina data.

Three hundred thousand pounds yee yearely spend

In hastning griefes vnto a deadly end.

Yee need not Hellebore. Tobaccoes fume

From Court and Cottage wil expell the rheume.

Alas fond Fooles! which spend your meanes and health,

With Sathans ioy, and hurt to Common-wealth.

Why come not in your Foes to doe you harme?

The English faint, if they but heare Alarme.

When Humors quaile, the Spirits moue but dul,

When Subiects faile, th' Exchequer is not full.

Let them, that loue the Smoake, fall with the smell.

Tis true, Tobacconists; why do yee swell

With anger at the truth? Ere seuen yeeres end

Tobacco will the banefull force extend.

It breeds a wheezing in a narrow breast,

The Hecktick Feuer, or thick Fleame at least.

A bastard heat within the veines it leaues,

Which spoyles the Infant, if the Wife conceiues.

Yet sipt with Hysops iuyce, or held in mouth,

Or snuft, it cures the Lungs, and Tisickes growth.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=131)

### 2.16. CHAP. XVI.

Traiano Boccalini the Author of the Booke called the New-found Politick
complayneth to Apollo, that the Seuen Wisemen of Greece, who were put in trust
to reforme the World, did deceiue his Maie­sties expectation; and that the
World was worse then euer it was.

Apollo retires himselfe in discontent; but at length by the Fraternitie of the
Rosie Crosse, he is comfor­ted and walkes along with them in Procession.

TRaiano Boccalini the late Publisher of the Newes of Parnassus, whether of
Zeale, or of Ambition, or of enuie to see many of his equals promoted in
Apolloes Court, informed his Maiestie, that the Seuen Wisemen of Greece and
others, whom he had deputed to reforme the World of their late corruptions,
had more theorically and scholastical­ly discoursed of remedies, then really
found out any in substance to curbe or cure them. The Wise­man Thales, hee
said, would faine haue a Surgeon of the Fairy-land to open a little window in
the heart of man, whereby all his deceitfulnesse might appeare to one anothers
sight. But forsooth for feare of a greater perill in launcing a musckle or
principall veine in this miraculous fabrick of mans body, this speculatiue
window must bee let alone. Solon perswaded them to take away the inequality of
Mine and Thine, and to diuide the whole world anew, whereby euery man the
Begger aswell as [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=132) the King, might
haue his iust share. Chilon aduised to banish the vse of those Mettals of Gold
and Sil­uer, as the pestiferous root of all Euill. Pittacus laid the fault of
the moderne abuses vpon Rewards conferred on men of meane deserts, who entring
in­to the sacred seats of Iustice peruerted all the Bles­sings, which God
bestowed on Mankind, and cau­sed their Attendants and Officers to be nicknamed
Leaches, Butchers, and Tyrants. Periander would haue the imaginary vertues of
Fidelitie and Secre­cie restored and stampt in mens mindes. Bias his Proiect
was to hunt men into their ancient habita­tions, where their old Ancestors
inhabited a thou­sand yeeres past to giue elbow roome to the right­full
Owners. Cleobulus pronounced his definitiue sentence, that all the scope of
the worlds reforma­tion consisted in Rewarding the Good, and in punish­ing the
wicked. Cato would haue the Catarrattes and windowes of Heauen opened and the
whole World drowned againe, excepting some few of the male Children, to whom
hee wished an in­gendring and spreading power to bee giuen like Bees, to
continue the race of men without being beholding vnto any more women, whose
vn­vnluckinesse, pride, and vanitie, as he said, occasio­ned all the
villanies, which deformed the present World. In conclusion, Traiano Boccalini
accused these Reformers for their Hypocriticall suggestions and conspiracies
against the sacred honour of Apol­lo, in setting out Proclamations onely to
please Fooles, that no Hucksters should sell oaten meale, [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=132) or pease by a
false dish, and such like trifling mat­ters. And these friuolous Proclamations
they di­vulged of purpose to blinde the eyes of the multi­tude, to seeme to
doe somewhat, when as their Office and charge was to see a general Reformation
of all the most notorious Vices, which infected the Generation of humane
kinde, as Simony, sale of Iudges places, Bribery, and the like.

Apollo knowing this to bee true, which Boccalini with his too too lauish
tongue had blabbed a­broad, and ashamed, that euery common Citizen of
Parnassus began now to smell out the drist of his Statesmen, and could readily
descant of those se­crets, which in ancient times as a diuine mysterie they
concealed from vulgar minds, he retired him­selfe much discontented aswell in
respect of this cause, as for that it lay not in his absolute will to root out
the knowledge of Euill from the Christian World. The Lady Minerua and the nine
Muses laboured to mitigate his Matesties griefe; telling him, that Sinne must
raigne, as long as men beare sway in the World, vitia erunt donec homines. But
no perswasions preuayled. No Company pleased his humour, saue sad Melpomenes,
insomuch that many doubted lest some strange kinde of Melan­choly, which the
Physicians neuer heard of, would whirle about the braines of the vertuous, and
at the last eclipse the glorious light of their vnderstan­ding, if the chiefe
Lord of wisdomes Society should continue long in his retired Lodge.

While both the Head and members of this sa­cred [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=133) Corporation
suffered in this Labyrinth of sor­row and shame, the Lady Mnemosyne brought
his Maiestie word, that foure graue personages were newly arriued at his Court
Gate, stiling themselues the Fraternitie of the Rosie Crosse. At the first hee
seemed to slight the newes, thinking they might be some of those Cabalisticall
Mountebankes, which went abroad selling of smoke, and making credu­lous
persons to belieue, that they were of a Mathe­maticall fry, and race of wise
Philosophers, to whom Mercurius Trismegistius had transferred the neuer erring
Art of discerning Truth from falshood, the meanes to vnite the variable will
of man, and that which Worldlings doe most prize, to make the Philosophers
Stone.

But when hee better vnderstood, that this Fraternitie were attired in long
white Robes, with Oliue branches in their hands, and that they were the foure
famous Patrones of Great Brittaines Monarchie, Saint George, Saint An­drew,
Saint Dauid, and Saint Patricke, and that they attended at his Pallace Gate
for his comming forth to Procession, great was his Ioy; and pre­sently without
intermission his Imperiall Maiestie came forth, and after hee had reuerently
embraced and graced this Noble Fraternitie, hee told them the Causes of his
late discontent, and that he tooke himselfe to bee much fauoured, that they
resorted to visit him now in his griefes extremitie. Saint George answered,
that the causes of his sadnesse conceiued for the vices and decayes of Great
Brit­taine [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=133) proceeded of a
fellow-feeling of a vertuous Conscience, and to that end they came now to
discouer their knowldge, and to lay open the ge­nerall faults of that
Monarchie in a new kinde of tickling straine, not so much to content the
Iudici­ous, for they that be whole need no Physicians, as to draw the carnall
minds of the Common people to heare their vices blamed, and consequently to
make them ashamed, which are not altogether past grace. And now, said hee, if
it please your Maiestie and your Learned Traine to walke along with vs in
Procession round about this eminent Ci­tie of Parnassus, wee will consecrate
the Churches anew, which perhaps will worke some remorse and contrition; and
for the obstinate, wee will blesse our selues and the Godly from their
conta­gious Company.

Apollo bad them goe forwards, and that himselfe, the Lady Pallas, the Muses,
the Graces, and all his Court euen from his Bedchamber to the Kitchin should
follow to see the Consecration, and to heare the Vices and Errours of the
Brittaines discouered.

The famous Patriarchs went forwards in such manner as the moderne Clergie are
wont to goe in Procession, and euery one of them successiuely sung as
followeth against the Corruptions of the Times.

### 2.17. CHAP. XVII.

The foure Patrones or Patriarches of Great Britaine doe sing in Procession the
ensuing Rithmes.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=134) Apollo
pronounceth a conclusiue Oracle to remedie all Abuses, preparing the way to
the Golden Fleece.

S. George.

FRom painting of the Trinitie

From iesting with high Maiestie,

From th' Alcoran and Papistry,

From Brokers rotten Tapistry.

From deepe Mysteries too holy:

From mad Fits and Melancholy;

From Iesuits Monkes, and Friers:

From Hypocrites, Knaues and Liers.

From trusting Saints, distrusting God

From feeling of his wrath and rod.

From Romes Pardons, Bulls and Masses:

From Wine Lees, and broken Glasses.

From Sale of Soules, and Heauens Gifts;

From Beades and bables, Whoorish shifts.

From wounding Christ on Gods right hand:

From grounding Faith vpon the sand.

From parting thence by any way

His Bodie plac't vntill Doomesday.

From condemning sacred Marriage:

From secret shrift, and lust full rage.

From Trust to Merits, except Christs

From Iuglers trickes and Antichrists.

Our Christs great Genius Blesse and defend vs.

S. Andrew.

FRom blaming things indifferent:

From working in our Faith a rent.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=134) From
aselfe-will'd rash Puritane,

As from a Foole, or Mauritane.

From him that railes against a Cope,

And yet would be his Parish Pope.

From ingrossing from a Brother

Goods or Charge due to another.

From many Offices alone,

Or Benefices more then One.

From causing Scandall to my Place,

Vsurping much with shamelesse face.

From Clergy-men non Residents:

From such as shew ill Presidents.

From s [...]it Pick-locks, and Cut-purse Knines:

From stealing Honey from Bee- [...]ines.

From sta [...]ting in anothers Coat,

Like Aesops Daw, preaching by roat,

From Dancing on the Sabaoth Day:

From shewing Youth lewd Cupids way.

Our Sauiours Genius Shield and protect vs.

S. Dauid.

FRom swallowing Law with greedie throat:

From tearing Christ his seamelesse Coat.

From selling Christ for Earthly drosse;

From wealth gain'd by good Christians losse.

From Iudges sentence after Sacke:

From Thunder, Tempests, and Sea-wracke.

From those, which Plaintiffes most approue;

As from Munkeyes, which Spiders loue.

From Lawes, which wrest the Sickmans staffe:

From Swine, which  [...]ate mo [...]e Foule then draffe.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=135) From
letting Lawyers haue their wils:

From Scammonie made into Pils.

From hirelings Tongues, and Make-bates hisse,

Betraying Law with Iudas kisse.

From a corrupted starely Iudge,

Which makes good Clients moyle and drudge.

From Magistrates too insolent:

From needlesse Courts impertinent.

From them which speake not what they thinke;

Which blame small faults, at greater winke.

From Iudges vpstars late from Clownes:

From Serpents stings, or Tyrants frownes.

The Worlds bright Genius Keepe and defend vs.

S. Patrick.

FRom hired Spies, and hidden Foes,

More dangerous then any woes.

From Leaders young, or too too Old:

From Souldiers knowne of nature Cold.

From Butchers, which mans bloud doe spill:

From sparing those, whom God bids, kill.

From a Commander meanly borne:

From reaping Tares ins [...]eed of Corne.

From hopes in Captaines not belou'd;

From ordring Bees, when they are mou'd.

From meeting Straglers night or day

Left vnprouided by the way.

From Souldiers tumul [...]s, ta [...]ts, and quips,

If long vnpaid in Forts or Ships.

From Leaders without stratagems;

From letting Hogs haue precious Gems.

From a Leader too out-ragious:

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=135) From a
Captaine not couragious.

From filthy moores and Irish bogs,

From Scottish mists and English fogs.

Discretions Genius Shield and preuent vs.

S. George.

FRom Spanish Pensions, and their Spies:

From weeping Cheese with Argus eyes,

From slumbring long in carelesse Peace:

From dreaming oft of curelesse ease.

From fond Maskes, and idle mumming:

From fain'd Playes and causelesse drumming.

From preferring Peace with danger

Before iust Warre, wrongs reuenger.

From suffering Foes to triumph still;

From letting Sathan haue his will.

From falling from Saint Michaels armes,

Not taking heed by others harmes.

From puffing vp proud Giants growne:

From pulling Dauids courage downe.

From louing Money more then God;

From keeping Beanes within the cod.

From disbursing needfull treasure,

To maintayne phant astick pleasure.

From greasing Lawyers hands with Gold,

Which better serues to keepe a Hold.

From fostring Suites (O poys [...]ous Toad)

For Money, which ends Warres abroad.

From those men, which sue Protections

To shrowd their lewd shrewd Defections.

Great Brittaines Genius Guard and restore vs.

S. Andrew.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=136)

FRom Iesuits old conuerted,

As from Brownists young per [...]erted.

From the Simony of a Priest;

From Mills, which spoyle the Owners griests.

From glorying in an outward Robe:

From tainting Faith. The Saints Wardrobe.

From a Priest, that couets money;

From a Bee-hiue without Honey,

From Preachers, which to Pride encline,

Or from old plainnesse may decline.

From those, which in silke Robes doe ruffle,

Which more for Goods then Good doe scuffle.

From such as line vpon the l [...]rch,

Like Dogs and Hogs within the Church.

From men, whose wits lie in their beards;

From Goats, and all such impious heards.

From the Bibles false construction,

As from ruine and destruction.

From all Aequiuocation,

With mentall reseruation.

From Romes Charmes and Babels Ballets:

From Lumbards bits and Spanish Sallets.

Our Christian Genius, Saue and protect vs.

S. Dauid.

FRom Westminster Hals Out-laries:

From causelesse long vagaries.

From meeting strong Competitours:

From Iudges growne Sollicitours.

From contesting with Superiours,

Or despising  [...]r  [...]feriours,

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=136) From
contending with our Equals,

Procuring anger, blowes, or brawles.

From crossing men in their disputes;

From losing loue, and Friends salutes:

From angring Lords, or Court Minions:

From selfe-will and wits opinions.

From Law-suits worse, then Spanish Poxe,

As bad as Hornes, or Widowes boxe.

From ignorant Clerkes and Deacons;

From seeing of fired Beacons.

From angring God with Cup or Can:

From drinking more, then serues one man.

From keeping Drunkards company:

From Agues, Coughes, or Timpany.

From Ale-houses, Bowling Allies;

From Bulls Pizzles, and Spaines Gallies.

Sweet vertues Genius Blesse, shield, and saue vs.

S. Patrick.

FRom all Actions, which are euill;

From vaine shewes, the Flesh, and Deuill.

From all State Reason hatcht in Spaine,

Which will doe wrong, and wrong maintaine.

From bloudy Clements cursed Knife,

That sought to spoyle his Souereignes life.

From Rauiliacks dawned Dagger:

From Iesuits, that will swagger.

From Forraigne F [...]s inuasions:

From Papisticall perswasions.

From them, which make free Christians  [...].

Ambitious Do [...]s with Moorish branes.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=137) From
sudden Insurrections:

From poysoned Confections.

From the Spanish Inquisition:

From want of good Munition.

From false and lewd Conspiracies:

From Rouers and Sea Pi [...]acies.

From rampant Nuns now clad in gray:

From Strumpets wholy giu'n to play.

From burning baits and Sinnes desire;

As from the smoke of Sea-coale fire.

Our Sauiours Genius Saue and defend vs.

S. George.

FRom carrying Coine out of this Land

Without the which it cannot stand.

From Wares and Bils of Bankers strange,

Except we cloth and fish exchange.

From bringing backe the Foxes Taile

For many Skins sold by retaile.

From priuate Gaine by publicke losse:

From comming home by weeping Crosse.

From wasting Woods for Timber fit;

From Troians too late after wit.

From high Sayles, and costly Coaches:

From Pickpurse Drugs, and much Loches.

From all Tobaccoes stinking fume:

From a foule breath, and store of Rheume.

From wearing Gold or Siluer-lace,

While Dearth and Warres rush on apace.

From Meate and Drinke seru'd in much Plate,

When Pe [...]ry afflicts the State.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=137) From
such, as English Carzey slight,

Preferring Spaines Silkes weake and light.

Our States great Genius Blesse and defend vs.

S. Andrew.

FRom eating Flesh insteed of Fish:

From hauing Scandall in my dish.

From spending time at Tragedies:

Or hard got Coine at Comedies.

From reading foolish Rimers Bookes,

Or lying Tales, like bayted hookes.

From much Play at Noddy and Trumpe:

As from the Smell of foule ship-pumpe.

From many Horses, Hounds, and Hawkes

Actaeons end, or plots of Faukes.

From idle Tales, Wares and Fables:

From Primero, Gleeke, and Tables.

From Irish, Lurch, Chance, and Ticktack.

The Boot deseruing or the Racke.

From the Truth maskt in disguises:

From all friuolus surmises.

From Cursing and from Periury:

From Coyning and from Forgery.

From Parasites, Knaues, and Sharkers,

From such Dogs, as are no barkers.

From an Alchymist growne threed-bare:

From much carke, and foolish care

The Heauens high Genius. Guard and refine vs.

S. Dauid.

FRom being vnthankfull vnto friends:

From leauing Angels, louing f [...]ends.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=138) From all
Physicians Recipes,

Which commonly proue Decipes.

From Physicke at a Papists hand:

From him, which hat es his Natiue Land.

From an Emperickes experience:

From a Scriueners straight-lac't Conscience.

From Tauernes, Tables, Cards, and Dice;

From Beggery, bad Name, and Lice.

From boystrous stormes and blustring blasts:

From ships at Sea, which haue no masts.

From Pot-bardhs and Poetasters:

From all vnthrifts, and great wasters.

From them, which dine alwayes in Powles:

From all Carousers in great bowles.

From a Crab face, which neuer smiles:

From Lawyers full of quirkes and wiles.

From Vsurers, and base Brokers;

From Attourneyes, that be soakers.

From Cut-throat Mercers baits and Bookes:

From Beares, big bugs, and rauenous Rookes.

From womens smiles and tempting lookes:

From Crocodiles and Cheaters hookes.

From a woman, which is franticke:

From a Seruingman Pedantick.

From too much sweat and trudging toyle,

As from a Lampe without some Oyle.

Heauens bright G [...]nius Shield and preuent vs.

S. Patrick.

FRom Vagabonds, Kn [...]nes, and Gypsies:

From Comets and Sunnes Eclipses.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=138) From
bloudie Surgeons, that would purge vs:

From cruell Iudges, that would scourge vs.

From a young Physicians Physicke;

From the Lungs, Consumption, T [...]sick.

From brain sicke Louers f [...]nd Conceits:

From coozening Pedlers strange deceits.

From Coughes, Blindnesse, and Vettigo:

From Biles, Tetters, and Serpigo.

From all Poxes and the Meazels;

From a House too full of Weazels.

From the Plague and putrid Feuer

Blesse me, Lord, and keepe me euer.

From the Scuruie, Crampe, and Itches,

From Bone-aches, and sore Stiches.

From the Gout, the Stone and Collicke;

Which some hinder to be frollicke.

From numme Palsies, and p [...]le Dropsies;

From secret Griefes and Pleurisies.

From Scabbedhands and foule Blisters:

From Purgations and much Glisters.

From Gluttonie and Drunkennesse

Causing these, and eu'ry sicknesse.

True Physicks Genius. Conuert and heale vs.

FRom Seruingmen without good parts:

From feeding such fit for dung-carts.

From Lubbers that will eate and drinke,

Doing nothing else, but lie and stinke.

From r [...]de Carters, and raw Saylers;

From Quick-sands, and Bedlem-Raylers.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=139) From
Bonds for Debts, or Indentures;

As from perillous Aduentures.

From one that feares to tame a Scold:

From a Coward and a Cuckold.

From proud Ladies vse of Pattens:

From the Popes and Paris Mattens.

From those which scorne their Countries tire,

And to Out-landish bend, like Wire.

From those, which long for each trifle.

And their Husbands Purses rifle.

From those, which hunt for curious cheere,

Chicken Peepers, and Phesants deere.

From Ladies vse of waters hot;

From pimpled faces, and teeths rot.

From them, which loue themselues alone;

Or such, as loue more Mates then one.

From a woman, thats wont to friske:

From Wine, which tasts not liuely brisk.

Our Soules bright Genius Diuert and keepe vs.

S. Andrew.

FRom Mens long locks, and Maids cut haire;

From these with points, those painted faire.

From Citizens like Gallants drest:

From Apes vngrac't, and so vnblest.

From things, Scandall which engender;

Geese with Ganders changing gender;

From Periwickes and curled lockes:

From Womanizers, and Smel-smockes.

From Newfangles, and Fond-fashions;

From fooles fancies, and wild Passions.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=139) From
setting Maids to Dancing Schooles,

Or Musicke much, to make them Fooles.

From a Cockney shallow-headed,

Tells not what legs a Sheepe hath dead.

From gazing on a Beauteous skin:

From a faire Apple, foule within.

From kissing much a Damsell sweet,

Though for a Pope a morsell meet.

From sucking on a lickrish bait:

From making crooked what is strait.

From faire Gazers out at Casements;

From false Mistresses embracements.

From Slanders cutting worse then Swords;

From bawdy Iests, and beastly words.

The Starres faire Genius Saue and direct vs.

S. Dauid.

FRom lulling in a Ladies lap,

Like a great Foole, which longs for pap.

From Time ill spent, and vaine Repute:

From Apple-trees without some fruit.

From Faith without wrought Charitie;

From false pretending Pietie.

From loue of Pelfe and worldly wealth,

Not carking most for my Soules health.

From Siluer Pictures loue or Gold;

From fancying Earth, when I am old.

From buying Lands Old and cruell;

From losing Heauen, gayning Hell

From Diues fare, and hardned mind;

While Lazarus with hunger's pin'd.

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=140) From
tumbling in a downy bed,

While Godlier men for cold lie dead.

From Misers, and those greedy Elues,

Which loue no Creatures but themselues.

From wishing Neighbours lazie bones,

When Hiues are full, to play the Drones.

From sneaking like a Snaile at home;

When Forraigne Climes yeeld elbow rome;

From them which hate Plantations:

From Sathans combinations.

Our Christ's bright Genius Blesse and reforme vs

S. Patrick.

FRom a faire House which seldome smoakes,

While the Owner in Riot soakes.

From slauish prodigalitie:

From miserable frug alitie.

From a Cloake that's full of patches:

From a Hen which neuer hatches.

From seeing Elues or strange Monsters;

Or those men my mind misconsters.

From those which causlesse doe arrest vs.

When we would gladly sit and rest vs.

From such sights make vs amazed:

From a Chamber not well glazed.

From rude people in a furie:

From a false and partiall Iurie.

From Almanacks false predictions:

From th' Exchange and Currents fictions.

From White Spaniards, or Red headed:

From all Women which are bearded.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=140) From
Black-haird Women, stubborne proud:

From Little Deuils scolding loud.

From the Faire-snouted held for Fooles;

From all long slow-backs, idle tooles.

From Red-hair'd Foxes, closely bad:

From pale and leane, too peeuish sad.

The Worlds great Genius, Blesse and defend vs.

After these deuout Patriarchs and famous Fra­ternitie of the Rosie Crosse, had
made an end of their Hymnes with an applauding Alleluiah to the Di­uine
Maiestie, for the discouery of themselues now at a pinch, when Sathan thought
to sist vs all as Wheate, and vtterly to eclipse the glory of this Monarchie,
they interceded vnto Apolloes Ma­iestie, that hee would proclaime some
fauourable Edict on the behalfe of their humble and penitent Clients.
Whereupon the Noble Emperour rose vp from his Sunny Throne, and pronounced his
Oracle.

If Brittaines King like valiant Hercules,

His Stables cleanse, and those Foxes footlesse,

Apolloes Oracle.

Which Christian Vines destroy, do firret out;

His Prouinces shall rise without all doubt.

And brauely flourish by our Golden Fleece;

As Rome was, sau'd once by the noyse of Geese,

So he restraine some of these vagaries:

For Contraries are cur'd by Contraries.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=141)

### 2.18. CHAP. XVIII.

Orpheus Iunior sheweth that one of the chiefest causes of the Decay of Trading
in Great Brittaine pro­ceeded by the rash Aduentures of the Westerne Merchants
in passing the Straites of Gibraltar, and in fishing on the Coast of
Newfoundland, without wafting ships to defend them from Pirats.

THe next day after this memorable Procession of the famous Fraternity. Apollo
caused a publick Proclamation to bee set vp on the great Porch of Neptunes
Royall Exchange, willing and requiring all such as wished well to Great
Britaine to repaire with their grieuances before him into the Hall of the said
Exchange, where hee had appointed a par­ticular meeting for the affaires of
that Common­wealth in the afternoone of the said day. Orpheus Iunior finding
by experience, that one of the late causes of the Decay of Trade arose by the
misgo­uerned and stragling courses of the Westerne Mer­chants, which either of
foole-hardinesse, carelesse­nesse, or of a griping humour to saue a little
charge, aduentured in their returne from Newfoundland, without Fleets, or
Wafters to guard them, or any politicke Order to passe through the Straits of
Gi­braltar, to the Dominions of the King of Spaine, to Marseilles, or Italy,
where yeerly they met with the Moorish Pirats, who by the conniuance of the
Great Turk, were suffered to prey vpon al Christiās, which they encountred.
With these inconueniences Or­pheus Iunior being grieued to see his Countrie
suf­fer [[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=141)
through these Merchants sides, he exhibited a Petition to his Imperiall
Maiestie. Shewing these irregular courses, as also how that the Golden Fleece
which now became rife in all mens mouthes might bee quickly surprized and
anihilated, if his Proui­dence did not becimes take some safe course to
se­cure the labours of those new Argonautickes, which spared no shipping to
saile into those Coasts, where this precious Fleece flourished on the backes
of Neptunes Sheepe.

Apollo vpon this Information examined the pro­ceedings of the English, and
comparing them with the Hollanders, as also with those of other Com­panies
established with Priuiledges and Ciuill Or­der; found more confusion among the
Fishermen of New foundland, then in any other. For where soe­uer the
Hollanders either fished or traded, they went strongly guarded with wasting
Ships to pre­uent all casualties. The Spaniards likewise being taught in
Queene Elizabeths time by the English, & sithence by the Moorish Pirats to go
wel prouided with some ships of Defence. Yea, and all those Com­panies in
London, which the King of Great Britaine had graced with Charters and
Freedomes prospe­red, and neuer went abroad without sufficient strength.
Onely, those petty Merchants, which were led with desire of Gaine, not willing
to en­ranke themselues into an orderly Societie, but as it were in despite of
Gouernment singled and seue­red from Fleets, these became continually a spoyle
to the Pirats.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=142) His
Maiesty viewed the East India Company, and found them Rich with many braue
seruiceable Ships.

He searched into the strength of the Turkie Mer­chants, and saw them stored
with warlike Muni­tion and abounding in wealth; yea, and by their painfull
Trading getting the start of the Italians, which heretofore in Argosies gained
and exported great treasure out of this Kingdome.

He pryed into the state of the Moscouie Compa­ny, and found them very able
subsisting of them­selues, and readie to supply their Countrey with many rich
Commodities.

He entred into the Mystery of the French Socie­tie, and also into the Easterne
Merchants, and be­held them winning the Trade from the Balticke Sea, and the
Hans Towne in Germany.

Onely the Westerne Trading he saw out of square, and all for want of setled
Fleets.

At last it came into his Maiesties minde, that the Noble King Iames of happy
memory did about three yeeres past see into these discommodities, and
thereupon directed out a Commission at the suite of the Corporation for the
Plantation of the New­foundland, to prouide a couple of good Ships on the
charge of the Fishermen, which yeerely fre­quented that Coast, continually to
assist them a­gainst the inuasions of Pirats, who had in a few yeeres before
pillaged them to the damage of fortie thousand pounds, besides a hundred
Peeces of Ordnance, and had taken away aboue fifteene hun­dred [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=142) Mariners to
the great hinderance of Nauiga­tion and terrour of the Planters.

Vpon mature consideration of this Royall Commission Apollo pronounced, that it
was neces­sary to keepe this Commission still a foot, aswell in time of peace
as of Warre, both for the rearing of expert Commanders at Sea, as for the
securing of that most hopefull Country. And to this purpose he commanded
Orpheus Iunior to attend at his Ma­iesties Court of Great Britaine, and to
sollicit his Soueraigne to conclude that Noble Designe, which his Royall
Father vpon most weightie deliberation had formerly granted.

The end of the Second Part.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=143)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=143)

## 3\. THE THIRD PART OF The Golden Fleece.

### 3.1. CHAP. I.

Orpheus Iunior is required by Apollo to discouer where the Golden Fleece lies.

Orpheus performes his Maiesties commandement, shewes that there be sundry
kindes of the Golden Fleece, all which, after an allusion to the En­glish
natures, hee reduceth into one maine Trade, to the Plantation and Fishing in
the Newfoundland. The generall cause, which moued Orpheus to regard this
Golden Fleece.

APollo secretly informed by the Fra­ternity of the Rosie Crosse, that Or­pheus
Iunior could well tell where the King of great Britaine might perpetually
finde Trading both in time of Warres, as Peace, to [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=144) inrich himselfe
and his subiects; which Trading they stiled the Golden Fleece, more certaine
then Iasons Fleece transported from Colchos, or the Phi­losophers Stone, so
much dreamed on by the Chy­mists, because the sheepe which yeelds this
preti­ous Gaine, were to be shorne for eight moneths space without
intermission, and of bodies farre bigger then the Peru sheepe, which the
Spaniards br [...]gge to equalize Asses for proportionable greatnesse. In May
last, 1626. he commanded Or­pheus Iunior, as hee tendred his seruice, and the
good of his languishing Countrey, to discouer where these Golden-coated sheepe
pastured, and the manner how the noble Britaines might attaine vn­to them.

Orpheus Iunior answered, that the Golden Fleece which the fraternity of the
rosie Crosse insinuated to his Maiestie, was parti-coloured like the
Raine­bow, so produced by the Patriarch Iacobs Art, ac­cording to the seuerall
obiects represented, and likewise diuided into the Naturall, the Artificiall,
and the Mysticall; sometimes singled out the one from the other, sometimes
mixt, as politike Mer­chants and Diers know best; yet all of them
com­prehended vnder one generall name, viz. Tra­ding. That it was necessary
for the Common-wealth of Great Britaine, to pursue all the kindes of these
obiects, lest the English Nation, who neuer likes any thing how profitable
soeuer, vnlesse it be diuersified, ‘Pragmata non Angli invariata probant.’
might take surfet of one sort of Trading, and at [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=144) length fall to a
loathing thereof. Whereto he ad­ioyned, that by many yeares experience, hee
had learnt the skill of discerning spirits. And that hee found out this
quality of the English, to delight in varieties; of Newes, though for the most
part false; of Apparell, though they sold their lands for it; of
multiplicities of Law suits, though oftentimes they knew themselues bought and
sold by them which they most trusted; of meate and drinke, though they felt
the euent in grieuous torments. And as in their natures they respected choise
and change, so in their outward senses hee obserued first that their sight
receiued more contentment in many colours, then in one alone; specially, those
colours of Gold and Siluer, they preferred be­fore the pure and simple, which
they held in con­tempt as fitter for Hob-lurkins, then for generous spirits.
As for their smelling, they approued of sundry sorts, as Ciuet, Amber-Greece,
Muske, Storax, and aboue all, of Tobacco, though some of them lost their wits
and the vse of their senses in the taking of it; and though most of them were
ready to choake for good fellowship. The like he said, he could discourse of
the rest of their senses, outward and inward. But these instances would
suffice, as he conceiued, to open the way to many kindes of Trading, as well
to furnish that Nation with those seuerall Commodities, though super­fluous,
as to replenish the Kingdome with more supplies, lest in prouiding themselues
barely on their Countries charge with all those wares which their newfangled
imagination prouoketh them [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=145) to long for,
their Countrie might in a small while deuour her selfe, or else eate vp her
owne tayle like a Munkey.

Now to explaine what hee had spoken of the mysticall Golden Fleece, hee onely
at that time of­fered to declare the nature, vse, and place where it
flourisheth, as how he came to the knowledge of it, if it pleased his Maiestie
to affoord him audi­ence. Apollo bad him proceed, signifying vnto him, that
the principall scope of the Meeting at that season, was to haue that
beneficiall Trade communicated to all his vertuous Attendants in Great
Britaine.

Orpheus Iunior then went forward in this dis­course: About ten yeares past,
most mighty Prince, musing with my selfe what might be the Psalmists meaning
of those words: Their sound is gone out into all Nations, I happily
coniectured at the last, that the Word of God should not onely be spread
abroad and planted by those which ought of zeale and charity to teach it; but
by those, which like the frogs out of the Dragons mouth, might publish it for
temporall ends. And when I had throughly Apocalyp. lookt into these ends, the
one neglected by the Professors of the Gospell, the other begun and con­tinued
with prosperous successe by the Spaniards in the West-Indies, where within
these 120. yeares, many thousand Heathen people haue receiued the Christian
Religion, though not so purely, as wee could wish, I collected this memorable
obseruati­on, that our Sauiour makes vse of our worlaly desires to serue his
diuine intentions. In this fashion deales [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=145) an Earthly
Father with an vntoward Daughter, for whose aduancement in mariage, he giues a
large portion to counteruaile her imperfections. By which meditations of mine,
I perceiued, that nothing but gaine could moue the carelesse minds of our
Ilanders to seeke abroad for new habitati­ons. I lookt into the Plantations at
the Summer Iles, Virginia, yea into Affrick, as farre as the Cape of good
hope, where for the ease of our East-Indian Fleetes, I conceiued at Sancta
Helena, or Soldana, a fit Plantation might be erected. But after that I had
considered the many difficulties by reason of the tediousnesse of the voyage,
the charge, and aboue all, the malice of the Spaniards, who being like to the
Dogge in the Manger, doe want people to plant, and yet they will not permit
others to plant. I saw that God had reserued the Newfound­land for vs
Britaines, as the next land beyond Ire­land, and not aboue nine or tenne dayes
saile from thence. I saw that he had bestowed a large portion for this
Countries mariage with our Kingdomes, euen this great Fishing, that by this
meanes it might be frequented and inhabited the sooner by vs. And I verily
thinke, that his Heauenly proui­dence ordained this Iland not without a
Mystery for vs of Great Britaine, that Ilanders should dwel in Ilands; and
that wee should ponder on this en­suing Morall:

Euen as our Sauiour Christ making Fishermen, Fishers of men, preferred, Peter,
Andrew, & others his Apostles, being plaine persons and simple, be­fore the
great Lords of the earth, as also the Lillies [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=146) of the field,
before the Royalties of Salomon: so in these latter daies, his vnsearchable
wisedome preferring necessary maintenance, before need­lesse superfluity, hath
allotted Newfoundland, the grand Port of Fishing, to the Professors of the
Gospell. And because the depraued nature of man­kinde delighteth in appetite
and some appearance of profit; therefore his sacred Maiestie discouered that
plentifull Fishing vnto vs, to allure vs from our home-bred idlenesse, to this
necessary place of Plantation. It is not Gold, nor a Siluer mine, which can
feed either body or soule; but the one requires nourishment to be gotten by
the sweat of the browes, the other must haue spirituall repast by the Word of
God. Before the Spaniards inhabited the West-Indies, and had found those rich
treasures in Peru; Sincerity raigned among the Nobles, and Simplicity among
the Commons. But now money being growne in some places more rife then in times
past, neighbourly Loue and Humility are fled backe into Heauen: so that we may
well curse the time when these Mines were first seized on by the Spaniards.
For, as the Author de la nouvelle Fraunce affirmeth: when I confider, saith
hee, that by these Golden mines, the Spaniards haue kindled and entertained
wars in all parts of Chri­stendome, and haue studied to ruinate their
neigh­bours, and not the Turke; I cannot thinke, faith this French writer,
that any other then the Deuill, hath beene the Author of their voyages. Ie ne
puis penser qu' autre que le Diable ait esté Autheur de leurs voyages. In this
resolution being confirmed, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=146) I transported
two seuerall Colonies of men and wo­men into those parts with full intent to
follow af­ter, and to lead the remnant of my life in this new Plantation.

It seemes strange vnto my vertuous followers in Parnassus, replied Apollo,
that a man of your fashion, not driuen by need, which as the prouerbe saies,
makes the old wife trot, but sufficiently proui­ded for in your natiue
Countrie, should now in the midst of your age, spend the best and rarest part
of your life, which is yet to come, in building and tilling of new places.

To this Orpheus Iunior answered; I confesse, most Noble Prince, that sometimes
I feele my Pil­low very vneuen, my head tossed and turmoyled with many a
netled thought, and my minde playing loath to depart from my natiue soile. One
while the conceit of my supposed worth, reputa­tion, kindred, acquaintance,
ease, conuenience of meanes at home, and other symbolized ornaments of this
present world, doe recall mee backe, like another Demas, from this charitable
worke in the Newfoundland. But instantly I blush for shame, when I thinke on
the magnanimity of Heathenish men, who may rise against vs at the iudgement
day, and plead their good deserts before our fro­zen zeale; That a Citizen of
Rome, for the safety of his City of Rome, sacrificed his life in that horrible
gulfe; That Codrus of Athens, though a King, did disguise himselfe as a
priuate Souldier, of set pur­pose to dye for the sauing of his people; That
the chiefest Nobility among the Gothes and Vandales, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=147) forsooke their
owne habitations, to accompany the meaner sort of people, and to lead them
into forraigne Countries, who without their personall presence, would haue
staid at home like Drones, and pined for want of liuing.

Patria magnanimis est vbicunque bene,

That's my Countrie which giues me my wel­being. Euery place agrees with an
honest minde, and that as naturally, as the Sea with the Fish, as the Ayre
with the Fowle. Another while I me­ditate on that saying of S. Paul: He which
prouides not for them of his owne houshold, is worse then an Infidell: Whereby
the care of my Wife and Chil­dren, kindling an indulgent loue within mee,
reuokes my resolution from this enterprize. But presently after I see the same
God ouerlooking Newfoundland, which ouerlookes Europe, and all the world ouer,
sounding out this Proclamation: He that loues his Father and Mother aboue me,
is not worthy of me: which the Iesuites imbracing some­what too meritoriously,
doe to our shame, put in practice, abandoning all the pleasures of their
na­tiue Countrie, and betaking themselues to the vttermost parts of the earth,
so that China and Iapan doe ring out the name of our Sauiour Christ by their
meanes and trauels.

Sometimes I suspect the Action, because I see men of my ranke so much giuen to
lazinesse, and the loue of their dunghils at home, that they will indure any
smart of oppression or cracke of credit, rather then they wil depart into a
remoter place to liue in perpetuall plenty. But this cogitation [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=147) quickly
vanisheth, when I consider the estates of our rich and poore, how the one will
not, the other cannot. The one lies besotted with the lullabies of carnall
ease, caring more for this worlds vanity, then for heauenly Blisse purchased
by workes of charity, which as S. Iames wrote, will helpe to couer multitudes
of sinnes. And the other for want of meanes, cannot get thither without some
good peoples deuotions. In which latter discommodity I am sory to find so many
helplesse in my Coun­try of Wales. Wheras close by vs, I see our neigh­bours
of Deuonshire scorning to become Gossips to pouerty, yearely to send aboue 150
ships to salute the Newfoundland, transporting therehence those Commodities,
without which, Spaine and Italy can hardly liue.

This is our Colchos, where the Golden Fleece flourisheth on the backes of
Neptunes sheepe, conti­nually to be shorne. This is Great Britaines Indies,
neuer to be exhausted dry. This pretious Treasure surmounts the Duke of
Burgundies Golden Flecce, which hee called after that name by reason of his
large customs which he receiued from our English Woolls and Cloth in the Low
Countries. From this Iland, our English transport worth 20000. pound; and
might yeerely treble this summe, if the Plantations goe forward as happily as
they doe, and may with the tenth part of the charge, which hath beene defrayed
about other Plantati­ons. So many men, so many mindes. Euery man hath his
peculiar fancie, either by the motions of good Angels, or by the instigation
of the Spirituall [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=148) Tempter, or by
the constitution of the braine, hot cold, or deprauedly mixt. But let men in
cold blood lay aside their crotchets, and the sparkling flames of imagination,
and iudiciously weigh the vtility of this businesse, comparing the dangers,
the remotenesse, and charge of other voyages, and no doubt but God will giue
them a new heart, to imbrace this proiect, which experience for these 80.
yeares space hath confirmed vnto vs to bee more beneficiall, then any other
whatsoeuer.

Here Orpheus Iunior suspended his speech; when as all the Auditors and
standers by shouted for ioy, to heare that a new Colchos was found out for the
restoring of Trading, which lately began to faile in the North-west parts of
Europe. There were many Ladies which purposed out of hand to imitate Isabella
Queene of Castile, in selling their Iewels, Rings, and Bracelets, for the
furthering of this Plantation and Fishing, as the other had done to furnish
out Columbus for the first discouery of the West-Indies. Great was the zeale,
& most hope­full the Charity like to spring from this zeale, (for euery man
prepared an auspicious offring for the gratulation of these ioyfull newes)
when they also vnderstood that all the profits of this Golden Fleece were to
be distributed among the Professors of the Gospel, & that Great Britaines
Monarchy might in a short time arriue to as great riches as the Spanish. After
these applauses, his Maiestie beckned to Or­pheus Iunior, that hee should
proceed in his dis­course. But suddenly the Lady Pallas interrupted him,
saying, that it were requisite, all his Nobles [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=148) and Gouernours
of Prouinces should be present at the discouery of the Golden Fleece, whereby
some timely order might bee taken for the guarding of the Coast, which
produced this pretious increase of Trade. Apollo liked very wel of this wise
admo­nition, & against that day seuennight, required his Pegasean Postmasters
to summon his Prouinciall Gouernours, all other businesses set aside, that
they should appeare before him in the great Hall of the Court of Audience at
Parnassus.

### 3.2. CHAP. 2.

Orpheus Iunior particularizeth the manifold bene­fits of the Golden Fleece,
which might serue to repaire the decay of Trade, lately complained of in Great
Britaine, and to restore that Mo­narchy to all earthly happinesse.

IVst on the prefixed day, the afore-mentioned Gouernors appeared before his
Maiestie, at the place appointed, where Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses,
the Graces, the Nymphs of Great Bri­taine and Ireland, and all the wise
Councellors of State, with the choise spirits of his Empire atten­ding on his
Maiestie, hee commanded Orpheus Iunior particularly to certifie vnto them the
neces­sity and commodity of the Golden Fleece, which might supply the defects
of Great Britaine, and restore it to the most flourishing estate, wherein it
euer stood in former times. Orpheus Iunior after some few excuses of his
disability, proceeded to epitomize the singular properties of the Golden
[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=149) Fleece
so much expected in this wise:

Most redoubted Emperor, and next to our great Creator, the prime Author of our
worldly happi­nesse, I am glad after the manifold crosses, which I haue
sustained by sundry accidents, that God hath reserued me an Instrument this
day to discouer that gaine, which helpes our Commerce personall betwixt party
and party, and the Prouinciall be­twixt our Kingdomes and the foraigne, and
both in the scale and ballance of Trade. But before I de­clare the Commodities
of this Trade, I wil first shew the Necessity wherein we stand, if it be not
sudden­ly aduanced forwards.

To begin with my Natiue Countrey Wales; Al­though many strange sicknesses haue
diuers times of late yeares afflicted vs, yet notwithstan­ding the multitudes
of people are here so great, that thousands yearly doe perish for want of
re­liefe. Yea, I haue known in these last deare yeares, that 100. persons haue
yearly died in a parish, where the Tithes amounted not to fourscore pounds a
yeare, the most part for lacke of food, fire and rai­ment, the which the
poorer sort of that Country stand in greater need of, then the Inhabitants of
the Champion Countreyes, by reason of their Mountaines and hills, which cause
the winter there to be most bitter with stormy winds, raine, or snow, and that
for the space of eight moneths. As also experience teacheth that Mountainous
people require more store of nourishment for their bodies, then they which
dwell in the plaines or vallies: which was the reason, that in the North
[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=149) parts of
England, Seruants vsed to couenant here­tofore with their Masters to feed them
with bread made with Beanes, and not of Barly from Allhalontide vntill May.

Another point of Necessity to procure vs to set 2 forwards this most hopeful
Plantation, and conse­quētly the Fishing, proceeds of the want of woods. For
the Ironmongers vpon what warrant I cannot learne, haue lately consumed our
woods, and those fit for timber, within lesse thē  [...] miles to the Sea, so
that we must shortly repaire to other Countryes for woods to be employed
towards shipping, buil­ding, husbandry, &c. which poore men are not able to
do. The decay of these woods also wil cause our breed of Cattle to decrease,
which hereto­fore stood as a shelter vnto them against tempestu­ous blastes.

Thirdly, this maine businesse is to be promoted 3 in regard of the Generall
Populousnesse of Great Britaine, which is the cheife cause, that Charity
waxeth cold. Euery man hath enough to doe, to shift for his owne maintenance,
so that the greatest part are driuen to extremities, and many to get their
liuing by other mens losses; witnes our Ex­tortioners, Periurers, Pet
[...]ifoggers at Law, Co­nycatchers, Theeues, Cottagers, Inmates, vnne­cessary
Alesellers, Beggers, burners of hedges, to the hindrance of Husbandry, and
such like, which might perhaps proue profitable members in the Newfoundland.
But aboue all, the state of younger Brothers is to the pitied, who by the
rigour of our Norman Lawes being left vnprouided of mainte­nance [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=150) are oftentimes
constrained to turne Py­rats, Papists, fugitiues, or to take some other
violent course to the preiudice of the Common-wealth.

For these important reasons arising out of meere necessity, Pantations ought
suddenly to be erected. And where with lesser charge then in the
New­foundland? Where can they liue to helpe them­selues, and benefit their
Country better, then in ioyning to encrease the reuenewes of the Crowne of
Great Britaine by the rich trade of Fishing? The Commodities whereof, I will
here cursorily re­peat.

First, this Trade of Fishing multiplyeth shipping and Mariners, the principall
props of this King­dome. 1 It yearely maintaineth 8000 persons for 6. moneths
in the Newfoundland, which were they at home would consume in Tobacco and the
Ale­house twice as much as they spend abroad. It re­leeues after their returne
home with the labour of their hands yearely their wiues and children, and many
thousand families within this King­dome besides, which aduentured with them,
or were employed in preparing of nets, caskes, victu­alls, &c. or in repayring
of ships for that voyage.

Secondly, It is neer vnto Great Britane, the next Land beyond Ireland, in a
temperate Aire, the 2 south part thereof being of equall Climate with Little
Britaine in France, where the Sunne shines almost halfe an houre longer in the
shortest day in the yeare, then it doth in England.

Thirdly, it will be a meanes for vs to reape the rest of the commodities of
that Countrey, which 3 [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=150) now we cannot
enioy for want of people to looke after them, and also for want of leasure,
our men there being busied in the Summer about the fish­ing, or in preparing
of their stages and boats, and afterward returning home against winter. The
commodities of the Land are Furres of Beuer, Sables, Blacke Foxes, Marternes,
Musk-rats, Ot­ters, and such like skinnes, as also of greater beasts; as
Deere, and other wild creatures. To this I ad­ioyne the benefit, which may be
made by woods, being pine, birch, spruce, Furre, &c. fit for boords, Masts,
barke for tanning, and dying, Charcoales for making of Iron. Out of these
woods we may haue pitch, Tarre, Rosen, Turpentine, Frankin­scence, and honey
out of the hollow trees, as in Muscouy, and heretofore in our owne woods
be­fore they were conuerted to the Iron Mills. There is great store of
Mettals, if they be lookt after.

The Plantations well and orderly there once erected, will helpe vs to settle
our Fishing Trade 4 farre more commodiously, then now it is. For whereas our
Fisher-men set out at the end of Fe­bruary, they may choose to set out before
the end March, if euery man hath his stages there ready against their comming,
and not by the first com­mers destroyed most barbarously & maliciously,
because their country men which come next after them may be behind them a
fortnight in building of others. And likewise the Planters themselues may fish
for Cod there a moneth before our Eng­lish men can arriue thither, and also
after they are gone they may fish almost all the yeare after.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=151) They may
fish there for other kindes of fish besides Cod, as Mackerels, Salmons,
Herrings, and Eeles, salting them and barrelling them vp: 5 which will much
aduantage this Kingdome being hither transported.

They may erect salt houses there, hauing woods 6 sufficient for that purpose,
which may saue this Kingdome much money, which now goes out to other
Countreyes for the same.

The Plantations may in a short time supply vs with Corne here in England, when
the same 7 growes deare, as commonly it doth within the space of euery fiue
yeares, whereby wee are faine to be beholding to Danzk, and Poland, expending
that way much of our Treasure. That Land hauing the vegetatiue salt and vertue
of it vnwearied, en­tire, and fresh, cannot but beare a world of corne,
considering also the gummes and liquors which from time to time since the
Flood or the Creation haue with the heate of the Sunne distilled out of the
trees into the earth, which renders it most fruitfull. The which may be
likewise gathered by obseruing the commodities and fruits, which now the earth
produceth without the industry of man.

No place of the world brings naturally more store of Gooseburies, and those
bigger then our Garden ones, R [...]sburies, Mulburies, Filbirdes, Straburies,
H [...]irtles, Cherries, wilde Pease, and b [...]undance of Roses.

By this Trading into Newfoundland, no com­moditie is caried out of the
Kingdome, as in other 8 voyages, which is a matter of great consequence.
[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=151) But by
the labour of their hands they bring home Fish wet and dry, and Traine Oile;
Or else they bring home Salt, Wines, Spice, Sugar, &c. in ex­change of their
Fish out of France and Spaine, a speciall enriching of this Realme, and an
augmen­ting of the Kings Customes and Impostes.

The Plantations there will saue many a poore 9 mans life, who falling sicke,
as among so great a number some may chance to be, may quickly re­couer their
healths by fresh victualls and good lodging.

This Plantation will preuent other Nations from engrossing the Countrey and
the Fishing to 10 themselues, as perhaps hereafter some may goe about such a
Plot. It will reduce such as resort thither, to acknowledge our Kings
soueraignty o­uer that Land. It will serue to bridle their out­rages, and also
the abuses committed by our owne Countrymen about the taking away with strong
hand one anothers stages and boates. It will serue to restraine their
insolencies, who now bragging, that they are there West and by Law, doe
wilfully set fire on the woods. It will bridle their thefts, which filch at
their departure all the railes of other mens stages, together with their salt,
which being full laden with fish, they are forced oftentimes to leaue behind
them. It will serue likewise to hin­der their barbarous casting of their
ballast into the harbours, which in a short time will ouerthrow both the
hauens and the Fishing.

To these motiues I could ioyne others; But be­cause I thinke here are
sufficient to lead men of [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=152) vnderstanding
to see into their profit, & what may most easily be performed, I will leaue
off to trou­ble your patient eares any longer with a more te­dious discourse,
hoping that these wil suffice as re­storatiues to repaire the languishing
humours of our Country. To the furtherance of which wor­thy worke I inuite the
Inhabitants of Great Bri­taine, like true Christian Patriots, to put to their
helping hands. What for mine owne particulars I haue done, our Newland
Merchants know. And more as yet I would doe, were my meanes answe­rable to my
mind; Howsoeuer, during my life I shall reioyce that in this vale of misery I
haue set out my talent to some good behoofe. And in the houre of death it
shall be my comfort, that I haue laboured to keepe the Faith not altogether
fruit­lesse and imaginary, but accompanied with some actuall deeds of Charity.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=152)

### 3.3. CHAP. 3.

Apollo calls an Assembly of the Company, for the Plantation of Newfoundland,
where Mr. Slany, Mr. Guy, and others, meeting by his Maiesties Commandement,
Captain Iohn Ma­son is willed to disclose, whether the Golden Fleece be there,
where Orpheus Iunior all [...] ad­ged it to be. Captaine Mason auerreth it to
be in the same Iland more abundantly then in any other place.

APollo hauing with acute iudgment, and ma­ture deliberation resolued to
countenance and continue the Plantation of the Iland commonly called the
Newfoundland, after his Ma­iestie had by publike proclamation commanded the
same to be hereafter called Britannioll, & to be diuided into three parts, as
Great. Britaine was at the first planting by the Troians, or as others
af­firme by the valiant Cimbrians, hee assembled all those expert gentlemen,
which had either aduen­tured their fortunes or persons in that hopefull
Countrey. And in the magnificent Hall of the Delphicke Palace, there appeared
the noble mind­ed Iohn Slany Treasurer of the society for that Plantation,
Humphrey Slany his brother, & others of the Corporation out of London and
Bristow; Then entred Iohn Guy Alderman of Bristow, who was the first
Christian, that planted and wintered in that Iland, establishing an English
Colony at [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=153) Cuperts Coue
within the Bay of Conception, about 13. years past. After him, came Captaine
Iohn Ma­son, who dwelt in that Country sixe yeares. Next to these, many others
out of Bristow and Wales suc­ceeded, who had spent some few yeares in that
Land. And particularly, one Captaine Winne a Cambro-Britan was much noted in
this Assembly for his personall abode and painefull care in set­ling the
Plantation at Feriland in the South part of this Coast, where for the space of
4 yeares hee did more good for my Lord Baltimore, then o­thers had done in
double the time.

Apollo not mindfull, that there were any more Aduenturers & Planters of
eminency then these, which he beheld there present, was about to frame a
speech vnto them, when the Lady Mnemosyne Princesse of Memory whispered his
Maiestie in the eare, that there were other Noble Britaines, which had
likewise aduanced this glorious enterprize. And why said Apollo, doe they
absent themselues from this Assembly? They haue reason for it, answered the
Lady Pallas; For if they repaire hi­ther to your Maiesties Court, and their
Enemies watching that opportunity should enter into their charge, the remedies
which you consult vpon at this present, will fall out to bee applyed, as
Phy­sicke to a dead Coarse; Some of the Dunkirkes may take their progesse into
your Britanniol, to solace themselues there with your Nimphs, and to glut
their greedy throats with Cods-heads. In what a case thinke you will your
Iasons bee with their Fishing for the Golden Fleece, if some of [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=153) these Raggamu
[...]ins make hauocke of their Ships, Mariners, Goods, and Plantations? Before
you borrow the personal presence of those Gentlemen who are here wanting, it
were fit you tooke some order to secure that Coast from Piraticall rouers. The
Lord Vicount Falkland looketh vnto his great Gouernement in Ireland, to see
the same well for­tified and guarded. The Lord Baltimore is likewise busie in
supplying his Colony at Feriland. Sir William Alexander attends on the valiant
King of Great Britaine, night and day, taking care by what meanes he may most
commodiously transport his Scottish Colonies into those parts. Sir Francis
Tanfield, and Sir Arthur Aston, two generous Knights, which to their immortall
glory, doe im­ploy their times in building and manuring that new ground,
cannot be spared from their Planta­tions, lest the wild Boares breake into
their Gar­dens. I thinke, said Apollo, I must send for Hercules from his
starry Spheare, or get another Medusa, whose very sight shall turne these
Dunkirkes into stones, before my vertuous followers shall endure the least
affront at the hands of malicious Erynnis, that Patronesse of barbarous
Pirates. In the mean time we will thinke on some conuenient course to
restraine these threatned thunders and blustering blasts.

And seeing that you my deare seruants, are here assembled at this time, I must
haue you to satisfie the wauering world, whether the Golden Fleece be in
greater plenty and abundance in this Iland or in New England, Virginia, the
Summer Iles, or in [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=154) some other
forraigne Coast, which your Nation may easily possesse. At these words, there
was much muttering among the English and Scottish. For some contended on the
behalfe of Virginia; others contested for New England. Euery man had his
opinion according to his imaginary obiect, wherein most preferred priuate
fantasies, before the intellectuall facultie. His Maiestie hauing pa­tiently
awayted for their vnanimous resolution, like Brethren of the same Iland, borne
vnder the same Prince, Religion and Gouernement, and see­ing no end of their
disputes, hee willed Captaine Mason to breake the Ice, in respect he had beene
sixe yeares acquainted with ice and frosts at Cu­pert Coue, one of the coldest
places of those Coun­tries, and boldly without partiality, feare, or sini­ster
regard, to disclose the secrets of the Soile, the benefits of the Land, and
whether this Plan­tation were such an inestimable iewell as Orpheus Iunior had
deliuered, or to be had in more estima­tion then any other place.

Captaine Mason after some complementall ex­cuse of his disability, answered in
this wise: I could haue wishe that Mr. Iohn Guy, my predeces­sor in
Britannioll, a man both learned & experien­ced in these exploits, had spared
me the relation, which your Maiestie hath imposed on me: But seeing the lot is
falne into my share, I will repeat those passages, which hee and others here
know better then my selfe.

This Iland now in question is altogether as large as England, without
Scotland. And at the [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=154) degree of 51.
of Northerly latitude. Where Eng­land ends, there this blessed Land beginnes,
and extends it selfe almost as farre as the degree of 46. iust in a manner as
the climate lieth from Caleis to Rochell. The weather in the winter somewhat
like vnto it in Yorkeshire, but farre shorter, for the Sun shines aboue halfe
an houre long [...]r in the shortest day, then it doth in London. The Summer
much hotter then in England, and lasteth from lune vn­to Michaelmas, specially
in the Southerly part. I haue knowne September, October, and Nouem­ber, much
warmer then in England. But one thing more I found worthy of an Astrologers
search, wherefore the Spring begins not there before the end of Aprill, and
the winter comes not in before December or Ianuary: the causes I know not,
vnlesse Nature recompenceth the defect of the timely Spring, with the backward
and later winter. Or else because our Plantations lay open to the Easterly
windes, which partaking of the large tract of the Sea, and of the icie
mountaines, which flote there, being driuen by the current from the Northerly
parts of the world, might happily proue the accidentall cause of the Springs
backwardnesse; yet tolerable enough, and well agreeing with our constitutiōs.
Towards the North, the land is more hilly and woody; but the South part, from
Renoos, to Trepassa, plaine and champaine euen for 30. miles in extent. It
abounds with Deere, as well fallow Deere, as Ellans, which are as bigge as our
Oxen. And of all other sorts of wilde Beasts, as here in Europe, Beuers,
Hares, &c. The like I may [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=155) say for Fowle
and Fish. I knew one Fowler in a winter, which killed aboue 700. Partridges
him­selfe at Renoos. But for the Fish, specially the Cod, which drawes all the
chiefe Port townes in Chri­stendome to send thither some ships euery yeare,
either to fish, or to buy the same; it is most won­derfull, and almost
incredible, vnlesse a man were there present to be hold it. Of these, three
men at Sea in a Boat, with some on shoare to dresse and dry them, in thirty
dayes will kill commonly be­twixt fiue and twenty and thirty thousand, worth
with the Traine oyle arising from them, one hun­dred or sixe score pounds. I
haue heard of some Countries, commended for their twofold haruest, which here
we haue, although in a different kinde: yet both as profitable, I dare say, as
theirs so much extolld. There is no such place againe in the world for a poore
man to raise his fortunes, comparable to this Plantation; for in one moneths
space, with reasonable paines, he may get as much as will pay both Land-lords
Rent, Seruants wages, and all Houshold charges, for the whole yeare, and so
the rest of his gaine to increase.

As for the other question, whether the title of the Golden Fleece may bee
conferred more de­seruedly vpon this Iland, then on any other for­raigne
place, where his Maiesties Subiects of Great Britaine doe vse to Trade? By the
last part of my Discourse, it is plaine, that it goes farre be­yond all other
places of Trade whatsoeuer, and iustly to be preferred before New England,
Virgi­nia, and other Plantations, for these foure reasons: [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=155) First, it lieth
neerer to Great Britaine, by three or foure hundred leagues, then eyther of
them. For wee may saile hither within twelue or fourteene daies, being not
aboue sixe or seuen hundred leagues passage: whereas Virginia lieth as far
again. Secondly, it is better in respect of Trade, and the concourse of
people, which with 500. or 600. Ships, doe yearly resort thither. By which
meanes they augment their Princes Customes, and doe maintaine many thousands
of their fellow-sub­iects, their wiues and children. Thirdly, he con­ueniency
of transporting Planters thither at tenne shillings a man, and twenty
shillings the Tunne of goods. And if the party be a Labourer, it will cost him
nothing for his passage, but rather hee shall receiue foure or fiue pound for
his hire to helpe the Fishermen on the Land for the drying of their Fish:
whereas euery man which goeth to Virginia, must pay fiue pound for his
passage.

Lastly, wee are better secured from Enemies, for we haue no Sauages to annoy
vs in the South­parts: And if any warres should happen betwixt Great Britaine
and Spaine, we need not feare their insolent inuasions. For wee haue a
Garrison of three or foure hundred Ships, of our owne Nati­on, which fish at
our doores all the summer, and are able to withstand an Armada, if their King
would but confirme that Commission, which his blessed Father, about three
yeares already past granted, that two warlike Ships be yearely sent as waftors
to defend the Coast, and to be authorized with power to leuy men & Ships
there, if occasion [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=156) so require; and
all vpon the charges of the Fishing fleete. This Commission I obtained, and
sithence I left it with my friend Orpheus Iunior, to bring to perfection, who
as I am informed, is at this pre­sent in the Court of Great Britaine, an
earnest soli­citor to that effect. To conclude, after the Fishing Fleetes are
returned homewards, we are safe, for the windes are commonly from August out
Westerly, whereby none can come to vs. And if they should; we haue other
places in the Country to goe to, till our Enemies bee gone. For there long
they dare not stay for feare of the Frosts, which perhaps their tender
complexions can­not brooke as well as our Northerly Nations.

### 3.4. CHAP. 4.

Apollo commands Iohn Guy, Alderman of Bri­stow, to shew how the Plantations in
the Newfoundland might be established & secu­red from the cold vapours, and
foggy mists which in the Spring are supposed to molest that Country.

APollo hauing noted how important to Great Britaine the Plantations are like
to succeed and fall out for the restoring of their State to worldly felicity,
that it proue a paralleled Monarchy to the proudest of the borde­ring
kingdomes, made choise of Iohn Guy, Alder­man [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=156) of Bristow, to
shew in what manner the Bri­taines should order their Plantations in this
Golden Iland, and secure their new habitations from the icie and cold foggy
Aire, which in some seasons of the yeare were reported by the Fishermen, to
molest and damnifie the Inhabitants.

Master Guy earnestly sought to post ouer the handling of this serious
determination to Captaine Mason, in respect hee had wintred there longer then
he had. But Apollo by no meanes would al­ter his imposition, saying, that in
regard that Mr. Guy had oftentimes beene personally in the Land, and wintred
there twise, being the first Christian, which made it apparent to the world
that it was habitable & commodious for the vse of mankinde, and also for that
he had calculated the mutations of the seasons, keeping a Iournall of euery
Acci­dent during his abode in the Country; hee, and none but he should direct
what might be conue­nient for the setling and prosperous propagation of these
most hopefull Plantations.

Mr. Guy seeing that by no entreaty or excuse, he could put the taske off from
himselfe, with a lowly reuerence to his Maiestie, he said; If the Noble
Emperour had askt my poore iudgement a dozen yeares past, concerning these
secrets, it may be, I might haue giuen him more agreeable con­tentment, then
at this time. For then the modell of the Country and Climat lay more fresh in
my apprehension. Notwithstanding, seeing the lot is cast vpon me, I will
produce the best remedies which I know for the correcting of the malignant
[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=157) ayre, if
so I may without scandall call it. The Country I assure your Maiestie, is as
tolerable as England, Caeteris paribus, comparing all the sea­sons together.

And if some nice persons feele one winter a­mong many, more snowy and frosty
then other, they seeme to forget their owne Country, where the like
inconuenience hapneth. But to auoid the worst, if euery Householder digge vp
the next ground to his habitation, and round about the same, and then burne
it, those moyst foggy va­pours will not appeare, specially after the Sunne
hath once warmed and pierced into the earth so dismantled and layd bare.
Secondly, let them dig welles neere their houses against winter, that they may
haue water in despite of the frost or snow. Thirdly, let them prouide them of
fewell enough before winter, to haue the same more seare and dried. Fourthly,
let them build their houses with a hill, or great store of trees interposed as
a shelter betwixt them and the sea-windes, which there are Easterly and very
nipping. There is no winter to speake of before the midst of Ianuary. And when
the Easterly windes blow, the weather is no other, then it is in Holland. And
I verily beleeue, that in the south part of the Land, where it trends to­wards
the west, and where the ground is eauen and plaine without hilles, it differs
not much from the temperature of the south part of Germany. And for the
further encouragement of our Planters, I can auow this for a certaine rule,
that once being passed a mile or two into the Land, the weather [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=157) is farre
hotter. I found Filberds fixe miles distant from the Sea side, very ripe a
moneth before they were fit to be eaten by the Seaside. So great an
al­teration there is within sixe miles space, by rea­son that those raging
Easterly windes are defended and asswaged by the hilles and woods which stand
as walles to fence and breake their force.

Aboue all things, I wish the Planters to sleepe in boorded roomes, and not to
be too idle the first winter for feare of the Scuruy. For in all Plantati­ons
this disease commonly seaseth vpon lazy peo­ple the first winter. Yea, Sir
Walter Rawleighs Colony in Virginia, though a hotter Country, 1586. could not
auoid this mortall sicknesse. These rules obserued, our Planters may liue
hap­pily. They may fish a moneth before others, which come out of England
thither to fish, & they may fish three moneths or more for Cod and Her­ring,
after they are departed, which will much en­rich them.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=158)

### 3.5. CHAP. 5.

Sir Ferdinando Gorge is accused by the western Fi­shermen of England, for
hindering thē of their stages, to dry their Fish in New England, and from
trading with the Sauages for Furres and other Commodities. Ferdinando Gorge
his answer. Apollo reconcileth their differences.

VPon the Friday seuen night before Easter, in Lent last, 1626. there arriued
here at Parnassus, certaine Westerne Merchants out of England, iust about that
time, as Apollo had decreed straight execution against some for the ea­ting of
Flesh on some prescribed dayes, for that weighty and politicall respect of
maintaining Na­uigation, wherein the workes of our Creator doe shew themselues
no lesse admirable, then the land. Assoone as these Merchants had heard this
neces­sary Law, with the execution, one of them, a per­son of very discreet
behauiour, desired liberty to speake on the behalfe of his poore Countrey men
for some oppressions, which Ferdinando Gorge Gouernour of the Fort at
Plimouth, whom they pointed at, present in the great Hall of the Court of
Audience, had vnder colour of a Patent deriued from his Earthly Soueraigne of
great Britains Pre­rogatiue, most vncharitably & vnlawfully commit­ted against
them, their Factors, and Mariners on the Coast of New England in America.
Apollo willed them to declare their grieuances. First, they [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=158) particularly
shewed that this place was an Hea­thenish Coast, vntilled, and voyd of
Christian Inhabi­tants: in regard whereof they tooke it to be law­full for
them being Christians, who in such re­mote wild Countreyes were to passe for
Free­men, and equal for right with Alexander the great, that went into the
East Indies, as they into the West, there to enioy the benefit of the Law of
Nations, to discouer new Countries, to exchange wares for wares, Cloath for
Furres, Ciuility for rudenesse, and likewise to transport Fish, which they
laboured hardly for, Pitch, Tarre, Masts, and such like, which they could not
haue in Europe, without a farre greater charge. All this notwith­standing, Sir
Ferdinando Gorge by his Lieutenant and Agents, opposed their Commerce, forced
them to compound for their Stages, and preten­ded the Commodities of the
Country to bee due to him, and his Associates, who first discouered the same,
and afterwards had obtained a Patent thereof, of the Noble King Iames for
their vse. Likewise, they intimated, that the Sea was free and common to all
men, more common then Er­go in the Schooles, or the word Homo; which the
Grammarians, euen since Orbilius, Quintilian, and Priscians time, haue stoutly
maintained to bee a common name to all men, ciuill and sauage; yea, and to all
sorts of women, the chast, as the strum­pet. In respect of which Community,
warranted by the Lawes of the Rhodes, the statutes of Oleron, by the
Constitutions of Holland, and lastly, by his transcendent authority which
wrote the Booke [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=159) called Mare
liberum, they hoped to settle a bene­ficiall Trading, as well for Fishing on
these for­raigne Coasts, as for such Land-Commodities, which the Sauages would
trucke with them.

Apollo vnderstanding of these oppositions, ten­ding in appearance to be a
publike grieuance, de­manded of Sir Ferdinando Gorge, wherefore hee sought to
engrosse those merchandizes, and to make a monopoly of the Furres, which being
bought of the Sauages, might in time by this con­course of his fellow
Christians, proue a meane to ciuilize those rude Nations; and specially his
Ma­iestie askt him why he went about to appropriate the Sea Coasts to some few
of his adherents, which ought to be common, which serued to ex­ercise honest
men in industrious courses, and to make good his Law against the eating of
flesh vpon prefixed dayes?

Sir Ferdinando Gorge answered: Most dread Soueraigne, the honour of a King
consisteth as well in aduancing the building vp his Sauiours Church, as the
inlarging of his Territories, which may proue an addition to the strengthening
of his Forces, and the inriching of his Crowne. For the perfection of which
glorious worke, it pleased God to raise mee and others to aduenture our meanes
for the discouery of this Country called New England, which before lay
vnknowne. Ha­uing found it a habitable place, commodious for the vse of many
distressed people, whom I saw to grone vnder the burthen of pouerty in my
natiue Soile; I resolued to imitate the painefull Bees, to [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=159) build houses,
like Hiues, and therein to transplant them. For which purpose to auoyd the
confused state of an Anarchy, I prepared the Plantation intended with the
support of the Regall counte­nance, and to that end got the Patent specified
by my Aduersaries with large priuiledges, immuni­ties, and power, whereby our
Planters might rest assured, not onely of security against Drones, but also of
the quiet fruition of their profitable ende­uours hazarded with their liues,
and not to bee attained without labours and the sweat of their browes. Of what
consequence not only this Plan­tation is, but likewise all others of the like
nature, who knowes better then your Maiestie, who once a yeare suruayes the
vttermost parts of the earth, euen to the Southerne Pole? For what is it,
which renders a Nation vnhappy? Next to the want of Gods knowledge, which the
Scripture termes Dark­nesse, it is the want of necessaries for the
sustenta­tion of life, as meat, drinke, and apparell. And when through a long
peace, and their ouerspent fields, their Country-men doe increase and mul­ply,
so that the extent of their natiue Land is not capable nor sufficient to
maintaine them, what (poore soules) shall they doe? If they rob or steale,
they are hanged. If they looke for worke, perhaps they may meet with some
couetous wretch that will retaine them during the haruest of Hay and Corne:
but in the Winter, which in this Climat is longer then the Summer, they may
starue for lacke of food, rayment and fyring. This inconuenience was foreseene
aboue 100. yeares [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=160) since by Sir
Thomas Moore, who grieuously be­wailes the ouer-sight of our Policies, for
condem­ning men to be hanged, who robd of meere neces­sity; In lib. de
Eutopia. whereas their Country, like a prouident Mother, ought rather to
prouide them reliefe, whereby they might liue like men borne of a wise and
politike mother. Some mothers haue loued their children, that they haue
hazarded their own liues, to get heritages for their younger children: yea,
and were content to suffer want themselues, rather then their ofspring should
miscarry.

Examples we can produce many. How came the world first to be planted? If the
first Generati­ons after Noahs Flood, had all abode in Armenia, Chaldea, and
Assyria, the rest of the world had beene created in vaine. Therefore God
sundred them by confounding their languages at Babell, that the glory of his
power might be noised in all Regions, and the sound of his Name, throughout
all Nations. This made Saturne to plant in Italy. This made Hercules to
trauell to the Atlantique Iles, and to ingraue his name on those memorable
Pillars at the Straights of Gibraltar. This made Iaso [...] with his braue
Fleete of Argonantickes to saile into Cholchos, in hope of a perpetuall Trade
for the Gold of that place with his Grecian Com­modities. How came the Iles,
the Iles of the Gen­tiles to be peopled, but by Plantations transported vpon
the charge of able and substantiall persons. Marseiles was ciuilized and
inhabited with a Greeke Colony. From whence are we all come into these parts?
We are not Natiues, but after many hands [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=160) led into this
Kingdome. Wee came from Saxony our selues, as the most of Italy doe descend
from the Northerly parts of Germany. The Spaniards deriue their pedegrees from
the runnagate Gothes, or from the Moores, who likewise glory to bee a remnant
of the fugitiue Arabes.

O what a shame is it vnto vs at this day, to see whole numbers of our English
and Scottish disper­sed abroad in Popish and Moorish Countries, tur­ned
Apostataes, and in time forgoing the memory of their naturall Mother-tongue,
as of the tue Faith, wherein they were baptized! Now how easily might this
monstrous and inhumane absur­dity be preuented by a timely Plantation?

To this end haue I and my Copartners labou­red. But as we were laying the
foundation, these Antiplanters enuying at those hopefull attempts like those
which repined at the rebuilding of Ieru­salem, would needs inioy the fruits of
our labours, despoyling vs of our Stages, and the plaine plats of ground
bounding on the Sea; and not thus con­tent, they would cut downe a tree worth
forty shillings, fit for a Mast, where a tree of two shil­lings might serue
their turne. Sometimes they would either of despite to the Planters, or in a
wanton vnbrideled humour, set fire on the woods two or three miles together.
We neuer gaine-said them to fish vpon our Coast, but on the contrary, we were
very glad of the occasiō. Only we sought to curbe their in solencies, which
committed these outrages. We endeuoured to hinder their wilfull casting their
ballast into the harbours, which in [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=161) small time will
quickly decide this present contro­uersie, when the harbours shall by this
outragious abuse, bee choakt and dammed vp without any hope of recouery.

As for the Trade of Furs, how can this be a grie­uance more then it is in
England, where the petty Lords of Mannors clayme a farre greater Iurisdi­ction
there, to enlarge their Forrests and games: yea and some haue obtained a Free
Warren, that none whatsoeuer should hawke or hunt vpon their Lands, or within
their Precincts. If this be allow­ed in Old England, much more ought we to
stand vpon out Royalties in New England, in lieu of our infinite charge and
paines taken in our voyages, and setling there our new inhabitants. What
Gentlemen of fashion will forsake their Country, except they shall haue a
larger extent of com­mand, and more hopes of benefit then at home? To suffer
such barbarous insolencies to bee done on a mans Free-hold, cannot but trouble
the mee­kest man on the earth: yea, another Moses, ano­ther Iob. To this I
adde, how some of these An­tiplanters led by an vnheard-of greedinesse of
gaine, haue sold vnto the Sauages, Muskets, Fowling-Peeces, Powder, Shot,
Swords, Arrow­heads, and other Armes, wherewith the Sauages slew some of those
Fishermen, which had so in­considerately sold such dangerous wares to
Infi­dels. By which means they are now become dan­gerous & formidable to the
Planters themselues. And farre more fearefull would they haue proued vnto vs,
if the King of Great Britain our Soueraign, [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=161) had not
strictly made a Proclamation to the contra­ry, that no Subiect of his should
presume to sel thē any such vnlawfull ware. Vp on the brute of which
Proclamation, the Sauages being hopelesse euer to receiue of our Nation more
Gunpowder; they very circumspectly sowed in the best cornefields they had all
the Powder which remained, with full expectation to reape a goodly haruest
thereof, as of Mastard or other seedes.

Apollo according to his wonted manner, hauing paused and meditated on the
Plaintiffes and Defendants allegations about one quarter of an houre: at last
pronounced this definitiue sentence. Forasmuch as wee conceiue both this
Plantation, and the Fishing Trade to be very ex­pedient to Great Britaine: we
order both of them, like Hippocrates Twinnes, to consociate together in
brotherly amity, and to assist one another with­out malicious emulation. That
the Fishermen haue conuenient places for the drying of their Fish on the land,
with as much woods as will serue for their fewell during their abode in that
Country, and for their returne homewards by the way, and also as much woods as
will build vp on repaire their Ships & Stages; prouided that the common sort
of Marriners shall not of their owne heads, without their Master of the Ship,
and one of the chiefe of the Planters be present, cut or cast down any woods,
but what by them shall be seene fit for those necessary vses. Secondly, that
none of the Fishermen shall throw their Ballast into the Har­bours to deface
the same. Thirdly, that for some [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=162) few yeares,
they shall not traffique with the Saua­ges, but shall leaue the same to the
Planters, vntill the Plantations be compleately strengthened, and of
sufficient power to liue of themselues, and bee conueniently armed against
those barbarous peo­ple. Fourthly, that all such plats of plaine lands, neere
to the Harbours, which the Planters shall from henceforth rid of woods, and
make apt for Stages to dry fish vpon, shall belong to the Plan­ters: And that
all such places which the Fisher­men haue already rid, and built Stages vpon,
shall appertaine to them for euer. As also al such Stages, which they shall
hereafter build for that purpose. In lieu of which priuiledges, euery Ship
shall transport a Tunne of such prouisions which the Plantations want,
receiuing for the same, tenne shillings, towards the fraught, and the price of
the goods by them disbursed in England. Fiftly, that both the Planters and the
Fishermen shall ioyne and suddenly assemble all their forces together with
their best endeuours to expell Pirates, and their Countries enemies; if any
arriue on that Coast, with intent to prey vpon eyther of them. Sixtly, if any
dissention happen betwixt the Fi­shermen and the Planters, the matter shall be
com­promitted to twelue mens arbitrement, sixe of the one side, and sixe of
the other, and if they misse to accord the parties difference, then the chiefe
per­son in the Plantation, and the Master of the Ship, whereof the Fisherman
is, to end the businesse as Vmpires and principall Iudges.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=162)

### 3.6. CHAP. 6.

Apollo moued to pitty vpon a Petition preferred vn­to him by certaine Saylers
Widowes, whose Husbands perished in the voyages vnder the East Indies Company,
causeth foure famous Knights of Great Britain, Sir Francis Drake, Sir M
[...]in Furbisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button, to signifie
their opi­nions, whereabout the best passage to the East Indies did lye.

VPon the Feast day of Saint Marke the Euan­gelist last past, 1626\. as Apollo
was confer­ring with certaine Cosmographers, for the aduancing of the East
Indy Trade, the Lady Pallas whispered his Maiestie in the eare, to admit some
into that conference, which had beene principall Nauigators imployed for
discoueries towards those Coasts. For said she, though speculation bee the
most noble Science in Philosophy, yet for the atchieuement of a reall and
beneficiall Trade, it serues to no other vse, then as a Preparatiue in
Phi­sicke to make the humours pliable and tractable for the insuing Purgation:
the which notwith­standing may proue erroneous and deceiueable, if it meetes
with a malignant, stubborne, or peruerse matter. For who can by a coniecturall
knowledge, pierce into more hidden occurrences? There is as much difference
betwixt speculation and pra­ctise, as is betwixt a clinicall scholler,
discoursing [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=163) of Countries by
his Map or Globe on a Table, as a Mariner trauersing the Ocean, where
oftentimes he meetes with such difficulties, that hee is forced to returne
home, and to wait for a more seasona­ble opportunity. Therefore if you meane
to hold vp and continue this Company, it were good you sent for some choyse
and well experienced Naui­gators which may direct this businesse, associated
with the Gentlemen aboue named.

Apollo liked very well of this aduise, and pre­sently caused these foure
famous Knights to bee sent for, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Martin Furbisher, Sir
Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button. As soone as they were come into his
Maiesties pre­sence, he related vnto them, that vpon a Petition exhibited vnto
him by many poore Widowes of the City of London, and of other Cities & Towns
in Great Britaine, how their Husbands perished in their voyages to the East
Indies, by the distempe­rature of the climate, in passing so often vnder the
Tropickes, and the burning Zones, they therfore de­sired eyther that he should
dissolue the East Indie Company, or finde out a more conuenient passage to
these Countries, where the Spices grew, which their Country men wanted.
Otherwise they must of necessity continue still vnmaried; or liue in dai­ly
feares to lose their succeeding Husbands, who for their reliefe would hazard
their liues, as the others had formerly done. For such was their ine­uitable
Fate, they said, that none would aduen­ture on Sailers Widowes, but men of the
same vocation. Vpon which clamors of these distressed [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=163) Creatures, his
Maiestie being moued to pitty and commiseration, required them to yeeld their
seue­rall censures, by what passage the English Nation might traffique into
those Lands of Spiceries with lesse perils and losses of Sailers. Sir Francis
Drake first deliuered his opinion, that the moderne Cos­mographers agreed vpon
foure waies to the East Indies: Two imaginary, by the Northeast, which Pliny
mentioned, Sir Hugh Willowby attempted, and the Hollanders prosecuted vpon the
North of Muscouy to Noua Zembla, Waygate, and the Ri [...]er Ob, but all in
vaine: and by the North-west, which Sir Martin Furbisher first entred into,
and Sir Tho­mas Button sithence pursued, but without fortu­nate successe. The
other two waies to  [...]aile into the Lands and Ilands of Spices, were
famous, which himselfe had past. The one through the Streights of Magellan,
the other by the Cape of good Hope. Of these, he liked those of Magellan, and
now the rather, for that Tierra del fuego, which is the South part of those
Streights, is lately found out by certaine Hollanders, to be an Iland: And
that himselfe had beene driuen by foule weather, as farre as 57. degrees of
Southerly latitude, where he found some Ilands, and in all likelihood, an open
passage about the 60. degree, which the Hollanders tried to be true, now
stiling the same, Lameers Streights. This way hee approued lesse dangerous
then the other, specially to the Molucca Ilands: so that they would begin
their voyage a­bout the end of August from England: that they might arriue
there by the end of December, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=164) which falls out
to be the first of Iune, or end of May, in these Streights. Sir Maurice Abbot
con­tradicted Sir Francis Drake, and said, that the greatest comfort in such
long voyages, was to be sure of fresh victuals, which they could not bee
assured of, by those Southwest Streights.

To this Sir Francis Drake answered: that for Wood, Water, Fish and Fowle, they
might haue enough on this side, and neere the Streights; that they might be
relieued in distresse at the Riuer of Amazous by their Countrymen, where
Captaine North, Captaine Parker, and Captaine Christmas had planted, whereof
the two last liued there of late, foure years in despite of the Spaniards,
whom they wearied out of the Country with the helpe of the Natiues, for all
that they came with 1500. men to surprize them. Being past the Streights, they
might haue fresh victuals in abundance at the Iland of Mocha in the height of
38. degree, which is subiect to the States of Arauco, deadly enemies to the
Spamards, and but fiue or sixe leagues from that Centinent. Or else they may
get some with ease at the Iland of Saint Maries, twenty or thirty leagues
further. If the Trade be to the Moluccaes, they may spare two moneths voyage
this way; and also they shall meet with Salomons Iles, and many rich places
vpon the Coast of New Guinea, which affoord plenty of victuals, Gold, Pearles,
and Spice. Sir Henry Middleton much misliked this Southwest way, because of
the vncertainty of prouision, and the solitarinesse of the voyage; whereas hee
was sure all the way by the Cape of [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=164) good Hope, at
Sancta Helena, Soldana, at the Iland of Madagascar, to be stored with
necessaries vntill he came to his iourneyes end. Further, hee said, as also
the East India Company confirmed the very same to be true, that they had small
doings now to the Moluccaes: For their Trade lay about laua maior, where they
had a Factory at Bantam, and to Serrat in Cambaia, to Sumatra, and the Persian
Gulfe.

After some altercation betwixt these last afore­specified, Apollo commanded
Sir Martin Furbisher to declare his opinion touching the Northwest passage,
which hee accordingly did, prouing that the most part of Meta incognita, where
hee had beene, seemed by all probability to bee broken lands and Ilands, and
that if he had had sufficient store of prouision, hee would haue aduentured
through in despite of the mountaines of Ice, which threatned to immure him in.
And that hee much maruelled at their slownesse of late, which finding the
passage cleere and open in a farre more tem­perate climate, then where he had
beene, did not­withstanding misse to finde it out.

Sir Thomas Button much incensed to bee taxed for slownesse, who had busied
himselfe all the daies of his life in warrelike actions, hauing beene at the
sacking of Cales, and imployed in Ireland against the Spaniards, in
Hispaniola, at the voyage of Al­giere, and many other Sea voyages, for answere
said, That if Sir Martin Furbisher had wintred in the 58. degree in America,
which experience taught to be as the 63. degree of Europes coldnes, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=165) hee would not
haue beene so briefe to impute slownesse vnto him. As for the Passage, hee
verily beleeued as Sir Martin did, it lay open. And that hee would haue done
his endeuour to haue sailed through. For in Hudsons Bay, hee saw two very
likely passages towards the Northwest, to enter in; but that hee was otherwise
authorized and com­manded to goe on Southwestwards to the bottome of Hudsons
Bay, so that hee durst not but follow the tenor of his Commission. Yet
notwithstanding he hoped, that he had not spent his time in vaine, during his
voyage in those angry climates. For first he discouered, that those Seas could
not bee sailed through, but in Iune, Iuly, and August, be­ing alwaies subiect
to foggs, ice, stormes, and sud­den windes. The sunne seldome seene, so that
the best Nauigator can hardly obserue the certaine height thereof. Onely his
chiefest comfort during his abode there, was, that the dayes were very long,
with very short nights: though otherwise the want of cleernesse to obserue
either sunne or starre, were able vtterly to ouerthrow the whole voyage.
Further, he noted, that Trumpets might not be spared, but most necessary to be
had of such as passe in those Seas. For if two ships went toge­ther, they
would quickly lose one another by rea­son of the thicke mist, though they went
so neere as they might hallow one to the other. Likewise, he said, that shirts
of male might not be spared, for feare of the sauages arrowes out of some
ambusca­do: Or else thicke leather Targets made of Buffe, as the Spaniards
vse. To this hee added, that by [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=165) experience hee
found another necessary note, which hee wished all such as were imployed in
these remote Enterprizes to beare in minde, to carry with them good tooles, as
well for repay­ring of their Ships, as to dig on the land, if they suffer
shipwracke: And withall, the fittest engines which can bee deuised for
weighing of shipping vpon such occasions; and in any case a couple of Crabs to
be brought along with them in these vn­knowne Discoueries, for the hoising and
landing of their Ships, or other heauy necessaries, as Artil­lery, Timber, &c.
Also, that the Discouerer should marke the set of the Tide. For whensoeuer he
loseth his strong Tide, or findes ground in 100 fathomes, let him rest
assured, that he goes out of his direct course, for the finding of this
hopefull passage. To conclude, Sir Thomas Button deliue­red two notes more of
great consequence for the preseruation of the Discouerers healths and liues,
which Apollo better liked then all the former Dis­courses; whereof the one
was, that hee obserued Aqua vita, Sacke, and such hot liquors, to become most
hurtfull to his men in the cold Winter, and on the other side, small drinke
and Barly water most soueraine to maintaine them in health. The other
obseruation was, that the iuyce of th [...]se ten­der branches or sprigs of
trees which flourished fresh and greene in the Winter, out-daring the bitter
blasts, and withstanding the extremity of the frosts, being pressed out, and
ministred to the sicke, did miraculously restore them to their health, And the
meanes of his first knowledge thereof, [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=166) proceeded by
seeing of the multitudes of Partrid­ges, which fed and liued thereon all the
Winter, to become fat and plumpe.

### 3.7. CHAP. 7.

Apolloes Censure of Sir Thomas Buttons voyage to the Northwest Passage.

His Directions for the preseruation of health in fro­sty seasons, and for the
preuenting of the Scuruy.

An Elegy in their commendations which aduentu­red their persons for the
discouery of the afore­said Passage.

APollo seemed much delighted with these narrations of Sir Thomas Button; and
to let the vertuous of Parnassus know some­what more of these remarkeable
euents, hee made this discourse: How many famous Captaines here haue I
admitted into my Court, which neuer entred into these hidden and magisteriall
secrets of nature? Nay, how many wise Philosophers bee there here graced with
my fauours, which vnder­stand not these wonders of naturall effects? This
Gentleman hath sufficiently performed his part in the discouery of the
Northwest passage, conside­ring the power limited vnto him by his Commissi­on,
which hee might not with safety transgresse. Yet I could wish such as bee in
authority in [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=166) assigning the
like Commissions hereafter, to adde that Clause, which King Henry the eight of
Eng­land sometimes vsed to enable his Generals with, that if that seruice
proued disastrous and vnfortu­nate, notwithstanding the former words of the
Commission, they should preserue the Honour of their King and Country by some
braue exploit of their owne proiecting. For many occurrences may, like rubbes,
light in their way, which the cleerest Eyes of State could not possibly
foresee. Sometimes the Enemy may haue a siluer bridge by slye intelligencers
into his Neighbours Land. Sometimes a Commander may meet with a good booty at
Sea, though he were beaten off from the Land. Or if one place be strongly
barricadoed, hee may finde another most easily to be wonne. What ouerthrew and
vtterly dispersed the inuincible Ar­mada in 1588\. but the precise relye,
which the Spanish Admirall stood vpon in regard of his Com­mission limited by
the Councell of Spaine? Let this suffice to excuse Sir Thomas Button for his
not entring into one of the two passages, which he suspected to crowne the
Discouerers voyage with eternall fame. And now to enter into the lat­ter
points of those secrets, which he mentions to haue tried, so vsefull for his
peoples health; know this, O ye that study Physicke, that as Hippocrates
wrote, mens inward parts, specially the stomacke, is hotter in Winter then in
Summer. Looke in an extreame frosty Winter, how all the sap and ver­tue of
Plants and Hearbs, shoote inwardly, and descend into the root, running thither
as to their [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=167) sanctuary,
refuge, and last helpe in nature. Euen so stands it with the body of man,
which for ve­getation and vigorous constitution, may in some sort be compared
to a Plant. In Summer, the heat and radicall moysture is dispersed here and
there, vp and downe, and through all the parts of the body, so that the heat
in the stomacke is of a mild oily warmth, and at that time more truely
natu­rall, then in the winter. For Experience teacheth, and Anatomists
confirme it, that in the winter, chiefly in frosty weather, mans liueliest
heate set­leth it selfe in the stomacke, neere the heart, the center and root
of life, the other parts being op­pressed with cold. There likewise it will
beginne quickly to inflame in frosty seasons. When the raw ayre gets into the
body at the mouth, and at the pores, or at such time, when these pores of the
skinne and outward superficies become thick­ned, whereby the spirits may not
haue their free euaporation. Hence grow oppilations and obstru­ctions; and
consequently the Scuruy, being aided on by the meseraicall veines, full of
putrified dam­pish blood, or by the melancholike spleen, swolne with too much
windy nourishment. For the aba­ting of which infirmities, moyst opening
medi­cines of a biting nature, cooling and piercing liquors, somewhat of a
milky mildnesse, and the iuyce of springing hearbs, must bee regarded by a
wise Phisitian, and preferred before strong liquors and fiery Drinkes, which
commonly are too too binding. I doe therefore much commend this Knight for
this carefull obseruation, as for the [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=167) discouering of
those tender Plants which Iaques Cartier applaudes to be so soueraigne against
the Scuruy, and called Anneda, by the Sauages of Ca­nada. But now of late
yeares, this precious Plant hath beene sought after by Champleine and other
Frenchmen, albeit without successe; vntill this Gen­tleman renewed the memorie
therof. And most fa­mous had he yet been, if he had transported hither some
Setsor Slips of these powerful Plants, which by this time might haue increased
to succour many an honest mans life distressed by this hidden & tre­cherous
Guest. I haue spoken the more largely of this sicknesse, because our moderne
Practitioners in Phisicke should take this obseruation for a watch­word, that
most of the new diseases, Agues, pu­tride Feuers, and such sicknesses as
spring in the winter or in the beginning of the Spring, they be but waiting-
Maids to this traiterous Lady; & for this cause, let them beginne their Cure
with the Scuruy, and with the cleansing of the Bloud, and the rest will vanish
away, as it were by miracle.

As soone as Apollo had ended this speech, hee charged Hippocrates, Galen,
Aegineta, and other famous Phisicians, to take care ouer all the English
Sailers, which from thenceforth, should hazard their liues to the Indies. He
likewise commanded the East Indies Company to be more bountifull to the poore
Widowes, whose Husbands chanced to miscarry in their seruice. Lastly, his
Maiestie cau­sed the London Merchants to ioyne together for the prosecuting
further of the Northwest passage, and for the honour of those braue spirits,
which [[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=168)
had already aduentured their persons in the disco­uery, to ingraue on a brazen
Table these verses following, and the same to place as a Frontispice on the
Delphicke Palace:

Orbis in Occiduâ latitat via parte sub Arcto,

Ducit ad Eoum qu [...] magis apta mare.

Dux Frobisherus, Dauis, Hudson, et inclitus ausis

Buttonus validis hanc petiere viam.

Cambria non tantum, sed et Anglia laudibus effert

Te, Buttone, suis; aequiparátque D [...]ako.

De quot te memorem saluum euasisse periclis?

Sint testes Indus, Maurus, Iērnus, Iber.

Non glomerata tibi Glacies imperuia ferro,

Non Hyemis longae nix numerosa nocet:

Quin tunc vlterius transisses, altera naui;

Obuia succedens sireleuasset onus:

Albioné mque nouam nobis incognita Meta

Tum benc vulgasset per fretanostramaris.

Neere to the Pole, there lurkes within the West,

A shorter way to saile into the East.

Braue Furbisher, Danis, and bold Hudson

Sought out this way with the valiant Button.

Not onely Wales, but England rings his name,

And with great Drake compares our Buttons fame

Though Ireland, Spaine, India, and Affrick rage,

To beare the brunts of his stout Pilgrimage:

Yet they will prize him more, when more they know

How he endur'd a winter deep with' Snow.

For eight moneths space, besides the Icy hills,

Which Natures eares with strange amazemēt fils.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=168) And if
supplies had come in his distresse,

New Pillars he, like those of Hercules,

Had raisd, but with Plus vltra in the place,

Where Drakes new Albion waites for Britaines race.

### 3.8. CHAP. 8.

The Merchants of Lisbone doe complaine on the English and Hollanders, for
trading into the East Indies for Spices, Drugs, and other Com­modities. Apollo
reiecteth their complaints, and aduiseth, how they may saile thither with
lesser inconueniences, then heretosore.

APollo hauing giuen order to the Inhabi­tants of Great Britaine, to set
forwards some Shippes for the discouery of the North west passage: word was
presently brought to the Portingals, that his Maiestie had interessed the
Protestants in the Trade of Spiceries. Where­upon the City of Lisbone sent to
Parnassus foure of their most substantiall Citizens, where being arri­ued,
they made meanes by Osorius one of their learned Bishops, to haue a full
Audience of their matter the next Court day, which fell out on the fift of
Iune last, 1626. as Menante the grand Post-master deliuered the last weeke at
Paris. But Mercurius Gallobelgicus affirmeth otherwise, that this weighty
cause was discussed on the ninth of Iune. Such is the disparity of iudgements,
and [[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=169)
inequality of reports, that wee cannot rightly be informed by any of these
Currents concerning those passages, which happen in our neerest times. How
much lesse then shall we credit Historiogra­phers of elder ages, which haue
left vs the occur­rences of many memorable affaires, which ought to serue as
mirrours to posterity? Howso­euer, most true it is, that the East Indy Cause
was decided before the sunne entred into the Tropick of Cancer, in this Moneth
of Iune last. The ground of the Plaintiffes suit was fixed most vpon the
Di­uision, which Pope Alexander the sixt made be­twixt the House of Castile,
and the House of Por­tingall, about 120. yeares past, that all the whole world
then newly discouered, or to bee discoue­red, should equally be shared betwixt
them both; the East Indies to belong vnto the Portingals, and the West Indies
to the Castilians; the same to haue and to hold to either of the said Nations,
their Factors, and Agents for euer warranted contra omnes gentes. Vnder colour
of which authenticke Patent, they freely inioyed the same, vntill the bold
English and Hollanders lately intr [...]ded into their Liberties, and haue
vsurped many of the Coasts in those rich Countries. Apollo not wont suddenly
without mature deliberation to order causes of such high consequences, sent
for Peter Martyr the Author of the Decades, and asked him, how that Partition
became ratified? Peter Martyr now a member of the Corporation of Par­nass
[...]s, and not daring to conceale the verity of that businesse from the
sincere Head of the vertu­ous [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=169) Society,
answered, that indeed such a Capitu­lation was treated of betwixt those
Princes, and that iust, as the said Commissioners intended to diuide the whole
world by certaine Lines and imaginary points in the Globe, they were quite put
out of their agreements by a Knauish Boy, who at that time accidentally bathed
himselfe in a riuer neere vnto them, as they debated of these Lines, and
hearing the Commissioners varying and wrangling about the drawing of these new
Lines, he turned his backe side vnto them, and wished them to forme the same
equally, as if they should delineat from the Center of his Ano, and so taking
the same for a patterne, the one halfe should appertaine to the one, and the
other halfe to the other. Vpon which ridiculous interrupti­on, the
Commissioners being abashed and asha­med, that a Childe should touch so
seriously vpon their Masters ambition, they departed, leauing the partition
vnperfect.

Apollo perceiuing that the Portingals drift was to ingrosse the whole Trade of
Spiceties as a Mo­nopoly preiudiciall to others of the Christian Pro­fession,
vtterly misliked their a spiring and greedy purposes, and after some bitter
exprobration of their Couetousnesse, hee framed this speech vnto them: In
going about to appropriate the whole world to your selues, yee seeke to
ecclipse the power of the Omnipotent, to forestall the wonder­full Art of
Nauigation, and by keeping backe the Protestants, to let the Mahumetans still
to ioyne with you in this beneficiall Trade. I confesse your [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=170) Nation deserues
to be commended for your dis­coueries of the Cape of Good Hope vnder Vasco de
Gama. But afterwards, for you to ingrosse into your hands more Coasts and
Trades then yee are able to mannage, is meere auarice, and a wrong to your
Creator, who happily by these your Neighbours aduentures, may in time to come
discouer as yet more vnknowne Countries, and settle in those remote places the
word of God, euen beyond New Guiny, where more Noble Nations doe yet reside
then yee haue found out. What greater glory can arriue to this part of the
world, then to search into the vttermost parts of those Southerne Regions? In
all ciuill Countries, the Inhabitants must as well looke into the Artificiall
waies of acquiring wealth, as into the naturall meanes abounding in the places
of their abode. This consists in Corne, Cattell, Wooll, Lead, Tinne, or in the
like Commodities, which are or­dinarily and without much Art deriued from
their natiue Seates. The other depends on their in­dustry and more curious
skill to work vpon those materialls, as by their Wooll to Compose Stuffes of
Serges, Perpetuanaes, Paropous, or the like; or else by Commerce and Traffique
to exchange some of their superfluous wares with Forraigners, for some of
their superfluities. Now in trading to these remote Countries, questionlesse
some of these goods are exported to counteruaile those Wares, which Strangers
might otherwise, to the preiudice of the Kingdome, import and bring in.

Before the Londoners and the Hollanders did set [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=170) out Fleetes to
the East Indies, the Turkes vsed to share with the Portingalls in those
Commodities which now the Protestants trade for. Heretofore they paid at
Lisbone, Aleppo, or Alexandria for eue­ry pound of Pepper, two shillings,
whereas now they pay but three pence in the East Indies, for Mace foure
shillings sixe pence, which now stands them but in nine pence. Cloues at
Lisbone or A­leppo, foure shillings sixe pence, and now but tenne pence.
Nutmegs there two shillings, here but foure pence. Indico foure shillings,
here twelue pence the pound. Likewise they paid for raw Silkes out of Persia,
twelue shillings, but now they pay at the Persian Gulfe, not eight shillings
the pound. Whereby a good Commonwealths­man may obserue, what Gaine there may
re­dound to Great Britaine, if this rich Trade be gra­ced and followed. And if
they transport no coine out of this Kingdome, but Spanish Reals, Dolers, or
outlandish monyes, carying also some of their Tinne, Carzeyes, and Broad
cloathes, to the Persian Gulfe, where they are best vendible; there is no
question, but this Kingdome will become much inriched. For the sound of
Denmarke, the Hans-townes, and France will returne vs more money, then they
haue need to bring into the Indies.

But first I could wish Aesculapius to call a con­sultation of his best
experimented Physicians, and to lay downe a dietary for their healths, for a
Nor­therne man taken out of his naturall Element, and placed but for a small
while in those fiery Cli­mates, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=171) will quickly
droope. And now in the inte­rim vntill this consultation bee concluded, out of
the experience of such as trauelled into those par­ched Countries, I wish them
to ballast their ships with Turneps, as a Defensatiue against the Scuruy, to
carry along with them the salt or iuyce of Scur­uygrasse well sodden, and
stopt vp in glasses, and a­boue all, the iuyce of Lemons.

Item, to bring along with them, good store of White wine Vineger to mingle
with water, a li­quor which preserued Sir Francis Drake in his long voyage
round about the world.

Item, to vse Cider, and such cooling drinkes, more then Wines or Aqua vitae;
sauing at times of excessiue heat, when the body becomes fainty, and the
spirits are withdrawne into the outward parts. Then, a little draught of their
hot waters, or a cup of Sacke, will refresh nature, although they sweat neuer
so much. For it is found out by experience, that the moisture which lies
within the body, is exhaled and forced into the exteriour parts, and that the
inward part then forsaken of that moist comfortable humour, and being cold,
gladly receiueth a sudden restoratiue to repaire those annoyances, which the
violence of that vn­usuall heat hath extracted.

Item, to feed betimes in the morning, and not at noone, when the Sunne is
vehemently hot, or else late in the euenings, once or twise a day, as their
stomackes serue them.

To winde vp this discourse in a word, I exhort our East India Merchants, to
beare in minde these few verses:

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=171)

If Englishmen, which Indias Coast doe range,

May not haue Spice for English goods exchange:

Farre be it from a Christian to transport

Our Treasure hence into an Heathnish Port.

'Tis better with plaine cheere to make our Feasts,

Then with repentance late to welcome Guests.

While these A [...]isoes I to England giue,

The Hollanders I meane not to forgiue.

Beware, lest whilst great bulkes of Ships yee raise

In hope of Gaine, yee reape not more dispraise.

How many men by Feuers to our cost,

Bred of Suns heat and salt meates haue we lost?

Cùm sine Thesauri massâ, nec Aromata vendat

India, nec mutet quae sua Terra refert:

Absit, vt hunc Belli Neru [...]m Mercator auarus

Tranferat, a [...]t ditet Regna inimica Deo.

Quā satius foret absque dapūprandere patellis,

Excidio Patriae quam saturare gulam?

Dum tibi vaticinor, non Belgis parco: cauete,

Ne Nautas, moles amplific ando ratum,

Diminuatis opum spe; manducare salita

Accelerat rabiem Sole calente Febris.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=172)

### 3.9. CHAP. 9.

Apollo sends for some of the Merchants Aduentu­rers of euery seuerall Company
out of Great Britaine, graceth them with his countenance, and promiseth them
the continuance of his Fa­uours.

AFter this businesse of the East India Trade was thus recommended and blest by
his Maiestie, with all auspicious graces, bonis auibus, and with sailes of
comfort velis secundis committed to Neptunes protection: His Imperiall
Maiestie sent for the other Aduenturers to for­raigne Countries out of Great
Britaine, some of the Moscouy Company, some of the Turky Mer­chants, some of
the French Trade, of the Sound, of the Dutch, of the Greenland Company, some
of the Virginian, of the Summer Ilands, of the Riuer of Amazons, of Guiny, and
Binny, and of o­ther Aduenturers, he caused some to appeare be­fore him,
charging them to follow their Trades without any more feare of Moorish or
Dunkirk Pirates. And particularly he charged the Aduen­turers into these last
recited Coasts to pursue their enterprizes, to saue their Country that
wastfull expence of Tobacco, which yearely would bee ex­ported out of their
Country, if they did plant that weed in those hot places, specially at the
A­mazons, and at the vppermost part of the Riuer of [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=172) Gambra in Guiny
about the 13. Degree, not a Mo­neths saile out of England, they should reape a
rich haruest of Tobacco; besides in this last, they might get Hides, Elephants
teeth, Cotton yarne, yea, and perhaps meet with another Golden Fleece, if it
be true, as some report, that the King of Morocco hath his fine Gold in
exchange of Sale, from People inhabiting not farre from this Riuer of Gambra.
All these hopefull Proiects did his Ma­iestie lay before our Britaines,
exhorting them to become more industrious, to cast by the hideous coat of
Pouerty, and with an vndaunted courage to saile into the vttermost Ocean.

Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos,

Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.

### 3.10. CHAP. 10.

Apollo to make the Golden Fleece a complete Ca­tholike Restoratiue to the
State of Great Bri­taine, commands the seuen wise men of Greece to declare out
of their experience, some more meanes for the inriching of that State: which
they seuerally performe.

NOtwithstanding all these profitable pro­iects, and more then reall
appearances of the Golden Fleece, Apollo in another Assem­bly held at Pindus
by reason of the violent Sum­mers heat, which infested the populous City of
[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=173)
Parnassus, in a Speech reiterating that as yet the Scales were not eq
[...]all, for the benefit of Great Britaine; his Imperiall Highnesse
concluded, that the Golden Fleece should be a Catholike Restora­tiue as well
for the Inlanders and the Sea Coasts, as for the Plantations to bee aduanced
forwards; and therefore hee wished the seuen wise men of Greece to repaire
their reputations lately lost in missing to reforme the world, and to deuise
some new Remedies and Commodities for the perpe­tuall good of that Monarchy,
which hee laboured to preserue as the apple of his eye.

Byas was chosen first to signifie his Opinion; who discoursed in this manner.
I haue trauelled ouer all this spacious Iland, and by a curious sur­uay, I
found more Parkes for Deere inclosed in this Country, then in all Christendome
besides. I found many Commons, Mountaines, Heath, and wast grounds, which
might be better conuerted and seuered for bearing of Corne, Grasse, and Hay,
wherein the labour will quickly defray the charge, and mightily inrich the
Natiues. In Lin­colneshire about the Washes and Marshes, there may many new
habitations be erected in imitati­on of the Low-County men, who haue wonne
from the Sea, as the Venetians before them their fa­mous City, more vnlikely
grounds then any I saw in Lincolneshire. A Patterne wherefore let them take
from Sir Hugh Middleton, that renowned Barronet, which makes London for euer
obliged vnto him for her water, a piece of worke eterni­zing his Name so
farre, that a Spanish Embassador [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=173) vpon the sight
thereof rauished with admiration, protested, that if such an enterprise had
beene at­chieued in Spaine, his King had ennobled him with the Title of a
Count. This industrious Gen­tleman, together with Sir Ambrose Theloall,
pur­suing on the like profitable workes, recouered a­boue 1000 acres of Land
from the Sea, in the Ile of Wight, worth a thousand pound a yeare. And if
others would follow their vertuous examples, doubtlesse the euent would crowne
their designes and cost with prosperous successe. If Commons were husbanded
and tilled, by such inclosures the Commoners should reape that commodity
seueral­ly in 20. Acres, which they could not in 100. while they lay confused.
A little Good is better mana­ged, t [...]en much disorderly inioyed. Some men
will get more by their Gardens and Orchards, then others by their Plow Lands.
How many Mountaines, Heaths, Wasts, and Furzy grounds might be conuerted to
better vses then they be at this day? Yea, and many thefts, robberies, and
o­ther intollerable abuses, might bee preuented by these inclosures.

Here Bias ended; when Pittacus began to dis­couer his Plot. Well hath my
Collegiat Bias mani­fested a matter of great import, beneficially ten­ding to
restore Great Britaine to prosperity. But what shall the Inhabitants
afterwards doe, when the genuine and natiue vertue, which now is ver­dant, of
a liuely saltish vigour, spicke and spanne new, what shall they doe fiue or
sixe yeares hence, when they haue throughly gotten the maiden­head [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=174) of these
wastes, and wearied all the youthfull graine of these grounds with bearing of
Corne? Will they feed and sucke still on the blood of their decaied veines?
The best grounds will grow out of heart in a short time, vnlesse they be
holpen by Art. I confesse the subiect, which I intend now to commend, is
sordide, rude, and more beseeming a Clownish Coridon, then one of my education
in this magnifique Court; yet neuerthelesse, because the same serues to inrich
his Maiesties Territories in these Westerne Coasts, which hee holds as deere
as his Thessalian Tempe, I will disclose the secret meanes to renew the life
of ouer-wearied Lands. There is no ground but hath Marle, ei­ther neere the
superficies of it, or deeper in the wombe of the earth abounding. This Marle
in some Countries, by the reuolution of time, is tur­ned to lime, or
limestone, and this lime in some places is growne to a finer mould, euen to
chalke, which is the perfection of all Marle. Where none of these abound,
nature hauing not as yet wrought her selfe to her fulnesse; I wish euery
Landed man with an Augur, boarer, or piercing worme, to search and try in the
deepest part of his earth, where the same lieth hid; for surely shallow or
thicke, he may finde Marle vpon his Land. If it be oily, vnctuous, and clammy,
then it is fat and rich. It is of sundry colours, and different likewise in
the goodnesse. For there is a yellow Marle, a Red, a Grey, and Blew; all which
are good, if they be oily and slippery as Sope, and mixed with earth; as also
weake, if it be incorporated with gra­uell, [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=174) stone or sand.
The red Marle is the worst, vnlesse it be found to lye neere the blew. For the
best is the blew in operation, and will last longest. Next vnto it is the
yellow, and the grey better then the red. All which may bee searched after in
the veines of the earth. Hauing met with it, let the Husband man glory, that
hee hath met with trea­sure, able to supply his owne and his Countries
necessities. Onely let him take this for a Caueat, that at the first marling
of his ground, hee must look he plow not with broad and deepe furrowes, but
narrow, lest he throw his Marle into the dead mould. For the nature of Marle
is to send all the goodnesse downewards, and for that cause it must not be
buried too deepe, but still kept aloft on the vpper mould. And in this it
differeth much from Dung and Mucke, which spend their vertue vp­ward, and will
ascend by their misty vapour springing vp to the face of the ground, though
they be buried deeper then they ought to bee. I could admonish men oftener to
hearten their out­worne grounds with other remedies, as with the soile of old
Ditches, or with sand, or to transferre and temper fresh earth brought from
lay grounds, with their ouerspent mould, as they vse in Deuon­shire. Or to
adde tough clay to the tender sandy, for the one is life to the other being so
incorpo­rated, specially moist with the dry. But I hope this being practised,
their Corne fields will pro­duce sufficient increase, so that they shall not
be­come too often beholding to the Sound of Den­marke for Rie, as commonly
heretofore euery [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=175) fiue yeares
they haue beene.

Periander after this speech, produced his opini­on: Seeing we haue, like
Moles, begunne to treat of earthly Commodities to inrich this decayed
Countrie, let me exhort them to plant Orchards, the benefits I dare well say,
will counteruaile the French Vineyards if they be rightly followed, and need
but small pruning and looking to after the first planting. By this way they
shall haue Cider, which with a little helpe of some Spice, will goe beyond
most of their Wines, and consequently, saue aboue sixe hundred thousand pound
a yeare, which now most lauishly are consumed by them, euen to the cutting and
ending of their fatall threed. Already some discreet and circumspect Landlords
haue couenanted & conditioned with their Tenants, that they shall euery yeare
during their Leases, plant fruit Trees: which if others will imitate, not
onely wines will grow in lesse vse, but malt will be spared out of the
superfluity of their store, to furnish the needy, and supply Naui­gations and
Plantations abroad.

As soone as Periander had done, Thales the Mi­lesian tooke his turne and
spake: Many small pie­ces of meat put into the Pot, make fat pottage, and as
the other Prouerbe implieth, many a small makes a great, and mountaines were
made of small motes or atomes, which I alleadge in my defence at this present,
for though I cannot promise Gol­den Mountaines to augment the State of Great
Britaine, yet I dare auow, that I shall reueale one Proiect which shall spare
them sixty thousand [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=175) pounds a yeare
now of meere necessity transpor­ted into France and Spaine for Salt. Why may
not they erect good store of Salt-houses in England neere those places, where
Coales are digged, about New-Castle, in Lancashire, and in Wales, where
late­ly an Alderman of London had one, which suppli­ed Bristow, and those
Westerne parts with very fine Salt? I know not what makes men so backward now
adaies, vnlesse they are made to beleeue by the Spirit of Errour, that a bare
naked Faith will iustifie them with doing any deedes of Charity. For besides
their yearely gaine, they may doe ve­ry meritorious deedes equall to Almes
giuing, which as S. Iames writes, will couer a multitude of sinnes, in setting
the poore at worke. If they think it much to erect so many Salt houses, as
will serue all the Ilanders, by reason of the deare rate of Coales to be
conuerted for other vses, let them set vp some in Newfound land, some in New
England, and others in New Scotland, where they may haue plenty of woods. And
it is knowne, that Wood fire without conuerting Wood into Charcoale, wil serue
to boile Salt as wel as Coal. There Salt be­ing at hand to be had for the
Fishermens vse, it will saue at the least twenty thousand pound, vnto the
English, which now with the tunnage and the Salt Discouery of Newfound Land.
they are forced to be at charge. Captain Whithorne in his book of the
Cōmodities of that Country, among other exceeding good notes by him there
deliuered, writes, that one Panne will make aboue 20. bushels of good Salt in
euery 24. houres, one­ly with mans labour and the Salt water; and not, [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=176) as some doe vse
to make Salt vpon Salt; which so there made, shall not stand in three pence
the bu­shell to those that prouide in that manner: Wher­as Salt now stands
them in twenty pence at the least euery bushell. And as the said Captaine
Whit­borne further affirmeth, that Salt thus orderly boy­led, doth much better
preserue Fish, whether it be Ling, Codde, or Herring, and keepe it sweeter,
then if the same were seasoned with any other kind of Salt. Yea, and Fish
preserued with this white fine Salt, will sell dearer in Spaine or Italy, then
if it were salted with the other muddy Salt.

After Thales, Chilon began his relation in this wise. I thinke there is money
enough in the Land, if people would bring it forth to take the Aire, that Aire
which God made common for the poore as the rich. What a deale of Plate is
there in London, and in rich mens houses, which some had rather goe directly
into Hell, then to sell it for the common good. It were fit that such
creatures had Tutors, or as the Ciuilians say, Curators to man­nage their
Estates for them, seeing they haue not the benefit of reason to distinguish
what is conue­nient for mortall men, which must suddenly re­turne to the dust
of the earth, and then whose shall these Goods be, which these Fooles haue
prepared with curses, & disquietnes of mind? If Commissi­oners and Presenters
were vpon their oathes, to sound & search into euery mans ability; Subsidies
might be trebled on some, and the needier sort eased. But in vaine doe I
speake of Tutors, Com­missioners, and Iuries, if Merchants bee not lookt
[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=176) vnto,
that they transport not Money, Plate, or Bullion, as the Statutes of Edward
the 3. Richard the 2. Henry the 4. Henry the 6. Henry the 7. and Edward the 6.
doe all strictly prohibite. Erasmus in King Henry the 8\. daies, was like to
feele the se­uerity of those Lawes, if that Magnificent King had not highly
fauoured him. For when this fa­mous Scholler thought to take shipping to goe
into the Low Countries at Grauesend, the Kings Officers con [...]iscated 300.
pound which hee had gotten in London, by the liberality of the King, Sir
Thomas Moore, and other fauourers of Learning in those daies; so that poore
Erasmus, like another Pauper Henricus, was constrained to returne backe to
London, where after that hee had bewailed his mishap to Sir Thomas Moore, and
other friends of his, hee was aduised by them to repaire to the Chamber of
Presence, when this noble King sate at dinner. The King wondred to see
Erasmus, who had taken his leaue of him aboue a fortnight be­fore. And
thereupon merily askt him, what winde draue him backe againe to his Court,
whom hee imagined to haue beene at Rotterdam? Erasmus shewed the Case, how his
Maiesties Officers vsed him. The King vnderstanding the matter, bestow­ed on
him 60. pound towards his stay, and wrote to the Searchers, commending their
dutifull care, that they should repay Erasmus all his money. Many Noblemen
also being present, incouraged by the Kings liberality, presented Erasmus with
good gifts, which with the Kings, amounted to 300. pound more; so that hee
returned home into his [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=177) Country with
twise so much more money, then he brought with him into England. And from
thence forth in all Companies, applauded the iu­stice and liberality of the
English Nation. If Offi­cers would watch to doe their indeauours for the
seizing of Coine, which may be transported yeare­ly in [...]o Forraigne parts,
doubtlesse money would become more plentifull within the Land.

Here Chilon ended. And Cleobulus framed his speech in this manner: So great is
some mens Couetousnesse at this time, that they had rather hazard their soules
to hell, rather then to imploy their money for the honour and weale of their
Country. They will rather keepe it by them, then lend part to releeue their
dearest friends. And I know not how to compell these wretches to bring it
abroad, vnlesse the Common-wealth would order Tutors ouer them, as my Brother
Chilon aduised, grounding the equity of this Order vpon the anti­ent writ, de
Lunatico inquirendo. For surely a spi­rit possesseth them worse then that,
which mad­ded Saul. There is no other way to draw money out of misers hands,
but by hope of profit. Since the Statute enacted in King Iames time, for 8. in
the 100. money is farre more scarce. And there­fore in my iudgement, if that
Act were repealed, there might insue a twofold benefit. First, money would
become more plentifull. And then if an Act were made, that Vsurers might be
tolerated to take 9. pound in the 100. pound, for one yeares vse, & that the
party which borrowes, should pay 20. shillings more to make it vp 10. pound,
as in [[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=177)
former time, and this last to be conuerted towards some meritorious work, mony
would waxe more abundant, and no man would grudge to pay 20. shillings for a
vertuous purpose. And perhaps the same would lessen the exaction of the rest
in the mercie of God. To this furtherance of money I would haue those Brokers
and extorting Iackes re­ceiue corporall punishment, who shall by indirect
tricks and monthly bills exact vpon pawnes more interest, then euer the Iew of
Malta tooke of his deadly enemies.

After him the Lawmaker Solon discoursed, as fol­loweth: I haue heard this day
sundry pretty pro­iects pronounced by my Colleagues for the en­riching of
Great Britaine. But if all these fall out happily, and the Deuill still
continue to sow his seeds of dissention in mens hearts to goe to Law one with
another for a Goats haire by the procure­ment of Makebates, and the aduice of
some coue­tous Lawiers, to what end shall his Maiestie spend his time to
succour and supply them with money, and they presently after to bestow the
same on others for the molesting of Innocents.

This were to make our great Appollo accessary and priuie to iniurious
dealings. First, let my good Ilanders weed out, or at least wise restraine the
in­solencies, deceits, and equiuocations of Lawiers, and then seeke for
remedies to heale their indispo­sitions. Shall the mild Comforter of humane
soules minister an occasion of scandall to reprobates, and fewell to their
iniquities? If they get wealth, men, as I see, haue not the wit to keepe it.
Therefore [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=178) I thinke fit,
and it is a treasure inualuable, to tame the Lawiers, before any more riches
be giuen, as swords in mad mens hands, to offend the seruants of God. What
intolerable knaueries haue beene exercised of late yeares by fellowes of this
ranke against honest men, yea against whole Countries, whose blood, like that
of Abell, doth cry for ven­geance? I know one poore Lordship in Wales which
was persecuted by them, and forced for foure thousand pounds to compound for
their na­tiue freehold, which by Records found in the Tower their Ancestors
had enioyed 300. yeares, and all vpon that farre fetcht maxime, Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, that no prescription of time might barre the Prince of his
Right? And if the wise King Iames of blessed memory had not set a period to
their insinuations, by limiting 60 yeares to his titulary demand, God knowes
to what euent their dangerous positions would haue issued vnto? It is an easie
thing for a man to find a staffe to beat a dog, and for a cunning Lawier with
the crochet of his braine to circumuent harmelesse people. How many thousand
pounds are yearely spent in Wales alone to maintaine suites at Law, which
might be well spared, if the fountaine were dam'd vp? Let the King of Great
Britaine shut vp the spring, which enuenomes multitudes of his poore subiects,
who grone vnder their burthen, worse then the Israelies vnder the bondage of
Egypt, and Wales alone shall saue aboue 40. thousand pounds a yeare, which row
they consume, besides their dear time not to be redeemed, in vnnecessary suits
at Law.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=178)

### 3.11. CHAP. 11.

Apollo not throughly contented with the proiects of the seuen wise men of
Greece, commands others, viz. Cornelius Tacitus, Cōminaeus, the Lord
Cromwell, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Secretary Walsingham, Sir Thomas Smith, and
Willi­am Lord Burleigh, who were knowne to be farre more Politicke Statesmen,
to deliuer their opi­nions, how Great Britaine might be inriched.

APollo liked reasonable well of the inuenti­ons demonstrated by the Seuen wise
men of Greece. But for all that, some of them hee deemed to be more theoricall
then really practick; and therefore He caused some of his vertuous
At­tendants, which had been famous for their Actiue diligence in managing
matters of State, to disco­uer more proiects, whereby Great Britaine might
attaine to a present fruition of Treasure. For, as his Imperiall Maiestie
said, Philosophers being Cli­nickes, and retired to close chambers delighting
more to be, as Persius notes of them

Esse quod Arcesilas arumnosi (que) Solones,

Obstipo capite & figentes lumine terram,

Like to Arcesilas or Solons found,

With down bent heads, & eies vpō the ground▪ then personally to bestirre
themselues, as men of motion ought, in bringing their purposes and plots to
execution, they could not proue so neces­sary members to act what he intended,
as those which had by their industry got the start of them [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=179) in actuall
businesse. The euent his Maiestie saw in Cicero, and Caesar, which moued our
most prudent Apollo to referre these Pragmaticke affaires of Great Britaine to
the experienced Cornelius Taci­tus, to Philip Comm [...]naus, to the Lord
Cromwell, which flourished in King Henrie the 8. daies, to Sir Thomas Chaloner
sometimes Ambassadour in Spain, & author of those admirable books de repub.
Anglorum instaur. to Sir Francis Walsingham, to Sir Thomas Smith, which wrote
the Common-wealth of England, and to William Lord Burleigh Treasurer of
England.

Cornelius Tacitus as the most ancient, was elected first to certifie his
censure, who with a free Romane candour framed this discourse: There is asmuch
difference betwixt the face and state of Great Bri­tane at this day, and the
fashion as it stood in Do­mitian; time, when I liued there with my victori­ous
father in law Iulius Agricola, as we see betwixt it and the Countrey of the
Crime Tartare. Then, there was elbow roome for the Inhabitants suffi­cient
without multiplicities of Law-suites, subtle shifts, conycatching, or
contagious thronging and hudling together: But now,

Sunt homines alij, natura Britannica differt.

In Britanes Isle both men and Land are chang'd.

We Romanes by our Legionary Cities wonne them to ciuility, which they
according to their quicke capacities speedily apprehending, em­braced the
Christian Faith, paid tribute to Caesar, and continued in loyall obedience
vnder his Lieutenants, vntill our Monarchy became transla­ted [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=179) to
Constantinople, that so the fulnesse of time might inuest Antichrist in old
Rome, the Babylon of the West. Since which time, as the Children of Israel
were sometimes aloft, sometimes cast downe, this Iland indured sundry changes.
But in my iudgement next vnto suits at Law, which the wise Solon obserued to
begger both Towne and Country, the populousnesse of some chiefe Cities, and
specially of London, doth impouerish the Roy­all Chamber of that Empire,
insomuch that it is in a manner impossible to inrich them, before the Drones,
and yong hungry Bees bee remoued to some forraigne Places by an Act of
Parliament, and so prest by transcendent authority. The peo­ple which I would
haue thus prest, are the Inmates, the Cottagers, the needy, and needlesse
numbers. An honest Minister assured me, that in his Parish at London, there
were many which perished of want, being ashamed to begge; and that he knew
tenne persons hauing but a roome of twelue foot square to containe them, & but
one bed for them all. Many of the like calamity might bee found in that City,
two or three housholds crept into one house; that I haue diuers times wondred,
that they are not euery second year visited with the Plague, or Purples,
considering the multitudes of Chan­nels, Iakes, and other vnpleasing places
which in­fect the Aire, able to poyson the strongest Snake. For the verifying
of this my allegation, I will pro­duce one example which may serue to confirme
the same. I haue heard it reported by very credible persons, that about 4.
yeares past in a house neere [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=180) S. Dunstons of
the West, the Priuies there being emptied on a night, the next morning they
found not onely their Brasse and Pewter in the lower roomes soild and filth'd,
but likewise their Plate two sto [...]s higher standing on their Cupboord,
tainted and corrupted with a yellowish vnseeme­ly colour. Yea and that which
Aristotle himselfe would admire at, they found their money in their purses to
haue lost the colour, as if it had beene of purpose varnished with smoaky
dung. If the seri­ous regard of their healths moue them not, yet let the
wisedome of Magistrates foresee the in­conuenience which yearely accrues to
the Gene­rality, by suffering vnnecessary people to hinder the gaines of the
industrious, and withall to know this, that too many of the industrious
Craftsmen themselues flocking together, doe so diuide the profit, which more
politikely being fitter for a few, that both the one and the other, are often
seene to faint vnder their owne waight. Better it is for a City to content
themselues with a few sub­stantiall neighbours, then to be troubled with ma­ny
rakers. If the City of London, which is thought to hold eight hundred thousand
Soules within it, and the Suburbes were rid of 40000 of these, the rest would
thriue the better, and saue at least two hundred thousand pounds a yeare,
which now are spent in vain, & hereafter wil be conuerted for the weale of the
whole Iland. In one yeare there were suppressed 700. Cottagers in
Glocestershire, since which time, that Country flourished.

Comineus Lord of Argenton, the great States­man [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=180) of France, whom
Katherine de Medicis Queen Mother, and somtimes Regent of that Kingdome, was
wont to terme the Heretike of State, because he disclosed the secrets of
Princes, vttered his opi­nion next after Cornelius Tacitus. In the warres
betwixt the House of Burgundy and my Soueraigne Lewis the eleuenth, I
remember, that Money fell out very scarce, as it doth now in Great Britaine,
for all that saying, which this wise King was accu­stomed to repeat, that his
France might be com­pared to a Meadow ready to bee mowne twise a yeare. And
one of the principall meanes, which he inuented to be stored with money, was
to raise his Coine. From the Saxons time vntill my time in the Raigne of King
Henry the sixt, an ounce of Sil­uer was diuided into 20. peeces, and so passed
for 20. pence. King Henry by reason of his wars with vs, and afterwards with
the House of Yorke, proclai­med the ounce at 30. pence. King Henry the 4.
vp­on the like necessity, enhansed it to 40. pence, which so lasted vntill
King Henry the 8\. daies, who raised the ounce to the value of 45. pence. King
Edward the 6\. proclaimed it at fiue shillings. If Money continues still
scant, I see no reason, but that it might be raised higher, as in former
times; which also would induce men to bring forth their Plate. In France,
Venice, yea and in Golden Spaine, Brasse money goes current, two and thirty
Mara­uedis amounting to sixe pence; which they call a Reall. Of these
Marauedis, I heard a Rhodomon­ting Castilian vaunt, that hee would bestow 600.
thousand of them with his deare Daughter, to her [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=181) mariage. In
some Countries they vse Shelles, Pep­per, and lether peeces for money. In
other places, gaddes of Steele or Iron. At the first troubles of the Low
Countries, they made stampes on Past-Boords, which they licensed to goe
current for Money. In the last warres of Ireland, base Coine was ordained to
supply the vse of the finest Siluer. As long as it will passe in estimation,
and warran­ted by publike authority, either Money may bee raised, or the same
of a mixt alloy, as the Venetian Liure, or the French Souls, or of such other
met­tall as the Prince liketh, may serue the Subiects turne in time of warres,
as it serues those Nations both in Warre and Peace.

The Lord Cromwell succeeded this Noble French­man, and said: that hee was one
of the chiefest In­struments vnder King Henry the 8\. to dissolue the
Religious Houses in England, & wished, that now some of those Farmes and
impropriated Tithes, were for a few yeares lent by the State of England to
support Ecclesiasticall persons in the new Plan­tations, meaning those, which
the State could spare in their places. And he hoped by this meanes, the Clergy
being prouided for in those New Lands, Churches would there be built the
sooner, and the Plantations in a short time would helpe to inrich this
Kingdome with many sorts of Commodities, specially if some of the Religious
that went in per­son, & others well beloued in their Country: that for their
sakes, others of good account would ac­company them, and so assist the Common-
wealth by their power and example.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=181) Sir
Thomas Chaloner renewed the old proiect of building Busses & flat Flemish
boates for fishing on the Easterly coasts of this kingdome, saying, that it
was a shame for his nation to looke on while the Hollanders yearely tooke
worth 300000 pounds of fish vpon our sea coasts, and in our liber­ties,
although they fished farther off then they did; for the truth of which
assertion of his he alleadged the testimony of Bartolus the famous Lawier. As
Ilands (saith he) in the sea next adioyning, so likewise the Sea it selfe to
an hundred miles extent is assigned to the bordering Countrey, I [...] Insul
ff  [...]de Iur.

Secretary Walsingham was of opinion, that letters of Mart or Reprizals would
furnish the land with treasure, so that they went forth in Fleetes more
strongly prepared then in Queen Elizabeths daies; For that now-a-dayes the
Pyrates of Algiere had taught the Spaniards more wit not to go so weak­ly mand
and stor'd as in times past. In Drakes, Hau­kins, and other braue Aduenturers
voyages, our English found a Golden age. But that now the case was otherwise.
Therefore they must goe strong, if they meane to surprize any rich Carricks.
Like­wise he wished them, whose powers extended not to supply themselues with
many Copartners, to watch about the lesser Ilands in America, and not to draw
too neere those Forts where the Gallies frequēted, nor to be aduenturous
about the time when the Spanish Fleet repaired thither. About Brazill, and the
riuer of Plate hee supposed they might intercept good booties & with more
safe­ty: or if they entred into Lameeres straights, they [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=182) might in the
South sea meet with rich prizes. Fur­ther, he animated the East Indy Company
to ioyne with the Hollanders to driue the Portingals out of the wade of
Spiceries. Further, he aduised the En­glish to prouide the like kinde
entertainment for the Spanish prisoners, if not in their owne Coun­trey, yet
in the Summer Ilands, and other Plantati­ons where they might be put to labour
as well as they employ them in their Gallies, vntil they paid sufficient
ransomes. Lastly, he counselled them to erect a speciall society of men of war
to ioyne to­gether in the Nauall expedition, and to lend vpon reasonable
considerations some of those shippes, which they tooke, to waft our Fishermen,
and to defend the Plantations.

Sir Thomas Smith protested, that there must be strait Lawes enacted against
superfluous commo­dities imported into the land out of other Coun­treyes,
before the Golden Fleece could possibly be­come the Catholike Restoratiue.
Among many superfluities hee insisted principally on three. 1. vpon the
extraordinary vse of Tobacco. 2\. vpon forraigne stuffes and silks, which
wrought the De­cay of English cloth, and consequently of many poore Housholds,
which liued by spinning, wea­uing, fulling and dressing of cloth. 3. He
enueigh­ed against the multitudes of wine tauernes, and Alehouses, saying that
a great part of our Treasure were yearly wasted in these fiery houses; That
halfe of them might well bee spared, and that in Cities and Townes, next to
the contagion of the Aire formerly mentioned, they were the chiefe causes of
the inflamation of mens blood, and so of [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=182) Feuers, and
most of our late sicknesses. And in conclusion he pronounced these verses.

In anciant times they vsed much to Fast,

And what was spar'd they turn'd to Almes at last:

But we the Sabbaths make Saturnall Feash:

On Holy dayes Drinke makes some worse then beasts.

If men did Custome pay for Ale and Beere,

Great Charles then Spaines King Philip richer were.

Our bloods inflam'd: Diseases grow by Wine:

Our Barnes waxe lesse: The Poore doe grone and pine.

Tempore Maiorum leiunis multa colebant,

In (que) Ele [...]mosynas Copia versa suit.

Sabbata nunc mutant in Satur nalia Bacchi,

Patrum Festa di s ebri tate scatet.

Si pro Ceruisid persoluer [...]t Anglia Censum,

Ditior Hispano, Carole magne, fores.

Corporis hinc nimy facta ebull [...]tio morbos

Accers [...], minuunt Hordea, languet Egenis.

Lastly, William Lord Burleigh brought forth his opinion, and said, that all
the meanes, restoratiues, and good orders, which hee had heard deliuered would
proue of no validity, nor euer come to per­fection, except his Maiesty of
Great Britaine might find some zealous ministers to execute the Lawes and
statutes concerning the hindrance of Trade. And further he signified, that one
maine point for reformation and repaire of Trading consisted in rewarding
those vigilant spirits, which like Senti­nells, awaked when others slept, or
proiected for the cōmon benefit, while others spent their time like belly-
gods in bibbing of sugred sack, & in pam­pring their guts with gluttonous
fare. In these two positiuely he laid the foundation of Great Bri­taines well
fare: In the execution of these new De­crees, and in rewarding of the
industrious: whereby the obstinate might be punished, and the vertuous [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=183) heartned. And
in conclusion, this prudent Atlas, on whose vnwearied shoulders sometimes
relied the waight of Englands cares, made this discourse: In one thing more I
note the prouident Remedy, which the diuine wisedome lately manifested in this
Kingdome by remouing from hence many people with famine, war, plagues, feuers
and other sicknes­ses; A remedy surely applyed for two beneficiall respects;
In his loue to these, by translating them to a happier place: In his mercy to
the rest, which suruiue, that they take heed by such terrible & sud­den
accidents, how they wast those means where­of they are but his Stewards in
lauish feasts, in To­bacco, Apparell, in suites at Law, or in drinking more
then sufficeth nature: And to bestow the estimate of what they shall saue
hereafter by their thrist on nobler monuments, in offring of sweet smelling
sacrifices to his sacred nostrills, by help­ing to build places of succour for
their distressed brethren, seeing that the noney-bees doe ouer­swarme at home;
for certainely, if all these, whom He lately tooke to his mercy, had been yet
liuing, their natiue Countrey could not containe them, but that a greater
Decay of trading would necessa­rily haue ensued; nor could all the wits of our
wi­sest Politicians haue deuised remedies to restore it, which now may in all
humane probability serue to make the Golden Fleece an absolute Catholike
Medicine. God grant, that the same may worke effectually, and conuert the
steely heart into a re­lenting, tender, and into that which is truly
Chri­stian. Let all good Christians say, Amen. Fiat voluntas Domini.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=183)

### 3.12. CHAP. 12.

The Order, which Apollo tooke for the setling of the Golden Fleece, before his
late Progresse into the Tropick of Cancer, recommending the same to the care
of the Fraternity of the Rosie Crosse, the foure Patrons of Great Britaine.
The Consultation of the foure Patrons for the good of Great Britaine; The copy
of Saint Da­uids sonnet, which he pronounced in the Am­phitheater at Parnassus
in honour of the King of Great Britaines mariage and Coronation.

THe day before the summers Solftice in Iune last 1626. Apollo sent for the
famous fra­ternity of the Rosie Crosse, St. George, St. Andrew, St. David, and
St. Patrick, those care­full Patrons of Great Britaine, and in the presence of
the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and o­ther vertuous persons his
Fauorites, he deliuered this short speech: The time now drawes on, that we
must take our Progresse into the Tropicke of Cancer, where we must exhilarate
with our in­fluence those rude subiects of ours, which inhabit neere the
Northerne Pole, to gratifie their natures, which otherwise would proue more
fullen, with some perpetuall Dayes without Nights, for their patience in
tolerating so many long nights with­out dayes at the winters Solstice, during
wch timeof our Progresse, I require you, my Gratious friends, to assist the
planters of the Newfoundlle, which we haue lately styled Britanniol, and to
treat on their behalfe with that magnanimous King Charles of [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=184) Great Britaine,
that hee confirme the commission and orders, which his Father of blessed
memory granted about three yeares past for the establish­ing of Wafting ships
for the defence of that hope­full Plantation, and of the fishing fleetes
against the oppressions of Pyrats, assuring him from vs, that there lies the
principall part of the Golden Fleece, which Orpheus Iunior hath sounded out in
his Cambrensium Caroleia, which he published at the celebration of his Mariage
with the Paragon of France; which likewise he lately renewed here before vs at
Parnassus: And not onely hee, but o­thers haue intimated the benefit of this
Proiect, namely, the Noble Sir William Alexander in his New Scotland, and
Master Misselden in his Circle of Commerce, who in most liuely termes paints
out the substance of this Fleece.

A braue Dessigne it is, as Royall as Reall, as Honourable as Profitable. It
promises renowne to the King, reuenew to the Crowne, Treasure to the Kingdome,
a purchase for the Land, a prize for the Sea, Ships for nauigation, Nauigation
for ships, Mariners for both: Entertainment for the rich, employment for the
poore, aduantage for the Aduenturers, and encrease of Trade to all the
subiects. A myne of Gold it is; The Myne is deepe, the veines are great, the
Oare is rare, the gold is pure, the extent vnlimited, the wealth vn­knowne,
the worth inualuable. All this you shall signifie vnto that Noble King. And in
the interim of our progresse, we command all the rest of my vertuous
Corporation to obey the Lady Pallas, [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=184) whom wee doe
substitute in our stead as Queene Regent to see our State well and peaceably
goner­ned. At these words the vigilant Emperor moun­ted vp into his fiery
Chariot, and began his state­ly Progresse.

After whose departure the foure Patrons con­sulted how they might grace the
mighty King of Great Britaine. St. George he deuised a triumphant shew to
honour the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, the Portraiture whereof
Menante meanes shortly to expresse. St. Andrew framed an eloquent Oration of
Vnity vpon that Embleme: Henricus Rosas, Iacobus Regna. St. Patrick compo­sed
a briefe booke of the Military Science, enter­laced with that late proiect of
the double armed squadrons, wherein euery Bowman was taught to vse of the Pike
as a Rest to his Bow; wherby his Country of Ireland might be secured from
hostile inuasions. St. Dauid made choise to reioyce the Kings heart with a
sonnet in memory of his hope­full Mariage and Coronation. The which when he
had perfected and sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus, Scogin and Skelton
the chiefe Aduo­cates for the Dogrel Rimers by the procurement of Zoilus,
Momus, and others of the Popish Sect, very saucily interrupted him. The true
copy whereof as it is registred in the Library of that Court, is this that
followeth:

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=185)

St. Dauid.

I Long to sing of Charles his Waine,

And with due praise to ralse

The Flowre deluce of Charle-le-maine.

New dayes bring forth new Layes.

O happy Starre! O hopefull daies!

Braue Iasons Golden Age!

Kinde Courtiers, heare S. Dauids Layes,

Free from wiles, farre from rage.

Who Cambriaes Ioyes then Cambers Son,

Should for this match expresse?

This match, whose Beames doe strike vpon

Towers, Fields, and Wildernesse?

Scoggins interruption.

What wilt thou proue a Phaeton?

Stand backe, and doe not presse:

Among our wits a Coridon,

Thy selfe a Swaine confesse.

Base is thy tune, so seemes thy state

In Courtlie Eagles eyes;

None may come in at heauens Gate

Without S. Peters Keyes.

Without great meanes none out of Wales

Shall greete our Noble King.

Dar'st thou then come with Newfound tales?

And them before him sing?

Thy Cambria is a barren land

For Goates and Satyres fram'd:

Like to the Alpes, or that wild Strand,

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=185) Which
thou hast Cambrioll nam'd:

Thy Nation meete to be still gull'd

With Lawyers quirks and quips:

Thy Muse vnholy, too much dull'd,

No drop of life she sips.

No Wedding Robe, hast thou on, Foole,

Yet look'st here wedding Cheere:

A Guest vnbid must bring his Stoole;

Stand backe and draw not neere.

St. Dauid.

Stand backe thy selfe, thou greedy Elfe,

Shall Slugges the Hauen hold?

And merry Greekes runne on a Shelfe

From Colchos bearing Gold?

Both Sea and Land in league conspire

Rich Cambrioll to deface,

If Argonautickes thou aspire

To keepe from Courtby Grace.

O how thy Midriffe swelles with Gall

Against an Antient Race!

Wee are no Slaues, true Britaines all

May see his Highnesse face.

If Cats may looke vpon a King,

And Curres barke at the Moone:

Arcadian Swaines like Swannes may sing,

And Da [...]y begge one Boone.

That Dauid which made Pagans bow

To Christ, though Fiends repine.

That man which made Polagians know

Then faults, and truth to shine:

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=186) That
name, which through Great Britaines Land

The first of March doth ring:

If not; the fame of Newfound land

Shall lead me to our King:

Whose Heart I faine with Orpheus straine

Would cheere; and then salute

The Queene, which Fates for him ordaine

With Violl and the Lute.

The sacred Muses sent me heere,

And, if Might quells not Right,

I will draw neere, (O doe not ieere)

The Light, their Angels sight.

To whom Ile show what's yet vnshowne,

My Countries griefe and neede;

And in thy eare (although a Clowne)

Ile whisper through a Reed.

Our Cambria is a fertile soile

Abounding with all store;

Else would not her Hells-brokers spoile,

And sucke her blood so sore.

Had Cambria not more Drones then need,

Her shoares would yeeld good ships:

Her Land more wealth, where now we feed

With honey needlesse lips.

Till Hydra suits bee well restraind,

Our Iarres will neuer cease:

Our meanes grow meane, our honour stain'd,

Voyd of Grace, voyd of peace.

But if our King play Hercules,

And daunt them with his Mace:

Old Cambria shall with Cumbers lesse

Sustaine new Cambriols case.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=186) And both
together Tribute pay

More store then Peru's Oare,

Which at his feete they'll yearely lay,

With some in hand before.

S. George did kill, as Legends say,

A Dragon fierce of prey:

Next vnder God this Monster may

None but our Soueraigne flay.

Marke well my words, whose Pedegree

Is fetch't from Cambers line;

And with our Leekes who do'st agree

Thy Roses to Combine.

Take wares vnbought, a thing that's strange,

Fish, Iron, Salt, and Pit [...]h,

Trayne, Skinnes, and Masts: or in Exchange

Fruit, Wine, Gold, Silkes most rich.

Our Seuerne goes not farre behinde

The Thames for fruitfull ground:

Nor this my Muse shall any finde

Vnrelisht or vnsound.

Let Friends or Fiends, or Momes accurst

Taxe her for want of life:

With sweet the best, with sowre the worst

She payes to end the strife.

I'st not folly? and vnholy

For Bayards to discerne

Of doubtfull colours suddenly,

Before the right they learne?

Although I am no Puritane,

Pure kisses I commend.

Pureiests I praise in any man,

So they to goodnesse tend.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=187) I haue
not read, I must confesse,

Those bookes cald Lutherane:

And thine, O Wickliffe, haue I lesse;

Yet am not I profane.

These Mysteries I leaue to such,

Who pale with study teach▪

Or vnto such, whom ouermuch

Wants Feare commands to preach.

Skeltons interruption.

Why dost thou smite, O busie wight,

Our eares with thy discourse?

Art thou a Iew, or Rome-a-Night,

A bruitish Turke, or worse?

Thy Song some Welsh Sidanens Loue

May gaine to thy desire:

But Courtly Dames will thee reproue,

Fly from high beauties fire.

Haunt thou Bride-Cakes, and Country cheere

As fits a Cambrian Peere.

Thy Mumsimus, thy murmurs here

None will but dizzards heare.

Bray there aloud, and roare complete

A midst thy Pipes and Ale:

From Babels seat springs thy conceit,

Thy sonnet is so stale.

S. Dauid.

I come not here for Belly-cheere,

Nor for Tobaccoes fume.

With mirth for mirrh my Soueraigne deare,

To perfume, I presume.

Whom mighty Ioue meanes to destroy,

He lets them qua [...]e a while:

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=187) And mads
them with a smoaky toy,

Themselues till they beguile.

Bayte thou those Beasts: and Ile take leaue,

To greet our Charles his waine:

Whose rayes shoot on, as I conceaue,

The stocke of Charle le-maine.

Their Starre I saw from Cambria West:

Which made me Gifts prepare,

Leekes crownd with Pearles; yet to contest

Against me still you dare.

You gape for Fees, but a Gold Ring

Suits not a Meazells snout.

A Lambe shall wring your Adders sting

And canuase all your rout.

Rather then you should terme me Iew,

Leane Bacon I will eat:

Or Pudding nere so blacke of hew,

or Hare, though beauties meat.

But if you please and stand precise,

Vpon those Iewish Lawes:

Your double tongue Ile Circumcise,

Which marres your Clyents cause.

I worship not false Mahomet,

Who barres the Ivy signe,

As ignorant, how some haue met

In wine the sisters nine.

Nor Romes good will seeke I to winne,

Which orders me to plow

Red furrowes vp in naked skinne,

And merits seed to sow.

Such Grace let Popes graue on themselues,

And leaue me as I am;

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=188) Who
brookes it worse then Egypts Elues

The Diuell, or his Dam.

I count that Church Ba [...]des Pedlery,

Which all for money cares;

Sells Masses, Pardons, Letchery,

Soules, Beads. ô precious wares!

Though lack a dandy, when he houles,

Frights children from the dugges:

Will men giue bribes to keepe their soules

From Purgatories bugges?

Though Apes weare coates, and some birds p [...]a [...]e,

Not knowing weale from woe:

Yet sober men (though somewhat late)

Owles Mattins should forgoe.

I hunt not for more miracles,

The Gospell to confirme:

Nor outward shewes, Gulls Spectacles,

To hold my Inside firme.

The Golden Calfe old Iewes averr'd

With manly voice to crake:

Christs body some are not a [...]eard,

From Gods right hand to rake:

I like as ill the Cloister life,

Vnlesse a Nunne I schoole.

Let him that hates an honest wife

Be gelt, or beg'd a foole.

No Priest shall cozen me to fast

To pull my courage downe,

If once of Shrift my Wife had tast,

Or lou'd a grasse-greene gowne.

At Tombes and Shrines I dare not call,

On Saints this match to guide:

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=188) Nor
Heauens Queene; let Idolls all

Lye from this mariage wide.

But vnto ONE, that's alway prone

To pardon humane vice,

I vow them both in Christ alone

A lining Sacrifice.

The Stony-heart who can deny

But vnion tender makes?

Of diffring Tunes an Harmony,

In spight of Hellish Snake;?

No venome shall their soules defile,

No dreames, no magicke spells:

Not Crocodile tempt them with guile.

So sweet Loues Posie smells!

No Beast shall touch their honey flowres,

No flashing curse them sindge,

What God hath set he weedes at houres;

Gods knot let none infringe.

With Oile of Gladnesse, Bathes of blisse

Dipt shines free Maiestie

In Albions Throne, where Thamesis

Extolls their Amitie.

The Crownes they weare, no Fiends can teare;

S. Michaell guards his owne.

The Golden Scepter which they beare

With Lawes swayes Field and Towne.

With might & maine their mind contends

The Dragon to put by,

Who red with blood at last intends

The westerne Monarchy.

Yet let him reckon with his O [...]st

For his warre-fares wages:

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=189) Not all
his Rents in Indiaes Coast

Will pay th' arrerages.

Let none wonder, if God Thunder

Vengeance for our Iarres:

While we vnder Sathan wander,

Himselfe with Dauid warres.

But reconcil'd he wils to fight

His Battells valiantly.

Though Dauids might Goliah slight,

On God all Conquests lye.

Couragious King, then bid vs smite

Tyrants downe, Gyants growne;

Downe with those Do [...]s, which Britaines spight,

Tara tantara downe.

Me thinkes Lisbon I see now wonne,

Th' Iles ransack't, th' Indies sack't,

And sweet Eliza thought vndone;

Rein-stald by vs swakt.

In March, like Iune, their springs first light

Reuiues our Garden beds

With louely Roses, red and white,

And Leekes with siluer'd heads.

The Spirits Gardner will keepe greene

With Buddes perpetually,

Our Rosie King and Lillies Queene,

On him if we relye.

Whom last I pray, as Pageants gay,

As Maskes, or Gemmes in Gold,

My Muse to prize, though clad in gray,

My Will, though too too bold.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=189)

### 3.13. CHAP. 13.

Vpon an Information preferred before the Lady Pal­las, against Scoggin and
Skelton for interrup­ting S. Dauid in his Sonnet; she vtters some
ob­seruations on the behalfe of the Learned, and thereby takes an occasion to
banish all Scoffing Companions from Parnassus, and from be­comming at any time
after partakers of the Gol­den Fleece discouered in this Treatise.

THe next day after this Sonnet was sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus by S.
Da­uid, Spencer the Emperours Atturney for the English Poets, being moued with
the vnman­nerly and rude interruptions of Scoggin and Skel­ton, informed
against them as Libellers before the Lady Pallas, who sate as Queene Regent in
Apol­loes absence. These dogrell Rimers confessed their Errour, that they were
seduced by the Spirit of Detraction, to disgrace this Reuerend Prelate as much
as in them lay, because his Grauity had composed that Sonnet in such a homely
straine, as seemed more conuenient for men of their ranke, then for a
venerable Patriarch, whose veine ought rather to flow with Heroicall blood,
then to bor­row their plaine robes of Poetizing.

Vpon this Confession of the Dogrell Rimers, ore tenus, the wise Regent
proceeded, and vttered these notable resolutions; that Scoggin and Skelton
well deserued to be punished as Libellers in that Starre-Chamber-Court. [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=190) First, because
they had interrup­ted a person of that high worth, and that publike­ly, before
they had heard the Sonnet throughly repeated, which argued, that they did it
more out of spleene and pre [...]udicate iudgement, then out of the
apprehension of their titulary liberties. Se­condly, that a simple course
Poeme inriched with liuely matter and iuyce, ought to be preferred be­fore an
heroicall swolne verse puft vp with the barme or froth of an inconsiderate
wit. Thirdly, that no man should critickly quote downe the im­perfections of
any Booke or writing, except hee also would note the best and choisest
conceits thereof, whereby it might appeare in the ballance of vnderstanding,
that the one did downe-waigh the other. For it is easier to finde faults, then
to mend them, to pull downe a house, then to build one vp. And whosoeuer would
marke the worst things, leauing the sweetest and most worthy of commendation
behinde; her Grace compared him to that Foole, which forsooke the Rose, and
smelt to the pricking brier. Fourthly, that many men vsed to reprehend the
works of the learned, which their owne muddy Pates could not appre­hend nor
comprehend, because they might seeme wiser to the standers by then the Muses
had made them. Fiftly, that a iudicious Writer should not care what censure a
malicious Sycophant gaue of his workes; For it were more honourable to bee
praised of one Socrates, then of a hundred Mo [...]ists. That Scholler
therefore, which with an Apology defends his innocency against these vipers
toungs [[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=190)
the most prudent Queen likened him to that hare­braind Traueller, which in the
scorching Moneth of Iune being troubled with the croaking noise of Frogs,
would needs light downe from his horse to be reuenged on them for offending of
his tender eares.

All this, sayd the noble Queene, did our Reue­rend Patriarch know, when hee
went forwards with his Sonnet notwithstāding the crosse-opposi­tions of these
Buffones, scorning out of a braue Bri­taine courage to reuenge himself on such
contem­tible creatures. Neuertheles, because their floutes and taunts tended
to the breach of Ciuill Orders, her Maiestie banished all scoffing companions,
and base ballet Rimers quite out of the Iurisdiction of Parnassus and Colch
[...]s, and for euer after to be­come incapable of the mystery of the golden
fleece.

## Appendix A

### Appendix A.1 The conclusion of Orpheus Iunior to his Soue­raigne the King
of Great Britaine.

IF with kind words your Maiestie approue

This Golden Fleece sprung from a subiects loue:

Ile sweare you hold your Fathers worth by right,

That from your lippes there shootes a quickning light.

But if your mind more waighty cares withdraw,

One fingers touch sufficeth me for Law.

Ile dreame that you haue read, what I present,

Or deem'd it meet for wisedomes Parliament,

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=191)

Or else Ile faine new fancies in my Braine,

That to your state this worke might bring some gaine:

Or that you doe of Vaughan well conceaue;

But to your Cookes this as a prey you leaue:

I care not, whilst crown'd Lillies you become,

While Trade helpes Armes abroad, and Peace at home.

### Appendix A.2 Orphei Iunioris conclusio ad Magnae Britanniae Regem.

SI placidis verbis tibi nostra probetur Opella,

Quae Maiestatis ponitur ante pedes:

Dignum iuro Patris te, maxime Carole, Sceptr [...],

Et iuro labris lumen inesse tuis.

Sin magis impediant grauiora negotia mentem,

Sat mihisi digito tacta sit ipsa t [...].

Idaeas fingam, te perlegisse: Senatu,

Aut Aulae scribis hanc meruisse legi;

Vel de Vauhanno bene te sentire: sed Orsa

Tradere nostra Coquis igne voranda tuis.

Nil moror: Albionis decorant dum Lilia Serta:

Dum foris Arma, domi Pax, Noua Terra viget.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19655&page=191)

[Home](/)

Vaughan, William, 1577-1641.. Date: 1626  

