---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Carmen triumphale, or, Englands triumph for her restored libertie with
White-Halls speech to her royal master, Charles the second King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland : also her sad complaint against the pretended
Committee of Safety, Rumpers, and the rest of those cruel tyrants, and the
unjust judges, who not only defaced and spoiled her stately buildings, but
also unjustly condemned her to be sold : with two short panagyricks to the
Right Honourable the city of London, and the University of Cambridge / by
William Smith, Gent.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=1)

Carmen Triumphale: OR, ENGLANDS TRIUMPH FOR Her Reſtored LIBERTIE. WITH WHITE-
HALLS SPEECH to her Royal Maſter, CHARLES the Second KING of Great BRITAIN,
FRANCE and IRELAND, Alſo her ſad Complaint againſt the pretended Committee of
Safety, Rumpers, and the reſt of thoſe Cruel Tyrants, and unjuſt Judges, who
not only defaced and ſpoiled Her Stately Buildings, but alſo unjuſtly
condemned her to be ſold. With two ſhort Panagyricks to the Right Honourable
the City of LON­DON, and the Univerſity of CAMBRIDGE.

—Nunquam LIBERTAS gratior extat Quam ſub REGE pio.—

Claudianus.

By WILLIAM SMITH, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for W. Jones, 1660.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Englands Triumph FOR, Her Reſtored Liberties.
  * 2\. To the City of LONDON, &c.
  * 3\. To the Univerſity of Cambridge, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=2)

## 1\. Englands Triumph FOR, Her Reſtored Liberties.

THough the refulgent and Illuſtrious Light

Of this high Theam might blind my duller ſight,

Though the more ſerious more acute Eſſays

Of able Pens might be juſt Remora's

To my attempts; this Long-expected Day

Commands that I theſe grateful lines ſhould pay.

My active Muſe this joyful Time inſpires,

And warms my Soul with more then uſual fires.

But ſtay (my Muſe) what beaſtly Creature's this

This terrour-cauſing Goblin? Sure it is

Not that three ſhapt Cymera, we are told,

Of by the ancient Poets; For behold

'Tis headleſs, wants both Body, Legs and Arms,

Good Dr. Fauſtus bring your ſtrongeſt charmes,

Your ſtrongeſt, for your beſt will ſcarce prevaile,

(I doubt) to conjure this deformed Tayle,

This Tayl compos'd of Haſlerigs Charity,

Of Vains Religion, Martins Chaſtity,

Of Nevills Athieſm, with thoſe mighty pair

Of Horns Lord Mounſo [...] on his Front doth near,

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=3) Of Tom
Scots Secretary-ſhip and Lechery,

Of Fleetwoods Tears for his late Excellency,

Of Whitlocks Juſtice, of that Mercy that

Liſle did extend to Hewit, when he ſat

Grand Butcher in Nols Inquiſition, with

That Fury, (far worſe than the Publick Faith)

The Good Old Cauſe. This long-liv'd Rump did dare

With an uncivil Civil War to tear

Theſe Nations, and with damned Votes did make

The State to tremble and the Church to quake,

And did benight us in a wilderneſſe

Of frantick Lights and new-born Heriſies.

At laſt All-seeing Heaven compaſſion took

And on ſad England caſt a milder look,

Then with a tongue that never ſpoke in vain

You may imagine ſhe us'd ſuch a ſtrain.

Monſter (more monſtrous then what Africk breeds)

" Devouring Hydra with his many Heads,

" Far more prodigious then that ugly Snake

" Alcides ſlew in the Lernaean Lake!

" Be gone to duskie ſhades of ſilent Night

" No more no more the pure Celeſtial Light,

" Contaminate with your ſulphurious breath

" Be gone to th'unfrequented ſhades of Death;

" Upon the Stygian Banks a thouſand yeares,

" (Poſſeſt with horrour, care-infuſing fears)

" Wander, avaunt Fury with many heads!

" Vaniſh! 'tis all commanding Heaven that bids.

This ſaid, theſe proud imperious Baſſaes ſtreight,

(Whoſe all-ore-breaking Rage the ſollid weight

Of Englands Sacred Rights and Ancient Lawes

Ne're could reſtrain) with their diſſembling Cauſe

And ſpurious brood of baſe diſſembling Jacks,

Of Jenizaries and of Sanſiacks,

Wereby a cleanſing, purging Northern wind

Swept clear away, and nothing left behind.

Then did Aurora (from her Roſie Bed

Riſing) her Purple, bluſhing Mantle ſpread

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=3) Ore our
Horizon, then the Day-Star clear

Enlightned our long-ſhadowed Hemiſphere;

And having ſhone a while reſignes his Ray.

And re-enthrones our long deſired Day.

But hold! what pleaſing Muſick's this, I hear?

O how it doth entice my raviſht ear!

Oh how the Thundring Drums and Trumpets ſound

whoſe heart rejoycing notes do not confound

My mind with dreadful Taratantara's;

No angry (yet well-rankt) Batalia's

Amaze my wondring eys; what need I fear?

Theſe Londons peaceful Militia are.

This gallant Body to Hide-Park now goes,

Hide-Park, appointed for the Rendevouz,

Where Englands choiſeſt

The Right Hononr­able the Earl of Winchel­ſey M.G. Maſſey, and Ald. Bunce, &c.
Trailed Pikes there Turkiſh Hiſt. of Solyman the Mag.

Heroes grac'd the Field,

And in well practic'd hands their Pikes then held.

Imperial † Vienna's walls did not,

See better Horſe or braver bands of Foot,

When Charls the Fift that famous Army drew,

'Gainſt the great Solyman and his numerous crew

Now roaring volleys, now loud ſhouts do tear,

With Skies-aſcending noiſe the Ambient Ayre:

With the ſhril ſound Weſtminſter Abbey rings;

The ſacred Reliques of our ancient Kings

This thundring Eccho now awakes; yea then

Our third and greateſt, Edward thought again,

Of Chreſceys fearful field; that proſperous Fift

(That valiant Heroe) Henry then did lift

Up his bleſt head, wondring to hear a ſound,

That would, the noiſe of Agincourt have drownd.

An end draws nigh; the time conducting Sun

His thrice auſpitious glorious courſe hath run;

Now doth the dark, incroaching might diſplay.

Her ſable curtains and excludes the Day,

Commanding all to leave th' adjacent Plain,

And joyfully home to retire again,

Where we will leave them till the next great Day,

With brisk Lyaeus waſhing cares away.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=4) Aurora
riſing in the Purple Eaſt,

The Humid Night, and Radiant Stars defac't.

When our great Senate do reſolve to bring

Back and enthrone our lawful Royal King,

The di­ſcrpition of this days So­lemnity is omited becauſe deſcribed in  [...]
her place by a worthy and lear­ned Pen.

Prolaiming that his Majeſty ſhall Reign

Of Britain, France and Ireland Soverign.

Now this long-wiſhed joyful, joyful

May 29

Day

Its heart reviving Splendour doth diſplay

The Sacred beams of Majeſty draw near,

And Loyal hearts with their bright Influence chear.

Now favouring Heaven doth her aſſiſtance lend

The flying Clouds commanding to diſcend

In duſt-allaying drops, more precious than

That ſhowre on Danae's Lap Jove once did rain.

Wonder not Mortalls why theſe drops fall now,

Th'obſequious Clouds but their Allegiance ſhow.

Englands brave Gentry ſhould in rank ſtand here,

As they in Order did this Day appear,

I would, thrice noble Cylly, here relate

Thy Regal Splendor and unuſual State,

If time and want of room did not reſtrain

My now to this one ſheet confined Pen.

When White-hall knew his Sacred Majeſtie

Within th' encloſure of her Walls to be,

Raiſing her lofty Tower-environed Head

Imagine thus (although ſcarce heard) ſhe ſaid,

Welcome (Great Maſter) Royal Charles, you are

Thrice welcome now; and you Illuſtrious Pair

Of High-born Princes welcome are, when I

Behold you all, O how I leap for Joy!

My Turrets all, would bow a willing head

To Kiſſe the ground whereon your feet do tread.

How long (Great Sir!) have I been deſolate,

Wanting the luſter of a Regal State,

Of a triumphant train and grand reſort

Attending alwaies on my Princes Court!

How long did Earth-born Villains me poſſeſs,

How long a Sultan and a Sultaneſse!

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=4) How long
did Red-Coats in my Chambers ſleep!

How long did me the Safe Committie keep,

Alas! I was condemned to be ſold,

And to be turned into good, red Gold;

For the all-ſearching Rumps an art did know

(Which the beſt Chymiſt never yet could doe)

To Metamorphiſe houſes [Parkes and all]

Into their pockets and to make them fall.

But this Day clears all doubts: for this bleſt Day.

Men, Women, Children, utmoſt joy diſplay;

Yea I believe that harmleſs Infants are

Drunk with conceit of joy. Long may you here

Live, and with a peace-giving hand reſtore

That ſplendour to me, which I had before!

She ſaid: when loud triumphant valleys tear,

With thundring Ecchoes the tranſparent Ayre,

The ſmoke of roaring Canons baniſh Light,

And flaming Bonefires do begin the Night.

## 2\. To the City of LONDON, &c.

Pardon Illuſtrious City if I ſay

'Twas thou, which cauſed this their happy Day,

If thy life giving hand had not aſſay'd

To lend a never-diſcontinued aid

To this deſired change, this riſing Light

Had ſcarce diſpel'd our long-tempeſtuous Night

How high (great City!) did thy glory riſe

When valiant Walworth's hand did ſacrifice

Thoſe two pernicious

Jack ſtraw and Wat Tyler.

Rebells and their Cauſe

To Englands juſt (by them infringed) Laws!

Thy long-unequal'd deeds Eclipſed lie,

(Walworth!) now Londons worthies clear outvie

Thy ſame; thou ſav'd the King and State (tis true)

But London gives a King to England new.

Londons beſt Patriots your immortal Fame,

Your glorious acts and never dying Name

Shall live, whilſt Londons Bridge to th' ſea gives Laws.

And Neptunes time-obſerving Surges aws.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=50901&page=5) Whilſt
through reed-bearing Banks Thames gently ſlides

And in a ſeries of Meanders glides

Towards Thetis kinder boſom; whilſt his Rays

All-ſeeing Phaebus at his riſe diſplays

On the once far renowned structure of

Old Paul [its now become our greateſt ſcoffe]

With grateful hands ſucceeding times ſhall rear

Up fame-preſerving Statues to declare,

(If theſe our preſent times ingrateful prove)

To your immortal Names their ardent Love.

## 3\. To the Univerſity of Cambridge, &c.

Now Alma Mater from the aſhes raiſe

Thy head, adorned with Apollos Bays;

From thy Syderial Face wipe of thoſe tears

Which furrowed have thy cheekes theſe twice ten years

Thy diſcompoſed, long unordered Haire

And dangling locks dreſſe as ſome time they were.

Thy Nectar-yielding Cup ſhall now oreflow,

And to it ſhall the Cornu-copia how;

Thy night diſpelling Sun ſhall further ſhine.

Then the cold Arcticke or Antarctick Line;

By armed Rage and Ignorance no more

Shall thy beſt Sons from thy kind breaſt be tore.

Now, O thrice noble

Clare Hall.

Houſe, thy ſacred wood

And poliſht ſtones (once taken to make good

Defenſive Rampers) great Apollo ſhall

With his well-tun'd, melodious Harp recall▪

Amphion like, and make them to repair

The riſing walls of thy intended ſquare.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Smith, William, 17th cent.. Date: 1660  

