---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Choice Psalmes put into musick, for three voices the most of which may
properly enough be sung by any three, with a thorough base / compos'd by Henry
and William Lawes, brothers and servants to His Majestie ; with divers
elegies, set in musick by sev'rall friends, upon the death of William Lawes ;
and at the end of the thorough base are added nine canons of three and foure
voices, made by William Lawes.

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=1)

CHOICE PSALMES PUT INTO MUSICK, For Three Voices.

The moſt of which may properly enough be ſung by any three, with a Thorough
Baſe.

COMPOS'D by Henry and William Lawes, Brothers; and Servants to His Majeſtie.

With divers Elegies, ſet in Muſick by ſev'rall Friends, upon the death of
WILLIAM LAWES.

And at the end of the Thorough Baſe are added nine Canons of Three and Foure
Voices, made by William Lawes.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, for Humphrey Moſeley, at the Prince's Armes in
S. Pauls Church-yard, and for Richard Wodenothe, at the Star under S. Peters
Church in Corn-hill. 1648.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=2)

Carolus D: G: Rex Ang: Sco: Fran: et Hiber:

[...]Regi, Regis, &c. Regum Ar╌ca╌na cano.

Henricus Lawes Regiae Majeſtatis à ſacra Muſica.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=2)

### TO HIS Moſt Sacred Majeſtie, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, King of great
Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.

I Could not anſwer mine owne Conſcience (moſt Gracious Soveraigne) ſhould I
dedicate theſe Com­poſitions to any but Your Majeſtie; they were born and
nouriſh'd in Your Majeſties ſervice, and long ſince deſign'd (ſuch as they
are) an Offering to Your Royall hand. Many of them were compos'd by my Brother
(William Lawes,) whoſe life and endeavours were devoted
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=3) to Your
ſervice; whereof, I (who knew his heart) am a ſurviving witneſſe, and therein
he perſiſted to that laſt minute, when he fell a willing Sacrifice for Your
Majeſtie: I were unworthy ſuch a Bro­ther, ſhould I tender ought that is his,
or mine, to any but our Graci­ous Maſter (from whoſe Royall Bounty both of us
receiv'd all we injoy'd;) and ſuch an Inſcription would not only ſeem a Theft
and Alienation of what is Your Majeſties, but (which I moſt abhorre) would
make me taſte of theſe ungratefull dayes. Your Majeſtie knowes when the Regall
Prophet firſt penn'd theſe Pſalmes, he gave them to the Muſitians to be ſet to
tunes; and they humbly brought them to David the King. Beſides, Mr. Sandys
inſcribes his Tranſlation to Your Sacred Majeſtie; ſo that this I offer is
Your Majeſties in all ca­pacities, and doth not ſo properly come, as rebound
back to Your Ma­jeſtie. I was eaſily drawn to this preſumption, by Your
Majeſties known particular affection to David's Pſalmes, both becauſe the
Pſalter is held by all Divines one of the moſt excellent parts of holy
Scripture; as alſo in regard much of Your Majeſties preſent condition, is
lively deſcribed by King David's pen. The King of Heaven and Earth reſtore
Your Majeſtie according to Your own righteous heart, which is the daily
earneſt prayer of

Your Majeſties moſt humble, moſt loyally devoted Subject and Servant, HENRY
LAWES.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=3)

### To the READER.

THeſe following Compoſitions of mine and my Brothers, ſet at ſeverall times,
and upon ſeverall Occaſions, (having been often heard, and well approv'd of,
chiefly by ſuch as deſire to joyne Muſick with Devotion) I have been much
importuned to ſend to the Preſſe, and ſhould not eaſily have been perſwaded to
it now, (eſpecially in theſe diſſo­nant times) but to doe a Right (or at leaſt
to ſhew my Love) to the Memory of my (Brother, unfortunately loſt in theſe
unnaturall Warres; yet lyes in the Bed of Honour, and expir'd in the Service
and Defence of the King his Maſter. Living, he was generally known, and (for
his Parts) much honoured by Perſons of beſt quality and condition. To give a
further Cha­racter of him I ſhall forbeare, becauſe of my neer relation, and
rather referre that to thoſe Elegies which many of his noble Friends have
written in a pe­culiar Book: But, as to what he hath done in Muſick, I ſhall
deſire the preſent and the future Age, that ſo much of his Works as are here
publiſhed, may be re­ceived, as the leaſt part of what he hath compos'd, and
but a ſmall Teſtimony of his greater Compoſitions, (too voluminous for the
Preſſe) which I the rather now
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=4) mention, leſt
being, as they are, diſperſt into private hands, they may chance be hereafter
loſt; for, beſides his Fancies of the Three, Foure, Five and Six Parts to the
Viols and Organ, he hath made above thirty ſeverall ſorts of Muſick for Voices
and Inſtruments: Neither was there any Inſtrument then in uſe, but he compos'd
to it ſo aptly, as if he had only ſtudied that. As for that which is my part
in this Compoſition, I had not thought at all (though much urg'd) to pub­liſh;
but that, as they had their birth at the ſame time with his, and are of the
ſame kinde, ſo they might enter both into the light together, and accompany
one another being ſo neere allied; Mine taking precedence of order only, not
of worth. I may be thought too partiall in what I have ſpoke of a Brother; but
here are fol­lowing many of our Friends and Fellowes, (whoſe excellency in
Muſick is very well knowne) who doe better ſpeak for him, while they mourne
his Obſequies: yet I (oblig'd before all other) cannot but bewaile his loſſe,
and ſhall celebrate his me­mory to my laſt houre.

Henry Lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=4)

### To the Incomparable Brothers, Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Lawes (Servants
to His Majeſtie) upon the ſetting of theſe Pſalmes.

THe various Muſick, both for Aire and Art,

Theſe Arch-Muſicians, in their ſev'rall waies

Compos'd, and Acted, merit higher praiſe

Then wonder-wanting knowledge can impart.

Brothers in blood, in Science and Affection,

Belov'd by thoſe that envie their Renowne;

In a Falſe Time true Servants to the Crowne:

Lawes of themſelves, needing no more direction.

The depth of Muſique one of them did ſound,

The t'other took his flight into the aire:

O then thrice happy and induſtrious paire,

That both the depth and height of Muſique found.

Which my ſweet Friend, the life of Lovers pens,

In ſo milde manner hath attain'd to do,

He looks the better, and his hearers too;

So in exchange all Ladies are his friends.

And when our Meditations are too meane

To keep their raptures longer on the wing,

They ſoar'd up to that Prophet and that King,

Whoſe Love is God, and Heav'n his glorious Scene:

Setting his Pſalmes, whereby both they and we

May ſinging riſe to immortalitie.

A. Tounſhend.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=5)

### To his Friend Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his Compoſitions.

TO chaine wilde Winds, calme raging Seas, recall

From profound Hell, and raiſe to Heav'n, are all

Of Harmony no fables, but true ſtory;

Man has within a ſtorme, a paine, a glory:

And theſe in me ſtruck by that art divine,

Submit to Muſique, above all to thine.

J. Harington.

### To my Friend Mr. Henry Lawes.

HArry, whoſe tunefull and well meaſur'd ſong

Firſt taught our Engliſh Muſic how to ſpan

Words with juſt note and accent, not to ſcan

With Midas eares, committing ſhort and long,

Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,

With praiſe enough for Envie to look wan:

To after age thou ſhalt be writ the man

That with ſmooth Aire couldſt humour beſt our tongue.

Thou honour'ſt Verſe, and Verſe muſt lend her wing

To honour thee, the Prieſt of Phoebus Quire,

That tun'ſt their happieſt Lines in hymne or

The ſtory of Ariadne ſet by him in Muſic.

ſtory.

Dantè ſhall give Fame leave to ſet thee higher

Then his Caſella, whom he woo'd to ſing,

Met in the milder ſhades of Purgatory.

J. Milton.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=5)

### To my worthy Friend (and Countriman,) Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his owne, and
his Brother Mr. William Lawes's incomparable Works.

WHere ſhall I place my wonder, when I ſee

Such right in both to't, ſuch equalitie

Of worth in either, that it cann't be knowne

Which does the greateſt, and the higheſt owne?

So when two Tapers mixe their beames, we ſay,

Not this more luſtre has, or that more ray;

But each has title to the light, and they

Make up one, common, undiſtinguiſh'd day:

Or, as when th' Flamen divers incenſe fires,

The perfume ſevers not, but in one aſpires;

So that from this Spice, or that piece of Gum,

We cannot ſay, ſuch, or ſuch odours come:

But mounting in a generall unknowne cloud,

The wonder of the breath's to each allow'd;

So here, ſuch equall worth from each does flow,

That to each light, to each we incenſe owe.

'Twas no neceſſitie (yet) this Union made,

(As when a weaker light does droop, and fade,

Unleſſe aſſiſted by another) No:

Each ſingly could full beames and odours throw.

No wanton, ruder aires affright your eare;

Th'are pious only, and chaſte numbers here:

(Such was that lovely Poean, when the diſpleas'd

Incenſed God th' Achaick Hoſt appeas'd,)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=6)Becoming or
the Temple, or the Shrine,

Fit to the words they ſpeak; like them, divine.

Such numbers does the ſoule conſiſt of, where ſhe

Meeting a glance of her owne harmonie,

Moves to thoſe ſounds ſhe heares; and goes along

With the whole ſenſe and paſſion of the ſong;

So to an equall height, two ſtrings being wound,

This trembles with the others ſtroke; and th' ſound

Which ſtirr'd this firſt, the other does awake,

And the ſame harmonie they both partake.

Nor doe they only with the ſoule agree

In this; they ſhare too in its eternitie:

And this, the one part of this work has tri'd;

For, though himſelfe remov'd, this does abide,

And ſhall doe ever: here, his memory

Shall ſtill ſurvive, and contemne deſtiny.

The ſame waits you (Sir) and when e'r you'r ſent

From us, you'll live here your owne monument.

Fr. Sambrooke.

### 1\. Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=6)

#### 1.1. I.

Henry Lawes.

[...] THat man is truly bleſt, who never ſtrayes by falſe advice, nor walks in
ſinners waies; nor ſits infected with their ſcornfull pride, who God contemne,
and pietie deride: He ſhall be like the tree that ſpreads his root by living
ſtreams, producing timely fruit; his leafe ſhall never fall: The Lord ſhall
bleſſe all his endeavours with deſir'd ſucceſſe, the Lord ſhall bleſſe all his
endeavours with deſir'd, deſir'd ſucceſſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=7)

#### 1.2. II.

Henry Lawes.

[...] WHo truſts in thee, O let not ſhame deject, thou ever Juſt, my chaſed
ſoule ſecure: Lord lend a willing eare, with ſpeed protect, be thou my rock
with thy ſtrong arme immure.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=7)

#### 1.3. III.

Henry Lawes.

[...] O Thou from whom all mercy ſprings, com­paſſionate my ſufferings, and
pitie me who truſts in thee: O ſhelter with thy ſhady wings, untill theſe
ſtormes of woe cleere up, or o╌ver blow.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=8)

#### 1.4. IV.

Henry Lawes.

[...] NOt in thy wrath againſt me riſe, nor in thy fury Lord chaſtiſe: Thy
arrowes wound, naile to the ground, to the ground, thy hand upon mee, thy hand
upon mee lyes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=8)

#### 1.5. V.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LOrd judge my cauſe, thy piercing eye beholds my ſoules inte╌grity. How
can I fall, when I, and all my hopes on thee relye? when I, and all my hopes
on thee relye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=9)

#### 1.6. VI.

Henry Lawes.

[...] CAſt off and ſcatter'd in thine ire, Lord on our woes with pitie look:
The Lands inforc'd foun­dations ſhook, whoſe yawning ruptures ſighes expire. O
cure the breaches thou haſt rent, and make them firmly permanent.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=9)

#### 1.7. VII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] THy beauty Iſrael is fled, ſunk to the dead, ſunk, &c. How are the
valiant, the valiant falne? the ſlain, the ſlain thy moun­taines ſtaine. O let
it not in Gath be knowne, nor in the ſtreets of Askalon, leſt that ſad ſtory
ſhould excite their dire delight, leſt in the torrent of our woe, of our woe
their pleaſure flow; leſt their tri­umphant daughters ring their Cimbals, ring
their Cimbals, ring their Cimbals, and curs'd Peans ſing, ring their Cimbals,
and curs'd Peans ſing.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=10)

#### 1.8. VIII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] WIth ſighes and cries to God I pray'd, to him my ſupplication made;
powr'd out my teares, powr'd out my teares, my cares and feares, my wrongs
before him laid, before him laid.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=10)

#### 1.9. IX.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LOrd, for thy promiſe ſake defend, and thy all-ſaving ſhield extend. O
heare my cries, my cries, O heare my cries, which with wet eyes and ſighes to
thee aſcend, and ſighes to thee, and ſighes to thee aſcend.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=11)

#### 1.10. X.

Henry Lawes.

[...] O Heare my cries, O heare my cries, preſerve his life, who will thy
Lawes, thy Lawes obey, and juſt commands fulfill: Mine eyes out-watch the
night, my cries prevent the ear╌ly morne, in due devotion ſpent; heare and
revive, and revive, thy juſtice execute on lawleſſe men; but thine owne
preſerve from their purſuit: Thy oſt tri'd mercies ever are at hand, thy
judgements on eternall Baſes ſtand, thy judgements, thy judgements on eternall
Baſes ſtand, on eternall Baſes ſtand.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=11)

#### 1.11. XI.

Henry Lawes.

[...] WOe is me, that I from Iſrael exi╌led muſt in Meſech dwell, and in the
tents, in the tents of Iſ­mael. O how long ſhall I live with thoſe, whoſe
ſavage minds ſweet peace oppoſe, and fury by diſſwaſion growes, by &c. and
fury, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=12)

#### 1.12. XII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] TO heare me Lord be thou inclin'd, my thoughts O ponder in thy minde,
and let my cries acceptance find: Thou hearſt my morning ſacrifice, to thee,
before the day-ſtarre riſe, my pray'rs aſcend, my, &c. my, &c. aſcend with
ſtedfaſt eyes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=12)

#### 1.13. XIII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LOrd ſhowre on us thy grace, inrich with gifts divine: Let thy
illuſtrious face upon thy ſer­vants ſhine, that all below the arched skie, may
thee and thy ſalva­tion know, ſalvation know.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=13)

#### 1.14. XIV.

Henry Lawes.

[...] HOw are the Gentiles all on fire? why rage they with vaine menacings?
Earths haughty Po­tentates and Kings 'gainſt God, againſt his Chriſt conſpire:
Break we (ſay they) their ſervile bands, and caſt their cords, caſt their
cords from our free hands.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=13)

#### 1.15. XV.

Henry Lawes.

[...] HAppy he, happy he, who God obeyes, nor from his direction ſtrayes: Thou
ſhalt of thy labours feed, all ſhall to thy wiſh, all, &c. all ſhall to thy
wiſh ſucceed. Like a faire and fruitfull Vine, by thy houſe thy wife ſhall
joyne; ſons obedient to command, ſhall about, ſhall about thy table ſtand:
Like green plants of Olives ſet by the moiſtning Rivolet, he who feares the
pow'r above, thus ſhall proſper in his love.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=14)

#### 1.16. XVI.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LAudate Dominum omnes Gentes: Laudate eum omnes Populi: Quoniam
confirmata eſt, con­firmata eſt ſuper nos miſeri╌cor╌dia ejus, & veritas
Domini manet in aeternum, & veritas Domini manet in aeter╌num, manet in
aeternum, in aeternum, aeter╌num.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=14)

#### 1.17. XVII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] DEpreſt with griefe, depreſt, &c. depreſt with griefe, when all reliefe
and humane pitie fail'd, I cri'd, My God, O look on me thou ever Juſt, thou
ever Juſt th' afflicted free. O from the grave, O from the grave thy ſervant
ſave, O from, &c. for mercy, for mer╌cy lives in thee: O from the grave, O
from the grave thy ſervant ſave, thy ſervant ſave, for mercy lives in thee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=15)

#### 1.18. XVIII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] BLeſt, O thrice bleſt is he, O thrice, &c. whoſe ſins remitted be; and
whoſe impieties God covers from his eyes, to whom his ſins are not imputed as
forgot, his ſoule with guile unſtain'd: while ſilent I remain'd, my bones
conſum'd, my bones conſum'd away, my bones, &c. I roared all the day, I roared
all the day; for on me day and night thy hand did heavie light: I then my ſins
confeſt, how far I had tranſgreſt, when all I had reveal'd, thy hand, thy hand
my pardon ſeal'd, thy hand my pardon ſeal'd.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=15)

#### 1.19. XIX.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LOrd, to my pray'r, to my pray'r encline, encline thine eare, and thy
afflicted, afflicted ſervant heare; nor theſe ſalt rivers of mine eyes, theſe
ſalt rivers of mine eyes, my God deſpiſe: A ſtranger as my fathers were, a
ſtranger, &c. I ſojourne here, I ſojourne here. O let me gather ſtrength
before I paſſe away, before I paſſe away, and be no more, before I paſſe, I
paſſe away, and be no more.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=16)

#### 1.20. XX.

Henry Lawes.

[...] WHen griefe, when griefe my lab'ring ſoul confounds, thou powreſt balme,
thou, &c. thou powreſt balme into her wounds; for thou, O Lord, art my
defence, my refuge, my refuge and my recompence: The vicious ſhall by vices
fall, by their owne ſins be ſwept, be ſwept from hence. God ſhall cut off
their breath, God ſhall cut off their breath, and give them up, and give them
up to death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=16)

#### 1.21. XXI.

Henry Lawes.

[...] LEt our foes with terrour quake, with terrour quake; let the earths
foundation ſhake: Judgement our great God affects, yet with e╌quity directs,
yet with equity directs. Theſe celeſtiall twins imbrace, theſe reflect on
Jacobs race: O how ho­ly, O how holy above all honour, honour, and at his
footſtoole fall.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=17)

#### 1.22. XXII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] HOw long? Lord, how long? how long? how long, O Lord? let me not for
ever be forgot. How long? how long, my God, wilt thou contract thy clouded
brow? contract, &c. How long in mind perplext ſhall I be daily vext? Conſider
and heare my cries, illuminate mine eyes, leſt with ex­hauſted breath I ever
ſleep, I e╌ver ſleep in death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=17)

#### 1.23. XXIII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] ACcept my pray'rs, nor to the cry of my affliction ſtop thine eare:
Lord, in the time of miſery and ſad reſtraint, ſe╌rene appeare; the ſighing of
my ſpirit heare, and when I call, with ſpeed reply.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=18)

#### 1.24. XXIV.

Henry Lawes.

[...] THe bounty of Jehovah praiſe, this God of gods all ſcepters ſwayes:
Thanks to the Lord of lords afford, and his amazing wonders blaze; for from
the King of kings eternall mercy ſprings.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=18)

#### 1.25. XXV.

Henry Lawes.

[...] YOu who the Lord adore, and at his Altar wait, and keep your watch, and,
&c. before the threſhold of his gate, his praiſes ſing, his praiſes ſing by
ſilent night, till cheerfull light, till, &c. till cheerfull light i'th Orient
ſpring.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=19)

#### 1.26. XXVI.

Henry Lawes.

[...] NOw the Lord his reign begins, thron'd between the Cherubins: O how
great in Sions Towr's! high a­bove, high above all earthly pow'rs. Great and
terrible his Name, ſince ſo holy, praiſe the ſame, ſince ſo holy, ſince ſo
holy, praiſe the ſame. On his holy Hill glory, glorifie and worſhip ſtill, and
worſhip ſtill. Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=19)

#### 1.27. XXVII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] NOw in the winter of my yeares, of my yeares, when time hath ſnow'd upon
my haires, upon, &c. Abandon, &c. abandon not, O Lord, till I unto this age
proclaime thy mighty pow'r in ſongs, the ſame, &c. unto the next record, till,
&c. thy mighty pow'r in ſongs unto the next record.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=20)

#### 1.28. XXVIII.

Henry Lawes.

[...] THe King Jehovah with thy juſtice crowne, and in a God-like reigne his
Son renowne; he ſhall with equity thy people ſway, and judgement, and
judgement in the ſcales, and judgement in the ſcales of juſtice weigh. He
ſhall deſcend like plenty, like plenty dropping ſhowres, which clothe the
earth, and fill her lap, and fill her lap, and fill her lap with flowres.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=20)

#### 1.29. XXIX.

Henry Lawes.

[...] MY ſoule, my ſoule, my ſoule and all my faculties Jeho­vah praiſe; ſing,
ſing, ſing till the skies re-eccho, re-eccho his aſcending fame: My ſoule, my
ſoule, O celebrate his Name; for he will not e╌ver chide, nor conſtant to his
wrath abide; but mildly from his wrath re­lents, and ſhortens our due
puniſhments, and ſhortens our due puniſh­ments: His glorious Name, with ſweet
accord, joyne thou my ſoule, joyne thou my ſoule to praiſe the Lord.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=21)

#### 1.30. XXX.

Baſſus.

Henry Lawes.

[...] OUr fervent ſoules on God attend, our help, who only can defend, who
only, &c. in whom our hearts exult for joy, in whom, &c. becauſe we on his
Name relye. Great God, to us propitious be, as we have fixt our hopes on thee,
as we have fixt, have fixt our hopes on thee. Halle­luiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Hal­leluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halle╌luiah, Halleluiah.

### 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=21)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=22)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=22)

#### 2.1. A Paſtorall Elegie to the memory of my deare Brother, William Lawes.

Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[...] CEaſe, O ceaſe, ye jolly Shepherds, ceaſe your merry layes; Pipe no
more, in medowes green, crown'd with Ivie and with Bayes: let your flockes no
more be ſeen on the verdant hillocks ſpread; but tune your oaten reeds with
ſadeſt notes, with ſadeſt notes to mourn: for gentle Willy, your lov'd Lawes
is [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=23)
[...]dead. Weep Shepherd Swaines, weep Shepherd Swaines, for him that was the
glory of your plaines: He could appeaſe the ſullen ſeas, and calme the fu╌ry
of the mind; but now (alas) in ſilent urne hee lyes, hid from us, and never
muſt returne, never, never muſt returne, and ne╌ver muſt returne.

Henry Lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=23)

#### 2.2. An Elegie to the memory of his Friend and Fellow, Mr. William Lawes,
ſervant to his Majeſtie.

Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[...] O Doe not now lament and cry, O do, &c. 'tis Fate concludes we all muſt
die; rather rejoyce that he is there, mending the Muſique of the Sphere: we
are dull ſouls of little worth, and coldly here his praiſe ſet forth, who doth
that truly ſure muſt be inſtructed by divinitie. Hark, O hark, the celeſtiall
Quire doth pauſe to heare his ſweeter Lyre: there he is ſet free from
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=24) [...]vaine
feares, or heart-heav'd ſighes, or briniſh teares. Couldſt thou thy fancy ſend
us downe, in Muſique we would place a crowne, ſo harmonious on thy faire
Herſe, ſhould out-tongue Ovid in his ſweeteſt Verſe.

By John Wilſon Doctor in Muſique.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=24)

#### 2.3. To the memory of his much reſpected Friend and Fellow, Mr. William
Lawes.

[...] BUt that, lov'd Friend, we have been taught, our deareſt duſt to mix
with duſt, I'm with thy Lyre ſo ſtrangely caught, my true affection counts it
juſt, and grounds it on a pious care, thy aſhes to involve in aire, involve in
aire: for thy rare fancy from its birth, far inconſiſtent is with earth, or
any inferiour element. How can dull clay preſſe downe thine eyes, and not an
earth-quake ſtraight ariſe?

John Taylor.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=25)

#### 2.4. An Elegie on the death of his Friend and Fellow-ſervant, Mr. William
Lawes.

Baſſus.

[...] DEare Will is dead, deare Will is dead, Will Lawes, whoſe active braine
gave life to many ſweet, to, &c. to, &c. harmonious ſtraine; whoſe boundleſſe
skill made Muſick ſpeak ſuch ſenſe, as if't had ſprung from an intelligence,
as if't had, &c. as if't had, &c. In's juſt proportioned ſongs, in's juſt
pro╌portio╌ned ſongs might you find, his ſoule convers'd with heav'n, his, &c.
with [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=25)
[...]heav'n, heaven with his mind, and in ſuch language that Rhet'rick never
knew, for his were Rhetorick, and ſweet Muſick too, and ſweet Muſique too:
Like that which brought from the Im╌periall skie Angels to men, Angels to men,
from men made Divels flie, made Divels flie. But (oh) he's dead, he's dead:
but, &c. he's dead. To heav'n is he gone? is he gone? the life of Muſick,
laus, laus of our Nation.

By John Cob, Organiſt of his Majeſties Chappell Royall.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=26)

#### 2.5. To the memory of his Friend, Mr. William Lawes.

[...] BRave Spirit, art thou fled? and ſhall not wee, ſince thou ſo ſoon art
dead ſhed teares for thee? O let our eyes like Limbeks be, ſtill dropping,
dropping teares for thee.

By Captain Edmond Foster.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=26)

#### 2.6. An Elegie on the death of his deare fraternall Friend and Fellow,
Mr. William Lawes, ſervant to his Majeſty.

[...] LAment and mourne, he's dead and gone, la­ment, &c. that was the moſt
Admired one, renowned Lawes, Generall of the Forces all in Europe that were
mu­ſicall. Have we not cauſe to weep and mourne, when as the children yet
unborn may make us ſad, to think that neither girle nor boy, ſhall ever live
for to enjoy ſuch Lawes, ſuch Lawes as once they had.

By Simon Ive.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=27)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=27)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=28)

#### 2.7. An Elegiack Dialogue on the ſad loſſe of his much eſteemed Friend,
Mr. William Lawes, ſervant to his Majeſty.

Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[...] NOt well? O no: Draw you black cloud, and ſee the ſoule of mine and all
our harmony drencht deep in bloud and unſtain'd loyalty, my deare Medora lyes.
Hard hap to ſay, Time was, 'twas he; but now he's ever, ever loſt to time and
mee. A fatall breath of honour challeng'd death with death. Vertue to have a
loyall fame, a royall grave. O
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=28) [...]now all
poure, good Will, good Will and Lawes is gone, and I forlome am come to poure
my balme into his wounds, and ſhowre theſe liquid ſtreames, untill I be (deare
Ghoſt) chang'd to a ghoſt like thee. Indeed my ſprings are dry: With thy warme
dew bathe his breaſt, for he is cold, cold as death, cold as death, and laid
to reſt. Then joyne our woes, and let our joyes diſſever, wee'l ſing in
griefe, ſing in griefe, and drop, drop, drop, drop our teares, and drop our
teares to­gether.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=29) [...]The
Muſes all doe mutually aſſent, in this ſad Dirge t' erect his Monument.

Chorus of 3.

[...]Harmonious ſoules, now let your verſe, with love and honour crown his
Herſe; all your ſpicie odours lend to the aſhes of a friend: Bathe him in a
cryſtall floud, till you waſh away the bloud, till you waſh away the bloud,
till, &c. Gently wind
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=29) [...]him,
and then bring freſh Bayes and Laurell from the Spring. Time will fade them,
make them dye: All other Trophies now lay by, no triumph to eternity, no
triumph, no triumph to eternity.

John Jinkins.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=30)

#### 2.8. An Elegie on his Friend Mr. William Lawes.

Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[...] BOund by the neare con╌junction of our ſoules, thus I condole thee, thus
be╌dew thy Herſe; and whilſt my throbbing heart thy Exit towles, towles,
towles, accept this ſacrifice of weeping verſe. What eyes can drily ſtubborne
be, when Lawes reſteth at ſuch a long continued pauſe? Let teares, let teares,
like pendents, garniſh ev'ry note, wav'd too and fro with gales of mourn­full
ſighes, and let the widow'd Muſes joyntly vote, to celebrate with
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=30) [...]griefe
thy Obſequies: for with thee vaniſh't all their airie pride, muffled in clay,
muffled, &c. that erſt was ſtellifi'd. Since then i'th center ſleeps true
harmony, let him (that's greedy of that ſacred gaine, that ſacred gaine,)
cloſe to his mother earth his eare apply; there wait to heare ſome ſad
melodious ſtraine. Within this womb hath pale im­partiall death, too ſoon, too
ſoon confin'd the Quinteſſence of breath.

John Hilton.

### 3\. Of 3. Voc. Baſſus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=31)

#### 3.1. I.

William Lawes.

[...] LOrd, as the Hart imboſt with heat brayes after the coole Rivolet, ſo
ſighes my ſoule for thee, my ſoule thirſts for the living God: when ſhall I
enter his abode, and there his beauties ſee? Teares are my food both night and
day, whiles where's thy God they daily ſay? My ſoule in plaints I ſhed, when I
remember how in throngs, we fill'd thy houſe with praiſe, with praiſe and
ſongs.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=31)

#### 3.2. II.

William Lawes.

[...] LEt God, the God of Battell riſe, and ſcatter his proud enemies: O let
them flie before his face like ſmoak, which driving tempeſts chaſe; as wax
diſſolves with ſcorching fire, ſo periſh in his burning ire.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=32)

#### 3.3. III.

William Lawes.

[...] OUt of the horrour of the Deep, where feare and ſorrow never ſleep, to
thee my cries in ſighes ariſe; Lord from deſpaire thy ſervant keep: O lend a
gracious eare, O lend a gracious eare, and my petitions heare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=32)

#### 3.4. IV.

William Lawes.

[...] OFt from my early youth have they afflicted me, may Iſrael ſay, oft from
my early youth aſſail'd, as oft have their endeavours fail'd: As plough-ſhares
teare the patient ground, as plough-ſhares, &c. The ever Juſt hath broke their
bands, and ſav'd me from their cruell hands.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=33)

#### 3.5. V.

William Lawes.

[...] HOw like a widow? Ah! how deſolate this City ſits, thrown from the pride
of ſtate? How is this potent Queen, who lawes to all the neighb'ring Nations
gave, become a thrall, become a thrall? who nightly teares from her ſalt
fountains ſheds, which fall upon her cheeks in liquid beds. Of all her lovers,
none regard her woes, and her perfidious friends increaſe her foes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=33)

#### 3.6. VI.

William Lawes.

[...] JUdah in ex╌ile wanders: Ah ſubdu'd by vaſt afflictions, ah ſubdu'd, and
baſe ſervitude among the Heathen finds no reſt. Ah! ſee how Si╌on mourns, how
Sion mourns, her gates and wayes lye unfrequented on her ſolemne, on her
ſolemn dayes. Her Virgins weep, her Virgins weep, her Prieſts lament, her
Prieſts lament, her Prieſts lament, and all her ſweets convert to gall, and
all, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=34)

#### 3.7. VII.

William Lawes.

[...] HOw hath Jehovah's wrath, O Sion, ſpread a vaile of clouds about thy
daughters head! From heav'n to earth thy beauty Iſrael is thrown, nor in his
fierce diſpleaſure ſpar'd his owne, nor in his fierce diſpleaſure ſpar'd his
owne: yet Lord thou e╌ver liv'ſt, thy Throne ſhall laſt, when Fun'rall flames
the world to cinders waste.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=34)

#### 3.8. VIII.

William Lawes

[...] SIng to the King of kings, ſing in unuſuall layes, that hath wrought
wondrous things, his conqueſts crowne with praiſe, whoſe arme alone and ſacred
hands their impious bands have overthrowne, their impious, &c. Let all that
dwell on earth their high affections raiſe with univerſall mirth, and loudly
ſing his praiſe; to Muſick joyne the warbling voice: let all rejoyce, let all
rejoyce, let all rejoyce with joy divine, let all rejoyce, rejoyce with joy
divine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=35)

#### 3.9. IX.

William Lawes.

[...] PRaiſe the Lord enthron'd on high, praiſe him in his ſan­ctity; praiſe
him for his mighty deeds, praiſe him who in pow'r ex­ceeds: praiſe with
Trumpet pierce the skies, praiſe him with Harps and Pſalteries: praiſe with
Timbrels, Organs, Flutes, praiſe on Violins and Lutes: with ſilver Cimbals,
ſilver Cimbals ſing, praiſe on thoſe which loudly ring. Angels all of humane
birth, praiſe the Lord of heav'n and earth, praiſe, &c. of heav'n and earth.
Singing Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=35)

#### 3.10. X.

William Lawes

[...] MY God, O why haſt thou forſook? why O ſo far withdrawn thine aide? nor
when I roared pitie took: My God, by day to thee I pray'd, and when nights
curtains were diſplay'd, yet wouldſt not thou vouchſafe a look; yet thou art
holy, thron'd on high: The Iſraelites thy praiſe reſound, the Iſraelites, &c.
our fathers did on thee relye, their faith with wreaths of conqueſt crown'd,
they ſought thee, and deliv'rance found.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=36)

#### 3.11. XI.

William Lawes.

[...] MY God, my rock, regard my cry, leſt I unheard, like thoſe that dye, in
ſhades of dark oblivion lye: to my aſcending griefe, to my aſcending griefe
give eare, when I my hands devoutly reare, before thy mercy-s;eat with feare:
He heares, his Name be magnifi'd. O thou that art to thine a tow'r, my ſongs
ſhall celebrate thy pow'r, my ſongs ſhall celebrate thy pow'r.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=36)

#### 3.12. XII.

William Lawes.

[...] THey who the Lord their fortreſſe make, ſhall like the tow'rs of Sion
riſe, which dreadfull earth­quakes never ſhake, nor all the raging, the raging
tumults of the skies, nor all, &c. Lo, as the hils of Salima divine Jeruſa­lem
incloſe, ſo ſhall his Angels in the day of danger ſhield and ſave them from
their foes, ſave them from their foes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=37)

#### 3.13. XIII.

William Lawes.

[...] BEhold, behold how good and joyfull a thing it is, Bre­thren to dwell
together in unity, Brethren, &c. 'tis like the precious ointment upon the head
that ran down unto the beard, ev'n unto Aarons beard, and went down, and went
down to the skirts of his clothing, like as the dew of Hermon, which fell upon
the Hill of Sion, upon the Hill of Sion: For the Lord promiſed there his
bleſſing: for the Lord promiſed there his bleſſing: for the Lord, &c. and life
for evermore, and life for evermore.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=37)

#### 3.14. XIV.

William Lawes.

[...] O Sing unto the Lord a new ſong, O ſing unto the Lord a new ſong: let
the congregation of Saints praiſe him, let Iſ╌rael rejoyce in him that made
him, and let the chil­dren of Sion be joyfull in their King: Let them praiſe
his Name in the dance, let the praiſes of God be in their mouthes, and a two-
edged ſword in their hands, and a two-edged ſword in their hands, to be
a­venged on the Heathen, and to rebuke the people, to bind their
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=38) Kings in
chaines, to bind their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles in links of ir'n,
that they may be avenged of them. Such honour have all his Saints, ſuch, &c.
ſuch honour, &c. ſuch, &c. Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Hallelluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=38)

#### 3.15. XV.

William Lawes.

[...] I Am weary of my groaning, I am, &c. my beauty is gone for very trouble,
and worne away becauſe of mine enemies: O ſave me, for in death who
re­membreth thee? Or who will give thee thanks in the pit? or who will give
thee thanks, or who will give thee thanks in the pit? in the pit.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=39)

#### 3.16. XVI.

William Lawes.

[...] IN the ſubſtraction of my yeares, I ſaid with teares, Ah! now I to the
ſhades below muſt naked goe; cut off by death before my time, and like a
flower cropt in my prime, and like a flower cropt in my prime, in my prime.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=39)

#### 3.17. XVII.

William Lawes.

[...] HOw long wilt thou forget me, O Lord, for e­ver? How long wilt thou hide
thy face, thy face from mee? How long ſhall mine enemies triumph over me, over
me? Conſider and heare me, O Lord: Lighten mine eyes, that I ſleep not in
death, that I ſleep not in death; lighten mine eyes, &c. that I ſleep not in
death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=40)

#### 3.18. XVIII.

William Lawes.

[...] LOrd, thy deſerved wrath aſſwage, nor puniſh in thy burning ire; let
mercy mitigate thy rage, before my fainting ſoule expire: O heale, my bones
with anguiſh ake; my pen­ſive heart, my penſive heart with ſorrow worn: How
long wilt thou my ſoul forſake? O pity, O pity, O pity, and at length returne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=40)

#### 3.19. XIX.

William Lawes.

[...] THou Mover of the rowling ſpheres, I through the glaſſes of my teares to
thee mine eyes erect, as ſer­vants mark their maſters hands, as maids their
miſtreſſes commands, and liberty expect; ſo we depreſt by enemies and growing
troubles, fix our eyes on God who ſits on high, till he in mercy ſhall
deſcend, till he in mercy ſhall deſcend, till he, &c. to give our mi╌ſeries an
end, to give our miſeries an end.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=41)

#### 3.20. XX.

William Lawes.

[...] TO thee I cry, Lord heare my cries, O come with ſpeed unto mine aide:
Let my ſad pray'rs before thee riſe, like incenſe on the Altar laid; or, as
when I with hands diſplay'd preſent my ev'ning ſacrifice.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=41)

#### 3.21. XXI.

William Lawes.

[...] THou that art enthron'd above, thou by whom we live and move: O how
ſweet! how excel­lent, is't with tongue and hearts conſent, thankfull hearts
and joyfull tongues, to renowne, to renowne thy Name in ſongs, when the
morn­ing paints the skies, when the ſparkling ſtars ariſe, thy high favours to
reherſe, thy firme faith in gratefull verſe? Take the Lute and Vio­lin, let
the ſolemne Harp begin: Inſtruments tun'd with ten ſtrings,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=42) while the
ſilver Cimball rings: from thy works my joy proceeds, while I triumph, while,
&c. while, &c. triumph in thy deeds. Who thy wonders can expreſſe? all thy
thoughts are fathomleſſe, all thy thoughts are fathomleſſe, hid from men in
knowledge blind, hid from fooles to vice inclin'd: who that tyrant Sin o╌bey,
though they ſpring like flowr's in May, parcht with heat, and nipt with froſt,
ſoon ſhall fade, ſoon, &c. ſoon ſhall fade, for ever loſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=42)

#### 3.22. XXII.

William Lawes.

[...] COme ſing the great Jehovah's praiſe, whoſe mercies have pro╌long'd,
prolong'd our dayes, ſing with a loud and cheerfull voice, with bending knees
and raiſed eyes, your God adore, in ſacred hymnes, in ſacred hymnes rejoyce.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=43)

#### 3.23. XXIII.

William Lawes.

[...] TO thee, O God, my God I pray'd, before the dawn­ing of the day, my
ſoule and waſting fleſh with thirſty ardour thee deſire, in ſcorched ſoile
with Aetheriall fire, whoſe drought no ſhowr's, whoſe drought no ſhowr's
refreſh.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=43)

#### 3.24. XXIV.

William Lawes.

[...] TO the God whom we adore, ſing a ſong un­ſung before; his im╌mortall
praiſe reherſe, where his holy Saints converſe. Iſrael, O thou his choice, in
thy Ma­kers Name rejoyce, Iſrael, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=44)

#### 3.25. XXV.

William Lawes.

[...] YEe Nations of the earth, our great Preſerver praiſe, all ye of humane
birth, to heav'n his glory raiſe, whoſe mercy hath no end nor bound, his
promiſe crown'd with con­ſtant faith. Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=44)

#### 3.26. XXVI.

William Lawes.

[...] LEt all with ſweet accord clap hands, their voices raiſe in honour of
the Lord, and loudly ſing his praiſe; who from above dire lightning flings,
the King of kings of all that move.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=45)

#### 3.27. XXVII.

William Lawes.

[...] NE iraſcaris, Ne, &c. Ne, &c. Do­mine: Satis, & ne ultra me mineris,
iniquitatis no­ſtrae. Populus tuus omnes nos, Populus, &c. Civitas Sancti tui
facta eſt deſerta. Sion deſerta facta eſt. Jeruſalem, Je╌ruſalem deſo╌la╌ta
eſt, de╌ſo╌lata eſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=45)

#### 3.28. XXVIII.

William Lawes.

[...] MEmento, Memento Domine congregationis tuae; Memento Domine, Memento
Domine: quam poſ­ſediſti ab initio, quam, &c. quam, &c. quam, &c. quam
poſſe╌diſti ab initio. Libera eos, li╌bera eos ex omnibus tribulatio╌nibus,
tribulatio╌nibus, tribula­tioni, tribulatio╌nibus, & mitte eis auxilium, &
mitte, &c. & mitte, &c. & mitte, &c. & mitte, &c. & mitte eis auxilium.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=46)

#### 3.29. XXIX.

William Lawes.

[...] IN reſurrectione, in, &c. in, &c. tua Domine, tua Domine, in
re╌ſur╌recti╌one, in, &c. tua Domine, tua Domine, in, &c. tua Domine.
Laetentur coeli, & exultet terra, & exultet terra, exul╌tet terra, exul╌tet
terra, exultet ter╌ra, & exul╌tet terra. Halleluiah, Halle╌luiah, Halleluiah,
Halleluiah, Halle╌luiah Halleluiah, Hallelui╌ah, Halleluiah.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=46)

#### 3.30. XXX.

William Lawes.

[...] GLoria, gloria, gloria Patri, & Filio, & Spiritui ſancto, & Spiritui
ſancto, Et, &c. & Spi╌ritui ſancto. Sicut erat in principio, ſicut, &c. Et
nunc, & ſemper, & ſemper, & in ſecu╌la, ſeculorum, Amen. Secula, ſeculorum,
Amen. Secu╌la, ſeculorum, Amen. Secula, ſeculorum, A╌men. Seculorum, A╌men.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=47)

#### 3.31. An Elegie on the death of his very worthy Friend and Fellow-
ſervant, M. John Tomkins, Organiſt of his Majeſties Chappell Royall.

[...] MUſick, Muſick, the Maſter of thy Art is dead, and with him all thy
raviſht ſweets are fled; then beare a part in thine owne Tragedy: let's
celebrate ſtrange griefe with Harmony. Let's howle, let's howle ſad notes
ſtolne from his owne pure verſe, in ſtead of teares ſhed on his mournfull
Herſe, let's howle ſad notes ſtolne from his owne pure verſe, from his owne
pure verſe.

By William Lawes.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=47)

CHOICE PSALMES PUT INTO MUSICK, For Three Voices.

The moſt of which may properly enough be ſung by any three, with a Thorough
Baſe.

COMPOS'D by Henry and William Lawes, Brothers; and Servants to His Majeſtie.

With divers Elegies, ſet in Muſick by ſev'rall Friends, upon the death of
WILLIAM LAWES.

And at the end of the Thorough Baſe are added nine Canons of Three and Foure
Voices, made by William Lawes.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, for Humphrey Moſeley, at the Prince's Armes in
S. Pauls Church-yard, and for Richard Wodenothe, at the Star under S. Peters
Church in Corn-hill. 1648.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=48)

[...]Regi, Regis, &c. Regum Ar╌ca╌na cano.

Henricus Lawes Regiae Majeſtatis à ſacra Muſica.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=48)

### TO HIS Moſt Sacred Majeſtie, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, King of great
Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.

I Could not anſwer mine owne Conſcience (moſt Gracious Soveraigne) ſhould I
dedicate theſe Com­poſitions to any but Your Majeſtie; they were born and
nouriſh'd in Your Majeſties ſervice, and long ſince deſign'd (ſuch as they
are) an Offering to Your Royall hand. Many of them were compos'd by my Brother
(William Lawes,) whoſe life and endeavours were devoted
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=49) to Your
ſervice; whereof, I (who knew his heart) am a ſurviving witneſſe, and therein
he perſiſted to that laſt minute, when he fell a willing Sacrifice for Your
Majeſtie: I were unworthy ſuch a Bro­ther, ſhould I tender ought that is his,
or mine, to any but our Graci­ous Maſter (from whoſe Royall Bounty both of us
receiv'd all we injoy'd;) and ſuch an Inſcription would not only ſeem a Theft
and Alienation of what is Your Majeſties, but (which I moſt abhorre) would
make me taſte of theſe ungratefull dayes. Your Majeſtie knowes when the Regall
Prophet firſt penn'd theſe Pſalmes, he gave them to the Muſitians to be ſet to
tunes; and they humbly brought them to David the King. Beſides, Mr. Sandys
inſcribes his Tranſlation to Your Sacred Majeſtie; ſo that this I offer is
Your Majeſties in all ca­pacities, and doth not ſo properly come, as rebound
back to Your Ma­jeſtie. I was eaſily drawn to this preſumption, by Your
Majeſties known particular affection to David's Pſalmes, both becauſe the
Pſalter is held by all Divines one of the moſt excellent parts of holy
Scripture; as alſo in regard much of Your Majeſties preſent condition, is
lively deſcribed by King David's pen. The King of Heaven and Earth reſtore
Your Majeſtie according to Your own righteous heart, which is the daily
earneſt prayer of

Your Majeſties moſt humble, moſt loyally devoted Subject and Servant, HENRY
LAWES.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=49)

### To the READER.

THeſe following Compoſitions of mine and my Brothers, ſet at ſeverall times,
and upon ſeverall Occaſions, (having been often heard, and well approv'd of,
chiefly by ſuch as deſire to joyne Muſick with Devotion) I have been much
importuned to ſend to the Preſſe, and ſhould not eaſily have been perſwaded to
it now, (eſpecially in theſe diſſo­nant times) but to doe a Right (or at leaſt
to ſhew my Love) to the Memory of my Brother, unfortunately loſt in theſe
unnaturall Warres; yet lyes in the Bed of Honour, and expir'd in the Service
and Defence of the King his Maſter. Living, he was generally known, and (for
his Parts) much honoured by Perſons of beſt quality and condition. To give a
further Cha­racter of him I ſhall forbeare, becauſe of my neer relation, and
rather referre that to thoſe Elegies which many of his noble Friends have
written in a pe­culiar Book: But, as to what he hath done in Muſick, I ſhall
deſire the preſent and the future Age, that ſo much of his Works as are here
publiſhed, may be re­ceived, as the leaſt part of what he hath compos'd, and
but a ſmall Teſtimony of his greater Compoſitions, (too voluminous for the
Preſſe) which I the rather now
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=50) mention,
leſt being, as they are, diſperſt into private hands, they may chance be
hereafter loſt; for, beſides his Fancies of the Three, Foure, Five and Six
Parts to the Viols and Organ, he hath made above thirty ſeverall ſorts of
Muſick for Voices and Inſtruments: Neither was there any Inſtrument then in
uſe, but he compos'd to it ſo aptly, as if he had only ſtudied that. As for
that which is my part in this Compoſition, I had not thought at all (though
much urg'd) to pub­liſh; but that, as they had their birth at the ſame time
with his, and are of the ſame kinde, ſo they might enter both into the light
together, and accompany one another being ſo neere allied; Mine taking
precedence of order only, not of worth. I may be thought too partiall in what
I have ſpoke of a Brother; but here are fol­owing many of our Friends and
Fellowes, (whoſe excellency in Muſick is very well knowne) who doe better
ſpeak for him, while they mourne his Obſequies: yet I (oblig'd before all
other) cannot but bewaile his loſſe, and ſhall celebrate his me­mory to my
laſt houre.

Henry Lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=50)

### To the Incomparable Brothers, Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Lawes (Servants
to His Majeſtie) upon the ſetting of theſe Pſalmes.

THe various Muſick, both for Aire and Art,

Theſe Arch-Muſicians, in their ſev'rall waies

Compos'd, and Acted, merit higher praiſe

Then wonder-wanting knowledge can impart.

Brothers in blood, in Science and Affection,

Belov'd by thoſe that envie their Renowne;

In a Falſe Time true Servants to the Crowne:

Lawes of themſelves, needing no more direction.

The depth of Muſique one of them did found,

The t'other took his flight into the aire:

O then thrice happy and induſtrious paire,

That both the depth and height of Muſique found.

Which my ſweet Friend, the life of Lovers pens,

In ſo milde manner hath attain'd to do,

He looks the better, and his hearers too;

So in exchange all Ladies are his friends.

And when our Meditations are too meane

To keep their raptures longer on the wing,

They ſoar'd up to that Prophet and that King,

Whoſe Love is God, and Heav'n his glorious Scene:

Setting his Pſalmes, whereby both they and we

May ſinging riſe to immortalitie.

A. Tounſhend.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=51)

### To his Friend Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his Compoſitions.

TO chaine wilde Winds, calme raging Seas, recall

From profound Hell, and raiſe to Heav'n, are all

Of Harmony no fables, but true ſtory;

Man has within a ſtorme, a paine, a glory:

And theſe in me ſtruck by that art divine,

Submit to Muſique, above all to thine.

J. Harington.

### To my Friend Mr. Henry Lawes.

HArry, whoſe tunefull and well meaſur'd ſong

Firſt taught our Engliſh Muſic how to ſpan

Words with juſt note and accent, not to ſcan

With Midas eares, committing ſhort and long,

Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,

With praiſe enough for Envie to look wan:

To after age thou ſhalt be writ the man

That with ſmooth Aire couldſt humour beſt our tongue.

Thou honour'ſt Verſe, and Verſe muſt lend her wing

To honour thee, the Prieſt of Phoebus Quire,

That tun'ſt their happieſt Lines in hymne or

The ſtory of Ariadne ſet by him in Muſic.

ſtory.

Dantè ſhall give Fame leave to ſet thee higher

Then his Caſella, whom he woo'd to ſing,

Met in the milder ſhades of Purgatory.

J. Milton.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=51)

### To my worthy Friend (and Countriman,) Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his owne, and
his Brother Mr. William Lawes's incomparable Works.

WHere ſhall I place my wonder, when I ſee

Such right in both to't, ſuch equalitie

Of worth in either, that it cann't be knowne

Which does the greateſt, and the higheſt owne?

So when two Tapers mixe their beames, we ſay,

Not this more luſtre has, or that more ray;

But each has title to the light, and they

Make up one, common, undiſtinguiſh'd day:

Or, as when th' Flamen divers incenſe fires,

The perfume ſevers not, but in one aſpires;

So that from this Spice, or that piece of Gum,

We cannot ſay, ſuch, or ſuch odours come:

But mounting in a generall unknowne cloud,

The wonder of the breath's to each allow'd;

So here, ſuch equall worth from each does flow,

That to each light, to each we incenſe owe.

'Twas no neceſſitie (yet) this Union made,

(As when a weaker light does droop, and fade,

Unleſſe aſſiſted by another) No:

Each ſingly could full beames and odours throw.

No wanton, ruder aires affright your eare;

Th'are pious only, and chaſte numbers here:

(Such was that lovely Poean, when the diſpleas'd

Incenſed God th' Achaick Hoſt appeas'd,)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=52)Becoming or
the Temple, or the Shrine,

Fit to the words they ſpeak; like them, divine.

Such numbers does the ſoule conſiſt of, where ſhe

Meeting a glance of her owne harmonie,

Moves to thoſe ſounds ſhe heares; and goes along

With the whole ſenſe and paſſion of the ſong;

So to an equall height, two ſtrings being wound,

This trembles with the others ſtroke; and th' ſound

Which ſtirr'd this firſt, the other does awake,

And the ſame harmonie they both partake.

Nor doe they only with the ſoule agree

In this; they ſhare too in its eternitie:

And this, the one part of this work has tri'd;

For, though himſelfe remov'd, this does abide,

And ſhall doe ever: here, his memory

Shall ſtill ſurvive, and contemne deſtiny.

The ſame waits you (Sir) and when e'r you'r ſent

From us, you'll live here your owne monument.

Fr. Sambrooke.

### 1\. Thorow Baſe.

Henry Lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=52)

#### 1.1. I.

[...]That man is truly bleſt, &c.

#### 1.2. II.

[...]Who truſts in thee, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=53)

#### 1.3. III.

[...]O thou from whom, &c.

#### 1.4. IV.

[...]Not in thy wrath, &c.

#### 1.5. V.

[...]Lord, judge my cauſe, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=53)

#### 1.6. VI.

[...]Caſt off, &c.

#### 1.7. VII.

[...]Thy beauty, Iſrael, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=54)

#### 1.8. VIII.

[...]With ſighes, &c.

#### 1.9. IX.

[...]Lord, for thy promiſe ſake, &c.

#### 1.10. X.

[...]O heare my cries, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=54)

#### 1.11. XI.

[...]Woe is me, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=55)

#### 1.12. XII.

[...]To heare me, Lord, &c.

#### 1.13. XIII.

[...]Lord, ſhowre on us, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=55)

#### 1.14. XIV.

[...]How are the Gentiles, &c.

#### 1.15. XV.

[...]Happy he, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=56)

#### 1.16. XVI.

[...]Laudate, &c.

#### 1.17. XVII.

[...]Depreſt with griefe, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=56)

#### 1.18. XVIII.

[...]Bleſt, O thrice bleſt, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=57)

#### 1.19. XIX.

[...]Lord, to my pray'r, &c.

#### 1.20. XX.

[...]When griefe, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=57)

#### 1.21. XXI.

[...]Let our foes, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=58)

#### 1.22. XXII.

[...]How long, &c.

#### 1.23. XXIII.

[...]Accept my pray'r, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=58)

#### 1.24. XXIV.

[...]The bounty of Jehovah, &c.

#### 1.25. XXV.

[...]You who the Lord, &c.

#### 1.26. XXVI.

[...]Now the Lord, &c.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=59)
[...]Halleluiah, &c.

#### 1.27. XXVII.

[...]Now in the winter, &c.

#### 1.28. XXVIII.

[...]The King Jehovah, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=59)

#### 1.29. XXIX.

[...]My ſoule, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=60)

#### 1.30. XXX.

[...]Our fervent, &c. Halleluiah, &c.

### 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=60)

#### 2.1. A Paſtorall Elegie to the memory of my deare Brother, William Lawes.

Thorow Baſe.

[...]Ceaſe, O ceaſe, &c.

Henry Lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=61)

#### 2.2. An Elegie to the memory of his Friend and Fellow, Mr. William Lawes,
ſervant to His Majeſtie.

[...]O doe not now lament, &c.

By John Wilſon, Doctor in Muſique.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=61)

#### 2.3. To the memory of his much reſpected Friend and Fellow, Mr. William
Lawes.

Thorow Baſe.

[...]

John Taylor.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=62)

#### 2.4. An Elegie on the death of his Friend and Fellow-ſervant, Mr. William
Lawes.

[...]Deare Will is dead, &c.

John Cob.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=62)

#### 2.5. An Elegie on the death of his deare Friend and Fellow-ſervant, Mr.
William Lawes.

[...]Lament and mourne, &c.

Simon Ive.

#### 2.6. To the memory of his Friend, Mr. William Lawes.

[...]Brave Spirit, &c.

By Captain Edmond Foſter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=63)

#### 2.7. An Elegiack Dialogue on the ſad loſſe of his much eſteemed Friend,
Mr. William Lawes, ſervant to his Majeſty.

Thorow Baſe.

[...]Why in this ſhade of night, &c.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=63) [...]

Chorus of 2.

[...]

Chorus of 3.

John Jinkins.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=64)

#### 2.8. An Elegie on his Friend, Mr. William Lawes.

[...]Bound, &c.

John Hilton.

### 3\. Thorow Baſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=64)

William Lawes.

#### 3.1. I.

[...]Lord, as the Hart, &c.

#### 3.2. II.

[...]Let God the God of battell riſe, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=65)

#### 3.3. III.

[...]Out of the horrour, &c.

#### 3.4. IV.

[...]Oft from my early youth, &c.

#### 3.5. V. Firſt Part.

[...]How like a widow, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=65)

#### 3.6. VI. Second part.

[...]Judah in exile, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=66)

#### 3.7. VII. Third part.

[...]How hath Jehovah, &c.

#### 3.8. VIII.

[...]Sing to the King of kings, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=66)

#### 3.9. IX.

[...]Praiſe the Lord, &c.  [...]Halleluiah, &c.

#### 3.10. X.

[...]My God, O why, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=67)

#### 3.11. XI.

[...]My God my rock, &c.

#### 3.12. XII.

[...]They who the Lord adore, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=67)

#### 3.13. XIII.

[...]Behold, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=68)

#### 3.14. XIV.

[...]O ſing unto the Lord, &c.  [...]Halleluiah, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=68)

#### 3.15. XV.

[...]I am weary, &c.

#### 3.16. XVI.

[...]In the ſubſtraction, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=69)

#### 3.17. XVII.

[...]How long, &c.

#### 3.18. XVIII.

[...]Lord, thy deſerved wrath, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=69)

#### 3.19. XIX.

[...]Thou Mover, &c.

#### 3.20. XX.

[...]To thee I cry, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=70)

#### 3.21. XXI.

[...]Thou that art enthron'd, &c.

#### 3.22. XXII.

[...]Come ſing, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=70)

#### 3.23. XXIII.

[...]To thee, O God, &c.

#### 3.24. XXIV.

[...]To the God whom we adore, &c.

#### 3.25. XXV.

[...]Ye Nations, &c.  [...]Halleluiah, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=71)

#### 3.26. XXVI.

[...]Let all rejoyce, &c.

#### 3.27. XXVII.

[...]Ne iraſcaris, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=71)

#### 3.28. XXVIII.

[...]Memento, &c.

#### 3.29. XXIX.

[...]In reſurrectione, &c.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=72)
[...]Halleluiah, &c.

#### 3.30. XXX.

[...]Gloria Patri, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=72)

#### 3.31. An Elegie on the death of his very worthy Friend and Fellow-
ſervant, M. John Tomkins, Organiſt of his Majeſties Chappell Royall.

[...]Muſick, &c.

William Lawes.

### 4\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=73)

William Lawes.

#### 4.1. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the Uniſon:

[...] LOrd, thou haſt been favourable to thy Land, thou haſt brought back,
thou haſt brought back the captivity of Ja╌cob, the captivity of Jacob; thou
haſt cover'd their fin: Turne us O God of our ſalvation, of our ſalvation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=73)

#### 4.2. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the 4th and 8th below.

[...] HHappy ſons of Iſrael, who in pleaſant Canaan dwell, fill the aire with
ſhouts of joy, ſhouts re­doubled from the skie, ſing the great, ſing the great
Jehovahs praiſe, Trophies to his glo╌ry raiſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=74)

#### 4.3. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the 4th and 8th.

[...]Theſe ſalt rivers of mine eyes doe not deſpiſe: O let me gather
[...]ſtrength before I paſſe away, and be no more.

#### 4.4. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the 4th and 8th.

[...]Why weepſt thou Mary? Why weepſt, &c. They have taken away my Lord, they
have, &c. and I know not where they have laid him, and I, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=74)

#### 4.5. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the Uniſon, and 5. below.

[...]'Tis joy to ſee how deadly ſin by faith in Chriſt doth mercy win, by
faith in Chriſt, by faith in Chriſt doth mercy win.

#### 4.6. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the 5th and 4th below.

[...]Gloria in excelſis Deo, gloria, &c. gloria, &c. in ter╌ra pax, &
hominibus bona voluntas, bona voluntas.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=75)

#### 4.7. A Canon of 4. Voc. in the 5.8. and 5th.

[...]Regi, Regis regum Arcana cano.

#### 4.8. A Canon of 4. Voc. in the Uniſon.

[...]Regi, Regis regum Ar╌ca╌na, Arcana cano.

#### 4.9. A Canon of 4. Voc. in the Uniſon.

[...]Shee weepeth ſore in the night, and her teares are in her cheeks, her
Prieſts ſigh, her Virgins are afflicted, and among all her lovers ſhee hath
none to comfort her.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=75)

#### 4.10. A Canon of 3. Voc. in the Uniſon.

[...]Jeſus, Jeſus, Jeſus is harmonious, a ſound of greateſt fame to us,
[...]a ſound, &c. Jeſus, Jeſus, a name moſt high, a name moſt high to be
ador'd, Jeſus, Jeſus ſweet eternall bliſſe is therein ſtor'd, Jeſus, Jeſus,
&c. Jeſus hath us re­deem'ed, Jeſus, no name like that, no name, &c. muſt be
eſteem'd, Je╌ſus, Jeſus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=99539&page=76)

### Appendix A THE TABLE

Henry Lawes.

  * THat man is truly bleſt, &c. 1
  * Who truſts in thee. 2
  * O thou from whom all mercy ſprings. 3
  * Not in thy wrath; &c. 4
  * Lord, judge my cauſe. 5
  * Caſt off and ſcattered, &c. 6
  * Thy beauty Iſrael, &c. 7
  * With ſighes and cries, &c. 8
  * Lord for thy promiſe, &c. 9
  * O heare my cries, &c. 10
  * Woe is mee. 11
  * To heare me Lord. 12
  * Lord ſhowre on us. 13
  * Now are the Gentiles, &c. 14
  * Happy he, &c. 15
  * Laudate, &c. 16
  * Depreſt with griefe, 17
  * Bleſt, O thrice bleſt, &c. 18
  * Lord to my pray'r, &c. 19
  * When griefe, &c. 20
  * Let our foes, &c. 21
  * How long, &c. 22
  * Accept my pray'r, &c. 23
  * The bounty of Jehovah, &c. 24
  * You who the Lord, &c. 25
  * Now the Lord his reigne, &c. 26
  * Now in the winter, &c. 27
  * The King Jehovah, &c. 28
  * My ſoule, &c. 29
  * Our fervent ſoules, &c. 30
  * Elegies on William Lawes. 8

William Lawes.

  * LOrd, as the Hart, &c. 1
  * Let God ariſe, &c. 2
  * Out of the horrour, &c. 3
  * Oft from my early youth, &c. 4
  * How like a widow, &c. 5
  * Judah in exile, &c. 6
  * How hath Jehovahs wrath, &c. 7
  * Sing to the King of kings. 8
  * Praiſe the Lord enthron'd, &c. 9
  * My God, &c. 10
  * My God my rock, &c. 11
  * They who the Lord, &c. 12
  * Behold, &c. 13
  * O ſing unto the Lord, &c. 14
  * I am weary, &c. 15
  * In the ſubſtraction, &c. 16
  * How long wilt thou, &c. 17
  * Lord, thy deſerved wrath, &c. 18
  * Thou Mover of, &c. 19
  * To thee I cry, &c. 20
  * Thou that art enthron'd, &c. 21
  * Come ſing the great Jehovahs praiſe. 22
  * To thee O God, &c. 23
  * To the God whom we adore. 24
  * Ye Nations, &c. 25
  * Let all with ſweet accord, &c. 26
  * Ne iraſcaris, &c. 27
  * Memento, &c. 28
  * In reſurrectione, &c. 29
  * Gloria Patri. 30
  * An Elegie on Mr. John Tomkins.
  * Canons of 3. and 4. Voices. 9

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Lawes, Henry, 1596-1662.. Date: 1648  

