---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Rump, or, An exact collection of the choycest poems and songs relating to
the late times by the most eminent wits from anno 1639 to anno 1661.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=1)

_[figure]_

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=1)

The Puritan.

Covenanter.

An Exact COLLECTION of ye Choiceſt Poems & Songs, Relating to the late times,
& Con­tinued by the most Eminent Witts from A 1639. to 1662.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=2)

RUMP: OR AN EXACT COLLECTION Of the Choyceſt POEMS AND SONGS RELATING TO THE
Late Times.

By the moſt Eminent Wits, from Anno 1639\. to Anno 1661.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome at the Gun in Ivy-lane, and Henry Marſh at the
Princes Armes in Chancery-lane. 1662.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=3)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=3)

## TO THE READER.

THou haſt here a Bundle of Rodds; not like thoſe of the Roman Conſulls, for
theſe are ſignes of a No-Government. If thou read theſe Ballads (and not ſing
them) the poor Ballads are undone. They came not hither all from one Author;
(thou wilt ſoon perceive the ſame hand held not the Pen) yet none but ſhew
either Wit or Affection (and that's bet­ter) or Both, which is beſt of all.
The truth is, this Rump, and indeed the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=4) whole Carcaſe
was ſo odious and bloody a Monster, that every man has a ſtone or rotten Egge
to caſt at it. Now if you ask who nam'd it Rump, know 'twas ſo ſtil'd in an
honeſt Sheet of Paper (call'd The Bloody Rump) written before the Tryal of our
late Soveraign of Glori­ous Memory: but the Word obtain'd not univerſal notice
till it flew from the mouth of Major General Brown at a Publick Aſſembly in
the daies of Richard Crom­well. You have many Songs here, which were never
before in Print: We need not tell you whoſe they are; but we have not
ſubjoyned any Authors Names; heretofore it was unſafe, and now the Gentlemen
conceive it not ſo proper. 'Tis hoped they did His Majeſty ſome Service, 'twas
for that end they were ſcribbled Now (thanks be to God) we have liv'd to that
day, that there is no Cavalier, becauſe there is no­thing elſe, and 'tis
wondrous happy to ſee how many are his Majeſties Faithfull Sub­jects,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=4) who were
ready to hang the Au­thors of theſe Ballads. But he that does not blot out all
that's paſt, and frank­ly embrace their New Allegiance, or re­members ought
but what ſhall pre­ſerve Univerſal Peace and Charity, let him be Anathema; For
he were a ſtrange man that ſhould now he unſatisfied, when thoſe that writ
againſt the King do now write for Him, and thoſe who wrote for Him, need now
write no more. Let Hea­ven now continue theſe Bleſsings on His Majeſty, that
no one Enemy live unrecon­ciled, nor any falſe Friend be undiſcover­ed, that
ſo there be no ſtrife, but who ſhall ſhew moſt Duty to ſo Excellent a KING.

> Farewell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=5)

## The Stationers to the Reader.

Gentlemen,

YOu are invited here to a Feaſt, and if Variety cloy you not, we are
ſatisfied. It has been our Care to pleaſe you; and it is our Hope you will
retribute an Acknowledgement. Theſe are ſelect Things, a work of Time, which
for your ſake we Publiſh, aſſuring you that your Welcome will Crown the
Entertainment.

> Farewell.

Yours, H. B. H. M.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE READER.
  * The Stationers to the Reader.
  * 1\. RUMP-SONGS. The Firſt Part.
    * 1.1. The ZEALOUS PURITAN. 1639.
    * 1.2. Pyms Juncto ▪ 1640.
    * 1.3. Upon Mr. Pyms Picture.
    * 1.4. A Song.
    * 1.5. Mr. Hampdens Speech againſt Peace at the cloſe Committee.
    * 1.6. A Song.
    * 1.7. A Song.
    * 1.8. The Humble Petition of the Houſe of Commons.
    * 1.9. The Anſwer to the Petition, &c.
    * 1.10. To the five Principal Members of the Honourable Houſe of Commons. The Humble Petition of the POETS.
    * 1.11. The Parliaments Pedigree.
    * 1.12. To thoſe who deſire no Peace.
    * 1.13. The French Report.
    * 1.14. A Loyal Subjects Oath.
    * 1.15. Short and Sweet.
    * 1.16. To the City of London.
    * 1.17. The Players Petition to the Parliament.
    * 1.18. A Madrigall on Juſtice, alluding to the PARLIAMENT.
    * 1.19. The Call.
    * 1.20. Englands Woe.
    * 1.21. Upon Ambition. Occaſioned by the Accuſation of the Earl of STRAFFORD, in the year 1640.
    * 1.22. The Argument.
    * 1.23. The Character of a Roundhead. 1641.
    * 1.24. A Curtain Lecture.
    * 1.25. A Mad World My Maſters.
    * 1.26. The Riddle.
    * 1.27. An Anſwer to a Love-Elegy (written from I. P. one of the Five Members, to his Delightfull Friend) in Latin.
    * 1.28. The Penitent Traytor. The Humble Petition of a Devonſhire Gentleman who was Condemned for TREASON, and Executed for the ſame, An. 1641.
    * 1.29. The Paſſage of a Coach travelling to Dover.
    * 1.30. The Five Members Thanks to the Parliament.
    * 1.31. Upon the Parliament Fart.
    * 1.32. The old Earle of Briſtol's Verſes on an Accommodation.
    * 1.33. The Rump's Hypocricy
    * 1.34. The Parliaments Hymnes.
    * 1.35. The Round-heads Race.
    * 1.36. On the Queens Departure.
    * 1.37. Pyms Anarchy.
    * 1.38. To my Lord B. of S. he being at York.
    * 1.39. An Elegie on the Moſt Reverend Father in God William, Lord Archbiſhop of CANTERBURY. Attached the 18. of December, 1640. Beheaded the 10. of January, 1644.
    * 1.40. A Mock Remonſtrance referring to the Porters Petition.
    * 1.41. The Caution. A SONG.
    * 1.42. Lilly contemn'd. A SONG.
    * 1.43. A Monſter to be ſeen at VVeſtminſter. 1642.
    * 1.44. London ſad London. AN ECCHO.
    * 1.45. Upon bringing in the Plate.
    * 1.46. The Prentices Petition to the Cloſe Committee.
    * 1.47. Londons Farewell to the Parliament.
    * 1.48. A SONG.
    * 1.49. Sir John Hotham's Alarm.
    * 1.50. The Publique Faith.
    * 1.51. The Sence of the Houſe, or the Reaſon why thoſe Members who are the Remnant of the two Families of Parliament cannot conſent to Peace, or an Acccommodation.
    * 1.52. Eſſex Petition to the Beſt of Princes.
    * 1.53. The Cryer.
    * 1.54. The Cavaliers Prayer.
    * 1.55. To whom it concerns.
    * 1.56. By the Author.
    * 1.57. To the City.
    * 1.58. The MONSTER.
    * 1.59. The Earl of Eſſex his Speech to the Parliament after Keinton Battle.
    * 1.60. A Dialogue between two ZEALOTS upon the &c. in the Oath.
    * 1.61. The Publique Faith.
    * 1.62. A Committee.
    * 1.63. The Model of the New Religion.
    * 1.64. To a Fair Lady weeping for her Husband Committed to Priſon by the Parliament. 1643.
    * 1.65. Mr. Fullers Complaint.
    * 1.66. Upon wearing the Kings Colours.
    * 1.67. A Western Wonder.
    * 1.68. A SONG.
    * 1.69. Upon Alderman Atkins bewraying his Slops on the great Training day.
    * 1.70. The Downfall of Cheapſide-Croſſe, May 2, 3, 4. 1643.
    * 1.71. A Vindication of Cheapſide-Croſſe againſt the Roundheads.
    * 1.72. A Song in defence of Chriſtmaſs.
    * 1.73. The Biſhop of Oſſery on the Rebells.
    * 1.74. A Bill on St. Paul's Church Door.
    * 1.75. A SONG.
    * 1.76. On two Parliaments diſſolved.
    * 1.77. Collonel Vennes Encouragement to his Souldiers. A SONG.
    * 1.78. A Second Weſtern Wonder.
    * 1.79. The Battel of Worceſter.
    * 1.80. Smectymnuus, or the Club-Divines.
    * 1.81. A Lenten Letany. Compoſed for a confiding Brother, for the benefit and edification of the Faithfull Ones.
      * 1.81.1. The Second Part.
    * 1.82. AN ELEGIE On the Death of Sir B•vile Grenvile.
    * 1.83. To my Lord Biſhop of S. on New-years day.
    * 1.84. A SATYR, Occaſioned by the Author's Survey of a Scandalous Pamphlet, intituled The Kings Cabinet opened.
    * 1.85. THE CLOSE.
    * 1.86. 1 June 1643.
    * 1.87. Munday.
    * 1.88. Tueſday.
      * 1.88.1. Wedneſday.
      * 1.88.2. Thurſday.
      * 1.88.3. Friday.
      * 1.88.4. Saturday.
      * 1.88.5. Poſtſcript.
    * 1.89. The holy Pedler.
    * 1.90. The Hue and Cry after Sir John Presbyter.
    * 1.91. The way to wooe a Zealous Lady.
    * 1.92. A Hue and Cry after the Reformation.
    * 1.93. The Times.
    * 1.94. The Commoners.
    * 1.95. The Scots Curanto.
    * 1.96. An Anſwer to a Letter from Sir John Mennis, wherein he jeers him for falling ſo quickly to the uſe of the Directory.
    * 1.97. The Kings Diſguiſe.
    * 1.98. The Rebell SCOT.
    * 1.99. The Scots Apoſtaſie.
    * 1.100. The Scots Arrears.
    * 1.101. A SONG On the Schiſmatick ROTUNDOS.
    * 1.102. Cromwell's Panegyrick.
    * 1.103. The Scotch War.
    * 1.104. The Power of Money.
    * 1.105. Contentment.
    * 1.106. On the Goldſmiths Committee.
    * 1.107. The mad Zealot.
    * 1.108. Of baniſhing the Ladies out of Town.
    * 1.109. Loyalty confin'd.
    * 1.110. On the demoliſhing the Forts.
    * 1.111. Upon Routing the Scots Army. A SONG.
    * 1.112. The diſloyal Timiſt.
    * 1.113. A Medley.
    * 1.114. A Medley of the Nations.
      * 1.114.1. The Scot.
      * 1.114.2. The Dutch.
      * 1.114.3. The French.
      * 1.114.4. The Spaniard.
      * 1.114.5. The Welſh.
      * 1.114.6. The Iriſh.
      * 1.114.7. The Engliſh.
    * 1.115. A Medley.
    * 1.116. The Levellers Rant.
    * 1.117. The Safety.
    * 1.118. The Leveller.
    * 1.119. The Royaliſts Anſwer.
    * 1.120. The Independents reſolve.
    * 1.121. The Lamentation.
    * 1.122. The Reformation.
    * 1.123. CHRONOSTICON Decollationis CAROLI Regis triceſimo die Januari• ▪ ſecunda hora Pomeridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.
    * 1.124. AN ELEGIE. Upon King CHARLES the first, murthered publickly by his Subjects.
    * 1.125. AN ELEGIE On The beſt of Men,The meekeſt of Martyrs,CHARLES the Firſt, &c.
    * 1.126. On the Death of his Royal Majeſtie, CHARLES late King of ENGLAND, &c.
    * 1.127. AN EPITAPH.
    * 1.128. The Engagement ſtated.
    * 1.129. On the happy Memory of Alderman Hoyle that hang'd himſelf.
    * 1.130. The States New Coyne.
    * 1.131. The Rebellion.
    * 1.132. On Britannicus his leap three Story high, and his eſcape from London.
    * 1.133. An Epigram on the People of England.
    * 1.134. Another.
    * 1.135. Upon report there ſhould be no more Terms kept at Weſtminſter.
    * 1.136. Upon the Cavaliers departing out of London.
    * 1.137. On Col. Pride.
    * 1.138. Upon the General Pardon paſt by the RUMP, 1653.
    * 1.139. Upon Olivers diſſolving the Parliament in 1653.
    * 1.140. Admiral Deans Funeral.
    * 1.141. The merry Goodfellow.
    * 1.142. The Rebells Reign.
    * 1.143. The Reſolve.
    * 1.144. Upon Cromwell's pulling out the Long Parliament. 1653.
      * 1.144.1. The Alligory.
      * 1.144.2. The Advice.
    * 1.145. Sharers in the Government. A MEDLEY. To 8. ſeveral Tunes.
    * 1.146. Upon Cromwell's refuſing the Kingly Power.
    * 1.147. The Encounter. A SONG.
    * 1.148. The Good Old Cauſe.
    * 1.149. The Protecting Brewer.
    * 1.150. The Power of the Sword.
    * 1.151. Cromwell's Coronation.
    * 1.152. The BREWER.
    * 1.153. In imitation of Come my Daphne, a Dialogue between Pluto and Oliver.
    * 1.154. A Quarrel betwixt Tower-hill and Tyburn.
    * 1.155. The Bloody Bed-roll, or Treaſon diſplayed in its Colours.
    * 1.156. The four Legg'd Elder; or a Relation of a Horrible Dog and an Elders Maid.
    * 1.157. News from Colcheſter.
    * 1.158. The Four-legg'd Quaker.
    * 1.159. A JOLT on Michaelmas day 1654. To the Tune of To himſelf that hath fool'd More than Mahomet could, &c.
    * 1.160. The Houſe out of Doors. April 20. 1653.
    * 1.161. The RUMP. December 26. 1659.
    * 1.162. Sir Eglamor and the Dragon: Or a Relation how Generall George Monck ſlew a moſt Cruell Dragon Febr. 11. 1659.
    * 1.163. The Cities Feast to the Lord Protector.
  * 2\. RUMP SONGS. The Second Part.
    * 2.1. The Re-reſurrection of the RUMP. Or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived.
    * 2.2. A New-Years-Gift for the RUMP.
    * 2.3. A New Ballad.
    * 2.4. The Breech waſh'd by a Friend to the RUMP.
    * 2.5. Chipps of the Old Block; or, Hercules Cleanſing the Augaean Stable.
    * 2.6. Rump Rampant, or the Sweet Old Cauſe in Sippets.
    * 2.7. Fortunate Riſing: or, The Rump Upward.
    * 2.8. A proper New Ballad on the Old Parliaament, or the Second Part of Knave out of Doors. To the Tune of Hei ho my hony, My heart ſhall never rue, Four and twenty now for your Mony, And yet a hard pennyworth too.
    * 2.9. A City Ballad.
    * 2.10. The RUMP Dockt.
    * 2.11. Arſy Verſy, or The Second Martyrdom of the RUMP.
    * 2.12. A Christmaſs Song, when the RUMP was firſt diſſolved.
    * 2.13. Bum-Fodder: or, Waſte-Paper, proper to wipe the Nations RUMP with▪ or your Own.
    * 2.14. A Vindication of the RUMP: or The RUMP Re-advanced.
    * 2.15. The RUMP roughly but righteouſly handled: In a New Ballad.
    * 2.16. The She-Citizens Delight.
    * 2.17. The RUMP Carbonado'd: or A New BALLAD.
    * 2.18. A Pſalm ſung by the People before the Bone-fires, made in and about the City of London, Febr: 11.
    * 2.19. A Diſplay of the Headpiece and Codpiece Valour, of the moſt Renowned Collonel Robert Jermy, late of Bafield in the County of Norfolk, Eſq with his Son Captain Toll by his ſide; now on their way for New-England. Or, the lively deſcription of a dead-hearted fellow.
    * 2.20. A Letany for the New-year.
    * 2.21. The New State deſcribed.
    * 2.22. The Devills Arſe a Peake: or, Satans beastly part, or in plain terms, Of the Poſteriors and Fag-end of a Long Parliament.
    * 2.23. The Committee of Safety.
    * 2.24. The GANG or the Nine Worthies and Champions, Lambert, &c.
    * 2.25. The Second Part.
    * 2.26. Vanity of Vanities, or Sir Harry Vane's Picture.
    * 2.27. The Glory of the WEST, or, The Tenth Renowned WORTHY, and moſt Heroick CHAMPION of this BRITISH ISLAND. Being an unparallel'd Commemoration of General MONK'S coming towards the City of LONDON.
    * 2.28. The City of LONDON'S New Letany.
    * 2.29. The RUMP ſerv'd in with a Grand Sallet: or, A New Ballad.
    * 2.30. Saint George for England.
    * 2.31. The Hiſtory of the Second Death of the RUMP.
    * 2.32. The Arraignment of the DEVIL for ſtealing away Preſident Bradſhaw.
    * 2.33. The Rota: Or News from the Common-wealths-Mens-Club, Written by Mr. Henry Stub; 'Tis better than a Syllybub.
    * 2.34. The Cobler's laſt Will and Teſtament: or, the Lord Hewſon's tranſlation.
    * 2.35. The Hangman's last Will and Teſtament, with his Legacy to the Nine Worthies viz. Col. Lambert, Creed, &c.
    * 2.36. A Hymne to the Gen•le Craft: or Hewſon's Lamentation.
    * 2.37. The Rump Ululant: or Penitence per force. Being the Recantation of the Old Ruſty-roguy-rebellious-rampant, and now ruinous rotten-roſted RUMP.
    * 2.38. The Holy Siſters.
    * 2.39. The Second Part of Saint George for England.
    * 2.40. A New Kickſhaw for the queaſie Stomack of Sathan and all thoſe that fight under his Banner.
    * 2.41. England's Triumph: or, The Rump Routed by a true Aſſertor of Englands Intereſt, General George Monk.
    * 2.42. The Parliament-Complment: or, the Re-admiſſion of the Secluded Members to the Diſcharge of their long retarded Truſt.
    * 2.43. The Cock-Crowing at the Approach of a Free-Parliament: Or,
    * 2.44. Saint George and the Dragon.
    * 2.45. A Free-Parliament Letany.
    * 2.46. A Dialogue betwixt TOM and DICK: the former a Country-man, the other a Citizen• Preſented to his Excellency and the Council of State, at Drapers-Hall in London, March 28. 1660.
    * 2.47. A Pſalm of Mercy. Uſula, (who cry's Ends of Gold and Silver) reads, and all the Siſters ſing.
    * 2.48. A Loyal Wiſh.
    * 2.49. The Honeſt Mens Reſolution.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=5)

## 1\. RUMP-SONGS. The Firſt Part.

### 1.1. The ZEALOUS PURITAN. 1639.

MY Brethren all attend,

And liſt to my relation:

This is the day, mark what I ſay,

Tends to your renovation;

Stay not among the Wicked,

Leſt that with them you periſh,

But let us to New-England go,

And the Pagan People cheriſh;

Then for the truths ſake come along, come along,

Leave this place of Superſtition:

Were it not for we, that the Brethren be,

You would ſink into Perdition.

There you may teach our hymns,

Without the Laws controulment:

We need not fear, the Biſhops there,

Nor Spiritual-Courts inroulment;

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=6)Nay, the
Surplice ſhall not fright us,

Nor ſuperſtitious blindneſs;

Nor ſcandal-riſe, when  [...]e diſguiſe,

And our Siſter-kiſs in kindneſs;

Then for the truths ſake, &c.

For Company I fear not,

There goes my Coſin Hannah,

And Ruben, ſo perſwades to go

My Coſin Joyce, Suſanna.

With Abigal and Faith,

And Ruth, no doubt, comes after;

And Sarah kind, will not ſtay behind,

My Coſin Conſtance Daughter;

Then for the truth, &c.

Tom Tyler is prepared,

And th' Smith as black as a coal;

Ralph Cobler too with us will go,

For he regards his ſoul;

The Weaver, honeſt Simon,

With Prudence, Jacobs Daughter,

And Sarah, ſhe, and Barbary

Profeſſeth to come after;

Then for the truth, &c.

When we, that are elected,

Arrive in that fair Country,

Even by our faith, as the Brethren ſaith,

We will not fear our entry;

The Pſalms ſhall be our Muſick,

Our time ſpent in expounding,

Which in our zeal we will reveal

To the Brethrens joy abounding;

Then for the truths ſake, &c.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=6)

### 1.2. Pyms Juncto ▪ 1640.

TRuth I could chide you Friends, why, how ſo late?

My Watch ſpeaks Eight and not one pin o'th State

This day undone, can ſuch remiſneſſe ſit

Your Active ſpirits, or my more Helliſh wit?

The Sun each ſtep he mounts to Heavens Crown,

Whilſt Pym commands, ſhould ſee a Kingdome down;

Y'ave ſpurs enough I'me ſure to make you run.

HOPES guilty, FORTUNES crackt, and th' ILLS y'ave done.

Thus Whilome ſeated was Great James his Heir,

Juſt, as you ſee me now, ith' Kingdoms Chair:

There the Great Seal, there Richmond, Hertford ſate,

There Marſhall, D [...]rſet, Friſtol [...]'s temperate pate,

But there ſate P [...]mbroke, life of Loyalty,

There Holland, flower of Fidelity.

We are no leſſe then Charles in power and ſtate,

You are our Junctoes, who were his of late;

Here ſits K — Holy Say, and Seal,

With Whartor, Warwick, Brookes inſpired zeal:

Stro [...]d, Hampden, H — Haſ [...]rigge, bold ſpirits,

Bold Martin, Ludlow, Vain, unmatched wights,

But their Church-Elder, Whites Religious beard,

There ſits Abomination Statiſts: Perd ▪

Charles wear at York thy Crown that pretty thing

We muſt moſt humbly be at London King▪

But what's the buſineſſe of the Houſe this day,

How ſpeaks my note, Commiſſioners of Array,

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=7)The nineteen
Propoſitions to be ſcand

A ſecond time, M— Train-band,

Letters from Tristram Whitcombe, and from Hull,

From Amsterdam, the Admirall; how full

Of high concernments are we Sirs, adviſe

How we moſt warily may weigh our priſe:

I do conceive it muſt be our firſt play,

Be't right or wrong, by Vote to damn th' Array,

If ever that take footing and advance,

Farewell Militia, and our Ordinance,

But what will the appearance be? yet ſtay,

Who dares our leading Votes and Wills gainſay?

Should any haughty ſpirit preſume ſo far,

What ſerves the Tower for then, or the Bar?

But if we fear the buſineſſe will not bend

As may be moſt conducing to our end:

By ſome feignd wile it muſt be our next Plot

To put it off, and a new time alot,

And juſt Jumpe for our turn: theſe Letters ſhall

From Whitcombe, Hotham, or our Admirall,

(Though forg'd untruths) be interpos'd and read,

To ſpend the time, and maze the Peoples head;

If the next day we yet ſuſpect to find

Such whoſe juſt Conſcience cannot be inclin'd

To be made Vaſſals to our deſperate ſence,

'Tis eaſie to procure a Conferrence,

Which ſhall out-ſpin the leiſure of the morn,

Then we' [...]e reſume the Houſe, and ſo adjourn

Till five at night, the moderate wearied thus,

Will quit their ſeats and leave us, none but us;

There's Preſident for this, this was the feat

That pluckt the Biſhops from the Barons ſeat,

This wrought good Orders, manag'd many a Vote,

This Art muſt my Diſciples learn by Rote.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=7)But if the
Accommodation chance to ſpring

Into debate, then your Artillery bring,

And lay that flat, that cold: my Genius ſtarts

With fear to find ith' Houſe two Loyal hearts;

Seem though we muſt teeth outwards to comply,

And humbly kiſſe the feet of Majeſty,

Yet live we cannot, but obedience dead,

Nor ſtand elſewhere but on the Kingdoms head;

Calmes proper are for guiltleſſe ſons of Peace,

Our Veſſels bear out beſt in ſtorming Seas;

Charles muſt not reign ſecure whilſt reigns a Pym,

The Sun if it riſe with us muſt ſet with him;

You have one pleaſure which muſt be expreſt

To Leiceſter Pembroke, St — and your reſt,

Bid Eſſex, Percy, and your Quondam Grom

O'th ſtool, to wait us in the Princes Room:

Some of you ſubtilly may in Cottons walk,

Sit and allure Affection by your talk,

'Twill be a work worthy your nimble wit,

To gain the Devil and us a Proſelyte.

So, to your buſineſſe, yet ere you be gone

Take my advice, then bleſſing light upon

Your nimble Votes, and firſt be ſure you ſhroud

Your dark deſigns in a Religious Cloud,

Gods Glory, Churches Good, Kings head Supreme,

A Preaching Miniſter muſt be your T [...]eame;

Next ſtructure of your Babel to be built,

Muſt ſpeciouſly be varniſht o're, and gilt

With Liberty, Propriety of lives

And fortunes, 'gainſt th' high ſtretcht Prerogatives.

And then a Speech or two moſt neatly ſpent,

For Rights and Privilege of Parliament;

Theſe two well mixt, you're need no other lures

To gain the People, and to make them yours.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=8)If Charles
diſpleaſed, with ſome witty, tart

Meſſage (and juſtly too) ſhall make you ſtart,

Saying ye have put him to his Guard, be ſure

Ye then be loud enough, and firſt cry Whore,

War rais'd againſt the Parliament, a great

Hinderance of the Iriſh Ayde, and ſtrong Abet

Unto the Rebels: then if any thing

You have may blaſt the Honour of the King,

Be it had enough, no matter from what hand,

Wee'l Vote it true, and then to believe command;

But on your memories if I impoſe no more,

You cannot miſſe your way when I'me before:

Riſe Synna, Sylla, Marius, Gracchus Ghoſt,

With the reſt of the whole Mechanick Hoſt,

Romes greateſt Earth-quakes, and this little trunck

Make with your deſperate Spirits deeply drunk,

Up from your drouſie urnes, the Ghoſt of thoſe

My Anceſtors that Richard did depoſe,

Drop freſh into my breaſt, my ſoul inſpire,

And ſtrongly actuate me with your fire,

That theirs thus mixt with my Malitious Gall,

Mine may with theirs fully poſſeſſe you all.

Go and exceed their Villanies as much more

As theirs did all attempts that was before;

Act paſt example, that it may be known

You copied no example but your own.

And if in after times, when ſilently

We ſleep, another ſi [...]ebrand chance to be,

'Twill be chief Crown and Glory unto him,

To ſay he playd his Prancks like you and Pym.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=8)

### 1.3. Upon Mr. Pyms Picture.

REader, behold the Counterfeit of him

Who now controuls the Land; Almighty Pym ▪

A man whom even the Devil to fear begins,

And dares not truſt him with ſucceſleſs ſins;

A man who now is wading through the Floud

Of Reverend Lauds, and Noble Straffords Bloud,

To ſtrike ſo high as to put Biſhops down,

And in the Miter to controul the Crown;

The Wretch hath mighty thoughts, and enter­tains

Some Glorious Miſchief in his Active Brains,

Where now he's plotting to make England ſuch

As may out-vye the villany of the Dutch;

He dares not go to Heaven, 'cauſe he doth fear

To meet (and not pull down) the Biſhops there:

Is it not ſtrange, that in that Shuttle-head

Three Kingdoms ruines ſhould be buried?

Is it not ſtrange there ſhould be hatch't a Plot

Which ſhould out-doe the Treaſon of the Scot,

And even the Malice of a Puritan?

Reader behold, and hate the poyſonous man;

The Picture's like him; yet 'tis very fit

He adde one likeneſs more, that's hang like it.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=9)

[...]

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=9)

[...]

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=10)

[...]

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=10)

[...]

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=11)

### 1.4. A Song.

To the Tune of Blue Cappe for me.

LEt Scots now return at Leſleys demand,

How all the Affairs in the North-part do ſtand,

And tell him the Parliament is fully agreed

To ſend him good ſtore of Mony with ſpeed,

To ſerve their occaſions: thus ſay, they ſhall find

For to come to paſſe, when the Devil is blind.

Let all their Brethren be new circumcis'd,

And Burton and — for Saints canonis'd,

And at the Sacrament ſit for their eaſe,

And pray unto God, even juſt when they pleaſe,

The Scots in deſpite ſhall pleaſe their own mind,

And do what they pleaſe, when the Devil is blind.

Next they will have in each City and Town

All painted Glaſſe-windows to be pull'd down;

One Bell in a Church to call them away,

It's enough when the Spirit doth move them to pray,

Without any Surplice or Tippet behind

The Prieſt ſhall ſay Service, when the Devil is blind.

Laſtly, the Parliament in any caſe

Will down with all Organs, for Piping is baſe;

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=11)No cringing
below the Altar ſhall be,

For that is a Trick of Idolatry:

Now tell me good Scots, are not Engliſh-men kind,

But when this comes to paſſe, ſay the Devil is blind.

### 1.5. Mr. Hampdens Speech againſt Peace at the cloſe Committee.

To the Tune of I went from England.

BUt will you now to Peace incline,

And languiſh in the Main deſign,

And leave us in the lurch?

I would not Monarchy deſtroy,

But only as the way to enjoy

The ruine of the Church.

Is not the Biſhops Bill deny'd,

And we ſtill threatned to be try'd?

You ſee the King embraces

Thoſe Councellours he approv'd before:

Nor doth he promiſe, which is more,

That we ſhall have their Places.

Did I for this bring in the Scot,

(For 'tis no Secret new) the Plot

Was Sayes and mine together:

Did I for this return again,

And ſpend a Winter there in vain,

I went more to invite them hither.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=12)

Though more our Mony than our Cauſe

Their Brotherly aſſiſtance draws,

My labour was not loſt.

At my Return I brought you thence

Neceſſity, their ſtrong Pretence,

And theſe ſhall quit the Coſt.

Did I for this my County bring

To help their Knight againſt their King,

And raiſe the firſt Sedition?

Though I the Buſineſs did decline,

Yet I contriv'd the whole Deſign,

And ſent them their Petition.

So many nights ſpent in the City

In that inviſible Committee;

The Wheele that governs all;

From thence the Change in Church and State,

And all the Miſchiefs bear the date

From Haberdaſhers Hall.

Did we force Ireland to deſpair,

Upon the King to caſt the War,

To make the World abhor him:

Becauſe the Rebells us'd his Name,

Though we our ſelves can do the ſame,

While both alike were for him.

Then the ſame Fire we kindled here

With that, was given to quench it there,

And wiſely loſt that Nation:

To do as crafty Beggars uſe,

To maim themſelves thereby to abuſe

The ſimple mans compaſſion.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=12)

Have I ſo often paſt between

Windſor and VVeſtminſter unſeen,

And did my ſelf divide:

To keep his Excellence in awe,

And give the Parliament the Law,

For they knew none beſide.

Did I for theſe take pains to teach

Our zealous Ignorants to preach,

And did their Lungs inſpire,

Read them their Text, ſhew'd them their Parts,

And taught them all their little Arts,

To fling abroad the Fire.

Sometimes to begg, ſometimes to threaten,

And ſay the Cavaliers are beaten,

And ſtroke the Peoples ears;

Then ſtreight when Victory grows cheap,

And will no more advance the heap,

To raiſe the price of Fears.

And now the Book, and now the Bells,

And now the Act the Preachers tells

To edifie the People;

All our Divinity is News,

And we have made of equal uſe

The Pulpit and the Steeple.

And ſhall we kindle all this Flame,

Onely to put it out again,

And muſt we now give o're,

And only end where we begun

In vain this Miſchief we have done,

If we can do no more.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=13)

If men in Peace can have their right,

Where's the Neceſſity to fight,

That breaks both Law, the Oath;

They'le ſay they fight not for the Cauſe,

Nor to defend the King and Laws,

But as againſt them both.

Either the Cauſe at firſt was ill,

Or being good it was ſo ſtill;

And thence they will infer,

That either now, or at the firſt

They were deceiv'd; or which is worſe,

That we our ſelves may erre.

But Plague and Famine will come in,

For they and we are near of kin,

And cannot go aſunder:

But while the wicked ſtarve, indeed

The Saints have ready at their need

Gods Providence and Plunder.

Princes we are if we prevail,

And Gallant Villains if we fail,

When to our fame 'tis told;

It will not be our laſt of prayſe,

Sin' a New State we could not raiſe

To have deſtroy'd the old.

Then let us ſtay and fight, and vote

Till London is not worth a Groat;

Oh 'tis a patient Beaſt:

When we have gall'd and tyr'd the Mule,

And can no longer have the rule,

We'le have the Spoyle at leaſt.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=13)

### 1.6. A Song.

To the Tune of The Queens old Souldier.

TO make Charles a great King, and give him no Power,

To Honour him much, and not obey him an Hower;

To provide for his Safety, and take away his Tower,

And to prove all is ſweet, be it never ſo ſower.

The new Order of the Land, & the Lands new Order.

To ſecure men their Lives, Liberties and Eſtates

By arbitrary Power, as it pleaſeth the Fates

To take away Taxes, by impoſing great Rates,

And to make us a Playſter by breaking our Pates▪

The new Order of the Land, & the Lands new Order.

To ſit and conſult for ever and a day,

To counterfeit Treaſon by a Parliamentary way,

To quiet the Land by a tumultuous ſway,

New Plots to deviſe, then them to betray.

The new Order, &c.

To leave all Votes free by uſing of Force.

That one make Petitions for Countie [...] by courſe,

To make Pym as great as his Mothers great Horſe,

Which William left Agnus, though his meaning was worſe.

The new Order, &c.

To encourage good Souldiers by caſhiering the Band,

To hearten brave Spirits by expelling the Land,

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=14)To quit
Digby and Deering, whom they can't un­derſtand

To frame not new Laws, but new Words, if well ſcan'd.

The new Order, &c.

To put by brave Doctors, becauſe th'are not taught,

To ſet for Preachers men, very well wrought,

Who all the day fiſh, but nothing ere caught;

This, Bretheren, were good, if not very naught.

The new Order, &c.

To ſend them their Zealots to Heaven in a ſtring,

Who elſe to Confuſion Religion will bring,

Who ſay the Lords Prayer is a Popiſh thing,

Who pray for themſelves, but leave out their King.

The new Order of the Land, and the Lands new Order.

### 1.7. A Song.

To the Tune of Cuckolds all a-row.

KNow this my Brethren Heaven is clear,

And all the clowds are gone,

The righteous men ſhall flouriſh now

Good dayes are comming on;

Come then my Brethren and be glad,

And eke rejoyce with me,

Lawn ſleeves and Roc [...]ets ſhall go down,

And hey then up go we.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=14)

Wee'l break the Windows which the Whore

Of Babylon hath painted,

And when the Popiſh Saints are down,

Then Burges ſhall be Sainted;

There's neither Croſſe nor Crucifix

ſhall ſtand for men to ſee,

Romes traſh and trumpery ſhall go down,

And hey then up go we.

What ere the Popiſh hands have built,

Our Hammers ſhall undoe,

Wee'l break their Pipes, and burn their Copes,

And pull down Churches too:

Wee'l exerciſe within the Groves,

And teach beneath a Tree,

Wee'l make a Pulpit of a Cask,

And hey then up go we.

Wee'l down with all the Verſities,

Where Learning is profeſt,

Becauſe they practice and maintain

The language of the Beaſt;

Wee'l drive the Doctors out of doors,

And parts what ere they be;

Wee'l cry all Arts and Learning down

And hey then up go we.

Wee'l down with Deans and Prebends too,

And I rejoyce to tell ye

How that we will eat Pigs our fill,

And Capon by the belly;

Wee'l burn the Fathers Learned Books,

And make the School-men flee;

Wee'l down with all that ſmells of wit,

And hey then up go we.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=15)

If once the Antichristian crew

Be cruſh'd and overthrown,

Wee'l teach the Nobles how to ſtoop,

And keep the Gentry down:

Good manners have an ill report,

And turns to pride we ſee,

Wee'l therefore cry good manners down,

And hey then up go we.

The name of Lords ſhall be abhorr'd,

for every man's a Brother,

No reaſon why in Church and State

One man ſhould rule another.

But when the Change of Government

Shall ſet our fingers free.

Wee'l make the wanton Sisters ſtoop,

And hey then up go we.

What though the King and Parliament

Do not accord together,

We have more cauſe to be content,

This is our Sun-ſhine weather;

For if that reaſon ſhould take place,

And they ſhould once agree,

Who would be in a Round-heads caſe?

And hey then up go we.

What ſhould we do then in this caſe,

Let's put it to a venture,

If that we hold out ſeven years ſpace,

Wee'l ſue out our indenture.

A time may come to make us rue,

And time may ſet us free,

Except the Gallows claim his due,

And hey then up go we.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=15)

### 1.8. The Humble Petition of the Houſe of Commons.

IF Charles thou wilt but be ſo kind

To give us leave to take our mind,

Of all thy ſtore.

When we thy Loyal Subjects, find

Th'aſt nothing left to give behind,

Wee'l ask no more:

Firſt, for Religion, it is meet

We make it go upon new feet,

'Twas lame before:

One from Geneva would be ſweet,

Let Warwick fetch't home with his Fleet,

Wee'll ask no more.

Let us a Conſultation call

Of Honeſt men, but Round-heads all,

God knows wherefore;

Allow them but a place to baul

'Gainſt Biſhops Courts Canonical,

Wee'll ask no more.

Let him be hang'd a Surplice wears,

And Tippet on his ſhoulders bears,

Raggs of the Whore;

Secure us from our needleſſe fears,

Let — and Burton have their ears,

Wee'll ask no more.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=16)

Reform each Univerſity,

And in them let no Learning be,

A great Eye-ſore;

From hence make Romes Arminians flee,

That none may have free-will but wee,

Wee'll ask no more.

Leſt the Elect ſhould go aſtray,

Let Coblers teach you the right way

To Heavens door;

And leſt their ſoles ſhould wear away,

Let them their Siſters underlay,

Wee'll ask no more.

Next from the Biſhops Hierarchy,

Oh the word ſounds but ſcurvily,

Let's hear't no more;

It ne're was taught the Apoſtles by,

Lay-Elders may the place ſupply,

Wee'll ask no more.

Next, for the State, we think it fit

That Mr. Pym ſhould govern it,

He's very poor:

The money that's for Ireland writ,

Faith let them have the Devil a bit,

Wee'll ask no more.

For ordering the Militia,

Let us ordain a new new way,

Ne're heard before;

Let the Great Council bear the ſway,

If you will give us leave you may,

Wee'll ask no more.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=16)

In this we will not be deny'd,

Becauſe in you wee'll not confide,

We know wherefore

The Citizens their Plate provide,

Do you but ſend in yours beſide,

Wee'll ask no more.

Now if that you'll make Hull your own,

There's one thing more we muſt ſet down

Forgot before;

Sir John ſhall then give up the Town,

If you will but reſign your Crown,

Wee'll ask no more.

### 1.9. The Anſwer to the Petition, &c.

I Charles the King will be ſo kind,

To give you leave to take your mind,

Of all my ſtore,

When I you Loyal Subjects find,

And you thoſe Members have reſign'd,

I askt before.

And when Religion's all your cares,

Or London have ſuch heed of theirs,

They had before:

When Warwick from Geneva dares,

Now Printed, bring the Common-Prayers,

And read them o're.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=17)

When all your Conſultations tend,

To pay what you have made men lend,

None knows wherefore;

When you no more ſhall ſay you'll ſend,

And bring me fairly to mine end,

You'll ask no more.

When your Smectymnuus Surplice wears,

Or Tippet on his ſhoulders bears,

Raggs of the Whore;

When Burton, — and Baſtwick dares,

With your good leaves, but ſhew their Eares,

They'll ask no more.

When what I borrowed I ſhall ſee,

Y'have paid each Univerſitie,

Of th' City ſtore:

And Doctors, Chaplains, Fellows, be

Free-willers of pluralitie,

They'll ask no more.

When the elect ſhall make ſuch haſt,

By th' Bretheren to be embrac't

In Tubs on floore;

When Coblers they ſhall preach their laſt

At Conventicles on a Faſt,

They'll ask no more.

When Biſhops all the Houſe adorns,

And Round-heads for their abſence mourns,

A great Eye-ſore;

When ev'ry Citizen leſſe ſcorns

Lord Wentworth's head, then Eſſex horns,

You'll ask no more.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=17)

When you no more ſhall dare hereafter,

A needleſſe thing which gains much laughter,

Granted before;

When Pym is ſent to Ireland ſlaughter,

And ne're more hopes to marry my Daughter,

You'll ask no more.

When you have found a clearer way

For ordering the Militia,

Then heard before;

When Atkins on the Training day,

Sha'nt dare his Office to bewray,

Hee'll ask no more.

When naught to me ſhall be deny'd,

And you ſhall all in me confide,

Good cauſe therefore;

When Denmark ſhall for me provide,

And now Lord Digby's on my ſide,

Ask me no more.

Laſt, when I ſhall make Hull my own,

This one thing more I muſt ſet down,

Forgot before,

When I have got into the Town,

I'le make ten more beſides that Clown,

Kneele and implore.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=18)

### 1.10. To the five Principal Members of the Ho­nourable Houſe of Commons.  
The Humble Petition of the POETS.

AFter ſo many Concurring Petitions

From all Ages and Sexes, and all conditions,

We come in the Rear to preſent our Follies

To Pym, Stroude, Haſlerig, Hampden and —

And we hope for our labour we ſhall not be ſhent,

For this comes from Chriſtendom, & not from Kent;

Though ſet form of Prayers be an Abomination,

Set forms of Petitions find great Approbation:

Therfore, as others from th' bottom of their ſouls,

So wee from the depth and bottom of our Bowles,

According unto the bleſſed form taught us,

We thank you firſt for the Ills you have brought us,

For the Good we receive we thank him that gave it,

And you for the Confidence only to crave it.

Next in courſe, we Complain of the great violation

Of Privilege (like the reſt of our Nation)

But 'tis none of yours of which we have ſpoken

Which never had being, untill they were broken:

But ours is a Privilege Antient and Native,

Hangs not on Ordinance, or power Legiſlative.

And firſt, 'tis to ſpeak whatever we pleaſe

Without fear of a Priſon, or Purſuivants fees.

Next, that we only may lye by Authority,

But in that alſo you have got the Priority.

Next, an old Cuſtom, our Fathers did name it

Po [...]tical licenſe, and alwayes did claim it.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=18)By this we
have power to change Age in Youth,

Turn Non-ſence into Sence, and Falſhood to Truth;

In brief, to make good whatſoever is faulty,

This art ſome Poet, or the Devil has taught ye;

And this our Property you have invaded,

And a Privilege of both Houſes have made it:

But that truſt above all in Poets repoſed,

That Kings by them only are made and Depoſed,

This though you cannot do, yet you are willing;

But when we undertake Depoſing or Killing,

They're Tyrants and Monſters, and yet then the Poet

Takes full Revenge on the Villains that do it,

And when we reſume a Scepter or a Crown,

We are Modeſt, and ſeek not to make it our own.

But is't not preſumption to write Verſes to you,

Who make the better Poems of the two,

For all thoſe pretty Knacks you do compoſe,

Alas, what are they but Poems in proſe,

And between thoſe and ours there's no difference,

But that yours want the rhime, the wit and the ſenſe:

But for lying (the moſt Noble part of a Poet)

You have it abundantly, and your ſelves know it,

And though you are Modeſt, and ſeem to abhor it,

'T has done you good ſervice, and thank He'ven for it:

Although the old Maxime remains ſtill in force,

That a Sanctified Cauſe, muſt have a Sanctified Courſe:

If poverty be a part of our Trade,

So far the whole Kingdome Poets you have made,

Nay even ſo far as undoing will do it,

You have made King Charles in manner a Poet,

But provoke not his Muſe, for all the world knows,

Already you have had too much of his Proſe.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=19)

### 1.11. The Parliaments Pedigree.

NO Pedigrees nor Projects

Of after-times I tell,

Nor what ſtrange things the Parliament

In former times befell,

Nor how an Emperour got a King,

Nor how a King a Prince,

But you ſhall hear what Progenies

Have been begotten ſince.

The Devil he a Monſter got,

Which was both ſtrong and ſtout,

This many-headed Monſter

Did ſtrait beget a Rout:

This Rout begat a Parliament,

As Charles he well remembers,

The Parliament got Monſters too,

The which begot Five Members.

The Members Five did then beget

Moſt of the Houſe of Peers,

The Peers miſ-underſtandings got

All Jealouſies and Fears;

The Jealouſies got Horſe and Men,

Leſt Warrs ſhould have abounded,

And I dare ſay this Horſe got Pym,

And he begot a Round-head.

The Round-head got a Citizen,

That great Tax-bearing Mule,

The Mule begot a Parliament Aſſe,

And he begot a Fool:

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=19)Some ſay
the Fool got Warwick,

And Rich gave him his whole Land,

In zeal Lord Rich got God knows who,

And God knows who got H—

This H— Surplices got down,

And thoſe Church Rites that were,

He hath Petitions enough each day,

No need of the Lords Prayer:

But it's no wonder that's cry'd down,

And that indeed the rather,

Cauſe Pym and he two Baſtards are,

And dare not ſay, Our Father.

Now ſince this is the chiefeſt thing,

Hath got this great diviſion,

Which London for to reconcile,

Hath got this great Munition:

The City hath now been refin'd,

From all her Droſſe and Pelf,

They're now about for to new mold,

And Coyn the Common-wealth.

### 1.12. To thoſe who deſire no Peace.

SHould all thoſe various Gales, whoſe titles are layn

Enrol'd within the Pilots Regiſter,

Break from their drowſie Dens, where they have

Bound up in ſlumbers, and invade the Main,

They could not raiſe a ſtorm like that which they

Raiſe in the Common-wealth, who would betray

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=20)Our Peace
to Civil War, in which the State

Muſt bleed it ſelf to death, and have the fate,

After its ſtock of life is ſpent, to lye

Buried i'th Rubbiſh of an Anarchy.

Should Ravens, Bats, and the ſhrill Owl conſpire

To twiſt their Notes into a General Quire,

And chuſe the Mandrake for the Chaunter, they

Could not ſhrill forth ſuch an ill-boding lay,

Or ſtrains ſo Jarring, as do thoſe whoſe throats

Warble the clamorous and untunefull Notes

Of Blood and Death, ſome whirle-wind, Sirs, has ta'en

Its Lodging up in the Fanatick brain

Of theſe bold ſons of tumult, I dare ſay

They moulded were of ſome diſtemper'd Clay,

Which from its Centre was by Earth-quake torn,

A Tempeſt ſhook the world when they were born;

Sure from its Sphere the Element of Fire

Is dropt, and does their boſomes now inſpire,

The flame lockt up in bold Ravillacks urne,

Is ſnatcht from thence, and in their hearts does burn.

Night, open thy black wombe, and let out all

Thy dreadfull furies, yet theſe furies ſhall

Not chill my heart with any fear, ſince day

Has furies ſhewn, blacker by far then they.

Let Vaux now ſleep untill the day of Doom,

Open his eyes, forgotten in his Tomb,

Let none revile his duſt, his Name ſhall be

Extirpated from every Hiſtory,

To yield a room for others, for 'tis fit

Their Names in place of his ſhould now be writ,

Who think that no Religion can be good,

Unleſſe't be writ in Characters of Blood,

No marvail if the Rubrick then muſt be

Blotted from out the Sacred Liturgie,

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=20)And thoſe
red Letters now no more be known,

They'le have no other Rubrick but their own.

But ſhall they thus impetuouſly roule on,

And meet not any Malediction?

Yes ſure, may ſleep, that milde and gentle balme,

Which all unkind diſtempers does becalme,

Be unto them a torture, may their Dreams

Be all of Murders, Rapes, and ſuch like Theams;

And when they're ſpent, may Wolves approach and howle,

To break their ſlumbers; may the Bat and Owle,

Before their Gates, to uſher in the dayes

Unwellcome light, ſtretch out their direfull layes;

'Mongſt their diſordered humors, may there be

A deadly Feud, and fatal mutiny;

May ſudden flames their houſes melt away,

And Feavers burn their houſes too of Clay;

May all their faculties and ſences be

Aſtoniſht by ſome drouſie Lethargie,

That there may be allow'd them only ſence

Enough to feel the pangs of Conſcience,

Griping their ſouls, that they who thought it ſin

To have peace without, may have no peace within

### 1.13. The French Report.

ME have of late been in England

Vere me have ſeen much ſport,

De raiſing of de Parliament,

Have quite pull'd down de Court,

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=21)De King
and Queen dey ſeperate,

And rule in Ignorance,

Pray judge ye Gentlemen, if dis

Be a la mode de France:

A viſe man dere is like a Ship

Dat ſtrikes upon de ſhelves,

Dey Priſon all, Behead and Whip

All viſer den demſelves,

Dey ſend out men to fetch deyr King,

Who may come home perchance,

Oh fye, fye, fye, it is be Gar

Not a la mode de France.

Dey raiſe deyr Valiant Prentices,

To guard deyr Cauſe with Clubs,

Dey root deyr Biſhops out of doors,

And Preſh demſelves in Tubs,

De Cobler and de Tinker too,

Dey will in time advance,

Pox take dem all, it is (Mort Dieu)

Not a la mode de France.

Inſtead of bowing to deyr King,

Dey vex him with Epiſtles,

Dey furniſh all deyr Souldiers out

With Bodkins, Spoons, and Whiſtles,

Dey bring deyr Gold and Silver in,

De Browniſts to advance,

But if dey be cheat of it all,

'Tiz a la mode de France.

But if when all deyr wealth is gone,

Dey turn unto deyr King,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=21)Dey will
make all amends again,

Den merrily we will ſing,

VIVE LE ROY, VIVE LE ROY,

Vee'le Sing, Carouſe and Dance,

De Engliſh men have done fort Bon,

And a la mode de France.

### 1.14. A Loyal Subjects Oath.

THis is my Oath, for ever to deſpiſe,

With heart and ſoul and all my Faculties

The Kings proud foes, and with my life ſubdue

All that to his Sacred Majeſty are not true,

To execute his Precepts with my Blood,

So far as Conſcience dictates it is good;

To make my body a Bullwark 'gainſt his foes,

And to maintain his red and whiteſt Roſe,

Venture Life and Living, Sword and Muſe,

Still to uphold the Glorious Flower-de-luce:

To be the ſame to Prince, and Duke of York,

Or for a curſed Jew that eats no Pork,

Let me be Curſed, and receive the Curſe

Hangs over Pym, and Hotham, and a worſe

I cannot wiſh, he that denyes this Oath,

Let theſe, and my Curſe, light upon them both.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=22)

### 1.15. Short and Sweet.

WIſe men ſuffer, good men grieve,

Knaves deviſe, and Fools believe,

Help, O Lord, ſend ayd unto us,

Elſe Knaves and Fools will quite undoe us.

### 1.16. To the City of London.

TEll me Cittz. what ye lack,

That the Knaves of the Pack

Ye do not ſee forth comming,

Love ye Treaſon ſo well,

That ye neither buy nor ſell,

But keep a noiſe with your Drumming.

What is't that you guard,

With your double watch and ward,

Your own wares, or your wiſes things,

If down come the Blades,

Then down go the Trades,

They'll not leave a dead or a live thing.

What doth your profit ſay,

When ſhall we ſee the day,

That money ſhall be paid in,

Great Strafford he is dead,

Ye have cut off his bead,

And the Biſhops all are laid in.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=22)

And yet you grow poor,

As any Common whore,

That hath been long a fading;

There's no man will buy,

Ye may leave to ſwear and lie,

As ye uſe to do in your trading.

There's ſomething Behind

That lies in the winde

And brings you thus to nothing,

What doth then remain?

O the Parliament muſt raign,

And you'll have A King and no King.

But though their power can

From a VVoman turn a Man,

If they pleaſe ſo to declare him;

Yet let them take heed,

The King is King indeed,

And the Souldiers cannot ſpare him▪

Is't nothing ye think

24\. in a Link

Kings that make his ſucceſſion:

Beſides for our Good,

Three Princes of the Brood,

And three Kingdoms in Poſſeſſion.

And all his Vertues too

Should be ſomething to you,

If they could ought amend you;

But 'cauſe Hee's Chaſte and Juſt,

You'd have Cruelty and Luſt,

Another King Harry God ſend you.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=23)

But if you mean to thrive,

And keep your trades alive,

And bring to your City treaſure,

Give the King his full Rate,

As well as to the State,

And let Him have London meaſure.

### 1.17. The Players Petition to the Parliament.

HEroick Sirs, you glorious nine or ten,

That can depoſe the King, and the Kings men,

Who by your Sublime Rhetorick agree,

That priſons are the Subjects libertie:

And though we ſent in ſilver at great rates,

You plunder, to ſecure us our Eſtates.

Your ſerious ſubtilty is grown ſo grave,

We dare not tell you how much power you have,

At leaſt you dare not hear us; how you frown

If we but ſay, King Pym wears Charles his Crown,

Such a word's Treaſon, and you dare not hear it,

Treaſon to ſpeak it, and yet not to wear it.

O wiſe myſterious Synod, what ſhall we

Do for ſuch men as you e're forty three

Be half expir'd, and an unlucky ſeaſon

Shall ſet a period to Triennial Treaſon,

When the fields pitcht, and ſome, for all their skill,

Shall fight a Bloody Battel on Tower-Hill;

Where Maſter Pym, your wiſe judicious Schollar,

Aſcends his Throne, and takes his Crown in Coller;

When Canterbury coming forth ſhall wonder

You have ſo long ſecur'd him from the Thunder

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=23)Of King-
hunting Prentices, and the Mayor

Shall juſſel zealous Iſaack from his Chair.

Fore-ſeeing Brookes, thou drewſt a happy lot,

'Twas a wiſe Bolt, although 'twas quickly ſhot;

But whilſt you live, our loude Petition craves,

That we the true Subjects, and the true Slaves,

May in our Comick mirth and Tragick rage,

Set up the Theatre, and ſhew the Stage,

The ſhop of truth and fancy, and we Vow

Not to Act any thing you diſallow:

We will not dare at your ſtrange Votes to Jea [...],

Not perſonate King Pym with his State-flear;

Aſpiring Cataline ſhall be forgot,

Bloody Se [...]anus, or who e're would Plot

Confuſion to a State; the Warrs betwixt

The Parliament, and juſt Henry the ſixt,

Shall have no thought or mention, cauſe their power,

Not only plac'd, but left him in the Tower;

No [...] yet the Grave advice of learned Pym,

Make a Malignant, and then Plunder him.

All theſe and ſuch like actions as may ma [...]

Your ſoaring Plots, and ſhew you what you are,

We will omit, leſt that your mention ſhake 'um,

Why ſhould the men be wiſer then you make 'um.

Methinks there ſhould not ſuch a difference be

'Twixt our profeſſion and your quality,

You meet, plot, talk, conſult, with minds immenſe,

The like with us, but only we ſpeak ſenſe

Inferiour unto you; we can tell how

To depoſe Kings, there we are more then you,

Although not more then what you would; the [...] we

Likewiſe in our vaſt Privilege agree,

Only yours are the longer; and controules,

Not only Lives and fortunes, but mens Souls;

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=24)For you
declare by Aenigmatick ſenſe,

A Privilege over mens Conſcience,

As if the Trinity would not conſent

To ſave a Soul without the Parliament.

Wee make the People laugh at ſome vain ſhew,

And as they laugh at us, they doe at you;

But then i'th Contrary we diſagree,

For you can make them cry faſter then wee:

Your Tragedies more really are expreſt,

You murder men in Earneſt, wee in Jest.

There we come ſhort: But if you follow't thus,

Some wiſe men fear you will come ſhort of us.

Now humbly, as we did begin, Wee pray,

Dear School-masters, you'd give us leave to play

Quickly before the King come, for we wou'd

Be glad to ſay y'ave done a little good

Since you have ſate, your Play is almoſt done,

As well as ours, would it had ne'er begun;

For we ſhall ſee e're the laſt Act be ſpent,

Enter the King, Exeunt the Parliament.

And hey then up go we, who by the frown

Of guilty Conſciences have been kept down:

So may you ſtill remain, and ſit and Vote,

And through your own beam ſee your brothers mote,

Until a legal trial do ſhew how

You us'd the King▪ and hey then up goe you:

So pray your humble Slaves with all their powers,

That they may have their due, and you have yours.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=24)

### 1.18. A Madrigall on Juſtice, alluding to the PARLIAMENT.

JUſtice is here made up of Might,

With two left hands, but ne're a right,

And men that are well-ſighted, find

This Juſtice ſits with both eyes blind:

Yet though the Matron cannot ſee,

She holds that edg'd Sword, Cruelty,

Which that it may not ruſt, ſhe whets

In cutting off the Iſlands Teats,

Who long ſince did Anathemize

Englands too too much ſeeing eyes,

Becauſe they have been found to be

Guilty of Wit and Piety:

All this and more they rudely vent,

By Privilege of Parliament.

All former Laws fall head-long down,

And are themſelves now lawleſs grown;

Equity hath been lately try'd,

And Right it ſelf been rectin'd;

The rules that ſhew a Chriſtian how

To live, muſt all be ruled now;

The Leſſon here to learn, is brought,

And Ethicks better manners taught;

Religion, and the Churches wealth,

Of late deprived of their health,

Were brought to th' Houſe, that they might be

Cured of their Integrity;

We found a ſeam for this great rent,

By Privilege of Parliament.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=25)

Moſt men do now the Buttocks lick

Of their great body Politick;

For not the head, but breech, is it

By which the Kingdom now doth ſit;

The world is chang'd, and we have Choyces,

Not by moſt Reaſons, but moſt Voyces,

The Lion's trod on by the Mouſe,

The lower is the upper Houſe:

As once from Chaos order came,

So do their orders Chaos frame,

And ſmoothly work the Lands deluſion,

By a Methodical Confuſion;

Theſe are the things that lately went

By Privilege of Parliament.

They would not have the kingdom fall

By an Ignoble Funeral;

But piouſly prefer the Nation

To a renowned Decollation,

The feet, and lower parts, 'tis ſed,

Would trample on, and off the head,

What ere they ſay, this is the thing,

They love the Charles, but hate the King;

To make an even Grove, one ſtroke

Should lift the Shrubb unto the Oake;

Anew-found muſick they would make,

A Gamut, but no Ela take.

This is the pious good intent

Of Privilege of Parliament.

In all humilitie they crave

Their Soveraign, to be their Slave;

Deſiring him, that he would be

Betray'd to them moſt loyally:

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=25)For it
were Meekneſſe ſure in him

To be a Vice-Roy unto Pym;

And if he would a while lay down

His Scepter, Majeſtie, and Crown,

He ſhould be made for time to come

The greateſt Prince in Chriſtendom.

Charles at this time not having need,

Thank'd them as much as if he did.

This is the happy wiſh'd event

Of Privilege of Parliament.

Pym, that ador'd Publicola,

Who play'd the baſe —

Who got a Luſt to ſacrifice

The Heroē to the Peoples Eyes,

Whoſe back-from-Hell-fetch'd-knaverie

By ſome is nick-nam'd policie,

Would be a Lyon with a pox,

When at the beſt hee's but a Fox;

And juſt like him that ſet on fire

The hallowed Epheſian Spire,

Hath purchas'd to be largely known,

In that he is an Addage grown:

All this to honeſt John is lent,

By Privilege of Parliament.

The Valiant Houſe was not afeard,

To pull our Aaron by the Beard;

To hide dark deeds from Gazers ſights,

Strove to blow out the Churches Lights,

That ſquares might run round as their head,

They long to have the Rochet ſped:

They Vote down Univerſities,

Leſt men from thence become too wiſe,

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=26)And their
benighted deeds diſplay,

Whoſe works of darkneſſe hate the day;

Hence they prefer in every Town,

The Petticoat before the Gown;

Theſe bleſſings to the Land are ſent

By Privilege of Parliament.

They put forth Orders, Declarations,

Unacted Laws, and Proteſtations,

O [...] which all can be ſaid, is this,

The whole is one Parentheſis,

Becauſe the ſence (without all doubt)

Were ne're the leſſe, were all left out.

Petitions none muſt be preſented,

But what are by themſelves invented,

Elſe they not heal, but Cicatrize,

And from the cure a Scar doth riſe,

Though Holy Cut, the fault commit,

Yet  [...]ong tail muſt be paid for it;

Unto this wound was laid a Tent,

By Privilege of Parliament.

They paid the Scottiſh debt, and thus,

To be more honeſt, they rob'd us;

They feed the poor, with what think ye,

Why ſure with large Calamity,

And once a month they think it fitting

To faſt from ſin, becauſe from ſitting,

They would have winde and ſtorms ſuppreſt,

To drive the Hallcyon from her Neſt:

Charles is a Picture, they make bold

To uſe the Scepter he ſhould hold:

They'd pull down one, but give as good

A Golden Crown, made up of Wood,

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=26)And thus
is Juſtice juſtly rent,

By Privilege of Parliament.

### 1.19. The Call.

Hoe Yes,

IF there be any Traytor, Viper, or Wigeon,

That will fight againſt God for the true Religi­on,

That to maintain the Parliaments Votes,

Of all true Subjects will cut the throats,

That for the King and his Countries good,

Will conſume all the Land with Fire and Blood.

I ſay,

If any ſuch Traytor, Viper, Mutineer, be born,

Let him repair to the Lord with the double gilt Horn.

### 1.20. Englands Woe.

I Mean to ſpeak of Englands ſad fate,

To help in mean time the King, and his Mate,

That's ruled by an Antipodian State,

Which no body can deny.

But had theſe ſeditious times been when

We had the life of wiſe Poet Ben,

Parſons had never been Parliament men,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=27)

Had Stateſmen read the Bible throughout,

And not gone by the Bible ſo round about,

They would have ruled themſelves without doubt,

Which no body can deny.

But Puritans now bear all the ſway,

They'll have no Biſhops as moſt men ſay,

But God ſend them better another day,

Which no body can deny.

Zealous P — has threatned a great downfall,

To cut off long locks that is buſhy and ſmall,

But I hope he will not take ears and all,

Which no body can deny.

P— Burton, ſayes women that's lewd and looſe,

Shall wear no ſtallion locks for a buſh,

They'll only have private boyes for their uſe,

Which no body can deny.

They'll not allow what pride it brings,

Nor favours in hats, nor no ſuch things,

They'll convert all ribbands to Bible ſtrings,

Which no body can deny.

God bleſſe our King and Parliament,

And ſend he may make ſuch K — repent,

That breed our Land ſuch diſcontent,

Which no body can deny.

And bleſſe our Queen and Prince alſo,

And all true Subjects both high and low,

The Brownings can pray for themſelves you know,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=27)

### 1.21. Upon Ambition.  
Occaſioned by the Accuſation of the Earl of STRAFFORD, in the year 1640.

HOw uncertain is the State

Of that greatneſſe we adore,

When Ambitiouſly we ſore,

And have ta'en the glorious height,

'Tis but Ruine gilded o're,

To enſlave us to our fate,

Whoſe falſe Delight is eaſier got, then kept,

Content ne'er on its gaudy Pillow ſlept.

Then how fondly do we try,

With ſuch ſuperſtitious care,

To build Fabricks in the Ayr?

Or ſeek ſafety in that sky,

Where no Stars but Meteors are,

That portend a ruine nigh?

And having reacht the object of our ayme,

We find it but a Pyramid of flame.

### 1.22. The Argument.

WHen the unfetter'd Subjects of the Seas,

The Rivers, found their ſilver feet at eaſe,

No ſooner ſummon'd, but they ſwi [...]tly went

To meet the Ocean, at a Parliament:

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=28)Did not
the petty Fountains ſay their King,

The Ocean, was no Ocean, but a Spring?

As now ſome do the Power of Kings diſpute,

And think it leſſe, 'cauſe more is added to't.

Pale Ignorance, can the exceſſe of ſtore

Make him ſeem poorer then he was before?

The Stars, the Heavens, inferiour Courtiers, may

Govern Nights Darkneſſe, but not rule the Day;

Where the Sun Lords it, ſhould they all Combine

With Lucia in her brighteſt dreſſe, to ſhine,

Their light's but faint: Nor can he be ſubdu'd,

Although but one, and they a Multitude.

Say Subjects, are you Stars? be it allow'd,

You juſtly of your numbers may be proud,

But to the Sun inferiour; for know this,

Your Light is borrow'd, not your Own, but His:

And as all ſtreams into the Ocean run▪

You ought to pay your Contribution;

Then do not ſuch Ingratitude oppreſſe,

To make him low, that could have made you leſſe

### 1.23. The Character of a Roundhead. 1641.

WHat Creature's this with his ſhort hairs,

His little band and huge long ears,

That this new faith hath founded,

The Puritans were never ſuch,

The Sanits themſelves, had ne'er ſo much,

Oh, ſuch a knave's a Rounded.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=28)

What's he that doth the Biſhops hate,

And count their Calling reprobate,

Cauſe by the Pope propounded,

And ſaies a zealous Cobler's better,

Then he that ſtudieth every letter,

Oh, ſuch a knave's a Roundhead.

What's he that doth high Treaſon ſay,

As often as his yea and nay,

And wiſh the King confounded,

And dare maintain that Maſter Pym,

Is fitter for the Crown then him,

Oh, ſuch a rogue's a Roundhead.

What's he that if he chance to hear,

A piece of London's Common-Prayer,

Doth think his Conſcience wounded.

And goes five miles to preach and pray,

And lyes with's Siſter by the way,

Oh, ſuch a rogue's a Roundhead.

What's he that met a holy Siſter,

And in an Hay-cock gently kiſt her,

Oh! then his zeal abounded,

Cloſe underneath a ſhady willow,

Her Bible ſerv'd her for her pillow,

And there they got a Roundhead.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=29)

### 1.24. A Curtain Lecture.

The Tune, Cannot keep her Lips together.

WILL you pleaſe to hear a Song,

Though it want both rime and reaſon,

It was pend to do no wrong,

But for deſcription at this ſeaſon,

Of he or ſhe what ere they be,

That wiſh Church-orders quite confounded,

Yet makes a ſhew, where e're they go,

Of Fervent zeal: I mean a Roundhead.

Firſt hee'l have a ſmoothing tongue,

Next hee'l learn for to diſſemble,

And when he hears of willfull wrong,

He'll ſigh and look as he would tremble,

The next of all then let him fall,

To praiſe mens hearts in ſecret bravery,

A ſpeaking ſtill againſt all ill,

That is the Cloak to hide their Knavery.

Let Charity be uſed much,

In words at length and not in action,

It is the Common uſe of ſuch,

Not to do, but give direction,

They'l be loath to ſwear an Oath,

By yea and nay, you may believe them,

But for their gains, they will take paines,

To cheat and ly, and never grieve them.

The Common-Prayer they like it not,

For they are wiſe and can make better,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=29)And ſuch a
Teacher they have got,

Confutes it all in word and letter;

For he can rayle mens hearts to quaile

With deep damnation for their ſinnning,

But to amend they ne're intend,

And to tranſgreſs they're now beginning.

But here is a very worthy man,

That undertakes more than he is able,

That in a Tub ſometimes will ſtand,

In Hey-barn, Sheep-houſe, or a Stable,

That all the Rout that comes about

To hear his Doctrines, Saints he calls them,

They vow and ſwear they nere did hear

Such worthy things as he hath told them.

They will not hear of Wedding Rings

For to be uſed in their Mariage,

But ſay they are Superſtitious things,

And doth Religion much diſp [...]rage,

They are but vain, and things prophane,

Wherefore now no Wit be-ſpeaks them

So to be ty'd unto the Bride,

But do it as the Spirit moves them.

No Pater-Noster nor no Creed

In their Petitions never mention,

And hold there's nothing good indeed

But what is done by their pretention,

Prayers that are old in vain they hold,

And can with God no favour merit,

Therefore they will nothing ſay,

But as they are moved by the Spirit.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=30)

The wiſeſt Schools they count but Fools,

Which do no more than they have taught them

For Browniſts they can preach and pray

With Wits their Fathers never bought them;

Then I perceive that wit they have

They gather it by Inſpiration,

No Books they need to learn to read,

If all be true of their relation.

Only the Horn-book I would have

Them practice at their beginning,

That you the better may perceive

The Fruits that comes by fleſhly ſinning.

Nevertheleſſe I would expreſs

All other Books that now are uſed,

Leaſt that the Ghoſt that lea [...]s you moſt

By too m [...]ch Art to be abufed.

Their Hair cloſe to their Heads they crop

And yet not only for the faſhion,

But that the Eare it ſhould not ſtop

From hearing of ſome rare Relation;

Therefore his Eares he will prepare

To hearken to an Holy Brother.

That in regard he may be heard

From one ſide of the Barne to th' other.

They count their Fathers were but Fools,

Which formerly became ſuch Debters,

To ſpend their Means upon the Schools,

To teach their Sons a few fond Letters,

The Chriſt Croſſe-row's enough to know,

For 'tis the Horn that muſt exalt 'em,

Their Gen'ral Vows his Antler'd Brows

Shall gore the Proudeſt dare aſſault 'em▪

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=30)

At the laſt when they muſt part,

Male and Female go together

Joynd in hand, and joyn'd in heart,

And joyn'd a little for their pleaſure.

Firſt for a Kiſſe they will agree,

And what comes next you may conjecture,

So that the Wicked do not ſee,

And ſo break up the Roundheads Lecture.

### 1.25. A Mad World My Maſters.

WE have a King and yet no King,

For he hath loſt his Power,

For 'gainſt his Will his Subjects are

Impriſon'd in the Tower.

We had ſome Laws (but now no Laws)

By which he held his Crown,

And we had Eſtates and Liberties

But now they they're voted down.

We had Religion; but of late

That's beaten down with Clubs,

Whilſt that Prophaneſſe Authoriz'd

Is belched forth in Tubs.

We were free Subjects born, but now

We are by force made Slaves,

By ſome whom we did count our Friends,

But in the end prov'd Knaves.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=31)

And now to ſuch a grievous height

Are our Misfortunes grown,

That our Eſtates are took away

By tricks before ne're known.

For there are Agents ſent abroad

Moſt humbly for to crave

Our Almes: but if they are deny'd,

And of us nothing have.

Then by a Vote ex tempore

We are to Priſon ſent,

Mark'd with the Name of Enemy

Of King and Parliament.

And during our Impriſonment,

Their lawleſs Bulls do thunder

A Licence to their Souldiers

Our Houſes for to plunder.

And if their Hounds do chance to ſmell

A man whoſe Fortunes are

Of ſome Account, whoſe Purſe is full,

Which now is ſomewhat rare.

A Monſter now Delinquent term'd,

He is declar'd to be,

And that his Lands as well as Goods

Sequeſtred ought to be.

And as if our Priſons were too good,

He is to Yarmouth ſent

By vertue of a Warrant from

The King and Parliament.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=31)

Thus is our Royal Soveraigns name

And eke his Power infus'd,

And by the vertue of the ſame

He and all His abus'd.

For by this Means his Caſtles now

Are in the power of thoſe

Who treacherouſly with Might and Maine

Do ſtrive him to depoſe.

Ariſe therefore brave Britiſh men,

Fight for your King and State,

Againſt thoſe Trayterous men that ſtrive

This Realm to Ruinate.

'Tis Pym, 'tis Pym, and his Colleagues,

That did our woe engender,

Nought but their Lives can end our Woes,

And us in ſafety render.

### 1.26. The Riddle.

S-Hall's have a Game at Put, to paſs away the time,

X-pect no foul-play; though I do play the Knave

I- have a King at hand, yea that I have:

C- Cards be ye true, then the Game is mine.

R-ejoyce my Heart, to ſee thee then repine.

A- that's loſt, that's Cuckolds luck.

T-rey comes like Quater, to pull down the Buck.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=32)

### 1.27. An Anſwer to a Love-Elegy (written from I. P. one of the Five
Members, to his Delightfull Friend) in Latin.

WHat Latin Sir? why there is no man

That e're thought you an Engliſh-Roman.

Your Father Horſe could teach you none,

Nor was it e're your Mother tongue,

Your Education too aſſures

Me, that your Poem is not yours:

Beſides, I thought you did deteſt

The Language of the Latin Beast,

But now your Impudence I ſee

Did hereby ſhew its Modeſty;

Each ſyllable would bluſh you thought,

If it had bin plain Engliſh taught,

And that your foul debauched ſtuff

Might do its Errand faſt enough,

Forſooth your Wiſedom thought it meet

That Words might run to give 'em feet,

Pardon me, Sir, I'me none of thoſe

That love Love-verſe, give me your Proſe,

I wiſh each Verſe to make delay,

Had turn'd lame Scazon by the way,

I read a Hell in every line

Of your Polluted Feſcennine;

Your Verſes ſtunk; to keep 'em ſweet

You ſhould have put Socks on their Feet.

And that the Anſwer which I ſhall

Now write, may be Methodicall,

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=32)I'le
briefly make ('tis not amiſs)

An Anacephalaeoſis.

And firſt I look'd for Neſtor; when

Mere Cupid trickl'd from your Pen,

Who was your Father, you make proof

By your Colt's tooth, though not your hoof,

She that was great with you, you hold

Did not lye in, but was with fole'd.

I wonder one ſo old, ſo grave

Should yet ſuch Youth, ſuch Lightneſſe have;

Of the Five Members you alone

Shall be eſteem'd the Privy One,

Who (like the Gnoſticks) preach your Text,

Increaſe and Multiply, and next

Convincing Doctrines you deduce,

Put out the Lights, and make Uſe.

You ſay I am a Maid exceeding

Apt to be taught by you good breeding.

But where there's breeding, it is ſaid

There's none, unleſſe a broken Maid

Turn Papiſt, (Stallion) they'le diſpence

With Whoredom, by an Indulgence,

Turn Fryer, that thou mayſt be free

At once with a whole Nunnery,

There 'twill be vertue to ride on

The Purple Whore of Babylon.

Thou mayſt as ſoon turn Turk, as King,

And that, O that's the tempting thing

That thou mayſt glut thy Appetite

With a Seraglio of Delight.

I am no Proſerpine, that thus

I ſhould deſire an Incubus:

But you muſt vote (if Me you'le win)

No Fornication to be Sin,

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=33)You ſay
the Houſe takes it not well

The King 'gainſt Rebells ſhould Rebell;

And that's the reaſon why you ſtand

To be Dictator of the Land,

Which mov'd me to a mighty toyle

Of getting Vardygreaſe and Oyle.

'Cauſe ſuch Itch-Med'cine is a thing

That's fitteſt to anoint you King.

You ſay youl'd undertake and do

Wonders, would I undergo you,

For my ſake you would Cobler play,

Your Trade ſhould be to underlay,

For Me you'd your chiefeſt blood,

Pray ſpend it on the Siſterhood,

You wiſh to dye in thoſe great Fights

Of Venus, where each Wound delights,

And ſhould I once to Heaven take wing,

Youl'd follow me, though in a ſtring;

Thank you (good Sir) it is our Will

You your laſt Promiſe doe fulfill;

There's nothing ſpoke that pleaſeth us

Like your (In funes Cedulus)

Next come thoſe idle Twittle-twats,

Which calls me many God-knows-whats,

As hallowed, beautifull, and faire,

Supple and kind, and Debonaire.

You talk of Women that did wooe,

When I am mad I'le do ſo too;

Then that my Father may not ſpye

The coupling of you and I,

He ſhall be guiltleſly detected,

As a true Subject ill-affected,

And ſo the Proteſtant ſhall lye

In Goal for fear of Popery.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=33)(From
hence it is that every Town,

Almoſt is now a Priſon grown,

Where Loyalty lies fetter'd, then

You do commit more ſins then men.)

But thoſe your words I have thought beſt,

Should puniſht be by being preſt;

And that this Body Politick

May then be well, which now lyes ſick,

May the Greek Π, that fatal Tree,

This Spring bear all ſuch fruit as thee.

### 1.28. The Penitent Traytor. The Humble Petition of a Devonſhire Gentleman
who was Condemned for TREASON, and Executed for the ſame, An. 1641.

To the Tune of Fortune my Foe, &c.

ATtend good Chriſtian People to my ſtory,

A ſadder yet was never brought before ye;

Let each man learn here like a good Diſciple,

To ſhun foul Treaſon, and the tree that's Triple.

Long time I liv'd in the Country next to Cornwall,

And there my Children were both breed and born all,

Great was my Credit, as my debts did ſpeak,

And now I'le ſhew you why my neck muſt break.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=34)

There being a Parliament called in September,

I was for th' Commons an Elected Member,

And though there were beſides above four hun­dred

Yet I at laſt was for the fifth part numbred.

For firſt, I joyn'd with ſome whom Piety

Made Knaves, leſt ſuch their Fathers prov'd ſhould be;

Their Ignorance to ſin enjoyned many Voyces,

Which made bad Speeches, but Excellent Noyſes.

Thus by my faction the whole Houſe was ſway'd,

All ſorts of people flockt to me for Ayd;

They brought me Gold and Plate in Huggar Mug­gar,

Beſides eight hundred pounds worth in Loaf-ſugar.

What e're the Grievance was, I did adviſe

They ſhould Petitions bring in Humble wiſe,

Which I did frame my ſelf, & thus did rook them,

They paid me when I gave, and when I took them.

By this I gained, and by the Money-Pole,

Which paid my debts, 10000 pounds i'th whole,

My Childrens Portions too, with much content,

I paid in State, by Acts of Parliament.

Thus though I make all Jeſuits fly the Nation,

My ſelf did practiſe much Equivocation,

For oft I Vow'd the Common-wealth as honey

Was ſweet to me, but I, by wealth, meant money.

And leſt my Plots ſhould after be unmasked,

And how I got ſuch Wealth, chance to be asked,

I caſt about how I might gain ſuch power,

As might from Juſtice ſafely me ſecure.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=34)

Then firſt I labour'd to diveſt the Crown,

Of all Prerogatives, and bring them down;

Firſt, to both Houſes, and then but one ſhould have them,

Five Members next, and laſt my ſelf would have them

Becauſe I knew the State would not admit

Such Change, unleſſe the Church did Uſher it,

I left the old Religion for advantage,

Endeavouring to ſet up one that did want age.

Which when all Learned Levites did withſtand,

(Regarding Gods Word more then my command)

I ſuch ſuppreſt, and made (for which I woe am)

The baſeſt people Prieſts, like Jeroboam.

Then each profeſſion ſent out Teachers, moe

Then both the Univerſities could doe,

To handle a Text the Good-wifes fingers itches,

And vows ſhe'll preach with her Husband for the Breeches.

By this new Godly lives but few did gain,

The reſt for want of Trading they complain,

I told them 'twas a wicked Counſellors plot,

And till his head went off, their wares would not:

This Great mans guilt was Loyalty and Wiſdom,

Which made me caſt about to work his Doom;

The Sword of Juſtice was too ſhort to do't,

2000\. Clubs muſt therefore jerk it out.

He being knockt down, ſome others for the like Crime,

Were ſent to Priſon, ſome eſcapt in time;

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=35)Thus Law
and Equity in awe was kept here,

And Clubs were taught how to controul the Scep­ter,

We took from th' Upper-houſe Votes five times five,

And they aym'd all the Kings Voyce Negative,

Which to effect we did an Order make,

That what he would not give, our ſelves would take.

Then we petition'd that the Forts and Towers,

And all the ſtrength o'th Kingdom might be ours,

And thus to ſave the King from Soveraign dangers,

As if he had better Fall by Us than Strangers.

Whilſt he denyes they Legally are ſtay'd on

By a  [...]aw call'd, Reſolv'd upon the Queſtion,

But ſtill his Chief ſtrength was above our Arts,

His righteous Cauſe, and loyal Subjects hearts.

Being Arm'd with theſe, by Heaven he was ſo bleſt,

That he ſoon honour Got, and all the reſt,

Bringing all ſuch to puniſhment endignant,

As were of my Contrived part, Malignant.

O Tyburn, Tyburn; O thou ſad Tryangle,

A vyler weight on thee nee'r yet did dangle,

See here I am at laſt with Hemp to mew,

To give thee what was long before thy due.

How could I bleſs thee, could'ſt thee take away

My Life and Infamy both in one day;

But this in Ballads will ſurvive I know,

Sung to that preaching tune, Fortune my Foe.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=35)

Then mark good Chriſtian people, and take heed,

Uſe not Religion for an upper weed,

Serve God ſincerely, touch not his Anointed,

And then your Necks ſhall never be disjoynted.

God bleſs the King, the Queen, and all the Chil­dren,

(And pardon me all, that I 'gainſt them have ill done)

May one of that brave Race ſtill rule this Nation,

And now I pray you ſing the Lamentation.

### 1.29. The Paſſage of a Coach travelling to Dover.

THe Foundation of the Coach, a Guilty Con­ſcience.

The Axeltree, Ambition and Cruelty.

The Wheels, Fears and Jealouſies.

The Reins, too much liberty and licentiouſneſs.

The ſix Horſes, five Members and K —

The Poſtillion, Captain Venne.

The Coach-man, Iſaac Pennington Lord Maior:

In the two ends of the Coach ſate Eſſex and B— In the Boots ſate Say and Seal,
and the ſilent Speaker. On the hinder part of the Coach was written this
Anagram.

Robert Devereux General. Never duller Oxe greater Rebel.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=36)

After the Coach follows Straffords Ghoſt, cry­ing, Drive on, drive on,
Revenge, revenge.

As this Coach was going through the City it was ſtaid by a Court of Guard, who
cry'd, Where's our Mony? where's our Plate? the Speaker ſaid, Ye have the
Publick Faith for't. Whereupon they paſſed towards Graveſend, where they
ſtayed at the Sign of the Hope, where was the Earl of War­wick, with a Ship
called the Carry-Knave.

### 1.30. The Five Members Thanks to the Parliament.

NOw tend your ear a while

To a tale that I ſhall tell,

Of a luſty lively Parliament

That goes on paſſing well.

Which makes our Gratious King, a King

Of ſo much worth and glory,

His like is not to be ſeen or found

In any Humane Story.

Win him who knows how many Crowns,

With loſſe of two or three,

Within ſo ſhort a time as this,

As Wonder is to ſee,

The Country eas'd, the City pleas'd,

O what a World is this!

When upright men did ſtand at Helme,

How can we fail or miſs?

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=36)

And yet beyond all this, the King

Doth in abundance ſwim,

Gramercy K — and Stroud ſay I,

Haſlerigge, H— Hampden, Pym.

And when as our Church Government

Was fallen into Diſorders,

As that upon Groſſe Popery

It ſeemed ſomewhat to border.

So ſweet a Courſe is taken now,

As no man need to fear,

For Biſhops learn'd, and Learned men

Have nothing to do here:

But every one ſhall teach and preach,

As beſt beſeems his Senſe:

And ſo we'll baniſh Popery,

And ſend it packing hence:

Now for that happy Church and State,

Dreſt up ſo fine and trym:

Gramercy K— and Stroud ſay I,

Haſlerigg, H— Hampden, Pym.

For Arbitrary Government,

Star-Chamber, High Commiſſion,

They will themſelves do all that Work,

By their good Kings permiſſion.

If any elſe preſume to do't,

They weigh it not a ſtraw:

They'll club ſuch ſawcy Fellows down,

As Beaſts debarr'd of Law.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=37)

And let no Wights henceforth preſume

To hold it Rime or Reaſon,

That Judges ſhall determine what

Is Felony or Treaſon:

But what the Worthies ſay is ſo,

Is Treaſon to award,

Albeit in Councel only ſpoke,

And at the Councel-board.

I'le ſhew you yet another thing,

Which you'll rejoyce to ſee,

The Prince and People know that theſe

Men cannot Traytors be.

Then let our King, our Church and State

Acknowledge as is due,

The Benefits they do receive

From this right Divine crue.

And for this Sea of Liberty,

Wherein we yet do ſwim,

Gramercy K — and Stroud ſay I,

Haſlerigg, H— Hampden, Pym.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=37)

### 1.31. Upon the Parliament Fart.

DOwn came Grave Antient Sir John Crooke,

And read his Meſſuage in a Book;

Very well quoth Will. Norris, it is ſo,

But Mr. Pym's Tayle cry'd No.

Fye quoth Alderman Atkins I like not this paſſage,

To have a Fart inter voluntary in the midſt of a Meſſage.

Then upſtarts one fuller of Devotion

Than Eloquence, and ſaid, a very ill Motion.

Not ſo neither quoth Sir Henry Jenking,

The Motion was good but for the ſtinking.

Quoth Sir Henry Poole 'twas an audacious trick

To fart in the face of the Body Politick.

Sir Jerome in Folio ſwore by the Maſs

This Fart was enough to have blown a Glaſs:

Quoth then Sir Jerome the Leſſer, ſuch an Abuſe

Was never offer'd in Poland nor Pruce.

Quoth Sir Richard Houghton, a Juſtice i'th Quorum

Would tak't in ſnuff to have a Fart let before him.

If it would bear an Action quoth Sir Thomas Hole­craft

I would make of this Fart a Bolt or a Shaft.

Then qd. Sir John Moor to his great Commendation

I will ſpeak to this Houſe in my wonted faſhion.

Now ſurely ſayes he, For as much as, How be it,

This Fart to the Serjeant we muſt commit.

No quoth the Serjeant, low bending his Knees,

Farts oft will break Priſons, but never pay Fees.

Beſides, this Motion with ſmall reaſon ſtands,

To charge me with that I can't keep in my hands.

Quoth Sir Walter Cope 'twas ſo readily let,

I would it were ſweet enough for my Cabinet.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=38)Why then
Sir Walter (quoth Sir William Fleetwood)

Speak no more of it, but bury it with Sweetwood;

Grave Senate, quoth Duncombe, upon my ſalvation,

This Fart ſtands in need of ſome great Reformation;

Quoth Mr. Cartwright, upon my Conſcience

It would be reformed with a little Frankencenſe;

Quoth Sir Roger Aſton it would much mend the matter,

If this Fart were ſhaven, and waſht in Roſewater;

Per verbum Principis, how dare I tell it,

A Fart by hear-ſay, and not ſee it, nor ſmell it.

I am glad qd. Sam: Lewknor we have found a thing,

That no Tale-bearer can carry it the King,

Such a Fart as this was never ſeen

Quoth the learned Council of the Queen,

Yes quoth Sir Hugh Breſton the like hath been

Let in a dance before the Queen,

Then ſaid Mr. Peak I have a Preſident in ſtore

His Father Farted laſt Seſſions before,

A Bill muſt be drawn then, quoth Sir John Bennet,

Or a ſelected Committee quickly to pen it,

Why quoth Dr. Crompton no man can draw

This Fart within Compaſs of the Civil-Law,

Quoth Mr. Jones by the Law't may be done

Being a Fart intayld from Father to Sonne,

In truth quoth Mr. Brooke, this Speech was no lye

This Fart was one of your Poſt-Nati

Quoth Sir William Paddy a dare-aſſuram

Though twere contra modeſtum: 'tis not prater natu­ram,

Beſides by the Aphoriſmes of my art

Had he not been deliver'd, h'ad been ſick of a Fart;

Then quoth the Recorder, the mouth of the City,

To have ſmother'd that Fart had been great pity,

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=38)It is much
certain quoth Sir Humphrey Bentwizle,

That a Round-fart is better then a ſtinking fiezle:

Have patience Gentlemen, quoth Sir Francis Bacon

There's none of us all but may be miſtaken;

Why right, quoth the great Attorney I confeſſe,

The Eccho of ones — is remedileſſe.

### 1.32. The old Earle of Briſtol's Verſes on an Accommodation.

THe Parliament cryes Arme, the King ſayes No,

The New Lieutenants cry Come on, let's go;

The Citizens and Roundheads cryes So, ſo;

The People all amaz'd cryes Where's the Foe;

The Scots that ſtand behind the Door cryes Boe,

Peace, Stay awhile and you ſhall know:

The King ſtands ſtill faſter than they can go.

If that the King by force of Armes prevail,

He is invited to a Tyranny;

If that by power of Parliament he fail,

We heap continual Warre on our Poſterity.

Then he that is not for Accommodation,

Loves neither God, nor Church, nor King, nor Na­tion.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=39)

### 1.33. The Rump's Hypocricy

WE faſted firſt, then pray'd that War might ceaſe,

When Praying would not ſerve, we paid for Peace;

And glad we had it ſo, and gave God thanks,

Which made the Iriſh play the Scotiſh Pranks.

Is there no God? let's put it to a Vote;

Is there no Church? ſome Fools ſay ſo by rote;

Is there no King, but Pym, for to aſſent

What ſhall be done by Act of Parliament?

No God, no Church, no King, then all were well,

If they could but Enact there were no Hell.

### 1.34. The Parliaments Hymnes.

O Lord preſerve the Parliament,

And ſend them long to reign,

From three years end, to three years end,

And ſo to three again.

Let neither King nor Biſhops, Lord,

Whilſt they ſhall be alive,

Have power to rebuke thy Saints,

Nor hurt the Members five.

For they be good and godly men,

No ſinfull path they tread;

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=39)They now
are putting Biſhops down,

And ſetting up Round-head.

From Holdſworth, Bromrigge, and old Shute,

Thoſe able learned Scholars,

Good Lord deliver us with ſpeed,

And all our zealous Followers.

From Fielding and from Vavaſour,

Both ill affected men;

From Lunsford eke deliver us,

That eateth up Children.

Thy holy Burton, Bastwick, —

Lord keep them in thy Boſome;

Eke him that hath kept out the King,

Worſhipfull Sir John Hotham.

Put down the King and Hartford, Lord,

And keep them down for aye;

Thy choſen Pym ſet up on high,

And eke the good Lord Say.

For Warwick wee beſeech thee Lord,

Be thou his ſtrong defence,

Holland, Brooks, and S — ſhield,

And eke his Oxcellence.

For B — and K — to

That are both wiſe and ſtout,

Who have rebuk'd the King of late,

And his ungodly Rout.

Once more we pray for Parliament,

That they may ſit ſecure,

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=40)And may
their Conſultations,

From Age to Age endure.

Let all the Godly ſay Amen,

And let them Praiſes ſing

To God and to the Parliament,

And all that hate the King.

### 1.35. The Round-heads Race.

I Will not ſay for the Worlds ſtore,

The World's now drunk, (for did I)

The Faction which now reigns would roare,

But I will ſwear 'tis giddy.

And all are prone to this ſame Fit,

That it their Object make,

For every thing runs Round in it,

And no form elſe will take.

To the Round-Noſe Peculiar is

The Ruby and the Roſe;

The Round-lip gets away the Kiſſe,

And that by Favour goes.

The Round-beard for Talke of State,

Carry it at the Club;

The Round-Robin by a like fate

Is Victor in the Tubb.

Hanworths Round-block ſpeak pollicy,

The Round-hoſe Riches draw.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=40)The Round-
heads for the Goſpell bee

The Round Copes for the Law.

Tom his Round Garbe ſo rules all o're,

The pox take him for mee

That e're lookes for ſquare dealing more,

And hears an health to thee.

### 1.36. On the Queens Departure.

UP, up wrong'd Charls his friends, what can you be

Thus Mantled In a ſtupid Lethargie,

When all the world's in Arms? and can there be

Armies of Fears abroad and none with thee?

Breath out your ſouls in ſighs, melt into tears,

And let your griefs be equal to your fears;

The Sphaeres are all a jarring, and their jarres

Seems counter-like to Calculate the Starres;

The Inferior Orbes aſpire, and do diſdain

To move at all, unleſſe they may attain

The higheſt Room, our Occedentall Sunne

Eclips'd by Starres, forſakes his Horizon,

Bright Cinthia too (they ſay) hath hid her face

As 'twere Impatient of her Sol's diſgrace;

And our fears tell us, that unleſſe the Sunne

Lend us his beams again, the World will run

Into another Chaos, where will be

Nought but the curſed Fruits of Anarchie;

Sedition, Murder, Rapine, and what's worſe

None to Implore for Aid; Oh, here's the Curſe,

But ſtay ye Starres, what will ye wiſh to bee?

More Sunns then one will prove a Prodigie:

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=41)To afright
the Amazed World, will ye be-night

That glorious Lamp, that Fountain of all light,

Will none but Sol's own Chaire, pleaſe your deſire?

Take heed bold Stars you'le ſet the world on fire.

### 1.37. Pyms Anarchy.

ASk me no more, why there appears

Dayly ſuch troopes of Dragooners?

Since it is requiſite, you know;

They rob cum privilegio.

Ask me no more, why th' Gaole confines

Our Hierarchy of beſt divines?

Since ſome in Parliament agree

Tis for the Subjects Liberty.

Ask me no more, why from Blackwall

Great tumults come into Whitehall?

Since it's allow'd, by free conſent,

The Priviledge of Parliament.

Ask me not, why to London comes

So many Muſquets, Pikes and Drums?

Although you fear they'll never ceaſe;

'Tis to protect the Kingdoms peace.

Ask me no more, why little Finch

From Parliament began to winch?

Since ſuch as dare to hawk at Kings

Can eaſie clip a Finches wings.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=41)

Ask me no more, why Strafford's dead,

And why they aim'd ſo at his head?

Faith, all the reaſon I can give,

'Tis thought he was too wiſe to live.

Ask me no more, where's all the Plate,

Brought in at ſuch an eaſie rate?

They will it back to th' Owners bring

In caſe it fall not to the King.

Ask me not why the Houſe delights

Not in our two wiſe Kentiſh Knights?

There Counſell never was thought good,

Becauſe it was not underſtood.

Ask me no more, why Leſley goes

To ſeize all rich men as his foes?

Whilſt Country Farmers ſigh and ſob,

Yeomen may beg when Kings do rob.

Ask me no more, by what ſtrange ſight

Londons Lord Maior was made a Knight?

Since there's a ſtrength, not very far,

Hath as much power to make as mar.

Ask me no more, why in this Age

I fing ſo ſharp without a Cage?

My anſwer is, I need not fear

Since England doth the burden bear.

Ask me no more, for I grow dull,

Why Hotham kept the Town of Hull?

This anſwer I in brief do ſing,

All things were thus when Pym was K—

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=42)

### 1.38. To my Lord B. of S. he being at York.

My Lord,

WHen you were laſt at London 'twas our fear,

Leſt the ſame Rout which threatned Majeſty,

Might ſtrike at you: 'tis but the ſame Career

To aime at Crowns, and at the Miter fly.

For ſtill the Scepter and the Croſier ſtaffe

Together fall, 'cauſe they're together ſafe:

Yet while the ſence of Tumults deepeſt grow,

And preſſe in us, no doubts in you ariſe;

There ſtill dwelt calm and quiet in your Brow,

As our Diſtractions were your Exerciſe:

And taught us, all aſſaults, all Il [...]s to beare,

Is not to fly from Danger, but from Fear.

That Courage waits you ſtill, ſome merely rode

From Tumults and the Peoples frantick Rage,

Counting their ſafety by their far abode,

And ſo grew ſafer ſtill at the next Stage:

But 'tis not ſpace that ſhelters you, the reſt

Secure themſelves by Miles, you by your Breaſt.

And now my Lord, ſince you have London left,

Where Merchants wives dine cheap, & as cheap ſup,

Where Fools themſelves have of their Plate bereft,

And ſigh and drink in the courſe Pewter cup.

Where's not a Silver Spoon left, not that giv'n than

When the firſt Cockney was made Christian.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=42)

No not a Bodkin, Pincaſe, all they ſend

Or carry all, what ever they can happe on,

Ev'n to the pretty Pick Tooth, whoſe each end

Oft purg'd the Relicks of continual Capon.

Nothing muſt ſtay behind, nothing muſt tarry,

No not the Ring by which dear Joan took Harry.

But now no City-Villain, though he were

Free of a Trade and Treaſon, dares intrude,

No ſawcy Prentiſes aſſault you there,

Engag'd by their Indentures to be rude:

Whom for the two firſt years their Maſters uſe

Onely to cry down Biſhops, and cleanſe Shooes.

There as in ſilent Orbes you may ride on,

And as in Charles his Wain move without jarres,

Your Coach will ſeem your Constellation,

Not drawn about by Horſes, but by Stars.

Till ſeated near the Northern Pole, wee thence

Judge your ſeat Sphear, you its Intelligence.

### 1.39. An Elegie on the Moſt Reverend Father in God William, Lord
Archbiſhop of CANTERBURY.  
Attached the 18. of December, 1640. Beheaded the 10. of January, 1644.

Moſt Reverend Martyr,

THou, ſince thy thick Afflictions firſt begun,

Mak'ſt Diocleſian's dayes all Calme, and Sun,

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=43)And when
thy Tragick Annals are compil'd,

Old Perſecution ſhall be Pity ſtyl'd,

The Stake and Faggot ſhall be Temp'rate names,

And Mercy wear the Character of Flames:

Men knew not then Thrift in the Martyrs breath,

Nor weav'd their Lives into a four years Death,

Few antient Tyrants do our Stories Taxe,

That flew firſt by Delayes, then by the Axe,

But theſe (Tiberius like) alone do cry,

'Tis to be Reconcil'd to let Thee dy.

Obſerve we then a while into what Maze,

Compaſſe, and Circle they contrive Delayes,

What Turnes and wilde Perplexities they chuſe,

Ere they can forge their Slander, and Accuſe:

The Sun hath now brought his warm Chariot back,

And rode his Progreſs round the Zodiack,

When yet no Crime appears, when none can tell,

Where thy Guilt ſleeps, nor when 'twill break the ſhell.

Why is His Shame defer'd? what's in't that brings

Your Juſtice back, ſpoyles Vengeance of her Wings?

Hath Mercy ſeiz'd you? will you rage no more?

Are Windes grown tame? have Seas forgot to roar?

No, a wilde fierceneſſe hath your minds poſſeſt,

Which time and ſins muſt cheriſh and digeſt:

You durſt not now let His clear Blood be ſpilt,

You were not yet grown up to ſuch a guilt;

You try if Age, if Seaventy years can Kill:

Then y'have your Ends, and you are harmleſſe ſtill,

But when this fail'd, you do your Paths enlarge,

But would not yet whole Innocence diſcharge;

You'll not be Devil All, you fain would prove

Good at a Diſtance, within ſome Remove,

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=43)"Virtue
hath ſweets which are good Mens due gaine,

"Which Vice could not Deſerve, yet would Retaine.

This was the Cauſe, why once it was your Care,

That Storms and Tempeſts in your Sin might ſhare,

You did engage the Waves, and ſtrongly ſtood

To make the Water guilty of his Blood.

Boats are diſpatcht in haſte, and 'tis his doome,

Not to his Charge, but to his Shipwrack come;

Fond men, your cruel Project cannot doe,

Tempests and ſtorms muſt learn to kill from you;

When this comes ſhort, he muſt Walk [...] Pilgrimage,

No Coach nor Mule, that may ſuſtein his Age,

Muſt trace the City (now a Deſert rude)

And combate ſalvage Beaſts the Multitude.

But when his Guardian Innocence can fling,

Awe round about, and ſave him by that King.

When the Juſt cauſe can fright the Beaſts away,

And make the Tyger tremble at her prey.

When nether Waves dare ſeize him, nor the Rout;

The ſtorm with Reaſon, nor the ſtorm without:

Loſt in their ſtreights when Plots have vanquiſht bin,

And Sin perplext hath no Relief, but Sin.

Agents and Inſtruments now on you fall,

You muſt be Judges, People, Waves, and All.

Yet 'cauſe the Rout will have't perform'd by you,

And long to ſee done what they dare not Doe.

You put the Crime to uſe, it ſwells your Heap;

Your Sin's your own, nor are you Guilty cheap,

You Husband All; there's no Appearance loſt,

Nor comes he once to th' Bar but at your cost;

A conſtant Rate well Taxt, and Levyed right,

And a Juſt value ſet upon each ſight.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=44)At laſt
they find the Dayes by their own Purſe,

Leſſe known from him than what they do disburſe:

But when it now ſtrikes high for him t'appear,

And Chapmen ſee the Bargain is grown dear;

They Muſter hands, and their hot ſuits enlarge,

Not to perſue the Man, but ſave the Charge;

Then leaſt you looſe their Custome, (a juſt fear)

Selling your Sinnes and others Blood too dear.

You grant their Suits, the Manner, and the Time,

And he muſt Dye for what no Law calls Crime.

Th' Afflicted Martyrs, when their pains began.

Their Trajan had, or Diocleſian.

Their Tortures were ſome Colours, and proceed;

Though from no Guilt, yet 'cauſe they diſagreed:

What league, what friendſhip's there? They could not joyn,

And fix the Ark and Dagon in one Shrine.

Faith, combats Faith; and how agree can they,

That ſtill go on, but ſtill a ſeveral way?

Zeal, Martyrs Zeal, and Heat 'gainſt Heat conſpires.

As Theban Brothers fight though in their Fires.

Yet as two diff'rent Stars unite their Beams,

And Rivers mingles Waves and mix their Streams;

And though they challenge each a ſeveral Name,

Conſpire becauſe their moyſture is the ſame.

So Parties knit, though they be diverſe known,

The Men are many but the Christian, one.

Trajan, no Trajan was to his own Heard,

And Tygers are not by the Tygers fear'd.

What ſtrange exceſſe then? what's that menstruous Power,

When Flames do Flames, and Streams do Streams devour?

Where the ſame Faith 'gainſt the ſame Faith doth knock,

And Sheep are Wolves to Sheep of the ſame Flock?

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=44)Where
Protestant the Proteſtant defies,

Where both Aſſent, yet one for Diſſent dyes?

Let theſe that doubt this, through his Actions Wade,

Where ſome muſt needs Convince, All may per­ſwade.

Was he Apoſtate, who your Champion ſtood,

Bath'd in his Inke before, as now in Blood?

He that unwinds the ſubtle Jeſuite,

That Feels the Serpents Teeth, and is not bit?

Unites the Snake finds each Myſterious knot,

And turns the Poyſon into Antidot.

Doth Nicety with Nicety undoe?

And makes the Labyrinth the Labyrinth's clew?

That ſleight by ſleight ſubdues, and clearly proves,

Truth hath her Serpents too, as well as Doves.

Now, you that blaſt his Innocence, Survey,

And view the Triumph of this Glorious day;

Could you (if that might be) if you ſhould come

To ſeal God's cauſe with your own Martyrdom,

(Could all the blood whoſe Tydes move in their veins,

Which then perhaps were Blood, but now in ſtains)

(Yield it that Force and ſtrength, which it hath took

Should we except his Bloud) from this his Book,

Your Flame or Axe would leſſe evince to Men,

Your Block and Stake would prop leſſe than his Pea;

Is he Apostate, whom the Baites of Rome

Cannot ſeduce, though all her Glories come?

Whom all her ſpecious Honours cannot hold,

Who hates the ſnare although the Hook be Gold?

Who Prostituted Titles can deſpiſe,

And from deſpiſed Titles, greater Riſe?

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=45)Whom Names
cannot Amuſe, but ſeats withall

The Protestant above the Cardinall?

Who ſure to his own Soul, doth ſcorn to find

A Crimſon cap the Purchaſe of his Minde?

"Who is not Great, may blame his Fate's Of­fence,

"Who would not be, is Great in's Conſcience.

Next theſe His Sweat and Care how to advance

The Church but to Her Juſt Inheritance,

How to gain back her Own, yet none Beguile,

And make her Wealth her Purchaſe, nor her ſpoyle:

Then, ſhape Gods worſhip to a joynt conſent;

'Till when the ſeamleſſe Coat muſt ſtill be Rent:

Then, to repair the Shrines, as Breaches ſprung,

Which we ſhould hear, could we lend Pauls a Tongue,

Speak, Speak great Monument! while thou yet art ſuch,

And Rear him 'bove their Scandals and their Touch;

Had he ſurviv'd thou mighſt in Time Declare,

Vaſt things may comely be, and Greateſt Fair.

And though thy Limbs ſpread high, and Bulk exceed,

Thou'dſt prov'd that Gyants are no monſtrous breed:

Then 'bove Extent thy Luſtre would prevaile,

And 'gainſt Dimenſion Feature turn the Scale;

But now, like Pyrrah's half adopted birth.

Where th'iſſue part was Woman, Part was Earth,

Where Female ſome, and ſome to stone was Bent,

And the one half was t'others Monument,

Thou muſt imperfect lye, and learn to Groan,

Now for his Ruine, ſtraightway for thine own:

But this and Thouſand ſuch Abortives are;

By Bloody Rebels Raviſht from his care;

But yet though ſome miſcarried in their Wombe,

And Deeds Still-born have haſtned to the Tombe,

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=45)God (that
Rewards him now) forbad his ſtore,

Should all lye hid, and he but give ith' Ore.

Many are Stampt, and ſhapt, and do ſtill ſhine,

Approv'd at Mint, a firm, and Perfect Coyne.

Witneſs that Mart of Books that yonder ſtands.

Beſtow'd by him, though by anothers Hands:

Thoſe Attick Manuſcripts, ſo rare a Piece,

They tell the Turk, he hath not conquer'd Greece,

Next theſe, a ſecond beautuous Heap is thrown,

Of Eaſtern Authors, who were all his own.

Who in ſo Various Languages appear,

Babel, would ſcarce be their Interpreter.

To Theſe, we may that Fair-built Colledge bring,

Which proves that Learning's no ſuch Ruſtick thing;

Whoſe ſtructure well contriv'd doth not relate

To Antick fineneſs, but strong laſting ſtate:

Beauty well mixt with ſtrength, that it complyes

Moſt with the Gazer's uſe, much with his Eyes,

On Marble Columns thus the Arts have ſtood,

As wiſe Seth's Pillars ſa [...]'d 'em in the Flood.

But did he leave here Walls, and only Own

A Glorious Heap, and make us rich in Stone?

Then had our Chanc'lour ſeem'd to fail, and here

Much honour due to the Artificer:

But this our Prudent Patron long fore-ſaw,

When he Refin'd rude Statutes into Law;

Our Arts and Manners to his Building falls,

And he erects the Men, as well as Walls:

"Thus Solons Laws his Athens did Renown,

"And turn'd that throng of Building to a Town.

Yet neither Law nor Statute can be known

So strickt, as to Himſelf he made his own,

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=46)Which in
his Actions Inventory lyes,

Which Hell or — can never ſcandalize:

Where every Act his rigid eye ſurveyes,

And Night is Barre and Judge to all his Dayes;

Where all his ſecret Thoughts he doth comprize,

And every Dream ſummon'd to an Aſſize;

VVhere he Arraigns each Circumſtance of care,

VVhich never parts diſmiſs'd without a Prayer;

See! how he ſifts and ſearches every part,

And ranſacks all the Cloſets of his heart;

He puts the hours upon the Rack and Wheel,

And all his minutes muſt confeſs or feel:

If they reveal one Act which forth did come.

VVhen Humane frailty crept into the Loome,

If one Thread ſtain, or ſully, break, or faint,

So that the Man does Inteerrupt the Saint,

He hunts it to its Death, nor quits his feares,

Till't be Embalm'd in Prayers, or drown'd in Teares.

The Sun in all his journeys ne're did ſee

One more devout, nor one more ſtrict than He.

Since his Religion then's Ʋnmixt and Fine,

And Works do warrant Faith, as Ore the Mine:

VVhat can his Crime be then? Now you muſt lay

The Kingdoms Laws ſubverted in his way:

See! no ſuch Crime doth o're his Conſcience grow,

(VVithout which Witneſs ne're can make it ſo;)

A clear Tranſparent White, bedecks his mind,

VVhere nought but Innocence can ſhelter find,

Witneſſe that Breath which did your stain and blot

Wipe freely out, (though Heaven I fear will not)

Witneſſe that Calme and Quiet in His Breaſt,

Prologue and Preface to his Place of Reſt;

When with the VVorld He could undaunted part,

And ſee in Death nor meagre Looks; nor Dart:

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=46)When to
the Fatal Block His Gray Age goes

With the ſame Eaſe, as when he took Repoſe.

"He like old Enoch to His Bliſſe is gone,

"Tis not his Death, but his Tranſlation.

### 1.40. A Mock Remonſtrance referring to the Porters Petition.

To Pym King of the Parliamented,

The Grievances are here preſented

Of Porters, Butchers, Broom-men, Tanners,

That fain would fight under your Banners;

Weavers, Dyers, Tinkers, Coblers,

And many other ſuch like Joblers,

As Water-men, and thoſe call'd Dray-men,

That have a long time ſung Solamen, &c.

WHereas, Imprimis, firſt, that is, the Porters,

The heavy burthens laid on their four Quarters

Is not complain'd of here; nor of Us, any,

Although We have good Cauſes, and full many,

As yet unknown; but there's a day will come

Shall pay for all, We ſay no more but Mum.

It is well ſaid by ſome, You are about

To give the Church and Government a Rout,

Let it be ſo cry VVe, for it is known,

To do't, you will want more hands than your own.

And ſince you are

Their Decla­ration.

neceſſitated to

Raiſe war, 'ifaith (Sirrevence) do, do, do;

'Tis fit that Old things ſhould grow out of date,

Like Hampden's Siſter, or that Beldame Kate.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=47)Old things
in courſe do commonly decay,

When New perhaps may laſt full many a day;

Old Frocks, old Shirts, old Brooms, old Boots, old Skins

Are much addicted to the Venial ſins

Of wearing out; and why not then the Church,

That has left many a ſimple man ith' lurch.

Beſide, the Porters ſo the Surplice hate,

Their very Frocks they have caſheer'd of late;

And rather than endure 'em, you may ſee,

They wear the Rope, the Hang-mans Livery.

The Butchers too, inſpired are at leaſt,

And know the very Intrails of the Beaſt

That wears thoſe

Surplices.

Smocks, and though they love a Whore,

A Babiloniſh one they do abhor.

In fine, in this great work of Reformation,

Which you intend ſhall ſtigmatize the Nation,

We pray to be Fellow-labourers, and

That you our Vertues right may underſtand,

Know that the Porters ſhall for Eighteen-pence

Carry the Dreggs of Rome in Bottles hence

To any Foreign part you'l think upon,

And bring the Juyce of the Turks Alcaron

In lieu of it; the Butcher kill'd in Slaughter

Shall ſend Gods, and the Laws Diſciples after:

There ſhall not a Religious Relique be

Left in the Church, or in the Library,

But ſhall be ſwept away by the Nice hand

Oth' Broom-mens Art, who nothing underſtand

More than Kent-ſtreet; If any them deride,

The Tanners come, and then beware their Hide;

And for the Weavers, they can preach, or pray,

As is well known to the Lords, Brooks and Say.

The Dyers they delight you know in Scarlet,

And care no more for Blood, than any Varlet;

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=47)Like
Archers good they will come on ſo powring,

That who eſcapes them will eſcape a ſcowring.

The Tinkers they can both make Holes, and mend 'em

In Church or State; if you will but befriend 'em

With Mettle; They care not for God or Divell;

A Pack of ſturdy Rogues inur'd to Evill.

The Cobler vows, and that you'l ſay is News,

To venture All, what over Boots, o're Shooes?

And likewiſe undertakes at a Cheap rate

The Government, though Crabbed, to Tranſlate.

The Water-men more flye than any Otters,

Knowing 'tis good fiſhing in troubl'd Waters,

If any do Oppoſe them, though their Betters,

They will betake themſelves unto their Stret­chers,

And ſo belabour 'em in Church and Cloyſters,

Their Bones ſhall rattle, like a Sacke of Oyſters,

In their thin Skins. The Dray-men likewiſe ſhall

With Cruſted Fiſts, fling 'um and fling 'um all.

Thus in Our ſeveral Functions We can ſerve ye,

Men fit for your Employment, pray obſerve ye;

And therefore liſt Us, where your beſt defence is,

In th' Yealow Regiment of's Oxcellencies:

So taking leave, reſting at your Commands,

We do ſubſcribe either Our Horns, or Hands,

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=48)

### 1.41. The Caution. A SONG.

To the Tune of Oh Women, Monſtrous Women.

YOu Sep'ratiſts that Sequiſter

Your ſelves from Laws are good,

Your Courſes ſo irregular

Shall now be underſtood;

Your fond Expounding corrupts the Bibble,

Yet you'l maintain it with your Twibble.

Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,

What do you mean to do?

He that does ſwear, though to a Truth,

You count him far worſe than a Lyer,

Yet you will firk your Siſter Ruth,

So it may edifie her;

You, like the Devil, abhor a Croſſe,

But I'le have as good Reaſon from Pyms Stone­horſe.

Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,

What do you mean to do?

Our Churches Hierarchy you hold

Within a foul Suſpition;

And ſay the Prelates Sleeves are old

Reliques of Superſtition;

The very Ragges of Rome they are

Such as the Whores of Babilon wear.

Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,

What do you mean to do?

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=48)

Therefore in Zeal and Piety,

You'l dy their Lawn in blood,

And root out their Society,

A work you think is good;

The Malice is, ſome of your Eares

Were cropt far ſhorter than your hairs.

Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,

What do you mean to do?

When you the Miter have pull'd down,

You'l be hang'd before contented,

Your next Pluck muſt be at the Crown,

A Plot long ſince invented:

But Grigge ſwears Tyburn ſhall have her due,

Hee'l be hang'd himſelf, if he hang not you.

Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,

What do you mean to do?

The Coblers were aſtoniſhed,

The Porters eke, alſo;

To hear the Noyſe that ecchoed

From your vaſt Tubb below:

But let him be hang'd will never mend,

The Cobler thinks upon his end.

But you to whom my Lines do tend

Have a care of what you do.

### 1.42. Lilly contemn'd. A SONG.

WHy art thou ſad? Our Glaſſes flow

Like little Rivers to the Mayne;

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=49)And ne're
a Man here has a Shrew,

What need'ſt thou then complain?

Then Boys mind your Glaſs,

And let all News paſs

That treats not of this our Canary,

Let Lawyers fear their Fate,

In the turn of the State,

We ſuffer if this do miſcarry,

Chor. 'Tis this will preſerve us 'gainſt Lillies predi­ctions,

And make us contemn our Fate and his Ficti­ons.

'Tis this that ſetts the City Ruff;

And lyne [...] the Aldermen with Fur;

It makes the Watchmen ſtiff and tuff

To call, where go you Sir?

'Tis this doth advance

The Cap of Maintenance,

And keeps the Sword ſleeping or waking;

It Courage doth raiſe

In ſuch Men now adaies,

That hereto [...]ore cry'd at Head-aching,

Chor. 'Tis this doth infuſe in a Miſer ſome pity,

And is the Genius, and Soul of the City.

Then why ſhould we diſpair, or think

The Enemy approacheth near?

Let ſuch as never us'd to drink

Sack, be enſlav'd to Fear.

Then to get Honor,

And that waits on her,

Strange Titles, Illuſtrious and Mighty.

Wee'l have a ſmart Bout

Shall ſpeak us Men and ſtout,

And I'le be the firſt that ſhall fight ye.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=49)Chor. He
that ſtifly can ſtand to't, and hath the beſt Braine;

Shall be ſtyl'd Son of Mars, and God of the Mayne.

### 1.43. A Monſter to be ſeen at VVeſtminſter. 1642.

WIthin this Houſe is to be ſeen

Such a Monſter as hath not been

At any time in England, nay

In Europe, Africk, Aſia.

'Tis a Round body, without a Head

Almoſt three years, yet not dead.

'Tis like that Beaſt I once did ſee,

Whoſe Tayle ſtood where his Head ſhould be;

And, which was never ſeen before,

Though't want a Head, 'thas Horns good ſtore,

It has very little hair, and yet

You'l ſay it has more hair than wit,

'Thas many Eyes and many Eares,

'Thas many Jealouſies and  [...]ears,

'Thas many Mouths, and many Hands,

'Tis full of Queſtions and Commands.

'Tis arm'd with Muskets, Pikes, it fears

Naught in the World but Cavaliers;

'Twas born in England, but begot

Betwixt the Engliſh and the Scot.

Though ſome are of Opinion Father

That the Devil was its Father,

And the City, which is worſe,

Was its Mother, and its Nurſe.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=50)Some ſay
(though perhaps in ſcorn)

That it was a Cretan born,

And not unlike, for't has the faſhion

Juſt as may be of that Nation;

For 'tis a Lyer, none oth' leaſt;

A ſlow Belly, an Evil beaſt;

Of what Religion none can tell,

It much reſembles that in Hell.

Some ſay it is a Jew diſguis'd,

And why, becauſe 'tis circumcis'd;

For 'twas deprived long ago

Of many a Member wee well know.

In ſome points 'tis a Jeſuited Prieſt,

In ſome it is a Calviniſt:

For 'tis not Juſtify'd, it ſaith

By Good works, but by Publick Faith.

Some call't an Anabaptiſt: Some

Think now that Antichriſt is come.

A Creature of an uncouth kind,

Both for its Body, and its mind:

Make haſt and ſee't, elſe 'twill be gon,

For now 'tis ſick, and drawing on.

### 1.44. London ſad London. AN ECCHO.

WHat wants thee, that thou art in this ſad taking?

A King

What made him firſt remove hence his reſiding?

ſyding.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=50)Did any
here deny him ſatisfaction?

Faction.

Tell me whereon this ſtrength of Faction lyes?

On lyes.

What didſt thou do when the King left Parlia­ment?

Lament.

What terms would'ſt give to gain his Company?

Any.

But how wouldſt ſerve him, with thy beſt endea­vour?

Ever.

What wouldſt thou do if here thou couldſt be­hold him?

Hold him.

But if he comes not what becomes of London?

Ʋndone.

### 1.45. Upon bringing in the Plate.

ALL you that would no longer

To a Monarch be ſubjected,

Come away to Guildhall, and be there liberall,

Your Wiſh ſhall be there effected.

Come come away, bring your Gold, bring your Jewells,

Your ſilver Shap't, or Molten,

If the King you'l have down, and advance to the Crown

Five Members and K—

Regard no Proclamations,

They're Subjects fit to Jeſt on,

Henry Elſing's far better than C. R.

Reſolv'd upon the Queſtion.

Come come away, &c.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=51)

You Aldermen firſt ſend in

Your Chaines upon theſe Summons,

To buy Ropes ends, for all the Kings Friends,

They're Traytors to the Commons▪

Come, come away, &c.

Your Baſons large, and Ewers,

Unto this uſe alot them,

If ere you mean your hands to clean

From th'Sins by which you got them.

Come, come away, &c.

Bring in your Cannes and Gobletts,

You Citizens confiding,

And think it no ſcorn, to drink in a Horn

Of your own Wives providing.

Come, come away, &c.

Ye Bretheren ſtrong and luſty,

The Siſters Exerciſe yee,

Get Babes of Grace, and Spoons apace,

Both Houſes do adviſe yee.

Come, come away, &c.

Let the Religious Sempſtreſs

Her ſilver Thimble bring here,

'Twill be a fine thing in depoſing a King,

To ſay you had a Finger.

Come, come away, &c.

Your Childe's redeemed Whiſtle

May here obtain Admittance,

Nor ſhall that Coſt, be utterly loſt,

They'le give you an Acquittance.

Come, come away, &c.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=51)

The Gold and Silver Bodkin,

The Parliament woo'd ha both,

Which oft doth make, the Houſe to take

A Journey on the Sabboth.

Come, come away, &c.

You that have ſtore of Mony

Bring't hither, and be thrifty,

If th' Parliament thrive, they'le ſo contrive

You ſhall have back Four for Fifty.

Come, come away, &c.

If when the Councell's ended,

Your Plate you will recover,

Be ſure you may the chief Head that day

On the Bridge or Tower diſcover.

Come, come away, &c.

### 1.46. The Prentices Petition to the Cloſe Com­mittee.

TO you cloſe Members, wee the Young men come

(If Juſtice in this houſe has any Room?)

With a Petition, but it is for peace;

If you are vext, pray let all Quarrells ceaſe;

Firſt, for Religion.) If't be no offence,

Nor hinder things of greater Conſequence)

We hope you do ſuppoſe there's ſome ſuch thing,

'Cauſe 'thas bin often mention'd by the King.

Wee'ld hav't eſtabliſht, and do hold it fit

That no Lay-Levites ought to meddle with't.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=52)Next, that
in ſpight of Treaſon, we may have

A happy peace, but that we need not crave,

For when our bodkins ceaſe 'twil be your pleaſure

That arms may ceaſe, not wanting wil, but treaſure;

Elſe you'le but put the King to farther trouble,

To beat you to't, and make you Subjects double.

We know y'are powerfull, and can wonders do

Both by your Votes and Ordinances too;

In caſe all thoſe Murther'd Innocent men

May by your Votes be made alive again,

Then your admiring Spirits ſhall perſwade us

That neither War nor Famine can invade us:

Till then you'le give us leave to truſt our Eyes,

And from our ſad Experience, now grow wiſe:

Let not the Collonell's gaping ſon o'th' City

Be made the Mouth unto this cloſe Committe;

Whoſe gaudy Troope, becauſe they're boyes, he boaſts

They are the Children of the Lord of Hoſts;

And knows no reaſon, (for indeed tis' ſcant)

Why States are not like Churches Militant.

Next, that Truth, Wiſedome, Juſtice, Loyalty,

And Law, five Members of our Faculty

(Who not by the King; but you, have been ſo long

By Votes Expell'd from your Rebellious throng)

May be reſtored; and in ſpight of Pym

Be heard to ſpeak their mind as well as him.

Which if not granted, we do tell you this,

Your Lord (whoſe head's in a Parentheſis)

Shall not ſecure you, but we ſhall unty

That twiſted Rabble of the Hierachy,

Clubs are good payments, and'mongſt other things

Know we are as many Thouſands as you Kings.

In the Interim pray tell your fore-horſe Pym,

Juſt as he loves the King, ſo we love him.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=52)

### 1.47. Londons Farewell to the Parliament.

FArewell to the Parliament, with hey, with hey,

Farewell to the Parliament, with hoe,

Your dear delight the City,

Our wants have made us witty,

And a — for the Cloſe Committee,

With a hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell the Lord of Eſſex, with hey, with hey,

Farewell the Lord of Eſſex, with hoe,

He ſleeps till eleven,

And leaves the Cauſe at ſix and ſeven,

But 'tis no matter, their hope's in Heaven,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell the Lord Wharton, with hey, with hey,

Farewell the Lord Wharton, with hoe,

The Saw-pit did hide him,

Whilſt Haſtings did out-ride him,

Then came Brooks and he out-ly'd him,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell Billy Stroud, with hey, with hey,

Farewell Billy Stroud, with hoe,

He ſwore all Whartons lyes were true,

And it concern'd him ſo to do,

For he was in the Saw-pit too,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell the Lord Brooks, with hey, with hey,

Farewell the Lord Brooks, with hoe,

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=53)He ſaid
(but firſt he had got a Rattle)

That but one hundred fell in the Battle,

Beſides Dogs, Whores, and ſuch Parliament Cattle,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell Say and Seale, with hey, with hey,

Farewell Say and Seale, with hoe,

May theſe Valiant Sons of Ammon,

All be Hang'd as high as Haman,

With the old Anabaptiſt they came on,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell K — with hey, with hey,

Farewell K — with hoe,

Thy Father writ a Godly Book,

Yet all was fiſh that came to the hook,

Sure he is damn'd though but for his look.

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell K — with hey, with hey,

Farewell K — with hoe,

Thy Houſe had been confounded,

In vain he had compounded,

If he had not got a Round-head,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell D— H— with hey, with hey,

Farewell D— H — with hoe

Twas his Ambition, or his need,

Not his Religion did the deed,

But his Widow hath tam'd him of the ſpeed.

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=53)

Farewell John Hampden, with hey, with hey,

Farewell John Hampden with hoe,

Hee's a ſly and ſubtile Fox,

Well read in Buchanan and Knox,

And hees gone down to goad the Oxe,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell John Pym, with hey, with hey,

Farewell John Pym with hoe,

He would have had a place in Court,

And he ventur'd all his partie for't,

But bribing proves his beſt ſupport.

VVith hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell John Pym with hey, with hey,

Farewell John Pym with hoe,

For all the feign'd diſaſter

Of the Taylor and the Plaſter,

Thou ſhalt not be our Maſter,

VVith hey trolly, lolly, loe,

Farewell Major Skippon, with hey, with hey

Farewell Major Skippon with hoe,

Ye have ordered him to kill and ſlay,

To reſcue him and run away,

Provide you vote fair weather, and pay,

VVith hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell our VVorthies all, with hey, with hey,

Farewell our VVorthies all with hoe,

For they inſtead of dying,

Maintain the truth by lying,

And get victories by flying,

VVith hey trolly, lolly, loe.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=54)

Farewell our Scotch Brethren, with hey, with hey,

Farewell our Scotch Brethren, with hoe.

They March but to the border,

But will be brought no farther,

For neither Ordinance nor Order,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell my little Levites, with hey, with hey,

Farewell my little Levites, with hoe,

Though you ſeem to fear him,

Yet you can ſcarce forbear him,

And when you thank him, you but jeer him,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell fears and jealouſies, with hey, with hey,

Farewell fears and jealouſies, with hoe,

Which, with lying Declarations,

Tumults, traytors, and proteſtations,

Have been the ruine of two Nations,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell little Iſaack, with hey, with hey,

Farewell little Iſaack, with hoe,

Thou haſt made us all, like Aſſes,

Part with our Plate, and drink in Glaſſes,

Whilſt thou growſt rich with 2 s. Paſſes,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

Farewell Plate and Money, with hey, with hey,

Farewell Plate and Money, with hoe,

'Tis going down by water,

Or ſomething near the matter,

And a Publique Faith's going after,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=54)

Farewell Members five, with hey, with hey,

Farewell Members five, with hoe,

Next Petition we deliver,

Sends you packing down the River,

And the Devil be your driver,

With hey trolly, lolly, loe.

### 1.48. A SONG.

NEw-England is preparing a-pace,

To entertain King Pym, with his Grace,

And Iſaack before ſhall carry the Mace,

For Round-heads Old Nick ſtand up now.

No Surpliſſe nor no Organs there,

Shall ever offend the Eye, or the Ear,

But a Spiritual Preach, with a 3. hours Prayer,

For Round-heads, &c.

All things in Zeal ſhall there be carried,

Without any Porredge read over the buried,

No Croſſing of Infants, nor Rings for the Married,

For Round-heads, &c.

The Swearer there ſhall puniſht be ſtill,

But Drunkenneſſe private be counted no ill,

Yet both kind of lying as much as you will,

For Round-heads, &c.

Blow winds, Hoyſe ſailes, and let us be gone,

But be ſure we take all our Plunder a long,

That Charles may find little when as he doth come,

For Round-heads Old Nick ſtand up now.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=55)

### 1.49. Sir John Hotham's Alarm.

COme Traytors, March on, to the Leader Sir John,

Though King Charles his Friends diſaffect you,

Do not obey him, but obey Devil Pym,

And the Parliament will protect you.

Let us plead that we Fight, for the King and his Right,

But if he deſire for to enter,

Let us Armed appear, and let us all ſweare

Our lives for his ſake we will venter.

But if he give Command, to diſarm out of hand,

As we our Allegiance do tender,

Let us preſently Sweare, that Commanded we are

By the Parliament not to ſurrender.

If he deſire for to ſee, what Command that may be,

We then will reſolve him no further,

But intreat him to ſtay, while we ſend Poſt away,

He ſhall have a Copy of the Order.

But if he Proclaime, me a Traytor by Name,

And all you that adhere to my Faction,

What an Honour it will be, when my Country ſee me,

Second Pym in a Trayterous Action.

But when the King ſends, to require an amends

Of the Parliament for ſuch denyal;

Whether Treaſon or no, the Law ſhall ne're know,

I muſt be put to your Vote for a Tryal.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=55)

And to put it to the Voice, or the Parliaments choice,

The Houſe being now ſo empty;

If there be ſuch a thing, as God or a King,

We'll carry it by five in the twenty.

If ſo pleaſe the Fates, as to change our Eſtates,

That the King his own Rights doth recover,

We will turn to their way, and the Town will betray,

Though a Ladder for our pains we turn over.

### 1.50. The Publique Faith.

SOme tell of Africk Monſters, which of old,

Vain Superſtition did for God-heads hold,

How the Aegyptians, who firſt knowledge ſpread,

Ador'd their Apis with the white Bulls head;

Apis ſtill fed with Serpents that do hiſs,

Hamon, Oſiris, Monſter Anubis.

But Sun-burnt Africk never had, nor hath

A Monſter like our Engliſh Publique Faith;

Thoſe fed on Snakes, and ſatisfi'd, did reſt,

This, like the Curtain Gulf, will have the beſt

Thing in the City, to appeaſe its ſtill

Encreaſing hunger, Glutting its lewd will

With Families, whoſe ſubſtance it devours,

Perverting Juſtice and the Higher Powers;

Contemning without fear of any Law,

Preying on all to fill its ravenous Maw;

Whoſe Eſtrich ſtomack, which no ſteele can ſate,

Has ſwallowed down Indies of Gold and Plate:

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=56)This is
the Publique Faith, which being led

By th' Cities wealth, has in this Kingdom bred

Such various miſchiefs with its viperous breath,

Blaſting its peace and happineſſe to death;

And yet this Idoll which our world adores,

Has made men proſtitute their truth like Whores,

To its ſoul Luſt, which ſurely may as well

And ſoon be ſatisfi'd, as th' Grave, or Hell;

This preys on Horſes, yet that will not do,

Unleſſe it may devour the Riders too:

This takes up all the Riches of the Land,

Not by intreaty, but unjuſt Command,

Borrowing extortively without any day

But the Greek Calends, then it means to pay;

This 'gainſt the Law of Nations does ſurpriſe

The Goods of Strangers, Kings, & in its wiſe

Diſcretion, thinks (though its not worth their note)

They're bound to take the Publique Faiths trim Vote

For their ſecurity, when this Publique Faith

Has broke more Merchants then e're Riot hath,

And yet, good men o'th City, you are proud

To have this Bankrupt Publique Faith allow'd

More credit then your King, to this you'll lend

More willingly then ever you did ſpend

Money to buy your Wives and Children bread,

By ſuch a ſtrange Inchantment being miſled

To your undoings; you who upon Bond,

Nay ſcarcely upon Mortgage of that Land,

Treble your Moneys value, would not p [...]rt

With your lov'd Coine, vanquiſh'd by th' power­full art

Of this Magician Publique Faith, juſtly inſtall

Him Maſter of your Bags, the Devil and all

That taught you get them by deceitfull wares,

And ſucking in (like Mornings draughts) young Heirs:

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=56)Well,
certainly if this fine humour hold,

Your Aldermen will have no other Gold

But what's in Thumb-rings, for their ponderous Chains,

They'le be the Publique Faiths juſt lawfull gains,

And have the Honour afterwards to be

Hang'd in them for its Publique Treachery.

What will become of you then, Grave and Witty

Inhabitants of this Inchanted City?

Who is't ſhall thoſe vaſt Sums to you re-pay,

When Maſter Publique Faith is run away?

O [...] who ſhall thoſe prodigious heaps renew,

Which were prodigally decreas'd by you?

Whom the whole world imagin'd men of thrift,

What will your Orphans do? How will they ſhift,

Whoſe whole Eſtates in th' City Chamber, hath

Been given a ſpoyle to ruin'd Publique Faith?

Perhaps you'le pawn your Charter to ſupply

The worthy wants of your Neceſſity.

Who is 't will take't, when all (but men miſled

Like you) know 'tis already forfeited?

Who is't will then into New Coine tranſlate

Such monſtrous Cupboards of huge antick Plate?

To Publique Faiths vaſt Treaſury bring in,

From the Gilt Goblet, to the Silver Pin,

All that was Coinable, and what to do?

Even to create you Knaves, and Traytors too.

Faith if you chance to come off with your Lives,

Your way will be to live upon your Wives,

Their Trading will be good, when Fortune wears

Your Colours in the Caps of th' Cavaliers,

Whoſe Cuckolds you'll be then, & on your brow,

Wear their Horns, as you Publique Faith's do now;

Then, then you'll howle, when you ſhall clearly ſee

That Publique Faith, was Publique Treachery:

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=57)Then
you'll confeſs your ſelves to 've been undone

By Publique Faith's man, Iſaack Pennington;

Then you'll repent that ever you did fling

Such monſtrous Sums away againſt your King;

When he in Triumph, with his War-like Train,

Shall to your terrour view your Town again;

Unleſſe his Mercy mittigate his wrath,

Juſtly conceiv'd 'gainſt you and Publique Faith;

That Reverent Alderman which did defile

His Breeches at the Muſtering ere while.

Shall then again thoſe Velvet Slops bewray,

Cauſe Publique Faith did make him go aſtray:

Pauls ſhall be opened then, and you conſpire

No more againſt the Organs in the Quire,

Nor threat the Saints ith' Windows, nor repair

In Troops to kill the Book of Common-Prayer;

Nor drunk with Zeal, endeavour to engroſſe

To your own uſe, the ſtones of Cheap-ſide Croſſe:

Then, then you'll bow your heads, your horns and all,

That ſo exalted were to ſave from thrall

Your ruin'd Liberties, and humbly pray

For Mercy, more then upon each Faſt-day;

When your Seditious Preachers to the throng,

Make Prayers Ex Tempore of five hours long;

Leſt you by early penitence prevent

Your certain danger, if not puniſhment,

Which you by no means may ſo ſafely do,

As quitting Publique Faith, and Treaſon too:

Then, then, though late, you to your grief will find,

That you have walkt (as Moles ith' Earth do.)

Of your fair reaſon, and obedient light,

Involv'd in Miſts of black Rebellious Night: blind

If theſe Inſtructions will not make you ſee

Your Errour, may you periſh in't for me,

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=57)And to
your Ruine walk in deathfull path,

That leads to'th Gallows with the Publique Faith.

### 1.51. The Sence of the Houſe, or the Reaſon why thoſe Members who are the
Remnant of the two Families of Parliament cannot conſent to Peace, or an
Acccommodation.

To the Tune of The New-England Pſalm, Huggle Duggle, ho ho ho the Devil he
laught aloud.

COme come beloved Londoners, fy fy you ſhame us all,

Your riſing up for Peace, will make the cloſe Com­mitte fall;

I wonder you dare ask for that, which they muſt needs deny,

There's 30. ſwears they'l have no Peace, and bid me tell you why.

Firſt I'le no Peace quoth Eſſex, my Chaplain ſayes 'tis Sin

To looſe 100 l. a day, juſt when my Wife lyes in;

They cry God bleſſe your Excellence, but if I looſe my Place

They'l call me Rebel, Popular Aſſe, and Cuckold to my face.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=58)

You Citizen Fools, quoth W— d' ye talk to to me of Peace,

Who not only ſtole his Majeſties Ships, but rob'd him of his Seas,

No no I'le keep the Water ſtill, and have my Ships well man'd,

For I have loſt and ſtole ſo much, I know not where to land.

Do Brother do, ſayes H— for Peace breeds us no quiet,

Beſides my Places to have loſt, with ſixteen Diſh­es dyet,

I play'd the Judas with the King, which makes the World deteſt me,

Nay ſhould his Majeſty pardon me, 500. would areſt me.

K — ſaid, theſe Londoners deſerve to looſe their Eares.

For now they'l all obey the King, like Citizen Cavaliers;

Let's vote this Peace a deſperate Plot, and ſend them a denyal,

For if they ſave the Kingdom, they'le give us a Legal tryal.

The Welſh-men rage quoth S — and call me villanous Goat

For plundering Hereford's Aldermens Gownes to make my Beſſe a Coat,

'Tis true the Town did feed me well, for which I took good Fleeces,

But if Peace come they'le tear me and all my Whores in piece.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=58)

Fight fight quoth Say, now now hold up theſe Jealouſies and Fears,

The work will ſhew I laid the Plot above theſe 17. years;

'Tis I that am your Engineer', but if for Peace you vote,

Oh then they'le make me go to Church, or elſe they'le cut my Throate.

My Father Goodwin quoth W— calls me a ſilly Lad,

And wonders theyl'e ask Peace of me who have been lately mad;

You chuſe me Iriſh General, and I chuſe to ſtay here,

For ſhould we fight among the Boggs, there's ne­ver a Sawpit near.

Thoſe Heathen Prentices quoth Brooks, that made my Coach-man ſtay,

Bid me be bare, although I ſpoke but 13. Bulls that day,

But if Peace lop off my learned Skull, then all my Houſe you'le ſee

The Sword of Guy, the Dun-cows rib, the Aſſes tooth, and me.

I made a Speech quoth R — when his Excel­lence firſt began,

For which he ſwore by a Pottle of Sack to make me a Gentleman:

But if the King get to Whitehall then all my hopes are paſt,

My Father was firſt Lord of the Houſe, and I ſhall be the laſt.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=59)

Keep Silence, quoth Mr. Speaker, but do not hold your peace,

Let's ſit, and vote, and hold them too't, for I'le do what you pleaſe;

I have had but poor 6000 l. beſides ſome Spoons and Bowles,

Nay, grant a Peace, and how ſhall I be Maſter of the Rolles?

Then ſpake 5. Members all at once; who for an Army cry'd,

Laſt year, quoth they, you reſcu'd us elſe we had all been try'd:

What though you be almoſt undone, you muſt contribute ſtill,

Or wee'le convey, our Trunks away, and then do what you will.

My Venome ſwells, quoth H— that his Majeſty full well knows,

And I, quoth Hampden, fetcht the Scots, from whence this Miſchief flows.

I am an Aſſe quoth Haſlerigg, but yet I'me deep ith' Plott,

And I, quoth Stroud, can lye as faſt, as Mr. Pym can trott.

But I, quoth Pym, your Hackney am, and all your drudgery do,

Have made good Speeches for my ſelf, and Pri­viledges for you:

I can ſit down and look on men, whilſt others bleed and fight,

I eat their Lordſhips meat by day, and giv't their Wives by night.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=59)

Then Vane grew black ith' face, and ſwore there's none ſo deep as I,

The Staff and Signet ſlipt my hand, my Son can tell you why,

The name of Peace they ſay 'tis ſweet, but oh it makes me ſhrink,

Straffords Ghoſt doth haunt me ſo, I cannot ſleep a wink.

Were Strafford living, Mildmay ſaid, he would do me no ill,

I hid my ſelfith' Privy, when the Houſe did paſs his Bill:

But all my Gold and Silver thread Gregory calls his own,

Though in a Ship I made my will, I was not born to drown.

You found me, quoth Sir R— P— I had been long a Knave;

You promis'd I ſhould be ſo ſtill, if you my Vote might have.

And I, quoth Laurence Whittaker, agreed to doe ſo too,

But if you ſerve old Courtiers thus, they'le do as much for you.

This Peace, quoth Michael Oldſworth, will bring me never a Fee,

Although my Lord have ſworn for Peace, and will not follow me.

Down, down with Biſhops, Wheeler ſaid, for I have rob'd the Church▪

Oh baſe, will you conclude a Peace, and leave me in the lurch.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=60)

Who ſpeaks of Peace quoth Ludlow, hath neither Sence nor Reaſon,

For I ne're ſpoke ith' Houſe but once, and then I ſpoke High Treaſon,

Your meaning was as bad as mine, you muſt de­fend my Speech,

Or elſe you make my mouth as foul as was my Fathers breech.

I'le plunder Him, quoth Baynton, that mentions Peace to Me,

The Biſhop would not grant my Leaſe, but now I'le have his Fee.

A Gunpowder Monopoly quoth Evelyn rais'd my Father,

But if you let this War go down, they'le call me Powder Traytor.

Oh Jove, quoth Sir John Hotham, is this a time to treat?

When Newcaſtle and Cumberland me to the Walls have beat?

You baſe-obedient Citizens d' ye think to ſave your Lives?

My Sonne and I will ſerve you all as I have ſerv'd Five Wives.

Indeed, quoth Sir Hugh Cholmley, Sir John you ſpeak moſt true,

For I have ſold, and morgaged, moſt of my Land to you;

My Brother would have ſerv'd the King, but was forbid to ſtay;

The King fore ſaw at Keynton-field, Sir Harry would run away.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=60)

I went down, quoth Sir Ralph Stapleton, with Muſ­quet, Pike and Drum,

To fetch Sir Francis Wortley up, but truly hee'd not come.

Oh Lord, Sir Robert Harlow ſaid, how do our Foes increaſe?

I wonder who the Devil it was that firſt invented Peace.

Treaſon, Treaſon, Treaſon, Sir Walter Earle cryes out,

Worſe than blowing up the Thames, the Dagger, or the Clout.

Hang me, quoth Miles Corbet then, for we are all confounded,

And Cavaliers will Cuckold me, as well as did the Roundhead.

Quoth Sir John Wray, Mr. Speaker? I'le end this matter ſtreit,

For this which is my Ninth Speech, I'me ſure is none of my Eight;

I try'd it at my Tables end, my Neighbours know 'tis right,

But Peace will make me ſpeak leſſe wit, and then farewell your Knight.

A-vengeance, quoth Harry Martin then, I'le ha no Accommodation,

For it was I, that bravely tore his Majeſties Pro­clamation;

Ith' Houſe I ſpoke High Treaſon, I have ſold both Land and Leaſe;

I ſhall not then keep but 3. Whores, Apox upon your Peace.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=61)

You ſee beloved Londoners, your Peace is out of ſea­ſon,

For which you have the ſence of the Houſe, and every Members reaſon:

Oh doe not ſtand for Peace then, for truſt me if you doe,

Each County in the Kingdome will riſe and doe ſoe too.

### 1.52. Eſſex Petition to the Beſt of Princes.

Sir,

THat All-Majesty (from whom you take

Your Heaven-Anointed Scepter) for whoſe ſake

You drink the Dregs of Bitterneſſe, which turns

Your Crown of Glory, to a Crown of Thornes;

View'd ſinfull Sodom, Sodom that offended

Even him, as we do you, that vilely blended

His gracious Promiſes, did wreſt his Powers,

And violate his Laws, as we do yours;

Yet urg'd by him whoſe Zeal brookt no denyal,

Would have ſav'd all, if ten were found but loyal.

Great Prince, to whom the Breath of Heaven hath read

The Principles of Mercy, in whoſe ſtead

You ſit as God to puniſh, or to ſpare,

Whoſe equal Hand can ruine, or repair

Our ſtaggering Fortunes▪ Pity, and behold

Rebellious Eſſex! People now grown old

In Diſ-obedience, who deſerv'dly ſtand

Like Calves, expecting Death from your Juſt hand.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=61)'Twas we
that bleated firſt Rebellion out,

Who being Pulpit-led, not apt to doubt

Our Lecturing Zealots, and but green in reaſon,

Were made too wiſe, and frighted into Treaſon:

We are a Cock-brain'd Multitude, a Rabble

Of all Religions, and we daily ſquabble

About vain ſhades, and let the ſubſtance paſſe,

Hating good Manners as we hate the Maſſe;

Our new diſcretions every day convince,

Our old Rebellions, 'gainſt ſo mild a Prince

Were ſcarcely fixt, but a freſh Ordinance comes,

And damns our Conſcience into deeper Sums;

Breaks ope our Houſes, Rifles all our Stuff,

Nay more, as if we had not yet enough,

Plunders our very wits; nay if we do

Shew but a ſorry ſhrug, Malignants too;

That in ſo much our people now obeys

As many Tyrants as the Year hath dayes:

But we have ten, ten, ten times multiply'd,

And thouſands more to that, which have deny'd

To bend their knees to Baal, whereof ſome lye

Cloyſtered in Grates, where they unpittied, cry

For Superannuated Cruſts, and there remain,

Even taking Gods and Charles his Name in vain:

Some ſcorning to be aw'd by Subjects, fled

From their dear Wives and Children; led

Like Theeves to Gaols, ſaluted with the Curſe

Of every Dunghill ſcurfe, with durt and worſe,

Where they are ſadly, but yet dearly fed,

Some ag'd, ſome weak, ſome dying, and ſome dead:

For their dear ſake (great Charles) they undertake

Deaths willing Martyrdome, for Charles his ſake;

Be gracious to their County, let her know

That ſhe, a miſerable Land, doth owe

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=62)Her ſweet
Redemption to their Congruous merit,

And leaſt they'le abjure what now they ſcarce in­herit,

Let that accuſtom'd Sun-ſhine of your Eye

Enrich her ſoyle, that ſhe may ſtill out-vye

Her Neighbouring Shires, & let that brand which now

She wears, be ſet on th' Epidemick brow;

And let the Loyal Gentry ſtill be known

By this firm Mark from the perfidious Clown;

Let them, like treacherous ſlaves, be alwaies bound

To pay Rack-rents, and only Till the ground;

Let neither them nor their baſe off-ſpring dare

To be ſo rich as buy a Purchaſe there.

Dread Soveraign,

Forgive, Forget, Remember, and Relent,

Reſemble him you ſo much repreſent,

And when pleas'd Heavens ſhall ſet thy Scepter free,

Triumph in him, and wee'll triumph in thee.

### 1.53. The Cryer.

O Yes, if any Man or Woman,

Of what degree ſoever,

Lord, Knight, Eſquire, Gentleman, or Yeoman,

Felt-maker, Button-Maker, or Weaver,

Coach-man, Cobler, or Brick-layer,

Sheriff, Alderman, or Mayor,

In City, Town, or Country, hath

Loſt his Religion, or his Faith,

Let him forth with repair to th' Cryer

Of Westminſter, where let him bring

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=62)The Mark
of what he doth require,

And he ſhall hear on't, if God bleſſe the King.

O Yes, if any Man or Woman,

Of what degree ſoever,

From the Marquis, to the Yeoman,

From the Straw-hat to the Beaver,

From the Land-lord, to the Dray-man,

Whether the Clergy, or the Layman,

Hath l [...]ſt a War-Horſe-Armes, or Dragoones,

That were the Treaſure of Buffoones;

Jewells▪ Money, Pearle, or Plate,

Cups for Service, or for State;

Come to the Cryer, and you then

Shall find them he knows where, but God knows when.

### 1.54. The Cavaliers Prayer.

GOd bleſſe the King and Queen, the Prince alſo,

And all his Loyal Subjects both high and low,

For Roundheads can pray for themſelves we know;

Which no body can deny.

The Devil take Pym and all his Peers,

God bleſſe Prince Rupert and his Cavaliers,

For if they come hither Pym will ſtink with fears;

Which no body can deny.

God bleſſe Rupert and Maurice withall,

That gave the Roundheads a great downfall,

And knockt their Noddles 'gainſt Worceſter wall;

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=63)

Lawn ſleeves and Surplices muſt go down,

For why, King Pym doth ſway the Crown;

But all are Biſhops that wears a Black Gown;

Which no body can deny.

Let the Canons roar, and the Bullets flye,

King Pym doth ſwear he'll not come nigh,

He ſayes, its a pittyfull thing to dye;

Which no body can deny.

The Horners they are brave Blades,

I do not know, but it is ſaid

The ſtout Earl of Eſſex is free of that trade;

Which no body can deny.

The Baker over Burton cannot domineer,

For it is moſt firmly reported here,

He's as free of the Pillory as ever they were;

Which no body can deny.

There is Iſaack Pennington both wiſe and old,

I do not know, but 'tis for truth told

That he is turned poor Sexton of Pauls.

Which no body can deny.

There is a Lord W— both wiſe and round,

He will meet Prince Rupert upon any ground,

And if that his hands behind him be bound;

Which few people will deny.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=63)

### 1.55. To whom it concerns.

COme, come, ye Cock-brain'd Crew, that can ſuppoſe

No truth, but that which travells through the Noſe;

That looks on Gods Anointed with thoſe Eyes,

You view your Prentices; ye that can prize

A Stable with a Church; that can Impeach

A Grave Devine, and hear an Hoſtler preach:

Are ye all mad? has your Fanatick zeal

Stifl'd your ſtock of Sences at a Meal?

Have ye none left to look upon theſe Times?

With Grief, which you and the unpuniſht Crimes

Have brought upon this miſerable Land?

Are ye all Bruits? not apt to underſtand

The neighbouring ſtroke of Ruine, till't be paſt?

And you become the Sacrifice at laſt?

What would you have? can Reformation border

On Sacriledge? or Truth upon Diſorder?

Can Rifleing, and Religion dwell together?

Can the way hence be ſaid the next way thither?

Go, ply your Trades, Mechanicks, and begin

To deal uprightly, and Reform within;

Correct your prick-ear'd Servants; and perſwade

Your long lov'd Arm-fulls; if you can thus trade

In Pigges and Poultry: let them ceaſe to ſmooth

Your Rumpled Follies, and forbear to ſooth

Your pious Treaſons, thus to kick and fling,

Againſt the Lords Anointed, and your King.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=64)

### 1.56. By the Author.

That neither loves for Faſhion nor for Fear,

As far from Roundhead, as from Cavalier.

### 1.57. To the City.

DRaw near you factious Citizens; prepare

To hear from me what hideous Fools you are;

What lumps of ſordid Earth; in which we find

Not any leaſt Reſemblance of a Mind;

Unleſſe to Baſeneſs and Rebellion bent

Againſt the King, to ayde the Paliament;

That Parliament, whoſe Inſolence will undoe

Your Cities Wealth, your Lives, and Safety too:

Are you ſo ſtupid, dull, you cannot ſee

How your beſt Vertues now are Treachery?

Apparent Treaſon, Murder, and the like:

How with unhallowed hands your ſtrive to ſtrike

Him, whom you ſhould your Loyalty afford,

(Great Charles) the bleſt Anointed of the Lord?

How you do daily contribute, and pay

Mony, your Truths and Honours to betray?

Bigg with Phanatique thoughts, and wilde de­ſire:

'Tis you, that blew up the increaſing Fire

Of foul Rebellion, you that only bring

Armies into the Field againſt your King;

For were't not for ſupportment from your Baggs,

That Great and Higheſt Court that only braggs

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=64)Of your
vain folly, long ere this had bin

Puniſh'd for their bold Sacrilegious ſin,

Of Actual Treaſon, there had never come

Upon this Kingdom ſuch a Martyrdom.

Armes hang'd up as uſeleſſe, and the State

Retain'd his freedom; had you kept your Plate,

No Keinton-Battails had with Mothers curſe,

Made Childleſs there the Treaſon of your Purſe;

The Publick Purſe o'th City; which muſt be

Eſteem'd the Cauſe of Publick Miſery;

No Drums had frighted ſilken Peace from out

The Neighbouring Countries, nor need you about

Your City with your guilded Muſquets goe

Trayning, not for good Service, but for Shew;

That the whole Town may ſee your Feathers ſpread

Over your Hatts, as th' Hornes doe o're your Head;

The Humble Parliament had never dar'd

To have preſcrib'd Laws to their King, but ſpar'd

Their Zeal in bringing Innovations, and

Diſtractions o're the beautious face oth Land,

They would not then have ſo Supreamly brought

Their Votes, to bring the Kingdomes Peace to nought;

Nor with ſo ſleight a value lookt on Him,

King Charles, and only doted on King Pym;

Nor for Authentick doctrine, have allow'd

As Law, the Precepts of Ingenuous Stroud;

Hampden nor Martyn had not then lookt bigge

Upon their King, nor Arthur Haſlerigge;

Nor yet K — on whom we now confer

The ſtyle of Trayterous Earle of M—

Secur'd by you, the Patrons of the Cauſe,

Condemn'd his Loyalty, and the Kingdoms Laws;

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=65)Nor miſ-
led Eſſex ▪ had not you been, nere

had acted on this Kingdoms Theater

So many Tragedie [...]; nor Warwick ſought

T'ingroſſe the Naval Honours, no nor thought

On any Action ſo unjuſt, unmeet,

As keeping from his Majeſty his Fleet;

Tis you have done all this, y'ave been the Head.

The very Spring from whence this River ſpread

The ſtreams of foul Rebellion; which we know

At laſt will drown'd you with its over-flow;

You the Arch-Traytors are, you, thoſe that ſlew

The Kingdoms happineſſe, and th' Allegiance due

Unto his Sacred Majeſty; you, you that have

Betray'd this Nations Honour to the Grave

of laſting Obloquy; you that have deſtroy'd

The ſmiling wealth of th' City, and made void

The good Opinion, which the King before

Had of your Loyalties, and th' Faith you bore

To th' Royal Stem; which ſtill has to your great

Advantage made this City their Chief Seat.

Fond and ſeditious Fools, d'ye think, yee

Are wiſer than Times numerous Progeny?

That have Ador'd your City, when did They

Your harmleſſe Anceſtors, ſtrive to give away

Their Wealth, and Duty from their Sovereigne Lord,

To make themſelves Traytors upon Record?

When did they their Plate and Coine bring in?

To be the Cauſe of their own Ruyning?

They never us'd to fright their King, nor draw

Tumults together, to affront the Law.

No, nor good Houſes, their Corſlets ſlept, and all

The Armes they us'd hung up in each mans Hall.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=65)They did
not then enamel'd Muſquets carry

To Train in Moor-fields, and in Finsbury:

But did in Comely Archery excell,

Like honeſt grave Children of Adam Bell,

And Climme oth' Clough, now each of you will be

More than a furious Wi [...]liam Cloudeſlee;

And trace the Streets with terror, as if Ven,

With Fulk and Mannwaring, were the only Men

Whom you did owe Allegiance to; as if They

Could give you priviledge to diſobey

The Royal Mandate, which does them proclaim

Guilty of Treaſon, and you of the ſame;

As deeply ſtand Impeacht, and will at laſt

Pay dearly for't, when your vain hopes are paſt.

All ſuccours, which you credit for your Merit,

Will be afforded you, by the help oth' Spirit,

That is the Devil; ſure the Heavenly Powers,

Will never Patronize ſuch Acts as yours.

Poor baffl'd City! baffled by a Crue

Of Men, which are as arrant Fools as you;

Surely your Brains can never be ſo dull

As not conceive this, which each empty Skull

Muſt needs reſent; how that their only Ayme

Is, to create your City all one Flame,

And as the Smoak and Sparks do up aſpire,

They'le ſit and laugh (like Nero) at the Fire

Themſelves have made; unleſſe your Heads be all

Horns and no Fleſh, you needs muſt ſee the Fall

That threatens you, like Lightning: To eſchew

Which Ruine, 'twould be Wiſedome to renue

Your loſt Allegiance, and Repentance bring,

As a freſh Victim, to appeaſe your King;

For be aſſur'd, Who to the King's untrue,

Muſt in their Nature needs be falſe to you.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=66)

### 1.58. The MONSTER.

PEace, Vipers peace, let Crying blood nere ceaſe

To haunt your bloody Souls, that love not Peace.

And curſt be that Religion, that ſhall cry,

A Reformation with Phlebotomye;

Your Impious Firebrands, whom the very Tears

Of Growning England, buried in their Fears,

Cannot extinguiſh; whom the bleeding Veins

Of deſperate Ireland, which even now remains

A very Golgotha, cannot aſſwage

Thoſe Stripes, the earneſt of Another Age

Taſte of your ſalvage Piety, and ly

The Lamb-leſs Martyrs of your Cruelty;

Whilſt you lye ſoftly emb'red, to encreaſe

The flames of Chriſtendome, and cry no Peace,

Let Sampſons coupled Meſſengers convey

Thoſe Firebrands hence, and let them make their way

To their own Houſes, conſume and devaſte,

Burn down their Barnes, and lay their Graynards waſte,

Demoliſh all within doors, and without,

Make havock there, deſtroy both Branch and Root.

Let all their Servants flee amaz'd; and cry,

Fire, Fire, and let no helping hand be nigh;

Let their Wiv [...]s live, but only live t' appear

Thornes in their Sides, and Thunder in their Ears;

May all their Sons run mad into the Street,

And ſeeking Refuge there, there may they meet

Th' encountering Sword, and whom it ſpares to kill,

May they be Slaves, and labour at the Mill:

Let all their Daughters beg, and beg in vain;

Let them be raviſht firſt, and then be ſlain;

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=66)Let all
their Kindred wander up and down,

Like Vagabond ▪ be laſht, from Town, to Town:

Let baſeneſſe be Entituled on their Names,

Too firm for all recoveries: O let Shames,

Reproach, and Lasting Infamy, remain

In deeper Characters than that of Cain;

Let Caitiff P— and that Bloody Plot,

Be Sanctified now, or at leaſt forgot;

And let thoſe Vipers vindicate their Crimes

In every Almanack to after times;

Where may there Treaſon live among their ſences,

More firm then Reigns of either Kings or Princes.

Thus may theſe Firebands thrive, and if this Curſe

Succeed not, let it yield unto a worſe.

For them, let them burn ſtill, till Heaven thinks good,

To Quench them in their Generations Blood;

So that the World may hear them hiſſe and cry,

Who lov'd not Peace, in Peace ſhall never dye.

### 1.59. The Earl of Eſſex his Speech to the Parlia­ment after Keinton
Battle.

HAil to my Brother Round-heads, you that ſit

At home, and ſtudy Treaſon, 'bove my Wit

Or Valour to maintain; it's you whoſe hearts

And brains are ſtufft with all Devilliſh darts

Of Rapine, and Rebellion; you whoſe dark

Religious Villanies, hates the leaſt ſpark

Of Juſtice or Obedience to the King;

To you, and none but you, true News I bring,

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=67)With all
my Fellow Rebells that ſurvive,

'Mongſt whom in faith my ſelf ſcapt ſcarce alive:

For when the Cavaliers, and Popiſh Schollers

Charg'd us ſo hot, my Coach full of Rex-dollers

I could have given to have been ten miles off;

And though the Zealots of our Party ſcoff,

And taunt the King's well-wiſhers, take't from me,

Happy were all the Round-heads that did flee;

They ſcapt a ſcowering, which through very fear

Took me and all my Regiment in th' Rear,

At the firſt Charge; for that when we ſhould fight,

We ſneakt away▪ and had more mind to —

For had I dard, to venture my dear life,

I ſhould have rought once for the Whore my Wife;

Yet I dare ſwear that we had won the day,

Had not ſo many fallen and run away:

And yet for all this Blood that hath been ſpilt,

My Sword is guiltleſſe, for faſt by the hilt

I held it in my Scabbard, and ſtill cry'd,

Well done, Fight on, unto the Fools that dy'd;

Whilſt I ſtole towards Warwick, to avoyd

The Field, with the ſad Spectacle quite cloyd:

I loſt my Coach, and (which doth make me fret)

I loſt  [...]lake's Letter in my Cabinet,

That reveal'd all our Treaſon, he good man

Suffer'd at Oxford, and unleſſe I can

Repent, 'tis ſaid, that I muſt dye like him,

Be Hang'd and Quarter'd, and you Mr. Pym:

We muſt be cautious, for the Cavaliers

Have deſperate ſouls, concerning thoſe baſe fears

That brought mee back again; beſides, the King

Has a Juſt Cauſe you know, and though we bring

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=67)The ſilly
Multitude into the Nooſe,

Our own hearts tell us we are like to looſe

Our heads, if Charles prevail; which we muſt do

If he proceeds thus, to kill ten for two,

You muſt provide new Armour, and more Armes,

And a new Generall, that dares hear Alarms

Of Drums and Trumpets; one that may have ſence

And valour to excell my Excellence.

The Peev [...]ſh Women as I paſs'd the Strand,

Bleſſe me knee deep, and would have kiſs'd my hand,

As King, whilſt I moſt curteouſly vayl'd

My Hat, and Feather to them, others rayl'd;

And them as wiſht, or knew I had the worſt,

For one that pray'd for me, dovoutly curſt.

The trueſt News of all I hope to tell ye,

Is that I have more mind to fill my belly,

Then fight again, for that ſame Dutchland Devil,

Rupert, the Prince of miſchief, and all evil,

My Victuals took away, and burſt my Waggons,

Whilſt the Kings Forces fought with fiery Dragoons,

And beat me out o'th' Field; although we blind

The Multitude, and ſay w' had ſea and wind,

Yet I proteſt the Elements themſelves

Conſpir'd to ruine us, Rebellious Elves:

And to conclude, ſome Jeering Cavalier,

Has put upon us, in a Song, this Jeer,

Rather than they ſhould have the better a,

That you and I were drawn and hang'd, &c.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=68)

### 1.60. A Dialogue between two ZEALOTS upon the &c. in the Oath.

SIr Roger from a zealous piece of Freeze,

Rais'd to a Vicar of the Children threes;

Whoſe yearly Audit may, by ſtrict account,

To twenty Nobles, and his vails Amount;

Fed on the common of the female charity,

Untill the Scots can bring about their parity,

So ſhotten, that his Soul like to himſelf,

Walks but in Querpo: this ſame Clergy Elf,

Encountring with a Brother of the Cloth,

Fell preſently to Cudgels with the O th:

The Quarel was, a ſtrange miſ-ſhapen Monſter

&c. (God bleſſe us!) which they conſter

The brand upon the buttock of the Beaſt,

The Dragons tayle ty'd on a knot, a neaſt

Of young Apocraphas, the faſhion

Of a new mental Reſervation.

While Roger thus divides the text, the other

Winks and expounds, ſaying, My pious Brother,

Hearken with reverence; for the point is nice,

I never read on't, but I faſted twice;

And ſo by revelation know it better,

Than all the Idolaters o' the Letter.

With that he ſwell'd, and fell upon the Theam,

Like great Goliah with his Weavers beam:

I ſay to thee, &c. thou ly'ſt,

Thou art the curled lock of Antichriſt:

Rubbiſh of Babel, for who will not ſay,

[...]ongues were confounded in &c?

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=68)Who
ſwears &c. ſwears more Oaths at once

Than Cerberus out of his triple Sconce:

Who views it well, with the ſame eye beholds

The old half Serpent in his numerous folds.

Accurſt &c. thou, for now I ſcent,

What lately the prodigious Oyſters meant.

Oh Booker, Booker, how cam'ſt thou to lack

this Sign in thy prophetick Almanack?

It's the dark Vault wherein th' infernal plot

Of Powder 'gainſt the State was firſt begot.

Peruſe the Oath, and you ſhall ſoon deſcry it,

By all the Father Garnets that ſtand by it;

'Gainſt whom the Church, whereof I am a Mem­ber,

Shall keep another fifth day of November:

Yet here's not all, I cannot halfe untruſſe

&c. it's ſo abominous.

The Trojan Nag was not ſo fully lin'd!

Unrip &c. and you ſhall find

Og the great Commiſſary, and which is worſe,

Th' Apparatour upon his skew-ball'd horſe.

Then (finally my Babe of Grace) forbear,

&c. will be too far to ſwear;

For 'tis (to ſpeak in a familiar ſtyle)

A York-ſhire wea-bit, longer, than a mile.

Then Roger was inſpir'd, and by Gods-diggers,

Hee'l ſwear in words at large, and not in Fi­gures.

Now by this drink, which he takes off as loath

To leave &c. in his liquid Oath.

His Brother pledg'd him, and that bloody wine,

He ſwears ſhall ſeal the Synods Cataline.

So they drunk on, not offering to part

Till they had quite ſworn out th' eleventh quart:

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=69)While all
that ſaw and heard them, joyntly pray,

They and their tribe were all, &c.

### 1.61. The Publique Faith.

STand off my Maſters: 'Tis your pence a peece,

Jaſon, Medea, and the Golden Fleece;

What ſide the line good Sir? Tigris, or Po?

Lybia? Japan? Whisk? or Tradinktido?

St. Kits? St. Omer? or St. Margaret's Bay?

Presto begon? or come aloft? what way?

Doublets? or Knap? the Cog? low Dice? or high?

By all the hard names in the Letany,

Bell, Book and Candle, and the Pope's great toe

I conjure thy account: Devil ſay no.

Nay, ſince I muſt untruſs, Gallants look to't,

Keep your prodigious diſtance forty foot,

This is that Beaſt of eyes in th' Revelations,

The Baſilisk has twiſted up three Nations.

Ponteus Hixius doxius, full of tricks,

The Lottery of the vulgar lunaticks.

The Knapſack of the State, the thing you wiſh,

Magog and Gog ſtew'd in a Chaffendiſh.

A bag of Spoons and Whiſtles, wherein men

May whiſtle when they ſee their Plate agen.

Thus far his Infancy: his riper age

Requires a more myſterious Folio page.

Now that time ſpeaks him perfect, and 'tis pity

To dandle him longer in a cloſe Committee,

The Elf dares peep abroad, the pretty Fool

Can wag without a truckling ſtanding-ſtool;

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=69)Revenge
his Mother's infamy, and ſwear

Hee's the fair Off-ſpring of one half-ſcore year;

The Heir of the Houſe and hopes, the cry

And wonder of the Peoples miſery.

'Tis true, while as a Puppy it could play

For Thimbles, any thing to paſſe the day;

But now the Cub can count, arithmetize,

[...]link Maſenello with the Duke of Guiſe;

Sign for an Iriſh purchaſe, and traduce

The Synod from their Doctrine to their Uſe;

Give its Dam ſuck, and a hidden way

Drink up arrears a tergo mantica.

An everlaſting Bale, Hell in Trunk-hoſe,

Uncaſed, the Divel's Don Quixot in proſe.

The Beaſt and the falſe Prophet twin'd together,

The ſquint-eyed emblem of all ſorts of weather.

The refuſe of that Chaos of the earth,

Able to give the World a ſecond birth.

Affrick avaunt! Thy trifling Monſters glance

But Sheeps-eyed to this Penal Ignorance.

That all the Prodigies brought  [...]orth before

Are but Dame Natures bluſh left on the ſcore.

This ſtrings the Baker's dozen, chriſtens all

The croſs-leg'd hours of time ſince Adam's fall.

The Publick Faith? why 'tis a word of kin,

A Nephew that dare [...] Cozen any fin.

A Term of Art, great Bohemoth's younger Brother,

Old Machiavel, and half a thouſand other.

Which when ſubſcrib'd writes Legion, names on truſs,

Abaddon, Belzebub, and Incu [...]us,

All the Vice-Royes of darkneſs, every ſpell

And Fiend wrap'd in a ſhort Tri [...]illable.

But I fore-ſtall the Show. Enter and ſee,

Salute the Door, your Exit ſhall be free.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=70)In brief
'tis call'd Religions eaſe, or loſs;

For no one's ſuffer'd here to bear his croſſe.

### 1.62. A Committee.

CAſt Knaves my Maſters, fortune guide the chance,

No packing I beſeech you, no by-glance

To mingle pairs, but fairly ſhake the bag,

Cheats in their ſpheres like ſubtile ſpirits wag.

Or if you pleaſe the Cards run as they will,

There is no choyce in ſin and doing ill.

Then happy man by's dole, luck makes the ods,

He acts moſt high that beſt out-dares the gods.

Theſe are that Raw-bon'd Herd of Pharaoh's Kine,

Which eat up all your Fatlings, yet look lean.

Theſe are the after-claps of bloudy ſhowres,

Which, like the Scots, come for your guide and yours.

The Gleaners of the Fielde, where, if a man

Eſcape the ſword, that milder frying-pan;

He leaps into the fire, cramping the claws

of ſuch can ſpeak no Engliſh but the Cauſe.

Under that foggy term, that Inquiſition,

Y' are wrackt at all adventures On ſuſpition:

No matter what's the crime, a good eſtate's

Delinquency enough to ground their hate.

Nor ſhall calm innocence ſo ſcape, as not

To be made guilty, or at leaſt ſo thought.

And if the ſpirit once inform, beware,

The fleſh and world but renegadoes are.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=70)Thus once
concluded, out the Teazers run,

And in full cry and ſpeed till Wat's undone.

So that a poor Delinquent fleec'd and torn

Seems like a man that's creeping through a horn,

Finds a ſmooth entrance, wide, and fit, but when

Hee's ſqueez'd and forc'd up through the ſmaller end,

He looks as gaunt and pin'd, as he that ſpent

A tedious twelve years in an eager Lent;

Or bodies at the Reſurrection are

On wing, juſt rarifying into aire.

The Emblem of a man, the pitied Caſe

And ſhape of ſome ſad being once that was.

The Type of fleſh and blood, the Skeleton

And ſuperfices of a thing that's gone.

The winter quarter of a life, the tinder

And body of a corps ſqueez'd to a cinder;

When no more tortures can be thought upon,

Mercy ſhall flow into oblivion.

Mercifull Hell! thy Judges are but three,

Ours multiform, and in plurality!

Thy calmer cenſures flow without recall,

And in one doom ſouls ſee their finall All.

We travel with expectance: Suffrings here

Are but the earneſts of a ſecond fear.

Thy plagues and pains are infinite; 'tis true;

Ours are not only infinite, but new.

So that the dread of what's to come, exceeds

The anguiſh of that part already bleeds.

This only difference ſwells 'twixt us, and you,

Hell has the kinder Devils of the two.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=71)

### 1.63. The Model of the New Religion.

WHoop! Mr. Vicar in your flying frock?

What news at Babel now? how ſtands the Cock!

When wags the floud? no Ephimerides?

Nought but confounding of the languages?

No more of th' Saints arival? or the chance

Of three pipes two pence and an ordinance?

How many Queer-religions? clear your throat,

May a man have a peny-worth? four a groat?

Or do the Junsto leap at truſs-a-fayle?

Three Tenents clap while five hang on the tayle?

No Querpo model? never a knack or wile?

To preach for Spoons and Whiſtles? croſs or pile?

No hints of truth on foot? no ſparks of grace?

No late ſprung light? to dance the wilde-gooſe chaſe?

No Spiritual Dragoones that take their flames

From th' inſpiration of the City Dames?

No crums of comfort to relieve your cry?

No new dealt mince-meat of Divinity?

Come lets's project: by the great late Eclipſe

We juſtly fear a famine of the lips.

for Sprats are roſe an Omer for a ſowſe,

Which gripes the conclave of the lower Houſe.

Let's therefore vote a cloſe humiliation

For opening the ſeal'd eyes of this blind Nation,

That they may ſee confeſſingly, and ſwear

They have not ſeen at all this fourteen year.

And for the ſplints and ſ [...]avins too, tis ſaid

All the joynts have the Riffcage, ſince the head

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=71)Swell'd
ſo prodigious, and exciz'd the parts

From all Allegiance, but in tears and hearts.

But zealous Sir, what ſay to a touch at Prayer?

How Quops the ſpirit? In what garb or ayre?

With Souſe erect, or pendent, winks, or haws?

Sniveling? or the extention of the jaws?

Devotion has its mode: Dear Sir, hold forth,

Learning's a venture of the ſecond worth.

For ſince the peoples riſe and its ſad fall,

We are inſpir'd from much, to none at all.

Brother adieu! I ſee y'are cloſely girt,

A coſtive Dover gives the Saints the ſquirt.

Hence (Reader) all our flying news contracts

Like the States Fleet, from the Seas into Acts:

But where's the Model all this while, you'll ſay

'Tis like the Reformation, run away.

### 1.64. To a Fair Lady weeping for her Husband Committed to Priſon by the
Parliament. 1643.

TUſh, let them keep him if they can,

He's not in hold while you are free,

Come, ſigh no more, but pledge the man,

What though in Fetters, yet can he

Be Priſoner unto none but thee;

Then dry your Eyes, for every tear

Makes them like drowned worlds appear.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=72)

Poſt through the Aire, my fancy went,

With wings diſguis'd, and there ſtood by

When he was brought to th' Parliament,

And ſtreight to th' Bar, to th' Bar, they cry,

The ſmiling Captain asked, Why?

With that they ſoon drew up his Charge,

Which Lady you ſhall hear at large.

Imprimis, he was married late

With a Gold Ring, unto a Dame,

Would make the beſt of us a Mate;

Witty, Pretty, Young, and Quaint,

And fairer then our ſelves can Paint:

Her lips do ſet mens teeth on edge,

Sure 'tis a Breach of Priviledge.

And her Malignant beauty, can

Provoke our Members up to riſe,

Nay make our General prove a man;

And the Star-Chamber of her Eyes,

Robs Subjects of their Liberties:

And then her voice keeps Eares in awe,

Even like the High-Commiſſion Law.

Nay more, the fair Delinquent hath

A pair of Organs in her throat,

Which when ſhe doth inſpire with breath,

She can command in every noat,

More then both our Houſes Vote

Her very Hair, put in Array,

Can fetter our Militia.

Her Cheeks ſtill Natures Pattent have,

Not yet call'd in, for only  [...]

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=72)In them
ingroſſed all that's brave,

And other Ladies Huckſters be,

Her Beauty's the Monopolie;

When theirs is ſpent, to her they come,

And chaffer with her face for ſome.

She keeps an Alter on her brow,

Her Eyes two Tapers on each ſide,

There Superſtitious Lovers bow;

Her Name is Mary too beſide,

Who owns a Faith that's ſanctifi'd;

Let's clap up him till further leiſure,

And ſend for her to wait our pleaſure.

Then go fair Lady, follow him,

Fear no Trumpet, fear no Drum,

Fair Women may prevail with Pym,

And one ſweet ſmile when there you come,

Will quickly ſtrike the Speaker dumb:

If not, then let one tear be ſpent,

And 'twill diſſolve the Parliament.

### 1.65. Mr. Fullers Complaint.

ENgland once Europes joy,

Now her ſcorn;

Ambitious to be forlorn,

Self, by ſelf torn;

Stand amaz'd?

Thy woes are blaz'd,

By ſilence beſt,

And wanting words, even wonder out the reſt.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=73)

Help Gracious King,

The ſource and ſpring

Of all our bliſs,

Alas the fault's not his;

Good Prince how is he griev'd,

That he's miſtook?

Or what's a Curſe,

Far worſe, he is not believ'd.

Help long-wiſht for Parliament,

If ſo good by your intent;

And will,

And skill,

Why ill is your ſucceſſe?

Alas Malignant humors lurk,

And cauſe the Phyſick not to work,

To give our woes redreſſe.

Help in the Law, ye Learned Sages,

Studied well in former ages:

But our Rents

Are above all Preſidents;

In fight, what's might,

That's right:

For Statutes are by Lawyers awed,

And Common-law by Canon-law out-lawed.

Help ye Divines our ſouls to plaiſter,

Settle the Legacy which your Maſter

Bequeath'd to his own at his deceaſe,

Even Peace:

Alas alas in Gilead,

Where is no balm for to be had;

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=73)O Cruell,

They that ſhould holy water bring, bring fiery fuell.

No help, no help,

Why then 'tis vain

For to complain;

And why men ſin with all their heart,

Sorrow only but in part;

And ſtill they cry

That all is ill,

And love to make't and keep't ſo ſtill.

Since then our wounds

Are grown ſo wide,

And all means try'd,

And all deny'd;

Good God help us at laſt,

Before all help be paſt,

For this is ſure,

Men made the wounds, but God alone can help the cure.

### 1.66. Upon wearing the Kings Colours.

ALas, what take ye pepper in the Noſe

To ſee King Charles his Colours worne in Poſe?

'Twas but an Ornament to grace the Hat,

And muſt we have an Ordinance for that?

O ſerious worthies! how can you diſpence

With ſo much time to draw a Grievance thence?

But you do very well to make it known,

When others Liberties ſurmounts your own;

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=74)You can
and will ſuppreſſe it, well, you may

Do even what you pleaſe, we muſt obey;

I hope you'll take in hand the Taylors Trade,

And teach us how our Apparell muſt be made,

That women in a Vote ſhall plainly ſee

How wide their Smocks and Petticoats ſhall be:

If this continue, faith turn Barbars too,

And cut our hair of the ſame length you do;

And let it be no leſs a Crime then Treaſon,

To wear, do, or ſpeak any thing that's reaſon:

As for the King, you'll ſay he's King, 'tis true,

But he can rule himſelf, and order you:

What, can he ſo? he's mightily too blame,

And faln into diſpleaſure for the ſame;

He will not grant that you're his Friends, 'tis true,

Should you rule two Kingdoms as a third does you,

Leſt from a Ribbin then, ſhould ſpring a Faction,

'Twas wiſely done to ſtop its growth i'th' Action;

Yet in deſpight of you, that this controule,

I'le wear my Soveraigns Colours in my Soul.

### 1.67. A Western Wonder.

DO you not know, not a fortnight agoe,

How they brag'd of a Weſtern wonder?

When a hundred and ten, ſlew five thouſand men,

With the help of Lightning and Thunder.

There Hopton was ſlain, again and again,

Or elſe my Author did lye;

With a new Thanksgiving, for who are living,

To God, and his Servant Ch [...]dleigh.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=74)

But now on which ſide, was this Miracle try'd,

I hope we at laſt are even;

For Sir Ralph and his Knaves, are riſen from their Graves,

And Cudgel'd the Clowns of Devon.

And now St— came, for his Honour was lame

Of the Gout three months together;

But it prov'd when they fought, but a running Gout,

For his heels were lighter then ever.

For now he out-runs, his Armes and his Guns,

And leaves all his money behind him;

But they follow after, unleſſe he take water

At Plymouth again, they will find him.

What Reading hath coſt and St— hath loſt,

Goes deep in the Sequeſtration;

Theſe wounds will not heal, with your new Great Seal,

Nor Jepſons Declarations.

Now Peters, and Caſe, in their Prayer and Grace,

Remember their new Thanksgiving;

Iſaack and his Wife, now dig for their life,

And ſhortly muſt do't for their living.

### 1.68. A SONG.

THe world is now turn'd upſide-down,

'Tis thought K. Charles will keep his Crown,

The Roundheads now ſhall all be put down,

And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=75)

Prince Rupert made fair work t'other day,

He kild all the Troopers that durſt to ſtay,

The reſt he kild, their Horſes running away:

And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.

And Eſſex his hornes hung ſo in his light,

Alas poor Cuckold, he could not ſee to fight,

And both Houſes they were all ready to —

And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.

Then ſend for W— and give him good pay,

He'le hoiſe up his Sayles and carry you away,

In hopes you'le ſtand his Friend another day:

And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.

### 1.69. Upon Alderman Atkins bewraying his Slops on the great Training day.

I Sing the ſtrange adventures and ſad Fate,

That did befall a Collonel of late,

A portly Squire; a Warlike hardy wight,

And pity 'tis, we cannot call him Knight,

A ſtout man at Cuſtard, and Son of Mars,

But oh the ſoul diſaſter of his.—

Before the Worthies, and the reſt beſide.

Who ſaw how he his Courſer did beſtride,

Weilding his Truncheon, like a Weavers beam,

And yet — his hoſe in every ſeam;

I cannot tell how fair he was i'th' Cradle,

But ſure I am he was foul enough i'th' Saddle:

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=75)For feats
of Armes none could come near him then,

He ſmelt ſo ſtrong, and when eight thouſand men

Diſcharg'd their Muſquets, he diſcharged too,

But what? his Office and his Guts? what though

He made a Houſe of Office of his Hoſe?

Stand further off, if it offend your Noſe:

Belike he meant to hanſell his New Satten,

Or, like fat Oxen, in his dung to batten;

But when in triumph he from Finsbury

Came home to Leaden-hall, he call'd to ſee

His Hellena, his Sultaneſſe, when ſhe

At's firſt approach ſmelt out his Knavery;

And leſt by the hot skirmiſh of the day,

Her Paris might miſcarry in the way,

Or mett with ſome wounds, ſends for in all haſte

Shambrook the skilfull Chirurgion, who begins at th' waſte

T'untruſs, and as he fumbling downwards tends,

He had the buſineſſe at his fingers ends;

Foh, quoth the Chirurgion, call the Kitchin Quean

With clout in hand to make his Worſhip clean;

Then about the Maſter all the Servants ſhuffl'd,

He, like old Lockwood in the Counter, ſcuffl'd,

Shew'd two broad mighty Hanches all bew ray'd,

Nay then, quoth Shambrook, how ſhall I be paid;

The Devil a wound I ſee, is this the prime

Of ſix City Colonels in good time?

They ſay that ſhitten luck is good, and I

Will put it to the Vote of Chivalry,

Whether all be not likely well to jump

In th' New Militia, when a — is trump.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=76)

### 1.70. The Downfall of Cheapſide-Croſſe, May 2, 3, 4. 1643.

WHat haſt thou done poor Croſſe, that this hard doome

Is laid upon thee? what is now become

Of all thy gilded Images? for behold,

That now is Stone and Brick, which once ſeem'd Gold,

The City-Rulers, in their Graver wit,

And late got Power, have now thought it fit,

That thou ſhouldſt be demoliſht, and pluckt down

By th' warrant of Lord Iſaack Pennington;

London's chief (ut vis) who thinks ſtore of good

He doth, in priſoning, hanging, ſhedding blood,

In robbing, plundering each that's good to's King,

Becauſe no Plate , nor Mony, they will bring

Into Guildhall: nay then it is no wonder,

If by his Order thou art pluckt aſunder,

When firſt the top of thee with many a knock

They did beat down, (Lord) how the ſilly flock

Of Round-heads ſhouted, looking up to th' Skies,

Giving God thanks for the great Victories

They had got 'gainſt thee, whilſt the Drums did beat,

And Trumpets ſounding; truly it was meet:

They threw their Hatts up, and their Muskets ſhot,

They ſhook their Heads, and clapt their Hands, what not?

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=76)And thus
when any Picture, Legge, or Arme

Was thrown to th' Ground, the Roundheads all did ſwarme,

And ſundry heaps tumbling one on another,

Striving who firſt ſhould ſee it, then a Brother

A long Prayer made for thanks, that now they might,

Doe what they liſt, be it nor Juſt, nor Right;

For now they keep the whole City in awe,

With wrong-expounded, and miſconſtrued Law,

Doing what they think fit, what's good i'th eyes

Of them, being led even as their Spirits riſe.

But for their Miſdemeanours let this Curſe

Light upon them, or a ten-times far worſe:

May they no Silver have, nor yet no Gold,

Becauſe there's Croſſes in't: and, to be bold,

May they lead Lives ſo croſt with grief and care,

That, at the laſt, may bring them to deſpair,

May they no good thing quietly enjoy,

May they even periſh as they walk, and dye,

And may they ſtill croſt be, and croſt again,

May Croſſes mixt with Loſſes be their pain,

Nay, becauſe Croſſes they deſire none,

May they have ever Croſſes two for one,

May all their Noſes rot, that we may know

Them, may their Eares as long as Aſſes grow,

May their Hair nere be long, and may their hands

Even pine away, may they ſtink as they ſtand:

And to conclude, may they all lead croſſe Lives,

Nay, which is worſe, be troubled with croſſe Wives.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=77)

### 1.71. A Vindication of Cheapſide-Croſſe againſt the Roundheads.

MUſt I then down? is an eternal doome

Paſt out againſt me? muſt I needs to Rome?

And why? it is contrary to the Laws,

To judge th' offendor e're they hear the Cauſe.

Why come you arm'd againſt me? what may be

The cauſe of difference 'twixt you and me?

Have I tranſgreſt the Law? or did I ever

Our gracious Soveraign from his People ſever?

Did I to a factious Covenant ſubſcribe,

Or turn a Jack-on-both-ſides for a bribe?

Rebells have long our wiſht for bliſſe defer'd,

All roſe in armes, but yet I never ſtir'd.

When ſuch a Prick-ear troop upou me gaz'd,

Crying (no Croſſe) good faith I ſtood amaz'd:

I was ſtruck dumb with wonder, and which worſe,

Becauſe I'de gold about me, fear'd my Purſe.

This zealous rabble came not to adore me,

Yet (thanks to th' Butchers) ſome fell down before me,

Others ran quite away, the reſt diſputed,

Miſ-uſing Scripture phraſes, but confuted.

Wiſedome they call'd Apocriphal, threw di [...]t on

All Fathers faces, but Saint P— and Burton.

Was God ith' middle of this Congregation?

Or were they led by inſtinct, or revelation?

Kings do [...]t their Crowns, and Cardinals their Copes,

All muſt be bare unto a crew of Crops.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=77)But do's
Religion ſuch a hatred bring,

To hate the very picture of a King?

Brethren what would you have? or what d'ye fear?

I draw no ſword, nor do I wear long hair.

I'le do no wrong (though arm'd with Pikes about)

Would you know why? 'twas to keep Round­heads out,

Who have not ſworn, but tane a Proteſtation

To leave no golden Croſſe to bleſſe our Nation.

They will divide my Coat, my Fleſh, my Bones,

Theyl'e ſhare the Gold, and give their Wives the Stones.

They ſay they'le pluck the Tower of Babel down,

All things go right when there's no Croſſe it'h Town.

But who can live without them? Croſſes are

The good mans bleſſings, and his certain ſhare.

He that would win an everlaſting Crown,

Muſt elevate his Croſſe, not throw it down.

They'le have no Common Prayer, but do abhor

All that is common, but a common W—

Will you  [...]ear reaſon? that's not common to ye,

Will Prayers prevail? He pray ex tempore.

You think 'tis juſtice that your factious crew

Are croſſe to me 'cauſe I am Croſſe to you:

You will have fleſh for fleſh, It's very dear

That Peters noſe ſhould pay for Malchas ear.

If he ſhould ſnuffle now, that were a jeſt,

That very thing would make him full bleſt:

You'l run to hear him, and cry's doctrine ſtrong,

Though non-ſenſe, in regard he ſtands ſo long.

Put out his eyes next time, and you may may find

A ſecond like the firſt, and doctrine blind.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=78)Some call
me Popiſh, and report they ſee

Divers adore me, what's all that to me?

Becauſe they worſhip me ſhall I fall down

Unto ſuch Calves, Mechanicks of the Town.

'Tis Popery, let them kneel that liſt, Ile ſtand?

Before Ile bow, Ile fly to ſome new Land.

Be ſorry Brethren, I am pleas'd to think

'Twas from too little wit, or too much drink.

Ile be a Roundhead ſpiritually ſent

To pardon your affronts, if youl repent.

I am a foe to Rome, for you ſhall find

When I am gone, there's the more room behind.

### 1.72. A Song in defence of Chriſtmaſs.

NOw Chriſtmaſs is come, let us beat up the Drum,

And call our good Neighbours together,

And when they appear, let us make them good chear,

That will keep out the wind and the weather,

To feaſt at this ſeaſon, I think 'tis no treaſon,

I could give you a reaſon why,

Though ſome are ſo pure, that they cannot endure to ſee a Nativity Pye.

I cannot but wonder, that the Souldiers ſhould plunder,

For keeping our Saviours birth,

For all Chriſtians then, or I cannot tell when,

Should ſhew forth their joy and their mirth.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=78)But our
Saints now adayes, deſpiſe good old wayes,

'Gainſt which they both preach and pray,

But to give them their dues, they're no better than Jewes,

That ſpeak againſt Chriſtmaſs day.

Theſe like the good chear, all times oth' year,

'Tis the birth day that doth them annoy,

Plumb-porrage and brawn, and the Doe and the Fawne,

With the Creature, they love to enjoy,

They often have meetings, and then there's ſuch greetings,

Such traceing of Siſters about,

They preach and they pray, but I muſt not now ſay

What they do when their Candles are out.

Yet I cannot forbear, to tell in your ear

What befell at a breaking of bread,

How a Virgin full neat, went thither to eat,

But it coſt her, her Maiden-head;

Theſe men of high merit, though much for the ſpirit,

Are yet for the Fleſh now and than,

For a new Babe of Grace, was got near the Place,

By a Congregational man.

The Dippers and Ranters, and our Scotch Co­venanters,

That bragge of their Faith and their Zeale,

Theſe abound in their fainings, but I'le make no complainings,

Nor will I their Secrets reveale,

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=79)

[...]

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=79)

[...]

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=80)The poor
Cavaliers, that ſtill lives in fears

Of Priſons, and Sequeſtration,

Though they keep Chriſtmaſſe day, are more ho­neſt than they,

But Honeſty's quite out of faſhion.

If you view our great Cities, and our Countrie Committees,

You will not find overmuch there,

Our Divines, though they preach it, themſelves do ſcarce reach it;

And our Lawyers have little to ſpare.

I could tell of ſome more, that have no great ſtore,

Of our Gentry, both Old and New,

But I think it is beſt, with edge tooles not to jeſt,

Nor to ſpeak all we know to be true.

But the poor Cavalier, as to mirthe and good cheere,

But now bid Chriſtmaſs adieu,

If the Taxes hold on, their Money will be gone,

They will want both to bake and to brew,

Their Healths are put down, who adher'd to the Crown,

'Tis they that muſt faſt and pray,

For to any mans thinking, both their eating and drinking,

Is like to be taken away.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=80)

### 1.73. The Biſhop of Oſſery on the Rebells.

LEt proud Babilon ceaſe to boaſt

Of her Pyramid's ſtately ſpires,

This Rebellion is more ſtrange,

Surmounting all Infernal fires.

No Age the like hath ever bread,

Nor ſhall when theſe Rebells be dead.

### 1.74. A Bill on St. Paul's Church Door.

THis Houſe is to be let,

It is both wide, and fair;

If you would know the price of it,

Pray ask of Mr. Maior.

Iſaack Pennington.

### 1.75. A SONG.

WHat though the Zealots, pull down the Prelates,

Puſh at the Pulpit, and kick at the Crown,

Shall we not ever, ſtrive to endeavour

Once more to purchaſe our Royal Renown?

Shall not the Roundhead firſt be confounded?

Sa, ſa, ſa, ſa boyes, ha, ha, ha, ha boyes,

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=81)Then
wee'le return home, with Triumph and Joy,

Then weel'e be merry, drink Sack and Sherry,

And we will ſing Boys, God bleſſe the King Boys,

Caſt up our Caps, and cry, Vive le Roy.

What though the wiſe, make Alderman Iſaack,

Put us into Priſon, and ſteal our Eſtates;

Though we are forced, to be un-horſed,

And walk on foot, as it pleaſeth the Fates,

In the Kings Army, no man will harm ye;

Then come along Boyes, valiant and ſtrong Boys,

Fight for your Goods, which the Roundheads enjoyes;

And when you venter, London to enter,

And when you come Boys, with Phife and Drum Boyes,

Iſaack himſelf ſhall cry, Vive le Roy.

If not then, chuſe him, 'twill not excuſe him,

Since honeſt Parliaments never made them Theeves;

Charles ne're did furder, Theeves dipt in Mur­der,

Never by Pardon, long Leaſe, or Reprieves;

For ſuch Conditions, and Propoſitions

Will not be granted, then be not daunted,

We will our honeſt old Cuſtomes enjoy:

Pauls now rejected, ſhall be reſpected,

And in the Quire, Voyces ſing hire,

Thanks to Jehovah, then Vive le Roy.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=81)

### 1.76. On two Parliaments diſſolved.

TWo Parliaments diſſolv'd! then let my heart;

As they in Faction, it in fraction part,

And, like the Levite ſad with rage, aſcribe

My piece-meal Portion to each broken Tribe,

And ſay, that Bethlehem, Judahs love, hath been

Wrong'd by the Fag-end crue of Benjamin.

O Let ſuch High preſumption be accurſt,

When the laſt Tribe ſhall wrong the beſt, and firſt;

While, like the Levite, our beſt Charles may ſay,

The Ravenous Wolf hath ſeiz'd the Lions prey.

Thus oft Inferiour Subjects are not ſhye,

A love to mock at Sacred Majeſty.

What Faculty ſhould not be injured,

If that the Feet had Power to ſpurn the Head?

And Kings Prerogative may ſoon fall down,

When Subjects make a Footſtool of a Crown:

The Starrs, the Heavens Inferiour Courtiers, might

Command the Darkneſſe, but not rule the Light,

Nor him that made it; ſhould they all combine

With Luna at the fu [...]l, our Sun ſhould ſhine

Brighter than they, nor can he be ſubdu'd,

Though he but one, and they a Multitude.

Say, Subjects ye were Starrs, and 'twere allow'd,

You juſtly of the Number might be proud;

Yet to your Sun be humble, and know this,

Your Light is borrowed, not your own, but His.

When the unfettered Subjects of the Seas,

The Fountains, felt their feet, and eaſe,

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=82)No ſooner
ſummon'd, but they nimbly went

To meet the Ocean at a Parliament.

Did then theſe petty Fountains ſay their King,

The Ocean, was no Ocean, but a Spring?

Let me alone, if freſh exceſs of ſtore

Can make me poorer than I was before.

And ſhall we then the power of Kings diſpute?

And count it leſſe, when more is added to't?

No, let the Common body, i [...] it can,

Be not a River, but an Ocean,

And ſwell into a Deluge, till it hide

The top of Mountains in its teeming pride.

Kings, like Noahs Ark, are nearer to the Skies,

The more the Billows underneath them riſe.

You then, who if your hearts were firſt in love,

Might ſit in Counſell with the Gods Above:

You, that do queſtion your Kings Power Below,

If you come there, will you uſe Heavens King ſo?

Do not aſpire, you muſt take up you reſt

More ſafe Below, than in the Eagles neſt.

Hath Clemency offended? will you harm,

And pluck the Sun from Heaven that makes you warm?

No King nor Biſhops pleaſe? what, have we got

An Outſide Engliſh, and an Inſide Scot?

If Faction thus our Countries Peace diſtracts,

You may have want of Parliaments, not Acts.

Ill-ended Seſſions, and yet well begun,

Too much being ſpoke hath made too little done.

So Faction thrives, Puritaniſm bears ſway,

None muſt do any thing but only Say.

Stoop, ſtoop, you baren-headed Hills, confeſs

You might be fruitfuller, if ye were leſſe.

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=82)Tremble
ye thred-bare Commons: are you vext

That Lambs feed on ye? Lions will come next.

### 1.77. Collonel Vennes Encouragement to his Souldiers. A SONG.

Fight on brave Souldiers for the Cauſe,

Fear not the Cavaliers,

Their threatnings are, as ſenceleſſe as

Our jealouſies and fears.

'Tis you muſt perfect this great Work,

And all Malignants ſlay,

You muſt bring back the King again

The clean contrary way.

'Tis for Religion that you fight,

And for the Kingdoms good,

By robbing Churches, plundering them,

And ſhedding Guiltleſſe blood.

Down with the Orthodoxal train,

All Loyal Subjects ſlay,

When theſe are gone, we ſhall be bleſt

The clean contrary way.

When Charles we have made Banckrupt,

Of Power and Crown bereft him,

And all his Loyal Subjects ſlain,

And none but Rebells left him.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=83)When we
have beggar'd all the Land,

And ſent our Trunks away,

Wee'le make him then a Glorious Prince

The clean contrary way.

'Tis to preſerve his Majeſty,

That we againſt him fight,

Nor ever are we beaten back,

Becauſe our Cauſe is right.

If any make a ſcruple at

Our Declarations, ſay

Who fight for us, fight for the King

The clean contrary way.

At Keinton, Brainsford, Plymouth, York,

And divers Places more,

What Victories we Saints obtain,

The like nere ſeen before.

How often we Prince Rupert kill'd,

And bravely wonne the day,

The wicked Cavaliers did run

The clean contrary way.

The true Religion we maintain,

The Kingdoms Peace and Plenty,

The Priviledge of Parliament,

Not known to One of twenty.

The antient Fundamental Laws,

And teach men to obey

Their lawfull Soveraign; and all theſe

The clean contrary way.

Wee, Subjects Liberties preſerve

By Impriſonment and Plunder,

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=83)And do
enrich our ſelves and State,

By keeping th' Wicked under.

Wee muſt preſerve Mechanicks now

To Lectorize and pray,

By them the Goſpel is advanc't

The clean contrary way.

And though the King be much miſled

By that Malignant Crew,

Hee'le find us honeſt at the laſt,

Give all of us our due.

For we do wiſely plot, and plot

Rebellion to allay,

He ſees wee ſtand for Peace and Truth

The clean contrary way.

The Publique-Faith ſhall ſave our Souls,

And our good Works together,

And Ships ſhall ſave our Lives that ſtay

Only for Winde and Weather.

But when our Faith and Workes fall down,

And all our Hopes decay,

Our Acts will bear us up to Heaven

The clean contrary way.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=84)

### 1.78. A Second Weſtern Wonder.

YOu heard of that wonder, of the Lightening and Thunder,

Which made the lye ſo much the louder;

Now li [...]t to another, that Miracles Brother,

Which was done with a Firkin of Powder.

Oh what a damp, ſtruck through the Camp,

But as for Honeſt Sir Ralph,

It blew him to the Vies, without beard, or eyes,

But at leaſt three heads and a half.

When out came the book, which the New-monger took

From the preaching Ladies Letter,

Where in the firſt place, ſtood the Conquerors face,

VVhich made it ſhew ſo much the better.

But now without lying, you may paint him flying,

At Bristoll they ſay you may finde

Great William the Con, ſo faſt he did run,

That he left half his name behind.

And now came the Poſt, ſaves all that was loſt.

But alas, we are paſt deceiving,

By a trick ſo ſtale, or elſe ſuch a tayl

Might mount for a new Thanks-giving.

This made Mr. Caſe, with a pittifull face,

In the Pulpit to fall a weeping,

Though his mouth utter'd lyes, truth fell from his eyes,

VVhich kept our Lord Maior from ſleeping.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=84)

Now ſhut up ſhops, and ſpend your laſt drops,

For the Laws of your Cauſe, you that loath 'um,

Leſt Eſſex ſhould ſtart, and play the Second part,

Of Worſhipfull Sir John Hotham.

### 1.79. The Battel of Worceſter.

ALl you that be true to the King & the State,

Come liſten, and Ile tell you what happen'd of late,

In a large field near Worceſters gate.

Which no body can deny.

Brave Sir John Byron, true to the Crown,

VVith forces too few, tis very well known,

VVent thither, 'tis ſaid, to keep the Town,

Which no body can deny.

But whether 'twas true, ye have learn'd to gueſs,

As for my own part I think no leſſe,

To give you a taſte of our Future ſucceſſe,

Which mo body can deny.

Thither came Fines with armes Complete,

The Town to take, and Byron defeat,

Proviſions were made, but he ſtaid not to eat,

Which no body can deny.

But as ſoon as he heard our great Guns play,

VVith a Flea in's ear, he ran quite away,

Like the lawfull begotten Son of Lord Say,

Which no body &c.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=85)

Nay had the old Crop-ear'd his Father dar'd

To approach the walls, his deſign had bin marr'd,

For Byron would not have proved a VVard.

Which no body can deny.

Pox on him he keeps his Patent yet,

But I hope next Term he ſhall not fit,

'Twas but quam diu ſe bene Geſſerit,

Which no body, &c.

But now behold, increaſed in force,

Hee comes again with ten Troups of Horſe,

Oh bloudy-Man he had no remorſe,

Which no body, &c.

They marched up boldly, without any fear,

Little thinking Prince Rupert was come ſo near,

But alas poor ſouls it coſt them dear,

Which no body, &c.

The Prince like a Gallant man of his trade,

Marcht out of the Town till this quarter was made,

Sir, the Enemies are near at hand it is ſaid:

Which no body, &c.

Where, where are they? Prince Rupert cryes,

And looking about with fiery eyes,

Some thirty behind a hedge he ſpyes.

Which no body, &c.

This Forlorn-hope he no ſooner ſaw,

But 4. or 5. more did towards them draw;

He asked, who's there? one anſwer'd him, haw,

Which no body, &c.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=85)

The man you'll ſay was rudely bred;

The Prince ſhot a Bullet into his head,

His haw had been better ſpared then ſaid,

Which no body, &c.

Prince Maurice then, to ſecond his Brother,

Diſcharg'd his Piſtol, and down fell another,

'Twere pitty but news were ſent to his Mother,

Which no body, &c.

Lord Digby ſlew one to his great fame,

So did Monſieur de Liſl [...], and Sir Rich. Crane,

And another French man, with a harder name,

Which no body, &c.

Prince Rupert to his own Force retired,

And bad them not ſhoot till their Doublets were fired,

His Courage and Conduct were both admired,

Which no body, &c.

He Charged but twice, yet made them ſhrink,

'Twere hard to get off now one would think,

Yet both can do it as eaſie as drink.

Which no body, &c.

Then have amongſt ye, quoth Sir Lewes Dives,

For a good Cauſe you know alwayes thrives,

His heart in his ſhoulders coſt many mens lives,

Which no body, &c.

John Byron did as bravely fight;

To the Prince of Wales his great delight,

He came home in ſafety and was made a Knight.

Which no body, &c.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=86)

My Friend David Walter in Doublet white,

Without any Armes either ruſty or bright,

Charg'd through them twice like a little ſpright,

Which no body, &c.

But oh Prince Maurice, where was he?

Where one of us would be loath to be,

Surrounded with Butchers three times three,

Which no body, &c.

Theſe men of Eaſt-cheap little ſaid,

But all their blows at his head they made,

As if they had been at work at their Trade,

Which no body, &c.

Then came a French-man fiery and keen,

He broke the Ring and came in between,

Ere a man let a — not a Butcher was ſeen.

Which no body, &c.

Brave Lord Wilmot, by whoſe hands did fall

Many a Rebell ſtout and tall,

Came to him without any Armes at all,

Which no body, &c.

Their Horſes then cloſe up they ſpur'd,

The wounds they gave were all with the Sword,

Their Piſtols proved not worth a —

Which no body, &c.

But the Parliament having quite forgot

To Vote that Sandys ſhould not be ſhot

By the hand of a Mounſier he went to the pot.

Which no body, &c.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=86)

Douglas a Scotch-man of great fame

Was ſlain that day for want of the ſame;

The Houſes in this were much to blame,

Which no body, &c.

Of all their chief Commanders that day,

I hold it fit I ſhould ſomething ſay,

His name was Brown, and he ran away,

Which no body, &c.

If a few more o'em ſhould ſhew ſuch a freak,

Both Houſes ſurely would quickly break,

And honeſter men would have leave to ſpeak,

Which no body, &c.

They fly, they fly, Prince Rupert cry'd,

No ſooner ſaid, but away they hy'd;

The force of his Armes they durſt not abide,

Which no body can deny.

### 1.80. Smectymnuus, or the Club-Divines.

SMectymnuus! the Goblin makes me ſtart!

I'th' Name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?

Syriack? or Arabick? or Welch? what skilt?

Ap all the Brick-layers that Babel built!

Some Conjurer tranſlate, and let me know it,

Till then 'tis fit for a Weſt-Saxon Poet.

But do the Brother-hood then play their Prizes

Like Mummers in Religion with diſguiſes?

Out-brave us with a name in Rank and File,

A name▪ which if 'twere train'd, would ſpread a Mile;

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=87)The
Saints monopolie, the zealous cluſter,

Which, like the Porcupine, preſents a muſter,

And ſhoots his quills at Biſhops and their Sees,

A Devont litter of young Maccabees.

Thus Jack of all trades hath devoutly ſhown

The twelve Apoſtles on a cherry-ſtone,

Thus faſhion's Al-a-Mode in Treaſons faſhion;

Now we have hereſie by Complication.

Like to Don Quixots Roſary of ſlaves

Strung on a chain; a Murnival of Knaves

Packt in a trick, like Gypſies when they ride,

Or like Colleagues, which fit all on a ſide:

So the vain Satyriſts ſtand all a row,

As hollow teeth upon a Lute-ſtring ſhow:

Th' Italian Monſter, pregnant with his Brother,

Natures Diaereſis, half one another,

He, with his little ſides-man Lazarus,

Muſt both give way unto Smectymnuus.

Next Sturbridge Fair is Smecks, for lo his ſide

Into a five-fold Lezar's multipli'd.

Under each arm there's tuckt a double gyſſard,

Five faces lurk under one ſingle vizard:

The Whore of Babylon left theſe brats behind,

Heirs of confuſion by Gavelkind.

I think Pythagoras's foul is rambl'd hither,

With all the change of Rayment on together:

Smec is her general Ward-robe, ſhee'l not dare

To think of him as of a thorough fare;

He ſtops the Goſſiping Dame; alone he is

The purlew of a Metempſichoſis.

Like a Scotch Mark, where the more modeſt ſenſe

Checks the loud phraſe, and ſhrinks to 13. pence▪

Like to an Ignis fatuus, whoſe flame,

Though ſometimes tripartite, joynes in the ſame:

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=87)Like to
nine Taylors, who if rightly ſpell'd,

Into one man are Monoſyllabel'd:

Short-handed zeal in one hath cramped many,

Like to the Decalogue in a ſingle penny.

See, ſee! how cloſe the curs hunt under ſheet,

As if they ſpent in Quire, and ſcann'd their feet;

One Cure, and five Incumbents leap a truſs:

The title ſure muſt be litigious!

The Sadduces would raiſe a queſtion,

Who muſt be Smec at th' Reſurrection.

Who coop'd them up together were to blame,

Had they but wire-drawn, & ſpun out their name,

'Twould make another Prentices Petition

Againſt the Biſhops and their Superſtition.

Robſon and French (that count from five to five,

As far as nature fingers did contrive,

She ſaw they would be ſeſſors, that's the cauſe

She cleft her hoof into ſo many claws,)

May tire their Carret-bunch, yet ne're agree

To rate Smectymnuus for Pole-money.

Caligula, whoſe pride was mankinds bail,

(As who diſdain'd to murther by retail)

Wiſhing the world had but one general neck,

His glutton blade might have found game in Smec.

No eccho can improve the Author more,

Whoſe lungs pay uſe on uſe, to half a ſcore:

No Felon is more letter'd, though the brand

Both ſuperſcribes his ſhoulder and his hand.

Some Welſh-man was his Godfather, for he

Wears in his name his Genealogy.

The Banes are ask'd, would but the time give way,

Beewixt Smectymnuus and Et caetera;

The Gueſts invited by a friendly Summons,

Should be the Convocation and the Commons;

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=88)The
Prieſt to tye the Foxes tayles together,

Moſely, or Sancta Clara, chuſe you whether.

See, what off-ſpring every one expects!

What ſtrange pluralities of men and ſects?

One ſayes hee'l get a Veſtery, another

Is for a Synod: But upon the Mother:

Faith! cry St. George, let them go to't, and ſtickle,

Whether a Conclave or a Conventicle:

Thus might Religions catterwaul, and ſpight,

Which uſes to divorce, might once unite.

But their croſſe Fortunes interdict their trade,

The Groom is Rampant, but the Bride diſplaid.

My task is done, all my Hee-Goats are milkt,

So many Cards i'th' ſtock, and yet be bilkt?

I could by Letters now untwiſt the Rabble,

Whip Smec from Conſtable to Conſtable.

But there I leave you to another dreſſing,

Only kneel down and take your Fathers bleſſing,

May the Queen Mother juſtifie your fears,

And ſtretch her Patent to your leather ears.

### 1.81. A Lenten Letany. Compoſed for a confiding Brother, for the benefit
and edification of the Faithfull Ones.

FRom Villany dreſt in the Doublet of Zeal,

From three Kingdomes bak'd in one Com­mon weal,

From a gleek of Lord Keepers of one poor Seal,

Libera nos, &c.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=88)

From a Chancery-writ, and a whip and a bell,

From a Juſtice of Peace that never could ſpell,

From Collonel P. and the Vicar of Hell.

Libera nos, &c.

From Neat's feet without ſocks, and three-peny Pyes.

From a new ſprung Light that will put out ones eyes,

From Goldſmiths-hall, the Devil, and Exciſe,

Libera nos, &c.

From two hours talk without one word of ſenſe,

From Liberty ſtill in the future tenſe,

From a Parliament long-waſted Conſcience,

Libera nos, &c.

From a Coppid Crown-tenent prick'd up by a Brother,

From damnable Members, and fits of the Mo­ther.

From Ears like Oyſters that grin at each other,

Libera nos, &c.

From a Preacher in buff, and a Quarter-ſtaff-ſteeple▪

From th' unlimited Soveraigne Power of the People,

From a Kingdom that crawles on its knees like a Creeple,

Libera nos, &c.

From a vinegar Prieſt on a Crab-tree ſtock,

From a foddering of Prayer four hours by the Clock.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=89)From a
holy Siſter with a pittifull Smock,

Libera nos, &c.

From a hunger-ſtarv'd Sequeſtrators maw,

From Revelations and Viſions that never man ſaw,

From Religion without either Goſpel or Law,

Libera nos, &c.

From the Nick and Froth of a Peny Pot-houſe,

From the Fiddle and Croſſe, and a great Scotch Louſe,

From Committees that chop up a Man like a Mouſe,

Libera nos, &c.

From broken ſhins, and the blood of a Martyr,

From the Titles of Lords, and Knights of the Garter,

From the teeth of mad-dogs, and a Country mans quarter,

Libera nos, &c.

From the Publique Faith, and an Egg & Butter,

From the Iriſh Purchaſers, and all their clutter,

From Omega's noſe, when he fettles to ſputter,

Libera nos, &c:

From the zeal of Old Harry lock'd up with a Whore,

From waiting with Plaints at the Parliament dore,

From the death of a King without why or wherefore,

Libera nos, &c.

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=89)

From the French diſeaſe; and the Puritan fry,

From ſuch as nere ſwear, but devoutly can lye,

From cutting of capers full three ſtory high,

Libera nos, &c.

From Painted glaſs, and Idolatrous cringes,

From a Presbyter's Oath that turns upon hinges,

From Westminſter Jews with Levitical fringes,

Libera nos, &c.

From all that is ſaid, and a thouſand times more,

From a Saint, and his Charity to the Poor,

From the Plagues that are kept for a Rebel in ſtore.

Libera nos, &c.

#### 1.81.1. The Second Part.

THat if it pleaſe thee to aſſiſt

Our Agitators, and their Liſt,

And Hemp them with a gentle twiſt,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to ſuppoſe

Our actions are as good as thoſe

That gull the People through the Noſe,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee here to enter,

And fix the rumbling of our center,

For we live all at peradventure,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=90)

That it may pleaſe thee to unite

The fleſh and bones unto the ſprite,

Elſe Faith and literature good night,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee O that wee

May each man know his Pedigree,

And ſave that plague of Heraldry,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee in each Shire

Cities of refuge Lord to rear,

That failing Brethren may know where,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to abhor us,

Of any ſuch dear favour for us,

That thus have wrought thy peoples ſorrows,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to embrace

Our dayes of thanks and faſting face,

For robbing of thy holy place,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to adjourn

The day of judgement, leaſt we burn,

For lo it is not for our turn,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to admit

A cloſe Committee there to ſit,

No Devil to a Humane wit!

Quaeſumus te, &c.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=90)

That it may pleaſe to diſpence

A little for convenience,

Or let us play upon the ſenſe,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee to embalm

The Saints in Robin Wiſdom's Pſalm,

And make them muſical and calm,

Quaeſumus te, &c.

That it may pleaſe thee, ſince 'tis doubt,

Satan cannot throw Satan out,

Unite us and the Highland rout.

Quaeſumus te, &c▪

### 1.82. AN ELEGIE On the Death of Sir B [...]vile Grenvile.

TO build upon the merit of thy Death,

And raiſe thy Fame from thy expiring Breath,

Were to ſ [...]eal Glories from thy Life, and tell

The World, that Grenvil only did dye well.

But all thy Dayes were fair, the ſame Sun roſe,

The Luſtre of thy Dawning, and thy Cloſe.

Thus to her Urn th' Arabian wonder flyes,

She lives in Perfumes, and in Perfumes dyes:

E're ſtormes, and tumults (Names undread­ed here)

Could in their Bloome and In [...]ancy appeare;

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=91)He in the
ſtock and treaſure of his mind

Had heaps of Courage, and juſt heat combin'd.

Where, like the thrifty Ant, he kept in ſtore

Enough for Spring, but for a Winter more.

In Peace he did direct his thoughts on Warrs,

And learn't in ſilence how to combat Jarres.

And though the Times look't ſmooth and would allow

No track of Frown or Wrincle in their Brow:

Yet his quick ſight perceiv'd the Age would low'r,

And, while the Day was faire, fore-ſaw the Show'r.

At this the prudent Augur did provide

Where to endure the storme, not where to hide,

And ſought to ſhun the Danger now drawn nigh,

Not by Concealment but by Victory.

As valiant Seamen, if the Veſſel knock,

Rather ſayle o're it, than avoid the Rock.

And thus Reſolv'd, he ſaw on either hand,

The Cauſes, and their bold Abettors ſtand.

The Kingdoms Law is the pretence of each,

Which theſe by Law preſerve, theſe by its breach,

The Subjects Liberty each ſide maintains,

Theſe ſay it conſiſts in freedom, theſe in Chaines,

Theſe love the decent Church, but theſe not paſs

To dreſſe our Matron by the Geneva Glaſs?

Theſe ſtill enſhrine their God; but theſe adore

Him moſt at ſome Ara [...]nah's Threſhing-floor.

Each part defends their King a ſeveral way,

By true Subjection theſe, by Treaſons they.

But our Spectatour ſoon unmask't the ſin,

And ſaw all Serpent through that ſpecious skin.

And midſt their beſt Pretext did ſtill deſpair,

In any dreſſe to ſee their Moor look fair.

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=91)And
though the Number weigh'd ith' popular ſcale

As light things float ſtill with the tyde and gale,

He with the ſolid mixt, and did conclude,

Juſtice makes Parties great, not Multitude.

And with this conſtant Principle poſſeſt,

He did alone expoſe his ſingle Breaſt,

Againſt an Armies force, and bleeding lay,

The great Reſtorer o'th' Declining Day.

Thus ſlain thy Valiant Ancestor did lye,

When his one Bark a Navy durſt defie,

When now encompaſs'd rounds he Victor ſtood,

And bath'd his Pinnace in his conquering Blood.

Till all his Purple current dry'd and ſpent,

He fell, and left the Waves his Monument,

Where ſhall next famous Grenvills Aſhes ſtand?

Thy Grandſire fills the Seas, and Thou the Land.

### 1.83. To my Lord Biſhop of S. on New-years day.

THough with the courſe and motion of the year,

Not only Starres and Sun

Move where they firſt begun;

But Things and Actions do

Keep the ſame Circle too,

Return'd to the ſame point in the ſame Sphear.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=92)

Griefs and their Cauſes ſtill are where they ſtood,

'Tis the ſame Cloud and Night

Shuts up our Joyes and Light:

Warres as remote from Peace,

And Bondage from Releaſe,

As when the Sun his laſt years Circuite rode.

Though Sword and Slaughter are not Parted hence,

But we like years and times,

Meet in unequal chimes,

Now a Cloud and then a Sun,

Ʋndoe and are undone,

Let looſe and ſtopt by th' Orbes intelligence.

Though Combates have ſo thick and frequent ſtood,

That we at length may raiſe

A Calendar of dayes,

And ſtyle them foul or fair,

By their ſucceſs, not Aire:

And ſign our Feſtivals by Rebels blood.

Though the ſad years are cloath'd in ſuch a dreſs,

That times to times give place,

And ſeaſons ſhift their grace,

Not by our Cold or Heat,

But Conqueſt or Defeat:

And Loſſe makes Winter, Summer, happineſs.

Nay though a greater Ruine yet await;

Such as the Active curſe,

The new diſeaſe.

Sent to make worſt times worſe,

Deaths keen and ſecret dart,

The ſhame of Hearbs and Art

Which proves at once our Wonder and our Fate.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=92)

Though theſe conſpire to fully our requeſt,

And labour to deſtroy,

And kill your New-years joy.

Yet ſtill your wonted Art

Will keep our wiſh in heart.

Proportion'd not toth' times but to your breaſt

Thus in the Storm you Calme and Silence find,

Nor Sword nor Sickneſs can approach your mind.

### 1.84. A SATYR, Occaſioned by the Author's Survey of a Scandalous Pamphlet,
intituled  
The Kings Cabinet opened.

WHen Lawes and Princes are deſpis'd and cheap,

When High patcht Miſchiefs all are in the heap;

Returns muſt ſtill be had; Guilt muſt ſtrive more

Though not to' Enoble, yet to Enlarge her ſtore.

Poor cheap Deſign! the Rebell now muſt flie

To Packet Warre, to Paper-Treacherie.

The Baſiliskes are turn'd to Cloſet-Spies,

And to their Poys'nous adde Enquiring eyes:

As Snakes and Serpents ſhould they caſt their ſting,

Still the ſame Hate, though not ſame Poyſon fling;

And their Vain teeth to the ſame point addreſſe,

With the like Rancor, though unlike Succeſſe:

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=93)So thoſe
that into undiſcerning veines,

Have thrown their Venom-deep, and their dark ſtains,

By frail Advantages, ſtill find it good,

To keep th' Infection high ith' Peoples Blood.

"For Active Treaſon muſt be doing ſtill:

"Leſt ſhe unlearn her Art of doing ill.

Who now have waded through all Publick aw,

Will break through Secrets and prophane their Law.

Know you, that would their Act and Statute ſee,

Nature kept Court, and made it her Decree.

When Angells talke, all their Conceipts are brought

From Minde to Minde, and they diſcourſe by Thought.

A Cloſe Idea moves, and Silence flies

To poſt the Meſſage, and diſpatch Replies,

And though Ten Legions, in the Round are bent,

They only hear to whom the Talk was meant.

Now, though in Men a different Law controules,

And Soules are not Embaſſadours to Soules:

Nature gave Reaſon power to find a way,

Which none but theſe could venture to betray.

"Two cloſe ſafe Pathes ſhe did bequeath to men,

"In Preſence, Whiſper; and at Diſtance, Penne.

Publick Decrees and Thoughts were elſe the ſame,

Nor went it to Converſe, but to Proclaim.

Conceipts were elſe but Records, but by this care

Our Thoughts no Commons, but Incloſures are:

What bold Intruders then are, who aſſail

To cut their Prince's Hedge, and break his Pale?

That ſo Ʋmanly gaze, and dare be ſeen

Ev'n then, when He converſes with his Queen?

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=93)Yet, as
who breaks the tall Bank's riſing Side,

And all the Shore doth levy with the Tyde,

Doth not confine the Waves to any Bound,

But the whole Streame may gain upon the Ground;

So theſe, streight Proſpect ſcorn, and Private View,

"The Crime is ſmall that doth engage a Few.

Theſe print their Shame, they muſt compleat their Sinne:

Not take ſome Waves, and ſhut the Sluce agen

But, to the Raging of their Sea, they do

Let in the Madneſſe of the People too.

But, 'cauſe their Crime muſt wear a Mask and Vail,

And fain the Serpent would conceal his Tail.

No ſooner comes the Libell to our view,

But ſee a ſtay'd demure, grave Preface too:

Which ſeems to ſhew they would not thus in­trude,

Nor preſſe ſo far, but for the Publick good:

But as ſome London Beggers uſe to ſtand,

In Grecians Coats with Papers in their hand,

Who are (as them indifferent Parts we meet)

Engliſh at Home, but ſolemn Greeks ith' ſtreet.

Of whom uncloath'd, and when the truth is heard,

Conſtantinople only knows the Beard.

So this ſly Masker, lay its Tinſell by,

Is only Painted Zeal, and Pageantry,

We need not let our Satyr here compute,

How it prophanes God in his Attribute.

See the Preface

But for it [...]s Light it need no B [...]ſhell call,

A Sempstreſſe Thimble will Eclypſe it all.

O! in what meekneſſe it pretends to creep!

How well the Tyger perſonates the Sheep!

It not Returns ill Language to the King,

Though the next Lines the Pſalms againſt Him bring.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=94)Then it
to th' Buſineſs comes, and lets us know,

Who reads it either is its Friend, or Foe.

If Friend, the Scandals all muſt true appear:

If Foe (alack the man is ne're the near.)

Foe no Light moves, no Miracles like theſe,

Hee'le ſay they're not the Kings too, if he pleaſe.

And tell us pray? what, may'nt your laſt words ſtand?

You counterfeit his Seal, why not his Hand?

But to admit, We now deduce and bring,

What after-notes clearly imply oth' King.

Firſt, They His Comfort from His Secrets wreſt.

They doe allow the King, but not the Breaſt,

The Sacred Knot muſt have a Tye, and Force,

To joyne their Hands, but yet their Thoughts Divorce:

And, as the Ivye weddes her Conſort-Tree,

Though joyn'd, and cloſe their chaſt Embraces be,

Yet in thoſe Twinnes and Circuits we can find

No Traffique, no Commerce of mind with mind:

So muſt the Sacred Laws of Marriage pierce;

Here ſhe may Sprout and Grow, but not Converſe.

And, like a Plant remov'd by Grafters toyle,

She finds not Nuptials, but a change of Soyle.

England to th' Queen tranſplanted thus muſt prove,

No Forraigne Kingdom [...], but a Forraigne Grove.

But, leaſt this groundleſſe ſeem, they reaſons vex,

And tell the World Shee's of the Weaker Sex.

In what wilde Braines this Madneſſe firſt began!

They're wondrous angry, 'cauſe the Queen's no Man.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=94)Fond Sirs
forbear, do not the world perplex:

Reaſon and Judgement are not things of Sex.

Souls and their Faculties were never heard

To be confin'd to th' Doublet, and the Beard.

Conſult one Age from this, and you ſhall find

A Queen the Glory of your Annals ſhin'd.

But who to farre and diſtant Objects flies,

Muſt ſay the Sun wants Luſtre, or he Eyes.

Our Preſent injur'd Queen returns that ſtore,

And doth again, what could be done before:

By the King's Judgement, ſhews Her own is Right,

And ſtill ſhe meets His Ray with her own Light.

Thus the wiſe King to Shebah's Queen was known,

Who knew Him wiſe by Wiſedom of her own.

But as all Publick Knowledge barr'd muſt be,

So Houſhold-Acts muſt have their Myſterie:

No Circumſtance can paſſe, no Servant made,

But muſt be wrapt in ſilence and cloſe ſhade.

One Place in Court a Riddle muſt afford,

Worthy a ſecret Sybi [...]s dark Record.

As the Kings Acts muſt all their limits prove,

So their Reſtraint and Reins muſt check his Love.

Eſteems of's Conſort by their pitch muſt fly,

Nor muſt He rate his Dear Queens Health too high.

He muſt affect thus far, and then no more,

His Tydes muſt be proportion'd to their ſhore;

His Tenderneſs their Weights and Ballanc [...] weare,

By Graines and Scruples they Confine His Care,

But (Savage) know, there can no ranſome be

Poys'd with the Health of ſuch a Queen as She.

She that at once ſuch weighty Acts can do,

That can be Queen and yet negotiate too:

Send and be ſent, and without more demurre,

Be both the Queen and her Embaſſadour.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=95)That
gives diſpatch for Ships, and when ſhe pleaſe,

Divides the Empire with the Queen o'th Seas:

Who dares the threats of any danger ſtand,

The ſtubborn Rock, or the Devouring Sand.

And though the Sea ſwell like Her fate, and Grave,

Look at Her Conſort, and deſpiſe the Wave.

The Captive Queen did (thus) the Tyrant tell,

I am no Captive ſo my King be well.

Q. Curtius, lib. 3.

By theſe her worth and rate is faintly known,

Paſt ſtories bluſh when ſhe erects Her own.

Search old gray Annals, you may find at length,

Some Queen in Vigour, and her mid-day ſtrength;

Who in her injured Conſorts cauſe, referres

To Copies glancing at theſe Acts of Hers.

But if Infirm and Sickly Queens we ſcanne,

No ſtory patterns her, None ever can

Shew us a Queen fraught with ſuch wide Affairs,

Here private Weakneſſe, there a Kingdom's cares,

Perplext and tortur'd from her reſt and eaſe,

By a Rebellion here, there a Diſeaſe:

Advice, and Medcines at one time we view,

A Counſel-board, Board of Phyſicians too.

Yet her Capacious Soul both theſe defeats,

While this hand holds Inſtructions, that Receipts.

Theſe are our fam'd Queens Crimes, but yet one more

Muſt be the main Ingredient of the ſtore.

Which ſeems to preſſe ſo deep, there's nought ſo bright,

But this may ſully all its luſtre quite:

'Tis her Religions Care: She tryes Her Pow'rs

To keep that ſtill, do not we ſo for Ours?

Why to one Face ſo diff'rent ſhapes have bin,

What Virtue is in Ʋs, in Her is Sin.

Our diff'rent Faiths did long together grow,

And neither ſuffer'd, neither loſſe did know:

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=95)And like
a ſtream, which 'twixt two fields doth flow,

Which as it Moiſtens, ſo Divides them too:

So did the Kingdoms Law throw Dew and growth,

In Weight and juſt proportion unto both,

And like a parting Current, ſlide along

To keep them wide, that neither neither Wrong.

Our Faiths were then but Two, but ſince a ſp'rit

So many Muſhrome Sects rais'd in a Night:

The Proteſtant (as ſhe could Parties gain

Who unconcern'd were in the Dregs and ſtaine)

Did recommend her Votaries, and bring

Her Faith to its Defender, our Juſt King.

Who with ſuch Zeal hath kept her Rites entire,

As well from Languiſhing, as from ſtrange Fire:

That ſtill the Cenſer ſavours its true ſcent,

Without Acceſſion, yet no Perfume ſpent;

The happy Martyrs find their Faith had ſtood

In Him, as when they bath'd it in their blood.

They joy to ſee, that He his God adores,

Not at High-places, nor at Threſhing-floores,

But ſpight of Scandals, pays his Homage ſtill

In the Juſt Beauty of the Sion-Hill.

The Other Sects, though as in Common-fields,

Which Swine, and Horſes, Mules and Oxen yields,

Who though at Diſtance fed, Approaching claſh,

And diſproportion'd ſhapes together daſh▪

So they, though one Rebellion them ſuſtain,

Themſelves Accuſe, and are Accus'd again.

Could they comply, then poſſibly might dwell

Some faint Agreement, though no Peace in Hell:

Now, theſe nice taſts no Forraign aids indure,

(Their Rebell Scots are Engliſh Rebells ſure,)

No, nor the Papiſts: much it with them ſticks,

Leſt theſe Mens Punniards ſhould be Hereticks:

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=96)Their
ſouls would be prophan'd, and clean undun,

Should they be ſlain by an Idolatrous Gun.

Go lay your Vizar by, your Masking ſtuff,

The Devil is tyr'd, and Hell hath laugh'd enough:

The world deſcryes the Cheat, 'tis quickly known

They no Faith hate, who have Reſolv'd on None.

Theſe may not fight: that is, the King you'd have

Tamely forſake his Crown, and be your Slave.

His Eaſier Subjects long agoe you gat,

All who approv'd your Baite, and ſwallow'd that.

Indeed, Diſcerning ſouls the ſnare forſook,

And through the Wave did ſtill deſcry the Hook:

But yet ſo cloſe deſigns were caſt about,

Your Race was half runne e're the King ſet out,

Yet you complain, and guilty fears do gnaw,

Leſt you ſhould ſcanted be for Space and Law:

Conſcious, though you your cauſe did forward meet,

Its Guilt and Sin hangs Plummets at its feet.

Are not the Jews, Walloones, the Turks, and all meet,

Whom from as Diff'rent Gods as Lands you call,

An Army strong to keep the cauſe in heart,

But that the King muſt with His Subjects part?

Can no Acceſſion ſo much ſafety ſend,

But you will Dread Him ſtill before you end?

Sometimes at Ebbes his God doth let Him ſtand,

That ſo the Reſcue may declare His hand.

But, what (you hope) may make the King's ſide pauſe,

Is what he writes about the Penall Laws.

Poor ſhallow ſouls, I deem it one from hence

To forfeit Loyalty, and forfeit Sence.

Shall ſuch as waſt their Blood be quite debarr'd,

And kept without the Pale from all Reward?

Shall fame report, ſhall after Ages tell,

So juſt a King regards not who do dwell?

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=96)But you
pretend, this was a State-Decree,

Nor without Pow'r which made may cancel'd be

The King nev'r ſayes it ſhall: but cannot doubt

That when his God hath brought his work about,

And ſhifted Jarres and Tumults into Eaſe,

And ſet him 'midſt his Counſell in High peace:

Their joynt united ſuffrage will think fit

To give this Act, or ſomething Great as it.

But ſee, His Pardon then to Ireland came,

(Wild Rebells) offers he not you the ſame?

He holds ſtill out the ſame freſh chearfull Ray,

You ſhut your Windows and exclude the Day:

Embrace the ſhine, or elſe expect the ſtroak,

The Flint the Sun ne're melts, at laſt is broke.

But now the Flood-gates op [...], and a free  [...]luce,

[...]ets in all ſenceleſſe Doctrines, and wild uſe;

And by Comparing what's ſaid long agoe,

Finds Diſproportion in the King's Acts now.

His paſt Reſolves it up to Preſent brings,

His Vowes to Vowes, and Things to combate Things.

A Different face throughout, and a freſh Scene

Succeed: and all his Acts ſeem ſhifted clean.

Weak men! who are depriv'd by Guilt or chance,

Of all the lights of Common Circumſtance;

That have unlearn't that Actions ſhift their Face,

And da [...]e their worth from Perſons, Time, and Place.

And ſundry ſuch, from whoſe Negl [...]cts appear

Acts as Sinnes there, which are Try'd Virtues here.

For inſtance then, o [...]t as the King reflects

His Oath's enjoyn, His People he protects.

Which Oathes extent, and Circuit we may view

Spread ore th' Five Execrable Members too.

Yet (far as't them concerns) that Chain is broke,

That Oath left Him, becauſe they le [...]t His Yoake ▪

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=97)Now of
this Pitch, and Size, do ſtill appear

All Aiery Scruples which are ſtarted there.

The King Declared, He thought you meant no ill,

Say, would you have the King Declare ſo still?

Allow but Different Circumſtance, and we

Find all your Scandalls will his Glories be.

Now, as the worſt things have ſome things of ſtead,

And ſome T [...]ades treaſure Jewells in their Head.

So doth this Libels womb Girt, and contain.

What though it compaſſe Round? it cann [...]t ſtain

Lines of ſo cleare, yet  [...]o Majeſtick ſtraine;

A moſt Tranſparent, yet a cloſe-wove Veine;

Which when we reach its Senſe, we may deſcry,

We ſee more by its Light, then our own Eye.

So Phoebus (when the Cloud and Night is done)

Lends us his Light, to know he is the Sunne.

Yet this expreſſive clearneſſe is but barke,

An Out-ſide Sunne which guards us from the dark.

Here the Bright Language ſhuts in Brighter ſenſe,

Rich Diamonds ſleep within a Cryſtall Fence.

Gemmes of that rate, to Tully they'd appear

Fit purchaſe for his Critick Senates Ear:

And their whole Shine in a full Luſtre tends

To God, His Conſcience, Conſort, and his Friends.

### 1.85. THE CLOSE.

No winding Characters, no ſecret Maze,

Could ſo perplex, but they have found their wayes.

They thred the Labyrinth, and what to do?

Whe'r tends the Guide? what purchaſe in this Clew?

Raſh Alexander forc't King Gordius Knot,

Q. Curtius lib. 2.

And ſo in hand found he a Rope had got.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=97) A New
Diurnal of Paſſages more

Exactly drawn up then heretofore.

Printed and Publiſhed, 'tis order'd to be,

By Henry Elſing the Clerk of the P.

### 1.86. 1 June 1643.

Since many Diurnals (for which we are griev'd)

Are come from both Houſes, and are not be­liev'd;

The better to help them for running and flying,

We have put them in Verſe to Authorize their lying.

For it has been debated, and found to be true,

That lying's a Parliament Priviledge too:

And that they may the ſooner our Conqueſts re­hearſe,

We are minded to put them in Galloping Verſe;

But ſo many Maim'd Souldiers from Reading there came,

That in ſpight of the Surgeons, make our Verſes go lame.

We have ever us'd Fictions, and now it is known,

Our Poverty has made us Poetical grown.

### 1.87. Munday.

On Munday both Houſes fell into debate,

And were likely to fall by the ears as they ſate;

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=98)Yet would
they not have the buſineſſe decided,

That they (as the Kingdom is) might be divided.

They had an intention to Prayers to go,

But Ex tempore Prayers are now Common too.

To Voting they fall, and the key of the work,

Was the raiſing of Money for the State and the Kirk▪

'Tis only Free-loan, yet this Order they make,

That what Men would not lend they ſhould Plun­der and take;

Upon this, the word Plunder came into their minds,

And all of them did labour a new one to find;

They call'd it diſtraining: yet thought it no ſhame,

To perſiſt in the Act, which they bluſht for to name.

They Voted all Perſons from Oxford that came,

Should be apprehended: and after the ſame,

With an Humble Petition, the King they requeſt,

He'd be pleas'd to return, and be ſerv'd like the reſt.

A Meſſage from Oxford conducing to Peace,

Came next to their hands, that Armes might ceaſe:

They Voted and Voted, and ſtill they did vary,

Till at laſt the whole ſence of the Houſe was con­trary

To reaſon; they knew by their Armes they might gain▪

What neither true reaſon, nor Law can maintain.

Ceſſation was Voted a dangerous Plot,

Becauſe the King would have it, both Houſes would not.

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=98)But when
they reſolv'd it, abroad muſt be blowne,

(To baffle the World) that the King would have none.

And carefully muzled the mouth of the Preſs,

Leaſt the truth ſhould peep through their jugling dreſs.

For they knew a Ceſſation would work them more harmes,

Than Eſſex could do the Cavaliers with his Arms.

While they keep the Ships and the Forts in their hand,

They may be Traytors by Sea, as well as by Land.

The Forts will preſerve them as long as they ſtay,

And the Ships carry them and their Plunder a­way.

They have therefore good reaſon to account War the better,

For the Law will prove to them but a killing Letter.

### 1.88. Tueſday.

A Poſt from his Excellence came blowing his Horn,

For Money to advance, and this ſpun out the Morn;

And ſtrait to the City ſome went for relief,

The reſt made an Ordinance to carry Powder-Beef.

Thus up go the Roundheads, and Eſſex advances,

But only to lead his Souldiers new dances.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=99)To
Reading he goes, for at Oxford (they ſay)

His Wife has made him Bull-works to keep him away.

Prince Rupert, for fear that the Name be con­founded,

Will ſaw off his Horns, and make him a Round­head.

The news was returned with General fame,

That Reading was taken ere ever he came.

Then away Rode our Captains, and Souldiers did run,

To ſhew themſelves valiant, when the Battail was done,

Preparing to plunder; but as ſoon as they came,

They quickly perceived it was but a flam:

An Ordinance of Parliament Eſſex brought down,

But that would not ſerve him to batter the Town.

More Mony was rais'd, more Men and Ammu­nition,

Carts loaded with Turnips, and other Proviſion.

His Excellence had Chines, and Rams-heads for a Preſent,

And his Councel of Warre had Woodcock and Pheaſant.

But Ven had 5000. Calves-heads all in Carts,

To nouriſh his Men, and to chear up their Hearts.

This made them ſo valiant that that very day,

They had taken the Town but for running away.

'Twas ordered this day, that thankſgiving be made,

To the Roundheads in Sermons, for their Beef and their Bread.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=99)

#### 1.88.1. Wedneſday.

Two Members this day at a Conference ſate,

And one gives the other a knock on the Pate.

This ſet them a voting, and the Upper Houſe ſwore,

'Twas a breach of Priviledge he gave him no more.

The lower the breaking their Members head vo­ted

A breach of their Priviledge; for it is to be noted,

That Reaſon and Priviledge in it did grow,

'Twas a breach of his Crown and Dignity too.

Then came in the Women with a long long Pe­tition.

To ſettle Militia, and damn the Commiſſion.

For if fighting continue, they ſay they did  [...]ear.

That Men would be ſcarce, and Husbands be dear.

So plainly the Speaker the Buſineſſe unties,

That preſently all the Members did riſe

They had hardly the leiſure all things to lay ope,

But ſome felt in their Bellies if they had not a Pope.

Some ſtrictly ſtood to them, and others did fear,

Each carried about them a fierce Cavalier.

This Buſineſſe was handled by the cloſe Com­mittee,

That privately met at a Place in the City.

So cloſely to voting the Members did fall,

That the humble Siſters were overthrown all.

But they and their Helpers came ſhort at the laſt,

Till at length the whole Work on Prince Griffith was caſt.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=100)

[...]

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=100)

[...]

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=101)And he
with his troup did handle the matter

He pleaſed every Woman, as ſoon as he came at her.

The Buſineſſe had like to have gone on her ſide,

Had not Pym perſwaded them not to confide.

For rather than Peace, to fill the Common-Wealth,

He ſaid hee'd do them every night himſelf.

#### 1.88.2. Thurſday.

This Day a great Fart in the Houſe they did hear,

Which made all the Members make Buttons for fear;

And One makes nine Speeches while the Buſineſſe was hot,

And ſpake through the Noſe that he ſmelt out the Plot.

He takes it to task, and the Articles drawes,

As a breach of their own Fundamental-laws.

Now Letters were read, which did fully relate

A Victory againſt Newcaſtle of late;

That hundreds were ſlain, and hundreds did run,

And all this was got ere the Battel begun.

This they reſolv'd to make the beſt on;

And next they reſolv'd upon the Queſtion,

That Bonfires and Prayſe [...], the Pulpit and Steeple,

Muſt all be ſuborned to couzen the People.

But the policy was more Mony to get,

For the Conqueſt's dear bought, and far enough ſet;

Such Victories in Ireland, although it be known

They ſtrive to make that Land as bad as our Own.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=101)No
ſooner the Mony for this was brought hither,

But a croud of true Letters came flocking to­gether,

How Hotham and's Army, and others were beaten,

This made the blew Members to ſtartle and threaten.

And theſe by all means muſt be kept from the City,

And only referred to the Privy Committee.

And they preſently with an Ex tempore Vote,

Which they have uſed ſo long, that they learned by rote,

They ſtyl'd them Malignant, and to Lyes they did turn them,

Then Corbet, in ſtead of the Hangman, muſt burn them.

And he after that an Ordinance draws,

That none ſhould tell truth that diſparag'd the Cauſe.

Then Pym like a Pegaſus trots up and down,

And takes up an Angel to throw down a Crown.

He ſtand like a Creature, and makes a long Speech,

That came from his mouth, and part from his breech.

He moves for more Horſe, that the Army might be

Part Mans fleſh and Horſe fleſh, as well as he;

And heel'l be a Colonel as well as another,

But durſt not ride a Horſe, 'cauſe a Horſe rid his Mother.

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=102)

#### 1.88.3. Friday.

Sir Hugh Cholmley for being no longer a Traytor,

Was ac [...]us'd of Treaſon in the higheſt Nature;

'Cauſe he (as they bad him) his Souldiers did bring,

To turn from Rebellion, and fight for the King.

They voted him out, but, nor they nor their men

Could vote him into the Houſe agen.

Sir Davids Remonſtrance next to them was read,

From the Cities Round-body, and Iſaac's the Head.

'Twas approv'd; but one Cauſe produc'd a de­nyal,

That all Traytors be brought to a Legal tryal.

For 'tis againſt Reaſon to vote, or to do

Againſt Traytors, when They are no other but ſo.

Becauſe about nothing ſo long they ſit ſtill,

They hold it convenient Diurnalls to fill.

And therefore they gave their Chronographer charge

To ſtuff it with Orders and Letters at large.

The King by's Prerogative, nor by the Law,

Can ſpeak nor print nothing his People to draw,

Yet Pennyles Pamphletters they do maintain,

Whoſe only Religion is Stipendary gain.

Yet Cum Privilegio, againſt King and the State.

The Treaſon that's taught them (like Parrats) they prate.

Theſe Hackneys are licens't what ever they do,

As if they had Parliament priviledge too.

[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=102)Thus
then they conſult: ſo zealous they are,

To ſettle the peace of the Kingdom by War.

But againſt Civil-war their hatred is ſuch,

To prevent it they'le bring in the Scotch and the Dutch.

They had rather the Land be deſtroy'd in a mi­nute,

Than abide any thing that has Loyalty in it;

And yet their Rebellion ſo neatly they trim,

They fight for the King, but they mean for King Pym

Theſe all to fight for, and maintain are ſent

The Laws of England; but New-England is meant.

And though ſuch diſorders are broke in of late,

They keep it the Anagram ſtill of a State.

For ſtill they are plotting ſuch riches to bring,

To make Charles a rich and glorious King.

And by this Rebellion this good they will doe him,

They'l forfeit all their Eſtates unto him.

No Clergy muſt meddle in Spiritual affairs,

But Layton nere heard of it, loſing his ears,

For that he might be deaf to the Priſoners cries,

To a ſpiritual Goalers place he muſt riſe.

The reſt have good reaſon for what they ſhall do,

For they are both Clergy and Laity too.

Or elſe at the beſt when the Queſtion is ſtated,

They are but Mechanicks newly tranſlated.

They may be Committees to practice their baw­ling,

For ſtealing of Horſe is Spiritual Calling.

The reaſon why People our Martyrs ador'd,

'Cauſe their Ears being cut off their Fame ſounds the more.

[[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=103)'Twas
ordered the Goods of Malignants, and Lands,

Shall be ſhar'd among them, and took into their hands.

They have Spirits of more Malignants to come,

That every one in the Houſe may have ſome

Then down to Guild-Hall they return their thanks,

To the Fools whom the Lottery has cheated with Blanks.

#### 1.88.4. Saturday.

This day there came news of the taking a Ship,

(To ſee what ſtrange wonders are wrought in the deep)

That a troop of their Horſe ran into the Sea,

And pull'd out a Ship alive to the Key.

And after much prating and fighting they ſay

The Ropes ſerv'd for Traces to draw her away.

Sure theſe were Sea-horſes, or elſe by their lying

They'le make them as famous for ſwimming as flying.

The reſt of the day they ſpent to bemoan

Their Brother, the Roundhead that to Tyburn was gone.

And could not but think it a barbarous thing,

To hang him for killing a friend to the King.

He was newly baptized, and held it was good

To be waſhed, yet not in water, but blood.

They ordered for his honour to cut off his ears,

And make him a Martyr: but a Zealot appears,

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=103)And
affirms him a Martyr, for although 'twas his fate

To be hang'd, yet he dy'd for the good of the State

Then all fell to plotting of m [...]t [...]ers ſo deep,

That the ſilent Speaker fell down faſt aſleep.

He recovers himſelf and rub [...] up his eyes,

Then motions his Houſe that 'twas time to riſe.

So home they went all, and their buſineſſe refer'd

To the Cloſe Committee by them to be heard;

They took it upon them, but what they did do,

Take notice that none but themſelves muſt know.

#### 1.88.5. Poſtſcript.

Thus far we have gone in Rythme to diſcloſe,

What never was utter'd by any in Proſe.

If any be wanting, 'twas by a miſhap,

Becauſe we forgot to weigh't by the map.

For over the Kingdom their Orders were ſpread,

They have made the whole Body as bad as the Head.

And now made ſuch work that they all do,

Is but to read Letters and anſwers them too.

We thought to make Finis the end of the ſtory,

But that we ſhall have more buſineſs for you.

For (as their proceedings do) ſo ſhall our Pen,

Run roundly from Munday to Munday agen.

And ſince we have begun, our Muſe doth intend,

To have (like their Votes) no beginning nor end.

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=104)

### 1.89. The holy Pedler.

FRom a Forraign ſhore

I am come to ſtore,

Your Shops with rare devices:

No drugs do I bring

From the Indian King,

No Peacocks, Apes, nor Spices.

Such Wares I do ſhow

As in England do grow,

And are for the good of the Nation,

Let no body fear

To deal in my Ware,

For Sacriledge now's in faſhion.

I the Pedlar am,

That came from Amsterdam

With a pack of new Religions,

I did every one fit,

According to's wit,

From the Tub to Mahomets pigeons.

Great Trading I found,

For my ſpiritual ground,

Wherein every man was a Medler;

I made People decline,

The learned Divine,

And then they bought Heaven of the Pedler.

Firſt Surplices I took,

Next the Common-Prayer-book,

And made all thoſe Papiſts that us'd 'um;

Then the Biſhops and Deans,

I ſtript of their means,

And gave it to thoſe that abus'd 'um.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=104)The
Clergy-men next,

I withdrew from their Text,

And ſet up the gifted Brother;

Thus Religion I made,

But a matter of trade,

And I car'd nor for one or t'other.

Then Tythes I fell upon,

And thoſe I quickly won,

'Twas prophane in the Clergy to take 'um.

But they ſerv'd for the Lay,

Till I ſold them away,

And ſo did Religious make 'um;

But now come away,

To the Pedler, I pray,

I ſcorn to rob or cozen;

If Churches you lack,

Come away to my Pack,

Here's thirteen to the dozen.

Church Militants they be,

For now we do ſee,

They have fought ſo long with each other;

The Rump's-Churches threw down,

Thoſe that ſtood for the Crown,

And ſold them to one another.

Then come you factious Crue,

Here's a Bargain now for you,

With the ſpoyles of the Church you may revel;

Now pull down the Bells,

And then hang up your ſelves,

And ſo give his due to the Devil.

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=105)

### 1.90. The Hue and Cry after Sir John Presbyter.

WIth hair in Characters, and Lugs in text;

With a ſplay mouth and a noſe circum­flext;

With a ſet Ruffe of Musket-bore, that wears

Like Cartrages, or linnen Bandileers,

Exhauſted of their ſulphurous contents,

In Pulpit fire-works, which that Bomball vents;

The Negative and Covenanting Oath,

Like two Muſtachoes, iſſuing from his mouth;

The buſh upon his chin (like a carv'd ſtory,

In a box-knot) cut by the Directory;

Madams Confeſſion hanging at his ear,

Wire-drawn through all the queſtions, How and Where

Each circumſtance ſo in the hearing felt,

That when his ears are cropt he'll count them gelt;

The weeping Caſſock ſcar'd into a Jump,

A ſign the Presbyter's worn to the ſtump:

The Presbyter though charm'd againſt miſchance,

With the Divine Right of an Ordinance.

If you meet any that do thus attire 'em,

Stop them, they are the tribe of Adoniram.

What zealous frenzie did the Senate ſeize,

To tare the Rochet to ſuch rags as theſe?

Epiſcopacy minc'd, reforming Tweed

Hath ſent us Runts, even of her Churches breed;

Lay-interlining Clergy, a device

That's nick-name to the ſtuff call'd Lops and Lice.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=105)The
Beaſt at wrong-end branded, you may trace

The Devils foot-ſteps in his cloven face.

A face of ſeverall pariſhes and ſorts,

Like to a Sergeant ſhav'd at Innes of Courts.

What mean theſe Elders elſe, thoſe Kirk Dragoons

Made up of Ears and Ruffs like Ducatoons?

That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun,

Thoſe new Exchange-men of Religion?

Sure they'r the Antick  [...]eads, which plac'd without

The Church, do gape and diſembogue a ſprout:

Like them above the Commons houſe have been

So long without, now both are gotten in;

Then, what imperious in the Biſhop ſounds,

The ſame the Scotch Executor rebounds.

This ſtating Prelacy, the Claſſick rout,

That ſpake it often, e're it ſpake it out;

So by an Abbies Sceleton of late,

I heard an Eccho ſupererogate

Through imperfection, and the voice reſtore,

As if ſhe had the hiccop o're and o're.

Since they our mixt Dioceſans combine

Thus to ride double in their Diſcipline,

That Pauls ſhall to the Conſiſtory call

A Dean and Chapter out of Weavers-Hall?

Each at the Ordinance for to aſſiſt,

With the five thumbs of his groat-changing fiſt.

Down Dagon Synod with thy motley ware,

Whilſt we do ſwagger for the Common-Prayer;

That Dove-like Embaſſie, that wings our ſence

To Heavens gate in ſhape of innocence.

Pray for the Miter'd Authors, and defie

Theſe Demicaſters of Divinity.

For where Sir John with Jack-of-all-trades joyns,

His Finger's thicker than the Prelates Loyns.

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=106)

### 1.91. The way to wooe a Zealous Lady.

I Came unto a Puritan to wooe,

And  [...]oughly did ſalute her with a Kiſs;

She ſhov'd me from her when I came unto;

Brother, by yea and nay I like not this:

And as I her with amorous talk ſaluted,

My Articles with Scripture ſhe confuted.

She told me, that I was too much prophane,

And not devout neither in ſpeech nor geſture;

And I could not one word anſwer again,

Nor had not ſo much Grace to call her Siſter;

For ever ſomething did offend her there,

Either my broad beard, hat, or my long hair.

My Band was broad, my 'Parrel was not plain,

My Points and Girdle made the greateſt ſhow;

My Sword was odious, and my Belt was vain,

My Spaniſh ſhooes was cut too broad at toe;

My Stockings light, my Garters ty'd too long,

My Gloves perfum'd, and had a ſcent too ſtrong.

I left my pure Miſtris for a ſpace,

And to a ſnip-ſnap Barber ſtreight went I;

I cut my Hair, and did my Corps uncaſe

Of 'Parrels pride that did offend the eye;

My high-crown'd Hat, my little Beard alſo,

My pecked Band, my Shooes were ſharp at toe.

Gone was my Sword, my Belt was laid aſide,

And I transformed both in looks and ſpeech;

[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=106)My
'Parrel plain, my Cloak was void of Pride,

My little Skirts, my metamorphis'd Breech,

My Stockings black, my Garters were ty'd ſhorter,

My Gloves no ſcent; thus marcht I to her Porte [...].

The Porter ſpide me, and did lead me in,

Where his ſweet Miſtris reading was a Chapter:

Peace to this houſe, and all that are therein,

Which holy words with admiration wrapt her,

And ever, as I came her ſomething nigh,

She, being divine, turn'd up the white o'th' eye.

Quoth I, dear Siſter, and that lik'd her well,

I kiſt her, and did paſſe to ſome delight,

She, bluſhing, ſaid, that long-tail'd men would tell,

Quoth I, I'll be as ſilent as the night;

And leaſt the wicked now ſhould have a ſight

Of what we do, faith, I'll put out the light.

O do not ſwear, quoth ſhe, but put it out,

Becauſe that I would have you ſave your Oath,

In truth, you ſhall but kiſſe me, without doubt;

In troth, quoth I, here will we reſt us both;

Swear you, quoth ſhe, in troth? had you not ſworn

I'd not have don't, but took it in foul ſcorn.

### 1.92. A Hue and Cry after the Reformation.

WHen Temples lye like batter'd Quarrs,

Rich in their ruin'd Sepulchers,

When Saints forſake their painted Glaſſe

To meet their worſhip as they paſſe,

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=107)When
Altars grow luxurious with the dye

Of humane bloud,

Is this the floud

Of Chriſtianity?

When Kings are cup-boarded like cheeſe,

Sights to be ſeen for pence a piece,

When Dyadems, like Brokers tire,

Are cuſtom'd reliques ſet to hire,

When Soveraignty & Scepters looſe their names,

Stream'd into words,

Carv'd out by ſwords

Are theſe refining flames?

When Subjects and Religion ſtir

Like Meteors in the Metaphor,

When zealous hinting and the yawn

Excize our M [...]niver and Lawn;

When blue digreſſions fill the troubled ayr,

And th' Pulpit's let

To every Set

That will uſurp the Chair?

Call ye me this the night's farewell,

When our noon day's as dark as Hell?

How can we leſſe than term ſuch lights

Eccleſiaſtick Heteroclites?

Bold ſons of Adam when in fire you crawl,

Thus high to be,

Perch'd on the tree,

Remember but the fall.

Was it the glory of a King

To make him great by ſuffering?

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=107)Was
there no way to build God's Houſe

But rendring of it infamous?

If this be then the merry ghoſtly trade?

To work in gall?

Pray take it all

Good brother of the blade.

Call it no more the Reformation,

According to the new tranſlation:

Why will you wrack the common brain

With words of an unwonted ſtrain?

As Plunder? or a phraſe in ſenſes cleft?

When things more nigh

May well ſupply

And call it down-right theft.

Here all the School-men and Divines

Conſent, and ſwear the naked lines

Want no expounding or conteſt,

Or Bellarmine to break a jeſt.

Since then the Heroes of the pen with me

Nere ſcrue the ſenſe

With difference,

We all agreee agree.

### 1.93. The Times.

TO ſpeak in wet-ſhod eyes, and drowned looks,

Sad broken accents, and a vein that brooks

No ſpirit, life, or vigour, were to own

The cruſh and triumph of affliction;

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=108)And
creeping with Themiſtocles to be

The pale-fac'd Penſioners of our enemy.

No 'tis the glory of the Soul to riſe

By falls, and at rebound to pierce the skies.

Like a brave Courſer ſtanding on the ſand

Of ſome high-working Fretum, views a land

Smiling with ſweets upon the diſtant ſide,

Garniſh'd in all her gay embroydered pride,

Larded with Springs, and fring'd with curled Woods,

Impatient, bounces in the cap'ring flouds,

Big with a nobler fury than that ſtream

Of ſhallow violence he meets in them;

Thence arm'd with ſcorn and courage ploughs a way

Through the impoſtum'd billows of the Sea;

And makes the grumbling Surges ſlaves to oar

And waft him ſafely to the further ſhoar:

Where landed, in a ſoveraign diſdain

He turns back, and ſurveys the foaming main,

While the ſubjected waters flowing reel,

Ambitious yet to waſh the Victor's heel.

In ſuch a noble Equipage ſhould we

Embrace th' encounter of our miſery.

Not like a field o [...] corn, that hangs the head

For every tempeſt, every petty dread.

Croſſes were the beſt Chriſtians arms: and we

That hope a wiſhed Canaan once to ſee,

Muſt not expect a carpet-way alone

Without a red-ſea of affliction.

Then caſt the dice: Let's foord old Rubicon,

Caeſar 'tis thine, man is but once undone.

Tread ſoftly though, leaſt Scyllah's ghoſt awake,

And us i'th' roll of his Proſcriptions take.

[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=108) Rome is
revived, and the Triumvirate

In the black Iſland are once more a State;

The City trembles: there's no third to ſhield,

If once Auguſtus to Antonius yield,

Law ſhall not ſhelter Cicero, the Robe

The Senate: Proud ſucceſſe admits no Probe

Of Juſtice to correct, or quare the fate

That bears down all as illegitimate;

For whatſoere it liſts to overthrow,

It either finds it, or elſe makes it ſo.

Thus Tyranny's a ſtately Palace, where

Ambition ſweats to climbe and nuſtle there;

But when 'tis enter'd, what hopes then remain?

The [...]e is no Salliport to come out again.

For Miſchief muſt rowle on, and gliding grow,

Like little Rivulets that gently flow

From their firſt bubbling ſprings, but ſtill increaſe

And ſwell their Chanel as they mend their pace;

Till in a glorious tyde of villany

They over-run the banks, and poſting fly

Like th' bellowing Wave [...] in tumults, till they can

Di [...]play themſelves in a full Ocean.

And if  [...]lind rage ſhall chance to miſs its way,

Bring ſtock enough alone to make a Sea.

Thus trebble treaſon▪ are ſecur'd and drown'd

By lowder cryes of deeper mouth and  [...]ound.

And high attempts ſwallow a puny p [...]ot,

A [...] Cannons overwhelm the ſmaller  [...]hor

Whiles the deaf ſenceleſs World inur'd a while

(Like the Catadupi [...]t the fall of Nile)

To the fierce tumbling wonder, think it none,

Thus Cuſtom hallow [...] [...]rreligion!

And ſtroaks the patient beaſt till he admit

The now-grown-light and neceſſary Bit.

[[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=109)But
whither do I ramble? Gauled times

Cannot endure a ſmart hand ore their crimes

Diſtracted age? What Dialect or faſhion

Shall I aſſume? to paſſe the approbation

Of thy cenſorious Synod; which now ſit

High Areopagites to deſtroy all wit?

I cannot ſay, I ſay, that I am one

Of th' Church of Ely-houſ [...], or Abington,

Nor of thoſe precious Spirits that can deal

The Pomegranates of grace at every meal.

No zealous Hemp-dreſſer yet dipp'd me in

The Laver of adoption from my ſin.

Put yet if inſpiration or a tale

Of a long-waſted ſix hours length prevail

A ſmooth Certificate from the ſiſter-hood,

Or to be termed holy before good,

Religious malice, or a faith 'thout works

Other than may proclaim us Jews or Turks:

If theſe, theſe hint at any thing? Then, then

Whoop! my diſpairing Hope come back agen:

For ſince the inundation of grace,

All honeſty's under water, or in chaſe.

But 'tis the old worlds dotage, thereupon

We feed on dreams, imagination,

Humours, and croſs-grain'd paſſions which now reign

In the decaying elements of the brain.

'Tis hard to coin new fancies, when there be

So few that lanch out in diſcovery.

Nay Arts are ſo far from being cheriſhed,

There's ſcarce a Colledge but has loſt its Head,

And almoſt all its Members: O ſad wound!

Where never an Artery could be judged ſound!

To what a height is Vice now towred? When we

Dare not miſcall it an Obliquitie?

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=109)So
confident, and carrying ſuch an awe,

That it ſubſcribes it ſelf no leſſe then Law?

If this be Reformation then? The great

Account purſued with ſo much bloud and ſweat?

In what black lines ſhall our ſad ſtory be

Deliver'd over to poſterity?

With what a daſh and ſcar ſhall we be read?

How has Dame Nature in us ſuffered?

Who of all Centuries the firſt age are

That ſunk the world for want of due repair?

When firſt we iſſued out in cryes and tears,

(Thoſe ſalt preſages of our future years)

Head-long we dropt into a quiet calm;

Times crown'd with roſie Garlands, ſpice and balm,

Where firſt a glorious Church and mother came,

Embrac'd us in her armes, gave us a name

By which we live, and an indulgent breſt,

Flowing with ſtream to an eternal reſt.

Thus raviſh'd, the poor Soul could not gueſs even,

Which was more kind to her yet, earth or heaven.

Or rather wrapped in a pious doubt

Of heaven, whether ſhe were in or out.

Next the Great Father of our Country brings

His bleſſing too, (even the Beſt of Kings)

Safe and well-grounded Laws to guard our peace,

And nurſe our virtues in their juſt increaſe;

Like a pure Spring from whom all graces come,

Whoſe boun [...]y made it double Christendome:

Such and ſo ſweet were thoſe Halcyon dayes,

That roſe upon us in our Infant rayes;

Such a compoſed State we breathed under,

We only heard of Jove, nere felt his thunder.

Terrors were then as ſtrange, as love now grown,

Wrong and Revenge liv'd quietly at home.

[[Page 202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=110)The ſole
contention that we underſtood,

Was a rare ſtrife and war in doing good.

Now let's reflect upon our gratefulneſs,

How we have added, or (O:) made it leſs,

What are th' improvements? what our progreſs, where

Thoſe handſom acts that ſay that ſome men were?

He that to antient wreaths can bring no more

From his own worth, dies banq'rupt on the ſcore.

For Father's Creſts are crowned in the Son,

And glory ſpreads by propogation.

Now virtue ſhield me! where ſhall I begin?

To what a labyrinth am I now ſlipp'd in?

What ſhall we anſwer them? or what deny?

What prove? or rather whither ſhall we fly?

When the poor widdow'd Church ſhall ask us where

Are all her honours? and that filial care

We owed ſo ſweet a Parent as the Spouſe

Of Chriſt, which here vouchſafed to own a houſe?

Where are her B [...]anerges? and thoſe rare

Brave ſons of conſolation? which did bear

The Ark before our Iſrael, and diſpence

The heavenly Manna with ſuch diligence?

In them the prim'tive Motto's come to paſſe,

Aut mortui ſunt, aut docent literas.

Bleſs'd Virgin, we can only ſay we have

Thy Prophets Tombes among us, and their grave.

And here and there a man in colours paint,

That by thy  [...]uines grew a mighty Saint.

Next Caeſar ſome accounts are due to thee,

But thoſe in Bloud already written be;

So loud and laſting, in ſuch monſtrous ſhapes,

So wide the never to be clos'd wound gapes;

[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=110)All ages
yet to come with ſhivering, ſhall

Recite the fearfull pres'dent of thy fall.

Hence we confute thy tenent Solomon,

Ʋnder the Sun a new thing hath been done▪

A thing before all pattern, all pretence

Of rule or copy: Such a ſtrange offence

Of ſuch original extract, that it bears

Date only from the Eden of our years.

Laconian Agis! we have read thy fate,

The violence of the Spartan love and hate.

How Pagans trembled at the thought of thee,

And fled the horror of thy tragedie;

Thyestes cruel feaſt, and how the Sun

Shrunk in his golden beams that fight to ſhun▪

The boſoms of all Kingdoms open lye,

Plain and emergent to th' inquiring eye.

But when we glance upon our native home▪

As the black Center to whom all points come,

We reſt amazed, and ſilently admire

How far beyond all ſpleen ours did aſpire.

All that we dare aſſert, is but a cry

Of an exchanged peace for Liberty ▪

A ſecret term by inſpiration known,

A miſt that brooks no demonſtration,

Unleſſe we dive into our purſes, where

We quickly find Our Freedom purely dear.

But why exclaim you thus? may ſome men ſay,

Againſt the times? when equal night and day

Keep their juſt courſe? the ſeaſons ſtill the ſame?

As ſweet as when from the firſt hand they came?

The influence of the Stars benigne and free,

As at firſt Peep up in their infancie?

'Tis not thoſe ſtanding motions that divide

The ſpace of years, nor the ſwift hours that glide

[[Page 204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=111)Thoſe
little particles of age, that come

In thronging Items that make up the Sum,

That's here intended: But our crying crimes,

Our Monſters that abominate the times.

'Tis we that make the Metonimie good

By being bad, which like a troubled floud

Nothing produce but ſlimy mire and dirt,

And impudence that makes ſhame malepert.

To travel further in theſe wounds that lye

Rankling, though ſeeming cloſed, were to deny

Reſt to an ore-watch'd world, and force freſh tears

From ſtench'd eyes, new alarum'd by old fears.

Which if they thus ſhall heal and ſtop, they be

The firſt that ere were cur'd by Lethargie.

This only Axiom from ill Times increaſe

I gather, There's a time to hold ones peace.

### 1.94. The Commoners.

1

COme your wayes

Bonny Boyes,

Of the Town,

For now is the time or never,

Shall your fears,

Or your cares

Caſt you down?

Hang your wealth,

And your health,

Get renown,

We all are undone for ever.

Now the King and the Crown

Are tumbling down,

[[Page 205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=111)And the
Realm doth groan with diſaſters,

And the ſcum of the land,

Are the men that command,

And our Slaves are become our Maſters.

2

Now our lives

Children, wives

And Eſtate,

Are a prey to the luſt and plunder,

To the rage

Of our age;

And the fate

Of our land

Is at hand,

'Tis too late

To tread theſe Ʋſurpers under.

Firſt down goes the Crown,

Then follows the Gown,

Thus levell'd are we by the Roundhead,

While Church and State muſt

Feed their Pride and their Luſt,

And the Kingdom and King confounded.

3

Shall we ſtill

Suffer ill

And be dumb?

And let every Varlet undo us?

Shall we doubt

Of each Lowt,

That doth come,

With a voice

Like the noiſe

Of a Drum,

And a Sword or a Buff-coat to us?

[[Page 206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=112)Shall we
loſe our eſtates

By plunder and rates

To bedeck thoſe proud upſtarts that ſwagger,

Rather fight for your meat,

Which theſe Locusts do eat,

Now every man's a beggar.

### 1.95. The Scots Curanto.

1.

COme, come away to the Engliſh wars,

A fig for our Hills and Valleys,

'Twas we did begin and will lengthen their jarrs,

We'l gain by their loſs and folleys;

Let the Nations

By invaſions,

Break through our barrs,

They can get little good by their ſalleys.

2.

Though Iriſh and Engliſh entred be,

The State is becom [...] our Debtor.

Let them have our Land, if their own may be free

And the Scot will at length be a getter.

If they crave it

Let them have it,

What care we:

We would fain change our Land for a better.

[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=112)

3.

Long have we longed for the Engliſh Land,

But we are hindred ſtill by diſaſters,

But now is their time, when they can't withſtand,

But are their own Countries waſters.

If we venter,

We may enter

By command,

And at laſt we ſhall grow to be Maſters.

4.

When at firſt we began to rebell,

Though they did not before regard us,

How the name of a Scot did the Engliſh quell▪

Which formerly have out-dar'd us.

For our comming

And returning,

They paid us well,

And royally did reward us.

5.

The better to bring our ends about,

We muſt plead for a Reformation;

And tickle the minds of the giddy-brain'd rout▪

With the hopes of an innovation.

They will love us

And approve us,

Without doubt,

If we bring in an alteration.

6.

Down with the Biſhops and their train,

The Surplice and Common Prayers,

[[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=113)Then
will we not have a King remain,

But we'l be the Realms ſurveyers.

So by little

And a little

We ſhall gain

All the Kingdom without gain-ſayers.

7.

And when at the laſt we have conquer'd the King,

And beaten away the Cavaleers,

The Parliament next muſt the ſame ditty ſing,

And thus we will ſet the State by the ears.

By their jarring

And their warring

We will bring,

Their Eſtates to be ours, which they think to be theirs.

8.

And thus when among us the Kingdom is ſhar'd,

And the People are all made Beggars like we;

A Scot will be as good as an Engliſh Leard,

O! what a unity this will be.

As we gain it

We'l retain it

By the ſweard;

And the Engliſh ſhall ſay, bonny blew-cap for me.

[[Page 209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=113)

### 1.96. An Anſwer to a Letter from Sir John Mennis, wherein he jeers him for
falling ſo quickly to the uſe of the Directory.

FRiend thou doeſt laſh me with a ſtory,

A long one too of Directory;

When thou alone deſerves the Birch,

That brought'ſt the bondage on the Church.

Didſt thou not treat for Bristol City,

And yield it up? the more's the pity.

And ſaw'ſt thou not, how right or wrong

The Common-prayer-book went along?

Did'ſt thou not ſcourſe, as if enchanted

For Articles Sir Thomas granted?

And barte [...], as an Author ſaith,

The Articles oth' Chriſtian Faith?

And now the Directory joſtles

Chriſt out oth' Church and his Apoſtles;

And tears down the Communion rayles,

That men may take it on their tayles.

Imagine, Friend, Bochus the King

Engraven on Sylla's Signet ring,

Delivering up into his hands

Fugurth, and with him, all his Lands;

Whom Sylla took and ſent to Rome,

There to abide the Senates doom.

In the ſame poſture I ſuppoſe,

John ſtanding in's Doublet and Hoſe,

[[Page
210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=114)Delivering up
amidſt the throng

The Common-prayer and Wiſedoms ſong

To hands of Fairfax, to be ſent

A Sacrifice to the Parliament.

Thou little thought'ſt what Jear began,

Wrapt in that Treaty? Buſie John▪

There lurk'd, the Fire that turn'd to Cinder,

The Church her Ornaments to Tinder.

There bound up in that Treaty lyes

The fate of all our Chriſtmaſs-pyes;

Our Holydaies there went to wrack,

Our Wakes were laid upon their back,

Our Goſſips ſpoons away were lurcht,

Our Feaſts and Fees for Women churcht;

All this, and more aſcribe we might

To Thee at Bristol, wretched Knight.

Yet thou upbraid'ſt and rayld'ſt in rime,

On me, for that which was thy Crime.

So froward Children in the Sun,

Amidſt their ſports ſome ſhrew'd turn done,

The faulty Youth begins to prate,

And layes it on his harmleſſe Mate.

Dated,

From Nympton where the Cider ſmiles,

And James has horſe as lame as Giles,

The fourth of May, and doſt thou hear?

'Tis as I take the 8th. year

Since Portugal by Duke Braganza

Was cut from Spain without a Hand-ſaw.

I. S.

[[Page 211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=114)

### 1.97. The Kings Diſguiſe.

ANd why a Tenant to this vile diſguiſe,

Which who but ſees, blaſphemes thee with his eyes?

My twins of light within their penthouſe ſhrink,

And hold it their Allegiance now to wink.

Oh! for a ſtate-diſtinction to arraign

Charles of High Treaſon 'gainſt my Soveraign.

What an uſurper to his Prince is wont,

Cloyſter and ſhave him, he himſelf hath don't.

His muffled feature ſpeaks him a recluſe,

His ruines prove him a religious houſe.

The Sun hath mew'd his beams from off his lamp,

And Majeſty defac'd the Royal ſtamp.

It's not enough thy Dignitie's in thrall,

But thou'lt tranſmute it in thy ſhape and all?

As if thy blacks were of too faint a dye,

Without the tincture of Tautology.

Flay an Aegyptian for his Caſſocks skin,

Spun of his Countries darkneſſe, line't within

With Presbyterian budge, that drowſie t [...]ance,

The Synod-ſable, foggy ignorance:

Nor bodily, nor ghoſtly Negro could

Rough-caſt thy figure in a ſadder mould:

This Privy-Chamber of thy ſhape would be

But the cloſe-mourner of thy Royalty:

Twill break the circle of thy Jaylors ſpell,

A Pearle within a rugged Oyſter ſhell.

Heaven, which the Minſter of thy Perſon owns,

Will fine thee for Dilapidations:

[[Page 212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=115)Like to
the martyr'd Abbeys courſer doom,

Devoutly alter'd to a Pidgeon-room:

Or like the colledge by the changeling rabble,

M— Elves, transform'd into a ſ [...]able.

Or if there be a prop [...]anation higher,

Such is the Sacriledge of thine attire,

By which th' art half depos'd: thou lookſt like one

Whoſe looks are under ſequeſtration.

Whoſe Regenado form, at the firſt glance,

Shews like the ſelf-denying Ordinance,

Angel of light, and darkneſs too, I doubt,

Inſpir'd within, and yet poſſeſs'd without:

Majeſtick twi-light in the ſtate of grace,

Yet with an excommunicated face.

Charles and his Mask are of a different Mint,

A Pſalm of mercy in a miſcreant print

The Sun wears mid-night, Day is beetle-brow'd,

And lightning is in Keldar of a cloud.

Oh the accurſt Stenography of fate!

The Princely Eagle ſhrunk into a Bat.

What charm, what Magick vapour can it be,

That ſhrinks his  [...]ayes to this Apoſtaſie?

It is but ſubtile  [...]ilm of tiffany air,

No Cob-web vizard, ſuch as Ladies wear,

When they are veil'd on purpoſe to be ſeen,

Doubling their luſtre by their vanquiſh'd skreen,

Nor the falſe ſcabbard of a Princes tough

Metal, and three pild darkneſs, like the ſlough

Of an impriſon'd flame: 'tis Faux in grain,

Dark-Lanthorn to our high Meridian.

Hell belcht the damp, the Warwick-caſtle Vote

Rang Britains Corfeu, ſo our light went out.

Thy viſage is not legible, the letters,

Like a Lords name writ in phantaſtick fetters:

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=115)Cloaths
where a Switzer might be buried quick:

Sure they would fit the Body politick.

Falſe beard enough to fit a ſtages plot,

For that's the ambuſh of their wit, God wot.

Nay all his Properties ſo ſtrange appear,

Y'are not i'th' preſence, though the King be there.

A Libel is his dreſs, a garb uncouth,

Such as the Hue and Cry once purg'd at mouth.

Scribling aſſaſſinate, thy lines atteſt

An ear-mark due, Cub of the Blatant beaſt,

Whoſe wrath before 'tis ſyllabled for worſe,

Is Blaſphemy unfledg'd, a callow curſe.

The Laplanders, when they would ſell a wind

Wafting to Hell, bag up thy phraſe, and bind

It to the Barque, which at the Voyage-end

Shi [...]ts Poop, and breeds the Collicke in the Fiend.

But I'le not dubbe thee with a glorious ſcar,

Nor ſink thy Skullar with a man of War.

The black mouth'd Si-quis, and this ſlandering ſuit,

Both do alike in picture execute

But ſince we're all call'd Papiſts, why not date

Devotion to the rags thus conſecrate?

As Temples uſe to have their Porches wrought

With Sphynxes,  [...]reatures of an antick draught,

And puzling Pourtraictures, to ſhew that there

Riddles inhabited, the like is here.

But pardon Sir, ſince I preſume to be

Clerk of this Cloſet to your Majeſty;

Me thinks in this your dark myſterious dreſſe

I ſee the Goſpel coucht in Parables.

At my next view my pur-blind fancy ripes,

And ſhews Religion in its dusky types.

[[Page 214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=116)Such a
Text-Royal, ſo obſcure a ſhade,

Was Solomon in proverbs all array'd.

Come all the brats of this expounding age,

To whom the ſpirit is in pupillage;

You that damn more than ever Sampſon ſlew,

And with his engine the ſame jaw-bone too:

How is't he ſcapes your Inquiſition free,

Since bound up in the Bibles livery?

Hence Cabinet-intruders, Pick-locks hence,

You that dim Jewels with your Bristol-ſence:

And Characters, like Witches ſo torment,

Till they confeſſe a guilt, though innocent.

Keys for this Coffer you can never get,

None but St▪ Peter ope's this Cabinet.

This Cabinet, whoſe aſpect would benight

Critick ſpectators with redundant light.

A Prince moſt ſeen, is leaſt: What Scriptures call

The Revelation, is moſt myſtical.

Mount then thou Shadow-royal, and with haſt

Advance thy morning-ſtar, Charles overcaſt.

May thy ſtrange journey contradictions twiſt,

And force fair weather from a Scotiſh miſt;

Heavens Confeſſors are pos'd, thoſe ſtar-ey'd ſages

To interpret Eclipſe, thus riding ſtages.

Thus Iſrael-like, he travels with a cloud,

Both as a conduct to him and a ſhroud.

But oh! he goes to Gibeon, and renews

A league with mouldy bread, and clouted ſhooes.

[[Page 215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=116)

### 1.98. The Rebell SCOT.

HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottiſh crew!

Then Madam nature wears black patches too?

What? ſhall our Nation be in bondage thus

Unto a Land that truckles under us?

Ring the Bells backward, I am all on fire,

Not all the Buckets in a Country Quire

Shall quench my rage. A Poet ſhould be fear'd,

When angry, like a Comets flaming beard.

And where's the Stoick? can his wrath appeaſe

To ſee his Country ſick of Pym's diſeaſe,

By Scotch Invaſion to be made a prey

To ſuch Pig-wiggin Myrmidons as they?

But that there's charm in verſe, I would not quote

The name of Scot without an Antidote,

Unleſſe my head were red, that I might brew

Invention there that might be poyſon too.

Were I a drowſie Judge, whoſe diſmal note

Diſgorgeth halters, as a Juglers throat

Doth ribbands: could I (in Sir Emp'rick's tone)

Speak Pills in phraſe, and quack deſtruction:

Or roar like Marſhall, that Geneva Bull,

Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full:

Yet to expreſſe a Scot, to play that prize,

Not all thoſe mouth-Granadoes can ſuffice.

Before a Scot can properly be curſt,

I muſt (like Hocas) ſwallow daggers firſt.

Come keen Iambicks with your Badgers feet,

And Badger-like, bite till your teeth do meet.

Help ye tart Satyriſts to imp my rage,

With all the Scorpions that ſhould whip this age:

[[Page 216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=117) Scots
are like Witches, do but whet your pen,

Scratch till the bloud come, they'l not hurt you then.

Now as the Martyrs were inforc'd to take

The ſhapes of Beaſts, like Hypocrites at ſtake,

I'le bait my Scot ſo, yet not cheat your eyes;

A Scot within a Beaſt is no diſguiſe.

No more let Ireland brag, her harmleſs Nation

Foſters no Venom, ſince the Scots plantation:

Nor can ours feign'd antiquity maintain,

Since they came in, England hath Wolves again.

The Scot that kept the Tower, might have ſhown

(Within the grate of his own breaſt alone)

The Leopard and the Panther, and ingroſt

What all thoſe wild Collegiates had coſt

The honeſt high-ſhoes in their termly fees,

Firſt to the ſalvage Lawyer, next to theſe.

Nature her ſelf doth Scotch-men Beaſts confeſſe,

Making their Country ſuch a wilderneſſe:

A Land that brings in queſtion and ſuſpence

Gods omni-preſence, but that Charles came thence,

But that Montroſs and Crawfords loyal band

Atton'd their ſins and chriſt'ned half the Land.

Nor is it all the Nation hath theſe ſpots;

There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots:

As in a picture, where the ſquinting paint

Shews  [...]iend on this ſide, and on that ſide Saint.

He that ſaw Hell in's melancholly dream,

And in the twi-light of his fancy's theam

Sca [...]'d from his ſins, repented in a fright,

Had he view'd Scotland, had turn'd Proſelyte.

A Land where one may pray with curſt intent,

O may they never ſuffer baniſhment!

Had  [...]ain been Scot, God would have chang'd his doom,

Not forc't him wander, but confin'd him home:

[[Page 217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=117)Like
Jews they ſpread, and as infection fly,

As if the Devil had Ubiquity.

Hence 'tis they live at Rovers, and defie

This or that place, Rags of Geography.

They'r Citizens o'th' world; they'r all in all,

Scotland's a Nation Epidemicall.

And yet they ramble not, to learn the mode

How to be dreſt, or how to liſp abroad;

To return knowing in the Spaniſh ſhrug,

Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug

Reſembles moſt, in belly, or in beard;

(The Card by which the Marriners are ſteer'd.)

No, the Scots-Errant fight, and fight to eat,

Their Ostrich-ſtomachs make their Swords their meat:

Nature with Scots, as Tooth-drawers hath dealt,

Who uſe to hang their teeth upon their Belt.

Yet wonder not at this their happy choiſe,

The Serpent's fatall ſtill to Paradiſe.

Sure England hath the Hemeroids, and theſe

On the North poſture of the patient ſeize,

Like Leeches: thus thy Phyſically thirſt

After our bloud, but in the cure ſhall burſt.

Let them not think to make us run o'th' ſcore,

To purchaſe villanage as once before,

When an Act paſs'd to ſtroak them on the head,

Call them good Subjects, buy them Gingerbread;

Nor Gold, nor Acts of grace, 'tis Steel muſt tame

The ſtubborn Scot: a Prince that would reclaim

Rebells by yielding, doth like him, (or worſe)

Who ſadled his own back, to ſhame his horſe.

Was it for this you left your leaner ſoil,

Thus to lard Iſrael with Aegypts ſpoyle?

They are the Goſpels Life guard: but for them

The Garriſon of new Jeruſalem!

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=118)What
would the Brethren do? the Cauſe! the Cauſe!

Sack poſſets, and the Fundamental Laws!

Lord! what a goodly thing is want of ſhirts!

How a Scotch-ſtomach, and no meat, converts!

They wanted food and raiment, ſo they took

Religion for their Seamſtreſſe and their Cook.

Unmask them well, their honours and eſtate,

As well as conſcience are ſophiſticate.

Shrive but their titles, and their money poize,

A Laird & twenty pounds pronounc'd with noiſe,

When conſtru'd, but for a plain Yeoman go,

And a good ſober two-pence, and well ſo.

Hence then you proud Impoſtors, get you gone,

You Picts in Gentry and Devotion;

You ſcandal to the ſtock of Verſe, a race

Able to bring the Gibbet in diſgrace.

Hyperbolus by ſuffering did traduce

The Oſtraciſm, and ſham'd it out of uſe.

The Indian, that Heaven did forſware,

Becauſe he heard the Spaniards were there,

Had he but known what Scots in Hell had been,

He would, Eraſmus like, have hung between:

My Muſe hath done. A voider for the nonce;

I wrong the Devil ſhould I pick their bones.

That diſh is his, for when the Scots deceaſe,

Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles.

A Scot, when from the Gallow-tree got looſe,

Drops into Styx, and turns a Soland-Gooſe.

[[Page 219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=118)

### 1.99. The Scots Apoſtaſie.

IS't come to this? what ſhall the cheeks of fame,

Stretcht with the breath of learned Londons name,

Be flag'd again? and that great piece of ſence,

As rich in Loyalty and Eloquence▪

Brought to the Teſt, be found a trick of State?

Like Chymiſts tinctures, prov'd adulterate?

The Devil ſure ſuch language did atchieve,

To cheat our un-forwarned Grandam Eve,

As this impoſtour found out, to beſot

Th' experienc'd Engliſh to believe a Scot.

Who reconcil'd the Covenants doubtfull ſence?

The Commons argument, or the Cities pence?

Or did you doubt perſiſtance in one good

Would ſpoyle the fabrick of your Brotherhood,

Projected firſt in ſuch a forge of ſin,

Wa [...] fit for the grand Devils hammering?

Or was't ambition that this damned fact

Should tell the world you know the ſins you act?

The infamy this ſuper-treaſon brings,

Blaſts more than Murders of your ſixty Kings;

A crime ſo black, as being advis'dly done,

Thoſe hold with theſe no competition.

Kings only ſuffer'd then, in this doth lye

Th' Aſſaſſination of Monarchy.

Beyond this ſin no one ſtep can be trod,

If not t'attempt depoſing of your God:

Oh were you ſo ingag'd, that we might ſee

Heavens angry lightning 'bout your ears to flee

[[Page 220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=119)Till you
were ſhrivel'd to duſt, and your cold Land,

Parcht to a drought beyond the Lybian ſand▪

But 'tis reſerv'd, till Heaven plague you worſe:

Be Objects of an Epidemick curſe.

Firſt, may your Brethren, to whoſe viler ends

Your power hath bawded, ceaſe to be your friends;

And prompted by the dictate of their reaſon,

Reproach the Traytors though they hug the Trea­ſon.

And may their jealouſies increaſe and breed,

Till they confine your ſteps beyond the Tweed.

In forrain Nations may your loath'd name be

A ſtigmatizing brand of infamy;

Till forc'd by general hate, you ceaſe to rome

The world, and for a plague to live at home:

Till you reſume your poverty, and be

Reduc'd to beg where none can be ſo free

To grant; and may your ſcabby Land be all

Tranſlated to a general Hoſpitall,

Let not the Sun afford one gentle ray,

To give you comfort of a Summers day;

But, as a guerdon for your Trayterous War,

Live cheriſh'd only by the Northern ſtar.

No ſtranger deign to viſit your rude coaſt,

And be to all but baniſht men, as loſt.

And ſuch in heightning of the infliction due,

Let provok'd Princes ſend them all to you.

Your State a Chaos be, where not the Law,

But power, your lives and liberties may aw.

No Subject 'mongſt you keep a quiet breſt,

But each man ſtrive through bloud to be the beſt;

Till, for thoſe miſeries on us you've brought,

By your own Sword our juſt revenge be wrought.

[[Page 221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=119)To ſum
up all — let your Religion be,

As your Allegiance, mask'd hypocriſie:

Untill, when Charles ſhall be compos'd in duſt,

Perfum'd with Epithetes of good and juſt;

HE ſav'd, incenſed Heaven may have forgot

T' afford one act of mercy to a Scot,

Unleſſe that Scot deny himſelf, and do

(What's eaſier far) renounce his Nation too.

### 1.100. The Scots Arrears.

FOur hundred thouſand pounds!

A luſty Bag indeed:

Was't ever known ſo vaſt a Sum

Ere paſt the River Tweede?

Great pity it is, I ſwear,

Whole Carts was thither ſent,

Where hardly two in fifty knew,

What Forty ſhillings meant:

But 'twas to ſome perceiv'd,

Three Kingdoms were undone.

And thoſe that ſit here thought it fit,

To ſettle them one by one,

Now Ireland hath no haſte,

So there they'le not begin;

The Scotiſh ayde muſt firſt be paid,

For ye came freely in,

And William Lilly writes —

Who writes the truth you know;

In froſty weather they marched hither.

Up to the chins in ſnow.

[[Page 222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=120)Free
quarter at exceſſe,

They do not weigh a feather,

Thoſe Crowns for coals, brought in by ſhoals;

Scarce kept their men together,

Of Plunder they eſteem

As trifles of no worth,

Of force ye dote, becauſe recruit

Iſſued no faſter forth.

If once this Caſh is paid,

I hope the Scot be ſpedd,

He need not ſteal, but fairly deal,

Both to be cloth'd and fedd.

Our ſheep and Oxen may

Safe in their paſtures ſtand,

What need they filch the cow

That's milch to ſojourn in their land.

I wonder much the Scot

With this defiles his hand,

Becauſe the ſumm's a price of Rome,

Rais'd out of the Biſhops lands;

But too too well ye know

To what intent they in come;

'Twas not their pains produc'd this gains,

'Twas ſent to pack them home:

Methinks I hear them laugh

To ſee how matters proved,

And give a ſhout, it ſo fell out,

Ye were more fear'd than loved.

If Jockey after this

Reneaginge hath forgot,

From antient fires, he much retires,

And ſhows himſelf no Scot.

[[Page 223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=120)

### 1.101. A SONG On the Schiſmatick ROTUNDOS.

ONce I a curious Eye did fix,

To obſerve the tricks

Of the Schiſmaticks of the Times,

To find out which of them

Was the merrieſt Theme,

And beſt would befit my Rimes;

Arminius I found ſolid,

Socinians were not ſtolid,

Much Learning for Papiſts did ſtickle.

But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,

ah, ha ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,

'Tis you that my ſpleen doth tickle.

And firſt to tell muſt not be forgot,

How I once did trot

With a great Zealot to a Lecture,

Where I a Tub did view,

Hung with apron blew;

'Twas the Preachers as I conjecture,

His Uſe and his Doctrine too

Were of no other hue,

Though he ſpake in a tone moſt mickle:

But ah, ha ha ha, &c.

He taught amongſt other prety things

That the Book of Kings

Small benefit brings to the godly,

[[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=121)Beſide
he had ſome grudges

At the Book of Judges,

And talkt of Leviticus odly,

Wiſedome moſt of all

He declares Apocryphal,

Beat Bell and the Dragon, like Michael:

But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha, &c.

'Gainſt Humane Learning next he envyes,

And almoſt boldly ſay's,

'Tis that which deſtroyes Inſpiration,

Let ſuperſtitious ſence

And wit be baniſhed hence,

With Popiſh Predomination

Cut Biſhops down in haſt,

And Cathedrals as faſt

As Corn that's fit for the ſickle:

But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,

ah, ha ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,

'Tis you that my ſpleen doth tickle.

### 1.102. Cromwell's Panegyrick.

SShall Presbyterian Bells ring Cromwels praiſe,

While we ſtand ſtill and do no Trophyes raiſe

Unto his laſting name? Then may we be

Hung like the Bells for our dependencie.

Well may his Noſe, that is Dominicall,

Take pepper in't, to ſee no Pen at all

Stir to applaud his merits, who hath lent

Such valour, to erect a Monument

[[Page 225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=121)Of
laſting praiſe; whoſe name ſhall never dye,

While England has a Church, or Monarchy.

He whom the laurell'd Army home did bring

Riding triumphant o're his conquer'd King,

He is the Generals Cypher now; and when

Hee's joyn'd to him▪ he makes that One a Ten.

The Kingdoms Saint; England no more ſhall ſtir

To cry St. George, but now St Oliver.

Hee's the Realm Enſign; and who goes to wring

His Noſe, is forc'd to cry, God ſave the King.

He that can rout an Army with his name,

And take a City, ere he views the ſame:

His Souldiers may want bread, but n'ere ſhall fear

(While hee's their General,) the want of Beer;

No Wonder they wore Bayes, his Brewing-fat

(Helicon-like) make Poets Laureat.

When Brains in thoſe Caſtalian liquors ſwim,

We ſing no Heatheniſh Pean, but a Hymne;

And that by th' Spirit too, for who can chuſe

But ſing Hoſanna to this King of Jewes?

Tremble you Scotiſh Zealots, you that han't

Freed any Conſcience from your Covenant:

That for thoſe bal'd Appellatives of Cauſe,

Religion, and the Fundamental Laws,

Have pull'd the old Epiſcopacy down,

And as the Miter, ſo you'le ſerve the Crown.

You that have made the Cap to th' Bonnet vaile,

And made the Head a Servant to the Taile.

And you curſt ſpawne of Publicans, that ſit

In every County, as a plague to it;

That with your Yeomen Sequeſtrating Knaves,

Have made whole Counties beggerly, and Slaves.

You Synod, that have ſate ſo long to know

Whether we muſt believe in God, or no;

[[Page 226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=122)You that
have torn the Church, and ſate t' im­paire

The Ten Commandements, the Creed, the Prayer;

And made your honors pull down Heavens glory,

While you ſet up that Calfe, your Directory:

We ſhall no wicked Jews-ear'd Elders want,

This Army's built of Churches Militant:

Theſe are new Tribes of Levi; for they be

Clergy, yet of no Univerſitie.

Pull down your Creſts, for every bird ſhall gather,

From your uſurping back, a ſtollen feather.

Your great Lay Levite, whoſe great Margent tires

The patient Reader, while he blots whole quires,

Nay reams with Treaſon; and with Nonſence too,

To juſtifie what e're you ſay or do:

Whoſe circumciſed ears are hardly grown

Ripe for another Perſecution:

He muſt to Scotland for another paire;

For he will loſe theſe, if he tarry here.

[...]urges that Reverend Presbydean of Pauls,

Muſt (with his Poundage) leave his Cure of Souls,

And into Scotland trot, that he may pick

Out of that Kirk, a nick-nam'd Biſhoprick.

The Protean Hypocrites, that will ne're burn,

Muſt here, or elſe at Tyburn take a turn.

And Will. the Conqueror in a Scotiſh dance

Muſt lead his running Army into France.

Or he and's Juncto among thoſe Crews

In Holland build a Synagogue of Jewes,

And ſpread Rebellion; Great Alexander

Fears not a Pillory, like this Commander.

And Bedlam John, that at his Clerks ſo raves,

Uſing them not like ſervants, but like ſlaves.

[[Page 227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=122)He that
ſo freely rail'd againſt his Prince,

Call'd him diſſembling ſ [...]btile Knave, and ſince

Has ſtil'd the whole Army Bankrupts; ſaid, that none

Of their Eſtates were equal to his own:

He that was by a ſtrong Ambition led

To ſet himſelf upon the Cities head:

But when he has reſtor'd his both-ſide fees,

Hee'l be as poor, or they as rich as hee's.

And that ſtill-gaping Tophet Goldſmiths Hall,

With all his Furies, ſhall to ruine fall.

Wee'l be no more gull'd by that Popiſh ſtory,

But ſhall reach Heav'n without that Purgatory:

What Honour does he merit? what Renown?

By whom all theſe Oppreſſion are pull'd down.

And ſuch a Government is like to be

In Church and State, as eye did never ſee:

Magicians hold, hee'l ſet up Common-prayer;

Looking in's face they find the Rubrick there.

His Name ſhall never dye by fire nor floud,

But in Church-windows ſtand, where Pictures ſtood▪

And if his Soul lothing that houſe of clay,

Shall to another Kingdom march away,

Under ſome Barnes floor his bones ſhall lye,

Who Churches did, and Monuments defie:

Where the rude Thraſher with much knocking on,

Shall wake him at the Reſurrection.

And on his Grave ſince there muſt be no Stone,

Shall ſtand this Epitaph; That he has none.

[[Page 228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=123)

### 1.103. The Scotch War.

WHen firſt the Scottiſh War began

The Engliſh man, we did trapan, with Pellit and Pike,

The bonny blythe and cunning Scot

Had then a Plot, which they did not, well ſmell, it's like;

Although he could neither write, nor read,

Yet our General Laſhly croſs'd the Tweed

With his gay gangh of Blew-caps all,

And we marcht with our Generall;

We took New-caſtle in a trice,

But we thought it had been Paradice,

They did look all ſo bonny and gay,

Till we took all their Pillage away.

Then did we ſtreight to plundering fall

Of great and ſmall, for were all moſt valiant that day;

And Jinny in her Satten Gown the beſt in Town,

From Heel to Crown was gallant and gay;

Our ſilks and ſweets made ſuch a ſmother,

Next day we knew not one another:

For Jockie did never ſo ſhine,

And Jinny was never ſo fine;

A geud faith a gat a ged Beaver then,

But it's beat into a Blew-cap agen

By a Redcoat, that did ſtill cry, Rag,

And a red ſnowt, a the Deel aw the Crag.

The Engliſh raiſed an Army ſtreight

With mickle ſtate, and we did wate to face them as well;

[[Page 229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=123)Then
every valiant Muſquet man put fire in pan,

And we began to lace them as well;

But before the Sparks were made a Cole,

They did every man pay for his Pole;

Then their bought Land we lent them agen,

Into Scotland we went with our men;

We were paid by all, both Peaſant and Prince,

But I think we have ſoundly paid for it ſince,

For our Silver is waſted, Sir, all,

And our Silks hang in Westminſter Hall.

The Godly Presbyterian, that holy man,

The War began with Biſhop and King,

Where we like Waiters at a Feaſt

But not the leaſt of all the gueſt, muſt diſh up the thing,

We did take a Covenant to pull down

The Croſs, the Crofier, and the Crown,

VVith the Rochet the Biſhop did bear.

And the Smock that his Chaplain did wear:

But now the Covenant's gone to wrack,

They ſay, it looks like an old Almanack,

For Jockie is grown out of date,

And Jinny is thrown out of late.

I muſt confeſſe the holy firk did only work

Upon our Kirk for ſilver and meat,

VVhich made us come with aw our broods,

Venter our bloods for aw your goods, to pilfer & cheat;

But we ſee what covetouſneſs doth bring,

For we loſt our ſelves when we ſold our King;

And alack now and welly we cry,

Our backs mow and bellies muſt dye;

VVe fought for food, and not vain-glory,

And ſo there's an end of a Scotiſh mans Story;

[[Page 230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=124)I curſe
all your Silver and Gold,

Aw the worſt tale that ever was told.

### 1.104. The Power of Money.

TIs not the ſilver nor gold for it ſelf

That makes men adore it, but 'tis for its power:

For no man does doat upon pelf becauſe pelf,

But all Court the Lady in hope of her dower:

The wonders that now in our dayes we behold,

Done by the irreſiſtable power of gold,

Our Zeal, and our Love, and Allegiance do hold.

This purchaſeth Kingdoms, Kings, Scepters, and Crowns;

Wins Battels, and conquers the Conquerors bold;

Takes Bulwarks, and Caſtles, and Cities, and Towns,

And our prime Laws are writ in letters of gold;

'Tis this that our Parliament calls and creates,

Turns Kings into Keepers, and Kingdomes to States,

And peopledomes theſe into highdomes tranſ­lates.

This made our black Synod to ſit ſtill ſo long,

To make themſelves rich, by making us poor;

This made our bold Army ſo daring and ſtrong,

And made them turn them, like Geeſe, out of door;

[[Page 231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=124)'Twas
this made our Covenant-makers to make it,

And this made our Prieſts for to make us to take it,

And this made both Makers and Takers for­ſake it.

'Twas this ſpawn'd the dunghill Crew of Com­mittees and 'ſtrators,

Who live by picking the Crockadile Parlia­ments gums;

This firſt made, and then proſpered the Rebells and Traytors,

And made Gentry of thoſe that were the Nati­ons ſcums:

This Herald gives Armes not for merit, but ſtore,

And gives Coats to thoſe that did ſell Coats before,

If their pockets be but lin'd well with argent and ore.

This, plots can deviſe, and diſcover what they are;

This, makes the great Fellons the leſſer con­demn;

This, ſets thoſe on the Bench, that ſhould ſtand at the Bar,

Who Judge ſuch as by right ought to Execute them;

Gives the boyſterous Clown his unſufferable pride,

Makes Beggars, and Fools, and Uſurpers to ride,

Whiles ruin'd Propriators run by their ſide.

[[Page 232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=125)Stamp
either the Armes of the State or the King,

St. George or the Breeches, C. R. or O. P.

The Croſs or the Fiddle, 'tis all the ſame thing;

This, ſtill is the Queen whoſoe'er the King be;

This, lines our Religion, builds Doctrine & Truth,

With Zeal and the Spirit the factious endueth,

To club with St. Katharine, or ſweet Siſter Ruth.

'Tis money makes Lawyers give Judgement, or plead

On this ſide, or that ſide, on both ſides, or neither;

This makes young men Clerks that can ſcarce write or read,

And ſpawns arbitrary Orders as various as the weather;

This makes your blew Lecturers pray, preach, and prate

Without reaſon or ſence againſt Church, King, or State,

To ſhew the thin lining of his twice-covered pate.

'Tis money makes Earls, Lords, Knights, and Eſquires

Without breeding, deſcent, wit, learning, or merit;

This makes Ropers, and Ale-drapers, Sheriffs of Shires,

Whoſe trade is not ſo low, nor ſo baſe as their ſpirit:

This Juſtices makes, and wiſe ones we know,

Furr'd Aldermen too, and Mayors alſo;

This makes the old Wiſe trot, and makes the Mare to go.

[[Page 233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=125)This
makes your blew aprons Right Worſhipfull;

And for this we ſtand bare, and before them do fall;

They leave their young heirs well fleeced with wooll,

Whom we muſt call Squires, and then they pay all:

Who with beggarly ſouls, though their bodies be gawdy,

Court the pale Chamber-maid, and nick-name her a Lady,

And for want of good wit, they do ſwear and talk bawdy.

This Mariages makes, 'tis a Center of love,

It draws on the man, & it pricks up the woman

Birth, virtue, and parts no affection can move,

Whilſt this makes a Lord ſtoop to the Brat of a Broom-man;

This gives virtue and beauty to the Laſſes that you wooe,

Makes women of all ſorts and ages to do;

'Tis the ſoul of the world, and the worldling too.

This procures us whores, hawks, hounds & hares;

'Tis this keeps your Groom, and your Groom keeps your Gelding;

This built Citizens Wives, as well as wares;

And this makes your coy Lady ſo coming and yielding;

This buys us good Sack, which revives like the ſpring,

'Tis this your Poetical fancies do bring;

And this makes you as merry as we that do ſing.

[[Page 234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=126)

### 1.105. Contentment.

WHat though the ill times do run croſſe to our will,

And Fortune ſtill frown upon us,

Our hearts are our own, and ſhall be ſo ſtill,

A fig for the plagues they lay on us;

Let us take t'other cup, to chear our hearts up,

And let it be pureſt Canary;

We'll ne'er ſhrink nor care, at the Croſſes we bear,

Let them plague us untill they be weary.

What though we are made both Beggars and Slaves?

Let's endure it, and ſtoutly drink on't,

'Tis our comfort we ſuffer 'cauſe we wont be Knaves,

Redemption will come e're we think on't;

We muſt flatter and fear, thoſe that over us are,

And make them believe that we love them,

When their Tyranny is paſt, we can ſerve them at laſt

As they have ſerv'd thoſe have been above them.

Let the Levites go preach for the Gooſe or the Pig,

To drink Wine at Christmas or Easter:

The Doctor may labour our lives to new trig,

And make Nature faſt while we feaſt her;

The Lawyer may bawl, out his Lungs and his Gall

For Plaintiff, and for Defendant,

At his Book the Scholar lye, while with Plato he dye

With an ugly hard word at the end on't.

[[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=126)

Then here's to the man that delights in ſolfa,

For Sack is his only Rozin.

A load of hey ho, is not worth a ha ha,

He's a man for my money that draws in;

Then a pin for the muck, and a pin for ill luck,

'Tis better be blithe and frolick,

Than ſigh out our breath, and invite our own death

By the Gout, or the Stone, or the Collick.

### 1.106. On the Goldſmiths Committee.

COm Drawer, ſome wine,

Or wee'll pull down the Sign,

For we are all joviall Compounders:

We'll make the houſe ring,

With healths to our KING,

And confuſion light on his Confounders.

Since Goldſmiths Committee

Affords us no pitty,

Our ſorrows in Wine we will ſteep 'um,

They force us to take

Two Oaths, but wee'll make

A third, that we ne'er meant to keep 'um.

And next, who e're ſees,

We drink on our knees,

To the King, may he thirſt that repines:

A fig for thoſe Traytors

That look to our waters,

They have nothing to do with our Wines.

[[Page 236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=127)

And next, here's a Cup

To the Queen, fill it up,

Were it poyſon we would make an end on't;

May Charles and ſhe meet.

And tread under feet

Both Presbyter and Independent.

To the Prince, and all others,

His Siſters and Brothers,

As low in condition as high born,

We'll drink this, and pray

That ſhortly they may

See all them that wrongs them at Tyburn.

And next, here's three bouls

To all gallant ſouls,

That for the King did, and will venter;

May they flouriſh when thoſe

That are his, and their foes,

Are hang'd and ram'd down to the Center.

And next, let a Glaſſe

To our undoers paſſe,

Attended with two or three Curſes:

May plagues ſent from Hell

Stuff their bodies as well

As the Cavaliers coyn doth their purſes.

May the Cannibals of Pym

Eat them up limb by limb,

Or a hot Feaver ſcorch 'um to embers;

Pox keep 'um in bed

Untill they are dead,

And repent for the loſſe of their Members.

[[Page 237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=127)

And may they be found

In all to abound,

Both with Heaven and the Countries anger,

May they never want Fractions,

Doubts, Fears, and Diſtractions,

Till the Gallow-tree choaks them from danger.

### 1.107. The mad Zealot.

AM I mad, O noble Feſtus,

When Zeal and godly knowledge

Have put me in hope

To deal with the Pope,

As well as the beſt in the Colledge?

Boldly I preach, hate a Croſſe, hate a Surplice,

Miters, Copes, and Rochets:

Come hear me pray nine times a day,

And fill your heads with Crochets.

In the houſe of pure Emanuel

I had my Education,

Where my friends ſurmiſe

I dazell'd mine eyes

With the light of Revelation.

Boldly I preach, &c.

They bound me like a Bedlam,

They laſht my four poor quarters;

Whilſt thus I endure,

Faith makes me ſure

To be one of Foxes Martyrs.

Boldly I preach, &c.

[[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=128)

Theſe injuries I ſuffer

Through Antichriſts perſwaſions;

Take off this Chain,

Neither Rome nor Spain

Can reſiſt my ſtrong invaſions.

Boldly I preach, &c.

Of the beaſts ten horns (God bleſſe us!)

I have knock'd off three already:

If they let them alone,

I'le leave him none:

But they ſay I am too heady.

Boldly I preach, &c.

When I ſack'd the ſeven-hill'd City,

I met the great red Dragon;

I kept him aloof

With the armour of proof,

Though here I have never a rag on.

Boldly I preach, &c.

With a fiery Sword and Target

There fought I with this Monſter:

But the ſons of Pride

My Zeal deride,

And all my deeds miſconſter.

Boldly I preach, &c.

I unhors'd the Whore of Babel

With the Lance of Inſpirations:

I made her ſtink,

And ſpill her drink

In the cup of Abominations,

Boldly I preach, &c.

[[Page 239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=128)

I have ſeen two in a Viſion,

With a flying Book between them:

I have been in deſpair

Five times a year,

And cur'd by reading Greenham,

Boldly I preach, &c.

I obſerv'd in Perkins Tables

The black Lines of Damnation,

Thoſe crooked veins

So ſtuck in my Brains,

That I fear'd my Reprobation,

Boldly I preach, &c.

In the holy tongue of Canaan

I plac'd my chiefeſt pleaſure,

Till I prickt my foot,

With an Hebrew root,

That I bled beyond all meaſure.

Boldly I preach, &c.

I appear'd before th' Archbiſhop,

And all the High Commiſſion:

I gave him no Grace,

But told him to his face

That he favour'd Superſtition.

Boldly I preach, hate a Croſſe, hate a Surplice,

Miters, Copes, and Rochets:

Come hear me pray nine times a day,

And fill your heads with Crotchets.

[[Page 240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=129)

### 1.108. Of baniſhing the Ladies out of Town.

1.

A Story ſtrange I will unfold,

Then which a ſadder ne're was told,

How the Ladies were from London ſent,

With mickle woe and diſcontent.

2

A heart of Marble would have bled,

To ſee this rout of white and red,

Both York and Lancaster muſt fly,

With all their painted Monarchy.

3.

Thoſe faces which men ſo much prize,

In Mrs. Gibbes her Liveries,

Muſt leave their falſe and borrowed hue,

And put on grief that's only true.

4.

Thoſe pretty patches long and round,

Which covered all that was not ſound;

Muſt be forgotten at the Farmes,

As uſeleſs and ſuſpicious charmes.

5.

Now we muſt leave all our Deſignes,

That were contriv'd within the Lines;

Communication is deny'd,

If to our Husbands we be try'd.

[[Page 241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=129)

6.

And here's the miſery alone,

We muſt have nothing but our own,

Oh give us Liberty, and we

Will never aske propriety.

7.

Alas how can a Kiſſe be ſent,

From Rocky Cornwall into Kent?

Or how can Suſſex ſtretch an arm

To keep a Northern ſervant warm,

8.

Oh London! Centre of all Mirth,

Th' Epitome of Engliſh Earth;

All Provinces are in the ſtreets,

And Warwick-ſhire with Eſſex meets.

9.

Then farewell Queen-street, and the Fields,

And Garden that ſuch pleaſure yields,

Oh who would ſuch fair Lodgings change,

To neſtle in a plunder'd Grange!

10.

Farewell good places old and new,

And Oxford Kates once more adieu;

But it goes unto our very hearts,

To leave the Cheeſe-cakes and the Tarts.

11.

Farewell Bridge-foot and Bear thereby,

And thoſe bald-pates that ſtand ſo high,

[[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=130)We wiſh
it from our very Souls,

That other Heads were on thoſe powles.

12.

But whether hands of Parliament,

Or of Husbands, we're content,

Since all alike ſuch Traytors be,

Both againſt us and Monarchy.

### 1.109. Loyalty confin'd.

BEat on proud Billowes, Boreas Blow,

Swell curled Waves, high as Jove's roof,

Your incivility doth ſhew,

That innocence is tempeſt proof.

Though ſurely Nereus frown, my thoughts are calm,

Then ſtrike affliction, for thy wounds are balm.

That which the world miſcalls a Goale,

A private Cloſet is to me,

Whilſt a good Conſcience is my Baile,

And Innocence my Liberty:

Locks Barres and Solitude together met,

Make me no Priſoner but an Anchorit.

I whil'ſt I wiſh'd to be retir'd

Into this private room was turn'd,

As if their wiſedomes had conſpir'd,

The Salamander ſhould be burn'd.

[[Page 243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=130)

The Cynick hugs his poverty,

The Pelican her wilderneſs,

And 'tis the Indians pride to be

Naked on frozen Caucaſus.

Contentment cannot ſmart, Stoicks we ſee

Make torments eaſie to their Apathy.

Theſe Menacles upon my Arm,

I as my Miſtris's favours wear;

And for to keep my Ankles warm,

I have ſome Iron Shackles there.

Theſe walls are but my Garriſon; this Cell

Which men call Goal, doth prove my Cittadel.

So he that ſtrook at Jaſons life,

Thinking he had his purpoſe ſure:

By a malicious friendly Knife,

Did only wound him to a cure.

Malice I ſee wants wit, for what is meant,

Miſchief oft-times, proves favour by th' event▪

I'me in this Cabinet lockt up,

Like ſome high-prized Margaret,

Or like ſome great Mogul or Pope,

Are cloyſtered up from publick ſight.

Retirement is a piece of Majeſty,

And thus proud Sultan, I'me as great as thee.

Here ſin for want of food muſt ſtarve,

Where tempting Objects are not ſeen;

And theſe ſtrong Walls do only ſerve,

To keep Vice out, and keep me in.

Malice of late's grown charitable ſure,

I'me not committed, but I'me kept ſecure.

[[Page 244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=131)

Whence once my Prince affliction hath,

Proſperity doth Treaſon ſeem;

And for to ſmooth ſo tough a Path,

I can learn Patience from him.

Now not to ſuffer, ſhews no Loyal heart,

When Kings wants eaſe, Subjects muſt bear a part.

Have you not ſeen the Nightingale,

A Pilgrim koopt into a Cage,

How doth ſhe chant her wonted tale,

In that her narrow hermitage.

Even then her charming melody doth prove,

That all her Boughs are Trees, her Cage a Grove.

My ſoul is free as the ambient aire,

Although my baſer part's immur'd,

Whileſt Loyal thoughts do ſtill repair,

T' accompany my Solitude.

And though immur'd, yet I can chirp and ſing,

Diſgrace to Rebels, glory to my King.

VVhat though I cannot ſee my King,

Neither in his Perſon or his Coyne,

Yet contemplation is a thing,

That renders what I have not mine.

My King from me, what Adamant can part,

VVhom I do wear engraven on my heart.

I am that Bird whom they combine,

Thus to deprive of Liberty;

But though they do my Corps confine,

Yet maugre hate, my Soul is free.

Although Rebellion do my Body bind,

My King can only captivate my mind.

[[Page 245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=131)

### 1.110. On the demoliſhing the Forts.

IS this the end of all the toil,

And labour of the Town?

And did our Bulwarks riſe ſo high

Thus low to tumble down?

All things go by contraries now,

We fight to ſtill the Nation,

Who build Forts to pull down Popery,

Pull down for Edification.

The Indepedents tenets, and

The wayes ſo pleaſing be.

Our City won't be bound about,

But ſtands for Liberty.

The Popiſh doctrine ſhall no more

Prevail within our Nation;

For now we ſee that by our works,

There is no Juſtification.

What an Almighty army's this,

How worthy of our prayſing,

That with one Vote can blow down that

All we ſo long were raiſing!

Yet let's not wonder at this Change,

For thus 'twill be with all.

Theſe works did lift themſelves too high,

And Pride muſt have a fall.

[[Page 246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=132)

And when both Houſes vote agen,

The Cavies to be gone,

Nor dare to come within the lines

Of Communication.

They muſt reſerve the ſenſe or elſe,

Referr't to the Divines,

And they had need fit ſeven years more

Ere they can read thoſe lines.

They went to make a Gotham on't,

For now they did begin

To build theſe mighty banks about,

To keep the Cuckoes in.

Alas what need they take ſuch pains!

For why a Cucko here

Might find ſo many of his Mates,

Hee'l ſing here all the year.

Has Iſaac our L. Maior, L. Maior,

With Tradeſmen and his Wenches,

Spent ſo much time, and Cakes and Beer,

To edifie theſe Trenches!

All trades did ſhew their skill in this,

Each Wife an Engineer;

The Maireſs took the tool in hand,

The maids the ſtones did bear.

Theſe Bulwarks ſtood for Popery,

And yet we never fear'd um,

And now they worſhip and fall down,

Before thoſe Calves that rear'd 'um.

[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=132)

But though for Superſtition,

The Croſſes have been down'd,

Who'ld think theſe works would Popiſh turn,

That ever have been round?

This ſpoyles our Palmiſtry; for when

Wee'l read the Cities fate,

We find nor Lines nor Croſſes now,

As it hath had of late.

No wonder that the Aldermen,

Will no more mony lend,

When they that in this ſeven years,

Such learned works have pen'd.

Now to debaſe their lofty lines,

In which the wits delighted▪

'Tis thought they'l nere turn Poets more,

Becauſe their works are ſlighted.

Theſe to a dolefull tune are ſet,

For they that in the town.

Did every where cry Up go we,

Now they muſt ſing down down.

But if that Tyburn do remain,

When tother ſlighted be,

The Cits will thither flock and ſing,

Hay, hay, then up go we.

[[Page 248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=133)

### 1.111. Upon Routing the Scots Army. A SONG.

To the Tune of Through the Wood Lady.

1.

CAm lend, lend y'are lugs Joes, an Iſe ſpeak a Song,

Sing heome agen Jocky, ſing heome agen Jocky,

O hes velient Acts an hes Prowes emong,

Sing heome agen heome agen O valent Jocky.

2.

Sirs, Jockie's a Man held a mickle Note,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Tha Breech o tha Covenant ſtuck in hes Throte,

Sing heome agen, heome agen, &c.

3.

For Jockie was riteous, whilk ye wad admire,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

A fooght for tha Kirk, bet a plunder'd tha Quire

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

4.

An Jockie waxt roth, and toll Angland a cam,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Fro whence hee'd return, but alack a is lame,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

[[Page 249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=133)

5.

An Jockie was armed fro topp toll to toe,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Wi a po're o Men and th'are geod D— I tro,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

6.

So valent I wis they were, an ſa prat,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Ne Cock nor Hen durſt ſtand in thare gat,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

7

In every ſtrete thay ded ſa flutter,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Ne Child durſt ſhaw his Bred and Butter,

Sing heome agen, Jocky, &c.

8.

Whan th' Angliſh Forces they her'd on o're night,

Sing heome again Jocky, &c.

Next Morne thay harneſt themſels for a fight,

Sing heome agen, heome agen, &c.

9.

Thare D— wes tha Mon that wad be ſen  [...]oot,

Sing heome agen, Jocky, &c.

He feas't tham awhile, then turn'd Ars's about,

Sing heome agen, heome agen, &c.

10.

Tha Men that ater this valent Scot went,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

[[Page 250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=134)Had ner
foond him oout, bet by a ſtrong ſent,

Sing heome agen, heome agen O val [...]nt Jocky.

11.

Bet ſe tha reward ò that Cowardly Crue,

Sing heome agen Jocky, &c.

Thare Countremon Ballatine ſent 'em to Corfew,

Not home agen, home agen, O ſlaviſh Jocky.

### 1.112. The diſloyal Timiſt.

1.

NOw our holy Wars are don,

Betwixt the Father and the Son;

And ſince we have by righteous fate,

Diſtreſt a Monarch and his Mate.

And firſt their heirs fly into France

To weep out their Inheritance;

Let's ſet open all our Packs,

Which contain ten thouſand wracks;

Caſt on the ſhore of the red Sea

Of Naſeby, and of Newbery.

If then you will come provided with Gold,

We dwell

Cloſe by Hell,

Where wee'l ſell

What you will,

That is ill;

For Charity waxeth cold.

[[Page 251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=134)

2.

Haſt thou done murther, or bloud ſpilt,

We can ſoon giv't another name,

That will keep thee from all blame:

But be it ſtill provided thus,

That thou haſt once been one of us;

Gold is the God that ſhall pardon the Guilt,

For we have

What ſhall ſave

Thee from th' Grave,

Since the Law

We can awe;

Although a famous Prince's bloud were ſpilt.

3.

If a Church thou haſt bereft

Of its Plate, 'tis holy-theft;

Or for Zeal-ſake, if thou beeſt

Prompted on to take a Prieſt;

Gold is a ſure prevailing Advocate:

Then come

Bring a ſumme,

Law is dumb:

And ſubmits,

To our wits;

For it's Policy guides a State.

[[Page 252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=135)

### 1.113. A Medley.

1.

ROom for a Gameſter that plays at all he ſees,

Whoſe fickle faith is fram'd, Sir, to fit ſuch times as theſe;

One that cryes Amen, to ev'ry factious Prayer,

From Hugh Peters Pulpit, to St. Peters Chair:

One that can comply with Croſier and with Crown;

And yet can bouze

A full carouze,

While bottles tumble down,

Dery down.

2.

This is the way to trample without trembling.

Since Sycophants only ſecure;

Covenants and Oaths are badges of diſſembling,

'Tis the Politique pulls down the pure:

To plunder and pray,

To proteſt and betray

Are the only ready wayes to be great,

Flattering will do the feat:

Ne're go, ne're ſtir

Have ventred farther,

Then the greateſt o' th' Damme's in the Town,

From a Copper to a Crown.

3.

I am in an excellent homor now to think well,

And I'me in another humor now to drink well;

[[Page 253]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=135)Fill us
up a Beer-bowl boy,

That we may drink it merrily;

And let none other ſee,

Nor cauſe to underſtand,

For if we do, 'tis ten to one we are Trepand.

4.

Come fill us up a brace of Quarts,

Whoſe Anagram is call'd true hearts;

If all were true as I would hav't,

And Britain were cur'd of its humor,

Then I ſhould very well like my fate,

And drink off my Wine at a freer rate,

Without any noiſe or tumor;

And then I ſhould fix my humor.

5.

But ſince 'tis no ſuch matter, change your hue,

I may cog and flatter, ſo may you;

Religion

Is a wigeon,

And reaſon

Is Treaſon;

And he that hath a Noble heart may bid the world adieu.

6.

We muſt be like the Scotiſh man,

Who with intent to beat down ſchiſm,

Brought forth a Presbyterian,

A Canon and a Catechiſm.

If Beuk wont do't, then Jockie ſhoot,

The Kirk of Scotland doth command;

And what hath been, ſince he come in,

I am ſure we ha' cauſe to underſtand.

[[Page 254]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=136)

### 1.114. A Medley of the Nations.

#### 1.114.1. The Scot.

1.

I Am the bonny Scot Sir,

My name is Mickle John;

'Tis I was in the Plot Sir

When firſt the Wars began:

I left the Court one thouſand

Six hundred forty one;

But ſince the flight

At Worſter fight

We are aw undone.

I ſerv'd my Lord and Maſter

When as he liv'd at home,

Untill by ſad diſaſter

He receiv'd his doom;

But now we ſink,

Uds bred I think

The Deel's gat in his room.

He ne man ſpares,

But ſtamps and ſtares

At all Chriſtendom.

2.

I have travel'd mickle grounds,

Since I came from Worſter bounds,

I have gang'd the jolly rounds

Of the neighbouring Nations;

[[Page 255]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=136)And what
their opinions are

Of the Scotch and Engliſh war,

In geed faith I ſal declare,

And their approbations.

Jockie ſwears

He has his load,

Bears the rod,

Comes from God,

And complaints go very odd

Since the ſiege at Worſter;

We were wounded

Tag and rag,

Foot and leg,

Wemb and crag;

Hark I hear the Dutchman brag,

And begin to bluſter.

#### 1.114.2. The Dutch.

3.

Uds Sacrament, ſal Hoghen Moghen States

Strike down der top ſails unto puny Powers;

Ten twoſand tun of Tivel Dammy Fates,

If dat der Ships and Goods prove not all ours:

Since dat bloot and wounds do delight dem,

Tararara Trumpet ſounds,

Let Van Tromp go fort and fight dem;

All de States ſhall firſt be crown'd,

Engliſh Skellam fight not on goat ſide;

Out at laſt the Flemins bear,

Dey ha' giv'n us ſuſh a broad ſide;

Dat ick ſal be forc't to retreat,

See de French man he comes in compleat.

[[Page 256]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=137)

#### 1.114.3. The French.

4.

By Gat Mounſieur 'tis much in vain

For Duſhland, France, or Spain,

To croſſe de Engliſh main;

De Nation now is grown ſo ſtrong,

De Divla er't be long

Muſt learna de ſame tongue.

'Tis bettra den far to combine,

To ſel dem Wine,

And teaſha dem to make der Laty fine;

We'll teaſh dem for to trip and minſh,

To kick and winſh,

For by de Sword we never ſal convince,

Since every Brewer dere can beat a Prince.

#### 1.114.4. The Spaniard.

5.

What are the Engliſh to quarrel ſo prone,

Dat dey cannot now adayes let deir neighbour a­lone,

And ſal de Grave and the Catholick King,

Before ever dus control'd wid a ſword and a ſling;

Sal bode de Indias be left unto de ſway,

And purity a doſe dat do plunder and pray;

E're dat we will ſuffer ſuch affronts for to be,

We'll tumble dem down, as you ſal ſennon ſee:

[[Page 257]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=137)

#### 1.114.5. The Welſh.

6.

[...]affy was once a Cottamighty of Wales,

Put her Coſin O. P. was a  [...]reater,

Was come in her Country Catſ [...]pluttery nailes,

Was take her welch hook and was peat her;

Was eat up her Shee [...]e,

Her Tuck and her Geeſe,

Her Pick, her Capon was ty for't;

Ap Richard, ap Owen▪ ap Morgon, ap S [...]ef [...]n,

Ap Shenkin, ap Powel was fly for't.

#### 1.114.6. The Iriſh.

7.

O hone, O hone, poor Teg and ſhone,

O hone may howl and cry,

St. Patrick help dy Country men,

Or fait and trot we dye;

De  [...]ngliſh ſteal our h [...]art of Ʋſquebagh,

Dey put us to de ſword all in Dewguedagh ▪

Help us St. Patrick we ha no Saint at all but dee▪

O let us cry no more, O hone, a cram, a cree!

#### 1.114.7. The Engliſh.

8.

A Crown, a Crown, make room,

The Engliſh man is come,

[[Page 258]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=138)Whoſe
valour

Is taller

Than all Chriſtendome:

The Spaniſh, French, and Dutch,

Scotch, Welch, and Iriſh Grutch,

We fear not,

We care not,

For we can deal with ſuch.

You thought when we began in a Civil war to waſte,

Our Tillage

Your Pillage

Should come home at laſt:

For when we

Could not agree,

You thought to ſhare in our fall;

But nere ſtir Sir,

For firſt Sir

We ſhall nooſe you all.

### 1.115. A Medley.

3.

The Engliſh. LEt the Trumpets ſound,

And the Rocks rebound,

Our Engliſh Natives comming;

Let the Nations ſwarm,

And the Princes ſtorm;

We value not their drumming.

'Tis not France that looks ſo ſmug

Old faſhions ſtill renewing,

It is not the Spaniſh ſhrug,

[[Page 259]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=138) Scotiſh
cap, or Iriſh rug;

Nor the Dutch-mans double jug

Can help what is enſuing,

Pray my Maſters look about,

For ſomething is a Brewing.

2.

He that is a Favorite conſulting with Fortune,

If he grow not wiſer, then he's quite undone▪

In a riſing Creature we daily ſee certainly,

He is a Retreater that fails to go on:

He that in a Builder's trade

Stops e're the Roof be made,

By the Aire he may be betray'd

And overthrown:

He that hath a Race begun,

And let's the Goale be won;

He had better never run,

But let 't alone.

3.

Then plot rightly,

March fightly,

Shew your glittering Arms brightly:

Charge hightly,

Fight ſprightly:

Fortune gives renown.

A right riſer

Will prize her,

She makes all the World wiſer;

Still try her,

Wee'l gain by her

A Coffin or a Crown.

[[Page 260]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=139)

4.

If the Dutchman or the Spaniard

Come but to oppoſe us,

We will thruſt them out of the Main-yard,

If they do but noſe us:

Hans, Hans, think upon thy ſins,

And then ſubmit to Spain thy Maſter;

For though now you look like Friends,

Yet he will never truſt you after;

Drink, drink, give the Dutchman drink,

And let the tap and kan run faſter;

For faith, at the laſt I think

A Brewer will become your Maſter.

5.

Let not poor Teg and Shone

Vender from der Houſes,

Leſt dey be quite undone

In der very trowzes:

And all her Orphans beſtow'd under hatches,

And made in London free der to cry matches;

St. Patrick wid his Harp do tun'd wid tru ſtring

Is not fit to unty St. Hewſon's ſhooes-ſtrings.

6.

Methinks I hear

The Welch draw near,

And from each lock a louſe trops;

Ap Shon, ap LLoyd,

Will ſpen'd her ploot.

For to defend her mouſe-traps:

Mounted on her K [...]fflebagh

With coot ſtore of Koradagh,

[[Page 261]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=139)The
Pritiſh war begins.

With a hook her was over come her

Pluck her to her, thruſt her from her,

By cot her was preak her ſhins.

Let Taffy fret,

And Welch-hook whet,

And troop up Pettigrees;

We only tout,

Tey will ſtink us out,

Wit Leeks and toaſted Sheeze.

7.

But Jockie now and Jinny comes,

Our Brethren muſt approve on't;

For pret a Cot dey beat der drums

Onely to break de Couvenant.

Dey bore St. Andrew's Croſſe,

Till our Army quite did rout dem,

[...]ut when we put um to de Loſſe

De deal a Croſſe about dem:

The King and Couvenant they crave,

Their Cauſe muſt needs be further'd;

Although ſo many Kings they have

Moſt barbarouſly, baſely murther'd.

8.

The French. The French-man he will give con­ſent,

Though he trickle in our veins;

That willingly

We may agree,

To a marriage with Grapes and Graines:

He conquers us with kindneſſe,

And doth ſo far entrench,

[[Page 262]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=140)That
fair, and wiſe, and young, and rich

Are finified by the French:

He prettifies us with Feathers and Fans,

With Petticoats, Doublets, and Hoſe;

And faith they ſhall

Be welcome all

If they forbear the noſe.

For love or for fear,

Let Nations forbear;

If fortune exhibit a Crown,

A Coward he

Muſt ſurely be,

That will not put it on.

### 1.116. The Levellers Rant.

TO the Hall, to the hall,

For juſtice we call,

On the King and his pow'rful adherents & friends

Who ſtill have endeavour'd, but we work their ends.

'Tis we will pull down what e're is above us,

And make them to fear us, that never did love us,

Wee'l level the proud, and make every degree,

To our Royalty bow the Knee,

'Tis no leſſe then treaſon,

'Gainſt freedom and Reaſon

For our brethren to be higher then we.

2.

Firſt the thing, call'd a King,

To judgement we bring,

And the ſpawn of the court, that were prouder then he,

And next the two Houſes united ſhall be,

[[Page 263]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=140)It does
to the Romiſh religion enveagle,

For the State to be two-headed like the ſpredeagle

Wee'l purge the ſuperfluous Members away,

They are too many Kings to ſway,

And as we all teach,

'Tis our Liberties breach,

For the Freeborn Saints to obey.

3

Not a claw, in the Law,

Shall keep us in aw;

Wee'l have no cuſhon-cuffers to tell us of hell,

For we are all gifted to do it as well,

'Tis freedom that we do hold forth to the Nations

To enjoy our fellow-creatures as at the creation,

The Carnal mens wives are for men of the ſpirit

Their wealth is our own by merit,

For we that have right,

By the Law called Might,

Are the Saints that muſt judge and inherit ▪

### 1.117. The Safety.

SInce it has been lately enacted high Treaſon,

For a man to ſpeak truth of the heads of the ſtate

Let every wiſe man make uſe of his reaſon,

See and hear what he can, but take heed what he prate.

For the proverbs do learn us,

He that ſtays from the battail ſleeps in a whole skin,

And our words are our own, if we can keep 'um in.

What fools are we then, that to prattle begin

Of things that do not concern us?

[[Page 264]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=141)

2

Let the three kingdoms fall to one of the prime ones

My mind is a Kingdom, and ſhall be to me,

I could make it appear, if I had but the time once,

I'm as happy with one, as he can be with three.

If I could but enjoy it

He thats mounted on high, is a mark for the hate,

And the envy of every pragmatical pate,

While he that creeps low, lives ſafe in his ſtate,

And greatneſs do ſcorn to annoy it.

3

I am never the better which ſide gets the battel,

The Tubs or the Croſſes, what is it to me?

They'l never increaſe my goods or my cattel,

But a beggar's a beggar and ſo he ſhall be,

Unleſs he turn Traytor,

Let M [...]ſers take courſes to hep up their treaſure,

Whoſe luſt has no limits, whoſe mind has no meaſur [...]

Let me be but quiet and take a little pleaſure,

A little contents my nature.

4.

My Petition ſhall be that Canary be cheaper,

Without Patent or Cuſtom, or curſed Exciſe;

That the Wits may have leave to drink deeper and deeper,

And not be undone, while their heads they bap­tiſe,

And in liquor do drench 'um;

If this were but granted, who would not deſire,

To dub himſelf one of Apollo's own Quire?

We'll ring out the Bells, when our noſes are on fire,

And the quarts ſhall be the buckets to drench 'um,

[[Page 265]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=141)

5.

I account him no wit, that is gifted at railing,

And flirting at thoſe that above him do ſit,

While they do out-wit him, with whipping and goaling,

Then his purſe and his perſon both pay for his wit,

'Tis better to be drinking;

If ſack were reform'd into twelve-pence a quart,

I'ld ſtudy for money to Marchandize for't,

And a friend that is true, we together will ſport.

Not a word, but we'l pay them with thinking.

### 1.118. The Leveller.

NAy prethee don't fly me,

But  [...]it thee down by me,

I cannot endure

A man that's demure,

Go hang up your Worſhips and Sirs;

Your Congies and Trips,

With your legs and your lips,

Your Madams and Lords,

And ſuch finikin words,

With the Complements you bring,

That do ſpell NO-THING,

You may keep for the Chains and the Furs:

For at the beginning was no Peaſant or Prince,

And 'twas policy made the diſtinction ſince.

2.

Thoſe Titles of Honours

Do remain in the Donours,

[[Page 266]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=142)And not
in that thing,

To which they do cling,

If his ſoul be too narrow to wear 'um,

No delight can I ſee

In that word call'd degree,

Honeſt Dick ſounds as well

As a name of an ell,

That with Titles doth ſwell,

And ſounds like a ſpell,

To affright mortal ears that hear 'um,

He that wears a brave ſoul, and dares gallantly do,

May be his own Herald and Godfather too,

3.

Why ſhould we then doat on,

One with a Fools coat on?

Whoſe Coffers are cram'd,

But yet he'l be damn'd

Ere he'l do a good act or a wiſe one?

What Reaſon has he

To be ruler o're me?

That's a Lord in his cheſt,

But in's head and his breast,

Is empty and bare,

Or but puff'd up with air,

And can neither aſſiſt nor adviſe one.

Honour's but air, and proud fleſh but duſt is,

'Tis we Commons make Lords, and the Clerk makes the Juſtice.

4.

But ſince men muſt be

Of a different degree,

Becauſe moſt do aſpire,

To be greater and higher,

Then the reſt of their Fellows and Brothers.

[[Page 267]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=142)He that
has ſuch a ſpirit,

Let him gain it by's merit,

Spend his brains, wealth, or blood

For his Countries good,

And make himſelf fit

By his valour or wit,

For things above the reach of all others.

For Honour's a Prize, and who wins it may wear it,

If not 'tis a Badge and a burthen to bear it.

5.

For my part let me

Be but quiet and free,

I'le drink Sack and obey,

And let great ones ſway,

And ſpend their whole time in thinking,

I'le ne're buſie my Pate

With ſecrets of State,

The News books I'le burn all,

And with the Diurnall

Light Tobacco, and admit

That they're ſo far fit,

As they ſerve good company and drinking.

All the name I deſire is an honeſt Good-Fellow,

And that man has no worth that won't ſome­times be mellow.

### 1.119. The Royaliſts Anſwer.

I Have reaſon to fly thee,

And not ſit down by thee;

For I hate to behold,

One ſo ſawcy and bold,

[[Page 268]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=143)To
deride and contemn his Superiours,

Our Madams and Lords,

And ſuch mannerly words,

With the geſtures that be

Fit for every degree,

Are things that we and you

Both claim as our due

From all thoſe that are our Inferiours.

For from the beginning there were Princes we know,

'Twas you Levellers hate 'um, 'cauſe you can't be ſo.

2.

All Titles of Honours

Were at firſt in the Donours.

But being granted away

With the Grantees ſtay,

Where he wear a ſmall ſoul or a bigger.

There's a neceſſity

That there ſhould be degree.

Where 'tis due we'l afford

A Sir John, and my Lord,

Though Dick, Tom and Jack,

Will ſerve you and your Pack,

Honeſt Dick's name enough for a Digger.

He that has a ſtrong Purſe can all things be or do,

He is valiant and wiſe and religious too.

3.

We have cauſe to adore,

That man that has ſtore,

Though a Bore or a ſot,

There's ſomething to be got;

Though he be neither honeſt nor witty;

Make him high, let him rule,

Hee'l be playing the fool,

[[Page 269]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=143)And
tranſgreſſe, then we'l ſqueze

Him for fines and for fees.

And ſo we ſhall gain,

By the wants of his brain,

'Tis the Fools-cap that maintains the City.

If honour be air, 'tis in common, and as fit,

For the fool & the clown, as for the champion or the wit.

4.

Then why mayn't we be

Of different degree?

And each man aſpire

To be greater and higher

Then his wiſer or honester brother,

Since Fortune and Nature

Their favours do ſcatter;

This hath valour, that wit,

T'other wealth, nor is't fit

That one ſhould have all,

For then what would befall

Him, that's born nor to one nor to'ther?

Though honour were a prize at firſt, now 'tis a chattle,

And as merchantable grown as your wares or your cattle.

5.

Yet in this we agree,

To live quiet and free,

To drink ſack and ſubmit,

And not ſhew our wit

By our prating, but ſilence, and thinking,

Let the politick Jewes

Read Diurnals and Newes,

And lard their diſcourſe,

With a Comment that's worſe,

[[Page 270]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=144)That
which pleaſeth me beſt

Is a Song or a Jeſt,

And my obedience I'le ſhew by my drinking.

He that drinks well, does ſleep well, he that ſleeps well, doth think well,

He that thinks well, does do well, he that does well muſt drink well.

### 1.120. The Independents reſolve.

COme Drawer and fill us about ſome Wine

Let's merrily tipple the day's our own,

VVee'l have our delights, let the Country go pine,

Let the King and his Kingdom groan.

The Crown is our own, and ſo ſhall continue,

VVee'l Monarchy baffle quite,

VVee'l drink off the Kingdomes revenue,

And ſacrifice all to delight.

'Tis Power that brings

Us all to be Kings,

And wee'l be all crown'd by our might.

2.

A fig for divinity lectures and law,

And all that to Loyalty do pretend,

While we by the ſword keep the Kingdom in aw,

Our Power ſhall never have end.

The Church and the State wee'l turn into liquor,

And ſpend a whole Town in a day,

We'l melt all their bodkins the quicker

Into Sack, and drink them away.

[[Page 271]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=144)We'l
keep the demeans

And turn Biſhops and Deans,

And over the Presbyters ſway.

3.

The nimble St. Patrick is ſunk in his boggs,

And his Country men ſadly cry O hone! O hone!

St. Andrew and's Kirk-men are loſt in the foggs,

Now we are the Saints alone.

Then on our Superiours and Equalls we trample,

And Jockie our ſtirrup ſhall hold,

The City's our Mule for example,

That we may in plenty be roul'd.

Each delicate diſh,

Shall but Eccho our wiſh

And our drink ſhall be cordial gold.

### 1.121. The Lamentation.

MOurn, London, mourn,

Bathe thy polluted ſoul in tears;

Return, return,

Thou haſt more cauſe of grief, then th'hadſt for fears,

For the whole Kingdom now begins

To feel thy ſorrow as they ſaw thy ſins,

And now do no

Compaſſion ſhow

Unto thy miſery and woe,

But ſlight thy ſufferings as thou didſt theirs.

2.

Pride towring Pride,

And boyling luſt, thoſe fatal twins,

Sit ſide by ſide,

And are become Plantations of ſins.

[[Page 272]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=145)Hence
thy Rebellions firſt did flow,

Both to the King above, and him below.

And ſordid ſloth

The Nurſe of both,

Have rais'd thy crimes to ſuch a growth,

That ſorrow muſt conclude as ſin begins.

3.

Fire raging fire,

Shall burn thy stately towers down,

Yet not expire,

Tygres and Wolves, or men more ſavage grown,

Thy Childrens brains, and thine ſhall daſh,

And in your blood their guilty tallons waſh,

Thy Daughters muſt

Allay their luſt,

Miſchiefs will be on miſchief thruſt,

Till thy Cap tumble as thou mad'ſt the Crown.

4.

Cry London cry!

Now now petition for redreſſe,

Where canſt thou fly?

Thy emptyed Chests augment thy heavineſſe,

The Gentry and the Commons loath,

Th' adored Houſes ſlight thee worſe than both,

The King poor Saint,

Would help, but can't;

To heav'n alone unfold thy want,

Thence came thy Plagues, thence onely Pity flow'th.

[[Page 273]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=145)

### 1.122. The Reformation.

TEll not me of Lords or Laws,

Rules or Reformation,

All that's done's not worth two ſtraws,

To the welfare of the Nation.

Men in power do ra [...]t it ſtill,

And give no reaſon but their will,

For all their domination.

Or if they do an act that's juſt,

'Tis not becauſe they would▪ but muſt,

To Gratifie ſome parties luſt,

Or merely for a faſhion.

2.

Our expence of blood and purſe

Has produc'd no profit.

Men are ſtill as bad or worſe,

And will be what e're comes of it.

We've ſhuffled out, and ſhuffled in,

The perſons, but retain the ſin,

To make our game the ſurer,

Yet ſpite of all our pains and skill,

The Knaves all in the pack are ſtill,

And ever were and ever will,

Though ſomething now demurer.

3.

And it cannot but be ſo,

Since thoſe toys in faſhion,

And of Souls ſo baſe and low,

And mere Bigots of the Na [...]ion,

Whoſe deſigns are power and wealth▪

At which, by rapines, fraud, and ſtealth,

[[Page
274]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=146)Audaciouſly
they vent ye,

They lay their Conſciences aſide,

And turn with every winde and tide,

Puff'd on by Ignorance and Pride,

And all to look like Gentry.

4.

Crimes are not puniſh'd 'cauſe their Crimes,

But 'cauſe they're low and little,

Mean men for mean faults in theſe times

Make ſatisfaction to a tittle;

While thoſe in office and in power,

Boldly the underlings devour

Our Cobweb laws can't hold 'um.

They ſell for many a Thouſand crown,

Things which were never yet their own,

And this is law and cuſtom grown.

'Cauſe thoſe do judge that ſold 'um.

5.

Brothers ſtill with Brothers brawl,

And for trifles ſue 'um,

For two Pronouns that ſpoyl all,

Thoſe contentious Meum, Tuum,

The wary Lawyer buyes and builds,

While the Client ſells his fields,

To ſacrifice to's fury;

And when he thinks to obtain his right

He's baffled off, or beaten quite,

By th' Judges will, or Lawyers ſlight,

Or ignorance of the Jury.

6.

See the Tradeſ-man how he thrives

With perpetual trouble,

How he  [...]heats, and how he ſtrives

His Eſtate t'enlarge and double,

[[Page 275]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=146)Extort,
oppreſs, grind and encroach,

To be a Squire, and keep a Coach,

And to be one o'th' Quorum,

Who may with's Brother worſhips [...]it,

And judge without law, fear or wit,

Poor petty Thieves that nothing get,

And yet are brought before 'um.

7.

And his way to get all this

Is mere diſſimulation,

No factious Lecture does he miſs,

And ſcapes no ſchiſm that's in faſhion.

But with ſhort hair and ſhining ſhooes,

He with two Pens and's Note-book goes,

And winks and writes at randome;

Thence with ſhort meal and tedious Grace,

In a loud tone and Publick place,

Sings Wiſedoms hymnes, that trot and pace,

As if Goliah ſcan'd um.

8.

But when death begins his threats,

And his Conſcience ſtruggles,

To call to mind his former cheats

Then at heav'n he turns his juggles.

And out of all's ill-gotten ſtore,

He gives a dribling to the poor,

In a Hoſpital or School-houſe,

And the ſuborned Prieſt for's hire

Quite frees him from th' infernal fire,

And places him ith' Angels quire,

Thus theſe Jack-puddings fool us.

9.

All he gets by's pains ith' cloſe,

Is that he dyed worth ſo much,

[[Page 276]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=147)Which he
on's doubtfull ſeed beſtows,

That neither care nor know much,

Then Fortunes favourite his heir,

Bred baſe, and ignorant and bare,

Is blown up like a bubble,

Who wondring at's own ſuddain riſe,

By Pride, Simplicity and Vice,

Falls to's ſports, drink, drab and dice

And makes all fly like ſtubble.

10.

And the Church the other twin,

Whoſe mad zeal enrag'd us,

Is not purify'd a pin,

By all thoſe broyles in which ſhe engag'd us,

We, our Wives turn'd out of doors,

And took in Concubines and Whores,

To make an alteration

Our Pulpitteers are proud and bold,

They their own Wills and factions hold,

And ſell ſalvation ſtill for Gold,

And here's our Reformation.

11.

'Tis a madneſſe then to make,

Thriving our employment,

And lucre love, for Lucres ſake,

Since we've poſſeſſion, not enjoyment.

Let the times run on their courſe,

For oppoſition makes them worſe,

We ne're ſhall better find 'um,

Let Grand [...]es wealth and power ingroſſe,

And honour too, while we ſit cloſe,

And laugh and take our plenteous doſe,

Of ſack and never mind 'um.

[[Page 277]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=147)

### 1.123. CHRONOSTICON Decollationis CAROLI Regis trice­ſimo die Januari
[...] ▪ ſecunda hora Pome­ridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.

‘Ter Deno Ianl Labens ReX SoLe CaDente CaroLVs eXVtVs SoLIo SCeptroq Ve
SeCVto.’

CHARLES — ah forbear, forbear! leſt Mortals prize

His Name too dearly, and Idolatrize.

His Name! Our Loſſe! Thrice curſed and forlorn

Be that Black Night which uſher'd in this Morn.

CHARLES our Dread Soveraign! — hold! leſt Outlaw'd Senſe

Bribe, and ſeduce tame Reaſon to diſpenſe

With thoſe Celeſtial powers; and diſtruſt

Heav'n can behold ſuch Treaſon, and prove Juſt.

CHARLES our Dread Soveraign's murther'd! tremble! and

View what Convulſions ſhoulder-ſhake this Land,

Court, City, Country, nay three Kingdoms run

To their laſt ſtage, and Set with him their Sun.

CHARLES our Dread Soveraign's murther'd at His Gate!

Fell fiends! dire Hydra's of a ſtiff-neck'd-State!

[[Page 278]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=148)Strange
Body-politick! whoſe Members ſpread,

And Monſter-like, ſwell bigger than their HEAD.

CHARLES of Great Britain! He! who was the known

King of three Realms, lyes murther'd in his own;

He! He! who liv'd, and Faith's Defender ſtood,

Dy'd here to re-Baptize it in his bloud.

No more, no more, Fame's Trump ſhall Eccho all

The reſt in dreadfull Thunder. Such a Fall

Great Chriſtendom nere pattern'd; and 'twas ſtrange

Earth's Center reel'd not at this diſmal Change.

The Blow ſtruck Britain blinde, each well-ſet Limb

By diſlocation was lopt off in HIM.

And though ſhe yet lives, ſhe lives but to condole

Three Bleeding Bodies left without a Soul.

Religion puts on Black, ſad Loyalty

Bluſhes and mourns ſo ſee bright Majeſty

Butcher'd by ſuch Aſſaſſinates; nay both

'Gainſt God, 'gainſt Law, Allegiance, and their Oath.

Farewell ſad Iſle! Farewell! thy fatal Glory

Is Sum'd, Caſt up, and Cancell'd in this Story.

[[Page 279]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=148)

### 1.124. AN ELEGIE. Upon King CHARLES the first, mur­thered publickly by his
Subjects.

WEre not my Faith buoy'd up by ſacred bloud,

It might be drown'd in this prodigious flood;

Which reaſons higheſt ground doth ſo exceed,

It leaves my ſoul no Anch'rage, but my Creed;

Where my Faith reſting on th' Original;

Supports it ſelf in this the Copies fall;

So while my Faith floats on that Bloudy wood,

My reaſon's caſt away in this Red flood,

Which ne're o'reflows us all: Thoſe ſhowers paſt

Made but Land-floods, which did ſome vallies waſt;

This ſtroak hath cut the only neck of land

Which between us, and this Red Sea did ſtand,

That covers now our world, which curſed lies

At once with two of Aegypts prodigies;

O're-caſt with darkneſs, and with bloud o're-run,

And juſtly, ſince our hearts have theirs outdone;

Th' Inchanter led them to a leſſe known ill,

To act his ſin, then 'twas their King to kill:

Which crime hath widdowed our whole Nation,

Voided all Forms, left but Privation

In Church and State; inverting ev'ry right;

Brought in Hells State of fire without light;

No wonder then, if all good eyes look red,

Waſhing their Loyal hearts from bloud ſo ſhed;

The which deſerves each pore ſhould turn an eye,

To weep out, even a bloudy Agony.

[[Page 280]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=149)Let
nought then paſſe for Muſick, but ſad cryes,

For Beauty, bloudleſs cheeks, and bloud-ſhot eyes.

All colours ſoil but black, all odours have

Ill ſcent but Myrrh, incens'd upon this Grave:

It notes a Jew, not to believe as much,

The cleaner made by a Religious touch

Of their Dead Body, whom to judge to dye,

Seems the Judaical Impiety.

To kill the King, the Spirit Legion paints

His rage with Law, the Temple and the Saints:

But the truth is, He fear'd and did repine,

To be caſt out, and back into the Swine:

And the caſe holds, in that the Spirit bends

His malice in this Act againſt his ends:

For it is like, the ſooner hee'll be ſent

Out of that body, He would ſtill torment;

Let Chriſtians then uſe otherwiſe this bloud,

Deteſt the Act, yet turn it to their good;

Thinking how like a King of Death He dies;

We eaſily may the world and death deſpiſe:

Death had no ſting for him, and its ſharp arm,

Only of all the troop, meant him no harm.

And ſo he look'd upon the Axe, as one

Weapon yet left, to guard Him to his Throne;

In His great Name then may His Subjects cry,

Death thou art ſwallowed up in Victory.

If this our loſſe a comfort can admit,

'Tis that his narrowed Crown is grown unfit

For his enlarged Head, ſince his diſtreſſe

Had greatned this, as it made that the leſſe;

His Crown was faln unto too low a thing

For him, who was become ſo great a King;

So the ſame hands enthron'd him in that Crown,

They had exalted from Him, not pull'd down;

[[Page 281]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=149)And thus
Gods truth by them hath rendred more

Than e're mens falſhood promis'd to reſtore;

Which, ſince by Death, alone he could attain,

Was yet exempt from weakneſſe, and from pain;

Death was enjoyn'd by God, to touch a part,

Might make his paſſage quick, ne'r move his heart;

Which ev'n expiring was ſo far from death,

It ſeem'd but to command away his breath.

And thus his Soul, of this her triumph proud,

Broke, like a flaſh of lightning, through the cloud

Of fleſh and bloud; and from the higheſt line

Of humane vertue, paſs'd to be divine:

Nor is't much leſſe his vertues to relate,

Than the high glories of his preſent ſtate;

Since both then paſſe all Acts but of belief,

Silence may praiſe the one, the other grief.

And ſince, upon the Diamond, no leſſe

Than Diamonds, will ſerve us to impreſſe,

I'le only wiſh that for his Elegie,

This our Joſias had a Jeremie.

### 1.125. AN ELEGIE On • The beſt of Men, , • The meekeſt of Martyrs, , and •
CHARLES the Firſt, &c.

DOe [...] not the Sun call in his light, and day

Like a thin exhalation melt away?

Both wrapping up their Beams in Clouds, to be

Themſelves Cloſe Mourners at the Obſequie

[[Page 282]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=150)Of this
great Monarch? does his Royal Bloud,

Which th'Earth late drunk in ſo profuſe a floud,

Not ſhoot through her affrightned womb, and make

All her convulſed Arteries to ſhake

So long, till all thoſe hinges that ſuſtain,

Like Nerves, the frame of nature ſhrink again

Into a ſhuffled Chaos? Does the Sun

Not ſuck it from its liquid Manſion,

And Still it in [...]o vap'rous Clouds, which may

Themſelves in bearded Meteors diſplay,

Whoſe ſ [...]aggy and diſhevel'd Beams may be

The Tapers at this black Solemnitie?

You ſeed of Marble in the Womb accurſt,

Rock'd by ſome ſtorm, or by ſome Tigreſs nurſt,

Fed by ſome Plague, which in blind miſts was hurld,

To ſtrew infection on the tainted World;

What fury charm'd your hands to Act a deed,

Tyrants to think on would not weep, but bleed?

And Rocks by inſtinct ſo reſent this Fact,

They'ld into Springs of eaſie tears be ſlack'd.

Say ſons of tumult ſince you think it good,

Still to keep up the trade, and Bath in Blood

Your guilty hands, why did you then not ſtate

Your Slaughters at ſome cheap and common rate?

Your gluttonous and laviſh Blades might have

Devoted Myriads to one publick Grave;

And lop'd off thouſands of ſome baſe allay,

Whilſt the ſame Sexton that inter'd their clay,

In the ſame Urne their Names too might entomb,

But when on him you fixt your fatall Doom,

You gave a blow to Nature, ſince even all▪

The  [...]ock of man now bleeds too in his fall.

Could not Religion, which you oft have made

A ſpecious gloſſe your black deſigns to ſhade,

[[Page 283]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=150)Teach
you, that we come neareſt Heaven when we

Are ſuppled into acts of Clemency?

And copy out the Deity agen,

When we diſtill our mercies upon men?

But why do I deplore this ruine? He

Only ſhook off his fraile Humanity,

And with ſuch calmneſſe fell, he ſeem'd to be,

Even leſſe unmov'd and unconcern'd than we;

And forc'd us from our Throes of Grief to ſay,

We only died, he only liv'd that Day:

So that his Tomb is now his Throne become,

T'inveſt him with the Crown of Martyrdome;

And death the ſhade of nature did not ſhroud

His Soul in Miſts, but its clear Beams uncloud,

That who a Star in our Meridian ſhone,

In Heaven might ſhine a Conſtellation.

### 1.126. On the Death of his Royal Majeſtie, CHARLES late King of ENGLAND,
&c.

WHat went you out to ſee? a dying King?

Nay more, I fear an Angel ſuffering.

But what went you to ſee? a Prophet ſlain?

Nay that and more, a Martyr'd Soveraign.

Peace to that ſacred duſt! Great Sir, our fears

Have left us nothing but obedient tears

To court your hearſe, and in thoſe pious flouds

We live, the poor remainder of our goods.

Accept us in theſe latter Obſequies,

The unplundred riches of our hearts and eyes;

[[Page 284]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=151)For in
theſe faithfull ſtreams, and emanations,

W'are Subjects ſtill beyond all Sequeſtrations.

Here we cry more than Conquerors: malice may

Murder Eſtates, but hearts will ſtill obey;

Theſe as your glory's yet above the reach

Of ſuch whoſe purple lines confuſion preach.

And now, (Dear Sir) vouchſafe us to admire

With envy your arrival, and that Quire

Of Cherubims and Angels that ſupply'd

Our duties at your triumphs: where you ride

With full caeleſtial Joyes, and Ovations,

Rich as the Conqueſt of three ruin'd Nations.

But 'twas the heavenly plot that ſnatch'd you hence,

To crown your Soul with that magnificence,

And bounden rites of honour, that poor earth

Could only wiſh and ſtangle in the birth.

Such pitied emulation ſtop'd the bluſh

Of our ambitious ſhame, non-ſuited us.

For where ſouls act beyond mortality,

Heaven only can perform that Jubilee.

We wraſtle then no more, but bleſſe your day,

And mourn the anguiſh of our ſad delay:

That ſince we cannot adde we yet ſtay here

Fette [...]ed in clay: Yet longing to appear

Spectators of your bliſſe, that being ſhown

Once more, you may embrace us as your own;

Where never envy ſhall divide us more,

Nor City tumults, nor the worlds uproar;

But an eternal huſh, a quiet peace

As without end, ſo ſtill in the increaſe,

Shall lull humanity aſleep, and bring

Us equal Subjects to the Heavenly King.

[[Page 285]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=151)Till
then I'le turn Recuſant, and forſwear

All Calvin, for there's Purgatory here.

### 1.127. AN EPITAPH.

STay Paſſenger: Behold and ſee

The widowed Grave of Majeſtie.

Why trembleſt thou? Here's that will make

All but our ſtupid ſouls to ſhake.

Here lies entomb'd the ſacred duſt

Of Peace and Piety, Right and Juſt.

The bloud (O ſtart'ſt not thou to hear?)

Of a King, 'twixt hope and fear

Shed and hurried hence to be

The miracle of miſery.

Adde the ills that Rome can boaſt,

Shrift the world in every coaſt,

Mix the fire of Earth and Seas

With humane ſpleen and practices,

To puny the records of time,

By one grand Gygantick crime,

Then ſwell it bigger till it ſqueeze

The Globe to crooked hams and knees,

Here's that ſhall make it ſeem to be

But modeſt Chriſtianitie.

The Law-giver, amongſt his own,

Sentenc'd by a Law unknown.

Voted Monarchy to death

By the courſe Plebeian breath.

The Soveraign of all command,

Suff'ring by a Common hand.

[[Page 286]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=152) A
Prince, to make the odium more,

Offer'd at his very door.

The Head cut off, O death to ſee't!

In obedience to the feet.

And that by Justice you muſt know,

If you have Faith to think it ſo.

We'll ſtir no further then this Sacred Clay,

But let it ſlumber till the Judgement day:

Of all the Kings on Earth, 'tis not denyed,

Here lies the firſt that for Religion dyed.

### 1.128. The Engagement ſtated.

BEgon Expoſitor: the Text is plain,

No Church, no Lord, no Law, no Soveraign.

Away with mental reſervations, and

Senſes of Oaths in files out-vy the Strand:

Here's Hell truſs'd in a thimble, in a breath,

Dares face the hazard of the ſecond death.

The Saints are grown Laconians, and can twiſt

Perjury up in Pills, like Leyden griſt:

But hold precize Doponents: though the heat

Of Zeal in Cataracts digeſt [...] ſuch meat,

My cold concoction ſhrinks, and my advance

Drives ſlowly to approach your Ordinance.

The ſign's in Cancer, and the Zodiack turns

Leonick, roul'd in curls, while Terra burns.

What though your fancies are ſublim'd to reach

Thoſe fatal reins? Succeſſe and will can teach

But raſh Divinity: a ſad renown,

Where one man fell to ſee a million drown.

[[Page 287]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=152)When
neither Arts nor Armes can ſerve to fight

And wreſt a Title from its Law and Right,

Muſt Malice piece the Trangum, and make clear

The ſcruple? Elſe we will reſolve to ſwear?

Nay out-ſwear all that we have ſworn before,

And make good leſſer crimes by acting more

And more ſublime? This, this extends the Line▪

And ſhames the puny ſoul of Cataline.

On this account all thoſe whoſe Fortune's croſt,

And want eſtates, may turn Knights of the Poſt.

Vaulx we out-vy'd thee, ſince thy plot fell lame,

We found a cloſer Celler for the ſame,

Piling the fatal Powder in our mouths,

Which in an Oath diſcharg'd blew up the Houſe.

Maugre Mounteagle, Aſpes not throughly ſlain,

Their poyſon in an age may live again.

Good Demas cuff your Bear, then let us ſee

The myſtery of your iniquity.

May a Man courſe a Cur? and freely box

The Queſtion? or the formal Paradox?

But as in Phyſick, ſo in this device

This que [...]k of policy the point is nice.

For he that in this model means to thrive,

Muſt firſt ſubſcribe to the Preparative;

Like Witches compact counter-march his faith

And ſoak up all what ere the Spirit ſaith;

Then ſeale and ſigne. Scylla threw three Barres ſhort,

He a had Sword indeed, but no Text for't.

Old Rome lam [...]nt thy infancy in ſin,

We perfect what thou trembledſt to begin,

Bluſh then to ſee thy ſelf out-done. But all

The world may grieve, 'tis epidemical.

[[Page 288]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=153)Heaven
frowns indeed. But what makes Hell en­raged?

Sweet Pluto be at Peace, we have Engaged.

### 1.129. On the happy Memory of Alderman Hoyle that hang'd himſelf.

ALL hail fair fruit! may every Crab-tree bear

Such bloſſomes, and ſo lovely every year!

Call ye me this the ſlip? marry 'tis well,

Zacheus ſlip'd to Heaven, the Thief to Hell:

But if the Saints thus give's the ſlip, 'tis need

To look about us to preſerve the breed.

Th'are of the Running game, and thus to poſt

In nooſes, blanks the reckning with their Hoſt.

Here's more than Truſſum cordum I ſuppoſe

That knit this knot: guilt ſeldome ſingly goes!

A wounded ſoul cloſe coupled with the ſenſe

Of ſin, payes home its proper recompence.

But hark you Sir, if haſt can grant the time?

See you the danger yet what 'tis to climbe

In Kings Prerogatives? things beyond juſt,

When Law ſeemes brib'd to doom them, muſt be truſs'd.

But O I ſmell your Plot ſtrong through your Hoſe,

'Twas but to cheat the Hang-man of your Cloaths▪

Elſe your more active hands had fairly ſtay'd

The leaſure of a Pſalm: Judas has pray'd.

[[Page 289]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=153)But
later crimes cannot admit the pauſe,

They run upon effects more than the cauſe.

Yet let me ask one queſtion, why alone?

One Member of a Corporation?

'Tis clear amongſt Divines, Bodies and Souls

As joyntly active, ſo their judgement rowles

Concordant in the Sentence; why not ſo

In earthly Suffrings? States attended go.

But I perceive the Knack: Old women ſay

And bee't approv'd, each Dogge ſhould have his day.

Hence ſweep the Almanack: Lilly make room,

And blanks enough for the new Saints to come,

All in Red letters: as their faults have bin

Scarlet, ſo limbe their Anniverſe of ſin.

And to their Childrens credits and their Wives

Be it ſtill ſaid, they leap fair for their lives.

### 1.130. The States New Coyne.

1.

SAw you the States mony new come from the Mint?

Some People do ſay it is wonderous fine;

And that you may read a great myſtery in't,

Of mighty King Nol, the Lord of the Coyn.

2.

They have quite omitted his Politick head,

His worſhipfull face, and his excellent Noſe;

But the better to tempt the ſiſters to bed,

They have fixed upon it the print of his Hoſe.

[[Page 290]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=154)

3.

For, if they had ſet up his Picture there,

They needs muſt ha' crown'd him in Charles his ſtead;

But 'twas cunningly done, that they did forbear,

And rather would ſet up his Ar— than his head.

4

'Tis monſtrous ſtrange, and yet it is true,

In this Reformation we ſhould ha' ſuch luck,

That Croſſes were alwaies diſdained by you,

Who before pull'd them down, ſhould now ſet them up.

5.

On this ſide they have circumſcrib'd God with us,

And in this ſtamp and Coyn they confide;

Common-wealth on the other, by which we may gueſs

That God and the States were not both of a ſide.

6.

On this ſide they have Croſſe and Harp,

And only a Croſſe on the other ſet forth;

By which we may learn it falls to our part

Two Croſſes to have for one fit of Mirth.

7.

A Country-man hearing this, ſtraight way did think,

That he would procure ſuch a piece of his own;

And knowing it like his Wifes Butter-print,

She ſhould ha't for a Token when as he came home.

8.

Then ſince that this is the Parliament coyn,

Now Lilly by thy myſterious charms,

Or Heralds, pray tell us if theſe ha' not been

Carmen or Fidlers before by their Arms.

[[Page 291]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=154)

### 1.131. The Rebellion.

NOw, thanks to the Powers below,

We have even done our do,

The Myter is down, and ſo is the Crown,

And with them the Corronet too:

All is now the Peoples, and then

What is theirs is ours we know;

There is no ſuch thing as a Biſhop or K—

Or Peer, but in name or ſhow;

Come Clowns, and come Boys, come Hoberde­hoys,

Come Females of each degree,

Stretch out your throats, bring in your Votes,

And make good the Anarchy;

Then thus it ſhall be, ſayes Alſe,

Nay, thus it ſhall be, ſayes Amie,

Nay, thus it ſhall go, ſayes Taffie,! trow,

Nay, thus it ſhall go, ſayes Jemmy.

Oh but the truth, good People all, the truth is is ſuch a thing.

For it will undo both Church and State too,

And pull out the throat of our King;

No, nor the Spirit, nor the new Light

Can make the Point ſo clear,

But we muſt bring out the defil'd Coat,

What thing the truth is, and where,

Speak Abraham, ſpeak Hester,

Speak Judith, ſpeak K [...]ſter,

Speak tag and rag, ſhort coat and long:

Truth is the ſpell that made us rebell,

And murder and plunder ding dong;

[[Page 292]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=155)Sure I
have the truth, ſayes Numphs,

Nay, I have the truth, ſayes Clem,

Nay, I have the truth, ſayes reverend Ruth,

Nay, I have the truth, ſayes Nem.

Well, let the truth be whoſe it will,

There is ſomething elſe in ours,

Yet this devotion in our Religions

May chance to abate our Powers:

Then let's agree on ſome new way,

It skills not much how true,

Take P — and his club, or Smec and his tub

Or any Sect, old or new;

The Devil is in the pack, if choyce you can lack▪

We are fourſcore Religions ſtrong,

Then take your choice, the Major voice

Shall carry't right or wrong;

Then let's have King Charles, ſayes George,

Nay, wee'l have his Son, ſayes Hugh;

Nay, then let's have none, ſayes gabbering Jone,

Nay, wee'l be all Kings, ſayes Prue.

Nay, but neighbours and friends, one word more,

There's ſomething elſe behind,

And wiſe though you be, you do not well ſee

In which door fits the winde;

And for Religion, to ſpeak truth,

And in both Houſes ſence,

The matter is all one, if any or none,

If it were not for the pretence;

Now here doth lurk the key of the work,

And how to diſpoſe of the Crown

Dexteriouſly, and as it may be

For your behalf and our own;

[[Page 293]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=155)Then
wee'l be of this, ſayes Meg,

Nay, wee'l be of this, ſayes Tib,

Come, we'll be of all, ſayes pittifull Paul,

Nay, wee'l be of none, ſayes Gib.

Oh we ſhall have, if we go on

In Plunder, Exciſe, and Blood,

But few folks, and poor, to domineer o're,

And that will not be good;

Then let's agree on ſome new way,

Some new and happy courſe,

The Country is grown ſad, the City is Horn mad,

And both the Houſes are worſe;

The Synod hath writ, the General hath ſhit,

And both to like purpoſe, for

Religion, Laws, the Truth, and the Cauſe

We talk on, but nothing we do;

Come, then let's have peace, ſayes Nel,

No, no, but we won't ſayes Meg,

But I ſay we will, ſayes fiery-face Phil,

We will, and we won't, ſayes Hodge.

Thus from the Rout who can expect

Ought but confuſion,

Since the Unity with good Monarchy

Begin and end in one?

If then when all is thought their own,

And lyes at their belief,

Theſe popular pates, reap nought but debates

From theſe many round-headed beaſt;

Come Royaliſts then, do you play the men,

And Cavaliers give the word,

And now let's ſee what you will be,

And whether you can accord;

[[Page 294]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=156)A health
to King Charles, ſayes Tom,

Up with it, ſayes Ralph, like a man,

God bleſſe him, ſayes Doll, and raiſe him, ſayes Moll,

And ſend him his own, ſayes Nan.

But now for theſe prudent Wights,

That ſit without end, and to none,

And their Committees in Towns and Cities

Fill with confuſion;

For the bold Troops of Sectaries,

The Scots, and their Partakers,

Our new Britiſh States, Col. Burges and his Mates,

The Covenant and its Makers:

For all theſe wee'l pray, and in ſuch a way,

That if it might granted be,

Both Jack and Gill, and Moll and Will,

And all the world will agree:

El [...]e Pox take them all, ſayes Beſs,

And a Plague too ſayes Mary,

The Devil, ſayes Dick, and his Dam too, ſayes Nick,

Amen and amen ſay we.

### 1.132. On Britannicus his leap three Story high, and his eſcape from
London.

PAul from Damaſcus in a basket ſlides,

Cran'd by the faithfull Brethren down the ſides

O [...] their embattel'd walls; Britannicus

As loath to truſt the Brethrens God with us,

[[Page 295]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=156)Slides
too, but yet more deſp'rate, and yet thrives

In his deſcent; needs muſt! the Devil drives.

Their Cauſe was both the ſame, and herein meet,

Only their fall was not with equal feet,

Which makes the Caſe Iambick: thus we ſee

How much News falls ſhort of Divinity.

Truth was their crying crime: One takes the night,

Th' other th' advantage of the New-ſprung Light

To mantle his eſcape: how different be

The Priſtin and the Modern Policy?

Have Ages their Antipodes? Yet ſtill

Cloſe in the Propagation of ill?

Hence flowes this uſe and doctrine from the thump

I laſt ſuſtain'd (beloved) Good wits may Jump.

### 1.133. An Epigram on the People of England.

SWeating and chafing hot Ardelio cryes

A Boat a Boat, elſe farewell all the prize.

But having once ſet foot upon the deep

Hot-ſpur Ardelio fell faſt aſleep.

So we, on fire with zealous diſcontent,

Call'd out a Parliament, a Parliament;

Which being obtain'd at laſt, what did they do?

Even ſqueez the Wool-packs, and lye ſnorting too.

[[Page 296]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=157)

### 1.134. Another.

BRitain a lovely Orchard ſeem'd to be

Furniſh'd with natures choiſe variety,

Temptations golden fruit of every ſort,

Th' Heſperian Garden fann'd from fein'd report;

Great boyes and ſmall together in we brake,

No matter what diſdain'd Priapus ſpake:

Up, up, we lift the great boyes in the trees,

Hoping a common ſhare to ſympathize:

But they no ſooner there, neglected ſtreight

The ſhoulders that ſo rais'd them to this height;

And fell to ſtuffing of their own bags firſt,

And as their treaſure grew, ſo did their thirſt.

Whiles we in lean expectance gaping ſtand,

For one ſhake from their charitable hand.

But all in vain, the dropſie of deſire

So ſcortch'd them, three Realms could not quench the fire.

Be wiſe then in your Ale, bold youths, for fear

The Gardner catch us as Moſſe caught his Mare.

### 1.135. Upon report there ſhould be no more Terms kept at Weſtminſter.

IS't poſſible? will no Terms then prevail?

And muſt the Gown and Bag jog on to ſale?

The Bills and Anſwers in our Courts become

Converted to the taring uſe of Drum?

[[Page 297]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=157)And
ſhall no more Confederacies paſs

'Twixt Midſomer and dying Michaelmas?

Though they deprive us of Old

An At­torney.

Hillary,

'Tis fit they ſhould allow the Trinity;

But that's denyed too: this Alteration

Contracts our whole time to a long Vacation.

Now farewell the (1.) Brown bowl, and Bonny Ale,

The Sanguine Herring, and its merry tayle;

(2.) Higgenian Quibbles, and the Harpean Lyre,

Fentonian Sweetneſs, and the Tow'ring Fire;

Our (3.) Host and Hoſteſs too, they're both Ʋxorums,

As Hermophraditus is, in Sex Duorums:

Weep (4.) Heaven, lament thy loſs, and thou Hell rore,

Thy Furnace ſcarce will ere be heated more;

Of Pleaſure, Paradiſe, thou muſt be barren,

And Purgatory furniſht but with Carrion:

Th'Abomination of the (5.) Hole i'th' Wall,

Now June is paſt, cry Pamphlets in the Hall;

And ſhe that's left but th' remnant of a Noſe,

Who to a Chirurgion (as men do ſuppoſe)

Did pawn the other part for cure of this,

Turn Zealot, and be Martyr'd when ſhe p—

All Trades, and all Societies lament

Your wants in us, you'le find cauſe to repent

The ſetting up your Idol Parliament:

For though on theſe Terms they'le no profit give

To Us, we'll try on other Terms to live.

[[Page 298]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=158)

### 1.136. Upon the Cavaliers departing out of London.

NOw fare thee well London,

Thou next muſt be undone,

'Cauſe thou haſt undone us before;

This Cauſe and this Tyrant,

Had ne're play'd this high rant,

Were't not for thy argent and Or.

2.

Now we muſt deſert thee,

With the lines that begirt thee,

And the Red-coated Saints domineer;

Who with liberty fool thee,

While a Monſter doth rule thee,

And thou feel'ſt what before thou didſt fear.

3.

Now Juſtice and Freedom,

With the Laws that did breed 'um,

Are ſent to Jamaica for gold;

And thoſe that upheld 'um,

Have power but ſeldom,

For Juſtice is barter'd and ſold.

4.

Now the Chriſtian Religion

Muſt ſeek a new Region,

And the old Saints give way to the new;

And we that are Loyal,

Vail to thoſe that deſtroy all,

When the Chriſtian gives place to the Jew.

[[Page 299]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=158)

5.

But this is our glory

In this wretched ſtory,

Calamities fall on the beſt;

And thoſe that deſtroy us

Do better imploy us,

To ſing till they are ſuppreſt.

### 1.137. On Col. Pride.

OF Gyants and Knights, and their wonderfull fights

We have ſtories enough in Romances,

But Ile tell you one new, that is ſtrange and yet true,

Though t'other are nothing but fancies.

2.

A Knight lately made, of the Governing trade,

Whoſe name he'l not have to be known;

Has been trucking with fame, to purchaſe a name,

For 'tis ſaid he had none of his own.

3.

He by Fortunes deſign, ſhould have been a Divine,

And a Pillar no doubt of the Church;

Whom a Sexton (God wot) in the Bellfry begot,

And his Mother did pig in the Porch.

4.

And next for his breeding, 'twas learned Hog-feed­ing,

With which he ſo long did converſe,

That his manners & feature, was ſo like their nature,

You'ld ſcarce know his ſweetneſſe from theirs.

[[Page 300]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=159)

5.

But obſerve the device, of this Noblemans riſe,

How he hurried from trade to trade,

From the grains he'd aſpire, to the yeſt, and then higher,

Till at length he a Drayman was made.

6.

Then his dray-horſe and he, in the ſtreets we did ſee,

With his hanger, his ſling, and his jacket;

Long time he did watch, to meet with his match,

For he'd ever a mind to the Placket.

7.

At length he did find, out a Trull to his mind,

And Ʋrſula was her name;

Oh Ʋrſl [...] quoth he, and oh Tom then quoth ſhe,

And ſo they began their game.

8.

But as ſoon as they met, O ſuch Babes they did get,

And Blood-royal in 'um did place,

From a ſwineheard they came, a ſhe-bear was their Dam,

They were ſuckled as Romulus was.

9.

At laſt when the Rout, with their head did fall out,

And the Wars thereupon did fall in,

He went to the field, with a ſword, but no ſhield,

Strong drink was his buckler within.

10

But when he did ſpy, how they dropt down and dye,

And did hear the bullets to ſing;

His armes he flung down, and run fairly to town,

And exchang'd his ſword for his ſling.

11.

Yet he claimed his ſhare, in ſuch honours as were

Belonging to nobler ſpirits;

[[Page 301]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=159)That
ventur'd their lives, while this Buffon ſurvives

To receive the reward of their merits.

12.

When the Wars were all done, he his fighting be­gun,

And would needs ſhew his valour in peace,

Then his fury he flings, at poor conquer'd things,

And frets like a hog in his greaſe.

13.

For his firſt feat of all, on a Wit he did fall,

A Wit as ſome ſay, and ſome not,

Becauſe he'd an art, to rhime on the quart,

But never did care for the pot.

14.

And next on the Cocks, he fell like an Ox,

Took them and their Maſters together;

But the combs and the ſpurs, kept himſelf and his Sirs,

Who are to have both or neither.

15.

The cauſe of his ſpight, was becauſe they would fight,

And becauſe he durſt not, he did take on;

And ſaid they were fit, for the pot, not the ſpit,

And would ſerve to be eaten with Bacon.

16.

But fleſh'd with theſe ſpoyles, the next of his toyles,

Was to fall with wild-beaſts by the ears,

To the Bearward he goeth, and then opened his mouth,

And ſaid, Oh! are you there with your bears.

17.

Our ſtories are dull, of a Cock and a Bull,

But ſuch was his valour and care;

Since he bears the Bell, the tales that we tell,

Muſt be of a Cock and a Bear.

[[Page 302]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=160)

18.

The crime of the Bears, was, they were Cavaliers,

And had formerly fought for the King;

And pull'd by the Burrs, the Round-headed Cur [...],

That they made their ears to ring.

19.

Our ſucceſſor of Kings, like blind fortune flings

Upon him both honour and ſtore;

Who has as much right, to make Tom a Knight,

As Tom has deſert, and no more.

20.

But Fortune that Whore, ſtill attended this Brewer,

And did all his Atchievements reward;

And blindly did fling, on this lubberly thing,

More Honour, and made him a Lord.

21.

Now he walks with his ſpurs, and a couple of curs

At his heels, which he calls Squires;

So when Honour is thrown, on the head of a Clown,

'Tis by Paraſites held up, and Lyars.

22.

The reſt of his pranks, will merit new thanks,

With his death, if we did but know it;

But we'l leave him and it, to a time and place fit,

And Greg. ſhall be funeral Poet.

### 1.138. Upon the General Pardon paſt by the RUMP, 1653.

REjoyce, rejoyce, ye Cavaliers,

For here comes that expells your fears;

[[Page 303]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=160)A
General Pardon is now paſt,

What was long look'd for, comes at laſt.

It Pardons all that are undone;

The Pope ne're granted ſuch a one:

So long, ſo large, ſo full, ſo free;

O what a gratious State have we!

Yet do not joy too much (my friends)

Firſt ſee how well this pardon ends,

For though it hath a Glorious face,

I fear there's in't but little grace.

'Tis ſaid the Mountains once brought forth,

And what brought they? a Mouſe introth;

Our States have done the like, I doubt,

In this their Pardon now ſet out.

We'll look it o're then if you pleaſe,

And ſee wherein it brings us eaſe;

And firſt, it Pardons words I find

Againſt our State, words are but wind.

Hath any pray'd for th'King of late?

And wiſh'd confuſion to our State?

And call'd them Rebells? he come in

And plead this Pardon for that ſin.

Hath any call'd King Charles that's dead

A Martyr? He that loſt his Head?

And Villains thoſe that did the Fact?

That man is pardoned by this Act.

[[Page 304]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=161)

Hath any ſaid our Parliament

Is ſuch a one as God ne're ſent?

Or hath he writ, or put in Print

That he believes the Devil's in't?

Or hath he ſaid there never were

Such Tyrants any where as here?

Though this offence of his be high,

He's pardon'd for his Blaſphemy.

You ſee how large this Pardon is,

It Pardons all our Mercuries,

And Poets too, for you know they

Are poor, and have not ought to pay.

For where there's money to be got,

I find this Pardon pardons not;

Malignants that were rich before,

Shall not be pardon'd till they'r poor.

Hath any one been true to th' Crown.

And for that paid his money down;

By this new Act he ſhall be free,

And pardon'd for his Loyalty.

Who have their Lands confiſcate quite,

For not Compounding when they might;

If that they know not how to digg,

This Pardon gives them leave to beg.

Before this Act came out in print,

We thought there had been comfort in't;

We drank ſome Healths to th' Higher Powers,

But now we've ſeen't they'd need drink ours.

[[Page 305]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=161)

For by this Act it is thought fit

That no man ſhall have benefit,

Unleſſe he firſt engage to be

A Rebel to eternity.

Thus in this Pardon it is clear,

That nothing's here, and nothing's there,

I think our States do mean to choke us

With this new Act of Hocus Pocus.

Well, ſince this Act's not worth a pin,

We'll pray our States to call it in,

For moſt men think it ought to be

Burnt by the hand of Gregory.

Then to conclude, here's little joy

For thoſe that pray Vive le Roy:

But ſince they'l not forget our Crimes,

Wee'l keep our mirth till better times.

### 1.139. Upon Olivers diſſolving the Parliament in 1653.

1.

WIll you hear a ſtrange thing ſcarce heard of before,

A ballad of News without any lyes,

The Parliament men are turn'd out of doors,

And ſo are the Council of State likewiſe.

2.

Brave Oliver came to the Houſe like a Spright,

His fiery looks ſtrook the Speaker dumb;

[[Page 306]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=162)You muſt
be gone hence, quoth he, by this light,

Do you mean to ſit here till Dooms-day come?

3.

With that the Speaker lookt pale for fear,

As though he had been with the night-mare rid,

Inſomuch that ſome did think that were there,

That he had even done as the Alderman did.

4.

But Oliver though he be Doctor of Law,

Yet he ſeem'd to play the Phyſician there;

His Phyſick ſo wrought on the Speakers maw,

That he gave him a ſtool inſtead of a Chair.

5.

Harry Martyn wondred to ſee ſuch a thing,

Done by a Saint of ſuch high degree;

'Twas an act he did not expect from a King,

Much leſſe from ſuch a dry bone as he.

6.

But Oliver laid his hand on his ſword,

And upbraided him with his Adultery;

To which Harry anſwer'd never a word,

Saving, humbly thanking his Majeſty.

7.

Allen the Copperſmith was in great fear,

He did as much harm ſince the Wars began;

A broken Citizen many a year,

And now he is a broken Parliament-man.

8.

Bradſhaw that Preſident proud as the Pope,

That loves upon Kings and Princes to trample;

Now the houſe is diſſolv'd I cannot but hope,

To ſee ſuch a Preſident made an example.

[[Page 307]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=162)

9.

And were I one of the Council of War,

I'le tell you what my Vote ſhould be,

Upon his own Turret at Weſtminſter,

To be hanged up for all comers to ſee.

10.

My Maſters I wonder you could not agree,

You that have been ſo long Brethren in evil;

A diſſolution you might think there would be,

When the Devil's divided againſt the Devil.

11.

Then room for the Speaker without his Mace,

And room for the reſt of the Rabble-rout;

My Maſters methinks 'tis a pitifull caſe,

Like the ſnuff of a Candle thus to go out.

12.

Now ſome like this change, and ſome like it not,

Some think it was not done in due ſeaſon;

Some think it was but a Jeſuits plot,

To blow up the Houſe like a Gun-powder-treaſon,

13.

Some think that Oliver and Charles are agreed,

And ſure it were good policy if it were ſo;

Leſt the Hollander, French, the Dane, and the Swede,

Should bring him in whether he would or no.

14.

And now I would gladly conclude my Song,

With a Prayer as Ballads are uſed to do,

But yet I'le forbear, for I think er't be long,

We ſhall have a King and a Parliament too.

[[Page 308]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=163)

### 1.140. Admiral Deans Funeral.

1.

NIck Culpepper, and William Lilly,

Though you were pleas'd to ſay they were ſilly,

Yet ſomething theſe propheſi'd true, I tell ye,

Which no body can deny.

2.

In the month of May, I tell you truly,

Which neither was in June nor July,

The Dutch began to be unruly,

Which no body can deny.

3.

Betwixt our England and their Holland,

Which neither was in France nor Poland,

But on the Sea, where there was no Land,

Which no body can deny.

4.

There joyn'd the Dutch, and the Engliſh Fleet,

Our Authors opinion then they did meet,

Some ſaw't that never more ſhall ſee't,

Which no body can deny.

5.

There were many mens hearts as heavy as lead,

Yet would not believe Dick Dean to be dead,

Till they ſaw his Body take leave of his head,

Which no body can deny.

6.

Then after the ſad departure of him,

There was many a man loſt a Leg or a Lim,

And many were drow'd 'cauſe they could not ſwim,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 309]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=163)

7.

One cryes, lend me thy hand good friend,

Although he knew it was to no end,

I think, quoth he, I am going to the Fiend,

Which no body can deny.

8.

Some, 'twas reported, were kill'd with a Gun,

And ſome ſtood that knew not whether to run,

There was old taking leave of Father and Son,

Which no body can deny.

9

There's a rumour alſo, if we may believe,

We have many gay Widows now given to grieve,

'Cauſe unmannerly Husbands nere came to take leave.

Which no body can deny.

10.

The  [...]itty is ſad of our Dean to ſing;

To ſay truth, it was a pittifull thing

To take off his head and not leave him a ring,

Which no body can deny.

11.

From Greenwich toward the Bear at Bridgefoot

He was wafted with wind that had water to't,

But I think they brought the Devil to boot,

Which no body can deny.

12.

The heads on London Bridge upon Poles,

That once had bodies, and honeſter ſouls

Than hath the Maſter of the Roules,

Which no body can deny.

13.

They grieved for this great man of command,

Yet would not his head amongſt theirs ſhould ſtand;

[[Page 310]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=164)He dy'd
on the Water, and they on the Land,

Which no body can deny.

14▪

I cannot ſay, they look'd wiſely upon him,

Becauſe People curſed that parcel was on him;

He has fed fiſh and worms, if they do not wrong him,

Which no body can deny.

15.

The Old Swan as he paſſed by,

Said, ſhe would ſing him a dirge, and lye down and di [...];

Wilt thou ſing to a bit of a body, quoth I?

Which no body can deny.

16.

The Globe on the Bank, I mean, on the Ferry,

Where Gentle and Simple might come and be merry,

Admired at the change from a Ship to a Wherry,

Which no body can deny.

17.

Tom Godfreys Bears began for to roare,

Hearing ſuch moans one ſide of the ſhore,

They knew they ſhould never ſee Dean any more,

Which no body can deny.

18.

Queen-hithe, Pauls-Wharf, and the Fryers alſo,

Where now the Players have little to do,

Let him paſſe without any tokens of woe,

Which no body can deny.

19.

Quoth th' Students o'th' Temple, I know not their names,

Looking out of their Chambers into the Thames,

The Barge fits him better than did the great James,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 311]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=164)

20.

Eſſex Houſe, late called Cuckolds Hall,

The folk in the Garden ſtaring over the wall,

Said, they knew that once Pride would have a fall.

Which no body can deny.

21.

At Strand Gate, a little farther then,

Where mighty Guns numbred to ſixty and ten,

Which neither hurt Children▪ Women nor Men,

Which no body can deny.

22.

They were ſhot over times one, two, three, or four,

'Tis thought one might 'heard the bounce to th' Tower,

Folk report, the din made the Buttermilk ſower,

Which no body can deny.

23.

Had old Goodman Lenthal or All [...]n but heard 'um,

The noiſe worſe than Olivers voice would have fear'd 'um,

And out of their ſmall wits would have ſcar'd um

Which no body can deny.

24.

Sommerſet Houſe, where once did the Queen lye,

And afterwards Ireton in black, and not green, by,

The Canon clattered the Windows really

Which no body can deny.

25.

The Savoys mortified ſpitled Crew,

If I lye, as Falstaffe ſayes, I am a Jew,

Gave the Hearſe ſuch a look it would make a man ſpew,

Which no body can deny.

26.

The Houſe of S — that Fool and Knave,

[[Page 312]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=165)Had ſo
much wit left lamentation to ſave

From accompanying a traytorly Rogue to his grave,

Which no body can deny.

27.

The Exchange, and the ruines of Durham houſe eke

Wiſh'd ſuch ſights might be ſeen each day i'th' week,

A General's Carkaſſe without a Cheek,

Which no body can deny.

28.

The Houſe that lately Great Buckinghams was,

Which now Sir Thomas Fairfax has,

Wiſh'd it might be Sir Thomas's fate ſo to paſſe,

Which no body can deny.

29.

Howards Houſe, Suffolks great Duke of Yore,

Sent him one ſingle ſad wiſh, and no more,

He might flote by Whitehall in purple gore,

Which no body can deny.

30.

Some [...]hing I ſhould of VVhitehall ſay,

[...]ut the Story is ſo ſad, and ſo bad, by my fay,

That it turns my wits another way,

Which no body can deny.

31.

To VV [...]stminster, to the Bridge of the Kings.

The water the Barge, and the Barge-men brings

The ſmall remain of the worſt of things,

Which no body can deny.

32.

They inter'd him in triumph, like Lewis the eleven,

In the famous Chappel of Henry the ſeven,

But his ſoul is ſcarce gone the right way to hea­ven,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 313]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=165)

### 1.141. The merry Goodfellow.

WHy ſhould we not laugh and be jolly,

Since all the World now is grown mad?

And lull'd in a dull melancholly;

He that wallows in ſtore

Is ſtill gaping for more,

And that makes him as poor,

As the Wretch that never any thing had.

How mad is that damn'd Money-monger?

That to purchaſe to him and his heirs,

Grows ſhriviled with thirſt and hunger;

While we that are bonny,

Buy Sack with ready-mony,

And ne'r trouble the Scriveners, nor Lawyers.

Thoſe guts that by ſcraping and toyling,

Do ſwell their Revenues ſo faſt,

Get nothing by all their turmoiling,

But are marks of each tax,

While they load their own backs

With the heavier packs,

And lye down gall'd and weary at laſt.

While we that do traffick in tipple,

Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,

Whoſe jaws are ſo hungry and gripple;

We ne'r trouble our heads

With Indentures or Deeds,

And our Wills are compos'd in a word.

[[Page 314]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=166)

Our mony ſhall never indite us,

Nor drag us to Goldſmiths Hall,

No Pyrats nor wracks can affright us;

We, that have no Eſtates,

Fear no plunder nor rates,

We can ſleep with open gates,

He that lyes on the ground cannot fall.

We laugh at thoſe Fools whoſe endeavours

Do but fit them for Priſons and Fines,

When we that ſpend all are the ſavers;

For if Thieves do break in,

They go out empty agin,

Nay, the Plunderers loſe their deſigns.

Then let us not think on to morrow,

But tipple and laugh while we may,

To waſh from our hearts all ſorrow;

Thoſe Cormorants which

Are troubled with an itch,

To be mighty and rich,

Do but toyl for the wealth which they borrow.

The Maior of the Town with his Ruff on,

What a pox is he better than we?

He muſt vail to the man with the Buff on;

Though he Cuſtard may eat,

And ſuch lubbardly meat,

Yet our Sack makes us merrier than he.

[[Page 315]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=166)

### 1.142. The Rebells Reign.

NOw we are met in a knot, let's take t'other pot,

And chirp o're a cup of Nectar;

Let's think on a charm, to keep us from harm,

From the Fiend, and the new Protector.

Heretofore at a brunt, a Croſs would have don't,

But now they have taken courſes,

With their Laws and their theft, there's not a Croſs left

In the Church, nor the Farmers Purſes.

They're with you to bring, for ſtuffing at a King,

For now you muſt make no dainty,

To have your Noſe ground, on a ſtone turned round

By Noll, and one and twenty.

But our Rights are kept for us, in Oliver's ſtore­houſe,

'Twere as good they were ſet in the Stocks:

They are juſt in the pickle, in the thirtieth Arti­cle,

Like Jack in a Juglers box.

We are loath for to look, for the Saints in a book,

But would not a man be vext,

To ſee them ſo rough with their blades and their buff,

But not a word on't in the Text.

We have been twelve years together by the ears

To prepare for a ſpiritual raign:

Men were never ſo ſpic'd, with the Scepter of Chriſt

In the hands of a Saint in grain.

[[Page 316]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=167)

'Twas brewed in their Hives by Citizens wives,

Who ventured their husbands far,

With Robin the fool, there was ne're ſuch a tool

To lead in the womens War.

He was ill at Command, but worſe at a ſtand,

So they ſought out another more able:

Then Fair ▪ undertakes, but Nol keeps the ſtakes,

And ſends away Fax with a bauble.

Will, Conqueror the ſecond, without his hoſt rec­kon'd,

And ſo did B— billet his Mate;

They made a great noiſe, 'mongſt women and boys,

But now they are both out of date.

Cowardly W— had but a foul Fortune,

And wanted a knife to ſcrape it,

When his Oriphice ran, there was no mortal man,

But omnibus horis ſapit.

Bradſhaw, the Knave, ſent the King to his grave,

And on the Bloud Royal did trample,

For which the next Lent, he was made Preſident,

And ere long may be made an example.

Doriſlaus did ſteer, to Hans mine heer,

And Askew to Don at Madril,

Ere a man could have ſcratcht, they were both diſpatcht,

Yet there they lye Leger ſtill.

Martin and St. Johns, and more with a Vengeance,

Had each a finger i'th' pye:

Some for the Money, and ſome for the Conny,

And ſome for they knew not why.

[[Page 317]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=167)

The Parliament ſate as ſnug as a Cat,

And were playing for mine and yours:

Sweep-ſtakes was their Game, till Oliver came,

And turn'd it to Knave out of doors.

Then a new one was caſt, and made up in haſt,

But alas they could do no more

Than empty our purſe, and empty us worſe

Than e're we were married before.

But in a good hour, they gave up their power

To one that was wiſer than they;

By common conſent, 'twas the firſt Parliament

That ever was felo de ſe.

After all this Jeer, we are never the near,

There ſits one at the Helm commanding;

One that doth us nick, with a trick for our trick,

And the ſtone in our foot notwithſtanding

He'll not relax, one groat of the Tax,

Though it come to more then he need,

He may keep it in ſtore, till his need be more;

Tis an Article of our new Creed.

So well he hath wrought, that now he hath brought

The Realm to the manner he it meant;

The fiſhes, and the foul, and the Devil and all,

And the monthly pay his high rent.

All this we muſt bear, but 'twould make a man ſwear

When they call us a Reformed Nation:

It can never ſink into my head for to think

That this is a Reformation.

[[Page 318]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=168)

'Tis the man in the Moon, or the Devil as ſoon,

Our Laws are aſleep upon ſhelves:

Our Charter & Freedom, we may bid God ſpeed um,

'Tis well we can beg for our ſelves.

Since Nol hath bereft us, and nothing hath left us,

Not a Horſe or an Oxe to plough land,

Let Oliver paſſe, come fill up my Glaſſe,

And here's a good health to Rowland.

### 1.143. The Reſolve.

1.

THere's no Man ſo worthy of Envy as he,

Drinks Sack, and is free,

Can draw down his mind to his preſent Con­dition,

And at that ebbe, can

Shew himſelf a better man,

Then his Enemy at his full tide of Ambition;

Has a breaſt ſo well Man'd, he fears not the thun­der

Of thoſe Baſtards of fame,

That have got a Name

By Rapine and Plunder;

But bravely deſpiſeth,

The Mock-Sun that riſeth:

He that's quiet within, what need he to care,

Though not worth a groat, h'as the whole world to ſpare.

2.

He's arm'd 'gainſt the Chances and Changes of State,

And ſtill meets his Fate,

[[Page 319]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=168)With a
Conquering Cup of the ſtouteſt Cana­ry,

Drinks healths to the beſt,

And he Wraſtles with the reſt,

Yet never is foyl'd, 'leſs his liquor miſcarry;

His thoughts are more ſoft then the bed that he lies on;

Who puts his cares to flight,

A Prince is o're Night,

And next Morn doth riſe one;

Let th'Fates do what they will,

He's the ſelf-ſame Man ſtill:

Scepters have Palfies, and Crowns too are ſhaking,

Who ſoundly doth ſleep, need not keep others waking.

3.

Then give us the Sack, let the Hen-hearted Cit,

Drink Whey, and ſubmit,

His Cucumber Courage does ne're well till bea­ten;

He, Camel-like, kneels,

And his Burthen ne're feels,

Till his back become gall'd, and his carcaſſe near eaten;

Has a ſpirit ſo poor, that ev'ry Fool rides him;

He's ſoul-leſſe, alone;

At beſt, but a Drone,

And no Man abides him;

He's a compact of Clay,

That will yield any way:

'Tis Sack and good Company ſets the Soul free,

Like the Muſick of that there's no Harmonie.

[[Page 320]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=169)

### 1.144. Upon Cromwell's pulling out the Long Parliament. 1653.

#### 1.144.1. The Alligory.

1.

AS Plutarch doth write, (a Man of known Credit)

A Serpent there was had a Mutinous Tayle,

Rebell'd 'gainſt the Head, that ſo oft had fed it,

And would not permit it to lead, or prevaile:

Is't not fit that by turns we Leaders ſhould be

Quoth the Tayle? follow me, as I've follow'd thee.

2.

Now, the Body being grown too ſtrong for the Head,

Quoth the Head, if it muſt be, then let it be ſo;

For quietneſſe ſake I yield to be lead,

But fear that from hence ſome miſchief will grow;

A thing ſo un-naturall never was read,

As the Head to turn Tayle, and the Tayle to turn Head.

3.

A Monſter like this, but of ſtranger Conditions,

Engender'd there was in the year thirty nine;

Rebell'd 'gainſt the Head, but with fawning Petitions,

To have him his Pow'r and his Right to reſign;

This Monſter (the truth on't to ſpeak) was begot

By a Mongrell Parſon, and that Hagg the Scot.

[[Page 312]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=169)

4.

So large and ſo mighty this Tayle grew in length,

That where ere it came, it ſwept all before it;

There was no reſiſting ſo pow'rfull a ſtrength,

The Head at the laſt was forc't to implore it:

All our Caſtles and Towns this Tayle did ſubdue,

A ſad tale to tell, but believe me 'tis true.

5.

Above ſeven years Conflict this Head did endure,

With that Monſterous Tayle, and the Spawn it begot:

During which time no Man's life was ſecure,

Our Goods and our Cattle all went to the Pot:

At laſt came a Champion with an Iron ſtayle,

And ended the ſtrife 'twixt the Head, and the Tayle ▪

6.

The Head being departed the Body began

To conſult with the Tayle what wa [...] beſt to do;

St. George (quoth the Body) 'tis ſaid was a Man,

But what can this thing be is called St. O.

Why he (quoth the Tayle) was one of our Rout,

And 'tis wonderous ſtrange he ſhould turn Tayle about.

7.

While thus they did argue in ruſht our St. O.

With Courage more keen then the Sword that he wore;

Quoth he, ye are vile things, not fit here to grow,

Such Fiends ne're was known in this place heretofore,

The wealth and the fat of the Country doth feed you,

And now I do gueſſe it is high time to bleed you.

[[Page 222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=170)

8.

Some ſay that this Tayle wore the mark of a P,

O, is a Letter in rank known before it;

How e're 't makes no matter, 'tis all one to me,

Save this, that I'm ſure the O had the more wit;

There's no Man ſo blind, but may eaſily ſee

He hath added unto his ſmall O, a tall P.

9.

My Story now ended come viva St. George,

That old true blew Lad, and Hoſpitable-Saint,

Bring a Butt of good Sack to fill up my Gorge,

At this tale of Head and Tayle I almoſt faint;

Howe're let it paſs; if you ſtuddy upon't,

I hope you will neither make Head or Tayle on't.

#### 1.144.2. The Advice.

1.

NE're trouble thy ſelf at the Times nor their turnings,

Afflictions run circular, and wheele about,

Away with theſe Murmurings, and, theſe Heart-burnings,

With the Juyce of the Grape wee'l quench the Fire out,

Ne're chain, nor impriſon thy Soul up in ſorrow,

What fails us to day, may befriend us to morrow,

Wee'l ſcorn our Content from others to borrow.

[[Page 323]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=170)

2.

Though Fortune hath left us wee'le ſtrive to re­gain her,

And court her with Cupps till her Favourite come,

Then with a Courage untam'd wee'le maintain her,

And ſilence the noyſe of the Enemies Drum,

Wee'le link her unto the Man moſt deſerving,

Shall keep her at work, as well as from ſtarving,

She ſhall not hereafter be at her own Carving.

3.

I hold him a Novice in Humane affairs,

Thinks whirlings in State a wonderous thing,

To daub up old Ruines with dirty repairs,

And inſtead of a Scepter to ſet up a Sling.

Such Atomes of Greatneſſe are but Fortune's laughter,

She fattens them up 'till they're fitted for ſlaughter,

Then leaves them at Tiburn to Tittar and Tauter.

### 1.145. Sharers in the Government. A MEDLEY. To 8. ſeveral Tunes.

SOme ſay the World is but a Cheat,

Troth we ſee't

For the feet

[[Page 324]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=171)Still
rebell againſt the Head,

When Antipodian Rulers ſway,

Who'le obey?

Thus ſome ſay,

Shall we not his own ſteps tread?

Pray were we not in the late Quarrel,

All pickl'd up in the ſame Barrel?

Then why that? or why this?

Our hearts are as great as his.

Harriſon.

Here is One that claims a ſhare

In the Scepter, and the Chaire,

Though he cryes Religion down,

Hee's Ambitious for a Crown;

Fain hee'd have his Head to ſhine

Where his Father  [...]ngs his Signe,

So he ſhould, had I the Power

In the twinkling of an how're

I, of his diſeaſe would cure him.

Blake

What think you of the Man of War,

Whoſe Muzle is the Sea-mans Star?

Hee's Arm'd within, and Wall'd without

To give the Rout, if that we dare;

But faith the Dutch will hem him in,

And make him either ſink or ſwim;

This is the News brought Mr. P —

To which he lent ſcarce half an Eare.

There is one, and a ſly one,

In Scotland, lurks to quarter with the Lyon,

He is your comeing Man ſir,

Will lead the Van ſir,

Pick out the meaning if you can.

Upon the leaſt Commotion;

[[Page 325]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=171)He wears
a Coat with double-colours faced,

On one ſide whereof the States is gravely placed,

But on the other the Cavies rudely raced;

Hold Ambodexter whither wilt thou go?

Lambert.

Then comes a ſtout Heart,

A Man very pert,

Reaking with Revenge, for Diſgrace;

He ſwore he was true

To give the Devil his due,

And as firm as the Noſe on his Face.

Ludlow.

Another puts in

To be a States Pin,

Good reaſon it ſhould be ſo,

He can Circumvent

A Parliament;

Then why not Our Oliver O?

Some talk this, and ſome talk that,

Some talk of New wars, and ſome they know not what,

But well fare the Cavalier, for at a bare word,

Hee's ſcarce left either Tongue or Sword.

John Lil­born.

Then Turbulent-ſpirited Jack bring up the Reere,

For thou haſt a Spleene farr keener than any one here;

Thou ſpurn'ſt at Authoritie, art Ambition's Minion,

And boy [...]' [...]t like thy Soap to advance a New-fang­led Opinion;

[[Page
326]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=172)Promotion's thy
drift, to rule doth make thy Wits roame,

But a Gibbet 'tis thought will ſtand betwixt thee and home.

### 1.146. Upon Cromwell's refuſing the Kingly Power.

1.

HOw poor is his Spirit? how loſt is his Name,

Deceiveth Opinion, and Curtailes his Fame?

When a [...] his Deſigns come near to their height,

'Twixt ſhall I and ſhall I, ſuſpect their own weight,

He has traffiqu'd for Honour, but loſt the whole Freight:

He that's ſtout in the Front, not ſo in the Rear,

Doth forfeit his Fame, and is Cow'd out by Fear.

2.

A ſmall part of Honor to him doth belong,

Conſults not the Glory, but faints in the throng;

That dares not embrace what his own Soul doth Vote,

But yields up Our Liberties to a Red-coat;

Sure Midſommer's near, and ſome Men doth dote:

I like the bold Romanes, (whoſe Fame ever rings)

That kept in Subjection ſuch pittifull things.

3.

He that will be Bug-bea [...]'d, is turn'd again Child,

A Reed than a Scepteris fitter to weild;

[[Page 327]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=172)Examine
the Story, no Story you'l find,

Saving the Story, that Kat will to kind,

The World is deluded, the Common-wealth blind;

Theſe falſe ſtamps of Honour prove but Copper-Mettle,

And Fame ſounds as loud from a Tinkers old Kettle.

4.

He that paſt has the Pikes, and found Canon-free,

Which ſhews that noe Curſe from his Parents could be,

Had a Soul ſo devout, it made Killing a Trade;

And now to retreat at the ſent of a Blade

Doth ſhow of what Mold our Knight-Errant was made▪

He that flagges in his Flight, when's Ambition ſores high,

Doth ſtabb his own Merit, & gives Fame the lye.

5.

Then Cicero-like, yea Gown-men drench Cares,

O [...]re-whelm'd with your Own, and your Coun­tries Affairs;

And Pulpit-men too be as Airy as Wee;

Do you but preach Sack up, we'l ne'r diſagree,

That Common-wealth's beſt that is the moſt free:

Then fret not, nor care not, when the Sack's in our Crown,

We can fancy a King up, or fancy Him down.

[[Page 328]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=173)

### 1.147. The Encounter. A SONG.

1.

HAng the Presbyters Gill,

Bring a Pinte of Sack Will,

More O [...]thodox of the two;

Though a ſlender diſpute

Will ſtrike the Elfe mute,

Hees one of the honeſter Crue.

2.

In a Pinte there's ſmall heart,

Sir [...]ah, bring us a Quart,

There's ſubſtance and vigor met,

'Twill hold us in Play,

Some part of the day,

But we'll ſuck him before Sun-ſet.

3.

The dareing old Pottle

Does now bid us Battle;

Let's try what his ſtrength can do;

Keep your Ranks and your Files:

And for all his Wiles,

Wee'l tumble him down Staires too.

4

The Stout-breaſted Lumberd,

His Brains ne'r encumber'd

With drinking of Gallous three;

Tricongius was named,

And by Caeſar [...]amed,

Who dubbed him Knight Cap-a-pe.

[[Page 329]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=173)

5.

If then Honour be in't,

Why a pox ſhould we ſtint

Our ſelves of the fullneſs it bears?

H' has leſſe wit than an Ape

In the blood of the Grape,

Will not plunge himſelf o're head and ears.

6.

Then ſummon the Gallon,

A ſtout Foe, and a tall One,

And likely to hold us to't;

Keep Coyn in your Purſe,

The Word is disburſe,

I'le warrant he falls at your foot.

7.

See, the bold Foe appears,

May he falls that him fears;

Keep you but cloſe Order, and then

We will give him the Rout,

Be he never ſo ſtout,

And prepare for his Rallying agen.

8.

Wee'l dreyn the whole Cellar,

Pipes, Butts, and the Dweller,

If the Wine does flow no faſter;

Will, when thou doſt ſlack us,

By Warrant from Bacchus,

Wee'l Cane thy Tun-belly'd Maſter.

[[Page 330]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=174)

### 1.148. The Good Old Cauſe.

NOw Lambert's ſunk, and valiant M —

Does ape his General Cromwell,

And Arthur's Court, 'cauſe time is ſhort,

Does rage like Devils from Hell;

Let's mark the fate and courſe of State,

Who riſes when t'other is ſinking,

And beleive when this is paſt

'Twill be our turn at laſt

To bring the Good Old Cauſe by drinking.

Firſt, red nos'd Nol he ſwallowed all,

His colour ſhew'd he lov'd it:

But Dick his Son, as he were none,

Gav't off, and hath reprov'd it;

But that his foes made bridge of's noſe,

And cry'd him down for a Protector,

Proving him to be a fool, that would undertake to rule,

And not drink and fight like Hector.

The Grecian Lad, he drank like mad,

Minding no work above it;

And Sans queſtion kill'd Epheſtion,

Becauſe he'd not approve it;

He got command, where God had land,

And like a Maudlin Yonker,

When he tippled all and wept, he laid him down to ſleep,

Having no more Worlds to conquer.

[[Page 331]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=174)

Rump-Parliament would needs invent

An Oath of Abjuration,

But Obedience and Allegiance are now come into faſhion:

Then heres a boul, with a heart and ſoul

To Charles, and let all men ſay Amen to't,

Though they brought the Father down

From a triple Kingdom Crown,

Wee'l drink the Son up agen to't.

### 1.149. The Protecting Brewer.

A Brewer may be a Burgeſs grave,

And carry the matter ſo fine and ſo brave,

That he the better may play the Knave,

Which no body can deny.

A Brewer may be a Parliament-man,

For there the Knavery firſt began,

And brew moſt cunning Plots he can,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer may put on a Nabal face,

And march to the Wars with ſuch a grace,

That he may get a Captains place,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer may ſpeak ſo wonderous well,

That he may raiſe ſtrange things to tell,

And ſo to be made a Collonel,

Which no body, &c.

[[Page 332]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=175)

A Brewer may make his foes to flee,

And raiſe his Fortunes, ſo that he

Lieutenant-General may be,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer he may be all in all,

And raiſe his Powers both great and ſmall,

That he may be a Lord General,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer may be like a Fox in a Cub,

And teach a Lecture out of a Tub,

And give the wicked world a rub,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer by's Excize and Rate,

Will promiſe his Army he knows what,

And ſet it upon the Colledge-gate,

Which no body, &c.

Methinks I hear one ſay to me,

Pray why may not a Brewer be,

Lord-Chancellor o'th' Univerſity,

Which no body, &c.

A Brewer may be as bold as Hector,

When as he has drunk off his cup of Nectar,

And a Brewer may be a Lord Protector.

Which no body, &c.

Now here remans the ſtrangeſt thing,

How this Brewer about his Liquor did bring,

To be an Emperour, or a King,

Which no body, &c.

[[Page 333]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=175)

A Brewer may do what he will,

And rob the Church and State, to ſell

His ſoul unto the devil of hell,

Which no body can deny.

### 1.150. The Power of the Sword.

LAY by your Pleading, Law lyes a bleeding,

Burn all your Studies down, and throw away your Reading;

Small power the Word has, and can afford us

Not half ſo many Priviledges as the Sword has:

It foſters your Maſters, it plaſters Diſaſters,

And makes your Servants, quickly greater than their Maſters;

It venters, it enters, it circles, it centers,

And makes a Prentice free in ſpight of his In­dentures.

This takes off tall things, and ſets up ſmall things,

This maſters Money, though Money maſters all things;

'Tis not in ſeaſon, to talk of Reaſon,

Or call it Legal, when the Sword will have it Treaſon;

It conquers the Crown too, the Furres and the Gown too,

This ſet up a Presbyter, and this pull'd him down too;

This ſubtil Deceiver, turn'd Bonnet to Beaver,

Down drops a Biſhop, and up ſtarts a Weaver.

[[Page 334]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=176)

This fits a Lay-man to preach and pray man,

'Tis this can make a Lord of him that was a Dray­man;

Forth from the dull pit, of Follies full pit,

This brought an Hebrew Iron-monger to the Pulpit;

Such pittifull things be, more happier than Kings be,

This got the Herauldry of Thimblebee and Slings­bee;

No Goſpel can guide it, no Law can decide it,

In Church or State, untill the Sword hath ſanc­tify'd it.

Down goes the Law-tricks, for from that Matrix

Sprung holy Hewſon's power, and tumbled down St. Patricks;

The Sword prevails ſo highly in Wales too,

Shinkin ap Powel cryes, and ſwears Cuts-pluttera­nails too;

In Scotland this Waſter, did make ſuch diſaſter,

They ſent their Money back for which they ſold their Maſter;

It batter'd ſo their Dunkirke, and did ſo the Don firke,

That he is fled, and ſwears, the Devil is in Dun­kirke.

He that can tower o'er him that is lower,

Would be but thought a Fool to put away his Power;

Take Books and rent 'um, who would invent 'um,

When as the Sword replyes, Negatur argumen­tum?

[[Page 335]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=176)Your
grand Colledge Butlers, muſt ſtoop to your Sutlers,

There's not a Library living like the Cutlers;

The bloud that is ſpilt, Sir, hath gain'd all the gilt, Sir,

Thus have you ſeen me run the Sword up to the hilt, Sir.

### 1.151. Cromwell's Coronation.

OLiver, Oliver, take up thy Crown,

For now thou haſt made three Kingdoms thine own;

Call thee a Conclave of thy own creation,

To ride us to ruine, who dare thee oppoſe:

Whilſt we thy good people are at thy Devotion,

To fall down and worſhip thy terrible Noſe.

To thee and thy Mermydons, Oliver, we,

Do tender our homage as fits thy degree,

We'll pay the Exciſe and Taxes, God bleſſe us,

With fear and contrition, as penitents ſhould,

Whilſt you, great Sir, vouchſafe to oppreſſe us,

Not daring ſo much as in private to ſoold.

We bow down, as cow'd down, to thee and thy Sword,

For now thou haſt made thy ſelf Englands ſole Lord,

By Mandate of Scripture, and Heavenly warrant,

The Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant too;

[[Page 336]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=177)To
Charles and his Kingdoms thou art Heir apparent,

And born to rule over the Turk and the Jew.

Then Oliver, Oliver, get up and ride,

Whilſt Lords, Knights, and Gentry do run by thy ſide;

The Maulſters and Brewers account it their glory,

Great God of the Grain-tub's compared to thee:

All Rebells of old are loſt in their ſtory,

Till thou plod'ſt along to the Padington-tree.

### 1.152. The BREWER.

To the Tune of the Black-ſmith.

THere many a Clinching Verſe is made

In honour of the Black-ſmiths trade,

But more of the Brewer may be ſaid,

Which no body can deny.

I need not much of this repeat,

The Black-ſmith cannot be compleat,

Unleſſe the Brewer do give him a heat,

Which no body can deny.

When Smug unto the forge doth come,

Unleſſe the Brew [...]r doth liquor him home,

He'll never ſtrike thy pot and my pot Tom.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 337]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=177)

Of all profeſſions in the town

The Brewers trade hath gain'd renown,

His liquor reacheth up to the Crown,

Which no body can deny.

Many new Lords from him there did ſpring,

Of all the trades he ſtill was their King,

For the Brewer had the world in a ſling,

Which no body can deny.

He ſcorneth all Laws and Martial ſtops,

But whips an Army as round as tops,

And cuts off his foes as thick as hops,

Which no body can deny.

He dives for Riches down to the bottom,

And cryes, my Maſters, when he had got um,

Let every tub ſtand upon his own bottom,

Which no body can deny.

In War-like acts he ſcorns to ſtoop,

For when his Army begins to droop,

He draws them up us round as a hoop,

Which no body can deny.

The Jewiſh Scots that ſcorns to eat

The fleſh of Swine, and Brewers beat,

'Twas the ſight of this hogs-head made 'um re­treat,

Which no body can deny.

Poor Jockie and his basket hilt

Was beaten, and much blood was ſpilt,

And their bodies like barrels did run a tilt,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 338]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=178)

Though Jemy gave the firſt aſſault,

The Brewer at laſt made them to halt,

And left them what the Cat left in the Mault.

Which no body can deny.

They cry'd that Antichriſt came to ſettle

Religion in a Cooler and a Kettle,

For his Noſe and Copper were both of one mettle,

Which no body can deny.

Some Chriſtian King began to quake,

And ſaid, with the Brewer no quarrels we'll make,

We'll let him alone, as he Brews let him Bake,

Which no body can deny.

He hath a ſtrong and very ſtout heart,

And thought to be made an Emperor for't,

But the Devil put a ſpoke in his Cart,

Which no body can deny.

If any intended to do him diſgrace,

His fury would take off his head in the place,

He alway did carry his Furneſſe in his face,

Which no body can deny.

But yet by the way you muſt underſtand,

He kept his foes ſo under command,

That Pride could never get the upper hand,

Which no body can deny.

He was a ſtout Brewer, of whom we may brag,

But now he is hurried away with a hag;

He brew'd in a bottle, and bak'd in a bag,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 339]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=178)

And now may all ſtout Souldiers ſay,

Farewell the glory of the day,

For the Brewer himſelf is turn'd to clay,

Which no body can deny.

Thus fell the brave Brewer, the bold ſon of ſlaugh­ter,

We need not to fear what ſhall follow after,

For he dealt all his life time in fire and water,

Which no body can deny.

And if his Succeſſor had had but his might,

We had not been in a pittifull plight,

But he was found many grains too light,

Which no body can deny.

Let's leave off ſinging, and drink off our Bub,

Wee'll call for a Reckoning, and every man Club,

For I think I have told you a Tale of a Tub.

Which no body can deny.

### 1.153. In imitation of Come my Daphne, a Dialogue between Pluto and
Oliver.

Pluto.

COme Imp Royal, come away,

Into black night we will turn bright day.

Oliver.

'Tis Pluto calls, what would my Syre?

Pluto.

Come, follow to the Stygian fire,

Where Ireton doth wait

To welcome thee in ſtate.

Oliver.

Were I in bed with Lamberts wife,

I'de quit thoſe joyes for ſuch a life.

Pluto.

[[Page 340]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=179)

My Princely Nol make haſt,

For thee we keep a Faſt.

Oliver.

In theſe diſmal ſhades will I

Unto thee unfold my Villany.

Pluto.

In my boſome I'll thee lay,

For thy ſake wee'l all keep holyday.

Chorus.

Wee'l rage and roar, and fry in flames,

And Charles himſelf ſhall ſee

How damn'dly we agree,

Yet ſcorn to change our Chains

For his eternal diety.

### 1.154. A Quarrel betwixt Tower-hill and Tyburn.

I'LE tell you a Story that never was told,

A tale that hath both head and heel,

And though by no Recorder inroll'd,

I know you will find it as true as ſteel.

When General Monck was come to the Town,

A little time after the Rump had the rout,

When Loyalty roſe, and Rebellion fell down,

They ſay, that Tower-hill and Tyburne fell out.

Q [...]oth terrible Tyburne to lofty Tower-hill,

Thy longed-for daies are come at laſt,

And now thou wilt dayly thy belly fulfill

With King-killers bloud whilſt I muſt faſt.

[[Page 341]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=179)

The High Court of Juſtice will come to the Bar,

There to be cooked and dreſſed for thee,

Whilſt I, that live out of Town ſo far,

Muſt only be fed by Fellony.

If Treaſon be counted the fouleſt fact,

And dying be a Traytor's due,

Then why ſhould you all the glory exact?

You know, they are ſitter for me than you.

To ſpeak the plain truth, I have groan'd for them long,

For when they had routed the Royal Root,

And done the Kingdom ſo much wrong,

I knew at the laſt they would come to't▪

When Titchburne ſate upon the Ben [...]h,

Twirling his Chain in high degree,

With a Beardleſs Chin, like a withered Wench,

Thought I, the Bar is fitter for thee.

But then, with ſtately compoſed face,

Tower-hill to Tyburne made reply,

Do not complain, in ſuch a Caſe

Thou ſhalt have thy ſhare as well as I.

There are a ſort of Mongrils, which

My Lordly Scaffold will diſgrace:

I know Hugh Peters his fingers itch

To make a Pulpit of the place.

But t [...]ke him Tyburn, he is thine own,

Divide his quarter [...] with thy  [...]ife,

Who did pollute with f [...]ſh and  [...]e

The quarters of the Butchers wife.

[[Page 342]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=180)

The next among theſe Petticoat-Peers

Is Harry Martin, take him thither,

But he hath been addle ſo many years,

That I fear he will hardly hang together.

There's Hacker, zealous Tom Harriſon too,

That boldly defends the bloudy deed,

He practizeth what the Jeſuites do,

To murder his King, as a part of his Creed.

There's ſingle-eyed Hewſon the Cobler of Fate,

Tranſlated into Buff and Feather,

But bootleſs are all his ſeams of State

When the ſoul is unript from the upper-lea­ther.

Is this prophane mechanical Brood

For me, that have been dignfy'd

With loyal Land and Straffords blood,

And holy Hewet, who lately dy'd?

Do thou contrive with deadly Dun

To ſend them to the River of Stix,

'Tis pitty, ſince thoſe Saints are gone,

That Martyrs and Murtherers bloud ſhould mix.

Then do not fear me that I will

Deprive thee of that fatal Day:

'Tis fit thoſe that their King did kill

Sould hang up in the Kings high-way.

My Priviledge, though I know it is large,

Into thy hand I'le freely give it,

For there is Cook that read the Kings Charge,

Is only fit for the Devils tribute.

[[Page 343]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=180)

Then taunting Tyburn, in great ſcorn,

Did make Tower-hill this rude reply:

So much rank bloud my ſtomack will turn,

And thou ſhalt be ſick as well as I.

Theſe Traytors made thoſe Martyrs bleed

Upon the Block, that thou doſt bear,

And there it is fit they ſhould dye for the deed;

But Tower-hill cryed, they ſhall not come there.

With that grim Tyburn began to fret,

And Tower-hill did look very grim:

And ſure as a Club they both would have met,

But that the City did ſtep between.

### 1.155. The Bloody Bed-roll, or Treaſon diſplayed in its Colours.

Triumphing News for Cavaliers,

The Rump ſmells ſtrong, caſt out by th' Peers.

OLd OLIVER's gone to the Dogs,

Oh! No I do miſtake,

Hee's gone in a Wherry

Over the Ferry,

Is call'd the Stygian Lake.

But Cerberus that Great Porter

Did read him ſuch a Lecture,

That made him to roar

When he came a-ſhoar

[[Page 344]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=181)

For being Lord Protector.

News, news, news,

Brave Cavaliers be merry,

Chear up your ſad ſouls

With Bacchus Bowls,

Of Claret, White, and Sherry.

Where is that Curſed Crew

Were of the laſt King [...] Jury,

By thy damned ſoul

Go fetch them Nol

Quoth  [...]luto in his fury.

Where is old Joan thy wife?

Her Highneſs I would ſee,

Come let her in

She ſhall be my Queen,

For a Cuckold thou ſhalt be.

News, news, &c.

Make room for a Ramping Lady,

One of the Devils race,

This ugly Witch,

And naſty Bitch

Spat in the King's ſweet face.

I [...]le make her a Lady of Honour,

Q [...]oth Pluto let her in,

And open the door;

For this old Whore

Shall wait upon my Queen.

News, n [...]ws, &c.

Here comes Sir HENRY MARTYN

As good as ever piſt,

[[Page 345]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=181)This
wenching beaſt

Had Whores at leaſt

A thouſand on his lift:

This made the Devils laugh,

So good a friend to ſee,

At Pluto's Court

There's better ſport,

Come thou ſhalt dwell with me.

News, news, &c.

Bid Caron bring his Boat,

Here comes a man of fame,

Who hath waited here

Above a year,

JACK BRADSHAW is his name,

O ho quoth Pluto then,

As loud as he could yawl,

By Oliver's Noſe

I did ſuppoſe

Thou hadſt been at White-hall.

News, news, &c.

Thou'rt welcome to my Court,

Here on my Scroul I find,

I have in ſtore

A thouſand more

As Arrant Rogues behind.

Why art thou ſad quoth Pluto?

My Servants muſt appear,

Then do not grudge

I'le made thee Judge

Of all my Subjects here.

News, news, &c.

[[Page 346]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=182)

Here comes a friend of mine,

Make room for the Lord LISLE,

His gueſts at laſt

Did come ſo faſt

That made old Pluto ſmile.

Thou muſt along with me,

Now 'tis too late to rue it,

Thy damned Soul

Is on my Scroul,

Remember Doctor Hewet.

News, news, &c.

What is the Cauſe Sir ARTHUR

Your Pulſes go ſo quick?

'Tis Biſhops Lands

That's in your hands

VVhich makes them beat ſo thick.

Thy Oath of Abjuration

Was far a worſer thing,

For the Devil and thou

Did ſtudy how

VVe ſhould abjure our KING.

News, news, &c.

Next comes Sir HENRY MILDMAY

As good as ever twang'd,

VVhat Laws had we

VVhen he ſcap'd free

And honeſt men were hang'd?

Perhaps the KING's good grace

May pardon what is paſt,

But that's all one

At Pluto's Throne

Thou muſt appear at laſt,

News, news, &c,

[[Page 347]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=182)

Shall Traytors be conceal'd?

Oh! no Sir HENRY VANE,

'Tis a pittifull thing

For our good KING

When Traytors are in grain.

If thou wilt take the pains,

Then pray thee go and look,

For I am told

Thou art enrol'd

In Pluto's bloody Book.

News, news, &c.

Here comes the Learned SPEAKER,

Whoſe baggs of Gold do ruſt,

Who would not hear

A Cavalier

Though his Cauſe were nere ſo juſt.

Corruption bears the ſway

Where Juſtice is deny'd,

The Devil take him,

And Mr. PYM,

And likewiſe Collonel PRIDE.

News, news, &c.

Make room for one-ey'd HEWSON,

A Lord of ſuch account,

'Twas a pretty Jeſt

That ſuch a Beaſt

Should to ſuch honour mount.

When Coblers were in faſhion,

And Nigherds in ſuch grace;

'Twas ſport to ſee

How PRIDE and he

[[Page 348]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=183)Did
juſtle for the Place.

News, news, &c.

What dreadfull ſhew is this?

'Tis PRIDEAUX or his Ghoſt,

He makes ſuch haſt,

And comes ſo faſt,

I think He's riding Poſt.

A Lawyer if thou art,

Amongſt the damned ſouls,

At Pluto's Barre,

'Tis better farre

Then pleading at the Roles.

News, news, &c.

Oh welcome Dr. PETERS,

And Co [...]ne [...] [...]OYCE alſo,

One of theſe twain

Was worſe than Cain

That gave the deadly blow:

One of theſe Curſed Rogues

Was he that did the feat,

But ſome men ſay

'Twas that Lord GRAY

That made the work compleat.

News, news, &c.

A Boat for this Old Doctor

To croſs the River Styx,

For Pluto he

Deſired to ſee

Some of his Antick tricks;

My Chaplain thou ſhalt be,

What more can be deſired?

[[Page 349]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=183)Oh!
quoth he

That cannot be,

My Leaſe is not expir'd.

News, news, &c.

Oh! my Rump, my Rump, my Rump,

My Rump ſmells wonderous ſtrong,

The bliſters riſe

About my Thighs

With voting here ſo long,

My Rump is grown ſo ſore,

I can no longer ſit,

Hold up thy Bum,

The Devil is come

With a Plaiſter to cure it.

News, news, &c.

VVhen Pluto keeps his feaſt,

The Rogues muſt all appear,

And Mr. SCOT

I had forgot,

Muſt taſt of this good Chear.

Find out the Man, quoth Pluto,

That is the greateſt ſinner,

If COOK be he

Then COOK ſhall be

The Cook to Cook my dinner,

News, news, &c.

God bleſſe the KINGS good grace,

And keep him from his foes,

I wiſh the rather

Becauſe his Father,

Had too too many of thoſe.

[[Page 350]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=184)God
bleſſe the Duke of YORK,

His Siſter, and Another,

Accurſt be thoſe

That do oppoſe

The ſending for their Mother.

News, news, news,

Brave Cavaliers be merry,

Chear up your ſad ſouls

With Bacchus Bowls,

Of Claret, White, and Sherry.

### 1.156. The four Legg'd Elder; or a Relation of a Horrible Dog and an
Elders Maid.

To the Tune of The Ladies fall; Or Gather your Roſe Buds, and 50 other Tunes.

1.

ALL Chriſtians, and Lay-Elders too,

For ſhame amend your Lives,

I'll tell you of a Dog-trick now,

Which much concerns your wives.

An Elder's Maid near Temple-bar

(Ah what a Quean was ſhe!)

Did take an ugly Maſtiff Cur

Where Chriſtians uſe to be.

Help Houſe of Commons, Houſe of Peers!

Oh now or never help!

Th' Aſſembly having ſate four years

Have now brought forth a whelp!

[[Page 351]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=184)

2.

One Evening late ſhe ſtept aſide,

Pretending to fetch Eggs,

And there ſhe made her ſelf a Bride

To one that had four leggs:

Her Maſter heard a Rumblement,

And wonder'd ſhe did tarry,

Not dreaming (without his conſent)

His Dog would ever marry.

Help Houſe of Commons, &c.

3.

He went to peep, but was afraid,

And haſtily did run

To fetch a Staff to help his Maid,

Not knowing what was done;

He took his Ruling Elder's Cane,

And cry'd out, Help, help here!

For Swaſh our Maſtiff and poor Jane

Are now, fight Dog, fight Bear.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

4.

But when he came he was full ſorry,

For he perceiv'd their ſtrife,

That according to the Directory

Theſe two were Dog and Wife:

Ah (then he ſaid) thou cruel Quean,

Why haſt thou me beguil'd?

I wonder'd Swaſh was grown ſo lean,

Poor Dog he's almoſt ſpoyl'd.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

5.

I thought thou hadſt no carnal ſenſe

But what's in other Laſſes,

[[Page 352]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=185)And
could have quench'd thy Cupiſcence

According to the Claſſis;

But all the Pariſh ſee it plain,

Since thou art in this pickle,

Thou art an Independent Quean,

And lov'ſt a Conventicle.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

6.

Alas now each Malignant Rogue

Will all the world perſwade

That ſhe that's Spouſe unto a Dog,

May be an Elder's Maid;

They'll jeer us if abroad we ſtir,

Good Maſter Elder ſtay,

Sir, of what Claſſis is your Cur;

And then what can we ſay?

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

7.

They'll many graceleſs Ballads ſing

Of a Presbyterian,

That a Lay-Elder is a thing

Made up half-Dog half-Man:

Out, out, (ſaid he, and ſmote her down)

Was Mankind grown ſo ſcant?

There's ſcarce another Dog in town

Had took the Covenant.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

8.

Then Swaſh began to look full grim,

And Jane did thus reply,

Sir, you thought nought too good for him,

You fed your Dog too high:

Tis true, he took me in the lurch,

And leapt into my arm,

[[Page 353]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=185)But (as
I hope to come to Church)

I did your Dog no harm.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

9.

Then ſhe was brought to Newgate Gaol,

And there was naked ſtript,

They whipt her till the Cord did fail,

As Dogs uſe to be whipt:

Poor City Maids ſhed many a tear

When ſhe was laſh'd and bang'd,

And had ſhe been a Cavalier,

Surely ſhe had been hang'd.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

10.

Her's was but Fornication found,

For which ſhe felt the laſh,

But his was Buggery preſum'd,

Therefore they hanged Swaſh.

What will become of Biſhops then,

Or Independency,

For now we find both Dogs and Men

Stand for Presbytery.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

11.

She might have took a Sow-gelder,

With Synod-men good ſtore,

But ſhe would have a Lay-Elder

With two legs, and two more.

Go tell the Aſſembly of Divines,

Tell Adoniram Blew,

Tell Burges, Marſhall, Caſe, and Vines,

Tell Now-and-Anon-too.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

[[Page 354]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=186)

12.

Some ſaid ſhe was a Scotiſh Girl,

Or elſe (at leaſt) a Witch;

But ſhe was born in Colchester,

Was ever ſuch a Bitch!

Take heed all Chriſtian Virgins now,

The Dog-ſtar now prevails;

Ladies beware your Monkeys too,

For Monkeys have long tails.

Oh Houſe of Commons, &c.

13.

Bleſſe King and Queen, and ſend us peace,

As we had ſeven years ſince,

For we remember no Dog-dayes

While we enjoy'd our Prince:

Bleſs ſweet Prince Charles, two Dukes, three Girls,

O ſave His Majesty!

Grant that his Commons, Lords, and Earls,

May lead ſuch lives as He

Oh Houſe of Commons, Houſe of Peers!

Oh now or never help!

Th' Aſſembly having ſate four years,

Have now brought forth a whelp!

### 1.157. News from Colcheſter.

Or, A Proper new Ballad of certain Carnal paſſages betwixt a Quaker and a
Colt, at Horſley near Col­chester in Eſſex. To the Tune of Tom of Bedlam.

1.

ALL in the Land of Eſſex,

Near Colcheſter the Zealous,

[[Page 355]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=186)On the
ſide of a bank,

Was play'd ſuch a Prank,

As would make a Stone-horſe jealous.

2.

Help Woodcock Fox, and Nailor,

For Brother Green's a Stallion,

Now alas what hope

Of converting the Pope,

When a Quaker turns Italian!

3.

Even to our whole profeſſion

A ſcandall 'twill be counted,

When 'tis talkt with diſdain

Amongſt the Profane,

How Brother Green was mounted.

4.

And in the Good time of Chriſtmas,

Which though our Saints have damn'd all,

Yet when did they hear

That a damn'd Cavalier

Ere play'd ſuch a Chriſtmas gamball?

5.

Had thy fleſh, O Green, been pamper'd

With any Cates unhallow'd,

Hadſt thou ſweetned thy Gums

With Pottage of Plums,

Or prophane minc'd Pie hadſt ſwallow'd.

6.

Roll'd up in wanton Swine's-fleſh,

The Fiend might have crept into thee,

Then fullneſſe of gut

Might have made thee rut,

And the Devil have ſo rid through thee.

[[Page 356]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=187)

7.

But alas, he had been feaſted

With a Spiritual Collation,

By our frugal Mayor,

Who can dine on a Prayer,

And ſup on an Exhortation.

8.

'Twas meer impulſe of Spirit,

Though he us'd the weapon carnal,

Filly Foal, quoth he,

My Bride thou ſhalt be:

And how this is lawfull, learn all.

9.

For if no reſpect of Perſons

Be due 'mongſt the ſons of Adam,

In a large extent,

Thereby may be meant

That a Mare's as good as a Madam.

10.

Then without more Ceremony,

Not Bonnet vail'd, nor Kiſt her,

But took her by force,

For better for worſe,

And us'd her like a Siſter.

11.

Now when in ſuch a Saddle

A Saint will needs be riding,

Though we dare not ſay

'Tis a falling away,

May there not be ſome back-ſliding?

12.

No ſurely, quoth James Nailor,

'Twas but an inſurrection

[[Page 357]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=187)Of the
Carnal part,

For a Quaker in heart

Can never loſe perfection.

13.

For (as our Maſters teach us)

The intent being well directed,

Though the Devil trapan

The Adamical man,

The Saint ſtands un-infected.

14.

But alas a Pagan Jury

Ne're judges what's intended,

Then ſay what we can,

Brother Green's out-ward man

I fear will be ſuſpended.

15.

And our Adopted Siſter

Will find no better quarter,

But when him we inroul

For a Saint, Filly Foal

Shall paſſe her ſelf for a Martyr.

16.

Rome that Spiritual Sodome,

No longer is thy debter,

O Colchester, now

Who's Sodome but thou,

Even according to the Letter?

[[Page 358]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=188)

### 1.158. The Four-legg'd Quaker.

To the Tune of The Four-legg'd Elder.

1.

ALL that have two or but one ear,

(I dare not tell ye half)

You of an Eſſex Colt ſhall hear

Will ſhame their very Calf.

In Horſley Fields near Colchester

A Quaker would turn Trooper;

He caught a Foal and mounted her

(O baſe!) below the Crupper.

Help Lords, and Commons, once more help,

O ſend us Knives and Daggers!

For if the Quakers be not gelt

Your Troops will have the Staggers.

2.

Ralph Green (it was this Varlet's name)

Of Colcheſter you'll ſwear,

For thence the Four-legg'd Elder came,

Was ever ſuch a Pair!

But though 'twas foul 'tween Swaſh and Jane,

Yet this is ten times worſe;

For then a Dog did play the Man,

But Man now play'd the Horſe.

Help, &c.

3.

The Owner of the Colt was nigh,

(Obſerving their Embrace)

And drawing nearer did eſpy

The Quaker's ſorrel Face:

[[Page 359]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=188)My Foal
is raviſh'd (then he cryes,

And fiercely at him ran)

Thou Rogue, I'll have thee haltered twice,

As Horſe and eke as Man!

Help, &c.

4.

Ah Devil, do'ſt thou tremble? now

'Tis ſore againſt thy will;

For Mares and preaching Ladies know

Thou haſt a Colts tooth ſtill:

But mine's not guilty of this Fact,

She was by thee compelled;

Poor thing, whom no man ever backt

Thou wickedly haſt Bellied.

Help, &c.

5.

O Friend (ſaid Green, with ſighs and groans)

Let this thy wrath appeaſe!

(And gave him then eight new Half-crowns

To make him hold his peace)

The man reply'd, though I for this

Conceal thy Hugger Mugger,

Do'ſt think it lawfull for a Piece

A ſilly Foal to Bugger?

Help, &c.

6.

The Maſter ſaw his Colt defil'd,

Which vext his Soul with doubt;

For if his Filly prov'd with Childe

He knew All would come out:

Then he afreſh began to rave,

(For all his Money taking)

Neighbours, ſaid he, I took this Knave

'Ith' very act of Quaking.

Help, &c.

[[Page 360]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=189)

7.

Then to the Pinfold (Gaol I mean)

They dragg'd him by the Mane,

They call'd him Beaſt, and call'd her Quean,

As if ſhe had been Jane.

O ſtone him (all the Women cry'd)

Nay geld him (which is worſe)

Who ſcorn'd us all, and took a Bride

That's Daughter to a Horſe!

Help, &c.

8.

The Colt was ſilent all this while,

And therefore 'twas no Rape,

The Virgin foal he did beguile,

And ſo intends to ſcape:

For though he caught her in a Ditch

Where ſhe could not revolt,

Yet he had no Scott'ſh ſpurr nor Switch

To ride the willing Colt

Help, &c.

9.

O Eſſex, Eſſex, England's pride,

Go burn this long-tail'd Quean,

For though the Thames runs by thy ſide,

It cannot waſh thee clean!

'Tis not thy Bleating Sonn's complaints,

Hold forth ſuch wanton courſes,

Thy Oyſters hint the very Saint

To horn the very Horſes.

Help, &c.

10.

Though they ſalute not in the Street

(Becauſe they are our Maſters)

'Tis now reveal'd why Quakers meet

In Meadows, Woods, and Paſtures.

[[Page 361]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=189)But
Horſ-men, Mare-men, all and ſome

Who Man and Beaſt perplex,

Not only from Eaſt-Horſley come,

But from Weſt-Middle-Sex.

Help, &c.

11.

This was not GREEN the Feltmaker,

Nor Willow GREEN the Baker,

Nor GEORGE the Sea-GREEN Mariner,

But RALPH the Graſſe-GREEN Quaker,

Had GREEN the Sow-gelder but known,

And done his Office duly,

Though RALPH was GREEN when he came on,

He had come off moſt blewly.

Help, &c.

12.

Alas you know by Man's fleſh came

The Foul-diſeaſe to Naples,

And now we fear the very ſame

Is broke into our Stable [...];

For Death hath ſtoln ſo many Steeds

From Prince and Peer, and Carrier,

That this new Murrain rather needs

a

Phyſician to the Earl of Pem­brook, who is no Quaker nor Quacker.

FARRAR than a Farrier

Help, &c.

13.

Nay if this GREEN within the walls

Of Colchester left forces,

Thoſe Cavaliers were Caniballs,

Eating his Humane Horſes!

But ſome make Man their ſecond courſe,

(In cool Blood will not ſpare)

Who butcher Men and favour Horſe

Will couple with a Mare.

Help, &c.

[[Page 362]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=190)

14.

This Centaur, unquoth Other thing,

Will make a dreadfull Breach:

Yet though an Aſs may ſpeak or

A new Sect of young Men and Women, who pray, eat and ſing ex tempore.

ſing,

O let not Horſes preach!

But bridle ſuch wilde Colts who can

When they'll obey no Summons,

For things begot 'tween Mare & Man

Are neither Lords nor Commons.

Help, &c.

15.

O Elders, Independants too,

Though all your Power's combin'd▪

Quakers will grow too ſtrong for you

Now Horſe and Man are joyn'd:

While Cavaliers, poor fooliſh Rogues,

Know only Maids Affairs,

She-Presbyters can deal with Dogs,

And Quaking-men with Mares.

Help, &c.

16.

Now as when Milan Town was rear'd,

A Monſtrous Sow untam'd,

With Back half Hair half Wool appear'd,

'Twas Mediolanum nam'd:

So Colcheſter muſt have recourſe

To ſome ſuch four-legg'd Siſter,

For ſure as Horſley came from Horſe,

From Colt 'twas call'd Col-chester.

Help, Lords and Commons, &c.

[[Page 363]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=190)

### 1.159. A JOLT on Michaelmas day 1654.  
To the Tune of

To himſelf that hath fool'd

More than Mahomet could, &c.

1.

IT fell on a day,

When good People ſay

St. Michael beat the Dragon,

My Lord the Protector

Did drive (like a Hector)

A Coach inſtead of a

Londinium petere ſolebat geſtatorio, ſe [...] vehiculo com­muni.

Wagon.

2.

Becauſe he did hear

The Chareteer

Did antiently wear a Crown,

Up went the Horſe-heels,

Round round went the Wheeles,

'Till his Highneſſe came head-long down.

3.

He reign'd them ſo hard,

They look'd back and were ſcar'd

To ſee him ſo red and ſo grim

Away then they fled,

And though he us'd to lead,

This new-modell'd Horſe would lead him.

[[Page 364]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=191)

4.

But O how they ſnuff

When his Piſtol flew off,

For which all the Saints ſuſpect him,

Doth Providence attend him,

Thirty thouſand defend him,

Yet a poor Pocket-piſtol protect him;

5.

How many a Hurl

Had poor Mr. * Thurl —

—Lo! He in the Coach did prank it:

He thought he had ſate

Chief Secretary of State,

But was toſs'd like a Dog in a Blanket.

6.

Nay had they run faſter

Hee'd follow his Maſter

Through all the Sceans of this Mad-ſhow:

A Brewer, a Collonel,

A Preacher a General,

A Protector, a King—then comes Bradſhaw.

7.

They ſlander my Lord

With a bug-bear Word,

That he did like Phaeton drive;

But his Highneſs try'd

Six Horſes to guide,

And Phaeton had now five.

[[Page 365]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=191)

8.

Mad Phaeton hurl'd

Fire all o're the World,

Then dead in a River was found:

But my Lord had no ayme

To ſet all in a flame,

And never was born to be drown'd.

9.

'Twas Nero did ſtrive

Such Charets to drive,

And publickly ſhew'd his Work;

But when my Lord ſticks

Up his Bills to ſhew tricks,

Hee'l undo th'other dauncing Turk.

10.

But if you look high,

There's ſome reaſon why

Theſe Jades did ſo fling and skip,

For though we afford

Him the power of the Sword,

He had no command of the Whip.

11.

Enthron'd in his Chair

(What a pox did He there?)

He took ſuch Protectorly courſes,

He ſeem'd Horſe and Mule,

But 'tis eaſier to rule

Three Kingdoms, than ſix Horſes.

12.

Not a day nor an hour

But we felt his Power,

And now he would ſhew us his Art:

[[Page 366]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=192)His
firſt Reproach

Is a fall from a Coach,

And his laſt will be from a Cart.

### 1.160. The Houſe out of Doors. April 20. 1653.

To the Tune of Cook Laurell.

1.

YOu ſaw Eleven Members turn'd out of Doors,

And 200. more were driven from home,

And then their own Lords were voted down ſtairs,

(When ſome of them crept into the Lower room:)

We purg'd and we purg'd, but all would not do't,

The Body had got ſuch a damnable Paunch)

'Till OLIVER fell upon Branch and Root,

Then down with it, down with it, down Root and Branch.

With a hey down, down a down down,

Sing ho down down to make up the Ditty,

With a hey down down a down down,

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

2.

Theſe Remnant Members began to ſay

Their General was fit to be had in ſuſpition;

And offer'd to Vote his Commiſſion away,

As if (forſooth) they had given him his Commiſ­ſion:

He did (yet did not) make uſe of his Sword,

On Men that could vote, and vote, but no more;

[[Page 367]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=192)He
ſhew'd them his Hilt, and ſpake but a word,

And that word blew the whole Houſe out of door.

With a hey down, &c.

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

3.

This day was Strafford all-to-be-Traytor'd,

Becauſe (they ſay) He had an Intent

(As this day Nol the Members ſcatter'd)

April 20\. 1641 April 20\. 1653

By an Army to force the Parliament.

At which old VANE now rants and raves,

For Strafford's bloud is not yet grown cold)

And yet we muſt ſay while we ſpeak of Knaves,

The Old is the Young, and the Young is the Old.

With a hey down, &c.

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

4.

Sir MILDMAY then with his hand on his groin,

(As fit for a Knave of the Diamonds) ſtood:

He eat the Kings Bread, & drank the Kings Wine,

So long till at laſt he drank of his Bloud.

So did CORNELIƲS HOLLAND too,

Whoſe ſhare i'th' Revenue doth fill three Pages,

But now when the Houſe is broke up (you know)

'Tis fit Houſhold Servants be paid their Wages.

With a hey down, &c.

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

5.

The Judge of Morocco (Treaſon HILL)

Devour'd at a Morſell all Taunton Dean,

He keeps five Chambers i'th'Temple, but will

(Now th' Houſe is pull'd down) be a Hillock again.

And the Devil too for his BOND doth call,

[[Page 368]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=193)Though
Dennis from Chamber to Chamber did hop,

He ſate Lord Preſident at Whitehall,

But now muſt go home to fit in his ſhop.

With a hey, &c.

The Parliament's broke as well a [...] the City.

6.

Now Alderman Fuſtian cocks not his Beaver,

Who chang'd his Name from Perry to PƲRY,

A Dean and a Biſhop made out of a Weaver,

That had been refus'd to be of a Jury:

He vow'd to leave not a Gentleman,

Though every Houſe were as big as Rome:

In all bloody Votes he higheſt ran;

But now may run down to his Bottom and Loom.

With a hey, &c,

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

7.

Now look to your Wives, for I am inform'd

That carnal SCOT is again broke looſe;

But the Houſe that ſhelter'd his Luſt is Reform'd

As he did the Hall of Lambeth-houſe;

(For he knew the High Commiſsion ſate there)

Both King and Cromwell he openly curs'd,

But Oliver now will pay his Arrear,

For of all kind of Scots the Engliſh is worſt.

With a hey down, down a down down,

Sing ho down down to make up the Ditty,

With a hey down down a down down,

The Parliament's broke as well as the City.

[[Page 369]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=193)

### 1.161. The RUMP. December 26\. 1659.

To the Tune of The Blackſmith.

NOw Maſter & Prentice for Rimes muſt pump

On Hab,

St. John's.

Noll, Arthur, and Lawſon Vantrump,

A Long Parliament of a Short Rump.

Which no body can deny.

For Wits and No-Wits now have an Itch

To prepare ſome damnable tearing Switch

For them whoſe very Face is a Breech.

Which, &c.

Twelve years they ſate above Kings and Queens,

Full twelve, and then had enter'd their teens

When Oliver came to out-ſin their Sins.

Which, &c.

And yet after all his ſignal Septembers,

Both he and his Babe, and his Other-Houſe Mem­bers

Saw Rump was but aſleep in its Embers.

Which, &c.

For up it roſe, then out 'twas blown,

For Lambert and Rump like my Lady and Joan,

Blew in and out till Rump blew out John.

Which, &c▪

And then it ſwell'd with ſuch monſtrous growth

[[Page 370]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=194)That by
and by it broke out in the South,

From whence it was called PORTS-MOUTH.

Which, &c.

From thence to London it rode tan-tivy,

(Though London then wore Holly and Ivy)

And ſate at Whitehall in a Council-Privy.

Which, &c.

Then ſuddenly Fleetwood fell from Grace,

And now cryes Heaven hath ſpit in his face,

Though he ſmelt it came from another place.

Which, &c.

Janizary Desbrow then look'd pale,

For, ſaid he, if this Rump prevail,

'Twill blow me back to my old Plough-tayl,

Which, &c.

But when he felt his own Regiment kick,

Oh, quoth he, this was my own Trick

'Gainſt my Brother Nol and my Nephew Dick.

Which, &c.

Now whom the Devil doth Rump repreſent?

'Twas This that Sir Thomas Jermyn meant

When he call'd it a Whipping Parliament.

Which, &c.

We're ſtript of all ſhelter from the long Robe,

As rich and warm as the Devil left Job,

For Satan Rump ſits Lord of the Globe.

Which, &c.

[[Page 371]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=194)

And yet when all is examin'd and ponder'd,

You'll find three Kingdoms enſlav'd & plunder'd,

For ſaying Fourty is leſſe than Four hundred.

Which, &c.

And now behold the Sign is in Clune,

But if Monck be honeſt or wiſe, then ſoon he

Makes Rump but the Italian's Domo Communi.

Which, &c.

Heaven bleſs the King, with his two brave Brothers,

From Rumps and Lords of the Houſe call'd Others,

And hang theſe Rumping Sons of their Mothers.

Which, &c.

And that He may bleſſe both Us and our Heirs,

Let all the Members of Commons and Peers,

Turn honeſt as He that wants his Ears.

Which no body can deny.

### 1.162. Sir Eglamor and the Dragon: Or a Relation how Generall George Monck
ſlew a moſt Cruell Dragon Febr. 11. 1659.

To the Tune of Sir Eglamor.

1.

GEnerall George that Valiant wight,

He took his Sword and he would go fight,

And as he rode through London Town,

Men, Women, Poſts, and Gates, fell down.

[[Page 372]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=195)

2.

But turning about towards Weſtminſter,

He ſaw it muſt come to Fight Dog, Fight Bear,

For there an old Dragon ſate in its Den,

Had devour'd (God knows how many) brave Men.

3.

This Dragon it was and a monſtrous Beaſt,

With fourty or fifty heads at leaſt,

And ſtill as this Dragon drank down Blood,

Thoſe heads would wag and cry good—good—good!

4.

No Hidra nor Leviathan,

For every Head look'd like a Man,

And yet they all grew Hidra-wiſe,

For cut off one and another would riſe

5.

Beſides it had moſt Deviliſh claws,

Call'd Committees of the Good Old Cauſe;

But Devil and his Dam had no ſuch Paunch

As this which ſwallow'd Root and Branch.

6.

It ſwallow'd Churches, Pallaces,

Forreſts, Iſlands, Lands, and Seas,

Cathedrall Choires it made but a Sallad,

And left not a man to ſing a Ballad.

7.

But that which made this Dragon prevaile,

Was a damnable Sting ſtuck in its Tayle,

This Tayle 'gainſt Chriſtendom made Wars,

And ſwept down all St. Georges Stars.

8.

Then Aegypts Plagues we underſtood,

Darkneſſe, Rivers turn'd to Blood,

[[Page 373]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=195)Upſtart
Vermin thick as wooll,

And Frogs and Locuſts Pulpits full.

9.

Yet that which moſt did Plague theſe Iſles,

Three Kingdoms lay ſo ſick of th' Piles,

For every man in dolefull dump

Was tortur'd with a Bloody Rump.

10.

But as in its Den this Dragon did ſit,

George gave it many a gay good hit,

Though then he had no Sword nor Sythe on,

But fought as Phoebus ſlew old Python.

11.

For George ſhot at him a flaming Letter,

(Which ſome then thought might have been bet­ter

He wipe'd the Rump away with a Paper,

And out it flew like a ſtinking Vapour.

12.

Now London had her own deſire,

For every Street was pav'd with fire,

All Men and Bells with many a thump,

Cry'd Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-R.

13.

Six thouſand fifty Bone-fires then,

(By twenty more thenth' Army had Men)

O monſtrous Rump, that thus requires

(Though but half broyl'd) ſix thouſand Fires▪

14.

This very day that Rump was burn'd,

Old Magna Charta was confirm'd;

This day they Voted that monſtrous thing,

Febr. 11\. 1647.

That no Addreſſes be made to the King.

[[Page 374]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=196)

15.

Now God bleſs Charles, & York, & Glouceſter,

From many or from one Impoſtor,

May Kings, and Peers, and Commons joyn

To ſave us both from Rump and Loyn.

### 1.163. The Cities Feast to the Lord Protector.

To the Tune of Cook Laurell.

SIR Mayor invites his Highneſſe his gueſt,

And bids him to Grocers-Hall to dinner,

There never was Saint at ſo great a Feaſt

Provided him at the Charge of a Sinner.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

And what was the day do you think, without jeſt­ing,

Of all the year it was Aſh-wedneſday,

This pious Reformer ſet apart for his Feaſting,

When all good Chriſtians ſhould Faſt and Pray.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

The Souldiers in cluſters throng'd for place,

To ſee this Monſter of their own making,

And ſaid it was a Protectors grace,

But that it wanted not much of A King.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

The Bucks of the City in herds were met,

And were paled in with a very good fence,

But what their Does did, I cannot tell yet,

Of that ye may hear three quarters hence.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

[[Page 375]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=196)

With that the Recorder marcht up to the Hall

With a diſh of Divinity dreſt for his pallate,

And laid before him a ſhoulder of Saul,

With a ſavory ſimily by for a ſalate.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

His Highneſſe commanded to lay it by,

'Twas fit for his people he'd make it known,

And they ſhould have it, good reaſon why,

For they wanted more ſhoulders than their own.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

A diſh of Delinquents heads in a Charger

Was ſent as a preſent from Goldſmiths Hall,

He wiſht his ſtomack ten times larger,

Yet made a long neck and poach'd them all.

With a ran tan the Divil is dead.

A Prelate was next, and to him he buckles,

With a Biſhoprick truſs'd before and behinde,

His Highneſs was in with him up to the knuckles,

And to his own kitchin the ſkuers aſſign'd.

With a ran tan the Divel is dead.

His Highneſs then calld' for a boule of Canary,

And drank ſo deep that it made him reel,

He toſs'd it to Lambert, and Lambert to Harry,

And Harry to the Mayor, and the Mayor to Steel.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

When Dinner was ended, away to the banquet,

Where ſnatching of Sugar-plums one from ano­ther,

H [...]l fill'd up his pockets, and ſaid God be thank­ed,

[[Page 376]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=197)And
carried them home to his Lady Mother.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

Then his Highneſs commanded the Mayor to kneel,

The Beaſt of the City was ſoon on his knees,

He made him a Knight with iron and ſteel,

And bid him riſe up, and pay him his fees.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

Up roſe my Lords worſhip and made him a leg,

With that the Knight-maker did give him the Sword;

His Highneſſe did ſpice him without a nutmeg,

When he made a bad Knight of a pittifull Lord.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

When he left the City he broke a jeſt,

His words were pithy, and I'le repeat them,

Farewell (quoth his Highneſs) thou ſpur-gall'd Beaſt,

Fools make the Feaſts, and wiſe men eat them.

With a ran tan the Devil is dead.

FINIS.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=197)

## 2\. RUMP SONGS. The Second Part.

### 2.1. The Re-reſurrection of the RUMP. Or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived.

To the Tune of the Blackſmith.

IF none be offended with the ſcent,

Though I foul my mouth, I'le be content,

To ſing of the Rump of a Parliament.

Which no body can deny.

I have ſometimes fed on a Rump in Sowſe,

And a man may imagine the Rump of a Lowſe;

But till now was ne're heard of the Rump of a Houſe.

Which no body can deny.

There's a Rump of Beef, and the Rump of a Gooſe,

And a Rump whoſe neck was hang'd in a Nooſe;

But ours is a Rump can play fast and looſe.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=198)

A Rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Meſſaleen,

And a Rump had Antonies reſolute Queen;

But ſuch a Rump as ours is, never was ſeen,

Which no body can deny.

Two ſhort years together we Engliſh have ſcarce

Been rid of thy Rampant Noſe (Old Mars)

But now thou haſt got a prodigious Arſe.

Which no body can deny

When the parts of the Body did all fall out,

Some Votes it is like did paſs for the Snout;

But that the Rump ſhould be King was never a doubt.

Which no body can deny.

A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine Lives,

Yet when her Head's off, her Rump never ſtrives;

But our Rump from the Grave hath made two Retrives.

Which no body can deny.

That the Rump may all their Enemies quail,

They'll borrow the Devills Coat of Mayl,

And all to defend their Eſtate in Tayl.

Which no body can deny.

But though their ſcale now ſeems to be th'upper,

There's no need of the charge of a Thankſgiving, ſupper,

For if they be the Rump, the Armi's their Crupper.

Which no body can deny.

There's a Saying belongs to the Rump,

Which is good although it be worn to the stump,

That on the Buttocks I'le give thee a Thump.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=198)

There's a Proverb in wch the Rump claims a part,

Which hath in it more of Sence than of Art,

That for all you can do I care not a Fart.

Which no body can deny.

There's another Proverb gives the Rump for his Creſt,

But Alderman Atkins made it a Jeſt,

That of all kind of Lucks, ſhitten Luck is the beſt.

Which no body can deny.

There's another Proverb that never will fail,

That the good the Rump will do when they pre­vail

Is to give us a Flop with a Fox-tail.

Which no body can deny.

There is a Saying which is made by no Fools,

I never can hear on't, but my heart it cools,

That the Rump will ſpend all we have in Cloſe-ſtools.

Which no body can deny.

There's an Obſervation wiſe and deep,

Which without an Onion will make me to weep,

That Flyes will blow Maggots in the Rump of a Sheep.

Which no body can deny.

And ſome that can ſee the wood from the trees,

Say, this ſanctified Rump in time we may leeſe;

For the Cooks do challenge the Rumps for their Fees.

Which no body can deny.

When the Rump do ſit wee'l make it our Moan,

That a Reaſon be enacted if there be not one,

Why a Fart hath a tongue, and a Fyeſt hath none.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=199)

And whilſt within the Walls they lurk,

To ſatisfie us, will be a good work,

Who hath moſt Religion, the Rump or the Turk.

Which no body can deny.

A Rump's a Fag-end, like the baulk of a Furrow,

And is to the whole like the Jail to the Burrough,

'Tis the Bran that is left when the Meal is run thorough.

Which no body can deny.

Conſider the VVorld, the Heav'n is the Head on't,

The Earth is the middle, and we men are fed on't;

But Hell is the Rump, and no more can be ſed on't.

Which no body can deny.

Flectere ſi nequeunt Superos Acharonta movebunt.

### 2.2. A New-Years-Gift for the RUMP.

YOu may have heard of the Politick Snout,

Or a tale of a Tub with the bottom out,

But ſcarce of a Parliament in a ſhitten Clout.

Whih no body can deny.

'Twas Atkins firſt ſerv'd this Rump in with Muſtard,

The ſawce was a compound of Courage and Cuſtard,

Sir Vane bleſs'd the Creature: Nol ſnufled & bluſterd.

Which no body can deny.

The Right was then in Old Olivers Noſe,

But when the Devil of that did diſpoſe,

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=199)It
deſcended from thence to the Rump in the cloze.

Which no body can deny.

Nor is it likely there to ſtay long,

The Retentive Faculties being gone,

The Juggle is ſtale, and Mony there's none.

Which no body can deny.

The Secluded Members made a Tryal

To Enter, but them the Rump did defie all

By the Ordinance of Self-denyal.

Which no body can deny.

Our Politique Doctors do us Teach,

That a Blood-ſucking Red-coat's as good as a Leech,

To Relieve the Head, if applyed to the Breech.

Which no body can deny.

But never was ſuch a Worm as Vane;

When the State ſcour'd laſt, it voided him then,

Yet now he's crept into the Rump again.

Which no body can deny.

Ludlow's Fart, was a Prophetique Trump:

(There was never any thing ſo Jump)

Twas the very Type, of a Vote of this Rump.

Which no body can deny.

They ſay 'tis good Luck, when a Body riſes

With the Rump upward; but he that adviſes

To Live in that Poſture is none of the wiſeſt.

Which no body can deny.

The Reaſon is worſe, though the rime be untoward,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=200)When
things proceed with the wrong end forward;

But they talk of ſad news to the Rump from the Norward.

VVhich no body can deny.

'Twas a wonderfull thing the ſtrength of that Part,

At a Blaſt, it will take you a Team from a Cart;

And Blow a Man's Head away with a Fart.

VVhich no body can deny.

When our Brains are Sunck below the Middle,

And our Conſciences ſteer'd by the hey down-diddle,

Then things will go round without a Fiddle.

VVhich no body can deny.

You may order the City with a Hand-Granado,

Or the General with a Baſtonado,

But no way for a Rump like a Carbonado.

VVhich no body can deny.

To make us as famous in Counſel, as VVars,

Here's Lenthal, a Speaker for mine—

And Fleetwood is a Man of Mars.

VVhich no body can deny.

'Tis pitty that Nedhams Fall'n into Diſgrace,

For he orders a Bum with a marvailous Grace,

And ought to attend the Rump by his Place.

VVhich no body can deny.

Yet this in deſpight of all Diſaſters,

Although he hath Broken the Heads of his Masters,

'Tis ſtill his Profeſsion, to give 'em all Plaſters.

VVhich no body can deny.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=200)

Let 'em cry down the Pope, till their Throats are ſore,

Their Deſign was to bring him in at the back door,

For the Rump has a mind to the Scarlet-whore.

VVhich no body can deny.

And this is a truth at all hands confeſt,

However unskillfull in any of the reſt;

The Rump ſpeaks the Language of the Beaſt.

VVhich no body can deny.

They talk that Lambert is like to be try'd

For Treaſon, and Buggery beſide,

Becauſe that he did the Rump beſtride.

VVhich no body can deny.

The Rump's an old Story, if well underſtood

'Tis a thing dreſs'd up in a Parliaments Hood,

And lik't; but the Taile ſtands where the Head ſhould.

VVhich no body can deny.

'Twould make a man ſcratch where it does not itch,

To ſee forty Fools heads in one Politick breech,

And that —hugging the Nation as the Devil did the VVitch.

VVhich no body can deny.

From rotten Members preſerve our VVives:

From the mercy of a Rump, our Eſtates and our Lives,

For they muſt needs go, whom the Devil drives.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=201)

### 2.3. A New Ballad.

To an Old Tune, Tom of Bedlam.

Make room for an honest Red-coat,

(And that you'l ſay's a wonder)

The Gun, and the Blade,

Are his Tools, — and his Trade,

Is for Pay, to Kill and Plunder.

Then away with the Laws,

And the Good Old Cauſe,

Ne'r talk o' the Rump or the Charter,

'Tis the Caſh does the feat,

All the reſt's but a Cheat,

VVithout That, there's no Faith nor Quarter.

'Tis the Mark of our Coin, GOD WITH US,

And the Grace of the Lord go along with't,

When the Georges are flown,

Then the Cauſe goes down,

For the Lord is departed from it.

Then away, &c.

For Rome, or for Geneva,

For the Table, or the Altar,

This ſpawn of a Vote,

He cares not a Groat —

For the Pence, hee's your dog in a Halter.

Then away, &c.

Tho' the Name of King or Biſhop,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=201)To
Noſtrils pure may be Loathſom,

Yet many there are,

That agree with the Maior,

That their Lands are wondrous toothſom.

Then away, &c.

When our Maſters are Poor, we Leave 'em,

'Tis the Golden Calf we bow too;

VVe kill, and we ſlay,

Not for Conſcience, but Pay;

Give us That, wee'l fight for you too:

Then away, &c.

'Twas That firſt turned the King out;

The Lords, next: then, the Commons:

'Twas that kept up Nol,

Till the Devil fetch'd his Soul;

And then it ſet the Bum on's.

Then away, &c.

Drunken Dick was a Lame Protector,

And Fleetwood a Backslider:

Theſe we ſerved as the reſt,

But the City's the Beaſt

That will never caſt her Rider.

Then away, &c:

When the Maior holds the Stirrop,

And the Shreeves cry, God ſpeed your Honours:

Then 'tis but a Jump,

And up goes the Rump,

That will ſpur to the Devil upon us.

Then away, &c.

And now for a fling at your Thimbles,

Your Bodkins, Rings, and VVhiſtles,

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=202)In truck
for your Toyes,

We'll fit you with Boyes:

('Tis the doctrine of Hugh's Epiſtles.)

Then away, &c.

When your Plate is gone, and your Jewells,

You muſt next be entreated

To part with your Bags,

And ſtrip you to Rags,

And yet not think y'are cheated.

Then away, &c.

The truth is, the Town deſerves it;

'Tis a Brainleſs, Heartleſs Monſter:

At a Clubb they may Bawl,

Or Declare at their Hall,

And yet at a puſh, not one ſtir.

Then away, &c.

Sir Arthur vows he'll treat 'em,

Far worſe than the Men of Cheſter,

He's Bold, now they're Cow'd,

But was nothing ſo Lowd

When he lay in the ditch at Leſter.

Then away, &c.

The Lord hath left John Lambert,

And the Spirit, Feaks Anointed,

But why oh Lord,

Haſt thou ſheathed thy Sword?

Lo, thy Saints are diſappointed.

Then away, &c.

Tho' Sir Henry be departed:

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=202)Sir John
makes good the place now,

And to help on the work

Of the Glorious Kirk,

Our Brethren march apace too.

Then away, &c.

While Divines, and States-men wrangle,

Let the Rump-ridden Nation bite on't,

There are none but we

That are ſure to go free,

For the Souldier's ſtill in the right on't.

Then away, &c.

If our Maſters won't ſupply us,

With Mony, Food, and Clothing:

Let the State look to't,

We'll ha' one that will do't,

Let him live,— we'll not damn for nothing

Then away with the Laws,

And the Good Old Cauſe,

Ne'r talk o' the Rump or the Charter

'Tis the Caſh does the Feat,

All the reſt's but a Cheat,

Without That there's no Faith, nor Quarter.

### 2.4. The Breech waſh'd by a Friend to the RUMP.

To the Tune of Old Simon the King.

IN an humour of late I was,

Yeleped a dolefull dump.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=203)Thought
I—we're at a fine paſs;

Not a man ſtands up for the Rump:

But lets be laſhed o'r and o'r.

While it lies like a ſenceleſs Fop. —

'Twould make a man a Whore,

To ſee a Tail tew'd like a Top.

Though a Rump be a dangerous bit,

And many a Knave runs mad on't,

Yet verily as it may hit,

An honeſt man may be glad on't.

To abuſe a poor, Blind Creature—

I had like to have ſaid and a Dumb;

But now it has gotten a Speaker,

And Say is the Mouth of the Bum,

When Beſſe rul'd the Land there was no man

Complain'd, and yet now they rail:

I beſeech you what differs a Woman

From a thing that's all Tongue, and Tayle?

Though a Rump, &c.

The Charter we've ſworn to defend,

And propagate the Cauſe.

What call ye thoſe of the Rump-end

But Fundamental Laws?

The Caſe is as clear as the Day,

There had been no Reformation,

If the Rump had claw'd it away,

You had had no Propagation.

Though a Rump, &c.

As a Bodie's the better for a Purge,

Tho' the Guts may be troubled with Gripes:

So the Nation will mend with a Scourge,

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=203)Tho' the
Tayle may be ſick of the Stripes.

Ill humours to conveigh,

When the State hath taken a Looſeneſs,

(Who can hold what will away?

The Rump muſt do the Buſineſs.

Though a Rump, &c.

The bold Cavalier, in the Field,

That laughs at your Sword, and Gun-ſhot,

An Ord'nance makes him to yield,

And he's glad to turn Tail to Bum-ſhot.

Old Oliver was a Teazer,

And waged warr with the Stump;

But Alexander, and Caeſar

Did both ſubmit to the Rump.

Though a Rump, &c.

Let no man be further miſled

By an Errour, paſt Debate;

For Sedgwick has prov'd it the Head,

As well of the Church as the State;

Honeſt Hugh; that ſtill turns up the Tippets,

When he Kneels to Adminiſter;

Sayes — a Rump, with Skippons ſippets,

Is a Diſh for a Holy Siſter.

Though a Rump, &c.

We're all the better for't,

'Tis the Fountain of Love, and of Life.

'Tis that makes the ſport,

Keeps the peace betwixt Man, and Wife.

Oh; — happy all they that have ſpent

Their Bloud, and Estates on the Breech,

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=204)For
they're ſure, at laſt to Repent;

And they'd better dye Honeſt than Rich!

Though a Rump, &c.

Through Pride of Fleſh, or State,

Poor Souls are overthrown:

How happy then is our Fate?

VVe've a Rump to take us down:

In matters of Faith 'tis true,

Some differings there may be,

But give the Saints their due,

In the Rump they all agree.

Though a Rump, &c.

'Tis good at Bed, and at Bord;

It gives us Pleaſure and Eaſe,

Will you have the reſt in a word?

'Tis good for the new diſeaſe,

(The Tumult of the Guts;)

'Tis a Recipe for the Kings Evill,

Waſh the Members as ſweet as Nuts,

And then throw them all to the Devil.

Though a Rump be a dangerous Bit,

And many a Knave runs mad on't,

Yet, verily, as it may hit,

An honest man may be glad on't.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=204)

### 2.5. Chipps of the Old Block; or, Hercules Cleanſing the Augaean Stable.

To the Tune of The Sword.

1.

NOw by your good leave Sirs,

Shall ſee the Rump can cleave Sirs,

And what Chips from this Treacherous Block

Will come you may conceive Sirs.

2.

Lenthall's the firſt o' the Lump ſure,

A Fart and he may jump ſure,

For both do ſtink, and both we know

Are Speakers of the Rump ſure.

3.

That Mine of Fraud Sir Arthur,

His Soul for Lands will barter,

And if you'd ride to Hell in a Wayn

Hee's fit to make your Carter,

4.

Sir Harry Vane, God bleſſe us,

To Popery he would preſs us,

And for the Devils Dinner he,

The Romane way would dreſs us.

5.

Harry Martin never miſt-a

To love the wanton Twiſt-a,

And luſtfull Aretines bawdy Leaves

Are his Evangeliſt-a.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=205)

6.

Harry Nevill's no Wigeon,

His Practiſe truly ſtygian

Makes it a Maſter-piece of wit

To be of no Religion.

7.

But my good Lord Glyn Man,

Pride is a deadly ſin Man,

Cots plultera nails few Traytors be

Like you of all your kin Man.

8.

If Saint-John be a Saint Sir,

He hath a deviliſh Taynt Sir,

While Straffords blood in Heavens High Court

Of Juſtice makes complaint Sir.

9.

Doctor Palmers all day ſleeping,

And into his Heart ne're peeping,

'Tis ill he that neglects his own,

Should have All-ſouls in keeping

10.

VVill Bruertons a ſinner,

And, Croyden knows, a Winner,

But O take heed leaſt he do eat

The Rump all at one Dinner.

11.

Robin Andrews is a Miſer,

Of Coblers no deſpiſer,

And could they vamp him a new head,

Perhaps he would be Wiſer.

12.

But Baron VVild come out here,

Shew your Ferret Face and Snout here,

For you being both a Fool and Knave

Are a Monſter in the Rout here.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=205)

13.

Nick Lechmere Loyalty needs ſtill,

And on Weather-Cocks he feeds ſtill,

If Heathen, Turk or Jew ſhould come,

So he would change his Creed ſtill.

14.

There's half-witted VVill Say too,

A right fool in the Play too,

That would make a perfect Aſſe,

If he could learn to Bray too.

15.

Cornelius thou wert a Link-boy,

And born 'tis like, in a Sink boy,

Ide tell thy Knavery to the World,

But thy pitch ſticks in my ink boy.

16.

Baron Hill was but a Valley,

And born ſcarce to an Alley,

But now is Lord of Taunton Dean

And thouſands he can Ralley.

17.

But if you ask the Nation,

Whence came his Elevation?

They'll ſay he was not raiſed by God,

But by our inundation.

18.

Lord Fines he will not Mall men,

For he likes not death of all men,

And his heart doth go to Pit to Pat,

When to Battle he ſhould call men.

19.

Perfideous VVhitlock ever,

Hath miſchiefs under's Beaver,

And for his ends will put the World

Into a burning Feavour.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=206)

20.

Aſhley Cowper knew a Reaſon,

That Treachery was in ſeaſon,

When at the firſt he turned his coat

From Loyalty to Treaſon.

21.

And gouty Maſter Wallop,

Now thinks he hath the Ballop,

But though he trotted to the Rump,

Hee'l run away a Gallop.

22.

There's Carew Rawleigh by him,

All good men do defie him,

And they that think him not a Knave,

I wiſh they would but try him.

23.

Luke Robinſon that Clownado,

Though his heart be a Granado,

Yet a High-ſhooe with his hands in his Poke,

Is his moſt perfect ſhadow.

24.

Salloway with Tobacco,

Inſpired, turn'd State Quacko;

And got more by his feigned zeal,

Then by his What de'e lack ho.

25.

But Liſle is half forgotten,

Who oft is over-ſhotten,

For juſt like Harp and Gridiron

His brains with Law do Gotten.

26.

Lord Monſon's next the Bencher,

Who waited with a Trencher,

Now his tail is jerk'd at home and abroad,

For he's a feeble Wencher.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=206)

27.

We hear from Sir John Lenthall,

Though his gouty Lord hath ſpent all,

His Rump's plac'd wrong, but 'tis his face

That is right Fundamental▪

28.

What Knaves are more to be vext, Sirs,

You'l hear when I ſing next, Sirs,

For now my Muſe is tir'd with this

Abominable text, Sirs.

Ridentem dicere verum, Quid vetat?

### 2.6. Rump Rampant, or the Sweet Old Cauſe in Sippets.

To the Tune of, Laſt Parliament ſat as ſnug as a Cat.

IN the name of the fiend,

What the Rump up agin,

The Delk, and the Good Old Cauſe,

If they ſettle agin,

Which to think were a ſin,

Good night to Religion and Laws.

Firſt Tithes muſt go down

Like a ſprig of the Crown,

Although J. Presbyter grumble;

Already they tell's

Our Lead and our Bells

They'll ſell, next our Churches muſt tumble▪

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=207)

This poor Engliſh Nation,

By this Generation,

Hath been grieved 11. years and more,

But in that ſeaſon,

And not without reaſon,

They ha' thrice been turn'd out of door.

Which they pleaſe to call force,

Yet themſelves can do worſe,

For this Parcel of a Houſe

Dare keep out of door,

Thrice as many more,

And value the Law not a Louſe.

Firſt by Owl-light they met,

And by that light they ſet,

The reaſon of it mark,

Their Acts and the light,

Do differ quite,

Their deeds do beſt with the dark.

Eſquire Lenthall had ſwore,

He'd fit there no more,

Unleſs in with Oxen they drew him,

That he once might ſpeak true,

They pick'd him out two,

Sent Pembrook and Salisbury to him.

When theſe Gameſters were pack'd,

The firſt gracious act

Was for pence for their friends of the Army,

Who for any ſide fight,

Except't be the right;

Sixſcore thouſand a month won't harm ye.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=207)

Yet many there be,

Say the Houſe is not free,

When I am ſure of that,

T' one another they're ſo free,

That the Nation do ſee,

They're too free for us to be fat.

Religion they wav'd,

Now they had us enſlav'd,

And got us ſure in their Claw,

They pull'd off their mask,

And ſet us our task,

Which is next to make Brick without ſtraw.

The next Act they made

Was for helping of Trade,

So they ſetled again the Exciſe,

Which the City muſt pay,

For ever and aye,

Yet might have choſe had they been wiſe.

To pull down their King,

Their plate they could bring,

And other precious things,

So that Sedgwick and Peters,

Were no ſmall getters

By their Bodkins, thimbles and rings.

But when for the good

Of the Nation 'twas ſtood

Half ruined and forlorn,

Though't lay in their power,

To redeem't in an hour,

Not a Citizen put out his horn.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=208)

They had manacled their hands

With King and Biſhops Lands,

And ruined the whole Nation,

So that no body cares

Though they and their Heirs,

Be cornute to the third Generation.

May their wives on them frown,

But laugh and lie down,

To any one elſe turn up Trump;

To mend the breed,

As I think there is need,

Be rid like their men by the Rump.

And may theſe wiſe Sophees,

Pay again for their Trophees,

For I hope the Parliament means

(Now they ha' been at the coſts

To ſet up the poſts)

To make them pay well for the Chains.

### 2.7. Fortunate Riſing: or, The Rump Upward.

GOod people, and you that have been undone

By Guns, and Drums and the Trumpets tone,

And new hard words ſince Forty and One.

Which no body can deny▪

Here is a word that will plague you more

Then any that ever went before,

'Tis the Rump of Harry Martins Whore,

VVhich, &c.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=208)

The Cauſe was at firſt a pretty conceit

To create a durty Rebel great;

But now that has left th'imperial Seat,

Which, &c.

A General was a glorious Name,

Till Eſsex his Member ſpoilt his fame;

For a Souldier ought to be good at the Game,

Which, &c.

The Communication Line was a Jigg,

And as good as the Bath to make women big,

Who never were ſo, till they learnt to digg,

Which, &c.

Artillery was a thundring word,

Where many appear'd with Musket and Sword,

To fright poor Atkins out of a turd,

Which, &c.

Cavalier was a name of as great a Force,

As Centaure, that is both Man and Horſe,

And for Raviſhing ſuffered many a curſe,

Which, &c.

Yet every Woman that had this fear,

Although in her heart a Roundhead ſhe were,

In her belly ſhe wiſht a Cavalier,

Which, &c.

Sequeſtration ſcar'd Men out of their Plate,

Exciſe drew potent Ale out of date,

And the Corps de Gard broke many of pate,

Which, &c.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=209)

The Plunderers made men hide their money,

And women their jewels, if they had any;

And one there was, hid Gold in her Cunny,

Which, &c.

A Commonwealth is a Citizens truſt,

And by his wife ador'd it muſt,

As a Topique to prove adultery juſt,

Which, &c.

The Protector ſtorm'd with all mankind,

Made Kings, and Princes walk behind,

Till the Divel out-ranted him in a wind,

Which, &c.

The Committee of Safety threw the Dye;

But ſome body ſpit in his face from on high,

And made the valiant Fleetwood cry,

Which, &c.

But the Rump is a word of ſuch a power,

Pronounc'd, your beer, like thunder, 'twill ſowr,

And after make you ſquitter an howr,

Which, &c.

The ſquirting at Epſom's not worth a louſe,

Rump out-does all, that comes there to carouſe;

For it ſhit from Portſmouth to Wallingford houſe,

Which, &c.

If Booth were no Knave, a Fool let him be,

To keep ſuch a ſtir for Liberty,

When the Rump ſets all it's Tenants Free,

Which, &c.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=209)

He that could imitate ſounds in a fart,

And ſpeak from behind with a wondrous Art,

Were he living now, ſhould take Lenthals part,

Which, &c.

And then a Fart for the Cities forces,

For Monk that's coming with all his Horſes,

And a T — for Fairfax too, that worſe is,

Which, &c.

A Parſon once in a frolick Divine,

Exhauſted Glaſſes, twenty and nine,

For Turkey's Rump in Canary wine,

Which, &c.

And ſure he received a Revelation,

When to preach he left his firſt Vocation,

That a Rump in time ſhould rule the Nation,

Which, &c.

Montelions Diall's a drolling Mock,

With a ſtick in the Countrey Fellows dock,

And fitter now than the Pallace clock,

VVhich, &c.

Morlay a joynt of the Rump grew bigg,

And ſwelling; but politick Haſlerigg,

Ha's ſent him for Phyſick to Doctor Trigg,

Which, &c.

Mad Vane was Anointed King, and ſaid,

He received a Crown that burden'd his Head,

For which the Rump ſent him home to Bed,

Which, &c.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=210)

The Abjuring Oath made the Speaker Sick,

Which Haſlerigg taking in the Nick,

For his fain'd one ſhow'd him a real Trick,

VVhich, &c.

Thus, what for aliment is unfit,

The Tail by a vertue guiding it,

Excludes, and leaves it ſelf beſhit,

VVhich, &c.

Let no man pretend any Cauſe,

Againſt the Rump to open his Jawes,

For it rules by the Fundamental Laws,

VVhich no body can deny.

### 2.8. A proper New Ballad on the Old Parlia­ament, or the Second Part of
Knave out of Doors.  
To the Tune of

Hei ho my hony,

My heart ſhall never rue,

Four and twenty now for your Mony,

And yet a hard pennyworth too.

GOod morrow my Neighbours all,

What news is this I heard tell?

As I paſt through VVestminſter-hall,

By the houſe that's near to Hell:

They told me John Lambert was there,

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=210)With his
Bears, and deeply did ſwear:

(As Cromwell had done before)

Thoſe Vermine ſhould fit there no more.

Sing hi ho Will. Lenthall,

VVho ſhall our General be?

For the Houſe to the Devil is ſent all,

And follow gid faith mun ye.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Then Muſe ſtrike up a Sonnet,

Come piper and play us a ſpring;

For now I think upon it,

Theſe Rs turn'd out their King.

But now it muſt come about,

That once again they muſt turn out:

And not without Juſtice and Reaſon,

That every one home to his Priſon.

Sing hi ho Harry Martin,

A Burgeſs of the Bench,

There's nothing here is certain,

You muſt back and leave your VVench.

Sing hi ho, &c.

He there with the buffle head,

Is called Lord, and of the ſame houſe,

Who (as I have heard it ſaid)

Was chaſtis'd by his Lady-Spouſe.

Becauſe he run at ſheep,

She and her Maid gave him the Whip;

And beat his head ſo addle;

You'd think he had a knock in the Cradle,

Sing hi ho Lord Mounſon,

You ha' got a park of the Kings,

One day you'l hang like a hounſon,

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=211) For this
and other things.

Sing hi ho, &c.

It was by their Maſters order

At firſt together they met,

Whom piouſly they did murder,

And ſince by their own they did ſet.

The cauſe of this Diſaſter,

Is 'cauſe they were falſe to their Maſter.

Nor can their Genſd'armes blame,

For ſerving them the ſame.

Sing hi ho Sir Arthur,

No more in the houſe you ſhall prate;

For all you kept ſuch a quarter,

You are out of the Councell of State.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Old Noll gave them once a purge

(Forgetting Occidisti,)

(The Furies be his ſcourge)

So of the cure miſt he.

And yet the drug he well knew it,

For he gave it to Dr. Huit.

Had he given it them he had done it,

And they had not turn'd out his ſon yet.

Sing hi ho brave Dick,

L. Hall and Lady Joan,

Who did against Loyalty kick,

Is now for a New-years-gift gone.

Sing hi ho, &c.

For had old Noll been alive,

He had pull'd them out by the ears.

Or elſe had fired their Hive,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=211)And kickt
him down the ſtairs;

Becauſe they were ſo bold,

To vex his righteous ſoul.

When he ſo deeply had ſwore,

That there they ſhould never fit more.

But hi ho Nol's dead,

And ſtunk long ſince above ground,

Though lapt in ſpices and lead,

That coſt us many a pound.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Indeed Brother Burgeſs your Ling

Did never ſtink half ſo bad;

Nor did your Habberdin,

When it no Peaſe-ſtraw had.

Ye were both choſe together,

'Cauſe ye wore ſtuff-cloaks in hard weather.

And Cambridge needs would have

A Burgeſs, Fool, and Knave.

Sing hi ho J. Lowry,

Concerning Abberdine,

No Member ſpake before ye,

Yet ye neer ſpoke again.

Sing hi ho my hony,

My heart ſhall never rue,

Here's all pickt ware for your mony,

And yet a hard penyworth too.

Ned Prideaux he went poſt

To tell the Protector the news,

That Fleetwood ruled the roſt,

Having tane off Dicks ſhooes.

And that he did believe,

Lambert would him deceive;

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=212)As he his
brother had gull'd,

And Cromwell Fairfax bull'd.

Sing hi ho the Attorney

Was ſtill at your command,

In flames together burn ye,

Still dancing hand in hand.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Who's that that would hide his face?

And his neck from the coller pull?

He muſt appear in his place,

If his Cap be made of Wool.

Who is it with a vengeance?

It is the good Lord Saint Johns!

Who made Gods Houſe to fall,

To build his own withall.

Sing hi ho who comes there?

Who 'tis I muſt not ſay;

But by this dark-lanthorn I ſwear

He's as good in the night as day.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Edge Brethren, room for one,

That looks as big as the beſt;

'Tis pitty to leave him alone,

For he is as good as the reſt.

No Picklock of the Laws,

He builds among the Daws.

If you ha' any more Kings to murder,

For a Preſident look no further.

Sing hi ho J. Bradſhaw,

In blood none further engages;

The Devil from whom he had's law,

Will ſhortly pay him his wages.

Sing hi ho, &c.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=212)

Next Peagooſe Wild come in,

To ſhew your weezle face,

And tell us Burleys ſin,

Whoſe blood bought you your place.

When Loyalty was a crime,

He liv'd in a dangerous time,

Was forc'd to pay his neck,

To make you Baron of the Cheque.

Sing hi ho Jack Straw,

We'l put it in the Margent,

'Twas not for Juſtice or Law

That you were made a Sergeant.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Noll ſerv'd not Satan faſter,

Nor with him did better accord;

For he was my good Maſter,

And the devil was his good Lord.

Both Slingsby, Gerrard, and Hewit,

Were ſure enough to go to it,

According to his intent,

That choſe me Preſident.

Sing hi ho Lord Liſle,

Sure Law had got a wrench,

And where was Juſtice the while,

When you ſate on the Bench?

Sing hi ho, &c.

Next comes the good Lord Keble,

Of the triumvirate

Of the ſeal, in Law but feeble,

Though on the Bench he ſate.

For when one puts him a caſe,

I wiſh him out of the place;

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=213)And if it
were not a ſin,

An abler Lawyer in.

Sing give the ſeal about,

I'de have it ſo the rather,

Becauſe we might get out,

The Knave my Lord my Father.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Pull out the other there,

It is Nathaniel Fines,

(Who Briſtol loſt for fear)

We'l not leave him behind's;

'Tis a Chip of that good old block,

Who to Loyalty gave the firſt knock.

Then ſtole away to Lundey,

Whence the foul fiend fetches him one day.

Sing hi ho Canting Fines,

You and the rest to mend 'um,

Would you were ſerved in your kinds,

With an enſe reſcidendum.

Sing hi ho, &c.

He that comes now down ſtairs,

Is Lord Chief Juſtice Glin.

If no man for him cares,

He cares as little again.

The reaſon too I know't,

He help to cut Straffords throat,

And take away his life,

Though with a cleaner knife.

Sing hi ho Britain bold,

Straight to the bar you get,

Where it is not ſo cold

As where your Juſtice ſet.

Sing hi ho, &c.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=213)

He that ſhall next come in,

Was long of the Council of State;

Though hardly a hair on his chin,

When firſt in the Council he ſate:

He was ſometime in Italy,

And learned their faſhions prettily

Then came back to's own Nation

To help up Reformation.

Sing hi ho Harry Nevil,

I prethee be not too raſh,

With Atheiſm to court the Devil,

You'r too bold to be his Bardaſh.

Sing hi ho, &c.

He there with ingratitude blackt,

Is one Cornelius Holland:

Who but for the Kings houſe lackt,

Wherewith to appeaſe his Colon.

The caſe is well amended,

Since that time, as I think,

When at Court gate he tended,

With a little ſtick and a ſhort link.

Sing hi ho Cornelius,

Your zeal cannot delude us,

The reaſon pray now tell us,

Why thus you plaid the Judas?

Sing hi ho, &c.

At firſt he was a Grocer,

Who now we Major call:

Although you would think no ſir,

If you ſaw him in White-hall.

Where he has great command,

And looks for cap in hand;

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=214)And if
our eggs be not addle,

Shall be of the next new Moddle.

Sing hi ho Mr. Saloway,

The Lord in Heaven doth know

When that from Heaven you ſhall away,

Where to the Devil you'll go.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Little Hill ſince ſet in the Houſe,

Is to a Mountain grown:

Nor that which brought forth the Mouſe,

But thouſands the year of his own,

The purchaſe that I mean,

Where elſe but at Taunton Dean?

Five thouſand pound per annum,

A ſum not known to his Granam.

Sing hi the Good Old Cauſe,

'Tis old although not true,

You have got more by that then the Laws,

So a Good Old Cauſe to you.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Maſter Cecil pray come behind,

Becauſe on your own accord

The other Houſe you declin'd,

You ſhall be no longer a Lord.

The reaſon as I gueſſe

You ſilently did confeſſe,

Such Lords deſerved ill,

The other Houſe to fill.

Sing hi ho Mr. Cecil,

Your honour now is gone,

Such Lords are not worth a whiſtle,

We made better Lords of our own.

Sing hi ho, &c.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=214)

Luke Robinſon ſhall go before ye,

That ſnarling Northern tike,

Be ſure he'll not adore ye,

For honour he doth not like.

He cannot honour inherit,

And he knows he can never merit:

And therefore he cannot bear it,

That any one elſe ſhould wear it:

Sing hi ho envious lown,

You're of the Beagles kind,

Who alwayes barked at the Moon,

Becauſe in the dark it ſhin'd.

Sing hi ho, &c.

'Tis this that vengeance rouſes,

That while you make long prayers,

You eat up widdows houſes,

And drank the Orphans tears.

Long time you kept a great noiſe,

Of God and the Good Old Cauſe;

But if God to you be ſo kind,

Then I am of the Indians mind,

Sing hi ho Sir Harry,

We ſee by your demeanor,

If longer here you tarry,

You'll be Sir Harry Vane Senior.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Now, if your zeal do warm ye,

Pray loud for fairer weather,

Swear to live and die with the Army,

For theſe Birds are flown together.

The Houſe is turned out a door,

(And I think it was no ſin too)

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=215)If we
take them there any more,

We'll throw the Houſe out of the window.

Bing hi ho Tom Scot,

You lent the Devil your hand:

I wonder he helpt you not,

But ſuffer'd you to be trapand.

Sing hi ho, &c.

They're once again conduced,

And we freed from the evil

To which we long were uſed,

God bleſs us next from the Devil!

If they had not been outed,

The Army had been routed,

And then this rotten Rump,

Had ſat untill the laſt trump.

[...]ut hi ho Lambert's here,

The Protectors Inſtrument bore:

And many there be that ſwear

His Lady had done it before.

Sing hi ho, &c.

Come here then honeſt Peters,

Say Grace for the ſecond courſe:

So long as theſe your betters,

Muſt patience have upon force.

Long time ye kept a great noiſe,

With God and the Good Old Cauſe,

But if God own ſuch as theſe,

Then where's the Devils fees.

Sing hi ho Hugo,

I hear thou art not dead,

Where now to the Devil will you go,

Your Patrons being fled.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=215) Sing hi
ho my hony,

My heart ſhall never rue:

Four and twenty now for a penny,

And into the bargain HUGH.

### 2.9. A City Ballad.

To the Tune of Down in a Bottom.

1

SInce the Realm loſt its head

All our trading is dead,

And our Money and Credit is flown;

We have try'd many new,

But find it too true,

That no Head fits ſo well as our own.

2.

The Drum and the Trump

Devour'd all to the Rump,

And then they drank healths for that,

But that yielding no greaſe,

They next came to ſqueeze

The City becauſe it was fat.

3.

The City declar'd

That they were afeard,

And they their Militia would ſettle;

But, except the Boyes,

They made only a noyſe,

Their Votes were in dock out nettle.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=216)

4.

The Mayor and his Peers

Durſt not for their ears

Aſſert the Militia's power:

Though once he ſeem'd for it,

He does now abhor it,

And Revolted in leſſe then an hour.

5.

'Tis that curſed wedge

That took off his edge,

For he looks like a jolly Clubber;

If he had but the life

And ſpirit of his Wife,

He would not lye ſtill like a Lubber.

6.

Our pair of new Sheriffs

Hang by them like ſleeves,

Their valour will ne're be their ſin;

So they be high and rich

They do not care which

Side looſes, if they may but win.

7.

That Earwigg that doth write

Himſelf Lord and Knight,

(And is one as much as the other)

Doth ſo ſtill undermine,

That he ſpoyles our deſign,

By the help of old Beſſe his Brother.

8.

He cares not a pin,

So as he may get in,

Who ere he keep out of his right,

He'll turn and return,

But be hang'd ere he'll burn,

For he dares neither ſuffer nor fight.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=216)

9.

His Ambition him thruſt

Into a Pageant at firſt,

And up to the Pulpit next;

And then into the Chair

Of our City Lord Mayor,

Which he better improv'd then his Text.

10.

O there did he ſqueeze

Out the Fines and the Fees,

Nor the Church nor the Laity 'ſcapes,

Had he ſtaid another Year,

At which he did lear,

He had preſt us like Canaans Grapes.

11.

There's juſt ſuch another

May well be call'd Brother,

A Collonel ſtout, and a Knight,

And an Alderman too,

As now Aldermen go,

That will neither take wrong nor do right.

12.

We ne're yet did know

That he durſt meet a foe,

And his pale colour ſpeaks him afraid

Yet in ſtory we read

He did one valiant deed,

Which was to his Masters Maid.

13.

Then to get an Eſtate,

He found out a Mate,

Which was an old Ʋſurers Daughter,

Supplanted the Son,

And then he begun

To be Wealthy, and Worſhipfull after.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=217)

14.

There are more beſides him

Stands for the back Limb,

A crue of ſuch Harlotry tools,

That who's not more blind

Then Fortune, may find

That he raiſes ſome beſides Fools.

15

Some are wary grave Sirs,

In their Chains and their Furs,

That dare not declare their opinion,

If hang'd they were all,

One tear would not fall

Without the help of an Onion.

16.

There's one kin to a Miter,

That's no Presbyter,

But loyal and honeſt and free,

Had we took down the Mayor,

And plac'd him in the Chair,

Up ſome body had gone and we.

17.

There's another, a Wit,

Was for all he could get,

But now wheels about and is true;

He may win all our hearts

Would he uſe his beſt parts

With our foes as he did with the Jew.

18.

The reſt of the Court

Are a mixt colourd ſort,

Rank Presbyter, rank Independent,

They do ſtill ſo prevail

For the Weſtminſter tayle,

'Tis feard we ſhall ne're have an end on't.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=217)

19.

But our Counſel of Commons

Are valiant old Romans,

And ſtand for our peace and freedom,

If that Dog that ſells Leather,

And the Salesman together

Would either be honeſt or be dumb.

20.

But yet we cann't ſee

Any reaſon why we

Should all be ſo much at their becks,

If we chains muſt forbear,

Pray why ſhould they wear

A Militia about their necks?

21

Our Town Clerk we took,

Has a ſerious look,

And his ſilence did ſhew him a wit,

But we diſcern him no more

Than the Court heretofore

Did that ſullen Mask which he writ.

22.

The late Petticoat Squire

From his ſhop mounted higher

To the Sword, and from that he did ſtart

By his mony and grace

To a Remembrances place

Now reports when the Rump let a fart.

23.

Their Chaplain that praid

Now recants what he ſaid,

And walks by a perfecter light:

The cauſe why he ſtraid

Was he wincked when he praid,

Now his eyes are open he's right.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=218)

24.

What ere the Cauſe be

We clearly may ſee,

No good thing propos'd for the City's,

But mens policy bends

It to their private ends,

That 'tis ſpoyl'd by the cloſe Committee.

25.

And it needs muſt be ſo,

For we all do well know

'Tis for wealth men are put into office;

And he that has ſtore

Domineers or'e the poor,

Whether Fool, Knave, Elder, or Novice.

26.

We our Members have ſent,

But the quick Parliament

Had firſt ſent their Members we find,

Yet no body knows,

With which ſide Monk will cloſe

Or will ſtand for before, or behind.

27.

Hee's a Souldier no doubt

Both skilfull and ſtout

But had need be more than a Stalian,

If his love ſhould extend

To the hindermoſt end,

And uſe us like Italian.

28.

A thouſand a year

If he could but tell where,

They thought would have made him to mind 'em;

But they promiſe ſtill,

As Diego made his will,

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=218)Great
things, but none knows where to find 'em.

29.

In this prodigal trick

They have out-done old Nick,

For what he did give he did ſhow.

Their title's the ſame,

And ſo is their aime

For ought any man doth know.

30.

Let it go as it will,

We are Citizens ſtill,

And free to this ſide, or that

We may prate, and may Vote,

But when it comes to't,

We'l be true to no body knows what.

31.

But this we ſee plain

'Twas for honour and gain

That we at the firſt did fall out,

And were not publick lands

Got in private mens hands

The times would ſoon turn about.

33.

And now we do find,

Theſe Saints in their kind,

Thoſe are mad that to aid them in flocks come,

And he that will fight

To keep us all from our right

Shall be chronicled for a Coxcomb.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=219)

### 2.10. The RUMP Dockt.

TIll it be underſtood

What is under Monck's Hood,

The City dare not ſhew his horns:

Till ten dayes be out,

The Speaker's ſick of the Gout,

And the Rump doth ſit upon thorns.

If Monck be turn'd Scot,

The Rump goes to pot,

And the Good Old Cauſe will miſcarry;

Like coals out of embers,

Revive the Old Members:

Off goes the Rump, like Dick and Harry.

Then In come the Lords,

Who drew Parliament Swords,

With Robes lined through with Ermin;

But Peers without Kings

Are very uſeleſs things,

And their Lordſhips counted but Vermin.

Now Morley and Fagg

May be put in a bagg,

And that doughty Man Sir Arthur,

In deſpair of his Foil,

With Alderman Hoyle,

Will become a Knight of the Garter.

That Knave in Grain

Sir Harry Vane

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=219)His Caſe
then moſt mens is ſadder;

There is little hope

He can ſcape the rope,

For the Rump turned him o're the Ladder.

That precious Saint Scot

Shall not be forgot,

According to his own deſires;

Inſtead of Neck-verſe

Shall have it writ on his Herſe,

Here hangs one of the Kings Tryers.

Thoſe nine ſons of Mars,

That whipt the Rumps Arſe,

I mean the Commanders War-lick;

If the Rump ſmell ſtrong

With hanging too long,

Shall ſerve to ſtuff it with Garlick.

That parcel of man

In length but a ſpan,

Whoſe wifes Eggs alwaies are addle

Muſt quit the Life-guard,

As he did when ſcar'd

By Lambert out of the ſaddle.

Lambert may now turn Floriſt,

Being come off the pooreſt

That ever did Man of the Sword:

The Rump let a Fart

Which took away his heart,

And made him a Equire of a Lord.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=220)

His Cheſhire glory

Is a pitifull ſtory,

There the Saints triumpht without battle;

But now Monck and his Friers

Have driven him into the Briers,

As he did Booth and his Cattle.

For the reſt of the Rump,

Together in a Lump,

'Tis too late to cry, Peccavi;

Ye have ſinn'd all or moſt

Againſt the Holy Ghoſt,

And therefore the Devil muſt have ye.

But now valiant City,

Whether muſt thy Ditty

Be ſung in Verſe, or in Proſe,

For till the Rump ſtunk

For fear of Monck,

Thy Militia durſt not ſhew its Noſe.

Baſe Cowards and Knaves,

That firſt made us Slaves,

Very Raſcals from the beginning;

Onely unto Moncks Sword

The Nation muſt afford

The honour of bringing the King in.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=220)

### 2.11. Arſy Verſy, or The Second Martyrdom of the RUMP.

To the Tune of The Blind Beggar of Bednall-green.

1.

MY Muſe, to prevent leſt an after-clap come,

If the winde ſhould once more turn about for the Bum,

As a preface of honour, and not as a frump,

Firſt with a Sirreverence uſhers the Rump,

2.

I ſhall not diſpute whether Long-tails of Kent,

Or Papiſt this name of diſgrace did invent;

Whoſe Legend of lies, do defame us the more,

Hath entail'd on us Rumps ne're heard on before.

3.

But now on its Pedigree longer to think,

(For the more it is ſtir'd the more it will ſtink)

'Tis agreed the Rumps firſt report in the Town

Did ariſe from the wooden invention of Brown.

4.

Old Oliver's noſe had taken in ſnuff,

When it ſate long ago, ſome unſavoury puff;

Then up went the Rump, and was ferkt to the quick,

But it ſetled in ſpight of the teeth of poor Dick.

5.

Then the Knight of the Peſtle, King Lambert, and Vane,

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=221)With a
Scepter of Iron did over it reign:

But the Rump ſoon re-ſetled, and to their diſ­grace,

Like Excrements voided them out of the place.

6.

It did now, like a Truant's well-diſciplin'd Bum,

With the rod of affliction harder become;

Or elſe like the Image in Daniel it was,

Whoſe Head was of Gold, but whoſe Tayl was of braſs.

7.

It endured the firſt heat, and proved no ſtarter,

But ſung in the midſt of the flames like a Martyr,

And whisk'd the Tayl like a terrible Farter,

And ſounded moſt chearfully, Vive Sir Arthur.

8.

But the next fire Ordeal put into a dump,

Sir Orlando the furious chief joynt of the Rump,

That he looked like the picture of Richard the Third▪

Or like an ejected and froſt-bitten T—

9

'Tis ſaid that his Durindana he drew,

And a Wight on the Road moſt manfully ſlew?

But, pardon'd by Charles, made good what they tell us,

How ill 'tis to ſave a thief from the Gallows.

10.

Being now to be burn'd, he ſoon did expire,

For he was but a flaſh, and would quickly take fire,

So that their fewel upon him to ſpend,

What was it but Coals to Newcastle to ſend?

11.

To bring 'em to th' ſtake as in order they lye,

Harry Martyn the next place muſt occupy;

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=221)'Twas
expected in vain he ſhould blaze, for he ſwore,

That he had been burnt to the ſtumps before.

12.

Tom Scot for the Bum moſt ſtifly did ſtand▪

Though once by a Bum he was fouly trapand;

But time and his office of Secretary

Had learnt him his Buſineſs more private to car­ry

13.

Some thought he arriv'd at his dignity firſt,

By being ſo well in iniquity verſt,

The myſtery of which he hath practis'd of late

In his Function, which was, to be Baud to the State.

14.

Hob Morley in ſilence did ſuffer the loſſe

Of his Rump, and with patience took up the Croſſe,

That to ſee him ſo ſing'd and ſo ſcorcht you would ſwear

No Camel more meekly his burden could bear.

15.

The Speaker was thought to the Rump to be true,

Becauſe like a Fart at firſt he burnt blew;

But ſtreight he was cunningly ſeen to retire,

For  [...]ear to endanger the Rolls in the fire.

16.

St. John a mortal of fleſh and of blood,

Swore by St. * Peter the example was good:

So facing about and ſhifting his ſtation,

He turn'd o're a new leaf in St. Johns Revelations.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=222)

17.

Harry Nevil that looks like a Mahomets pigeon,

Accuſed to be of a State-mans Religion,

Is left to his choyce what proceſſe hee'll have,

To be burnt for an Atheist, or hang'd for a Knave.

18.

Now ſtop thy Noſe reader, for Atkins doth come,

That ſhame to the Breeches as well as the Bum.

To wiſh he was burnt were an idle deſire,

For he comes provided to ſhit out the fire.

19.

But leaſt he without a Companion ſhould be,

Here's Liſle that comes next ſtinks worſer then he;

So fouly corrupt, you may plac't in your Creed,

Such a Rump could alone ſuch a Fistula breed.

20.

Poor Ludlow was bogg'd in Ireland of late,

And to purge himſelf came to the Rump of the State;

But gravely they told him he had acted amiſs,

When he ſought to betray the Rump with a kiſs.

21.

Ned Harby was ſure an herb John in the pot,

Yet could he not ſcape the diſaſterous lot:

Scarce Church'd of the Gout was the truſty old Squire,

But he hopt from the F [...]ying-pan into the fire.

22

Robin Andrews was laid on laſt as they tell us,

For a log to keep down the reſt of his fellows;

Though he ſpent on the City, like one of the Roysters,

Each morning his * two pence in Sack and in Oyſters.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=222)

23

Next Praiſe-God, although of the Rump he was none,

Was for his Petition burnt to the Bare-bone:

So Praiſe-God & Rump, like true Joſephs together,

Did ſuffer; but Praiſe-God loſt the more * leather:

24

There's Lawſon another dag-lock of the tayle,

That the water to avoid, to the water did ſayle;

And in Godly ſimplicity means (as they ſay)

To manage the Stern, though the Rump's out of play.

25.

But Overton moſt with wonder doth ſeize us,

By ſecuring of Hull for no leſſe than Chriſt Jeſus,

Hoping (as it by the ſtory appears)

To be there his Lieutenant for one thouſand years.

26.

Lord Mounſon? Oh Venus! what do you here?

I little thought you were a Rumper I ſwear:

But an impotent Lord will thus far avail,

He will ſerve for a Cloak to cover the tail.

27.

To burniſh his Star Mr. Salisburie's come,

With the Atmos of gold that fall from the Bum;

Sure 'twas but a Meteor, for I muſt tell ye,

It ſmelt as 'twere turning to th' Aldermans jelly.

28.

Brother Pembroke comes laſt, and does not diſdain

Tho' deſpis'd by the world, to bear up the train:

But after New-lights ſo long he did run,

That they brought him to * Bethlehem before they had done.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=223)

29.

Thus the Foxes of Sampſon that carried a brand

In their tails, to deſtroy and to burn up the land;

In the flames they had kindled themſelves to expire,

And the Dee'l give them Brimſtone unto their fire.

### 2.12. A Christmaſs Song, when the RUMP was firſt diſſolved.

To the Tune of I tell the Dick.

THis Chriſtmaſs time, 'tis fit that we

Should Feaſt and Sing and merry be

It is a time of mirth;

For never ſince the world began,

More joyfull news was brought to man,

Then at our Saviours birth.

But ſuch have been theſe times of late,

That Holy dayes are out of date,

And holyneſſe to boot;

For they that do deſpiſe, and ſcorn

To keep the day that Chriſt was born,

Want holyneſſe no doubt.

That Parliament that took away

The obſervation of that day,

We know it was not free;

For if it had, ſuch Acts as thoſe

Had ne're been ſeen in verſe or proſe,

You may conclude with me.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=223)

'Twas that Aſſembly did maintain

'Twas Law to kill their Soveraign,

Who by that Law muſt dye,

Though Gods anointed ones are ſuch,

Which Subjects ſhould not dare to touch,

Much leſſe to Crucifie.

'Twas that which turn'd our Biſhops out

Of houſe and home both branch and root,

And gave no reaſon why▪

And all our Clergy did expell,

That would not do like that Rebell.

This no man can deny.

It was that Parliament that took

Out of our Churches our Service Book,

A Book without compare;

And made Gods houſe, (to all our griefs)

That houſe of Prayer, a Deu of Thiefs,

Both here and every where.

They had no head for many years

Nor heart (I mean the Houſe of Peers)

And yet it did not dyes

Of theſe long ſince it was bereft,

And nothing but the Tayle was left,

You know't as well as I.

And in this Tayle there was a tongue,

Lenthall I mean, whoſe fame hath wrung

In Country and in City;

Not for his worth or eloquence,

[...]t for a Rebell to his Prince,

And neither wiſe nor witty.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=224)

This Speakers words muſt needs be winde,

Since they proceeded from behind;

Beſides, you may remember,

From thence no Act could be diſcreet,

Nor could the ſenſe o'th' Houſe be ſweet,

Where Atkins was a Member.

This tale's now done, the Speakers dumb,

Thanks to the Trumpet and the Drum;

And now I hope to ſee

A Parliament that will reſtore

All things that were undone before,

That we may Chriſtians be.

### 2.13. Bum-Fodder: or, Waſte-Paper, proper to wipe the Nations RUMP with▪
or your Own.

FRee Quarter in the North is grown ſo ſcarce,

That Lambert with all his men of Mars,

Have ſubmitted to kiſs the Parliaments Arſe,

Which no body can deny.

If this ſhould prove true (as we do ſuppoſe)

'Tis ſuch a wipe as the RƲMP and all's Foes

Could never give to Old Olivers Noſe,

Wich no body can deny.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=224)

There's a Proverb come to my mind not unfit,

When the Head ſhall ſee the RƲMP all be-ſhit,

Sure this muſt prove a moſt lucky hit,

Which, &c.

There is another proverb which every Noddy,

Will jeer the RƲMP with, and cry Hoddy-doddy

Here's a Parliament all Arſe and no Body,

Which, &c.

Tis a likely matter the World will mend

When ſo much blood and Treaſure we ſpend,

And yet begin at the wrong end,

VVhich, &c.

We have been round, and round about twirl'd

And through much ſad confuſion hurl'd,

And now we are got into the Arſe of the World,

Which, &c.

But 'tis not all this our courage will quail,

Or make the brave Sea-men to the RƲMP ſtrike ſail,

If we can have no head we will have no tail,

Which, &c.

Then let a Free Parliament be turn'd trump,

And ne're think any longer the Nation to mump

With your pocky, perjur'd, damn'd old RƲMP,

Which, &c.

But what doth Rebell RƲMP make here,

When their proper place (as W— P— doth ſwear)

[...]t the Devils Arſe in Derb [...]ſhire.

Which, &c.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=225)

Then thither let us ſend them a tilt,

For if they ſtay longer, they will us beguilt

With a Government that is looſe in the hilt,

Which, &c.

You'l find it ſet down in the Harrington's Moddle

Whoſe Brains a Commonwealth doth ſo coddle,

That 't has made a Rotation in his Noddle,

Which, &c.

'Tis a pittifull paſſe you men of the Sword

Have brought your ſelves to, that the Rum [...]'s your Lord,

And Arſie Ʋerſie muſt be the word,

Which, &c.

Our Powder and Shot you did freely ſpend,

That the Head you might from the Body rend,

And now you are at Wars with the But-end,

Which, &c.

Old Martin and Scot have all ſuch an itch,

That they will with the Rump try t'other twitch,

And Lenthal can greaſe a fat Sow in the Britch,

Which, &c.

That's a thing would pleaſe the Butchers and Cooks,

To ſee this ſtinking Rump quite off the hooks,

And Jackdaw go to pot with the Rooks,

Which, &c.

This froward Sir John (who the Rump did ne're fail)

Againſt Charles Stuart in a Speech did rail,

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=225)But men
ſay it was without head or tayl,

Which, &c.

Juſt ſuch is the Government we live under,

Of a Parliament thrice cut in ſunder;

And this hath made us the Worlds wonder,

Which, &c.

Old Noll when we talkt of Magna Charta,

Did propheſie well we ſhould all ſmart-a;

And now we have found his Rump's Magna Fart-a,

Which, &c.

But I cannot think Monck (though a Souldier and Sloven)

To be kin to the Fiend whoſe feet are cloven,

Nor will creep i' th' Rumps Arſe to bake in their Oven,

Which, &c.

Then ſince he is coming, e'ne let him come

From the North to the South, with Sword and Drum,

To beat up the Quarters of this lewd Bum,

Which, &c.

And now of this Rump I'le ſay no more,

Nor had I begun, but upon this ſcore,

There was ſomething behind, which was not be­fore.

Which, &c.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=226)

### 2.14. A Vindication of the RUMP: or The RUMP Re-advanced.

To the Tune of Ʋp tails all.

FUll many a Ballad hath been Penn'd,

And ſcoffing Poem writ

Againſt the RUMP; but I intend

To ſpeak in Praiſe of it.

Come Jove and Apollo, come Venu [...] and Mars,

And lend your aſſiſtance: to ſpeak of the A —

Will require a prodigious wit,

There's ſcarce a Lady to be found

That loves either Pear or Plum

One half ſo well, if ſhe be ſound,

As tabering at her B —

It may be, you'l ſay, I'm wide of the Caſe,

Since that Muſick's made in a diſtant place:

I anſwer the bredth of your Thumb.

When Alderman Atkins did bemar

His Hoſe through a Panick fear,

And Captain Rea that man of War,

Oh! what a Hogo was there?

If you ask me, what praiſe is in this? at a word,

The Captain ſo ſenced himſelf by a T—

That his Enemies could not come near.

There is not a Lawyer in Country or Town,

Whoſe Rhetorick doth prevail,

Although he hath purchas'd Fee ſimple by th' Gown,

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=226)But loves
to be dealing in Tail;

And I may well ſwear by Apollo or Mars,

That at a Place called, the Oven's Arſe,

Oft times I have drunk good Ale.

And when you are dallying with a young Maid,

Would you not her Buttocks bethump?

And I have been often well apaid

With a Gooſe both fat and plump:

The Body being eaten, we ſtrive for the Tayl,

Each man with his Kan'kn of nappy brown Ale,

Doth box it about for the RƲMP.

The RƲMP of a Coney I often have ſeen

Moſt piteouſly claw'd by a Ferret,

And a Capons Rump is a bit for a Queen,

Although ſhe's a Perſon of merit.

In preaching and praying who ſpends the whole day,

At night keeps a Rump wherewithall for to play,

Be he never ſo full of the ſpirit.

I wonder who firſt call'd the Parliament RƲMP,

Some ſay, that it was Jack Hobby,

And ſome, fiery P — good wits will jump;

Now I write not this to bob ye,

But only to tell ye that good Mr. P —

For all that he's cropt, yet he could not get in,

But was fain to remain in the Lobby ▪

The other day I was going in haſte,

(To think on't it grieves my heart)

I ſaw a poor Fellow all nak'd to the waſte,

And whipt at the Arſe of a Cart:

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=227)His Rump
('tis true) ſuffer'd the Rout. But I would

Fain know who it was, that durſt be ſo hold,

As to call Mr. Speaker Sir F —

He might as well have ſtiled him Anus,

Since he was the mouth of the RƲMP.

As cunning a Fox as Romes Sejanus:

But I do not love for to frump;

Or elſe I could tell ye, my Friends, to an Ace,

What good can acrew to the Land by a Mace,

As long as the Knave's the great'ſt Trump,

Our zealous ſticklers for Reformation

Will edifie on the Rump of a Siſter,

And it will never grow out of faſhion

To Phyſick the Tayl with a Gliſter.

But beware that Monk doth not come with a bit­ter

Purge to the Rump which will make her beſhit her

For ſhe hath already bepiſt her.

### 2.15. The RUMP roughly but righteouſly hand­led: In a New Ballad.

To the Tune of Cook Laurel.

1.

MOre Sacks to the Mill, here comes a freſh Wit,

That means without Mittens (as you ſhall ſee)

To handle a RUMP that's all to beſhit,

Sirreverence of the Company.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=227)

2.

And let other ſinners that love a whole skin,

Keep out of my reach for fear of a Stone;

For I'm like the Hang-man, who (when's hand was in)

Said he had as good truſs up forty as one.

3.

Firſt I'le tell you whence this Rump-regnant came,

When England to Faction and Schiſm was bent,

By means of long peace to ſettle the ſame,

Our noble King ſummon'd a Parliament.

4.

A Parliament which may make old men grieve,

And Children that ne're ſhall be born com­plain;

I mean ſuch as dy'd before they did live,

Like Harrington's Rota or th' Engin of Vane.

5.

This Parliament, like a wilde skitiſh Tit,

Unman'd and unback'd, and unapt to obey,

Would let neither Prince, Peer, nor Prelate ſit,

Yet ſtammel'd nos'd OLIVER ſmelt out a way.

6.

With Piſtol and Muſquet he brought the Beaſt under,

And aw'd it ſo much, and ſo far did prevail,

That tamely he dockt it, and (to all mens won­der)

He caſt off the Colt and ſadled the Tayl:

7

Which ſhortly began to kick at's Command,

And reſtive it grew, and left its true pacing,

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=228)Which
made him reſolve on his own Leggs to ſtand,

And turn the RUMP out of the ſtable a gra­ſing.

8.

The Red-coats, with breath like my Lady's Bumblaſt,

This Parliament-ſnuff blew twice out and in;

But North and Weſt-winds will ſo out it at laſt,

That nought but Hell fire ſhall light it agen.

9.

Though now they tempt Monk with a 1000. per annum,

In hopes that to worſhip, his face hee'l fall flat on;

Yet he's wiſe enough to reſiſt and diſdain 'em,

And cry, Get behind me, thou Bob-tail of Satan.

10.

Right pat with St. George's this Story will jump,

Poor England's the Damſel appointed for ſlaugh­ter,

And Monk the St. George to kill Dragon RƲMP,

And ſafely reſtore to the King his fair Daugh­ter.

11.

The Rump thus in groſſe no more ſhall be plaid on,

But now I will whet my Pen (if it pleaſe ye)

To joynt it, & ſhew what foul parts it is made on,

God grant that our Stomachs prove not over-queaſie.

12.

Here's Lenthal once Mouth to the Parliaments mind,

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=228)Though he
at length acted the Fundament's part,

Whoſe Speech was not breaking of Silence but Winde,

And's giving the Thanks of the Houſe, but a Fart.

13.

But many I find this Opinion are firm in,

That he has no real diſtemper at all,

But feigns it; and like a Prophetical Vermin,

Runs from an old Houſe that is ready to fall.

14.

If Ludlow the ſtate of Grace he had been in,

And kept himſelf ſafe fro' th' Committee of Safety,

For's Fathers ſake, Deputy Fart he had been,

Inſtead of the Froſt, they call Say the crafty.

15.

Next comes the Rump's Gad-fly, the Jehu-like driver,

King-abjuring ARTHƲR; Sir, you (if I ken you)

O' th' Biſhop's Vriah-like fall were Contriver,

To get the fair Berſheba of their Revenue.

16.

But 'twas a more carnal concupiſcence,

That at Briſtol-Vicaridge ſet you a neighing,

Which you enjoy'd and occupy'd in the ſence

Which puts pretty Maids to piſhing and fying.

17.

Nay you like the Trojan-Adulterer ſwore,

To thoſe that once ſaved you from the King's Fury,

That rather than Helen of Dureſm reſtore,

Their Troynovant in its own aſhes you'd bury.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=229)

18.

But I dare no farther his paſſion provoke

For fear of a prejudice which it may do me

For with his own Choller ſhould he chance to choke,

The Hang-man in Action of Treſpaſſe might ſue me.

19.

Then have at Sir Harry the Int'reſt Refiner,

Who's not of the Church, but Society of JE­SUS,

And can make Divinity's Self-Diviner,

And model new Heavens, and new Earths to pleaſe us.

20.

'Twas he that injected the ſublimd matter

To late Lady Lambert, and ſhe to th' Squire,

Which made him Protector, and Parliament-ha­ter,

And to be Fift Monarch devoutly aſpire.

21.

Like Grub from Sheeps tails, ſince the Rump doth him throw,

He'll creep to ſome placket of Sanctification,

And come forth a Fleſh-flye next Summer, and blow

New Maggots in's Church, of more whimſical faſhion.

22.

Me [...]hinks in his eyes the waters do gather,

As if the Lord Straffords Death troubled his ſight;

Perhaps he repents and means (like his Father)

Ev'n in his own Garter to do his Ghoſt right.

23.

There goes the twice treacherous Banquerout Salloway

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=229)From
Weſtminſter Wolves, to Tow'r Lions bound,

Cauſe he from one Treaſon to another did fall away,

And will fall again, but not quite to the ground.

24.

The next is a Politick Pen-man that got-land

By's Knavery more then his Birth, and 'tis his-hope

That Lambeth ſhall ever and ever be Scot-land,

And ſeat of an Arch-one, but not of a Biſhop.

25.

Here's Nevil (who to be made in Scot's ſtead

A State-Secretary) did practiſe a New art,

To th' Office, (by Letters unto the Houſe read)

He courted himſelf in the name of Charles Stuart ▪

26.

Now ſee with a POX, where Martin comes on,

The ſeed of corrupt and ſinfull Loyns,

Who a worthy had been, if as near Solomon

In Wiſdome, as number of Concubines.

27.

If in utter darkneſſe there ſhould be a failing

Of Horror, the Rump may furniſh it with

Squire Fleetwood to help out the weeping and wailing,

And Sir William Brereton for gnaſhing of teeth.

28.

Now Mildmay, and Whitlock, and Liſle I might call in,

And Maſter Lord Salisbury (from Noble houſe

Who ſeems not deſcended, ſo much as down faln)

And others, which well may ſerve a freſh Muſe.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=230)

29.

And now the Rump's ſet in the Salt, and Monck

Hath offer'd full fairly his own for to make it,

But finding himſelf by the Devil out-drunk,

He honeſtly cryes, Nay then let him take it.

30.

But for 'em when hence they go, (ſuch were their follies)

Above nor beneath, there no quiet place is,

King Charles in Heaven, in Hell Tyrant NOL is,

Who (as God us'd Fleetwood) will ſpit in their faces.

31.

Now mark what ſweet Morſells Hell ſwallowed of late,

There's Cromwell, and Prideaux, and Bradſhaw, and theres

He that made Old Nick (when he enter'd his Gate)

Cry, Oh my Bon Pride, are you there with your Bears?

32.

And now I no longer will rake in this ſink,

But ſhortly the RƲMP is for Tyburn, and then

I'le tell you more of it; but you (as I think)

Do now ſtop your Noſes, and I'le ſtop my Pen.

### 2.16. The She-Citizens Delight.

To the Tune of Cuckolds all a Row.

YOu Cow-hearted Citizens

What is your damn'd pretence,

To keep your ſelves within your beds▪

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=230)And not
fight for your Prince;

Whoſe Majeſty ſhould you behold,

Your ſhame will breed your woe,

And then like fools you will cry out▪

Cuckolds all a row.

There's ſome of you whoſe Biſhops Lands

Do ſo much clog their heels,

That now they cannot ſtir, whereas

Elſe would they run on wheels:

But yet I hope a time will come

When you ſhall be made know,

And told unto their faces that

You'r Cuckolds all a row.

But yet for one moſt reverent Act

You are to be commended,

That through your Rams-Head zeal you have

Your Brother Rump Befriended,

To ſeat them in the Parliament Houſe,

Their wiſdomes forth to ſhow,

But they and you are all alike

Cuckolds all a row.

But I adviſe you ſet this RUMP

In ſalt for fear of ſtinking,

'Twill fall unto the Devils ſhare,

Becauſe 'tis his by drinking;

In ſpight of all their Acts and Laws

Hee'l car' them down below,

Then Hell and City all alike

Cuckolds all a row.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=231)

Alas poor Lambert is undone,

And now he may go Preach,

Since 'tis the Engliſh Al-a-mode

For every Rogue to Teach;

He'le noſe it bravely in a Tub,

And let his Brethren know

That they are Damn'd unleſſe they dip

Cuckolds all a row.

But where's your mighty Fleetwood now,

His honor' [...] worn to th' ſtump,

He'le ſerve Ambaſſador to hell

To make room for the Rump,

And thus King-killers one by one

Shall to the Devil goe

Upon the City Aſſes pack

Cuckolds all a row.

And now Cow-hearts look to your ſhops,

The Red-coats will you fright,

And plunder you becauſe they know

Your hornes hang in your light;

Not matter, for you have been the cauſe

Of all the Kingdoms woe,

And do deſerve ſtill to be call'd

Cuckolds all a row.

But if that you would honeſt grow,

And do a glorious thing,

Which is to rouſe and take your Armes,

And fight for Charles our King;

Which Act your Credits will regain,

And all the World ſhall know

That you ſhall then no more be call'd

Cuckolds all a row.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=231)

### 2.17. The RUMP Carbonado'd: or A New BALLAD.

To the Tune of the Black-ſmith.

LEnd me your ears, not cropt, and I'le ſing

Of an hideous Monſter, or Parliament thing,

That City and Country doth wofully wring,

VVhich no body can deny.

Take care that no Sectary be in this place,

For if you offend the leaſt Babe of Grace,

The Rump will be ready to fly in your face,

VVhich, &c.

They fram'd a Remonſtrance, to ſet all on fire,

Which took with the People, as they did deſire,

And forc'd them to Covenant that they would conſpire,

VVhich, &c.

No ſooner exalted was Eſſex his horn,

But God's law, and man's too the Cuckold did ſcorn,

To ruine our Country this Rebel was born,

Which, &c.

Take Warwick along, if company you lack,

No Admiral like an old Puritan Jack,

A verier Knave you cann't find in the Pack,

Which, &c.

Theſe arm'd with Commiſſions by Sea and by Land,

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=232)Did ſend
forth their forces the King to with­ſtand,

Till of all that was good they had ſoon made an hand,

Which, &c.

In glory and wealth, we once ſo abounded,

And were in Religion ſo thoroughly grounded,

That none could have ſhatter'd us thus but the Roundhead,

Which, &c.

Which pluck'd down the King, the Church and the Laws,

To ſet up an Idol, then Nick-nam'd the Cauſe,

Like Bell and Dragon to gorge their own Maws,

Which, &c.

They baniſht all Royalliſts out of the Line,

And ſcarce would endure to hear any Divine,

That would not for company cogge, lye, and whine,

Which, &c.

So frantickly zealous they were at that ſeaſon,

That the five rotten Members impeacht of High Treaſon,

They guarded againſt all Right, Law and Reaſon,

Which, &c.

Will fool was counted the worſt of the twain,

Till Tom fool Lord F—the Cauſe to maintain,

His Honor and Conſcience did fearfully ſtain,

Which, &c.

Sir William at Run-away-downs had a bout,

Which him and his Lobſters did totally rout,

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=232)And his
Lady the Conqueror could not help him out,

Which, &c.

Though General B— do now fawn and be­ſeech,

The Cavaliers found him a blood-ſucking Leech,

He would ſeem a Convert, but he ſtinks of the Breech,

Which, &c.

All will confeſſe that Saint Oliver Cromwell

Had learn'd in his Reign the three Nations to cumwell,

Although it be true that he did love a Bum-well,

Which, &c.

But young Dick and Harry, not his Heirs but his Brats:

As if they had leſſe wit and grace than Gib-Cats,

Slunk from their Commands like a pair of drown'd Rats,

Which, &c.

The ſound of a Rump nere heard of before,

In their addle pates did ſo whiſtle and roar,

That ſtreight they betook themſelves to the back door,

Which, &c.

When Haſlerig of the Rump brought up the rear,

The Army was in ſuch a bodily fear,

That no one commander durſt ever appear,

Which, &c.

Down goes the Publick, when Knaves uſurp Power,

The Rump by one Ordinance can more men de­vour,

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=233)Than all
the great Guns ſhot from the Tower,

Which, &c.

Pennington long ſince was broken to fitters,

Yet fits with the Rump of Sects to Pig-litters;

And ſuch as come near him, he all to beſquitters,

Which, &c.

If Alderman Atkins you keep not in minde,

Hee'l take it ſo ill, that hee'l fly out behinde,

And make you remember with every winde,

Which, &c.

Titchborn could preach, pray and prate by the Spirit,

And Ireton little better, who rang'd like a Ferret [...]

And Tyburn thinks long to give them their merit,

Which, &c.

Lord Gourney was right, whom the City betraid;

Now the City would be right, were the Maior not a Jade:

Till ſuch as he be made examples, nere look for better Trade,

Which, &c.

Ne're did any Nation ſo court their own good,

As we have all offers of mercy withſtood,

God's judgement on our rapine, and ſhedding of blood,

Which, &c.

All wiſe men and good, ſay it is a miſchievous fate,

A Kingdome to turn to a Popular State;

Yet wee'l take no warning untill it be too late:

Which, &c.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=234)

A deſperate crew of ſelf-ſeeking Elves,

Do wilfully force us on quicklands and ſhelves;

This we ſee, yet we ſeek not to ſafeguard our ſelves,

Which, &c.

For when the poor Cits are plunder'd by force,

Their grievances find as little remorſe

I'th' man-beaſt, the Maior as in his great horſe,

Which, &c.

The Rump yet fits brooding upon their cloſe ſtool

In labour to bring forth a Knave or a Fool;

Begotten by a new Legiſlative Tool,

Which, &c.

Sir Henry Vane Prince of the laſt modell'd rout,

Was known as a Traytor, both cunning and ſtout,

Yet for being too rampant the Rump ſhit him out,

Which, &c.

James Harrington Knight or Knave, chooſe you whether,

For in the Rump ſtill Knight and Knave go toge­ther,

The times cannot mend till hee's tyed to his te­ther,

Which, &c.

Harry Martin and Scot with ſome thirty eight more

Are reſolved on the queſtion to keep us all poor,

Whileſt they have the power to Plunder and Whore,

Which, &c.

Who can gain-ſay that it was a ſtrong fart,

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=235)Which
blew the Lord Disborough back to his Cart,

And taught ſilly Fleetwood of crying the Art,

Which, &c.

'Tis pity that Hewſon the Lord ſhould have died

For piercing his Brother, the Cobler's Hide,

Since the word of Command came from his blind ſide,

Which, &c.

Luke Robinſon wants both his Briſtles and Aule

To ſtitch up his lame Legge, and help him to craule,

Who down-right hath halted betwixt God and Baal,

Which, &c.

The Prentices once put the Troupers to flight,

And the Red-coats for fear then were ready to ſhite,

When Lambert the Atheiſt marcht Northward to fight,

Which, &c.

The Greeks that ſack Troy from the Belly did come

Of Epriis his Horſe; but with Musket and Drum

The War among us is carried on by the Bum,

VVhich, &c.

Jack Presbyter ſtruts up and down in a jump,

Curtail'd on purpoſe for fear leaſt the Rump

Should ſit on his skirts and give him a thump,

Which, &c.

Inſtead of an Uſe of divine Conſolation,

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=235)The
Hypocrite publiſht a late Exhortation,

To trapan this poor City, and beggar the Nation,

Which, &c.

For what is call'd Chriſtian, it is no great matter,

So they may but gather, they care not who ſcatter;

They cannot be gifted unleſs they do flatter,

Which, &c.

Since Charles was beheaded we have backward gone,

And now are brought ev'n to the bare Rump-bone,

Which ſpeaks in no other but Atkins his tone,

Which, &c.

'Tis hard to ſay, how much theſe Arſe-wormes do urge us,

We now need no Quack but theſe Jacks for to purge us,

For reſiſting our Head the Tayle now doth ſcourge us,

Which, &c.

Lenthal now Lords it though the Rabble him mock,

In calling him Speaker, and Speaker to the Dock,

For an hundred pound more hee'l kiſs their very Nock,

Which, &c▪

And now if we crave but a Parliament Free,

We are ſure to feel Plunder, or Priſon to ſee;

They'l gore us, and bore us, & ſlaves we muſt be,

Which, &c.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=236)

We are ſenſible now, that there is no one thing,

Can full ſatisfaction to all Intereſt bring,

Till in ſpite of all Traytors, we fetch in the King,

Which, &c.

Monk like the Oracle playes faſt and looſe;

We know not yet, whether hee's a Fox or a Gooſe,

He had need look about him, for his neck's in a nooſe,

Which, &c.

Then to conclude this innocent Song,

Leaſt the Rump ſhould infect you, which ſmelleth ſo ſtrong:

Old Old Nick bleſs them all, and take them e're long,

Which no body can deny.

### 2.18. A Pſalm ſung by the People before the Bone-fires, made in and about
the City of London, Febr: 11.

To the Tune of Vp tails all.

COme let's take the Rump

And waſh it at the Pump,

For 'tis now in a ſhitten Caſe:

Nay if it hang an Arſe,

Wee'l pluck it down the ſtares,

And roſt it at Hell for its greaſe.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=236)

Let the Devil be the Cook,

And the roaſt overlook,

And lick his own fingers apace;

For that may be born,

(if he take it not in ſcorn

To lick ſuch a privy place.)

Though we are bereft

Of our Armes, Spits are left,

Whereon the Rump we will roaſt;

Wee'l prick it in the Tayl,

And baſt it with a Flayl,

Till it ſtink like a Cole-burnt Toaſt.

It hath lain long in brine,

Made by the Peoples eyne,

So 'tis ſalt through unſavoury meat;

Wee'l draw it round about

With Welſh Parſley, and no doubt

It will choak Pluto's great Dog to eat.

We will not be mockt,

This Rump hath been dockt,

And if our skill doth not fail;

To fear it is good,

Or elſe all the blood

In the Body, will leak out at the Tail.

Then down in your Ire,

With this Rump to the fire,

Get Harrington's Rota to turn it;

If Paper be lackt,

The Aſſeſsment Act

You may ſtick upon' [...] leſt ye burn it.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=237)

But ſee there my Maſters

It riſes in bliſters,

And looks very big on the matter;

Like a roaſting Pigs ear;

It ſings, do ye hear?

'Tis enough, come quickly the Platter.

Lay Trenchers and Cloth,

And away bring the Erot [...],

Did the Devil o' th' Fag-end make none;

But hold, by your leave

Napkins we muſt have

To wipe our mouths when we have done.

Come Ladies pray where?

Will you none of our Chear?

Are ye of ſuch a ſqueamiſh nature?

Pray what is the reaſon?

Are Rumps out of ſeaſon?

But 'tis an abuſe to the Creature.

Come wee'l fall on,

Pray cut me a Bone,

The Meat may be healthfull and ſound;

Fogh! come let us bury [...]t,

To th' hole we muſt carry't,

This Rump it ſtinks above ground.

This Fire wee'l ſtile

The Funeral pile,

The Grave ſhall be under the Gallows;

The Vane ſhall be th' Scull

Of ſome Trayterous Fool,

And the Epitaph ſhall be as follows;

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=237)

Ʋnderneath the Stones

A Rump-Corporate's bones,

Are laid full low in a ſink,

And we do implore ye

Let them rest, for the more ye

Do stir them, the more they will stink.

### 2.19. A Diſplay of the Headpiece and Codpiece Valour, of the moſt Renowned
Collonel Ro­bert Jermy, late of Bafield in the County of Norfolk, Eſq with his
Son Captain Toll by his ſide; now on their way for New-Eng­land. Or, the
lively deſcription of a dead-hearted fellow.

To the Tune of a Turd, or the Black-ſmith.

DId you ne're hear of the Baby of Mars,

That charg'd Fox's wife with a Tars,

For his valour lies all in his Arſe,

Which needs muſt be very ſtrong.

A ſanctify'd Colonel in beaten Buff,

With a Scarlet Jump that's (1) Cudgel-proof;

And his Son (2) Crowland Coward of the ſelf-ſame ſtuff,

Who got the Wench bigg with young. Proba­tum eſt.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=238)

He's a Journey-man Soldier to the States Army,

And 'tis in his terms, When you fight you muſt ſpare me:

So runs the Commiſſion of Colonel Jermy,

If I be informed true.

Upon a Mock-Larm he's ſure in the Van,

Where he takes none, and does no more hurt than he can.

He's a pittifull Souldier, though a cruel man,

Let's give the Devil his due,

To ſacrifice to his fears and his pride,

He caus'd a (1) Church-Champion be mur­der'd and try'd

By the Judge of his name, and the Rope on his ſide;

'Tis Pity they ever were parted.

Yet you cannot but ſay 'twas very well meant,

When he went to the Houſe of Parliament,

In love to his Country before he was ſent,

In a Coach, when he might have been Carted.

You muſt alwayes take the good-will for the deed,

Though at (2) Piſen he had not the luck to ſpeed;

Yet ſome other place may have very great need,

If the Devil releaſe but his hire.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=238)

So dear was his love that he (1) purchas'd a throng

Of Sea-men, in Lice and Lungs very ſtrong.

Sure he will be ſome body ere it be long,

If he be not laid in the mire.

How the Sailers did hollow and throw up their Hats,

And the men with wide mouths that us'd to cry Sprats;

But the brave Spark of Arundel made them look like drown'd Rats,

When he (2) humbled Tom T [...]ll for his ſin.

That high-born Hero had cudgell'd their Swords,

Had they not almoſt expir'd at his words;

But the whole deſign was not worth two half-Turds,

Though you throw the (3) three Juſtices in.

In his laſt good ſervice he (4) took the City,

By an Order from the miſtaken Committee,

Where he ſcap'd a ſcowring, the more was the pitty;

For 'twas foul when you've ſaid what you can.

He march'd into the Gates with an hundred more,

O brave! he ne're did the like before;

For he us'd to ſneak in at the (5) back dore,

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=239)As
becomes a right modeſt man.

When they entred the Town they beleagur'd the Maior,

And with wonderfull courage they ſtormed the Chair;

But they ſoon were all ſoul, and ran very fair,

As if they'd been bred for the Courſe.

For the (1) Bells were rung backward, as he ſayes his Prayers,

And his head went forward with his haſte down the ſtairs,

Like a man of diſpatch in the State-affairs,

Thank Fortune it was no worſe.

'Tis much to be wondred he ſhould leave the Rump,

Though his love to that end has receiv'd a Law frump,

But that is his god whatever is Trump;

Yet his Spirit now was blind.

Had the Rump but once fizl'd, 'twas the ſtrongeſt ſide,

But a Fart has ſo routed his Troop in their pride,

Though infallible (2) Butler was his guide,

That they are both blown down the winde.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=239)

Yet that would be thought a true (1) Engliſh­man,

Let him make true Latine if he can;

Yet learned mens lives this Raſcal will ſcan,

And when he has done it deny it.

This is Jermy's Forlorn when brave Jacks appear;

He has little of wit, and leſſe of fear,

And ſwears for his Collonel by the year;

And when he is in, he will ply it.

When the Nation was Jaded with a (2) Quaker,

This Jipp [...]e forſooth was a great Undertaker,

And amongſt other Trades a Juſtice-maker,

(3) Brewer, Tirrell, and Gaffer Life.

We're made and created by his ſtinking breath,

To ſit on the Bench upon Life and Death.

We'd as good have had a Turd in our teeth,

Without any further ſtrife,

I thought this Collonel would fail,

When he was upon his Codpiece-bail,

He got ſuch a flap with a Fox tail,

As more at large in your (4) Box, Sir.

But now if we may believe common fame.

At preſent they ſay he's fled for the ſame,

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=240)How
poorly this Fellow has plaid his Game!

But let him not ſcape without knocks, Sir.

Yet he is ſuch a Coward that I dare ſay,

He neither dares fight nor yet run away,

And yet he'd be glad to ſtand at a ſtay,

If he might but have his Quietus.

For tell him his baſeneſs but once to his face,

Y'are ſure enough he dies on the place,

If he hangs not himſelf upon this diſgrace,

'Tis one to a Thouſand he'l beat us.

### 2.20. A Letany for the New-year.

FRom all and more than I have written here,

I wiſh you well protected this New-year;

From Civil war, and ſuch uncivil things

As ruine Law and Goſpel, Prieſts and Kings;

From thoſe who for ſelf-ends would all betray,

From ſuch new Saints that Piſtol when they pray,

From flattering Faces with infernal Souls,

From new Reformers, ſuch as pull down Pauls,

From L [...]nſy woolſy Lords, from Town betrayers,

From Apron Preachers, and extempore Prayers,

From Pulpit-blaſphemy & bold Rebellion,

From Bloud and—ſomethings elſe that I could tell ye on,

From new falſe Teachers which deſtroy the old,

From thoſe that turn the Goſpel into Gold,

From that black Pack where Clu [...]s are alwayes, Trump

From Bodies Politique and from the Rump,

From thoſe that ruine when they ſhould repair,

From ſuch as cut off Heads inſtead of Hair,

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=240)From
twelve Months Taxes and abortive Votes,

From chargeable Nurſe-Children in red Coats,

From ſuch as ſell their Souls to ſave their Sums,

From City Charters that make Heads for Drums,

From Magistrates which have no truth or know­ledge,

From the red Students now in Greſham Colledge,

From Governments erected by the Rabble,

From ſweet Sir Arthurs Knights of the round Table,

From City-Saints whoſe Anagram is Stains,

From Plots and being choak'd with our own Chains,

From theſe, and ten times more which may en­ſue,

The Poet prays, Good Lord deliver you.

### 2.21. The New State deſcribed.

LO here a Glorious Realm ſubverted ſtands,

Juſt Tumbler-like upon the Feet and Hands:

Once Europes Pride and Envy, now their Scoff,

Since the baſe Entrayles cut the Head on't off,

The Body loſt its form, and's turn'd a Lump;

Now all the Limbs are Vaſſals to the Rump,

Which all the Nutriture devour'd and ſpent,

Yields nothing back but ſtink and excrement,

And all returns that ever this doth ſend us,

Serves only to defile us and offend us;

'Tis by much pamparing grown a ſtrange Diſeaſe,

Which all receives, and gives nor food nor eaſe

To th' pining Body, but is craving ſtill;

And we by feeding it our ſelves do kill;

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=241)Which
nothing lives by that has any worth,

But thoſe baſe vermin which its ſtink brought forth.

If every Member in this Body would

Withdraw its ſtrength and influence, as they ſhould,

This naſty Highneſs quickly muſt abate,

And yield to th' Head which only ſaves the State.

### 2.22. The Devills Arſe a Peake: or, Satans beastly part, or in plain
terms, Of the Poſteriors and Fag-end of a Long Parliament.

To be ſaid or ſung very comfortably. To the Tune of Cook Laurel.

O Fooliſh Brittanicks, where are your hearts fled?

What fiend doth the Nation bewitch;

That ſince you like Rogues cut off your own Head,

Your Noſes cloſe in with the Britch?

The Britch! ſuch a bit, Nolls paunch could never brook,

For it put him ſtill to his dumps;

And though full meals of Hell-broth he oft took,

Yet alwaies he ſpew'd out the Rumps.

Till Lambert the Knave and Fleetwood the fool

(Though Dick perſwaded them from it)

Did overturn the Devils Cloſe ſtool,

And like Dogs return to their Vomit.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=241)No ſooner
the Councel Table was ſpread

With many a vomited gull

But the Army turn'd ſqueazie and turned their Head,

For they ſoon had their Belly full.

The Red-coats could never this Rumbling digeſt,

Till advis'd by Old nick and his train,

(Who good unwittingly oft may ſuggeſt)

They ſpew'd up their Vomit again.

Their Surreverence was for a while out of ſight,

Till Whettam began to deplore 'um,

And Arthur the Knight of the Spur a bold wight,

The Rump of a Rump did reſtore 'um.

Then a pox light on the pittifull Rump,

That a third time above board vapers,

Which Old Nick blew out; but now turns up Trump,

As Jone farted in and out Tapers.

The Houſe by this Legion was long time poſſeſt,

But at laſt they were caſt out of dore;

Yet finding it ſwept, returned a new gueſt

Seven-times more a fiend than before.

Away then ye pittifull Citizen ſlaves,

Who let ſuch enormities paſs,

Were you but true men or but errant Knaves,

Fools durſt not you ride like an Aſs.

Then dare to be Honeſt, and beat up your Drum,

For when the Rogues hear of your power,

You'll ſmell what a ſcent proceeds from the Bum,

From Whitehall, at leaſt to the Tower.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=242)

S' foot! what if theſe Arſ-worms with gifts of our gold

Great George to defend them ſhould move

Our goods & our Liberties, then would be ſold,

And the Devil a Monk would he prove.

Then pluck up your Spirits, and draw out your Swords,

'Tis force that muſt only prevail,

We have long enough ſtood out in bare Words,

Let's now make a ſtod for their Tayl.

Then Vive le Roy let's merrily Sing,

Can any Man well in his Wits,

Think worſer of Charles our Noble good KING,

Than thoſe who do govern by Fits?

Search round the great City what ill you can ſee,

Which the Raſcally Rump hath not done,

And then you will wiſh with the Nation and me,

That CHARLES had his Heritage won

For Swearing, Sacriledge, Murther, and Lyes,

KING-Killing, Hypocriſy, Cheats,

They make no more of theſe Sins, then of Flies,

HELL is almoſt out-damn'd by their Feats.

Then fight ye like men for the good of the Nation

As ye hope to be civilly Drunk,

On free coſt at bleſſed CHARLES Corona­tion,

Pray hard for the truneſſe of Monk.

Heaven bleſs our good Soveraign, the beſt of all Men,

Let the King of our Hearts be Trump,

That Peace and Proſperity may come agen,

Squire Dun and Old Nick take the Rump.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=242)

Then let the Knaves ſhuffle three Kingdoms a­while

Till each Curr at his Fellow ſnarles,

Ere long they will Cut, and after the Broyle

The Dealing muſt fall to KING Charles.

This Flap with a Fox-tail ſhall have the ſame lot,

That unhorſt his Tumble-down Highneſs,

For ſince the reſt of the Members are not,

The Rump muſt ſhortly have FINIS.

### 2.23. The Committee of Safety.

HEard ye not of the Phanatick Committee

Of Safety, whom London that ſtiff-necked Citty

Profanely diſturbed, and was not that pitty?

Oh bleſſed Reformation.

This gallant Committee made up of a crue

Of three and twenty bad men and untrue,

Would have made both our Church & our State for to rue.

Still bleſſed Reformation.

Charles Fleetwood is firſt and leads up the Van,

Whoſe counterfeit Zeal turns Cat in the pan,

And dame Sankey will ſwear he's a valiant man.

Oh, &c.

John Lambert at Oliver's Chair doth roare,

And thinks it but reaſon upon this ſcore,

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=243)That
Cromwell had ſitten in his before.

Still, &c.

Desborough's a Clown, of whom it is ſed,

That to be a States-man he never was bred,

For his Shoulders are far better proof than his Head.

Oh, &c.

But whatever he wants is ſoundly made up

By ſubtle Sir Vane, who would bring us to ſup

Large draughts from the whore of Babylon's cup.

Still, &c.

And under the arm of that masked Turk

Little Bennet creeps in to help on the good work,

And by voting down Tithes to reform the proud Kirk.

Oh, &c.

The Tobacco-man Salway with a heart full of gall

Puff-down Bells, Steeples, Prieſts, Churches, & all

As old ſuperſtitious Relicks of Baal.

Still, &c.

Holland the Link-boy's a worſhipfull Wight,

For he muſt ſtand by to hold them a Light

While they do their works of darkneſs and night.

Oh, &c.

Next Steel the Recorder, whoſe politick Noddle

With Out-landiſh Notions of State doth ſtill quoddle,

Would here introduce the Venetian Moddle.

Still, &c.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=243)

Brandriffe a harmleſs and innocent Pigeon

Moſt zealouſly moves, that each ignorant Wigeon

May have leave to profeſs and own any Religion.

Oh, &c.

Wat Strickland him ſecond's that furious Ram,

And ſwears that when firſt to Holland he came,

All Sects were permitted in Amſterdam.

Still, &c.

Whitlock that miſchievous dangerous Elf

Never ſticks to turn ſides to promote his own Wealth,

And hath Wit enough, Law enough to damne himſelf.

Oh, &c.

Ludlow's a Saint of the Levelling mold,

And of courage undaunted, for Faith makes him bold,

Since the fort at Duncannon is his ſtrong hold.

Still, &c.

Thompſon a Perſon of noted affection,

Though ſuſpected as guilty of much circum­ſpection,

Yet is one of this Gang for the Peoples correcti­on.

Oh, &c.

Jeſuitical Berry can hardly afford

A Gown-man to preach, but will make us accord,

That Mars hath beſt right to the two-edged ſword.

Still, &c.

Poor Sidenham would preach and pray too if he could,

But finding he cannot perform what he would,

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=244)He is
bent and reſolv'd ne're to do what he ſhould

Oh, &c.

At Preſident Laurence let none dare to ſcoff

Or abuſe his grave Sermons, to call them riff raff,

Hee's a Father of England, and the Horſe-men thereof.

Still, &c.

Lord Hughſon the Cobler's teeth greedily chatter

To carve up a Prentice's Head in a Platter,

For he will go through-ſtitch with the whole matter.

Oh, &c.

John Clark in his haſt is all lightning and thunder,

To break all Demuries and weak Scruples aſun­der,

While his fingers do itch at the Cities rich plun­der.

Still, &c.

No marvel that Lilburn is one of this Train,

As frantick as any, and as croſſe in the grain,

For Robin inherits his Brothers mad Brain.

Oh, &c.

The Mountain did travel and bring forth of late,

What was't but a Mouſe? and Sir Harrington's pate

Is pregnant with formes of the Utopian State.

Still, &c.

What? A Scotch Rook among all theſe Engliſh Jack-dawes,

The Laird Warriſton's in for the Gude Old Cauſe,

To ſubvert all Proprieties, Charters and Laws.

Oh, &c.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=244)

A brace of ſage Aldermen act in the Play,

Ireton and Titchburn who faithleſly may,

The Londoners Counſells and Plottings betray,

Still, &c.

So here's a Committee of Safety compounded

Of Knave and of Fool, of Papiſt and Roundhead,

On Baſe's of Treaſon and Tyranny grounded.

Oh, &c.

Theſe did their Proteſtant Soveraign kill,

Theſe glory'd the bloud of the Nobles to ſpill,

And trampled on Parliaments at their own will.

Still, &c.

Theſe were the Carbuncles of Oliver's Noſe,

And the Rump's ſtinking excrements as we ſup­poſe

Bound up in the linings of Atkins's Hoſe.

Oh, &c.

Tredeskin himſelf never had ſuch a Show

As this Knack, which would all our Rights o­verthrow,

And Caligula-like ſlay three Lands at a blow.

Still, &c.

What Reſolves and what Orders were paſt I ſhan't tell,

Nor will any longer on this Subject dwell,

E're now an Account is given in Hell,

Where they'l make a new Reformation.

For Monck charm'd the Goblin, and packt it a­way

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=245)To its
propereſt Place, with black Pluto to ſtay,

For which let true Engliſh-men joyfully ſay

St. George wrought the true Reformation.

### 2.24. The GANG or the Nine Worthies and Champions, Lambert, &c.

To the Tune of Robinhood.

IT was at the Birth of a Winters morn,

With a Hey down down a down down,

Before the Crow had piſt,

That nine Hero's in ſcorn

Of a Parliament forlorn,

Walkt out with Sword in fiſt.

Johnne Lambert was firſt a dapper Squire,

With a Hey down, &c.

A mickler man of might

Was nere in York-ſhire;

And he did conſpire

With Vane Sir Harry a Knight.

Desborough was ſuch a Country Swain,

With a Hey down, &c.

An Eaſter Sun nere ſee;

He drove on a main

Without any brain,

Such a jolt-head Knave was he.

Kelſey was a brave Button-maker;

With a Hey down, &c.

As ever ſet mould upon Skewer;

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=245)And this
Wiſe-aker

Was a great pain-taker,

T' make Lambert's Noſe look blewer.

The devout and Holy Major Creed,

With a Hey down, &c.

I known't of what Faith or Sect,

Had mounted a  [...]teed,

And vow'd he would bleed

'Fore Lambert ſhould be checkt.

Duckenfi [...]ld (Steel was nere ſo true,)

With a Hey down, &c.

And as wiſe as ever was Toby.

Lay in the Pu [...]lew,

The Cock-pit Av [...]nue,

To hinder the Speakers Go-by.

A man of Stomack in the next Deal,

With a Hey down, &c.

Was hungry Colonel Cobbet,

He would eat at a Meale

A whole Common-weale,

And make a Joynt but a Gobbet.

The following Champion is Barrow,

With a Hey down, &c.

An Ominous name for a Swine-Herd,

He flew like an Arrow,

Thither whence Lord Harry

But durſt not draw his Whinyard.

Room for Packer a toyling Ditcher,

With a Hey down, &c.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=246)He had
ſet his Spade an edge,

He hop't to be Richer

By being a Bricher

And Lambert his Stake in the hedge.

For Nobilities ſake we may not forget,

With a Hey down, &c.

That Valiant Mars his true Son,

His Cobling Feat

Lackt a Parliament Seat

That Marks-man one-eyed Hewſon.

Theſe being aided with Red Coat and Creepers,

With a Hey down, &c.

After a ſhort Diſpute

The Liberty Keepers,

Were made Boo-peepers,

And the Speaker ſtrucken Mute.

But well ſaid Sir Arthur, what time of the day?

With a Hey down, &c.

The Parliament's now in the Prime

They ſtand at a Bay,

And have miſt their Prey,

And Cowardly curſe the time.

### 2.25. The Second Part.

NOw Johnne is gone to the North Countrey,

With a Hey down, &c.

And glad he is to retire,

He cryes Cramme O Cree,

Have mercy on me

[...] ſet a-Fire.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=246)And
Desborough gotten into his Farm,

With a Hey down, &c.

Untill they do him need,

'Meant the Houſe no harm,

But took it for a Barn,

His Lord and hee's not agreed.

Kelſey is praying for the Dole,

With a Hey down, &c.

Of the Hoſpital that's Suttons;

He is out of the Roll,

And hath ne're a Loop-Hole,

And now his Arſe makes Buttons.

And Creed will now believe Sir Arthur,

With a Hey down, &c.

His Steed is Chopt for a Jade,

He will be a Carter

Before a Martyr,

And is turned Regenade.

Duckenfield's in a pittifull Caſe,

With a Hey down, &c.

The Speakers Horſes and Coach,

Were at ſtake with the Mace,

And he's thrown Aums Ace,

Tyburn owes him a reproach.

By being too greedy Colonel Cobbet,

With a Hey down, &c.

Ha's got a Bone in his throat,

He hath ſighed and ſobbed

And grievouſly throbbed,

But it will not help the Choak.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=247)

Pray take your turn too Mr. Barrow,

With a Hey down, &c.

What think you of your Plot?

Your Sow will not Farrow,

The Hang-man's Harrow,

That Hurdle will be your Lot.

Tye him up DƲN, 'tis Goodman Packer,

With a Hey down, &c.

That would ſet up another Noſe,

Had he been a Backer

As Colonel Hacker,

H'ad liv'd in ſpight of his Foes.

H [...]ſon's Companions as ſcabby a [...] Coots,

With a Hey down down a down down.

Have infected him with the mange,

They have piſt in his boots,

He muſt cry roots,

And TƲRN OƲT to Turnup muſt change.

### 2.26. Vanity of Vanities, or Sir Harry Vane's Picture.

To the Tune of the JEWS Corant

HAve you not ſeen a Barthol'mew Baby,

A Pageant of policy as fine as may be,

That's gone to be Shown at the Mannor of Raby,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=247)

There was never ſuch a proſtitute Sight,

That e're profan'd this purer Light,

A Hocus Pocus juggling Knight,

Which, &c.

He was taken for a Delphick Tripus,

Another doubt-ſolving Oedipus,

But the Parliament made him a very Quibus,

Which, &c.

His cunning State tricks and Oracles,

His lying Wonders and Miracles,

Are turned into Parliament Shackles,

Which, &c.

Goodly great Sir Oneſimus VANE,

The Annointed King of Saints not Reign?

I ſee all Godlyneſs is not Gain,

Which, &c.

John a Leyden that Munſter's Jing,

Was a Fool and an Aſſe to this pretty Thing,

But the Parliament hated the name of a King,

Which, &c.

This holy Saint hath pray'd till he wept,

Propheſied and Divin'd while he ſlept,

But fell in a T — when aſide he ſtept,

VVhich, &c.

He ſate late in the Houſe ſo diſcontent,

With his Arms folded and his Brows bent,

Like Achitophel to the Parliament,

Which, &c.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=248)

He durſt not ſpeak of a Concubine,

Nor gave more Councel to any Deſign,

But was muſing on a Hempen Line,

Which, &c.

He ſee Mr. P — take a great deal of Pain,

To get in with the reſt as Members Again,

But they were Voted as uſe-leſs as VANE ▪

Which, &c.

They gave him a Conge with ſuch a Vote;

'Twas thought they had learned it by Rote,

Ever ſince he went down to Graves-end by Bote.

Which, &c.

For all his Ceremonious Cringing,

He ſhall undergo a notable Swinging,

There is now no more need of his Engine,

Which, &c.

When firſt the Engliſh War began

His Father was a Court Trepan,

And 'roſe to be a Parliament Man,

Which, &c.

So from the Father came unto the Son,

Whom wo and Mis'ry now do wait upon,

For Counſelling Protector John,

Which, &c.

A Gemini they were, Pollux and Caſtor,

One was a Teacher, the other a Paſtor,

And both like R — betrayed their Maſter,

Which, &c.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=248)

The Devil ne're ſee ſuch two Sir Harry's,

Such a peſt'lent pair nor near nor far is,

No not at the Jeſuites Sorbon of Paris,

Which, &c.

They talkt of his having a Cardinals Hat,

They'd ſend him as ſoon an old Nun's Twat;

For turning in pan there was nere ſuch a Cat,

Which, &c.

His dainty project of a Select Senate,

Is Damned for a blaſphemous Tenet,

'Twas found in the budget ('tis ſaid) of Monk Bennet,

Which, &c.

Of this State and Kingdom he is the Bane,

He ſhall have the reward of Judas and Cain,

And 'twas he that overthrew Charles his Wain,

Which, &c.

Should he ſit where he did with his miſchievous brain,

Or if any his Councels behind do remain,

The houſe may be called the Labour in Vain,

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=249)

### 2.27. The Glory of the WEST, or, The Tenth Renowned WORTHY, and moſt
Heroick CHAMPION of this BRITISH ISLAND. Being an unparallel'd Com­memoration
of General MONK'S coming towards the City of LONDON.

TO unperplex the Riddles of our State,

And to diſcover t'us our hidden part,

Welcome (we cry) Welcome to George the Great,

A joyfull ſight to ſee.

Not like the Macedon's impatient ſword,

That ſolv'd the doubt tyed in the Gordian Cord,

Great George doth time proportion due afford,

A joyfull, &c.

Wiſdoms great pattern bred at Bellonaes Breſt,

Prudence and Valour joyned in one Reſt▪

No more St. George ſhall be but George the Bleſt,

A joyfull, &c.

As Caeſar did the affrighted Boat-man learn,

When he ſate trembling at the ſtinking ſtern,

My fates Embarqued that do's the world con­cern,

A joyfull, &c.

So the wrackt Veſſel of the ſtate diſtreſt,

With Heav'ns angry blaſts, now ſeeks for reſt,

From the Favonian Gales of George o'th' West,

A joyfull, &c.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=249)

His great excelling merits in the Scale,

Of our rais'd hope, nor ſhall the angry Taile,

Of any Comet 'gainſt our peace prevail,

A joyfull, &c.

Another Fabius, whoſe wiſe delayes

(Like a miſty morn, guilt with the Suns noon'd rayes)

Have Crown'd him with the Glorious Bayes,

A joyfull, &c.

He that has marched quite three Kingdoms o're,

Subdu'd his great mind for to make them four,

The ſigns to bring peace and plenty to our door.

A joyfull, &c.

Let all antient Glory then be a Romance,

Let old Fame, and craz'd Time, lye in a Trance,

Nothing new but Hony Soit qui maly penſe,

A joyfull, &c.

This is the Noble Champion of the Garter,

The Great Defender of the Magna Charter,

The Soveraign Good came from the Northerne Quarter,

A joyfull, &c.

To ſettle a Nation without any Blowes,

To break down the Bridge of another Noſe,

To do what all wiſh, but no body Knows,

A joyfull, &c.

To compleat a Deſign without any Noyſe,

To amuſe the Loud cry of Vive le Roys,

And ſport all along with your Common wealth toys,

A joyfull, &c.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=250)

But all the grand Hero's and wiſe ones together,

None had ſuch advantage of Wine and Weather,

'Tis true he's ſprung of a Princely Feather,

A joyfull, &c.

Where ſhall we begin his Trophees to raiſe?

Or when ſhall we make an end of his praiſe?

The bleſſing and honour and joy of theſe dayes.

A joyfull, &c.

The untam'd Scot (before his glorious time)

Has made t'expiate their treacherous crime,

They own him ſole Conqueror of their Clime,

A joyfull, &c.

His great and moſt powerfull Influence.

Ha's reſtrain'd them in their Obedience,

As if they own'd the Vice-roy of their Prince,

A joyfull, &c.

The ſhifting Iriſh 'bey'd his great command,

The ſlaughtered Dutch, yet rowling on the ſand,

Crave a reflux, to keep them from his hand,

A joyfull, &c.

Thrice did he Victory over them repeat,

And the almoſt wearied State were forc'd to treat

To ſave them from a final laſt defeat,

A joyfull, &c.

Whether we conquer'd are, or we muſt ſubmit,

By his all-powerfull hand to them that ſit,

We are ſure to be eas'd of our preſent fit,

A joyfull, &c.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=250)

What if great George ſhould come to the City,

And in all your good humours ſhould preſently fit ye,

And I hope he will do; elſe more is the pity.

A joyfull ſight, to ſee.

### 2.28. The City of LONDON'S New Letany.

To the Tune of the Black-Smith.

FRom Rumps that do Rule againſt Cuſtomes and Laws,

From a fardle of Fancies ſtil'd a Good Old Cauſe,

From Wives that have nails which are ſharper than Claws,

Good Jove deliver us all.

From men who ſeek Right where it's not to be had,

From ſuch who ſeek good where all things are bad,

From wiſe men far worſe than fools or men mad.

Good Jove, &c.

From Soldiers that wrack the poor out of dores,

From Rumps that ſtuff Coffers to pleaſure their Whores,

Which they ſecretly ſqueeze from Comm [...] ­wealth ſcores,

Good Jove, &c.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=251)

From Ingroſſers of wealth to lye by their walls,

Which they force from poor women for keeping of Stalls,

And chooſe for to riſe by other mens falls.

Good Jove, &c.

From Knaves that doe pocket good Subjects E­ſtates,

From ſuch that give Plaiſters when they've bro­ken our Pates,

From Rumps that do Vote down our Poſtes, Chaines and Gates,

Good Jove, &c

From States-men that Court the Thing that they hate,

From wofull Repentance that comes too late,

From thoſe that delight in making of bate,

Good Jove, &c

From Souldiers who mutiny for want of their pay,

And at laſt go ſneeking without it away,

Crying, they hope for a far better day,

Good Jove, &c.

From one who brought Forces to fill up the Town,

That when Rumps were at higheſt he might pull them down,

Becauſe he himſelf doth aim at the Crown,

Good Jove, &c.

From Commanders who never drew ſwords but in Schools,

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=251)Which
were button-pointed to favour ſuch fools,

Who in vapouring words do threaten Joynt ſtools,

Good Jove, &c.

Who to looſe drop of blood would faint at the heart,

And in dread of a Gun are ſcar'd at a Fart,

If one blows but his Noſe it makes them to ſtart.

Good Jove, &c.

Who think every bruſh of wind an Alarm,

To which they make ready and cry out Arm, Arm,

Yet ſecretly pray that there may be no harm,

Good Jove, &c.

From a City that lyes on its back to be Gelt,

From thoſe that won't ſtir till famine be felt,

From the Pike, the Gun, the Sword, and the Belt,

Good Jove, &c.

From a ſimple Maior not fit to Rule Hoggs,

From ſuch as obey him like Spannel Doggs,

From Summers heat and from winters Foggs,

Good Jove, &c.

From Country Petitions and Declarations,

That will not be drawn one inch from thei [...] ſta­tions,

But triumph in words for old Reformations.

Good Jove, &c.

From Apprentices valour and threats from the City,

Which would Act great Wonders, yet forbear in pitty,

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=252)From
Fools that conceit themſelves very witty,

Good Jove, &c.

From Oaths and Engagements impoſed by force,

And broken as faſt without any remorſe,

Alleadging them Ceremonies of courſe,

Good Jove, &c.

From thoſe whoſe damn'd actions with Treaſon are Crown'd

From ſuch that would Law and Goſpel con­found,

And vow that the City they'l burn to the ground,

Good Jove, &c.

From People that murmur with Swords in their hand.

And keep an entreating when they may command,

Yet had rather looſe all than Knaves to withſtand,

Good Jove, &c.

From Rumps that the Kingdoms Revenue have ſpent,

From an everlaſting Parliament,

And from an Army full of diſcontent,

Good Jove, &c.

From ſuch who do courteſies with a long pauſe,

From thoſe who condemn before they hear the Cauſe,

And from Trades that are worſe than picking of ſtraws,

Good Jove, &c.

From a Foes mercy when one lyes in his power,

From a Friends anger in an ill hour,

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=252)And from
a Fool that's Lieutenant of the Tower.

Good Jove, &c.

From men who make uſe of their Friends in the nick,

And when the Brunt's over againſt them do kick,

The thoughts of ſuch Varlets do make my Muſe ſick.

Good night good people all.

### 2.29. The RUMP ſerv'd in with a Grand Sallet: or, A New Ballad.

To the Tune of the Black-ſmith.

1.

POetical Muſes have fallen heavy as a Mallet,

Upon the poor Rump for diſguſting their Pallet,

To cure the diſrelliſh take now a Grand Sallet,

Which no body can deny.

2.

This RƲMP is deriv'd by lineal deſcent,

As the undoubted Heir, and excrement,

Of the yet perpetual Parliament,

Which, &c.

3.

This was ſuch an Idol, as the Z [...]alots did ſtrain

Their Purſes and Conſciences for to maintain,

Though it prov'd both of Church and Kingdom the bane.

Which, &c.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=253)

4.

The tail of the Dragon's not ſo bad as this Rump,

Which hath three ſuch Kingdoms worn to the very ſtump,

And muſt leave them for the time a confuſed Lump,

Which, &c.

5.

Our Lawes, Lives, Lands, Liberties, were upon ſale,

By this everlaſting Rump, Fag-end or tail,

Yea to ſave our very Souls they refus'd to take bail.

Which, &c.

6.

A Tail which was eaten up almoſt of the Pox,

That ſtunk more like Carrion, than ever did Fox,

Or that which was roſted of late at the ſtocks.

Which, &c.

7.

A Rump that the People did hate, ſcorn, and curſe▪

As a Devil incarnate, or of ſomething that's worſe,

Of Schiſm and Rebellion both Mother and Nurſe,

Which, &c.

8.

The Othodox Cler [...]y was forc'd for to fly,

They were plundred and ſequeſtred without reaſon why,

But only becauſe they would not comply,

Which, &c.

9.

Then as guilty of Popery the Common-prayer-book was damn'd,

And with all kind of News-books the Churches were cram'd,

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=253)Venting
lyes, non-ſence, blaſphemy, and what's not to be nam'd.

Which, &c

10.

Then the Antient Order of Biſhops went down,

Which in the Church Chriſtian was ever of Re­nown,

The Proverb proves true, No Miter, No Crown,

Which, &c.

11.

In whoſe ſtead we planted Elders and Presbyters,

Which impowr'd, brake Princes and People in fitters,

And with their Claſſes and Aſſes them all to be­ſquitters,

Which, &c.

12.

They call'd then a Synod which ſcarce could a­gree.

I'th' ſpace of three years whether there be a TRI­NI [...]Y,

From ſuch pur-pure-blind Levites God bleſs you and me,

Which, &c.

13.

That Aſſembly was juſt like the Members that choſe it,

Without Learning and Honeſty, all the World knows it,

Fit Jakes-farmers for the Rump, they could twang and noſe it,

14.

They combin'd with the Scots to bring in a Direc­tory,

Tending neither to our Good, nor yet to Gods Glory;

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=254)'Tis a
ſhame that Tom Fuller ſhould name't in Church-ſtory,

Which, &c.

15.

For whereas a Chriſtian ſhould be taught how to pray,

And both rightly to believe, and humbly to obey,

Nor Lords prayer, nor Creed, nor Decalogue have they,

Which, &c.

16.

Then curſe ye Meroz, in each Pulpit did thunder,

To perplex the poor people and keep them in wonder,

Till all the Reins of Government were broken quite aſunder,

Which, &c.

17.

Then St. Pauls the Mother-Church of this City and Nation,

Was turn'd to a Stable, O ſtrange Profanation!

Yet this was one of their beſt fruits of Reforma­tion.

18.

Of all that is Chriſtan they make no great matter,

So they may but gather they care not who ſcat­ter;

Their Tryers would approve none but ſuch as bribe and flatter,

Which, &c.

19.

Inſtead of an Ʋſe of Divine Conſolation,

Theſe Hypocrites publiſht a late Exhortation,

To trepan and beggar this City and Nation,

Which, &c.

20.

If they be eſtabliſh [...] bid England farewell,

And rather than dwell here i'th' Suburbs of Hell,

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=254)Chooſe
Turkey, or Tartary, or any where to dwell,

Which, &c.

21.

This form will ne're ſuit with the Engliſh Com­plection,

Which is free and too Heroick to yield baſe Sub­jection,

Or to take from a Pope in each Pariſh correction,

Which, &c.

22.

Who ever did Lord it like theſe ſelf-ſeeking Elves,

Which have forc'd us on covenants, vows, oaths, and other ſhelves,

That ſhould warn us for the future to look to our ſelves,

VVhich, &c.

23.

All ſober men know that 'tis a miſchievous fate,

A Kingdom to turn into a popular State,

And Epiſcopy into a Presbyterate,

VVhich, &c.

24.

Yet the Parliament ſet  [...] the pure Members five

Both of Church and  [...]ngdom, the downfall to contrive,

That by the Ruines o [...] our Sion this their Babel might thrive,

VVhich, &c.

25.

The Presbyters 3\. years were long ſince expir'd,

And yet, as if they had not our patience quite tir'd,

To ſpur-gall us ſtill afreſh they have conſpir'd,

VVhich, &c.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=255)

26.

Then why ſo many Bonfires of late in this City?

Why ſuch ringing of Bells, and rejoycing? 'Tis pity

That ye ſhould be ſo gull'd by the Rump, that does out-wit ye,

Which, &c.

27.

For the Houſe is like Hydra, if one head ye kill,

Another ſtarts up, another full as ill;

So, though one Rump is gone, yet another fits ſtill,

Which, &c.

28.

They have altered the ſcean, the people to pleaſe,

Becauſe in commotions they muſt them appeaſe,

We have thus chang'd our bed, but not our diſ­eaſe,

VVhich, &c.

29.

Their ſhifting and ſhuffling is but to decoy us,

While Spiders do ſpin, their Cobwebs annoy us,

If the Houſe ben't ſwept clean, ere long they'l de­ſtroy us,

Which, &c.

30.

If they mean as they talk of a Parliament free,

How comes it that ſuch Qualifications we ſee,

That no one known Royaliſt can choſen be?

Which, &c.

31.

The beſt things corrupted do ever prove worſt,

Then that the next Parliament make amends for the firſt,

Let's chooſe no more Zealots, le [...]t in pieces we burſt,

Which, &c.

32.

For when as the Schiſmaticks i'th' Houſe do prevail

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=255)Then the
head and all the Members are led by the tail,

So that all parts in doing their duty needs muſt fail,

Which, &c.

33.

Let the Militia be ſetled e're you part with your Money,

Elſe you'l find them gall and wormwood whom you took for honey,

And the Souldiers will inſult 'ore as ſoon as they've undone ye,

VVhich, &c.

34.

'Tis believed the 3. Generals, Fairfax, VValler, and Brown,

Are ſorry now for what they once helpt to pull down,

And 'tis hopt they'l redeem it by deeds of Re­nown,

Which, &c.

35.

We are ſenſible now that there is no one thing

Can full ſatisfaction to all Intereſts bring

But onely Charles the ſecond, our known lawfull King,

Which, &c.

36.

Let's dally no longer, but like Britains let's ſtand,

For GOD and KING CHARLES, and the Laws of the Land;

Let's up and be doing, let's do't out of hand.

Which no body can deny.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=256)

### 2.30. Saint George for England.

To the Tune of Cook Laurell.

THe VVestminster Rump hath been little at eaſe,

Of which you have heard enough one would think,

And therefore wee'l lay it aſide if you pleaſe,

For the more we do ſtir in't the more it will stink.

Theſe County reſolves for a Parliament fre [...],

Makes the Rump ſmell worſe than it did of late,

For now it runs down their heels you may ſee,

You may call them our Privy-Members of State.

But why ſhould this Rump deal ſo roughly with Kent?

When England was conquer'd they were ſcot-free,

Muſt they for declaring of all men be ſhent?

But long-tail and bob-tail can never agree.

'Tis much diſputed who Antichriſt is,

I think 'tis the Rump, nor am I in jeſt,

For indeed, although of the number it miſs,

Of this I am ſure 'thas the mark of the Beaſt.

I cannot believe that our General Monck

Intends to protect it, hee's not ſuch a Fool;

For if he were rightly inform'd how it ſtunk,

He never would joyn with ſuch Grooms of the Stool.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=256)

Though't be not whole Antichriſt, 'tis the worſt part,

By it both the Pope and the Turk are out-done,

If it be not the head, nor the feet, nor the heart,

'Tis the Rump of the VVhore of Babylon.

So pocky, ſo ſtinking, ſo cheating to boot,

That he that has got but an eye or a noſe,

Would never beſtride it; Then why ſhould he do't?

And make the poor Devil his ſtallionſhip loſe;

If I might adviſe him, he ſhould not come near it,

The ſcent of that houſe is naught for his Gout,

And for his Army too; he might well fear it,

'Tis enough to infect both his horſe and his foot.

Nor would I wiſh him to come to VVhitehall,

For that hath been an unfortunate place,

From thence Noll was fetch'd, and Dick had his fall:

And George may take heed that it be not his Caſe.

I remember the time when he fought for the King,

And the Cauſe was good though he did not pre­vail:

O let not the Boyes in the ſtreets now ſing,

He was once for the Head, but now for the Tail.

Then George for England ſtrike up thy Drum,

And do they devoir this Rump to deſtroy,

That Noble King Charles the ſecond may come,

And our Streets may eccho with Vive le Roy.

[...]nd if He ſhould come by thy Valour and Might,

In that brave exploit thou'lt have more to brag on,

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=257)Than
e're had Saint George that valiant Knight,

Who reſcued the Maid by killing the Dragon.

Then lay by the thought of a Parliament free,

But firſt bring the King in if you be wiſe,

For without Kings & Lords theres none can be;

'Twill be but a Rump of a bigger ſiſe.

You know how to do it, and needs not much ſchooling,

All that you need to ſay is, let it be done,

Then why ſhould you ſtand delaying and fooling,

You fought for the Father, why not for the Son?

If you do not do't, much honour you'l loſe,

Which He and We mean you, for this We do know,

That in ſpight of the Rump, and all other his Foes,

He will be brought in whether you will or no.

### 2.31. The Hiſtory of the Second Death of the RUMP.

To the Tune of The Parliament ſate as ſung as a Cat.

1.

COme buy my fine Ditty

Of News from the Citty,

As it was told in Devonſhire;

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=257)The Pimp
that whips weekly

Your Breech Politickly

Sells not ſo much truth in a quire.

2.

Tom Kings-man; near undone

With long ſtay in London,

Laſt week to the Country did gallop;

Where he took Cavaliers

With his News by the ears,

As they did the Pot to drink all—up.

3.

Quoth he, I once went

To th' late Parliament,

Whoſe Members (when I had ſeen 'em)

Made me think of a Rat,

That was caught by a Cat,

And eat up the tail, that is venom.

4.

But yet to the ſtump

Of that Poyſonous Rump,

Th' Old Mouth did ſoder in ſeaſon;

And when that was done,

Like a Lay-elder Gun,

It ſtunk at both ends of High Treaſon.

5.

The Monſter did come

Of mere Mouth and Bum,

Moſt cunningly thus compacted,

That if queſtion'd it were,

For miſchief done there,

It might ſwear, 'twas by no body acted.

6.

O' the nature and name

Of each Member that came

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=258)Should I
give a full relation,

Youl'd gueſſe by the ſtink,

That I rak't in the ſink,

And common-ſhore of the whole Nation.

7.

Religions you might

Find all there, but the right;

For through the ſame Sieve they ran,

Which Noll us'd before

To ſift the Houſe o're,

Till nothing was left but the Bran.

8.

But of thoſe they had,

Diviſions being made

By Fortune's hand, (which is uncertain)

Some Members got many,

Some few, ſome not any,

As Nevill complained, and Martin.

9.

Indeed from Uſurpers

They freed us and our Purſe,

And praiſe of thanks had been their hire,

For taking us thean

Out o'th' Frying-pan,

Had they not caſt us into the fire.

19.

For Cromwell they voted

A Tyrant, though rotted,

'Cauſe when they firſt footed their Game,

Hee'd not let them carry

To prey on the Q [...]arry,

But gorg'd himſelf on the ſame.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=258)

11.

And King Olivers Sons,

(Like Prince-playing Whore-Sons,

That on too high parts had ventur'd)

They ſtrip't with a hiſs

Of their State-properties,

And exeunt two Fools as they enter'd.

12.

What elſe they do,

By our Purſes we knew,

As well as that ſcribling Knave Nedham;

Some good Laws they un-did,

And ſome bad they founded,

And ſhortned our Chain for our Freedom.

13.

To quell this fierce Monſter,

A Knight did anon-ſtir,

Who wanted Arms; yet from a Waggon

O' th' Popes hee'd take none,

But from Preſter-John,

And ſo St. George fell by the Dragon.

14.

Then Lambert's Wife chid him,

And (like Cromwell) bid him

Confound it, and mount the Throne Royal,

Your Weapons are long

Quoth ſhe, and as ſtrong,

My ſelf of 'em both have made tryal.

15.

He finds the Anabaptist

For his purpoſe aptiſt,

And treads the ſteps of Knipper Dolin,

He faſts, and he prayes,

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=259)I'th'
new canting phraſe,

As if Heaven were taken with drolling.

16▪

Some Packs he inveagles,

O'th' blood-coated Beagles,

To's party, the Rump-men did ſo to,

And victualled ſo well,

The adjacent fort Hell,

As if they no other would go to.

17.

Little John thus did draw,

'Gainſt th' Out-law,

(Good King) to try who ſhould have thy Deer,

And thus for both poyſons,

A quarrel did riſe once

Betwixt the foul Toad and the Spider

18.

Bold Lambert advanced,

He picquier'd and pranced,

And's Party with ſpeeches did urge on.

But though he and Morley

Did ſnarle and look ſurly,

They cheated the Devil and the Chirurgion.

19.

For ſoon the Red-coat,

(Who'l not fight, but vote)

When Lamberts ſide ſtronger was found,

By (at leaſt) two foot,

And a Trooper to boot,

Did let the Rump fall to the ground.

20.

And with General Lent hall,

The Houſe they o're w [...]natall,

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=259)Religion
and Laws they n'ere ſtood on,

But ſought ſtill to hold,

Ill got Land and Gold,

Which firſt made the Old Cauſe a Good One.

21.

So fell the aged ſway,

Of five Months and a Day,

We yet ſee no Heir apparent,

But from Scabberd pregnant,

Expect Poſthume regnant,

If Midwife Monck kindly take care on't.

22.

The Sword-men addreſs to's,

Pleas, and Manifeſto's,

Which ſhew 'em leſs honeſt than crafty,

Whilſt a Tyrannous crew,

Our dangers renew,

That's call'd a Committee of Safety.

23.

But Fleetwood and Whitlock,

(The Laws cunning Pick-lock)

With Salloway and Vane, two prime Praters,

Loved Treaſon ſo well,

That again to't they fell,

And betray'd ev'n their own Fellow-traytors,

24.

In's villany Bradſhaw,

Of conſtancy made ſhew,

For ſcorning Repentance as fickle,

His life he ſoon ended,

And to hell deſcended,

This of my Faith is an Article.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=260)

25.

Yet Politicus.

(The Devil's Succubus,

To teem for his Commendation)

Advizes us all

To mourn, and we ſhall,

Whilſt that Hell-hound yelps in our Nation.

26.

And now Lambert's Cohorts,

And Monks (which makes wo hearts)

Do ſeem to conteſt, but anon,

We ſhip-wrack't ſhall be,

When they can agree

From what coaſt the ſtorm ſhall fall on.

27.

Whilſt Buff and Red-coats

Are ſanctified notes

Of Chriſt's and his Goſpel's Protectors,

But 'mong themſelves ſolely,

Do they paſs for holy,

As Beſſus and's Sword-men for Hectors.

28.

They that heard this ſtory,

Firſt  [...]ighed, and were ſorry

To hear of poor Englands confuſion,

Then drank a full Bowl

To that Royal ſoul

That muſt ſettle all in concluſion.

Vivat.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=260)

### 2.32. The Arraignment of the DEVIL for ſteal­ing away Preſident Bradſhaw.

To the Tune of, Well-a-day, well-a-day.

2

IF you'l hear news that's ill,

Gentlemen, Gentlemen,

Againſt the Devil: I will

Be the Relator.

Arraigned he muſt be,

For that felloniouſly,

'thout due ſolemnity,

He took a Traytor.

2.

John Bradſhaw was his name.

How it ſtinks, how it ſtinks,

Who'l make with blacker fame,

Pilate unknown.

This worſe than worſt of things

Condemn'd the beſt of Kings,

And what more guilt yet brings,

Know 'twas his own.

3.

Vertue in Charles did ſeem,

Eagerly, eagerly,

And villainy in him

To vye for glory;

Majeſty ſo compleat,

And impudence ſo great

Till that time never met,

But to my Story,

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=261)

4.

Accuſers there will be

Bitter ones, bitter ones,

More than one, two, or three,

All full of ſpight.

Hang-man and Tree ſo tall,

Bridge, Tower, and City-wall,

Kite and Crow, which were all

Robb'd of their right.

5.

But Judges none are fit,

Shame it is, ſhame it is,

That twice ſeven years did ſit

To give Hemp-ſtring dome;

The fiend they would befriend,

That he might in the end

To them like favour lend

In his own Kingdom.

6.

Sword-men it muſt be you,

Boldly to't, boldly to't,

Muſt give the Devil his due,

Do it not faintly;

But as you rais'd by ſpell

Laſt Parliament from hell

Omnipotently.

7.

The Charge they wiſely frame

(On with it, on with it,)

In that yet unknown name

Of Supreme power.

Which ſix weeks hence by Vote

Shall be or it ſhall not,

When Monk's to London got

In a good hour▪

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=261)

8.

But twelve good men and true,

Cavaliers, Cavaliers,

He excepts againſt you,

Juſtice he fears.

From Bar and and Pulpit he

Craves ſuch as do for ſee

Serve all turnes: for hee'l be

Tryed by his Peers.

2.

Satan, y'are guilty found

By your Peers, by your Peers.

And muſt dye above ground,

Look for no pitty.

Some of our Miniſtry,

Whoſe Spirits with yours comply,

As Owen, Caryl, Nye,

For death ſhall fit 'ee.

10.

Dread Judges; mine own limb

I but took, I but took.

I was forced without him

To uſe a Crutch.

Some of the Robe can tell

How to ſupply full well

His place here, but in hell.

I had none ſuch.

11.

Devil, you are an Aſſe,

Plain it is, plain it is,

And weakly plead the caſe;

Your wits are loſt.

Some Lawyers will out-do't,

When ſhortly they come to't,

Your craft, our gold to boot▪

They have ingroſs'd.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=262)

12.

Should all men take their right,

Well-a-day, well-aday,

We were in a ſad plight,

O'th' Holy Party.

Such practiſe hath a ſcent

Of Kingly government;

Againſt it we are bent,

Out of home-Char'ty.

13.

But if I dye, who am

King of Hell, King of Hell,

You will not quench its flame,

But find it worſe:

Confuſed Anarchy

Will a new torment be;

Ne're did theſe Kingdoms three

Feel ſuch a curſe.

14.

To our promotion Sir,

There are here, there are here,

Through ſome confuſed ſtir

Doth the high-road lye.

In hell we need not fear

Nor King, nor Cavalier,

Who then ſhall dominere

But we the Godly?

15.

Truth then, Sirs, which of old

Was my ſhame, was my ſhame,

Shall now to yours be told,

You cauſed his death.

The Houſe being broken by

Your ſelves (there's Burglary)

W [...]ath entered forcibly,

And ſtopt his breath.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=262)

16.

Sir, as our Preſident

Taught by you, taught by you,

'Gainſt the King a way went

Moſt ſtrange and new:

Charging him with the Guilt

Of all the blood we ſpilt,

With Swords up to the  [...]ilt,

So wee'l ſerve you.

17.

For mercy then I call,

Good my Lords, good my Lords,

And Traytors I'le leave all

Duly to end it.

Sir, Sir, 'tis frivolous,

As well for you as us,

To beg for mercy thus,

Our crimes tranſcend it.

18.

You muſt dye out of hand,

Satanas, Satanas,

This our Decree ſhall ſtand,

Without controll,

And we for you will pray,

Becauſe the Scriptures ſay,

When ſome men curſe you, they

Curſe their own ſoul.

19.

The fiend to Tyburn's gone,

There to dye, there to dye.

Black is the North anon,

Great ſtorms will be,

Therefore together now

I leave him and th' Gallow:

So News-man take 'em thou,

Soon they'l take thee.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=263)

### 2.33. The Rota: Or

News from the Common-wealths-Mens-Club,

Written by Mr. Henry Stub;

'Tis better than a Syllybub.

1.

AT Weſtminſter where we take boat,

There on the left hand you may note

The ſign of the Turks Head and Throat.

2.

What Heads and Thoats therein there be,

If you'l have patience to ſee,

Theſe few lines here ſhall notifie.

3.

Here Harrington breeds up his youth

To the diſcover of no Truth,

All Common-wealths-men in good ſooth.

4.

A queſtion here, though nere ſo rude,

Is ſo belabour'd, and ſo rew'd,

And into ſundry pieces hew'd.

5.

If un-reſolved by I, or Not,

It muſt be put to the Ballot.

'Tis Mr. Harringtons own plot.

6.

The fineſt thing that ere was ſeen,

The one ſide white the other green,

And there you muſt put in a Bean.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=263)

7.

Firſt Harrington doth hawk and hum,

And tells a ſtory of old Rome,

Which from his own ſtore never come.

8.

He cites Sigonius and Lampridius,

Authors which to the Club are hideous,

And he in quoting moſt perfideous.

9▪

But there a ſad miſhap befell,

Which much doth grieve me for to tell,

But I am glad it was ſo well.

10.

The learned man ſtood up and ſpoke,

That by two Loſſes he was broke,

His Reputation and his Cloke.

11.

Quoth he, my Reputation

I hear is tumbled up and down

Much like a Foot-ball through the Town.

12.

And for my Cloak, by this good light,

This Raſcal Miles but yeſter-night

With Coffee did it all bedite.

13.

Next Polixfen, that Politician,

Yet ſurely he is no Hebrician,

And (as I take it) a worſe Grecian.

14.

Whom  [...] did ſo fright,

He was not himſelf again that night,

'Twas thought he did himſelf beſhite.

15.

There's Poultney too that man of Law,

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=264)In
Politicks he is but raw,

But prattles more than a Jack-daw▪

16.

Who ſpeaking once of Injuſtice,

Made a diſtinction ſomewhat nice,

It was between a Sin and Vice.

17.

Next comes in Gold that brazen-face,

If bluſhing be a ſign of grace,

The Youth is in a wofull caſe.

18.

Whilſt he ſhould give us Sol's and Ob's,

He brings us in ſome ſimple bobs,

And fathers them on Mr. Hobs.

19.

Nay, he hath got the prettieſt feat,

Monarchs out of the world to beat,

Thus proves they're all a tacite Cheat.

20.

If man in ſtate of nature be,

And one imparts his right to me,

I cheat him of his property.

21.

The like, if many men poſſeſt,

To one gives all their intereſt;

He muſt be deem'd a Cheat at beſt.

22.

We want not an Attorney hight,

Lame Collins (if I name him right)

Oh! 'tis a very learned Wight.

23.

The ſubtleſt man that ere I ſaw,

Did arguments from Scripture draw,

Religion was before the Law.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=264)

24.

If ſo Sir Harrington's miſtane,

Religion doth the Law ſuſtain,

Law property, it is moſt plain.

35.

A Parſon too, of no ſmall note,

His ſenſe as thred-bare are his coat;

And neither of them worth a groat.

26.

The man doth hope in time to be

Chaplain to the Academy;

Hee's fit, for he can ſcarce tell three.

27.

Morley, who thought to have been one

Of the Committee, but was none;

For had he, they'd been all undone.

28.

'Twas well foreſeen, for the wiſe Knot

Thought that the man might have a Plot,

For to have dipped their Ballot.

29.

One in a ſpeech he did reherſe,

'Gainſt the Popes land, he was ſo fierce▪

He cut it off at leaſt in a teirce.

30.

He ſaid he'd quote Authority,

That the full lengsh of Italy

Contain'd but threeſcore miles and three▪

31.

A Cambrobritain here god-wot,

Muſt needs make one of this learned Knot,

But 'twere as good if he were not.

32.

Taf [...] Morgan, God he [...] Worſhip ſave,

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=265)Doth
ſhit among them very grave,

He's no great States-man, but great K—

33.

Laſt, Skinner of his Chair grown proud,

Doth gravely weild the buſie croud,

And ſtill to Orders cries aloud.

34.

To tell you more of Mr. Skinner,

He'd rather talk than eat his Dinner;

Tis that which makes him look the thinner.

35.

But whilſt the Man to Strafford cry'd,

Sir you to Orders muſt be ty'd,

Or elſe you muſt not here abide.

26.

For our courſe here, is not to prate

Of things that do too near relate

To the Affairs of preſent ſtate▪

37.

Speak to the queſtion, it is ſound,

In what of Government the Ground,

Or the foundation may be found.

38.

Strafford with that did lowly bow,

Good Mr. Speaker calm your brow,

And of my Argument allow.

39.

For had your Queſtion any ſenſe,

I ſhould not take the confidence

To give your Worſhip ought offence.

40.

But ſince for non-ſenſe it may paſſe,

To ſpeak to you in Country-Phaſſe,

Your Worſhip is a learned Aſſe.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=265)

41.

Which words he took in ſo much ſcorn,

That nothing elſe would ſerve his turn,

But preſently he muſt adjourn.

42.

Adjourn, quoth Strafford, in a fright,

Are you a Burgeſſe or a Knight?

Sure I ſhall to the Tower to night.

43.

But loe, the worſt of all diſaſters,

A Youth ſtood up, My learned Maſters,

All Governments are much like plaſters,

44.

Plaiſters, quoth Strafford, let me dye;

If not this poor Academy,

H [...]ve not ſome grand infirmity.

45.

And ſince it happens to be ſo,

I may chance be infected too;

Therefore my Masters all, adieu.

Exit.

### 2.34. The Cobler's laſt Will and Teſtament: or, the Lord Hewſon's
tranſlation.

1.

TO Chriſtians all I greeting ſend,

That they may learn their ſouls to amend

By viewing of my Coblers end.

2.

Firſt, to the new Lords I would give all,

But that (like me) they're like to fall,

Though heartleſs Fleetwood has no gall.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=266)

3.

Yet he deſerves this Legacy,

ROPE take you all, well may I cry,

Hou're Murderers as well as I.

4.

And will thus (wry-neck) end your race,

Since wilfulful Murther hath no place

In the late Parliaments Act of Grace.

5.

My Paring-Knife I'le Lambert give,

He may have uſe on't if he live,

For's throat as well as his brow I believe.

6.

But Richard and Harry I have forgot,

Shall I give them my Hammers? No, I will not,

For they did not ſtrike while th' Iron was hot.

7.

Vane take my Bends, and Wilks my Clue,

Atkins my Hoſe of Safforn Hue,

But Gregory ſaith my Clothes are his due.

8.

My Cuſhion will fit Q. Dowager Cromwell,

Whilſt Shipton wifes Propheſie ſhe doth thumb well,

In Chair of State 'twill eaſe her Bum well.

8.

For Oliver thou didſt ſet me on high,

I aim'd not at it, though I winkt of an eye,

Yet I wiſh not now to come thee nigh.

10.

For ſure ere this thou'lt burn with thy Noſe,

Which out of thy Noſtrils Brimſtone throwes,

Would thou wert here to ſinge my Foes.

11.

There is another Lord, that's Rich,

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=266)To cure
the City whoſe fingers did itch:

But only I went thorough ſtitch.

12.

And yet they ſay I was out of my Trade

When as Phlebotomy I Made,

Some Chyrurgion to do't I'de better have paid.

13▪

Ill-looking death turn back thy ſhaft,

If Charon me over Styx ſhould waft,

It would diſgrace our Gentle-craft.

14.

I'th' Good Old Cauſe I traded ſt [...]ll,

But in't my Lordſhip ſmelt ſome ill,

To mend it though, prov'd paſt my skill.

15.

Therefore to Tyburn I muſt ride,

Although it cannot be deny'd,

But that I have lived ſingle ey'd.

16.

And if my Foes will do me right,

They'l ſay, I've ſet the crooked ſtreight,

Why then I am a Man upright.

17.

I wiſh the Jury find it ſo,

John Lilburns Jury would ſay no,

Stitch up the Lord, let the Cobler go.

18.

But 'tis no jeſting matter I trow?

For I can't laugh although you do;

Yet may make a wry-mouth, or ſo.

19

Before, when we debaucht the Nation,

We could have vouch'd our Reformation,

By a day or two of Humiliation.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=267)

20.

Now 'tis not currant Pay, for I

Have wail'd my ſins, and yet they cry,

Hang him, he weeps but with one eye.

### 2.35. The Hangman's last Will and Teſtament, with his Legacy to the Nine
Worthies viz. Col. Lambert, Creed, &c.

I Have lived to ſee ſuch wretchedneſſe,

When none but Honeſty are Crimes,

That my Ropes are turned into Rimes.

I and my Gallows groan.

Things are ſo carried I can't tell how,

There's as many above ſtill as are below,

I have hang'd ſuch in ſhirts as white as ſnow.

I and my Gallows groan.

Oliver he lived by a Plot,

The Parliament ſits ſtill, and why not?

And I fared well by a bow-knot.

I and my Gallows groan.

All my delight was in a Jayl,

My eſtate was got at a Carts tayl,

I know not what theſe people ayle.

I and my Gallows groan.

Oliver he a Coach would drive,

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=267)And was
honey in the Parliaments Bee-hive,

Neither he nor I lov'd a reprive.

I and my Gallows groan.

I wiſh I had had his Protectors reſt,

I'de have laid it an earneſt for a jeſt,

But Sir Harry Vane's worth all the reſt,

I and my Gallows groan.

I have chopt off many a worthy Head,

And thanks to the Sheriffs have been well fed.

But that I can dock muſt never be ſed.

I and my Gallows groan.

Lambert I knew was troubl'd with the yellows,

And more perplexed with his fellows.

Had I liv'd I'de cur'd him at the Gallows:

I and my Gallows groan.

Never was any ſo bad as my Trade,

The Nine Worthies would have made,

As a Drudge before ſomething a Jade,

I and my Gallows groan.

But I had got nothing by the thing,

There's indempnity againſt the ſtring,

But my heir may get by a forward Spring,

I and my Gallows groan.

I ſee John Lilburn at a bar,

And Sir George Booth that man of war,

But could get neither in my Car.

I and my Gallows groan

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=268)

I think the Ordinaries long Prayer,

Hath ſpoyl'd frequenting of my fair.

Till all long-winded R — are there.

I and my Gallows groan.

For half thirteen pence half penny wages

I would have cleared all the Town cages,

And you ſhould have been rid of all the Sages.

I and my Gallows groan.

There was much climbing among the Grandees,

Yet they all I ſee know the wood from the trees,

And all to couſin me of my fees.

I and my Gallows groan.

The High Court of Juſtice was out of uſe.

The Thieves and the Bench had made a Truce,

For want of Authority, a lean excuſe.

I and my Gallows groan.

'Twould vex any body to keep an Axe

As long as there are any Alderman Packs,

Or Deshorough eke with his wide Sacks.

I and my Gallows groan.

That Duckenfield, Packer, and Major Creed,

Of my helping hand ſhould have ſuch need,

When I am not able to do the deed,

I and my Gallows groan.

Lambert would alſo borrow the Block,

As well as my Lady did Olivers Cock,

But like him I muſt patiently bear this mock.

I and my Gallows groan.

[[Page 511]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=268)

Fleetwood alſo lacks ſome of my skill,

And that I can't do't Folks take it ill,

I'de hang um all, if I could have my will.

I and my Gallows groan.

'Tis vain to look for old mens ſhooes,

Elſe I had had Hewſon in a nooſe,

But my Succeſſor won't him looſe.

I and my Gallows groan.

Tyburn was once in mourning clad,

For a great Man, and I alſo very ſad,

A full bunch will make you all glad.

I and my Gallows groan

### 2.36. A Hymne to the Gen [...]le Craft: or Hew­ſon's Lamentation.

To the Tune of the Blind Beggar.

LIſten a while to what I ſhall ſay

Of a blind Cobler that's gone aſtray

Out of the Parliaments High way,

Good people pity the blind.

His name you wot well is Sir John Hewſon

Whom I intend to ſet my Muſe on,

As great a Warriour as Sir Miles Lewſon,

Good people, &c.

Hee'd now give all the ſhooes in his ſhop

The Parliaments fury for to ſtop,

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=269)Whip
Cobler like any Town-top,

Good people, &c.

He hath been in many a bloody field,

And a ſucceſsfull ſword did wield,

But now at laſt is forced to yield,

Good people, &c.

Oliver made him a famous Lord

That he forgot his Cutting Bord,

But now his Thred's twiſted to a Cord,

Good people, &c.

Criſpin and he were nere of kin,

The gentle Craft have a noble Twin,

But he'd give Sir Hughs bones to ſave his skin,

Good people, &c.

Abroad and at home he hath cut many a Hide,

A Dog and a Bell muſt now be his Guide,

They'l laſh him ſmartly on the blind ſide,

Good people, &c.

Of all his War-like valiant Feats,

Of his Calves leather and his Neats,

Let him ſpeak um himſelf when he repeats,

Good people, &c.

I'le only mention one exploit,

For which when he begs, I'le give him a Doit,

How he did the City vex and annoy't,

Good people, &c.

He marcht into London with Red-coat and Drum

During the time we had no Bum,

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=269)Being
right for an Army as a Cows Thum,

Good p [...]ople, &c.

And there he did the Prentices meet,

Who jeered him as he went through the ſtreet,

But he did them very well-favouredly greet,

Good people, &c.

Bears do agree with their own kind,

But he was of ſuch a cruel mind,

He kill'd his Brother Cob. before he had din'd.

Good people, &c.

He ſtrutted then like a Crow in a Gutter,

That no body durſt once more Mutter

The Capon-Citizens, 'gan to Flutter,

Good people, &c.

After he had them thus defeated,

To his old Quarters he retreated,

And was by Fleetwood notably treated,

Good people, &c.

He is for this I hear Indited,

Though the Week before by them Invited,

But Wiſe Men ſay they had as good as Shited,

Good people, &c.

He cares not for the Seſſions a Lowſe,

They reach not a Peer of the other Houſe,

He's frighted to ſee that he is a Parliament chouſe,

Good people, &c.

And now hee's gone the Lord knows whether,

He and this Winter go together,

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=270)If he be
caught he will looſe his Leather,

Good people, &c.

H'ad beſt get him in ſome Countrey Town,

And companie keep with Desbrow the Clown,

You ſee how the World goes up and down.

Good people, &c.

His Coach and his Horſes are gone to be loſt,

He muſt vamp it and cart it and thank thee mine hoſt,

There's no more to be ſaid of an old Toaſt,

Good people, &c.

Sing Hi Ho Hewſon, the State nere went upright,

Since Coblers could Pray, Preach, Govern and Fight,

We ſhall ſee what they'l do now y'are out of ſight,

Good people pity the blind.

### 2.37. The Rump Ululant: or Penitence per force. Being the Recantation of
the Old Ruſty-roguy-rebellious-rampant, and now ruinous rotten-roſted RUMP.

To the Tune of Gerrards Miſtriſs.

FArewell

Falſe Honors, and uſurped Powers farewell,

For the Great Bell

Of Juſtice rings in our affrighted ears.

The Gripes

Or wounded Conſcience far exceed all ſtripes,

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=270)Yet are
ſmall types,

Of thoſe ſharp pains Rebellion juſtly fears.

See how

Th' unmasked people hiſs us out of doors,

And call us Knave.

Becauſe though We, their Servants be,

We made them but our Slaves.

For ſince

We laid the Country waſt like ravenous Boor [...],

They ſeek our bloods,

Our Hands

Becauſe they prize their Liberties,

But to devour their Goods.

We dip'd in Royal blood, to take his Lands

At our Commands,

And made 3. Kingdoms headleſs at one blow.

The ſtrife

We caus'd was chiefly to cut off his life,

With curſed Knife;

He that was Vertues Friend, muſt be our foe made

Religion do our Drudgery to baſe Ends.

But now we find,

They that do ſow pretences, mow

A Harveſt of the wind.

And now

When clamorous vengeance calling for amends

Begins our grief,

Our Friend the Devil, with his Evill,

Can give us no relief.

Go ſearch

All Lands beneath the Suns Star-ſpangled perch,

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=271)

[...]

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=271)

[...]

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=272)You'l
find no Church

Like ours, while reverend Biſhops held the chair.

But thoſe

We know with our deſigns would never cloſe;

And therefore choſe

In their ſteads to ſet up Extempore prayer.

Poached Eyes,

And words twang'd through a whining Lectu­rers Noſe

Did fill our Purſes,

That many have Rings, and better things,

Which now give only curſes.

And thus

Hell was our Text, though Heav'n were our Gloze

And Will our Reaſon,

Religion we made free of Hocus trade,

And voted Loyalty Treaſon.

Since we

With wicked Armes have made the Croſier flee,

Errour is free

To lay her nets, to make weak minds her prize,

All Sects,

Schiſmes curſed Hereſies with ſtubborn necks,

Corrupt our Texts,

And crane up Scripture to maintain their lyes.

You ſee

The crop-ear'd Anabaptiſt ſowing Tares

In every ground,

Though the Plagues of War, wherever they are

The Church and State confound.

So do

The Roman Noſes vend their Popiſh wares,

By twylight ſtill;

And the Quaker half mad, though he looks ſo ſad,

Grinds in the Jeſuites Mill.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=272)Our
Drums

Did drown our Proceſs, and our Writs; our Plums

Bid kiſs our Bums,

We ſent our Laws and Perſons to the Tower;

From whence

To be deliver'd, 'twas in vain to ſence

By talking ſenſe;

No Habeas Corpus in the Court of Power.

The Gown

Did ſtoop the Reverend Velvet to a crew

In ſhort Red-coats,

Who many a day, have made you pay,

For cutting your own throats.

VVe rob'd

The whole of Food to pamper out the few,

Exciz'd your Wares,

And tax'd you round, ſixpence the pound,

And maſſacred your Bears.

But now

Deſpairs black clouds do hang upon our brow,

For all do bow

Their hearts to their true Shepheard,

Charles their King.

And we,

The Wolfiſh Rulers now muſt Subjects be

To deſtiny,

And end our Juncto in a fatal ſtring.

Then learn

All future Traytors by our Tragick doom,

E're 'tis too late,

Leſt when you make Kingdoms to ſhake,

You copy out your fate.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=273)VVe know

Our high affronts to Church and State make Room

For us in Hell;

But yet we'l hope, till the ſad Rope

Sayes bid the VVorld farewell.

Facit indignatio verſum.

### 2.38. The Holy Siſters.

SIx of the Femal ſex, and purer ſect,

Had conference of late to this effect,

How they might change the Popiſh Name of Preaching?

Then quoth the firſt it ſhall be called Teaching.

The ſecond newly warm'd with heavenly Nectar,

Fell to commend the ſacred name of Lecture.

The third not half ſo learned, yet full as wiſe,

Said, ſhe like it beſt to call't The Exerciſe.

Nay, quoth the fourth, the Brethren, as I hear,

Do term it Speaking in Northampton-ſhire.

The fifth with none of theſe yet did accord,

But term'd it purely handling of the Word.

Then, quoth the ſixth (Standing) a name moſt fit;

For Preachers in the Pulpit ſeldome ſit.

For Application then, quoth they, we fear

Our ſelves not ſufficient th'uſe to bear,

Nor to conceive the meaning of ſome man;

Some able Brethren we muſt have, who can,

Being full of Spirit, Miniſter ſupply,

And help 'gainſt our Carnal infirmity;

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=273)Repeat
the Buſineſs, and all faults redreſſe;

Such, who with zeal and heat can fully preſſe

The Point home, that ſo the Caſ [...] being clear,

We may remember't ſweetly many a year.

And though in Concord Frailties we oft fall,

The help of ſuch good men will raiſe us all,

By putting in New ſtrength and life, whereby

Being edified, We grow and fructifie.

Thus the Six Siſters did at laſt conſent,

And ſo departed thence Incontinent.

### 2.39. The Second Part of Saint George for England.

To the Tune of To drive the cold Winter away.

NOw the Rump is confounded,

There's an end of the Roundhead,

Who hath been ſuch a bane to our Nation,

He hath now plaid his part,

And's gone out, like a fart,

Together with his reformation,

For by his good favour,

He hath left a bad ſavour,

But's no matter, wee'l truſt him no more;

Kings and Queens may appear

Once again in our Sphere,

Now the Knaves are turned out of door.

And drive the cold Winter away.

Se [...], Nevil, and Vane,

With the reſt of that train,

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=274)Are into
Oceana fled,

Sir Arthur the brave,

That's as arrant a Knave,

Has Harrington's Rota in's Head,

But hee's now full of cares

For his Foals, and his Mares,

As when he was routed before:

But I think he deſpairs,

By his Armes, or his Prayers,

To ſet up the Rump any more.

And drive the cold Winter away.

I ſhould never have thought,

That a Monk could have wrought

Such a Reformation ſo ſoon;

That Houſe, which of late

Was the Jaques of our State,

Will ere long be a Houſe of Renown;

How good wits did jump,

In abuſing the Rump,

Whilſt the Houſe was preſs'd by the Rabble;

But our Hercules Monk,

Though it grievouſly ſtunk,

Now hath cleans'd that Augaean ſtable.

And drive the cold Winter away.

And now Mr. Prynne,

With the reſt may come in,

And take their Places again,

For the Houſe is made ſweet,

For thoſe Members to meet,

Though part of the Rump yet remain;

Nor need they to fear,

Though the Breeches be there,

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=274)Which
were wrong'd both behind and before,

For he ſaith, 'twas a chance,

And forgive him this once,

And He ſwears he will do ſo no more.

And drive the cold Winter away.

'Tis true there are ſome,

Who are ſtill for the Bum,

Such Tares will grow up with the Wheat,

And there they will be, till a Parliament come

That can give them a total defeat:

But yet I am told,

That the Rumpers do hold,

That the Saints may ſwim with the tyde:

Nor can it be Treaſon,

But Scripture and Reaſon,

Still to cloſe with the stronger ſide.

And drive the cold Winter away.

Thoſe Lawyers o'th' Houſe,

As Baron Wild-gooſe

With treaſon Hill, Whitlock, and Say,

Were the bane of Laws,

And our Good Old Cauſe,

And 'twere well if ſuch were away:

Some more there are to blame,

Whom I care not to name,

That are Men of the very ſame ranks,

'Mongſt whom there is one,

That to Devil Barebone,

For his ugly Petition gave thanks.

And drive the cold Winter away.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=275)

But I hope by this time,

Hee'l confeſs 'twas a crime,

To abet ſuch a damnable crew,

Whoſe Petition was drawn

By Alcoran Vane,

Or elſe by Corbet the Jew:

By it you may know,

What the Rump meant to do,

And what Religion to frame;

So 'twas time for St. George,

That Rump to diſgorge,

And to ſend it from whence it firſt came, &c.

And drive the cold Winter away.

### 2.40. A New Kickſhaw for the queaſie Stomack of Sathan and all thoſe that
fight under his Banner.

To the Tune of Cook Laurell.

YOu pitifull Rimers now be you all dumb;

Let no Dames of the Dunghill ſing Ditties a­bout

St. George and the Dragon, and little Tom Thumb,

With Wallingford Houſe and the Rump are worn out.

Here's an Ola Polidra ſo pleaſant and new,

The Tayle of the State had n'ere ſuch a Hogooe.

With a hey down down, &c.

Come liſten you Cooks and learn my new Diſh,

'Tis that that will fill your Gueſts bellyes with laughter,

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=275)'Tis a
meat neither made of fleſh nor fiſh,

But will make all that taſt it to lick their lips af­ter.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Firſt take you three Farts from the Parliament-Breech,

The head of an Onion to rubb on your Platter,

The Hums and the Ha's of Mr. Scot's ſpeech,

Spoke twice to no purpoſe, and mince not the matter,

Here's an Ola, &c.

Take the Linings of Alderman Atkins his Hoſe,

Some oth' cobling Collonel's Shooe-makers wax,

The juyce of Tichburn's and  [...]reton's Toes,

'Twill ſettle your Stomacks, and ſtrengthen your Backs.

Here's an Ola, &c.

If an Independent Sermon you hear,

Be ſure you take all that is ſpoke to the Text,

Some of my Lord Pride his Zeal for a Fear,

And a Prayer by the Spirit made by that Part comes next.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Take Munſon's chaſte motions towards a Wench,

The Sword of the Spirit handled by Gough,

The fear of the Judges that ſate on the Bench

When the Head of this Iſle by the Tayle was lopt off.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Take all the old Speaker's Honeſty whole;

For if it be leſſen'd 'twill prove little or none;

And, if you have room, you may ſtop up the hole

With the Knighthood and Wiſedom of Sir John his Son.

Here's an Ola, &c.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=276)

Take one of Sir Arthur's paſſionate dumps,

Sir Harry Vane's Harry Vane's hearty Prayers for Monck,

The froth of the Good Old Cauſe worne to the ſtumps.

And modeſt Harry Martins diſcourſe for a Punk.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Of Publick Faith an Ounce if you can get it,

Stew'd well in an Honeſt Committee-mans skull,

Then with the Coales of Hugh Peter's Devotion beat it,

'Twill give all the Devills in Hell Belly full.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Take the Whites of a Puritans lifted-up eyes,

And the Saffron engendred on a Presbyters gums,

Mr William  [...]illye's Aſtrogolical Lyes,

And the meditations of Salloway biting his thumbs.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Of Lam [...]ert's Religion as much as a Nut,

And of his Wive's Honeſty much thereabout,

With the ſpirit that moveth holy Brethren to rut,

And maketh the holy Siſters hold out.

Here's an Ola, &c.

Sow it in an Exciſe-man's Conſcience well fear'd,

And in a French-man's Codpiece 2. hours let it ſtew,

Then ſtrow it o're with a Puritan's beard;

'Tis a Diſh for the Devil and for his Dam too.

Here's Ola, &c.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=276)

But then if it want a Man to ſay grace,

It muſt be done by one that's a Sinner,

An Independent Doctor juſt turn'd out on's place,

Muſt needs be moſt fit to give thanks for this Din­ner.

### 2.41. England's Triumph: or, The Rump Routed by a true Aſſertor of
Englands Intereſt, General George Monk.

A SONNET. To the Tune of, Fill up the Parliament full.

WHat makes the Souldiers

To ſtand to their Arms?

'Tis for what they profeſt,

To keep us from harmes,

The Members ſecluded

Comes in by fwarmes

To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,

To fill up the Parliament full.

You know that the City Gates

Late were thrown down

The Walls too were order'd

By Parliament frown:

But General M [...]nk has pleas'd

Souldier and Gown.

And fill'd up the Parliament full, full, full,

And fill up the Parliament full.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=277)

A diſpute there was had

By the Members ſecluded,

Brave Monk was the Umpire

And found them deluded,

But Englands great joy

Is now wholly concluded:

For he's fill'd up the Parl. full, full, full,

For hee's fill'd up the Parl. full.

Sir Arthur the Valiant

Muſt make his Speech large,

Left the Members Excluded

Lay Treaſon to's Charge.

Hee'd better have dealt

With his New-caſtle Barge,

Than to ſ [...]e the Old P. full, full, full,

Than to ſee the old P. full.

The Aldermen Grave,

And the Commons o'th' City

Impriſoned were,

The more is the pity,

But General Monk ſaid,

That I will acquit ye,

For the P. now ſhall be full, full, full,

For the P. now ſhall be full.

Have you not ſeen

Freſh Flowers in the Spring;

And bave you not heard

A Cage-bird to ſing?

But if the Cage-Members

Would bring in the King.—

It would fill up the Parl. full, full, full,

It would fill up the Parl. full.

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=277)

The Parliament now will

Come into their Geers,

For Secluded P—

(That once loſt his Ears)

Marcht in with his Rapier

For Commons and Peers,

To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,

To fill up the Parliament full.

Whoſe often Declaring

Has furniſht the Nation

With Parliament Arguments

Of the old Faſhion,

And would have both

King, Lords and Peers in this Nation

To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,

To fill up the Parliament full.

Our brave General Monk

We bound are to thank,

The Honeſt Lord Fairfax

Has plaid (too) his prank,

No thanks to be given

To the Rump nor the Shank

To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,

To fill up the Parliament full.

Had the City ne're mov'd,

Nor the Prentices ſtrove,

They'd loſt their Old Charter:

But MONK had a love

To challenge the Grand Ones

Which Miſchiefs did move;

And ſo fill'd up the Parl full, full, full,

And ſo fill'd up the Parliament full.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=278)

### 2.42. The Parliament-Complment: or, the Re-admiſſion of the Secluded
Mem­bers to the Diſcharge of their long retar­ded Truſt.

SInce ſixteen hundred forty and odd,

We have ſoundly been laſhed with our own rod

And we have bowed our ſelves down at a Ty­rants nod,

Which no body can deny.

Whe have ſeen a new thing call'd a Council of State,

U [...]held by a Power that's now out of date,

Put to th [...] Q [...]eſtion, by th' Members of Forty eight,

Which, &c▪

We have ſeen what we hope we ſhall ne'r ſee agin

Now Lambert and Desbrow are ſnar'd in the gin,

The tayl cunningly pieced unto the skin.

Which, &c.

A ſword that has frighted our Laws out of door,

A Back ſword I wot, that muſt cut ſo no more,

By the honou [...] of Monk now quitting that ſcore,

Which, &c.

A Vote lately called the Judgement o' th' Houſe,

To be eſteemed and reputed not worth a Louſe,

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=278)And the
Grandee of Portſmouth made a fine chouſe

Which, &c.

We have ſeen an Aſſeſsment, a thing for Taxes,

Though the Common-wealth wane the private Waxes:

Swords into Plowſhares, and ſuch Bills into Axes,

Which, &c.

Another new ſtory of Qualification,

That belong'd to no honeſt man of the Nation,

Like the ill contrived Authors, quite out of Fa­ſhion.

Which, &c.

Original ſin was damn'd by that Law,

The Son of a Cavalier made a Jack-ſtraw,

To be chewed again by their ravenous Jaw,

Which, &c.

To fill up the Houſe, and to ſhuffle the deal,

New Writs iſſued out, for their new Common­weal,

But it's not worth asking who is't payes the Seal,

Which, &c.

I wonder who payes the late Parliament Printers,

That Place they may hold as many Summers as Winters,

And wiſh their Preſſes were broken in ſplinters,

Which, &c.

A great many Traytors by them lately made,

Makes Treaſon be thought a Common trade,

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=279)Sir
George Booth and Jack Lambert a while in the ſhade,

Which, &c.

We ſhall now ſure give over that word ſequeſter,

Now the tail is cured of that rankling feſter,

The twentieth of April is much about Eaſter,

Which, &c.

How many thanks of the Houſe ha' been idely ſpent

Upon people that ſtill have been Male-content,

But they muſt fall from thoſe dainties in this ſhriving Lent,

Which, &c▪

That honourable favour no more ſhall be given

To the factious merit of a Party Hell-driven,

For now our twenty years odds will be even,

Which, &c.

Then room for our Priſoners detain'd in the Tower,

And away with the new Lieutenants power,

Who's minting the widdowed Good Old Cauſes Dower,

Which, &c.

Sir George Booth ſhall not think this a hit of ſate,

Nor Excuſe his Keeper whoſe Warrant's out 'f date,

We ſhall ſee them all cry Peccavi too late,

Which, &c.

Eleven years Miſchief, tumults and rage,

Are the onely Memorials of this Common-wealths age,

And all to be thankt by Haſl [...]rigg the ſage,

Which, &c.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=279)

Let our Liberty-keepers be chang'd to Restorer,

Let our Peace carry Truth and Duty before her,

Hee's a Fool and a Knave that elſe will adore,

Which, &c.

This Janus-like freedom, though it pleaſe not all,

And averſly doth look on the Scepter and Ball,

Will ſhut up his Temple at next Common-hall,

Which, &c.

Then let's pray to Great Jove, that made Monk ſo kind

To our deſperate eſtate, to put him in mind,

With the reſt of our Worthies of the Great Thing behind,

Which no body can deny.

### 2.43. The Cock-Crowing at the Approach of a Free-Parliament: Or,

Good news in a Ballot,

More ſweet to your Pallat

Than Fig, Raiſon, or stewed Prune is:

A Countrey wit made it

Who ne'r got the Trade yet;

And Mad Tom of Bedlam the Tune is.

1.

MOre Wine Boy; to be ſober

Is ſottiſh in my Opinion,

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=280)When ſo
near we do ſee

The day that will free

Three Kingdoms and a Dominion.

CHORUS. Then off with your Pots, Engliſh, Iriſh and Scots,

And loyal Cambro-Britains,

From Lobſter-like jump

And the Head-playing Rump

You'l ſoon have an Acquittance.

2.

Though Monk's mind lyes not open

To every mind that's buſie,

A Free Parliament

Is his intent,

No Noll, nor Lambert is he.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

3.

A Parliament untainted,

(Away with ſecluded Members:

New flame it might make,

Again to untake,

And ſtir up rebellious Embers.)

Cho. Then off with, &c.

4.

A Parliament of Members

That in Blood and Eſtate are no ſmall Boyes [...]

The deviliſh Rump-elves

Are for none but themſelves,

Thoſe will be (like God) for us all boyes.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

5.

Such a Parliament more happy

Then Fiſhes will create you,

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=280)Though
no trade you do drive

But to tipple and ſwive,

You'l be plump in fleſh and eſtate too.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

6.

A Hound and a Hawk no longer

Shall be tokens of diſaffection,

A Cock-fight ſhall ceaſe

To be breach of the Peace,

And an Horſe-race an Inſurrection.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

7.

The Stages to their Freedom

Shall be reſtored ſoon after,

And Poets like Lictors

Shall ſcourge our Afflictors,

And make our old Suff'rings our Laughter,

Cho Then off with, &c.

8.

W — P — ſhall be the Maſter

O'th' Revells (for's contrition,)

His Hiſtrio-maſtyx

Was one of his raſh tricks,

E'r his early circumciſion.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

9.

We'l preach and pray 'thout canting,

In a Language Heaven knows better▪

Than ah Lord repeating,

And Hum and Ha bleating

With calves of the Lips in the Letter [...]

Cho. Then off with, &c.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=281)

10.

Wee'l no more to enſlave us

Wear Chains, but to boaſt our Riches,

We Lobſters will eat,

And not be their meat,

When the right Rump wear [...] the Breache [...].

Cho. Then off with, &c.

11.

All Nations ſhall adore us,

Stiff Don at our foot ſhall tumble,

The Dutch-men ſhall fear us,

And all to M [...]jn Here us;

And French cry votre tres-humble.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

12.

The Citizens ſhall flouriſh,

Lord Maiors, when the office expires,

Shall a Knight-hood obtein,

If they're not of the ſtrain

Of Exciſe, nor Church-land Buyers.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

13.

This London had effected

E'r now, and honour had got ſo,

But for Knaves Ireton

And Titchburn were known,

When the Drugſter's Son was not ſo.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

14.

Each year ſhall bring a harveſt

To th' Plough-man, who was vext ill

When but every fourth year

By the Tax-Calendar

It came like the Biſſextile.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=281)

15.

His Rent he ſhall pay duly,

Nor to ſpend ſhall he want his groate'r;

His Landlord ſhall be

Of his Beer to him free,

And of's fleſh to his Wife and his Daughter.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

16.

But now my furious fancy

A Project is concocting

When God ſhall have ſent

A true Parliament,

What a Rope ſhall we do with this mocking?

Cho. Then off with, &c.

17.

Like Mare with dock to th' Manger,

To ſhew it no cheat at all is

It like one doth appear,

But it is none, and where

The head ſhould have been, the tail is:

Cho. Then off with, &c.

19.

Or we'l ſend for the Ghoſt of Lorrell,

Who choakt ſo neatly the Peak-feaſt,

And hee'l Carbonado

It with little a-doe,

To make the Devil a Breakfaſt.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

20.

We read of a Rump in St. Auſtin,

That (before this of ours) out-went all,

Which ſounds did let  [...]ly

As articularly,

As if it had a Lenthal

Cho. Then off with, &c.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=282)

20.

But nere poor Rump was firked

Like this by wits, and no wits.

Nor ever was game

So fit as this ſame

To enter and fleſh young Poets.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

21.

More good things I could utter,

But now I find by a token,

That the play will begin,

And good fortune come in

E'r the Prologue be quite ſpoken.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

22.

Charls Wanes's 'ore the new Chimney,

The Suns near our Horizon,

The Fowles of the night

Are taking their flight,

Ere Cheſhire prey they ſeize on.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

23.

Wee'l drink and pray no longer

For the King in myſtical faſhions:

But with Trumpets ſound

His Health ſhall go round,

And our Prayers be Proclamations.

Cho. Then off with, &c.

24.

Now Iockey, Teag, and Shenken,

Shall boaſt no more of St. Andrew,

St. Patrick, or St. Davie,

But St George, who, to ſave 'ee,

'Gainſt Dragon-Rump like a man drew.

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=282)

Chorus. Then off with your Pots, Engliſh Iriſh and Scots,

And loyal Cambro-Britains,

From Lobſter-like jump,

And the Headplaying Rump

You'l ſoon have an Acquittance.

### 2.44. Saint George and the Dragon.

To the Tune of, Old Souldjour of the Queens, &c.

NEws, News: — Here's the Occurrences, and a new Mercurius:

A Dialogue betwixt Haſlerigg the bafled, and Ar­thur the furious:

With Iretons readings upon Legitimate and Spu­rious,

Proving that a Saint may be the Son of a Whore; for the ſatisfaction of the
curious.

From a Rump inſatiate as the Sea,

Libera nos Domine.

Here's the true reaſon of the Cities infatuation:

Ireton has made it drunk with the cup of abomina­tion:

That is, — the Cup of the Whore, after the Geneva interpretation:

Which, with the Juyce of Tichburn's Grapes, muſt needs cauſe Intoxication.

From a Rump, &c.

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=283)

Here's the Whipper whipt—by a friend to George, that whipt Iack, that whipt
the Breech,

That whipt the Nation, as long as he could ſtand over it: — After which

It was it ſelf Re—jerk'd, by the ſage Author of this Speech:

Methinks a Rump ſhould go as well with a Scotch ſpur, as with a Switch.

From a Rump, &c.

This Rump hath many a Rotten and unruly Member,

Give the General the Oath, cryes one; — (but his Conſcience being a little
tender,)

I'll Abjure you, with a Horſe-pox, quoth George,— and make you remember

The 'Leaventh of February, longer than the Fifth of November.

From a Rump, &c.

With that — Monk leaves (in Rump aſſembled) — the three Eſtates.

But oh, —how the Citizens hugg'd him for break­ing down their Gates,

For tearing up their Poſtes and Chaines, and for clapping-up their Mates,

(When they ſaw, that he brought them Plasters for their broken Pates.)

From a Rump, &c.

In truth, this ruflle put the Town in great diſor­der,

Some Knaves (in Office) ſmil'd, —expecting 'Twould go furder;

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=283)But at
the laſt—my life on't, George is no Rumper —ſaid the Recorder:

For there never was either Honest man, or M [...]nck of that Order.

From a Rump, &c.

And ſo it prov'd, for Gentlemen, ſayes the General,

I'll make you amends;

Our Greeting was a little untoward, but we'll part Friends,

A little time ſhall ſhew you which way my Deſign tends,

And that, beſides the good of Church and State, I have no other ends.

From a Rump, &c.

His Excellence had no ſooner paſs'd this Declara­tion and Promiſe,

But in ſteps Secretary Scot, — the Rumps man Thomas,

With Luke, their lame Evangeliſt — (the De­vil keep 'um from us,)

To ſhew Monk what precious Members of Church and State the Bummha's.

From a Rump, &c.

And now comes the Supplication of the Members under the Rod,

Nay, My Lord, (cryes the Brewers Clerk) good my Lord, — for the love of God,

Conſider yourſelf, us, — and this poor Nation, and that Tyrant abroad;

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=284)Don't
leave us:—but George gave him a Shrugg, inſtead of a Nodd.

From a Rump, &c.

This mortal Silence was followed with a moſt hi­deous Noyſe

Of Free-Parliament Bells, and Rump-confounding Boyes:

Crying, Gueld the Rogues, Singe their Tayles — when with a low Voyce;

Fire and Sword, by this Light, cryes Tom, let's look to our Toyes.

From a Rump, &c.

Never were wretched Members in ſo ſad a Plight:

Some were Broyl'd, — ſome Toasted, others burnt out-right.

Nay againſt Rumps ſo Pittyleſſe was their Rage and Spite,

That not a Citizen would kiſs his Wife that Night.

From a Rump, &c.

By this time, Death, and Hell appear'd in the ghaſt­ly Looks

Of Scot, and Robinſon; (thoſe Legiſlative Rooks)

And it muſt needs put the Rump moſt damnably off the Hooks,

To ſee, that when God has ſent Meat, the Devil ſhould ſend Cooks.

From a Rump, &c.

But Providence, their old Friend, brought theſe Saints off, at Laſt,

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=284)And
through the Pikes and the Flames, un-diſmem­bred they paſt,

Although (God wot) with many ſtruglings, and much Haſt.

(For — Members, — or no Members was but a meaſuring Caſt)

From a Rump, &c.

Being come to Whitehall; — there's the diſmal mone:

Let Monk be Damn'd, cryes Arthur, in a terrible tone:

That Traytor: —and thoſe Cukoldly Rogues that ſet him on.

(But, tho' the Knight Spits blood, 'tis obſerv'd that he Draws none.

From a Rump, &c.

The Plague Bawle you, cryes Harry Martyn, you have brought us to this
Condition,

You muſt be canting, and be Pox'd, — with your Bare-bones Petition,

And take in that Bull-headed, ſplay-footed Member of Circumciſion,

That Bacon-fac'd Jew, Corbet: that Son of Perdition.

From a Rump, &c.

Then in ſteps Driv'ling Mounſon, to take up the Squabble:

That Lord; which firſt taught the uſe of the Wood­den Dagger, and Laddle,

He, —that out-does Jack Pudding, at a Cuſtard, or a Caudle.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=285)And were
the Beſt Fool in Europe, but that he wants a Bauble.

From a Rump, &c.

More was ſaid, to little Purpoſe; the next News, is a Declaration

From the Rump; for a Free-State, according to the Covenant of the Nation,

And a Free-Parliament, under Oath, and Qua­lification,

Where none ſhall be Elect, but Members of Repro­bation.

From a Rump, &c.

Here's the Tail Firk'd; a Piece acted lately with great applauſe,

With a Plea for the Prerogative Breech, and the Good Old Cauſe:

Proving, that Rumps, and Members are antienter than Laws:

And that a Bumme Divided, is never the worſe for the Flawes.

From a Rump, &c.

But all things have their Period, and Fate,

An Act of Parliament diſſolves a Rump of State:

Members grow weak; and Tayles themſelves runs out of Date:

And yet thou ſhalt not Dye; (Dear Breech) thy Fame I'll celebrate.

From a Rump, &c.

Here lies a Pack of Cheats, that did their Souls, and Country Sell.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=285)For
Dirt: The Devil was their good Lord; him they ſerv'd well;

By his Advice, they Stood, and Acted; and by his Preſident they fell,

(Like Lucifer) making but one ſtep betwixt Hea­ven, and Hell.

From a Rump inſatiate as the Sea,

Libera nos Domine.

### 2.45. A Free-Parliament Letany.

To the Tune of, An old Souldier of the Queens.

1.

MOre Ballads; — here's a ſpick—and—ſpan new Supplication;

By Order of a Committee for the Reformation,

To be read in all Churches and Chappels of this Nation,

Upon pain of Slavery, and Sequeſtration.

From Fools and Knaves, in our Parliament-free

Libera nos Domine.

2.

From thoſe that ha' more Religion, and leſſe Conſcience than their Fellows;

From a Repreſentative, that's fearfull, and jealous;

From a ſtarting Jadiſh People, that is troubled with the yellows,

And a Prieſt that blows the Cole— (a Turd in the Bellows.)

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=286)

3.

From Shepheards, that leade their Flocks into the Briers;

And then, Fleece 'um. — F [...]om Vow-breakers, and King-tryers:

Of Church and Crown-lands from both Sellers and Buyers:

From the Children of him, that's the Father of Lyers.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

4.

From the Doctrine and Diſcipline of

Sedgewick

now, and anon;

Preſerve us, and our wives: from

Iohn a Nokes.

John T & Saint

Iohn a Styles.

John

Like Maſter, like Man, every way but one:

The Maſter has a large Conſcience and the Man has none.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

5.

From Major Generals, — Army—Officers; and that Phanatique Crew:

From the Parboyl'd Pimp Scot; and from Good-face the Jew:

From old Mildmay, that in Cheapſide miſtook his

Repulſed by a Citizens wife.

Que [...]e,

And from him that wont Pledge— give the Devil his due.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

6.

From long-winded Speeches, and not a wiſe word,

From a Goſpel-Miniſtry ſetled by th' Sword,

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=286)From the
Act of a Rump, that ſtinks when 'tis ſtir'd;

From a Knight of the Post, and a Cobling Lord,

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

7▪

From all the Rich People that ha' made us Poor;

From a Speaker that creeps to the Houſe by a Back-dore:

From that Badger Robinſon, (that limps, and bites ſore:)

And that dog in a doublet Arthur,—that will do ſo no more

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

8.

From a certain Sly Knave with a Beaſtly name:

From a Parl'ment that's wilde, and a People that's tame.

From Skippon, Titchbourne, Ireton, — and a­nother of the Same;

From a Dunghill Cock, and a Hen of the Game.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

9.

From all thoſe that ſate in the High Court of Juſtice;

From Uſurpers, that ſtile themſelves the Peoples Truſtees;

From an old Rump, in which neither Profit nor Guſt is;

And from the recov'ry of that which now in the Duſt is.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

10.

From a back-ſliding Saint, that pretends t' Ac­quieſce;

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=287)From
croſſing of Proverbs (let 'um Hang that confeſs)

From a Sniveli [...]g Cauſe in a Pontifical dreſs:

And two

Jacks both.

Lawyer's, with the Devil,

And his Damm in a meſs.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

11.

From thoſe that trouble the Waters to mend the Fiſhing;

And fight the Lord's Battels, under the Devill's Commiſſion:

Such as eat up the Nation, while the Govern­ment's a Diſhing,

And from a People when it ſhould be Doing ſtands Wiſhing.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

12.

From an everlaſting Mock-Parliament;— and from none;

From Straffords Old friends, — Harry, Jack and John.

From the Sollicitor's Wolfe Law, deliver our King's Sonne:

And from the Reſurrection of the Rump that is dead and gone.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

13.

From Foreigne Invaſion and Commotions at Home,

From our preſent Diſtraction, and from worſe to come:

From the ſame hand again, Smectymnuus or the Bumme:

[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=287)And from
taking Geneva in our way to Rome.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

14.

From a Hundred thouſand pound Tax, to main­tain Knaves and Whores:

(But it is well given to Theſe, that turn'd Thoſe out of Dores)

From undoing our Selves, in plaſtring old Sores:

He that ſet them a work, let him pay their Scores.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

15.

From Saints, and Tender-Conſciences in  [...]uff;

From Mounſon in a Fome; and Haſlerig in a Huff;

From both Men and Women that think they ne­ver have Enough.

And from a Fools Head that looks through a Chain and a Ruff.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

16.

From thoſe that would divide the Gen'ral and the Citty;

From Harry Martins Whore, that was neither Sound nor Pretty;

From a Faction, that ha's neither Brain nor Pitty;

From the Mercy of a Phanatique Committee▪

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

17.

Preſerve us good Heaven from intruſting thoſe,

That ha' Much to Get, and Little to Looſe;

That Murther'd the Father, and the Son would Depoſe.

(Sure they cann't be Our Friends, that are their Countrey's Foes,)

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=288)

18.

From Bradſhaw [...]'s Preſumption, and from Hoyle's Deſpairs;

From rotten Members; blinde Guides; Preaching Aldermen; and falſe May'rs;

From Long Knives, Long Eares, Long Parlia­ments, and Long Pray'rs,

In mercy to this Nation, — Deliver us and our Heirs.

From Fools and Knaves, &c.

Libera nos Domine.

### 2.46. A Dialogue betwixt TOM and DICK: the former a Country-man, the other
a Citizen [...] Preſented to his Excellency and the Council of State, at Dra
­pers-Hall in London, March 28\. 1660.

To the Tune of I'le never love thee more.

Tom.

NOw would I give my life to ſee

This wondrous Man of might.

Dick.

Doſt ſee that Jolly Lad? That's he;

I'le warrant him hee's Right.

There's a true Trojan in his face:

Obſerve him o're and o're.

Dick.

Come Tom; If ever George be baſe,

Chorus

Ne'r truſt good-fellow more.

[[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=288)Hee's
none of that Phantaſtique Brood,

That Murther while they Pray;

That Truſſe and Cheat us for our Good;

(All in a Godly way,)

He drinks no Blood, and They no Sack

Into their Guts will poure.

But if George does not do the Knack,

Cho.

Ne'r truſt good-fellow more.

His quiet Conſcience needs no Guard;

Hee's Brave, but full of Pitty.

Tom.

Yet by your leave he knock'd ſo hard,

H'ad like t' awak'd the City.

Dick

Fool, 'Twas the Rump that let a Fart,

The Chaines and Gates it tore,

But if George bears not a true heart,

Cho.

Ne'r truſt good-fellow more.

Tom.

Your City blades are cunning Rooks;

How rarely you collog [...]e him?

But when your Gates flew off the Hooks,

You did as much be-rogue him.

Dick.

Pug'h— 'Twas the Rump did only feel

The blows the City bore.

But if George ben't as true as Steel,

Cho.

Ne'r truſt good-fellow more.

Tom.

Come, by this Hand, wee'l crack a quart,

Thou'lt pledge his health, I trow.

Tom.

Tope boy, Dick— A luſty diſh my heart,

Away w'ot; Tom— Let it go.

Drench me you ſlave in a full Bowl,

I'll take't and 'twere a ſcore.

Dick.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=289)

Nay, if George be'nt a hearty ſoul,

Cho.

Ne'r truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

But hark you, Sirrah, we're too loud,

Hee'l Hang us by and by.

Me'thinks; he ſhould be vengeance Proud?

Dick.

No more than Theee or I.

Tom.

Why then I'le give him the beſt Blade

That e're the Bilbo wore.

Dick.

If George prove not a Bonny Lad,

Cho.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

'Twas well he came, we'd mawl'd the Tail.

— We've all thrown up our Farms,

And from the Musket to the Flayl,

Put all our Men in Arms.

The Girles had ta'ne the Members down,

Ne're ſaw ſuch things before.

Dick.

If George ſpeak not the Town our own,

Cho.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Dick.

But prethee, are the Folk ſo mad?

Tom.

So mad ſay'ſt? — They're undone,

There's not a Penny to be had,

And ev'ry Mothers Son

M [...]ſt fight, if he intend to eat,

Grow Valiant now he is Poor.

Dick.

Come—yet if Geore don't do the feat,

Cho.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

Why Richard, 'tis a Deviliſh thing,

We're not left worth a Groat.

My Doll has ſold her Wedding-ring,

And Sue has pawn'd her Coat.

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=289)The
Sniv'ling Rogues abus'd our Squire,

And called our Miſtriſs Whore.

Dick.

Yet— if George don't what we require,

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

By this good day; I did but Speak,

They took my Py-ball'd Mare;

And put the Carri'on Wench to th'ſqueak:

(Things go againſt the Hair.)

Our Prick-ear'd Cor'nel looks as bigg

Still, as he did before.

Dick.

And yet if George don't hum his Gigg,

Ch.

Ne're trust Good-fellow more.

'Faith, Tom our Caſe is much at one;

We're broke for want of Trade;

Our City's baffled and undone,

Betwixt the Rump and Blade.

We've emptied both our Veins & Baggs

Upon a F [...]ctious Score.

If George compaſsion not our Raggs

Cho.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

But what doſt thou think ſhould be the Cauſe

Whence all theſe Miſchiefs ſpring?

Dick

Our damned breach of Oaths and Laws;

Our Murther of the King.

We have been Slaves ſince Charls his reign▪

We liv'd like Lords before.

If George don't ſet all right again,

Cho.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Tom.

Our Ʋicar—(And hee's one that knows)

Told me once, — I know what▪ —

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=290)(And yet
the Thief is woundy Cloſe)

Dick.

'Tis all the better;—That

H'as too much Honeſty and Wit,

To let his Tongue run o're;

If this prove not a luchy hit,

Chorus.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

Shall's ask him, what he means to do?

Tom.

—'Good faith, with all my heart;

Thou mak'ſt the better Leg o'th' Two:

Take Thou the Better part:

Il'e follow, if thoul't lead the Van.

Dick.

Content; — I'le march before.

If George prove not a gallant man,

Chor.

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

My Lord;— in Ʋs the Nation craves

But what you're bound to do.

Tom.

—We have liv'd Drudges: Ric.—And we:

Both.

We would not dye ſo too.

Reſtore us but our Laws agen;

Chorus

Th' unborn ſhall thee adore;

If George denies us his Amen,

Ne're truſt Good-fellow more.

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=290)

### 2.47. A Pſalm of Mercy. Uſula, (who cry's Ends of Gold and Sil­ver) reads,
and all the Siſters ſing.

To the Tune of, Now thanks to the Powers below ▪ Sing it in the Noſe.

WHat a Reprobate crew is here,

Who will not have Jeſus Reign?

But ſend all our Saints

To Bonds and Reſtraint,

And kill 'um again and again?

Let's riſe in a holy fear,

And fight for our heavenly King▪

We will ha' no power

But Vane in the Tower

To rule us in any thing!

Come Siſter, and ſing

An Hymne to our King,

Who ſitteth on high Degree;

The Men at Whitehall,

And the wicked ſhall fall,

And hey, then up go We.

A Match, quoth my ſiſter Joyce;

Contented, quoth Rachel too;

Quoth Abigaile, yea, and Faith, verily,

And Charity, let 't be ſo.

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=291)Our
Monarchy is the Fift,

Shall laſt for a thouſand years;

O'th' wicked on earth

There ſhall be a dearth,

When Jeſus himſelf appears!

And we are the Babes of Grace,

The fruits of an holy Seed;

For old Father Cann

(That Reverend man)

Begat us in Word and Deed.

The earth is our own,

For Title there's none,

But in the right Heirs of Sion;

Then let us be free,

For verily we

No King ha' but Judah's Lion.

'Tis verity, quoth old Joane,

And Sooth, quoth my ſiſter Prue,

'Tis manifeſt truth, quoth mortified Ruth,

And the Goſpel is ſo, ſay's Su.

The Biſhops and Bells ſhall down,

For we have an holy Call;

The Saints are beyond

All Order and Bond

Of duty to Prieſts of Baal.

Their Pipes and Organs too,

Their Superſtitious Shirt,

Their Canons and Bulls,

(To cozen poor Gulls,)

Wee'le trample 'um in the Dirt.

No Ordinance ſhall

Command us all,

[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=291)For we
are above their thrall.

We care not a Straw

For Reaſon or Law;

For Conſcience is all in all.

Ay marry, quoth Agatha,

And Temperance, eke alſo,

Quoth Hanna, it's juſt, and Mary it muſt

And ſhall be, quoth Grace, I trow.

The Steeple-houſe Lands are ours,

Kings, Queens, Delinquents too,

And James's and all

The Court at White-hall,

And Somerſet-houſe alſo.

For The'balds it is our right,

And Marrow-bone-Park to boot,

And Eltham's our own.

At Endfield there's none,

But our ſelves that ſhall grub a root.

And Greenwich ſhall be

For Tenements, free

For Saint to poſſeſs Pell-mell.

And where all the Sport

Is at Hampton Court,

Shall be for our ſelves to dwell.

'Tis bleſſed, quoth Bathſheba,

And Clemence, w' ar' all agreed;

'Tis right, quoth Gartrude, and fit ſay's ſweet Jude.

And Th [...]m [...]ſine yea indeed.

For Husbands we ſhall have have none,

But Brothers in purity;

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=292)We will
not be Wives

And tye up our Lives

To Villanous ſlavery;

But couple in love and fear;

When mov'd by the ſpirit to't;

For there is no ſin

To let a Saint in,

When he has the grace to do't.

And thus are we taught,

No folly is wrought,

When Brothers will execiſe▪

Both Kiffin and Hills

(No Printer of Bills)

Have prov'd it in ample wiſe.

'Tis true, quoth Elizabeth,

And 'tis very good, quoth Pris,

And Aquila too will have it be ſo,

And ſo will my Siſter Si [...].

What though the King Proclaim's

Our Meetings no more ſhall be;

In private we may

Hold forth the right way,

And be, as we ſhould be, free,

Our Husbands wee'l make believe,

We go but to take the aire,

Or viſit a Nurſe,

And lighten their Purſe

With a little diſſembling Prayer.

Or if they be croſſe,

(Let um ſtand to the loſſe)

We'l tempt our Apprentices,

(By writing a Daſh,

To cozen the Caſh,)

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=292)And make
'um meer Novices.

Oh very well ſaid, quoth Con,

And ſo will I do, ſay's Franck.

And Mercy cry's I, and Mat, really,

And I'm o' that mind, quoth Thank.

Wee'l cut off the wicked Rout,

And bath us all in their Blouds;

Their Houſes and Land

Wee'l have at Command.

And common upon their Good [...]s

No mortal King nor Prieſt,

No Lord, nor Duke wee'l have,

Wee'l grind 'um to Griſt,

And live as we lift,

And we will do wonders brave;

Come Dor [...]as and Cloe,

With Lois and Zoe,

Young Letice and Beterice and Jane,

Phill, Dorothy, Mawd,

Come troup it abroad,

For now is our time to reign.

Sa, ſa, quoth my ſiſter Bab,

And Kill 'um, quoth Margery;

Spare none, cry's old Tib, nor quarter ſay's Sib.

And hey! for our Monarchy.

Let's all take the Sacrament,

That we to each other be true,

And kill without pity

In Country and City,

The wicked ungodly Crew.

We'l favour no Sex, nor Age,

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=293)No
Quality, nor Degree;

But all ſhall to Pot,

Both Engliſh and Scot,

That hinder our Liberty.

The Maior of the Town,

(That terrible Brown,)

And Cox and the Captains all,

Wee'l torture and ſlay

In a mercileſs way,

And mince 'um, like herbs, as ſmall.

Ay, that is the way, quoth Emm,

Quoth Phoebe, we conquer ſhall;

Say's Lucy, 'tis well; quoth Jylian and Nell,

'Twill make us amend for all.

### 2.48. A Loyal Wiſh.

What Faith, Hope, and Charity,

Fanaticks in Truth profeſs,

By Germanie's Woe,

And our Rebels

or, Siſters, Ʋtrum, horum, harum.

here too,

Well may we do more than gueſs

Th' ar' juſt like Gadarens Swine,

Which the Devils did drive and bewitch!

An Herd, ſet on evil,

Will run to the Devil,

And's Dam, when their

Brains

Tails do itch:

The let 'um run on!

Say's Ned, Tom, and Iohn:

Ay! let 'um be hang'd, quoth Mun!

Th'ar' mine quoth old Nick,

[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=293)And take
'um ſayes Dick,

And well come! quoth worſhipfull D [...].

And God bleſs King Charles, quoth George,

And ſave him, ſay's Simon and Sill,

I, I, quoth old Cole, and each loyal Soul▪

And Amen, and Amen, cry's Will.

### 2.49. The Honeſt Mens Reſolution.

But what, ſhall we doe with our Wives,

That fi [...]k up and down the Town?

And one is for Bowles,

And t'other for Knowles,

But all againſt Cox and Brown?

They cheat us all with their looks,

And ſnivell and ſnot by roate!

And nothing but ſqeak,

For Venner and Feake,

And for a Lac'd Morning-Coat,

For ſuch a Bell-dam,

Sayes Sylas and Sam,

Let's have an Italian Lock!

No, no! It's far better,

Quoth Robin and Peter,

To take 'um all down ith' Dock!

But that will not do, ſayes Nump,

Then nothing, ſayes Roger and Raph!

Let's lay 'um, ſayes Nat, and ſplay 'um, ſayes Wat,

And then we ſhall make 'um ſafe.

[[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=294)But,
Faith, y'are all out oth' way!

The Siſters have ſuch a Trick!

No Inſtrument will

Seclude 'um from ill,

But ſtill againſt P—'s, they'l kick.

What ſhall we do then? quoth Hall,

Let's cope up their Lecherie!

Sayes Rowland we may,

Be Maſters, that way.

But will not laſt long, quoth

Theophilus.

The.

What ſhall we do then,

Quoth Cutbert and Ben.

Let's do 'um like men, quoth Dan,

Let's fill up their Chincks,

Sayes Myſtical Sphynx.

Quoth Taffie, then I'm your man!

And I am as cut, quoth Cad,

And She [...]kin, Me  [...]at-a-whe.

Ap Howel, It's true, and Morgan & Hug [...]

Y Cambrie, Dieu, Dal [...]h-a-whe.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40823&page=294)

Notes

(1.).

The Scotch Ale-houſe in Harts-horne Lane.

(2.).

Clerks of the Exchequer, that uſed to drink their Mornings Draughts there.

(3.).

They call'd one another ſo.

(4.).

To Westminſter.] Places there where Clerks in Term time uſually break their
Faſt.

(5.).

A Bawdy-houſe.

* 

Vocem  [...] THURLO rithmicè reſpondentem noſtrates deſiderant: nomen itaque
(ipſius homulli inſtar crucis) hanc  [...] patitur; noſtroque vel verſiculo,
ac ipſo curru, huc illuc impellitur.

* 

H [...] hath a great kindneſſe for that Saint, not becauſe of his Keys, (which
he knew he ſhould never make uſe of) but in reference to Pe­terborough
Minſter, the ſtones of which built his new houſe

* 

Some Authors hold that it was but three half pence, but Poetry will not admit
broken number.

* 

Courteous Reader, he is a Leather ſeller.

* 

Not Bethlehem in Juda (for he is none of the Magi)

(1).

Cudgell'd by Mr. Armiger at Wells in Norfolk, Novemb. 4\. 1654.

(2).

Ran away ſix miles at Crowland Siege, and ne're lockt be­hind him.

(1).

He cauſed Parſon Cooper to be ha [...]'d by Judge Iermy, for fear he ſhould
beat him.

(2).

He corrupted twenty free Burgherr at Riſen, to give their Votes for h [...]m
in the laſt Election for Parliament.

(1).

He hired 100. men to come with him to LYN with ſwords and guns, for fear Mr.
HOWARD, and his two men ſhould beat him.

(2).

Mr. Howard gave him a box on the ear with the back of his hand, and he fell to
the ground with fear.

(3).

Juſtice Cremar, Juſtice Peddar, and Juſtice Life.

(4).

He took the City of Norwich when the Gates were open, and no oppoſition.

(5).

Mrs. Foxe's back door.

(1).

The Bells were rung backward, which alarm'd the City, wh [...] came in and had
beat him, if he had not run away upon the noiſe of it.

(2).

Iermy's Chaplain that prayes, and ſwears, and fights, and lyes for him in
ordinary.

(1).

Let us ſhew our ſelves true Engliſh men, is his uſual ſaying

(2).

He that drank ſo much Aſſes milk, as, without the Parlia­ment's mercy, he is
like to be a Fool for ever.

(3).

Two Iuſtices in Norfolk.

(4).

Maſter Armiger hath the exemplification of a Verdict in a Box, wherein Iermy's
Baude [...]y with Foxes wife is ſet forth.

[Home](/)

Brome, Alexander, 1620-1666.. Date: 1662  

