---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A Collection of letters and poems microform / written by several persons of
honour and learning, upon divers important subjects, to the late Duke and
Dutchess of Newcastle.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=1)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=1) A COLLECTION
OF LETTERS AND POEMS: Written by ſeveral Perſons of Honour and Learning, Upon
divers Important Subjects, to the Late Duke and Dutcheſs OF NEW CASTLE.

LONDON: Printed for Langly Curtis in Goat-Yard on Ludgate-Hill.

MDCLXXVIII.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=2)

## Table of contents

  * 1\. LETTERS, &c.
  * 2\. LECTOR IN ALMAE MATRIS Armario DUM LIBROS EXCUTIS, Hic illic ingenia perveſtigans ſedulò, Non potes non EXOSCULARI Foetum PULCHERRIMUM INCOMPARABILIS Et (ſuprà quàm cuidam credibile eſt) PHILOSOPHANTIS HEROINAE, D. MARGARETAE, MARCHIONISSAE Novo-Caſtrenſis, Cui Suada Linguam, Pallas animum imbuit.
  * 3\. POEMS, &c.
    * 3.1. To the most Illuſtrious and moſt Excellent Princeſs, The Marchioneſs of NEW-CASTLE. After the reading of her Incomparable POEMS.
    * 3.2. To her Excellency the Lady Marchioneſs of NewCaſtle, on Her Incomparable Works.
    * 3.3. On her Grace the Dutcheſs of New-Caſtles Cloſet.
    * 3.4. To the Illuſtrious Princeſs, Margaret, Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle, on Her Incomparable Works.
    * 3.5. To the moſt Accompliſh'd and Incomparable Princeſs, The Dutcheſs of New Caſtle her Grace.
    * 3.6. To the Glory of her Sex, the moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs, the Lady Marchioneſs of New-Caſtle, upon her moſt admirable Works.
    * 3.7. On the Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle her Grace.
    * 3.8. An Elegy upon the death of the Incomparable Princeſs Margaret Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle.
    * 3.9. An Elegy on the Death of the Incomparable Dutcheſs of NEW-CASTLE.
    * 3.10. In Obitum Margaretae Duciſſae Novo-Caſtrenſis.
    * 3.11. Ʋpon the Death of the Illuſtrious and Incomparable Lady, Margaret Dutcheſs of New Caſtle.
    * 3.12. To the Duke.
  * 4\. On the Death of the moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs, the Lady Dutcheſs of NEW-CASTLE.
    * 4.1. An EPITAPH.
    * 4.2. Tumulus Nobiliſſimae, Illuſtriſſimaeque Principis, Margaretae Duciſſae Novi-Caſtri.
    * 4.3. In Illuſtriſſimam Dominam Margaretam, NoviCaſtri Duciſſam, EPITAPHIUM.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=2)

## 1\. LETTERS, &c.

Hague, the 28th. of November, 1658.

MADAM,

ACcording to your Excellencies com­mand, I have been of purpoſe at Leyden, and
there delivered your Preſent in­to the hands of the Rector Magni­ficus (as we
call him) of the Univerſity, who ſome days after hath made a ſo­lemn
exhibition of it to the Lords Curators, in a pub­lique meeting of the whole
Academical Senate, and, in their name, hath ſent me the Letter here encloſed;
by which I hope the faithful diſcharge of my Am­baſſage ſhall be teſtified,
and give your Excellency [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=3) occaſion of
further Employment to beſtow upon the unworthy perſon,

Madam, of

Your Excellencies Humble and Obedient Servant, Huygens de Zulichem.

This Letter came but even now from Leiden, ſo that I hope your Excellency will
not ſuſpect any negligence in me.

ILLUSTRISSIMA DOMINA,

OBtulit Bibliothecae publicae Zulichemi Dominus Divinum ingenii veſtri foetûm
qui ſive proſà ſive Carmine omnem admirationem excedit. Princeps ingenii,
Princeps terrarum, Princeps foeminini ſexus me­rito diceris. Abripitur
foecunda tua erudito, per coelos, ter­ras, maria, & quicquid in natura, vel
civili vita, ullove Scientiarum genere, nobile occurrit. Ipſa Pallas
Acade­miae noſtrae praeſes Tibi aſſurgit, gratiáſque immenſas provestro munere
agit, & cum Imaginem veſtram aſpicit, ſe ipſam veluti in ſpeculo intueri
videtur. Vale

Datae Lugduni Batavo­rum, XXVIII. Novem. MDCLVIII.

Illuſtriſſima Domina

Virtutum veſtrarum Admirator & Cultor ſummus, Anthonius Thyſius, Academiae
Rector.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=3)

EXCELLENTISSIMA DUX,

ALter ferè menſis est, quòd votis omnibus expetitum munus Epiſtolas tuas
accepimus: neque tamen intereà temporis ab officio ceſſavimus, ſed vel in
honore Nuncupationis nos jactavimus, vel obſtupuimus in admiratione Operis, in
quo multa tam acutè, tam aptè, tam elegantèr exponis, ne nec Venus, aut Lepor
aliquid addant. Scilicèt hoc demùm animi, hoc conſilii, hoc ingenii tui, hoc
ejus eſt ſpei, quam annos aliquot jam ſuſtines amplifican­dae Philoſophiae.
Nam cave Te quaeſumus, ne Canta­brigiae quenquam eſſe credas tam infacetum, &
à Gra­tiis alienum, quem non mirificè delectent Literarum ista­rum
amoenitates; Propterea, (quae feliciſſimè recludis) arcana Naturae non aliter
atque ſecretiores Sacro­rum ritus, & ceremonias Ʋniverſi inſpicimus, laudamus,
amplectimur, & inter legendum etiam per paginas diſpen­ſamus oſcula, ſed ea
quae ſoli Philoſophi dare, & acci­pere Veſtales ipſae nequaquàm erubeſcerent.
Nondùm (quod ſcimus) Annalibus excidêre, neque certè per nos unquam excident
erudita nomina, Aſpaſia Periclis, Ode­nati Zenobia, Polla Lucani, Boethii
Ruſticiana; quae tamen, ſi reviviſcerent hodiè, adeò tecum (Inclyta Dux) de
eruditionis palmâ non contenderent, at famae tuae potiùs ancillantes, ſolam
Margaretam, conſummatiſſimam Prin­cipem & agnoſcerent, & poſitogenu certatim
adorarent. Illae namque pluvias tantùm hic illie aquas collegêre: Tu perenni
gurgite paſſim exundas: Illis interdùm adſpira­vêre Muſae, quae ſuam in Te
poteſtatem omnem oſten­dêre: Illae denique partitae ſunt doctrinam: Tu
ſtudio­rum omne genus verſu, & proſâ non modò tetigiſti, ve­rum etiam
tractâſti: nec alios tandèm indagationi tuae fi­nes propoſuiſti, quàm quos
ipſa rerum Natura admittit; quamobrèm, etſi (velut Aquila in nubibus) quicquid
ve­naris, [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=4)
capis, nuſquam tamen major nobis, aut illuſtrior vi­dêre, quàm in nuperis
iſtis Sapientiae commiſſionibus et­enim invidendâ planè dexteritate vel
Tirones ſemitam ingreſſos reducis in viam; vel nitedulas è ſenticetis ſuis
extrahis; vel hoſtes veritatis destringis & defricas, He­roina monſtris ex
orbe Scientiarum averruncandis genita. Perge (Dux invictiſſima) & (quo
incoepisti ſucceſſu) in hâc immortalitatis Palaeſtrâ Te (ſi placet) diutiùs
exerce; Nos quidem ut antea ſemper, ita nunc quo­que tanto tibi ſtudio ubique
favemus, ut majori non poſ­ſimus.

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 3 Nonas Maii. 1665.

Celſitudini tuae addictiſſimi Procancellarius, reliquus que Senatus Academ.
Cantabr.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

WE have lately with extraordinary joy re­ceived the two teſtimonies of Your
great mind and favor towards us, namely your Epiſtles and Poems, with which
your Grace hath been pleaſed to honor us, both which we em­brace with the ſame
mind with which we do all Sub­lime and Excellent things, which ſo long as
there is any Curteſy among men, do bring Fame to their Au­thors. In your Poeſy
we praiſe that Life and native Verdure, every way conſiſtent with it ſelf,
Caſtalian like, it ſtands not ſtill, nor boils over, but with a gen­tle Stream
doth touch our Ears, and ſlide into our minds. In your Philoſophy we praiſe
that lightſome and piercing accuteneſs, nothing conſtrained, nothing obſcure;
you render all things clear and genuine, in­deed [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=4) nature truly
natural: So difficult to men is nature and truth. Alas how do they vex and
pur­ſue her fleeing from them; others ſuppoſe her to be ſwallowed in
Whirlepools, (as another Scylla or Charibdis) ſuch a one indeed as they do
commonly find to be of report or opinion: others grope for her in a vain
Vacuity with the like ſucceſs: yea, ſome there are which ſeek her among Ghoſts
and Goblings, as if ſhe were ſome Witch, or Sor­cereſs; ſome offer violence to
her, and put her to the rack, and make her rather Lie then Confeſs. To your
Grace ſhe doth freely open and unbowel her ſelf, fearing to be branded with
incivility if ſhe ſhould deny; Your Grace only amongſt Women owes nothing to
Nature: for how much ſoever ſhe hath graced you with an incomparable luſtre in
your Feature, or pregnancy of Wit, your Grace hath returned all of it in theſe
Elegancies of Phi­loſophy and Poeſie, with a moſt excellent retaliation.
Laſtly, leſt we ſhould be further troubleſome to your Grace, we wiſh we could
ſpeak out and pub­liſh to the World, what Thanks we conceive in our Minds for
this ſo genuine and proper a Gift, ſo fraught with ſweeteſt Elegancies; Then,
though there be ſo vaſt a diſproportion between your Gra­ces Favours and our
Merits, our diſtance would be ſo much the leſs: Farewel moſt Noble Princeſs,
long may your Grace live, who are an ornament to Learning, and a Patroneſs to
the Learned and us, who are,

Your Graces moſt devoted Servants in all Duty and Reverence, The Maſter and
Fellows of the Colledge of St. John the Evangeliſt in the Univerſity of
Cambridge.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=5)

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

LIbros tuos eximios illos opidò & feliciſſimè In­genii partum excepit nostrum
hoc Collegium eâdem gaudii magnitudine, quâ olim Illuſtriſ­ſimi Principis
Conjugis Tui adventum nos hîc con­victu ſuo non dedignantis. In fatis eſt
ſcilicet, aut potiùs haereditarium quoddam jus eſt Tuae familiae de Collegio
noſtro benè mereri. Dilatata Collegii Pomoeria, & pulcherrimo opere explicata
murorum facies teſtantur eximium in literas amorem nobiliſſimae Salopienſis
Co­mitiſſae, jam tunc virtutes tuas & Gentilitiam erga Muſas bonitatem
praeludio quodam augurantis. Il­luſtriſſimus quoque Conjux Tuus nos hîc
Conſortio ſuo cohoneſtavit, atque quantum gloriae nobis indè defluxiſſe putes,
quòd illa quae hîc poſuit Virtutum rudimenta in tam inviolatam Majeſtati
Regiae etiam in adverſiſ­ſimis fidelitatem omniumque artium tanto illo Ordine
dignarum ſcientiam excreverunt! Sed haec Tibi cum aliis Communis laus eſt,
favere literis. At quòd Tu, Foemina ſcilicet Illuſtriſſima, Aulae deliciis
innutrita, non ſolùm faveas, ſed & doceas qui ſibi videntur eru­diti: quòd non
tantùm calleas omnes Tui Ordinis ele­gantias, ſed etiam ingenuas noſtri
ſermonis Veneres, & nihil inſuper corum neſcias quae ſcire laudi eſt; denique,
quòd prima omnium non ſolùm Philoſophiae ſpinoſiſſimos calles pervagata es,
ſed emolliiſti Sermo­nis Tui nitore, id quod doctiſſimis virorum minimâ ferè
cum laude pertentatum; hoc Tuum ſolius decus eſt, hoc praeteritorum ſeculorum
Foeminis, & praeſèntis hu­jus Heroinis exprobabit hoc noſtrum ſeculum: Ʋnum
tancùm deeſt belliſſimis Tuis ſcriptis, ut nimirum inter Cultiſſimas Orationes
Tuas inſcribatur una, quae gau­dium noſtrum ob honorem hunc à Te Collegio
nuperrimè [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=5)
praeſtitum ſatis dignè eloqui poſſit. Digna enim es ſola, quae cùm
Philoſophiam tantoperè exornâſti, Te­ipſam exprimas: nos certè non poſſumus,
quibus prae­ripuiſti omnes Vernaculae linguae Elegantias, quóſque adeò
conjeciſti in Latini ſermonis antiquam, ſed incul­tam Majestatem, ut Te, quam
coràm alloqui erubeſci­mus, è longinquo tutò veneremur. Vivas ergò,
Illu­ſtriſſima Princeps, in hujus ſeculi gloriam, Tui Sexûs honorem, noſtri
Invidiam, admirationem utriúſque; & feliciſſimos annos exigas etiam ultrà
ſpem, non vota.

Dat. è Coll. D. Joan. Cantab. 14 Cal. Jul. 1663.

Obſequentiſſimorum Illuſtriſſimae Excellentiae Tuae Cultorum Magiſtri &
Sociorum Colleg. D. Joannis Evangeliſtae in Academia Cantabrigienſis.

# Excellentiſſimae Honoratiſſimaeque Dominae, Do­minae Margaretae,
Marchioniſſae Novo-Caſtrenſi.

EXCELLENTISSIMA DOMINA,

QƲanta ſit, quámque ſevera nobis ex dignati­one Veſtrâ concepta laetitia, ſi
non aliunde te­ſtando ſimus, liceat exinde potiſſimùm indicari, quòd in hoc
jucundiſſimo nobis officio gratitudinis ex­primendae, & ſeriùs aliquantò
verſemur, & ſolliciti etiamnum ſimus. Ea ſiquidem eſt natura Beneficii, ut
remunerandi vices deſideret, Veſtri autem nec fortuna repoſcit, nec patitur
Amplitudo. Quo fit, ut, muni­fici aliàs qui ſumus, tantúmque honoris rependere
ſoliti, [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=6)
quantum ipſi accipimus, eo quòd viros, caetera proba­tiſſimos, noſtro
qualicunque teſtimonio auctiores redde­re videamur; Veſtro tandem tam
praecellenti munere donati, tenuitatem ultro noſtram fateamur. Hoc in­terim
gratulari nobis liceat felicitatis noſtrae, eam eſſe Tibi cum Literis communem
cauſam, ut nemo laudare beneficia Veſtra, aut etiam exprimere pro dignitate
poſſit, qui non & ipſe commendatior exinde fuerit; adeò conjunctam habemus cum
officio laudem, ut nec teſtari quantum debemus, ingrati poſſimus, nec quanta
accepimus intelligere, niſi literati. Quae Tua ſingu­laris eſt bene merendi
ratio, non ſolùm Amplitudine Veſtrâ digna largiris, ſed & ſimul efficis, quo
tantis Tuis Auſpiciis digni & nos aliquando ſimus: nec verò literis tantùm,
quod una potes, patrocinium praestas, ſed & artes Ipſa illustras, & quantum
eſt ullibi ſcienti­arum promoves felicitèr, & exornas. Ignoſce nobis
Illuſtriſſima Marchioniſſa, ſi mirari identidem ſubeat, cui demum Tu, nóſque
adeo debemus pulcherimas iſtas & Tuas dotes; quî factum fuerit, ut nullo
imbuente ſtudiorum arbitrio, nullâ obſtetricante Academiâ, in Foe­minâ tandem
conveniant, res caetera deſjunctiſſimae, Eloquentia, Poeſis, & Philoſophia.
Sanè, qui anti­quos adeo miramur, eandem artium armorúmque prae­ſidem Deam
veneratos, quid de Te tandem ſentiemus, quae Ipſa Tibi Minerva es & Athenae
ſimul, Muſae omnes juxta & Helicon, Ariſtoteles pariter ac Ly­caeum? Profectò,
ii ſumus, qui felicitatem citiùs no­ſtram intelligere, quàm exponere Tuam
poſſumus, quae tam ſupra noſtram est exprimendi copiam, quàm eſt praeſens iſta
qualiſcunque adumbratio, extra fingen­di neceſſitatem. Quo magis noſtrâ
referre credimus, quibus Te propriùs ſentire datum eſt, testari aliquà, pro
genio noſtro, locique hujus (quo non eſt alius Tui [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=6) ſtudioſior) quo
tandem animo, quibus ſtudiis, quibúſ­que amplexibus Clariſſima Tua opera
excipimus & ex­oſculamur. Qnod quidem officii noſtri tam ſincerè prae­stamus,
quâm verè in ampliſſimam laudem cedit, mag­nae huic & florentiſſimae
Societati, Te nobis habere pro­pitiam, quam & tota commendat eruditio, &
litera­torum univerſus ordo ſuſpicit, & veneratur. Tanti erat Excellentsſſima
Domina, Te primam exemplo Tuo ostendere, poſſe & Foeminas Philoſoaphri. Ʋnum
illud reliquum, in auctiorem Nominis Veſtri famam optamus, teſtatioréſque
virtutes Tuas, ut tot támque erudita Opera, tali aliquando idiomate donata
exeant, quali inter Romanos Tullium & Maronem, inter Graios Platonem, &
Demoſthenem legimus, & mi­ramur. Quod ſi contigerit uſquam, Te facili in vota
noſtra, proventúmque literarum uberiorem, ſperamus, etiam & ſpondemus, brevi
fore, ut ex ipſo ſcientiarum incremento ſentiat orbis, quam conſecuta es
Gloriae Aeternitatem.

Dat. è Coll. Sanctae & Individuae Trinitatis, 2 Cal. Feb. 1663.

  * Johan. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Clem. Nevil.
  * Theod. Croſland.
  * Geo. Chamberlaine.
  * Fran. Barton.
  * Guliel. Lynnett.
  * Gualt. Catsby.
  * Richardus Stedman.
  * Robertus Scott.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=7)

# To the Moſt Excellent and Moſt Honourable Lady, the Lady Margaret,
Marchioneſs of Newcaſtle.

MOST EXCELLENT LADY,

HOw great and ſerious a joy doth ariſe to us from Your Excellencies
Condeſcenti­on, though we cannot otherwiſe make it appear; yet hence chiefly
it may be ſhewed, be­cauſe in this moſt pleaſing Duty of expreſſing our
Thankfulneſs, we have been ſomewhat tardy, and are yet ſolicitous; for ſuch is
the nature of a good turne that it calls for a requital; but your
Excel­lencies Fortune and Greatneſs doth neither require nor brook it, whence
it comes to paſs that we who are otherwiſe Bountiful, and are wont to return
as much as we have received, becauſe we may ſeem to render perſons in other
things moſt approved by our teſtemony, ſuch as it is, more allowable; at
length being endowed with your moſt excellent Gift, we do freely acknowledge
our deficiency. In the mean time we may juſtly pride our ſelves in this, that
your Excellency, as well as our Learning, is ſo much the cauſe of our
Happineſs, that none can commend your Gifts, or expreſs their worth, but will
himſelf thereby grow more commendable: therefore have we Praiſe and Duty
joyned, that we may not avouch how much we owe being un­thankful, nor
underſtand what we have received unleſs Learned: Your Excellency doth not only
beſtow Gifts worthy your Nobleneſs, but alſo there­by make way that we our
ſelves may, in time, be worthy of your ſo great Favors: which is a reaſon of
well-deſerving, proper only to your ſelf: neither [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=7) indeed doth your
Excellency only afford Patronage to Learning (which you only can do) but alſo
make Arts more famous; and whatſoever there is any where of Sciences you do
happily promote and adorne. Pardon us moſt Illuſtrious Marchioneſs if we often
wonder to whom, at length, your Excel­lency, and we our ſelves, do ſo much owe
thoſe excellent Arts, and your Excellencies Endowments; how it came to paſs
that Eloquence, Poetry, Phi­loſophy, things otherwiſe moſt different, ſhould
without the help of a Tutor, without the Mid­wifery of an Univerſity, at
length, agree in a Woman: Indeed we who wonder that the Antients ſhould adore
the ſame tutelar Godeſs both of Arts and Arms, what ſhall we think of your
Excellency, who are both a Minerva and an Athens to your ſelf, the Muſes as
well as an Helicon, Ariſtotle as well as his Lycaeum? Indeed ſuch is our
condition that we can ſooner underſtand our own happineſs then expreſs yours,
which is ſo far beyond the high­eſt of our expreſſions, as this preſent
Deſcription, ſuch as it is, is beyond the neceſſity of a Fiction. We think it
concerns us very much (who have the happineſs to underſtand ſo much of your
Excellency) ſome way to teſtify, according to our genius and that of this
place, then which none can admire you more, with what mind, withwhat deſires,
with what real affections we do receive and em­brace your moſt Excellent
Works; which part of our duty we do as ſincerely perform as it doth truly tend
to the great honour of this floriſhing So­citey, that we enjoy your
Excellencies undeſerved favour, whom all Learning doth commend, and all
degrees of the Learned adore and honor. So much [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=8) beyond
Expectation it was (moſt Excellent Lady) that you the firſt of all, by your
own example, ſhould make it appear that even Women may be Philo­ſophers. One
thing we wiſh for, the enlargement of the fame of your Excellent name, and
more ſignal vertues, that your moſt learned Works may appear in ſuch a
language in which we read and admire Tully and Maro amongſt the Romans, Plato
and Demoſthenes amongſt the Grecians. Which if it ever come to paſs, we hope
and alſo pro­miſe (your Excellency being willing) accord­ing to our deſires,
and the greater increaſe of Learn­ing, that in a ſhort time, by the very
augmentation of Sciences the World may be ſenſible what Eternity of Glory your
Excellency hath obtained.

Given from the Colledge of the Holy and Ʋndivided Trinity, the ſecond of the
Calends of Febr. 1663.

  * John Pearſon, Maſter.
  * Clem. Nevill.
  * Theod. Croſland.
  * George Chamberlaine.
  * Francis Barton.
  * William Lynnet.
  * Walter Catesby.
  * Richard Stedman.
  * Robert Scott.

MADAM,

THe Univerſity of Cambridge, in their full Senate, have judged it a neceſſary
duty to make known their ſenſe of the high Favour which they received in the
Preſent made to [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=8) them of your
moſt Excellent Volumes. This, ex­preſſed by their publick Orator, approved by
them­ſelves, is committed to my care to convey, as being their unworthy
Vicechancellor: under which title, alſo as Maſter of a ſmall Colledge, I ſtand
in a double obligation for the ſame Preſent, to be

Cambridge. S. M. Magd. Coll. July 13. 1663.

Your Excellencies moſt Humble and moſt Devoted Servant, EDWARD RAINBOWE.

ILLUSTRISSIMA MARCHIONISSA,

ETſi nobis in more familiarius nihil est, quàm, ut homines omnes eruditionis,
& virtutis famâ florentes, curâ, ſtudióque nuſquàm non proſequa­mur: ſingulari
tamen, & praecipuo quodam impetu non modò gloriae tuae favemus, verumetiam
Excellentiſſimam Heroinam, tanquam Coelo delapſam Sibyllam venera­mur. Quippe
foemineae ſortis egreſſa terminos, longè ultra mundum muliebrem ſapis, &
quicquid uſpiàm Egregium, aut Divinum eſt intra mortales, id tuo Tibi jure
vindicas. Sive ſtas in acie, ſive exerces tribu­nalia, ſive Carmen fundis,
ſive nodos explicas, nuſquàm haeres, nuſquam ſuccumbis, Dux, Miles, Senator;
Poeta, Philoſophus, ac (ut verbo expediamus) Ʋna om­nium inſtar. Tot igitur, &
tantas, & tam exquiſitas animi dotes admirata Cantabrigia nec tacere facilè
nec ulteriùs ſe continere poteſt, quin exclamet.

O Soror, ô doctum quae ſola es Foemina Nomen! (carmen enim effluit
imprudenti.) Quod niſi nolueris, interrogare Te porrò cupimus, Iſta tam laetae
indolis, [[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=9)
tam felicis ingenii, tam excelſi judicii flamma quo pri­mùm incenſa Numine,
quibus adjuta flatibus, aut e­nutrita fomitibus effulget? An virili veſte
induta Marchioniſſa annos fortaſſe aliquot, idque Athenis inter Philoſophos
delituiſti? An Regina rerum Phi­ſophia (quae virorum conſpectum verecundè
fugit) ſoli Tibi ſe viſendam exhibuit, virgineóſque ſinus omnes expoſuit? An
denique tuis in Aedibus ſedem poſuêre Gratiae, ne dubitemus alibi jam in
Angliâ, quàm Can­tabrigiae, vel Oxonii tertiam vigere Academiam, ubi dictata,
inſtillatáque Tibi ab Apolline Oracula, quaſi ſitientibus auribus ebibamus?
Sed quoniam Te vel con­ditio Naturae, vel modeſtiae ſtola cohibet à Roſtris, &
Cathedrâ, Libros edis, quos partim nuncupas, par­tim dono Sororibus Academiis
mittis. Nos quidem de magnitudine & animi, & beneficii tui Nobis gra­tulamur,
geminúmque munus in Sacrario Sapientiae re­ponimus, ut in Sexûs honorem
evolvant Poſteri, habe­ántque quod Socraticarum omnium, & Pythagorea­rum
Mulierum fragmentis praeferant.

Dat. Cantab. è frequenti Senatu, quinto Idus Julii 1663.

Amplitudinis, & honoris veſtri ſtudioſiſſimi Procancellarius, reliquuſ (que)
Senatus Acad. Cant.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=9)

## 2\. LECTOR IN ALMAE MATRIS Armario DUM LIBROS EXCUTIS, Hic illic ingenia
perveſtigans ſedulò, Non potes non EXOSCULARI Foetum PULCHERRIMUM
INCOMPARABILIS Et (ſuprà quàm cuidam credibile eſt) PHILOSOPHANTIS HEROINAE,
D. MARGARETAE, MARCHIONISSAE Novo-Caſtrenſis, Cui Suada Linguam, Pallas animum
imbuit.

Sed, quoniam Ipſa (per ingenuae frontis molitiem) in­ter Viros Sententiam
dicere non ſuſtinet, in imagine ſaltèm, & hâc altae Mentis Effigie aeternis
debet intereſſe Nominibus.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=10)

# Illuſtriſſimo Excellentiſſimo Nobiliſſimóque Principi Gulielmo Marchioni, &
Comiti de Newcaſtle, &c.

ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,

MEritò olim jactavimus, Te haſce aliquan­dò Aedes, atque haec Muſarum ſacra
co­luiſſe. Cúmque ea, ut par erat, longè maxi­ma, quae ſtudioſis hominibus
contingere poſſit, gloria videretur; viciſti ultrò ſpei votorúmque nostrorum
fi­dem, & ad tantam ſuperbiendi materiam amplius ali­quid adjicere voluiſti.
Tibi utique parùm erat nos pri­ma praeludentis ingenii, & tenera adhùc
Virtutis incu­nabula oſtentare potuiſſe; niſi ex Te etiam teneremus clariſſima
adultae jam confirmataeque Indolis monumenta. Dedignata eſt Mens illuſtris &
generoſa rebus argu­tis ac levibus nimium temporis abſumere; quod facit tamen
hodiè maxima ſcribentium pars, in opprobrium (ut videtur) ac contumeliam
literarum: Tibi verò diſ­plicuit otioſa ſedulitas: Meditatus es aliquid viro
nobili ac ſtrenuo non indignum, opúſque concinnâſti ſe­culis omnibus
profuturum. Oppoſuimus olim Gallis pe­ditatûs vim, ac virorum robora; nunc
Tuâ, Princeps Illuſtriſſime, induſtriâ, equitandi etiam peritiâ ſuperi­ores
ſumus: Tu illos ſuas, quibus unicè ſibi placebant, artes edocuiſti. Nec tamen
aegrè fert Equeſtris na­tio Te hanc ei palmam praeripuiſſe; neque enim tan­tùm
ſe in certamine minorem proſitetur, verumetiam ſuo ore atque Linguâ ſe victam
eſſe gloriatur. Et quidni illa Tibi ambo ſe cederet, qui nihil unquam mediocre
potes? Poetarum miraculis fidem feciſti; Pri­mus utique Pegaſum, alatóſque
nobis Equos oſtendiſti, qui tandem humum ſpernunt, Tuáque pennâ in altum
levati, per Virorum ora, ac ſuper aſtra volitârunt. [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=10) Vivent, atque
in omni Seculorum memoria vigebunt Excellentiae veſtrae ſcripta nobiliſſima,
quantúmque ho­noris Platoni ſuo atque Ariſtoteli tribuunt homines umbratici,
tantum Tibi concedent, Reges, virique to­to orbe Illuſtriſſimi. Gratiſſimis
nuper animis No­biliſſimae Conjugis Tuae labores accepimus: nunc Tuos pari
ardore complectimur. Est hoc optandum maximè beneficiorum Conjugium; haec
ſumma eſt animorum Con­cordia, quibus unicum eſt de nobis benè merendi
Cer­tamen. Exultantes recipimus Illuſtres Libros, eòſque inter Sacratiora
Bibliothecae Monumenta recondemus. Intereà, propter iterata benevolentiae ac
benignitatis indicia, Vobis gratias quas poſſumus maximas habe­mus, cunctáque
longè feliciſſima omni votorum Religi­one exoptamus.

Dat.è Coll. D. Joan. Evang. Cantabr. 6 Idus Decemb. 1663.

Illuſtriſſimae Veſtrae Excellentiae Humillimi ac Devotiſſimi Clientes,
Magiſter ac Socii Collegii D. Joannis Evang. Cantabr.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

DƲo magnae mentis ſummaeque erga nos benevo­lentiae ſpecimina Epiſtolas &
Poemata (qui­bus nos Excellentia vestra redhoneſtare dig­nata eſt) nuper pleni
gaudio accepimus: quae Ʋtráque eo animo amplectimur, quo Sublimia ſolemus &
praeclara omnia, ſuis Auctoribus, donec ineſt hominibus humanitas meretiſſimam
famam reportatura; In Poeſi ſpiritum il­lum [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=11) laudamus,
leporémque nativum undique & aequa­bilem; nec ſtagnat Caſtalis, neque
exaſtuat, leni fluore lambit aures, atque animis illabitur. In Philoſophia
lucidum & penetrans acumen nil coactum, nihil myſti­cum liquida das omnia &
genuina; vere Naturalem Naturam. Difficilis vicis Natura, & Veritas: heu
quamvexant illi perſequuntúr (que) fugientem: Alii rapi eam fingunt in
vorticibus, Scyllam quaſi; aut Charibdim alteram, qualem etiam revera eſſe
famae & exiſti­mationis non raro experiuntur: alii in vacuo palpunt & inani
parili fortuna: imo ſunt qui inter Daemones querunt & Genios, quaſi ſagae
quaedam eſſet, aut ve­nifica: nonnulli vim tentant, in igne torquent,
cogunt­que ſeipſam mentiri potiùs, quam fateri: Tibi ſe ultro pandit & denudat
penitus, ruſticitatis notam, ſi negaret, reverita, ſola videns (Illustriſſima
Domina) inter Foe­minas quae Naturae nihil debes: quantum quantum enim Te
decoravit, aut luce formae, aut indole ingenii id omne eidem rependiſti in
hiſce Philoſophiae & Poëſeos elegantiis, pulcherrimâ talione. Denique Tibi
porro moleſti ſimus pro genuino hocce quo nos deceras pleno Venerum &
gratiarum pignore utinam eloqui poſſimus gratias, quas mente concipimus; tunc
ab ejus merito longo quamvis nihilo minùs intervallo, minori tamen diſtaremus.
Vale (Nobiliſſima Heroina) & vive diu quae literas ornes & foveras literatos,
& nos

Illuſtriſſimae Excellentiae Veſtrae Cultu omni & officio obſervantiſſimos
Magiſtrum & Socios Collegii D. Joannis Evangeliſtae in Academiâ
Cantabrigienſi.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=11)

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS.

WE lately received, with abundance of de­light and Complacency, thoſe two
tokens of your favour, with which your Grace hath been pleaſed, to honour us;
Your Poems, and Philoſophical Letters, both which we entertain and embrace
with that careful reſpect, which is due to thoſe high and noble undertakings,
which will procure in all ages (while men have any humanity) condigne fame and
renown to their Authors. In your Poems we admire that Life and Spirit, as alſo
that Native, and Even Fancie, which, every where, is Conſpicuous. Your
Heli­con is neither Pond nor Sea, but like a fair and deep River gently
ſlides, and flow's in upon your Readers. In your Philoſophy there appears,
every where, a clear and ſearching acuteneſs of Judge­ment, nothing forced, or
Myſterious: All is plain and genuine, meer and natural Nature. We men find
Nature and Truth very coy and ſullen, alas how we vex, perſecute, and chaſe
her, who yet ſtill outruns us: Some imagine her to be in Whirl­pools and
Quick-ſands, like another Scylla or Cha­rybdis, and they find Her ſo now and
then, in their ſhipwract Credit and Reputation. Some grope for her in Vacuums
and empty ſpaces, with a ſuc­ceſs not unlike their ſuppoſals. Some fancy her
among Daemons and Spirits, as if ſhe were a Witch: Others torment her in the
Fire, or Rack her, and force her rather to Belie, then Con­feſs her ſelf. But
ſhe willingly ſhews herſelf all bare and naked to your Grace; Madam, you are
one, if not the only one of your Sex, that owe Nature [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=12) nothing; for
whatever luſtre and beauty of body or mind, ſhe hath deckt and enriched you
withal, your Grace has largely recompenſed her, and are per­fectly quit with
her in theſe your elegant Poems, and Philoſophy. In a word, to be no longer
troubleſom to your Grace, we would we could but expreſs what thankful
acknowledgements we, in mind and thought, do conceive, for this twin-pledge of
your Love, full of all Muſes and Graces; then we ſhould fall leſs, though
ſtill continually, ſhort of ſo high a favour. May you live long, moſt
Virtu­ous and Heroick Lady, to adorn, maintain, and nouriſh Learning, and
Learned men, and Us, who are, in all offices of Honour and obſervance.

Your Graces bounden Servants, The Maſter and Fellows of St. Johns Coll. in
Cambridge.

# Excellentiſſimae Nobiliſſimaeque Principi, Marga­retae Novi-Caſtriae
Duciſſae.

ILLUSTRISSIMA HEROINA,

PAllida & exanguis haec chartula Sacratiſſimos Tuos amplexus ſummâ eáque
debitâ venera­tione ſolicitat, unde Promethei ad inſtar vi­tam & vigorem (Quae
ſoles dare) ambitioſo & lauda­bili furto ſurripiat: Quin haud vitio vertenda
erit pia nostra nec inhoneſta fraus, Quum ſpirare, & vivere oportet eam
Epiſtolam, quae tanto Nomini in­ſcripta aeternitatis aemula, & particeps
affinitatis jure facta eſt. Nempe Tu Ea es divinior Artemiſia, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=12) Quae Mauſolo
tuo non perpetuum certiſſimae mortis indicem, & monumentum ſolummodò extruere,
ſed vitam ipſam aeternitati inſerere Praeclaros Animi mo­tus ſacri calami
Impulſu continuare, Limpidos Corporis humores, & nobilem ſanguinem ex benignâ
Ingenii Tui venâ aeternum ſupplere, nec non eximia geſta & faci­nora ad vivum
exprimere, coram ſiſtere, & denuò agere valuiſti: Exhibuiſti nobis talem
principem qualis ipſe ſolus eſt, Cujus Imaginem à Te unicâ vel effingi, vel
dignè delineari poſſe fateatur univerſus Philoſo­phorum Chorus. Exhibuiſti
gratiſſimum orbi munus, praeſentis ſaeculi decus & ornamentum, futuri
Arche­typum & elaboratum exemplar. Inſuper videre eſt quàm mirabili artificio
(Laudatiſſimi Phidiae jure) conjunctiſ­ſimo numini Illuſtriſſimam Tuam
intexuiſti Imaginem, uſque adeò intemperanti mortis occurſu fabricam fa­ciens,
ut perpetuum Veſtrum conjugium ab ipſà haud ſejungi poſſit aut divelli. Quantâ
animi devotione Ornantiſſimae Heroinae egregium munus amplexamur, ſentire
poſſumus, aptè exprimere (Quae Tua & pro­pria Laus eſt) neutiquam confidimus:
Digneris, quae­ſumus, ut donum Tuum tanquam caelitùs delapſum an­cile
duraturae felicitatis augurium & teſſeram ſilentio (uti par eſt) veneretur
Collegium noſtrum, vel, quod majus, Veſtrum.

  * Johan. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Geo. Chamberlaine. Vm.
  * Clem. Nevil.
  * Anth. Marſhall.
  * Guliel. Baylie.
  * Richardus Stedman.
  * Rob. Crane.
  * Guliel. Lynnet.
  * Rob. Scott.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=13)

EXCELLENTISSIMA PRINCEPS,

HIſtoriam Viri tui quantivis pretii, Geniique plenum opus non modò exertiſſimâ
manu ac­cepimus, verum etiam à capite ad calcem incredibili voluptate, uti
omnia tua jamdudùm evol­vimus. Inter legendum verò non ſemel hic, illic circa
numeros, periodóſque ſubſtitimus, nunc ſtili, nunc ar­gumenti, nunc denique
compoſitionis elegantiâ detenti: ac quia togatis hominibus tuam illam tam
artificem dex­tram tetigiſſe non licet, quod proximum eſt, audemus: hoc eſt
Theatrum honoris, bipaténſque pugillar (in quo paginam utrámque facit Heros
Novo-Caſtrenſis) plus millies amplexamur. Neque tamen Chartae ſaepiùs
imprimimus oſcula, quàm omnibus illa, ſinguliſque Mu­ſis ingeminare nos
exiſtimamus. Nullum enim ingenii tui foetum exponere potes, quem non in uſus
ſuos, de­liciáſque & tollet Alma Cantabrigia, & (ut in par­tem quoque muneris
admittat posteros) Bibliothecae Publicae tholo ſuſpendet. Vivet igitur domi,
militiae­que clariſſimus Imperator, Téque (dum literis honor conſtabit) non
impar gloria ſequetur: itá raro, ſingu­larique exemplo facta dictis ubique
aequas, & invictiſſimi Ducis res tanto ſcribis Spiritu, quanto pridem ab Ipſo
geſtae fuerunt. Quodſi forſan Bellatores in arce Pal­lados olim quaerent (tàm
ad Hiſtoriae fidem, quàm ad exempli normam) conſummatiſſimi Imperatoris
imaginem, adumbratam illam invenient non in Cyro Xenophontis, ſed in
MARGARETAE GULIELMO. Hoc nomine Tibi nos debemus plurimum Eruditiſſima
foe­minarum; at non hoc uno nomine. Etenim in Stu­diis ubicunque jam nobis
haeret aqua, praeſentiſſimum Numen occurris: in Oratione ſi laboramus, verba
dictas: ſi Poëticas fores pulſamus, recludis: Si condi­mus [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=13) Hiſtoriam, à
memoriâ es: Si Philoſophos inter ambigimus, & involvimur, extricas: poſtremò,
ſi ſtu­demus modò, fers opem ſupra verticem ſemper adſtans Mulier divini
admodum vultus, atque inexhauſti vigoris. Hoc autem totum quid aliud eſt, quàm
mo­dis omnibus addictam Tibi Cantabrigiam non ſolùm exercere, ſed obruere
beneficiis? Tot ergo magnifi­centiae tuae radios (quibus illuſtramur) quâ Nos
un­quam gratiarum actione, quibus Muſarum opibus redimemus? Niſi forte quae D.
Margaretae pectus, mentémque illam homine ſublimiorem nunc habitant, hùc bonâ
tuâ cum veniâ remigrent Veneres, Gratiae­que. Id ſi principali indulgentiâ
concedas (Heroina) tuis veſtigiis pro modulo inſiſtemus, nervos omnes
in­tendemus, totúmque Helicona ciebimus, ne Mars ille tuus ſine vate, ac
virtutum tantarum Latino praecone pugnâſſe videatur.

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 14 Cal. Januar. 1667.

Eminentiae tuae addictiſſimi PROCANCELLARIƲS reliquuſque Senat. Acad. Cantab.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,

THat incomparable and moſt deſired Book of your Grace's, containing the
Hiſtory of his Grace's Actions, in the late War, we have not only readily
received but alſo peruſed and read over, as we are wont to do with whatſo­ever
you write; yet in reading it we muſt acknow­ledge that we ſtop'd often,
becauſe we could not but admire, every where, both the loftineſs of the
argument, and elegancy, and ſpruceneſs of the Stile, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=14) and
Compoſition; and in regard that at ſo great a diſtance we could not be
admitted to the favour of kiſſing your Hand, we ceaſe not to beſtow ten
thou­ſand embraces upon every page of that Book, which hath ſo noble and
immortal a ſubject as is his Grace the Duke of Newcaſtle; although your Grace
can neither dictate nor publiſh any Work which the Univerſity of Cambridge
will not own, and eſteem, yet for this laſt Eſſay of your Graces we retain a
moſt ſingular affection, and, in teſtimony thereof, lodge it in the richeſt
Cabinet that we have, our publick Liberary; for the peruſal of the preſent,
and ſucceeding generation, long therefore ſhall the moſt valiant, and renowned
General live, and your Grace too with him, ſeeing you have written his
enterpriſes with as great a ſpirit as he himſelf per­form'd them; hereafter if
generous and high born men; if men of War ſearch our Library for a Model of a
moſt accompliſhed General, they ſhall find it expreſſed to the life, not in
Xenophon's Cyrus, but in the Dutcheſs of Newcastle's William. Moſt Excellent
Princeſs, you have unſpeakably obliged us all, but not in this reſpect alone,
for whenſoever we find our ſelves non-plus'd in our Studies we repair to you,
as to our Oracle, if we be to ſpeak you dictate to us; if we knock at Apollo's
doore, you alone open to us; if we compoſe an Hiſtory you are the
Remembrancer; if we be confounded and puzled among the Philoſophers, you
diſentangle us, and aſſoil all our difficulties: in a word, whatſoe­ver we
attempt your Grace now vouchſafe's to ſtand by us, and ſuggeſt as a Lady of a
moſt Princely per­ſonage, and of an inexhauſtible vigor; and thus you do not
only exerciſe, but oppreſs us with your noble­neſs; [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=14) nor can we
deviſe what returne of thanks to make, unleſs thoſe Muſes and Graces (which
have taken up their reſidence in your Breaſt) may, with your Graces leave,
retreat for a while to us. If your Grace think good ſo to favour us, we ſhall
all of us, jointly and ſeverally endeavour that here­after his Excellency the
great Duke of Newcaſtle may not want a Latine Poet, for the perpetuating of
his Honour, and your Graces in forreign Coun­tries.

Cambridge Dec. 16\. 1667.

Moſt renowned Princeſs,

Your Graces moſt devoted Servants, The VICECHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of
the Ʋniverſity of CAMBRIDGE

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

WE have received your Excellencies in­comparable and moſt beneficial books
with ſuch grandure and reverence of mind, as it is very fit we ſhould, as a
pledge and warant of our future ſecurity; for ſeeing we are to Contend in a
bruitiſh world for life, much more for honour, with the reproaches of an
illiterate age, as it were now deſparing of attaining to any per­fection in
our weighty affairs, leſt Cambridge, and Philoſophy, and Learning ſhould grow
infamous, Your Excellency hath only brought it to paſs, that we have hopes yet
to live; the memory of our name being perpetuated in your Excellencies Books,
which [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=15)
will not only ſurvive our Univerſities, but hold date even with Time it ſelf;
and doubtleſs we ſhall live, for as much as it pleaſeth you, moſt Excellent
Prin­ceſs, ſo long as either Name or Honour remains, either to Virtue or
Books; and incontinently this age, by the reading of your Books, will looſe
its barbarity and rudeneſs, being made tame by the Ele­gancy both of your
ſtile and matter: and moreover it will not judge us to be no-bodies whom ſuch
an accompliſh'd Princeſs hath not refuſed to make not only the Peruſers, but
even the Moderators, and Judges of her Works. So as the very worth of your
Excellencies Books, hath brought us, being willing, altogether perſwaded and
convinced into a juſt admiration of your Excellency. However your Grace may
ſee how much your Praiſes are impaired, not ſo much by the default of our Wit
(though that be very great) as becauſe you have the hap to live in ſuch an
unfortunate age. Antient Greece it ſelf, the ſole Governneſs of all juſt
merits and re­wards, in the cauſe of ſuch unparallel'd vertues, would have
ſpent her ſelf in ten years Panegyricks; neither would there be any cauſe why
Iſocrates ſhould prefer his Athenians (though they were Minerva's Scholars)
before Cambridge; to whom your Excel­lency (for ſuch honour doth your Grace
procure) doth kindle a new, yet never periſhing, Light: An­tient Rome it ſelf
would have reſolved all your Praiſes into Statues and Monuments of your name,
by which there might ariſe continually Cornelia's, and if there were any
other, therefore the Glory of their Age, and the Honour of your Sex, becauſe
your Excellency had not then a being, but reſerved by the Author of all
things, and born in after times [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=15) for the honour,
and ornament of this age in which we live. The Titles and Triumphs are long
ſince obſolete, and worn out, the honour of Greece and Rome lives only in a
little ſlender fame, and thoſe Marbles inſcribed with the names of ſo many of
the Learned, are mouldered into duſt, and yet all theſe live, and flouriſh in
their due Praiſes, and are the ſurvivors of all their admirers, and this Glory
is only common to your Excellency, with thoſe fa­mous Worthies, that as
neither the famous Statues, nor the applauſe of their admirers, nor the
popu­lar vote, but the ſolid Grace of their Works, and Virtue which is its own
beſt Herauld, doth declare their merits: So your Excellencies moſt
unparal­leld worth, and our thankful acknowlegment with­out the furniture of
tumultuous applauſes, hath ſet apart a place in our Library, that faithful
Depoſi­tory of Wits, for your Grace, where, according to our ſlender
proviſion, which alſo the Cuſtome of our Anceſtors, by whom we are the better
enabled, and our own ingenious confeſſion, we do with great earneſtneſs
deſire; we henceforth with acclamations that ſuch an Illuſtrious Princeſs
(reaſon being now reſtored, Philoſophy confirmed, Envy conquered) doth eſteem
that in others which ſhe honours in her own perſon; We will therefore that
this, whatſoever it is, be the argument of a Grateful mind.

Dated from our Coll. Octob. 6. 1667.

Moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs,

Your Excellencies moſt humble Servants, devoted to your Clemency and Honour,
The Maſter and Fellows of St. Johns Coll. in Cambridge.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=16)

# Eminentiſſimae, Celſiſſimaeque Principi D. Marga­retae, Duci Novocaſtrenſi.

NOn mutamus Excellentiſſima Princeps; de Lucubrationibus tuis univerſis idem
ſenti­mus, quod de ſingulis; Singulas autem quan­toperè miremur, ut Quamque
beneficio tuo vidimus, aut perlegimus, neque Ipſa neſcis, & nos aliàs
judi­ciis certis non modo notum fecimus, verùm etiam in omnem occaſionem
intenti porrò faciemus. Hoc in Li­teras voluntas, hoc (quae tam latè ſe jam
diffundit) Eruditio tua ſingularis à togatis Hominibus dudum ex­egit: Hoc
Orationes, hoc Epiſtolae, hoc Numeri, Saléſque, hoc Fundamenta; hoc poſtremò
(quae Canta­brigiae tuae inſcribis) ſubacti judicii, & lectionis penè
infinitae Pericula meruêre. Quamvis enim ubique viget, & dum (humanitati locus
ullus erit) vigebit Cantabrigia, tamen Illius perpetuitati multum adji­ciet
Librorum tuorum Aeternitas. Non igitur im­meritò Te (doctiſſima foeminarum) de
ſcriptis editis & amamus, & ſuſpicimus, in illà Contemplationum Arce nos
jactamus, quam Tu Poſteritati ſtupendis ope­ribus extruxisti. Clariſſimè
quidem inter Cives ad al­tiſſimum honoris apicem evectamicas; Sed (quod ad­huc
auguſtius eſt) omnem illam fortume magnitudinem immortalis ingenii felicitate
ità ſuperas, ut quae verſa­re ſolemus exemplaria Graeca, Latináque miſſa jam
facere, & tuâ Ʋnius ſapientiâ contenti eſſe poſſimus. Quotiès enim in
Philoſophiam ſecedis, ſola Magistri nullius in verba juras, ſed in omni
Doctorum familiâ laborans & ſubtilitèr expendis, & acutè diſcernis, & ad
unguem caſtigas quicquid aut riſit Democritus, aut flevit Hereclitus, aut
deliravit Epicurus, aut tacuit Pythagoras, aut intellexit Ariſtoteles, aut
ignoravit [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=16) Arceſilas, nec
omittis ſiquid Majorum inventis addi­dêre novi homines, Verulamius, Harvaeus,
Carteſi­us, Galilaeus. Hoc (Eminentiſſima Dux) hoc de­mùm eſt heroicè
Philoſophari. Sed quò Nos Tecum rapis? Nam Principatum in Literis, tenes,
nullis finibus circumſcriptum; nec uſquam Tibi deſinit Na­tura rerum: at ultra
Oceanum Mundus alter exurgit. Mundum illum flamantem loquimur, quem & luce tuâ
incendis, & accuratiùs multò, quàm olim, in Critia, Plato, deſcribis. Ad eum
modum in omni ſcientiarum genere ſi pergas ſapere, certè mox id conſequere, ut
in poſterum Margareta non ampliùs Heroinae, ſed ipſius Philoſophiae nomen
habeatur. Sic, velut in anteceſ­ſum audent ſperare.

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 5 Idus Octobr. 1668.

Eminentiae tuae addictiſſimi PROCANCELLARIƲs reliquuſque Senat. Acad. Cantab.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS:

OUr opinion is not in any wiſe altered; of all your Books in general we judge,
as in rea­ſon and equity we muſt of every one of them: and what unſpeakable
eſteem we have for every one of them, neither are you ignorant, nor may we (as
we did, or hereafter ſhall receive any of them ſeverally) forbear to publiſh
to the World. This we think, and this, upon every oc­caſion, we profeſs to be
a return, that your Graces affection to the Commonwealth of learning
(to­gether with your Perſonal advancement in all man­ner [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=17) of Knowledge)
hath, long ago, called for from all ingenious Scholars: This is a debt, which
men of ſeveral profeſſions pay you daily, in conſideration of the pleaſure and
profit they reap from your O­rations, your Epiſtles, your Comoedies, and your
Grounds: but eſpecially we of Cambridge remem­ber, and, with exceeding
delight, peruſe (the great­eſt Honour that of late hath been done by a
De­dication to this Community) your moſt judicious and elaborate Obſervations
upon Experimental Philoſophy. For although we nothing doubt, but the
Univerſity of Cambridge will flouriſh, whileſt there is any regard in the
World had to Learning, and Modeſty, yet to the Perpetuity of ſo famous, and
antient a Corporation, we cannot but hope for an addition from the Eternity of
your Labours. It is not therefore for nothing (moſt learned Princeſs) that far
beyond what we can expreſs, we renown and admire your Grace, looking ever and
anon upon, and glorying in that immortall ſtately Fa­bric of Contemplation,
which you have erected for the Wonder, as well as for Inſtruction of
Poſte­rity. It's true, our eyes are almoſt dazled, when we preſume to look up
to that height of National honour, wherein you ſhine above moſt of your Sex.
But (which is yet far more noble and Prince­ly) the luſtre of your Wit hath ſo
ſurpaſſed the greatneſs of your Fortune, in glory, that we may now very
plauſibly throw away our other Greek, and Latine Authors, and be content to
learn only, what you teach in proper and good Engliſh. For, when you retire to
Study, you take (as we ſee) nothing at all upon truſt; you ſit down at no
Phi­loſophers Feet, but enquiring into the Myſteries of [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=17) every Sect, you
moſt exactly weigh, diſtinguiſh, and correct whatſoever Democritus laughed at,
or Heraclitus wept, or Epicurus raved, or Pythagoras con­cealed, or Aristotle
underſtood, or Arceſilas was ig­norant of. Nor do you neglect, or omit, in
caſe the Lord Verulam, or Harvey, or Des Cartes, or Ga­lilaeus hath pretended
to add to the atchievements of the Antients. This indeed, this it is (moſt
emi­nent Dutcheſs) to ſtudy, to reſolve, to determine, like a Royal and
Impartial Profeſſor: But whither on the ſudden have you tranſported us? For
that Principality (which is yours) in Learning admits (it ſhould ſeem) of no
bounds, but in your happy and pregnant imagination alone. Nature is infinite;
and you your ſelf, having nothing further to know in this, firſt diſcover, and
then travel into another, World: we mean your Blazing World, which you
enlighten with your own luſtre, and deſcribe to us far more accurately, then
ever Plato in his Critias attempted. After this manner in all ſorts of
Scien­ces, if your Eminency proceed, Margaret will ſhortly paſs, not only for
the name of the Dutcheſs of New­caſtle, but alſo for the Cognizance of
Philoſophy. So we dare, as it were, before hand, hope, and pro­miſe our
ſelves, who ſtudy continually to be more and more (if it be poſſible) then we
are already.

Cambridge Oct. 10\. 1668.

Moſt renowned Princeſs,

Your moſt humble and devoted Servants, The VICECHANCELLOR and the reſt of the
Senate of the Ʋniverſity of CAMBRIDGE.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=18)

# Illuſtriſſimae Excellentiſſimaeque Principi Marga­retae Navo-Coſtrenſi
Duciſſa.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

CƲm jampridem nobis explorata penitúſque perſpecta, ſit ſingularis
Amplitudinis Tuae na­tura quae ſic eſt & multiplici eruditione or­nata &
inſitâ humanitate imbuta, ut & poſſit propter maximam facultatem, & ſoleat
propter ſummam be­nevolentiam de Literarum Cultoribus optimè mereri,
committere certè noluimus quin utróque nomine obſtricti alacriores haſce
literas ſempiternae obſervantiae indices Celſitudini Tuae offeremus; cujus
eximia bonitas prae­clarum hoc & peculiare habet, quòd nec ab amicis
ſo­licitando, nec precibus noſtris rogando evocata eſt, ſed ſuâ ſponte effuſa
& ex ſe tota: rapitur nimirum ad quamvis ſui ſimilitudinem excellens quaeque
indoles, & quicquid aliqualis praeſtantiae opinionem ſuſtinet, veluti cognatum
ſibi, invitat, amplectitur, tuetur. Quàm magnificum hoc atque Tuum quòd
diſciplinas noſtras Tuae jam venerationis exemplo auguſtiores reddidiſti?
Quanto illud cunctis titulis ſpecioſius ibit in ſecula, quòd in ea generis
claritate fortunaeque opulentiâ ſtu­dia ſic amas, ut pauperes ſolent? In
quibus tam fe­liciter verſaris, ut nemo ità literaturae vel deſervire vel
ſufficere videatur, ut quotidie novi aliquid mira­culi parias, ut Foemina
Viris, Aulica Academicis doctri­nae palmam praeripueris, ut ſingulis denique
in ſua cu­juſque laude praeſtantior evaſeris. Ignoſce obſecramus, ſi minum
aliquem, ne Principem quidem noſtram ipſa naturâ tantopere valere, aut
propriis viribus in mul­tiformes iſtas altiſſimáſque cogitationes excitari
atque [[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=18)
erigi non credamus: ampliſſimam, illam mentem, per omnigenae diſciplinae
ſeriem latiſſimè patentem, neceſſe eſt divinitùs illuſtrari, docet nos ea tot
tantarúmque rerum penè infinita comprehenſio quantus Te coeleſtis ſpiritus
habitator intrârit, & quàm non ſimplex numen uni­cum hoc pectus ad univerſa
ſcientiarum ſpatia laxave­rit. Cúmque his auſpitiis quicquid unquam volueris
in artibus conſecuta ſis, cùm liquidae veritatis notionem melior aliquis
genius Principis noſtrae beneficium forè decrevit, cúmque Tuum fuerit non
argumentari, ſed pronuntiare oracula; nihilominus (quae eſt Amplitudi­nis tuae
verecundia) exquiſitis rationibus aſſerere Tua placita & confirmare dignaris
tanquam Tibi fides non debeatur, quaſi aſſenſum noſtrum non aliqua religio
conſtringat. Poſthac certè nobis in iſto genere vigili­arum ferias deſtinamus,
& Philoſophiae tandem metam prehendimus, cùm Celſitudo Tua ſpeculationem iſtam
dignam existimaverit, cujus ſe curis imbueret, ſibique propiùs addiceret:
Etenim nihil non investigatum ple­néque comprehenſum dabit istius accuminis
felix per­ſpicatia, nihil non inventum cum Cantabrigienſibus ſuis communicabit
iſtius candoris paratiſſima propenſio. Ne tamen ignobilem interim quietem
agere, aut de­ſidiae litare videamur, reliquiſti nobis difficillimam ſanè
Provinciam, gratulationem. Quippe divinum quiddam Literarum Alumnis quod certò
ſequantur nunc adeptis lucubrationes Tuae jamdudum praestiterunt, in ſtudiis
ſcilicet tranquilitatem; ideóque nec cuiquam veterum Regum aut Imperatorum
honeſtiorem unquam titulum erectum fuiſſe opinamur quàm nos hic Gratiae Tuae
ponendum cogitamus,

MARGARETAE I. PHILOSOPHORUM PRINCIPI.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=19) Ob
profligatos errores, ſublata dogmatum diſſidia & pacem reipublicae literariae
restitutum.

Dat.è Coll. S.S. & Individuae Trin. 3 Non. Octob. 1668.

  * Johan. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Anth. Marſhall.
  * Guliel. Lynnet.
  * Richardus Stedman.
  * Rob. Scott.
  * Iſaac Barrow.
  * Joannes Hawkins.
  * Robertus Moyle.
  * Guliel. Corker.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

ACcepimus, eâ, quâ par fuit animi reverentiâ & honore tam grandis beneficii,
Libros Tuos, id eſt, Incolumitatis noſtrae archas & argu­mentum. Nam, quum in
hâc ultimâ obruteſcentis mundi barbarie dimicandum ſit nobis de Vitâ, nedum de
Honore, cum tot illiteratis ſeculi dehoneſtamentis; ac quaſi deſperandum eſſet
de ſummâ rerum noſtrarum; nè viliſſimi nominis forent Cantabrigia,
Philoſophia, Eruditio; Effeciſti Ʋnica, ut putemus nos etiam porrò poſſe
vivere, conſignatâ noſtri nominis memoriâ in Li­bris Tuis, etiam ultra
Academias, & cum tempore aequabilitèr duraturis. Vivemus certè, quandoquidem
ità Tibi placuerit, Illuſtriſſima Princeps, quamdiu Virtuti & Libris conſtabit
Honos; & ſimul ac Libros Tuos legendo Feritatem exuerit Iſthoc ſeculum, tantâ
rerum verborúmque elegantiâ cicuratum; aeſtimabit in-ſuper, [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=19) neque nihili
prorſùs nos fuiſſe, quos ut Ope­rum ſuorum Arbitros non recuſaverit,
Ornatiſſima Princeps, Ita ipſa Librorum dignitas volentes, per­ſuaſos
omnimodò, victos bonâ fide traduxit in Iuſtiſ­ſimam Tui admirationem. Ʋteunque
tamen vides quantum laudum Tuarum deterendum ſit, non tam in­genii noſtris
culpâ (licet nimiùm huc! & immane quantum tanta Dignitati imparit) quàm quòd
Nata ſis in infelici hoc ſeculo Tantae Virtutis ergô exiliiſſet Graeciae
antiqua illa, juſtiſſima meritorum aeſtimatrix in Panegyrica decennalia; neque
eſſet cur Athenas ſuas, licet Minervae alumnas, praeponeret Iſocrates
Cantabrigiae, cui Tu tantum quippè honorem concilias, cui novem nec evenidam
lucem accendis. Omnia ſua Elogia Roma illa vetus explicâſſet in ſtatuas & Tui
nominis Titulos, quibus aſſurgerent quotidiè Corneliae Liviae, & ſi quae aliae
tunc fuerunt ideò ſeculi ſui Decus, & ſexûs Tui Gloria, quoniam Tu tunc
tem­poris nec dum nata eras, ſed Reſervata à ſummo re­rum Authore, & quaſi
comperendi nata in aetatis no­ſtra felicitatem & ornamentum. Sed obſoleverunt
dudum Tituli & Triumphi: periit quicquid fuit Grae­cia & Romae, niſi tenuis
quaedam Fama: etiam ipſa quae magis durare putantur marmora, tot doctorum
no­minibus inſcripta, dilapſa ſunt in vagum pulverem, Vivunt tamem adhuc
vigéntque ipſi Authores debitiſ­ſimis ſuis laudibus ſuperſtites, &
admiratoribus ſuis vivaciores. Et communis haec Tibi cum celeberimis illis
mortuis constabit Gloria; quòd, ut illos non jam demonſtrant ſtatuarum elogia,
admirantium applauſus, & ſecunda populi admurmuratio; ſed ſolidum doctri­nae
decus, & virtus ipſa ſuîmet Nomenclatrix: ſic & meritiſſimum Decus Tuum &
gratiſſima animi noſtri atteſtatio, abſque operoſo illo gratulationum & [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=20) applauſuum
apparatu, ſeliget Tibi locum in Bibliothecâ nostrâ, fidiſſimâ illâ ingeniorum
cuſtodiâ, & depoſi­taria, ubi, quod tenuis res noſtra nobis permittit, quod &
mos majorum & per quos profecimus ingenua Con­feſſio depoſcit, nos ſubindè
acclamabimus, Quod & (reſtitulâ in integrum Ratione, ſirmatâ Philoſophiâ,
victâ Inſidiâ) Literas in aliorum aeſtimet, in ſuâ Perſonâ nobilitet
Illuſtriſſima Heroina. Hoc igitur non ingrati animi indicium qualecunque eſſe
voluimus.

Illuſtriſſima Princeps,

Clementiae Tuae & Honori Devotiſſimi Clientuli, Praefectus Sociique Collegii
D. Joannis Evangeliſtae.

Cantabrigiae Eid. Octob. 6\. 1668

MADAM,

BY the Bounty of ſeveral Benefactors, our Liberary is furniſhed with many
large Vo­lumes; yet we have none we ſo highly e­ſteem, and are more proud of,
then thoſe written & given us by your Graces own hand. Jewels have their value
crowded in a little room. The Sybills Leaves as they became fewer advanced
their price. Among pieces all ſo perfectly excellent, we dare not otherwiſe
offer at a Compariſon, then as the Subject leads and determins us. The
Greatneſs and Miracle which hath appeared in the Life of the moſt Incomparable
Duke of Newcaſtle, could not but raiſe, in your Grace thoughts anſwerable to
ſo glorious a Theame, and give us at the ſame [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=20) time, both
Wonder and Delight, to read the Hi­ſtory of that full-blown Vertue and Glory,
which with us appeared firſt in their bud and Bloſſome. The next Glory to that
of having done ſuch Won­ders, is to have writ them ſo well and exactly. And,
had the Sex allowed it, Your Grace had done the ſame Actions, and left Deſpair
to any other Pen to have reached, their height. A grateful mind, which we
deſire to Expreſs, is the Prologue to our new Requeſt: but our chief Truſt and
Con­fidence is in your own ready and natural inclinati­ons to all Acts of
Bounty and Charity. They that are cunning in the Art of Begging, are ſo well
verſed and ſtudied in Faces, that among an hun­dred, they know which to let
paſs, and where to fix: they read at firſt ſight the Characters and
Diſpoſitions of a ready and willing Goodneſs: and will ſometimes pitty them
they Beg of, as carrying Faces apt to undo them into as low poverty as they
themſelves ſuffer. Though perhaps we have not ſo particular knowledge af thoſe
outward Linea­ments which might encourage this confident ad­dreſs; yet the
general Fame, beſides our own know­ledge, will not ſuffer us to be ignorant,
of thoſe of your great and generous Soul, which ſtayes not for opportunities
offered, but ſeeks them, and to know where it is wanting, is all the argument
neceſſary to your noble Bounty. We are ſo unhappily en­gaged in Building, that
we can neither leave off, nor go on without the help and aſſiſtance of others.
Yet we could be content to change our deſigne, and wholly leave what we have
in hand, to erect a Statue to your Graces Name and Memory. That as one
Margaret ſtands with us famous to Poſte­rity [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=21) for her Zeal to
promote the growth of Know­ledge, which was then upon its recovery from a long
and dark ignorance: ſo now your Grace ap­pears with fairer advantage, being
your ſelf, to the ſhame and reproach of our Sex, the great pattern and example
of Learning. We deſpair of raiſing any more laſting Monument to your Name,
then what already your Grace hath left with us. But, you will oblige here very
many Beads-men and Votaries, who will make it a great part of their ſtudy,
that the famous Acts of your Charity and Bounty, may be read not only in
Stones, but Men, who ſhall for ever bleſs your Memory, and pray for your
Happineſs. In which number your Grace will find at preſent

Feb. 28\. 1671.

MADAM,

Your Graces moſt obliged and devoted Servants, The Maſter, Fellows, and
Scholars of St. Johns Coll. in the Ʋniverſity of CAMBRIDGE.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=21)

# To the moſt Illuſtrious and Excellent Prince, the Lord Duke of Newcaſtle,
&c.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

THat your Grace Might not want freſh oc­caſions to oblige us, our Colledge was
not hitherto a finiſht Building, and we owe the perfection of our Colledge to
the late ge­nerous obligements of your Grace, when you ho­noured us with the
Picture of the late Right Ho­nourable Mary Counteſs of Shrewsbury, your moſt
noble Aunt, and our ſecond Found'reſs. 'Tis true, we here have lodged hitherto
with Conveniences, enough to atteſt the Generoſity of your thrice noble
Family, above as well our Expectations as Merits; and beyond what Learning
durſt promiſe it ſelf from this Barbarous Age. Our Colledge Walls are as
ſtrong, as our Noble Foundreſſes Deſignes were generous: and the Sun looks
upon us ſtill, but as he ſhould, through no Crevices or Chinks, nor makes more
day than we permit him to our melancholy Retirements. Nor would your Grace's
Illuſtrious Aunt be now aſhamed of that fair addition ſhe made our Colledge,
if the durable­neſs of the work can reflect any honour upon that generous
Effort of her Charity. But we wanted the laſt advantage our preſent Buildings
could re­reive: the Effigies of the Noble Counteſs of Shrews­bury, which would
at once, ennoble her Foundation, and our acknowledgements; and remind the
curi­oſity of Strangers, that this Age hath not been bar­ren of Illuſtrious
Inſtances of Charity, and of our thankful reſentments of ſo great
Encouragements to [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=22) Learning. Yea,
my Lord, your Grace hath now inſtructed us, and may undeceive others: and the
Statue of your Illuſtrious Aunt ſhall now encou­rage our Studies, and
ſuperintend over our Profi­ciency as her own Deputy: and we ſhall be aſhamed
to have lived unprofitably, and unanſwerably to ſo noble a Benefaction; or
that the Illuſtrious Counteſs of Shrewsbury ſhould, amidſt the Joys, wherein
She is ſurrounded by a bleſſed Immortality, have the diſſatis­faction to have
loved Learning in vain, and have built us a Synagogue, and ſo nobly ſeconded
the deſignes of the late moſt Serene Mother of K. Henry the ſeventh: 'Tis true
we ought to have owned the Honour to have ſet up ere now the Statue of the
moſt Noble Counteſs of Shrewsbury, but that which excuſes all Immoralities,
that which involved Kings, and King­doms, your moſt noble Family, and
Learning, in one Common Deſolation, the late Rebellion, hindred us till now:
We could only look on with Sorrow, the place deſigned for the Effigies of your
Grace's moſt Noble Aunt, and ſigh that the barbarous wickedneſs of the times,
which allowed no viſible remembrance of Saints or Kings, ſhould be able to
defeat our Deſigne, to perpetuate, in this nature, Her Memory, and our
Acknowledgements: But, we dare be bold humbly to conceive, this our late
thankfulneſs will be no diſadvantage to her happy Memory, and that the
Inſcription of St. John's Col­ledge upon her Statue, will hold even with the
lateſt Date of time: and that it may not be the only miraculous Priviledge of
ſome Rivers, after they have enricht their neighbouring Banks, to dive
ſuddenly into the Earth, for the ſpace of ſome miles, and riſe again into
their former greatneſs, [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=22) and acquire a
newer, and more laſting glory, by being, ſo long, undiſcovered: thus ſhall the
moſt Noble Counteſs of Shrewsbury be not diſadvantaged (as far as our weak
pretences can reach) by this our poſt-fact Acknowledgements, but, like
Majeſty, by this diſtance of Years, command a greater Veneration. But if we
dare pretend ſo much to honour the Memory of the Bleſſed now in Heaven, how
ſhall we pay the Living, thoſe that by ſo great Obligations have deſerved all
that we can pre­tend to of Gratitude and Eſteem, amongſt which, your Grace's
Favours to our Colledge hath entitled you the Principal. My Lord, to ſuch we
are poor in every thing but Prayers: and that your Grace may long live to be
(as you are) the honour of this Age, your moſt Noble Family, and (which we
take the boldneſs to be proud in) this Colledge: that, by that Civility,
whereby you have made even your misfortunes Illuſtrious, and Crown'd Heads
your Admirers, you may long unteach this Barba­rous Age that bruitiſh
diſaffection to Learning; that you may ſurvive that envy which your Grace's
Excellent Accompliſhments as well as our little Learning hath attracted, is
the Deſire of

May it pleaſe your Grace,

Your Graces moſt Devoted, Obliged, and humble Servants, The Maſter and Fellows
of St. John's Colledge.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=23)

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE,

IT would be a matter of great difficulty to re­count your great Praiſes, but
it would be an endleſs undertaking to ſet forth your Merits; how great your
Graces worth is in all parts of the World, eſpecially this of England, may be
con­jectured, even from hence, in that although we may endeavour to reckon up
your Graces particular Fa­vours towards us, yet are we no way able to expreſs
them: And yet to paſs by your Graces benificence in ſilence, becauſe we are
altogether unable to an­ſwer the worth of it, would be to excuſe our ſelves
from a leſs, and incurr upon our ſelves the gilt of a greater Crime; and ſo
leſt we ſhould betray our ignorance in ſpeaking or writing to be profeſſedly
ungrateful, ſomething we muſt offer to your Grace though we fall never ſo much
ſhort of the great­neſs of your Merits; our devotion in attempting, may in
part excuſe our inability in performing, what we owe to your Grace: Pardon us
great Sir if we devoutly admire thoſe ſingular perfections, for the knowledge
of which we are beholding to your Grace alone, whom when we admire for your
Excel­lency in other Arts, we find that you alone are able to make your Horſes
if not altogether equal, yet but little inferiour to their Keepers, we are
convinced that your Induſtry together with your Skill is ſo a­vailable, that
they almoſt ſeem worthy of the ſociety of Men, and if they could but ſpeak, as
men do, we ſhould hear them complaining that they are in­jured in not being
accounted rational Creatures; when being taught by your Grace they are a
ſafeguard in War and the greateſt ornament of a Common-wealth [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=23) in Peace. Go on
therefore Great Sir who only art able to bring ſuch great things to
perfection: Long may your Grace live like your ſelf, that you may grace the
World with your Inventions, aſſiſt the King with your Counſel, preſerve your
Countrey by your aid and Valor, and continue to honour us your moſt humble
Servants with your Patron­age.

  * John Pearſon Maſter of the Coll.
  * Geo. Chamberlaine Vice-Maſter.
  * Clem. Nevill.
  * Robert Boreman.
  * William Baylie
  * Robert Crane.
  * Humphrey Babington.
  * Richard Stedman.
  * Robert Scott.

Given from our Colledge of the Holy and Ʋndivided Trinity, the fifth of the
Calends of April 1663.

# Excellentiſſimo Honoratiſſimóque Domino, Domi­no Gulielmo Marchioni Novo-
Caſtrenſi, &c.

EXCELLENTISSIME DOMINE,

PƲlchrè & prudenter Reges Clariſſimos, ſolus qui referre potes, imitaris, cûm
eodem op­timè merendi ſtudio, tum nec minore largiendi facultate: Illis utique
debemus ampliſſima haec Mu­ſarum ſacraria, & reditus quibus fruimur,
ampliſ­ſimos: Quod optandum erat reliquum, Tu nobiliſſimâ nos arte donâſti, &
humanis uſibus longè commodiſ­ſimâ. Eximiam proinde Nominis gloriam, utrique
[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=24) & meriti
eſtis, & conſequuti, & tranſmittendam in poſteros feliciſſimam memoriam, in
quantum durabunt marmora & eruditio. Patere, Vir Illuſtriſſime, quan­tum
Veſtra poteſt inſignis Humanitas, ut in laudes tam cumulatas, hoc inſuper
accedat debitiſſimum Tibi, quòd inter Heroas omnes, quos ab interitu certior
Hiſtori­corum ſides, aut Poetarum vindicat ingenium, vix Tibi unum in arte Tuâ
imitandum habueris, neminem omnino conferendum habeas. Sanè, inter Deos,
An­tiqui celebrant Apollinem, ob iſthanc fortè peritiam, praepoſitum Equis
Solaribus cuſtodem juxta ac modera­torem; At ille demum is erat, à quo
perperam edoctus Phaethon triſtiſſimas imprudentiae poenas dedit; quanto
feliciorem habiturus exitum, ſi in Tua tempora incidiſ­ſet. At etiam Apolline
prior Neptunus, tutelaris idem Oceani & Equorum Deus, magno cum dedecore
iſtius artis, praelatam ſibi Pallada dolebat, & poſtha­bitum oleae Pegaſum
ſuum, ſcilicet uno victus ſuffra­gio, clariſſimam Athenas Ʋrbem, Minervae
reliquit inſigniendam. Quàm Tu Marino Numine dignior es, à quo, ſi contigiſſes
medius, magnâ ſuâ cum gloria tuliſſent, & inſignem Pallas repulſam, & felicius
no­men Athenienſes. Nec verò eſt, cur imperitos pror­ſus hâc in re fuiſſe
Veteres, aut minus induſtrios, creda­mus; magna quidem ea ſunt, quae de
Pegaſo, Cyllaro, Bucephalo, alliſque, non oppidò multis, accepimus: Verùm illi
ſolùm perficienda fuit res Equeſtris, qui effi­cere primus potuit, id quod Tu
facis, ut nobiliſlimum animal, & poſt homines, omnium ſagaciſſimum, rati­onis
quodammodò particeps eſſet, & tantùm non huma­nâ dignum ſocietate: Quod, ſi
Poetarum Princeps nu­dum Equitis epitheton, conſultiſſimo fortiſſimóque Vi­ro
dignum decus, & Neſtori ſuo par crediderit, quo Te nomine inſigniemus,
Clariſſime Marchio, eoſdem & [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=24) annos meritum
quos [...] tranſegit, & melio­rem, ſi contigerit uſquam, famae Tuae praeconem.
Quod ſolum noſtrae opis eſt, magnos inter ſcientiarum inſtau­ratores Te merito
ſuſpicimus, & poſt divinam illam ſanctiſſimi Regis, proximè reponimus Icones
Tuas; Optimo quidem jure, ut, qui ſtrenuus olim Regiae Ma­jeſtatis aſſertor
eras & vindex, eidem eſſes cum Rege Tuo, quantum in nobis eſt, aeternitati
ſacer: Id inſu­per vovemus alacres, magna nos & amplitudini Veſtrae
devotiſſima Societas; Ita Tu nobis uſque faveas, Il­luſtriſſime Heros
Apollinaris. & Muſae omnes Mar­chioniſſa Tua.

Dat.è Coll. S.S. & Individuae Trin. 4 Cal. Febr. 1663.

  * Johan. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Clem. Nevil.
  * Theod. Croſland.
  * Anth. Marſhall.
  * Georgius Chamberlaine.
  * Franciſcus Barton.
  * Robertus Crane.
  * Guliel. Lynnet.
  * Gualterus Catsby.

MY LORD,

BEſides the publick acknowledgement of the great honour done to the
Univerſity, in a­dorning their Library with your Excellen­cies own moſt exact,
and renowned Works; The Duty of my place calls upon me to let your Honor know,
that as this ſingular Grace, and Favour is [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=25) highly reſented
by all; ſo by none more particu­larly acknowledged, and admired then, by

K.C.C. Jan. 16\. 1663.

My LORD

Your Excellencies moſt obſervant Servant  
James Fletewood.

ILLUSTRISSIME MARCHIO,

MIrificè tenemur immenſae laudis & Artis o­pere, quod nupèr imputâſti ſeculo,
& Al­mae Cantabrigiae, dono dediſti; tantum e­nim, ac tam certum eruditionis
argumentum & Acade­miae pergratum, & gloriâ tuâ dignum uno omnes ore
ag­noſcimus: Nec alio fortaſſe Nobis, Poſteriſve opus erit Theatro, quo ſummâ
cum veneratione tam Fortunae, quàm Animi tui magnitudinem intueamur. Nomen
quidem aliquod, decúſque olim in hoc ſtudio fuit Xeno­phontis, & Balbi, &
Simonis Athenienſis; cete­rùm ex quo luculentiſſima res, Novo-Caſtrenſis
Me­thodus in lucem prodiit, Autores iſtos nec miramur ad­modum, nec
deſideramus, ne Veterum faeces cum ho­dierno flore miſcere videamur. Si verò
merito ſuo ce­lebretur Theſſalia, quòd Marti ſacrum Animal effudit, Ʋlláne
unquam Oratio Excellentiſſimo Marchioni par eſſe poterit, cujus ingenio non
Equum jam aliquem ſingularem, ſed Equeſtrem Scientiam totam debemus? Nondùm
nobis (Invictiſſime Domine) nondùm ex­cidére diſcrimina, quae totiès in acie
Regiarum copia­rum Ductor ſubiiſti: Verùm quià virtutem, & fidem, & triumphos
tuos abundè loquuntur, quotquot Heroas, [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=25) & arma
frequentant, nos Academicis ſpaciis innutriti, ac literarum omnium amantes in
Equeſtri Apparatu toti ſumus, ubi cuncta ſubtilitèr accuratè, expreſſéque
arbitraris: Appellamus Aelios, ac Perſios noſtrates; appellamus etiam (ſi
placet) Exteros, qui poſthabitis ubique ſuis Magiſtris, Ʋnum Te conſulunt,
unum au­diunt, unum verſant, & ſuum quiſque Quadrupedem ad nutum, obruſsámque
tuam caſtigant. Quantum ad Alumnos togae, & ſi ferè (quae fortunae nostrae
maligni­tas eſt) vix ultra jumentum ſapimus meritorium; ta­men extremum
Diſcipulorum tuorum agmen claudere non erubeſcimus, ab Hipparcho longè omnium
huma­niſſimo moniti, hodiè primùm in alieno foro peregrina­mur, Circum
ingredimur, in quatuordecim ſedemus, equiria ſpectamus; neque tamen aut
Xanthum, aut Cyllarum, aut Incitatum, aut Pegaſum ipſum am­pliùs, ſed quem Tu
ſeligis, alis, instruis, abſolvis, Caballum admiramur,

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 9 Cal. Februar. 1663.

Excellentiae tuae addictiſſimi PROCANCELLARIƲS reliquuſque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,

UT Tibi uſque ſuppetat nova nobis benefaci­endi materia, deerat quippe
Collegio noſtro necdum abſoluto & ad faſtigium bonâ fide perducto ultima
manus, & exacti probè operis Comple­mentum. Habitavimus quidem hucúſque,
maximâ cum Tuae Illuſtriſſimae Familiae Gloriâ, eleganter & ſplen­didè ſatis,
quantum è re noſtrâ eſſet, & liceret per temporum Literis infenſorum incuriam.
Suſtinent ſe [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=26) fortiter ſatis
muri noſtri, nec ruinam minitantur, aut admittunt (niſi quà decet) ſolem: nec
diſpuderet Il­luſtriſſimam Comitiſſam Salopienſem ſui Operis, cujus firmitati
in tam grande Collegii noſtri Ornamentum tot anni ſuffragantur. Sed deerat
adhùc, quae tranſeun­tibus memoriam tanti beneficii refricaret;
Honoratiſsi­mae Principis Effigies, & quaſi Vicaria Inſpectrix tanti
aediſicii, noſtraeque in bonis ſtudiis profectionis. Et no­ſtrî nos puduit
veſci frugibus, nec arborem ſuſpicere, unde tanta nobis beneficia decidebant.
Ergo per Te li­cuit, Illuſtriſsime Princeps, nobis non jure impingi poſſe
Ingratitudinis notam: & jam ex voto collocata in Collegii noſtri tholo
nobiliſsimae Amitae tuae Effi­gies, nos animabit indies, quaſi novus loci
Genius, & tantae praeſentiae Conſcientia urgebit nos porrò in hoc li­terarum
certamine, ne inutiles vixiſſe videamur, aut poeniteret olim Illuſtriſſimam
Heroinam, inter tot gau­dia, quibus in Coelo jam fruitur, feciſſe nobis haec
otia, hanc Domum, alterámque à Sereniſsimâ P. M. Prin­cipe Margareta
Fundatrice noſtra habuiſſe hujus Col­legii Procurationem. Et quidem, ne
fecerimus hoc an­te, & obſignatum Testati ſimus tanti beneficii
grati­tudiniſque noſtrae nomen, obstitit bellorum rabies infenſa Principibus,
Familiae Tuae, Literiſque (Heu nimis) in univerſum omnibus. Licuit nobis
tantùm inſpicere defoſſum ſat altè in ſacris hiſce aedibus locum
Illuſtriſ­ſimae Mariae Salopienſis Statuae deſtinatum, & ingemiſ­cere, tantum
potuiſſe delirans in rabiem uſque iſthoc ſe­culum in pientiſsimam Nobiliſsimae
Foeminae memo­riam, in Literas bonas noſtrámque omnium Gratitudi­nem. Nec
tamen deteretur aliquid de Illuſtriſsimae Comitiſſae Gloria, dum nobis (ſerò
licèt) detur eſſe Gratis, dum perennaverit Collegium noſtrum, Hono­ratiſſimae
Principis Statuae inſcriptum: Et ne ſola ſint [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=26) Fluviorum
quorundam miracula, diſcurrere ſcilicet lato alveo in laſcivientem riparum
viriditatem, deindè ſubducere ſe ex oculis, & acto per oculta aliquorum
mil­lium curſu emergere rurſùs, & vindicare ſeſe in ſu­periorem magnitudinem:
emicabit meliùs poſt tot an­norum intervallum Illuſtriſſimae Comitiſſae fama,
& quantum licet per gratiſſimam noſtram beneficii in nos Ejus Commemorationem,
majorem ſibi conciliabit è lon­ginquo Reverentiam. Si audeamus haec tantáque
ſpon­dere in Mortuorum memoriam, quo ergò Tibi, Illuſtriſ­ſime Princeps,
ſuperſtiti adhuc (bono cum Deo) ſa­tisfiet à nobis, cui tam ſolenne eſt, &
haereditarium tot beneficiis Collegii noſtri vota, & omnia Honoris ſuffra­gia
demereri? Ʋt autem ſerum ſit Lacrymoſum illud alterum defuncti olim Herois
celebrandi, & poſteros noſtros potiùs maneat officium; ut diù faveas nostro
nomini; dedoceátque haec tempora immanem illam in Liter as feritatem ſumma
illa Comitas Tua, quâ tot exteros Principes Tibi conciliâsti, expugnâsti
Invidiam, nullum Tibi infenſum reddidiſti, niſi communem om­nium hoſtem, in
votis ſummè eſt,

Illuſtriſſime Princeps,

Clementiae Tuae devotiſſimis Clientibus Magiſtro & Sociis Collegii D. Joannis
Evangeliſtae in Academiâ Cantabrigienſi.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=27)

MOST EMINENT PRINCE,

ON whom to father the rare, and admirable Method of Horſmanſhip, that
ſingular, and uſeful Invention, which hitherto ſo many Nations, and ſo many
ſeveral Societies of men, and ſo many Commanders in chief, have earneſtly
deſired, though Strangers peradventure may, yet of all men a­live We of the
Univerſity cannot be to ſeek; becauſe every ſingle line, that Apelles draws,
ſerves us for a ſufficient Character, and Cognizance of the Ar­tificer: But in
regard of our unfeigned, and un­alterable Zeal for the Duke of Newcaſtles
honour, We did heretofore (if your Highneſs remember) now and then entreat,
and beſeech you not to ſup­preſs any longer (than neceſſity required) ſo
learned, and uſeful, and compleat a Work. In that humble petition of ours
whether we did as became us, or no, we determine not: only (with leave) we
ſup­poſe that the reaſonableneſs alone of our importu­nity prevailed at length
with, and overcame a Ge­neral otherwiſe abſolute, and altogether invincible.
Whereupon at this day (by your Princely favour) we ſee and with exceeding
delight (as occaſion is) peruſe a ſecond demonſtration of your abilities,
ex­poſed now to publick view, for the benefit of all generous and high-
ſpirited men in Europe, ſo that no man hereafter may dream of any Perſon in
any Place whatſoever, more Noble, or (in what part of Learning you pleaſe)
more an accompliſhed Maſter, than your moſt Excellent ſelf: for, as if in the
former Volume you had only vouchſafed us a taſt to whet our Stomachs, you now
ſpread, and furniſh a Royal Table with all ſorts of Delicacies; [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=27) you now gratify
the appetite of your Countrey-men; you now encounter, and anſwer the enquiry
of Cambridge Philoſophers, in whoſe judgement your laſt adventure ſeems always
to be the moſt Glori­ous. If they will enter the Liſts, and compare, we
challenge not only theſe old Profeſſors, Bellerophon, Seſostris, and Sarmenes,
but alſo the later Authors of greateſt account in France, and Italy,
Pignatel­lus, Labrovius, and Griſon. Let them altogether appear, and either
they muſt immediately vaniſh, or elſe ingenuouſly bluſh that they are but once
na­med in the ſame day with matchleſs Cavendiſh. And although they may ſeem,
at firſt, ſomewhat more than ordinarily concerned, to be thus at length
re­duced, yet as ſoon as ever they hear the Name of Duke William, they bow to
your Sovereignty, and falling infinitely ſhort of your Glory, they confeſs you
the moſt abſolute and only Maſter, and them­ſelves your Pupils. But why do we
mention theſe ſeveral Dreſſers, when as (if we look abroad) we may daily ſee
both Kings and Princes reſorting to your Palace, condeſcending to ſit at your
Feet, and intreating you as their Oracle to declare unto them, firſt where and
of what Race to chuſe a Horſe for the Mannage, and then how to Feed, and
Order, and Mount, and to Work, and Raiſe, and Stay, and Ride in all Voltoes,
and Corvetts, Forward, Backward, Side-ways, on both hands, juſt as the Rider
directs. For this ſame purpoſe, and in or­der only to be Matriculated into the
Duke of Newcaſtle's Academy, the renowned Cavaleers of all Orders attend,
whether they be Knights of the Golden Fleece, in Burgundy, or the Knights of
of St. Michael, in France, or the Knights of the [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=28) Annunciation in
Savoy, or the Knights Batchelors, the Knights of the Bath, and the Knights of
the Garter, in England: for all agree to learn of you, to Back, to Sit, and
Ride, as you direct; and whenſoever at a loſs, or puzled, or in diſpute to
acknowledge you the only Governour, and Dictator, and Um­pire, and ſuch a
Maſter of Horſe, as can (when you pleaſe) infuſe ſenſe, and reaſon not only
into Men, but alſo into Brutes. Moſt deſervedly there­fore ſhall you (Great
Sir) in your Book entertain, and exerciſe the Studies not only of this, but
like­wiſe of ſucceeding Generations, as we confidently preſage, and promiſe
our ſelves, who are

Cambridge, March. 13\. 1667.

Your Graces moſt Humble and moſt Devoted Servants, The VICE-CHANCELLOR and the
whole Senate of the Univerſity of Cambridge.

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

UN de ſit equeſtris Methodus, Illa tot Gen­tibus, tot hominum contuberniis,
tot Impera­toribus expetita Gaza, minimè omnium mi­ramur; nam Apellem ſtatim
ex lineae ſubtilitate. Ve­rùm, quia Te ſingularitèr adamamus, quod
elucubra­tus es, laborioſum, & doctum Opus ne ſemper intra Veſtae penetralia
concluderes, ſaepè (ſi meminiſti) plu­ribúsque verbis interpellavimus:
recténe, an perperàm, Ipſe videris; certè poſtulationis noſtrae aequitate
victus es, & expugnatus tandèm Dux aliàs inſuperabilis; [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=28) hinc alterum
videmus, & beneficio tuo obtinemus excellentis ingenii periculum, quod in
Europae totius Theatro facere dignaris, No quis in poſterum imagi­netur Ʋno Te
quicquam eſſe uſpiàm aut generoſius, aut (quâ parte velis) eruditius. Etenim
quaſi ſupe­riori Volumine ſalivam tantùm nobis moviſſes, Menſam nunc inſtruis
uberiorem, nunc Civium quoque deſideri­um exples, noſtraeque Philoſophorum
expectationi ſatis­facis, quibus proxima quaeque tua non poſſunt non vi­deri
conſummatiſſima. Conferant ſe (neque enim re­pugnamus) non modò Veteres illi
Bellerophon, Se­ſoſtris, Sarmenes; ſed heſterni ſi placet) Domito­res Itali,
Gallive, Pignatellus, Labrovicus, Griſon; quid? Velut Ʋmbrae diffugiunt; &
quamvis in ar­gumento nobili dolent ſibi palmam praeripi, tamen, ubi Nomen
audiunt Gulielmi Ducis, agnoſcunt numen, longéque infra Cavendiſhi laudes
jacentes, ſummum Illum, unicunque Magiſtrum, ſe verò contrà faten­tur. Sed
quorſùm tergeminos, Agitatores loquimur? Cùm Reges eliam, & Terrarum Domino
cernamus ad Te convolantes, Te (praeſtantiſſime Moderator) affectantes, Te
conſulentes, interrogantéſque, ut ab Ori­gine primâ repetas, diſcernas,
expendas quâ Regione, ſtirpéque veniat Bellator Sonipes, quomodo parandus,
alendus, erudiendus, curandus, inſiliendus, erigendus, admittendus,
compeſcendus, & in omnem partem pro arbitrio flectendus; nec alio fine, quàm
ut in tuam Ʋnius Academiam adſcribantur, limen jam tuum obſident ſa­cri
(quotquot in honore) Collegae, ſive Aurei Velleris apud Burgundos, ſive S.
Michaelis apud Gallos, ſive Annuntiationis apud Sabaudos, ſive denique
Periſce­lidis, aut Balnei, aut Ordinis Aurati in Patriâ: Nam tuum ad nutum ſe
componunt, tuis auſpiciis inſcendunt, & equitant, & quotieſcunque vel
delirant, vel abdi­tum [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=29) aliquid,
abſtruſúmque quaerunt, omnibus, & ſin­gulis Tu Rector, Tu Theſaurus, Tu
Dictator es, & Princeps juventutis, qui non hominibus jam ampliùs, ſed Brutis
ipſis mentem, animúmque inſpiras. Quo­circa tuis laboribus non ſolùm hujus
ſeculi, verum eti­am omnis aevi studia exercebis, quemadmodum in ante­ceſſum
ſibi pollicentur.

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 3 Id. Martias 1667.

Eminentiae tuae cupientiſſimi PROCANCELLARIƲS reliquuſque Senat. Acad. Cantab.

# Eminentiſſimo Illuſtriſſimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci, Marchioni, Comiti
Novo-Caſtrenſi, &c.

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

REcenſere ſingulos quos nactus es Titulos operae res eſſet difficilioris, quos
autem mereris pror­ſus infinitae; Publica Tua in Ʋniverſum Orbem merita hunc
noſtrum praecipuè Britannicum quanta ſint vel hinc licet conjicere, quòd
privata in nos Tua pro dignitate exprimere ſoliciti etiamnùm ſi­mus neutiquam
valeamus: Silentio tamen praeterire beneficia ſatis quia laudare non poſſumus,
à leviori nos eſſet culpâ expedire majoriſque criminis reatum contra­here,
ingratos palàm profiteri, ne in dicendo rudes vi­deamur. Tentandum igitur eſt
aliquid etſi parum ſuc­cedat, in magnis utique voluiſſe ſat eſt; Voluntati
licet impar ſit potentia, impotentiam officioſa excuſabit vo­luntas. Ignoſcas
itaque, Princeps Illuſtriſſime, ſi de­voti ſuſpiciamus virtutes Tuas, quas vel
noviſſe tibi uni omnes acceptum referimus; ſi mirari ſubeat tuae in [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=29) caeteris
potentiae praeſtantiam, qui vel Equos potis es reddere ipſorum cuſtodibus ſi
non omnino pares, parùm ſaltem inferiores; Tua in ipſos uſque adeo cùm arte
valet induſtria quod tantùm non efficias ut humana ſocietate digni videantur,
quos niſi ſola deficeret lo­quela, conquerentes audiremus ſe injuriâ rationis
parti­cipes non haberi, quùm à Te edocti maximum in Re­publica ſint Belli
praeſidium, maximum ibidem Pacis ornamentum. Solus ergò qui potes, tanta
pergas per­ficere, Vive diu, tibimetipſi ſoli diúque ſimilis, Ornes inventis
Orbem, Conſilio Regem juves, Patriam auxi­lio incolumen praeſtes, & nos Tui
studioſiſſimos Tuo uſque Patricinio tuearis.

Dat. è Coll. S. S. & Individuae Trin. 5 Cal. April. 1668.

  * Johan. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Georgius Chamberlaine, Vm.
  * Clem. Nevil.
  * Rich. Boreman.
  * Guliel. Baylie.
  * Robertus Crane.
  * Humph. Babington.
  * Rich. Stedman.
  * Robertus Scott.

# Excellentiſſimo Invictiſſimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci Novo-Caſtrenſi, &c.

ILLUSTRISSME CELSISSIMEQUE PRINCEPS,

QƲàm gratum animi cultum affectúmque, cùm univerſa togatorum gens, tum Muſae
preſer­tim DEO Triuni ſacrae, Familiae Tuae de­beant & enixè devovent, ut non
tam ex verbis, quaelongo [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=30) poſt linquis
intervallo, quàm ex cauſis, quarum Ipſe Author es aeſtimare velis, à Clementia
Tua demiſſe obſecramus. Enimvero, ut taceamus ingentia dona in literatos
jugiter collata, tum praeclara iſta, quibus, unà cum forulis noſtris tantùm
non ſuccumbimus, volumi­na, novis nos urges & oneras gratiaum argumentis,
beneficia beneficiis pertegis, & quo majus plenè exco­gitando non poteras,
Teipſum donas. Quo quidem in­troeunte, videtur Bibliotheca noſtra, Veſtrae
veluti Magnitudinis aemula, auguſtiorem multò ſpeciem in­ducere; & ne quid
adventûs deſit ſolennitati, ſponte ſedibus ſuis ſe movent minorum gentium
Heroës, cer­tatim ad unum omnes aſſurgunt, & facto agmine in anguſtias ruunt,
ut Tibi locum officioſe cedant. Quos inter Anteſignanus CAESAR, Britannorum
olim hoſtis acerrimus, herbam Tibi promptiſſimè porrigit, priorem lubens
agnoſcit, & ſerò tandem intelligit difficilem fuiſſe de Inſula nostra
victoriam, utpote quae Tui ſi­miles, & Te tulerit. Sed defunctorum iſtae
gratu­lationes, & ſuperſtiti etiamdum Principi minùs ac­commodatae: Quòd verò
per ora hominum domi foriſque volitas, quòd celebria Tua dicta, & res palàm
geſtae, omnium oculos aurèſque trahant, & tanquam ſyderum influxus ubique
praeſtò ſint, id imprimis Excellentiſſi­mae Heroinae MARGARETAE Tuae, tum
fideliſſimo Il­lius Interpreti meritiſſimò ferimus acceptum. O factum bene ut
quae poſteris aeternûm profutura ſunt, ab oculatâ teſte, & individuâ rerum
Tuarum Sociâ exarata tranſmitterentur; ut quae orbe Terrarum con­ſcio
perpetrata ſunt, linguâ gentibus communi celebren­tur; ut totius denuò Europae
Magnates Novo-Ca­ſtrii Vitam tanquam virtutis omnigenae Exemplum, legant,
ſuſpiciant, imitentur. Quod noſtrum eſt inter­ea, DEUM Opt. Max. ſuppliciter
oramus, Ʋt ae­tati [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=30) Tuae quàm
plurimos porrò annos propitius adjiciat, quibus veneranda Principis Senectus,
quaſi redditâ ju­ventute, revireſcat, & uberrimam novae inſuper Hi­ſtoriae
materiem poſteris ſuppeditet.

Ità vovere indies non deſinimus,

Dat. Cantab. à Coll. S. S. atque Individ. Trin. Junii 19\. 1669.

Celſitudini Veſtrae devotiſſimi

  * Joann. Pearſon, Magiſt. Coll.
  * Geo. Chamberlaine, V. M.
  * Clem. Nevill.
  * Guliel. Baylie.
  * Rob. Crane.
  * Humph. Babington.
  * Guliel. Lynnet.
  * Rich. Stedman.
  * Jo. Hawkins.

QƲod uſque adeò inclareſcas, Illuſtriſſime Prin­ceps, quaeque dudum Nominis
Veſtri celebri­tas meritò videbatur ſumma, major quotidiē fiat, ſeriò illud
Tibi, illud & nobis, ſi per Te lice at, Collegium nos Vestrum Superbè
gratulamur. Quin pa­teris, Heros Ampliſſime, otia Veſtra nunquam non
oc­cupatiſſima & à nobis interpellari, inque tantâ omni­um adeundi vos
ſalutandique contentione, ne Tuorum, ne domesticos, humiles licèt, applauſus
dedigneris. Dum famam Veſtram omnes ubique praedicant rapiúntque ſuas ad
partes Nominis Vestri gloriam, dum Britan­nia ſibi Te dum Academia vendicat,
quidni & nos, quibus, utpote minoribus, tantum Patrocinium & de­eſſe [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=31) & deberi
videatur, Te noſtrum (quale nobis De­cus & Ornamentum!) gloriemur? At nec fas
eſt credere Amplitudinem Veſtram ablatam nobis velle tam justam gloriandi
Anſam, quum illud ſolum ſummis Ve­ſtris in nos Beneficiis egiſſe hucuſque
videaris, ne Tan­tus è nobis prodiiſſe Heros difficulter nimis olim
crede­retur. Verſabamus manu animóque ſedulo quae apud nos ſui Ingenii
Vestraeque vitae Geſtorum Elegantiſſi­ma Monumenta depoſuerat, Sereniſſima
Princeps Con­ſors Vestra Praeclariſſima, moramur ſingulis Paginis, Summa
quaeque, hoc eſt, omnia notamus, haurimus ocu­lis quae olim famâ nobis
plurimum, non tamen ſatis innotuerant, dumque vivi vivum legimus, placidè
per­ſruimur, & noſtro & poſterorum bono; & cum illâ in Re toti ſumus opportunè
ſupervenit Praeſtantiſſimum Tui Teſtimonium Egregium illud hodiè Bibliothecae
no­ſtrae, imo Veſtrae, Ornamentum. Accepimus Clariſſi­me Ducum, hoc honoris &
amoris Veſtri Argumentum eà, quâ par erat & reverentiâ & gratitudine.
Re­poſuimus Librum Illum inter reliquam Muſarum ſu­pellectilem; nec erit in
poſterum qùod malè audiamus quaſi ex literis emolleſcerent nimium hominum
animi, & non è nobis prodiret quiſ quam niſi rebus gerendis in­eptior, cum Tu,
Fortiſſime Dux, ducis Muſarum Cho­ros, exerces juventutem Academicam, excitas
animos, reguláſque ponis, quibus ad ardua quaeque obeunda vel interlegendum
aſſuefiant. Profuiſti hucuſque Patriae populóque Veſtro factis uſúque rerum,
quod cum ulterius nec licet nec opus eſt, ea Tu inter Pacis otia documenta
tradis, quibus tranſeunt ad poſteros Ʋtiles artes; & ad quae hujus Saculi
homines per Exemplum, ad ea poſteri ex praecepto vestro instituantur: nec
ullum pro­fectò magno Principe Immortalitatem merituro dignius benefaciendi
genus quam quod in poſteros erogatur: [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=31) Nondum Senuiſti
Praeſtantiſſime Dux, etſi emeritus, mereris tamen: Aciem inſtruis, diſponis
militem, ex­ercitum ducis, & quicquid ad Victoriam docti Equi for­téſque
equites valuerunt unquam, & valuerunt pluri­mùm, illud Tu vel inter otia &
ludos meditaris: fir­maſti imperium hominum, Animalque nobis impar &
Potentiſſimum ad uſus noſtros Amplitudo veſtra feli­citer efformavit. Quin
macte virtute Veſtra Dux Optime; inſtrue Tu tua tempora, ut deponant hodiè
homines omnem morum feritatem, vel ſe fateantur ul­trò ipſis Brutis
immaniores. Haec ſunt otia Vestra; fruaris itaque Pace & Receſſu illo, Serus
in Coelum redeas, Siſque diu quod hodiè experimur, Ingens Bri­tanniae decus,
literarum praeſidium, & perilluſtre anti­quae virtutis exemplum pariter &
firmamentum: Illa, proſperáque omnia Amplitudini Veſtrae precamur.

Devotiſſimi Tibi Magiſter & Socii Collegii D. Joannis Evangeliſtae in Academiâ
Cantabrigienſi.

Dat. è Collegio praedicto 3 Cal. Aprilis, 1668.

VEſtris imprimis auxiliis debemus, Illuſtriſſime Princeps, quòd Nobiliſſima
Domina, Sa­lopiae Comitiſſa, juſtis ſuis apud nos hono­ribus, quibus diù
fraudata est, gaudeat jam tandem, & triumphet. Te autem, cui meritò in Bello
maximi, in pace optimi contigit titulus, apud Reges, ſummóſque Principes
Equeſtris ſtatuae manet ſedes, & expectat gloria. Tam magna praeſtitit
Celſitudo Tua, ut in ſolâ virtute ſperari poſſint praemia, & contenta ſit
tantùm meruiſſe. Nulli autem rectiùs ſciunt, aut digniores [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=32) ſunt, qui
respublicas adminiſtrent, quàm qui vehemen­tiùs averſantur & minimè volunt.
Perduellium in Angliâ nullibi fiet mentio ſine veſtrinominis virtute & ſummâ
laude, nec vel in diſſitiſſimis terris tam horri­ficum belli fulmen latere
potuit. Non mediocris nos honoris & ſuperbiae tangit ſenſus, cum cogitemus ea
apud nos olim ſcientiae, prudentiae, & invicti animi ſe prodidiſſe ſpecimina,
quae hodiè pleno eluceſcunt ju­bare. Magnus ex Illuſtriſſimâ Familiâ contigit
honos, qui autem è propriâ virtute ſequitur longè adhuc ma­jor eſt. Clarum
virtutis & gloriae facem, quam Cel­ſitudini Tuae Parentes praetulerunt,
lucidiorem tradet poſteris. Superiores noſtri ad nos detulerunt, quo animo &
ſtudio nos ſimul & bonas literas, dum hîc moram traheres, proſequebaris; id
inſuper nos in poſterum uni­cè curabimus, ut ea, quae hodiè de Te habetur
opinio, incorrupta ad ſeros uſque nepotos deſcendat, & diutiſ­ſimè vivat. Ʋt
autem egregia illa, quâ maximè gau­des et fulges inclareſcat indies
benefaciendi indoles, eam ipſis parietibus noſtris inſcribi obnixè petimus,
utpotè quae hac ratione ultra mortalitatis fatum ſit duratura, Eo­rum in
numero nos ſumus, quibus ſtultitiae nota inuri­tur, quòd aedificare caeperint,
neſciunt autem perſicere. Ʋtinam non ita verum eſſet infortunium, quod vetat
quo minùs hoc in nos quadret infame dedecus. Nobis enim non contemnendam
pecuniae ſummam teſtamento ſuo legavit vir quidam Optimus, quam huic uſui
de­ſtinavimus, ille autem, cujus fidei commiſſa erat fatis nuper ceſſit, & an
cum illo ſepulta prorſùs ſit, non­dum ſatis intellegimus. In luto igitur
relicti, à Te, aliiſque quibus propentior ad benignitatem animus eſt, oſtiatim
emendicare cogimur, ut miſerè claudicanti jam operi aliquale ſaltem praeſtetis
auxilium. Non magna meditamur, non invidioſa arte extructa, non [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=32) excelſis &
variegatis columnis ſuffulta, non caelatis laquearibus elaborata, nec marmore
fulgentia deſignamus tecta. Quod aggredimur, non ſuperbiae aut luxûs, ſed
neceſſitatis opus eſt. Extremi enim Collegii parietes miſerè nutant, & hianti
ore ruinas minantur, ita ut hoc quod novum eſt quaſi fulcrum & pulvinar ſibi
po­ſtulâſſe videantur. At angustiores inſuper ſedes noſtrae ſunt quàm ut
ſuccreſcenti Muſarum ſoboli ſufficiant. Quare, ſi benevolentia Veſtra lapides
cum Deucalione poſt tergum jaectt, numeroſiores exurgent juvenes, atque adeò
plures veſtri Cultores. Det Deus integrum ſemper, quo jam gaudes, animum,
corpus agile & vividum, ſenectutem tardam, vel quae nihil habeat ſenectutis
prae­ter ipſam prudentiam. Sic Precantur,

Cal. Mart. 1671.

Celſitudinis Veſtrae humillimi Oratores, Magiſter, Socii & Scholares Collegii
Divi Johannis Evangeliſtae in Academià CANTABRIGIENSI,

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

NOn ubique locorum negliguntur, aut algent Muſae; nam Tu foves indiès, & Almae
Parenti ſtudes adhuc: imò verò, conſtantèr adeo, prolixéque ſtudes, ut quò
voluntatem iſtam egre­giam in aevum retineres, propter incredibilem naturae
tuae benignitatem ne quidem ſis admonendus; etenim ſponte tuâ ruis in amplexus
Academiae, nec ullum of­ficii genus omittendum tibi cenſes. At in Literis
ho­neſtandis, in exornandâ Virtute dum ita tempus omne tuum traducis, ad
ſummam profectò laudem, gloriámque [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=33) contendis:
contendis autem (ut ſoles) magnis itine­ribus, & expedito planè curſu, quoniam
Armarium Cantabrigiae non Hipparcho jam ampliùs, aut Effigie tuâ vernaculâ
ſolùm, verùm etiam Latinis Commentariis locupletas: Commentarios illos
intelligimus (ſi placet) accuratos, & ſanè quàm venuſtos, in quibus
excellen­tiſſima Margareta perpetuam Rerum geſtarum, Even­torumque tuorum
Hiſtoriam condit. Quanti verò apud nos ponderis ſit exquiſitiſſima Lucubratio,
noli quaerere Dux eximie; neque enim Ipſe neſcis, & nos certè Ora­tione noſtrâ
nequimus explicare. Id potiùs nunc agi­mus, ut Theatrum illud Honoris eadem
operâ Can­tabrigiae, Tibi Seculóque gratulamur: Cantabri­giae primùm, nihil
jucundius eſſe poteſt, quàm Pe­ricula & Labores evolvere Imperatoris tanti,
quantus Ipſe non Ʋnius jam Britanniae, ſed omnium conſenſu gentium & es, &
haberis: deinde. Tibi benè omi­namur, quia Tibi (quod nec Achilli Homerico,
nec Hectori Naeviano, contigit) ad memoriae dignitatem abundè ſufficit à
laudatiſſimâ Principe laudari, Quae Te non ita tamen Immortalitati
commendavit, ut non ipſa quoque in Te commendando propriam Ingenii gra­tiam
ſit conſecuta: poſtremò, gratulamur huic Seculo, quod penè ſolus illuſtras,
qui vel ſolus (conſummatiſ­ſime Dux) quodlibet ſeculum illuſtrare poſſes.

Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 10 Cal. Junii 1669.

Eminentiae tuae addictiſſimi PROCANCELLARIƲS reliquuſque Senat. Acad. Cantab.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=33)

MOST EMINENT PRINCE,

THat Scholars are not every where, nor al­together neglected, your Grace is
one of our greateſt Inſtances; for as occaſion ſerves you condeſcend, and
vouchſafe both to countenance, and encourage us. And this you do, as with all
imaginable ſucceſs, ſo likewiſe with ſuch wonderful obligingneſs, and
conſtancy, that for a continual inſtigation thereto (we ſee) you need not the
leaſt item from us; for that purpoſe the goodneſs of your own Nature, and the
nobleneſs of your Spirit is abundantly ſufficient. But whileſt in this manner
you regard Learning, and embelliſh Virtue, you give the World to know, that
you are neither a Stranger to, nor unacquainted with the direct Road to
Honour, and Glory; And thither indeed only you march with ſuch expedition and
conduct, that you have already (beyond what an Univerſity can write) enriched
our publick Treaſury with ſome laſt­ing Monuments of your Skill and Gallantry.
Shall we beg leave to remember your Book of Horſmanſhip, which we love to
peruſe and boaſt of to Strangers? Or will you permit us, with all
thankfulneſs, to name your laſt Favour, that accurate and faithful Hiſtory
(which the moſt Excellent Margaret hath writ) of your Life, and Actions? In
what eſteem the for­mer Work is among us all, we have already decla­red; and
what we think of the latter, ask us not (we pray you) moſt incomparable Duke;
for you know very well, and we cannot, in any words of ours, ſuf­ficiently
expreſs. Only we preſume at preſent to congratulate ſo fair a Theatre of
Honour to the Univerſity of Cambridge, and to your ſelf, and to [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=34) this whole
Generation of men altogether: Firſt, to the Univerſity, which cannot but with
exceeding ſatiſ­faction read over the Atchivements, and Hazards of ſo famous a
General, as you are, and as all Brave Men acknowledge you to be: for your own
ſake in the next place we rejoyce, becauſe (which neither Homer's Achilles,
nor Xenophon's Cyrus, nor Naevius his Hector attained to) your Actions are
regiſtred by an unparrelled Princeſs, who yet hath not ſo tranſcribed your
image, as not therein to interline, and inſert a very legible Portraiture of
her own Wit, and Parts: Laſt of all, we muſt needs be glad for the luſtre, and
advantage of this pre­ſent Generation, which now almoſt ſhines alone in You,
moſt accompliſhed Prince, who of your ſelf alone are ſufficient to have
ennobled any other Ge­neration of men whatſoever. Long therefore may you live
in this reputation. So we Pray, and re­main,

Cambridge, May 22\. 1669.

Moſt Excellent Prince,

Your Graces moſt Humble and moſt Affectionate Servants, The VICE-CHANCELLOR
and the whole Senate of the Univerſity of Cambridge.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=34)

MADAM,

THe worthy preſent which your Excellency hath been pleaſed to make me by Mr.
Slaughter, hath ſtrucken me into new ad­miration of your goodneſs and
knowledge. The firſt, that you are pleaſed to retain ſo obliging a me­mory of
a Perſon that can no ways merit ſo huge a Favour: And for the ſecond, every
Page in your excellent Book, affordeth abundant matter. I think my ſelf
exceeding happy that I live in the age which is bleſſed with the preſence of
ſo brave a Perſon as you are, Madam; who as you are the Ornament of this, will
be the Envy of all future ones. But your Excellency loveth as little to hear
your own Praiſes, as you do much to deſerve the greateſt. Therefore I will not
adventure upon that impoſſible task, but ſhall reduce my ſelf into my own Orbe
of Humility and thankfulneſs, for this great Honour you have been pleaſed to
do me, aſſuring your Ex­cellency with all, that you could not have deigned it
to any man living, who is more than I am,

Paris, June 9\. 1657.

MADAM,

Your Excellencies moſt Humble and moſt Obedient Servant, Kenelme Digby.

I Crave leave of your Excellency, that I may preſent here my moſt humble and
obliged Reſpects, to my Noble Lord, my Lord Marquis your Husband.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=35)

MADAM,

I received your Honours Letter, and the Books according to your Command, and
had not a fatal Sickneſs for a long time confined me to my Chamber, and made
me unfit for any buſineſs, (and much more to Write to ſo Illuſtrious a
per­ſon) I had long e're this returned my moſt humble, and hearty Thanks for
that infinite Honour you were pleaſed to do me (a poor impertinent thing in
Black) in deigning to write, and truſt me with the diſtribu­tion of your
Favours (or magnificence rather) to the Univerſity. Your Books were received
(as in­deed they ought) with very much reſpect, and gra­titude, and I am
commanded by the ſeveral Col­ledges to returne their humbleſt Thanks to your
Honour. I inſcribed every Book before I gave it to the reſpective Colledges,
with ſuch an Inſcription as Poſterity might know who was their Benefactor. For
inſtance, that to Magdalene Colledge, thus,

....Liber Collegii Divae Magdalenae, ex Dono Il­luſtriſſimae Heroinae
Margaretae Novo-Caſtrenſis Marchioniſſae, Authoris.

What this ſignifies your Honour may eaſily know. I humbly beg your Honours
Pardon for this con­fident, and (I fear) impertinent Scrible of,

Q. Coll. Oxon. Mar. 24\. 1655.

MADAM,

Your Honours moſt Obliged Humble Servant, Thomas Barlow.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=35)

MADAM,

YOur Honour pleaſed to Command two Books (lately compoſed by your Excel­lency)
to be ſent to Cambridge, one to be placed in the Publick Library there, and
the other to be beſtowed upon my ſelf, your Honours mean­eſt Servant; It is
and ſhall be my Care that this, together with that other formerly ſent, may
remain a Monument to Poſterity of your Excellencies great worth and ſingular
affection to our Univerſity, which I doubt not but will, forever, be moſt
grate­fully acknowledged, by ſuch as ſhall frequent the Common Library, and
eſpecially by him whom this great Favour hath rendered

Cambr. Octob. 22\. 1656.

Your Excellencies moſt Humble and Thankful Servant, William Moore.

MADAM,

I have received, from your Excellence, the Book you ſent me by Mr. Benoiſt;
which obliges me to trouble you with a ſhort expreſſion of my thanks, and of
the ſenſe I have of your extra­ordinary Favour. For tokens of this kind are
not ordinarily ſent but to ſuch as pretend to the title as well as to the mind
of Friends. I have already read ſo much of it (in that Book which my Lord of
Devonſhire has) as to give your Excellence an accout of it thus far, That it
is filled throughout with more [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=36) and truer
Idea's of Virtue and Honour than any Book of morality I have read. And if ſome
Co­mique Writer, by converſation with ill People, have been able to preſent
Vices upon the Stage more ri­diculouſly and immodeſtly, by which they take
their rabble, I reckon that amongſt your Praiſes. For that which moſt pleaſes
lewd Spectators is nothing but ſubtile Cheating or Filch, which a high and
noble mind endued with Virtue from it's Infancy can never come to the
knowledge of. I Reſt

Febr. 9\. 1661.

Your Excellencies moſt humble Servant Thomas Hobbes.

ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

I Received (by the hand of your ingenious Ser­vant) that moſt noble Preſent,
(thoſe excel­lent Books) you were pleaſed to ſend our Colledge, and (the
meaneſt of your moſt obliged and thankful Servants) my ſelf. I confeſs I am
(and for ever ſhould be) amazed at your Excel­lencies condeſcention, your
great charity and mag­nificence to things ſo far below you, did I not well
know that the greateſt goodneſs is moſt diffuſive; that thoſe Glorious
Heavenly Bodies (even the Sun it ſelf) diſpence their Rayes and benign
Influences to Vallies and little Villages, to Shrubs and Vole­hills, as well
as Mountains, or the talleſt Cedars. I ſhall not call your Excellencies Books
an addition to our private Library, but this a little acceſſion to [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=36) them; they
being (like their Illuſtrious Author) a far greater Library of Arts and
Ingenuity. Sure I am, even Bodlies Library cannot boaſt of any ſuch Donation,
ſince King James ſent his Royal Works, and thoſe of his late Martyr'd Majeſty
were placed there, nor is like to do, till Kings and your Excellen­cy, write
and ſend again: whoſe parts are not (in a tedious way acquired, but infuſed;
not got by Study, or a laborious induſtry, but given by the immediate and
propitious Hand of Heaven, and therefore more Divine, like that firſt
principle from whence they flow. We have a Manuſcript Author in Bodlies
Library, who endeavors to ſhew, That Women excell Men: your Excellency has
proved what he propoſed, has done what he indeavored, and given a
demonſtrative argument to convince the otherwiſe unbelieving World. Your Works
will be a juſt foundation of a laſting and immortal Honour to your ſelf; (but
I fear) a reproach to our Sex and us, when Poſterity ſhall conſider, how
little we have done with all our Reading and Induſtry, and how much your
Excellency without them. I ſhall not indeavor (what this and after ages will)
to commend your Writings (they are their own beſt Panegyrique) he that would
do this well, ſhould have the genious and elocution of their great Au­thor. My
onely aim is, humbly to acknowledge a Debt I can never pay, and return the
unfeigned thanks and gratitude of

Q. Coll. Oxon. May 21\. 1663.

(Moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs)

Your Excellencies moſt devoted and moſt humble Servant, Thomas Barlow.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=37)

MADAM,

I received (a fortnight ago) your Honours Letter, and the Books you ſent; one
to the Univerſity Library, one to the Vice-Chancel­lor, and another to my
ſelf. Mr. Vice-Chancel­lor received your Book (as indeed he ought) with very
much thankfulneſs, and ſenſe of the great Civility you had done him, and
commanded me to return his reſpects, and hearty Thanks, which he would have
done himſelf, but that both he and his Family hath been ſore viſited with
Sickneſs (for almoſt a whole year) ſo that he has not been (nor now is) in a
condition to write. The like thanks, and (if poſſible) infinitely more, I muſt
re­turn in behalf of the Univerſity, and my ſelf; being amazed at your
goodneſs, and undeſerved Kindneſs, that a perſon ſo Illuſtrious, and (for
place and parts ſo) Eminent, ſhould look upon ſo unconſiderable, and
impertinent a thing in black, as I am, but that I know the Sun doth ſhine on
Shrubs, as well as Cedars, and Princes many times caſt their Favours upon
perſons infinitely below them; whence they can expect no return but gratitude;
and when I fail to pay that Tribute (ſo juſtly due to your Honour) may I have
your hate, which will be the greateſt curſe I am capable of. I have as yet
only read one Story in your Book, and the Language, and In­genuity of it, to
me ſeems ſuch, that I am perſwa­ded the famous Monſieur Scudeny would wiſh
him­ſelf the Author of it. If I miſtake not I think I told you in my laſt,
that I had a Manuſcript Book in my keeping (for it was never yet Printed)
which the Author intitles thus—Womens Worth, or a Trea­tiſe [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=37) proving by
ſundry reaſons that Women excell Men. Many of my Sex will hardly believe it,
yet I be­lieve your Honour may prove the beſt Argument in the World to
convince them of their infidelity. I humbly beg pardon for this rude and
impertinent Scrible. That God Almighty would be pleaſed to bleſs you and all
yours, is, and ſhall be, the conſtant Prayer, of

MADAM,

Q. Coll. Oxon. Sept. 3\. 1656.

Your Honours moſt Obliged, Humble Beadſman  
Thomas Barlow.

MADAM,

THat I have not long e're this made at leaſt ſome ſlender return of the
meaneſt Gra­titude, a verbal acknowledgement, I take the greater boldneſs now
at length to Apologize; for that it is in no ſmall meaſure juſtly chargeable
upon the Chain of thoſe grand Favours, where­with (as the Roman Lady of old,
with Bracelets and Jewels) I have been, by your Excellency, over­whelmed into
an Extaſy. The truth of which is too much evidenced by an undeniable argument,
that like ſuch as are newly rowſed out of a Trance, not yet fully returned to
my ſelf, I now begin to talk Idly. Indeed I could not but deplore my own
unhappineſs; as equally rack'd between two hate­ful extreams, Ingratitude and
Preſumption, that can neither be ſilently grateful to ſo Noble a
Bene­factreſs, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=38) without too
palpable and diſingenuous un­worthineſs, nor verbally thankful to ſo
Illuſtrious a Princeſs without a Solaeciſm; but that I am well aſſured your
Excellencies Heroick Candor will at leaſt connive at the moſt rude, if cordial
and humble, expreſſions of a moſt devoted mind. And ſuch (Madam) is that, I
here with all ſubmiſſion pre­ſent unto you, loaded with ſuch various Inſtances
of your ſignal Favours, as never can (except we could ſuppoſe your Illuſtrious
ſelf may) find out a Parrallel. That ſo mean, ſo obſcure a Perſon ſhould have
the Honour of receiving firſt into his cuſtody ſo rich a Treaſure, as the
genuine Product and Iſſue of ſo Noble a Mind; and then be commanded to divulge
this his Glory, by preſenting them to a whole Univerſity in ſo Glorious a
Name; that this Honour (a high Reward it ſelf) ſhould yet be fur­ther
enhaunced by a ſplendid Gift, truly wor­thy the Grandure of the Donor, and
that tranſ­mitted by that Golden Pen, which hath enricht the World with ſuch
excellent variety of inimitable Writings; that a poor ſcanty Study ſhould
ſwell into a Library, and become a Repoſitory for ſuch rich Volumes;—Pardon me
(Madam) if at theſe reflections I wax proud, and be tranſported beyond the
narrow compaſs of my contracted ſelf. Your Ex­cellencies Bounty (a true
Tranſcript of the Divine) creates, what it cannot find, a worthineſs in the
Re­ceiver, and ennobles him, whom it makes the ob­ject of generous
Beneficence.

What Honourable reception your Excellencies former Works (in the poſſeſſion
whereof each pri­vate Colledge-Library, as well as that publick one of the
Univerſity, juſtly prides it ſelf, and boaſts its [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=38) riches) found
amongſt us, as (indeed) by very few Acknowledgements then ſignified: How much
more acceptable theſe latter Volumes are, ſilence alone can beſt tell. Few
durſt before adventure upon ſo difficult a Task: and the Reaſon ſince that is
more apparent and confirmed (if I may without prophanation make uſe of the
moſt Illuſtrious Lord Marqueſs his Expreſſion)—None now dares write a Letter.—

What concernes my moſt unworthy ſelf, is, that I ſhall, in Teſtimony of my
thankfulneſs, and as a perpetual monument of your Excellencies munifi­cence to
me when I die, tranſmit your noble Gift as a ſacred Heyre-loom to my Family,
and whileſt I live, ſhew your Princely Hand as the Letters-Patents of my
greateſt Honour, which is to have this leave of wholly devoting my ſelf ever
to be

Illuſtrious Madam,

Your Excellencies moſt Humble moſt Obedient, Obliged, and Ʋnworthy Servant,
and Vaſſall David Morton.

Madam,

SInce my laſt, I received by the hands of (your Grace's faithful Servant, and
my worthy Friend) Dr. Mayne, two Copies of my Lord Duke's life, (writ by your
Grace) one for our Colledge, and another for my ſelf. I cannot [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=39) but admire your
Graces great goodneſs and con­deſcention, your continued munificence and
charity to us (excellent Virtues which I wiſh in all, but find in very few)
which with all humility, and a deep ſenſe of the very many Obligations laid
upon us, we thankfully acknowledge. He who thinks to requite, undervalues your
Grace's Favours; which (like your eminent parts and place) are too great to
admitt any proportionable returnes from us, beſides our conſtant Prayers and
Gratitude; which (as in duty we ſtand bound) we ſhall duely pay. I have read
your Graces Book, which is writ with ſo much evenneſs and proſpicuity of
Stile, ſo much truth and generous impartiallity, as well becomes the
(Illuſtrious perſons moſt concerned, the) great Subject and Author of it. His
Grace's high Birth and Fortune, his unſtained Royalty to his Prince, his great
Courage, and prudent Conduct, and ſuch other his Graces eminent Virtues have
deſerved, and your Grace's Hand has built him a laſting Mo­nument, which (when
Pyramids of Braſs and Marble periſh, or, being Sacrilegiouſly removed and
ſtoln, diſappear) will transfer both your Names and Honours to all Poſterity.
That the good pro­vidence of Heaven would long preſerve and proſ­per your
Grace (the honour of your Sex, and by your unparalel'd Virtues the reproach of
ours) is the Prayer of

Q. Coll. Oxon. Feb. 2\. 1667.

MADAM,

Your Grace's moſt Obliged, Faithful and Humble Servant, Thomas Barlow

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=39)

MADAME,

JE ne puis attribuer l'honneur que Vous m'avez fait de m'envoyer Vos oeuures,
qu'a ceque vous avez ſceu qu'autres fois j'avois apporté icy d' Angleterre que
ce qu'il y en avoit déja de publié. C'eſt, Madame, que j'honore infiniment la
Vertu par­tout où je la deſcouvre, & qu'elle eſt encore plus a admirer en
Vostre Sexe & dans les Perſonnes de Vo­ſtre qualité, que dans le noſtre, &
parmis les ſcavants; Je la propoſe en exemple à toutes les Dames dont ja'y
l'honneur de m'pprocher, & je prens maintenant la liberté, Madame, de vous
feliciter du plaiſir que vous avez d'eſlever ſi fort voſtre ame par deſſus les
autres, & de vous meſler ſi avant dans toutes les in­trigues de l'Ʋnivers.
C'eſt bien autre choſe que de n'ſtudier que celles d'une Cour, & que de ne
choiſir des ornamens que ſurune toileté. Dieu veuille, Madame, qu'un ſi noble
divertiſſement vous occupe tousjours, & que vous croyez auſi tousjours que je
ſuis,

A Paris le 3 d'Octob. 1669.

MADAME,

Voſtre tres Humble & tres Obeiſſant Serviteur SORBIERE.

Tres Haut & Puiſſant Prince

CRoiroiton qu'il eſt poſſible que voſtre tres-Il­lustre Alteſſe ſe pouvoit
encore ſouvenir d'une ſi inutille creature que moy? depuis 25 ans que je ſuis
retirée de Paris, & parmis les plus rudes [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=40) attaques de la
Fortune qu'avoient agitée voſtre Alteſſe comme les tonneres & les Vents qui
taſchoient debray­ler les forts Cedars du Lebanon, en maintenant la ſainte
cauſe, d'un des plus juſtes Roïs que jamais a eſtés ou que jamais y ſera. En
li ſant ceſte hiſtoire veri­table de la vie de voſtre Alteſſe faite par ceſte
Tres­illuſtre, & Tres-verteus Princeſſe, Madame la Du­cheſſe, j'avois de la
peyne a retenir mes larmes, ayant eſté moy meſme une triſte ſpectateur de
toute ce que paſſa à Paris & fidel intelligencier de tout ce que paſſoit en
Flandre & la Holland juſques au retour de vostre Alteſſe en Angleterre; & je
veu que toute ces travers de la Fortune, ne conſiſta en autre choſe qu'a une
perpetuel combat, entre le voulloir & le pouvoir de voſtre Alteſſe; L'une
combattant pour l'eſta­bliſhement du Roy, par le depence inevitable qu'il
fal­loit pour maintenir ſa juſte cauſe, preſque aux abois, non ſeulement, par
le ſequeſtration des immenſes re­venues des biens de voſtre Alteſſe, mais par
le conſtraint qu'on vous fit de vous retirer, a fin pour enſuitte de rui­ner
la cauſe du Roy par le ruine qu'on vous fit le pre­mier; mais Dieu vous a
ſuſcitée des amys, & vous avez un pouvoir plus ample qu'auparavant, & il a
faite de voſtre Alteſſe come Dieu fait à Job en re­ſtituant le decouple ſon
ſaint nom ſoit louée & vous con­tinue ſa paix, & ſa ſainte Grace. Je leu auſſy
la Phi­loſophie de la Haute & verteuſe Princeſſe Madame la Ducheſſe,
veritablement Tres-curieuſe; & en estate de faire honte à noſtre miſerable
Philoſophie de l'ecol­le que n'est autre choſe qu'un vray jeu des Cartes;
conſiſtantes en Sophiſmes & Authorites mal citêes, la quelle a perdue la
Theologie, & rendue la Medi­cine la Riſée du Monde, et pire que l'Emperice: Et
quoy que ie n'entend pas l'exerciſe du manage des chevaux [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=40) non plus que le
haut Almand; toutefois ces precepts me ſemble ſi Majeſteux que touts les
maiſtres du monde en doibt prendre example. C'eſt pour quoy je metteray ces
Divines eſcrites dans le frontiſpiece de ma Bibliotheque, a fin que les
enfants des mes enfants profiteroient de tout ces riches enſeignments. Il
reſte maintenant que je remercie Tres-humblement voſtre Tres-Illuſtre Alteſſe
de la ſouvenance quelle volut avoir de moy, qui n'eſt pas tant triſte de me
voir reduittê a une ſi age que me devroit donner craint a mourir citô, come de
me voir approchant à un age ſi grand qui me pourroit faire incapable de rendre
a vostre Alteſſe les ſervices dignes de la memoire que je dois conſerver dans
mon ame pour demeurer eternellement,

De Voſtre Tres-Illuſtre Alteſſe le Tres-humble & Tres-obeiſſant Serviteur, D.
AUISSONE.

MADAM,

WHen, in the Book which your Lady­ſhip hath been pleaſed, by Mr. Benoiſt, to
honour me with, I read ſo many Orations, upon ſo many ſeveral occaſions,
appro­priated to ſo many ſeveral Perſons, my admiration riſes to ſo great a
height, that I know not how to expreſs it, yet when I conſider that you,
Madam, are the Author of them all, my Wonder then abates, the ſight which I
have had of your former Works, ha­ving raiſed my thoughts to anexpectation of
as great [[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=41)
a product, from your Ladyſhip's Pen, as this is: but when I think what thanks
to return, for ſo great a Favour, I am quite at a ſtand, for were I as good a
Poet, or Orator, as ever was, it were impoſſible, either in Proſe or Poem, to
ſet forth a ſufficient gra­titude. I find my ſelf therefore, who have no Skill
in either, obliged to ſay no more, but only to beg your Ladyſhip's acceptance
of the Humble Thanks of,

Bridgewater-houſe, Dec. 30\. 1662.

MADAM,

Your Ladyſhip's moſt humble Servant J. BRIDGEWATER.

MADAM,

YOu have convinced the World, that your Sex can as well propagate Learning as
our Species, and taught us juſtly to own all, from our Mother-Wit; 'Tis
without the help of Claſſick Authors, Schools, or Languages, that you Madam,
have compoſed your moſt excellent Poems, Playes, Fables, The World's Olio,
Opinions Philoſophical and Phyſical, which are the greateſt Prize the
Invention of Printing can boaſt of: That Admiration and Praiſe, which your
Excellency merits, muſt be the ſtudy of Ages to come; which, by your Works,
may be made more knowing. Hi­therto the ſtolen Tales of Learning, which
Scholars, painfully diſingenious, have, in ſeveral Ages, Tranſ­lated from loſt
Languages, and entitled themſelves [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=41) the Authors,
are not Rules to try the truth of your notions, nor means to clear them to us,
but skreen them from our captivated Apprehenſions. Who means to Improve,
Madam, by your diſcoveries, muſt ſtudy them alone, and freeing themſelves of
the Pains of Grammar Rules, tedious Methods, and the Fallacies of unproved
Maxims, may arive early at Truths, may know and be able to diſcourſe things,
not ſenceleſs Diſtinctions; and Philoſopha­ting, your way, from the viſible
effects of Nature, may ſoon know more than the Schools, make their Learning
uſeful, and Bankrupt the Trade of Pedan­try: That you have received, Madam, a
Tribute of Applauſe from the Perſons of moſt fame this Age affords; that
Univerſities have done you Ho­mage as the Queen of Sciences, will be the leaſt
of your Glory, whileſt you inſtruct not them, but the Univerſe, not this
alone, but ſucceeding Ages; and will have your Fame as oft renewed, as freſh
Generations come to ſpy this World, by the light you leave them; which cannot
be traduced, for it's Parentage, being ſprung from your Rational Soul alone,
that borrowing nought from others, can have no Rivall in Renown, but may
challenge that ſin­gular Honour which all Ingenious Perſons publiſh, and will
be made Sacred to your memory, by the moſt learned, while I among the meaneſt
ſhall live and dye,

Chelſey, Sept. 4\. 1662.

MADAM,

Your Excellencies Higheſt Honourer and Humbleſt Servant CHARLES CHEYNE.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=42)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

I have, according to your commands, read your Excellencies Orations, and will
not diſobey your Excellence, in concealing my Opinion of them. Was it to
condemn any thing, either in matter or the language, having your Excellencies
Warrant for it, I would freely expreſs it, and if it be otherwiſe, I beg your
Excellencies Favour, that Truth may not paſs for Courtſhip, as being to ſo
great a Lady from ſo mean a man, it is in danger to be ſuſpected, which your
Excellence hath been pleaſed to foreſee and forbid. I am, I confeſs, no great
reader, of late, of new Books, having tried formerly, that to find in them the
leaſt Jewel it muſt be ſifted out of a great deal of Rubbiſh, and the worſt
is, that their Authors take up Errors upon truſt one from another, which the
better they adorn with new dreſſes, the greater injury they do to man­kind. To
make up ſuch Volumes out of Collecti­ons, as Bees gather Hony from this and
that Flower, is rather laborious Induſtry than fine Wit; But to ſpin out of
one's own Bowels, not Cobwebs as Spiders do, but rich Tiſſues of Gold and
Silver, ex­preſſes a great Fancy well improved, with much thinking. As every
man is not capable of ſo extra­ordinary Productions, ſo is not every Woman;
but that Women are naturally as capable of it as Men, if not more, may eaſily
be proved by making an exact compariſon of both their Temperaments and Organs,
which would be a diſcourſe too long to be inſerted in a Letter, and your
Excellence hath ſo clearly decided that Queſtion by your unimitable Works,
that it ſaves ſufficiently that trouble. The [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=42) greateſt
Maſters in Oratory having been neceſſitated to acknowledge, that the beſt art
conſiſts in hiding of it, it may be inferred, that it is yet better to have
none at all, as a natural Amble is to be preferred to that which is got with
Tramells, or the grace­ful Walking of a Gentleman more eſteemed than the
affected Demarch of a Dancer: and it is truly a very rare thing to be a great
Scholar without be­ing acquainted with the Univerſities, and Learned without
the help of Teachers. As there is variety of Sciences, ſo there are ſeveral
ſorts of Capacities to acquire them, ſome proving excellent in one kind, ſome
in another; but to be capable of all, as well Philoſophy as Playes, and Poems
as Orations, be­longs only to a very few, whoſe Statues ſhould be erected in
all the eminent Places in the World, for their Glory, and our Admiration. I
can hardly ſtop my Pen from deſcribing what I have marked in ge­neral; for to
ſet down my particular Obſervations, they are of ſo many extraordinary Things,
that or­dinary Terms (and I am capable of no other) can­not make them to be
underſtood, and I am extreme ſenſible, that even what is commonly called
Defect, here becomes comly, like ſome Moles in a beautiful Face, and that what
ſeemes ſtrange at firſt, becauſe it croſſes the uſual Methods of our Studies,
gives at laſt occaſion of amazement, to ſee your Excel­lency go ſo far in the
way of knowledge, with ſtand­ing ſtill, in a manner, and that others ſhould
run continually like Squerils in a Cage, without advan­cing forwards; which
happens, I believe becauſe they dare not, or cannot go one ſtep without
Stilts, and your Excellence truſts to the goodneſs of your Legs, having been
pleaſed to allow me the [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=43) honour to read
your Manuſcript, I make no doubt but your Excellency will afford the patience
to read this tedious Letter, which though it makes a very ſmall ſound, and a
weak clapping of Hands, is a part of that great Applauſe the whole World gives
to your Excellency, and a certain teſtimony, that I am out of Inclination, as
well as Duty,

London, Sept 4\. 1662.

MADAM,

Your Excellencies moſt Humble moſt Obedient and moſt Faithful Servant,
BENOIST.

MADAM,

HAd I returned you this Letter of Thanks, for the great Honour you did me in
ſend­ing me your Plays, before I had read them, it would have lookt like a
peece of Flattery, and my Praiſe of you would have made me like a Blind man,
who fell in love with a Beauty which he ne­ver ſaw. But having taken time to
read them all over, and ſome of them more than once, I can now upon a clear
Judgement aſſure your Ladyſhip, that my entertainment was ſo great, that I
know not whether I read them or ſaw them Acted. For though the Plots, Acts,
and Scenes, be dreſt in ſeveral ſhapes, and have that which is the life of
Pleaſure, a muſical variety, yet the Wit, and rich Compo­ſure of them is ſo
much every where the ſame, that I fancied my ſelf a Spectator in the peruſal,
and was [[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=43)
doubtful, whether your Ladyſhip with your Book had not ſent me the new Theater
too. I never in any Dramatick Writings met with more Honour and Virtue matcht
with more Sharpneſs and delight. Which had it come from ſuch a Pen as Ben
Jonſon's, who was always powring Oyle into his Lamp, and owed moſt of his
Excellencies to his laborious Induſtry and Art, I ſhould the leſs wonder. But
coming from a Quill held by a Ladys Hand, who made it not her Toyl but
Recreation to do rarely, confirms me in an Opinion which I have long held,
That the beſt Art is nothing but the beſt Imitation of Nature; and that your
Books are the true face, and others but the painted. Madam, as I look upon you
as a great Princeſs, (for you are ſo) ſo that which renders you to be the
Glory and happieſt of your Sex, is that you can bring forth ſuch Children of
your Mind in a Wilderneſs, and in your Coun­trey Walks can chuſe all the Muſes
to be your Maids of Honour. And, truly, when I conſider one part of your
happineſs more, which is, That you have a Noble Lord to be your Fellow-Poet,
whoſe Harmonious Soul and Wit, is exactly tuned to yours, I have nothing left
to wiſh, but to be al­lowed to remain

Oxford, May 6, 1662.

Your Ladyſhips true Honourer, Jaſper Mayne.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=44)

MOST HONOURED,

I have waited long for a convenience to return my very humble gratitude to
your Excellency, that the poor Church of Litchfield hath ſome hope in due time
to receive ſome furtherance in it's Reparation, from your noble munificence. I
am one of thoſe many, that are perſwaded, that your Ex­cellency ſpent more
Treaſure to maintain the Royal Cauſe, in the late Warrs, beſides the hazard of
your Perſon, than any Subject in the three Realms; and am at wonder that it is
not moſt eminently rewarded and repayed. My gratious Lord; I having been one
from my youth addicted to the ingenuity of Poetry, whereof your Honour hath
been a great Patron, did betake my ſelf, thirteen years ſince, to write three
Books in Verſe, Latine and Heroick, to bewail the moſt barbarous murther
committed upon the perſon of King Charles the Martyr. The work is long­ſince
finiſht, and ſhall in due time be publiſht; In the third Book thereof, mention
being made of his Majeſties moſt Heroick Champions, theſe Verſes fol­lowing,
ſet forth your Excellency as I was able;

Quid Neo-Caſtrenſis parat, audentiſſimus Heros,

Muſarum, Martiſque decus, Menſaeque benignae?

Cogit ab egelidis Boreae regionibus agmen

Intrepidum, laethúmque volens pro Rege paciſci.

Receive this Teſtimony, my very gratious Lord, from him that is willing to
embalm your memory with due praiſe.

Litchfield, Feb. 10\. 1663.

Your Excellencies Moſt Devoted Servant, Joh. Lich. & Coven.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=44)

MADAM,

I Gave your Grace not long ſince the trouble of a very large Letter, and know
not whether I may wiſh it came ſafe, being affraid there was ſome kind of
rudeneſs in ſo tedious a Scrible. I now ſend this to crave Pardon for the bold
im­portunity of that; and to deſire another addition to your Graces Favours,
which is, to honour the laſt Edition of my Witchcraft with your Illuſtrious
Eye, and Acceptance. I ſuppoſe I have in it an­ſwered ſome of your Graces
Objections, and have added a Relation or two, which I am well aſſured of, and
believe them good evidence of Fact. I have ordered that Book I have ſo long
ſpoken of to be ſent with it, if it can yet be procured; and implore your
Graces ingenious Candor in judging the faults of both. For that of
Preexiſtence I have many things to ſay more about it, which I think not fit
publickly to expoſe; your Grace may com­mand my inmoſt ſentiments of thoſe
matters which I ſhall be proud to impart to a Perſon of ſo great Honour and
Judgement, being really

Bath, Dec. 22.

MADAM,

Your Grace's Moſt Humbly Devoted Servant, Joſ. Glanvill.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=45)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR,

I held a long diſpute within my ſelf (moſt Noble, and moſt Honourable Madam)
whe­ther I ſhould not incurr the juſt cenſure of Condemnation, by this bold
preſumption of writing to your Ladyſhip, a perſon ſo noble, ſo courted, ſo
admired, and I ſo obſcure, that I could never brag of the happineſs once to
have ſeen, much leſs of being known to your Honour: my low condition on this
hand, deterred me much, and on that your Illuſtrious Place, balanced with a
gallantry of Spi­rit, well becoming your true Nobility, in birth and match:
yet when I conſidered, in my mind, that your Honour was pleaſed to appear now
in ano­ther dreſs, under the Veil of Books, I thought my ſelf unworthy that
exceeding Honour you have vouchſafed me, if I ſhould not, at leaſt,
acknowledge, what I could never retaliate or expreſs: And who can expreſs the
merit of that noble favour? The Heavenly Raptures of your Soul, compoſed with
that elaborate skill, and beams of pure Wit, that your lines paſs admiration?
Were thoſe Antients now alive, who firſt diſcourſed of Atomes, Matter, Form,
and other Ingredients of the Worlds Fabrick, they would hang their Heads,
confounded to ſee a Lady of moſt Honourable Extraction, in Prime of youth,
amidſt a thouſand faſheries of greatneſs, ſay more of their own Myſteries,
than they with all their worldly contempts, long Lives, Cells, and So­litary
Retirements. Great Souls in the light of con­verſation, gain far more
Knowledge, than mewed up Cloyſterers, and ſhew more to the World; their
Inventions ſhine more Orient, their Illuminations [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=45) more Refulgent,
though cloathed in vulgar termes, their own peoples Dialect: Few mount Fames
Cha­riot with borrowed Wings: and thoſe old Philoſo­phers too knew only their
own Tongue Greek, as your Honour complains you only ſpeak your Native Engliſh.
Wherein they had ſome advantage of you, a Language more copious, round, and
full, though the Engliſh can want no Elegance, Propriety, or Sweetneſs, when
it flows from ſuch a Mouth as yours, or drops from ſuch a Pen. Go on then
(moſt Honourable Madam) to bleſs the World, with theſe noble Infants of your
Brain; give Po­ſterity an example for after Ages, ſince former have given you
none, but what you have outſtript: It were Impiety, to wiſh you leſs great,
that Court­ſhips might not defraud us of your Immortal mo­numents: No, be
great ſtill, Diminutions would but cool thoſe Heroick Fires within you; let
For­tune confer all her Gifts on you as Nature hath all her endowments,

That you may raiſe your Muſe to ſuch a Pitch

As all ſhall Gaze and Wonder at, none reach.

And I aſſure you (moſt Noble Madam) you can never ſtand higher, or greater in
the whole Worlds eſteem than you now are, and ever ſhall be in the moſt
deſerved Veneration, of him who glorieth, to ſubſcribe himſelf,

Utrecht, Dec. 2\. 1653.

Moſt Honourable, and moſt Virtuous Lady

Your Honours moſt Humble and moſt Devoted Servant  
Robert Creyghtone.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=46)

# May it pleaſe your Excellence, My ever Honoured, Moſt Noble Lord.

WHen I laſt had the honour to kiſs your Excellencies Hands at Antwerp, you
were pleaſed to beſtow on me, The Paſſions of the Soul, Written by the Noble
Du Cartes, in Token of your ſingular Love and Re­ſpect to me: The Work
Learned, the Author Re­nowned, rendered the Gift Eminent, but much more,
conferred by ſo Honorable a Peer, upon ſo unconſi­derable a creature, as my
ſelf: and all ought to have been vehement incentives to a thankful
acknow­ledgement: yet hitherto your ſplendor, even in this your Eclipſe, hath
ſo prevailed over my modeſty, that I buried your Favour not in Oblivion but
Si­lence; thinking it well became my condition, rather to hold my peace, than
ſpeak below the merit, or ſlat the ſublime dignity of the Perſon to whom I
ſhould ſpeak. But now your Excellencies late ac­cumulation of exceſſive
Charity, in ſending me by Dr. Morley, the Works of your moſt Honourable,
Vertuous, and Learned Conſort, hath chidd my Ingratitude unto a Bluſh beyond
Confuſion; and made me feel ſome of Du Cartes Paſſions, transfer­red from your
firſt gift to your ſecond: I ſhould have conſecrated all my pains, to your
never dying Fame, as to a prime Patron of Learning, and I re­ceive Books from
you; Books rare and tranſcen­dent, diſtilled from the Brain of a moſt Noble
Mi­nerva, a Lady, your own Lady, whom delicacy of Education, height of Birth
and Place, might well have exempted from ſuch inferiour employments: [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=46) yet compoſed
with ſo curious art, quick ſtile, refined airy notions, Words ſo proper
elegant and de­lightful both in Verſe and Proſe, that I muſt ever admire the
Harmony of her inſpiring Soul: And thence reffecting on my ſelf, blame my own
un­worthineſs, who have ſpent more time at Univer­ſities, without any benefit
to Poſterity, than her Honour hath lived years in the World: ſo freſh and
vigorous is her Fancy, ſo dull and ſuperan­nuated mine: yet in this dejection
of Mind, I am much refreſhed, that your Excellence accounts me worthy to read
her lines; you caſt me down, and raiſe me up; caſt me down by her Writings,
which as I never expected, ſo I never hope to parallel, and you raiſe me, by
the uncancelled eſtimation, which you ſtill bear in memory of my mean ſelf. It
is your goodneſs (my ever Honoured Noble Lord) to peruſe low things with Grace
and Mer­cy, and the method of all Honourable Souls, to ſhine on Shrubs, that
their Favours may higher ad­vance in Proſpect. You ſubjugate my Affections, as
you do great Horſes to your Managery. Na­poli gli putedri, Roma ſcozzona gli
huomini, the Italian Proverb goes; Naples tames Horſes, and Rome Men: The
Virtues of both reign in you: In the rare art of taming Horſes you excell all
mor­tals, and ſubdue Men by a no leſs wonderful Af­fability: that he muſt be
out of the light of repu­tation, whom you have not particularly obliged, or
pointed out with ſome mark of Honour: I triumph much in your reſpect of me,
not that I have deſerved it, but that you have vouchſafed it; and ſhall wiſh
no longer to be bleſt, then I [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=47) ſhall evermore
endeavour to expreſs my ſelf in all things.

Ʋtrecht, Dec. 2\. 1653.

My ever Honoured moſt noble Lord,

Your Excellencies moſt Obliged, and moſt affectionate Servant, and Beadsman.
Robert Creyghton.

MADAM,

I was very much ſurprized when your Servant ſaluted me from ſo Illuſtrious a
perſonage; but when he produced thoſe noble Volumes as an intended Teſtimony
of your Ladyſhips reſpect, the unexpectedneſs of ſo great an honour made me
ſuſpect the Meſſenger of a miſtake, and that he pre­ſented me with what was
meant fitter for the Colledge, or at leaſt to ſome more worthy and
conſiderable per­ſon than my ſelf. But he perſiſting ſtill in the ſame ſtory,
my doubts were ſwallowed up into admira­tion of your Ladyſhip's ſingular and
unparalleld goodneſs; which ſeems to me to be Corrival with the excellency of
your Wit, and to ſeek an equal ſhare of Glory in ſearching out Objects of ſuch
con­deſcending Acts of Civility, and Bounty, in theſe obſcure corners of
Academical Retirement, as the other in piercing into the greateſt difficulties
and the moſt dark and obſtruce Receſſes of Philoſophy. Madam I humbly crave
Pardon for my boldneſs, and impatience that I offer ſo haſtily to return
thanks for ſo eminent a Favour, before I have well compu­ted [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=47) the value
thereof, nor as yet fitly poliſhed and adorned my Stile, by a longer converſe
with your Ladyſhips moſt Elegant and Ingenious Writings. But the cauſe of
defects in this kind being ſo freely confeſſed, your noble cand or will be
pleaſed to ac­cept the rude reality of thoſe ſpeedy acknowledge­ments made by

C.C.C. June 9.

Thrice-Excellent Madam,

Your Ladyſhips moſt Humble and Thankful Admirer, Henry More.

MADAM,

IN you, the World hath an Illuſtrious Example of the truth of their Opinion,
who hold, that no Virtue is ſingle, but alwayes accompanied with ſome (if not
all) of its Fellows. For (to omit thoſe many other Virtues, which ſeem to
contend each with other, which ſhall render you conſpicuous) to that general
Charity of yours, whereby you dayly oblige all mankind, in ſupplying the
poverty of their Underſtandings with the Spiritual Almes of Know­ledge; you
have added an extraordinary Genero­ſity, by enriching with your choice
Volumes, the Libraries of ſome particular Perſons, whom you are pleaſed to
think capable of comprehending your curious Speculations therein contained.
And in the number of theſe your Bouuty hath given me a right to account my
ſelf. For which eminent Grace and Favour while I ſtrive to ſhew my ſelf
Grateful, I find [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=48) my Faculties
wholly taken up with Admiration: and that Reaſon I ſhould make uſe of, to help
me expreſs my ſentiments decently, is dimmed with the Glories of the Perſon to
whom I addreſs, If, there­fore, I am not able to acquit my ſelf of that Duty,
as I ought; you are to reflect on the exceeding difficulty of it. Juſtice
requires, you ſhould pardon the Effects of that Tranſport and Aſtoniſhment, of
which your Excellencies are the cauſe: and when I cannot advance the due
Tribute of Thanks, you ought to admit my Homage of Acknowledge­ments.

Your Wit, Madam, is above all Commenda­tions; your Induſtry above Belief; your
Labours, in Writing, above humane patience; your Curio­ſity above Imitation;
your Notions above any, but your own Subtlety; and all above your Sex. Your
Collections by the improvement they receive from your fertile Brain, become
your own Productions: and thoſe obſcure Hints delivered to you in the
Diſcourſes of others, by paſſing through your lightſome Imagination, are
turned into bright and full Diſcoveries. You ſolve Pro­blems with more eaſe
than others have propoſed them: and your Pen hath this particular advantage,
that it leaves no Darkneſs on the Paper beſides that of the Ink. Where you
treat of Arguments for­merly handled by others, you either give them more
light, or contract what they had before into a narrower and more familiar
Compaſs; and upon all occaſions you either produce new things, or ſpeak old
ones after a new manner; ſo that you ſtagger the truth of that ſaying of the
wiſe Man, That nothing is new under the Sun. Your Expreſ­ſions [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=48) for the moſt
part are Natural, yet Select; at once explaining and adorning your Matter: and
they who read your Books with deſign to be in­formed in points of Philoſophy,
find themſelves at the ſame time introduced alſo in Rhetorique. In a word;
while you bring Reaſons for the moſt ad­mirable Works of Nature, you ſhew your
ſelf to be her greateſt Miracle: and your prodigious Sa­gacity inclines even
the Envious to believe, that all you need do to comprehend the moſt obſtruſe
things, is only to think on them.

This Language, Madam, is but the imperfect Echo of your merits; nor can any
thing, but your modeſty, hinder you from owning it ſo to be. How­ever, I moſt
humbly beſeech you to hear it, as moſt proper to that high Honour and
Veneration due to you from,

London, May 3\. 1663.

Moſt incomparable Madam,

Your Excellencies moſt humble Servant, Walt. Charleton.

MADAM,

YOur Books have here had a very honou­rable, and publick Reception, and are
not only placed in the private Libraries of every ſingle Colledge, but in the
publick alſo. Not without the Applauſe and Admiration of the Learned men of
this Place, that one of your Sex, a great Princeſs, and not bred to the Arts
with [[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=49)
labour, and toil, as they are, ſhould with ſo much excellent variety appear
among us. And truly Ma­dam when I conſider the various Subjects you have paſt
through, it would poſe me ſomething to find a proper place in any Library for
your Works to ſtand in, whether among the Orators, Poets, Philoſophers,
States-men, or Polititians, ſince every one of theſe may be ambitious to ſtand
next you. Nor can I forbear to let your Ladyſhip know, that the two laſt Books
which you were pleaſed to ſend to me, added to the former, which I had the
honour to re­ceive from you, are for their number my leſſer Li­brary, but for
the value which I put upon the Noble Hand which drew the Lines, far the
greater. Your Servant tells me you would willingly have ſome of them
tranſlated into the Catholick Language. Though it will be hard to make them
ſpeak ſo good Latine as they now do Engliſh, yet I have prevailed with an
Ingenious Perſon of this Colledge to under­take the Work when ever you ſhall
pleaſe to aſſign his Task, whereby your Writings will be enabled to travel
beyond the Seas, and ſpread themſelves, both to your Honour, and the Honour of
your Na­tion, as far as the Commonwealth of Learning reaches. How far your
Ladiſhip will be ſerved in this particular, when you are come to a reſolution
with your own Noble Thoughts, you may pleaſe to ſignify to

MADAM,

Your Ladyſhips real Honourer, And moſt Obliged Servant, Jaſper Mayne.

Chriſt Church in Oxford, May 20\. 1663.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=49)

MADAM,

I Have the ill Fortune when I am bound to ac­knowledge a very high Obligation
to your Excellence, at the ſame time alſo to ſtand in need of your Pardon,
that I have done it no ſooner. However, I wiſh I had the Skill to perform the
one part as anſwerable to your merit and my duty, as I am confident of your
goodneſs to give ſucceſs un­to the other. The Books you condeſcended to
be­ſtow upon me have turned a ſorry Study into a rich Library, which are ſo
much their own commenda­tions (beſides the gloſs your Honourable Name muſt
give them) that mine I fear may look like Injury and Rebatement to their
Worth. I muſt not, Madam, be too bold with your hours, which you have devoted
to better uſes than the reading of ſuch Papers; but with the tender of my
hum­bleſt Thanks to your Excellence for the high Ho­nour you have vouchſafed
me, wiſhing you all the happineſs of this, and the better life to come, I
Reſt,

MADAM,

Your moſt humble Servant, Thomas Tully.

Edm. Hall, Oxon, June 30\. 1663.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=50)

MADAM,

IN obedience to your Commands ſent me by your Servant in his laſt Letter, I
have put your Book of Tales into the Hand of a fit perſon to tranſlate them
into Latine as I think either Uni­verſity can afford. Being an exact Maſter of
both Languages, and enabled with a Genius ſit for ſuch an undertaking. I have
alſo read as much of your Poetry tranſlated by a young Scholar as hath
hither­to paſt his Pen. In ſome parts whereof I find him happy enough. But
your Excellent Fancy expreſ­ſing it ſelf ſometimes in Terms of Art, and Words
only known to Philoſophy, he tells me the hardeſt part of his Task will be how
to find out current Roman Words to match them. To remove which difficulty, I
have directed him to read Lucretius be­fore he proceed farther; who having
ſoftned the moſt ſtubborn parts of Natural Philoſophy, by ma­king them run
ſmoothly in his tunable Verſes, by an eaſy Imitation will teach him to do the
like. Ha­ving in theſe two particulars moſt readily ſerved you, I ſhould
return you my Studied Thanks, for the ſe­veral Books you are pleaſed to ſend
me, if they did not make me unhappy, by converſing with the Children of your
Mind at ſo great a diſtance from the incomparable Parent. For I do aſſure your
Excellency, I look upon Welbek, as long as you are there, not as a Noble Houſe
ſeated among ſolitary Groves, but as a perfect Court of Wit and Learning,
where you have all the Muſes for your Maids of Honour; and the beſt
Philoſophers, Stateſmen, Orators, and Hiſtorians for your Counſellors: And all
theſe for the Glory of your Sex, created from [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=50) your ſelf. Had
I the Art, like ſome here, to teach Birds to Speak, All the Fowls which fly in
your Woods ſhould preſently be transformed to Nigh­tingales, and taught Muſick
enough to ſing the praiſes of ſo great a Miſtreſs. To whoſe Vertues I ſhall
always remain,

London, April 21\. 1664.

A moſt real Honourer And Devoted Servant, Jaſper Maine.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

HAving received a Copy of your Works, for the uſe of the Library of Chriſt-
Church, and another as a particular favour to my ſelf; I haſten to make my
acknowledgments for both: and muſt beg leave to ſay that your Excel­lency has
found the way to make the Arts truly libe­ral, while you not only adorn them
by your Cul­ture, but propagate them by your munificent diſtri­bution. So that
it will reſt a Problem not eaſily to be reſolved, whether you appear greater
in your acquiſitions or obligings: whether you inſtruct the World, or enrich
it more? But it were an envious piece of curioſity, to labour in the Heraldry
of your Virtues which are all greateſt, becauſe Yours: and are not to be the
Subject of Conteſt, but Argument of Praiſe and Admiration: In particular
manner they are ſuch, to

Your Excellencies Moſt Humble and Obliged Servant  
Jo. Fell.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=51)

MADAM,

I Am very ſorry that my unhappy Fate hath neceſſitated an unbecoming Slowneſs
in ac­knowledging a Favour, that requires all poſſi­bilities of Gratitude, and
exceeds them. But yet, had I nothing elſe to ſay in excuſe of my no ear­lier
return to the laſt Noble effects of your Graces goodneſs, it were ſufficient;
That my ſence of that mighty Honour was too big for my Pen; and when I began
to ſpeak my reſentments of it, I found my ſelf as unable to expreſs them, as
to deſerve their oc­caſion. Bet yet, Madam, this is not all the reaſon, for I
was from home when your Grace's Preſent came, and have been ſo almoſt ever
ſince; other­wiſe I had not added to my want of merit on other accounts, that
alſo of appearing inſenſible, and de­fective in endeavours of acknowledgment;
I muſt ſay endeavours, for my Gratitude can riſe no higher. Since my receipt
of your Grace's ingenious Works, I have, as my occaſions would permit, caſt my
Eyes again into them, and I am ſorry they cannot dwell there, where I find ſo
pleaſing, and ſo in­ſtructive an entertainment. And though I muſt crave your
Pardon for diſſenting from your Grace's Opinion in ſome things, I admire the
quickneſs, and vigor of your Conceptions, in all: In which your Grace hath
this peculiar among Authors that they are, in the ſtricteſt ſenſe, your own,
your Grace being indebted to nothing for them, but your own happy Wit, and
Genius; a thing ſo uncommon even among the moſt celebrated Writers of our Sex,
that it ought to be acknowledged with wonder in yours. And really, Madam, your
Grace hath ſet [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=51) us a patern,
that we ought to admire, but cannot imitate. And whereas you are pleaſed
ſometimes to mention your being no Scholar, as an excuſe of de­fects, your
modeſty ſuppoſeth; By that acknow­ledgment you ſhew our imperfections that
pretend we are ſo, rather than diſcover any of your own.

As for the laſt Trifle I was bold to preſent to your Graces Eye, it is much
indebted to the ob­liging reception you were pleaſed to afford it; and there
is nothing that ſets ſuch a luſtre on your Graces great Wit, and Intellectual
Perfections, as that ſweet candor of your Spirit that renders you ſo
acceſſible, even to your meaneſt admirers. Where­as your Grace is pleaſed to
object againſt ſome part of the deſign of my Diſcourſe, that it ſets the
per­fection of the ſenſe higher than that of Ratiocination; I humbly deſire
that your Grace would conſider, that there are two ſorts of Reaſoning, viz.
Thoſe that the Mind advanceth from its own imbred Idaea's and native Store,
ſuch are all Metaphyſical Contemplations. And thoſe natural reſearches which
are raiſed from experiment, and the objects of ſenſe. The former are indeed
moſt perfect when they are moſt abſtracted from the groſneſs of things
ſenſible, but the others are then moſt compleat when they are moſt accomodated
to them; and when they are not, they are Aery, and Phantaſtick. Now what I
have ſaid about thoſe matters is to tie down the mind in Phyſical things, to
conſider Nature as it is, to lay a Foundation in ſenſible collections, and
from thence to proceed to general Propoſitions, and Diſcourſes. So that my aim
is, that we may ariſe according to the order of nature by degrees from the
exerciſe of our Senſes, to that of our Reaſons; [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=52) which indeed
is moſt noble and moſt perfect when it concludes aright, but not ſo when 'tis
miſtaken: And that it may ſo conclude and arrive to that per­fection, it muſt
begin in ſenſe: And the more ex­periments our reaſons have to work on, by ſo
much they are the more likely to be certain in their con­cluſions, and
conſequently more perfect in their actings. But Madam, I doubt I begin to be
tedi­ous, and therefore, at preſent dare add no more, but that I am,

Illuſtrious Madam,

Your Grace's moſt Humble and moſt devoted Servant, Joſ. Glanvill.

MADAM,

I Had not thus long deferred my dutiful Ac­knowledgments to your Ladyſhip for
the Ho­nour which I received, with your Ingenious Book of Orations; if I had
not been in hopes to recommend my Gratitude by preſenting your Lady­ſhip with
this Poem, lately Printed; and though it ought not to be ranked amongſt thoſe
polliſhed Pieces, which are derived to the World from your fair hands; yet,
Madam, I cannot doubt of your candid Reception of it; ſince in that ſhining
Circle of Graces, which Illuſtrates your Character, there is not any one more
conſpicuous, than your Ge­nerous Humility; which I am confident, will ob­tain
my Pardon of your Ladyſhip for preſuming [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=52) to return you
ſuch a worthleſs Preſent, and Divert­ing you from thoſe ſolid Entertainments,
by which you ſo improve your Heroick Spirit, and honour the Commonwealth of
Letters.

Norwich, May 12\. 1663.

MADAM, I am with profound Reſpect

Your Ladyſhips moſt Humble and moſt Obedient Servant S. Tuke.

# To the worthily Honoured Dr. Charleton, Phyſitian in Ordinary to his
MAJESTY.

HONOURED SIR,

HAving received the noble Preſent from Dr. Yerbury's hand, which you were
pleaſed to recommend to his care; and with it, the very ſignal Favour of your
obliging Letter; I hereby haſten to render my acknowledg­ments in reference to
both, which yet muſt needs fall ſhort, of being in any degree, a juſt return
to either. I have in the incloſed attempted to ſpeak mine, and the
Univerſities Duties, and moſt grate­ful recognitions to my Lord Duke: but can
only hope they may become acceptable from the advan­tage your Hand and
Recommendation will give them: and indeed I ſhall the more need your
Friend­ſhip herein, becauſe I underſtand ſome Perſons have, according to the
method of ill Nature, pleaſed themſelves in doing me unhandſome Offices, with
[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=53) the
Excellent Princeſs her Grace. Whoſe great and piercing Underſtanding will, I
hope, unravel their vile Arts, who can only recommend themſelves by traducing
others. Sir you will ſpeak a great Truth, and do no leſs an Obligation both to
this Place and me, if you ſhall be pleaſed to aſſure my Lord Duke and his
incomparable Princeſs, that this Univerſity and my ſelf have all imaginable
gratitude for their Favours, and Veneration for their Perſons: I ſhall with
the ſame ſincerity make profeſſion of the juſt regard I bear your ſelf, and
deſire to be eſteemed

Dec. 26.

SIR,

Your moſt Faithful Hamble Servant, J. FELL.

MADAM,

I Received the Honour of your Graces laſt Let­ter; but have not time now for
ſo large a return, as ſo ingenious a Diſcourſe might juſt­ly require, only I
cannot for bear intimating to your Grace, that I am not ſo fond a mechaniſt,
as to ſup­poſe all the Phoenomena of the World to be raiſed meerly by thoſe
Laws; but moſt of them perhaps by a Principle that is vital; And the Anima
Mundi I take to be a very likely, and convenient Hypothe­ſis. Of this I am
ready to give your Grace an ac­count, that you ſhall be pleaſed to permit it.
But the buſineſs of this is ſomewhat of another nature, being to implore a
Favour from your Grace, not [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=53) upon mine own,
but a publick account. There is in this Place a Library erected, chiefly for
the diverſion of Gentlemen that come hither upon the occaſion of the Bath.
There are in it ſeveral worthy Authors, but it wants the great Honour and
Ornament of the Illuſtrious Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle's Works. I know, Madam,
your Grace hath alwayes writ out of a Principle of Noble Generoſity, and
Charity towards Mankind; and are very ready to diſpenſe your Influence to
thoſe that need your Informations: To this I underſtand moſt of the
conſiderable Li­braries of England can bear a Teſtimony; and there­fore I am
bold upon the confidence I have in your Grace's goodneſs, to become an humble
Solicitor in the behalf of ours, which will be very much en­nobled by ſo
glorious an Inſtance of your Grace's Favour, if you ſhall pleaſe to Honour it
with thoſe Ingenious Works, by which your Grace doth ſo much outſhine your
Sex, and many, that would be thought the greateſt Wits, of ours. You ſee,
Ma­dam, what an apprehenſion I have of your Grace's Benignity and Candor, in
that I can appear before your Grace in a requeſt for a Favour to others, when
I am my ſelf ſo infinite a Debtor to thoſe many ob­ligations your Grace hath
been pleaſed to lay upon me, for all which I have nothing to return, but the
moſt humble and devout Acknowledgments, of,

Bath, Octob. 13.

Illuſtrious Madam,

Your Grace's moſt Obedient And moſt Obliged Servant, Joſ. Glanvill.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=54)

MADAM,

I Received a freſh obligation from your Grace in the excellent Hiſtory you
were pleaſed to order for me. In which your Grace hath done right to one of
the moſt Illuſtrious Hero's of our Age, and erected a laſting Monument to his
Virtue. And in it, Madam, your Grace hath ſweet­ly and wonderfully twiſted the
Faithfulneſs of an Hiſtorian, with the Affections of a Wife; And your
Illuſtrious Lord hath in this an Honour beyond the other great Subjects of
Hiſtory, That his Grace hath not only as much deſerved to be Celebrated as
they, But hath moreover the happineſs of the neareſt Re­lation to an Heroine,
whoſe Pen is as Glorious as his Sword. And 'tis not eaſy to ſay which is
really the greater Wonder, the Famous Loyalty of that great Perſon, or the
uncommon Excellence of the Pen that deſcribed it. But I muſt take up from a
Sub­ject, in which, when I have ſaid all I can, I ſhall be defective; and
return to the laſt Letter wherewith your Grace was pleaſed to Honour me. For
the buſineſs of Witches upon which your Grace reflects again in this, I have
ſpoken many things more a­bout it in ſome Additions to my Conſiderations,
which I am now ſending to the Preſs. As ſoon as that Diſcourſe is extant, I
ſhall beg your Graces acceptance of it. In the interim thoſe things may be
ſuperſeded.

By Lower Nature in my laſt, Madam, I meant, the meer Animal, and Plaſtick
Faculties, whoſe vio­lent Impetus is the cauſe of many of our irregularities
and vices. As to the reſt, I acquieſce in your Grace's Determinations; And
whereas your Grace is pleaſed [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=54) to Excuſe the
liberty of Arguings; 'tis Madam with me that which leaſt of all things needs
to be excuſed. For I profeſs the largeſt freedom of Diſcourſe and Inquiry. As
for violent and captious Diſputes and Oppoſitions, I indeed much diſlike the
immodeſty, and immoralities of them; But for free and ingenious exchange of
the Reaſons of our particular Senti­ments, 'tis that which diſcovers Truth,
improves Knowledge, and may be ſo managed as to be no diſintereſt to Charity.
Your Grace Madam, I know is a Perſon of ſo much Honour and Judgement, as not
to take any thing amiſs from my liberty in ex­preſſing my apprehenſions, which
I uſe not to ob­trude upon any, but to propoſe to their Conſidera­tion and
Enquiries; and for my ſelf there is nothing obligeth me more than the
knowledge of variety of Conceptions. There is a Diſcourſe of mine ex­tant upon
a Subject not very ordinary, which con­tains Notions which ſome excellent
Perſons have not deſpiſed, and are not uſually met with in other Writings. I
am inquiring after it for your Grace, and as ſoon as I can procure one (which
is not very eaſy, that being out of Print) I ſhall ſubmit it to your Grace's
Judgement. I never ſaw that Book of Experimental Philoſophy, which your Grace
men­tions. And to this, Madam, I have no more to add at preſent, but that I am

Bath, Aug. 25.

Your Grace's moſt Humble Honourer and Servant, Joſ. Glanvill.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=55)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

IT was moſt fit and equal that as your great Name and Merit tranſcends the
glories of o­ther Perſons; it ſhould be alſo as ſingular in its Deſcription;
and have an Hiſtorian ſome way proportioned both in Honour and unparallel'd
Ca­pacities to its ſelf: which juſt felicity having hap­pened to your Grace,
by the Pen of your Illuſtri­ous Princeſs, it remained that one narrow dialect,
ſhould not confine that Relation to this our Iſland, which was to give Example
to the Heroes of all Nations. And now that in this reſpect alſo, your Name is
happily Conſecrated to Eternity, We of this Place, are to look upon it as a
ſignal Honour, to be made Sacriſts to it: and to think it a particular Reward
of our ſuffering in that cauſe, which you ſo gloriouſly aſſerted, and
accompanied in its fall, to be judged a proper repoſitory, for the Nobleſt
Hiſtory of its greateſt and moſt buſy tranſactions, and of the Perſon moſt
gloriouſly concerned in them. And certainly while Oxford is an Univerſity of
Loyalty, as well as Learning, which I hope it will never for­get to be, your
Graces virtues and atchivements, will be their equal argument of Study, and
Imitati­on: as now your Favours are of their moſt grate­ful recognition and
acknowledgment: which in their behalf, with all poſſible Devotion, are laid at
your Graces Feet, by

Dec. 26.

Your Grace's Most Obedient moſt Humble, And moſt Faithful Servant, J. Fell.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=55)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

IT was my misfortune to be abroad in Kent when the Letter wherewith your Grace
vouch­ſafed to Honour me, came to London. And therefore as I came late to
taſte the Pleaſure of ſo high a Favour, I hope your Grace will permit me to
plead that delay in excuſe of this ſlow return of my moſt humble
Acknowledgments and Thanks for it. My moſt Noble Lord (were it not known by
experience that great Perſons, and great Minds, are moſt apt to ſtoop from
their own height, and own mean and inconſiderable ſervices offered to them) I
ſhould ſay it was too low a Condeſcenſion in your Grace, to take notice of my
readineſs to comply with your Deſires: Wherein (beſide the diſcharge of my
Duty) I did likewiſe ſerve the ends of my Ambition; it having ever been the
Vanity of Soul­diers to think themſelves dignified by the Honours done to
their General. This made me with great Delight employ my ſelf in Deſigning
that for your Grace, which I ſhould be ſorry to live to accom­pliſh, being
already unhappy enough, in Burying too many Princes. For the thing it ſelf I
am glad to ſee the King do that which is ſo decent and wor­thy of him, as to
order your Grace a Tomb among the Kings, who have always been ſo near to him,
and who ſtood up ſo cloſe to his Father in extremity of Danger, and ſo
bravely, that had not God deſigned to reſtore the Crown, in his own Miraculous
way, it had certainly been done before by your Hand. However your Grace hath
prepared for your ſelf a more Noble, and more laſting Monument, in the Fame of
your Heroick Actions, of ſome of them I [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=56) had the
happineſs to be an Eye-witneſs, upon which pretence I humbly beg the Honour to
retain unto your Grace in the Quality of

Bromley in Kent, July 2\. 1671

My LORD,

Your Grace's moſt Obedient Souldier and Servant, Joh. Roffen.

# To the Incomparable Princeſs, MARGARET, Dutcheſs of NEW-CASTLE.

MADAM,

AMong many other things, by which your Grace is pleaſed to diſtinguiſh your
ſelf from other Writers, this ſeems to be not the leaſt remarkable; that
whereas they imploy only their wit, labour, and time, in compoſing Books, You
beſtow alſo great ſumms of Money in Print­ing Yours: and not content to enrich
our Heads alone, with your rare Notions, you go higher, and adorn our
Libraries, with your elegant Volumes. To that general Charity, which diſpoſeth
you to benefit all Mankind, you have added a ſingular Bounty, whereby you
oblige particular Perſons: and out of a Nobleneſs peculiar to your Nature, you
cauſe your Munificence to Rival your Indu­ſtry.

This, Madam, among many other your Ex­cellencies, Gratitude commands me to
acknowledge; Your Grace having been pleaſed to number me a­mong [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=56) thoſe, whom
you vouchſaſed to honour with ſuch extraordinary Preſents. For which I know
not how to ſhew my ſelf duely thankful, otherwiſe than by celebrating your
Generoſity, and return­ing you ſome account of the good effects they wrought
in me, while I peruſed them. Which con­ſidering the Noble End for which you
wrote them, and my inability to make you a more proportionate retribution;
will not, I hope, be unacceptable to you. To this purpoſe, therefore, I am
bold to ſend your Grace this rude Paper. Which yet I deſign, not as a
Panegyric of your worth (for what affects us with admiration, ſtrikes us alſo
with dumbneſs: and Stars are beſt diſcerned by their own luſtre) but as a
ſhort Scheme of my own grateful Sentiments. And if I be not ſo happy, to
deliver them in Language agreeable to the dignity of the Subject, I humbly
beſeech you to conſider, that ſuch occaſions offer themſelves very rarely; and
that nothing is more difficult, than to make the Pen obſerve Decorum, where
Reaſon is put into diſorder, Juſtice, Ma­dam, requires you ſhould pardon the
effects of that aſtoniſhment, whereof your Wonders are the cauſe.

They tell us, that the End of all Books is either profit, or pleaſure: but I
think that diſtinction (as many other in the Schools) might well be ſpared:
becauſe, in truth, profit ſuppoſeth pleaſure; and pleaſure is the greateſt
profit; nor am I aſhamed to profeſs, that in all my reading I have no other
aim but pleaſure. It will not then, I hope, Madam, be thought derogatory to
the Profitableneſs of your Grace's Books, If I acknowledge my ſelf to have
received very great pleaſure in reading them. And [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=57) this pleaſure
was ſo charming, it ſo far tranſported me, as often to make me wiſh, you might
never entertain a reſolution of cauſing your works to be Tranſlated into any
other Language: that ſo all Ingenious Forreigners, invited by the Fame of your
moſt delightful Writings, might be brought to do Honour to the Engliſh Tongue,
by learning it on purpoſe to underſtand them. For I am zealous for the
Reputation of my native Language, and of ſo communicative a temper, as to
deſire all men ſhould participate of what I find delectable. Beſides, I could
not but remember, that I had known a great Man of our Nation, who ſtudied
Italian, only to acquaint himſelf with the Mathematiques of Galileo, in his
Del Movimento, and Saggiatore; and Spa­niſh, meerly out of love to the
Incomparable Hiſtory of Don Quixot: and was thereupon the more apt to promiſe
my ſelf that your Grace's Works, no leſs admirable in their kind, than either
of thoſe, would have the like influence upon ſome of the Bons Eſprits beyond
Sea. But this, Madam, was only my Wiſh: it is not now my Counſel. Should I
here particularly recount to you, what the things were, that raiſed this ſo
great delight in me, I ſhould both offend by prolixity, and tacitly caſt
diſparage­ment upon the reſt. For,

Pauperis eſt, numerare Pecus,

He is but poor, who can account his Wealth:

And what the witty Roman Stoic ſaid of the excel­lent ſayings of Zeno,
Cleanthes, Chryſippus and other Princes of that Sect, may be conveniently
accommo­dated to the delightful Remarks every where occur­ring in your Books,
viz. That no choice can be made, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=57) where all
things are equally Eminent. However, be­cauſe there is no ſatiſfaction in
Generals, and that Order is neceſſary to plainneſs: give me leave to divide my
Text into three parts, your Natural Philoſophy, your Morals, and your Poetry.

For your NATƲRAL Philoſophy; it is in­genious and free, and may be, for ought
I know, Excellent: but give me leave, Madam, to confeſs, I have not yet been
ſo happy, as to diſcover much therein that's Apodictical, or wherein I think
my ſelf much obliged to acquieſce. But, that may be the the fault of my own
dull Brain: and Oracles have been after found true, that were at firſt Dark
and Enigmatical. Again I am ſomewhat ſlow of be­lief alſo; a continual ſeeker:
as conceiving, I have too much cauſe to be of Seneca's opinion, that Men may,
indeed enquire and determine what is moſt pro­bable, but God alone knows
what's true, in the things of Nature. Nor am I ſingle in this Sceptical
Judge­ment. The ROYAL SOCIETY it ſelf (the Tribunal of Philoſophical
Doctrines) is of a con­ſtitution exceedingly ſtrict and rigid in the
exami­nation of Theories concerning Nature; no reſpecter of Perſons or
Authorities, where Verity is concerned; ſeldom, or never yielding aſſent
without full con­viction: and that's the Reaſon why it made choice of theſe
three Words for its Motto, Nullius in verba.

This Madam, can be no diſcredit to your Philoſophy in particular, becauſe
common to all others: and he is a bold Man, who dares to exempt the Phyſics of
Ariſtotle himſelf, or of Democritus, or Epi­curus, or Des Cartes, or Mr.
Hobbs, or any other hither­to known. For my part, Seriouſly, I ſhould be loath
[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=58) to
affirm, that they are any other but ingenious Comments of Mens Wits upon the
dark and inex­plicable Text of the World; plauſible Conjectures at beſt; and
no leſs different, perhaps, from the true Hiſtory of Nature, than Romances are
from the true actions of Heroes. Nor will I adventure to determine, which of
the two, Ariſtotle or your Grace, hath given us the beſt definition of the
Hu­mane Soul: He, when he calls it Entelechia; or you when you ſay, it is a
Supernatural ſomething, &c. So difficult is it to make a judgement of what
ſeems incomprehenſible.

Nor are you to be diſcouraged, Madam, If your Philoſophy have not the fate to
be publickly read in all Univerſities of Europe, as your Grace, doubt­leſs out
of a moſt Heroic ambition to benefit Man­kind, deſires it ſhould. For, while
Men are Men, there will be different Intereſts, and conſequently different
Opinions: nor is the multitude of Follow­ers a certain ſign of the Soundneſs,
but of the Gain­fulneſs of any Doctrine. If, therefore, the World, which is
obſtinate (you know) and governed by pre­judice, will not be induced to
eſteem, what you think uſeful; the blame lyes not at your Door, and you ought
to conſolate your ſelf with this reflexion; that you have ſufficiently
teſtified your good inten­tions, and done more than your Duty, in publiſhing
your Conceptions. Beſides, the Virtuoſi of our Engliſh Univerſities have, of
late years, proclamed open War againſt the tyranny of Dogmatizing in any Art
or Science: and as for thoſe of the Roman Religion; there is, I fear me, but
little hope, of ma­king them your Proſelites. Becauſe thoſe canting
Polititians, called School-men, having made a new and [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=58) party-colour'd
Veſt for the Church, of a kind of Drugget, conſiſting of the Thrums of
Peripatetic Philoſophy, cunningly interwoven among the Gol­den threads of the
Chriſtian Faith; and prevailed, upon Princes to make it Piacular for any
Scholar to appear with his Judgement clad in any other Livery: it is not very
unlikely, the Profeſſors there will ſoon be brought to offend their Superiors,
by laying aſide the defence of Ariſtotle's Maxims, to aſſume the Patronage of
New. So that in my ſilly conceipt, as the Cabbage is obſerved to ſtarve the
Vine, if ſet too near: ſo the Philoſophy of Thomas Aquinas and others of the
ſame myſtical Tribe, will hinder the growth of yours, in the ſame Ground.

For your MORAL Philoſophy (for ſo I take liberty to call your occaſional
Reflections upon the Actions, Manners, and Fortunes of Men) Your Grace has
not, indeed tied up your Pen to the la­borious rules of Method, or the
formality of a new Syſteme in Ethics: but (what is as well) you have
opportunely, and under various heads, diſperſed many uſeful remarks,
concerning Prudence, as well Civil, as Domeſtic, in moſt of your Writings. And
this, it may be preſumed, you were pleaſed to do, not for want of Skill to
reduce your rules of life into the order of dependence and connexion; but with
de­ſign, to ſhew your plenty, and ſurprize your Readers with good counſel even
where they leaſt expect it. You choſe rather to regale us with delicate
Fictions, under the veil whereof wholeſom inſtructions are neatly contrived,
than to embaraſs and tire us with the obſervation ofa long train of Precepts,
which are never ſo effectual, as when naturally flowing from agreeable
Inſtances and Examples: Your very in­terludes [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=59) contain
adviſo's, and your digreſſions are ſeaſonably inſtructive: like wiſe
Husbandmen, you plant Fruit-Trees in your Hedge-rows, and ſet Straw­berries
and Rasberries among your Roſes and Lil­lies. This, Madam, is a piece of no
ſmall art, though not obvious to common Eyes: and if any diſlike the courſe
you have taken in thus ſcattering and diſguiſing your Morals; I would have him
asked this Queſtion, Whether or no it be folly for a man to refuſe to gather
Oranges and Citrons, only be­cauſe the trees that offer them, are not ranged
in the Order of Cyrus's Quincunx? or whether a Noſegay be leſs fragrant,
becauſe pluck'd from Flowers grow­ing diſperſedly? To all who have read your
Comi­cal Tales, with the ſame purity of Mind, with which you wrote them, and
are withal qualified to ſearch into the Mythology of all your imaginary
Dialogues: to all ſuch, I ſay, it is evident, that you have drawn the Images
of all the Virtues, on one hand, and their oppoſite Vices, on the other, ſo
much to the life; that men, beholding them, muſt be, by grateful violence,
compelled to love the Pulchritude of thoſe, and abhor the deformity of theſe.
Now, this, Ma­dam, you could not have done had you not firſt had the Idea's of
all Virtues within your ſelf: it being abſolutely neceſſary for a Painter,
firſt to conceive the form or ſimilitude of the thing he intends to
re­preſent, in his own Imagination; and then to make the reſemblance according
to that form. So that in ſtrictneſs of truth, thoſe Pictures we call
Originals, are but Copies, yea Copies of Copies: as being firſt drawn from the
life in the Phantaſy, and after pourtrai'd upon Tables. Beſides this, your
Grace is further happy, in that the Morals of your Pen are [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=59) clearly
exemplified in thoſe of your Life; in which I have never heard any thing
blamed, any thing di­ſputed, unleſs whether it hath been more Innocent, or
more Obliging. In fine, the Documents of both your Pen and Life ſeem to be ſo
good, that who­ever is able to moderate his Paſſions, and regulate his Actions
by them, needs not to ſeek further af­ter Happineſs: nor need I fear to
pronounce him ar­rived at ſuch perfection, that it will not be eaſy for him to
be brought to do ill, either out of Weakneſs, or out of Deſign.

For your POETRY; therein your Grace hath more than a ſingle advantage above
others.

First, Your Vein appears equally facile, equally free, and copious upon all
occaſions, in all ſorts of arguments. The Buskin and the Sock are equally fit
for your Muſes Legs. Your Phanſy is too ge­nerous to be reſtrained: Your
Invention too nimble to be fettered. Hence it is, that you do not always
confine your Senſe to Verſe; nor your Verſes to Rhythme; nor your Rhythme to
the quantity and ſounds of Sillables. Your Deſcriptions, Expreſſions,
Similies, Allegories, Metaphors, Epithets, Num­bers, all flow in upon you of
their own accord, and in full Tides: and Verſes ſtand ready minted in the
Treaſury of your Brain, as Tears in ſome Womens Eyes, waiting to be called
forth. So that in you is verified the Doctrine of Plato, in his Dialogue
in­titled Io; that Poeſy is not a faculty proceeding from judgement, or
acquired by labour and induſtry; but a certain divine Fury, or Enthuſiaſm,
which ſcorning the controle of Reaſon, tranſports the Spirit in Rap­tures, as
Jove's Eagle did Ganymed, or as Witches are ſaid to be wafted above the Clouds
on the wings [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=60) of their
Familiars. Which is, perhaps, the ground of that old ſaying, nemo fit Poeta,
no Poet is made, but born ſo: as the rage and liberty of a Poetic Ge­nius gave
occaſion to paint Pegaſus with Wings, in a flying poſture, and without a
Bridle.

Secondly, In your whole Oglio of Poems, I find nothing which is not intirely
Your own. Like good Houſewifes in the Countrey, you, make a Feaſt wholly of
your own proviſions: yea, even the Dreſſing, Sawces, and Garniture of the
Diſhes are Your own. And were Perilius Fauſtinus revived (he, who out of envy
to the Glory of Virgil, made and publiſhed a large Catalogue of his Thefts
from Homer and Heſiod) he could hardly diſcover ſo much as a ſingle Verſe
borrowed, by you, from any Poet, antient or modern. So circumſpect you are to
avoid being thought a Plagiary, that you walk not in beaten Paths, but decline
even the rules and methods of your Predeceſſors, and ſcorn Imitation, as a
kind of Theft. A commendation, Madam, due to very few, perhaps to none beſides
your ſelf. As your Grace, therefore, owes all your Poeſy to the inſpi­ration
of your own happy Genius alone; ſo we owe all the Pleaſure we are ſenſible of
in reading your Poems, to you alone. I may have many rivals in theſe my
thankful acknowledgements, you can have no Competitor in the Glory of their
occaſi­ons.

This double Felicity is augmented by the acceſſion of two others, no leſs
worthy admiration. One is, that as you have made your ſelf an Original, ſo are
you likewiſe ſecure from being Copied. You have indeed, given the world an
illuſtrious Example; but you have given what it cannot take, the Example
[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=60) being
of that height, that it is hardly attainable. You provoke our Emulation, and
at the ſame time caſt us into deſpair. Your Poetical Fancies rather brave,
than inſtruct our capacities: and by ſetting before our Eyes things
inimitable, you vex our ambition, and oblige us to an unprofitable trouble.

Another is, that you exceed all of your delicate Sex, not only in this age,
but in all ages paſt. It would puzle the beſt Hiſtorian to find your Parallel
among the moſt famous Women: and in the Mo­numents of the Roman greatneſs,
even while that Glorious Nation held the Empire as well of Virtue and Wit, as
that of the World, I cannot meet with an Heroine, to whom I dare to compare
you. There are, I confeſs, who tell us of a Noble Roman Lady, one Sulpitia,
who compoſed a Hiſtory of Domiti­an's times, in Hexametre Verſes, and wrote
many Elegant Poems beſides; and who hath been highly celebrated by Martial,
Tibullus, Sidonius Apollinaris, and of late by Scaliger alſo, as an eminent
Pattern both of a Chaſt and Immaculate Life, and of a neat Poetical Wit: and
once I had ſome thoughts of drawing a Parallel betwixt that Lady and your
Grace. But, upon a ſecond examination of the par­ticular Remarks, wherein I
had fanſied the reſem­blance chiefly to conſiſt; and a more ſerious review of
the Story of her Life, and the remains of her Pen, (extant among the Fragments
of Latine Po­ets, and uſually annexed to Petronius Arbiter) I perceived, I
could not proceed in that reſolution, without diſadvantage on your part, by a
conference ſo unequal; and thereupon reſumed my former co­gitation, that your
Grace's Statue ought to be placed [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=61) alone, and at
the upper end, in the Gallery of Heroic Women, and upon a Pedeſtal more
advanced than the reſt. We read not that Nature hath been ſo Prodi­gal of her
choiceſt Largeſſes, as to produce two Cice­ro's, or two Virgil's, or two Ben
Johnſon's: why, then, ſhould we ſeek after your Equal? It was their glory to
be ſingle: and it muſt be yours, to have no Peer, for ought we know, you are
the Firſt great Lady, that ever Wrote ſo much and ſo much of your own: and,
for ought we can divine, you will alſo be the Laſt.

Theſe, Madam, are a few of thoſe ſwarms of thoughts that crowded into my
unquiet Head, when I propoſed to my ſelf to expreſs ſome part at leaſt of the
great Honour and Reverence I owe your Grace. If I have ſo far obeyed the
impulſe of my Gratitude and Devotion, as to put them into Words, and offer
them to your knowledge; it was not, I aſ­ſure you, out of a vain conceipt,
that they were anſwerable either to your vaſt Merits, or to my Obli­gations;
but meerly upon Confidence, you would deſcend to exerciſe your Goodneſs and
Candor, in receiving them as a ſimple recognition of both. And if I have
ſuppreſſed the reſt; it was out of good Manners, and a due fear of farther
offending your Patience. I am not ignorant, Madam, that our Prayers to God,
and our Addreſſes to Princes ought to be ſhort. Reſigning you, therefore, to
the converſa­tion of your own more ingenious and uſeful thoughts, and to the
Tranquill Fruition of thoſe intellectual pleaſures, that continually ſpring up
in you from the Virtues of your Life, and the Fame of your Wri­tings; I moſt
humbly beg your favourable Inter­pretation [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=61) of what I have
here weakly ſaid, and with all Submiſſion imaginable, caſt my ſelf at your
Feet, as becomes

Your Graces, Juſt Honourer, and moſt Intirely Devoted Servant, Walter
Charleton.

From my Houſe in Covent-Garden May 7\. 1667.

MADAM,

I Had the Honour to hear ſo good Solutions given by your Excellency upon
divers Que­ſtions moved in a whole Afternoon, you was pleaſed to beſtow upon
my unworthy Converſati­on, that I am turning to School with all ſpeed, humbly
beſeeching your Excellence may be ſo boun­tiful towards my Ignorance, as to
Inſtruct me about the Natural Reaſon of thoſe Wonderful Glaſſes, which, as I
told you, Madam, will fly into Powder, if one breaks but the leaſt top of
their tails: whereas without that way they are hardly to be broken by any
weight or ſtrength. The King of France is, as yet unreſolved in the Queſtion,
notwithſtanding he hath been curious to move it to an Aſſembly of the beſt
Philoſophers of Paris, the Microcoſme of his King­dom. Your Excellence hath no
cauſe to apprehend the cracking blow of theſe little innoxious Gunns. If you
did, Madam, a Servant may hold them cloſe in his Fiſt, and your ſelf can break
the little end of their Tail without the leaſt danger. But, as I was bold to
tell your Excellence, I ſhould be loath to [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=62) believe any
Female Fear ſhould reign amongſt ſo much over-maſculine Wiſdom, as the World
doth admire in you. I pray God to bleſs your Excel­lence with a dayly increaſe
of it, and your worthy ſelf to grant, that among thoſe Admirers, I may ſtrive
to deſerve, by way of my humble Service, the Honour to be accounted,

Hague, March 12\. 1657.

MADAM,

Your Excellencies moſt Humble and moſt Obedient Servant  
Huygens de Zulichem.

I have made bold to joyn unto theſe a couple of poor Epi­grams I did meditate
in my Journey hither, where your Excellencies Noble Tales were my beſt
entertainment. I hope Madam, you will perceive the intention of them, through
the Miſt of a Language I do but harp and gheſs at.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,

THe Obligations by which your Grace has eminently engaged your Servants in
par­ticular, and in General the whole world, or at leaſt the Judicious and
Civil part of it, are ſo many and great, that to ennumerate them to this
preſent Age may ſeem a large Hiſtory, and to Gene­rations to come a real
Romance. The happineſs was ſo great we received the laſt year, when we had, by
your Graces Permiſſion, the Honour to pay our Duties to your happy ſelf, that
the Contemplation of it by your Grace's abſence, adds the more to our
Infelicity. But we ſhall not wholly deſpair to be [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=62) reſtored to
the ſame capacity of waiting on your Grace, which we are extreamly ambitious
of: In the mean time preſenting my Wifes moſt humble Ser­vice to your Grace, I
take the confidence to ſub­ſcribe my ſelf,

April, 22\. 1668.

MADAM,

Your Graces very great Honourer, And moſt Devoted Humble Servant, BERKLEY.

MY LORD,

IT is not Strange to me that your Grace is pleaſed to ſurpriſe me with ſuch
obliging ci­vilities which are ſo eſſential to your Nature, and made cuſtomary
by ſo many frequent Habits, that it were as difficult for your Grace not to do
Acts like your great ſelf, as it is for others (eſpe­cially in this
degenerating Age) to imitate yours. I return your Grace my moſt humble Thanks
for the high Honor and Favour of your Books, recei­ved by my ſelf, and Son,
which are much to be valued by judicious Perſons, for the worth contain­ed
therein, and rendred moſt Illuſtrious, for the great Authors ſake, who will be
much admired, not only by the preſent Age, but by all ſucceſſion of Ages, as
long as Loyalty, Sincerity, and high Acts of Honour are eſteemed by Men, and
have [[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=63)
any attractive Power, My Lord, I moſt humbly beſeech your Grace to believe me
to be

Berkeley-Houſe at St. Johns, April 22\. 1668.

Your Grace's high Honourer, And moſt Obedient Servant, BERKELEY.

MY LORD,

THe Right your Grace has to be a Supream Patron of Poeſy, is given you, from
your Affection to the Muſes, and the excellent merit of your own Compoſitions,
which have ſo many ways beautified Poeſy, and delighted our Theatres, as they
have received from your Wit (if poſſible) equal Glory with your other
Gallantries and Actions, which have ſo much honoured our Nation; for this
Cauſe I muſt beg your Graces Pardon, that I preſume, to preſent you with this
in­conſiderable Poem of mine, of which (though I wanted not Inclination) I
durſt not adventure a di­rect Dedication to your Grace, with whom I had not
the Honour of an Acquaintance ſufficient to incourage ſuch a boldneſs, as alſo
ſome doubt, it might not deſerve a Patronage from ſo excellent a Poet, which
made me rather venture its publick Dedication to this Honourable Perſon of my
Alli­ance, I have mentioned before my Book, though this my private Addreſs to
your Grace, muſt be my greater Ambition, ſince you are not only a moſt
accompliſhed Judge, but an Author: yet I preſume to ſay that your Grace may
challenge ſome con­cernment [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=63) in this Poem,
as it treats of the paſt Glory of our Anceſtors; in which the Antiquity, and
Ho­nour of your Blood, could not but have a high Re­nown: and as your Grace
has ſcarce a Parallel, in all Acts of Generoſity, and Nobleneſs, ſo your
In­comparable Lady, doth no leſs excell in her Quality, and Sex, (the
unequal'd Daughter of the Muſes) beſides all other her voluminous Productions,
which compleat the Wonder of her Name, to whom I have preſumed to preſent,
likewiſe, with your Lord­ſhip, a Book of my Poem, as an expreſſion to both
your Graces, how much you are Honoured by,

May 3\. 1669.

My LORD

Your Graces Very Humble Servant, Edward Howard.

MADAM,

I Owe it to your Graces ſingular condeſcention, and goodneſs, that my Letters
are not diſplea­ſing, and I ſee a great deal of Generoſity, in your Graces
acceptance, of ſuch mean things, as my ſlender ſtock of Knowledge can impart.
As for your Inquiry about the Plaſtick Faculties; I Anſwer, that they are
thoſe, whereby the Body is formed at firſt, and by which the Alimental Juices,
are after, through the whole courſe of Life, orderly diſtribu­ted for the
purpoſes of growth and nutrition: But whether, as your Grace inquires, they
are Faculties inherent, in the Soul, or are only Mechanical Mo­tions [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=64) of the Body I
cannot determine certainly. But I rather incline to the Platoniſts, who will
have the Soul to be the Bodies Maker, and they affirm (as is ordinary; though
with ſome diverſity in the Names and Preſentation) That there are three ſorts
of Faculties, which they Phancy as Analogous parts, or Regions in the Soul,
(Viz.) The Mind, ſo they call the higheſt Faculties of abſtract Reaſon, and
Underſtanding, which is the Firſt. The Second they call the Soul, (Viz.) as it
is united to the Body, and exerciſeth the operation of Senſe. The Third, is
the Image of the Soul, which is thoſe Fa­culties, that are called Plaſtical,
that move and turn the Body, but are devoid of Underſtanding, or Senſe; Now
how the Soul, which is Immaterial, can manage and order Corporeal Motions is a
dif­ficulty of which Philoſophy as yet hath given no account, as I have
particularly taken notice, and proved in my Sceptis Scientifica, but yet the
thing ought not therefore to be denied, becauſe the man­ner of the moſt
obvious ſenſible things is to us un­known; And by this we can only prove, that
we have yet no certain Theory of Nature: And, in good earneſt, Madam, all that
we can hope for, as yet, is but the Hiſtory of things as they are, but to ſay
how they are, to raiſe general Axioms, and to make Hypotheſes, muſt, I think,
be the happy priviledge of ſucceeding Ages; when they ſhall have gained a
larger account of the Phoenomena, which yet are too ſcant and defective to
raiſe Theories upon: ſo that to be ingenious and confeſs freely, we have yet
no ſuch thing as Natural Philoſophy; Natural Hiſtory is all we can pretend to;
and that too, as yet, is but in its Rudiments, the advance of it your [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=64) Grace knows is
the deſign and buiſineſs of the Royal Society; from whom we may reaſonably at
laſt expect better grounds for general Doctrines, than any the World yet hath
been acquainted with; but this, Ma­dam, is an excurſion. I therefore return to
your Graces Letter, which inquires ſome things, about my No­tion of the Souls
Original: As to this I would not be underſtood to affirm peremptorily a thing,
which the greateſt part of Men, neither have, nor can re­ceive, only I
conſider it as an Hypotheſis, that may be taken up to ſatisfy thoſe minds that
are much troubled at the ſeeming inequalities of Providence; and whether true,
or falſe, this I will take the bold­neſs to be confident in, That the Doctrine
of the Souls Praeexiſtence, doth beſt ſuit with the appearan­ces of the World.
And beſt Anſwers for the Di­vine Juſtice and Goodneſs, in all the affairs of
Pro­vidence; In this Madam, I am a little Dogmatical, and this ſtep further, I
think I may take, without im­modeſty; That the Doctrine hath ſo much to ſay
for it ſelf, from Reaſon, and the higheſt Antiquity, as to render it fit to be
conſidered, and indeed, ſince the two other wayes, are confeſſedly deſperate,
me­thinks there ſhould be no harm in examining this; which is all I pretend
to. But particularly to your Grace's Quaery, Whether were Souls Created or
Un­created? I Anſwer, no doubt Created: But then I do not ſee how that
follows, which your Grace is pleaſed to infer, Viz. That Sin was then Created,
For our Souls in their State were Spotleſs and Innocent, as the Angels of God.
That Mankind was ſo firſt, and fell by a voluntary Tranſgreſſion, is the
com­mon Doctrine; and how we may ſuppoſe it was par­ticularly in the way of
Praeexiſtence, your Grace will [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=65) ſee eaſily,
when I ſhall have procured that Book of mine, I have mentioned, and promiſed
your Grace, but cannot yet light on. The other part alſo of your Graces
Diviſion: Viz. That if thoſe Souls were Eternal, they are Gods; is I humbly
conceive a miſtake likewiſe, ſince though the World, had been Created from
Eternity (which even the Schools confeſs poſſible) it had nevertheleſs been a
Creature, by reaſon of its dependence upon another, for its being, and to have
been produced, and yet from Eternity, is no abſurdity, our Faith affirms it,
in the Eternal Generation of the Son, and Proceſſion of the Holy-Ghoſt, and to
take an inſtance with which we may make more bold: If the Sun had been from
Eternity no doubt it would have ſhone E­ternally, and yet it's Beams had been
effects and de­pendent; And whereas your Grace ſaith again, That what is
Immaterial is a God: I muſt here alſo take the boldneſs, to enter my Diſſent
to your Propo­ſition; Indeed Mr. Hobbs denys all Immateriality to Created
Beings, but I think upon grounds preca­rious and unſafe, That our Souls are
Immaterial in their Natures, hath been ſufficiently proved by ſome late
Philoſophers; particularly by the moſt learned Dr. H. Moore, and I alſo have
done ſomething about this, in my Book of Praeexiſtence, If your Grace de­mands
my Reaſons; they ſhall be ready at the leaſt intimation, of thoſe commands
which I ſhall ever account a ſingular Honour to obſerve. For the anti­quity of
Praeexiſtence, which your Grace rightly ob­ſerves, to be no certain Argument
of the truth of it, I humbly ſay I have not alledged it, for a demon­ſtration
of the thing, but to take off the prejudice we are apt to have againſt all
ſuppoſed Novelties, [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=65) and to ſhew
that it is not ſo deſpicable, an Hypothe­ſis but that ſeveral great minds of
former times, even in the Ages of the beſt Antiquity have owned a kindneſs for
it, and conſequently that we cannot, without ſome immodeſty, deny it a
favourable hear­ing, But madam, I forget my ſelf, and the conſi­deration I
ought to have of your Grace's Time and Patience, and therefore only add, that
I am,

Bath, Octob. 13\. 1667.

Illuſtrious Madam,

Your Graces Moſt Obedient Servant, Joſ. Glanvill

MY LORD,

HAd I not been out of Town a great part of the laſt Summer, and almoſt all
this Winter, I had written to your Grace long ſince. The Town might have
furniſh'd me with occaſions of writing that had not been impertinent. For only
to ſay that I am the humbleſt of your Graces Servants, and that no man has a
greater Honour for you than I have, would be Impertinent, ſince all that know
me, know it of me already, and I hope your Grace believes it. But (my Lord)
the Printing of the Humouriſts has given me a new occaſion of troubling you,
and deſiring your Favour to be an Advocate, for me, to my Lady Dutcheſs, to
procure me her Pardon, and a favouroble re­ception of that little Comoedy. My
Lord, (as long as you are ſo great a Mecaenas) it will be im­poſſible [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=66) to defend your
ſelf from the Importunate Addreſſes of Poets: And Poetry is in ſuch a
de­clining condition, that it has need of ſuch Noble Supporters as are at
Welbeck: Your Grace ſaw this Comoedy (before the Sting was taken out) and was
pleaſed to approve it, which is to me more than the Plaudit of a Theatre: As
it is, it ſtands more in need of Pardon, and Protection, which I hope your
Grace, and my Lady Dutcheſs will have the Mercy to afford it. I have (in this
Play) only ſhown what I would do if I had the liberty to write a general
Satyr, which (though it ſhould really re­flect upon no particular perſons,
yet) I find the Age is too faulty to endure it. If, for this reaſon, I were
not tyed to too great a ſtrictneſs for a Poet, I ſhould not deſpair of
preſenting you with ſome­thing much more worth your view than this mang­led
Play; but all that I can do can never make any proportionable return to the
favours, received from you, by,

London, April 20\. 1671.

My LORD,

Your Graces moſt Obliged Humble Servant, Tho. Shadwell.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=66)

MADAM,

I Am to beg your Graces Pardon for my ſelf, and this imperfect Piece, for
which I have bor­rowed the Patronage of your Name; I am not ignorant of the
diſadvantage that Name might ap­pear with (before ſuch a Trifle as this Play)
if it were not too well known, and had been too often pre­fixt to excellent
Pieces of your own to ſuffer any detraction now: This Dedication will only in
ſome meaſure expreſs the Honour that the Humbleſt of your Servants has for
your Grace, and the Power you have to protect ſo defenceleſs a Poem. But
(Madam) I confeſs it is too great a Preſumption, for me, to hope that your
Grace (that makes ſo good uſe of your time with your own Pen) can have ſo much
to throw away as once to read this little offspring of mine: And (but that
before I found not only Pardon for an Offence of this kind but encouragement)
I ſhould deſpair of having this for­given. When none of all the Nobility of
Eng­land gives encouragement to Wit, but my Lord Duke and your excellent ſelf,
you are pleaſed to receive favourably and encourage the very endea­vours
towards it: and under that notion this poor Play begs your Pardon and
Reception. Though it met with oppoſition from the Malice of one party, yet
ſeveral men of Wit were kind to it. But whatſoever oppoſition threatens that,
or me, it can never prejudice either, if that be Protected by your Grace, and
I be thought what I really am,

London, April 20. 1671.

MADAM,

Your Graces moſt Humbly Devoted Servant, Tho. Shadwell.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=67)

MADAM,

BEing an Hundred and fifty Miles from Lon­don, at a place called Chaddeſton,
near Man­cheſter: I had an account, but the laſt Poſt, of the receit of your
Graces Noble preſent: other­wiſe you had received a more early Acknowledg­ment
with my humble Thanks; which are all the return I can make for that, and many
other Fa­vours I have received from Welbeck: It had been Bounty enough (and as
much as I could have ex­pected) for your Grace to have Pardoned the
pre­ſumption of my Dedication, which intituled you to the Patronage of ſo
ſleight a thing: but to reward my Crime, is beyond expreſſion Generous. Thus
your Grace, like Heaven, rewards the intention without conſidering the
imperfection of the Act. My Deſign was, in ſome meaſure, to teſtify my
Grati­tude, and the Honour I have for your Grace: but even this Acknowledgment
has run me more in debt. Your Grace is thus reſolved to be before-hand with
all your Servants. Let them be never ſo dilligent, your Benefits will out-go
their Services; and they can never over-take your Bounty. I, for my part, am
in deſpair of ever coming near it: But nothing ſhall ever hinder me from
making uſe of all occaſions, I can lay hold on, to teſtify the great Honour I
have for my Lord Duke, and your Grace, and that I am,

MADAM,

Your Graces moſt Humble, and moſt Obedient Servant  
Tho. Shadwell.

May, 25\. 1671.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=67)

MADAM,

COnſidering that the Divine Gods accept of Offerings, though never ſo trivial,
when that their poor and obliged Creatures of­fer them with true Devotion,
incourages me here, by your Favours and Goodneſs, to believe alike of your
Ladyſhip, and to hope your Pardon and ac­ceptance of this Sacrifice of Thanks,
which in all Humility I thus Dedicate for the Honour of your Book, of which I
dare not ſay I am now unworthy, ſince I find where it comes, it has the
Efficacy of Great Seals, and Patents, to meliorate both Perſons and Places,
and ſuch Eſteem and Reverence as they come welcomed with, I muſt always and
much more account due to your Ladyſhips Orations, and to be Eternally paid by,

MADAM,

Your Ladyſhips Moſt Devoted, Humble, and Obliged Servant, Bullingbrooke.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

THough deprived ſo many years of your moſt Noble Preſence, yet left your Grace
ſo perfect an Idea in our Thoughts of your great Virtue, and thoſe rare
faculties of your Underſtanding, wherewith Nature hath adorned [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=68) your Grace, ſo
that we ever do admire the ſame, it being often our moſt pleaſing delight to
diſcourſe thereof, beſides the remembrance of your many great and undeſerved
Favours formerly received; and though we ſtand infinitely Obliged for the ſame
un­to your Grace, yet you are pleaſed to increaſe our Obligations, by
Honouring us with the Noble Gift of five ſeveral Books together, of your
Graces laſt Edition, which eſpecially for what belongs to thoſe Sublime
matters of Natural Philoſophy are only for the moſt Learned, and Judicious
Under­ſtandings, and for us to admire, and keep them as a ſingular mark of
your Graces great Benevolency toward us, and an Emblem of your high
Perfecti­ons, after our Lives to be left as a Teſtimony of the ſame. In the
mean time we humbly intreat your Grace to preſerve us all in your good
Opi­nion, and Honour me with a belief that I am as long as I live, to the
utmoſt of my weak Ability,

Your Graces, Moſt Humble and moſt Obedient Servant, J. Duartes.

Antwerp, Octob. 20. 1671.

My Siſters with the tender of their moſt Obedient Service, Humbly kiſs your
Graces Hand.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=68)

MADAM,

UNto the Rich and Incomparable Preſent of your Excellencies Works, wherewith
you have been pleaſed to Honour the Uni­verſity, I have, by the ſpecial
appointment of Mr. Vice-Chancellor, given a juſt reception; which word I
confeſs we could not uſe without being guilty of great rudeneſs, but that we
have placed them by that Illuſtrious Piece wherewith his Excellency your
Renowned Lord had before Honoured us, which is it ſelf Incomparable. Indeed
Madam, the Univer­ſity finds her ſelf oppreſſed herein with ſo many
Obligations in one, that She knows not where to begin her Acknowledgments; as
conſidering, that not only her Repoſitories are dignified to be the Cabinet of
ſo rich a Jewel, but that She is ſingled out by your Excellency, and valued
above the reſt of the World for her Approbation, and (as your Excellency
pleaſes to ſtile it) to be a Judge of it. Alas, Ma­dam, that is an Office we
dare not aſſume, not only without cenſure of Arrogance, but even of
Impro­priety; for ſeeing that every one is to be judged by their Peeres, who
ſhall undertake to be Judge of that that hath no Peer? We may ſee other things
by the Light, but to perceive the Light it ſelf we cannot call for another
Light; ſo neither may this gallant Work be Judged but by its own Innate
Ex­cellency, and the ſplendor it ſelf carrys in it. No, Madam, 'tis Honour
enough for us that we are taught by it, we will not uſurp upon it; and ſhall
count it our Pride and not our Shame to be out-done by ſo Tranſcendent an
Example. We acknowledge that we are become inſtructed in the Sciences which
our [[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=69)
ſelves profeſs; Philoſophy, Oratory, Phyſick, Po­etry, we write them over our
Doors, but we find them herein at a farr cheaper rate ſent home to thoſe
Doors, and that by a hardineſs of Invention which your Excellency firſt hath
ſhewed unto the World, and that an eaſy one too, by ſending us to that common
and neglected Miſtreſs, even Nature her ſelf, to whoſe Benignity if we would
confide (as your Excellency hath done) we ſhould make far greater Progreſſes
in the ways of Knowledge and Wiſdom (as likewiſe your Excellency hath done)
than through all the tedious Diſciplines wherewith we are detained and vexed
in our rugged Nurſeries. Two things do juſtly leave us, Madam, under a
ſurprize and admiration of your Excellencies great Production; Firſt, that it
ſhould proceed from a Per­ſon of ſo high Honour and Fortune; for Ignorance in
ſuch things as thoſe is appointed by the World unto ſuch Eſtates, and thought
a kind of Preroga­tive belonging unto Wealth: And next, that it ſhould proceed
from a Sex unaccuſtomed to, and commonly excuſed from ſuch painful and
elevated Inquiſitions. For (as your Excellency hath ob­ſerved) men do aſſign
to your Sex nothing but va­nities, and Trifles for their Portion, and under
co­lour of Courtſhip do confine them in their Educa­tion only to ſome
inferiour Qualities, and ſo in ef­fect but to a kind of delicate Barbariſm:
But herein your Excellency hath ſhew'd great Courage in breaking through that
Obſtruction, and by a Fe­male and unuſual Chevalry have reſcued your whole
Nation and Sex from the oppreſſion and injury in this point, and of that great
Giant, the World. For our part of your Univerſity, we muſt needs ſub­ſcribe
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=69) to your
Excellencies judgment herein, for 'tis the Muſes were eſteemed our beſt
Genius's and Sciences did chooſe unto themſelves for their Deities not Patrons
but Patroneſſes: and our Corporation of Learning, though it conſiſt all of
Men, yet when we would expreſs it in the Abſtract and in Picture we repreſent
it by a Woman. And in fine, my ſelf, Madam, (who am allowed the Honour to be
the Cuſtos of your immortal Donary) muſt be obliged to borrow from a Womans
Eloquence exemplified in the Work it ſelf, whereby to expreſs worthily the
Reſentments due unto it by thoſe that have em­ployed me, and particularly mine
own, who am,

May 20\. 1663.

MADAM,

Your Excellencies moſt Humble and Devoted Servant, Thomas Lockey, Keeper of
the Publick Library.

MADAM,

EVer ſince I had the happineſs to ſee any of your Graces moſt ingenious
Writings, I have felt a mighty Deſire to ſpeak my par­ticular gratitude for
thoſe ſingular Compoſures to all which the World is obliged; And had attempted
ſomething towards it more than three years ſince, but that my acknowledgments
miſcarried in the way. I am, Madam, an Admirer of Rarities, and your Grace is
really ſo great an one, that I cannot but in­deavour [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=70) ſome Teſtimony
of a proportion'd reſpect and wonder, though perhaps there may be Indeco­rum
in the boldneſs of ſuch unknown Addreſſes. I am ſenſible it can contribute
nothing to your Graces great ſtock of Fame to be acknowledged by
inconſiderable Perſons; But yet we muſt be juſt, and 'tis Religion to
celebrate the Virtuous. And I know your Grace is too generous to contemn the
offerings of the meaneſt Devoto's, upon the incou­ragement of which Belief I
am bold to beg Favour and acceptance for a Trifle of mine that was deſigned
for your Grace, as ſoon as it ſaw the Light, but could not find it's way into
the North. I ſhould not have the confidence to preſent ſo mean a thing to ſo
deep and Sagatious a Judgement, had I not an opi­nion of your Graces Candor
and Goodneſs, equal to my apprehenſion of your other Celebrated Per­fections;
and theſe are ſo Illuſtrious and ſo great, that our Sex would envy, did they
not admire, and your own too, Madam, were they not univerſally concerned in
the Honour. For your Grace hath con­vinced the World, by a great inſtance,
that Women may be Philoſophers, and, to a Degree fit for the Ambitious
emulation of the moſt improved Maſcu­line Spirits.

But, Madam, 'tis time to beg your Graces Par­don for the rudeneſs of this bold
intruſion; and I know, that grandure and generoſity of Mind that occaſion'd
the fault, will forgive it to

Bath, April 22.

Illuſtrious Madam,

The Humbleſt of your Graces Admirers, and Servants, Joſ. Glanvill.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=70)

MADAM,

THe greateſt Favour I could have expected in Anſwer to my boldneſs, was but a
pardon for the confidence of that intruſion; But that your Grace ſhould ſo
generouſly accept my Trifles, and make me ſo Glorious a return as I re­ceived
in your moſt ingenious Letters, this, Madam, was an Honour as much beyond my
expectation, as deſert; and exceeds all my poſſibilities of ac­knowledgment.
But if ever any thing happen within the reach of my indeavours, by which I may
ſerve or gratify your Grace, I ſhall then give evidence of the great
reſentment I have of this condeſcention, and the Veneration which is due to a
Perſon of ſo obliging and ſo unuſual a Virtue. Your Grace, I know, is Nobly
inquiſitive, and hath a rich ſtock of generous Apprehenſions; and Perſons of
this Character uſe to be pleaſed in the peruſal of the va­riety of others
Conceptions; And on this account I preſume, that thoſe notions I ſometimes
entertain my ſelf with, may not be unacceptable, being not alto­gether of the
road and common track. And if your Grace pleaſe to permit, and pardon my
Importuni­ties, I ſhall take occaſion to give you my ſenſe of ſome things that
are not of the meaneſt concern­ments. For the preſent I am obliged to anſwer
the particulars of your Grace's Letter, in which your Grace hath very much
obliged me by thoſe argu­ments you are pleaſed to excuſe; and to them I make
this humble return.

1\. That whereas your Grace calls the Induce­ments to the belief of Witches,
probable Arguments, I am apt, with ſubmiſſion, to think ſome of them to [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=71) be as great
demonſtrations as matter of Fact can bear; being no leſs than the evidence of
the Senſes, and Oaths of ſober Atteſtors, and the critical inquiries of
Sagacious, and ſuſpitious Perſons; which Circum­ſtances of Evidence, your
grace knows, ſome of thoſe Relations have to prove them. And there is a
particular Story which is ſufficiently famous, and of part of which I my ſelf
was a Witneſs, which I think is not ſubject to juſt Exception. 'Tis that of
the Drum in the Houſe of Mr. Mompeſſon of Tedworth in Wiltſhire. Of this,
Madam, I ſhall take an occaſion to give your Grace a particular ac­count, if
you have not yet been acquainted with the circumſtances of that unuſual
diſturbance. But to confine my ſelf now to your Grace's conſiderations on the
ſubject; The ſecond thing I obſerve, is,

The intimation of an Argument againſt the Ex­iſtence of Witches, becauſe they
are not mentioned by Chriſt, and his Apostles, concerning which I humbly
deſire your Grace to conſider.

1\. That Negative Arguments from Scripture uſe not often to be of any great
ſignification or validity. Our Saviour ſpake as he had occaſion, and the
thou­ſandth part of what he ſaid, or what he did, is not recorded, as one
Evangeliſt intimates. He ſaid no­thing of thoſe large unknown Tracts of
America, gives no intimations of the Exiſtence of that nume­rous People, much
leſs any inſtructions about their Converſion. He gives no particular account
of the affairs and ſtate of the other World, but only that general one, of the
happineſs of ſome, and the mi­ſery of others. He makes no diſcovery of the
Mag­nalia of Art, or Nature, no not of thoſe whereby the propagation of the
Goſpel might have been [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=71) much advanced;
viz. The Myſtery of Printing, and the Magnet. And yet no one uſeth his
Si­lence in theſe Inſtances as an Argument againſt the being of things, which
are the evident Objects of Senſe. I confeſs the omiſſion of ſome of theſe
particulars is pretty ſtrange and unaccountable, and an argument of our
Ignorance of the Reaſons and Menages of Providence, but I ſuppoſe of nothing
elſe; or if it were, I crave leave to add,

2\. That the Goſpel is not without intimations of Sorcery, and contracts with
evil Spirits. The ma­licious Jews ſaid our Saviour did his Miracles by their
aſſiſtance, He caſts out Devils by Beelzebub. And he denys not the ſuppoſition
or poſſibility of the thing in general, but clears himſelf by an appeal to the
Actions of their own Children, whom they would not ſo ſeverely criminate. And
beſides this,

3\. The Apoſtles had intimations plain enough of the being of Sorcery and
Witchcraft, as ſeems to me evident from Gal. 3\. 1. Gal. 5\. 20. Rev. 9\. 21.
Rev. 21\. 8. Rev, 22\. 15.

'Tis very true as your Grace ſuggeſts, that Su­perſtition and Ignorance of
Cauſes make Men many times to impute the Effects of Art, and Nature, to
Witchcraft and Diabolick Contract. And the Com­mon People think God, or the
Devil to be in every thing extraordinary. But yet, Madam, your Grace may
pleaſe to conſider, That there are things done by mean and deſpicable perſons,
tranſcending all the Arts of the moſt knowing and improv'd Virtuoſi, and above
all the Eſſays of known and ordinary Nature. So that we either muſt ſuppoſe
that a ſottiſh ſilly old Woman hath more knowledge of [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=72) the intrigues
of Art, and Nature, than the moſt ex­erciſed Artiſts, and Philoſophers, or
confeſs that thoſe ſtrange things they performe, are done by con­foederacy
with evil Spirits, who, no doubt, act thoſe things by the ways and
applications of Nature, though ſuch as are to us unknown. This, Madam, is, I
conceive, as much as is neceſſary to be ſaid to the Argumentative part of your
Graces excellent Letter.

As for the following Periods, I am moſtly of the ſame Opinion with your Grace,
in the way that I underſtand them. Nature is in a continual motion (for there
is no ſuch thing as Reſt in the World) and perhaps that is not purely
Mechanical, but may, in great part (at leaſt as to the beginnings and
directi­ons of it) be aſcribed to the Soul of the World, which poſſibly is the
great Archeus that formes Plants, Animals, and other more curious Phoenomena.
And there is no doubt but (as your Grace ſuggeſts) that much wickedneſs is
cauſed by the meer impulſe of Lower Nature; and I believe ſeveral Men are
determined to Actions of Vice by the odneſs of their particular make and
contexture. But whereas your Grace ſaith that nothing but God himſelf can be
perfect, I cannot ſo well underſtand that. Abſolutely ſo, and in all kinds,
'tis true, I grant it, but your Grace doth not ſeem to intend the propoſition
in that ſenſe. And to be Perfect in a lower kind is but to have all the parts
and faculties that are re­quiſite to ſuch a being, in that order, diſpoſition,
and all other circumſtances which are ſuitable to its Idea, and proper for its
reſpective ends. And in this ſenſe I think all things are perfect in their
firſt con­ſtitution; according to what your Grace ſaith af­terwards, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=72) That [God
cannot create any Imper­fection, being abſolute Perfection himſelf] which
appoſitely fits mine, but I can not ſee how it ſo well conſiſts with your
Graces former aſſertion, except it be intended to infer, That God made
nothing; a Propoſition which methinks your Grace ſhould not own; but ſome
things that follow ſeem to look that way, when you are pleaſed to ſay [Neither
can I conceive how God could actually make or act any thing, either in a
Mechanical manner, or a Free, being not locally moving] To which I humbly ſay
that if your Grace doubts the poſſibility of the Cre­ation out of nothing, I
think I can ſpeak ſome things as a Philoſopher, that may render it
rea­ſonable. Nor is actual motion in the Deity neceſ­ſary to his actions,
ſince he is Immenſe and needs not local motion to render him preſent by his
Eſſence, or his Virtue, to any place of the great Univerſe, being Eternally
there by the Infinity of his being, and his Power. And whereas your Grace is
plea­ſed to ſay, that God is no Mechanick, I conſent that He is not ſo
properly, in that he needs not material Inſtruments to act by. But yet he hath
made all things by a kind of Geometry; in Number, Weight, and Meaſure, ſaith
the Holy Oracle. And there is a ſort of Mathematicks in all the Works of
Na­ture.

Thus, Madam, I have made bold with your Graces Patience, in confidence of your
Candor, and your goodneſs, which I implore, for the Pardon of this Voluminous
Trouble. And in order to it, I have this to ſay, that I could not well have
ſaid leſs without having been wanting in ſome of your Graces Periods; and
there is ſomething elſe, in which [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=73) I deſpair of
being ever able to ſay enough, and that is, to expreſs how much I am,

Illuſtrious Madam,

Your Graces Humble Admirer, and Devoted Servant, Joſ. Glanvill.

Bath, July 8.

# To the Right Honourable, the Lady MARGARET, Marchioneſs, of New-Caſtle.

EXCELLENT MADAM,

I Well know that the Generous never propoſe to themſelves any other End of
their Favours, beſides Content, which neceſſarily reſults from the purſuance
of their own Noble Inclinations, but only the Benefit of the Perſons, upon
whom they chooſe to confer them: and that therefore they uſu­ally ſelect ſuch
Subjects, whereon to exerciſe their Beneficence, that ſeem more likely to
husband it, by a ſilent Devotion, and modeſt Acknowledgment, than to abuſe it,
by attempting a Retribution. And this, Madam, both teacheth and aſſureth me;
that though the Favour you were pleaſed to do me, in ſending me one of your
admirable Books, newly publiſhed, under the Elegant and moſt accommo­date
Title of The WORLDS OLIO; be ſo eminent an one, as to require from me a more
ſig­nificant Expreſſion of my Gratitude, than either my Wit, or Fortune, or
Intereſt can ever be able to make: yet none can be more acceptable to you,
[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=73) than
this, That I intend ever to continue your Debtor. So much, therefore, I here
ſolemnly profeſs; and moſt faithfully promiſe you, that I never will, ſo much
as in a wiſh for a Capacity of Retaliation, prophane the Freedom of the
Obligation your good­neſs moved you to lay upon me.

But, not to ſtate the Particulars of my Debt, at leaſt in brief; might give
you juſt cauſe to ſuſpect, that I underſtand not the Value of what I have
re­ceived. And, therefore, I humbly ask your leave, that I may acknowledge to
you, that you have highly benefited me, in my Reputation, in my
Ʋn­derſtanding, in my Affections.

Firſt, I ſay you have benefited me in my Re­putation; in that you have
declared me capable of ſo ſingular an Honour, as to be in the number of thoſe
Perſons, whom you thought worthy to receive ſo rich a Preſent, from ſo Noble a
Hand. For me to have ſat among the Multitude, whom your Sta­tioner invites to
feaſt upon your OLIO, had been proportionable enough to the degree of ſo
ordinary a Judgement, as mine: but to be among thoſe few, whom your ſelf had
nominated for your Chief Gueſts, was a Grace infinitely above my Ambi­tion.

Secondly, You have benefited my Ʋnderſtanding; in that your Philoſophical
Phancies have furniſhed me with variety of ſuch Novel Conceipts, concern­ing
ſundry the moſt difficult Problems in Nature; as that if my Memory be but
faithful enough to retain them, I ſhall never be unprovided of ſomwhat that is
poynant and grateful, to entertain Curioſity withall: and whenever my own
Reaſon is at a loſs, how to inveſtigate the Cauſes of ſome Natural Se­cret
[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=74) or
other, I ſhall relieve the Company with ſome one pleaſant and unheard of
Conjecture of yours. So that by reading of your Philoſophy, I have acqui­red
thus much of advantage; that where I cannot Satisfy, I ſhall be ſure to
Delight: which is ſome­what more than I dare promiſe from any other Diſcourſes
of the ſame Title; in ſo much as they generally leave the Mind in a kind of
Anxiety and Regret, when ever they fail to afford it Satisfaction. And,
certainly, if it be (as ſome hold) reaſonable to allow, that the Fictions of
Poets, and Roman­ciſts do uſually take as ſtrong hold of mens Minds, and Charm
their Affections as powerfully, as the moſt Authentique Narrations of
Hiſtorians; though the Reader well underſtands the Paſſages related by theſe,
to be certain Truths, and the adventures de­ſcribed by Thoſe, to be meerly
Imaginary; and this, becauſe Delight is equal on both ſides: if this, I ſay,
be juſtifiable, that man can run but little hazard of his Judgement, who ſhall
affirm, that your Suppo­ſition of Fayeries in the Brain, and of our Thoughts
being their Conſults and Suggeſtions; and your opini­on that the Fayeries
digging for Stones in the Quar­ries of the Teeth, to repair their decay'd
Tenements in the Head, is the Cauſe of the Tooth-ach; are as worthy the
hearing, as the moſt ſolid demonſtrative Theory of any Philoſopher whatever;
inſomuch as theſe may yield both as high and laſting a Delight as that. I ſay
Delight as High and Laſting; for, to ſpeak my Thoughts clearly, the Pleaſure
that ariſeth from the comprehenſion of the moſt perfect and la­borious
Demonſtration in Geometry, I never could find, either in height or duration,
much to exceed that, which I have ſometime been affected withall, [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=74) at the recital
of a Facetious Poetical Extravagancy, of which I had not afore heard. Nor do I
believe, that the Raptures, and Exultations of Don Quixot were much inferior
to that famous one of Archimed, which tranſported him out of himſelf, as well
as out of the Bath, into a loud Exclamation, I have found it, I have found it.
And the Reaſon of this Equa­lity may be well enough thought, to conſiſt
chiefly in the unſatisfiedneſs of our Nature, which always hurrying our Minds
on to Novelties, cauſeth us to put an equally cheap rate upon all things we
think already in the poſſeſſion of our Underſtanding; and to value acqueſt of
a freſh, though perhaps uſeleſs, and abſurd Opinion, above the calm fruition
of an­tient and irregular Maxims. But, this (Madam) being a Paradox, ought to
have more room, than can be ſpred in a Letter, whoſe deſign'd Argu­ment is
Thankfulneſs: and beſides, ſhould I adven­ture further, to avouch it, the ſame
could not but much redound to my diſadvantage; inſomuch as it might render me
ſuſpected for ſomething of a Scho­lar, and conſequently incapable of the
Honour and Pleaſure of ſometimes attending you, and hearing your more than
ingenious Diſcourſes. For as I re­member, in one of your Prefaces, or Epiſtles
to your Readers, you have been pleaſed expreſly to declare; That you never
Converſed, ſo much as one Hour, with any Philoſopher, or Profeſſed Scholar, in
your whole Life: and that, doubtleſs, muſt have proceeded from your conſtant
Averſion to ſuch blunt Company; not from your want of opportunities to hear
what they could ſay. Becauſe, being always Educated among the Nobleſt, and
moſt Knowing Perſons of our Nation; you could hardly eſcape the Conver­ſation
[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=75) of the
moſt Learned in all the Arts and Sci­ences; unleſs you purpoſely withdrew your
ſelf from their Society, or ſhut your Ears againſt their Diſ­courſes.

But, Madam, among thoſe, who have peruſed your Writings, I meet with a ſort of
Infidels, who refuſe to believe, that you have alwayes preſerved your ſelf ſo
free from the Contagion of Books, and Book-men. And the Reaſon they give me,
is this; that you frequently uſe many Terms of the Schools, and ſometimes ſeem
to have Imp'd the Wings of your high-flying Phanſy with ſundry Feathers ta­ken
out of the Univerſities, or Neſts of Divines, Philoſophers, Phiſicians,
Geometricians, Aſtronomers, and the reſt of the Gowned Tribe. For inſtance, of
Divines, when you ſpeak of Praedeſtination, Free will, Tranſubſtantiation, &c.
Of Philoſophers, when you mention Quantity, Diſcrete and Continued, the
Ʋni­verſal and Firſt Matter, Attoms, Elements, Motion, Dilatation, and
Contraction, Rarefaction, and Cenden­ſation, Meteors, &c. Of Phyſicians, when
you diſtin­guiſh of Choler, Phlegme, Melancholy, and Blood, and ſpeak of the
Circulation of the Blood, of Venricles in the Heart and Brain, of Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, and expatiate upon Fevers, Apoplexies, Convulſions,
Droqſies, and divers other Diſeaſes, with their particular Cauſes, Symptoms,
and Cures: Of Geometricians, when you touch upon Triangles, Squares, Circles,
Diameters, Circumferences, Centres, Lines, ſtreight and crooked, and their
proportions each to other, and that invin­cible Problem, the Quadrature of the
Circle: Of Aſtronomers, when you ſpeak of the Horizon, Me­ridian, Aequator,
Zodiack, Ecliptick, Tropicks, Poles of the World, and of the Ecliptick, and in
a manner [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=75) run over the
whole Doctrine of the Sphere, repre­ſenting the model of the Univerſe, and
caſt ſome tranſitory glances alſo upon the Doctrine Theorical concerning the
Motions of the Orbs, and Pla­nets. Nor can I, indeed, hope to diſſolve the
ſtif­neſs of theſe mens unbelief; untill I ſhall be better able to convince
them, that all theſe Scholaſtical Terms and Notions may be brought into the
World with us, and afterwards drawn forth of the Soul, by ſolitary Meditation,
and the labour of ones own Thoughts; and are not rather inſtilled into it, and
impreſt upon it, by often Hearing, or Reading the Diſcourſes of others, who
profeſs thoſe Arts and Sciences to which they belong, and for the more plain
and methodical teaching whereof, they were firſt Invented and Recorded. But I
fear me, while I inſiſt thus particularly upon the Reaſon alleadged by theſe
men, in defence of their Diffidence, I may fall into the ſame danger, for the
avoidance of which, I even now left my Paradox deſtitute of Aſſertion: and
therefore I lay by that ſubject, and take up another more opportune and
conſiderable, as to the diſcharge of my Duty, and confeſſing how many wayes
you have obliged me.

I acknowledge, therefore, in the laſt place; that my Affections muſt own you
for their Benefactreſs. For thoſe many Moral Apothegms, and Satyrical
Remarques upon the Manners of Men and Wo­men, which you have frequently
inſperſed upon the Leaves of your Book, are ſo pathetically delivered, and
with ſuch vigour of proper and familiar Lan­guage preſſ'd home to the Boſome
of every man; as that that perſon muſt be irrecover ably loſt in the darkneſs
of Vice, who doth not, through thhm, clearly [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=76) diſcern the
Luſtre and Amiableneſs of Virtue, and thereupon inſtantly abominate his former
Deformi­ties, and become your perfect Proſelite. When a Young, Noble,
Beautiful, Witty, and Sprightly Lady, one on whom all the Pleaſures of the
World ſeem to be Enamoured, and in throngs offer them­ſelves to be accepted
and commanded by her; when ſuch an one, I ſay is heard to Preach up
Temperance, Abstinence, Modeſty, Chaſtity, Solitude, and the ſuppreſſion of
all irregular ſenſual Appetites. What Sardanapalus is there, who muſt not
bluſh at the me­mory of his Vicious Acts, and being convinced, that the
delights of a Soul, well ordered according to the rules of Virtue and Honour,
are infinitely more charming and deſirable, than the moſt magnified Pleaſures
of the Body, ſwimming in an Ocean of Luxury, and Laciviouſneſs; firmly reſolve
with him­ſelf, thenceforth to ſeek for Felicity, not in the ſhort Titillations
and Blandiſhments of the Senſes, but in the Purity and conſtant Serenity of
the Mind. Is it poſſible, that any of our Ladies, ſhould retain her pretences
of Platonick Love, or continue the practiſe of her petty Arts of Daubing and
Painting, of Diſ­ſembling, Mediſanſe, and Detraction: after ſhe hath once read
your ſmart Invectives againſt them, and ſolid Arguments to ſhew, that they may
all be juſtly ſuſpected for Bawds to procure and conceal the fruition of that
Pleaſure, which doth not con­ſiſt in the admiring converſation of Souls, but
in the cloſe Conjunction of Bodies, and the ſatisfaction of that rank Appetite
of the Fleſh, commonly called Luſt? In a word; what Sex, Age, Conſtitution,
Condition is there, whoſe moſt ſecret Ulcers, the ſharpneſs of your Wit and
Pen hath not launced [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=76) open to the
bottom; and afterward preſcribed moſt eaſy and certain Remedies for the Cure
of them? So that I may well conclude this Paragraph with ſaying that your
Moral Eſſayes contain wiſe Pre­cepts enough in them, for the Reformation of
the Age we live in, and that, certainly, is ſo bad that no Man need ever fear
a worſe.

And, now, Incomparable Madam, having done my Homage to you, in token of what I
hold by the tenure of your Wit and Bounty, it remains, that I humbly beg your
Pardon for the rude and tedious manner of it. And that, I hope, you will grant
me, when you have conſidered, that the Devotion may be ſincere, where the
Ceremonies are imperfect; and I have aſſured you, that I will never omit to
pay you thoſe Dues of Thanks, and conſtant Obſervance, that belong to you,
from me, as one whom your Goodneſs hath made,

London, January 1\. 1654.

Your Eternal Honourer, and Faithful Servant, W. Charleton.

# To the moſt Illuſtrious, and moſt Excellent Princeſs, Margaret Dutcheſs of
New-Caſtle.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

SEeing your Graces ſingular Genius, hath long ſince been experienced, and
fully diſcovered to us; for ſuch as is both accompliſh'd with all various
Learning, and furniſhed with a Native Cur­teſie; that for its high abilities,
it is able; and for [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=77) its eminent
Candor, it uſually obtains infinitely upon the favourers of Learning: We
obliged on both theſe accounts, were unwilling to incurr ſo great a Crime, as
not chearfully to Conſecrate to your Grace, theſe our Acknowledgments, as
Argu­ments of our Eternal Obſervance. Your Graces goodneſs having this,
peculiar and above others, that 'tis neither forced by Solicitations of
Friends, nor Importunities of Petitions, but voluntary and of its own accord
flowes out, and delivers it ſelf. Truely every more than ordinary Spirit is
powerfully drawn out to what is like it ſelf, invites, embraceth, and
preſerves, whatever bears the name of any kind of Excellency, as allyed to it.
But how truely Mag­nificent is this of your Grace, that the Arts them­ſelves,
by your Graces Example, are render'd more Auguſt and Venerable? How ſhall
future Ages ſtoop under the weight of your Graces Fame, that your Grace in
that Nobility of Extract, and conflu­ence of Fortune, ſhould yet outvie in the
Methods of Learning, even thoſe, whoſe neceſſities muſt prompt them to
diligence? Wherein your Grace hath made ſo happy a progreſs, that never any
can more appear, a Devotiſt to, or Proficient in Learn­ing: ſo that your
Graces teeming Brain is ever bring­ing forth ſome new Miracle: and though a
Wo­man, yet hath merited the Diadem of Learning be­fore Men; though a
Courtier, yet before the Aca­demicks: In a word, wherein any one, is in any
thing Excellent, yet is your Grace in that thing far more excellent. Nor can
we believe, that any mortal Man, no not your Grace our Princeſs (with your
Graces Pardon) can from Natures inſtinct, or humane ſtrength be excited and
raiſed to ſo manifold [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=77) and profound
Speculations. It muſt neceſſary, be that that moſt capacious Soul of your
Grace, expa­tiating it ſelf ſo far into all ſorts of Learning, is Di­vinely
inſpired; that almoſt Infinite Comprehenſion of ſo many and ſo great Notions
informes us, how great a meaſure of the Heavenly Spirit hath poſſeſt your
Grace; and that no ſingle Deity hath enlarged this one Soul unto the Immenſe
Tracts of all the Sci­ences. With theſe happy Omens hath your Grace reached
unto, whatever in the Arts ſeemed good unto your Grace when ſome Diviner
Genius of your Grace our Princeſs, judged the No­tion of any clear Truth,
would be beneficial. And whereas it was your Graces Work, not to give
Rea­ſons, but Magiſterially to Prononce, as from an Oracle; (yet ſuch is your
Graces condeſcention) that all your Graces Tenets are aſſerted and con­firmed
with moſt Cogent Arguments: as if we did not owe a Belief, and had not a
certain Devotion obliging our Aſſent to your Graces bare Aſſertion. Henceforth
therefore do we Deſtine our ſpare hours unto theſe kinds of Studies, and are
reaching unto the perfection of Philoſophy, ſeeing your Grace hath judged
theſe Speculations ſuch as are worthy your Graces Intentions, and nearer
Approximations: for ſuch an happy clearneſs of Wit ſhall render every theng
diſcoverable and fully to be comprehended, and that moſt free inclinination of
your Graces Can­dor will communicate every thing diſcovered to your Graces
Cantabrigians. Yet leſt we ſhould give our ſelves up to unworthy Eaſe, and
Conſecrate our ſelves to Sloth, your Grace hath left us one very difficult
Task, namely Thankfulneſs. Foraſmuch then, through your Graces Labours,
Minerva's [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=78) Pupils have
now obtained that Divine thing, which they may, without error, purſue, to wit
a calm re­poſe in all our Studies; we therefore judge that a more Honourable
Monument was never at any time erected, to any of the ancient Kings or
Emperours, than what we here humbly dedicate to your Graces worthy name and
memory.

To Margaret the Firſt:

Princeſs of Philoſophers:

Who hath diſpelled Errors:

Appeaſed the differences of Opinions:

And reſtored Peace,

To Learnings Commonwealth.

> From the Colledge of the Sacred and Individual Trinity. Octob. 5. 1668.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=78)

## 3\. POEMS, &c.

### 3.1. To the most Illuſtrious and moſt Excellent Princeſs, The Marchioneſs
of NEW-CASTLE. After the reading of her Incomparable POEMS.

MADAM,

WIth ſo much Wonder we are ſtrook

When we begin to read your match­les Book;

A while your own exceſs of Merit ſtays

Our forward Pens, and do's ſuſpend your Praiſe;

Till time our minds do's gently recompoſe,

Allayes this Wonder, and our Duty ſhow's;

Inſtructs us how your Virtues to Proclaim,

And what we ought to pay to your great Fame;

Your Fame which in your Countrey has no Bounds!

But whereſoever Learning's known, it ſounds.

Thoſe Graces Nature did till now divide,

Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,

Are joyn'd in you, and all to you ſubmit,

The brighteſt Beauty, and the ſharpeſt Wit;

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=79) No
Faction here, or fiercer Envy ſwayes,

They give you Mirtle, while we offer Bayes;

What Mortal dares diſpute thoſe Wreath's with you?

Arm'd thus with Lightning and with Thunder too.

This made the great New-Caſtle's Heart your prize;

Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious Eyes,

Had only pow'r his Martial mind to tame,

And raiſe in his Heroick Breaſt a Flame;

A Flame, which with his Courage ſtill aſpires,

As if Immortal Fewel fed thoſe Fires:

This mighty Chief, and your great ſelf made One,

Together the ſame Race of Glory run;

Together on the Wings of Fame you move,

Like yours his Virtue, and like his your Love.

While we, your Praiſe endeav'ring to rehearſe,

Pay that great Duty, in our humble Verſe,

Such as may juſtly move your anger; you

Like Heaven forgive them, and accept them too:

But what we cannot, your brave Hero payes,

He builds thoſe Monuments we ſtrive to raiſe;

Such, as to after Ages ſhall make known,

While he Records your deathleſs Fame, his own;

So when an Artiſt ſome rare Beauty draws,

Both in our Wonder ſhare, and our Applauſe;

His Skill, from time, ſecures the Glorious Dame,

And makes himſelf Immortal in her Fame.

George Etherege.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=79)

### 3.2. To her Excellency the Lady Marchioneſs of New­Caſtle, on Her
Incomparable Works.

MADAM,

WHen with ſtol'n Metaphors we would diſplay

Thoſe Glorious Lights which rule our Night and Day,

We call them Lamps and Spangles, and ſuborn

Our Wits t'obſcure, what we cannot adorn:

But when ſome fading Beauty haunts our Eyes

Tempting to Praiſe, what Greateſt Souls Deſpiſe,

We can advance the Phraſe all ſmoothly runs,

Her Cheeks are Roſes, and her Eyes are Suns.

Great Virtues only by themſelves are prais'd;

What's higheſt higher by no Art is rais'd:

'Tis proper only to our Imperfections

To need, or to admit, our Wit's Protections.

Were your Pen's Noble Iſſue ſuch ſmall things,

As the fine Poet to his Miſtris ſings:

Or elſe ſuch pretty Babies as are ſent

Out from the lab'ring Preſs, to Complement

Our Childiſh Age; which nothing ſo wel pleaſes

As Liſpings, Weakneſs, and Wit's Diſeaſes:

Then I, perhaps amongſt the reſt might waſt

Some Paper, to be your Encomiaſt;

And, in the preſent mode; pick Crums and Scraps

From Sirs that wear their Phancyes in their Caps,

And Cook a Meſs of Bumbaſt to delude

And glut at once the gaping multitude.

But 'tis your Wit's prerogative to be

As far above all Praiſe as Flattery:

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=80) And
ſince you have ſaid All, we boldly may

Excuſe our ſelves, you've left us nought to ſay.

In ev'ry Line you give us we deſcry

Your Panaegyrick, our Apology:

Where all's ſo well like you, that to conceive

Ought but our wonder may admittance have,

Is to ſuppoſe, you either cannot ſee

Our meanneſs, or will veil your Majeſty.

Then he betrays your Name whoe're eſſayes

To load it with vain Epithets of Praiſe:

Who ſeems to underſtand all you have writ,

T'advance his own, doth much abaſe your Wit.

Madam we're in a maze: ſuch Glorys can

Not be beheld by what is only Man.

When you are pleas'd to work new Miracles

We'll ſee and read what's yours and nothing elſe:

When you give Eyes as well as Light, when you

With Language will on us new Tongues beſtow,

When you can make us write juſt as you do;

We'll learn to praiſe your Works: But ſure it is

Impoſſible; you can do all but this.

'Tis equally abſurd for us to gueſs

We e're ſhould do ſo much or you ought leſs.

Thanks for our Freedom from the learned Thrall

Of thrice-three Miſtreſſes; you're One and All:

Thoſe antique wits which ereſt would not be ſeen,

But in a miſt of obſcure Tongues which Screen

More Follies far than Phanſies, are become

Like their own Pump'd-out Oracles all dumb;

Great Ariſtotle and his greater

Plato▪

Maſter

VVith their long rabble have the ſame diſaſter.

Theſe Paper-Armies Bodly's Goal contains

Your Captives are, fretting in Iron Chains.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=80)

One Lady's pregnant Brain has ſlain whole hoſts

Of Rabbys, and quite laid their Paper ghoſts,

VVhich haunted all our Studies, and perplex'd

Our wearied thoughts with a Moth-eaten Text.

VVho would not give a life that he might live

In the next Age, to ſee the Learned ſtrive

VVhoſe Margin ſhould ſtrut biggeſt with your Name

VVho raiſe up higheſt Pyramids of Fame

Over your peaceful Aſhes; may it be

Such Phoenixes can know mortality.

VVas it her modeſty (for ſhe's a VVoman)

Made Nature Coy, and ſhew her ſelf to no man?

She walk'd in Vizors till ſhe met with you.

VVhat wonder if ſhe did retir'dneſs vow

And to our Ruffian Sex ſhewd Nun that late

Unveil'd to your Sex; and but one of that?

You need not fear to die, ſhe needs muſt live

Her ſelf, whoſe Noble Office 'tis to give

Life to our late Poſterity: each line

Of yours muſt be their Oracle, your Shrine.

Your Images the work of your own Pen

Shall fruſtrate all the curteous Cheats of men,

Pronouncing all your true adorers bleſt

Without the help of Conjuror or Prieſt.

Be merciful to Captives (Madam) and

Kill not all thoſe that bend at your Command.

Your ſofteſt Sex your Noble Order ſhall

Vote all ſuch cruelty Apocryphal.

You have ſubdu'd the VVorld of Learning, ſpare

At leaſt ſo much alive as may declare

Who was the Conqueror; that all may know

VVhate're ſurvives is owing all to you.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=81)

You have out-done what's mortal; Imitate

Thoſe Pow'rs above which to maintain their ſtate

Let ſome poor vaſſals live, and worſhip'd are

Not by whom they deſtroy, but whom they ſpare.

Then ſheathe your Conqu'ring Pen ſince nothing now

Remains unvanquiſh'd but your Works and you.

### 3.3. On her Grace the Dutcheſs of New-Caſtles Cloſet.

WHat place is this? looks like ſome Sacred Cell

Where holy Hermits anciently did dwell,

And never ceas'd Importunating Heav'n

Till ſome great Bleſſing unto Earth was giv'n;

Is this a Ladys Cloſet? 'tcannot be,

For nothing here of vanity you ſee;

Nothing of Curioſity nor Pride,

As all your Ladies Cloſets have beſide;

No mirrour here in all the Room you find;

Unleſs it be the mirrour of the Mind,

Nor Pencil here is found, nor Paint agen

But only of her Ink and of her Pen.

Which renders her an Hundred times more fair

Than they with all their Paints and Penſils are:

Here ſhe is Rapt, here falls in Extaſy

VVith ſtudying high and deep Philoſophy:

Here theſe clear Lights deſcend into her Mind

VVhich, by Reflection, in her Books you find,

And thoſe high Notions and Idea's too,

VVhich, but herſelf, no VVoman ever knew,

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=81) Whence
ſhe's their chiefeſt Ornament and Grace,

And Glory of our times: Hail Sacred Place!

To which the World in after times ſhall come,

As unto Homer's Shrine, or Virgil's Tomb,

Hon'ring the Walls in which ſhe made abode,

The Air ſhe breath'd and Ground whereon ſhe trod,

Counting him happy, who but ſees the Place

And happier who leaſt Relick of her has;

For whoſe Sole Inkhorn they as much would bid

As once for Epicletus's they did.

Thus Fame ſhall Celebrate, and thus agen

The Arts ſhall honour her, who honour'd them,

Whilſt others who in other things did truſt

Shall, after Death, lye in forgotten Duſt.

### 3.4. To the Illuſtrious Princeſs, Margaret, Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle, on Her
Incomparable Works.

VErtue, and Wit's great Magazine,

Accept an Offering to your Shrine,

Whoſe wondrous Raptures needs muſt raiſe

All Souls to Poetry or Praiſe:

With ſuch Amazement I was ſtrook,

(Madam) when firſt I read your Book,

To ſee your Sex with ſo great Parts,

Treat of all Sciences and Arts,

As if Inſpir'd i'th' Times of Old,

When Poetry all things foretold.

That Waller, Denham, and the Wits,

Who write ſuch mighty things by fits;

I did expect ſhould all at leaſt,

Have ſent in Preſents to the Feaſt,

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=82) But
that they chooſe to write no more,

Shews they re out-done and ſo give o're,

Though 'tis allow'd their luck was ſuch,

They did Coyne Mettle that held Touch,

Like Min'raliſts, they ſprung a Vein

Of Oare, they could not long maintain;

Your Pregnant Brain does every day

Spring Mines of Gold, without allay,

The Droſs you ſo Refine that we,

Only the purer Mettle ſee,

Yours is th' Elixar of true Wit,

Becauſe it finds all Subjects fit.

Had Spencer liv'd your Works t'have ſeen,

You muſt have been his Fairy-Queen.

Great Virgil would have thought it due,

Not to name Dido Queen, but You.

And had you liv'd when Ovid writ

You'd been the Subject of his Wit;

He would have made a richer Piece

Of you, than Helen fair of Greece.

You've all that's bleſt in humane kind,

In outward form, and in your mind:

When you with Beauty do invite,

Your Virtue checks proud Appetite.

Some Ladys think they'r born in vain

Unleſs they Teem; your fruitful Brain

Brings better iſſue; here's the odds,

They pleaſe but Men, you pleaſe the Gods.

Strange Power 'tis you Govern by,

What Nature asks you can deny:

Great Miracle in what you do,

That can Charm Men and Angels too;

Th'honour and envy of our Age,

That write for Gown-men, and the Stage;

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=82) Though
you ſpeak to us in one Tongue,

You ſeem all Languages t'have known,

And Secrets to the World reveal,

As if the Gods did ſometimes ſteal,

To tell you News, and from above

You knew all paſſages of Love,

We muſt conclude 'tis only thence

You can have your Intelligence,

By which our Knowledge you ſo raiſe,

You merit Crowns, that ask but Bayes.

### 3.5. To the moſt Accompliſh'd and Incomparable Princeſs, The Dutcheſs of
New Caſtle her Grace.

MAdam, 'tis you whom both in Form and Mind,

Nature has favour'd 'bove all Female kind,

You have been conſtant from the firſt of Youth

To Friendſhip, Juſtice, Chaſtity and Truth,

Wit in your Childhood did begin to reign,

And like the Tide came flowing in amain,

Wherein ſuch high Conceptions did lye,

As rais'd a new and true Philoſophy.

Things Natural and Moral you have writ,

And both in Scenes and Poems ſhew'd your Wit,

Letters and Dialogues declare your Fame,

In Hiſtory you Eternalize the Name

Of your Dear Lord, when truly you relate

His Loyal Actions for the King and State;

All this makes you admir'd and envied too,

'Cauſe you've done more than any yet could do,

In you the Glory of your Sex do's ſhine,

And all perfections in your Soul combine,

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=83) What
ever is thought Virtue's found in you,

Your mind is high, and yet 'tis humble too;

Not Pride (as Envy ſtiles it) but a Flame

More noble ſtrives t'immortalize your Fame,

For you do ſtoop to thoſe of low deſcent,

And with compaſſion to their Caſe reſent,

Which Fortune Frowns upon: How can there be

A nobler Mind and nearer Deity?

Nay Fortune ſeeing how Nature favour'd you,

To her Perfections added Honour too;

Thus Honour, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue joyn'd,

Made you the greateſt Wonder of your Kind,

Let none preſume to draw your Picture then

For you ſurpaſs all th'art and Skill of Men,

Who e're looks on you with a ſtricter view

Sees Natur's chiefeſt maſterpiece in You.

### 3.6. To the Glory of her Sex, the moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs, the Lady
Marchioneſs of New-Caſtle, upon her moſt admirable Works.

NOw let enfranchiz'd Ladies learn to write,

And not Paint white, and red, but black, and white,

Their Bodkins turn to Pens, to Lines their Locks,

And let the Inkhorn be their Dreſſing-box:

Since, Madam, you have Scal'd the walls of Fame,

And made a Breach where never Female came.

Had Men no Wit, or had the World no Books,

Yet here's enough to pleaſe the curious looks

Of Every Reader: ſuch a General Strain,

Would reinſtruct the School-boy-world again,

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=83)
Philoſophers and Poets were of old

The two great Lights, that humane minds control'd;

The one t'adorn, the other to explain,

Thus Learnings Empire then was cut in twain.

But Univerſal Wit and Reaſon joyn's

To make you Queen: nor can your ſacred Lines

Without a Paradox be well expreſs'd

Truth never was ſo naked, nor ſo dreſs'd.

Majeſtick Quill! that keeps our minds in Awe,

For Reaſons Kingdom knows no Salique Law,

Or if that Law was ever fram'd 'twas then

When Women held the Diſtaff not the Pen.

The Court the City, Schools and Camp agree,

Welbeck to make an Univerſity,

Of Wit and Honour, which has been the Stage,

Since 'twas your Lords the Heroe of this Age;

Whoſe Noble Soul is Steward to great Parts,

And do's diſpence his Reaſons and his Arts,

His Wit and Power, his Greatneſs, and his Senſe,

With as much Freedom, and Magnificence,

As when our Engliſh Jove became his Gueſt,

And did receive a more than Humane Feaſt.

With Arts of Wit, he mixes thoſe of Force

And Pegaſus is his old Manag'd Horſe.

No wonder he excells all other Men,

They but Nine Muſes had, and he has Ten.

A Lady whoſe Immortal Pen transferrs,

To our Sex Shame and Envy, Fame to hers;

Whoſe Genius traces Wit through all her wayes

In abſtruſe Notions, Poems, and in Playes.

Then why ſhould we the mouldy Records keep

Of Plautus, or diſturb Ben Johnſon's Sleep?

The Silent Woman Famous heretofore

Has been, but now the VVriting Lady more.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=84)

### 3.7. On the Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle her Grace.

MADAM,

WHilſt others ſtudy Books, I ſtudy you,

And can b'Experience this affirm for true,

Of all your Sex you have the greateſt worth

As ever yet theſe later times brought forth,

And I have Studied many, and ſome ſuch

As former times could hardly better much,

Your Soul ſo Spiritual it doth appear

Fram'd for ſome Angel of a higher Sphere,

However 'twas infus'd, I know not how,

Into a mortal Body here below,

Aſpiring reſtleſly like Fire and Flame

To mount again to th'Sphere from whenc it came,

So nobly active as it doth by Truth,

As by the World the Macedoniau Youth,

As ſoon as y'ave o'recome and Conquer'd one,

You grieve there are not more to overcome,

There being nothing ſo Sublime and High

But you can reach in all Philoſophy;

Nor ſo profound and deep again, but you

With eaſe, can dive and penetrate into,

Your Virtues being ſo infinite, I find

When I conſider but your Soul and Mind,

'Twere eaſier for me never to begin

Than ever to give o're when once l'm in;

Which whoſoe're ſhould go about to tell,

Might number all the Stars of Heav'n as well,

The blades of Graſs upon Earth's ſpacious Plain,

Or Sands the Sea's vaſt Boſome does contain.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=84)

But as your greateſt Beauties have their moles,

So ſome ſmall faults are ſtill in greateſt Souls,

And I ſhall tell you, Madam, what they be,

T'acquit my ſelf, o'th Crime of Plattery:

'Tis an Ambition above mortal ſtate,

And Mind with Glory never ſatiate,

Without which Glory and Ambition

No noble Action yet was ever done,

So avidious and ſo Covetous of Fame,

As only for Eternizing their Name

They, as the Phoenix life to's young do's give,

Would be content to die that that might live.

But now I'll tell what my opinion is

Of Fame (and pardon if I Judge amiſs:)

Fame's but a ſhadow of great action,

And but the Eccho of't when we are gone,

Than whoſe Trumpet no Muſick is more ſweet

Nor none's alive more pleas'd with hearing it,

But I do'nt know what pleaſure I ſhould have,

When I am dead with Muſick at my Grave.

### 3.8. An Elegy upon the death of the Incomparable Princeſs Margaret
Dutcheſs of New-Caſtle.

HEnceforth be Dumb, ye Oracles of Wit;

Ye humbly muſt to Fate ſubmit:

How ſoon muſt ye decline! How low muſt fall!

Since She is gone who did Inſpire ye all?

Her Books are the beſt Patterns for the Pen,

Her Perſon was the beſt of Subjects too;

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=85) In Wit
and Senſe She did excel all Men;

And all her Sex in Virtue did outgoe.

Though Grief affords ſome Floquence,

Henceforth expect but little Senſe;

For, ſince ſhe's gone, all we can do

Will but the Pangs of Dying-writers ſhow.

VVhen the bright Ruler of the Day

Th'Horizon of his Preſence has bereft

Some feeble ſtreaks of Light are left,

Yet darkneſs ſoon muſt come, and all that light decay.

Our Sun's forever ſet, we have no hope

Of this as of the other Sun's return:

VVe all in Darkneſs muſt forever grope,

And we for ever muſt in Tears her abſence mourn.

Philoſophers muſt wander in the dark;

Now they of Truth can find no certain mark;

Since She their ſureſt Guide is gone away,

They cannot chuſe but miſerably ſtray.

All did depend on Her, but She on none,

For her Philoſophy was all her own.

She never did to the poor Refuge fly

Of Occult Quality or Sympathy.

She could a Reaſon for each Cauſe preſent,

Not truſting wholly to Experiment,

No Principles from others ſhe purloyn'd,

But wiſely Practice ſhe with Speculation joyn'd.

None was more good, and once none was more fair:

She was not as moſt of her frail Sex are;

Who 'ave Fruitful Wombs but Baren Brains,

She left the beſt Remains:

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=85) Though
we no Iſſue of her Body find

Yet ſhe hath left behind

The Nobler Iſſue of her mighty Mind;

Learning ſhe needed not, nor yet deſpis'd:

Though from herſelf all Arts ſhe knew;

The truly Learn'd ſhe nobly Patroniz'd,

And every Artiſt, ſhe encourag'd too.

Let all her Sex faſhion by her their Lives:

She was the beſt of Women, beſt of Wives.

Ther Lord Sh'was warme and loving as the Spring,

But to all others cold as Winters Ice,

Her ſight on all a ſhiv'ring awe did bring,

And nipt, at firſt, all vain attempts of Vice;

But though in Love ſhe bore a Noble pride,

She to each Skilful man of Art

Her Converſation freely doth impart,

And to all others civil was beſide.

But we by praiſing thus provoke our Grief

VVhich never can expect Relief,

Nor can the moſt luxurious Praiſe

(Though penn'd with Art that might deſerve the Bayes.)

Nor all which we can think afford

Eaſe to her much lamenting Lord:

Whoſe loſs does now by far outvye

All he yet e're ſuſtain'd

Yet he once loſt much more for Loyalty

Than any Subject, and much leſs has gain'd;

This noble half ſhe left behind

Who by her much lamented death muſt find

Too great a Trial for the greateſt Mind.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=86)

Oh what Expedient can there be

Found to ſupport his Magnanimity!

The beſt of Husbands, and the nobleſt Peer;

The beſt of Generals, beſt of Subjects too,

Whoſe Arts in Peace as well as War appear:

He knows how to adviſe, and how to do;

His Prudence and his Courage might uphold

The moſt decay'd and crippled State,

And reſcue it from the Jawes of Fate:

His Body may, but Mind, can ne're be old;

Him ſhe has left, and from our ſight is hurl'd

And Gloriouſly ſhines in the true Blazing VVorld.

Thomas Shadwell.

### 3.9. An Elegy on the Death of the Incomparable Dutcheſs of NEW-CASTLE.

IF with due honour you would Solemnize

The great New-Caſtles Funeral Obſequies

Let every Science in cloſe-mourning ſtand

About the Hearſe, with Cypreſs in her hand:

Philoſophy herſelf ſhall hold the Pall,

(She's the chief Mourner at this Funeral)

Philoſophy which well the Poets drew

With Womens Features; here we find it true,

Nature, whoſe Lovers (in their Courtſhip rude)

Into her Privy-Chambers did intrude,

Out of her own Sex modeſtly one choſe,

To whom her ſelf ſhe naked did diſcloſe:

VVho all her wonders did ſo well explain,

That ſhe the only wonder did remain.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=86)

Let Rhetorick, the pow'rful Syren there

Dreſt in her richeſt Livery appear;

Dreſt in thoſe Robes which Tully to her gave

When the Worlds Miſtrels Rome, he made her Slave;

Or the ſtrong Reaſon of New-Castles Books,

VVeav'd with the Charming ſoftneſs of her Looks:

But yet her weakneſs let her here confeſs,

Her Silence beſt this Sorrow do's expreſs.

The Muſes Her in laſting Tears ſhall ſteep,

The Graces mourn, and Comoedy ſhall weep:

And thouſand Cupids ſigh forth mournful Airs,

And wiſh for Eyes, to eaſe their Grief by Tears.

Let them their Bowes in ſign of honour wave,

And with their Torches light her to her Grave.

Nor will they this attendance her deny,

Thoſe Torches firſt were lighted at her Eye.

VVho now their un-arm'd Deities will dread?

Their Magazine is now demoliſhed.

Yet did not her Muſe kindle unchaſt Fires,

That Heav'nly Cupid Heav'nly Thoughts inſpires:

No Kitchin-flames before her Beams would burn,

And wanton Love did to Devotion turn.

Thus Sol at once lifts up the Lamp of Day,

And warms at once, and bids the Perſian Pray.

Great Iſſue of Natures united Pow'rs!

Glory of your Sex, and Diſgrace of ours!

VVhich ſhall I call the greater Prodigy,

That you were ſuch, or being ſuch could Dye?

Did Nature fear leſt that thy boundleſs Mind

For future ſearch ſhould nothing leave behind?

Or did you take this flight to Heav'n to ſee

How it with Thy fair Model did agree?

Whate're the cauſe; Joy rings through every Sphere;

And Heav'n more Heaven is ſince you came there.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=87) None in
it with more Native Luſtre ſhine,

Or livelier do reflect the light Divine.

Such ſpotleſs Innocence in that Boſome lyes,

Eve thinks ſhe brought you forth in Paradice:

For that firſt crime left not a leſſer trace

On any Breaſt of all her num'rous Race;

Excepting one, whom you ſit next to there,

Who her Creator in her Womb did bear:

And with her too almoſt you may contend,

What He Created you did Comprehend.

Bleſt Soul, who dwelleſt in Eſſential Light,

Direct us loſt in Ignorance, and Night!

Whilſt we with grateful Off'rings, what before

We all admir'd, do humbly now adore.

Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cant.

### 3.10. In Obitum Margaretae Duciſſae Novo-Caſtrenſis.

BArbara iam ſileat, ſileat quoque Graia vetuſtas,

Nec jactet fidas Itala terra nurus:

Hanc unam attonitum non mendax Fama per Orbem

Centeno potiùs debuit ore loqui:

Dulcè cavâ Sapphô teſtudine flebat amorem,

Sed nec pulchra ſatis, ſed néque caſta fuit:

Haec toto numeris animóque, & corpore conſtat,

Vitaetiam castis conſonat ipſa modis.

Arſit ſida ſuum Letho quóque Portia Brutum,

Caeſaris at tinctus Sanguine Brutus erat:

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=87) Hujus
dum Regem ſequitur per Bella Maritus,

Per medios Ignes Ipſa ſequuta Virum.

Mauſolum epotum taceat Regina, ſub imo

Viventem vivens Haec quoque corde tulit:

Penſile nec Tumuli jactet;

Vitam ejus deſeri­pſit.

monumenta Mariti

Duratura magis condidit iſla ſui.

Natorum numero Niobe non provocet Illam,

Nec ſpecie, Niobes quae Dea ſtravit opes:

Bis ſeptem è gravido, ceu Jupiter, Illa cerebro

Pignora dat; (decuit ſic peperiſſe Deam)

Pignora ceu ſpeculo totum referentia mundum,

Non niſi cum Mundo pignora digna Mori,

Ah! cur non placuit Tibi vivae Academia ſedes,

(Ceu

Qui fuit è Coll. Jo­hannes Can­tabr.

Ducis) ut jactet nomine Granta tuo!

Invidit ſexus; jam Filia non potes eſſe,

E Fama titulus nec foret ille Tuâ.

At dum pauperibus legâſti Scripta Camoenis

Ditia, dum Mammas exeris uſque Tuas,

(Nunc eniam ſuper Aſtra faves) Academia Mater

Te Matrem poſthàc eſt habitura ſuam

Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cantabr.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=88)

### 3.11. Ʋpon the Death of the Illuſtrious and Incomparable Lady, Margaret
Dutcheſs of New Caſtle.

1.

DEath! thou haſt done thy worſt, we dread not now

The threatnings of thy angry Brow.

By thy laſt victory we're hard'ned grown,

Learnt to deſpiſe thy malice, ſcorn, and frown.

Thy ſaucie Power is ſo great,

That we like Slaves are become deſperate.

2.

Since brave New-Caſtles Dutcheſs thou haſt ſlain,

We baſer Mortals to complain

Think it a crime, dye we would rather all,

That ſo we might attend her Funeral,

VVait on her, when her Soul takes flight

Into the Manſions of Eternal Light.

3.

VVithin her Breaſt ſuch throngs of Virtues grew

That they their Priſon overthrew,

And being vex'd at this ſame ſottiſh Age

VVhere dull Impertinence ſo much does rage,

Their Fetters broke they upwards hie

In hopes to find there better company.

4.

She ſcorn'd thoſe trifles which her Sex adore,

VVhich they vain Fools do value more

Than inward worth, would not like them miſpend

That little time which God to her did lend.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=88) It was
her only buſineſs here

To dreſs her Soul, and make it fine appear.

5.

Her pow'rful reaſon aw'd enticing ſence,

Taught Rebel-thoughts Obedience.

VVhen ſtupid matter would unruly prove,

Inſtructed it, more calmly how to move.

External Pleaſures ſhe thought Sin,

Compar'd with thoſe Delights which dwell within.

6.

So vaſt a knowledge ne're was yet confin'd

Within one ſingle Womans Mind

Her Fancy it was ſtrong, ſo great her VVit,

That nothing but her Judgement equal'd it:

When e're ſhe ſpoke the winged crew

Of pretty Notions ſtreight about her flew.

7.

What e're ſhe pleas'd with eaſe ſhe overcame,

Learning before her time was lame,

Nature was dreſs'd but ſlovenly till ſhe

Made it ſo ſpruce by her Philoſophy.

It heretofore in Tatters went,

Is grown Gentile now, and can Complement.

8.

Had ſhe but liv'd when blind Antiquity

Call'd what it pleas'd a Deity.

She would have quite engroſs'd the Worſhip Trade,

Jove and his Kindred had been Bankrupts made.

They muſt have Starv'd without Relief,

Pin'd to Mortality, and Dy'd with Grief.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=89)

9.

Rome where Divinity was ſold ſo cheap,

Who Temples built on ev'ry heap

Of dirt and rubbiſh, would have quickly ſent

It's Mungril-Gods all into Baniſhment.

Told them 'twas manners to give place

To one of a more noble Heav'nly Race.

10.

How well did Providence her real worth

Declare to th'World and ſet it forth,

When it in ties of Holy Wedlock joyn'd

The beſt of Men to th'beſt of Womankind.

And ſuffer'd fair Lucaſia's Charms

To vanquiſh and ſubdue the God of Arms.

11.

The mighty Cavendiſh could only prove

A Husband to the Queen of Love,

Heav'n would have had her ſooner, 'twas in ſtrife

Whether ſhe ſhould Dye firſt, or be his Wife.

At length reſign'd its right to ſhow

How much to his great merits it did owe.

12.

What Joy above at her arrival there?

The Angels crowd to welcome her.

And big with wonder all pay Reverence

Unto a Soul of ſo much Excellence,

A Soul ſo pure, ſo bright all o're,

That they the like had never ſeen before.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=89)

### 3.12. To the Duke.

YOur pardon, Sir, if ſtriving to expreſs

Perfections which in her were numberleſs,

I vainly mine own weakneſs do betray,

And ſhow how little fooliſh Rhithms can pay

To her vaſt Merits, which like th'Ocean ſtretch

And drown what e're dares come within their reach.

For if to tell of with due Praiſe her Fame,

And as I ought her Virtues to Proclaim:

She would have had me rightly underſtood

She muſt have been leſs Worthy and leſs Good.

## 4\. On the Death of the moſt Illuſtrious Princeſs, the Lady Dutcheſs of
NEW-CASTLE.

### 4.1. An EPITAPH.

SHe's Dead, and here ſhe lies; the vulgar cry:

Fools know not that great Wits can never dye.

She ſleeps; nay, that's too much: As well could ſhe

Admit of Death, as ſuch a Lethargie.

Yet ſay ſhe Sleep, her very Dreams outvie

All our Grave Lectures of Philoſophy.

Perhaps ſhe Reſts; 'tis time for her: but O!

What Fates attend her Reſt poor Mortals know.

Tir'd with this World's Impertinence, ſhe's come

For privacy to this Retiring-Room:

The place we call her Tombe, where ſhe doth lie,

But 'tis her Cloſet, our great Library.

Howe're, ſhe hath withdrawn her ſelf from hence,

And our Wits Freez, rob'd of her Influence.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=90) Like
breathleſs Statues, here we ſtand all dumb,

Not one wiſe word to ſet upon her Tomb.

The brighteſt Sun blind Moles muſt never ſee;

So ſhe ſeems dead becauſe we ſenſeleſs be.

Her ſprightly Soul, ful of Aethereal Fires,

Up far above our Regions now aſpires,

To ſeek new Game, ſince all things here below

Grew ſtale, and nothing left ſhe did not know.

Her Phant'ſies heat had ſcortch't all Subjects, hurl'd

The Univerſe into the Blazing-World:

And having nought out of her ſelf do do,

She ſoon too active for her Body grew.

Spirits are not confin'd, out thence ſhe flaſhes,

And leav's her houſe conſum'd to theſe few aſhes.

Puff then broil'd Chymiſt, wrangle out thy Fire,

Th'Elixyr's fled: and till thou canſt inſpire

Theſe ſilent Aſhes with new Forme, reſtore

Us ſuch a Phoenix as we had before;

In ſpite of thy big words, we ſtanders by

Shall call thee fool, and thy fine Art a Lie.

Be gone thou ſilly Poet, and invoke

The Deſtinies, thy Muſes all are broke,

Cannot inſpire thee longer, but by ſtealth

Out of her Books the Muſes Common-wealth.

This Ladies learned Duſt which here doth lye

Hath drunk thy boaſted Helicon quite dry.

Bring, old and new Philoſophers, your Art,

Rip up Dame Natures Bowels, pierce her Heart.

Alas, all's now too late, here's nothing left,

Her early Induſtry hath you bereft

Of all her Jewels, and your Wits at once;

And bids you this new title wear, Grave-Dunce.

She could not elſe have gone to reſt ſo ſoon,

Who never paus'd before her work was done.

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=90) All
Natures Treaſure in this Tomb doth lye,

If you would find it. Fools deſpair and dye.

Here lies that nobleſt Lady, whoſe great name

Hath choak'd the Muſes, and hath glutted Fame.

A Name! All Poetry is mute to hear it,

This hardeſt Marble here doth ſweat to bear it.

And did not yet the Sacred Aſhes live,

And better words to Stones, than Men have, give.

We could not know that here encloſed lies,

The wonder of admired Myſteries.

Arts, Sciences, Muſes, and Graces all

Compriſed in one Golden Manual.

If thou wouldſt know more of her, ſearch for it

Amongſt the many Wonders which ſhe writ.

If out of thoſe thou canſt not ſpell and frame

Th'Illuſtrious Dutcheſs of New-Caſtles Name,

Thou haſt but one help left thee, in a word,

Conſult the Living-Oracle, her Lord.

'Tis Treaſon againſt Wit for any one

To ſpeak her name at length, but him alone:

Seeing in him, and him alone, we find

Whatever ſhe of Wit hath left behind.

And VVit this Lady-Wonder ſhall ſurvive

VVhilſt this great Prince of Honour is alive.

Yea, may He live, till we can weary grow

Of all that Nature in one piece can ſhow;

Wit might ſeem larger whil'ſt in Two it ſhone,

'Tis ſtronger now contracted into One.

VVhilſt by his Curteſy ſhe had ingros'd

So much, the honour of our Sex ſeem'd loſt:

Wit was Hermaphrodite, when One in Twain;

But now 'tis only Maſculine again.

Clement Ellis, Miniſter.

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=91)

### 4.2. Tumulus Nobiliſſimae, Illuſtriſſimaeque Principis, Margaretae
Duciſſae Novi-Caſtri.

QƲis Deus extremum poſſit prohibere dolorem,

Cùm Dea ſublimi tendit in Aſlra fugâ?

Pectore lacteolo condatur ferreus enſis,

Et non purpureo Sanguine tinctus erit?

Alta cadat Cedrus, nemoroſae gloria Sylvae,

Non tamen ad Coelos diriget ora fragor?

Quid vetet, ut Saevi perculſus imagine fati

Non gemat, & nubes diſſipet uſque ſuas?

Lampade victrici dum transfert Foemina morti,

(Foemina, cui nomen non niſi gemma fuit,)

Ʋnica, virtutum comitatus, vita, ſalliſque,

Graviter officiis conſuluiſſe ſuis.

Hoc fuit innuptae decus, obſervâſſe parentes;

Ʋxoris, Domini non violàſſe torum.

Non dolus aut ferrum, mollis facundia, nec vis

Surripuit nuptam Conjugis è gremio.

Sed ſitiens mortis telum divortia fingit,

Et, quod non poterant caetera fata, facit.

Occidit illa, ſuis decus, omnibus altera Pallas,

Deliciae, Muſis, Coelitibúſque comes,

Nunquid in aeternum vivet poſt Funera Virtus?

Nunquid eruditi fama ſuperstes erit?

Qui poterit vivae tolli virtutis Imago?

Ardentem Pallas non ſuperare rogum?

Num febris calor inſanae praecordia vellit?

Et Canis aeſtivus viſcera caeca vorat?

Noſtrarum extinguet Lachrimarum copia morbum,

Mortis & immerget ſpicula ſaeva dolor.

Frigida Sublimem repetunt Cruciamina Mentem?

Vitaleſque aurae deſeruêre focum?

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=91) En
noſtri in tantam Dominam flagrantia Zeli

Scintillas reparat, Religióque fovet.

Certè igitur fatis nondum conceſſit iniquis

Foemina, quae nullo crimine tincta fuit.

Non ita jampridem divinitùs acta Creatrix

(Ʋnius eſt ſummi, poſſe creare, Dei.)

Ex nihilo ſinxit diverſa volumina Coeli,

Mundum alium, ſtabiles fixit utrinque Polos.

Huic ſe tranſmiſit Solio, quia pulchrior illi

Virtutum eſt facies, formáque lucidior;

Quàm quae vel lippis vulgus dignetur ocellis;

Aut noſtro immeritos praebeat Orbe dies:

Sic nimia Phoebus nè vi perſtringeret Orbem,

In Clymenis gremium nocte ſilente redit.

Huc ſe tranſmiſit, ne longa abſentia Mundum

Jam tum conſtructum verteret in cineres.

Iſtum dura Fames torqueret, crapula noſtrum,

Aequales ſi non tendat utrique manus.

Ne tantam invidiam pariat, quòd inhoſpita tecta

Linquat, pernici Pectore ſumma petens;

Haec non contineat ſpatioſam anguſtia mentem,

Quae velit influxum reddere utrique ſolo.

Indulſit noſtris ſua quaeque Volumina terris,

Nunc alios Orbes hiſce beare cupit.

Ʋtque ſciant omnes, quantùm ſciat omnia, ſeſe

Translalit, expreſſam Numinis effigiem.

ANDERTON.

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=92)

### 4.3. In Illuſtriſſimam Dominam Margaretam, Novi­Caſtri Duciſſam,  
EPITAPHIUM.

SIſte Pauliſper gradum, Viator,

Non longùm moreris erit neceſſe:

Legenti licet currere,

Currenti licet legere,

Ʋtrique intelligere,

Quòd hic ſita eſt

Lectiſſima Foemina,

Domina Margareta,

Neo-Caſtrenſis Duciſſa.

Nobilitate verè Aulicâ,

Eruditione verè Academica,

Pietate verè Coelicâ,

Praedita & dotata.

Animo virili, ſuper ſexum,

Sapientiâ ſenili ſupra aetatem,

Ingenio entheo, ſupra ſortem,

Afflata & imbuta.

Quam licèt ex hoc noſtro diſcas Vixiſſe,

In ſuis tamen ſcriptis ediſces Vivere,

Scilicet in Vitâ quam ſcripſit, Mariti,

Suam quoque perpetuare.

Quam licèt Bona Opera,

Moralia, Evangelica,

Ad arces Coelorum avolantem ſecuta ſint.

Literata tamen

Philoſophica, Hiſtorica, Poëtica,

In Terris ſpirantem & commorantem referunt,

Servabuntque ſuperſtitem.

Fuit

Florentiſſimi Mariti, Ʋxor Splendidiſſima,

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=92)
Bellicoſi viri, Doctiſſima Matrona,

Armati Ducis, Togata Duciſſa,

Quam ſi habuiſſet Socrates Ʋxorem,

Plato ejus Philoſophiam, non literis mandâſſet.

Quae ſi habuiſſet Caeſarem Maritum,

Ille non ſua Geſta ſuâ manû ſcripſiſſet.

Illa ipſa

Socratis Dicta

Enarrâſſet.

Caeſaris Facta

Fidelitèr, Feliciter,

Qualem ſi Martialis mordax ſperaviſſet ſibi,

Nunquam non Doctiſſimam Conjugem optâſſet.

Quam modò, Hiſtorias omnes callentem,

Curtúmque torquere Enthymema potentem,

Rebúſque honeſtis Finem Ʋltimum imponentem,

Cúmque Homero Maronem comparantem.

Ʋtrumque imitantem,

Vidiſſet Satyricus, non frontem corrugâſſet,

Non intollerabilem Ʋxorem,

Sed Raram in Terris Avem, dixiſſet.

Vitam

In Aulâ Regiâ, Honoratam,

Egit.

In Minervae Caſtris, Eruditam,

In Eccleſiâ Dei, devotam,

Domi, Contemplativam,

Foris, Activam,

Piè, Placidè, Pacatè

Mortem

Mortalinatae, Expectatam,

Obiit.

Philoſophiae deditae, non formidatam,

Ad Chriſtianam ſpem vocatae, exoptatā,

Laetè, Tranquillè, Beatè, Quâ tranſlata eſt

A meditatione purâ, ad Perfectam Viſionem,

A creaturis contemplandis ad intuendum Creatorem,

A Poëtarum camoenis, ad Angelorum Hymnos,

Ab Aulà Terrenâ, ad Curiam Coeleſtem.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=93) Libros
Suos, ſobolem Suam, ad utramque Academiam

Miſit, at ad dandam non capiendam doctrinam.

Quibus Bibliothecas publicas ditavit,

Quae Ipſa Bibliotheca Animata fuit.

Opera illius fuere ſuum pretium,

Labores illius ſuum praemium.

Dedit, ut Herodotus unum Librum,

Singulis Muſarum unum volumen.

Quae cùm ſunt ingreſſa Bibliothecam Joannenſem,

(Solam nobis ex officio memorandam Bibliothecam)

Quàm denſum obviam vênit agmen ſalutantium?

Quae cùm ſua ibidem ſubſellia petebant,

Quàm grande fuit certamen locum cedentium

Vitam Conjugis, quam ſcripſit, ad ſuas Parallelas

Appoſuit Plutarchus, & locum apparavit.

Philoſophia, quam ſcripſit, ſe Veteribus adjungi

Modeſtè non dignata, ad Recentiores conceſſit.

Poëtas omnes ſingulóſque unicè dilexit,

Omnéſque ſingulóſque ſuo ordine viſitavit.

Indigna eſt loco iſti catenâ alligari,

Ad quem ſibi adeò liberè acceſſum rogavit.

Anima Ejus regnat in Choro Beatorum,

Corpus (vides) jacet hîc in Choro Poëtarum. Illa Ipſa,

Ʋt in Annulo gemma, utrobique refulget.

At Tu, quiſquis es, Viator,

Orandus es Lachrymulis

Tuis, pro merito, novum

Heliconis hîc Rivum dare,

Ʋbi Muſis jam fecerunt novum

Tot Poëtarum tumuli Parnaſſum.

Tho. Brown, Coll. Joan. Cantab.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=108911&page=93)

[Home](/)

Date: 1678  

