---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A new way of reading the Bible according to the three Norfolk clergy-men,
those champions against the Quakers. Edward Beekham, D.D. and rector of
Gayten-Thorpe. Henry Meriton, rector of Oxborough. Lancaster Topcliffe, L.B.
sometimes Sen. Fell. of Gon. and Caius College, Cambridge. Norfolk.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A New Way of Reading the Bible, According to the Three Norfolk Clergy-Men, THOSE Champions againſt the QUAKERS. Norfolk.Edward Beekham, D. D. and Rector of Gayten-Thorpe.Henry Meriton, Rector of Oxborough.Lancaſter Topcliffe, L. B. ſometimes Sen. Fell. of Gon. and Caius College, Cambridge. Inferr'd from an Inſtance of Theirs, in a Book Entituled, A Brief Diſcovery of ſome of the Blaſphemous and Seditious, Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers, taken out of their moſt noted and approved Authors: Humbly Offered to the Conſideration of the King and both Houſes of Parliament.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33526&page=1)

## 1\. A New Way of Reading the Bible, According to the Three Norfolk Clergy-
Men, THOSE Champions againſt the QUAKERS.

Norfolk.

## • Edward Beekham, D. D. and Rector of Gayten-Thorpe. , • Henry Meriton,
Rector of Oxborough. , and • Lancaſter Topcliffe, L. B. ſometimes Sen. Fell.
of Gon. and Caius College, Cambridge.  
Inferr'd from an Inſtance of Theirs, in a Book Entituled, A Brief Diſcovery of
ſome of the Blaſphemous and Seditious, Principles and Practices of the People
called Quakers, taken out of their moſt noted and approved Authors: Humbly
Offered to the Conſideration of the King and both Houſes of Parliament.

UPon ſight whereof I was curious to peruſe a Book that carried ſo rare and
extraordinary a Title: And to be brief in my Obſervation thereupon, ſhall only
conſider their firſt Paragraph, and therein ſhew how Egregiouſly theſe
Scholars and Divines ſtumbles at the Threſhould: And that I may be juſt to
them, take the Paragraph at large; a Juſtice they have not obſerved to­wards
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33526&page=2) the
Quakers; They ſay, ‘George Fox, the firſt Foun­der, and great Apoſtle of this
Sect, Great Myſtery, Pag. 209. ſaith againſt his Opponent thus, This Light,
that doth enlighten every one that cometh into the World, which he (viz. G.
F's Opponent) calls Conſcience, is not Con­ſcience. And in Pag. 331. (G. F.
further faith.). The Light which every one that cometh into the World is
enlightned withal, is Not Conſcience; for the Light was before any thing was
made, or Conſcience named.’ And again, to aggravate the ſuppoſed Blaſphemy
upon them, they make this Marginal Note, viz. The Quakers teach, that the
Light within, by which they are guided is not Conſcience.

Now this being in the Front of their Book, to be ſure it was not intended for
one of the leaſt of the Quakers Blaſ­phemies; though they might as well have
called it Sedi­tion (the other Crime they lay to their Charge) as to make it
Blaſphemy, to ſay, That the Light within is not Con­ſcience. But if this be
Blaſphemy, pray let us hear how the Scripture will Read after their new way of
Tranſlating Conſcience for Light, which the Quakers, according to the Holy
Evangeliſt, &c. call Chriſt, and they call Conſcience. John 1. 4, 9. In him
(meaning the Divine Word) was Life, and the Life was the Conſcience of Men:
And the Conſcience ſhineth in Darkneſs, and the Darkneſs comprehendeth it not.
There was a Man ſent from God, whoſe Name was John, the ſame came for a
Witneſs, to bear witneſs of the Conſcience, that all Men through him might
believe. He was not that Con­ſcience, but was ſent to bear witneſs of that
Conſcience: That was the true Conſcience, that lighteth every Man that cometh
into the World. John 8\. 12. I am the Conſcience of the World, he that
followeth me, ſhall not walk in Darkneſs, but ſhall have the Conſcience of
Life. And alſo, 1 John 1. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. This then is the Meſſage which we
have heard of Him, and declare unto you, That God is Conſcience, and in him is
no Darkneſs at all: If we ſay we have fellowſhip with him, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33526&page=2) and walk in
Darkneſs, we Lye, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Conſcience, as
he is in the Conſcience, we have fellowſhip one with another, and the Blood of
Jeſus Chriſt his Son cleanſeth us from all Sin. Again, Rom. 13. 12. Put on the
Armour of Conſcience. Leſt the Conſcience of the Glorious Goſpel, &c. 2 Cor.
4\. 4. God, who commanded the Conſcience to ſhine out of Darkneſs, hath ſhined
in our Hearts, to give us the Conſcience of the Knowledge, &c 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Laſtly, The Nations of them that are ſaved ſhall walk in the Conſcience of the
Lamb.

But to read thoſe Scripture Quotations truly, leave out the word Conſcience,
and read the word Light inſtead thereof.

It is to be lamented, that Men that wear ſo Religious a Character, and would
paſs for the Key and Keepers of the Holy Scripture to the People, ſhould be ſo
much too hard for themſelves, by letting their Miſtake of the Qua­kers
Principles carry them into ſo great an abuſe of the Scriptures, as to be
guilty of the Crime they would faſten upon them; as certainly they all are,
who degrade the Di­vine Light of Chriſt, in alledging it to be Conſcience,
which may as well be Blind and Defiled, as Knowing and Pure.

Beſides, it is to be admired, that theſe Three Clergy-Men, who by vertue of
their Function, are obliged frequently to read the Common-Prayer, ſhould be
ignorant of a Principle ſo Emphatically Expreſt therein, as may be read in
that Book, viz. The Goſpel on Chriſtmas Day. The Collect. on John the
Evangeliſt, and the Epiſtle on the ſame Day, with the Col­lects on Whitſunday
and Munday; and many other places, too tedious to mention, conſidering my
intended Brevity. And why they ſhould Brand the Quakers, that agree with the
Church of England in ſo great a Principle, I know not, unleſs in Reallity they
are not what their Character be­ſpeaks them to be.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Gouldney, Henry, 1656 or 7-1725.. Date: 1699  

