---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Greenes Orpharion VVherin is discouered a musicall concorde of pleasant
histories, many sweet moodes graced vvith such harmonius discords, as agreeing
in a delightfull closse, they sound both pleasure and profit to the eare.
Heerein also as in a diateheron, the branches of vertue, ascending and
descending by degrees: are covnited in the glorious praise of women-kind.
VVith diuers tragicall and comicall histories presented by Orpheus and Arion,
beeing as full of profit as of pleasure. Robertus Greene, in Artibus Magister.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=1)

Greenes Orpharion. Wherin is discoue­red a musicall concorde of pleasant
Histories, many sweet moodes graced vvith such harmonius discords, as agreeing
in a delight­full closse, they sound both pleasure and profit to the eare.
Heerein also as in a Diateheron, the branches of Vertue, ascending and
descending by degrees: are covnited in the glorious praise of women-kind.
VVith diuers Tragicall and Comicall Histories presented by Orpheus and Arion,
beeing as full of profit as of pleasure.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.

Robertus Greene, in Artibus Magister.

AT LONDON, Printed for Edward VVhite, dwelling at the little North doore of S.
Paules Church: at the signe of the Gun. 1599.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=2)

## To the Right Worshipfull Mai­ster Robert Carey Esquire, Robert Greene
vvisheth encrease of all hono­rable vertues.

ENnius (Right Worshipful) had a Maecenas, though his verses were rude, &
Hippocrates durst present his pictures though they were rough. The blindest
Bay­ard hath a reason to shadow his presumption: for sayth hee, will is aboue
skill. Soothing my selfe (right Worshipfull) with their humours, hauing
attempted to frame out an ORPHARION, to harsh to make a concord in any cunning
eare: yet with old Ennius doating in my youth as he did in his age: I doe
presume to present my rurall Instrument vnder the shadow of your patronage,
and the rather for that as the poore Cobler durst prefer his chattring Pye to
Augustus, for that the Emperour was af­fable
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=3) and curteous,
so hearing your Worship to be indued with such honourable vertues and
plausible qualities, as drawes men to admire and loue such vnited perfection:
I embolden my selfe to trust vpon your Worships curteous acceptance, which if
it be such as others haue founde and I hoped for, & that any way this
Orpharion may agree with the daintines of your touch and fingering, the end of
my la­bours and the summe of my desires consort in one sympathie, and in that
hope, I com­mit your Worship to the Almightie.

Your VVorships humbly to commaund, Ro. Greene.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=3)

## To the Gentlemen Readers Health.

GEntlemen, I haue long promi­sed my Orpharion, and because I would not
frustrate your ex­pectation: at last it is leapt into the Stacioners Shoppe,
but not from my Study, for then might you thinke I had sweld with the
mountaines, and brought foorth a Mouce, but the Printer had it long since▪
marry whether his presse were out of tune, Paper deere, or some other secret
delay driue it off, it hath line this twelue months in the suds. Now at last
it is crept forth in the Spring, a slender bud and easily to be nipt with the
least frost of Disdaine.

Therfore doo I entreate whatsoeuer melody my Orpha­rion yeeld: you would
fauour the blossome with the Sun­shine of your curteous acceptance, else shall
you discourage a Gardener for grafting any more, and therefore hoping to finde
you as euer I haue done, farwell.

Rob. Greene.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Worshipfull Maister Robert Carey Esquire, Robert Greene vvisheth encrease of all honorable vertues.
  * To the Gentlemen Readers Health.
  * 1\. Greenes Orpharion.
    * 1.1. Orpheus Tale.
    * 1.2. Arions Tale.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=4)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=4)

## 1\. Greenes Orpharion.

CVpid hauing taught me what restlesse passions are in loue, what continual
perturbations Fancy affoordes to such as ac­count beauty the principal end of
their affects: hauing recea­ued the wound, I sought where to find a salue fit
for the easing of my malady: Experience willing that I should not tye my
thoughts on delay, told me that such as were enueno­med with the Scorpion,
must be healed by the Scorpion, that the Tarantals sting could not be pulde
out without Musick, that he which was pierced with Achilles Launce must be
healed by his Speare, and they which were char­med with Loue, must seeke to
loue, or els lacke remedy: Wherupon doubtfull what I should doo, I was willed
to sue to Venus as soueraigne Goddesse and patronesse of such perplexed
patients. I left my home and sayled to Cipres, there found I men vnknowne, but
not her whom I lookt for: there might I sée Venus Pallace like the gor­gious
Tower built by Semeramus. Sloth being Porter, sléepy, and suffering frée
passage to all, the gate of entrance was not the way to returne: for at the
other side was a doore to depart, where Beggery stoode and threatned all, but
strooke some with his whip of repentance: within I found Princes, great Lords
and men of meane calling, al prisoners, some fettered by the eyes, others by
the eares, some by the tong, as hauing more lust in their mouth then loue in
their mindes, none or fewe cheyned by the harts, and such as were set
inthroned in a secret Cell: those Ve­nus shrinde vp as wonders of the worlde,
well: missing what I came for, I past spéedily from thence to Paphos, where
Venus had onely a Temple, thither came multi­tudes on Pilgrimage, making
vowes, vttering oathes, [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=5) and protesting
promises: if they might enioy the fruition of their Ladyes, to be sworne
votaries to the Goddesse: Some were fauoured, others disgraced: some
dispaired, some hoped, but all found the ende of theyr pilgrimage was to buy
smoake with many perrills and daungers: But all these instances were no
arguments to diswade me from my iourney: But as Medea though I saw the best
and allowed of it, yet I followed the néerest & smar­ted for it, for such as
be in loue are like the Déere which one while strike at the Tamarisk trée with
their hornes, and then gréedily burst on it with their mouthes, others the
people of Mamaca, that surfet on Dates, and yet dye with them in their mawes.
Louers exclaime agaynst Cupid, and yet they goe on pylgrimage to Paphos, they
call Venus vniust, and yet offer her incense and sacrifice, they fore-sée
misery, and yet run headlong on their owne misfortune. So fared it with mee,
for seeing these men thus deepely passionate, and yet so slenderly rewarded,
as who carried away the greatest trophe, had his ensigne stamped with
repentance: yet their mishaps could not make me learne to beware, but from
Paphos I went to the fountaine of Alcidalion, where I heard Venus to a­uoyde
the heate of Sommer, was kept close Prisoner by Mars in a Pauillion, but I
found the rumour false, yet did I not repent mee of my arriuall, for there I
sawe sit­ting about the bancks, infinite troupes of faire and beau­tifull
Ladyes, all votaries vnto Venus, smyling at the fondnesse of men, and laughing
at the passions of theyr Louers, making true loue knots of rushes, that broke
ere they could be twisted: some séemed lyke Saintes, those were subtill and
peruerse: others fawned, and those were flatterers: some wept, and they let
fall teares of deceite: some séemde to haue many eyes, and those had many
fan­cies: some two harts, and yet they were very chast: for some had twenty
measuring their Loues by their lookes: gazing still vpon their countenance and
gesture, I percei­ued [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=5) hard by seperate
from the rest a fewe Ladyes sitting passing solitarie, their names were
ingrauen in the trées, but so long since as hardly I could read them, yet I
found out Hero, Penelope, Thisbe, Artemesia, alas a small num­ber and
disdained by the rest, these had their eyes shut a­gainst beauty, and their
eares open to vertue, their harts subiect to loue, but onely stamped with one
Carracter, re­sembling the Emeraulde, that neuer looseth the first im­pression
nor admitteth any other: well here I could ney­ther finde Venus, nor heare of
her, but scoffinglie those girles told me, she was either in Ida or in
Erecinus, desi­rous to loose no time, I hasted from Alcydalion to Ida, where I
could see no steps of a Goddesse, but only the an­cient monument of Troy
cōsumed to cinders, there I no­ted the end of loue, the reward of lust, the
trophes of Ve­nus, the follies of women in Helena, that brought Priamus his
sonnes, and so famous a Cittie to confusion. From thence I posted to Erecinus,
the Mountaine was greene and pleasant to the eye, the stones that appeared
higher then the grasse séemed like Iacinthes, the mosse was flo­wers, the very
rubbish below pearles, so ye nature seemd to haue conquered art, and art
nature, and a supernatu­rall glory both in musing at the gorgeous scituation
of this deuine Mount, looking if eyther there were Palace or Temple dedicate
to Venus, I sawe none, but casting mine eye into the bordring vale, I saw a
Shepheard gra­sing of his flockes. Desirous to learne of the man any newes of
the Goddesse, pacing downe from the Hyll, I went and saluted him in this
manner.

Shepheard, so I name thee for thy flockes, more maist thou be, for Apollo kept
Midas sheepe, and Mercury ta­ken the shape of a Heardman: but measuring thy
degrée as present thou seemest, I craue so much fauour at thy hands, as to
tell mee whether Venus is resident about this mount of Erecinus, or no, I haue
beene at all her pla­ces of abode, and this is the last of all her earthly
mansi­ons: [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=6)
This Shephearde hearing me salute him so curte­ouslie, laying downe his pipe
and his hooke aunswered thus bluntly.

Friend, what I am it little reckes thée, thou seest my fouldes, and then why
standest thou vpon higher titles: In calling me shepheard or Swaine, thou
giuest me my due, if my degrée be greater, my sheepe may serue for thy excuse,
to thy question: as it sauours of folly, so I thinke best to aunswer it with
silence, yet for I see thy thoughts to be full of passions, and thy face the
map of sorrowes, the two notes of a Louer, if I knew my counsaile might
pro­fite thee, or my experience warne thee, I would bestow a little wast time
while my Sheepe grase so hard, to holde thee chat.

Hearing the Shepheard beginning so roughly, to con­clude so gently, willing to
be auditor to his Country pre­cepts, I aunswered him thus.

Shepheard, if thou be no better, (for thy talke makes me suspect higher, Know
that I haue tolde many cares, numbred many passions, felt many sorrowes,
vttred ma­ny sighes, shed many teares since Venus entertained me, with Roses
at the first, & afterwarde beate me with Net­tles, I haue found loue to be a
Laborinth, a fury, a hell, wherein men aliue féele worse paines then those
ghostes that pay Charon hier for his ferriboat: gréeued thus, yet as one in a
lunacie: I neuer fore-sawe my miseries. I heard many counsailes, and read many
preceps, but al in vaine, yet for that time hath many chaunces, the Fates
their Canons tied to opportunitie. Fortune her decrées variable, and loue,
many accidents: I will humbly craue what thou hast offered, promising to be
attentiue and not ingratefull, as farre as a strangers abilitie may grati­fie.

The Shephearde without further promising or lon­ger delay, began thus.

Thou seest that I sitte heere féeding my flocks by Ere­cinus, [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=6) whether daily
resorte multitudes of amorous Pil­grims suing to Venus for releefe of their
passions, but how she vsed these fond and perplexed patients, as it pit­ties
mee to rehearse, so it wil grieue thee to heare. Those youthes whose yeeres
more then their mindes, are fryed with a small flame of ordinarie fancie,
rather inserted by nature then inferred by loue, such she entertaineth most
sumptuously, as fittest obiects for her to worke vpon, put­ting oyle in the
flame, fire to flax, and beautie as the bale­full obiect to youth, for she
knowing the olde verse to bee too true for her to disproue, Quod latit ignotum
est: igno­ti nulla Cupido, that, what is secret from vs we neuer de­sire to
inueagle them with her charmes, she present beu­tie excellent by nature, yet
far more gorgious by arte: faire faces, smiling lookes, alluring gestures
swéet spée­ches, these are the baites that she layes to intrap, & youth is so
fond that he cannot but taste, resembling the poore Mouse, that feedeth
soonest on the most infectious Rosal­ger, respecting the colour, not the
confection, after once shée hath gotten youth limed fast on her twigges, then
Cupid vseth them as marks, and at euery shoote galleth to the quicke, that the
woundes cannot be cured, till ey­ther we finde remedie by repentance, which
oft cōmeth too late, or haue a quittance by death, which they thinke commeth
too soone. Others, that haue beene stale stay­ers in her Court, spending their
time in sighes, teares, and many dispayring passions, such shée feedeth on
with delayes, giuing thē one day an incarnatiue to heale, and the next day a
contrary medicine to fester, choking theyr sences with perfumes, and straight
stifling them with Hemlock, suffering theyr Ladies in the morning to wash
their temples with Rose-water, and at night to quaffe to them gall and
vinegar, shadowing smiles with frownes, sower lookes with wanton actions,
fettering them with the wings of hope, but hanging dispaire at their heeles,
least soaring too hie, they should seaze & catch their pray: [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=7) suppose she sets
thē on the top of her whéele, where, poore man I know thou desirest to be
plaste, and for their long trauell, she giues them with Ixion a clowde, a
faire dame I mean, as shee bestowed vpon Paris, yet shalt thou finde, that she
fetcheth all her virgins from the fountain of Al­cydalion, (beleeue me Pilgrim
I will not warrant theyr maidenheads) because thou seest they haue many eyes,
and many harts, which haue many fancies, and many lures, and trust me
Pilgrime, many causes must needes bring out some effects: But leauing these
doubts as may not once haue entrance into Louers thoughts, and af­firming that
all are virgins that come from Venus, for Diana hath so few in her traine,
that she marries not one in seauen yéeres, whē the louer hath what he long
sought for, he findes not the fairest Christall but hath his staine, the
brightest topar but hath his spot, the richest Gold, but hath his ore, and the
purest creature feminine I meane: but hath her common imperfection, either
proud without profite, and thats a purgation for the Purse, or fayre without
wit, and that is to marry a woodden picture with a golden creast, full of
fauour but flattering, and so he may reape many kisses and little loue,
shrewish, de­ceitfull, wilfull, fond, new fangle, and what not: nay, perhaps
proue so light in the braines, that she make him swell in the browes, that as
he hath beene in his youth a votary to Venus, so in his age he may proue a
companion to Vulcan, and Pilgrim quoth the Shepheard, this is to sitte on the
toppe of Venus wheele, these bitter sauces be her cheefest delicates, and
these painted Sepulchers her richest trophies. Thou seest I sit neere
Erecinus, and therfore speake by experience, thou saiest to Venus thou art in
loue, thou wouldest faine haue a wife frō Alcidalion, looke before thou
leape, pry into Venus Cofers, and sée what chaffer she prouides for her
chapmen, I haue counsayled, now rests it in thee either to followe it with a
momen­tary sorrowing content, or to forsake it with a perpetu­all [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=7) pleasing mislike.

Hearing the cunning experienced swaine to discourse so roundly of the matter,
I imagined either he had beene in loue, or an enemie to Venus, so that I
demaunded of him if he would not haue men loue at all?

Yes quoth he, so they count Dianas virgins not Venus wantons: I replied she
had very few or none, hee aun­swered, had shée more suters, shee woulde
prouide more maydes, but Venus spying them passe towards her Pal­lace, layeth
such snares to intangle, such traps to intice, such charmes to bewitch, such
dangers to preiudice, that none or very few ariue at Dianas mantion, and such
as doo: come thither halfe maimed.

Then quoth I, you conclude peremptorily against Ve­nus and her crue, and very
hardly against women. Hea­ring me say so, he tooke me by the hande, & softly
whispe­ring in mine eare, Pilgrim I may say to thée, Wiues be they neuer so
watcht they will: Maides be they neuer so bashfull they wish, and widdowes bee
they neuer so coy, they would, take me not generally Pilgrime quoth hée, and
with that sitting downe he tooke his pipe in his hand, and plaid so sweetly,
that like Argus at Mercuries melo­die I fell on sleepe.

No sooner had Morpheus shut mine eyes, but I fell in­to a dreame, mee thought
I was ledde from Erecinus by Mercury, alongst the galupin or siluer paued way
of hea­uen to the hie built house of Ioue, there woulde I haue gazde at the
gorgious buildings, but my guide was in haste, and conducted me into the great
Hall, wher Iupiter and the rest of the Gods were at a banquet, no sooner was I
entred amongst them, but Mercury sprinkled me with water, which made me
capaple of their diuine presence, so yt I sat stil looking on their persons,
and listning to their parle, at last me thought blunt Vulcan that sat at ye
low­er end of the boord, although Venus aboue, sat opposite to Mars, beganne
thus roughly to breake silence: I cannot [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=8) mighty Gods but
smile to thinke that when my wife and her blind Sonne, the one with her boxe
of beauties, the o­ther with his quiuer of Arrowes, passe abroade to shewe
their Deities: what number of poore perplexed men as Patients come to haue
cure of their hurts, some in their eyes, that haue gazed with the Phylosopher
agaynst too bright a Sunne, and such are blind; some that with Vlis­ses haue
not stopped their eares, but haue listened the Sy­rens, and they complaine of
their hearing: some in their harts, and those bewraies their passions by their
grones: none comes without gréefe, nor returne throughly cured, so that I
suppose either the wounds are very perilous, or my wife a bad Surgion. Truth
(quoth Iupiter) but what number of women come hether: Multitudes (quoth
Vul­can) Apollo smoothly and yet with a smile, demaunded if they were as bad
to cure as men: No (quoth Vulcan) for be the wound neuer so déepe, tis
perfectly cured in twelue houres, eyther my wife is more friendly to Wo­men,
or their sores more easie to salue. No (quoth Mer­cury) it is because their
loues are like a mans breath a­gainst bright stéele, which scarse lighteth on
before it leapeth off, or like wood wet in Allom water, which lieth in the
fire and waxeth hot, but neuer burneth: their harts resemble a Pumice stone,
light: & which way soeuer you turne it: full of starting holes, that if fancy
steale in at the one, he can step out at the other: or els quoth Iupiter,
their harts haue no holes at all, but as firme as flint, that nei­ther fancy
nor loue can enter, for Venus teacheth them extremities, eyther to fawne & be
too fond, or to be too coy and too stubborne, which causeth so many to put vp
inuer­tiues against her. Least of all (quoth the Goddesse,) in a great chafe
hath Iupiter cause to accuse women of cruel­ty, if not, I appeale to Iuno, at
this all the company smiled and Ioue was silent, well (quoth Apollo,) leauing
these quips seeing we haue met to be merry, if it please you to allow of my
motion, to make vs some musicke, I will [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=8) raise vp the Ghosts
of Orpheus and Arion, two, famous in their times for their instruments, and
greatly experi­enced in Loue, as béeing great trauailers, and with that
conuersing the greatest Potentates in the world, who often are as full of
loues as they are of dignities: these shall please vs with harmony, and
discourse either what they thinke, or what they haue heard of womens Loues: To
this all the Gods gladly agréede, and Mercury was sent in Post to Pluto for
these two Musitians, scarse had I thought Mercury had béene out of the Hall,
before I saw enter with this winged God the Ghosts of Orpheus and Arion, so
liuely to the eye, and so well trussed in their apparell as they séemed
perfectly such as they were when they liued vpon earth: Orpheus after that he
had doone due reuerence to the Gods, especially to Apollo: tuning his
instrument without any more commaund, as if his seruice should be saluery, hée
daintily toucht the Cordes with a sweete stroake, and to a melodious tune,
sung this Ditty.

Orpheus Song.

HE that did sing the motions of the starres,

Pale colour'd Phaebus borrowing of her light:

Aspects of planets oft oppos'd in iarres,

Of Hesper Henchmen to the day and night.

Sings now of Loue as taugh by proofe to sing:

Women are false and loue a bitter thing.

I lou'd Euridicae the brightest Lasse,

More fond to like so faire a Nymph as she:

In Thefaly, so bright none euer was,

But faire and constant hardly may agree.

False harted wife to him that loued thee well:

To leaue thy loue and choose the Prince of hell.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=9)

Theseus did helpe, and I in hast did hie,

To Pluto, for the Lasse I loued so:

The God made graunt, and who so glad as I,

I tunde my Harpe, and shee and I gan goe▪

Glad that my loue was left to me alone.

I looked back, Euridicae was gone.

She slipt aside backe to her latest loue,

Vnkinde shee wrong'd her first and truest Feere,

Thus womens loues, delights as tryall proues,

By false Eurydycae I loued so deere.

To change, and fleete, and euery way to shrinke,

To take in loue, and lose it with a winke.

SCarse had Orpheus ended his song, but Iupiter thin­king not to let so faire a
ball fall to the grounde: tooke opportunitie thus by the hand.

This present Dittie of Orpheus tendeth to our forepas­sed discourse, as though
the Fates had forepointed our talke, and this arriuall consequence of their
infallible de­crees: sith then the vnkindnes of Euridicae discouers the
inconstancie of women, & that Orpheus hath by his sun­dry passions made an
Anatomy of loue: let vs heare hys opinion howe hee censures of beautie. Apollo
at Iupiters motion commaunded Orpheus, who not amased (as a Ghost come from
hell) began thus. The Question right mighty Gods is easie, for that commonly
all gaze at beauty as at the fairest obiect that flattereth the eye, yet a
thing perilous, howsoeuer it seemes precious: seeing the fairest Lawnes
soonest take the déepest staines, the brightest Beralles the greatest flawes,
and oftentimes the fairest faces with intollerable faults: Greece vaunted not
so much of her beautifull paragon, as Troy lamented of their incestuous
strumpet, men came to Rome to sée Messalines beauty, but Rome sorrowed that
shee was counted a Harlot: Thessaly rung of Euridites proportion, [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=9) but Thessaly
shamed and Orpheus grieued at her bad con­dition, and yet forsooth though we
find beauty thus preiu­diciall, yet we must leape at it, though to our vtter
ruine we light in the ditch: But as the fish Ramera listning to the sound of
the trumpet, is caught of the Fishers: as the Porcupine standeth staring at
the glimmering of the Starres, and is ouertaken with dogges: as the Leopard
looking at the Panthers painted skinne, is caught as a pray: so he which
taketh too much delight to gaze vppon beautie, is oft times galled with greefe
and misery: yea, his pleasure shall inferre such profite, and his good will
such gaines, as if hee reapt the beautifull Apples of Tan­talus, which are no
sooner toucht, but they turne to ashes.

Beautie no sooner flourisheth but it fadeth, and it is not fully ripe, but it
beginneth to rotte: it no sooner blossom­meth, but it withereth: and scarcely
being toucht, it stay­neth like the Guiacum leafe, that hath the one halpe
par­ched before the other halfe be perfect, to the Birde Acau­this, which
hatched white, yet turneth blacke at the first storme: Or like to the stone
Astites, that changeth cou­lour with the onely breath of a man: this (right
mightie Gods) is my censure of beautie, that vnlesse ioyned with vertue, it is
like the feathers of the Phenix, placed in the carkasse of a Crow, but where
faith and feature are Re­latiues, that beauty I call diuine and metaphisica,
for be­cause gratior est pulchro veniens è corpore virtus. Thys discourse of
Orpheus all the Gods applauded except Ve­nus, Iuno brookt it as hauing lost
the Ball, and Venus thought it was best to pocket vp whatsoeuer a Ghost out of
hell did tattle, and so I would haue all faire Gentlewo­men to take it: well,
so well did the Gods like and allow of his talke, that Iupiter questioned him
what hee thought generally of women: Orpheus neither forcing Iuno nor Venus,
as one that could but goe to hell, boldly made an­swer, that their generall
sex stood vpon two extreames, ei­ther too curteous or too cruell, and that he
had made expe­ence [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=10) of both, and
which quoth Iupiter are the worst? I note (quoth Orpheus) if your question
tendes towardes men, because my particuler instance may be no generall
Example, but this well I wot, crueltie hath the greatest punishment appointed
for it in hell, which may it please you and the rest of the Gods to be
attentiue, I will proue with a knowne history. The Gods setling themselues in
their seates, shewed by their silence how they lik'd of his motion, whereupon
Orpheus began thus.

### 1.1. Orpheus Tale.

SInce the mad frowes of Bacchus (in that I was sworn an enemy to women through
the vnkindnes of Euri­dicae,) stoned me to death while I sate playing musicke
to the Rockes, which seemed to mooue at my melody: my soule sent to Pluto, I
founde fauour at his handes for that he wronged me of my wife, that I had frée
liberty to passe into euery seuerall mancion: wherupon one day with my Harpe I
walked through seuerall places, and heard seue­rall complaints, but at the
last I came to a thicke fogge, the smoake and stench so deadly and pestilent,
as all the ghosts in hell, respecting this dungeon, seemed to liue in Elisium,
out of this mist I heard the voice of a woman, vt­tering pittifull shrikes,
hauing remorse of her passions, I toucht my Harpe, and plaid, thinking while
my musicke lasted, to make her forget her torments, as I had done the other
ghosts in hell, but she told me all was in vaine, sith as her faulte exceeded
all, so her torture was more then they all: for here quoth she I hang by the
haire of ye heade in so thicke a smoake and stinking a fog, as no tongue can
expresse, nor imagination conceiue it. Desirous to heare the cause of this
strange extreame, I askt her name, and the offence, shee wisht mee  [...]alfe
angerly to cease my fid­ling, and she would discourse at large: I put vp my
pipes [[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=10) at
such a dry blowe, and shee murmured out of the fogge thus.

I am Lidia that renowned Princesse, whose neuer matched beauty seemed like the
gorgious pompe of Phoe­bus, too bright for the day: rung so strongly out of
the trumpe of Fame, as it filled euery eare with wonder: Daughter to Astolpho,
the King of Lydia: who thought himselfe not so fortunate for his Diadem, sith
other Kings could boast of Crownes: nor for his great possessions, al­though
indued with large territories, as happy that hee had a Daughter whose
excellencie in fauour stained Ve­nus, whose austere chastitie set Diana to
silence with a blush: Know whatsoeuer thou art that standest attentiue to my
tale, that ye ruddiest Rose in all Damasco, the whi­test Lillies in the créeks
of Danuby, might not if they had vnited their natiue colours, but haue bashed
at the vermi­lion staine, flourisht vppon the pure Christall of my face: the
Marguerites of the westerne Indies counted more bright and rich, then that
which Cleopatra quaft to An­thonie, the Corall highest in his pride vppon the
Affricke shoares, might well be graced to resemble my teeth and lippes, but
neuer honoured to ouerreach my purenes. Re­maining thus the mirrour of the
Worlde, and natures strangest miracle: there arriued in our Court a Thracian
Knight, of personage tall, proportioned in most exquisite forme, his face but
too faire for his qualities, for hee was a braue and resolute Souldiour. This
Caualier com­ming amongst diuers others to sée the roiallie of the state of
Lidia, no sooner had a glaunce of my beautie, but he set downe his staffe,
resoluing either to perrish in so sweet a Laborinth, or in time happily to
stumble out with These­us. He had not staide long in my Fathers Court, but hee
shewed such Knightly deeds of chiualrie amongst the no­bilitie, lightned with
the extraordinary sparkes of a cou­ragious minde, that not onely hee was liked
and loued of all the chéefe Péeres of the Realmes, but the report of his
[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=11) valoure
comming to my Fathers eares, hee was highly honored of him, & placed in short
time as Generall of his warlike forces by Land: resting in this estimation
with the King, preferment was no meanes to quiet his minde, for loue had
wounded so deepe, as honour by no meanes might remedy, that as the Elephants
can hardly bee ha­led from the sight of the Wast, or the Roe buck from ga­zing
at red cloth, so there was no obiect that could so much allure the wauering
eyes of this Thracian called Acestes, as the surpassing beautie of the
Princesse Lydia, yea, so déepely he doted, that as the Camelion gorgeth
herselfe with gazing into the ayre, so he fedde his fancie with sta­ring on
the heauenly face of his Goddesse, so long dally­ing in the flame, that he
scorcht his wings, & in time con­sumed his whole body. Beeing thus passionate,
hauing none so familiar as he durst make, hee fell thus to debate with
himselfe.

Is it Alcestes loue that troubles thee? why thou art a Souldiour, sworne to
armes, not to Armour: to incounter foes in the féelde, not to courte Ladies in
the Chamber: Hercules had almost performed his twelue labours, ere he durst
find leysure to loue, and thou art scarse acquain­ted with Mars, but thou
seekest to be priuate friend to Ve­nus: away fond foole, to thy Speare and
Shielde, manage thy horse, though héere in a peaceable Countrey: let not Bées
hiue in thy Helmet, rust inblaze the figure of sloath on thy Armour, or loue
call thee her milksoppe, by whom warre it selfe hath approoued martiall: hast
thou forgotte that which thou suckest out of thy Nurses teate, that to loue is
to loose, and fancie bee it neuer so charie, is meere folly: for loue how
soeuer it bee, is but a Chaos of cares: and fancie though neuer so fortunate,
hath her crosses: for if thou inioy the beauty of Venus, thou shalt finde it
small vantage: if thou get one as nice as Minerua, thou mayst put thy winnings
in thine eye: if as gorgious as Iuno, thy account being cast, thy sums will be
rated with losse: [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=11) yea, be shée
chast, be shée vertuous, be shée curteous, con­stant, rich, renowned, honest,
honourable, yet if thou be wedded to a woman, thinke thou shalt finde in her
suffici­ent vanity to counteruaile her vertue: assure thy selfe ne­uer to liue
lesse without disquiet, nor die before thou haue cause to repent: which
Craterus the Emperour noted, when wishing that some sinister misfortune might
befall his foe: he prayed vnto the Gods he might be married in his youth, and
dye without issue in his age: accounting mariage by this wish, farre more full
of preiudice, then of pleasure. This, yea all this Acestes thou knowest to be
true: but suppose it were not, is there not sufficient to dis­swade? beside,
seest thou not? or hath fancy cast such a maske before thine eyes, that thou
wilt not sée? that her beauty as it is excellent, so it is high seated: both
in the dignity of her parentage, & the selfe conceite of her mind, to be gazed
at, and so honored: not to be reacht at and so enioyed, thou séest she is
little liberall of her lookes, much lesse prodigall of her loue: she couets
rather a God, then a man: thē amongst men think she wil aime at the high­est,
or sit still as she is: Pride in her greatest pompe sits inthrond in her eyes,
and disdaine in her lookes: that if she glaunce to so low as Acestes, it is
rather to grace him with a smile then to shew him any fauour: beside, fortune
hath opposed her selfe to thy aspiring thoughts, in that thy good will hath
not yet deserued any such guerdon: thy desire, is farre aboue thy desert: and
the poore stay of a wandring Knight, farre vnfitte for the Princely state of
worthy Lidia: But suppose she were pricked in the same veine, and that Venus
would friendly instill some drops of her inchaunted water to mollifie her
hart, yet ye Duke her Father will neither condiscend to her mind, nor con­sent
to my motion: nay if he should but heare of such reck­les folly, as he hath
wrought my promotion, so hee would worke my confusion: and in troth Acestes,
not without cause: for art thou so voyde of vertue, or vowde to vice, as
[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=12) to requite
his liberality with such disloyalty: to returne the trust which hee reposeth
in thée with such treachery: Tush, Loue is aboue Lord or law, friend or faith,
where Loue buddeth, no Maister is made account off, no King cared for, no
friend feared of, no duty respected: but all things done according to the
quality that is predominant. Hast thou béene a Souldiour, and dreamest thou of
such doubts? are the courtings of Venus, more perrillous then the incounters
of Mars? or the deniall of a Lady, worse then the daunt of a foe: no Acestes,
be not faint harted as the North Ilands, where the people Iberi dwell foster
no venemous beast, nor the Sea called Mare mortuum fee­deth no Fish, so are
there no Cowards suffered to arriue at Paphos, she is but a woman, and
therefore to be wone: Then sound on the march, aske not of what degrée she is,
but where she is: these words Acestes (carry emphasis) and are more fit for a
Souldier then for a Louer: for loue is quesie, and if it be ouer-strained,
cracketh at the first wrest: enduring in this doubt, he sat downe déepely
ouer­charged with melancholy passions; that as he which ea­teth of the Goord
Nutte, loseth his memory: and as the Elephant féeding on the Helytropian
becommeth sleepy: so Acestes fell into a drowsie kind of contemplature, that
to auoide such cogitations as combred his minde, hee got him selfe into a
Gallery which was built betweene the Turrets of the house, and there sette
himselfe downe as halfe in a traunce: Loue, that tooke pitty of this patient,
so fauourd him, that he had not sat long in his dumps but that Lidia came
thither all alone to be solitary, who séeing Acestes sitting thus sadly
slumbring, determined for her owne recreation to be a little plesant with him,
and ther­fore awakened him thus.

Why how now Acestes, is it your custome in Thracia to vse slumbers after meat
for Phisick? or is it some me­lancholy impression that thus amateth your
sences? trust me at the first I called to remembrance the picture that [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=12) Zerxsis drew of
Endimion, lying vpon the mount of Ereci­nus, who leaning his head on his hand,
his eyes shutte as one in a dreame: yet had his face so bedued with distilling
teares, as his outward plaints did sufficiently bewray his inward passions:
and so Acestes, in this thy solitary dump? didst thou resemble Endimion, both
in countenance and colour, that had teares fallen from thine eyes as thou wert
in a traunce? I had happily demaunded how Phebe had vsed thee: So apalde was
Acestes at this sodaine pre­sence of Lidia, that hee sat still as a man
depriued of his sences: till at the last gathering of his wittes together he
start vp, and his due reuerence done, he made this an­swere.

I think Madam that melancholy is not particuler ei­ther to person or place,
but that being a complexion, it fol­loweth oft-times the quality of the
affection: so that the mind any way distrest, the body must yéeld in effect to
the most precious part: I confesse therefore, that being dis­quiet at my hart,
I felt mine eyes heauy, as they which were the chéefest procurers of my
malady: but when I awoke and sawe your excellency, both your presence and
curtesie greatly daunted my mind: your presence, in daze­ling mine eyes so
suddenly with so solemne an obiect: your curtesie, in that your Ladyshippe
without curiositie would vouchsafe to talke with so mean a Gentleman: but I
sée the best fruite hath the brauest blossomes: the most precious stone, is
chosen by the most glistering hue, and the best conditions, by the swéetest
countenance: so that where beauty raigneth, there vertue remaineth: and vn­der
a faire face resteth a faithfull hart: But whereas you say you had taken mee
for Endimion by my penitrature & countenance, but that I wanted teares to
decipher my sorrow: I answer, that the hottest thunders are not euer quenched
with raine, nor the déepest gréefes euer discoue­red by teares: the stone
Garatides fryeth without and is cold within, the Germander least when it is
most full [[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=13)
of moisture, looketh then most dry: where the sea is most déepe, there it is
most calme: & where is the smallest shew of teares, there oft are the greatest
effect of sorrow: For trust me Madam, I thinke Endimion sighing for the
ab­sence of his Lady Luna, neuer felt more bitter passions on the mount
Erecinus, then I suffered in this halfe wa­king slumber: why (quoth Lidia) are
you in loue? Acestes at this question fetcht a déepe sigh, as it séemed his
heart strings should haue crackt in sunder, he stood as one in an extasie,
doubting whether nowe hee should take time by the fore-head, or to defer it
till afterward: well, séeing op­portunity so fit, he boldly tooke hart at
grace, and began to giue this encunter.

They (Madame) that séeke to stop the swift running Volgo, a Riuer that leadeth
into Persia, by staying the streame, maketh the flood flow more fiercely: to
represse the fier, is to encrease the flame: and to conceale loue, is to
smother smoake in the nosethrill, which either wil out, or els stifleth:
wounds fed of with delayes fester, and oft prooue incurable: fancy long held
in the grasse, seldome prooues a timely Haruest: which makes me to set my
ha­zard on the Dice, and either presently to heare the curte­ous sentence of
my life▪ or the cruell doome of my death. Since most excellent Princesse, I
arriued at the Court of Lidia, so hath mine eyes fed on the beauty of your
face, mine eares wrapt in admiration of your deuine wit, my mind inchaunted
with the consideration of your vertues, and my hart as the receptacle of all
these excellencies, so deuoted to the substance that contriues such
supernatu­rall qualities, that the exceeding pleasure, which so long luld mee
in delight, at length suncke so déepe, that they grew to gréeuous passions: to
say all (what I could at large discourse) in on worde, so long did I gaze at
your beauty, that I was snared, and so long did I admire your vertue, that now
I rest your Captiue: so farre Madame entred the Laborinth, that either I must
perrish with the [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=13) Minotaure, or els
humbly craue your ayde, that the clue of your mercy may hale me forth of such
an intricate dan­ger.

Lidia, who swelled in choller at these spéeches, coulde not brooke to heare vp
the ende of his discourse, but faring like angry Ioue, who in his rage
couereth the beautifull Skye with a world of stormes, so she incensed with
dys­daine, filled her sweet countenaunce with a shaddowe of bitter frownes,
knitting her browes she beganne thus to reply.

Why gentle maister Knight, hath too much familiari­tie bredde contempt? are
you such a good Phisiognomer, that you haue insight into my wrincle in the
browe and dimple in the cheekes? I see well if Apelles that cunning Painter,
suffer the greasie Sowter to take a view of his curious worke, hee will growe
so malapart as to meddle with his picture, that he must be thrust into his
shop with Nae sutor vltra crepidum, if the proude Centaur Ixion bee bidden to
the feast of the Gods, no lesse then Iuno herselfe will suffice him for his
choyce.

Set a Begger on horsebacke, and they say he will ne­uer light: extoll one of
base stock to any degree of digni­tie, and who so proud and hautie: I speake
this Acestes to thy reproofe, for that my Father hath made thée generall of
his forces, seekest thou to maister him in fortune: will no dyet downe but my
Fathers owne Dish? no meaner mate suffise vnlesse thou marry with a Prince?
Dyd my Father preferre thee, and now wilt thou presume to bee his better? haue
my lookes beene so louing, my glaunces so full of good will, as to promise so
much as thou doost pre­sume? no▪ but the least countenaunce of familiaritie to
a seruile minde, procureth great incouragement: hast thou euer noted any of my
actions so base, that thou mightest think I would match with a man of thy
calling? Haue I wantond it so euer in thy sight, as thou mightst think mee fit
for Venus? But suppose my minde were so fonde, as I [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=14) would (soring so
hie as euer I haue doone) stoope nowe so low? thinkest thou my Father coulde
affoorde thee hys Daughter Lidia, whom he farre priseth aboue his crown?
hopest thou to compasse his consent? No, but if he knewe of thy daring
presumtion, he would repay thy follie with such punishments, as thy aspiring
thoughts doe merrit: hée woulde vnplume thée of all thy feathers: and like
E­sops Crowe turne thee naked to the worlde: that they which grudged at thy
hastie promotion, might laugh at thy sudaine fall: if therfore thou loue thine
own welfare, kéepe thy selfe within thy bounds: least in soaring with the
Hobby, to fall to the geound with the Larke: and in daring with Phaeton, thou
fal headlong into such infirmi­ties, as thou shalt neuer be able to créepe out
of: and with that she flung away in a great rage, and left Acestes pas­sing
passionate: so that hee sate him downe againe more melancholie then he was
before: musing aud meditating vppon the cruell resolution of Lidia, slumbring
thus on his harde fortune, vppon a suddaine hee fell into these tearmes.

But by the swéete, how should wee know the sower: the white séemeth most
siluer hued when it is adioyned to blacke: and prosperitie is most sweetest
when it hath beene fore-crossed with aduersity. This principle perhaps Lidia
meanes to make me try by experience, thinking to féede mee first with bitter
broathes, that after, dainty fare may more delight me: for the childing colde
of Winter, makes the Sommers Sun more pleasant: and the frow­ning lookes of
Lidia, will cause her smiles to séeme more cheerefull. Then Acestes cease not
to pursue thy sute, vn­till thou finde her more curteous, or resolutely vowed
to remaine obstinate.

Thus like a valiant Champion, Acestes neuer feared that mislike hung in Womens
browes, and into theyr harts hee could not pry: but hoped the best, and sought
for opportunitie to iterate his sute in this distresse. But For­Fortune [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=14) meaning plesantly
to sport with this young no­uice, would not minister such fitte occasion that
hee might haue sole and solitary accesse to his Goddesse: for Lidia vpon
pretended purpose, so warily auoided his companie: and with such disdainfull
lookes rewarded his proffered dutie, that Acestes was faine to aime his course
by a new compasse, and therefore getting into his Chamber, step­ping to his
standish, he wrote her a Letter to this effect.

# Acestes to the beautifull Princesse Lidia, wisheth what shee desires.

SUch as take surfeite by féeding too greedily on the Ho­ny combes of Hibla,
seeke cure by tasting ouermuch of the swéete suger Canes in Candi. The
Phalanga stingeth deadly, and his venome can bee drawne out onely by rub­bing
ouer the place with golde. They which fall sicke of Loue, must haue potions
ministred by fancie & charmes from Venus to tie about their temples, or els
come Apol­lo with all his drugs: the patient will returne him thys answer.
Nullis amor est medicabilis Herbis. I speak thys sweet Princesse, as a patient
troubled with the same pas­sions: for so déeply haue I imprinted the rich
Carracters of your exquisite perfections, in the closet of my thoughts▪ that
neither mine owne endeuour féeling I haue aspyred too hie, nor your rigor
checking me I am borne to lowe, serueth any way to race out those Ideas which
so firmelie I haue conceiued: I seeke to suppresse loue with reason: and I
finde that I quench fire with Flaxe: I vse absence, that is Oyle in the flame:
I frequent cōpany, their talke is tedious vnto mée: I séeke to be solitarie,
oh then as in visions your swéete selfe is present, as that celestiall ob­iect
whereon mine eye coueteth to gaze, and my minde to meditate. Sith then Madame,
your beautie hath made me surfeit, let your curteous bountie cure my disease:
re­iect [[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=15)
him not so rigorously that regardeth you with such re­uerence: poore Knights
haue their loues not in their own willes, but as Loue and Fortune pleaseth to
allot: some gaze hie and stumble not, as Vulcan whē he courted Ve­nus, some
looke low and gaine not, as Eumenides, that ma­ried a Farmers daughter that
proued vnchast: sure I am howsoeuer I shall speede, it will be more honor for
mee to perrish in her desires, then liue in base fortunes. Then Madam, séeing
my loue is like to ye stone Lincostis, which the lowder the winde bloweth, and
the déeper they are drencht in the water, the more they burne & blaze: so the
more you séeke to coole my fancie with disdaine, the more my affection is
kindled with desire: the greater dispayre you driue mee into by denials, the
greater hope incoura­ged by cōstancie I haue to obtaine my requests? in which
feruent affection I meane to remaine without change, crauing in liew of this
my loialtie, that I may bee admit­ted by degrées into your fauor, euen as my
deserts in loue shall merrit, which shall be as the blisse of heauen to him
that pineth away, and as yours onely and euer.

Still in hope Acestes.

THis Letter conueid with great spéede and no lesse se­crecy to Lidia beeing
then solitary in her Chamber, who receiuing them, vnripping the seales, sawe
no sooner the name of Acestes, but shee perceiued he was importu­nate in his
old sute: which droue her into such a fury, as at the first shée flung away
his Letter in great disdaine, vpbrayding him of immoderate presumption, that
durst attempt the loue of such a Paragon: so that throughly in­flamed with
choller, shée stept hastily to the Letter and red it, which after shée had
perused, falling into a satyri­call scoffing kinde of vaine, shee rudely
returned him this aunswere.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=15)

# To her new found Louer Acestes, the great Knight of Thracia, Health.

SWéete Sir, I receiued your passionate Letters, and pitty them as the
inhabitants of Labia Laborinth doo the passengers that perrish on their
shelues, whom they gaze on, but neuer releeue: your witty inuention tels me
that you are stung with the Phalanga, and so are in loue: take it the more
patiently, for no doubt the serpent was Venus messenger, els had she not fancy
in stéed of infecti­on: But alas, your malady cannot be cured but by my
meanes: know then braue Caualier of Thracia, that my cunning is too small to
enterprise the composition of any secret simples, and my calling too great to
become a Phisition to such a paltring Patient: so that I neyther can nor will
cure any other mans disease by being preiu­diciall to mine owne safety, but
gentle sir thinke me not cruell: for it is the influence of the starres, & the
effectes of nature that maketh these contrarieties, as hauing op­posde vs in
the calculation of our natiuity, for as the Panther cannot abide the company
of the Ownce, as the Uulture is mortall enemy to the Eagle, and the blood of a
Lyon & a Woolfe can neuer be mixed in one bowle, so as impossible it is by
requests, be they neuer so ruthfull to become thy friend, which by the
destinies and instinct of nature am thy mortall foe. Cease then to accuse mee
of cruelty, and leaue off to appeale to my curtesie, for thou shalt alwayes be
sure to finde the one, and neuer to feele the other: yet least thou should
condemne Lidia of ingra­titude, who euer was bountifull to her greatest foes,
though I cannot inwardly mittigate thy misery, yet I wil outwardly teach thée
to apply such playsters, as if the experience of them approue true, shal
greatly appease thy paine: It is reported that he which drinketh of the ri­uer
[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=16) Auerna,
cooleth and mortifieth his affections, but if the water be toucht by any
meanes before it be drunke, the vertue thereof is of no value. He that weareth
the fethers of the bird Ezalon about him, shal euer be fortunate in his loue,
but if they be not puld when the Sunne is eclip­sed: they are of no force, and
to be briefe there is nothing that sooner driueth away amorous conceits, thē
to rub the temples of thy head with the sweate of an Asse, which if you can
performe, as no doubt you may put in practise, feare not but you shall count
my Phisicke authenticall. Thus gentle knight of Thracia, you haue heard my
mind, and so I warn you to wade no further, least I haue cause to laugh and
you to repent.

Lidia of Lidia resolued to mislike of Acestes of Thracia.

THis Letter shee sent by one of her Gentlewomen to Acestes, who no sooner read
the contents, but the dis­daine of his Goddesse strooke such a colde dumpe to
his hart, that hee sat as the picture of Pigmalion, when the poore caruer
leaned with great passion on his marble mi­stresse: his thoughts were on
dispaire, his musings on dispaire, the obiects to his eyes, sounded the vgly
shadowe of dispaire: that as one lunatick, he said: Venus was ths strumpet of
Mars, the baude of Iupiter, the Patronesse of leachers: and that in all her
Kingdome there was ney­ther loue nor vertue, but lust and vanity: I graunt
(quoth he) she hath beauty to bestow, but so it is tempred with pride, as hee
that buyes it dooth penetentiam emere: shee hath many such truls as Helena to
sell, but they were ei­ther so froward or so frolick, as feare may perswade
them from the one, or turne them from the other: shee is God­desse of womens
hearts, but shee trickes them vp with such false colours, and engraues so many
principles of her Philosophy, in the very center of it, that they are as
[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=16) expert in
coyning of deceites, forging of teares, feigning of sighes, casting of lookes,
lending of fauning smiles, and such preiudiciall pollicies to bewitch men, as
euer the Caldees were in their diuinations, but this is, suffiseth not to
reuenge me on her words, would she were mortall, thē would shee were Mars,
that I might with my arming Sworde pearce their disdaine and ingratitude in
single Combate.

As thus hee was halfe in a frensie, one came to him from the King with
Letters, the contents whereof were, that he should make him ready with all
possible speede to passe into Pamphilia, to make inuasion with fire & sword:
This newes come to Acestes view, as a man reuiued frō the dead, hee burst
from his former plaints, and began thus to frolicke with him selfe: Now
despight of Venus hath Fortune sworne to ioyne me in friendship with
op­portunity, now time proffers the full cup, and the deuill take me if I
carowse it not: Now Lidia shall be mine if euer she shalbe to any: women are
wonne with honors: the fame of Prowesse challengeth more then eloquence, a
Souldiers sword preuaileth more with a Princesse, thē a Cowardes pen: when
newes shall come to Lidia that Acestes hath made a conquest of Pamphilia, whē
he sends the Kinges Crowne as a token to the faire and matchles Lidia, thē no
doubt but she wil be as curteous, as now she is cruell: her lookes will
lighten loue, where now they drop hate: her words will be welcome, where now
they threten reuenge: Conquerers carry commaunds in their foreheads, and loue
kneeles to them where others bow to loue? then Acestes ply thee, martiall thy
Souldiours in hast to Pamphilia, and there fight both for honor and loue,
which either resolue to get or to misse of both with death: Hauing thus
comforted him selfe, he prouided all things necessary for his voiage into
Pamphilia, both of souldiers, money, victuals, and munition: which beeing
ready: taking his leaue onelie of the King (for Lidia would  [...] [...]
[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=17) and his
Daughter on his right hand, were amazed, as noting in his face some
extraordinary sparkes of Chiual­rie: Acestes pacing vp to the steps that
decended from the Kings seate, placing on eyther hande a King, began thus to
deliuer his tale.

Right mightie Soueraigne, executing the charge of the Generall of thy forces
against Pamphilia, as thy cō ­maund and my allegance bad me, I entred with
fire and sword, and by the helpe of Fortune made conquest of the Countrey, the
King is slaine, his Crowne I sent to thy Daughter, the kingdom is garisond to
thy vse: his confe­derates these two Kings of Caria & Cylicia, for that they
vnited their supplies to his forces, I inuaded, conquered, and brought hither
Captiues: their Crownes theyr king­doms, the treasure, the bondslaues, for
that they were without thy Commission, I not present to thee, but to the
Princesse Lidia, with all the honour I won in the fielde, euer vowing to
deuote all my thoughts, my actions, and my Sword and life, as prest to execute
her commaunde and seruice: with that, rising vp, he led the Kinges to the
Princesse, and deliuered them her as her Captiues, shee coulde not for shame
in such a presence, but faine a good countenaunce, and accept them gratefully:
whom shee forthwith presented to her Father, who entertaind them as belonged
to such Kingly prisoners: all the Nobles ca­sting their eyes on Acestes, as
honouring the man for his vertues: the King starting vp, gaue him great
thanks, and bad him demaunde some-what before that honorable assemblie: with
the gift whereof hee might gratifie him: swearing whatsoeuer he craued, as he
was true King hée woulde performe it: Acestes hearing this happy motion,
casting his eye on the Lady Lidia, boldly beganne his re­quest thus.

Although right mighty Soueraigne, Crownes and Kingdoms be swéete, and your
grace hath willed mee to aske any thing without acception: yet for that I
paunde [[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=17) my
life & honor for the atchiuing of these conquests with my blood, which a
Souldiour holdeth far deerer then Di­adems, I little make account of such
pelfe: but rather make choise of that which I prefer before honour, life, and
land, or all the world, if it should be presented to me: and that is, the
faire and vertuous Princesse Lidia. Scarce had Acestes vttered this worde
Lidia, but the King start­ing from his seat, turned to his daughter, and asked
what loue was passed betwixt her & Acestes. Such (quoth shee) with a frowning
countenaunce, as past betwixt Iuno and the Centaure Ixion: I not deny, but
before his iourney to Pamphilia, he courted and made great sute by worde, and
letters, but howe I disdained the motion of so base a com­panion, let the
aunswers of his Letters manifest: And nowe before this royall & honorable
assembly I protest, if Acestes were featurde like Narcissus, as couragious as
Hercules, hauing as many heroicall vertues as euer had any, and could present
me euery day two Kings for Cap­tiues till he made me Empresse of the World,
yet woulde I disdaine him, as one vnworthy the Princesse Lidia. At this
aunswere, all the assembly abashed, as counting the Princesse discourteous and
ingrate: the King as a man inflamed with furie, began to prosecute his
Daughters speech in this manner: Presumptuous Thracian, vnfitte with these
late conquests, rather obtained by the ill for­tune of these Kings, then thy
prowesse: for thou hast done mee seruice, I graunt thee life, but for thyne
aspyring thoughts to demaunde the Princesse Lidia, I discharge thée of thy
Generalship, and absolutely of my seruice, cō ­maunding thee vpon paine of
death, within ten dayes to depart out of all my dominions, and neuer to
approch my Confines or land. This saide, the King in great choller rose vp
ready to depart, the Nobles were amazed and greeued, yea, aud grudged secretly
at Acestes wrong, but for feare of the King were silent: Acestes howsoeuer
in­wardly vexed, yet shewed no discontent in his counte­nance, [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=18) but with a
Souldiers courage pulling of his Gar­land, said: I am not dismaied at this
doome, for that I ne­uer greeued at the ouerthwarts of Fortune: what I haue
got in thy Court, I leaue, as disdaining ought yt is thine: the honour I haue
wonne, is mine owne, and that thou canst not depriue me off, and so committing
my fortunes to my deserts, I leaue thee and thy Court: and so soone as may be
thy Country: where if euer I arriue, I dare thee to doo thy worst: and with
that Acestes went away, and the King with the two Kings and the Lords, passed
in to dinner.

No sooner was Acestes alone, but the ingratitude of the King, the disdaine of
his Daughter, the disgrace offe­red by both, so pierst him to the hart, that
as such as drink of Lethe become obliuious: so he forgetting the beauty of
Lidia, fell to such déepe thoughts of hate and reuenge, that he enioyned
himselfe for a great space to be solitary, that Nemesis and he might consult
together how to bring both the Father and the Daughter to confusion: at last
hee re­solued to goe to Armenia to Sertorius, there great Poten­tate of that
Country, whom hée knew to be mortall ene­mie to the King of Lidia, and in this
resolution hée tooke his iourney. No sooner was hee arriued in the Armenian
Court, but worde was brought to Sertorius that Acestes the martiall Thracian,
that conquered Pamphilia, Ca [...]ia, and Cylicia, was come disguised, and as
a stranger into his Court: the King hearing this, tooke one or two of hys
chéefe Lords, and went to salute Acestes, and to giue him honourable
entertainement, such as belonged to so migh­tie a Cōquerer: Acestes
perceiuing himselfe to be known, after due reuerence doone to the King, began
at large to discourse to him what seruice he had doone to the King of Lidia,
and how hee was rewarded, crauing succour and supply of his Maiestie, that hee
might reuenge with hys Sworde. The King amazed at such monstrous ingrati­tude,
wondring how such base resolutions coulde harbour [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=18) in the hart of
Prince, he promised Acestes not onely to ayde him with an army of approoued
Souldiers, but in person to hazard him selfe, both to requite olde iniuries:
and to reprooue in iustice such an abuse offred without de­sert. This answer
of Sertorius so contented Acestes, that after great thanks, hee rested in the
Court, passing fro­licke, til the forces were furnishing: which no sooner were
ready, but without delay Sertorius and Acestes marched merrily forwarde
towardes the confines of Lidia, as soone as Acestes had sette his foote within
the ground of the in­gratefull King, drawing his Sword, hee swore not to
sheathe it, till hee had made it drunke with the blood of Lidians, commaunding
his Souldiers (for Sertorius had giuen him the ordring of the battailes) that
they should vse all extremeties of martiall, burne, sack, spoile Citties,
Townes, and Castles, to cast all to the ground, to take none Captiues of
whatsoeuer degrée or sex, but to put all to the Sword: men as they were
subiects in Lidia, Wo­men as the wormes that he most hated: Children as the
issue of them both: the pillage of all should be theirs, only the King of
Armenia should haue the Kingdome, and he would content him selfe with reuenge:
this Oration en­ded, he furiously marched forward, and where hee came, left
the Countrey desolate: The King of Lidia hearing this, was driuen into a great
agony, but dissembling his gréefe for feare of discouraging his Souldiers, he
leuied a mighty army, and hasted forward to buckle with Acestes whom he met
halfe at aduantage, as hauing most of his men at pillage: whereupon the
Lidians taking oportuni­ty set vpon the Armenians, but Acestes so rangde those
that he had, in such warlike sort: that he not only aboade the braue of his
enemy, but entred his battaile, disorde­red his ranckes, and put them to the
flight: many were slaine in that present place, such as escapt and fled, were
met by the Pillages and haruiers of the Armenians, and all put to the sword,
so that of forty thousand Lidians there [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=19) scarse remained
thirty with the King, who passing vp in­to the Country: insconst him-selfe
within a strong Castel with his Daughter Lidia, a few faint harted Souldiers,
and all the treasure hee could get: Acestes followed his Fortunes, and leauing
Sertorius behind with the mayne battaile, tooke with him ten thousand Horse,
and sixe thou­sand foote, and made after the King of Lidia, as fast as his men
were able to march: comming at last to the Castell weere he was insconst,
first he intrencht a siege round a­bout and legard it on euery side, then he
damd vp all such springs, wels, and Conduits, as serued the Castell with fresh
water: this done, hee resolued not to loose a man at the assault, but to make
them yeeld by famine. The Prin­cesse Lidia looking ouer the walls, séeing how
her mortall enemy had girt the Castell with Souldiers, Armenians men there
thirsted after blood, and hated both her and her Father, she fell from
thoughts to passions, from passions to teares: insomuch that she sat her
downe, and wept bit­terly: her Father comming vp the batilments, séeing his
daughter in such perplexed estate, finding want of victu­als, and that of
force he must be famished: gréefe stopping his spéech, he sat him downe and
bare her company in her passions: and after consulted how to preuent ensuing
mi­sery, many coniectures cast: at last they resolued to sub­mit themselues to
his mercy, whereupon Lidia decking her selfe in most gorgious attire,
accompanied onely with two of her Ladies, passed out of the Castell gate, &
went toward the Legar: the Sentonell no sooner had them in hold, but they were
honourably conueyed to the Pauilion of Acestes, who being certified that the
Princesse Lidia was attended to speake with him, leapt from his seate, and
went to entertaine her, Lidia no sooner saw him, but she fell downe at his
feete: Acestes curteeusly tooke her vp, and setting her in his seate,
demaunded her what shē craued: Lidia all blubbered with teares, falling downe
on her knées, began thus.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=19) Mighty
Acestes, if repentance were any satisfaction for offences, or sorrowe any
salue to couer ingratitude, if teares might wipe away disdaine, if a Uirgines
blood would pay raunsome for them which haue done amisse: I would present all
these to pacifie the fury of thy con­quering Sword: but I know such déepe hate
of my Fa­thers ingratitude, such desire to reuenge my rechlesse dis­daine, and
the disgrace proffered by both: hath set a fire the hart of Acestes, as
nothing may serue to quench such an ouer heated flame: Oh yet might I finde so
much fa­uour, that my death might redéeme the old man my Fa­ther, if not for
the losse of Kingdome, yet of life: and from falling into the handes of his
ancient enemy Sertorius, I should account Acestes as mercifull as he is
valiant: if my treaties may not preuaile, as it little behooueth Ace­stes any
way to fauour Lidia, yet graunt me this, that I may dye vpon thine owne
Sworde, that my blood vani­shing on thy blade, thou mayst be satisfied, and I
slaugh­tred: by the hand of Acestes so braue a Souldier, might dye contented.

No sooner had shee vttered these words, but shee pou­red foorth such streames
of teares, as made the Armeni­ans to take pitty of the distressed Princesse:
Acestes ta­king her vp againe, called for his Sworde, and vnshea­thing falling
downe at her feete, began thus to make reply.

Such déepe impression of gréefe swéete Goddesse, hath pierced the heart of
Acestes, in that hee hath lifted his Sworde against the Lord that harboreth
Lidia such sor­row, such repentance, such remorce, in that I haue doone any
thing that might offend the Princesse Lidia, whose deuine presence hath raced
out all intent to reuenge: and so captiuated againe her Acestes: that héere
franckly he offreth his conquering Sworde, (that hath atchiued so many
battailes) into the hand of his mistresse to chastice eyther with death if she
please, that daring Knight that [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=20) hath so déepely
offended, and with that he sat as a man in a traunce: Lidia séeing she had
brought the Beare to the stake, thought now so cunningly to muzzle, as she
would kéepe him heereafter for biting: following therefore her inchauntment,
shee fell about his necke, and wette his chéekes with her teares in such sort,
that at last from wée­ping they fell to kissing, yea so did Acestes comfort
Lidia, that from melancholy she grew to be somewhat plesant, the Knight
possessed thus of his Lady (as hee thought) af­ter he had banqueted her with
such delicates as souldiers can affoord, taking only her hand for pawne of his
fafety, he went with her to the Castell, where they were no soo­ner entred,
but the King of Lidia with his Crowne in his hand met Acestes, and submitting
him selfe, offered both his diadem and daughter as due to so victorious a
cham­pion, Acestes refused his dignities, but accepting of his Daughter,
embraced her, and entred into priuate and familier parle: insomuch that
choller past vppon both sides, they began to treate of the marriage, which was
concluded: when the King of Armenia returned out of his Kingdome: wherupon
without delay (so feruent was the loue of Acestes,) hee tooke leaue of Lidia
and her Father, and going downe to the Legar, raysed the siege, to the great
admiration of all his Souldiers, and from thence marched to the Campe where
Sertorius lay: to whom Acestes reueled what had past, and craued that he would
depart out of Lidia with sufficient coyne answerable for his costs: Sertorius
with a frowning looke tolde him that in battaile he neuer plaid in iest, and
what he had wonne with the blood of his Souldiers and danger of his owne
person, he would not deliuer vp but by battaile: Acestes whose minde was too
haughty to intreat, said nothing, but secretly stole from the Campe, and
trauersing through Lidia, got vp of Horse and Footemen, the number of sixe and
thirty thousand, with whome trusting to his For­tunes, hee marched closely and
secretly to the Campe, [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=20) of Sertorius,
where he arriued about midnight, vsing now pollicy, that before had conquered
with prowesse: so that killing the watch and Sentonell, he past the Courte of
garde, and set vpon the Souldiers, making a great slaugh­ter of such men as
were sleepie and amaz'd: yet Sertorius escaped, but Acestes passed forward and
followed him in­to Armenia, where his fortunes so serued him, that hee
conquered Armenia, and brought the King himselfe cap­tiue to Lidia: comming
thus in tryumph to my Fathers court, seating him in greater pompe and
possessions then euer he had, he began to vse his late familiarity towards me,
but I as a woman changed in calling and condition, shooke him off with more
disdaine then before: hee chal­lenged my Fathers promise, who presently
commaunded he should be apprehended and put in close prison: wee ha­uing thus
cauhgt the Lyon in ye snare, my Father questi­oned mee how I would haue him
vsed. I would not re­solue on any lesse penaltie then death, my reason least
in letting him abroad, he should fal to his fortunes: the ma­ner of his
martirdome I deuised to be famine, as hee in­tended to vs by his leager: my
Father yeelding him ab­solutely into my hands: I prosecuted the matter,
causing euery day for his greater torment, a course or two of dain­tie viands
to be carried before the window that looked in­to his Chamber, and my selfe to
agrauate his sorrowes, would passe often by his lodging in most pleasant
humor. Acestes séeing himselfe thus ouertaken in his own follie, by trusting
too much the teares of a woman, would not exclaime against the sexe, but
séeing no way but death, no kinde but famine, he resolued to shew an honorable
mind in great patience, & so remained their foure dayes, when, pinched with
extreame hunger almost euen to death: as Lidia passed by, he fell into these
passions.

Meate, meate, oh for want of meate I perrish: Ah hunger, hunger, the
extreamest of all extremeties: were I amongst men, men would pittie me:
amongst beastes, [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=21) beastes should
feede me or feede vpon me. Amidst ye pikes would I venterously escape, or
valiantly perrish: on the land, I could shift: in the Sea, I could swimme: no
place so barren, no people so barberous that woulde not releeue me or soone
ridde mée: euery where more help, no where lesse, hope, ah hunger, hunger, the
extreamest of all extre­mities. Thrice cruell Lidia, no worse I will tearme
thée for that once I loued thee: not suffering mee to liue, nor simply to dye:
my head is giddy, mine eyes dazell, fallen are my cheekes, and my tonge die my
words, my sinewes shrinke, my blood consumeth, all my limmes fainte, and my
hart failes me: euery minute I die, and I with I dyd but die: too long am I
out of the way, to bee well out of the way: Ah hunger, hunger, the extreamest
of all extre­mities.

Ah Liuia, haue I deserued thus to bee doone vnto, I gaue thee Crownes, and
thou wilt not giue mee a crum: I bestowed Kingdoms on thy Father, aud hee
presents me with famine: thus Loue wrought the traine, and for­tune, nay mine
owne folly performed the treason: yet this hope I haue, that he hath found me,
is hee that hath fashioned mée, who though he scourge mee, will yet saue me,
how be it my God I cannot but cry, ah hunger, hunger, the extreamest of all
extremeties.

What is it I would not rather be, then thus bee? then thus, ah then thus in
pined walles to attende so bitter a death? I faint, alas I faint, my harts
anguish commaun­deth my tongues silence: then Acestes silently be patient,
patiently be penitent, penitently perrish, and that last martirdome will be
thy least miserie, because longer thou shalt not cry: ah hunger, hunger, the
extreamest of all extremeties.

This complaint highly contented Lidia, so that shee departed and tolde it to
her Father, reioycing that her deuised fourme of death sorted to so bitter
euents: well another day past, so hungry grew Acestes, that he greede­ly
[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=21) fed on the
flesh on his armes, spilling that bloode with his own teeth, which before he
had so prisde in many bat­tailes: which when hée had done, readie to giue vp
the ghost, seeing the bare bones of his armes, he fell into this last
complaint: Miserable wretch euen in the highest de­grée, miserably with my
teeth haue I tyred on mine own flesh, till now bloodlesse and famished, my
latest gaspe hardly giues passage to a few, and my farewell wordes, Lidia, ah
Lidia, wherof is thy hard hart formed? that the sting of such diresse cannot
peirce it, hast thou the eares of a woman to heare my cries, and not the hart
of a woman to pitty my case? Ah Lidia, he that loued thee, for that hee loued
thee must die: he that sounded thy praises in sundry Prouinces, him hast thou
pinned and pined vp, till those armes are bare from flesh, that in many
battailes bruted thy fame: I will not curse; thou art Lidia, nor exclaime at
my last date thou wert my loue: nor pray for reuenge, sith at my death my
patience shall giue my soule the bet­ter passage. But fondly, how short a time
haue I to speak and yet how foolishly I speake, to name my earthly God­desse
when I shoulde pray to my heauenly God: the one hath consumed me, the other
must saue mée: now comes the touch, my hart yeeldes to him that framed it, now
the last bitter sweete pang of death endes what the malice of man hath
inflicted, and so falling downe, he died.

As soone as I perceiued hee was dead, not yet content with reuenge, I caused
his body to be hang'd in chaynes, that the world might see the trophée of my
crueltie: The manner of his death beeing knowne, the Nobles and spe­cially the
Commans began to murmure that so braue a warriour who had made foure Kingdoms
tributories to Lidia, shoulde so ingratefully perrish through ye malicious
disdaine of a woman, yea, so farre it pierced into the hart of Selidon great
Duke of our realme, that suddainly cau­sing a mutiny, he summond most of the
Nobles, & told thē such a tirant was too heauy for them to beare, to be
short, [[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=22) the
Nobles agréed, the Commons of their free will came in flocks to reuenge, so
that he had quickly leauied an Ar­mie of an hundred thousand men, and entred
into the Ca­stle, tooke mée and my Father prisoners, whom hee com­maunded to
be famished in the same place where Acestes ended his life, there without
remorse we dyed, they tooke downe the body of Acestes, and buried him with
princelie funerals, and ouer his tomb, for that he attempted the re­uenge:
they crowned Solydor King of Lidia.

AS soone as she had ended her tale, she fell to her won­ted cryes and shrikes,
not answering to any question, so that I left the place and returned backe
with my Harp: Orpheus hauing thus discoursed, Iupiter asked Venus how the
liked of the tale: marry quoth shée, as of one that Orpheus tells, comming out
of Hell: nothing preiudicial to my Dietie, sith shee was enemy to loue, and of
so au­stere chastitie: it rather toucheth Iuno or Diana, the one stately in
her lookes, the other too chary in her thoughts: for my part so I dislike of
her disdainfull crueltie, as if I might haue censured, if possible it might
haue béene, shee shoulde haue had a more bitter death vppon earth, and a more
pinching paine in hell: Truth quoth Mercurie, for perhaps the paine is not so
great to remaine in the fogge, as the remembrance how faire once shee was, and
nowe to haue all smeared with the smoake: I think when Ve­nus was a maid, she
was more charie of her face then her maidenhead: and more warie of her beauty
then her ho­nestie. These quippes quoth Mars are digressions, but leaue Venus
and talke of Lidia, whose life was so strickt, whose hart so opposde to loue,
whose thoughtes so full of pride and disdaine, as her instance serueth rather
to bée produced for a wonder, then for example to condemne women, sith the
world I thinke containes not one so bad: Apollo smiling said, Well taken Mars
for you owne ad­uantage, women must be pleasde, and Venus will frowne [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=22) if she be not
flattered: Vulcan sits fast a sléepe, or else I would not haue spoake so broad
before, but to drink down all the frumps, Ganimede (quoth he) fill in Nectar,
so the Gods from disputing fel to carowsing, and then Arion tu­ning his
instrument, began to warble out this Ditty.

The Song of Arion.

SEated vpon the crooked Dolphins back,

Scudding amidst the purple coloured waues:

Gazing aloofe for Land, Neptune in black,

attended with the Tritons as his slaues.

Threw forth such stormes as made the ayre thick▪

For greefe his Lady Thetis was so sick.

Such plaints he throbd as made the Dolphin stay,

women (quoth he) are harbours of mans health:

Pleasures for night, and comforts for the day,

what are faire women but rich natures wealth.

Thetis is such, and more if more may be:

Thetis is sick, then what may comfort me.

Women are sweets that salue mens sowrest ills,

women are Saints, their vertues are so rare:

Obedient soules that seeke to please mens wills,

such loue with faith, such Iewels women are.

Thetis is such, and more if more may be:

Thetis is sick, then what may comfort me.

With that he diu'd into the Corall waues,

To see his loue, with all his watry slaues.

The Dolphin swam, yet this I learned then:

Faire women are rich Iewells vnto men.

ARion hauing ended his Ditty, Apollo sayde, this falls out fitte, for Orpheus
hauing made the diuision of a womans nature to be either too cruel, or too
curteous: [[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=23)
Arion standeth in his song as well to defend, as he to op­pose: accounting
women the wealth of nature, and farre more profitable then Orpheus saies they
are preiudiciall, therfore if it please the rest of the Gods, we'le heare what
Arion censures of that sexe, they gladly agreed, and Apol­lo commaunded him to
shewe his opinion, where-vpon Arion began thus.

No sooner right mighty Gods, had nature in her curi­ous moulde formed the
counterfeite of Beauty, but loo­king vpon her workmanship, shee fell in loue
with that metaphysicall excellency, as Pigmalion did with the per­fection of
his owne Art: which may assure vs, that it is most exquisite, wherein curious
nature taketh such ex­treame delight: this glorious Idea drawne out from the
secret temper of the graces nature, bestowed more prodi­gally vpon women then
men, as creatures more worthy and excellent: the richest gold hath the rarest
colour, the purest stones are most cleare, the sweetest Flowers most pleasing
to the eye: and women as the purest quintissence circolated from all other
liuing things, are therefore the most beautifull and faire: yea in their own
sex, beauty is the touchstone of vertue, and ye fairer a woman is, the ful­ler
of good conditions: for such as nature hath either slipt ouer with negligence,
or made in her melancholy, so that they are ill fauoured and deformed eyther
in face or body: such I holde as a principle to be counted stigmaticall, as
noted by nature to be of a bad constitution: then must we confesse that beauty
is excellent, as the pride of nature: deuine, as fetcht from the Gods:
glorious, as the delight of the eye: pleasing, as the content of the hart: and
to be estéemed aboue all things, as the very couer and superfi­cies vnder
which vertue lyes hid: if then men séeing such heauenly obiects, such swéet
Saints, haue their eyes fixed, their minds fettered, their thoughts inchanted
with their loues, are they to be blamed or not? rather to be thought of
Heroicall conceite: that place their liking on the foun­dation [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=23) of beauty, and to
be counted men of great iudge­ment, that in their desires séeke to covnite
themselues to such an excellency: for may not he which enioyeth a beau­tifull
Lady, boast that he possesseth at command? by spen­ding a few yéeres in
wooing, some part of his liuing in ex­pences, his dayes quiet in sighs, his
nights sléep in teares, by these toyes and a few other passions, he possesseth
him­selfe of that creature which the graces and nature had studied many ages
to make excellent: yet there be some such satiricall copes-mates▪ that spare
not to raile against them, calling them the imperfection of nature, saying
beauty is vanity, and the signe of little honesty, noting women as waspish,
froward, deceitful, toyish, light, sullen, proud, inconstant, discurteous,
cruell, and what not: such as can afford them no better spéeches, I would haue
either made Euenuches or Esseni or plaine Asses, neuer to be fauoured of
women, but to be accounted as stoicall com­panions, vnfit to attend on such
beautifull and vertuous creatures: for in my opinion swéete and simple soules:
they be pleasant, open harted, far from deceit God wote, as bearing all their
owne secrets both graue, and yet ha­uing many mad and merry tricks to pleasure
men, hum­ble & lowly, submitting themselues to what their friends will lay
vpon them: constant, as neuer to be turnd from their opinions: kind enough,
and to be short, as full of ex­cellent qualities, as the precious stone Silex
is full of se­cret vertue, and this right mighty Gods is my opinion of women:
The Gods smiled at this censure of Arion, and wished him if he could to proue
it with an instance as Or­pheus did the contrary: Arion laying by his
instrument, and the Gods being silent, he told his tale to this effect.

### 1.2. Arions Tale.

AFter that Right mighty Gods, the Pirats had hea­ued me ouer boord, & that
being receiued vpon a Dol­phins back, I was safely transported to Loyath, the
King [[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=24) glad
of my arriuall, as honoring me for that I was coun­ted the most perfect
musition in Thece, and musing at the strangenes of my fortunes: to make his
péeres and princes of his land, partakers not only of my melody, but of the
wonder: he proclaimed a generall feast, not of vo­lentary but vpon commaund,
that all Dukes, Earles, Barrons, Knights, and other Gentlemen, should with
their wiues and children, for the more magnificence be present: which strickt
Edict, was so straightly obeyed of all, that at the day appoynted, none failed
to be present: there appeard in the Kings Pallace such troups of Lords and
Ladies, as might with their glorious brauery ouer­charge the eye with
pleasure. To these the King presen­ted me clad in my rich robe, with mine
instrument euen as I sate on the Dolphins back, with the whole discourse of my
fortunes: wherat they were all driuen into a wan­dring admiration, after long
gazing on me, as at a man reserued to some higher or more hatefull destiny,
they sate downe in the great Hall to dinner: beeing placed by the King him
selfe and his Sonne, who then playde the Marshall of the Hall: the yong
Prince, whose name was Philomenes, giuing greatest attendance where hee sawe
the fairest Ladies: as hauing his eye drawn rather with beauty then chiualry,
at last he espied a lampe that light­ned all the rest, or rather disgraced
them: as Phebe dooth the little fixed Starres: for so farre she surpast the
other Ladies in excellency, as she did in dignity: and by birth she was
daughter to Pelopidas the Duke, and great com­maunder in Corinth, this Lady
whose name was Argen­tina was so faire: as touching the faultles mixture of
ver­million flourisht vpon Iuory, & so full of fauor for the per­fect
proportion of the linaments, whereupon this natiue colour was ouer-dasht, that
nature had made beauty ab­colute, and beauty made Argentina the most
excellent: Philomenes séeing so heauenly a Nimph, stoode staring on her face,
as at a wonder, gazing so long, that Venus séeing [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=24) Ceres and Bacchus
honored all the rest, thought to arrest the yong Prince for her attendant, so
that leuelling Cu­pids arrow aright, and wishing the boy to draw home, she
pierst Philomenes so deepe, that hee shrunk & start at the suddaine prick
which this inuenomed arrow had tainted him with: feeding thus his eye, his
fancy & his thoughtes with contemplation, hee lost his stomacke to gorge with
the Camelion on the ayre: sure was that messe where Argentina sat, to haue
what attendance the Prince could grace them with: but their seruice was so
broken and so ill sewed, that either they must coniecture the Prince to bee no
cunning seruitor, or els that his hart was on his halfe-penny: well, dinner
beeing doone and the tables ta­ken vp, Arion fell to his musick, and the
cheefe Ladies to the measures, Philomenes ringleader of the rout, singled out
the Lady Argentina, who blushing to sée the young Prince make choise of her
aboue the rest, gaue such a glo­rie to her face, that Philomenes all on fire
at the sight, had almost forgotte the time of the measure: but calling his
wits together, he led formost till the musick ceast, & then wringing her by
the hand, he whisperd to her thus. I see Madam that all these Lords and Ladies
present, frolicke themselues as fitting the time, and feeding my Fathers
delightful humor: my silly selfe onely excepted, who thys day giuing mine eyes
leaue to banquet on your beautie, commanded my stomacke to fast and pray, that
my heart which had surfetted on the excellencie of loue, might finde a
curteous Phisition: now swéete saint it resteth in your fauour, whether I
shall triumph as the most happiest, or sorrow as the most miserable. The
musick called on to an other measure, so that Philomenes was interrupted, &
for­ced to tread his taske, but as soone as the musicke gaue breathing time,
Argentina beginning her exordium with a blush, made Philomenes this aunswer.

It seemeth sir, that tis a mery time, your honor is so well disposed to bee
pleasant, singling out a cunning musition. [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=25) the simplest
plaine song, that your descant might séeme the more refind. It behoueth such
as my self to brook ye frumps of a Prince, & to take them for fauours, for
Kings wordes may not offend, if in wrath, much lesse in iest: might your
handmaide dare to reply, in my opinion howsoeuer your eyes haue banquetted,
your sight is neuer the worse, nor they the more satisfied: for your harts
surfeite I will bee beadwoman, with your stomack not in fasting, but pray that
your Phisition may prooue such as would fit your de­sires: but my Lorde to
your last clause, it is vnlikely your mirth dependeth of my fauour, whose
fauour cannot profit nor disfauour preiudice, but taking it in iest as your
honor profferd it, I pray you for my part my Lord to be as mer­ry as you
please. The instruments sounded, and forward must Philomenes, who wisht Arions
strings might crack, that his melody ended, he might proceed in his prattle.
As soone as the musick stopt againe, the Prince began thus.

Beléeue me Lady, if you take my talk for a iest, you haue a deeper insight in
my thoughts then my self: for by your diuine beauty, (the oath that for the
whole world I would not infringe) so déeply in earnest did I break into my
first passion, that my hart féeleth far more then my tongue vt­tered, so
strongly and strangly hath loue on a suddain vi et armis as they say made
entrance, there where fancie be­fore could haue no passage, so that rightly
hast thou sayde Argentina, that though mine eyes & hart surfeited, yet they
are not satisfied: as vowing themselues euer deuoted to so excellent a choyse:
which if they may possesse as it lyes in your power, nature by no meanes may
minister thē grea­ter content: As Philomenes was ready to wade further in his
discourse, the daunce, I know not vpon what occasion, brake of, and the old
man calling his sonne, tolde the noble men they should heare one of Arions
schollers, whervpon he commaunded his sonne to take the instrument in hys
hand, who very nie as skilfull as his Maister, obeyed his Fathers charge, and
glad that time had giuen him oppor­tunitie [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=25) to shew his
cunning before this Goddesse, hee be­gan to play, and sung a sonnet to this
effect.

CVpid abroade was lated in the night,

his winges were wet with ranging in the raine,

Harbour he sought, to mee hee tooke his flight,

to dry his plumes I heard the boy complaine.

I opte the doore, and graunted his desire,

I rose my selfe, and made the wagge a fire.

Looking more narrow by the fiers flame,

I spied his quiuer hanging by his backe:

Doubting the boy might my misfortune frame,

I would haue gone for feare of further wrack.

But what I drad, did me poore wretch betide:

For forth he drew an arrow from his side.

He pierst the quick, and I began to start,

a pleasing wound but that it was too hie,

His shaft procurde a sharpe, yet sugred smart,

away he flewe, for why his winges were dry.

But left the arrow sticking in my brest:

That sore I greeude I welcomd such a guest.

PHilomenes hauing ended his song, they all generallie commended the skil of
the yong Prince, but especially Argentina, who hearing him sing both swéetly
and passio­nately, was charmed as if she had heard the Sirens, that while all
the other walked abroad, shee fained herselfe not well, and withdrew solitary
into her Chamber, where a­lone, she began to ruminate in her memory all the
perfec­tions of Philomenes, as well the swéenes of his face, ye pro­portion of
his body, as the vertues & qualities of the mind: his courage, his comlines,
his dignities, but there she stopt & gaue a sigh, as being a prince too high
for her to gaze at, meditating thus: shee so swallowed vp the potions yt
Ve­nus [[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=26) had
tempred with her sorcery, as drunk with his beu­tie, she began to fall with
herselfe into this parle.

Unhappy Argentina, whose youth vertue hath brideled with chast thoughtes,
whose yeeres beauty inchaunteth with fond lookes, resembling the nettle, which
may bee handled in the bud, but stingeth in the flower: do thy ver­tues
increase like the pace of a Crab, backwarde? Hast thou in thy cradle been
continent, and wilt thou in thy sa­dle be impudent? art thou come to this
feast to buy follie? knowst thou not that Venus stands by the wine-presse of
Bacchus, and breathes her venom vppon his liquor? satst thou downe pleasant &
must thou rise passionate? I and in loue Argentina? and why not in loue? was I
not fra­med for loue? are not Womens harts the Exchequour where fancie yeelds
vp his accounts: yes Argentina, and feare not to loue, for if thy choyce be
right made, there can nothing come for marriage but honour: but with whom art
thou in loue? with Philomenes the Kings Sonne and heire apparent to the Diadem
of Corinth, a steppe higher Argentina then it becommeth thee to tread a degrée
farre aboue thy fortunes, a star to high for thée to gaze at. Kings as they
are men before the gods, so are they gods before men: such high personages as
wee must honor with our lookes, not attempt with our loues: Why but Argentina
he loues thee, he is inamored of thy beauty, hee sues with wordes, and
intreates with his eyes: What then: can­not such great Princes be sooner
pensick then passionate: weare fauour in their mouthes, when they haue
flatterie in theyr harts: Dooth not loue hang in their eye-lyddes, which as it
is taken in with euery looke, so tis shaken off with euery winke: is not their
fancies like the Somers dew, which scarce wetteth the grasse before it bee
dryed vp with the Sunne? take heed Aagentina, Princes haue liberties and
priuiledges, they can laugh out faultes, which wee must pay with pennalties:
Wee hold Venus for a Goddesse, they neuer offer her incense nor sacrifice:
[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=26) and yet
they no sooner craue, but she is ready to graunt: yea but hath sworne ah fond
foole, Periuria ridet Amantum Iupiter: Louers oaths are like fetters made of
glasse that glister faire, but couple in restraint: if swearing had made loue
perfect, Carthage had possest Eneas for their King: Phillis had not hangd her
selfe, nor Medea said Deteriora sequor, yet men must be credited, els shall
loue be a sha­dow: talkt of, but not put in execution: all are not Sons to
Anchisis, nor brothers to Iason, nor traitors like Demo­phon: Philomenes face
bewraies his faith, & me thinkes his looks containe loyalty: Thus poore wench
doo I per­swade my selfe to the best, whereas perhaps he meanes but to sport
with me to make triall of my wit, well if it be so, I wil endeuor to loue him
lesse thē I doo, but if he mean truth, I will labour to loue him more then I
haue done: and with this she rested content, & went abroad to find out the
rest of the Ladies. Argentina had not serued her selfe thus in secret, but
Philomenes was as solitary: for getting himselfe vp into his Study, then
setting down his head on his hand, & his elbow on his book, he began thus to
debate with himselfe. Philomenes thou hast read much & reapt litle, that at
one look hast learnd more, thē in seauen yeres study thou couldst discouer:
Hermes told thée that beauty was a star, whose influence had sundry effects,
this was Allegorical, & thou didst only passe it ouer for a principle. Auicen
said that loue was a fury, how didst thou estéeme of this but as an axiome:
Epictetus called Venus the rest­lesse planet, thou tookest this for a dart: &
Amphibological Aphorisme comments thou hadst none, and conceiue thou couldst
not: but now if Hermes, Auicen, or Epictetus want interpreters, let amorous
Schollers be auditours to my precepts: for I haue found beauty a star, and
haue gazd a­gainst it: Loue is a fury for it is full of passions, & Venus a
restlesse starre, for since the Goddesse distilled into my thoughts her
precious Balms, the opperation hath béen so mighty, as my greatest rest hath
béene restlesse disquiet, [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=27) what néed these
ambigues, this schollerisme, this foolery, thou art in loue with Argentina,
the cōmanders daughter of Corinth, a Duke, but thy Subiect: why then doost
thou vse preambles & protestations? canst thou not say flatly I am in loue,
Venus Cofers when they haue the greatest found, are alwaies most empty: &
louers when they prat­tle most, are thought either great talkers, or déepe
flatte­rers: then Philomenes discouer thy mind, Argentina is a woman, &
therfore to be wooed, & so to be won: Kings may command, where poore men
cannot intreat: tis better to name a crowne then to write a Letter: an ounce
of giue me, is worth a pound of heare me: the name of Quéen is a great
argument, & therfore feare not: thou hast as much to be liked, as she to be
loued. Thus far wel Philomenes, but suppose she hath already setled her
affection, & hath made choise of some other: séeke not to diuert her, for she
that is faithles to one, will be constant to none, if thou loue her, wish her
not to be disloyall, but rather paune thy life, then disparage her honor, &
wrastle with Loue, whom if thou subdue: thou extéemst a glorious conquest. In
this resoluti­on he flung out of his chamber, and passing into the priuy
Garden, there he found all the Ladies sparfeled abroad in sundry borders, som
gathering flowers, others in discour­ses of the excellency of the place, some
in prattle with the birds, all busie, none idle: taking thus a superficial
view of them all, as hauing his eye wandring for a fairer obiect: he passed
forward to finde out if it might be the Lody Ar­gentina, whom he spied with
her mother in a shady walke of the Garden: seeing non but thē two, thither
went Philo­menes & saluted them in this maner: Honorable Dutches, well
accompanied with your faire daughter, the Mother happy for bearing so swéete a
creature, & Argentina fortu­nate in cōming from such a parent: your walking
in this shady Arbour resembles Latona, tripping with her train, Diana in the
Lamns, where hauing her self tried the for­wardnes of Esculapius her husband:
she schoold her daugh­ter, [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=27) so that Diana
vowed perpetual chastity: I hope Lady that ye Duke Pelopidus, brooks not
company with Escula­us, & therfore you néede not nusle vp your daughter in
such heresie: The Dutches hearing the yong Prince so plesant being her selfe a
Lady of merry disposition, made him this answer. Lord Pilomenes, were I Latona
indéed & as was­pish in minde, as ready as she to reuenge: I would cause
Phebus to chastice your frumps as he did the sons of Mo­bae, in loding my back
with such reuerence, & my daughter with such beauty, to your strange
supposition, as far as Pelopides differs from Esculapius: so far was mine from
Latonas perswasion, so beléeue me sir, if Roses be not ga­thered in the bud,
they either wither or proue windfalls: Maids must be married, least they be
marred: if they be coy & sweare chastity, they oft wish and wil with secrecy,
youth is the subiect of loue, & Siens that are grafted yong, haue the surest
ioynts, therefore so far am I from that au­stere peruersnes of some mothers,
that as yong as Argen­tine is, if there were a man whom she could loue & we
like of, they should neuer break off for yeeres. Philomenes hea­ring how the
Dutches desembled not, began thus to re­ply: & what manner of man should he be
that might both content you & please your daughter? the one measuring by age,
the other be youth: I would haue him, quoth the Dut­ches, to be of age
answerable to my daughters yéeres, and his parētage proportioned to his
parentage, least inequa­lity of time or birth might bréed mischeefe, his
personage such as might féed her eye, his vertues such as might plese vs both,
his liuing answearable to all these, & him would I count a fit husband for
Argentina. A right conclusion quoth Philomenes, for there is no match yt is
right made if pelfe conclude not the premises: if he had ye age of Adon, the
honors of Hercules, ye proportiō of Theseus, the vertues of yeboy, yet si nil
attuleris ibis Homere foras, if he haue not liuing, al his loue is laid in ye
dust: but what say you Argē ­tina, in faith let me as your gostly father,
haue you at shrift [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=28) before your
mother, tel me were you neuer in loue: Ar­gentina blusht & was silent, as one
that durst not be bold before her mother: whereupon Philomenes said, see
Ma­dam, tis your presence makes your daughter so squemish, I pray you pratle
with some other of the Ladies, & giue vs leaue a litle to be secret héere in
this walk, perhaps I wil be a suter to your daughter, what say you Madam, shal
I haue your good wil? I, & my good word my Lord quoth she, if you meant
earnestly: & with that smiling she went her way & left them to thēselues:
Philomenes seeing himselfe thus alone with his Goddesse, thought to take hold
of her mothers last words & frō thē to driue his insinuation thus.

You heare swéet Saint how fauourably your Mother speakes, now Madam what
censure shall I haue at your hands? I cānot paint out many passions, not tel
tales with such large periods as many vse to doo, but I wil court thée and woo
thée in one word, & that is Argentina I loue thée, more I cannot promise, and
so much I will performe by the faith of a Prince: Argentina séeing Philomenes
speak so plainly, & therfore as she thought so faithfully made this answer: my
Lord, you take the antecedent of my mothers answer for a fouor, but you leaue
out the consequent: and that is if you meane in earnest, for I cannot thinke
youe grace would look so low as vpō Argentina, but rather gaze at some
glorious princesse, whose Maiesty might match Iuno, whose worthines Pallas,
whose beauty venus, & with these might bring for her dowry a Diadem: but? &
with that Argentina staid & blusht: which Philomenes espied, & therfore
wringing her by the hand said: but, what Ma­dam, nay forward with the rest or
you proffer me great wrong: why then my Lord, quoth she, and with that shee
gald him with a glance: but if your honor would vouch­safe to fauor such a
simple maid, as from a meane Lady to make her a Quéene: for other thē mariage
I dare sweare your Lordship dooth not intend: your Father gracing our loues
with his Kingly consent, though I could not with [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=28) loue sufficient
request loue: as in person & parentage vn­fit for your highnes, yet would I
with obedience and hu­mility make supply of these defects which otherwise were
wanting. This answer of Argentina so contented Philo­menes, as that hee stoode
as a man in a trance, at last hee tooke her hand in his, and swore, that
before the feast were ended he wold make her princesse of Corinth, let this
suf­fise Argentina, qd. he, & with that he sealed vp the bargain with a kisse,
and walked towardes her Mother, to whom he deliuered Argentina thus: Madam
here I deliuer your daughter as safe as I receiued in outwarde appearance, but
how I haue schoold her, time will make trial, perhaps we haue strooke the
match, and therfore let the Lorde Pe­lopidus prouide a good dowrie, and with
that he went his way: when the matter comes to that effect my Lord, you shall
haue a dukedome with her: at that the Prince turnd back and said, thats mine
already, and her Father is like to bee my subiect, and so to holde his liuing
in cheefe: the Dutchesse smilde, & thus they parted. But leauing Philo­menes
to the King his Father, who hauing noted as nar­rowly as his sonne, the beauty
of Argentina, had great ly­king of the Lady, so that he made inquirie of those
which were Pelopidus neerest neighbours, what disposition the virgin was of,
they all affirmed to the King that shee was so vertuous, humble, curteous, and
adorned with such ex­cellent qualities, as the fourme of her life was a
methode wherby other Gentlewomen did direct their actions. The King hearing
this, resolued in his minde there coulde not be a fitter match for his Sonne,
whervpon determining to break with the yong Prince, as he was in this humor,
hée met Philomenes whom he tooke aside, and began to questi­on him as
concerning Argentina, whether hee could fancy the Lady or no. Philomenes
afraide the King had espyed their loues, made answer, that he neuer tooke such
narrow view of her that he could yéeld his iudgement with affec­tion: then doo
qd. the King, and giue me within two daies an answer, and so he departed.
Philomenes ioyfull of this, [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=29) no sooner met
Argentina, but he told what motion his Fa­ther had made, but to make a smal
haruest of a little crop: Philomenes at the two daies end so answered his
Father, that the King breaking with the Duke, it was concluded that the end of
the feast should be the beginning of ye mar­riage, which was such a ioy to the
nobles to see their yong Prince allied in his owne Land, that they deuised
newe Iustes and pastimes, continuing the feast many dayes to their great ioy,
and the Louers most happy content: The mariage and the feast thus finished,
the Nobles departed, Pelopidus leauing his daughter thus honorably espoused,
took this leaue, the maried couple staying still with the old King in his
Court, who being of great age, liued not long after, but paide his debt vnto
nature, so that Philomenes was crowned King of Corinth: Liuing thus happily
with his wife Argentina, thinking his degrée too high for For­tune to
preiudice, it so fell out, that Marcion the King of Sycilia, hearing that his
ancient enemy Philomenes father was dead, thought to try what mettall was in
the sonne, to proue if he were as valiant and fortunate as his father,
therfore he leauied a great Army & prouided a great fléete to saile to
Corinth, which was no sooner rigged but he im­barqued his men, and as soone as
wind & weather woulde permit, sailed towards Corinth, where arriuing in a
De­sert place, as politick to land without any great resistāce: he vnshipt
his men, and all his furniture for war: and let­ting his Nauie ride in the
road, hee marched forward into the maine land, vsing as one yt intended a
conquest, fire & sword, Philomenes hearing by Postes how Marcion was landed
with a mighty Hoast, and had spoiled many of his prouinces, started vp, &
summoning his Lords about him, raised a mighty hoast, such as neuer King of
Corinth dyd before him, and with thē marched to meet with Marcion, whom he
incountred by the Riuer yt runneth by the great plaines called the Corinth
downes: then pitching his pa­uilion, he intrenched his Army, and so had
Marcion forti­fied his: lying thus a while, at last by Heralts they resol­ued
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=29) vpon a day
of battaile, which once come & both the Ar­mies rangd: they ioynd battaile so
furiously, the one to cō ­quer, the other to defend: Philomenes hart made one
with equitie, the other with dispaire, that a long while ye fight was
doubtfull, till at last fortune allotted the best to Mar­cion, in such sort
that the fielde was his, the Corinthians most slaine, some fledde, the King
valiantly fighting, taken prisoner: Marcion triumphing in the victory, marched
for­wardes to the Citty leading Philomenes as his Captiue: comming to the
gates, ye Cittizens yéelded vp the keyes, & he as a valiant conquerour entred,
& passing into the pal­lace, found there the Queene all blubbred with feares,
as a woman almost sencelesse, whom he comforted and com­mitted to ye custodie
of one of his Duke: seated thus vic­toriously in Corinth, he not onely
disgraded the King from all dignitie, but disrobing him, commanded that he
should be turnd out of the pallace, and that he should not be relée­ued vpon
paine of death, but if he would haue any thing to satis-fie his thirst, he
should gette it with his handythrift: Philomenes not abashed at this doome,
intreated the King to be good to his wife, and so went and became a labourer
for day wages, contented with this fortune: Marcion the next day sent for the
Queene, who although forlorne with teares, yet nothing her narrowly, hee found
her the fayrest creature that euer yet in his life he had viewed, so that hée
fell extreamly in loue with her, and offered her what ly­berty or pleasure
shee would haue, courting her with ma­ny faire promises and amorous conceits,
but all in vaine, for shee was resolued whatsoeuer fell, life or death, yt
none to her but her loue Philomenes: Marcion captiuated in her beauty, was
restlesse, féeling such strange & vncouth passi­ons, that at last he fell into
these termes.

What fond motions Marcion are these that disturbe thy mind? what childish
thoughts vnfit for a king, a souldier, nay for one that hath conquered both a
Crowne and king­dom: thou camst from Sycilia to be victor, & heere thou art
arriued & not vanquished, thou hast beaten Philomenes in [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=30) battaile, & art
brought vnder by his wife in loue, thy reso­lution was to terrifie thy foes
with thy sword, so thou hast don, but faine to please a woman with thy tongue:
by this fond foolery I may note, yt Venus frowne is of more force then the
weapons of Mars, that affections are harder to be supprest then enemies to
subdue: that loue is aboue King and keiser, where Cupid commaunds, there
dignity hath no priuiledge to withstand: then Marcion yéelde, sue and intreat,
but whom, the wife of Philomenes thy captiue, ra­ther commaund her, and what
shee will not yeelde by in­treaty, take by constraint: in so dooing should I
reape in­famy, and forced loue is neuer swéete: no Marcion allure her with
wealth, promise she shal be thy paramore, to seat her next thy selfe in thy
kingdome, women are won with fauors, and there is none so chast but time and
gifts may intice. In this resolution he sent for Argentina, & beganne thus to
deliuer his minde vnto her. Thus seest Argentina, how I haue fauourd thée, no
like a Princesse that were captiue, but euen as a Quéene that is sole mistres
and so­ueraigne of my affections, thy beauty hath cōquered that hart which
had made conquest of thy Country, & subdued him who before, womans feature
neuer vanquished: then Argentina take pitty of him that for thy loue is so
passio­nate, consent that I may enjoy thée as my paramour, and thou shalt be
honourd as shée that is best loued of the King of Sycilia, I could Argentina
y• seest obtaine by force what I sue for by intreatie: but I couet rather to
possesse my selfe of thy louely consent, then by constraint: yéeld there­fore
what I request, and héere before the Lords of Sycilia, I promise to grant
whatsoeuer thou shall commaund, so it touch not my Crowne nor thy Husbande,
though to the danger of my person, fréely without exception: Argentina as one
nothing dismaid, returnd him this answere: I not deny Marcion thou hast
subdued Corinth, and deposed the King, which I attribute rather to his bad
fortunes, then thy prowesse or chiualrie, but in all thy conquest thou shalt
neuer boast thou hast conquered either Philomenes or hys [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=30) wife Argentina,
séeing we are only ouercom, not vanqui­shed: in that both of vs remaine
contented, and kéepe our minds vntoucht: thou art inchaunted with my loue, no
Marcion, but perhaps thou art fed with lust, & neuer hope that Argentina will
minister any meanes to appease the flame: although thou shouldst inforce her
to consent by the most extreame torments: Philomenes liues, & so long wil &
loue: not thée, but him whom I vowed to be true vnto for euer: yet thy last
condition hath somwhat perswaded me, that if thou graunt what I request, I
will consent not only to be thy paramour but thine for euer: the king was so
glad of this, that he iterated with an oath to performe her demauud: then this
it is quoth Argentina: Tomor­row morning thou shalt shut thy selfe into a
secret place, wherof my selfe wil kéepe the key, & there for thrée dayes thou
shalt fast, without tasting any thing so aslake hunger or thirst: this time
thou shalt pray to the Gods for the re­mission of our sinns which we shal
offend in by breach of matrimony, then at the terme of thrée days thou shalt
frée­ly take the vse of my body before thou eat any meat, other­wise if thou
faile but as much as Proserpina to taste a graine of the pomgranet, thou shalt
neuer after question me of loue: thus doo, and I grant to like thée, or els
here is my head, let that pay my raunsom: Marcion was so setted in her beauty,
that he thought it nothing to vndertake this taske, and therfore promised
before his Lords to fast three daies, and then to lye with her before he eat
any meat, or els neuer to motion her any more of loue: whereupon the next day
the Princesse shut him vp till the date was expi­red, in which thrée dayes he
felt such torments, such pin­ching hunger and extreme thirst, that he cursed
loue, and exclaimed against beauty as a charme yt made men sence­les, willing
to giue for one crum the Diadem of Corinth▪ well the terme expired, all the
Nobles were assembled & sat in the great hall, expecting what euent shold fall
either of ye kings fast, or of Argentinas request: at last Argentina sent the
key to one of the Lords, that the king might come [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=31) into the Hall
whether she presently would repaire: the Lord went to the chamber doore and no
sooner put the key to the lock, but Marcion started vp and cryed for meat, the
Lord vnlockt and saw the king glance at him with such a fierce looke, that he
was afraid and started back: villaine quoth Marcion, hast thou brought me any
meat, and with that running as a mad man into the hall, flinging in fury among
the Lords: Why Gentiles (quoth he) sit you héere without meat? why are not the
tables spread? doo I allow such niggardly allowance, or wil you famish him
that fo­stereth you all? At this he was in a rage, Argentina ap­parailed in
her richest robes, came pacing, that she looked more like an Angell, then a
mortall creature, insomuch that euery eye directed their glaunces at so
heauenly an obiect, except Marcion, who at her sight sat as a man great­ly
amated: hauing her mayde followe her with a dish of meat crumd: Argentina with
a smiling countenance ta­king him by the hand, sayd thus.

Redoubted Conquerour, according to promise I am come in the presence of these
Lords to offer my self subiect to your highnes plesure, ready to goe whither
your grace shal conduct me: Marcion at this cried out, & thinkst thou
Argentina that famisht men haue minde on beauty, or is hunger to be satisfied
with loue? no, no, tis true Marcion, Sine Cerere & baco friget Venus, reason
could not subdue lust, but fasting hath set it on a non plus: but what is that
the mayde carries? meat my Lord quoth she for your ho­nour after, and with
that she blusht: Marcion no sooner heard her name meate, but he leapt to the
mayde, puld a­way the dish, saying: farwel fond loue, and welcome that wherof
one morsel is worth a monarchy, Argentina giue me leaue to eate, for thou hast
conquered Marcion in his own folly, and with that he fell to his meat,
wherwith af­ter he had somewhat appeased his hunger, sitting him in his seat
royal, he began to parle with his Lords of Argen­tinas pollicy, highly
extolling the constancy of so true a wife, and so far entred into
consideration of the chaunce of [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=31) fortune, and fall
of Princes, that rising from his throne, he went and embraced and kist
Argentina, not only prai­sing her for her redy inuention to perswade him from
his vanity, but for her sake sent for her husband, and yéelded him his Crowne
and his Kingdome, and liuing his sworn friend, returned home into Sycilia.

NO sooner had Arion ended his tale, but Mars taking opportunity, said: we sée
by this euent, that as women haue their vanities whereby to be checked, so
they haue their vertues redounding greatly to their praise: beeing both
affable and constant, although that single instance of Orpheus his Lidia did
inferre the contrary: And so quoth Apollo would Venus serue for an instance if
you mean of constancy, for no doubt if you may be iudge, al beauty shal be
vertue, & all women shal be Saints: & now quoth Iu­piter, Apollo by your leaue
to take Mars his part, we oft rightly to think of women, seeing so oft we
seeke their fa­uors, & speak to them by intreaties for their loues, other­wise
we should proue our selues very ingrate: to beat thē with rods, that feast vs
with banquets, to proffer them Scorpions that giues vs no worse then their own
selues: Liuely spokē quoth Mercury, but Iuno likes you neuer the better for
this flattery, as supposing you haue sued to more then contented her, or
becommed you: but in my opinion, Arions tale paints out a paragon, a matchles
mirrour, as wel for constancy, as the other for cruelty: these extremes
therfore infer no certain cōclusions, for they leaue a mean betwéene both,
wherein I think the nature of women doo consist, neither so cruel but they wil
grant, nor so constant but they will yeeld, & rather oft-times proue too
curteous then too vnkind: Sée quoth Mars how péeuishly you con­clude, to taunt
them still of vnconstancy: well Mercury, quoth he, thou art subtill, & canst
by thy fallacions prooue what thou wilt: but yet this I set down for mine own
o­pinion, that women the more beautiful they are, the more curteous, the more
constant, ye fuller of excelent qualities: [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=32) and rather
vertues, and by the Riuer of Stycks I swere, and with that he rose in a
choller, this I will approoue a­gainst him that dare maintaine the contrary:
though not with my pen, yet my sword: at this the Gods smild, and Mars in such
a rage clapt his hand on the boord: that I a­woke, not knowing what became of
the Gods or of Ari­ons soule, only I remembred their tales.

BEing thus awakt, I lookt about mee, and still sate my Shepheard: how now good
fellow, quoth I, haue I not taken a lusty nap? thy Pipe sounded so swéetly,
and there I had such a dreame as I would not haue lost for much, for I hope it
wil after more profit me then all my iourny, I haue past to Erecinus: I am
glad quoth the Shepheard, my pipe did thée so much pleasure, and if thy
slumber hath presented thée any visions, note them, for al dreames that men
sée in Erecinus, prooue true: and with that standing vp, me thought he had
wings on his head, shoulders, and féete: he bad me farwell, & tooke his
flight: then I knewe it was Mercury. Whereupon, calling to mind the occa­sion
of my iourney: I found that either I had lost loue, or loue lost me: for my
passions were eased, I left Erecinus and hasted away as fast as I could, glad
that one dreame had rid me of fancy, which so long had fettred me, yet could I
not hie so fast, but ere I could get home, I was ouertaken with repentance.

FINIS.

Robert Greene.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3564&page=32)

[Home](/)

Greene, Robert, 1558?-1592.. Date: 1599  

