---
layout: default
---
 
THE Temple of Death, A POEM; Written by the Marquess of NORMANBY. Horace of the Art of Poetry, Made English by the Earl of Roscommon. THE Duel of the STAGS, By the Honourable Sir Robert Howard. Together With several other Excellent Poems by the Earls of Rochester and Orrery, Sir Charles Sedley, Sir George Etheridge, the Honourable Mr. Montague, Mr. Granvill, Mr. Dryden, Mr. Chetwood, and Mr. Tate. To which is added several Poems of the Honourable Madam Wharton.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Warren for Francis Saunders at the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. MDCXCV.

# THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.

I Was desirous to make the Publick a Present, without being at the same time oblig'd to make an Apology. The present Collection of Poems has afforded me an occasion to perform it. They all carry such Credentials, as not only to justifie the good Taste of our Age and Nation, in the General  Approbation that has been given of the greater part of them, but likewise to authorize their demanding the Reception of all Posterity. It is neither my Province, nor have I the Presumption to shew, that the Performances of such Illustrious Hands, as this Collection is made up of, will stand the Test of the severest Criticisms, and are work'd according to the Standard Rules of Poetry: but the best Judges I could advise with, have assur'd me they are so; and it is my Duty as well as Pride, to acquiesce in their Authority, and Recommendation. Nevertheless, supposing some small oversights shall have been committed for want of a due  Review: yet I must beg the Courteous Reader to be pleas'd to consider, that the Richest Ore will have some Dross; notwithstanding which I despair not of so Honourable a Reception, as shall hereafter give Encouragement for a Second Volume.

The French have lately Publish'd Five or Six Volumes of their choicest Poems, by several Hands; but I must beg, that this Collection may not be thought to be done in imitation of them. We are pretty well recovered from the Servile way of following their Modes; and this Publication is an effect of Emulation, to shew, That as the English Genius and Language  for the Drama and for Epick Poetry, has been granted, infinitely to excel theirs; so we have no less the Advantage in the less, tho' nice Productions of the Nature of these Collections. Their Gallantry and Courtship is what we justly condemn as Foppery; and their Panegyricks are made up of nothing but Intolerable Dawbing: whereas in this Collection you will find Performances of the Sublimest Fancy, Govern'd by Solidity of Judgment, and Polish'd by the utmost Delicacy of Art; which sufficiently demonstrates, that our Great Patrons, the MecoEnases of Poetry, can, when they please, be the Virgils and Horaces too.

 I shall no longer detain the Courteous Reader, than to give him my Assurances that all Care and Diligence has been used as well by the Printer as my self, to render this Impression becoming such finisht Pieces from so Masterly Hands.
F. S.
# THE CONTENTS.

* PReface to the Art of Poetry, by the Earl of Roscommon.

* Of the Vse of Poetry, by E. Waller, Esq Page 1.

* Horace of the Art of Poetry, by the Earl of Roscommon. p. 5.

* The Temple of Death (a Translation out of French) by the Earl of Mulgrave. p. 33.

* A Paraphrase on the 148. Psalm, by the Earl of Roscommon. Writ at 12 Years of Age. p. 49.

* To Orinda: In Imitation of Horace, by the Earl of Roscommon; Integer Vitae, &c. p. 55.

* The Grove, by the same Author. p. 58.

* The Duel of the Stags, by Sir R. Howard. p. 65.

* To Celia, by Sir Charles Sedley. p. 83.

* Answer, by the same Author. p. 85.

* To Celia, by the same Author. p. 86.

* To Chloris, by the same Author. p. 88.

* To a Lady, who told him he could not Love. p. 90.

* To Chloris, by the same Author. p. 92.

*  The Picture, in Imitation of Anacreon's Bathillus, by the Earl of Mulgrave. p. 95.

* To a Coquet-Beauty, by the same Author. p. 99.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 102.

* The parting of Hector with his Princess Andromache, and only Son Astyanax, when he went upon his last Expedition, in which he was Slain by Achilles; done out of the Greek of Homer, Iliad 6. by Knightly Chetwood. Writ in 1677. p. 103.

* On a Poet who Writ in the praise of Satyr; by the Earl of Rochester. p. 111.

* A Farewel to Love. p. 114.

* To Celia, by a Person of Honour.* p. 116.

* Epilogue to Every Man in his Humour, by the same Author.* p. 117.

* On the Death of the late Duke of Ormond, 1687. by Knightly Chetwood. p. 121.

* To his Grace the present Duke of Ormond, by the same Author. p. 124.

* The Earl of Rochester's Answer to a Paper of Verses, sent him by L. B. Felton, and taken out of the Translation of Ovid's Epistles, 1680. p. 127.

* To a very Young Lady, by Sir George Etherege.

* The Forsaken Mistress, by the same Author, a Dialogue. p. 130.

* The Divided Heart, by the same Author. p. 133.

* To Mr. J. N. on his Translation out of French and Italian, by the same Author. p. 135.

* Virtue's Urania, by the same Author. p. 138.

*  Sylvia, by the same Author. p. 140.

* To Celia, by Sir Charles Sedley. p. 142.

* The Submission, by the same Author. p. 144.

* Constancy, by the same Author. p. 146.

* The Indifference, by the same Author. p. 148.

* Pastoral Dialogue, by the same Author. p. 152.

* To a Lady, who fled the sight of him, by Sir George Etherege. p. 156.

* To a Lady, asking him how long he would Love her, by the same Author. p. 158.

* To Mr. G. Granville, on his Verses to the King, by Mr. Edmund Waller. p. 159.

* To Mr. Waller, by Mr. G. Granville. p. 160.

* On Myra's Singing, by the same Author. p. 162.

* In praise of Myra, by the same Author. p. 164.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 167.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 168.

* Verses sent from an unknown hand, to Mr. G. Granville in the Countrey. p. 169.

* Song, by Sir George Etherege. p. 171.

* To her Excellence, the Marchioness of New-Castle. after the reading her Incomparable Poems, by the same Author. p. 173.

* Epilogue to Tartuff, spoken by himself, by a Person of Honour.* p. 177.

* The Imperfect Injoyment, by Sir George Etherege. p. 180.

* A Prologue spoken at the Opening of the Duke's New Play-house, by the same Author. p. 184.

*  Falling in Love with a Stranger at a Play, by Sir Charles Sedley. p. 187.

* Indifference Excused, by the same Author. p. 189.

* To my Honoured Friend Sir Robert Howard, on his Excellent Poems, by Mr. J. Dryden. p. 191.

* An Ode, in Imitation of—Quid Bellicosus cantabor, &c. Hor. Od. 11. l. 2. by Mr. John How. p. 198.

* The Platonick, by Sir Charles Sedley. p. 201.

* To a Devout Young Woman, by the same Author. p. 203.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 205.

* On the Lamented Death of the late Countess of Dorset, by N. Tate Servant to Their Majesties. p. 207.

* To Chloris, by Sir Charles Sedley. p. 212.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 214.

* Song, by the same Author. p. 216.

* A Dialogue between Amintas and Celia, by the same Author. p. 219.

* The Lamentations of Jeremiah, by Mrs. Wharton. p. 224.

* To Celia, by an Vnknown Hand. p. 232.

* Song, by a Person of Honour.* p. 236.

* A Song, by Mrs. Wharton. p. 238.

* On the Storm between Gravesend and Diepe; made at that time, by the same Author. p. 240.

* To Mrs. A Behn, on what she Writ of the Earl of Rochester, by the same Author. p. 242.

*  To Melpomene against Complaint, by the same Author. p. 245.

* Wit's Abuse, by the same Author. p. 248.

* My Fate, by the same Author. p. 251.

* On the Death of Mr. Abraham Cowley, and his Burial in Westminster-Abbey, by the Earl of Orrery. p. 253.

* On the Death of King Charles II. Writ at that time, by the Honourable Charles Montague. p. 259.

* On the Marriage of the Lady Mary with the Prince of Orange, by Edmund Waller, in the Year 1677. p. 270.

# THE PREFACE TO THE ART of POETRY.

I Have seldom known a Trick succeed, and will put none upon the Reader; But tell him plainly that I think it could never be more seasonable than now to lay down such Rules, as if they be observ'd, will make Men write more Correctly, and judge more discreetly; But Horace must be read seriously or not at all, for else the Reader wo'n't be the better for him, and I shall have lost my labour. I have kept as close as I could, both to the Meaning, and the words of the Author, and done nothing but what I believe he would forgive if he were alive; And I have often ask'd my self that Question. I know this is a Field  Per quem Magnus Equos Arunci flexit Alumnus.

But with all the respect due to the name of Ben. Johnson, to which no Man pays more Veneration than I; it cannot be deny'd, that the constraint of Rhyme, and a literal Translation (to which Horace in this Book declares himself an Enemy) has made him want a Comment in many places.

My chief care has been to Write intelligibly, and where the Latin was obscure, I have added a Line or two to explain it.

I am below the Envy of the Criticks, but if I durst, I would beg them to remember, that Horace ow'd his Favour and his Fortune to the Character given of him by Virgil and Varius, that Fundanius and Pollio are still valued by what Horace says of them, and that in their Golden Age, there was a good Vnderstanding among the Ingenious, and those who were the most Esteem'd were the best Natur'd.
Roscommon.
# OF THIS TRANSLATION, And of the Use of Poetry: BY Edmund Waller, Esq
ROme was not better by her Horace taught,Than we are here, to comprehend his thought:The Poet writ to Noble Piso, there,A Noble Piso does instruct us here,Gives us a pattern in his flowing Stile,And with rich Precepts does oblige our Isle, Britain, whose Genius is in Verse exprestBold and sublime, but negligently drest.Horace will our superfluous Branches prune,Give us new rules, and set our Harp in tune,Direct us how to back the winged Horse,Favour his flight, and moderate his Force;Though Poets may of Inspiration boast,Their Rage ill govern'd, in the Clouds is lost;He that proportion'd wonders can disclose,At once his Fancy and his Judgment shows.Chast moral Writing we may learn from henceNeglect of which no wit can recompence;The Fountain which from Helicon proceeds,That sacred Stream should never water weeds,Nor make the Crop of Thorns and Thistles growWhich Envy or perverted Nature sow.Well-sounding Verses are the Charm we use,Heroick thoughts, and vertue to infuse;Things of deep sense we may in Prose unfold,But they move more, in lofty numbers told; By the loud Trumpet, which our Courage aids,We learn that sound, as well as sense perswades.The Muse's Friend, unto himself severe,With silent pity looks on all that Err;But where a brave, a publick Action shines,That he rewards with his Immortal Lines;Whether it be in Counsel or in Fight,His Countrey's Honour is his chief delight;Praise of great Acts, he scatters as a seed,Which may the like, in coming Ages breed:Here taught the fate of Verses, always priz'dWith admiration, or as much despis'd,Men will be less indulgent to their faults,And patience have to cultivate their thoughts,Poets lose half the praise they should have got,Could it be known, what they discreetly blot,Finding new words, that to the ravish't Ear,May like the Language of the Gods appear,Such as of old, wise Bards employ'd to makeUnpolish't men their wild retreats forsake, Law-giving-Heroes, fam'd for taming Brutes,And raising Cities with their Charming Lutes,For rudest minds, with Harmony were caught:And civil Life was by the Muses taught.So wandring Bees would perish in the Air,Did not a sound, proportion'd to their Ear,Appease their rage, invite them to the Hive,Unite their force, and teach them how to thrive,To rob the Flowers, and to forbear the spoil,Preserv'd in Winter by their Summers toyl,They give us food, which may with Nectar Vie,And Wax that does, the absent Sun supply.
# HORACE OF THE Art of Poetry.
By the EARL of Rescommon.IF in a Picture (Piso) you should seeA handsome Woman with a Fishes Tail,Or a Man's Head upon a Horse's Neck,Or Limbs of Beasts of the most different kinds,Cover'd with Feathers of all sorts of Birds,Wou'd you not laugh, and think the Painter mad?Trust me that Book is as ridiculous,Whose incoherent Stile (like sick Mens Dreams)Varies all Shapes, and mixes all Extreams.Painters and Poets have been still allow'd,Their Pencils, and their Fancies unconfin'd,This priviledge we freely give and take; But Nature, and the Common Laws of Sense,Forbid to reconcile Antipathies,Or make a Snake engender with a Dove,And hungry Tygers court the tender Lambs;Some that at first have promis'd mighty things,Applaud themselves, when a few slorid LinesShine through th' insipid dulness of the rest;Here they describe a Temple, or a Wood,Or Streams that through delightful Medows run,And there the Rainbow, or the rapid Rhine,But they misplace them all, and croud them in,And are as much to seek in other things,As he that only can design a Tree,Would be to draw a Shipwreck or a Storm.When you begin with so much Pomp and Show,Why is the end so little and so low?Be what you will, so you be still the same.Most Poets fall into the grossest faults,Deluded by a seeming Excellence:By striving to be short, they grow Obscure, And when they would write smoothly they want strength,Their Spirits sink; while others that affectA lofty Stile, swell to a Tympany;Some timerous wretches start at every blast,And fearing Tempests, dare not leave the Shore;Others in love with wild variety,Draw Boars in Waves, and Dolphins in a Wood;Thus fear of Erring, joyn'd with want of Skill,Is a most certain way of Erring still.The meanest Workman in the Aemilian Square,May grave the Nails, or imitate the Hair,But cannot finish what he hath begun;What is there more ridiculous than he?For one or two good features in a FaceWhere all the rest are scandalously ill,Make it but more remarkably deform'd.Let Poets match their Subject to their strength,And often try what weight they can support,And what their Shoulders are too weak to bear, After a serious and judicious choice,Method and Eloquence will never fail;As well the Force as Ornament of Verse,Consist in choosing a fit time for things,And knowing when a Muse should be indulg'dIn her full flight, and when she should be curb'd.Words must be chosen, and be plac'd with skill,You gain your point, if your industrious ArtCan make unusual words easie and plain,But (if you write of things Abstruse or New)Some of your own inventing may be us'd,(So it be seldom and discreetly done)But he that hopes to have new Words allow'd,Must so derive them from the Graecian Spring,As they may seem to flow without constraint;Can an Impartial Reader discommendIn Varus, or in Virgil what he likes?In Plautus or Caecilius? Why should IBe envy'd for the little I invent,When Ennius and Cato's copious Style Have so enrich'd, and so adorn'd our Tongue?Men ever had, and ever will have leave,To coin new words well suited to the age:Words are like Leaves, some wither every year,And every year a younger Race succeeds;Death is a Tribute all things owe to Fate;The Lucrine Mole (Caesar's stupendous Work)Protects our Navies from the raging North;And (since Cethegus drain'd the Pontin Lake)We Plow and Reap where former Ages row'd.See how the Tyber (whose licentious WavesSo often overflow'd the neighbouring Fields,)Now runs a smooth and inoffensive Course,Confin'd by our great Emperor's Command;Yet this and they, and all will be forgot;Why then should Words challenge Eternity,When greatest Men, and greatest Actions dye?Use may revive the obsoletest Words,And banish those that now are most in Vogue;Use is the Judge, the Law, and rule of Speech. Homer first taught the World in Epick Verse(To write of great Commanders, and of Kings,Elegies were at first design'd for Grief,Though now we use them to express our Joy)But to whose Muse we owe that sort of Verse,Is undecided by the Men of Skill.Rage with Iambick's, arm'd ArchilochusNumbers for Dialogue and action fit,And favourites of the Dramatick Muse.Fierce, Lofty, Rapid, whose commanding soundAwes the tumultuous noises of the Pit,And whose peculiar Province is the Stage.Gods, Heroes, Conquerors, Olympick CrownsLoves pleasing Cares, and the free joys of Wine,Are proper subjects for the Lyrick Song.Why is he honour'd with a Poet's Name,Who neither knows, nor would observe a Rule?And chuses to be Ignorant and Proud,Rather than own his Ignorance, and Learn,Let every thing have its due Place and Time. A Comick Subject loves an humble Verse,Thyestes scorns a low and Comick Stile.Yet Comedy sometimes may raise her Voice,And Chremes be allow'd to foam and rail:Tragedians too, lay by their State to grieve;Peleus and Telephus exil'd and poor,Forget their swelling, and Gygantick Words.He that would have Spectators share his Grief,Must write not only well, but movingly,And raise Mens Passions to what height he will,We Weep and Laugh, as we see others do,He only makes me sad who shews the way,And first is sad himself, then (Telephus)I feel the weight of your Calamities,And fancy all your miseries my Own,But if you Act them ill, I sleep or laugh:Your looks must needs alter as your Subject doesFrom kind to fierce, from wanton to severe,For Nature forms, and softens us within,And writes our fortunes changes in our face. Pleasure enchants, impetuous Rage transports,And grief dejects, and wrings the tortur'd Soul,And these are all interpreted by Speech;But he whose words and fortunes disagree,Absurd, unpitied, grows a publick Jest.Observe the Characters of those that speak,Whether an honest Servant, or a Cheat,Or one whose blood boils in his youthful Veins,Or a grave Matron, or a busie Nurse,Extorting Merchants, careful Husbandmen,Argives, or Thebans, Asians or Greeks.Follow Report, or feign coherent things,Describe Achilles, as Achilles was,Impatient, rash, inexorable, proud,Scorning all Judges, and all Law but Arms;Medaea must be all Revenge and Blood,Ino all Tears, Ixion all Deceit,Io must wander, and Orestes mourn:If your bold Muse dare tread unbeaten paths,And bring new Characters upon the stage, Be sure you keep them up to their first height.New Subjects are not easily explain'd,And you had better chuse a well known Theme,Than trust to an Invention of your own;For what originally others writ,May be so well disguis'd, and so improv'd,That with some Justice it may pass for yours;But then you must not Copy trivial things,Nor word for word too faithfully Translate,Nor (as some servile Imitators do)Prescribe at first such strict uneasie rules,As they must ever slavishly observe,Or all the Laws of decency renounce:Begin not as the' old Poetaster did,(Troy's famous War, and Priam's Fate, I sing)In what will all this Ostentation end?The labouring Mountain scarce brings forth a Mouse:How far is this from the Meonian Stile?Muse, speak the Man, who since the Siege of Troy,So many Towns, such change of Manners saw. One with a flash begins, and ends in smoak,The other out of smoak brings glorious light,And (without raising expectation high)Surprizes us with darling Miracles,The Bloody Lestrygons inhumane Feasts,With all the Monsters of the Land and Sea;How Scylla bark'd, and Polyphemus roar'd:He doth not trouble Us with Leda's Eggs,When he begins to write the Trojan War;Nor writing the return of Diomed,Go back as far as Meleager's Death:Nothing is idle, each judicious LineInsensibly acquaints Us with the Plot;He chooses only what he can improve,And Truth and Fiction are so aptly mix'dThat all seems Uniform, and of a piece.Now hear what every Auditor expects;If you intend that he should stay to hearThe Epilogue, and see the Curtain fall; Mind how our tempers alter with our years,And by those Rules form all your Characters.One that hath newly learn'd to speak and go,Loves childish Plays, is soon provok'd and pleas'd,And changes every hour his wavering mind.A Youth that first casts off his Tutor's Yoke,Loves Horses, Hounds, and Sports, and Exercise,Prone to all Vice, impatient of Reproof,Proud, careless, fond, inconstant, and profuse.Gain and Ambition rule our riper years,And make us Slaves to interest and power.Old Men are only walking Hospitals,Where all Defects, and all Diseases croudWith restless pain, and more tormenting fear,Lazy, morose, full of delays and hopes,Opprest with Riches which they dare not use;Ill-natur'd Censors of the present Age,And fond of all the follies of the past.Thus all the treasure of our flowing Years,Our ebb of Life for ever takes away. Boys must not have th' ambitious care of Men,Nor Men the weak Anxieties of Age.Some things are acted, others only told;But what we hear, moves less than what we see;Spectators only have their Eyes to trust,But Auditors must trust their Ears and you;Yet there are things improper for a Scene,Which Men of Judgment only will relate;Medaea must not draw her murthering Knife,And spill her Childrens blood upon the Stage,Nor Atreus there his horrid Feast prepare,Cadmus's, and Progne's Metamorphosis,(She to a Swallow turn'd, he to a Snake)And whatsoever contradicts my Sense,I hate to see, and never can believe.Five Acts are the just measure of a Play,Never presume to make a God appear,But for a business worthy of a God,And in one Scene no more than three should speak.A Chorus should supply what Action wants, And hath a generous and manly part;Bridles wild rage, loves rgid Honesty,And strict Observance of Impartial Laws,Sobriety, Security, and Peace,And begs the Gods to turn blind Fortunes wheel;To raise the Wretched, and pull down the Proud.(But nothing must be Sung between the Acts,But what some way conduces to the Plot.)First the shrill sound of a small rural Pipe,(Not loud like Trumpets, nor adorn'd as now)Was entertainment for the Infant Stage,And pleas'd the thin and bashful Audience,Of our well-meaning, frugal Ancestors.But when our Walls and Limits were enlarg'd,And Men (grown wanton by prosperity)Studied new Arts of Luxury and Ease,The Verse, the Musick, and the Scene's improv'd:For how should Ignorance be judge of Wit,Or Men of Sense applaud the Jests of Fools?Then came rich Cloths and graceful Action in, Theninstruments were taught more moving notesAnd Eloquence with all her pomp and charmsForetold as useful and sententious Truths,As those deliver'd by the Delphick God.The first Tragedians found that serious StileToo grave for their Uncultivated Age,And so brought wild and naked Satyrs in,(Whose motion, words, & shape were all a Farce)(As oft as decency would give them leave)Because the mad ungovernable Rout,Full of confusion, and the fumes of Wine,Lov'd such variety and antick Tricks.But then they did not wrong themselves so much,To make a God, a Hero, or a King,(Stripp'd of his golden Crown and purple Robe)Descend to a Mechanick Dialect,Nor (to avoid such meanness) soaring highWith empty sound, and airy notions fly.For, Tragedy should blush as much to stoopTo the low Mimick follies of a Farce, As a grave Matron would to dance with Girls:You must not think that a Satyrick StileAllows of scandalous and brutish Words,Or the confounding of your Characters.Begin with Truth, then give Invention scope,And if your Stile be natural and smooth,All men will trie, and hope to write as well;And (not without much pains) be undeceiv'd.So much good Method and Connexion mayImprove the common and the plainest things.A Satyr that comes staring from the Woods,Must not at first speak like an Orator;But, though his language should not be refin'd,It must not be Obscene, and Impudent:The better sort abhors scurrility,And often censures, what the Rabble likes.Unpolish'd Verses pass with many Men,And Rome is too Indulgent in that Point.But then, to write at a loose rambling rate,In hope the World will wink at all our faults, Is such a rash, ill-grounded confidence,As Men may pardon, but will never praise.Consider well the Greek Originals,Read them by Day, and think of them by Night;But Plautus was admir'd in former time.With too much patience (not to call it worse)His harsh, unequal Verse, was Musick then,And Rudeness had the Privilege of Wit:When Thespis first expos'd the Tragick Muse,Rude were the Actors, and a Cart the Scene,Where ghastly Faces, stain'd with Lees of Wine,Frighted the Children, and amus'd the Croud;This Aeschylus (with indignation) saw,And built a Stage, found out a decent dress,Brought Vizards in (a Civiler disguise)And taught Men how to speak, and how to act.Next Comedy appear'd with great applause,Till her licentious, and abusive Tongue,Wakened the Magistrates Coercive power,And forc'd it to suppress her Insolence. Our Writers have attempted every way,And they deserve our praise, whose daring MuseDisdain'd to be beholden to the Greeks,And sound fit Subjects for her Verse at home.Nor should we be less famous for our Wit,Than for the force of our Victorious Arms;But that the time and care, that are requir'dTo overlook, and file, and polish well,Fright Poets from that necessary Toyl.Democritus was so in love with Wit,And some Mens Natural Impulse to write,That he despis'd the help of Art and Rules,And thought none Poets, till their Brains were crack'd.And this hath so Intoxicated some,That (to appear incorrigibly mad)They Cleanliness and Company renounce:For Lunacy beyond the Cure of Art,With a long Beard, and Ten long dirty Nails,Pass currant for Apollo's Livery. O my unhappy Stars! If in the Spring,Some Physick had not cur'd me of the Spleen,None would have writ with more success than I;But I am satisfied to keep my sense,And only serve to whet that Wit in you,To which I willingly resign my claim.Yet without writing I may teach to write,Tell wh the duty of a Poet is; his Wealth and Ornament consist,And how he may be form'd, and how improv'd,What fit, what not, what excellent or ill,Sound judgment is the ground of Writing well:And when Philosophy directs your choiceTo proper Subjects rightly understood,Words from your Pen will naturally flow.He only gives the proper Characters,Who knows the duty of all Ranks of Men,And what we owe to Country, Parents, Friends,How Judges, and how Senators should act,And what becomes a General to do. Those are the likest Copies which are drawn,By the Original of humane Life.Sometimes in rough and undigested PlaysWe meet with such a lucky Character,As being humor'd right and well pursu'd,Succeeds much better, than the shallow Verse,And chiming Trifles, of more studious Pens.Greece had a Genius, Greece had Eloquence,For her ambition and her end was Fame.Our Roman Youth is bred another way,And taught no arts but those of Usury;And the glad Father glories in his Child,When he can subdivide a Eraction.Can Souls, who by their Parents from their birthHave been devoted thus to rust and gain,Be capable of high and generous thoughts?Can Verses writ by such an Author live?But you (brave Youth) wise Numa's worthy Heir,Remember of what weight your Judgment is,And never venture to commend a Book, That has not pass'd all Judges and all Tests.A Poet should instruct, or please, or both;Let all your Precepts be succinct and clear,That ready Wits may comprehend them soon,And faithful Memories retain them long;For superfluities are soon forgot.Never be so conceited of your Parts,To think you may perswade us what you please,Or venture to bring in a Child alive,That Canibals have murther'd and devour'd;Old Age explodes all but Morality;Austerity offends aspiring Youths:But he that joyns instructions with delight,Profit with pleasure, carries all the Votes;These are the Volumes that enrich the Shops,These pass with admiration through the World,And bring their Author an Eternal fame.Be not too rigidly Censorious,A string may jar in the best Master's hand,And the most skilful Archer miss his aim; But in a Poem elegantly writ,I will not quarrel with a slight mistake,Such as our Natures frailty may excuse.But he that hath been often told his fault,And still persists, is as impertinent,As a Musician that will always play,And yet is always out at the same Note;When such a positive abandon'd Fop,(Among his numerous Absurdities)Stumbles upon some tolerable Line,I fret to see them in such company,And wonder by what Magick they came there.But in long Works, Sleep will sometimes surprize,Homer himself hath been observ'd to nod.Poems (like Pictures) are of different forts,Some better at a distance, others near,Some love the dark, some chuse the clearest light,And boldly challenge the most piercing Eye:Some please for once, some will for ever please;But Piso (tho' your own Experience, Joyn'd with your Fathers Precepts make you wise:Remember this as an important truth.Some things admit of Mediocrity,A Counsellor, or Pleader at the Bar,May want Messala's powerful Eloquence,Or be less read than deep Cassellius;Yet this indifferent Lawyer is esteem'd.But no authority of Gods nor Men,Allow of any mean in Poesie,As an ill Consort, and a course Perfume,Disgrace the Delicacy of a Feast,And might with more discretion have been spar'd.So Poesie, whose end is to delight,Admits of no Degrees, but must be still,Sublimely good, or despicably ill.In other things Men have some reason left;And one that cannot Dance, or Fence, or Run,Despairing of success, forbears to Try.But all (without consideration) write;Some thinking that th' omnipotence of Wealth Can turn them into Poets when they please.But, Piso, you are of too quick a sightNot to discern which way your Talent lies,Or vainly struggle with your Genius;Yet if it ever be your fate to Write,Let your Productions pass the strictest hands,Mine and your Fathers, and not see the light,Till time and care have rip'ned every Line.What you keep by you, you may change & mend;But words once spoke can never be recall'd.Orpheus inspir'd by more than humane power,Did not (as Poets feign) tame savage Beasts;But Men as lawless, and as wild as they,And first disswaded them from rage and blood.Thus when Amphion built the Theban Wall,They feign'd the Stones obey'd his Magick Lute,Poets the first Instructers of Mankind,Brought all things to their proper, native Use;Some they appropriated to the Gods,And some to publick, some to private ends; Promiscuous Love by Marriage was restrain'd.Cities were built, and useful Laws were made;So ancient is the pedigree of Verse,And so Divine a Poet's Function.Then Homer's and Tyrtaeus Martial Muse,Waken'd the World, and sounded loud Alarms.To Verse we owe the Sacred Oracles,And our best Precepts of Morality;Some have by Verse, obtain'd the love of Kings,(Who, with the Muses, ease their wearied minds)Then blush not, Noble Piso, to protect,What Gods inspire, and Kings delight to hear.Some think that Poets may be form'd by Art,Others maintain, that Nature makes them so;I neither see what Art without a vein,Nor Wit without the help of Art can do,But mutually they need each others aid.He that intends to gain th' Olympick Prize,Must use himself to hunger, heat, and cold,Take leave of Wine, and the soft joys of Love; And no Musician dares pretend to skill,Without a great Expence of time and pains:But every little busie Scribler nowSwells with the praises which he gives himself;And taking Sanctuary in the Croud,Brags of his Impudence, and scorns to mend.A wealthy Poet takes more pains to hireA flattering Audience, than poor Tradesmen doTo perswade Customers to buy their Goods.'Tis hard to find a Man of great Estate,That can distinguish Flatterers from Friends.Never delude your self, nor read your BookBefore a brib'd and fawning Auditor;For he'll commend and feign an Ecstasie,Grow pale, or weep, do any thing to please;True friends appear less mov'd than Counterfeit:As Men that truly grieve at Funerals,Are not so loud, as those that cry for hire.Wise were the Kings, who never chose a Friend,Till with full Cups they had unmask'd his Soul, And seen the bottom of his deepest thoughts.You cannot arm your self with too much careAgainst the smiles of a designing Knave.Quintilius (if his advice were ask'd)Would freely tell you what you should correct,Or (if you could not) bid you blot it out,And with more care supply the vacancy:But if he found you fond, and obstinate;(And apter to defend than mend your faults)With silence leave you to admire your self,And without Rival hug your darling Book.The prudent care of an Impartial Friend,Will give you notice of each idle Line,Shew what sounds harsh, and what wants ornament,Or where it is too lavishly bestowed;Make you explain all that he finds Obscure,And with a strict Enquiry mark your faults;Nor for these trifles fear to lose your love.Those things, which now seem frivolous, and slight,Will be of serious consequence to you, When they have made you once Ridiculous.A Mad Dog's foam, th' Infection of the Plague,And all the Judgments of the angry Gods,We are not all more heedfully to shun,Than Poetasters in their raging fits,Follow'd and pointed at by Fools and Boys;But dreaded and proscrib'd by Men of Sense.If (in the Raving of a frantick Muse)And minding more his Verses than his Way,Any of these should drop into a Well,Tho' he might burst his Lungs to call for help;No Creature would assist, or pity him,But seem to think he fell on purpose in.Hear how an old Sicilian Poet died:Empedocles, mad to be thought a God,In a cold fit leap'd into Aetna's Flames.Give Poets leave to make themselves awayWhy should it be a greater sin to kill,Than to keep Men alive against their will?Nor was this chance; But a deliberate choice; For if Empedocles were now reviv'd,He would be at his Frolick once again,And his pretensions to Divinity.'Tis hard to say, whether for SacrilegeOr Incest, or some more unheard of CrimeThe Rhyming Fiend is sent into these Men:But they are all most visibly possest,And like a baited Bear, when he breaks loose,Without distinction, seize on all they meet.None ever scap'd that came within their reach,Sticking like Leeches till they burst with blood,Without remorse insatiably they read,And never leave till they have read Men dead.
# THE TEMPLE OF DEATH.
By the Earl of Mulgrave.
# A Translation out of FRENCH.
IN those cold Climates, where the Sun appearsUnwillingly, and hides his face in tears;A dreadful Vale lies in a Desart Isle,On which indulgent Heaven did never smile.There a thick Grove of Aged Cypress Trees,Which none without an awful horrour sees, Into its wither'd Arms, depriv'd of Leaves,Whole Flocks of ill-presaging Birds receives:Poysons are all the Plants the Soyl will bear,And Winter is the only Season there.Millions of Graves cover the spacious Field,And springs of blood a thousand Rivers yield,Whose streams opprest with Carcases and Bones,Instead of gentle Murmurs, pour forth Groans.Within this Vale, a famous Temple stands,Old as the World it self, which it commands;Round is its figure, and four Iron-GatesDivide Mankind, by order of the Fates.There Come in Crouds, doom'd to one common Grave,The Young, the Old, the Monarch, and the Slave.Old Age, and Pains, which Mankind most deplores,Are faithful Keepers of those sacred Doors;All clad in mournful Blacks, which also LoadThe sacred Walls of this obscure Abode, And Tapers, of a pitchy substance made,With Clouds of smoak increase the dismal Shade.A Monster, void of Reason, and of Sight,The Goddess is, who sways this Realm of Night.Her Power extends o'er all things that have breath,A Cruel Tyrant, and her Name is Death.The fairest Object of our wond'ring EyesWas newly offer'd up her Sacrifice;Th' adjoining places where the Altar stood,Yet blushing with the fair Almeria's Blood.When griev'd Orontes, whose unhappy flameIs known to all that e'er converse with Fame;His mind possest by Fury and Despair,Within the Sacred Temple made this Prayer:Great Deity! Who in thy hands do'st bearThat rusty Scepter, which poor Mortals fear;Who wanting Eyes, thy self respectest none,And neither spares the Laurel, nor the Crown! Oh, thou whom all Mankind in vain withstands,Each of whose Blood must one day stain thy Hands!Oh, thou who every Eye, which sees the Light,Closest again in an eternal Night!Open thy Ears, and hearken to my Grief,To which thy only Power can give Relief:I Come not hither to prolong my Fate,But wish my wretched Life a shorter date,And that the Earth would in its Bowels hideA Wretch, whom Heaven invades on every side:That from the sight of Day I could remove,And might have nothing left me but my Love.Thou only Comforter of Minds opprest;The Port, where wearied Spirits are at rest;Conducter to Elyzium! Take my Life;My Breast I offer to thy Sacred Knife:So just a Grace refuse not, nor despiseA Willing, though a Worthless Sacrifice. Others, their frail and mortal State forgot,Before thy Altars are not to be broughtWithout constraint; the noise of dying rage,Heaps of the Slain, of every Sex and Age,The blade all reeking in the gore it shed,With sever'd Heads and Arms confus'dly spread,The Rapid Flames of a perpetual fire,The Groans of Wretches ready to expire:This Tragick Scene makes them in Terrour Live,Till that is forc'd, which they should freely give,Yielding unwillingly what Heaven will have,Their fears eclipse the Glory of their Grave▪Before thy Face they make undecent moan,And feel a hundred Deaths in fearing one;The flame becomes unhallow'd in their Breast,And he a Murtherer, who was a Priest;His Hands profan'd in breaking Nature's Chain,By which the Body does the Soul detain:But against me thy strongest Forces call,And on my Head let all the Tempest fall; No shrinking back shall any weakness shew,And Calmly I'll expect the fatal blow;My Limbs not trembling, in my mind no fear,Plaints in my Mouth, nor in my Eyes a Tear.Think not that time, our wonted sure relief,That universal Cure for every grief,Whose aid so many Lovers oft have found,With like success can ever heal my wound;Too weak's the Power of Nature, or of Art;Nothing but Death can ease a broken heart.And that thou mayst behold my helpless state,Learn the extreamest rigour of my Fate.Amidst th' innumerable beauteous Train,Paris, the Queen of Cities, does contain,The fairest Town, the largest, and the best,So fair Almeria shin'd above the rest.From her bright Eyes to feel a hopeless flame,Was of our Youth the most ambitious aim; Her Chains were marks of Honour to the Brave,She made a Prince, when e'er she made a Slave.Love, under whose Tyrannick Power I groan,Shew'd me this Beauty e'er 'twas fully blown;Her tim'rous Charms, and her unpractis'd Look,Their first assurance from my Conquest took;By wounding me, she learnt the fatal Art,And the first sigh she had, was from my Heart;My Eyes with Tears moist'ning her snowy Arms,Render'd the Tribute owing to her Charms:But as I soonest of all Mortals paidMy Vows, and to her Beauty Altars made;So among all those Slaves that sigh'd in vain,She thought me only worthy of my Chain.Loves heavy burden, my Submissive HeartEndur'd not long, before she bore her part;My violent flame melted her frozen Breast,And in soft Sighs her pity she exprest;Her gentle Voice allay'd my raging Pains,And her fair hands Sustain'd me in my Chains; Even Tears of Pity waited on my moan,And tender Looks were cast on me alone.My hopes and dangers were less mine, than hers,Those filled her Soul with Joys, and these with FearsOur hearts united, had the same desires,And both alike, burn'd in Impatient Fires.Too Faithful Memory! I give thee LeaveThy wretched Master kindly to deceive;Make me not once possessor of her Charms;Let me not find her Languish in my Arms;Past Joys are now my Fancies mournful Theams;Make all my happy Nights appear but Dreams;Let not that Bliss before my Eyes be brought;Oh! hide those Scenes from my tormenting Thought;And in their place, Disdainful Beauty shew,If thou would'st not be cruel, make her so;And something to abate my deep Despair,Oh, let her seem less Gentle, or less Fair. But I in vain, flatter my wounded Mind,Never was Nymph so Lovely, or so Kind:No cold Repulses, my Desires supprest,I seldom sigh'd but on Almeria's Breast;Of all the Passions which Mankind destroy,I only felt excess of Love and Joy:Numberless Pleasures charm'd my Sense, and theyWere as my Love, without the least Allay.As pure, alas, but not so sure to last,For, like a pleasing Dream, they all are past.From Heav'n her Beauty like fierce Light'ning came,Which breaks through Darkness with its Glorious Flame,A while it Shines, a while our Sight it chears,But soon the short-liv'd Comfort disappears,And Thunder follows, whose resistless Rage,None can withstand, and nothing can Asswage.So oft the Light, which those bright flashes gave,Serves only to conduct us to our Grave. When I had just begun Love's Joys to taste,(Those full Rewards for Fears and Dangers past)A Fever seiz'd her, and to nothing broughtThe richest Work that ever Nature Wrought.All things below, alas, uncertain stand;The firmest Rocks are fix'd upon the Sand:Under this Law both Kings and Kingdoms bend,And no beginning is without an end.A Sacrifice to Time, Fate dooms us all,And at the Tyrant's Feet we daily fall:Time, whose bold hand alike does bring to dustMankind, and all those Powers in which they trust.Her wasted Spirits now begin to faint,Yet Patience ties her Tongue from all Complaint,And in her Heart, as in a Fort remains,But yields at last to her resistless pains;Thus, while the Fever am'rous of his Prey,Through all her Veins makes his delightful way, Her Fate's, like Semile's the Flames destroyThat Beauty they too eagerly enjoy.Her charming Face is in its Spring decay'd,Pale grow the Roses, and the Lilies fade;Her Skin has lost that lustre which surpastThe Sun's, and did deserve as long to last;Her Eyes, which us'd to pierce the firmest hearts,Are now disarm'd of all their Flames and Darts,Those Stars now heavily and slowly move,And Sickness triumphs in the Throne of Love.The Fever every moment more prevails,Its rage her Body feels, and Tongue bewails;She, whose disdain so many Lovers prove,Sighs now for Torment, as they sigh for Love,And with loud Crys which rend the neighb'ring Air,Wounds my sad heart, and wakens my Despair▪Both Gods and Men I charge now with my loss,And wild with Grief, my Thoughts each other cross; My Heart and Tongue labour in both extreams,That sends up slighted Prayers, while this blasphemes:I ask their help, whose malice I defie,And mingle Sacriledge with Piety.But that which does yet more perplex my mind,To Love her truly, I must seem unkind:So unconcern'd a Face my Sorrow wears,I must restrain unruly floods of Tears.My Eyes and Tongue put on dissembling forms,I shew a Calmness in the midst of Storms,I seem to hope, when all my hopes are gone,And almost dead with grief, discover none.But who can long deceive a Loving Eye,Or with dry Eyes behold his Mistress die?When Passion had with all its terrours broughtTh' approaching danger nearer to my Thought,Off on a sudden, fell the forc'd disguise,And shew'd a sighing heart in weeping Eyes,My apprehensions now no more confin'd,Expos'd my sorrows, and betray'd my mind. The Fair Afflicted, Soon perceives my Tears,Explains my Sighs, and thence concludes my Fears;With sad Presages of her hopeless Case,She reads her Fate in my dejected Face;Then, feels my Torment, and neglects her own,While I am Sensible of hers alone;Each does the others burden kindly bear,I fear her Death, and she bewails my Fear:Though we thus suffer under Fortune's Darts,'Tis only those of Love which reach our Hearts.Mean-while the Fever mocks at all our Fears,Grows by our Sighs, and rages at our Tears,Those vain effects of our as vain desire,Like Wind and Oyl increase the fatal fire.Almeria, then, feeling the DestiniesAbout to shut her Lips, and close her Eyes,Weeping, in mine fix'd her fair trembling Hand,And with these words, I scarce could understand; Her Passion in a dying Voice express'dHalf, and her Sighs, alas, made out the rest.'Tis past; this pang, Nature gives o'er the strife;Thou must thy Mistress Lose, and I my Life;I die, but dying thine, the Fates may proveTheir Conquest over me, but not my Love;Thy Memory, my Glory, and my Pain,In spight of Death it self, shall still remain:Ah! Dear Orontes, my hard Fate denysThat hope is the last thing which in us dies:From my griev'd Breast all those soft Thoughts are fled,And Love survives, although my Hope is dead;I yield my Life, but keep my Passion yet,And can all thoughts but of Orontes quit;My flame increases as my strength decays,Death, which puts out the light, the heat does raise;That still remains, though I from hence remove,I lose my Lover, but I keep my Love. The Sigh, which sent forth that last tender word,Up towards the Heav'ns like a bright Meteor soar'd,And the Kind Nymph bereft of all her Charms,Fell cold and breathless in her Lover's Arms;Which shews, since Death could deny him relief,That 'tis in vain we hope to die with grief.Goddess, who now my Fate has understood,Spare but my Tears, and freely take my Blood;Here let me end the Story of my Cares,My Dismal Grief enough the rest declares.Judge thou by all this Misery display'd,Whether I ought not to implore thy aid:Thus to survive, reproaches on me draws,And my sad wishes have too Just a Cause.Come, then, my only hope; in every placeThou visitest, Men tremble at thy Face, And fear thy Name; once let thy fatal handFall on a Swain, that does the blow demand.Vouchsafe thy Dart: I need not one of those,With which thou dost unwilling Kings depose;Thy weakest, my desir'd release can bring,And free my Soul already on her wing.But since all Prayers and Tears are vain, I'll try,If, spite of thee, 'tis possible to dy.
# A PARAPHRASE On the CXLVIII. PSALM.
By the Earl of Roscommon.OAzure Vaults! O Crystal Sky!The World's transparent Canopy,Break your long silence, and let Mortals know,With what contempt you look on things belowWing'd Squadrons of the God of War,Who Conquer wheresoe'er you are, Let Echoing Anthems make his Praises knownOn Earth, his Foot-stool, as in Heaven his Throne.Great Eye of All, whose Glorious RayRules the bright Empire of the Day.O praise his Name, without whose purer Liglit,Thou hadst been hid in an Abyss of Night:Ye Moon and Planets who dispence,By God's Command, your Influence.Resign to him, as your Creatour, due,That Veneration which Men pay to you;Fairest, as well as first of things,From whom all Joy, all Beauty springs.O praise the Almighty Ruler of the Globe,Who useth thee for his Empyreal Robe:Praise him ye loud harmonious Sphaeres,Whose Sacred Stamp all Nature bears.Who did all Forms from the rude Chaos draw,And whose Command is th' universal Law:Ye wat'ry Mountains of the Sky,And you so far above our Eye.Vast ever-moving Orbs, Exalt his Name,Who gave its being to your Glorious Frame:Ye Dragons, whose Contagious BreathPeoples the dark Retreats of Death,Change your fierce hissing into joyful Song,And praise your Maker with your forked Tongue:Praise him ye Monsters of the Deep,That in the Seas vast Bosoms sleep,At whose Command the foaming Billows roar,Yet know their Limits, Tremble, and Adore.Ye Mists and Vapours, Hail and Snow,And you who through the Concave blow.Swift Executors of his holy Word,Whirlwinds and Tempest praise the Almighty LordMountains, who to your Maker's ViewSeem less than Mole-Hills do to you,Remember how, when first Jehovah spoke,All Heaven was Fire, and Sinai hid in Smoak:Praise him sweet Off-spring of the Ground,With Heavenly Nectar yearly Crown'd.And ye tall Cedars, celebrate his Praise,That in his Temple Sacred Altars raise:Idle Musicians of the Spring,Whose only cares to Love and Sing,Fly thro the World, and let your trembling ThroatPraise your Creatour with the sweetest Note.Praise him each Salvage Furious Beast,That on his Stores do daily feast.And you tame Slaves of the Laborious Plow,Your weary Knees to your Creatour bow:Majestick Monarchs, Mortal Gods,Whose Power hath here no Periods:May all Attempts against your Crown be vain,But still remember by whose power you Raign:Let the wide World his Praises sing,Where Tagus and Euphrates spring.And from the Danube frosty Banks, to those,Where from an unknown head great Nilus flows:You that dispose of all our Lives,Praise him from whom your power derives.Be True and Just, like him, and fear his Word,As much as Malefactors do your Sword.Praise him old Monuments of Time,O praise him in your Youthful prime.Praise him fair Idols of our greedy Sence,Exalt his Name, sweet Age of Innocence:Jehovah's Name shall only last,When Heaven, Earth, and all is past.Nothing, Great God, is to be found in Thee,But Unconceivable Eternity:Exalt, O Jacob's Sacred Race,The God of Gods, the God of Grace,Who will above the Stars your Empire raise,And with His Glory, Recompence your Praise.
# TO ORINDA: An Imitation of HORACE.
By the Earl of Roscommon.Integer vitae, &c.Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 22. 
*I.VIrtue (dear Friend) needs no defence,No Arms, but its own Innocence;Quivers, and Bows, and poison'd Darts,Are only us'd by guilty Hearts. 
*II.An honest mind, safely, aloneMay travel through the burning Zone,Or through the deepest Scythian Snows,Or where the fam'd Hydaspes flows. 
*III.While (rul'd by a resistless fire)Our Great ORINDA I Admire.The hungry Wolves that see me strayUnarm'd and single, run away. 
*IV.Set me in the remotest placeThat ever Neptune did embrace,When there her Image fills my Breast,Helicon is not half so blest. 
*V.Leave me upon some Libyan Plain,So she my Fancy entertain,And when the thirsty Monsters meet,They'll all pay homage to my Feet. 
*VI.The Magick of ORINDA's Name,Not only can their fierceness tame,But, if that mighty word I once rehearse,They seem submissively to roar in Verse.
# THE GROVE.
By the same Author.AH happy Grove! Dark and secure retreat,Of Sacred silence, Rest's Eternal Seat;How well your cool and unfrequented shadeSuits with the chaste retirements of a Maid.Oh! If kind Heavn had been so much my friend,To make my Fate upon my choice depend;All my ambition I would here confine,And only this Elyzium should be mine.Fond Men by Passion wilfully betray'd,Adore those Idols which their fancy made; Purchasing Riches, with our time and care,We lose our freedom in a gilded Snare;And having all, all to our selves, refuse,Opprest with Blessings which we fear to use.Fame is at best but an inconstant good,Vain are the boasted Titles of our Blood;We soonest lose what we most highly prise,And with our Youth our short-liv'd Beauty dies.In vain our Fields and Flocks increase our store,If our abundance makes us wish for more.How happy is the harmless Country Maid,Who rich by Nature, scorns superfluous aid!Whose modest Cloaths no wanton eyes invite,But like her Soul, preserves the Native White;Whose little store, her well-taught Mind does please,Not pinch'd with want, nor cloyd with wanton ease,Who free from Storms, which on the Great Ones fall,Makes but few Wishes, and enjoys them all; No care but Love can discompose her Breast,Love, of all Cares the sweetest and the best.Whil'st on sweet Grass her bleating Charge does lie,Our happy Lover feeds upon her eye;Not one on whom or Gods or Men impose,But one whom Love has for this Lover chose,Under some favourite Myrtle's shady Boughts,They speak their Passions in repeated Vows:And whilst a Blush confesses how she burns,His faithful heart makes as sincere returns.Thus in the Arms of Love and Peace they lie,And whilst they Live, their flames can never die.
# THE DUEL OF THE STAGS.
Written by the Honourable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.IN Windsor Forest, before War destroy'dThe harmless Pleasures which soft Peace injoy'd;A mighty Stag grew Monarch of the Heard,By all his Savage Slaves obey'd, and fear'd: And while the Troops about their Soveraign fed,They watch't the awful nodding of his Head.Still as he passeth by, they all remove,Proud in Dominion, Prouder in his Love:[And while with Pride and Appetite he swells;]He courts no chosen object, but compels:No Subject his lov'd Mistress dares deny,But yields his hopes up to his Tyranny.Long had this Prince imperiously thus sway'd,By no set Laws, but by his Will obey'd;His fearful Slaves, to full Obedience grown,Admire his strength, and dare not use their own.One Subject most did his suspicion move,That show'd least Fear, and counterfeited Love;In the best Pastures by his side he fed,Arm'd with two large Militia's on his head:As if he practis'd Majesty, he walk't,And at his Nod, he made not haste, but stalk't▪ By his large shade, he saw how great he was,And his vast Layers on the bended Grass.His thoughts as large as his proportion grew,And judg'd himself, as fit for Empire too.Thus to rebellious hopes he swell'd at length,Love and Ambition growing with his strength.This hid Ambition his bold Passion shows,And from a Subject to a Rival grows.Sollicits all his Princes, fearful Dames,And in his sight Courts with rebellious flames.The Prince sees this with an inflamed Eye,But Looks are only signs of Majesty:When once a Prince's Will meets a restraint,His Power is then esteem'd but his Complaint.His Head then shakes, at which th' affrighted HeardStart to each side; his Rival not afear'd,Stands by his Mistress side, and stirs not thence,But bids her own his Love, and his Defence.The Quarrel now to a vast height is grown,Both urg'd to fight by Passion, and a Throne;But Love has most excuse, for all, we find,Have Passions, tho' not Thrones alike assign'd.The Soveraign Stag shaking his loaded head,On which his Scepters with his Arms were spread,Wisely by Nature, there together fix't,Where with the Title, the Defence was mixt.The Pace which he advanc'd with to engage,Became at once his Majesty, and Rage:T'other stands still with as much confidence,To make his part seem only his defence.Their heads now meet, and at one blow each strikesAs many strokes, as if a Rank of PikesGrew on his Brows, as thick their Antlers stand,Which every Year kind Nature does disband.Wild Beasts sometimes in peace and quiet are,But Man no season frees from Love or War.With equal strength they met, as if two OaksHad fell, and mingled with a thousand stroaks.One by Ambition urg'd, t'other Disdain,One to Preserve, the other fought to Gain:The Subjects, and the Mistresses stood by,With Love and Duty to crown Victory:For all Affections wait on prosperous Fame,Not he that climbs, but he that falls, meets shame.While thus with equal Courages they meet,The wounded Earth yields to their strugling Feet;And while one slides, t'other pursues the Fight,And thinks that forc't Retreat looks like a Flight;But then asham'd of his Retreat, at lengthDrives his Foe back, his Rage renews his strength.As even Weights into a motion thrown,By equal turns, drive themselves up and down;So sometimes one, then t'other Stag prevails,And Victory, yet doubtful, holds the Scales.The Prince asham'd to be oppos'd so long,With all his strength united rushes on;The Rebel weaker, than at first appears,And from his Courage sinks unto his Fears.Not able longer to withstand his might,From a Retreat at last steals to a Flight.The mighty Stag pursues his flying Foe,Till his own pride of Conquest made him slow;Thought it enough to scorn a thing that flies,And only now pursu'd him with his Eyes.The Vanquish'd as he fled, turn'd back his sight,Asham'd to flie, and yet afraid to fight: Sometimes his Wounds, as his excuse survay'd,Then fled again, and then look'd back and stay'dBlush't that his Wounds so slight should not denyStrength for a fight, that left him strength to flie.Calls thoughts of Love and Empire to his aid,But fears more powerful than all those perswade,And yet in spight of them retains his shame,His Cool'd ambition, and his half-quench'd flameThere's none from their own sence of shame can flie,And dregs of Passions dwell with misery.Now to the Shades he bends his feeble course,Despis'd by those that once Admir'd his force:The Wretch that to a scorn'd Condition's thrown,With the World's favour, loses too his own.While fawning Troops their Conquering Prince enclos'd,Now render'd absolute by being oppos'd; Princes by Disobedience get Command,And by new quench'd Rebellions firmer stand;Till by the boundless offers of success,They meet their Fate in ill-us'd happiness.The vanquish't Stag to thickest shades repairs,Where he finds safety punish't with his cares;Thorough the Woods he rushes not, but glides,And from all searches but his own he hides;Asham'd to live, unwilling yet to loseThat wretched life he knew not how to use.In this Retirement thus he liv'd conceal'd,Till with his Wounds, his Fears were almost heal'd;His antient Passions now began to move,He thought again of Empire, and of Love:Then rouz'd himself, and stretch'd at his full length,Took the large measure of his mighty strength; Then shook his loaded Head; the shadow too,Shook like a Tree, where leaveless Branches grew:Stooping to drink, he sees it in the Streams,And in the Woods hears clashing of his Beams;No accident but does alike proclaimHis growing strength, and his encreasing shame.Now once again, resolves to try his Fate,(For Envy always is importunate;)And in the Mind perpetually does move,A fit Companion for unquiet Love.He thinks upon his Mighty EnemyCircl'd about with Pow'r, and Luxury.And hop'd his strength might sink in his desires;Remembring he had wasted in such Fires.Yet while he hop'd by them to overcome,He wisht the others fatal joys his own.Thus the unquiet Beast in safety lay,Where nothing was to fear, nor to obey; Where he alone Commanded, and was LordOf every Bounty, Nature did afford,Choose Feasts for every Arbitrary sense,An Empire in the state of Innocence.But all the Feasts, Nature before him plac't,Had but faint relishes to his lost taste.Sick Minds, like Bodies in a Fever spent,Turn Food to the Disease, not Nourishment.Sometimes he stole abroad, and shrinking stood,Under the shelter of the friendly Wood;Casting his envious Eyes towards those PlainsWhere with Crown'd Joys, his Mighty Rival Reigns.He saw th' obeying Herd marching along,And weigh'd his Rival's Greatness by the Throng.Want takes false Measures, both of Power, and Joys,And envy'd Greatness is but Crowd, and Noise.Not able to endure this hated sight,Back to the Shades he flies to seek out Night.Like Exiles from their Native Soils, though sentTo better Countreys, think it Banishment.Here he enjoy'd, what t'other could have there,The Woods as Shady, and the Streams as Clear,The Pastures more untainted, where he fed,And every Night, chose out an unprest Bed.But then his lab'ring Soul with Dreams was prest,And found the greatest weariness in Rest;His dreadful Rival in his sleep appears,And in his Dreams again, he fights, and fears:Shrinks at the stroaks of t'others Mighty Head,Feels every wound, and dreams how fast he fled.At this he wakes, and with his fearful Eyes,Salutes the Light, that Fleet the Eastern Skies.Still half amaz'd, looks round, and held by fear,Scarce can Believe, no Enemy was near. But when he saw his heedless fears were brought,Not by a Substance, but a drowsie Thought,His ample sides he shakes, from whence the DewIn scatter'd Showers, like driven Tempests flew.At which, through all his Breast new boldness spread,And with his Courage, rais'd his Mighty Head.Then by his Love inspir'd, resolves to tryThe Combat now, and overcome, or die.Every weak Passion sometimes is aboveThe fear of Death, much more the Noblest Love.By Hope 'tis scorn'd, and by despair 'tis fought,Pursu'd by Honour, and by Sorrow brought.Resolv'd the paths of danger now to tread,From his scorn'd shelter, and his fears, he fled.With a brave haste now seeks a second Fight,Redeems the base one by a Noble Flight.In the mean time, the Conqueror injoy'dThat Power by which he was to be destroy'd.How hard 'tis for the Prosperous to see,That Fate which waits on Power, and Victory.Thus he securely Raign'd, when in a Rout,He saw th' affrighted Heard flying about;As if some Huntsmen did their Chace Pursue,About themselves in scatter'd Rings they flew.He like a careful Monarch, rais'd his Head,To see what Cause that strange disturbance bred▪But when the searcht-out Cause appear'd no more,Then from a Slave, he had o'ercome before,A bold disdain did in his Looks appear,And shook his Aweful Head to chide their Fear▪The Herd afraid of Friend and Enemy,Shrink from the one, and from the other Fly; They scarce know which they should Obey, or Trust,Since Fortune only makes it Safe and Just.Yet in Despight of all his Pride, he staid,And this unlook't for Chance with Trouble weigh'd.His Rage, and his Contempt alike, swell'd high,And only fear'd his Enemy should Flie;He thought of former Conquest, and from thenceCouzen'd himself into a Confidence.T'other that saw his Conqueror so near,Stood still and list'ned to a whisp'ring fear;From whence he heard his Conquest, and his Shame;But new-born Hopes his antient Fears o'recame▪The Mighty Enemies now met at length,With equal Fury, though not equal Strength;For now, too late, the Conqueror did find,That all was wasted in him but his Mind.His Courage in his Weakness yet prevails.As a bold Pilot steers with tatter'd Sails,And Cordage crackt, directs no steddy Course,Carry'd by Resolution, more than Force.Before his once scorn'd Enemy he reels,His Wounds encreasing with his Shame, he feelsThe others Strength, more from his Weakness grows,And with one furious push, his Rival throws.So a tall Oak, the pride of all the Wood,That long th' Assault of several Storms hath stood; Till by a Mighty Blast more pow'rfully push't,His Root's torn up, and to the Earth he rusht.Yet then he rais'd his Head, on which there GrewOnce, all his Power, and all his Title too;Unable now to rise, and less to Fight,He rais'd those Scepters to demand his Right.But such weak Arguments prevail with none,To plead their Titles, when their Power is gone.His Head now sinks, and with it all defence,Not only rob'd of Power, but Pretence.Wounds upon Wounds, the Conqueror still gives,And thinks himself unsafe, while t'other Lives:Unhappy State of such as wear a Crown,Fortune does seldom lay' em gently down.Now to the most scorn'd Remedy he flies,And for some Pity seems to move his Eyes;Pity, by which the best of Virtue's try'd,To wretched Princes ever is deny'd.There is a Debt to Fortune, which they payFor all their Greatness, by no Common way.The flatt'ring Troops unto the Victor fly,And own his Title to his Victory;The faith of most, with Fortune does decline,Duty's but Fear, and Conscience but Design.The Victor now, proud in his great success,Hastes to enjoy his fatal Happiness;Forgot his Mighty Rival was destroy'dBy that, which he so fondly now enjoy'd.In Passions, thus Nature her self enjoys,Sometimes Preserves, and then again destroys;Yet all Destruction which Revenge can move,Time or Ambition, is supply'd by Love.
# TO CELIA.
By Sir Charle Ssedley.YOU tell me, Celia, you approve,Yet never must return my love;An answer that my hope destroys,And in the Cradle wounds our joys.To kill at once what needs must die,None would to Birds and Beasts deny.How can you then so cruel prove,As to preserve and torture Love?That Beauty Nature kindly meantFor her own Pride, and our Content; Why shou'd the Tyrant Honour makeOur greatest torment? Let us breakHis Yoke, and that base power disdain,Which only keeps the good in pain.In Love and War th' Impostor do'sThe best to greatest harms expose.Come then, my Celia, let's no moreThis Devil, for a God adore.Like foolish Indians we have been,Whose whole Religion is a sin.If we the Laws of Love had kept,And not in Dreams of Honour slept,He wou'd have surely, long ere this,Have Crown'd us with the highest Bliss;Our Joy had then been as compleat,As now our Folly has been great.Let's lose no time then, but repent,Love welcomes best a Penitent.
# ANSWER.
By the same Author.THyrsis, I wish, as well as you,To Honour there were nothing due:Then would I pay my Debt of LoveIn the same Coin that you approve;Which now you must in Friendship take,'Tis all the Payment I can make;Friendship so high, that I must say,'Tis rather Love with some allay.And rest contented, since that IAs well my self as you deny.Learn then of me bravely to bearThe want of what you hold most dear;And that which Honour does in me,Let my Example work on thee.
# TO CELIA.
By the same Author.PRinces make Laws, by which their Subjects live,And the high Gods, Rules for their Worship give.How should poor Mortals else a Service findAt all proportion'd to their mighty Mind?Had it been left to us, each one would bring,Of what he lik'd himself, an Offering;And with unwelcome Zeal, perhaps, displeaseTh' offended Deity he would appease.All powers but thine, this Mercy do allow,And how they wou'd be serv'd themselves do shew. A rude Barbarian wou'd his Captiv'd FoeFully instruct in what he'd have him do.And can it be, my Celia, that LoveLess kind than War shou'd to the vanquish't prove.Say, cruel Fair, then, would you that my flameShou'd for a while move under Friendship's Name;Or may it boldly, like it self appear,And its own Tale deliver to your Ear?Or must it in my tortur'd Bosome live,Like Fire in quiet Flints, and no Light give:And only then humbly send forth a smallSpark, when your self does on that Subject fall?My Passion can with any Laws comply,And for your sake do any thing, but Die.
# TO CHLORIS.
By the same Author.CHloris, I justly am betray'dBy a Design my self had laid;Like an old Rook, whom in his Cheat,A Run of Fortune does defeat.I thought at first with a small SumOf Love, thy heap to overcome;Presuming on thy want of Art,Thy gentle and unpractis'd Heart.But naked Beauty can prevail,Like open force, when Plots do fail.Instead of that thou hast all mine,And I have not one Stake of thine: And, like all Winners, do'st discoverA willingness to give me over.And though I beg, thou wilt not now;'Twere better thou should'st do so too:For I so far in Debt shall run,Even thee I shall be forc't to shun.My Hand, alas, is no more mine,Else it had long ago been thine:My Heart I give thee, and we callNo Man unjust that parts with all.What a Priest says, moves not the mind,Souls are by Love, not Words, combin'd.
# To a Lady, who told him he could not Love.
By the same Author.MAdam, though meaner Beauties might,Perhaps, have need of some such slight;Who to excuse their Rigour, mustSay they our Passions do mistrust,And that they wou'd more pity shew,Were they but sure our Loves were true.You shou'd those petty Arts despise,Secure of what is once your Prize.We to our Slaves no Frauds address,But as they are, our Minds express.Tell me not then I cannot Love,Say, rather, you it ne'er can move;Who can no more doubt of your Charms,Than I resist such pow'rful Arms: Whose numerous force that I withstoodSo long, was not through any hope I cou'dEscape their pow'r; but through despair,Which oft makes Courage out of fear.I trembling saw how you us'd thoseWho tamely yielded without blows:Had you but one of all them spar'd,I might, perhaps, have been ensnar'd,And not have thus, e're I did yield,Call'd Love's whole Force into the Field.Yet now I'm Conquer'd, I will proveFaithful as they that never strove.All flames in matter, where too fastThey do not seize, the longer last.Then blame not mine for moving slow,Since all things durable are so.The Oak that's for three hundred YearsDesign'd in growing, one out-wears.Whilst Flowers for a Season madeQuickly spring up, and quickly fade.
# TO CHLORIS.
By the same Author.CHloris, you live ador'd by all,And yet on none your Favours fall.A stranger Mistress ne'er was known,You pay us all in Paying none.We him of Avarice accuse,Who what he has, does fear to use.But what Disease of Mind shall ICall this, thy hated Penury?Thou wilt not give out of a store,Which no Profuseness can make poor.Misers, when Dead, may make amends;And in their Wills enrich their Friends. But when thou Dy'st, thy Treasure dies,And thou canst leave no Legacies.What madness is it then to spare,When we want power to make an Heir?Live, Chloris, then at the full rate,Of thy great Beauty; and since FateTo Love, and Youth, is so severe,Enjoy'm freely while th'art here.Some caution yet Ide have thee use,Whene're thou dost a Servant chuse.We are not all for Lovers fit,No more than Arms or Arts of Wit.For Wisdom some respected are,Some we see po'wrful at the Bar;Some for Preferment waste their time,And the steep Hill of Honour climb;Others of Love their business make,In Love their whole Diversion take.Take one of those, for in one BreastTwo Passions live but ill at rest: And even, of them, I'd have thee flyAll that take flame at every Eye.All those that light and faithless are,All that dare more than think thee fair.Take one of Love who nothing says,And yet whom every word betrays.Love in the Cradle pretty shews,And when't can speak, unruly grows.
# THE PICTURE.

# In Imitation of ANACREON'S BATHILLUS.
By the Earl of Mulgrave.THou Flatterer of all the Fair,Come, with all your skill, and care,Draw me such a Shape, and Face,As your Flatt'ry would disgrace.Wish not that she would appear,'Tis well for you She is not here,Scarce can you with safety seeAll her Charms describ'd by me, Who, alas, have found too wellWhat a power does in them dwell;I, alas, the danger know,I, alas, have felt the Blow;Mourn, as lost, my former Days,That did not sing of Celia's praise;And those few that are behindI shall blest, or wretched find,Only just as she is kind.With her tempting Eyes begin,Eyes that might draw Angels inTo a second sweeter sin.Oh, those wanton rowling Eyes!At each glance a Lover dies:Make them bright, yet make them willing,Let them look both kind and killing.Next, draw her Forehead, then her Nose,And Lips just opening, which disclose Teeth so white, and Breath so sweet,So much Beauty, so much Wit,To our very Soul they strike,All our Senses pleas'd alike;But so pure a white and redNever never can be said;What are words in such a case?What is paint to such a Face?How should either Art avail us?Fancy here it self will fail us.In her Looks, and in her MeenSuch a graceful Air is seen,That if you with all your ArtCan but reach the smallest part,Next to her, the Matchless She,We shall wonder most at Thee.Then, her Neck, and Breasts, and Hair,And her—but my Charming FairDoes in a thousand things excel,Which I must not, dare not tell.How go on then? Oh, I seeA Lovely Venus drawn by Thee;Oh how fair she does appear!Touch it only here and there;Make her yet seem more Divine,Your Venus then may look like mine,Whose bright form, if once you saw,You by her would Venus draw.
# TO A Coquet Beauty.
By the same Author.FRom Wars and Plagues come no such harms,As from a Nymph so full of Charms,So much Sweetness in her Face,In her Motions such a Grace,In her kind inviting EyesSuch a soft Enchantment lies,That we please our selves too soon,And are with vain hopes undoneAfter all her softness, weAre but Slaves, while she is free;Free, alas, from all desire,Except to set the World on fire.Thou, fair Dissembler, dost but thusDeceive thy self as well as us;Like Ambitious Monarchs, thouWould'st rather force Mankind to bow,And venture o'er the World to roam,Than govern with content at home.But trust me, Celia, trust me whenApollo's self inspires my Pen,One hour of Love's Delights out-weighsWhole Years of Universal Praise,And one Adorer kindly used,Is of more use, than Crowds refused.For what does Youth and Beauty serve?Why more than all your Sex deserve?Why such soft alluring ArtsTo charm our Eyes, and melt our Hearts?By our loss, you nothing gain;Unless you love, you please in vain.
# SONG.
By the same Author.FRom all Uneasie Passions Free,Revenge, Ambition, Jealousie,Contented I had been too blest,If Love and You would let me Rest.Yet that Dull Life I now Despise;Safe from your Eyes,I fear'd no Griefs, but, Oh, I found no Joys.Amidst a thousand soft Desires,Which Beauty moves, and Love inspires;I feel such pangs of Jealous Fear,No heart so kind as mine can bear.Yet I'll defie the worst of harms;Such are those Charms,'Tis worth a Life, to Die within your Arms.
# The Parting of Hector with his Princess Andromache, and only Son Astyanax, when he went upon his last Expedition, in which he was Slain by Achilles.

# Done out of the Greek of Homer, Iliad. 6.
By Knightly Chetwood.HEctor, though warn'd by an approaching Cry,That to Troy Walls the Conqu'ring Greeks drew nigh;T'his Princess one short Visit pays in haste,Some Daemon told him this would be his last:Her (swiftly passing through the spacious Streets)He nor at home, nor in the Circle meets, Nor atNote, The Temple of Minerva. Minerva's, where the Beauteous TrainMade Prayers and Vows to angry Powers in vain.She, half distracted with the loud Alarms,(The Prince was carry'd in his Nurse's Arms)Runs to a Turret, whose commanding heightPresented all the Battel to her sight,Advancing Grecians, and the Trojans flight.Here Hector finds her, with a Lover's PaceShe speeds, and breathless sinks in his Embrace:The Nurse came after with her Princely care,As Hesperus fresh, promising, and fair,Hector in little, with paternal JoyHe blest in silent Smiles the Lovely Boy.The Princess, at his sight compos'd again,Pressing his Hand, do's gently thus complain:My Dearest Lord, believe a careful Wife,You are too lavish of your precious Life: You formost into every danger run,Of me regardless, and your little Son.Shortly the Greeks, what none can singly do,Will compass, pointing all the War, at you.But before that day comes (Heavens) may I haveThe mournful Privilege of an early Grave!For I, of your dear Company bereft,Have no Reserve, no second Comfort left.My Father, who did in Cilicia Reign,By fierce Achilles was in Battel Slain:His Arms that Savage Conquerour durst not spoil,But paid just Honours to his Funeral Pile:Wood-Nymphs about his Grave have planted sinceA rural Monument to a mighty Prince:Seven Brothers, who seven Legions did Command,Had the same Fate, from the same murdering hand.My Mother too, who their sad Heir did reign,With a vast Treasure was Redeem'd in vain;For she soon clos'd her Empire, and her Breath,By Wretches last good fortune—Sudden Death. Thus Father, Mother, Brethern, all is gone,But they seem all alive in you alone.To gain you, those Endearments I have sold,And like the Purchace—if the Title hold.Have pity then, here in this Tower abide,And round the Walls and Works your Troops divide.But now the Greeks, by both their Generals led,Ajax, Idomeneus, Diomede,With all their most experienc'd Chiefs, and brave,Three fierce Attacks upon the Out-works gave;Some God their Courage to this pitch did raise,Or this is one of Troy's unlucky Days.Hector reply'd, This you have said, and more,I have revolv'd in serious Thoughts before.But I not half so much those Grecians fear,As Carpet-Knights, State-Dames, and Flatterers here,For they, if ever I decline the Fight,Miscall wise Conduct Cowardise and Flight; Others may methods chuse the most secure,My Life no middle Courses can endure.Vrg'd by my own, and my great Father's Name,I must add something to our ancient Fame.Embarqu'd in Ilium's Cause, I cannot fly,Will Conquer with it, or must for it die:But still some boding Genius does portendTo all my Toils an Vnsuccessful end,For how can Man with heavenly Powers contend?The Day advances with the swiftest pace,Which Troy, and all her Glories, shall deface,Which Asia's sacred Empire shall confound,And these proud Towers lay level with the ground:But all compar'd with you does scarce appear,When I presage your case, I learn to fear:When you by some proud Conqu'rour shall be ledA mournful Captive to a Master's Bed.Perhaps some haughty Dame your hands shall doom,To Weave Troy's Downfal, in a Grecian Loom. Or lower yet, you may be forc'd to bringWater to Argos, from Hiperia's Spring;And as you measure out the tedious way,Some one shall, pointing to his Neighbour, say,See to what Fortune Hector's Wife is brought,That famous General, that for Ilium fought.This will renew your sorrows without end,Depriv'd in such a Day, of such a Friend.But this is Fancy, or before it ILow in the Dust will with my Country lie.Then to his Infant he his Arms addrest,The Child clung, crying, to his Nurse's Breast,Scar'd at the burnish'd Arms, and threat'ning Crest.This made them smile, whilst Hector doth unbraceHis shining Helmet, and disclos'd his Face:Then dancing the pleas'd Infant in the Air,Kiss'd him, and to the Gods conceiv'd this Pray'r:Jove, and you Heavenly Powers, whoever hearHector's Request with a Propitious Ear,Grant, this my Child in Honour and RenownMay equal me, wear, and deserve the Crown:And when from some great Action he shall comeLaden with Hostile Spoils in Triumph home,May Trojans say, Hector great things hath done,But is surpass'd by his Illustrious Son.This will rejoyce his tender Mothers Heart,And sense of Joy to my pale Ghost impart.Then in the Mothers Arms he puts the Child,With troubl'd Joy, in flowing Tears she smil'd.Beauty and Grief shew'd all their Pompand Pride,Whilst those soft Passions did her Looks divide.This Scene even Hector's Courage melted down,But soon recovering, with a Lover's Frown,Madam (says he) these Fancies put away,I cannot Die before my fatal Day.Heaven, when we first take in our vital Breath,Decrees the way, and moment of our Death.Women should fill their Heads with Womens Cares,And leave to Men (unquestion'd) Mens Affairs.A Truncheon sutes not with a Ladies Hand,War is my Province that in chief Command.The Beauteous Princess silently withdrew,Turns oft, and with sad, wishing Eyes, does her Lords Steps pursue.Pensive to her Apartment she returns,And with Prophetick Tears approaching Evils mourns.Then tells all to her Maids, officious theyHis Funeral Rites to living Hector pay,Whilst forth he rushes through theThe Left Gate, accounted Ominous. Scoean Gate,Does his own part, and leaves the rest to Fate.
# ON A POET Who Writ in the Praise of SATYR.
By the Earl of Rochester.TO vex and torture thy unmeaning BrainIn Satyr's praise, to a low untun'd strain,In thee, was most impertinent and vain.When in thy Person we more plainly seeThat Satyr's of Divine Authority;For God made one on Man, when he made thee: In whom are all those Contradictions joyn'd,That make a Fop prodigious, and refin'd;A Lump deform'd and shapeless, wert thou born,Begot in Love's despight, and Nature's scorn,And art grown up the most ungainly Wight,Harsh to the Ear, and hideous to the Sight:Yet Love's thy Business, Beauty thy Delight.Curse on that silly hour that first inspir'dThy Longing to Admire, and be Admir'd,To paint thy Grizly Face, to Dance, to Dress,And all those awkard Motions that expressThy Loathsome Love, and Filthy Daintiness.Who needs will be an Ugly Beau, Garsoon,Spit at, and scorn'd by every Girl in Town;Where dreadfully Love's Scare-crow thou art plac'dTo fright the tender Flock, who long to taste.For none so Lewd and Silly yet have prov'd,Where thou mad'st Love, t'endure to be Belov'd. 'Twere Counsel lost, or else I would advise;But thy half Wit will ne'er let thee be Wise:Half Witty, and half Mad, and scarce half Brave,Half Honest, which is very much; a Knave,Made up of All those Halves, thou canst not passFor any thing intirely but an Ass.
# A FAREWEL TO LOVE.
ONce more Love's mighty Chains are broke,His Strength and Cunning I defie:Once more I have thrown off his Yoke,And am a Man, and do despise the Boy.Thanks to her Pride, and her Disdain,And all the Follies of a scornful Mind:I had ne'er possest my Heart again,If Fair Miranda had been kind. Welcome, Fond Wanderer, as EaseAnd Plenty to a Wretch in pain,That worn with Want and a Disease,Enjoys his Health, and all his Friends again.Let others waste their Time and Youth,Watch and look pale, to gain a peevish Maid,And learn too late this dear-bought Truth,At length they're sure to be betray'd.
# By a Person of HONOVR.*
THough, Phillis, your prevailing CharmsHave forc'd me from my Celia's Arms,That kind defence against all Powers,But those resistless Eyes of yours:Think not your Conquest to maintain,By Rigour and unjust disdain.In vain, fair Nymph, in vain you strive,For Love does seldom Hope survive.My Heart may Languish for a time,Whilst all your Glories in their prime,Can justifie such Cruelty,By the same force that Conquer'd me.When Age shall come, at whose commandThose Troops of Beauties must disband;A Tyrant's strength once took away,What Slave so dull as to Obey?
# EPILOGUE TO Every Man in his Humor.
By the same Author. *INtreaty shall not serve, nor Violence,To make me speak in such a Play's defence:A Play, where Wit and Humour do agreeTo break all practis'd Laws of Comedy:The Scene (what more absurd) in England lies,No Gods descend, nor dancing Devils rise;No Captive Prince, from nameless Countreybrought,No Battel, nay, there's not a Duel fought. And something yet more sharply might be said.But I consider the poor Author's Dead:Let that be his Excuse—Now for our own,Why—Faith, in my Opinion, we need none.The parts were fitted well; but some will say,Pox on 'em Rogues, What made'em chuse this Play?I do not doubt but you will credit me,It was not Choice, but meer Necessity.To all our writing Friends, in Town, we sent,But not a Wit durst venture out in Lent.Have patience but till Easter-Term, and thenYou shall have Jigg and Hobby-horse again.Here's Mr. Matthew, or Domestick Wit,Does promise one of the ten Plays h'as writ:But since great Bribes weigh nothing with the Just,Know, we have Merits, and in them we trust;When any Fasts, or Holy-days, deferThe publick Labours of the Theatre. We ride not forth, although the Day be fair,On Ambling Tit, to take the Suburb-air:But with our Authors meet, and spend that timeTo make up Quarrels between Sense and Rhyme.Wednesdays and Fridays, constantly we sate,Till after many a long and free debate,For divers weighty Reasons, 'twas thought fit,Unruly Sense shou'd still to Rhyme submit.This the most wholesome Law we ever made,So strictly in this Epilogue obey'd:Sure, no Man here will ever dare to break.Enter Johnson's Ghost.Hold, and give way, for I my self will speak,Can you encourage so much Insolence,And add new faults still to the great OffenceYour Ancestors so rashly did commitAgainst the mighty Powers of Art and Wit?When they condemn'd those noble works of mineSejanus, and my best-lov'd Cataline: Repent, or on your guilty Heads shall fallThe Curse of many a Rhyming Pastoral:The three bold Beauchamps shall revive again,And with the London Prentice conquer Spain.All the dull Follies of the former AgeShall rise and find applause upon this Stage.But if you pay the great Arrears of Praise,So long since due to my much injur'd Plays:From all past Crimes I first will set you free,And then inspire some one to write like me.
# UPON THE DEATH Of His GRACE the Late Duke of ORMOND, Anno 1687.
By Knightly Chetwood.REligious Discord, Fury of this Isle,A little Truce, cease your harsh Notes a while!Honour, Religion, Vertue, Learning, allDemand our Tears at their Great Patron's fall. Whilst slight Court-Meteors, soon advancing high,Short-liv'd too long, once seen neglected die;At Eighty Years Ormond's Propitious LightSeems immaturely ravish'd from our sight.Some Prosperom Star torn from his Native Sphere,Would cause such Wonder and Confusion there.The Vertues of four Reigns he kept intireFin'd from the Dross, as Gold by Chymick fire.Exalted Vertues, which here want a Name,Too weighty for the labouring Wings of Fame!Of Ancient Honour, Loyalty, and Truth,The Noblest Standard for our wand'ring Youth.Thus whilst the Patriarch liv'd, who pass'd the Flood,The Jewish State by Ancient Maxims stood;But He once gone, the Base, Degenerate Age,Sunk to its old Apostasie, and Rage.Some have in Courts, others in Camps been great,In Business some, some in a Wise Retreat,Ormond in all, his vast Imperious MindExcell'd in each, as if to one confin'd:All times of Life, all Stations he could grace,The distant Poles of goodness did embrace,With crowding Lights, fill'd all the glorious Space.Thro' several Climes he a bright Course did run,Kind, as the enliv'ning Progress of the Sun.Warm'd by his Beams, even sad Hybernia's IsleLook'd up, and chear'd her Visage with a Smile;Mov'd Britain's Envy, but, her Patron dead,Deep in his Fens, her Genius sinks his Head.O—rd, which, during this Apollo's Reign,Rival'd your Sister, and improv'd your Vein, If you just Tribute to his Hearse deny,Your Swans fall Speechless, and your Streams be dry.Some grateful Voice his Glorious Life shall sing,More above Subjects, than beneath a King.
## To His Grace the present DUKE.
THis Atlas gone, what Hero do's remain,The ponderous Mass of Honours to sustain?'Tis You, Great Sir, his Rights, his Vertues too,(That best Succession!) are devolv'd on You. Your Mind, well-ballass'd, bears the prosperous Gales,They cannot over-set, scarce fill your Sails.What a fair, steddy Course you steer alongThro' Scylla's Barkings, and false Syrens Song!Your Friendship not debas'd by Treacherous Art,Your Actions speak the Language of your Heart.Fortune despairs, or Flattering, or Unkind,To daunt your Courage, or corrupt your Mind.Some plac'd in foolish Pride's new tottering Seat,Grow less from little, labouring to look Great:Such do not rise, but weigh great Titles down,Their Misplac'd Coronets but eclipse the Crown:Whilst your digested Honour easie lies,Came as a Debt, not taken by Surprize.Thus Torrents, Creatures of the Winter Sky,O'erflow whilst hurtful, in the heats grow dry: But Sacred Nile warm'd by the Rising Sun,With him a thousand Leagues from his high Source do's run;With a rich Deluge all the Plains do's bless:Aegypt were ruin'd, if his Streams were less.
# The Earl of ROCHESTER's Answer, to a Paper of Verses, sent him by L. B. Felton, and taken out of the Translation of Ovid's Epistles, 1680.
WHat strange Surprise to meet such Words as these?Such Terms of Horrour were ne'er chose to please:To meet, midst Pleasures of a Jovial Night,Words that can only give amaze and fright,No gentle thought that does to Love invite.Were it not better for your Arms t' employ,Grasping a Lover in pursuit of Joy, Than handling Sword, and Pen, Weapons unfit:Your Sex gains Conquest, by their Charms and Wit.Of Writers slain I could with pleasure hear,Approve of Fights, o'er-joy'd to cause a Tear;So slain, I mean, that she should soon revive,Pleas'd in my Arms to find her self Alive.
# TO A Very Young LADY.
By Sir George Etherege.SWeetest Bud of Beauty, mayNo untimely Frost decayTh' early glories which we trace,Blooming in thy matchless Face;But kindly opening, like the Rose,Fresh Beauties every day disclose,Such as by Nature are not shewnIn all the Blossoms she has blown▪And then what conquest shall you make,Who hearts already daily take;Scorcht in the Morning with thy beams,How shall we bear those sad extreamsWhich must attend thy threatning Eyes,When thou shalt to thy Noon arise,
# THE Forsaken Mistress.
By the same Author.
# DIALOGUE.
TELL me, gentle Strephon, whyYou from my Embraces fly?Does my Love thy Love destroy?Tell me, I will yet be coy.Stay, O stay, and I will seign(Though I break my Heart) disdain;But lest I too unkind appear,For ev'ry Frown I'll shed a Tear.And if in vain, I court thy Love,Let mine, at least, thy pity move:Ah while I scorn, vouchsafe to woo,Methinks you may dissemble too.Ah Phillis, that you wou'd contriveA way to keep my Love alive,But all your other Charms must fail,When Kindness ceases to prevail.Alas! No less than you, I grieve,My dying flame has no reprieve,For I can never hope to find,Shou'd all the Nymphs, I Court, be kind,One Beauty able to renewThose Pleasures I enjoy in you,When Love and Youth did both conspireTo fill our Breasts and Veins with fire.'Tis true, some other Nymph may gainThat Heart which merits your Disdain,But second Love has still allay,The Joys grow aged, and decay.Then blame me not for losing moreThan Love and Beauty can restore:And let this truth thy comfort prove,I wou'd, but can no longer Love.
# THE DIVIDED HEART.
By the same Author.AH! Celia, that I were but sure,Thy Love, like mine, cou'd still endure;That Time and Absence, which destroyThe Cares of Lovers, and their Joy,Cou'd never rob me of that partWhich you have giv'n me of your Heart;Others unenvy'd might possessWhole Hearts, and boast that Happiness.'Twas Nobler Fortune to divideThe Roman Empire in her Pride,Than on some low and barb'rous Throne,Obscurely plac'd, to rule alone.Love only from thy Heart exactsThe several Debts thy Face contracts,And by that new and juster way,Secures thy Empire and his sway;Fav'ring but one, he might compelThe hopeless Lover to rebel.But shou'd he other Hearts thus share,That in the whole so worthless are,Shou'd into several Squadrons drawThat strength, which kept entire cou'd awe,Men would his scatter'd Powers deride,And conqu'ring Him those spoils divide.
# To Mr. J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian.
By the same Author.WHile others toil, our Country to supplyWith what we need only for Luxury,Spices, and Silk, in the rich East provide,To glut our Avarice, and feed our Pride.You Foreign Learning prosperously transmit,To raise our Virtue, and provoke our Wit.Such brave Designs your Gen'rous Soul inflameTo be a bold Adventurer for Fame;How much oblig'd are Italy and France,While with your Voice their Musick you advance?Your growing Fame with Envy can oppose,Who sing with no less Art than they Compose; In these Attempts, so few have had success,Their Beauties suffer in our English Dress:By Artless Hands, spoil'd of their Native Ayr,They seldom pass from moderately fair:As if you meant these Injuries to atone,You give them Charms, more Conqu'ring than their own.Not like the dull laborious Flatterer,With secret Art those Graces you confer.The skilful Painters, with slight stroaks impart,That subtil Beauty which affects the Heart.There are, who publickly profess they hateTranslations, and yet all they Write, Translate:So proud, they scorn to drive a Lawful Trade,Yet by their Wants, are shameless Pirates made:These you incense, while you their Thefts reveal,Or else prevent in what they meant to stealFrom all besides; you are secure of praise,But you so high our Expectation raise, A gen'ral Discontent we shall declare,If such a Workman only should repair.You to the Dead, your Piety have shewn,Adorn'd their Monuments, now build your own:Drawn in the East, we in your Lines may traceThat Genius which of old inspir'd the place:The banish'd Muses back to Greece you bring,Where their best Airs you so Divinely sing;The World must own they are by you restor'dTo sacred shades, where they were first ador'd.
# Virtue's Urania.
By the same Author.HOpeless I languish out my Days,Struck with Vrania's Conqu'ring Eyes:The Wretch at whom she darts these rays,Must feel the Wound until he dies.Though endless be her Cruelty,Calling her Beauties to my Mind,I bow beneath her Tyranny,And dare not murmur she's unkind.Reason this tameness does upbraid,Proff'ring to arm in my defence;But when I call her to my aid,She's more a Traytor than my sense.No sooner I the War declare,But strait her succour she denies,And joyning Forces with the Fair,Confirms the Conquest of her Eyes.
# SYLVIA.
By the same Author.THe Nymph that undoes me, is Fair and Unkind,No less than a Wonder by Nature design'd;She's the Grief of my Heart, the Joy of my Eye,And the cause of a Flame that never can die.Her Mouth, from whence Wit still obligingly flows,Has the Beautiful Blush, and the Smell of the Rose; Love and Destiny both attend on her Will,She wounds with a Look, with a Frown she can kill.The Desperate Lover can hope no redress,Where Beauty and Rigour are both in excess;In Sylvia they meet, so unhappy am I,Who sees her must Love, and who Loves her must die.
# TO CELIA.
By Sir Charles Sedley.AS in those Nations where they yet adoreMarble and Cedar, and their aid implore,'Tis not the Workman, nor the precious Wood,But 'tis the Worshipper that makes the God:So, cruel Fair, tho Heaven has giv'n thee allWe Mortals (Virtue, or can Beauty) call,'Tis we that give the Thunder to your Frowns,Darts to your Eyes, and to our selves the Wounds.Without our Love, which proudly you deride,Vain were your Beauty, and more vain your Pride,All envy'd Beings that the World can shew,Still to some meaner thing their greatness owe. Subjects make Kings, and we (the numerous TrainOf Humble Lovers) Constitute thy Reign.This difference only Beauties Realm may boast,Where most it favours, it enslaves the most.And they to whom it is indulgent found,Are ever in the rudest Fetters bound.What Tyrant yet, but thee, was ever knownCruel to those that serv'd to make him one?Valour's a Vice, if not with Honour joyn'd,And Beauty a Disease, when 'tis not kind.
# THE SUBMISSION.
By the same Author.AH! Pardon, Madam, if I ever thoughtYour smallest Favours could too dear be bought;And the just greatness of your Servant's Flame,I did the poorness of their Spirits Name;Calling their due attendance, Slavery,Your power of Life and Death, flat Tyranny;Since now I yield, and do confess, there isNo way too hard that leads to such a bliss.So when Hippomanes beheld the Race,Where Loss was Death, and Conquest but a Face, He stood amazed at the fatal strife,Wondring that Love shou'd dearer be than Life,But when he saw the Prize, no longer staid,But through those very dangers sought the Maid,And won her too: O may his Conquest proveA happy Omen to my purer Love;Which, if the honour of all VictoryIn the resistance of the Vanquisht lie,Though, it may be, the least regarded Prize,Is not the smallest Trophy of your Eyes.
# CONSTANCY.
By the same Author.FEar not, My Dear, a Flame can never die,That is once kindled by so bright an Eye:Look on thy self, and measure thence my Love,Think what a Passion such a Form must move;For though thy Beauty first allur'd my Sight,Yet now I look on it but as the LightThat led me to the Treasury of thy Mind,Whose inward Virtue in that Feature shin'd.That knot (be confident) will ever last,Which Fancy ty'd, and Reason has made fast;So fast, that time (although it may disarmThy Lovely Face) my Faith can never harm; And Age, deluded when it comes, will findMy Love remov'd, and to thy Soul assign'd.The Passion I have now, shall ne'er grow less:No, though thy own Fair Self should it oppress.I could e'en hazard my Eternity,Love but again, and 'twill a Heaven be.
# THE INDIFFERENCE.
By the same Author.THanks, Fair Vrania, to your scorn,I now am free as I was born;Of all the Pain that I endur'd,By your late Coldness, I am Cur'd.In losing me, proud Nymph, you loseThe Humblest Slave your Beauty knows;In losing you, I but throw downA Cruel Tyrant from her Throne.I must confess, I ne'er could findYour equal, or in Shape, or Mind.Y'ave Beauty, Wit, and all things know,But where you shou'd your Love bestow.I unawares, my Freedom gave,And to those Tyrants grew a Slave;But would y'ave kept what you have won,You should have more Compassion shewn.Love is a burthen, which two Hearts,When equally they bear their parts;With pleasure carry, but no one,Alas, can bear it long alone.I'm not of those, who Court their Pain,And make an Idol of Disdain;My hope in Love, does ne'er expire,But I lose also the Desire.Nor yet of those, who ill receiv'd,Would gladly have strange things believ'd,And if your Heart you do defend,Their Force against your Honour bend.Whoe'er does make his Victor less,His own low weakness does confess;And whiles her pow'r he does defame,He poorly doubles his own shame.Even that Malice does betray,And speak concern another way.And all such scorn in Men is butThe Smoak of Fires ill put out.He's still in Torment, whom the RageTo Detraction does engage;In Love, Indifference is sureThe only sign of perfect Cure.Yet, Cruel Fair, if thou canst proveAs happy in some other Love,As I could once have done in thine,The Sun on Happier does not shine.
# A Pastoral Dialogue.
By the same Author.STrephon! O Strephon! Once the Jolliest Lad,That with shrill Pipe did ever Mountain glad,While'ome the formost at our Rural Plays,The Pride and Glory of our Holy-days:Why dost thou now sit musing all alone,Teaching the Turtles yet a sadder Groan?Well'd with thy Tears, why does the Neighb'ring BrookBear to the Ocean what she never took? Why do our Woods, so us'd to hear thee Sing,With nothing now but with thy Sorrows ring?Thy Flocks are well and fruitful, and no SwainThan thee more welcome to the Hill or Plain.No loss of these, or care of those are left,Hath wretched Strephon of his Peace bereft;I could invite the Wolf, my Cruel Guest,And play unmov'd, while he on all did Feast;I could endure that every Swain out-run,Out-threw, Out-wrestl'd, and each Nymph shou'd shunThe hapless Strephon: But the Gods, I find,To no such trifles have this Heart design'd;A feller grief, and sadder loss, I plain,Than ever Shepherd, or did Prince, sustain;Bright Galatea, in whose matchless FaceState Rural Innocence with Heavenly Grace, In whose no less to be adored mind,With equal light, even distant Virtues shin'd,Chaste, without pride; though gentle, yet not soft;Not always cruel, nor yet kind too oft:Fair Goddess of these Fields, who for our sports,Though she might well become despised Courts,Belov'd of all, and loving one alone,Is from my sight, I fear, for ever gone;Now I am sure thou wondrest not, I grieve;But rather art amazed that I Live.Thy Case indeed is pitiful, but yetThou on thy loss too great a price dost set;Women, like Days are, Strephon, some be farMore bright and glorious than others are;Yet none so wonderful were ever seen,But by as Fair they have succeeded been.Others as Fair, and may as worthy prove,But sure I never shall another Love;Her bright Idea wanders in my Thought,At once my Poyson, and my Antidote;The Stag shall sooner with the Eagle soar;Seas leave their Fishes naked on the shoar;The Wolf shall sooner by the Lambkin die,And from the Kid the hungry Lyon flie;Than I forget her Face; what once I Love,May from my Eyes, but not my Heart remove.
# To a Lady, who fled the Sight of him.
By Sir George Etherege.IF I my Celia cou'd perswadeTo see those Wounds her Eyes have made,And hear, whilst I that Passion tell,Which, like her self, does so excel,How soon we might be freed from Care!She need not fear, nor I despair.Such Beauty does the Nymph protect,That all approach her with respect;And can I offer ViolenceWhere Love does joyn in her defence? This Guard might all her Fears disperse,Did she with Savages Converse.Then my Celia wou'd surprizeWith what's produc'd by her own Eyes;Those matchless Flames which they inspireIn her own Breast, shou'd raise a fireFor Love, but with more subtil Art,As well as Beauty charms the Heart.
# To a Lady, asking him how long he would Love her.
By the same Author.IT is not, Celia, in our powerTo say how long our Love will last,It may be we within this HourMay lose those Joys we now do taste:The Blessed, that Immortal be,From Change in Love are only free.Then, since we Mortal Lovers are,Ask not how long our Love will last;But while it does, let us take careEach Minute be with Pleasure past;Were it not madness to denyTo Live, because w'are sure to Die.
# TO Mr. G. Granville, ON HIS VERSES TO THE KING.
By Mr. Edmund Waller.AN Early Plant, which such a Blossom bears,And shows a Genius so beyond his Years;A Judgment which could make so fair a Choice,So high a Subject to employ his Voice,Still as it grows, How sweetly will it sing,The growing Greatness of our Matchless King?
# TO Mr. WALLER.
By Mr. G. Granville.WHen into Lybia, the Young Grecian, came,To Talk with Hammon, and Consult for Fame;When from the Sacred Tripod where he stood,The Priest inspir'd, Saluted him, a God;So own'd by Heaven, less glorious far was he,Great God of Verse, than I, thus Prais'd by Thee;Whoe'er their Names, can in thy Numbers show,Have more than Empire, and Immortal grow: Ages to come, shall scorn the Pow'rs of Old,When in thy Verse, of Greater Gods they're told.Our Beauteous Queen, and Martial Monarch's Name,For Jove and Juno, shall be plac'd by Fame;Thy Charles, for Neptune, shall the Seas Command,And Sacharissa shall for Venus stand:Greece shall no longer Boast, nor Haughty Rome,But think from Britain, all the Gods did come.
# ON MYRA's Singing.
By the same Author.THE Syrens, once Deluded, Vainly Charm'd,Ty'd to the Mast, Vlysses Sail'd un-harm'd:Had Myra's Voice Entic'd his List'ning Ear,The Greek had stop't, and wou'd have Dy'd to hear:When Myra Sings, we seek th' Enchanting Sound,And Bless the Notes which do so sweetly Wound.What Musick needs must dwell upon that Tongue,Whose Speech is Tune-full, as another's Song; Such Harmony, such Wit, a Face so fair,So many pointed Arrows, who can bear?The Slave that from her Wit, or Beauty flies,If she but reach him with her Voice, he Dies.Like Soldiers, so in Battle we succeed,One Peril scaping, by another Bleed:In vain the Dart, or glittering Sword we shun,Condemn'd to Perish by the Slaughtering Gun.
# IN Praise of MYRA.
By the same Author. 
*I.TUNE the Harmonious Lyre: Begin my Muse,What Nymph? What Queen? What Goddess shall we chuse?Whose Praises shall we Sing? What Charmer's NameTransmit Immortal down to Fame?Strike, strike thy Strings; let Echo take the Sound,And bear it far, to all the Mountains round:Pyndus again shall hear, again rejoyce,And Haemus too, as when th' Enchanting Voice Of Tuneful Orpheus Charm'd the Grove,Taught Oaks to Dance, and made the Cedars move. 
*II.Nor Venus, nor Diana will we Name,Myra is Venus and Diana too,All that was feign'd of them, apply'd to her, is true:Then Sing, my Muse; let Myra be our Theam.As when the Shepherds do their Garland make,They search, with pains, the Fragrant Meadows round,Plucking but here and there, and only takeThe Choicest Flow'rs, with which some Nymph is Crown'd.In Framing Myra so Divinely Fair,Nature has taken the same care;All that is Lovely, Noble, Good, we see,All-beauteous Myra, all bound up in Thee. 
*III.Where Myra is, there is the Queen of Love,Th' Arcadian Pastures, and the Cyprian Grove.When Myra Walks, so Charming is her Meen,In every Movement, every Grace is seen.When Myra speaks, so just's the sense and strong,So Sweet the Voice, 'tis like the Muse's Song.Place me on Mountains of Eternal Snow,Where all is Ice, all Winter Winds that blow;Or cast me underneath the Burning Line,Where everlasting Sun do's shine,Where all is scorcht—Whatever you decree,Ye Gods, whereever I shall be,Myra shall still be Lov'd, and still Ador'd by Me.
# SONG.
By the same Author.PRepar'd to Rail, Resolv'd to Part,When I approach the Perjur'd Maid;What is it awes my Timorous Heart?Why is my Tongue afraid?With the least Glance a little kind,Such wondrous Pow'r have Myra's Charms!She drives my Doubts, Enslaves my Mind,And all my Rage disarms.Forgetful of her broken Vows,when gazing on that Form Divine,Her Injur'd Vassal, trembling bows,Nor dares the Slave Repine.
# SONG.
By the same Author.SO Smooth, and so Serene but now,What means this Change on Myra's Brow?Her Aguish Love now glows and burns,Then chills, and shakes, and the Cold Fit returns.Mockt with deluding Vows and Smiles,When on her Pity I depend,My airy hope she soon beguiles,And Laughs to see my Labours never end.So up the Steepy Hill with pain,The weighty Stone is rowl'd in vain;Which having toucht the top, recoils,And leaves the LabourerSisyphus. to renew his Toils.
# VERSES Sent from an Unknown Hand, To Mr. G. GRANVILLE, In the Countrey.
WHY, G—lle, is thy Life confin'd,To Shades, Thou whom the Gods design'dIn publick, to do credit to Mankind?Why sleeps the Noble Ardour of thy Bloud,Which from thy Ancestors, so many Ages past,From Rollo, down to Bevil Floud,And then appear'd again at last,In Thee, whom thy Victorious LanceBore the Disputed Prize, from all the Youth ofIn the first Tryals, which are made for Fame,Those to whom Fate Success denies,If taking Counsel from their Shame,They modestly Retreat, they're Wise:But, why should you, who still succeedIn all you do, whether with Graceful Art you leadThe fiery Barb, or with as Graceful Motion treadAt shining Balls, where all agree,To give the highest Praise, and the first Place to Thee.So Lov'd and Prais'd, whom all Admire,Why, why should you from Courts, or Camps retire?If Celia is unkind, (if it can be,That any Nymph can be unkind to Thee?)If Pensive made by Love, you thus retire,Awake your Muse, and string your Lyre;Thy tender Song, and thy Melodious Strain,Can never be addrest in vain:She needs will Love, and we shall have Thee back again.
# SONG.
By Sir George Etherege.TELL me no more you Love; in vain,Fair Celia, You this Passion feign;Can they pretend to Love, who doRefuse what Love perswades them to?Who once has felt his Active Flame,Dull Laws of Honour will disdain;You wou'd be thought his Slave, and yetYou will not to his Pow'r submit.More Cruel then those Beauties are,Whose Coyness wounds us to despair;For all the kindness which you shew,Each Smile and Kiss which you bestow▪ Are like those Cordials which we giveTo Dying Men, to make them Live,And Languish out an Hour in pain;Be Kinder, Celia, or Disdain.
# To Her EXCELLENCE, the MARCHIONESS OF NEW-CASTLE, After the Reading of Her Incomparable POEMS.
By the same Author.Madam,WIth so much Wonder we are struckWhen we begin to Read your matchless Book;A while your own excess of Merit staysOur forward Pens, and does suspend your Praise, Till Time our Minds does gently recompose,Allays this Wonder, and our Duty shews,Instructs us how your Virtues to proclaim,And what we ought to pay to your Great Fame;Your Fame, which in your Countrey has no Bounds,But wheresoever Learning's known, resounds.Those Graces Nature did till now divide;Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,Are joyn'd in you, and all to you submit,The brightest Beauty, and the sharpest Wit.No Faction here, or fiery Envy sways,They give you Myrtle, while we offer Bays.What Mortal dares dispute those Wreaths with You,Arm'd thus with Light'ning, and with Thunder too?This made the Great New-Castle's Heart your Prize,Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious Eyes,Had only pow'r his Martial Mind to tame,And raise in his Heroick Breast a Flame:A Flame, which with his Courage still aspires,As if Immortal Fuel fed those Fires:This Mighty Chief, and your Great Self made One,Together the same Race of Glory run;Together in the Wings of Fame you move,Like yours, his Vertue: And like yours, his Love.While we your Praise endeav'ring to rehearse,Pay that great Duty in our Humble Verse;Such as may justly move your Anger, You,Like Heaven, forgive them, and accept them too. But what we cannot, your brave Hero pays,He builds those Monuments we strive to raise:Such as to after Ages shall make known,While he records your Deathless Fame, his own.So when an Artist some rare Beauty draws,Both in our wonder share, and our applause:His skill from Time secures the Glorious Dame,And makes himself Immortal in her Fame.
# EPILOGUE TO TARTUFF, Spoken by Himself.
By a Person of Honour.*MAny have been the vain attempts of WitAgainst the still-prevailing Hypocrite▪Once, and but once, a Poet got the day,And vanquish'd Busie in a Puppet-play:But Busie rallying, arm'd with zeal, and rage,Possest the Pulpit, and pull'd down the Stage.To laugh at English Knaves is dang'rous then,While English Fools will think them Honest Men But sure no Zealous Brother can deny usFree leave with this our Monsieur Ananias.A Man may say, without being call'd an Atheist,There are Damn'd Rogues among the French and Papist,That fix Salvation to short Band and Hair,That belch and snuffle to prolong a Pray'r?That use t'enjoy the Creature, to expressPlain Whoring, Gluttony, and Drunkenness?And in a decent way perform them too,As well, nay, better far, alas, than you;Whose Fleshly Failings are but Fornication,We Godly phrase it, Gospel-Propagation,Just as Rebellion was call'd Reformation.Zeal stands but Cent'ry at the Gate of Sin,Whilst all that have the Word pass freely inSilent, and in the dark, for fear of Spies,You march, and take Damnation by surprize:There's not a Roaring Blade in all this Town,Can go so far tow'rds Hell for Half a Crown, As I for Six Pence, for we know the way;For want of Guides, Men often go astray:Therefore give ear to what I shall advise,Let every Married Man, that's Grave and Wise,Take a Tartuff, of known Ability,To teach and to instruct his Family,Who may so settle lasting Reformation,First get his Son, then give him Education.
# THE Imperfect Enjoyment.
By Sir George Etherege.AFter a Pretty, Amorous Discourse,She does resist my Love with a pleasing force;Mov'd not with Anger, but with Modesty,Against her will she is my Enemy.Her Eyes the rudeness of her Arms excuse,Whilst those accept what these seem to refuse;To ease my Passion, and to make me blest,Th' obliging Smock falls from her whiter Breast;Then with her lovely Hands she does concealThose Wonders Chance so kindly did reveal; In vain, alas, her nimble Fingers stroveTo shield her Beauties from my greedy Love;Guarding her Breasts, her Lips she did expose,To save a Lilly she must lose a Rose;So many Charms she has in ev'ry place,A hundred Hands cannot defend each Grace.Sighing, at length her force she does recal,For since I must have Part, she'll give me All.Her Arms the joyful Conqueror embrace,And seem to guide me to the sought-for place.Her Love is in her sparkling Eyes exprest,She falls o'th' Bed for Pleasure, more than rest.But Oh, strange Passion! Oh, Abortive Joy!My Zeal does my Devotion quite destroy,Come to the Temple, where I shou'd AdoreMy Saint, I Worship at the sacred Door;Oh, cruel Chance! The Town which did opposeMy Strength so long, now yields to my Dispose; When, overjoy'd with Victory, I fallDead at the foot of the surrender'd Wall,Without the usual Ceremony, weHave both fulfill'd the Am'rous Mystery,The Action which we shou'd have joyntly done,Each has unluckily perform'd alone;The Union which our Bodies shou'd enjoy,The Union of our eager Souls destroy.Our Flames are punish'd by their own excess,W'd had more Pleasure had our Loves been less;She Blush'd and Frown'd, perceiving we had doneThe Sport, she thought, we scarce had yet begun.Alas, said I, Condemn your Self, not Me;This is th' effect of too much Modesty.Hence with that peevish Virtue, the DelightOf both our Victories was lost i'th' Fight; Yet from my Shame, your Glory does arise,My Weakness proves the Vigour of your Eyes:They did consume the Victim, e're it cameUnto the Altar, with a purer Flame:Phillis, let then this Comfort ease your Care,Y'd been more Happy, had you been less Fair.
# A PROLOGUE Spoken at the Opening of the Duke's New Play-House.
By the same Author.'TIS not in this, as in the former Age,When Wit alone suffic'd t' Adorn the Stage,When things well said, an Audience cou'd Invite,Without the hope of such a Gaudy Sight:What with your Fathers took, wou'd take with you,If Wit had still the Charm of being New; Had not Enjoyment dull'd your Appetite,She in her homely Dress wou'd yet delight;Such stately Theatres we need not raise,Our Old House wou'd put off our dullest Plays.You Gallants know, a fresh Wench of Sixteen,May drive the Trade in Honest Bombarine,And never want good Custom, shou'd she lieIn a Back-Room, two or three Stories high:But such a Beauty as has long been known,Though not decay'd, but to Perfection grown,Must, if she mean to thrive in this lewd Town,Wear Points, Lac'd-Petticoats, and a rich Gown;Her Lodgings too, must with her Dress agree,Be hung with Damask, or with Tapestry;Have China, Cabinets, and a great Glass,To strike respect into an Am'rous Ass.Without the help of Stratagems and Arts,An old Acquaintance cannot touch your Hearts.Methinks 'tis hard our Authors shou'd submitSo tamely to their Predecessors wit, Since, I am sure, among you there are fewWou'd grant your Grandfathers had more than you:But hold! I in this business may proceed too far,And raise a storm against our Theatre;And then what wou'd the wise Adventurers say,Who were in a much greater Fright to dayThan ever Poet was about his Play?Our apprehensions none can justly blame,Money is dearer much to us than Fame:This thought on, let our Poets justifieThe Reputation of their Poetry;We are resolv'd we will not have to doWith what's between those Gentlemen and you.Be kind, and let our House have but your praise,You're welcome every to damn their Plays.
# Falling in Love with a Stranger at a Play.
By Sir Charles Sedley.FAir Amarillis, on the Stage, whilst youBehold a feigned Love, you gave a true;I like a Coward in the Amorous War,Came only to look on, yet got a Scar;Fixt by your Eyes, I had no power to flie,They held me whil'st you gain'd the Victory:I thought I safely might my sight content,To which the power to like (not Love) I lent;And if I ventur'd on some slight Discourse,It should be such as could no Passion nurse:Led by the treacherous lustre of your Eyes,At last I plaid too near the Precipice: Love came disguis'd in Wonder and Delight;And I was Conquer'd e're I knew him right;Your words fell on my Passion, like those showersWhich swell and multiply the rising Flowers;Like Cupid's self, a God, and yet a Child,Your Looks at once were awful, and yet mild:Methoughts you Blush'd, as Conscious of my Flame,Whil'st your strict Vertue did your Beauty blame:But rest secure; y'are from the guilt as free,As Saints Ador'd from our Idolatry;And Love, a Torment, does for me prepare,Beyond your Rigour in my own Despair.
# Indifference Excused.
By the same Author.LOve, when 'tis true, needs not the aidOf Sighs nor Tears to make it known;And to convince the Cruel'st Maid,Lovers should use their Love alone:Into their very Looks 'twill steal;And he that most will hide his Flame,Does in that Care his Pains reveal,Silence it self can Love proclaim.This, Aurelia, made me shunThe Paths that common Lovers tread,Whose guilty passions are begun,Not in their Hearts, but in their Head.I cou'd not sigh, and with cross'd ArmsLament your Rigour and my Fate,Nor tax your Beauty with such CharmsAs Men Adore, and Women Hate:But Careless Live, and without Art,Knowing my Love you must have fp'ide,And thinking it a foolish part,To strive to shew what none can hide.
# To my Honoured Friend Sir ROBERT HOWARD, On His Excellent Poems.
By Mr. John Dryden.AS there is Musick uninform'd by ArtIn those wild Notes, which with a merry HeartThe Birds in unfrequented Shades express,Who better taught at home, yet please us less:So in your Verse, a native sweetness dwells,Which shames Composure, and its Art excells.Singing, no more can your soft numbers grace,Than Paint adds Charms unto a Beauteous Face. Yet as when mighty Rivers gently creep,Their even calmness does suppose them deep;Such is your Muse: No Metaphor swell'd highWith dangerous boldness lifts her to the Sky;Those mounting Fancies, when they fall again,Shew Sand and Dirt at bottom do remain.So firm a strength, and yet withal so sweet,Did never but in Sampson's Riddle meet.'Tis strange each Line so great a weight should bear,And yet no sign of toil, no sweat appear.Either your Art hides Art, as Stoicks feign,Then least to feel, when most they suffer pain,And we, dull Souls, admire, but cannot seeWhat hidden Springs within the Engine be:Or 'tis some happiness that still pursuesEach Act and Motion of your Graceful Muse.Or is it Fortune's Work, that in your HeadThe curiousRete Mirabile. Net that is for Fancies spread, Lets through its Meshes every meaner Thought,While rich Idea's there are only caught.Sure that's not all; this is a piece too fairTo be the Child of Chance, and not of Care.No Atoms casually together hurl'dCoulde'er produce so beautiful a World.Nor dare I such a Doctrine here admit,As would destroy the Providence of Wit.'Tis your strong Genius then which does not feelThose weights would make a weaker Spirit reel:To carry weight, and run so lightly too,Is what alone your Pegasus can do.Great Hercules himself cou'd ne'er do more,Than not to feel those Heav'ns and Gods he bore.Your easier Odes, which for Delight were penn'd,Yet our Instruction make their second end:We're both enrich'd and pleas'd, like them that Wooe,At once a Beauty, and a Fortune too. Of Moral Knowledge Poesie was Queen,And still she might, had wanton Wits not been;Who like ill Guardians liv'd themselves at large,And not content with that, debauch'd their Charge:Like some brave Captain, your successful PenRestores the Exil'd to her Crown again;And gives us hope, that having seen the DaysWhen nothing flourish'd but Fanatick Bays,All will at length in this Opinion rest,"A Sober Prince's Government is best.This is not all; your Art the way has foundTo make improvement of the richest ground,That Soil which those Immortal Laurels bore,That once the Sacred Maro's Temples woreElisa's Griefs, are so exprest by you,They are too Eloquent to have been true.Had she so spoke, Aeneas had obey'dWhat Dido rather than what Jove had said. If Funeral Rites can give a Ghost repose,Your Muse so justly has discharged those.Elisa's shade may now its wandring cease,And claim a Title to the Fields of Peace.But if Aeneas be oblig'd, no lessYour kindness great Achilles doth confess,Who dress'd by Statius in too bold a look,Did ill become those Virgin's Robes he took.To understand how much we owe to you,We must your Numbers, with your Authors view;Then we shall see his work was lamely rough,Each figure stiff as if design'd in Buff;His Colours laid so thick on every place,As only shew'd the Paint, but hid the Face.But as in Perspective we Beauties see,Which in the Glass, not in the Picture be;So here our sight obligingly mistakesThat Wealth which his your Bounty only makes. Thus vulgar Dishes are by Cooks disguis'd,More for their dressing than their substance priz'd.Your curiousAnnorations on Statius. Notes so search into that Age,When all was Fable but the Sacred Page,That since in that dark Night we needs must stray,We are at least misled in pleasant way.But what we most admire, your Verse no lessThe Prophet than the Poet doth confess.E're our weak Eyes discern'd the doubtful streakOf Light, you saw Great Charles his Morning break.So skilful Sea-men ken the Land from far,Which shews like Mists to the dull Passenger.To Charles your Muse first pays her dutious Love,As still the Antients did begin from Jove.With Monck you end, whose Name preserv'd shall be, As Rome recordedHic situs est Rufus qui pulso vindice quandam. Imperium asseruit non sibi sed Patriae. Rufus Memory,Who thought it greater honour to obeyHis Countrey's Interest, than the World to sway.But to Write Worthy things, of Worthy Men,Is the peculiar Talent of your Pen:Yet let me take your Mantle up, and IWill venture in your right to Prophesie."This Work by Merit, first of Fame secure,"Is likewise happy in its Geniture:"For since 'tis born when Charles ascends the Throne,"It shares, at once, his Fortune and its own.
# AN ODE In Imitation of —Quid Bellicosus Cantabor, &c. Hor. Od. 11. Lib. 2.
By Mr. John How.WHAT is't to us, who guides the State,Who's out of Favour, or who Great,Who are the Ministers and Spies,Who votes for Places, or who buys.The World will still be rul'd by KnavesAnd Fools contending to be Slaves; Small Things, my Friend, serve to supportLife, troublesom at best, and short:Our youth runs back, occasion flies,Grey Hairs come on, and Pleasure dies:Who would the present Blessings loseFor Empires which he cannot use.Kind Providence has us supply'dWith what to others is deny'd,Virtue which teaches to condemnAnd scorn ill Actions and ill Men.Beneath this Lime-Tree's fragrant shade,On Beds of Flowers supinely laid,Let's then all other Cares remove,And Drink and Sing to those we Love:Here's to Neaera, Heaven design'dPerfection of the Charming kind,Whose Beauty, Voice, and wondrous WitLays all Adoring at her Feet,Makes Angels envy, Nature vain,And me delight in hopeless pain. May she be Blest, as she is Fair,And Pity me as I Love her;The rest let's leave to the unseen Powers,This Moment and this Glass is ours.
# THE PLATONICK.
By Sir Charles Sedley.FAIR Octavia, you are much to blame,To blow the fire, and wonder at the flame.I did converse, 'tis true, so far was mine;But that I Lov'd, and hop'd, was wholly thine;Not hop'd, as others do, for a return,But that I might without offending burn.I thought those Eyes which every hour enslave,Could not remember all the Wounds they gave:Forgotten in the Crowd, I wisht to lie,And of your Coldness, not your Anger, die;Yet since you know I Love, 'tis now no timeLonger to hide, let me excuse the Crime; Seeing what Laws I to my Passion give,Perhaps you may consent that it should live▪First, It never shall a hope advanceOf waiting on you, but by seeming chance.I at a distance will Adore your Eyes,As awful Persians do the Eastern Skies:I never will presume to think of Sex,Nor with gross Thoughts my Deathless Love perplex:I tread a pleasant path without design;And to thy care my Happiness resign,From Heaven it self thy Beauty cannot beA freer Gift than is my Love to Thee.
# TO A Devout Young Woman.
By the same Author.PHillis, this mighty Zeal asswage.You over-act your part;The Martyrs at your tender Age,Gave Heaven but half their Heart.Old Men (till past the Pleasure) ne'erDeclaim against the Sin,'Tis early to begin to fearThe Devil at Fifteen.The World, to Youth, is too severe,And like a Treacherous Light,Beauty the Actions of the FairExposes to their sight.And yet this World, as old as 'tis,Is oft deceiv'd by't too;Wise Combinations seldom miss,Let's try what we can do.
# SONG.
By the same Author.WHEN Aurelia first becameThe Mistress of his Heart,So mild and gentle was her Reign,Thyrsis, in hers, had part.Reserves and Care he laid aside,And gave his Love the Reins;The headlong course he now must bide,No other way remains.At first her Cruelty he fear'd,But that being overcome,No second for a while appear'd,And he thought all his own:He call'd himself a happier ManThan ever Lov'd before;Her Favours still his Hopes out-ran,What Mortal can have more?Love smil'd at first, then looking grave,Said, Thyrsis, leave to boast;More joy than all her kindness gave,Her Fickleness will cost.He spoke, and from that fatal time,All Thyrsis did, or said,Appear'd unwelcome, or a Crime,To the Ungrateful Maid.Then he despairing of her Heart,Would fain have had his own.Love answered, such a Nymph could partWith nothing she had won.
# On the Lamented DEATH Of the Late Countess of DORSET.
By N. Tate, Servant to Their Majesties.HOME, Shepherds, to your Cottages retire,Your Dorset Mourns; no more the Pipe inspire.Your Mirth is done, your Care is vain; what needTo Tend those Flocks, that will no longer Feed?Nature her self concern'd for Him appears,Sables for his and her lost Darling wears,She Sighs in Storms, and Weeps in Seas of Tears. Ev'n Earth that does the precious Relicks shroud,Laments the Treasure that shou'd make her Proud:Alone exempted from the gen'ral Care,The Skies rejoyce to have regain'd their Star.Profane Disease: The Crime had been too great,In only Batt'ring of so fair a Seat!Which spightfully thou quite hast undermin'd,Because the bright Remains would still have shin'd:So Envious Rome no Method cou'd employFair Carthage to Subdue, but to Destroy.Mute are the Groves, where Happy Shepherds sung,And Philomel once more has lost her Tongue;The Palm and Myrtle Glades no longer please:Cypress and Yew are now the only Trees. The ruthfull'st Objects, most Endearments have,The Uncouth Vale Delights, and gloomy CaveCan please, because it represents the Grave.Tears our Refreshment are, our sole Relief,To give Despair free scope,To set the Sluces ope,And Rowl with the Impetuous Tide of Grief.Let the next Age the costly Tomb prepare,To her shrin'd Image come, and seek her there;The Present rears, beyond the Pow'r of Art,A breathing Monument in ev'ry Heart.What Rhet'rick can divorce, what Charms of Verse,The Sighing Mother from her Darling's Hearse?To trace her Features, and her Virtues paint,In Form an Angel, as in Life a Saint;Are Themes ill suited to a Parent's Grief,The Food of Sorrow, an unkind Relief: One only Sov'raign Balm sick Nature bears,A Sympathizing Royal Mourners Tears:Though Gods, nor Goddesses, may Fate reverse,Our Goddess Weeping Consecrates the Hearse.Behold, forlorn the Muses Patron laid,With Mourning Cupids in the Cypress shade;Of Fate, nor cruel Skies, he once complains,But inwardly the Conflict deep sustains,The strugling Tumult in his Breast restrains.O DORSET, cou'd our Worthless Live pretend(Whose Comforts only on thy Smiles depend)To Bribe thy Griefs, how pleas'd cou'd we resignOur Breaths, compounding for one Pang of thine.Our Useless Breaths are tender'd now in vain,Since Tuneful Notes no more must chear the Plain,Let Numbers cease; for whom shou'd they relieve,That can no Comfort to their Patron give?Yet, DORSET, Live, in pity to the Age,That to Condole thy Loss forgets its Rage;The Impious Age still from one Crime is free,Mad with Intestine Strife, we all agree,As in Admiring in Lamenting Thee!Let those dear Pledges Intercede at least,The Living Relicks of the Fair Deceas'd;Till Infant Beauty to full Bloom arrives,The Mother's Virtues, and her Charms revives:Till Dawning Buckhurst to his Zenith rise,And gild (like you) and warm our Northern Skies.Till then Indulge our dearest Wishes scope,Next Age's DORSET, Britain's second Hope.
# TO CHLORIS.
By Sir Charles Sedley.CHloris, I cannot say, your EyesDid my unwary Heart surprize,Nor will I swear it was your Face,Your Shape, or any nameless Grace;For you are so entirely Fair,To Love a part, injustice were;No drowing Man can know which dropOf water his last breath did stop;So when the Stars in Heaven appear,And joyn to make the Night look clear; The Light we no one's Bounty call,But the united work of all;He that both Lips, or Hands adore,Deserves them only, and no more;But I Love all, and every part,And nothing less can ease my Heart.Cupid that Lover weakly strikes,Who can express what 'tis he likes.
# SONG.
By the same Author.AVrelia, Art thou madTo let the World in meEnvy Joys I never had,And censure them in Thee.Fill'd with grief for what is past,Let us at length be wise,And the Banquet boldly taste,Since we have paid the price.Love does easie Souls despise,Who lose themselves for Toys,And Escape for those devise,Who taste his utmost Joys.To be thus for Trifles blam'd,Like theirs a Folly is,Who are for vain Swearing Damn'd,And knew no higher Bliss.Love should like the Year be Crown'd,With sweet variety;Hope should in the Spring be foundKind Fears, and Jealousie.In the Summer Flowers should rise,And in the Autumn Fruit;His Spring doth else but mock our Eyes,And in a Scoff Salute.
# SONG.
By the same Author.LOVE still has something of the Sea,From whence his Mother rose;No time his Slaves from doubt can free,Nor give their Thoughts repose:They are becalm'd in clearest Days,And in rough weather tost;They wither under cold delays,Or are in Tempests lost.One while they seem to touch the Port,Then straight into the Main,Some angry Wind, in cruel sport,Their Vessel drives again.At first, Disdain and Pride they fear,Which if they chance to scape,Rivals and falshood soon appearIn a more dreadful Shape.By such degrees to Joy they come,And are so long withstood,So slowly they receive the Sum,It hardly does them good.'Tis Cruel to prolong a Pain;And to defer a Bliss:Believe me, gentle HermioneNo less Inhumane is.And Hundred Thousand Oaths your FearsPerhaps would not remove;And if I gaz'd a Thousand Years,I could no deeper Love,'Tis fitter much for you to guess,Than for me to explain;But grant, O grant that HappinessWhich only does remain.
# A DIALOGUE BETWEEN AMINTAS AS and CELIA.
By the same Author.A Mintas, I am come alone,According as I said;But whither is thy Honour flown?I fear I am betray'd:The Looks are chang'd, and in the placeOf Innocent Desires,Methinks I see thy Eyes and FaceBurn with unusual Fires.Sees not my Celia Nature wearOne Countenance in the Spring,And yet another Shape prepare,To bring the Harvest in?Look on the Eagle, how unlikeHe to the Egg is found,When he prepares his Pownce to strikeHis Prey against the ground.Fears might my Infant Love become;'Twere want of kindness now,Should Modesty my Hope benum,Or check what you allow.Amintas, hold, What could you worseTo worst of Women do?Ah! How could you a Passion nurseSo much my Honour's Foe?Make not an Idol of a Toy,Which every breath can shake,Which all must have, or none enjoy,What course so e'er we take:Whil'st Women hate, or Men are vain,You cannot be secure;What makes my Celia then a painSo fruitless to endure?Could I the World neglect for Thee,Thy Love, though dear it cost,In some unkind Conceit of me,Would be untimely lost:Thou would'st thy own Example fear,And every heedless wordI chance let fall beyond thy Care,Would some new doubt afford.If I am Jealous, 'tis becauseI know not where you Love;With me fulfil Love's gentle Laws,And all my Fears remove.Women, like things, at second hand,Do half their Value lose;But whilst all Courtship they withstand,May at their Pleasure choose.This were a fine Discourse, my Dear,If we were not alone;But now Love whispers in my Ear,There's somewhat to be done.She said, she never would forgive:He Kissing, swore she should;And told her she was mad to striveAgainst their Mutual Good. What farther past, I cannot tell,But sure not much amiss;He vow'd he Lov'd her dearly well,She answered with a Kiss.
# THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.
By Mrs. Wharton.
# CHAP. I.

# The ARGUMENT.

Verse 1. The Miserable Estate of Jerusalem, by reason of her Sin. 12. She Complaineth of her Grief. 18. And confesseth God's Judgments to be Righteous.
 
*1.HOW doth the Mournful Widow'd City bow?She that was once so great: Alas, how low?Once fill'd with Joy, with Desolation now. 
*2.Tears on her Cheeks, and Sables on her Head;She mourns her Lover's lost, and Comfort's Dead.Alas, alas, lost City, where are those,So proud once to be Friends, now turn'd her Foes? 
*3.Judah is gone; alas, to Bondage gone,Amongst the Heathen Judah mourns alone,Griev'd, and in Servitude, she finds no rest,Follw'd by none but those by whom opprest. 
*4.The Feasts of Zion, no one now attends,Unhappy Zion, destitute of Friends:Her Priests still Sigh, and all her Virgins Mourn,Because her Gladness now finds no return. 
*5.Her Enemies are great, and ever nigh,Still Fortunate, because her Crimes were high. Her Captiv'd Children, still her guilt upbraid,Who Mourn whilst their Insulting Foes Invade. 
*6.Her Beauty which excell'd, is now no moreThat brightness which all Nations did Adore;Here Princes are like hunted Harts become,Breathless and Faint, whilst the Pursuit goes on:Alas for Zion, all their Strength is gone. 
*7.Jerusalem then thought upon the HourWhen she was Crown'd with Peace, Delight,and Power;Thoughts once so Joyful, Mournful now andVain,The Foe Insults, whilst she no help fustains,Mocking both at her Sabbaths and her Pains. 
*8.Her Crims have caus'd her to be far remov'd,Jerusalem, who was so well belov'd. All those who in her Pride admir'd her Fame,Despise her now, because thy've seen her Shame:Sighing she turns away, with Shame distrest,Amaz'd, Despis'd, Deserted and Opprest. 
*9.Circl'd with Guilt and Shame, she cannot fly,Her Comforts far remov'd, her End too nigh;She vainly think, on that 'tis now too late,Behold those Griefs, which no one can repeat,Her Fall is steep, and all her Foes are great. 
*10.Her Sanctuary is by them betray'd,All her Delights they carelesly invade,Even the Heathen, of whom God had said,They should not in her Holy Temple tread. 
*11.Her hungry People sigh, and give awayFor Bread, their Treasures, lest their Lives decay.Consider, Lord, see her with Gares bow'd down,For I am Vile, and Zion left alone. 
*12.All you who pass this way behold and see,Are my Griefs small? Do others grieve like me?Are not these Sorrows, under which I bow,With which the Lord hath brought my Soul so low?Turn back and Mourn with me, because my LordIn his fierce Anger doth no Peace afford. 
*13.He from above hath Flames and Horrour sent,Circling my Soul with Pain and Discontent;His Snares, alas, my weary Feet betray,Whilst Desolate and Faint, I Mourn all DayFor Zion lost, her Glory thrown away. 
*14.Our Sins have brought those Chains which his CommandHath fastn'd now (who can his Power withstand?)Now they are link'd by his Almighty Hand. The Lord forsakes, and I am now the scornOf Enemies, because of God forlorn:He was my Strength, and now, alas, 'tis gone. 
*15.My Mighty Men are all by him cast down,They're crush'd by numbers, and I'm left alone;Whilst silently thy Virgin Daughters Mourn,Unhappy Mournful Judah left Forlorn. 
*16.For this I Weep, and waste my self in Tears,Because her Help's far off, and Sorrow's near:Ah, wretched Judah, where is now thy hope?Thy Foes still triumph whilst thy Children droop. 
*17.Zion spreads forth her Arms to be reliev'd,But who can Comfort whom the Lord hath Griev'd? Her Enemies increase and flourish still,By his Command, by his all-powerful Will.Ah, wretched City, scorn'd and sham'd by all,Who can enough lament thy dreadful Fall? 
*18.Yet he is Just, for I am Guilty found,The Lord, with Righteousness is always Crown'd.Ye that pass by, see me with Sorrows Drown'd,My weight of Sin hath press'd me to the Ground.Who is it now my Freedom can restore?My Youth and Captive Virgins are no more. 
*19.I call'd for all my Friends, but they were gone,Friendship grows cold, when Misery comes on:With Hunger pin'd, my Priests and Rulers Dy'd,Within my Walls perish'd my Strength and Guide. 
*20.My Crimes were great, so are my SorrowsBehold my Lord, see the Afflicted bow; (now, Abroad th' unwearied Sword bereaves of Breath,And Grief at Home, is a more Cruel Death. 
*21.All round me hear my Sighs, and see my Tears,Whilst there is none that can relieve my Cares:My Foes hear, and rejoyce at what is done:But thou wilt surely, Lord, at last return,And then the Enemy, like me, will Mourn. 
*22.Their Crimes are great, turn, Mighty Lord, and see,Affict 'em then, as thou Afflictest me.My Griefs are great, turn therefore and Relent;My Sighs are many, and my Heart is Faint.
# TO CELIA.
By an vnknown Hand.ALL things submit themselves to your Command,Fair Celia, when it does not Love withstand;The power it borrowed from your Eyes alone,All but himself would yield to who has none;Were he not blind, such are the Charms you have,He'd quit his Godhead to become your Slave.Be proud to act a Mortal Hero's part,And throw himself, for Fame, on his own Dart? But Fate hath otherwise dispos'd of things,In different Bonds Subjecting Slaves, and Kings.That Fate (like you, resistless) does ordainThat Love alone should over Beauty Reign.By Harmony the Universe does move;And what is Harmony, but Mutual Love?See gentle Brooks, how quietly they glide,Kissing the rugged Banks on either side,Whil'st in their Crystal Stream at once they show,And with them feed the Flowers which they bestow;Though prest upon by their too rude Imbrace,In gentle Murmurs they keep on their paceTo their Lov'd Sea; for even Streams have Desires,Cool as they are, they feel Love's Pow'rful Fires,And with such Passion, that if any forceStop, or molest 'em in their Am'rous Course, They swell with Rage, break down, and Ravage o'erThe Banks they Kiss'd, the Flowers they fed before.Who would resist and Empire so Divine,Which Universal Nature does enjoyn?Submit then Celia e're you be reduc'd:For Rebels Vanquisht once, are vilely us'd.And such are you, when e're you dare obeyAnother Passion, and your Love betray.You are Love's Citadels, by you he reigns,And his proud Empire o'er the World maintains;He trusts you with his Stratagems and Arms,His Frowns, his Smiles, and all his Conquering Charms.Beauty's no more but the dead Soil which LoveManures, and does by wise Commerce improve;Sailing by Sighs, through Seas of Tears, he sendsCourtship from Foreign Hearts: For your own Ends Cherish a Trade; for as with Indians weGet Gold and Jewels for our Trumpery;So to each other, for their useless Toys,Lovers afford Inestimable Joys:But if you're fond of Trifles, be, and Starve,Your Gugaw Reputation preserve;Live upon Modesty and empty Fame,Foregoing Sense, for a Fantastick Name.
# SONG.
By a Person of Honour.*AS he lay in the Plain, his Arm under his Head,And his Flock feeding by, the fond Celadon said,If Love's a Sweet Passion, why does it Torment?If a Bitter (said he) whence are Lovers Content?Since I suffer with Pleasure, why should I complain,Or grieve at my Fate, when I Know, 'tis in vain?Yet so pleasing the Pain is, so soft is the Dart,That at once it both Wounds me, and Tickles my Heart.To my self I sigh often, without knowing why;And when Absent from Phillis, methinks I could Die; But Oh! what a Pleasure still follows my Pain;When kind Fortune do's help me to see her again.In her Eyes (the bright Stars that foretel what's to come,)By soft stealth now and then I examine my Doom.I press her Hand gently, look languishing down,And by Passionate Silence I make my Love known.But Oh! how I'm Blest, when so kind she do's prove,By some willing Mistake to discover her Love;When in striving to hide, she reveals all her Flame,And our Eyes tell each other what neither dare name.
# A SONG.
By Mrs. Wharton.HOW hardly I conceal'd my Tears?How oft did I complain?When many tedious Days my FearsTold me I Lov'd in vain.But now my Joys as wild are grown,And hard to be conceal'd:Sorrow may make a silent Moan,But Joy will be reveal'd.I tell it to the Bleating Flocks,To every Stream and Tree,And Bless the Hollow Murmuring Rocks,For Echoing back to me.Thus you may see with how much JoyWe Want, we Wish, Believe;'Tis hard such Passion to Destroy,But easie to Deceive.
# ON THE STORM BETWEEN Gravesend and Diepe; Made at that Time.
By the same Author.WHen the Tempestuous Sea did foam and roar,Tossing the Bark from the long-wish'd for Shore;With false affected fondness it betray'd,Striving to keep what Perish'd, if it stay'd.Such is the Love of Impious Men, where e'reTheir cruel Kindness lights, 'tis to ensnare: I, toss'd in tedious Storms of troubled Thought,Was careless of the Waves the Ocean brought.My Anchor Hope was lost, and too too nearOn either hand were Rocks of sad Despair.Mistaken Seamen prais'd my fearless Mind,Which, sunk in Seas of Grief, could dare the Wind.In Life, tempestuous Life is dread and harm,Approaching Death had no unpleasing Form;Approaching Death appeases ev'ry Storm.
# TO Mrs. A. BEHN, On what she Writ of The Earl of Rochester.
By the same Author.IN pleasing Transport rap't, my Thoughts apireWith humble Verse to Praise what you Admire:Few living Poets may the Laurel claim,Most pass thro' Death, to reach at Living Fame.Fame, Phoenix like, still rises from a Tomb;But bravely you this Custom have o'ercome. You force an Homage from each Generous Heart,Such as you always pay to just Desert.You prais'd him Living, whom you Dead bemoan,And now your Tears afresh his Laurel crown.It is this Flight of yours excites my Art,Weak as it is, to take your Muse's part,And pay loud Thanks back from my bleeding Heart.May you in every pleasing Grace excel,May Bright Apollo in your Bosome dwell;May yours excel the Matchless Sappho's Name;May you have all her Wit, without her Shame:Tho' she to Honour gave a fatal Wound,Employ your Hand to raise it from the ground.Right its wrong'd Cause with your Inticing Strain,Its ruin'd Temples try to build again. Scorn meaner Theams, declining low desire,And bid your Muse maintain a Vestal Fire.If you do this, what Glory will insue,To all our Sex, to Poesie, and you?Write on, and may your Numbers ever flow,Soft as the Wishes that I make for you.
# TO MELPOMENE AGAINST COMPLAINT.
By the same Author.IN soft Complaints no longer ease I find,That latest refuge of a Tortur'd Mind;Romantick Heros may their Fancy pleaseIn telling of their Griefs to senceless Trees.'Tis now to me no pleasure to rehearseA doleful Tale in Melancholy Verse!Men are more Deaf than Trees, more Wild than Seas:Complaints and Tears will sooner Storms appease, Than draw soft pity from an Humane Breast.All Sooth the Happy, and Despise the Opprest.Each Man who lives, of sorrow hath his share,Or else of Pride, and cannot pity spare,For those whose weight is more than one can bear.All who are happy, do their Merit boast,Think Heaven ows 'em more, and Heav'n is Just.Still they observe the Opprest with Partial Eyes,And think their Crimes draw Vengeance from the Skies.But were they gentle, pitiful, and mild,Not (as they are) rough, unconcern'd and wild.What Joy can pity bring on other's Grief?For what I feel, affords me no relief;To see another's Eyes with pity melt,For wretched me, would add to what I felt.Since in Complaints there can no ease be found,For such an Heart as mine in sorrow drown'd. Sleep, sleep, Melpomene, thou, mournful Muse:For of my Torments, I will thee accuse.I'll say thou keep'st 'em waking with thy Charms,And drives soft slumbers from my Longing Arms.Sleep, sleep, my Muse, and let my Cares alone;But if thou wilt not, since thy Harp is strung,Attend a while, and, like a dying Swan,My latest Accents shall be sweetly sung.
# WIT's ABUSE.
By the same Author.I Ask not why Astraea fled away,But wonder more, why any Vertues stay;In such a World, where they are made a scorn,Oppress'd by numerous Vice, mangled and torn,Wounded by Laughter, and by Wit forlorn.I mean not here by Wit, what's truly so,But that false Coin which does for Current go.'Tis certain but a few can Judgment makeOf such a gift, which but a few partake.Ignorant Judges may decide a Cause,Sooner against, than for Concealed Laws. This is Wit's Pledge, but few those Precepts know,Which many false Pretenders over-throw.And yet amongst those very few, there areSome who betray that Glorious Character;Whilst low-born Falshood goes for Heavenly Wit;How many aim at what so few can hit?The Trade of Hell was never hard to get.Thus these Intruders double ends pursue,Rooting out Wit, they root out Vertue too.Soft pity passes now for Servile Fear,A generous scorn of Life for mean despair.Truth and Sincerity the Fools proclaim,Which witty falshood always load with shame.An Active Soul affected Notions prove,Out-flying common Thoughts, or private Love.Thus tho' each Vertue in it self they hate,They love to make it add to a Deceit. Undress'd 'tis scorn'd; but favour'd and allow'd,When to the Neighbouring Vice it lends a Cloud.Thus the Inconstant Empress of the Night,Tho' foul, and spotted, cloaths her self with Light,And can with borrow'd Beams be always bright.
# MY FATE.
By the same Author.RAising my drooping Head, o'er charg'd with Thought,Having each Scene of Life before me brought;I chid my self because I durst repineAt Nature's Laws, or those that were Divine.Throughout the whole Creation 'tis the same,The Fuel is devoured by the Flame;Each peaceful, harmless, unoffending thingIs to the Offender made an Offering:Even God himself. Hold, my aspiring Thought;Descend, my Muse, thy flight too high is wrought;Tell not, how He, all peaceful, and all kind,Was offer'd for the vilest of Mankind;A Victim for the vilest was design'd. Descend, I say, my Muse; low things affordTheams high enough for thee: Touch not the Word,Till he hath touch'd thy Wings with Grace Divine,Then, only his, thou shalt the World decline.The harmless Dove the Falcon doth betray;The Lamb is to the Wolf become a Prey;And Men to whom free will Heaven doth impart,To follow still the Counsels of his Heart,If wrack'd with doubt; if harmless, he designsPeace to his Heart, and still his Wish confinesJustice to Peace, and Love to Quiet joyns.Why then the Dove-like Fate will sure be his;Short is his Life, unsettled is his Bliss:Hard Fate; that choice we eagerly pursue,Is, or to be undone, or to undo.
# ON THE DEATH OF Mr. Abraham Cowley, AND HIS BURIAL IN Westminster-Abbey.
By the Earl of Orrery.OUR Wit, till Cowley did its lustre raise,May be resembled to the first Three Days,In which did shine only such streaks of LightAs serv'd but to distinguish Day from Night: But Wit breaks forth, in all that he has done,Like Light when 'twas united in the Sun.The Poets formerly did lie in waitTo rifle those whom they would imitate:We Watch'd to rob all strangers when they writ,And learnt their Language but to steal their Wit.He from that need his Country does redeem,Since those who want may be supply'd from him;And Foreign Nations now may borrow moreFrom Cowley, than we could from them before:Who though he condescended to admitThe Greeks and Romans for his Guides in Wit;Yet he those Ancient Poets does pursue,But as the Spaniards great Columbus do;He taught them first to the New World to steer,But they possess all that is precious there.When first his Spring of Wit began to flow,It rais'd in some, Wonder and Sorrow too, That God had so much Wit and Knowledge lent,And that they were not in his Praises spent.But those who in his Davideis look,Find they his Blossoms for his Fruit mistook:In diff'ring Ages diff'rent Muses shin'd,His Green did Charm the Sense, his Ripe the Mind.Writing for Heaven, he was inspir'd from thence,And from his Theam deriv'd his Influence.The Scripture will no more the Wicked fright:His Muse does make Religion a Delight.Oh how severely Man is us'd by Fate!The Covetous toil long for an Estate;And having got more than their Life can spend,They may bequeath it to a Son, or Friend: But Learning (in which none can have a share,Unless they climb to it by Time and Care,Learning, the truest Wealth which Man can have)Does, with his Body, perish in his Grave:To Tenements of Clay it is confin'd,Tho' 'tis the Noblest Purchace of the Mind:Oh, why can we thus leave our Friends possestOf all our Acquisitions but the best?Still when we study Cowley we lament,That to the World he was no longer lent;Who, like a Lightning, to our Eyes was shown,So bright he shin'd, and was so quickly gone.Sure he rejoyc'd to see his flame expire,Since he himself could not have rais'd it higher;For when wise Poets can no higher flie,They would, like Saints, in their perfection die.Though Beauty some Affection in him bred,Yet only Sacred Learning he would wed;By which th' Illustrious Off-spring of his Brain,Shall over Wit's great Empire ever Reign:His Works shall Live, when Pyramids of PrideShrink to such Ashes as they long did hide.That Sacrilegious Fire (which did last YearLevel those Piles which Piety did rear)Dreaded near that Majestick Church to flie,Where English Kings, and English Poets lie:It at an awful distance did expire,Such pow'r had Sacred Ashes o'er that Fire;Such as it durst not near that Structure comeWhich Fate had order'd to be Cowley's Tomb;And 'twill be still preserv'd, by being so,From what the rage of future Flames can do.Material Fire dares not that place infest,Where he who had immortal Flame does rest.There let his Urn remain; for it was fitAmongst our Kings to lay the King of Wit:By which the Structure more renown'd will proveFor that part bury'd, than for all above.
# ON THE DEATH OF King CHARLES II.
Writ at that Time, By the Honourable Charles Montague.FArewel, Great Charles, Monarch of blest Renown,The best Good Man, that ever fill'd a Throne:Whom Nature, as her highest Pattern, wrought,And mixt both Sex's Vertues in one Draught. Wisdom for Councils, Bravery in War,With all the mild Good-nature of the Fair.The Womans sweetness temper'd Manly Wit,And Loving Power did Crown'd with Meekness sit;His awful Person Reverence engag'd,Which mild Address and Tenderness asswag'd:Thus the Almighty Gracious King above,Does both command our Fear, and win our Love.With Wonders born, by Miracles preserv'd,A Heavenly Host the Infants Cradle serv'd.And Men His healing Empire's Omen read,When Sun with Stars, and Day with Night, agreed.His Youth for valorous Patience was renown'd,Like David, persecuted first, then Crown'd.Lov'd in all Courts, admir'd, where e'er he came,At once our Nation's Glory, and its Shame: They blest the Isle, where such great Spirits dwell,Abhorr'd the Men, that could such worth expel.To spare our Lives, He meekly did defeatThose Sauls, whom wand'ring Asses made so great;Waiting, till Heaven's Election should be shown,And the Almighty should His Vnction own,And own He did—His powerful Arm display'dAnd Isreal, the Belov'd of God, obey'd,Call'd by His Peoples Tears, He came, He eas'dThe groaning Nation, the black Storms appeas'd:Did greater Blessings, than He took, afford,England it Self, was more, than He, Restor'd▪Unhappy Albion, by strange Ills opprest,In various Feavers tost, could find no rest:Quite spent and wearied, to His Arms She fled,And rested on His Shoulders, her fair bending Head.In Conquests Mild, He came from Exile kind,No Climes, no Provocations, chang'd His Mind:No Malice show'd, no Hate, Revenge, or Pride,But Rul'd as Meekly, as His Father Dy'd;Eas'd us from endless Wars, made Discords cease,Restor'd to Quiet, and maintain'd in Peace:A mighty Series of new Time began,And rowling Years in joyful Circles ran.Then Wealth the City, business fill'd the Port,To Mirth our Tumults turn'd, our Wars to Sport:Then Learning flourish'd, blooming Arts did spring,And the glad Muses prun'd their drooping wing.Then did our flying Towers improvement know,Who now command as far, as Winds can blow.With Canvass Wings round all the Globe they fly,And, built by Charles His Art, all Storms defie: To ev'ry Coast with ready Sails are hurl'd,Fill Us with Wealth, and with our Fame the World:From whose Distractions Seas do us divide;Their Riches here in floating Castles ride.We reap the swarthy Indian's Sweat and Toil,Their Fruit, without the mischiefs of their Soil.Here in cool Shades their Gold, and Pearls receive,Free from the heat, which does their lustre give.In Persian Silks, eat Eastern Spice; secureFrom burning Fluxes, and their Calenture.Under our Vines upon the peaceful Shore,We see all Europe tost, hear Tempests roar:Rapine, Sword, Wars, and Famine rage abroad,While Charles their Host, like Jove from Ida, aw'd;Us from our Foes, and from our selves did shield,Our Towns from Tumults, and from Arms the Field. For, when bold Factions Goodness could disdain,Unwillingly He us'd a straiter Rein:In the still gentle Voice He lov'd to speak,But could with Thunder harden'd Rebels break.Yet though they wake't the Laws, His tender MindWas undisturb'd, in Wrath severely Kind.Tempting His Power, and urging to assume;Thus Jove in Love did Semele consume.As the Stout Oak, when round his Trunk the VineDoes in soft wreaths, and amorous foldings twine,Easie and slight appears: The Winds from farSummon their noisie Forces to the War,But though so gentle seems his outward form,His hidden strength outbraves the loudest storm:Firmer he stands, and boldly keeps the Field,Showing stout Minds, when unprovok'd, are mild. So when the Good Man made the Crowd presume,He show'd himself, and did the King Assume:For Goodness in Excess may be a sin,Justice must tame, whom Mercy cannot win.Thus Winter fixes the unstable Sea,And teaches restless Water constancy,Which under the warm influence of bright days,The fickle motion of each Blast obeys.To bridle Factions, stop Rebellion's course,By easie Methods, vanquish without force,Relieve the Good, bold stubborn Foes subdue,Mildness in Wrath, Meekness in Anger shew,Were Arts, Great Charles His Prudence only knew.To fright the Bad thus awful Thunder rolls;While the bright Bow secures the Faithful Souls.Such is thy Glory, Charles, thy lasting Name,Brighter than our proud Neighbour's guilty Fame:More noble than the Spoils, that Battles yield,Or all the empty Triumphs of the Field.'Tis less to Conquer, than to make Wars cease,And without fighting, awe the World to Peace;For proudest Triumphs from Contempt arise,The vanquisht first the Conquerours Arms despise,Won Ensigns are the gaudy marks of scorn,They brave the Victor first and then adorn.But peaceful Monarchs Reign like Gods; while noneDispute, all Love, bless, Reverence their Throne.Tigers, and Bears, with all the Savage Host,May Boldness, Strength, and daring Conquest boast: But the sweet Passions of a Generous Mind,Are the Prerogative of Humane kind,The God-like Image, on our Clay imprest,The Darling Attribute, which Heaven loves best.In Charles, so Good a Man and King, we seeA double Image of the Deity.Oh! Had He more resembled It! Oh whyWas He not still more like; and could not die?Now do our Thoughts alone enjoy His Name,And faint Ideas of our Blessing frame!In Thames, the Ocean's Darling, England's Pride,The pleasing Emblem of his Reign does glide.Thames the support, and Glory of our Isle,Richer, than Tagus, or Aegyptian Nile.Though no rich Sand in him, no Pearls are found,Yet Fields rejoyce, his Meadows laugh around;Less Wealth his Bosom holds, less guilty stores,For he Exhausts himself, t'enrich the Shores: Mild, and Serene, the peaceful Current flows,No angry foam, no raging Surges knows.No dreadful Wreck upon his Banks appears,His Crystal Stream unstain'd by Widow's Tears,His Chanel strong and easie, deep and clear.No Arbitrary Inundations sweepThe Plowman's Hopes, and Life into the deep,The Even Waters the old Limits keep.But oh! He Ebbs, the smiling Waves decay,(For ever, Lovely Stream, for ever stay!)To the black Sea his silent course does bend,Where the best Streams, the longest Rivers, end.His spotless Waves there undistinguisht pass,None see, how Clear, how Bounteous, Sweet, he was.No difference, now, (though late so much) is seen,'Twixt Him, fierce Rhine, and the Impetuous Seyne.But lo! The Joyful Tide our Hopes restores,And dancing Waves extend the wid'ning Shores.JAMES is our CHARLES in all things but in Name:Thus Thames is daily lost, yet still the same.
# ON THE MARRIAGE Of the LADY MARY WITH THE Prince of ORANGE.
By Edmond Waller, in the Year 1677.AS once the Lyon Honey gave,Out of the Strong such Sweetness came:A Royal Hero, no less brave,Produc'd this Sweet, this Lovely Dame.To her the Prince, that did opposeSuch mighty Armies in the Field,And Holland from prevailing FoesCould so well free, himself does yield.Not Belgia's Fleet (his high Command)Which Triumphs where the Sun does rise,Nor all the force he leads by Land,Could guard him from her Conquering Eyes.Orange with Youth Experience has,In Action Young, in Counsel Old:Orange is what Augustus was,Brave, Wary, Provident and Bold.On that fair Tree, which bears his Name,Blossoms and Fruit at once are found:In him we all admire the same,His Flowery Youth with Wisdom Crown'd.Empire and Freedom Reconcil'd,In Holland are, by Great Nassaw,Like those he sprung from, Just and Mild,To willing People he gives Law.Thrice happy Pair, so near Ally'dIn Royal Blood, and Virtue too;Now Love has you together ty'd,Let none this Triple Knot undoe.The Church shall be the happy place,Where Streams which from the same Source run,(Tho' divers Lands awhile they grace)United there again make one.A thousand Thanks the Nation owesTo him that does protect us all,For while he thus his Niece bestows,About our Isle he builds a Wall.A Wall like that, which Athens had,By th' Oracle's Advice, of Wood:Had theirs been such, as Charles has made,That Mighty State till now had stood.FINIS.
# A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Francis Saunders.

## FOLIO.

THe Baronage of England, in 3 vol.

Monasticon Anglicanum, in 3 vol.

Both Writ by Sir William Dugdale.

Shakespear's Plays

Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays.

Ben. Johnson's Works.

Mr. Cowley's Works.

Sir William D'avenant's Works.

Mrs. Phillip's Poems.

Mr. Chaucer's Works.

Mr. Spencer's Fairy-Queen.

Mr. Milton's Paradice Lost and Regain'd.

Mr. Killigrew's Plays.

Davila's History of the Civil Wars of France.

Paul Parata's History of Venice.

An Epistle to the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold. Occasion'd by His Majesty's Victory in Ireland. By Charles Montague, Es que.

An Epistle to Charles Montague, Esq on His Majesty's Voyage to Holland. By Mr. George Stepney.

## QVARTO's.

SIR Charles Sedley's, Sir George Etherege's, and Mr. Wycherly's Plays; being in all Ten, either in 1 vol. or single.

Mr. Dryden's Plays and Poems in 3 or 4 vol.

Mr. Shadwel's 17 Plays in 1 vol, or single.

Mr. Lee's 11 Plays in 1 vol. or single.

Mr. Otway's 9 Plays in 1 vol. or single.

Or any other single Play, or in vol.

## OCTAVO's. Poetry, &c.

EArl of Rochester's Poems.

Sir John Sucklin—Poems, &c.

Sir John Denham's Poems.

Sir Robert Howard's Poems, &c.

Mr. Waller's Poems.

Dr. Donn's Poems.

Pastor Fido, by Sir Richard Fanshaw.

Hudibras compleat.

Godfrey of Bulloign.

Mrs. Behn's Lovers in Fashion.

# Books Lately Printed.

THe Life of Alexander the Great, Dedicated to the Queen.

Henry the Fifth, Mustapha, Black Prince, and Tryphon, and Guzman, all Five by the Earl of Orrery, and Bound together, or single.

The Committee, the Surprizal, the Vestal Virgins, the Indian-Queen, and the Duke of Lerma, by Sir Robert Howard, either Bound by themselves, or with the Earl of Orrery's.

An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam.

The Practical Christian in four parts, Written by Dr. Sherlock of Winwick.

Seraphick Love, Written by the Honourable Mr. Boyle.

The Memoirs of the Court of Spain, by the Lady that Writ the Travels into Spain.

The Life of the Emperor Theodosius the Great.

A Present for the Ladies, being an Historical Account of the Female Sex, &c.

The Visions of Don Francisco de Quevedo.

A Collection of Letters, by Sir Tobie Matthews.

Zaide, a Romance, in 2 parts.

Zingis, a Tartarian History.

The Royal Slave, by Mrs. Behn.

The Gallants, in 2 parts.

Sultan of Barbary, and Philautus and Bellamont, Two Novels. Both Translated by Ladies.

All Sorts of Divinity, History, Poetry and Romances; and all Sorts of Gilt and Plain Paper.
