---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The rewarde of wickednesse discoursing the sundrye monstrous abuses of
wicked and vngodlye worldelinges: in such sort set downe and written as the
same haue béene dyuersely practised in the persones of popes, harlots, proude
princes, tyrauntes, Romish byshoppes, and others. VVith a liuely description
of their seuerall falles and finall destruction. Verye profitable for all
sorte of estates to reade and looke vpon. Nevvly compiled by Richard Robinson,
seruaunt in housholde to the right Honorable Earle of Shrovvsbury. A dreame
most pitiful, and to be dreaded.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=1)

❧ The rewarde of Wickedneſſe Diſcourſing the ſundrye monſtrous abuſes of
wicked and vngod­lye worldelinges: in ſuch ſort ſet downe and written as the
ſame haue béene dy­uerſely practiſed in the perſones of Popes, Harlots, Proude
Princes, Tyrauntes, Romish By­shoppes, and others. VVith a liuely deſcription
of their-ſeue­rall falles and finall deſtruction. Uerye profitable for all
ſorte of eſtates to reade and looke vpon.

¶ Nevvly compiled by Richard Robinſon, Seruaunt in houſholde to the right
Honorable Earle of Shrovvſbury.

A dreame moſt pitiful, and to be dreaded

Of thinges that be ſtraunge,

VVho loueth to reede:

In this Booke let him raunge,

His fancie to feede.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=2)

## ❧ To the Worſhipfull, Gilbert Talbote, Eſquier, Seconde Sonne to the Right
Honourable Earle of Shrowſburie. &c. Richard Robinſon VVisheth the feruent
feare of God, Increaſe of Vertue, VVorship and Ho­nour, vvith Good ſucceſſe,
and many Ioyful yeares.

FOr as much as the litle cree ­ping Creatures of the Earth, doe teache euerie
reaſonable perſon to vſe ſome kinde of trade, whereby for his trauaile in the
Sommer, hee maye in the bluſtering blaſtes of Storming Hiemps, be releeued by
the ſweate of his browes, when nothing elſe is to bee reaped vpon the ſoile,
but onelye Monſterous and huge driftes of Snowe: VVhich is dayly put in vſe by
the litle Dormous, who in the Sommer­time, ceaſſeth not from traueyling, till
shee be fully perſwaded to haue ſufficient ſtore in her Cabbin, to defende the
hungry time of winter: Likewiſe the crawling Ant, toileth from the firſt showe
of Sir Phe­bus face in the morning, till the blacke Mantelles doe obſcure the
bla­ſing beames of the ſame: The Squirrill that lightlie Leapes from Braunche
to Braunche, is euer occupied, as appeareth by the greate ſtore of Nuttes,
that shee heapeth togeather in Sommer time, to in­counter the barren ſeaſon:
The fearefull Flye is not forgetfull of the ſame, but carrieth his trauailes
to the warme hollowe reede, wherein hee dwelleth holſomely, and Bankettes
merilie of his late trauailes: (VVhat shall I ſay, of the buſie Bee) whoſe
curious ſkill in building of her Lodge, and knowledge in Flowers and Hearbes,
in choſing the Good, and leauing for the Spider the ill, neuer ceaſing, but
alwaies in trauaile, hoping in winter to reſt and enioye the fruites of her
tra­uaile: Immediatelye vpon the ſodaine, is not onelye ſpoiled of this the
fruites of her great toyle, but commonlye ſlaine for the lucre therof: (Euen
ſo) Right VVorshipful, as I am not onely taught to abandon Idlenes, as wel by
the holy Scriptures, as alſo by theſe creeping Crea­tures: So am I doubtful,
leaſt after my trauaile, I shall reape the harme­les Bees rewarde: Except, (as
my truſt is) your VVorship do ſeeme by your curteſie, to protect as well mee,
as this litle portion of my labour: For mee thinkes that I heare alreadie
Enuie whet his Teeth, whoſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=3) blade woulde
long agoe, haue beene bathed in my blood, if ſecreate thwacks could haue
touched my guiltles Carkas: Yet notwithſtanding I ſee the blaſing brond in his
fiſt, to fiere the great Cannons vpon me: for alreadie falſe Report his
Trumpeter, ſoundeth vp his forging Trumpe of Detraction, whoſe honeſt nature
is neither content with that which hee wisheth him ſelfe, nor yet pleaſed if
he might haue or obtaine, that which other men deſire. Many mofriendes this
chafing Champion hath, whoſe Cankered mindes, and prowde ſtomackes, would not
much ſtick to take in hand to Lift with Atlas: To wraſtle with Sampſon, or
take the club from Hercules. But diſdaining further to ſpeake of Enuie, and
his ſaide friendes, which hateth euery man, and euery man him, & them, being
nothing doubtful of Momus, Zoilus, nor Sicophants wl [...]elps: I am as well
content to beare with their barking, as many vvorthy Clarkes heretofore haue
done, and doe daylye. So that it maye pleaſe your VVorshippe, to take in good
part this ſimpletrauaile of mine, vvhich to eſchewe Idlenes, and ſpeciallye i
[...] ſuche times as my turne came to ſerue in watche of the Scottishe Queene,
I then euery night collected ſome part thereof, to thend that nowe it might
the better appeare, that I vſed not altogeather to ſleepe: Though one time I
chaunſed among many vvatchfull nightes, to take a ſlumber, vvhich incited mee
to compile this fiction of Poetry, as more largely appeareth in my Prologue:
And though it bee a Drouſie Drea­ming peece of vvorke, neither garnished vvith
Rhetorike, Eloquence, Curious tearmes, nor pleaſaunt matter, to purchaſe
prayſe of daintie Dames, and fantaſtical Knights of Cupids court: (As it is
not painted vvith theſe properties) ſo I am aſſured that your vvorship doth
not miſlike the want thereof. And for that it was thus begunne and ended in my
Lord your Fathers houſe: my ſinguler good Lord and Maiſter, for whome, and my
good Lady my Miſtres, I and al mine, dayly pray, as we are many waies bound to
doe: Doe nothing miſtruſt, but that your vvorship will the rather take in good
part the ſame, not weying the gift; but the good vvill of the gyuer. And ſo
your vvorship doth as vvell binde me and mine, to reſte yours, to our power,
as alſo therby, my poore peece of trauaile from the ſpoile of Sclander, and
the blody butcher Enuie, by the ſame, garde and keepe, for othervvaies, my
ſaide enemies vvill not ſticke to revvard my paines vvith the poore harmles
Bee. Thus I ceaſe, and reſt.

¶ Your VVorshippes poore beſeecher. Richard Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=3)

## ❧ The Aucthour to the Reader.

AS Idleneſſe the daughter of deſtruction, is to be abandoned of all men, that
loue to leade the life of good and honeſt members of a cōmon vvealth: ſo is
it as conuenient that euery man yeeld account to his countrey of his Zeale and
good vvil that he ought by duty to beare vnto the ſame, by ſome vertuous or
Godly vvorke, for good example ſake: In cōſideration vvhereof (Gentle reader)
as vvell to profite my countrey (to my povver) as alſo to eſchevve Idleneſſe:
I haue attempted this my ſecond vvorke vnto the place of thy indifferent
iudgement, not miſtruſting, but thou vvilt as thankefully accept the ſame, as
I haue vvillingly vouchſafed to be­ſtovve my trauaile, to pleaſure thy delite
in reading hereof. And though it be eſcaped my handes, not altogether ſo vvel
plained and pollished, as I purpoſed it should haue beene: Attribute I praye
thee, the cauſe to the buſie liues, that all my Lorde my Maiſters men do leade
in the ſeruice of our Soueraigne Lady, the Queenes Maieſtie: Sith the
protection of the Scottishe Queene vvas committed to my ſaide Lorde in charge,
vvhoſe true and duetifull ſeruice therein, to his Prince both night and daie:
as vvell by the trauaile of his Honours ovvne Perſon, as alſo all them that
ſerue him: I doubte not but FAME hath tolde it to all the Princes in EVROPE
and noble ſubiectes: as it vvere to bee a Mirrour to the reſt, that shall
ſerue in cre­dite of their Prince, from age to age, no litle to the encreaſing
of his honour, and all his: (vvhich God maintaine). And I, being one of the
ſimpleſt of a hundreth in my Lordes houſe, yet notvvithſtanding, as the order
there is, I keepe my vvatche, and vvarde, as time appointeth it to mee: at the
vvhich times, gentle reader, I col­lected this together, faining that in my
ſleepe MORPHEVS tooke me to PLVTOS Kingdome in a Dreame: The vvhich deuice, I
miſtruſt not, but thou shalt thincke vvell of: Notvvithſtanding I knovve that
the Papiſte vvill gnashe his teeth at me: The vvanton Dames vvill ſcolde at
mee: The Couetous vvorldlinges vvill diſdaine mee. The vaine glorious
perſonnes in Aucthoritie, vvill enuie mee: Falſe accuſers vvill abhorre mee,
Traitours vvill vtterlye deteſt this my ſimple vvorke. Another ſorte there is,
vvhiche I namde not yet: As the Cobler, and ZOILVS: VVhoſe nature is to plaie
hiſsing HIDRAS parte, reiecting the vertuous labours of paine­full perſonnes,
Lying Idle them ſelues like Buzzing Drones, deuouring vp the ſvveete trauaile
of the buſie Bees, (but for theſe I paſſe not.) Sithe the moſt noble and
famous vvriters of the vvorlde, haue not yet hitherto eſcaped the d [...]t of
their abhominable tongues. VVherefore Ilothe lenger to beſtovve the time ſo
ill, as to ſpeake of their beaſtlie behauiour againſt the ſkilfull. Beſeeching
thee once a­gaine gentle Reader, that I maie reape at thy handes, but the
revvard of my good vvill, vvhiche shall not onelie content my trauaile: But
alſo binde mee another time, to preſent ſome other noueltie, more fitter to
[...]eede thy fantaſie. Hoping in the meane vvhile, thou vvilt in my abſence
ſtande an indifferent friend. Thus vvishing to thee and thine, as to my ſelfe
and mine: I bid thee fare vvell.

From my Chamber in Sheffield Caſtle. The xix. of Maie. 1574.

¶ Thy Friende. R. Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=4)

## ❧ The Aucthour to the Booke.

THY woefull plaints, thy rueful face, and carefull countenaunce shoe,

To all the worlde: bee not tonguetide, reueale abroade the woe

That is among the ſillie ſoules, in Plutos ouglie lake,

For vvickedneſſe done on the Earth, howe loue doth vengeance take.

Blushe not my booke, to thunder foorth, the tormentes thou haſt ſeene,

Tell vvilfull vvits, and hatefull hearts, vvhat iuſt deſerued teene:

In Plutos pitte they shall abide, that headlong plunge in ſinne,

Bee not abashte to tell the best, vvhat plagues be there within.

And whome thou ſawe in ſincke of ſorrow, bewaile and toile in griefe,

VVhy and vvherefore, for whome, and what, they bide in this miſchiefe.

And vvhy thou mourneſt, tell the cauſe, and vvherefore thou art ſad,

No doubt thy teares, and trauaile both, may thouſands make full glad,

Except the Cobler gin to carpe, that alwaies loues to cauell,

Or ſecte of Sicophants ſtur vp, (Zoilus) that drnnken Iauel.

To ſtampe and ſcorne againſt thy talke, that thou art chargde vvithall,

For to rewarde thy ſugered gift, vvith bitter ſtinking gall.

(But if they doe) no force, no harme, their vvonted vſe is knowen,

The difference both of them, (and thee) Report hath iustly blowen.

And doubte not but the learned, loue, thy company to haue,

And hiſſing Hidras venimde ſtinge, shall daylie from thee ſaue.

And vvhen the ſkilfull heades shall ſcan, the tale that thou muſt tell,

I charge thee, pardon craue of them, it doth become thee vvell.

And if they doe demaunde, from vvhence thou came, or whats thy name,

The Iuſt reward of wickedneſſe, my Lords I am the ſame,

(Saye thou) vvhich came from Plutos-Pit, whom Morpheus led with him,

In drowſie Dreame, to ſee the ſoules, Rewarded there for ſinne.

VVhich ſightes, ſo rare and ſeldome ſeene, as in my dreame I ſee,

Good Lords, and Ladus, vvith the rest, shall ſtraight reuealed bee,

And doing dutie, thus no doubte, but thou shalt bee imbraste,

Of ſuche as doe of honour, or of vertuous learning taſte.

FINIS.

I Quoth Richard Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=4)

## ❧ The Booke to the Aucthour.

AND muſt I needes be packing hence, about ſuch newes to beare,

VVhich shalbe to the moſt, theſe daies, an inward griefe to heare?

VVhy knowſt thou not, that worldlings wish, to dwel on earth for aie,

And may not bide, but them abhorre, which ſaye they muſt awaye?

Howe shall I ſcape the cruell Iudge, that is corrupt with golde,

Or craftie Carles and Muckſcrapes now, that al from poore men hold?

The Tyrant he will whet his blade, the prowde will preſent puffe,

The wanton Dames will ſkould at mee, the Roiſter ſtrange wil ſnuffe.

Piers Pickthanke and Tom teltale, will deuiſe a thouſand waies,

Tibbe Tittiuilly, that lowring Laſſe, ſome yll on mee wil raiſe.

VVhoremongers, they and al their mates, I doubt wil ſtone me ſtraight,

Flatterers, Filchers, and Sclanderers both, I looke but when they ſight.

Rent Rackers, that doe fleece the poore, and Baillifes falſe vntrue,

VVith bragging Officers forgetting God, that Conſcience bid adue.

Murder, Treaſon, Theft and Guile, maye not abide my face,

The greateſt number at theſe daies, will hurt mee in eache place,

And luſtie Youth, ſtarke ſtamping mad, wilbe to heare theſe newes▪

VVherfore I greeue theſe Dreames to tel, ifte were in me to chooſe,

Thinkſt thou theyle credite Dreames theſe daies, that Chriſt wil ſcarce
beleeue?

No, no, I doubt it ouermuch: then blame not mee to greeue.

But had thou pende ſome pleaſaunt ſonges, of Uenus ſmiling boye,

I not miſtruſt but almoſt all, would clappe their handes for Ioye.

Or any thing, but that which doth, reprooue mens ſilthy vice,

No doubt among the moſt, it would haue beene of greateſt Price.

But ſpeede, as ſpeede maye, abroade I will attempte in haſte,

Eyther of thankes, or elſe rebukes, the tone or tother taſte.

The vertuous ſorte I not miſtruſt, the wicked here I warne,

The wiſe in chriſt, wil thanke me much, the foole wil laugh me ſcorne.

And now the paines & plagues below, where Charon rowes the barge,

As Thaucthour hath commaunded mee, I shall declare at large.

And if I chaunſe to ſpeake amiſſe, thy pardon here I craue,

Repentaunce at the ſinners hande, Is all Chriſt ſeekes to haue.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=5)

## ¶ Richard Smith in praiſe of the Aucthor.

YE Muſes all of Theſpyas, with ſacred Songes that ſing,

Novv ſtaie your ſteppes geue eare a while, and harke what newes I bring.

Your Sonne that lately did indite with ſacred ſiluer quill,

In Forest here is fled awaye, vnto Pernaſſus hill.

VVhere hee among the Muſes there, and Ladies of great Fame,

Contrites the time both daye and night, in ſeruice of the ſame.

Beholding of theſe Goddeſſe face, with bewtie shining bright:

Like to Diana with her traine, Reſplendishing by night.

Ambroſia is his foode, ſweete Nectar is his drinke,

VVhat pleaſures are not reaped there, that mortall heart can thinke?

I doe him deeme in deede, to bee ſir Orpheus Fe [...] ▪

VVho made the ſtones to vnderſtande, and ſenceles Trees to heare.

The ſauage Beastes of ſundrye kinde, came thruſting in a throng,

And went out of the vvilſome woodes, to heare his ſacred ſong.

Suche grace the Muſes geue to ſome, for to delight the eare,

And to allure the mortall mindes, enchaunted as it were.

A Diamonde for daintie Dames: For Peeres a precious Pearle,

This Robinſon the Rubi red, a Iewell for an Earle.

Suche Pearle can not bee bought I knowe, for all the Golde in Cheap [...],

The graces heare haue powrd their giftes togeather on an heape.

Suche giftes can not bee graft no doubt, vvithout ſome power deuine:

Suche cunning hyd in one mans head, as Robinſon in thine.

If I might vewe thy pleaſaunt Poemes, and Sonettes that excell,

Then shoulde I not thirst for the floodes of Aganippes vvell.

Thou profered priſe at Olimpias, and gotte the chiefest game,

And through the ſchoole of cunning skill, hast ſcalde the houſe of Fame.

VVhere thou on ſtage alone, doſt ſtande Triumphantlye,

About thy head a Garlande gaye, of liuelye Laurel Tree.

VVhich that theſe Noble Nimphes thought good for blaſing theyr re­nowme,

In token of this learned Lore, adorned vvith that Crowne.

If I should penne this praiſe, as thou doeſt vvell deſerue.

It vvere a volume for to make, and time  [...] vvould not ſerue.

For vvhat needes vvater to bee brought, to powre into the Seas,

Or vvhy doe I vvith Penne contend about this Robins praiſe?

VVhome  [...]umpe of truth hath blowen abroade, that hilles and Dales
re­ſoundes▪

VVith Eccoes from the earth below, vp to the skie reboundes.

FINIS.

¶ Quoth Richard Smith, Clark [...].

## Table of contents

  * ❧ To the Worſhipfull, Gilbert Talbote, Eſquier, Seconde Sonne to the Right Honourable Earle of Shrowſburie. &c. Richard Robinſon VVisheth the feruent feare of God, Increaſe of Vertue, VVorship and Honour, vvith Good ſucceſſe, and many Ioyful yeares.
  * ❧ The Aucthour to the Reader.
  * ❧ The Aucthour to the Booke.
  * ❧ The Booke to the Aucthour.
  * ¶ Richard Smith in praiſe of the Aucthor.
  * 1\. ❧ The Prologue.
  * 2\. ¶ The rewarde of wickedneſſe.
    * 2.1. ¶ HELLEN tormented for her treaſon to her Huſbande, and liuing in fornication ten yeares, whoſe wordes followe.
    * 2.2. ❧ The Bookes verdite vpon Hellen.
    * 2.3. ❧ Pope Alexander the ſixt rewarded for his wickedneſſe and odible lyfe, with his colledge of Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Moonckes, Freers,▪ and Nunnes, with the rabble of greaſie Prieſtes, and other members of Idolatry and ſuperſtition. &c.
    * 2.4. ¶ The bookes verdite vpon this wicked Pope.
    * 2.5. ❧ Young Tarquine rewarded for his wickedneſſe.
    * 2.6. ❧ The rewarde of Medea for hir wicked actes, and falſe deceyuing of hir father, ſleying of hir children and hir owne Brother, and working by inchauntment. This hiſtorie is merueylous tragicall, and a good example for VVomen.
    * 2.7. ❧ The bookes verdite vpon Medea.
    * 2.8. ❧ The wordes of tormented Tantalus, being rewarded for his extortion and couetouſnes: Oppresſing of the poore people of his Countrey: And for other wicked actes.
    * 2.9. ❧ The bookes verdite vpon Tantalus.
    * 2.10. ❧ The rewarde of an Ambicious and vaine glorious counſeller, called Vetronius Turinus: For his wicked life among them that hee might ouercome, and for his Pride: whoſe wordes folow in the middes of his tormentes.
    * 2.11. ❧ The Bookes verdit.
    * 2.12. ❧ The wofull complaint of the monſtrous Emperour Heliogabalus for ſpending of his dayes in abhominable whoredome.
    * 2.13. ❧ The Bookes verdit.
    * 2.14. ❧ The two Iudges for ſlaundering of Suſanna: and bearing falſe witneſſe againſt hir, be rewarded for the ſame moſt terribly.
    * 2.15. ❧ The Aucthor to the twoo Iudges.
    * 2.16. ❧ Pope Ihoan rewarded for hir wickedneſſe.
    * 2.17. ❧ Newes betwene the Pope and Pluto, and of the Proclamation about the Ladder twixt Hell and Heauen.
    * 2.18. ❧ The torment of Tiranny, and the reward for his vvickedneſſe; Being a King called Mydas: VVhich Tirannouſlye, ſwallowed not onely his Countrey for Lucre ſake, but his houſeholde Seruauntes alſo.
    * 2.19. ❧ The rewarde that Roſamond had in hell, for murdering of hir huſbande Albonius and liuing vitiouſlie in hir huſbandes dayes.
  * 3\. ❧ Retourning from Plutos Kingdome, To Noble Helicon: The place of Infinite Ioye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=5)

## 1\. ❧ The Prologue.

IN December when daies be short and colde,

And irkeſome nights amid the ſtorms gan rore,

That flockes from feeldes forſake their folde,

And Birdes from ſwelling floodes do shrinke to shore,

The plowgh doth reſt that cut the ſoyle of yore.

And toyling Oxe in cabin cloſe doth ſtande,

That wonted was to trauayle painefull land [...]:

And when the hawtie hilles and ragged rockes,

In mantels white be clothed rounde aboute:

VVhen foules and beaſtes, aſwell by heardes as flockes,

Seekes ſmoking ſpringes, hote thirſt to dowte,

VVhoſe flames doth force the froſen banckes throughout,

To yeelde their flintish ribbes, to gushing floods of raine,

And locked ſtreames at large to ſet againe:

VVhen euerie Tree the ardent coulors loſt,

And braue depainted lookes of fragrant ſmelles.

VVhen bragging Boreas thus the ſoyle had toſt,

That Hart and Hinde did quake in fieldes and felles,

VVith Bull and Beare for colde both cries and yelles.

And shrowling makes eche thing that life doth beare,

To ſtande with shaking limmes, the ſtormes to heare.

On eyther ſide the hilles when blaſtes doe riſe,

As sharpe as thornes the naked ſkinne doth hit,

And Saturne to the earth doth shewe his froſen eyes,

VVhoſe wrath doth pinch eache creature to the quicke,

VVhich oft doth cauſe both young and olde fall ſicke,

VVith cough, and colde, and ſtopping rheumes alſo,

Quotidians, feures, diſeaſes many mo:

And when Eolus his priſon had vnlocken,

And all the retchleſſe route let runne at large▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=6)VVhoſe
ruſshing rage eache pleaſant braūch hath broken

VVhereof before Dame Flora had the charge,

On Tiber ſt [...]rreth neyther boate nor Barge.

Tryta [...] ſoundes hir trump, and Neptune gins to frowne,

The ſayler ſtrikes from maſt the ſayles a downe.

VVhen young and olde their bones with cloth doe loade,

And hoodes vnto their heades doe buckle faſt:

And when the Boye doth reſt that bare the goade,

And keepes the chi [...]neyes ende til Hyemps ſtorms be paſt,

VVhen men doe doubt their winter ſtuffe to laſt,

And carefull cattell with open Iawe doth craue,

Their keepers meate their carkas for to ſaue.

VVhen men delight to keepe the fire ſide,

And winter tales incline their eares to heare,

VVhen mery mates be met, that will abide,

Eache  [...]illes his pot of Nutbrowne A [...]e or Bere,

As is the trade of Ale knightes euery where,

To toſſe the pottes and plye the flitting boules,

Then pay their pence, and pacl [...]e with dronken noule [...].

In this ſeaſon it was my lotte to fall,

Among a maſque choſen for the  [...]nce,

Some reelde, ſome fell, ſome helde them by the wall,

Some ſang, ſome chid, and ſware gogs precious bones,

(Quoth one to me) friende camſt thou from ſaint Jones?

what penaunce haſt thou done, thou art ſo leane & pale▪

No force (quoth another) he shall fyll his pot of Ale.

Content (quoth I) and thereto I agree,

Fyll pot Hoſtice of Pery, Ale, or Bere:

My heade it recreated after ſtudie,

To shut foorth the time, though ruſticall they were,

Thus walkt th [...] Kanikin both here and there,

Till the wife cryed to bed for ſauing of hi [...] fire,

Contented (quoth I) for that was my deſire.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=6)

The shot was gathered, and the fyre rakte vp,

Eache man to his lodging began for to draw:

Some ſtackering ſtumbled as mad as a Tup,

Some crept vnder the mattreſ [...]e into the ſtrawe.

Another ſort began to pleade the common lawe.

I lookt about and ſawe them ſo dight,

Put out the candle and bad them goodnight.

My drowzie heart thus being at his reſt,

Tooke no care for the colde, all ſorrowes were paſt:

So late it had beene at the good Ale feaſt,

That the worlde for euer I thought woulde laſt.

In mine eare thunders no sounde of winters blaſt.

I thought none yll, my heade was layde full ſaft,

All carke and care my wandring ſprite had la [...]t.

Not lying thus one hou [...]e by the clocke,

Me thought the chamber shone with Torches bright,

And in the haſte at doore I hearde one knocke,

(And ſayde what) Slugge, why ſleepeſt all the night?

I ſtarting vp behelde one in my ſight,

Dasht all in golden raies, before me did appeare,

(And ſayde) I am a God, beholde that ſtandeth here.

Mine eares were filde, with noyſe of Trumpets ſounde,

And dazled were mine eies, my ſence was almoſt gon▪

But yet amazde my knee vaylde to the grounde,

And ſay de heare Lorde, thy will and mine be one,

VVhat is thy minde, more redie there is none,

To ride to runne, to trauell here and there,

By lande and ſeas halfe worthie if I were.

But  [...]ſt to know thy name I humbly thee beſe [...]che,

Forgiue my  [...]udeneſſe this of thee to craue,

He aunſwering ſayd▪ with m [...]eke and lowlie ſpeeche,

Morpheus is my name▪ that alwaies power haue,

Dreames to shewe in Countrie, Courte, or Caue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=7)In the heauens
aboue, or Plutoes kingdome loe,

Its I that haue the power each thing t'unfolde and sho [...] ▪

And knowe (quoth he) that euerie night and daye,

VVho shutteth vp his eyes, his heade to feede with ſleepe,

His wandering ſpirite attendes on me alwaye,

To trudge and trauell, where I shall thinke it meete,

As well to mounte the ſkies, as in the ſecrets deepe,

As ſwifte as thought, what God hath greater poure,

Then all that is or was, to shewe thee in an houre?

And whether wilt I goe, Lorde Morpheus (quoth I)

I here am preſt thy will for to obey.

VVith an earneſt lookes (quoth hee) I will that by and by,

To Plutoes kingdome with mee thou take thy waye.

Though frayde I were, I durſt not well ſay naye.

VVith him I went that irkeſome place to ſee,

VVhere wofull ſprites full ſore tormented bee.

And going by the way theſe wordes he ſayde,

Be of good cheare, me thinkes thou lookeſt pale,

Plucke vp thy hearte and be no deale afrayde,

Although thou goe into this ouglie vale.

And thus or he had fynisht halfe his tale,

Cerberus barckt that griſelie hounde of hell,

The earth did quake to heare him houle and yell.

VVhen Morpheus hearde this cruell barcking Curre▪

For Mercuries rodde he ſende with all the haſt,

This wondering porter charmde he might not ſturre,

Till he [...] and I throughout his offyce paſt,

So to the ſeconde warde wee came at laſt.

VVhere VVrath kept the walles, and Enuie the gates,

Aſſociate with Pride and vvhoredome their mates.

VVith cruell countinaunce terrible to ſ [...],

Theſe horrible officers fixed their eyes,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=7)Filthie to
beholde monſtrous and ouglie,

They gathered to the gates like ſwarmes of Bee [...],

Gnashing their teeth, aſking who were theſe,

That durſt be ſo bolde Plutos kingdome to enter,

Or within their office ſo rudelie to venter.

I am Morpheus (quoth hee) mine auctoritie you knowe,

As well in the heauens as alſo here,

My nature and qualitie is dreames for to showe,

Therefore giue place, and let me come neere.

Theſe wordes ſcarce ſaide, but the gates opened were.

So to the thirde warde we came by and by,

Not far from that place where great Pluto did lye.

The warde as I ſaide where Pluto then lay,

VVas fortefied with Tirauntes for the nonce,

Some crying, ſware yea, and other ſome nay,

Renting eche others flesh from the bones,

Some flang fierbrandes, and other ſome flang ſtoanes.

VVith howling and crying terrible to heare,

VVhat plague could be thought that was not preſēt there?

The chiefe Captaines of all this rablous route,

The grea­teſt vices on earth be chiefe Cap­taines in Hell.

VVere Oppreſſion of the poore and  [...]ake Priuate gaine,

VVith a ſorte of their kinne that looked full ſtoute,

That in that vale for euer muſt remaine.

There was Peter Pickethanke and Priuie diſdaine,

Tom Teltale was appointed in a Turret to watche,

Laurence Lurcher a Baylife to ſnatche and to catche.

There was Darckeneſſe and Ignoraunce linckt in a chaine,

Let vs ab­horte theſe vices and cruell crimes.

VVith Errour and Freevvill, Arrogance, and Selfelooue,

Forgetfulneſſe of God, and Tranſgreſſion did remaine,

VVith Miſtrust and Superſticion, which might not remoue

Hipocriſie the King in a turret aboue.

VVith Lucre, Cruelneſſe, and Bludshed his brother,

Domination, and Fulneſſe, Abundaunce, and other.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=8)

Pompe he ſat puffing as though he were madde,

Symony vnder hande began to conuaye,

Confuſion doth de­  [...]o [...] wic­kedneſſe.

Iniquitie and Sophiſtrie, with countenaunce full ſadde,

Sat with Murther, and Tyranny curſing the daye,

Certainelie to ſee it was a tragicall playe,

To beholde abhomination, what torments she had,

(with the reſt) whereat Confuſion was glad.

Many thouſandes there were that I omit,

For want of time fullie to deſcribe,

To tell truth the number paſſeth ſkill and wit,

To be namde of mee, that howled there and cryde.

VVhen theſe loth ſome leyds, had Morpheus eſpyde,

They flew on heapes to know from whence he came,

VVho aunſwered thus I am a God no man.

And whats thy name (quoth they) Morpheus aunſwered he

VVhome Pluto doth admire, and honor both I trowe,

And Proſerpine your Queene, mightie though they bee,

And Mynos your Iudge will doe the ſame I knowe.

I am the God that alwayes dreames doth show.

I am free this waye to guide and leade eache man,

without demaunde to knowe from whence I came,

Then vp ſtart Peter Pickethanke by and by,

Theſe newes to Pluto in haſte he ran to tell,

And almoſt madde, with open Iawes gan crye,

My Lorde (quoth hee) thers ſtraungers come to hell,

VVhat  [...]l [...]e (quoth Pluto) is not all thinges well?

Yea Sir (quoth hee) its Morpheus that is here,

Then Pluto aunſvvered, why bidſt him not come neere?

The thirde wa [...]de opened then at large,

The Pallace then approching in our ſight,

VVhere raging furies of wofull ſoules had charge,

To torment thouſande wayes, both daye and night,

Miſerable darckeneſſe there was without light,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=8)Graſping and
groping, greate diſcorde and ſtrife,

VVeeping and wayling, and blaſphemous life.

The ſtinking ſmoke that from that dongeon roſe,

Corrupts the ſkies, and clowdeth all with shade,

The thundering blaſt that from that furneſſe bloſe,

A dubble paine, the ſillie ſprites hath made▪

VVith rufull plaintes to heare in euerie glade.

That i [...] the ſorrowes halfe were pende I ſee,

In teares there woulde be drowned manie an eye.

But when we came this ouglie God before,

Hayle (quoth Morpheus) thou God of darckeneſſe great,

Hayle Proſerpina here Queene for euermore,

Long may thou holde thy place and ſeate,

I am come (quoth hee) my cuſtome for to pleate,

Thou knoweſt of olde that woont I am to ſee,

As well thy kingdome, as mightie Ioues on hie.

By Styx (quoth hee) thy auncient cuſtome olde▪

I will not breake, but as thou haſt before,

In all my regiment, I will thou shalt be bolde.

To doe all thinges as thou waſt woont of yore,

But looke of mee thou ſeeme to craue no  [...]nore.

Except you two, who is my gates within,

To pray for pardon it profytes not a pin.

Then aunſwered Morpheus I neuer thought to craue▪

The pardon of the prowdſt that in thy ſoyle dōth reſt,

Nor yet the greedie Tyraunt toombde in grieſlie graue▪

Nor any ſuch that pooremen hath oppreſt.

For gylefull gluttons to ſpeake I thought it leaſt.

All theſe with other mo, I know muſt ſtaye with thee,

Howe wickedneſſe rewarded is thats all I wish to ſee.

Content (quoth Pluto) and commaundment he gaue,

To all his offyc [...] his kingdome through,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=9) ▪That
Morpheus and I shoulde licence then haue,

Eache place for to ſearche in Hill, Dale, and Clowgh,

In thicke or in thin, in ſmooth or in rough,

In hote or in colde where euer it bee,

The wickeds rewarde we shoulde both heare and ſee.

This ſaide, we departed from that filthie puddle,

And foorth wee paſt, the left ſide that caue,

VVhere wee founde a greater and crueller trouble,

Then all this while I knewe any to haue,

For one among manie we hearde raile and raue.

VVith a wofull voice▪ me thought it ſaide this,

Come ſee alas the rewarde of wickedneſſe.

At length to the place we chaunſt for to hit,

VVhere Alecto had charge to rule and diſpoſe,

There we behelde one lying in a pit,

Sodden in ſorrowes from the toppe to the toes.

Their paines for to painte in meeter or proſe,

Doth paſſe my ſkill, the leaſt to deſcribe,

Though Teſſiphon hir ſelfe my pen now shoulde guide.

But what I ſawe in this my drowſie dreame;

And who they▪ were▪ as now to minde I call,

VVhy and wherefore to you I shall proclaime,

That thus they loſt the ioyes ſupernall,

And haue poſſeſt the wofull place infernall▪

Lende me your eares for now my tale beginnes▪

How wicked wightes rewarded be for ſinnes.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=9)

## 2\. ¶ The rewarde of wickedneſſe.

### 2.1. ¶ HELLEN tormented for her treaſon to her Huſ­bande, and liuing in
fornication ten yeares, whoſe wordes followe.

O Fouleſt fuery, that raging hell doth guide,

O worſe then wrath, or endleſſe wicked life

O ſwarming plages, y• paſſeth fleſh to bide,

O doubtful dome of Plutos broiling ſtrife.

O Stigion ſpew thy flames to ende this life.

O iuſt rewarde I ſaye, of wicked déedes:

O greateſt miſchiefe, among theſe puddels rife,

O come make haſte, you flames of glowing gleedes.

You Gods that ſit in ſeates of paſſing bliſſe,

whoſe Joyes my endles paines ſurmounteth farre:

Doe you conſent for to rewarde mée this,

that whylome was in Greece, the Lampe, and Starre?

What meant you firſt to make and then to marre?

I am the worke of all your whole conſentes:

No brute nor fame, of Earthly woman harre,

woe worth my fate, full ſore it mée repentes.

O worthye Dames, lende mée your liſtening eares,

refraine your Citherons, and pleaſaunt Lutes alſo:

With Virginalles, delighting many eares,

from out your heartes, let thought of Muſicke goe.

Perhaps you daine, that I ſhall will you ſo,

but meruaile not, ne at my wordes take ſcorne:

It is your partes though you were ten times moe,

to helpe my plainte, with teares that I was borne.

Caſte of your Golden Rayes, and ritche attyre,

put on the mourners weedes, ſee [...]e to lament:

Hide your painted faces, that ſette mens heartes on fire,

learne this of mee, your bewtye ſoone is ſpent.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=10)You maye by
mée your wicked liues lament,

from ſpowting Conduites let guſhe the ſloods of teares

Let ſcalding ſi [...]hes from broyled heartes be ſent,

your iuſt rewarde for wickedneſſe appeares.

Although it doth abaſhe eache daintye Dame

to reade of mee, or yet to heare mée read:

I am the marke for you to ſhun like ſhame,

diſdaine me not though hygh you beare your head▪

You that of Huſbandes all this while bée ſped,

bee true to them in all your conuerſation:

Beware take héede, defile no time theyr bed,

among the Gods it's great abhomination.

I was in bewtye paſſing all the reſt,

and ſo by nature as curious made and wrought:

That if in mée there had béene grace poſſeſt,

to match the Gods I might haue well béene thought.

But vertue is the bewtye, Ladies all,

Uertue is the beautie of man and woman.

and not your painted faces and ſhining glée:

No greater mischeefe can among you fall,

then for to féede your ficle prophane eye.

For once I had my ſelfe ſuch prophane lookes,

twirlde out with eyes that were celeſtiall like,

Whoſe ſparckling twinche were ſharper then the hookes,

caſt in the ſtreame with baite for Fiſhe to bite▪

A thing immortall ſeemed I to bée,

but yet corrupt with maners that were nought▪

As painted Tombe [...], with bones bee inwarde filthy:

ſo outward I, but inwarde vices wrought.

And to her ſelfe be wayling thus alas,

in eyther hande an Ore, ſhée laboureth ſore:

At length ſhée was eſpide where I and Morpheus was,

then calde ſhée vs that ſtoode vpon the ſhore.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=10)Came neare
good Morpheus, ſtraight thée gan to rore,

thou ſéeſt my paines, thou knowſt not yet my name:

In Stigion lake I bide for euermore,

the wife of Menelaus I am the verye ſame.

And Hellen loe I am that heare abide,

within this ryuen Boate, inuironde as you ſée:

As iuſt reward for fleſhlye luſt and pride,

which ſ [...]apeth not, but heare rewarded bée.

Many a worthy wight loſt his life for mée,

and dyed all berayde and  [...]lorried all in blood:

Therefore I praye thée yet come neare and ſée,

the tormentes I abide within this helliſhe flood.

Alas vneth my hande can holde the pen,

my ſight deuoured is with gréeuous teares▪

When I but thinke howe that I ſawe her then.

that once did leade the crewe of Uenus peares,

No honeſt heart but it would rewe her  [...]late.

that hearde and ſawe as much as wée that tide:

But all alas to gréeue it is to late,

the Gods ordeine that ſhée ſhall there abyde

Amid a Sea that boyleth fierye floods,

with mixed blood flyes vp and downe the Skies,

Where lurking Rockes with hautie dreadfull muds

on euerye ſide appeared in our eyes.

About the which moſte venemous ſerpentes flyes,

huge ſtorming blaſtes this wicked ſtreame doth moue:

What ſparkes of gleides riſe vp like ſwarmes of Bées,

A deſcripti­on of the place where ſhee toweth in a riuen Boate in Stigion

and furies fell theyr wicked partes doe prooue.

For in a Boate berent on euerye ſide,

(and as I ſayde) ſhee ſittes, in euery hand an Ore:

And ſtriueth ſtyll betwéene the winde and Tyde,

nowe haling from the Rockes, and by & by from ſhore.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=11)The choyſe is
harde, when this refuge is beſt,

to toyle amid theſe flaming fluddes as ſhée:

Or elſe t'ariue amid the Serpentes neſt,

for on the lande with blades the Tyrantes bée.

Which rounde about this plaguie Stigion pit,

in battaile raye and armour blacke doe ſtande:

Cutthrotes, as egar as any Fiſhe of byt,

that alwayes watche to ſee her come to lande.

Eache Butcher holdes a mortall Are in hande,

for to reuenge the blood ſhee cauſed ſhed:

The which for truth, when as I vewde and ſcande,

with heapes of woe, to Morpheus thus I ſaide.

Alas (quoth I) this gréeues mée moſt of all,

The Gods haue no reſpect of perſons.

to ſee her fate, whoſe bewtye Clarkes commende:

Mée thinke the Gods that ſit in ſeates ſupernall,

ſome mercye ſhould at length and pitye ſende.

Eache one (quoth Morpheus) who ſeemeth to offende,

according to theyr deedes without reſpect

Haue here rewarde for wickedneſſe in t'hende,

as pleaſeth Pluto, or whome hee hath elect.

And as theſe wordes were ſayde, wée hearde hir crye,

The one fornicator deſtroyeth the other experience telleth.

(O Paris, Paris,) for cuermore woe bée the time

Thy faigning face, it was my chaunſe to ſpye,

or that it was thy lucke to looke on mine.

Thou ſteynde my name, alas ſo did I thine,

my miſchiefe hit by thée, by mée the like thou had▪

O wicked Hellen, this all men maye define,

And Paris for thy part, thy fortune was as bad.

O worthye Troye, happye had thou binne▪

What mis­chiefe doth not a wic­ked woman breede?

if ſleepie Nurſe had ſtrangled mée in bed:

Then bloodye miſchiefe had ſcaped all my kinne,

and noble Hector had neuer loſt his head.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=11)Many a worthy
man had liude, that nowe is dead,

Troy had floriſht ſtill, whoſe walles are ſact full loe:

Menelaus had neuer yet polluted bed,

and if the Gods my death had poynted ſo.

All Greece vnto this daye, doth curſe the time,

[...]n y [...] bar­gaine wher no man  [...]innes. &c.

with many a famous Prince of noble birth:

So Paris, thou art like wiſe curſt of thine,

for thou and I were troubles to the earth.

Alas therefore nowe chaunged is our mirth,

It is an old prouerd take heede is a fayre thing.

the bloodſhed in our cauſe doth vengeaunce crye:

Therefore take héede you Dames of mightye birth,

to t'hende of all beginninges, euer caſt your eye.

For, had I neuer painted vp my face,

nor ſhot the boultes of wanton whirling eyes:

Had grace and vertue dwelled in that place,

then had I ſaued al the liues of theſe.

For when a man the lookes of women ſées,

hée lyeth at watche, to ſée her caſt the darte:

Hit whome it happes, (hée is no man that flees,)

then blame him not, that doeth defende his part.

For thou alas good Paris not to blame,

(nor none but I) that caſt my ſecreate lookes

Olde plea­sure [...] brede newe ſor­rowes.

So ſleightfullye, to tyſe thee with the ſame,

before the Gods I wiſh: none other bookes.

I caſte him ſugred baites, I catche on bitter hookes,

or elſe the ſuite had Paris neuer take:

I layde him letters, in ſecreate holes and noukes,

for to attempte the venture for my ſake.

And what was hée that would not take in hande,

Wickednes deſtroyeth it ſe [...]e.

to haſſarde all, at that time for my ſake,

Whoſe matche on earth, did neuer goe nor ſtande,

then blame him not ſuche enterpriſe to make?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=12)O Ladies bée
wittye, and quietneſſe make,

and dread the Gods you worthy Grecian Dames▪

For here ſhee lyes within this flaming lake,

bewrapt in woe, to quite her youthfull games.

My Pageant though I playde in open ſight,

and that the world did manifeſtly knowe:

I woulde not wiſhe that you by ſecreate night,

or cloſer craft ſhould vſe your Huſbandes ſo.

The Gods aboue all ſleightye ſecreates ſhowe,

to euerye eare and eye, bée ſtraight reuealde:

You heare it read in Scripture long agoe,

that naughtye actes were neuer yet concealde.

And then when Fame h [...] [...]unded vp hir trumps,

A ſinne & a ſhame before the Gods and men alſo.

and publiſht all your déedes and filthy life:

Then ſhall confuſion put you to your Iumpes,

your Huſbandes ſhall diſoaine to call you wife.

Your friendes ſhall bluſhe to heare you namde,

your foes reioyce in euery coaſt about:

To call you mothers, Children are aſhamde,

loe this beſure, it euer falleth out.

And finallye the Gods from ioye and bliſſe,

ſhall caſt you into Stigion lake to frye:

As pleaſeth Pluto ſo your ſorrowes is,

marke well my wordes, I doe alleadge no ly [...].

And then it is to late for to repent or crye,

your woefull S [...]rikes reioyſeth hell to heare:

(As for my parte) vnhappye wretche I trye,

whoſe iuſte reward thou ſéeiſt plaine appeare.

When fowleſt thought of treaſon to your mates,

Marke you worthye Matrones the counſel of  [...]ofull Hell [...].

ſhall pricke your  [...]ickle mindes as ſome it doth:

Yet let this one thing pearce your péeuiſhe pates,

that like the ſlipp [...] yſe ſo glideth from ye youth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=12)And ſith
there is nothing of greater truth,

through lewdeneſſe loſe not then your noble names.

Bée moſt aſſured, miſchiefe ſtreight inſuth,

alas therefore, take heede you worthy Dames.

And ſcorne no deale, my rewfull plaintes to heare,

if hap bée on your ſides, I maye ſuch warning bée

To euerye one that is poſſe [...]t with feare,

that by my fate like daunger for to flée.

Therefore as ofte as follye feedes your eye,

ſpende time in reading bookes, that worthy Clarks haue pende:

In ſteede of Lu [...]es and other harmonie,

your willing eares a while to learning lende.

So Cupid and his Lore you ſhall forget,

The ver­tuous and godlye Wiues be ſhrinde a­mong the Gods for euer.

with all ſuch driftes as he and his doe driue:

Of ſclaunder and reproche you ſhall eſcape the net,

and Fame with golden trumpe ſhal ſound your vertuous

Thus winning noble name, your lines ſhall end, line,

ſo vertuouſlye that after vitall breath,

The Gods theyr Aungels for your ſpirite ſhall ſende,

to dwell with them in bliſſe, thus Scripture ſayth.

And with theſe wordes caſt almoſt on the ſhore,

the woefull wretch with toyled wearye bones,

With all the haſte in flood doth laye the Ore,

that headlong Boate and all, doth flée attonce.

Where hiſſing Serpentes ſwarme as thicke as haile,

that likewiſe wayted in theyr ſubtile kinde

With whetted ſtinges this Lady to aſſaile,

for to rewarde her lothſome luſtfull minds.

And as wée did perceyue ſhée wiſht that we,

to euery worthy wight report ſhould make,

Howe fornicatours in hell rewarded bée,

and howe the Gods vppon them vengeaunce take.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=13)For ſtraight
alas amid that ouglye lake,

her hande ſhee putteth vp, and bad farewell:

Thus endles paines her former talke gan ſlake,

more newes of her, I am not able to tell.

For why, the hiſſing of the wicked wormes,

with fome of ſurging lakes, that rores againſt the rocks

And furious thondering flames, that boiles and brommes,

beſide the fowles of many filthye flockes,

On Helmettes, Billes, yeelde many mortall knockes,

with thumping of the Cannons cruell ſhottes:

The noyſe of Chaines, and wrenche of bandes and locks,

with ſmorid ſmoke, of boyling Pitche in Pottes.

As fearefull daunſe of Chimneys builded hye,

The In­nocentes blood ſhed w [...]lfullye, craueth vengeance.

and fall of Turrets, that ſleyeth man and childe:

With widowes, whoſe fatherles children doe crye,

theyr plaintes alas, all Joye of hope exilde.

To heare them grone, whome mortall weapon ſpoilde,

with craſhe of ſtaues, that then in péeces flowe:

A voyce cryed vengeaunce (on them that were defilde

with ſpilling guiltleſſe blood) that might not doe thereto.

Another voyce, went hurling vp and downe,

woe, woe, to ſuch as ſtrife ſturre vp or brewe:

And ſpecially by warres, to ſacke both Citie and Towne,

[...] voyce.

laye waſte the ſoyle and ploughe, where Oxen drewe.

From mirthe to mourning, all to chaunge a newe,

wiues and children, ſpoilde before eache others face:

The cauſers euer, the firſt them ſelues that rewe,

and woe ſtill bée to you, that haue ſo litle grace.

Theſe ſoundes of ſorrowes, that roſe ſo many waies,

bereu'de vs Hellen, poore wretche in flaming Seas.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=13)

### 2.2. ❧ The Bookes verdite vpon Hellen.

WHo hearde me tell this tale, that doth their eies witholde,

Or that their collours doth not pale, to heare it read or tolde?

Is any heart ſo harde, that woulde not melt to heere?

You Ladies doe you not regarde, the fall of bewties peere?

And haue you locked vp, ſalt flooddes within your eyes?

VVhy haue you kiſt Meduſas cup? Your heartes why doe they frees?

Hath Lethea Lake bewicht all you that liuing be?

Nor hath not pittie neuer twicht your heartes to mourne with me?

Perhappes you doe diſdaine to heare ſuch tydings tolde:

But yet you may be glad againe, I ſaye both young and olde.

Uliſſes wife doth loaſe no fame nor honour here:

No, No, nor any one of thoſe, that liue in godlie fere.

Nor yet the good Alcest, doth catch no blotte nor ſtaine:

Nor Griſeld doth not loaſe the leaſtof Hippos happie gaine,

I am aſſured this, that Cleopatra winnes

Through Fame a triple bliſſe, loe now my tale beginnes.

For Creſeid she is one, whoſe face may blush to heare,

Of Hellens life, that now is gon, vngracious Circes peere.

In bewtie Venus matche, Arcynos worſe by mutche:

Medeas ſleyghtes shee had to catch, whome pleaſed me to towche.

Iſay its ſuch as theſe, that Synons shiftes doe vſe:

And vertuous ſtudies ſeeme to leſe, on wanton toyes to muſe.

I meane ſuch retcheleſſe dames, that play Sylenos part:

To winne ſuch merry pleaſaunt games, as teache ſir Cupids art.

Loe theſe are they and ſuch, that ought with shamefaſte looke,

To be abasht when they shall touche, or vew this ſimple booke.

Sith Hellens faultes are knowne, and yours in ſecret hyd:

Take heede leaſt you be ouerthrowne, as Hellen hath be teed.

And blame hir vices all, but wofull chaunce bewayle:

For while I liue euen ſo I shall, if ſorrow might preuaile.

And ſith it was your happes, ſo worthy a Dame to haue:

To warne you from ſuch after claps, as turne you might to ſcath.

VVhoſe face did ſtaine the reſt, of all that earthly were

Adornde in euery ioynt and dreſt, moſt like dame Bewties pere.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=14)Therefore
from ſacred breaſt, what ſcalding ſighes ſtreight  [...]ende,

Let not your chriſtall eies haue reſt, to thinke of Helens ende.

VVith Niob bathe your face in teares, for Helens ſake,

Vnto the Gods call, cry, for grace, for to eſcape the lake,

VVhere Hellen thus with paines, in riuen boate doth rowe.

In fiery ſeas she ſtill remaines, becauſe shee was vntrewe.

### 2.3. ❧ Pope Alexander the ſixt rewarded for his wickedneſſe and odible
lyfe, with his colledge of Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Moonckes, Freers,▪ and
Nunnes, with the rabble of greaſie Prieſtes, and other mem­bers of Idolatry
and ſuper­ſtition. &c.

O Hell, O Hell, deſerued long agoe,

and raging Furies that beare immortall ſpight,

What doe you meane, why ſpare you any woe,

that ſhould increaſe our paine, & pleaſure our delight?

Where is your woonted wrath, accuſtomed to thro

among the ſoules vnto your charge committed:

Come doe your worſt, conſume vs all aro,

diſpatche vs ſtreight, lets be no longer  [...]litted.

Thou filthy floode of Lymbos lurcking lake,

From choaked pitte, come belche abroade thy flames:

Why come you not you Furies for to take

a greater vengaunce, I call you by your names.

Spew out Plegethon, thy furious fiery flake,

O hell why vomitſt not thy greateſt gorge of all:

Once giue conſent a finall ende to make

of vs, that doe your wrath ſo gladly call.

Come ougly ſhapes from olde ſepulchers ſent,

come filthy Fowles from loathſome boyling puddle,

Come monſterous Grypes, that Tyrius guttes hath rent,

some Judge of Sprits, come, come increaſe our trouble.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=14)Come Prince
of darckneſſe, giue thy fearefull iudgement,

O hell vnfolde thy gates, and let the flaming ſteame

Make haſt to increaſe our puniſhment,

Diſpatche vs once, out of this endeleſſe trouble.

O vile Idolatrie, the Prince of perdicion,

the waye thou directes to euerlaſting paines:

O filthie moment, and wicked ſuperſtition,

O blynde doctrine, Interpretor of dreames.

O rotten relikes with all your addicion,

fye vpon you all, ſith thus it comes to paſſe.

Falſehoode in the end hath no remiſſion,

as witneſſe our deuilliſhe deteſtable maſe.

And with theſe woordes, he caſte his head a wrye,

amonge the ſhaueling greaſie chuffhead Friers:

And ſeeing Morpheus ſtanding preſent bye,

the ſawſie ſorte of Prieſtes with Moonks and Nunnes appeares

At which this Pope beganne to roare and crye,

alas (quod hée) beholde where Morpheus ſtandes:

Hee will proclayme abroade that heare wée lye,

that rule of h [...]ll, and heauen did take vppo'ns.

What ſhall wée doe (quod hée) beſt call him hether,

it hayneth ſo there is none other ſhifte:

Lets ſay wee came for Soules, they anſwered altogether,

The Tres is knowne by his fruite.

and that wee meane to make a general ſhrifte.

Let not bee knowne the cauſe wherefore and why,

haſt out of credite thereby our Lawes bee brought:

And si [...]h of cuſtome wee wonted were to lye,

to tell truthe nowe, at all it profites naught.

But while the rowte of Sathans bonde and flocke,

ad eſte them ſelues to gloaſe and paint this lye:

(Moegera comes) and caſt her fierye blocke,

among the heape that all in flames doeth flye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=15)Then on theyr
Captaine, the ſhorlinges call and knocke,

but all in vaine, hee coulde not helpe him ſelfe.

His ſinnes had tyed him faſter then the rocke,

hée myght not part out of that woeful delfe.

Then faſt vpon Saint Frauncis gan they crye,

mée thought as it were a mad Mattins they ſong:

They were ſo prickt with paines they had no time to lye,

the par [...]ſhe was beguilde, the ſeronde peale not r [...]ng.

Some ſong Sanctamaria Ora pro nobis,

with Senſars & Candleſtickes they brake cache others face:

The Pope ſweare Gods fleſhe Pax uobis,

who loſt but his labour there was ſo ſmall grace.

Some cryed on Saint Iames, and ſome on Saint Iohn,

and ſome on Saint Auſten, Saint Laurence and Leo.

On Saint Peter with his Keyes, cryed many a one,

but among the whole rowte I heard not Laus deo.

Suche raye was neuer hearde, what euer they meant,

the noyſe ſhoke the clowdes that hang in the Skies:

With na [...]les and téethe, eache others fleſhe they rente,

that Ecco reportes the fearefull plaintes and cryes.

But when they ſée that Morpheus kept his place,

this curſed Captaine faſt vpon him cryed:

And ſayde come Morpheus and vewe our woefull caſe,

beholde howe I and all my mates bée fried.

☞

No lenger leyn the trueth they might for woe,

and Maug [...]e of theyr willes Pluto them compelde:

The Trai­tour & the theef: both confeſſe the truth when they ſee no better.

Wherfore and why, they vrged were to ſhoe,

and ſo at lengthe, theſe wordes to him hée telde.

I was (quod hée) a Pope and of my name,

the Sixt I was and Alexander hight.

But for to heare my life, no man may bide for ſhame,

that hath the dread of God before his ſight.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=15)But lende a
while thy lyſtening eares to mée,

and I ſhall frieght thy head in bearing of the leaſt:

Sith my rewarde thou doeſt ſo perfite ſée,

to tell the truth at length I call it beſt.

In learned Scholes I had béene trayned long,

Theodore Borgia [...] maie  [...]ope and called Alexadr [...] and ſurna med
the  [...]i [...]te.

and hoyſte by fortunes wheele, I was a loftye height:

Yet ſtill my heart in high Ambition hong,

my head for higher ſtate, ſtill practiſde ſleight.

From highe to harre, I gaped euerye howre,

firſt calde Theodore Borgia of birth and line:

A Cardinall I thought not of greateſt power,

yet ſée my fortune in my later time.

(For as I ſayde) from height to harre, yet herte of all,

I thought to ſit, vnworthye though I were:

There was ſo many watching for the balle,

whoſe eyes by deuilliſhe arte, I did deceiue and bleare.

Many being of mightier birth and blood,

of greater fame then I by farre awaye,

Woulde haue preuented mee with many a ſnub,

becauſe I ſought the ſeate, and Papalſea.

And when I ſawe I could not reache the marke

and I wanted power and friendſhip tooe:

With coniuration I gan to playe my parte,

and craf [...]lye theyr mindes I altered newe.

Through Nigrom  [...]ncie and Inuocation, I

calde vp a Deuill with whome I did confarre:

Touching my ſute, ' [...]o aunſwered by and b [...],

to graunt him his requeſt, hée would exalt mée harre.

Thus being conuerſaunt with Deuilles leng,

theyr ayde and helpe I [...]raued euery daye:

They aunſwered mee with ſpeache of pleaſaunt tongue,

to doe theyr beſt they would not ſticke nor ſtayr,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=16)But firſt I
muſt both couenaunt and vowe,

The pro­miſe to the Deuill.

in preſence of the filthye Prince of darkeneſſe:

That all his Lawes infernall I ſhoulde allowe,

and therevnto addicte my ſelfe by practiſe.

Whiche graunted was, and not denyed at all,

Mons Caballus [...] a ſecrete houſe to worke kna ue [...]e a litle with [...]
[...] Rome.

to Mons Caballus, a place not diſtant farre,

In a cleare daye this Prince infernall

I mette, ſo cloſe no liuing body warre,

In a Chambre there, him ſelfe hée did preſent

in Ritche apparell, and Golden rayes to ſée,

Three crownes vpō his head, O [...]cht with ſtones Orient:

lyke ſtatelye robes hath not beene ſeene with eye.

A ſéemelye face preſenting midle age,

a ſtature meete as might bee thought in minde:

His countenaunce ſhewd, a perſon verye ſage,

whoſe wyll to mine, by cruell oathes I ioynde.

A Pro­thonotarie is vnder­ſtande the greateſt writer or C [...]ar [...]e in
whoſe lik [...] ­ne [...] th [...] de­uill ſhe [...]d him  [...]f [...].

Thus corporate like  [...] Prothonotarie,,

or of the world the greateſt Prince of all:

What was it then that I calde vnto memorye:

but it was graunted mee without deniall?

For there hee graunted mée my heartes deſire,

and ſayde I ſhould bee Pope the next that was:

W [...]n [...] with the Phenixe ſet my heart on fire,

ſuche haſt I made to  [...]ee it brought to paſſe.

Then with a gladſome heart I wiſhte to knoe,

Behold the fruites of our holye Father the Pope.

the time of my  [...]:

And howe I ſhoulde in ſtate of conqueſt goe,

becauſe I bare a deadlye hate to Italye.

Hée aunſwered mée with great diſceyte and ſayde,

The deceyt  [...] & doubt ful promiſe made by

a Leuen and eyght I ſhould bee Pope of Rome:

But ſée at length, howe I was q [...]itie and payde,

it prou [...]de not ſo when all was ſayde and done.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=16)I made
accounte to proſper ninetene yeere,

[...]he deuil to the Cardi­nall.

and glad I was as any man might bee:

I thought to make them ſtoupe both farre and néere,

but yet I was deceyude, the Deuill failed mee.

Innocens of that name the tenthe died ſtraight,

then by the moſt elections, placed was I:

In the chayre of Pompe, I ſtretchte my ſelfe on heyght,

for Pope I was proclaimed by and by.

Then Alexander the ſirt I had to name,

and all for Solemnization of degree:

Thus recheleſſe Rome agréed to the ſame,

bothe Ritche and Poore, then wiſhte it ſo to bée,

Thus was the Myter, with the Triple crowne,

ouchte rounde about with ſtones of worthye pryce,

(Set on my headde) in chayre of ſtatelye Rome,

igrauen ſubtelly by curious crafty vice.

Arayed in robes of glearing beaten Golde,

with Pearles depotherid here and there in ſight:

And at my feete in handes did Cardinals holde,

a Roſe of fineſt mettall coſtlye dighte.

I treade on Tiſſue, eache foote I ſet on grounde,

aboue my head was borne a ſhryne of golde:

Eache knee fell to the earth, to heare my voyce or ſounde,

who went at libertye, that I bad take or holde?

Kinges and Princes, with noble peeres I brought

in feare and awe ſo muche, they durſt not route,

Them and their countreys I ſackt & brought to nought

to mee and mine that would not bowe and ſtowpe.

All Italie in my wrathe I rente and ſhooke,

all Chriſtian Princes I vexed night and daye:

I baniſh Kinges, their regall ſeates I tooke,

who durſt to mee, ſo hardye doe or ſaye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=17)Honoured like
a God I was in euery ſteede.

Who ſpake againſt my Lawes that ſcaped death?

All faithfull men with ſworde and fire I rid,

alleadging that they liu'de out of the Chriſtian faith.

A Leuen yéeres the Tyrante thus I playde

Tyrantes proſper not long.

and eyght monethes, then ſicke I fell at laſte:

I wared feble, my courage quite decayde,

I pinde awaye and Atropos made haſte.

Thus I kept my bedde longe ſpace and time,

the cauſe thereof I gladlye wiſht to knoe:

So at the lengthe I calde a man of mine,

that of my ſecreates many times did knoe.

Modena was his name that beſt I truſt,

Popes Manckes Friers. &c. in ſteed [...] of gods word ſtudied C [...] ­
[...]uration Nigromā ­cie & other curſed a [...]s.

into my Waredroabe, my keyes withall I ſent:

There laye a Booke within a Cubbard thruſt,

of Nigromancie in Seruius firſt frequent.

When as my ſeruaunt into my Waredroabe came,

(A Pope hée founde) all deckte in Ritche araye:

That ſeemed as hée thought a very earthly man,

Of whome afrayde, my ſeruaunt came his way.

And all a freight to me he tels this tale,

which drewe me in a maze and muſing minde:

Yet after a while, I calde my man by name,

and ſent him once againe the booke to finde.

This booke with golde and precious ſtones was bounde,

I neuer loued Chriſtes Teſtament halfe ſo well:

Of Nygromancie there was containde the ground,

throughout the earth there was not any ſuch.

But when my man the Wardroabe entered

againe, he founde the Pope iawſting vp and downe:

Although he were afrayde, yet manly ventred,

and fainde himſelfe, as though he ſought a gowne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=17)But terriblye
this Pope with ſparkling looke,

(ſayde to my man) my friende what doeſt thou here?

Where at hée ſhranke forgetting of the booke,

almoſt hee loſt his winde for very dread and f [...]are.

With trembling fleſhe anon thus aunſwered hée:

The aunſwere of the meſſenger to the  [...]u, and the anſwere of the vi
[...]on againe.

for the Pope I come to fetche a Gowne (hée ſayd)

What Pope? (quod viſion) you haue no Pope but mée,

and I am hée, that ought to bée obeyde.

With this my man returned backe agayne,

and what hée ſawe reuealed in myne eare:

Whiche when I heard did much augment my payne,

for death at hande, I knew would ſtraight appeare.

Then ſickneſſe did encreaſe, eache hower more and more,

and at the length, time gan to drawe ſo nye:

One like a meſſenger rapping at the doore,

with open mouth awaye diſpatche gan crye▪

With this the doores abroade gan flye,

and ruſhing in hee comes to ſpeake with mée:

Firſt word hee ſayde: haſte haſte diſpatche (quod hée)

the time is come, from death thou canſt not flee.

Then Jobiected  [...]o his charge full ſore,

the former promiſe that he made to mée:

The Pope is deceiued by the De­uilles craf­tye promiſe

Howe I oughte to liue eyghte yeere by couenant more:

And if a leuen and eyght obſerued bee

(Quod hee) agayne my ſayinges you haue miſtaken,

eleuen yeares eyght monethes was all I meant:

My promiſe to obſerue I haue not yet for ſaken,

of eleuen yeeres eyght monethes not one doeth want.

Full glad I woulde haue crau'de a lenger time,

but all was vaine to ſpeake him fayre at all:

With cruell lookes, hee aunſwered thou art mine,

thou ſhalt with mee, into the lake inf [...]rnall.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=18)And thus he
turnde his backe and went his waye,

then ſtraight my Corps, did yeld vp vitall breath:

My wofull ſpirite he toke with him that daye,

where nowe I am tormented with double death.

Loe, what it is to worke by Coniuration,

or to deale with deuils by wicked arte?

Beholde the ende of all abomination,

A fayre warning for Loniurers & Inchan­ters. &c.

am I not well rewarded for my part?

A Guerdon méete is Hell, for ſuche as I,

that ſought ſo much to ſitte in ſtatelye ſeate:

(Nowe who is Pope) vnhappye wretche I trye,

that am preparde for Sathans hooke a baite.

Loe Morpheus: thus I did beginne and ende,

The ſay­ing is, a good beginning make a good en­ding.

I lefte my Sonne with all my heapes of treaſure:

Through al the world, there was not one his friende,

poore and ritche ſtill ſought his great diſpleaſure.

I lefte his Siſter (whome both wée twoo)

as ofte as pleaſed vs did vſe and take,

Godlye actes of our holie father the Popes do [...]g [...]s.

Carnallye eache night and daye wée knewe,

a common Concubine, I did my Daughter make.

And with theſe wordes, Maegaera commeth flying,

a thouſande newe de [...]iſed plagues ſhée bringes:

Take heare (quod ſhée) your iuſt reward for lying,

and there withal great flames of fire flynges.

This done, ſhée then departes a pace,

to put in vſe her wanted cancarde nature:

A death it was for to beholde her face,

or elſe to vewe her vglye monſtrous ſtature.

Where at the rable of all this recheles rancke,

immediatelye like bedlems ſweare and ſtare▪

Into the hollowe hole of gleydes they ſancke,

where furious  [...]iendes, theyr fleſhe in péeces tare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=18)Thus they
vaniſht, and fled out of our ſight,

with carefull cryes, our ruthful eares they filde:

The pit with clowdes of fearefull irkeſome night,

and dreadful darkenes rounde about was hilde.

Yet many wée behelde, with offeringes and oblations

that approched nighe, for haſt they headlong came:

Frier Ruſhe bare the Croſſe, Clarke of the ſeſſions,

a member of their Churche, the Popes owne man:

Frier Ruſh

Thouſandes came knip knap, pattering on Beades,

Friars Munkes and Nunnes, came after with haſt,

As vowed Pilgrimes, came Wiues widowes & Maides,

of the holye Popes workes the fruites for to taſt.

Whome when I ſawe, theyr ſtate I did bewaile,

with teares I ſtéepte a thouſand times my face▪

Alas, they ſought that might not them preuaile,

the Pope their God, was in a woful caſe.

Hée broylde in fire, and endleſſe woe and paine,

and all his ſecte, they taſted of the ſame:

For worldly pleaſure, Hell is all theyr gaine,

Beſide on earth an euerlaſting ſhame.

Woulde God thought I, in this my drearye dreame,

my countrey men, were preſent nowe with me:

To vewe the plagues, where Papiſtes doe remaine,

that then they might that filthye faſhion flée.

And turne to Chriſt, which ſuffered for theyr ſake,

the bloodye butchering Pope for to deteſt:

In health and wealth. theyr prayers for to make,

to God of might that graunteth our requeſt.

But while that thus, I waylde the want of faith,

awaye (quod Morpheus) Lets packe and get vs hence:

Why heareſt thou not one gaſping for his breathe?

yea (quod I) but knowe not wel from whence

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=19)The wofull
noyſe doeth come, nor where it is,

geue mée thy hande (quod hée) and bée not frayd [...]:

It is ſome Sprite rewarded for his miſſe,

Whoſe carefull cryes, his wicked life bewrayde.

¶ His name his life, his actes that did complaine,

All at fewe vvordes heareafter doe remaine.

### 2.4. ¶ The bookes verdite vpon this wicked Pope.

O God howe worthy is thy name? Thou art our Lord and King.

As many as confeſſe the ſame, to ioye thou doeſt them bring.

And ſuch as doe thy name denye, and rob the of thy glory:

Thou doſt confound them by & by, and dashe them out of memory.

All ſecreates thou doſt knowe full wel, no man can hide from thee:

And all that in the earth doeth dwell, or in the heauens bee.

Or in the Seas or ſtony rockes, from farre thou doeſt behold

The fowles that ſcale the ſkies by flockes, and more then can be told.

Thinfernal lake quakes at thy voice, eache fiend doth howle and yel:

And thundreth out an odious noiſe, when they of the heare tell.

O filthie Tiraunt then to thee, (I ſpeake) that tooke in hande

Among vs all a God to bee, to rule both Sea and lande.

And heauen where the Lord doeth ſit, and hell where nowe thou art:

No doubt thou hadſt but litle witte, to playe that theeuishe part.

It is to Alexander that, with open mouth I crie:

VVoe worth the time he ſpared not, to leade the flocke awrie.

Loe, where he is that rulde the roſt, and euery kinde of feaſt:

VVhoſe v [...]unting tongue would boaſt, he was a Father bleſt

As well within the holie throne, as lowe in Stigian Lake:

And that he could both vp and downe, bring whome he pleaſde to take.

Twenty hundreth thouſand ſoules, at Maſſe he could remoue:

VVith ſealing of his Bulles and ſcrowles, or wagging of his Gloue.

So could he pul them downe from God, when pleaſed him againe:

As thicke as flakie ſnowe abroade, or miſtie dropping Raine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=19)And thus the
w [...]olfe deuoured our good, & made vs ſlaues & drudges

Sackt our countries, ſpoylde our bloode, and made vs liue like ſnudges.

Kilde our ſoules and bodies two, deflowred wiues and maydes:

And kept from vs Chriſts teſtamēt new, and gaue vs bels and baides.

Olde rotten rellickes, ſtockes, and ſtones, and Ceremonies blinde:

VVith ſtinking pardons for the nonce, to feede our foolish minde.

Thus with his Gods both deafe and dumbe, he tyſte vs from the Lord:

VVhich ſent from heauen Chriſt his ſonne, as ſcriptures doe recorde.

VVhoſe precious bloud hath made vs free, from hell and all hir ſting

And hellish Pope from thine and thee, which God his people wring.

I yrke to name him any more, and faint within my breaſt:

Vengance doth vpon him rore, the Lorde hath thee deteſt.

Thy iuſt rewarde among thy mates, with laſting paines is quit:

In flashing flames bewayle their ſtates, in dolefull dreade they ſit.

Yet would they ſay that with a maſſe, they could Plegethon quenche:

And all the ſoules that damned were, deliuer with a blenche.

And yet themſelues lye broyling there, in fire paſt the crownes:

And with their Idoles ſweate & ſweare, though here they ſat in thr [...]s

Me thinke them fooles that had ſuch ſkill, in fetching ſoules from hel:

And be compelde againſt their will, in carefull Caue to dwell.

Sith Italie had cauſe to ioye, at this vile Tyrantes death:

VVhat cauſe haue we to thanke the Lorde, that are reſtorde to fayth:

From bondage now are ſet atlarge, and woolues deliuered fro:

And therefore duetie giueth charge, our thankefull heartes to sho.

Lets lift our handes with ioyed heart, that liuing be this time:

That Gods true worde in euery part, may florish ſtill and shine.

Let Alexander ſaue him ſelfe, with all his holie ſkill:

For with his rellickes and ſuch pelfe, he may doe what he will.

No doubt he lyeth there for ſport, to paſſe the time away:

Or elſe to vewe the greate reſort, shat Ladies Psalter ſaye.

Perhaps that Purgatorie paines, he will to bliſle conuert:

The ſillie ſoules that there remaines, shall taſte no more of ſmart.

Fie on him fie, and all his mates, the heauens curſe him yet:

Of flaming hell he is the gates, and guide to Stigian pit.

His ſtincking Maſ [...]es let him take, and Ceremonies blinde:

Doom Gods a thouſand though hee make, according to his minde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=20)Yet he and
they doe perish all, the ſcripture prooues it plaine:

So doe as many ſhppe and fall, as to his loare doe leane.

But let vs builde vpon the rocke, of Chriſtes Goſpell pure:

So wee with him amongſt his flocke, for euer shall endure.

VVhere as one God and perſons three, be prayſed day and night:

And where we shall for euer bee, alwayes within his ſight.

### 2.5. ❧ Young Tarquine rewarded for his wickedneſſe.

AWaye with all your playntes and bloobering teares,

Your carefull cryes ſhut vp in ſilence quite:

For here behoulde ſuch cruelneſſe appéers,

Of all the reſt but I no wight hath felt the like.

Hell ſhowes hir force on me with double ſpite,

No paine to mine, nor none ſo worthy blame,

As I deſerue, I well confeſſe the ſame.

O pryde, pryde, of miſchiefe roote and all,

Wo worth the time I thée delighted ſo:

Thou made me climbe vntill I catcht the fall,

Not onely to my ſhame, but alſo endleſſe wo.

Through pryde, I loſt both loue, and honor long ago,

Pryde ruled me ſo much, no goodneſſe I regarded▪

Therefore for wickedneſſe beholde I am rewarded.

Of noble line and race, deſcerded I,

And a Ruler was, and Ruler mighe haue béene,

But yet my heart in wretchedneſſe dialye:

I fearde not God, nor forſt his lawes a pinne,

I ranne my raſe alwayes in deadly ſinne.

I cleane forgot my ſelfe, and eke from whence I came,

I rather thought my ſelfe a God then mortall man.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=20)

For who, had that, which I did lacke or want,

Of golde or ſiluer or ſtones of precious price?

For my bodie, coſtlye apparell was not ſkant,

Nor nothing elſe that pryde might well entice,

Thus vertue decayde, but ſtill increaſed vice.

To pamper vp the paunche, the filthy fleſhe fulfill,

I wholy gaue my ſelfe with earneſt heart and will.

Which cauſed me to acumilate eche houre,

Upon my heade more plagues then can be namde:

The Gods agréed their vengance for to poure

On earth for aye: my name I ſtainde and ſhamde,

Thus may you heare how I am Juſtly blamde.

To my diſprayſe, and to the prayſe of ſoome,

That by my loſſe to honour & great prayſe haue  [...]oome.

Sith Morpheus thou art here, and brought thy friend with thée

Be witneſſe of the woe that Tarquine bydeth here:

Sith Poets haue pende the wicked life of mée,

Of my rewarde thou mayſt reporte well bere.

For the purpoſe none more méeter then thou here:

It is no councell that all the worlde doth knoe,

Nor yet forgot, that was done long agoe.

Fie on rapine, through guilefull treaſon wrought,

Fie on the ſwelling fleſh that ſoule and bodie kils:

Fie on filthineſſe, whoſe ende is euer nought,

And fie on folly, that all good maner ſpils.

Take héede all you that follow fleſhly wils.

Of me prowde Tarquine made a mirror clere:

So may you ſhunne the paines I ſuffer here.

Beholde, when I did Lucrece finde in bed,

☞

Through harmefull ſleight premeditate before,

With naked ſworde in hand to hir I ſayde:

Conſent to me (quoth I) elſe ſhalt thou liue no more:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=21)Thy tender
fleſhe this Lainche ſhall e [...]rue full ſore:

Then will I ſlea the worſt thy houſe within,

Ile make report you were committing ſinne.

Which wordes did rauiſhe ſo her noble ſence and witte,

That tremblingly ſhee quakes, as doeth the Aſpen Lea [...]e:

Feare ſtreight compeld her quakinglye to ſit,

Like as ſhee woulde depart with vitall breath,

The naked Sworde in ſight, ſtil threatning preſent death,

Thus I rauiſht a Ladye both vertuous and chaſte,

Wherfore I am cōpelde, (alas) theſe ſorowes to taſte.

Whereat eache tongue did talke to my diſprayſe,

And for the ſame, I baniſht was for euer:

(Sith then) all my poſteriti [...] aye euermore decayes.

Loe thus the Gods their vengance doe deliuer:

Bewayled be the daye that then I did com thither.

Among my wicked deedes, this onely was the worſt,

Therefore I was and am for euermore accurſt.

I am a ſacke of ſorrowe in this ſincke

And ſti [...]cking p [...]dole wherein you ſee me lye:

Whoſe faultes with mine reſpondent pende with inke,

Were euer hearde or ſcande with learned eye?

As vice to my reproache, ſo vertues Fame doth flye

Tooth' prayſe of Lucrecia and example of all ſuch.

As of hir doe delight, and of me doe reade much.

For when this wilfull act committed was▪

And I had fed my luſt this noble matron on:

Then for to liue, nothing ſhe loued leſſe,

With wringing handes, Alas ſhe maketh mone,

Come Atropos (quoth  [...]ee) make haſt that I were gone

And crying ſtill, come Clotho come make ſpéede,

Of Lucrece life, vntwine the fatall thréede.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=21)

Then pardon craued ſhée of Colatine

Colatine was the huſband of Lucrece.

And of hir father Spurius by and by:

I haue made offence, wo woorth the wicked time,

Thus wéeping ſayde this Lady rufully:

I hearing this from thence departed ſpedilye.

And left in wofull plight, this Dame drownd vp with teares,

Whoſe vertues, in women full rarely now appeares.

But al you Ladies, Wiues, and Maides eache one,

Of what degree or yet eſtate you bée:

No doubte although Lucrecia bée gone,

As myr [...]our maye remaine, this  [...]orye when you ſée.

So may you learne the gifte of chaſtitye,

What loue you ought your huſbandes for to beare,

In ſpending of her daies, the profe doeth plaine apeare.

O wretched wight (quod he) howe dare I ſhewe my face?

The earth doeth threate this wilfull acte of myne:

It is, and wilbe Iudgde I wanted grace,

Thus loſing honour, I ſteynde my Auncientes line.

At all that beare my name, the people doe rep [...]e.

Yea the very ſtones that in the ſtreates doe lye,

Into the Heauens, vpon this crime doe crye.

Then wiſhed ſhée Ipolas happye chaunce,

Or Virgineas ende, or Didos long agoe:

(Quod ſhee) thereof this deede, falſe Taquine ſhould not vaunce,

That nowe for euer, ſhame abroade ſhal b [...]o [...].

And ſhall my huſband w [...]te him ſerued ſo?

That ſhall hee not, (quod ſhee) a ſwoorde ſhée tooke,

In blattering blood, the vit all breath forſooke.

Loe Morpheus, alas, nowe haue I tolde thée all,

And of my being here, the cauſe wherefore and whye.

Nowe mayſt thou thinke, my grace was very ſmall,

That in my life coulde not for mercye crye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=22)But
wickedneſſe cra [...]es vengeaunce, to the ſkye.

And not without a cauſe the Gods doe puniſhe hate,

And ſo they doe al them that liue in whoredome ſtate.

But Morpheus, Morpheus. ſith thou ſéeſt my lot,

A bleſſed déede it is, the ſame for to declare:

From Ritche and Poore, I praye the hide it not,

Proclaime howe wicked men rewarded are.

From Pride and whoredome, wiſhe thy friendes beware▪

The time is ſhort on earth they haue to dwell,

But endles tormentes euer bide in hell.

If mortall men did knowe, what paine is heare,

Then woulde they lothe the worlde they loue ſo well:

Their pompe, their Pride, and all theyr glittering geare,

To puniſhe the paunche, ſome feare would ſure compell.

All treaſon and fleſhlye fraude, for to expell.

All Tyrantes trades no doubte, they would forgoe,

And if they felt the leaſt of this my woe.

But hée that blinded is, with eaſe and wealth,

Their rauiſht heartes hath dulde their wittes as lead:

Gods feare is gone, and eache man for him ſelfe,

To purchaſe pelfe the worldling toyles his head.

The Childe forgettes his Father being dead.

To taſte of death him ſelfe, no deale miſtruſt,

Tyll grizlye ghoſt do blowe, that néedes away he muſt.

Alas howe vaine is all thing on the earth,

What care to catche, what feare to kéepe it ſtill:

What ſorrowe it ſettes, where ſhould bee ioye and mirth,

Ingendering hate, there as ſhould bee good will.

Prouoking wrath, The verye ſpirite to ſpill.

And yet beholde howe euerye man doth watche,

And with the trowte the choking hoke doth catche.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=22)

And thus fare well nowe gette you hence from mée,

You knowe my minde, deale in it as you will:

My wicked acte, and iuſte rewarde you ſée,

And howe my paine increaſeth euer ſtill.

Awaye (quod hée) beholde downe yonder hill

Alecto comes with flaming flaſhing winges,

For pride & whordome, a thouſand plagues ſhée brings.

Then ſtreight departed wée and left him there,

And wandering vp and downe, thoſe ſmokye pittes:

Mée thought a rufull voice, as it a woman were,

Faſt bye, declard what plagues ſhée felt by  [...]ittes.

To heare her plaint I almoſt loſt my wittes.

On whoredome ſtill ſhée cryed, woe worth that wicked ſinne,

That mortal fleſhe ſo much deliteth in.

But when I calde to minde the leade wherein,

I ſawe Tarquinus lye, with flames of Brimſtone whoſe:

In middes whereof, hée ſtoode vp to the chinne,

All blubberid with bliſters, alas not frée one ſpotte,

And howe with ſodden Pitche, his body all was blotte.

Twoo fiends ſhot thonder boltes, at him on either ſide,

Whereat hée dowkes, his careful face to hide.

Thus in this fornace, amid theſe boyling heates,

Hée ſtandeth to the Chin, but when hée dowketh ſoe:

And thus the fezing dartes, ofte in his viſage beates,

The feare thereof increaſeth double woe.

Thus Tarquine was rewarded, and ſo were thouſandes moe.

That had theyr factes declared to theyr face,

Which was to late as then, to crye for grace.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=23)

### 2.6. ❧ The rewarde of Medea for hir wicked actes, and falſe deceyuing of
hir father, ſleying of hir children and hir owne Bro­ther, and working by
inchauntment. This hiſtorie is merueylous tragicall, and a good example for
VVomen.

O Dreadfull Stix, boyle vp thy poyſoned floodes,

and cruell Cacus torments newe deuiſe:

Giue ſentence Mynos of theyr guiltleſſe bloodes

that murderers handes haue ſhed in any wiſe.

You furies fell, why doe you yet deſpiſe

with greater plagues my paines for to increaſe,

And for to ſee the bloode of Innocents ariſe,

whoſe mouthes from crying vengance neuer ceaſe?

And where ſhée ſtoode, hir heade ſhée caſt awry,

In wofull plight as euer wretch might be,

And ſo by chaunce at length did Morpheus ſpie,

whoſe open iawes, gryed ſtreight to him and me.

Saying Morpheus come and bring thy frinde with thée,

a greater newes to learne thou ſhalt in haſt▪

Of all thou haſt peruſed with thine eye,

I worthy am the greateſt griefe to taſte.

I knowe thou camſt from place where Hellen rowes,

in th' [...]rkeſome lake where doubtfull Dragons bee,

And yet hir wicked life and mine God knowes

are not to be comparde, although that ſhee,

For certaine yeares liued in adulterie,

and betrayed hir huſbande, good noble Menelaus,

Set Greece and Troy at great mortalitie,

ſhed bloode, ſackt Cities, baniſht godly lawes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=23)

(Yet this hir fact, not halfe like mine alas)

why doth not hell brayde out hir ſtinking breth?

And my deſertes much worſe then Hellens was,

(Hell ſpew thy ſpight) deuoure me once with death.

Will neyther ruthe, nor ſpight, ſtirre vp your heartes?

will none of thoſe once m [...]ue you to diſpatche,

But will you alwayes playe ſuch cruell partes?

more wiſhing death, more  [...]gering life I catche.

(Quoth Morpheus) what is thy name declare it,

where waſt thou borne, why art thou plagued tell?

(Quoth ſhee) againe, no more I will not ſpare it,

Make haſt (quoth hée) I may not tarry well.

A'the which, with gréenous ſ [...]riking yell,

ſhée did deſcribe hir wicked crimes and name,

I am (quoth ſhée) ſo puniſht here in hell,

that paſſeth wight with tongue to tell the ſame.

My name is Medea (quoth ſhée) moſt trewe,

daughter I was to Oetes that worthy king:

Which had the Ramme where fleece of golde ygrewe,

the greateſt iewell of any earthly thing.

Which was my fathers, and in his keeping,

watcht with a Bull, that was of worthy might,

And a Dragon with mightie poyſoned ſting,

that ſtoutly kept this Ramme both day and night.

Many a worthy Prince and champion ſtoute,

had loſt their liues in venture giuing,

Which neuer brought their purpoſe yet about,

An olde ſaying, al couet, all lo [...]e.

nor no man to this day but Iaſon liuing.

Deuoured they were by the rauening of theſe two,

he loſt his life, that thought to win his ſhooes:

Theſe beaſtes ſo violently did all men purſue,

that for to die might neyther will nor chooſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=24)

Whiche was my Fathers chiefe of exaltacion,

hée floriſhed in wealth no Prince his like:

Drad hée was of euerye lande and Nation,

hée forſte no ſtrength of all his  [...]o [...]s a mite.

And yet of treaſure all, he ſette his chiefe delite

on mée his Daughter deare, that ſought his griefe:

I quite my Fathers loue with mortall ſpite,

I playde the whore, the murdreſſe and the théefe.

Harke nowe Morpheus, what a parte I playde,

by my Father deare my Brother and my Childe:

And what a noble quene I afterward betrayed,

with many moe by wicked arte I broilde.

And other ſome I baniſhte and exilde,

by Deuilliſhe wayes as women ſhoulde not doe:

For why they ought with mercye to bée milde,

and not theyr wicked willes for to purſue.

Beholde howe I did nature quite forſake,

for this I did as true as here I am:

When Iaſon came this conqueſt for to make,

(falſe traitour I) through mée the fléece hée wanne▪

For arte of wicked Charme I ſtraight beganne,

for Iaſon ſake my Parent to betraye:

Diſmaide my Father ſillye Aged man,

abandoned his houſe, with Iaſon ranne awaye.

By incantacion: I brought it ſo to paſſe,

that Iaſon ſlewe bothe Bull and grieſly Beaſt:

Atchieu' [...] all thinges as his deſire was,

for of my Brother I cauſed him poſſeſt,

That in the Regall ſeate, ſhould crowne & ſcepter  [...].

in Colcos Lande it booted not to reſt:

For why my Father ſo greate an hoaſt did reare.

with fléeſe to flye, we thought it was the beſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=24)

For why harde by my Father followed faſt,

But to eſcape his handes, harke what I did:

I kilde my Brother, his armes and legges I caſt

Throughout the fielde whereas my Father rid▪

Which when my Father ſawe, ſo ill betide,

and knewe his ſonne thus martyrred for to bée:

With woefull cheare to get them vppe ſtraight hide▪

togeather (alas) eache chopped péece layde hée.

Then downe his Aged face, doeth tumble teares apace▪

and vp in armes the Martyred head doeth gette:

Oh Sonne moſt deare, alas (quod hée) for grace,

and many a kiſſe on deadlye mouth doth ſette.

And then with nayles, his face he rentes and teares,

that downe the purple ſtreames of blood doe flée:

And readye death within his face appeares,

but ſtyll he cryed, (alas) deare ſonne for thée.

To tell but halfe the morning that hée made,

no doubte your eyes like conduicte ſpoutes would run,

For verye woe hée pulleth out a blade,

to ſlea him ſelfe for ſorrowe of his ſonne.

But yet his men and ſeruauntes chaunſte to come,

my carefull Father there they did preuent:

Or elſe no doubte more miſchiefe had béene done▪

and all through mée, accurſt and diſobedient.

Then after ſtormes of many woefull plaintes,

perſwaded by ſuche men as wittye were:

Like as Apelles Agamemnon, paintes,

I maye compare my Fathers dreirye chéere:

Then in meane while, that hée was ſtayed there,

with ſpéede from Colcos Iaſon, and I did paſſe

For my Brothers funerall, hée builded A [...]lters fayre

to Sacrifice vpon, as then the maner was.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=25)

Loe by my Father thus I playde the the théefe,

gainſt nature and womanhood my Brother ſlewe▪

And vſed witchcraft againſt the true beleefe,

and like a Traitres, awaye with Iaſon flewe.

Haſte thou euer harde of any ſo vntrue?

To playe like part I thincke did neuer none:

Naye Morpheus yet more miſchiefe did I brewe,

for after this I murdered many a one.

Through Nigromancie, Eſon being olde,

from crabbed crooked Age, I made him yong againe:

Liuelye and lightſome, actiue and bolde,

and purelye purged in euerye Puls and vaine.

And Trees being dead I made beare fruite againe,

which increaſed my credite, more then euer it was:

Through falſe crafte, I cauſde Pelleus be ſlaine,

by his Daughters handes I brought it ſo paſſe.

Whome I made beléeue, as Eſondid.

that Pelleus theyr Father ſhould youth achieue:

And tolde them playne in doing as I bid,

hee ſhould bee altered newe, not feeling paine nor grefe.

Thus I illuding them, they thought it true,

(So did Pelleus him ſelfe) that time good man:

That being ſlaine from age to youth a newe,

hee ſhoulde bée chaunged by killing of a Ram.

(The trueth was nothing ſoe) it was my fetche,

to cauſe his Daughters, their Fathers blood to ſhed:

An olde Ram I badde them ſlea and wittely to watche,

that no man ſawe, when they to worke procede.

But (quod I) looke that your Father bleede

in one veſſell, and with this Ram at once:

And doing thus, I ſayde that by and by with ſpéede,

theyr Father ſhould ariſe with youthful fleſh and bones.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=25)

Theſe ſillye Siſters and Daughters to this man,

beléeued well this ſubtile tale of mine▪

And as I bad, they ſlewe an aged Ram,

and ſo they did theyr Father deare in fine.

Beléeuing faithfullye by power deuine,

that theyr olde Father ſhould bée made yong:

(Alas) which was not ſo, but onelye crafte of mine,

to make an ende of him whome I had hated long.

Thus exited I, by crafte theyr worke alas,

and dead lyeth theyr father bléeding faſt.

But harke, Morpheus harke, how it then came to paſſe,

miſchiefe hath euer her due rewarde at laſt.

I thought this wicked déede, that thus was done and paſt,

woulde beſt haue pleaſed Iaſon, then my Lorde:

Which chaunſte not ſo, for hée with all the haſt

fled from mée quite, and all my actes abhorde.

And ſo to Corinthe, to Creon, Then the King

hée tooke his waye as ſtraight as thing might bée:

Who had a Daughter called Cruſo, (bewties darling)

whome Iaſon married, and ſo refuſed mée,

Whereat Dame Fame ſound vp her Trumpet hye,

eache liuing eare was filled with the ſame:

Which made mée broyle as whot, as gleyde might bée,

till I had ſpilde this tender noble Dame.

Which through Magike, and vile Coniuration,

A cofer I inuented with diuers Jewels moe:

Subtillye contriued of a ſtraunge faſhion,

with the which to Creuſo, I made my ſonnes to goe,

To preſent the ſame, that liuelye Ladye toe,

who gratefullye receyued it, but yet (alas) beguilde:

For through my arte, when as it was vndoe,

there flewe foorth fire, that burnde both man and child.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=26)

Conſumde to duſt this Ladye freſh and gaye,

burnde all the pallas fiue yardes within  [...]he grounde:

Urged Iaſon him ſelfe to flée away,

or elſe with fire he had béene ſtreight confound.

Many a wofull heart I made within that ſtounde,

the Clowdes themſelues, bewayling teares let fall.

The rockes and hilles brake out their plainting ſounde,

beſide the guiltleſſe bloode, that did for vengance call.

Of noble Iaſon thus the heart I ſlewe,

who thought to be reuengde of mine iniquitie:

Towards me when I perceyu'de he drew,

my two ſonnes left aliue, without compaſſion or pitie,

Which were both tender, well made, and wittie,

of my body begot, and naturallye borne,

For malice to their father Iaſon, amyd the Citie,

I cut their throtes (and made their bodies torne,

With wilde horſes) vp and downe the ſtréete,

beſide much miſchiefe more than this be ſure.

In all this ſtincking vale, yet did thou neuer méete

with any wretch that did like gréefe procure.

But who ſo euer meanes, in wickedneſſe to byde,

or leade a Tyrauntes life, in thend ſhall haue rewarde,

According his deſerts, this cannot be denyed▪

Though mortall fleſhe thereto haue no regarde.

And then (quod ſhe) thou knoweſt my name and why

that I am thus tormente in Stygion pitte,

O that witches and Coniurers knew ſo well as I,

of Joues mightie doome that doth in heauen ſitte,

Then woulde they mende, if they had grace or witte,

To ſerue the Lorde woulde ſet theyr whole delight:

And diſobedient children woulde their follye flitte,

aſſur edly the Lorde at length doth ſmite.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=26)

And with theſe wordes her paines increaſte ſo ſore,

(But that ſhée ſayde) report good Morpheus thus:

Or elſe a [...] all wee heard her ſaye no more,

but that ſhée ſhrikte as one that tormente is.

Thus ſeeing the reward of her wicked déedes,

Wée ſtayed a while her tormentes to behold:

Which at a moment, both daye and hower bréedes,

much more then can by any tongue bée tolde.

To ſée the ſtaring Deuilles with fiery ſpeares,

The tor­mentes of Stigion.

on Dragons backes with poiſoned pumples pight:

As at a Quintan, at Medea, eche Tyrant beares,

and through her runnes, that trickling blood appeares.

Then from the ſcalding heart, by violence out teares,

Hote flames of fire, at woundes on euery ſide,

Monſters with hornes, and lothſome louped eares,

Ranne on this wretch, with gnaſhing téeth they cryed.

The blood by murder, this wicked wretche had ſhed,

thondered vengeaunce, whoſe terrible noyſe,

Heapte double paines vpon her wretched head,

and filde that dreadeful vale, (alas) with woeful noiſe.

Innumerable of Witches, out of theyr Cabbins roſe,

with ſcreming ſcrikes, they yelded loude and hye.

Hote Pitche and Brimſtone, eache one on other throſe,

A hell it ſelfe, mée thought it was to ſée.

Eache one in hande, begrypte a Butchers knife,

the blades in fleſhe on euerye ſide they hide:

The throate, the Guttes, or nexte to ridde the life,

the mortall woundes they make on euery ſide.

Then ſtraight with thundring throate Maegaera cryde,

come, Cacus, come, bring double paine and woe:

Let wickedneſſe in endles flames bée fride,

come, come, the Gods haue ſixte it ſoe

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=27)

At which came Cacus, and Cloudes of fire ſhakes,

more fearefull farre then blaſte of ſtorming winde

Eache pitte boylde vp, the craggye mountayne quakes,

all crawling creepes, the Snakes of Serpentes kinde.

No greater griefe, no damned ſpryte coulde finde,

For out of flaſhe, to gleydes of glowing coale,

From paine, to paine, from place to place aſſignde,

and al to toyle and teare the woefull ſoule.

And thus wée lefte this late rewarded Dame,

and ſo adreſtour ſelues, to crooked Charons bote,

Where many a wandering ſpirite, had paſſage by y• ſame,

through boyling broath, thrée times as ſulfer hote,

With muche a doe, at length wée paſſage gote,

and downe the ſmoaking banckes, wée crept [...] on knée,

Tyll at the length by chaunce it was our lotte,

twoo men to ſée tormented woefullye.

### 2.7. ❧ The bookes verdite vpon Medea.

HEr cauſe who can bewaile, that plaide this butchers parte:

As from her father deare to ſteale, that lou'de her in his hart,

Her brother thus to ſlea, the Parentes hearts to kill:

And with a ſtraunger ronne awaye, to feede her fleshly will.

The guiltleſſe blood to ſucke, of Creuſo vvorthy Dame:

And all at once vppon a rocke, to waſt in fiery flame.

Beſide, her Children deare hath wounde with mortall knife.

The ſmiling Babes her body beare, bereft their tender life.

VVhat eyes can ſtint from fluddes, whoſe eares doe vnderſtande

To cal to minde the gyltles bloods, shed by this womans handes:

VVhat harme by witchraft done, it paſſeth tongue to tell:

Or any heart to thinke the ſomme, or hand to penne it well.

(Alas) whoe would haue thought, that in a womans breaſt:

Dame nature would haue let been wrought, to breede ſo much vnreſt:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=27)But harde it
is to truſt, what euer that shee bee:

That to hir father is vniuſt, shee meanes the ſame to thee.

But loe you cruell Dames, that loue your wils ſo much:

I ſpeake it now to all your shames, if there be any ſuch.

Medea now is gone, that all the bate did brewe:

Take heede among you there be none, with hir to prooue vntrewe.

You witches all take heede, you ſee how God rewardes:

And what appoynted is your meede, that diuelish actes regardes.

Leaue of your inuocation, your crosſings and your charmes:

(Alas) it is abomination, and doth increaſe your harmes.

You parents it is time, to looke your younglings to:

Leaſt with this Prince, you ſay in fine, heartes caſe and child adue.

Keepe in your daughters ſtrayght, beſt counſell I can geue:

Leaſt that perhaps shee catch a bayte, that both your harts may greue.

And bring them vp in feare, and godlie bookes to reede:

And then be ſure that thou shalt heare, that wel thy chide shall ſpeede

And banish wilie will, from out thy daughters place:

His ſleyghtie shiftes will thouſands ſpill, you know he wanteth grace

Let bouldeneſſe banisht be, lay libertie aſide:

And looke you neuer doe agree, to paint them vp in pride.

And ſo you shall reioyce, your daughters dayes to ſee:

VVith Helchias lift vp your voyce, with prayſe as glad as hee.

Thus farwell Virgins all, God guide you in his way:

I doubt not but Medeas fill, your tender heartes shall fraye.

And ſith shee broyles in hell, whereas releaſe is none:

There I am ſure that shee shall dwell, it helpeth not to mone.

I cannot weepe therefore, to thinke what partes shee playde:

Shee loſt hir ſoule for euermore, hir name is quite decayde.

Take heede, hir gaines you ſee, the Gods not one doe ſpare:

For this or that, looke what they be, rewarded well they are.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=28)

### 2.8. ❧ The wordes of tormented Tantalus, being rewarded for his extortion
and couetouſnes: Oppresſing of the poore people of his Countrey: And for other
wicked actes.

IF any here haue cauſe for to complaine,

What maye I doe that pined am for foode?

I wiſhe and wante, I craue but all in vaine,

I ſée the tempting fruite, and ſo I doe the  [...]ood:

Whereof to eate and drinke, I wiſh none other good,

If all the world were mine, ſharpe hunger gnawes me ſo,

To haue my belly  [...]ilde, al this I would forgoe.

No ioye nor pleaſure, halfe doth glad the heart,

Nor greateſt thing that minde hath thought moſt ſwéete:

Though all were mine, in euery place and parte,

And that eache man were knéeling at my féete,

Like pleaſure to this woe, was not compared yet.

For hunger paſſeth all, who knewe his part with mée,

No death ſo bad, as liuing thus to bée.

But wickednes want'h not his iuſt reward.

Gregor.

All you that beare rule therefore

Howe you come thereby, it's beſt you haue regard:

And being mighty, how you vſe the poore.

Yóur owne infirmityes remember euermore.

Beware of couetouſnes, it's a ſlye and ſlieghtye baite▪

Bernar.

The father of Ipocriſie, and forger of diſceite.

And ambition is a priuie poiſon,

It's alſo a peſtilens, couered cloſſe:

The nouriſhe of enuie, the fountaine of treaſon,

Plutar.

The mouthe of make bate, to all mens loſſe,

The blinder of hartes, as the world nowe goes.

Making of remedies, diſeaſes greate ſtore,

Herm.

And of pure ſalues, many a great ſore.

But hée that ſéekes aboue the reſt to bée,

And gapes to reache the higheſt ſtarre alofte:

Tullius.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=28)No doubt many
times forgetteth equitie,

And alſo Juſtice, it plaine appeareth ofte,

Who deſireth glorye, that fortune hath not ſkofte▪

Though lulde a while, within her fichle lappe,

At length ſhe leaues him cadgde within her cruel trappe.

But al to late alas I doe confeſſe,

My wicked crimes, wherefore I ſuffer nowe.

In time and ſpace, I would not finde redreſſe.

To God nor man, I would not bende nor bowe:

No mans Judgement but mine owne I would allowe.

Repent that life, I thought I had no neede,

For as on earth, I thought eache where to ſpéede.

Though for my helpe, confeſſion come to late,

Auguſt.

Yet in time, confeſſion is a remedie:

It confoundeth vices, reſtoreth vertues to eache eſtate.

Deuilles it vanquiſheth, in greateſt extremitie:

The Gates of Paradiſe, it openeth moſt fréely.

Gods vengeaunce ceaſſeth, if man confeſſe betime,

Ambroſ.

But ſo to doe, the grace was neuer mine.

Sith confeſſion is the life of a ſinner,

Barnar.

A glorye to good men, and neceſſary to thoffendour.

Hée that will not confeſſe, whereof he was beginner,

His grace with mine maye bée called ſclender.

But happye is hée that goodes ill gotte doth render

To them againe, from whence they came at firſt,

Bée ſure otherwaies they ſtande to God accurſt.

(Alas) how vaine is pleaſure, that moſt ſo much imbrace?

Auguſt.

With what diligence, and expectacion men

Doe ſéeke this worldly wealth, that bideth but a ſpace?

Sliding ſtilye hence, no time appointed when,

Wherefore I wiſhe you all, Gods haſty wrath token:

Boaſt not to daye, what thou wilt doe to morrowe,

Hier [...].

Or y• the Sun go down, thy mirth may turne to ſorow.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=29)

Set little by richeſſe, and riche ſhalt thou be,

Chriſost.

Set leſt by renowme, and fa [...]ne ſhall loue thée beſt:

Care not for afflictions, take them quietlie,

Let reaſon rule thée, ſo ſhalt thou be in reſt.

He that ſcapes the wrath of mightie  [...]oue is bleſ,

But they that wicked are, no doubt muſt plagued bée,

What néedeth better proofe, or tryall but by me.

[...]n [...]a.

For iudgement without mercie is euer due

Iacobus.

To them that be vnmercifull to the poore:

But ſure mightie men, doe thinke Gods worde not true,

They thinke to line, and dure for euermore,

As I my ſelfe did, Alas I crye therefore.

My wicked déedes, my woe doe ſtill increaſe,

And puttes me out of doubt, my paines ſhall neuer ceaſe.

One day déemeth another from time to time

Plinius.

Of this, or that, as things doe chaunce to fall:

But the laſt day giueth iudgement, declaring euery crime

When eche man is compelde to make accountes for all,

Then ſwéete worldely welth, doth taſte like bitter gall.

Who hath ſuſtained wrongs, for vengaunce then ſhall cry.

Th'oppreſſors of the poore, ſhal periſh by and by.

And with theſe wordes, he ſnatche that the trée,

The fruite whereof, declined to his lippe:

Which on the ſodain, from hys mouth gan flée,

And ſ [...]oodes with ſwelling waues vpon his chinne doe hit.

Yet might he not attaine thereof one bit.

But ſtaruing ſtandes, betwéene theſe two for foode:

Diſguiſde for want of meate, this careful Caitiue ſtood.

And looking backe by chaunce hée Morpheus ſpyed

(And me) that ſtoode vpon a bancke aboue:

To whome ſtreight waye hée ſhowted, houlde and cryed,

Come néere good Morpheus and ſee the paines I prooue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=29)And warne all
them, to whome thou beareſt loue,

my wicked lyfe, that once I ledde to flée:

Byd them reſtore the gooddes got wrongfully.

And what's thy name quoth Morpheus woulde I know?

From whence thou came, of whome thou art deſcended?

And why thou doeſt endure this cruell woe,

What haſt thou done, the Gods be thus offended?

My actes (quoth hée) might well haue bene amended.

But when I was on earth, and had the worlde at will, Lactaneius

I neuer thought to dye, but to haue liued ſtill.

I am the ſonne of Iupiter, a God of mightie fame,

And borne of Plote, as witneſſe writers olde,

And at my birth had Tantalus to name,

Lorde of many a countrie. I was a Captaine bolde,

But the cauſe of my plague the Poets haue miſtolde.

Yet Morpheus thou ſhalt here the cauſe wherfore and why

The Gods awarde me here to wayle and crye.

Some thinke the Gods tooke vengaunce  [...]or my ſonne,

Young Pelop's, whome when I wanted meate,

And that the Gods vnto my houſe did come,

Becauſe ſome ſaye I ſlewe him for to eate,

The Poets therefore thought that I thys fleeing bayfe,

Was iudged by the Gods alwayes to want & wiſh:

(As ſtill I doe) but yet the cauſe was this.

For in my countrie none but I the chéefe:

Subiect vnto me they were both far and ni [...].

Who was ſo hardie but  [...]a [...]ger of his teeth,

I pluckt him on his knees, and if he lookt awry?

But (alas) of wicked counſell each houre may I crye,

Which put it in my heade, the poore for to ſubdue

In Phrigia where I rulde, which now full ſore I rue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=30)

What could bée thought, that earthly man might pleaſe,

To pompe the paunche, or féede the gréedy eye?

(Nothing at all) but by the lande or ſeas,

With a word of my mouth, I had it by and by.

I thought to mount aboue the ſtarry ſkye.

A woefull chaunce betide, the cauſers of my ſmart,

Which counſeld mée to play, the Tyrantes parte.

Alas, alas, what grace had I vile wretche,

To poule, and ſpoile, my ſubiectes as I did?

Repen­taunce to late.

Out of reaſon, theyr rentes I did both racke and retche:

And another ſort from houſe and grounde I rid:

Compeld them to bandone familye and kinred,

I baniſht whome mée liſt, eache man was glad to pleaſe

Both mée and mine, that thought to liue at eaſe.

I neuer had inough, ne could I bée content

To take the world as all my elders did:

I famiſhte the countrey with fines and double rent.

Eſtéeming not the mite, that poore men to me offred,

I gapte for gobs of Golde, which gréedily I coffred.

Money was my deſire, get it howe I might,

Of Ritche or Poore, all one, as wel by wrong as right.

But Morpheus, nowe to tell the ſum and all,

Wicked counſell.

I will not leaue the leaſt, for thus it is:

My ſeruauntes through theyr counſell were principall,

That thus I was corrupt, I crye therefore alas,

They fed mée with fables, to bring theyr purpoſe to paſſe.

And in my name the poore they ſpoyled quite,

To mee vnknowen, when I receiu'de no mite.

Thus many a ſcore, that ſerued mée that time,

That were of baſe degrée, and of the ſimpleſt ſort:

By title of my name, alofte beganne to clime,

And ſought for ſeates of greater fame and port:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=30)To ſpoyle my
ſubiectes they thought it but a ſport.

The ſimpliſt knaue I had, that any office beare,

Was honored of my Subiectes, as I my ſelfe it were.

For theyr owne aduauntage as it did appeare,

To picke them thankes, within mine eares they whiſper,

Kéepe down y• dunghil knaues (quoth they) in dread & feare

The Churles bée ritche, let's purge them with a gliſter:

The pooreſt widowe, bée ſure they neuer miſt her.

The fatherles, (alas) a begging out they thruſt,

Who payde not al & more, a packing néedes they muſt.

And ſo my ſubiectes heartes (alas) I loſt,

My honor eke decaide, eache tongue declarde my crime:

Thus I purchaſte hate of them that lou'd me moſt,

And bare the name, for worſt of al my line:

Thus were the poore oppreſt, eache day by mée and mine.

A thouſand hungry ſoules, within one yéere made I,

For meate and drinke, the countrey through to crye.

I was corrupt with couetiſe, I neuer had inough,

For all my worldly treaſure, yet euer was I needye,

As faſt as I ſpoilde, al the countrey through,

Yet with the Cormorant, I gaped alwayes gréedye,

Therefore the rewarde of my wickednes came ſpedye.

For my extorcion and famiſhing of the poore,

Beholde howe I am quitte, with like for euermore.

Morpheus, moue thine acquaintaunce to take good héede

Whome they appoint and put in aucthoritye,

Let them bée ſure, they ſhall aunſwere with ſpéede,

For extorting the poore, and other enormitye:

Although they miſtruſt not, any tranſformitye.

But alwayes doe thinke, on the earth for to dwell,

Unlookte for comes death, and rewardes them ful wel.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=31)

Who h [...]ted I ſo ill, as them which lou'de mée beſt?

Who gained at my handes, but ſuch as taught mée guile?

Thoſe that wiſhte mée worſhip, I euer loued leaſt:

My practiſe was alwaye, my countrey for to ſpoyle,

By meane whereof I did my name defile,

And ſuch as would in myne affaires haue dyed:

Moſte churliſhlye, of thankes I haue denyed,

Thus on this worlde, a God I alwayes made,

Too ma­ny of this condiciō at theſe daies.

Wherein I thought to dwell for euermore:

At my pleaſure and will, the Countrey did inuade:

Paſſing not a pinne for the curſes of the poore.

If hee filde not my bagges, I thruſt him out of doore,

As for mercye, at my hande, it booted not to craue,

They did but ſturre my choler, more cruelly to  [...]aue.

I lou'de vaineglory moſt, hée was my counſel chiefe,

There wantes no pickthāks.

And priuate gaine of whome I ſpake before,

And other ſuch, as teare my ſubiectes with theyr téeth,

As a Dogge a bone, they vſde my people poore,

Of Te [...]ales and Pickthanks, I alwaies had great ſtore,

Whoſe whiſpering tales, were Goſpels in mine head,

And thus in ſteede of trueth, with falſehood was I fed.

My ſhoulders laden were, with worldly muck,

And yet mine eyes deſired what I ſee:

Though all the world were layde vpon a rocke

It neuer might haue ſatiſfied myne eye,

If more then inough, had halfe contented mée,

I might haue liu'de, in honour al my dayes,

And of the poore haue wonne immortal praiſe.

B [...]ye of worldly mucke, fie on it twenty times,

P [...]ulu [...].

To mutuall enuie, moſt men it doeth prouoke

And vaineglorye, doeth teache a thouſand careful crimes,

In euery miſchiefe, theſe twee, doe euer ſtrike a ſtroke,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=31)A deceytfull
ſwéeteneſſe, That bindes to Sathans yoke

Auguſt.

An vnfruiteful labour, a continuall dread and feare,

A daungerous a [...]auncement, The aucthor of diſpaire.

Uaineglory alwayes, without repentaunce endeth.

Whoſe beginning without prouidence is:

Prouokes the Gods to wrath, the people it offendeth.

Who gloreth in this globe, that thinkes hée doeth amiſſe?

Such there are.

Hee g [...]peth like a gu [...]ton, for glorye to bée his,

Whoſe eyes bee fixte into the Skies on hye,

And wiſheth winges aboue the Sunne to flée.

What greater follic can bée then to couet Ritches,

Diog [...].

It tormentes the minde, and breakes the quiete ſléepes,

It vexeth the heart, and myrth away it twitchis.

Many miſerable thoughtes, in the conſcience it kéepes,

It ſhakes vp the ſtomacke, making ſowers of ſwéetes,

It ſhorteneth the life, as the Philoſopher ſayeth,

It makes Children, & kinſfolke, wiſhers of your death.

It kéepeth from doing Godlye charitable déedes;

Horae.

It cauſeth the partye not cheriſhe him ſelfe,

Being neuer friendly to any man that needes,

Diſpatching eache man of theyr perfi [...]e health,

Loe, theſe bee the fruites of this vile worldly pelfe,

Which cauſeth man, to liue a miſers life,

Whoſe ende is deſtruction, to man, mayde, and wife.

And with theſe wordes, the woefull ſillye wretche

His Jawes ope caſte, that boilde and burnde with heate:

And withered ſtaruen armes, with violence doe ſtretche, eate,

In hope to catche the ſlieghty tempting bayte,

Which hanges on flattering bowes, that flatters him to

And to his mozid mouth declines y• barked is ful drye,

Whē the hungry ſoule, would eate, away y• fruite doth flye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=32)

And flood on euery ſide, ſwels vp with boyling waues,

Wherein hée ſtandes an inche aboue the Chinne:

Whoſe cruell thyrſt to drynke, no litle cra [...]es,

But when to taſte, poore ſoule hée doth beginne,

It blencheth out of ſight, as it had neuer béene.

Then touched fruite, doeth beate him on the téethe,

Appointed by the Gods, to worke him double griefe,

With face deformde, al quaking ſtandeth hée,

Ten times worſe then death, the Caiti [...]e lookes:

Nought els vppon his legges, but ſkinne and bones to ſée,

Eache finger of his hande, as bare as angling hookes,

His bellye as thinne, as out of ſeaſon flowkes.

Muche like a ſhadowe of the Moone hée ſtandes,

With rewfull cheare, doth wring his careful handes.

And after a while, amid his tormentes greate,

(Quoth hee) Oh Marcus Curius, bleſſed bée thy dayes.

Marcus Curius.

Thou waſt indifferent, thou dealt not with diſceate▪

Thou wanſt thy ſubiects harts, & wanſt immortal praiſe:

Thou waſt a louing Capitaine, to men at al aſſaies.

For to thy people thou waſt a Parent deare,

As by thy noble actes, among them did appeare.

Thou didſt deuide the ſoyle, by iuſt and equall line,

And to eache man, thou fortye acres gaue:

Which ground before alotted was for thine.

[...] ▪like, for like, with leaſt thou would but haue,

The faithful heartes of men, was al that thou didſt craue.

Therefore thy iuſt rewarde, is with the Gods on hy [...],

And through the earth, thy ſame, abroade doth flye.

And wride his head, and Morpheus ſtraight behelde,

Thou knoweſt my name (quoth he) I pray y• get the hence

To leaue my talke, by thyrſt I am compelde:

The hungry worme, doth alſo worke mée vengeance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=32)Sith of my
déedes thou haſt true intelligence,

Declare it to thy frindes, how euer they regard it,

How I for my wickedneſſe of Pluto am rewarded.

That will I doe (quoth he) the beſt I may or can,

To all the worlde diuolgat ſhall it be,

My voyce ſhall thunder it out vnto eche man,

The rewarde of wickedneſſe that now I ſée:

Doe ſo (quod Tantalus) and there with all doth hée

Betwi [...]t the fruite and guylefull fountaines vaine,

Watching wiſheth foode to eaſe his hungry paine.

And thus we both departe, and went our way,

This dreirye doubtfull Myſer, left we there,

Whoſe thirſte increaſeth griefe, to ſee the pray

That heart woulde haue, in ſight doth aye appéere.

Streight came Alecto, And ſhee began to ſweare:

(quoth ſhée) thou oppreſſor, thy hunger ſtill increaſe,

To rewarde thy wickedneſſe, hope not to haue releaſe▪

No ſooner from the valley were we gone,

But in our eares we hearde a carefull crye,

Which ſayde (alas) in Plutos kingdome none

Suſtaineth halfe the plagues that I doe taſte and trye,

Fie one worldely workes, fye vpon them fye.

(Quoth Morpheus) to me, make haſte, we will go ſée,

Who it is that plaines and  [...]ones ſo grieuouſlye.

### 2.9. ❧ The bookes verdite vpon Tantalus.

THe monſtrous Camel, that ſtāping beaſt, & cake the ſluggish Aſſe

And Bayarde bolde, I may compare to many men alas▪

VVhich with the Camell beares awaye, the masſie packe of pelfe,

Yet twiſe as ſlowe as ſluggish Aſle, but onely for themſelfe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=33)The lothſome
loade of wished wealth, the harts hath ſo bewitcht:

That Iuſtice, friendship, pitie, and loue, away is from them twitcht.

VVith brags they bouldly leape & plunge, nothing they do miſtruſt:

As Baiard doeth, till at the length, to yeld to harme they muſt.

Theſe Beaſtes mee thinke doe wel preſent, the qualities of ſuch,

That with the Camel, drug and drawe, of worldlye wealth ſo much.

As Tantalus the Phrigion did, the Camels part that plaide.

VVhoſe mind frō Midas muck, in time, no counſel could haue ſtaid.

His Beaſtly heart beare that away, that body nor bones could doe:

As ſome ſuch Camels at theſe daies, are lately ſtart vp newe.

VVithin the circuite of our ſoile, which members beare of men,

VVhoſe cuſtomes in their countrey is, to beaſtly now and then.

For oft their greedy paūche deuoures, their neighbors houſe & groūd,

Yea Paſtures, Parks, whole fields, & Tounes, & al that may be found.

VVhich paſſeth beaſt, or beaſtly bones, of worldlinges for to beare:

Although their hearts docraue as much, as both they ſee and heare.

They hoke and holde, with tothe and naile, by ſlight of wily braine,

That which we ſee, each time and tide, doth waſte like ſnow in raine.

Goodes are ill gotte, which cauſeth loſſe, of endleſſeioy and bliſſe,

To purchaſe paines, where laſting griefe, and tormente euer is.

Marke this wel you mighties whome, the Lord appointesto rule,

Lende not your eares in any wiſe, to Peter Pickthankes ſchole.

His flattering fetche doth robbe you al, offamous honour due,

VVhoſe painting penſels euermore, reprocheful colours hewe.

And cauſeth curſes of the poore, whoſe plaints the Lord doeth heare,

[...]edreſſing ſtreight their care & grief, throughout the earth echewhere

VThat Camell then more couetous, what Aſſe more dull of witte,

VVhat boulder Bayara can be found, to keepe the lothſome pitte,

Thē are theſe muckſerapers at theſe daies, that ſwalow vp the poore,

VVhich haue to much, yet not content, but proule for more & more?

VVhoſe gluttons eies are neuer filde, till gaping chappes bee full

Of ſuddie ſoile, and ſlimie ſlitche, where at this while you pulll:

And then your woeful ſoules bewaile, the daies your carkaſſe ſpend [...] ▪

In wickednes, and neuer could finde any time to mende.

But wordes are wind, what will you more? No vertue is regarded:

Be as be maie, the daie will come, your workes will bee rewarded.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=33)

### 2.10. ❧ The rewarde of an Ambicious and vaine glorious counſeller, called
Vetronius Turinus: For his wicked life a­mong them that hee might ouercome,
and for his Pride: whoſe wordes folow in the middes of his tormentes.

PEace Tantalus hold ſtill thy plainting chaps.

Bewaile no more thy ſtate, thy lot is light enough,

And if thou knewe of my miſchaunſed haps,

And how I am torment, within this ſtinking clough.

Cōtented would thou be, where now thou art not ſo,

And if thou felte but leaſt of this my endles woe.

Fye of the face of fortunes ſmiling lookes,

Whoſe ſlye deceyte is ſugred baytes to caſt:

The fooliſhe ſorte to catche vpon hir hookes,

That erſte from ſmiling mouth, the Iudas kiſſe had taſte.

And ſuche as ſhée hath ſet the hext of all,

Shée moſt delites to geue the greateſt fall.

Who ſittes ſo ſure as in the ſimple ſeate?

Who is ſo Ritche, as hée that reaſon doth content?

Who ſcapes the hooke, that leapes at euery baite?

Who meddles much at laſt that is not ſhent?

Or yet who deales with craft that is not ſpide?

Who hath not al mens wrath, that euermore hath lide?

The ſure pathe I neuer founde as yet,

Which was to ſet all worldly thinges at nought.

With Phaeton, I thought aboue the ſtarres to ſit,

On worldly wealth was euermore my thought.

Iſiodorus.

But cuſtome teacheth al thinges ſhal litle bee,

That to the ſhow ſemes greate, too worldly eye.

Who dwelles in Princes fauours that knowes him ſelfe,

Or at the leaſt for gettes not what he was?

Who lookes not hye, that catcheth worldly wealth,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=34)Which ſlippes
away as dewe vpon the graſſe.

Hermes.

Fye, on it fye, it leades to endles fire,

And meare deſtruction bringes, on them that it deſire.

But in valleys lowe, the qiuetſt dwelling is,

On loftye mountaines, the ſtorming blaſt doth blowe:

The mounting Phenix, ſhall witneſſe bée of this,

Phenix.

Who doth full well, the heartes of climbers ſhowe.

Whoſe ende with her, doth meare deſtruction call,

Which doth from loftye ſkyes, belowe to aſhes fal.

Who with Icarus ſéemes to flye a lofte,

Or with the Pine, his fellowes ouergrowes,

That many times, with fortune is not ſkofte,

And with the Pine, be rente and ſpoilde of bowes?

Who ſtandeth in conceyte, with foliſhe fonde Nesſus,

That in the ende of his miſfortune miſſes?

But what auailde the Bookes that I haue read?

The wicked ende of none, might cauſe mée to amende:

I ſawe long ſyth, howe euery Tyrant ſpead,

By worthy writers, woſe actes had Clerkly pende.

And theyr ſucces, that in ſuch vice abounded,

Howe ſhort they rainde, and were by God confounded.

But let me bée, for ſo I maye no doubte,

Full well be made a mirrour to each one:

That be in Princes fauour, & make them ſelues ſo ſtout,

(As I) vnhappy wretch, haue beene not long a gone.

I had ſo deepe a witte to purchaſe worldly wealth,

In vertue a very foole, and cleane deceiu de my ſelfe.

And with theſe wordes his paines ſo much encreaſte,

That worſe then mad, a thouſand times he flinges:

Then to the brinke of loathſome lake hee preſte,

And cryed, behold, what wicked doinges bringes.

Drawe neare good Morpheus, harken what I ſaye,

And to thy friendes report another daye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=34)

I was (quoth hée) aduaunſte to ſuch degrée,

And in the fauour ſtoode, of Alexanders grace:

☞

So much at laſt, that in all cauſes hée

Looke mine aduiſe, in thinges that doubtful was.

My counſell lead him, euer as my liſt,

Who had a ſ [...]te, I not his friende, his purpoſe miſt.

All men gaue place, when I in counſell cloſe,

Unto this noble Emperoure, both night and day:

My fame eache howre, encreaſed ſtyl and roſe,

I ſaued whome my liſt, agayne I put awaye

(Whome pleaſed mee) and ruled mee at will,

I made both good, and bad, full glad to pleaſe mée ſtill.

Vetronius Turinus, is my proper name,

Uetronius Turinus.

Chiefe counſeller, this famous Emprour too:

Which bleard my inward eyes in taſting of the ſame,

I could not know my ſelfe, as I was wont to doe.

Such incōparable ſweetneſſe, is found in Princes fauor,

Whom Fortune calles ſo high, forgets their owne be­hauiour.

Such hap a while excéedeth Loios taſte,

Whoſe ſinatch ſome lickoras lips, the moſt doe wiſhe:

Yet whoſoeuer to gape, therefore doth haſte

Sal trye in thende, Serdonia, plaine it is.

For ſweeteſt meates, ſoure ſauce they ſaye is beſt,

This is, and euermore, was vſed at eache feaſt.

Thus I elect, and choſen chiefe of all,

In ſecreate familiaritie, with this noble man:

I was ſo pufte with pride, I did miſtruſt no fall,

Thus eache mans heart, through dread and feare I wan.

A while I plaide the B [...]are, I nipt both yong and olde,

I kept them ſo in awe, to barke none durſt bée bolde.

Thus euery man of mée did ſtand in feare,

Eache one with bending knées, to me did bowe:

They honoured mée,  [...]s I the▪ Emproure were,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=35)I gaped for
ſuch glory, as was not méete nor dew.

Thus like a chowgh, depaint in peacoks tayles,

Amid the gulfe of Cille, I hoyſt my rotten ſayles.

And at the length this one thing blinded me,

When euery man my lawfull fauour ſought,

Then I began to looke both ſtowte and hie,

I ſpake them fayre, when inwarde ill I thought.

Great bribes I did receyue, and made all men beléeue,

That whome my liſt, I coulde both gladde and grieue.

Thus ritche I made my ſelfe, and moſt men poore,

That to this noble Emproure any ſute procurde:

And thoſe of whome the Emproure made a ſtore,

Such meanes I wrought, that long he not indurde.

And yet a greater ſleyght then this I vſed long,

I dayly ſought to wreſt all men with wrong.

Faire wordes I  [...]edde them with, and nothing elles,

On eyther part their money I receyued,

I eate their kirnels, and fed them with the ſhelles.

Who truſted me that ſcaped vndeceyued?

I playde the Mariner, that looketh backe and rowes,

And yet with floode, his boate contrarie flowes.

For where theſe ſuters did awayte to knowe,

By me this noble Emperour his pleaſure,

Then would I nodde my head, and frindely countenaunce (ſhowe.

(As who ſhoulde ſaye) abyde a nother leyſure.

Thus of the Emprours graue determination,

I made a trade as twere an occupation.

Till at the length, all men with murmuration,

Perceyuing that I fabled with them ſo,

With open Iawes, made open exclamation,

And earneſt lookes caſt on me too and fro,

Whereat report, a Poſte did ſende for Fame,

Which cauſd hir crooked Trumpets ſound abrode the ſame

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=35)

Thus to this noble Princes eares at length it came,

And publiſht all abroade, it was on euery ſide.

And of the ſame accuſde of euery man,

That rounde about me ſtoode, and to the Emprour cryde:

O famous noble prince, incline thine eares to heare.

Turinus wickedneſſe, to thée ſhall now appeare.

Then all my former lyfe diſcloſed was,

And prooude by credible perſons before my face:

When the Emperour vnderſtoode both more and les,

He iudgde me to be led into the market place.

Where ſtraungers were of countries far and nye,

Which grieude me worſe, then twentie times to die.

In the market place, ſometime where I with pryde,

More like a Prince then otherwiſe had walkd the ſtones

There to a ſtake, my limbes full faſt they tyde,

With cruell engins inuented for the nonce,

Where young and olde, ſtoode rounde about to ſée,

The fall of him, which earſt did looke full hie.

Then hidden malice did ſhewe his furious face,

Whoſe tongues before as ſwéete as ſuger ſéemde:

(And crying ſayde) thou Tyraunt voyde of grace,

The proofe is plaine, it was not as thou wéende,

Thou thought thou had our harts, becauſe we capt and knéelde,

Which inwardely with ſpitefull hate we ſtéelde.

Then curſes blacke into the ſkies they ſende,

His execu­tion ma­keth people glad.

To all the Gods where mightie Ioue doth ſitte,

That after all this ſhame, I might be torne and rent,

Within the puddle of Plutos ſtincking pitte.

And there withall, their handes a pace they clappe,

Gréene ſtickes and ſtubble, about the ſtake they wrap,

And fire thereto, on euery ſide they ſet,

Whoſe powdering ſmoke, mountes vp the loftie ſkies,

The flaſhing flame eche man was prone to let,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=36)To th'ende
thereby my doubled paine might riſe,

Thus lingered life, with tormentes worſe then death,

By meanes of ſmoke compelde to yelde my breath.

Whereat with gladſome heartes reioyced many a one,

Tooth' great reproche of all my bloode and line,

With haſt a Bedle Themperour calde on,

And ſtraightly chargde, about the ſtake that time,

To ſounde theſe wordes in th'eares of young and olde,

VVith fumes lo here he dieth, that fumes hath euer ſolde.

Thus confuſion my guerdon quitte ful well,

And payde my hyre which I deſerued beſt,

The Gods alſo condemnde me into hell,

Among the wicked ſorte with whome I am poſſeſt,

of yrkeſome Stigion whereas Phlegethons flames,

The pompe of cruell Tyrauntes euer dayly tames.

Loe this the lotte of wicked life in th'ende,

Looke to your ſtates you that Counſellors bée,

You that perſwade the nobles to offende,

Leaue of betime for my rewarde you ſée,

Bee ſure whoſoeuer in wickedneſſe procéedes,

In thende the Gods doe recompence their deedes.

How ſayſt thou Morpheus haſt thou hearde the like?

Whome haſt thou knowne to haue a fall like mine?

Coulde Fortune worke to me a greater ſpite,

Then firſt to whirle me vp, then caſt me downe in fine,

When leaſt of all hir wrath I did miſtruſt?

From hext of Pelops turret, no helpe but downe I muſt.

Thus through the coſte I got eche poore mans curſe,

With ſhamefull death, and hell at latter daye:

A deere bought treaſure, thus to fill my purſe,

To loſe the ioyes among the Goddes for aye.

Theſe words no ſooner ſayd, ſo much increaſt his pains

His tongue with ruful voyce his perfit talke conſtrains.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=36)

This ſincke of ſorrow wherein he ſtandes and cryes,

With pitche and Brimſtone boyles vp like a floode,

Where ſerpents with their triple heads ſtill yelling flyes,

Whoſe crooked clawes are bathed in his bloode.

From out whoſe mouthes ſuch foming flames ariſe,

Which lighteth in his face, or ſpowteth in his eyes.

Eche finger of his hande was turnde to ougly ſnakes,

A man de­formed.

His téeth were chaungde to wormes Cereſtres like:

His legges all ſerpentes, that dayly vengaunce takes,

Upon eche other, that venomly gan ſmite.

His toes vpon his feets, were filthie Todes to ſée,

That ſwelde with poyſon as bigge as they might bée,

His heart the Captaine of his ſleyghtie tongue,

Tranſformd in likeneſſe of a Hedgehogge kinde:

Before whoſe greedie mouth ſuch riped fruite was hong,

As monſtrous beaſt in hearte did wiſhe to finde.

Which when he toucht, they turnde to Scorpions all,

Perforce his lippes from gaping chappes lets fall.

His guilefull tongue was turnde to Crocadyle,

Amidde whoſe ſleightie heade braſt out conſuming coles,

From out whoſe eyes fell droppes like gaddes of ſtéele,

Wherewith ſometime he trapt poore ſillie ſoules.

And molten golde into his mouth was pourde,

Whoſe gaſping gummes moſt gréedely deuourde.

And yet a greater griefe then this hadde hée,

A plagie paine aboue the reſt no doubt:

An horrible feend, none ſuch in hell to ſée,

Before him ſtandes, whoſe voyce doth roare and ſhoute,

What ioyes among the Gods they loſe that wicked are,

This ougly Geylor to him ſtreight did declare.

The ſcrip­ture allea­ged then. Pſal. 84. Pſal. 24. Pſal. 3.

And with the Pſalmes began this cruell Clarke,

To taunte the torment wretche with griefe to heare,

Saying Turinus incline thine eare and harke:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=37)I am thy
Curate, thou art my Pariſhner.

Geue eare (quoth hée) and marke my ſayinges well,

Elſe ſhal theſe hookes, with care thy corps compel.

And then theſe places of ſcripture ſtraight hée reades,

And ſhakes his Snakie head, with grinning téeth:

Roma 8. Apoca. 22. Math 24. 1. Theſ. 4. Math 25. Apoca. 7. Apoca. 4. Apoca.
21.

And ſcoffes him ſtill, with all his olde done déedes,

That then to heare, no litle was his gréefe.

And then this frouning Curate, braggingly gan hoaſt,

And tels the wretch, what endles ioyes hée loſt.

Thou haſt loſt (quoth hée) myrth out of meaſure,

☞

, All libertye, all Light, all reioyſing and health:

Eſay. 43. Eſay. 1. Eſay. 5. Math. 11. John. 3. John. 5. Luke. 5.

, All wealth, all ioye, and glorious pleaſure,

, All honour, all power, al long of thy ſelfe.

, With ſolace, and loue, vnitie, concorde, and peace,

, Wiſedom, vertuous melodye, and felicities increaſe.

, Méekenes, and beatitude, from the is fled and gone,

, And that in moſt glorious heauenly Citye:

, Hope for no redreſſe, be ſure heare is none,

, But euer more, vnſpeakeable miſerye.

, This Den (quoth hee), is ſtill the place of paines,

, For thée and ſuch, of whom the poore complaines.

, Nowe haſt thou loſt the company of Archangels,

, With Thapoſtles, Patriarkes, and Cherubins:

, Powers, Thrones, Dominione, and Aungels,

, Confeſſors, Uirgins, Martyrs, with bleſſed Zeraphins.

, Where righteous ſprites, ceaſe not, but alwaies ſing.

, Holy, Holy, Holy, God of earth, and heauen King.

And with theſe words, with haſt hée ſhut the booke,

To ſome place elſe hée ranne to execute his ſpite:

Whereat Turine caſt vp a woeful looke.

(Quoth hée) good Morpheus take foorth thy pen and write,

(Alas) regeſter vp my rewfull wicked ende.

It may preuent much harme, & if the ſame were pende.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=37)

But Morpheus [...]aſting downe his heade for woe,

Uneth one worde, coulde well pronounce almoſt,

But ſayd, come Robinſon, I praye thée let vs goe,

My heart doth w [...]rche to ſee this gr [...]ſlye ghoſt.

And then he wiſht that all offenders ſée,

How Pluto doth rewarde all them that wicked bée.

And thus we left Turinus in his paines,

Whoſe wante of grace, we both lamented much:

And there in Jayle he ſhakes his lincked chaines,

Whoſe bandes to breake, no mortall handes may tuch.

His endleſſe paines it bootes not to be wayle.

No ſacrifice to Ioue, can ought at all pr [...]uayle.

### 2.11. ❧ The Bookes verdit.

LOE thus to ſee him pulde, with raging hagges of hell,

That whilom thouſandes ruide, eſteemd with Princes well.

I meruell in my minde, ſuch men should plagued bee,

VVhome Fortune hath aſſinde, vnto ſuch dignitie.

But now I doe perceyue, none ſuch the Gods will ſpare:

That poore men doe bereaue, of money goodes or ware.

Or whome by counſell ſeemes, to blinde their Noble eyes:

VVhoſe iudgements beſt eſteemes, and quites with double fees.

Or ſuch as ſentence ſel, by ſlye and cloked craft:

And harmeleſſe ſoules compel, a fruiteleſſe tree to grafte.

On theſe the Gods doe poure, their wrath by whole conſent:

And alter in an houre, the wickeds yll intent.

Regarding not at all, their ſtatelie hie degree:

But shortlye giue the fall to ſuch as climbe to hie.

Turinus now hath loſt his prince that lou'de him beſt:

And ſuch as hate him moſt, ioyde thus to ſee him dreſt.

VVhat profittes blubbred teares? The Gods haue iudged thee:

How long or fewe yeres, (they know) ſo doe not wee.

To leaue thee in thy paines, of very▪ force I muſt:

No hope but this remaines, a warning fayre I truſt▪

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=38)

### 2.12. ❧ The wofull complaint of the mon­ſtrous Emperour Heliogabalus for
ſpending of his dayes in abhominable whoredome.

SYth Morpheus thou art come to take the dewe

of Plutos kingdome where the wicked guerdon haue:

Of all the reſt thou euer ſée or knewe,

I am the marke to guide the reſt from ſcath▪

Loe howe I lye, that earſt did floriſh braue▪

and yet Turinus thinkes he hath much wrong,

I heare him hither, vpon the furies raue,

yet not ſuch cauſe as I▪ Turinus holde thy tongue

Oh how tickle is the ſtaye of honors hie?

what doth auaile a while to guide the earth?

Th'example plaine appeareth now by me,

an Emprour once deſcende of noble birth▪

My triple crowne that was abundaunce worth▪

my Scepture ſette with Saphirs rich to ſée:

My ſworde that helde in feare ſuch murt [...] ▪

as neuer yet was dewde by any eye.

Nor yet the ſounde of great renoumed  [...]ame,

though all the worlde I helde in feare and awe,

That can excuſe the leaſt of blotted blame,

nor that the Gods at all regarde a ſtrawe.

(No Morpheus no) who doth offende their lawe▪

although he were ten times as high againe:

Upon the ſnap they catche him in a flawe,

their hautie maſte flies ouer borde amaine.

Upon the rocke the ſhaken Hull is caſt,

that prowdely hoyſt hir ſayle before on hie▪

And ſo vnwares they periſh wyth a blaſt,

the which before miſtruſted not to die.

Then from the ſtincking gayle the ſprite doth flée:

and as the dunghill ſecke, hath ſpent his dayes,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=38)The
[...]llie ſoule, in bale or bliſſe ſhall bée,

thus vice or vertue hath rewarde alwayes.

Unhappie wretch I was of Rome elect▪

and by conſent of all the rulers there,

The noble Senate choſe me to protect,

but when in hande the fearefull ſworde I beare,

Not onely Rome, but through the whole Empire,

I quight forgot my ſelfe, and place they ſet me in:

Then did my filthie nature ſtraight appéere,

the hidden ſmoke, to flaſhing flames begin.

For after that I had in hande to rule,

and that my worde to loſe and binde had power,

I brought the Senate to a nother ſchoole,

exalting vice much hier then Pelops tower.

The Sages graue e [...]pulſing euery houre,

new Lordes, new lawes, it did appeare by me:

Thus Rome to ruyne I brought from honour,

from vertue to vice, great ſhame and infamie.

Thus firſt of all, when I from Syria came,

to Rome to rule, and royall ſcepture guide:

Varius Helioga­balus.

Heliogabalus the Romaine bloode may banne,

I was a meane to laye their ſame aſide.

Wiſdome nor vertue I neuer might abide,

In brute and beaſtlie toyes alwayes I dwelde.

All ſuch as ſinne correcte I did deride,

to filthie liuing a thouſande I compelde.

And thus of Rome that was a mirrour cleare,

from whome at firſt all nations knowledge hadde,

Of honour, vertue and prowes the name did beare,

in myſte of filthie ſlaunder by me was ladde

Whereat the prudent men wept teares full ſadde,

to ſée the vile abuſe that then I ſet aloft:

Uertuous Uirgins then to flie were gladde,

vurauiſht fewe ſcapt, that might be caught.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=39)

Inſatiable was my ſwelling luſte,

my pampered fleſhe to whoredome was addicte:

I lookte on none but néedes conſent they muſt:

Loe thus (alas) with vice I was afflicte.

I woulde the mortal launce in tender youth had ſtickte

my wicked heart that wickedneſſe deſired:

Then ſhould not now no Plutos furye prickt

this ſoule of mine, that here in flames lyeth fyred.

If Atis chaunce betime I had ſuſtainde,

then had I ſquencht the ſparke that bred vnreſt:

My wretched ſprite, that nowe in hell is painde,

among the Gods in bliſſe had béen poſſeſt.

Whom nowe thou ſéeſt with torments ſtyll oppreſt,

and alſo ſcapte on earth, reproche and ſhame:

Unhappy Rome, then had thou twiſe béen bleſt,

that nowe for euermore bewayles the ſame.

The laſt Asſirian King in filthy life,

Sar­danapalus the laſt Aſ­sirian king liued too vile a life to bee re­hearſed.

I did excéede a thouſand kinde of wayes:

All Rome throughout, I rauiſht Maide and Wi [...]e,

of Uirgins euer, I made them common prayes.

Thus ſpent I my wicked fleſhly dayes,

I made a Senate, of harlottes and bandes:

In open ſight I kept no better playes,

then filthilye to vſe theſe common Iades.

Thus houſes builded I, for ſchooles of ſin,

to ayde them with I gaue them largely treaſure:

The vertuous Matrons, I pluckt them quickly in,

compelling them vnto this filthy pleaſure:

(Alas, alas) I paſt al Godlye meaſure,

there was no ho, with mee: who durſt denye?

But if they had, I ſpied ſuch a leaſure,

that from their ſhoulders, I made their heads to flye.

Into the handes of Bawdes, I did commit,

the greateſt dignitye of the Publike weale:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=39)To common
Rybawdes, voyde of grace and witte,

I gaue aucthoritye, aſwell to choſe as deale,

Who had a ſute to mée that did preuaile,

except in Lechery hée did excéede?

The vertuous ſort were euer ſure to fayle,

when as the wicked at euery turne did ſpéedr.

Luxurious meates and drinckes, I euer ſought,

a thouſand wayes I ſtudyed for the ſame:

Upon the Publike weale the leaſt I thought,

to labour after luſt, that was my game.

If I ſhould publiſhe halfe by proper name,

the life of late, I lewdlye led in ſinne,

The fineſt head it would both tire and tame,

therfore to trouble thée, I will not nowe beginne.

What ſhould I ſpeake of noble famous Dukes,

Yt is nedefull for Princes & noble men to cal ſage, wiſe & lear­ned men to bee
of their counſell, & ſuch as bee Gentlemē, well brou­ght vy.

that from the Senate, by violence I put:

Or of the ſage wiſe Maiſters, that with rebukes,

I cruellye, out of the Senate ſhut?

I catcht the bitter buſke, and loſt the pleaſaunt Nut,

twoo Carters I choſe to bée my counſell chiefe:

I blindlye drewe to ſhote at blanked But:

which was the cauſe at leangth of all my griefe.

Protogenes the tone of theſe were calde

Protogenes & Cordius two ſleues borne.

Cordius, thother had by proper name:

Theſe twoo through Rome the common wealth forſtald,

to the loſſe of my honour, and great increaſe of ſhame.

For vice floriſhed, and vertue waxed lame:

Vitellus in gluttouy, alwayes I did excéede:

Vitellus at one ſup­per was ſet ued with. 7 thouſande fiſhes, and. 5 thouſande
Fowles.

Wanton meates for the nonce, then I gan frame,

to pamper the paunche, when nature liſt not féede.

What ſhould I tell of the ſtraunge kinde of Fiſhes,

ſo rare vneth no man can knowe them well:

Which at one meale, ten thouſand diſhes,

with as many Fowles as doe the Fiſhe excell,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=40)The like ere
nowe, hath any man heard tell?

an Emperoure to leade (alas) like gluttons life?

Yong tender Maides, alwayes I did compell,

throughout Italie, with many a noble wife.

And when I had ſuffiſde by violence,

[...]n abhominable thing and dam­nable.

my filthye fleſhe, yet not contented ſo:

I ripte theyr wombes in open audience,

theyr tender bowelles, and ſecreates for to ſhoe.

In progreſſe, when I did delite to goe,

with mée ſixe hundreth Chariots of harlots went:

In ſtéede of Sage, and noble counſels los,

thus I my time in wickedneſſe ſtill ſpent.

And ſuch as chiefe to mée I did appoint,

and ordaine greateſt rule of all to beare:

The ſentence of my fame, the villans ioynt,

I innocent, the ſuters not the neare.

They fed me with follye they whiſpered in mine eare,

Zoticus that variette, a ſlaue and dunghill borne:

Zoticus.

Whome of nought to noblenes, I did vp reare,

in thende rewarded mée with double ſcorne.

Hée playde by mée, as Turinus did before,

by noble Alexander, who guerdon gaue:

(So well) that fame, for euermore,

ſoundes vp his praiſe for quiting of that knaue.

What ſhould I ſaye, it is but vaine to ra [...]e,

for in time I had no grace this to prenent:

But hée that will thus much exalt a ſlaue,

him ſelfe ſhalbe the firſt, that ſhall repent.

Becauſe this variette, Zoticus did excell

in all wicked vices moſt abhominable:

I preferde him to the greateſt liuing that fell,

both Realmes & Kingdoms, with countreys honorable:

To no man vertuous I ſeemed conformable,

but onely to ſuch as abounded in ſinne:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=40)To theſe and
ſuch like, I was euer tra [...]able.

when eache man loſt, theſe knaues did winns.

The Deuill ſo kindled his ſtre in my breaſt.

and foſtered in mée ſuch deteſtable vice:

Becauſe Alexander was not ſlaine, I could not reſt.

that was mine Awntes ſonne both learned and wiſe.

To poyſon him I offered, Jewelles of great price,

becauſe my wickedneſſe ſo much hée hated:

One while treaſon, I conſpired with ſpice,

in diuers drinkes and meates, his death I animated.

But nowe behold the guerdon and rewarde,

of filthy vile and deteſtable life:

And howe the Gods theyr ſeruauntes doe regarde,

defending them from murders bloody knife.

My endeful wel, maye warne both man and wife,

for Alexander, whome I thought to kill:

Hée ſcapte the ſnare, when I began to drife,

the firſt I was my ſelfe, that in the ſame did sy [...].

For hée through vertue, wanne the noble heartes,

of thancient Senate, and commons of the ſame:

In whoſe ſafegarde, not one from other ſtarles,

but with conſent, togeather ioyntly frame.

And thus beganne with mée, that tragicallike game:

Tyrantes can not raigne, experience long hath taught:

The Gods that ſuffer long, at length doe blame,

the wicked imagination, they euer bring to nought.

For by procuring Alexanders death.

I haſted mine owne to my life agréeing:

My wicked ſeruauntes, like Traitours falſe of faith,

were thonely conſpiratours, and cauſers of my dying.

They ſlewe my adherentes, and put mée to flying.

my familiers a thouſand wayes they kilde

Before my face. I ſtanding by and ſéeing,

for life durſt not ſpeake, but as a coward yéeld.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=41)

But how I yéelded, it's ſhame to make relation,

S [...]m [...]mir [...] his mother  [...] [...]icious woman.

I f [...]ed into a priuie, and there was take,

My mother murdered on the ſame ſorte and faſhion,

Our funeralles togither, amidde that dounge we make.

Loe my rewarde for filthy whoredomes ſake.

The Gods forgot me not, they quitt [...] me home:

They caſt me headelong into this f [...]ery lake,

vpon the earth for aye good fame is gone.

(Alas) Morpheus yet thou knowſt not all,

I praye thee  [...]ide a while and heare the reſt,

I am ſure as yet, thou neuer hearde like fall,

of noble birth, hatcht in ſo high a neſt.

But what preuailes where vice is ſo poſſeſt.

A while I rulde, and tumbled in my ſinne:

I wanted nothing, that moſtrous life requeſt,

of feare I fruſtrate was, I dred not God a pin.

Therefore mine odious corps throughout the Citie,

with hookes they drewe, both vp and downe the ſtréetes

With ordure fylde, no man of me had pitie,

haulters of  [...]empe were both our winding ſhéetes.

Fie on him villaine, they ſkrickt & cryde like ſprites,

with clapping handes eche one reioyſt to ſée,

With wordes of great reproche the furies had delites,

my olde deſerued deedes to wreake on mee.

Then to the common  [...]akes they dregged mée,

at the filthieſt conduict downe they woulde me caſt,

But that it was to narrow, at leaſt by fingers thrée,

or elſe I had bene ſhrinde within that dongue at laſt.

But then tyed to a mightie mylſtone full faſt,

into the floode of Tiber was I throwne:

Where many a worthy ſhippe hath paſt,

the tumbling ſtreams was made my tumbe and throne.

Loe Morpheus loe, thus was I ſeru'de of ſuch,

that earſt from naught to Princes mates I brought:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=41)Beholde theyr
actes, to whome I gaue ſo much,

aboue the reſt, my miſaduentures ſought:

But alas, the ende of wickedneſſe is naught,

the Gods alwayes, take vengeaunce at the length:

I thought I ſhould the fixed ſtarres haue raught.

but yet abated was my hawtye heart and ſtrength.

At the age of one and twentye yéeres I dyed,

and monſtrous Heliogabalus they calde my name:

To my reproche, report the ſame hath cryed,

who heard therof, that made not ſport and game?

And looke who leades my life, ſhal euer taſt the ſame,

vtter confuſion, haſteth for his praye:

Perdurable miſchiefe, comes after faſt with ſhame,

and makes theyr paſporte at the latter daye.

But Morpheus, to tell thée all my beaſtly actes,

an hundreth Clarkes were not able to pen them:

And againe whoſoeuer ſhould heare of like factes,

ſo deteſtable they are, it would but offend them.

But I praye thée warne thy friendes to amend them,

my gilte thou haſt hard, my paines thou doſt ſée:

To repent betime, I praye God to ſend them,

for be ſure wicked déedes, are rewarded wickedly.

Bid them flye whoredome, and vile vicious déedes,

they are ſure to loaſe Gods kingdome for euer:

Honeſt men doe hate them, as nettles or wéedes,

but ſhame and ill report leaueth them neuer.

At length theyr owne Minions doe ſeeke theyr decaye,

on whome purſues death, of life the bereuer:

Which makes an end of beggery, cōmitting hell the pray,

if they in wickedneſſe, vnto the ende perſeuer.

And with theſe wordes this wicked wretche,

among his tormentes, was toyled ſo ſore,

With a pitifull lookes, his hande forth did ſtretche,

as who ſaye a dewe, I can ſpeake no more.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=42)His mother in
a flaming puddle began to roare,

eche Deuill put in vſe his terrible trade:

With greater ſpite then accuſtomed before,

to terrible to heare the noyſe that then they made.

This monſtrous Emperour in hell thus ſtoode,

tyed faſt by the members on a ſnakie whéele:

Which ran about as if it were woode,

Invironde with Bawdes as blacke as the De'yle

Hooked for the no [...]ce with hote glowing ſtéele,

which Butchered his bowels about his féete:

And for to rewarde his wickedneſſe wéele,

Thinfernall fire, ſtreight way they beyte.

Whereat anone ſuch ſmoke there do [...]h ariſe,

with leade that boyles, in ſtormes like raging ſeas,

And with a twinche, a thouſande Dragons flyes,

ten times as faſt as ſnowe in windie dayes.

Grypes as gréedie as Woolues that ſéeke their prayes,

and on him gnawe, that myſer tyed full faſt:

The cruell wheele doth bounſe, and neuer ſtayes,

Loe, thus his paines for euer more doth laſt.

And thus we left this wretch (that dwels in endleſſe pain)

A number for to vewe, that crying did complaine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=42)

### 2.13. ❧ The Bookes verdit.

WHen filthie luſt doth guide, and hath the helme in fiſt:

Beware the winde and tyde, take heede of had I wiſt.

A wilfull mate is hee, for to direct the waye:

He doubtes no perill nie, in ſayling on the ſea.

But hoyſe aloft he cries, it blowes a merie blaſt:

And ſo at randome flies, while youthfull life will laſt.

At Caphars lampe they runne, with hoyſed ſayle amaine:

VVhich ſeemeth like the Sunne, in ſight of feeble braine.

A ſtale that leades the way, to Scyllas ſandy coſt:

VVhich drinketh euery day, their blood through folly loſt.

Caribdes greedie Iawes, lye gaping euerie houre:

And whom shee catcheth in hir clawes, shee ſpares not to deuoure.

But loe the prancke of pride, and race that rudeneſſe runnes:

The ende of wanton workes are ſpide, ſe how deſtruction comes,

Marke rushing youth, how vaine he ſpendes his retcheleſſe dayes:

Note well how pleaſure breedeth paine, a thowſande kinde of wayes.

If puffing pompe with golde, might eaſe this Princes paine:

Or force of armed champions bolde, could helpe his griefe againe:

Then all his ſcrikes and cryes, had quite bene husht and ſtilde:

So had his eares and eyes, with worldlie workes beene filde.

If I shoulde make rehearſe, what his offences were:

Although in proſe or verſe, it woulde corrupt the eare.

The Gods abhorde his dayes, the worlde doth ſounde his shame:

And vengaunce vengaunce manie wayes, agreeth to the ſame?

VVhat profites now his ſporte, wherein he playde the beaſt,

VVith all his bawdes reſorte, or eke his gluttons feaſt.

VVhat now auailes his crowne, with precious ſtones beſet?

Or and he had as great renowne, as mortall man might get.

Sith mighties know not when, the Goddes will knocke and call,

No more then other pooreſt men, that ſimpleſt be of all,

Therefore looke well about, keepe filthie luſt away:

Beware I ſay the hidden doubt, that lyes in ſecret ſea.

Let vertue guide the helme, and wiſdome hoyſe the ſayle:

So shal you voyde the daūgers great, that might your voyage quayle.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=43)

### 2.14. ❧ The two Iudges for ſlaundering of Suſanna: and bearing falſe
witneſſe againſt hir, be rewarded for the ſame moſt terribly.

FYrſt to this place when happed vs to hytte,

A roome we founde where beſt we myght beholde

Of euery ſide that ſtinking Stygion pitte,

That all the reſt excelde a thouſande folde,

Stuft full to'th top it was of young and olde,

(But as I ſayde before) a couple there we sée,

Whoſe tongues behind were halde with hookes full hie.

Before their faces with trumpet hoarſe and dimme,

To powting mouth a monſter fell doth ſet,

Whoſe voyce increaſeth care that be the hearing in,

With foming iawe, his teeth beginnes to whet.

His gloring eyes with ſparkes of fire fret,

He caſteth vnder clowdes, and ſtints his trumpet ſtreite,

And with a ratling ſpéech declares theſe words on heite.

(Quoth he) ſith ſlaunder is committed to my charge,

And that it pleaſeth Pluto my ſeruice to accept,

Within this pitte mine office wide and large,

His lawes and ſtatutes ſtreight ſhall be full truely kept.

And there withall aloft anon he lept,

From the gibbet cuts their tongues wherby they hange,

And like a madde man in a rage into a furnaſſe flange.

Where molten braſſe doth boyle as redde as gléedes,

I blende with ſulfer, pitche and ſtincking tarre,

And ſcaldes the ſcoffered tongues that wounded bléedes.

Whoſe fyring ſtreame may well be ſpied a farre,

From bottome low which mounth from height to harre.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=43)And dims the
chriſtall ſkies, & beames of glering light,

But that we ſtoode ſo nie elſe had we loſt the ſight.

Tartarus hath this pitte to proper name,

Which is in hell moſt yrkſome place indéede,

Tartarus.

And is appoynted wicked tongues to tame,

That doe delight in ſclaunders to proceede,

Who brueth bate that well doth after ſpéede?

Who ſtaines the vertuous man by falſe ſurmiſed way▪

That in the ende leaſt pennie doth not paye?

For mightie Ioue that doth in heauens ſitte,

To forge commaundes Vulcanus faſt to hye,

Newe thundring boltes to make for euery pitte,

Whereas theſe ſlaundrous wretched verlottes lie.

Who many thouſands wrought, and downe ſende by & by,

Which boltes the cruell Jaylor in ſturdy Bow doth ſet,

And cruelly flinges, with heades full ſharpe iwhet.

Into the mouth and through the tongues they fli [...],

Of eyther of theſe lyther ſlaunderous mates:

Where as conſuming coales as red as ſerpents eye,

Doe euer lodge as porters of the gates,

Two ſerpentes euer ſate vpon their pelled pates.

And euer through the ſkull they pell the braine,

Yet alwayes as it waſted it ſtill increaſt againe.

In ſhooting thunderboltes and arrowes as I ſaide,

At theſe falſe accuſers, and bréeders of vnreſt,

That ougly Geylor chaunſt holde vp his heade,

And Morpheus ſpide, whome then he did requeſt,

To come and ſée how lyers there were dreſt.

For this the place (quod hee) that ſlaunder doth reward,

Though many thouſandes not the ſame regard.

And then with filthy forke their iawes abroade he ſet,

Within whoſe mouthes were broodes of ſcorpions hatcht,

Whoſe hunger not ſlackt but they might alwayes get Some

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=44)Some part of
wicked lime, thus at his tongue they ſnatch:

And yet it doth encreaſe, their gréedie guttes to hatche.

Yet they bée neuer filde, nor hee conſumde no deale,

Loe, thus they taſte of woe, that ſclanderous lyes do tel.

I ſaye come neare, this Jayler ſayd againe,

And what thou ſeeſt among thy friendes report:

Though ſclaunder bée torment with double paine,

Yet euery daye thou ſéeſt I haue reſorte:

No doubte I trowe, they thinke it but a ſporte.

For els theyr tongues from lyes they would applie,

To mightie Ioue they ought for mercye crye.

For if they doe not mende in haſte, bée ſure

I will mine office yéeld (quoth hee) no double:

Elles a larger dominion, I meane for to procure,

For this is full you ſée, already round about:

And now ſuch ſclanderers come, that bée ſo ſtout▪

And with ſo Clarkly cunning, their matter forge & fain,

That certainely I can yéeld them equal paine.

But chiefly who be theſe (quod Morpheus) would I know

That thus aboue the reſt, ſo cruelly bée vſed?

(Quoth hée) twoo Judges in Iſraell long agoe,

That ſclandered Suſanna, whome they would abuſed,

By fleſhly déedes they thought to haue miſuſed,

This vertuous wife and noble worthy Dame,

Whom when ſhe would not, accuſde her with the ſame.

But bide a while (quoth hée) them ſelues ſhal make report,

And when thou heareſt them, Judge as thou thinkeſt beſt:

And with theſe wordes out of that filthy ſort,

With crooked hooke, hée halde them by the breaſt:

Whome when I vewed, with hande my ſelfe I bleſt.

If I ſhould tell of their deformed lookes,

The redieſt tongue, would fyre to reade the Eookes.

When vp they caſt their eyes, & Morpheus there behelde,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=44)With woefulſ
[...]e looke, that euer eye did vewe:

Daniel. 13.

For veryſorrow with whorſy noiſe they yelde,

And crying ſayde, oh happy dayes a dewe.

Woe worth the daye alas, that Father vs begot,

And curſed bée our byrth, our mother ſlewe vs not.

Wée twoo in Iſrael whilome Judges were,

That al thing rulde among the Jewiſhe Nation:

In Babilon one Ioachim, dwelling there,

And then among the Jewes in mighty eſtimation,

By meanes whereof to our contentation,

No houſe ſo fitte as his, for vs to lye and bée,

Of whome againe no man more glad then hée.

Which Ioachim one Suſanna tooke to wife,

The onely Daughter of Helchia Juſt:

That liued chaſte and vertuous all her life,

Who in the Lorde did euer put her truſt:

Whoſe ardent beawty, ſtyred vp our luſt

So flamingly that like a gleyde wée broild,

This noble Dames chaſte life to haue defilde.

As in the thirteenth of Daniel, there it doth appeare,

Daniel. 13.

What ſleyght wée vſed burning in her loue:

To come by cur purpoſe, wee brought her in diſpayre,

For thus wée ſweare by al the Gods aboue:

Except ſhée did conſent that ſhée ſhould haſtely proue,

For that wée had her there, we ſayde wee would accuſe her

In filthy fornication we found aman abuſe her.

Wée ſtealing in before the Drcharde doores were hard,

The rather then wée thought our purpoſe to haue had:

But naked though ſhée ſtoode our talke ſhee not regarde,

O Lorde (quoth ſhée) nowe am I hard béeſtad:

Alas ſhée ſayd, theſe ylles are bothe twoo bad.

Yet had I rather byde theſe Tyrants accuſation,

Then for to yéelde and worke abhomination.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=45)

Which when we ſaw with open mouthes we cryed,

Fye vpon this woman, an adultereſſe (quod we)

At the which al the ſeruauntes haſted faſt and hyed,

And vp they brake the doores, and in with ſpéede they flee:

Wée accuſing her, reported this wée ſée.

Wherat the ſeruants ſad, made ſorrow for the ſame,

For why before, no man could ſtaine her name.

Upon the morrowe before the elders all,

Wée falſelye did accuſe her there, vpon the ſame:

But ſhée in prayer, vpon her knées did fall,

And calde vpon the Lord, in prayſing of his name:

Whoſe eares heard wel her plaint: for ſhée from ſhame,

By God deliuered was: and wée to thraldome brought,

The ſame wée had, as wée this Lady thought.

For by an Infauntes mouth, ſturde vp by God,

The verye truth of all our thoughtes reuealde:

And in a worthy ſentence, divulgate al abroade,

So that there was no Iote nor title once concealde:

And that wée both, ſith then haue ſore bewailde.

Daniel was his name, the Prophete of the Lord,

That ſau'de his ſeruaunt, according to his worde.

And thus wée were reprooued of our falſe intent,

Suſanna, ſet at libertye with ioye and triple praiſe:

Daniel vpon vs, gaue his cruel iudgement,

Loe, thus at miſchiefe ended wee our dayes:

The Gods condempne vs, heare to lye alwayes.

In paines perpetuall, whoſe endles woe no tongue

Is able to deſcribe, that wée haue ſuffered long.

And world with worlds, withouten ende and ends,

Shall here bewaile our wilfull ſclaunderous tongues:

And yet on earth are ſome that in the ſame offendes,

And thinke the Gods forget, becauſe they ſuffer long:

(No no Morpheus) they doe reuenge eache wrong.

And ſclaunder ſcapeth not, but heare is double quitte.

Bée iudge, that ſéeſt vs thus formented in this pitte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=45)

This odious vale throughout thou ſhalt not ſée,

The like to vs, our plagues ſo faſte increaſe:

Wiſhe al thy friendes therefore, like ſclander for to flée,

For heare theyr paines loe, neuer haue releaſe.

Crye therfore betime, their tongues from ſclander ceaſſe.

He that from one or other theyr honeſt name doth take,

Before the Gods a great offence doth make.

For wée vnhappy wretches ſo much deſired,

To haue the vſe of this ſayd noble Dame:

That like a gleide our inward ſprites were fyred,

Our purpoſe to obtaine, wée forſt no ſinne nor ſhame:

But when wée were denied, wée falſely layde the blame

Upon that vertuous wight, that neuer did offend,

For our reward therefore behold the ende.

Some thinke theyr héeles be hoiſt, where head ſhall neuer come,

Whoſe eyes be bleard in glory vaine & balde,

And in theyr doultes conceyts, they thinke to geue y• dome,

Where they were neuer yet to counſel calde,

Whoſe purpoſe miſte, theyr wilful blood doe ſcalde.

Theyr Lordly heartes mand vp with beggers purſe,

Doth worke the thing which afterward they curſe.

But yet at miſchiefe the ſclandering tongue doth ende,

The proofe is plaine, if grace might guide the way:

The Gods doe ſtill theyr ſeruauntes true defende,

The wicked man doth euer loſe his praye:

And in his pride comes ſoneſt to decaye.

Hée falleth through his owne imagination,

As here by vs the ende doth make probation.

O ſclaunder, ſclander, alas, woe worth the time,

That euer wée from hateful heart let flée:

By trifling tongue, thoſe wicked dartes of thine,

To wounde theyr ſtates that liued vertuouſlye.

Take héede therefore al you that ſclaunderers bée.

Though our faulte therfore with you bée not regarded.

Aſſure you yet, with vs you are rewarded.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=46)

And with theſe wordes the cruell Jaylor ſtraight,

With horrible gromeling noyſe his trumpet ſoundes:

Where at like Cadmus ſéede they brawle and fight,

With crooked hookes eche one an other woundes.

To whome comes Alecto and ſcowling frownes,

With greater plagues for to rewarde theſe lyers,

And with hir breath ſettes all on flaming fiers.

Whereat I bleſt me to beholde their paines,

Rauiſht of my witte almoſt, I went awaye.

Then when I thought how many here remaines,

Which practiſe nothing more then ſlaunder night & day [...]:

Thought I tis beſt from ſlaunder that you ſtaye.

Accuſe not true Suſanna, the Lorde protects hir ſtill,

His ſeruaunt he defends and you ſhal want your will.

Away (quod Morpheus) I heare a meruels crye,

It ſéemes not farre, I wonder what it is:

With ſéeking vp and downe, at length did there eſpie,

Another was rewarded for his wickedneſſe,

I long (quoth Morpheus) to know what noyſe is this,

And ſo we ſtayde, whereas we heard one ſaye,

Lo wicked men your iuſt rewarde for aye.

### 2.15. ❧ The Aucthor to the twoo Iudges.

WHoſe tongue hath beene defylde with ſlaunders heretofore▪

That humbly weepes not like a chyld, with great repēting ſore.

O wicked wretches fye, your Guerdon now is quit:

In Tartarus loe where you lie, that did in iudgement ſit.

Take heede you boaſting blabbes, that Innocentes defyle:

You shall be whipt with cruell roddes, within this little while.

VVhat ſinfull deede is this, that woman to accuſe,

That neuer yet was knowne amiſſe, hir body to abuſe?

Howe dare you be ſo bolde, your neyghbors for to ſpoyle,

Of greater treaſure then of golde, or fieldes of fertill ſoyle?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=46)The mountes
of Mydas pelfe, no crownes that Princes were:

Nor yet king Alexanders welth, to ſell not halfe ſo deare

As is the honeſt name, whome euill tongues deuoure,

Er now, that neuer yerned blame, are blotted in an houre.

But you that ſlaunderers bee, to minde Suſanna call:

And prayſe the Lorde, ſo shall you ſee Gods vengaunce on them fall▪

For Jacob was accuſde, poore man that thought none ill:

Alas how long hath ſpite bene vſde, of them that want their will?

The ſlaundering tongue is ſuch, if thought doe wag awry:

To winne the wager heele not grutche, thus to proclayme and cry:

That this or that I might, and will, and pleaſeth mee:

And thu. I ought to haue of right, and ſweres it ſo to bee.

Thus haue I done ſayth hee, when truth is nothing ſo:

Or elſe he ſayth that this I ſee, to worke the parties wo.

And thus accuſed are, it pitieth me to heare,

Suſannas that be guiltleſſe, a thouſande in a yeare.

Therefore you filthie Iudges your ende Iioye to ſee:

Now lye without refuge in hell eternallie.

You ſprang of Cadmus ſeede, your nature plaine doth sho:

But yet the Goddes at length doe w [...]e, all ſuch his ſeruauntes fro.

VVith Joachim I doe reioyce, Suſanna thus to ſee

Elected by Goddes holie voyce, with Aungels for to bee.

### 2.16. ❧ Pope Ihoan rewarded for hir wickedneſſe.

THe time that mortall men doe here abide,

Within this worlde that laſteth not an houre:

If fortune chaunce to ſmile vpon their ſide,

Then ſtill they ſtriue from har to higher power.

Content with preſent ſtate not one there liues,

But ſuch as ſhoulde liue beſt, the worſt example giues.

Much woulde haue more, the proverbe olde doth ſay,

Tis true indéede, much no man doth content:

For more and more all men doe gape eche daye,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=47)They thinke
the worlde will laſt and not be ſpent.

Oh very fooles, deceyued foule ye bée:

If happe be on your ſides example take by mée.

To know my life, and what I was ſometime,

Who liues and ſées me lie amiddes this endeleſſe wo,

That woulde not doubt the like rewarde in fine,

That I deſerued iuſtly long ago?

I muſt confeſſe my paine to little is,

Though twentie times it were much worſe then this.

Harke what I ſay the ſtoutſt among you all,

Who fitteth hext that hath not cauſe to feare?

Some blaſt doth blow that giues the grieuous fall,

Its often ſeene euen once in twentie yere,

Though Fortune hoyſe the ſeates of ſome aloft,

Yet ſhée delightes to caſt them downe as ofte.

Nothing more brittle is then ſtate of man,

Both night and day exp [...]ience doth appéere:

Yet notwithſtanding, who doe not what they can,

To liue like Goddes as long as they be héere?

Though time do teache, al thinges begunne maſt ende

No mendement yet I ſée of ſuch as doe offende.

Except the Gods they thought for to diſplace,

From out their ſeates wherein they ſitte on hie:

Or that from Ioue for to diſpoſe the mace,

Wherewith hée rules the earth and all the ſkie:

Elſe wot I not what all this miſchiefe meanes,

For Codrus lou'de of Gods, ritch men diſdains.

On heapes to Pluto headlong here they runne,

Hell ſcarſe is able the halfe part to holde:

The father is torment for wronging of his ſonne,

And eke the ſonne for like in triple folde.

The mother for the daughter ſuſtaines wo:

The daughter for the mother, and many other mo.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=47)

But how happie be they that welth do not taſte,

And that with pouertie yelde thankes to the Gods?

No doubt aboue the ſtarres all ſuch men are plaſte,

They be not ſcourged nor whipped with our roddes.

Therefore by our harmes learne to be warned,

Elſe ſhall you be ſure with vs to be charmed.

At the which wordes then Morpheus alofte did call,

What art thou (quod he) tell me thy name ſtreight way?

(Shee aunſwered) and ſayde: euen ſo with ſpéede I ſhall,

If it pleaſe thee here a while to bide and ſtay.

And if it be not long I am content (quoth he)

And ſo with woful plainte theſe wordes declared ſhe.

O Morpheus Morpheus I am that wofull wight,

His words ſpoken to Mor [...]heus

That once did ſitte in Peters ſeate and place:

A man I ſeemde to be alas in all mens ſight,

And yet a wicked woman the leſſe my grace.

I did take vpon me the Goſpell for to guide,

Yet contrarie both I and mine did liue beſyde.

And Iohan was I calde, and of my birth a Citie,

Named Maience tooke hir proper name:

Brought vp in learned ſcooles the more great pitie,

That grace had not béene lincked to the ſame.

Learning I loued of all ritcheſſe vnder heauen,

Till I conquered the knowledge of Sciences ſeauen.

I refuſed my countrie and frindes euery one,

Many a Pro [...]ince I trauaylde to and fro,

Better learned then my ſelfe I met not with one,

Of what eſtate or degrée he were, high or loe.

And in all theſe places where euer I came,

I was thought among the people to be a very man.

In Englande once I was the countrey to peruſe,

From thence to Roome I did returne with ſpéede,

Within the which I did no deale refuſe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=48)Gramer,
Sophiſtry, Logike, and Rethorike, for to reade.

My fellowe not founde, ſo ready was my braine,

Nothing wanted Morpheus, but grace I tel thée plaine.

In Lotaries time, that Emperour was then,

After the death of Leo by full election,

I was choſen for my wiſedome aboue al men,

To haue the Papall dignitye in my protection.

And ſo was made Pope, and ruled as my lyſt,

Tyll my abhomination accuſde mée or I wiſt.

For hauing at my wyll what harte could beſt thinke,

And ruling as it were all men as pleaſed mée:

Then layde I away both Booke, Pen, and Inke,

The ſwelling fleſhe with them could not agrée.

I ſpared neyther Cardinal Biſhop, Munke nor Frier,

To fulfil my deſire, I paſt not who they were.

Tyll at the laſt I chaunſed great with Childe,

At Saint Iohns Laterans deliuered was I:

And thus the Seate of Peter by mee was defilde,

Alas therefore full oft to late I crye.

Afterwarde depoſed I was, and ſo put downe,

And begged my bread both in Countrey and Towne.

At this filthye acte the Gods were offended,

And ſente mee to Pluto, his Judgement to trye:

Out of all the Heauens I was then ſuſpended,

And heare am adlotted in paines ſtill to lye,

Loe, nowe thou knoweſt both the cauſe and my name,

Therefore I pray thee warne thy friendes of the ſame.

Tell women, that haue fine pollytike wittes,

That except they dread the Gods with honour due:

Whome Fortune hexte of all, with Scepture hits,

The hurtfull fall be they ſure doth enſue.

Although her nature bée ſometime to ſmile,

It's beſt yet take héede ſhée winke them not a wile.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=48)

From valley lowe, when Titan mounts the Hilles,

Hée doth diſmount as faſt as riſe before:

The Phenix ſcaling ſkies with ſinged quilles,

Turnes to the Earth againe, what néedeth more?

For fluddes that riſe, when at the hexte they bée,

Doe fall as faſt againe, the proofe we ſée.

And finallye, will euerye kinde of wight,

As well as women them ſelues, to knowe and ſée:

And that in time of wealth, they ſet theyr ſight

To vewe what ſuch doe wante that ſimpler bée.

Their goodes and Landes with ſtate of noble raine,

Bewty, Youth, and al thinges els, ſhall ſhrinke againe.

You knowe the nine worthies laſted but a time,

The monſtrous mountes do waſte and weare awaye:

Then what is it that is made of ſliche and ſlime,

That can vpon the earth long ſtand or ſtaye?

All is but fleſhe which waſteth like the ſnowe,

When life ſhall part, the wiſeſt doth not knowe.

Nowe alas, ſith the world is thus vnſure,

And fleſhe ſo fraile, what fooles bée mortall men:

That haue ſuch hope in that for to endure,

That ſtraight ſhall ſlip awaye they know not when?

What gaines get they that winne a litle pelfe,

For which the Gods at laſt condempne him ſelfe?

Theſe wordes thus ſayde, the rage of furious hell,

With new inuented miſeries gan then to increaſe:

That very woe and ſorrowe did compell,

This newe founde Pope from further talke to ceaſe.

Within my ſecreate hart, I pitied much her caſe,

Bicauſe ſhée was a woman, and had ſo litle grace.

But then to ſée the great Souſeheaded Friars,

With Iommarnold Muncks, on heapes how faſt they fel,

Beſide platterfaſde Abbots, & Prieſts with pricke eares:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=49)Howe buſie
they were it paſſeth tongue to tell.

I thinke they ſang for they gaped ſo wide,

That to heare theyr ſeruice I might not abide.

Eache nowke was full of Nunnes, as buſye as the beſt,

Properly apparelled like newe faſhioned Players:

Prating Pardoners, were Cookes of the Feaſt,

Whoſe ſcullions were a number of beaſtly Southſaier [...].

Euery one occupied, not one of them was idle,

But neyther with Teſtament nor with Sacred Bible.

At length they fell out what ſo euer was the matter,

They fought with Senſars, and holy water Cans:

Great Beades about eache others face they clatter,

I litle thought they had béene ſuch men of theyr hands.

We ſaw them ſo diſquiet, we ſtoode from them afarre,

For feare of blowes before that wée were warre.

I ſawe no man there that ſéemde to make peace,

The like maiſtries at Olimpus, were neuer ſo made:

Thicke and thréefold on heapes they lye like Beaſtes,

Theyr nayles were ſo long no man calde for a blade.

Thus violently they diſguiſed one of them the other,

In ſuch fury, that the ſon tormented his owne Mother.

It was a wonder to mée verye ſtraunge,

To ſée what May games they made in that pitte:

Like Maiſters of Fence (great ſtroakes they did chaunge

One with another) ſtarke madde out of witte.

A maruailous Muſicke, a prayer moſt painfull,

Among Chriſtian people nothing more dainfull.

Whereat (quod Morpheus) looking on mée,

Doeſt thou behold (quoth hée) what miſerye is here,

And what preſumption in ſome women may bée,

And howe to come by theyr purpoſe, full litle they feare▪

But what miſchiefe is this, heare for to finde,

Theſe Popes & theſe prelates y• to preach were aſſinde?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=49)

Theſe are they which beare the world in hand,

That in heauen and hell, they had euermore power:

(As they ſayde) ſo it was, and with God did ſtande,

Out of hell to fetche thouſandes of ſoules in one hower.

And no worde true all was fables and lyes.

With falſe Doctrine and Idolatry the blearid our eyes.

Theſe are the Bellye Gods, that outward did appeare,

To bée moſt holye, and iuſt alway in theyr liuing:

Which before God very Ipocrites were,

And liu'de like brute Beaſts, without any thanks geuing.

They pleade a Priuiledge, to doe what theyr lyſt,

As if hell and Heauen were both in theyr fiſt.

And thus wée departed and left the new found Pope,

With her Colledge of Cardinals, and other her mates:

At hext of theyr ſeruice without veſtment or Cope,

With nailes large and long, they biſpte each others pates.

So downe the dales, wée drewe to beholde,

The manifold miſchiefe among yong and olde.

Whome then to ſée through many a knaggy cruſt,

And brethles blaſt, with ſtormes as Kaſor kene:

And ſcaping dartes all redde with cankred ruſt,

Wée paſſed through, of any one not ſéene.

Yet by the way a thouſand ſightes we ſée,

Of which to thinke, full oft [...] it gréeueth mée.

Tyll at the laſte, wée drewe vnto the place,

And hurtfull hole in cruell Stigion lake:

Whereas wée heard a man bewaile his caſe.

No pained ſoule, might greater ſorrow make.

Theſe wordes me thought, the wofull wretch did crye,

Come ſee (alas alas) the tormentes where wee lye.

FINIS▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=50)

### 2.17. ❧ Newes betwene the Pope and Pluto, and of the Proclamation about
the Ladder twixt Hell and Heauen.

THus leauing Helen in endleſſe woe and paine,

Through yrkeſome vale from crag to crag we crept:

Tormented ſprites we hearde of eche ſide plaine,

Thouſandes thouſandes, ſchryking cryed and wept,

Linckt faſt in chaynes, with cruell Kéepers kept.

Whoſe name and actes we liſted not to craue,

But paſſed foorth to vewe the monſtrous caue.

Till at the length to a ſtéepe and hawtie hill▪

Siſiphus for his de­ſolute and vicious li­uing.

We chaunſt to come whereas me thought I ſée,

One rowling vp a ſtone that tumbleth on him ſtill.

Thus night and daye from toyling reſts not hée.

Alſo Duke Theſeus for his tirannys,

Bitten with  [...]ipers and torne with Toades in ſunder,

In a pitte or puddle, that belched light and thunder.

Eneas following Sibil rounde about that denne,

Up hill from cragto crooked Torre he runnes,

His wandering limmes ſtill treades the filthie fenne,

In hope to haue in ſight that alwayes ſhunnes.

Alſo women drewe water in buckets that runnes.

With very manye mo to long to name,

As then me thought had plagues much like the ſame.

But as wée went mée thought I ſawe a glade,

There are moe wayes to hell then one.

That made a ſhoe as it a paſſage were,

Which was in déede of very purpoſe made,

From thence to Rome erectes a mightie ſtere▪

This is the way [...] frō Rome to Pluto.

And Gorgon with a Clubbe was Porter there,

Except from Rome, in, there he might not paſſe,

Or elſe ſome ſuche as truſted in the Maſſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=50)

This way paſſe ſoules from paines to endeleſſe bliſſe,

The waye that ſoules paſſe tho­rowe be­twene hea­uē and hel.

When pleaſe the Pope to ſende his letters thither,

Morpheus and I experience ſaw of this,

The Popes man and wée met altogither,

Who brought Pardons packt vp in a bouget of lether.

Beſides letters that to Pluto then he deliuered,

On the which Pluto looked, peruſde, and conſidered.

Wherevpon Pluto his counſell calde ſtraight,

A filthie heape of crooked noble ſtates,

To here their mindes becauſe it was of weight,

To gratifie the Pope and all his holye mates,

Sende for the meſſenger, and ſo theſe wordes debates.

My friende (quoth hée) tha'rt welcome to this place,

So are they all that loue thy mayſters grace.

But by the floodes of dreadfull flaming Styx,

The newes thy maiſter writtes doe grieue my guttes ful ſore,

For reuenge, theſe clawes as ſharpe as thornie prickes,

Shall toſſe and teare the ſprites of many a ſcore,

(Ah worthy Pope) thy decay I much deplore▪

A Cater for my Kitchine, prouider of the praye,

What meruell though I curſe the cauſe of thy decaye?

And with theſe wordes his ſcowling face lets poure,

The guſhing floodes and ſpowtes of fier red,

He gnaſht his téeth and gan to glowte full ſoure,

With belching breath, to'th meſſenger thus ſayde:

Take here an aunſwere vnto my ſupreme heade.

(Byd him be merye) I ſhall aſſiſtaunce ſende,

To taxe all ſuche, as with him doe contende.

With a romiſhe thankes, the meſſenger packeth,

Charged with the letters that Pluto doth ſende,

Poſte horſes by commiſſion in eache place he taketh,

Untill he ariued at the ſtayers ende,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=51)Whereas from
Lymbo to Roome he ſhould aſcende,

Being a luſtie Lurdaine a Fryer of Saint Fraunces,

Twixt Rome and hel from ſteppe to ſteppe he daunces.

Thus the Fryer fled we hearde no more of him,

But ſtraight on a ſtage a Trumpet ſounded was,

Wherevnto aſſembled ſuch ſoules as for ſinne,

Were ſent by the Pope to be puniſht alas,

Who thought to be pardoned by vertue of the maſſe.

Elſe hoping to heare of the Popes comming thither,

Then thinking to be releaſt from thence altogither.

When ſilence was made with much a doe,

This yll faſte Herraulde theſe wordes then declared:

That many men to the Pope were vntrue,

And their large offrings and deuotions nowe ſpared,

For to come to God other meanes they prepared.

Hauing no truſt in the Pope nor his traditions,

But cal him the Captaine of Idolatrous ſuperſtitions.

To our Prince Pluto his letters doe declare,

That toward the North Pole Gods word is ſo embraſte:

That no man for pardons will giue mony nor ware,

(In Englande eſpecially) he is vtterly diſgraſte▪

Except among a fewe here and there that are plaſte.

That with their friendes in nowkes and odde holes,

Sing a maſſe of Requiem for al chriſtian ſoules.

Which is to no purpoſe the money being gone,

That maintayned his grace and all his whole rowte,

His Cardinals, his Abbottes, his Friers, with ſir John,

His Nunnes, and his Ancrees, and all be thruſt out,

His Pardnors go begging and wandring about.

The ſhauelings be ſhronken that once bare the ſwaye,

Their credite and cuſtomes be runne to decaye.

And Boner that bolſtred the beames of his glorie,

Lyeth Sunke in the ſandes that onſe beare the blade:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=51)That many a
Chriſtian therewith made full ſorie,

A while in Chriſtes Uineyarde he cut a great glade,

And ſtoute Storie that all the ſturre made.

Storie▪ Gardiner. Fecknam.

Gardiner is wanting that was the blood letter,

And Fecknam is faſt that was the clocke ſetter.

Beſyde an infinite number within that ſame Ile,

That now be decayed and worne out of minde:

Baniſht is Babilon that floriſhter [...] while,

And the way to Ieruſalem by the Goſpell they finde

The Pope they repute to be a guide blinde.

They paſſe not a pin, for his bleſſinges nor curſes,

Let him ſaye what he will, they holde faſt their purſes.

And in place of his friendes are ſtarte vp his foes,

And one cruell Captaine that workes all the griefe,

A Iewell of Chriſt Jeſus gaue Harding the bloes,

Iuell.  [...]arding▪

Confuting his fables in ſpite of his teeth,

Hée féedes the poore flocke with Chriſtian beléefe.

Squencht is the confidence I ſay of our Harding,

Thers none young nor olde that eſtéemes him a farding.

One Barthlet wée may ban throughout this whole vale:

And ſo may the Pope with Candle, Booke and Bell,

In the Papall pedigrewe, hee tels ſuch a tale,

That all Romiſh Roges may rore to heare tell,

That Chriſtians had knowledge of the trumprye they ſe [...].

For he tippes vp the ſacke, and all poureth out,

From the firſt to the laſt, he rappes the whole route.

(This and much more) being the iuſt cauſe,

Of the Popes great plague and miſerable want:

(I meane of money) to maintaine his lawes,

Perforce muſt perſwade you, that here make your plaint,

Conſidering Gods worde hath him on the tainte.

You wofull ſoules that in Purgatorie lye,

Muſt yet here remaine there is good cauſe why.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=52)

(Which is this) you know the Pope hath béen at coſt,

To found betwixt Pluto and Rome theſe ſtayres:

And nowe it is like, that his labour is loſt,

Becauſe that his cuſtomes and credite thus weares:

Yet hée hath ſet Prieſts, Munkes, Nunnes, and Friers.

And the reſt of his Rable in hande for to make,

A Ladder to reache into Heauen for your ſake.

And vp it was reared▪ yeares long a goe,

The buil­ding of the Lader and the timber with the workmen.

And well vnderſet with Dyrges and Maſſes:

With Popiſhe Props, thouſandes on a roe,

As Pardons, Buls, Idols, Holy water, and Aſhes:

Palmes, and holy Bread, and many olde Traſhes,

Lampes, Lightes, Croſſing and Créeping,

And all to redreſſe your pitifull wéeping.

Singing, and Ringing, with Belles euery where,

Senſing, and Fenſing with Booke Bell and Candle:

Curſing, and Praying, of Muncke, Nun, and Frier,

Night, daye and hower, al thing for to handle:

Like workemen worthy, not bunglers to Scamble.

A building to bolte ſo hye in the ſkyes,

doth craue Cunning workemen, and ſuch as are wiſe.

But loe (alas) the Popes willing minde,

The cauſe of the fall thereof.

For money to releaſe you of theſe bitter paines:

So many thouſandes ſtroue this Ladder to climbe,

That you miſt the Heauen, and hée his great gaines:

For bending it brake, with waight of your Chaines.

By meanes whereof, therein, who put truſt,

World without ende, remaine héere they muſt.

And too ſhort it was, by full ten degrées,

The tor­mented  [...]oules per­ſwaded to dwell for e­ue in paines.

And neuer could reach Gods glorye and bliſſe:

Although hee, and his, were as buſie as Bees,

In thende it woulde haue prouided but this:

Wherefore bée contented no remeedye is,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=52)Tyl the
Ladder bée mended, hence to diſpatche yée,

Or el [...] that the Pope, come him ſelfe for to fetch yee.

The Goſpell of Chriſt, hath throughly confounded,

Not onely this Ladder, of the Popes owne deuice:

But alſo deſtroyde al them that firſt founded

The painted helles, and paper Paradice:

Heare among vs, they ſhall playe theyr Price.

Theyr ſtinking Idolatrye, and vile Superſtition,

As holye as they bée, heare findes no remiſſion.

Therefore it is Pultos pleaſure that you knowe,

What fortune hath hapned, your Father the Pope:

Hee him ſelfe to Heauen, is not able to goe,

Except Saint Peter, hale him vp in a Roape:

Or that hée chaunſe to bée pulde by his Coape,

By our Lady of Walſingham, & ſwéet Roode of Cheſter

Elſe his porcion in Heauen, is ſcant worth a Teſtar.

Theſe wordes being ſaide, hée diſmounteth the ſtage,

Saying, vengeance, and torment, protect Plutos grace:

At the which cryed out with terrible rage,

Both yong and olde that were in that place:

A ſight to ſorrowfull, in beholding theyr caſe.

(I meane) of al ſuch, as put truſt in the Maſſe,

Theſe Newes made theyr torments much worſe then (it was.

To ſée the ſorrowfull ſort hale one another,

Crying out on the Popes, and his ſhauelinges there:

The Father, the Sonne, the Daughter, the Mother,

The Uncle, the Aunte, and Grandſier appeare:

To the ninthe degrée, thouſandes there were

Both Ritch and Poore, that truſted to the Maſſe,

Not one of themall, but I am ſure there hée was.

Some cryde fye of Idols, and ſome of holye water,

Some of Superſticion, and ſome of Scalaceli:

Other ſome lamented, the mumbling of Lady Pſalter,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=53)(Alas) quod
another, this will not preuaile yée,

Now maye you ſée, their trumprye doth faile yée.

So it doth them ſelues, for loe where they lye,

That late hoyſt theyr Gods, in Haulters full hye.

And loe (quoth hée) where they hée ſinging a Maſſe,

Pope Alexander, Pope Ioane, and both vnder a ſtoale:

Sée you not the ſwéete blood of hayles in a glaſſe,

Which Idoll brought hither many a poore ſoule?

A Pardoner mée thinke ſtandes by with a ſcrowle.

Some officer bée like of Saint Johns ſweete Frary,

Looke who is in his bookes it is beſt you prepare yée.

At which wordes ſuch a number brake out,

Of Caues and Sinkes on euery ſide:

As Tipling Bibs, and Suckers of grow [...]e,

Se [...] Sowers, and Brewbates, thyther faſt bide:

Tutors, and Teltales, in euery nowke cryde.

Pickethankes and Prow [...]ers, beare holy water,

Their maiſters (being worldlings) ſayd Confiteor, and (Miſereator.

Flattery light Lampes, to our Lady of grace,

Ipocriſie, calde them vp to the offering,

Saint Anne of Buckſtones was waſhing a pace:

But Lucre was lifting ſmall pence to the Coffering.

At ſhrieft they were cloſe in euery place.

Tw [...] faces in one hoode, the Croſſe then did beare,

Whereat abhomination, beganne for to ſweare.

Great deui [...]ion there ſéemed to bée,

All that were there▪ did knocke on theyr breaſt:

But (alas) to late for to crye then Peccaui,

Althoughe the Pope both Croſſed and bleſte,

For when hée lookte backe, at Ite miſſa eſt:

When Dan Limli [...]ter, the Candles ſhould oute,

All flewe on a fire their Colledge through out.

¶ Howe the Ladder was amended, that lately was craish [...],

After that time trulie of no man I aihſte.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=53)

### 2.18. ❧ The torment of Tiranny, and the reward for his vvickedneſſe; Being
a King called Mydas: VVhich Tiran­nouſlye, ſwallowed not onely his Countrey
for Lucre ſake, but his houſeholde Seruauntes alſo.

THus as wée left theſe Romiſh Roges, of whome I ſpake of late,

Wée chaunſte  [...] heare a woeful wight, y• did bewaile his ſtate.

And Tiranny his name was calde, who lou'd to leime the poore,

And ſuppe the gaine of ſweating browes, for to increaſe his ſtore.

This mighty mate ne mercy mindes, when he on ſoile did dwell,

But eate vp all on euery ſide, as they that want can tel.

The widow and the Fatherles, the Stranger that doth toyle:

His houſehold Seruitours and al, hée ſéeketh for to ſpoyle.

Whome lended hée his  [...]ares vnto, but onelye vnto ſuche,

As vnto Pluto ſacrifizde theyr ſoules to gaine him muche?

Tyl at the laſt his Tiranny, the ayre corrupt with ſmell,

Whereat the Skies, did turne theyr hewe, and Limbo gan to yell.

The Mountaines roare by Eccos voice, into the Heauens hye,

The ſcrikes and cryes of wronged wights, and al togeather flye.

The Preachers powred teares apace, repentance ſtyl they cryde,

But al in vaine, his eares were ſtopte, ſuch newes he might not bide.

His ſtoared groūd, his racked rents, his heards of goats, with ſheepe &

His prouling pick [...]hāks, made him to forget his duty cleane:

Whom when y• Ioue peruſde, and ſearchte his flintiſh Pharaos heart, graine,

Upon the ſnappe grimme Mors he ſends, to ſtick him with his Dart.

Who wound him ſo, that Atropos to line ſtraight laid the launce,

Gods people by this Tyrants death, from bondage to aduaunce.

Whoſe wandring ghoſt, to Carons bote, with fearful grenes is gone,

To dwell among the damned ſprites, for other hope is none:

Where, in a pit, a place is pitchte, a woeful chayre to ſit,

In molten mettall to the Crowne, a place for Tyrantes fit.

His officers bande him round about, with bagges of money thruſt,

Which neuer ceaſe, with gnaſhing téeth, to lend him many a duſt.

Meduſa is his Coke, to dreſſe this wretche his meate,

Which ſets before him crawling Snakes, and vgly Todes to eate.

His counſellers bée retcht on length, theyr Guts on hookes bée torne,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=54)Whoſe fowle
deformed filthy tongus bewaile that they were borne▪

Thus toſt & torne, with torments great, with thūderbolts bethwakt,

On forkes & fleſhhooks ſtreind & ſtretcht, eche ioynt from other crakt,

And to augment this Miſers griefe, with hookes they hale him out

Uppon a froſen ſcaffolde hoyſt, this Tyraunt lookes about:

Where helliſh Hegges and Furies ſhewe a ſight t'increaſe his paine

Which is the ioyfull Eden fieldes, where ſaued ſoules remaine.

The bliſfull bankes there might he ſée, the valleyes ſwéete & fayre,

Where wants no floures of noble taſte, for to perfume the ayre.

All kinde of fruites do ſhew themſelues, and readie ripe they hynge,

Of pleaſures paſſing man to wiſhe, there wantes no kinde of thinge▪

Pernaſſus hill to baſe a bancke, to be comparde to this,

Or Helicon in ſuch reſpect, a wéedie pyngle is.

Nor Cithera pearle of all the earth, is ought but counterfet,

Though it were deckt with all the golde, that Alexander ge [...].

Tho I had dronke and ſupped vp, ſweete Aganippes well,

Or G [...]ba [...]elus ſkilfull floodes, yet want I ſkill to tell

The heapes of ioyes, this ioyfull fielde is garniſhed with all,

Doth much ſurmount this worldly bliſſe, thriſe more then ſuger gall

For there Sir Tellus doth not taſte of Hiemps froſen face,

Nor Boreas bragges the weakeſt twigge, ſturs not within that place▪

For Phebus hee his golden beames, diſperſeth here and there:

And Iupiter the ſiluer droppes from ſkies doth cauſe retire.

(In ſeaſon due) to mol fie theſe fieldes of endeleſſe bliſſe,

Where none may come but ſuch as by the Goddes appoynted is.

Whoſe garmentes be as white as ſnow, on inſtrumentes they ſing.

And neuer ceaſe, but prayſing God, of earth, and heauen king.

And crownes vpon their heads they were, & aungels foode they eate,

Still Gloria  [...] excel [...] ſing to▪th Lambe vpon the ſeate.

There might this Tyraunt well beholde the poore whome he opreſt▪

Amid theſe ioyes for euermore, appoynted for to reſt.

And ſuch as leaſt he did eſtéeme, and all be rent with wrong,

Their happie life eche houre did ſee, and daylie hearde their ſong.

Which when he hearde, a triple paine aſſaultes this caytiues ghoſt.

When hee did way his mund [...] mucke, and heauens treaſure loſt:

In equall ballaunce when he tryed, how Conſcience him accuſde,

(Quoth hee) fie on you Im [...]es of hell, that thus haue me abuſde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=54)Meaning by
the muckhill Mates, which whiſpred in his eare,

And taught him how Goddes people poore, for gaines to rend & teare.

To ride, to runne, to hale, and drawe, as bondeſlaues euery houre,

To whippe and ſcourge no mo then all, that were within his poure.

But Oh (quoth hée) let all the worlde example take by mee,

Let neuer greateſt Prince on earth thinke other but to dye.

Oh, fye on goodes, thryſe fye on golde, and tentimes fie on ſuch

As ſhall procure great mightie men, the poore by wrong to touch.

And then he wrange his handes for wo, what happe had I (quoth hée)

To lende my eares to Dunghil Doltes, at their commaunde to bée,

And baniſht from my ſeruice quite, the bloode of gentle race,

Which alwayes counſaylde me to minde, mine honor and my grace?

But as the Rauens ſéeke their praye, or Woolfe the ſpoyle purſues,

So did the Churles by meanes of me, eache where their furie vſe.

The ſonnes of Théeues & ruſtick Carles, might leade me as they liſt,

So that the gobs of gloring golde, they brought to freight my fiſt.

Yet as they ſpoylde the coaſt abroade (from me) ſo did they pinche,

So that at euerye elne, I ſcarce receyued halfe an inche.

I pitied not the Wydowes cauſe, nor fatherleſſe I wayde,

Both townes and countries rounde about, to paſtures great I layde▪

Yet had I mines, with vineyardes large, with corne and cattell ſtore

Yea Lordſhips, lands, parckes houge & wide, yet ſtil I lookt for more.

Mules and Camels infinite, Townes and Caſtles greate,

Thus Fortune with hir ſmiling lookes, hir worldly hookes can bayte

To catche the couetous Tyrant with, to preſent to Plutos grace,

Whoſe wickedneſſe he doth rewarde full well within this place.

And then hée lookt vpon theſe ſlaues, much yll (quoth he) betide,

You verlots borne, that thus bewitcht a Prince of ſuch a pride▪

Much yll and wo may hap to thée, thou foule deformed ſlaue.

And all thy mates that mooued mée, this mundan mucke to craue.

The childe vnborne curſe you & yours, the hils ſhall ſounde the ſame,

The ſtones in ſtréets cry out on you, the ſkies proclaime your ſhame.

The heauens abhor both you and yours: hel rend you with his iawes,

And Furies all in Stigion ſtreames, torment you with their clawes▪

Much more he ſayde but what it was, for ſkrikes we coulde not tell,

His men of truſt and hée that time, in tormentes ſo did yell.

But ſtill they bang him with theſe bagges, like madmen in their rage

And ſtreite theſe furies with their hookes, did moūt him from ye ſtage.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=55)Where
tumbling hée in molten golde, doth walter here and there,

Till at the length, of him nor his, we coulde not ſée nor here.

But ouer the pit with letters blacke, this ſentence there was pende

This is the place of iuſt rewarde for Tyrauntes in the ende.

Then by and by, a thundring voyce came poudering vp the pitte,

(Which ſayde) remember thende you men, in chayres of ſtate that ſit.

For Pluto is the Iaylor here, to mightie Ioue aboue:

He pardons none but all alike, (take heede it doth behooue)

Which words did make my hart to ſhrink, as flowers doe in June,

So that to ſpeake one worde for life, I durſt not once preſume.

But in my heart I wiſht all men, King Mydas mucke to flée,

And ſpeciallye the number that of mightie honor bee.

For they that reade the Poetes workes, ſhal here of Mydas much,

And how he crau'de all to be golde that he might féele or touche.

But though the Poets fabled ſo, and I in dreames doe faine,

Yet let not Tyrauntes better truſt, but taſte of Plutos paine.

### 2.19. ❧ The rewarde that Roſamond had in hell, for murdering of hir
huſbande Al­bonius and liuing vitiouſlie in hir huſ­bandes dayes.

WHen from this Pope we were depart and gone,

Meaning to returne, the night was almoſt ſpent:

But there faſt by we hearde one crye a non,

Which ſayde (Alas, alas) to late I doe repent,

My wanton dayes, my luſtie youthfull toyes,

Haue baniſht me from Aungels part of ioyes.

The ſounde there of a woman did preſent,

For S [...]reminglie it rang among the caues,

Which when we hearde we coulde not be content:

But ſcalde the cragges among the flaming waues.

Till at the laſt a dungeon had we ſpyde,

Wherein the woman was that latelye cryde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=55)

And as we ſtoode thereof to take the vewe,

In ſcalding furneſſe whoſe flaſh doth ſtill increaſe,

A ſeeming noble Dame with crowne and ſcepture n [...] we

(Among a number) ga [...] firſt of all to preaſe,

And ſayd (Oh Morpheus) ſuch haſte why doſt thou make▪

I pray thee bide a while, yet for a womans ſake.

Wherefore (quoth hée) my preſence doth no good,

And yll I may abide, the night is almoſt ſpent:

Shee hearing this, cryed out as one were wood,

Abide and beare two wordes, then go I am content.

Diſpatche (quoth hee) for long I cannot bide,

But firſt of all, thy name and cauſe deſcribe.

(Oh quoth ſhée) this place prepared is,

For wickedneſſe the iuſt rewarde to bée,

And ſuch as liue againſt the Goddes amiſſe,

Be vſed here with tormentes as you ſee.

Sith Morpheus thou all dreames doſt ſhew eche where,

Publiſh this abroade how we are vſed here.

And let them know how Roſamonde the Quéene,

To Albonyus late wife that was ſometime,

Lyeth torment here as thou haſt preſent ſeene,

For filthie life, and odious bloodie crime.

My life did craue none other ende but this,

Therefore beholde rewarde of wickedneſſe.

Therefore let mée to women warning bée,

To honor God the beſte, and next their ſpouſed mates:

And ſay that Roſamonde thus ſayde to thee,

Who doth not ſo, ſhall enter at theſe gates.

It doth become eache woman night and daye,

To holde them well content, at what their huſbandes ſaye,

You luſtie bloodes poſſeſt with hawtie hartes▪

Your loftie lookes correct with meaner ſtate,

Refuſe to playe theſe wanton wilfull partes,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=56)From follye
flée, leaſt you repent to late.

Sometime I lookte as hye as hexte of you,

Which is the onelye cauſe I bid al ioyes adewe.

Séeme not to ſwell a haſt ye worde to heare,

No vauntage ſéeke, nor quarrels frame to breede:

An honeſt womans part is euer to forbeare

The ſayinges of her huſband, if wel ſhée thinke to ſpéede.

Where loue is linkte, wordes cannot brewe the bate,

But where diſſemblers are, fewe wordes then cauſeth hate.

And laye aſide your newe diſguiſed raye,

Leaue prancking of your ſelues with painted face:

From whirling heyre and there your eyes prophaned ſtay,

Bée faithful Matrons found in euery place.

Who doth hir ſpowſed Mate in any caſe betraye,

Shall ſure repent it ſore, with mée another daye.

For if that grace had light vpon my ſide,

Then had I dread before the doubtfull ende:

And ſo eſcaped that which nowe alas I bide,

As Guerdon méete for them that ſo offend.

For through one word I heard my huſband ſaye,

My ſtomack was ſo ſtowte, I made him ſtraight away.

Which was but ſmall and eaſie to bée borne,

But that the wicked ſprite mée tempte to ſeeke his blood,

For euen as Judas his Maiſters death had ſworne,

Infect with like temptacion, that preſent time I ſtoode.

Uengeance I inuented, and vengeance haue I caught▪

To ſeeke my Huſbandes life, mine owne deſtruction brought.

Loe, this was the cauſe. At my Huſbands returne,

From doing great Battailes in Countreys full farre:

Being his pleaſure a while for to Soiourne,

To reſt him at eaſe after his Warre:

Let call a Triumphe, and made a great Feaſt,

To the which aſſembled all his Lordes of the beſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=56)

And being in his meriment, Thus Jeſted with mée:

Tooke a Goblet with Wine, and theſe words thē he ſayd:

(Drinke a tawnt to thy Father, Wife quoth hée)

Who before in Battaile was wounded to dead.

Thus for to ſaye, much is not a mis,

Who euer doth ſpeake it, where any grace is.

But (alas) vnhappilye I, as moſt women bée,

Was pufte full of Pride, and mutable minde:

I ſwelde as a Toade his death for to ſée,

Yet ſpake I him fayre his ſences to blinde:

O God what miſchiefe can women inuent,

And if a man alter but once theyr intent.

When I ſpake him as fayre as heart might deuiſe,

And made the greatſt ſhewe of Faithfull true loue:

Inwardlye then I dyd hate and deſpiſe,

My noble Huſbande all Creatures aboue.

Therefore I confeſſe, it is harde for to knowe,

When a woman ſpeakes fayre, if ſhée meanes it or no.

I polluted filthilye my Huſbandes bedde,

With one of his ſeruauntes, whome after I made

Moſt Traiterouſly to ſmite of his head,

As hée laye a ſléepe with his owne ſworde or blade.

And ſo tooke his Treaſure, and to the Seas wée fled,

There leauing my Huſband wounded to dead.

This Squiers name, that did this wicked déede,

Melchis was called a ſtoute worthy Knight:

In Rauenne there became to procéede

A mighty Prince of great power and might.

Yet for all this, with him ſtraight I tyred,

For eache daye on my filthy luſt beaſtly deſired.

Were hée Gentle or ſimple, I ſpared none,

Of one aboue another, I made no ſtore:

For ſhame, Feare, and Grace, from mee were quite gone,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=57)I paſte not a
pinne were they Ritche or poor [...]:

My filthy fleſhe ſo wickedly was ſette,

That all was but fiſhe that came to the nett [...].

But among al the reſt one noble man,

That then of Rauenne was a gouernour:

As ofte as pleaſed him nowe and than,

Had greate delite to holde mée as Paramour.

On whome a while my flitting minde did runne,

As erſt it had of Melchis latelye done.

For whoſe ſake Melchis my huſbande newe,

Through treaſon framde, and vile Duplicitye,

Within my heart his death, I gan to brewe,

Becauſe at large I thought to liue more viciouſly.

To worke the feate by ſleyght, and ſcape the blame,

I priuily poyſoned wine, & made him drinke the ſame.

To the middes dranke Melchis this Cup of Wine,

Which made him looke with colour dead and wan:

But when hee ſawe that Traytreſſe heart of mine,

With much a doe theſe wordes declare hée gan

With rufull face. Thou wicked wretche (quoth hée)

Albonius thou through Treaſon ſlew, ſo haſt done me.

And there withall his hande vppon mée layde,

And vrged me in  [...]angre of my head,

To drinke the tother halfe before I ſtaide,

Which was no ſoner done but downe wee both fell dead,

And thus at miſchiefe ended I my life,

That ſometime was a Famous Princes Wife.

Loe Morpheus, this is the ſumme and all:

Nowe thou knoweſt my name, my wicked fact and déede:

I praye thée yet what haſte ſoeuer fall,

Warne women of the like, it's not a litle néede.

To theyr Spowſed mates, bid them bée meeke & true,

Or tell them elſe confution doth enſue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=57)

Bid them méeken theyr mindes with al due obedience,

And to humble them ſelues to theyr Huſbandes alwaies:

For it is commonlye ſéene by auncient experience,

That none but the wilful doe catche their decaies.

Though wylye in working the craftie Dames bée,

Them ſelues they deceaue in the  [...]oe you may ſee.

And now farewel Morpheus thou wotes what I meane,

Thou mayeſt ſay thou met with a miſerable wight:

That firſt procured her Huſband to bee ſlaine,

And alſo poyſoned a valiaunt Knight.

This was my acte and the cauſe of my fall,

Quite murther, for murther, my ſelfe laſte of all.

And with theſe wordes a Tyraunt with a hooke,

In tender ſides, the mortall woundes hée printes,

Another on a forke this wicked woman ſhooke,

Nothing preuailed leſſe, then for to crye with plaintes

A thouſande naked blades in her they thruſt,

And ſtill (quoth they) this woman was vniuſt.

Mée thought it was a feareful ſight to ſée,

Pitye wrought ſuch griefe in mee, I wept for woe:

I thought that in a womans heart, had layen more pitye,

Then for to ſerue her faithfull Huſband ſo.

Why doſt thou muſe (quoth Morpheus) then to mée?

This is the iuſt reward of them that wicked bée.

The night is almoſt ſpent (quoth hée) come let vs goe,

The leaſt of theyr paines paſſeth our helpe:

I will bring thee ſafe to the place thou came fro,

Bee not doubtful of Cerberus that fowle curriſhe whelpe,

Nor of any that is heare, I will anſwere them all:

Bee of good cheere what euer doe be fall.

Thus wandering backe, wée looked about,

And or euer wée wiſt, were at Plutoes Pallaice:

At the which wée heard ſo cruell a ſhowte,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=58)As if they
had all gon togither in malice,

Yet when we came néere them the truth then appéered,

It was but a triumph, and nought to be feared.

Then after a while vpon a ſtage full hye,

An yll faſte yoman a blacke Trumpet blew:

And when ſilence was made, hée proclaymed a crye,

In the name of Pluto for tydinges moſt true.

(Quoth hee) bloodie Boner the Butcher comes here,

That hath furniſht our kitchin this many a yere.

Moreouer (quoth hée) it is Plutos high pleaſure,

That all men prepare in the beſt ſort they can,

Sith he is to Pluto and Proſerpin ſuch treaſure,

To receyue him amonge vs as becomes ſuch a man,

You know what his ſeruice hath bene heretofore,

Looke to your dueties what needes any more?

This ſayde, he departed ſtraite from the ſtage,

And to Plutos Pallace hée then tooke the waye.

But then to ſée both man boye and Page,

To ſet newe deuentions in order and raye,

The halfe to declare, it paſſeth my witte,

I am ſure the like, was neuer ſeene yet.

There was fyling of fire boltes in holes and in noukee,

Headding of daries, and poynting of ſpittes,

Skouring of blades, and bending of hookes,

Mending of fireforkes, and wyring newe whipes,

Barreling of Pitche, Sulfur, and Saltepeeter,

With more then can be deſcribed in meeter.

But for to be briefe ſo willing they were,

That nothing was wanting to ſet out the ſhowe,

As by their dilligence full well did appéere,

No man coulde be more welcome there I know.

Boner (quoth one) Boner quoth another,

Welcome as hartelye as Father or Mother.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=58)

With all thinges poynt vice, and fit for the nonce,

Foorth came Pluto, and Proſerpin the Quéene,

To méete Boner the ſucker of ſoules, fleſh, and bones,

In ſuch order and ſorte as hath not bene ſéene.

I ſhall make a deſcription as nie as I can,

How they went in order to méete him eche man.

Firſt two and two came marching togither,

With a Pickeforke or Fleſhooke in euery fiſt,

A blacke banner diſplayed that wauered in the weather,

Which obſcured the light with darcke ſtinking miſt.

Yll faſte Trumpiters a number there were,

From whoſe mouthes flewe a thunder odible to here.

The number I knew not ſo many there were,

But braue and fine they were out of doubt:

In hattes like hiues, and hoaſe bumde with heare

With rough courlde heades, they looked full ſtout,

They were ſo luſtie they ſeemde to be cutters,

For they made it tentimes as bigge as ſwarfe Rutters.

Next after theſe there came in a raye,

By heapes whole ſwarmes of Plutos nobilitie,

Which did ride vpon Beares that did gape for their praye,

That alwayes were fed with the ſpoyle of ſimplicitie,

About their neckes hang double chaynes of golde▪

But to aſke their names I durſt not be bolde.

Then came his Chapleins by two and by thrée,

And after them followed the great Uicare of all,

And on his heade a triple Crowne ware hée,

Arayed in robes that were full Pontificall,

On a ramping Lyon that gaped full wide,

This greaſie Prelate that preſent did ride.

And then followed Pluto and Proſerpin his Quéene,

Upon as ſtraunge horſes as euer I ſee,

For like the hote gleydes glowed their eine,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=59)Mightie and
monſtrous, long, large, and hie

With a number of Lordes, and Ladies alſo,

Came after in order, beſide other moe.

Cerberus was taught in the Porters warde,

The gutes were ſet open againſt Boner came,

Of Morpheus, and mee no man tooke regarde,

Their minde ranne ſo much of this noble man.

By meanes whereof without more a doe,

We gate out o'th gates or any man knewe.

Being out of the gates we ſcaled a rocke,

To ſee if wee might there ſpie Boner comming,

Who in deede appeared in ſight with a flocke,

That came like Bedlems hedlong then running.

Himſelfe led the way like a Champion ſtoute,

On a Dragons backe that ſpoylde rounde aboute.

He kept no order nor the companie that he brought,

For headelong came reeling both olde and young,

As thicke as hayleſtones, a man woulde haue thought,

Whereof ſome cryed, and otherſome ſoung.

But downe the hyll one and other came tumbling,

With Sancta Maria, I hearde them faſt mumbling.

A Banner was borne with red all to ſpotted,

Before this butcher that pittie was to ſée,

Whoſe armes in the middes was rufully blotted,

With the bloode of Martires whome he cauſed to die.

And in the ſhielde painted as plaine did appeere,

An innocent Lambe, a cruell Woolfe, and a Beare.

In a fielde all blacke, on the other ſide his flagge,

Was depainted a fagot that glowed like a gleede,

And a bludd [...]e hande with a ſworde that did bragge,

Gainſt all that profeſt Chriſtes Goſpell in déede.

With a poaſie that threatned both aged and young,

To be léeue in his lore, or elſe howe their tongue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=59)

But then to ſée what a méeting there was,

Betwéene Pluto, Proſerpin, and Boner that time,

For want of ſkill I muſt let it paſſe,

I cannot mention th'one halfe in this rime.

(No diſpleaſure to the Pope) if himſelfe had bene there,

It had not beene poſſible to made him better cheare.

Mary what they ſayd, that, wée did not know,

But there was for ioye ſuch colling and kiſſing:

Some laught that teeth a foote long they did ſhow,

And clawde eache other by the pate without miſſing.

To ſee the triumph made with fleſhhookes & ſpits,

Had bene able to haue brought a man from his wits.

For thunder and lightning flew fizing about.

Dartes and firebrandes walkt here and there,

Bonfiers were made in all hell throughout,

For ioye that Boner was comming ſo néere.

Whoſe face I frayde leaſt he ſhoulde haue ſpide me,

For when he was liuing he might not abide me.

Behinde Morpheus I crept, till they marched by,

And were paſt as farre as Cerberus warde,

But when they were within we hearde ſuch a crye,

As among all the ſorrowes before I not hearde.

They ſet bell on fire with making a feaſt,

And all was to welcome this lately come geſt.

What was Boners Buſineſſe that I doe not knows▪

Peraduenture he went to fetche ſoules away thence.

But iudge as you liſt therein yea or no,

I would not be with him for all the Popes pence.

But if Boners babes doe thinke that I lie,

Then let them go thither the truth for to trie.

❧ The ende of the Rewarde of VVickedneſſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=60)

## 3\. ❧ Retourning from Plutos Kingdome, To Noble Helicon: The place of
Infinite Ioye.

WHen wée from Plutos Pallaice came, and vewed had this woe.

(Quod Morpheus) yet I haue a walke, a litle waye to goe.

For ſith I haue take al this paine, the doleful place to ſée,

My friendes ſhall knowe of my affayres, for that I am ſo nye.

This viage hight I long a goe, performde my promiſe is,

As thou thy ſelfe who eare demaunde, ſhal witneſſe bée of this.

My Ladies lookte for mée long ſince, ſome vncouth newes to heare.

And howe in Stigion flames they ſped, that liuing, wicked were.

Therefore it ſtandes mée much vpon, my promiſe to performe,

For that vnto theſe worthy Dames, ſo firmely I haue ſworne.

It nothing doth behoue (quoth hée) with them to bawke or blooke,

For why they doe from mighty Gods, deſcende of Sacred ſtocke.

Of Mercurie the onely ſayde Mineruas dearlinges déere,

Whoſe mightie Muſe, and learned ſkill, had neuer yet theyr péere.

In Helicon their dwelling is, with Cytheron full hye,

Pernaſſus for theyr pleaſure haue, when they thereto agrée.

And loe, where (Helicon) appeares of truth a princely place,

Where thou and I, theſe Ladies with, muſt commen face to face.

At which mine eyes I lifted vp: The fore ſayde place I ſée,

Which was mée thought ſo paſſing fine, as neuer thing might bée.

The Redroſe, and the Roſemarye, Inuironed this Hill,

In euerye nooke the G [...]lyflower, him ſelfe preſented ſtyll.

The comely Bancks with Dayſies deckt, and Primroſe out of crie,

The Uiolets and Cowleſlops ſwéete, abought in ſight I ſpye.

With other Hearbes that pleaſaunt were, which did mée good to ſée.

Whoſe fragrant ſmels perfume the ayre, y• from this place doth flee,

The Thruſtel and the Nightingale, with Muſike ſwéete they Pipe,

So pleaſauntlye the Gods them ſelues to heare would much delite.

[...], here doe yéeld the Chriſtal Springs, theyr trickling ſiluer floods,

And there Pomgarnet Trée with fruite, to earth doth veile his buds.

The F [...]lbeard in another place, as browne as Beryes ſhoe,

[...]ſ [...]nes I ſpyed the Orrange hyng, with Quince and many moe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=60)What waſt
that wanted there (nothing) that might delite the minde▪

But hée that lookte (in euery place) the ſame ſhould preſent finde.

In triple wiſe the Arbours caſt, I made of ſwéeteſt Briar,

Mirt with the Uine, that vp and downe the ripeſt grape doth beare.

Of Bore are Turrets dubbed round, & ſtayres by ar [...]e wel wrought▪

Taſcende into the tops thereof, as fine as maye bée thought.

Wherein theſe Ladies ofte doe ſit, this Joyfull ſight to vewe,

For there they maye afarre, beholde what ſtrangers come a newe.

And when wée had peruſde this place, of highe and mightye  [...]ame,

In hexte of al theſe Turret tops, wée ſpied a noble Dame,

Adornde and deckte, in comelye raye, and ſéemely to beholde,

Hir face was like an Angel bright, whoſe hayre that ſteinde the gold▪

Not curld and fruzulde her browes about, but combde in order fayre,

And on her head of Laurell made, a garlande which ſhee ware.

No double Ruffes about her necke, no garded Gowne ware ſhee,

Nor on her handes that ſteinde the ſnow, no ringes there were to ſee.

Hir eyes ſtoode ſtedfaſt in her head, they whirlde not here and there▪

Nor in her face you cōuld eſpye, ought elſe but grace appeare.

A comely Gowne ſhée had vpon, of collour ſad and ſage,

As beſt became a worthy Dame, preſenting midle age.

To whome wée drewe in al the haſte, our reuerence for to vſe,

Whom when ſhee ſaw, firſt word ſhee ſaid, welcome (quoth ſhe). what newes▪

But further or I do proceede, her name I ſhal deſcribe,

And in what order that I ſée, hir Siſters in that tide.

Melpomina, this Ladye hight, the eldeſt of the nine,

That there among hir Siſters ſate, within that Turret gréene.

And euerye Ladye with a Booke, in ſtudie ſate full faſt,

And reading of the worthy actes, that had beene done and paſt.

The workes of Poets all they had, and ſcanning there they were▪

Who was beſt worthy in his time, a Poets name to beare.

And Inſtruments in euery nowke, theſe noble Ladies had,

To recreate theyr Muſes with, and for to make them glad.

And euerye one appareyld like, whoſe face like ſtarres did ſhiu [...],

Reſpondent to Melpomina, In gracious giftes diuine.

Among them were no wanton ſongs, nor Bacchus banequets ſought▪

Nor newe deuice of prancking Pride, nor ſigne of euill thought.

There was no care to purchaſe lande, nor fleeſſing of the poore,

Nor renting Houſes out of crye, nor hording for a ſtore.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=61)There was no
[...]riuing for ſuch pelfe, as worldlinges nowe delite,

[...]om Teltale could not there bée found, that worketh al the ſpite.

Nor Peter Pickthancke beare no ſwaye, for all his craftye fatche,

The Bai [...]fe Laurence Lurcher, there hath nothing for to catche.

There is no Tyrant there, that ſpoiles nor doth y• poore man wrong,

No taking in of Commons is, within that circuite long.

One ſéekes not there anothers blood, his liuinges to obtaine,

No priuie hate, nor open wrath, among them doth remaine.

Hipocriſie doth take no place, among theſe worthye Dames,

Of any Crime it is not heard, that one another blames.

The ruggie blaſt of Boreas mouth, at no time taketh place,

There Ver, and Flora, both do ſhewe theyr gorgious face.

Nor Zephirus doth ſhake no braunche, within that ſacred Hill,

But euery thing in former ſtate, alwayes continueth ſtyll.

Nor Hiemps hath no power there, the flakye Snowe to caſt,

There is nothing that taketh taſte, of cruell Winters blaſt.

And as I ſayde ere while, hawe that wée did theſe Ladies ſpie,

(So what wée ſayd) and they to vs, Ile tell you by and by.

When wée in order found them thus: Haile Ladye Morpheus ſayde,

With Cap in hande I vailde to earth: (They bad mée hele my heade)

(And welcom Morpheus) one and all, they ſayde reioyſinglie,

Why haſt thou bene ſo long (ꝙ they) what newes haſt brought with thée▪

What newes (ꝙ Morphe) newes ynough, aread frō whence I came

I haue performoe my promiſe made, as ought an honeſt man.

You did requeſt and I agréede to vewe vile Stigion lakes,

And to peruſe with wicked ſorte, what order Pluto takes.

And how they are rewarded there, it was your willes to know,

That did delite in euill actes to worke poore people woe.

(Quoth they thats true) & were you there? I came from thence (ꝙ hée)

Then all at once they gaue him thankes, as glad as they might bée.

With modeſt words tell vs (ꝙ they) what ſightes that you haue ſéene

For thankes is all you get of vs, to quite your toyled paine.

But what we can or may be boulde, that honeſt ſéemes to bée,

(To pleaſure you) in any wiſe, we ſhall thereto agrée.

But ſpeake, tell on, lets loſe no time (quoth one) we thinke it long,

Begin good Morpheus (quoth the reſt) and we will holde our tongue.

So Morpheus ſtreight began his tale, and t [...]ulde them how that hée▪

Among a Maſque of merye mates, by chaunce did light on mée.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=61)And howe wée
paſt from ward to ward, & what was done and ſayde,

And when wée came to Plutoes place, among them howe wée ſped.

And whome we ſaw, and what they did, & what theyr ſayinges was,

Correſpondent to the trueth diſcribed, more and les.

But when hée tolde them of the Pope, that Alexander hight,

And of the Seruice that they ſang, and vſed day and night:

And what reſort of Shauelings hée, had with him euery howre,

The Ladyes all on Laughing fell, yea, rounde about the Tower.

Yet wofull for the reſt they were, becauſe they wanted grace,

For very zeale theſe worthy Dames, in teares did waſhe theyr face.

Where at when Morpheus did behold, theſe Ladies woful cheare,

(Quod hée) if I had thought on this, I would not haue come heare.

But ceaſe your dolour yet a while, your liſtning eares lende mée,

And wipe away thoſe plainting teares, which gréeueth me to ſee.

For certs I haue, of woefulueſſe and dyrefull deſtnye tolde,

Of pleaſaunt Pageantes Ile rehearſe, & Triumphs many folde.

In wandring vp and downe the vale, to ſee theſe vglye fightes,

About the place where Pluto laye, wee ſawe great Lampes & lights.

With Pageands playd, and Tragedies, & noiſe of Trumpets ſound,

Yea, Bo [...]fires blaſde, with thumping guns, that ſhooke the trembling
groūd.

Which when we hard, & did behold, we haſted faſt to know,

What was the cauſe, wherfore or why, thoſe trumpets gan to blow.

And comming to the Pallaice Gates, wee néede not craue them why,

For Boner comes with open Iawe, both yong and olde gan crye.

So Morpheus ſet the Tale an ende▪ and as I ſayde of late,

[...]ne ſo as Boner welcomd [...] was, at large di [...]cride the ſtate.

Where at the Ladies euery one, with comely ſmiling cheare,

Laide by their Bookes, & lawght ful faſt, thoſe newes of him to heare

A ha (quoth they) is Boner there? Thats Plutoes Butcher bolde▪

It's Plutoes parte to welcome him, for ſeruice done of olde.

And reaſon good another ſaide, deſertes muſt néedes bée quit,

And ſo they are I doe perceyue, by you in Plutos pit.

Some ſcoſte & ſayd, hee went for Soules, that long in Stigion dwelde▪

And other ſome to preache and teache, a great opinion helde.

But in the fine a thouſand thankes, they yéelded Morpheus there:

(And ſayde) they would deſerue his paines, if able that they were,

And yong man (quoth Melpomina) ſith thou haſt taken paine,

Wée doe confeſſe for recompence, thy debtors to remaine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=62)But muche I
wonder howe thy witte did ſerue theſe ſights to ſée,

Nay maruaile not (quoth Morpheus then) al while he was with mée.

But otherwyſe in deede (not hée) nor any mortall man,

That could or might at any time, Phlegetons fiers ſcan.

Thats true, but whats his name (quoth one) hee lookes with muſing moode:

He is (quoth Morpheus) towards you al, and ſproong of Robins blood,

Whoſe painefull pen hath aye béene preſt, for to aduance this place,

As at theſe dayes, his actes full well, ſhal witneſſe to your grace.

And certainelye his chirping tongue, delites to bawke no truth,

But plaine ſong partes each where doth ſing, as well to age as youth.

Therfore ſith I had promiſe made, this vglye place to ſée,

Mée thought a fitter man to take, I could not finde then hée.

(Quoth Vranye) with ſéemely lookes, Good ſir yee ſaye full true.

For had you not ſome bodye take, no man had knowne but you.

And thē your la [...]er had béen loſt, which now great thanks doth craue.

Nor the reward had beene knowen, that wicked people haue.

And ſith you light vpon our friende, ten times the gladder wée.

To warning of the reſt we truſt, theſe newes in Print to ſée.

And with theſe words they tooke their bookes, frō Turret ſtraight diſ­cend,

With one accord they chargde me al, to haſt y• this were pend.

In verſe (quoth Clio) pithilye according to your Dreame,

We charge you that to al the world, your pen doe ſtraight proclaime,

And the Rewarde of wickedneſſe your Booke ſhall haue to name,

No better title can bée founde to grée vnto the ſame.

But when I hard theſe woordes in déede, ſo full of care I was,

That when I ſhould haue aunſwere made, no word from mée coulde pas.

My wits were waſt, my ſence was fled, and ſtil I ſtoode amaſde,

Like Hart before the Hounde afright, or Birde in pitfall daſde.

And what to ſay I read [...]es was, they gaue ſo ſtraight a charge,

Yet at a venture by and by, theſe wordes I ſpake at large.

Madames (quoth I) my willing mind aye alwaies yours hath béene,

Although the groſeneſſe of my head, deſeru'de no praiſe to winne.

And more then twentye times aſhamde, aſſuredlye I am,

That any of my barren workes, your learned eyes ſhoulde ſcan,

Apollos prudent worthie ſkill, nor Pallas actiue feates,

(I neuer knew) to promiſe this, how ſhall I pay my debtes?

My ſillie eares Mineruas voyce could neuer vnderſtande,

Alas good Ladies woulde you I ſhoulde take this worke in hande?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=62)If Caliope
rulde my pen, and did thereto agrée,

Then ſhoulde you well and eaſie ſpie at all no fault in mée.

And ſith as yet I neuer taſte, your milke of ſacred breſt,

I doe beſéeche you euerie one, forget your laſt requeſt.

And place ſome other in my ſtéede, this worke in hande to take,

And ſo you ſhall your little Birde a chéerefull Robin make.

And otherwyſe when all is done, for to acquite my paines,

With loſſe of all my labour I ſhall purchas Cherils gaines.

What, will you ſo (quoth one indéede,) by this what doe you meane?

Who might for ſhame denie vs all to take ſo mickle paine?

What neede you to aleadge ſuch doubts, you are to blame (quoth ſhée)

Who want you to aſſiſt you with, when we thus friendelie bée?

And are we not both ſome and all, for to erect the ſame?

Who euer yet tooke paine for vs, but wan immortall Fame?

And then ſhée helde me faſt bith hand, come Siſters then (quoth ſhée)

Come bring your keyes vndoe your lockes, & let this younge man ſee

How we exalte the ſtudious ſorte, whoſe paynefull hande and quill,

Is apt at any time to yéelde their fruites vnto this hill,

I hearing this, vneth one worde, durſt ſaye but helde me ſtill.

And countnaunce made as if I woulde conſent vnto their will.

And ſo they brought vs to the place, that all the reſt excéedes,

Ten times as much as in ſwéete May, the Cowſlops ſtincking wéede.

And méete vpon the mountaine toppe, bolt vp into the ſkies,

This noble place of endeleſſe fame, moſt curiouſly doth ryſe,

Whoſe Turrets here & there doe ſhowe the cūning workmans ſkill,

That firſt by art that ſtatelie place began on ſacred hill.

Epowdered were the Walles abroade, with ſtones of Onix kinde,

The reſt was Chryſtall, finely wrought, that like the Orient ſhinde,

Méete ſquare it was on euerye ſide, as could bée thought in minde▪

Set out with Phanes, that here and there, flew vp & downe the wind.

No doores but one, where on was ſet, nine lockes made for y• nones,

Of fineſt Golde, with curiouſt workes, outcht rounde with precious ſtones▪

And euery Siſter had a key, reſpondent to the ſame,

Which by the vſe of Cuſtome ould, did know theyr auntient name▪

To which eache Siſter put her keye, abroade the Gates were caſ [...],

They had mée come and there he holde, my Guerdon due at laſt.

And as wee paſſed through the Court, the pleaſaunt houſe to vewe,

Amid the ſame I did eſpie, a Laurell where it grewe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=63)Wherein a
thouſande Birdes I thinke, or me with ſwéetelie voyce,

On euery ſpray the littleones ſit, and gladſomelie reioyce.

Upon eche Laurell twigge there hange, the pennes of euerie one,

Whoſe painefull handes their learned Muſe, declared long agone▪

And grau'd in gold was eche mans name, & what their trauels were

For monumentes tacquite their paines, ſhall hang for euer there,

Thus when we had behelde at will the faſhion of this trée,

Theſe Ladies bid vs yet abide a greater ſight to ſée.

And then they brought vs to a place, where all the Poetes bée,

In Pictures drawne by cunning arte, eache man in his degree.

And as their trauels did appéere, to challenge prayſe or fame,

Euen ſo eache one exalted was according to the ſame.

Among a number ſome I knewe, whoſe workes full oft I reade,

That picturde were in liuelie forme, as they had not beene deade▪

The firſt of all, olde Homer ſate with viſage ſage and ſad,

Upon his head of Laurell made, a triple garlande had.

Then Virgill as their order is, with wan and paled lookes,

Was placed in a comelie ſeate, of eyther ſide his Bookes.

[...]uid next to Virgill ſate, as leane as hée might bée,

Whoſe muſing moode in all reſpectes, did with the ſame agrée.

And Chawcer for his merie tales, was well eſteemed there,

And on his head as well ought beſt, a Laurell garland were.

All theſe I knewe and many moe, that were to long to name,

That for their trauels were rewarde, for euermore with Fame.

And looking rounde about that houſe, to ſée and if I might

By chaunce of any countrey men of mine to haue a ſight:

At length I was eſpide there of Skelton and Lydgat,

VVager, Heywood, and Barnabe Googe, all theſe togither ſate.

With diuers other Engliſh men, whoſe names I will omit,

That in that place enioye the like, of whome I ſpake not yet.

And méete behinde the doore I ſawe a place where Cherill ſate,

Arte there thought I vnto my ſelfe? I am like to be thy mate.

By then we had behelde all this, the night was almoſt gone,

Therefore Ile take my leaue of you (quoth Morpheus) euery one,

Thers no remedie but depart, this youngman muſt away,

Beholde where  [...]os ſhewes hir face, and doth diſcloſe the daye.

With al our harts theſe Ladies ſayd: & thanks we thouſands giue,

And what wée may good Morpheus doe, its yours euē while wée liue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=63)With veyled
knée vnto the grounde, my leaue of them I tooke,

Who gentlye bid mée all farewell, and chargde mée with the boo [...]

And good yong man (quoth they) take paines theſe few newes to pen,

So ſhalt thou earne greate thankes of vs, and of all Engliſhe men.

And for our ayde bée ſure of it, gainſte Zoilus and his whelpes,

For to defend thy Booke and thée, wée promiſe heare our helpes.

Loe heare you ſee, howe wée acquite our ſeruauntes at the laſt,

Wée cauſe them liue, when cruell death hath take the vitall blaſt.

And here a place wée will prepare, for thée among theſe men,

That haue immortall glorye wonne, by painefulneſſe of pen.

At which moſt courteouſly, I craude, and vailed with my knée,

And ſayde good Ladies call againe, this charge if it maye bée.

Commit it to ſome other man, that hath much better ſkill,

And better knowth an hundreth times, to ſcale your learned Hill.

Your Honours haue in Th'innes of Court, a ſort of Gentlemen,

That fine would fit your whole intentes, with ſtately ſtile to Pen.

Let Studley, Hake, or Fulwood take, that William hath to name▪

This peece of worke in hande, that bée more fitter for the ſame.

But when they hard mée ſpeake theſe words, they were offēded ſore

Wée ſaye looke to thy charge (quoth they) and let vs heare no more▪

And then they whyrled to the Gate, away they vaniſht ſtraight,

Which when wée ſawe wee there withall deſcended downe the hight.

So Morpheus brought meé home againe, frō whence I came before,

And bade mée laye mée downe and sléepe, for I had traueylde ſore▪

But looke (quoth he) vnto thy charge: as thou wilt aunſwere make,

Forget nothing that thou haſt ſeene, in flaming Stigion Lake.

And then hée tooke his leaue and went, no more I might him ſée,

But with this trauaile out of hande, full ſore he charged mée.

And as a man whoſe ſillie ſprightes, had wandered all the night,

So in a ſlumber waked I, and vp I gat me right,

And called for the merie mates in th'euening that were there,

I meruell where they bée (quoth I) another aunſwerd here.

Alas it was a death to ſée their lookes ſo deade and pale,

And how both purſe, & heade of witte, were ſacte and ſpoilde with  [...]l▪

Some Gaged Daggers, ſome their Coats, when al was gone & ſpe

The Ale wife ſhée would néedes bée paide, before that any went.

Some had ſurfette, ſome toke colde, and ſome for ſléepe were loſt,

(What tho) whē pēce were out of purſe, be gon ſtraight cride my hoſt

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=64)And ſeude his
Geſtes by Croſſeleſie lane, and litle wittame home,

They néede not doubt the théefe byth way, for Money had they none.

Yet ouernight hée that had ſéene, the carping of mine Hoſt,

Howe welcome were his newcome Geſtes, & how the Churle could boſt

Of this and that, and fill the Pots, laye Apples in the fire,

And nowe Ile drinke vnto you all, thus cryed the Aple ſquire.

Come Kate▪ goe Wife, fill bowle againe: Ioane looke vnto the doore,

Pipe Minſtrum, make vs Murth a while, God ſendeth al men ſtore:

That like the Cyrents ſong, my Hoſt playde Synons parte,

And made them lende theyr liſtening eares vnto his guileful arte.

To euery Feaſt hée biddes a Geſt, fetch drinke good Dame ſaith hée,

And make this Gentleman ſome Chéere, yare welcome ſir ſaith ſhée.

And thus they bid you to the Roſt, and herte of all ſhall ſit:

But or you part, I hold a crowne, theyle beate you with the ſpit.

I found theyr fetch, no force thought I, ſith you ſuch Cutthrotes bée,

No more then néede, or force compels, no gro [...]te you get of mée.

And there withall my Hoſteſſe calde: I payde and got mée thence,

No fauour there was to bee had, but for the litle pence.

And then I calde my Dreame to mind, whereat ſtraight way I went,

To put in vſe the promiſe made, The time in ſtudye ſpent.

Tyll I had made a finall ende, of this my little Booke,

To haſte the ſame to Printers handes, al trauailes els forſooke.

What thankes therefore I ſhall deſerue, God knowth ſo doe not I.

But as my meaning is herein, let Fame proclaime and crye.

(Bée as bee maye) yle take my chaunce, as hap ſhal caſt the Dice,

Sith once I knowe yet hytherto, my trauaile paide the Price.

FINIS.

Quoth. R. Robinſon.

## Appendix A

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11139&page=64)

❧ Imprinted at London in Pawles Churche Yarde, by William Williamſon.

[Home](/)

Robinson, Richard, fl. 1574.. Date: 1574  

