---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The Case of Cornelius Bee and his partners Richard Royston, William Wells,
Samuel Thompson, Thomas Robinson, and William Morden, booksellers.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The CASE of Cornelius Bee and his Partners, Richard Royſton, William Wells, Samuel Thompſon, Thomas Robinſon, and William Morden, Bookſellers.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=105543&page=1)

## 1\. The CASE of Cornelius Bee and his Partners, Richard Royſton, William
Wells, Samuel Thompſon, Thomas Robinſon, and William Morden, Bookſellers.

THE CRITICI SACRI, being a Collection of divers Eminent Authors, all or the
major part of which were out of print, Cornelius Bee and his Partners, by the
Advice of divers Learned Divines, did undertake the Printing of them: which
Great Work was carrying on (though with as much expedition as poſſible) about
ſix years, and compleated in Nine Volumes in Folio, An. 1660\. The Authors
which were before ſold for Fifty or ſixty pounds ſeverally, being ſo collected
and printed verbatim, the Price was reduc'd to Thirteen pounds ten ſhillings.
The Charges of which ſaid Work in Nine Volumes, by buying ſeveral Manuſcripts,
and preparing and methodizing the Copy fit for the Preſs, amoun­ted to about a
Thouſand pounds, beſides Paper and Printing.

Upon Conſideration whereof the KING's Majeſty, upon the Petition of the ſaid
Cornelius Bee, was graciouſly pleaſed to grant to him and to his Aſſigns his
Royal Privilege in Anno 1660\. for the ſpace of Fourteen years from thence
next enſuing; thereby prohibiting all and every perſon and perſons to re­print
the ſaid Work, or any part or parcell thereof, within His MAJESTIE's
Dominions, during the ſaid Term, without the Leave and Conſent of the ſaid
Cornelius Bee: As by the ſaid Privilege (printed in the Firſt Volume of the
ſaid Nine) it doth more fully and at large appear.

Notwithſtanding which ſaid Privilege, and likewiſe Acts of Parliament, which
prohibit the reprint­ing of all Books, either in part or whole, without the
Conſent of him who makes a due Entry of the ſame in the Regiſter-Book of the
Company of Stationers at their Hall, which the ſaid Cornelius Bee had done
accordingly at the Coſt of about Seven pounds; one Mr. Matthew Pool hath (in
the ſaid Corne­lius Bee's Abſence in Holland, without his Leave and Conſent)
undertaken a Work which he calls A Synopſis of the Critical and other
Commentators upon the Bible: in purſuance of which Deſign he hath nominated
ſeveral Voluminous Commentators, and amongſt them the ſaid CRITICKS, of which
eſpecially he intends to make an Epitome with the reſt. The dealing with which
Voluminous Authors the ſaid Cornelius Bee and his Partners ſhall not at all
look upon themſelves as concerned in, provided he forbear the Injuſtice of
taking any thing out of the ſaid CRITICI SACRI in Nine Volumes, which they
have printed at ſo vaſt a Charge. Which nevertheleſs if he ſhall purſue to
doe, (beſides the infringing the Right that the ſaid Cornelius Bee hath in
them by his MAJESTIE's ſaid Privilege and the ſaid Acts of Parliament) he will
hazard the making the ſaid Books unſailable, and, ſo much as in him lies,
contribute to the Ruine of him the ſaid Cornelius Bee and his Partners: too
many men con­ſidering what they ſhall ſave by the ſmallneſs of the Price,
rather then what they ſhall gain by the Goodneſs of the Book.

To theſe Conſiderations the ſaid Cornelius Bee and his Partners are forced to
joyn this neceſſary Addition, viz. That in the late ſad and diſmal Fire in
September 1666\. it pleaſed God that there were burnt and conſumed above
Thirteen hundred of the ſaid CRITICI SACRI, which, if reckoned but barely as
they coſt, amount to Twelve or thirteen Thouſand pounds; of which Loſs the
ſaid Cornelius Bee ſuſtains the one half, and his ſaid Partners the other
half. (Beſides divers other Books belonging to the ſaid Cornelius Bee that
were alſo then burnt and conſumed, to the value of Four thou­ſand pounds, all
which lay at his Warehouſe in Sion College near Cripplegate.

Now the ſaid Cornelius Bee (by this ſad Accident being fruſtrated of his hopes
and expectations of reaping the Benefit and Advantage of his great Care, Coſt
and pains) doth intend and hath deſigned to re-print the ſaid CRITICKS in far
better Method then this already done, and hopes and is verily perſuaded that
no perſon whatſoever, that's ſwayed either by Reaſon, Conſcience or Juſtice,
will in­deavour to abridge him of or obſtruct him in that lawful and laudable
way of Advantage, having al­ready ſuffered ſo extreamly in an Ʋndertaking
tending ſo highly to the Glory of God, the Publick Good, the Propagation of
Religion, and Credit of our Nation.

And although the ſaid Mr. Poole, to ſtrengthen himſelf in this his
Ʋndertaking, hath gain'd the Subſcriptions of divers Reverend and Learned
Perſons, to teſtifie the Ʋſefulneſs of this his Work, of which the ſa [...]d
Cornelius Bee and his Partners do not pretend to be Judges: yet they have
reaſon to believe, that he never acquainted them with the ſaid Cornelius Bee's
Right and Intereſt therein, who (he doubts not) would elſe have declared that
they had no deſign to prejudice the juſt Title o [...] [...]he ſaid Cornelius
Bee.

The Premiſſes rightly conſidered, they leave it to the Judgment of all prudent
and ſober perſons, to judge how this Deſign of Mr. Poole's can conſiſt with
that Honour, Conſcience and common Prudence which he pretends to in his
printed Papers.

So that the ſaid Cornelius Bee and his Partners do in reaſon and common
Juſtice expect that the ſaid Mr. Poole ſhould deſiſt from that part of his
Deſign wherein the aforeſaid Nine Volumes are con­cern'd, and likewiſe leave
the Epitomizing or other digeſting of the ſaid CRITICI SACRI to the ſaid
Cornelius Bee's own diſcretion and diſpoſal, ſeeing it evidently appears that
they are abſo­lutely his own proper Right and Proprietie.

[Home](/)

Date: 1666  

