---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# New citharen lessons with perfect tunings of the same, from foure course of
strings to fourteene course, euen to trie the sharpest teeth of enuie, with
lessons of all sortes, and methodicall instructions for all professors and
practitioners of the citharen. By Thomas Robinson, student in all the seuen
liberall sciences.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=1)

NEW CITHAREN LESSONS, With perfect Tunings of the ſame, from Foure courſe of
Strings to Fourteene courſe, euen to trie the ſharpeſt teeth of Enuie, with
Leſſons of all ſortes, and methodicall Inſtructions for all Profeſ­ſors and
Practitioners of the CITHAREN.

By THOMAS ROBINSON, Student in all the ſeuen liberall Sciences.

The tuning of the Citharen with fourteene courſe of ſtrings.

Vniſons | dia paſons | diapaſons.

_[figure]_

Theſe ſeuen with frets are double ſtrung | al the other ſingle | twiſted.

LONDON Printed by William Barley, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Gracious-
ſtreete. 1609. Cum Priuilegio.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT HO­NOVRABLE, SIR WILLIAM CECIL, Vicount Cranborne, Sonne and
Heire to the Right Honourable the Earle of SALISBVRIE, and Knight of the
Ho­nourable order of the Bathe, Thomas Robinſon wiſheth all happineſſe, with
the increaſe of all true Honour and Vertue.

WAlking in my Garden of good will (Right Honou­rable,) I could find no bet­ter
Flowers, then thoſe that ſpring from faithful Loue, bound with the bond of
dutie, to make my labours gracious in your thoughts. Loue to your Honour,
ſprung from the roote of your Lord and Grandfa­thers bountifull and moſt
Honourable kindneſſe to­wards my Father, who was (vntill his dying day) his
true and obedient Seruant. Duetie bindeth me, for that I was my ſelfe
ſometimes Seruant vnto the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=3) Right
Honourable, THOMAS Earle of Exceſter, your Honours vncle, and alwaies haue
taſted of the comfortable liberalitie, of your Honours Father; for whoſe ſake
(next vnder God) I craue your Ho­nours Pardon, for this my bold attempt. Thus
bree­ding (Right Honourable) as it were a protection from your Pardon: I moſt
humbly leaue you to the Lord, and betake my ſelfe to my Prayers for your
Honours health and proſperitie in all con­digne dignitie.

Your Honours to commaund in all dutie. Thomas Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=3)

## To the Reader.

GEntlemen, blame me not although J haue beene ſo long cracking of this nutte,
ſith at laſt J haue giuen you the ſweeteſt Cornell of my conceited Cithering.
For firſt, you ſhall haue ſtrange leſſons with ſtrange tunings for the foure
ſtringed Citharen, the like neuer found out before for ſweetnes and goodnes to
play (euen an organe kind of play) a­lone, alſo leſſons for two to play
together, & withall a third Citharen; (which inuention was firſt begun by an
Italian in Jtaly, but altered, and ſtrings augmented by me.) Con­taining
fourteene courſe of ſtrings: most full, ſweete and eaſie, for the which
Citharen, J must remaine a thankeful debter, and well willer to a moſt kind
and louing Gentle­man and ſcoller of mine, Master Edward Winne, an attendant
of the Right Honorable ROBERT Earle of Salisburie, now Lord high Treaſurer of
England. Thus not forgetting my ſelfe, in remembring my friend, J moſt
louingly bid you all Adue.

Your muſicall friend Thomas Robinſon.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SIR WILLIAM CECIL, Vicount Cranborne, Sonne and Heire to the Right Honourable the Earle of SALISBVRIE, and Knight of the Honourable order of the Bathe, Thomas Robinſon wiſheth all happineſſe, with the increaſe of all true Honour and Vertue.
  * To the Reader.
  * 1\. A nevv, eaſie, and perfect Introduction to the Citharen, ſet foorth both for the learned and them which are vnlearned.
    * 1.1. The firſt rule.
    * 1.2. The ſecond rule.
    * 1.3. The third rule.
    * 1.4. The fourth rule.
    * 1.5. The fifth rule.
    * 1.6. The ſixt Rule.
    * 1.7. The ſeuenth Rule
    * 1.8. The eight Rule.
    * 1.9. The Ninth Rule.
    * 1.10. The tenth Rule.
    * 1.11. The eleuenth Rule.
    * 1.12. The twelfth Rule.
    * 1.13. To tune the Citharen.
  * 2\. For the Citharen.
  * 3\. For two Citherens in the vniſon.
  * 4\. The firſt Leſſon both for inſtruction, and alſo to play alone as a good Proficient.
  * 5\. For two Citharens.
  * 6\. For the Citharen.
  * 7\. Here beginneth Leſſons for Foureteene Courſe of Stringes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=4)

## 1\. A nevv, eaſie, and perfect Introduction to the Citharen, ſet foorth
both for the learned and them which are vnlearned.

Scholler.

GOD giue you good morrow Sir, this is the howre and time, the which you
appointed me to come and keepe, and truely ſir, if it pleaſe God that I profit
(according to your promiſe) by your good inſtructions, you ſhall not find me
vnthankefull.

Maſter.

Welcome good Scholler, and truely I haue great hope in you, for that I ſee you
ſo willing, and withall I ſee you haue allready laide hold of one of the beſt
properties which doth belong to a Muſitian, which is: to keepe time, likewiſe
if your capacitie, be anſwerable to your deſire▪ I doubt not but that you will
quickly proue a good Scholler: come, where is your Citharen and your Booke.

Scholler.

Heere ſir they bee both.

_[figure]_

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=4)Treble.
  * Meane.
  * Baſe.
  * Tenor.

Maſter.

It is well done of you, you haue Gotten a very good Citharen, for it is both
faire and good, true fretted, and eaſie to play vpon. Now in the name of God
let vs beginne, and firſt marke, as your Citharen lyeth before you with his 4
courſe of ſtrings, ſo likewiſe the 4 lines or rules in your booke lye
ac­cordingly, and repreſent the ſame ſtrings as heere you ſee mentioned▪ And
alſo, as the frettes or ſtoppes of your Citharen extend the whole breadth of
the necke of it called the finger boord: ſo euery ſtring hath both the name
and vſe of the ſame fret one ſo well as the other, as if you ſtoppe in the
firſt frette, (with your forefinger) in the treble, then it is b in the
treble. if you ſtoppe the firſt frette in the meane, then it is b in the
meane, and if you ſtoppe the firſt frette in the baſſe, then it is b in the
baſſe, if you ſtoppe the firſt frette in the tenor, then it is b in the tenor,
and ſo of the reſt of the ſtoppes cdef &c. but where you ſee a in any of the
ſtrings, that ſtring muſt not be ſtopped, but muſt be ſtricken open.

Scholler.

Truely this is moſt plaine and eaſie, for a child of 4 yeeres of age that
knoweth but his letters abc may conceiue this as well as one of 20. yeeres
old. But when ſhall I beginne to learne to play a leſſon.

Maſter.

I will tell you when, euen then when you haue gotten all theſe rules
fol­lowing by heart without booke, and alſo can tune your inſtrument your
ſelfe.

Scholler.

why? how if it be this month before I can them by heart? ſhhll I not learne a
leſſon this month?

Maſter.

No, for to learne before you know what, why, and how: were like a Bee moyld in
a barrell of honny, for how were it poſſible for you to play well? with a good
grace? comely without making of anticke faces: except you firſt know a rule,
or reaſon to guide your hand and body.

Scholler.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=5)

VVell Sir, if it be your will that I ſhall firſt learne thoſe rules, before I
ſhall learne to play a leſſon? I am contented to get them by heart, for you
are my Maſter, and you know what is beſt to bee done for a Scholler, write
downe your rules, and god willing I will not touch my Citharen, vntill I can
them perfectly by heart.

Master.

I commend you, doe as you ſay, and vpon my life you ſhall very ſo one at­taine
to your deſire for the Citharen, for if you ſhould get falſe fingring at the
firſt, you ſhould be conſtrained, firſt to learne to forget, before it were
fit for you to remember, which were both a griefe, trouble, and loſſe of time
and charges. Therefore in the name of God marke theſe rules following.

### 1.1. The firſt rule.

Note, that firſt, in ſtopping of your inſtrument, that you hold out the wriſt
of your hand, for ſo you ſhall ſtoppe both the cleaner, and with more eaſe, be
the readier to carry your whole hand too and fro at your pleaſure.

### 1.2. The ſecond rule.

Note, that where, or in what ſtop ſo euer you are ſtopped with your
fore­finger, that there, in the ſame ſtoppe you hold your thombe right ouer
againſt it.

### 1.3. The third rule.

Note, that in what ſtoppe ſo euer you are ſtopped, that you plucke away no
finger vntill you needes muſt.

### 1.4. The fourth rule.

Note, that in any full ſtoppe, that you reliſh with that finger that is moſt
idleſt, and in a ſingle ſtoppe, with that finger that is the ſtrongeſt.

### 1.5. The fifth rule.

Note, that you doe not ſtriue with any ſtoppe, but doe it with eaſe, for
painefull playing, cauſeth many odde anticke faces.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=5)

### 1.6. The ſixt Rule.

Note, that in running of a point, where you leaue a ſtoppe, you leaue a
finger, and where you leaue no ſtoppe, you leaue no finger.

As for example.

_[figure]_

### 1.7. The ſeuenth Rule

Note that, that is ſaid to be a point, when two of one time, foure or twice
foure, all which goe by two and two, and the ſecond is ſingle, or all be
ſingle ſtoppes, as is aboue mentioned.

### 1.8. The eight Rule.

Note alſo, that the firſt of a point is to be ſtrucken downward, and the
ſe­cond vpward, and for that purpoſe where you ſhall ſtrike vpwardes, it is
noted vnder the letter with a pricke or point, as you ſee aboue:

### 1.9. The Ninth Rule.

Note, that you ſtoppe cleane, and alſo ſtrike cleane, in a full ſtroke plumpe
together, not raking or ſcattering.

### 1.10. The tenth Rule.

Note that you leane vpon no finger, but the little finger of your right hand.

### 1.11. The eleuenth Rule.

Note alſo, that you leane lightly vpon the Citharen with your right arme.

### 1.12. The twelfth Rule.

Note, that you keepe alwayes your hands cleane, and your nailes ſhort.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=6)Theſe rules had
perfectly without booke, you ſhall then learne to tune your Citharen as
followeth. Firſt, ſet vp your Trebles ſo hie as you dare ven­ter for breaking,
and let them be both of one tune or ſound, then ſet vp your Menes, ſtopping
them in (c) making them in (c) to agree with the Trebles in (a) open all in
one ſound, then ſet vp the Baſe, ſtopping it in (b) making it agree with the
Menes all in one tune; then laſtly ſet vp the outermoſt ſtringes called the
Tenor, ſtopping it in (d) making it agree with the Menes in (a) o­pen all in
one ſound; this done, your Citharen will be in tune ready for you to learne a
leſſon.

### 1.13. To tune the Citharen.

[...]

Scholler.

Truely ſir, I like theſe Rules very well, and God willing I will not reſt
vn­till I haue them perfectly by heart, but I pray you what ſignifie thoſe
figures vnderneath the ſtoppes.

Maſter.

They ſignifie with what fingers you ſhall ſtoppe, as thus: the figure of one
thus noted 1. is for the forefinger, the figure of two thus noted 2. is for
the ſecond finger, the figure of three thus noted 3. is for the third finger,
and the figure of foure thus noted 4. is for the little finger, and looke
vnder what let­ter any of theſe figures ſtands at, that letter is to be
ſtopped with that finger which that figure doth repreſent, and ſo many letters
as ſtand one right vnder another muſt be ſtricken all together, and ſo the
vppermoſt letter ſhall haue the vppermoſt figure, and ſo the next letter
vnder, the next figure vnder, and ſo the reſt. Now followeth the times either
long time or ſhort.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=6)This figure
here vnder placed, will inſtruct thee more plainely, concer­ning the valuation
of the ſaid notes, the Characters being expreſſed by the notes of Muſicke
thereunto adioyned.

Example.

  * A Semi-briefe.
  * A Minim.
  * A Cro­chet.
  * A Qua­uer.
  * A Semmi Quauer.

[...]

  * A Pricke Semibrefe
  * A Pricke Minim.
  * A Pricke Crochet.
  * A Pricke Quauer.

[...]

Scholler.

I thanke you ſir, all this I ſee is both good and neceſſary, and now, when it
pleaſeth you, ſet mee ſome leſſons I pray you, for I find my ſelfe very ready
and very happy to meet with ſo good a Tutor.

Maſter.

Now you find my words true, that without theſe Rules it had beene impoiſsble
for you to haue profited any thing at all, and now I will God wil­ling ſet you
downe ſome leſſons fit for you to learne, and ſo harder and har­der, and that
better and better.

Finis Thomas Robinſon.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=7)

## 2\. For the Citharen.

### 2.1.

[...]MY Lord Treaſurer his Pauen.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=7) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 2.2.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=8) [...]THe
Galliard to the Pauin before.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=8) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 2.3.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=9) [...]A
Fantaſie.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=9) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=10) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 2.4.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=10) [...]WAdes
Welfare.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 2.5.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=11) [...]POwles
Carranta.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 2.6.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=11) [...]O O
Cupid looke about thee.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=12)

## 3\. For two Citherens in the vniſon.

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=12) [...] [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=13) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=13) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=14) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=14) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=15) [...] [...]A
Iigge for two Citherens.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=15) [...] [...]A
Iigge for two Citherens.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=16)

## 4\. The firſt Leſſon both for inſtruction, and alſo to play alone as a good
Proficient.

### 4.1.

[...]A Ground.  [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=16) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.2.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=17) [...]PIpers
Galiard.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=17) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

### 4.3.

[...]A Pſalme.  [...] [...]

### 4.4.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=18)
[...]PHilips Pauin.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.5.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=18) [...]A
Galiard.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.6.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=19) [...]A
Galliard: Can ſhe excuſe my wrongs.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=19) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.7.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=20) [...]A
Galiard.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=20) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

### 4.8.

[...]A Pſalme.  [...] [...]

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=21)
[...]PAſſamezo Pauen.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=21) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.9.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=22) [...]OFt I
haue forſworne her company.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.10.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=22)
[...]GALliard to the Quadron Pauin.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.11.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=23) [...]AN
Almaine.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.12.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=23) [...]A
French Toy:  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.13.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=24)
[...]EXcuſe me.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.14.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=24)
[...]RObinſons Ideſsbie.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.15.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=25) [...]AN
Almaine.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.16.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=25) [...]THe
Frogge.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.17.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=26)
[...]RObinſons Riddle.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.18.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=26)
[...]SHepheard ſhoothome.  [...] [...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.19.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=27) [...]IOan
come kiſſe me now  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.20.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=27) [...]A
Pſalme.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.21.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=28)
[...]PAſſamezo Galiard.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=28) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.22.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=29) [...]THe
new Hunts vp  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=29) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.23.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=30)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=30)

[...]

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=31)
[...]SOuches March.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.24.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=31)
[...]WHetelies wheat ſheafe.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.25.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=32) [...]O
Hone.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.26.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=32) [...]AN
Aimaine.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.27.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=33) [...]AN
Almaine  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.28.

[...]I Lift my heart to thee.  [...]

### 4.29.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=33) [...]AN
Almaine  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.30.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=34)
[...]RObinſons modicum  [...] [...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.31.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=34) [...]AN
Almaine.  [...] [...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.32.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=35)
[...]FArewell deare loue.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.33.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=35)
[...]ALexander Chezum his Curranta.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 4.34.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=36) [...]RObar
[...]s Requeſt.  [...] [...] [...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 4.35.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=36) [...]THe
Quadro Pauin.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=37) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=37) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=38)

## 5\. For two Citharens.

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=38) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=39) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=39)

## 6\. For the Citharen.

### 6.1.

[...]WHat if a day.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=40) [...] [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=40) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=41) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=41) [...] [...]
[...] [...]

_[figure]_

### 6.2.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=42) [...] AH, ah
alas, thou God of Gods▪ bow down thine cares diuine  [...]lend Ladies here
warme water ſprings to moiſt their chriſtall eyne, that they  [...]may weepe
and waile and wring their hands with mee for death of my be-  [...]loued
ſonne, alas, alas, alas, alas, alas, loe dead is he, oh  [...]od thou that
[...]guideſt the ghoſts and ſoules of them that are fled, ſend ſighes ſend
ſobs, ſend  [...]grieuous grones, and ſtrike poore Dauid dead: Abſalom,
Abſalom, O  [...]my ſonne Abſalom, my ſpirite with thine ſhall flie, come
death moſt ſweet,  [...]alas moſt ſweet, for now, for now▪ for now, for now I
craue to die to die, to die  [...]I craue to die.

### 6.3.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=42) [...]
[...]NOw Cupid looke about thee, thy Kingdome is decay-  [...] [...]ing, young
men beginne to flout thee, young men beginne to flout thee and  [...]
[...]turne their deeds to ſaying, in men there is no paſſion, loue is ſo out
of faſhion.  [...]

### 6.4.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=43) [...] NOw
Cupid looke about thee, thy Kingdome is de-  [...]caying: young men beginne to
flout thee, and turne their deedes  [...]to ſaying, in men there is no
paſsion, loue is ſo out of faſhion.

Here endeth the Leſſons for foure courſe of Stringes.

_[depiction of cittern]_

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=43)

## 7\. Here beginneth Leſſons for Foureteene Courſe of Stringes.

### 7.1.

[...]PAauana Paſſamezo.  [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=44) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=44) [...] [...]
[...] [...]

### 7.2.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=45) [...]M
North his Nouell.  [...] [...] [...]

### 7.3.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=45)
[...]FAntaſia.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=46) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=46) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

### 7.4.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=47)
[...]FAntaſia 2.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=47) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...]

### 7.5.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=48)
[...]FAntaſia. 3.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=48) [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...] [...]

### 7.6.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=49)
[...]FAntaſia 4.  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1720&page=49) [...] [...]

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Robinson, Thomas, fl. 1589-1609.. Date: 1609  

