---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Four for a penny, or, Poor Robin's character of an unconscionable pawn-
broker, and ear-mark of an oppressing tally-man with a friendly description of
a bum-baily, and his merciless setting-cur, or follower.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=1)

Four for a Penny: OR, Poor Robin's CHARACTER Of an Unconſcionable Pawn-Broker,
AND Ear-Mark of an Oppreſſing Tally-Man: WITH A friendly Deſcription of A Bum-
Bailey, And his Mercileſs SETTING-CUR, or FOLLOWER.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Four for a Penny: OR, Poor Robin's CHARACTER OF A PAWN-BROKER.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=2)

## 1\. Four for a Penny: OR, Poor Robin's CHARACTER OF A PAWN-BROKER.

WE here preſent you, Gentle­men, with a parcel of Beaſts of prey, worſe than
ever A­frick bred; and more Unclean than any that entered into Noah's Ark: yet
Cloven-footed, in imitation of their Syre; and all ſo Superlative in their
Kinds, that each may diſpute for Precedency: Onely for Method ſake, we ſhall
begin with the moſt Slye and Dangerous,

An UNCONSCIONABLE Pawn broker (for there are Conſcionable Dealers in that Way,
that are a Relief and Comfort to the Poor; and thoſe are not concern'd in this
Character:) an Unconſcionable [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=2) Pawn-broker, I
ſay, is Pluto's Factor, Old Nick's Warehouſe-keeper, an Engliſh Jew that lives
and grows fat on Fraud and Op­preſſion, as Toads on Filth and Venome; whoſe
Practice out-vies Uſury, as much as Inceſt ſimple Fornication; and to call him
a Tradeſman, muſt be by the ſame Figure that Pickpockets ſtile their
Legerdemain an Art and Myſtery. His Shop, like Hell-gates, is always open,
where he ſits at the Receipt of Cuſtom, like Cacus in his Den, ready to devour
All that is brought him; and having gotten your Spoils, hangs them up in Rank
and File, as ſo many Trophies of Victory. Hither all ſorts of Garments reſort
in Pilgrimage, whilſt he playing the Pimp, lodges the Tabby-petticoat and
Ruſſet-breeches together in the ſame Bed of Lavender.

He is the Treaſurer of the Thieves Ex­chequer, the Common FENDER of all
Bulkers and Shop-lifts in the Town. To this purpoſe he keeps a private
Warehouſe, and Ships away the Ill-gotten Goods by wholeſale; dreading nothing
ſo much, as [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=3)
that a Convict ſhould honeſtly Confeſs how he diſpos'd the Moveables. He is a
kind of Diſeaſe quite contrary to the Gout; for as that haunts the Rich, ſo
this mainly torments the Poor, and ſcarce leaves them ſo much as a Primitive
Figg-leaf to cover their Nakedneſs. Mrs. Joan, when ſhe is minded to ſee her
Sweet-heart, and Gam­mar Blew-bottle going to a Chriſtening, muſter up the
Pence o'th' Saturday-night to redeem their beſt Riggings out of Cap­tivity;
but on Munday-morning infallibly bring them back (like Thieves that had on­ly
made an Eſcape) to the old Limbus: and this ſo often, till at laſt they know
the way, and can go to Pawn alone by themſelves. Thus they are forc'd to
purchaſe the ſame Clothes Seven times over; and for want of a Cheſt to keep
them in at home, it coſts Thrice as much as they are worth for their lodging
in his cuſtody. When they come in, like other Priſoners, they firſt pay
Gar­niſh, the Twopences for Entrance-money; after this, Sixpence a month for
every 20 s. lent, (which yet indeed is but 19 s. 6 d.) [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=3) that is (according
to their Reckoning of thirteen months to the year) Six ſhillings and ſix pence
Intereſt for One pound for a year; which makes Thirty three pounds, ſix
ſhillings, and eight pence in the hun­dred, viz One third part of the
Principal, and juſt 27 l. 6 s. 8 d. more than the Sta­tute allows; beſides
Twelve pence for a Bill of Sale, if the matter be conſiderable. So that ſince
they never lend half the value on any thing that is brought them, if a Pawn-
broker lay out 100 l. he firſt makes neer 40 l. per Annum advantage certain,
as aforeſaid: And then conſidering how many Thieves, &c. (their chief
Cuſtomers that bring the lumping bargains) never in­tend to Redeem, and how
many Poor are not able, eſpecially ſince as ſoon as the year and day expire,
they preſently diſ­poſe their Pawns, or pretend to do ſo, we may reaſonably
conclude, that theſe Horſe-leeches make Cent. per Cent. at leaſt of their Mony
in a year: And all this by a Courſe tending onely to the encouragement of
Thieves, and ruine of thoſe that are ho­neſt, but indigent.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=4) Near of Kin
to theſe Caterpillers, is the Un­conſcionable Tally-man, but a little more
adventu­rous, and dealing ſo much in Wood, that 'tis ſup­poſed his Deſerts may
intitle him to die on a Leaf­leſs Tree. He is one that Eateth up the Poor (to
uſe a ſacred Phraſe) even as Bread, and yet under a charitable pretence of
ſerving and accommoda­ting them: For he lets them have Ten ſhillings worth of
ſorry Commodities (or ſcarce ſo much) on Security given to pay him Twenty
ſhillings by Twelve pence a week. Then his Wandering Me­phiſtophilus, with the
bundle of Rattles, whom we may call The Devil's Rent-gatherer, haunts them
more diligently than a revengeful Ghoſt does a Murderer, or a tormenting
Conſcience a Tray­tor: And if they happen to fail the firſt or ſecond week,
ſnaps them or their Security, and makes them forthwith pay the utmoſt
farthing; allead­ging, now their former Agreement was void. We have nothing to
do with thoſe that deal according to Conſcience.

There is yet another Pack of the Charitable Vermine, that make it their
Buſineſs to lend Mo­ney by the week. This crafty Extortioner com­monly keeps a
blinde Ale-houſe; and you muſt firſt, beſides a world of Complements, ſpend
two or three ſhillings at ſeveral times, before he be at leiſure, or Money
comes in, or that you can per­ſwade him to like your Security: at leaſt you
get but 18 s. for every 20 s. but muſt give Bond (and him 12 d. for making it)
to repay full 20 s. at 2 s. [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=4) per week; who in
caſe of failure, takes the firſt advantage to be as kinde to you as the laſt
Gentle­man. And ſo by theſe Subtleties, and continual Returns, they likewiſe
make much more than double of their Money in a years time, as by ex­act
Calculation may appear.

Theſe are the Nimrods, the private Hunters in this vaſt Forest of Chimneys,
that draw the Poor into their Nets, and pick them to the very Bone. But the
Bandogs that they make uſe of, are the Bum-bailey, and his Setting-Cur: The
firſt, a kind of Excreſcence of the Law, like our Nails, made onely to ſcratch
and claw; a ſort of Birdlime, where he lays hold he hangs; a Raven that pecks
not out mens Eyes, as others do, but all his ſpite is at their Shoulders; and
you had better have the Night­mare ride you, than this Incubus. He is one of
Deu­calion's By-blows, begotten of a Stone, and has ta­ken an Oath never to
pity Widow nor Orphan. His firſt buſineſs is to bait you for Money for his
(con­founded) Civility; next, to call for Drink as faſt as men for Buckets of
water in a Conflagration: Af­ter which, becoming grave and ſerious, he adviſes
you in revenge to arreſt the Plaintiff, and offers to do it, with or without
cauſe; 'tis all one to him, if he perceive you have money. His Follower is an
Hanger that he wears by his ſide; a falſe Die of the ſame Bale, but not the
ſame Cut: for it runs ſomewhat higher, inflames the Reckoning, and ſo does
more miſchief. He's a Tumbler that drives in the Coneys; but is yet but a
Bungler, and knows [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95646&page=5) not how to cut up
a man without tearing, unleſs by a Pattern. This is the Hook that hangs under
wa­ter to choak the Fiſh, and his Officer the Quill a­bove, which pops down as
ſoon as ever the Bait is ſwallowed. Though differing in degree, they are both
much of a Complexion, onely the Teeth of this latter are more ſharp, and he
more hungry, becauſe he does but ſnap, and hath not his full half-ſhare of the
Booty. A main part of his Office is to ſwear and bluſter at their trembling
Priſoners, and cry, Confound us, why do we wait? let's Shop him: whilſt the
other meekly replies, Jack, be patient; 'tis a civil Gentleman, and I know
will conſider us: which Species of Wheedling in Terms of their Art, is called
Sweeten and Pinch. The Eyes of theſe Wolves are as quick in their Head, as a
Cut-purſes in a Throng; and as nimble are they at their Buſineſs, as an Hang-
man at an Exe­cution. They'll court a broken Pate to heal it with a Plaister
of Green-wax, and ſuck more ſilver out of a Wound than a Surgeon. Yet as theſe
Eels are generally bred out of the Mud of a Ban­krupt, ſo they commonly die
with their Guts ript up, or are decently run through the Lungs; and as they
liv'd hated, die unpitied. We ſpeak here of thoſe onely that abuſe the
Intentions of the Law, and act Oppreſſion under the colour of ſerving common
Juſtice.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1678  

