---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The peoples plea for the exercise of prophesie. Against master John Yates
his monopolie / by Iohn Robinson.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=1)

THE PEOPLES PLEA FOR THE EXERCISE of Propheſie. Againſt Maſter JOHN YATES his
MONOPOLIE

By IOHN ROBINSON.

1\. COR. 14. 1. Follow after Charity, and deſire ſpirituall gifts, but rather
that yee may propheſy.

RICHT RIGHT

Printed in the year, 1641.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=2)

COR VNVM VIA VNA

## TO MY CHRISTIAN FRINDS IN NORWICH, and thereabouts, Grace, and ſalvation
from the God and giver thereof.

THat loving and thankfull remem­brance, in which I alwaies have you (my
Chriſtian friends) provoketh me as continually to commend unto God your
welfare, ſo to reioyce greatly when I vnderſtand thereof, and ſpecially that
your ſoules doe proſper. And as the proſperity of the ſoule is principally
furthered by the zealous preaching of the Goſpell, ſo hath it been matter of
vnfained reioycing vnto me, to heare  [...]ow God hath of late ſtirred up
amongſt you, divers  [...]nſtruments, whoſe zealous indeauours he hath vſed
[...]hat way, and covering in mercy what is euill (of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=3)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=4) ignorance
and infirmity on their parts (I hope) i [...] their enterance and
miniſtrations, doth bleſſe what  [...] of himſelfe▪ to the good of his choſen.
But as it fal [...] leth out in nature, that the pure waters draw of th [...]
tainture of the ſoyl through which they run; ſ [...] with you it ſeemes, the
pure truths of the Goſpel have ſuffered by ſome, too great mixture with ſundr
[...] Popiſh errours about the Church and miniſterie, i [...] and by which
they are Propounded▪ and this mor [...] eſpecially by M. Yát [...]s, a man of
good gifts i [...] himſelfe, and note amongſt you, pleading the cauſ [...] of
the whore of Babylon, the Church of Rome, a Chriſts wife, and of Antichriſts
clergie, as of Chriſt miniſtery. And as this clergies exaltation is not little
furthered by uſurpation on the peoples liberty which it ſwalloweth vp, and
thereby ſwelleth above proportion: ſo in all his pleading for the one, he dot
[...] neceſſarily implead the other; and as in other thing [...] ſo ſpecially
in the exerciſe of Propheſie, or teachin [...] in the Church by an ordinary
gift, in which every on [...] that is able bringeth his ſhot in due time and
orde [...] for a joynt feaſt of that heavenly repaſt, the word o [...] God.
The argument in his writing (ſent unt [...] mee by W. E. with his conſent, and
that before th [...] Majeſtrate) I haue ſet downe word for word and an­ſwered:
and therewith confirmed what I have In t [...] Iuſtification of Separation
publiſhed, in juſtificati­on of this exerciſe againſt his exceptions and
anſwers [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=4)
which being ſcattered here and there in his large diſ­courſe, and divers of
them divers times repeated, I haue collected, contracted, and ſet in orderly
oppoſition to their contrary Arguments: and that without any the leaſt wrong
(to my knowledg) unto him or his cauſe: as hauing left out nothing in his
writing, which might ſeeme to bring aduantage to his purpoſe.

Now if any ſhall aſke me, why I haue not ra­ther anſwered M. Hall his large
and learned volume againſt me, and the generall cauſe which I profeſſe. My
reaſons are, firſt, becauſe it is a large volume ſo full farced by him, as it
ſeemes he might prevent further anſwer. Secondly his Treatiſe is as much (and
more imediatly) againſt the Reformiſts, and their cauſe in the maine, as
againſt us and ours. Thirdly, the truth requireth not that perſons, but things
be anſwered in my defence againſt Maſter Bernard. Laſtly, I doe put as great
difference between him and M. Yates, as between a word-wiſe Orator, both
laboring more, and being better able to feed his Reader with the leaues of
words, and flowers of Rhetorick, then with the fruits of knowledge, as alſo
ſtriuing rather to oppreſſe the perſon of his adverſary with falſe and proud
reproches, then to convince his Tenet by ſound Arguments: and between a man
ſin­cerely zelous for the truth, and by his ſimple and ſo­lid dealing by the
Scriptures, as M. Yates doth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=5) giving
teſtimony of his vnfained loue thereof, which truth, my prayer to God is, that
he with my ſelfe, and all other ſo ſeeking it, may find and therein ac­cord in
all things.

And for you (my Chriſtian frends) towards whome for your perſons, I am minded
even as when I lived with you, be you admoniſhed by me (which I alſo intreat
at the hands of the Lord on your behalf) that you carefully beware, leſt in
any thing you fall from your ſtedfaſtneſſe: but, on the contrary, grow in
grace, and in the knowledge and obedience of the Lord Ieſus in his whole
revealed will. And let me the more earneſtly exhort you herevnto, by how much
the contrary evill is the more dangerous and common. A man may fall forward,
and in ſo doing endanger his hands and face: but in falling backward the
danger is farre greater, as wee ſee in old Eli, of whom wee read, that he fell
backward, and his necke brake and he died, 1 Sam. 4. 18. And how common a
thing is it for men amongſt you, and the whole land thorow, in their declining
age, to decline in grace, wo­full experience teacheth: there being few old
diſciples to be found, who in their age do hold the ſame tem­per of zeale and
goodneſſe which they had vpon them in their younger times: this being one
maine reaſon thereof that the meanes amongſt you are farre more for convertion
then preſervation: and for birth, then nouriſhment: Whereas they (by the Lords
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=5) gracious
diſpenſation in the orderly ſtate of things) who are Planted in the houſe of
the Lord, in the Courte of our God, shall flourish, yea shall ſprout in old
age▪  [...]d are fat and greene, to shew that the Lord is juſt, and with him
is none vnrighteouſneſſe. Pſalm. 92\. Of this grace he who is the Authour and
finiſher of our faith, make both you and vs partakers alwayes.

> Amen.

Iohn Robinſon.

## Table of contents

  * [Figure]
  * 1\. ARG. I. M. I. Yates.
  * 2\. ANSW. I. Robinſon.
  * 3\. M. Yates. A. R G. • ▪
  * 4\. ANSWER.
  * 5\. M. Yates. ARG. 3.
  * 6\. ANSWER,
  * 7\. ARG. 4. M. Yates.
  * 8\. ANSWER.
  * 9\. ARG. 5.
  * 10\. I. Rob, ANSWER.
  * 11\. M. Yates. ARGVM. 6.
  * 12\. I. ROB. ANSWER.
  * 13\. M. Yates. ARG. 7.
  * 14\. I. Rob. ANSW.
  * 15\. M. Yates. ARG. 8.
  * 16\. •. Rob. ANSW.
  * 17\. M. Yates ARG. 9.
  * 18\. I. Rob. ASWER.
  * 19\. M. Yates. ARG. 10.
  * 20\. I. Rob. ANSW.
  * 21\. The Confirmation of the Scriptvres and reaſons brought in my booke to proue publick propheſying out of office by an ordinary gift.

# [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=6) [[Page
1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=6)AN ANSWER TO THE
Arguments Laid downe by M. Iohn Yates, Preacher in Norwich, to proue ordinary
Propheſie in publick, out of office vnlawfull: Anſwered by Iohn Robinſon.

## 1\. ARG. I. M. I. Yates.

FROM the Commiſſion of Chriſt Ioh. 20. v. 22. 23. all Propheſie in publick is
to re­mitt, and retain ſins: and Chriſt grants this power to none but ſuch as
he ſends, v. 21. and ordains there vnto, v. 22. But men out of office are
neither ſent nor ordained thereunto, therefore in publick ought not to meddle
with the power of the keyes. I know the exception will be this, that many out
of office haue propheſied, the Scripture approving it. I anſwer, An ordi­nary
rule is neuer infringed by an extraordinary example, but ever by an ordinary.
To marry my ſiſter is inceſt; yet in Cain it was no inceſt, becauſe the
example was extrordinary, I may not ſteale, and yet it was lawfull for the
Iews to rob the Egip­tians, becauſe that was Gods extraordinary permiſſion▪
extra­ordinary exſamples, as they make no rules; ſo they breake none: [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=7) but ordinary
examples, muſt euer follow the rule: and if they doe not, they breake it,
Chriſt therefore laying down a perpe­tuall rule of binding and loſing to all
ſuch as are ſent and ordai­ned either by himſelfe immediatly, or by ſuch as he
shall point thereonto, it muſt neceſſarily follow, that any ordinary exam­ple
will breake this rule if it be not framed accordingly: ther­fore I conſtantly
affirme, that no ordinary propheſie ought to be out of office. As for
extraordinary, that can not oppoſe this rule, becauſe it is o [...] an other
nature, and therefore is not to be limited within the compaſſe of an ordinary
rule. Secondly, I anſwer, That all the propheſies out of office▪ were by the
ſecret motion of the ſpirit, which was warrant for all ſuch a [...] had no
calling by office thereunto.

## 2\. ANSW. I. Robinſon.

THat all propheſie in publick (and in priuate alſo) is for the remitting and
retaning of ſinnes. I acknow­ledge▪ but that Christ grants this power to none
but to ſuch as he ſends and ordaines by the Commiſſion given Iohn 20\. 21, &c.
I plainly deny, and require his proofe. He ſhould then grant it to none but to
A­poſtles: for the commiſſion there given, is peculiar conveyed to them
immediatly from Chriſt, confir­med by the miraculous in breathing of the H.
Ghoſt and by them to be exerciſed and diſpenſed principally towards
unbeleevers; of all which nothing i [...] common to ordinary officers, As
Chriſt then gives power of binding and looſing ſins to the Apoſtle [...]
[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=7) there, ſo
elſe where, to ordinary Paſtors. Ephe. 4▪ Elſe where to the whole Church
gathered together in one, Mat, 15. 17. 18. 1. Cor, 5. 2, Cor. 6\. 6. 7, 8 9.
10. And Laſtly in other places to every faithfull brother confeſſing Ieſus
Chriſt, Mat, 16\. 18. 19. &c. and Cap. 18. 15. Luk. 17\. 3. And ſince the
power of binding and looſing ſinnes is onely by way of ma­nifeſtation, and
declaration of the word of God, the Law, and the Goſpell. Look unto whom the
word of God is given, vnto him the power of binding and loo­ſing ſins is
giuen, though to be vſed by divers ſtates of perſons, after a diverſe order,
which order doth in no ſort aboliſh the being of the thing, but only preſerues
it from confuſion.

And where he takes it for granted that the exam­ples for Propheſying out of
office in the Scriptures were extraordinary, as Cains marryng of his Siſter
and the Iewes (the Iſralites, he ſhould ſay (stealing from the Egiptians▪ his
compariſons are without compaſſe, and his affirmations without truth. Theſe
their practices were againſt the light of nature, and morall law (then written
in the tables of mens hearts, and afterwards written in the tables of ſtone) ſ
[...]ue as there was an extraordinary diſpenſation by the Lord of the Law, and
God of nature. But what like is there in this, that a man (out of office)
hauing receiued a gift of God, whither extraordinary, or ordinary, by [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=8) which he is
enabled to propheſie, that is to ſpeake to edification, exhortation and
comfort of the Church ſhould ſo uſe the ſame good gift of God, in his time and
order? What Eclipſe is here of the light of nature or violation of naturall
honeſty? if M. Yates had remembred the Law which forbad men to Plough with an
oxe and aſſe together, Deu. 22. 10. he Would not thus haue yoked together
things of ſo vnlike kinde▪

And for the ſecret motion of the ſpirit by which in his ſecond anſwer he
affirmeth that all propheſies out of office were, he ſpeaketh both that which
is true, and againſt himſelfe. For what were theſe ſecret moti­ons of the
ſpirit, but the Prophets zeal for Gods glo­ry, and mans good, which alſo were
ſufficient on their part, for the uſe of the gift whither ordinary or
extraordinary; whither in men in office or out, it was not material. So that,
for the vſe even of an extraor­dinary gift there was required (at leaſt at all
times) no extraordinary motion of the Spirit. But onely that which was, and is
ordinary to them, and us. God ther­fore, for his own glory, and the good of
his people giuing the gift, whither extraordinary or ordinarily unto a man he
hath a warrant ſufficient from his zeale to Gods glory; and mans ſaluation, to
uſe the ſame gift in his time, place and order. Of which here­after.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=8)

## 3\. M. Yates. A. R G.  [...] ▪

FROM the execution of a publick function in the Church Prophecy ordinary is by
preaching to bring the glad tidyngs of peace and good things to Gods people:
and this the Apo­ſtle ſayes is not warrantable without ſending. Rom. 10. 15.
We muſt feed the flock becauſe we are ſet ouer it Acts. 20. 20 to propheſy to
Gods people is an honourable calling, and none ought to take it upon him, but
he that is called of God as was Aron. Heb. 5. 4. The place of Iudas is called
a Charge. Act. 1. 20. the miniſters are the light of the world. Mat. 5. 14.
Stars in the right hand of Chriſt. Rev. 1. 20. Iohn was a man ſent from God.
Ioh. 1. 6. Chriſt ſent his Apoſtles in the midſt of wolues. Mat. 10. 16. I
haue not ſent theſe Prophets, ſayt [...] the Lord, and yet they ran. Ier. 23.
2. as many as found not their Genealogie to be from Levi (from Aaron he should
ſay) were put from the prieſthood. Neh. 7. 64. All theſe places keep us to an
ordinary rule▪ and for all ordinary prophecying there can be no exception from
it, without an open breach thereof, as for all your places of prophecying out
of office, they are all of them to be vnderſtood of the extraordinary: which
cannot be tyed to ordinary rules. For ſo we should abridge God of his liberty:
but we muſt beware of imitation, leaſt we become licentious.

## 4\. ANSWER.

HERE is a long harveſt for a ſmall croppe, All that can be gathered hence
either by reaping or [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=9) gleaning is no
more then that no man may exerciſe a publick function, or office of miniſtry
in the Church without a lawfull ſending or calling from the Lord, by the
meanes which he hath ſanctified. Which as it concerneth M. Yates well to
conſider of, eſpeci­ally, reckoning (as he profeſſedly doth) his Genealogy
from the Pope of Rome: ſo doth it not impeach our prophets at all, who haue a
lawfull calling for the uſe of their gift, though not ſo ſolemne (neither need
they) as they who are to exerciſe and fulfill a con­ſtant miniſtery and
charge. But for the word Sending, which he ſo much urgeth, it muſt be known,
that as all that teach lawfully, whither in office or not, are ſent by Chriſt
in reſpect of their perſonall gifts and graces: ſo ordinary officers are not
ſent by thoſe, who appoint them to miniſter, as were the ex­traordinary.
Apoſtles ſent by Chriſt, who appointed them. Sending importeth a paſſing of
the ſent from the ſender to an other, and ſo the Apoſtles were ſent by Chriſt
to preach the Goſpell to the Iewes and Gentiles: but ſo are not Paſtors ſent
by the Church (which calleth them) vnto others, but by her ap­poynted to
miniſter to her ſelfe. They who were in their time Apoſtles, afterwards they
might be ſent to miniſter: they who are Paſtors, are ſent by Chriſt, firſt as
members, or in their perſons or perſonal gifts, that as paſtors they may
afterwards be called to mi­niſter. [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=9) And that M. Yates
may haue for the cal­  [...]ng of our prophets, whereon to inſiſt, thus we
pra­  [...]ſe. After the exerciſe of the publick miniſtery ended,  [...]
Rulers in the Church, do publickly exhort, and re­  [...]ire that ſuch of
their own or other Church, as haue gift to ſpeak, to the edification of the
hearers▪ ſhould  [...] the ſame, and this according to that which is writ­
[...], Act. 13\. 14. &c. where Paul and Barnabas com­ing into the Sinagogue,
the Rulers, after the work of the  [...]dinary miniſtery was ended
(conſidering them not  [...] Apoſtles which they acknowledged not, but one­
[...] as men hauing gifts) ſent unto them, that if they had a­  [...] word of
exhortation to the People, they ſhould ſay

## 5\. M. Yates. ARG. 3.

[...]Rom the true cauſes of propheſy in the new teſtament,  [...] which are
two, either immediate revelation, or impoſition  [...]ands: the firſt is Act.
2. 17. & 10\. 44. the ſecond. Act▪  [...]7. & 19\. 6. A third cauſe of publick
prophecy connot be  [...]n: therefore ordinary prophecy in publick out of
office being  [...]her by immediat revelation, or impoſition of handes, is
[...]wfull, You may ſay the contrary, But it will be without  [...]arrant of
the word.

## 6\. ANSWER,

[...] ▪ this Arg. are ſundry errors Logicall and Theo­  [...]ogicall. And
firſt, why doth he not make Chriſts a thing upon the Apoſtles Iohn. 20\. and
the deſ­cending [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=10) and ſitting of
the cloven  [...]iery▪ tongu [...] vpon them, Act. 1\. cauſes of propheſy as
well as impoſition of hands; Secondly impoſition of hands is  [...] cauſe at
all of propheſy, to ſpeake properly, as M▪ Yates ſhould doe. (affecting the
name of a Logitian▪ It is no naturall cauſe, for to imagine that men took the
holy Ghoſt in their hands, and reached it to  [...] thers, were ridiculous:
neyther is it a morall cauſe,  [...] in which there are propounded no
Arguments, a [...] motiues of perſwaſion. It is indeed no more then ſigne
denoting the perſon; not a cauſe effecting t [...] thing. Thirdly, if it were
a cauſe, yet ſhould it n [...] be made the member of a diuiſion oppoſed to rev
[...] lation, but a cauſe or meanes ſubordinate unto it  [...] vnto the end:
ſince it ſerued to the conveing of t [...] ſpirit, by which ſpirit all
reuelation is, and by reue [...] tion all propheſy: extraordinary by immediat
reue [...] tion, ordinary by mediate: both which they were  [...] the Church,
as is the latter now euen in men out  [...] office, by meanes of their ſtudy,
and Gods bleſſ [...] upon the ſame: elſe could there neuer be lawfull  [...]
fice, Paſtor or Teacher choſen in the Church to  [...] worlds end. The gift of
propheſy comes not by  [...] office, But being found in perſons before, ma
[...] them capable of the office by due meanes.

## 7\. ARG. 4. M. Yates.

FROM diſtinction of ſpirituall gifts, 1\. Cor. 1 [...]. 4.  [...]. verſe
gifts, adminiſtrations and operations. All theſe [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=10) be referred to
that general verſ. 1. Gifts therefore in this  [...]ce muſt be but one kinde
of ſpirituall gifts, and be diſtin­  [...]ished from the other two. The firſt
then are meerly gifts:  [...] ſecond, gifts and offices together, the third,
rather the  [...]ect of a gift then the gift it ſelfe: and therefore the Holy
[...]oſt knowing how to ſpeake aptly, giues more to the effect,  [...]en the
cauſe: the worke then the worker for in truth mi­  [...]ulous workes exceede
all the vertue that poſſibly can be  [...]agined to be in a mere creature: and
therefore it is only a  [...]e beliefe, or faith whereby man is rather a
patient,  [...]n an agent in the worke. Theſe 3. generall heads are de­
[...]ed againe, or rather exemplified by many perticulars: firſt,  [...]ſe 8.
9. 10. all lay downe a kinde of ſpirituall gifts, firſt a  [...]rd of wiſdom,
2. a word of knowledge, 3. of miraculous  [...]th, 4. of healing. 5.
operations of great workes 6. pro­  [...]ying, 7. deſcerning of ſpirits, 8. of
tongues, 9. of inter­  [...]tation. That ſome of theſe gifts are extraordinary
no wiſe  [...]n will deny, yet that I may proue them all extraordinary,
[...]ſider 3 things, Firſt, the cauſe: ſecondly the effect: thirdly,  [...]
ſubject. The cauſe without all doubt is the ſpirit▪ yet que­  [...]n may be of
the maner, and meaſure. For maner, whether  [...] ſpirit alone or the ſpirit
aſſiſting our induſtry, and pains I  [...] alone, becauſe all theſe effects
depend equally vpon the ſame  [...]ſe: and I haue no reaſon to ſay, that
propheſy should be  [...]re by my paines and induſtery, then ſtrange tongues,
or any  [...]er gift: for then I should magnifie▪ the Holy Ghoſt in one  [...]
more then an other. That which is giuen by the ſole op [...] ­  [...]ion of
the ſpirit is more then that which is come by, through  [...]nary paines. I
bleſſe God  [...]or his ordinary providence  [...]ere my hand goes with the
Lord in my ordinary affayres:  [...]t wherein I finde the Lord doe for me
where I had no hand  [...]re I ought to magnifie him much more: ſo in theſe
gifts, if [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=11) ſome were
ordinary, ſome extraordinary, then the ſpirit sho [...] not haue equal praiſe
in them all▪ The orator prouing C [...] to deſerue more prayſe for his
clemency towards Marcellus t [...] all his famous victories, vſeth the maner
of the cauſe to shew  [...] In thy warrs, O Emperour, thou hadſt Captains, and
ſo [...] diers, vertue and valour: weapons and munition, &c, But ſ [...] ring
Marcellus thou alone didſt it, to thee alone it belongs  [...] all the glory
of it: ſo if propheſy in this place aboue all the  [...] muſt come in for an
ordinary gift, then may I ſay, O bleſ [...] ſpirit, Propheſy is thy gift: yet
doe I acknowledge thy ordi [...] bleſſing upon my labours in this: but as for
ſtrange tongu [...] and the reſt, I acknowledge they are thy meere gift, with
all paine, and labor of mine, therefore the greater praiſe I g [...] thee,
Were not this to deminish propheſy in regard of the  [...] which the H. Ghoſt
prefers before them all; and therefore  [...] shew as great power in that gift
as in any other▪ The man [...] then being all one in giuing, the ſecond
queſtion is whit [...] they were giuen in the ſame meaſure. I anſwer, No, Ro
[...] 12\. 6. and hereupon the Apoſtle commanded▪ that one p [...] phet should
be ſubject to an other, and willingly yeeld place  [...] him, that had the
greater meaſure. I leaue the cauſe,  [...] come to the effects, which learned
men cannot diſtinguis [...] will shew you my judgment and follow it as you
pleaſe, To  [...] two firſt gifts is giuen a word: by words wee expreſſe our m
[...] nings, therefore the ſpirit muſt not onely giue a gift, but a [...]
bility and power  [...]o vtter that gift for the greateſt good of  [...]
hearers. Brother it is the part of a divine, to ſtudy for  [...] and fit
words; and indeed when God hath giuen us learn [...] by exceeding great
paines, yet wee finde great imperfection  [...]ant of words. Now here I learn
that the ſpirit of God did  [...] traordinarily ſupply this want, by giuing
unto men excellent  [...] terance of heauenly things. The firſt two gifts are
wiſdome  [...] knowledge, wiſdom is a holy underſtanding of heauenly th [...]
[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=11) [...]ith
aprudent application of them to their ſeuerall vſes▪ Knowledge, or ſcience is
an inſight into divers heauenly truth [...] [...]t wanting that prudent
application: theſe two gifts with a  [...]uitfull vtterance of them could be
no ordinary gifts ſtudied  [...]t by their own pains, but ſuch as the H. Ghoſt
doth imme­  [...]iately inſpire into them. I shovld  [...]e very glad to heare
that  [...]ur Congregations were full of theſe wiſe and underſtanding
[...]en, then I doubt not but you would the ſooner recall your  [...]l
[...]es. The three next gifts, of faith▪ healing, and great  [...]orkes are
undoubtedly extraordinary, and were never to bee  [...]tained, by any ſtudy of
ours. For the foure laſt I doubt not  [...]t you will grant three of them
extraordinary. Diſcerning of  [...]irits was not by ordinary meanes but
extraordinary, as you  [...]ay ſee in Ananias and Saphira, Simon Magus, and
others,  [...]hich were ſeene by an extraordinary Spirit. For ſtrange
[...]ngues. I hope you will not ſtand in granting it, if you conſi­  [...]r
but the firſt originall of them Act. 2. and for interpreta­  [...]on of theſe
tongues that was as difficult as the other: why  [...]ould you now ſtick at
propheſy, which I will plainely shew  [...]as more difficult then both the
reſt. For how should either  [...] or I come to▪ be able to propheſy, except
there were ſom [...] [...]ilfull in the originall tongues as likewiſe the
helps of com­  [...]entaries. and interpretations; You ſee God appointed theſe
[...] meanes to helpe us to propheſie: and where they are wan­  [...]ng, it is
ſimply impoſſible for any man to become an ordinary  [...]rophet: Indeed the
H. Ghoſt can ſupply the want of both  [...]eſe: & therefore will you,  [...]ll
you, it muſt be granted that  [...]is propheſy was extraordinarie For take
away the ordinary  [...]eanes of propheſie and then the thing it ſelfe will
ceaſe. now  [...] may plainly underſtand that the Primitiue Church had  [...]t
theſe means of propheſie, that you ſee wee haue: they had  [...]t the
originall tongues tranſlated, and therefore God gaue  [...]en extraordinary
gifts in ſpeaking, and interpreting them▪ [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=12) ſee then I
entreate you how theſe two meanes beeing extraor­dinary inforce you to yeeld
the other of the ſame nature. Were i [...] poſſible for you to become a
Prophet wanting the tranſlation o [...] the, new and old Teſtament as likewiſe
all interpretation;  [...] with which now through Gods bleſſing the whole
world is r [...]pl [...]mshed; I know you will anſwer, and ſay no: then
Prophe­ſie in the Prunitive Church was extraordinary becauſe the Gentiles had
not ordinary tranſlations and interpretations of them.

## 8\. ANSWER.

IF I ſhould follow M. Yates in his courſe I ſhould rather write one Sermon
againſt another then bring an Anſwer to an Argument, briefly then, as I can,
omitting other things to that which con­cerns directly our preſent purpoſe.
His affirmation that the gifts mentioned 1 Cor. 12\. are onely extraor­dinary,
I do [...] deny: and anſwer his reaſons as fol­loweth. And firſt that
(contrary to his unreaſonable reaſon) we both may & ought to magnifie the H.
Ghoſt more in one gift then another: ſince the ſame Holy Ghoſt worketh more
excellently and for our good in one gift, then in another: And ſecondly (as a
fur­ther truth and more contrary to his ſtrange aſſerti­on) that in ſome
workes of the Spirit, though not here expreſſed, in which the Lord uſeth our
indu­ſtry and care, he is infinitly more to  [...]e magni­fied, then in any
whatſoever the immediate and mi­raculou [...] worke of the ſame ſpirit,
wherein  [...]e uſeth it not. For example, in  [...]ng ſaith and repentance:
[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=12) for the
working of which by his ſpirit, God uſeth our careful hearing and meditation
of his word, the Law and Goſpell, Thirdly, compare wee even ex­traordinary
gifts with extraordinary: wee ſee, that God uſed the induſtry, and pains of
the extraordi­ry Prophets for the reading and meditating in, and of the Law,
Dan. 9.  [...]3 v. 2\. and of the latter Pro­phets, of the former Prophets
writings, As alſo of the Apoſtles in the reading, knowledge, and memory of
them both, Rom. 4. 10. & 4\. 3. &c. [...]ea even of the very heathen authors▪
whoſe ſayings they ſomtime quote in their prophe [...]es or ſermons, Act. 17.
28. 1 Cor▪ 15. 33. T [...]. 1.  [...]2\. 2.  [...]m. 4\. 13.  [...]he like
induſtry, or care not being required for the  [...]ift? or uſe of ſtrange
tongues: and yet did the Ho­ly Ghoſt much more excellently utter it ſelf in
their Propheſies, and ſermons then in ther tongues a [...] M. Yates oft. and
truly aſſumeth.

Vpon verſe. 8 be rightly deſcribeth wiſdom a holy  [...]nderſtanding of
heavenly things with a prudent appli­  [...]ation of them to their ſeverall
vſes: and knowledge,  [...] [...]ſight into divers heavenly things, yet
wanting that pru [...] [...]ent applycation, with the fruitfull utterance of
them▪ [...]ut that theſe could be no ordinary gifts studyed out by  [...]eir
owne paines, but ſuch  [...] the Holy Ghost did im­mediately conſpire into
them, he barely affirmeth; and thinke, ſingularly; but am ſure vntruly I
marveiled  [...]hat he would ſay to theſe two gifts of wiſdom and [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=13) knowledge to
proue that they could not be ord [...] nary: and did expect ſome ſpeciall
reaſons for his  [...] ſingular interpretation: but behold a bare bone  [...]
[...]ffirmation brought by him with out marrow, fleſ [...] skin, or coulour of
proofe. Wherein he is alſo t [...] more blame-worthy, conſidering that be
cannot b [...] ignorant, how the moſt iudicious both at home, an [...] abroad,
doe vnderſtand th [...]ſe two gifts as meant  [...] the two ſpeaciall
qualifications of the Paſtor, an [...] Teachers; ordinary gifts of ordinary
offices: of whi [...] miniſteries amongſt th [...] r [...]ſt ordained by
Chriſt t [...] one Lord of his Church▪ the Apoſtle ſpeaketh ver [...] 5\. as
verſe. 4. of their gifts, by that one ſpiri [...] Which ordinary gifts all
lawfull paſtors and Teachers (ordinary offices) then had, and beſide them,
many others not in office; and by the gra [...] of God, ſome amongſt vs: and
that by the help  [...] nature ſtudy and prayer, and the bleſſing of God [...]
ſpirit therevpon. Which bleſſing of God I wil n [...] deny to haue then been
for degree extraordina [...] upon mens weaker indevours, for their furniſhi
[...] with theſe ordinary gifts: which makes nothing againſt our purpoſe. That
the gife of faith is undoubte [...] extraordinary is ſaid by him but Doctors
haue doub [...] ed of it. See for one, Beza in his great Annotati [...] upon
the words, both affirming, and proueing th [...] by faith is meant an aſſent
vnto the doctrine propou [...] [...]d which is an ordinary gift of the ſpirit.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=13)Where he
makes no doubt but we will grant, that  [...]hree of the four laſt were
extraordinary, he but threaps  [...]indneſſe vpon us, as we uſe to ſay. That
Peters gif [...] [...]f diſcerning was extraordinary in the cauſe of Anna­
[...]ias Act. 5. we confeſſe: but not ſo in the caſe of Simon Magus Acts. 8\.
of whome he iudgeth by his wordes (as of the tree by the fruit) in which he
did  [...]otoriouſly bewray himſelfe to be in the gall of bit­  [...]erneſſe,
to the diſcerning of any ordinary Chriſtian. The gift of diſcerning both of
doctrine and manners  [...]s in a meaſure required of every Chriſtian. Phil.
[...]. 9. 10. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Heh. 5\. 14. but is beſtowed by  [...]he giver
thereof upon ſome more liberally: ſome­  [...]imes extraordinarily, as then
upon ſome in ſome  [...]aſes, ſometimes ordinarily, as both then and now
[...]n all ſuch as had, and haue more Chriſtian diſcreti­  [...]n then other
men.

That interpretation of tongues was as difficult as  [...]trange tongues
immediately inſpired, is not true. They  [...]ho Acts 2\. heard the Apoſtles
ſpeake in their own  [...]ongue, and were able to ſpeak the Iewes language
[...]hen in uſe, might interpret theſe ſtrange tongues  [...]nto the Iews,
without any extraordinary gift: as M.  [...]ates hearing a glorious Formaliſt
ſpeake much La­  [...]ine in his Sermon, can interpret that ſtrange tongue of
his unto the People, without any ex-traordinary gift of interpretation: and ſo
might it well be in the Church of Corinth with' ſome, though the tongue were
given extraordinarily.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=14)Laſtly,
it doth not ſhew plainly, that propheſie w [...] more difficult then strange
tongues, though all we [...] true which he ſpeakes of the difficulty thereof.
F [...] by all reaſon and experience a man then might. a [...] now may, become
an ordinary Prophet for abilit [...] by ordinary helpes; but ſo neither could,
nor can  [...] ſpeake a ſtrange tongue, as there meant, but by e [...]
traordinarie inſpiration, That ſimple neceſsitie  [...] Commentaries and
Interpretations which he require [...] for a mans becōming an ordinary
Prophet, I da [...]e n [...] acknowledge: of great uſe they are, but not of
ſimp [...] neceſsity: that prerogatiue Royall of ſimply neceſſity I would
challenge as peculiar to the Holy Scripturs; which are able to make the man of
God perfec [...] fully furniſhed to every good work. 2. Tim. 3\. 16. 17▪ But
where he ads, that the Primitive church had not  [...] originall tongues
tranſlated, it is ſomething for his, ye [...] and for the Popes purpoſe alſo,
if it be true, and th [...] the Church, eſpetially ſome good ſpace, after
[...] conſtitution, might be without the Scriptures in knowne tongue. But how
unadviſed, and unskilf [...] is he in ſo ſaying; how detracting frō Gods
gracio [...] providence towardes his Church: and how partia [...] on the
Clergies part, and againſt the Commonal [...] of Gods inheritance; For the
thing then. The o [...] Teſtament was wholly tranſlated by the 70
Interpreters, at the inſtance of Ptolemy Philadelphus Ki [...] of Egipt into
Greeke the mother tongue of the Corinthians; [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=14) Ioſeph Ant. l.
12. 2. Iren. l, 3. 24. 25: Corenth beeing in Achaia and Acha [...]a in Greece:
In which the ſame tongue they had alſo every part  [...]f the new Teſtament
then writen, as the moſt was. Which language was alſo ſo univerſally knowne
[...]roughout the whole world, by reaſon partly of the  [...]reeke Monarchy
under Alexander, and partly of  [...]e Greeke learning at Athens, as that the
Apoſtle  [...]ould write his Epiſtle in Greeke to the Romans, [...]ough in
Europe, as underſtanding the tongue ſuf­  [...]ciently. B [...]ſides, the
Corinthians had had Paules and  [...]ther Apoſtolicall mens preachings, and
conferen­  [...]s amongſt them along time, which were uncom­  [...]arible
better then all the commentaries in the world. And for the Corinthians
abilitie for this work  [...] is but reaſon we reſpect this Apoſtles Teſtamony
[...]f them, which is, that they were enriched in all  [...]tterance, and in
all knowledge, 1. Corinth. 1\. 4. In which two gifts as the abilitie for
ordinary prophe­  [...] doth properly conſiſt, ſo to appropriate them
[...]nto extraordinary Prophets, conſidering the gene­  [...]ality of the
Apoſtles ſpeech, and drift, with o­  [...]her circumſtances elſe where
obſerued, were to fer­  [...]er them in uniuſt bondes of reſtraint.

And having thus wiped off his colours of reaſon▪  [...]hat the Apoſtle, 1.
Cor. 12\. ſpeakes onely of ex­  [...]raordinary gifts, I will (by the grace of
God) plainly  [...]hew the contrary, & that he ſpeaks of ordinary alſo

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=15)And
firſt, in teaching, ver. 3. that no man can c [...] Ieſus the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghoſt, he points out gift and grace of the ſpirit, ordinary and common t
[...] all Chriſtians.

Secondly, ver. 5. he ſpeakes of diverſities that i [...] of all the divers and
ſeverall miniſteries ordinary and extraordinary in the Church under Chriſt th
[...] Lord, and ver. 4. of ſeverall gifts for the ſame; an [...] ſo
neceſſarily of the ordinarie gifts for the ordinari [...] miniſteries, then
and now.

Thirdly, from ver. 8. where mention is made o [...] the word of wiſdom, and
the word of knowledge, ordinary gifts of ordinary perſons, both in and out of
office, now, and then

Fourthly, ver. 12. he compares the Church of Corinth to a body, hauing Christ
the head▪ and each  [...] them members for their parts, of whome one had th
[...] gift, another that, given of God, for their mutual [...] good, but by
them abuſed otherwiſe: whereupon I conclude, except there were in  [...]orenth
no ordinary gifts in Paſtors, Teachers, or others of God given and by them
abuſed, that he ſpeaks not of extraordinarie gifts onely.

Fiftly, ver. 28. after Apostles, and Prophets, h [...] mentioneth Teachers,
which were ordinary officers and therefore ſpeakes of ordinarie gifts and
teaching▪ as alſo Helpers and Governours, who what were they  [...]u [...] D
[...]ns and Elders? or take the words as they [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=15) are Helps and
Governments: then which, what is  [...]ow, or was then more ordinary, both in
reſpect of  [...]iniſtery and gift? Whereupon I conclude with good aſſurance,
that the Apoſtle 1. Cor. 12\. treats of  [...]he gifts of the ſpirit, both
extraordinary and ordi­  [...]nry.

## 9\. ARG. 5.

FRom compariſon of propheſie & ſtrange tongues which ar [...] laid through all
the 1. Cor. 14. Verſ. 1. prepheſie is prefer­ed before all other ſpirituall
gifts, which cannot be ordinary: for no ordinary and common gift is to be
preferred before all extraordinary and ſpirituall gifts. D [...] you will ſay,
though it be not more excellent, yet it is more profitable: I anſwer it is
both more excellent and more profitable: for the Apoſtle intends both
extolling it for the end, which sh [...]s how good and excellent it is, as
likewiſe for the uſe, making knowe the profit & benefit of it, That which is
the beſt  [...] of our deſire, muſt needs be the beſt: but of ſpirituall
gifts, propheſie is the beſt obiect of our deſire, 1, Cor. 12. 31. Deſire the
beſt gifs, chap. 14. 1. Co vet ſpirituall gifts, but rather that yee may
propheſie, Second­ly, as it is beſt to our ſelues, ſo is it the beſt to others
as may appeare by the whole chapter. Thirdly, all other gifts are given for
the good of propheſie, and not propheſy for them. As it is the beſt gift, ſo
it is the moſt profitable, as being eſpecially for edifi­cation, exhortation,
and comfort. But it may be you will obiect; Is not an ordinary gift of
propheſie better then the extraordi­narie gift of tongues, or at leaſt more
profitable? I anſwer No: for the tongue, Acts 2. 3. 4. were more profitable to
the Church then ever was the ordinary gift of any man: but compare or­dinary
[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=16) with
ardinarie, and extraordinary with extraordiny and wee grant propheſie the
priveledge.

## 10\. I. Rob, ANSWER.

TO this Argument he himſelf giues a ſufficie [...] anſwer in our name; onely
he ſets it down  [...] thing lam [...]ly; where if it came in all full
ſtrength, would eaſily with ſtand the force of his Argument For where he
ſhould ſay for us, if he ſpeake out th [...] ordinary propheſie is more
excellent then, tongu [...] becauſe more profitable; he makes us to ſt [...]
thus, though it be no [...] more excellent, yet  [...] is more profitable: it
being moſt plaine, that the Apoſtle prefer propheſie before tongues becauſe it
tends more t [...] edification of the, Church according to which reſ­pect
alone wee are to meaſure the excellency o [...] Church ordinances, and ſo to
frame the obiect o [...] our deſire unto them. But what ſpeake I of more
excellent, and more to edification? ſince the ſtrange tongues as there uſed
without an interpreter, were ſo far from being comparible to ordinary
propheſie for any good end or uſed as they were on the con­trary moſt vaine
and rediculous, as appeares, ver. 11▪ 22. 23. That then which he brings for
the com­mendation of tongues from Actes 2\. is nothing for tongues as uſed in
Corenth. The former were as of ſimple neceſſity in themſelues unto the
Apoſtles, for [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=16) ſpreading of
the Goſpell unto all nations, ſo then  [...] there profitably uſed: but in
Corinth ambiti­  [...]ly and profanely abuſed, which M. Yates ſhould  [...]e
obſerved but hath not in his compariſon, Laſt­  [...] [...] add as aiuſt
anſwer to whatſoever he hath ob­  [...]ted, That tongues conſidered in
themſelves, how  [...]htly ſoever uſed▪ are not comparible for uſe and
[...]or excellency vnto ordinary propheſying or prea­  [...]ng conſidered in
it ſelf: ſeing that by it as well by extraordinary ſaying faith is wrought
Rom. 10  [...]ich none can ſay of ſtrange Tongues in them­  [...]ves, without
a ſtrange Tongue both from truth  [...]d ſence: no nor of any other ſpirituall
gift.

And as it doth not appeare by the Apoſtles pre­  [...]ring of propheſie before
tong [...]es, that therefore  [...] propheſie was extraordinary; ſo it appeare
un­  [...] mee by the Corinthians preferring of tongues  [...]for [...] it
that it was but ordinary: & therefore diſ­  [...]arded by them in compariſon
of the extraordina­  [...] ▪ and miraculous gift of tongues: whereas, had it
[...]o been extraordinary, immediate and miraculous  [...]oſt like it would
have caried with it the like with  [...] other, or greater regard, in their
eyes.

## 11\. M. Yates. ARGVM. 6.

[...]ROM exemplification, ver. 6. if I come unto  [...]ou [...] & [...]. I
hope you will grant that the Apoſtle Paul had [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=17) all thoſe
ſpirituall gifts, and therefore speaking of ſ [...] propheſie as he had
himſelfe, he muſt needs ſpeak of  [...] traordinary: likewiſe he had the
knowledge of tong [...] and yet prefers propheſie before all his languages,
thou [...] hee ſpeake more then they  [...]. Now the example in  [...] own
perſon muſt needs ſe [...] for [...] he generall: and therfore if in the
generall  [...] ſ [...]l [...] speak of ordinary proph [...] ſying, and in the
particul [...]r of extraordinary, it wo [...] prove idle; for an example is of
the ſ [...]me kinde w [...] the generall. Again in bringing foure particulers
he p [...] revelation first, as the cauſ [...] of all the reſt; which ſhow
[...] plainly he ſpeaks of ſuch propheſ [...]e,  [...] c [...]me by revelati
[...] for revelation brings  [...] [...]n to knowledge, and knowled [...]
teacheth wholſome  [...], and propheſie ſerveth to  [...] ter it.

## 12\. I. ROB. ANSWER.

I Do plainely deny the ground upon which  [...] builds the whole weight of his
argument which  [...] that the example, and the thing exemplified muſt  [...]
of the ſame kind, How oft doth Chriſt exemplif [...] the ſufferings of his
diſciples by his owne ſuff [...] rings, and the ſending of his Apoſtles by his
fathe [...] ſending of him? were they therfore of the ſame kin [...] their
ſufferings meritorious, and their ſendin [...] mediatorious, becauſe his was
ſuch? But amongſt other evidences againſt him (wherewith all writing [...]
divine, and humane are ſtored) ſee one, fitly paring [...] with this in hand.
The Apoſtle provoking the Gal [...] ­thians [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=17) [...]. 1 unto
iuſt deteſtation of ſuch as preached a­  [...]ther Goſpel amongſt them, takes
an example from  [...]s owne preaching, veſ. 8. But though wee or an
[...]ngell, from heaven preach, another Goſpell unto yov,  [...]n that which
we have preached vnto yov, let him be ac­  [...]rſed. As if he ſhould ſay, I
have preached vnto you  [...]rmerly iuſtification by faith without the works
of  [...]e Law of Moſes: they now preach vnto you iuſtifi­  [...]ation by the
works of the law ioyned with Chriſt,  [...]c. He exemplifieth their preaching
by his▪ were  [...]ey therefore of one kind both Apoſtolica [...] becavſe
[...]auls was ſuch? It is ſufficient for an example if it  [...]gree with the
thing, which it is brought to exem­  [...]lifie in that for which it is
brought. And ſo the  [...]omming of Chriſt to iudgement, is by the Apoſtle
[...]xemplified by the comming of a thief in the night.  [...]. Theſſ. 5\. Are
therefore their commings of the  [...]me kind? or is it not ſufficient that
being moſt  [...]ontrary in their kinds, they do yet agree in the ad­
[...]nct of ſuddeneſſe? So is it ſufficient, if Pauls ex­  [...]aordinary
Propheſying, and the Corinthians or­  [...]inary, agree in the adiunct or
effect of profitable­  [...]eſſe or edification, which thing alone the Apoſtle
[...] his exemplification hath reſpect unto. His obſer­  [...]ation about
Revelation ſeems true, and good in it  [...]elfe: but ſhews not plainely that
for which he brings  [...], no nor hath ſo much as a plaine ſhew for it. For
[...]hat ſhew hath it of proof that he ſpeaks of extraor­dinary [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=18) propheſie,
becauſe it comes from revelation except he takes it for granted, that there is
in th [...] Church no revelation of the ſpirit for teaching bu [...]
extraordinary, or miraculous: which how can I gra [...] or he aſſirme? Of this
more Argum. 8.

## 13\. M. Yates. ARG. 7.

FROM the fruition of ſpirituall gifts. 1, Cor. 14▪ 2. 6. hath a Pſalme, that
is ſome admirable praiſe o [...] God, or doctrine, that is ſome worthy point
of inſtru­ction; or a tongue, that is, can speak miſteries with ad­miration,
or revelations of ſome ſecrets either for doctri [...] or prediction; laſtly,
or interpretation whether of ton [...]ues [...] doctrines, or Scripture: all
theſe muſt needs bee had ei­ther by the ordinary païnes of the Church, or by
the ex­traordinary gift of the spirit, you ſay by the one, and  [...] by the
other: and that I agree more with the ſcriptu [...] then your ſelfe, conſider
but the diſtinction  [...] the gifts, and their admirable matter. A Pſalme
muſt needs conſiſt of meeter, which required art to compoſe  [...] ▪ Secondly
it could not for the matter of it, but ſound forth ſome worthy praiſe of God.
Do you think the corinthian [...] did study the art of muſick, or likewiſe
read ſome admi­rable divine books to find out ſweete matter to make their
ſongs of? Alas, brother, give God the glory, it was no doubt ſome ſudden
motion of the spirit, that did inflame the hearts of beleevers with ſome
worthy matter of praiſing [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=18) God. Doctrine,
that is laid downe by our ordinary paines, is that we uſualy give vnto
Doctors▪ which after long ſtu­dy, and reading the Scriptures is drawne unto
ſome profi­table heads pithily proved, and contrary errours refuted by it. I
thinke in Corinth there were none of theſe Do­ctors, and yet I doubt not but
they were as excellent: for ſuch Doctors as delivered theſe Doctrines had them
after  [...] more eaſie manner▪ even the immediate worke of the ſpirit. I hope
with out any further diſpute you will yeeld  [...]hat the having of a strange
tongue was extraordinary, a [...] [...]ikewiſe the revelation and
interpretation.

## 14\. I. Rob. ANSW.

NOt to meddle with his deſcription of a Pſalm▪ Doctrine, &c. further then
concernes our pre­  [...]ent occaſion: The firſt, a Pſalme was not ſo undoubt­
[...]dly, as he maketh it ſome ſudden to wit, extraordi­  [...]ary motion of
the ſpirit &c. The ſcriptures rather in­  [...]inuate the contrary▪ and that
theſe Pſalmes and ſpi­rituall ſongues were alſo (beſides Pſalmes of David)
[...]nd thoſe then made by extraordinary motion (which will not deny) even
ordinary and coneaved by or­  [...]inary men and motions. Ephe. 5. 18. 19.
Col. 3.  [...]6\. Jam. 5\. 13. The ſcriptures are to be extended  [...]
largly, and to as common uſe, as may be, neither▪  [...] any thing in them to
be accounted extraodina­ry, [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=19) ſaue that which
cannot poſſibly be ordinary which theſe might be For the finding out of ſweet
ma [...] ter they had admirable divine books to read, even th [...] wonderfull
divine ſcriptures; For muſicke, as witho [...] doubt many in that moſt rich
and delicate City we [...] expert in it, ſo what reaſon he hath to require for
t [...] Church ſinging then in uſe, ſuch ſtudy, and art, I ſee no [...] except
it be becauſe he dwels too neere a cathedra [...] Church. Hee may ſee for the
plaineneſſe of ſinging uſed in former times (and before the ſpouſe of Chri
[...] the Church in all her ordinances was by Antichri [...] ſtripped of her
homely but comely attire, and trick [...] up with his whoriſh ornaments) that
which Auſ [...] hath of this matter, Confeſſ. l. 10. c. 13.

For the ſecond which is Doctrine, he but thinks th [...] were no Doctors in
Corenth. But he may well change  [...] thoughts, if he both conſider how that
Church abou [...] ded (in the body of it) even to exceſſe, in all knowled
[...] and utterance, the Doctors two ſpeciall faculties as  [...] ſo how this
Apoſtle in his Epiſtle: c, 12. v. 28\. affirme [...] expreſly that God had ſet
in the Church, amongſt oth [...] officers, Doctors, or Teachers, Beſides that
it is enoug [...] for my purpoſe if there were any in Corinth, thoug [...] not
officer able by ordinary gift to deliuer Doctri [...] which (conſidering the
fore-ſignified ſtate of th [...] church both in reſpect of Pauls miniſtry
amongſt th [...] and teſtimony of them, being in that Citty, which  [...] the
chief of all Greece for gouerment, Greece alſo  [...] ­ing [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=19) the fountaine
of learning, and eloquence) ca [...] [...]ot, I thinke, be reaſonably denyed.

To yeeld you without further diſpute that Revelation  [...]d interpretation
were (viz. onely the immediate work  [...]f the ſpirit, were in us more
courteſie then wiſdom.  [...]or Interpretation, I ſee not but, that either he
him,  [...]elfe who ſpeak the tongue by an extraordinary gift  [...]r any
other man that underſtood it, having ordina­  [...] ability to interpret the
matter delivered) both  [...]awfully might and in conſcience ought ſo to doe
[...]xcept he would quench the ſpirit both in reſpect of  [...]e extraordinary
gift of the tongue, and ordinary  [...]ift of interpretation: but that the
Paſtor or Tea­  [...]her might not doe this by his ordinary gift (which  [...]
yet a fort ſtrong enough to keep us from yeeld­  [...]g) were ſtrange to
imagine. Beſides let it be no­  [...]d how the Apoſtle v. 13. exhorts to pray
for the  [...]ift of Interpretation: Now how a man might pray  [...]r an
extraordinary and miraculous gift, which hee wholy wanted, without an
extraordinary motion,  [...]r promiſe, and meerly upon the Apoſtles exhor­
[...]ation generall, I ſee not, but would learne of him  [...]at can teach me.

## 15\. M. Yates. ARG. 8.

FROM preſent Revelation v. 30 In the verſ going before is laid downe in what
order they ſhall propheſie [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=20) even as it was
before for strange tongues: yet here is further injunction and that is of
ſilence, if any thing  [...] more weight ſhall be reveiled unto another: why
ſho [...] the other keep ſilence if it were knowne before, that th [...] man
ſhould speake after him; if it were ordinary prop [...] ſying and ſuch as our
paines, and study brought us un [...] then were it fit that we ſhould have our
liberty to goe  [...] and not be interrupted by another, but the Apoſtle up
[...] the Revelation to another even ſiting by injoynes ſilence  [...] the
preſent ſpeaker, which if his Revelation had been ſ [...] died before could
not be any motive, or perſwaſion why  [...] ſhould yeeld to the other, that is
now upon the ſudden  [...] take his place: this were for one Prophet to
diſgrace an [...] ther: but the cleare ſence is to any man that will not wr
[...] gle, that becauſe it pleaſeth the ſpirit to inspire one ſittin [...] by
with ſome more excellent matter, either in regard  [...] the ſame ſubiect or
ſome other, the Apostle enioynes  [...] [...]ence.

## 16\.  [...]. Rob. ANSW.

TO his queſtion why the former ſpeaker ſhould k [...] ſilence if it were
knowne before that a ſecond ſhou [...] speak after him it is eaſily anſwered:
that ev [...] therefore he was to keep ſilence, that is, to take  [...]
himſelfe i [...] [...] time, as being to thinke in modeſt [...] that the cond
[...]its of the ſpirit of God did not run i [...] to his veſſell alone, but
that others alſo might recei [...] [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=20) [...] the
fulnes of the ſame ſpirit to ſpeake [...] ſome  [...]ing further to the
edification of the Church; eſ­pecially ſitting down in ſome appoynted place
which it ſhould ſeeme verſ. 36. and Act. 13. 14. he  [...]at purpoſed to
propheſie vſed to take: and which  [...]der I thinke the Iewes yet obſerve in
their ſyna­  [...]ogues. And where he addes, that if it were ordinary
[...]opheſie and ſuch as our ſtudy brought us vnto, then we [...] [...] fit we
ſhould have our liberty to goe on and not to be in  [...]upted by another,
which he alſo accounts a diſgrac­  [...]g of the former; I would know of him
whether  [...]ere not as fit, & much more, that the extraordinary
[...]rophets immediately inſpired by the Holy Ghoſt  [...]d who could not
erre, ſhould have their liberty  [...] go on uninterrupted? Is not this
without all com­  [...]ſſe of reaſon, that the extraordinary Prophet in
[...]i [...]ed, ſhould not have as much liberty to goe on  [...]ithout being
interrupted, as the ordinary, who  [...]ight Worthily deſerve to be
interrupted for ſpea­  [...]ng untruly or impertinently? although I doe not
[...]ink that the Apoſtle requires any interruption of  [...]e former by the
latter (which were rude) if not  [...]orſe) but onely a convenient ceſſation,
or place gi­  [...]ng to a ſecond by the firſt ſpeaker, as hath been  [...]d.
Now the exception of diſgrace to the former  [...] the latters ſpeaking is
well to be minded, that it  [...]y appear  [...]ow evill cuſtomes do infect
the minde  [...] godly men, ſo as they think it a diſgrace that on [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=21) one ſhould giue
place to another to ſpeake aft [...] him further, or otherwiſe then he hath
done. But  [...] was not ſo from the beginning: but ſince they, wh [...] under
Chriſt ſhould be ſervants of the Church, hav [...] been her maſters, and have
exerciſed this magiſt [...] riall teaching now in vſe, Where ordinarily one a
[...] lone in a Church (divers others in divers places better able then he,
ſitting at his feet continually t [...] learne) muſt be heard all his life
long; thinking it  [...] diſgrace to have another to ſpeake any thing furthe
[...] then he hath done: Which was the very di [...]eaſe i [...] the Church of
Corenth: wherein he that ſpeake fir [...] would take up all the time himſelfe;
whereas  [...] ſhould in modeſty haue conceived, that a ſecond o [...] third
(eſpecially ſeeming provided to ſpeake by ſeating themſelues in the ſame place
with him) mig [...] have ſomething revealed further, or otherwiſe the [...] he
had.

Which Revelation the Apoſtle doth not oppo [...] to fore-going ſtudy (as M.
Yates thinketh) but unto emulation and ſtudy of contradiction: teaching tha
[...] the ſpirit alone muſt be heard in the Church, ſpeaking by whoſe mouth
ſoever. And, that there is i [...] the Church an ordinary ſpirit of
revelation; beſide [...] comfortable experience, theſe places amongſt many
other, do clearly prove, Mat. 11\. 28. & 16\. 17▪ Eph. 1. 17. P [...]il. 3\.
17.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=21)

## 17\. M. Yates ARG. 9.

FRom vocation, ver. 29. 32. 37. theſe ſpirituall men are cal­led Prophets, and
to imagine a Prophet without a calling that which the Scripture will not
endure: therefore all theſe  [...]rophets either had immediate calling from
God, or mediate  [...]om men; or elſe they took it up themſelves: the two
firſt we [...] [...]ant lawfull callings, but this intollerable. Numb, 11. 28.
[...]he ſervant of Moſes ſay [...]s, Forbid Eldad and Medad to pr [...]
[...]eſie: his reaſon was, becauſe he thought they had no calling  [...]hich
had bin true, if they had taken it up without immediate  [...]piration: But
Moſes knowing that it was from God, wish­  [...] that the like gift might be
upon all Gods people: ſo that  [...]oſe were true Prophets for the inſtant by
an immediate call  [...]m God: and the text ſayes, They added no further▪
[...]wing  [...]at as the gift ceaſed, ſo did they,

## 18\. I. Rob. ASWER.

[...]T is true, that ſpirituall men are called Prophets, [...] or rather
Prophets, Spirituall men: what is it the [...] [...] that makes a ſpirituall
man, but the gift of the  [...]irit? and what a prophet ordinary or
extraordina­  [...], but the gift of propheſie ordinary or extraordi­
[...]ry? Whereupon it followeth undeniable, that ſo  [...]any with us, or
elſewhere, as haue the ordinary gift  [...] ability to propheſie, are
Prophets, though out of  [...]fice. In this Argument he hath made a ſnare
wher­with [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=22) himſelfe i
[...] taken unavoidably. Secondly,  [...] affirme that our Prophets haue a
calling which ha [...]e declared formerly not to make them Proph [...] by
condition or eſtate, for that they are by th [...] gifts, but for the uſe or
exerciſe of the ſame gift b [...] fore beſtowed upon them by the Lord, through
th [...] labour and induſtry. Of Eldads and Medads pr [...] pheſying we ſhall
ſpeak hereafter, onely note w [...] in the meane While, how M, Yates, and
rightly, proportioneth their propheſying to their gift as w [...] doe alſo
ours: according to that of the Apoſtle, Ha [...] ing then gifts differing,
according to the grace that is  [...] ven to us, whether propheſie, let us
propheſie according  [...] the proportion of faith, or a miniſtery, let us
waite on  [...] miniſtery, Rom. 12\. 6. 7. They then that haue a gif [...]
muſt propheſie according to their proportion▪

## 19\. M. Yates. ARG. 10.

FRom diſtinction, v. 37. the Apoſtle from the whole Ch [...] turnes himſelf to
their Prophets, and ſpirituall men, she [...] ing plainely, that theſe had
ſome particular place abo [...] the reſt: and he gives them ſpeciall charge to
obſerue the thing he writes to the Church: therefore thoſe were in ſome call
[...] aboue others: and to imagine the contrary, is to run wide of t [...]
current of the whole Scripture: to ſet men in publick place wi [...] out
calling, is the ſame with confuſion and diſorder,

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=22)

## 20\. I. Rob. ANSW.

THis Argument is founded upon the groundleſſe preſumption with the former:
viz. that there is in the Church no lawfull calling for men able to
[...]ropheſie, but by officing them. And for Pauls tur­  [...]ing his ſpeach
to the Prophets. ver 37. it ſhewes in­  [...]eed, that they were aboue the
reſt, after a ſort: and ſo  [...]hey are with us rightly preferred before
others which want that endowment of the ſpirit, by which  [...]hey are enabled
to ſpeake to the edification of the Church.

## 21\. The Confirmation of the Scriptvres and reaſons brought in my booke to
proue publick propheſying out of office by an ordinary gift.

AND before wee come to examine M. Yates his Anſwers to the Scriptures by me
produced, I  [...]eſire the Reader to obſerue with mee theſe two  [...]hinges▪
firſt, that I doe not affirme in my book  [...]hat al the there alledged
Scriptures are meant of or­  [...]inary but propheſie: that the ſame is proued
by them Neither will he (I perſume) deny, but that many  [...]hinges are
ſufficiently proued from a ſcripture by  [...]eceſſary conſiquence, and iuſt
proportion, beſides  [...]he particular properly intended in it. 2. That M.
[...]ates ſo puts the queſtian, as that it is hard to ſay▪ [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=23) ſay whether he
doe mee or himſefe the mo [...] iniury: namely whether the places prove an ord
[...] ­nary gift of propheſie out of office. For, as I do not ſa [...] that
they proue the gift, but the vſe, and excerci [...] of the gift beſtowed by
God whether ordinary,  [...] extraordinary, ſo neither would he haue dinied
(ha [...] he not leaped, before he had lookt) but that othe [...] beſides
miniſters, haue an ordinary gift of propheſy [...] Where the Apoſtle requires
of him that deſires an of­fice of a Biſhop, that he be apt to teach, 1\. Tim.
3. 1. 2 [...] and able to exhort with ſound doctrine Tit. 1. 9. dot [...] he
not therein moſt evidently teach, that the gift and ability to teach, preach
and propheſie, not one­ly may, but muſt, both be and appeare to be in the
perſon to be called to the office of miniſtery? He [...] that is not a
prophet, or hath not the gift of prophe­ſying or preaching (for by his gift he
is a prophet, and by the uſe of it he occupies the place of a pro­phet) before
he be apointed a Paſtor, is an Idol ſhep­herd ſet up in the temple of God:
neither doth the office giue on  [...]o much indeed as encreaſe the gift, but
onely giues ſolemn commiſſion and charge to uſe it.

The firſt Scripture by me brought, is Numb. 11 [...] 29\. Where Moſes the man
of God wiſheth that the whole people of the Lord were Prophets, the Lord
putting his ſpirit upon them.

This place, ſaith M. Yates in his Anſwer ſpeakes; of the powring of the Spirit
in an extraordinary manner [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=23) may appeare by
the occaſion of the ſpeach, verſe  [...]4\. &c. Where he alſo in a tedious
manner (as his  [...]nner is) he proueth the gift of propheſying gi­  [...]n
to the 70. Elders to haue been extraordinary:  [...]hich as I deny not, ſo
neither needed he to haue  [...]oved. But this I affirme, that hence is proued
the  [...]wfullneſſe of ordinary propheſying out of office  [...] men inabled
thereunto. And firſt, as Moyſes wi­  [...]ed that all the Lords people were
Prophets, the Lord  [...]ving his ſpirit unto them; ſo the miniſter may and
[...]ght to wiſh that the Lord would ſo bleſſe the or­  [...]nary endeauours
of his people now, by his ſpirit, as  [...]at they all might be Prophets, that
is, able for gifts  [...] ſpeak to edification. The miniſter which deſireth
[...]t this, enuieth for his owne, and the Clergies ſake  [...]hich Moſes
would not that Ioſhua ſhould doe for  [...]s. Secondly Moſes makes it all one
to bee a  [...]rophet, and to have the Lord putting his ſpirit vp­  [...] a
man. Now if the Lord ſo giving his ſpirit un­  [...] a man, as that he thereby
be inabled extraordina­  [...]ly to propheſie, make him an extraordinary pro­
[...]het, why ſhould not by due proportion, ſuch a  [...]ift of the Spirit
given by the Lord to a man as by which he is inabled to propheſie ordinarily,
ſerue al­  [...] to make him an ordinary Prophet? and ſo by con  [...]quence,
if there be amongſt us any though out of  [...]ffice ſo enabled to propheſie,
or preach what hin­  [...]reth them from being Prophets euen of the Lords
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=24) own
making by his ſpirits gift, and worke upo [...] their ſtudy, and
[...]ndeauours? And if they be Pr [...] ­phets then may they Propheſie: which
Moſes alſo  [...] that place inſinuates: for in wiſhing that they we [...] all
Prophets, he wiſheth as wel the uſe as the poſſe [...] ­ſion of the gift. M.
Yates may ſee a very learned▪ ma [...] Io. Wolphius in his comment▪ upon 2.
Kin. 23. ſhew­ing by this place the libertie of priuate Chriſtian [...] that
are able to ſpeak and teach not onely in ordina­ry congregations, but even in
moſt ſolemn Councel [...]

The next place is 2▪ Chron. 17. 7. where Kin [...] [...]hoſaphat ſent his
Princes to teach in the Cities of I [...]d [...] and with them the Levites,
&c.

M. Yates accounts it a monstrous conceite that th [...] princes ſhould be
publique teachers, which ſaith he wer [...] onely by theyr preſence and
authority to back the Leuites [...] adding that the traſlation is mended by
Iunius an [...] Tremelius &c. but if the Iewes heard him (pro­feſſing the
knowledge of Moſes and the Prophets to ſpeak, ſo they would marvaile at his
ignorance [...] of a thing ſo frequent and evident in their writings with whom
it is and euer hath been a receaued truth that any of their wiſe men as they
after the Scriptures math. 23\. 34. 1. Cor. 1. 20. I [...]. 18-18▪ call them,
may and ought to teach in theyr ſyna­gogues without reſpect had to office:
neither doth the tranſlation of Iunius and Tremelius by any neceſſity make for
him: neither can it be ſet againſt me with­out [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=24) violence to the
originall: from the ſimplicity  [...]here of they do (with due reverence unto
them be ſpoken) ſeeme vnto mee ſome thing to turne a­  [...]e in the 8 ver.
Pagnine, the 70 Interpreters, Ierom [...]d all our Engliſh Bibles carry it
directly to our  [...]ſe. And if the conceit be monſtrous that theſe princes
[...]eached publikely, it is not bred onely in my braine:  [...]e uery ſame
ſcripture having been alledged very  [...]ely by the publick Profeſſour in the
Vniverſitie  [...] Leyden in a ſolemne aſſembly, as expreſly proving  [...]
lawfull for others then miniſters to teach publick­  [...]. And becauſe much
weight lieth upon this ground  [...]hich yet hee thinketh very ſandy [...] and
light, I will  [...]ake it cleare to all indifferent mens indgments, that
[...]eſe Princes, and ſo others in Iſraell, and Iudah▪  [...]ough no Levites,
nor Church officers) might law­  [...]lly teach and preach publickly in the
Temple,  [...]ynagogues, and Cities.

Firſt then, all Princes, Magiſtrates, Indges,  [...]d Governours were bound to
open expound, and  [...]ply the Laws by which they governed, according  [...]
the ſeverall occaſions offred? otherwiſe they ruled  [...] tyranny, &
appetite: which laws for al adminiſtra­  [...]ons even of the common wealth
were onely the written word of God: wherupon I conclude, that if  [...] open,
expound, and apply the word of God, be to  [...]reach, and teach, they then
had not onely power▪  [...]ut charge ſo to doo.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=25)2 It may
appeare what theſe Princes of Iekoſap [...] (partaking of his power) were to
do in this cauſe, which he himſelfe, and other godly kings haue do [...] the
ſum of his moſt pithy ſermon we haue record [...] 2 Chron. 19. unto the
Iudges. verſ. 6. 7. and unto  [...] Levites verſ. 9. 10. 11. as alſo his
divine prayer  [...] to God in the publike Congregation. chap 20\. 5. &c.
Likewiſe the excellent ſermon of King He [...] kiah unto the Prieſtes, and
Levites, in the very Te [...] ­ple, 2. Chron. 29\. 4. 5. &c. alſo of N [...]h
[...]mia [...] with  [...] ­thers, teaching the people the Law of the Lord.
Neh. 10: the Kings, and Princes being as ſhepherds feed the people, as by
Goverment, ſo by inſtructi [...] in the Law of their God Defend wee downe low
[...] to the time of Chriſt, and we ſhall ſee this mat [...] put out of al
queſtion. Do we not read every whe [...] how that the Scribs, Phariſees, and
Lawers did tea [...] publickly amongſt the Iewes; of whom yet ma [...] were no
Levites or Church officers, but indifferen [...] of any tribe, Phil. 3\. 5.
And if it were not the rece [...] ­ved order in Iſrael of old, for men out of
office  [...] ſpeake, and teach in publick, how was Ieſus the  [...] of Mary
admited to diſpute in the Temple with  [...] Doctors; Luk. 2\. 46. and to
teach,  [...]nd preach in the Sy­nagogues ſo commonly as he did; Mat. 9, 35.
Luk. 16\. 17. and how were Paul, and Barnabas, ſitting dow [...] in the
Sinagogues, ſent unto, after the lecture of the L [...] [...]y the ruler, that
if they had any word of exhortation  [...] [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=25) people, they
ſhould ſay on? Act. 13. 14. 15.

But if any man ſhall anſwer, that theſe were ex­  [...]ordinary perſons and ſo
taught by an extraordina­  [...] gift, he ſpeakes the truth, but to no
purpoſe, For  [...]at was that to the order receiued in the Temple,  [...]d
Synagogues, and to the Rulers thereof, who did  [...]t beleeve in Chriſt, nor
acknowledge either his, his Apoſtles authority; but onely admitted them to the
uſe of their gift, as they would haue done,  [...]d did ordinarily, any other
men able to teach: as alſo  [...] rulers of the Synagogues of the Iews do at
this  [...]y.

The third place is miſtaken by the printer, in o­  [...]itting onely one
prick, which was corrected in any Coppies, and might eaſily haue been obſerued
[...] the Reader, For Ier, 50. 45. it ſhould be Ier., 50  [...] 5\. M. Yates.
therefore upon this Scripture refutes  [...]s owe gueſſe, and not my proofe.

The fourth place is Math. 10\. 1. 5. 6. where  [...]hrist calling unto him his
12 Diſciples ſends them to  [...]each the Kingdom of heauen to the lost ſheep
of Iſrael. His anſwer is, that the 12 Apoſtles were called into of­  [...]ce,
and had their calling from the firſt election of Chriſt  [...]ut had a further
confirmation after, & greater meaſure  [...] Gods Spirit to lead them into al
truth, as a Iuſtice of  [...]ace may be put into office, and yet receiue a
further  [...]on­  [...]rmation, yea and greater meanes to performe his pl
[...]. [...] affirme on the other ſide, (and ſhal, evidently  [...] [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=26) it God
aſſiſting mee) that theſe 12 were not act [...] poſſeſſed of their
Apoſtleſhip, till after Chriſts ſurrection but were onely Apoſtles elect, as
you him the Major elect, who hath not the office of  [...] ­jor committed to
him of a good ſpace after. Nei [...] am I herein of the mind with the Papists
(to put Yates out of feare) that Peter was not in office  [...] Chriſt gave
him charge to feed his ſheep Joh. 21, (wh [...] yet I am pe [...]ſwaded never
Papiſt held of his Apo [...] ­ſhip, but of his primicy, and univerſall headſh
[...] or Biſhoprick) but of the ſame mind, whereof h [...] ſelfe is in his
firſt argument, to wit, that his com [...] ­ſion Apoſtolick was actually
conferred upon  [...] ioyntly with the reſt. Iohn. 20\. 22 23.

1 Now if the commiſſion Apoſtolike were but t [...] giuen, they were but then,
& not before actually  [...] ­poſtles, except he will ſay they were Apoſtles,
be [...] they had commiſſion, that is calling from Chriſt to bee. I would now
ſee how hee can ſalue  [...] wound, which he hath given himſelfe.

2 After that the Lord Ieſus had Mat. 11\. 11. p [...] ­ferred Iohn Baptiſt
aboue all the Prophets whi [...] were before him, he yet adds in the ſame
place th [...] the least in the Kingdom of heauen is greater then  [...] The
leaſt▪ that is the leaſt Miniſter; In the kingdom  [...] heauen that is in the
church of the new teſtamēt pr [...] ­porly called, which began not till after
the death  [...] Chriſt who liu [...]d and dyed a member of the Iewi [...]
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=26)
[...]urch. the Apoſtles then being officers of the  [...]urch of the new
teſtament, and Kingdom of hea­  [...], and not of the old or Iewiſh Church, it
cannot  [...] that they were Apoſtles in act, before Chriſt  [...]ath: except
an adiunct can be before the ſubject,  [...]d an officer before the
corporation in & of which is an officer.

[...]. Conſidering the ignorance of theſe diſciples at  [...] time in the
maine miſteries of Chriſt: of the na­  [...]e of his kingdom, his death and
[...]e [...]ur [...]ection,  [...]at. 20. 21. Luk. 24\. 20. 21. &c.  [...]oh
[...]. 20. 9. Mar. [...]. 14. as alſo, how utterly  [...] they were gifts
befitting Apoſt [...]l [...]cal teaching (for which)  [...]eing an extraord
[...]nary diſpenſotion, and that in  [...] higheſt degree) extraord [...]nary,
& infallible revela & direction of the ſpirit was  [...]equiſit, wher with
[...]y were but firſt, ( [...]s it ſeemet [...])  [...]p [...]inckled John.
[...]. and afterwards more plentifully filled at the day Pentecoſt) they were
as fit for an Apoſtleſhip as  [...]vid was for Sauls armour which he could not
[...]eild nor goe wi [...]h.

4\. Beſides, if they had the office of Apoſtleſhip  [...]mmitted to them Mat.
10\. how was it that they  [...]ntinued not their miniſtration in that office;
but  [...]rning after a few dayes to their maſter, continu­  [...] with him as
his diſciples till his death. Chriſt Ie­  [...] did not keepe a company of
none-reſidents about  [...]m for his Chaplins, as M. Yates inſinuates againſt
[...].

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=27)Laſtly,
we are expreſly taught, Eph. 4. 8. 11.  [...] Chriſt  [...]ſ [...]ended on
high, he gaue gifts unto men▪ Apo [...] Prophets, &c. The Apoſtles then were
firſt giuen  [...] tually at the Lords aſcenſion, and Were before o [...]
deſigned to become Apoſtles, or Apoſtles  [...]lect,  [...] not ordained▪ nor
poſſeſſed of any office: and therfore preached, and that with warrant from Chr
[...] without office.

The next Scripture is, Luk. 8\. 39. by M. Y [...] thus opened: Christ hauing
deliuered the man poſſeſſ [...] [...]ids him go, and ſhew what great things
God had  [...] for him: and it is ſayd he went and Preached (that is  [...] be
to their purpoſe) by ordinary paines and ſtudy, he pr [...] ched the Goſple.
And with pitty upon us poore ſo [...] that cannot distinguiſh the publiſhing
of amiracle,  [...] the gift (he ſhould ſay the work, if he diſtinguiſh as he
ought) of preaching; he addeth that if  [...] had minded to haue made him a
publike preacher, he  [...] firſt have taken him with him, and inſtructed him,
[...] then haue ſent him abroad.

1\. Let it be obſerued, that the word uſed by M [...] for his preaching,
[...] is the ſame word which commonly uſed for the moſt ſolemne preachi [...]
that is, by the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, Second [...] Chriſt bids him, Mar.
5. 19. Go home and declare  [...] great things the Lord had done for him, and
had had c [...] paſſion on him, and ver. 20\. he is ſayd to haue publiſh [...]
in Decapolis (Luke hath it,  [...] [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=27) [...] great
things Ieſus had done for him. Which he do­  [...], what elſe did hee, but
preach, publiſh and de­  [...]e the great loue and mercy of God, in and by Ie­
[...] Chriſt towards miſerable ſinners for the curing of  [...]ir bodily and
ſpirituall maladies? 3. Where he  [...]es the pybliſhing of this miracle and
the preaching of  [...] Gospel diuers things, and pitties us poo [...]e ſoules
that cannot distinguiſh between them: as Chriſt bade the  [...]en of
Jeruſalem, not to weep for him, but for them­  [...]s; ſo ſurely had he need t
[...] pitty not us herein,  [...] himſelfe in his ſo great miſtaking. Are not
the  [...]acles of Chriſt ſtoried in the Scripture a maine  [...] of the
Goſpel? and the publiſhing of them a  [...] of the preaching of the Goſpel?
And when M.  [...]s opens & publiſheth a miracle of Chriſts (as this  [...]
did) doth he not as well and as truly preach the  [...]ſpel as at any other
time? Let the wiſe iudge,  [...] is to be pittied. To ſhut up this point, it
is ſayd  [...] 20\. 30. that Ieſus did many other ſignes, &c. and  [...]. 21.
But theſe are writen that yee might beleeue that  [...]s is the Christ, the
ſonne of God, and that beleeuing  [...] might haue lefe through his name. The
publiſhing  [...] of the ſignes & miracles which Chriſt did, is the
[...]ching of faith in his name, to ſalvation: which  [...] man therefore did,
eſpetially amongſt them  [...]ch were not ignorant of the Law of Moſes, and
[...]miſe of the Meſſiah to come: which, by his glorious [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=28) miracles done
by his owne power, and in his o [...] name, he both declared and proued
himſelfe to  [...] Joh. 5, 36 & 10\. 37. 38. And where he adds, that C [...]
gaue this man commiſſion to do that which he di [...], but  [...] mirs who
gaue ours ſuch authority, I anſwer euen  [...] ſame Chriſt, as then
immediately, ſo now media [...] by thoſe unto whome he hath giuen authority u
[...] himſelfe for the ordering of the gifts of his ſpirit his Church. And
ſufficient it is for the queſtion  [...] tween him and me, if it appeare (as
in this pe [...] that Chriſt hath giuen commiſſion to men o [...] office by an
ordinary gift, to publiſh and preac [...] publick the Goſpel of ſaluation.

I doe quote next in my booke, Luk. 10\.  [...] which for that W. E. omitteth,
and leaues out,  [...] Yates thanketh God; but in truth he hath more  [...] to
[...]anke him, for ſparing him a place which ſo p [...] nantly proueth the
preaching of the kingdom of [...] by men out of office: except he can aſſigne
ſome  [...] found office, and the ſame but of two or three  [...] laſting, as
ver. 17. to thoſe 70 there ſent.

We are in the next place to come unto Joh. 4 [...] 29\. 39. which he openeth
and anſwereth with a [...] ration, as the fo [...]me [...] place, wit [...]
pitty and com [...] ſion on this manner,  [...] ſimplicitie, with contr [...]
tion to his owne writing ſimplicity that cannot ſee b [...] preaching of the
Gospel, and carrying tydings of a [...] that told her (to wit▪ the woman of
Samaria)  [...] [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=28) th [...]ngs
that euer ſhe did, is not this (ſaith ſhe) the Christ?  [...]t beſides
ſimplicity, here is contradiction: for ſayes M▪  [...]binſon, and that truly,
a woman is not ſuffered to ex­  [...]iſe an ordinary gift of propheſie in the
Church; and▪  [...]ll the women of ſamaria ſerue your turne that it is law­
[...]ll for men to exerciſe ſuch a gift?

It is indeed my ſimplicity to thinke that the Goſ­  [...] (as the word
importeth) is nothing elſe But glad  [...]dings: and that to preach the Goſpel
is nothing elſe  [...]t to carry or bring glad tydings of Chriſt before
[...]omiſed, then come into the world. It is alſo my  [...]plici [...]y to
thinke, ſince by the tydings which this  [...]man brought, many of the
Samaritans beleeued on  [...]iſt in a meaſure, ver. 39 and that without
preaching  [...] word of God none can beleeve, Rom. 10\. 14. 17. that
[...]refore ſhe preached unto the Samaritans the ſame  [...]rd of God in a
meaſure alſo, and that as truely & [...]ectually as euer M. Yates▪ did to his
pariſhionners  [...]ugh ſhe went not up into a pulpit as he doth. And  [...]t
he may iudge aright of this matter, let him call minde, that thoſe Samaritans
receiued the bookes Moſes as did the Iewes: and as they looked for the
[...]eſſias, or Chriſt promiſed to, and of Abraham: [...]ing themſelues for
the children of the Patriarks▪  [...] true worſhippers of God, as they had
been, ver.  [...] 28\. and being ſo prepared, were eaſily made as  [...]ions,
or corne feilds white unto the Harueſt, ver. 35\.  [...]d ſo this woman, by
declaring unto them that, by [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=29) which this
Ieſus, the ſonne of Mary, proued himſel [...] to be the Chriſt, or Meſſias
promiſed, preached fai [...] unto them moſt properly and effectually, euen t
[...] [...]aine point of  [...]aith then in controuerſie both in  [...] dea
and Samaria and Galil [...], and the countries the unto ad [...]oyning; which
was, that Jeſus was the Ch [...] I ſuppoſe M.  [...]tes▪ hath not ſuffuciently
thought theſe things, and do hope, that in godly modeſ [...]y  [...] will
ſuffer himſelfe to be better informed.

And for co [...]radict [...]o [...], between theſe 2. propoſition A woma [...]
may not teach in the Church, and A wom [...] may teach out of the Church, or
where no Church (as it was in Samaria) it muſt be by other Logi [...] then I
haue learned. But he will then demand as  [...] doth, how this Womans
preaching can ſerue  [...]y  [...] I anſwer, uery well, by good conſiquence of
reaſ [...] thus: If a woman may lawfully teach out of  [...] Church to the
begetting of faith as this women d [...] but not in the Church, becauſe ſhe is
a woman  [...] ſex: then a man againſt whom that reaſon of reſtr [...] of Sex
lieth not, may lawfully teach both without within the Church. Of which
conſiquence m [...] hereafter.

Another Scripture is, Act. 8\. 1. 4. with cha. 11.  [...] 20 21. where it is
recorded how all the Church at  [...] ruſalem was ſcattered abroad except the
Apoſtles,  [...] that they which were ſcattered abroad, went euery w [...]
preaching the word, &c.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=29)M. Yates
anſwereth, that beſides the Apostles which  [...]ere in office, there were
ſeventy diſciples, which Christ  [...]efore his death had made laborers in his
haruest: & ther­  [...]re theſe might preach, or any other that had an
extraordi­  [...]ary gift of propheſie: the one by vertue of his office & gift
[...]gether, the other by commiſſion from the Holy Ghoſt to  [...]xerciſe that
gift which they had receaued in the day of  [...]ticoſt, or any other, But
ſayes your authur, compare this  [...]ace with Acts 11. 19. 20. 21. and the
truth, will ful­  [...] appeare. I anſwer  [...] will fully appeare againſt
yov: for  [...]hriſt charged both his Apoſtles, and likewiſe the 70.
[...]iſciples, that they ſhould preach to none but the Jewes:  [...]nd
therefore it is ſufficient that they had ſo many prea­  [...]ers in office
already by the commiſſion of Chriſt▪ to go [...] [...]orow all thoſe places:
neither w [...]l [...] I d [...]ny, that  [...]ere might be others whom the
Holy Ghoſt immediately  [...]iſed up to manifeſt the excellent gifts that were
to be  [...]wred downe upon the Church in the primatiue times.

His anſwer is uery darke and ambiguous, but in which are contained ſundry
errors evident enough.  [...] He makes thoſe of the diſperſio [...] which went
about  [...]eaching the word, to be of the 70 diſciples. Luk. 10.  [...]d
others the like furniſhed with an  [...]x [...]r [...]ordinary gift  [...]
propheſie: but ſeemes to allow them for no officers  [...] the beginning of
his anſwer, when he thus ſpea­  [...]eth, Beſides the Apoſtles which were in
office there were  [...]0\. Diſciples &c. yet afterwards in theſe words, and
[...]refore it is ſufficient, that they had ſo many preachers  [...] office
already by the commiſſion of Chriſt to go thorow [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=30) all theſ [...]
places, &c, [...]e beſ [...] w [...]s ſome office or oth [...] upon them.
Secondry,  [...]e miſſeth in two Scripture which in his anſwere,  [...]e
pointeth at: the former  [...] Act. 2▪ where he gathereth, that others beſides
th [...] twelve, rece [...]ued the gift of propheſie extraordina [...] at the
day of pent [...]coſt: the  [...]ec [...]nd  [...]if I miſtake no [...] is
Math. 10\. 5. 6. where he  [...]aks the edict or proh [...] b [...]t [...]on
of Chriſt  [...]aid upon the Apoſtles, and (as h [...] ſa [...]th) upon the▪
70. Diſciples of preaching to  [...]ny  [...] Je [...]s, [...]rr aboue the
reach thereof, euen unto this ti [...] of the diſpertion, whereas it reached
only to the dea [...] of Chriſt, when the wall of partition between Ie [...]
and Gentiles was broken downe:  [...]fter which the were by the expreſſe w
[...]rds of their Commiſſion  [...] preach to all people, beginning indeed at
Ieruſalem  [...] [...]arrying there, till they were indued with power from
[...] high, and ſo proceeding to all nations. Luk. 24. 47. 4 [...] as it is
alſo recorded Act. 11\. 20. that ſome of th [...] diſperſion, preached the
Lord Ieſus to the Grecians  [...] A [...]tioch. 3ly, it is plaine by that
which I haue fo [...] merly ſaid, that neither theſe 70 diſciples (no nor t
[...] [...]2,) were by Chriſt poſſeſſed of any office before h [...] death; no
nor yet furniſhed with any extraordina [...] gifts of propheſie: the
Euangeliſt (who knew we [...] and is worthy to be beleeued) bearing alſo
witneſ [...] with mee, that the Holy Ghoſt was not yet giuen beca [...] that
Ieſus was not yet glorified, John. 7\. 39.

Laſtly it is altogether unreaſonable to imagine th [...] [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=30) they who were
ſcatered and preached abroad, being the body of the Church at Ieruſalem
(excepting the Apoſtles▪ were all officers: and little more reaſonable to
thinke that they were all extraordinarily  [...]nd [...]ed with the ſpirit▪ of
propheſy. For firſt, there is no circumſtance in the text  [...]eading that
way: and to i­magine extraordinary, and mi [...]culous things with­out good
euidence, is extraordinary  [...] and p [...]eſumption. 2. the onely  [...]
giuen unto them a [...] ▪  [...]ll he Church which  [...]ey that were ſcat
[...]e [...]ed ab [...]o [...]: a [...]d againe  [...] 1 [...].  [...]ey which
were ſc [...]ttered abro [...] ▪  [...] th [...] Cy­pru [...] & Cyrene, &c.
nothing  [...] any  [...]ce of miniſtry. 3. Their preaching he [...] and
[...]e [...]e is  [...] noted to be by reaſon of their catering hither and
[...] ther through perſecution, and not of any e [...]t [...]rdi­nary gift,
and diſpenſation committed unto the [...]. Fourthly, if they had been
extraordinary Prophet [...] immediately, and extraordinarily inſpired, there
had been no need of ſo ſpeedy ſending of Bar [...]abas from Ieruſalem to
Antioch with ſupply, though he were a man full of the Holy Ghoſt, for ſo were
ſuch Prophets as well as he Ephe. 2\. 20. & 3\. 5. I conclude therefore as
before that theſe mens preaching was by a gift▪  [...]nd liberty, common unto
them and us.

The next Scripture is 1. Pet. 4, 10. 11. As euery man hath receiued the gift
ſo minister the ſame one to another as good ſtewards of the manifold grace of
God; if any man [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=31) speake, let him
ſpeake as the oracles of God, if any ma [...] miniſter let him doe it as of
the ability which God giueth▪ that God in all things may be glorified, &c.

This (ſaith M. Yates) is little to the purpoſe, onely thus much: would the
Apoſtle perſwade, that wee ought to be harberous one of another, and that
without grudging, becauſe all that we haue is giuen us of God, who hath left
us not as ingroſſers of his benifits, but as good diſpoſers to his glory and
our brothers good.

He that veiweth the place with out prejudice, cannot but ſee, that the Apostle
would perſwade more then ſo much: and that M. Yates doth injuriouſly en­cloſe
the Apoſtles words, ver. 10. to verſe 9. which though they lie in common to
both, yet belong much more to the verſe following, v. 9\. He exhorteth to
ho­ſpitality, and v. 10. riſeth from that particular to the more general uſe
of al gifts or graces, & ſo v. 11. brings for example, two ſpecialties. 1. the
gift of propheſie in ſpeaking. 2. the miniſtering of the ability which God
giueth bodily or otherwiſe in the Church. nei­ther can the Apoſtles meaning
without extream vio­lence bee reſtrained to ver. 9. which ſpeakes onely of
hoſpitality: which is but the uſe or miniſtering of that one gift or grace of
liberality. He ſaith in the tenth verſe. As euery man hath receiued the gift:
that is as one hath receiued this gift, another that, and eve­ry one ſome: ſo
miniſter the ſame one to another: that is, ſo let every ſuch perſon mutually
in the bond of [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=31) [...]ove as
ver. 8. communicate his gift: as good diſpoſers  [...]f the manifold grace of
God: that is knowing that  [...]very one what gift ſoever, he hath received,
[...]s but as the Lords Steward therein. Is Liberality [...]lone a manifold
grace? and Hospi [...]ali [...]y alone the mi­  [...]ſtering of a manifold
grace of God? To the miniſte­  [...]ing of a manifold grace, the Apoſtle
perſwades, and therefore not onely that wee ought to be harborous one to
another, which is but the miniſtering of one grace.

Two other Scriptures from the Reu [...]la [...]ion follow. The former is cha.
11. v. 3. I will giue to my two wit­neſſes, and they ſhal propheſie a thouſand
two hundred ſix­ty dayes, clothed in ſackcloth.

Th [...]s is meant ſaith M. Y [...]tes) of the 2 Teſtaments, and the
inſtruments that God ſhould raiſe up to uſe as faith­full witneſſes againſt
Antichriſ: but what is this for an ordinary gift of propheſie? Surely in this
there is ſome ex­traordinary thing, becauſe it is ſaid God will giue power,
that is giue them life againe: for Antichriſt  [...] k [...]ll theſe witneſſes
when he ſtopped the current of the Holy word of God, and ſhut the mouthes of
the miniſters, &c.

His expoſition I will not deny (nor need to feare) ſaue as with great
partiallity on the clergies part, he make the miniſters of the word of God,
that i [...], men in of­fice, the only faithful witneſſes againſt ancichriſt.
wher­as the contrary is moſt true; and that in Antichriſts reign no church
officer, as an officer witneſſed againſt him, but all for him: as both hauing
their authority by him, and binding themſelues to ſubmit their  [...] [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=32) trine to his
cenſure. The perſons indeed, that were alſo officers, euen Maſſe-preiſt,
Monkes and Friers, witneſſed ſome of them againſt him, but ſo did not their
offices, or they in reſpect of them, (which is all one) but rather with him,
as aduantaging his ſtate and Hierarchy. Something extraordinary I doe with him
acknowledg to haue been in them, in reſpect of the order then preuailing, and
of the bondage ſpiri­tuall under which all both things and perſons were: as
alſo of the degree of theire ordinary both gifts and graces to put them forth
in ſeruice of the truth: but that theſe witneſſes againſt Antichriſt had any
extra ordinary, or miraculous gift of propheſie (which he inſinuateth, and
muſt affirme if he will draw them from our part) is meerly imagined both
againſt ex­perience & their own plea. But for the opēing of this place, I
referre the reader to our learned Coun­tryman M. Brightman, where he ſhall
find affirmed, and proued, that theſe two prophets were the holy Scriptures
and Aſſemblies of the faithfull.

The other ſcripture is Reu. 14\. 6, where the Angell flieth in the midſt of
heaven hauing the euerlaſting Goſpell to preach unto them that dwell on the
earth, and to euery nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

By heauen (ſaith M. Yates) is to be understood the ui­ſible Church, and by the
Angell the learned men that God hath euer raiſed up in the midſt of popery to
carry the ble­ſſed word of God in the midſt of heauen that is raiſed from
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=32) the
earthly curruption of Antichriſt, but not as yet a [...] the height of purity,
&c.

As I doe not conceive of any ſuch miſtery in theſe words. (flying in the
mideſt of heauen) but onely that theſe Angells ſhould roundly and clearly,
ſpe­cially in reſpect of former times, publiſh the Goſpell farr, and neer, as
is the flying of a bird in the airy hea­uen or firmament ſpeedy and euident;
ſo, that ſignifi­ed, I aſſent to his expoſition, as being alſo no way
preindiciall, but much aduantageable to my purpoſe. For if thoſe learned, and
Angell-like men were to publiſh the goſpell in the mideſt of popery; and that
neither by an extraordinary, or miraculous gift, nor by uertue of their
office, then is publick prophe­ſying out of office by an ordinary gift
approuable. The firſt part I hope he will eaſily grant; if not, let him name
the man miraculouſly inſpired in the midſt of popery. For the latter, the
office it ſelf or func­tion was no miniſtery of Chriſts appointment, as being
the office of a Frier, Monke, or Maſſe-prieſt, ſo their power to adminiſter it
was from or by the pop [...] as vniuerſall Biſhop: that is, as Antichriſt. in
reſpect then of the Goſpell which they had preached▪ and of their gifts &
graces perſonal, by which they wer both enabled & prouoked there n̄to, they
were Angels of God; but in regard of there office, and power Eccleſiaſticall▪
and Hierarchicall, Angels of Antichriſt. Beſides that when they gaue their
cleareſt teſtamo­ny [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=33) againſt
Antichriſt, they were, for the moſt part, all excommunicated out of the Church
of Rome, and ſo being no members could not be officers of a­ny Church.
Whereupon I conclude, that the wit­neſſe which they ga [...]e to the truth,
was but perſo­nall and not miniſteriall ſo far forth as it was of God or by
him approued. And thus it appeareth how in the quoting of thoſe ſcriptures, we
haue not offred abuſe to Gods word, as he abuſeth vs, but haue with good
conſcience, as in the ſight of God, noted them as ſeruing to proue lawfull,
publique propheſie by an ordinary gift out of office.

Laſtly 1. Cor. 14\. comes into handling, with the proofs thence taken: which
what weight they haue ſhall appeare after reherſall of ſome more generall
conſiderations promiſed in my booke, in the ſame place, for the better
underſtanding of the point, as, 1. that the Church of Corinth aboue all other
Chur­ches, did abound with ſpirituall gifts both ordinary and extraordinary.
2. that they abuſed theſe gifts too much unto faction and ambition. 3. that
there upon the Apoſtle takes occaſion in the beginning of the 12. Chap. and ſo
forward, to draw them to the right uſe of the gifts of God, which was the
im­ploiment of them to the edifying of the body in loue 4. and Laſtly, that
hauing layd down chap. 13. a full diſcription and large commendation of that
grace of loue, cha. 14, and the beginning of it, he exhorts to, [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=33) propheſying,
and to the ſtudy and uſe of that gift which though it were not ſo ſtrange a
thing as was the ſudden gift of tongues. nor which drew with it ſuch wonder
and admiration, yet was it more profi­table for the Church: and though a
matter of leſſe note, yet of greater charity, which muſt beare ſway  [...]n
all our actions, Whereupon I lay downe the firſt rea­ſon for brethrens, though
no officers, liberty in theſe words Becauſe the Apoſtle ſpeakes of the
manifeſtation of  [...] gift or grace common to all perſons, as well bre­
[...]heren as miniſters, ordinary as extraordinary, and  [...]hat at all times
which is loue: as alſo of ſuch fruites  [...]nd effects of that grace, as are
no leſſe common to  [...]ll, then the grace it ſelf, nor of leſſe continuance
in  [...]he Churches of Chriſt, to wit, of edification, exhor  [...]ation, and
comfort, verſe. 3. compared with 1. Theſſ. 5. 11, 14.

In anſwering the former part of the Reaſon he is  [...]ery large but more
negligent, as it appeares in his  [...]enying that the Apoſtles ſpeaks of a
gift common  [...]o all perſons, and in more then denying, for his rude
[...]erme I will conceale for his credits ſake, that it was  [...]ōmon to all
perſons at al times admiring how I dare  [...]ffirme any ſuch thing: adding:
that loue was enioy­  [...]ed to all but this gift onely of ſuch, as did
excell a­  [...]ongſt them: whereas the uery gift, which I ſpeake  [...]f in
that place, or grace rather, as I there call it, was one other▪ but the grace
of loue; as any that will [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=34) may ſee in the
reaſon: which generall grace ough [...] to man [...]feſt, and expreſſe it
ſelfe in the ed [...]fying uſe of all  [...]e ſpecial gifts of the ſpirit,
which by it are ſet  [...] wo [...]ke and m [...]ed, as the leſſer wheels of a
clock by the greater. & from which grace the▪ Apoſtle pro­voketh the Church to
the ſtirring up of the gift of propheſie, unto  [...]d [...]fication, as well
now as then. and whereas, to my ground, as he puts it, and as after a ſort I
intended from ver. 3. compared with 1 Theſſ [...] 5, 11. 14. viz. that ſince
the end which is ed [...]fication▪ exhortation, and comfort continueth,
therfore the gift of propheſie alſo continueth, he anſwreth; that there are
many, means to effect one end, & yet ſome of them may ceaſe yea all of them, &
others come i [...] their roomes,  [...]s for extraordinary gifts, ordianry: &
ſo for Apoſtles, ordinary Miniſters: inſtancing furthe [...] in tōgues, which
ver. 26. are for ed [...]fication; he nei­ther ſpeakes ſo properly, as is
meet, nor all admitte [...] which he ſaith, takes away the force of the Argum
[...] Strange tongues, to ſpeake properly, and expreſly as in diſputing, are
no meanes of edifying the Church but the interpretation, and applycation of
the mat­ter of the tongues: neither doth the office of the mi­niſterie in it
ſelfe edify. but the uſe and exerciſe of it in teaching, and exhorting? no nor
yet the gift of propheſying, but as it is uſed in ſpeaking, as ver. 3. hee
that propheſieth, that is uſeth the gift of prophe­ſy, ſpeaketh unto men, to
exhortation edefication & [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=34) [...]mfort.
There being then no other means to edifie  [...]hort & comfort in the Church
but propheſying; the  [...]poſtle, as appeareth by the two places ſet together
[...]ying theſe duetyes from the common grace of loue  [...]s well upon
bretheren, as officers, ordinary as ex­  [...]aordinary, and at all times, in
the Church, therein  [...]iues warrant to an ordinary exerciſe of propheſy in
[...]e Church by men out of office, to wit hauing  [...]ifts and abilityes
anſwerable, to the end of the  [...]orld.

The ſecond Argument is from ver. 21. where the Apoſtle ſaith, ye may all
propheſie one by one, that  [...]ll may learne, and all may be comforted, he
ſpeaks  [...]f all propheſying as largly as of all learning.

This, ſaith he, is abſurd: are all the Church Prophets  [...] all may
propheſie who ſhall learne? the Holy Gh.  [...]yes all but that is to be
underſtood of ſuch as haue  [...]ifts: all ought to haue the gift of hearing,
but the  [...]ke is not of propheſying: and I ſay this gift was ex­
[...]aordinary for how could all men ſtudy the Scrip­  [...]ures when they had
them not in their natiue  [...]ongues?

It were abſurd indeed, if I thought, that euery per­  [...]on in the church
were to propheſie: but why ſhould  [...]e chalenge me, or I purge my ſelf of
this abſurdity?  [...]hereas the contrary is moſt evident, both in the
[...]ords of the queſtion, which are that others hauing  [...]eceiued a gift
thereunto, may ought to ſtir up the [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=35) ſame, and to
uſe it in the Church; and every when in the handling of it. By all then I mean
all that ha [...] gifts: and ſo take all for propheſying as largly, y [...] in
the ſubiect, according to the receiued rule of o [...] pounding the notes of
vniverſality, as the other a [...] for learning. His queſtion, if all may
propheſie w [...] ſhall learne; is eaſily anſwered. For they who propheſie at
one time may learne at another: It is th [...] diſeaſe of the exalted Clergie
to ſcorn to learne any thing of others then themſelves, and almoſt o [...] of
another. Where he further ſayth, that all oug [...] to haue the gift of
hearing, but the like is not p [...] pheſying, It is true and that euery
particular perſ [...] in the Church is not bound to haue the gift; but if
[...] ſpeake any thing to the purpoſe in hand, he muſt  [...] further and ſay
that no ordinary brethren out of off [...] ought to haue the gift of
propheſie: which if it w [...] true, then ought none to ſtriue for fitneſſe to
beco [...] officers: neither were the reproofe iuſt which the Apoſtle layes,
not onely, nor ſo much, if at all, up [...] the officers, as upon the
brethren, H [...]b. 5. 11. that f [...] the time they ought to be teachers. Of
his unwort [...] miſtaken about the Scriptures not being in the Corinths
natiue tongue, which he makes the only grou [...] of his Anſwer, elſewhere. To
conclude this argumen [...] The Apoſtle writing to the Church of Corinth, y
[...] may al propheſie one by one, cannot be underſtood  [...] extraordinary
Prophets, except wee conceiue that t [...] [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=35) [...]ody of
that Church was or might be prophets ex­  [...]raordinary, and miraculouſly
inſpired: which, cōſide­  [...]ing the ſuper-excellency of that State by me
elſe­where laid downe, is a preſumption aboue my reach and leaſt of all
agreeing with M. Yates his iudg­ment in his anſwer to the next Argument, which
is, that extraordinary propheſie did then begin to ceaſe  [...]n the Church.

The third Argument is from ver. 34. where the Apoſtle reſtrains women from
propheſying, or other  [...]peaking in the Church with authority as alſo 1.
Tim [...]. 11. 12. and in forbidding women, giues liberty to  [...]ll men
gifted accordingly, oppoſing women to mē  [...]ex to ſex, and not women to
officers: and againe, in  [...]eſtraining women ſhewes his meaning to be of
or­dinary not extraordinary propheſying: for women  [...]mmediately
extraordinarily, and miraculouſly inſpi­  [...]ed might ſpeake without
reſtraint, Exod. 15. 20.  [...]udg▪ 4. 24. Luk. 2 36. Acts 2. 17, 19.

It is a pitteous thing to ſee how M. Yates intag­gles himſelfe about this
Argument, ſtraining all the  [...]eyns of his wit, if not of a more tender
part, his con­ſciene, to draw ſome face of anſwer upon it: That which hath any
ſhew of anſwer either in that place, or any other throughout his tedious and
perplexed diſcourſe, I will relat and refute: confirming the Ar­gument
clearly, as I am perſwaded, to any indifferent  [...]udgment.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=36)His firſt
anſwer, or exception is, that it is moſt abſurd to imagine that the Corinth.
women did follo [...] their ſtudy, and tooke ordinary paines to make ſermons.
Secondly that extraordinary propheſie d [...] ceaſe, and that not all at once,
but firſt in women & that the Apoſtle therefore eſpecially aimes at them,
[...] though, to wit in their own iudgment the ſame meaſu [...] were ſtill
upon them, as well as in former time [...] when Chriſt that ſaues both man and
women woul [...] extraordinarily manifeſt himſelfe in both, yet firſt a [...]
ter a ſufficent manifeſtation of his grace & goodneſ [...] he withdrew thoſe
extraordinay gifts from that ſ [...] then afterward from the other: His third
anſw [...] upon which he doth moſt inſiſt, is, that the Apoſ [...] forbids two
generall faults in the women; the one that th [...] would pray, and propheſie
uncouered, 1. Cor. 11.  [...] imitating the Pythoniſſes and Sibelles of the
Genti [...] in laying aſide their vaile, and ſpreading their haire  [...]
gainſt▪ decency, and comlineſſe: the ſecond that in th [...] huſbands
preſence, they would be as ready to ſpeake  [...] they: and therefore the
Apoſtle finding the women to  [...] buſe this gift, prohibits the uſe of it,
whether ſimply or  [...] he cannot iudge. Fourthly, he admires by what Log
[...] this will follow; women are forbiden to propheſie, therfore men haue
liberty: which, ſayes hee, is an ill conſ [...] quence.

In his firſt Anſwer or rather exception, he m [...] takes both the ſtate of
the queſtion, and alſo the  [...] ture [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=36) of the
ordinance. The queſtion is not of the ſtu­dy, or ability of theſe women, which
yet I thinke was greater then he maketh account of, but of their for­wardnes
to teach which was certainly too great. And what conſequence is this? The
Corinthian women were not ſufficiently furniſhed to teach by an ordi­nary gift
therefore they needed not to be reſtrained from teaching. Nay therfore they
needed much more ſuch a bridle of reſtraint to be caſt upon them; eſpe­cially
conſidering their manniſh bouldneſſe, and im­modeſty inſinuated againſt them
here by the Apoſtle, in part, but much more chap. 11.

Neither for the ſecond poynt, are they that ſpeak in the exerciſe of
propheſie, to make a ſermon by an houreglaſſe, as M. Yates gathers; that were
to abuſe the time and wrong the gifts of others (but briefly to ſpeak a word
of exhortation, as God enableth, & that after the miniſteriall teaching be
ended, as Act. 13. queſtions alſo about things deliuered, and with them euen
diſputations, as there is occaſion, being part or apurtenances of that
exerciſe, 1. Cor. 14. 35. Act. 17. 2. and 18\. 4,

For the Prophets gifts and abilities then, as under the law a bullock or lamb,
that had any thing ſuperflu­ous, or lacking in his parts might yet be offered
for a free­will offering, but for a vow it was not to be accepted. Lev. 22.
23. ſo in this exerciſe of Propheſie, as in a free will offering, according to
the gift of God, that [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=37) which is leſſe
perfit, and exact, may farr better be accepted, then if the ſame were
preſented in the Paſtors vowed ſeruice, and miniſtration.

For his ſecond Anſwer: As it is true, that extraordi­nary propheſie did ce
[...]ſe by degrees, ſo is it not certaine, but a meere preſumption, that it ce
[...]ſed firſt in women, but moſt untrue it is, that the Apoſtle there aims at
all  [...] the ceaſing of that gift in women, Eccleſiaſticall Hiſto­ries
worthy of credit in this kind, doe certifie, that the ſtreame of the ſpirit
was ſo far from being neare dry at this time, as that it ranne a ſtrong
current wel nigh a hundred yeares after, for all the extraordina­ry gifts
thereof, as for the caſting out of Deuils, fore­ſeing and foretelling of
things to c [...]e, healing the ſicke, & raiſing of the dead, of wh [...]n d
[...]uers ſo raiſed liued many yeares after, witneſſe amongſt others
Iraenaeus, adv. Her. lib. 2. c. 57\. whom alſo for the ſame purpoſe Euſ. Hiſt.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 7\. alledgeth: And euer or women, Euident it is by the
Scriptures that ex­traordinary Propheſie in a very plenteous manner by them, &
that in the preſents of men continued in the Church many years after Pauls
writing of this Epiſte. Philip the Evangelist had four daughters vergins which
did propheſie, Act. 2\. 1. 9 and that in the preſence of the Apoſtle. Lo, four
extraordinary Propheteſſes in one houſe. and the daughters of one man: ſo that
[...]itherto the conduit of the ſpirit of propheſie kept  [...]is courſe as
well upon their daughters as ſons. Ioel, 2. Act. 2. So Rev. 2\. 20. we read
how the woman Jeſabel [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=37) [...]alling her
ſelfe a propheteſſe, taught and by teaching  [...]duced the Lords ſervants in
the Church of Thya [...]yra, [...]n which place, as the errors and evils of
the perſon.  [...]s condemned, ſo is the former order of the Church manifeſted
to be, that women, propheteſſes extraor­dinary, might teach. Laſtly, the
prohibition of women by the Apoſtle is perpetuall, and not with re­ſpect to
this, or that time as it appeares by the rea­ſons there of, both in this
place, and in the Epiſtle to Timothy, and ſuch as equally belong to former
times and latter: and no more to the latter end then to the beginning or
meddle time of the manifeſtation of the grace and goodneſſe of Chriſt.

What can be more abſurd then to ſay that theſe reaſons, The women muſt be
under obedience, 1. Cor, 14. 34. & not uſurpe authority ouer the man, but be
in ſilence, becauſe Adam was first formed, then Eve. An [...] Adam was not
ſeduſed, but the women, &c. 1\. Tim. 2. 12. 13 14. were not morrall and
perpetuall? Were not thoſe reaſons and grounds for womens ſilence in the
Church, without extraordinary diſpenſation by mi­raculous inſpiration, of as
great force ſeuen yeares before, as when Paul wrote this Epiſtle? It is
there­fore moſt cleare that the Apoſtle aimes not at all, at any ceaſing of
the gift of extraordinary propheſie now growing on, but at the uniuerſall, and
abſolute reſtraint and prohibition of womens propheſying, not extraordinary,
but ordinary.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=38)In his
third anſwer he dealeth worſe then in any of the other, in labouring to
ſmother one truth un­der another. For albeit the women of Corin [...]th were
become ſo manniſh, as that they would propheſi [...] uncovered, and withovt
their veile, the enſigne o [...] their ſubiection, yet doth not the Apoſtle
meddle at all with that malady in this place, but in the 11. cha. of the
Epiſtle, as himſelfe noteth, Here and in Tim. he ſimply forbids the thing:
there the manner of do­ing it. Likewiſe for their being as forward to ſpeake
as their huſbands, and in their pre [...]ence, it may be true in part, and in
ſome. But what then? Doth the Apoſtle in theſe places onely forbid their
ſpeaking uncouered and permit them to teach ſo it be veiled? or forbids he
onely their being as forward as their huſbands, but gives them leaue to ſpeake
in the Church, ſo it be with good manners &, after their huſ­bōds which his
anſwer inſinuates? Or is it not evidēt to all that will not ſhut their eyes,
that he ſimply, & that ſeverely, inhibits them all ſpeaking whatſoever in this
exerciſe, Are not the words plain enough? Let the women keep ſilence in the
Church, for it is not permit­ted to them to ſpeake, but to be under obedience,
as the Law ſayth. And againe, It is a ſhame for them to ſpeak in the Church.
And in 1. Tim, Let the women learne in ſilence with all ſubiection. And, I
ſuffer not a woman to teach, nor to uſurpe authority ouer the man, but to be
in ſubjection. For Adam was firſt formed, &c. Do not [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=38) and every one
of the Reaſons binde women to all  [...]eace and deepe ſilence in the Church,
yea to ſuch  [...]d ſo abſolute, as that they may not ſo much as aske queſtion
for learning any thing themſelues, ver. 35.  [...]uch leſſe teach others any
thing? I therefore con­  [...]ude this as a moſt certain and undeniable truth,
[...]at the Apoſtle ſpeakes here of ſuch a gift and ex­  [...]rciſe as women
are ſimply forbidden to uſe in the  [...]hurch, and therefore not of an
extraordinary gift  [...]r exerciſe, which they might uſe lawfully and did
[...]oth before, and a long time after the writing of this  [...]piſtle.

His laſt anſwer now comes in conſideration, which  [...]s, that the
conſiquence is ill, women are forbidden, and  [...]herefore men are permitted
to propheſie in the Church by  [...]n ordinary gift.

If the conſiquence ſeem not good, why doth he ſo ſtrugle as before otherwiſe
to make an eſcape frō  [...]he Argument? let us cōſider of the force of it,
which appeareth to me irreſiſtable in theſe 3. things. Firſt, the Apoſtle in,
and for this worke oppoſeth the men to the women, ſex to ſex and ſo in
prohibiting wo­men, he permits men. When the H. Ghoſt oppoſing faith and works
in the cauſe of iuſtification, denies that we are iuſtified by works is not
then the conſe­quence good, that therefore we are iuſtified by faith where he
oppoſeth beleevers and vnbeleevers in the  [...]ſe of Saluation and teacheth
that beleevers ſhall [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=39) be ſaued doth
he not teach conſequently, that vnbe­leevers ſhall periſh? if conſequences be
not good [...] muſt confeſſe my ſelfe farre to ſeeke both in Logi [...] and
Divinity.

Secondly, the reaſons of the prohibition of wom [...] proue the conſiquence
which are all ſuch as prefe [...] the men, before the women, and ſubiect the
women to the men in the Church, and in this very work of propheſie, of which
he treateth. But now if in pro­hibiting women, he gaue not liberty unto men▪
where were the prerogatiue of men aboue women which is the onely ground, upon
which he buildeth his prohibition?

Thirdly, where verſe 34. 35. It is not permitted for women to ſpeak but if
they will learn any thing to ask then huſbands at home, if their huſbands
might not ſpeake neither nor any more then they, what reaſon can be rendred of
the Apoſtle ſo ſpeaking?

Laſtly M. Yates in denying this conſequence, ſhe­weth that ſo he might deny
ſomething, he tooke no great heed what it were. The Apoſtle in this whole
Chap, takes order for ſome to propheſie? and de­barring women therefrom;
either admits men to the uſe of that liberty, or els we muſt haue ſome third
kinde of perſons thought of, which are neither male nor female.

My fourth Argument is from verſe 29 and 32. L [...] the prophets ſpeake
[...]wo or three, and let the reſt iudg [...] [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=39) [...]nd the
ſpirit of the prophets are ſubiect to the prophets. [...]hence I affirm, that
the Apoſtle ſpeaks not of ex­  [...]raordinary prophets or propheſying, ſince
they in  [...]heir Doctrine could not erre, and ſo were not ſub­  [...]ect to
any ſuch iudgment, or cenſure of others. He  [...]nſwereth roundly, though
briefly in this place, that  [...]heſe prophets were not infallibly aſſisted▪
and more larg­  [...]y in another place, that ſuch prophets as haue an in­
[...]allible aſſiſtance are no [...] ſubiect to this Rule: but others
[...]hat had but as the Apoſtle ſayd, Rom. 12. 6. meaner  [...]ifts were to be
examined according to the p [...]oportion of  [...]aith, ſo that extraordinary
prophets might mix ſome of  [...]heir own wi [...]h the extraordinary gifts of
Gods ſpirit,  [...]hich was to be cenſured by ſuch as had a greater mea­
[...]ure: for none are to thinke that all that ha [...] th [...]ſe
extraor­dinary gifts were free from errour in their ve [...]y doctrine. We ſee
the strange gift of tongues was abuſed, and ſo  [...]ight the reſt be.

That one extraordinary Prophet had a greater mea  [...]ure, and proportion of
gifts then another, I acknow  [...]edge; but that any one of them could erre
in doctrin or was not infallibly aſſiſted therein by the ſpirit  [...] deny,
as a moſt pernicious errour, weaking the foundation of faith, and truth of the
word of God: neither hath Maſter Yates ſo much as enterpriſed an anſwer unto
the Scriptures brought by me to proue the contrary: which were Epheſians 2.
20. where the Epheſians as the houſhold, or Church of God, are ſaid to be
built upon the foundation of the Apoſtles and [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=40) Prophets, &c. &
chap. 3. 5. where he ſpeaks of  [...] mistery of Chriſt, which in other ages
was not m [...] known unto the ſonnes of men, as it is now revealed u [...]
his holy Apoſtles and Prophets by the ſpirit. When it apeares, that the Church
is as well built upon t [...] foundation of the prophets, to wit extraordinar
[...] which then were, for of them he ſpeaketh, as up [...] the doctrine of
the Apoſtles, and they as infallibl [...] euen for the very foundation,
inſpired by the Hol [...] Ghoſt, as the other. So that, if the Prophets co
[...] erre in doctrine, then the Apoſtles, & if in doctrin [...] taught why
not written, and if one alone, why n [...] more, or all? and if they might
erre how know  [...] that they did not erre? If he ſay the meaner in gift
might erre, but not the greater; firſt the ſame follo [...] ­eth alſo touching
the Apoſtles, how much more tou­ching the Prophets before Chriſt. not
comparible t [...] thoſe after him, why then may there not be errors in the
writings eſpecially of thoſe meaner gifts as with­out doubt ſome were in
compariſon of the reſt? what whether this wind will bring who ſeeth not?
More­over, whereas wee propound ſuch interpretations and doctrines, as we
gather from the Scriptures, by diſcourſe of reaſon, and ſo may erre; they, on
the contrary every one of them d [...]livered doctrine by immediate
inſpiration of the ſpirit, in which by rea­ſon of the divine impreſſion which
it made in their hearts, differencing it from all both humain collec­tion
[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=40) and
Diabolicall ſuggeſtion, they could not erre, or miſtaken; but know infallibly
when. and wherein, they  [...]ere moued by the holy Ghoſt. Beſides there is
not alike  [...]aſon of ſtrange tongues, and propheſie, for the conſide­
[...]tion in hand, ſince the Church is not built upon the  [...]undation of
ſtrange tongues, as upon the foundation of  [...]opheſie; neither was the
matter of the ſpeach inſpired  [...]t the language onely, except the ſame
perſons were  [...]rophets alſo▪

Laſtly, if there were the like reaſon of tongues. and  [...]opheſie, yet
except men might erre in a tongue, and  [...]e [...]m themſelues inſpired
extraordinarily when they  [...]ere not, which were abſurd to affirme; it
could not e­  [...]nce any poſibility of erring in doctrine by extraordi­
[...]ary Prophets.

The laſt Argument in my booke I take from ver. .37  [...]8\. If any man think
himſelfe to be a prophet, or ſpirituall let  [...]im acknowledge that the
things that I write unto you are the  [...]ommandements of the Lord: But if
any be ignorant let him be  [...]gnorant.

M. Yates taxeth mee for making a Prophet, and ſpiritu­  [...]ll man all one,
ſince by a ſpirituall man is meant ſuch as excel­  [...]ed in any ſpirituall
gift, propheſie, or other, But without cauſe: ſince I neither mean more nor
need more for my purpoſe, then that a Prophet bee included in the general of a
ſpirituall man. But wherefore doth he not anſwer the Argument or minde where
the force thereof lieth? which is in the▪ words following; let him acknowledge
that the things that I write are the commandements of the Lord. But if any man
be ignorant, let him be ignorant. The extra­ordinary Prophets, were guided as
immediately and in­fallibly by the reuelation of Gods ſpirit. as Paul himſelf,
and might as▪ wel haue required of him to acknowlede [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=41) that the things
which they ſpeake were the commandemen [...] the Lord, as hee of them: neither
was it poſſible that th [...] or any of them ſhould bee ignorant, that the thi
[...] which he ſpake were the commandements of the Lo [...] Which Argument is
alſo much ſtrengthned, and mad [...] in my iudgment, unanſwerable; by that
which we fin [...] ver. 36 Came the word of God out from you, or came it unto
[...] onely? which words the Apoſtle doth not direct unto  [...] women, as M,
Yates miſconceaueth with great erro [...] and contrary both unto reaſon, and
to the expreſſe Gre [...] text which will not beare it, but to the Prophets; w
[...] whome hee dealeth, and that by way of compariſon w [...] himſelf, from
whome, to wit, by immediate revelatio [...] the word of God came after a ſort
to the Corinthia [...] Which plainly proues that they could not be extraord
[...] ­nary prophets, from whom the word of God came u [...] the Church as
well as from himſelfe: they being inſpir [...] immediately by the Holy Ghoſt
as well as he.

The Chriſtian Reader may finde, beſides theſe, othe [...] reaſons from this
Scripture laid-downe by our worth [...] countryman M. Cartwright in his
Confutation of the Rh [...] miſts, Sect. 5\. for the iuſtification of this
exerciſe as ordi­nary and continuall.

The other Arguments in the ſame place of my book [...] to the ſame purpoſe,
though M. Yates could no [...] but take knowledge of, yet he not thought good
to med­dle with, One of them onely I will annex in this place word for word,
as there I haue ſet it down.

It is the commandement of the Lord by the Apoſtle that a Bishop be apt to
teach, and that ſuch Elders or Bishops he called as are able to exhort with
ſound doctrine & to conuin [...] the gain-ſayers, 1. Tim, 3. 2. Tit. 1\. 9.
now except men, before they be in office may be permitted to manifeſt [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=41) [...]eir gifts
in d [...]ctrine ſo in prayer, which are the two main  [...]rks requiring
ſpeciall qualifications in the teaching  [...]ders, Acts. 6, 4. how ſhal the
Church, which is to chooſe  [...]em. take knowledge of their ſufficiency, that
with  [...]th and good conſcience they may call them, and ſub­  [...]it unto
them for their guides? If it be ſayd, that upon  [...]ch occaſion, triall may
be taken of mens gifts: he that ſo  [...]ith, grants the queſtion, but muſt
know beſides, firſt that  [...]ens gifts & abilities ſhould be known in Some
meaſure,  [...]efore they be once thought on for officers: and ſecondly,
[...]at there is none other uſe or triall of gifts, to wit in and  [...]y the
Church, but in propheſying▪ for every thing in the  [...]ords houſe is to be
performed in ſome ordinance there  [...] nothing thrown about the houſe, or
out of order in it  [...]nd other ordinance in the Church ſaue this of
propheſie  [...] there none, where in men out of office are to pray and
[...]each, &c, Laſtly, M. Yates in denying this liberty, be­  [...]des other
euils, reproueth the practiſe of all reformed  [...]hurches, and of the the
Church of England with them.  [...] is not onely permitted as lawfull, but
required as ne­  [...]eſſary where I line that ſuch as haue bent their
thoughts  [...]owards the miniſtery, ſhould before hand uſe their gifts
[...]ublickly in the Church: and intollerable bondage it  [...]ould bee
thought by them to have paſtors ordained for  [...]hem as all there are vnto
the places in which they are to miniſter, of whoſe ability in teaching they
had not taken former experience. And not onely ſo, but it hath been fur­ther
decreed in a ſolemne Synod, that in all Churches  [...]he  [...]her ſpringing
up, or growing to perfection, the order of prophe­  [...]ie ſhould be obſerued
according to Pauls inſtitution, and that  [...]nto that fellowſhip, to wit of
Prophets, ſhould be admitted  [...]ot onely the miniſters. but alſo the
Teachers, and of the Elder [...] and Deacons and euen of the uery common
people, ex ip­ſa [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=42) plebe. if there
were any which would confer their gift [...] [...]eived of the Lord to the
common benifit of the Church,  [...] Harmon. Synod. Belg: de pro [...]hetica,
Ex Synodo Embd [...] Can, 1\. 2. And for England it ſelfe; what will M. Yates
[...] to the Common places, as they are called; or Sermons, as  [...] deed
they are in the Colledges, not onely permitted u [...] but impoſed upon
diuers, who neuer receiued order prieſthood? What to ſuch as preach by the
Biſhops [...] cence, without any ſuch order? yea to all ſuch as are  [...]
dained and called miniſters, but haue not actuall char [...] & ſo are theas
Popiſh accidents in the Sacrament, wi [...] out a ſubiect? Laſtly, it might be
ſhewed, if need we that greater liberty then he alloweth, is uſed by diuers
the Romiſh Church, the Spirituall Egipt, and houſe bondage for Gods people: ſo
as the bondage of the v [...] Hager of Rome is not ſo great in this caſe, as
he wo [...] bring upon Sarah her ſelfe.

The Lord giue unto his people courage to ſtand  [...] this liberty amongſt the
reſt, wherewith Chriſt ha [...] made them free; and unto us who enioy it.
grace to  [...] the ſame unto his glory, in our mutuall edification  [...]
men.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

Reader, be pleaſed to take notice,  [...]ow that, in the  [...] page of the
preface and in the 18. line after the word an­ſwered, there muſt follow this:
and thing in it know I non [...] not Anſwered

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119884&page=42)

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1641  

