---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Choice, chance, and change: or, Conceites in their colours

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=1) CHOICE,
CHANCE, AND CHANGE: OR, Conceites in their Colours.

_[figure]_

Imprinted at London for Nathaniell Foſbrooke, and are to be ſold at his ſhop
in Pauls Churchyard at the ſigne of the Helmet. 1606.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=2)

## [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=2) TO THE
READER.

IF your choiſe chaunce to bee good, change it not, if your conceit chance to
chuſe amiſſe, allowe it not: If it carry a good colour, and the cloth be
naught, eſteem it not: but if it be good and you conceite it not, change your
humor, but keepe your choiſe: In briefe, here are con­ceits of diuerſe
colours, ſome in graine and none but will bide the weather: but if you be in
loue, here is a leſſon for your learning, where you may find paſſion put to
her patience, wit to his whirligigge, the foole to his part, and the better
conceite to his beſt corner: ma­ny wild Geeſe flie in their owne feathers, and
a tame duck is a pretie fowle: In ſom, there is nothing ſo good but may be
mended, nor ſo ill but may bee well taken: kind fellowes and honeſt wenches I
know will not be angry, and if any man be out of his wits, God ſend him well
into them againe: and ſo hoping that good con­ceites, will chuſe the beſt and
leaue the worſt, I will change kind thankes for kind acceptance, and ſo reſt,
as I find cauſe.

Inſert theſe words into the beginning of the eight leafe before the end of the
Booke: I could be glad of your fau. &c.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE READER.
  * 1\.  A Dialogue, after a friendlie greeting, vpon a ſodaine meeting, betweene Arnofilo and Tidero: as they trauailed vpon the way, betwixt Mount Ierkin, and the great City at the foot of the wood, in the long valley.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=3)

## 1\. [[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=3) A
Dialogue, after a friendlie greeting, vpon a ſodaine meeting, betweene
Arnofilo and Tidero: as they trauailed vpon the way, be­twixt Mount Ierkin,
and the great City at the foot of the wood, in the long valley.

Ar.

TIDERO, Well met, of all the men in the world, I would neuer haue thoght to
haue ſeene you in theſe parts: why? how many thouſand yeeres ſince I ſaw you
laſt.

Tidero:

Not many thouſand: what? am I become a ſpirite that you wonder at mee? this is
as good as a good yeer on you: how long haue you been away, and how haue you
done ſince yeſternight: is a yeere or two ſuch a time of abſence, as if one
ſhould come out of his graue to maze the world with miracles? I muſt confeſſe
I haue beene abroade, and haue ſeene more then I haue eaten, and [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=4) drunke more then
hath done mee good: but what of that? all is well that ends well: and
therefore hoping that you will leaue your wondering, in honeſt kind­neſſe tell
me how you doe? and haue done euer ſince I ſaw you?

Ar.

Sometime well, and ſometime ſo ſo: meate whole, but:

Tid.

But, where is now the old ſhrug at that wicked but? an old mezill will haue a
miſers tricke: if you had bin where I haue bin, and endured that I haue don,
you would leaue your ſhrinking of your ſhoulder, at the burthen of eaſe.

Ar.

Why, but tell me, haſt thou been a trauailer?

Tid.

I haue walked a little ouer the great water, ſome ten thouſand of miles, and
yet haue found the waye home againe.

Ar.

And for ought I ſee, thou art welcome home, and no doubt but many of thy
friends will be glad to ſee thee: for my ſelfe, I am glad euen with all my
hart, to ſee thee ſo wel.

Tid.

You are glad of your eieſight, and ſo I think are many more, that after the
common faſhion carrye the name of friends, but:

Ar.

Tuſh I praye thee, leaue thy But: I doubte thou haſt mette with ſome vnkinde
kindred, fained friende, hol­lowe companion, cogging Raſcall, or dogged
peſaunte, that hath giuen you a dry ſalutation, bidden you to a hūgry
break­faſt, that you are not in full true charity with all the world: But put
away melancholie, let the Diuell goe hang himſelfe, one honest man is worth a
hundred beggers: and for my poore state, thou knowest it: and ſuch as it is,
take parte with it: goe home with mee, and ſtaie till I bidde thee goe. I
pro­teſt [[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=4) I
ſhall bee glad of thee: and for my little wealth, I had ra­ther ſpend it on
ſuch a companion, then leaue it to a ſight of Churles: for thou knoweſt I haue
no ſtore of Heires, and therefore I pray thee, bee let vs be merry, and let vs
liue to­gither.

Tid.

Why how now? doe you take me for a woman, that you come vpon mee with a
ballad, of Come liue with me and be my Loue; well, loſſe of time is but
ven­tered ware, and the gaine of repentance, but the greefe of vnderſtanding;
but, I will hope the beſt, that I haue now founde a man, whoſe breathe is not
poiſo­ned.

Ar.

Poiſoned man, God forbid; but ſay, where with all doeſt thou meane?

Tid.

With deceit, lying, diſſembling, in effect all one kind of poiſon; which in
theſe days is as cōmon among men, as painting among women.

Ar.

Fy vpon it, talke not of it, for my wife ſhe I am ſure v­ſeth not the one, and
for my ſelf God bleſſe me from the other: But leaue tricks to trickers, and
tell me I pray thee in a word, what haſt thou ſeen in thy trauaile?

Tid.

In a word, variety: I can not in one word better expreſſe the ſum of all: for
indeed I haue ſeen much, & much variety in that I haue ſeene.

Ar.

As how I pray thee?

Tid.

I haue ſeene the greate water called the Sea, to which compared, the greateſt
Riuer is but a lit­tle Channell, and the greateſt flood, except that which was
in the time of Noah, is but as a diſh of water: the taſte of which water is
ſalte: and in this water liue a whole worlde of ſtraunge fiſhes; of which I
haue ſeen [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=5)
ſome very great, ſome not ſo great, and ſome far leſſe: but, as vpon the Land,
ſo in the Sea, I ſaw the great eat vp the little: a Whale would hunt a whole
ſkull of He­rings, and ſwallow down a number of them: The Por­poiſe would hunt
the Samon and the Shad, the Seale would feed vpon the Whiting, but the Whale
would take order with a world of ſmall fiſhes: and ſo you ſee vpon the land,
among the fowles of the ayr: the Eagle vpon the Pheſant or the Poulte: the
Faulcon vpon the Mallard, or the Partridge, the Hobby vpon the Larke, and ſo
ſtill the great feede vppon the ſmall ones: ſo in beaſts the Wolfe vpon the
ſheepe, the dog vpon the hare, the Fox vpon the Lamb, the greater euer makes
his pray vpon the leſſe: and yet as in birds and beaſts, ſo in fiſhes haue I
obſerued, that the ſword fiſh, and the Dolphin will be the death of a Whale: a
little Iacke of a Marlin, will be on the neck of a Partridge, and a little dog
will put downe a great Beare.

Ar.

Yea, but they can neuer do it, but when they haue them at aduantage.

Tid.

That is vnderſtood, but they doe ſo: how euer they catche them at it.

Ar.

Yea they do indeed, but how they do it, that would be knowne.

Tid.

It is not for me to looke after, for I will neyther flie into the Ayr to aſke
the birds, nor diue into the ſea, to aſke the fiſhes: nor be a beaſt on the
land, to learne a note of their nature; and yet there comes much good by them.

Ar.

As how I pray thee?

Tid.

Why when a Whale is wounded, he will runne [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=5) to the ſhore, and
then the fiſhermen make much mony of his oyle, when a Marlin killeth a
Partridge, the faul­coner fares the better, and when the dog pulls downe the
Beare, it makes ſport for the maſter of the game.

Ar.

Thou ſaiſt true, but let them alone with their ſports, & tell me what els
ſawest thou at the ſea?

Tid.

I ſaw how woodden horſes went with the wind, which carried men and
Merchandize, ouer the water from one land to another: but ſometimes, with a
ſo­daine tempeſt man & horſe ouerthrown vpon a Rock, and the goods all flote
or drownd, ſomtime man, horſe and ware through a leake, ſink all into the ſea:
ſomtime ſwallowed in a ſand, and ſometime vpon a ſodaine one fall vpon
another, and by fire and ſword, one or both fall to deſtruction: theſe horſes
were called Shippes, Pinnaces, Hoyes and ſuch like: and let me tell you, as
Dauid the Prophet ſaid: he that paſſeth the deepe ſeeth the wonders of the
Lord: for if I ſhould tell thee what dangers I haue eſcaped both by ſea and
land, thou wol­deſt ſay, I were bound to praiſe God.

Ar.

Thou ſaiſt well, I haue heard ſo much of the daungers of the ſea, that I care
not, if I keepe one foot of Land: but I pray thee tell me a little further of
thy trauaile.

Tid.

I will tell you, at ſea I ſaw none of thoſe toyes that I haue heard fooles
talke of, as Mermaides and Si­renes, for they are in deede but fictions: but I
ſaw in a cleer day, a great depth vnder one ſhip vpon a calm, in a ſtill
water, the tops of ſteeples and old ſtone walles, which the Sea had ſwallowed
by ſom great breache o­uer the banks of that country: and as I heard afterward
in my trauaile, in the drowning of thoſe townes there [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=6) periſhed a worlde
of people, and no ſmall maſſe of wealth.

Arnofilo.

A pittifull Spectacle, and yet we ſee, when wealth breedeth pride, GOD will
ſend vs a ſore plague: but I pray thee proceede, and tell me of thy further
Tra­uaile.

Tid.

I will: when I firſt arriued on ſhore with ſome other of the Shippe, wherein I
made my paſſage, I be­held the Soile, which was as this is, repleniſhed with
graſſe, herbs, flowers, and trees, and ſo forth: and for the Fowles they did
fly, the Beaſtes did feede, and men and woemen did walke and talke as we doe:
onely they did vary in their attire, and in theyr language from vs: the poore
did for the moſt part drinke water, and the ritch wine; the poore fedde moſt
vpon herbes, rootes, courſe bread, and little fleſh: the riche vpon ſuch Cates
as the country will yeelde: their cities were faire to the eie, but ſlight for
the ſubſtance, their wealth great, but in few mens hands, their lawes ſtricte,
and well obſer­ued; the Men, neither Pigmeies nor monſters; their wo­men ſome
fair, ſome foule: but one thing I noted chief­ly in the country, that in euery
houſe the inhabitants had a priuate law in their owne houſes, and one
neigh­bour with an other, beſides the common lavves of the country.

Arnofilo.

For thoſe, in that they may bee tedious to thee to recite, I will deferre them
till another time: but, I pray thee tell mee ſomething of the priuate lawes
among them.

Tid.

Betvvixt neighbours it vvas one Lavv, that eue­ry man ſhoulde pay his ovvne
houſe rent, and not [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=6) to truſt vnto his
neighbour. Another Law, that euery man ſhould prouide for his owne houſhold
all things neceſſary, and not to borrow of his neighbour: another Lawe, that
no man ſhould owe his neihbour any thing but compliments: an other was that no
man ſhould be bould with his neighbours wife, further then ſhe wold let him,
howſoeuer the common Law woulde direct him. No man ſhould ſlander his
neighbours wife, for feare of hurting him, and doing her no good: No man
ſhould tell tales, though true, betwixt partie and par­tie, that might mooue
ſtrife, for breaking of peace: No man ſhould denie a kindneſſe promiſed vnto
his neighbour, or his wife, leaſt he ſhould grow angry, and ſhee take thought:
No man mighte make hornes at his neighbour, though hee knewe him to bee a
cuck­olde, for feare of breeding of bate betwixte a Man and his wife: theſe
with many other priuate Lawes, were verie ſtraightly and carefully obſerued,
betwixt neighbour and neighbour: beſides, there is one o­ther that I had
forgotten, and that is this, that no man might father his neighbours childe,
how ſoeuer hee had talked with the mother of it, for feare to breede the
Fathers vnkindeneſſe, and the Mothers vndoo­ing.

Ar.

Prety Lawes, and well noted; I ſee there was ſome good fellowſhippe among
them, and that they had a care of their buſineſſe: it was well, for without
theſe lawes, knaues and fools might haue done much hurt: what was the
puniſhment to bee layde vppon the offendors in any of theſe items, or priuate
Lawes?

Tid.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=7)

No open matter of ſhame, but among them­ſelues he that did offend, according
to the nature of his offence was cenſured▪ if he wanted wealth, held a poor
man, if he wanted wit, a foole: if honeſty, a knaue, if kind­neſſe, a dog: and
ſo though ſuffered to bee a dweller, yet not eſteemed as a neighbour.

Ar:

Truely good, ſo it ſhould be, as the world goes: neigh­bours ſhould be kind
one to another, or els there were no neighbourhood: but tell me I pray thee a
little of the priuate lawes in eache houſe.

Tid.

If a man were maried to a ſcold, let her work for her liuing, and pray for
patience:

If a woman were maried to a foole, let him walke to wind yarne, or pick nuts.

If a man had a whore to his wife, to think of his own caſe, and ſo: to
conceale his ſorrowe, or to bee rid of his miſchiefe:

If a woman be maried to an Eunuche, to do ſomthing to ſaue his ſhame from
knowledge.

No man muſt goe to market without money, nor to dinner without meate.

No man muſt go to bed till he be ſleepy, nor riſe till he be awake.

No man muſt looke for money till he haue earned it, nor pay money till he haue
it.

Many other ſuch lawes, or Items there are agreed vp­on, among them, which were
but tedious to recite: ſom of which, I haue forgotten, but theſe I can well
remem­ber.

Ar.

Prety noted, I thanke thee for them with all my hart: but what puniſhment is
there appointed for the offenders, in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=7) any of theſe
agreements;

Tid.

I will tel you, he that will liue with a ſcoulde muſt be laught at for his
labour:

Shee that is wife to a fool, liues in ſuſpition of God forbid:

Hee that will liue with a whore muſt wear a greate cap:

Shee that is married to an Eunuch muſte goe to phi­ſick for the greene
ſicknes:

He that goes to market without mony muſt come home without meate:

Hee that dines without meate, muſt feed vpon faſt­ing:

He that goes to bed til he be ſleepy, muſt lie & tum­ble till he be weary: and
he that riſeth ere he be wake muſt bee held for a mad man.

Hee that lookes for mony he knowes not why, muſt haue it he knowes not when,
and hee that will paie it ere hee haue it, muſte bee wondered at of all the
worlde:

Ar.

Gramercy good wagge, for thy good noates, pretty laws, and pretty puniſhments,
if tt were worſe, it would not bee ſo well: for Scolds and whores, and fooles
and cuckolds would be cut of order for pride, if they were not taken downe
with ſome trick: And to tell a truth, it is requiſite that a man ſhold not bee
ſo lazy as to goe to bed, ere hee bee ſleepy, nor ſo madde as to riſe in a
dreame: ſo fooliſh to goe to market without monye, or ſo peeuiſh, as to dine
without meat, or ſo childiſh, as for to look for mony without deſart, and to
paie it before hee haue it, why it is a thing impoſſible: and therfore the
Agreements are good, I like them well: pittie but
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=8) they ſhould be
kepte: But I pray thee, tell me a little further of thy trauell, in that
country or any other:

Tid.

I will tell you: for the greate men, I durſt not look too greatly at them: for
fear their greatnes would haue too greate an eie at my looking; onely I ſawe,
they were wel proportioned, ſtrong limmed, manlike faces, wore good cloathes,
rode on fat horſes, pinched not theire owne bellies, nor were not afraide of a
cuppe of wine, kept their cuntries in peace, and liued in a league of greate
loue: this was all that I there no­ted, amonge the greate ones: and for the
name of the Countrie, as I heard; it was called, Terra Straue.

Ar.

I find it not in the mappe by that name, but tis no mat­ter, on with thy
diſcourſe.

Tid.

For the meaner ſort of people, yet not the ba­ſeſt, for thoſe are alikeeuery
where: Roges will begge, beggars will not be baſhfull, fooles wil crie, and
dogs will barke, and therefore let them paſſe; but, for the better ſort, I
found them good fellowes, of what con­dition ſoeuer: Male, or female, Learned,
or vnlearned, there would none be out, for his hand in a helth, how­ſoeuer
they had fared: the Schollar would diſpute vp­on none but the full pointe, and
the vnlearned by Ex­perience had a carouſe, at the higheſt: Ciuill cariage and
fair conditioned, drink, and ſpende and paie, like right lads and not
quarrell, till the cuppe had made a conqueſt of al the cōpany; & thē ipſe
hee qui the which leapte ouer the hedge, and fel in the ditch, A, B, C, non
habet P: how rouſts the henne when the cock is a ſleep: tis twelue a clock,
and god giue you good night:

Ar.

But is it poſſible, was ther ſuch good good fellowſhip?
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=8) much good do
their hearts, and yet tis pitty ther was not more dauncing and leſſe drinke:
for then their heeles might haue held vp their heads, and their waies might
haue been fit for a better worke: but ſo long, as they went all one waie, I
like the better of their trauell.

Tid.

Oh ſir: a little nap makes them as freſh as if they had neuer been ſalted: and
daunce and ſing, and if need bee a better thinge: tuſhe they are a gallant
peo­ple, the men were good muſitians, and there wenches would ſing
excellently: but for that I had no long time to tary there, I could not
obſerue much more then I haue told you: and therefore if the time wil giue vs
leaue, I will tell you what I ſaw in an other countrie, which I next fell
vpon.

Ar.

I praie thee doe, thou canſt not pleaſe mee bet­ter.

Tid.

I will tell you: croſſing but a little riuer, and it was ouer a ſhort narrow
ſtone bridge, I fell into a Country that had another name, which mighte well
be: for in many things me thoughte it differed in na­ture.

Ar.

As how? I praie thee tell me.

Tid.

Firſt for the ſoyle it was more full of ſand, and Duſt, and not ſo fair and
fat, as the neighbour country, yet had it no lack of wood, nor Corne nor
fruite: For the country people, I meane the meaneſt ſort fed much of garden
commodities; which with helpe of a little oyle, and ſcarce ſweet butter, made
them diſhes of meat fit for their ſtomackes: and their drinke was moſte either
vpon plaine water of the brooke, or vpon Apple water, otherwiſe called Sider
which [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=9) which
was in a manner their wine: their villages large and their houſes ſtrong,
though nothing ſtately: the people moſt plaine without welt or guarde, or
almoſte wit or vnderſtanding, more then to know their owne, the way to the
Church and the field, and the Taphouſe if there were any in the Towne, the way
to the Market and home againe; to plough, and plant, and ſowe, and reape, to
thraſh and grind, to make hard bread and eat it with ſtrong teeth, to make
Loue illfauouredly and to get children to furniſh the pariſh: theſe were the
main points of their conditions: for to talke of more then a Codshead, would
trouble a fiſherman, the ſhephearde more then of a ſheepshead, nor the
ploweman further then his tillage▪ nor the Butcher more then his Bullock: for
if you did goe any further, you did but trouble their capacities: but for
thoſe matters you ſhould hear them talke ſo ſauourly, that if you did want
witt to conſider how ſoone thoſe ſmall Cunnings woulde bee learned, you would
haue been buried in a dungheape, ere you could get out of the cleane: oh how
the fiſherman would diſcourſe of his angle, his line, his cork, his lead, his
bait, his net, his grinne, his leape, his weere, and I know not what; his
obſeruing of time day and night, his patience to attend, his crafte in drawing
his baite along the ſtreame, his dreſſing of his baite to drawe the fiſh to
it, his playing with the fiſh when he hadde him, his hoiſing of him out of the
water, and then what a meſſe or meate he could make of him, although
per­happes it prooued all but a Gudgin: but if it were a Codshead, his lippes
would bee worth the licking, and in this was his Element, heere was his ſtudy,
and [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=9) in theſe
matters of little moment, woulde hee ſpen d the whole ſpirit of his
vnderſtanding. With whome, although it were no greate hurte, for to looſe a
little time, yet it was ſome pleaſure for to heare him, and beſides to noate
his kinde of pride in his poore trade.

The Sheepheard he would ſo talke of his Rammes and his Weathers, of his Ewes
and his Lambs, his hogs and his ſheerlings: the big h [...]ne, and the fine
wooll, the deepe ſide, and the broad Ioines: the nature of theyr breed, and of
their feed, their waſhing, their ſhearing, their marking, their folding, their
diſeaſes and their me­dicines: the Flie and the Scabbe, and how to trimme
them, and picke them, and dreſſe them, and then with a ſigh to talke of the
Rot, and what a heauy thing it is a­mong them: to be ſhort, if you had time to
attend the end of his diſcourſe, there is no Heraulde in ſearching out and
deliuering of a coate of a very greate Antiqui­ty, could weary you more then
hee woulde your pati­ence, with a tale of the Petigree of ſome of his choyce
Cattell: for ſuch a Ramme was of ſuch an Ewe, that was bredde in ſuch a
grounde, of ſuch a Mans, that had ſo many Rammes from ſuch a ground, and he
that was the Maſter of ſuch a ground brought ſom twenty Rammes from ſuch a
Country, and withall the owner of thoſe Sheepe had them out of ſuch a Shire,
of the beſt ſtrayne that was in all that Countrey, and they in that Country:
came I know not from whence, but and if I woulde hauè ſtayed for to haue
hearde him out, I think that he woulde neuer haue left, till he had come to
Iacob, or Laban, or Abell the firſt Shephearde
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=10) that euer
was, to come to the Straine of his Sheepe: but, I left at a point enough for
my learning: for I ga­thered out of all in briefe, how ſoon he that had mony
might learne to gaine by ſheep, though he would not lap himſelfe in a ſheeps
ſkinne: but, if you ſhould take him out of his element; then he was gone, and
you did his capacity much hurt: for, there was the ſumme of his worlds
paradiſe: of which he would ſpeake with ſuch a feeling contentment, th [...]
it were pitty ſuch a ſpirite ſhould be drawn from his pleaſure: but, to be
ſhort by the ſum of his ſpeeche I gathered in briefe, with mony how to make a
good ſhepheard in a little time: on a hard ground breed ſmall ſheepe; on a fat
ground big­ger boned: put not the Rams to the Ewes too ſoon, for feare the
Lamb be to forward: looke to them for the Scab, and the flie, leaſt I looſe my
ſheepe, or my ſheepe looſe her fleece: giue them dry layer, for fear of the
rot; and in lamming time, to take heed of the Fox, the wolfe the Brock, and
other vermine: to waſh them in fayre weather, not to ſheare them till they be
dry, and take heede of clipping of their ſkinnes, for feare of the flie: to
put them in good paſture, and haue an eie to them for feare of the theeſe:
many other ſuch kind of matters belong to the care of ſuch a courſe: but,
becauſe I ra­ther deſired the knowledge, then the profeſſion of it, I left him
to his flock, which God bleſſe to his holy plea­ſure, and ſo an end. Then fell
I in with the ploughman, who tolde me ſuch a tale of the nature of the earth,
of the choiſe of his ſeede, of his firſt and ſecond tilthe, of his manuring,
plowing, ſowing, harrowing, reaping, binding, carting, pitching, mowing,
threſhing, winow­ing,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=10) and fanning:
and ſo putting vp into the Garner for ſtore, or into the ſacks for the mill,
or the market, with haye Ree, & Who to his horſe; and hum and hah to me with
ſuch a garlicke breath, as would haue poiſoned a dog: I learned enough in a
little time, to ſerue me for a great while, for though I loue to know any
thing, yet God bleſſe my brains, for my limmes are not not now fit for labour:
Age and trauaile, hath giuen them too great a weakneſſe, beſides the nature of
my ſpirit, that though it hath carried my bodie on the earth yet, hath it euer
looked aboue the earth, for my com­forte.

Ar:

I thanke thee for that yet, with all my hearte: and I am not a little glad to
heare it: that all the worlde cannot make thee to forget heauen: for it is no
little happineſſe to ſee much, & knowe much, and make good vſe of all: For,
cannot a a man be a fiſher, but he muſt gape like a cods head? nor bee maſter
of a fewe ſheepe, but hee muſt liue and die in a ſheepes coate? or haue a barn
full of corne, but hee muſte bee bounde prentiſe to his flaile? the miller &
his mare may doe well both to carry ſackes, but the Maiſter of them both
ſhoulde not put his wits into a bagge: beleeue me, it is not a little griefe
to think how men beefoole themſelues, or the deuil bewitch­es men with folly:
why, is it not a myſerie to think, howe the breath of one villaine, poyſons
the heartes of an hundred: When he that trauailes a good ſubiect, comes home
againe a traytor, ſerues god at home, and the deuill abroad, goes fourthe to
gaine honour, and comes home to bee hanged? are not theſe pittifull illuſions?
well, ha [...]py art thou that haſte been infected with none of theſe
diſeaſes: but tel mee I pray thee, what didst thou further note in the
courtes, and cities of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=11) that country
and other, where thou haſt been.

Tid.

I will: the citties in that country were large, & well builded, for ſtrength
more then beauty, for they were moſt of ſtone, and couered with a kinde of
ſlate, but many of theyr townes were decaied, their caſtles, and chief howſes,
ruinated, as it ſhould ſeeme, either by ſome ciuill warres, or ſome vnciuil
Enemy: for the gouernors, they wer men of further matter for theyr wit, thē
their aſpects, did make promiſe of: and yet they would knit the browes, look
vnder the Eies, ſtroke downe their beards, nod with their heads, ſhake vp
poore men; whippe Roges, Rate Beggars, empriſon offenders, hang vp theeues and
in all they could, ſeeke to maintaine peace: that was one thing I cheefely
no­ted in their Citties: but for their courts I ſtaied ſo little a while in
them, that I cannot iuſtly ſaie any thing in their commendation; and yet in
the contrary I would ſaie as little, for feere I ſhoulde wrong them: But in
their townes, and citties, I ſawe many things and ma­ny prettie lawes, and
cuſtomes among them, which in mine opinion were not vnworthy the noting: The
firſt law was, that no man ſhould marry a faire wench with­out mony, except
hee were rich: for fear of the horne for want of maintenance:

Item that no old woman that had wealth and children ſhould marry a young
beggar, for feare of waſting her childies goods, and putting her ſelfe to her
patience:

No man aged ſhould marry a wench too young, for feare of the curſe of
contrarietyes.

No man ſhould be a ſtranget to his owne howſe, for fear his wife would procue
a goſſip.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=11) No woman
ſhould be maſter of her huſband, for feare of the next neighbors riding.

No man ſhould bring his horſe into a ſtable, but he ſhould pay for his meat
ere he came out.

No man ſhould take more then he had warrant for, leſt he ſhould anſwer it at
the gallowes.

No vintner ſhould mingle water with his wine, except he vvere allovved it by
his Company.

No Tailor ſhould put more ſtuffe in a garment, then vvas allowed him for his
meſure.

No ſhoemaker ſhould make his ſhoos to ſtrong, for feare they hold to long.

No Tradesman ſhould ſell his ware too good cheape, for feare of hinderance to
his Trade.

No Ieſter ſhould bee fauoured of the wiſe, for feare of being more knaue then
foole.

No Conſtable ſhould be ſuffered to be drunk, for feare the vvatchmen ſhould
fall aſleepe.

No Fool ſhould inherit too much land, for fear a knaue ſhould to ſoone alter
the property.

He that could get no children ſhould not mary: and ſhe that could not abide a
man, ſhould bee ſet to keepe chickens.

No man might haue two vviues, for feare of breeding vnquietnes.

No woman might haue two huſbands, for feare ſhe ſhould be in loue vvith
neither.

Many other ſuch idle things there vvere agreed vp­on among them; vvhich for
tediouſnes I let paſſe: for being no maters of great moment, it is no great
matter for their remembrance, only thus much I remember,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=12) that no man
ſhould be found drunke in a houſe, but he ſhould be laid in the ſtreete till
he were ſober▪

Ar.

Prety items, and good reaſon for the keeping of them: for as I ſaid before,
lack of care among mad people, may be the ſpoile of a whole market; it is not
meet that men ſhould be per­ſwaded, that the moon is made of a green cheeſe;
it is a princi­ple in Philoſophy: Contraries can not be togither: age and
youth can not be in one predicament: Ianuary and May ne­uer meet togither,
but, if age long to be in his graue, youth wil be a good ſtaffe to lead him to
it but I mean the crooked crip­ples, that are not able to looke vp ſo high as
the eie of Venus, with a golden ſhowr will think to come in at the window of
her chamber: and therefore ſuch an abſurdum ſhould not paſſe in the ſchoole of
Cupid: though that ſomtime, for breeding an old Stalian, may be better then a
yong Colte.

Secondly, he that is a ſtranger to his wife, is worthy to find her a
ſtraggler: and ſhe that is maſter of her husband, muſt weare the breeches.

Againe, hay is deere, prouender is costly, and horſe meate muſt be paied for,
and therefore let trauailers looke to their purſes.

And for theeues, when they are hanged, honest men thriue the better.

For Vintners, Tailers, Shoomakers, and all Tradeſmen, pitty but they ſhould
liue by their trades.

And for a drunken Constable, why he may be the ſpoile of a watch; but for
fooles and ieſters the world is prettly well rid of them, and therfore I ſay
no more to them. But I pray thee go on with thy trauail, and tell me ſomwhat
els that thou haſt ſeen and noted.

Tid.

I ſaw ſomthing that it grieued me to ſee, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=12) no leſſe to
remember.

I ſaw in a City or borrough towne, I know not well whether a pitifull ſight,
An old old, and very very very aged old man, with a moſt exceeding illfauoured
and ougly face, and a much far and a great deale worſe bo­dy, whoſe legs were
worſe then wood, for they would haue ſtood vpright, which his could not; with
a pair of eies worſe then glaſſe, for they were cleer and his were not: and,
with ſuch a breath, as except to the ſtinke of a rotten toothe, I cannot
compare it to any ill ſauor in the world. Now this vntimely, miſbegotten and
accur­ſed borne creature, was (alas that I ſhould ſpeake it) maried for his
money to a moſt fayr, ſweet, yong, dain­ty, ſtrait, fine damſell that a man
might ſee in a whole city, oh fine loue that could be betwixt them.

Ar.

Fy vpon it, what an ouerſight was that in the whole pariſh? why, the maids or
the young men, or ſome good body or other might haue forbid the banes, or haue
taken hir away from him, by the way: was there neuer an Orlando that wold
venter a lim for Iſſabell?

Tid.

Yes that there was, for els I feare I ſhould haue ſpoild the Groome, howſoeuer
it woulde after haue faln out with the Bride; but, to tell you what fell out,
vpon a ſodaine as this monſter of a Man was comming homewards to his owne
houſe, a little from the towne, in a little Lane at the turning of a hedge,
were prepa­red for the purpoſe tenn gallant Caualieroes, well horſed, and
weaponed, and euery way fully appointed for the purpoſe: put the peaſaunte to
his palſey, and on a ſpare horſe furniſhed for the purpoſe, took the Bride in
all her ritche Iewells and coſtly attire, and farre
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=13) from that
country carried her, from whence he coulde neuer fetch her: for griefe
whereof, I meane his rich Chaines of pearls, and iewels, wherewith hee had
a­dorned his worlds idol, he took ſuch a heauines in his hearte, as tumbled
his head in his graue: and ſhee ſweet Lady, liued a happy life with a more
worthy be­loued.

Ar.

More ſaiſt thou? why leſſe worthy could none bee, if he were as thou hast
deſcribed him: oh curſed pelf, that makes ſuch a Coblatiue couiunction: but
this is the fault of ma­ny fooles, that, as Iewes doe Moors, ſel their
children for mo­ny: but the end of thy tale, was better then the beginning,
which I was glad to heare: but tell me haſt thou ſuch an o­ther?

Tid.

Yes that I haue, and much of the ſame nature, In a country market towne, neare
vnto this citty dwelt a woman of great wealth, who being of the yeares of
ſcarce vnderſtanding, for ſhee could hardly goe, with out Leaning, a moſt
hollow eied, wrincled faced, drop­ping noſed, toothleſſe mouthed, ſlauering
lipped, moſt ill countenanced, worie complexioned, and worſe con­ditioned,
crooked, creeping and cripled old woman, fel in loue with a moſt gallant,
neat, handſome, tall, ſtraight and goodly gentleman, who for the only loue of
that ſhe had, caſte himſelfe away, vpon this old Croane: but, though he had a
little troubled his conſcience, with a little ceremony, the matter far from
his hart, fin­ding her humour too much enclined, to the ſpaniſh grape, and for
want of naturall heat, to drincke much of ſpirits of wine▪ & hot waters plied
her ſo with ſuch drinks, as droue her into ſuch a heate, as put her into
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=13) ſuch a feuer,
as carried her quickly to her long home, and left him poſſeſſor of all her
wealth:

Ar.

A good bargaine, but ill gotten for ſuch a kindnes, was but a kinde of poyſon:
but yet, if hee meante not her death, it was no great matter for her ſicknes.

Tid.

Oh no, I haue heard him proteſt, not for all the world, for had ſhe liued ſhe
ſhould haue lacked no che­riſhing, but for lyeing with her, hee woulde not
haue come in bed with her, for hurting her; for ſhee was ſo tender that ſhee
was ready to fal in peeces.

Ar.

It was done like an honeſt man, to haue ſome pitty on her that had ſo much
loued him, I thanke him for it, euery man would not bee ſo kinde: but on I
praye you, haſte thou any more of theſe?

Tid.

Not in this nature, but if it may not ſeeme te­dious, I could tel you a merry
tale, how I loſt my ſelfe at a wedding.

Ar.

I praie thee doe.

Tid.

It was my hap one daie to hear of a great Bridail, or contry wedding, in a
pretty village neer vnto a mar­ket towne, which ſolemnity was kept, at the
houſe of one ſir Slapſawce, a ſlouenly knight, that by an vnhap­py chaunce
came by a title more then hee was worthy of: for hee had nothing in him of a
knighte, more then his title, excepte it were, that hee wore ſpurres and a
ſworde: for hee was vſed to ride very often to the faires, and to the Market,
and they were both guilte and dammaſked for feare of wearing out too ſoone, A
ſatten Ierkin he wore, which was his greate grand­fathers, & it was his pride
to ſpeak of it in honor of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=14) Antiquitie,
beſide a brooch in his hat, which was the Boſſe of ſome horſe bridle, that
hauing beene ſome pawne to his ancetors, was left to him for a legaſie: which
beeing ſet in his hat, would make him ſhake the head with no ſmall pride: but
not to ſtand too long vp­on an idle deſcription,

Let it ſuffice that he was fat, both in belly and purſe: dwelte in a faire
houſe, and kept good victuals for his friends which were not many, nor often:
but, at feaſts, hee would be luſty, brewe good beare, & down with a bullock:
and make no ſpare as long as it woulde laſt: So now at this time betwixt
Maiſter Ienkin his el­deſt ſonne, and miſtris Parnel, his neighbours daughter
whoſe fathers purſe made a match with his land, there I ſay at his houſe at
this bridale feaſt, was a great mee­ting of all the gallants of both genders
in the Country I omit to tel what charge he ſaued by the world, of Capons,
Chickins, Geeſe, Lambes, pigs, yea and ſome Bullocks, brought in by the
tennants, with malt and meale, beſide Apples plummes and plumm cakes, that
there wāted nothing that might be had, ſo good cheap but all this is nothing
to the purpoſe of that I meane to ſpeak of, for during this time of feaſting
being in the Summer time, ther wanted no variety of ſports, as hun­ting,
hawking Muſicke and dauncing, courting, and kiſſing, and what not, that was
neceſſary: and yet for my ſelf, being brought thither by a friend, I left my
ſelfe I know not how and not being out of a chamber was as it were in a wood,
ſawe many waies and knewe not which to take: for when I had taken a
ſuperficiall view of them all olde and young, faire and foule: men and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=14) woemen: I was
in ſuch a caſe, that I knew not which waie to turne mee, for, firſt touching
the men, one hee was ſo fine at kiſſing of his hand, as if he did wipe his
mouth at euery worde, an other would congey ſo low that his points had much
adoe to holde, ſo that thoſe were too full of compliments, for my conference,
an other hee was ſo neate, fine, and all ſo fine, that for fear of tutching
his ruffes, diſplacing his ſword pointe, or ſome ſuch nice kinde of Anoyance,
I durſt not come too neer him: An other, he was ſo rude & ſo buiſie with euery
bodie, that I was loath to be troubled with him: An other was ſo eloquent,
that I knew not how to talk with him: An other was ſo dull of vnderſtanding,
that I had no edge to deale with him, Another ſo baſhfull, that I was loath to
make him bluſh: and another ſo ſawcy▪ that I was glad to ſhunne him, and other
was ſo old that I ſhould haue had a Chronicle, to anſwer him and an other ſo
young, that it was pitty to trouble him: thus among men I could ſingle out no
mate: And for the woemen, if one had a good wit, then was her face nothing
anſwerable, ſo that I coulde rather deſire to hear her, then ſee her: and if
an other were faire, then her wit was oute of the waie, ſo that I mighte
rather pleaſe mine eie then trouble my tong with her, ano­ther if ſhee were
rich, then was ſhe ſo olde that ſhee was out of date with mee: an other was ſo
younge, that I was affraid to venter on her: So that, in ſome, I knewe not how
to beſtirre mee: either to ſtand like a ſpie, to heer, and ſee, and ſaie
nothing, and to looſe time, in tal­king to idlenes, but to tell you of the
graces, and coun­tenances of them all, as well men as woemen▪ it were
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=15) a prety Ieſt
to thinke on: if I could remember them all in the right: for the men, one
would ſtand ſnuffing and ſpitting, as if he had bin new come from Tabacco: An
other would ſit ſhaking of his legs, as though hee were kicking of a dull
horſe: an other would ſtand with his armes aſtrut, like a Scarcrow in a peas-
garden, another wold ſet out his foot to look vpon his new ſhooſtrings:
another would frown, as though he were too good for the company, and another
bite the lippe, as though he had ſom pain in his middle finger: one did look
as if he woulde whine for an ill looke of his Miſtriſſe, another ſtand like a
Godſon that ſhould be conning of his leſ­ſon by heart, one like a foole that
was aſhamed of good company: and another like a knaue that was a Setter for
fooles: ſo that, afrayd to touche one, come neere an other, trouble one, or
bee troubled with another, I left my old Maſters to their ha now ha, and the
Madcapps to their heidegies, and for a while rather ſtood to the blame of
ſilence, then would flie the ſhame of folly: and ſo leauing euery one to his
humor, fell to note the va­riety of countenances, among the woemen: one would
ſit mumping, as though teeth would haue much plea­ſured her: Another nod the
head, as though ſhe hadd bin nurtering of youth; another lere on either ſide,
as a Cat at a mouſehole; another ſwell with pride, as if ſhe were Miſtris of
the Harueſt cart, another make ſo ma­ny faces, that ſhee had nere a good one
among them; one would be ſtretching of her bodies, as if her waſte were too
ſtreight, another bee putting off and on hir gloues, to ſhew the rings on her
fingers, another ſtand and ſigh as if her heart would haue burſt for loue.

Ar.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=15)

Yea marry, that was the wenche I looked for all this while: did not her colour
come and go often, and did ſhe not vſe little ſpeech, and change the coppy of
her countenance, and fiddle much with her fingers, and wag the forepart of her
ſoot and withdraw her ſelfe from much company?

Tid.

She did all this and much more, as ſomtime lay­ing her hand on her heart,
another while ſtretching her fingers to heare them cracke, as if euery ierke
of a ioynt were a huſband, and by and by look in her hand, as though ſhe had
been tolde of her fortune vnder her middle finger, and then a little ſhake the
head, as if it wer not fully to her mind; & this wēch did I fall aboord
withall; and for lack of better buſines, fell to court her with a few good
words.

Ar.

As how I pray thee:

Tid.

In this manner: fayr virgin, if it be no trouble to your patience to put you
out of your paſſion, let me in­treat you to remoue your melancholy, for it is
not a­greeable to your complexion: ſir quoth ſhe, it may bee you haue made me
bluſh, to think what you would ſay to me, but if my mind be not in perfect
ſtate, I can not take you for a Phiſician: yet for your good counſaile I
thanke you, and that is all the fee you muſt looke for.

Ar.

The wench had ſome wit, I perceiue by her anſwer.

Tid

Wit, yes at will, for this was but the firſt blowe, but ſee what followed:
Lady quoth I, your fee is too greate, for ſuch a ſmall peece of Phiſicke; but,
indeede if that I did but knowe the Nature of your diſ­eaſe, I woulde ſtudye
for your cure, and deſerue a fee before I woulde take it: but the mynde of
ſickeneſſe [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=16) is
vpon ſo many cauſes, that the griefe is hard to geſſe, without ſom light from
the agrieued: but that known, he is either vnlearned or vnlucky that can
miniſter no cōfort: you ſay well quoth ſhe, but what if it be known to be
cureles, what then is any counſaile without com­fort?

Ar.

Perilous Ape, I feare it will proue an Vrchin.

Tid.

Oh no, tis a prety creature, as you will confeſſe when you heare more: but let
me tell you my replie. It may quoth I ſeem cureles, that may haue helpe, and
therefore good words may do good in the nature of a good wil: words quoth ſhe
are good when they are wel ſpoken; better when they are well meant, & good
when they are well taken, and better when they are well re­turned: but for
good will, it is a kind of riddle that ſim­ple wits vnderſtād not; for fine
wits can ſo equiuocate, that plain meaning is much abuſed, where the
miſbe­liefe of good words makes the ouerthrovv of a good mind.

Ar.

Why how now man, was this a wenche?

Tid.

It was a woman at leaſt of woman kind, as fayr a damſell as I thinke liues in
the world: but, let me tell you how I went about with my witts to meete a
little with her good will. Lady quoth I, good will grounded vpon good cauſe,
may out of a good meaning bring forth good words, which working good effect in
agood mind, may vpon a good conſideration worke a good concluſion; Beauty is a
good thing to the Eie, vertue to the mind theſe work a loue in deſart, which
is good in reaſon: Novv loue in reaſon hauing a great povver in nature, may
make the riddle eaſy to be red, wher know­ledge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=16) vvill not
diſſemble ignorance.

Ar.

Well ſaid wag, it was well put to.

Tid.

No ſuch matter, my fortune vvas yet too far from ſuch a figure; for, let me
tell you her anſvver, and then giue your iudgment.

Ar.

I pray thee do.

Tid.

Why Sir quoth ſhe I perceiue you go from one Riddle to another; knovvledge to
diſſemble ignorance is for vviſedom to bee hid in folly, vvhich is a ſtrange
conſtruction for a weak capacity: if the cauſe of good will be miſconceiued,
the good words may then be diſ­placed, and ſo the matter miſtaken the time may
be but miſpent: Beauty is but a ſhadow that hath no ſubſtāce, where reaſon
may be blinded with illuſion, and vertue is ſo far from nature, that it is not
ſeen but with the eye of grace; and for Loue it is grown ſuch a leſt, that it
is rather laughed at then beleeued in the world: therfore where you find
beauty, do not flatter it with vertue, till you ſee it: and for vertue do not
amiſſe conceiue it, leaſt you wrong your ſelf in it, but where in deed you
find it, I can not blame you to loue it.

Ar.

Oh vnhappy the [...]fe, able to rob reaſon of his vnderſtan­ding: but I hope
thou wouldeſt not leaue her ſo.

Tid.

I think not, for thus I fell vpon a replie: to blame loue were a blot in
kindnes, and to yeelde to reaſon is a bond in wit▪ to find folly in wiſedom is
the ſearche of a deep wit, and to wey words in their true worth, is the proofe
of good vnderſtāding: but to laugh at loue is no proof of good wil: If
therefore the vertue of your ſpirit in the beauty of your eies hath drawn my
hart to loue, will you not be as good as your word, not to blame me
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=17) for dooïng
well: for if reaſon faile not my conceipte, let me not mooue patience in
ſpeaking truth, & let not truth ſeeme flattery, where vertue hath but her due
honoure: ſo ſhall the riddle be ſoone read, whoſe ſubſtance is but your ſelfe,
and the paſſion beſt cured wher my humble ſeruice may be graced: Sir quoth ſhe
I hope you wil pardon my weaknes, to entertain your patience with idlenes: for
to anſwere your Argumēts, would require a better Scholar, then my learning:
you may iudge amiſſe and meane well, Complexions and conditions may differ,
and I maie beleeue, and be de­ceiued, when wordes may want their weighte in
good will: Loue is a dangerous ſpirit, and where hee is ſna­red by any
ſubtilty, doth much hurt, where he is ta­ken: If I were ſo well acquainted
with him, as you woulde ſeeme to bee, it maye be, I ſhoulde employe him as you
woulde, but to leaue ridling, in reaſon let me tell you this: as I woulde not
bee vuthankfull to a ſtraunger: ſo would I not bee ſtraunge to my ſelfe, as I
can commend your wit, I muſt haue care of my will, & til I be able to be a
friēd, not to admit the entertain­mēt of a ſeruāt; & therfore, whē you
know my diſeaſe, hoping you wil be my Phiſitiā, I wil follow your coun­ſail▪
to be as merry as I maie, & hauing no better fee, onely I thank you for your
kindnes: Lady quoth I, I am ſory, Time admits me not, with your fauour, to
deliuer you further my minde, Let it ſuffice you that I am youres more then I
can ſaye, thoughe I can ſaie no more, then that I am yours: if occaſion in
your com­maundement may make triall of my truſt, I will attend my deſart in
the hope of your regarde: and ſo hoping, that loue will bee without daunger,
where words car­ry
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=17) the true
weight: if affection may helpe a paſſion, let me intreat you to applye my
faith to your fancy, and I hope my phiſick will doe you good: but ſince,
neither time, nor place doth fitte our further confe­rence, I praie you let me
intreat you thus f [...]re to ho­nour my fortune, as to wear this ring for my
ſake, a lit­tie hoope of gold, in which was ingraued, Sic fides, ſo is faith,
pure, and without end: which with a bluſhinge deniall, vpon ſuch importunity,
ſhee tooke and gaue me for a fauour to weare for her ſake, a little Cupid of
Bugle finely wroght, and written ouer his eyes in black letters: Caecus ſictus
Amor; vpon the mutuall receipte of theſe tokens, with ſome little ſhorte
congey wee parted, leauing her to her old paſſion, that I knew not; or to this
newe paſſion that I had mooued, but yet, founde not, or to ſmile at my folly,
which I doubted not: and ſo ſequeſtring my ſelfe from the woemen to chewe the
cud of this kindneſſe, I fell, or at leſt was fal­en vpon, by a young gallant
in ſhewe, but indeed a companion for a dogge, rather then for any better
condition: Yet to bleer the eies of fools he could plaie the knoue with
ſetting on the face of an honeſt man: this youth in a baſket, with a face of
Braſſe, vpon a little ac­quaintance (for a little would ſerue his turne) comes
to me, with this ſalutation: by your leaue ſir: It ſeemes you are a ſtraunger
in theſe partes, but if you can a­waie with our countrie ſports, will you make
one at bowles for a rubber or two? we wil play no great game (and yet would
hee cheat for a ſhilling:) No good ſir quoth I, I thank you, I am not
acquainted with your groūd, & ſhould but pul down a ſide, & therfore I pray
you nowe pardon mee: will you then ſir quoth hee haue a reſte at Primero, or a
game or two at tables:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=18) it is the
worſt thing in the world to ſtand idle: true ſir quoth I, but it is as good be
Idle, as ill exerciſed, and to tell truth, I am no gamſter: beſides indeede,
vnder the ſhadowe of ieſting; I did not like he ſhould ieſt awaie my mony:
Indeed Sir, to ſaie the truth you do the bet­ter, it is the worſt ſpent mony
at plaie, that can bee: for recreation, among good company, a little mony is
not ill ventered: but I pray you ſir, what news abroad? hear you nothing from
the Court? nor from beyonde the Seas? now I knowing his condition, and
deſirous to bee ridde of his Company, told him, that I heard no late newes
from the court, but from beyonde the Seas I heard ſome letters read, in which
I ſaw no matter of Import; but one I pray you ſir quoth hee (Rowſing vp his
raſcall humour) in hope to hear of ſome matter for his purpoſe: let me be
holding to hear it, for we in the Country liue ſo farre off from al good
places, that news com to vs like fiſhes, neuer till it bee ſtale: and and yet
ther too, are we glad of it: why ſir quoth I, thus it is; I read, that there
was a notable knaue vnder the ſhadow of a fool, vſed to great mēs howſes,
wher with a bold face railing vpon one to pleaſe an other, he would abuſe
both: and euer chiefly following the beſt cheere, the deepeſt purſes, and
ſhalloweſt wits, thus ſomtime with a gull, and otherwhile with a white pigeon,
one while with a Gander, an other while with his grey gooſe, it fell out, that
there was diuers miſchiefes wrought by his villany: The Chamber maid, was
poi­ſoned in her ſleep, wherevpon ſhee fel into a timpany: my young maſter
loſt much money at play, and tales went betwixt friendes to ſet neighbours
together by [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=18)
the Eares: with theeſe, and many other ſuch Trickes, this cuſtomer with all
his confederates, being founde one daie together, aboute ſome wicked
conſultation, were by a generall conſent, taken ſuddenly together, whipte all
out of the citty, and baniſhed the Country, vpon pain of death neuer to
returne. Is it poſſible quoth hee ſtrange newes in deede, I thank you for it:
wel Sir, you will not walke abroad, I will leaue you for a while, and com to
you anon: but I heard no more of him for that time.

Ar.

It is no matter if you neuer hear more of him, nor a­ny of his condition: for,
if there he one honeſt man of them, he is out of the waie from al his
companie, but I praie thee tell me what became of the wench, didſt thou ſee
her no more ne­ther?

Tid.

Yes that I did, I ſaw her, I ſpake with her, and with much adoe obtained fauor
at her hand: but if it might not be tedious▪ I will tell you a little of the
circum­ſtance that paſſed betwixt vs, ere we came to the chief pointe.

Ar.

Which pointe was that? the buſke pointe, or the gaſ­kin pointe?

Tid.

Tuſh a pinne for thoſe points, our thoughtes were carried in a higher courſe
of contentment: I will tell yow ſhee was faire, which made me not fooliſh, ſhe
was kinde, which made not me careles, ſhee was wiſe, which made not me
wilfull, and ſhee was vertu­ous, which made not me vnhappy: but, while I thus
commend her, I ſaie nothing of our conference, which was as I will tell you:
The next daie beeing fair, & ma­ny Ladies, and gentlewomen willing to take the
aire, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=19) hand in
hand, euery one ſingling out his miſtreſſe, lea­ding them along vpon a fayr
green, conuerſing as they thought conuenient; my ſelfe not willing to bee
lefte alone, and moſte willing to haue ſo good a friende, tooke out my
Miſtriſſe by entreaty, to take a little pati­ence with my trouble; with whome,
hauing trod a ſtep or two, I fel aboord with in this manner. Sweet miſtris,
though idle heads make a fiction of Cupid, yet better Iudging heartes know,
that Loue can neuer bee blin­ded: for the eies of Loue looking into the hearte
of vertue, ſweare the ſeruice of Reaſon, to the honour of Beautye: Seruante
quoth ſhee, (ſince you will needes haue it ſo) Let mee tell you yet, that
there is no golde pure vntill it bee refined, nor any ringe but it hath two
endes, till they bee both ioyned in one: ſo faith is not knowne, till it be
prooued, nor endleſſe, but in the knot of Loue: But, as it is a greate Arte to
refine golde, and no leſſe cunning to caſte it into a Ring: ſo is it a greate
proofe of Witte, to find out the pureneſſe of faith▪ and no leſſe happineſſe
to make vſe of it in Loue: but, as good mindes will euer conſtrue good things
vnto the beſt, ſo for to doubte the worſe, is not amiſſe in the beſt meaning:
Lady quoth I, a cauſeleſſe ſuſpition breedes a needeleſſe iealouſie, and where
all good is intended, why ſhoulde any be miſconſtrued: the refining of gold is
in the fire, and the ſitting of the Ring in the hande; ſo, is the trying of
faith in the care of affection, but the knitting of Loue, is in the content of
the heart. Where if feare bee a hinderaunce vnto happineſſe, reaſon muſt want
a part of his perfection: In deede quoth ſhe, hope
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=19) is a prety
humour, but it is not alwayes followed with felicity: but for that I would
neither hide the Sunne in a cloude, nor make daye light of Mooneſhine, I will
leaue to your owne diſcretion to conſider, what is beſt to bee conceiued: and
for that, all eyes are not in one head, nor all thoughtes in one heart, let
mee intreate you to bee wiſe for your ſelfe, and I ſhall bee the glad­der of
your vvell dooing: Lady quoth I, I ſhall do well in nothing, but your
gladneſſe, neyther ſhall I bee glad of any thing, but in that you ſhall well
allowe of: for, to be wiſe in your will, ſhall ſtand the happineſſe of my
witt, and to paſſe the courſe of your contentment, ſhall bee the imperfection
of my diſcretion; and therefore let eies looke how they liſte, and heartes
thinke what they liſt, to your vertue I auowe my loue, and in your Loue be the
ioy of my life. Seruant quoth ſhee, I com­maund you then whatſoeuer you ſee to
haue patience, and whatſoeuer you heare to haue ſilence, vntill the next time
that wee meete againe, when you ſhal heare that ſhall not greeue you, though
not enioy that may content you: and ſo let vs away, for our company is go­ing
in, and I haue ſpoiled a Gooſe that I muſt plucke a feather with: with theſe
good wordes and ſuch like, wee went ſomething faſt, vntill we ouertooke our
company that were going before vs, and in we went into the par­lor, where
beeing all ſet, ſome fell to cardes, ſome to Tables, ſome to playing vppon
Inſtruments of Mu­ſique, and ſome to ſinging, I placing my ſelfe ſome­what
neere vnto my newe Miſtriſſe, tooke a booke in myne hand, and fell to reading
of it, which beeing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=20) of the ſpoile
of Troy, ſcarce had I read three lines of the firſt leaſe, but a ſtraunge
humorde braine, that had but a little wit in his head, falles in hand with my
fair miſtris: but, if I ſhould tell you howe ſhee handled him, it were a tale
almoſt worth the telling.

Ar.

I praie thee doe for ten to one, if hee were a cappe, ſhe would fit him with a
coks combe:

Tid.

And ſo ſhee did, and a bell and a bable to it, or els I am deceiued: for let
me tell you, firſt for his pro­portion, he was ſquared out of a timber logge,
which was crooked at both ends, and little better in the midſt, his face bigge
enough, and wanted no noſe, and for his lippes they ſuted his ſlauer well, his
haire of the color of a roane horſe, and as hard as the ſtumpe of a Rubbing
bruſh: and for a beard it was ſo thick, that it harboured a greate traine of
his retinue, his bo­dy much after the Barrell, and his legges with the wrong
ende vpwardes, yet had this fellow a paire of bootes on, and ſpurres, that
were too long for his heeles: now for his apparrel, had hee been a trauailer,
I ſhould haue taken him for ſome ſtraunge foole, but beeing, as I after heard,
a neighbours childe, I found he was a notable gull: Nowe this foole falls to
cour­ting of my Miſtris, and thus hee comes to her: Miſt­ris are you heere? I
thinke I haue fitted you nowe, am I not in your colours: why quoth ſhee, you
haue ſo many, that I cannot tell which is mine, if I were a greate Lady, folks
would take you for my foole: but I ſee your trickes well enough; becauſe you
haue many miſtreſſes, you woulde haue coloures for them all; why, let me ſee,
you have Aſhe coloure for
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=20) one, Oh that
is for her that hath the greene ſickneſſe: and yealow for another, that is for
her, that hath the yealow Iaunders, you know who I meane, that was ſick for
loue of you: and white for an other, that was lately recouered of an Ague, or
a worſe matter, you know the cauſe of her ſickneſſe: and blewe for an other,
becauſe ſhe is in a conſūption through your vn­kindnes: and tawny for an
other, you knowe who that was, that painted her ſelfe, and her coloure was not
right: and Carnation for another, who you knowe, is daintilie painted, but for
whom is your Crimſon? tru­ly for you miſtris: I thought ſo in earneſt, quoth
ſhee; for I cannot chuſe but bluſh when I ſee you, and ſo you wear crimſon,
for my colour: well when I perceiue I am among your miſtreſſes: but I pray you
henceforth leaue me out, for he that is my ſeruante ſhall weare no other
liuery but mine: who? I miſtris quoth hee: no, though I am not ſo rich as I
would be, I weare no liue­ries, I can tell you: No, yes ſaid ſhee, I hard you
ſaie not long ſince, that one of your miſtreſſes had put the foole vpon you,
but you would ſhake off her livery▪ why ſo I haue quoth the good gooſe, I haue
both ſhakē off her and her liuery: but in truth miſtris, but that I haue
loued you wel, I could not beare theſe floutes at your hand: for I hope I am
not beholding to you, but tis no matter, they ſay with brawling and ſquabling
beg­gars comme ſtill together and ſo maie wee if you will, why quoth ſhee, ſo
wee are already me­thinkes, are wee not mette heere together: But harken vnto
mee ſeruaunre, it ſeemes by youre
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=21) gloue, you
nowe haue been a hawking, what? haue you fluſhed a woodcock? I heare there was
one Iuſte in your waie, the laſt time I ſaw you: indeede quoth hee it is true,
and a vengeance on it, For my Taſſel made after it, and went ſo farre; that I
had like to haue loſte him: But you are ſo full of quibibbles, that I feare
you meane knauery: But it is no matter when you haue done your wil, make an
end: Oh ſeruante quoth ſhee, you forget your ſelfe, will you nowe bee an­gry
with your miſtriſſe? but tell mee I praie you, doe you not ſometime vſe to
hawke at the Iaie and the woodpicker? Yes quoth hee that I doe, yea but quoth
ſhee not in thoſe cloathes: why miſtriſſe I pray you quoth hee, doe you thinke
I am affraid of my cloathes? No I am able to buy newe when theſe are donne, I
woulde you ſhoulde well know it: I knowe it well Seruaunte quoth ſhee, but I
meane an other matter that the Hawke miſtaking her game ſhould (ſeeing your
colours) Seiſe vpon your ſelfe, inſteede of a woodcock, a woodpicker I woulde
haue ſaide, well ſaide miſtris, quoth hee, there is an other blowe, but I will
beare it as well as I may: but it is no matter I will thinke of it as I haue
reaſon; yea Seruaunte quoth ſhee will you take my pepper in your noſe, and
ſnuffe at a little mirth? Naye then I perceiue your pro­uerb will not holde,
wee ſhall neuer come neerer together then wee are: yes faith good Miſtris
quoth he, that I will come a little neerer you, when Re­moouing his ſtoole hee
ſits cloſe by her, and offers to take her by the hande, when ſhe deſired him
to forbear [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=21)
her, for his hands did ſo ſweate that ſhee coulde not indure them: ſpeake
quoth ſhee your minde, and I will heare you, but if you will not hold your
fingers, I will leaue you: well then miſtriſſe quoth hee, let mee tell you,
you knowe I loue you: if it bee true quoth ſhoe, I am ſorry for it, for I loue
not you, I like you, I delighte not in you: but I am ſure quoth he, you doe
not hate me: bee you aſſured quoth ſhee, I will not hate my ſelfe: I hope
qnoth hee, you will not make a foole of me; I praye you quoth ſhee, doe not
make a foole of your ſelfe: With this the gentleman began to grow Angrie: when
vpon the ſodaine, a gentlewoman of the companie, full of wittie conceits came
to my miſtriſſe with theſe wordes: come coſen, you and your ſeruaunte neuer
meete, but there is ſome warres ere you part: but come on, let vs leaue this
fiddle faddle, and nowe fall to ſome prettie ſport, or other: contente quoth
ſhee withall my heart; when making of a little rounde, ſate ther downe vnder a
greate baye windowe in the parlor ſome fiue coople of vs, and no ſewe madde
laddes, and wen­ches at our backes, to heare and note our paſtimes: which was
as I will tell you, neither purpoſes, tales, nor Rideles, but a merry ieſt,
that I neuer hearde of before, callen Decorums and Abſurdums, euerie one muſte
ſhewe his witte, till either the braines were wearie, or the dinner were
readie: and thus they beganne. The ſharpe witted wenche, whome I often ſpake
of before, was the firſte, who
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=22) thus fell to
her buſineſſe: To ſpeake good words to a good vnderſtanding, is a decorum in
iudgement: to which the next replied: To ſpeake wiſely to a foole is an
abſur­dum in Reaſon: then followed another with this ſpeech; To anſwer loue
with kindnes is a decorum in Nature: to which the next replied, To beſtow loue
vnworthily is an abſurdum in wit: then followes another, To hope on deſart, is
a decorum in reaſon: to whome the next reply­ed, To be afraide of fortune is
an abſurdum in iudge­ment: then came it to my Miſtris, who thus deliuered her
opinion, To honour wiſedom is a decorum in Loue: and then it came to me, who
thus made my reply, and not to loue vertue, were an abſurdum in humanity: then
comes it to our foole, who thus brought out the trea­ſure of his caſket, To
gather wealth is a decorum in thrift: to which was ſodenly replied, To dig in
a dung­hill is an abſurdum in honor, then comes it about again to the firſt,
who thus began againe. To keep promiſe in kindneſſe, is a decorum in loue: to
which was replied, To performe an ill vow, is an abſurdum in Grace: then
fol­lowed the next in this manner, To play the foole wiſe­ly is a decorum in
conceit, to which was replied: To play the wag vnkindly is an abſurdum in good
manner: then comes it againe to my Miſtreſſe, who thus deliuered her mind, To
be conſtant in loue is a decorum in honor: to which I replied, To be falſe to
honour is an abſurdum in Loue: then comes it to the gull, who thus fell to
plaine Engliſh. To be kind to her ſeruant were a deco­rum in my Miſtreſſe: to
which a mad wenche replyed, A ſeruant to be too ſaucy with his Miſtriſſe, wer
an abſur­dum in duty: Now as it vvas comming about againe,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=22) comes in the
ſeruice for dinner, whereupon we brake off our talke for that time; but after
we had dined, and paſſed away a little time vvith idle prattle, wee gat our
ſelues togither againe, all ſauing the Aſſe, who for feare of more coales then
he could carry, gat himſelfe out of doors, vvhere vve neuer looked after him,
but fell to a new ſport, to anſwer many words in one: one muſt pro­pound, and
an other anſwer.

Ar.

As how? I pray thee tell me.

Tid.

You ſhall heare, the firſt began thus: If a man labour all the daies of his
life, and get nothing till his death, vvhat ſhal he be thought?

Awn.

Vnhappy.

Pro.

If a vvoman bee kind but vnconſtant, vvhat ſhall ſhe be accounted?

Awn.

Vnwiſe.

Pro.

If a man deſerue vvell of his Miſtriſſe, and ſhe re­quite him ill, vvhat ſhal
ſhe be thought?

Awn.

Vnkind.

Pro.

If a virgin be faithfull to her Louer, and he proue a Traitor to her truſt,
vvhat ſhall he be called?

Awn.

Vngratious.

Pro.

What is the faireſt thing in the vvorld?

Aw.

Trueth.

Pro.

What is the ſvveeteſt thought in the mind?

A.

Loue

Pro.

What is the moſt ſure in the vvorld?

Awn.

Death.

Pro.

What the greateſt offence in the world?

A.

Treaſō.

Pro.

What is the nobleſt thing in the vvorld?

Aw.

Valor

Pro.

What is moſt dangerous?

Awn.

Truſt.

Pro.

What is moſt fearful?

Aw

Warre.

Pro.

What moſt ioyful?

Aw.

Peace.

Pro.

What is moſt rare?

Aw.

Honeſty.

Pro.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=23)

What moſt common?

Aw.

Beggery.

Pro.

What moſt ſubtill?

Aw.

Wit.

Pro.

What moſt kind?

Aw.

Will, if it be pleaſed: oh you are out, quoth all the company, for talking of
pleaſing: and ſo with a pleaſing laughter the company brake off, and euery one
with his Miſtris, fell to walking abroad, when my Miſtris making one, I had no
reaſon to ſtaye behind; and therefore to be ſhort, ſingling our ſelues from
the company, I fell thus into diſcourſe with hir: Miſtris, is there any thing
more pretious in the mind then the Loue of the heart? I beſeech you anſwer me
in a word: No quoth ſhe I thinke nor; But quoth I, would you loue that heart,
where you found that ſpirit? yea, I think I ſhould: but would you beleeue that
tongue that did ſpeak from ſuch a heart? yes, I think I ſhould quoth ſhe; and
will you eſteem of that loue, that ſuch a tongue ſpeaks, out of ſuch a heart?
yes, I haue reaſon for it; then good Miſtris, let your eies in my heart, ſee
the trueth of that loue that can not liue, but in your grace: well Ser­uant
quoth ſhe, I ſee you would ſpeak well if you could hit on it, oh Miſtriſſe
quoth I, I had rather hit wel then ſpeake of it: wel quoth ſhe, I perceiue you
haue learned to turne the point vpon a quarrell: oh but quoth I, I had rather
ioine hands vpon a friendſhip: but when ioyning of hands may cauſe the
breaking of hearts, the conceit quoth ſhe is ill caried: yea but quoth I, when
the want of hands breeds the woe of hearts, content is much hin­dered: oh, but
patience (quoth ſhe) is an excellent trial of trueth: yea but quoth I delay is
the death of delight: yea but quoth ſhe loue is euer conſtant, ſo long quoth I
as kindnes is comfortable: oh ſeruant quoth ſhee, loue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=23) ſees in
abſence, nothing qd. I but ſorow: oh ſir, who wil not watch his hauk ſhall
neuer reclaim her: but quoth I if ſhe be flying ſhe is better on the fiſt then
on the mew: wel, he that wil not pluck for a card, is not worthie of a prime,
but qd. I, he that can be fluſh, may better carrie the reſt: wel ſeruant, I
will conſider of your diſcretion, & where honor may be kind, reaſon wil not be
vngrateful: you are a ſtranger in this coūtry, & yet I heare well of your
eſtate, but giue me leaue to be my ſelfe, & as I find you wiſe, continu my
good opiniō, which being more then I will ſpeake of, I wil leaue to you to
thinke: and ſo once more let me intreat your ſilent patience to put off one
ſutor more: who ſpeaks ſo by rule that I can hardly anſwer him by roat:
Miſtris, let he cariage of my diſcretion ſo continue your good opiniō, that
the hope of my fortune be in the honor of your fauor, in which let me be
whollie yours, or els not be mine own: with this vve brake off our talk for
that time, & going in, my Miſtris was ſaluted by a ſpruſe cōpanion that
loookt like a let­ter in print: who with a ſmoothe Anus coūtenāce, as if he
had bin a prologue to a play, with a wink & ſimper thus begins. Fair Lady,
manie fair dayes to the looks of your fair eies: & ſir, as manie quiet nights
to your trou­bled brains, to bring your wits in tēper. I read qd. he, in the
rule of affection, beauty is loues obiect, loue beau­ties ſubiect: but qd. ſhe
where ſimplicity vnderſtāds not the proiect, the ſubtilty may be an abiect.
qd. he where reaſon caries affection it fauours diſcretion: but qd. ſhe wher
wit wāts iudgmēt, wil goes to repētāce for vnder­ſtāding: I but qd. he
wher wits wilful reaſō wāts in iudg­mēt: & qd. ſhe, reaſon without
diſcreſion leads vvit out
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=24) courſe: why
Miſtriſſe quoth he, can reaſon be without diſcretion? I haue heard ſo quoth
ſhe, of a ſcholer in Philoſophy, where in ſearching the ſecretes of Nature,
may be the ouerthrow of reaſon, which only proceeds from want of diſcretion:
oh but Miſtriſſe, extreamities exceed the rule of reaſon, and therefore he is
a ſimple Scholar, that will looſe himſelfe in finding nothing: and yet quoth
ſhe, he that ſeeks too far may looſe him­ſelfe ere he be aware: yea but quoth
ſhe, he that gaines more then himſelfe, in looſing but himſelfe, may thinke
well of his profit, what euer be his paines: yea but quoth ſhe, if deſire be
fed with vaine hope, when the gayne is but loſſe, what is the iſſue of ſuch a
profite? Sorrowe quoth he to Reaſon, but patience to diſcretion: alas quoth
ſhe, all one ſence ſet down in two words, where the griefe of patience is the
ſorrow of reaſon: why but Miſtriſſe quoth he, what is the helpe? I know not
quoth ſhe better then this, I thinke you were better keepe ſil­uer in your
purſe, then ſpend it in making of golde. In­deede quoth he you ſay wel, there
be ſo many All-miſ­ſers, that Alcumiſtry is out of credite, and yet it is ſo
pleaſing a ſtudie, as ſets many good wits a worke; yea, but then quoth ſhe, if
wiſe men wil be madde, who can helpe their diſeaſe? indeed you ſay true; and I
think that Loue and Alcumiſtrie are alike, for when reaſon affec­te [...]h
beauty, and wit honoreth vertue, yet ſhall fortune giue a blow, that ſhall
breake the necke of both theyr trauailers. He then quoth ſhe that is wiſe wil
ſhunn it, and a cowarde naturallye will feare it: but I hope you haue wit
enough to auoide it: well Miſtriſſe quoth he, though I ſcare not the worſt,
yet ſince I can not hope
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=24) the beſt, you
ſhall ſee I will not grow mad in the ſtudie of feminine Philoſophie: howſoeuer
I follow the maſ­culine rules of reaſon. You do well qnoth ſhee, for if in the
ſtudy of the feminine Philoſophy, the rules of reaſō miſtakē make the
maſculinewit proue folly, it wil proue a very pittifull peece of learning: but
ſince you are com to your Grammer rules, and I an ill Sholer in an Acci­dens,
I pray you pardon my ſimplicitie if my partes of ſpeech be imperfect: with
that the quick witted wench that ſtood by, and gaue audience to their
eloquence, as the Scholer was about to frame his anſwer, brake it off with
theſe words; com on Coſen, let vs go to cards, & leaue your Pro & Contra:
Maſter Scholer, you muſt haue a wife from ſchoole, if you will win her by
learning: In­deed forſooth quoth he, Panpudding is a good diſh for a groſſe
ſtomack: O ſir quoth ſhe, I hope it wil doe well for a ſcholers commōs: how
now Coſen quoth my Mi­ſtris, you are euer croſſing my friendes, in trueth I
loue learning with my heart, though not to read in a booke that I like not:
truly Miſtris quoth hee, I woulde I had a book to your liking: in deed quoth
ſhe ſo would not I, for I had rather be beholding to you for nothing, then be
indebted for a trifle: but quoth ſhe if you pleas, let vs go to ſom other
ſports, for it maie be, we haue wearied ſom of the companie with too much idle
talke; I hope not, but what ſhal pleaſe you and them, I ſhal bee con­tented
with; and if I maie be admitted, I wil be readie to make one, com on quoth
miſtris Madcap, let vs goe to griefes and ioies, let vs ſit round; which ſoon
agreed vp­on, we ſate round, and thus fell to our buſineſſe. Firſt began my
quick wit with theſe words, what a griefe it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=25) is, for a
good witte to want mony? the next followed, what a ioy is, it to be content
with a little: then the next▪ what a grief it is, to be wronged and cannot
helpe it, the fourth: what a ioye it is to ſee the ruine of oppreſſiō? an
other what grief doth grow by the death of a frind▪ an other what ioy doth
come by the death of an Enemy? then comes it to the Scholer, what grief doth
growe by the pride of beauty? then to my miſtris what ioie doth grow in the
preuenting of folly: then to me, what grief to reaſon? not to deſerue grace:
then a­gaine to Madcap, and what ioy hath loue in the ſecret of fauour? then
an other: what grief to vnkindnes: thē the next, what ioy to cōfort: what
grief to ingratitude? what ioie to kindnes: what grief to falſhood? what ioy
to faith? Oh quoth Madcappe then bring in health & ſicknes, & I knowe not
what, tuſh we wil giue ouer this and to ſome other ſports, but look ſupper is
comingin, and therefore we muſt giue ouer, ſo for that time we brake off, but
what followed after I will tell you.

A.

I pray thee do, & hartily thank thee for this I haue hard.

Tid.

After Supper we had ſome table talk, of diuers idle thinges, amonge other,
there was ſome ſpeech of the natures of deſpights: wherof one was this: what a
ſpight it is, for a faire ſweet wench, to marry a filthy ougly fellowe,
another was, what a ſpight it was to ſee a horſe of ſeruice drawe in a doung-
carte, an other a Hawke to be killed by an owle, another a milk-cowe to be
ſtung by a hedgehog, an other to ſee a hound coupled with a maſtiffe, an other
to ſee a nightingale killed by a cat. another what a ſpight it is to ſee good
meate, and haue no ſtomake, and an other, to haue a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=25) ſtomack and
wante meate, and an other, to want teeth, and for a woman to want her tonge:
at laſt, one mer­ry fellowe comes out wyth his ierke: what a ſpight it is for
a poore man to be made cuckoulde, by a filthy fellow? yea quoth Madcap, but it
is a greate comforte to a thief, to ſee his fellows hang with him for
com­pany: indeed, quoth an other to liue alone is too much ſolitarynes, yea
quoth an other, and ſome time a foole mars a play: tis true quoth maddecap it
is a ſpighte a gald lade ſhold come among good horſes: with that the Knight,
the maſter of the houſe riſeth, and calls a hall hoh, Gentlewoemen, and my
good frinds, what ſhal the minſtrels ſtand Idle? and ſo forgetting the name of
muſitians, bid call in the fidlers, and my maiſt­ers, euery one to his wench,
oh when I was a young mā I could haue beene nimble at this geare: Sonne take
your Bride and call in your frinds, and aboute the houſe, beſtirre your
ſtumpes a little, come on: when The wags and the wenches, with the groome and
his bride, fell to take hands, and ſcarce had begun a ſteppe or two in foure
ſquare, I would haue ſaid a qua­drant pauen, but in comes a poſte for
puddings, a meſ­ſenger from a maſke, that deliuered ſuch a ſpeech of the
aduenturs of an aſſe vpon the but of a rams horn, & the dangerous paſſage oner
a puddle of water, that but for the honor of that knight, & trouble of his
houſe, they wold not vndertake for a buſhel of wheate, with a deal of traſh as
was not worth remembrance: ſomewhat abſurdly ere the tale was told, with a
drū & bagpipe came ſuch a morice daūce, a maſke I would ſay ther; but they
made fools merry, and themſelues ſporte, I could ſaye
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=26) little in
their Commendation, but that for their coſt and their cariage, bred and
cheeſe, and a cup of ale, had ben a ſufficient banquet for ſuch a company: who
hauing daunced, which they did very ilfauouredly, fel to dicing being both
Maſkers and mummers, when after the rate of nine ſhillings among eighteene▪ of
them, they fell to plaie, and hauing gotten ſome ten groates, ſtruck vp the
drumm with no little mirth: for, though they cared not for their mony, yet
theire gaines would pay for their vizards: and for theire clo­thes, they were
but borrowed of their neighboures: but thus, after they had maſked and mummed,
away they went, and lefte it by this time, aboute the hower of ſleepe, when
euery one taking leaue o [...] the other, my miſtris gaue me a kinde good
night, which made mee ſleepe neuer the worſe.

Ar.

I beleeue thee, but I pray thee, tell mee what followed the next morning.

T.

I wil tel you; after ſome kind of viſiō fancie or dream I know not whether,
troubled with I knowe not what remembring a leſſon that a Lady of worth once
gaue mee, that I ſhoulde not obſerue dreames, for that they are but illuſions,
forbidden in the worde of the moſt wiſe, I did what I could, to put them out
of my mind, and getting vp ſomething early went abroad into the garden,
wiſhing rather in the daie to behold the liuing Subſtaunce of my loue, then in
the night to be illu­ded, with the ſhadow of my delight, whereafter a di­uine
exerciſe, in the humble cōtemplation of my ſpi­rit, I met (with wide heauen)
the ioye of my heart, in a worde my miſtris, who whether, according to the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=26) cuſtome of
her good houſwifery, in riſing early, or whether ſhe vſed the prime of the
morning for the time of her deuotion, or that ſhe choſe that time for the
preicruation of her health, I know not, but there I met her at the corner of a
walke with her waiting gen­tlewoman, who knowing her duty, and loath to
diſ­pleaſe, fell a little behinde her: nowe my Miſtriſſe had a booke in her
hand, which ſhutting vppe with a modeſt ſmile, ſhee did thus ſalute me.
Seruante good morrow, what abroade ſo earlie? I had thought no bo­die had been
ſo earlie a ſtirrer as my ſelfe: but I ſee I am deceiued: miſtris quoth I,
ſhall the ſetuant bee in bed after his Mis? that wer to much ſluggardiſe: but
for your good morrow, many thouſand requite you; A fayre morning▪ a faire
garden, and a faire Lady, fair be­fall theſe fair meetings: why how now
ſeruant, quoth ſhe, A faire minde, faire thoughts, and faire wordes; you
ſhould doe well to goe to the faire with ſuch faire wakes: So I doe miſtris
quoth he, you are the faire that haue boughte me and mine: yea Seruant, haue I
all? what then haue you leaft for your ſelf? enough quoth I, Grace, and duty,
the one to ſerue, and the other to pleaſe: and what quoth ſhee? miſtris quoth
I, in loue and honour▪ and how quoth ſhee? in obedience & pa­tience: As how
quoth ſhee? I anſwered, to doe your will, and attend your will: is it poſſible
ſeruant, quoth ſhee, that I haue ſuch a power ouer you? why miſtris quoth I is
it ſo ſtrange, that you ſhoulde haue power ouer your owne? Ales quoth ſhe, I
pitty thy fortune in thy affecting of vnworthines and quoth I, I ioie in my
happines to haue ſauour in ſo much honour: oh but
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=27) my good
ſeruant, if your eſtate want meane to anſwer the nobleneſſe of your mind, a
greeuous ioy wil make a miſerable paſſion: yea but Miſtriſſe, if the content
of the minde bee a kingdome in conceite, patience that knowes no pride, makes
loue the happineſſe of life: but how is reaſon ſatiſfied, where neceſſitie is
not ſupplied? patience in hope finds the comfort of grace: but where time is
grieuous, how is loue comfortable? why though the winter be cold, is not the
ſpring pleaſing▪ yes: but a thin harueſt makes a poore farmer: oh Miſtris,
liues not the Shepheard ſomtime merier then the Maſter of the ſheepe: and the
wench with the milk paile, then the lady of much riches? Indeed qd. ſhe I haue
heard much of the ſhepheardes & their loues, but whether they be fictions or
figures I know not; but giue me leaue, ſhall I leaue Lady for Miſtris, wealth
for want, a court for a cottage, & command for obedience, & all for the hope
of loue? no Miſtris, loue makes a cottage a court, where content is a kingdom,
and what greater wealth then in the riches of the mind? for obedience in
kindneſſe it is the worke of Loue, and to be a worthy miſtris, is better then
an vnworthy Lady: and therefore let hope bee an aſſurāce in the perſwaſion of
loue: but who is the wor­thy Miſtris? ſhe that hath power ouer her ſelfe: and
who the moſt worthy ſeruant? he whom ſuch a Miſtris hath entertained: good
ſeruant hurt not thy ſelf, in doing me good; good Miſtris doe mee good in not
wiſhing my hurt: If I ſhould loue, & not liue with you, where is the contēt
of your conceit▪ if I can liue without your loue, let no conceit content me:
if I ſhold fauor you & ouer­throw my fortune, what ſhal be the reward of my
folly? [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=27) If
your vertue grace my loue, howe much ſhould my ſeruice honour you? If the
world frowne on mee, who wil helpe me? If the Heauēs bleſſe you, who can hurt
you? nowe fie vpon thee ſeruant, I knowe not what to ſay to thee: and for that
there are company comming, let this in brief ſuffice thee: ſo farre as I maie,
I doe af­fect thee, in honor I wil grace thee, haue patience for a time, & it
ſhall be happy for thee: ſor though my eſtate be not much, yet it is in mine
owne diſpoſing, and my parents in the Earth, I am at the heauens direction,
for my reſolution: and therefore, feare not the fruit of thy faith in the hope
of my fauoure, for, I am thine, but I pray thee giue me a little leaue, to
ſhake off one ſu­ter more: walke by and heare vs, and when he is gon, let him
goe for euer▪ Miſtris quoth I, your commaund is a lawe, take your pleaſure in
any thinge, make mee onely happy in beeing what you will I ſhall bee; and with
this woorde, taking of her a ſober ſmiling leaue, I ſtept a little aſide, and
ſeeing company comming, left her to entertaine a young gallant, who a little
ſtep­ping forwardes from his company, ſaluted my miſt­ris in this manner.
Faire Ladie what al a Nimphale? Bleſſed be thoſe▪ Siluane creatures that can
enioy the preſence of ſuch a goddeſſe. Peace quoth ſhe, I wil run away rather
then make you an idolater, ſpeake not ſo prophanely, there is no goddeſſe on
earth▪ and for your Nymphes, they are but poets fictions: pardon mee Lady
quoth hee, if I ſpeak vnprobably and Let mee ſay what I think: how much is
this ſweet ground ſweetned by ſo ſweet a creature? nothing at all quoth ſhee,
it is [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=28) your
ſweet gloues, whoſe perfume puts downe all the ſent of the flowers: Oh how
much quoth he, doth your Beautie giue a luſtre to the faireſt flower vvhen in
the Roſes of your cheeks maid Flora bluſhes to ſee the pure crimſon of her
beſt colour▪ O Sir quoth ſhe, you meane the roſes of your ſhooeſtrings;
indeede they are of a good Ribbin, and well died I thinke they are in graine:
and ſo is all aboute you, cloath and ſilke, I ſee you euer haue the beſt; I
woulde be loath quoth he to weare the worſt, but Ladie.

Ar.

Tuſh, I praie thee let him goe with his foolery; I ſee it was ſome noddy, that
I doubte not was quickly ſhaken off. Let me heere what followed betwixt you,
and your ſaire miſ­tris.

Tid.

I will; this gallant with a fewe flouts pretily put off, After the company had
walked aboute the garden, wee were called in to breakefaſt, where a bride-cake
and a meſſe of cream, with the helpe of a cold pie, ſtai­ied our ſtomackes
well, till dinner: but breakefaſt done, Madcappe, that was ever buſie with
inuentions to ſet our braines aboute ſomething calls vs toge­ther, and downe
wee muſt ſit in a ring: and fall to yea and no: one muſt propound, another
anſwere, and the third giue the reaſon, and propound the next: As thus Madcap
began: If you ſee a fayre wenche, would you not haue her if you could come by
her▪ The ſecond an­ſweres, No; the third makes the reaſon: beecauſe ſhee maie
be more coſtly then comfortable: nowe hee be­ginnes; If you were married to a
foule ſlut, will ye keepe her? ſecond yea: third becauſe ther is no reme­die.
If you loue a wenche, and cannot haue her; will
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=28) you fret: 2,
no, 3 for loue is full of patience: If you loue your miſtris and can enioye
her; will you not bee glad of it? 2, yea, 3 or elſe hee were mad: If your wiſe
make you Cuckold, wil you put her away? 2 No, third, for ſhee may be
profitable: If your miſtris commaund you any thinge, will you diſobey it? 2
yea. 3, for ſhee may commaūd him not to loue her, which he can­not. If your
friend abuſe you, will you not hate him? a no. 3 for he may do it vnwillingly,
and then is to be par­doned: If you come where a faire wench is will you hide
your eies, becauſe you wold not ſee her? 2. yea: 3 becauſe ſhe may blinde the
wit, which is, worſe then the eie ſight. If your friends get your wife with
child, and you cannot, will you be angrie with any of them? 2 no, 3 for it
hides an imperfection. If your miſtris haue a fine wit, and your wife, but a
plaine vnderſtan­ding, will you loue her better then your wife? 2, no. 3 for
that witte that will rule a wife will not pleaſe a Miſtris If your miſ. be
kind & your wife dogged: wil you loue your miſ. better then your wife? 2 yea.
third for, there is cōſort in kindnes, but ther is none in doggednes. If your
huſband be a fool, and your friend be wiſe, wil you loue your frind beſt: 2
yea. 3. for a fool is butthe trouble of vvit: but, quoth mad cappe, let me
aſke you one thing, what is moſt likeſt a halfe moone? 2 a Romain C. 3,
be­cauſe it is ſharp at both ends; wel quoth an other but what is like to
loue? ſecond nothing, third becauſe quoth Maddecappe, there is no ſuch thinge
there is bargaining and ſelling; looking and telling, luſt and folly,
commanding & obeying, marying & getting of Children, the ſous monie muſt marry
the daughter, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=29)
and the widows purſe, marry her yonger ſon: this muſt be done, & that muſt be
done, friends muſt talk, & folks muſt meet, the Banes muſt be aſked, the
Church muſt be paid, the gueſts muſt be bidden, the dinner muſt bee eaten, the
minſtrels muſt play, the youth muſt dance, & the Bride muſt bluſh, and the
Groom muſt make a leg, and gloues muſt be worn, and the cakes muſt be ſet vp,
and the night grows late, and you muſt get you to bed, and here is a ſtir: but
for loue, alas, where is he all this while▪ god knows and not I: for old folks
cannot, yon­ger folks do not, wiſe folks will not, and as for fools, let them
whiſtle, I wil not com to them: but quoth ſhe, now we are out of our yeas and
noes, and therefore let vs all to ſome other ſport, when ſodenly comes in ſir
Swadd the old knight in ſtead of a gentleman, an hee no naye muſt haue a
dance: fie for ſhame, come come, to mor­row is the laſt day I tell you, and
therefore bee liuely & nimble, and haue abowt with theſe guirles: when to
ſa­tiſfie the olde huddle wee called for the muſique, and paſſed the time in
dancing till dinner; which done,

Ar.

Yea that I would learne? what follow d after dinner;

Tid.

After dinner we fell to ſuch table talk, as was thoght beſt fitting to the
company; one deſcrying of a paraſite by ſoothing of errors, another girding at
a pandar by his brazen face, and his intelligence of leue: another commending
beautye to bee a foile vnto vertue, another the honour of wit in the guiding
of loue, another what difference was betwixt valour and fury, an other of the
plague of loue in the ſolly of iealouſie, another out of his epicurious humor,
made a kinde of oration in the praiſe of a gooſe pie, and one of Bacchus ſworn
men, could talke of no­thing but of a cup of wine, the ſcholar commended
learning, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=29)
becauſe it was the Mistris of Art: and another experience, for that it was the
labor of reaſon: Madcap commended a fool, becauſe he could take no thought,
but my Mistriſſe a wiſe man for conſideration of all natures, and I my Miſtris
for her wiſe­dom in iudgement.

Ar.

I thought where I ſhould haue you, but what procee­ded?

Tid.

I will tell you, as we were going on with our o­pinions vpon ſuch points, as
we were to talke of, came in certaine ſtrangers, for the entertainment of
whom, we roſe from the table, and after a little ordinary cour­teſie, leauing
euery one to his friend or his Miſtriſſe, I with my miſtris tooke a turne in
the garden, where in very much kindnes, we fell to this conference: Seruant
quoth my Miſtris, to feed you with vaine hopes might argue much indiſcretion
in my cariage, & ſo breed ſom tuch in my reputation, and not to regard your
worthi­nes, might be a diſgrace to mine vnderſtanding: & ther­fore if you can
conceiue me right, you ſhal do your ſelf no wrong: miſtris qd. I far be it
from my good, to wiſh your hurt: do with me what you wil, for I am but as you
wil: your direction ſhall be my courſe in the due care of your commademēt: my
hopes cannot be vain that feed on the honor of your vertue, & in your regard
of my vn­worthines, ſhall be the height of my worlds happines: well ſeruant, I
will now altar your Title, for you haue made a conqueſt of your Miſtris, and
therefore muſt now be called my maſter: & therfore now maſter, ſince your
ſeruant hath no doubt of your honorable emploi­ment, let me ſee to what good
office you will preferre the care of my ſeruice: oh Miſtris quoth I, I can not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=30) ſo ſoone
forget my duetie, but yet to ſatiſfie your will, I will thus far take your
fauour: that ſince you will bee at my commaund, I command you the office of a
moſt kind and true friend; that you will in your loue com­maund my life, in
your wiſedome aduiſe my will, and ſo frame my affection to your diſcretion,
that my heart beeing in your hands, you may worke it to your plea­ſure: and
therefore ſince the effecting of my felicity re­ſteth onlie in your fauour; in
the title of a friend, carie all things to your contentment: wel ſeruant quoth
ſhe, in your humblenes I ſee ſuch noblenes, that were I a Princeſſe, you
ſhould be no beggar: but as I am, let this ſuffice for thy comfort: That I
haue often ſeen thee, de­ſired to know thee▪ heard well of thee, and now haue
ſeene that in thee: that wherein I can honour thee, bee ſure I wil not faile
thee: and in token of that trueth that ſhall neuer deceiue thee, with the loue
of my heart, my hand heere I giue thee: but to bleare the eies of aduer­ſaries
to our fortunes, if diſcontentments ſhould be ta­ken, let vs go in as friends,
and remaine louers, it ſhall not be long before you ſhall heare of me to your
com­fort: with this ſpeeche being rauiſhed, as one founding in delight, as a
full hart could ſpeake, I made her this anſwer: to your hand I giue my heart,
with a more hap­py then worthie hand, your ſight of me was my bliſſe, your
ſpeeche to me my comfort, your regard of me my honour, and your fauor my
felicitie: but for your loue, what a ioie it is to my life, I ſhall leaue it
to your better iudgement then my ſpeeche: and therefore if I paſſe a point of
your direction, let me loſe the dial of my com­fort. With which words we went
in, and ſeeming more
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=30) ſtrange then
before: after manie pleaſing paſſages a­mong the merrie company, the next daye
b [...]ing the breaking vpp of the feaſt, till the next time of our mee­ting,
wee tooke a kind of ſtrange leaue eache one of other.

Ar.

But tell me, what followed? now ſhe was Lady of thy hart, how cameſt thou to
be Lord of her houſe? or what was the iſſue of thy fortune?

Tid.

Good I aſſure you, but yet came news of, as you ſhall heare: within few daies
after my comming home to my lodging where I laie in a Citie, not far diſtante
from her habitation, which I had before acquainted her with: ſodenlie in a
morning comes a letter vnto me by a footman brought me from my Miſtriſſe, the
ſu­perſcription wherof was this. To my aſſured louing friend Tidero, with
ſpeed: The contents whereof were in brief as followeth.

As a friend I requeſt you, as a Seruant I command you, and as a Maſter I
entreate you, without anſwer of excuſe, preſently to make your appearāce at
my houſe, there to vnderſtand what ſhall happen, much is conceiued by a
little, in which I reſt.

Yours as you know, Lamina.

I thanked the meſſenger, and with as much ſpeede as I could, returned him with
this anſwer.

To my beſt and onely beloued friende, the Lady Lamina.

FAir Miſtriſſe, kind ſeruant, and deere friend, excuſe ſhall be abuſe, where
there is poſſibilitie of perfor­mance:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=31) If I could
flie, I woulde vſe wings for wordes: in the aſſuraunce, of my happines, ioyful
of what ſhal happen: ſo til I come, comming I reſt, in the loue a ſer­uant,
your kinde maſter, and euer bounden friende:

Tidero.

This letter was no ſooner ſealed vp and ſent awaie, but I haſted all I could
to be at the heeles of it, ere it came at home, but it was receiued, peruſed,
and tricks Inuented, and put in practiſe, and all er [...]l coulde come there:
where with ſuch attendants as I thought fit. I was entertained at the gate,
with a young damſell, very beautiful, ritchlie attired, and Eloquently ſpoken,
who after the paſſage of ordinarie curteous demea­nour, leading me along a
baſe Court into a Gardame, and ſo a gallary, fell by the waie to court me with
theſe wordes. Sir: my coſen the Ladie of this houſe, hath this daie performed
a kind part with me: I praye you pardon me, if in the paſſion of Loue, I paſſe
the care of modeſty: Shee hath but ſupplied my place, and for mee hath pleaded
in your affectiō: ſhe hath told me of your worthynes, and I hope hath made
you hers, whom be­fore you knew her was wholly yours: I know you wiſe and
honourable, and therefore hope you will no leſſe conceale my diſgrace, then
deuiſe my comforte: Shee is gon from hence, and left me heere for that
purpoſe: what you ſee, howſe, land, or wealth, whatſoeuer, is at my will, and
in your will at my commaund, be pleaſed therefore I beſeech you with my ſuite,
and work not my ruine in youre deniall: for in the one you maie haue both a
ſeruāt, and a friend, in the other, a ſtranger and an Enemie: Lady quoth I,
if I could be falſe to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=31) fauour, but
faith feares no fortune, my reſolution bee­ing ſetled in the fixing of
affection, I will rather haue patience with the vnkindnes of a friend, then
deſerue the rage of an enemy: It is nether houſe, lād, nor wealth that can
corrupt me, beauty nor words that can bewich me, nor the threats of fortune
that can affright mee: Lamia is the day light of my loue, let the ſtarrs giue
their light where they liſt: to her haue I auowed my ſeruice, and in her loue
will I run the courſe of my life: this one honor for her ſake I will doe you,
bury your words in obliuion, and take leaue to returne to my diſ­comforte: no
quoth the Lady that muſt not bee, here is nothing intended you but pleaſure:
and therefore feare nothing may befall you, your horſes are ſtabled, your
ſeruants ſhall be merry, and their Maſter not mal­content: returne you muſt
not, till you heare from your Miſtriſſe, for ſuch was her commaund, and
therefore I pray you haue patience: my miſtriſſe apparelled like a young man
but with a Periwigge, and a falſe Bearde, comes vppon the ſoddaine as wee were
entering in­to the greate Chamber, and preſentes mee with a Let­ter from my
Miſtriſſe, the ſuperſcription in this manner:

To my truſty ſeruant, my louing Maſter, and approoued friend Tidero with
ſpeede: pardon mee to perſwade you to that may perhappes diſpleaſe you, to
lacke my preſence for your better benefite: for I leaue you a hearte that
deerelie loues you, and a hand of honour, I ſaie, that in her fauoure maie
grace you, ſhee is another, and not my ſelfe, beleeue her, truſt her, and Loue
her, and I will thanke you for her,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=32) for her
ſeruant is my friend, conſider of theſe con­tents, and in her command make my
contentment; ſo till I ſee you, which ſhall be I know not when, in hope of
your kindnes to my friend, I will reſt euer.

Your very louing friend, Lamia.

This Letter when I had read, and knew it to bee her hand, what tricke ſoeuer
was in her head, I preſently tooke a pen and inke and returned the meſſenger
with this anſwer.

To my gratious Mistris, my louing ſeruant and faithfull friend the Lady Lamia
with ſpeede.

LAdy, is it the part of a friend to perſwade falſhood in Loue? your preſence
is the Sun of my daylight, & your abſence the darknes of delight. I ſeeke no
benefite but your loue, nor can loue other then your only ſelfe; diſgrace be
all worlds grace but in your eies, nor will I honour a heart but in your
hands; your ſelf vvithout an other I ſerue, and you only and no other can I
loue: and therefore hovvſoeuer you account of a friend, I vvill neuer be falſe
to my affection, & ſo till I ſee you, vvhich if it be neuer, yet vvhile you
liue vvill I loue you euer; and ſo reſt.

Your faithfull friend Tidero.

This letter ſealed & deliuered, avvay goes the meſſen­ger, vvhiſpering vvith
the yong Lady a vvord or two, to entertain me with a little talke, till ſhee
were gotten in,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=32) and new
attired, which was not long a dooing: for by the time that we had heard a
little muſique of a prettie lad that did plaie vpon a baſe violl and ſing to
it: the ſong was ſcarce ended, but in comes my loue, my Mi­ſtriſſe attired
like a horſe woman, that had bin new diſ­mounted, and with a prety ſmile after
ſhee had ſaluted many, at laſt comes to me, with what? Friend, in truth you
are welcom: did you not receiue a letter from me? yes good friend quoth I a
couple: In deed friend quoth ſhe you are beholding to me, for had it not bin
diſcur­teſie to bid a friende to dinner, and not giue him enter­tainment, I
had not come againe ſo ſoone: but if I had not com, you ſhould haue had no
great cauſe to miſlike of your company: but I hope it is wel, in trueth you
are welcom, you ſhall ſtay with me to night, to morrow go as ſoon as you wil;
good friend quoth I, I thank you, you ſhall command a greater matter in my
ſeruice: So after a few complimēts we ſate down to dinner, where there wanted
no part of comfort that might be found in Ta­ble kindnes; as welcome, caruing
and drinking, and ſo forth. But after dinner was done,

Ar.

Yea now you com to the matter that I long to heare of.

Tid.

I will tell you; after the cloath was taken away, my Miſtris began to
entertain the company vvith theſe vvords. In generall hoh, you are all
vvelcome; you that come from a feaſt can better beare vvith a leſſe pittāce
but vvhat lacks in meat, let vs fill out in mirth; and firſt quoth ſhe to her
Page: Sirra take your viole and plaie, and ſing the ſong that was taught you
of Loue, which commanded, was ſoon obeied, and thus performed: the Boy taking
his inſtrument, fell to play & ſing this ditty,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=33) which I will
recite vnto you: for I got it out of his book.

Of all Conceites which is the beſt? Loue.

Yet what is that is thought a ieſt? Loue.

What thought is that giues ſmalleſt reſt? Loue.

Yet in the end makes reaſon bleſt? Loue.

What wound is that is hardly healed? Loue.

What deed is that is ſureſt ſealed? Loue.

What thought is ſweeteſt beſt concealed? Loue.

What comfort kindeſt beſt reuealed? Loue.

What word is ſweeteſt to be heard? Loue.

What ſoundly made can not be mard? Loue.

What ſeruice merits moſt reward? Loue.

What grace is worthy moſt regard? Loue.

What Loue moſt constant in a friend?

Where Loue is louely without end?

Well ſaid Boie quoth ſhe, now goe your waies to din­ner: Let vs alone, and now
my maſters quoth ſhe, doe but imagine ye are at a Bridall, and let vs bee as
merrie as we were there, let vs fall to ſome ſport or other▪ play maie be
coſtlie, muſique we ſhall haue enough anon, & therefore let vs ſpend a little
time in ſome pleaſing ex­erciſe: I will begin to you: whereto euery one giuing
a willing conſent, ſhe began thus: we haue been at yeas and noes, griefes and
ioies; let vs now goe to Buts, one propound, another anſwer, the Third giue
the reaſon: Beautie is a bleſſed hue: 2 But: 3 it workes manie curſed actions:
then another, monie is a good thing: 2 But, 3▪ it brings many to miſerie:
Again vertue is honourable, 2 But, 3 ſomtime ſhe wants mony: Againe Loue is
preti­ous, 2 But; 3 if it be right: Againe, kindneſſe is the ioye
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=33) of loue: 2
But, 3 in conſtancy: then qd. I loue is the ioy of life: 2 But quoth the
ſecond: in a true friend quoth my Miſtris: Again patience is a vertue: 2 But,
3 a poor one: another, hope is comfortable, 2 But▪ 3 when it is happy: Content
is a kingdome, 2 But, 3 in conceite. As we were going on with our Buts, comes
in a gallant youth wel accompanied and attended, who as it after­wards fell
out, was a Suter to the young Lady, that to trie my conſtancie came about me
with a trick of loue, or rather wit indeed, to find out the trueth or falſhood
of a louer: wherupon the company roſe, and after al ob­ſeruances of due
compliments, he with his yong Lady, and I with my Miſtris fell to ſuch parlee,
as we thought beſt for our purpoſe: he in the Parlour, and wee in the garden,
where what followed you ſhall heare.

Ar.

Good I doubt not.

Tid.

Good indeed, and better to: for after that we had walked a turne or two, ſhee
reuealing of her deuiſe, to try the conſtancy of my affection, tooke all
thinges ſo well, and requited them ſo kindly, as honour could de­ſire, that
Loue might enioye: but by the waie among other talke, I praie thee friend
quoth Shee, do me this kindneſſe for to lend me your little Table book in your
poeket: for I did a little ouerlooke you the other daie and I am much
miſtaken, but I ſawe you writing of verſes: In deede Miſtriſſe quoth I it is
true, vppon ſome certaine idle notes that I tooke out of my obſeruati­on of
certaine Creatures, I wrote a fewe idle odde lines, which I will committe vnto
your kindeneſſe in ſecrete to make vſe of: which no ſooner hadd ſhee taken,
and read it ouer, but a heartie laughter, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=34) much thankes
ſhe tooke of me: and told me ſhe vvould reade them at nighte in her bedde; but
the booke put vp in her pocket, vvith contented mindes in we go to­gether,
paſſed avvaie the daie pleaſantly, and after ſup­per the young gallant a
neighbour hard by tooke his leaue of his miſtris, and avvaie leauing vs to
fall to ſuch fortunes as fell out.

Ar.

Oh, but I praie thee kinde wagge, tell me ſome of thy verſes.

Tid.

I will, vpon a finicall Aſſe I wrote a kind of Epi­gramicall ſonnet in this
manner.

A dapper fellow that is fine and neate,

His hoſe well gartered, and his Ruffes well ſet

Without his picktoothe can not eate his meate,

Nor ſit at Table where the clothe is wet.

Can talke of nothing but of daintie fare,

And thinke of nothing but of faſhion;

Troubles his conſcience but with little cares

And yet will ſhew ſome idle paſſions:

Can ſmile and ſimper, congey, kiſſe the hand,

And caſt a ſheeps eie at a fie for ſhame

And on the tiptoes of his honour ſtand,

When God he knowes it neuer knew his name.

What will this Gallant leaue vpon his graue?

He liu'd a Raſcall, and he died a knaue.

Ar.

Good in trueth, more I pray thee, what was the next?

Tid.

The next was on a fool, on a ſwaggering ruffe.

He that was gotten in a drunken fit,

Bred vp in brabbles, and by ſhifting liues,

His Dad a Tinker, and his Dam a Tit,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=34) His portion
nothing but what Fortune giues:

Studies no art, but how to cheate and coſen,

To packe a Card, or cleanly ſtrike a Die,

Swears by the Elle, anddrinketh by the douzen,

Talkes what he liſt, and euery word a lie:

Bragges of his ſtate, ard ietts like Iack an Apes,

Weares no good cloths, but of an others coſt:

Gets ſome odd booties, by vnhappy ſcapes,

Spends on the ſcore, and neuer paies his Hoste.

What will be ſaid of him another daie?

God hath done well to take a knaue away.

Ar.

Another honeſt wagge, if thou loueſt me.

Tid.

I will, and another and another to, and as many as I can remember, if you like
them ſo well.

Ar.

The more the better, I pray thee out with them.

Tid.

I will: vpon a ſhamfaſt clovvn in gaie clothes.

He that makes curtſie at a Ladies doore,

And bluſheth at a clappe vpon the Cheeke,

And ſaies good morrowe Miſtriſſe and no more,

And weares his ſilken clothes but once a weeke.

Stoupes and goes backward, when he makes a legge

And ſaies forſooth at euery word is ſpoken:

And onely keeps his Maidenhead for Megge

And in his hat will weare her true loues token:

Can not endure to taſt a Cup of wine,

And loues the Browne loafe better then the white:

Will at the ſpending of a penny whine,

And alwaies goes to bed at Candlelight.

VVwat will be written on his worſhippes Tombe?

Wo to the Bride that meets with ſuch a Groome.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=35) Vpon a churle
that was a great vſurer.

A chuffe that ſcarce hath teeth to chew his meate,

Heares with deafe eares, and ſees with glaſſy eies,

Vnto his graue his path doth daily beate,

Or like a logg vpon his pallet lies:

Hath not a thought of God, nor of his grace,

Speaks not a word but what intends to gaine,

Can haue no pitty on the poore Mans caſe,

But will the hart ſtrings of the needy ſtraine:

Cries not till death, and then but giues a groane,

To leaue his ſiluer, and his golden bags,

Then gaſpes and dies, and with a little moane

Is lapped vp in a few rotten ragges:

What will this Clunchfiſt leaue vpon his graue?

Here lies the Carkaſſe of a wretched knaue.

Ar.

Rightly hit, more I pray thee.

Tid.

Vpon a cheating Companion.

He that was borne out of a Baſtard race,

Betwixt a beggar and a Gentleman,

A filthy Carkaſſe and an ougly face,

And plaies the foole before Maid Marian:

Can ſeeme as ſober as a Millers Mare,

And can not bluſh at any villany:

In euery Market ſhifteth for a ſhare,

And ſits himſelfe for euery company:

Hath all the Cards vpon his fingers ends,

And keeps a knaue in ſtore for many a tricke.

VVill be a traitor to his trueſt friends,

And liues not by the dead, but by the quicke.

Vpon his Tombe what memory will paſſe?

Here lies the damnedſt Rogue that euer was.

Ar.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=35)

Oh filthy raſcall, it is pitty that he ſhould come among good company, but on
I pray thee with ſome more.

Tid.

The next was vpon a Gull, that for a little wealth was made a Gentleman of the
firſt head, which was thus:

He that is well conceited of his wit,

Becauſe a knaue or foole doth flatter him,

And knowes not how to ſtand, nor goe nor ſit,

When in his garments he is gaie and trim:

Rides like the trey of Clubs betwixt two Clownes,

Ayealow doublet, and a tawny hoſe,

Hath halfe ayeard of Land, in two country townes,

And like a Hogge doth gruntle as he goes:

Weares a courſe ſtocking, and a Holland Ruffe,

A Brooche and picktoothe, in an old ſilke hat,

Lookes bigge at Beggars, takes a ieſt in ſnuffe,

And in an alchonſe ſpends he cares not what:

Of this great Gull what memory will paſſe?

He liu'd a Cockscombe, and he died an aſſe.

Another vpon a Pander.

He that is hatcht out of a Cucker broode,

Betwixt a Kiſtrell, and a Bagige kite,

Feedes all on offall and ſuch filthy foode,

Is neither fit for feather, nor for flight:

But in his teeth can cloſely keepe a ring.

And make a motion for a filthy matche,

Can beare the Bob, while other play and ſing,

And hath the craft to cloake and connicatche:

Can like a dogge lie ſneaking at a doore,

And creepe and curtſie, couche and bowe the knee,

And be a carier to a common ſtore,

What will be ſaid of ſuch a ſwad as he:

Here lies a tronke of natures trechery▪

A ſlaue that onely liu'd by lechery.

Ar.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=36)

Some more I pray thee, what was the next?

Tid.

Vpon a louing foole, as you ſhall heare.

A foole that knowes not how to vſe his eies,

But takes a picture for an Angells face,

And in his thoughts ſtrange wonders will deuiſe,

To bring his wits into a pitteous caſe:

Matcheth the light with darknes, heauen with hell,

Wiſedome with folly, Ignorance with wit:

And to himſelfe will ſuch fond fancies tell,

As neither are for wit, nor reaſon fit.

But like a Madman mumbleth to himſelfe,

His dainty Parnell hath no paragon,

But like an Ape ſits ſidling with an Elfe,

Till Lands and goods and life, and all are gone.

What will ſome write that did his folly proue?

Here lies the foole that liu'd and died for loue.

The next was vpon a prodigall Cockeſcomb, that troubled all good company.

He that will strew his mony in the ſtreetes,

Followes the dice, and alwaies throwes at all,

Offers diſgrace to euery Man he meetes,

Snuffes vp the Noſe, and ſwaggers for the wall:

Cares for no lawe, and knowes not how to loue,

Makes ſleepe and eating his ſoules paradice,

Will not put vp that may his patience moue,

Treads on a worm, and braues a flight of flies:

Lookes a to ſide, and ſwears at euery word,

Knits vp the Browes, and ſets his armes a ſtrut,

Takes all mens tables, laics his knife aboord,

And plaies the ſlouen with a filthy ſlut?

After his death what will befall his due?

Here lies the Captaine of the damned crue.

Ar.

Good waggeries, but hadst thou none of the feminine gender▪

Tid

Yes ſome one or two, but no more.

Ar.

I pray thee tell me them.

Tid.

I will: the firſt was this, vpon a fowle idle ſlut.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=36)

She that is neither faire nor riche, nor wiſe,

And yet as proude as any Peacocks taile,

Mumpes with her lippes, and winketh with her eies,

And thinkes the world of fooles will neuer faile.

Stands on her pantofles for lacke of ſhoos,

And idly talkes for want of better wit,

Will haue her will, what euer ſo ſhe looſe,

And ſay her mind, although ſhe die for it:

Is Coſen germane to a iacke an Apes,

And ſiſter to her Mothers ſpeckled ſowe,

Kin to a Codſhead, when he kindly gapes,

Aunt to an Aſſe, and Coſen to a Cowe.

What will be ſaide of her ſo fit for no man?

Oh fie vpon her, twas a filthy woman.

The next was vpon a cunning Tit, as thus

She that lookes fifteene thouſand waies at once,

Makes twenty faces ere ſhe dreſſe her head,

Studies for words to ſerue her for the nonce,

With idle trickes to bring a foole to bed:

Turnes vp the white of an ilfauoured eie,

Treads on her toes, becauſe her heeles are ſore,

Splaies out her foote▪ and holds her head awry,

And be ares her placket far enough before:

Speakes all in print, and reads with a ſtrange grace,

Writes like a ſcriuener, like a Fidler ſing,

Sits fourteen howrs a painting of her face,

And tries the vſe of many a ſecret thing:

Of ſuch a Minkes what memory will paſſe?

A cunning Ape, will Coſen many an aſſe.

Ar.

Pretily put on, but I pray thee didſt thou write none in com­mendation of ſome
worthy Creature?

Tid.

Yes, ſome two or three which you ſhall heare. The firſt vpon a true ſouldier.

He that was well begot, and truely bredde,

VVrought all with true ſtitche, and both ſides alike,

Hath not his fancie on vaine humors fed,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=37) Eut finds the
bliſſe, that baſeneſſe can not ſeeke.

Starts not to heare a Demiculucrin,

Nor feares to charge upon a stand of pikes,

Fights like a fury, when his hand is in,

Shrinkes not the ſhoulder where the Coward ſtrikes:

But loue: a Trompet better then a pipe,

Prefers a March before a Moris daunce,

Reares a dead wound but as a little ſtripe:

And a coate armour for his cogniſaunce:

Gets yet this good, that when his bones be rotten,

His worthy fame will neuer be forgotten.

The next was of an honeſt man that tooke great pains for ſmall profit, and yet
held vp the head: As thus.

VVho beates his braines to write for no rewarde,

May breake his Pen and lay his paper by:

VVho ſerues for Grace, and liues without regard,

May ſigh and ſob, and grieue and mourne and die:

And yet againe ſince Heauen will haue it ſo,

Some ſhall haue wealth, and other ſome haue woes:

Patience doth many paſſions ouergoe,

That are vntemperate ſpirits ouerthrowe:

Let him that can not liue then learne to die,

VVhat ſhall be, ſhall be, ſpight of death and hell,

They are but babies that will howle and crie,

Cowards that faint to bid the world farewell:

No, fill the hearts with ſorrow to the brinke,

A true bred ſpirit hath no power to ſinke.

The next was vpon a merry honeſt fellow that was out of tune for his purſe.

He that was gotten in a Chriſtmaſſe night,

After a deale of mirth and merry cheere,

When Tom, and Tib, were in their true delight,

And hee lou'd her, and ſhe held him full deere

Brought vpon plainneſſe trueth and honeſty,

Can not away to heare of Knauery,

Liues with his Neighbors in true amity,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=37) And cares not
for this worldly brauery:

Goes through the world, with yea and nay and ſo,

And meddles with no matters of import,

When to his graue this honeſt man ſhall goe,

What will the world of all his worth report?

Here lies a man, like hiues that haue no hony,

An honeſt Creature but he had no mony.

The laſt I wrote of my ſelfe, which was this.

He that is moulded of a noble mind,

Purified mettall, ſteele vnto the backe,

Flies not with fethers of a Buzzards kind,

Cries not with feare, to heare a thunder cracke.

Sups vp his ſighes, and ſwallowes downe his griefe,

Begs but of God, or of his greate vicegerents,

Can not endure to name the word reliefe,

And ſerues but honor, or her loues adherents:

Knowes his deſart, and yet can not importune,

Bites on bare neede, and yet laments no lacke,

Hates to be cald, or thought the child of fortune,

Stoupes not to death vntill the heart do crack:

Liues like himſelfe, and at his lateſt breath,

Dies like himſelfe, ye though he ſtarue to death.

Ar,

Starue ſaiſt thou? no it is pitty that ſuch a ſpirit ſhould haue ſuch a
fortune: howſoeuer it ſtand with thee, bee thus far bold with me: liue with me
& ſhare with my fortunes, I proteſt I will want of my mind, ere thou ſhalt
want that thou needeſt but with many thanks for thy kind verſes, & diſcourſes,
I pray thee tell me, what followed of thy fortunes with thy Miſtris▪

Tid.

I will tell you: after ſhe had taken my Table book and peruſed ſuch trifles as
ſhee founde, well Seruante quoth ſhee, I ſee you are a wagge; but it is no
matter, I muſt tell you in plaine termes, I know ſom of them de­ſerued as much
as you haue written, but letting al theſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=38) toies paſſe,
let me tel thee, the loue I bear thee, with the truth I haue foūd in thee,
haue made me ſo much thine, that I am no more my owne: & in token hereof,
receiue from me this diamond, & for that I know not how thou art furniſhed for
mony, take here this purſe of golde, to defray ſuch charges as may fall vpō
you for your good: beſides here is a pair of bracelets, which you ſhal wear
for my ſake: in the morning be ſtirring early, for I mean to be at the Church
hereby ioyning to my houſe, there to make faſt that knot that ſhall neuer be
vndone: & ſo, let vs go in and paſſe away the time as friends, but no further
in the eie of the world: for it ſhall be beſt to my content, that the care be
priuately caried, till our com­fort be not to be croſſed: with theſe words, as
it were ouercom with ioy, with willing conſēt I obeied her cō ­mandement:
all which euening and night we paſſed in ſuch exerciſes, that all parties
pleaſed, we went euery one to his lodging, but how little ſleep I tooke, I
leaue to the wachmē in the work of loue: in the morning the Lady not long
after me at the Church dore, ſeing me at my praiers, kindly ſaluted me, & the
Churchman ready with a few witneſſes of her prouiding & my only ſeruāt hauing
ſent another home vppon neceſſary occaſions: ſcarce was the book opened, a few
words read, and our harts ioyning hands, but by a villanus plot of a damna­ble
Iew, that in the ſhape of a man caried the ſpirit of a deuil, came into the
Church with ſome dozen of Maſ­carados with ougly vizards on their faces, with
ſwords and daggars drawne, cried out Tidero: with the afrighte wherof the Lady
fell down, & after many ſoundings lay as dead: the Captain of theſe accurſed
caitifes, was one Sulferino a gallant there in the country, who hauing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=38) waſted his
eſtate, thought likewiſe to be the ouerthrow of this Ladies, who in the
pretence of loue to her, pra­ctiſed this villany to me: well, vpon ſodaine how
was I here diſtreſſed? my Loue lying as it were dead before me, my enemies
ready to diſpatch me: but vppon the ſodaine holding my life at as high a rate
as I could, de­termining to ſell it deare, among them I went, & with a Piſtoll
that my Man gaue me, and ſuch weapons as we had, we laid the chiefe villaine
on the earth, & thoſe that could, got away▪ but my ſelfe ſore wounded, & my
ſeruāt no leſſe, looking vpon my Miſtris, I ſaw her come to life againe, when
her eies alifted vp, ſhe ſighed out, on friend art thou aliue? thou maiſt ſay
thou haſt had an enemy and not a friend, but good friend leade mee home: which
I did with ſome few that were with vs: but no ſooner come into the chamber,
but ſending for her Couſen the fayr Lady, after ſhe had deliuered the whole
diſcourſe, in mine armes tooke her leaue of the world: beſeching her (euen a
little before her laſt gaſp) for her ſake, to doe me all the honour ſhe could:
to tell you my caſe in the paſſion, that then took me, it is more then I can
expreſſe: but the Lady her Coſen priuately keeping me till I was healed of my
wounde, within a fewe daies after finding the ſharpe reuenge intended me by a
brother of my late dead enemy, conueied mee away with my ſeruants to Sea,
furniſhing mee with all things neceſſary for my voiage, but as one miſchief
fo­loweth another, ſo was it with me; for being neer vnto the coaſt of this
countrie; came a ſodaine tempeſt, in which our ſhip driuen on a rocke, tooke a
wracke, by means whereof, goods none at all, and men few, were ſaued, yet my
ſelfe by meanes of a piece of a Maſte that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=39) floated on
the waues, was driuen on land, and with a few crownes in my pocket, and theſe
bracelets on my armes, that had like to haue ſpoiled my ſwimming gat to ſhore,
and am come away as you ſee, not yet three daies ſince, and your ſelfe the
firſt of my friends that I haue met with.

Ar.

Thou haſt told me of ſuch a Merry goe ſory, as I haue not often heard of: I am
ſory for thy ill fortune, but am glad to ſee thee aliue: ſorrowe not for her
that is gone, for that is helpleſſe, nor for thy ſelf too much, for that is
needleſſe, thy for­tunes may be better at home, then they haue bin abroade;
take no thought, be merry, we are now hard at the Towne, we will dine
togither, and ſoone we will home togither: I haue a neigh­bor within a mile,
may hap liue to do thee good: Let vs goe.

Tid.

Arnofilo I thanke you, and thinke my ſelfe happy to haue mett with you; when
wee come home wee will talke further of the world, in the aduancement of my
fortune, you ſhall but bind a friend: now what his fortune was, and what
courſes he ran in it, if I heare you like well of this, you ſhall hear of the
reſt, ere it be long.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=39)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=40)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=40)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=41)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=41)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=42)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=42)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=43)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=43)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=44)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=44)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=45)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=45)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=46)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=46)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=47)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=4950&page=47)

[...]

[Home](/)

Breton, Nicholas, 1545?-1626?. Date: 1606  

