## (unknown project)

# Gvvydonius The carde of fancie wherein the folly of those carpet knights is
decyphered, which guyding their course by the compasse of Cupid, either dash
their ship against most daungerous rocks, or els attaine the hauen with paine
and perill. Wherein also is described in the person of Gwydonius, a cruell
combat betvveene nature and necessitie. By Robert Greene Master of Arte, in
Cambridge.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=1)

GWYDONIVS.

❧ The Carde of Fancie WHEREIN THE FOLLY OF those Carpet Knights is decyphered,
which guyding their course by the compasse of Cupid, either dash their ship
against most daungerous Rocks, or els at­taine the hauen with paine and
perill. WHEREIN ALSO IS DESCRI­bed in the person of Gwydonius, a cru­ell
Combat betvveene Nature and necessitie. By Robert Greene Master of Arte, in
Cambridge.

At London Imprinted for Wil­liam Ponsonby. 1584.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=2)

## ¶TO THE RIGHT HO­nourable, Edward de Vere Earle of Oxenford, Vicount
Bulbecke, Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and Lord great Chamberlaine of
England. Robert Greene vvisheth long life vvith in­crease of honour.

THat poore Castiliā Frontino (right honora­ble) being a very vnskilful
painter, presented Alphōsus, the Prince of Aragō with a most imperfect
picture, which the king thankful­ly accepted, not that he liked the work, but
that he loued the art. The paltering Poet Cherillus dedicated his duncing
Poems to that mightie Monarch Alexander, saying that he knew assuredly if
A­lexander would not accept them in that they were not pi­thie, yet he would
not vtterly reiect them, in that they had a shew of Poetrie. Caesar oft times
praised his souldiers for their will, although they wanted skill: and Cicero
as well commended stammering Lentulus for his painfull in­dustrie, as learned
Laelius for his passing eloquence. Which considered (although wisdome did will
mee not to straine further then my sleeue would stretch) I thought good to
presēt this imperfect Pamphlet to your honors protectiō, hoping your
Lordship will deigne to accept the matter in that it seemeth to be prose,
though some thing vnsauory for want of skill, and take my wel meaning for an
excuse of my boldnesse, in that my poore wil is not in the wane, whatsoeuer
this imperfect worke doo want. The Empe­rour Traian was neuer without sutors,
because so courte­ously he would heare euerie complaint. The Lapidaries
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=3) continually
frequented the Court of Adobrandinus, be­cause it was his chiefe studie to
search out the nature of stones. All that courted to Atlanta were hunters, and
none sued to Sapho but Poets. Wheresoeuer Maecanas lodgeth, thether no doubt
will schollers flocke. And your honour being a worthie fauourer and fosterer
of learning, hath forced many through your exquisite vertue, to offer the
first fruits of their studie at the shrine of your Lord­ships curtesie. But
though they haue waded farre & found mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing
but Mites, yet this I assure my selfe, that they neuer presented vnto your
Honour their treasure with a more willing minde, then I doo this simple trash,
which I hope your Lordship will so accept. Resting therefore vpon your honours
wonted clemencie, I commit your Lordship to the Almightie.

Your Lordships most dutifully to commaund, Robert Greene.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=3)

## To the Gentlemen Readers, health.

PAN blowing on his Oten pipe a little homely Musick, and hearing no man
dis­praised his small cunning, began both to plaie so loude, and so long, that
they were more wery in hearing his musick, then he in shewing his skill, till
at last to claw him and excuse themselues, they said his pipe was out of tune.
So Gentlemen, because I haue before time rashly recht a­boue my pitch, & yet
your curtesie such as no man haue accused me, I haue once againe aduentured
vpon your pa­tience (but I doubt so farre) as to be rid of my follie, you will
at the least saie as Augustus said to the Grecian, that gaue him oft times
many rude vearses: Thou hadst neede (quoth he) reward me wel, for I take more
paines to read thy workes, then thou to write them. But yet willing to abide
this quip, because I may counteruaile it with your former curtesie, I put my
selfe to your patience, and commit you to the Almightie. Farewell.

Robert Greene.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=4)

## Ad Lectorem in laudem Authoris.

PVllulat en stirpi similis speciofa propago

Aureolus (que) nouo reuirescit ramus amoris

Vere: (tuo verè iam VERE dicandus honori):

Ista salus Iuueni, Comiti  [...]it gloria nosse

Accepisse decus: Comites vbi passibus aequis

Ales amor virtus (que) sagax decurrere nôrunt.

Ventilat iste faces, restinguit at illa furentes

Taedas. Ne [...] taedet Pueri sic taedia caeci

Fallere, qui caecis conuoluit viscera flammis,

Ergo refer grates qui deuitare cupi'sti

Spumosos Veneris fluctus, scopulos (que) minaces

Qui fragilem tumidis cymbam mersisse procellis

Possent. Hàc iter est, hàc dirige, tutior ibis.

Richardus Portingtonus.

## Table of contents

  * ¶TO THE RIGHT HOnourable, Edward de Vere Earle of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbecke, Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and Lord great Chamberlaine of England. Robert Greene vvisheth long life vvith increase of honour.
  * To the Gentlemen Readers, health.
  * Ad Lectorem in laudem Authoris.
  * 1\. ❧ THE CARD OF Fancie.
  * 2\. The Debate betweene Follie and Loue, Translated out of French by Robert Greene, Master of Artes.
    * 2.1. The second discourse.
    * 2.2. The third discourse.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=4)

## 1\. ❧ THE CARD OF Fancie.

THere dwelled in the Citie of Metelyne a certaine Duke called Clerophontes,
who through his prowesse in al martiall ex­ploits waxed so proud & tyrannous,
vsing such mercilesse crueltie to his forraine eni­mies, and such modelesse
rigour to his na­tiue Citizens, that it was doubtfull whether he was more
feared of his foes for his crueltie, or hated of his friends for his tyrannie:
yet as the worst wéede spring­eth vp more brauely then the wholesomest hearbe,
and as the crookedst trée is commonly laden with most fruit, so this rigorous
Duke was so fauoured and fostered vp by fortune, his estate béeing so
established with honour, and so beautified with wealth, so deckt with the
diadem of dignitie, and endued with fortunate prosperitie, ha­uing in warres
such happie successe against his foes, & in peace such dutifull reuerence of
his friendes, (although more for feare then fauor) as he seemed to want
nothing that eyther fortune or the fates could allowe him, if one onely sore
which bred his sorrowe coulde haue bene sal­ued. But this griefe so galled his
conscience, and this cursed care so combred his mind, that his happinesse was
greatly surcharged with heauinesse, to sée the cause of his care could by no
meanes be cured. For this Clerophon­tes was indued with two children, the one
a Daughter named Lewsippa, and the other a sonne called Gwydo­nius,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=5) this Lewcippa
was so perfect in the complection of her bodie, and so pure in the
constitution of her minde, so adorned with outwarde beautie, and endued with
in­ward bountie, so pollished with rare vertues and exqui­site qualities, as
she séemed a séemely Venus for her beu­tie, and a second Vesta for her
virginitie; yea, Nature and the Gods had so bountifullye bestowed their giftes
vpon her, as Fame her selfe was doubtfull whether shée should make greater
report of her excellent vertue, or ex­quisite beautie. But his sonne Guydonius
was so con­trarie to his sister Lewsippa, (though not in the state of his
bodie, yet in the stay of his minde) as it made all men meruaile how two such
contrarie stems could spring out of the selfe same stocke: His personage
indéede was so comely, his feature so well framed, each lim so perfectlye
couched, his face so faire, and his countenance so amiable, as he séemed a
heauenly creature in a mortall carcasse. But his minde was so blemished with
detestable qualy­ties, and so spotted with the staine of voluptuousnesse, that
he was not so much to be commended for the propor­tion of his bodie, as to bée
condempned for the imperfec­tion of his minde. He was so endued with vanitie,
and so imbrued wt vice, so nursed vp in wantonnesse, & so nus­led vp in
wilfulnesse, so carelesse to obserue his Fathers commaund, and so retchlesse
to regard his counsell, that neither the dreade of Gods wrath, nor the feare
of his fa­thers displeasure, could driue him to desist from his de­testable
kinde of liuing. Nay, there was no fact so filthy, which he would not commit,
no mischiefe so monstrous, which he wold not enterprise: no daunger so
desperate, which he would not aduenture: no perill so fearefull, which he
would not performe: nor no action so diuellish, which he would not execute. So
immodest in his man­ners, so rude in his iestures, yea, and so prodigall in
his expences, as mines of golde were not able to maintaine [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=5) such witlesse
prodigalitie. This loathsome lyfe of Cwy­donius was such a cutting corasiue to
his Fathers care­full conscience, and such a haplesse clogge to his heauie
heart, that no ioye could make him inioye anie ioye, no myrth could make him
merrie, no prosperitie could make him pleasant, but abandoning all delyght,
and auoyding all companie, he spent his dolefull daies in dumpes and dolors,
which he vttered in these wordes.

NOw (quoth he) I proue by experience, the saying of Soph [...]cles to be true,
that the man which hath many children shall neuer liue without some myrth, nor
dye without some sorrowe: for if they be vertuous, he shall haue cause whereof
to reioyce, if vicious, wherefore to be sad, which saying I trie performed in
my selfe, for as I haue one childe which delights me with her vertue, so I
haue another that despights me with his vanitie, as the one by dutie brings me
ioye, so the other by disobedience bréeds my annoy: yea, as ye one is a
comfort to my mind, so the other is a fretting corasiue to my heart: for what
griefe is there more griping, what paine more pinching, what crosse more
combersome, what plague more perni­tious, yea, what trouble can torment me
worse, then to sée my sonne, mine heire, the inheritour of my Dukdome, which
should be the piller of my parentage, to consume his time in roysting and
ryot, in spending and spoiling, in swearing and swashing, and in following
wilfullye the furie of his owne frantike fancie. Alasse, most mise­rable &
lamentable case, would to God the destinyes had decréed his death in ye
swadling clouts, or y• the fates had prescribed his end in his infācy. Oh y•
the date of his birth had ben the day of his burial, or y• by some sinister
storme of fortune he had ben stifled on his mothers knées, so that his
vntimely death might haue preuēted my ensuing so­rowes, and his future
calamities: for I sée that y• young frie will alwayes proue olde frogges, y•
the crooked twig
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=6) will proue a
crabbed trée, that the sower bud will neuer be swéete blossome, how that which
is bredde by the bone wil not easily out of the flesh, that he which is
carelesse in youth, will be lesse carefull in age, that where in prime of
yeares vice raigneth, there in ripe age vanitie remai­neth. Why Clerophontes,
if thou séest the sore, why do­est thou not applie the salue, and if thou dost
perceiue the mischiefe, why doest not preuent it with medicine, take away the
cause and the effect faileth, if Gwydones be the cause of thy ruth, cut him
off betimes, least hée bring thée to ruine, better hadst thou want a sonne
then neuer want sorow. Perhaps thou wilt suffer him so long till he fall sicke
of the Father, and then he will not one­ly séeke thy lands and liuing, but
life and all, if thou pre­uent not his purpose: yea, and after thy death he
will be through his lasciuious lyfe the ouerthrowe of thy house, the consumer
of thy Dukedome, the wracke of thy com­mon weale, and the verie man that shall
bring the state of Metelyne to mischiefe and miserie. Sith then thy sonne is
such a sinke of sorrowes, in whose life lies hid a loath­some masse of
wretched mishaps, cut him off as a grace­lesse graft, vnworthie to growe out
of such a stocke. A­lasse Clerophontes, shalt thou bee so vnnaturall as to
séeke the spoile of thine owne childe, wilt thou bée more sauage then the
brute beasts in committing such cruel­tie, no, alasse the least misfortune of
our children doth so moue vs, that as the Spider féeleth if her web be prickt
but with the point of a pin, so if they be toucht but with the least trouble,
we féele the paines thereof with prick­king griefe to pinch vs. Why hath not
nature then cau­sed loue to ascend as wel as to descend, and placed as
du­tifull obedience in ye child, as louing affection in ye father: & with that
he fetcht such a déep sigh, y• it was a signe of ye extreame sorrow he
conceiued for his sons witlesse folly. But as he was readie againe to enter
into his doleful [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=6) discourse, to
aggrauate his griefe the more, and increas [...] his care, certaine complaints
were brought him by sun­drie Citizens, of the outragious behauiour of his
sonne Gwydonius, which being attentiuely heard, he in great cholar called for
his sonne, against whom he thundered out such threatning reproches, laying
before his face the miserie that would insue of such recklesse mischiefes, &
promising that if he directed not his course by a newe compasse, and leuelled
his life by a new line, he woulde not onely repay his folly with the penaltie
of the lawe, but also by consent of his Commons, disinherite him of his
Dukedome: that Gwydonius greatly incensed with the seuere censure of his
Father, broyling with furious rage, sturdely burst foorth into these stubborne
tearmes.

SIr, (quoth he) if Terence his Menedemus were a­liue, and heard these your
fond and fantasticall re­sons, he would as readely condemne you of crabbednes,
as he accused Chremes of currishnesse: for as he by too much austeritie
procured his sonnes mishappe, so you by too much seueritie séeke to bréed my
misfortune. You old men most iniustly, or rather iniuriously, measure our
stailesse moode by your stayed mindes, our young yeres by your horie haires,
our flourishing youth by your wi­thered age, thinking to direct our dooings by
your doa­tings, our wills by your wits, our youthfull fancies by your aged
affections, and to quench our fierie flames by your dead coales and cinders:
yea, supposing that the Leueret shuld be as skilfull in making of a head as
the olde Hare, that the young Cubs shoulde as soone tapish, as ye old Fox,
that y• young Frie shuld as wel auoid the net as the olde Fish, and that the
young wantons shuld be as warie as the old wysards. But this sir, is to make
fire frost, to chaunge heate to colde, mirth to mourning, singing to sadnesse,
pleasure to paine, and to tye the Ape
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=7) and the Beare
in one tedder, sith then young stemme [...] will not be set on a withered
stocke, that the young twigge liketh not vnder the old trée, that the toyish
con­ceipts of youth are vnfit for the testie cogitations of age: I meane for
your satisfaction and my solace, to departe from the Court, and to spend my
dayes in trauell.

Clerophontes no sooner heard this determination of his sonne Gwydonius, but
his sorrow was halfe salued, and his care almost cured, thinking that by
trauell hée should either ende his life or amend his lewdnesse, and therefore
both hearted and hastened his sonne in this his newe course, least delay might
bréede daunger, or time by some toye cause him tourne his tippet, furnishing &
finishing all things necessarie for his sonnes iourney, who readie to goe
(more willing to trauell, than his fa­ther to intreate him) had this friendly
farewell giuen him by Clerophontes.

SOnne (quoth he) there is no greater doubt which doo­eth more déepely
distresse the minde of a young man, then to determine with himselfe what
course of life is best to take, for there is such a confused Chaos of
contra­rie conceipts in young wits, that whiles they looke for that they
cannot like, they are lost in such an endles La­berinth, as neither choice nor
chance can draw thē out to their wished desires, for so manie vaines so many
vani­ties: if vertue draweth one way, vice driueth another way: as profit
perswades thē, so plesure prouokes them: as wit weigheth, will wresteth: if
friends counsell them to take this, fancie forceth them to choose that: so
that de­sire so long hangs in doubt, as either they choose none, or els
chaunce on the worst. But in my opinion, the fittest kind of life for a young
Gentleman to take (who as yet hath not subdued the youthfull conceipts of
fancie, nor made a conquest of his will by witte) is to spende his [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=7) time in trauell,
wherein he shall finde both pleasure and profite: yea, and buy [...] that by
experience, which other­wise with all the treasure in the world hée cannot
pur­chase. For what chaungeth vanitie to vertue, staylesse wit to stayed
wisedome, fonde fantasies to firme affecti­ons, but trauell: what represseth
the rage of youth, and redresseth the witlesse furie of wanton yeares, but
tra­uell: what tourneth a secure life to a carefull lyuing, what maketh the
foolish wise, yea, what increaseth wit and augmenteth skill, but trauell: in
so much that the fame Vlysses wonne, was not by the tenne yeares hee laye at
Troy, but by the time he spent in trauell. But there is nothing Gwydonius so
precious which in some respecte is not perillous, nor nothing so pleasaunt
which maye not be painefull: the finest golde hath hys drosse, the purest wine
his lées, the brauest rose his pric­kles, each swéete hath his sower, each
ioye his annoy, each weale his woe, and euerie delyght his daunger. So
trauaile Gwydonius is a course of life verie plea­sant, and yet very
perillous, wherin thou mayst practise vertue if thou take héede, or purchase
discredite if thou béest carelesse: where thou maist reape renowne if thou
béest vertuous, and gaine reproch if thou be vici­ons: whereout doo spring
wisedome and folly, fréedome and bondage, treasure and trash, fame and
discredite, honour & shame, according to the dispotion of him which eyther
vseth it to his profit, or abuseth it to his discom­moditie. Sith then thou
shalt beare sayle in such peril­lous Strayghtes, take héede least thou dash
thy ship agaynst most daungerous Rockes. It is a saying Gwy­donius, not so
common as true, that hée which will heare the Syrens sing, must with Vlysses
tye himselfe to the mast of a ship, least happely he be drowned. Who so meanes
to be a sutor to Circes, must take a Preser­uatiue, vnlesse he will be
inchaunted.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=8) He that will
fish for y• Torpedo, must annoynt his hand with the oyle of Nemiphar, least he
be charmed, & who so meaneth to enter combat with vanitie, must first sure­ly
defence himselfe with the target of vertue, vnlesse hée meane to be a captiue
to care, or calamitie. I speak this Gwydonius by experience, which afterwarde
thou shalt know by proofe, for in trauell thou shalt finde such sub­till
Syrens as will indaunger thée, such sorcering Cirees as will inchaunt thée,
such poysoned Torpedos, as will not onely charme thy hand but thy heart, if by
my expe­rience and other mens perils thou learn not to beware. First
Gwydonius, be not too sumptuous least thou seeme prodigall, nor too couetous
least they compt thée a nig­gard: for by spending in excesse thou shalt be
thought a vainglorious foole, and by too much sparing a couetous pesant. Be
not wilfull in thy dooings that they count thée not witlesse, nor too rash,
that they think thée not de­uoyd of reason: be not too merrie that they count
thée not immodest, nor too sober least they call thée sullen, but shew thy
selfe to be an olde man for thy grauitie, and a young youth for thy actiuitie:
so shal all men haue cause to praise thée for thy manners, and commend thée
for thy modestie. Be not too curious Guydonius, that they déeme thée not
proud, nor too curteous, least they call thée coun­terfaite. Be a friend to
all, & a foe to none, and yet trust not without triall, nor commit any secret
to a friendlye stranger, least in too much trust lye treason, and thou be
forced by repentaunce to  [...]rie Peccaui. The swéetest Muske is sower to be
tasted, the finest Pils most bitter to be chewed, and the flattering friend
most tickle being tried, then beware least faire words make fooles faine, &
glozing spéeches cause had I wist come too late. Lende not Gwydonius a
listning eare to the Alarums of loue, nor yéeld not thy fréedome to the
assault of lust, be not dazeled with the beames of fading beautie, nor daunted
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=8) with the
desire of euery delicat damsell, for in time such blisse will proue but bane,
and such delightfull ioye, but despitefull annoye. Lust Gwydonius will prooue
an eni­mie to thy pursse, and a foe to thy person, a canker to thy minde, and
a corasiue to thy conscience, a weakner of thy wit, a molester of thy minde, a
besotter of thy sences, and finally a mortall bane to all thy body, so that
thou shalt find pleasure the pathway to perdition, and lusting Loue the load-
stone to ruth and ruine. Séeke not then Gwydonius gréedely to deuour that
baite, where-vnder thou knowest a hurtful hook to be hidden: frequent not y•
plesure which wil turn to thy poyson, nor couet not y• cō ­panie, which will
conuert to thy confusion, least through such follye thou haue cause in time to
bée sadde, and I to be sorrowfull. Now Gwydonius that thou hast heard the
aduertisement of a louing father, follow my aduice as a duetifull Childe, and
the more to binde thée to per­fourm [...] my former preceptes, that this my
counsaile be not drowned in obliuion, I giue thée this Ring of gold, wherein
is written this sentence, Praemonitus, Praemu­nitu [...]. A Posie pretie for
the wordes, and pithie for the matter, shorte to bée rehearsed, and long to
bée related, inferring this sence, that he which is fore-warned by friendlye
counsayle of imminent daungers, is fore-armed against all future mishappe and
calamitie, so that hée maye by fore-warning preuent perills if it be possible,
or if by sinister fortune he cannot eschew them, yet hée maye beare the Crosse
with more patience and lesse griefe. Kéepe this Ring Gwydonius carefully, that
thou maist shew thy selfe to respect thy owne case▪ and regarde my counsaile:
and in so dooing thou shalt please me, and pleasure thy selfe.

CLerophontes hauing thus ended his discourse, em­bracing his sonne with
fatherlye affection, and gi­uing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=9) him his
blessing, went secretlye into his Cham­ber the more to couer his griefe which
hée conceyued for his sonnes departure: vnwilling his sonne should per­ceyue
by his sorrowe how vnfainedly he both liked and loued him.

WEll, Gwydonius hauing taken his leaue of his fa­ther, furnished both with
counsell and coyne, with aduice of wisedome and ayde of wealth, passed on his
iourney very solempnly, vntill he was past the bounds of his fathers Dukedome,
and then as merrie as might be he trauayled by the space of seauen wéekes
without anye residence, vntill he came to a Citie called Barut­ta, where
(whether he were delighted with the scituati­on of the place, or deluded with
the perswasion of some Parasiticall persons) he securelye setteled himselfe by
the space of a whole yeare: in which time hee  [...] care­lesly floated in the
seas of voluptuousnesse, and so reck­lesselye raunged in lycentious and
lawlesse lybertie, thinking himselfe a peasaunt if hée were not prodi­gall,
counting nothing comelye if not costlye, nothing seemelye if not sumptuous,
vsing such monstrous ex­cesse in all his actions, that the Citizens of Barutta
noted him for a myrrour if immoderate lyfe, and a ve­rye patterne of witlesse
prodigalitie: yea, his excessiue expences daylye so increased, that Mynes of
golde had not bene sufficient to mayntaine his pompous magnifi­cence, in so
much that the Magistrates of Barutta, not onelye meruayled where hée hadde
coyne to counter­uayle his expences, but also beganne to suspecte him eyther
for some skilfull Alcumist, or that hée had some large Commission to take vp
those pursses that fell in­to lapse, for want of sufficient defence:
wherevppon béeing called before the Magistrates and stricktlye exa­mined
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=9) what Trade
hée vsed, why hée stayed so long, in the Citie, and howe hee was able to
mayntayne so Princelye a porte as hée carryed? Guydonius vnwil­lyng to haue
them priuye to his Parentage, beganne to coyne a scuse, yet not so cunninglye
but hée was trapte in his owne talke, and so caste in Prisonne, where hée laye
clogged with care, and deuoyd of com­forte, hauing not so much as one trustye
friende, amon­gest all those trothlesse flatterers which in prosperitie hadde
so frequented his companye, the ingratitude of whome, so perplexed his
molested minde, as sur­charged with sorrowe, hée burst foorthe into these
tearmes.

ALas (quoth hée) now haue I bought that by hap­lesse experience, which if I
hadde bene wyse, I might haue gotte by happye counsayle: Nowe am I taught that
with payne and perill, which if selfe-loue hadde not besotted my sences, I
myght haue learned with profitte and pleasure: that in the fay­rest Sandes is
most ficklenesse, out of the brauest Blossome moste commonlye springeth the
woorste Fruite, that the finest Flower seldome hath the best smell, that the
moste glystering Stone hath often­tymes the leaste vertue, and that in the
greatest shew of good wyll lyes ofte times the smallest effecte of
friendshippe, in moste flatterye leaste fayth, in the fairest face the falsest
hearte, in the smoothest Tale the smallest Truth, and in the swéetest gloses
moste sower ingratitude: Yea, I sée nowe (quoth hée) that in trust lyes
treason, that fayre woordes make fooles fayne, and that the state of these
fayned friendes are lyke to the Marygolde, which as longe as the Sunne shyneth
openeth her leaues, but with the least [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=10) Clowde
beginneth to cloase, lyke the Uyolettes in A­merica, which in Summer yéelde an
odoriferous smell, and in Winter a most pestilent sauour: so these Para­sites
in prosperitie professe most, but in aduersitie per­fourme least: when Fortune
fauoureth they laugh, when shee frowneth they lowre: at euerye full Sea they
flowrish, but at euerye deade Neape they fade: Like to the Fish Palerna, which
béeing perfectlye white in the Calme, yet tourneth passing blacke at euerye
storme: to the Trées in the Desartes of Aff [...]ica, that flourish but while
the South winde bloweth, or to the Celedony s [...]one, which retaineth his
vertue no longer than it is rubbed with golde. Sith then Gwydonius, (quoth
hee) thou findes such falsehoode in friendshippe, and such faythles deedes in
such paynted speaches, shake off these fawning curres with the flagge of
deflaunce, and from hencefoorth trye ere thou trust. I, but (quoth hee) it is
too late to applye the salue when the sore is in­curable to crye alarum when
the Citie is ouer-runne, to seeke for couerte when the storme is past, and to
[...] héede of such flattering mates when alreadie thou art deceyued by such
fawning Marchauntes: nowe thou wilte crye Caue when thy coyne is consumed, and
be­ware when thy wealth is wracked, when thou hast nothing wherof to take
charge, thou wilt be chary, and when follye hath alreadie giuen thée a mate,
thou wilt by wisedome séeke to auoyde the checke, but nowe thou tryest it
true, that thy Father foretolde thée, that so long thou wouldest bée
carelesse, as at last Re­pentaunce woulde pull thée by the sléeue, and then
had I wyst would come to late.

Wel Gwydonius, sith that which is once past can neuer be recald againe, if
thou hast by follie made a fault, séeke by wisdome to make amends, & heap not
care vpō care, nor adde not griefe to sorrow, by these thy pittifull
com­plaints, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=10) but chéere vp thy
selfe and take heart at grasse, for the end of woe is the beginning of weale,
& after mi­serie alwaies insueth most happie felicitie.

Gwydonius hauing thus dolorously discoursed wyth himselfe, remained not aboue
ten dayes in prison, but that the Senate taking pittie of his case, and séeing
no accusations were inferred against him, set him fr [...]e from his
Purgatorie, and gaue him good counsaile that héere­after he shoulde beware by
such witlesse prodigali­tie to incurre such suspition. Theseus neuer triumphed
more after he had escaped the daunger of the perillous laborinth, then poore
Gwydonius did whē he was set free from this pernitious Limbo, now the
bitternesse of bon­dage made his fréedome seeme farre more swéete, and his
daunger so happily escaped, caused his deliuerie seeme far more delightfull.
Yet he conceiued such discourtesie a­gainst the Citizens, for repaying his
liberall good will with such loathsome ingratitude, that the next morning he
departed from Barutta, not stored with too much mony for molesting his minde,
nor ouercharged with coine for  [...]ombering his conscience with too much
care, but hauing remaining of all his treasure onely that ring wh [...]ch his
father gaue him, trauailing verie solempnly toward A­lexandria.

Where at that time there raigned a certaine Duke named Orlanio, who was so
famous and fortunate, for the peaceable gouernment of his Dukedome,
administe­ring iustice with such sinceritie, and yet tempering the extremitie
of the lawe with such lenitie, as hée both gai­ned the good will of straungers
in hearing his vertue, & wonne the heartes of his subiectes in féeling his
bountie, counting him vnworthye to beare the name of a So­ueraigne, which
knewe not according to desert, both to cherish and chastise his subiects.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=11) Fortune and
the fates willing to place him in the pallace of earthly prosperitie, endued
him with two children, the one a sonne named Thersandro, & the other a
Daughter called Castania, eyther of them so adorned with the giftes of Nature,
and beautified with good nur­ture, as it was hard to knowe whether beautie or
ver­tue held the supremacie. But least by this happie estate Orlanio should be
too much puffed vp with prosperitie, Fortune sparing him the mate, yet gaue
him a slender checke, to warne him from securitie, for before his daugh­ter
came to the age of fourtéene yéeres, his wife dyed, lea­uing him not more
sorrowfull for the losse of her whom he most entirely loued, then carefull for
the well bring­ing vp of her whome he so déerely lyked. Knowing that as his
Court was a Schoole of vertue to such as brideled their mindes with
discreation, so it was a nurse of vice to those tender yéeres that measured
theyr willes wyth witlesse affection, estéeming lybertie as perillous to the
staie of youth, as precious to the state of age, and that no­thing so soone
allured the minde of a younge maide to vanitie, as to passe her youth without
feare in securitie. Feared with the consideration of these premisses, to
a­uoyde the inconueniences that might happen by suffe­ring Castania to leade
her lyfe in lawlesse libertie, hée thought it best to choose out some vertuous
Ladie to keepe her companie, who might directe her course by so true a
compasse, and leuell her lyfe by so right a lyne, that although her young
yeares were verie apt to bée intangled in the snares of vanitie, yet by her
counsell & companie, shée might steddelye tread her steppes in the trace of
vertue, and none hée coulde finde more fitte for the purpose then a certaine
olde Widdowe, called Ma­dame Melytta, honored for her vertuous life throughout
all Alexandria, who béeing sent for to the Court, he salu­ted [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=11) on this manner.

MAdame Melytta (quoth hée) the reporte of thy ho­nest conditions, and the
renowme of thy vertuous qualyties are such, as thereby thou hast not onely
pur­chased greate praise, but wonne greate credite through­out all the
Countrie. Insomuch that I incensed by this thy singular commendation, I haue
selected thee as the onely woman to whome I meane to commit my chie­fest
treasure, I meane Melytta, my Daughter Castania, to whome I wyll haue thée bée
both a companion and a counseller, hoping thou wilt take such care to traine
her vp in vertue, and trace her quite from vice, to winne her minde to
honestie, and weane her quite from va­nitie, that shée in her ripe yeares
shall haue cause to thanke thée for thy paines, and I occasion to re­garde
thée as a friende, and rewarde thée for thy dily­gence.

FIrst Melytta, so that shée leade her lyfe both chary­lye and chastly. Let her
not haue her owne wyll, least shée prooue too wilfull, nor too much lybertie,
least shee become too lyght. The Palme trée pressed downe, groweth
notwythstanding but too faste. The Hearbe Spattania, though troden on, groweth
verie tall, and youth although stricktlye restrained wyll prooue but too
stubburne.

The vessell sauoureth alwayes of that lycour wherewith it was first seasoned,
and the minde retay­neth those qualyties in age wherein it was trayned vp in
youth. The tender twigge is sooner broken then the strong braunch, the young
stemme more brittle then the olde stocke, the weake Bramble shaken with
eue­rye Winde, and the wauering wyll of youth tossed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=12) with euerie
puffe of vanitie, readie to be wracked in the waues of wantonnesse, vnlesse it
be cunningly guided by some wise and warie Pylot.

Then Melytta, youth is so easily intrapped with the alluring traine of foolish
delights, and so soone intangled with the trash of pernitious pleasures,
suffer not my daughter to passe her time in idlenesse, least happily be­ing
taken at discouert, she become a carelesse captiue to securitie (for whē the
mind once floteth in ye surging seas of idle conceits, then the puffes of
voluptuous pleasures, and the stiffeling stormes of vnbridled fancie, the
raging blasts of alluring beautie, and the sturdy gale of glozing vanitie, so
shake the ship of recklesse youth, that it is dai­ly in doubt to suffer most
daungerous shipwracke. But let her spend her time in reading such auncient
authors as may sharpen her wit by their pithie sayings, & learne her wisedome
by their perfect sentences. For where na­ture is vicious, by learning it is
amended, and where it is vertuous, by skill it is augmented. The stone of
se­cret vertue is of greater price if it be brauely polished, th golde though
neuer so pure of himselfe, hath the better coulour if it be burnished, and the
minde though neuer so vertuous, is more noble if it be inriched with the gifts
of learning. And Melytta for recreation sake, let her vse such honest sportes
as may driue awaie dumps, least she be too pensiue, & frée her mind from
foolish conceites, y• she be not too wanton. Thus Madame as you haue heard my
fatherly aduise, so I praie you giue my daughter the like friendly
aduertisement, y• héereafter she may haue both cause to reuerence thée, and I
to reward thée.

Melytta hauing heard with attentiue héede the mind of Orlanio, conceiued such
ioy in this new charge, & such delight in this happie chaunce, as with
chéerefull counte­nance she repaid him this aunswere.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=12) SIr (quoth
she) although in the largest Seas are the sorest tempestes, in the broadest
wayes most boy­sterous windes, in the highest hilles, most daungerous happes,
and in the greatest charge the greatest care, yet the duetie which I owe you
as my Soueraigne, and the loue I beare you as a subiect, the care I haue to
please you as my Prince, and to pleasure you as a Potentate, the trust you
repose in my truth without sufficient try­all, y• confidence you put in my
conscience without sure proofe, the courtesie your grace dooth shewe mée
without anie desert, haue so inflamed the forepassed fire of dueti­full
affection, and so incouraged mée to incounter your graces courtesie, with
willing constancie, that ther is no happ [...] so harde which I woulde not
hazard, no daunger so desperate which I woulde not aduenture, no burthen so
heauie which I woulde not beare, no perill so huge which I would not passe,
nor no charge so greate, which both willingly and warily I would not performe.
For, since it hath pleased your grace to vouchsafe so much of my simple
calling, as to assigne me for a companion for your Daughter Castania, I will
take such care in the charie performaunce of my charge, and indeauour with
such diligence both to couns [...]ll and comfort Casta [...]a, as your grace
shall perceiue my dutie in pleasing you, and my diligence in pleasuring her.

THE Duke hearing the friendly and faythfull pro­testation of the good Ladie
Melytta, tolde her that al­though it were great trouble for one of her age to
frame her selfe as a companion to such young youth, and that some care
belonged to such a charge, yet hée woulde so counteruaile her painefull labour
with princely lybera­litie, that both she and all Alexandria should haue cause
to speake of his bountie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=13) MElytta
thanking the Duke for such vndeserued cur­tesie, setting her householde
affaires in good order, repaired to the Court as spéedely as might be. But
lea­uing her with Castania, againe to Cwydonius.

Who now béeing aryued at Alexandria, pinched wyth pouertie and distressed with
want, hauing no coyne left wherewith to counteruaile his expences, thought it
his best course, if it were possible, to compasse the Dukes seruice, repairing
therefore to the Court, he had not stai­ed there thrée dayes before hée found
fit opportunitie to offer his seruice to Orlanio, whome verie duetifully hée
saluted on this manner.

TYE report (right worthie Prince) of your incompa­rable courtesie and
pearlesse magnanimitie, is so bla­zed abroade throughout all Countries, by the
golden trumpe of Fame, that your grace is not more loued of your subiects
which tast of your liberall bounty, then ho­noured of straungers, which onely
heare of your prince­ly vertue. Insomuch that it hath forced me to leaue my
natiue soile, my parents, kindred, and familiar friendes, and pilgrimelyke to
passe into a straunge Countrie, to trie that by experience héere, which I haue
heard by re­port at home. For it is not (right worthie sir) the state of your
Countrie which hath allured me (for I déeme Bo­hemia, whereof I am, no lesse
pleasant then Alexandria, neither hath want of liuing) or hope of gaine
intised me, for I am by birth a Gentleman, and issued of such pa­rents as are
able with sufficient patrimonie to main­taine my estate, but the desire, not
onely to sée, but also to learne such rare curtesie and vertuous qualities as
fame hath reported to be put in practise in your Court, is the onely occasion
of this my iourney. Now if in recompence of this my trauaile, it shall please
your grace to vouch­safe of my seruice, I shall thinke my selfe fully
satisfied, [[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=13)
and my paines sufficiently requited.

Orlanio hearing this dutifull discourse of Gwydoni­us, marking his manners,
and musing at his modestie, noting both his excellent curtesie and exquisite
beautie, was so inflamed with friendlye affection towarde this young youth,
that not onely he accepted of his seruice, but also preferred him as a
companion to his sonne The­sandro, promising that since he had left his
Countrie and parents for this cause, he would so counteruaile his du­tifull
desert with fauour and friendshippe, as he shoulde neuer haue cause to accuse
him of ingratitude.

Gwydonius repaying heartie thankes to the Duke for his vndeserued curtesie,
béeing nowe brought from woe to weale, from despaire to hope, from bale to
blisse, from care to securitie, from want to wealth, yea, from hellish
miserie, to heauenly prosperitie, behaued himselfe so wisely and warily, with
such curtesie in conuersati­on, and modestie in manners, that in short time
hée not hnely purchased credite and countenaunce wyth Or­lanio, but was most
entirely liked & loued of Thersādro.

Now there remained in the Court a young knight, cal­led Signor Valericus, who
by chaunce casting his glaun­cing eies on the glittering beautie of Castania,
was so fettered in the snare of fancie, and so intangled with the trap of
affection, so perplexed in the Laborinth of pinch­ing loue, and so inchaunted
with the charme of Venus Sorcerie, that as the Elephant reioyceth greatly at
the sight of a rose, as y• bird Halciones delighteth to view ye feathers of
the Phoenix, and as nothing better contenteth a Roe buck, then to gaze at a
red cloth, so ther was no ob­iect that could allure the wauering eies of
Valericus, as the surpassing beautie of Castania, yea, his onely blisse,
pleasure, ioy, and delight, was in féeding his fancie with staring on the
heauenlye face of his Goddesse. But alasse her beautie bredde his bane, her
lookes, his [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=14)
losse, her sight his sorowe, her exquisite perfections, his extreame passions,
that as the Ape by séeing the Snaile, is infected, as the Leoparde falleth in
a traunce at the sight of the Locust, as the Cockatrice dyeth with behol­ding
the Chrisolito, so poore Valericus was pinched to the heart with viewing her
comely countenaunce, was gri­ped with galding griefe, and tortured with
insupporta­ble tormentes, by gasing vppon the gallant beautie of so gorgeous a
dame. Yea, he so framed in his fancie the forme of her face, and so imprinted
in his heart the per­fection of hir person, that the remembrance thereof would
suffer him take no rest, but he passed the daie in dolour, the night in
sorrow, no minute without mourning, no houre without heauinesse, that falling
into pensiue passi­ons, he began thus to parle with himselfe.

Why how now Valericus (quoth hée) art thou haun­ted with some hellish hagge,
or possessed with some fran­tike fury, art thou inchanted with some magical
charme, or charmed with some bewitching Sorcerie, that so so­dainely thy minde
is perplexed with a thousand sundrie passions, alate frée, and now fettered,
alate swimming in rest, and now sinking in care, erewhile in securitie, & now
in captiuitie, yea, turned from mirth to mourning, frō pleasure to paine,
from delight to despight, hating thy selfe, and louing her who is the chiefe
cause of this thy ca­lamitie Ah Valericus, hast thou forgot the saying of
Pro­pertius, that to loue howsoeuer it be, is to loose, and to fan­cie howe
charie so euer thy choice be, is to haue an ill chaunce, for Loue though neuer
so fickle, is but a Chaos of care, and fancie, though neuer so fortunate, is
but a masse of miserie, for if thou inioye the beautie of Venus, thou shalt
finde it small vauntage, if thou gette one as wise as Minerua, thou mayst put
thy winninges in thine eye, if as gorgeous as Iuno thy accompts being cast,
thy gaine shall be but losse: yea, be shée vertuous, [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=14) be  [...]he cha
[...]t, be she courteous, be she constant, be she rich, be she renowmed, be
she honest, be she honourable, yet if thou be wedded to a woman, thinke thou
shalt finde in her sufficient vanitie to counteruaile her vertue, that thy
happinesse will be matcht with heauinesse, thy quiet with care, thy
contentation with vexation: that thou shalt sowe séede with sorrowe, and reape
thy corne with sadnesse, that thou shalt neuer liue without griefe, nor dye
without repentaunce, for in matching with a wife ther is such mischifes, and
in mariage such miseries, that Craterus the Emperour wishing some sinister
Fortune to happen vpon one of his foes, prayed vnto the Gods, that he might be
maried in his youth, and dye without issue in his age, counting mariage such a
combersome crosse, and a wife such a pleasant plague, that he thought his foe
could haue no worse torment, than to be trou­bled with such noysome trash. Oh
Valericus, if the con­sideration of these premisses be not sufficient to
per­swade thée: if the sentence of Propertius cannot quench thy flame, nor the
saying of Craterus coole thy fancie: call to minde what miseries, what
mischiefes, what woes, what wailings, what mishappes, what murders, what care,
what calamities haue happened to such, as haue bene besotted with the balefull
beautie of women, en­ioying more care than commoditie, more payne than
pro­fite, more cost than comfort, more gréefe than good: yea, reaping a tunne
of drosse, for euery dramme of perfect golde.

What carelesse inconstancie ruled Eriphila? what currish crueltie raigned in
Philomela? how incestruous a life lead Aeuropa? and how miserable was that man
that married Stheuolea? What gaines got Tereus in winning Progne? but a
loathsome death for a little de­light. Agamemnon in possessing the beautie of
Crecida, caused the Grecian armie most gréeuously to be plagued.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=15) Candaules was
slaine by his murdering wife, whom so intyrely hée loued. Who was thought more
happy than the husbande of Helena, and yet who in time lesse for­tunate? What
haplesse chaunces insued of the chasti­tie of Penelope? what broyles in Rome
by the vertue of Lucretia? the one caused her sutours most horriblye to be
slayne, and the other that Tarquin and all his po­steritie were rooted out of
their Regall dignities. Phae­dra in louing killed her haples sonne Hippolitus,
& Cli­temnestra in hating slew her louing husband Agamem­non. Alas Valericus,
how dangerous is it then to deale with such Dames? which if they loue, they
procure thy fatall care: and if they hate thée, thy finall cala­mitie.

But ah blasphemous beast y• I am, thus recklesly to raile & rage without
reason, thus currishly to exclayme agaynst those without whome our life though
neuer so luckly, should séeme most loathsome, thus Tymon lyke, to condempne
those heauenlye creatures, whose onely sight is a sufficient salue against all
hellish sorrowes: is this right, to conclude generallye of perticular
premis­ses, is it Iustice to accuse all for the offence of some, is it equitie
to blame the staye of vertuous women, for the state of vicious wantons? Doost
thou thinke Valeri­cus to shake off the shackles of fancie with this folly? or
to eschewe the baite of beautie, by breathing out such blasphemie? No, no,
assure thy selfe, that these thy ra­ging reasons, will in time be most
rigorouslye reueng­ed, that the Gods themselues will plague thée for bray­ing
out such iniurious speaches. Alas, Loue wanting desire, maketh the minde
desperate: and fixed fancie bereaued of hope, tourneth into furye. The loyall
faith I beare to Castania, and the loathsome feare of her in­gratitude, the
déepe desire which inforceth my hope, and the deadlye despayre which
infringeth my happe, so tos­seth [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=15) my minde with
contrarie cogitations, that I ney­ther regarde what I saye, to my harme, nor
respecte what I doo, to my owne hurte: yea, my sences are so be­  [...]otted
with pinching Loue, and my minde so fretted with frying fancie, that death
were thrice more wel­come, than thus to linger in despayring hope.

And with that, to passe awaye those pensiue passi­ons, hée floung out of his
Chamber with his Hawke on his fiste, thinking by suche sporte to dryue a­waye
this melancholycke humour, which so molested his minde.

But as hée was passing thorough the Courte, hée was luckelye incountered by
Melitta and Castania, who minding to haue some sporte with Valericus before
hée did passe: had the onset thus pleasauntly giuen him by Castania.

IT is harde Signor Valericus (quoth she) to take you either without your Hawke
on your fiste, or your heart on your halfepenie, for if for recreation you be
not retriuing the Partridge with dogs, you are in solemne meditation driuing
away the time with dumpes, ney­ther caring for companie to solace your
sadnesse, nor ple­santly discoursing of some amorous Parle: which makes the
Gentlewomen of this Court thinke, that you are either an Apostata to Loue, as
was Narcyssus, or haue displayed the flagge of defiaunce against Fancie, as
did Tyanaeus. If these their surmised coniectures be true Valericus, I warne
thée as a friend to beware by other mens harmes, least if thou imitate their
actions, thou be mangled with the like miserie, or maymed with the like
misfortune.

Valericus hearing his Saint pronouncing this su­gred harmonie, féeling
himselfe somewhat toucht with this quipping talke, was so rapte in admiration
of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=16) her
eloquence, and so rauisht in the contemplation of hir beautie, that he stoode
in a maze not able to vtter on [...] word, vntil at last gathering his wits
together, he burst foorth into these speaches.

MAdame (quoth he) what it pleaseth the Gentlewo­men of this Court to surmise
of my solytarinesse I knowe not, but if they attribute it too curiousnesse, or
coynesse to strangenesse, or statelinesse, either that I am an enimie to loue,
or a foe to fancie, that I detest theyr bountie with Narcissus, or contempne
their beautie with Tiancus, they offer me great iniurie, so rashly to
coniec­ture of my disease, before rightly they haue cast my wa­ter. But to put
your Ladiship out of doubt what is the cause of my dumpes, so it is that of
late raunging the fieldes, my heart (my hawke I shoulde say Madame) ho­uered
at such a princely pray, and yet myst of her flight, that since she hath
neither prunde her selfe, nor I taken anye pleasure. Marie if the fates should
so fauour me, or fortune so shrowde me vp in prosperitie, that my desire might
obtayne her wish, I would not onely change my mourning to mirth, my dolour to
delight, and my care to securitie, but I would thinke to haue gotten as rich a
pray as euer Caesar gaind by conquest.

SUrely Signor Valericus (quoth Melitta) no doubt the pray is passing princely,
since the valew thereof is ra­ted at so precious a price, and therefore we
haue neither cause to condempne your Hawke of haggardnesse, for want of
pruning, nor you of foolyshnesse for want of pleasure. And if your heart (your
hawke I should saye Signor Valericus) hath reacht farther with her eye, than
she is able to mount with her wing, although I am no skilfull Fawlconer, yet I
thinke you had better kéepe her on the fist still and so féede her with hope,
then let her [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=16) misse agayne of
her flyght, and so she tourne tayle and bée foyled.

In déede Madame (quoth Valericus) your counsaile is very good, for as there is
no better consect to a crazed minde, than hope, so there is no greater
corasiue to a carefull man than despaire, and the Fawlchoners also iumpe with
you in the same verdite, that the Hawke which misseth her praye, is doubtfull
to soare aloofe and prooue haggard. Yet if she were so tickle, as she would
take no stande, so ramage as she woulde be reclaymed with no lure, I had
rather happely hazarde her for the gayning of so péerelesse a praye, though I
both lost her and wanted of my wish: than by kéeping her still in the Bynes to
prooue her a kyte, or me a coward.

In déede Sir (quoth Castania), Fortune euer fauo­reth them that are valyant,
and things the more hard, the more haughtie, hie and heauenly: neyther is anye
thing harde to be accomplished, by him that hardelye enterpriseth it. But yet
take héede that you fishe not so fayre, that at length you catche a Frogge,
and then repentaunce make you mumble vp a masse with Mi­serere.

No Madame (quoth he) it is neuer séene that hée which is contented with his
chaunce, should euer haue cause to repent him of his choyce.

And yet (quoth she) hée that buyes a thing to déere maye be content with his
chaffer, and yet wish he had bene more chaire.

Truth Madame, (quoth Valericus) but then it is trash and no treasure, for that
which is precious is ne­uer ouerprised, and a bad thing though neuer so cheape
is thought too chargeable.

Oh Sir (quoth Melytta) and is it not an old say­ing, that a man maye buye
golde too deare, and that Iewells, though neuer so precious maye bée set at
too [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=17) high a
price. I sée if you had no better skill in manning of a Hawke, than in making
of a bargaine, you would prooue but an ill Fawlchoner. But since we haue so
long troubled you with our talk, we wil now leaue you to your sport, and so
bid you farewell.

Valericus with a courteous Conge repaying theyr courtesie, and with a
glauncing eye giuing hys God­desse the dolefull A dio, went solytarily into
the secret woods, wher laying him downe in the shade, he fell into these
musing meditations.

WHat greater prosperitie (quoth he) can happen vn­to any earthlye wight, than
if he be crossed with care, to finde a confect to cure his calamitie: then if
hée be pinched with paines, to get a playster for his passi­ons: if he be
drenched in distresse, to finde a meanes to mitigate his miserye, which I sée
by proofe perfourmed in my seelye selfe: for the sight of my Goddesse hath so
salued my fore-passed sorrowes, her sweete words hath so healed my heauye
woundes, that where be­fore I was plunged in perplexitie, I am nowe placed in
felicitie: where before I was oppressed with care, I am now refreshed with
comfort. O friendly Fortune, if from hencefoorth thou furiouslye frowne vppon
mée, if thou daunt me with disaster mishappe, or crosse mée with perpetuall
care, yet this thy friendlye courtesie shall bée sufficient to counteruayle
all future enormi­tyes.

But alas, I sée euery prosperous puffe hath his boy­sterous blaste, euerye
swéete hath his sower, euerye weale his woe, euerye gale of good lucke his
storme of sinister Fortune: yea, euerye commoditie his discom­moditie annexed:
the bloud of the Uiper is most health­full [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=17) for the sight,
and most hurtfull for the stomacke, the stone Celonites is very precious for
the backe, and very perillous to the braine: the flower of India pleasaunt to
be séene, but who so smelleth to it, féeleth present smart: so as the ioye of
her presence procureth my delight, the annoye of her absence bréedeth my
despight: yea, the  [...]eare that she will not repaye my loue with lyking,
and my fancie with affection, that she wil not consent to my request, but
rather meanes to stiffle me with the ra­ging stormes of repulse, and daunt me
with the doome of deadly denialles, so fretteth my haplesse minde with hellish
furie, that no plague, no paine, no torment, no torture can worse molest me,
than to be distressed with this dreadfull despaire.

Alas, her callyng is too high for me to clymbe vnto, her royall state is farre
aboue my reach, her haughtie minde is too loftie for me to aspyre: no doubt if
I offer my sute vnto her she will prooue like the Stone of Sili­cia, which the
more it is beaten the harder it is: or like the spices of Ionia, which the
more they are pounded the lesse sauour they yéelde, lyke to the Isiphilon,
which yéel­deth foorth no iuyce though neuer so well brused: so, though I
shoulde with neuer so great deuotion offer vp at her Shrine, prayers,
promises, sighes, sobbes, teares, troth, faith, fréedome, yea, and my heart it
selfe, as a pledge to pleade for pitie, yet she would make so small accompt of
these my cares, and as lyttle regarde my ruth and ruine, as Eriphila did her
faithfull friend In­fortunio.

But oh vilde wretch that I am, why doo I thus with out cause condempne
Castania, why doo I accuse her of crueltie, in whome raigneth nothing but
courtesie? why doo I appeach her of coynesse, in whome bountie shew­eth small
curiousnesse?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=18) How friēdly,
how familiarly, yea how faithfully did she talke with me, what a chéerefull
countenaunce did shée carrie towardes me, what sodaine glaunces, what loue­ly
lookes, which no doubt are signes that though she re­pulse me at the first,
she will not refuse me at the last: though she be straight in words, she wil
not be strange in minde: though she giue me some bitter pilles of de­niall, it
shall be but for the better tryall. And shall I then béeing fedde with this
hope prooue such a meacocke or a milkesoppe as to be feared with the
tempestuous Seas of aduersitye, when as at lenghth I shall arriue at the Hauen
of happie estate: shall I dread to haue my shippe shaken with some angrie
blastes, hoping to bee safelye landed on the shoare, and so haue my share of
that, which the showers of shrewde Fortune for a time hath denied me. No, no,
Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustauit amara. Hee is not worthye to sucke the
swéete, which hath not first sauoured the sower: hée is not worthie to eate
the kernell which hath not crackt the shell, hee deserueth not to haue the
crowne of victo­rye, which hath not abidde the brunt of the Battaile: he
meriteth not to possesse the praye, whih will not wil­lyngly take some parte
of the payne: Neyther is hée worthye of so heauenlye a Dame as Castania, that
woulde not spende the most precious bloud in his bo­dye, in the pursute of so
péerelesse a péece.

VAlericus thus mittigating his paine with the milde medicine of hope, and
rooting out the dead flesh of despayre with the Playster of trust, determyned
to stryke on the Stythe whyle the yron was hotte, and to pursue his purpose
whyle his Mystresse was in her good moode. And therefore leauing his sporte
[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=18) for this
time, hied him to the Court in hast: where insi­nuating himselfe into the
societie of the Ladies and gen­tlewomen, hée shewed himselfe in sport so
pleasaunt, in talke so wittie, in manners so modest, in conceits so cun­ning,
in parle so pithie, & in all his conuersation so come­ly, that whereas before
hée was specially loued of none, now he was generally lyked of all: insomuch
that for a time there was no talke in the Court but of the Meta­morphosis of
Valericus minde. Who often times deter­mining in plaine tearmes to present his
sute to Castania, when he came to the point, feare of offence and dreade of
deniall, disappointed his purpose, that he remained mute in the matter: but at
last perceiuing delaie bred daun­ger, séeing his mistresse sit alone in his
presence, houering betwéene feare and hope, he began the assault with this
march.

MAdame (quoth hée) for that I sée you sitting thus so­litarie in dumps▪ I am
the bolder to prease in place, although the most vnworthie man to supplie it.
Hoping you will pardon my rudenesse for troubling thus rashly your musing
meditations, and count my companie the lesse offensiue in that I sée you
busied with no such sery­ous matters whervnto my presence may be greatly
pre­iudiciall. Cyneas the Philosopher, Madame, was of this minde, that when
the Gods made beautie, they skipt be­yond their skill, in that they framed it
of greater force then they themselues were able to resist, if then there is
none so wise or worthie whome beautie cannot wracke, nor none issued of such
princely birth, whom beutie can­not bend, though I haue bene intangled with
the snare of fancie, and haue listened to the lure of beautie, I am the more
to be borne with, and the lesse to bée blamed. For I must of force confesse
Madame, that the giftes of nature so abundauntly bestowed vpon you, your
excel­lent [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=19)
beutie and exquisite vertue, haue so scaled the wals of my fancie, and sacked
the fort of my fréedome, that for my last refuge I am forced to appeale vnto
your cour­tesie, as the onely medicine which may cure my intol­lerable
disease. Nay incurable I may well call it, for (I speake with teares
outwardly, and droppes of bloud in­wardly) vnlesse the missing showers of your
mercye mittigate the fire of my fancie, the drops of your prince­ly fauour
quench the flame of my affection, and the guerdon of your good will giue a
soueraigne Playster for my secrete sore, I am lyke to passe my lyfe in more
miserie, then if I had taken the infernall tormentes. But I hope it is not
possible, that out of a Sugered Fount shoulde distill a bitter streame, out of
a fra­graunt flower a filthie sappe, and from such diuine beautie shoulde
proceede hate and hellish crueltie.

It is Madame your beautie which hath wrought my woe, & it is your bountie
which must worke my weale. It is your heauenly face which hath depriued mée of
lybertie, and your curteous consent must bée the meanes to redéeme mée from
captiuitie: for as hée that eateth of the Briane leafe, and is infected, can
by no meanes bée cured, vnlesse hée taste of the same roote: As hée which is
wounded of the Porcuntine, canne neuer bée healed vnlesse his woundes bée
washt with the bloude of the same beast, as there is nothing better against
the sting­of a Snake, then to bée rubbed with an Adders slough, and as hée
which is hurt of the Scorpion séeke a salue from whome hée receiued the sore,
so Loue onely is re­medied by Loue, and fancie by mutuall affection: You
madame must minister the medicine, which procured the maladie, and it onely
lies in your power to applie th [...] plaister which inferred the paine.

Therefore I appeale to your good grace and fauour, and at the barre of your
beautie I humblie holde vp my [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=19) handes, resting
to abide your sentence, either of consent vnto life, or of deniall vnto death.

CAstania hearing this solempne discourse of Valeri­cus, was driuen into a maze
with this vnlookt for motion, musing that he would so farre ouershoote
him­selfe, as to attempt so vnlikelye a match, and therefore with disdainefull
countenaunce shée gaue gim this daunt.

AS your present ariuall Signor Valericus, dooth not greatly preiudice my
muses, so I thinke it will as lit­tle profit your motion, and as your companie
pleaseth me regarding the person, so it much misliketh me, respec­ting the
parle: that your countes beeing once cast, you shall finde your absence might
haue more pleasured you, and better contented mée. For it is vnpossible
Valeri­cus to call the Fawlcon to that Lure wherin the pennes of a Camelion
are pricked, because shée dooth deadly de­test them, it is harde to traine the
Lyon to that trappe which sauoureth of Diagredium, because he loatheth it. And
it is as impossible to perswade mée to enter league with fancie, which am a
mortall foe to affection, and to vowe my seruice to Venus, which am alreadie
addicted to Diana. No, no sir, I meane not to loue least I liue by the losse,
nor to choose, least my skill béeing small I re­pent my chaunce. She that is
frée and willinglye run­neth into fetters is a foole, and who so becommeth
captiue wtout constraint, may be thought either wilful or witles. It is good
by other mens harms to learne to beware, & to looke before a man doth leap,
least in skipping beyond his skill, he light in the myre. Who so considereth
the fickle­nesse of mens affections, & the fléeting fondnesse of their fading
fancie, who carefully looketh at the lyghtnesse of their loue, and marketh the
inconstancie of their waue­ring
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=20) minde, who
readeth the recordes which make men­tion of their déepe dissemblinges,
faithlesse protestations, false vowes, periured promises, fained loue, and
forged flatterie: how poore Ariadne was abused, howe Medea was mocked, how
Dido was deceiued, how Oenone was reiected, and how Phillis was forsaken, and
yet would be allured to the traine with such filthie scraps, I woulde count
her chaunce too good, were her choice neuer so bad. But leauing these
necessarie doubtes, Valericus, I tell you for troth, if I ment to loue, it is
not you I meane to lyke, if affection forced me, it is not your person I meane
to fancie, your patrimonie is not sufficent to counter­uaile my parentage, nor
your bringing vp my birth, and therefore I would wish you to sow the séede of
your sute in a more fertill soile, for in me you shall finde no grafts of
graunt to growe, nor no consent to be cropped, for I neither lyke of your
vnlikely loue, nor meane not to bée framed to your fancie.

Valericus béeing pushed with this Pike, thought it a signe of small courage to
yéelde at the first foine, & there­fore looking more narrowly to his ward, and
gathering himselfe within his weapon, he stoode to his tackeling with this
replie.

MAdame (quoth hée) if you condempne me of folly for climing a staffe to high,
or accuse me of fondnesse for laying my loue on a person of such princely
parentage, if I séeme to make an ill market in cheaping such precious chaffer,
as the price thereof is farre aboue my reach, yet my offence is too small to
beare anie waightie penaunce, sith where the fault procéedeth of loue, there
the pardon ensueth of course, but your beautie shall beare all the blame, as
the onely spurre of this my rash enterprise. For as it is impossible for the
yron to resist the operation of the Adamant, or the sily strawe the vertue of
the suck­ing [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=20) Ieat, so as
impossible it is for a loner to withstande the brunt of beautie, to fréeze if
he stande by the flame, or to peruert the lawes of Nature. So that madame if
you kn [...]we what a breach your beautie hath made into my breast, and howe
déepelye I haue shrined the Idoll of your person in my happelesse heart, I
assure my selfe though my person and parentage, my birth and bringing vp be
farre vnfitte for such a mate, yet you would déeme my loue and loyaltie to
deserue no lesse. Loialtie I call it madame, for as all things are not made of
one mould, so all men are not of one minde, as the Serpentine po [...] ­der is
quickly kindled, and quickly out, so the Salaman­der stone once set on fire
canne neuer be quenched, as the soft Waxe is apt to receiue euerie impression,
so the hard mettall neuer chaungeth forme without melting. Iason was neuer so
trouthlesse as Troilus was trustie, Paris was neuer more fickle then Pyramus
was faythfull, Ae­neas was neuer so lyght as Leander was faythfull: And sure
Madame, I call the Gods to witnesse, I speake without faining, that sith your
beautie and vertue ey­ther by fate or fortune is so déepely shrined in my
heart, if it please you to accept me for your slaue or seruaunt, and admitte
mee so farre into your fauour, as that I may fréely inioy the sight of your
sweete face, and féede my fancie in the contemplation of your beautie, in
liewe thereof I will repaie such duetifull seruice, as the be­trothed fayth of
Erasta to his Persida, shall not compare with the loue of Valericus and
Castania.

CAstania hearing these perplexed passions procéede from wofull Valericus,
pricked forwarde to take some remorse of his tormentes, felte within her minde
a carefull conflict betwéene fancie and the fates: loue and the destinies,
fancie perswaded her to take pittie of his pai [...]es, the fates forced her
to giue him the repulse, Loue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=21) wisht her to
retourne his good will with gayne, the de­stinyes draue her to denie his
request, tossed thus with contrarie cogitations, at last she burst forth into
these doubtfull spéeches.

VAlericus, as I am not altogether to reward thy good will with hate, so I
cannot repaie it with loue, be­cause fancie denies me to like: to marie I
meane not, to retaine seruaunts I may not. Marie to let thée either to loue,
or looke, take this for an aunswere, I neither can nor will.

And with that shée went her waie, leauing Valeri­cus greatlye daunted with
this doubtfull aunswere, with feare and hope so fiercely assailed, that béeing
lefte alone, hée beganne thus to consider of his amorous conceites.

IF euer wofull creature had cause to complaine his wofull case, then
vndoubtedly maye I preace for the formost place, for there is no sorrow more
sower, no torment more terrible, no griefe more grieuous, no heauynesse more
hurtfull, then to haue desire requited with despight, and good wyll with hate,
then to like vp­pon hope of courtesie, and to finde nothing but hate and
hellish crueltie.

Alasse poore Valericus, is thy true loue thus trifling­lye accounted off, is
this the guerdon for thy good wyll? Doeth thy déepe desire merite no better
desert, then hast thou no choice, but eyther to dye desperatelye, or else to
liue loathsomelye? Why fonde foole, doest thou count her cruell, that at the
first giues not a frée consent? Do­est thou thinke her coye that commeth not
at the first call, wouldest thou haue the match made at the first mo­tion?
Shée that is wonne with a worde, wyll bée lost with a Winde, the Hawke that
bates at euerie cast of [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=21) the Lure, wyll
neuer bée steadfast on the stonde, the wo­man that frameth her wyll to euerie
wishe, will prooue but a wild wanton. No, no, Valericus, let not her denials
daunt thée, let not the sower tast of her talke quat thy queasie stomacke,
conster all thinges at the best, though her censure was verie seuere, yet shée
knitte vppe her talke wyth a courteous close. The hound which at the first
default giueth ouer the chase, is called but a curre. The Knight that finding
the first encounter comber­some, giueth ouer the quest, is counted but a
coward, and the louer that at the first deniall is daunted with des­paire, is
neyther worthie to obtaine his desire, nor inioy his desert. And with that hée
floung out of his Cham­ber, both to auoyde the melancholy which tormented his
minde, and sée if hée coulde haue a sight of his Goddesse.

But Castania altogether vnwilling to parle wyth her newe patient, kept her
selfe out of his sight, which Valericus espying, was no whit amazed, but lyke
a va­liaunt Souldier gaue the fort a fresh assault with a new kinde of
batterie, séeking to obtaine that with writing, which he could not gaine with
words, and therefore spee­dely framed a letter to this effect.

# Signor Valericus to the Ladie Castania, health.

THere is no creature (madame Castania) so bereaued of reason, or depriued of
sence, which béeing oppressed with direfull calamities, findeth not by méere
instinct of nature, a present medicine for his maladie, man onelye excepted,
who by reason of this want, maye iustlye ac­cuse the iniurious Gods of
iniustice. The Tyger though

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=24)

neuer so deadly wounded tasteth the roote of Tama­riske, and is presently
cured: The Deare béeing stroken though neuer so déepe, féedeth on the hearbe
Dictamum, and forthwith is healed: the Lyon salueth his sicknesse by eating
the Sea woolfe, and▪ the Unicorne recouereth his health by swallowing vp the
buddes of a Date tree. But man béeing crossed with care, or oppressed wyth
griefe, pinched with fancie, or perplexed with Loue, fin­deth no Hearbe so
wholesome, no medicine so milde, no Playster so perfect, nor no Salue so
soueraigne, which by their secret vertues can appease his passions. Which
madame I knowe by proofe, and nowe speake by expe­rience, for your diuine
beautie and secrete vertue, the perfection of your bodie and the bountie of
your minde, hath kindled such a flaming fire in my haplesse heart, that by no
meanes it maye bée quenched, but will tourne my bodie into dry earth and
sinders, vnlesse by the drops of your pittie it be spéedelye redressed. Then
Madame your beautie is my bale, let it bée my blisse, since it hath wrought my
woe, let it worke my weale, and let not my faithfull seruice and loiall loue
be recompenced with such rigorous refusalls. Striue not for my lyfe, since you
haue my lybertie, séeke not my death, since you are the Saint to whome I offer
vp my deuotion. But good ma­dame, let the swéete Balme of your beneuolence
salue the sore which so painefully afflicteth my carefull consci­ence, and
with the deaw of your grace redéeme him from most hellish miserie, whose lyfe
and death standeth in your aunswere, which I hope shall be such as belong­eth
to the desert of my loue, and the shewe of your beautie.

Yours if he be Don Valericus.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=22)VAlericus
hauing thus finished his letter, sent it with as much spéede as might be by
his Page to Casta­nia, who finding her at conuenient leasure, with most
reuerent dutie deliuered it. Castania at the first sight coniecturing the
contents with scorneful lookes and dis­dainfull countenaunce vnripped the
seales, where séeing and reading his déep deuotion, she perceiued that his
af­fection was no lesse in déede, than hée professed in word, she
notwithstanding would take no remorce of his tor­ment, but to dryue him more
into dolefull dumpes, she retourned him this dampe.

# Castania, to Signor Valericus.

AS it is impossible (Signor Valericus) to strayne moyst licour out of the drye
flint, to procure flaming heat in that which alreadie is nipped with chilling
colde, to force the sturdie streames to run against their common course, so as
harde it is to winne vnwilling loue, ey­ther with teares, for trueth. For if
thy birth and patri­monie coulde counteruaile my parentage, if my Father were
content to knitte vp the knotte, yet neyther his commaunde nor thy intreatie
shoulde not make me to choose without my owne loue or liking. Sith then thou
arte the man, whome I rather loath than like, cease from thy sute, make a
vertue of necessitie, and as­swage the flame thy selfe, which no other will
quench. By importunate persisting in thy purpose where no hope is, thou
proouest thy selfe rather a desperate sotte than a discréete souldiour. To
hoppe against the Hill, is extreame fondnesse, to stryue agaynst the streame
méere follye, then Valericus auoyde the one and eschew the other: for if thou
wilt séeke to gaine my good wil,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=22) thou shalte
tourne the endlesse stone with Sisiphus, and therefore take my naye for an
answere. For if I wold I can not, and if I coulde I will not. And so
fare­well.

No waye yours, Castania.

VAlericus hauing receyued this rigorous Letter from ruthlesse Castania, séeing
with what great disdaine she reiected his dutifull deuotion, and howe with
coye countenaunce and lowring lookes she rewarded his loy­all loue, hée
beganne with reason somewhat to represse his rage, and with wisedome to
redresse his witlesse follye, for comparing her crueltie with his owne
cour­tesie, and her wilfull disdaine with his willyng du­tye, his disordinate
desire beganne not onely to decay, but his extreame loue tourned to extreame
hate, in so much that forced with despight, hée sent her in reuenge these
raging lynes.

# Valericus the despised, to de­spitefull Castania.

DIogenes béeing demaunded why so extreamelye hée hated women, aunswered,
because (quoth he) they be women: so if thou aske of me why so rudely I raile
agaynst thy recklesse folly, I aunswere, because thou arte Castania, whose
mercilesse minde is so misledde with ingratitude, and whose currish nature is
foyled with carelesse inconstancie, that lyke Menechmus Sup­reptus his wife,
thou doost not begin to loue, ere agayne thou séekest t [...] hate. Thou
playest Castania lyke the young Eagles, which béeing hatched vp by the Birde
Osyphaga, neuer séeke to pearke on loftye Mountes, but to sitte in durtye
Dales, and lyke the gréedie kyte

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=23)

which leaueth the swéete flesh, to praye on the stinck­ing carrion. But why
doo I so farre forget my selfe? Is shée to bée blamed that leaueth her choyce
to haue a better chaunce, or is the Fawlchon to bée accused of bastardie, that
leaueth the Starlyng to praye on the Larke? No: and no doubt such is thy case,
for if it be true that all speaketh, or at the least suspecteth, thou art lyke
by thy louers Parentage to become a greate Potentate: for if armes bée the
bewrayer of auncient discentes, no doubte hée is come of an olde house.

Yea, thy Father Orlanio maye reioyce if hée lyue to sée the daye that his
Daughter shall bée so well wed­ded as to such a wranglyng Wisarde. But
Pasiphae preferred a Bull before a King, and Venus a sméered Smith before Mars
the God of Battayle. Tush, Psom­neticus was Father to Rhodopes Children,
whosoeuer begatte them, and that Cloake is of a course spinning, that cannot
kéepe off the raine. Farewell.

Liuing he hopes to reuenge thy iniuries. Wofull Valericus.

CAstania no sooner had read these despitefull lynes of Valericus, but her
minde fried with the flames of furie, and her breast boyled with raging wrath,
in such sort, that she coulde not be in quiet nor take any rest, she busied
her selfe so carefully in studying with what kinde of reuenge she might best
wreake her wrathe vp­pon him, and requite his spitefull speaches. At last
wo­manlike, she found her tongue the best wepon, and with that she plagued him
in this sorte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=23)

# Castania to Valericus, neither health nor good hap.

THE Mastiffe Dogge Valericus, can neuer queste lyke a Spaniell, but hée must
alwayes barke lyke a Curre, it is naturall for the Pye to chatter, for the
Iaye to iangle, and for thée to rayle and rage like a franticke foole. Dooest
thou (thinke Valericus) by brauling like a beggar to become a king, or by thy
moodlesse follye to obtaine my fauour, no, as I knowe thy knauerie, so I passe
not for thy brauerie: neither can those vaunts stande for payment, where the
partie is prickte for a péeuish paltring patch. It is no maruell if thy
doggish letters sauoure of Diogenes doctrine, for in troth thou art such a
Cinicall kinde of Dun [...]e, that thy fond felicitie is in biting bitterly
those, whom otherwise thou canst not reuenge. In déede gentle Balaams Asse, if
I had bene so lyght as to haue loued you, I myght iustlye haue bene accused to
haue bene a Curre or a Kystrell, for in faith she that féedes her fancie on
thy face, maye onely reape this profite to fill her eyes full with the figure
of a foole. For my louers Armes Vale­ricus they are imblased in such a coate,
as it is harde for thée to controwle. But I know thou boastest y• thou hast
gotten thy Antiquitie by conquest, and kéepest thy Let­ters patentes in the
beggers bor [...]. Thus adieu Sir Dunce, the more you mislike mee, the better
I loue my selfe.

Thy detested foe, Castania.

VAlericus his heart was so hardened with hate, as he was nothing dismayed with
this rigorous reply, but thought himselfe halfe satisfied, that he hadde thus

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=24) kindly
toucht her to the quicke, praying the Gods, that sith it was not in his
possibilitie to make any sufficient reuenge, they would by some sinister
meanes requite hir crueltie. But leauing him to his dumpes, at last to
Gwydonius, who besides the beautie of his bodie, and the bountie of his minde
(whereat all Alexandria won­dred, had by good gouernment and perfect practise,
ob­tained such a dexteritie in all things, as in feates of armes no man more
forward, in exercise none more ac­tiue, in playe none more polliticke, in
parle none more pleasant, amongst his auncients very wise, amongst the
youthfull who more merrie: so that there was no time, person, nor place,
whereto he aptly applyed not himselfe: insomuch that he entered into such
fauour and family­aritie with Thersandro and Castania, that he was the onely
man whose companie they desired to enioye. But especially Castania, who by
casting a gazing glaunce some time vpon the beautie of Gwydonius, felte a
cer­tayne restraint of libertie in her affections, an altera­tion of minde,
and as it were a ciuill assault within her selfe: but hauing small practise in
the pangs of loue, shée could not coniecture the secret cause of these her
so­da [...]e passions, thinking that as it was a toye lyghtlye taken, so it
would as lightly be left: and vpon this still she rested, conceiuing onely an
ordinarie kinde of liking towards Gwydonius.

Who bathing thus in the streames of blisse, and safely harboured in the hauen
of happinesse, wanting nothing which might content his minde, eyther for
ple­sure or profite, thought it a poynt of méere folly, eyther to seeke or
wish for more than inough, knowing that to strayne further than the sléeue
would stretch, was but to make the arme bare, and to skippe beyonde a mans
skill, was to leape, but not to knowe where to lyght: to auoyde therefore
hastinesse in hazarding, hée fell a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=25) slumber in
the carelesse seate of securite.

But as it is impossible for a man to sléepe by the Ui­per and not bée
inuenomed, to gaze vppon the Cocka­trice and not be infected, to stare vppon
the Sunne and not bée dazeled, to looke vpon Medusas head and not be
transformed, to wade in the waues and not bée drench­ed, to handle coales and
not be scorched, so it was as impossible for young Gwydonius to gaze vppon the
beautie of Castania and not bée galled, to fire his eyes vppon her feature and
not bée fettered, to sée her vertu­ous qualyties and not bée inueigled: for
her courtesie hadde so incountered him, her modestie hadde so ama­zed him, and
her charie chastitie so inchaunted him, that whereas hée came to Orlanio his
Courte frée from affection, hée was nowe become a seruyle Slaue to Fancie,
before a foe to Lust, nowe a friende to Loue: yea, hée felte such an
alienation of his senses, and such a straunge Metamorphosis of his minde, as
reason was tourned to rage, myrth to mourning, ioye to annoye, delight to
despight, weale to woe, blisse to bale: in fine, such contrarye passions so
perplexed this doubtfull Patient, as maugre his face, he yéelded the Fort to
fan­cie, and pulde in the former flagge of defiaunce, intrea­ted for truce,
and beganne to enter parle with Cupide on this manner.

O Gwydonius (quoth hée) what straunge chaunce, naye, what rare chaunge, what
sollempne motion, naye, what sodayne madnesse, what foolish frensie, or rather
what franticke affection hath possessed thée?

Is thy lawlesse lybertie tourned to a slauish captiui­tie? Is thy fréedome
fettered? Are thy sences besotted? Is thy witte inueygled? Werte thou of late
a defier of Venus, and arte thou nowe a defender of vanitie. [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=25) Diddest thou of
late renounce beautie as a foe, and wilt thou now imbrace her as a friende. Is
this the carefull keeping of thy Fathers commaundement, or is this thy
diligent duetie in obseruing the counsayle of thy olde Sire Clerophontes? Hast
thou so soone forgotte his fatherlye precepts, or committed to oblyuion his
friend­lye aduertisement? Did hée carefully warne thée to be­ware of Loue, and
wilt thou carelessely wedde thy selfe to Lust? Did he shewe thée what poysoned
ban [...] is hid­den vnder the painted baites of beautie, and wilt thou be
haled to the hooke?

O haplesse case: naye rather, if the charye charge thy Father gaue thée, will
be no constraint, if his coun­sayle will not commaunde thée, if his warning
wil not make thée warie, nor his aduice be thy aduertisement: yet let imminent
perills, and insuing daungers bée a precious preseruatiue against future
calamities. Con­sider with thy selfe Gwydonius, what difference is be­twéene
fréedome and bondage, betwéene libertie and captiuitie, mirth and mourning,
pleasure and payne, rest and care, happinesse and heauinesse: and so farre
dooth he which is frée frō affection differ from him which is fettered in
fancie.

Why but Gwydonius, why doost thou thus reckles­ly rage against reason? Why
doost thou thus fondly ex­clayme agaynst thine owne welfare? Why doost thou
condempne thy selfe of that crime whereof thou art not guyltie.

Thy Father warned thée to beware of fickle fancie, but this thy lyking is
firme affection. Hys counsayle was to perswade thée from leawde lust, but not
from lawfull loue, from vanitie, not from ver­tue: yea, his will was to wish
thée from lykeing such a lewd minion, who had neither birth, welth nor vertue,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=26) but a little
fading beautie to be either her credite or thy countenance, not to warne thée
from louing such a chast maiden, nay a péereles Princesse, whose birth may
coun­tenaunce thy calling, whose power may promote thée, whose liuings may
inrich thée, whose vertue maye ad­uaunce thée: yea, in obtaining whome, thou
shalt gaine both honour, and perhaps the inheritaunce of a Duke­dome.

Doost thou thinke then Gwydonius in winning so worthie a péece, to purchase
thy Fathers displeasure, nay assure thy selfe he will not onelye be content
with thy chaunce, but he will thinke thou hast runne a hap­pier race, than
Hyppomanes did in winning Atlanta. Content with thy chaunce? Why Gwydonius art
thou so fonde a foole, as to count the Castle conquered, that as yet thou hast
not compassed: to suppose the Citie sac­ked, which thou hast not beséeged: to
thinke the bul­warke beaten, which as yet thou hast not battered: or to count
the Ladie wonne, whome as yet thou hast not wooed. Nay Gwydonius, if thou
weigh thy case in the equall Ballaunce, thou hast more cause of feare than of
hope, of doubte than of assuraunce, of myssing thy pretence, than of obtayning
thy purpose.

The Fawlchon (Gwydonius seldome perketh with the Merlyne, the Lyon seldome
lodgeth with the Mouse, the Hart seldome féedeth with the Pricket, A­quila non
capit Muscas, and a Dame indued with No­bilitie, vouchsafeth not to match with
a man of meane Gentilitie. Of meane Gentilitie Gwydonius? yea truely, for
Castania rather thinketh thée sprong of some poore peasaunt, than of anye
princely personage.

Besides, alas Fortune her selfe denieth me anye such fauour, my good will as
yet hath deserued no suche gwerdon, my desire is farre aboue my deserts,
[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=26) my
ambition aboue my condition, and the poore staye of wandering Gwydonius farre
vnfit for the princely state of worthie Castania. But put case she did will as
I did, wish that she wer pricked in ye same veine, caught in the same snare,
trapped with the like traine, & fired with the like fancie, yet the Duke her
father will neither condes­cend to her mind, nor consent to my motiō, neither
think well of her liking nor of my loue, nay if he shoulde but once heare of
such recklesse folly, as he hath wrought my promotion, so he would worke my
confusion, as hée hath bene my friend, so he would be my foe, and in troth
Gwydonius not without cause, for art thou so voide of vertue, or vowed to
vice, so nursed vp in vanitie, or nus­led vp in villanie, as to requite his
liberalitie with such disloialtie, to returne the trust which he reposeth in
the [...] with such treason. Tush, Loue is aboue Lord or Lawe, friend or
faith. Where Loue leadeth, no master is made account off: no king cared for,
no friende forced off, no dutie respected, but all things done according to
the qua­litie y• is predominant. Why Gwydonius, what doubts are these that
thou thus dreamest on? Why dost thou cast beyond the Moone, and feare before
thou art in daunger to fall: knowing that Loue and Fortune desireth not them
that are dastards, nor careth not for them that are cowardes. The Captaine
that retireth from the walls before he hath the repulse, shall neuer returne a
conque­rour, the Souldier that fainteth before the battaile bée fought, shal
neuer vaunt himself of victorie. He that fea­reth euerie tempest is not fit to
be a trauailer. He that doubteth euerie waue shall neuer proue a perfect
Py­lot, and he that in loue dreadeth euerie chip of mischance, may well
encounter, but neuer obtaine the conquest.

Sith then Gwydonius, hardie venturing is a signe of happie victorie, sound out
the march with the trumpet of trust, beginne the assault, giue the onset. Laie
the bat­tering
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=27) péeces of
loue, against the bulwarke of beautye, and no doubt thy successe shall bée
such as thou shalt tri­umph with Caesar and saie, Veni, Vidi, Vici. And art
thou so presumptuous fonde foole, as to promise thy selfe the conquest,
knowest thou not that the path of loue is perillous. And with that he fell
into such melancholike passions, such contrarie cogitations, such doubtfull
thoughtes, such fearefull supposes, that as hée which cateth of the Goorde
roote looseth his memorye, and as the Elephaunt when hée eateth of the
Helitropion leafe, is then verie sléepie, so Gwydonius was so perplexed with
these vnacquainted passions, that contrarie to his custome hée hadde driuen
mirth into mourning, plea­saunt conceites into painefull cares, laughing into
low­ring, singing into sorrowe, as béeing thus besotted to solace himselfe,
hée went into a Parke adioyning to the Dukes Pallace, where sitting vnder the
shade of a béech trée, leaning his head on his hande, he laye as one in a
slumber. But Fortune willing somewhat to fauour this young Nouice, brought it
so to passe, that Tersan­dro, Valericus, Castania and Melytta, with diuerse
other gentlemen, were for recreation sake, raunging in ye same Parke, who
espying ghostly Gwydonius [...]itting as one in a traunce, Castania passing
before the rest, pulling him by the sléeue, draue him thus out of his dumpe.

WHy how now Gwydonius (quoth shée) are you drea­ming or doubting, or is your
minde musing vpon some metaphusicall motions, that you sit thus as a man half
mortified, your solempne iesture makes me remem­ber the picture of Pigmalion,
which once I sawe portray­ed out by a skilfull painter, who leaning his head
on his Marble mistres, (that so vnfainedly he loued) sate wyth his [...]eyes
as one in a slumber, hauing his face notwyth­standing so bedewed with brinish
teares, as his outward [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=27) plaintes did
sufficiently bewraie his inward passions. In truth Gwydonius I had taken thée
for Pigmalion, if thou hadst hadde teares as thou wert in a traunce, for thou
doest not greatly differ from him neither in counte­naunce nor colour, wel if
it were but a dreame Gwydo­nius, that thus combred thy conscience, or a doubte
that made thée thus dumpish, I wil deuine the one if it be not to darke, or
decide the other, if it be not too secrete, marie if the case be combersome, I
leaue it to the iudgement of these Gentlemen.

GWydonius wakened out of his musing slumber wyth this sugured harmonie, séeing
before his eyes his gor­geous Goddesse, the verie Saint, at whose shrine he
was offering vp scalding sighes, farre fetcht sobbes, plaintes, prayers, and
protestations, was so appalde with her pre­sence, that as the Basiliske
looseth his sences with the sight of a naked man, as the Torteise séeing the
North starre is benummed, as the Hermeline looking on the stone Echites is
greatly amazed, so Gwydonius séeing the incomperable beautie of his best
beloued Castania, was so astonished, yea, so inchaunted with the rare
perfection of this heauenly Pallas, that as one besotted he sate sence­lesse,
not being able to vtter one worde, vntill at length reuiued with the view of
her chéerefull countenance, he repaide her with this pleasaunt aunswere.

MAdame (quoth he) whereas iestingly you saye, that at the first sight you had
taken me for perplexed Pig­malion by my pittifull plaintes and carefull
counte­naunce, but that I wanted trickeling teares to decypher my sorrowe, I
aunswere, that woe may verie well bée wythout watrie wailinges, for when the
Stone Ga­ratides fryeth wythout, it fréezeth within, the Ger­maunder leafe,
when it is most full of moisture, looketh
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=28) then most
drie, where the streame is most déepe, there it is most still, and where is
the smallest shewe of teares, there is the greatest signe of sorrowe. And also
I call the heauens to witnesse, that when you wakened me out of my dreame by
your diuine eloquence, I tooke you either for beautie to be Venus, for
comelynesse to be Pallas, or for port and honour to be Iuno, so that both your
pre­sence and curtesie daunted my minde, your presence in dazeling my eies so
sodainely with so solempne a sight, your curtesie, in that your Ladyship
without curiositie would vouchsafe to talke with so meane a Gentleman. But
Madame, sith that I perceiue your skill in nauiga­tion to be great, in that
you made so cunning a coniec­ture, and without anie great aiming, so rightly
hitte the marke, to put you out of doubt, I confesse I was both in a dreame
and a doubt, wherein sith it pleaseth your ho­nour to take so much paine, I
will craue your aide to de­uine the one, and decide the other.

### 1.1. The Dreame.

I Was walking (Madame Castania) in my dreame, (as I supposed) solitarily by
the sea side, where, as I tooke delight to sée the Dolphins leape (which as
the Ma­riners saie is a signe of imminent tempest) I forthwith espyed a rocke
in the sea, wherevpon stoode a Ladie arai­ed with roabes of burnisht golde▪ so
formed and framed, so adorned and decked with the giftes of Nature, as at the
first I tooke her to bée Thetis, that had so gorgeouslye clad her selfe, to
welcome home her louer and Lord Nep­tunus. But viewing her countenaunce more
narrowly, I perceiued her to be a mortall creature (though vnwor­thie such
diuine beautie should be shrouded in the sub­staunce of an earthly carcasse)
which so inflamed my af­fection, so fired my fancie, & sp kindled my desire,
that the [[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=28)
tormentes of Tantalus, the torture of Ixion, the sorrowe of Sisiphus, were not
halfe comperable to the perplexed passions that pinched my haplesse heart,
when I sawe all hope cut awaie from inioying this earthly Goddesse, the sea
which compassed the rocke was so déepe and daun­gerous, the cliffes so stéep-
downe and fearefull, as to des­cend was no lesse daunger then death it selfe,
thus as I surged in griefe, and wandered vp and downe in woe, I spied a bridge
a farre off, whereby was a passage to the rocke, which sight so salued my
forepassed sorrow, and so reuiued my daunted minde, as I was driuen into an
ex­tasie for ioy, to sée so good meanes to inioy my wished de­sire. Comming to
the bridge, I found it built of glasse so cunningly, and so curiously, as if
Nature her selfe had sought to purchase credit by framing so curious a péece
of workmanship. But yet so slenderly, as ye least waight was able to pash it
into innumerable péeces, and vn­derneath the bridge did run so terrible a sea,
such boun­cing billowes, such tumbling waues, such fearefull sur­ges, such
roaring stremes, such hideous goulfs, as it made the passage séeme a thousand
times more perillous. This terrible sight was such a cooling Card to my former
con­ceits, as hope was turned to feare, blisse to bale, & suppo­sed happinesse
to assured heauinesse. And yet my fancie was not quenched, but rather far the
more inflamed, my desire was not diminished, but augmented, & my liking no
lesse, but rather inlarged, so that to liue in loue with­out hope was
loathsome, to séeke redresse was losse of life, to want my wish was horror, to
inioy my will was hell, to liue in care without comfort was calamitie, to
séeke for cure was more th [...] miserie, not to possesse ye pray was hellish
daunger, to venture for the prize was haples death. Thus crossed with cares, &
daunted with such di­uers doubts, desperate hope so repulsed direfull feare,
y• incouraged by ventrous desire, I hadde either obtained
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=29) my wish, or
wanted of my will, if your Ladyshippe had not so sodainely wakened me out of
my slumber. Thus madame Castania, you haue heard my dreame, now the doubt is,
whether it had ben better to haue ventured vp­pon the brickle bridge, and so
either desperatly to haue ended cares with death, or else valiantly to haue
inioy­ed desire with renowme, or still like a fearefull dastard to haue ended
my dayes in lingering loue with my­serie.

Castania hearing the surmised dreame of Gwydoni­us, both smelled the fetch,
and smiled at the follie of this young youth, knowing that these fantastical
visions and presupposed passions, would in time (if he tooke not héed) proue
but too true, to preuent therefore such imminent perills, shée nipt her young
nouice on the pate with this parle.

GWydonius (quoth shée) I haue listened to thy drousie dreame, with déep
deuotion, by so much the more desi­rous attentiuely to heare it, by howe much
the more I finde it straunge and wonderfull: yea, so straunge as if I my selfe
had not wakened thée out of thy slumber, I would either haue thought it a
fained vision, or a fanta­sticall inuention, but sith these Gentlemen héere
present & mine owne eyes are witnesses, & thine owne tongue a testimonie of
thy talke, suffice I beléeue it, though I can not diuine it: to giue a verdit
where the euidence is not vnderstood is vanitie, to yéeld a reason of an
vnknowen case is méere folly, and to interpret so straunge a dreame without
great practise is but to skip beyond my skill, and so lay fast in the mire.
Yet least I might séeme to promise much and performe nothing, I will decide
your doubt if you please to take my doome for a censure.

It is a saying Gwydonius, not so common as true, that the hastie man neuer
wantes woe, and that hée [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=29) which is rash
wythout reason, seldome or neuer sléepeth without repentaunce. To venture
amiddest the Pikes when perills cannot bée  [...]schewed, is not fortitude but
folly, to hazarde in daungers, when death ensueth is not to bée worthely
minded, but wilfully mooued. Uer­tue alwayes consisteth betwéene extremities,
that as too much fearefulnesse is the signe of a quaking cow­ard, so too much
rashnesse betokeneth a desperate Ruf­fian. Manhoode Gwydonius consisteth in
measure and worthynesse, in fearing to hazard without hope. But to giue a
verdite by thine owne voyce, I perceiue thou art guiltie of the same crime,
for when the bricklenesse of the Bridge portended death, and the surging Seas
in­ferred losse of lyfe, yet desire draue thée to aduenture so desperate a
daunger. Better it is Gwydonius to liue in griefe, then to die desperatelye
without grace: bet­ter to choose a lingering lyfe in miserie, then a spéedie
death without mercie, better to bée tormented wyth haplesse fancie then with
hellish fiends, for in lyfe it is possible to represse calamity, but after
death neuer to re­dresse miserie. Tully Gwydonius in his Tusculans que­stions,
discoursing of the happinesse of life and heauinesse of death, sayth, that to
lyue we obtaine it of the louing Gods, but to die, of the vnluckie destinies:
meaning heereby, that lyfe though neuer so loathsome, is better then death,
though neuer so welcome: whereby I con­clude Gwydonius, that to liue carfully,
is better then to die desperatly.

Gwydonius perceiuing that Castanias parle was nothing to the purpose, and that
shée toucht not that point whereof hée desired most to bée absolued, but meant
to shake him off wyth a flée [...]elesse aunswere, beganne to drawe her to the
Trappe wyth this traine▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=30)MAdame
Castania (quoth he) I confesse that rashnesse neuer raigneth without
repentaunce, nor hastie ha­zarding without haplesse harmes, that he which
aduen­tureth desperate daungers is a foole, & he that passeth ine­uitable
perills is worse then an Asse: Yet from these so generall rules Madame, I
exempt these perticular excep­tions, namely Loue & Necessitie, which two are
tied wtin no bonds, nor limitted within no law, for whom ye diuel driues he
must néedes run, be the passage neuer so peril­lous: and whom Loue or
Necessitie forceth, he must ven­ture be the daunger neuer so desperate: for as
there is no enterprise so easie which to an vnwilling man séemeth not verie
hard to bée atchieued, so there is no incounter so combersome where will
wisheth, that séemeth not pas­sing easie to bée perfourmed, nowe this will is
with no­thing sooner pricked forwarde, then either with the force of Loue, or
sting of necessitie. So that whosoeuer ad­uentureth in a daunger, though neuer
so desperate, is not to be blamed, if inforced by fancie, or incouraged by
affection, and especially where the perill is in possibily­tie to bee passed
without death, and in the performaunce thereof, the possession of such a prise
as the passionate person more estéemeth then lands, limmes, or lyfe it selfe,
bée it neuer so swéete. In which case madame my cause consisteth. For the
Ladie who was an heauenly obiect to my glasing eies, was so beautified with
the giftes of na­ture, and so perfectly pollished with more then naturall
perfection, that with the only view of such diuine beutie, my sences were so
besotted, my wit & will so inueigled, my affection so inflamed, & any fréedome
so fettered, yea, Loue alreadie had made so greate a breach into the bul­warke
of my breast, that to obtaine so gorgeous a God­desse, I thought death no
daunger, though neuer so dire­full, nor losse of lyfe no torment, though neuer
so ter­rible.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=30)In déed
Gwydonius quoth Thersandro, I agrée with thée in this poynt, that there is no
carpet Knight so co­wardly that wold not passe most perillous pikes to
pos­sesse so liuely a Dame as thou doost decypher, nor no da­stard so daunted
with dread which would not greatlye indanger himselfe to inioy so louely a
damsell, in y• frui­tion of whom consisteth nothing but ioy, blisse, rest,
con­tentation of minde, delight, happinesse, yea, all earthlye felicitie.

And yet Sir (quoth Gwydonius) your sister Casta­nia condemnes me of follye, in
ventring for so precious a price, when as hope perswaded me, that no hazarde
could be haples, and assured me that Loue and Fortune fauoureth them that are
bold: that the Gods themselues séeing my perplexed passions, would of pittie
defend me from those perillous daungers. For if Theseus by Di­uine power were
ayded against the force of the mon­strous Minotaure, or if Iason, who
constrained with a couetous desire to obtaine the golden Fléece, arryuing at
Colchos, was preserued by the Gods, from the dint of the deadly Dragons, no
doubt Iupiter himselfe woulde either haue made the staggering bridge more
strong (cō ­sidering that no hope of wealth, no desire of riches, no
gréedinesse of gaine, no loue of lucre, but beautie her selfe was the victorie
I meant to vaunt of,) or els if I hadde sowsed in the roaring Seas, hée woulde
haue prouided some happie Dolphin, that Arion lyke, I might arriue at the
desired Rocke: and then my daun­gers should haue bene tourned into delight, my
perilles into pleasures, my hazarding into happinesse: yea, I should haue
possessed that heauenly paragon, and enioy­ed the loue of that louelye Venus,
whose onelye sight were a sufficient salue, against all fore-passed sor­rowes.

Staye there Master Gwydonius (quoth the Ladye
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=31) Melytta) for
I sée to graunt one false proposition, is to open a doore to innumerable
absurdities, and that by suf­fering you too long, of these supposed premisses,
you wil inferre some cauillyng conclusion to your former rea­sons: thus I
replye. That I confesse necessitie to haue no lawe, but I graunt not the same
of Loue: for if it be lawlesse, it is leawde: if without lymittes,
lasciui­ous: if contayned within no boundes, beastlye: if ob­serued with no
order, odious: so that lawlesse Loue without reason, is the verye Load-stone
to ruth and ru­ine.

Sith then Master Gwydonius as your selfe affirme, this was the pricke that
pusht you into perill, how can the effect be good, when the cause was naught,
or howe can you clearkly defend your desperate motion, procée­ding of such a
fonde and foolish occasion. But it was the perfection of her comelye person,
her exquisite feature, and rare beautie, that so kindled thy desire, and so
be­witched thy sences: for, who is so fearefull that beautie will not make
bolde? who so doubtfull, that beautie wil not make desperate? yea, what so
harde that a man will not hazarde, to obtayne so diuine a thyng, as beautie.

Oh Gwydonius, hast thou not hearde the Fish Re­mora lystening to the sounde of
a Trumpet is caught of the Fishers, that while the Porcupine standeth sta­ring
at the glymmering of the starres, hée is ouer-taken with dogges, that the
Deare gazing at the bowe is stri­ken with the bolte, that the Leoparde looking
at the Panthers paynted skinne is taken as a praye, and that he which taketh
too much delyght to gaze vpon beautie, is oftentimes galled with griefe and
miserie. Yea, his pleasure shall inferre such profite, and his good wil such
gayne, as if he reapte the beautifull apples of Tantalus, [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=31) which are no
sooner toucht, but they tourne to ashes.

Beautie Gwydonius, no sooner flourisheth but it fadeth, and it is not fullye
ripe before it beginne to rot: it no sooner blossometh but it withereth, and
scarcelye béeing toucht it stayneth, lyke to the Guyacum leafe, that hath the
one halfe parched, before the other halfe be perfect: to the Birde Acanthis,
which hatched white, yet tourneth blacke at the first storme: or lyke to the
Stone Asti­tes, that chaungeth colour with the onelye breath of a man.

If then Gwydonius, Beautie be so fading, so fickle, so momentarie, so moouing,
so withering, so waning, so soone passed, and so soone parched: is this the
Iewell, which you count more déere than life? and the Iemme which you thinke
worthie to be purchased with the dan­ger of death? No doubt Gwydonius, if you
wonne the victorie, you might vaunt of a great Conquest, and if your long hope
were repayed with a great happe, it shoulde bée much lyke to his, which
thinking to em­brace Iuno, caught nothing but a vanishing clowde.

You doo well Madame (quoth Castania) to put an If, in it, because hée that
vaunteth of victorie before hée hath wonne the fielde, maye prooue himselfe a
foole: hée that bragges of gaines before the accompts be cast, may perhappes
put his winnings in his eyes: and hée that bloweth the Mort before the fall of
the Buck, may very well misse of his fées: so he that counts himselfe a
spée­der before he be a wooer, sheweth himselfe a vaine per­son or a vaunting
patch.

Might it not bée I praye you Master Gwydonius, that passing the bridge scaping
the dangerous seas, & hap­pely arriuing at the desired Rocke, yet you might
misse of your purpose? Yes forsooth: for many a man bendeth his bow, y• neuer
killeth his game, laieth y• strap y• neuer
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=32) catcheth the
fowle, pitcheth the Net that neuer getteth the fish, & long time are heauie
wooers that neuer proue happie speeders.

So perhaps Gwydonius you might be crossed with a chippe of the same
mischaunce, and the gorgeous Dame whome you adore for a Goddesse might repaye
your li­king with loathing, your loue with hate, your good will with despite
and your fixed fancie with small affection, either that she lyked you too
little, or loued another too much. All these doubts Gwydonius are carefullye
to be cast, and wisedome it is to feare the worst, and finde the best: but you
Sir like a lustie champion, thinke a La­die won at the first looke, and the
good will of women gained at the first glaunce, thinking the Gods thēselues
are to be accused of iniustice, if they be not ayders to your enterprise,
insomuch that if in ventring ouer the perilous passage, you had by disaster
Fortune fallen in­to the daungerous Seas, you doubted not but that Iu­piter
would haue sent a Dolphin, that Arion like you might escape the fearefull
surges: but Gwydonius bée not so ventrous, least though you harpe very long,
you get not the like hap. These premisses considered, if my censure might
stand for a sentence, I déeme it better to be counted a dastardly coward, than
a desperate caitife, better to forsake your Goddesse, than your God, better to
lyue pinched with a few momentarie passions, than with desperate death to
destroy both soule and body: for there is no sore such which in time may not
be salued, no care such which cannot bée cured, no fire so greate which may
not bée quenched, no loue, liking, fancie, or affection, which in time may not
either be repressed, or redressed.

Valericus hearing this rough replye of Castania, sup­posed that although she
leuelled at Gwydonius, yet shée shot at him, and fearing the fort should be
too much sha­shaken [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=32) with this fearce
assault, he stifly defended the walles with this fresh Alarum.

MAdam quoth hée, I se you will sit nye the wals eare you be thrust out for a
wrangler, and that you will speake against your owne conscience, but you will
haue the conquest: for my owne part Madame, howsoeuer I séeme to lyke it, I
will not saye I mislike it, but I am sorrie you Madame Melitta shoulde so
blasphemous­lye imblaze the Armes of beautie, and so recklesselye rayle
against the sacred lawes of loue: sake héed [...] for crossing Cupid so
crabbedlye, for though he for­giue and forget, Venus is a woman, and will s
[...]eke re­uenge.

Valericus (quoth she) take no care what daunger I incurre for speaking the
truth, if I chaunce to bee har­med, it is mine owne mishap, and for Venus
reuenge I care for it the lesse because I feare it not: if I speake against my
selfe, you may sée I am the fitter to bée a Iudge, because I am not partiall,
nor haue any respect of persons.

These quippes Madame (quoth Gwydonius) are no­thing to the purpose, therefore
in the behalfe of my selfe and beautie thus I answere. That as there is
nothing that so soone procureth a man to loath as deformitie, so there is
nothing which sooner perswadeth a man to loue than beautie, for the most
precious stone is chosen by the most glystering hiew, the purest golde by the
most per­fect colour, the best fruite by the brauest blossomes, and the best
conditions by the swéetest countenaunce, so that where beautie raineth, there
vertue remaineth, and vn­der a faire face resteth a faithfull heart. Sith then
beau­tie and bountie cannot be parted, what man is hée so brutish, whom the
least of these will not make to break or bende?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=33) And wheras
you condemn me of vanitie for vaunting before the victorie, I say, that if
fortune had so fauored mée, that I had gayned the presence of my Goddesse, I
would neuer haue doubted to haue obtained my desire: for if she had séene the
desperate daunger which I aduē ­tured, and the fearefull perilles which I
passed for her sake, she coulde not but of conscience, repaye my loue with
vnfayned loyaltie, and my good will with treble gaine. And in troth I thinke
it vnpossible, that such hea­uenlye beautie shoulde bée eclypsed with
crueltye, and such perfect comelynesse be blemesht with curious coynesse.

Why Gwydonius (quoth she) doost thou call it cruel­tie, not to condiscende to
the request of euerie one that wooeth, or doost thou tearme it coynesse not to
yéelde to the assaulte of euerye flattering Louer, then in my iudgement it
were good for euerye woman to bee both cruell and coye, that by crueltie she
might auoyde the traine of trothlesse wooers, and by coynesse  [...]schewe the
troupe of faithlesse suters.

And so Madame (quoth Valericus) she should reape small comfort and lesse
credit.

Tush Signor Valericus (quoth Gwydonius) it plea­seth her thus merelye to iest,
whereas I knowe shée dooth accompt more of a courteous Dame, than of a curyous
Damsell, and that her Ladishippe so detesteth the name of crueltye, that shée
woulde bee loath to bée thought to haue a mynde deuoyde of mercie. And in
troth to leaue these particular instaunces, women in generall, or for the most
parte, are bountifull, courte­ous, sober, chaste, demure, not imbrued with
vice, but indued with vertue: so that by howe much womens bodies are weaker
than mens, by so much their mindes are more strong and vertuous.

What Gwydonius (quoth she) doo you thinke to bée [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=33) a frée-man in
Wales, for offering a léeke to Saint Da­uie, or to bring Pan into a fooles
Paradise, by praysing his Pipe.

Not so Madame (quoth he) but I hope in extollyng a Souldiours life to haue
Saint George to my friend, and in giuing verdit with Venus to gaine her good
wil, and to reape the reward that Paris had for his censure.

Marie sir (quoth Castania) if you haue no better get­tings, you may gaine long
inough, and yet liue by the losse: for in obtaining one friend, you shall
reape two foes as Paris did, who was more plagued by Pallas and Iuno, than
pleasured by flattering Venus.

And yet Madam (qd he) his mishap shall not make me to beware: for if Venus
wold grant me but one Lady in the world, whom most entirely I loue, I would
neither respect Pallas, Iuno, nor Diana her selfe, were she neuer so
despitefull.

Yes but you wold (quoth she) if she pinched you but with Acteons plague, to
pester your heade with as ma­ny hornes as a Har [...]. It wold cause you
coniecture your new Mistresse were too much giuen to the game, or that thou
wert come from Cornetto by discent.

Tush Madame (quoth he) doo you count Acteons hap such a great harme, the only
sight in séeing Diana naked, was a recompense for all his ensuing sorrowes,
and if my selfe might inioye my wish, and obtaine the heuen­ly Dame that so
hartely I desire, the plague of Acteon, nay ye griping grief [...], ye ghostly
spirits do suffer, shuld not counteruaile the ioye I shoulde conceiue in
inioying so péerelesse a Iewell.

Truly (quoth Thersandro) thou art worthie Gwy­donius to be a chapman, that
thou bids so well for thy chaffer, and in my minde she is not in Alexandria,
who for her beautie is so to be loued, or at ye least wold déeme thée not
worthy to be liked. But leuing these amorous
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=34) discourses,
let vs hye vs in hast to the Court, least in tarrying Orlanio misse [...] vs,
and so we be shent. The com­panie obaying the minde of Thersandro, passed as
spée­dely as might be to the Pallaice, where being arriued, they departed
euery man to his owne lodging.

Castania had no sooner conueyed her selfe closely in­to her chamber, but her
minde was moued with a thou­sand sundry motions, and she felt such a cruell
conflict in her haplesse hart, by the assault of diuers contrarie passi­ons,
that how stoutly so euer she defended the walles, she found her force too weak
to resist the rage of so reck­lesse a tyrant. Now the prayers Valericus powred
forth came to effect, now Venus meant to be reuenged for the crueltie she vsed
to her valiant Captain Valericus, who so valiantly had fought vnder the flagge
of affection, and yet could by no meanes preuayle. For Castania hea­ring the
sugured Eloquence, which so swéetlye flowed from the sappie wit of Gwydonius,
framing in her fan­cie the forme of his face, and printing in her heart the
perfection of his person, was so intangled in the snares of Loue, as shée
coulde by no reason redresse her mise­rie, but will shée, nyll shée, fell into
these bitter com­plaints.

ALas witlesse wretch (quoth she) that I am, what fie­rie flames of fancie doo
frie within mée? what desire, what lust, what hope, what trust, what care,
what dis­paire, what feare, what furie? that to be payned wyth these perplexed
passions, to me that neuer felt the force of them before, is no lesse dolour
than death it selfe, bee it neuer so dyrefull. O Gods, where are nowe be­come
those loftye lookes I vsed to Valericus? Where is the disdaynefull dealynges,
the coye countenaun­ces, the curyous congies, the causelesse crueltie?

Yea, the harde heart, which so rigorouslye reiected the [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=34) loue of him which
so entirely liked me. Could I, fonde foole that I am, valiauntly withstande
the assaults of a worthie Gentleman, & shall I cowardly yéeld to an vn­knowen
straūger: did I loath him whose parentage was little inferiour to mine, and
shall I loue another of base and vild birth: did I disdaine to looke at the
lure, and shall I now stoope without stall, come without call: yea, and to
such an emptie fist, O lawlesse Loue, O witlesse will, O fancie, fraught full
of phrensie and furie. Alasse, if I should be so carelesse as to consent to
this franticke toie, what will they say, that praised me for my vertue? will
they not as fast dispraise me for my vanitie, wil not my father fret, my
kinsfolke crie out, my friendes be sor­rie, my fo [...]s and especially
Valericus, laugh me to scorne, and triumph of this my mishap: yea, wil not all
y• world wonder to sée me alate giuen to chastitie, and now shake hands with
virginitie, to yéeld my déerest iewell & chie­fest treasure into ye hands of a
stragling straunger, who came to my fathers court without countenance or
coine, wealth or worshippe, credit or calling: yea, who by his owne report is
but a person of small parentage. Séeke then Castania to asswage this flame,
and to quench this fire, which as it commeth wtout cause, so it wil consume
without reason. For the greatest flowe hath the soonest ebbe, the sorest
tempest hath the most sodaine calme, the hottest loue hath the coldest end,
and of the déepest desire oft times ensueth the deadlyest hate: so that she
which settles her affection wt such spéed as she makes her choice without
discreation, may cast her corne she knowes not where, and reapes she wots not
what, and for her hastie choosing, may perhaps get a heauie bargaine. Alasse,
I knowe this counsaile is good, but what then? can I denie that which the
destinies haue decréede, is it in my pow­er to peruert that which the Planets
haue placed? can I resist that which is stirred vp by the starres? No, what
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=35) néede I then
make this exclamation, sith I am not the first nor shall not be the last whom
the frantike phrensie of flickering fancie, hath with more wrong and greater
vauntage piteously oppressed. What though Gwydoni­us be not wealthie, yet he
is wise, though he be not of great parentage, yet he is of comelye personage,
it is not his coine that hath conquered me, but his countenaunce, not his
vading riches, but his renowmed vertues, & I far more estéeme a man then
money: I but the Duke my fa­ther is not so base minded as to bestow me vpō so
meane a Gentleman, he neuer will consent that poore Gwydo­nius shuld inioy y•
which he hopeth some pearlesse prince shall possesse. What then? shall I
preferre my Fathers weale before mine own wil, his liking before mine own
loue? no, no, I will choose for my selfe whatsoeuer my choice be. Why but
perchance Gwydonius will no more estéeme thee then thou didst Valericus, &
repay thée with as smal fancy as thou him with affection. Tush, doubt it not
Castania, thou art y• dame which he so deciphered in his dreme, thou art y•
Venus which he saw in his visiō, y• art y• goddesse, whose beauty hath so
bewitched him, y• art y• iewell to possesse, y• which ther is no hap so hard
which he would not hazard, no daunger so desperate which hée wold not
aduenture, no burden so heuie which he wold not beare, nor no perill so huge
which he wold not passe. And shall not then Gwydonius be my seruant, sith I am
his Saint, shall not I like him which loueth mée, sith he is my ioy, shall I
not inioye him? Yes, Gwydonius is mine, and shall bée mine in despight of the
fates and Fortune.

Castania hauing thus pittifully powred out her plaints would gladly haue giuen
Gwydonius intelligence (with modestie if she might) of her good will towardes
him, & god knows how faine Gwydonius wold haue discouered his feruent
affection, if too much feare had not astonished [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=35) him, & too great
bashfulnes staied her. She therfore houe­ring betwéene feare & hope,
perseuered so long in his pen­siue passions & careful cogitations, y• by
couert concealing of her inward sorrow, the flame so furiously fried with­in
her, that she was constrained to kéepe her bed. Wher­vpon Melytta coniecturing
the cause of her care by y• co­lour of her countenaunce, thought to sift out
the occasion of her sorrow, y• by this meanes she might apply a medi­cine to
her maladie, & finding fit opportunitie, she brake with her in this wise.

Madame Castania (quoth shée) since I haue by y• Duke your father bene assigned
to you as a companion, I haue in such louing wise both comforted & counselled
you, as I hope you haue iust cause to say y• I haue most careful­ly tendred
your estate, for perceiuing how willing you were to follow my direction, I
counted your wealth my weale, your pleasure my profite, your happinesse my
ioy, & your prosperitie my felicitie. Which friendly care if it wer [...] not
to be considered, if I shuld shew you what great sorrow I sustaine by your
heauinesse, you would iudge my words to procéede either of folly or flatterie,
but if your sore be such as it may be salued, if your care may be cured, if
your grief may be redressed, or your malady mi­tigated by my means, cōmand me
good Castania in what I may to pleasure thée, & thou shalt find me so charely
to performe my charge, as my willing mind shall euidētly bewray my well
meaning. I see Castania, of late, such a straunge Metamorphosis in thy minde,
as for pleasant conceits thou dost vse pensiue cogitations, thy chéerefull
countenance is changed into lowring lookes, thy merrie deuises into mournful
dumps, & yet I cannot coniecture no cause of this sodaine alteration. If want
of riches should worke thy woe, why thou swimst in wealth, if losse of
friends? thou hast infinit of noble parētage, which loues thée most entirely.
If thou meanest no longer to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=36) leade a
single life, no doubt thy father will prouide thée of such a princely match,
as shall content thée for his per­son, and countenaunce thée with his
parentage. But if in all these supposes I haue mist the marke, and haue not
toucht the case of thy calamitie, vnfolde vnto me Ca­stania what the paine is
that thus doth pinch thee, and as­sure thy selfe, I will be so secrete in thy
affaires, as euer Lampana was to her Ladie Cleophila.

Castania hearing this friendly discourse of Melytta, thought for al this faire
glose ye text might be to intricate, & that these painted spéeches would proue
but rotten pil­lers, fearing therefore the fetch, and doubting the worst, if
shée bewraie her minde, shée framed her this aun­swere.

MAdame (quoth she) the incomperable curtesie and vn­fained friendship which
since your first comming I haue found in you by experience, will neither
suffer mée to suspect your Ladyshippe of flatterie, nor my selfe wil­lingly to
be accused of ingratitude, for your diligence hath bene so great, & my deserts
so small, that if I might but liue to requite some parte of your good will, it
were the second felicitie I looke for in this life. But touching the pensiue
passions which thus diuersly perplexed mée, I aunswere, that as he which is
wounded of the Bores tuske, if his sore take aire is verie hardly healed, as
hée which stroken with a Scorpion if his wound take wind can neuer be cured:
so madame, many inward maladies carry this nature, that if they be once
discouered [...] they are far the more hardly recouered, that it is better to
con­ceale them with griefe, then reueale them in hope of re­léefe.

Not so Castania, your principle is not true, for if your passions procéeded of
loue, which of all other inward sores requireth greatest secrecie, yet
vndoubtedly y• more [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=36) it is discouered,
the sooner it is cur [...]d, for as the sto [...]e of Armenia béeing couered
with sande, burneth most ex­treamly, and no sooner taketh aire but it cooleth,
so the fi­rie flames of loue raked vp in silence, frie most furious­ly, but
béeing by discourse dis [...]losed, they soone conuert from flame to fume and
smoke. Wherfore good Castania impart vnto me the matter which doeth import
thée so néere, and I sweare vnto thée by the sacred rites of Cae­res, which is
so honoured in Alexandria, that if thou doost loue where thy friends do not
like, and thy wish be con­trarie to their will, yet I will séeke all meanes
possible to redresse thy sorrowe.

Alasse good mada [...]e, rather then you shoulde thinke mée so incredulous or
suspitious, as not to beléeue your oth, or doubt of your secret dealing, I
will without delay make you priuie to the cause of my paine, what perill so
euer I incurre by reuealing it. So it is Melytta, that the perfection of
Gwydonius, his exquisite qualities, and ex­cellent vertues haue fiercely
assaulted the fort of my fancie, as I am perforce constrained to resigne my
liber­tie captiue vnto his curtesie, and to make his person the prison of my
heart. This lucklesse and vnlikely loue ma­dame, is the cause of my care, &
the sum of my sorrowe, this frantike affection hath driuen my drouping heart
to shew forth these drousy looks, this is it which hath made me an enimie to
my selfe, a foe to all good companie, & to delight in nothing but sorrow &
solitarinesse: yea, this is the sore, which if in time it be not salued, will
preuent by death all other miseries.

And is this (quoth Melytta) the paine that so greatly perplexeth you, is this
the  [...]re which so cōbers thy con­science? is this the daunger which
driues thée into such deepe distresse? Doest thou thinke so supersti
[...]iously of Gwydonius, or so abiectly of thy selfe, y• thou deemest this
[...] impossible to be brought to passe: no, no, doubte
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=37) not Castania,
I my self dare absolutely promise thée, that thy loue shall sort to such
happie successe, as thou thy self doest séeke for.

And with that Melytta staied by a sodaine sight shée had of y• Saint that
Castania so hartely serued, for Gwy­donius was entering in at the chamber
doore with a dish of delicates, which Orlanio hearing his Daughter was sicke,
had sent her. Melytta séeing y• Cupid began to fauor the cause of his clients,
in giuing them such fit opportu­nitie to discouer their cares wēt her way,
leauing Gwy­donius y• first man to play his part in this tragicall Co­medie,
who seeing his goddesse thus surprised with sick­nesse, was so galled with
griefe, so pinched with hellish passions, & so tortured with extreame
torments, y• his co­lour began to change, & he fetcht a deep sigh or two,
which Castania hearing, she perceiued wtout touching his pul­ses, the cause of
these his sodain passions. In fine, such me­lancholike motions so amazed his
minde, that he was al­most mute in his message, yet at length incouraging
himselfe, he presented it vnto her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the Duke your Father hearing of your sodain sicknesse, in
token of his fatherly affection, a­mongst all his dainties, hath sent you this
dish, which he thinks most méete for your diet, wishing your Ladyship to let
no doubtfull motions distresse your minde, nor no carefull thoughtes cumber
your conscience, for you shall lacke nothing if you reueale to him your want,
which ei­ther your will or wish can desire. And truely madame, to manifest my
willing duetie (if the prayers of a poore Gentleman may be heard of the
heauenly Gods) I wish that before you tast of this foode, it may turne to
Nectar, whereby not onely your sicknesse should be salued, but your diuine
beautie and vertue according to desert shuld be crowned with immortalitie.

Castania perceiuing with what seruent affection [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=37) Gwydonius vttered
these wordes, began to chéere vp her selfe, in hope y• her good will should
not be repaied with ingratitude, taking therfore the present at his hands, and
liking it neuer the worse for his sake that brought it, she returned him this
replie.

Gwydonius (quoth she) as I haue cause most reuerent­ly to accept of my fathers
louing curtesie, & to repay his natural affection with most dutiful obedience,
so I haue cause to thanke thée for thy paines, and to thinke wel of thée for
thy wish, promising in recompence of thy good will, if in any respect I may
plesure thée, to séeke and sue to my father for preferment.

Madame, I account the performance of my message no paine, but pleasure, and I
think my selfe as much ho­noured by this office, & thrice more happie thē if
I shuld in Ganimedes place present the cup to Iupiter. But Ma­dame, sith that
to stop the streame, is to make the floud flow more fiercely, to represse the
fire, is to make it flame more furiously, and to restraine the force of loue,
is to kindle a greater flame, least too long delaie shoulde bréede too great
daunger, and by concealing my sorrow I shuld make the sore incurable, I
thought good either pre­sently to heare the curteous sentence of my lyfe, or
the cruell doome of my death. So it is Madame, that too long gasing vpon the
beames of your heauenly beautie, & to narrowlye construing ouer your vertuous
conditions, I remaine so caught in the snare of your bounty, & so thral­led in
the thridde of your vertue, that the staie of my life hangeth in your hands,
either to driue me downe to hellish miserie, or to hoist me vp to heauenly
felicitye. For although I haue not héeretofore by duetifull seruice made
manifest the loyaltie of my loue, yet since I first framed in my fancie (as in
a mirrour) the shape of your surpassing beautie, my heart hath bene crossed
with such cruell Camizados for your sake, as if with the Target
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=38) of hope, I
had not withstoode the furious force of such ra­ging furies, I had by dispaire
bene dashed against most dangerous rocks. Sith thē Madam y• sight of your
swéet face hath fast fettered my fancie in the linkes of loue, as without your
meanes I can neither bée redressed nor re­leased: I humbly desire you neither
to resist the motion of my wel meaning, nor to reiect the deuotion of my good
will, but to accept your poore Gwydonius as a faithfull seruant.

Castania hearing diligently the faithfull discourse of distressed Gwydonius,
perceiuing by his sighes the pinch­ing sorrow of his thoughts, and séeing him
to fast fettered in folly, on a sodaine to giue her the slip, had that she
desi­red, and now her louing lookes was tourned to lowring glances, her
delightfull curtesie, to disdainfull coynesse, & she thought to repaie the
swéet meate wherewith before she feds him, with most sowre sauce, not that she
misliked of his loue, for it was the onely thing she desired, but to make him
the more feruent in affection, vttering these or such like words to her selfe
secretly.

And is not Castania the victory most accounted of, wher the conquest is most
doubtful? is not the castle which abi­deth the longest battery thought the
richest bootie, are not those pearles which are scarcely found & hardly
gotten, euer of the greatest value, what so is gained by p [...]rill, is
thought alwaies precious, hardly come by, warily kept. The Maide that by long
sute and much trauaile is ob­tained, by how much the more she was hard in the
win­ning, by so much the more she will be swéet in the wea­ring, she which in
her virginitie is charie of her chastiti­tie, in her marriage wil be as warie
of her honestie, ther­fore I will qualifie ye hot loue of Gwydonius with a
cold potion, & with that she made him this waspish answere.

Why Gwydonius, shal the olde Prouerbe be verified in thee, that the Priest
forgets himselfe that euer he was [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=38) a Clearke, that
too much  [...] bréedes contempt. I sée well if Appelles that cunning Painter
suffer the greasie Sowter to take a view of his curious worke he will grow so
malapert, as to meddle with his picture: if the proud Centaure Ixion be bidden
to the Feast of the Gods, no lesse then Iuno her selfe wil suffice him for his
choyce.

Set a beggar on horse-backe they saye, and he wyll neuer alyght. Extoll one of
base stocke to any degrée of dignitie, and who so proud and haughtie. I speake
this Gwydonius to thy reproofe: is thy stomacke alate wax­en so queasie, that
no diet will downe but my Fathers owne dish? will no meanor mate suffice thee,
vnles thou match with a Prince? is there no Ladie will like thée, but my loue?
is there no courser Dame to couet, vnlesse thou courte vnto me? Did my Father
promote thee to this thou art from the state of a begger, and wilte thou now
presume to be my better? Hau [...] my lookes bene so louing, my rountenaunce
so courteous, my glaunces so full of good will, as to promise so much as thou
dost pre­sume? No: but one only countenance in a seruile mind  [...] too much
incouragement. Doost thou thinke Gwydo­nius; that I accompt so meanelye of my
person; as to match with a man of thy pi [...]ch  [...] I so  [...] [...]acke
my credite, as to c [...]mber my selfe with one of th [...] callyng? Shall I
so stayne my state, as to stoope to thy lure? No: where is thy coyne to
maintaine my coun [...]enaunce? Where is thy wealth to vphold my worship?
Where is thy patrimonie to counteruayle my personage? But put  [...]ase I
accepted of thy sute: d [...]t thou thinke euer to gaine my fathers good will?
doost thou thinke it is p [...]s­s [...]b [...]e to compasse his consent? dost
thou hope euer to take him in such a vaine as he will be willyng to giue his
verdit on thy side. No Gwydonius, but if he were pri­uie to this thy
presumption, he would repaye thy
follye[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=39) with
too much furie, he would vnplume thée of all his feathers, that like Aesops
Crowe thou mightst receiue the reward of thy rashnesse. If therfore thou loue
thine owne welfare keepe thy selfe within thy boundes, and striue not farther
than thy sléeue will stretch, least in climing too high, thou catch the sorer
fall.

Castania hauing thus sharply shaken vp my young youth Gwydonius, thought she
had giuen him a suffici­ent cooling Carde: but he no whit dismayed with thys
denial, like a lustie champion entred pece mele with her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the poore shoomaker was not bla­med for viewing Appelles
picture, but because in find­ing fault he went beyond his shooe: the Centaure
Ixi­on was not reprooued for his familiaritie with Iuno as he was a guest, but
in that his sute tended to the sacke­ing of her honestie: familiaritie neuer
bréedes contempt in a good mind, neither am I to be accused of y• crime, for
the most seruile slaue in Alexandria (I call the heauens as witnesses of my
wordes) dooth not with more louing duetie reuerence and honour your person and
paren­tage, then doth your poore seruaunt Gwydonius. Well Madam though my
nature and nurture be such in your sight, as they bewray my bringing vp and
birth to bée so base, as if I meane to draw my discent, I must (as you say)
imblaze mine armes in the beggars coate, yet thus much I aunswere in respect
of my parents and without arrogancie thus farre I stande on my pantuffles,
that the credit I haue in your Fathers Court, is not coequal with the calling
I haue in my owne countrey, if I did not count it more great credite and
honour, in that I haue sometime inioyed a curteous countenance of your swéete
selfe, since my comming. But if I were the most famous Prince in the world, I
so estéeme your deuine beautie and exquisite vertue, as I would thinke my self
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=39) farre
vnworthy to possesse such heauenlye perfection: which if I could obtaine, the
displeasure of your Father could no whit discourage mée, his thundring
threates could no whit amaze me: no, death it selfe could neuer daunt my
minde, were it neuer so despitefull. But who (say you) can lay their loue wher
is no desert, and wher want bréeds a flat deniall?

Ah Castania, Nature by her secret motion, hath indu­  [...]d all creatures
with some perfect qualities, to supplye that what which bréedes misliking. The
Moule depri­ued of sight hath a wonderfull hearing, the Hare being very
fearefull is most swifte, the fish hauing no eares, hath most cléere eyes: so
though want of dignitie dis­grace me, though want of coyne discountenaunce me,
though lacke of wealth impaires my credite, yet Nature hath giuen me such a
loyall and louing heart, as I hope in the perfection of that, she hath
supplyed the want of all the rest: so that Madame though I want coyne I do not
want constancie, though I haue no lands, yet I lack not loyaltie, though I
want wealth, yet I want not wil to ende my life to doo you good, or spend my
time to doo you seruice.

GWydonius hauing thus pithely replyed, draue Casta­nia into a great doubt,
whether she should presentlye consent to his demaund, or still driue him off
with de­layes, whether she shuld yeelde the fort at the first skir­mish, or
stand to the doubtful euent of battaile: at length least she shuld digresse
from the course of womankinde, she thought best to denie that she most of all
desired, and therefore then gaue him this aunswere.

GWydonius (quoth she) in what state you came to my Fathers Court I know, what
you are by discent I knowe not, nor I care not, and if I did, it auayl [...]th
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=40) not, but this
I saye, that it is harde taking of Fowle, when the net is discryed, and ill
catching of Fish, when the hooke is bare: impossible it is Gwydonius to
inferre beléefe, where no credite will be giuen, and to deceyue her that
spieth thy fetch: when the string is broken, it is hard to hit the white, and
when a mans creditte is called in question, perswasions can little preuaile.
It is a religion amongst louers to sweare and forsweare, to promise mountaines
and perfourme moulhilles, to bée ripe without and rotten within, to carrie a
rustie blade in a veluet scabberde, and a siluer Bell with a leaden clapper.
Therefore Gwydonius I had rather mistrust too soone, than mislyke too late, I
had rather feare my choice than rue my chaunce, I had rather stop at the
brimme, than at the bottome: for the signet being set, it is too late to
breake the bargaine, and fancie being once fixt, it is too late to reclayme
affection. For the loue of a wo­man is lyke the Oyle of Flynt, which being
once con­gealed will neuer be dissolued, like the Diamonde, which being once
rubbed with the gum of a Pine trée, will neuer be broken: so if I fancie any,
sith I meane not to fléete, it shall bée such a one, as I néede not re­pent
me.

And whereas you say Gwydonius, that in despight of Fortune, Nature hath giuen
you a louing heart, I my selfe surely did neuer déeme any lesse, but thought
you of the crue of those louers that loue too much, ha­uing as manie Ladies as
they haue wits, and that is not a fewe, who count that euery face must haue a
new fancie, and if they sée a thousand the [...] must be all view­ed with a
sigh, which considered Gwydonius, I meane not to like nor to loue neither you
nor any other.

AND shall then Madame (quoth he) my merite be re­payed with no  [...]eede,
shall my good will be requited [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=40) with no gain?
shall I haue in lieu of my loue no liking? will you so swar [...]e from
[...]ustice, as not to giue euerye one according to his desert? at the least
recommpence? not desire with despight, and heartie loue with loathing hate,
for as the Poet sayeth. ‘Quis enim succenset a­manti.’

Well Gwydonius, as I will not be thy priuie friend, so I will not be thine
open foe, and as I cannot be so curteous as to requight thee for thy paines,
so I wil not be so cruell as to despight thée for thy presumption, and whereas
thou crauest gaines for thy good will, I am content to remaine thy vnwilling
debter.

Yet Madame (quoth he) where the debt is confest, ther remaineth some hope of
recouerie, for though y• cre­ditor be neuer so vnwilling to pay the debt being
due, hée shall by constraint of lawe and his owne confessi­on, ( [...]augre
his  [...]ace) be forced to make restitution.

Truth Gwydonius (quoth she) if he commence his ac­tion in a right case, & the
plea he puts in, proue not im­perfect. But yet take this by the way, it is
hard for that plaintiffe to recouer his costs, where the defendant bëe­ing
Iudge sets downe the sentence.

Gwydonius feeling himselfe pincht to the quick with this pretie quip made no
further reply, but l [...]st his l [...]ng tarying might bréed suspition,
wishing his Mistres wel­fare, tooke his leaue very solempnly and sorrowfully,
of Castania, who séeing him gone and her selfe alone, be­gan thus to muse and
meditate vppon the sharpe aun­sweres she had giuen her best beloued Gwydonius.

WHy Castania,what franticke follye hath made thée thus far to forget thy self.
Is the bird inticed to the s [...]rappe by the  [...]ew of the nettes, is the
Foxe allured to the  [...]al [...] by the  [...] of the trappe, will the Mouse
[...]ch  [...]nder that Ensigne, where the Cat
proclaymeth[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=41)
her selfe Captaine? will the silly Doue lay her egges in the Fawlchons neast?
or is it the meanes to haue him to thy friend, whome with bitter blowes thou
doost re­buke: is there no other call for courtesie but crueltie? doost thou
finde no fitter meanes to obtain a reasonable request but by a rigorous
repulse? or is it the nature of women to defie that outwardly which they most
desire inwardly, to loath that in their mouth, which they loue in their minde,
to reiecte that with their hande, which they most willingly would receiue in
their heart? Doost thou thinke Castania to drawe Gwydonius to thy desire, by
detesting him? Doost thou thinke to allure him to thy loue, by loathing him?
Doost thou suppose to winne him to thy will by these waspish aunsweres? No:
and what, doost thou know what perill will insue of this re­pulse, what
daunger will followe of this denyall? Is it lyke he will put it vp patiently?
No sure, either looke to haue his extreame loue tourned to extreme hate, or
that he will persist no longer in the pursute of his purpose. Oh would to God
Gwydonius, thou wert againe to be­gin thy demaund, and I to frame mine
aunswere: then would I salue thy sores with swéet strops, not with cut­ting
corasiues: then wold I mittigate thy maladie with easie medicines, not with
pinching playsters: then wold I comfort thée with consent, not daunt thée with
deny­alls. But alas, had I wist now comes too late, & there­fore Castania if
thou hast made a fault, séeke to make a­mends, and recompence this his iniurie
with most friēd­ly courtesie.

And with that came Melitta, who comforting Casta­nia, passed away the rest of
the day in parle.

But Gwydonius, who all this while had a flea in his eare, was driuen into a
quandarie with the taun­ting quips of his Mistresse, fearing that although his
ac­compts [[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=41)
were great, his gaines should be little, & though he made a very long haruest,
yet he shoulde reape but a very small croppe, thinking that vnder such sower
spée­ches, a sugred minde could not be contained: yet at last entring into
déeper consideration with himselfe, he fell into these tearmes.

But by the swéete (quoth he) how should we know the sower: but by the blacke
how should we know the white: he neuer greatly accompteth of prosperitie which
hath not bene before pinched with aduersitie: which per­chaunce Castania
meanes to make me trye by expery­ence, thinking to féede me first with bitter
broaths, that her after daintie fare may more delight me: to daunt me with the
raging stormes of deniall, that the calme of her consent may more content me:
to make mée tast the bitter pills of annoy, that héerafter I may enioy the
greater ioy: for the chilling cold of Winter makes the sprowting spring time
séeme farre more pleasaunt, the parching heate of Summer, makes the coole
shade more delightfull, and the frowning lookes of Castania, will make her
smiling countenaunce séeme more chéerefull. Then cease not Gwydonius to pursue
thy sute with end­lesse paine, either to enioy her curtesie, or tast of her
cru­eltie, to thy great happinesse or extreme heauinesse.

GWydonius thus like a valiant champion, neuer ama­zed with any chip of
misfortune, neuer feared to giue the assault for all the first repulse, but
onely sought op­portunitie how he might in close combat once again in­counter
with Castania, vowing either to return wt some signe of victorie, or els to
put lim and life in hazard. But fortune meaning plesantly to sport wt this
yoūg nouice, wold neuer minister such fit occasiō, y• he might haue
so­litary accesse to his goddes, for Castania of pretēded pur­pose
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=42) so warely
auoided his companie, and with such dis­dainfull lookes so reiected his dutie,
as Gwydonius was constrained to séeke his course, by a new compasse,
dely­uering vnto one of her maides a friendly letter to this effect.

# Disdayned Gwydonius to his desired Castania, Health.

WHo so tasteth (Madame Castania) of the Riuer Li­cos in India, féeleth such a
continuall flame to fry and fret his intrayles, as it is more torture than to
bée tormented with the hellish-furies, and this griefe canne neuer be
redressed, but with drinking the bloud of his déerest friend. And as he that
is venomed by the Pha­langa, féeleth such painfull passions, as he runneth
mad, and is onely cured by the meanes of most harmonious musicke: so Madame,
the furious heate of fancie, dooth so scorch and scale my haplesse heart, and
dooth perplexe me with such hellish pangues, as death it selfe were thrice
more desired, than thus to driue my dayes in do­lour. And I haue so gréedely
swallowed vp the sugred poyson of your deuine beautie, as through the
extremi­tie of pinching griefe, which so direfully distresseth me, I rest as
one distract from his senses, not possible to ob­taine a cure for this my
calamitie, vnles with the deaw of mutuall affection you mitigate my maladie,
or with the pleasant harmonie of your musical consent, you ap­pease my
miserie.

Sith then Madam my care procéedeth from your beau­tie, let my sore be cured by
your bountie, sith the perfec­tion of your person hath wrought my bane, let
the effect of your courtesie procure my blisse, and reiect him not [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=42) so rigorously,
which respe [...]th you so reuerently. Loath him not so hatefully, which
loueth you so heartely: nor repaie not his dutifull amitie, with such deadly
enmity. The pike fatally prosecuteth the fish Mugra, as his mor­tall foe, and
yet séeing him snared on the fishers hooke, he spéedely shreddeth the line in
sunder, to deliuer him, the Snake most deadly detesteth the field-mouse, and
yet she heapeth vp in her hole store of prouision to preuent her enimies
penurie: and shall then madame, your cruel­tie so farre excéede these
sencelesse creatures? shall your rigour be so voide of reason, as to requite
your friende with paine? when they repaie their foes with pleasure, to driue
your friends into distresse, when they redéeme their foes from daunger, no
madame, I hope you wil not counteruaile my constancie with such discurtesie,
nor so recklesly regard your poore Gwydonius, whose loue and loyaltie is so
great, that as the stones which are found in the riuer Lyncestis, the lowder
the winde bloweth, & the deeper they are drencht in the water, the more they
burne and blaze: so the more you séeke to coole my fan­cie with disdaine, the
more my affection is kindled with desire, the more you loath, the more I like:
the greater dispaire you driue me into by denialls, the greater hope,
(incouraged by constancie) I haue to obtaine my re­quest, in which feruent
affection, I meane to remayne without chaunge, crauing in liewe of this my
loyaltie, that you will spéedely send the messenger of present con­solation,
to him which pineth awaie, and is yours one­ly, and euer.

Still in hope, Gwydonius.

CAstania hauing receiued this Letter from her assured friend Gwydonius,
although she perceiued by the con­tents
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=43) that his loue
was not counterfait, but constant: not lyght, but loyall: not floting, but
faithfull: and that she should not finde him immutable in prosperitie, which
was so permanent in aduersitie. Yet (whether it were for coynesse in consent,
or charinesse of choise I knowe not) she once againe thought to sound him more
deeper, to kéepe out still the flagge of defiaunce, and to spende one Uollée
of shot in the face of her enimie, to sée if a hot skirmish would make him
flie the field. And if lyke a valiaunt souldier he did manfully march on, and
not re­fuse the brunt of the battaile, shée woulde then resigne the fort of
her fréedome into his hands, and yéelde vp the bulwarke of her breast, which
so long he had battered, that triumphauntly he might set vp Trophees in signe
of a most victorious conquest. To put therefore the mat­ter in question, she
returned him this answere.

# Castania to Gwydonius which hopeth in vaine, health.

MAister Gwydonius, your Letter béeing more hastely receiued then heartely
read, I perceiue by the con­tents, that you are still perplexed with your
pensicke pas­sions, and that your disease is incurable, for if your pains may
be appeased, or your maladie mittigated by no me­dicine, but by my meanes, you
are like either to pay your due vnto death, or still to linger in distresse.
My cunning is too small to enterprise the composition of anye secrete simples,
and my calling too great to become a Phisition to such a paltering pacient, so
that I neither can nor wil cure another mannes harme by mine owne mishap. To
loue him whome I cannot like, were but to wreast a­gainst mine owne will, to
flatter him whome I meane [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=43) not to fancie, is
but a méere tricke of extreame follye. What the cause is Gwydonius, that thy
good will reapes so small gaine, and that so rigorously I repaie thy loue with
hate, I knowe not, vnlesse the constellation of the Starres by some secrete
influence haue so appointed it in the calculation of our natiuitie. But this I
am sure, that as no Serpent can abide the smell of a harts horne, as the
Panther escheweth the companie of the Ownce, as the Uulture is mortall enimie
to y• E [...]le, and as it is impossible to hatch vp a Swanne in an Eagles
neast, to temper Oile & Pitch together in one vessell, to mixe the bloud of a
Lyon and a Woolfe in one bowle, and to pro­cure amitie betwéene the Fawlcon
called Tilo, and the Foxe, so hard is it to procure me by ruthfull request to
be thy friend, which am by instinct of nature thy protested foe, and as harde
to winne me to thy wife, who so little likes of thy loue, that the verie
remembrance of thy per­son makes me fal into most hatefull passions. Cease
thē Gwydonius to condempne me of crueltie, and leaue off at last to appeale
to my curtesie, for thou shalt alwayes bée sure to feele the one, & neuer to
finde the other. Yet least thou shouldest accuse me of ingratitude, though I
cannot inwardly mittigate thy miserie, yet I will outwardlye teach thée to
applie such plaisters (as if the experience of them proue true) shall greatly
appease thy paine. Plinie Gwydonius reporteth, that hée which drinketh of the
ri­uer Auerna, cooleth and mortifieth his affections, but if the water be
toucht by any meanes before it be drunke, the vertue thereof is of no value.
He that weareth the feathers of the Birde Ezalon about him, shall euer bée
fortunate in his loue, but if they bée not pulde when the Sunne is eclipsed,
they are of no force: and to con­clude, ther is nothing that sooner driueth
awaie amorous conceits, thē to rub y• temples of thy head with ye sweat of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=44) an Asse,
which if you canne performe it, as no doubt you may put it in practise, I hope
you shall be redressed from your intollerable griefe, and I released from such
an im­portunate sute.

Forced by the destinies still to denie thee, Castania.

Gwydonius hauing viewed and reuiewed ouer this Letter, seeing y• rigorous
resolution of his mistres, could by no meanes be remoued, and that a most
seuere sen­tence was pronounced against him by a most iniurious Iudge, was
driuen into a doubt whether he should styll with plaints sue for pittie, or
else blasphemously exclaim against her brutish crueltie, whether he should
bewraie his parents and parentage to the Duke and her, or still stand to the
doubtfull chaunce of Fortune, to pursue his purpose still with plaints, her
hellish crueltie perswaded him: to blaspheme against her, the sinceritie of
his lou [...] would not let him: to bewraie his birth, diuerse daun­gers might
insue: to stand to the chaunce of Fortune, was still to hazard without hope:
combred thus with di­uers cogitations, at last he determined to breake vp the
batterie, and to laie too an  [...] hold, but to returne with as much speede
as might be to his father Clero­phontes Court, there by absence to mittigate
the mala­die which so grieuously molested him: yet he thought be­fore his
departure to giue her a friendly farewell, that might both confirme his
constancie, and condempne her crueltie, which he framed to this effect.

# Gwydonius to Castania, prosperous  [...] in all her affaires.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=44) I Meane
not, most mercilesse mistresse, any longer so s [...]e for mercie, nor with
pittifull plaints to trouble your patience, sith to stirre that which the
Starres hath  [...]a [...]ed, is to striue against the streame, and to force
that which the fates haue framed, is to couet to be counted a foole, but as
one whom fortune meanes to make a myr­  [...]ur of miserie, and ouer whom
Venus her selfe meanes to  [...] [...]s of a most haplesse vassall, I
sorrowfully send you this fainting farewel, as a faithfull token of my
fer­uent affection, for séeing neither my person canne please, nor my liuing
like you, nor my base calling content you, nor I my selfe reape any guerdon
for my good will, to a­uoid the remembrance of these passions, which renue my
paines, & to asswage the rigour of my raging loue, I pur­pose as spéedely as
wind & weather will permit me, to abandon ye place of your abode, not incensed
by furie, as one in despight, but inforced by ye rage of fancy to depriue my
selfe of al delight, either to consume in solitarie cares without compassion,
or by absence to mittigate some part of my martirdome: for to hope stil I sée
is but to heap wo vpon wretchednes, and care vpon calamitie Yet madam thus
much I say, y• Dido quéene of Carthage loued Ae­neas, a banished exile, and a
stragling stranger. Enphinia daughter to the king of Corinth, & he [...]e
apparant to his crowne, who for her feature was famous throughout all the East
Countries, vouchsafed to applie a soueraigne plaister to the furious passions
of Acharisto, her fathers bondman. The dutchesse of Malphey chose for her
husbād her seruāt Vl [...]ico, & Venus, who for her surpassing beuty was
canonized for a Goddesse, disdained not the loue of limping Vulcan, they mada
[...]e respected the man, and not their money, their wils, & not their wealth,
their loue, not their liuings, their constancie, not their coine: their
persō, not their par [...]n [...]age: & the inward vertue, not ye outward
[...]. But you are so addicted to the opinion of Danae, y•
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=45) minde, my
bitter spéeches were written with my hand, not wrought with my heart, my
deniall was onely for the better triall, and those rigorous repulses were
either to rip vp thy fained fancie or feruent affection, for if thou hadst
retired at the first foile, I would haue thought thy fancie but a flash,
readie to be quenched with the least mis [...]ing deaw of misfortune. But
since thou hast kept thy course so rightly by thy compasse, amidst most
daun­gerous rockes, and hast stoode to thy tackling against all the blustering
blasts of fortune. Assure thy selfe in liew of this thy loue, thou hast not
héeretofore found me so dis­dainfull, as héerafter thou shalt find me
dutifull, neither did I euer reiect thée so currish lye, as I will accept thee
curteously, being redie to restore the iniurie I haue offe­red thée, with anye
courtesie that thou maist eyther honestly require, or I iustly affoord. But
alas Gwidonius what curtesie shall I euer be able to shew thée, that may
counteruaile thy kindnes? How entirely shal I loue thée to requite thy
loyaltie? what duetie can be a due recom­pence to this thy good will: yea, if
I by any meanes canne quit this thy loue, I neuer doubt to bée déemed
ingrate­full while I liue: Thy worthy constancie (Gwydonius) hath wonne the
castle which many haue besieged, & thou hast obtained yt which diuerse haue
sought to gaine: yet it is not the shape of thy beautie, but the hope of thy
loi­altie which entiseth me, not thy faire face, but thy faith­full heart: not
thy comely countenaunce, but thy modest curtesie, not thy words, but thy
vertues: not thy wealth, but thy wit: for she that builds her fancie vpon such
fa­ding subiects, tieth her loue to the inconstant whéele of fortune. And what
though the Duke my father be incen­sed against me, for making (in his minde)
so carelesse a choice? What care I for his friendship, so I haue thy fa­uour,
let him fret, let my friends frowne, let liuinges be lost, hap what hap wil,
no mis [...]ing showers of m [...]chance­no [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=45) boysterous blasts
of aduersitie, no terrible tempestes of disaster fortune, shall make my
constant minde in a­ny respect to mooue: no torments, no trauaile, no care, no
calamitie, no penurie, no pouertie, no onely the losse of life shall diminish
my loue, in liew whereof remain thou but constant, and in pledge of my
protested good will, haue héere my heart and hand, to be thine in dus [...]e
and a [...]hes.

Thine, though the Gods say no: Castania.

THis Letter being most luckelye deliuered into the hands of Gwydonius, I leaue
you to iudge Gentle­mē into what a quādarie this yoūg youth was brought to
see such a sodaine chaunge, and so happie a chaunce, as to haue his hellish
bale requited with heauēly blisse, his despightfull annoy, with delightfull
ioye: his hea­uinesse with happinesse, and doubtfull despaire tourned to
assured hope: to sée Fortune which of late defied him as a foe, now to imbrace
him as a friend, and to will that he did wish: to sée his mistres crueltie
tourned to curtesie, her disdaine to desire, her bitter pilles to sugu­red
potions, her stormie repulses to calme consent, and her contemptuous
protestations, to most constant pro­mises. For if the carefull captiue, who by
the doome of the Iudge expecteth each hower to die, reioyceth when he heareth
his pardon pronoūced, no doubt Gwydonius ioye could be no losse, sith deniall
was his death, and consent the conserue to heale his wounds: the greater care,
the greater ioye, the more paine the greater pleasure, the more hellish
miserie the more heauenly felicitie. Yea, Gwydonius was driuen into such an
extasie for ioy, that he was in doubt, whether this letter was preferred to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=46) [...] [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=46) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=47) him in déede,
or presented to him in a Uision, whether hée were wrapte into a Traunce, or
ra­uished with some drowsie slumber: but at last percei­uing it to be no
fained fantasie, such a déep desire infor­ced his affection, as he thought
euery moment a month, euery houre a yeare, euerye daye a thousande, vntill hée
might fréely enioy the presence and sight of his loue and Ladie Castania.
Fortune meaning to aduaunce him to the toppe of her inconstant whéele, brought
it so to passe, that before the wéeke was ended, he spied Castania wal­king
alone in the garden: which sodaine sight so reui­ued his sences, ye without
anye dread or doubt he man­fully marcht on towards her, and was as hastely &
har­tely incountred by Castania: who embracing Gwydo­nius in her armes,
welcommed him with this salutation.

AS the Whale (Gwydonius) maketh alwayes signe of great ioye at the sight of
the fish called Talpa Ma­rina, as the Hynde greatlye delyghteth to sée the
Leo­parde, as the Lion fawneth at the viewe of the Uni­corne, and as he which
drinketh of the Fountaine Hy­penis in Scithia, féeleth his mind so drowned in
delight, that no greefe though neuer so great, is able to asswage it: so
Gwydonius I conceiue such surpassing pleasure in thy presence, and such
heauenlye felicitie in the sight of thy perfection, that no miserie though
neuer so mon­strous is able to amaze me, no dolour though neuer so direfull is
able to daunt me, nor no mishap though ne­uer so perillous, is able to make me
sinke in sorrow, as long as I inioy thy presence, which I count a soueraine
preseruatiue against all carefull calamities. That as he which tasteth of the
hearbe Hyacynthus is neuer com­bred with care, and as he that weareth the
stone Aga­thes about him, is surely defenced against all insuing sorrrowes, so
inioying the sight of thy séemely selfe, and [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=47) féeding mine eyes
with the forme of thy feature, I think my selfe sufficiently shrowded against
all the tempestu­ous showers of sinister fortune. And to proue these my
promises to be no fained vanities but faithfull veritie, I commit my selfe, my
stay, and state into thy hands to dispose of me at thy plesure, wishing rather
to liue with thée in most distressed penurie, than to linger héere in most
fortunate prosperitie.

GWydonius listening attentiuely to this sugred har­monie, was so rauished with
the sight of her sweete face, and so rapt into a traunce with the
contemplation of her beautie, that as the Lyon tasting of the gumme Arabicke
becommeth senselesse, as the Bul by browsing on the barke of a Iuniper trée
falleth a sléepe, as the Ca­mill standeth astonished at the sight of a Rat: so
Gwy­donius séeing in his armes the Saint whom in heart hée did honour, and
imbracing the Goddesse whome with most déepe deuotion hée did adore, was so
amazed, that he was not able to vtter one worde as witnesse of his happinesse,
vntill at last gathering his wits together, he beganne thus to reply.

CAstania (quoth hée) it is an axiome in Philosophie, that the colour ioyned
hard to the sight, hindereth the sence, the flower put into the nosethrill
stoppeth the smelling, the Wine vessell béeing full, lets passe no wine though
neuer so well vented, the water-pot béeing fil­led to the brimme, yeeldes
forth no licour, though hauing a thousand holes: so where the minde is
surcharged with ouermuch ioy, or too much pleasure, there the tongue is both
tied, and the sences so restrained, that the heart is neither able to conceiue
the ioye, nor the tongue able to expresse the pleasure. Which Castania I nowe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=48) speake by
proofe, and knowe by experience, for I am so drowned in delight by inioying
that princely Iemme, which I estéeme the rarest and richest Iewell, not onely
in Alexandria, but in all the worlde, and so puffed vp in pleasure by thy
diuine presence. Yea, thy faithfull and vnfained affection, the promise of thy
constancie, and the hope of thy loyaltie, the report of thy chastitie, & the
renowme of thy modestie, the force of thy beautie, & the fame of thy vertue.
But aboue all thy prodigall boun­tie, in bestowing these heauenlye perfections
on thy poore Gwydonius, béeing by person and parentage most vnworthy to
possesse them, so surcharg [...]th my silly heart with excessiue ioye, that my
tongue not being able in part to expresse the extreame pleasure of my minde, I
am with Phili [...]tion the Comicall Poet, constrayned by silence to vnfolde
that affection, which in words the filed phrase of Demosthenes were not able
to decypher. But this assure thy selfe Castania, that if Iuno wold aduance me
to be Monarch of the world, if Pallas would preferre me to excéede hautie
Hercules in valour, if Venus wold present me with some princely péece of
heuenly perfecti­on, yet would I not so gladly receiue their proffers, as I
doo gratefully accept the promise of thy loue and loy­altie. No, I accompt the
treasure of Croesus but trash, in respect of the guerdon of thy good will: I
accompt the fortune of Caesar but folly, respecting the fruites of thy fauour:
I estéeme the dignities of Priamus as dregs, in respect of thy diuine
perfection. Yea Castania, I am so snared with thy beautie, and so intangled in
the trap of thy bountie, as I shall neuer leaue to loue thée, nor e­uer
beginne to like any other.

IT is easie Gwydonius (quoth Castania) to purchase credite, where the partie
is alreadie perswaded, and to infer beléefe, where euery word is counted an
Oracle. [[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=48)
Therefore omitting these friuolous protestations, thus much I say touching the
purpose. Cecillius Metellus was wont to say, that as it was necessary that old
men shuld be graue in counsaile, so it was expedient young men should be
secret in loue, and therefore when the contract was made betwéene Fuluius and
his daughter, he sealed vp their lippes with his signet, meaning that to
violate the secret conference of louers, was to commit a second sacriledge. I
speake this Gwydonius, as one carefull of thy staye and my state: for if
Orlanio my father should but once heare of our loue, or suspect our liking, it
wold bréede thy mishap and my miserie: yea, no doubt hée would spéedely
preuent our pretence, which woulde bée thy care and my calamitie. Dispose our
affaires at thy pleasure, but discouer not our purpose, if thou hast won the
castell vaunt not of the conquest, if thou hast made a good market, bragge not
of thy gaines, lest by boasting of thy bootie, thou loose thy pray and be
thought a prat­ler. And Gwydonius aboue all men beware of Valeri­cus, least
vnder the shape of a friend, he proue in tyme thy mortall foe, least his
fained amitie proue faithlesse enmitie: that in trusting too much without
triall, thou finde not treason: and then though thou repent, yet had I wist
cometh too late, & so thou wish thou hadst neuer loued, and I neuer liked.

TUsh Castania (quoth Gwydonius) he that is afraide to venter on the Bucke
because he is tapisht in the briers, shall neuer haue hunters happe, and he
that puts his doubt in loue for euery chaunce, shal neuer haue lo­uers lucke.
Cannot the Cat catch Mice, without she haue a bell hanged at her eare? Cannot
the Hobbie seaze on his praye but he must checke? Cannot the Spaniell retryue
the Partridge, but he must quest? and cannot we deale so warely but all the
worlde must wonder at
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=49) it? Yes, it
is a subtill birde that bréedes among ye aerin of Hawkes, and a shifting
Shéepe that Lambes in the Foxes Denne, and he shall looke narrowlye, that
spyes me halting. Let Orlanio not onely weigh our workes, but our wordes, and
let Valericus both déeme our déeds, and deuine our thoughts, and yet I hope we
will deale so secretlye in our affaires, as neither the one shal haue cause to
suspect our familiaritie, nor the other to detect our affection. And therefore
Castania least (if we bée spyed) the time and place giue occasiou of mistrust,
I will leaue you as I found you, and so farewell.

WEll these two louers placed thus by fortune in the Pallaice of earthlye
prosperitie, floated so secure­lye in the streames of blisse, as they thought
no chips of mischaunce might chaunge their present happinesse to future
heauines, as long as their priuie contract was kept so secret to themselues.
But as they which cannot sée fire in the strawe are stone blinde: so he that
cannot sée the flame of fancie is a foole. It is harde to couer smoake, but
more harde to conceale loue, which these two Louers in tract of time tryed
true. Who as close­ly as they kept their cloake, yet it was most easie to
es­pie the lining: for fancie secretly restrayned, is like the sparke couered
with ashes, which at length bursteth in­to a great flame. For there passed
betwéene Gwydoni­us such amorous glaunces, such louing lookes, such cour­teous
congies, such countenaunces, and such friendlye familiaritie, such often
méetings, such open gréetings, such sighes, such sobbes, and such straunge
passions, as not onely Valericus but all the Courte (though they poore soules,
thought to daunce in a Nette and not bée séene) perceiued how entirelye they
loued, and lyked [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=49) [...]ach other.
Which as it did not displease many which loued Gwydonius as their friend, so
it greatly despited Valericus which was his foe, to see one of small
counte­naunce preferred before one of his callyng, that Gwy­donius shoulde
winne the Bulwarke which he so long had battered: that hée pitching the Field,
another shuld obtaine the Conquest: that hée laying the siege, ano­ther
shoulde vaunt of the victorye: that while he beat the Bush, another shoulde
catche the Birdes: and that the méede of his merite, should be giuen to one of
small deserte. Béeing combred with these cholaricke cogita­tions, and
perplexed with these despightfull passions, inflamed with wrathfull furie, he
fell into these termes.

O Goddes (quoth hée) what courtesie is there to bée founde in such Kytes of
Croesus kinde, or what constancie is there to bée hoped for, in suche dayntye
disdayning Dames? whose wauering wills and stay­lesse wittes both waxe and
wane with the Moone, whose Lunaticke mindes chaunge with euerye sud­dayne
motion; yea, whose lyghtnesse and leawdnesse is suche, as they delyght with
the Rauen to feede on the moste loathsome fleshe, with the shée Woolfe to
choose the fowlest Make, with Aesops Cocke to pre­ferre the barley Corne
before a most precious pearle, & with Glaucus to make a chaunge of his golden
armour for brazen harnesse.

Didde not Euphinia forsake most famous Princes, and imbrace a most infamous
Bonde­slaue? Didde not Sirichia the Princesse of Den­marke reiecte moste
Princelye Potentates, and at laste accepte a poore Peasaunt? Yea, didde not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=50) Venus her
selfe with the béetle, disdain all day to light on the most fragrant flowers,
and at night vouchsafeth to lodge in a filthie cowsheard: I meane, did shée
not refuse the renowmed Gods, and choose a most deformed Smith.

Why, but Valericus, is it fancie that forceth them to this folly? Doth loue
lead them? doo the Destenies driue them? doth beautie allure them? Is it their
countenance that constraineth them? no, they are clownes: is it their person
or parentage that perswadeth them: no, they are pesants. But like craftie
Calipsos they thinke by these vnequall matches to rule the roste after their
owne dy­et, to be soueraigne Mistres of their owne mindes, with Venus to let
Vulcan possesse the trée, and Mars enioye the fruite, to haue their husbands
féede the shéepe, & some other reape the fléece: vnder the shaddowe of his
heade, doo defende themselues from such heate, as would other­wise greatly
scorch their credite, to make him followe the bent of their bowe, although he
set the Cuckoldes end vpward. It is a simple cloake that cannot couer one from
a shower of raine, and a silly husband that is not able to father that another
dooth beget. But to see howe these gallaunt girles, if they like not the
partie, what shewe of shamefastnesse they will make, how they will vale their
face with the visour of virginitie, howe they will cloake themselues with the
colour of continencie, how charie they will be of their chastitie: whereas if
they fancie, who so loose of their lips, and frée of theyr flesh as they. But
Valericus, why doost thou thus recke­lessely raile and rage against
womankinde. It is not Castania that thus crosseth thée with care, but
Gwydo­nius that bréedeth thy griefe. It is not shée that infer­reth thy sore,
but hée that procureth thy sicknesse.

Shée is not the meanes of thy maladye, but hée the hinderer of thy medicine.
Shée is not the [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=50) worker of thy
woe, but he is the sower of thy sorrowe. And shall hée bée puffed vp with
prosperitie, and I pres­sed downe with miserie? shall he swimme in wealth, and
I sinke in want? shall he bath in blisse, and I waile in woe? shall he bée
pampered vp with pleasure, and I pinde awaie with penurie? No, I will either
spoile him, or spill my selfe, in despight of the fates and fortune.

WHile thus Valericus sought opportunitie to reuenge his wrath vppon guiltlesse
Gwydonius, Fortune minding to bewraie her immutabilitie, brought it so to
passe, that whereas Orlanio was accustomed to paie a yéerely tribute to the
duke of Metelyne, which surmoun­ted to the sum of thirtie thousand Duckets,
either wil­fully or vnwittingly he with-held this debt, which Cle­rophontes
claimed as his due, insomuch that béeing de­manded by Embassage for ye paiment
of this tribute, hée flatly answered, that he would not from hence foorth
dis­burse one denier, & he was sorrie that in paying it héere­tofore he proued
himselfe such a foole. Wherevpon Cle­rophontes being fraught with raging fury,
was so incen­sed against Orlanio, that taking counsaile of his nobily­tie, he
determined with as much spéede as might bée, to wage battaile against him, and
to obtaine that by con­straint, which he denyed him of curtesie. As thus he
was musing with himselfe whom he shuld appoint Captaine generall of his armie,
because he meant not in proper person to abide the hazarde of the battaile,
the rem [...]m­braunce of his sonne Gwydonius, came into his minde, which not
onely amazed him, but so molested him, as hée was driuen into most distressed
dolour, now he called to minde his mercilesse crueltie in correcting his
faults, and his moodlesse rigour in rebuking his folly:  [...]owe he be­wailed
his long absence, and wished his spéedie presence: yea, he was so diuersly
perplexed, as he began thus dolo­rously
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=51) to discourse
with himselfe.

ALasse (quoth he) now I sée the saying of Cicero to be true, that who so
wilfullye peruerteth the lawes of nature, séemeth to proclaime himselfe an
enimie to the Gods: for that Nature neuer framed anye thing a­misse, wherein I
haue most grieuously offended: For in beastly rage I haue surpassed the brute
beasts, and in crueltie the sencelesse creatures: I haue béene more deuoyde of
pittie then the fowles of the aire, and more vnnaturall then the Fishes of the
Sea. The Birde called Apis Indica, séeing the venimous Uiper readie to deuour
her young ones in the neast, presenteth her selfe to death, to preserue them
from destruction. The Eagle is so carefull ouer her young, that if it happe by
her de­fault one of them doe perish, shée willinglye woundeth her selfe in
many places with her owne beake. The Ly­on so louingly fostereth vp her
Whelpes, that shée ne­uer tasteth of the praie vntyll they bée fullye
satisfied. The Foxe is so carefull ouer her cubbes, that shée wil­lingly
falleth into the Hunters handes to defende hir young from harme. But I vilde
wretch, (as though I had drunke of the Ryuer Lincestis in Bohemia, which
presently tourneth whatsoeuer it toucheth into stones. In stéede of friendly
courtesie, haue abused mine owne sonne with frowning crueltie, in liew of
mercie I haue brought him to miserie, the fatherlye affection I haue shewed
him, hath béene raging furie: yea, my rygorous Nature, naye rather my
vnnaturall rage hath béene such towardes him, as hée lyueth a bannished exile
in a straunge Countrey, perhappes pinched wyth penurye, oppressed with
pouertie, wandering in the wilde De­sartes, in daunger of deuouring, in peryll
of spoyling, afflicted not onelye with the maladie of the bodie, but the
miserie of the minde: so that no doubte hée wisheth [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=51) that I had neuer
béene Father to such a sonne, or he ne­uer sonne to such a Father.

Alasse what ioye canne I nowe enioy, when I want my onely ioye? What comfort
canne I haue to sée my childe in calamitie? What pleasure canne I take while
hée toyleth in penurie, who nowe in mine age shoulde bée the staffe whereon to
staie, that by his valyaunt cou­rage and warlike prowesse (wherewith from his
in­fancie hée hath béene indewed) might defend mee from mine enimies, and
reuenge mée of my foes. But alasse I lament too late, the calme commeth out of
time, when the Shippe alreadie hath suffered shipwracke, and these pittifull
plaintes little preuaile, where the patient is alreadie pushed into perill.
No, no, my rage hath béene too greate, to heare of his hastie retourne, my
peruerse furie hath béene such, as hée dare not abide my pre­sence: and surely
my sorrowe is too greate euer to bée salued.

And with that Clerophontes start vp, minding to reuenge these his cholarike
cogitations by bloudie bat­taile, vppon the confines of Alexandria, and
therefore in greate hast mustered all his men, made great prouisi­ons for the
warre, and caused his Nauie to bée rigged, for that hée meant to conueie his
armie by sea into Alex­andria.

While thus there was no worde through the whole Dukedome of Meteline but
warre, warre, and no newes but of the cruell conflicte that shoulde insue
betwéene the two Dukes. Certaine Merchauntes of Alexandria, which then roade
in the Hauen, durst not goe a shoare to sell their commodities, but as fast as
Winde and weather would serue them, highed them out of the har­bour, and
coasted spéedely into their owne countrie: wher they no sooner arriued, but
they made reporte there­of to Orlanio, who driuen into a dumpe wyth this
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=52) noysome
newes, whether he doubted of the puissant pow­er of Clerophontes, who was such
a worthie warriour, and in battaile so bolde, that no man durst abide him, or
whether he feared his owne force was not able to resist the furie of his
raging enimie. He presently summoned all his Lordes to a Parliament, where
after some confe­rence, it was concluded, that Thersandro should bée sent
Embassadour to Metelyne to parle of peace with Clero­phontes, which
determination was no whit deferred, but with as much spéede as might be, the
barke wherein he should passe was prouided, the charge of the Embassage was
giuen him, & he accompanied with a traine of braue Gentlemen, departed.

But if this newes was dolefull to Orlanio, no doubt it was death it selfe to
Gwidonius, who hearing that his Father would bend his force against the place,
wherein he was. Sawe all possibilitie taken awaie from obtay­ning his purpose.
For he feared death if he were know­en to Orlanio, and he doubted despightfull
hate at the least if he bewraide himselfe to Castania. Which double dolour so
distressed him, as he felte himselfe diuersly per­plexed with dumpish
passions, his mirth was tourned to mourning, his pleasaunt conceits, to
painefull cogitati­ons: his wanton toyes, to wailing thoughtes, now he
a­bondoned all good companie, and delighted onely in soly­tarie life, the
wilesome woodes were his wished walkes, and the secret shades the couert he
chiefly coueted. In fine, he séemed rather a Tymon of Athens, then a
Gentle­man of Alexandria, so that all the Court meruailed at this so sodaine a
chaunge: but especially Castania, who cōiecturing his doleful hart by his
drousy looks, was asto­nished at this his strange state, casting in her mind
whe­ther she had giuen him any cause of this care, or whether by her occasion
he was crossed with this calamitie. But alas poore soule, howsoeuer she aimed
she mist ye marke, [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=52) for Gwydonius
felte his disease so secrete, as hée knewe none could but himselfe deuine the
cause of his maladie, which no doubt was such, that it woulde haue inferred
present death, if he had not hoped for some happie newes by Thersandro.

Who no sooner luckely ariued at Metelyne, but Clero­phontes was certified,
that the Dukes son of Alexandria was come to impart with his grace some
waightie mat­ters of importaunce. Nowe at this instaunt when the message was
brought him, his Daughter Lewcippa was by, who (as the Nature of women is,
desirous to sée and bee séene) thought she woulde both heare the parle, and
viewe the person of this young Embassadour, and therefore found fish on her
fingers, that she might staye still in the chamber of presence, whether
presently Ther­sandro was sent for, who curteously and curiously dooing his
obysaunce to the Duke, deliuered his Embassage in this manner.

WHere-as (ri [...]ht worthie sir) O [...]lanio, the Duke of A­lexandria, more
vnwittingly then wil [...]ully denyed certaine tribute, which hée confesseth
both hée and his predeces [...]ours haue paide to you and your aun [...]est
[...]urs. Hearing that heerevppon your grace meanet [...] rather to wage
battaile, then to loose anie parte of your due al­though he feareth not your
force, as one able euery way to withstand it, nor passeth of your puissaunce,
as a Po­tentate sufficient to resist your power. Yet, the care hée hath of his
subiectes safetie, and the loue hee hath to pre­serue the life of his commons,
the regard he hath to paie and performe that which conscience and custome
requi­reth, and lastly, meaning with Tully, Iniquissimam pa­cem iustissimo
bello anteponere. Hée hath sent mée both to sue for conditions of peace, and
to pay the tribute, which if your grace shall refuse, of force he must put his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=53) hope in the
hazard of Fortune.

THersandro hauing thus pythelye performed his charge, Clerophontes tolde him
that vpon a sodaine he woulde not dispatche so waightie a matter, but meant
first both to consulte and take counsaile of his Nobles: which done, within
thrée dayes hée shoulde haue an aunswere. In the meane time hée commaun­ded
Lucianus the Steward of his house, verie courteous­lye to intreate both
Thersandro and his traine, and to feast them with such sumptuous fare, as they
might haue cause most highly to extoll his magnificence.

But leauing Clerophontes to consult with his lear­ned counsaylours, and
Thersandro to companie with the lustie Courtiers, againe to Lewcippa, who
while this young youth was telling of his  [...]ale, neuer markte the matter,
but the man, nor regarded not the parle, but re­spected the person: neuer
noted the contents, but view­ed his countenance: In such sort, that shée was
so scor­ched with the fire of fancie, and so scalded with the flame of
affection, so bewitched with his beautie, and so inuea­gled with his bountie,
as hée was the onelye man that made her checke at the praie, bate at the Lure,
and wyl­lingly yéelde to the first assaulte of fancie. And on the other side,
Fortune so fauoured, that Thersandro prin­ting in his heart the perfection of
Lewcippas person, felte his fréedome so fettered by the viewe of her hea­uenly
face, and so snared in the beames of her amorous glaunces, that hée wisht that
eyther this discention had neuer growen, or that hée hadde not béene the
deliue­rer of the message, for hee felt his heart alreadie so ouer­growen wyth
good-will towardes this younge Prin­cesse, as no salue but her selfe was able
to mittigate his sorrowe, no medicine but her courte [...]e was able to cure
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=53) his
calamitie, and hée thought to preferre his sute to his professed foe, was
follie: to linger still in loue, was death and miserie: to séeke for helpe at
her handes, neyther woulde the present state permitte him, nor time suffer him
to prosecute his purpose: daunted with these diuerse doubtes to auoyde the
melancholike motions that mo­lested his minde, hée presently went from his
lodging to the Court, that by companie he might driue awaie these dumpes,
where hée found in the great chamber diuerse Ladies and Gentlemen, passing
awaie the time in plea­saunt parle, amongst whom was that pearelesse Para­gon,
princely Lewcippa: who (after due reuerence done to the Gentlewomen in
generall) was singled out by Thersandro, and courted in this wise.

MAdame (quoth hée) if anie creature hath iust occasi­o [...] to accuse either
Nature or the Gods of iniustice, man onelye hath the greatest cause to make
this com­plaint, for there is none eyther so depriued of reason, or deuoide of
sence, which by some naturall instinct dooeth not skilfully presage of perills
before they come, and wa­rily preuent ere they be past.

The Goates of Lybia knowe certainelye when the Canicular dayes beginne,
wherein commonlye they fall blinde, and therefore by eating the hearbe
[...]olopodium they prouidentlye preuent their disease. When the Ly­on leaueth
his Lawnes, and raungeth in forraine De­sertes, hée alwayes foresheweth a
drought. When the Fish called V [...]anascapos sinketh downe to the bot­tome
of the Sea, hée bewrayeth greate tempestes to bée imminent. But man is so
farre from this se­crete foresight, that not onelye hée cannot deuine of these
ensuinge daungers, but rather wilfullye
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=54) or willing,
pusheth himselfe into most manifest perills, which madame, I speake, as
féeling my selfe distressed with this want. For if I had bene indued with this
sa­cred prescience, perfectly to presage of ensuing perilles, I had not ben
crossed with such cares as I am like to incur, nor hadde cause to repent this
my present arriuall. But sith lacke of such skill hath procured my losse, and
that when the hurt is had it is too late to take héede, though reuealing of my
mishappe cannot heale my miserie, nor repeating of my paines redresse my
sorrowe: yet, I meane to participate my passions to your good grace, that
though you cannot or will not mittigate my mala­die, yet you maye pittie my
estate, which will some­what ease my heauinesse. I came to your Fathers Court
madame, a frée man of Alexandria, and am lyke to retourne a captiue of
Metelyne, I arriued deuoyde of care, and am lyke to departe, drenched with
calamitie: I landed frée from affection, but feare to passe hence fraught with
fancie: my charge was onely to parle of peace, but my chaunce is to discourse
of passions. Yea, your beautie hath so fettered my fréedome, and so snared my
heart in the linkes of your loue, that it shall ne­uer bée raced out by anye
sinister meanes of For­tune, although I sée it is almost impossible to obtayne
it.

For I doubte our parents are lyke to proclaym [...] themselues professed foes,
and the vrgent necessitie of my affayres, forceth mée to departe so spéedelye,
as want of time wyll not suffice to make tryall of my loue, whereby I might
claime a sufficient guerdon for my good wyll: yet howsoeuer the matter shall
happe, whether my hope be voide, or my happe be vaine, I meane madame to
remaine yours for euer.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=54) Lewcippa
tooke such delight in hearing Thersandro discourse so louingly, as she could
scarely kéepe her coun­tenaunce from bewraying the pleasure she conceiued in
this parle, séeing that her loue was requited with ly­king, and her fancie
incountered with the like affecti­on. Yet least Thersandro should thinke her
too curteous if she shuld come at the first call, and very light of loue, to
like at the first looke, she framed him this aunswere.

SIr (quoth she) if of your sute for conditions of peace there insue no better
successe than the reuea­ling of your passions shall reape pittie at my handes,
or if the intreatie for truce be as lightly respected by my Father, as either
your person or petition is regarded by me, you are like to carrie home cold
newes to your coū ­trey, and to vaunt that you bad faire, but bought little:
that your Haruest was long, but your corne not worth the cropping: that your
venter was much, but your gaines such, as if your winnings proue no better,
you are lyke to liue by the losse. For sir, doo you suppose mée so sottish, as
to thinke euery one that flatters dooth fan­cie, or so addicted to selfe loue,
as by a few filed phrases to be brought into a fooles Paradice: knowing that
it is the fashion of men by their fained subtiltie to deceiue our faithfull
simplicitie. No, for if you meane to coun­terfaite, take this for a rule, it
is ill halting before a cre­ple. But sir, this your sodaine liking bewrayes y•
light­nesse of your loue, this your fonde affection, imports the ficklenesse
of your fancie: for soone hot, soone cold? easely inflamed, as quickly
quenched: like to the Apples of A­rabia, which begin to rot, ere they be halfe
ripe. And if I meant to loue, had I none to like but my Fathers foe? should I
desire him whom my Father dooth detest? And if I should so farre forget mine
owne staye, or my Fa­thers
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=55) state, as to
consent, it were impossible either to appease his wrath, or to get y• graunt
of his good will, so yt to desire y• which I can neuer inioy, wer to driue my
self wholy into despair, which wold smally profit you, and greatlye
displeasure me, and therefore cease to sue for that, which may [...] well
[...]e wisht, but neuer obtai­ued.

Thersandro although he heard Lewcippa decide the case sufficiently, yet he was
so wilfull, that he woulde not take her doome for a verdite, but retourned her
this replye.

MAdame (quoth he) where in liew of hate there in­sueth loue, it is alwayes the
signe of the greater affection: and that it is a thing either confirmed by the
Fates, or appointed by the Gods. Tereus the Prince of Thra [...]e, being sent
by his Father to defie Pand [...]on the king of Athens, was enamoured of his
daughter Prog­ne, whereby betwéene the Parents in stéede of fatall en­mitie,
there insued friendly amitie. When as the blou­die warres betwéene Atis the
King of Libia, and Lyca­bas the Prince of Assur was most hot, young Adme­tus
being sent Ambassadour into Libia, was so stroken in loue with Alcest, onely
Daughter to his fathers foe, and she repaying his lyking with such loyaltie,
as death it selfe could neuer dissolue their amitie. If madame, these
premisses may perswade you to take pittie of my passions, or these examples
induce you, not to let the ha­tred of our parents be a hindrance of our loue,
whether your father reiect me as a foe, or accept me as a friende, I doubt not
but the destinies will driue the bargayne through, in despite of them and
fortune.

Sir (quoth she) I confesse Progne poore wench loued Tereus, but how wretchedly
did he reward her loyaltie? and Scylla was enamored of Mino [...] her fathers
foe, but [[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=55)
how tyrannously did he repay her loue with treacherie, Tarpeia betrayed the
Tower of Rome to one of the Sa­bynes whom she most entirely loued, but the
méede of her merite was extreame miserie. Shall I then Ther­fandro sée the
traine and yet fall into the trappe, shall I spie the nettes, and yet strike
at the stale? shall I sée the mishap, and yet wilfully incurre the mischaunce,
no I meane not for an inch of ioye, to reape an ell of an­noy, for a moment of
mirth a month of miserie, for a dram of pleasure, a whole pound of paine, and
by pro­curing mine owne delight to purchase my fathers death and destruction.
But let this suffice Thersandro to signi­fie how I pittie thy passions, and
thinke wel of thy per­son, that if my Fathers will might be framed to my wish,
if he would condiscend as I would consent, thou onely art the man who in the
way of mariage shoulde dispose of me at thy plesure. But sith the frowning
state of Fortune denies our loue to haue such happie successe, hope well, and
rest vpon this poynt, that I will alwaies like thee as a friend, though not
loue thée as my pheere.

AS Thersandro was ready to replye, and to seale vp the bargaine of their loue
vppon her swéete lippes, Clerophontes came in, who marred all their market, &
tourned their swéete to sower, for he gaue Thersan­dro his aunswere before
Lewcippa, which was this.

That he neither ment to accept of the conditions of peace, nor to receiue the
tribute, but to claime his due by the doubtfull euent of battaile. That he
shortly preten­ded in person to visite Orlanio, and within the walls of
Alexandria to demaund his debt, and that he would be­stow his Fathers Dukedome
vpon a Lord of his called  [...] in dowrie with his Daughter Lewcippa.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=56) Thersandro
was nothing amazed with the first part of the message, but when he hearde howe
Clerophontes meant presumptuously both to depraue him of his ly­  [...]ing,
and depriue him of his Loue, he was so puffed vp with wrath and chollar, as
hap what hap would, he fell into these tearmes.

I Remember (quoth he) that Caligula the Emperour prouiding a mightie armie to
subdue great Bri­taine, when he was come to the Sea, readie to post ouer his
Souldiours in his Nauie, he lefte off his endlesse enterprise, and set them to
gather Cockles. Siphax bold­ly boasting that he would bestowe the kingdome of
Nu­midia vpon his second Sonne, was by Massinissa ouer­throwen, and solde as
captiue to the Romanes. I dare not sir inferre comparisons, because they be
odious, nor apply the examples, sith time and place forbids me: but this I
say, that to fish before the net, is alwaies counted fol­ly, and to vaunt
before the victorie, is but vanitie. Yea, and if I had as good right to your
Daughter Lewcip­pa, as I haue to the supposed Dowrie which you as­signe her, I
woulde in despight of Lucianus and the di­uell himselfe, dispose her at my
pleasure.

Clerophontes hearing the cholaricke conclusion of Thersandro could scarcely
bridle his frantick furie from raging without reason against this young youth,
yet somewhat mittigating his moode, he breathed out these cruell threatenings.

IF the lawe of Armes (quoth he) did not both safely protect thee, & surely
forbid me to hurt thée in y• thou art a messenger, I would with such seueritie
chastice these thy presumptuous spéeches, as thou shuldest learn héereafter to
answere with more reuerence: yet I wysh thée not to stande too stiffe vpon
this poynt, least if thou [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=56) be so recklesse
as to breake the bondes of reason, I be so forgetfull as to passe the lymits
of the law. Thou hast receiued a determinate aunswere for the Embassage, &
there I charge thée this present day to depart out of my Dominions.

Thersandro fearing the tyrannie of this cruell Cle­rophontes, presently passed
out of the Chamber of Pre­sence, taking his leaue of Ladie Lewcippa, onelye
with louing lookes, which she requited with such glaunces of good will, as
they were sufficient signes what insup­portable sorrowe she receiued by his so
sodayne depar­ture: yet knowing that her fancie was incountred with mutual
affection, she droue away the mystie clowdes of despaire, hoping that the Gods
séeing their faithful ami­tie, would take pitie of their passions, & in time
redresse their miserie.

But Thersandro hauing with spéede dispatchte hys affaires (all his train being
set aboord, and they coasting the straights with a luckie gale) was so combred
with care, and so ouer-growen with griefe, that he passed no hower, minute,
nor moment, without wofull waylyng, sorrowfull sobs, and farre fetcht sighes,
so that the Gen­tlemen his companions, supposing that he was thus painfully
perplexed for feare of Clerophontes pu [...]ssance, began both to comfort and
incourage him not to doubte or dread the force of the enimie, sith his father
was able to repulse him, without any daunger to himselfe, or any great damage
to his subiects. But these their perswasi­ons could no whit preuaile to
asswage his passions, this their incouragement coulde not cure his care.

But as there is no greater bane to the bodye, than trouble of the minde: so
Thersandro so long continued in these pensiue passions, and carefull
cogitations, con­cealing his griefe so couertly, which so much the more
furiously flamed within him, that he was constrayned
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=57) to kéepe his
Cabbin till his arriuall at Alexandria.

Where being set on shore, and presently conueyed to the Courte, he remained
for the space of thrée dayes, so strangely perplexed, as he was not able to
make report of his message: which so griped Orlanio with such in­speakable
griefe, as he wished rather to haue died vali­antly wt the force of hys
enimye, than to put the health of his sonne in hazard by passing so perillous
a iournie. But Thersandro séeing that sorrow would not salue his sore, but
rather increase his sicknesse: that mourning would not appease his maladie,
but rather augment his miserie: began to take heart at grasse, and within few
dayes began to recouer his former health. And then hée declared to his Father,
what he had in charge from Cle­rophontes, how he meant spéedely to wage war
against him, & by force of armes to driue him out of his Duke­dome, which he
had alreadie promised to one Lucianus in dowrie with his Daughter. Orlanio
hearing this proud presumption of this bragging Duke, thought the greatest
barkers were not alwaies the sorest biters, and that it was farre more easie
with words to obtayne the victorie, than with déeds to attayne the Conquest.
Yet, least he might be taken at vnwares, he made a generall muster throughout
all his Dominions, prouiding in euery place necessarye munition for the
defence of hys Countrey. And assembling his Nobilitie to giue theyr verdite,
who were fittest to bée Captaines in this skirmish: after some consultation
had in this cause, they concluded, that since Clerophontes meant to ioyne
battayle in his owne person, that lykewise hée shoulde bee Generall of the
field, and Gwydonius who surpassed all the rest in martial exploites, should
be Lieuetenant, and conduct the armie, which he no sooner hearde but hée was
tormented with inspeakable griefe, he beganne to [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=57) pull downe his
Peacockes feathers, to hang his wings, and crye creake: euery man hoping to
winne fame was merrie, but he alone mourning: euery man laughed, & he alone
lowred: insomuch, that he was generallye sus­pected to be a fearfull cowarde,
and that dread of daun­ger draue him into these dolefull dumpes. But as they
rashly coniectured the cause of his sorrowe, so they mist the nature of his
sicknesse: for Gwydonius séeing that of this cruel conflict his calamitie
should ensue, and that this bloudie broyle would bréed his bane, he fell into
such solitarie surmises, and such musing meditations, that Valericus his open
friende and yet his secrette foe, sought by sundry meanes to search out the
cause of his care, but not being able to wring out any thing, eyther by
flattering promises or fained protestations, he ceased frō his importunate
sute. But froward fortune brought it so to passe, that Valericus comming by
the chamber of Gwydonius, heard him thus desperatly discoursing with himselfe.

ALas (quoth he) I sée the Sunne being at the highest declineth, the Sea being
at full tide ebbeth: calme continueth not long without a storme, neither is
happi­nesse had long without heauinesse, blisse without bale, weale without
woe, mirth without mourning. For who a late so floated in the flouds of
felicitie as I, which now by the sinister meanes of frowning fortune am sowsed
in the seas of sorrow, exalted alate to the highest degrée of happines, am
nowe driuen to the greatest extremiti [...] of euill: alate puffed vp with
prosperitie, & now pushed downe with aduersitie: yea, alate placed in
Paradise, and now plunged in perplexitie.

Oh Gwydonius, if thy fathers friendlye preceptes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=58) might haue
perswaded thée, if his aduice had bene thy aduertisement, and thou hadst
carefully kept his coun­saile, then by his fore-warning thou hadst bene fore-
ar­med against all mishap and miserie. The force of fickle fancie had not then
giuen thee the foyle, loue had not so lyghtly procured thy losse, nor the
painted shew of beau­tie had not so soone procured thy bane. My bane? Why fond
foole, beautie hath bred my blisse, fancie hath not giuen me the foyle, but
hath yéelded me the fort: Loue hath not wrought my losse, but requited me with
treble gaine.

Hath not Castania requited my loue with loyaltie, and repayed my good will
with mutuall affection? Is shee not my Saint and I her seruaunt? Are wée not
contracted together by loue, and shall continue together by lawe? May I not
dispose of her in the waye of mar­riage at my pleasure? Yes, but what then,
the more is my grief, and the greater is my care. For if her presence
procureth my delight, will not her absence bréede my de­spight? If her consent
preserued my life, will not her contempt inferre my death? Yes. For alas sin
[...]e the de­stinies meane to dissolue that fancie hath decréed, since the
frowning fates séeke to vnloose that which loue hath linked, since froward
fortune means to break the bonds wherin beautie hath boūd vs, since these
bloudie broiles will cause Castania (where before shée accepted mée for a
friend) nowe to reiecte mée for a foe: What better lucke canne I looke for,
then a loathsome lyfe, or what better happe can I hope for, than horrour and
hea­uinesse? Yea, which waye so euer I tourne mée I sée nothing but woe and
wretchednesse. For if Or­lanio perceyued our liking, how would he storme at
our loue? If he knew my chaunce, how woulde he fret at his Daughters choyce?
Woulde hée euer consent, [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=58) that Castania
should match with so meane a mate, that her princely personage should be
disgraced with my base parentage, that her calling shuld be crazed with my
slen­der countenaunce: no, he would no doubt first banish me out of all his
dominions. Tush Gwydonius, would God this were the worst, and then thou
mightest hope in time by some meanes to redresse this doubt. But if Or­lanio
shoulde knowe thou wert heire apparaunt to the Dukedome of Metelyne, and onely
sonne to Clerophon­tes, his fatall foe, what torment were there so terrible,
which thou shouldest not trie? What paine so pinching, which thou shouldst not
passe? What hap so hard which thou shouldest not hazard? Yea, what death so
direfull, which at his cruell hands thou shouldest not suffer? And what if
Castania were priuy to thy state, dost thou think her so constaunt as to
consent to her Fathers foe? doest thou thinke she would wish the sonnes weale,
when the Father wisheth her mishap? No, assure thy selfe if thy state be once
knowen, that Castania wil most deadly de­test thée, which will be more
grieuous to thée then death it selfe, be it neuer so terrible. Sith then
Gwydonius, thou must shortly either go in armes against thine owne father, or
else loose both thy loue and thy life, let not de­laie bréede daunger, but
strike on the stith while y• yron is hot, Castania hath promised to forsake
both Father, friendes, and her owne countrie, to passe wher and when it
pleaseth thée, she doubteth no daungers, shée forceth of no misfortune, she
careth for no calamitie, she passeth for no perills, so she inioy thy desired
companie, and there­fore as spéedely as may be, conueie her closely into y•
con­fines of Metelyne, before eyther she know thy staie or thy state. And
shall I so practise her with pollicies? shall I so sift her with subtiltie?
shall I put so little trust in her troth? and so small confidence in her
constancie? as to cō ­ceale from her anye secret? No, come woe, come
wretch­ednesse,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=59) come death,
come daunger, hap what hap will, I will presently impart vnto her my present
state, and my pretended purpose.

Valericus hearing this doubtfull discourse of Gwy­donius, was driuen into an
extasie for ioy, to sée that hée had found such fit meanes whereby he might
not onely purchase the Dukes fauour, aspire vnto honour and dig­nitie, but
also obtaine the loue of Castania, for he meant spéedely to preuent the
pretence of Gwydonius by vn­folding to the Duke the summe of his secrete
purpose, assuring himselfe, that after Orlanio knew his parents and parentage,
that hée was sonne and heire to Clero­phontes, no price though neuer so
precious, no raunsome though neuer so rich, might redéeme him from the most
despightfull death that could be deuised. And of these premisses he inferde
this conclusion, that the cause bée ta­ken awaie the effect faileth, that
Gwydonius béeing re­iected, hée should bée receiued: that hée being despighted
with hate, he shoulde be requited with loue, and vppon this hope he went
presentlye to bewraie this matter to Orlanio, whom he found with his sonne
Thersandro, and diuerse other noble men consulting what course they had best
take against Clerophontes, whome Valericus salu­ted in this wise.

PLato (right worthie Prince) that graue and wise phi­losopher, whose sentences
in all ages haue bene hol­den as most diuine Oracles, portrayeth out in the
books of his Common wealth, the picture of a perfect Citizen, whose liniaments
béeing first leuelled, hée tricketh vp with these coulours, that he loue his
Prince loyallye, kéepe the lawes carfully, and defend his Countrie valy­antly,
in which thrée pointes (saith he) consisteth the chie­fest duetie of a trustie
subiecte: this saying of Plato throughly considered, and calling to minde the
sun­drie [[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=59)
good tournes which without desert your grace hath bestowed vppon me, I thought
if I shoulde not repaye your fauour with faithfulnesse, and your trust you
re­pose in me with inuiolable troath, I might bée counted a vicious vassall,
deuoide of all vertue, a trecherous Ci­tizen, rather then a trustie subiect, a
carelesse slaue, then a carefull Gentleman: yea, a gracelesse monster, misled
with ingratitude. I am come (right worthie Sir) not to betraie my foe, but to
bewraie my friende, not to disco­uer the fault of my enimie, but to disclose
his offence, which liueth with me in perfect amitie, in whose com­panie
hetherto hath ben all my ioy, pleasure and delight: but since his pretence is
greatlye preiudiciall to your graces person, I thought to preferre your
profite before mine owne pleasure, and the commoditie of my countrie before
mine owne priuate contentation. So it is that Gwydonius, whome your grace hath
honoured, and all the Court estéemed, is sonne and heire to Clerophon­tes, the
Duke of Metelyne, who by the péeuish pollicie of his Father, vnder the
pretence of seruice, is purposed to procure your fatall death, and the finall
destruction of your Dukedome. And the better to performe this di­uellish
practise, hée hath contracted himselfe to my La­die Castania, who blinded with
his beautie, and inueag­led with his wit, hath consented, not onely to kéepe
his counsaile to your confusion, but also closely to conuey her selfe with him
into his Countrie. Which pretence if your grace doth not spéedely preuent, you
shall finde that delaie bréedes daunger, & that procrastination in perils is
but the mother of mishap.

And haue I (quoth Orlanio) brought vp the Birde that will picke out mine owne
eyes? Haue I fostered vp the Serpent in my bosome that will bréede my bane?
Haue I giuen her lyfe that séekes to yéelde me death? Haue I cherisht her
béeing younge, and wyll shée
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=60) consume me
being older: was there none to choose but Gwydonius, nor none to loue but the
son of her fathers foe? Will she preferre her lust before my life, her priuate
pleasure, before the safetie of my person? Well, as she for­gets the dutie of
a child, so I will forget the natural af­fection of a Father, and therefore
Valericus, goe spéedely with these noble men to Gwydonius chamber, and
ap­prehend him, that I may requite his hatefull trecherie with most hellish
torments. And Thersandro, sée you that Castania be closely kept vntill we haue
caught the tray­tour, least she vnderstanding that their deuise is disclo­sed,
she saue her selfe by flight.

Valericus hauing this commission giuen him from the Duke, made no delay, but
passed to Gwydonius lod­ging with as much spéed as might be: but Fortune who
after euery chip of mischaunce, sendeth some lot of good lucke, and after
euerie storme of aduersitie, sendeth a qui­et calme of prosperitie, so
carefully prouided to frée Gwy­donius from mishap, that he was newlye gone
towardes Castania, to impart vnto her this his pretence, but before he came to
her chamber, he was incountred by Thersan­dro, who stearnly taking Gwydonius
by the bosome, pul­ling out his Rapier, commaunded him as a traitour to stand,
or else without anye farther doome he shoulde féele the dint of death.

Gwydonius amazed with this sodaine motion, stoode as one in a traunce, neither
being able to defend himselfe with word or weapon, but yéelded himself into y•
hands of Thersandro, who shakt him vp with these bitter spée­ches.

THou traiterous wretch (quoth he) as it is impossible for the flame so closely
to bée couered, but it wyll bée spied, so it is impossible, but that treason,
though neuer so secret, should in tract of time bée disclosed, which now
[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=60) by
experience is verified in thée, for although thou hast hetherto falsely fained
thy selfe to be a straunger of a fo­raine nation, thou art now knowen to be
sonne and heire to Clerophontes that cruell tyraunt my Fathers foe, by whose
péeuish pollicy thou hadst not only brought the common wealth to confusion,
but didst pretend to be pre­iudiciall to my fathers person, if thy deadly
practise & di­uellish purpose had not by Valericus his meanes ben pre­uented.
Hast thou ben so trained vp in trecherie, or is thy minde so spotted with
villany, as to repaie my Fathers good wil with such barbarous ingratitude, and
to deuise his destruction which simply foresought thy preferment. Yea, to
counsel my sister Castania, not onely to consent to thy desire, but to my
fathers death? Is this the manner of Metelyne? or the custome of thy countrie,
to be such co­soning counterfaits? Well, since I haue happely attach­ed thée
as a traitour, & as a villanous rebell, both trans­gressing humane and diuine
lawes, thou shalt abide the paine & punishment due to such diuellish
offenders. Now let thy cruell sire Clerophontes frée thée from those tor­ments
that thou art like to suffer for thy trecherie, & let the Lords of Metelyne
deliuer thée from his hands, who meanes in most miserable wise to martir thée.
Yea, let thy Concubine Castania, who is like for her gracelesse disobedience
to sippe of the same sorrowe, sée if her teares will now preuaile to mooue
Orlanio to pittie. No, if Iu­piter himselfe sent Mercurie to mittigate his
moode, nei­ther the authoritie of the one, nor the eloquence of the other
might preuaile to pacif [...]e his furie.

GWydonius séeing that not onely his purpose was pre­uented, and his secretes
disclosed, but that also Vale­ricus most villanously had accused him and
Castania of that which they neuer so much as once imagined, was so perplexed,
and driuen into such dumpes, as he séemed by
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=61) [...]lence
[...]o a [...]erre that which Thersandro had alleadged, yet at last he began
thus to replie.

THersandro (quoth he) as I meane not to affirme that which is false, so I will
not denie that which is true, but come dolor, come death, come miserie, come
martyr­dome, come torture, come torments, I wil neither accuse my selfe
iniustly, nor excuse my selfe by periurie. I con­fesse Thersandro that I am
sonne and heire to the Duke of Meteline, & contracted to thy sister Castania,
that Cle­rophontes is my father by the lawe of nature, & Castania my wife by
the league of loue, but that I either preten­ded or purposed to be
preiudiciall to Orlanios person, or y• Castania was counsailed or euer
consented to her Fa­thers confusion, I not onely denie, but I will proue by
combat, that Valericus most villanously doth accuse vs of that whereof we are
altogether sacklesse.

WHy Gwydonius, (quoth he) wilt thou séeke to proue thy self loial, when the
hearers déeme thée a lyar, or to make a tryall of thy troth, when thy words
can haue no trust? Doest thou thinke my fathers furie will suffer thée to
fable? Doest thou thinke his wrathfull rage will abide thy reasons, or that he
wil be so patient as to heare thée pleade thine owne cause? No, if thou wert
as cléere from these crimes alleadged against thée by Valericus as I am, yet
in that thou art sonne to Clerophontes, the coine of Croesus, and kingdomes of
Caesar, were not su­fficient raunsome to redéeme thée from death. But
Gwy­donius, since thy health hangeth in my handes, and thy lyfe or death is in
my power, I will neither bée so bloudie minded as to bréede thy bane, nor so
cruell, as to be the cause of thy confusion. The guerdon Gwydonius I craue for
this my good will, and the recompence I claime for this curtesie, is: that
when thou commest to [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=61) Metelyne, thou
certifie thy sister and my loue and Ladie Lewcippa, that for her sake I haue
procured thy safetie, that her perfection hath preserued thée from perill, the
loue I beare her hath saued thy lyfe, the duetifull deuo­tion I owe vnto her,
hath redéemed thée from death and daunger. And in token of this my vnfained
affection, I will lift my hand against none that commeth from Me­telyne, but
against Lucianus onely.

Before Thersandro was able fullye to vnfolde his minde, or that Gwydonius had
time to yéeld him thanks for the sauegard of his lyfe, they hearde a greate
noise, which made Gwydonius flie, and Thersandro hie him ha­stely to Castanias
lodging. Nowe the companie which came, was Orlanio himselfe, who certified by
Valericus that Gwydonius could not be found, laid not only watch and ward
throughout all his Dukedome to attach him, but went in proper person with his
Garde to apprehend Castania, and laie her in close prison, whom he found all
blubbered with teares, for that she had vnderstoode the cause before of her
brother▪ Thersandro: Orlanio no sooner spied her thus wéeping, but he raged
against her in this wise.

HAth the force of loue, nay rather the furie of lust (vild wretch) so blinded
thy vnderstanding, that to accom­plish it thou passest not to peruert both
humane and di­uine lawes. Doth lasciuious affection and fleshly fancie so
furiously frie within thée, as thou woldest procure thy fathers death to
purchase thy diuellish desire? Could no rules of reason, no prick of
conscience, no respect of hone­stie, no feare of God, nor dread of man,
prohibit thée from pretending such a monstrous mischiefe, as to conclude wt my
mortal foe to worke my fatall confusion. The young Storkes so tender the old
ones in their age, as they will not suffer thē so much as to  [...] to get
their owne liuing.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=62) The Bird
called Apis Indica, being young, séeing the old ones through age growen so
weake, as they are not a­ble to wa [...]e their wings, carri [...] them
continually from place to place on their backs: these sauage creatures haue
but onely sence, and are obedient, thou hast both reason & sence, & art more
vnnatural, these bruite beasts are most dutifull to their parents, and thou a
reasonable creature art most disobedient to thy Father: yea, contrarie both to
the lawes of Nature and nurture, thou séekest to bath thy handes in his
guiltlesse bloude, and without care or conscience to commit most cruell
murther, which is so hatefull to all things, as the sencelesse plantes and
stones most deadlye detest such villanie. The Oliue trée so hatefully
abhorreth a Parracide, that who so bée­ing guiltie of that crime, attempteth
to plant it, dooeth not onely himselfe presently perish, but the trée
forthwith wayneth and wythereth. The stone Epistrites so loath­eth this
offence, counting it a fact so repugnaunt to na­ture, that it wil not
vouchsafe to be worne by a murthe­rer. And shall I then let thée liue whō the
sencelesse crea­tures do so deadly loath. No, this hād which cherisht thée
being a child shall now chastise thée béeing such a cursed caitife. And with
that he drew out his Fawlcon redie to haue slaine her. But that Thersandro
knéeling down, de­sired him that he would not so in his furie forget
him­selfe, as without the sentence of the law put her to death, but to commit
her to ward vntill the wars betwéen him & Clerophontes were happely ended, &
then vppon more straight examination, if she wer found faultie, to assigne her
a punishment due for such an offence. Orlanio some­what pacified with his
sonnes perswasion, commanded that presently she should be carried to prison,
and the La­die Melytta with her, as an actor also in this Tragedie. And that
with all spéed they should post the countrie for the attaching of the traitor
Gwydonius.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=62)Who after
that he parted from Thersandro, séeing be­fore his eyes the terrour of
torments, and the hellish horrour of death, was driuen forward so with the
dread of daunger, and feare of imminent perills, that know­ing perfectly the
coast of the Countrry, he passed so se­cretly & spéedely, as he was not so
much as once descried by the Postes that pursued him, but scaped safely [...]
out of the Dukedome of Alexandria. Béeing now without the dint of the Dukes
daunger, séeing that although hée had escaped himselfe, yet he had lefte his
Loue and La­die Castania in hazarde of her life, he began thus to ex­claime
against his owne folly.

AH Gwydonius (quoth he) what folly hast thou com­mitted by this thy fearefull
flight, what carefull ca­lamitie is like to insue of this thy cowardise in
auoy­ding Scylla thou art falne into Cha [...]ibdis, in preuenting one danger
thou art like to be plagued with a thousand discommodities. Had it not bene
better for thée to haue died in Alexandria with honor than to lyue heere with
shame and reproach, to haue suffered mishap with Ca­stania then to linger
héere in miserie? Doost thou thinke that she will euer count of such a prating
Paras [...]te, as will loue her in prosperie and leaue her in aduersitie, as
preferreth his owne safetie before her securitie, his lyfe before her loue,
and draweth himselfe out of daunger to leaue her in distresse? No, she will
contempne thée as a coward, more fit to be a mate to some country  [...]nt,
than a  [...]atch for such a courtly Princesse, she will thinke thy greatest
faith was but fained ficklenesse, thy forged loue was but filthie lust, thy
promises was but periuries, and that thy greatest amitie was but most
dissembled enmitie: so that of a professed friend she wil become thy professed
foe, her desire will tourne to despite, and her loue to most hellish hate.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=63) Why alas,
would my paine haue pleased her, would my martirdome haue contented her minde,
had my peril procured her profite, or my care her commoditie. Naye, rather
would not my daunger haue bene her death, my mishap her miserie, my torture
her torments, and my fatall destinie hir finall destruction. By sauing my life
in time we maye enioye our loue, but by death no hope had bene lefte for
obtaining our desire: so that I assure my selfe, Castania will rather allowe
of my pollicie by preuenting perilles by flight, than mislyke of my pract­ise
in procuring mine owne safetie. And vpon this point I rest, hoping that the
Gods séeing how vniustly Vale­ricu; hath accused vs, will in tract of time
ridde vs from blame and reward him with shame.

GWydonius was not more distressed with dolour than poore Castania was combred,
wt care to sée so strange a chaunce and so sodaine a chaunge, that she who of
late was a royall Princesse, was now a ruthfull priso­ner, that her fréedome
was tourned to fettars, her digni­tie to miserie, and her happie stay to a
most hellish state: that after flouds of teares which fell from her Christall
eyes, she burst foorth into these tearmes.

ALas (quoth she) what poore Damosell was euer dri­uen into such doubtfull
distresse? what Princes was euer perplexed with such dolefull passions? what
mayde was euer crossed with such mishap? nay what creature euer was clogged
with the like calamitie? Haue the spightfull destinies decréed my destruction,
or ye peruers [...] Planets conspired my bitter bane? Dooth froward for­tune
meane to make me a mirrour of her mutabilitie, or is this the rewarde that
Cupid bestowes vppon hys Clyents? Is euery one that dooth fancie maymed with
[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=63) the like
misfortune, or is loue alwayes accōpanied with such haplesse lucke? Alas no,
for their loue is lawfull, & mine leawd and lasciuious: their fancie is fixed
vppon vertue, and mine vpon vanitie, they make their matche with consent of
their parents, and I my market with­out my fathers counsaile: so that I am
like in choosing such chaffre, to chop and chaunge and liue by the losse: yea,
to buye repentance at an vnreasonable rate. Had it not bene better for thée
Castania, to haue condiscended to the requests of Valericus, then consented to
the sute of Gwydonius: to haue liked thine owne countrey-man, than loued a
straggeling straunger: to haue satisfied thy selfe with assuraunce, than
vainely to fish for hope?

Truth, but what then? can the strawe resist the vertue of the pure Iet? can
the flaxe resist the force of the fire? can a louer withstand the brunt of
beautie? fréeze, if he stande by the flame: peruert the lawes of nature, or
es­chew that which is framed by the fates, or flye from the force of fa
[...]cie? No, for who so escapeth the deadlye dartes of Cupid, shall be
scorched with his fire, and shée that with the deaw of chastitie quencheth
this flame, shall be o [...]er-taken with his wings: so that to seeke by
flight to eschewe affection, is foolishly to enterprise that which can neuer
be atchieued.

But alas, if I must néedes lende a listening eare to the allurements of loue,
was there none to like but thy Fathers foe? Now fonde foole couldest thou shew
him courtesie, that intendes to repaye thée with crueltie? Howe couldest thou
choose the sonne to thy mate, when the father séekes thy miserie? It is not
possible to mixe the bloud of a Bull and a Beare together in one vessel. The
Lyons whelpes wil neuer cōpanie with the young Wolues: the Fawlchons called
Pelagrae will neuer fly with the young Lauaretes, and if the egges of a Crowe
and a Curlewe bée put in one neaste, they
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=64) both
foorthwith burst in sunder, because there is such [...] auncient enmitie
betwéene the olde ones. And wilt thou then be so wilfull to loue him whome thy
Father dooth loath, or so peruerse as to place thy selfe in that Paren­tage,
where there is such mortall hatred betwéene y• Pa­rents? wilt thou so farre
forget the duetie of a childe, as more to respect thy fatall enemie, than
regard thy natu­rall father? But why vilde wretche doo I thus fondely fable,
though Clerophontes be my fathers foe, yet Gwy­donius is my faithfull friende:
though the one séeke to procure my paine, the other séekes to purchase my
plea­sure: though the olde sire striues to subuert my fathers state, yet the
sonne neuer sought to be preiudicall to his person: although that periured
parasite Valericus hath most vniustly accused him of treacherie. Shall I then
hate him who hath alwaies honoured me? shall I work his woe that wisheth my
weale? shal I be his bane, who hath bred my blisse? shall I detest him, which
serueth me with most déepe deuotion? No, I héere heartely powr [...] out most
pitifull plaints to the Gods to preserue my Gwydonius from perill, and that
Fortune may so fauor him as he may passe out of Alexandria without death or
danger. What though I héere in prison pine in pain, what though I sinke in
sorrowe, what though I be di­stressed with griefe, and oppressed with miserie,
what though I be crossed with care, and combred with cala­mitie? Tush, let my
Father fret and fume in his furie, let my brother rage and rayle, let that
traitor Valericus triumph, and all the Countrey most bitterly curse me: yea,
let them martir me most miserablye, let them tor­ment me most terribly, yet
direful death shall not feare me, as long as I know Gwydonius is deuoyde of
daun­ger. For I hope though fortune frowne, though the de­stinies denie it,
though y• fates forsweare it, yea though the Gods themselues say no, yet in
time we shall haue [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=64) such happie
successe, as the loyaltie of our loue, and the cléerenesse of our conscience
by the lawe of Iustice doo deserue. And therefore Gwydonius shall be the
Planet whereby to direct my dooings, he shall be the starre shal guide my
compasse, he shall be the hauen to harbor in, & the Saint at whose shrine I
meane to offer my deuo­tion.

Castania hauing thus discoursed with her selfe, shée determined when the
warres were ended, if she coulde haue no hope to enioy the loue of Gwydonius,
to confesse her faults, and to sue for mercie at the barre of her Fa­thers
curtesie, not that she meant to liue without Gwy­donius, or to loue or like
anye other, but to prolong her dayes in dolour, that she might most rigorously
reuenge the villanie of Valericus, and by bathing in his bloude she might both
satisfie her selfe and signifie to Gwydo­nius how intirely she loued and lyked
him. But lea­uing her perplexed with these passions, againe to Clero­phontes.

Who frying still in his franticke furie, was not any whit perswaded to
conclude peace with Orlanio, but ha­uing mustred his men, as speedely as might
be, imbarkt them, and with a luckie gale arriued at the coast of A­lexandria,
wher the borderers not able to abide his force, were constrained to saue
themselues by f [...]ight. But hee as a man hauing exiled from his heart both
pietie and pitie, bathed his hands in guiltlesse bloud fiering euery fort,
battering downe euery bulwarke, sacking each Ci­tie, racing downe the walles
to the grounde, and com­maunding his souldiours vpon paine of most greeuous
punishment, not to haue any respect of persons, neyther to regarde the hoarie
haires of the aged Citizens, nor the tender yeares of the sucking Infants, but
to imbrue their blades with the bloud of all men, of what degrée soeuer.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=65) Orlanio
hearing how Clerophontes had inuaded hy [...] dominions, and with what
barbarous crueltie hee hadde murthered his subiects, hauing also intelligence
by his Scowtes, that his armie was passing huge, the better to resist the
furious force of his enimie, hyred out of other Countreyes, a great multitude
of Mercenarie Souldi­ours, so that he gathered a meruailous great hoast,
wherin was an infinit number indued with great skill, and long experience.

Furnished thus sufficiently both with men and mu­nition like a wise and warie
Captaine, séeing that he no waye els might resist the puissaunt power of so
migh­tie a Prince, determined without further delaye to méete him and to giue
him present battaile, hauing meruailous affiaunce in the approoued manhoode &
ver­tue of his Souldiours.

Clerophontes likewise being of such a valiaunt and inuincible courage, as he
séemed from his infancie to bée vowed to Mars and martiall affaires, manfully
marched forward to méete with his enimies, which he performed so spéedely,
that within few dayes, both the Armies wer within viewe, which Clerophontes
séeing, he began to incourage his souldiours on this sort.

ALthough most trustie subiects (quoth he) I neither doubt of your prowesse,
nor haue cause to feare your manhoode, as hauing mine Armie fraught with the
most couragious Captaines, and boldest blouds of Metelyne, yet I wish you to
consider how desperately we haue ad­uentured vpon the Conquest of this
Dukedome, which if we atchieue, we shal not onely gaine perpetual fame and
renowme, but reap such riches and treasure, as shall sufficiently counteruaile
our trauaile. But to obtaine this victorie we must behaue our selues
valiantly, nei­ther dreading any daunger though neuer so desperate, [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=65) nor doubting any
perill though neuer so fearefull. Be­fore our face we haue our enimies,
behinde our backes the surging seas, so that fight we must, but flye we
can­not: in being couragious we winne the fielde, and re­turne conquerours: in
proouing cowards, we both loose our liues and the conquest: if we foyle our
foes we re­turne with triumph, if we faint and flye we haue no hope of
safetie, but death and desperation is imminent. Be then hardie to hazard, and
valiaunt to venture a­middest the prease of your enimies, that daunted with
your valour they may be forced to flye, and we both tri­umph and inioy the
treasure.

CLerophontes hauing thus louinglye incouraged his souldiers, Orlanio on the
other side séeing his men began to feare the force of the enimie, and were
amazed with such a monstrous multitude, prickt them forward with this Parle.

THat mightie Monarch Alexāder y• great, who for his martiall exployts, was a
mirror to all his posteritie, whose prowesse was such as he daunted Darius, &
by his inuincible courage made a conquest of the whole world: hearing on a
time one of his Captaines to demaunde what multitude was in their enimies
campe, aunswe­red, that it was not the point of a good soldier to inquire how
many the enimies were, but wher they were, mea­ning that to feare the
multitude is rather the signe of cowardise, then a tokē of courage. Which
saying I wish you carefully to consider, y• the huge army of Clerophon­tes
neither amaze your minds, nor abate your valor, sith y• the equitie of our
cause doth more thē counteruaile his companie. He inuadeth our realme without
reason, & we defend but our owne right: he cruelly séeketh to depriue vs of
fréedō, & we lawfully do maintain our own liberty.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=66) He
tirannously striueth to make vs bondslaues, and we fight to frée our selues
from captiuitie. If he preuayle let vs looke for no pittie, but that we shall
be murdered without mercie, we shall sée before our face our wiues rauished,
our daughters defloured, our parents put to death, our children slaine, our
goods spoyled, our Citie sacked, and our selues brought to vtter ruth and
ruyne. Sith then we are placed betwéene two extremities, ei­to possesse our
owne with plentie, or to passe our liues in penurie: let vs valiauntly venter
whatsoeuer wée gaine, let vs fight without feare: for better it is to die with
honour, than to liue with shame.

BY that time Orlanio had ended his Oration, the Ar­mies met in a Plaine,
within thirtie leagues of A­lexandria. Where both of them ordering (as became
good Captaines) their people, there began in the breake of the day, the most
cruell and terrible battaile that earst was heard of, considering the number
on both partes, theyr experience and pollicie, with the valiant prowesse and
courage of the Captaines. Thus continued they in fight, euen almost vntill
éeuen, with meruaylous slaughter on both sides, the victorie yet doubtfull,
till in the ende the Alexandrians began to faint and flye, more oppressed with
the excesse of the multitude, than distres­sed for want of manhoode, for there
were two and fortie thousand slaine, but not one taken prisoner, and of
Cle­rophontes companie eight and twentie thousand slain, and sixe hundred
mortally wounded. This monstrous massacre and fearefull slaughter, so amazed
the mindes of these two Captaines, that for the better burying of the dead,
and healing of them which were hurte, they concluded a truce betwéene them for
fiftéene dayes, in which time Orlanio sent Ambassadors to parle of peace wt
Clerophontes, but in vaine: for he was resolued either [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=66) valiantly to die
in the field with glorie, or to inioye the Dukedome of Alexandria with
renowme. Yet as a wor­thie Prince, preferring the securitie of his soldiers
before the safetie of his owne person, he offered them the com­bat, which
Orlanio to auoide the effusion of bloud, most willingly accepted. Nowe it was
agréed and concluded betwéene thē, that two champions might be chosen, who by
the dint of the swoord should stint the strife betwéene these two armies. If
he of Metelyne remained victor, then Orlanio shuld not onely paie his former
tribute, but deliuer vp his Dukedome into the hands of Clerophon­tes. But if
y• Alexandrians obtained y• conquest, y• Duke of Metelyne should peaceably
depart the countrie, release the tribute, and also resigne his state, and
become a sub­iect to Orlanio. And for the better kéeping & confirming of these
conditions, they presentlye dispatcht Embassa­dours to Fernandus the king of
Bohemia, to intreate his maiestie that he would vouchsafe to become iudge in
the combat, who for that he wished wel to both these dukes, graunted to their
requests, and with as much spéede as might be, came to Alexandria. But in the
meane time there was some difference aboute the champions. For Clerophontes
sayd, that sith in loosing the field, consisted the losse of liuing, life, and
libertie, and in getting y• vic­torie, the gaine of a Dukedome, he would in
proper per­son fight the combat and trie the chance of Fortune, and therefore
made a challenge to Orlanio. But he finding himselfe farre vnfit to resist his
furious force, refused it. Yet promising, that none vnlesse he were descended
of Nobilitie should enter the lists, wherwith Clerophon­tes was verie well
contented. Nowe while this truce continued, which was prolonged for thirtie
dayes, it was lawfull for them of Alexandria to come and viewe the campe of
Metelyne, and for the Metelynes to goe and sée the Citie. Wherevpon
Clerophontes desirous to sée Or­lanio
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=67) and his
Court, went onelye accompanied with his garde to Alexandria, where he was most
royally enter­tained, and sumptuously feasted by Orlanio, both of them
remitting the rigour of their mallice, till it shoulde bee shewed in effect,
by reason of their manhood. But as soone as Thersandro and the other Lords saw
Clerophontes, y• he was rather a monster then a man, hauing each lim so
strongly couched, each part so proportioned, so huge of sta­ture, & so fierce
of countenance, they were so daūted with the sight of his persō, as they
almost feared to come in his presence, saying: that thereof the boldest blouds
in Alex­andria were not able to abide the force of Clerophontes. Who now
peaceably departing to his hoast, lefte Orlanio as greatly perplexed for
assēbling his nobilitie together, amongst whom he appointed the champion
shuld be cho­sen. They not onely with one consent withstood his cō ­maund,
but began to murmure and mutine against him, condempning him of folly that he
would so vnaduisedly commit his own state, & ther stay to the doubtful hazard
of one mans hap. Orlanio seeing y• it was now no time to chastise this their
presumption, vnlesse he meant to raise ciuill dissention in the citie, which
were the next way to confirme the enimie, & bréed his owne confusion, he
dissē ­bled his cholar & began to work a new way. For first he fréed Castania
out of prison, thē made generall proclama­tion throughout his Dukedome, y•
what Lord so euer wt ­in his land would try the combat with Clerophontes, if
he remained victor in the conquest, he would not onely giue him his daughter
Castania to wife, let him possesse peaceably the Dukedome of Metelyne as her
dowry, but be content to acknowledge him as his liege, & paye him tribute, as
he was wont to Clerophontes.

While he lingered and listened how this proclamition would preuaile, Castania
hearing this seuere sentence & dolefull doome pronounced, séeing that shoulde
not onely [[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=67)
be forced to forsake Gwydonius, but be constrained to match in marriage with
one whome shée should neyther loue nor like, burst forth into these bitter
complaintes.

A Alasse (quoth she) how pinching a pain it is to be per­plexed with diuers
passions, what a noisome care it is to be combred with sundrie cogitations,
what a woo it is to hang betwéene desire & despaire, & what a hell it is to
houer betwéene feare and hope. For as to him which is assured to die, death is
no dolour, in that he perfectlye knowes there is no salue can cure his sorrow,
so to him which feares to die, & yet hopes to liue, death were thrice more
welcome, then to linger in such doubt. In which cursed case alas my case
consisteth, for as out of the riuer Cea in Sicillia bursteth most feareful
flames, and yet the streame is passing colde, neither is the water able to
quench the fire, nor the fire cause the water to bée hotte, so the heate of
hope flameth out of the chilling fountaine of feare, & yet the force of the
one is not able to asswage the vehemencie of the other, but still my heauie
heart is diuersly assailed with them both. If my Father Orlanio winne the
conquest, I doubt my desire shall neuer haue happie successe, if Clerophontes
triumphe as victour, I greatly feare his crueltie is such, as I shall not
escape most haplesse death. And yet againe I hope that then my own Gwydonius
wil accept me for his, and with trium­phant armes imbrace me. But alas, will
Clerophontes suffer him to match with his mortal so, wil he not rather preuent
it by my peril? Yes no doubt, if he returne with triumph, my Father shal serue
him as a subiect, my bro­ther shall become his vassall, my friendes shall bée
for­lorne, my Citie sackt, and my natiue Countrie brought to vtter confusion.
And shall I for the loue of a straun­ger wishe these straunge stratagemmes?
Shall I to féede mine owne fancie, and content my lustinge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=68) minde, wish
my Fathers death, my Brothers bane, my friends mishap, my Countries confusion,
and perhappes my owne miserie. For though Gwydonius loued mée when our parents
were friendes, he will not now lyke me béeing foes: but to reuenge the
iniuries my Father offered him, will subtilly séeke to sacke my honour and
honestie, and so triumph of my shame and discredit. Had I not better praie my
Father may winne the combat, & then shall I bath in the streames of blisse,
and flowe in the flouds of felicitie, then shall I dread no daunger, no feare,
no perills: then shall I see my father, friendes, and Countrie, flourish in
most happie prosperitie: then shall I inioy some iolly Gentleman, who will
loue me béeing young, and cherish me being olde, and possesse the Duke­dome of
Metelyne for my dowrie. And canst thou Ca­stama be so ingratefull, as to will
his woe which wish­eth thy weale, to desire his destruction which prayeth for
thy prosperitie? canst thou be so couetous as to  [...]rau [...] that for thy
possession, which is thy Gwydonius patrim [...] ­nie, or so suspitious as to
accuse him of trecherie, which hath bene but to trustie: to count him a
counterfaite, which hath alwaies bene constant? No, come what come will, let
froward fortune fauour whome she please, so I may ioy and safely inioy my
onely ioy Gwydonius.

As Castania had thus ended her complaint, Gwydo­nius who all this while lurked
about the borders of A­lexandria, heard what successe Orlanios affaires had
with his Father Clerophontes, how verie fewe or none at all durst trie the
combat with him, that his loue and Ladie Castania was the prise that he should
get that gained the conquest. Which things considered, supposing y• Castania
had cast him off, & that she plaid, out of sight out of mind, by a secret and
trustie messenger, he presented her with this Letter.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=68)

# Gwydonius to Castania health.

THE pure spice Castania the more it is pounded, the swéeter smell it yéelds,
the Camomill increaseth most béeing troden on, the Palme trée the greater
waight it beareth, the straighter it groweth, the stone Terpistetres the more
it is beaten the harder it is, and loyall loue is not weakened by the stormes
of aduersitie, but rather far the more fortified by the froward state of
frowning for­tune: which Madame I speake by proofe and experience, for since I
haue sipped of the sower dregs of sorrow, and bene pestered with the bitter
pills of penurie, since sini­ster fortune hath crossed me with mishaps, and
disaster fates haue driuen me downe to miserie, my fancie hath so furiously
assaulted my minde, and affection hath so in­cessantly battered the bulwarke
of my brest, as y• sparks of loue which were kindled in me in prosperitie, are
tur­ned to fierce and firie flames by aduersitie. So that ma­dame, your
presence did not before procure me such plea­sure, as your absence doth paine,
neither was I so drow­ned in delight in frequenting your companie, as I am
drenched with despight by leading my life in sorrowfull calamitie. Alasse
Castania what vnspeakeable griefe hath tormented mée? what direfull dolour
hath distres­sed me? what hellish horrour hath hunted me? yea, what woe and
wretchednesse hath wracked my wittes, since thou hast béene proclaymed a praie
to him whosoeuer winneth the prise in the combat. Howe ofte haue I wi­shed
that I might bée the champion to make the chal­lenge, that I might venture my
lyfe to purchase thy lybertie, that my death might redéeme thée from daun­ger.

But alasse, I sée to wishe is in vaine, to to craue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=69) of the Gods,
that thy Father shoulde vaunt of the victo­rie, is but to wish that your loue
shoulde haue haplesse successe: to praie that Clerophontes should returne with
conquest, thou wilt déeme I desire thy friends misfor­tune, thus assailed with
diuerse doubtes, I driue off my dayes in dolour: hoping howsoeuer fortune
froune, that the fates wil assigne vs a perfect calme of permanent fe­licitie,
for this sturdie storme of pinching miserie.

Thine euer, exiled Gwydonius.

CAstania hauing receiued this Letter, séeing that no si­nister chaunce of
fortune was able to change y• fixed fancie of Gwydonius, conceiued such
assured hope in his constancie, as now she thought his troth was filed with no
spot of trecherie, that his faith was quite deuoide of flatterie, and that
whatsoeuer chaunced, she might safe­ly repose her staie and state in his
loyaltie. Insomuch that to driue out the euill opinion which she thought her
brother Thersandro had conceiued of Gwydonius conspi­racie, shée secretly
shewed him the Letter, which after he had read ouer and carefully construed
euerie clause, hée began both to detect and detest the villanie of Valericus,
desiring his sister Castania that she would earnestly per­swade Gwydonius in
disguised apparell spéedelye to re­paire to her lodging, promising with
solempne vowes and sacred oaths, not to bée preiudiciall to his person:
Castania affying greatly in her brothers faith, and desi­rous to haue a sight
of her louing Gwydonius, returned him these fewe lines.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=69)

# Castania to Gwydonius, prosperitie.

WHo so tasteth Gwidonius of the hearbe Mely, Sophi­los is neuer tormented with
the sting of aduersitie, and she that weareth the stone Mephites aboute her,
ne­uer soroweth at sinister fortune, who so fancieth without faining neuer
proueth fickle, and she that loueth loyally may well be crossed with
calamitie, but neuer iustly ac­cused of inconstancie. Account thy Castania
good Gwydo­nius to be in the same predicament, for let disaster mishap driue
me downe to most deadlye miserie, let the cruell fates compasse me with cursed
care, l [...]t fortune and the destinies conclude my confusion, yet it shall
not diminish my fancie, but rather increase my affection. I will stil in
weale, in woe, in bale, in blisse, in mirth & miserie, say I loue, and it is
onely Gwydonius. For shall our fancie bée such as it shal be foiled with
misfortune: no, but as The­tis chaunging into many shapes, at last returned
into her owne forme, so into what mishap I be driuen by misery, yet I will
stand in mine olde state in despight of ye fates and fortune. Come therefore
Gwydonius to the court in disguised apparell, but without care, for thou shalt
finde me so trustie, as my troth shall be without spotte, & thy health without
hazard. Thus wishing thy curtesie to conster well of my constancie, I bid thée
farewell.

Thine or not her owne, constant Castania.

GWidonius hauing carefully construed ouer y• contents of this louing letter,
although ye rigor of Orlanio might haue giuē him sufficient cause of
suspitiō, yet ye cléerenes of his own conscience & the loue he bare to
Castania, wold
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=70) not suffer
him eyther to suspect anie treason, or to doubt of anie deceit, but determined
without any delay to put the saftie of his person and the sauegard of his life
into her handes. But leauing him to bring his purpose luc­kely to passe,
againe to Orlanio.

Who séeing that his proclamation could not preuaile, and that his nobles
preferred their owne safetie before his securitie, was perplexed with such
hellish passions, and griped with such pinching griefe, as the Ghoasts
tor­mented with gri [...]y fiends felt no such haplesse furie. To fight with
Clerophontes, he felt his strength farre vnfit to resist his force, to denie
the combat hée neither could [...] nor wold, although he brought himselfe to
confusion, and his children to captiuitie, so that howsoeuer he tourned
himselfe, he sawe before his face death and dispaire, woe and wretchednesse,
mishap and miserie. Combred thus with this curelesse care, and sitting
solitarily in sorrow, séeing the dismal day drew on, and hearing that
Fernan­dus the king of Bohemia was lately landed, he fell into more furious
passions, vntill he was driuen out of his dumps by his sonne Thersandro, who
perceiuing his fa­ther thus dolefully daunted, he began most louingly to
comfort him, promising that since none durst venture to deale with
Clerophontes, he himselfe would fight y• com­bat, and either worthelye winne
the conquest with re­nowme, or manfully die in the field with honour.

Orlanio hearing the bold courage of this new champi­on, felt his sorrow
somewhat salued by this proffer, per­swading himselfe y• his sonne was better
able to abide ye brunt then he, & hoping that the Gods would fauour the
equitie of the cause, and assuredly by iustice graunt him the victorie.
Resting I saie vppon this hope, and than­king Thersandro for his naturall
affection, and pray­sing him for his noble courage, hée presentlye went to
méete Fernandus, whom he most princely entertained, [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=70) conducting him
very royally into Alexandria, where hée most sumptuously feasted him and all
his traine. But as they passed away the time in pastime and pleasure, so poore
Thersandro spent the daye in dolour and the night in sorrowe. For although to
comfort his Father he made light of the combat, and valiauntly offered
him­selfe to trie the chaunce of Fortune, yet séeing his eni­mies force farre
to excéede his féeble strength, he began to faint, although like a worthie
Gentleman he couered his dreadfull courage with a desperate countenaunce,
raunging vp and downe the fieldes to driue awaye his melancholy, where by
chaunce in disguised apparaile he met Gwydonius, to whom after some Parle past
betwéen them, he bewrayed the whole state of the matter, howe he was to enter
combat with Clerophontes, and that hée doubted greatly of the euent of the
victorie, fearing the force of his Father, and fainting at his owne
imbecili­tie. Which Gwydonius hearing he made this short aun­swere.

THersandro (quoth he) it is vaine with long talke to passe away the time when
delay bréedes daunger, & folly to hope for faire weather when the aire is
ouer­cast with clowdes: leauing off therefore all oathes to confirme my faith,
thus much to the purpose. If it please thée to trust me without triall, and to
giue anye confi­dence to my words, I héere promise both to make mani­fest my
loyall loue to Castania, and to repay thy courte­sie, that I will, resembling
thy person, and disguised in thy armor, enter combat with my father
Clerophontes, either intending by winning the victorie to obtaine my will, or
by loosing the conquest to want my wish: if this my proffer please thée, I
will passe priuilie to yt Court, if not good Thersandro, let me goe as I came.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=71) Thersandro
commending the subtill deuise of Gwy­donius caried him as couertly as could be
to Castania, to whom he was  [...] more welcome than soone come, re­maining
closely in her closet till ye next morning. Casta­nia [...] nothing of their
pretēce. Fernandus [...]ing of Bohemia the nexte daye being gone with all his
[...] place appointed for the com­bat. Orlanio, Castania, and all the Lords of
Alexandria, clad in mourning attire folowed him, thinking this dis­mall day
should be the  [...]te of their destruction. And  [...] thirfting after bloud,
and glory [...]ng in the hope of his supposed conquest, stoode in the  [...]
foe. To whome Gwy­donius his  [...] furnished with the armour of Ther­sandro,
presented himselfe▪ Who séeing, that forced by the fond allurements of loue,
he was to fight, not wyth his mortal foe, but with his natural father, he fell
into these doubtfull dumpes.

Alas poore Gwydonius (quoth he) how art thou com­bred with diuers cogitations,
what a cruell conflict dost thou sinde in thy minde betwéene loue and
loyaltie, na­ture & necessitie? who euer was so wilfull, as willingly to wage
battaile against his owne father? who so cruell as to enter combat with his
owne sire? Alas, duetie per­swades me not to practise so monstrous a
mischiefe: but the deuotion I owe to Castania driues me to perfourme the
déede, were it thrice more daungerous or desperate. The honour I owe to my
Father makes me faynt for feare, but once to imagine so brutish a fact: the
loue I owe to Castania constrayneth me to defende the combat if Iupiter
himselfe made the challenge. And is not (fond foole) necessitie aboue nature,
is not the lawe of loue a­boue King or Keyzar, Father or Friends, God or the
Diuell? Yes. And so I meane to take it: for either I wil valiantly win the
conquest and my Castania, or lose [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=71) the victorie, and
so by death ende my miseries.

With that the trumpets sounded, and Gwydonius lustely leaping into the lystes,
fell presentlye into fury­ous fight with his father, driuing not onely
Fernandus & Orlanio, but also both the armies into a great doubt, for although
Clerophontes most cruelly prosecuted him, yet he alwaies receiued the strokes,
but neuer so much as once returned one blow, till at last looking aloft, and
spying Castania, his courage so increased, that all feare set aside, he
carelessely flang away his sword and shield and ranne vpon his Father, not
onely tearing from him his target, but vyolently casting him vpon the ground,
and spéedely vnlacing his Helmet, offered to cut off his head with his owne
sword: but Clerophontes crying out confessed himselfe captiue, and granted his
enimie the conquest. Wherevpon they of Alexandria, gaue a mightie showte, and
Fernandus and Orlanio came down readie to carrie Clerophontes captiue to the
Citie. But Gwydoni [...]s▪ first demaunded of Orlanio if hée was con­tent to
perfourme that which he promised by proclama­tion, to whom Fernandu [...]
aunswered that both he would and should or els as he was his friend so he
woulde bee his foe. Gwydonius hearing this faithfull assertion of the King,
pulling downe his beauer, began to speake in this manner.

I Let thée Orlanio (quoth he) and the worthie king of Bohemia to knowe, that I
am Gwydonius, sonne and heire to this conquered Clerophontes, who for the loue
of thy Daughter Castania haue not spared contra­rie to the lawe of nature, to
fight with mine owne Fa­ther, hoping the destinies by my meanes haue decréed,
not onely of fatall foes to make you faithfull friendes, but to finish vp our
loue, which otherwise coulde not haue bene perfourmed.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=72) I haue wonne
Orlanio my Fathers Dukedome by vic­torie, and thy Daughter by conquest, the
one I had be­fore by inheritaunce and the other by loue, yet I wold willingly
haue thy good will, which if thou graunt, I hope my father will both pardon my
offence and thinke well of my proffer.

Clerophontes kissing and imbracing Gwydonius, tolde him his care was halfe
cured, in that such a good Captaine had wonne the Conquest. Fernandus &
Orla­nio stood astonished at this strange Tragedie, doubting in whether they
dreampt of such a rare deuice, or saw it effect. At last Orlanio as one
wakened out of a traunce, with trickeling teares imbraced Clerophontes,
honou­ring him as his Soueraigne, and promising not onely to giue Castania to
Gwydonius, but also halfe his Dukedome in dowrie. Clerophontes thanking him
for his curtesie, consented most willingly to this motion, so that before
Fernandus departed, the marriage betwéen Gwydonius and Castania, Thersandro
and Lew­cippa, was most sumptu­ously solemnized.

EINIS.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=72)

## 2\. The Debate betweene Follie and Loue, Translated out of French by Robert
Greene, Master of Artes.

The Argument.

IVpiter made a great Feast, at the which all the Gods were commaunded to be
pre­  [...] [...] Loue and Folly arriue at one Instant at the gate of the
Palla [...]ce, which was shut, hauing nothing open but the wicket. Fol­ly
seeing Loue readie to enter in, passeth before, which repulse driueth Loue
into choller. Folly auoucheth that of right shee ought to bee the formost.
Wherevpon they enter into disputation of their power, dignitie and
superioritie. But Loue not able to get the cō ­quest by words, taketh his
bowe in hand and shooteth at her, but in vaine, for Folly became inuisible,
and in de­spight pulleth out Cupids eyes. And for to couer this deformitie,
shadoweth his face with a vayle, so  [...] by the Destinies▪ that it was not
possible to take it awaye. Venus complaineth of Folly vnto Iupiter, who
appoint­eth Appollo and Mercurie to plead  [...] of these two Clients, whose
discourse beeing heard,  [...] pronounceth his sentence.

Folly.

I Feare greatly that I shall be the last at the Feast of Iupiter, where all
the Gods no doubt doo attend mée. And yet me think I sée the Sonne of Venus
which is as late as  [...]. I will pass [...] before him, least they call
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=73) me sluggish
and sloathfull.

Loue.

WHat foole is this that repulseth me so rudely? take heede least hast make
wast, and that thy rashnesse cause thée not cry Peccaui.

Folly.

Oh sir, blame me not though I make hast, for I goe before to tell the Gods,
that you come at leasure.

Loue.

Nay, that which is easely begun, is not alwaies light­ly ended: for before
thou escape me, I will reuenge this thy iniurious iesting.

Folly.

Let me goe fond Loue and stay me not, for as it is a shame to quarrell with a
woman, so it is more discre­dit to take the foyle.

Loue.

The foyle. What boasting brags be these? who hath euer aduentured to despise
mée, much lesse to defie mée? But doost thou know what I am.

Folly.

Thou art Cupid the Sonne of Venus.

Loue.

How darest thou then vaunt thy selfe against mée, which how little so euer I
be, am the most redoubted of all the Gods.

Folly.

Thy words are great whatsoeuer thy workes be, but tell me, what or wherein
lyeth this thy great power.

Loue.

The heauens and the earth fonde foole are witnesses of my words, there is no
place where I haue not lefte Trophées in signe of triu [...]ph. Looke into
heauen, and [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=73) demaund if any of
the Gods haue escaped my handes? Begin with olde Saturne, Iupiter, Mars,
Apollo, and end with the Demigods, Satyres, Fawnes, and Siluanes: Nay, the
Goddesses themselues will not shame to con­fesse somewhat. Looke vpon the
earth, and sée if thou canst find one, which hath not ben foyled by my means.
Behold in the furious Seas, how Neptune and his Tri­tons doo yéelde me
obeysaunce. Yea, and lastly looke into Hell it selfe, if I haue not forced
Pluto that infernall Prince, to steale awaye Proserpina the daughter of
Ce­res. And to the ende, thou doubt not with what engines I haue atchieued
these victories, behold this Bowe and these Arrowes onely, which haue wonne
mée these wor­thie Conquests. I haue no néede that Vulcan doo tem­per my
tooles. I am not accompanied with the Furyes and Harpies, to cause me to be
feared before the Com­bat. I haue not to doo with Charyots, Souldiours,
Cap­taines, men of armes, nor great troupes of Horsemen, without the which
mortall men cannot triumph. No, I haue no other counsaile, munition, nor ayde,
but my selfe. When I sée mine enimyes in the Fielde, I present my selfe with
my Bowe, and lette flye my Boltes, and the victorye is alwayes gotten at the
first stroke.

Folly.

I excuse thy youthfull yeares poore Cupid, or else I woulde blaze thée for the
most presumptuous patche in the worlde. It séemeth by thy vaine vaunting that
euerye one holdeth his lyfe of thy mercie, and that thou art the onelye Lorde
and Soueraygne both in Heauen, Earth, the Sea, and Hell. But manie things are
spoken which are neuer beléeued.

Loue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=74)

And art thou so hard of beléefe, to denie that which euery one confesseth.

Folly.

I haue not to doo with other mens opinions: but this I am sure, that it is not
by thy force and prowesse, that so many myracles are wrought in the worlde,
but by my industrie, by my meanes, and by my diligence, although thou knowest
me not. But if thou doost conti­nue long in this thy choller, I will let thée
vnderstand that thy bowe and thy arrowes whereof thou vauntest so much, are
more weake than waxe, if I bende not the one, and temper the other.

Loue.

Doost thou thinke by this scoffing to pacifie myne anger, or by contemptuous
threatening to quallyfie my choller. Hast thou euer (fonde foole) handled my
bowe, or directed my boltes? Is it thy prowesse and not my force which
perfourmeth such valyaunt Conquestes? But since thou regardest me and
respectest my force so little, thou shalt presently féele the proofe thereof.

Folly maketh hir selfe inuisible, so that Loue cannot hit her.

Loue.

But where art thou become? How hast thou esca­ped me? This onely is the
straungest case that euer chaunced vnto me. I had thought that amongst all the
Gods I onely could haue made my selfe inuisible. But now I sée I am deceiued.

Folly.

Did not I tell thée before, that thy bowe and thy ar­rowes are of no force,
but when it pleaseth me, and that [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=74) by my meanes thou
alwayes obtainest the conquest. Meruaile not if I be inuisible, for if I list
the eyes of the Eagle or of the Serpent of Epidawrus, cannot espie me, for
Camelion like I take the shape of them with whom I doe remaine.

Loue.

Truely as I coniecture thou art some Sorceresse, or some Inchauntresse, some
Circe, some Medea, or some Fayrie.

Folly.

Well, since thou doest thus recklesly raile vpon mée, know that I am a
goddesse as thou art a God, my name is folly: I am she which raiseth thée vp,
and casteth thee downe at my pleasure. Thou vnloosest thy bowe, and lettest
flie thine arrowes in the aire, but I place them where it pleaseth me. Thou
doest addresse thy selfe a­gainst Iupiter, but he is of such puissaunce, that
if I both guided not thy [...] hand, and tempered thy arrow, thy feeble force
could little preuaile against his prowesse. Indeede yu didst force Iup
[...]ter to loue, but I caused him to change himselfe into a Swanne, into a
Bull, into Golde, into an Eagle. Who caused Mars and thy mother Venus to bée
taken in bed together by the limping cuckolde Vul­can, but I? If Paris had
done no other thing but loued Helena, Sparta had neuer reioyced, nor Troy ben
brought to ruine. But did not I cause him to goe to Menelaus vnder coulour of
Embassage, to Court vnto his wife to leade her awaie by force, and after to
defend his vniust quarrel against all Greece? Who had spoken of the loue of
Dido, if he had not deuised to goe a hunting, that she might haue the better
commoditie to communicate with Aeneas, that by such priuate familiaritie he
might not be ashamed to take from her that which long before most willingly
she would haue giuen him. I beléeue no men­tion had béene made of Artemizia,
if I had not caused
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=75) her drinke
the cynders of her husbands dead carcasse, for else who had knowen whether she
had loued her hus­band more then other women. The effect and issues of things
alwayes make them to be praised or dispraised. If thou makest men to loue, yet
I am oft times the chiefest cause. But if any straunge aduenture or greate
effect chaunceth, in that thou hast no part, but the onely honour belongeth
vnto me. Thou rulest nothing but y• heart, the rest I gouerne: yea, I leade
thée, I conducte thée, and thine eyes serue thée to no more vse then the
beames of the Sunne to a blinde man. But to the ende thou knowe mée from hence
foorth, and that thou mayst giue mée thankes for conducting thée carefullye:
Beholde nowe howe greatlye thine eyes dooe profite thée.

Follie putteth out Cupids eies.

Loue.

Alasse Iupiter, O my mother Venus, what auayleth it to bée thy sonne so
feared, so redoubted, both in heauen and in earth, if I be subiect to bée
iniured as the most vile slaue in the worlde: Alasse, haue I thus lost mine
eies by an vnknowen woman.

Folly.

Take héede sond foole another time to rayle vppon those who perhappes are of
more force and puissaunce then thou. Thou hast offended the Quéene of men,
thou hast outraged her who gouerneth the heart, the braine, and the minde:
Under whose shadowe euerie one once in his lyfe shroudeth himselfe, and ther
remaineth either long or short time according to his merite, thou hast
dis­pleased her who procureth thy renowme, thou hast con­tempned her who hath
aduaunced thée, and therfore hath [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=75) this misfortune
fallen vpon thy head.

Loue.

Alasse, how is it possible for me to  [...] her whom I neuer knew, or to
reuerence that person whom before I neuer sawe: but if thou hast borne me such
great good will as thou saist, pardon this my offence, and restore me my
sight.

Folly.

To restore thée thine eyes is not in my power, but I will couer the place to
hide the deformitie.

Folly couereth Cupids face with a Scarfe, and giueth him wings.

And in liew of this haplesse lucke, thou shalt haue these wings which shal
cary thée whether thou wilt wish

Loue.

But where hadst thou this vaile so readie to couer my deformitie.

Folly.

It was giuen me as I came hether, by one of the de­stinies, who told me it was
of that nature, that if it were once fastned, it could neuer be vnloosed.

Loue.

How vnloosed? am I then blinde for euer? O vile and traiterous wretch, coulde
it not suffice to pull out mine eyes, but to take awaie the meanes, that the
Gods can­not restore them, now I sée the sentence verified on my selfe, that
it is not good to take a present at the hande of an enimie. O cruell
destinies, O cursed daie: shall not the heauens, the earth, and the seas haue
cause to waile, sith loue is blinde. But why doe I complaine héere in vaine,
it is better for me to sue to the Gods for reuenge­ment.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=76)

### 2.1. The second discourse.

Loue goe [...] from the Pallace of Iupiter, lamen­ting to himselfe his
mischiefe.

Loue.

Alasse in what miserable case am I, what can eyther my bowe or mine arrowes
auaile me, nowe can I not cause whom I  [...] [...]oue, but without respect of
persons, eue­rie one is in daunger of my darts. Hetherto I haue one­ly caused
daintie damsells and young youths to loue, I did choose out the brauest
blouds, and the fairest and most well featured men: I did pardon vile and base
persons, I excused the deformed creatures, and let olde age re­maine in peace.
But now thi [...]king to hit a young gal­launt, I light vpon some olde
[...]ting lecher: in stéed of some braue Gentleman, I strike some filthie
foule lur­den. And it shall happen (I d [...]bt) that they shall bée most
fortunate in their loue, so that by patrimonie, pre­sence, or wealth, they
shall soonest winne the fauour of women, and by this meanes my kingdome shall
come to ruine, when men sée in it such disorder and euill gouern­ment.

Venus hauing long sought Cupid, now meeteth him.

I haue carefully long sought thée my deare sonne, mer­uailing what the cause
shoulde bée that thou hast not bene present at the banket of Iupiter. Who is
great­ly incensed against thee, not onely for thy absence, but for the
complaintes which are  [...] out against thée by sundrie poore artificers,
labouring men, pesaunts, slaues, hand maides, olde men, and toothlesse aged
women, cry­ing all vnto Iupiter, that they loue, thinking themselues greatly
iniured in this respect, that the passion which is [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=76) proper to worthy
and noble men, should be inflicted vpon them which are of the base and vildest
sort.

Loue.

Had not the great misfortune which is chaunced vn­to me happened, I had
neither bene absent from the ban­quet, nor these gréeuous complaints had not
bene infer­red against mée.

Venus.

Why? and art thou hurt? Who hath thus vailed thine eies.

Loue.

Folly hath not onely pulled them out, but also hath put this bande before mine
eies, which can neuer be taken a­way.

Venus.

O cursed enimie of all wisedome, O haplesse wretch, vniustly called a
Goddesse, and more vnrightly tearmed immortall, hast thou depriued me of my
chiefest delight and felicitie. O disaster loue, O dissolute mother, O wo­full
Venus. who séest thy sonne, thy ioy, and onely care, thus cruelly depriued of
his sight. Well, since thy mishap is so great, I vowe that euerie one that
shall loue (what fauour or happie successe so euer he shall haue) shall not be
without some care, trouble, or calamitie, that hée vaunt not himselfe to be
more happie then the sonne of Venus.

Loue.

Cease off good mother from these sorrowfull com­plaints, & redouble not my
griefe by these your dolorous discourses, suffer mée to beare mine owne
misfortune, and wish not euill vnto them which shall bée my sub­iectes.

Venus.

Well, let vs then goe to Iupiter, and complaine of this cursed inchauntresse.

### 2.2. The third discourse.

Venus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=77)

If euer thou hadst pittie of my plaintes, most iust Iupiter, when thou sawest
me labour to saue my son Aeneas from the furie of the raging Seas, and to
defend him from other daungers, in the which he was present at the siege of
Troy. If my teares for the death of my deare Adonis moued thée to compassion.
The surpassing sorrow that I doe conceiue for the great iniurie offered to
Cupid, I hope shall moue thée to pittie. If teares wold suffer me I would
bewraie the cause of my sorrow, but behold my sonne in what plight he is, and
thou shalt ea­sily perceiue the cause of my complaint.

Iupiter.

Alasse my deare daughter, what doe these teares pre­uaile, knowest thou not
what fatherly affection I haue alwaies borne thée, what doest thou distrust
that I wyll not succour thée, or that I cannot.

Venus.

No, I neither doubt the one, nor distrust the other, I onely demaund iustice
against Folly, the most outragi­ous furie in the world, which hath thus
grieuously abu­sed Cupid.

Folly.

Most mightie and soueraigne Iupiter, beholde I am héere readie to answere to
Venus complaints, and to de­bate my right against Cupid.

Iupiter.

Folly, I will neither accuse nor excuse thée, vntill I haue heard the defence
of the one, as well as the plaint of the other, least I should be thought
parciall, neither for the more auoiding of iniustice in the matter, wil I
suffer you to plead your owne causes, but Venus choose you one of the Gods,
and Folly take you an other.

Venus.

I choose Appollo to defend my cause.

Folly.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=77)

And I Mercurie to maintaine my right.

Iupiter.

Then Apollo & Mercurie, prepare your selues to plead well in your clients
cases, and Apollo since you take the plaintiefes part, let vs heare what you
can say.

Apollo.

THe common people, right soueraigne Iupiter (although their minds be sotted &
almost sēceles, yet they haue al way had loue in such sacred estimation, y•
they haue care­fully rewarded thē wt the titles of honor & dignity, which
haue excelled in y• holy affection, estéeming this only ver­tue (if so rightly
it may be tearmed) sufficient of a mā to make one a God. The Scithians for
this cause canonized Pilades & Orestes, erecting temples vnto thē, & calling
thē the Gods of amitie. Castor & Pollux were made immor­tal by this meanes,
not in y• they were brothers, but in y• (which is rare) their loue was
inuiolable. Howe hath fame blazed abroad y• loue of Dauid & Ionathas, y•
amitie of Pithias & Damon, & of Titus & Gysippus. But y• better to make
manifest y• force of loue & amitie, I will alledge the saying of Darius, who
opening a Pomgranat, being demanded wherof he would haue as many as ther were
graines within, answered, of Zopyres: this Zopyre was his faithful friend, by
the meanes of whom he conquered Babylon. I remember also a certaine Syrian
demanding a maide in marriage, and being willed to shew of what wealth he was,
said that he had no other riches but two friends, estéeming himself rich
inough with such possessi­ons to craue y• daughter of a great lord in mariage.
Did not loue cause Ariadne saue Theseus life, Hyperminestra redéeme Linceus
frō danger, & Medea frée Iason from pe­rill? Haue not many poore soldiers ben
aduanced to high dignities by y• meanes of loue? yea, doth not all pleasure &
profit procéed to man by loue, causing him to looke wt an
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=78) amiable
countenance, to speake pleasantly, and to be cu­rious in his ieastures,
although by nature he be dull, sot­tish, & of a fierce looke. What causeth a
man to go braue & fine in his apparell, séeking euerie day new fashions, but
loue? What procureth Gentlewomen to haue their haire frizeled, crisped, and
embrodered with golde, to be dressed after the Spanish, French, or Italian
fashion, but Loue. Painting their faces if they be foule, with liuely colours.
But if they be faire, they so carfully kéepe their beautie from the parching
heate of Summer, from the chilling colde of Winter, from Wine, raine, and age,
as they re­maine almost euer young, not so much as forgetting to haue their
shooes made fine and neate (because the curi­ousnesse of men is such, as they
leaue not to looke from the crowne of the head to the soale of the foote) to
haue their iemmes, iewells, ouches, ringes, perfumed gloues, and what not? In
fine, what beautie or brauerie is in the apparell eyther of man or woman, all
proceedeth of Loue. Shall I saie that Musicke was onely inuented by loue, yea
truely, for eyther it mittigateth the passions wherewith men are perplexed, or
else augmenteth their pleasure, so that dayly they inuent diuerse kindes of
in­strumentes, as Lutes, Citrons, Uiolls, Flutes, Cornets, Bandoras, whereon
they plaie Madrigalis, Sonnettes, Pauins, Measures, Galiardes, and all these
in remem­braunce of Loue, as he for whom men doe more then for anie other.
What causeth men to iust, tourney, runne at tilt, and combat, but loue? Who
caused Comedies, shews, Tragedies and Masks to be inuented, but Loue. Wher­of
commeth it that men delight to rehearse their amo­rous chaunces and straunge
passions, and to relate them to their companions: some praising the courtesie
of his Ladie, another condempning his mistresse crueltie: yea, recounting a
thousande mishappes which happen in theyr loues: as Letters disclosed, euyll
reportes, [[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=78)
suspitious iealousie, sometimes the husband comming home sooner, than either
the louer would, or the wife do­eth wish: sometimes coniecturing without
cause, and other times beléeuing nothing, but trusting vppon hys wiues
honestie. To be short, the greatest pleasure after loue, is to tell what
perillous daungers are passed. But what maketh so many Poets in the worlde, is
it not Loue? the which séemeth to be the plaine song whereon all Poets doo
descant: yea, there is few which write vp­pon any serious matter, but they
close vp their worke with some amorous clause, or els they are the worse
ac­cepted. Ouid hath celebrated the fame of Cupid, Pe­tracke and Virgil,
Homere and Liu [...]us, Sapho, yea & that seuere Socrates wrote somewhat of
his loue Aspasia.

Tush, who rightly can denye, that Loue is not the cause of all the glorie,
honour, profite and pleasure which hap­peneth to man, and that without it he
cannot conueni­entlye lyue, but shall runne into a thousande enormi­ties.

All this happie successe came by Loue, as long as hée had his eyes, but now
being depriued of his sight, and accompanied with▪ Folly, it is to be feared,
nay certain­ly to be beléeued, that he shall be the cause of as manie
discommodities, mischiefes and mishaps, as hethertoo hée hath bene of honour,
profit, and pleasure. The noble men which loued their inferiours, and the
subiects which du­tifully serued their Lords, shall be meruailously chaun­ged
by the meanes of folly, for the master shall loue his seruaunt onely for his
seruice, and the seruaunt his ma­ster onely for commoditie. Yea, there is none
so addicted vnto vertue, but if once he loue, he shall presently com­mit some
foolish touch: and the more straight and firme loue is, the greater disorder
there shall be by the meanes of Folly. There will returne into the world more
then one Biblis, more then one Semyramis, then one Myrrha,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=79) then one
Canace, then one Phaedra. There shall be no place in the world vnspotted. The
high walls and tre [...] ­lissed windowes, shall not kéepe the Nunnes and
Uest­all Uirgins in sauegard. Olde age shall tourne her a­ged affections into
fond fancies and wanton desires.

Shame shall lyue as an exile. There shall be no diffe­rence betwéene the Noble
and the pesaunt, betwéene the Infidell and the Moore, the Turke and the Iewe,
the Ladie, the Mistresse and the hand-maide. But ther shall insue such a
confused inequalitie, that the faire shal not be matched with the wel
featured, but shal be oft times ioyned with fowle and deformed persons Great
Ladies and noble Dames shall fall in loue with them whome before they would
disdaine to accept as their seruants. And when the loyall and faithfull
Louers, haue long languished in the loue of some beautifull Dame, whose
mutuall good will they haue gayned by deserte: then Folly will cause some
fickle & false flatterer, to enioye that in one hower, which in all their life
they coulde not attayne. I passe ouer the continuall debates and quar­rells
that shall ensue by Folly, whereof shall spring woundes, massacres, and most
fearefull murthers. And I greatly feare that wheras Loue hath inuented so
ma­ny laudable sciences, and brought foorth so many com­modities, that now he
will bring great idlenesse accom­panied with ignoraunce, that he will cause
young Gen­tlemen to leaue feates of armes, to forsake the seruice of their
Prince, to reiect honourable studyes, and to appplye them selues to vaine
songs and sonnets, to chambring and wantonnesse, to banketting and glut­tonie,
bringing infinite diseases to their bodies, and sun­drie daungers and perills
to their persons, for there is no more daungerous companie than of Folly.

Behold O souereigne Iupiter the mischiefes and mi­series [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=79) that are like to
insue, if Folly be appointed com­panion to Loue. Wherefore I in the person of
all the Gods beséech, your Maiestie to graunt that Loue maye not be ioyned
with her, and that Folly may gréeuously be punished for the outrage she hath
done to Cupid.

As soone as Apollo had ended his Oration, Mer­curie in defence of Folly
beginneth to speake in this wise.

Mercurie.

WHereas (right worthie Iupiter) Apollo hath with his painted eloquence set out
the praises of Loue, and hath sought with his filed phrases to discredit
Fol­ly, I hope when your Maiestie shall throughlye heare the cause decyded,
you will commende his Eloquence, more than his reasons. For it is not vnknowen
vnto you and all the Gods, that Folly is no whit inferiour vnto Loue, and that
Loue should be of no force without her, neyther could his kingdom indure
without her help, ayde and counsayle. I praye you call to remembraunce how
Folly incontinently after Man was placed in Pa­radise, beganne most
imperiously to rule, and hath euer since continued in such credite, as neuer
any Goddesse had the like, raigning and ruling amongest men, from time to
time, from age to age, as the onely Princesse of the worlde. Insomuch that who
haue bene more hono­red than fooles. Who was more subiect vnto Folly, than
Alexander the great. which féeling himselfe to suffer hunger and thirst, to be
subiect to sorrow and sicknesse, not able to kéepe himselfe from dronkennesse,
yet would be honoured for a God.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=80)What kinde of
people hath bene in greater credit than Philosophers, and who more fooles? Did
not Aristotle most foolishly dye for sorrowe, because he knewe not the ebbing
and flowing of the sea? Did not Crates in casting his treasure into the sea,
commit a wise déede? What folly shewed Empedocles, by his straunge
coniectures? what say you to Diogenes tunne, and to Aristippus flat­terie? Who
so throughly considereth their opinions, shal finde them subiect to the state
of Folly. How many other sciences are there in the world, which are altogether
foo­lish, and yet the professors of them had in high reputa­tion amongest men.
They which are Calculators of Natiuities, makers of charecters, casters of
figures, are they not Friers of this fraternitie. Is it not Folly to be so
curious, as to measure the heauen, the height of the starres, the breadth of
the earth, and the deapth of the sea, and yet the professors heereof are
highly estéemed, & onely by the meanes of Folly. Nay, how could y• world
continue, if the daungers, troubles, calamities and dis­commodities of
mariage, were not couered by folly.

Who would haue coasted the seas if Folly had not ben his guide? to commit
himselfe to the mercie of y• winde the waues, to liue in daunger of fearefull
surges, and and perillous Rockes, to trafficke with sauage and bar­barous
people, onely incensed by the meanes of Folly. And yet notwithstanding by this
meanes the com­mon wealth is maintained, knowledge and learning augmented, the
properties of hearbes, stones, and birdes beastes, perfectly searched out.
What Follye is it most daungerously to passe into the bowels of ye earth to
dig for yron, and seeke for golde? How many Arts and occu­pations shuld be
driuen out of the world, if Folly were banished? truly the most part of men
should either beg for want, or dye for hunger. How should so many Ad­uocates,
Procurators, Sergeaunts, Atturneyes, Scriue­ners, [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=80) Imbroderers,
Painters, and Perfumers liue, if Lady Folly were vtterlye exiled. Hath not
Folly in­uented a thousand deuices to drawe a man from idle­nesse, as
Tragedies, Comedies, Dauncing schooles, Fen­cing houses, wrastling places, and
a thousand other foo­lish sports.

Hath she not made men hardie & venterous to fight with Lyons, Boares & Bulles,
onely to gaine honour, & to passe other in folly. What did Antonie and
Cleopa­patra when they straue who should spend most in beast­ly banketting?
What caused Caesar lament that he had not begun to trouble the world [...]in
that age, wherin A­lexander had conquered the greatest part? Why did di­uers
séeke to fill vp the valleyes, to make plaine the mountaines, to drye vp
riuers, to make bridges ouer the sea, as Claudius the Emperour did? What made
Rho­dope build the Pyramides, and Artemisia frame the sumptuous sepulcher? but
Folly. In fine, without this Goddesse man should be carefull, heauie, and
whollye drowned in sorrow: whereas Folly quickeneth his spi­rite, maketh him
sing, daunce, leape, and frame himselfe altogether to pleasure. It is not
possible that Loue shuld be without the daughter of youth, which is Folly. For
Loue springeth of sodaine and sundry causes, by recey­uing an Apple, as
Cydippe: by looking out at a Win­dowe, as Scylla: by reading in a Booke, as
the Ladye Frauncis Rymhi: some fall in loue by sight, some by hea­ring, but
all liuing in hope to obtane their desires. And yet some haue loued without
anye naturall cause, as Pigmalion, who fell in Loue with his marble picture, &
I pray you what Sympathia could there be betweene a lyuely youth, and a dead
stone, what was it then but Folly that kindled this flame? what forced
Narcissus to fall in Loue with his owne shadowe, but Folly. Yea, what
aduenture is passed in loue without Folly.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=81) For the
Philosophers define Folly to be a depriuation of Wisedome, and Wisedome is
altogether without passions: of the which when Loue shall be voyde, then no
doubt the sea shall be without waues, and the Fire without heate.

Consider but a young man which onely placeth his delight in amorous
conceiptes, decking, dressing, and perfuming himselfe most delicately, who
passeth out of his lodging, fraught with a thousand sundry fancies,
ac­companied with men and pages, passing to the place where he may haue a
sight of his Mistres, obtaining for his trauell no gain but perhaps some
amorous glaunce, making long sutes, spending his time and his treasure,
consuming his wit, and wasting his wealth, and yet reaping nothing but
disdaine and discredite. But if it chaunce that his Mistresse condiscend vnto
his requests, she appoynteth him to come at some suspitious houre, which he
cannot performe without great perill. To come with companie, were to bewray
his secrets: to go alone, most daungerous: to goe openly, too manifest: so
that he must passe disguised, sometime like a woman, other times like a
peasant or some vilde person, scaling the walles with ladders, clyming vp to
the windowes by cordes: yea, continually in daunger of death, if Follye did
not holde him vp by the hand. It is not also vn­knowen vnto you how manye
sundrye passions doo per­plexe the poore passionate Louers, all which procéede
of Folly, as to haue ones heart seperated from himselfe, to be nowe in peace
and than in warre, now couering his dolour, blushing one while and looking
pale another, fraught wholly with feare, hope and shame, séeking that
carefully which he séemeth to flie, & yet doubtfully dread­ing not to find it,
to laugh seldome, to sigh often, to burn in cold, & fréeze in heate, to be
crossed altogether wt cōtra­ries, [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=81) which be signs
not only of folly but of phrēsie. Who shall excuse Hercules, handling so
carefully the distaffe of Omphale, or Salomon for combring himselfe with so
ma­ny Concubines, Annibal in submitting himselfe to his loue, Aristotle in
obeying Hermia, and Socrates in yéel­ding to Aspasia, and many other which we
sée daily to be so blinded, as they knowe not themselues, and what is the
cause héereof but folly, so that we sée that it is she which maketh loue to be
so feared & [...]doubted, it is shée that honoureth him, exalteth his name,
and causeth him to be counted as a God. Further, whosoeuer loueth must applie
himselfe to the affection of his mistresse, although it be contrarie to his
natural constitution, if he be quiet, wise and discréete, yet if his louer
please to haue him chaunge his state, he must turne his stearn and hoise his
saile to goe with another winde, Zethius and Amphion could not agrée, for
because the delight of the one was a despight to the other, vntill Amphion
left his musicke. If the Lady whom thou louest be couetous, thou must chaunge
thy selfe into golde, and so fall into her bosome, if she be merrie, thou must
be pleasaunt, if sullen, thou must be sad. All the seruauntes and sutors to
Atlanta were hunters, because she delighted in that sport. Many Gentlewomen to
please their louers which were Poets, left the rocke and the néedle, and tooke
in hand pens and bookes: now tell me if these straunge Metamorphosis be not
méere pointes of folly? Doe you thinke that a soul­dier which goeth to the
assalt, marketh ye trenches, thin­keth of his enimies, or of a thousande
harguebushes, wherof euerie one is sufficient to destroy him? No, he on­ly
hopeth to win the conquest, and doth not so much as once imagine the rest. He
which first inuented sailing, doubted not of the perillous daungers: and he
that play­eth, neuer thinketh to become a looser, yet are they all thrée in
daunger to be slaine, drowned, and vndoone. But
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=82) [...] [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=82) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=83) [...] [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=83) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=84) [...] [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=84) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=85) [...] [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=85) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=86) [...] [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=86) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=87) [...] [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=87) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=88) [...] [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=88) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6132&page=89) what then?
they neither doo sée nor will sée what is hurt­full vnto them. So we must
coniecture the like of lo­uers, for if they did sée the dreadfull dangers, &
the feare­full perills wherein they are, how they be deceiued and beguiled,
they wold neuer honour loue as a God, but de­test him as a diuell, and so
should the kingdome of loue be destroyed, which now is gouerned by ignorance,
care­lesnesse, hope, & blindnesse, which are all the handmaides of folly.
Remain [...] in peace then fond loue, and séeke not to breake the auncient
league which is betwéene thée & folly. For if thou doest, thy bowe shall be
broken, thy darts shall be of no force, Contemtae (que) faces et sine luce
[...]a­cent.

¶When Mercurie had finished the defence of Folly, Iu­piter seeing the Gods to
be diuersly affected, that some held with Cupid, and some with Folly, to
decide the doubt he pronounced this sentence.

FOr the difficultie and importaunce of this difference and diuersitie of
opinions, we haue remitted the deci­ding of it vntill three times seauen
times, and nine ages be past, in y• meane while we straightly command you to
liue friendly together, without offering iniurie one vnto another. And Folly
shall guide and conduct blind Loue whether she séemeth best, and for the
restoring of his eyes, after wee haue spoken with the Desti­nies it shall be
decréed.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

AT LONDON Printed by T. East, for William Ponsonby. 1584.

[Home](/)

Greene, Robert, 1558?-1592.. Date: 1584  

