## (unknown project)

# A learned and true assertion of the original, life, actes, and death of the
most noble, valiant, and renoumed Prince Arthure, King of great Brittaine Who
succeeding his father Vther Pendragon, and right nobly gouerning this land
sixe and twentie yeares, then dyed of a mortall wounde receyued in battell,
together vvith victory ouer his enemies. As appeareth cap. 9. And was buried
at Glastenbury. cap. 12. an. 543. Collected and written of late yeares in
lattin, by the learned English antiquarie of worthy memory Iohn Leyland. Newly
translated into English by Richard Robinson citizen of London. Anno Domini.
1582. — Assertio inclytissimi Arturii Regis Britanniae. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=1)

A Learned and True Assertion of the original, Life, Actes, and death of the
most Noble, Valiant, and Renoumed Prince Arthure, King of great Brittaine.

Who succeeding his father Vther Pendragon, and right nobly gouerning this Land
sixe and twentie yeares, then dyed of a mortall wounde receyued in battell,
together with victory ouer his enemies. As appeareth Cap. 9. And was buried at
[...]laste [...]bury. Cap. 1 [...]. An. 543.

Collected and written of late yeares in lattin, by the learned English
Antiquarie of worthy memory Iohn Leyland.

Newly translated into English by Richard Robins [...] Citizen of London. Anno
Domini. 1582.

LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, ouer against the
Sign [...] of the Castell. 1582.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=2)

## Insignia Illustrium Patronorum, huius opusculi selectorum.

ARTVRVS BARO

Gray, de VVilton.

D. HENRICVS SIDNEY, Illustrissimi Or­dinis Garterij Miles, vnus
Consiliario­rum D. Reg. & in Principa­tu Walliae Praesid.

Magister Thomas Smith D. Reginae Custumarius Principalis, in Portu London.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=2)

## To the Right Honorable Lord ARTHVRE GRAY, Baron of Wilton, Lord Deputie &
Liefetenant Generall for the Queenes Ma [...]estie in Ireland: To the Right
Honorable Sir HENRY SIDNEY, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, &
President for her Maiestie in the  [...] of Wales: To the Right worshipfull.
M. THOMAS SMITH, Esquire, & Chiefe, Customer for her Maiestie in the Porte of
London: & to the Wor­shipfull Societie of Archers, in London yearely
celebrating the renou­med memorie of the Magnificent Prince ARTHVR [...] & his
Knightly Order of the Round Table:

Grace, mercy, & Peace in the Lord Euerlastinge.

HAVING in mindefull memorie (Right Honourable, and Worshipp­full) that
mercifull couenaunt of peace, by our omnipotent Crea­tor towardes all flesh
thus mani­fested (I do set my Raine Bowe in the cloudes, Gen. 9. & it shall be
as a tokē betwene me & the earth) promising hereby neuer to destroy the same
any more by waters: how much ought mākind specially, en­ioying by this
peaceable pact, from Heauē, Earth, & the Sea aboundance of benefittes: feare
God in his holines, loue one an other in righteousnesse, and vse these
bene­fittes with thankfulnesse to the aduauncement of his glory. For this
Bowe, this Rainebowe I say of his coue­nant,Arist met [...] liber 3. Cap. 1.
and pledge of his peace, left vnto vs frō the deluge (as Aristotle affirmeth)
Naturally appeareth by reflection or giuing backe of the light of the Sunne,
Trac. 2. from a cloude opposite, or against the same. So our heauēly God, the
Father of light, and giuer of grace, departeth with the light of his manifolde
mercies vnto mankinde, from the opposite cloude of his displeasure. Againe,
this Bowe of his co­uenant
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=3) and pledge of
his peace, (as it is saide by Alber­tus) To be so much lesse in appearance, as
by how much the Sunne is higher in the Heauens, and contrarie wise so much
greater, as the Sunne is lower to the earth: So much lesse be the mercies of
God minded of man, as his mightie power appeareth out of our sight, and againe
so much greater seeme his mercies vnto vs, as his mightie power is nere vs in
sight. Thirdly according to Aristotle, this Rainebow of his co­uenant & pledge
of his peace, As it appeareth in the Spring time, in Sommer, in Autume & in
Winter, euening & morning, but specially in Autumne: So is the performance of
his mercifull couenant, and peaceable pacte at all times ap­parant, but
specially in Autumne, that is when man­kinde laboureth most to leaue sinne,
and bring­forth fruites of good life as I saide, fearing God in his holinesse,
louing one an other in righteousnesse, and v­sing his benefittes with
thankfulnesse. Thus and to this end graunting his couenant, our omnipotent
Creator and gratiouse God ordayning Man ruler ouer his Crea­tures in earth,
yet vnder his protection in heauen, hath not onely bounde vnto him all humaine
societie, but hath also substituted euen his liuetenauntes godly rulers ouer
the same to the foresaide effect for the aduaunce­ment of his glory,
confirming the same couenant with the aucthoritie of his holie worde on this
manner. [...] Reg. 7 I will ordaine a place for my people of Israell. I. And I
will plant him, and I will dwell with him. II. And he shall be no more
troubled. III. And the children of iniquitie shall not vexe or afflict him any
more. IIII. By his word here he promised that which by his deede he performed
to our forefathers▪ Adam in Paradise, Gen. 1\. Noah & his children, Gen. 9\.
Abraham & his seede Gen. 12\. But louing his  [...]lect, and hating their
e­nemies, he performed his promise vnto Iacob in his prouidence, and vnto
Laban in his iudgments, Gen. 30\. So did he in like manner vnto Ioseph, and
his vnnaturall brethren, Gen. 37\. Yea in his prouidence laying his right hand
vpon Ephraim, and in his iudgement his left hand vpon Manasses. Gen. 48\.
Whereby as he prospered and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=3) protected his
holy ones in peace and warres against their enemies, we reade also in the
deuine histories from time to time how and by what ordenarie meanes of power,
force, and defence, he reached vnto his feeble flocke his mightie arme to the
discomforture of the enemie & vt­ter subuertion both of their power &
pollicie, according to his promises aforesaide. Heere then memorable and
praiseworthie is the prouidence of this most mightie God, who promising helpe
vnto the Iewes against the Gentiles, vsed no kinde of speach so much as
this,Deut 32. That he would bend his Bow and dye his shaftes in bloud. As who
say, God wil [...] make the Iewes shoote strong shootes to ouer­throw their
enemies: or at the least, that shooting is a wonderful mightie thing,
whereunto the high power of God is likened. This bow a weapon of defence, the
Raine Boe a token of truce: This Bow in peace a plea­sure, the Raine Bowe a
signe of serenitie: this Bow in warres a paine to the enemie, the Raine Bow at
al times and to all people Gods toaken betwene him and the earth. The one an
instrment of mercy, the other of destruction: the godly haue both as their
comfort and sauegarde by Gods protection, the vngodly either wanting the one
or hauing both, haue them to their confusion and subuertion by his
reiection.Reg. 3 [...]. As we reade of King Saul, that he was slaine of the
Philistians being mightie bow men: and with him also his Sonne  [...]onathas
who as the scripture saith neuer shot shaft in vaine. And that the kingdome of
Israell after Sauls death came vnto King Dauid: who after he was King, decreed
by the first sta­tute which he enacted.2\. Reg.  [...] That all the children
of Israell should learne to shoote in the bowe, according to a law made many a
day before vt patet in libro iustorum, a booke not now in vse to be
[...]ounde. In his booke of Psalmes as hee saide He was at peace with them
that hated peace. So named hee the bow and arrowes in diuers manners &
meaninges▪ as in his Psal. 7. vers 13. & 14\. Psal. 11. vers. 2. Psal. 18.
vers. 13. Psal. 21. vers. 12. Psal. 45. vers. 6. Psal. 49. vers. 9. 64. vers.
3. & 4\. 76. vers. 3. 91. vers. 5. 127. vers. 4. & 5\.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=4) Finally in his
147. Psal. vers. 6. Praying to God for de­liuerance from his enemies and for
their destruction. He saith, shoot thine arrowes and consume them: So yet that
He neither trusted in bowe nor sworde, but in the power of God. Hee affirmeth
it Psalme 44. vers. 6. And to conclude that he had rather liue in a godly
peace thē to warre against the wicked, he saith in the 119. Psal. vers. 15.
As at a marke he will ayme to walke in the wayes of the Lord. Of this minde
was not King  [...]osias, who though leading a godly life at home in Iuda, yet
going vniustly to fight against Nichao King of Egipt, [...] Reg. 23. was
rather friendly dehorted by him frō his purpose then otherwise, saying: Leaue
off to worke a­gaynst the Lord which is with mee least he do  [...]tay thee,
which admonition Iosias not regarding as spoken from God, tasted in deed of
Gods iust iudgment: for being shot thorow with arrowes he was woūded to the
death incontinently. I could at large here call to minde the commendation of
this peaceable practise of shooting which once I as a rawe scholler reade ouer
in Toxophilus, and at times by tasked lessons interpreted in latine here and
there: but for breuitie, I refer your ho­nours, and worshipes vnto the
Histories there, of the E­thiopian king, and Cambyses king of Persia. Of
Sesostris and his archers. Of the Messagetanes which neuer went without their
bowe and quiuer neyther in peace nor in warres. Of Policrates and his one
thowsand archers. Of the Scithians (whose whole substance and riches of a man
being a yoake of Oxen and a plow, a Nagge and his dogge, his bowe and his
quiuer) were inuincible a­gainst Darius and other Monarckes. To be short, the
Grecians, Persians, Athenians, and the Romanes, whose shooting in peace and
warres was worthie of praise and fame. Neyther here ought I nor will I omit
with silence the deserued fame of our Ancestors in fauouringe this exercise in
this our litle England long ago [...]e liuing and of latter time, though
breefly, referring your honours & worshippes vnto the histories at large, as
of Brute and his Troianes the first Brittaines, before and after the a­riuall
of Iulius Caesar, Claudius, & Vespasian Emperoures
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=4) and they
Romanes: after them the Saxons vntill the time of Vortiger, the vsurping
murtherer, who (Gods prouidence so working for them, and his iudgement vpon
him) by the two Brethern and valiant Brittaines Aurelius sirnamed Ambrose, &
Vther Pendragon, be­ing burned in his Castell in Wales, was occasion of the
Brittaines more happier estate afterwardes. But here yet by the way (Right
honourable and worshipfull) as I applaude in this their well doing, so it had
beene a thing of Brit­taine most worthelie to be wished, for that Prince him
selfe lesse opprobrius of all mē more praise worthie, and most pretiouse in
the sight of God: if the serpent Ty­rus had wanted here his vennime vncurable,
though his flesh proued medicinable against all other poysons (as saith
Cardanus in his booke of Comfort.) I meane if Vther Pendragon had wanted that
serpentine poyson of adulterie, Nigromancie & murther (things odible to God
and good men:) when that most incomperable King Arthure of great Brittaine for
his princely pro­wesse, valiant vertues, and triumphant victories yet prooued
more Royally renoumed throughoute all the worlde in his time and to his
posteritie. The He­brwes with greate and not vndeserued titles extolled their
Iudas Maccabeus. Homer the glory of all Greeke Poets left Hector and Achilles
most commendable vn­to the worlde. Neyther by lesse diligence did the
Gre­cians adorne with praise Alexander the most mightie conquerour. And the
Romanes aduanced the noble actes of their Caesar to the Skyes not enough. The
Bur­gonians profoundly praised Godfrey of Bulloyn (for his noble valiancy) as
the scourge of the Sarazens in his dayes. And as euery one of those are
commended with due desert: so in like māner there were neuer Brittaines
wanting of excellent learning and exquisite knowledge to leaue with carefull
diligence and credible commen­dation, the progenie, life, prowesse
prosperitie, and tri­umphant victories of our said auncient Arthure wor­thely
published vnto the worlde. And as Alexander
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=5) would haue
none to purtract him but Apelles, nor a­ny but Lysippus to engraue him in bras
[...]e, nor any but Pyrgotiles to worke him in pretiouse stone: So where in
not three, but many Artizans as learned Gildas, William of Malmsbury, Nennius,
Diuionenses, Graius, Iosephus, Geoffrey of Munmuth, Siluester Giraldus. &c.
performed their worthie workmanshippes in our Ar­thure Maur (to vse the
Brittaine phrase:) euen one En­glish Leyland for his learned laboure laudable,
hath per­fectly polished him in all poyntes. Chusing a cheefe & most
perspicuouse, a valiant & most victoriouse, a cou­ragiouse and most
conquerouse, a religiouse and most redoubted Royall soueraigne King Henry the
eight, as sole supreme Patron and protector thereof against the cankered
currish kinde of caueling carpers. Bycause his elder brother being named
Arthure, he him selfe a most christian King for all heroicall vertues
commendable, the rather seemed to fauour and further the aduance­ment of the
fame of his most renoumed auncestor this same our ancient Arthure and the
knightly traine of his rounde table. Hereupon by patent of his princely
pre­rogatiue ordayned, graunted, and confirmed hee vnto this honorable Citie
of London, free electiō of a Chief­taine and of Citizens representing the
memory of that magnificent King Arthure, and the Knightes of the same order,
which should for the mayntenance of shooting onely, meete together once a
yeare, with so­lemne and friendly celebration therof. So much in his noble
minde preuayled all prouident care of princely prowesse,2 Reg. 1. valiancie,
cheualrie, and actiuitie, that he not onely herein imitated the examplers of
godly K. Dauid for his Israelites as before,A [...]o  [...]30 and of that
noble Emperour Leo in ouerthrowing idolatrie, and exalting archerie maugre the
mallice of that Romane Antichrist, and all his members: but also inuincibly
maintayned the praiseworthie practize of this shooting in peace & wars by the
examples of his princly progenitors. As after t [...]e
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=5) conquest, of
K. Henry II. alîas Beauclerck so sirnamed, the first furtherer of K. Arthures
benificencie, valiāt Ed­ward sirnamed long & first vizitor of the saide
Kinges tombe, valiant and victorius Edward III▪ & IIII. bounti­ous and
liberall Richard II. good and gratiouse Henry the V. wise, po [...]itique,
iust, temperate, and graue King Henry the V [...]I. his father. Neither hath
this ceased in the branch, that flourished in the bole: but by the milde,
religiouse, and gratiouse King Edwarde the VI. and now last of all by the
Phenix of feminine sex, our most re­doubted Hester and gratiouse soueraigne
Ladie Queene Elizabeth laudably lasteth in force and effect:Hest. Cap.  [...]
▪ whose highnesse so many yeares humbling, not exalting her selfe the more by
reason of her power, wholy setteth her subiectes in peace, preferring the
same. Now therefore (Right honourable and worshipfull) as duetie bindeth euery
degree to further the welfare of this blessed peace, and the profit of this
excellent practise: proceede I humbly beseech you with noble Nehemias and
those godly su­peruisors with dutifull diligence,2\. Esd. 4, with the one hand
holding your boes, and with the other hand as good la­borers for your Prince &
publique wealth, to beare the burdens of your vocation, towards the buylding
of this earthly Ierusalem, euen from the morning spring till the Starres come
forth. Continually I say accustome your selues to seeke this peace of the
gospell and to ensue the same, ryde on I say with renoume vpō that White
Horse whose sitter hauing a boe and a croune giuen him hath promisse from the
mightie power of God, Reuel.  [...]. that he shall go forth conquering and
shall ouercome. That Christ our King of the v [...]iuersall Church with his
croune and septer, and with the shaf [...]es of his mouth or worde and gospell
of peace may pearce throughout the worlde to the aduauncement of his glo­ry
which shal sit on the raineboe in his maiestie to iudge all Nations, (as the
feare of his holynesse, mutuall loue in righteousnesse, and thankfulnesse for
his benefites may moue all men) I haue trauieled in the translation of this
booke out of Latin into English, with all humble &
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=6) true harted
reuerence, beseeching God to assist you right honourable Lord Deputie with his
omnipotent power, that as an inuincible Iosua you may continually bring in the
people to the due knowledge of God, Deut. 31. and obedience of our Prince: &
as a notable Nehemias in true feare of God without feare of foe buylde vp this
earthly Ierusalem to the perfection of that perpetuall peace, promised in the
heauenly Ierusalem. Finally that you right honourable Lord President, and you
right worshipfull Master Tho­mas Smith with your worshipfull associates,Psal.
121. Dayly pray­ing for the peace of this Ierusalem, as the amitie thereof is
sweete by the vnitie of your mindes:Psal. 132. So that, Hoc sit lon­gissime vt
periucundum sic cohabitare fratres in vnum, I accor­ding to my humble duty
hartely do pray vnto God, cra­uing pardon of your honours and worshippes
generally for this my bold dedication. And beseeching you fauou­rably to
accept the same in furderance of my poore stu­dy of dutifull well wishing
towardes my Prince & coun­trie: I humbly and hartely beseech the eternall &
om­nipotent God to multiply his manifolde mercies vpon your honours &
worships, that being all of one dutifull minde in God towardes the maiestie of
our most sacred soueraigne lady (vnder her long liuing in peaceable
pro­speritie) we may after this life attaine vnto that peace­able and
perpetuall kingdome of Heauen to raigne as coheires with Christ our Lord in
the glory of his Father. AMEN.

Your Honourable Lordships, and worthie Worships most humble and faithfull
poore Orator, RICHARD ROBINSON, Citizen of London.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=6)

## I. L. Ad Candidos Lectores.

Delituit certé multis Arturius annis,

Vera Brittannorum, Gloria, Lumen, Honos:

Dispulit obscuras alacer Lelandius vmbras,

Sydereum mundo restituit (que) iubar.

Plaudite Lectores studiosa caterua diserti,

Prestitit officium candidus ille suum:

Hinc procul at fugiant Codrino felle tumentes,

Ne proprio crepitent ilia rupta malo.

## I. L. To the Syncere Readers.

Many yeeres surely Arthure hidden lay,

Of Brittons, the Glory, Light & Honor true:

Cheerely hath Leyland driuē darke shadowes away,

And yeelds the world bright shining Sun to view.

Of Learned Readers, reioyce yee studious Crew,

He sincere did his Duetie bounden fulfill:

Farre hence flee those their spyte which spew,

Least their Intestines burst with their owne ill.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=7)

## The Table of the names of those Authors, whose testimonies this present
Booke vseth.

Foraine writers.

  * Poets. 
    * Lucanus.
    * Iuuenall.
    * Martiall.
  * Historiographers 
    * Cornelius Tacitus.
    * Paulus Diaconus.
    * Claudius Gallus.
    * Iohānes Anneuillanus.
    * Valerius.
    * Boccace.
    * Diuionensis.
    * Ponticus Virunnius.

Brittaine writers.

  * Theliesinus.
  * Ambrosius Maridunensis.
  * Merlinus Caledonius.
  * Melchinus.
  * Patricius Glessoburgensis.
  * Gildas Bannochorensis.
  * Anonymu [...].
  * Nennius.
  * Samuell.
  * Beda Girouicanus.

Brittaine writers.

  * Asserius Meneuensis.
  * Gulielmus Meildunensis.
  * Galfridus Monemuthensis.
  * Aluredus Fibroleganus.
  * Henricus Venantodunensis.
  * Iosephus Iscanus.
  * Siluester Giraldus.
  * Matheus Parisius.
  * Iohannes Chysistoriographu [...].
  * Gulielmus Paruus.
  * Iohannes Fiberius.
  * Thomas Vicanus.
  * Ranulphus Higedenus.
  * Mattheus Florilegus.
  * Iohannes Burgensis.
  * Thomas Melorius.
  * Scalechronica.
  * Chronica Durensia.
  * Chronica Glessoburgensia.
  * Chronica Persorana.

2\. Cor. 13. Nihil contra veritatem a­gere possumus, sed pro Veri­tate.

Prou. 12.Labium Veritatis firmum in perpetuum.

Prou. 21. Testis autem mendax peribit.

Esdra.  [...]. 9. Super omnia autem vincit Veritas.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=7)

## Certaine memorable Notes inserted into this As­sertion since the
Translation thereof. By Ric. Ro.

AS Pliny saith, Ingenui pudoris est fateri per quos proseceris: So I must
freely confesse the friendly helps of those which profited me in this purpose.

First by conference with Master Steuen Batman, a lear­ned Preacher and
friendlie fauourer of vertue and learning, (touching the praise worthie
progenie of this K. Arthure) he gaue me this assured knowledge on this maner
taken out of his Auncient records written at Aualonia.

Uerses found in certaine Cronicles, wherein were dis­courses had of Aruiragus
king of Brittaine 45\. yeeres after the natiuitie of Christe.

Twelue men in number entered the Vale of Aualon:

Ioseph of Aramathia was the chiefest flowre of them.

Ioseph the sonne of Ioseph, his father did attend,

With other tenne: and Glaston did possesse.

There al [...] ▪, this writing did witnesse, that K. Arthure of greate
Brittaine descēded of the stocke of y• saide Ioseph viz. Helarius the Nephewe
of Ioseph begate Iosue, Iosue be­gate Aminadab, Aminadab begate Castellors,
Castellors begate Manaell, Manaell begate Lambord and Vrlard, and Lambord
begate a sonne that begate Igerna of which wo­man, king Vther Pendragon begate
the noble and renou­med King Arthure. Whereby it plainely appeareth, that K.
Arthure descended of the stocke of Ioseph.

Againe, like wise of the same kindred (whereof K. Arthure came) proceeded
these auncient Brittaines also.

Peter the Cosē of Ioseph of Aramathia, king of Arcadia, begate Erlan, Erlan
begate Melianus, Melianus begate Arguthe, Arguthe begate Edor, Edor begate
Lotho which maried to wife the sister of K. Arthure, of whom Lotho be­gate 4
sonnes, to wit, Walwanus Agranaius, Guerelies, and Garelies: all which were
noble men of authoritie in Brittaine where they dwelt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=8) Moreouer he
shewed me  [...]ut of his auncient records the interchaunges of king Arthures
armes which hee gaue in three chiefes, from the first to the third: viz.

His first armes he bare in a shield Gules, (red) three Ser­pentes, Or. gold

His second hee bare in a shield Vert, (greene) a plaine Crossargent: in chiefe
the figure of the Virgin Marie with Christe in her armes.

His third and last in a shield Azure, (blew) three  [...]ownes. Or. (gold.)

But after knowledge of these seuerall armes, I had intelli­gence of a
certaine. French booke, wherein he is reported to aue giuen a shielde Azure
(blew) 13. Crownes. Or. gold

This booke beeing in an English mans handes, I was not so desirous to see it,
but he as willingly shewed it & lent it me. There was in it portracted both
the seuerall names, shieldes, and seuerall armes in colours also depainted of
all K. Arthures knights and vnder euery one the commenda­tion due vnto him by
his cheualrie. Which because the en­grauing of their armes was very
chargeable, & the circum­stance of matter more then I could in so shorte time
publish in the English tongue: I was enforced to content me with this briefe
collection concerning K. Arthure. and with the names of 16. kinges, one Duke,
and 149. knightes, so ma­ny as were therin printed. viz.

## Of King Arthure himselfe it saith Directly vnder his shield thus.

King Arthure did beare in his shield Azure (blew) 13. Crownes of golde. He was
a greate conquerour, and of noble and valiant prowesse, hee instituted the
order of the rounde Table in the kingdome of greate Brittaine: Unto the which
he appointed all his chosen knightes at Whitsontide yeere­ly to come, and
holde their Homage of him by the same or­der.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=8)

## Now  [...]oweth the names of those knightes, and first hovv many kinges

Kinges.

  * 1 Le Roy Meliadus.
  * 2 Le Roy Ban de Benock.
  * 3 Le Roy Boort de Gauues.
  * 4 Le Roy Karados.
  * 5 Le Roy Lac.
  * 6 Le Roy de Clare [...].
  * 7 Le Roy Vrien.
  * 8 Le Roy Lo [...]tho de Orchany.
  * 9 Le Roy Ryon.
  * 10 Le Roy Pelinor.
  * 11 Le Roy Baude magu [...], de Gorre.
  * 12 Le Roy Pharam ondo.
  * 13 Le Roy Galganoys de Nor­galles.
  * 14 Le Roy Aguisant d' Escosse
  * 15 Le Roy Malaquin d' outre les marches de Gallounne.
  * 16 Le Roy Claudas.
  * I  [...]Le Duke de Clarence.

Knightes.

  * 1 Messier Lancelot du Lac.
  * 2 Boort de gauues.
  * 3 Gawain d' Orchany.
  * 4 Messier Tristran de Lyon­noys.
  * 5 Lyonet de Gauues.
  * 6 Helias le Blanc.
  * 7 Hector des Mares.
  * 8 Bliomberis de Gauues.
  * 9 Gaherriet.
  * 10 Keux le Seneschall.
  * 11 Messier Yuaine.
  * 12 Bruor le Noir.
  * 13 Baudoyer le Conestable.
  * 14 Agruall de Galles.
  * 15 Segurades.
  * 16 Patris le Hardy.
  * 17 Esclabor le Messoniez.
  * 18 Saphar le méscognieu.
  * 19 Sagremor le desree.
  * 20 Gyron le Curtoys.
  * 21 Seguram le Brun.
  * 22 Galehault le Bla [...]c.
  * 23 Le Morholt de Ireland.
  * 24 Danayn le Roux.
  * 25 Amilan de Sessougn [...].
  * 26 Brallain.
  * 27 Brallain que lon disoit le Cheualier an duex espees.
  * 28 Gallehaulte.
  * 29 Lamorat de Lysth enoys.
  * 30 Brunor de Gauues.
  * 31 Le bon Cheualier de Nor­galles.
  * 32 Henry de Ryuell.
  * 33 Messier Gullat.
  * 34 Gueherres.
  * 35 Aggrauaine le Orguilleux.
  * 36 Mordrec de Orchany.
  * 37 Gyrfflet.
  * 38 Dodvnel le Sauaige.
  * 39 Yuain le Auoutre.
  * 40 Ozement Coeur hardy.
  * 41 Gualegantine le Galloys.
  * 42 Gaherriet de Lemball.
  * 43 Mador de la porte.
  * 44 Bamers le forcene.
  * 45 Dynadam de Estrangor▪
  * 46 Herret le filz de lac.
  * 47 Artus le petit.
  * 48 Cinglant Rochmont.
  * 49 Artus lesbloy.
  * 50 Guallogrenant de Winde­zores.
  * 51 Kandelis.
  * 52 Merangis des portz.
  * 52 Gauuaine le franc.
  * 53 Gnades le fort.
  * 54 Pharas le Noir.
  * 55 Pharas le Roux.
  * 56 Iambegues le Garruloys.
  * 57 Taulas de la mountaine.
  * 58 Abandam le fortune.
  * 59 Damatha de folim [...]t.
  * 60 Amand le bel Iousteur.
  * 61 Ganesmor le Noir.
  * 62 Arphin le Dire.
  * 63 Arconstant le adures.
  * 64 Le Beau couranr.
  * 65 Le laid hardy.
  * 66 Andelis le Roux serr [...]e.
  * 67 Bruyant des Isles
  * 68 Ozenall de Essra [...].
  * 69 Le Cheualier de Esther.
  * 70 Le Varlet de Glayn.
  * 71 Heroys le ioveux.
  * 72 Fergas du  [...].
  * 73 Lot le Cou [...]enr.
  * 74 Meliadus del Espinov.
  * 75 Meliadus an no [...]r aeil.
  * 76 Avglius des vaux.
  * 77 Iamburg du Chastell,
  * 78 Messire Clamorat.
  * 79 Surados des sept fontanes.
  * 80 Le Varletan Circle.
  * 81 Kaedins de Lonizein.
  * 82 Lucane le Boutellier.
  * 83 Brumer de la fountaine.
  * 84 Lenfant du plessies.
  * 85 Persides legent.
  * 86 Sibilias aux dures maius.
  * 87 Sinados le Esile.
  * 88 Arphazat le groz coeur.
  * 89 Le blonde Amoreux.
  * 90 Argahac le Beau.
  * 91 Normaine le Pelerin.
  * 92 Harmaine le felon.
  * 93 Toscane le Romane▪
  * 94 Landone le Leger.
  * 95 Le fort troue.
  * 96 Le Noir Perdu.
  * 97 Le fortune de lisle.
  * 98 Le see des Dames.
  * 99 Le Forester de Dēnewich,
  * 100 Le Chasseur de on [...]re les marches.
  * 101 Ieyr & Landoys de Rufe.
  * 102 Geoffroy le Lancoys.
  * 103 Randowin le persien.
  * 104 Froyadus le Gay.
  * 105 Rousse lin de la autre mōd [...]
  * 106 Gurrant le Roche dure.
  * 107 Arm. on. ouuerd serpent.
  * 108 Ferrand du tertre.
  * 109 Thor le filz de Arez.
  * 110 Iupin des croix.
  * 111 Ydeux le fort Tyrane.
  * 112 Bolinian du Boys.
  * 113 Le bon Cheualier sās paou [...]
  * 114 Brouadas le Espaignoll.
  * 115 Brechus sans Pitye.
  * 116 Malignain.
  * 117 Le Cheualeur de Scallo [...]
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=9) 118 Melias de l' Espi [...].
  * 119 Agr [...]erle  [...]el Patride [...] [...] Circle d' Or.
  * 120 Mandius le noir.
  * 121 Perceuall de Gallis.
  * 122 Aeuxdestraux.
  * 123 Lamant du Boys.
  * 124 Melianderis de Sansen.
  * 125 Mandrin le Sage.
  * 126 Kalahart le petite.
  * 127 Sadocde Vencon.
  * 128  [...]
  * 129 Verrant de la Roche.
  * 130 Le Brunsans ioy,
  * 131 L [...]sterin le grand.
  * 132 Le Cheualier des sept voyes
  * 133 Gryngaloys le fort.
  * 134 Malaquin le Galoys
  * 135 Agricole Beaugrand.
  * 136 Gualiandres du Tettre.
  * 137 Margondes le Rongo.
  * 138 Kacerdius de la Vallce.
  * 139  [...]
  * 140 Tal [...]mor le Volan [...]
  * 141 Alibel de Logres.
  * 142 Dalides de la Ryuier.
  * 143 Arain du pinē.
  * 144 Arganor l [...] riche.
  * 145 M [...]has le Beau Cheuali [...] ▪
  * 146 Mehadus le Blanc.
  * 147 Malaquin le gros.
  * 148 Me [...]er Palamides.
  * 149 Alexander le Orpheli [...].

Summa totalis 166. Knightes.

Whereof

  * Kinges 16.
  * Dukes 1.
  * Knightes 149.

Besides notice of these I vsed in my translation from time to time, the helpe
(of Master Iohn Stow, & M [...]ster Camb [...]ē diligēt sear­chers in
antiquities▪) for the interpretation of those hard brittish and Welch
[...]ownes or names of places, which neither Master Leyland the Collector of
this Assertion had expounded per­fectlie, neither I my felfe the translator c
[...]ld other­wise of my selfe haue perfourmed. For the which I am to gratifie
them as the others also before re­cyted.

## Table of contents

  * Insignia Illustrium Patronorum, huius opusculi selectorum.
  * To the Right Honorable Lord ARTHVRE GRAY, Baron of Wilton, Lord Deputie & Liefetenant Generall for the Queenes Ma•estie in Ireland: To the Right Honorable Sir HENRY SIDNEY, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, & President for her Maiestie in the 〈◊〉 of Wales: To the Right worshipfull. M. THOMAS SMITH, Esquire, & Chiefe, Customer for her Maiestie in the Porte of London: & to the Worshipfull Societie of Archers, in London yearely celebrating the renoumed memorie of the Magnificent Prince ARTHVR• & his Knightly Order of the Round Table:
  * I. L. Ad Candidos Lectores.
  * I. L. To the Syncere Readers.
  * The Table of the names of those Authors, whose testimonies this present Booke vseth.
  * Certaine memorable Notes inserted into this Assertion since the Translation thereof. By Ric. Ro.
  * Of King Arthure himselfe it saith Directly vnder his shield thus.
  * Now •••oweth the names of those knightes, and first hovv many kinges
  * 1\. The Assertion of K. Arthure.
    * 1.1. CHAP. II. K. Arthures Coronation.
    * 1.2. CHAP. III. The XII. Battelles fought by Arthure.
    * 1.3. CHAP. IIII. K. Arthures expedition towardes the French.
    * 1.4. CHAP. V. K. Arthures Familier Cheualyers, or knightes.
    * 1.5. CHAP. V•. •. Arthures Rounde Table.
    * 1.6. CAP. VII. King Arthures Godly Disposition.
    * 1.7. CAP. VIII. King Atthures Seale.
    * 1.8. CHAP. X. K. Arthures Commendation.
    * 1.9. CAP. XI. The Antiquitie of Aualonia.
    * 1.10. CHAP. XII. K. Arthures Buriall.
    * 1.11. CAP. XIII. The two Pyrameds in that religious place.
    * 1.12. CAP. XIIII. What manner Person Guenhera was.
    * 1.13. CHAP. XV. K. Arthures Tombe found.
    * 1.14. CAP. XVI. The Translation of King Arthures bones.
    * 1.15. CHAP. XVij. A confutation and ouerthrow of Slaunders rashly affirming that Arthure was not liuing.
  * 2\. A Peroration or briefe Conclusion To the Readers.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=9)

## 1\. The Assertion of K. Arthure.

EVIDENT It is, by the speciall agreement of Greeke and Latine writers, that
Hercules was borne of Alcmena, by the adultery of Iupiter. But what manner of
person, or how mightie in times past hee was, I sup­pose is euen of the
meanely learned better knowne, then that at this presēt needeth any further
Insinuatiō. And very many others there were borne in adultery, (as by the
Auncient History largely appeareth) whose prowesse at home, and in warres,
notably excelled. Amongest whome also our Arthure, the chiefest ornament of
Brittayne, and the onely myracle of his time, florished famously. May I
therefore bee so bolde by good leaue of Gulielmus Paruus, William Par­uus &
Polido­rus Virgilius, two aduersa­ries of K. Ar­thures fame. yea and so of his
most mightie successour in place, Polido­rus, euen with condigne praises to
commend my country­man Arthure: and with the same dilligence to leane vnto the
Brittish history interpreted by Geoffrey of Munmouth a man not altogether
vnlearned, (what soeuer otherwise per­sōs ignorant of antiquitie, which
thinke themselues to haue knowledge, shall say) as vnto a firme defence,
rather then vnto the fond fables or base stuffe of forraine writers. Truly, in
fables which haue crept into the history of Arthure, I doe not more delite,
then Polidorus, the Iudge. But to bee a­fraide of any man by reason of his
greate age, or eloquence, or authoritie, finally as like a foolish forsaker of
the truth, I shoulde so leaue her partes vndefended: that certainely will I
neuer doe:The Authours good purpose in this worke. An other way, do equity,
honesty, the rule of fame, and heerehence a iust loue to my country, yea truth
it selfe (thē which one thing, nothing more deare I loue) fully moue me. But
yet neither thinke I to wage battaile with yt Learned: In meane time, yet by
good reason it shall be free for me, to make most famous the state of my
coūtrie, and spe­cially
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=10) the partes of
truth, euen with singuler dilligence expedyte industry, cheerefull labour,
prompt counsell, quicke iudgment, yea, and finally by all meanes. Therefore,
trust­ing in the good will, humanitie, and courteous fauour of the honest
readers, I will now attempt somewhat more, circum­spectly to finde out Prince
Arthures Originall, euen from the very egge,

Est locus Abrini sinuoso littore ponti,

Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit aestus,

Fulminat hic laté, turrito vertice Castrum,

Nomine Tindagium, veteres dixere Corini.

A place there is ith' winding shoare of th' Abryne Sea by name,

Scituate in middest of a rocke, wheare ebbing ryde the same

Enuironeth. A Castle here with towery top shines bright,

(By auncient Cornish mē so called) which Tintagill tho hight.

A Constant same is there giuen out by the voyce of ma­nie, and also confirmed
with the wrytinges of Lear­ned men, that Gorloys the Gouernour of Cornewale
had heere his habytation for him, and his. He had to wife Igerna, a woman no
doubt of most louely Feature, but of an Improbate or vitious Chastitie. Hether
somewhat oftener for recreation of his minde,Vther Pendra­gon, king Art.
father. repayred Vther, kinge of the Brittaines, and surnamed Pendragon: So
called for his Serpentine or subtile wisedome, (as I suppose) whose friendlie
wellwiller Gorloys also was.

Architrenius in his fifth booke (if I count aright) writes these verses.

Hoc trifido mundum, Corinei postera sole,

Irradiat Pubes, quarti (que) puerpera Phoebi,

Pullulat Arturum, facie dum falso adulter

Tintagoll irrumpit, nec amoris Pendragon aestum,

Vincit, & omnificas Merlini consulit artes.

Mentitur (que) Ducis habitus & Rege latenti,

Induit absentis presenti Gorloys ora.

The after coming youth, lightens the world of Coriney

With his three clouē sonne: & she that brought forth at that day

The fourth Phoebus, broght forth Arthur, whilst the adulterer he

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=10) Euen
Tintagol so false of face brake in most wickedly.

Neither Pendragon vanquished the flaming fire of Loue,

But Merlins artes so manifold by counsel seekes to proue:

And counterfeites the Dukes attyre (as while the King did gles [...]

Thus) He put on the present face of absent Duke Gorloys.

CUstome, acquaintance, and companying together, doe sette loue one sire.Ouid.
Epist.  [...] And because as a certaine Poet sayth (Lis est cum forma magna
Pudicitiae: that is, Twixt Comelinesse and Chastitie, greate Debate there
seemes to bee.) Lust gotte the mastery ouer Igernaes Chastitie: Where­vppon
also afterwardes Arthure was begotten of her, to­gether with a beautifull
virgin,Vther Pendra­gon begat Ar­thur of Igerna the wife of Gorloys,
Go­uernour of Cornwale, and also a Virgin named Anna. named Anna. It must not
heere bee omitted whereof Hector Boetius makes relation: namelie that Vther at
length slue Gorloys, as hee was fighting in the behalfe of Nothaleos
Gouernour, agaynst the Saxonnes, and forsaken of him, that euen the rather hee
might more freely obtayne his will of Igerna. But the name of Arthures is
knowne to bee noble with the Romaynes, yea and also familyer amongest them:
that from hence Iuuenall the Poet in his third Satyre writeth these. Cedamus
Patria, Viuant Arturius istic, & Catulus. Frō our Countrie depart let vs:
Originall of Arth. name. There Arthure liue & Catulus. Samuell the Brittish
writer describeth the starre Arcturus so called Per Cappa ad vrsam, alluding,
that hee taketh his name or significatiō thereof from the Greeke Originall.
But here it ought not to redounde vnto Arthures preiudice or re­proch, that
the father being an adulterer did leaue after him a sonne borne to valiant
courage, prosperitie, & triumphant victories: seeing he was not in fault, that
he the lesse proceeded frō lawfull matrimony, seeing that he afterwardes
proued both a valiant and honest person.

Nam genus & Proauos,

Ouid. 13. lib. Metam. Fibis.

& quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra puto.

For kindred & forefathers, eke which we

Haue not begun, I scarce thinke ours to be.

How greatly also the childe prospered in vertue, it then ap­peared, what time
his father (who had florished in strength, Counsell and Judgemente also not
without Glorie) de­departed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=11) out of this
life at Verolamium, Iohn Stowe. hauing ordayned beefore,Then an anci­ent
Cittie, which was neere saint Al­bones, the foū dations where of are yet
apparant. the dignitie Royall vnto his base gotten sonne, be­cause he had none
borne in lawfull matrimony.

### 1.1. CHAP. II.  
K. Arthures Coronation.

THe history of Brittaine affirmeth that Arthure began his Raigne ouer the
Islandes of this kingdome in the xv. yeere of his age, and was crowned of
Dubritius Bishop of the City of Caerlegion vpon Vske in Wales. Iohn Stow.
Jo­hanues,What time Arthur was crow­ned. A. D. 316. Graius a writer his
testimony. Iohn Stow. y• writer of the goldē history seemeth to accounte vpō
xviii. yeeres when Arthure ascended vp to the Roayll seate. Scalaecronica, of
which booke (as I am moued by coniecture) one Gray, was Authour, doe say, that
Arthure receaued the dignitie of his crowne at Venta alîas Caerguent now
called Winchester. The two rulers of the Pictes and Scots viz. Lotho, vnto
whome Anne the sister of Aurelius Ambrosi­us, king of Brittaines was maried,
and Conranus, vnto whome Ada the sister of Anne was espoused, began to enuy at
the same so ioyfull prosperitie of Arthure: for both of them, but especially
Lotho aspyred vnto the Dominion of Brit­taine. Two Rulers of the Pictes aspire
vnto Ar­thures king­dome. Heereuppon followed afterwardes, that hee ioy­ning
vnto him Osca, otherwise Occa, a most filthye per­son, made warre against
Arthure. At length the matter came to hande stroakes, and the Pict beeing
ouercome, had the worse successe, partly by the helpe or furtherance of the
most inuincible Hoel, who plaied the Captaines parte there. The little booke
of the Empyre of the Brittaynes and English men vpon the Scottes their
friendly wellwil­lers,Battle and vic­tory ouer Ar­thur his ene­mies by Hoel
his friend. affirmeth this victory to bee obtayned at Yorke by the saide Hoel.
And that (the Scottes beeing vanquished) Arthure left the auncyent Dominions
(by petitions beeing so moued) vnder the rule of his friende Augusellus, whom
hee made Gouernour ouer them. Neither did better for­tune happen vnto the
Saxonnes: when as Colgrino the Duke was slaine, and Baldricus with Childricke
fledde away. After victorie ensewed Concord. Lotho [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=11) yeelded him selfe
vnto the Brittaynes. Mordred and Gal­loambieuinus the Sonnes of Lothon by
Anne, be­sought Arthure of fauour & pardon by wonderfull meanes, and at length
were made friendes. In the meane season had Arthure married Guenhera daughter
vnto Cadorus the Duke of Cornwale,Arthure mar­ried Guenhera the daughter of
Cadorus Duke of Cornwaile. a woman of rare beawtie. Afterwards also he subdued
vnto him the Saxones with most bloudy bat­tels.

### 1.2. CHAP. III.  
The XII. Battelles fought by Arthure.

NEnnius the Brittaine a writer of good and auncient credit, amongst many
others maketh most lightsome mention of his battels: whose wordes although by
the neg­ligence of Printers and iniurie of time, they be somewhat displaced,
yet notwithstandinge because they make much for our present matter, and bring
with them a certaine reue­rent antiquitie, I will here set them downe, and in
their order. Arthure fought in deed against those Saxones, with the gouernours
of the Britaines, but he himselfe was gene­rall. The first battell was at the
entraunce of the floude 1 called Gleyn, alias Gledy. The second, third,
fourth, and 2 3 4 5 fift, was vpon an other floud called Dugles, which is in
the Countrie of Lynieux. The sixt was vpon the floud which 6 is called Bassas.
The seauenth was in the wood Caledon, 7 that is, Catcoit Celidon. The eight in
the Castle of Gwy­nyon. 8 The nynth was fought in the Cittie of Caerlegion 9
vpō Vske. Iohn Stow The tenth on the Sea shore, which is called
Trai­theurith, 10 otherwise Rhydrwyd. The eleauenth in the hill 11 Which is
called Agned Cathregonion. The twelfth in the 12 Mount Badonis, Some iudge
this to be Bathe▪ wherein many were slaine by one assault of Arthure. Thus
farre witnesseth Nennius.

Iohannes the wryter of the golden historie ratifyeth the selfe same truth
touching the twelue battels fought against those Saxones. Iohn the wri­ter of
the gol­den history.

Aluredus Fibroleganus the historeographer also decla­reth the like.

And so these are the wordes of Henry sirnamed of Hun­tington Henry of
Huntington. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=12)
in the second booke of his history. Arthure the war­rier, in those dayes the
Captaine generall of soldiours, and of the rulers in Brittaine, King Art
[...]ure Xij times Ge­neral, and Xij. times Cōque­rour. fought most valiantly
against the Saxons. Twelue times was he generall of the battell, and twelue
times got he the victory, And there also. But the battles and places wherein
they were fought a certaine histo­riographer declareth.

Henry of Huntington seemeth here to haue hitte vpon the bréefe history of
Nennius, the name of whose exemplar (as it seemeth) was not set downe.
Herehence came that si­lence. Neyther was that booke common in mens handes at
that time, and in this our age is surely most rare: onely three exemplars do I
remember that I haue seene.Iohn Rhes [...]s a louer of Anti­quitie. Iohn
Rhesus a louer of Antiquitie, & the same a diligent setter forth there­of,
hath a little booke entituled Gilde, which booke (so farre as I gather by his
speach) had not to Authour Gildas, but Nennius.

The Elenchus or Registred Table of the librarie at Batle Abbey, Iohn Stow.
accounteth the historie of Gildas among there trea­sures, I haue diligently
enquyred for the booke: but as yet haue I not found it. The Reporte is, that
the exemplar was translated or carried to Brecknocke there to be kept.

Now must we report the Battels.

THe writer of the life of the reuerent Dubritius, Arche­bishop of the Cittie
Caerlegion vpon Vsk, Iohn Stow. not vnele­gantly, doth cōmemorate such like
matters. When at length Aurelius the King was made away by poyson, (and that
V­ther, What time Arthure succe­ded Vther his Father. his brother ruled a few
yeares) Arthure his Sonne by the helpe of Dubritius succeded in gouernement,
who with bold courage set vpon the Saxones in many battles, and yet could he
not vtterly roote them out of his Kingdome, For the Saxones had subdued vnto
them selues the whole com­passe of the Island which stretcheth from the water
of Hum­ber vnto the Sea Cattenessinum or Scottish Sea.Arthure could not cleane
roote all the Saxones out of Brittaine. For that cause the Peares of the
Realme being called together, he de­termined by their counsell what he might
best do, against the [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=12) irruption of the
Pagane Saxones, At length by comm [...]n counsell he sendeth into Armorica,
(that is to say, the letter Brittaine, H [...]el King of Brittaine aides him
with a powe of 15000. men.) vnto King Hoel his Ambassadors, which aduer­tised
him at full, touching the calamitie of the Brittaines, who comming with
fiftene thousand of armed men into Brittaine was honorably entertayned of
Arthure, and D. Dubritius: going vnto the Cittie of Lincolne beseeged of the
Saxones, Lincolne be­seeged by the Saxones. hauing fought ye battell, there
were six thousand of Saxones which eyther being drowned or wounded with
weapons, dyed.Their slaugh­ter & fight. But the others flying away vnto the
wood of Cale­don, being beseeged by the Brittaines, were constrayned to yeeld
themselues: and pledges being taken for tribute yeare­ly to be paied, he gaue
them leaue with their shippes onely to returne into their Countrie.
Afterwardes within a short time the Saxones were ashamed of the league made:
and hauing recouered their strength, they made their league as voyde, and
beseeged the Cittie Badon rounde about,Bath beseeged by the Saxons. which now
is called Bathe: this when Arthure hearde of, hauinge gathered his hoast
together, and beholding the Tentes of his enemies, he spake thus vnto them.

Because the most vngodly Saxones, K. Arthure seekes to be aduēged of the
Saxones. disdaine to keepe pro­mise with me, I keping faith with my God, will
endeuoure to be aduenged of them for the bloud and slaughter of my
Ci­tizens:His wordes. Let vs therefore manfully set vpon those Traytours whom
by the Mediation of Christ out of all doubt we shall ouercome with a wished
triumphe. And hee rushing vpon the ranckes of the Saxones, beinge helped by
the prayers of Dubritius in ouerthrowing many thousandes,His victorie o­uer
them. obtay­ned the victorie: and the few which fled this garboyle, he cau­sed
them to yeelde to his mercy.

Boccace in his booke of Lakes and Marishes, thus wryteth. Murais that Lake so
called famous is, by the victory of Arthure, King of Brittaine: for men say
that the Scottes, Pictes and Irishmen being by him beseeged, were compelled to
yeelde themselues there.Boccace men­tioneth of Arthure. The same Authour in
his viii. booke of Famouse Personages maketh a notable mention of Arthure
being moued with a certaine
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=13) Godly zeale,
to the end he would not with vnthankfull si­lence ouerpasse, so mightie a
personage, and so worthie a man.M. Camden. Neyther here are those thinges
which appeare in the Cronicles of a certaine writer of Digion differing from
our purpose.Cerdicius the Saxon helde warre with Arthure. Cerdicius hauing
more often conflict with Arthure, if he were one moneth vanquished, he more
sharp­ly assaulted in another moneth. At length Arthure, with irksome toyle so
being awearied, after the Xii yeare of Cerdi­cius his comming (by fealtie to
him sworne) gaue him the Country Auonia Southwarde,Arth. friendly to his foo.
and Somaria: which part Cerdicius called West saxony.

Gulielmus a Medulphi curia both a gallant writer,William of Malmsbury and also
a learned, and which thing first in his history (he as most faithfull) in his
first booke of the Kinges of Britaine men­cioneth,Arthure sore distressed had
it not bene for Ambrose a Romaine. bringeth in by the way these testimonies,
of Arthure. And now truly had it come to an euill passe with the Brit­taines
(as he vnderstoode) had not Ambrose onely of the Romans bene left aliue, (who
after Vortigerus, was Mo­narke or King, with the surpassing exployt of warlike
Ar­thure, repressed the outragiouse barbarouse enemines of the Kingdome.

Moreouer hetherunto seeme these things to pertaine, which in the fragmentes of
Gildas the Brittaine are reade after this manner.Gildas. The Brittaines like
conquerours take cou­rage to them, prouocating their enemies to fight, vnto
whom by the Lordes good pleasure the victorie fell euen to their de­sire. From
that time, otherwhiles the Citizens, otherwhiles the enemies got the vpper
hand, that in this people it might be approued, how the Lord after his
accustomed māner, dealt with this present Israell, and whether he loued the
same, yea, or no, euen vnto the yeare of the seege of the mount Badon, and
lastly almost of the petty spoylers there, in no litle hurly­burly, whereas
euen I my selfe was borne. These saith Gildas. Behold the slaunderer is now
present, and as one cruell of eye sight, requyreth a reason of me, why Gildas
remembreth not Arthure, Aduersaries quarrel against Arthure. if he were then
liuing. To these I answere, that I will hereafter speake of Gildas. In means
time the aduersarie calleth to minde, that Gildas when the [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=13) battaile was
fought at Bathe, was but an Infant: By rea­son whereof euen his Actes done or
not done of him, some­what slenderly are vnderstood by the aduersarie.

Gulielmus a Medulphi Curia, William of Malmesbune a friendly wri­ter. a little
before, beareth so honourable a testimonie of Arthure, that smally it shall
dif­fer, whether, if not superiour, yet as equall hee reputed him with
Ambrose. But Nennius an Authour of no bad cre­dite,Nennius an­other. so much
perfourmed in fauour of Aurelius Ambrosius, as Gildas in the fauour of
Arthure: Uiz. that leauing out the name of the one, hee might attribute
vprightly by iust cause vnto the other all honour, concerning the battle
fought at Bathe. But neither doe these alone performe this: There are a number
of good authours, which cōfirme the selfe same matter with a certaine iust
Authority. Except in meane time, he be so vniust a Judge, that he allowe of
nothing, bee it ne­uer so credible, which smelleth not of Tullie or Liuy, when
he him selfe in meane time smelleth I knowe not what of Ae­milius: Which thing
shall not displease me, when I shall vn­derstand, that hee franckely
confesseth this matter. In the meane while I wil recyte the testimony of that
Iohn which concerning Arthure write the golden historie. This yeere beeing the
tenth of Cerdicius, king of the West Saxones, did arise Arthure amōg ye
Brittaines, a most valiāt warrier.

### 1.3. CHAP. IIII.  
K. Arthures expedition towardes the French.

THe sixte booke of the History of Brittaine speaketh co­piously touching
things done by Arthure in Fraunce: vnto which countrie he went not, before hee
had fore­seene (as it seemed then in deede) with aduised counsell, the
immunitie or disburdenance of Brittaines troubles.Mordred Ar­thure his
Ne­phewe, put in great trust. He had to Nephewe one Mordred by name, sonne of
Lotho, king of the Pictes & of Anna sister of Aurelius Ambrosius king of
Brittaine. Unto this man, because hee was most nea­rest in bloodde, and
familiar in acquaintance, did hee com­mitte all his kingdome, together with
Guenhera his most louing wife. For Mordred, in respect of forti­tude
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=14) or
magnanimitie, was most commendable, and besides this for his quicke and prompt
witte, in accom­plishing his affayres:His vertues mixt with vi­ces. which
vertues, had hee not obscu­red with most ardent lust of ruling, and offence of
adultery, (but in meane time at first kept close for feare) hee had in deede
beene worthie to haue beene accompted amongst the most famous personages. Nowe
had Arthure entered into Fraunce, and the Gouernors being subdued, hee had
left a notable testimony of his prowesse there.Hoels neece, viz. Helen, stolne
out of Armorica. Behold, now com­meth a sauage Tyraunt, cruell and fierce, who
had raui­shed Helen the neece of Hoel of Armorica, or the lesse Brit­taine
(stolen away and brought out of Brittaine) at the coaste of Fraunce, and where
vpon she died. Arthure could not take well this so heynous a repreach done
vnto Helen, and straight way gotte the Tyraunte by the throate,Arthure
reuengeth that iniury. that hee vtterly destroyed this greate and horrible
Monster. And not longe after did Hoel cause to bee erected a sacred Tombe for
Helen in the Islande where she died, and a name fitly giuen vnto the place
where Helens Tombe was made, which serueth euen till this daye. The Cro­nicles
of the writer of Digion in Burgonie, Diuionensis. doe with greate commendation
extolle Arthure warring in Fraunce, by these like wordes.

Arthure for nine yeeres space,Arth. subdu­ing Fraunce, his Nephewe Mordred in
meane time betrayeth him cōfederating with Cerdici­us subdued Fraunce vnto
him, hauing betaken his kingdome and Queene vnto Mordred his Nephew. But he
desiring ambitiously to raigne (yet fea­ring only Cerdicius) gaue him, to the
end hee should fauour his doinges, seauen other prouinces. viz. Sudo Saxony or
Southsex, Sudorheiā or Southery, Berrochiam or Barcke­shyre: Vilugiam or
Wiltshier: Duriam or Dorcetshire: Deuoniam or Deuonshier: and Corineam
Cornwale. And Cerdicius cōsenting vnto these (sēding for ye englishmē)
restored his prouinces,Anno. 516. Mordred crowned. and was crowned after the
manner of the countrie at Wintchester. But Mordred was crow­ned ouer the
Brittaines at London. And so Cerdicius, whē he had raigned three yeeres,
died, while Arthure yet remay­ned amongest the French: vnto whome Kinrichus
suc­ceeded. In the Seauenth yeere of whose Raigne Ar­thure, [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=14) returned into
Englande.Arth returned into England. Thus farre out of the Cronicles. These
which I haue nowe recited, haue not onely their antiquitie, but also credite,
and with a certaine circumstance are consonant to the History.

And that I may somwhat more friendly speake in fauour of Athures Tryumphes
ouer the French, there are (be­sides these) many thinges, which I with a
certaine zeale doe omitte altogether. But yet, that must I as it were touch by
passing ouer the rest: viz. that it is manifest by the inscription of Arthures
greate Seale (concerning which wee will in place conuenient speake
circumspectly) that he was made famous by the sirname of a French men. And
neither was this donne without manyfest oc­casion, at any time. For, as
touching the Antiquytie and euen most sure knowledge of the Seale, so
euident­ly, I doubt not, but that I may assuredly beleeue (so their appeare
vpright Judges heerein, and which are skil­full in auncient monumentes) that I
shall proue by nota­ble reasons, the same was proper, peculier and naturall,
and proceeding from the workemaster. But these thinges more rightly appeare in
there place. I will at this instant onely heereto adioyne one Valerius,
Valerius reporting that K. Arthure vanquished 30. king­domes. which
remem­breth vs of thirtie kingdomes vanquished by Arthure. For in those dayes
a greate company of Gouernoures helde vn­der their Jurisdictiō the Islands
together with Fraunce and Germany.

### 1.4. CHAP. V.  
K. Arthures Familier Cheualyers, or knightes.

SOme man woulde peraduenture heere looke for, that I shoulde also with a
mightie praise blaze on the victo­ryes of Arthure, touching which the historie
of Brittaine reporteth. Historiographers doe contend in this behalfe, and the
controuersie, as yet resteth vnder the Judge. But I will declare nothing
rashly: For so much as it ap­peareth most euidently, that both obscure and
absurde re­portes haue crept into the historie of Arthure: which thing is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=15) of the
curious sorte easily sound faulte with. But this in deede is not a cause
sufficient iust, why any man should neglect,  [...]abiect, or deface the
Historie otherwise of it selfe, lightsome and true. Howe much better is it
(cast­ing awaye trifles, cutting off olde wiues tales, and su­perfluous
fables, in deede of stately porte in outwarde shew, but nothing auayleable
vnto credite, beeing taken away) to reade, scanne vpon, and preserue in
memo­rie those thinges which are consonant by Authorytie. For, that which nowe
a long time is embraced of Learned men with greate consent: ought not in what
soeuer moment of time barcking against it, together with faith or credite
there­of, to be quite taken away.

Otherwise the History had not hetherto remained in so greate reputation.
Therefore, because it is a worke of greater importaunce, then wee presentlie
are in hande with,K. Arthures knights of his round Table. exquisitely,
curiously and perfectlie to displaye all the deedes of Arthure: let vs for
this season omitte the Romaines, and let vs aduaunce with penne his famy­lier
friendes.Hoel the first knight. Hoelus Gouernour of Armorica, or the lesse
Brittaine in this famous company of Nobles, by a certaine right of his,
requyreth the next place from the first: Concerning whose comming into
Brittaine, and war­like prowesse, we haue formerly written in the chapter of
the warres accomplished by Arthure.

Hetherunto ensewe Mordred and Gallouinus, Bre­thren Germaynes vnto Arthure by
bloodde and famili­arity alyed.Gallouinus the second knight Of which two, this
first at length, like a per­iured persō and the same a Reuoulter neuer enough
discom­mendable (that I speake nothing of the crime of his adulte­ry) was
slayne in battle. One Hector Abrinus beeing thereof scarce a true witnesse,
and as I gather with iudge­ment, more rightly sirnamed Alaunicus. But the
second, be­ing alwaies a man constant, perfourmed most faithfull di­ligence
both in all forraine warres, and also specially in that conflict at Dorcester,
aboute the returne of Arthure out of Fraunce into Brittaine, who was chiefe
next vnto him against Mordred. Melchinus the Brittish Poet [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=15) blazseth the fame
of Gallouinus. [...] The same doth Iohannes Anneuillanus in his booke
intituled Architrenio a worke not vnelegant, namely by these verses.

Et Walganus ego qui nil reminiscor auara

Illoculasse manu: non haec mea fulgurat auro,

Sed gladio dextra: recipit, quo spargat, & enses;

Non loculos stringit, nec opes: in carcere miles

Degener & cupide, tumulato rusticus aere,

Et me bella vocant Et tua forsitan vrget

Solicitudo: vale.

And Walgan I with couetous hand nought distribute which haue

This my right hād shines not with gold but with the sword so braue

It takes that it may distribute, euen swordes not bagges it bendes.

Nor wealth, though I a Knight distrest, yet not vntrue to friendes,

Ne yet in countrie liued I like a couetouse muck [...]scrape:

But now the warres away call me vnto my wonted state,

And thine affaires also,

Perhappes vrge the thereto: Farewell.

ALso that History of Arthure, in deede Fabulus (which commonly is carried
about written in the mother tongue) affirmeth that Gallouinus was buried in a
certaine Chappell at Dorcester. Gallouinus buried at Dor­cester. In which
poynt what manner booke soeuer it be, it misseth not the marke altogether, as
the booke entituled Scalaecronicon makes manifest relation:His bones Gi­an
[...]like. and ye inhabitantes of ye Castle do now repute his bones al­most
Gyanllike in stead of a miracle.According [...] to the record of Glastenbury
the name, are Fugatius and D [...]mianus. This Lucius being created the first
Chri­stian King in England liued about the yere after Christ 182 William of
Malmesbury his iudgment of Gallouinus. And that long since in the time of
Lucius Magnus there was a Chappell founded in the Castle of Dorcester and
dedicated vnto our Lord and Sauiour Christ: what time Fugatius and Damianus
Brit­taines preached the Gospell as by the Annales or yearly recordes of the
same Cittie (hearing a reuerēt figure & resem­blance of Antiquitie) it doth
plainely appeare. That it may be most acceptable, and besides that most true
which I haue aboue inferred, touching both the death and buriall of
Galo­uinus: it shall not through me stand, that the iudgement of William de
Medulphi Curia as touching the death and buriall of this Gallouinus (by reason
of his fortitude neuer
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=16) enough
commended) should eyther weare out of memory or vtterly perish. Wherefore, I
esteeme it worthie the labour here to sette downe his wordes out of the third
booke of the Kinges of England that herehence the discreete Reader might euen
fully try as it were at a tutchstone the sincere brightnesse of true gold,
from that which is counterfeite.

Then in the Prouince of Wales which is called Rossia was founde the Sepulchre
or Tombe of Gallouinus or Walwine, H [...]s wordes of reporte. which was the
Nephewe not degenerate of Ar­thure, by his sister. He gouerned (in that Coast
of Brittaine which to this day is called Waluuthia) as a Knight most fa­mous
in prowesse: but being (of his brother, and the Nephew to Hengistus concerning
whom I haue spoken in the first booke) driuen out of his Kingdome, did first
to their great detriment recompēce his banishment, iustly pertaking praise
with his Unckle, for that he put off or auoyded the downe­fall from his
Country then ruinouse. But Arthures Tombe was at no time seene, whereupon
Antiquitie of foolish dreames and fables, did vainely surmise that he would
yet come againe. But the burying place of the other (as before I set down in
the time of William the first King of Englād) was found fourtéene foote long
vpon the Sea coast,The manner of Galouinu [...] his death, after the reporte
of W. Malm [...]b. where (as some men affirme) he was wounded of his enemies
and cast out of shipwrake: certaine persones haue saide, hee was slaine by the
Citizens at publique banquet. So saith the Authour Gulielmus Meildunensis, Wi
[...]liam of Malmsbury. as concerning Gallo­uinus. But I (if it might bee
lawfull for me as a puny) would make tryall of my strength wt these
weapons,Iohn Leylands opinion to the contrarie. against this authour
Meildunensis so olde and most beaten Souldi­er, to bestow & beare of the
blowes. viz. It is not like to be true, that men of Gyantlike height (as I
gather by y• graue 14. foote long) were then liuing in the dayes of
Gallouinus. Wherefore vndoubtedly in mine opinion it is more credible that it
was the graue of some Gyant inhabitinge the coun­trie. For that first such did
inhabit Albion, it appeareth both by auctoritie of forraine and of our owns
writers.His proofe out of a brittish Poet named Ioseph [...]. The one of which
two his credit I folowing, namely Iosephus of Deuonshire a Brittish Poet, most
absolutly elegante by all [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=16) meanes, (hauing
taken out of his Antiocheides a work im­mortall, these few verses) I will vse
them as testimony for breuitie sake.

His Brutus auito

Sanguine Troianus, Latijs egressus ab oris

Post varios casus consedit finibus, orbem

Fatalem nactus, debellatorque Gigantum,

Et terrae Victor nomen dedit.

A Troian Brute by auncient bloude, ariued frō Romane roade

After sundry hazardes, and, here in these coastes aboade

And hauing got his destned land, subdued the Gyants fell

As Conquerour he left his fame vpon the earth to dwell.

Architrenius in his sixt booke of Gyantes inhabiting Albi­on recyteth these.

Hos auidum belli Corinei robor auerno

Praecipites misit: cubitis ter quatuor altum.

Gogmagog Herculea suspendit in aere lucta,

Antheumque suum scopulo, detrusit in aequor.

These Corineus his puysant strength (of eager moode to fight)

To hell sent headlong: Gogmagog of twelue cubites height,

By him (like Hercules wrastling) into the aire was throwne

His Antheus eke and from the rocke in seaes was cast adowne.

NEyther am I ignorant that in times past there was on ye sea shoare a Castle
called Galouine, touching which the Authour M [...]ildunensis as aboue hath
written: whose footesteppes are as yet apparant. But that was not the
ha­bitation of the Gyant, as neyther perhappes of that Galo­uine of Arthures,
but of some latter vycegerent bearing the same name. But y• which he
mētioneth of Arthures Tombe at that time, is most true.William of Malmsbury a
most curious and painful searcher of Antiquitie. No one man more curiously
sear­ched forth, at any time all the treasures of the library at Gla­stenbury.
This onely was here wanting in him towardes knowledge, that he dying about the
first yeare of the Raigne of Henry y• second King of England, knew nothing of
Ar­thurs tombe. For so much as y• same tombe was found after­wards in ye
beginning of y• raigne of K. Richard coeurde ly­on. William of Malmsbury. But
I returne wt William Meildunensis into fau [...]ur,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=17) out of the
which as yet I haue not openly fallen: By whome a man as in his age most
learned in all kind of Good letters, and of singuler wit, diligence and care
in searching forth An­tiquitie, I confesse and in deede that franckly must a
[...]irme my selfe to haue beene oftentimes helped in the knowledge of
Antiquitie. Undoubtedly it is a poynte of honestie to ac­knowledge by whom a
man profiteth. It liketh me well, here, vnto the conclusion to adde the
notation which I my selfe gather of the name of Gallouinus out of the Brittish
language.The interpre­tation of Gal­louinus his name. Walle signifieth
straungers or walsh. Guin, Al­bum, or white. Like as if a man by this phrase
would de­describe a comely, elegant and beawtifull personage: except a man
more rightly thinke that he tooke his originall from the Saxonish rude
language, as Walwine signifieth Gallus A­micus, Leoflwyn Charus Amicus, and
Aldwyne Vetus Amicus.

Now approcheth Augusellus, Augusellus the th [...]d knight. of whom we haue
aboue spo­ken a fewe wordes. Who was in so feruent fauour with Ar­thure, that
hee was deseruingly made a beneficiall Gouer­nour ouer the Scottes. This man
[...]endered like for like.

Being sent for amongst many other Princes to the end he might performe him
selfe a companion with Arthure in his expedition towardes Fraunce, Iohn Stow.
so  [...]arre refused hee not his enioyned charge,An auncient Cittie in Kent
nere Sandwich the ruins of it yet remaine▪ The Prowesse and valiant ad­uenture
of him, one Grai­us a wri [...]er witnesseth. that with greate example of
valiancie there manifested, and retorning home on the Coast of Rich­borow with
much more prowesse, (Mordred beinge ouer­come in ciuil wars and there put to
flight) he falling amōgst the Hoastes with bloud & lyfe endaungered,
valiantly beha­ued himselfe: as y• Authour of those bookes Schalechronica (one
Grayius as I suppose) is none euil witnesse at al there­of. And because
touching the chusing out, or election of those Princes (vnto Arthure being
obedient) we haue formerly made promise: it auaileth here to signifie that
there were ma­ny & notable elections, not spoken of by him. But that was most
notable of all,Iohn Stowe. which appeared in Isca or Exceter other­wise in the
Cittie of Caerlegion, or Chester vpon Vske. What time it was proclamed vnto
wars against ye French. But what haue the Muses to do with Mars? vndoubtedly▪
[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=17) either
little or nothing. And yet if there were a iust famili­aritie betweene them,
they shoulde rather wish well vnto Mars, that for his sake they might
deseruingly giue Arthure greate thankes, who either restored or instituted a
Lear­ned Quier of Ecclesiasticall persons in the saide cittie of Ca­erlegion:
Wryters. Geoffrey of Mūmouth. Iohn of  [...]o­row. if Geoffrey of Munmouth,
Iohn Burgensis, and Rossus Verouicensis declare the trueth. This in meane time
appeareth plaine by the historie of Anonimus the wri­ter, that Amphibalus,
Rossus of Warwicke. Anonimus a writer. Iulius, & Aarona martyres did wor­ship
Christ, and also had learning in estimation, in the saide cittie of Caerlegion
or Chester vpon Vske. From whome agayne credible it is that others receiued
the same letters frō hand to hande. There is also (if we may beleeue credible
reporte) in the treasuries at Cambridge at this daye, a Ta­ble of the
priuiledge by Arthure sometime confirmed to the furderāce of studēts. But as
yet haue I not searched out the credite of this deede.

Iderus sometime a speciall fauourer of K. Arthures court comes nowe to the
number of those Cheualyers. Iderus the 4. knight, neare of blood vnto Arthure.
This man beeing neare alyed in blood vnto Arthure, performed many valyant
examples of prowesse, and continually did cleaue to his Princes side. And at
length, by what hap I knowe not, (hee dying,) left a speciall welwishing vnto
Arthure: who also carefully accomplished his funerall at Aualonia. I haue
reade at Glastenburie a little booke of the antiquitie thereof, gathered very
dilligently by a certaine Moncke of that place: In which booke he declareth
many thinges of Arthures good will towardes this man departed: and of y•
liberalitie or beneficiall goodnesse (for y• same his cosens sake) bestowed
vpon religious persons there inhabiting.His benefice [...] towardes the Church
at Glastenbury. Of late there did hang a Table at a pillor within y• Church of
Glas­tenburie, which accoūted Iderus amongst the Benefactors and restorers of
the Church at Glastenburie. Lancelot th [...] fifth knight. Lancelot a man
most famous requireth place euen amongest y• most ex­cellent Cheualyers to be
giuen him. Unto which desire I easilie graunt as one readie to speake this in
his commenda­tion: that hee was a certaine vpright and faithfull friende of
Arthures. His valiancy appeared largely at y• battle which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=18) was fought
betweene Mordred the traytor and Arthure. A faithfull friend and valiant
aduenger of iniury done by Mordred vnto Arthure. He liued in deede after the
battle, & as I reade once or twice, conueyed vnto Guenhera (mourning at
Arthures death) the bodie from Ambersburie vnto Glastenburie. But Gy­raldus
seemeth sincerely to attribute his buriall in one place or other at
Glast̄bury, Syluester Giraldus his testi­m [...]nie of his buriall at
Glas­tenburie. as in his Speculo Ecclesiastico: & in his worke De Institutione
Principis, appeareth. Although it rather seemeth to me in mine opinion y• he
tooke his firste tombe at Ambersburie, Carodocus  [...] sixte knight Whose
fame the Cronicles at Dorcester  [...]toll. Caradocus a name of noble prowesse
martiall, followed Arthure in his expedition towardes Fraunce. And returning
homewarde was slaine, as it see­meth on the coast of Richborowe, in the ciuill
battle. The Cronicles of the porte of Dorcester, a worke sauouring of
antiquitie makes mention of Caradocus. The inhabitants of the Castle there
euen at this day after a sorte renewe the memorie of Caradocus, affirming that
they haue in their Custodie I knowe not what Lyneamentes of his. And not so
contented, they sette foorth Arthures Courte, and Guenheras lodging. Nowe
ruffleth in the number and traine of Arthures noble warriours. But I▪ (so y•
it be done without offence to them, because I haue onely taken vpon me to name
the most excellentest of them and to praise them) haue purposed to ouerpasse
the residue,Cadorus the 7. Knight, of the most noble proge [...]ie of the
kinges of England. yet otherwise praise worthie, and last of all to adioyne
that Cadorus of Corne­wale. Hee was of the most noble progeny of the kinges of
Brittaine, and gouerned the people in the Mountayny soyles of Cornewale. A
stoute defē ­der & preferrer of his princes dignitie. Undoubtedly he was a
stoute defender of his princes dignitie and had perpetuall familiaritie with
the Brittaines. At length when hee dyed, hee left af­ter him a sonne named
Constantine: (who after the Death of Arthure) was made Ruler ouer Brittaine.
Constantine his sonne suc­ceeded Arth.  [...] ldas his testimony of
Constantine a de­generate child a murtherer of Innocentes. Hee, (to the ende
they following their fathers example in times pas [...]e shoulde not aspyre
vnto the kingedome) caused the sonnes and Supporters of Mordred the traytor
and Nephewes of Gallouinus to be slaine with the sworde. But either this fact
or the like doth Gildas the Brittaine shewe in these wordes. Of which so
wicked a mischiefe, Constantine the Tyrants vncleane whelpe of Damonia [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=18) was not ignorant,
who this yeere after y• horrible oth made, from which he againe swarued (that
he would not worke a­ny iniuries vnto the Citizens, swearing first by God,
then by the mother of Christ, and therwith taking all the companies of holy
ones to witnesse) did notwithstanding by blooddie sword and speare rush into
the tender brests of two mothers and cruelly perced the bowelles or intrayles
of two princelie youthes, vnder y• same religious Amphibalus & of so many
ouerseers euen standing at y• very Alt [...]r, whose armes (being without
armour which no one man at y• time more valiātlier vsed then they) hee
cruelly cut off euen standing at the Al­ter, and with his Speare violently
teare them in peeces. But they shall crie for reuenge vnto God, before the
high throne of his Maiestie in the day of iudgement and at the Gates of thy
city (Oh Christ) shall they hange vp their reue­rend banners of pacience and
of faith. He [...]herto haue wee spoken of his Knightes or Cheualyers.

### 1.5. CHAP. V [...].  
[...]. Arthures Rounde Table.

NOwe is there very conuenient place to bringe in a­mongest other thinges, a
fewe, but chosen, excel­lent, finally magnificent testimonies of Arthures
round ta­ble and of his good cheare. Unto these had not all noble men accesse:
But onelie they. viz

Lucida quos ardens euexit ad aethera Virtus,

Virtus sola virens nullis moritura diebus,

Whom Vertue cleere aduanced to the skies,

Euen Vertue alone which florishing neuer dies.

THis stately sturre (as they say) he somewhat more of­ten solemnized.Iohn
Stow. But specially in the cittie of Caerlegi­on, Vsuall places where K. Art
[...], kept his  [...] table. or Chester vpō Vske which place he notably
esteemed of. The same did he at Vēta Simenorū alîas Winchester, & at Camalet
in Somersetshire. The common vnlearned sorte of writers supposeth, that Venta
to bee called by an­other name, that is to saye, Camelet. But I passe not vpon
the iudgement of the common sorte. The publike
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=19) reporte of
them which dwelt at the lowermost parte of the hill Cancaletum, On this side
Somertō neare vnto Glasten­bury is the vil­lage Surton & Camelet an old
forte. or an olde forte, is, that Murotrigum or the Towne now called Somerton,
spreadeth, aduaun­ceth, and solemnely settes foorth the fame of Arthure
some­time inhabiting the Castle. Which Castle of olde time was both most
statelie and also most strongly buylded, and in a most high or loftie
prospect.K. Arthure in­habited a ca­stle at Somertō Good Lorde, what and howe
many most deepe Ditches are there heere? How many vallyes are there heere out
of the earth delued? Againe what daungerous steepenesse? And to end in fewe
words, truly me seemeth it is a mirackle, both in Arte and nature.

At seges est vbi Troia fuit stabulantur in vrbe,

Et fossis pecudes altis, vallo (que) tumenti

Taxus, & astutae posuere Cubilia vulpes,

But corne there is where Troy did stand, & cattle there abound,

Stalled in towne with ditches deepe, in trēch mounting frō groūd,

There Yew trees grow, & subtile Foxes made their cabbins roūd.

ANd in deede this is the interchaunge of humane af­fayres. Heerehence had
Ilcester that auncient Towne this calamitie. Heereupon doth the customary
traffique there beholde the cleere welspring with heauie eyes, and weepe their
fill. There the inhabitants plow the ground, and euery yeere finde by seeking
for them, Golden, Siluer, and Brasen peeces of money, expressing the images
not very liuely of the Romanes. Whereof euen I my selfe haue had a few giuē
mee of those inhabitants. Fraūcis Lord Hastings Earle of Hū ­tington an
excellēt ornamēt of those noble youthes about the king of Englād, &
sometimes my benefactor in good learning, as heire of y• Piperells, Bottrells,
& of the Hūgerfordes, hath in his possession the ruined old cotages of
Camelet, together with ye large groūds adiacēt.Iohannes An­neuillanus, a
writer, extol­leth K. Arth. round table. Iohānes Anneuillanus ye wri­ter in
his Architrenio extolleth Arthures rounde table for ye excellēcy therof. The
same doth Volateranus in his thirde booke of Geography, in these wordes. He
also being plen­tiful at home, vsed amōgest his nobles a roūde table that
there should be no cōtētiō, through ambitiō for seates. At Vēta Symeno
alîas Winchester in ye castle most famously [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=19) knowne,K.
Arthures round table where it stan­deth. stādeth fixed ye table at the walle
side of ye kinges Hal, which (for ye maiesty of Arthure) they cal ye round
table. And wherefore? Because neyther the memorie nor felowship of the rounde
Trowpe of Knightes as yet falles out of Noble mens mindes, in the latter age
of the world. King Edward sirnamed the longe,K. Edward the first made much of
that round order of Knightes in his time. as fame telleth, made much of that
rounde order of Knightes. To those vses was the round table instituted and
framed, (if it be worthie of credit) and that it was with three feete made of
perfect gold. There bee which write that one Mortimar by name, spent and
consu­med away those treasures. That thing yet by the way is most certaine out
of the historie of Thomas Vicanius, that Roger Mortimer helde a very great
feast or banquette at Kenelworth, Roger Morti­mer, solem­nished the same order
at Kenelworth. whether as he of noble minde sent for most ex­cellentest
Cheualiers, or Knightes, as it had beene vnto Ar­thures round table of
Knightes: Hereupon were very many tokens of knightly prowesse set foorth in
deede: which the di­ligent posteritis shal with great desire reade expressed
in wry­tinges. But now so long a while, from this Cheualris of Arthure and his
trayne, I passe ouer to his godly disposition.

### 1.6. CAP. VII.  
King Arthures Godly Disposition.

WIth how greate and how sincere deuotion hee was enclyned towards the
Christian Common wealth, it appeareth plainly by the aucthoritie of auncient
writers. He vsed the familiaritie of Dubritius Bishoppe of the Cittie of
Caerlegion or Chester vpon Vske, Two Bishops religiouse fa­uourers of K.
Arthures wel­fare. a man both of singu­ler learning and also of continencie in
life: so farre forth that he throwly felt as victor in the battel at Bathe,
his prayers a­uaylable. Furthermore Dauid Meneuensis a man no doubt of
exquisite holynesse, as then felt both the fauour and libe­rallitie of
Arthure: Of S. Dauid. so farre forth that the people Me­neuenses, Iltutus a
God­ly and learned father an other religiouse fa­uourer of Ar. report the
Bishoppes sea to haue bene by them re­ceyued as by Arthures meanes translated
from the Cittie of Caerlegion or Chester vpon Vske vnto them. Iltutus a man of
incomperable lyfe being companion of these two,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=20) hearing of
that singuler magnificence of his, & zeale towardes God, was bolde (as the
setter forth of his life writeth) not onely face to face to goe see Arthure,
but also to salute him and haue communication with him. Through which (in
deede boldnesse) much lesse offended he the Prince seeing that he both gaue
him very greate thankes and also an ho­nest rewarde. Arthure (if auncient
writers and constant same de reporte the truth) had depainted in his Martiall
tar­get, the stimlitude of the virgin Mary: which target he vsed in many
battels, and specially in that battell at Bathe. In such tryfling matters I do
not much force to write. But by the way, that is not a thing vnworthie to be
heard of the god­ly, which Samuel the writer of Brittaine, and Disciple of
Elbodus the Bishoppe, (who flourished about nyne hun­dreth yeares agoe) thus
maketh mention of, concerning Ar­thures expedition or rather peregrenation.
Arthure went vnto Ierusalem when as he tooke with him the signe of the Crosse
of wood in memory of his Sauiour,K. Arthure his iourney to Ie­rusalem. whereof
the frag­mentes are at this day reserued in Wedale a towne of Lodo­neia, six
miles from Mailros. Finally he exceedingly estée­med of those Church men at
Glastenbury, His zeale & speciall good will towardes the Church men of
Glastenbury as partly I haue aboue saide in Idero, and as I will here more
largely shewe. Siluester Gyraldus in his booke De Institutione Principis thus
wryteth. For aboue all the Churches in his Kinge­dome he fauoured and beare
best good will vnto the Church of our Lady S. Mary at Glastenbury, and with
greater de­uotion aduaunced the same before other Churches. Poli­dorus
(according to his equitie and iudgment, and so farre as his aucthoritie
serueth him) declareth there was no Mo­nasterie at Glastenbury, in Arthures
time: So exquisite a iudge is he of Antiquitie and specially concerning
Brit­taine. He also contendeth that euen all the whole worlde by this rule
(but in deeds a most vniust rule) is constrayned to embrace, maintaine, and
beleeue that which is spoken of him touching Antiquitie, as that which is
pronounced for an Oracle.Iohn Layland a bearer with Polidorus. To that he
saith and writeth in truth, will I as Vir­gill saith. Ense leuis nudo parmaque
inglorius alba. That is, (With naked sword and sclender bright sheelde without
boa­sting [[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=20)
easely defend his aucthoritie and iudgment so auncient.So farre as he bringes
forth the truth, and other wise his enemy. But what he falsly or vntruly
declareth, (which thing he doth somewhat oftener through all partes of his
History) I may not beare with all, I can not abide it, neyther will I suffer
it, but the truth, (so much as it shall stand me vpon) will I restore to her
comelynesse, fame, and glory, as one cheerefull and nothing fearefull in so
doing, though the enemies of truth burst them selues with inwarde mallice.
For, vnto this most honest opinion that I should couragiously clea [...]e in
this behalfe,Alias  [...]ganus and Dami­anus. the thing done by those two
Apostles of the Brittaines, namely Fugatius and Damianus, and the E­pistle of
Patritius the great which I haue in my custody con­firming the same (to omit
for breuitie sake the testimonies of many others) do will me,This was king
Henry the 2. Sonne of Ge­offrey planta­genet, brother to king Henry the first
succe­ding him. An. 1154. raigned 3. yeares. 9. monethes. & 12\. dayes, and
was buried of Founteuerard in Fraunce. or rather commaund me. Hen­ry
Plātagenet (the Nephew of Henry Beauclarcke King of England by the daughter
of Mathilda) affirmeth, by pre­script and manifest wordes in a certaine deede
of gift, that he saw, (and that it should not want vpright credit) that hee
read the couenants and articles concerning a certaine bene­uolence of
Arthures, extended towardes the religiouse per­sons inhabiting Aualonia. But I
will hereunto annexe the very wordes of King Henries gift, out of the
originall deede.

Moreouer what thinges so euer haue beene giuen me from my Predecessors.Wordes
con­tayned in king Henry the 2. his deede of gift proceding from king Arthures
be­neuolence to­wardes the Church men at Aualonia. William the first, William
the se­cond, and Henry my Vnckle. Yea of their Ancestors, namely of Eadgar the
father of Sir Edwarde of Edmond, and of his father Edward, and of Ealfred the
Grandsire of the same, of Brinwalchius Kenwinus, Baldredus, Ina, Cuthre­dus,
and of Arthure, and many other Christian Kinges. And also of Kenwalchius the
Pagan King, whose priuile­ges and writings I haue diligently caused to be
searched and to be presēted & read in my presence. Thus far the deed of gift.
If these witnesses of sure credit make not sufficiēt for most apparant
knowledge of the truth, surely there can nothing at any time auaylably serue.
For not to be satisfied with these being receyued and knowen at full, is
neyther the parte of a wise head, no nor yet of a good iudgment.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=21)

### 1.7. CAP. VIII.  
King Atthures Seale.

ANd because I haue againe entred into the Misteries of sacred Antiquitie and
am descended a curious searcher into the bowels thereof, it liketh me to bring
forth to light an other matter, namely Arthures Seale, a monumēt most
cunningly engrauen, auncient, and reuerent. Concerninge which,He meaneth
Robert Caxtō who translated the history of K. Arthure. Caxodunus maketh
mention, yet breefly and sclen­derly in his preface to the history of Arthure:
which the com­mon people readeth printed in the English tongue. Being moued
with the testimony of Caxodunus whatsoeuer it were, I went vnto Westminster,
to the end that what so as an eare witnesse I had heard,K. Arthures Seale kept
at Westminster in Iohn Ley­landes dayes. I might at length also as an eye
witnesse beholde the same. Pondering well that sayinge of Plautus, in my
minde. Pluris valet oculatus testis vnus quam Auriti decem.

Of more force standes eye witnesse one,

Then ten eare witnesses among.

The keeper of those secretes being requested of mee to shew me this monument,
by and by delyuered it both to bee seene and handled.His reporte in praise
thereof, describing the properties The sight of the Antiquitie pleased me at
full, and for a long time the Maiestie thereof not onely drewe a­way but also
detayned myne eyes from me to the beholding thereof. Of such force it is for a
man aptly to chaunce vp­on a thing with greate care desired. The substance
which tooke the most lyuelyest figure of Arthure imprinted vpon the Seale,
(and which as yet doth firmely keepe the same still) is ware of redde coloure,
which by some mishape, or in­iury of long time perished, is crazed here &
there into peeces. But so yet notwithstanding as no part of it is altogether
lac­king. For the fragmentes or litle peeces thereof being be­fore time by
some mischaunce crazed, are so closed vp toge­ther with siluer plates which is
of rounde forme, such as is the vtter side of the Seale, that no parte of them
may fall off. For vpon the vtterside of this seale it is thus engraued with
these breefe, but in very deede most excellent, most hauty, and most
magnificent tytles. That is to say.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=21) PATRICIVS
ARTVRIVS BRITTANNIAE, The Insculp­ture of K. Arth. Seale and the Inscriptiō
therof, GALLIAE, GERMANIAE, DACIAE IMPERA­TOR. And of trueth this inscription
circleth the outermost compasse of the Seale. The former parte thereof is most
bright shining by a circle of christall, which being taken off, streightway
may any man touch the war, which by reason of the Antiquitie is most harde.
But the Portracture of Ar­thure printed thereupon,K. Arthures maiestie
represented on the seale. resembleth I wotte neare what Heroyicall Maiestie.
For the Prince as it were inuested with purple, royally sitteth vpon a halfe
circle, such one as we see the raine boe is.Nota. Hauing a crowne vpon his
heade he shineth like the sunne. In his right hand riseth vp a scepter wrought
with a Flowerdeluce at the toppe: And his left hand holdeth a globe adorned
with a crosse. His bearde al­so groweth comely, large, and at length, and euen
that is a maiestie. The other side of the Seale is altogether couered ouer
with a thinne plate of Siluer. By meanes wherof also it is vncertaine of what
fashion it is. There hangeth downe at the same a string chainefashionlike
twisted of Sil­uer. Certes Reader, I pray God I be deade but thou woul­dest
desire to see the same, such and so greate is both the anti­quitie and also
the maiesty of the thing. At length the keeper of those secretes was there
requested by me to signifie vnto me, if he had learned any thing ouer and
besides this, as touching the seale hanging thereat. For, amongest very ma­ny
ornaments which glittering with Gold & precious stones did adorne the tombe of
Edwarde the Simple, The seale, one of the orna­ments which were about  [...]
tombe of K. Edwarde the simple. King of Eng­land, euen this also was worthie
of memorie. But he coulde say nothing to these demaundes sauing onely this,
that hee thought the same was by ye king laid in ye place to ye perpetu­all
memorie of the most high and mighty prince Arthure. Surely if a man might
lawefully by any coniectures gather and set downe the trueth in writing, I
would not thinke that such a seale had benee translated from Glastenburie: It
was transla­ted from Glas­tenbury to Westminster. vppon which monastery (by
misfortune of fire most filthily debased) the most bountifull prince bestowed
such rewardes, as hee for his excellent godlines might more easily giue, then
those mōckes might hope for. K. Henrie himselfe as I haue aboue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=22) mentioned,
made testimony of Arthures free gift, and so farre forth as he both sawe and
read the same. By meanes whereof also it might come to passe, that the
parchment beeing eaten out with little wormes, and meathes by long tract of
time, so famous a monument of antiquitie be­ing founde, he deliuered the same
to the Monasterie of first fame, there to be kept safe, and to be seene for
euer of the no­bylitie in all posterities. Certes (except my coniecture
faileth me) the expences or charge is small in deede, yea, none at all. This
yet in the meane time pleaseth me, that while we in­treate of Arthure and of
things done by him, Glastenbury is alwaies at hand and most friendly promiseth
his endeuour towardes assured knowledge of things. From whence in deede all ye
fruite of our labour at this presēt is to be fetcht,He meaneth either ye
recordes there, as Chro­nica Glessobur gensia, either els Patricius
[...]lesioburgen­sis. as it were from a most plentifull running fountaine.
Neither surely is there any thing apparant, (that I doe knowe of) which more
euidently approueth that Arthure was liuing, thē the same Seale doth. Which
thing, if God so would, some persons (leaning rather to their opinion, selfe
will, and final­ly rashnesse, then vnto any vpright reason) doubt not to deny.
But after this we will chuse a place, wherein by full & whole aboundance of
argumentes, wee may ouerthrowe the vio­lent rabble of slaunderers. In the
meane season wee must more subtilely discusse the inscription of the Seale.
For, this hath her misteries, which when they shall receiue light, shall both
with greater pleasure, and also apter grace fill ye eares of honest readers,
and being filled shal wonderfully delight thē: which thing is worth the
trauell, & that in deede largely.

The name PATRICIVS, Patricius whēce it hath originall. is taken as from the
maiestie of the Romans. The noble men of Rome are called by that name. viz.
such as are come of the firste Senatours: That seemeth Tacitus to signifie by
these wordes. In those dayes Caesar tooke into the number of Noble men, euery
one most auncient of the Senate, or which were of noble personage. Liuius
makes this mētiō. Romulus created 100. Senators, which were called Patres or
Fathers, Patres & Patricij why so cal­led. by reasō of honor done to thē &
also Patricij or noble mē by reason of their progeny. Therefore it is euident
that Arthure receiued that same no­table [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=22) same of his name
from his parentes and Auncesters.From whence the name of Arthure was first
deriued. Whereupon also it appeareth that as yet, the glory of Ro­mane
Maiestie (translated or applyed vnto the Brit­taines, in their titles) waxed
not cold in those dayes. I haue also beleeued that the name of Arthure tooke
his beginning from the Romane Arthures. For Iuuenall the Poet in his thirde
Satyre writeth thus.

Cedamus Patria, Viuant Arturins istie, & Catulus.

From our countrie departe let vs:

There Arthure liue and Catulus.

ALthough Brittaine was by Claudius brought into one only countrie,Anno
Chri­sto nato. 44. it was yet a thing most familier a­mongst ye noble men of
Brittaine, partly to take vnto thē ye names of the Romans, & to giue them
most often vnto their children, by this persuation (as I veryly beleeue not
foo­lish) so moued, that herehence they would procure honour vnto them &
theirs, & gaine thēselues fauour of the Romans. Lucius whome the Brittaines
sirnamed the great, Constan­tine and he also the great, Aurelius Ambrosius, &
Arthure vnto these not inferior, doe mightely ratifie this mine opiniō. The
same thing also is performed in ye attribution of names vnto noble women. For
example, such were Claudia Ruf­fina a woman sincerelie learned,Pero [...]s in
Cor [...]ucopia nameth her a Nimph, & one of Iupiters noces. as Martiall the
Poet wit­nesseth. Helena the most holy matron, and Vrsula that Cy­nosura or
glittering Starre so called. And where as the in­scription of ye Seale by a
certaine circumstance of words cal­leth him Emperor of Brittaine, Fraūce,
Germany & finally of Dēmarcke. This also cōmeth to passe through ye custome
of the Romans & their dilligēce, yt together with their triūphes the titles
also of natiōs conquered might accrewe or encrease vnto the cōqueror.Bowes
vsed for triumphes at Rome. For a token hereof the Bowes were vsed in
triumphes at Rome, and the Coynes of Caesar with their figures were with like
care stamped. But the name of the Emperor, as by Auncientie, Arthure aptly
called Em­perour. (after the testimony of Cae­sar, Cicero, and Liuius
apparant) pertained vnto the gouer­nors of y• legions: wherupon Arthure is
called Emperor by
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=23) dest seruant
of all vnderstood before, the comming of his gra­cious Lord,Mordred meetes
him. and with a full appoynted Hoast not without counsell and helpe of Pictes,
Scottes, & West Saxones, most boldly meetes him, returning home. The Coast of
Kent ratled with all manner noyse of weapons: and now the Cap­taines stood
orderly before their ensignes: the troupe of Che­ualliers also conquerours of
the world wt chearefull assaulte tossed their weapons,The armies of them both
en­samped. parte of them drew out their si [...]e sla­shing blades, and part
shaked their shiuering sp [...]ares with strong handes. They had all one
voyce. The battells were warrelike fightes. Arthure most  [...]eund with this
prompt alacritie and stoute courages of his Souldiours, as the miracle both of
all manhood, and also of ripe wisdome by ex­perience, made such a like Oration
vnto them by lifting vp his eyes from the earth vnto heauen, and with
cherefulnesse of countenance together with a certaine maiestie mixed, say­ing
on this manner.

Yee Cheualiers the most noble lightes of martiall pro­wesse,K. Arthures noble
Oration vnto his soul­diours & sub­iectes going to fight a­gainst Mor­dred and
his company. and you the other multitude of most approued valiancie, do see
whither our fortune and associate of so great victories hath brought vs, as
what we haue with most strong hand gotten abroade, wee may not onely keepe
vpright, but also get vs more greater booties with some straunge and large
increase: the which thing that it may at this instant be brought to passe and
more ease­ly, such occasion is now offered vs, as all good happes could not in
deede, if they would, more plentifully, nor more prosperously offer themselues
to fauour vs frend­ly. Let vs therefore go to this geare with most manly
courages, whither as Fortune, Valiancie, and finally victory calleth vs. Now
is the most impudent Mordred at hand, yet one most nearest to me in bloude,
whome I haue brought vp and loued in hope of greate fame, and so far forth
made much of, and that in very many booties be­stowed vpon him in deede, and
those no lesse beneficiall as whē I should passe into France to aduenge me of
mine enemies, he so seeming to be then vndoubtedly of pro­found counsell, vnto
him I did both commit my wife & [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=23) state, (and that
which is much more) my natiue country to keepe, and to gouerne our affaires as
our deputie, fi­nally to defend the same most valiantly from the dayly assault
of Saxones, Scottes, & Pictes. But he in meane time forgetfull of my most
bountiful liberallity towards him, & of our familiaritie, (which for most part
in humaine affaires, hath vndoubtedly cheefest importance) and not remembring
the solēne oath of warelike order, wherby he is to me most deeply
bounden,Nota. like a false periured and mightie contemner of God and man,Their
first  [...] in Kent. yea an adulter also, (as Fame reporteth) now
entertayneth me, a King and Conquerour of Nations, and his Liege soueraigne
Lord returning into mine owne Countrie (if God so would permit him) euen with
opē hostilitie, hauing rea­dy for his cōplices the Pictes his kinsmen, the
Scottes their neighbours, & last of all the Saxones to helpe him.

And neither doth this so notable mischeefe only touch me, but in deede it
toucheth you all. Wherfore you most inuincible Champiōs, my only care, & you
most valiant fellow souldiers, with present prowesse, handle your co­mune
cause, and let vertue now shine forth in you, which I haue hetherunto
perceiued to be ready, valiant & won­derful alwayes. Sir Gallouinus you the
most praise worthy garland of warlike prowesse,Sir Gallouinu [...] his charge.
whose glory for manie cau­ses, and cheefly this, is most commendable vnto the
world (in that you haue set at nought, Mordred our cō ­mune enemie, and in
respect of equitie & oath of your a­legeance to vs made, haue despised him
your brother in Law.) Stād you here on your right hand, as the most apt
furnished horne with strēgth of Souldiours. For the first shares of hand
stroakes and of renome shal light in this troupe of yours.Sir Augus [...]llus
his charge. Sir Augus [...]llus as the bulwarke of most approued valiancie
shall cast himselfe to encounter with our enemies at the left wing. I my selfe
(& God to friēd) will in the middest of you fight it out continually and will
be present as your onely safegard, but to the ene­mies will I be a terrour, a
scourge, and a deserued de­struction.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=24) But what
neede many wordes, which neyther in deede adde nor take away valiant courage.
Your valiancy is enlarged by custome, exercise, and sustayning of labour,
watchinges and penury, yea finallie by shedding of the enemies bloud, and
spoyling the same enemies: For the which considerations both I to you, and you
to me againe (God fauouring so iust a cause) do promise assu­red victory. Go
to, make immortall tryall of your man­hoodes, and slay down right those
traytours at a pinch. When he had thus saide,The apparant promptitude of king
Arth. his souldiours. they altogether at their Gouer­nours commaundement
showted aloude, and with a chere­full onsette, bestowing in order their
ensignes, far and wide shewed forth the valiant tokens of warlike attempt. So
at the length partly their enemies being slaine, and partly put to flight,His
victory. Arthure obtayned the victory with an horrible ouerthrow of his
enemies. But there were slaine in that battell fought at the hauen of
Dorcester, Two of his Cheualiers, or knightes shine. both Gallouinus and
Augusellus the two thunderbolts of the battell, as Gra­ius maketh mention in
his booke called Scalecronica, and as other Authours of fame not to be
despysed, do witnesse. Mordred blaming Fortunes vntowardnesse, with a Nauy
recouered, & the remnant of his Hoast therein, got him with shame enough to
the hauen of Tāmeroth on the Sea coaste of Cornwaile. The noble coarse of
Gallouinus was en­tombed in a certaine Chappell within the Castle of
Dorce­ster. But Arthure; (the death of two so excellent famouse men being
fully knowne to him) sore bewailed the same: and with oftē prayer, as also
with very deepe greefe of heart, suppressing sorrow from their handes, (nobly
minded and of Godly disposition as he was) fatherly tooke care ouer them. And
then in deed hauing a fresh prepared with incredible ex­pedition a full Hoast
and army, he determined with long ior­neyes to pursue his lewde enemie, and as
it were vpon the snappe to ouerthrowe the fugetiue.Mordredes preparation
against king Arthure, the second time. Mordred yet was more craftie, then of
power able to withstand: hereupon found he out a meane for vnacustomed
inuentions. He had ma­nifest knowledge giuen him by espyals, that Arthure most
absolutly furnished for the battell, was comming at hand. [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=24) Wherefore he
commanded euery souldier wearied vpon ye lād, & againe wt toile vpō ye sea,
as also penury of corne, to de­parte for a season, & hauing refreshed their
industrie, labour, & dilligence, as also furnishing them with munitiō, so
well as he could through ye moūtayny soiles of Cornwale, by ye way yt leadeth
to the banckes of Seuerne, not farre thence distāt cō ­ducteth he his hoast
with easie iornies: and in a place which of ye cōmon sorte of writers is
called Camblā (where as are waste groūds & partly a natural moist plaine, &
a little hill ri­sing vp to yt vse of a watch or prospect) did he pitch his
tents. Here am I cōpelled to interpose or set downe by the way my iudgment
cōcerning the place where it was fought by both parts: and for yt cause yt I
should not thinke to bring hether any thing amōgst ye rest, as if it were out
of Iupiters braine, but that with ye good leaue of ye learned sort I might
explane my cōiecture, without all bitternes or disdaine as it were tou­ching
it by the way. In which behalfe I freely cōfes my selfe hardly to hold
opiniō with Hector Boetus the Scot, which (as his maner is) applieth all most
famous facts of antiqui­ty in Brittaine to yt cōmendatiō of his owne
coūtry, beyond all meane & measure. And here he boldly affirmeth ye Arthure
(with his last ensignes) fought it out not far frō ye great flow­ing riuer of
Seuerne, which he barbarously calleth Hūbar not knowing the circūstance of
the phrase.Nota. But the history of Brittaine beleeueth otherwise,Arthures
secōd battle with Mordred, and the place where, Graius a writer in the fauour
of Arthure. & affirmeth that he scourged his enemies in his last battle in
Cornwale: so yet notwith­standing as he mētioneth how Mordred was ye second
time vāquished and put to flight by Arthure at Winchester.

Graius vndoubtedly an excellent chāpion in behalfe ot ye truth & a stoute
assertor of Arthures glory, holdes ye same opi­nion. Neither singeth the sound
censured society of learned witnesses any other Song. But truely our
coniecture is not of the places, but of the name of the place. Sure­lie I am
almost brought to that poynte, to beleeue that the Riuer Alaune is easily
chaunged by the faulte of vn­learned Lybraryes into Camblan. M. Cambden. This
Riuer ryseth in Cornewale a fewe Myles aboue the Towne Athels­towe otherwise
Padstowe, a fisher Towne not so farre
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=25) scituate from
the Salte water of Seuerne: by meanes wherof, (but yet mixed with salte
waters) it runneth downe lower into the countrie. Aboute the heade springes of
that Origi­nall in Champion grounde, and a certaine waste plaine, there is a
famous place, somewhat more fruitfull of grasse thē of corne. The reporte
(amongest the inhabitants so many ages preserued) declareth that of olde time,
there was made a notable garboile by fighting in yt place, but in meane time
the truth of the historie is vnknowne vnto ye commō sorte. Many things no
doubt euen in this our age are founde out of ye same place by ploughmen &
those that delue at the Riuer: such as are these quoynes which shewe the
gouernments of auncient personages, ringes, fragments of harnesse & brasen
ornamēts for Bridles vnguilte, for trappers & also Saddles for Horses. This
is my coniecture, both by reason of the scituation of the place, & also for ye
name of ye riuer of Alaune, rūning hard by, yet not far dissonant (if a man
behold it more throughly) frō Camblan. Arthure now draweth neare, & passing
ouer ye ri­uer of Tamermouth, M. Cambden. by knowne passages, yet otherwise a
streame most violent in many places & most deepe (the enimy fugitiue not being
regarded) he pitcheth tents against tents. Behold, desperation (as oft times
it hapneth) restoreth vn­wonted boldnes to the ouercōmed part. And wherupon
both partes prouoke battle, burning with hope of spoyle & of victo­ry, as also
fearing nothing lesse then death.

Quis cladem illius pugnae, quis funera fando

Explicet? aut possit lachrymis aequare labores?

Who shall that bloodie broyle expresse or the dead corpses name?

Or who can iustly tell the toyles with iust teares for the same?

MOrdred the first forman of all mischiefe (this battle be­ing attempted) and
he thrust through with y• sword, re­ceiued a iust rewarde for his breach of
faith or periury.Mordred sl [...]ne outright. Let him be an example, & that
for euer, to such as for desire of go­uernment infringe and violate their
faith. There was slaine together with ye tyrant a great nūber of noble
personages & of old beaten souldiers: But neither was the victorie without
bloodsheddebefallen vnto Arthure. For in that broyle and [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=25) fierce fight,K.
Arthure re­ceiued his deaths wound, & yet had the victorie. himselfe was
either slaine outright, or wounded past recouery, so that a little while after
with publike lamēta­tiō of all Brittaine (but specially of his heauie
hearted cheua­lyers for the mischance of so noble a Prince) he was caried
a­way frō thence. And this in deede was the end or death of the most puissant
Prince Arthure.

### 1.8. CHAP. X.  
K. Arthures Commendation.

ARthure is nowe deade (if so hee may bee sayde to haue dyed well) whose fame,
memory, and prayse fully and wholly liue, and shine forth in the worlde.

Our ancestors,Auncient Ar­thors, as Poets, & Historiographers, writing in
commendation of K. Ar­thure. both Poets and also historiographers were so
friendly, honest, and thankefull towardes Arthure, that they both enobled his
fame and factes, and also adorned them with eternall memorie and commendation.
Theliesinus Melchinus, who is also called Meuinus, Ambrosius Mari­dunēsis, &
Merlinus Caledonius the most excellent starres of Brittaines antiquitie haue
performed this effect. Nennius and Samuell, historiographers of Brittaine haue
performed no lesse memorie bestowing their statelie st [...]les of
commenda­tions accordingly. Touching whome and others also wee haue before
fitly spoken in their places,Chrisistoriographus. affying in the autho­ryty of
Galfredus, Aluredus, Hēry of Huntington, Iohn termed the Golden
Historiographer, William of Malmes­burie. Graius, and Boccace.

But if it now auayle any man to knowe anything as yet more in matter and
larger discourse: I will not refuse (in the best dilligēce that I can) to
restore to light a fe [...]e wordes taken out of the most approued Authors.Is
[...]. Iosephus the wri­ter brought vp at Exceter in Deuonshire, and the
Golden floud of Greeke and Latine eloquence in his dayes, extolleth Arthure to
the very cloudes, not onely for his excellent prowesse, as in his Antiochides
appeareth by these verses, conten­ding for the victorie with the Romane
antiquitie.

Hinc caelebri fato faelici claruit ortu,

Flos Regum Arthurus: Cuius cum facta stupori

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=26) Non micuere
minus, quòd totus in aure voluptas,

Et populo narrante fauus, Quaecun (que) priorum,

Inspice: Pelleum  [...]omemndat fama Tyrannum.

Pagina Caesareos loquitur Romana tryumphos,

Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.

Sed nec Pinetum Coryli, nec sydera solem

Aequant, Annales Latios, Graios (que) reuolue.

Prisca parem nescit, aequalem Postera nullum

Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes.

Solus, praeteritis melior, maior (que) futuris.

Hence florished by famous fate, and origin prosperous

Arthure the flowre of kinges, whose deedes shined no lesse mer­ueilous

Thē that both peoples eares & tongues did in his praise delite:

As. If thou view of former wights, what euer bookes recite.

Fame doth Pelleus tyrant blaze: and Romane histories

Extoll their Caesars tryumphes greate, after their Victories.

Renoume aduanceth Hercules subduing Monsters greate:

But not Coryli, Pinetus, nor Stars the Sune his heate.

Coequate▪ Search the Cronicles of Greekes & Latines both:

Ancient age knoweth not his like, ne yet posteritie doth

His match declare. All kinges, alone in deede surmounteth he,

Better then those are deade & gone, Greater then any shall be.

THere hath beene seene latelie at Giastenburie a little Booke of matters
touching Antiquitie, gathered by a certaine most studious Moncke of ye same
Cloyster: who by exercise of Rethoricall coulour as it were handling an o­ther
matter▪ doth famously mētiō of Arthure in these wordes. I passe ouer with
silence also to speake of Arthure the no­ble king of Brittaine buried with his
wife betweene two Pyramedes within the churchyard of those Mōckes, & many
princes also of ye Brittaines. Siluester Giraldus Meneuēsis, a chiefe
fauoueer of Antiquitie in his booke entituled the Institution of a Prince,
enobleth Arthures fame with this maner speach.Siluester Giral­dus his
testi­mony of K. Arthure.

The memorie also of Arthure y• noble king of Brittaine ought not to be buried
or vtterly trodē vnder foote, whom y• histories of ye monastery of
Glastēbury (whose chiefe patron, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=26) factor and
mightie supporter he also was in his dayes) do much aduaunce.  [...] no doubt
a  [...] the Poet of his time, [...] and no lesse elegant,  [...] Ar­thures
praise in these verses, which euen at this day  [...] in his booke
Architrenio.

Alter Achilles

Arthurius, teretis mensae genitina venustas,

A Ramo Phrygius, dandi non vnda led aequor.

An other Achilles

Arthure was, whose first growne grace, through out his table rounde

Him Phrigius made as of a Branch with fruites which doth a boūd

For liberall hand, not Riuer he, but a maine sea [...] foūd.

BUt here if ouer & besides this I should endeuour large­ly, to adorne Arthure
with praise as the multitude of Authours do most truly write and agree vpon
him: sooner should copy of eloquence faile me, then magnificencie of
light­some testimony howsoeuer. Be it sufficient then that we vse at this
present the most famouse commendations,Trittem [...]us his testimony▪ who was
fa­mouse Anno. 1484. though of fewe writers. I pray you, what is the cause
that Tritte­meus in in his breefe Crounicle maketh so excellent mention of
Arthure. Ddoubtlesse the cause is plaine enough. For by reason he learned the
same of others in plaine trouth, there­fore did he as thankfull commit it vnto
posteritie: which thing doubtlesse he would neuer haue done, had he doubted of
the veritie of the cause,Trittemius his wordes in cō ­mendation of king
Arthure. But now let Trittemius him selfe in presence speake. Which Arthure
excelling in great huma­nitie, wisdome, clemencie and manhood, studied by all
endeuour to shew him selfe beloued and reuerenced of all, and to excell all:
because also he abounded in vali­ancie of minde with wonderfull liberalitie
towardes all men, and specially towardes Church men, vnto whome for zeale to
Godwardes, he gaue very many benefittes, yea and also rewardes. He droue out
of Brittaine both Saxons and Pictes. He mightely subdued, the Scottes,
Irish­men, and Orcades vnto his kingdome.

Volateranus Volateranus. in his third booke of Geography honoureth the fame of
Arthure & diligently celebrateth his valiant actes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=27) Furthermore
also Iacobus Philippus of Bergoma in his 9. booke of Cronicles, Iacobus
Phi­lippus Bergo­mas. aduanceth Arthures valiancie e­uen with most condigne
commendations.

And neither doth Nauclerus, in his history make any lesse relation of
him.Nauclerus his testimony These testimonies doubtlesse (men both most
learned & most exercised in Antiquitie would neuer haue set downe) if they had
not first beene fully perswaded, that Ar­thure in times past was aboundantly
notable by all orna­mentès of valiancie. But such is the lewdnesse of many
men, and their disdainefull minde, that they altogether being se­duced with
ignorance, (and that in deede very rude) do not manifestly see at full, but
blindly neglect, contemne, and alto­gether reiect the truth. Such Censors or
Judges in auncient histories let them go a Godes name, and let them enioy
their foolishnesse at full, I will not say their madnesse. What if I should
bring forth am [...]ngst the rest, that notable testimony of Hector Boaetius,
Hector Boaeti­us a Scottish writer. a writer in our time, touching ye
immortall glory of Arthure? Surely by this accompt nothing shal fall from his
dignitie, but very much shall be added therto for this cause, that y• Scots in
old time (I know not by what instinct of nature) hated the Brittaines as y•
Prouerbe sayeth. Odio Vatiniano. Whereupon, to be praysed of an aduersarie,
e­nemie and euen a deadly foe, standeth in place of a rewarde for
victory.Hector Boae­nus his com­mendation of K. Arthure. These are then his
words. King Arthure was no lesse famouse in glory for notable exploytes, & for
maie­stie, then the Kinges of Brittaine, which liued before his dayes:
whereupon the Brittaines during his raigne very much encreased in riches &
power. Thus far saith Boaetiꝰ. What iust occasion wish I here to be giuen me
of Polidorus the Italian, Polidorus Vir­gillius a cor­rupt witnesse of King
Arthures worthi­nesse. that euē by some memorable testimony of his, I might
also aduaunce Arthures countinance, & make him looke aloft? He handleth
Arthures cause in deed, but by the way, he yet is so fainte harted, luke warme
& so negligent y• he makes me not onely to laugh, but also to be angry (as
while he is contrary to truth, and filled wt Italian bitternesse) I know not
whether he smile or be angry. For he wresteth him selfe wretchedly in the
aptnesse of the history, which yet that he might frame after a sort, he is
compelled, will hee [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=27) nill he, to come
in fau [...]ur wt Geoffry of Monmouth: whom before (as it seemed vnto him) he
had in many words (pro­ceeding mightely rather of bitter stomacke, then of
good dis­gestion) corrected also at his owne controlemēt. Whom for y• as an
interpreter I haue once or twise only defēded in a cause as no doubte most
iust. (A danger in deed great might red [...]ūd vpon my heade) if I should
passe beyond ye boundes of equity. I will take heede therefore, and trusting
onely in ye ver [...]tie of the cause, I will continually beare the same
aboute wt me for a bulwarcke & sure defence. Though Polidore hold his peace it
is not needfull by and by for the whole worlde to be mute: And although Italy
in times past so esteemed of Arthure, and yet still doth, when bookes printed
both of his prowesse, & victories (as I haue learned) are read in the Italian
tongue yea in y• Spanish, Bookes prin­ted of Arthure in forraine language
[...]. and also in the French tongue: whereupon also the English collection of
Thomas Mailerius his trauaile, is published abroade. The aduersarie I know
will say, that many lyes haue crept into those bookes. Wherefore this is
nothing els, but to Teach him which is fully taught. As I contemne fables, so
I reuerence & imbrace ye truth of the histo­ry: neyther will I suffer this to
be taken away from mee at any time, but with losse of life. Unthankfull
persons I vtter­ly eschew and I betake me vnto those Rockes & monumēts, the
true witnesses of Arthures renoume and maiestie. And in this behalfe,Siluester
Gi [...]al­dus in his I­tenerario tou­ching Breck­nocke. Siluester Geraldus
Meneuensis, entertay­neth me comming to him wt these wordes taken out of that
worke of his called Itenerariū. He vnderstandes conclusiue­ly that Brecania
or Brecknock rounde about is the Land so called as it were by reason of the
lostis blastes from ye North winde. From Zephirus or the Westerly winde, it
hath the mountaine places of Canter Vehā, alias ye lesse Vehany, frō Auster
or the sontherly winde, it hath hilles southwarde, whereof the principall is
called in the Brittaine language Cair Arture: Cair Arthure or Arthures Castle.
that is to say Arthures Castle, by reason of the two toppes of the hilles
ascendinge vpwardes shew­inge them selues in maner of a Castle.K. Arthures
Chaire of State. And because the Chaire of State is there erected in a high
and harde place it is by a common name assigned vnto
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=28) the high and
mightie Arthure King of Brittaine. These saith Siluester, Baldwinum ali [...]s
Mount­gomery. Giraldus. Now must I take my iourney from the hilles of Brecania
vnto Baldwine, a Towne in olde time famouse, which for foure hundreth yeares
and more a­gone, (of Roger then gouernoure of Mountgomerie, and Earle of
Shrowsbury, was called Mountgomerie. Here amongest the ruinous olde Cotages of
the walles,King Arthures Gate there. is a place by common reporte knowne,
which the remnant of the citizens of later age do call Arthures gate. Truly
the people of Wales haue alwayes beene and as yet are with a certaine
Gentlemanly feruent affection bent to set forth the praises of their Princes.
Gentlemen of Wales praise worthie in praysing their Prince studi­ously
addicted. Through which title euen at this day shyneth forth the fame together
also with the commendation not vulgar of Arthure sirnamed the greate: who is
also called in the Brittaine language Arthure Vaur. Maur In the Brittish
tongue signifieth great:King Arthure sirnamed Ar­thure the great but the fond
pronunciation of the welch tongue (in the worde Copulatiue Maure) turneth M.
into V. Like as also in other wordes by reason of their proper tearming, B. is
oftentimes turned into V.

### 1.9. CAP. XI.  
The Antiquitie of Aualonia.

THe circumstance of speach, here admonisheth me that I expresse somewhat
touching Arthures buriall: where­of as I haue made sufficient mention, so
iudge I it specially (for the lightsome order) conuenient that I should first
with exquisite diligence consecrate vnto posteritie the Anti­quitie of that
place,Diffinition of Aualonia the place where King Arthure was buried. whither
vnto the deade corpes was caried. Aual in the Brittish tongue signifieth
Malum, (or as I may with a more commō phraise interprete it) Pomum, an Aple:
and Aualon signifieth Pomarium, or Orcharde. By reason whereof also, of
Merlinus Caledonius, (as Geoffrey Ar­thurius of Monmouth interpreteth the
same) it is called the Isle of Apples,Geoff [...]y of Monmouth his testimony
[...]hereo:. in these wordes.

Insula  [...]omorum quae fortunata vocatur,

[...]'x re nomen habet, quia per se singula profert.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=28) Non opus
est illi sulcantibus arua colonis:

Omnis abest cultus nisi quem natura ministrat.

Vltro foecundas segetes producit & Vuas:

Nataque poma suis, praetonso germine syluis.

The Isle of Apples, which called is fortunate,

Of effect hath name, for it bringes forth all thinges:

The seeded ground no neede of Plowmen hath,

All tillage wantes, saue that which Nature bringes.

Of it owne accorde it beares both Grapes & Corne,

And apples grow in woods, first grafts being pruned & shorne.

MElchinus the Brittaine makes mention of Aualonia and of the religious place
there.Melchinus. Siluester Giraldus in his booke De Institutione Principis,
thus speaketh. And y• is­land which at this day is called Glastenbury, was
called in auncient time Aualonia: For it is an Islande altogether en­vironed
with moorish or fenny groundes:Siluester, Giral­dus & Whereupon in the
Brittish tongue it is called Aualon, that is, an Island fruitefull of apples:
For with apples (which in the Brittish tongue are called Aual) this place
aboundeth.

Patricius the Apostle or teacher amongest the Irishmen in a certaine Epistle
makes mention of this place,Patricius, all 3. witnesses of Avalonia. but by
an­other name, whose wordes also I will hereunto annex.

I haue conuerted Ireland vnto the way of truth, and when I had grounded them
in the christian faith, I retur­ned at length into Brittaine, & as I beleeue
(by the gui­dance of God, who is the way and the life) I chaunced into the
Island Iniswitriue, Alias Ciuitas,  [...] trina, nunc Glastenbury. wherein I
found a holy and auncient place chosen of God, and consecrated vnto the Virgin
Mary, and there also founde I certaine Brethrē instructed with the rudiments
of the Christian faith,Supposed ra­ther to be  [...]. which succeeded the
Disciples of Fugatius and Dami­anus.

Thus farre sayth Patri [...]ius: who in that place of his epistle also
recyteth the names of twelue religious persons: where of two were noble
personages: Of all which twelue, he had chiefe Rule, as by these wordes it is
manifest.

So they preferred me (though against my will) before
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=29) themselues.
And againe, in the same Epistle the brethren shewed me writings of those holy
men Fugatius and Dami­anus, F [...]ga [...]tis and Dir [...]aianus. wherein
was conteyned that the twelue Disciples of S. Philip and Iacob the Apostles
had founded and erected that auncient Church: and that three Pagan kinges had
gi­uen so many possessions of land vnto those twelue.

And last of al how that Fugatius & Damianus had builded a chappell on a high
hill,Vt ante dixi, Fagaunt & Di­ruuianus. not farre from Aualonia in the
ho­nor of God and S. Michaell. Heere is enough at this presēt (euen touch and
goe) to haue vnderstanding of the reuerend father Patricius his Epistle.

Gulielmus Meildunensis, W. of Malmes­burie his testi­mony. in his booke of the
antiquitie of the religious house at Glastenburie, and in his first booke of
kinges vnto Henrie Blesensis otherwise Soliasensis Bi­shop of Venta▪ Simenorum
or Winchester, writeth not vn­like matters. Wherupon also by good coniecture
it may bee scene that this William, tooke his translations out of the E­pistle
of Patricius Siluester Giraldus in his booke De Insti­tutione Principis,
Siluester Gi­raldus his testimony and ex­planation of Glastenburie. not
inconueniently explaneth the Etymō or true interpretation of the name. It was
also in times past called in the brittish language  [...]niswitrine: by ye
which word the Saxones which came thether afterwarde called that place
Glastenbury. For Gles in their tongue signifieth Vitrum or glasse, and Bury
signifieth Castrum or Castle, and is called together the city of Glastenburie.
These doth he affirme. Tru­ly vnto me this seemeth to bee a  [...]cule faulte
in writers of bookes that they heere do recite Byry for burg or berg: Byry in
the Saxon tongue is in Latine Curia: As for example, Al­dermanburie, that is
to say Seniorum Curia. Also Litlebyry, that is Parua Curia. Canonbyry commonly
called Canbyry. Burg otherwise Borow, signifieth a hill, and high places of
earth cast vp. Finally Beng is in the Latine tongue called Castrum: by reason
whereof I more truly beleeue we must reade Berg or Burg, for a Castle: which
worde Giraldus vseth or maketh it to serue for a Towne: although as I may
freely confesse, I finde the name written diuersly amongest the ancients viz.
Glessenbyry Glestōbury and Glessēburg. And there are which pronounce Glas
for Gles: Although [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=29) Gles is more
perfect and more Auncient, as by the name of the Islandes of Glastenburie it
appeareth plainly.

### 1.10. CHAP. XII.  
K. Arthures Buriall.

NEither can I, nor wil I publish for trueth, whether Ar­thure dyed out right
in the battle fought at Alaune, Writers of Brittaine affirming where Arthure
died. which is commōly called Camblā, or at Aualonia, while his woūds were
in healing. The writers of Brittaine with one voyce holde argument, that he
dyed at Aualonia, through griefe of the same woundes: But touching the place
of his buriall, they doe all agree as one.

This one thing dare I be bolde to affirme,The Brittaines sorowfull for the
death of K. Arthure. the Brittanes were so sorowfull for the death of their
Soueraigne Lorde, that they endeuored by all meanes to make the same famous,
and to leaue the name of their Gouernour euen for euer feare­full and to bee
trembled at amongest the Saxones: So farre foorth as they with a certaine
plausible and straunge inuen­tion did spreade abroade Rumors both of his
comming a­gaine, and of his ruling againe. Touching the againe com­ming (of
Arthure so woūded to death) into Aualonia afore­said, certaine Brittaines did
blindly write.Merlinus Caledonius a writer his verses of K. Arthures death But
none more at large nor more lightsome, then Merlinus Caledonius being
instructed (as some men suppose) of Theliesinus the Poet: whose verses also I
will heere annex, selected out of his little booke of prophecy, Geoffrey
Arthurius beeing interpreter thereof.

Illuc post Bellum Camblani vulnere laesum,

Duximus Arthurum, nos conducente Barincho.

Aequora cui fuerant, & coeli Sidera nota.

Hoc Rectore ratis, cum Principe venimus illuc,

Et nos quo decui [...] Morgan suscepit honore,

In (que) suis thalamis posuit super aurea Regem

Fulcra, manu (que) sibi detexit vulnus honesta,

Inspexit (que) diu: tandem redire salutem.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=30) Posse sibi
dixit, si secum tempore longo

Esset, & ipsius vellet Medicamina fungi.

Gaudentes igitur, Regem commissimus illi,

Et dedimus ventis redeundo vela secundis.

The English.

Thether after the battle was at Camblan fiercely fought.

(Barinchus so conducting vs) we Arthure wounded brought.

Who knew the seas, & of the stars the Clymats perfectly,

By this guider of the hel [...]e with Prince we thether ply.

And Morgan vs receiued as it behouea with honor dewe,

In Chāber his on Goldē hearse,

Morgan a faithfull friend and true subiect vnto Arthure.

and laide the king to view.

And with his friēdly hād forthwith did Arthures woūd vnhill,

Long looking thereon, said, may be life come againe yet will.

If he along time were with him, & would his medicines vse,

Therfore with ioy the king to him we did betake to chuse,

And hoist our sailes with prosperous wind▪ by our returne our porte to finde.

SYluester Gyraldus writeth in his Speculo Ecclesiasti­co, that Morgās noble
wife made prouision for Arthures [...]uriall.Morgans wife made prouisiō for
Arthures buriall. And againe, in his booke De Institutione Principis he makes
relation of these thinges. Whereupon also the no­ble wife of Morgan, and
Gouernesse of those partes againe as Patronesse there and also neare of blood
vnto Arthure, after the battle at Kemelen caused him to be conueyed into an
Isle (which now is called Glasconia) to cure and heale vp his woundes.

The interpretor of the Brittish history, writeth of the death of
Arthure,Brittannicae Historiae Interpres testimonium dat de morte Arthurii. on
this manner, as in his sixt booke appeareth. Arthure being wounded vnto death
at the battle at Cam­blan went vnto Aualonia, his kingdome being left vnto
Constantine the sonne of Cadorius Duke of Cornwale.

Iohannes Burgensis Abbot, in his Annales hath left these wordes in credible
writinges. Iohannes Bur­gensis testimoniū de eodem. When Arthure was at the
pointe of death, he kept him selfe secret, that his enemies should not insult
at such and so great a mishap, nor his friends be discōforted as troubled in
minde. Thus farhe.

Now must wee speake of the relious place at Aualonia, wherein Arthure was
buried.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=30) Melchinus
specially makes mention of this and also of Ar­thure buried there.Aualonia cō
­mended by 3. writers. viz. M [...]lchinus, & Malmsbury Giraldus.

Gulielmus a Medulphi curia both els where, and speci­ally in his booke De
antiquitate Glessoburgensi, religious­ly celebrateth this place where Arthure
was buried.

The same thing doth Giraldus Meneuensis also in his Speculo Ecclesiastico, and
in his booke De Institu­tione Principis, religiouse houses were not at that
time so common, and in so many places of Brittaine, as they be in these dayes.

Saxons of noble linage, a people without knowledge of God if happely being
sicke they dyed at home, were buryed in pleasant gardens: if they were flame
abroade, and in bat­tell, they were then buryed in graues digged out of the
earth, which they called Burghs, Burying place [...] how and  [...]or whom in
those dayes. neare vnto their tentes: but the base common people were buried
euen in medowes and o­pen fieldes. There was at that time a religiouse place
neare vnto the olde Church, in very greate estimation. By which title and of
the whole nobilitie in all the west Prouinces of Brittaine, it was chosen as a
place allotted for their burials. The same was afterwardes often done by such
Saxons as had the knowledge of God. As at Douer of the Kentish­men, at Yorke
of the Brygantes, at Lindiffarna or Ly­land and so forth in other places.
Concerning the place of his buriall it is now sufficient manifest.

It remayneth that I make declaration of the ceremony and manner of his
buriall.Ceremonies vsed at King Arthure his buriall. There was present (but
secretly) a Troupe of Noble personages which mourned for ye death of their
soueraigne Lord bereft frō them by such sinister fate. The wife of Morgan
alone prouided for the buriall thinges needfull:Morgans noble wife a­lone
prouided for Kinge Ar­thures buriall. a woman doubtlesse of incomperable
godlinesse, who performed all ceremonies and seruices with greefe of minde,
and floudes of teares. The manner in those dayes was to bury in the graues,
and to lay them as a sur­ceasing from sorrow to the vse of Tombes or sepulcres
great boules or bodyes of Alder trees, whereof the places about Aualonia neare
adioyning were most fruitfull. For the Al­der tree hath I know not what
propertie with the naturall
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=31) moyst ground,
such as is a Churchyarde: so farre forth as the substance thereof laide on
this sorte, more deepe in the Earth, should be reputed for euerlasting not
onely. The bo­dy of Arthure thus bewailed and mourned for,How he was interred
in the earth. was buryed in a graue of sufficient depth, with the greate boale
of Alder tree therein laide hollow. And because he liued most mag­nificent in
fame, factes, and rule of his kingdome (they fo­lowing diligently the custome
and integritie of Christians in this poynt) bestowed vpon the Tombe of Arthure
so buried,Monumentes of him. a toaken of perpetuall memory namely a Crosse,
signyfyinge Mnemosynen vitae perpetuae: that is to say, the remem­brance of
life euerlasting. It was made of a leaden plate, one foote long more or lesse,
which I haue beholden with most curiouse eyes, and handled with feareful
ioyntes in each part, being moued both with the Antiquitie and worthinesse of
the thing. It conteyneth vpon it these wordes in those not so greate Romane
letters, but indifferent cunningly gra­uen. viz.

HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX ARTHVRIVS, IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

But here peraduenture some curiouse person would search out for what purpose
the inscription was commended to our memory vpon the leaden plates. It was a
most vsual manner in that age, and endured euen vntill latter times to bestow
vpon Noble mens Tombes leaden plates engrauen. Of which not a fewe haue I
seene in euery place throughout all Brittaine. Leade of his nature is ea­silie
engrauen, and when it is once grauen continueth both a very long time, and
also most firmly, as witnesseth ex­perience.This was set vp in places where
enemies were vanquished by the Emperour. The myne hilles where leade groweth
much, are scarce fiue miles distant from Aualonia. The Romans as Lordes of
riches, were not ashamed to set vp a standard of stone vnto Claudius Caesar by
a very long table of leade, almost in the very bottomes of those hilles at the
head [...] springes of the fabulus little floude▪ Ochides within the
iu­risdiction of Fontanus the Bishoppe, engrauen on this man­ner. TI. CLAVDIO
CAESARI. AVGVST. P. M. TR. P. VIIII. IMP. XVI. DE BRITAN. This [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=31) Standard of Stone
a few yeares past was turned vp out of the earth by the plowe,In tempo re
regni  [...] Reg.  [...]. and translated vnto the house of Tho­mas Howarde,
Duke of Northfolke at London.

### 1.11. CAP. XIII.  
The two Pyrameds in that religious place.

WIthin the burying place which was consecrated at Aualonia stand two Pyramedes
of most auncient buylding,Within the burying place were set vp  [...] 3\.
Pyrameds. bearing a shew of figures & letters, but the windes, stormes, and
time which consumeth all thinges, finally enuy of man from time to time haue
so defaced the notable figures and inscription of auncient workes, that they
can scarce be discerned by any neuer so sharpe sight of the eye.Auncient
wri­ters commen­ding the same. The conti­nuall trauell of writers commendeth
these, and specially the diligence of Gulielmus Meildunensis that greate
Antiqua­ry: whom also Siluester Geraldus euen he a louer of Anti­quities, doth
follow at an inche. Doubtlesse both of thē handle their matters learnedly:
The one whereas by exquisite la­bour he restored to light a fresh, both titles
and figures which were not altogether raced out of knowledge for foure
hun­dreth yeares before, according as in his famouse and elegant litle booke
De Antiquitate Glessoburgensi, appeareth. The other in that he leaning vnto
sound argumentes and relati­on of auncient writers, proueth that Arthures
Tombe was in times past eyther erected betwene the two Pyrameds, or in a place
not far distant from them.King Arthures Tombe where it was erected. Of
Giraldus we wil say more in the Tombe of Arthure found.

In the meane time, I wil herevnto annex the discrip­tion of the Pyrameds,
artificially purtrayed out by the very pencilles of the same Gulielmus, as it
were in a plaine table to the eyes of the beholders. And where as that no
doubte is vnknowne vnto all men, I would willingly publish it, (if I could
possibly expresse the truth) what those Pyrameds do meane,The meaning and
discription of those two Pyramede [...] which being erected in a litle space
from the olde Church do after a sorte include the Churchyarde of those
religiouse persons.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=32) Undoubtedly
the more statelyer,Tabulatus larger, and nearer Pyramed vnto the Church hath
fyue storyes height or flooers boorded, & is in height, 26. foote. This
although it foreshewed some de­cay by reason of ye too much oldnesse, yet hath
it a few appa­rant spectacles of Antiquitie, which may be plainely reade,
al­though they can not fully be vnderstode.Note the blindnesse of that time in
prefer­ring a Bishop before a king. For in the vpper story or floore boorde is
made an image in likenesse of a Bi­shoppe. In the second is an Image
expressing a Kingly state, and letters: Her, Sex, & Bliswerh. In the third
neuerthe­lesse are names. Wem Creste. Bantomp. Winewegn. In the fourth. Hate▪
Wulfredi & Franflede. In the fifte, and which is the lowest, an image and this
writing. Logwor. Weslielas & Bregdene. Swellwes, Huyrgendes berne. But the
other Pyramed hath 18. foote height and foure storyes or flooers boorded
wherein these wordes are reade, Hedde, Episcopus & Bregorred & Beorwalde. What
these may signifie I do not rashly define: but I gather by suspition, that
within or about the same place are laide in hollow stones the bones of them
whose names are reade on the outside. Surele Logwor for certaine is affirmed
to be the person by reason of whose name Logweres Beorh, was so called, which
is now called Montacute. Beorwalde neuerthelesse was Abbot after Hem­giselus.
These saith Meildunensis (vnto whom the learned ought to referre these
Pyrameds) as from him by all meanes borowed, and most famously set forth. Now
ye lady Guen­hera offereth her selfe to be ioyned wt A [...]hure her Husband.

### 1.12. CAP. XIIII.  
What manner Person Guenhera was.

I Haue easely beleeued, that Guenhera was descended out of the progeny of the
Dukes of Cornwale: both leaninge vnto other argumentes, and also for this
cause specially, that the History of Brittaine makes mention yt she was
brought vp in ye Pallas of Cadorus [...]uke of Cornwale, Where the Lady
Guenhe­ra was brought vp. & also from hence taken vnto wi [...]e by Arthure.
The coniecture is, and that not altogether vncertaine this name of Guenhera
soundeth in the Brittish language the same that Bella Dona [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=32) doth in the
Italian & in frēch. Belle Dame, no doubt the name was giuen for some fame: as
Guenllean, that is White or fayre Leonora, Her descriptiō. or of coniecture
Helena: so as ye worde White may signifie faire, beautifull, or amiable.
[...]ut as it is suffici­ently apparant ye she was beautifull, so it is a
thing doubted, whether she was chaste yea or no. Truly so far as I can with
honestie I would spare the impayred honor and fame of noble womē: But yet the
truth of ye historie pluckes me by the eare, & willeth not onely, but
commandeth me to declare what the Ancients haue deemed of her. To wrestle or
contend with so greate authoritie were in deede vnto me a controuersie and
that greate.Beautie & Chastitie seldom a­gree inuiolab­ly. The historie of
Brittaine affirmeth, that she had not onely carnall knowledge of Mordred the
Pict, but also that she was ioyned to him in mariage. O mischiefe, O lewd
life, O filthy dayes.

The writer of the historie of Gildas is in deede an Aun­cient Author,Anonimus.
(but in mine exemplar that same Anonymus) declareth these things of Guenhera
the adultresse.A writers testi­monie tou­ching Guenhera.

Arthure in despite of M [...]lua the ruler, beseeged the fenny countries neare
vnto Glesconia: which noble man had defi­led Guenhera being stolne away and
caried thether. This testimonie as touching a Queene, though hee say she was
stolne away, is scarce honourable. Women of such beauty are now and then
stolne away by their owne good will. Howsoeuer it was, most assured is this,
that she liued no long time after the Death of her Husband, and the Adulterer.
But whether through any disease of the bodie, or with vnfayned sorrowe she
dyed (which I doe sooner beleeue) it appeareth not playnely. Writers make
mention, that the beeing moo­ued with repentance did put vpō her a holy Veyle
at Ambro­sia, and that there she dyed and was also there buried, vntill both
the dilligence and also Godlinesse of Sir Lancelot the most courteous and most
inuincible knight had translated the bones and ashes afterwardes vnto
Aualonia. Sir Lancelot, knight, a friend of Guenhera [...] after her death.
Heere aryseth a doubt against the suspition of this Adulterie.

Whether so notable a Louer or friend of Arthure, and the same a reuerencer of
his royaltie had cōmitted such a fact that hee woulde burie the Adultresse in
the most Religiouse
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=33) place so
neare her husbāds graue in the earth.Nota. where she was buried. The history
of the cloister at Glastēbury which was dilligētly collected, fully sheweth
that Guenhera was buried in the religious place neare her husbandes Tombe, and
that her bones and ashes were found the same time that her husbandes were.

Siluester Giraldus Menenēsis cōfirmeth this in his booke De Institutione
Principis speaking of Arthure in the [...]e wordes.

For hee had two wiues, whereof in deede the last was buryed with him,Siluester
Giraldus his testimony both of Ar­thure & of Guenheraes dead corpses. and her
bones founde at one time with her husbandes bones, so yet separated that the
two parts of the graue towardes the head, namely (which should containe the
bones of her husband) had beene as­cribed vnto him: But the third part at the
feete cōtained the bones of a woman vpwardes. Where as also a yeal­low locke
of a womās haire, with the former integrity & coulour was foūd, which as a
certaine Moncke desirously caught vp in his hand & lifted it vp, it altogether
streight­way perished into dust or pouder.

The same Giraldus recyteth such like matters in his booke intituled Speculo
Ecclesiastico: Hee doubtlesse might well with some authority speake concerning
this geare, for so much as, euen then he (beeing established in the fauour of
K. Kichard coeur de Lion, king of England) came the ve­ry same time that the
Sepulchre was found at Glastenbury, and as an eye witnes (by cōduction of
Henry de Soliaco ne­phew vnto K. Henry by Adela and cosen germaine of K.
Richard beeing the president of Glastenburie, De Soliaco. but after­wardes
Bishop of Winchester) learned full and whole all thinges which vnto Arthure
appertained.

Yet notwithstanding, if it were lawfull for me heere to speake all thinges
which I thinke, I would surely af­firme that those thinges are of farre better
credite, which are delyuered vs of Arthures buryall, then of Guenheras. And
yet woulde I not doe any iniurie vnto the Authory­tie of Auncyent wryters,
that euen the posteritie in time to come myght not handle mine Authoritie or
allegation in a worse manner. At Glastenbury vppon the Tombe [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=33) of Lydias Marble
or Touchstone Artyficially engrauen (and erected for Arthure and also for
Guenhera) these two little verses,Arthures and Guenheras Tombe ercted at
Glastenbury. sauoring of that his time, are written in this manner.

Hic iacet Arturi coniux tumulata secunda,

Her Epitaph.

Quae meruit coelos, Virtutum prole faecunda.

The second wife of Arthure heere, entomed lo doth ly,

Who for the fruites of Vertuous life deserued the heauens on hye.

THere bee which say that Henry Suynesius Abbot of Glastenbury was the composer
of these verses: Except any man thinke that Henry Blesensis alias Soliacensis
chaunged his name into Suynesius, in whose time the bones and ashes both of
Arthure and also of Guenhera were founde.

But what Giraldus & Henricus do meane by the name of Second wise, truly I doe
not sufficiently vnderstand. For so much (as I cā remēber) I haue neither
hard of the name nor memorie of a second wife vntill this day.

But let credite remaine with Authors: by the latter part of the second litle
verse (Virtutū prole faecūda) it appeareth y• Guenhera was more vertuous
thē apt to beare children. Nei­ther am I ignorāt what Boetius writeth
here,Nota. How Guenhe­ra was stolne a­way of the Pictes. that in times past
there was a sharp battle fought betweene Arthure and Mordred, at the riuer of
Hūber, and yt Guenhera being euē there caried away of ye Picts, into their
tents, afterwards died and was buried at Horestia in the streete Angusia. But
I leaue Hector to the reporte of Veremūdus & Turgotus those obscure writers.
And it might so bee, that the Tombe was there erected for another Guenhera not
Queene.

### 1.13. CHAP. XV.  
K. Arthures Tombe found.After Arthures death, the Sax­ons florished, but the
Brit­taines perished

WHen the Saxones powre grewe to some force after Arthures death, & that the
Picts & Scots by and by were put to flight, & chased away beyond the vale of
Seuerne, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=34) The
same Saxones began not so much to feare, and much lesse to esteeme of, but
rather openly to set at nought the remnauntes of those vanquished Brittaines.
Wherefore, the glory of them beganne to floorish, but of the Brittaines to
decrease and fade away:Saxones were negligent in the fame of Britones▪ their
posteritie. Yet so, as the Saxones left almost nothing (touching affaires
passed betweene them and the Brittaines) at that time perfectly written for
the posterytie.

For, those thinges which were written (after Christ was knowne vnto them)
concerning the first victories of the Sax­ones, are deliuered by the reportes
of the common people, & so receiued, and in writinges so committed: or els the
Brit­taines being vtterly worne away by so many battles, be­stowed scarce any
iust or right dilligence in writing of the his­torie. Only there are extant
certaine fragments of Gildas the Moncke of the City Bangor rather flaying
aliue,Iohn Stowe dismem­bring, and wounding to death the Brittaines, then
allowing them with any value of vertue, so farre foorth as he seemeth a
Rethorician thorowly moued to make euyll reporte. By this meanes were the
affaires of Brittaine, through calamitie of battles left obscure or
vnrebayled. The historicall singers on­ly studied to preserue also with
musicall meanes the famous memorie of Nobles in those daies.Bardi were such as
sung to the harpe, the famous factes of noble personages. They sung the famous
facts of noble personages vpō the harp. This studie or practise wonderfully
profited knowledge, as it were deliuered by hand vnto posterity. Whereupon in
deede it so commeth heere to passe also, that the name, fame, and glory of
Arthure might so be preserued after a sorte.

O factum bene.

Si quid mea Carmina possunt,

Aonio statuam sublimes vertice Bardos.

Bardos Pieridum cultores, at (que) canentis,

Phoebi delitias, quibus est data cura perennis,

Dicere nobilium clarissima facta virorum

Aurea (que) excelsam famam super astra locare.

The English.

O well done.

If any thing my verses may auayle,

These statelie singers then aduance Will I,

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=34) That high
Parnassus mount for to assaile.

As singers honouring the Muses friendes duly,

And Phoebus his delightes singing sweetly.

The famous actes of noble men to blase,

And stately fame I'th golden heauens to place.

WIlliam A Norman had conquered the Nation of Englishmen by permission of
God,Anno.  [...]. a Christo nat [...]. and now came the kingdome of England,
1154\. Regni. Anno. 1. vnto Henry the second of that name, Nephew by Matildes
the daughter of Henry Beau­clercke, and the Sonne of Geoffry Plantagenet, Duke
of Gaunt. This man endeuoring by all meanes to enlarge the limittes of his
kingdome,1154\. Regni. Anno. 1. applyed also his minde vnto the kingdome of
Ireland. Richard of Clare Erle of Chepstowe, (so called by reason of the
wanderinge Riuer) a man both most noble by birth, fortune, and vertue, went
into Ireland, beeing before requested of Deronutius the ruler of Lagenia, so
to do: in which expedition hee beha­ued him selfe so valiantly,Giraldus. C
[...]brensis calleth him Richard Strongbow [...] Earle of C [...]p­stow. that
(they being cast out by heapes put to flight, and vanquished which withstood
the Ruler) he purchased him selfe fame an immortall glory and (if this also
might any thing auaile to the purpose) he obtayned be­sides greate riches vnto
him selfe thereby,Iohn stow. taking to wife E­ua the daughter of Deronicius,
and heire by right nougth. King Henry had vnderstanding of the successe of
Richard the Erle of Chepestowe, and whether he enuyed his glory, or (which is
most like) that hee earnestly sought the pray of this rich kingdome, hee
forbad this Richard in the meane time to  [...]eare rule in Ireland, not
disdayning yet to proffer him reward. He being wise, fully knowing the Princes
pur­pose, gaue place vnto this right. In the meane season Henry hauing
prepared no small part of an Hoast, came into Cambria or Wales, 1157\. Regni
Anno. 3. and purposing there to appoynt the resi­due, he thēce straight
sayled from Menenia or Sanct Dauids into Ireland, Iohn stow. with hope of
which kingdome to obtaine, hee burned as hote as fire. Whiles he busieth him
selfe here a­boutes being (for his worthinesse as befitted) receyued of the
Gouernoures of Wales, at h [...]s banquettes there (vsing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=35) an
Interpreter) he gaue eare not with out pleasure vnto the historicall singers,
which singe to the Harpe famous actes of noble men. Truly there was one
amongst the rest most skilfull in knowledge of Antiquitie.King Henry the
second for his valiancy compared to▪ K. Arthure and was inquisitiue after his
mo­nument. He so sunge the praises and noble actes of Arthure comparing Henry
with him as Conquerour in time to come for many respectes, that hee both
wonderfully pleased, & also delighted the Kinges eares: at what time also y•
King learned this thing especially of the historical singer, that Arthure was
buried at Aualonia in the religiouse place. Whereupon sending away the saide
sin­ger as witnesse of such a monument most liberally rewar­ded, he had
conference with Henricus Blesensis, alîas Soli­acensis his nephew, who euen
then or a litle after was made of an Abbot in the Isle of Bermundsege, cheife
Magistrate ouer Glastenbury that he might with most exquisite diligēce search
out thorowly the Tombe or burying place of Arthure within the compasse of that
religiouse house. It was assay­ed by him other whiles and at length founde out
with greate difficulty, in the last dayes,King Arthures Tombe found Anno Ric.
Re­gis▪ 1. as some suppose of Henry the se­cond, King of England: but as
others thinke (vnto whom I easely assent) in the beginning of the raigne of
Richard the first, his Sonne.

Touching both this searching for, and finding out of the bones, two persons
specially amongst others haue written their mindes: of which two one was a
Moncke of Glasten­bury, and by name vnknowne to me, but the other was
Sil­uester Giraldus. Siluester Gi­raldus Furdermore there had beene hereunto
added also Gulielmus Meildunensis, as the third witnesse to be conferred with
them both,M [...]lmsbury. but that death had taken him away in his aged yeares
before the Scpulcre or Tombe was found. The testimonies of these men will I
vse especially, and at this instant I will bring hether the wordes of
Anno­nymus the Moncke.The place where King Arthure his Tombe was found at that
time and the manner therof King Arthure was entombed, like as (by K. Henry ye
second) Henry y• Abbot had learned, whose cosen germane & familier friend he
of late was. But ye King had often times heard this out of the actes of the
Brittaines & of their historicall singers, that Arthure was buried neare vnto
the old Church in the religiouse place betweene two [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=35) Pyramedes in
times past, nobly engrauen, and erected as it is reported for the memory of
him.

And King Arthure was buryed verie deeply for feare of the Saxons, whom he had
often times vanquished, & whome he had altogether reiected or cast out of the
Isle of Brittaine. And whome Mordred his mischeeuous Nephew had first called
backe againe and brought thither against him: least they (should also with
mallice of minde raige in crueltie to­wardes the deade body) which had
laboured by tooth & naile euen now to possesse againe the whole Island after
his death. Againe for and in respect of the same feare, he was laide in a
certaine broade stone, (as it were at a graue) found of them which digged
there, of seauen foote as it were vnder ye earth: when yet notwithstanding
Arthures Tombe was founde more lower, of nyne foote depth. There was moreouer
founde a leaden crosse not set into the vppermost but rather neathermost parte
of the stone,Nota His inscription & the subtile deuise of the Workmen in those
dayes. hauing thereon these letters engrauen. HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX
ARTHVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

And the Crosse taken out of the stone, (the saide Abbot Henry shewing the
same) we haue seene with our eyes, and haue reade these letters. But like as
the Crosse was in­fired to the neathermost parte of the stone: So that parte
of the crosse engrauen (to the ende it might bee more secrete) was turned
towardes the stone. Doubtlesse a wonderfull industrie and exquisite wisdome of
the men in that age, who by all endeuoures desired to hide in secret manner
the body of so greate a personage, and their Soueraigne Lord, especially the
Patrone of that place, by reason of the instant troubled state: And who yet
had further care that at one or other time afterwardes (when the trouble
surceased, by the perfect order of those letters engrauen in the Crosse and
found out other whiles) they might make apparant testimonies of his buriall.

And as the foresaide King Henry had before declared all the matter to the
Abbot: so the body of Arthure was found not in a marble Tombe (as it befitted
so notable a Kinge)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=36) NOw in fit
time comes forth Siluester Giraldus, Siluester Giral­dus his testi­monie of
Ar­thure his Tombe foūd. that same eye witnesse of Arthures bones and ashes
found, and aptly adioyneth his accounte vnto these wordes.

And his body (which as it were fantasticall in the end and as it were by
spirites translated vnto places a farre off, and not subiect vnto death,
fables so fully had fay­ned) was in these our dayes by wonderfull and as it
were meruailous tokens founde out buried more deeper in the earth at
Glastenburie betweene two Pyrameds, in old time set vp within the religious
place, and by a hollow Oake marked or knowne, & was with honor trāslated
in­to the Church, & decētly bestowed in a Marble Tombe. Whereupon a leaden
crosse being engrauen in the stone not in the vpper part as it is accustomed
(but on the lowermost part rather) which wee also haue seene (for we haue
handled the same) conteyned these letters en­grauen and not eminent and
extant, but rather inward­lie turned to the stone.

HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX ARTVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIAE.

And these wordes follow euen there. And seeing there were some euident tokens
of finding the bodie there by his inscriptions, and some by the Pyramedes
engrauen (although as very much defaced and ouerworne by too much oldnesse of
time:) yet most chiefely and most e­uidentlie did Henry the second king of
England declare and manifest full and whole vnto those Monckes, according as
he had harde of that auncient historicall Musician the Brittaine: namely that
they should finde him buried deepely in the earth for xvi. foote at the least,
& not in a Tombe of stone, but in a hollow Oake. And therefore his body
(beeing laide and as it were hidden so deepe, to the end that it might not be
founde of the Saxons, inhabiting the Island after his death, whome he in his
life time had so puissantly subdued & almost destroyed) might sarcely at any
time be found.A wise pollycy of workmē in those dayes.

And for this cause were the letters as testimonies of truth engrauen vpon the
crosse turned inwardes to the stone, to the end they should at-that time kepe
in secret, what they conteyned and that sometime also according to the place &
time [[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=36)
requisite) they might discouer or manifest that same mea­ning. Moreouer also
he writeth these words euen in the same place. We must also know that the
bones of Arthures bodie which were foūd, were so greate, that euē that
say­ing of the poet might seeme in these words to be fulfilled,

Grandia (que) effossis mirabitur ossa Sepulchris.

And the Tombes being digged forth right:

He shall maruaile at the greate bones in sight.

The largnesse of K. Arthures Lineaments.

FOr the bone of his shinne beeing layde to the shinne of a most tall person
(which also the Abbot shewed vs) and as it was fastned vnto that grounde neare
vnto his foote, retched it selfe largly, three fingers ouer his knee.

Also the scalp of his head as it were a wonder or spectacle, was capable and
grosse, in so much as betweene the eye bryes and the eyes it largely conteyned
a hande bignesse.Nota. Ten woundes discerned in his scalp. There appeared in
this, tenne or moe woundes: all which (except one only greater then the rest
which gaped wide and which onely seemed to bee a deadlie wounde) grewe
toge­ther into one whole scarre.A relation to a further testi­mony of
Giraldus. in Specu­lo Ecclesiastic [...] yet parly doubted. Nowe if it shall
auaile any man either to repeate y• very selfe same thinges which I haue ere
while recited out of Giraldus, or not much vnlike to these, let him read his
booke viz. Speculum Ecclesiasticū, where as two chapters lightsomly entreat
of this matter. In meane time yet I haue somwhat which helds me doubtfull. For
Gi­raldus affirmeth yt his burying place was of Oake, which as I doe not
streyght way affirme to be false: So I will insinu­ate those thinges, which
vehemētly persuade me to y• cōtrary. First,Alder trees in Aualony. the
nūber of greate Alder trees which by a certaine na­ture are growing
cōmodious for the ground there. Moreouer agayne, I thinke the inhabitants of
Aualonia, were not so ig­norāt of natural things, y• they should beleeue y•
Oake would continue longer in somwhat a moyst ground, then the watery Alder
tree, which is growing in the grounde.

They which haue writtē of Trees, willingly attribute som­what moist groūds
to be apt both for Alder & Elme trees to be brought forth in thē.Where
Giral­dus affirmeth K. Arthures Tombe to be found. There also remaineth
another doubt, which, (if I any thing rightly iudge) shall rather seeme a
plaine errour, then any doubt at all. Gyraldus con­firmeth that Arthures Tombe
was founde betwene two
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=37) Pyrameds in
the religious place,viz. betweene two Pyrameds at Aualonia alias Glastenbury
at Aualonia: In which o­pinion, (as it were, so confirmed with testimonie of
ancient writers) euen I also remaine. But I am so farre frō beleeuing any
thing to be engrauē in thē, which thing Arthures tombe (as Giraldus
declareth y• verie same) should shew, expresse, or make famous, that in deede
vnto me may appeare nothing lesse like to be true.A doubt. If there had beene
any such thing, I pray you who more truly or more playnly should haue
manifested y• same,Malmesbury. thē Gulielmus Meildunēsis? vnto whom alone
all posteritie ought to refer both their portractures & inscriptions. But hee
in deede speaketh not so much as one worde of Ar­thure, whome elswhere he
diligently extolleth. Doubtlesse it is a coniecture probable, that Giraldus
was vtterly ignorāt what inscriptions those Pyrameds contayned, seeing he
saith the letters were worne out by antiquitie or oldnes of time.

But I let passe Giraldus (a mā truly otherwise learned & a great & greedy
deuourer of anciēt knowledge) as I am pro­uoked by another care not
vnprofitable for the purpose: Namely that I should not onely by the testimonie
of two, whom I haue aboue named, but also by a full number of wri­ters,
confirme, establish, and persuade as it were ratified, Ar­thures Tombe
founde.Iohn Leylands insertion of famous men for proofe of Ar­thures Tombe
found. Also to the end that that thing may more commodiously be done, I thinke
there are causes agree­able why I may more profoundly repeate all and singuler
testimonies of famous men within a certaine conuenient and euydent scope of
matter.Claudius a Frenchman. In which behalfe Claudius a frēch­man (to the
end the reader may vnderstand that the credible report of Arthures Tombe found
hapned euen vnto straun­gers vpright and perfect) shall be a greate witnesse
in matter aboundant.

Anno 1217\. The bodie of Arthure that Noble king of Brittaine, (which had lyen
buried. 600. and moe yeeres) was found in the Church of S. Mary at
Glastenbury.

Heere, in computation of the yeeres, either by the Au­thors negligence (or as
more sincerelie the Interpreter saith) by the negligence of the booke writer,
did there creepe in a faule error. For, Henry the Secōd of that name king of
Eng­land dyed about the yeere after Christes byrth a thousand [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=37) one hundreth and
nyntie:Anno Domini 1190. and the Tombe was founde in the first yeare of the
raigne of King Richard the 1. his sonne. The Cronicles of Persor Abbey doe
make relation of these thinges.Perso [...]ana. Iohn Stow.

Anno Domini 1191\. the Tombe of Arthure Kinge of Brittaine was found at
Glastenbury: Anno Domini 1191. the leaden crosse vp­on his brest, declaring
that his name was there written. Iohannes Fiberius who is also commonly called
Beuer, writeth these thinges most briefly, and by way of running it ouer.

Anno Domini 1191. were founde at Glastenbury the bones of Arthure. Matthew
Paris Moncke of the Monaste­ry of S. Albane at the racing and seege of that
most auncient Cittie Verolamium, nere vnto S. Albones in the Countie of
Hartford, thus mentioneth of the Tombe. The bones of the most famouse King
Arthure were founde at Glasten­bury, laide vp in a certaine most auncient
Tombe there, about the which stoode erected two most auncient Pira­meds
wherein the letters were engrauen, but by reason of the too much rudnesse and
deformitie they could not be reade.By what c [...]aunce Ar­thures Tombe was
founde (as Matthew Pari [...] saith) which  [...] Iohn Ley­lan de affirme
[...] he neuer heard of to be true. And they were found by this occasion. For
as they digged there, to bury a certaine Moncke, which with a vehement desire
in his life time, had before wished for this place, as to be therein buried:
they founde a certaine close Tombe, vpon the which was put a leade crosse,
wherein was engrauen: HIC IACET IN­CLITVS BRITONVM REX ARTVRIVS, IN INSVLA
AVALONIAE SEPVLTVS. But that place beinge rounde about encompassed with Marish
groundes, was in times past called the Isle of Aualon, for truth that is the
Ile of Aples.

Like as by Good right I fauour verie much the authoritie of this Matthew, so I
am sory that a fewe wordes chaunced redounding to this declaration in the
inscription. Certes that which he mentioneth of the Moncke,Ranulphus Higeden
of Che­ster mentio­neth of Ar­thures Tombe I neuer hearde of before, neyther
doth he so farre forth perswade mee of the truth.

Ranulphus Higeden of Chester also maketh mention of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=38) King Arthure
his Tombe. I omit to mention other Au­thours, and that with employed
diligence, because I would not seeme to affectate the number of witnesses in a
matter so manifestly knowne and credited.

### 1.14. CAP. XVI.  
The Translation of King Arthures bones.

I Remember that in my Epistle dedicatory, I haue spoken of Arthures
Lyneamentes, three times translated. Whereof, which was the first, (because it
appeareth not e­uident enough by the greater Church at Glastenbury, from
whence they write these were first of all conueyed) I will somewhat more
manifestly and more lightsomely notify. I learned of the Monckes at
Glastenbury most diligent reser­uers no doubte of the Antiquitie pertayning to
their Cloyster, that Arthures Lyneamentes were translated into the greate
Church (which worke was greatly augmented by the libe­rallitie of Henry
Plantagenet) from the religiouse place:Arthures bones & ashes translated into
the greate Church at Glastenbury. but not laide in that place at that time
where they now be. There is a porch towardes the South parte, and a Chappell
from whence they go into the Treasury.The remo­  [...]ing of them into the
midle Iles of the Queare. In this place men af­firmed that Arthures bones
remayned for a certaine season: after that againe, that they were translated
into the midle Iles of the Queare.

By which interchaunge of time, a newe, stately, and mag­nificent Tombe out of
blacke Marble (such as we see the Ly­dian or tutch stone) was both heawne and
cut out, & at that time together framed, by vnaccustomed workmanshippe and
witty deuise: concerning which, and also the translation there­of, to write at
this present, it were vndoubtedly a needlesse thinge, seeing that in the
chapter before going touching Ar­thures Tombe founde,The third translatiō of
King Arthure in the dayes of King Edward, sirnamed the long, alias the first
of that name. all those matters appeare together in their order. Therefore let
our history apply it selfe vnto the third translation: which was made in y•
dayes of Edward, sir­named Longshanke, K. of England not only the cheefest
pa­trone of Arthures praise, but also ye louer, & great reuerencer of his
fame, when as all ye Lyneamentes of them remayning [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=38) in the most
stately Tombe (where they tooke their rest toge­ther before) sauing the shinne
bones of the King, and of the Queene, which he commaunded to be kept abroade,
it was no doubte a spectacle of Antiquitie very acceptable vnto the nobilitie
thither resorting. And to the ende now that so noble a deede of King Edwarde
(who neuer enough can bee com­mended) may enioy eternall fame: I will recyte
al and singu­ler such testimonies hetherunto pertayning, as were most
faithfully taken out of the Arches of the Monastery of Gla­stenbury, Authour
of which things also was the same Monck of Glastenbury, who had in him a most
earnest care to extoll Arthure with due commendations, and with a sounde faith
to aduaunce vnto the posteritie these actes done by him. The writer neyther
wanted lightsome order, nor wit in han­dling his matters: But that age had
neyther familierly Greeke nor Latine eloquence. What manner thinges so e­uer
these bee, as he write them, so will I recyte them in or­der, yet pondering by
the way, that poynt in time conueniēt: not with how greate elegancie, but how
worthie and howe true those thinges are, which he maketh mention of.

Anno Domini 1276. King Edward, The same King and his wife. viz. King Arthures
Tombe. the Sonne of Hen­ry the thirde came with the Queene his wife vnto
Glasten­bury. But vpon Tewsday next folowing the Kinge and all his Court was
entertayned there at the Monasteries chardges. On which day in the twylight
time he caused to be opened Arthures Tombe, where, (in two Coffines theire
portractures and Armes being depainted thereon) hee founde the bones of the
saide Kinge, of a wonderfull thick­nesse and largenesse seperated.King Edward
the first, and Queene El [...] ­anor his wife behold King Arthur [...] Image &
the Quenes his wife with their inscrip­tions. The picture of the Queene in
deede was made with a Crowne vpon her heade. The Crowne of the Kinges picture
was made lyinge downe, with the abscision of his left eare, and with the
euident signes of that wounde whereof hee dyed. Upon euery one of these was
founde a manifest plaine inscription.

The day folowing, namely being wednesday, the Kinge shutting vp the Kinges
bones, and the Queene his wife the Queenes bones, folded vppe in seuerall
wrappers [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=39) of
precious preseruatiues and putting to their seales,Their cōman­dement made
for preser [...]atiō of the Lynia­mentes of K. Arthure & his Queene
en­tombed, & for continuall▪ re­seruation of theire memo­ria [...].
com­maunded that the same Tombe should be with all speede pla­ced before the
hye Alter, outwardly retayning still the heades of them both to be seene,
engrauen by reason of the zeale of the people, inwardly setting therein such a
like sentence. Haec sunt ossa nobilissimi Regis Arthurij quae Anno Do­minicae
incarnationis. 1278. Decimo calend. Maij per. Dominum Edwardum Regem Angliae
illustrem hic fue­runt sic collocata, praesentibus Leonora serenissima eiusdē
Regis consorte, & filia Domini Edwardi Regis Hispa­niae: Magistro Gulielmo de
Midleton, tunc Noowice [...]si e­lecto Magistro. Thoma de Becke, Archidiacono
Dorce­tensi & predicti Regis Thesaurario, Domino Henrico de Lascey comite
Lincolniae, Domino Amadio comite Sabau­diae, & multis magnatibus Angliae. Thus
farre mentio­neth the Mòncke of Glastenbury.

Go now William Paruus together with thy successour in place,William Par­uus an
enemy of K. Arthures fame. and stoutly deny thou that eyther Arthure liued
not, or was not victoriouse in times past. Surely thou shalt ney­ther haue me
partaker, nor fauourer, no nor yet one in loue with thine opinion, nay rather
errour, at any time. Un­doubtedly it were a greate and greeuouse crime, not
onely worthie of stripes, but also of all kinde of punishment, if any man
should derogate from her the glory due to his Cuntrie, should enuy the fame of
his Princes, which haue most iustly deserued well of the common weale, and
should not finally stand vp with valiancy and famouse actes by all meanes to
adorne and illustrate the same.

Truly, I hope (most friendly Readers) it will fall out, (that the equitie of
the cause being knowne) and also ye truth, I shall haue you my friendly healpe
[...]s herein: and that (such is your good will, humanitie, and integritie)
you will also willingly render me thankes for my duety towards the com­men
weale.Iohn Leylādes pention to the friendly Rea­ders. In the meane time I
trusting to this good for­tune will doubtlesse endeuour all that I may, so as
hauing taken a fresh courage vnto me, and that most confirmed, I may bodly
enterprise to  [...]uckle with hand to hand, and by might and maine ouermatch
the broode of backbyters which [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=39) importunatly,
greeuously, and enuiously murmure at, and inueigh against the commendations of
Arthure, for so, as it were to make an end of my worke, haue I by all meanes
determined with my selfe.

### 1.15. CHAP. XVij.  
A confutation and ouerthrow of Slaun­ders rashly affirming that Arthure was
not liuing.

HIstoriographers do contend,Writers vary­ing what time K. Arthure li­ued. and
as yet the controuer­sie is before the iudge, at what time Arthure florish­ed.
And this contention hath so encreased, and gathered force, that doubts,
(concerning vniuersall credite of the historie, which declareth his exploits
done) as yet sticke to the feoble concepts of the Readers.

But this is so weake a slaunder,Valerius. Hector Boeti­us. that if needes not
any di­ligent answere. Valerius saith that he florished in the time of Zenon
the Emperour. But Hector Boetius reporteth in the time of Iustinian the
Barbarians then inhabiting Italy. Finally others write otherwise: concerning
the time I doe not much force vpon,Paulus Diaco­nus. were it euen now.
Although yet from hence, the time is easily gathered, namely frō the raigne
of Aurelius Ambrosius, of whome also Paule the Deacon makes mention. Perhaps
some of the aduersaries will say, Now comes it to passe, that Paule remembreth
not Arthure? I answere, Paule had other matters to busie himselfe with, then
doubtfully to make famous the Brittaines, which were not as yet forsakē of
the Romans. In y• meane time he takes away nothing frō Arthures dignitie or
historie because he is not named of him: seeing by the way a good number of
no­ble perosnages throughout the whole worlde are of the same Author passed
ouer with silence.

Undoubtedly y• seemeth to haue greate effect, whereas Gil­das the wryter of
Brittaine wrytes nothing at all of Ar­thure, There be which cyte the
testimonie of Gildas, both in his fauour and praise also.Gildas a fable [...].
But that Gildas in deede is a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=40) fabler, and
layde foorth as an open praie vnto filly wormes and Moathes, [...]. at
Oxenforde, in the Lybrary.

Gildas his historie is published abroade of Polidorus, vn­doubtedlie a
fragment of y• old Gildas, but it is lame, out of order, and maimed, so farre
forth, as if he were now againe restored to life, the father would scarce
knowe his chylde. It is euidently knowne that he wrote bookes which by him
were entituled Cambriedos, found out eight handreth yeres and more agone in
the Islandes of Ireland, and caried ouer in to Italy. Admitte the Historie of
Gildas bee true: How coulde he as an eye witnesse declare any thing truely of
Ar­thure, when he him selfe saith, y• he was borne in the yeere when the
battle was fought at Bathe, where Arthures victo­rie (and that in deede most
famous) fell vnto him, as Nen­nius witnesseth. The enemy gathereth. Gildas
makes no mention at all of Arthure: Ergo he was neuer liuing. Un­doubtedly a
subtile gathering, such a one as this is: Gildas remembreth not Aruiragus,
Lucius, or Constantine the greate, and therefore they were not liuing▪ O
strange force of Logicke! And yet being hartened with this so weake argu­ment
(as it seemeth to him in deede) he thinkes he hath easily gotten the best
game. Is this an Italian reason? For certain­ly, now can I hardly any longer
abyde to be called Vltramō tanus, or one that goeth beyond his boundes: And
sure­ly why?

Caelum non animum mutant, qui trans Mare currūt.

The ayer, not mind change they,

Which take their voyage ouer the Seay.

I know yet in the meane time, what y• Wealch Writers doe iudge of Gildas his
silence,Gildas an vn­thankefull per­son & reproch­full towardes his countrie
of Brittaine. so much as vnto Arthure apper­taineth: namely, for that Hoel the
cosengermaine of Gildas was slaine of Arthure: this was ye cause his name was
neg­lected. But I will not so much rest vpō this helpe or sauegard: being
rather ready to fight out the battle with him, because (as vnthankefull and
the same scarse wise, I will not say vn­godly) hee hath blemished his
countrimen the Brittaines with this blot or error of his.

Britanni nec in Bello fortes, nec in pace fideles.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=40) Surely but
that I should seeme to fauour mine owne af­fection, or feede the choller of my
stomake, I my self woulde heere coragiously enforce my weapō & that in deede
sharpe a­gainst this slāderous enemy of ye Brittaines. But I will mo­derate
mine anger, being ready to bring hether from another place (amōgst these)
most valiāt or stoute defēders of ye truth, least mine affectiō may seeme
to haue iniured any man.

Siluester Giraldus (in his Topographia or description of Wales) promiseth that
he will answere this slander of Gil­das, Siluester Giral­dus promised to
confute the slanders of Gil­das. in his Topographie or description of
Brittaine: which booke y• he hath so writtē in times past, I doubt not; but
so far as I know it is not in these our dayes extant in any place. What hee in
meane while writeth in his 2. booke of y• Des­criptiō of Wales, Nota.
Siluester Giral­dus his praise of the Brit­taines. I wil now amongest others
bring forth to light. But for so much as Iulius Caesar, who was such a mā
­ner of mā, as ye testimony of the whole worlde vnder Cassiui­lane ye Duke
sheweth, viz. when, as Lucane ye Poet saith.

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.

Anno. ante Christ. natiui [...]. 50.

Vnto the Brittaines by him sought,

He shewed his trembling backe for nought.

Were not those Brittaines valiant and coragious persons? Againe,An. ante
Christ. natiuitat. 401. Post Christum 107. what were they whē Bellinus &
Brennus added y• Romane Empyre vnto their victories? what were they in y•
daies of Constantine the Emperor, & sonne of Helen some­time heere
Queene?Brittaines al­waies appro­ued valiant persons, & en [...] in Arthure
his time. An. 140. Is [...]ae▪ what were they in ye raigne of Aurelius
Ambrosius Anno, post Christ. 466\. whom also Paule the Deacō extolleth with
praises? And to cōclude, what fellowes were they in ye daies of our famous
Arthure. An▪ post Christ 516. Iosephus the writer brought vp at Exceter in
Deuon­shire in his booke Antiochiedes, thus singeth.

Inclita fulsit.

Posteritas Ducibus tantis, tot diues Alumnis,

Tot faecunda Viris praemerent qui viribus orbem,

Et fama veteres. Hinc Constantinus adeptus,

Imperium, Romam tenuit, Bizantion auxit,

Hinc Senonum ductor,

La [...]des veter [...] Heroum▪ & Regis Arthuri [...] praecipue.

captiua Brennius vrbe,

Romuleas domuit, flammis Victricibus artes,

Hinc & saeua satus, pars non obscura tumultus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=41) Ciuilis,
magnum solus quimole soluta

Obsedit, melior (que) stetit pro Caesare murus.

Hinc celebri fato foelici floruit ortu,

Flos Regum Arthurus: Cuius cum facta stupori

Non micuere minus, totus quòd in aure voluptas,

Et populo narrante fauus, Quaecun (que) priorum,

Inspice: Peleum commendat fama Tyrannum,

Pagina Caesareos loquitur formosa tryumphos,

Alciden domitis attollit gloria monstris.

Sed, nec Pinetum Coryli, nec sydera solem

Aequant. Annales Latios, Graios (que) reuolue.

Prisca parem nescit, aequalem Postera nullum

Exhibitura dies. Reges supereminet omnes

Solus, praeteritis melior maior (que) futuris.

The English.

Noble Posteritie.

With so great Princes richlie shined,

The praises of ancient Poten­tates, & amō ­gest them of K. Arthure
especially.

& Patrons so many.

So stored with men which cōquered the world with valiancy.

And fame extolleth auncients. Hence had Constantine possest

The Empyre, Rome he surely kept, and Bizance eke encreast.

Hence Brennus the Italians guide, (in Citie captiued so)

With cōquering flames the stately towers of Rome did ouerthrow.

And hence those cruell Impes, a part (of ciuil [...]roile) not base,

Alone besiedge their mightie Prince, the huge hoaste letting p [...]sse.

Defence & sauegarde so, whereby to Caesar was.

Hence florished by famous fate, & origin prosperous

Arthure the flowre of kinges, whose deedes shined no lesse mar­ueilous!

Thē that both peoples eares & tongues did in his praise delue:

As, if thou view of former wights, what euer bookes recite.

Fame doth Peleus tyrant blaze: and Romane hist [...]ries

Extoll their Caesars tryumphes greate, after their victories.

Renoume aduanceth Hercules subduing monsters greate:

But not Coryli, Pinetus, nor Starres the Sunne his heate

Coequate, Search the Cronicles of Greekes & Latines both:

Auncient age knoweth not his like, ne yet posteritie doth

His match declare. All kinges alone in deede surmounteth he,

Better then those are dead & gone, Greater then any shall be.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=41) HOw or in
what manner these may not answere the prayses by Gildas before recyted, the
discreets Reader at large fully seeth:Gildas his for­mer dispraise of the B
[...]it­taines here o­uermastered with praise worthiness. and perceyueth
Arthures commendati­ons hereunto (amongest the rest added) to agree so well
vnto this place, that I almost haue no néede to reckon them as (I trust) with
any fault of mine, but in deede (good Rea­ders) if I iudge aright, with your
very much pleasure and delight. For the verses before going haue their right
father or authour that he in deede should then be liuing. Moreouer againe they
so pleasantly allure the eares of vncorrupt sense, with a certaine apt
continnitie or proper agreement, with pure elegancie and equall Maiestie (that
except fancy faile me) they shall fully & wholy please the Reader,Ponticus
[...] an Italian, commē ­ding the Brit­taines. yea were it so that I reckoned
them ouer ten times. Ponticus Verunnius an Italian but yet one that loued the
Brittaines well, beinge iustly angry with Polidorus the Italian, thundereth
forth these wordes.

O admirabile tunc genus Britonum qui eum, (Caesarē [...]ntelligit) bis in
fugam expulerunt, qui totum orbem submiserat occidentis: Cui quasi totus
mundus postea nequiuit resi [...]tere illi etiam fugati resistunt, parati pro
patria & libertate mortem subire. Which may thus be englished.

O wonderfull nation of the Brittaines in that age, which twise put him (he
meaneth Caesar) to flight, who had conque­red the whole west part of the
world: whom as it were, when the vniuersall world could not resist
afterwardes, euen they them selues being put to flight, resisted, being ready
to dy for their Country and the libertie thereof.

Hereupon singeth Lucane the Poet vnto their praises,Lucanus. (writing of
Caesar) as before is saide.

Territa quaesitis oftendit terga Britannis.

Vnto the Brittaines by him sought,

he shewed his trembling backe for nought.

IF in this place I should rather endeuour to mende the matter with multitude
of testimonies,Iohannes An­neuillanus in Architrenio also commen­ding the
Brit­taines. then with vpright truth of effect, I could also take out of
Iohannes Anneuilla­nus his Architrenio (that litle booke wittily in praise
hand­ling [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=42) the
same) certaine litle verses concerning the valiancy and prowesse of the
Brittaines. For so should I shutte vp the mouthes of brabling backbyters
against the praises of these Brittaines, and that with a sufficient frontier
framed for the purpose. But me seemeth that I make more a dooe about these
bablers then is conueniēt. Let them with shame enough come to naught and
burst them selues in their enuy: for so much as the honour of Brittaine
neyther standeth nor falleth by meanes of such foggy mistes. But by the way,
least I should seeme not mindefull enough of my promise, I come againe to the
encounter ready to vanquish the force of argumentes which the aduersaries haue
gotten. The Ro­mane writers (say they) made no mention of Arthure, wherefore,
like it is to be true, that he was not liuing.

If no thing be true, but that which appeareth by truth of Romane writers, it
should go euill to passe with the history of the whole worlde. The infinite
force of thinges worthie of memory, and of noble effect consisteth rather of
eye witnesses at home resident and inhabiting, then of the vncertaine
rela­tion made by forraine writers.Romanes carefull for their owne fame, but
neg­ligent in all o­ther mens. For the Romanes made al­most all the whole
worlde bond slaues: and writers which proceeded amongest them, and were there
borne applyinge their mindes to the study of eloquence, made their owne
ex­ploytes euen admirable or wonderfull: but the enterprises & actes of other
Nations they dyed euen so obscure and debase, that almost they made them none
at all.

For the matter was so handled by them, that they woulde elegantly and not
truly pleade their cause. They painted out such thinges in writinges, which
they might rather law­fully hope for, then see at that time, done by the most
prudent Gouernours. And vndoubtedly maruell it is not, that they made no
remembrance at all of Arthure. The Goathes at that time had inuaded Italy, and
barbarouse style with phrase of writing and speaking was brought in, in steade
of elo­quence,Honour vnto learning in times past rare. so farre forth, that
honour vnto learning was rare, & rewardes for the same, were most rarely vnder
stoode off. And ye matter was not handled by writers but by warriers.
Wherefore if any certaine thing were written as touchinge [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=42) Arthure the same
might rather bee done of the Brittaine writers what manner persons so euer
they were, then of the nouicy and ignorance of the Romanes, not onely
declyning from the function or office of writing, but also carefully thin­king
vpon their owne wretched estate and calamitie, dayly faling vpon them by many
meanes, lettinge passe all other thinges.

An other brabler after this alledgeth, more vaine matters are in Arthures
History conteyned then that they may tolle­rably be allowed of him that is of
ripe iudgement, and discréet knowledge. If he meane touching that History
which is reade amongest the common sorte in the Italian, Spanish, Frenche and
English tongues, I do not much striue with him. Although the vpright reader
shall call to minde, the same thing hath beene often times done, euen in the
History each where forraine of Charles, Rowlande, Godfrey, Guy, and Bellouse,
Most puysant Personages haue beene parcyally pray­sed in truth. that I may let
passe many others. Neyther yet not­withstanding are their names, or credit of
the true History taken away the more. It is no noueltie, that men mixe
tri­flinge toyes with true thinges, and surely this is euen done with a
certaine employment that writers might captiuate y• simple common people with
a certaine admiration at them when they heare of marueylouse matters. So was
Hercu­les, so was Alexander, so Arthure, and so was also Charles commended.
But there is an other farre greater reason in­cident to the History of
Arthure, then I do conceaue of. For those thinges which are not apparant in
course of ages, which are not probable, which as aliable helpes agree not with
the credit of Authours, which are not embraced in long exercise of y• ages,
and furderance of learned men, & by them compro­bate or fully ratified I do
not vnaduisedly allow off.Graius the Authour of that booke Schalecronic [...]
had much a doe with suc [...] backbiters Many yeares againe, Graius the
Authour of the booke Schalecro­nicon (as I suppose) had great contention with
this rable of backbyters. Unto him was Beda obiected, who passed o­uer Arthure
with great silence. Paraduenture this holy, man refused to mention ye Prince,
because he was borne in adulte­ly. And it might also be, y• when he had heard
some one or o­ther prophecies spoken of him, by those historical signes y• it
a­lienated [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=43)
his minde vtterly from the whole history.Beda more re­ligiously then
Historically addicted. But they neyther adde, nor take away credit. That is
most true, wher­as Beda other wise a good man and a learned, did not onely
sienderly esteeme of the glory of Brittaines name, but also despysed or
neglected it. For, there was some what a dooe betwene them and the Saxons
concerning the rule ouer Brittaine. Nota The tyranny of the Romish Bishop
be­twene the Saxons and Brittaines of olde time. The Romish Bishoppe practized
by all meanes to keepe vnder his iurisdiction (which hee had most wickedly
obtayned) the English Saxons. For this cause the Brittaines cursed him. He
againe with a certaine hatred moued, sette the Saxons and them together by the
cares. Then, I pray you what praises might the Brittans hope for at the Saxon
writers? Undoubtedly, cold cōmendations or rather none at all. Adde hereunto,
that Beda also was ignorant in y• affaires of Brittaine before the dayes of
Gildas: so farre forth as hee neither knew of y• monumēt in meniory of
Arthures Coro­nation at Ambrosia, nor of y• same thereof. A thing credible it
is, that the calamitie of those warres which had consumed and destroyed
Churches, together with libraries infinite, had vtterly raced out of
knowledge, manifest or euident monu­mentes of Antiquitie. Whereupon to him
that should then take in hand to write of Antiquitie touching Brittaine, all
thinges were most obscure and vnknowne. There are which thinke many thinges
haue beene translated into Ar­morica or the lesser Brittaine, although at this
day verie fewe thinges may be hoped for from thence, sauing that a few notes
are extant in most auncient exemplars of the liues of holie men thither
reparing, and which intermixe light with darknesse.

Gulielmus Paruus of Bridelington, in his Prologue before his History thus
thundereth out his errour.

Gal [...]ridus Hic dictus est, William Par­  [...]us  [...] [...]un­der of
Arthure cognomen habens Arthurij, qui diuinationum illarum nenias ex
Britannica lingua transtulit, quibus vt non frustra creditur, ex proprio
fig­mento multa adiecit. William Paruus there saith: This man is called
Geoffry bearing the sirname of Arthure, who translated ye Fabulus Dreames of
those prophecies  [...]ut of y• Brittaine language: whereunto he (as men do
not credit [[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=43)
vainelie hath also added many thinges after the deuice and imagination of his
owne braine. These wordes vttereth he vpon a stomake and contempte. But I will
sing him a contrarie songe euen for euer and a day. That men beleeue him in
vaine, except he prooue this rather by reason, then by naked or playne wordes.

Well I knowe, and that too well, manie fables and vani­ties are disperced
throughout the whole history of Brittaine. Yet, therein are matters (if a man
behold the same more thorowly) such as might not be desired without greate
hinde­rance of auncient knowledge, and which beeing rather reade then
vnderstood by William Paruus beare not any shewe at all of commodity. Againe,
I will also heere set downe an­other honourable testimony, namely not onely
touching the Interpreter of the historie, but also concerning Arthure him
selfe. Plainly it appeareth, that whatsoeuer thinges this fel­low published in
writing (concerning Arthure, and Merline to feede ye curiositie of the not so
discreete persōs) were fained­ly inuented of lying and dissembling Authours.
Let him cogge and foyste sixehundreth times, if hee will. Merli­nus was in
very deede a man euen miraculously learned in knowledge of thinges naturall,
and especially in the science Mathematicall: For the which cause he was most
acceptable and that deseruingly vnto the Princes of his time, and a farre
other manner of man, then that hee woulde re­pute himselfe as one subiect vnto
y• iudgement of any cowled or loytering grosseheaded Moncke. But I will let
passe Arthure and Merline, the one more valiant, the other more learned, then
that they ought to regarde eyther the pratling or importunitie of the common
people. And that seemeth vnto me a thing most vnequall and against all
right,Monacus Mo­naco I [...]uidet. that one Moncke beareth enuie towardes
another Moncke, which is euen dead and gone. William Par­uus might haue hoped
for greater victory of the liuing, then of the deade Persons. This yet by the
waye did hee count for aduauntage, to strike him that woulde not strike
againe.

But if the Spirites of dead men haue any knowledge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=44) of humane
matters, he shall so farre perceiue that beyond equity and honesty hee beares
away no victorie from Geof­frey, that dead is, but that by his wounde he hath
procured him selfe a perpetuall wounde and bloodshedde. Neither is there cause
why hee should hope for the present helpe of that Phisition Polidorus from the
Citie Vrbinas, for as much as hee him selfe also languishing of like disease
hath very greate neede of a cunning mans cure. And there remayneth as yet
another wounde, wherewith W. Paruus supposed that hee had euen quite
dispatched Geoffrey out of this life. For, so hee insulteth. Nec vnum quidem
Archie­piscum vnquam habuere Britones. Neither (saith hee) had the Brittaines
in deede so much as one Archbishoppe at any time.

Didst thou learne this amongest the Brigantes?

Asserius Meneuensis, sometimes the Schoolemaster of Alfredus sirnamed the
greate, king of England, taught mee another manner of matter in these wordes,
in the booke of his Cronicles. Vixit Alfredus circiter. annum. 842. & post 28.
ann. Qui saepe depredabatur (Hemeidum Re­gulum intelligit) illud Monasterium &
Paraeciam S. Degwi, id est, Dauidis, aliquando expulsione Antisti­tum qui in
eo praeessent, sicut & nobis Archiepiscopum propinquum meum & me aliquando
expulsit, sub ipsis. Which did oftentimes spoyle (he meaneth Hemeidus the
Duke) that same Monasterie and parrish of Saint Degwy that is S. Dauid, in
times past by banishing of the Bishoppes which bare sway therein, like as he
banished sometime frō vs the Arch­bishoppe my neighboure, and me also vnder
them.

Gyraldus makes mention and with verie good credite that Dubritius was
Archbishop of Exceter. Iscanus & Iscae. For Isca so called is the most noble
Cytie of Deuonia, and most aunci­ent of others, (by reason of the Ryuers and
floude bearing the same name) there edyfied, which also was called of the
Romans, the citie of Caerlegion or Chester vpon Huske. The Bishoppes Sea
beeing translated from thence vnto Sainte Dauids, where the most holy and the
same most Learned Dauid florished in the dignity of an Archbishop. Iohn Stow.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=44) Sampson a
man of famous memorie, Archbishop of S. Dauids in Wales shunning the
sickenesse or disease of the Jaundice, went vnto Armorica, or the lesse
Britaine: where­vpon came the originall of the Archbishopricke of Dolence. And
from Sampsons time vnto y• victories of y• Normans o­uer the Welchmen all the
Bishops beyond Seuerne as yt were of solemne orders were consecrate by the
bishop of Sainte Dauids their Primate: who when the Paule fay­led him, with
tooth and nayle retayned still all his title and interest.

Moreouer, it appeareth by y• Dialogue of Siluester Giral­dus that the Cannons
at S. Dauids (in the time of Dauid the Bishop which succeeded Bernharde) had a
treatie with Richarde the greate, Archbishop ouer the Kentish men (in presence
of Hugucion the Cardinall) concerning the Me­tropolitane tytle of their
Church: whereof the same Giral­dus, handled earnestlie an entreatie at Rome,
being after­wardes chosen Bishop of S. Dauids.

And that I may recite more Ancient testimonies, Ptolo­meus Lucensis, (who
wrote the liues of the Romish Bi­shops) declareth y• in Eleutherius his time
three chiefe flam­mins in Brittaine were conuerted into so many
Archbi­shops.3\. Bishops Sees. London. Yeorcke, and Ca [...]tlegion vpon Huske
in Walles. London, in old time called Troynouant, & Yeorcke then also called
Brigantum, without doubt florished famously with this dignitie or prerogatiue.
Where then is the third Bishops Sea? Where els but in Wales.

In which poynte that I my selfe say nothing, Trittemi­us surely in his
abridgment of Cronicles is also a lightsome and plaine witnesse. May not then
William Paruus the Schoolemaster be ashamed to haue inculcate into the eares
of Polidorus his scholler farre better Learned then him­selfe such vaine
tales. But, beholde, by one euill another euill chaūcing. The ingrafted error
so far forth hath now in­fected a nūber, y• scarce is this disease curable by
any Helleborus, no though they sayle into Anticyria for ye same. And yet for
sooth are they compelled, I knowe not by  [...] violent Authoritie in the
meane time to haue a good opynyon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=45) of thie their
Schoolemaster. These I say before hand are hard poyntes to beleeue. Surely I
wish all thinges prospe­rous vnto my Schoolemasters. But when the matter is in
handling concerning truth and credite of the cause, doubt­les [...]e I beare
no partiall affection towardes any of them: No certainely  [...] I shoulde by
and by knowe that they woulde euen catch and conquere for mee all mine enemyes
at once.

## 2\. A Peroration or briefe Conclusion To the Readers.

HEtherto (most courteous Readers) haue I descri­bed Arthure in his coloures,
not without dili­gence, laboure, and finally a ready good will: but yet in
meane while, whether with like eloquence, grace, and good successe I haue done
this, let that by the iudgemēt of honest and learned persons bee determined.
For I knowe very well, How slender Furniture I haue at home: For the which
cause I challenge not any thing at all vnto my selfe: Vndoubtedly I might
soone appeare both rash & vnwise, if I should so doe. Onely I purposed of good
wil to make tryall of my wit in a matter honest, to helpe the history
languishing, to aduance the glory of my country, hindred by enuy, and beeing
enthralled vnto the crafty deceiptes of euill willers, restore the same
honestly vnto liberty. I knowe it will come to passe, that most mighty enemies
will assaulte my doinges: Let them ouer­come with powre, if they can, so the
trueth be ours. I will imitate the Noble Palme Tree, which beeing pressed
downe with heauie burdens yet falleth not to the ground at any time. And
neither at this instant doe I seeke for any reward: so you vouchsafe me your
courtesy, good will & fauour, truly I may persuade my selfe I haue al thinges
that I rightlie looke for. And for amendes, on my part also shall hereunto
ensue most requisite promp­titude & expedite alacrity, enflamed also by vertue
of en­ment [[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=45)
vnto like enterprises not onely, but also to imparte you greater matters which
shall stirre vp your learned eares, and being stirred vp, may long detaine
them, and so de [...]eyned as it were by a certaine land floude of plea­sant
delight therewith bring them vnto fragrant fieldes. And all these thinges do I
easily promise my selfe, tru­sting in your honestie and helpe, as one
doubtlesse fully bent vpon hope thereof. Surely my muse (such as it is)
altogether is youres: neyther tendeth  [...]he to any other purpose at any
time, but vnto your behoofe, and the cō ­moditie of all men. I count it a
base seruice to satisfie the common peoples humor: but to performe you my
continuall industrie differeth not far from a kingdome, such a one as by a
iust cause I may prefer euen before the kingdome of Alexander. For what more
reserued hee vnto him selfe wholy (when he dyed) of so greate Riches,
possessions and dominions, sauing fame onely. This, (though by many accomptes
in example inferior) ob­teyned by your meane shall I yet so earnestly aduance,
that nightes and dayes shall she watch for your welfare & emolument. And at
lengthe (those same most thicke mistie cloudes in deede of ignorance beeing
shaken off, & vtterly dashed aside) the light of Brittish Antiquitie with
displayed beames farre and wide shall shine forth. God giue you long life and
wellfare, most sincere fauorers of vertue and good learning.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=46)

LONDON. Imprinted by Iohn wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane ouer against the
signe of the Castell. 1582.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=8884&page=46)

[Home](/)

Leland, John, 1506?-1552.. Date: 1582  

