## (unknown project)

# The solace of Sion, and ioy of Ierusalem. Or consolation of Gods church in
the latter age redeemed by the preaching of the Gospell vniuersallye. Beeing a
godly and learned exposition of the Lxxxvij. Psalme of the princelye prophet
Dauid: written in Latine by the reuerend Doctor Vrbanus Regius, pastor of
Christes Church at Zelle, in Saxonie. 1536. Translated into english by R.
Robinson citizen of London 1587. — Psalmus octuagesimus septimus, de gloriosa
Christi ecclesia

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=1)

THE Solace of SION, and Joy of IERVSALEM. Or Conſolation of Gods Church in the
latter age, redeemed by the preaching of the Goſpell vniuerſallye. Beeing a
godly and learned expoſition of the Lxxxvij. Pſalme of the Princelye Prophet
DAVID: Written in Latine by the reue­rend Doctor VRBANVS REGIVS Paſtor of
Chriſtes Church at Zelle, in Saxo­nie. 1536.

Tranſlated into engliſh by R. Robinſon Citizen of London, 1587.

Ioel 2. verſ. 32.

But whoſoeuer ſhall call vpon the name of the Lord ſhall be ſaued. For in
Mount SION and in Ieruſalem, ſhall be deliuerance as the Lorde hath ſaid, and
in the remnant whome the Lord ſhall call.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=2)

‘Pſal. 45. [...]egina à dextris  [...]i. &c▪ verſ. 9. ’‘Pſal. 113. Qui facit
muli­erem orbā ha­bitare cum familia ſua, matrē  (que) filiorum laetam fore.
verſ. 9. ’‘ [...]ex concupiſcet  [...]ecorem tuum.  [...]. verſ. 11.’

[...]eſ 2.  [...]a. 2. heb. 9  [...]ay. 49.

Qui Structor Eccleſiae ſuae eſt, Angul  [...]riſ (que) Lapis,

Rex SION & Salem, Leo Iudae, Floſ (que) Ieſſae.

Nutritioſ (que) creat Reges, Nutriceſ (que) Reginas,

Eccleſiae ſuae, protegat (inquam) CHRISTVS:

Reginam ELIZABETH, Scuta & Regalia ſua.

[...]at▪ 3.  [...]eb. 13.

Liberae vt SARA [...] ▪ filij multi fiant.

Donec nos in SION Dei, Ciuitate (que) Viui,

SALEM ſic Caeleſti coagaudea [...]nus omnes.

CIVITAS LONDON. ‘Pſ. 101. Annūcictur in Sion nomen Domini & laus eiꝰ in
Ierusalem verſ. 26.’

Ex omnibus Ciuitatibus edificatis (O Deus) ſan­  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=2)

## To the Right Ho­norable, Sir George Barne Knight Lord Maior of the City of
London, & to the Right worſhipful his Brethren the Al­dermen of the ſame,
Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal and eternal Beatitude in Chriſt
Ieſus our Lorde and Sauiour Euerlaſting.

KNOVVLEDGE of GOD by his holy wil, word, & works omnipotent conceiued, Faith
in his heauenly prouidence, preſence and promiſes al ſuf­ficient perceiued,
and obedi­ent thankfulneſſe for his ine­ſtimable bounty, benefits & bleſsing
permanent receiued (Right Honorable, Worſhipfull, and Reuerend in the Lord) as
they are three moſt excellent plants of deuine vertue; of whoſe fruite if our
firſt Parents in Paradiſe, had taken, taſted and diſgeſted aright, (as they
did of a contrarie) not onely their ſolace there had beene without Sorrowe
their ioy without anoy, and their life without death, to the inſpeakable
ſolace and infinite ioy of the eternall GOD their Crea­tor: But alſo both they
and all their poſteritie had beene freed from the thraldome of Sathan, ſinne,
Death and Hell from time to time euen for euer. For thereby in ſteede of
knowledge, wilful bold­nes: for want of faith, incredulytie: and for obedi­
[...] [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=3) i
[...]o paine, proſperity into aduerſitie, health into ſicknes, life into
death, and bleſsings into cur­ſings: Albeit the ſame our omnipotent Creator,
mercifull Redeemer & gratious ſanctifier, accor­ding to his holy will, word
and work, by his hea­uenly prouidence, preſence, and promiſes by hi [...]
bountie benefites and bleſsings, afterwarde [...] (finding better fruites of
knowledge, repentance, faith, and obedience in thē) comforted and con­firmed
both the ſame, our firſt ſinfull parentes & their ſeede after them▪ videlize
[...] SETH, ENOS, KAINAN, MALALIEL,  [...]ARED & ENOCH with long and happie
daies vpon earth. Of which ſeauen ENOCH eſpecially euen aliue (the reſt of the
fathers beholding the ſame) was from thence tranſlated into heauen, not onely
for a repentance vnto the nations in this life but alſo to ſignify the
immortalitie of the bodies▪ & ſoules of the Lord [...] elect after this life
euerlaſtingly: And hereupon the beſt approued Interpreters and writers gather
that as the Lord in ſixe daies created the world, & [...]eſted the ſeauenth
day: ſo the ſame ſhoulde en­dure ſix thouſand yeares, & the ſeuenth thouſand
ſhold be the Sabath of eternal reſt: and as the firſt ſixe Fathers from ADAM
to ENOCH died by courſe of nature, and the ſeauenth was tranſla­ted aliue into
Heauen, ſo during the firſt 6000. yeares death ſhould rai [...]n the world but
in the 7000 ſhould begin th [...] [...]edneſſe of life in the world
euerlaſting.

Here then conſeque [...] (after ENOCH) we now [...] mundi  [...] ▪ for our
time haue great cauſe of conſolation, To remember how yet in the firſt age,
God calling NOAH (a reſt or ceaſing) with his famelye into
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=3) the Arke, and
they obediently entring were ſaued when al the world beſides were conſumed.
Gen. 6 And how in the ſecond age of the worde, SH [...] (the renoumed) of
whome the firſt Iewes came, & IAPHETH (enlarged) of whome the firſt Gen­tiles
came, both the ſonnes of the ſame NOAH, ſhould (being bleſſed) ioine handes
together to­wards the building of the earthly SION and hea­uenly IERVSALEM:
when their brother CAM (crafty) for his diſobedience was accurſed Geneſ. 9Anno
Mūdi 2000. And his children the Cananites an idolatrous and wicked people
were confounded in their preſum­tuous building of the earthly BABEL. How alſo
the ſecond age expired, and in the 23. yeare of the third beginning▪ ABRAHAM
(the father of a multitude) being called by God out of the Citie of HARAN in
Meſopotomia, into Paleſtine euē there amongſt the infidels receiued the
promiſe concerning Chriſt incarnate of his ſeed, that the world ſhoulde by him
recouer the bleſſings that it loſt through ADAM: Geneſ, 12. Which was by the
will of God more amply perfourmed in the Lords couenāt vnto Dauid (beloued)
of the tribe of IVDA, the yongeſt ſonne of ISHAY: Who from keeping of ſheepe
being called to be a king ruled in SION and in IERVSALEM with great ſolace and
ioy of his people: a Conqueror of their enemies, a comforter of their
friendes, and as a princely deuine  [...] Lords annointed, re­ceiued the
effectual promiſe concerning Chriſt [...] incarnate to come of his  [...], and
the ſure & ſafe ſtability of his euerlaſting kingdome. 2 Sam. 7. and though he
builded not the Lord a materiall Temple, yet hee endeuoured moſt religiouſly
to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=4) aduance
Gods glorie in his congregation with de uine ſeruice and worſhip, according to
the holie will of the Lord, ſolemply celebrating the ſame with heauēly
harmony of ſacred ſonges, and with Pſalmes of prayer and praiſe: appointing
ASAPH, H [...]MAN, IDITHVM, and the ſonnes of KORACH, moſt ſkilful Muſitions,
to play vpon and ſing to melodious inſtruments, with ſweet ſolace & ioy in the
Lord. After whom SOLOMON (peaceable) his ſonn ſucceeding being appointed of
the Lord to builde and beautify the Temple, for religion, wiſedome, wealth,
power, and proſperitie, incom­parably floriſhed at the firſt: But in his elder
years forgetting God and falling vnto Idolatrie, he procured Gods diſpleaſure,
the hatred of his enemies and decay of his kingdome. And in the third age the
Lorde thinking vpon his promiſe made vnto Dauid aforeſaid, by his prouidence
ordained the moſt godly, wiſe, proſperous and victoriousAnno mundi  [...]oo.
Regni Aſa. 10 kinges of IVDA, as Aſa, Ioſaphat, Ioathan, Ezechi­as, and
Ioſias, and after them, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, kings of Perſia: with
Zerubbabel, Ne hemias, & Eſdias, their helpers to build the Lords houſe,
deſtroy all Idolatry, bring the people out of Babilonical thraldome, and ſet
them forwards in the way of the promiſed heauenly SION, and Ieruſalē In whoſe
daies alſo the Lord ſtirred vp his holy Prophets Eſay, Ieremy, Ezechiel,
Daniell and the reſt to pronounce vnto the Nations his holy wil word & works,
to preach vnto al true be­leeuers his prouidēce, preſence, & promiſes in his
church & kingdome by Chriſt, and his Goſpel of euerlaſting ſaluation. In the
fourth age of the  [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=4) the Prophets
Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne of God came into the world for the ſaluation of al true
beleeuers: whō anno Chri­ſti. 1. Anno mu [...] di, 3970. the very Gentiles of
the  [...]aſt, at his firſt comming ac­knowledged & worſhipped, the Iewes
afterwards ſca­tered here and there among the Gentiles, and many of their
Rulers beleeued in him. Though the Phariſes, Scribes and Hipocrites with other
wicked Iewes de­ſpiſed his doctrine and perſecuted his perſon, and his
Apoſtles alſo: of whom the denying Peter, a penitent Paſtor among the Iewes;
and the perſecuting Saule a conuert Paul among the Gentiles, were alſo mightie
meſſengers & workmen of their maiſter Chriſt, when with thē the other
Appoſtles and many chriſtian Do­ctors, Martires and mēbers of the Primitiue
Church, vnder 12. perſecutions for the ſame cauſes and effectes, liued and
died the faithfull ſeruants of Chriſt, and In­heritours of the promiſed
heauenly SION and Ieruſa­lem. And as euen in that age the Romane Antechriſte
began his kingdome to conſtitute mans traditions a boue Chriſts inſtitutions:
whome Tyrants, Epicures, Sophiſters, and manifolde miſcreantes vpheld &
hadAnno Chriſti. 1004, Mundi 5004. in honor. So euen then & in the fift age of
the world the Lord God ſtirred vp good and gratious Emperors and kinges, godly
ſpiritual perſons, and religious mē bers of his Church, to ſettle and defend
his trueth and aduance the glory of his heauenly kingdome, to the ſubduing of
the ſame Antichriſt. And now are almoſt 600 yeares entred into the ſixt age of
the world, the Lordin his holy wil, word and work perfourming his prouidence,
preſence, and promiſes in his church and kingdome euerlaſting (by gathering
the ſame out of euery Nation, the faithful of his flock) who ſhal par­take
with him of the celeſtial ſolace & infinite ioy in the heauenly SION and▪
Ieruſalem, in the Sabaoth of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=5) eternall
reſt. Towardes the well wiſhing wherevnto (Right honorable worſhipful, &
reuerēd in the Lord) like as the Apoſtle Paul writ his louing ſalutatiōs
vn­to the Romanes, at that time the choſen church of Chriſt, and (amongſt ſome
of them engrafted in the true faith before himſelfe was called) praied thē to
ſa­lute VRBANVS his fellow helper in Chriſt: So do  [...] [...]om. 16. moſt
humbly, and hartely, reuerently, & dutifully re­cōmend vnto your honour and
worſhips godly & fa­uourable acceptations of this ſhort, but ſweet Pſalm, this
little but learned labour, publiſhed by ſo faithful a fellow helpen of Paul,
this VRBANVS REGIVS or kingly Citizen of Chriſt in our time. who as he being
pre­ſent in ſpirite, though abſent in body for two yeares, ſent the ſame in
latine as a token of remēbrance vnto the worſhipful Senators of Hamborow, his
friēds: So I a poore Citizen of LONDON, & wel willer of your worſhips my good
benefactors, doe dedicate & conſe­crate this my tranſlation of the ſame In
perperuam Mnemoſinā prōptitudinis meae in praecatione & prax­in pro
pietatibus veſtris. And ſo humbly beſeeching your honour & worſhips to accept
my great good wil in ſo ſmal a ſubſtance, though great in effect. I hartely
pray for the happy & long encreaſe of Gods benefites and bleſſings vpon this
City terreſtiall & for the end les perfruitiō therof with Chriſt the
immaculate Lāb▪  [...]el. 5. his Angels, elders, & thouſandes thouſandes of
his e­lect vnto whome with the father and the holy Ghoſt, they inceſſantly
ſhal aſcribe all power, & riches, and wiſedome, and ſtrength, and honor, and
glory, and praiſe. For euer, and euer. So be it.

Your honors and worſhips humble Orator. Richard Robinſon.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Honorable, Sir George Barne Knight Lord Maior of the City of London, & to the Right worſhipful his Brethren the Aldermen of the ſame, Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal and eternal Beatitude in Chriſt Ieſus our Lorde and Sauiour Euerlaſting.
  * 1\. The Lxxxvii Pſal. according to the Hebrues: Whereof the Title is attributed A Pſalme or Songe of the SONNES of KORACH.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=5)

## 1\. The Lxxxvii Pſal. according to the Hebrues: Whereof the Title is
attributed A Pſalme or Songe of the SONNES of KORACH.

Tom [...] 2\. op [...] rum ſuorū in­terpretant [...] Pſalmo [...]. AVGVSTINE
ſaide well, that this Pſalme was verye briefe in circumſtance of wordes, but
greate in ſubſtance of all the ſentences. For whereas it hath but ſea­uen
verſes onely, yet notwithſtanding it deſcribeth profoundlie the Churche of
Chriſt, the Heauenly Ieruſalem, the ſpi­rituall Sion, as the fruitfull Mother
both of the Iewes and Gentiles: what a one, & how large ſhe ſhall be, when as
ſhe ſhal not only haue Citizens from among the Iewes, but from among the
Gentiles al­ſo, throughout the whole worlde. And out of this Pſalme learne we
that Arti­cle of our faith, I beleeue there is one Catholike holy Church, the
Cōmunion [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=6) of
Saintes: And I ſuppoſe this is euen very ſpecially neceſſary for this ou [...]
age, that we may exactlye learne, and daylie handle this Article out of the
holy Scriptures, leaſte we be ſeduced either by the [...] certain ſect which
belee­ued that Chriſt ſhould raign 2 [...]000\. yeares onely. Anabaptiſtes and
Chiliaſts of our time, carnally vnderſtanding the predictions of Prophets
concerning the Church: ei­ther els be carried away with admirati­on of their
glorious and ſtately Titles, who at this day thruſte foorth into Chri­ſtians
the inuentions of mans braine, for, and in ſteede of the true
worſhippingChiliaſtae in  [...]gipto exorti anno mundi. 261. of GOD, vnder
pretēce of the Church. As if the Church (of whome we daylie make mention in
the Apoſtolike Créede) were either a worldlye pollicye, or the Author of
infinite tradicions, which atAnabaptiſt [...], in Germania. anno Chriſti▪
[...]534▪ this day falſe and tyranicall teachers of this latter age do caſt
(as it were ſnares into the conſciences of chriſtian people, (like as the
Prophet Ezechiell in his 13. Chap. ſpeaketh of thoſe deceiuers) That they
mighte ſlaye the Soules of them which die not, and giue life to the ſoules
that liue not: in lying to my People which beleeue their lies▪ Verſe▪ 19.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=6)

The Lxxxvii Pſal. verſ. 1.

Her foundations are vpon the holy Hilles. Pars 1.

The Lord loueth the Gates of Sion more, thē al the dwel­lings of Iacob. Pars
2.

PAVLE the Apoſtle wrote in 1▪ Cor. 10. That all thinges happened to the Iewes
in Type or figure (as it were) vnto a People Tipicall or figuratiue: wherfore
we will herehence enter our purpoſe, from the Type vnto the trueth, and from
the ſhadowe vnto the Light it ſelfe. What notable thing ſoeuer is any-wheare
in the Scripture mentioned as touching Sion, Ieruſalem.The ſhadow [...] of the
Lawe without ſaith cannot be vnderſtood [...]Iuda and Iſrael, what ſo deuine
promiſes of Chriſt and his euerlaſting Kingdome are any wheare ſet downe) all
this doth the carnall People of the Iewes referre vnto themſelues, and the
earthly Sion & Ieruſalem. Wherefore in theſe and ſuch like Propheſies, the
Iewes notably flat­ter themſelues, and moſt arrogantly de­ſpiſe the Gentiles
in compariſon of them ſelues. Becauſe as S. Paule ſayeth 2. Cor.  [...]. Thoſe
Gentiles haue the  [...]o [...]e [...]i [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=7) vntaken from
their hearts, as in the rea­ding of the Olde Teſtament, and the Kingdome of
God is taken from them. They alſo erre not knowing the Scrip­tures, neither
ſhall the Veile or Coue­ring of their vngodly ignorance be ta­ken away, except
they firſt be conuer­ted vnto the Lord. verſes 14. 15. 16. So  [...]as whiles
they imbrace not IESVS of Nazareth for theire true Meſſias or Sauiour, fore
promiſed in the Lawe and the Prophets, and ſente vnto vs from God in the laſt
w [...]ek of the yeares which Daniell declareth Cap 9. verſ. 27.) but i­magine
themſelues another Sauiour or Sacrifice offered I know not whom) it is
impoſſible for them to vnderſtande the ſacred miſteries of the Gaſpell in the
Prophets, which are not vnderſtoode but by the gouernment and guide of ye
ſpirit of Chriſt, who ſpeaketh in the Prophets. And none haue the ſpirit of
Chriſt, but they which beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt.

Wherefore, alſo in this Pſalme as yet ſtill pleaſantly dreame they, of that
ſame auncient Cittye of Sion in time paſt ouerthrowne and laide waſte by the
[...] ▪  [...] (as Daniell alſo witneſſeth) [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=7) neuer to be
reſtoryd againe. But the Church of Chriſte which hath the holye Ghoſt, and
thereby alſo true vnderſtan­ding of the Scripture, knoweth indeede, that,
Ieruſalem and Sion was in time paſt beloued of God: For, at Ieruſalem was the
Prieſthoode of the Leuites, the Sanctuarie propiciatorie, a place dedi­cated
for religion or true worſhipping of God, that ſame notable treaſure of ſa­cred
Scriptures, the Law and the Pro­phets, wherein is the Goſpell of eternall
ſaluation. And in Ieruſalem was the Kings royall Throane, vpon the which
ſhould ſit that ſame true King of Iſraell, the Meſsias which was to be born of
the ſeede of Dauid: but, all this ſhould come to paſſe in a certaine other
order, then other Kinges had their gouernment:

In this Sion were glorious thinges begun: For the ſame Ruler ouer Iſraell
(Ieſus Chriſt) came into this Sion, and into his holy Temple. Malachy. 3:
Ther­in preached he the vnſearcheable Riches of his grace: Therein beganne he
that mighty Kingdome of his, by the woorde of his Goſpell and by his ſpirite,
which was miraculouſly powred vpon his A­poſtles
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=8) in Sion. The
Law and the Pro­phets were in that place accompliſhed: For, Ieſus of Nazareth
the ſonne of Da­uid after the fleſh, the true Meſsias came into Sion, riding
vhon an Aſſes Colte, [...]at. 21. Mark. 11.  [...]ke, 19.  [...]ohn 12. the
true and eternall King of Sion: and in the ſame Cittie celebrated the true
feaſt of Paſſouer, and néer vnto the ſame offered vppe himſelfe to GOD his
Fa­ther, the full accompliſhment of all figu­ratiue ſacrifices: the ſacrifice
of true re­demption, and the verye immaculate Lambe died he at the feaſt of
Eaſter for the ſinnes of all the worlde: and all this did he the alone high
Prieſte, who with one onely oblation purchaſed euerla­ſting redemption vnto
Iſraell.

Out of Sion afterwards plentifully iſſued the Goſpell of Gods grace into
[...]ſay. 2. the worlde, by the Apoſtles: And the Primitiue Church, which at
the firſte was but very ſmall in number, wenteMicheas. 4▪ out of Sion, and
diſperſt her ſelfe into the four partes of the world, that the Scrip­tures
might be fulfilled, Concerning the calling of the Gentiles vnto the grace of
the Goſpell. The Church (I ſay) knewe e [...]n the earthly Sion to  [...]ee
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=8) for a
ſeaſon beloued & preſerued of God, vntill Siloh, (that is) the promiſed
Sa­uiour came into her: and out of her (by the remnants of Iſrall ſaued:)
ſhould Si­on the true Church of Chriſt come foorth into all the worlde, as the
mother of all true beléeuers in Chriſte. And ſhee alſo knewe euen that ſame
Sion in Canaan to haue ben a figure of the true Sion, the Church of God
diſpearſed throughout the world, which is the heauenly Ieruſa­lem: As it is
alſo ſaide by S. Paule 13. Hebr. Ye are come vnto the hil of Sion, and to the
Cittye of the liuing God, the heauenly Ierualem &c.

Although therefore the Holy Ghoſte fore-propheſted theſe things touching the
earthly Ieruſalem, and the earthly Sion, as by a Type or Figure: yet he
intitu­led this Pſalme eſpeciallye of the true Sion, the Church of Chriſt,
which is to be gathered from among the Iewes, and Gentiles alſo: neither had
he reſpect on­ly vnto the earthly Cittie, & her walles of ſtone, but vnto the
ſpirituall Cittye, and her ſpirituall Scituacions, and vnto farre greater
matters, then the faithleſſe Jewes could conceiue of.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=9) The holye
Ghoſt chieflye recorded this, touching The holy Cittie the newe Ie­ruſalem,
deſcended from Heauen, pre­pared as a Bride, trimmed for her Huſ­bande: Apoc.
21. verſ. 2. And as S. Paul ſaith in the former Epiſtle and 11. Cap. Heb.
Hauing the foundations of the Cittie, whoſe Builder and maker is not man
alone, but GOD himſelfe made man, verſe. 10,

The holy Ghoſt premeditated this, as concerning the true foundation of Si­on,
The liuely ſtone, of men indeed re­fuſed, but of God choſen, and had in
reputation. Mat 21. He foreſignified theEpheſ. 2. The founda­tion of the Holy
Cittie. liuely ſtones alſo builded (vpon the ap­prooued corner ſtone, choſen,
precious, and liuely.) as that ſpirituall houſe, the Tabernacle and Temple of
the liuing God. Yea, he prefigureth The Moun­taine of the houſe of the Lord,
prepared in the toppe of the Mountaines, exalted aboue the Hilles: wherunto
the People ſhal ronne, and many nations ſhal make haſte, as it were vnto a
Fort of refuge, to learne the waies of the Lorde, and to walke in his pathes.
Micheas 4. verſ. 1 and 2.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=9)He in whome
and for whome God hath promiſed true and aſſured benefites vnto his elect, is
King not of this world,By Chriſt we are nombre [...] amōſt the Ci­tizens of
th [...] heauenly Ie­ruſalem▪ or an earthly perſon, but is ſpirituall,
heauenly and eternall.

Wherefore, the elect ones of GOD are not to looke after the benefites of this
worlde, for the which we neither were baptized, nor haue beleeued. But we muſt
ſeeke for the aſſured good things vncorrupt and eternall.

Undoubtedly Auguſtine ſaieth verie godlily, writing vpon the 91. Pſalme. We
are not Chriſtiās, but for the world to come: Let no man hope for the good
things in this life, let no mā promiſe himAuguſtin' i [...] pſal. 91.ſelfe
the proſperity of the world becauſe be is a Chriſtian. No Cittie vpon earth
(which ſhal ſoone periſh) muſt we look for, but the true Cittie, whoſe walle
and foūdation God himſelfe is: vpon whom all the praiers of the godly ones do
reſt, of whome, (in the exilement of this life) they are continually mindfull,
as of the true Cuntrey: To the poſſeſſion wher­of they refer and wholy bend
all the de­teminations and deedes of their life. For they ſeeke after true
glory▪ honour▪ and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=10) bleſſed
immortalitie, which they finde not in Citties and tranſitorie benefites of
this Countrey, but in the heauenlie Kingdome or Cittie of God. Herehence hath
this Pſalme that ſame his abropt [...] beginning, for it ſaieth. Her
foundations when as not withſtanding there is not any one word goeth
[...]efore in the verſe, concerning the ſame Cittie. Wherfore the Pronoune
Relatiue (Her) is to bee referred vnto the Church of God: which hee nowe not
as a Gueſt or inhabitantDauid. but as a felow▪ Citizen of the Saintes and
houſholde Seruants of God, (by the ſpirite reueiling) ſawe with the eyes of
Faith, and ſore ſighed after with moſte ſeruent prayers: as he which knew that
there is no reſt, peace, life, nor ſaluation without the Limittes of this
Cittie of God.

Such cogitations Chriſtians haue, (whoſe conuerſations are in heauen) as Paule
ſaieth, Philip. 3. Who when they are riſen from the death of ſinne, ſeeke for
and are carefull after heauēly things and not earthly thinges. Coloſ. 3. Whoe
alſo  [...]ay with S. Paul. Now liue I not but Chriſt liueth in me. The world
is to me [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=10)
crucified, through Chriſt and ſo am I to2▪ Gallat. 20. verſe.the world. Galat.
6

Therefore this ſame Citizen of theWhat mane [...] Citizens they of the
heauenly leruſelē be heauenly Ieruſalem, meditating many things with
himſelfe, of the bleſſed Citty of the holy ones (being full of the holye
Ghoſte) burſteth out into the wordes of this Pſalme: which Pſalme is a
conti­nuall teſtimony of the godly cogitations of that man, concerning the
Article of the faith, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, the Communion of
Saintes: For, what thing we loue from our hart, of this we thinke continually,
and wee kéepe it not in ſecret: but we af [...]ewards ſpare no ſpeach euen
vnto the full publi­ſhing thereof, according to that ſaying: Out of the
aboundance of the heart, the mouth ſpeaketh. Math. 12. verſ. 34. Da­uid
therefore ſaith. Her foundations (vn­derſtand of the Citty) which I loue with
moſt earneſt minde, wherein but (vn­knowne to me) I am yet made ſafe or
preſerued by hope: wherein for euer (the Sauiour of the world ſo vouchſafeing)
I ſhall ſtill remaine, are in the hill of Ho­lineſſe, for ſo ſaith the Iewe,
we ſhoulde ſay in the holy Hilles.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=11)Citties of
this mortall life, bee theyIn worldlye or humane thing no­thing perpe­tually
firme. fenced or defended with how ſtrong ſo e­uer muniments or Bulwarkes, are
yet not withſtanding builded vpon the ſand: For whatſoeuer mans hand buildeth,
the ſame can it alſo caſt downe. There­fore, Citizens of earthly Citties
cannot dwell in ſufficient ſafetie: all their Rit­ches, yea life, and finally
whatſoeuer they haue, are laid open to their enemies. Wherefore we rightly
then ſay, that no earthly Cittie hath her foundation in theThe holy Citty hath
all things perpe­tual, firm and  [...]ure in the Hilles. Hilles: For although
no enemies aſſault the ſame, yet time is the conſumer of thinges, and
corruption at length wa­ſteth thoſe thinges which haue bene in this world moſt
ſtrong: but the founda­tions of this Cittie are ſound, firme, and perpetuall,
becauſe they are in the Hilles.

What then? are not earthly Citties alſo in the hilles? is the Citty ſafe which
is ſcituate on the hilles? Why then ſaith the Lord by his Prophet Abdias, To
theAbdias. Cap. 1Hilles of Seyr, and the dwellers thereon▪ The pride of thy
heart puffed thee vp, becauſe thon dwelſt in the clefts of the Rockes, whoſe
habitation is hie, tho [...] [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=11) ſayeſt in thine
hart, who ſhall bring me vnto the ground? The Lord maketh an­ſwere to the
bragging of the Edomites: If thou exalt thy ſelfe as the Eagle, and make thy
neſt among the ſtarres, thence will I bring thee downe (ſaith the Lord) And
ſurelye though Ieruſalem were in the olde time builded in the mount Sion and
the little hilles: yet notwithſtan­ding it was eaſie to be aſſaulted and
beaten downe of their enemies▪ the Chalde­ans and the Romans.

All earthly buildings be they neuer ſo ſtrong and ſtabliſhed in the hilles and
Rockes, are yet builded vpon the ſand: Becauſe they ſhal in time fal to y•
groūd and periſh. Wherefore the Prophet here ſpeaketh of other hilles, as the
HebrueCaraſs▪ [...]oun declareth, which ſignifieth holines Therefore thoſe
foundations are in theHilles of ho­lines. hilles of holineſſe, that is, not in
earthlie hils, but in the Heauens. For y• foūdatiō which this citty hath, Is
that immouableChriſt▪ is the foundation of the churchRocke (Mat. 16.)
whereupon the Church is builded, and ſtandes to the vtmoſt a­gainſt the gates
of hell. Whereof the A­poſtle mentioneth. No man can lay any other foundation,
then that which is laid
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=12) euen Chriſt
Ieſus▪ 1 Cor 3. Wherfore the Apoſtle when he ſpeaketh of that bleſſed Cittie,
ſheweth openly this foundation: and ſaieth. Thoſe Cittizens (that is
Chi­ſtians)Epheſ 2 verſe. 20. 21. & 22. are builded vpon that foundati­on of
the Apoſtles and Prophets, Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe being the Head corner ſtone,
in whom, what building ſoeuer is coupled together, groweth vnto àn holy Temple
in the Lord: In whome ye alſo are built together, to be the Habitation of God▪
by the Spirite.

The Cittie is holye, firme, and eter­nal,Why the Citty is cal­led holy. & it
hath Cittizens euē the holy ones as the Apoſtle euery where calleth them: For
although they be ſinners born, yet in that Cittie they are regenerate of
wa­ter & of the ſpirite: yea, They are iuſtifi­ed by faith, and ſanctified by
the name of1 Cor. 6. verſ. 11.Ieſus, and by the ſpirite of our God. And all
things which are without this Cittie are prophane and abhominable before God.
In this Cittie onely is true holi­neſſe, (as the Phophete Abdias ſaieth verſ.
17) But vpon mount Sion ſhall bee delierance, and it ſhall bee holye. And the
Prophete Eſay declareth, Cap. 4, Then hee that ſhall bee left in SION▪ [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=12) [...]nd hee that
ſhall be lefte in Ieruſalem ſhall be called holie, and euerie one ſhall bee
written among the liuing in Ieru­ſalem, when the LORD ſhall waſh the
filthineſſe of the daughters of Sion▪

verſes 3. & 4.

The Lordeloueth the Gates of Sion▪ &c. Pars. 2▪

THis latter parte of the firſt verſe ſheweth how fatherly the Lord lo­ueth vs
for Chriſts ſake, the foun­dation of this Cittie▪ vpon whomeWe are belo­ued of
God▪ for Chriſts ſake. we are builded, as a ſpirituall houſe.

The Lord ſaieth he loueth the Gates of Sion (that is) the Church of Chriſte.
For, we are beloued of God, for his ſons ſake▪ Through whom we haue obtained
reconciliation: when as (before we were not yet reconciled through the death
of his ſonne) we were the enemies of God. Epheſ. 1. Rom. 5. And he loueth vs
aboue all the Tabernacles of IACOB: So much as to the figure or outward ſhewe
pertaineth, wee know out of the Law of Moiſes▪ howe the Gates of the earthly
[...] SION or the Cittie Ieruſalem was ſo
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=13) ordained for
the worſhipping ▪of GOD [...]eruſalē was  [...]rdained for  [...]euine
ſeruice in the olde age, That it ſhould not bee lawfull for any to offer
ſacrfice, but with in the ſanctuary of the Cittie▪ Deut. 12. 2. Par. 6.

Wherfore, although there were ma­ny Sinagogues in Canaan, and many places
wherevnto the people reſorted by companies, yet not withſtanding Ieruſa­lem
alone had the Temple, and Pallace royall of Dauid, and was called the holy
Cittie, as the Prophet Eſay ſheweth cap 52. Put on thy Garments of beautie O
Ieruſalem, thou holie Cittie: for hence­forth there ſhal no more come into
thee the vncircumciſed and the vnclean ver. 1 And in his 26\. Cap. he ſaieth,
The Citti­zens of that Cittie, are called an holye people, redeemed of the
Lord. verſe. 12. And this Prophet Dauid in his 78\. Pſal ſingeth The LORD hath
choſen the tribe of IVDA, the hill of SION, whom he loued. verſ. 69. Al thoſe
things which are ſpoken of the earthlye Ieruſa­lem, in figure, are to be
referred vnto Chriſts Catholike Church: which ſpiri­tuall Cittie the Lord
loueth aboue al the dwelling places of Iacob, which long [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=13) [...]goe wer
ſhadowes and figurers, things temporall, by which notwithſtanding the heauenly
Cittie of Chriſtians (euer during) was here ſhadowed.

verſe. 2

Verye excellent thinges are ſpoken of thee thou Cittie of God, alwaies.

IF we learne this verſe aright, we ſhal moreouer recite y• Article of the
Cat­holike Church in the Simbole of our Créede, daily not vainely and without
faith: For, the Church is in this place called the Citty of God. But ſome
would ſay, is not God euery where? yea euen a­mong the Turks, why thē is the
Church onely (that is) the congregation of Chri­ſtians, called the Cittie of
GOD? For, Eſay the Prophet ſaieth Cap. 66. Heauen is my ſeat and the earth is
my footſtool.

I anſwere, God is euery wheare byGod though he be euerie wher by power &
eſlence yet he is by grace preſent with the  [...] power and eſſence, but not
euery whear by grace, but in Chriſtians onely, whoe beléeue in Chriſt the
Mediator: There­is God ſaide to dwell in his Church, be­cauſe the Church is
that peculier people of God, ſanctified in the blood of Chriſt▪ &
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=14) conſecrated
to God in Baptiſme, by the holy Ghoſt: that it may be a liuely Tem­ple and
Tabernacle of God, wherin hée dwelleth, whereinto he powreth out his holy
ſpirit with his guitts, & on which he beſtoweth (through Chriſt)
incorruptibi­lity and eternitie. For, as touching Chri­ſtians, God ſpecially
faith in 26\. Leuit. I will ſet my Tabernacle in the middeſt of you, and my
ſoule ſhall not loath you: I will walk amōgſt you, and I wil be your God, and
you ſhal be my people. verſ. 11 which place ye holy Apoſtle S. Paul 2 cor 6.
referreth vnto all Chriſtiās which are the people of God & the true Church of
Chriſt. ver. 19 And ye holy Euangeliſt S. Iohn. in reuel. cap 11. writeth.
Behold, the tabernacle of god is with mē, & he wilbe with thē, & they ſhall
be his people, and God himſelfe ſhal be their god with thē And the Prophet
Ezechiel ſaith cap. 37. My tabernacle ſhall be in thē, and I will be their
God, & they ſhal be my people verſ. 27. After this maner doe the Pro­phets cal
Chriſtians the Citty of God: As it is in the 46. Pſalme, The riches of the
flood ſhal make glad the city of god the moſt higheſt hath ſanctified his
Ta­bernacle [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=14) God is in the
midſt of her ther fore ſhe ſhal not be remooued, God will giue help vnto her
and that right early.

And herevpon Aurelius Auguſtinus that reuerend and moſt exerciſed deuine in
Scriptures, when as he did confute ye Romanes blaſphemies (by reaſon of the
irruptions of ye Goathes) ſlaundering the way of trueth, calleth the Church,
that is the cōgregation of Chriſtiās (becauſe ſhe is predeſtinate to raign
wt God for euer) the city of God, as in his firſt booke vnto Marcellinus
appeareth, for, he was per­ſuaded by the ſacred Scriptures, yt there wer two
cities: One, the church of God which (here amongſt the vngodly in this [...]
world) liuing by faith in Chriſt, hath her perigrination or ſoiourning frō
time to time & place to place: the other is of this world, or pertaineth to
the Deuil, which hath y• vngodlie ones, not beleeuing in ye goſpel of chriſt,
veſſels of wrath, prepared for euerlaſting deſtruction wt the deuill & his
angels. He deriueth y• City of God as beginning at Abell, who was a Soiour­ner
in this worlde, by grace predeſtinate vnto life, by grace a Straunger on
[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=15)The other he
bringeth from Cain the murtherer, which was firſt borne a Cit­tizen of this
world, of whome it is read, that he builded a Cittie: But of Abell a Pilgrim
in this world, we read not that he builded any Cittie.

This Cittie then of the holie ones is from aboue, although it bringeth foorth
Cittizens heare in this worlde, in whom it liueth Stranger-like, vntill the
time of her Kingdome come: when as ſhe ſhall gather together all her Cittizens
riſing againe to life euen in their bodies, when the Kingdome promiſed ſhall
be geuen them, where with their Prince the King of all holie ones they ſhall
raigne worlde without end, as the ſaide Auguſtine dili­gentlie handleth in Lib
15. Cap. 2. De Ciuitate Dei.

The Pſalmograph therefore here ſai­eth▪ Very excellent things are ſpoken of
thee, thou Cittie of God: Nowe except wee ſleepe all too ſluggiſhly, and
neglect our benefites to come, it ſhall wel pleaſe vs to ſearch out and
diſcerne, what glo­rious thinges theſe may bee, which are ſpoken off,
touching, or in the Church of  [...] ſpoken of v [...] which  [...]e [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=15) leeue in Chriſt,
and confeſſe Chriſt.

Firſt and for moſt, who hath at any time explaned this praiſe-worthy Title
euen by dignity, That Chriſtians are cal­ledChriſtians are called the City of
Godthe Cittye of God? For in this one Tytle all good thinges are vnderſtoode,
namely, y• ſhe inioyeth very good Lawes,Her Excellēt Members▪ a moſt wiſe
Magiſtrate, faithfull & moſts learned Teachers, inuintible Warriors a quiet
and moſt obedient People, true Peace, and Safetie, true Holineſſe,
Righ­teouſnes, true Joy, ſure or certain knowledge of ſpeciall things, and
brieflye true life and Saluation: for ſo is this Citie called, becauſe God
dwelleth in her, as in his owne houſe, his beloued and holye Tabernacle. And
where God after this manner dwelleth by grace, I praye ys, what good things
may be wanting? doth not ſuch a one dwell ſafelie? And the Cittie ſo ſafe
inſulteth with S. Paule a­gainſt her enemies on this manner: If God be on our
ſide, who can be againſt vs. Rom 8.

Wherfore, if God be King and Lord in her, there muſt ueedes be in her
abſo­lute felicitie by al meanes: that is to ſay, Righteouſneſſe and
euerlaſting ſaluatiō.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=16) Chriſt the
king of glorie with al his good graces dwel in the Church: by good right then
doth Paul, firſt a perſecutor, and af­terwardes a builder and defender of the
Church, call her glorious, as in Epheſ 5.

And what are theſe Glorious thinges which are ſpoken of in or touching this
Church?

The Church is called The holy and beloued ſpouſe of Chriſt. Epheſ 5. whom The
glorious Titles of the holy Church. (as Oſeas ſaith) Chriſt the king of glory
hath maried vnto himſelfe for euer, in righteouſnes, in iudgemēt, and in
mercy and cōpaſſiō & faith, that ſhe may know how he is the Lord. cap 2.
verſ. 19 & 20. The Church is thus diuerſly alſo called. The City of the liuing
God. Heb 13. Eſa. 60. The city of the great king, a beauti­full place, and the
ioy of all the whole earth. Pſal. 47: verſ. 2.

The people that dwell therin ſhall haue their iniquity forgeuen. Eſay. 33.
verſ. 24. The body of Chriſt. 1 cor. 12. Epheſ cap 1. The piller and groūd of
truth. 1 Tim. 3. Mount Sion, the heauenlye Ieruſalem. Heb. 12. verſ 22.

The hill of the Lord, the holy hill. Eſay.  [...]. & 63.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=16)The Temple
of God. 1 Cor. 3. verſ. 17.

The Horne of ſaluation exalted in the houſe of Dauid, the ſeruāt of God. Luk.
1 The houſe of God. Heb 3. 1 Tim. 3.

The houſe of Iacob, the ſeat of Dauid. Eſay. 9. Luk. 1. A City ſought out, and
not forſaken. Eſay. 62. verſ. 12.

Of this Ieruſalem it is ſaid Pſal. 147 Thy God hath made the Barres of thy
Gates ſtrong: he hath bleſſed thy Chil­dren in thee: He ſetteth peace in thy
borders, and ſatisfieth thee with the flower of wheat. verſes. 13. and 14.

The Queene on the right hand of God in a veſture of golde of Ophyr, wrought
with needle worke: Pſal 45.

The King ſhall haue pleaſure in thy beautie. ibidem. verſes 9 and 11,

Of this City (ſaith the Lord) I will be a wall of fire round about her, and
wil be the Glorie in the middeſt of her. Zach. 2. In Sion wil I giue ſaluation
and my glo­ry vnto Iſraell. Eſa. 46. verſ. 13.

The vineyard of the Lord. Eſa 5\. verſ. 1

The Siſter of Chriſt, Canti [...]: 5. verſ. 1.

My Doue is alone, and my vndefiled Cap, 6. verſ. 8.

The Garden encloſed, a Spring ſhutivp,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=17) and a
Fountaine ſealed vp. Cantic. 4. verſe 12

An Orcharde of Poungranets, with ſweet fruites. &c. Cantic. 4. verſ. 14.

The peculier people of Cod, and fol­owers of good works. 2. Titus. ve. 14.

A Sprituall Houſe. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

A holy Prieſthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

A Choſen Generation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

A Royall Prieſthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

A Holy Nation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

A People which haue come out of darkneſſe into light. 1 Pet. 2. cap. verſ. 9.

The Heritage of God. Eſay. cap. 19.

Of this Cittie it is ſaide. I will make an euerlaſting couenant with you, euen
the ſure mercies of Daui [...]d my faith ſeruant. Eſay 60.

The Nation and Kingdome which wil not ſerue thee, ſhal periſh from the earth
Eſay. 60.

I will giue my lawe in their inwarde partes, and write it in their heartes,
and I will be their God, and they ſhall be my people. Ieremy. 31. verſe. 33.
And they ſhall all knowe me from the leaſt to the greateſt, and I wil forgiue
their iniquity [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=17) and remember
their ſinnes no more verſe 34.

But to knowe GOD is eternall life. Iohn 17.

The Lord buildeth SION. Pſal 102 verſ. 16.

In SION is the Lords name decla­red, and his praiſe in Ieruſalem▪ ibidem. verſ
21.

The bleſſed of my Father. Math. 25. For whom the kingdome of God is pre­pared
from the beginning of the world. verſ▪ 34.

The Chlldrē of God. Hoſea 1. Iohn. 1 Galat 3. phil 2.

The Heires nf Chriſt, and Co-heires with Chriſt. Rom. 8.

The fellow-Citizens with the Saints, The houſholde ſeruants of God. Epheſ 2
verſ. 19.

The Veſſels of glorie. Rom 9. verſ 23.

As Lights ſhining in the world, 2 phi verſe 25.

Iuda and Iſraell. Hoſea 1. Rom. 2. and 9. Which names are full of miſteries,

The Children of promiſe. Gallat 3. verſ 29. 4. and 28.

The Children of SARA the free

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=18)woman. Gal. 4
verſ. 31.

The Church builded vpon the Rock, a­gainſt which the Gates of Hell ſhall not
preuaile. Math. 16. ver. 18.

Called Chriſtians as of the Lord Chriſt.

Act. 11. verſ. 26.

The ſeed of Abraham, Gal 3. verſ. 29.

The kingdome euerlaſting of the Meſſi­as. Abdias. cap. 1. ver. 21. 2. Pet. 1.

The brethren of Chriſt. Pſal. ar

The holy ones. Rom. 1.

The new man. Epheſ. 2.

New Creature in Chriſt. Gal. 6.

A Garland of glory ſhalt thou be in the hande of the Lord, and a royal Diadem
in the handes of thy God Eſa. 62. verſ. 3.

And thou ſhalt be called Hiphzibah (that is) My delight is in thee. verſ. 4.

Of her it is ſaid by the Prophet Eſay cap 54, Feare not, for thou ſhalt not be
aThe fauor of God towards his Church.ſhamed, neither ſhalt thou be
confoun­ded. verſ. 4. For a momēt, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for
a little ſea­ſon, but with euerlaſting mercie haue I had compaſſion on thee.
ſaith the Lorde thy Redeemer. verſ. 8.

My mercy ſhall not depart from thee neither ſhall the couenant of my peace,
[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=18) fall away
(ſaith the Lord) that hath com­paſſion on thee. verſ. 10.

Of her againe, Eſay. 60. I will make thee an eternall glorie, and a  [...]y
from Generation to Generation, verſ. 15. Thou ſhalt call Saluation thy Wa les,
and Praiſe thy Gates. verſ. 18. The Lord ſhal be thine euerlaſting light.
verſ. 20.

Iuda ſhall be ſaued, and Iſraell ſhall dwell ſafely. Ieremy. 23. verſ, 6. And
in E­ſay againe cap 49. Though a woman for get her Childe, yet will not I
forget thee O SION. verſ. 15. Beholde, I haue grauē thee vpon the palm of
mine hands thy walles are euer in my ſight. verſ. 16.

Briefly, out of Sion was the true Meſsias, and Sauiour of Iſrael looked
for,The Meſsias promiſed  [...] of, SION. as Dauid ſingeth in the 14. Pſal.
Who ſhal giue ſaluation out of SION vnto Iſraell? verſ. 7.

And S. PAVLE ſaieth Rom. 11. Out of SION ſhall hee come which ſhall deliuer.
&c. verſ. 29.

And GOD by his ſeruants the Prophets & Apoſtles throughout al y• Scrip­tures
hath ſpoken glorious thinges in figures, and euident promiſes: For ſhee hath
Promiſes of this preſent life, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=19) of the life
to come. 1. Tim, 4.

After this maner hath the gréeke text as in Latine (de te of thée) But the
true meani [...] of ye Hebrue hath (in te) in thée: [...]ar. & this
preiudiceth nothing to vs, for both are true. Thoſe excellent things which I
haue made mencion off, are ſpoken of the Church, by the Prophets and Apoſtles,
and in the Church: For, what other thing are they, but ſacred holy miſteries
of the Goſpell, touching euerlaſting life & ſal­uation, which ſurely are
dailie preached and ſounded foorth both of the Church, and in the Church, that
by hearing of ſo great matters, faith might come vnto vs and by Faith,
Juſtification and Salua­tion.

The Hebrue text addeth Selah whichSelah. S. Ierome tranſlateth Semper,
alwaies: For, the Church as a Bride glorious in her Huſband, ſhal euermore be
preached off: glorious things ſhal be ſpoken of her and in her ſhall be
continually ſung the ineffable glorie of the euerlaſting grace of God in
Chriſt our Lord.

And ſo the Iewes for the moſt parte interpret the word Selah for euerlaſting
like as it is euident in their Epitaphes, [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=19) as the Iewiſh
Epitaph is in Hebrue, at Baſill, His ſoule continue in Paradice, Amen, Amen,
Amen For euer and euer. For it is vnderſtood by that verſe in the 84. Pſalme.
They ſhall praiſe thee for e­uer and euer: And ſo likewiſe by Thar­gus the
Hebrue writer vpon this 87. Pſalme.

Rabbi, Aben Ezra expoundeth it for trueth or truelie. Dauid Kimhi writeth,Ama.
that it is a token of lifting vp the voice, in this Pſalme from the roote, to
lift vp. Salal. So as indéed by this perſuaſion, the cogi­taciō of ye mind is
moued erneſtly to way & cōſider a great matter: for in this place it is a
worthy little verſe, to the medita­tion wherof, all the powers of the minde
may be profoūdly and earneſtly moued. For our matter is now in making, weeThe
Riches of the church are that Church, the excellent Cittie of God, cōcerning
which ſo glorious things are ſpoked off: Al which things are pro­miſed and
ſurelye giuen vs from God in Chriſt: For ſo greate and vnſpaakeable are they,
that the Prophet Eſay, and the Apoſtle Paule write of theſe. That for them
which loue God, ſuch thinges are prepared, which neither eie hath ſeene
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=20) nor eare
hath hard, neither yet the heart of man conceiued. Eſa 64. 1 Cor. 2.

Now let vs ioine the Hebrue phraſeIn what pointes the Church of Chriſt is
glorious. vnto the Gréeke te [...]t, and you ſhall ſee a goodly conſonancy,
Glorious ſayinges are ther of thee, but, in thee, O City of God. For without
thée, & of thée is all euil ſpo­ken. For thoſe ſame glorious thinges which are
ſpoken off touching ye Church, are vndoubtedly not ſpoken of her, but in the
Church: for without the Church▪ the world, that is, the cōgregation of the
vn­godly, the ſpouſe of the deuil, the enemie of Chriſt, with her Ruler is not
glorious but ſpeake meer & extreame infamies or ſlaunders of the Church.
Without the Church (wher the Goſpell is ſcorned and hiſſed out of doores) ſo
ſoundeth the verſe, Reprochful things are ſpoken of thee O city of Satan? For
ſo alſo ye vngodly ones flatter thēſelues that they are the Catho­like
Children of God, the ancient Chri­ſtians and the City of God: But others (not
honouring the Pope) them doe they cal the children of Satan: yea, they
con­demne the Goſpel of the grace of God, or as the damnable doctrine and
errour of Satan.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=20)At
Auguſta, one of thoſe Papiſtes a Doctor of the Popes Diuinity by ſugge­ſtion,
in preſence of Duke▪ Maurice cried out vpon thē which beleeued in ye Goſpel
of Chriſt, (which hee called the new Do­ctrine) as perſons infamous, and
vnwor­thely requeſted rightly to beare witneſſe of y• Truth before Judges or
Magiſtrats as we ſay in Duch, Sie ſollen mir zukey  [...]er warheit odder
zeugknus gut genug ſein. So Paul that moſt excellēt light of the Church, was
contēptibly reckoned for a Sower of ſtrange doctrine. Actes. 17.

Paule and Silas were called Diſtur­bers of the whole worlde. ibidem

And [...]n times paſt as it appeareth in ye Apollogie of Tertullian againſt
the Gen­tiles, the Chriſtians were of Gentiles na­medThe Church of God is
railed on by the vngodly ones murtherers, Church-robbers, ince­ſtuous perſons,
publique enemies, mur­therers of Infants, procurers of wic­ked luſts, Bawdes,
and Aſſe-heades: in that they worſhipped an Aſſes head as it were a God: which
ſuſpition Cornelius Tacitus had ſtirred vp.

The aſſemblye of Chriſtians to the Supper of the Lord was counted of the
vngodly ones, a Faction.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=21)Chriſtians
were named the cauſe of all publique miſchiefe, and of all inconuenience
amongſt the people of the world: If the riuer Tiber roſe vp to the
walles:Chriſtians bearing the blame of all euill happes. If the riuer Nilus
flowed not vp ouer the fleldes, if the Skies ſtood ſtill, if the earth quaked,
if euer any Famine or peſtilence were, by and by it was denounced, Caſt thoſe
Chriſtians to the Lions. Finally,Chriſtianos ad Leonem. they were reprochfully
called vnfruitful in their buſineſſe, and not good for any thing. They were
alſo called, Sarmentitij & Semitij becauſe being boūd to a block of greate
waight, ſtanding vpright and compaſſed about with fier wood they werNot [...].
brent to aſhes: And for this cauſe alſo they were accompted deſperate, and
caſt away.

In Ciprians time there was among the enemies of the Chriſtians one
De­mitrianus, a man of great name, which ſaide, that all miſſchiefes whereby
the world was toſſed and turmoiled, was to be imputed vnto the Chriſtians, for
that the Boddes of the Gentiles wer not wor­ſhipped amongſt them: And then it
was an offence to be a Chriſtian.

Iulianus the Apoſtate in reſpecte of [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=21) reproch called
the Chriſtians Galileans, as Nazianzenus writeth.

The Iewes at Rome called the Chri­ſtian faith and that congregation, a Sett,

Of this ſect (ſay they vnto Paule) it is knowen vnto vs, that in euery place,
men ſpeake againſt it. Act. 28.

Chriſt the head of the Church, the huſ­band and foundation thereof, heard
him­ſelfe called of the Iewes,, a Samaritane, a­Seducer and deceiuer of the
people, one hauing a Deuill, aud a ſedicious perſon. And in our time ſuch as
beleeue the Goſ­pell and reiect the doctrines of men diſa­gréeable to y•
Goſpel, (y• I may omit infi­nite other ſlaunders) are called of the vn­godly
ones Lutherane Heretikes: But Chriſt the huſband of the Church, in this world
deſpiſed and abiect, (ſuch is his vnſearcheable wiſedome) turneth euen theſe
ſlaunders alſo into glorie for the Chriſti­ans. For who had not rather heare
tenne hundreth thouſande reproches of the vn­praiſ-worthy Gentiles and vngodly
per­ſons abhominable before God (and that for the name of Chriſt) then to
beare the ſtate of a king, and enioy at eaſe all the honoures and benefites of
this worlde  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=22)This one
bleſſing of Chriſte confoundeth all the cruell curſes of this worlde. Bleſ­ſed
are you whē men reuile you and ſhall ſpeake all euill againſt you for my
names ſake falſly: Reioice and bee glad, becauſe your rewarde is greate in
heauen. Math. 5. verſes. 11. and. 14.

Verſ. 3 I will thinke vpon Rahab and Babilon with thē that knowe me.

Verſ. 4 Beholde the Philiſtines alſo and they of Tyre, with the Morians, loe,
ther was hee borne.

FIrſt of al, the names of the aforeſaid Nations muſt be declared, and the
meaning of the Prophet ſhall more eaſily appeare: Rahab therefore is a Sirname
which Eſay alſo in his 30 chap. giueth vnto Egipt, becauſe it was a proud
People, in whome when the Iewes put their hope and confidence, they were
de­ceiued.

Wherfore Eſayas ſaieth, For the Egip­tiansare vanitie, and they ſhall help in
[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=22) vaine.
Their (Rahab or) ſtrength is to ſitCayſtil.

And in the 51 chap. Art not thou that ſame (Arme) that hath ſmitten the proud
(Egipt?) Arnobius and Auguſtine vnder­ſtand by that ſame Strumpet in Iericho,
thoſe y• are wiſe in their owne conceites:

Unto the other Doctors Rahab ſee­meth to ſignifie raſhneſſe and inſolency or
pride wherewith the Egiptians▪ are by good right entituled as the ſpeciall
Ene­mies of the the Iewes. And Thargus the Hebrue writer in this place hath
Mitſarri that is to ſay Egipt for Rahab. Mitſarri. Raab.

Thoſe perſons called Allophili (as it is in y• Gréeke tranſlation) are
Philiſtines For the Hebrue text hath Pheleſſer, whichPheleſſer. S. Hierome
tranſlateth▪ for Paleſtine.

And the ſame Hierome vpon the firſt Chapiter of Amos, giueth to note that the
70 Interpreters called the Philiſtines al­waies Strangers borne: For
whereſoe­uer (ſaith he) in the olde Teſtament w [...] read Straungers borne,
they are to bee vnderſtoode not commonlye, as touch­ing all forraine Nations,
but properly of Philiſtines which nowe are called  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=23)Theſe
Nations, that is to ſay Egipti­ans, Babilonians, Paleſtines, Tyrians and
Ethiopians were well knowen to the Iewes for their Neighbourhoode and for
their malignant mindes towardes them.

Hereby therefore y• Prophet teacheth in the perſon of God, that the before
men­tioned people, although hetherto they knewe not God and were manifeſtly
vn­godly and accurſed (as all other Nations being without hope, and wanting
know­ledge of God in the world) ſhall yet not­withſtanding be receiued into
the grace & fauour of the Goſpell. As if he ſaide I wil remember thoſe Nations
amongſt them which will knowe me: that is, amongſt my elect & true Chriſtians,
which knowe and worſhip me by Faith in Chriſt. Bleſ­ſed is he which God ſo
thinketh vpon, that he is written in the booke of life, & what maner of life
ſoeuer he led before, hee yet through grace by Chriſt may be reckoned amongſt
the people of GOD, that is, the Church of Chriſt,

Our Scholemaiſter D. Martin Lu­ther, that he might alſo open the miſter [...]
of the calling of the Gentiles, in this place vnto the  [...]ares of y•
Germanes doth th [...] [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=23) tranſlate it,
Ich will predigen laſſen Ra­hab vnd Babell, das ſie mich kennen ſollē: that
is to ſay▪ I will let pr [...]ch Rahab & Babilon that they may knowe me.

And this rightlie and perſpicuouſly ſo he doth: For, that this is the rule of
a good Interpreter, S. Ierome writing vnto Summa and Fretela teacheth vs: That
he might expreſſe the phraſe of an other language in the proprietie of his
owne tongue, which thing alſo amōgſt y• anciēts y• be slearned writers haue
done: as Tul­ly in Protagora Platonis▪ & in Oeconomi­  [...]o Xenophontis▪ &
in Demoſthenes his o­ration againſt Aeſchines, & many others. In which place
heare that folly bragging of the outragions Sinagogue is beaten backe wheras
it crieth, Abraham is our father, we are the heritage of GOD, the Gentiles are
accurſed. Iohn. 8, verſ. 39.

For it is a cleare and euident Teſti­monie of the calling of the Gentiles out
ofThe Goſpell pertaineth vn to al nations. the whole world, to the Goſpel of
Chriſt: For by the calling of the aforeſaide Nati­ons, in this place are all
other Nations alſo to be vnderſtood whereſoeuer they be thronghout the worlde.

And like as the Prophets do propheſi [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=24) of the grace
of Chriſt to be imparted vnto the Nations that the kingdome of Chriſt may be
Catholike or vniuerſall: There­fore not onely ſhall God remember the
poſteritie of ABRAHAM, after the fleſh, but alſo the Gentiles in the whole
worlde, out of whome by faith he maketh the ſonnes of Abraham, that if not in
con­ſanguinitye, yet in the ſame Faith they may reſemble their true beleeuing
father Abraham: Therefore doeth the Apoſtle call Abraham the Father of all the
faith­full by Circumſiſion, that vnto them al­ſo Righteouſneſſe might bee
imputed, euen as (vnto him beleeuing the pro­miſe concerning Chriſt) Faith is
impu­ted vnto righteouſneſſe. Rom. 4. 16. verſ. 9. 7. Gal. 3. verſ. 7. 22.

The Lawe worketh nothing theare nor the generation as touching the fleſh: For
the promiſe happened not vnto Abraham, by the Lawe, nor to his ſeede, That hee
ſhould be the heire of the worlde, but by righteouſneſſe of faith. Like as in
3. cap. Gal. verſ. 7. he ſaith, They which are of faith, are the Children of
Abraham.

Wee vnderſtande here, that the fleſh hathe no prerogatiue in reſpecte of
iuſti­fication [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=24) but faith in
Chriſte: Wherefore wee which were taken from among the Gentiles, and (which as
the ſame Apoſtle ſaieth) were once farre off, are now made neere by the blood
of Chriſte. Epheſ. 2. verſ. 13.

Who from out both Iewes and Gen­tiles hath made one, and hath broken the
ſtoppe of the partition wall. verſ. 14.

Nowe wee both through him haue an Enterance vnto the Father of mercies by one
ſpirite. verſ. 18.

This doth the promiſe of God in this Pſalme, I will thinke vpon Rahab and
Babilon. &c. that is to ſay, I will call and take vnto me Children from out of
al the Nations in the world, and not out of Ca­naan onely: which ſurely ought
to be rec­koned by good right amongſt the glori­ous thinges which are ſpoken
off touch­ing the Churche of Chriſt.

For the Apoſtle alſo in the third cha­piter to the Epheſians, fearmeth the
cal­ling of the Gentiles into the Church or Congregation of ISRAEL, a
Miſte­rye: which was not alwayes knowen vnto the Sonnes of men, but is
reuey­led vnto the Holye ones, the Apoſtles of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=25) Chriſt and
his Prophets, by his holy ſpi­rite, namely that the Gentiles are fellow­heires
with the Iewes, members of one body, and Coo-partners of the promiſe of life
in Chriſt.

And the Prophet Dauid here addeth in the ende of this verſe Loe, there is hee
borne (that is to ſay▪) the people of the na­tions▪ before remembred:

Where are they borne? I anſwere, wheras hee reconeth vp by the name of thoſe
Nations▪ it is certaine, that he ſpeaketh of them which are now borne: but he
af­firmeth▪ the miſterie of regeneration To be by water & the Sperite, as in
Iohn 3. And he teacheth alſo that thoſe Nations borne anew theare, that is
(within the gates of SION, in the citie of God) haue giuen their name vnto
Chriſt, forſaking their Idols, and are to be conuerted from darkneſſe vnto
light, and from the pow­er of Satan vnto the true and liuing God that they may
alſo receiue forgiueneſſe of Sinnes, and inheritance amongſt them which are
ſanctified by faith in Chriſt.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=25)

Verſ. 5

And of SION, it ſhal be reported, that manie are borne in her: And hee euen
the moſt high ſhal ſtabliſh her.

IN this place the tranſlation (as S. Hierome ſayeth to Summa and Frete­la)
according to the places, times and pleaſures of olde writers, differeth frō
the Hebrue veritie: For, that ſaith, Vnto SION it ſhall be reported, many are
borne in her. But the Greeke translation hath it thus, The Mother Sion ſhall
ſay many perſons are borne in her. Finallie, the weſt church hath now for a
long time read, Shal Sion ſay many are borne. &c? The notable negligence of
the Popiſh Prelates for ſpirituall matters in this Authors time In which place
not without cauſe do we deteſt the negligence of the Prelates of the Church,
in whoſe power at this day conſiſteth the chéefe regarde of thinges who do
ſurmount the Princes of the Empire both in wealth and reuenues: much more are
equal vnto them, and yet in ſo many ages not euen one hath bene ſound who at
the charge of the Church goodes, hath reformed the exemplars of the Byble or
at leaſt wiſe the Pſalter▪ within all the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=26) Churches is
ſong nightes and daies: ſuch faithfull Stewardes of God are they for ſooth?
But let vs ſuffer them to fill vp the meaſure of their Fathers indeede, the
Phariſes: whoe euen themſelues with like periurye gouerned their Sinagogue in
time paſt ſo long, that whiles they woulde not repent them, they vtterly
pe­riſhed from the face of the earth.

Firſte, wee will ſhowe foorth what meaninges the Hebrue Text hath. Of SION it
ſhall bee reported, that is, of the Church of Chriſte it ſhall bee prea­ched,
Manye are borne in her. That is e­uerye one that is regenerate by the
Spi­rite, is borne in that SION: For, inWithout the Church of Chriſte is no
ſaluation. the Church are, the worde of life, and the Sacramentes of our
ſaluation.

Wherefore, they which remaine out of the Church, are the Children of wrath,
the Children of olde ADAM, yea car­nallThe Sonnes of Adam. Children dead in
ſinnes and ſubiect vnto eternall damnation.

But they which in SION addreſſe or reedifye the Cittye of GOD, doe finde the
Goſpell of Saluation, and the Sacramentes by the whiche they are borne anewe
and are made the Children [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=26) of grace, the
Sonnes of GOD, and new men, are raiſed vppe from the Death ofWe are
regenerate, by th [...] Goſpell and Sataments. Sinne, and made Spirituall
heires of eternall life.

The Hebrue Phraſe is, Vir & Vir, Homo & Homo, for the worde Vnuſ­quiſque.

Luther whome the Spirite of Chriſte taught, by moſte grieuous tribulations not
onely to ſinge with the voice, but alſo with the ſpirite and trueth, expreſſed
this verſe to the Germanes, vnderſtanding on this maner: Man wirt von Zion
ſagen, das aller ley leut drinnē geboren werden. It ſhall be ſaid of Sion,
all Nations ſhall be borne therein: which we out of the He­brue text doe thus
expound, Vir & Vir, that is, euery one in whatſoeuer Nation he be borne, at
length yet againe hee is borne anewe in SION. As Peter al­ſo in the Actes Cap.
10. ſayeth, Of trueth I perceiue that GOD is no  [...] of Perſons, but in
euerye  [...] that feareth him and worketh Righ [...] ­ouſneſſe is accepted
with him. verſ. 34. and 35.

According to ye Gréeke edetion we read, The mother Sion, y is ye church which
is [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=27) the
ſpiritual mother (For within y• [...]hurch we were borne a new with w [...]ter
and of the Spirite, and in the lap of the Church, as infantes are in their
mothers bellie:) And firſt we are nouriſhed with milke, & afterward with
ſtrong meat that is with the word of God preached vnto vs accor­ding to our
capacitie: vntill we all meete together in the vnity of faith and know­ledge
of the ſonne of God, vnto a perfect man, and vnto the meaſure of the age of
the fulneſſe of Chriſte▪ as the Apoſtle S. Paul ſaith Epheſ. 4.

Unto this ſpirituall byrth by or from God, had Eſay reſpect: with whome in his
49. thay, The Church (marueiling at the multitude of her Children) crieth
thus: Who hath begotten theſe? Seing I am barraine, and deſolate, a Captiue
and a Wanderer to and fro, and who hath  [...] them?

And the Lord God anſwereth her,  [...], I will lift vp mine hande to the
Gentiles, and ſet vp my Standerde to the people, and they ſhall bring thy
Sonnes in their armes, and they ſhall carrie thy Daughters vpon their
ſhoulders, ibidem. vers. 22.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=27)And the
Apoſtle S. Paule in the 4. Gal ſpeaking of the Church ſaith, But Ieruſa­lem
which is aboue is free, which is the Mother of vs all: For it is written,
Re­ioice thou barraine that beareſt no Chil­dren: Breake forth and crie thou
that tra­ueileſt not: For the deſolate hath many mo children then ſhe which
hath an huſ­band. Eſay 54.

Auguſtine in this place vnderſtandeth by the word Homo, Chriſt, by reaſon of
the diſpoſing of the nature humane taken vpon him: which though it haue a
godlye ſer [...]e or meaning, yet is it not ſpoken in place.

Arnobius (not marking the Hebrue ſence, Homo & Homo) vnderſtandeth Adam
begetting ſonnes which may poſ­ſeſſe the earth, & Chriſt begetting ſonnes
which may poſſeſſe the Heauens: But theſe wordes make nothing for the
pur­poſe. For, he rehearſeth before, diuers na­tions▪ purpoſing to ſhewe that
not onelye the Iewes but alſo the Gentiles (whereſoe­uer in the world they be)
ſhal fully attain to that Citie of God, and ſhall be borne a­new in her, that
this ſecond and ſpiritual byrth may not onely pertaine to Iſraell,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=28) after the
fleſh, but without reſpect of any perſon euen vnto all Nations: For, by the
Commaundement of Chriſte, The Goſpell was to be preached vnto all Cre­atures.
Which thinge ſith it bringeth re­generation, all Nations are altogether to be
admitted into this Citty, That they might be borne anewe (as Peter ſayeth) not
of mortal ſeed, but of immortal ſeed, by the worde of the liuing GOD, which
abideth for euer. 1. Peter. 1. verſ. 23. For ſo our Lorde himſelfe openeth
openeth vnto vs all the Propheſies touching the ſaluation of the Gentiles in
Math. 8. and Luke. 13. Manye ſhall come from the Eaſte, and the Weſt, from the
North, and the South, and ſhall reſt them with A­braham, Iſaac, and Iacob, in
the King­dome of GOD. Mathew. 8, verſe. 11▪ Luke. 13. verſ. 29.

Wee haue alſo in this place a moſte ſtrong weapon againſt the argumentes of
the Iewes, and thoſe which embrace Iu­daiſme: who doe wreſt and arrogate the
promiſes (made vnto this Spirituall SION) to them and to their earthlye
IERVSALEM: as if theſe ſo great cōmendations were ſpoken of the earthly
[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=28) Cittie.
And in our age the newe Do­natiſtes and ſecte of Chiliaſtes, moſt foo­liſhlie
alſo dreame with the Uncircum­ciſed, promiſing themſelues earthelye thinges:
where the Spirite of Chriſte promiſeth in the Prophetes (with moſte ſwéet
allegories) ſpirituall and celeſtiall thinges. Unto which fanaticall per­ſons
alſo the moſte delicate Table of the worde of GOD is turned into a Snare and
Trappe, yea into an offence and Re­taliation: Their eies are darkened that
they ſée not, and their backes are alwaies made crooked, that they ſée nothing
but earthlye thinges, whereas meere Cele­ſtiall thinges are promiſed vnto the
elect ones of GOD. For thoſe Nations whome the Prophet and Pſalmograph here
reckoneth vp, and affirmeth to bee borne in SION for a trueth are not borne in
that earthlye SION and IE­RVSALEM: Wherfore we doe moſt neceſſarilye
vnderſtande the verſe to bee ſet downe as concerning the Spirituall SION.

For ſo the Apoſtles and EuangeliſtesThe king­dome of Chriſt is ſpi­rituall.
(as the Interpreters of the Prophetes taught by GOD) haue inſtructed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=29) vs to
vnderſtand and handle the Oracles of the Prophets on that maner. Chriſt the
ſpirituall king, a high Prieſte of good thinges to come, promiſed in the
Goſpell vnto a ſpirituall people, thinges ſpiritual and eternall and not méere
temporall good things. wherfore, as Auguſtine wri­ting vpon the 39. Pſal
admoniſheth vs: Let no man promiſe himſelfe that, which the Goſpel promiſeth
him not: The ſcrip tures promiſe vs not in this worlde but tribulations,
perſecutions, Calamities, en­creaſe of ſorrowes, aboundance of temp­tations:
to theſe thinges let vs ſpeciallye prepare vs, leaſt vnprepared wee vtterly
fall. Theſe ſaith he.

That halfe verſe, (The moſt High, e­uen hee ſhall ſtabliſh the ſame) hath in
it more conſolation, then our ſlender capaci­ty can comprehend: It is a
certaine ſpe­cial thing of thoſe glorious  [...]ytles which are declared of y•
City of God. For, what can bee ſpoken more glorious and more excellent of the
Church of God then that the ſame is not founded and eſtabiſhed by humane
handes, ſtrengthes or counſels, but of the ſelfe ſame GOD the work­maiſter and
preſeruer of all things. [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=29) For euen he
Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of the higheſt God, the power and wiſedome of God the
father was ſent to be a Rocke & foundation, a Wall and couering of this holy
Citie. Here vpon it followeth, that this Citie ſhall alwayes be ſafe, from the
tyranny of death and of the Diuel, which hath dominion ouer Death: much more
then ſhall ſhee be ſafe from  [...]ickle fading and britle power of this
world. For, ſee­ing that God himſelfe is the founder, con­firmer, and defender
thereof, it cannot be deſtroyed nor ſubuerted, yea, the founda­tion of this
Citie ſhall ſtand vnſhaken or immoueable, euen to the vtmoſt, and for euer. As
it is in the 47. Pſal. God hath founded the ſame Citie, (his Church) for euer.
verſ. 7. Therefore although it bée oppugned or aſſaulted of moſt cruell and
moſt mighty enimies without all t [...]uces, namely of Sinne, feare of Death,
the De­uell, the World and the Fleſh, yet it ſhall not be caſt downe at any
time, but it ſhal ſtand firme and mightie through Chriſt. Who is a fierie Wall
in the compaſſe of his new Ieruſalem: And he that toucheth her, toucheth the
apple of Chriſts eye, as Zachary ſaith. Cap. 2. verſ. 5.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=30)Hereupon
learne we that the building of that Citie is not begotten, continued,God is
the maſter buil­der of the Church. & confirmed with any ſtrength of men, but
with the alone power of God: For he hath laid y• firſt ſtone, & not only
frameth in order all the building thereof, but alſo kéepeth & preſerueth the
ſame: Altogether it depēdeth of y• ſame God, not of vs, leaſt any man ſhould
boaſt therof. For whiles the vngodly is conuerted vnto Chriſt, héeThe Church
of God is beutified by Chriſt. is builded vpon Chriſt, he is made a liue­ly
ſtone of that ſpiritual building, but hée is cōuerted by the alone power of
Chriſt: whiles Chriſt ſendeth his Goſpel, giueth harty ſorow or repentance,
faith & his ho­ly ſpirit. As without the Spirit of Chriſt we can do nothing
Ioh. 15. And the Apo­ſtle Paul openly confeſſeth in 2. Tim. 2.The begin­ning
of our iuſtification is of God and not of our ſelues. That the beginning of
repentance is not in our power, but is giuen from aboue: If at any time (ſaith
he) God giue thē repen­tance to know the truth, & recouer them­ſelues from
out of the ſnare of the deuil, wherin they are holdē of him at his plea­ſure.
ver. 26. If God then lay y• foundation of this cito, y• is, if he make thē of
y• childrē of wrath, y• childrē of grace, & not they thē ­ſelues, If God
draw ſinners vnto him & [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=30) fréely iuſtifie
them for Chriſts  [...]ake, y• they may be conuerted from their vngodlines, &
beleeue, & in beleuing may be made fit ſtones to y• building of this ſpiritual
Sion: If he (I ſay)  [...]ay y• ſtones himſelfe & poliſhFreewill i [...]
nothing in the c [...]ſ [...] of Iuſtification them, & build & ſtabli [...]h
the whole City al­ſo, I pray you what glory hath free wil  [...] y• caſe of
Iuſtification? Hath not he which buildeth & confirmeth this City all y•
glo­ry? whiles y• holy Ghoſt beginneth in vs Iuſtification, & conſerueth the
ſame, to the1\. Cor. 1. verſ. end y• he which glorifieth, ſhould not glory in
y• Law, nor in Works, nor in Strength, but in y• Lord? Whē as No man can come
vnto Chriſt the corner Stone of that buil­ding, except the heauēly Father do
draw him Ioh. 6. And no man can come vntoIohn. 6.the Father but by this corner
Stone Ieſus Chriſt. Ioh. 14 Here are the new & old Pe­lagiansNew and old
Pelagians confounded. confounded and vtterly fal downe which go about to build
& ground this ci­ty by their own works, merits & paſſions which blaſphemouſly
affirme that Grace is giuen according to our merits▪ & moſt arrogantly caſt
away the grace of Chriſt.The opinion of  [...]choole Doctors in meriting
[...] If a man ſhal aſke of theſe howe they are cōuerted? They anſwere, they
do y• which is in their power to do, & endeuor toward
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=31) wel doing wt
natural ſtrēgth or ability of vnderſtanding & wil, & ſo they merit Pri­mā
gratiam de congruo: And whē fréewil is helped of grace (by deede brought
forth from freewill and grace) they affirme,Their opini­on of meri­ting ex
Con­digno. that they deſerue euerlaſting life. de con­digno. Nowe, ſome men
are aſhamed of ſuch blaſphemous doctrine, and deny that they euer taught ſo,
to the end they might deceiue ſimple ſoules. But I appeale vn­toSo is that
booke of the maſter of the Sentences called. the bookes of the Aduerſaries, I
ima­gine no vntruth: Let the ſchoole Doctors be peruſed ouer (in diſt. 25 26.
27. 28.) of the ſecond, touching thcological Senten­ces & you ſhall there ſee
that ſame where vpon S. Paul ſpeaketh in the 2. Coloſſ. verſe 8. ſaying: They
haue ſpoyled vsWhat it is to builde the Church of God vppon  [...]u nane er­
[...].through Philoſophy & vaine deceiuing. But, truely, ſo to extol the
nature of man (not yet borne a new through the ſpirite of Chriſt,) what other
thing elſe is this then to deſire to builde and grounde the Church by their
own powers & ſtrengths without Chriſt the foundation? For, to builde and
ground the Citie of God, is no other thing, but, of vngodly ones, to make
godly ones, to tranſlate ſinners from out of the kingdome of ſin and death,
into the [[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=31)
kingdome of righteouſnes and ſaluation, to pardon ſins & to implant mēbers of
the Church iuſtified to build vpon the Rocke Chriſt, & in the faith of Chriſt
& hope of the goſpel ſo to preſerue them, yt they may not fal away, but
cōtinue ſtil in the faith. And this work (as Auguſtin ſtrongly proueth in his
book de Bono perſeuerantiae) is the gift of God alone. Therefore y• alone moſt
high buildeth, bewtifieth, ſtabliſheth, & preſerueth this city, as al
ſcriptures do beare witnes. Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs (inPſal. 115. verſ.
1. ye beginning, continuance & conſeruation of iuſtification) but vnto thy
name, giue the glory. We will gladly confeſſe then, that all foundations of
ſaluation, which hetherto euil bewitched perſons haue de­uiſed by mans
wiſedome, (to the end that we ſhould be iuſtified and ſaued by them) are not
onely ruynous, but alſo the verie deuowring gulfe of hell: whereinto are o­uer
whelmed ſo manie as embraſe not Chriſt the head and foundation: ſo many as by
the workes and traditions of men goe about to builde and eſtabliſh this
Ci­tie. For they are moſt peſtilent builders, ſuch as in times paſt the
Phariſeys and Scribes were: who when they ought to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=32) haue bene
builders (moſt vnfaithfully re­itcted the corner ſtone, without the which the
ſpiritual building cannot ſtand at all.

Learne moreouer, that the Church ſhalThe Church of Chriſt is eternall. ſtil
continue alwayes, though infinite of­fences dayly eſcape in her, which
threaten deſtruction & downefal to the city of God. For, we which are citizens
of ſo excellent a City do euen yet make warre (as it ſe­meth) in a doubtful
battel, and more inffr­mity  [...]ē ſtrength is ſeene in vs. And that
bewtiful City is obſcured with innume­rable kinds of Croſſe & infirmity in
this world. Sathan aſſaults the ſame by a thou­ſand ſleights: The members &
Apoſtles of Satan diſturb the ſame with errors: Ty­rants with open hoſtility
inuade & ſpoils the ſame. But this is our conſolation, (what manner of forme
ſoeuer this Citie beareth in this world) god who hath founded & ſtabliſhed the
ſame is of more might then al the enimies which aſſault it.

Wherefore ſhe ſhall ſtill continue in­vincible, and at length moſt gloriouſly
(in the power of her chiefe founder, & King, Chriſt) ſhe ſhall triumph ouer al
her eni­mies, the world, the deuill, & death▪ which thing Dauid ſaw in y•
ſpirit▪ & ſingeth in y• [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=32) 62\. Pſal. He
(euē god) is my ſtrength & my ſaluation, &c. verſ. 7. And he exhorteth the
Church y• ſhe would always wt confidēce flee for refuge vnto her founder,
ſaying. Put your truſt in him alwayes, &c. ver. 8.

Verſ. 6.

The Lorde ſhall rehearſe it when hee writeth vp the people, that hee was borne
there. Sela.

NOw ſée in what eſtimation Chri­ſtians are had, whether Iewes or Gentiles,
when they are borne a new in SION: God himſelf hath regiſtred them in the book
of life and doth reckon them vp name by name, as his peculiar people, as his
inheritance pur­chaſed with the precious blood of Chriſt. The Lord (ſaith he)
in writing the people born a new in Sion, ſhal reckon them vp among the
Catalogue of his ſaints or Children: Out of this book of life ſhal he num­ber
or name them, ſaying. There was he borne, namely in Sion. This is the Citi­zen
preſcribed & predeſtinate vnto ye number of ye heauēly citizens: him do I
know, & acknowledge as a Citizen of my Citie▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=33) Luther
tranſlateth it thus: Der herr writ predigen laſlen in allerley ſprachen, das
cleretlich auch claſelb, gebcren wer­den. which may thus be engliſhed. The
Lord wil let preach in all manner of ſpée­ches, that ſome ſhalbe borne there.

That was begunne by the Apoſtles in the day of Pentecoſt, when being
inſpirtdActes.  [...]. by the power of the holy Ghoſt from a­boue, they
publiſhed forth ye great works of God, in diuers languages: & the ſame thing
comes to paſſe at this day, and ſhal be accompliſhed in the world, euen to the
fulneſſe of the Meſsias his kingdome.

O holy and moſt louely Regiſter: ForThrough faith in Chriſt we are enrol­led
in the Booke of life. they that ſhalbe on this manner enrolled by God in the
Catalogue of his Sainctes (who are partakers of the Sacrament of regeneration
in SION, and are made alredie Citizens) ought not to doubt of Gods grace
towards them, and of their ſaluation: For the giftes and callings of God are
ſuch and in ſuch manner. That he can neuer repent him of them. Rom. 11 If thou
beleeueſt in Chriſt, thou findeſt thy ſelfe in the booke of life, Thou art a
Citizen of ye heauēly IERVSALEM thou art borne of God. Concerning ſuch,
[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=33) Chriſt
ſaith. Luke. 10. Reioyce that your names are written in the heauens. Them doth
hee acknowledge and reckon as his houſehold: For although there is
nothingWhom, God is ſaid to knowe. vnknowne to God, but al things are eui­dent
before the eyes of God, yet, he is ſaid in the ſcriptures to know thoſe
perſons, whom be loueth as his Sonnes, which do the wil of their Father, and
ſhal dwel in the houſe of their father for euer. 1. Ioh. 2. So. S. Paul. 2.
Tim 2. ſaith, The foun­dation of God remaineth ſure, and hath this Seale, the
Lord knoweth who are his. And in Iohn 10. Chriſt calleth his ſheepe by their
names and bringeth them foorth vnto the Paſtures of life. But as touching the
vngodly he ſaith, I neuer knewe you. Math 7.

And in the end of this verſe the worde Sela is added: To the intent that not
ſo much the word it ſelfe as the cogitations and meditation of ſo bleſſed a
writing & myſterie of our Regeneration might bee vnderſtood: Leaſt ſo great
matters ſhould be negligently as it were ouerlooked.

For if we bée wiſe wee will alwayesThe profi [...] we haue of our Baptiſ [...]
conſider moſt earneſtly the grace or bene­fite of our Baptiſme: That we are
bapti­zed [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=34)
vnto the redéeming death of Chriſt Ie­ſus, whereas all our ſins, and euen
death the reward of ſins are vtterly ſwallowed vp. We ought neuer to forget,
that in SI­ON wée are well borne who were firſt euill borne in the Babilon of
this worlde: Namely the children of wrath, enimies of God, accurſed and the
bondſlaues of ſa­than. And will you heare that excellent Citizen of this
bleſſed SION, Paul, how much he eſteemeth this his allotted hap­pineſſe? howe
worthily hee eſtéemeth the moſt ample gift of our regeneratiō  [...] 3\. Tit.
But (ſaith he) when the bountifulnes and loue of God our Sauiour, towards man
appeared not by the works of righteouſ­nes which we had done, but according to
his mercy he ſaued vs by the waſhing of the new birth & the renewing of the
ho­ly Ghoſt Which he ſhedde on vs aboun­dantly,Tit. verſ. 4. 6. 7.through
Ieſus Chriſt our ſauiour. That wee being iuſtified by his grace ſhould be made
heires, according to the hope of eternal life. This is a true ſaying. And S.
Peter 1. Pet. 3▪ ſaith. To the whichPet 3.alſo the figure that now ſaueth vs
(euen Baptiſme) agreeth, not the putting away [...]erſ. 21. & 22.of the filth
of the fleſh, but in that a good [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=34) conſcience
maketh requeſt to God by the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt. Which is at the
right hand of God gone into heauen, and ſwallowing vp death that we might be
made heires of eternal life. Therefore our dulneſſe is to be abborred who (for
ſo great a grace of the fountaine of regene­ration wherein wee haue put vppon
vs Chriſt & God hauing nowe elected vs for his children borne a new vnto the
life ce­leſtiall, in the number of his Citizens) do not continually render him
thanks: And finally who doe not endeuour our ſelues that being clenſed by the
bloode of Chriſt from our ſinnes we might liue, ſoberlie, iuſtly and godly in
this preſent world.

Glory be to God our moſt merciful fa­ther for the exceeding riches of his
longa­nimity, whereby he inuiteth vs vnto re­pentāce and a life worthy of
baptiſme, & continually beareth with ſinners. The ſame God perform in vs, ſo
as with wor­thy thankſgiuing wee may alwayes re­member That, we are born there
in Sion: That is in the Catholike Church by the ſpirite, & that there by faith
we may fully continue in the ſame City, wherein both Prophets & al righteous
ſoules euē before
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=35) the
incarnation of the Sonne of God, are regenerate or borne a newe by the
Cir­cumſition of the heart: which Conſiſteth in the Spirit, and not in the
letter, whoſe praiſe is not of men but of God. Rom. 2. verſ. 29.

Verſe. 7

The Singers alſo & Trom­peters ſhal he rehearſe: All my freſh ſprings ſhall
bee in thee.

HEre again the Tranſlations var­rie: The Hebrew text hath Kehil­lim, which
ſome doe tranſlate as it were for ſhalmes, others, like as they which dance
for ioy: H [...]lal in dad ſignifieth to leade the Dance, to reioyce. And
where the Hebrewe hath Migniny. (my fountaines or welſprings,) y• Greeke word
ſignifieth (an habitation): although this varietie doeth nothing impugne the
Catholike veri [...]y, for both of them are taught as true. Yet it is very
good to de­ſcerne the meaning of the Prophet in the ſacred phraſe: for, where
as the Greeke tranſlation which is read in the Church [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=35) at this day is
not the pure or ſincere tranſlation of the 70. Interpreters, but is va­rying
and corrupt, we do well by y• coun­ſell of S. Ierome, if in the reading of the
Law and the Prophets wee ſhall returne vnto the Original, That is, vnto the
He­brew language: The meaning then of the Prophet Dauid in this verſe
(according to the Hebrew phraſe) is, And the ſingers are there (vnderſtande in
that SION) whereas people of all Nations are borne a new, and not the Iewes
only. But what ſing they? Undoubtedly theſe glorious & moſt magnificent workes
of God, which he as the moſt high founder and preſeruer of the Church worketh
in the Church to the ſaluation of the Church.

And ſeeing that thoſe thinges which God promiſeth and performeth in Chriſt to
and for his church, are ſuch and in ſuch manner, that they exceede al humane
per­ſeuerance, and vnderſtanding of all crea­turesHow other ioyes do be­gin in
the Spirit. in reſpect of their excellency, The Prophet ſaith heere That thoſe
ſingers in SION are like vnto them which dance for ioy, who for the immoderate
ioyes y• they haue conceiued by the preaching of y• Goſpel, do euen leape &
dance for ioy.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=36) But he
ſpeaketh of a ſpirituall ioy which iſſueth out of faith in Chriſt, (whiles wée
are perſwaded of the holy Ghoſt that our ſins are aboliſhed by the death of
Chriſt) that wee are ſo reconcyled vnto God the Father by his ſonne incarnate,
ſuffering for vs and ryſen from death to life, that he would vouchſafe to be
our Father for euer and euer. This grace or benefite of adoption ſo
chéerefully comforteth Chri­ſtians, that they deſpiſe all worldly ioyes in
reſpect of the ſyncere ioy of the Spirit: And doe eſt [...]eme them as no
other thing elſe then lamentation and ſorow. Which thing it ſelfe Spiritual
perſons wil teſti­  [...]e, who haue felt ſometimes in their con­ſciences both
the wrath of God, and alſo his mercye in Chriſt promiſed, and haue faſted the
ſweete worde of God, and the vertues and effects of the world to come.
Wherfore he ſaith not only The ſingers, but he addeth there are alſo,
Trompeters, that hee may more clearely expreſſe the greatneſſe of that
ſpiritual Joy.

And where as he addeth (Al my freſh ſpringes ſhalbe in thee) he ſpeaketh of
the manifolde & diuerſe graces or gifts of the holy Ghoſt, which the father
for his ſons [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=36) [...]ake moſt
aboundantly powreth out vp­onThe ſpirite o [...] God impar­teth his gifts moſt
[...]ichlie vnto his Church. his Church: neither in déede doe thoſe Welſprings
flow elſewhere, without his Church although the moſt gratious God, doth euen
power out alſo vpon the Gen­tiles diuerſe giftes of body and ſoule, yet the
welſpring of Chriſts grace iuſtifying, the Welſpring of grace, of knowledging
our ſinnes and of acknowledging gods goodnes, The welſpring of ſpiritual peace
and true Joy, The welſpring of thankes, of prayers & thankſgiuing, the
welſpring of the gift of daily praiſing the Lord that welſpring moſt largely
opening to y• [...]te of Charitye, and the reſidew of the Wel­ſprings of the
gifts of the holy Ghoſt flow not nor guſh not out in the wilderneſſe of the
vngodly ones, but in the encloſed and moſt pleaſant garden of the Church:
con­cerning which welſpringes euery where we reade many things in the
Scriptures as in the 68. Pſal. He is gon vp on high, he hath led captiuitie
captiue and giuen gifts vnto men. verſ. 18.

In elder dayes before the fulneſſe of time had appeared. when as yet the elect
ones looked for the Meſsias & ſauiour (and that wt doubtful deſires to come in
y• fleſh, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=37)
thoſe welſprings of Graces then flowed in SION, and in the Synagogue of the
people. For, In Iury was God knowne,Pſal. 76. ver. 1.and his name was great in
Iſrael.

The Gentiles were an horrible and drye Deſart, without knowledge, how to
glorifie God: as in Rom. 1. Concerning whom is ſaid in the Pſal. Powre out thy
wrath vpon the Gentiles which haue notPſal. 68. & [...]. 10. ver. 25knowne
thee. In the Synagogue or Congregation was the ſacred Scripture, therin was
the true vnderſtanding of the Prophecies concerning Chriſte which ſhould come,
yea the Prophecyes, Faith, Hope & other free giftes according to the reaſon of
that time.

Nowe when Chriſt the ſaluation of God was ſent into the world, not a fewe
little  [...]iding ſtreames and ſmall well­ſprings of the giftes of the Holy
Ghoſt, but the wide windowes of heauen being opened, great floods and ſeas of
free gifts plentifully flowed foorth in the Churches of Chriſt: And the
predictions of the Pro­phets were in deede fulfilled, as touching the moſt
ample effuſion (of the ſpirite of the Meſsias glorified) in and vppon his Chu
[...]ch: as in the foreſaid 68. Pſalm. He [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=37) hath giuen gifts
vnto men. ver. 18. And as in Eſay. 12. verſ. 3. You ſhal draw out wa­ters with
ioy out of the fountaines of the Sauiour, And as in the 32\. Chap. verſ. 15.
Vntill the Spirite bee powred vppon vs from aboue, and the wilderneſſe become
Carmel, or a fruitful field, and the plenti­ous fielde be counted as a Foreſt.
ver. 17. And the worke of Iuſtice ſhall be peace, euen the worke of Iuſtice
and quietneſſe and aſſurance for euer. verſ. 18. And my people ſhall dwell in
the tabernacle of peace, and in ſure dwellings and in ſafe reſting places. And
as it is ſaid in the 44. Cap. verſ. 3. And I will powre out water vpon the
thirſty, and floodes vppon the drie grounde: I will powre out my ſpirite vppon
thy ſeede, and my bleſsing on thy buddes. And they ſhall growe as among the
graſſe, and as the Willowes by the ry­uers of water. verſ. 4. And againe in
the 35\. Chap. verſ. 6. 7. thus. In the wildernes ſhall waters breake out, and
ryuers in the Dezart. And the drie ground ſhalbe as a Poole and the thirſty as
Springs of wa­ter. Alſo as the Prophet Ezechiel in his 36\. Chap. ſaith. verſ.
25. Then wil I powre cleane water vpon you, and yee ſhall bee
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=38) cleane: yea
from al your filthines, & from all your Idols will I cleanſe you. A newe heart
alſo will I giue you, and a new ſpi­rite will I put within you: and I will
take away the ſtony heart out of your body, & I wil giue you an heart of
fleſh. ver. 26. There ſpeaketh h [...]e of Baptiſme and of the holy Ghoſt
which in Baptiſme is be­ſtowed vppon vs. Moreouer in the Pro­phecy of Ioel
Chap. 2. as it is ſaid: And it ſhall come to paſſe that after this▪ I will
power out my Spirit vpon al fleſh ver. 28 And in Acts▪ 2. appeareth. Finally
as in the Prophecy of Zachary and 13. Chapter is written. And in that day
there ſhalbe a fountaine opened, to the houſe of Da­uid, and to the
inhabitants of Ieruſalem, to waſh away their ſins & filthines ver. 1.

This Fountaine is Baptiſme and the holy Spirit, with his gifts, whereby alſo
commeth the waſhing away of ſpirituall vncleaneneſſe, and the knowledge of the
Scriptures to the edifying of the Church. Unto this fountain of water of life,
flow­ing out to life euerlaſting, are wee called by Chriſt in the 7. of S.
Iohns Goſpel. If any man thirſt, let him come vnto mee and drinke: Who ſo
beleeueth in me (as [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=38) the Scripture
ſaith) out of his body ſhal flowe euen fountaines of liuely water: Which thing
he ſpake as concerning the Spirit, which true beleeuers in him were to receiue
and enioy,

To be briefe, in Sion, (that is) in the Church, God himſelfe dwelleth as in
his ſpirituall Temple: what meruaile is it then, if in the Church onely liuely
foun­taines or welſprings of al gracesd [...] burſt foorth and water this
Paradiſe vnto fru­ctifying in this Spirituall SION? We do héere finde
aſſuredly the word of God in a Catholique ſence, the ſpirit of Chriſt faith,
true righteouſnes, remiſſion of ſins, peace of Conſcience, Joy of the Spirite,
Loue, and fulfilling of the law, and what ſoeuer ſpirituall benefites may bée:
Be­cauſe wée finde the neuer failing foun­taine of all benefites God himſelfe,
who is the moſt liuely bleſſedneſſe. But the Gretians doe reade this verſe,
thus, The dwelling in thee is as it were of all them that doe reioyce.

The Prophet Dauid héere ſpeaketh of a Spirituall Joy which true beleeuers
onely in Chriſte, doe poſſeſſe: Concer­ning which S. Peter in 1. Epiſt. Chapt.
1 [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=39) ſaith:
Whom yee haue not ſeene, and yet loue him, in whom nowe though yee ſee him
not, yet do you beleeue and reioyce with ioy vnſpeakable and glorious. ver. 8
Receiuing the end of your faith, euen the ſaluation of your ſoules. verſ. 9.
True ioy cannot be but where the ſorowfull perſon is deliuered from all euils.
The greateſt miſchiefes are, to be caſt away from god, to remaine in ſinne, to
ſuffer the tyranny of death and to bee reſerued to eternall damnation. For al
the euils of this world being compared to theſe horrible and e­ternall euils
are euen ſcracely ſhadowes of Euils.

But true deliuerance from vndoubtedTrue ioy is in the Church alone. and
greateſt Euils may no where elſe be found, but in SION, as it is ſaid by the
Prophet Ioel. 2. Chap. Euery one which ſhall call vpon the name of the Lord
ſhal ſhall bee ſaued. For in Mount Sion and Ieruſalem ſhalbe deliuerance (as
the Lord hath ſaid) and in the remnant, whom the Lord ſhall call. verſ. 32.

No where elſe then but in the Church the true SION can there bee true ioye:
Wherefore the dwelling or habitation of al them (which truely reioyce by
reaſon, [[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=39)
their ſins are forgiuen thē through Chriſt and ſaluation by him reſtored vnto
them) is in SION alone: They that are with out Sion, are in their ſinnes,
therfore they are the bondſlaues of death and the deuil. When as therefore
they lye in moſt grée­uous & eternall paines enthralled, what place of true
ioy may be ther, yea, though they fully & wholly poſſeſſe in the meane time
euen al the pleaſures of this world?

Marke alſo that he ſaith (Of all themThe righte­ouſneſſe of Chriſt pertaineth
not onl [...] vnto the Iew but alſo to the Gentilethat reioyce,) is to
vnderſtand, not onelie that the Iewes, but alſo the Gentiles are to bee
admitted to the true Joy of SION, by the promiſe of God: which thing the
Scripture euery where witneſſeth. In ye 46\. Pſal. The Gentiles are called by
name vnto this heauenly ioye. O clappe your hands together all yee people, O
ſing vn­to God with the voyce of melody. Hee is the great King ouer all the
earth. verſ. 1. & 2. And Paul in 15. Rom. Praiſe the lord all ye Gentiles, and
laud yee him all peo­ple together. verſ. 11. And the Prophet E­ſay. Chap. 11.
The Gentiles ſhall put their truſt in him: according to the tranſlation of the
70. Interpreters. And this Pro­phet Dauid ſingeth in his 63. Pſalm. The
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=40) righteous
ſhal reioyce in the Lord & put his truſt in him, and all they that are true of
heart ſhalbe glad. verſ. 10. Beholde he ſaith not, the lewe onely ſhall
reioyce in the Lord but the iuſt: is no man iuſt then but the Iew? Aſke of
Paul, who in Rom. 3. teacheth, That the Iew is not iuſtified by the workes of
the Lawe, but by faith in Chriſt the righteous and onely iuſtifier. And by and
by hee after that ſaieth. Is hee the God of the Iewes onely? Is hee not alſo
the God of the Gentiles? verſes. 29 30. Yes of the Gentiles is he alſo God,
which iuſtifieth Circumciſion by faith and vncircumfition through faith. And
in the 9. Rom. ver. 30. he ſaith: What ſhal wee ſay then? That the Gentiles
which followed not righteouſnes, haue attained vnto righteouſnes, euen the
righteouſnes which is of faith.

Heere the Scripture openly teacheth (ſo farre as vnto iuſtification
pertaineth) that there is no difference betweene the Iew and the Gentile: all
haue ſinned, and haue neede of the glory of God, but by the alone grace of
Chriſt they are iuſtified. And as S. Peter in Acts 15. confeſſeth, god (ſo
much as to iuſtification belongeth) [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=40) made no
difference betweene the Iewes and the Gentiles. verſ 9. If hee made no
difference betwéene them, if he alſo iuſti­fie the Gentiles by faith in
Chriſt, euen then againe ſhall the Gentiles be founde iuſt by Chriſt: If they
be iuſt, then alſo do they reioyce in the Lorde, they reioyce in SION: They
haue aſwel their dwelling place as the Iewes the fleſh of Abra­ham haue in
SION: out of which citie no man is excluded but by that incredu­litie which
with the vnfaithfull Iewes he reiecteth, becauſe they embraced not Ie­ſus
Chriſt the king of SION, Whome the Father himſelfe (as Dauid ſaith)
ap­pointedPſal. 2.ruler ouer Syon his holy hill: And placed him as the head of
the Gen­tiles. Pſal. 17. Therefore the dwelling place of all which truely
reioyce, (that is to ſay of Chriſtians) is in SION, namely the Church of
Chriſte: concerning which ioy of y• Chriſtians, the Prophet Eſay thus
Prophecyeth in the 51. Chapiter. Ioye and gladneſſe ſhal be founde in SION,
thankſgiuing & the voice of praiſe. ver. 3. And the redeemed of the Lorde
ſhall re­turne and come with ioy vnto Sion, and  [...]uerlaſting ioy ſhall be
vpon their heades
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=41) they ſhall
obtaine ioy and gladneſſe, and ſorrow and mourning ſhal flee away. ver. 11. I
euen I am he that comfort you, Who art thou, that thou ſhouldeſt feare a
mor­tall man, and the ſon of man which ſhall be as withered graſſe. ver. 12.
Which true and perfite ioy (neuer to bee taken away from vs. Ioh. 16.) Chriſt
our Lord & God (who be bleſſed for euer) vouchſafe to giue vs heereby true
faith in him, and in the world to come by the cleare and manifeſt beholding of
him. Amen.

They that impugne our Catholique faith, which we haue confeſſed ſixe yéeres
agone, in a very great aſſembly before y• he Church neither at Seuen­hilled
[...], nor, yet a  [...] Mo­  [...]rchy. Emperour & States of the Romane
Em­pyre at Auguſta, & will haue themſelues accounted onely Catholique, doe tye
the Church to the Seuenhilled Babilon, and ſo deſcribe her, that ſhe may be
ſeene and p [...]rceiued with our very eyes, as if indeede ſhée were a worldly
Monarchy, wherein a viſible heade and Uicar generall might beare rule: They (I
ſay) with their finger point at that Spirituall SION. But the Scripture both
heere in this place and elſewhere often ynough teacheth, that the Head, the
builder and King of that Sion [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=41) is Spiritual,
and the City Spirituall, not earthly, alſo the Citizens of that glorious Citie
to bée newe creatures in Chriſt re­ioyſing, ſinging and leaping for ioy, not
openly ryding on ſtately ſtéedes, in kings Pallaces, & al prodigalitie of this
world, but in the Spirit: for, being ſaued throughTitus. cap. 2.hope (as S.
Peter ſaith) with inward ioy, they looke for that bleſſed hope and ap­pearance
of the glorie of the great God, and our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt in the day of our
ful redemption. But in the meane time, they wéepe & lament in this world:
Contrariwiſe the world reioyceth and is glad. And as Chriſt ſaith, in the
worlde they Finde affliction, but in themſeluesIoh. 16. ver. 33peace, through
Chriſt the ouercommer of the worlde. For, if a man beholde the Church
according to her outward ſhewe, ſhée ſhall not beſéeme the dwelling place of
them which reioice, but a lothſome pri­ſon of ſorrowfull and afflicted
perſons. Therefore the bleſſings of that ſpirituall habitation do excéede all
vnderſtandings, and are not perceiued with fleſhly eyes: And the vngodly ones
in this worlde ac [...] not worthy to ſée no not euen the leaſt ci­tizē of
this holy City▪ ado [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=42) her true
bleſſinges which wée haue in Chriſt. The Worlde ſéeth the outwarde man which
is corrupted, but hée ſéeth not the heauenly Ieruſalem with her citizens borne
a newe of the Spirite.

The rich glutton in Luke. 16. ſeeth, Lazarus a begger, full of ſores, and
fami­ſhed with hunger at his gate: but I pray you what carnall eye ſight, yea,
what hu­mane reaſon woulde knowe ſo wretched and abiect a perſon in outward
ſhewe to be the beloued childe of God to raigne wt Chriſt, and whom the verye
AngelicallChriſtians lie couered with figures of ca­lamitie. Spirits did
attende vppon? with ſuch fi­gures of calamity lye Chriſtians couered in this
worlde. The Apoſtles thoſe moſt excellent and noble Princes in Chriſtes
kingdome, how afflicted were they in the kingdome of this worlde? They ſéemed
outwardly the vyleſt perſons of all men, they were buffited wt blowes, they
wan­dered vncertaine coaſts, they were railed on & became as the moſt lothſome
things of the worlde. Where (I pray you) were then the eyes which could
perceiue ſuch & ſo great compéeres of the heauenly king­dome? finally how
vnknown was Christ  [...] [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=42) vnto the
children of this world, in y• Sy­nagogue of his people? For as it is ſaide by
Peter, if carnall eyes could haue ſeene and known the Lord of glorie, the
Iewes would not haue crucified him. And in the 32. Pſal. he telleth vs what
maner of per­ſon he was reputed in the worlde. I am aPſal. 22. ver.
[...]worme (ſaith hee) and no man, a reproch of men, and the outcaſt of the
people, all they which ſee mee, haue laughed mee to ſcorne. verſ. 6.

This one thing therfore let vs be care full of, That we may ſtill continue in
the Citie of God, (euen by faith in Chriſt) let vs redily embrace affliction,
as the com­panion of the Goſpel and for the name of Chriſt as the heauenly
watchword and badge of his kingdome, let vs not eſtéeme or paſſe any thing,
what blinde iudge­ments of this worlde are giuen vpon vs, but let the
determination of ye holy Ghoſt touching vs in this Pſalme be onely ſet before
our eyes. videliz. The Lorde lo­ueth the gates of SION: what ſhal the moſt
peſtilent enuie of the enimies then hurt vs, which cryeth that wee are gone
backe from God, and from his Church? The Lorde himſelfe  [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=43) wherein wee
are, although then in the ſight of the Children of this worlde ſhee ſéeme
outwardly vile and a dongeon, yet is ſhe an excellent and impregnable city.
The Aduerſaries reproch vs wt errors, but heare, they that acknowledge Chriſt
doe wel vnderſtand, that all fountaines of Gods graces do flow in this City of
God Therefore euen then alſo doth the ſounde doctrine of Chriſt, a right and
true faith, yea good workes indeede and ſtudie after godlines here hence flowe
forth likewiſe. yet doubtles faith is far more lukewarm in vs thē is
expedient. But we muſt pray vnto the Lord, & that inſtantly, that what he hath
mercifully begun in vs he would make perfit the ſame. That we ſéeme not to
haue receiued in vain ſo great grace of God in our Sion, and that the moſt
glori­ous name of Chriſt be not for our ſakes blaſphemed: According to Peters
admoni­tion therfore. Let vs abſtaine from fleſhly1\. Pet. 2. ver. 11.luſts
which ſtriue againſt the Soule, and as ſtraungers and Pilgrims in this world,
(whoſe glory paſſeth away) let vs séeke wt earneſt deſire after a future and
perma­nent City. Wherein (as S. Iohn ſaith) There ſhalbe no more death▪ nor
mour­ning [[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20465&page=43)
nor crying, nor ſorow, but God ſhal wipe away in her all teares from the eyes
of his true beleeuers. Apoc. 21. verſ. 4.

Let the Children of this worlde takeThe Authors comfortable Concluſion to the
elect of God. their delightes in earthly Cities, and fill their mindes with
pleaſures which ſhall ſoone haue an ende, for they ſhalbe conſu­med from of y•
earth▪ which now they vn­iuſtly occupie and enioy: Let vs (whomEphe [...].
ver. 1 [...]. God hath called to the rich glory of hea­uenly inheritance)
ſeeke for things which are aboue. Where Chriſt our king andColoſ. 3. ver. 1
[...] ▪ high Prieſte ſitteth at the right hande of God. Which the ſame King of
glory vouchſafe to accompliſh & performe: For into this City (concerning which
ſo glo­rious things are ſpoken) except we beere in this life do enter by
Faith, we ſhal not poſſeſſe the ſame in Deede, when this world ſhall haue an
end: which without doubt ſhall not long endure.

FINIS.

Vrbanus Regius.

Pſal. 135.‘Praiſed be the Lorde out of SION, which dwelleth in Ieruſalem:
Praiſe ye the Lord. verſ. 6.’

R. R.

[Home](/)

Rhegius, Urbanus, 1489-1541.. Date: 1587  

