## (unknown project)

# Certain selected histories for christian recreations vvith their seuerall
moralizations. Brought into Englishe verse, and are to be song with seuerall
notes: composed by Richard Robinson citizen of London

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=1)

CERTAIN Selected Hiſtories for chri­stian Recreations vvith their ſeuerall
Moraliza­tions.

¶Brought into Engliſhe verſe, and are to be ſong with ſeuerall notes:
Compo­ſed by Richard Robinſon Citi­zen of London.

Tempestiue, Intempestiue.

Vigilate, Orate & Laudate Dominū.

Quia ſolus ille ſalus hominum.

Recordare, & Redde. Simplicitate, & Sinceritate.

¶Imprinted at London for Henry Kirkhā, and are to be ſolde at the little
North dore of S, Paules, at the ſigne of the blacke Boye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=3)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=3)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=4)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=4)

## To the worſhipfull maiſter Symon Roo, novve Maister of the worſhipful
Companie of Letherſellers in Lon­don, and to the Wardens and whole fellowſhip
of the ſame, Richard Robinſon Citizen and Freeman of the ſame Companie,
wiſheth the aboundance of Gods euerlaſtyng Grace.

REcogniſyng my ſelf in ſonderie vviſe a debter (right vvor­ſhipfull) amon­geſt
other conſi­derations, J am moued to remēber my duetie to vvar­des the good
expectations of youre vvorthineſſe, vvhiche I haue longe tyme vviſhed that God
vvould ena­ble me any maner of vvaie, to teſtifie
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=5) my good vvill
tovvardes you. Albeeit vvantyng hetherto that vvhiche might beſt behoue me to
bring for your better contentation. I haue thought it good as tyme novv
ſerueth, to preſent you vvith ſuche ſimple trauell, as my barren induſtrie
could yelde in lieu of learned and large lucubrations, an [...] vnlearned and
little peece of labour▪ for the accompliſshyng of parte of my duetie, beyng a
ſmall pāphlet, vvhiche J haue entituled Certaine ſelect Hi­ſtories, for
Chriſtian Recreation, no [...] onely ſeruyng for the vſuall feaſte o [...]
Chriſtmas, beeit at this tyme celebrated, but alſo neceſſarie to be vſed fo
[...] decent Recreation at all other tyme [...] conuenient. Euery hiſtorie
beyng compoſed into ſeuerall verſe, vvith th [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=5) gloſe or
Moralization thereof aptly applied, and their apte tunes for their vſe to be
ſonge, vvith the argumente of euery Historie prefixed, vvhiche as I confeſſe,
is but of ſmall value, to reſponde vvith your expectations, yet herein as I am
to craue pardon for my boldneſſe, in dedicating the ſame vn­to you, I haue
good hope that you vvil not all together reiecte my good vvill, vvith the
ſimpleneſſe of the vvoorke: But deme the beste of me, As one that vvould bee
glad, in any greater mat­ter to ſatiſfie your vvorthie good vvilles at all
tymes. And thus beſe­thyng youre vvorſhippes, to beare vvith this my poore
beginnyng, J ſurceaſe to trouble you any further. Restyng you in the tuitiō
and gouer­naunce
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=6) of the
almightie. From my Chamber on the Southvveſt ſide of the Cathedrall Churche of
S. Paule in London, This xxi. daie of De­cember. M.D.lxxvi.

Your vvorſhips poore brother and faithfull oratour in Chriſt Richard Robinſon,

## Table of contents

  * To the worſhipfull maiſter Symon Roo, novve Maister of the worſhipful Companie of Letherſellers in London, and to the Wardens and whole fellowſhip of the ſame, Richard Robinſon Citizen and Freeman of the ſame Companie, wiſheth the aboundance of Gods euerlaſtyng Grace.
  * 1\. ¶Certaine ſelected Hiſtories for Chriſtian Recreation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=6)

## 1\. ¶Certaine ſelected Hiſtories for Chriſtian Recreation.

### 1.1.

¶The argument.

¶ Chriſte beyng borne, the Angelles reueile the ſame with glad tidinges vnto
the poore ſhep­herdes. The ſtarre ſeen in the Eaſte. The Sages repare with
their preſentes, to doe homage vnto the Sauiour of the worlde.

To the tune of La bonetta.

IF Angels voice, did firſt reioyſe

In ſpiritus concordia:

To ſhepherdes poore, ſinging e­uermore

Deo in excelſis gloria.

Chriſt God & man, eche chriſtiā

Of due, muche more this daie,

Ought dedicate, in bliſfull ſtate,

Thy birthe with glorie aie.

If wiſemen three, brought preſentes free

Their true loue alſo to declare:

The firſt brought golde, the ſecond was bold,

With Mirrhe hym to prepare.

The thirde Inſence, with full pretence,

Thei mekely offred thus all three,

Chriſte God and man, to worſhip than,

In Bethleem borne truely.

#### 1.1.1. ¶The Moralization.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=7)

OF theſe giftes thus, we maie diſcuſſe,

As ſkilfull writers duely ſcan:

Golde firſt of all, Treaſure to call,

Of wiſedome in Chriſte tokenyng than.

Mirrhe doeth include, a harte indude,

With true repentaunce aye.

Inſence eke tells, deuotion dwelles,

In mynde with ſtedfaſt ſtaye.

In token true, of honour due,

Their Sauiour Chriſte chefe Kyng vnto,

Theſe giftes gaue thei, whereby we maie,

Our Chriſtian duetie ſhewe.

This ſolempne feaſt, let euery geaſt,

Biden in Chriſtes faithe and feare:

To Chriſtes birth, newe men forthwith,

In loue and life appeare.

Golde, Mirrhe, Inſence, from conſcience,

Of ſynne and vice, bare and deuoyde,

To Chriſt our Kyng, thus for to bryng,

Let our care alwaies be employde.

Let faithe ſtedfaſte, man whiche thou haſte▪

Receiued by Baptiſme,

In promiſe made, neuer to fade,

As golde giue this to hym.

Let hope of heale, in vs preuaile,

By Chriſte whiche hym in name profeſſe▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=7)That he maie
haue, our ſoules to ſaue,

This Mirrhe giue more and leſſe.

Let loue likewiſe, our due compriſe,

Bothe towardes God, and alſo man:

To Chriſte Ieſus, we rightly thus,

Doe bryng our Inſence than.

Bis.

With one cleare voyce, thus to teioyce,

In Chriſtes birthe then doe all wee,

That beare Chriſtes name, practiſe the ſame,

Henceforthe perpetually.

And let vs praie, in faithe alwaie,

That Chriſte our Sauiour,

His Churche our Queene, & realme frō tene

Preſerue maie euermore.

Finis.

### 1.2.

The argument.

Mannes praier is a melodie to God, whiche al­though it baue ſome good ſucceſſe
in the worlde, yet there is now and then a whiſte­lyng charmer ſtirred vp to
bereue and ſpoyle vs of this enioyed felicitie.

To the tune of La bande la ſhaft.

Ehouah vouche thy ioyfull ſpirite,

Eche Chriſtian harte to ioye this daie,

As by a Starre thou didſt vizite,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=8)Kynges in the
Eaſte them to diſplaie,

The birthe of Chriſte at Bethleem,

A Sauiour vnto mortall men.

Minerua and you Muſes nyne,

Aſſiſt me with your ſacred aide:

Some ſolempne ſong to frame with tyme,

From ioyfull harte to be conuaide,

With thankfull voyce to celebrate,

Chriſtes birthe now to commemorate.

Tiberius Emperour once did raigne,

In Muſicke muche delighted he:

Who huntyng on a tyme certaine,

Did heare a noyſe of melodie.

A Harper twas harde by did plaie,

Whereat this prince amaſde did ſtaie.

And tournes his horſe vnto that place,

Approchyng nere a riuer long:

He did diſcrie where then there was,

The Muſician plaiyng his Harpe vpon,

The tenour of whoſe ſong was this,

Mans praier to God a melodie is.

The Emperour ioyfull this to heare,

Demaunded the Muſician tho,

Why he ſo pleaſantly plaied there,

My Lorde ſaieth he that will I ſhowe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=8)Theſe thirtie
yeres and vpwards I,

Haue vſed here this harmonie.

Suche grace and vertue in my noyſe,

The Goddes by fate haue graunted me:

That fiſhes from this riuer reioyſe,

To come to hande and taken bee,

So that relieue I did with all,

My ſelf, my wife, and children ſmall.

But out alacke this Harper ſaies,

Good ſir it hath chaunſte contrary:

Vnto my mynde within fewe daies,

A charmer came whiche chearfully,

On the further bancke did whiſtle ſo,

That he hath fecht the fiſhe me fro.

And therefore gracious Lorde ſaieth he,

As you are potent Emperour,

And ſole prince of this Imperie,

I humblie craue your good ſuccour,

For to expell and baniſhe hence,

The charmer and his euill pretence.

Tiberius courteous aunſwere gaue,

Frende by no meanes but one I maie:

Thy caſe redreſſe, a hooke I haue,

Of golde within this Caſket gaie,

[...]olde here of me the ſame doe take,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=9)And to this
rodde with baite faſte make.

Then vſe the ſleight that longs thereto,

On warblyng Harpe to plaie adreſt,

The fiſhes friſkyng to and fro,

Vpon the baite them ſelues will reſt.

And when thou feeleſt them feede on faſte,

Drawe vp the fiſhe on lande them caſte.

So ſhalt thou hereby fruſtrate quite,

This ſubtill charmer of his praie,

If thou demaineſt thee thus a right,

Confuſed he ſhall walke his waie,

The Harper did this heſt fulfill,

And fecht vp fiſhe euen at his will,

A meanyng hereof Morall wiſe,

My muſe in modeſt maner ſhowe,

Who this Tiberus Emperour is,

The Riuer and Harper alſo.

With Fiſhe and Charmer who thei be,

Diſcribed in auncient hiſtorie.

#### 1.2.1. ¶The Moralization.

CHriſte to Tiberius is comparde,

Which loueth to heare the melod [...] ▪

Of praier vnto hym prefarde,

And doeth delite huntyng to bee.

To ſaue the ſoule by Sathan ſought,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=9)His ſpoyle to
make and bryng to nought:

This Riuer with the Fiſhe therein,

Reſembled are the Worlde vnto,

And people fraught with odious ſynne,

The poore man plaiyng there alſo,

[...]che Preacher is with ſacred lore,

That drawes vp fiſhe to heauenly ſhore.

But then a Charmer ſteppeth there,

The Preachers harpe which doth diſturb [...]

In triple trade doeth he appere,

To caſte the ſoules in ſlepe abſurde,

And whom to ſleepe he can not win,

As Ianglers vaine he hems them in.

And if he make no Ianglers vaine,

Enuie in hym yet vigor hath,

To lure theſe ſoules for to abſtaine,

And quite forſake the perfecte path,

That either thei become abiecte,

Or neuer the wiſer in effecte.

Wherefore needes muſt the golden hooke,

Bee had of euery Preacher here,

[...]or Goddes deuine grace muſt thei looke,

That thei maie fiſhe in faithe and feare,

[...]uche comfortable noyſe to make,

Bothe Charmer and the fiſhe to take.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=10)

Where ſith in faithe we Chriſte profeſſe,

God graunt we thereof frutes maie giue,

With praier to hym and neuer ceaſe,

Elizabeth our Queene long liue,

Vs to protecte by grace deuine,

And gaine celeſtiall ioyes in fine.

Finis.

### 1.3.

¶The Argument.

¶Amongſt the children of this worlde, all are not of one ſeede and generation,
and there­fore puttyng apart the bondwoman and her children, from the
freewoman and her iſſue, thei are to be reputed accordyngly.

To the tune of Sondaie Mornyng.

APollo with thy ſacred lore,

My ſclender ſkill and penne direct,

The birthe of Chriſte ſtill to adore:

With ſolempne ſacred ſonge ſelect,

Dame Pallas with thy Nimphes be preſte,

To further this my thirde requeſte.

A noble kyng ſometymes did raigne,

With witte and wealthe, endued was he:

A Queene he had, with whom certaine,

He liude a tyme, though vicious ſhee.

Three ſonnes by ſtraunge ſeede procreate,

Digreſſyng had, baſe borne by kynde,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=10)On her the
fourth ſonne he begate,

More greater comfort to his mynde.

It chaunced that when Atrapos,

Of fatall life bereft this Kyng:

The Queene with her ſonnes did diſpoſe,

The funeralles accompliſhyng.

In yearth with pompe the corps to laye,

With ſtately tombe enſhrinde for aye.

Whiche doen beholde within ſhort ſpace,

Theſe ſonnes emong them did contende:

Who ſhould ſuccede in fathers place,

In fine yet did thei condiſcende.

Vnto an auncient knight to goe,

Whiche Secretarie was of late:

To the dead Kyng, and hym thei doe,

Commit their caſe to arbitrate.

The knight when he with pacience heard,

Them and their caſe conſidered well:

To them he thus his mynde declared,

My Lordes doe yeelde to my councell.

Your purpoſe then ſhall well proceed,

This ſaied thei, hereunto agreed.

My ſentence ſo aſſigne you ſhall,

The buried corps againe vp take:

[...]nd that you gree emongſt you all,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=11)Your bowes and
ſhaftes prepard do make

To ſhoote thereat incontinent,

And who ſo pearceth deepeſt in,

The ſame I deeme by myne aſſent,

Bothe regal croune and realme ſhall win.

All fowre ſonnes hereto did agree,

The buried corps and take from ground,

Thei binde it faſte vnto a tree:

Eche one to giue his deepeſt wounde.

The firſt the kyngs right hande did hitte,

Wherefore it was awarded fitte.

That he as onely heire and Lorde,

Of Fathers lande proclaimed ſhould bee,

The ſecondes ſhafte with fleſhe begorde,

Through fathers mouthe did perce truly▪

Wherefore to haue the ſoueraigne ſwaie,

And cheef rule of his Fathers lande,

More certainly he ought thei ſaie,

Of twaine the firmer lot to ſtande.

The thirde his harte did penitrate,

By reaſon whereof thought it was,

That he without ſtrife or debate:

Should cheefly rule in Fathers place,

But when the fourth ſonne ſhould prepare,

To ſhoote he ſhrikte with wofull care.

Criyng alacke, this luckleſſe daie,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=11)I doe lament,
heare thus to ſee,

Thy corps oh Father can he ſaie,

Of thy ſonnes wounded now to bee.

The Goddes defende that liue or deade,

My Fathers corps, I periſhe ſhould:

This ſaied, hym in his Fathers ſteade,

To raigne as Kyng the nobles would.

The other three ſonnes were diſmiſt,

From all and euery rule or ſwaie,

My muſe no longer now deſiſt,

The Morall hereof to diſplaie.

[...]his Kyng wiſe noble and wealthie,

To Ieſus Chriſte compared maie bee:

Moraliztion.

[...]hiche did mankinde his ſpouſe ordaine,

But ſhe in tyme did violate:

[...]he ſacred bedde with whoredomes ſtaine,

After ſtraunge Goddes a miſcreate.

[...]onceiued and brought forthe ſonnes three,

Pagants, Iues and Papiſte ſecte:

[...]hereof the firſt did wounde truely.

The Kinges right hande with ſhaft infecte.

[...]hē thei (Chriſtes doctrine whiche doth ſit,

At right hande of his Father deare:)

[...]d quite forſake his ſeruaunts ſmite,

With ſondrie woundes vpon yearth heare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=12) As
perſecutyng Pagans fell,

Enemies to Chriſte and his Goſpell.

The ſeconde ſonne eke putatiue,

The Kyng of Kynges more deepely perſt,

When as the Iewes to hym did giue,

Vineger and Gall to quenche his thirſt.

The thirde moſte wicked ſonne of three,

With poyſoned ſhafte did nothyng ſpare:

To wound Chriſtes harte the King moſt hie,

The Papiſts doe this ſonne declare.

While thei doe ſtriue with might and maine,

Chriſtes faithfull flocke on yearth to quell:

Which ſhould one corps and ſoule containe

In frutes, in frutes of the Goſpell.

How haue thei whet their arrowes ſharpe,

To pearce Chriſtes & his members harte.

The fourthe ſonne now define I thus,

That wailde and would not ſhoote at all:

Becauſe he ſawe ſo miſcheuous,

Pretence of ſonnes vnnaturall.

Eche Chriſtian true the fourth ſonne is,

Whiche feareth God and would none ill:

If he doe ill, to ſacrifiſe,

In righteouſneſſe he hath good will.

Suche a one my ſonge doeth ſignifie,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=12) In ſacred
throne celeſtiall:

Shall raigne with Chriſte in Maieſtie,

At the laſte daie Iudiciall.

For whiche in faithe and feare letts praie,

That Chriſte from ill preſerue vs maie.

And as we ſubiectes all are bounde,

For our noble Queene Elizabeth:

Our praiers to God with ioyfull ſounde,

Let vs directe, in health and wealth.

That it would pleaſe the Kyng of Kynges,

Chriſte our anker, marke, and ſtaye:

Her to preſerue in all good thyngs,

And proſper vs her ſubiectes aye▪

Finis.

### 1.4.

The Argument.

¶The life preſent procureth either fauour, and grace at the handes of God, if
we retourne in tyme, either els neglectyng tyme, purchaſeth vs his heauie
indingnation, bothe now and in the worlde to come.

To the tune of Beckinghams Galliarde.

YE ſacred Nimphes of Hellicon,

By Ioues almight decree:

Voucheſafe once more to looke vpon,

This fourth ſolempnitie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=13) Caliope with
thy chriſtall voyce my Muſicke adiuuate,

From ioyfull harte with

Thākfull mouth, Chriſtes birth to celebrate

In tyme to watche, in tyme to wake,

While candle laſts to come,

Vpon this theame, I here doe make,

This admonition,

Tyme let vs ſpende, well till the ende,

Of howre glaſſe bee out runne.

Liue here muſt wee in full pretence,

To giue no libertie:

To ſynne by will or negligence,

Our light to dampnifie.

As Alexander ſometyme kyng of

Macedonia lande:

Decreed in Courte a Candle ſhould

Bee light and burnyng ſtande.

And ſent his Heralds to eche place,

And coaſte where he bare ſwaie:

With trumpetts blaſt, his will to blaſe,

To ſubiects all. That thei

Which had tānſgreſt, ſhould come in preſt

To Courte without delaie,

If any ſubiecte had tranſgreſt,

Gainſt Alexander kyng,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=13)Let hym
appeare, his caſe redreſt,

Should bee in eche ſuche thyng.

So that before the kyng he came,

Whiles candle light did caſte:

And if he tarried paſte that tyme,

His labour was but waſte.

And who ſoeuer had doen offence,

And came not in due tyme,

To hym plaine death for negligence,

The kyngs will did aſſigne,

Of better and wourſe, ſome had recourſe,

Toth courte giltie of crime.

The ſtorie telles a nomber greate,

Appearde before the kyng:

The Candle caſtyng light and heate,

Had pardon for eche thyng.

A nomber greate there were alſo,

To come at all refuſed,

On thoſe the kyng the penaltie,

Without redemption vſed.

And ſome that while the Candle burnde,

In commyng ſtaied ſo longe:

The Candle out, that thei retournde,

With woe and wailyng ſonge,

We Chriſtians here, how to appere,

Eche one maie learne emong.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=14)

#### 1.4.1. ¶The Moraliziation.

CHriſte is this Alexander Kyng,

That ſwaies the ſacred ſworde:

We ſubiectes his here all liuyng,

If wee doe feare this Lorde.

As he is fauourable, and with

Mercie full repleate:

So mercifull doeth he appeare,

To ſynners ſmall and greate.

Not limityng a tyme onely,

Of life to mortall men,

But lends vs ſacred lore, whereby

He maie our hartes lighten,

With Candle light of deuine might,

Let vs take due tyme then.

And let vs come when Chriſte, doeth call

While Candle light doeth laſt,

Then pardon we procure vs ſhall,

Before the tyme bee paſt.

So ſhall we bleſſed light enioye,

And Chriſtes pardon aye:

And feare no worldly foes annoye,

That would ſeeke our decaie.

With humble faithfull Engliſhe harte,

To Chriſte praie we eche one,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=14)Our roiall
Queene for to imparte:

His bleſſed light vpon:

And vs to ſtande with lamps in hande,

By hym in ioyfull throne.

Finis.

### 1.5.

¶The Argument.

Mannes life is likened to a continuall warfare, and conflicte with Sathan. The
Serpente and the Tode fightyng together, the Serpente be­yng reſerued by helpe
of man, ſheweth exā ­ple of gratitude. The Tode that ſought the Serpentes
deſtruction, hath in fine his due guardon.

To the tune of Flearyng fancie, ſyngyng the iiii. and v. line of euery verſe
alike.

TO encreaſe in Chriſte our comfort ſtill,

Reuailed vs by ſondrie meanes,

Though ſcripture fraught with ſacred ſkill,

Doe farre ſurmount all humane dreames

[...]mongſt a ſorte of pithie theames,

This prophane ſtorie merits praiſe,

Chriſtes cōbate & conqueſt which bewraies.

Caeſar Augustus liuyng than,

A noble knight his ſubiect was:

[...] valiaunt worthie gentleman,

Who ridyng once as he did paſſe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=15)A Foreſt
through, by happe alaſſe,

A Tode with Serpent fightyng ſawe,

Eche others bloud deadly to drawe.

With tried force a tyme fought thei,

The Tode hauyng the maſterie,

This gentle knight did ſtraight aſſaie,

In Serpents quarell happe to trie.

Wounded the ſame Tode greuouſlie,

But not without a mortall wounde,

Hym ſelf eſcaped and fled the grounde.

The Serpent alſo thence did flee,

And when in place this worthie knight,

Alone thought beſte his wounde to ſee,

From ſtately ſteede alacke did light.

His inwurde partes with poyſon dight,

He founde where did encreaſe his greef,

And homewards rides to haue releef.

Where long tyme languiſhyng in paine,

So that his will and Teſtament:

For to bee made, he did ordaine,

Prepared to dye incontinent,

Yet when as by the fire feruent,

For comfort further laied he was,

And that diſpaire in hym had place.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=15)

Euen then beholde the Serpent late,

In whoſe defence this greef he cought,

Was entered in at this knights gate,

And ſeen by ſeruants, ſtraight thei ſought

To ſhewe their maiſter thinkyng nought,

Of ſuche a happe then did he will,

The Serpent ſhould be brought hym till,

The knight when he the Serpent ſawe,

The ſame it was did well agniſe,

In whoſe defence through ouerthrawe,

Hym ſelf to feight did enterpriſe,

Againſt the Tode though ieoperdies,

Of death thereby his life purſewed,

Yet as he was with witte endewed.

Commaunded all his ſeruaunts there,

That thei ſhould not the Serpent noye,

Saiyng, daunger none I feare,

He will me doe but rather ioye.

The Serpent then did hym employe,

In open preſence them emong,

To ſucke the poyſon with his tong,

Whereof takyng ſacietie,

Out of the houſe forthwith he ran,

And purged his ſtomacke preſently,

Of poyſon in hym taken than,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=16)And to the
wounde a freſhe he came,

Sixe tymes by courſe till he did voide,

The poiſon ſuckt, the knight emploide.

Hym ſelf Milke to adminiſtrate,

Vnto the Serpent, then beholde,

The Tode entered the knights gate,

Whiche late with poiſon deade and colde,

Did wounde this courteous knight ſo bolde

In purpoſe came aduenged to bee,

Of knight and Serpent preſently.

The knight when as he hereof hearde,

Vnto his ſeruaunts all did ſaie,

Sirs nought diſmaie be not afearde,

This is the Tode without all naie,

Whom I did wounde this other daie,

In defence of this Serpent heare,

For whoſe ſake eke my wounde I beare.

So that I will if this Serpent,

By any meanes my healthe reſtore,

He ſhall eſcape incontinent,

And if you loue my life therefore,

This Tode deſtroye withouten more,

The ſeruaunts hearyng what he ſaied,

With ſwordes & ſtaues on Tode then laied.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=16)

By meanes whereof the Tode thei kilde,

The Serpent hereat ioyfull was,

And thankfully his due fulfilde,

As gratefull, and touchyng the caſe,

Tourned aboute his feete apace,

Where thus departyng this Serpent,

The knight was healed incontinent.

#### 1.5.1. ¶The Moralization.

THe morall hereof to define,

Firſt the Emperour here comparde,

To our heauenlie Father we aſſigne,

The ſame of duetie beſt referde,

The Knight olſo whereof you heard,

Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte doeth meane,

The Tode declares Sathan certaine.

The Serpent man is termed well,

Firſt for the poyſon of his ſynne,

Next for the medicen to expell,

Poyſon receiued hym ſelf within,

As for Chriſtes Image eke in hym,

For man againſt the Deuill ought feight,

To vanquiſhe hym by deuine ſleight.

Becauſe there is none other wight,

But thou oh Chriſte our Sauiour,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=17)Whiche in
defence of man doeth fight,

Againſt Sathan the Tode therefore,

When mankinde was through ſynne forlore,

Chriſte ſought for vs againſt Sathan,

And in our right hym ouercame.

Albeit not in one place onely,

He wounded was but ſondrie greef,

As well in hym ſelf feele did he.

As in his members greate miſchieef,

He ſuffered doen for their relieefe,

Man if thou be thankfull therefore,

Haue Serpents helpe for him in ſtore.

That is to ſaie, thou oughteſt vizite,

Chriſte in his members greeued here,

In pouertie or other plight,

Miſerable if it appere,

Them to releeue as needes require:

And what thou ſo doeſt vnto them,

Take it for well rendred againe.

But if the Tode retourne doe make,

After firſte ſight harme to renewe,

In Chriſte to thee then courage take,

And ſeeke the meanes hym to ſubdewe,

Then certainly eche firme vertue,

In Baptiſme firſte receiued by thee,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=17)Obſerued ſhall
bryng full remedie.

So ſhalt thou Sathan vanquiſhe quite,

And purchace peace perpetuall,

Of bodie and ſoule with Angells bright,

In perren ioyes celeſtiall,

Whiche to enioye God graunt vs all,

That after our combate yearthly here,

Conquerours with Chriſte we maie appere.

Finis.

### 1.6.

The argument.

¶Mannes life is a waifaryng or trauillyng. To finde forthe three felicities,
but in ſteade of gropyng for the ſweete, here we taſte of the ſower, neither
attaine wee our deſired porte of reſt in this life, but in the worlde to come.

¶To the tune of the Sturdie rocke, ſyngyng the iiii. and v. line of euery
verſe alike.

REſigne now Muſes all your mone,

To me amaſed ſillie wight,

Which wanderyng long, & far haue gone,

Voide of releef, reſt and delight,

Doe comfort myne enfebled ſpirite,

Forced in verſe to verifie,

No ioye on yearth of certaintie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=18)

I reade Ganterus ſo by name,

Did wiſhe a place of endleſſe ioye,

When on a daie to paſſe it came,

Earely to walke he did emploie,

And ſo farre went without anoie,

Till he entred a lande into,

Whoſe kyng deceaſt but lately tho.

It chaunced there after ſhorte tyme,

The Nobles had intelligence,

Of his manhoode, and doe encline,

Their councells all with diligence,

Hym as their Prince of excellence.

To chuſe in royall ſeate to raigne,

Whereat Ganterus ioyed certaine.

The night come on his ſeruaunts weight,

With due attendaunce in degree,

And brought hym to a chamber ſtreight,

Where ſtoode a bedde bedect richely,

At the heade whereof he then did ſee,

A Lyon laied, and at the foote,

A Dragon dreadfully whiche lookt.

Vpon the right ſide of that bed,

An vglie Beare was couched lowe,

And on the lefte ſide, doune were laid,

Serpents and Todes in lothſome ſhowe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=18)Hereat
Ganterus maſde, would knowe,

Of thoſe his ſeruaunts then preſent,

What by theſe ſtrange beaſts here was mēt.

Saiyng, is this bed ordained me,

Yea ſoueraigne Lorde thei aunſwerde ſo,

For tofore this our kynges truely,

Here lodged and died long agoe,

Deuoured by theſe beaſts here loe,

Hereat Ganterus grudgyng ſaied,

This I miſlike all ill apaied.

Your kyng will I not be therefore,

And ſo departed from that place,

Ariuyng to an other ſhore,

Where eke to rule he choſen was,

The night aprochte, then in like caſe,

He was conducte to take his reſt,

Where was a bed with ſharpe ſwords dreſt.

Whereat he caſtyng vp his eyes.

Demaunded if he ſhould lye there,

Yea Lorde, eche ſeruaunt certefies,

Our kyngs in this bed lodged were▪

Bereft and are of life ſo deare,

Saieth he all ſaue this likes me well,

Your kyng to be I liſt nought mell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=19)

Yet tariyng in thoſe coaſtes that night,

No ſoner was Aurora ſeene,

But he preparde in penſiue plight,

To leaue that lande and Lordſhip cleene,

And languiſhyng three daies in teene,

At length it was his lucke to ſpie,

An olde man in the waie to lye.

This olde man had in his right hande,

A ſtaffe, and ſeyng Ganterus come,

Required of hym to vnderſtande,

Whence, and whither he would in ſomme

And who he was to giue reaſon,

I come from countrees farre ſaieth he,

My name Ganterus hight truely.

And whether ſaieth the olde man tho,

Doeſt thou intende to take thy waie,

Ganterus ſaied, I muſt now go,

Three thynges to finde, whiche I ne maie,

What three bee thoſe? tholde man can ſaie,

Ganterus aunſwered his requeſt,

Thus as to hym it ſeemed beſt.

The firſt abundaunce without want,

The ſeconde ioye without diſtreſſe,

The thirde is light not anoyant,

With irckſome and lothſome darkneſſe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=19)The olde man
heard him thus expreſſe,

And ſaied my frende, this ſtaffe doe take,

By this waie ſtraight thy iourney make.

Then ſhalt thou ſee before thy face,

A hill bothe tedious, huge and highe,

Toth toppe whereof is a foote pace,

Whiche doeth contain vii. ſteppes onely,

Vpon the ſame thy trauell trye,

And when toth toppe thou doeſt attaine,

Thou ſhalt beholde, and ſee there plaine.

A Pallace princely edified,

There reſt, and ere thou further trie,

With ſtaffe at gate three tymes aplied,

Doe knocke. The Porter by and by,

Will aunſwere thee, and then pardie,

Shewe hym this ſtaffe, and ſaie to hym.

That I doe craue thyne enteraunce in,

And if he then graunt thee ingreſſe,

There ſhalt thou finde thy hartes deſire,

Then Ganterus did ſo doubtleſſe,

As he was willed of this olde ſier,

And to the Porter commyng nier,

His ſtaffe once ſeen, receiued he was,

Where he found all thyngs brought to pas.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=20)

#### 1.6.1. ¶The Moralization.

EXplane now muſt the meanyng here,

Who this Ganterus called maie bee,

Eche Chriſtian good maie well appere,

Like to Ganterus, whiche ſimplie,

Deſpiſeth worldly vanitie,

And is from tyme to tyme enclinde,

Theſe three thyngs to ſeeke for and finde;

The firſte aboundance as is ſaied,

Withouten want or penurie,

The ſeconde, ioye nothyng delaied,

The thirde light from all darkneſſe free,

And theſe obtained can not bee,

But in the life of laſtyng ioye,

Our toyle thereto we muſt imploye.

O man therefore like iourney make,

With Ganterus for three daies ſpace,

By Praier firſt doe vndertake,

By Faſtyng nexte, this pilgremes race.

Thirdlie, by Almoſe in any caſe,

Theſe three daies trauell till thou come,

Vnto the firſt ſuppoſed Kyngdome.

Some mundaine ioyes there ſhalt thou finde

And people thee to intertaine,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=20)There worldly
pleaſures are enclinde,

To chuſe thee, as a prince to raigne,

Puffyng thy harte with pride annoyde,

But looke about thy chamber well,

There ſtands a bedde, its death to tell.

This bed mans life is likened to,

Where in a ſhort tyme he doeth lye,

Neare to whiche lurcks a Lyon lo,

Sathan, gainſt vs his force to trye,

A Dragon eke wee shall eſpye.

And by hym coucht an vgly Beare,

Whiche waite (as death) on vs echewhere.

Todes and Serpents there alſo are,

Thone showes, mannes giltie conſcience,

The other doeth his ſynnes declare,

To accuſe and condempne negligence,

Of theſe hauyng intelligence,

Wee maie doe well quicke ſpede to make,

This worlde our Kyngdome to forſake.

Then come wee to the ſeconde lande.

Where carnall pleaſures beare the ſwaie,

(To whom conſentyng) out of hande,

Sonnes of perdition vs make thei,

Then to our chamber takyng our waie,

Letts looke toth bed, rhere shall we ſee,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=21)The ſame euen
hell it ſelf to bee.

The sharpe ſwordes there doe repreſent,

(For careleſſe gluttons carle) preparde,

Who taſtes in hell endleſſe torment,

To late repentyng afterwarde,

The handlyng of poore Chriſte ſo harde,

If wee well waie this lodgyng place,

Haſte vs from carnall Kyngdome apace.

Then if wee will further to trie,

Theſe three thynges wee deſire to finde,

Letts walke on till tholde man wee eſpie,

Euen Ieſus Chriſte guide of mankinde,

With ſtaffe of faithe for vs aſſignde,

To giue vs that repentaunce pure,

Whiche had) shall our deſires procure.

The foote pace then wee maie aſcende,

Whiche leadeth vs to life ſincere,

Seuen ſtepps it hath, if we pretende,

To finde thoſe three we ſought wel eare,

Goe we vp theſe ſtepps (whiche appere,

The woorkes of mercie ſeuen to bee,

Our deſires then obtaine shall wee.

Theſe shall conducte vs to that place,

Whiche wee looke for. But comming than

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=21)Toth gate
where is all this ſollace,

We muſt knocke thriſe with ſtaffe in hand

That is, thus muche to vnderſtande,

Contrition, Confeſſion and ſatiſſiſance,

Muſt then helpe vs in thenteraunce.

The Porter then to vs will ſtepp,

Gods deuine goodneſſe doeth he meane,

Who after this our trauell greate,

Thus furniſht will not vs diſdaine,

But gladlie vs will entertaine,

In wealth withouten want, in ioye,

And light, that laſt voide of all noye.

For whiche the Lorde in mercie guide,

Our goyngs and doyngs to directe,

That from his feare we neuer ſlide,

But that to our ſteps we ſo reſpecte,

That his gracious gates we maie amplecte,

And with Chriſte entertained bee,

To reſt in endleſſe felicitie.

Finis.

### 1.7.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=22)

¶The conſtaunte courſe in ſpirituall combate and turneiment of eche faithfull
Chriſtian, againſt Antechriſt our malignant aduerſarie obtaineth in fine
condigne rewarde of tran­quile felicie in this worlde, and in the worlde to
come, perpetuall felicities inſpeakeable.

¶To the tune of Iocundarie.

MArche now my muſe wt martiall might,

In ſpirituall combate conqueryng:

Condigne rewarde doeth euer light,

On verteous worthie trauellyng.

Declare of Adonias kyng,

That pretie Hiſtorie,

In wealth who ſometyme floriſhyng:

Delighted muche to ſee,

His knights at tourney practiſyng,

The feates of cheualrie.

It happened that vpon a daie,

By Proclamation made there:

His knights in armour ſhould araie,

Them ſelues eche with ſhield and ſpere.

Then by decree he did ordaine,

What knight ſo euer could,

Hym ſelf with prowes beſt demaine,

Haue worthie hier he ſhould:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=22)This knowne of
knights a noble traine,

Came tourney for to holde.

The daie of their appearaunce come,

And their aſſembly made ſo:

The kyng did will of thoſe knights ſome,

In one parte ſhould aſide go.

The other halfe of them theare,

He made them ſelues deuide,

The firſt parte choſen ſtreight to beare,

Their armour did prouide:

To lait in place of purpoſe wheare,

The tourney ſhould bee tride.

Then gaue the kyng commaundement,

Who on the parte contrary:

With ſpeare to doe his beſt was bent,

To touche, awaie take, and carry.

The armour ſo that doune was laied,

The owner thereof preſently,

Out of the troupe ſhould be conuaied:

To tourney with his enemie,

And for the purpoſe was a maied,

Ordained to arme hym redily.

[...]hat doen encounter ſhould her knight,

Gainſt hym that toucht the armour late,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=23)Whom if he
foilde or put to flight,

That daie he ſhould bee decorate.

With royall croune and placed bee,

At table with the kyng,

A certaine knight with valiancie:

Conditions theſe hearyng,

With diligence about lookte hee,

Euery ſhielde beholdyng.

Emongſt them all he marked one,

With apples three gilt garniſht:

In greate deſire that ſhielde alone,

His greedie mynde had rauiſht.

And that ſame ſhield he toucht with ſpere,

Straight waie the other knight,

Who ought it, of the maide there:

Did make hym ſelf bee dight,

And entereth liſtes withouten feare,

Againſt the other wight.

In tourney whiche loe he that ought,

The armour toucht by proweſſe,

Behaded hym that ſo had ſought,

To cary awaie his harneſſe.

And as the kyng commaunded it,

Of late, the conquerour,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2068&page=23)

[Home](/)

Robinson, Richard, citizen of London.. Date: 1577  

