## (unknown project)

# A proceeding in the harmonie of King Dauids harpe That is to say, an
exposition of 13. psalmes of the princely prophet Dauid, from the 22. vnto the
35. psalme, being a portion of the psalmes expounded by the reuerend Doctor
Victorinus Strigelius, professor in Diuinity in the Vniuersity of Lipsia in
Germany. Translated out of Latin into English by Richard Robinson, citizen of
London. Anno Christi 1591. Seene and allovved. ... — Hypomnēmata in omnes
Psalmos Davidis. Psalm 22-34. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=1)

A Proceeding in the Harmonie of King Da­uids Harpe.

That is to ſay, An expoſition of 13. Pſalmes of the Princely Prophet Dauid,
from the 22. vnto the 35. Pſalme, being a portion of the Pſalmes expounded by
the reuerend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius, profeſſor in Diuinity in the
Vniuerſity of Lipſia in Germany.

Tranſlated out of Latin into Engliſh by Richard Robinſon, Citizen of London.
Anno Chriſti 1591.

Seene and allowed.

Briefe Contentes of theſe 13. Pſalmes.

Of

  * Prophecy and Prayer. 22.
  * Thankes giuing. 23.30.
  * Doctrine onely. 24.29.32.
  * Doctrine and thankesgiuing. 33.34.

Of

  * Prayer onely. 26.28.32.
  * Prayer, as Pſalme 25
  * Conſolation. 27

Pſal. 34. Verſes 25. & 16.

The eies of the Lord are vpon the righteous: & his eares are open vnto their
praiers. The countenance of the Lord is againſt them that do euill, to roote
out the remembrance of them from the earth.

_[figure]_

Printed at London by Iohn Wolfe, and are to be ſold at his ſhop ouer againſt
the great South dore of Saint Paule.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=2)

TANDEM SI.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=2)

## To the right Hono­rable Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord high Chauncellor of
England, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Maieſties moſt honorable priuy Counſell: Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of
Temporal and eternall Beatitude, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord and Saui­our
euerlaſting.

KIng Dauid the man beloued of God after his owne hart (Right Honorable and
moſt worthy Mecenas) though he was alſo the faithfull feeder, the Shepheard of
God,1 Sam. 16.7. the ſeruant of the Lord, the Conquerour in­uincible, the
Captaine of the deſtitute, the ſacred Pſalmograph, the melodious Muſitiō, the
ſweet ſinger of Iſrael, and Patrone of ſin­gers, the praiſe-worth Prophet of
God the annointed of the Lord, and princely figure of Chriſt, the ſoueraigne
King of all kinges: Albeit (I ſay) he was ſuch an earthly perſonage, endewed
with mo heauenly graces, then euer any was either before or after him: yet, in
himſelfe feeling, and of himſelfe confeſſing great and manifolde infirmitie of
humane nature, by many his moſt greeuous conflicts betweene the Spirit and the
Fleſh, ſuffering (according to the ſay­ing of Saint Paul, that old beaten
ſouldier of Chriſt) Inward feares, outward feightinges. 2\. Cor. 7.5. he found
alſo by experience in the world both inward and outward enuy, both domeſticall
and for­reine enmity, and vnder the handes of the higheſt Iehouah, both
temptations of abiections, troubles of deiections, and tryalles of his truth,
conſtant faith and vnfained conuertion. So as by the prouidence of God: ſeeing
all this, ſorting for his beſt behoofe beyond either his deſire or deſert (As
all thinges worke for the beſt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=3) to them that
loue God &c. Rom. 8.28.) amongeſt his other greeuous complaints in his ſacred
Pſalmes, to mollify his miſeries with me­ditating of Gods mercies, hee
eftſoones tooke into his handes the harpe of his heauenly harmony, ſounding
thereuppon and ſinging to the ſame ſuch like conſolatary concluſions of Gods
goodnes to­wards his elect, as this is: Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of all. Pſa. 34. verſ. 19. And
againe ſuch like teſtimonies of Gods indignation againſt the reprobate as this
is: ibid. But mallice ſhall ſlay the wicked, and they which hate the righteous
ſhall periſh. verſ. 21. That theſe effectes apparantly were thus proued in him
and his enemies, the hiſtory of his life and acti­ons, and the euents of his
enemies enterpriſes moſt euidently do teſtify. For it was a thing paſt his and
all humane expectation and helpe, that he ſo mighty a Perſonage, aduaunced
from the ſheep­hooke to the ſcepter. 2. Sam. 7.8. From a Kings page. 1 Sam
16.21 to a kings perſonage. 1. Sam. 5.3. Long perſecuted by Saul. 1. Sam. 18.
whoſe life he ſaued 1 Sam. 24.13. committing thoſe two horri­ble ſinnes. 2.
Sam. 11. And ſo vtterly deſtitute of all ſauegard and ſafety in himſelfe, for
which he felt Gods iudgement and iuſtice threefolde, viz.  [...] the death of
the Childe borne  [...] his baniſhment for the facte, and  [...] temptation of
abie­ction for exerciſe of his faith, his owne ſonne his hartes greefe 2. Sam.
17. and ſo many nations his vtter enemies, Pſ. 18. It was (I ſay) a thing
impoſsible with man, and paſt all his expectation, that this deſolate Dauid
ſhould find ſuch fauour with God and man, as to reobteine a right recouery of
that, which he had before loſt with ſo great iniuſtice, viz. Gods grace and
fauour, his eſtate of digni­ty, kingdome, life, and felicity: Notwithſtanding,
ſuch was the pro­uidence, preſence & promiſe of the moſt higheſt Iehouah (as
is affir­med by the holy Ghoſt, the true witnes of Gods moſt worthy will &
working herein. The Lord in his mercies ſo looked vpon him with his louing
fauour, that he ſearched the ſecrets of his hart, heard his ſorrowfull ſighes,
ſalued his ſore, renued his ſpirit, remitted his ſin, healed his harmes, ſaued
his life, prolonged his dayes, continued his kingdome: and finally, clothed
his enemies with ſhame, but made his Crowne to floriſh, Pſ. 132. verſ. 19.
Then all which bleſſings none could bee more at any time or greater, by God
beſtowed vppon any mortall Prince or Potentate vpon earth: whereuppon highly
commending the great goodneſſe and mercie of Almighty God as the onely vmpier
in this ſpirituall and corporall conflict, well and worthily aſcribing the
glory of this triumph vnto the higheſt Ie­houah, doth this learned expoſitor
Victorinus Strigelius thus pro­foundly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=3) inferre of
this Warriour and wraſtler: Dauid being temp­ted, prayeth: praying, hee was
deliuered, and being deliuered he gaue thankes. O excellent order of a
princely warfare, O more ſur­paſſing vertue of diuine deliuerance, O moſt
blisfull Conquerour by the crowning Creator. Many proud pompus and mighty
Mo­narckes of old time, as idolatrous, tirannous and wicked Pharao,
Nabuchadnezar, Antiochus, and ſuch others, extolling themſelues for Gods,
contemning the true God, and afflicting his people for their true profeſſion,
haue warred againſt thoſe weaklinges to the diſtruction of their bodies,
ſoules, kingdomes, and infinit thow­ſandes others of their aliaunces: and
after them ſuch other pro­phane princes, foreprophecyed of by Daniell, as the
Aſsirian and Caldean Lyon, the Percian Beare, the Macedonian Leopard, Dan. 7\.
cap. verſes 4.5.6.7. and the Romane beaſt farre differing from the others, all
warring againſt the Sainctes of God, attributing their victories to their owne
valors, derogating the glory of the immortall God, haue deſtroyed diuers
kingdomes, their owne and others, with infinit thouſandes of bo­dies and
ſoules into perpetuall perdition, with Sathan and his an­gels for euer. But
this diuine Dauid, the Lords Conquerour ſo fought his battels againſt the
enemies of God and his truth, as this interpreter inferreth of him in the 7
Pſalme, that the very youthes of his people and dominions, might at home in
the Church and Scholes heare, reade, learne & profite in the law of Moyſes and
doc­trine of the Prophets, touching the promiſes infallible of the
euer­laſting kingdome of Chriſt, and the ſaluation of all the faithful for
euer: of which euerlaſting kingdome, Salomon ſonne of the ſaid K. Dauid was
alſo a liuely and expreſſe figure, as in the 45. Pſalme is mentioned.

Such a peaceable, ſpirituall and corporall warfare in this laſt age of the
world, hath God of his vnſpeakable goodneſſe, grace, and mercie giuen vs this
many yeares in England by the preaching of the Goſpell in the Halcion daies of
our moſt ſacred Saba, Queene Elizabeth, hearing, honouring and aduauncing to
our great com­fort and conſolation the wiſedome of Chriſt himſelfe a better
then Salomon, Idque ſub ſummi Iehouae [...] noſtro, Gen. 5.1. Wherein (Right
Honorable) wee haue manifolde and great cauſes in euery degree with the ſame
our diuine Debora, aſ­well Gouernours as all others, Iudges 5.9. willing
perſons among the people of Iſ­raell to praiſe the Lord of Hoſtes for his late
moſt gracious victory gi­uen vs ouer the Spaniſh Syſera by ſea: As alſo with
the ſame our humble Heſter to celebrate the Lordes louing mercies,Heſt. 15.22.
with conti­nuall remembrance of thankefulneſſe for ſupplanting and
ſuppreſ­ſing [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=4)
the prowde, hauty enterpriſes of hawty Haman domeſticall, ſo as we may ſay,
The Lord hath ſaued his Sion, dwelling with the Daughter of Babel, 2\. Zach.
7. And finally, with the ſame our ioy­full Iudith (the exaltation of
Hieruſalem, the glory of Iſraell, and re­ioycing of our nation) To ſing a ſong
of praiſe vnto the Lord of hoſtes for his heauenly helpe,Iudith 13.4.9. in
ouercomming, ſubuerting, and vanquiſh­ing the pollicy, power, and practiſes of
that Olophernes, the romiſh Antichriſt, and his miſchieuous members, the
Ieſuitiſh Semina­ries and Sectaries, with ſuch other forreine Scorpions,
whatſoeuer and whereſoeuer. Since therefere the ſolace of the Lords Syon, and
ioy of his Hieruſalem in our churches and common wealthes of England and
Ireland, by the gracious and omnipotent preſence and preſeruation of Chriſt
himſelfe, the true Michael and head of his church and kingdome euerlaſting,
enuironed with his ange­licall miniſters and watchmen ouer vs (as this
princely Prophet Dauid ſweetly ſingeth) Continueth ſtill firme and immouable,
Pſal. 125.2. There neither is, nor ought to be any member of this body, no nor
the meaneſt, nor baſeſt labourer in this Vineyard of the Lord ſo floriſhing,
but he is bounden by all good and dutifull induſtrye to beſtowe his time in
praying for, his trauell in proſpering, and ta­lent in preferring the beauty &
beatitude thereof, to the aduaunce­ment of Gods alone glory and continuall
comfortes of the faith­full: Amongeſt whom (Right Honorable good Macenas)
reputing my ſelfe ſimpleſt of many thowſands, and much bounden vnto the
goodnes of God, and thoſe good benefactors which any way haue helped or healed
my weake eſtate, and ſupported my poore poſſi­bility, both in the ſtudy of my
tranſlations, and in the exerciſe of my pen in writing (two ſimple ſhiftes in
me, but ſingular giftes in others of better countinance in the Church and
common wealth.) Here therefore finding my ſelfe indebted vnto your noble
bounty, more thē vnto any other Benefactor whatſoeuer yet liuing: I hum­bly
craue pardon of your Honor for my long delayed duty, and humbly beſeech your
accuſtomed benignity, now (though late to accept in good worth (as in part of
paiment of my debt-bounden duty long ſince lyable to your Honorable deſertes)
this pittance of my poore ſtudy and pen, which is my laſt tranſlation
intituled, A proceeding in the Harmony of the princely prophet Dauids Harpe:
(wherof a former part was dedicated to the late noble Erle of Warwicke
deceaſed) a token of my true intent (as God knoweth) which would painfully put
in vre the performance of my bounden duty, to the full ſatisfaction of all my
honorable, worſhipfull, and worthy good benefactors, and their worthy good
expectations: [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=4)
Though my hinderances haue bin great, and my infirmities are yet many, Euen as
the diſtreſſed wight wandering from Hieruſalem to Ie­richo, deſirous to be
ſetled at Gods good pleaſure, Luk. 10. in the conſolation of the faithfull,
till God the reſtorer of them that truſt in him, do fur­ther increaſe and
confirme me with his grace, fauour and comfort. In meane time I reſt, humbly
crauing and hartily beſeeching the ſame omnipotent and immortall God, to
bleſſe and preſerue your Honorable good Lordſhip with long life, proſperous
health, in­creaſe of Honor in the earthly Syon, and with the perfruition of
life and ioies in the celeſtiall Ieruſalem, for euer & and euer. Amen. London,
at my poore houſe In Saint Martins parriſh by Ludgate this Thurſday the 22.
day of Aprill be-in S. Georges euen, anno Chriſti 1591.

Your Right Honorable good Lordſhips moſt humble and debt-bound O­ratour vnto
the Almighty, Richard Robinſon, Citizen of London.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=5)

## Rodolphi Waddingtoni decaſticon in Pſal­morum encomion & huius operis

SVnt animae morbi varij dum corpore clauſa eſt,

Quae ſcelerum premitur colluuione graui.

Horum qui quaerit ſibi plene dulce leuamen,

Hic Dauidis Pſalmos nocte dieque legat.

Lectio Pſalmorum pſallit ſolatia vera:

Hinc mens fracta malis ſe leuat atque fouet

Gratia prima Deo, Dauidi ſit proxima regi,

Strigeliuſque petit, ne ſua laus pereat.

Ordine poſtremus Robinſonus licet extat,

Tu tamen O Lector viue Richarde, canas.

## Table of contents

  * To the right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton, Lord high Chauncellor of England, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter, and one of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuy Counſell: Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal and eternall Beatitude, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord and Sauiour euerlaſting.
  * Rodolphi Waddingtoni decaſticon in Pſalmorum encomion & huius operis
  * 1\. PSALME. XXII. Deus, Deus meus, reſpice in me.
    * 1.1. To him that excelleth vpon Aiieleth Hasſhahar. A Pſalme of Dauid.
    * 1.2. The ſeconde part of the xxij. Pſalme, touching the Reſurrection of CHRIST.
  * 2\. ❧ A PSALME OF DAVID. Dominus regit me.
    * 2.1. The Pſalme and expoſition.
  * 3\. ❧ A PSALME OF DAVID. Domini eſt Terra. &c.
    * 3.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 4\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid. Ad te Domine leuaui. &c.
    * 4.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 5\. ❧ A PSALME OF DAVID. Iudica me Domine.
    * 5.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 6\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauids thankſgiuing after deliueraunce. Dominus illuminatio mea. &c.
    * 6.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 7\. A Pſalme of Dauid, or prayer for deliueraunce. Ad te Domine clamabo.
    * 7.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 8\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid, exhortatorie to Princes and great perſonages. Afferte Domino filij Dei.
    * 8.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 9\. A Pſalme or Song of the dedication of the houſe of Dauid. Exaltabo te Domine.
    * 9.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 10\. To him that excelleth. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauids deliuerance. In te Domine ſperaui.
    * 10.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 11\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid, to giue instruction. Beati Quorum. Of the Tytle.
    * 11.1. ❧ The diſpoſition of the Pſalme.
      * 11.1.1. Of the firſt place.
      * 11.1.2. The ſecond place.
      * 11.1.3. Of the third place.
      * 11.1.4. ❧ Of the fourth place of the Pſalme.
      * 11.1.5. ¶ Of the fift and laſt place.
  * 12\. A Pſalme of Dauid exhortatorie, to praiſe and thanke God. Exultate iuſti in Domino.
    * 12.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * 13\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauids thankſgiuing after deliueraunce. Benedicam Domino in omni tempore. &c. Of the Tytle.
    * 13.1. The Argument.
    * 13.2. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.
  * Appendix B Faults eſcaped, thus corrected.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=5)

## 1\. PSALME. XXII. Deus, Deus meus, reſpice in me.

The Argument and diſpoſition of the Pſalme.

MOued I am vndoubtedly to beleeue for certaine, that the doctrine comprehended
in the monuments of the Prophets and Apoſtles, is deliuered from the true God,
and that all other Religions, ſtriuing with the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apoſtles, are fabulus, and againſt God, both blaſphemous and deadly; When I
conſider the doctrine of our Religion, to be more auncient then the opinions
of other Nations, and to be confirmed by manifeſt diuine teſtimonies, I doe
alſo behold, (not without great pleaſure) the diſcent or race of our Teachers,
euen from Adam to the diſciples of the Apoſtles. Finally, ſeeing by meruailous
meanes the Church is preſerued, which beareth about thys doctrine euery where
in the world, and ſeeing that the moſt wiſeſt, and moſt modeſt perſons, had
rather ſuffer all torments then to caſt the ſame away: I doubt not, but that
the Church of CHRIST thinketh rightly of God, truely calleth vpon God, is
truely heard, and ſhall haue her rewards in the ende. But much more
vehe­mently I am ſo mooued to beleeue, ſo oft as I conſider or thinke vppon
the ſayings of our Prophets, touching the fatall or diuine mutations of ye
whole world, touching the perpetuall order of the gouernments thereof, alſo
tou­ching the comming, Paſſion, and Reſurrection of our Redeemer, of whom GOD
in the beginning before ſpake, that he woulde ſende him vnto man­kinde, to
take away ſinne, and death, and to reſtore vnto vs righteouſneſſe and life.

Amongſt theſe prophecies, (which properly and plainly doe preache of CHRIST,)
this Pſalme (in mine opinion) hath the ſpeciall place, which with ſo great
light of wordes and efficacie of meaning, ſetteth before our eyes the paſſion
and reſurrection of Chriſt: as I cannot eaſily beleeue, that neyther Apelles
nor Durerus the moſt excellent Paynters, if they had ſeene [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=6) Chriſt before theyr
eyes, (as he was hanged vpon the Croſſe,) could better or more euidently haue
expreſſed the ſame with theyr colours. For although Dauid liued certaine
yeeres before Chriſt was ſent in the fleſhe, yet notwith­ſtanding, beeing
fully inſpired with the light of the holy Ghoſt, he ſo deſcri­beth Chriſt,
(ſuffering for vs, and rayſed from death to life,) with ſuch no­table words,
that this 22. Pſalme, may ſeeme more rather a declaration of the preſent
deede, then a Prophecie of thoſe things that were to come. For the Prophet
taketh his beginning euen from thoſe very words which Chriſt himſelfe vſed, as
he hanged in his extreame agonie, and hee foreſheweth the venimous illuſions
wherewith thoſe enemies of Chriſt, (beeing then in hys moſt greeuous
calamitie) inſulted againſt him: afterwardes hee addeth a moſt lightſome and
large deſcription, wherein he moſt euidently layeth o­pen, the ſpeciall or
chiefe parts of this Tragedie. viz. They pearced (ſayth hee) my hands and my
feete, &c. verſe. 17. Alſo, They parted my garments amongſt them, and cast
lots vpon my vesture. verſe. 18. To theſe deſcriptions are ma­nie complaints,
prayers, & conſolations inſerted, which containe moſt fer­uent affections.

In concluſion, there is added a moſt gladſome narration, or diſcourſe of the
reſurrection and glory of Chriſt, which he enioyed after he had ſubdued his
enemies vnder his power. Let vs therefore loue and oftentimes reade this moſt
ſweete Pſalme, not onely to the end that it may inſtruct vs concerning the
deedes doone by our Captaine and Redeemer, but alſo for thys cauſe, that it
may confirme vs againſt Academicall doubtings of our aduerſaries, which
oftentimes mightily ſhake mens mindes: whither the doctrine which the Prophets
and Apoſtles haue left for monuments, be deliuered frō God himſelfe, who in
very deede is Creator and conſeruer of all things, whom onely to worſhyp with
true godlines of minde, & whom to obey it behoo­ueth vs. Againſt theſe weapons
may a man oppoſe (as it were a Buckler,) the godly and continuall meditation
of this Pſalme, which witneſſeth, that the greateſt matters of all, are from
God declared vnto the Prophets, which things the euent it ſelfe alſo hath
approoued and ratified. Sithens therfore, ſure it is, that theſe Prophecies
haue theyr groundes from GOD, it muſt needes be alſo, that the other doctrine
of the Church, is of and from GOD. But now let vs heare Dauid himſelfe,
ſpeaking familiarly with vs.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=6)

### 1.1. To him that excelleth vpon Or the Hynde of the Morning, & this was
the name of ſom cōmon ſong. Aiieleth Hasſhahar. A Pſalme of Dauid.

Verſe. 1.

My God, my God (looke vpon me) why haſt thou forſaken me? and art ſo farre
from my health, and from the words of my complaint?

Verſe. 2.

O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou heareſt not: and in the night ſeaſon
alſo I take no reſt.

A Moſt heauie or ſorrowful lamentation is this, which farre paſſeth our
thinking or ſpeaking, and a complaint of the minde, ſtriuing wyth temptation
of abiection: for, it cannot be, but the ſame perſon which ſuſtained Gods
wrath, came into that cogitation, as if he were forſa­ken and caſt away from
God. And although we in this inſtant and preſent fortune, doo not attaine vnto
the greatneſſe of the cōplaint, which Chriſt earneſtly, and not diſſemblingly
there vſed: yet notwithſtanding, ſome of the members of his Church féele ſome
ſmall taſte of theſe agonies.

When our firſt Parents had begotten of themſelues two Sonnes, they were
brought into good hope it ſhoulde come to paſſe, that euen theſe ſhould become
as it were, the firſt young plantings of the true Church, and with ioyfull
minds thought they vpon the promiſe made vnto them by God, touching their
ſéede alſo: afterwards, when they ſaw their chéefeſt hopes ſud­dainly to be
quailed by the death of Abell, (whoſe ſlaine bodie they beheld,) and his other
wicked brother to become a repro­bate, no doubt then they were in ſo great
mourning & ſorrow, that they often might cry out, My God, my God, why haſt
thou forſaken me? Why repreſſeſt thou not the raging deuill, and breakeſt not,
nor enfeebleſt his power? Dauid béeing driuen into exile, and not onely
bereaued of his Kingdom, but (which was far greater then his Kingdome) béeing
ſpoyled of all opi­nion of holines and righteouſnes, no doubt vnderſtoode well
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=7) this verſe,
and with often ſpéeches repeated the ſame, eſpecially heere, looking vpon
thoſe diſtreſſes whereof hee knoweth him­ſelfe to be both the Authour and
originall, crying in this verſe: My God, my God, &c. Vnto theſe perſons is
King Ezechias alſo to be added. For when he (béeing himſelfe, as it were
op­preſſed with a greeuous and deadly ſicknes) ſaw death euen at the dore, he
beganne to cry out, ſaying: Like a Lyon hath the Lord broken my bones. Eſay.
cap. 38. verſe. 13. And Ieremy the Prophet may well be numbred with theſe
alſo, as it ſéemeth where he ſayth: The comforter that ſhould refreſh my
ſoule, is far from me. Lam. cap. 1. verſe. 16.17.18. For what thing may happen
more ſorrowfull and lamentable, vnto a pittifull ten­der harted man, and a
louer of godlines, then to ſee his Coun­try, together with the Temple, moſt
miſerably fired or bur­ning, and his Cittizens, partly to be ſlaine, and
partly carryed away into vnknowne places by the enemies. But Chriſtes
ſorrowes, and greeuous perplexities, had much more bitter­neſſe in them: for
Chriſt bare in himſelfe the whole maſſe of our ſinne, he felt the wrath of God
poured vpon him, euen as if he had polluted himſelfe with our filthineſſe.
Therefore thys great and vnſpeakeable burthen, not onely expreſſed vnto him a
bloody ſweat, but alſo this tragicall complaint, which ſignifi­eth, that
Chriſt had a greeuous conflict with the tentation of abiection.

Truly it is a great and huge calamitie, to looſe or forgoe viſible helpes or
ſuccours, and to be forſaken of fréendes, but this by no meanes can be
compared to the forſaking of GOD. For the eternal Father, exerciſed not in the
puniſhment of his Sonne, his vertue and diuine power, but ſuffered him to bee
tormented with horrible miſeries both in ſoule and bodie.

Moreouer, the Word (as Iraeneus moſt grauely ſaith in his third Booke and 21.
chap.) ceaſſed in Chriſt, that his humane nature might die in him and be
crucified: that is, The word, or ſeconde perſon in Trinitie, abuſed not his
power againſt hys calling, but gaue place vnto his Fathers wrath againſt
ſinne, and became obedient vnto his Father vnto death, euen the [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=7) death of the
Croſſe. Thus haue I breefely ſpoken touching the firſt and the ſeconde verſes,
that the Reader may thus be in­ſtructed therein. For this ſame greatneſſe of
the complaint, can not be vttered by any ſpeech, but is to be learned in godly
me­ditation, and in the vſe or courſe of our life.

Verſe. 3.

But thou continueſt holy, ô thou worſhippe of Iſraell.

The thirde verſe ſetteth downe a conſolation againſt the moſt ſorrowfull
complaint aboue recited: for as hee that ſuffe­reth ſhypwracke (beeing by the
violent rage of the ſtorme toſ­ſed vp and downe) if happily he fall vpon any
Rocke, or boorde of the broken ſhyp, which the Grecians call  [...], that is,
a boorde to ſwim vpon, he layes all the holde thereupon that hee can, and ſo
amongſt the outragious roring ſtormes of the North, ſuccoureth himſelfe
thereupon for a ſeaſon. So Chriſt in midſt of the waues of his troubles and
tryals, embraceth conſolation to himſelfe, wherby he eſtabliſheth and
confirmeth his minde, leaſt he ſhould faint or quaile, and be ouercome of the
cruell enemy. And the firſt place of conſolation, is the ma­nifeſtation of
God. [But thou continueſt holy] when thou ma­keſt thy ſelfe knowne amongſt vs,
and haſt giuen thy worde vnto vs, it reſteth agréeable thereby, that our
prayer and our gronings are not in vaine nor fruſtrate. For neither in deede
vainly, nor without cauſe, hath God ſo oftentimes made him­ſelfe knowne with
ſo euident teſtimonies. Let vs not eſteeme theſe things to be as vaine viſions
and imaginations, or delu­ſions and paſtimes: God hath doone great and mighty
mat­ters heereby: he would ſhewe plainly, that he is carefullie af­fected for
our ſaluation, and he would heereby deliuer vnto vs, the teſtimonies of his
word and doctrine, wherein hee impar­teth vnto vs, the heauenly gyfts and
ſocietie of his bleſſednes. Finally, he hath for that cauſe manifeſted
himſelfe, ſo as hee would witneſſe, that he will both be acknowledged and
called vpon, and that he will alſo heare and ſaue vs.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=8)Like as
therefore the Sonne of God, in his moſt trouble­ſome ſtormes or tempeſts, hath
firſt a reſpect vnto the manife­ſtation of God, (as men ſay the Phenician
Marriners, eſpying theyr Cynoſura, that ſtarre in the night, guiding them in
the Skyes, they are of good confidence as it were to ariue in a ſafe Port.) So
let euery one of vs, firſt and formoſt caſt our minde and eyes vnto the
notable teſtimonies of Gods manifeſtation, and beeing with theſe confirmed,
let vs craue of God, help and deliuerance, or at leaſt mittigation of our
preſent calamities. And where he addeth, [ô thou worſhip of Iſraell,] the
ſtudious ſort may knowe, that the nowne Relatiue is put for the foun­dation.
For, the worſhip of Iſraell in this place, ſignifieth the ſame people or
congregation, prayſing and worſhipping God with a true hart.

And what may be thought more ſweete? then that we ſure­ly know, that the
Congregation is the Temple of God, wher­in God dwelleth and abideth, as in the
2\. Cor. cap. 6. it is writ­ten. You are the Temple of the liuing God, (as God
ſaith) be­cauſe I will dwell in them, Leu. 16.12 and will walke amongſt them,
and I will be their God, & they ſhall be my people. And Chriſt ſaith moſt
ſwéetly, If any man loue me, he will keepe my worde, and my father will loue
him, and we will come and make our dwel­ling with him. Iohn 14. verſe. 23.

Verſe. 4.

Our Fathers hoped in thee, they truſted in thee, & thou didſt deliuer them.

Verſe. 5.

They called vpon thee, and were holpen: they put theyr truſt in thee, and were
not confounded.

The ſecond place of conſolation, is héere brought from an example of the
ſocietie of our Fathers, wherein are deliueran­ces many and meruailous, ſette
downe and left vs: and that I may omitte the reſt, which almoſt are
innumerable, who would not by good right, meruaile at the moſt ioyfull ende or
concluſion of thoſe calamities,Gene. 39.7 13.20.21. which Ioſeph that moſt
holy young man patiently ſuffered. For, firſt hee was taken awaie [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=8) from his Parents
cheriſhing, which he held moſt entire, and moſt deerely loued: after that,
vpon a falſe ſuſpition of adulte­rie, hée was caſt into pryſon. In theſe
inconueniences, which are not ſlenderly to be accounted vpon, doubtleſſe
Ioſeph cra­ued of God nothing more, then that béeing deliuered from falſe
accuſation, he might ſafely and ſoundly be reſtored into his na­tiue Countrey.
But moſt true is the ſaying of S. Paul, Eph. 3, God can giue all things more
aboundantly, then we eyther can hope, or can conceiue in our mindes. Verſe.
20. For Ioſeph was aduaunced with ſuch glory, that he reteyned that place,
which was the next or ſecond, vnto the Royall principallitie of Egipt. Vpon
this example and ſuch like, Chriſt heere nowe looking, was ſtirred vppe, and
conceiueth ſome conſolation. For Gods will was, there ſhould a memoriall of
ſuch like déedes remain, to the end the Church might aſke and looke for of
him, the like deliueraunces.

Verſe. 6.

But as for me, I am a Worme, and no man: a verie ſcorne of men, and the
outcaſt of the people.

Verſe. 7.

All they that ſee me, laugh me to ſcorne, they ſhout out theyr lips, and ſhake
theyr heads, ſaying:

The ſixt little verſe, reciteth a complaint, which declareth, that the godly
are exerciſed in a certaine perpetuall turmoyle, and enterchange of
temptations and conſolations. Marie felt in herſelfe a ioy not common, when
ſhee hearde the Angels,Mat. 1.20 Luk. 1.38.44. Luke 2.19 Math, 2.16
Sheepheards, and Wiſemen make mention, and witnes that which they had ſéene
and hearde of Chriſt the infant: but thys ioy within a while after was
diminiſhed whē ſhe vnderſtood of the ſubtill deceipts which were layd by
Herod for Chriſt. And euen ſo heere now in Chriſt, great is the varietie of
his moti­ons or affects, for, although he before recited two notable
con­ſolations, wherein he both might and ought to ſettle his mind, yet
notwithſtanding, he is ouercome with the greatnes of the ſorrow, and once
againe falles to complayning. But hee ma­keth aunſwere by way of examples,
ſhewing the difference [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=9) which was betwéene
him and the reſt of the Fathers. As if he ſayde they were men, but, I am no
man, but a worme. Thys humilitie wherin Chriſt vouchſafed for our ſakes to
debaſe and abiect himſelfe, exceedeth all wiſedome and eloquence of An­gels
and of men. For although Chriſt was in forme of God, (that is, in nature and
power equal with God,) yet he vſurped not this equalitie of God, namely,
againſt his calling: but, as S. Paule moſt wiſely ſaith: He humbled himſelfe
in the ſhape of a ſeruaunt. Phil. 2.7.

And although the greatnes of theſe things cannot be com­prehended of vs, yet
let vs render thankes vnto the Sonne of GOD, that he is carefully mooued for
our ſaluation, and that he manifeſted thys hys vnſpeakeable humility & loue
towards vs, in thus ſuffering for our ſake. The other parts of thys ſixt and
ſeauenth verſe, may enough be vnderſtoode out of the Hi­ſtory left vnto vs in
the wrytings of the Apoſtles. Wherefore I come to the next verſe, wherein
there is a poyſonfull & dead­ly byting taunte of the vngodly High Prieſtes,
and their com­panions, inſulting againſt Chriſt.

Verſe. 8.

He truſted in God, that he would deliuer him; let him deliuer him, if he will
haue him.

The eyght little verſe, is a byting taunte of the reprochfull crew of the
Iewiſh Nation: as if they ſaid: goe to thou goodly Champion, ſeeke nowe to
ſaue both thy ſelfe and vs? And as the vngodly Iewiſh people did ſpitefully
reuile the Sonne of GOD, ſo Epicures doo in all ages, ſcorne and mocke at
Chri­ſtian Religions or ordinaunces: and when the ſame are about to hinder
theyr profit, they then endeuour all they can to ex­tinguiſh the Goſpell, and
practiſe all impietie and crueltie a­gainſt Chriſt and his members. But there
is an enemy much more hating Chriſt, namely the deuill: hee firſt by his
hatred towards GOD, pluckt away our firſt Parents from him.

The ſame Manquellor, holdeth alwaies the mindes of the vngodly ones, bewitched
with falſe perſwaſions of God, theſe [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=9) hee abuſeth or
illudeth as inſtruments, to the fulfilling of his infinite bitterneſſe of
hatred againſt the Sonne of God. Ther­fore are vngodly Biſhops and theyr
Champions, the Actors or part players of theſe illuſions. But that moſt proude
ſpyrit is theyr Poet: and howe wretched a thraldome is it, to be an
in­ſtrument of ſuch and ſo great fury and hatred againſt God?

Verſe. 9.

But thou art hee that tookeſt mee out of my Mo­thers wombe:Simile in Pſal. 71,
5. thou waſt my hope whē I hanged yet vpon my Mothers breſtes.

Verſe. 10.

I haue beene left vnto thee, euer ſince I was borne: thou art my God, euen
from my Mothers wombe.

The ninth and tenth verſes, containe a third place of con­ſolation, which is
taken from the prouidence of GOD: and it appeareth by this one little verſe,
that Dauid heere with phy­loſophical eyes beheld or looked vpon mans nature,
and to haue gathered dilligently therby al teſtimonies of Gods prouidence
touching the ſame. For although in the world a moſt beautiful order of the
heauenly motions, the moſt acceptable ſeaſons of dayes and nights, the
reuolution of the yéere, the meruailous compaſſe or courſe of the Sunne, and
other Planets, the fruit­fulneſſe of the earth, and finally the whole nature
of things, be ſette before vs to acknowledge the will and preſence of God: yet
notwithſtanding, there is not a more excellent teſtimonie, (that there is a
God, and that by his prouidence, the worlde is gouerned, and that hee
prouideth for all things appertaining to man, and not onely to all, but alſo
for euery one,) then is the whole creation or faſhioning of man, and euery
figure & per­fection of mankind.

For, that I may let paſſe to ſpeake of forming or propor­cioning an Infant in
the wombe, what can be ſo meruailous, as the bringing foorth of the Infant
into this worlde? For ex­cept God himſelfe play the Midwiues part, and fulfil
that Of­fice, it cannot vndoubtedly be brought to paſſe, that any one Infant,
ſhould come forth ſafe and ſound into the world.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=10)The
Anatomiſts, that is, they of that ſcience which cutte mens bodies, and lay the
parts diſtributed before theyr eyes, doo know the place Os Sacrum, (which name
is deriued, as of the moſt holy and diuine work of generation) is moſt
ſtraight­ly cloſed or ſhut, and that not any thing, be it neuer ſo little, can
pearce ye ioynt of that bone: and yet out of theſe ſtraights God meruailouſly
bringeth foorth the timely Infant, as it were in a certaine due ſeaſon, and by
the outſtretched ioynts of the thyghes. Therefore moſt truely ſaith the
Prophet, or rather Chriſt himſelfe, héere, following Phyſiologie, (that is,
the rule of nature,) Thou ô God, haſt brought me out of my Mothers wombe.

Furthermore, this alſo is moſt pleaſant to be conſidered, that God (vnto the
young childe as yet in the wombe) prepa­reth and ordaineth foode or nutriment,
fitte and conuenient e­uen in the Mothers breaſts. For after the child is once
concei­ued, the Menſtruall blood is diſtributed into three parts. The firſt
part, which in puritie excelleth the others, is diſperced in­to the Matrice,
to nouriſh the young one quickning by a little and a little. The ſecond part,
ſomewhat leſſe pure, aſcendeth into the place of the Mothers dugges, to be
there turned into Milke, which within a while after, may nouriſh and ſuſtaine
the childe borne. The thirde part, of the others eſpeciallie leaſt pure, is
ſetled in a certaine thinne ſkinne of the Matrix, vntill ſuch time, as
together with the childe newe borne, the manie menſtures of the Mother are
ſent foorth.

Séeing therfore God performeth the Midwiues dutie vn­to vs all, and not that
onely, but alſo procureth proper nouriſh­ment to thoſe younglings, as yet
vnborne, doubtleſſe we muſt confeſſe, that the liues of men are cared &
prouided for of him alſo. Wherefore let vs daily comfort and confirme our
ſelues, with the remembrance of theſe wonderfull workes, ſo often as we are
diſtreſſed for or concerning our liuing, or for defence and deliuerance out of
greateſt perrils. And let vs cry out with the Prophet. Thou haſt brought mee
out of my Mothers wombe, and haſt nouriſhed me with my Mothers breaſt:
therefore no [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=10) doubt it is, but
thou wilt both defende, and alſo eftſoones deli­uer me created after thine
Image, and redéemed with the blood of thy Sonne.

Verſe. 11.

O goe not farre from mee, for trouble is harde at hand, and there is no man to
helpe me.

The eleuenth verſe, mixeth a moſt ardent Prayer, with complaints and
conſolations before expounded. For the whole Pſalme ought to be referred,
partly to the kinde exhortatiue, and partly to the kinde demonſtratiue: and
wheras the minde is ſtirred vp and confirmed with the other places of
conſolati­ons, he ioyneth thereunto alſo a prayer, which as Salomon
af­firmeth: Is a ſtrong Tower. Prou. 18. verſe. 10. That is, the onely Tower
and ſacred Anchor, wherunto wee (forſaken of all creatures) ought to flie: he
alſo vſeth two argumēts, wher­of the firſt is taken from the obiect. As if he
ſaid, great ſtormes and tempeſts fall vpon me, wherefore be preſent to helpe
mee, beeing mooued with the greatneſſe of my calamities. So ſpea­keth Dauid
alſo in the ſixt Pſalme, Heale me ô Lord becauſe I am weake. The other
argument is taken as from the perſon of God: as if hee ſaid: There is beſides
thée onely, no man which can helpe mee, and qualifie or mittigate my miſeries.
Therefore thou beeing mooued with the truth of thy promiſes, helpe mee.

Verſe. 12.

Many Oxen are come about me: fatte Bulles of Baſan cloſe me on euery ſide.

Verſe. 13.

They gape vpon me with theyr mouth, as it were a ramping and a roring Lyon.

The two verſes following, amplifie the propoſition of the narration: for where
he ſaid before breefely, Trouble is harde at hand, now he ſheweth foorth and
explaineth this breuity. For he telleth with how great perrils or daungers hee
is inſnared, and with notable Metaphors painteth out the crueltie of the
[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=11) Phariſies
hatred: hee calleth the Biſhops and Rulers of the Iewiſh people Oxen and fatte
Bulles, becauſe vnder pretence of the Miniſtery, they vſurped vpon them
tyrannicall power, and obteyned ſuch authority, that both al their ſayings and
doo­ings, were allowed by the iudgement of the rude multitude, and embraced
with great reioycing of them. But much more plainely vnderſtoode héere it is,
that he compareth the bitternes of the High Prieſtes hatred againſt Chriſt,
vnto the rage of a Lyon, by whoſe roring all other beaſts are made afraid. And
the Prophet héere alludeth this vnto the firſt promiſe, wherein GOD himſelfe
proclaimed battaile againſt the deuil, ſaying: I will ſette enmitie betweene
thee & the Woman, yea, betweene thy ſeede, and her ſeede. Neyther indeede may
it otherwiſe be, but that the deuill burneth with beaſtly cruell hatred
againſt Chriſt and hys Church, ſithence hee knoweth, that by this one
Captaine, hys power is broken and enféebled.

Verſe. 14.

I am poured out like water.

Hée amplyfieth the narration to the diſcription by parts or diuiſion: firſt of
all he ſaith: He is poured out like water. This part containeth a moſt ſwéete
conſolation, for it is witneſſed by Chriſt, that hee hath paide a ſufficient
raunſome for ſinne: for although the bloody ſweat, wherewith the Sonne of God
was all ouer waſhed, when he was in the Garden, might haue pa­cified his
Fathers wrath: yet notwithſtanding, leaſt any man ſhold be ouercome with
deſperation, by reaſon of the greatnes of his ſins, hée gaue his ſoule euen
vnto the death, and ſhed his bloode (then the which nothing is more precious,)
like water moſt plentifully to redéeme vs, or as it were, bring vs out of
bondage into libertie.

We muſt therefore hold ſtill our opinion againſt the No­uatians, the
commaundement of GOD is immutable or vn­changeable, that although our ſinnes
be great, yet when wee truely repent, let vs returne vnto GOD, with full truſt
of re­conciliation for Chriſt his ſake: and let vs not deſpayre for the [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=11) greatnes of our
fault, but that the power of Gods Sonne, is to be accounted of, and to be
preferred farre beyond all the ſinnes of euery man. And let vs not adde
blaſphemy vnto our other faults, which accuſeth God of vntruth, and denieth
that mens ſins can be forgiuen them. Like as Saule and Iudas are there­fore
condemned, becauſe they beleeue not, that for the Sonne of Gods ſake, their
ſinnes are forgiuen them.

Caine was accuſed of thys blaſphemie, that hee returned not vnto God, but alſo
added blaſphemie therunto, ſaying, My ſinne is greater then that it may be
forgiuen. Gen. 4.13, Theſe things haue I bréefely ſpoken, touching the
particle, which ſetteth before vs neceſſary conſolation: that God will haue
none to deſpaire, be theyr ſinnes neuer ſo gréeuous.

Idem.

My hart melteth within my bodie like waxe: all my bones are diſperſed.

Hée ſayd before, that all his whole body was ſo dryed vp, as there was no
moiſture therein left. Now he complaineth of the féebleneſſe of his bones,
wherin a cheefe ſtrength was wont to be. They were diſperſed and ſo ſhaken,
that they coulde not performe theyr dutie. Thirdly, hee deſcribeth the melting
or conſumption of the hart, My hart (ſaith hee) is melted within me, as waxe
melteth at the fire. O inſpeakeable humility, Chriſt heere ſuſtaineth the
wrath of God, and is made faultie, as if he had defiled himſelfe wyth mine,
thine, and all mens ſinnes. Thys féeling of Gods wrath againſt ſinne, is the
obiect and cauſe of horrible feares which Chriſt ſuffered, that we ſhoulde not
ſuffer them.

Hee is made as it were our ſhadow of refuge, becauſe the Creature of God, is
not able to endure his wrath. But I am mooued by the worde  [...] in Luke. 22.
ver, 44. to thinke that Chriſtes bloody ſweat, was the reſolution of his whole
bodie, now vtterly enfeebled: yeelding vp breath, drying vppe hys blood and
all his ſtrength.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=12)

Verſe. 15.

My ſtrength is dryed vp like a potſheard. &c.

In the fourth of Deut. verſe. 24. it is ſayd: Thy God is as a conſuming fire.
For the féeling of Gods wrath, is as a fyre conſuming the hart and ſtrength of
man: as Hezekias moſt truly ſayth in Eſay, cap. 38. verſe. 13. who had but
once taſted a little of the ſame, viz. Like a Lyon hath he broken al my bones.
But Chriſt felt the wrath of God againſt the ſinnes of al men, and thys he
perceiued to be poured vpon him, euen as it were for a ſacrifice. Therefore
elegantly compareth hee heere his weakenes vnto a Potſhearde, which is dryed
at the fire, and hath no moiſture or liquour left therein. Let vs therefore
loo­king vpon Chriſt, thinke vpon both theſe, viz. That GOD is vnfainedly
angry with ſinne, and that by meanes of this ſacri­fice, we are receiued into
fauour. Theſe things are alwaies to be remembred and repeated of vs.

My tongue cleaueth to my Gummes.

All men when they ſée that death approcheth neere, doo féele a drineſſe of
theyr tongue, and deſire drincke greedilie, the better to moiſten and refreſh
theyr dryed mouthes: For when the blood hath recourſe in great feares vnto the
fountaine, that is, the hart, it muſt needes be, that the outward members are
deſtitute of moyſture, and ſo doo require the ſteepeture.

Ioh. 19.28.So Chriſt vppon the Croſſe cryed out, I thirſt: for thys word is
not onely to be applyed vnto the ſignification, yt Chriſt thirſted for the
ſaluation and reſtoring of Mankind, but ought firſt to be taken as the worde
ſoundeth, touching the naturall thyrſt.

Idem.

And thou ſhalt bring me into the duſt of death.

Thys is a ſorrowfull lamentation, as are many others in this Pſalme: as if he
ſayd, the eternall Father was not ſatiſ­fied [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=12) with the
languiſhing and enfeebling of my body, ſhyuering of my bones, conſumption of
my hart, and finally extreame drought of my gummes, but it was his pleaſure
alſo, that I ſhould die and be buried.

Verſe 16.

Manie dogges are come about me: and the coun­ſell of the wicked layd ſiege
againſt me.

Thoſe whom before he called Oxen and fat Buls, (which mightily runne vpon men
whom they méete) the ſame perſons nowe he calleth many dogges. And he hath
heerein alſo reſpect vnto the title of the Pſalme, wherin Chriſt is compared
vnto a Harte, which is courſed by many dogges.

Verſe. 17.

They pearced my handes and my feete, I may tell all my bones; They ſtande
ſtaring and looking vpon mee.

Verſe. 18.

They part my garments among them, and caſt lots vpon my veſture.

Like as Fuluia reioyced in the death of Cicero, ſo the Prieſtes and vngodly
Teachers reioyced in the puniſhment of Chriſt, who had reprehended theyr falſe
opinions, and theyr deceiuable traditions: and finally, becauſe he ſeemed to
wyth­ſtande and hinder theyr authoritie and gaine. But although there be many
vicious affects or motions in man, yet notwith­ſtanding the great ioy or
gladneſſe which euill men receiue by the calamity of good men, is a ſure token
of theyr mind bewit­ched of the deuill, and ſtirred vp of infernall Furies.

For ſo is mans nature created, and all men of good minds hold this meaning,
that they doo nothing reioyce at the puniſh­ments of euill perſons, but doo
rather bewaile the miſeries of mankinde, which in a ſhort ſpace is caſt downe
into tragicall calamities. It appeareth then, that in the Iewes thus
ioyful­lie applauding, and like deadly enemies inſulting againſt Chriſt, (who
was condemned by theyr wicked decrées) there [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=13) remained no
pittifull affection or commiſeration towards him, but that all feelings and
motions agreeable to nature were e­uen by the deuill vtterly taken from them.
Thys profiteth vs to conſider for thys cauſe, that we may craue of God to be
go­uerned by him, and defended againſt the deuill, leaſt that wee ſhoulde be
drawne headlong into ſuch like furies. The other verſes which pertaine to the
declaration, are more largely ex­pounded in the Hiſtorie of the Goſpell.

Verſe. 19.

But be not thou farre from mee, ô Lord, thou art my ſuccour, haſte thee to
helpe me.

Verſe. 20.

Deliuer my ſoule from the ſword, & my darling from the power of the dogge.

Verſe. 21.

Saue mee from the Lyons mouth; thou haſt heard mee alſo from among the hornes
of the Vnicornes.

Theſe three laſt verſes, doo rehearſe a prayer amplified, by mentioning the
dangers wherein he was then diſtreſſed.

### 1.2. The ſeconde part of the xxij. Pſalme, touching the Reſurrection of
CHRIST.

Verſe. 22.

I will declare thy Name vnto my Bretheren, in the midſt of the Congregation
will I prayſe thee.

LIke as Lucius Aemilius Paulus who was cal­led the Conquerour of Greece, (the
Macaedo­nian warres within a few daies moſt ſpeedilie and moſt happily
finiſhed,) was carried with tryumph into the Cittie, and mounting vppe to the
Capitoll, rendred his thanks vnto the Gods for his affaires well exployted: So
our Captaine and Sauiour Chriſt, by the [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=13) power of GOD
béeing rayſed vp from death to life, and now making his tryumph ouer the
multitude of his enemies, gaue thankes, not vnto Iupiter as Aemilius did, but
vnto his Eter­nall Father, who had crowned him with the glorious victorie
which is beneficiall vnto the Church. That benefite he promi­ſeth to retaine
in perpetuall memory, and to celebrate the ſame with a thankfull hart vnto all
eternitie. But therwith alſo he deſcribeth the chiefe effect of his
reſurrection: he affirmeth that he is againe raiſed from death to life, not to
the end he ſhould be idle, or thenceforth not to be buſied in any good worke,
or that he ſhould boaſt himſelfe onely of his wiſedom and power, and ſo hold
for moſt aſſured, that he ſhould alwaies remaine in moſt great and eternall
pleaſures: but he ſayth expreſly, that he is riſen for this cauſe, to the ende
hee may gather vnto God hys Church by the miniſtery of the Goſpell, which may
praiſe and worſhip him in the life euerlaſting.

This then is the ſpeciall effect of his Reſurrection, namely the gathering of
his Church, which comes to paſſe by the mi­niſtery of the Goſpell, which the
Apoſtles diſperſed or publi­ſhed throughout the whole worlde. So in an other
place it is ſayd: Thus it behooued Chriſt to ſuffer, and to riſe againe the
third day, and that in his Name, repentance and remiſſion of ſinnes ſhould be
preached among all Nations, beginning at Ie­ruſalem. Luke. 24. verſe. 46.47.
Truly héere is ſette before vs a manifold conſolation. The Sonne of GOD
affirmeth, that hee will preach the Goſpell, yea though the worlde repine and
repugne the ſame, and that he will publiſh another doctrine be­ſides the Law.

Hée wyll therefore preſerue the Miniſtery, and theſe ſtu­dies and learning,
and hée alloweth the endeuours of them which preach the Goſpell. Let vs
comfort our ſelues with thys conſolation, ſo often as wee doo conſider the
daungers of the Church, though fatall puniſhments oppreſſe the worlde for
theyr Idolatries, Epicuriall furies, luſtes, & other miſchiefes which are
innumerable: yet ſure and certaine it is, that the Church of God ſhall
remaine, which amidſt the thickeſt of the [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=14) enemies ſhall
preach the worde of the Goſpell of Chriſt. And neyther will Chriſt ſuffer,
that at any time the knowledge of him ſhall be vtterly forgotten of men, but
hee himſelfe wil ex­ecute the Office of teaching, like as in this place hee
ſayth. I wyll declare thy Name vnto my Bretheren, in the midſt of the
Congregation will I praiſe thee.

But euen in theſe ſelfe words, there is deliuered vs a moſt ſwéete doctrine,
touching the efficacie of the Goſpell preached by miſerable and weake perſons.
The world iudgeth the Goſ­pell to be a deceiuable doctrine, and derideth her
Miniſters as it were vnprofitable bablers, which goe about to take quite a­way
the chiefe ſtrengthes of humane ſocietie from amongſt men: but theſe prophane
iudgements Chriſt dooth heere con­fute: yea, (ſaith he) I my ſelfe will
preache, and will bring to paſſe, that the Miniſters ſhall not be diſcouraged
with vnprofi­table contention, but that the Miniſterie of the Goſpell ſhall
in­deede be the power of ſaluation to all that beleeue. Although therefore the
Miniſters are in trueth but Earthen veſſels, yet ſure it is, that theyr
preaching is effectuall, and ſhall profit manie men.

Hetherto alſo approcheth the thyrd conſolation, which the moſt ſwéet phraſe
[Brother] ſetteth before vs. I wil declare thy name vnto my bretheren. I pray
you what may be more ſwéet­ly thought or ſpoken, then that Chriſt calleth all
men his Bre­thren, which heare learne and embrace the Goſpell. And that Chriſt
indéede doth loue vs with a brotherly loue, that doth hys taking of humane
nature vpon him declare. For that he might ioyne vs in a moſt néere bonde with
hym, hee became fleſhe of our fleſh, and bone of our bones, as Paule ſayth.
Heb. 2. ver. 24 Thys taking and knytting of our nature, is a teſtimonie of a
great loue towards vs. But the Paſſion of Chriſt declareth thys effect much
more euidently, wherein hee ſuffered puniſh­ment due to the righteouſnes of
GOD, and fully paid ye raun­ſome for vs. For it was his good pleaſure, to
redéeme and re­duce vs, which were oppreſſed with moſt gréeuous miſchiefes,
as, ſinne & death, into our auncient dignitie and former liberty.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=14)Héereby it
appeareth, that there is no ſuch loue of any bro­ther towards hys naturall
Brother, as is the feruent loue of Chriſt towards vs, whereunto he giueth the
name of brother. So often therefore as thou beginneſt to pray, and that thy
vn­worthineſſe hindereth thee, be thou turned in minde & thought vnto thys
little verſe of Chriſt, wherin he expreſly calleth Be­léeuers his Bretheren.
For ſithence he is our Brother, and lo­ueth vs moſt feruently, let vs not
doubt, but that we are recei­ued and heard, (though vncleane and manifoldly
guilty we be) yet for the interceſſion and prayer which our Brother maketh for
vs: and neyther is there any thing ſo ſurely layd vp in the vnmeaſurable
treaſure of Gods goodnes and mercy, which hee will not willingly bring foorth,
and fréely partake with thys, when he is requeſted of this High Prieſt and
Mediator, whom the name of a Brother maketh not abaſhed nor aſhamed.

Wherefore in all our lyfe long, in all our dangers, and in our daily prayers,
let vs thinke vppon this moſt ſwéet name Brother, and inculcate the ſame to
our mindes, that wee may ſurely beleeue, our Brother ſitting at the right hand
of our Fa­ther will helpe vs, and beſtow vpon vs preſent and eternal
be­nefits. Let it ſuffiſe to haue héere bréefely thus much noted of theſe
words: becauſe the greatneſſe of the matters cannot be conceiued in words.

Verſe. 23.

O prayſe the Lorde, yee that feare him, magnify him all yee the ſeede of
Iacob: and let all the ſeede of Iſraell feare him.

Before, Chriſt (rayſed from death to life) directed a prayer of thankes
giuing: nowe he ſpeaketh vnto the remnant of the godly Iewiſh people: and he
doth exhort them, that with a true reuerence of minde, they doo worſhip and
obey their Meſſias: and not to deſpiſe the benefit of the ſonne of God, but
that they gyue thanks vnto the eternall Father, whereas he béeing pa­cified
with thys ſacrifice, receiueth men into hys fauour, and imparteth vnto them,
the fellowſhip of his bleſſedneſſe.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=15)

Verſe. 24.

For he hath not deſpiſed nor abhorred the prayers of the poore; Hee hath not
hyd his face from him, but when he called vnto him, he heard him.

The reaſon of cohortation is taken of the proper example: the eternall Father
hath not deſpiſed my prayers & my ſighes, yea euen then when I was diſtreſſed
in moſt great and moſt gréeuous calamities: but he hath heard me, and hath
graunted ſo ioyfull an end vnto my labours, that to expreſſe his goodnes I am
not able, in reſpect of the greatneſſe thereof. Wherefore you alſo béeing
admoniſhed by my example, learne heere lyke­wiſe to flee vnto God, and to
craue of him reconciliation, hys holy Spyrit, and other benefits.

Verſe. 25.

I will prayſe thee in the great congregation: my vowes will I performe in the
ſight of them that feare thee.

Hée turneth his prayer to the Congregation of the Nati­ons which he therefore
calleth great, becauſe it is euery where diſperſed throughout the whole world,
and in multitude excee­deth the little flock which GOD hath called out of the
Iewiſh people: for Chriſt would not haue his Church thenceforth tied vnto any
certaine Kingdome or pollicie, like as before it was limitted within little
bounds, but he would haue his Goſpell, by hys Apoſtles to be diſperſed amongſt
the Nations, and a­gaine to gather the light which the Nations (forgetfull of
the promiſe gyuen to the firſt Parents) had before loſt.

But although Munckes and others the vnlearned ſort, vn­derſtand not what the
name of Vowe meaneth, ſo oftentimes repeated in the Pſalmes, yet
notwithſtanding, moſt ſimple it is ſo to define what a Vowe is, as in the
Pſalmes it is taken for. A Vowe is a couenaunt to performe the worſhippings of
the firſt Table, which are theſe: 1\. Feare of GOD: 2. Loue: 3. Faith: 4.
Patience: 5. Inuocation: 6. Thankſgiuing: 7. Cō ­feſsion: [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=15) and 8\. The
preaching of Gods name &c. Theſe wor­ſhippings, and theſe workes or vowes
(ſayth he) will I per­forme vnto thee, whereunto by good right I am bounde.
Let the declaration of thys word (in what manner ſo euer) be alſo applyed vnto
other ſayings in the Pſalmes: as in Pſalm. 116. ver. 14. I wyll pay my vowes
in the ſight of the people of God. &c.

Verſe. 26.

The poore ſhall eate and be ſatisfied: they that ſeeke after the Lorde, ſhall
prayſe him, theyr hart ſhal liue for euer.

Verſe. 27.

All the endes of the world ſhall remember them ſelues & be turned vnto the
Lord: & al the kindreds of the Nations ſhall worſhip before him.

Verſe. 28.

For the Kingdome is the Lords, and he is the Go­uernour among the people.

Theſe verſes agrée with them that goe before, and cleere­lie witneſſe, that
the Goſpell ſhall be effectuall, and ſhall begin eternal lyfe in all men which
doo repent, and vnfainedly beléeue the ſame: ſithence then ye infirmitie of
the Teachers is ſo great, and the confuſions in the Church are ſo many: all
mens minds are mooued, and ſéeke to know, whether the voice of the Goſpel doo
profit mankind, or ye indéede it be onely a diſſembling voyce: whether Paule
or Phocilides, or Theognis or Eſope, dyd more profite.

Moreouer, becauſe men ſée the pollicies troubled with diſ­ſention in Religion,
many alſo are terrified from the profeſſi­on of the Goſpell, as if it were
onely the firebrand of ſeditions. Againſt theſe falſe iudgements of mans
reaſon, wee muſt ga­ther teſtimonies touching the efficacie and dignitie of
the Mi­niſterie. Héere the Sonne of GOD affirmeth, that the prea­ching of the
Goſpell ſhall be effectuall: for ſo hee ſaith: The poore, that is, the
afflicted, ſhall be ſatiſfied, and receiue com­fort to withſtand all terrours
and dangers, and ſhall together celebrate Gods benefits, that hee hath made
himſelfe knowne, [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=16) by ſending hys
Sonne, and giuing his Goſpell. Finally, the harts of the godly ones, embracing
the doctrine of Chriſt and hys Apoſtles, ſhall haue full fruition of new
heauen, wiſedom, righteouſnes, and life euerlaſting. Therefore it profiteth to
teach, heare, learne, and embrace the Goſpell, yea although godleſſe perſons
will not ſée what it profiteth: yea, they iudge the preaching of the Goſpell,
to be eyther a vaine fable, or a diſ­ſimulation, or a firebrand of ſeditions.

Verſe. 29.

All ſuch as be ſatte vppon earth, ſhall eate, and worſhippe GOD.

Verſe. 30.

All they that goe down into the duſt, ſhal kneele before him: and no man hath
quickened hys owne ſoule.

Theſe two little verſes following, doo declare or make mention as touching the
calling of the Gentiles, wherof when it is ſpoken, let vs thinke vppon thrée
thinges. Firſt, let the greatneſſe of Gods mercy be thought vpon, gathering
him an eternall Church, not onely out of the Iſralitiſh people, but alſo from
among the Nations which were polluted with Idols, luſts, and all kindes of
filthineſſe. Secondly, let the teſtimony of Gods promiſe in the Goſpell (which
is free and vniuerſall) be conſidered of vs. Thirdly, let vs knowe, that the
ſayings touching the calling of the Gentiles, are the abbrogacions of the Law,
and refutations of that dreame which the Iewes had concerning the politicall
Kingdome of the Meſſias.

But ſeeing els where often, and ſome what more preciſely touching thys matter
it is ſpoken of, as in the 53. chapter of Eſay, I will not be heere any more
tedious, but of purpoſe I ſurceaſe the declaration héereof, leaſt the
greatneſſe of my Co­ments be too tedious vnto the Reader.

Verſe. 31.

My ſeede ſhall ſerue him: they ſhall be accounted vnto the Lord for a
generation.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=16)Verſe. 32.

They ſhall come; and the heauens ſhall declare his righteouſnes vnto a people
that ſhall be borne: whom the Lord hath made.

The Epilogue or concluſion of the Pſalme, containeth a notable and lightſome
deſcription of the Church: for firſt it in­ſtructeth the Reader concerning the
perpetuitie of the King­dome or Church of Chriſt. For it ſaith, there ſhall
alwaies re­maine ſome ſeede, and be ſome remnants which with true and
acceptable Religion ſhall worſhip GOD.

Let vs then hold faſt this conſolation, that wee may moſt firmelie beléeue,
the Church ſhall neuer be vtterly deſtroyed: no, though the deuils themſelues,
and all the vngodly ones, doo threaten both deſolation & infinite deſtruction
vnto the Church. Moreouer, there are in thys place, proper and conuenient
acti­ons attributed vnto the Church: the Church ſhall not make warre, nor
leade foorth her Armies for to conſtitute and make any newe formes of policie,
but ſhee ſhall doo other works.

Shée ſhall preach the righteouſnes of Chriſt, and ſhall re­fute mens opinions,
which fayne that wee are iuſt, for or by reaſon of diſcipline and ceremonies.
Finally, ſhée ſhall be the kéeper or preſeruer of the Goſpell deliuered from
Chriſt, as it were by hand: and ſhall ſtudie by all care and induſtry, to
de­fend and ſette foorth the puritie of this doctrine, touching the
righteouſneſſe of Fayth.

This is the diſpoſition of this Pſalme, which by no meanes ſatiſfieth the
greatneſſe of the matter therein contained: but yet ſomtimes it admoniſheth
the godly Readers what is to be ſoundly conſidered, as touching the moſt
profitable, and moſt graue or pro­found ſentences in the ſame.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=17)

## 2\. ❧ A PSALME OF Eſa. 40.11. Ierem. 23.5. Eze. 34.23 Ioh. 10.11. 1. Pet.
2.25 DAVID. Dominus regit me.

The Argument.

LIke as Homer in the third Booke of his Iliades, compareth two Orators
together, Menelaus and Ʋliſſes, and indeede attributeth vnto the one eloquence
like vnto the winter ſnow, but vnto the other ſhort and pithy ſpeech, wherin
fewe, but very ſweet things were vttered: ſo the holy Ghoſt vſeth in certaine
Pſalmes, plentifull and excel­lent phraſe of ſpeech, which lacketh no ſpeciall
commendati­on of eloquence, when hee not onely teacheth, but alſo may mooue
and delight men: in ſome he vſeth a ſhort, but a verie ſweet phraſe of ſpeech.
For it is the part of one, and the ſelfe ſame cunning Sayler or Pylot, to
ſayle with largerſpread, and ſhorter gathered ſayles, that is, a man may
lengthen out hys ſpeech, and with a learned breuitie ſpeake what he thinketh.

How much plentie and excellencie of phraſe is there in the 103\. Pſalme?
wherein the corporall and ſpirituall benefits of God are celebrated: in thys
Pſalme, may the ſame argument, indeede more breefe, but in farre more
excellent figures be ex­pounded. For heere, whē the Prophet Dauid is holden
as ama­zed with admiration, of the greateſt benefits of God, beſtowed vpon
him, and vpon the whole Church, & acknowledged that he wanted wordes, to ſette
foorth both the ſweetnes and plenti­fulnes of them, at length he entereth into
the cogitation of two figures, then which nothing is more louely, nor any
thing may be proponed, which may more allure the godly ones vnto gy­uing of
thanks.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=17)For as it
is the Sheepheards office or dutie, to bring & leade forth the flocke into
feeding places, and make them to drink of wholeſome water, and the ſame to
gouerne and defend againſt the rage of Wolues, finally, to lay to his helping
and healing hands, when the ſheepe are ſicke or diſeaſed; ſo the Sonne of GOD,
(who calleth himſelfe The good Sheepheard. Ioh. 10.14) exerciſeth the ſame
offyces, in gathering, gouerning, defen­ding, and ſuccouring hys Church: for
firſt, he feedeth and re­freſheth vs wyth the Goſpell, Which is the power of
ſaluation to all that beleeue. Rom. 1. verſe. 16. Next of all, hee gouerneth
hys Church and all the godly ones with the holy Ghoſt: that they may be his
eternall heritage and (Populus peculiaris ſectator bo­norum operum,) his
peculiar people, a follower of good works, as it is ſayd, Titus. cap. 2.
verſe. 14. Thirdly, he defendeth hys Church againſt the outrages of the
deuill, and the worlde, that ſhe may acknowledge her prayers to be receiued,
and thorowlie hearde: and not to doubt that ſhee is the beloued darling of
GOD.

Laſt of all, he executeth the offyce of a Phiſition, in healing our wounds,
that is, our ſinnes and calamities: for he both for­giueth them theyr ſinnes
which vnfainedly repent, and of hys vnſpeakeable goodnes, mittigateth the
puniſhments. Then this figure or ſimilitude of a Paſtor, which he ſetteth
downe in the beginning, nothing may be thought more ſweete; for as in the
firſt figure or ſimilitude, he reſembleth GOD vnto a Sheep­heard, and his
Church vnto a flocke of ſheepe: ſo in the other figure, he compareth GOD vnto
a rich Hoſte, and himſelfe vn­to the gueſt.

And it is the offyce and dutie of an Hoſte, to furniſh the Table with meate
and drinke, whereby the hunger and thyrſt which the gueſtes haue gotten, may
be quenched, and whereas he may with fragrant ſmels recreate and refreſhe his
gueſtes: theſe ſame things doth the Sonne of GOD as a moſt liberall Hoſte,
largely and liberally beſtow vpon vs: for he feedeth and refreſheth vs, not
with meate and drinke, fecht from els where, but he giueth himſelfe vnto vs,
to feede and drinke vppon, ac­cording [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=18) to that ſaying
extant in the 6\. cap. of S. Iohn. My fleſh is meate indeede, and my blood is
drinke indeede. verſe. 55. &c.

Vnto theſe moſt delicate repaſts, hee addeth  [...], viz. a ſurplus, or
ſuperaboundance of delicacie, namely the gyft of the holy Ghoſt, which of
right, and woorthily is compared vnto moſt ſweet Balme. But although Dauid
heere ſpeaketh of thys ſpirituall refreſhing eſpecially, yet, not abſurdly is
the circum­ſtaunce of the Pſalme applyed, vnto the nouriſhing and de­fence of
our bodies, and vnto the ſuſtentation of thys life. Nei­ther are theſe things
beſtowed vpon vs by chaunce, which ap­pertaine vnto this life, but are
diſtributed by the liberall hande of GOD, for the cauſes which are often
ſpoken of in the Church.

Furthermore, vnto theſe figures are added notable conclu­ſions, which flow
from a hart full of Fayth. Yea, though I ſhall walke in the vallie of the
ſhadow of death, yet I will feare no euill, for thou Lord art with me. verſe.
4. Alſo, Becauſe the Lorde himſelfe is my Sheepeheard and mine Hoſte, I ſhall
want no good things at a­ny time: J ſhall not be deſtitute of any ſolaces, but
they ſhall accom­panie me, euen till J come vnto the life euerlaſting: then
which, no­thing can be more bleſſed, neyther any thing be cōceiued more
aboundant in all benefits. Let vs therefore take out of thys Pſalme manifold
doctrine & conſolation: & let vs vſe the ſame, ſo often as we will aduaunce,
amplifie, and magnifie the benefits of God, by Chriſt our Mediatour beſtowed
vpon vs.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=18)

### 2.1. The Pſalme and expoſition.

Verſe. 1.

The Lord is my Sheepheard: therefore can I lacke nothing.

THys is a ſhort little verſe, but no ſpéech may be equall in greatnes of
matters which it con­taineth: therefore alſo will wee be the breefer in
expounding the ſame, and will onely follow the ſpeciall principall poynts of
the matters thereof. Of all figures which ſette foorth The goodneſſe, (and as
I may ſay with S. Paule, Titus. 3.4.) the bountiful­neſſe, and loue of God our
Sauiour towards man, I know not whither any other may be more louelier then
thys ſame, which attributeth to GOD the perſon of a Sheepeheard. For a fee­der
of ſheepe, knoweth right well how tender beaſts the ſheepe are, how naked, how
needy of others helpe, gouernment, and defence: therfore remembring his
Office, (according to theſe verſes) thus he dooth.

STabulis in mollibus ſinit herbam carpere Oues,

Dum mox frondoſa reducitur Aeſtas:

Et multa duram ſtipula filicumque maniplis,

Sternit ſuper humum glacies ne frigida ledat,

Molle pecus, ſcabiemque ferat, turpeſque podagras.

At vero Zephiris cum laeta vacantibus Aeſtas,

In ſaltus gregem atque in paſcua mittit,

Dum mane novum dum gramina canent,

Et ros in tenera pecori gratiſsimus herba eſt.

Inde vbi quarta ſitim Coeli collegerit hora,

Et cantu querulae rumpunt arbuſta Cicadae

Ad puteos aut alta greges ad ſtagna iubet,

Currentem illiginis potare canalibus vndam.

Aeſtibus ad mediis vmbroſam exquirit vallem,

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=19)Sicubi
magna Iouis antiquo robore quercus:

Ingentes tendat ramos aut ſicubi nigrum,

Illicibus crebris ſacra nemus accubet vmbra.

Tum tenues dat rurſus aquas & paſcit rurſus,

Solis ad occaſum cum frigidus aera Veſper:

Temperat, & ſaltus reficit iam roſcida Luna,

Littoraque Halcionen reſonant & Acanthida dumi.

HE ſuffers in warme Cottages,

his ſheepe to take their meat:

Till Summer ſeaſon freſh & greene,

returned be with heat.

And ſtore of ſtraw and ferne he layes,

by handfuls on harde ground.

Leaſt tender beaſt by cold or ſcurffe,

or gowte doe get deaths wounde.

In pleaſant Summer but when as

the Eaſt winds blow indeed:

He ſends his flocke toth' thickets, and

fatte paſtures there to feede.

Whilſt morning ſprings, & whilſt the gras

doth floriſh and reioyce:

The dewe on tender herbe diſtils

to beaſts moſt happyeſt choyſe.

Before the fourth howre of the day,

when drought they find and heate:

And that the Graſhoppers doe burſt,

through ſhrubbes with clamors great:

He bids his flocks goe to the ponds,

or pooles that offer firſt,

Or running water of the brookes,

by drinke to quench theyr thyrſt.

But in the hotteſt time of day,

ſome ſhadowe vale ſeekes he:

Or Oke of auncient ſtrength,

which called is Ioues tree.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=19)Whoſe
boughes ſpread farre, or place he findes,

where ſacred ſhadow ſtaies:

Within darke wood, of willowes full,

for all the liuelong daies.

And then againe he watereth them,

and them to feede he plyes:

Till Sunne be ſet, and euening cold,

the ayre to temper hyes.

And till the lightſome moyſtning Moone

doe ſhine through darkſome wood:

And till the Halcyon byrds by ſhore

and Goldfinch ſing a good.

But in as much, as the harmleſſe ſhéepe needeth not onely good féeding, but
alſo defence, as it is written.

A Lit Paſtor veloces Spartae catulos arcem,

Que moloſſum, vt his cuſtodibus nocturnum a ſtabulis furem:

Incurſuſque Luporum arceat: Morborum

Quoque cauſas & ſigna animaduertit Paſtor,

Et medicas manus adhibet ad vulnera Ouium:

Denique in ſinu ſepe geſtat, aut grauidas matres,

Aut teneros Agnos & dulcibus vndis pecus omne refundit.

THe Sheepheard brings vp Spartane whelpes

ſwift, and the Maſtiue fell:

That by theſe Keepers he from folds,

the night theefe may expell.

And eke reſtraine th'aſſaults of Wolues,

the Sheepheard thus diſcreete,

The cauſes of Sheepes ſickneſſes

and ſignes dooth marke and ſeeke.

By helping hand to cure the wound

of each diſeaſed beaſt:

And laſt of all beares in his armes,

the Ewes with young encreaſt.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=20)Or els he
ſuccours ſillie Lambes,

and beares each beaſt about

The pleaſant ſprings, to quench theyr thyrſt,

and feede deuoide of doubt.

This figure ſet foorth in Virgils verſes, Lib. 3. Georgicorum, ſo much
delighteth the Prophets, that often and much they pro­pone the ſame to the
Church: namely Eſay the Prophet ſayth in his 40\. cap. verſe. 11. He ſhall
feede his flocke like a ſheepe­heard, he ſhall gather the Lambes with hys
arme, & carry them in his boſome, and ſhall guide thē with young. And
Ezechiell in his 34\. chap. verſe. 23. ſayth: And I will ſette vp a
ſheepe­heard ouer them, and hee ſhall feede them, euen my ſeruaunt Dauid he
ſhall feede them, and he ſhall be theyr Sheepheard.

And ye my ſheepe, the ſheepe of my paſture are men. &c. But if any man deſire
to know, what manner a one Iehouah is, the Shéepheard of the Church, there is
nothing that wée may ſo eaſily make tryall of: for the Sonne of GOD nowe and
then in the tenth chapter of Iohn, rehearſeth this affirma­tion: I am the true
Sheepheard, verſe. 11.16, 27, 28, 29. And S. Peter, in hys firſt Epiſtle and
ſecond Chapter, ſayth expreſlie: You haue ſometime ſtrayed like ſheepe, but
are now returned vnto the ſheepheard and Biſhop of your ſoules. verſe. 25. The
ſame meaning may be confirmed by a right compariſon of the members in the
preachings of the Prophets. For Eſay with­out all doubt, in hys forty Chap.
prophecieth of S. Iohn Bap­tiſt the forerunner of Chriſt, and of Chriſt
himſelfe: Of Iohn Baptiſt, he ſayth: The voyce of a Cryer in the wildernes,
pre­pare ye the way of the Lord. verſe. 3. Of Chriſt hee ſaith: Hee ſhall
feede his flocke like a Sheepeheard. &c. ver. 11. Ezechiell in hys thirtie
foure Chap. vndoubtedly calleth Chriſt Dauid, by an vſuall phraſe in the
propheticall ſpeech. verſe. 23.

But hauing now determined the grounde of our purpoſe, that thys Shéepeheard
and Lord of Hoſtes, is the Son of God our Mediator, let vs ſee if it pleaſe
you, what maner of Shéep­heard he is, what he dooth, what works he exerciſeth,
and with [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=20)
what buſines hee is encombred: for hee ſitteth not idle in hea­uen, reioyſing
onely in his owne power & wiſedome: But hee giueth gyfts vnto men, namely,
Paſtors and Doctors, that the body of the Church may be builded. Ephe. 4.11.
For firſt, hée féedeth vs with the preaching of hys Goſpell, and ſwéetlie
re­freſheth afflicted conſciences with the vſe of the Sacraments, which are
the ſureſt pledges and ſeales of the righteouſneſſe of Fayth: and leaſt thys
Miniſtery whereby the eternal Church is gathered vnto GOD, ſhould vtterly
perriſh, he oftentimes ſtyrreth vp fitte Teachers, and inſtructeth them with
neceſſa­rie gyfts to the expounding and ſetting foorth of the doctrine.

So in thys laſt age of the world, hee hath gyuen vs an ex­cellent Teacher,
viz. D. Martin Luther, a reſtorer of the doc­trine of the Goſpell more purer,
and great companies of Prea­chers. Thys benefit, or thys firſt kinde of
féeding, it behooueth all mens mindes and tongues to haue in reuerence, and
wyth prayſes to extoll euen vp to the heauens: but our harts are too cold in
giuing of thanks, and in reuerencing ſo great a benefit. We muſt pray vnto GOD
therefore, that he woulde illumi­nate our mindes with thankfulnes, which both
acknowledgeth and honoureth the Author of ſo great a benefit, and obeieth him
him in the duties of loue and other vertues.

Next of all he gouerneth vs with hys holy Spyrit, that we may doo ſome thinges
acceptable vnto God: that is, that wee truely acknowledge and call vnto GOD,
truly beléeue, giue thankes, and obey him in our calling, and calamities. For
without thys Gouernour of our minde, will, and hart, (whom he hath promiſed to
giue thoſe that aſke,) men ſtyrred or ſet on by the deuill, eaſily fall into
Epicuriall furies, or into other fa­naticall errours, alſo into tragicall
miſchiefes and inextricable calamities, like as the examples of notable wits
doo ſhew, who wanting this guide, are ſtayned with horrible infamies.

Thirdly, he reſtraineth the raging deuill, that hee cannot accompliſh all the
bitterneſſe of his hatred: and with his migh­tie hand and miniſtry of good
Angels defendeth and kéepeth his ſilly ſhéepe againſt this roring Lyon, which
ſeeketh to catch, [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=21) ouercome, and
carry away the ſame.

Fourthly, he bringth into the right way, and healeth thoſe that goe aſtray and
offende, without contumacie or ſtubborne diſobedience: neyther caſteth he vs
away, which are the ſhéepe of his paſture by reaſon of our infirmities, but
hanging about hys necke, he louingly beareth vs, and with hys blood waſheth vs
when we are filthy and deformed. Thys admirable, and al­moſt incredible louing
kindnes of our Shéepheard, let it ſtirre vs vp: So, as, we denying all
vngodlines and worldly luſts, may liue godly, iuſtly, and ſoberly in thys
preſent worlde, looking for the bleſſed hope and appearing of the glory of the
great GOD, as S. Paule moſt ſweetly wryteth in his ſecond chap­ter to Titus,
verſe, 12.

Laſtly, vnto all theſe, hee addeth as it were  [...], viz. a ſurplus or
ſuperaboundance, for the helping ſuſtentations of this our life: namely,
fruitfulneſſe of the earth, & of the liuing crea­tures, proſperous health,
liuing, clothing, meane dwelling places, peace, good Princes, quiet and ſweet
wedlock, neceſſa­rie gyfts in our calling, good ſucceſſe in our counſels &
ſtudies, proſperitie of our children, and finally, other good gifts which are
innumerable.

But wilt thou vnderſtande howe neceſſary the benefits of thys Paſtor are, then
haue in thy mind the ſilly Sheepe, and vnto her compare the great infirmitie
of our own nature. The ſilly Sheepe hath in herſelfe, neyther any wit nor
counſell, but the fleſh wandereth at randome till ſhe light into the Wolues
iawes: and what is the wandering ſheepe, when ſhee cannot without the
Shéepeheards helpe be brought againe to the fold? Furthermore, ſhe neither
hath any courage nor defence, wher­with ſhe may or is able to reſiſt or
withſtand, the violence and aſſault of the Wolues. Finally, that I may
manifeſt the mat­ter in one word: The ſhéepe is a beaſt, fooliſh, fearful,
weake, and layd open for all iniuries of the Wolues, if ſhe be deſtitute of
the Shéepheards watching and warding.

Neyther indéede is one Egge ſo like another, or Milke like vnto Milke, as the
ſtate of humane nature is reſembling thys [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=21) figure. For in
the darke places, and in the darkeſome night, our mindes doo wander aſtray,
neither haue they any proui­dence which reſpecteth life euerlaſting: we all
like ſhéepe haue wandered out of the way which leadeth vnto eternall
bleſſed­neſſe, yea, except we be layd vpon Chriſtes ſhoulders, and be carried
hanging about his necke, we ſhall (plunged headlong in darkneſſe and errours)
perriſh euerlaſtingly. And what in vs is there, wherewith wee are able to
reſiſt the deuill when he aſſaulteth vs? There is no ſuch wiſedome or power
with­out GOD, but the deuill is able to ouerthrow and quite ex­tinguiſh it:
which things ſith ſo indéede they be, let vs in our daily prayers, remember
that we are the ſheepe of this Shéep­heard, and let vs flée for ſuccour vnto
him, and craue help, de­fence, and gouernment of him.

But in thys place, ſome man woulde aſke the queſtion, why the Shéepeheard of
the Church ought to be Iehoua, that is, the true GOD, Creator of heauen and
earth? There are many cauſes for which it is néedfull, that the guide and
Sheepeheard of the Church, ſhould not onely be man, but al­ſo by nature GOD.

The firſt is, Nature onely which hath ende, cannot de­ſtroy the workes of the
deuill, namely, ſinne and death, and reſtore vnto the Church righteouſneſſe
and life euerlaſting. The ſecond is, no creature can alwaies and euery where
bee preſent with the Church and euery member thereof. The thyrd is, no
creature can ſée the ſights of the hart, and diſcerne true inuocation from
hypocriſie. And the fourth cauſe is, no creature entreth into counſell with
the diuine nature. For theſe cauſes, which els where are largely explained, it
is needfull that the Sheepeheard and Biſhoppe of our ſoules be Iehoua, that
is, GOD, whoſe nature and power is eternal, vnſpeakable, and infinite.

Thus farre haue I ſpoken of the firſt part of the Syllo­giſme, indéede more
breefe then for the greatneſſe of the mat­ter: but, as the manner of theſe
Comments, ought in truth to be: now wyll I ſpeake of the other part or member,
which of [[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=22)
Logicians is called the Conſequent. [I ſhall not lacke: or no­thing ſhall be
lacking vnto me.] It is a moſt ſure rule, hee that hath the word of God, he
hath God himſelfe: hee yt hath God, to him can nothing of the principall
bleſſednes be lack­ing, becauſe God was before the worlde was made, and by his
word he made all things, therefore the word of God ma­keth and bringeth all
things vnto vs: but contrariwiſe, hee that hath not the word, hee hath
nothing, but fainteth amidſt the floodes, like vnto Tantalus, and as he
ſéemeth moſt to haue any thing, ſo yet within a while after, euen that is
taken a­way from him, according to that ſaying of Chriſt: To hym that hath,
ſhall be giuen: and from him that hath not, (name­lie the word) euen this that
he ſeemeth to haue, ſhall be taken away from him. Luke, 19, verſe. 26.

But although theſe ſpéeches are proudly ſcorned & hate­fully handled of
prophane perſons: yet notwithſtanding, let vs beléeue Chriſt affirming them,
who is Trueth it ſelfe, ſo to vs ſaying: Firſt ſeeke ye the Kingdome of God,
and all o­ther things ſhall be giuen vnto you. Math, 6, 33. As if he ſaid, if
any man haue, by Gods graunt and gyft, the chéefe good things, acknowledgment
and calling vpon God, conſolation and gouernment of the holie Spirit,
obedience agreeable to the wyll of God, and ſpecially remiſſion of ſinnes, and
deliue­raunce from the power of the deuill, and from euerlaſting death,
finally, if he haue righteouſnes and life euerlaſting, to him are none
appurtenaunces lacking, or helping ſuſtentati­ons of thys our mortall life and
calling. This ſentence dooth the example of Salomon, and the figure of the
prodigall Sonne notably deſcribe.

Salomon in the beginning of hys raigne, required nothing of GOD but
wiſedom,1\. Reg. 3.9. to acknowledge GOD with a true feare and fayth, and to
gouerne his Subiects according to Gods wil. This prayer ſo pleaſed God, that
he ſaid vnto him. I haue giuen thee a wiſe and vnderſtanding hart, ſo as not
any one before thee was like vnto thee, neither ſhal any be thy like after
thee. But theſe things alſo which thou haſt not asked, I [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=22) haue giuen thee,
namely, riches and honour, ſo as there ſhall neuer be thy like at any time
heereafter. 3\. Reg, 3, 12.

The prodigall Sonne returning home,Luke, 15.12 required nothing els of hys
Father, but to be reconciled into his fauour, and ſwéetly applauding himſelfe
héerein, hee deſired to be but pla­ced amongſt the baſeſt hyrelings: but what
happened? Hys Father by and by commanded a Ring to be giuen him, a new Garment
vpon his back, and ſhooes to his féete, and prepareth a delicate banquet,
wherewith he might entertaine his reco­uered and reconciled Sonne. Let vs
therefore followe the guide and good ſucceſſe of thys our Shéepeheard, and let
vs not doubt, but that in purpoſe and euent, he will moſt aboun­dantly ratifie
and confirme hys promiſe in the tenth of Saint Iohns Goſpell extant: viz. My
ſheepe heare my voyce, and they follow me, and I giue them euerlaſting life,
and no man ſhall take them out of myne handes, becauſe I and the Father am
one. verſes 4, 11, 14, 16, 18.

Verſe. 2.

He ſhall feede me in a greene Paſture: and bring me foorth beſide the waters
of comfort.

In the firſt verſe hee deſcribed the Shéepehearde of the Church, and called
him Iehoua, and added therewith, that through thys Gouernour, nothing ſhoulde
be wanting vnto vs: now with a pleaſant phraſe, he ſetteth foorth the féedings
or manner of lyuing which the flock hath. For like as Shéepe doo féede vpon
thrée-leaued graſſe, and of greene graſſe, and drinke of the Riuer which
(runneth through the ſtones) more purer then Amber paſſeth into the fielde: ſo
the Church is fed with the Goſpell, Which is the power of God vnto ſaluation
to all beleeuers. Rom. 1, 16. and drinketh out of the pure foun­taines of the
Prophets and Apoſtles, conſolation, which is the beginning of life
euerlaſting.

But let thys contrarietie or Antitheſis of doctrine be con­ſidered, which
greatly beautifieth thys verſe. Philoſophie and the Law doo not deliuer a man
from ſinne and from death, but [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=23) doo leaue the
halfe dead man ſuccourleſſe, as the Leuite and the Prieſt did in the tenth
Chapter of S. Lukes Goſpell. verſe 31, 32. For Philoſophy is onely a
meditation of death, that is, a funerall complaint, deploring mans miſeries
and death.

The Lawe, not onely bringeth no helpe to humane na­ture, ſpoyled & gréeuouſly
wounded, but alſo more and more encreaſeth the dolor or greefe of the wounds,
moyſting them with the Vineger of malediction or curſing. But the Goſpell
bringeth peace and life, to thoſe that beléeue in the Sonne of GOD, and
ſetleth theyr mindes (with full confidence of this Mediator) in God. How much
therefore places ſandie & ſette with thornes, doo differ from pleaſant and
ſoft Paſtures: and how much filthy muddie Pooles, doo differ from the cléere
and moſt wholeſome Springs, ſo much difference there is betwixt Philoſophie,
the Law, and the Goſpell.

For, as no man is able to take meate out of the fire, or water out of the
Flint ſtone, ſo is it not onely hard & difficult, but indéede alſo not
poſſible, to finde remedie of vnfained ſor­row, eyther from Philoſophy, or
from the Law. But they which by the preaching of the Goſpell, doo ſee the
ſaluation of God, (which is prepared before the face of all people,) theſe
with Simeon doo ſing that ioyfull tryumphant ſong, Lord now let thy ſeruaunt
depart in peace according to thy worde. &c. Luke, 2, 29. that is, nowe I féele
my ſelfe to reſt in Gods fa­uour, now doo I take the taſte of eternall life,
and doo eaſilie deſpiſe the miſeries of thys life, after that I haue
acknowled­ged my Mediator the Sonne of GOD, and ſo acknowled­ged, haue taken
ſure hold of him, by fayth: and haue receiued by him, both remiſſion of my
ſinnes, and reconciliation alſo with God, according to the ſaying of S. Paule:
If GOD be wyth vs, who ſhall be againſt vs? Rom, 8, verſe 31. Who ſpared not
his owne Sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death, howe ſhould he not with him,
giue vs all things alſo. verſe, 32. Who ſhall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods choſen? it is GOD that iuſtifieth. verſe 33. Who ſhall condemne? It is
Chriſt which is dead, yea or rather which is riſen againe, who is alſo [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=23) at the right hand
of God, & maketh requeſt alſo for vs. ve. 34.

Theſe are the ioyful paſtures and moſt wholſome ſprings from whence wee may
both féede vppon peace, and drinke alſo of ioy in the holy Ghoſt: from out of
all other doctrines, we can gather nothing but vaine Cockle and Darnell. Let
vs loue theſe Paſtures and fountaines therefore, and let vs not ſuffer the
riches of our poſſeſſion, eyther to be polluted wyth filthineſſe, or corrupted
with poyſon: that is, let vs flée from all corruptions of doctrine and deadly
Sophiſtry to ye Church, and let vs pray, That we may be ſanctified in the
trueth, like as the Sonne of God himſelfe prayed for vs. Iohn, 17, verſe, 17.

Verſe. 3.

Hee ſhall comfort my ſoule, and bring me foorth into the pathes of
righteouſnes for his Names ſake.

Wée doo not ſette downe diuers interpretations vpon e­uery verſe, as many men
doo in the Pſalmes, which wil ſpeak all things euery where, and boaſt vpon
theyr rare learning, and therewith ſatiſ-fie the eares of Diuines: but we
ſéeke out a principall propoſition in euery writing, and thereunto (ſo much as
may be doone) we aptly and rightly apply the other parts.

Hee ſpake before of the féeding and watering of the Church, which two,
containe the ſpeciall benefite of the Church, namely, remiſſion of ſinnes, and
(as wee els where haue vſed to ſpeake) the righteouſneſſe imputatiue, ioyned
with the gyft of the holy Ghoſt. Nowe hee preacheth as con­cerning the
ordering of our lyues and conuerſations agréea­ble vnto the will of God. For
as the ſillie Sheepe can not go­uerne her ſelfe, ſo cannot thys life be
gouerned by mans alone power and wiſedome, as in the tenth of Ieremie it is
ſayd: O Lord, I knowe that the way of man is not in himſelfe, neyther is it in
man, to walke and direct his ſteppes. verſe, 23. For ſo great is the
blindneſſe and infirmitie of our nature, ſo manie and ſo diuers are the ſnares
of the deuill, finally, ſuch a heape of buſineſſes and dangers, that both our
life and our vocation [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=24) can not ſoundly
and wholſomly be gouerned and ordered, but by GOD: therefore are theſe
ſpéeches ſo oftentimes repea­ted in ye Pſalmes, crauing of God to be gouerned:
as in the fift Pſalme: O Lord leade me in thy righteouſnes, becauſe of mine
enemies, make thy way plaine before my face. verſe. 8. Alſo in the 86. Pſalme:
O Lord teach me thy way, and I will walke in thy truth, knit mine hart vnto
thee, that I may feare thy Name▪ verſe, 11. And in the 119. Pſalme: Direct
thou my ſteps according to thy worde, and ſo ſhall no wickedneſſe haue
dominion ouer mee. Parſ. 13, verſe 5. Alſo in the 143. Pſalm. Teache mee (ô
Lorde) to doe thy will, becauſe thou art my God, let thy good Spirit bring me
into the right waie. verſe. 10.

The neceſſity of theſe prayers, doo the examples of mighty perſonages well
ſhewe, that is to ſay, Adam, Lot, Aaron, Ge­deon, Sampſon, Saule, Dauid,
Salomon, Ioſias, and others innumerable, who béeing forſaken of GOD, haue
horribly fallen, and ſome of theſe haue returned into the right waie, ſome
haue béene caſt headlong into eternall deſtruction. Let vs not therefore
thinke it a ſlender benefit, ſo to be gouerned of God, leaſt we filthily
violate the rule of right and honeſt workes, and leaſt we fall into tragicall
miſchiefes, and into tragicall calamities.

But the particle is not any thing vaine, which is added in the ende of this
verſe, [for his Names ſake,] but it teacheth vs that wee muſt caſt out of our
mindes the opinion of our merits, and let vs beléeue that all good gyfts,
whether they be ſpyrituall or corporall, are beſtowed vpon vs, firſt by the
vn­ſpeakeable mercy and goodneſſe of GOD, and afterwardes for thys end, that
God may be truly acknowledged, called vp­pon, and worſhipped: for thys
particle, containeth the cauſes efficient and finall. For as nothing mooueth
GOD to be­ſtow his benefits, but hys owne mercifull louing kindnes, ſo the
ſpeciall end of all Gods gyfts, is, that both the plenty and pleaſure of them
might mooue vs vnto the acknowledgement and worſhypping of GOD.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=24)

Verſe. 4.

Yea, though I walke through the valley of the ſha­dowe of death, I will feare
no euill: for thou art with mee.

Thys is a notable and memorable concluſion, which is a ſigne and token of a
moſt feruent ſpyrit: as is ſaid in the Ger­maine tongue: Ich geb vmb alle
tewffle vnd vmb den todt nicht ein Klipplin: and in Latine, Non eſtimo vnius
aſsis diabo­los omnes & mortem: and thus engliſhed, I wey not the vallue of
one farthing, not all the deuils, nor death his ſting. For Fayth is the
ouercommer of the world, & of all terrors what­ſoeuer, according to that which
is written by S. Iohn, in hys firſt Epiſtle, and fift Chapter, This is the
victory which ouer­commeth the world, euen our fayth. verſe, 4.

But the godly ones are to be admoniſhed as touching the enterchange of
temptations and conſolations, wherof the 30. Pſalme ſayth: I ſayd in my
proſperity I ſhal neuer be remoo­ued, thou Lord of thy goodneſſe haſt made my
hill ſo ſtrong. verſe 6. Thou didſt turne thy face (from me) and I was
trou­bled. verſe 7. Elias, with a great vehemencie of the holy Ghoſt therunto
mooued, ſlew the falſe Prophets,1, Reg. 18 1. Reg 19 4.5. and was greeuouſ­lie
angry with King Achab: but thys notable man, feared Ieſabels threatnings ſo
much, that hee ſought where to hide himſelfe in ſome ſecrete place.

Abraham the Father of the faythfull,Gene. 14.17 who with a verie handfull of
men, put to flight great hoſtes of the Caldeans, within a while after, ſo
trembled,Gene, 20.2 that he durſt not declare his wiues name. Theſe examples
declare, that the holy ones doe not alwaies feele in themſelues like
feruencies of the ſpyrite, but are ſometimes drenched into feares and plunges,
that they may acknowledge theyr owne weakeneſſe, and confeſſe it is true which
the Church ſingeth in the Hymne.

Sine tuo Numine nihil eſt in homine, nihil eſt innoxium.

Without thy grace (ô God) in Man,

Nought well he doth, nor well he can.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=25)But ſéeing
in the Pſalmes, there is ſpoken oftentimes of theſe changes of the affects or
motions in the holy ones, wee wyll heere be the breefer, leaſt wee excéede a
meaſure in our Comment.

Idem.

Thy rod and thy ſtaffe comfort me.

It is well knowne what are the weapons which Shéepe­heards vſe. For as the
ſilly ſheepe are driuen or ruled wyth the rod, leaſt they ſhould ſtray from
the fields, ſo by the ſtaffe they are defended againſt the violent aſſault of
the Wolues. The rod therefore ſignifieth gouernement, and the ſtaffe de­fence
from GOD: alſo the ſtaffe may be taken for the word of God, whereupon, we
(béeing wearied with daungers and temptations,) reſting and ſtaying our
ſelues, are then in good ſecuritie and ſafety.

Verſe. 5.

Thou ſhalt prepare a Table before mee, againſt them that trouble mee: thou
haſt annointed myne head with Oyle, and my cuppe ſhall be full.

The former part of the Pſalme, ſetteth downe a moſt ſwéete ſimilitude of the
Sheepeheard and his ſheepe: in reſpect whereof, to my now remembrance, that
ſame ſaying ſerueth for my purpoſe in thys place, which Virgil ſayth of Dido.
Ex­pleri mentem nequit, ardeſcitque tuendo: The mind not ſatiſ-fi­ed,
therefore, the more it ſeeth, deſires the more. The ſecond part of the Pſalme,
followeth with a figure or reſemblance of an Hoſte and hys gueſt, which alſo
moſt ſweetly deſcribeth the fatherly louing kindneſſe of GOD towardes vs. For
as the welthy Hoſte furniſheth his table with meate for hys gueſts, filling
his golden Cuppes with the beſt Wine, and hys ſiluer diſhes with the
delicateſt dainties: and when the Table is taken vp, ſerueth thē alſo with
moſt fragrant ſwéete ſauours: ſo God is able, and ſufficient of himſelfe, to
enriche and make vs happy, for not onely hee nouriſheth and ſtreng­theneth
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=25) our bodies
with great plentie and varietie of things, which partly appertaine vnto our
liuing, and partly ſerue for pleaſure, but alſo hee féedeth and refreſheth our
ſoules wyth ſpirituall meate and drinke, giuing vs alſo moſt ſweet ſmel­ling
Balme.

Neyther neede we ſéeke for Allegories of euery worde, in the deſcription of
this repaſt, foraſmuch as they teache in breefe, that we are nouriſhed and
cheriſhed, euen from God, in ſpite of all the deuils and theyr inſtruments,
and that wee are comforted by the rod of his diuine helpe, with ſuch things as
appertaine vnto the ſuſtentation of our bodies, and conſo­lation of our
mindes. But if any man of a godly zeale, applie the Table and Cuppe, vnto the
miniſtery of the Goſpell and Sacraments, and the ſwéete balme vnto the gyft of
the holie Ghoſt, hee ſpeaketh nothing contrary from the Analogie of Fayth. For
as by the word and Sacraments, our Fayth is enflamed, ſo by the holy Ghoſt,
the ſaluing of our woundes, and mortification of our fleſh is begun in vs,
which ſhall then be accompliſhed, when as from death wee ſhall be rayſed to
life, and glory euerlaſting.

And whereas wee tranſlate it [my cup full,] others doe tranſlate it in thys
manner, My cuppe running ouer. But both waies tende to one meaning: for full
cups often drunke, doo make men full of drinke: and in this other tranſlation,
there is ſette downe a picture of the holy Martyrs, which like men in theyr
mirth, doo reioyce in midſt of theyr death, and nowe and then inſult againſt
Tyrants, as Laurence, Agnes, and the hiſtories of others doo declare. Nowe
remaineth to ſpeake of the laſt verſe.

Verſe. 6.

But thy louing kindneſſe and mercie, ſhall follow mee all the daies of my
life: and I will dwell in the houſe of the Lord for euer.

The concluſion of the Pſalme, is full of Faith, beleeuing that God will not
onely ſupply our wants, with the benefits [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=26) of thys life, but
alſo, will after thys life, giue vs wiſedome, righteouſnes, and ioy
vnſpeakeable. Where hee ſayth that [hee will dwell in the houſe of the Lord
for euer,] that may more eaſily be vnderſtoode, by conſidering the
repreſen­tation of the ſilly Sheepe: for as the ſheepe is therfore fedde, that
within a while after, ſhée béeing well filled and fatted, is brought into her
Maiſters houſe, and that ſhe may bee made meate, yeeldes her wooll, & ſerues
to other vſes for her Mai­ſter requiſite: ſo are we in thys life fedde with
the worde, and Sacraments, and are after a ſort prepared, that we may be fitte
meate vnto GOD in the life euerlaſting. That notable ſaying of Ignatius is
well knowne: Let mee be grounde wyth the teeth of beaſtes, ſo I be made fitte
bread for GOD.

Laſt of all, to the end the doctrine of this Pſalme, may be the more euident,
let theſe benefits of God be conſidered: Our creation: the manifeſtation of
God: the ſending of his Sonne: the beſtowing of his word and Goſpell: the
giuing of his ho­ly Spirit: promiſe of eternall life: good bringing vp:
defence of body and ſoule: the vanquiſhing of the deuill: the ſetting forth of
learning and true doctrine: Gods gouernment in our conuerſation and
enterpriſes: ſucceſſe of our counſels, happi­neſſe of our ſtudies: and
vprightneſſe of iudgement: proſpe­ritie of our children: good examples and
eſchewing of offen­ces: good report: publique concord: peace and meane ſtate
of pollicie: and a ſounde eſtate or conſtitution of the Church.

Theſe benefits, if in minde we embrace, we ſhal the more acknowledge the
fatherly louing kindneſſe of God, and accuſe our owne vnthankfulnes, and with
vnfained ſorrow of hart, craue of God to enflame in vs, the motion of a
thankfull hart, and a deſire to ſhew foorth our thank­fulneſſe for all our
life time.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=26)

## 3\. ❧ A PSALME OF Deu. 10.14. Iob. 28.24, 1. Cor, 10▪ 16. DAVID. Domini eſt
Terra. &c.

The Argument.

THIS Pſalme of Dauid, is verily ſhort in verſe, but full of learning. For it
inſtructeth the Reader, as touching the Church, and al­ſo the offyce and dutie
of the Magiſtrate. The Church (it ſayth) is a company gathe­red out of all
mankinde, tyed vnto the King and head, Chriſt: which Church, without
hypocriſie, perfor­meth inward and outwarde worſhippings agreeable vnto the
Goſpell, and againe, which from Chriſt receiueth righteouſ­neſſe and bleſſing:
that is, forgiuenes of ſinnes, the holy Ghoſt, and life euerlaſting.

Thys diſcription appertaineth vnto the Church properlie called, that is, vnto
the Congregation which is borne a new of the holy Ghoſt. For in a generall
name of the Church, wee comprehende all thoſe which are not enemies, but
hearers of the Goſpell, yea, though they be without true feare of God, and
without fayth. And ſeeing the Church hath neede of ſuc­cour, thys Pſalme
exhorteth all Princes and Gouernours of Common-weales that they would
vouchſafe theyr honeſt and peaceable ſuccours, vnto ſuch as teach and learne
the Goſpel, and not to exerciſe crueltie againſt thys poore & needy
Con­gregation, which retaineth the heauenly doctrine. But howe few ſuch
perſonages doe yeeld vnto thys exhortation, the mat­ter it ſelfe, and the
euent thereof ſheweth. For many Princes ſette foorth theyr written decrees,
euen wyth blood againſt the Confeſſors of the true doctrine. Others take vppon
them the [[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=27)
defence or patronage of fanaticall Teachers. Some trifle or dallie with the
Biſhoppes, that they may catch or gripe into their hands, the riches of their
Collidges, or Eccleſiaſtical pro­motions. But although the greater part of
Princes doe ſwarue from the rule of theyr dutie, yet notwithſtanding, God
turneth the minds of ſome, ſo, that they acknowledge the doctrine of the
Goſpell, and for to nouriſh the Church, as it were bani­ſhed in the world:
ſuch Princes both doe vnderſtand, and ex­ecute theyr functions or offices
giuen them from God. For theſe ſayings are knowne full well, viz. Pſalme, 82.
I ſayde yee are Gods, &c. That is, you are Gods Vizegerents or deputies, and
doe impart Gods benefits vnto men, namely, The Law of of God, righteouſnes,
and peace. Againe, as in Eſay. 49. Kinges ſhall be thy Nurſing Fathers, and
Queenes ſhall be thy Nurſes. verſe. 23.

### 3.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compaſſe of the world,
and they that dwell therein.

THE Prophet heere, beginneth his diſcription of the Church, from the heade and
the place wherein the Church is gathered. For although the Church is not tyed
vnto tytles of Biſhops, and ordinary ſucceſſion, as they call it: yet, is it
not with out a Head and Gouernour. For the Heade of the Church, is the Sonne
of GOD, vnto whom (from the eter­nall Father,) all power is giuen both in
Heauen and Earth. Thys Gouernour, wiſe and mightie, gathereth vnto himſelfe a
Church, euen out of all mankinde, by the preaching of the [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=27) Goſpell, and
defendeth the ſame from the tyrannie of the de­uil, that it may be his
euerlaſting inheritance: and out of this place is taken manifold doctrine and
conſolation. For firſt, it witneſſeth, that Chriſt is truly and by nature God,
and for becauſe the Name of the true God, is giuen vnto Chriſt, and that the
worke of creation, is properly aſcribed vnto the na­ture of the omnipotencie
onely, it is néedfull that there bee in Chriſt, a nature both diuine and
omnipotent. Let therefore thys teſtimony be adioyned vnto other ſayings, which
make moſt plaine and notable manifeſtation of the diuine nature of the
Meſſias.

Secondly, he admoniſheth great and ſmall, to remember that they are not Lords
of the earth, but onely Court keepers or Bailiffes, and that they muſt render
vp accounts of theyr Stewardſhip adminiſtred: of thys ſentence, if Gouernours
or Rulers woulde be earneſtly mindfull, vndoubtedlie they would doo their
duties in the feare of the Lord & in humilitie: neyther woulde they with ſuch
libertie, exerciſe tiranny & ra­pine. At thys day, becauſe many doo falſly
imagine, that they are Lords properly called of theyr owne riches, they beare
ſway with puffed pryde, and carrie hautie mindes, & doo fléeſe theyr Subiects
with immoderate exacting them: but after a while, they ſhall render accounts
to the Lord of the Feoe, and like vaſſals vndutifull, ſhall ſuffer great and
iuſt puniſhment, with the loſſe of their Feoe.

Thirdly, he teacheth of Chriſtian libertie, in the which ſence verily it is
cited by S. Paule, in the 1\. Cor. 10. Whatſo­euer commeth into the ſhambles,
of that eate yee, asking no queſtion for conſcience ſake: The earth is the
Lordes, and all that is therein. verſe. 25. Let therefore the dreames of
diffe­rence in meates be refelled: and with giuing of thanks, let vs eate
eyther of fleſh or of fiſhe, and let vs not vnder a certaine ſuperſtition,
feare any offence, wherein there is none of­fence.

Fourthly, hee giueth conſolation vnto the godly ones, which for the profeſſion
of the true doctrine, doo liue in exile. [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=28) For, ſeeing [the
earth is the Lords.] let vs not doubt but hee taketh care of thē, that the
godly ones may haue meane har­bours and ſuccours: according to that ſaying of
Chriſt, In my Fathers houſe are many dwellings, &c. Iohn, 14, verſe, 2. And we
ſee at this preſent day, many notable examples of Chriſtes prouidence,
preparing for his Church, and the godly exiles, ſafe dwelling places, and
giuing Halcyon dayes, euen in the midſt of the raging ſeaes and ſtormes of
Germanie.

Let vs therefore craue and expect of Chriſt the Lorde of all the worlde,
ſuccours and harbours, and other benefits ne­ceſſary for this life, and let vs
not (diſcouraged with feare of baniſhments) caſt away our profeſſion of the
Goſpell: for as much as hys promiſe is true, and nothing fallible, namelie,
Firſt ſeeke ye the kingdome of God, and all other things ſhall bee gyuen vnto
you. Math, 6, 33.

Verſe. 2.

For he hath founded it vppon the Seas: and pre­pared it vpon the floodes.

Hée amplifieth the wiſedome and power of the Heade of the Church which ſhineth
and is notably ſeene in the framing and preſeruation of the world: for who
woulde not be aſtoni­ſhed, thinking that the earth could without props, be
ſetled at reſt in the midſt of the world? Who meruaileth not by right, that
the Sea, ſith it is farre greater then the lande, dooth not ouerwhelme all
mankind with the ouerflowing therof? Fur­thermore, who can without great
admiration) beholde the Heauen, and the Clowdes aboue vs, wandering without
pyllers to ſupport ſuch a mightie maſſe, and varietie of bo­dies.

Theſe are the works of the Workmaiſters vnſpeakeable wiſedome and power, the
conſideration whereof might mooue vs, to thys purpoſe, that we ſhoulde
beleeue, the Church is preſerued and defended by God without viſible helpes &
ſafe­gards. For if God on this manner, nowe ſuſtaine theſe crea­tures
ſenceleſſe, and which ſhall perriſh in the conſuming of [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=28) thys world by
fire: who doubteth (that the Church, which is Gods heritage, and ſhall worſhyp
him in all eternities) ſhall be by Gods mighty hande nouriſhed and ſuſtained:
as moſt ſwéetly it is ſayde in the forty ſixe Chapter of Eſay. You are borne
of me from the wombe, and brought vppe of mee from the byrth. verſe 3. I haue
made you, I will alſo beare you, and I will carry you, and I will deliuer you.
verſe. 14. I omitte to ſpeake of the Philoſophers diſputations, touching the
ſetling or ſtay of the earth, leaſt I heere ſeeme to be rather reaſo­ning
philoſophically then diuinely.

Verſe. 3.

Who ſhall aſcend into the Hill of the Lorde, or who ſhall riſe vp in his holie
place?

Verſe. 4.

Euen he that hath cleene handes, and a pure hart: and that hath not lift vp
his minde vnto vanitie, nor ſworne to deceiue his Neighbour.

Hée proponeth a queſtion concerning a matter, the grea­teſt of all others,
namely, which, what a one, and where the true Church of GOD is? and thereunto
maketh aunſwer. The Church (ſaith hee) is a Congregation embracing the word
deliuered from GOD, and acknowledging calling vp­pon and worſhipping God,
according to the rule of his word, and abhorring from all opinions and
worſhippings which a­gree not with that rule.

Thys deſcription is made more notable, by conſidering an Antitheſis, or
contrariety betweene the true Church, and the pontificall crew, which for
riches and promotions, falſely challenge vnto themſelues the moſt holy name of
the Church. For in thys pontificall crewe, firſt dooth vanitie floriſh and
rule the roſt, that is, confuſion of opinions and worſhippings. for who
knoweth not how filthy things are Idoles, prayer for the dead, and the
prophaning of the Lords Supper in funeral Maſſes, and Maſſes for money? It is
manifeſt alſo, that their Bookes touching canonicall ſatiſ-factions, are full
of errors, darkning the light of the Goſpell.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=29)Finally,
ſure it is, that theyr Bookes ſpeake not rightly, touching remiſſion of
ſinnes, and to be the ſuppreſſion of faith embracing remiſſion of ſinnes: yea,
and that by thē a contra­rie opinion is defended. viz. That men ought alwaies
to doubt of the remiſſion of ſinnes.

Moreouer, the harts of hypocrits are vncleane, that is, without true feare of
GOD, and without fayth, becauſe they are proude with the perſwaſion of theyr
wiſedome and righteouſneſſe, in loue with themſelues, and debaſe & deſpiſe
others farre vnder themſelues, as did the Phariſie in the 18. of S. Lukes
Goſpell. Theſe ſinnes with a malignant coun­tenaunce, repugne the feare of
God, and the confidence in the mercie of GOD. Thirdly, theyr tongue is full of
periuries, that is, blaſphemies againſt the true doctrine, which they
vn­iuſtly condemne of heriſie and ſedition. Laſt of all, their hands are
imbrued with the blood of the godly ones, which they ſley for the profeſſion
of the Goſpell, and for the reprehending of theyr Idolatry.

Nowe on the contrary part, let the Image of the true Church be conſidered.
Firſt of all, the true Church embra­ceth the Goſpell giuen by Chriſt, and
declineth not vnto va­nitie, that is, dooth not corrupt the doctrine, mingling
there­vnto lewde opinions and worſhyppings, but ſhunneth and with all her hart
trembleth to haue corruption of doctrine, and voluntary ſeruing of God.
Moreouer, ſhe hath a cleane hart, that is, as S. Peter interpreteth it: A hart
purified by Fayth. 1\. Peter, 1.22. And as S. Paule ſayth, commeth with
boldneſſe vnto the throne of Grace. Heb. 4.16. Finally, ſhe hath not a
blaſphemous tongue, nor hands defiled with the bloode of the holy ones, but
rather ſuffereth the vnrighteous iudgements of the world, and is layd open to
al chaunces of ſuddaine dan­gers. But heere is a neceſſary admonition to be
repeated, that thys deſcription of the Church ſo properly called, is not ſette
downe as touching hypocrites, intermingled with the true Church in outward
ſocietie: for although they of the true Church, profeſſe true doctrine, and
are not polluted with ma­nifeſt [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=29) Idoles, yet in
hart they are careleſſe, and without re­pentance. Such, a great multitude are
there alwaies in the Church, like as the Parable of the ſeede ſignifieth.
Math. 13.

Verſe. 5.

Hee ſhall receiue the bleſſing from the Lord, and righteouſnes from the God of
his ſaluation.

When we ſee the Church to be oppreſſed with a greater weight or force of
calamities thē the reſt of the ſkom of man­kinde is, we were wont to aſke the
queſtion, what peculiar good gyfts, or what treaſures had the Church? for it
ſeemeth a thing abſurd, that the Church dare promiſe vnto her hea­rers great
benefits, when ſhe herſelfe is ouerlayd with grea­teſt miſeries? With thys
obiection heere, he méeteth thus: affirming that the Church receiueth
excellent gyfts of God, viz. Righteouſnes, bleſſing, and euerlaſting
ſaluation. Let vs ſuffer the Heathen people, the Mahometiſts, and the Popiſh
ſectaries, to preache and extoll theyr promotions, riches, and pleaſures, we
will highly magnifie thys prerogatiue of the Church, that in thys certaine
Congregation, righteouſneſſe, bleſſing, and euerlaſting ſaluation is beſtowed.

But let the word of righteouſneſſe be vnderſtoode, not of diſcipline, which is
an vncleane hypocriſie, but of the impu­tation of righteouſneſſe in thys life,
and of the righteouſneſſe finiſhed or conſumate after this life, which ſhall
be ſuch as the Lawe requireth, namely, the excellent acknowledgement of GOD,
and the loue vndefiled.

Bleſſing is oppoſed againſt curſing, and ſignifieth deliue­rance from Gods
wrath, deſtruction of ſinne and of death, and the gyft of the holy Ghoſt
beginning in vs newe light, & ſanc­tifying vs vnto life euerlaſting. In the
name of ſaluation, are contained all merueilous deliuerances of ye Church,
euen frō the very firſt beginning, and the rayſing from death, vnto glo­rie
and life euerlaſting. Let vs therefore meruaile at, and highly aduaunce theſe
proper benefits of the Church, and for them let vs render thankes vnto God:
and let vs not followe [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=30) the fooliſhnes of
Glaucus, who preferred braſen Armour be­fore golden. Let vs not more loue
pleaſure and riches, then GOD and good gyfts, whereof I haue ſpoken.

Verſe. 6.

Thys is the generation of them that ſeeke him, euen of them that ſeeke thy
face, ô Iacob.

The difference betweene the Church and the vngodlie ones, dooth ſpecially
ſette foorth thys verſe. The vngodly ones ſéeke after pleaſures, and their
inſtruments, as in the verſes of Mantuan it is ſaid.

Ambitioſus honos, & opes, et faeda voluptas,

Haec tria, pro trino Numine mundus habet.

Deſire of honour, wealth, and filthy pleaſure,

The world theſe three, for three Gods holdeth euer.

But the Church content with foode and rayment, ſéeketh eſpecially after GOD,
and leaſt ſhée ſhould ſtray a wrong way from GOD, followeth the rule of his
diuine mani­feſtation, in no poynt fayling her. For it is the ſinguler
wiſe­dom of the Church, not to ſéeke for God by any other means, then by his
worde and teſtimonies from him, neither to call vpon any other God, then vpon
this very ſame GOD, who hath made himſelfe knowne vnto Iacob, that is, vnto
hys Church.

Verſe. 7.

Lyftvppe your heads, ô yee gates, and be yee lyft vppe yee euerlaſting doores,
and the King of glorie ſhall come in.

It was the manner of the people in the Eaſt parts of the world, to exerciſe
theyr iudgement in the gates: for as nowe the Senators doo méete, and ſitte
together in the Court, ſo, in times paſt, they which were about to conſult
vpon the cauſes of the Common wealth, mette and ſatte in the gates.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=30)The Prophet
Dauid therefore, exhorteth héere all Prin­ces and Gouernours, that they would
giue harbour and ſuc­cour vnto the Goſpell and to the Church, and to thinke,
that thys ought to be theyr firſt and ſpeciall care, that euery one of them
beſtowe in his place of calling, hys counſaile and ende­uour, to retaine the
Miniſtery of the Goſpell, in publique ad­miniſtration of the Churches, to the
nouriſhing of the neceſ­ſary ſtudies and exerciſes of the Church, and to the
defending and maintaining of the Miniſters, Teachers, and Schollers in the
Church and Schooles.

Manifeſtly it appeareth, that in Kingdoms and Citties, theſe Offices or
duties, are euery where neglected of the moſt Gouernours or Magiſtrates. They
ſéeke not for apt or fitte Paſtors to theyr Churches, there are not ſallaries
or meane wages gyuen vnto ſuch as are able to ſerue in place, there is not
youth ſufficiently employed, vnto the neceſſary ſtudies or exerciſes of the
Church of GOD: no, rather in Princes Courts there be, which fléeſe from the
Preachers of the Goſ­pell, theyr due deſerued wages and ſtipends, and doo
beſtow the ſame vppon thoſe, whoſe helpe or dilligence they doe vſe, both in
the Court, and about theyr prophane buſines. Theſe things doo I therefore
recite, to that ende onely, that the ſay­ing of thys Pſalme may be vnderſtood,
and applyed vnto the ſame vſe.

Wée therefore with this ſpeech, doo admoniſh Princes and Citties, to haue
care, that the Goſpell may be purely and rightly preached in their Churches,
and that we may comfort all thoſe, which ſuffer dangers and miſeries for the
aduaunce­ment thereof. Finally, with thys very ſame ſpéech doo we ac­cuſe
Tyrants, which goe about to deſtroy the Miniſtery of the Goſpell, and others
alſo which neglect the ſetting foorth of the ſame. For if Gouernours or
Rulers, haue onely the ouer­ſight, charge, and keeping, of mens bodies and
goods, vndoub­tedly I know not, what difference there is, betweene them, and
Heardeſmen or Paſtors. Nay, what are Cōmon weales flouriſhing with wealth and
power, (wanting true acknow­ledgment [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=31) and calling vpon
God,) but Lanthornes without light, and a certaine Ciclopicall hugenes, hauing
blinde and raſh wandering motions of theyr mindes? Let therfore Ma­giſtrates
vnderſtand, and execute the offices of theyr vocati­ons, which els where in
one word are comprehended, where the Pſalme ſayth: I ſayd ye are Gods, that
is, bearing Gods Office, or béeing Gods Deputies, and beſtowing Gods be­nefits
vpon men: that is, the doctrine of God, righteouſneſſe and peace. This
teſtimony without long circumſtaunces, tea­cheth, that it is the ſpeciall
cheefe worke of all Magiſtrates, to aduaunce and preſerue the knowledge of
GOD, in man­kinde.

Verſe. 8.

Who is the King of glorie? it is the Lord, ſtrong and mightie, euen the Lord,
mightie in battell.

Alwaies there hath béene, are, and ſhall be, ſome Kings or mighty Princes,
enemies vnto the Goſpell: theſe mens good wils towards the Goſpell, hee finely
ſetteth foorth, ſay­ing: [who is the King of glory?] for theſe Princes deſpiſe
the doctrine of the Goſpell, as a thing fabulous, and many of thē practiſe
the deſtruction thereof, as if it were the firebrande of ſeditions, and the
plague of Common weales. But although in manifold manner, the aduauncement of
the Goſpel be hin­dered, yet it wyll haue his operation notwithſtanding,
accor­ding to thoſe verſes.

VT aggeribus ruptis cum ſpumens Amnis

Exut, oppoſitaſque euicit gurgite moles:

Fertur in aruafurens cumulo Campoſque

Per omnes, cum ſtabulis armenta trahit.

AS when a frothing foming floode,

the broken bancks ouer-runs:

And ſo contrary mighty ſtoppes,

by great increaſe ouer-comes,

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=31)

Of violent force, is carryed forth

through all the fieldes, euen there

With folde or Cottage, quite away

the Cattell ſo doth beare.

So Chriſt the King of glory & mighty in battell, (though whole Kingdomes
repine and repugne thereat) diſperſeth the ſounde of the Goſpell, and
gathereth him a Church, and de­fendeth the ſame meruailouſly againſt Tyrants:
further­more, the meaning of thys ſaying ſhall be more notable, and ſwéeter
vnto vs, if we doo conſider the Hiſtory, as touching the reſtoring & purifying
of the Goſpell, by the miniſtry of the reuerend Father, D. Martin Luther. For
who remembreth not, what manner Decrées were publiſhed againſt the doc­trine
of the Goſpel, when it firſt grew vp again amongſt vs. Neyther indeede did the
Enemies onely beſtow their counſel and endeuour, to extinguiſh the light of
the Goſpell, but alſo troubleſome and vnquiet perſons, who would ſeeme to be
pro­feſſors of the Goſpell, (with moouing ſeditions) haue aliena­ted many mens
mindes from this doctrine: but yet amongſt ſo diuers chaunces, and ſo many
differences of things, the pure doctrine of the Goſpell is ſpreade néere and
farre of, a­gainſt which, the very gates of hell ſhall not preuaile. For he
that is in vs, is ſtronger and mightier then the Prince of thys world.

Verſe. 9.

Lyft vp your heads, (ô yee gates) and be yee lyft vp ye euerlaſting doores:
and the King of glory ſhal come in.

Verſe. 10.

Who is the King of glory? euen the Lorde of Hoſtes, he is the King of glory.

The ſelfe ſame phraſe of ſpéech vnto the Magiſtrates, is not in vaine, nor
raſhly repeated: for firſt thys repeticion de­clareth, with what ſeueritie God
requireth, that they which [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=32) ſitte at the
helme in the Common weales, may be mooued with care of helping forwarde the
aduauncement of the Goſ­pell: moreouer, it ſignifieth tender affection of very
many Gouernours or Princes towardes the Church. For, ſome neglect the care for
neceſſary doctrine: others are of that ſa­uage beaſtly blood-ſucking and
rigorous diſpoſition, that they exerciſe cruelty againſt the Teachers and
profeſſors of the Goſpell. Vnto ſuch dooth the Pſalme in thys place denounce
puniſhments: as if he ſaid. If you will wage your battayles againſt Chriſt,
know, yee ſhall come to vtter deſtruction, for he is the Lord of Hoſtes, and
mightie in battaile: that is, hée vanquiſheth and deſtroyeth Tyrants, as
Iulianus the Apoſta­ta cryed out, Thou haſt conquered me, ô Galilaean. And in
the Image of Senacherib, (as Herodotus ſayth) was written in Gréeke, this
ſentence.

Jn me intuens diſce pietatem.

By the beholding heere of mee,

Let godlineſſe be learnd of thee.

## 4\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid. Ad te Domine leuaui. &c.

The Argument.

LET vs alwaies haue in our eyes, the ſumme of that doctrine which Chriſt
him­ſelfe ſetteth downe: when hee commaundeth to preache Repentance, and
Remiſsion of ſinnes: for God wyll haue his Church by ſome means or other, to
acknowledge the greatnes of ſinne ſticking in the natures of men, and the
greatneſſe of mercy for Chriſtes ſake [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=32) promiſed: to the
ende ſhe may know, that ſhe cannot ſatiſ-fie the Lawe of God, nor by
diſcipline be iuſt before GOD, but ought to ſeeke remiſſion of ſinnes, by and
through the Medi­ator. Vnto thys ſumme of doctrine, appertaineth this twentie
fiue Pſalme; for firſt it heapeth vp the greatnes of ſinne, which how ſoeuer
it be, may be ſo deemed or reputed by the conti­nuall flames of mens luſtes:
who is ſo ſenceleſſe furious, that dare boldly ſay, there is little euill in
mans nature, when hee hath doubtings of Gods prouidence, and blinde ſecuritie,
whereby it comes to paſſe, that men eyther doe lightly, or not at all, feare
the iudgement and wrath of God? Alſo the loue of our ſelues, wherein wee ſerue
more our owne pleaſure and glory, then the glory of God? Touching all theſe
euils, thys Pſalme ſayth, O remember not the ſinnes and offences of my youth,
nor my tranſgreſsions. verſe 6. Againe, Bee mercifull vnto my ſin, for it is
great. verſe 10. that is, much and manifold: but it is to be lamented, that
there are in all ages lyings preached, where­by the greatneſſe of ſinne is
made leſſe and obſcured.

After thys, he heapeth vp, aduaunceth and amplifieth, the greatnes of Gods
mercie, receiuing mans nature fallen, & not reiecting the ſame amongſt the
deuils: for he ſaith expreſlie, Call to remembrance O Lorde, thy tender
mercies, and thy lo­uing kindneſſe, which hath beene euer of old. verſe 5.
When our firſt Parents did fall, and had procured vnto themſelues eter­nall
puniſhments, God in his moſt iuſt wrath, remembring his mercy, receiued
wretched mankinde into his fauour, and turned the puniſhment vppon his Sonne:
vnto thys hiſtorie doubtles the Prophet heere alludeth, where he ſayth,
Remem­ber thy mercies which haue beene of olde.

But leaſt any man eſteeme, that out of the true Church this benefit, (namely
remiſſion of ſinnes) is giuen: he bindeth expreſly his promiſe vnto the Church
on this manner: All the pathes of the Lord are mercy and truth, to ſuch as
keepe his Co­uenaunt, and his teſtimonies. verſe 9. That is, the Cittizens of
the Church, which heare and embrace the Goſpell, and (obey­ing the preaching
of the ſame,) doe truely repent, and flee in [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=33) theyr prayers
vnto the Mediator, doe obtaine from God, re­miſſion of theyr ſinnes and life
euerlaſting.

Therfore thys Pſalme beautifieth a ſpeciall Article in the Creede, I beleeue
the forgiuenes of ſinnes. And becauſe wee haue not onely neede of forgiuenes
of ſinnes, but alſo of other be­nefits, he craueth of God, the gouernment and
gyft of the ho­lie Ghoſt, defence in daungers, and the vniuerſall deliuerance
of the Church. Heerehence it is a thing perſpicuous, what plenty of doctrine
and conſolation, thys xxv. Pſalme ſetteth downe vnto the Reader.

### 4.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

Vnto thee (ô Lord) haue I lift vppe my ſoule, my GOD in thee doe I put my
truſt: ô let mee not be confounded, neither let myne enemies tryumph o­uer
mee.

THere is a very great difference betwéene the prayers of the Heathen, and our
prayers: for the Heathen people wander a wrong way, and call vpon they knowe
not what, neither may they perſwade themſelues to be hearde: as Haecuba (of
whom Euripides ſpeaketh) crieth. O Iupiter, auicquid es, ſine hoc coelum, ſiue
mens infidens huic coelo. viz. O Iupiter, what ſoeuer thou art, eyther this
heauen, or the mind ſetled in this heauen: ſo that a contrary wiſe they wander
frō the true GOD, and know not his will.

But, our manner of calling vpon the true God, beholdeth and ſpeaketh vnto him,
who comming from his ſecrete ſeate, hath by aſſured teſtimonies reuealed
himſelfe, and made hys [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=33) promiſes vnto vs:
and our prayer, wiſely and feruently diſ­cerneth him from the lying Gods of
all Nations.

For like as the Fathers, Abraham, Iſaack, Iacob, Moſes, Dauid, Daniell and
others, in theyr manner of praying, dyd know that they ſpake vnto this true
God, who had made him­ſelfe knowne in his promiſes, and by bringing the people
out of Egypt: and did pray & beleeue that they were receiued and heard, euen
for the promiſed ſeede ſake: ſo doo we alſo call vp­pon the ſame true God, who
is the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, crucified for vs, and raiſed from
death to life: and for thys Mediators ſake, we beléeue that we are heard. That
this admonition, touching the difference of true and falſe inuoca­tion is
neceſſary, no doubt at all it is, which let vs vndoub­tedly make familiar vnto
vs, ſo often as we begin our prayer and thankſgiuing.

But, after wee haue ſeperated our manner of praying, from the furies of them
which worſhip Idoles, let vs diſtin­guiſh the ſame from the vaine babling of
Hypocrites: for Hy­pocrites make their prayers, without any true motion of the
hart, as of the Phariſies it is ſaid in the ſixt of S. Mathewe. But in vs, let
there be a conſent of the hart and voice, and a hart enflamed with the light
and loue of GOD: let it mani­feſt our diuine motions, with a voyce worſhipping
or pray­ſing GOD.

Therefore Dauid ſayth héere expreſly: [Vnto thee haue I lift vppe my ſoule,]
furthermore, becauſe without fayth, no Prayer is effectuall, hee addeth
heereunto a mention of hys fayth, reſting in God, for the Mediators ſake: and
vnto thys vertue, which is the proper ornament of the Church, he attri­buteth
a notable effect, becauſe (ſayth he) In thee I doe put my truſt, neither ſhall
I be aſhamed: neyther ſhall I be any mat­ter or cauſe vnto mine enemies,
wherein they ſhall laugh me to ſcorne, or buſie themſelues againſt mee, to
reproche or reuile me: for, fayth is the vanquiſher of the deuill, and all his
inſtruments, and ſuffereth not the faythfull or beleeuing [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=34) ſoule, to be caſt
out of Gods fauour by any engines, howe craftily and ſubtilly deuiſed ſoeuer
they be.

Verſe. 2.

For all they that hope in thee, ſhall not be aſha­med: but ſuch as tranſgreſſe
without cauſe, ſhall be put to confuſion.

A moſt ſwéete promiſe, wherewith hee ſtirreth vppe and confirmeth himſelfe in
time of prayer: for our vnworthineſſe murmureth againſt vs, and endeuoureth
what it may, to driue away fearefull mindes from praying. Againſt this
feareful­neſſe, wee muſt oppoſe the voice of the Goſpell, which affir­meth,
that (though yet defiled) we are aſſuredly notwithſtan­ding freely receiued
for the Sonne of Gods ſake. But the pro­miſe is amplyfied, by adding thereunto
the Antitheſis. Such as tranſgreſſe without cauſe, ſhall be put to confuſion:
that is, hypocrits and others ſhall be confounded, which haue con­fidence in
theyr owne wiſedome, righteouſnes and power, and mooue or ſtirre vp eyther
vniuſt or vnneceſſary matters.

Verſe. 3.

Shew me thy waies (ô Lorde) and teache mee thy pathes.

Verſe. 4.

Leade me forth in thy truth, and learne me, becauſe thou art the God of my
ſaluation, in thee hath been my hope all the day long.

Howe neceſſary this prayer is, the furies of Epicures doo well ſhewe, the
dotages of the Stoicks, Academicall dubitati­ons, and other infinite errours
alſo manifeſt the ſame, wher­with mans minde is intangled, except it be
gouerned wyth the word of God, and with the holy Ghoſt.

A great number of men there is, which imagine, that GOD is nothing. The
Stoicks doo tye GOD vnto ſeconde cauſes or meanes, and ſay that he can doo
none other wiſe then euen as ſecond cauſes doo mooue. The Academicks doe
de­fend a diſtruſt or doubting in Religion and matters diuine.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=34)Finally,
the furies of Heretiques are ſo great in varietie, that no man is able to
comprehend them either in thought, or expreſſe them in words. We therefore,
thinking vpon theſe monſters of opinions, let vs be afraid to fall into them,
let vs bewaile mans blindneſſe and boldnes, and let vs pray vnto God, that he
woulde gouerne vs with his light, ſo that wee wander not a wrong way from the
truth.

Verſe. 5.

Call to remembrance ô Lord thy tender mercies, and thy louing kindneſſe, which
hath beene euer of olde.

Now he teacheth plainly, with what confidence hee may come vnto GOD: although
I knowe my ſelfe to be vniuſt, and haue deſerued puniſhment, yet I flée for
ſuccour vnto thy mercy, and doo beleeue I am receiued, for the Mediators ſake
promiſed vnto the Fathers, and ſent at the time appointed.

Truely thou mighteſt iuſtly haue deſtroyed our firſt Pa­rents after theyr
fall, euen as thou deſtroyedſt Sodom, and the Townes neere the ſame: but thy
hart relented in thee, and thy pittifull mercie enflamed thee, that thou didſt
not ex­excute ye fury of thy diſpleaſure, becauſe thou art God. Which art not
delighted in our deſtruction, neither wilt thou the death of a ſinner, but
that he may be conuerted and liue. With the ſame mercy thou ſauedſt Noah in
the Deluge, and reuokedſt Abraham from errour and Idolatrie, broughteſt the
people out of Egipt, and finally haſt mercifully receiued Aaron and others
innumerable, which haue horribly fallen.

Séeing therefore, euen from the beginning, thou haſt ſet foorth thy free
promiſe touching remiſſion of ſinnes, to be gy­uen vs by thy mercy, and haſt
by very many examples wit­neſſed, that thou receiueſt them which embrace that
promiſe, I doo earneſtly beſéech thee, that of thy vnſpeakeable mercie, thou
wouldeſt alſo receiue me into thy fauour, for the promi­ſed Lord and Sauiour
his ſake.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=35)

Verſe. 6.

Oh remember not the ſinnes and offences of my youth, nor my tranſgreſſions:
but according to thy mercie, thinke thou vpon mee (ô Lorde) for thy goodneſſe.

Thys principall peticion in all the Pſalme, is to be dilli­gently conſidered
of, not onely ſo, that our carnall ſecuritie and hipocriſie (which maketh ſin
ſéeme little) myght be amen­ded, but alſo that the greatnes of Gods mercy
might be looked vpon.

The ſinne of his youth, he calleth all that weight of ſinne, which as children
borne we bring with vs, darknes of mind, a contrariety of will from God, and a
contumacie or diſobedi­ence of hart. Tranſgreſſions, hee vnderſtandeth to be
actuall ſinnes, which are partly voluntary, and partly not volunta­rie, alſo
ſinnes of ignoraunce and negligence: theſe ſo great miſdéedes dooth he craue
to be forgiuen him, and to be blotted out of all memory, by the immenſe and
vnſpeakeable goodnes and mercy of GOD.

But ſeeing the whole place as touching ſinne, is els where often repeated, I
will ſtay no longer in thys verſe, but I will bring the Reader to conſider the
ſum of thys doctrine.

Verſe. 7.

Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach ſinners in the
way.

Verſe. 8.

Them that be meeke ſhall he guide in iudgement: and ſuch as be gentle, them
ſhall he learne his way.

How excellent and ſwéet a vertue graciouſnes, or good­nes is, the ſayings of
Menander declare, Bonus vir, eſt com­mune bonum: A good man is a common
bliſſe. Alſo, Quam dulce temperamentum eſt copulatic bonitatis et prudentiae.

How ſweet a mixture may that be,

Where goodnes with wiſedom ioynd we ſee.

The example of thys moſt excellent vertue, is moſt nota­bly [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=35) ſeene in GOD, who
(as Chriſt ſayth) ſuffereth the ſun to ſhine both vpon the good and the euill,
and ſendeth rayne on the iuſt and vniuſt. Math. 5. verſe. 45. And not that
indeed onely, but alſo of his owne frée will offereth vs reconciliati­on, and
with a certaine aboundance of his goodnes, requireth vs to come into fauour
with him, and aſketh no ſatiſ-faction of vs for our offence, but would haue
his Sonne to pay that raunſome.

But leaſt any man thinke, that theſe things in reſpect of their greatneſſe,
are fayned or diſſembling, let him heare how S. Paule ſpeaketh. 2\. Cor. 5.
Now then are we Ambaſſadours for Chriſt, as though God did beſeech you by vs:
wee pray you in Chriſtes ſteade, that ye be reeonciled to God. verſe. 20. For
he made him to be ſinne for vs, which knewe no ſin, that we ſhould be made the
righteouſnes of God in him. verſe. 21. But ſo great is the force of Gods
gracious goodnes, that it can neyther be conceiued in mind, neyther may it be
vttered with mans ſpeech.

Neyther is he onely gracious, but alſo iuſt, that is equall according to one
rule which he hath ſette downe: for as he re­prehendeth and accuſeth all men,
without exception, by the voyce of the Lawe, ſo he receiueth all men without
partiality, according to the frée and vniuerſall promiſe of his Goſpell: Come
vnto me (ſayth he) all yee which labour and are loden, and I will refreſh you.
Math. 11.28. And although by the miniſtry of the Lawe and the Goſpell, hee
teacheth ſinners which are curable, and alſo by puniſhments, which are
ad­moniſhers and publiſhers of ſinne, yet in all theſe he is faith­full, and
ſuffereth vs not to be tempted aboue our ſtrength, but giueth an ende with
temptation, that wee may be able to beare the ſame.

So hee, not onely with Nathans ſpeech rebuked Dauid, but for a certaine ſeaſon
tooke his kingdome from him, and hauing chaſtened him in his iudgement,
reſtored him into his kingdom. For iudgement is oppoſed againſt furie, and
ſigni­fieth mitigation of paynes which we haue deſerued: as Iere­mie [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=36) in hys tenth
Chapter ſayth: Correct me O Lorde in thy iudgement, not in thy furie, leaſt
thou bring me vnto nothing. verſe. 24.

Verſe. 9.

All the pathes of the Lord are mercy and trueth, vnto ſuch as keepe his
couenaunt and his teſtimo­nies.

In thys moſt ſwéet little verſe, hee comprehendeth the ſumme or ſubſtance of
his promiſes, as if he ſayd: God is tru­lie mercifull and beneficiall towards
his Church, which em­braceth the word deliuered by him, and in faith of hys
worde calleth vppon him and worſhippeth him: ſo S. Paule as tou­ching the
gathering of the Church from out of the Iewes and Gentiles, ſayth in hys 15.
Chapter to the Romans. Nowe I ſay that Ieſus Chriſt was a Miniſter of the
Circumſcition, that is, (of the people circumciſed) for the truth of God, to
cōfirme the promiſes made vnto the Fathers. verſe 8. And let the Gen­tiles
prayſe God. verſe. 9. &c. And to omit other teſtimonies of the Mercy and Truth
of GOD, howe greatly dooth that Prayer of Ieremie delight mee, in the thirde
Chapter of hys Lamentations: It is the mercies of the Lord that wee are not
conſumed, becauſe his compaſſions fayle not. verſe. 22.

But to the end the phraſe both in thys place & els where often mentioned, may
be rightly vnderſtoode, I wyll heere make aunſwere vnto the obiection of the
Munckes: [God is gracious and mercifull vnto them that keepe his teſtimonies.]
No man keepeth the teſtimonies of God, becauſe no man ſa­tiſ-fieth the Law:
therefore no man is loued of God. I aun­ſwer, we muſt looke vpon the kinde or
maner of ye argument, vnto which the Maior apertayneth, whether it be the
voyce of the Lawe, or in truth the ſaying of the Goſpell, bidding vs to
embrace this doctrine with fayth and good conſcience: as the phraſe is ſuch in
all the 119. Pſalme euery where, I haue kept thy Law. Therefore the Maior is
not to be vnderſtoode as the Lawe ſpeaketh, of the perfit fulfilling, but it
is to bee [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=36)
vnderſtood as touching the profeſſion of the true doctrine, as the Goſpell
ſpeaketh, in hauing fayth and a good conſcience: therefore to keepe the
Teſtament of GOD, and his teſtimo­nies, is to embrace the doctrine deliuered
from God, wyth fayth and good conſcience, and to profeſſe and aduaunce the
ſame.

Concerning this profeſſion (ſuch as all the godly ones haue, and ſuch as is
both neceſſary and poſſible to be) doth the Ma­ior ſpeake: and the whole
ſentence containeth both moſt ſweet doctrine and conſolation. It teacheth that
they are the mem­bers of the Church, who doo embrace and loue the true
doc­trine, and not the enemies or deſpyſers of the doctrine: and he addeth a
proper promiſe vnto the Church, thus: All the waies of the Lord are mercy and
truth. If we make manifeſt the Maior, we muſt denie the Minor. No man keepeth
the te­ſtimonies of God: yea they all doo keepe them which embrace the true
doctrine with fayth and good conſcience: vnto all theſe is conſolation heere
ſette downe, to the ende they may know, that they indeede are the members of
the Church, and that God hath care ouer them.

Verſe. 10.

For thy Names ſake, ô Lorde, be mercifull vnto my ſinne, for it is great.

Hée repeateth a principal peticion notably amplified with three
circumſtaunces, whereof the firſt is, a frée and meere confeſſion of ſinne.
The ſeconde a conſolation in the forgiue­nes of ſinnes. And the thirde a
recitall of the cauſes impulſiue and finall.

Therefore, as to that which concerneth the confeſſion of ſinne, let that
ſpeech be alwaies in our ſight, which S. Iohn hath in hys firſt Epiſtle and
firſt Chapter. If we ſay that wee haue no ſinne, we deceiue our ſelues, and
there is no trueth in vs. But if we acknowledge our ſinnes, God is faythful
and iuſt to forgiue vs our ſinnes, and to clenſe vs from all
vnrighteouſ­neſſe. verſe. 8.9.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=37)For GOD
requireth an earneſt acknowledgement and confeſſion of ſinnes, and he will
haue the prayſe of righteouſ­neſſe and mercie attributed vnto him: of
righteouſnes, truelie in accuſing and puniſhing ſinne, but of mercy in
receiuing and ſauing ſuch as fall, which turne and are conuerted vnto him.
Which things, ſith ſo they be, let euery one acknowledge him ſelfe as a
wretched perſon, in this blindnes and ſecuritie, hor­ribly to neglect the
wrath of GOD, and by many meanes to ſtray away from his precepts, and to hurt
others with many ſcandales, and to procure puniſhment vnto themſelues and
o­thers, and that they can not vnderſtand, eyther the greatnes or multitude of
theyr ſinnes or ſtrayings, but let euery one confeſſe, that he hath deſerued
preſent & eternall puniſhment, and with vnfeyned ſorrowe let him cry: Againſt
thee onelie haue I ſinned, and doone this euill in thy ſight: that thou
mighteſt be iuſtified in thy ſaying, and cleere when thou art iudged. Pſalm.
51. verſe. 4. And let not feares onelie remaine in vs, but let a conſolation
of fayth come thereunto alſo, which beléeueth the wrath of GOD is pacified by
his ſonne, and that for his ſonnes ſake our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, and that
righteouſnes and life is reſtored vnto vs.

Let vs alſo aſcribe vnto God in aſking forgiuenes of our ſinnes, two cauſes,
the impulſiue and the finall. The impul­ſiue, is the vnmeaſurable and true
fatherly mercie, wherin he will not the death of a ſinner, but that hee be
conuerted and liue: for as the Father hath compaſſion ouer his Children, ſo
the Lord hath mercy of them that feare him. This cauſe dooth Eſay aſcribe vnto
God, in hys 64. Chapter, and 8. and 9. ver­ſes, ſaying thus: But thou ô Lorde,
thou art our Father. &c. Be not angry ô Lorde aboue meaſure, neither remember
ini­quitie for euer.

The finall cauſe is, that the excéeding greatneſſe of thy mercy may be
honoured, and that others which are in great feare and trembling, may returne
vnto thée, and worſhippe thée againe vnfeinedly.

You ſee then that euery worde héere, hath hys propper [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=37) efficacie, and
that in a very little verſe greateſt matters are included.

Verſe. 11.

What man is he that feareth the Lord, him ſhal he teache in the way that he
ſhall chuſe.

Verſe. 12.

His ſoule ſhall dwell at eaſe, and his ſeede ſhall inherite the Land.

Verſe. 13.

The ſecrete of the Lord is among them that feare him: and he will ſhew them
his couenaunt.

Godlines (ſaith S. Paule) is profitable vnto all things, ha­uing the promiſes
of this preſent life, and of the life to come. 1\. Tim. 4.8. And godlines
containeth the feare of God, fayth, and other vertues of the firſt Table: what
be then the fruites of godlineſſe? The firſt and moſt neceſſary of all, is the
doc­trine and gouernment in our priuate life and vocation. For mans wiſedom,
except it be gouerned by God, is vnhappy, according to that ſaying of Ieremie
in his tenth Chapter: I know ô Lorde, that the way of man is not in himſelfe,
neyther is it in man to walke and to direct his ſteppes. verſe. 23. The other
fruite is,  [...] bonorum, the additions of ſome good things, which are either
the inſtruments or ornaments of this life: touching this fruite Chriſt ſayth:
Seeke ye firſt the kingdome of God, and the righteouſnes thereof, & all other
things ſhall be miniſtred vnto you. Math 6, verſe 33. The 3. fruite is, the
proſperitie of our Children, as it is ſaide in an other Pſalme: The generation
of the iuſt, ſhall be bleſſed. And no doubt of it, that ſentence which
Theocritus reciteth, was re­ceiued from our firſt Fathers.

Piorum liberi faeliciores ſunt, impiorum infaeliciores. viz.

Godly mens children more happy be,

Then are the children of the vngodlie.

The fourth effect, is the preſence and helpe of God in ca­lamities: for he
calleth that a ſecrete, becauſe reaſon (without the worde verily beleeueth God
careth not for afflicted per­ſons. But the godly ones doo know, and that for
moſt aſſured [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=38) they hold by all
meanes, that God is preſent in calamities, or (as the Prophet ſayth,) God
dwelleth with the contrite and humble ſpirit, that he may quicken the hart of
the contrite, and ſette vp the Spirit of the humble.

Verſe. 14.

Myne eyes are euer looking vnto the Lorde: for he ſhall plucke my feete out of
the nette.

The prayer of King Iehoſaphat is knowne, which agrée­eth with thys verſe, When
we know not what is to be doone, this onely is left vs, to lift vp our eyes
vnto thee. 2\. Chro. 20.12. For therfore is the Church ſpoyled and bereft of
mans helps, that ſhe may call vpon God, and acknowledge herſelfe to be
gouerned by the helpe of God onely: yea thereby to be preſer­ued and defended
in ſo great varietie of dangers, which hang ouer her nights, and daies.

And that I may not neede to ſay any thing of the other ages of the Church,
this is doubtleſſe moſt manifeſt, the Church waxing olde, ſhall haue no other
ſuccouring place or refuge, but onely vnto the boſome of God, as he ſaith in
the 46. Chapter of Eſay: You ſhall be borne in my boſome, I wil carry you euen
vnto the extreame olde age of your hoarie hayres. verſe. 4.

Verſe. 15.

Turne thee vnto me, and haue mercy vpon me, for I am poore, and in miſerie.

The Church is alwaies as a widow, and an Orphane in thys worlde, and hath no
other Patron or defender but God, who is the Iudge of widowes and Father of
Orphanes. He­therto apertaineth that parable mentioned by Chriſt, in the 18.
of S. Luke of the widow ſo often calling vpon the Iudge, which at length,
through her importunitie vrging him, dyd wring out of him both the knowledge
and iudgement of her cauſe.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=38)

Verſe. 16.

The ſorrowes of my hart are enlarged: ô bring thou me out of my troubles.

Verſe. 17.

Looke vpon mine aduerſitie & miſery: and for­giue me all my ſinne.

In the tenth Pſalme, all this whole meaning or purpoſe of the Prophet is ſette
downe, whereunto this Hypotheſis or grounde béeing applyed, is made more
notable and ſweeter. That thou maiſt take the matter into thine hande, the
poore committeth himſelfe vnto thee, for thou art the helper of the
friendleſſe. Pſalm. 10. verſe 16. As if he had ſaid: the greateſt number of
Gouernours and people, either neglecteth, or for­ſaketh, or with deadly
enmitie oppugneth the Church, vnfay­nedly enduring the ſorrowes of a woman in
childbirth. But although few there be which ſorrow for Ioſephes harme, and are
mooued with mercifull cares towards the Church, yet al­though ſhée be full of
vlcers & ſores, that ſhee cannot miniſter phiſicke vnto others: ſo they by
reaſon of theyr ſlender abili­tie, can neyther helpe nor ſaue the Church.

Seeing therefore no ſauegarde remaineth vnto ye Church, but this one, which
ſhee craueth and looketh for of thee, it is thy power, and propperly
appertaining to thy diuine and fa­therly Name, not to ſee the Church deſtitute
of neceſſary ſaue­gard and helpe: but to deliuer and bring her frō
deſtruction, and to adorne her with gifts of thys preſent life, and of the
life eternall.

And indeede not in vaine or vnaduiſedly, but with great regard dooth Dauid
heere intertexe, amongſt other his Pray­ers, the peticion of his ſinnes to be
forgiuen him: for other be­nefits cannot be obtained, except we firſt receiue
forgiuenes of ſinnes and reconciliation, then which benefite, none can be
thought greater. For to how little purpoſe ſhoulde other be­nefits profit vs,
without the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes? For as Sophocles ſayth:

Hoſtium dona non ſunt dona, & non ſunt vtilia. viz.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=39)The gyfts
of our enemies, no gifts at all be,

Nor any thing profit our ſtate or degree.

Let therefore the praying for thys ſpeciall and greateſt be­nefite, be
included amongſt other peticions, and let that ſay­ing of the Pſalme be much
and often repeated of vs. And for­giue me all my ſinnes.

Verſe. 18.

Conſider mine enemies how many they are: and they beare a tyrannous hate
againſt me.

Verſe. 19.

O keepe my ſoule and deliuer mee: let me not be confounded, for, I haue put my
truſt in thee.

The Church is aſſaulted by enemies innumerable, as the Rock in ye Sea is
alwaies beaten vpon with ruſhing waues, for it is both rent in peeces with
diſcordes or diſagreements in opinions, and féeleth the crueltie of Tyrants.
But we are ad­moniſhed by this ſaying: [They hated me with an vniuſt ha­tred,]
that we doo ſuffer (as S. Peter ſayth) not as murthe­rers, or theeues, or
euill dooers 1\. Pet, 4.15. But as Chriſtians. verſe, 16. that is, for the
confeſſion of the Goſpell.

Let not filthineſſe of life, ſpoyles, too much vniuſt better portions
allotted, tyrannicall cruelties, and other vices, pro­cure vs iuſt hatreds.
Moreouer, let good men (which are far from theſe vices) know, that ingratitude
is a common diſeaſe almoſt of all mankinde, and let them patiently beare, that
for theyr ſpeciall good will and great benefits, they haue euil wil, hatred,
reproches, and other euils rendered vnto them: like as all Hiſtories are full
of the examples of ingratitude.

Verſe. 20.

Let righteouſnes and perfect dealing waite vpon me, becauſe I haue truſted in
thee.

Thys Prayer agreeth with that ſaying of Eſay, in his 8. Chapter, Binde vp the
teſtimonie, ſeale vp the Lawe among my Diſciples. verſe 16. That is, I ſée
there will followe moſt ſorrowfull darknes, amongſt the people of GOD, and
that [[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=39) moſt
men will caſt away from them, the doctrine of the Meſ­ſias, of fayth, and true
inuocation, and of true worſhippings of GOD, and will embrace the Ethnicks
opinions, as con­cerning a worldly gouernment of the Meſſias, and of heaping
vp ſacrifices: but O God, I beſéech thee kéepe the word (that thou haſt
deliuered vnto the Prophets) in the mindes of thē, which heare, learne, and
embrace thy doctrine propheticall: and euen keepe thys doctrine ſealed, leaſt
they eyther looſe the word it ſelfe, or the naturall meaning therof: ſo Dauid
pray­eth in thys place, Let righteouſneſſe and perfect dealing &c. That is,
preſerue the Goſpell, and true vnderſtanding there­of, in the mindes of them
that call vpon thee, and ſuffer vs not to be enſnared with errours, but
gouerne vs with thy holie Spirit, that in all our enterpriſes and actions, we
may godlie and inuiolately follow the rule of thy word. For they that ſtep a
nayle breadth from this rule, and follow the opinions of rea­ſon, are toſſed
with great errour, and wrapped in the igno­raunce of the greateſt matters.

Verſe. 21.

Deliuer Iſraell (ô God) out of all his troubles.

God will haue vs in prayer, to be mooued with godly care for the welfare of
others, & of the whole Church as it is writ­ten. Pray for the peace of
Ieruſalem Pſalm. 122. verſe. 6.

Let vs therefore when wee pray for our owne matters, ioyne thereunto our
prayers for the preſeruation of the whole Church: and becauſe (as I haue often
ſaid) the prayers con­ceiued by the holy Ghoſt, haue effect of Gods promiſes,
no doubt of it there remaineth life euerlaſting, wherein the Church béeing
deliuered from all euils, ſhall ſo peaceably reſt in God.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=40)

## 5\. ❧ A PSALME OF DAVID. Iudica me Domine.

The Argument.

TO him that conſidereth the daungers and cala­mities of the Church, the
meaning of this Pſalme is not obſcure, which daungers ſhe en­dureth for the
profeſſion and publiſhing of the true doctrine; for although the induſtry of
ſetting forth the heauenly doctrine be neceſſary, ſeeing it is moſt ſeuerely
enioyned vs by God, yet there doe meete wyth, and accompanie that induſtry,
contempts, hatred, pouerty, ba­niſhments, and manifolde miſeries. The enemies
of the Goſ­pell moſt cruelly accuſe vs, and lay in our diſh, the crimes moſt
of all to be abhorred, as of moouing ſedition and hereſies in the Church, and
call vs both hereticks and ſciſmatiques. Vn­to theſe poyſonful ſlaunders, they
adioyne a Nero-like cruelty, and put many to death.

But to the end the feare of their raylings and puniſhments may nothing diſmay
our mindes, we muſt with feruent pray­ers beſeech of God, that he would be the
Patrone & Iudge of our cauſe, and that he would maintaine and defende the
ſame, againſt the rage of that murthering Congregation of Caines deuotion.
Theſe prayers and theſe ſighes ſhal not be in vaine, but ſhall aſſuredly
obtaine preſeruation of the bodie of the Church, though in ſome members of
her, ſhe be perſecuted. For, ſo ſaith Chriſt in the 18. of Luke, Now ſhal not
God auenge his elect, which cry day and right vnto him: yea, though he ſuffer
long for them, I tell you he will auenge them quickly▪ verſes, 7.8.

Therefore thys Pſalme ſhall be the more excellent, and [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=40) ſweeter, to thoſe
that continually doe pray for the Church, and earneſtly conſider of the
greatnes of the dangers, wherein the Church is toſſed nights and dayes.

### 5.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

Be thou my Iudge ô Lord, for I haue walked inno­cently: my truſt hath beene
alſo in the Lorde, there­fore ſhall I not fall.

Verſe. 2.

Examine me ô Lorde, and prooue me, try out my reynes and mine hart.

Verſe. 3.

For thy louing kindneſſe is euer before mine eyes, and I will walke in thy
truth.

VNto thy iudgement (ſaith hee) doo I appeale, who art the ſearcher of the
heart and reynes: thou knoweſt, that I am neyther mooued with curioſitie, or
any lewde luſt, nor with any blind obſtinacie, to embrace and profeſſe, the
Euan­gelicall doctrine of true inuocation, of the true acknowledge­ment of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and which concerneth all the neceſſary parts of a Chriſtian
life: and that I deeme it not as a thing to be reiected or caſt away, but that
I therein fauour and obey, thy moſt ſeuere and immutable commaundements, which
enioyne men rightly to call vpon God, according to his Goſpell, and forbid
that Idols ſhould be worſhipped.

Wherefore, ſéeing I haue not raſhly, but for thy glorie and my ſoules health
ſake, embraced ye doctrine of the Goſpel, and that I endeuour by all meanes to
aduaunce the ſame: of thee I craue moſt feruently, that thou wouldeſt take
vppon thee, the patronage both of thy cauſe, and of him which em­braceth
[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=41) the
doctrine of thy Church, and deliuer thoſe that are vniuſtly oppreſſed. I will
not with perſpicuous words, make any longer declaration of theſe verſes, but I
beſeech the Son of GOD, that he would mercifully protect the true doctrine and
the ſuccouring places of the Goſpell, and that he woulde not ſuffer the word
of truth to be extinguiſhed, which hee hath made manifeſt vnto mankinde, as it
was deliuered from the boſome of his eternall Father.

Verſe. 4.

I haue not dwelt with vaine perſons, neyther will I haue fellowſhip with the
deceitfull.

Verſe. 5.

I haue hated the Congregation of the wicked, and will not ſitte among the
vngodly.

Verſe. 6.

I will waſh mine hands in innocencie ô Lord, and ſo will I goe to thine Altar.

Both theſe vertues are neceſſary, a confeſſion of the true doctrine, and a
ſeperating of our ſelues from the enemies of the Goſpell. For as the loue of
truth, cannot be without a bitter hatred of Sophiſtry or diſſimulation: ſo,
needfull it is, that the keepers of the heauenly doctrine, doo withall theyr
hart abhorre and abſtaine, from Caines murthering Congre­gation: and this
ſeperation of the true Church from the falſe, is moſt lightſomly apparant.
Firſt in refuting opinions and worſhippings ſtriuing with the word of GOD:
then after­wards, in ſhunning falſe and diſſembling partakings in Reli­gion:
laſt of all, in auoyding the colourable dealings, which are wrought or brought
to paſſe, eyther for lucre or eaſe and reſt ſake. Touching theſe three manner
of waies, I wyll ſpeake bréefely, leaſt any man dreame that he may be a
Neu­ter, or of no Religion, and ſitte vpon both ſtooles at once.

Firſt it appeareth ſufficiently, that the true doctrine, is not onely to be
proponed, but that falſe doctrines are alſo to be refuted: for although
politique men doo hate nothing more, then to contende for Religions, yet
needfull it is, that mani­feſt Idolatries and errours, ſhould be reprehended,
yea if the [[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=41)
world cruſhed together fall vtterly down. Touching this pur­poſe, a moſt
manifeſt confirmation may be taken out of the commaundement of Chriſt. Beware
of falſe Prophets. Math. 7. verſes, 15.16.24. For ſéeing men neither haue any
deſire for, or flee from that they knowe not, it is needefull that the
ſleights and ſnares of deceitfull perſons, ſhould be made ma­nifeſt vnto the
worlde, and that the vizors ſhoulde be plucked off from their falſe
perſwaſions. It is not therfore enough (as many thinke) to preach the true
doctrine, and yet leaſt Prin­ces ſhould be diſpleaſed thereat, either to be
altogether ſilent in refuting contrary doctrines, or to molifie or excuſe anie
errours.

Next of all, let vs wiſely and feruently beware, leaſt with diſſembling
felowſhips the true doctrine be obſcured, becauſe, as S. Paule ſaith, A little
ſowre leuen marres the whole lump of dowe. Gala, 5. verſe 9. And that ſpeech
alſo of Marcus Are­thuſius is true, which is recited by Theodoretus. lib. 3.
cap. 7. Ad impietatem, obulum conferre vnum, perinde valet, ac ſi quis
conferat omnia: Who to impietie beſtoweth but one halfe pe­nie, in effect as
much he doth, as hee that all thereon beſtow­eth. Wherefore as God himſelfe is
ſtrong, and a ielous God, which cannot abide any ſocietie betwéene Chriſt and
Belial, which doubtleſſe is impoſſible: ſo let vs flée from and beware of all
ſuccours of felowſhips or partakings: ſéeing that ſay­ing of Sophocles is moſt
true.

Hoſtium dona, non ſunt dona, et non ſunt vtilia.

The gyfts of our enemies no gyfts at all be,

Nor ought doe auaile our ſtate or degree.

For when the enemy ſpeaketh flatteringly, and with a comicall countenaunce
works his tragedy, we muſt not truſt him at any hande: Becauſe there are
ſeauen abhominations lurking ſecretly in his hart, as Salomon ſayth in his
Prouerbs. chap. 26. verſe. 25. I would ſay more to this purpoſe, had not our
Country Germanie to her great loſſe, learned howe much credite is to be giuen
and attributed vnto ſophiſticall fellow­ſhips.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=42)Laſt of
all, we muſt not colour vp the matter with our e­nemies, eyther for peace or
profit ſake: as ſome now adaies, hauing a right perceiuerance in the true
doctrine, by ſiniſter ſleights practiſe to win the aduerſaries good wils vnto
them. For the aduerſaries are not appeaſed nor healed with ſuch fayre
ſpéeches, but are euen much the more ſtirred vppe, and conceiue good hope the
time will come, that theſe guileful flat­terers, leauing ye true Church at
randon, wil againe take thē ­ſelues vnto theyr Tents of miſchiefes. But let
not vs ſitte with vaine perſons, neither keepe company with the craftie or
fraudulent dealers, which comes to paſſe, eyther by neg­lecting to refute the
enemies errours, or vſing a diſſembling fellowſhip in opinions, or with
vngodly ſuggeſtion or collu­ding with the aduerſaries: but let vs beare a moſt
bitter ha­tred againſt the murthering Congregation of Caines deuoti­on, leaſt
we be polluted with the ſocietie of theyr madde wor­ſhipping and crueltie: but
let vs waſh our hands in innocen­cie, that we may walke about the Altar of the
Lord.

Verſe. 7.

That I may ſhew the voice of thankſgiuing: and tell of all thy wondrous works.

Hée reciteth a finall cauſe, whereunto is to be referred, the ioyning together
with the true Church: therefore (ſaith hee) doo I deſire to be a member and
Cittizen, of the moſt prayſe woorthy Country the Church, that I may performe
the wor­ſhippings which GOD moſt ſeuerely requireth, as in calling vpon him,
in thankſgiuing, teaching and confeſſing.

For in the Church onely are exerciſed the true calling vp­pon God,
thankſgiuing, and other workes of the firſt Table: many other vertues, as
temperance, gentlenes, &c. are alſo found, euen in them which know not God, as
in Pomponius of Athens, and other ſuch like. But true prayer, is only pro­per
to the Church, and in truth is the ſpeciall or cheefe wall of the Church,Prou.
18. as Salomon ſaith: The Name of the Lorde is a ſtrong Tower. That is, true
calling vpon God. But let vs [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=42) diſcerne the
degrées: for eyther we craue ſome thing of God, or we giue thanks for benefits
receiued: that is, we witneſſe that God vnfeinedly helpeth vs, and ſo we giue
him thanks, and by the celebracion of this benefit, we ſtirre vp our ſelues
and others vnto the feare of GOD, fayth in him, and true calling vpon him. But
of theſe vertues proper to the Church, I haue elſewhere ſpoken oftentimes.

Verſe. 8.

Lord, I haue loued the habitation of thine houſe, and the place where thine
honour dwelleth.

The whole Pſalme is a Sermon, which bids vs flee from the enemies of the true
doctrine and the true Church, and to embrace the true doctrine, to loue,
helpe, and aduaunce the true Church. To thys effect alſo apertaineth this
little verſe. [I haue loued thy Church,] which is, the Church and houſe
wherein GOD dwelleth, and which with true prayſes wor­ſhippeth God. To the
cheriſhing, helping and maintayning of thys Church, I employ my ſtudies,
counſels and labours. For God will haue vs to loue his Church, which teacheth
a­right, and will haue vs manifeſt our zeale thereunto, and hée will haue the
Miniſterie of the Goſpell to be reuerenced and helped: like as in the 122.
Pſalme he commaundeth, ſaying: Pray for the peace of Ieruſalem. verſe. 6. And
ſtraight is added his promiſe of reward. They ſhal proſper that loue thee.
verſe Idem.

Like as therefore in the honey Hiues, euery Bée beſtow­eth his labour for the
common profit of all: ſo, let euerie one of vs, employ all our endeuours and
duties, for the ſafetie and tranquilitie of thoſe ſocieties which teach the
Goſpell aright, and let vs helpe and further godly ſtudies, ſo as the pure
doc­trine touching God, and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, may bee ad­uaunced and
preferred euen vnto our poſterity.

Verſe 9.

O ſhutte not vp my ſoule with the ſinners, nor my life with the blood-
thirſtie.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=43)Verſe. 10.

In whoſe hands is wickedneſſe: and theyr right hand is full of gyfts.

Hée not onely craueth thys, that hee may be defended a­gainſt the crueltie of
enemies, but another thing alſo, name­lie, that he might not be defiled or
ſtained with the ſocietie of Idolaters and Manquellers, wherewith the enemies
of the Goſpell doo defile themſelues, and he prayeth alſo, that he may not be
enſnared in their puniſhments. For many there bee, which are not ignoraunt of
the true doctrine, but yet for feare they diſſemble theyr opinion, and with
theyr diſſimulation, doo confirme the rage of Tyrants.

Let ſuch know, there muſt needes be a manifeſt confeſſi­on, both for the glory
of God, and for to deliuer others, which for confeſſion of their fayth, are
violently carried to torments. But heere muſt the Reader be admoniſhed of the
propper names of the enemies of the Goſpel: to the end he may learne to ſhunne
them: before in thys Pſalme hee paynts them out with foure proper tearmes,
calling them vaine, crafty, malig­nant, and vngodly perſons. Heere he
preciſely termeth them ſinners, blood-thirſty, practiſers of euill counſels,
and corrupt Iudges, or money men.

I meane not to ſtay long vpon theſe, leaſt any man ſhould thinke me to take
pleaſure in reproching them: but I am moo­ued to exhort the godly ones, that
they woulde conſider what manner of monſters the enemies of the Goſpell are,
whom the holy Ghoſt heere affirmeth to be compact and framed of ſo many and ſo
great vices and miſchiefes.

Verſe. 11.

But as for me, I will walke innocently: O Lorde deliuer me, and be mercifull
vnto me.

Hée repeateth his prayer for defence amplified vnto the Antitheſis, or
contrarietie: ſeeing with all my hart I doe eſ­chewe and tremble, to followe
the vngodlineſſe and miſ­chiefes [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=43) of the enemies of
the Goſpell: and with a good con­ſcience profeſſe the true doctrine, of thée
doo I craue, and from thée doo I looke for defence. For I well know, that I am
not enuironed or fortefied with any power againſt the cruelty of the Enemies,
but am openly layd foorth to all theyr weapons, except it pleaſe thee to be my
protector and defender.

Verſe. 12.

My foote ſtandeth aright: I will praiſe the Lord in the Congregations.

In the very laſt verſe there is added a finall cauſe, why he craueth to be
preſerued: namely, that He might praiſe the Lord in the Congregations. This
cauſe muſt wee dilligentlie conſider: for God will haue the Miniſtery of the
Goſpell to be publique, hée will not haue it in corners, as to haue the
prea­ching of the Goſpell ſhut vppe, ſo to be kept onely as the cere­monies of
the Goddeſſe Ceres were: but he will haue ye ſame to be heard of all mankinde,
hee will haue himſelfe to be ac­knowledged and called vpon.

Therefore will he haue honeſt and publique méetings to be, and amongſt theſe
will he haue the voice of the Goſpell to ſounde: hée wil haue himſelfe there
to be worſhipped and cal­led vpon. And he will haue thoſe ſame méetings or
Congrega­tions, to be witneſſes of the ſeperating of the Church of GOD, from
the Sects of other Nations, factions, and opinions.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=44)

## 6\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauids thankſgiuing after deliueraunce. Dominus
illuminatio mea. &c.

The Argument.

ALthough there be a great varietie of motions in thys Pſalme perceiued, yet
the principall Prayer is, that the Prophet Dauid might be, and remaine, a
member of the true Church, and that hee might neuer be excluded from the
number of the children of GOD. Thys benefit hee craueth of God, neyther in
vaine, nor raſhly, but hath great & iuſt cauſes of moſt feruent prayer. For it
is moſt ſure, that (without the Church, which God in the beginning both called
and created, by promiſe ſette foorth touching his Sonne,) there is no
ſaluation.

For like as without the Arke of Noah in the Deluge, there were none ſaued vpon
the earth: ſo without this Congregati­on, which embraceth the Goſpell, there
are no heyres of eter­nall fellowſhip with God, as the heauenly ſentences doe
often affirme, and as S. Paule ſaith: Whom he hath choſen, thoſe hee hath
called. Rom. 8. verſe 30. Seeing therfore it is the cheefe be­nefite of man,
to be a fellow of thys company, which ſhal haue life and ioy euerlaſting, and
ſhall enioy the felowſhip of God, it is the part of a godly minde, and of one
that thinketh of hys ſaluation, to ſeeke which is the true Church, that hee
may ioyne himſelfe thereunto in minde, will, and confeſſion, that he may be
part of thys Congregation and flocke of Chriſt, and that he may vtterly
eſchewe the enemies of the true doctrine, and of the true Church, like as in
the former 26. Pſalme is ſaid: I haue hated the Congregation of the wicked.
verſe 5. But [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=44) the true Church
is diſcerned frō other ſects by the preaching of the true doctrine, and by
the lawful vſe of the Sacraments: and what the voice or preaching of the true
doctrine is, the writings Proheticall and Apoſtolicall doe ſhew, wherin there
is no doubtfull doctrine as touching the foundation: that is, touching the
Articles of our fayth, touching the eſſence and will of God, touching the
Redeemer, the Law, the promiſes, vſe of the Sacraments, and the Miniſterie.
But which, what manner a one, and where the Church is, in another place els
where, more plentifully is explaned.

### 6.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

The Lord is my light, and my ſaluation, whom then ſhall I feare? The Lord is
the ſtrength of my life, of whom then ſhall I be afraid?

Verſe. 2.

When the wicked (euen mine enemies & my foes) came vpon me, they ſtumbled and
fell.

Verſe. 3.

Though an hoaſte of men were laide againſt mee, yet ſhall not mine hart be
afraid: and though there roſe vp warre againſt me, yet will I put my truſt in
him.

EVen as the Painter Tymanthes, could not de­ſcribe Agamemnons countenaunce,
beholding the ſacrifice of his Daughter Iphigenia: ſo no phraſe of ſpéech can
diſplay the feruencies of fayth, vanquiſhing feares, & tremblings: but in ſome
ſort, let vs conſider the conflict and victorie of Fayth. The Lord (ſaith he)
is my light, that is, my comforter, for as [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=45) Michaeas ſayth,
When I ſitte in the darknes, the Lorde is my light. Chap. 7. verſe. 8. Then,
heere ſaith Dauid further, my ſaluation, and the ſtrength of my life. That is,
I am enuiro­ned with thy neceſſary ſtrength and ſaluation, I doo not feare any
rage or power of mine enemies: for as S. Paule ſayth: If God be on our ſide,
who can be againſt vs? Rome. 8.31.

Theſe victories or conqueſts are vnderſtoode of the godlie ones, which are
acquainted with exerciſes of fayth: for al­though our harts doo naturally
tremble, ſo oft as dangers fall vppon vs: yet notwithſtanding, faith ſtriueth
[...] the vtmoſt out of feares, and conquereth the deuill and the world. O
bleſ­ſed are they vnto whom this victory is giuen by our Lord Ie­ſus Chriſt. O
wretched are they vppon whom the deuill ſhall tryumph. Let vs therefore craue
of God, a ſimple and vnfey­ned fayth, which is the vanquiſher of the deuill &
the world.

Verſe. 4.

One thing haue I deſired of the Lord, which I wil require, euen that I may
dwell in the houſe of the Lorde all the daies of my life: to beholde the faire
beautie of the Lord, and to viſite his holy Temple.

This is a principall propoſition of this Pſalme, as I haue ſaid in the
Argument: for he maketh a notable difference be­tweene the godly ones, and the
vngodly ones. The vngodlie ones deſire nothing more gréedily then riches and
wealth, as Midas in Ouid ſaith:

Effice quicquid corpore contigero fuluum vertatur in aurum.

Graunt that what with body touch I ſhall:

May into glittering gold be turned all.

But Dauid and all the godly ones, with moſt feruent pray­er, and with all
theyr whole hart, doo craue of God, the ſociety as well of the calamities, as
of the benefits which the Church hath: and doo more deſire, and earneſtly
wiſh, rather to bee doore keepers in the houſe of the Lorde, then to dwell in
the Courts of the vngodly ones, where vaine ambition beareth ſway, and vaine
glory full fraight with diſſimulation.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=45)So touching
Moſes, the Apoſtle in his Epiſtle to the He­brues, Chap. 11. ſayth: By fayth
Moſes when he was come to age, refuſed to be called the Sonne of Pharaos
Daughter. ver. 24. For hee preferred the exerciſe of calamities amongſt the
people of God, farre beyond the brittle and fraile ſhadowes of pleaſures:
iudging the reproch for Chriſtes ſake, to be grea­ter wealth then the
treaſures of Egipt, therewith beholding the recompence or reward of theſe
miſeries in the worlde to come.

Let vs knowe, that theſe examples of great perſons, are ſette forth for vs to
follow. Although therfore we are in truth, a néedy and poore Congregation, yet
with this firme and per­petuall conſolation, let vs molifie theſe our
miſeries, That we doe dwell in the houſe of the Lord, and are as Paule in the
ſecond Chapter to the Epheſians ſaith: Of the houſholde of God, and Cittizens
with the Saints. verſe. 19.

To mée truely nothing ſéemeth may be more gloriouſlie ſaid or thought, as
touching the members of the true Church, then this ſaying of Paule, agréeing
with the ſaying of thys Pſalme. viz. One thing haue I required. &c.
Furthermore, he calleth The will of the Lord, true calling vpon God, and firme
conſolation of our mindes, & rule of our life, all which things, are to be
accounted of all men, amongſt the ſpeciall good gifts. And let vs not be
mooued with the iudgements of Epicures, which ſette downe other limits of the
cheefe good gyfts, and other bounds of things to be by vs required: but let vs
know that mankinde was thereto created, that therein the know­ledge of God
might appeare, and that it might declare true te­ſtimonies of God, and enioy
his fellowſhip in the life euerla­ſting. Therfore a thouſand cauſes there be,
why with ſuch fer­uencie of minde, the Prophet deſireth the ſocietie and moſt
firme coniunction with the true Church.

Verſe. 5.

For in the time of trouble, hee ſhall hide me in hys tabernacle: yea in the
ſecrete place of his dwelling ſhal he hide me, & ſet me vp vpon a rock of
ſtone.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=46)The
Hiſtories of all ages doo ſhewe, that the vniuerſall Church, and all the godly
ones, are exerciſed in greateſt dan­gers: neyther can the truth of the
doctrine be retained, with­out great contention: the moſt ſweete figure heere,
then pro­miſeth defence vnto the Church, viz. He ſhall hide mee in hys
Tabernacle. For as Iehoſhebeah, the wife of Iehoiada the Prieſt,2\. Chro. 22
11.12. (when wicked Athalia raged, in putting to death all the Kings ſeede of
the houſe of Iuda,) kept and preſerued the young King Ioas, and ſixe yeeres
hid him ſafely in the houſe of God: ſo the Lord knoweth how to deliuer his
owne out of temptation, and to defende them, euen as it were poore
ſup­plicants flying to ſome place of refuge.

Vnto thys moſt ſwéete promiſe, let vs annexe examples of Gods wonderfull
deliuerances: let vs confeſſe (ſo the mat­ter is) that we all in the horrible
tempeſts & ſtormes of Ger­manie, are helped and defended by GOD himſelfe: for
theſe great benefits, let vs giue thanks vnto God, the eternall Fa­ther of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and let vs hartily beſéech him, for his ſonnes ſake, Ieſus
Chriſt our Lorde, (for vs crucified and rayſed from death to life,) that he
henceforth and for euer would defende vs in his Tabernacle, as it were
ſecretly hyd­den for our refuge: for there is no ſtronger ſafegarde or
de­fence in all kind of dangers, then is the Tabernacle of God, or (as Eſay
ſaith) the boſome of God.

Verſe. 6.

And now ſhall he lift vp my head aboue all mine enemies rounde about me.

Verſe. 7.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation, with great gladneſſe: I
will ſing and ſpeake prayſes to the Lord.

Well doe the Lawyers ſay, That they which haue recei­ued a benefit, are
naturally bounde, (according to the manner of theyr abilitie) to render due
recompence. And what is it I pray you, that wee are able to render vnto God,
beſides our ſacrifices of thankſgiuing. Let vs therefore rightly thinke [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=46) with Dauid, that
any danger falling vpon vs, is not by chance daſhed aſide, or driuen away: but
that wee are helped & pre­ſerued euen by God himſelfe, and that he heareth our
prayers. Let our minde honour God aright, that hee hath not a vaine name, and
that hee dooth not neglect men, but that hee vnfai­nedly heareth them that
calleth vpon him in his Church, and that he vndoubtedly beholdeth and helpeth
his Church, and keepeth his promiſes with his ſeruaunts.

Theſe alſo let vs inculcate and beate into our memories, and let vs
commemorate the ſame vnto others, let vs publiſh the ſame abroade when we are
helped and deliuered: that e­uen others alſo may be ſtirred vp to the due
acknowledgment of GOD.

Verſe. 8.

Harken vnto my voice ô Lorde, when I cry vnto thee, haue mercy vpon me, and
heare me.

Verſe. 9.

My hart hath talked of thee, ſeeke ye my face, thy face Lord will I ſeeke.

Verſe. 10.

O, hide not thou thy face from me, nor caſt thou thy ſeruant away in
diſpleaſure.

In the fourth verſe, he required to be cooptate or choſen into the ſocietie of
the true Church, then which benefite, none was more wiſhfull: now becauſe it
is no leſſe vertue to kéepe that is gotte, then to gette that we can, he
prayeth feruently, and craueth of God, that he may be able euermore to remaine
A Cittizen with the Saints, and one of the houſholde of God. For he ſaw the
example of Saule, who when hee was the firſt King ouer the people of God, and
vndoubtedly at the firſt had the Spirit of God in him: afterwards, by reaſon
of his con­tempt in greeuous offences, hee was not onely forſaken of God, but
alſo was caſt foorth into eternall deſtruction.

While he lookes vpon this example, he oftentimes ſendes foorth both prayers
and ſighes: as if he ſaid, Lord make me a veſſell of mercie, and caſt me not
away amongſt the veſſels of wrath. Caſt me not away from thy face, and take
not thy holy [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=47) Spirit from me.
Pſalm 51. verſe 11. Séeing then ſo great a per­ſonage as King Dauid, with
often ſpéeches vſed theſe prayers, [forſake mee not, nor caſt me away,] it is
not our parts to doubt, but that God is continually to be prayed vnto, that
hée would confirme that which hee hath wrought in vs: and ſee­ing he hath made
vs to haue a will, that he will enable vs al­ſo to performe the ſame, ſo as we
may render ſome acceptable ſeruice vnto him.

Heere alſo let the godly Reader conſider, in what manner Dauid while he was
praying, lifted vp and ſupported himſelfe with remembraunce of precepts and
promiſes: My hart ſaid vnto thee, ſeeke ye my face: that is, thou commaundeſt
in thy vnſpeakeable goodnes and mercy, that we ſhould craue good things of
thee, and thou addeſt moſt large promiſes to ſtir vs vp vnto true prayer.
Although therefore great is the imbeci­litie, and great is alſo the amaſednes
of mans minde, flying from God, yet notwithſtanding béeing ſtirred vp and
prouo­ked by ſo many precepts & promiſes, let vs correct our doubt­ing, and
let vs begin to come vnto God, hauing Chriſt for our guide: and let vs not
thinke that Gods promiſes are vaine ſoundes, or pronounced ſpeeches as
Epicures doo imagine.

For God hath not in vaine manifeſted himſelfe by ſo ex­cellent teſtimonies,
not in vaine hath he declared his will: he will haue our darknes and
doubtfulneſſe to be by his word a­mended: for he is a true God, and kéepeth
his promiſes, as in the 25. Pſalme it is ſaid: All the waies of the Lord are
mercie and truth. &c. verſe 9.

Verſe. 11.

When my Father and my Mother forſake me, the Lord taketh me vp.

This is an amplification borrowed from the vnfaithful­neſſe of friendes,
whereof Plato ſpeaketh, ſaying: A friende, & yet an vnconſtant creature by
nature. And Sophocles ſaith,

Nullum atrocius vulnus eſt, quam defectio amici. viz.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=47)No wound
more greeuous, nor more great,

Then when a friend dooth friendſhip breake.

Againſt this great ſorrowe, which the forſaking of moſt néere allied friendes
procureth, let vs oppoſe the conſolation, wherewith Dauid ſupporteth himſelfe,
ſaying: My father & my Mother haue forſaken me, but the Lorde hath taken mee
vp. Let vs know, that obedience and moderation of the mind in ſuffering ſuch
calamities, dooth pleaſe God: and that in the meane time, the Sonne of God
himſelfe, hath care ouer vs, and that he is our faithfull and firme Friende,
whoſe beneuo­lence or great good will, let vs ſtudie by all meanes
continual­lie to retaine and keepe. For he both will and can help, when we are
not only forſaken of friends, but alſo of all Creatures. As in the 72. Pſalme
it is ſaid: He deliuered the poore which had no helper. And in the tenth
Pſalme: Vnto thee is the poore man left, thou art the helper of the
friendleſſe: that is, of them who béeing forſaken of ſeconde meanes, doo call
vpon thee.

Verſe. 12.

Teache mee thy way (ô Lorde) and leade mee in the right way, becauſe of myne
enemies.

Verſe. 13.

Deliuer me not ouer into the will of mine aduer­ſaries; for there are falſe
witneſſes riſen vp againſt me, and ſuch as ſpeake wrong.

The true Church is aſſaulted with diuers kindes of ene­mies, as Turkes,
Biſhops, Kings, and Princes: the Cham­pions of Biſhops, practiſe and bend
their endeuour to deſtroy the Church with ſword and fire: and Munckes, with
others which beare ſway, with opinion of learning in Courts, en­flame the
wrath of theſe.

The Prophet heere, not onely therefore prayeth for go­uernment, but alſo for
defence of the Church, euen from God himſelfe: which doubtleſſe is neceſſarie
in ſo great diuerſitie of daungers.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=48)

Verſe. 14.

I ſhould vtterly haue fainted, but that I beleeue verily to ſee the goodneſſe
of the Lord, in the Lande of the liuing.

As if he ſaide, although I am oppreſſed on euery ſide, as the ſtone or Rocke
in the Sea is beaten vppon with ruſhing waues: yet I ſhall bee preſerued in
the Lande of the liuing. That is, I ſhall not be oppreſſed of mine enemies in
thys life, neyther ſhall I afterwards be ſwallowed vppe into eternall death:
but I ſhall worſhip and praiſe GOD amongſt the li­uing in this life, and in
the life euerlaſting. So ſayth he in the 118. Pſalme: I ſhall not die, but
liue, and declare the works of the Lord. verſe 17.

Verſe. 15.

O tarry thou the Lords leyſure: be ſtrong, and he ſhall comfort thine hart;
and put thou thy truſt in the Lord.

That is, call vpon God, craue and looke for hys helpe, and thy fayth or
confidence ſhall by little & little wexe ſtrong: let thy hart reſt in hope,
and expectation of Gods onely helpe. Touching this rule, there is a notable
example ſette foorth in the Hiſtory of Ioſeph: for, although he was ſold of
his Bre­theren,Gene. 39. ver. 1.13.21 and afterwards caſt into priſon, yet
with thys conſo­lation he ſupported himſelfe, he reſted in the promiſe of God,
and béeing ſetled at peace in thys fayth, hee looked for deliue­raunce: and
truly the euent ſheweth it is true that is ſayd in the fourth Pſalme: The
Lorde hath choſen to himſelfe the man that is godly. verſe. 3. The Lord, not
by mans enterpri­ſes, but by meruailous meanes, deliuereth his, which mans
reaſon can in no wiſe pro­uide for.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=48)

## 7\. A Pſalme of Dauid, or prayer for deliueraunce. Ad te Domine clamabo.

The Argument.

THREE kindes of enemies there are, by whō the Church is moſt cruellie
aſſaulted: for, firſt Tyrants doe rage with open violence to deſtroy the
Church and the Goſpell: next to them, Heretiques and fanaticall perſons in all
ages, doe deuiſe diuers corruptions of doctrine, wherewith men beeing
bewitched, doe wander in errour from God. Laſt of all, there are Hypocrites
mingled in the Church, whom Paule calleth falſe Bretheren.

Theſe Serpents, whom the Church nouriſheth in her bo­ſome, know the ſleights
of hurting moſt ſubtilly, for although they openly flatter the Church, and
will ſeeme to be defenders of a true opinion, yet priuily, if occaſion be,
they can lay a colde pad vnder the matter: that is, they mangle and deface the
doctrine rightly expounded, with vnſauerie & vaine ca­uillations, and doe moſt
hatefully agrauate the ſlender faultes of them which teache aright; neither
know they how to giue theyr helping hand, to ſuch as humble themſelues, or
pardon thoſe that doe fall; but doe all to rende and ſpoyle that ſhyp wherein
they are carried, with blinde vaine pleaſures.

Such Aſpes are the more hurtfull, howe much leſſe they can be ſhunned or
eſchewed. Touching theſe therefore, doe I vnderſtand this Pſalme intreateth,
wherin firſt, a feruent pray­er is recited by the Prophet, leaſt euen with the
diſſimulation of Hypocries we ſhoulde bee defiled, or be inſnared in theyr
[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=49)
puniſhments. Afterwardes, there is a thankſgiuing added, wherein two moſt
excellent vertues, Truth and Righteouſneſſe doe ſhine: for as Truth
acknowledgeth from whence a bene­fite is receiued, ſo Righteouſnes bindeth vs,
to make due requi­tall according to our whole abilitie. Wherefore when he
ſayth Bleſſed be the Lord which hath heard the voice of my prayer, hee
witneſſeth himſelfe to be of a true meaning. And where hee addeth, And in my
ſong wil J praiſe him, he promiſeth himſelfe he will be iuſt and vpright in
performing mutuall duties. viz. in acknowledging and celebrating the benefits
of God. And ſo let Dauids deliuerances be read of vs, that wee beeing
con­firmed with theſe examples of Gods promiſes, we may learne to craue and
looke for helpe and defence after like manner, in all calamities and daungers.

### 7.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

Vnto thee will I cry ô Lord my ſtrength, think no ſcorne of me, leaſt if thou
make as though thou hea­reſt not, I become like them that goe downe into the
pit.

Verſe. 2.

Heare the voice of my humble peticions, when I cry vnto thee: when I hold vp
mine hands towardes the mercy ſeate of thy holy Temple.

I Haue oftentimes elſe-where ſaid, that in al our praying, there are fiue
things to be conſidered: Firſt, what God is whom we call vpon. Se­condly, the
commaundement of GOD, which moſt ſeuerely preſcribeth thys worſhyp. Third­lie,
[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=49) his
promiſe of hearing vs. Fourthly, the thing which we are to craue. Fiftly and
finally, our Fayth, beléeuing that we are accepted before God, and heard by
him.

Theſe fiue ſpeciall points dooth Dauid, moſt aptly com­priſe in the beginning
of this Pſalme. For the proper name Iehoua, pointeth as it were the finger
vnto the true God, ma­nifeſted to the people of Iſraell, and diſtinguiſhed
from the Ethnick Gods. But the commandement and promiſe are ſig­nified, in the
mention of the Oracle, or Mercie-ſeate, whereof it is written in the 25. of
Exodus, That from thence GOD would ſpeake vnto the people, and there would he
heare them calling vpon him. For God wold be called vpon in that place, and
vnto thys place he enioyned the people. Thys figure ex­cellently pertaineth
vnto Chriſt: for the Church calling vpon GOD, is enioyned to come vnto the
Mediator, and is not heard but for his ſake, as it is written. What ſoeuer yee
ſhal aske the Father in my Name, he ſhall giue it you. Iohn. 16.23. But Dauids
fayth ſhineth in theſe words, [My ſtrength] for no man can without
acknowledgement & confidence in Chriſt in hys prayer, call vpon God.

Finally, the thing to be craued, is deſcribed when he ſaith: Leaſt I become
like them that goe downe into the pit. And a little after, O plucke me not
away, nor deſtroy mee with the vngodlie ones. Therefore notably is it ſaid of
one of the aun­cient Fathers: That Prayer is a moſt hard worke or labour,
becauſe not onely the intention is required, but alſo the conſi­deration of
the reuelations and teſtimonies of God, and a di­ſtinction to be made from the
Ethnicks maner of praying, and a thinking vppon the promiſes, and a fayth in
the ſame repo­ſed.

But who can expreſſe the greatnes of this affect? Thinke no ſcorne of me? For
as in the ciuill conuerſation of men, the mouth ſilent, or muſing
countenaunce, makes ſome ſhewe of diſdainfull meaning: ſo in the ſpirituall
conflict, God ſeemeth ſilent, and as it were eſtranged from vs, when hee
deferreth our deliueraunce, and ſuffereth vs to be vexed in great cala­mities.
[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=50) As when
Ioſeph was not only ſold of his Bretheren, but alſo caſt into priſon, with
daunger of life and good name, what els might he thinke, but that God was
deafe and dumbe all that while? But thys ſorrowfull or heauie cogitation, is
to be vanquiſhed by fayth, as Iob ſayth: Yea though he kyll me, I will yet
truſt in him, and hee ſhall be my Sauiour.

Thys victorie giue vs O God, through our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and ſtrengthen
our infirmitie, which is ſo farre vna­ble to enter into ſuch conflicts, except
it be fully by thee in­ſtructed, and armed with the fortitude of Fayth.

Verſe. 3.

O plucke me not away, neyther deſtroy me with the vngodly & wicked dooers,
which ſpeake friend­lie to theyr Neighbours: but imagine miſchiefe in theyr
harts.

Thys is a principall propoſition of thys Pſalme, wherein he beſeecheth God,
wyth moſt feruent prayers, and euen with all his hart, that he might not be
hurt, eyther with the peſti­lencie of hypocriſie, which with a flattering face
workes miſ­chiefe, or be plunged in the puniſhments due to hypocrits.

But I pray you conſider with what colours hee painteth out the moſt
miſchieuous beaſts: he calleth thē expreſly, Vn­godly, and wicked ones,
becauſe hypocriſie is a ſinne diſagrée­ing with the firſt Table. For although
hypocrites are not de­filed with outward Idolatries, yet in theyr hart they
are with out true feare of God, and without fayth in him, & frame their
opinions of Religion, according to the pleaſures of Princes: next of all, they
worke iniquitie, becauſe ſuch as finally differ from theyr meanings, and doo
not applaude, or like of al theyr Paradoxes or ſtrange opinions, they endeuour
to deface and oppreſſe by ſlaunder: for they differ not meanely frō others,
but manfully performe that which the old ſaying admoniſheth them: Serpens non
fit Draco, niſi multos Serpentes deuoret.

A Serpent can no Dragon be,

Except he deuoure Serpents many.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=50)But
although they worke all theſe miſchiefes, yet they will ſpeake of peace vnto
theyr Neighbour, that is, with a populer & plauſible ſhewe they ſette foorth
themſelues & theyr owne dooings. For ſo they diſpute, that they are mooued
with a righteous zeale to defende the glory of God, and doo ſeeke and prouide
for mans euerlaſting ſaluation.

By thys goodly ſpeech, they gaine themſelues the fauors of the common people
and others, who for conſtancie accept of rigor, and in euill begun matters,
wilful boldnes, ſéemeth better then repentance. As therefore Dauid prayeth,
that he may not be pluckt away, nor deſtroyed with the vngodly ones. So doo I
with all my hart pray, that God the eternall Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
will neuer ſuffer me to be a ſociate or companion of ſuch hypocrites, nor once
take his worde of truth from my mouth: but that he woulde direct my ſteps
ac­cording to hys word, and that he would for euer keepe me in ſimplicitie and
righteouſnes, which are enemies vnto hypo­criſie.

Verſe. 4.

Reward them according to theyr deedes, & accor­ding to the wickedneſſe of
theyr inuentions.

Verſe. 5.

Recompence them after the works of their hands, pay them that they haue
deſerued.

Theſe curſings are read in the Pſalmes, not as mens in­dignations, but as the
voice of the holy Ghoſt, giuing iudge­ment vpon the puniſhments of hypocrites,
which are not con­uerted vnto God, neyther obey the commaundement which is
deliuered in the Apocalips: Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and doe the firſt workes. Apoc. 2. verſe. 5.

For like as other ſinnes are plagued with horrible puniſh­ments, ſo no doubt
of it, cruell puniſhments are the compa­nions of hypocriſie, which practiſe to
caſt a glimmering miſt before the eyes of God and men, that they ſhoulde not
ſee that which they ſée. I would therefore haue all thys ſpeech to be
vnderſtoode, with the exception of repentance, whereby the [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=51) mittigation of
puniſhments is obtained according to that ſay­ing, If your ſinnes be red as
the ſcarlet, they ſhall be white as ſnow. That is, though you be guiltie and
defiled, yet if you returne vnto God, not onely your ſinnes ſhall be forgiuen,
but alſo the puniſhments ſhall be taken away, or mittigated. Let not therefore
a diſſembling hypocriticall defence of ſinne, be added to the reſt of our
ſlydings, but let both our hart and tongue pronounce the confeſſion of
Daniell: Vnto thee ô lord belongeth righteouſneſſe, but vnto vs ſhame and
confuſion: we haue ſinned, Dan. 9.7.8 we haue doone wickedly, wee haue
departed from thy waies: heere vs for the Lordes ſake. Thys is the meane
whereby the woundes of the Church may be healed, not to follow our firſt
Parents, who after theyr fall, couered theyr nakednes with figge leaues.

Verſe. 6.

For, they regard not in theyr mind, the workes of the Lord, nor the operation
of his hands: therefore ſhall hee breake them downe and not builde them vp.

Hée explaneth the cauſe & fountaine of hypocriſie, where­of I haue ſpoken:
therefore hypocrites in ſhew good, in effect worſt of all, ceaſe not to heape
vppe braules and contentions, becauſe they conſider not the works of the Lord,
who ſuffers his ſeruaunts ſometimes for a ſeaſon to be ouerwhelmed, but not to
be vtterly oppreſſed. And yet at length, after Haman hath publiſhed his
ſlaunders and miſchiefes, there hath beene tranquillitie reſtored to the
Church.

But it yrcketh me to ſtay long vpon the deſcription of thys hypocriſie, then
which not any more ſorrowfull plague hath burſt out of the whirlepoole of
hell: therfore now I come vn­to the ſecond part of thys Pſalme.

Verſe. 7.

Prayſed be the Lorde, for he hath heard the voyce of myne humble peticions.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=51)Verſe. 8.

The Lord is my ſtrength and my ſheelde, my hart hath truſted in him, & I am
helped, therfore my hart daunceth for ioy, and in my ſong will I praiſe him.

Verſe. 9.

The Lord is my ſtrength, and he is the wholſome defence of his annointed.

The thankſgiuing towards God is truth, which acknow­ledgeth, that benefits are
receiued of God, and that he is God indeede: that he is omnipotent, preſent
with vs, and our hel­per: and it is a worke of righteouſnes, wherin a man
bindeth himſelfe to render acceptable duties towards God. By thys ſlender
diſcription may be vnderſtoode, that thankfulnes is a vertue compounded of two
ſpeciall vertues, namely Truth, and Righteouſneſſe. Truth acknowledgeth from
whence a be­nefite is receiued. Righteouſneſſe performeth mutuall duties.
Dauid therefore is true and iuſt: for hee plainly acknowled­geth, that he is
both heard and helped of GOD: and by this profeſſion he witneſſeth, that God
is not a vaine Name, that he is not idle, nor bounde to ſecond cauſes, but
that hee is in­deede effectuall, and helpeth ſuch as call vpon him.

Héerewith alſo, Dauid bindeth himſelfe to mutual duties, acceptable vnto God,
when he ſayth: And in my ſong will I prayſe him. For I pray you, what is there
that we can render vnto God, beſides the ſacrifice of prayſe? Now
contrariwiſe, conſider what a monſter an vnthankful perſon is, who is cō
­pact and framed of horrible ſinnes▪ viz. Lying & Vnrighteouſ­neſſe. When
Alexander thought that hee obtained his King­dome eyther by chaunce or through
his owne vertue, and con­feſſed not that it was giuen him of God, he is a
lyer, and that euen againſt God: afterwards, hee is become vniuſt, not
rendering vnto God his bounden dutie, when hee preſcribeth himſelfe to be
worſhipped as a God. Séeing then, thankſgi­uing is a neceſſary worſhip doone
to God, and that ingratitude towards GOD, is an horrible offence, let vs be
thankfull to God, both for all benefits of the ſoule and bodie, and alſo euen
[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=52) ſpecially
for thys ſame thing, that we are not ſnared with the counſels of hypocrites,
nor haue not dealt vniuſtly in the will of the Lorde, but haue kept our fayth,
yet indeede not of our owne ſtrength or power, but by the helpe of our Lorde
Ieſus Chriſt.

Verſe. 10.

O ſaue thy people, and giue thy beſſing vnto thine inheritance: feede them,
and ſett them vppe for euer.

That which Cicero ſpake of hys Countrey, in his ſecond Booke De legibus, the
ſame may much more truely be ſpoken of the Church: Neceſſe eſt charitate eam
praeſtare pro qua mori, & cui nos totos dedere, & in qua noſtra omnia ponere &
quaſi cō ­ſecrare debemus. Needfull it is, that our Country excel in loue and
good affection, for whom we ought to die: to whom wee haue wholy addicted our
ſelues, and in whom we haue repo­ſed all things, and as it were ought to
conſecrate the ſame. It is not therefore our part, neither fitteth it the name
of a Chri­ſtian to doubt, but that, for the vniuerſal Church (whoſe Cit­tizens
we deſire to be reputed and named) we muſt pray con­tinually.

Preſerue, gouerne, and defende thy Church O God, a­gainſt the deuils, Tyrants,
Heritiques, and the furies of falſe bretheren, and theyr wicked practiſes: and
ſeeing there are in mankind, many which curſe the Church, bleſſe thou Lorde
thine inheritance, and after thou haſt reſtrained the prac­tiſes of the
Enemies, adorne thou her with thy glorie euerlaſting. Amen.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=52)

## 8\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid, exhortatorie to Princes and great per­ſonages.
Afferte Domino filij Dei.

The Argument.

ALthough I allow not the rule of interpreting, which culleth out the Oracles
of God, into di­uers meanings: yet certaine Hiſtories are ſo written, that
with a ſafe analogie of fayth, they may be expounded alegorically: as the
Hiſto­rie of Gedeon is doubtleſſe a notable figure of the Kingdom of Chriſt.
So the leading of the people out of Egipt, is a figure of deliueraunce from
the tyrannie of the deuill and death euer­laſting.

Wherefore ſithens this Pſalme dooth celebrate the glori­ous acts which are
ſette foorth, in bringing the people out of Egipt, it ſhall ſtand well with
the Reader, eyther to embrace the hyſtoricall meaning, or wiſely and fitly to
vſe it as an ale­gorie touching the kingdome of Chriſt. And if he wil reſt cō
­tented with the hiſtorie, he may take out of thys Pſalme doc­trine moſt
neceſſary, as touching the manifeſtation of God: for it is needfull that the
true God (whom we doe call vpon) be diſcerned from falſe or counterfet Gods, &
be vnderſtoode how he is to be ſought vnto; Namely euen as he hath by aſ­ſured
teſtimonies, manifeſted his eſſence & will. Like as ther­fore the Fathers and
Prophets in theyr prayers, ſpeake vnto thys true God, which made himſelfe
knowne in promiſes, and in that bringing them out of Egipt, by viſible and not
fayling teſtimonies: ſo let our prayers likewiſe behold and ſpeake vn­to
[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=53) the ſame
God, which brought his people out of Egipt, by publiſhing ſo many teſtimonies,
and ſent his Sonne adding like teſtimonies, as in the reſurrection of the dead
and others. But if the Reader like better the Alegory, let him apply the
Pſalme vnto the gathering of the Church, by the miniſtery of the Goſpell and
Sacraments; by which Chriſt ſitting at the right hand of God, alwaies was, is,
and ſhall be effectuall, and in the harts of beleeuers illumineth newe light,
righteouſnes, and life euerlaſting.

### 8.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

Bring vnto the Lord (ô yee mightie) bring young Rammes vnto the Lord: aſcribe
vnto the Lord wor­ſhip and ſtrength.

Verſe. 2.

Giue the Lorde the honour due vnto hys Name, worſhyppe the Lorde with holy
worſhip.

THE Prophet in this place exhorteth all men, that they woulde offer the
ſacrifice of praiſe, that is, The fruite of theyr lips confeſſing hys Name,
Heb. 13. And the glory of GOD is the acknowledgement and celebrating of the
righ­teouſneſſe of God, in accuſing and puniſhing ſinnes, and hys mercy in
receiuing ſuch as fall and are conuerted vnto hym. Thys glory dooth not the
Epicure attribute vnto God, who ſayth moſt ſaucilie, That God is nothing, nor
careth not for things pertaining to men.

Saule although hée knew there was a God, and the ſame to puniſh miſchiefes:
yet he did not as yet giue vnto GOD perfect glory. But Dauid affirmeth both
that there is a God, [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=53) and that he is
iuſt, horribly puniſhing miſchiefes, and again, a mercifull GOD, receiuing and
ſauing miſerable mankind fléeing for mercy vnto the Mediator.

This man giueth vnto God perfect glory, that he is a God, that he is iuſt,
that hee puniſheth, that hee is good, mercifull, and a Sauiour, and that he
alſo puniſheth, not to deſtroy, but to ſaue: this glory is then only
attributed vnto God, whē we haue learned the Goſpell, and by faith doo
acknowledge the Sonne of GOD.

[Holy worſhip,] hée calleth the High Prieſtes attyre, whereby he vnderſtandeth
the righteouſneſſe of fayth, accor­ding to that ſaying: That I might be found
in him, not hauing mine owne righteouſnes, which is of the Law, but that which
is of the fayth of Chriſt, which is of the righteouſneſſe of God by fayth.
Phil. 3. verſe. 9. Therefore it ſignifieth, that the Sa­crifices of the olde
Teſtament, are to be aboliſhed, as in the fourth of Iohn it is ſayd: True
worſhippers ſhall worſhip the Father in Spirit and trueth. verſe. 23.

Verſe. 3.

It is the Lord that commaundeth the waters: it is the glorious God that maketh
the thunder.

Verſe. 4.

It is the Lord that ruleth the Sea, the voyce of the Lord is mighty in
operation, the voyce of the Lorde is a glorious voice.

Verſe. 5.

The voice of the Lord, breaketh the Caedar trees, yea the Lord breaketh the
Caedars of Libanus.

Verſe. 6.

Hee made them alſo to skyp like a Calfe: Libanus alſo and Syrion, like a young
Vnicorne.

Verſe. 7.

The voyce of the Lord deuideth the flames of fire, the voyce of the Lord
ſhaketh the wilderneſſe, yea the Lord ſhaketh the wilderneſſe of Cades.

Verſe. 8.

The voyce of the Lord maketh the hyndes to bring foorth young, and diſcouereth
the thick buſhes.

The ſumme of theſe verſes, wherein is a moſt excellent deſcription, the fourth
Chapter of S. Paules Epiſtle to the [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=54) Hebrues reciteth.
The word of God (ſaith he) is liuelie and mighty in operation, and ſharper
then any two edged ſword, & entreth through, euen to the deuiding a ſunder of
the ſoule and the Spirit, and the ioynts and the marrow, and is a diſcer­ner
of the thoughts and the intents of the hart. verſe. 12. For like as in the
promulgation of the Lawe, fearefull thunders, and ſhaking aſtoniſhments were
in heauen and earth, ſo the publiſhing of repentance, wherewith the holy Ghoſt
ſharplie reprehendeth ſinners, is not a vaine voice but effectuall, pear­cing
into the mindes and harts of mankinde, and illumining the acknowledgement of
ſinne, and the wrath of GOD, and ſtirring vp horrible feares. For who
trembleth not in al parts at the hearing of thys voice? For the wrath of God
is reuea­led from heauen, againſt all impiety & vnrighteouſnes of thē which
with-hold the truth in vnrighteouſneſſe. Rom. 1. ver. 18. Againe, That euery
mouth may be ſtopped, and all the world be found guiltie before God; All haue
ſinned and haue neede of the glory of God. Rom. 3.19.

Touching the efficacie heereof, there is a notable exam­ple propounded in the
ſecond Chapter of the Acts: When they heard theſe words, they were ſtricken in
theyr harts, and ſaide vnto Peter, and to the reſt of the Apoſtles; Men and
brethe­ren, what ſhall we doe? verſe. 37. And vnto thys place, a gram­maticall
admonition or notice muſt be added, touching the proper names of Syria and
Cades: for the name of Libanus is knowne to all men. But Moſes ſheweth in the
third of Deu­teronomie, That the hill Hermon, was called Syria of the
Sy­donians, and of the Amorites, Shenir. verſe. 9. And the booke of Ioſua
ſetteth thoſe downe, as the lymits and bounds of the Holy-Land, viz. From the
Eaſt, Euphrates, from the Weſt, the Sea Mediterraneum, from the North,
Libanus, and from the South, the Deſert of Cades.

Verſe. Idem.

In hys Temple doth euery man ſpeake of hys honour.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=54)Hetherto
hath hee deſcribed, the feares and tremblings which remaines in mens mindes,
hearing the voyce ſharplie reproouing ſinnes, and ſhewing the wrath of God.
Nowe hée deſcribeth the manner of worſhyppe, and the benefits of the new
Teſtament. For when mens harts are aſtoniſhed with the acknowledgement of Gods
wrath, they flee for refuge ſtraight vnto the Mediator, in cōfidence of the
promiſed mer­cie: againe, in conſolation a newe and eternall righteouſnes is
begun, and a life honouring God aright. Neither indeede are the efficacies of
ye words in this verſe to be neglected. For where he ſaith: [All men ſpeake of
hys honour,] no doubt hée ſignifieth, it ſhall come to paſſe, that the Church
ſhall bee gathered, not onely from among the Iewes, but alſo from a­mong the
Gentiles. And hys meaning is, they ſhall ſpeake of his honour, in that a man
may diſcerne the Religion of the newe Teſtament, from Leuiticall ceremonies.
For the Le­uits were kyllers of beaſtes in theyr ſacrifices: but true
wor­ſhippers ſhall worſhyp the Father in ſpirit and truth, and of­fer the
Calues of theyr lyps, confeſſing the name of the Lord, that is, Prayer,
thankſgiuing, and confeſſion.

Verſe. 9.

The Lorde ſitteth aboue the water flood: and the Lord remaineth a King for
euer.

The Hiſtories of the Deluge, and of bringing the people out of Egypt, are
notable figures of Baptiſme: for as Noahs familie was preſerued,Gene. 9. when
all the wicked ones were de­ſtroied: ſo they which are ingrafted in Chriſt by
Baptiſme, are deliuered from eternall death, and are endued with righ­teouſnes
and life euerlaſting. Moreouer, like as Pharao was ouerthrowne in the Red
Sea,Exod. 14.23. when the Congregation of the people of Iſrael was
meruailouſly preſerued: ſo in Baptiſme our ſinnes are buried, and we together
with Chriſt, doo riſe againe, that we may walke in newneſſe of life.

Of thys Alegory we haue plentifull Authors and witneſ­ſes, as S. Paule, in the
1\. Cor. 10. and S. Peter, in his firſt E­piſtle [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=55) and third
Chapter. Therefore dooth Chriſt raigne by the preaching of the Goſpell, and by
Baptiſme, gathering his Church, vpon whom he beſtoweth eternall benefits. viz.
wiſ­dome, righteouſneſſe, and neuer ending life.

For whereas both the King and Kingdome, beare them­ſelues correlatiuely, (as
Logitians vſe to ſpeake,) it muſt needes be, that of an eternall King, the
kingdome muſt be al­ſo eternall: but touching the Kingdome of Chriſt,
elſewhere is oftentimes ſpoken.

Verſe. 10.

The Lord ſhall giue ſtrength vnto his people, the Lord ſhall giue his people
the bleſſing of peace.

[Strength] ſignifieth the gyft of the holy Ghoſt, which is the Spirit, not of
fearefulneſſe, but of ſtrength and loue: for when thys helpeth vs, when wee
will we are able to doe ac­ceptable things vnto GOD, and wholeſome things for
our ſelues, and his Church. As touching this vertue or ſtrength, diuine and
heauenly it is ſayd in the 24. of S. Luke. But tar­rie you in the Cittie of
Ieruſalem, vntill you be indued wyth ſtrength from aboue. verſe. 49. And in
the firſt of the Acts: Receiue ye the power of the holy Ghoſt.

The [Bleſſing,] comprehendeth all benefits neceſſarie for the bodie & the
ſoule. Let vs therefore render thanks vnto the Sonne of God, the King and High
Prieſt of his Church, that he giueth vs his Goſpell and his holie Spyrite,
which helpeth our infirmitie, and giueth vs other benefits, neceſſary vnto the
ſoule and body: and let vs declare our thankful­neſſe towards him, not onely
in words, but alſo in godly duties.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=55)

## 9\. A Pſalme or Song of the dedication of the houſe of Dauid.2\. Sam. 7.2.
Deut. 20, 5 Exaltabo te Domine.

The Argument.

I Haue before, now and then ſaide, that there are two kindes of trials or
vexations of the Church: for ſome doe cruelly afflict the body, and ſpoyle vs
of the benefits neceſſary for the body: theſe are ſickneſſes, pouertie,
baniſhments, dangers of life, and loſſe of wife and children. Theſe
inconueniences, although they are not ſlender, yet are they more eaſily borne,
whē in our harts doe ſhine, the acknowledgement of the mer­cie, benefits, and
preſence of God, healing & embracing vs for his Sonnes ſake. Laurence indeede
was conſumed vppon the hote burning coles, and Stephen was ſtoned to death,
but ey­ther of them was merrie in the midſt of death, becauſe they perceiued
in theyr hart, a ioyfulnes, riſen of the acknowledge­ment of the preſence and
mercy of God.

There are alſo other tryals or troubles, much more ſor­rowfull and bitter,
which pearce into the very ſoule and ſpirit; namely, when with beholding the
preſence and goodneſſe of God, for a certaine ſeaſon we feele no priuate
thing, but the ſorrowes of death, and the dangers of hell: and do feare that
we are for euer caſt away amongſt the deuils: theſe deiections or downe-
caſtings of vs, can not be deſcribed with words, but the examples ſhewe after
a ſort, this degree of tryals or trou­bles.

Job without any deformitie, patiently ſuffered the loſſe of his children and
ſubſtaunce, and pronounced thys ſpeech full [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=56) of godlineſſe:
The Lord gaue, and the Lorde hath taken awaie: bleſſed be the Name of the
Lorde. Iob. 1.21. But this ſo greate a perſonage, being burthened with the
weight of ſpirituall ten­tations, fretted & fumed againſt God, crying out: Let
the day perriſh wherein J was borne. &c. Chap. 2. verſe. 3. So Jeremie
be­tweene feares and tremblings, ſayd: Curſed be the day wherein J was borne.
Chap, 20, verſe, 14. For how much the ſtrength of the mind is, greater then
that of the body, ſo much more gree­uous are thoſe troubles which we conceiue
in our mind, then they which are borne in our body.

But, to what end doe I ſay ſo much, touching the degrees of temptations or
troubles? Surely to thys ende, that thou maiſt vnderſtand what obiects Dauid
beholdeth in his thankſ­giuing. For firſt he rendereth thankes to God for
defence a­gainſt Saule and his other enemies, who had conſpired hys preſent
death: thys part of the Pſalme dooth he amplifie with moſt ſweete compariſon
of his afflictions and deliueraunces.

After that, he celebrateth Gods goodneſſe, mortifying & quickning, bringing
downe to hell, and rayſing vp frō thence. That is, ſtriking mankinde with
feares, which are the feelings of Gods wrath, and againe, comforting vs that
we ſhoulde not fayle or quayle, and ſo be ouercome of our cruell enemie. But
of thys meaning, we will ſay more as we doe expounde other things.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=56)

### 9.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

I will magnifie thee ô Lord, for thou haſt ſette me vp: and not made my foes
to tryumph ouer me.

Verſe. 2.

O Lord my God, I cryed vnto thee, and thou haſt healed me.

Verſe. 3.

Thou Lord haſt brought my ſoule out of hell, thou haſt kept my life from them
that goe downe to the pitte.

WHereas it had béene enough to ſay, I render thanks vnto thee, becauſe thou
haſt deliuered mee, with howe many wordes dooth Dauid a­dorne thys
propoſition: for firſt hee vſeth the word, which properly ſignifieth a drawing
out of the pit or poole. As therefore Ioſeph and Ieremie, beeing drawne out of
pits, are deliuered from death,Gene. 37.20 and 39, 13 Iere, 38, 13 ſo the
Prophet héere affirmeth, that he was drawne out of the perril of death, not by
mans helpe, but with the right hand of the moſt High. After that alſo, he
addeth thys circumſtance, that his peruerſe and euill reioycing enemies, had
no matter wherein they ſhold or might beſtow their moſt poyſonfull byting
gyrds and taunts againſt him. Thirdly, he compareth his deliueraunce vnto the
healing of woundes: for as Iob in his fift Chap. moſt ſwéetly ſayth: God
woundeth and healeth, he ſtriketh, & his hande maketh whole. Laſtly, he ſayth,
That hee was rayſed from death to life, and as it were recouered out of hell,
when Saule and his other enemies fell headlong into preſent and e­ternall
miſeries. So in like manner, all and euery one of vs heere in Germanie, may
celebrate in word and wryting, the [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=57) benefits of God,
and may ſay vnfeinedly with Ieremie, chap. 3\. It is the mercies of the Lord
that we are not conſumed, be­cauſe his compaſſions fayle not. verſe, 22. For
had not the ſha­dowe of the Lords hande ſhielded vs, (wretched and weake
ſoules) we had euen now lately beene deſtroyed of the Turks and other enemies:
but God, who is not delighted with our deſtruction, hath mercifully mittigated
thoſe puniſhments, and hath kept vs as it were the apple of hys eye.

Verſe. 4.

Sing prayſes vnto the Lord, (ô ye Saints of his) and giue thanks vnto him for
a remembraunce of his ho­lineſſe.

Hée applyeth his example vnto the vniuerſall Church, to the ende others alſo
might learne, (beeing partly confirmed by promiſes, and partly by examples,)
to craue deliueraunce of God, and béeing preſerued, to celebrate the goodnes
of God. For God is no accepter of perſons, but receiueth and ſaueth all them,
that flée for mercy vnto the Mediator: as in the 10. to the Romans it is
written. God is rich towards al them that call vpon him. And Ioel in his
ſecond Chapter, ſayth: Euerie one that calleth vpon the Name of the Lord,
ſhall be ſaued.

Theſe promiſes (which haue in them great ſwéetnes and excellencie,) let vs
apply vnto our vſe, in the daily daungers of our life, and let vs knowe, that
God is indeede iuſt & righ­teous, and that there is no reſpect of perſons with
God.

Verſe. 5.

For his wrath endureth but the twinckling of an eye, and in his pleaſure is
life: heauineſſe may en­dure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning.

I would to God our mindes in miſeries coulde rightly be perſwaded, that God
puniſheth not to deſtroy, but to ſaue vs, and to reſtore vs vnto life and
ioyfulnes. For our mindes bée­ing confirmed with this vndoubted purpoſe of
God, ſhoulde paſſing well beare all the burdens layde vpon vs by God: but
[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=57)
experience ſheweth how hard a thing it is, firmely to retaine thys purpoſe of
minde in our calamities. For where the ſcrip­ture nameth a ſhort time of
tribulation, that ſeemeth vnto vs a ſpace of many ages. Let vs therefore
diſcerne Philoſophi­call perſwaſion from fayth, and let vs preferre the worde
of GOD, before the actions of our ſences or vnderſtandings.

In Philoſophy, a man beléeueth water is warme when he hath dipped his finger,
and experience hath taught that it is warme: but in embracing the word of God,
there is wrought a contrarie thing: Perſwaſion, that is, Fayth, goeth before
conſolation. As Ieremie, though he ſaw his Countrey ruina­ting, or neere her
deſtruction, yet he knew that Gods Church was not forſaken, and hee béeing
confirmed with this know­ledge, patiently beareth the preſent miſeries: for
hee vnder­ſtandeth theyr cauſes, and that there ſhould be an end of them, and
he knewe that the Church ſhoulde for all thys be reſtored and gathered againe.
Therefore let Pſalmes of like meaning bee adioyned vnto this place, which doo
make declaration of the ſhortneſſe of afflictions, and of theyr ioyfull
concluſion or en­ding.

Eſay in his 54. Chapter ſayth: For a little while haue I forſaken thee, but
with my great cōpaſſions I wil gather thee: for a moment in mine anger, I hid
my face from thee for a lyt­tle ſeaſon: but with euerlaſting mercy I haue had
compaſſion of thee. verſe, 7.8. And in the 16. of Iohn, the Sonne of God
ſayth: You ſhall ſorrow, but your ſorrow ſhall be turned into ioy. verſe, 20.
And your ioy ſhall no man take from you. ver. 22. And the Apoſtle S. Paule
ſayth: The afflictions of thys pre­ſent time, are not woorthy of the glory
which ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs. Rom. 8.18. And in the ſecond Epiſtle to the
Corinthi­ans, he ſayth: Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
cauſeth vnto vs a farre more excellent, and an eternall weight of glory. Chap.
4, verſe, 17.

Wherefore with a good courage let vs ſuffer momentanie incōueniences, for
while we looke about vs (as they ſay) and doo heere buſie our ſelues, loe
immortalitie ſhall approche.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=58)

Verſe. 6.

And in my proſperitie, I ſayd, I ſhall neuer be re­mooued: thou Lord of thy
goodneſſe haſt made my hill ſo ſtrong.

Verſe. 7.

Thou didſt turne thy face from me, & I was trou­bled.

The meaning of theſe verſes is moſt ſimple, which D. Lu­ther now and then, in
expounding the Booke of Geneſis reci­teth: We were all wont in time of victory
& tryumph of the Spirit againſt the fleſh, to be ſtrong and couragious: but
whē incredulitie aſſayled our harts, by & by we wexe faint-harted. Ieremie
féeling the conſolation and victory of fayth, ſayth thus in hys twentie
Chapter. The Lorde is with me like a mightie Gyant, therefore my perſecutors
ſhall be ouerthrowne, and ſhall not preuaile, but ſhall be greatly confounded.
&c. ver. 11. But the ſame man within a while after, with moſt ſorrowful
complaints, deſcribeth the debaſed eſtate of his minde. Idem. How is it that I
came forth of the wombe? To ſee labour and ſorrow, that my daies might be
cōſumed with ſhame? Wher­fore, not in vaine, nor vnaduiſedly dooth he pray in
the ſeuen­teene Chapter, ſaying: Be not terrible vnto me, thou art mine hope
in the day of aduerſitie. verſe 17.

So all and euery ſuch of vs, as are repleniſhed with ſpy­rituall ioy, let vs
couragiouſly abide the aſſault of ſathan, and the worlde, and let vs not wey
all the inuentions or practiſes of our enemies, no not the value of a trifle.
But when we are plunged into ſorrowfulneſſe, by the ſufferaunce of God, and
feele not the Spirit of fortitude in vs, then indeede are wee by nature
fearefull, and wee are amaſed euen as much wyth the ſounde of a leafe falling
from the Tree, as if all the world cruſhed together, ſhould ſuddainly oppreſſe
vs.

I my ſelfe knowe a certaine Paſtor of the Church, who when he had with a
mighty courage, endured very many, and moſt great calamities, and was well
addreſſed and armed a­gainſt the threatnings of Tyrants, euen at the laſt
point as it [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=58) were, (béeing
caſt downe from the ſtep of fayth,) he begun to be ſo toſſed with ſorrowfull
ſadnes, that hee was not very far from vtter deſperation.

But, goe to, let vs not alwaies ſpeake of ſpirituall com­bats and conflicts:
which of vs all is endued with ſo great ſtrength of Fayth, that he is not
ſometime troubled in mind, how to liue, and to obtaine other neceſſary
benefits for his bo­die? Seeing therefore it is a hard and difficult thing, to
keepe ſuch a courſe, as our ſhyppe may eſcape both the Rockes, viz. Pryde and
Deſperation, let vs daily pray with the Apoſtles, Lord increaſe our fayth.
Luke 17. verſe 5. For true it is, that the Church ſingeth of the Spirit of
Fortitude, Loue, and Chaſtiſement:

Sine tuo Numine, nihil eſt in homine, nihil eſt innoxium.

Without thy grace (ô God) in man,

Nought well he doth, nor well he can.

Thys good Spirit helping vs, we are able euen from on high, to deſpiſe death
and all daungers: but when the ſame Spirit dooth not imprint and fixe in vs
his power or vertue, we then lie ouerthrowne, and yeelde the victorie to the
verie ſhadowes of our enemies.

Verſe. 8.

Then cryed I vnto thee (ô Lord) and gat mee vnto my Lord right humbly.

Verſe. 9.

What profit is there in my bloode, when I goe downe into the pit?

Verſe. 10.

Shall the duſt giue thanks vnto thee: or ſhal it de­clare thy truth?

Verſe. 11.

Heare ô Lord, and haue mercy vpon me: Lorde be thou my helper.

S. Auguſtine ſayth notably in a certaine place: Whether ſhall I flee? from God
angry, vnto God mercifull For there is nothing more wholeſome, then to returne
vnto him when he ſtriketh vs, and of him to craue remedies for our ſorrowes.
Like as Iob in hys thirteenth Chapter ſayth: Yea though he [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=59) ſhould kill me,
yet will I truſt in him, and he ſhall be my Saui­our. Thys example let vs
followe in great violence of tem­peſts, and in the concourſe of calamities,
and let vs not ſéeke inordinate remedies, but let vs flée vnto the fountaine
of the lyuing water, that is, vnto GOD: which when ſo we ſhal doo, wée ſhall
aſſuredly prooue the helpe and preſence of God, and finde the reſtitution of
eternall lyfe.

But while we are praying vnto God, there are both other cauſes to be proponed,
and alſo euen ſpecially this final cauſe.

Tu mihi praeſidium, tua me protectio ſeruet,

Ʋt tibi ſeruatus carmina grata canam.

Thou art my ſafegarde, thy defence keepe mee,

That beeing ſafe, I may ſing thanks to thee.

Thou art not delighted with our deſtruction, therfore pre­ſerue me together
with thy Church, that I may in thys life, and in all eternity magnifie thée:
but as touching thys cauſe of deliueraunce, I haue elſewhere oftentimes
ſpoken.

Verſe. 12.

Thou haſt turned my heauineſſe vnto ioy: thou haſt put off my Sackcloth, and
girded mee wyth gladneſſe.

Hée affirmeth plainely, that prayer is not a vaine noyſe, but obtaineth of GOD
a ioyfull end of miſeries: Thou haſt turned (ſaith he) my heauineſſe vnto ioy,
ſuch as Boyes and Gyrles in a calmetime of the Common-weale were wont to ſport
themſelues withall, and my mourning wéede béeing cut in péeces, thou haſt
adorned me with a wedding garment: ſo no doubt of it, as I may ſo ſay with
Tobie, God will reſtore to euery one (which call vpon him in confidence of the
Me­diator) after heauines, gladneſſe.

Verſe. 13.

Therefore ſhal euery good man ſing of thy praiſe without ceaſing: ô my God, I
will giue thanks vn­to thee for euer.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=59)Euen as in
hys prayer, he made mention of the final cauſe, [Therefore deliuer me, that I
may prayſe thee,] ſo now after hys deliueraunce, he is not a diſſembler, or
vniuſt, but with an excellent fayth, performeth hys promiſes: and hee dooth
not onely for a ſmall time declare the goodnes of GOD, but with euerlaſting
prayſes magnifieth God. The ſame muſt al we doo: neyther muſt we after
benefits receiued, nouriſh in vs Epicuriall cogitations, as thus: perhaps thou
haſt deliue­raunce by good hap, or by humane induſtries. This horrible
vnthankfulnes, let vs (as they ſay) with Oares and ſayles, that is, by all
poſſible meanes, auoide and eſchew: and let vs moſt firmely beleeue, that
through Gods alone helpe, the dan­ger is driuen away.

## 10\. To him that excelleth.1\. Sam. 23, 14 Pſalm. 71.1. ❧ A Pſalme of
Dauids deli­uerance. In te Domine ſperaui.

The Argument.

THE ſentence of Plato in his Epitaph is praiſed, which Cicero expreſſeth in
theſe words: Nam cui vero ex ſeipſo apta ſunt omnia, quae ad beate vi­uendum
ferunt, nec ſuſpenſa aliorum aut bono caſu, aut contrario pendere ex alterius
euentis et errare coguntur, huic optime viuendi ratio comparata eſt. viz: For
vnto what man all things are of hys owne induſtrie at his vſe, which ſerue to
a bleſſed life, & (not ſuſpended, eyther with the good or ſiniſter fortune of
others,) are not compelled to depende of another mans haps, & ſo to fayle,
this man hath gotten a rule [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=60) of the beſt
kinde of life. Thys ſentence dooth the thirtie one Pſalme notably interprete,
diſcerning a true hope from a car­nall hope. For as Pluto warneth vs, that all
our hope or confi­dences, ſhould not depende vpon the benefits of fortune, or
of humane friendſhips, the ſame doth this Pſalme allowe. But wheras it
bringeth vs to the conſideration of our own vertues, that part of Platoes
ſentence, doth this Pſalme reiect & refuſe: for we muſt be brought to the
conſideration of Gods goodnes, ſeeing many things happen vnto man, when mans
vertue with out Gods helpe, vtterly fayleth. Therefore it commaundeth, that
God be of vs acknowledged and called vpon, and it pro­miſeth helpe: but the
whole Pſalme ſhall be more excellent in vſe, if the figure of ſome godly
Paſtor or Teacher, bani­ſhed for the confeſſion of hys fayth, be heere
repreſented.

For like as Chriſt in the time of his paſſion, was not onely cruelly handled
of his enemies, but alſo forſaken of his friends, falling from him for very
feare: ſo godly exiled perſons, doe feele both the crueltie of enemies, and
vnfaithfulnes of theyr owne friendes, for it is moſt truly written by Tyrteus
the Mu­ſitian.

Curat nemo vagos, et laedere nemo veretur:

Non Exul curae ducitur eſſe Deo.

No man cares for the wandring wight,

To hurt him, none dooth feare.

Men thinke that God forgetteth quite,

Poore Exiles liuing heere.

What then ſhall the godly man doe in ſuch a caſe? whe­ther ſhall hee flee for
ſuccour? Hee ſhall haue in minde and mouth, the promiſes and conſolations of
thys Pſalme. The Lord preſerueth them that are faithful. Againe: In thee O
Lorde haue I put my truſt, let me neuer be put to confuſion. verſe, 1. That
this is no vaine Rethorick, we ſhall well prooue, if in vnfained ſorrow,
(which the crueltie of enemies cauſeth vs, and the for­ſaking of friends,) we
ſhall call vpon God.

Thys our age ſeeth the examples of good men, who being driuen from theyr
abyding places, for the conſtancie of theyr [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=60) confeſſion, are
meruailouſly defended and preſerued of God. Wherefore truſting in the helpe of
God, let vs not caſt awaie our confeſſion of the true doctrine, but let vs
preach the ſame conſtantlie for the glorie of God, and for the ſaluation of
our ſoules: and let vs commende vnto God, all the euents of our buſineſſes:
who ſuffereth vs not to be aſhamed, but in hys righteouſneſſe will deliuer all
them that call vpon him.

### 10.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

In thee ô Lorde haue I put my truſt, let me neuer be put to confuſion: deliuer
mee in thy righteouſ­neſſe.

THere is a notable Emphaſis in the particles, [In thy righteouſneſſe,] as if
he ſayd, many truſt in theyr money, ſome mighty perſons in the fauour of
Friendes, and ſome in theyr wiſedome and righteouſnes. But I truſt not in
viſible things, (thē which nothing is more vncertaine, nor any thing more
fading,) but all hope of wel­fare I doo repoſe in God: and I craue that I may
be hearde, not for my righteouſnes, which is eyther none at all, or in­deede
ſtained, but for the righteouſnes of God himſelfe, made knowne in the Law, of
the which the Law and the Prophets doe beare witnes. And it is the
righteouſnes of God, which the Goſpell hath made knowne, and Fayth
apprehendeth frée remiſſion of ſinnes, and the acceptation vnto life
euerlaſting. Thys hope is not confounded, but ſurely obtaineth deliue­rance,
according to the purpoſe of God. But ſome man wold obiect. I ſée not how Iohn
Baptiſt, Paule, Stephen, and Lau­rence, [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=61) were at all
deliuered, which were moſt cruelly ſlaine of Tyrants. The aunſwer is not
difficult to ſuch as vnderſtand the doctrine of the Church, concerning the
cauſes of calami­ties: for although they were put to death for theyr
confeſſion, yet they felt ioy in theyr harts, which is the ouercommer of
death, and their death is glorious in the ſight of the Lord, not onely becauſe
it ſetteth forth & adorneth the glory of God, but alſo becauſe it ſhal haue a
glorious end in the life euerlaſting, where God ſhal fully and wholie deliuer
his Elect from ſinne and death, and ſhall be all in all.

Let therefore the obiects be diſcerned, concerning which, Hope is exerciſed:
for although eternall life, is aſſuredlie for the Sonne of Gods ſake to be
looked, yet notwithſtanding, there are other deliuerances, according to the
purpoſe of God, in this life to be looked for. Let vs alſo haue alwaies in our
ſight, the moſt graue and moſt godly ſentence, which Iob in hys thirtéenth
Chapter reciteth. Yea though he ſhoulde kyll me, yet will I truſt in him, and
he ſhall be my Sauiour. Theſe cannot be vnderſtoode of men, liuing in idlenes
& pleaſures, but in vnfained ſorrowe, when we are aſſaulted as the ſtone with
the Sea waues, euery where beaten vpon. Hic animis opus eſt, opus eſt hic
pectore firmo, vincente omnia ſpectra, quae in occulos incurrentos fidem
langue-faciunt. viz.

Heere courage needfull is, and conſtant hart likewiſe,

All Goblins ruſhing in our ſight,

Our fayth vnfeeble for to conquer quite.

Verſe. 2.

Bow downe thine eare to me: make haſte to deli­uer mee.

Verſe. 3.

And be thou my ſtrong Rocke, and the houſe of defence, that thou maiſt ſaue
me.

The Poet ſayth:

Dole tantum, ſponte diſertus eris.

Onely ſorrowfull if thou be,

Thou art diſtreſſed willingly.

For the Prophet heere is not ſatiſ-fied with the worde [Deliuer,] but
enlargeth his Prayer with moe wordes. [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=61) As if hee ſayd,
gyue not eare vnto my Prayers, as though thou wert in hande with an other
matter: doe not deferre thy helpe, but with great liſtening, know my cauſe,
and béeing e­uen at the firſt oppreſſed, and ſuffering not my deſerts,
deli­uer thou me: be vnto me a well defenced forte, whereunto I may ſafely
flee for ſuccour, and wherin I may ſafely hyde me.

Verſe. 4.

For thou art my ſtrong Rocke, & my Caſtle: bee thou alſo my guide, & leade me
for thy Names ſake.

The rule of hys prayer, is borrowed out of the firſt pre­cept, I am the Lord
thy God. Exod. 20. As if the Prophet here ſayd: ſeeing thou haſt made thy
ſelfe knowne vnto vs of thy great goodnes, and haſt giuen vs thy word, and
wilt not that the ſame ſhall be extinguiſhed, preſerue and defende vs: that
ſome Congregation of GOD may alwaies remaine vppon earth: that there may be
both Teachers and learners, leaſt doctrine be extinguſhed, leaſt learning doo
perriſh. For ſo oft as mencion is made of Gods Name, let vs comprehende the
cauſes impulſiue and finall. [For thy Names ſake,] that is, for thy promiſe,
wherein thou affirmeſt, that thou wilt helpe them that call vpon thee, and for
thy glories ſake.

For the acceptable glory of God, is ſpred abroade of the godly ones, who after
theyr deliuerances, are true & iuſt, as I haue elſewhere oftentimes ſaid: alſo
the blaſphemous cla­mors of the enemies are refuted, when examples are
propo­ned, which doe ſhew that God hath care of the poore and nee­die
Congregation truſting in the Name of the Lord.

Verſe. 5.

Drawe me out of the nette that they haue priuilie layd for me, for thou art my
ſtrength.

Hée craueth to be defended, not onely againſt manifeſt vi­olence, but alſo
againſt vngodly fraude of the enemies of the Goſpell: for there is no man ſo
wiſe, which without the ſafe­gard of the Sonne of God, can eſchew all the
ſnares and de­ceypts [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=62) which are layde
by the enemies of the true doctrine: for they know how to colour ſmoothe and
faire cauſes wyth vniuſt dealings, and with ſoft ſpéech how to diſſemble.
Ther­fore there is no watchfull warineſſe equall vnto the moſt craf­tie
practiſes of the enemies, but it hath neede of the Sonne of GOD, to ſafegard
and preſerue the ſame.

Verſe. 6.

Into thy handes I commende my Spirit: for thou haſt redeemed mee, ô Lord thou
God of truth.

A concluſion full of Fayth, as if he ſayd. I doo well conſi­der, that I am not
ſufficiently furniſhed and armed, againſt the violence and craft of the
enemies. Therefore béeing deſti­tute of mans counſaile and helpe, I flée to
thee for refuge, and yeeld my ſelfe wholly vnto thee & in thy hand I repoſe
all that I haue: for I know, that thou wilt keepe thy purpoſe with a firme
fayth, ſéeing alſo thou haſt oftentimes before deliuered me. For fayth, béeing
confirmed with remembrance of former deliueraunces, beleeueth that God is not
onely rich in thoſe things promiſed, but beleeueth alſo, that he moſt
aboundant­ly performeth the ſame hee hath promiſed, and conceiueth a moſt
aſſured hope of his deliuerances in time to come. But, ſeeing the Sonne of
God, rehearſed this verſe a little before the ſeperation of the ſoule from the
body, who doubteth the ſame forme of words is to be vſed, not onely in other
dangers of life, but alſo in the midſt of death.

For then muſt we cry out with Stephen, Lorde Ieſus re­ceiue my Spirit. Acts.
7. verſe. 59. For Chriſt our Lorde, not onely will, but alſo can, with a
mighty hand plucke and deli­uer our ſoule, flitting out of thys frayle
manſion, and ſet the ſame free from the deadly aſſault of the deuils
themſelues, ſée­ing hee is both the Creator and Redeemer of our ſoules,
ac­cording to that ſaying: I giue them eternall life, and no man ſhall take
them out of mine handes, becauſe I and the Father am one. John, 10. verſe, 28.
Into thys hande therefore excelling in fayth and power, let vs deliuer our
ſelues wholy without [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=62) doubting: which
when wee ſhall doo, the thing it ſelfe ſhall ſhewe, they are not vaine
delectations, which are ſaid in this verſe. Thou haſt redeemed mee, ô Lord God
of truth.

Verſe. 7.

I haue hated them that tolde of ſuperſticious va­nities: and my truſt hath
beene in the Lord.

He amplifieth the propoſition of ye Pſalme, by compariſon of contraries, that
is, of a True hope and Carnall hope: for like as a true hope is not
cōfounded, becauſe it dependeth of God, ſo all other hopes are fruſtrate
which depende vpon a rotten thredde, for ſo humane helps ſeeme woorthily to be
called, for their incertainty and vnconſtancie: but if any man doo iudge theſe
to be vaine delectations, let him heare the complaints of wiſemen, confirming
the purpoſe which I haue ſette downe.

Cicero in his ninth Booke of Epiſtles, concerning Pom­peyes defences, writeth
thus: Thou knoweſt well, that Cnaius Pompeyus, was neither ſafe in the glorie
of hys fame, nor of his acts, nor with the ſutes and ſeruices of Kings and
kingdoms, which he was oftentimes wont to boaſt of. &c. Cicero plainely
affirmeth, that Pompey was neyther wyth his owne poſſeſſions nor hys friends
helps, ſafely enough pre­ſerued againſt the aſſault of fortune: for, what ſo
is ſayde of the likeneſſe or forme, the ſame euen in like manner may be ſayd
of the whole nature or kinde of any thing: for al humane helps hold by a
ſlender thred, and things which haue beene of force, ſuddainly fall to decay.
We ſhall therefore remember, that againſt confidence in humane helps, there
are many ſen­tences deliuered vs from God, as in the 146. Pſalme. Truſt not in
Princes, nor in the Sonnes of men, in whom there is no helpe. verſe. 2. And in
that of Ieremie. Chap. 17. Curſed is eue­rie one which putteth his truſt in
man.

Verſe. 8.

I will be glad and reioyce in thy mercie, for thou haſt conſidered my trouble,
& haſt known my ſoule in aduerſities.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=63)Verſe. 9.

Thou haſt not ſhut me vp into the hande of the enemie, but haſt ſette my feete
in a large roome.

The effects of a true hope are heere deſcrbed wyth great excellencie of words.
Pompey béeing ouercome of Caeſar, was ouerwhelmed into Epicuriall opinions,
diſputing as it were, that God cared not for mens matters. But Dauid beeing
ba­niſhed from hys kingdome, beleeued, that God both regarded and helped him:
with thys fayth when he is ſupported, there followeth a conſolation and a
féeling of gladneſſe. For he was not ſhutte vp in the hands of hys Sonne
Abſalon, 2\. Sa. 15.14 2. Reg. 25.7, (like as K. Zedechias in his fleeing
away, was brought backe againe, and at the Conquerours commaundement, had his
eyes put out,) but he was reſtored into his kingdome.

Therefore it is farre better to truſt in God, then in hu­mane helps: for God
conſidereth both the painefull trauaile, and the ſorrow of the godly ones, as
it is written in the tenth Pſalme, and knoweth the way of the iuſt, that is,
he not one­ly alloweth, but alſo helpeth them. And as furthermore S. Peter
ſayth: The Lorde knoweth howe to deliuer his out of trouble or tentation. 2\.
Peter. 2. verſe. 9.

Verſe. 10.

Haue mercy vpon me ô Lorde, for I am in trou­ble, and mine eye is conſumed for
very heauineſſe: yea my ſoule and my body.

Verſe. 11.

For my lyfe is wexen olde with heauineſſe: and my yeeres with mourning.

Verſe. 12.

My ſtrength fayleth me, becauſe of mine iniqui­tie, and my bones are conſumed.

Albeit the name of tribulation dooth comprehend all theſe words, which in
effect may happen vnto a miſerable man. Yet is it leſſe to ſay the whole then
all: & to effect leſſe, perceth as it were this breefe meſſenger. Wherefore,
he layeth open all things that are included in one word, to the end he may
ſhew [[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=63) his
miſeries vnto God. For, as the onely daughter poureth out into her Fathers
boſome her cares and griefes, and order­ly rehearſeth euery euill affected
part: ſo Dauid, and all the godly ones, doo open themſelues wholy vnto God,
and make manifeſt particularly, the greefe or ſorrowe of euery member vnto
him.

But ſome man will heere obiect, what needeth all this re­citall: ſeeing God of
himſelfe knoweth all thinges, and that God is not honoured with the tragedies
of Captiues? there­to I aunſwer: Wee haue not to deale with God abſolutelie,
like as he is in his Maieſtie, but with God by relation, which hath ſo made
himſelfe knowne vnto vs, that he is more moo­ued with the feeling of our
calamities, then any father is moo­ued ſeeing the great calamitie of his moſt
deerely beloued Daughter.

Therefore when we are in praying, we ſpeake familiar­ly with GOD, and in the
ſame matter, wee imitate the ex­ample of God himſelfe, who doth ſweetly frame
and aply hys worde vnto our weake capacitie. We knowe, that vnto vs a childe
is borne, and vnto vs a Sonne is giuen. In the confi­dence of thys childe and
Sonne, doo we come vnto God, and vtter our words with a certaine freedome, as
in the thirde to the Epheſians it is written: By whom we haue boldneſſe and
enteraunce, with confidence by fayth in him. verſe, 12. And as in the
fourteene Chap. to the Hebrues, Hauing ſuch an High Prieſt, let vs goe boldly
vnto the throne of grace. ver. 16. But let the little clauſe be wel marked: as
if he ſaid, my ſtrength, by reaſon of mine iniquitie, is weakened, becauſe he
reciteth the firſt and ſpeciall cauſe of all calamities. For, therefore are we
burdened with ſo many and ſo great calamities, becauſe we all liue ill, and
euery one of vs doo offend, and finally, wee beare about with vs, ſinne
enlarged in vs. As therefore, The Spirit liueth for righteouſneſſe ſake: ſo
the body is mortified by reaſon of ſinne. Romans. 8. verſe, 10. But of thys in
other places.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=64)

Verſe. 13.

I became a reproofe among all mine enemies, but ſpecially among my Neighbours,
and they of mine acquaintance are afraide of me: and they that dyd ſee me
without, conueied themſelues from me.

Verſe. 14.

I am cleane forgotten as a dead man out of mind, I am become like a broken
veſſell.

Verſe. 15.

For I haue hearde the blaſphemie of the multi­tude, and feare is on euery
ſide, while they conſpyre together againſt me, and take theyr counſaile to
take away my life.

Hée deſcribeth with notable words, the image of a godlie exiled perſon, and
there needes no long interpretation in theſe complaints, becauſe they are
vnderſtood with their examples conſidered, eſpecially, in aſmuch as we
ourſelues doo ſuffer the like things. For GOD will haue vs, that in ſuch
calamities, both euen when wee are aſſaulted of our enemies, and alſo when we
are forſaken of our friendes, we ſhould verie neere reſemble the image of hys
Sonne, as it is written in the 8. to the Romans. He will alſo haue vs to lay
away from vs, the cō ­fidence in humane helps, and to craue helpe and
deliueraunce from him, as in another Pſalme it is ſayd: My Father & my Mother
forſooke me, but the Lord taketh me vppe. Pſalm, 27. verſe. 12.

Verſe. 16.

But my hope hath beene in thee ô Lorde, I haue ſaid, thou art my God.

Verſe. 17.

My time is in thy hande, deliuer mee from the hand of mine enemies, and from
them that perſecute mee.

Verſe. 18.

Shew thy ſeruaunt the light of thy countenaunce, and ſaue me for thy mercies
ſake.

Verſe. 19.

Let mee not be confounded ô Lorde, for I haue called vpon thee.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=64)Hée
repeteth the principall propoſition, as it was wont to be doone in all
wrytings, as if he ſayd: neyther am I ſo ouer­come with the forſaking of my
friendes, neyther am I ſo bro­ken with mine enemies furies, as to caſt away
hope of ſal­uation: but when there remained no good aduertiſement in mee, I
turned mine eyes to thee, and with vndoubting faith, I ſayd, Thou art my God.
O bleſſed are they, who in great violence of aduerſities, and concourſe of
calamities, doe flee vnto God. O wretched are they which fall downe vnder
ſor­row, as Saule and many others flee from God. Furthermore let the little
clauſe be marked of vs, viz. My time is in thyne hands. For God giueth euery
Paſtor or Teacher, his raſe of life, and in meane time preſerueth his body in
health, hee gy­ueth him ſafe dwelling, good pollicie, a place for teaching and
lyuing, to preſerue the ſhyppe wherin Paule iournied ſo long, till he ſafely
ariue into his wiſhed Hauen. Acts, 27, verſe, 44.

Hetherto appertaineth that ſaying of Chriſt, Suffer theſe to depart away. As
if he had ſaide, although it be a thing cer­taine, and deliberated vppon by
you, not onely to ſeeke the death of the Teacher and Maiſter, but alſo of his
Schollers and Diſciples, yet, I appoynt how farre you ſhall rage, and doe
fortifie ſufficiently enough my Miniſters againſt your crueltie. For if all
the Apoſtles had beene at one inſtant put to death, who ſhould haue borne
about, and ſpread abroad the Goſpell in the world?

Let vs therefore hold ſtill thys conſolation, the Teachers of the doctrine
cannot be at any time oppreſſed, before they ſhall haue ended theyr courſe.
Paule was often nerer death, then when he was beheaded by Nero: but becauſe
the laſt end of Paule life, was limitted in the handes of God, it was not yet
fully finiſhed, but by a wonderfull meanes was he ſaued and defended.

Idem. 19.

Let the vngodly be put to confuſion, and be put to ſilence in the graue.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=65)Verſe. 20.

Let the lying lyps be put to ſilence, which cruel­lie, diſdainefully, and
deſpitefully ſpeake againſt the righteous.

The Hiſtories of all ages doo notably declare theſe threat­nings, 2\. Mac. 15.
Nicanor when he had proudly threatned the deſtruction of the Temple of
Ieruſalem, beeing ſlaine in the battell, ſuffered condigne death, for hys
cruel, proude, and reprochfull ſpeech againſt the Church and Miniſtery of Gods
word. verſe. 5. & 28. So Arbogaſtus that Tyrant when hee had threatned, he
wold change the Churches into Stables for Horſes, beeing ouercome of
Theodoſius the Emperour in a great battell, ſlew himſelfe as Saule did. 1\.
Sam. 31. I omit the Hiſtories of Herod, Iulian, and others, which had the lyke
endes, when God exerciſed vpon them his wrath or iuſtice di­ſtributiue.

Verſe. 21.

O howe plentifull is thy goodneſſe, which thou haſt layd vp for them that
feare thee: and that thou haſt prepared for them that put theyr truſt in thee,
euen before the Sonnes of men.

Verſe. 22.

Thou ſhalt hyde thē priuily by thyne owne pre­ſence from the prouoking of all
men: thou ſhalt keepe them ſecretly in thy Tabernacle frō the ſtrife of
tongues.

Verſe. 23.

Thankes be to the Lord, for he hath ſhewed me meruailous great kindneſſe in a
ſtrong Cittie.

Auguſtine ſayth notably in a certaine place: Let others meruaile at Gods
power, whoſe ſteps ſhine in the moſt beau­tifull Theatre of the world: I will
meruaile at Gods goodnes and mercy, promiſed for Chriſt his ſake. Euen ſo
Dauid, as it were one amaſed with meruailing, at the mercifull louing
kindneſſe of GOD, cryeth out, How great is thy goodnes? which is not onely
ſecretly hidde, as in a Treaſurie, but alſo [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=65) openeth and
ſpreadeth it ſelfe abroade: For in the gouern­ment and defence, not onely of
the vniuerſall Church, but of all the godly ones alſo, this is manifeſtly
ſéene: thys goodnes is to be magnified and prayſed, with great thankfulneſſe,
like as Dauid magnifieth the ſame, ſaying: Thankes be to the Lord, for he hath
ſhewed me meruailous great kindneſſe in a ſtrong Cittie.

Verſe. 24.

And when I made haſt I ſayde, I am caſt out of the ſight of thine eyes.

Verſe. 25.

Neuertheleſſe, thou heardeſt the voice of my prayer, when I cryed vnto thee.

There can be no greater wounde made in mankinde by the deuill, then the tryall
of abiection: they which feele thys wounde, doo vnfainedly cry out with Dauid
and Ionas, I am caſt out of the ſight of thine eyes. But againſt thys byting
we muſt oppoſe prayer, and vnſpeakeable ſighings, like as Ionas in hys ſeconde
Chapter ſayth: When my ſoule was vexed in mee, I thought vppon the Lorde, that
my prayer might come vnto thee, euen to thy holy Temple. And that thys remedie
or Medicine is moſt effectual working of all others, this Pſalme witneſſeth,
which ſayth in thys laſt verſe, Thou heardeſt the voyce of my prayer, when I
cryed vnto thee.

So often therefore, as God ſuffereth vs not to be plunged into thys moſt
ſorrowfull tentation, let vs followe the exam­ples of Dauid and of Ionas, and
other the holy ones, which were not tongue-tyed, but with vnſpeakeable ſighing
called vpon God, & haue had ſufficient proofe of Gods deliuerance. Forthys
tentation differeth from deſperation, becauſe deſpe­rate perſons bring foorth
no prayers nor prayſes, but are an­gry with God, and doo flee from God: but
they which ſtryue with tentation of abiection, doo as yet retaine ſtill ſome
ſparke of fayth, and ſighing of prayer, and at length, by the helpe of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, doth ouercome the deuill.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=66)

Verſe. 26.

O loue the Lord all yee his Saints, for the Lorde preſerueth the faythfull,
and plentiouſly rewardeth he the proude dooer.

Verſe. 27.

Be ſtrong, and he ſhall ſtabliſh your hart: all ye that put your truſt in the
Lord.

Thys is a comfort or conſolation and an application of the example to the
vniuerſall Church: as if he ſaid, euen as I am heard of God, ſo ſhall you be
heard alſo: therefore be ſtrong, doo not become faint-harted, doo not caſt
away your confeſſi­on of the true doctrine, comfort and confirme your minds,
in hoping & expecting for Gods alone helpe. And there is a moſt ſweete promiſe
added: The Lorde ſhall ſtabliſh your hart, all ye that put your truſt in him:
that is, all yee which are true and conſtant, which embrace the truth of God,
and teach true doctrines without hypocriſie.

But contrariwiſe, God ſhall deſtroy the proude perſone, which moſt impudently,
and moſt proudly contemne GOD, truſting in humane power, for that pryde is
puniſhed of God, ſo often affirmeth the word of God, namely in the 16.
Chap­ter of S. Luke, What ſoeuer is glorious in the world, is abho­minable
before God. verſe. 15. And as Saint Peter in hys fift Chapter, ſayth: God
reſiſteth the proude, but giueth grace to the humble. verſe. 5.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=66)

## 11\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauid, to giue instruction. Beati Quorum.  
Of the Tytle.

THE title admoniſheth the Reader of the Au­thour, and of this kinde of
doctrine, which this Teacher profeſſeth: For GOD will haue no Bookes publiſhed
in the Church, without aſſured Authors. But therefore hee calleth ſome
Prophets, and ſome Apoſtles, & adorneth thē with teſtimonies, to the end we
may know from whence, and by whom the doctrine is accepted: therefore it is
needfull that Titles be ſette before the Bookes. And what manner of perſonage
Dauid was, and with what Spirite hee writ the Pſalmes, the very laſt words
which Dauid the Sonne of Iſai ſpake, doe witneſſe, viz. Euen the man who was
ſette vp on high, the annointed of the God of Jacob, and the ſweete ſinger of
Iſraell ſayth: The Spirit of the Lord ſpake by mee, and his worde was in my
tongue. 2, Sam. 23. verſe, 1, 2. Let vs therefore reade thys Pſalme, and the
reſt which Dauid hath made, euen as the Oracles of the holy Ghoſt, and let vs
not be otherwiſe affected in reading the Pſalmes, then as if we ſhould heare
the voyce of God ſounding from heauen.

Hetherto I haue ſpoken of the Authour, in truth more breefely then the
greatnes of the matter requireth. But there were not many moe words to be
vſed, ſithence in other places often, the prayſe of the Pſalmes is ſette
downe. Now muſt we ſpeake of the kinde of doctrine which is manifeſted in thys
Pſalme, that we may hold ſtill the Argument of the Pſalme [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=67) it ſelfe: but
the worde of the miniſtery of the Goſpell is one, and the ſame euerlaſting,
euen from the firſt preaching after Adams fall: namely, the preaching of
repentance, reproouing ſinne, and from thenceforth followed the promiſe of
forgiue­neſſe of ſinnes, and of reconciliation. Wherefore in this Pſal. which
by right, and worthily is called Maſcil, that is, The pro­per wiſedom of the
Church, (not knowne vnto Philoſophers nor Phariſeis,) there are ſpeciall
places contained, as the accuſing of ſinne, and the conſolation which
affirmeth, that the ſinnes of them which repent, are forgiuen, and that the
Church ſhal yet remaine, yea, euen amongſt the downefalles of kingdoms. And
although the ſelfe ſame goodneſſe, or excellencie of the things which are
expounded in thys Pſalme, may ſufficientlie ſtirre vp the godly ones, vnto the
perpetuall meditation of this writing: yet notwithſtanding, by the ſame alſo
may be eſtee­med, howe much commendation is to be attributed or giuen vnto
this Pſalme, ſo as Paule an Orator more rightly then Pe­ricles, thundering and
lightning in the midſt of his auditorie, vſed the teſtimonie of thys Pſalme in
a moſt weighty cauſe.

For when in his fourth Chapter to the Romans, he helde a ſharpe and ſeuere
diſputation, touching the righteouſneſſe of faith imputatiue, he vſed two
teſtimonies to confirme his, yea the opinion of the whole Church of God.
Whereof the firſt is out of the Hiſtory of Abraham, which Moſes writ
lightſom­lie: and the other is repeated out of the thirty-two Pſalme. Paule
lacked not for witneſſes, the conſciences of all the Pro­pheticall companie,
like as Peter ſayth: Ʋnto this man doe all the Prophets beare witneſſe, &c.
Acts. 10. But with a ſinguler aduiſement, he alledgeth two witneſſes, whoſe
dignitie & ex­cellencie is great, namely Moſes and Dauid.

For as the ſhyning Sunne, is the Captaine of the heauenly company, ſo is Moſes
the Moderator of all the other Prophets. For the other Prophets holde that for
ratified, which they ſee determined of this Graund Maiſter. But Dauid is the
naturall or lawfull Diſciple of Moſes, & (amongſt the Prophets which follow
Moſes,) ſhyneth as it were Heſperus or the morning ſtar [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=67) amongſt the
glimmering Night ſtars. And although all thys mans wrytings are ful of
teſtimonies (touching the free remiſ­ſion of ſinnes,) which are beſtowed vpon
the faithfull ones, for Chriſtes ſake the Mediator: yet notwithſtanding,
ſeeing Paule out of thys Pſalme, taketh his proofe of a cauſe, the greateſt
and largeſt of all others, there is no doubt, but the thirtie-two Pſalme, in
all the multitude & ſcope of the Pſalmes, glittereth like a notable precious
ſtone of rare vertue. But let this ſuffiſe to haue beene breefely before
admoniſhed, touching the Ar­gument and dignitie, wherewith thys Pſalme
excelleth many others.

### 11.1. ❧ The diſpoſition of the Pſalme.

Verſe. 1.

Bleſſed is he whoſe vnrighteouſneſſe is forgiuen, and whoſe ſinne is couered.

Verſe. 2.

Bleſſed is the man, vnto whom the Lord imputeth no ſinne: and in whoſe Spirit
there is no guile.

THE firſt place of thys Pſalme, is a notable and excellent teſtimonie of the
manner of iuſti­fication. For it teacheth how we may obtaine forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes, namelie, by the mer­cie of GOD, not imputing, but coue­ring our
filthineſſe and wretchedneſſe for the Mediators ſake. He plainely affirmeth,
They are bleſſed ▪ that is, iuſt, and the heyres of life euerlaſting, whoſe
ſinnes by the great mercy of God are forgiuen, couered, and not imputed vnto
them. Thys teſtimonie is ſo euident, firme, and perſp [...]cuous, that it
cannot be weakened by any cauillation: nor [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=68) mooued out of
place. Thys teſtimonie, as the Rocke immoo­uable in the Sea, reſiſteth all
ſtormes and tempeſts, accor­cording to thys verſe.

ƲT Pelagi rupes magno veniente fragore,

Quae ſeſe multis circum la [...]rantibus vndis

Mole tenet, ſcopuli nequicquam, et ſpumea circum

Saxa fremunt, laterique illiſa refunditur alga.

AS Rocke, or huge Sea banck, (which ſowſing tide,

With roring waues ruſh on) doth firme abide:

Nor Rock nor foming ſtones doe fret or fume:

But flagge or Reede ytoſt to'th ſhoare, conſume.

The ſecond place, is an applying of the determinate pur­poſe vnto the ground
of the matter, that is, a framing of the example vnto the rule: for Dauid by
hys example, teacheth the whole Church of a thing, the greateſt of all others,
name­ly, of accuſing and confeſſing of ſinne in great feares, and of
conuerſion vnto God, which is wrought by the confidence in the promiſed mercy
for the Mediators ſake.

I ſayth he, went about with many ſleights of ſecrete dea­lings, to couer, and
as it were with certaine ſayles, to ouer­ſpreade my ſinne: but whilſt I am
aſhamed to confeſſe my ſinnes, I fel into ſo great feares and downefals,
riſing by fee­ling Gods wrath, that I am almoſt at deathes dore. There­fore
looking circumſpectly about all my buſines, I had nought els remaining, but
one moſt ſafe receipt from feares, that I might acknowledge and confeſſe my
fault, and craue par­don with confidence, not of clemencie to be deſpayred,
but aſ­ſuredly promiſed for the Mediators ſake. Therefore the reſt of the holy
ones, looking well vppon myne examples, may learne likewiſe to confeſſe theyr
ſinne, and flee vnto the mer­cie of GOD, and there to reſt, as in a moſt ſafe
Hauen or Harbor▪ Thys is the manner whereby we obtaine remiſſi­on of ſinnes,
Thys is the way, either eaſie or hard, to come [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=68) vnto
iuſtification. By thys way it is néedefull that wee goe. And if any man will
ſeeke for other way, let him call vppon Fortune, as it was wont to be ſaid.

The thirde place is a conſolation, the greateſt of all, and moſt cheefely
neceſſary, which affirmeth, that the Church ſhal remaine, yea euen amongſt the
ſtormes & tempeſts of king­domes: ſurely at thys day all men haue neede of
this conſola­tion, ſeeing not onely the Turkiſh Armie, but alſo inteſtine and
inward warres yet in Germanie, ſticking by the rybbes, are within our
beholding.

The fourth place is, a moſt ſwéete promiſe of Gods go­uernment, which in ſo
great infirmitie of our nature, amongſt ſo many ſnares of the deuill, and
finally in ſo great a heape of buſines and dangers, we cannot want at all.

The fift place is, a preaching of repentance, which wit­neſſeth, that God not
onely reprehendeth ſinne by preaching the Law and the Goſpell, but alſo
compaſſeth vs about with tokens of our guiltineſſe, namely, horrible
calamities, pub­lique and priuate, which are the puniſhments for ſinne, and
the admoniſhments vnto repentance.

But leaſt the godly ones ſhoulde be vtterly cruſhed, and weakened with
violence of tempeſts, and concourſe of cala­mities, hée ſheweth the very ende,
and as it were the Port of reſt and tranquillitie, and diſcerneth the godly
ones from the vngodly ones. Although (ſayth he) puniſhments fall vpon the
vngodly, yet notwithſtanding, the godly ones ſhall bée pre­ſerued by
meruailous meanes, or ſurely ſhall be ſupported with a more inwarde
conſolation. For the Lorde knoweth a thouſand waies, howe to deliuer his
ſeruaunts out of theyr miſeries and tentations. This is the ſumme of thys
Pſalme, to the daily reading whereof, both the copiouſneſſe, and ſweet­neſſe
of the matters therein contained, and alſo the very trou­bleſome eſtate of our
daies doe exhort vs: wherin ſurely, both the doctrine and the conſolation
ſette downe by Dauid, is ne­neſſary vnto all the godly ones.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=69)

#### 11.1.1. Of the firſt place.

FOraſmuch as Grammer is the foundation of all true in­terpretation, firſt of
all let vs ſée, what is the natiue ſig­nification of the words which Dauid
vſeth, ſpeaking in the Hebrue tongue. Naſa with He in the ende, or Naſa with
Aleph, ſignifieth to take and lift away, which therefore is vſually ſayde:
Bleſſed are they whoſe iniquities are forgi­uen, that ſoundeth in the Hebrue
tongue thus: Bleſſed is hee who is lightened of hys iniquitie. And S. Iohn the
Euange­liſt ſeemeth to follow thys figure, when he ſaith: S. Iohn Bap­tiſt
called Chriſt the Lambe of God, which taketh awaie the ſinnes of the world.
1\. John. 36. Namely, that a man may vn­derſtand, ſinne is an intollerable
burden, and plunging vs downe euen to the very bottom of hell. Of which burden
yet notwithſtanding we are ſo deliuered, that the Sonne of God taketh it vpon
himſelfe, and lighteneth or eaſeth vs thereof.

I will adioyne heereunto, the words of the reuerend D. Martin Luther, in hys
expoſition vpon the fourth Chapter of Geneſis. If you apply the word Naſa vnto
the corporal thing, it ſignifieth to take vnto you, or to lift vp on high, as
in the 6. Chapter of Eſay it is ſayd. I ſaw the Lord ſitting vpon an high
throne, and lifted vp. verſe, 1. But thys is in a far other man­ner, then that
in thys 32. Pſalme. [Bleſſed is the man whoſe ſinnes are taken away,] and yet
notwithſtanding both one. The Grammarian vnderſtandeth that in Eſay, he
vnderſtan­deth not thys, becauſe hee knoweth not the matter. For it is one
thing, To ſitte vppon an high throne, and another thing, To take away ſinne:
that is, to forgiue, take away, or doo a­way: but ſpecially it is elegant and
fine, that, (by the worde Lightening,) hee compareth ſinne to a great burden,
vnder [[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=69)
which, Caine lyeth oppreſſed, ſo that hee cannot take breath, except it be
remooued from him. But the Epiſtle vnto the He­brues, declareth the manner
whereby we are lightened, and eaſed of thys burden, where he ſayth: By fayth
Abel offered a better ſacrifice. Chap. 11, verſe, 4.

Chaſchab. Touching thys word, excellently well ſaith the man of God, D. Martin
Luther, expounding the 15. Chapter of Geneſis. I doe not greatly gaine-ſay,
whether you take, that, to [repute,] or to [conſider of,] for the matter
commeth all to one effect. For when the Maieſtie of God thinketh vp­pon me,
that I am iuſt, that my ſinnes are forgiuen mee, that I am free from
euerlaſting death, & I with thankſgiuing in faith do apprehend this cogitation
of God touching me, I am then iuſt, not by my works, but by fayth, whereby I
hold faſt Gods thinking vpon me: for the cogitation of God, is infallible
ve­ritie. Therefore when I wyth a firme fayth, take hold of thys cogitation, I
am not iuſt with a wandering and doubtfull opi­nion.

For Fayth is a firme and certaine, eyther cogitation or confidence in God,
that he is mercifull for Chriſtes ſake, that for Chriſtes ſake, he thinketh
for our behoofe vppon the conſi­derations of peace, and not of affliction or
wrath. For theſe are Relatiues. The cogitation of God or his promiſe, and the
fayth whereby I hold faſt the promiſe of God. Therefore S. Paule hath rightly
rendered the word Chaſchab, by the worde  [...], to repute or eſteeme of,
which alſo alludeth vnto co­gitation, as the worde of [reputing.] For if thou
beléeueſt God promiſing, GOD reputeth thee for iuſt: but hetherto in­deede
ſerue theſe. Nowe let vs ſpeake of the ſentence Nega­tiue and Affirmatiue.

Bleſſed are they] that is, the iuſt before GOD, and the heyres of euerlaſting
life, not they which performe diſcipline without faith, which is wretched, and
vncleane hypocriſie, not vnlike to figge leaues, wherewith our firſt Parents
coue­red their nakedneſſe after theyr fall: neyther they which extol
themſelues by reaſon of the prerogatiues of Circumſition, or [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=70) of Sacrifices.
But they (who caſting away and vtterly refu­ſing all confidence in theyr
workes and merits) doo flee vnto the mercy of God, for hys Sonnes ſake the
promiſed Media­tor, and doo beléeue that theyr ſinnes are freely forgiuen
them, and that whether they be faultes doone and paſt, or preſent blemiſhes,
the ſame are couered, and not imputed vnto them. For although God requireth
our vertues, and will not haue vs cherriſh our ſelues in the luſtes of the
fleſh, but earneſtlie commaundeth vs, that we ſhould not onely bridle them,
but vtterly mortifie them: yet notwithſtanding, they can nothing auaile vs in
the iudgement of God, for they are polluted, and all to defiled with
concupiſcence.

Except therefore God doo turne away his eyes from our ſinnes, yea alſo euen
from our righteouſnes and vertues, and repute vs iuſt for hys Sonnes ſake,
whom fayth taketh holde vpon: all is loſt on our ſides: the onely mercy, or
the onelie reputation of God, ſaueth vs. Heere therefore is our doctrine
grounded, that we are made iuſt before GOD, onely by the mercy of GOD,
forgiuing and couering, and not imputing ſinnes.

Out of thys Fountaine hath Paule drawne hys diſputati­ons to the Romans and
Galathians, wherein hee attributeth righteouſneſſe vnto fayth, and not vnto
works, or to the Law. But in thys place, a plauſible and populer cauillation
is to be refuted, which bringeth vnto the proper and natiue meaning of thys
Pſalme, as it were a certaine darke night. For our aduerſaries doo ſay, Why
doe not you vnto thys Pſalme cited by Paule, adioyne other Pſalmes in like
manner, expreſſing of workes? As the man is bleſſed which conſidereth of the
poore and needy. &c. Pſal. 41. If by the figure Synecdochen (ſay they) ſayings
of works and fayth might be ioyned together, there would be ſeene a very fitte
interpretation, and the con­trouerſie ſhould be taken away. I aunſwer. Alwaies
in ſay­ings touching works, firſt it is needefull that the doctrine of
reconciliation ſhould be comprehended. Becauſe although Dauid dooth well in
making battels, yet the worke is not [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=70) pleaſing to God,
neyther dooth he call vpon God for helpe, ex­cept he firſt craue and beléeue
to haue his ſinnes forgiuen, for he hath alwaies ſinnes in thys life: but when
by faith hee re­ceiueth forgiueneſſe of hys ſinnes, it is needfull that this
faith ſticke to the promiſe of the Mediator, and not to his owne works. Thys
ſentence therefore remaineth firme, that recon­ciliation ought to goe before,
and that thys is by fayth doone freely: ſo thys ſaying firſt ſhineth foorth,
[Bleſſed are they whoſe iniquities are forgiuen,] beyonde all other ſpéeches,
which afterwards doe make mention of works. And ſeeing reconciliation is made
by fayth freely, the Synecdoche muſt be ſhut out and ſhunned, which confuſeth
the doctrine of Re­conciliation and of Works, and imagineth that
reconciliation is made by meanes of our works.

For, let the weightineſſe of the wordes be marked in the Pſalme: firſt he
nameth Forgiueneſſe, which is Reconcilia­tion, whereby God ceaſeth to be angry
with man, and wil not caſt him away into eternall puniſhments, but receiueth
him into fauour, loueth him, and will gouerne and ſaue him: and both hys
actuall ſins paſt are forgiuen him, and alſo the great infirmitie which as yet
remaineth, yea in the very regenerate perſons in thys life. Which thing
indeede is more notablie ſignified in the words following. Bleſſed are they
whoſe ſins are couered, which may be vnderſtoode, both of actuall, and ſinnes
remaining in mankinde, like as elſewhere it is ſayde, Pſalm, 130. If thou Lord
wilt be extreame, to marke what is doone amiſſe, who ſhall abide it? verſe. 3.
If GOD ſhoulde poure out all his wrath againſt our ſinnes, no man ſhould be
able to endure the greatneſſe of hys puniſhments: Like as Saule, Iudas, Dathan
and Abiron, were ouer-whelmed wyth ſuddaine terrors.

But of the holy ones it is often ſayd, as in Eſay the fourth Chapter: I haue
couered thee with a ſhadow in the day. verſe 6. That ſhadow is our Mediator,
the Sonne of GOD, for whoſe ſake, both our actuall ſinnes are forgiuen, our
puniſh­ments are mittigated, and our preſent & manifold infirmitie, [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=71) (though it be a
ſinne ſtriuing with the Law of God) yet is co­uered, that is forgiuen for the
Mediators ſake, making inter­ceſſion for vs.

Thys greatneſſe of the mercy of God, muſt be acknow­ledged, that we may giue
thanks vnto GOD, and our pray­ers be the leſſe hindered: for our owne diſtruſt
alwaies mur­mureth, crying out againſt vs, Why dooſt thou pray, ſeeing thou
art vniuſt, and vnworthy? But againſt thys diſtruſt, let the greatneſſe of
Gods mercy be thought vpon, who wil heare vs, and receiue vs, though we be
vncleane, becauſe hee coue­reth with a ſhadow, our ſinnes, and our
vncleaneneſſe, like as it is ſayd in the eyght to the Romans: There is now no
con­demnation vnto thē which are in Chriſt Ieſus. ver. 1. Thirdly it is ſayd:
Bleſſed is the man vnto whom God imputeth no ſinne: as if he ſaid. Truely
euery man hath ſinne in his cor­rupt nature, like as S. Iohn ſayth 1\. Iohn.
1. If we ſay we haue no ſinne, wee are lyars, verſe. 8. There reſteth in the
regene­rate, a great doubting of God, ſome lewde ſecuritie, or di­ſtruſt,
confidence in humane helps, and many wandering flames of luſtes.

Becauſe of theſe miſchiefes, God may iuſtly condemne vs, and puniſh vs with
horrible plagues. But hee imputeth not our ſinnes to vs, that is, he is not
angry with vs, as wyth guiltie perſons: and thys mercy he will haue to be ſo
aſſured vnto vs, as Eſay ſayth: The Mountaines ſhall remooue, and the Hylles
ſhall fall downe, but my mercy ſhall not depart from thee, neyther ſhall the
couenaunt of my peace fall away, ſayth the Lord that hath compaſſion on thee.
Chap. 54. ver. 10. That is to ſay: although all that is in the worlde, ſhoulde
vt­terly perriſh, yet know thou, that this my promiſe touching the Mediator,
ſhall remaine firme and ſtabliſhed: and there­fore doo thou by fayth embrace
the ſame, and with thys conſo­lation ſupport thy ſelfe: yea though many
offences, and many confuſions of humane things, with diuers temptations,
op­pugne and aſſault thy fayth.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=71)Neyther is
there any guile in hys Spirite.

That is, where the acknowledgement and confeſſion of ſinne is, where
acknowledgment of the mercy of GOD, and promiſed free reconciliation is,
holding faſt by fayth, the for­giueneſſe of ſinne, in ſuch a hart there is no
hypocriſie, diſſem­bling ſinne, or arrogating righteouſnes vnto it ſelfe. For
the firſt place, or principall propoſition, containeth two partes, namely,
that all men are vnder ſinne, alſo a promiſe, that God will forgiue ſinne. For
if we be iuſt, not for our worthi­neſſe or merits, but by God not imputing
ſinne, and by him forgiuing ſinne, it ought to be a thing moſt euident, that
all men haue ſinne, and that God is able to impute ſinne vnto al men:
therefore the ſumme of the firſt place of this Pſalme is, we are ſo reputed
iuſt, when wee acknowledge and confeſſe our ſelues to haue ſinne, and doo
beléeue that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs by Gods mercy for Chriſtes ſake.

This ſentence doo not onely the ſayings of the Scripture confirme, but alſo
the confeſſions of the godly Fathers: for ſo S. Ierome, in his Dialogue
againſt Pelagius the Heretique, ſayth: Then are wee iuſt, when wee confeſſe
our ſelues to be ſinners, and that our righteouſneſſe commeth not of our own
deſert, but of the mercie of God. And S. Auguſtine (whom Proſperus citeth)
ſayth: Our righteouſnes, although it bee true, for the true end of good,
wherunto it is referred, yet ſuch it is in thys life, that it rather is
apparant in remiſſion of our ſinnes, then in the perfection of our vertues.

#### 11.1.2. The ſecond place.

THE ſecond place is Dauids confeſſion, ſhewing an exam­ple of the proponed
ſpeech. Thys confeſſion is amplified with a diſcription of horrible feares and
humblings, touching [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=72) which, Ezechias
the King ſayd: Like a Lyon hath he broken all my bones.

Verſe. 3.

For while I helde my tongue, my bones conſumed away through my daily
complaining.

Like as Minos the Iudge remooued the pitcher, ſo God by laying puniſhments
vpon vs, namely with the feeling of his wrath, expreſſeth vnto vs the
confeſſion of ſinne. And confeſſi­on is to acknowledge ſinne, and to craue and
beléeue to haue forgiueneſſe thereof. Contrariwiſe, to be ſilent, is to feele
ſin, and not to craue or beleeue frée remiſſion of ſinne, but to re­maine in
doubting and in feares, or to ſeeke for conſolation by our works: lyke as ſome
by Monckeries, & others by works doo ſeeke it.

Where he addeth, My bones were conſumed, he meaneth, his bones (the feeling of
ſinne, which the Lawe of God wor­keth in our harts or mindes) to be conſumed
away. For by thys féeling of Gods wrath againſt ſinne, the courage and
ſtrength of the body is quailed, and wonderfully afflicted, as in ſuddaine
dangers of death, and in other great ſorrowes we ſée by experience. Touching
thys breaking or conſuming of bones, reade Doctor Luthers expoſition vpon the
51. Pſal.

Verſe. 4.

For thy hande is heauie vppon me day and night.

Hée expoundeth the cauſe from which theſe feares and humblings vnſpeakeable
doo riſe: for ye hand of God is migh­tie vnto both, eyther to humble or to
exalte, according to that ſaying of Peter. Humble your ſelues vnder the
mightie hand of God, that he may exalt you in time conuenient. 1\. Pet. 5.6.
Great is the ſorrowes which the bodies, (eyther ſlaine wyth ſworde, or torne
in peeces with beaſtes) doo feele: but nothing are the moſt cruell tormentings
of the bodie, if they be compa­red with true feares, and ſorrowes of the
minde, which ryſe by feeling the wrath of God, and which are elſewhere often
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=72) deſcribed
in the Pſalmes. For how much more the force of the minde excelleth that of the
body, ſo much more greeuous are thoſe things felt in the minde, then in the
body.

Idem.

And my moyſture is like the drought in Summer.

Like as before he compared hys vnſpeakeable ſighes and grones vnto the roaring
of Lyons, which when all wilde Beaſtes doo heare, they tremble with feare: ſo
nowe with a moſt pleaſant figure, hee deſcribeth the faintneſſe or
langui­ſhing of hys hart: for as in the Sommer ſeaſon all things are parched,
and the fennie places are dryed vp with heate, ſo the word Laſchad, that is,
the radicall humor by feeling the wrath of God, is withered and ſcorched. For
the hart in great ſad­neſſe is dryed vp and ſcorched, as the Marques C
[...]ſſimiros his hart (béeing taken out of his bodie when he was deade,) men
ſay it was like vnto a dry Peare.

Neyther indeede can I deliuer you a more notable de­ſcription of ſadnes, then
that which is extant in the wrytings of Phiſicke: ſadnes therefore is a motion
of the hart, where­with the hart beeing ſtriken with ſome contrary miſliking,
is conſtrained, preſſed, trembleth, and languiſheth with a ſharpe feeling of
ſorrowe: and except the ſadnes ſurceaſe, at length the hart béeing dryed vp,
vtterly perriſheth. Thys vexation or torment is ordained for vs, that both the
feare of future euill might reſtraine vs, and ſadneſſe for the euill paſt
ſhoulde be a reuenger, and the puniſhment for offences, and the witneſſe of
Gods iudgement.

Verſe. 5.

I will knowledge my ſinne vnto thee, and I wyll not hyde mine vnrighteouſnes.

Verſe. 6.

I ſayd I will confeſſe my ſinnes vnto the Lord, and ſo thou forgaueſt the
wickedneſſe of my ſinne.

After a large and lightſome deſcription of hys feares, now followeth a
repeticion, and declaration of the principall pro­poſition: [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=73) ſo man obtayneth
remiſſion of ſinne, when he con­feſſeth his ſinne, and craueth frée remiſſion
for the promiſe of Gods ſake. Thys is a ſwéete and firme conſolation, truely
be­ginning in our hart life euerlaſting: which affirmeth that we haue
forgiueneſſe aſſuredly, yea though wee bring no merits with vs, but thys ſame
very groning acknowledging ſinne, and crauing forgiueneſſe of ſinne.

For ſeeing thys Pſalme perſpicuouſly, treateth of the frée forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes alwaies, let vs beare about with vs in our minde and hart, thys
doctrine and conſolation, and let vs exerciſe the ſame in daily prayer and
repentance: which whē wee ſhall doo, the proper and natiue meaning of the
Pſalme, ſhall be more excellent in vs.

Verſe. 7.

For thys, ſhall euery one that is godly make hys prayer vnto thee, in a time
when thou mayſt be founde.

Hée tranſ-ferreth or applieth the example of the manner of iuſtification, that
is, of the confeſſion of ſinne, and the forgiue­neſſe thereof, vnto the
vniuerſall Church, as if he ſayd: [al­though the holy ones acknowledge
themſelues to haue ſinnes in them, and doo craue and beléeue they are forgiuen
them,] you ſée then, that the doctrine of repentance and of forgiuenes are
ioyned together: he promiſeth not forgiuenes vnto ſecure perſons, and ſuch as
doo not ſorrow for their ſinnes, but vnto them in whoſe harts are remaining
feares and conſolations. And although Hypocrites doo ſharply contend, that the
rege­nerate perſons, doo ſatiſ-fie the Lawe, and be iuſt by fulfilling the
Lawe: yet notwithſtanding, all the godly ones confeſſe, that they ſtill carry
about with them many and great euils, and doo with continuall teares bewaile
them: namely, doub­tings, diſtruſt, ſecuritie, and many flames of vicious
luſts, which hypocrites doo diſſemble with all. But the holy ones doo
acknowledge that they haue ſinnes in them, and doo craue for­giueneſſe of
them, and reſt applauding in the doctrine of thys [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=73) Pſalme: they
know they are ſo iuſt, becauſe theyr ſinne is co­uered, and not imputed vnto
them.

Hetherunto appertaineth the memorable ſaying of S. Au­guſtine in hys booke of
Eccleſiaſticall opinions, Chapter 37\. The holie ones, (ſayth he) doe
earneſtly, and in theyr owne perſon pray: forgiue vs our ſinnes; Let him be
accurſed that thinkes or deemes the contrary, and giueth vnto the holy ones,
an imagination fained in thys behalfe.

#### 11.1.3. Of the third place.

Idem.

But in the great water floodes they ſhal not come nigh him.

Verſe. 8.

Thou art a place to hide mee in, thou ſhalt pre­ſerue me from trouble: thou
ſhalt compaſſe mee a­bout with Songes of deliueraunce.

There are many notable lights of words in theſe verſes, which we ought not at
a bluſh to looke vpon, but with eyes full bent to conſider of. The word Sether
is a Den in which a­ny thing is hidden: ſo Eſay writeth in hys fourth Chapter.
For vpon all the glory ſhall be a defence, and a couering ſhall be for a
ſhadow in the day for the heate, and a place of refuge, & a couert for the
ſtorme, and for the rayne. verſe. 5.6. And in the 91. Pſalme, Dauid ſayth: Who
ſo dwelleth vnder the de­fence of the moſt High, ſhall abide vnder the ſhadowe
of the Almightie. verſe. 1. But it ſhould be too too long, to proſecute all
the examples of thys ſignification.1\. Reg. 18, 4 Like as therefore Ab­dias
hyd the Prophets, leaſt that they ſhould haue been ſlaine of wicked Ieſabell,
ſo God by wonderfull meanes protecteth his Church, and all the godly ones,
againſt the furies of the deuill and his inſtruments. The word Pallet,
ſignifieth to bée eſcaped out of the enemies handes, as in Geneſis, 14. it is
[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=74) ſaid: And
there came one which had eſcaped. ver. 13. Doctor Luther addeth heereupon. The
word Happalit, is to be noted in thys place, which ſignifieth Taken away, and
as wee were wont to ſay, the reſidue of any hauock or deſolation: and it is
the proper naming of the holy ones. For God ſuffereth theſe ſo to be plunged
in daungers, that they ſeeme to be bewailed, and yet at ye length they are
deliuered by meruailous meanes. So, when all the whole world ſhall be
condemned, we which confeſſe Chriſt, and truſt in hys death, ſhall be
preſerued as the Remnaunts.

Heere alſo the Reader is to be admoniſhed, of the moſt pleaſant figure, wherin
the holy Ghoſt, as an excellent Pain­ter deſcribeth the furie of the deuill
and the world. For hee cō ­pareth the enemies which addreſſe and put in
practiſe all the indeuour of theyr kingdome vnto our deſtruction, like
ouer­flowing waters ruſhing vpon the Lande, both with great vi­olence, and
with great aſſault: not to that ende onely to ſhew what the aduerſaries doo
thinke, but alſo to admoniſh vs, that in men there is not ſo great ſtrength
and courage, that we are able to endure theyr deadly ouercharging vs: namely,
that in ſuch daungers, we may not onely forgette humane defences, which ſeeme
able to be oppoſed, but alſo that we may altoge­ther deſpayre of them, and
onely leane vnto him, who in this caſe is called a Hyding place.

Thus farre haue I ſpoken of the Grammaticall expoſiti­on, which
notwithſtanding can neuer be conceiued enough: nowe it followeth, that I
ſpeake a fewe wordes touching the matters themſelues, for the order and
lengthening of the Pſalme.

S. Paule, in the 8. to the Romans, compriſeth the whole order whereby God
createth & conſerueth the Church. Whom he hath choſen, thoſe hee hath called,
whom hee hath called, them alſo hath he iuſtified, and whom he hath iuſtified,
them alſo hath he glorified. verſe. 30. As thoſe whom hee will haue made like
to the Image of the Sonne of God. Seeing there­fore Dauid in thys moſt learned
Pſalme, had ſaide ſufficient [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=74) enough, touching
the iuſtification of the Elect, and thoſe that are called: he adioyneth
héereunto a new kinde of preaching, touching the Croſſe and glorification of
the Church, which is a meruailous defence, conſeruation and gouernment of the
poore and needy Congregation diſperſed, and truſting in the Name of the Lorde.
For becauſe the deuill burneth with a deadly hatred againſt GOD and hys
Church, he neuer cea­ſeth to enflame hys inſtruments, the Tyrants &
Heretiques, to exerciſe theyr crueltie againſt the afflicted renmants of the
Church, and to deface the doctrine with ſcandales & diſcordes of opinions.

Time would ſoone fayle me, if I ſhould repeate the exam­ples of all ages,
which declare the beaſtly crueltie of the de­uill againſt the feeble flocke,
which is the keeper of true doc­trine. Therefore omitting the recitall of
examples, which by reaſon of antiquitie, are farre remote from our memory, let
vs conſider the dangers, calamities, and conflicts of our time. For if euer
the deuill at any time whetted his teeth, euen now ſurely as it were looſed
from his chaynes, hee rangeth in the world, ſtyrring battels vpon battels, and
engendering diuers monſters of opinions, that with ſlaughter and lyes hee
might oppreſſe and extinguiſh the Church, now wexing old. There­fore raging in
thys laſt age of the worlde, hee rangeth Lyon-lyke, which in much ſlaughter as
a Conquerour, lyeth pro­ſtrate vpon hys pray wyth hys iawe embrued with blood,
and when hunger is driuen away, yet for all that layeth not away hys wrath,
but heere and there throwing downe Bulles, hee threatens the Calues, and now
wexeth ſhow with a wearie tooth: becauſe he ſeeth that day draweth neere,
wherein hys exceeding filthineſſe ſhall be layde open, and hys endleſſe
tor­ments ſhall more and more be increaſed.

But againſt thys raging furie of the deuill and the world, thys Pſalme ſetteth
downe a Trench or defence, which no power created can ouercome. For as God
hath appointed the Sea within hys limits and bounds, to the ende it ſhoulde
not with daily Deluge ouerwhelme vs: ſo hath hee encloſed the [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=75) deuill within
hys boundes, which to kéepe and containe his furie, it is needfull. For
although the Church in ſome part be perſecuted, yet the Church is the
Conquerour, and the rem­nants are by meruailous meanes preſerued and defended,
not indéede with Bowe and Sword, but by the Lord God, as it is ſayd, Hoſea. 1.
verſe. 7. Wherefore, in the moſt ſorrowfull ſpectacles of ciuill broyles, and
which as yet ſticke by the rybs of Germanie, and in beholding the confuſion of
opinions, let vs caſt our eyes vnto thys moſt ſwéete promiſe: But in the great
water floods they ſhal not come nigh him. As if he ſaid: Thou art vnto me a
defence or ſhade, thou kneweſt to deliuer me out of temptation, whether it be
by glorious deliueraunce in thys life, or by inwarde conſolation, or by other
meanes, which are pleaſing vnto thee, and are wholeſome for me. Laſt of all he
ſayth, Thou ſhalt compaſſe me about with Songes of deliueraunce. For as they
who when they ſeeme to bee taken pryſoners, haue eſcaped ſafely, and ioyfully
haue ſunge ſome ſolemne ſong of victory: ſo ſhall I with all thy vniuerſall
Church, magnifie thy goodneſſe, wherein thou haſt not giuen vs as a pray vnto
the enemies iawes, and haſt deliuered our ſoule as the ſilly byrde out of the
Fowlers ſhare: finally, brea­king the ſnare thou haſt deliuered vs, as it is
moſt ſweetlie ſaid in the 124. Pſalme. But no ſpeech may ſufficientlie bee
able to expreſſe at full, and enlarge the worthines of this pro­miſe:
therefore I will be more breefe, and wil nowe come to the verſes following.

#### 11.1.4. ❧ Of the fourth place of the Pſalme.

Verſe. 9.

I wyll enforme thee, and teach thee in the waie wherein thou ſhalt goe: and I
will guide thee wyth mine eye.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=75)The Way
ſignifieth vſually our vocation: and there is no vocation whereunto mans alone
wiſedom or vertue without God, can be anſwerable: Like as Ieremie in hys tenth
Chap­ter ſayth, O Lord, I know, that the way of man is not in him­ſelfe,
neyther is it in man to walke and direct his ſteppes. ver. 23. As if he ſayd:
I acknowledge, & by proofe it ſelfe I finde, that we ſillie wretches in euery
our vocation, are by al means beſette and aſſaulted with our infirmitie, of
the deuill, and of diuers ſcandales and daungers: thou therefore gouerne vs,
and make vs veſſels of mercy. &c. For as the ſilly ſheepe hath neede of
defence, not onely againſt Wolues and Lyons, but alſo of gouernment, that ſhee
fall not into the Fennie rotten groundes, and other inextricable miſchaunces:
ſo ſurelie wee had neede, (in ſo great infirmitie of ours, and amongſt ſo
ma­ny ſnares of the deuill,) not of defence only, but alſo of gouer­ning our
minde, will, and hart, that eyther our opinions and enterpriſes ſwerue not
from the will of God, or that our af­fections raſhly ranging, doo make
diſperſions, or ſcatterings from the flocke, and ſtirre vppe offences hurtfull
vnto the Church.

Heereof are all thoſe ſpeeches, ſo often repeated in the Pſalmes, as in the
fift Pſalme, Lorde leade me in thy righte­ouſnes becauſe of mine enemies,
direct my way in thy ſight. And in the 143. Pſalme, Teach mee to doe thy will,
becauſe thou art my God, let thy good Spirit leade mee in the right way. And
in the 119. Pſalme. Direct my ſteps according to thy word, that no
vnrighteouſneſſe haue power ouer me. &c. So in thys place, the promiſe of Gods
gouernment is wyth moſt ſweet words recited: I will enforme thee and teach
thee in the way wherein thou ſhalt walke. That is, I will rule thée with
counſaile, and will bring to paſſe, that thy labour ſhall not be in vaine, but
that my glory may be aduaunced by thee, and that many by thy miniſterie, may
be called vnto the ſoci­etie of eternall life.

Finally, I will guide thee with mine eye. That is, like as Princes doo not
alwaies vſe words and ſpeeche, ſo often as it [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=76) pleaſeth them to
commaund any thing, but oftentimes euen with a becke, or eye-wincke onely, doe
giue notice what their pleaſure is: ſo I with an inwarde conſolation will
ſupport thee, leaſt thou fayle, or leaſt thou be ouercome of thyne ene­mies.

The ſame figure (then which, none is more pleaſant) may be beautified by the
example of the Goldſmith. Hee when hee hath caſt hys golde into the fire,
neuer turneth hys eyes from it, but firing them thereon, ſtedfaſtlie beholdeth
the ſame, and taketh dilligent heede, that it be left no longer then reaſon
re­quireth in the earthen veſſell. Euen ſo in like manner, God hath an eye to
our counſels, actions, conflicts, and dangers, and ſuffereth vs not to be
tempted aboue our ſtrengthes, but with temptation giueth an ende, that we may
be able to abide the ſame. But the ſweetneſſe of thys figure, cannot be
expreſ­ſed with any eloquence.

#### 11.1.5. ¶ Of the fift and laſt place.

Verſe. 10.

Be yee not like to Horſe and Mule, which haue no vnderſtanding: whoſe mouthes
muſt be holden with bitte and bridle, leaſt they fall vpon thee.

Verſe. 11.

Great plagues remaine for the vngodly, but who ſo putteth his truſt in the
Lorde, mercy embraceth him on euery ſide.

Alwaies in the true Church, both the doctrines doo ſounde, viz. Preaching of
repentaunce, and the voyce of the Goſpell, touching forgiueneſſe of ſinnes:
therefore he now addeth the preaching which exhorteth to repentance. Bee yee
not like to Horſe and Mule. &c. That is, acknowledge the wrath of [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=76) God againſt
ſinne, nouriſh not euery your luſtes, continue not in offending againſt your
conſcience, but caſt yee away the purpoſe of ſinning, and flee yee vnto God in
confidence of hys Sonne, and in thys fayth receiue yee the forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes, and begin ye newe obedience acceptable to God. For except ye doo
repent you, God will bridle you, and chaſtiſe you ſharpely: for death, and
other humane miſeries, are the pry­ſons of the vngodly, and the Inne, lodging,
or ſchoole place of the godly ones, which ought to admoniſh men, touching the
wrath of God againſt ſinne.

Horrible plagues were diſperſed throughout all ye world, Sodom, Egipt,
Ieruſalem, Babilon, and Rome are deſtroyed. God by theſe examples, both
brideleth the vngodly ones, and warneth all men to acknowledge, that God is
vnfainedly an­gry with ſinnes, and that to the ende ſome may be conuerted vnto
God. Furthermore, he teacheth that the holy ones, yea though they be together
afflicted, yet they are preſerued, and at length deliuered from death and all
euils. For both the god­ly and vngodly ones, are burdened with death, and
vexed with horrible calamities. But the vngodly doo vtterly perriſh, and fall
into eternall deſtruction, becauſe they will not be con­uerted vnto God, and
receiue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: but con­trariwiſe, they which craue remiſſion
of ſinnes, know them­ſelues by reaſon of ſinne, to be ſubiect vnto death and
other miſeries, (and yet they are not caſt away from God for all theſe
puniſhments.)

Therefore they endure calamitie, and craue forgiueneſſe, and know that they
are vnfainedly heard and helped of God, and at length haue theyr deliuerance
appointed them.

Verſe. 12.

Be glad ô ye righteous, and reioyce in the Lorde, and be ioyfull all ye that
are true of hart.

Very many Pſalmes are like vnto Epigrams, wherein ſome ſentence béeing
propoſed, after that followe amplificati­ons, taken out of vſuall precepts,
and laſt of all is added, a [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=77) concluſion: ſo
this Pſalme endeth with thys concluſion. They which hold faſt theſe
conſolations of free remiſſion, and of helpe in calamitie, doo find in great
dolors, true eaſe and deli­ueraunce, yea the taſt and beginning of life
euerlaſting.

All thys whole doctrine, beſides and beyond Philoſophy, and the iudgement of
mans reaſon, is to be preferred, and diſcerned from the Lawe. For it is the
voyce of the Goſpell, wherein the ſecrete will of God is manifeſted touching
true remiſſion of ſinnes, and touching true conſolation in perſe­cution.

Therefore thys Pſalme is of diuers interpretations de­formed: becauſe fewe doo
rightly vnderſtande the doctrine of frée remiſſion of ſinnes, and many
vnlearned perſons, confu­ſedly deale with thoſe kindes of doctrine, the Lawe
and the Goſpell.

## 12\. A Pſalme of Dauid exhortatorie, to praiſe and thanke God. Exultate
iuſti in Domino.

The Argument.

ALthough thys Pſalme be chiefely conſiſting in giuing of thanks, celebrating
the creation of things, euen from nothing, and the proui­dence wherewith God
is preſent in his work­manſhip, not as a Stoicall God, but as dooing that
which is moſt freely doone: yet notwith­ſtanding, there is by way annexed vnto
thankſgiuing, a moſt ample doctrine, touching the true worſhippings of God,
and touching Feare and Fayth.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=77)For as the
thinking vpon the vnſpeakeable goodneſſe and mercy of God, ſtirreth vp fayth
in our harts, ſo the conſidera­tion of the power and maieſtie of God,
procureth feare. Let vs therefore borrow out of thys Pſalme, firme and euident
te­ſtimonies of the creation of the world, euen from nothing, and of
prouidence, and beeing confirmed as touching theſe ſay­ings, let vs conſtantly
reiect the opinions of Epicures and Stoicks, which murmure in mens mindes
whiles they are in praying: let vs not imagine, that God is abſent frō his
work­manſhip, or cannot doe otherwiſe then as ſeconde cauſes doe mooue him.

But let vs with moſt firme aſſent beleeue, that God is pre­ſent with all his
Creatures, and that all which are preſerued, and ſo farre forth as they are
preſerued, are ſupported and maintained by God: but yet ſo, as God is dooing
that which is freely to be doone, hee maintaining it ſo long as it pleaſeth
him, and therewith dooth it, ſo farre as he hath in his proui­dence decreed it
to be doone: and that he doth moderate & change ſome things through his
vnſpeakeable goodneſſe, for the welfare of his Church.

Then after thys conſidered, let vs walke before the Lorde in Feare and in
Fayth, as the ſeconde Pſalme commaundeth: Serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce
vnto him with reuerence. ver. 11. That is, let there be in vs a moſt ſweete
mixture, and ſocie­tie or copulation moſt delectable of both affections, of
Feare, and of Fayth. And let our harts indeede beleeue, that the ly­uing and
true God is our Creator, nouriſher, and gentle Fa­ther, dealing with vs as
with his tender children; but let our harts therewith acknowledge his
righteouſnes, feare his iudge­ment, and obey him, ſhunning all occaſions of
ſinning. And if in thys manner we ſhall apply vnto our vſe the ſayings of thys
Pſalme: the reading thereof ſhall be both more notable and more ſweete vnto
vs.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=78)

### 12.1. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

Reioyce in the Lorde, ô yee righteous: for it be­commeth well the iuſt to be
thankfull.

Verſe. 2.

Prayſe the Lorde with harpe: ſing Pſalmes vnto him with the Lute, and
inſtrument of ten ſtrings.

Verſe. 3.

Sing vnto the Lord a newe ſonge, ſing praiſes lu­ſtilie vnto him with a good
courage.

THE Prophet héere beginneth with a heauen­ly Poeme touching GOD, and the works
of God, from a propoſition Paraneticall, which declareth, that Dauids minde
when hee ſunge thys, was full of ioy, and gladnes of the holie Ghoſt
vnſpeakeable. I doo exhorte (ſaith hee) all men which are vpright in fayth,
and haue good conſcience, to acknow­ledge Gods preſence and goodnes: whoſe
ſteps ſhine not on­ly in this vniuerſall béeing of all things, in thys
beautiful and wide world, and in the high heauen diſtinguiſhed with ſo ma­nie
lights of ſtars, in that mighty great maſſe of the earth, in the almoſt
infinite greatneſſe of the Sea, but chéefeſt of all in his Church: which God
vnfainedly beholdeth and careth for, to whom he giueth his word, whom he
calleth, whom hee hel­peth, finally, whom he heareth and preſerueth, both in
thys lyfe, and after thys life.

Therefore thys infinite and great goodneſſe and mercy of God béeing knowne,
the greatneſſe of his works, and as S. Paule ſayth: The manifold diuers
wiſedome of God beeing knowne. Col. 1.9. Let the godly ones reioyce in God,
and re­ioyſing giue thanks: let them worſhyppe and reuerence hys [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=78) preſence in hys
wonderfull workes, that by Fayth and the Spirit, they may receiue a certaine
taſte of euerlaſting lyfe. Theſe moſt ſweete affects of ioy and gladneſſe
vnſpeakeable, doo not the Epicures feele, which doubt of Gods prouidence, nor
the bitter enemies of the Goſpell, nor hypocrites & proude Phariſies, nor
fooles, which are in loue with the winde and ſmoke of worldly glory: but the
iuſt and righteous men vnto whom God hath giuen the light of his Goſpell, and
as Saint Paule ſaith: The firſt fruites of the Spirit of Chriſt, and the
pledge of heauenly bleſſings and of life euerlaſting. 1\. Corin. 15. verſe.
23.

Let them take their notable beatitude, and theyr ioyes, which ſeeke nothing
but the pleaſures of thys world, and the inſtruments of them: let them leaue
vnto vs weake and vn­worthy perſons that cheefe good thing, that ſame true,
and by all meanes abſolute wiſedome, that ſame alone and perfect beatitude,
touching which, Chriſt our Lorde himſelfe, in a ſhort and moſt weightie
ſentence ſaith: Thys is eternall lyfe, to knowe thee the true God, and whom
thou haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt. Iohn, 17. verſe, 3. The ſumme or effect therefore
of the thrée verſes in the beginning, is thys. Let vs (knowing the infinite
wiſedome and goodnes of GOD, alſo beholding the greatneſſe, varietie, and
meruailous force and power of God working in all things,) reioyce in God, and
in all his works, and with great ioy and gladneſſe let vs giue thankes vnto
him.

Verſe. 4.

For the worde of the Lord is true, & all his works are faithfull.

The firſt Anologie of the propoſition, is taken from the Truth of God,
therefore let all mens mindes & tongues wor­ſhip God, becauſe he is True, and
with a right fayth perfor­meth his promiſes: thys vertue is made more euident,
by conſidering the Antitheſis. Mans nature is wrapped in many cloakes or
colours of diſſimulations, & is as it were bolſtered [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=79) and borne out
with certaine ſayles: the fore-heade, counte­naunce and eyes, oftentimes
diſſemble, but the ſpeeche moſt often.

But touching God, we muſt beleeue that he is true, and that his worde hath no
ſnares or ambiguities hurtfull vnto men: as it were the Apple of contention,
or the riddles of the Monſter Sphinx, nor that the threatnings of God are
vaine terrifying, nor hys promiſes ſette foorth to allure fooles by all
meanes: for that ſentence which is ſette downe by S. Paule is immoouable: God
is true and without falſhood.

Verſe. 5.

He loueth righteouſneſſe and iudgement.

An other reaſon taken from the moderation of the righte­ouſnes and mercy in
God: God dealeth not with vs by ſtrickt Law, but moderateth his iuſtice with
clemencie. When thys purpoſe is confirmed in our mindes, the Feare of God,
Faith or Confidence, and Hope of pardon appeare in theyr order.

Dauid aſſuredly feared, and looked for puniſhments for his adultery: but he
knew that there were degrees appointed of Feare and of Fayth, according to
that ſaying of S. Paule, Grace aboundeth aboue ſinne. Rom. 5. verſe. 21. Hee
therefore craueth pardon, and knoweth that the faithfull are accepted, and doo
obtaine mittigation of theyr puniſhments.

Idem.

The earth is full of the goodneſſe of the Lord.

Verſe. 6.

By the word of the Lord were the heauens made, and all the hoſtes of thē by
the breath of his mouth.

Verſe. 7.

He gathereth the waters of the Sea together, as it were vpon an heape, and
layeth vp the deepe as in a treaſure houſe.

The thyrd reaſon is taken from the Creation, becauſe he is the Creator and
preſeruer of all and euery thing whatſoe­uer: thys reaſon is amplified in the
diſtribution: for the ſcrip­ture reciteth three parts of the world, the
Heauen, the Earth, [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=79) and the Sea: now
let the Reader conſider what fitte Meta­phors thys our Poet hath and dooth vſe
in deſcribing the parts of the world.

In the Heauen (he ſayth) that the proportion of the hoſtes, is there liuely
ordained, moſt worthy of conſideration and ad­miration: for the Sunne is the
Captaine and Ruler of the o­ther lights, thys Captaine doo the Plannets as it
were Offi­cers of account, eyther goe before or followe, or goe by hys ſides.
Alſo moſt elegantly hath Manilius written, almoſt euen like as the degrees of
men are in a Common wealth: ſome béeing Noble men, others Knights, and others
Common peo­ple: ſo doo ſome ſtarres excel others in theyr power or might. Hys
verſes are theſe.

ƲT que per ingentem populus deſcribitur vrbem,

Praecipuumque Patres retinent, et proximum equeſter,

Ordo locum poſt quem ſuccedunt agmina Plebis,

Jn qua vulgus iners magna & ſine nomine turba eſt

Sic Natura gradus ſtellarum condidit, vt ſint,

Et procerum ſimiles aliquae, primaſque ſequatur,

Languidior tenui ſplendens fulgore Caterua.

Sydera nam paribus, ſi certent omnia flammis,

Jpſe ſuos ignes Aether tollerare nequiret,

Totus et accenſo Mundus flagraret Olympo.

AND euen like as by Cittie great,

the people is compard,

Where cheefeſt place the Fathers haue,

the Knights next, afterward

The order then which followeth,

is the Commenaltie by name,

Which dooth include a multitude,

deuoide of skill or fame:

So Nature hath ordaind degrees

of ſtarres in ſtately skie,

Some like to Lords, and ſome againe

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=80)Inferiors
to ſupplie.

But multitude of ſtarres is made,

of meane and ſlender might,

For if all ſtarres ſhould once contend

with equall flame of light,

The Element could not endure

to feele ſuch feruent heate,

But with heauen fyered, all the world

ſhould burne with blazing great.

Touching the Earth, he ſayth, It is full of the goodnes of the Lord: for who
would not of right meruaile at the effectu­all propertie of the Earth, and at
the fruitfulnes thereof in all kinde of growing things. We enioy and haue
daily vſe of ſo many herbes, ſo many remedies, ſuch diuerſitie in iuyces and
ſmels which the ſelfe ſame earth bringeth foorth, all which ſpring vp, and
grow out of one and the ſame Earth, and doe flouriſh with a moſt
incomprehenſible and a moſt hidden in­creaſe. Neyther indéede in the outward
face onely dooth ſhee ſende forth theſe riches to vs, but alſo holdeth diuers
kinds of Mettals conceiued in her very bowels, moſt excellent preci­ous
ſtones, and other miracles, with admiration whereof, Dauid béeing amazed,
rightly cryeth out, The Earth is full of the goodneſſe of the Lord.

Laſtly, touching the Sea, he addeth that the fame hath an incredible
greatneſſe, as it were ſhutte vp in a wombe or bel­lie, leaſt burſting the
bancks, it ouercome all, and with a déepe ſurge, getting ouer all oppoſite
ſtops, runneth with rage car­ried into the open groundes, with ſuch increaſe,
and through all the fieldes, that it carrieth away by force, both the Cattell
and theyr harbouring places. But he rightly compareth the depth of the Sea
vnto a Treaſure houſe, ſeeing that in them are many kindes of Fiſhes ſecretly
hidden, whereof ſome in theyr hugeneſſe farre exceede other liuing beaſtes
vppon the Lande. I might héere deſire in thys place, to runne into the
Hiſtorie of the notable & ſinguler ornaments of all the parts [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=80) of the worlde:
but I néede not to ſtay any longer vpon theſe, ſéeing there are Bookes abroad,
largely and notably written of the Heauens, and of the whole worlde. Therefore
letting paſſe the hyſtoricall commemoration: I will admoniſh the Reader
touching fiue circumſtances of the creation and pre­ſeruation of all things.

The firſt wherof is, that the Creation is a common worke of the Father, the
Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt: that indeede dooth the meaning of thys Pſalme
teach, which expreſly reci­teth the names of the perſons, By the word of the
Lord, Caeli, that is, by the word of the Father of Heauens, and by the
ſpi­rite of his mouth, (not indeede created, but creating) all the hoſtes of
them. The ſecond circumſtance is, that all thinges are made of nothing: of
thys ſentence thys very Pſalme is a manifeſt witneſſe, when it ſaith in the
ninth verſe, He ſpake the word, and it was doone, he commaunded, and it ſtood
faſt. That is, when God ſpake or commaunded, the things were begun: then not
of any former matter were they begunne, as the Stoicks fayned two eternall
things, The Minde, and The Matter.

The third circumſtance is, that God fréely and willinglie, then when it
pleaſed him, did make the world, and that he did thys worke moſt fréely, & not
of neceſſitie did erect this frame. Touching thys circumſtance, let the
ſayings be retained of the 114. Pſalme. The Lord hath doone all things as it
plea­ſed him And of the 135. Pſalme. What ſoeuer the Lord plea­ſed, that did
he in Heauen, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all the deepe places. verſe. 6. The
fourth circumſtance is, that he de­parted not from his worke, but was and is
preſent with eue­ry creature, and preſerueth the circumſtances of things, that
he vpholdeth the Heauen, and heauenly motions: that he ma­keth the Land
fruitefull, brings foorth the fruite on the earth, and gyueth life vnto all
creatures liuing. Thys preſence of God doo theſe teſtimonies confirme. In him
we liue, mooue, & haue our being. Acts. 17.28, Bearing vp all things by his
migh­tie word. Heb, 1, 2. By him all things were created. &c. Col. 1, 16.
[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=81) He
quickeneth all things. 1\. Tim. 6.13. The fift circumſtance is, that he is not
tyed vnto ſecond cauſes: touching thys cir­cumſtaunce the godly mindes are to
be inſtructed, to knowe, that God is not a Stoicall God, but dooing freely
that he dooth, and not tyed to ſecond cauſes: yea, that he for our ſighings or
ſorrowes, dooth moderate ſecond cauſes, or hinder or change them: but I néede
not to bring hether any more thinges tou­ching theſe circumſtances, ſeeing
they are at large explicated elſewhere.

Verſe. 8.

Let all the earth feare the Lorde: ſtande in awe of him all yee that dwell in
the world.

Verſe. 9.

For he ſpake, and it was doone, he commaunded and it ſtoode faſt.

I ſayde in the Argument, that thys Pſalme contained, not onely Thankſgiuing,
but alſo doctrine touching The feare of God, and Fayth in him. He therfore
exhorteth in this verſe, all mankinde, and ſpecially the Church, to feare the
Lorde, whoſe power is ſo great, that all things are by him created at his
onely word euen from the beginning: and that he thence­forth preſerueth and
gouerneth the ſame. For as the name of Father, which is attributed vnto GOD,
procureth vs to be­leeue: ſo the deſcription of Gods power and Maieſtie,
ſtyr­reth vp feare in vs.

Verſe. 10.

The Lorde bringeth the counſell of the Heathen to naught: and maketh the
deuiſes of the people to be of none effect, and caſteth out the counſels of
Princes.

Verſe. 11.

The counſell of the Lord ſhall endure for euer, and the thoughts of his hart
from generation to ge­neration.

Hée amplifieth the power of God, by an Antitheſis, or con­trarietie: the
counſels & enterpriſes of men without the helpe [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=81) of God, are
fruſtrated and made voide, but the will of GOD is immooueable and euerlaſting.
All Bookes are full of the examples, which confirme and ſette foorth thys
contrarietie.

They of Carthage contended for rule with the Romans a long time: but all theſe
enterpriſes, in as much as they were not helped by God, were vaine, and made
ridiculous: and at length, Carthage béeing vtterly deſtroyed, could not any
way withſtande or let the Romans from obtaining the rule or go­uernment of
them both.

Nicanor the Captaine of King Antiochus, did proudelie threaten the deſtruction
of the Temple at Ieruſalem:1, Mac. 7.35. 2. Mac. 15.30 but thys proude
Captaine together with hys Hoſte, did Iudas Maccabaeus ouerthrow, and cauſing
his members, both head hand and ſhoulder to be heawen off from the body, they
han­ged them on the other ſide of Ieruſalem.

Arbogaſtus Francus, when he came to Millan, being fur­niſhed with an Hoſte of
moſt cruell Nations, barbarouſlie e­nough threatned, that he would change the
Churches into ſta­bles for horſes: but thys ſeditious perſon, did the good
Em­perour Theodoſius ouercome in a great battell, and as hee was fleeing away,
brought him into ſuch a ſtraight of perplex­itie, that he ſlew himſelfe.

The tyme might fayle me, if I would commemorate, not onely auncient Hiſtories,
but alſo the examples of our time, which ſufficiently doo ſhewe, that the
enterpriſes of wicked counſels (euen for the welfare ſake of Gods Church,)
haue béene ouerthrowne, and that the counſell and enterpriſe of GOD, hath and
ſhall remaine immooueable in the gouerne­ment of his Church.

Verſe. 12.

Bleſſed are the people whoſe God is the Lorde Iehouah; and bleſſed are the
folke that he hath cho­ſen to him, to be his inheritance.

Hée annexeth vnto the amplification a notable concluſion touching the Church,
which containeth moſt plentifull doc­trine [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=82) & conſolation:
for he teacheth which is the true Church, namely, the Congregation hearing and
embracing the worde deliuered from God, as touching the Creation, and other
Ar­ticles, and calling vpon Iehoua the Lord of Hoſtes, that is, the true and
lyuing God, manifeſted vnto the people of Iſraell.

And hee therewith alſo affirmeth, that the Church of God ſhall remaine for
euer, and that the preaching of the Goſpell cannot be vtterly extinguiſhed:
for if the Church be the inhe­ritance of God, (as oftentimes it is called
elſewhere) no man ſhall be able to ſhake the ſame out of Gods hands, no though
he bluſter out fire and lightnings. But, becauſe theſe conſo­lations are often
repeated, and are not vnknowne to the god­ly ones, I proceede vnto the verſes
following.

Verſe. 13.

The Lord looked downe from heauen, and be­held the children of men: from the
habitation of his dwelling he conſidereth all them that dwell vppon Earth.

Verſe. 14.

He facioneth all the harts of them, & vnderſtan­deth all theyr works.

Like as he ſpake before of the Creation, ſo now hee diſpu­teth of Gods
prouidence: Mans infirmitie, although it doe thinke that God is the Creator,
yet it afterwards imagineth thereof as if the Shipwright departeth from his
ſhyppe newe builded, and leaueth the ſame to the gouernement of the Sea­men:
that ſo God departeth from hys worke, and that hys Creature is onely left to
the gouernement of it ſelfe. Thys imagination ſeperateth God from his
Creatures, and faineth him to be idle: againſt thys filthy errour, mens mindes
muſt be taught, that God, highly diſcerneth of mankind, and what manner of
perſon euery one is, what he doth, what he taketh vpon himſelfe, with what
minde, with what godlines he em­braceth Religion, thys God beholdeth, and hath
regard of the godly and vngodly ones.

But, although he ſupporteth the Creatures in theyr na­tures [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=82) and ſubſtances,
and for a great part preſerueth the or­der of the bodies which he hath
ordained: yet in hys vnſpeak­able mercy he moderateth many parts, and eyther
helpeth or hindereth ſecond cauſes, and oftentimes changeth them, as the
examples of the Miracles, recited in the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall
hyſtorie declareth. But moſt often hee turneth mens wils and counſels whither
it pleaſeth him, without ſe­cond cauſes: as when hee mooued King Alexanders
minde to fight againſt the Perſians, and after that gouerned the warri­ours
right hande: or when hee made the enemies afrayde in theyr running away. As
the 76. Pſalme ſayth: Hee ſhall re­fraine the Spirit of Princes, and is
wonderfull amongſt the Kings of the earth. verſe 12. So let vs know, that God
moſt fréely in mens natures and wils, with his wiſedome & mercie moderateth
many things, yea and that beſides ſeconde cau­ſes.

But many aſke the queſtion: why are euill things doone, ſéeing God is preſent
at his workmanſhyp? Touching thys queſtion, let that moſt true and moſt ſimple
aunſwere be al­waies in our ſight: That God doth worke moſt freely, and freely
is preſent at ſecond cauſes, & moderateth many things in them, and worketh at
once ſo farre, as according to his vn­ſpeakeable wiſedome he iudgeth is to be
wrought at once.

Verſe. 15.

There is no King that can be ſaued by the mul­titude of an hoſte: neyther is
any mightie man deli­uered by much ſtrength.

Verſe. 16.

A horſe is counted but a vaine thing to ſaue a man: neyther ſhall hee deliuer
any man by his great ſtrength.

Thys is a contrarietie betwéene Gods helpe and humane defences. All things
pertaining to men are vncertaine and frayle, and ſoone fall away as little
flowers: but Gods helpe is aſſured and ſafe in our vocation, and in our
neceſſary buſi­neſſe, whether ſecond cauſes doo helpe vs, or that they ſéeme
to [[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=83)
forſake vs. Let it ſuffiſe to declare thys ſentence by the exam­ple of
Tygranes.

Tygranes King of Armenia and Syria, going about to de­fende his Siſters ſonne
Mithridates King of Pontus, againſt the power of Lucullus and the Romans, had
gathered an hoſt of two hundred and fiftie thouſande Souldiours: and beeing
highly proude of thys iolly company, he burſt out into manie haughty ſpeeches,
like as if not Gods helpe, but humane ex­pedition and force were the cauſe of
victory. But thys proude King did Lucullus, with a ſmall power ouercome and
put to flight before the battell was begun, hauing ſlaine in the Hoſt, 150000.
enemies, as ſayth Plutarch in the hiſtory of Lu­cullus. Let vs therefore
learne, that the facioned figure of this world, is a ſlender ſhadow and
vanquiſhing dreame, and that in God alone all our hope of ſaluation ought to
be repoſed.

Verſe. 17.

Behold, the eyes of the Lord are vpon them that feare him: and vpon them that
truſt in his mercie.

Verſe. 18.

To deliuer theyr ſoules from death, and to feede them in the time of dearth.

Hée ſpake before of the generall prouidence wherewith God prouideth for all
humane kinde: nowe he moſt ſweetlie maketh mention, of the ſpeciall care
wherewith God embra­ceth, meruailouſly gouerneth, defendeth and preſerueth hys
Church. Beholde, ſayth he, the eyes of the Lord are firmelie bent vpon the
members of the true Church, which both feare God and call vpon him, the
acknowledgement and confidence in the Mediator Ieſus Chriſt, firſt ſhining
foorth in theyr mindes.

He ſayth theſe are taken out of a thouſand dangers, which threaten preſent
death, and are nouriſhed with foode, euen in penury of victuals in vacation
time. So did he preſerue Elias, when Ieſabell raged, and gaue him
intertainement wyth the woman of Sarepta. 1, Reg. 17, 15. & 19.2. So in like
manner preſerueth he mercifully vs, miſerable and vnworthy perſons, [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=83) in the common
ſhypwracke and fier flame of Germanie, and that he would thenceforth mittigate
theſe puniſhments which we haue deſerued, we moſt humbly beſéech him.

Verſe. 19.

Our ſoule hath patiently tarryed for the Lorde: for he is our helpe and our
ſhielde.

Verſe. 20.

For our hart ſhall reioyce in him, becauſe wee haue hoped in his holy Name.

Thys is a concluſion which of greateſt conſequence a­greeth with the whole
Pſalme: ſéeing that God hath crea­ted and preſerued all things, and is able,
(ſuch is his wiſedom and goodnes) to withſtand and hinder all the ſiniſter
practiſes which are prepared for the deſtruction of hys Church, and ſee­ing
hée is true in kéeping his promiſes, and tempereth his iu­ſtice with a
wonderfull clemencie, may we any thing doubt, but that our hope ought to be
fixed and take roote in God, who is our helper and our ſhielde, both in other
dangers, and euen then ſpecially in that clauſe when we are deſtitute of all
crea­tures? Let vs therefore goe on, with cheereful lightſome cou­rage, and in
thys hope, let vs aſſwage theſe calamities & diffi­culties: in that we know
aſſuredly, that God will be preſent with vs, yea though the broken ſhiuered
boordes of the ſhyp forſake vs vtterly, as it were ſuffering ſhypwrack.

Verſe. 21.

Let thy mercifull kindneſſe (ô Lorde) be vppon vs: like as we doe put our
truſt in thee.

There can be no Thankſgiuing without Prayer: for theſe two worſhippings are ſo
in themſelues knitte together, that they may rather be ſeperate in thought
then in déede. Hee therefore concludeth thys moſt ſwéete Pſalme with a prayer,
then which nothing can be thought more ſwéete: as if he ſaid. Embrace vs
louingly with thy mercy and goodnes, and not onely forgiue vs eternall
puniſhments, but alſo mittigate thoſe that are preſent, leaſt our hope be
vaine and fruſtrate, [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=84) but rather
indeede effectuall and ſafe. And that vouchſafe thou to doo, both for thy
excellent glory and fame, and alſo for and in reſpect of our infirmitie:
touching which, all is loſt wyth vs, except thy mercy doo recreate and refreſh
the ſame.

## 13\. ❧ A Pſalme of Dauids thankſgiuing after deliueraunce. Benedicam Domino
in omni tempore.1\. Sam. 21, 11 &c.  
Of the Tytle.

IT is harde to ſette downe the ſeaſons of times, wherein Saule was caſt away
from God, and Da­uid was annointed of Samuell: but ſeeing it is manifeſt, that
Dauid after Saules death raigned fortie yeeres, and that the hiſtorie of the
firſt Booke of Kinges, declareth Dauid to be made King when hee was but young,
it ſtandeth well agreeable to truth, that Dauid was called to gouerne the
people of Iſraell about the twentie yeere of hys age. There ſhall be then
according to this compu­tation, tenne yeeres from the time he was called vnto
his king­dome, to the tragicall end of Saule. All thoſe ten yeeres ſpace,
continuall ſnares were laid for Dauid, and all things made rea­die for his
deſtruction, when Saule ſought all the meanes hee coulde to diſpatch out of
this lyfe the ſucceſſour of his King­dome. Whereby it is a thing moſt
manifeſt, with what ſtormes and raging floodes of miſchiefes Dauid was toſſed,
and howe often hys life was ſette euen vpon the very edge of the Razor, that
is, in extreame danger and vtmoſt perrill of death.

And to omit the other parts of the hiſtorie of Dauid, who would not be
thorowly mooued with pittie, reading the cir­cumſtaunces ſette downe in the
1\. Sam. 21. which witnes Da­uid [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=84) to be brought
into ſo great diſtreſſe, that he was compel­led to flee vnto the King of that
wicked Countrey of the Pa­leſtines, which he knewe with deadly hatred
diſagreed from the Church or Religion of the people of Iſraell: and not that
onely did he, but alſo to eſcape the ſnares layd for his lyfe, was enforced
with vnſeemely behauiour and geſtures moſt vnfit­ting ſuch a perſonage, to
deforme himſelfe, and faine himſelfe as one out of his wits.

Let vs therefore knowe, that in thys Pſalme a Thankſgi­uing is contained, not
onely for deliueraunce in particuler, whereof mention by name is made in the
tytle, and in the firſt of Sam. 21. but alſo for all his tenne yeeres defence
and cherri­ſhing, while hee was baniſhed and was layde open for all the
weapons of an vngodly King, and became as it were a caſt a­way from God. But
although Dauid in this long exile eſca­ped diuers miſchaunces, and many
diſtreſſes: yet notwithſtan­ding, the calamities of his ſixe monethes
baniſhment, which was the puniſhment for his adultery & other ſinnes, did more
greeue Dauid, then the diſtreſſes & dangers of ſo many yeres. For, a good
conſcience in aduerſitie is a great ſolace, according to thoſe common
ſentences of the Poets.

Eſt aliquid magnis, crimen ab eſſe malis.

Some faulte yet ſure remaines in me,

From miſchiefes great though I be free.

Againe, according to that ſaying: Conſcia mens recti, mi­ſeris tutiſsima res
eſt.

The minde aſſured of her dooing well,

In miſeries, moſt ſafely ſure doth dwell.

For it is a light matter to ſuffer calamities, and feele no wounde in
conſcience. But that is a greeuous thing, & I know not whether any thing be
more harde, then for a man to beare about the ſignes of guiltines, and to be
caſt downe and gree­ued with the greatneſſe of calamities for certaine ſinnes,
which horribly doe wounde his conſcience. Wherefore, if there had beene no
other cauſe why to eſchew ſinnes, yet this had beene great enough, whereby wee
might the eaſilier beare or endure [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=85) the greatneſſe
of calamities layd vpon vs. But of the tytle, thus farre enough: it followeth
that I nowe ſpeake touching the Argument of thys Pſalme.

### 13.1. The Argument.

LIke as a garland finiſhed of diuers flowers, is not only plea­ſant in ſight,
but alſo meruailouſly refreſheth with ſmell thereof the ſence of the
noſethrils: euen ſo this Pſalme, with the goodnes of the words and ſentences
thereof, allureth and inuiteth the Reader vnto it. For it comprehendeth moſt
graue precepts, moſt ſweete promiſes, moſt ſeuere threatnings, and delectable
exhortations: and amongſt all theſe, he hath com­priſed his owne example,
wherein he bids vs looke, leaſt ey­ther by our vnworthineſſe, or by the vaine
dreame of particu­laritie, we be driuen from God, and from calling vpon him.

Our vnworthines murmureth againſt vs, ſo often as wee pray, and endeuoureth to
take away all hope of his hearing vs. To the ſame ende tendeth the cogitation
of his election, as if the benefits of God, pertained but to certaine perſons,
as the benefits of Princes Courts, appertaine vnto ſome fewe per­ſons. Dauid
in thys Pſalme healeth both theſe doubts, affir­ming that God heareth him, yea
wretched and vnwoorthy as he was, and bidding that others alſo confirmed by
this exam­ple be leſſe afraide to come vnto God, and that they doe not
imagine, there is any acception or reſpect of perſons with God, ſeeing God is
iuſt, according to one rule which he hath ſette downe, and dooth not admit of
any prerogatiue beſides thys rule. Therefore we beeing encouraged with both
conſo­lations which is deliuered in the Goſpell, that the promiſe of grace
dependeth not of our worthines, and is vniuerſall, let vs more willingly and
feruently call vpon God: and let vs not doubt, but that he wyll mercifully,
and very fatherlie heare our prayers, yea though we be vnworthy & deſerue
puniſhments, ſo we doe turne in time vnto him, and ceaſe to offende againſt
[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=85) our
conſcience. What ſhall I ſay touching the lightſomnes of the words, which like
notable precious ſtones do ſhyne in this Pſalme? He bids vs not onely to looke
vp to the Lord, but is an exhorter vnto all that are afflicted, that they
woulde make haſte vnto God, and without tarrying runne to him, forget­ting
theyr vnworthines, and theyr filthineſſe.

How greatly doth the Militarie metaphore delight mee, wherin he moſt
pleaſantly deſcribeth the watches & guardes of Gods Angels ouer vs. The Angell
of the Lord (ſaith he) tar­rieth rounde about them that feare him: &
deliuereth them. ver. 7. Furthermore, where hee ſayth, O taſte and ſee howe
gracious the Lord is. &c. verſe. 8. dooth ſignifie, that the mercifull lo­uing
kindneſſe of God is ſo euident, as it runneth not onely in to the eyes and
eares, which are called the ſences of doctrine, but alſo is embraced with the
handes, and may almoſt be per­ceiued in taſte. But theſe I will with moe words
expound, as I am expreſſing this Pſalme.

### 13.2. ❧ The Pſalme, and expoſition thereof.

Verſe. 1.

I will alwaies giue thanks vnto the Lord, his praiſe ſhall euer be in my
mouth.

Verſe. 2.

My ſoule ſhall make her boaſte of the Lorde: the humble ſhall heare thereof
and be glad.

Verſe. 3.

O prayſe the Lord with me, and let vs magnifie his Name together.

THE Kingdome of God (ſayth the Apoſtle,) is not meate and drinke, but
righteouſneſſe and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghoſt. Rom. 14.17. The hart of
man béeing repleniſhed with thys ſpirituall ioy, doth not maruell at, nor
magni­fie [[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=86)
any thing, nor prayſeth nor extolleth any thing, but the Lord onely: who
beſtoweth himſelfe wholy vpon vs, in ma­nifeſting himſelfe, in ſending his
Sonne, and enduing vs with his holy Spirit, in forgiuing our ſinnes, in giuing
vs lyfe e­uerlaſting, and in diſtributing vnto vs his benefits, which are the
helps and furtheraunces of our preſent life and voca­tion.

For it cannot be, but the beſtowing of ſo many & ſo great benefits, dooth
ſtyrre vppe the godly minde, to ſing a ſong of Thankſgiuing for the ſame: but
let the deſtruction of tymes elſewhere often recited be héere conſidered. For
like as Chriſt the head of the Church, reioycing in the Spirit, gaue thankes
vnto hys Father, that he had made knowne his Goſpell vnto the ſlender flocke,
when it was hidden and not knowne to the wiſemen of the world.

Again alſo, he béeing at hys Paſſion oppreſſed with great­neſſe of ſorrowes,
cryed out: My GOD, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee. Marke, 15.34. So all
the godly ones doe féele the enterchange of gladnes and ſorrowe, and beeing
in­déede glad, doo giue thanks vnto GOD, vſing the very verſe of thys Pſalme.
I will alwaies giue thanks vnto the Lord, hys prayſe ſhall euer be in my
mouth. But they that are brought low, and almoſt cruſhed with greatnes of
calamities, doo ſing theyr funerall ſongs, ſuch as theſe are. I ſayd in my
heauines, I am caſt away from the ſight of thine eyes. Pſal. 31, 21. Again,
How long wilt thou be angry (ô Lord) for euer. &c. Like as therfore in the
nature of things, there are interchanges of the day and of the night, of
Summer and of Winter: ſo in the harts of men, dooth the féeling of bleſſednes
and gladnes ſhine foorth, out of ſome more, and out of ſome leſſe. Therefore
no­tably ſayd the auncient Writers as touching ſpirituall ioy.

Rara hora, breuis mora.

The ſildeſt happie howre of daie,

Hath in our time the ſhorteſt ſtaie.

For indeede our fleſh kéepeth vs vnder, as it were a cer­taine burden, and
dooth not ſuffer vs alwaies to lift vppe our [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=86) minde and eyes
vnto heauen. Wee are alſo aſſaulted by the deuill and the world by innumerable
ſleights, as the Rocke in the Sea is daſhed vpon with raging waues. In theſe
con­flicts, the ſame thing befalleth vs, which happened vnto Paule who ſayth:
Inwarde feares, outward frightings.

In the ſecond verſe, (My ſoule ſhall make her boaſt of the Lord, &c▪) Let
there be conſidered a contrarietie: a man may ſée ſome Idiots or ſottiſh
perſons, fooliſhly flattering them­ſelues for theyr ſhadowe, or ſmall ſmoke of
wiſedome or elo­quence, or power, or riches, or other gyfts, which are onelie
the vaniſhing ſhadowes or figures of thys world. But Dauid héere glorieth or
boaſteth in the Lorde, whom he beléeueth is hys wiſedome, righteouſnes,
holines, redemption and bleſ­ſedneſſe: as if he ſaid: I as for other good
gyfts eyther of bo­dy or minde, alſo I adde outwarde good things whatſoeuer,
they are vncertaine, and more vehemently vaniſhing thē the wate [...] flood.

Doubtleſſe ſmall is all mans wiſedome, as Cicero cryeth out: O me nunquam
ſapientem, et aliquando id, quod non eram fru­ſtra exiſtimatum. A lack for me
that was neuer yet wiſe, and ſometimes haue beene that, which I was not in
vaine reputed for. How féeble a thing mans vertue is, and how ſoone ſhe is
caſt out of her ſtacion, examples of knightly perſonages doe ſhew, touching
which I haue ſpoken in another place: doubt­leſſe nothing is more vncertaine
then the wealth of thys world, and he is ſoone a poore Irus, which of late was
a rich Craeſus. Which things, ſith ſo they be, let vs lift vppe our harts for
the Lords ſake, who can giue vs the principall, the beſt, the greateſt, yea,
the euerlaſting & endleſſe good, which no aſſiduitie or continuance of time
can exhauſt or dry vp. In the third verſe there is a conſolation or comfort,
whereby hée exhorteth the vniuerſall Church to worſhyppe and magnifie GOD. For
as in our prayer we ought to aſke and craue thoſe things which are for the
peace of Ieruſalem, & vnto the peticion to adioyne ſupplications, for our owne
buſines or ne­ceſſities, for the welfare of the whole bodie: ſo Thankſgiuing
[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=87) muſt be
referred to thrée purpoſes, whereof the firſt is, that glory may be giuen vnto
God for his power and preſence in in the Church, and that Epicures, Stoicks,
and other blaſ­phemous perſons may be refuted. The ſecond is, that we
ad­moniſh our ſelues, benefits are not beſtowed vppon vs by chaunce, but that
God indeede hath care ouer vs, that he hea­reth our prayers, and that the ſame
God helpeth vs.

The third is, that thys our confeſſion may be a teſtimony amongſt other men,
touching Gods prouidence, and confirme others to beleeue vndoubtedly, that God
hath care ouer hu­mane matters, and that the prayers of the Church are heard
of him.

Verſe. 4.

I ſought the Lord and he heard me: yea he deliue­red me out of all feare.

Verſe. 5.

They had an eye vnto him and were lightened, and theyr faces were not aſhamed.

Verſe. 6.

Loe the poore cryeth, and the Lord heareth him: yea and ſaueth him out of all
his troubles.

Hée paſſeth heere from the figure Hypotheſin, that is, frō the grounde of the
matter vnto Theſin, that is his determi­nate purpoſe. That is to ſay, hee
ſetteth downe his owne ex­ample to be followed by the vniuerſall Church: for
wee muſt not imagine, that Gods promiſes doo pertaine but onely to a few, as
priuiledges belong vnto certaine perſons onely, but let vs moſt ſtedfaſtly
beléeue, that the promiſe touching the Goſpel, is vniuerſall, & fréely made,
according to Chriſtes ſay­ing: Come vnto me all yee which labour and are
laden, and I will refreſh you. Math, 11. verſe, 18. Alſo as S. Paule ſayth.
Therefore is it of fayth freely, that the promiſe may be ſure. Gala. 3.14.

Theſe things ſith ſo they be, let vs learne, that though wée be wretched and
vnworthy, yet we are regarded, helped, and heard of God: and when we be
helped, let vs acknowledge, confeſſe, and declare vnto our ſelues and to
others, that God [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=87) is the Actor of
our benefit, and that not by chance or humane induſtry, but by God our helper,
dangers are driuen away.

Verſe. 7.

The Angell of the Lord tarrieth round about thē that feare him: and
deliuereth them.

Héere is a notable conſolation, touching the watches and ſafegard of Gods
Angell ouer vs: for the deuill cruelly aſſaul­teth the Church: as the verſe
ſayth:

ƲElut celſum oppugnat qui molibus Vrbem,

Aut montana ſedet circum caſtella ſub armis,

Nunc hos nunc illos aditus, omnemque pererrat,

Arte locum, et variis aſſultibus irritus vrget.

AS one with mightie Engines, which

aſſaults a Cittie great,

Or all in Armes about the Bulwarks

ſtately hath his ſeate:

Now giues he theſe attempts,

nowe others, and by euery ſleight

Inuades each place with diuers faults,

yet vaine both force and fight.

Againſt thys enemie we are enuironed with neceſſary de­fences and ſauegardes
of Angels, which repreſſe & danquiſh the violent rages of euill ſpirits: theſe
things though we ſee not with eyes, and prophane perſons doo déeme them
thinges fabulus: yet that thus indeede it is with vs, many notable
te­ſtimonies in hyſtories, and among the ſayings Propheticall and Apoſtolicall
ſufficientlie doo ſhew the ſame. The hiſtories of Iacob, Elias, and Elizeus
are knowne: and Dauid ſayth: For he ſhall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to
keepe thee in all thy waies. Pſal. 91. verſe. 11. Let vs therefore render
thanks vnto God, that he hath giuen vs his Angels to be our preſeruers, and
with ſo much more quiet mindes, let vs du­tifully employ our ſelues in our
vocation.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=88)

Verſe. 8.

O taſte and ſee how gracious the Lord is: bleſſed is the man that truſteth in
him.

A concluſion celebrating the goodneſſe of God, and the confidence in hys
vnſpeakeable goodneſſe: and although no ſpéech may ſuffiſe for the greatneſſe
of ſuch a matter, yet I wil follow the principall poynts of things, and will
briefely ſhew how gracious the Lord is, and how much a friend vnto man­kinde.
Firſt of all it is ſufficiently apparant, that all & euery other thing, was
made for the vſe of mankinde, and the ſame man ſo created and expreſſed to the
Image of God, that God was delighted and full pleaſed in him, as in his laſt
and moſt excellent worke: for that ſignifieth the Saboth which GOD ordained
after the creation of the man and the woman. But afterwards when they had
fallen & deſerued euerlaſting per­dition amongſt the deuils, God of hys
vnſpeakeable mercie, reſtored hys ruined Church, by ſetting forth his promiſe
of the Sauiour to come: which beeing heard, wretched man & wo­man then knewe,
that they were receiued againe into Gods fauour, and thereby conceiued aſſured
hope of life euerlaſting. Thys promiſe did he after that eftſoones repeate,
and make knowne in ſpeaking with the Fathers or Patriarks & Pro­phets: and at
length, according to hys promiſe ſo often repea­ted, God ſent his onely
begotten Sonne, taking vpon him our nature, and pacifying by his death, the
moſt iuſt wrath of God againſt our ſinnes: he alſo poured out of hys owne and
hys Sonnes boſome, hys holie Spirit vpon his Apoſtles, and other true
beleeuers, which bare witneſſe that wee are the Sonnes of God, and healeth our
infirmitie, and ſanctifieth vs vnto life euerlaſting.

Thys vnſpeakeable goodnes of God dooth S. Paule cele­brate or reuerence, in
the thyrde Chapter to Tytus, ſaying: But when the bountifulneſſe and loue of
God our Sauiour to­ward man appeared; Not by the workes of righteouſneſſe
which we had doone, but according to his mercy he ſaued vs, [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=88) by the waſhing
of the newe birth, and the renuing of the holy Ghoſt. Which he ſhed on vs
aboundantly through Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour. That we being iuſtified by his
grace, ſhoulde be made heyres according to the hope of eternall life. verſes.
4, 5.6.7. But goe to, (that wee ſpeake not alwaies of ſpirituall gyfts) what
haue wee that is not beſtowed vppon vs by the bountifull hand of God, towards
the ſuſtentation of this our mortall lyfe? For he is our life, and the length
of our dayes, through his goodnes the ſillie bird indéede ſterueth not, as I
may ſay with the Chriſtian Poet. By the graunt and gyft of thys Lord, we enioy
peace; habitations, meane gouernments in Common-wealthes and Schooles, honeſt
and quiet wed­locks, learning, and finally other helping reléefes, almoſt
in­numerable for our vocation and life. So often therfore as we enter into
cogitation, both of thys plentie and pleaſure of be­nefits, let vs ſay aloude
with Dauid, O taſte & ſee how gra­cious the Lord is, and let vs repoſe all our
inward cares vpon ſo great goodnes, according to that ſaying of S. Peter: Caſt
thy care vpon the Lord, and he ſhall nouriſh thee. 1\. Peter. 5, verſe. 7.

Verſe. 9.

O feare the Lorde, yee that be his Saints: for they that feare him, lack
nothing.

Thys verſe containeth a precept and a promiſe: for, hee exhorteth the godly
ones, that they woulde liue in the feare of the Lord, whereunto fayth is
adioyned, or rather moſt neere: and vnto theſe he promiſeth plenty of all
things neceſſary and wholeſome. The examples of Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacob are
knowne, whom God in greateſt ſcarcitie of victuals nouri­ſhed.

Alſo let there be in our ſight thrée cauſes, for which God deliuered his
promiſes touching corporall things. The firſt is, that we imagine not theſe
benefits are brought vs by chance, but let vs beléeue that they are
diſtributed vnto vs, by the vn­ſpeakeable goodneſſe of God. The ſeconde is,
that wee may [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=89) know, God will
alwaies preſerue ſome Congregation, which will kéepe his doctrine, who
doubtleſſe hath néede of harbou­rings and other helpes. The thirde cauſe is,
that we may in prayer and expectation of and for ſuch helps, exerciſe our
faith: but theſe were wont to be more plentifully diſcuſſed vpon in the ſumme
of Chriſtian doctrine.

Verſe. 10.

The Lyons doe lack and ſuffer hunger: but they which ſeeke the Lord, ſhall
want no maner of thing that is good.

Hée amplifieth a promiſe with a contrarietie: the rich, which lyonlike doo
ſeaze, vpon all things for themſelues, are oftentimes ſhaken out of all theyr
poſſeſſions: ſome alſo pine away with hunger: as Pithius who was Purueyor of
the victuals for Xerxes hoaſt, is ſaid to haue dyed with very hun­ger. But the
godly ones which ſeeke the Kingdome of God, and hys righteouſneſſe, are not
deſtitute of neceſſary benefits for the body: that is, are by God nouriſhed
and defended mer­uailouſly. Like as in the time of Ieruſalems deſtruction,
ſixe thouſand of the godly ones, at the forewarning and bidding of an Angell,
departed into the Cittie Pella, within the Coun­trey of Decapolis, and were
there preſerued and defended a­gainſt all mens opinion. So at thys day amongſt
ſo manie troubles of Germanie, God preſerueth the néedy and poore Congregation
truſting in the Name of the Lord.

Verſe. 11.

Come yee children and harken vnto mee, I will teach you the feare of the Lord.

Verſe. 12.

What man is hee that luſteth to lyue, and would fayne ſee good daies: keepe
thy tongue from euill, and thy lips that they ſpeeake no guile.

Verſe. 13.

Eſchewe euill and doe good: ſeeke peace and enſue it.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=89)In the
holy Scripture are thrée thinges ſpecially deliue­uered. Firſt, doctrine
touching the Articles of our faith. Next vnto that, conſolations: which are
the remedies of ſorrowes. Laſt of all, precepts of actions. As therfore in
other Pſalmes, ſentences are ſette downe, touching the true acknowledge­ment
and calling vpon God, beſides conſolations: ſo in thys Pſalme are rules
touching life and manners, which ſhine as it were certaine precious ſtones,
and the ſum of the precepts are theſe: So runne, that thou maiſt haue an eye
to thy mark, & take good choyſe of the meanes leading thee to the mark. Let
the Marke of our ſtudies & labours be the glory of God, and the flouriſhing
and peaceable ſtate of the Church: the meanes or waies leading vnto this Make,
let be the ſtudies of the heauenly doctrine, conioyned with the loue of
righte­ouſneſſe, chaſtitie, truth, and publique concorde: for the ſafe and
ſure eſtate of the Church, touching which I haue ſayde, cannot without theſe
and many other vertues, eyther be or­dered or retained in right courſe. The
foundation of thys ex­cellent and moſt beautiful eſtate, is the ſwéete
agréement in the true doctrine, and a bitter hatred of Sophiſticall or
cauil­ling doctrine. Therfore the Sonne of God Chriſt Ieſus, pray­eth for the
Church. Father ſanctifie them with thy truth, thy word is truth. John, 17,
verſe, 17. Vnto thys ſtudie of truth, let loue of vniuerſall righteouſnes be
adioyned, which is, the a­uoyding of vices, and ſtudie of well dooing:
finally, let vs haue ſuch moderation of mindes, that we may be able to ſuf­fer
and beare with certaine inconueniences, though againſt our wils, to the end
that publique concord be not thereby diſ­quieted.

Theſe moſt wiſe, and moſt chéefely wholeſome precepts, are deliuered in two
little verſes: Keepe thy tongue from e­uill, and thy lips that they ſpeake no
guile; Eſchewe euill, and doe good, ſeeke peace and enſue it.

Verſe. 14.

The eyes of the Lord are ouer the righteous, and his eares heareth theyr
prayers.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=90)A moſt
ſweet promiſe deſcribing the prouidence of God, beholding and hearing his
Church and all the godlie ones. In Creete men ſay there was Iupiters Image
made without eares, which a certaine Epicure there ſette vp: (as he
ſigni­fied) God to be deafe, and did not heare mens prayers. Againſt theſe
vile obſcurities or abſurdities, Dauid confirmeth vs: nay, (ſayth he) God is
neyther deafe nor dumbe, but ſéeth and heareth all things which are doone in
the Church, ney­ther is hee an idle beholder of mens matters, but vnfainedlie
careth for, kéepeth, gouerneth, and defendeth his Church. For it cannot be,
that hee which with meruailous workmanſhyp made both the eye and the eare,
ſhould be voide of ſéeing and hearing, according to that ſaying in the 94.
Pſalme. He that planted the eare, ſhall he not heare? or hee that made the
eye, ſhall he not ſee? verſe. 9. But who be righteous, that muſt bée learned
out of the Goſpell: for the worde of the Goſpell dooth teach, we are
righteous, not in our owne ſinceritie, (ſéeing all are ſinners, and haue neede
of the glory of God,) but by im­putation for the Sonne of Gods ſake: thys
conſolation muſt we ſette againſt our owne vnworthines, which driueth vs a­way
from praying vnto God.

Verſe. 15.

The countenaunce of the Lorde is againſt them that doe euill: to roote out the
remembrance of thē from the earth.

It ſhould be too long a Catalogue, if we héere recited the deſtinies of
mightie perſonages, which were horribly ouer­throwne, and came to vtter ruine:
as of Hercules, Achilles, Aiax, Iaſon, Phillip of Macaedonia, Pompey, Caeſar,
Antho­nie, and others innumerable: the tragicall endes of theſe per­ſonages,
doo well declare thys ſentence or verſe. The counte­naunce of the Lord is
againſt them that doe euill, to roote out the memorie of them from the earth.
And although it may be diſputed vpon, why he ſayth: [To roote out the memory
of the vngodly,] when of truth in ſacred & prophane hiſtories, [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=90) there are long
deſcriptions of the vngodly ones: yet notwith­ſtanding, the explication or
meaning héereof is ſimple & plain, if vnto theyr vniuerſall end or deſtruction
you will apply thys forme of words. God deſtroyed the whole race and of-ſpring
of Saule, excepting the poſteritie of Ionathas: 2\. Sam. 3.1. 2, Sam. 7.13. ſo
an vniuerſal deſtruction oppreſſed the whole race of King Alexander. The whole
progenie of the Kings of Syria and Egipt, for their hey­nous offences, was
pluckt vp by the rootes. Let therefore not onely obſcure and baſe perſons
feare the iudgement of the Lord, but alſo euen they which excell in power: for
there is no power ſo great, nor ſo floriſhing in glory & wealth, but God can
eaſily turne topſituruie or vpſide-downe, as the hiſtorie of all ages doo
ſhew.

Verſe. 16.

The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them: And deliuereth them out of all
theyr troubles.

Verſe. 17.

The Lorde is nigh vnto them, that are of a con­trite hart: and will ſaue ſuch
as be of an humble Spirit.

Howe hard it is to embrace in calamitie thys conſolation, experience teacheth:
for mans reaſon iudgeth not that GOD is preſent with wretched perſons: but the
doctrine of the Goſ­pell witneſſeth, that men are not caſt away from God by
rea­ſon of theyr miſerie, but rather, that God euen then promi­ſeth helpe, and
mittigation and deliueraunce from miſchifes. Let vs therefore gather héere
ſome promiſes of helpe, mittiga­tion of puniſhments, preſence and deliuerance
of God.

The Lord is good, and as a ſtrong hold in the day of trou­ble, and he knoweth
them that truſt in him. Nabum. 1. verſe. 7. Turne vnto the Lord your God, for
he is gracious and merci­full, ſlow to anger, and of great kindnes, and
repenteth him of the euill. Ioel, 2, 13. The Lord healeth thoſe that are
broken in hart, and bindeth vp theyr ſores. Pſal. 147. verſe, 3. Call vpon me
in the day of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie me.
Pſal. 50. verſe. 15. Dwelling with the broken and [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=91) humble ſpirit,
that he may quicken the harts of the ſorrowful. Eſay. 57. To him will I looke,
euen to him that is poore & of a contrite ſpirit, and trembleth at my words.
Eſay. 66. verſe. 2. That is, a contrite and humble heart, is the ſtore-houſe
of GOD.

Verſe. 18.

Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of
all.

Verſe. 19.

Hee keepeth all his bones, ſo that not one of thē is broken.

GOD at length deliuereth hys Church out of all miſe­ries, but in meane time,
while we liue héere, needefull it is, that we obey in ſome calamities: becauſe
hee will haue hys Church ſubiect vnto perſecution, and yet deliuereth he manie
dailie, yea euen out of corporall miſeries, and when he dooth not altogether
deliuer, yet hée mittigateth theyr puniſh­ments.

Thys mittigation dooth the Prophet often deſcribe and pray for, and let vs
learne alſo to pray for the ſame. For this weake nature of man, were not able
to abide the greatneſſe of Gods wrath, if he ſhoulde be hotely angry againſt
vs as our ſinnes deſerue.

Therefore cryeth Dauid out in the 6. Pſalme. Lorde re­prooue me not in thy
wrath. Againe, in the hundred and thir­tie Pſalme. If thou Lorde wilt be
extreame to marke what is doone amiſſe, ô Lord who may abide it. verſe. 3.

Verſe. 20.

But miſ-fortune ſhall ſley the vngodlie: and they that hate the righteous
ſhall be deſolate.

All mans lyfe long is full of examples, which confirme and ſette foorth this
ſorrowfull ſentence: but now for breuitie ſake, I will be content with the
Hiſtory of Marcus Craſſus.

Marcus Craſſus, purpoſing to fight againſt the Parthians, came into Syria, the
next yéere after his Conſulſhip, the yeere [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=91) fiftie and one
before Chriſt our Sauiour was borne. Thys Craſſus, when hee had vnderſtoode
that there was a greate maſſe of money hidden in the Temple of the Iewes, went
to Ieruſalem, and hauing leaue to come into the ſecrete places of the Temple,
(againſt his promiſe made vnto them) tooke away from thence more then a
thouſande Talents, that is, thréeſcore tunnes of Golde: but within a while
after, thys extraordinary Conſull, (moſt couetous as he was,) payd the price
of hys periurie and ſacrilidge, together with his ſonne Publius a moſt
excellent young man beeing ſlaine, himſelfe more then threeſcore yeeres olde:
where with him, thirtie thouſand Romane Souldiours were ouerthrowne and taken
priſoners.

Verſe. 21.

The Lorde deliuereth the ſoules of his ſeruants, and all they that put theyr
truſt in him, ſhall not be deſtitute.

The moſt part of men doo openly deſpiſe & hate the Goſ­pell: after that, the
Miniſterie, that is, the office of teaching doo they iudge to be the fyer-
brand of ſeditions, and of the ſcat­tering of al mankind: And truely S. Paule
himſelfe with no­table words deſcribeth the bitterneſſe of mens hatred againſt
the Teachers of the Goſpell, where hee ſaith: The Apoſtles are reputed as men
appointed to death, and are made a gazing ſtocke vnto the world. 1\. Cor. 4.
verſe, 9.

That is, for execrable forlorne perſons, wherewith God is angry, without
pacifying, from whom all and euery crea­ture abhorreth, and whoſe ſhadow
hurteth (as it were a con­tagion) the whole ſocietie of men: but although the
greater part of the worlde, burdeneth and ouerchargeth the Goſpell with theſe
exceeding crymes, yet S. Paule with a mightie minde cryeth out againſt theſe
falſe iudgements: I am not a­ſhamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt, for it is the
power of God vnto ſaluation to euery one that beleeueth. Rom. 1, verſe. 16.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=92)So Dauid
with hys voice confirmeth vs, All they that put theyr truſt in him, ſhall not
be deſtitute. With thys conſola­tion let all good men, eſpecially they which
haue authority in the Church, comfort themſelues againſt vnrighteous
iudge­ments: and let them knowe, that God hath care ouer them, who ſhall
doubtleſſe deliuer the ſoules of his Seruants. So bée it.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

Pſalm. 9. verſe. 14.

That I may ſhewe all thy prayſes within the ports of the daughter of Syon: I
will reioyce in thy ſaluation.

Ecclus. 14. verſe. 16.

Giue, and take, and ſanctifie thy ſoule. &c.

Reuel. 19. verſe. 1.

Hallelu-iah: Saluation, and glory, & honor, and pow­er be to the Lord our God.

Radiantem Solem non reſtringam. Per me Ric. Robinſon.

## Appendix B Faults eſcaped, thus corrected.

PAge 27. for vacantibus, reade vocantibus.

Page 29. for arcem, reade acrem.

Page 112. for vnfeeble, reade t'enfeeble.

Page idem. for diſertus, reade deſertus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=92)

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=93)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1118&page=93)

[...]

[Home](/)

Strigel, Victorinus, 1524-1569.. Date: 1591  

