## (unknown project)

# A fourth proceeding in the harmony of King Dauids harp That is to say; a
godly and learned exposition of six psalmes moe of the princely prophet Dauid,
beginning with the 62. and ending with the 67. Psalme. Done in Latin by the
reuerend Doctour Victorinus Strigelius professor in Diuinitie in the
vniuersitie of Lipsia in Germany Anno 1502. Translated into English by Richard
Robinson citizen of London 1596. Seene, perused, and allowed. ... —
Hypomnēmata in omnes Psalmos Davidis. Psalm 62-67. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=2)

A fourth Proceeding in the Harmony of King Dauids Harp.

That is to ſay; A Godly and learned Ex­poſition of ſix Pſalmes moe of the
princely Prophet Dauid, begin­ning with the 62. and end­ing with the 67.
Pſalme.

Done in Latin by the reuerend Doctour Ʋictorinus Strigelius Profeſſor of
Di­uinitie in the vniuerſitie of Lypſia in Germany Anno 1502.

Tranſlated into Engliſh by Richard Ro­binſon Citizen of London. 1596.

Seene, peruſed, and allowed.

Keepe me O Lord from the handes of the vngodly: pre­ſerue me from the wicked
men,

Pſal 140.4.

Behold, he that keepeth Iſrael, ſhall neither ſlumber nor ſleepe,

Pſal. 121.4.

The Lord himſelfe is thy keeper, the Lorde is thy defence vpon the right hand,

verſ. 5.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes.[?] 1596.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=3)

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Qui LEO de Iuda eſt, & FLOS de Ieſſe, Leones Protegat & Flores ELIZABETHA
tuos.

## Briefe Contents of theſe ſixe Pſalmes.

  * Of Doctrine 62
  * Of Prayer and Doctrine 63
  * Of Prayer and Doctrine 64
  * Of Praiſe 65
  * Of Thankeſgiuing and Praiſe 66
  * Of Thankeſgiuing, as Pſalme 67

Iudith. 9.11. ‘Humilium Deus Auxilium.’

Reu. 5.5. ‘Vincat Leo de tribu Iuda radix Dauid.’

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=3)

To the right honorable Sir Tho­mas Egerton knight, Lord keeper of the great
Seale of England, grace, mercy, peace, and plenitude of temporal and eternal
beatitude in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, and Sauior euerlaſting.

NOw, euen now amongſt vs in theſe later dayes (right Honourable and choſen
Patron) do the prouidence, preſence and promiſes of God ap­peare, worke, and
prooue effectual­ly according to that ſaying of the holy God of Iſ­rael▪ in
the dayes of Samuel. Th [...] that honour me I will honour, 1\. Samuel. 2.30▪
and they that deſpiſe me ſhal be deſpi­ſed. This was then ſpoken and
afterwardes effe­cted touching the careleſſe and diſobedient chil­dren of Ely
and their poſteritie, as inward aduer­ſaries of the welfare of Gods Iſrael.
This was alſo then ſpoken,2▪ Sam. 8.17. and afterwardes effected in a godly
religious and iuſtified Zadok (ſucceeding Abia­thar, one in authoritie with
king Dauid) againſt his outward enemies the Philiſtines and other nations in
thoſe victories▪ For as in all ages and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=4) nations there
haue been, are, and ſhalbe both in­ward aduerſaries and outward enemies,
diſho­nouring God, & honoring man more then God: So the Lord of all power, and
God of all grace, hath euer had a righteous Abraham in Caldea, a iuſt Lot in
Sodome, a godly Daniel in Babylon, a deuout Tobyas in Niniuie, a patient Iob
in Huſſe, and a zealous Nehemias in Damaſco: who both amongſt inward and
outward enemies haue ho­noured God and been honoured by him, deſpi­ſing thoſe
which haue deſpiſed him. And againe, Gods prouidence, preſence, and promiſes
haue been no leſſe effectuall with others, as Ionathas in the Court of Saul to
fauour Dauid: Obadia in the Court of Achab to entertain the Prophetes:
Abdemelech with king Zedechias, to intreate for Ieremie: Petrus, Dorotheus and
Gorgonius in Dio­cleſians court to embrace Chriſtianity: & general­ly to
honour God, which hath honoured them, and to deſpiſe thoſe which haue deſpiſed
him. Neither in our time hath Gods goodneſſe in this failed. For like as we
haue had, and ſtill haue in­ward aduerſaries, as Athiſtes, Epicures,
Hypocrites, and voluptuous worldlinges which contemning the grace of God,
peruert both their owne waies, and hinder, diſcourage, diminiſh, and blemiſh
the welfare of the godly elect by faith: So this our age and preſent happie
ſtate, wanteth not forreign enemies farre off, which with Tyranny, Papi­ſtry,
Infidelitie, Hereſie and Schiſmes lie lurking, looking for a day to aſſault
vs, and bend all their pollicies, and powers to ſubuert vs, which haue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=4) honoured God,
who hath honored vs, and who may iuſtly contemne them that contemne him. As
bleſſed be God for his louing fauour and vn­ſpeakeable mercies manifeſted long
agone, and of late time vpon this our little Bethulia of Eng­land, where our
gratious Iudith humbling her ſelfe in his feare, ſeeking the honour of God,
hath been honoured by his prouidence, is honoured by his preſence, and ſhalbe
honoured by truſting in his promiſes aboue humane expectation, to his endleſſe
glory and praiſe, and our continual com­fort: but to the contempt and
confuſion of all contrary oppoſite powers whatſoeuer. In reſpect whereof
(Right Honourable) and for that both Prince and Piere, rich and poore haue
iuſt cauſe to reioyce in his feare, and to be thankfull for the enioying of
this his fauor: As I (of many others which may doe better) acknowledge my
ſelfe to be one of the leaſt in abilitie, yet for that I would not be the laſt
in good will of any which can or may any way expreſſe their dutifull indeuour
in Honouring that God which hath honoured vs, and contemning them which
contemne him, and vs. Ha­uing theſe xx. yeares and vpwardes, applied my time &
talent in tranſlating learned mens works out of Latin into Engliſh, approued
by authority, & furthered by faithful benefactors, wheras I did certaine
yeares paſt dedicate ſome of theſe Expo­ſitions vnto the right honourable
learned and vertuous Sir C. H. K. Lord Chancellor, of Eng­land, and after him
another portion to the right honourable Sir I. P. K. Lord Keeper, &c. your
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=5) honours
Anteceſſor: and laſt of all, another part, to the Queenes moſt excellent
Maieſtie well ac­cepted: Do now addreſſe, and dedicate the expo­ſition and
tranſlation of theſe fewe Pſalmes mo vnto your honourable good Lordſhip: as
vnto that honourable perſonage,Ie [...]mie 44.19. choſen of the Lord, for a
ſhepheard to ſtand before him in practiſe a­gainſt all inward aduerſaries of
Gods Iſrael a­mongſt vs,Iſay. 49.2. and as a choſen ſhaft in the quiuer of the
Lord for praier, againſt all forraigne enemies far from vs. Humbly beſeeching
your honourable good Lordſhip heerein thankfully to accept my good wil: to the
furtherance of my poore pen and ſtudie: And my heartie and thankfull praier
ſhall be dayly preſt vnto almightie God for your ho­nourable lordſhips long
life, health, increaſe of honour and permanent heauenly felicitie in Chriſt
Ieſus.

London in S. Brides pariſh, 2\. No­uember, 1596.

Your Honours humble and deuoted Orator, Richard Robinſon, Citizen of London.

## Table of contents

  * Briefe Contents of theſe ſixe Pſalmes.
  * 1\. PSAL. LXII. Nonne Deo ſubiecta erit, &c.
    * 1.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 1.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.
  * 2\. PSAL. 63. Deus, Deus meus, ad te de luce, &c.
    * 2.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 2.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.
  * 3\. PSAL. 63. Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
    * 3.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 3.2. The Pſalme aed expoſition thereof.
  * 4\. PSAL. 65. Te decet Hymnus Deus in Syon.
    * 4.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 4.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.
  * 5\. PSAL. 66. Iubilate Deo omnis terra, &c.
    * 5.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 5.2. The Pſalme and Expoſition therof.
  * 6\. PSAL. 67. Deus miſereatur nostri.
    * 6.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 6.2. The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=5)

## 1\. PSAL. LXII. ‘Nonne Deo ſubiecta erit, &c.’

To the excellent Muſitian Ieduthun: a Pſalme of Dauid. VVhen he left Aſaph and
his bre­thren before the arke of the Lordes couenant to miniſter there. As in
1\. Chron. 16.39.40.41, 42.

### 1.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe whole Pſalme is a doctrine inioyning vs to haue cōfidence repoſed in God
alone,The effectes of this Pſalme. and for­bidding vs to truſt in anie hu­mane
helpes: For he that put­teth his truſt in the friendſhip and familiaritie of
men, as in demonſtrations or rules immo­ueable, he holdeth himſelfe by a
ſlender and intrueth a rotten threed; as that moſt pleaſant Orator Demades
ſometime ſaid. But not with leſſe elegancie is it ſaide by Salomon. Prou. 27\.
verſ. 19\. As in water face an­ſwereth to face ſo is the heart of man vnto
man. The rewardes of wicked amitie. Euery hi­ſtorie is full of examples, but
we for breuities ſake wil be content with the example of Aratus the Siconian.
Aratus whom Polybius calleth the Grand Guyde, of the Achaians common-wealth,
liued long moſt lo­uingly, [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=6) & moſt familiarly
with the Macedonian kings: But at length through fained ſuſpitions conceiued
by them againſt him, poiſon was giuen vnto him: which hauing d [...]unke vp
and receiued into his inward partes: Aratus ſaide, Haec ſunt praemiae Regiae
amicitiae. Theſe the rewards be of kingly amitie. Neither in deede are ſuch
kinges and princes fauours only more ebbing & flowing then anie arme of the
ſea, but the zeales of all men without exception are vncertaine, and more
eaſi­ly changed then the Moone, which neuer keepeth one countenance. This
inequalitie maketh the 146. Pſalm there ſaying Verſe 2. O put not your truſt
in princes, nor in the ſonnes of men in whom there is no helpe. But few at any
time do beleue theſe ſayings without experience, which is the Schoolemiſtres
of fooles, according vnto the prouerbe: Stultus accepto damno ſapit. It is
euer the fooles guiſe, by harme receiued to be wiſe. For there is not anie man
whom you ſhall ſee not a little proud with a ſmall puffe of winde riſing from
the fauours of mightie perſons, and in truſting hereunto doe buſie themſelues
in matters vnneedfull. But we being tho­roughly mooued with Gods
admoniſhments, let vs a­mend theſe euils, and let vs learne, that God is only
a faithfull and firme friend, counſellor and helper, who indeed forſaketh not
his, in the midſt of death.

### 1.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.

Verſe 1

My ſoule truely waiteth vpon God, for of him commeth my ſaluation.

Verſe 2

He verely is my ſtrength, and my ſaluati­on: He is my defence, ſo that I ſhall
not greatly fall.

Doctrine of the firſt Commaundement touching Si­lence & Hope, as I ſaid, is
deliuered in this Pſalm: ver. 1. [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=6) Waite (ſaith he)
vpon the Lord, Of patience and hope in God, when we are af­flicted. addreſſe
thy ſelfe vnto him, and hope in him. Waiting or ſilence is oppoſed a­gainſt
impatience, and diſdaine, to him that ſeeketh reme­dies not granted, or els
granted: but in deſpiſing the order which God hath ordained, as many ſeeke for
medicines or helpes from Southſayers againſt the commaundement of God, which
forbiddeth to aſke counſell of the diuell and his inſtrumentes. Others runne
for helpe vnto Phi­ſitians, whoſe ſcience although it be graunted and
approo­ued by God, yet ought it not to be the firſt and principall obiect of
mans will. Let vs therefore in miſeries be pati­ent, and let our hope be
deeply rooted in Gods promiſes, which cannot be wearied, nor in any wiſe
mooued out of place. But afterwardes let vs in a right order ſeeke reme­dies
graunted vs, leaſt wee ſinne vppon the contrary part, namely in tempting God
according to the ſaying of Syra­cides chap. 38.9. My ſonne faile not in thy
ſickneſſe: but pray vnto the Lord, and he wil make thee whole. Deferre not to
turne vnto God, and then giue place vnto the Phiſition. Verſe. 11\. Theſe
rules if wee ſhall follow we ſhall neuer be caſt out of our ſtanding, but we
ſhall ſtand like rockes immoueable, whereupon the fro­thing fome of the ſea
daſhing, doth againe fall away from them.

Verſe 3

How long wil ye imagin miſchiefe againſt euery man? ye ſhalbe ſlaine all the
ſorte of you: yea as a tottering wall ſhall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

Like as the raging diuel vexeth & greeueth the Church in her olde age,Sathans
extreme outrage againſt the church in her old age, which by reaſon of age is
weaker and fee­bler: So the inſtrumentes of the diuell doe inſult vppon dead
perſons & ſuch as are brought low, & [...]o not make vp the broken wall with
fortified watches; but with violence and aſſault endeuour what they can, quite
to euerthrowe [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=7) the ſame. This
proper mark of diueliſh reioyſing at good mens miſeries, let vs not ſuffer to
be burning in vs: but let vs be mooued with other mens miſeries, and let vs
ſtudie as our vocation and abilitie will ſerue vs, rather to pacifie then
increaſe them. For hee that ſtandeth let him take heed leſt he fall: for it
may happen to euery man that doth happen to any man.

Verſe 4

Their deuiſe is onely how to put him out, whom God wil exalt: their delight is
in lies, they giue good wordes with their mouth, but curſe with their heart.

Though our whole life be full of diſſimulations, yet the examples of Courts
are more manifeſt: for there the face, countenance, and eies doe often
diſſemble, but the ſpeech moſt often: for the greateſt part of Courtiers doe
flatter a man to his face, but priuily, if occaſion be, can lay a colde pad in
the ſtraw. And ſpecially if they ſee any ſtranger to proſper, [...]mulation in
princes courts, &c. and to be of any eſtimation with the prince: vnto this
mans deſtruction doe they prepare and bend all their enterpriſes. But theſe
plagues of Courtes, are better knowne then that they require long recitall of
them heere by me in this place.

Verſe 5

Neuertheleſſe my ſoule, waite thou ſtill vpon God, for my hope is in him.

Verſe 6

He truely is my ſtrength and my ſaluati­on: So that I ſhall not faile.

Verſe 7

In God is my health, and my glory: the rocke of my might, and in God is my
truſt.

Antonius ſaith by Ciceroes citing: Haec mea in dicen­do ratio eſt▪ vt ſi quid
boni cauſa habet  [...] habitem, hae­ream, commo [...]ar, &c. This rule hold I
in ſpeaking, that if the cauſe I take in hand haue in it any goodneſſe, or
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=7) right, in
the ſame I may dwell, ſtand and remaine, &c. So the holyghoſt twice or thrice
repeateth here that which is excellent, that he may keepe ſtill the hearer or
learner of his Pſalme in the cogitation of moſt excellent matters: for as
Epictetus notably ſaid, Non poteſt doctrina aculeos relinquere in animo, niſi
quis eadem quotidie aud [...]at & ad vſum transferat. Doctrine can leaue no
ſtrength in the minde, except a man daily heare the ſame, and apply it vnto
vſe. Let vs not then with a certaine loathing and ſa­tietie be quite carried
away from repeating of moſt excel­lent ſentences, but let vs giue thankes vnto
the holyghoſt that he ſpeaketh the ſame matters from the ſame purpo­ſes, and
with this confirmeth our faith.

Verſe 8

O put your truſt in him alway (ye people) poure out your hearts before him,
for God is our hope.

He applieth his example vnto the vniuerſall church, as if he ſhould ſay; God
is much more ready to giue, then we are to receiue. Come ye therefore vnto
this good and gra­cious Lord, who is more truely called, The delights of
mankinde, then was Titus the ſonne of Vaſpaſian, and freely put forth your
petitions in his preſence, yea poure out your hearts before him: for he
reioyceth and is deligh­ted in this conſent or vnity. Laſt of all, put your
truſts in him, not onely in proſperitie, but moſt ſpecially in aduerſi­tie,
and beleeue ye that you are receiued and heard, yea, though all creatures
ſeeme to haue conſpired your deſtru­ction. Hitherto appertaineth the notable
ſaying of Saint Paul Epheſ. 3. where hee affirmeth, that wee haue theſe three
things, by Chriſt, eaſie acceſſe vnto the Father, free ſpeech, and ſure
confidence to be heard. Doubtles it is a great thing for a man to come in the
ſight of God; and a greater matter to ſpeake franckely and manifeſtly, that
which a man thinketh. But the greateſt matter of all [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=8) is, without
doubting to beleeue, that God denieth vs no­thing. Nowe thinke with your ſelfe
what and how great thankes is due vnto the Sonne of God the Mediatour, through
whoſe grant and gift we poſſeſſe all theſe things.

Verſe 9

As for the children of men, they are but vaine, the children of men are
deceitfull vpon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanitie it
ſelfe.

Verſe 10

O truſt not in wrong and robberie, giue not your ſelues vnto vanitie: if
riches increaſe ſet not your hearts vpon them.

Euery law is a commandement of that which is right, and a conuincer of that
which is wrong: And Iuſtice com­prehendeth the eſchewing of vices, and the
ſtudie of well doing. Like as therefore he hath hitherto deliuered vs a rule
or precept touching confidence ſetling it ſelfe in God: So now afterwardes he
forbiddeth vngodly confi­dence in humane things. For our body is weake, our
fea­ture or beauty fraile, our health vncertaine, our life moſt ſhort and
fickle fading, honour is vaine, becauſe it is either fained, or not of
continuance, our wil is corrupt, wiſdome is ſmall, vertue languiſhing, and
finally affection trouble­ſome. Seeing therfore al humane things are weake,
britle and fraile, may we doubt yea or no, but that it is more ſafe and far
better to truſt in God onely, then to nouriſh an vn­godly confidence, not
onely in Princes and Peoples good will, but alſo in their wealth and other
things, which while they glitteringly ſhine, are brickely broken.

Verſe 11

God ſpake once and twice; I haue alſo heard the ſame, that power belongeth
vnto God.

Verſe 12

And that thou Lorde arte mercifull: for [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=8) thou rewardeſt
euery man, according to his worke.

The laſt verſes containe a Reaſon, why it is better to haue our hope repoſed
in God, then in creatures: becauſe there is in God a will and power to helpe
and ſaue. Crea­tures either lacke will, or power, or both. For firſt as Pla­to
ſaith elegantly, Amicus eſt animal naetura mutabilis: A friend is a creature,
ſoone changed in nature. Next of all, ſecond cauſes can not any way worke,
without the firſt: But the will of God towards the godly ones is
vn­changeable, according to that ſaying, Iſay 54. verſe 10\. But my mercy
ſhall not depart from thee, nor the co­uenant of my peace ſhall be moued,
ſaith thy merciful Lord. And how ſay ye to it that gods power hath nothing to
withſtand or let it, but all things giue place to it, and all things yeelde
and obey the ſame? Let therefore our hope indeuour it ſelfe with the will and
power of God, and not with humane indeuours and helpes. But the phraſe of Lawe
[Thou ſhalt reward euery man according to his worke,] let that be vnderſtoode
according to the inter­pretation of the goſpel: for the preaching of the
goſpel tea­cheth, who be iuſt, & who be vniuſt,Who be iuſt, and who be vniuſt.
in what maner workes do pleaſe or not pleaſe God. The perſon is iuſt, that is
ac­cepted vnto God, not for workes, but for the Mediatours ſake whom mans
faith reuerently embraceth with a kiſſe. Againe, obedience be it neuer ſo lame
and vnperfect, yet notwithſtanding when faith in the Mediator ſhineth forth
before the ſame, it is acceptable vnto God. But hee that beleeueth not in the
ſonne, vpon him remaineth the wrath of God, than which nothing may be thought
more ſorrow­full.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=9)

## 2\. PSAL. 63. ‘Deus, Deus meus, ad te de luce, &c.’

A Pſalme of Dauid when he was in the wildernes of Ziph in the Country of Iuda.
1. Sam. 23.24.

### 2.1. THE ARGVMENT.

LIke as ſound health is more acceptable vn­to them which are recouered and
broght out of ſickneſſe, then vnto others which were neuer ſicke in bodie:
euen ſo good things long before deſired, do more de­light vs then thoſe which
we haue continually recei­ued.The want of a goo [...] thing ma­keth it more to
be deſired. For of Priuation or wanting (if I may ſo ſay with the Logicians)
are the habites eſteemed, and men in wanting vnderſtand how precious good
things be. The ſame thing hath beene vſually happening to the godly ones: for
although they loathe not their preſent bene­fites, namely the voice of the
miniſtery, and lawful vſe of the ſacraments, nor yet with fulneſſe are
eſtranged from them. Yet notwithſtanding more feruently doe men deſire theſe
benefites, ſo often as from their mo­thers breaſt (that is, from the publike
miniſtery, and from the outward ſocietie of the church) they are ta­ken and
plucked away. For then the milke of Gods word waxeth ſweeter and ſweeter, and
the crummes falling from the Lordes Table are had in more price and reuerence.
To this purpoſe ſaint Iohn Chryſoſtome [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=9) expounding the
firſt chapter of the epiſtle to the Ro­manes ſaieth,S. Iohn Chryſo­ſtome his
wo [...]des vppon the firſt chapter of Saint Paul to the Ro­manes appliable to
this place. Nunc verbum Dei inter nos habitat abun­de cum omni ſapientia, &
ſine periculo docetur & diſcitur, quia pij Principes ſuſcipiunt patrocinium
docentium & diſcentium eu [...]ngelij doctrinam. Hac autem copia verbi, &
praeſenti tranquillitate non ita afficiuntur homines vt par  [...]erat. Veniet
igitur tempus triſte & luctuoſum, qu [...] diſsipatis publicis caetibus
eccleſiae, pauci exul [...] in aliquo angulo trepide conuenient, & inter ſe
communicabūt frag­menta caeleſtis doctrinae & conſolationes, & pro his
reli­quiis Deo ingentes gratias agent. In Engliſh thus: Now the worde of God
dwelleth plenteouſly amongeſt vs. with all wiſedome, and is without daunger
taught and learned, becauſe godly Princes take vpon them to de­fend the
teachers and learners of the doctrine of the goſpel. But men are not ſo well
giuen to fauour this plenty of the word, nor to further this preſent
peacea­ble eſtate, as meet it was they ſhould haue done. Ther­fore a heauie
and lamentable time ſhall come, wherein the publike congregations of the
Church being ſcatte­red here and there, a few perſons ſhall aſſemble
them­ſelues in ſome corner with feare, and ſhall communi­cate amongſt
themſelues the fragments of the heauen­ly doctrine, and conſolation, and for
theſe fragments ſhall render great thankes vnto God. This ſame opi­nion of
Chryſoſtome hath ſuch familiaritie and likeneſſe with this our age, that
neither may one egge be more like another, nor milke more like milke: For all
chur­ches, and all ſchooles, do euen as it were thorowly rage with the daily
preachings of the goſpel, and the ſacra­ments are rightly adminiſtred. But
becauſe the grea­teſt part of men is vnthankefull vnto God for ſo great plenty
and abundance of his worde, We muſt feare a fa­mine will come, not indeede of
bread and wine, but of the word of God. Let vs therefore walke in the light,
while we haue light, leſt darkeneſse come vpon vs, Iohn 12.35. And [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=10) although godly
exiles and certaine others oppreſſed in miſerable manners are not able to come
to the hear­ing of the goſpel preached: yet with this conſolation do they
ſuſtaine themſelues, that not only they are the citizens and members of the
Church, which by the grant and gift of GOD doe heare the preachers of the
goſpel and miniſters therof in Churches and Schooles; but they alſo which
ioyne together their prayer and confeſsion with the true church: for like as
Dauid was not at all ſeuered from the ſocietie of Gods church, bi­cauſe hee
was baniſhed: So the godly ones with Tur­kiſh or pontificall tyranny being
oppreſſed and deſti­tute of publike miniſtery, are and remaine citizens of the
church, if they adioyne their praiers and worſhip­pings vnto thoſe
congregations, wherein the goſpel is preached: and doe not caſt away their
confeſsion of the trueth.

### 2.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.

Verſe 1

O God thou art my God, early wil I ſeeke thee.

Verſe 2

My ſoule thirſteth for thee, my fleſh alſo longeth after thee in a barren and
drie land, where no water is.

THis is a notable deſcription of a feruent de­ſire. For like as the Hart being
purſued, flieth, and is made weary with long chaſe, ſo that he earneſtly
deſireth the liuely run­ning waters, to quench his thirſt, and re­freſh
himſelfe withall: ſo the godly minde vnfainedly, and from his heart deſireth
to haue recourſe vnto the publike congregation of the church, wherein ſoundeth
the pure word of the goſpel, and the ſacraments are rightly admi­niſtred:
[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=10) for ſo
ſaieth the 27. Pſalme verſe 4. One thing haue I deſired of the Lord, which I
will require, euen that I may dwell in the houſe of the Lord, al the dayes of
my life, to behold the  [...]a [...]e beauty of the Lord, and to viſit his
holy temple. And the 95. pſalme and fourth verſe ſaith, Bleſſed is the man
whom thou chuſeſt and receiueſt vnto thee; He ſhall dwell in thy Court, and
ſhall be ſatiſfied with the pleaſures of thy houſe, euen of the holy temple.
Theſe and ſuch like ſayings which are euery where extant in the pſalmes do
inſtruct the Rea­der touching greateſt matters. For firſt they do teach that
there is no thing better, nor any thing more wiſhfull then to liue moſt
friendly and louingly with the congregation which is the Temple and dwelling
houſe of God and ſhal for euermore enioy the ſight of God. Secondly, they
ac­cuſe and condemne the erronious perſons which will bee members of no
church, but ſeeke for Platoes citie, where­in is no infirmitie. Let ſuch knowe
that they are not cho­ſen vnto the ſociety of life euerlaſting, becauſe they
are not of that congregation of thoſe that be called, according to that ſaying
of S. Paul Rom. 8.14. Whom he hath cho­ſen, thoſe he hath called. Thirdly,
they comfort the god­ly ones, who indure great ſorrow in their mindes to be
ab­ſent from the common aſſemblies of the church: for Mat. 5.6. They are
bleſſed which hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe: and moſt earneſtly wiſh
and deſire to be ioyned with the true church. Laſt of all, they diſcerne the
true church from other Sectes. For the church hold­eth faſt the poſſeſſion of
the holy and ſacred fountain, from whence are drawne neceſſarie doctrine and
whole ſome conſolations. But other ſectes are deſart places full of errours
and darkeneſſe, and voyde and barren of al conſo­lation: for though they
retaine a particle of the Lawe, yet they either are vtterly ignorant of, or
corrupt the goſpell. But touching this difference I haue oftetimes elſewhere
ſpoken in the Pſalmes.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=11)

Verſe 3

So haue I looked for thee in holines: that I might behold thy power and glory.

He expreſſeth plainely the cauſe of this deſire, becauſe God is in the Church
alone truely acknowledged and cal­led vpon, and the ſpeciall preſence of God
is perceiued: for he calleth Gods glorie, the proper ornament of the church;
namely the pure doctrine of the goſpel, and ſignes of grace, which are called
vſually the Sacraments. The power of God; he ſignifieth that maner of preſence
wher­with god is preſent vnto his church alone: for though God in power and
ſubſtance be euery where, according to Ie­remies ſaying 23.24. Doe not I fill
heauen and earth? And Paul ſaith Actes 17.28. In him wee are, liue, and moue:
yet, by another reaſon God dwelleth in his church: for there he is by his word
and ſacraments ſo effectuall, as he may regenerate & ſanctifie many vnto life
euerlaſting. This power doeth not reaſon ſee, which is mal-contented with the
ſimple and baſe outward ſhewe of the worde and ſacraments. But Dauid and other
the godly ones feele in their heart a new light, and the beginnings of
euerlaſting life, inflamed by the word and ſignes of grace, Rom. 1.16 The
goſpel is the power of God for ſaluation vnto all that beleeue.

Verſe 4

For the louing kindeneſſe is better then the life it ſelfe: my lippes ſhall
praiſe thee.

He amplifieth the cauſe of feruent deſire by compariſon of preſent and
eternall benefits. The greateſt part of men ſeeketh after honours and
pleaſures, and thinketh theſe fa­ding and vaniſhing ſhadowes the chiefe good
gifts or bleſ­ſings. But I preferre thy mercy promiſed in the goſpel before al
benefites which are momentanie in this life: For what doth the whole
poſſeſſion of the world profite a man, if thereby he endanger his owne ſoule?
with this ſentence our mindes are ſo to be confirmed, that we may euen
deſ­piſe thoſe, which deride vs ſo thinking.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=11)

Verſe 5

So long as I liue will I magnifie thee on this manner, and lift vp my handes
in thy name.

Verſe 6

My ſoule ſhall be ſatiſfied as it were with marrow and fatneſſe, when my mouth
praiſeth thee with ioyfull lips.

He ſpake before of the impulſiue cauſe▪ that is, of the obiect, which mans
will chiefly deſireth: Now addeth he the ſmall cauſes of ſo great a deſire: I
deſire not the con­iunction or aggregation vnto the church, with a certaine
ambition or couetouſneſſe, aſſociate themſelues with the church for wealth and
promotions ſake, but I looke for, and ſeeke after thoſe chiefeſt and moſt
excellent concluſi­ons, that I may call vpon God, and declare my
thankful­neſſe vnto him both with tongue and other dueties. For although in
theſe miſeries of baniſhment I doe call vpon God, yet with ſighs and teares I
make my ſupplications. Seeing then God loueth a cheerefull giuer, there
ſhoulde be nothing more wiſhful vnto me, then with a ioyful mind and mouth to
worſhip and honour God. And if I might be once partaker of this deſire, I
ſhould iudge my ſelfe of nothing more happie, and with my head to touch the
top of the ſkies. But the firſt fiue verſes doe excellently de­ſcribe the
reaſon of his praier: For firſt in his praier ſhi­neth faith beleeuing that
wee haue God mercifull vnto vs as the Pſalme in this place ſaith. O God thou
art my God. Secondly his feruent praier riſeth of this faith, which is
compared vnto a thirſt: My ſoule thirſteth for thee. Thirdly praying he ſeeth
God, that is,A repetition of Dauids praier▪ and fiue reaſo [...] thereof.
feeleth the ſpeciall preſence of God: So haue I looked for thee in holineſſe.
Fourthly, the feeling of Gods mercie & com­fort farre paſſeth all pleaſures:
For thy louing kindnes is better then the light it ſelfe. Fiftly, vnto praier
is the worſhipping of God adioyned, or rather made like: My [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=12) lips ſhall praiſe
thee, &c. Laſt of all: The minde is fed full of conſolation, none otherwiſe
then the bodie is with fat meate, in theſe wordes. As it were with marrow and
fatneſſe, &c.

Verſe 7

Haue I not remembred thee in my bed, and thought vppon thee when I was
wa­king.

Verſe 8

Becauſe thou haſt been my helpe; there­fore vnder the ſhadowe of thy winges
will I reioyce.

Verſe 9

My ſoule hangeth vpon thee; thy right hand hath vpolden me.

He confirmeth his affirmation from a ſtrong reaſon, as if he ſaid: If I now do
duely remember thee with thank­fulneſſe in my ſorrowfull and lamentable
banniſhment, what thinkeſt thou that I will doe when I ſhall be reſto­red into
the rightfull recouerie of that which I haue loſt wrongfully? For then wil I
frankly and freely, fully and wholly giue thee thankes, and I will driue the
ſhip as it were with oares, but I will ſaile with large ſpred ſailes and
proſperous windes, that is, I wil moſt euidently de­clare that I am thankfull
vnto thee for thy helpe, defence and reſtitution. Vnto thee I ſay I will
wholly deuote my ſelfe, and in thee wil I repoſe and as it were conſecrate al
that is mine.

Verſe 10

Theſe alſo that ſeek the hurt of my ſoule, they ſhall go vnder the earth.

Verſe 11

Let them fall vpon the edge of the ſword, that they may be a portion for
Foxes.

He addeth vnto his other affectes or motions, (which are moſt feruent in this
Pſalme) a iuſt indignation againſt his enemies, and being ful of faith, and
the holy ghoſt fore-prophecieth [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=12) vnto them a
tragicall end of their miſchiefe.Dauid praieth for the deſtructi­on of his
ene­mies. Now indeed Saul proudly ruleth, carrieth ſtately counte­nance in the
worlde, and laieth ſnares for me poore Inno­cent: But within a while my
enemies ſhalbe miſerably ſlaine and ſhall die and bee buried with diſhonour.
Theſe ſtormes doe I foreſee, ſitting as it were in a Tower, and am partly
ſorrowful for the euerlaſting deſtruction of ma­ny ſoules and partly reioyce
that God ſetteth forth a teſti­monie of his preſence in the Church, whereinto
others looking, may learne to feare God.

Verſe 12

But the king ſhall reioyce in God, al they alſo that ſweare by him ſhal be
commen­ded: for the mouth of them that ſpeake hes ſhalbe ſtopped.

He affirmeth that hee will become a king truſting in Gods promiſe, according
to that ſaying; Haba [...]uk 2.3. If the Lord ſhall tarry, looke for him,
becauſe when he commeth, hee will come ſpeedily and will not linger. He alſo
addeth a perticle touching an othe, which is not to thoſe that vnderſtand the
doctrine of obſcure the ſe­cond Commaundement. For an othe is a kinde of
cal­ling vpon the name of God, wherein wee promiſe ſome­thing, putting or
taking God firſt for a witneſſe and iudge in the cauſe. For we pray that he
would confirme our pro­miſe with his teſtimonie, and puniſh and deſtroy the
par­ties guiltie of periury, or falſe forſworne perſons, accor­ding to ye
threatning added in the ſecond commandement, And as God alone is to be called
vpon, ſo were it a wicked thing to ſweare but by the name of the true God, as
in Deuter. 10\. Moyſes commandeth. But the full doctrine touching an othe
cannot be heere explaned: wherefore let ye godly ruler take & apply them for
that purpoſe out of bookes methodically written and publiſhed.His proteſtation
of thankfulneſſe towardes God. For in this Cōmentary we do not intreate vpon
common places, but [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=13) with a certaine
grammaticall diligence, we interprete the ſame Pſalme ſo, as the reading of
them may be more ea­ſie and pleaſant vnto the yonger ſort.

## 3\. PSAL. 63. ‘Exaudi Deus orationem meam.’

To him that excelleth, a Pſalme of Dauid; againſt his enemies, and touching
their puniſhment, and deſtruction.

### 3.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis Pſalme is a praier againſt Syco­phantes and ſlaunderers in kinges and
princes courtes, which moſt ſubtilly ſeeke to ſtaine the true doctrine and the
godly ones: For, ſuch both vnder­ſtand and prooue the ſaying of Megiu [...]
who was a Sycophant in the court of Alexander the Great: Calumniare audacter,
quia aliquid ſemper haeret: Slaunder ſtill boldly, ſomething alwaies ſticks in
thee. But the Pſalme threatneth vnto them a puniſhment of recompence, which is
deſcribed in the verſe of the poet. Struens alteri malum, ſtruit fuo epati
malum, Who ſeekes a miſchiefe to another man, may ſeeke his own deſtruction
now or then. Againe, Iuſta malis haec ad miſſo pro crimine p [...]na eſt. Si
quae feterunt eadem patientur & ipſi. Null [...] enim p [...]na iuſtior eſt
quam necis artifice [...] arte per [...]r [...] ſu [...].

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=13)

A puniſhment iuſt to the wicked men,

This is for crime ſo committed by them,

That if they haue done anie wickedneſſe,

They therfore ſhould ſmart al remedileſſe:

For no puniſhment more iuſt can be,

Then the wicked in their wickedneſſe periſh to ſee.

Of this rule there are examples ſet down in the hi­ſtorie of Daniel and
Heſter: For, indeede they which ſlaundered Daniel were caſt into the denne of
Lyons: and Haman was hanged vpon the ſame gebet, which he had prepared for
Mardocheus.

### 3.2. The Pſalme aed expoſition thereof.

Verſe 1

Heare my voice, O God in my praier▪ pre­ſerue my life from feare of the
enemie.

Verſe 2

Hide me from the gathering togither of the froward, and from the inſurrection
of wicked doers.

Verſe 3

Which haue whet their tongue like a ſword: and ſhoot out their arrowes, euen
bitter wordes.

Verſe 4

That they may priuily ſhoot at him, which is perfect, and ſodainly doe they
hit him, and feare not.

Verſe 5

They courage themſelues in miſchiefe: and commune among themſelues, howe they
may lay ſnares, and ſay that no man ſhall ſee them.

Verſe 6

They immagine wickedneſſe and practiſe it; that they keepe ſecret among
them­ſelues, euery man in the deepe of his heart.

Albeit there ſeeme to be no remedie againſt the Syco­phantes byting or nipping
girdes; yet wee muſt craue of [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=14) God, that he
himſelfe would repreſſe and vanquiſh thoſe Sycophantes, which bend the moſt
hurtfull weapon to do miſchiefe, namely their tongue: and doe nothing
lawfully, nor manifeſtly,Apelles his de­ſcription of Slan­der, with her
ad­herentes. but worke all in ſecret and by ſubtill de­ceiptes. When I reade
theſe thinges the declamation of Lucian the poet comes into my minde, which he
made a­gainſt ſlander: for he declareth that there was ſuch a de­ſcription of
ſlaunder ſet forth by Apelles painter of Ephe­ſus, viz. There ſate a noble
great perſon with very lōg eares, reaching forth his hand vnto ſlaunder,
comming a far off vnto him; about which perſon ſtand two ſilly women,
Ignorance, and Suſpition. To him ſtrait com­meth Slaunder brauely attired,
ſhewing euen the verie countenance, geſture of body and all manner action, of
beaſtly cruell anger, and in her left hand holding a burning brand, but with
her right hand haleth by her a ſilly wretched yong man whom ſhee holdes by the
haires of his head, he ſtretching forth his handes vp to the Goddes, and
taking the immortall Gods to wit­neſſe. There comes for moſt next a pale
fellow, vile in ſhew, the ſight of his eyes nothing dimme, but one ve­rie like
vnto thoſe whoſe putrified bodies are ſcarce couered with a thin skin. You may
ſoone ſuppoſe this fellow is malice. Now come after Slander two or three
wretched women her companions, whoſe office is to exhort, inſtruct, and make
readie three myſtris: The interpreter of the picture ſaide, theſe were ſnares
and deceites. At his back in mournful weed all ragged and torne followeth
Repentance, who turning her head behind her, with teares and ſhame, ſpieth
Trueth comming.

We looking vpon this table, as it were into a certaine glaſſe, let vs learne
that Ignrance and Suſpition are the feeding or furthering inſtrumentes which
quickly cōceiue the burning flames of ſlander. As alſo let vs conſider that
the welſpring of this miſchiefe is Malice and Emulation, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=14) which ſtriue and
contend for excellencie, and greeueth at o­thers welfare. And Slaunder is
furniſhed with al ſleights of harming, ſuch as are flatterie, lying, periurie
and impu­dencie. And though this kind of people be fearefull & dare not hand
to hand fight with an enemy: yet in their darke places, and as it were in a
deepe dungeon, they dare put forth all wilful boldnes. Wherefore moſt worthy
of ha­tred it is, and to bee curſed of all men, ſeeing it hath no­thing of
trueth, or ſoundneſſe in it.

Verſe 7

But God ſhal ſodainly ſhoot at them with a ſwift arrow: that they ſhalbe
wounded.

Verſe 8

Yea their owne tongues ſhall make them fall: Inſomuch that whoſo ſeeth them
ſhall laugh them to ſcorne.

Verſe 9

And all men that ſee it ſhall ſay, this hath God done; for they ſhall perceiue
that it is his worke.

The ſecond part of the Pſalme denounceth puniſh­ments vnto Sycophantes, which
they deſerue: For as they with their weap [...]ns caſt downe whatſoeuer they
hit; ſo againe are they caſt downe by God, that their deſtruc­tion might be
vnto others an inſtruction and example.

Euerie hiſtory is full of examples, but wee for breuitie ſake will be content
with that delaration which Lucianus ſetteth downe, touching Apelles and
Antiphilus: For al­though Apelles had neither ſeene Tyrus at any time, nor yet
knowne Theodota, authour of the ſedition ſtirred vp in Tyrus at anie time, yet
one Antiphilus enuious of the arte and fauour which Apelles had, was bolde to
accuſe him before the king of the conſpiracie moued in Tyrus, and ſtayning him
with this ſlaunder brought him within the daunger, and predicament of loſing
his head.Apelles accuſed of moouing ſedi­tion by Antiphi­lus, how he was
acquited thereof and the reward of them both. And had not one of the
Conſpirators which were taken and put in pri­ſon been bold deteſting ye
miſchief of Antiphilus, and pi­tying [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=15) the vnhappie
eſtate of Apelles, to prooue that hee had nothing to doe with thoſe ſeditious
perſons, doubtles hee had ſuffered death as puniſhment for the miſchiefes
pretended by them of Tyrus. Therefore when king Ptolo­meus knew the matter,
hee changed his purpoſe, and re­warded Apelles with 100. talents, putting into
bondage Antiphilus the Slaunderer.

Verſe 10

The righteous ſhall reioyce in the Lord, and put their truſt in him & all they
that are true of heart ſhalbe glad.

Like as to the ſhining beames of the ſunne▪ the ſmokes and cloudes do giue
place: So by the help of God, trueth is at length conquerour of Slaunders:
which like foming waues daſhing vppon the rockes doe againe fall off from
them,Trueth the con­querour of Falſhood. when the ſame rocks afterwardes ſtand
ſtedfaſt and immoouable: with this purpoſe, the holy ones being con­firmed,
let them go with ioyfull mindes reioyſing, and with hope lighten themſelues of
their dangers.

## 4\. PSAL. 65. ‘Te decet Hymnus Deus in Syon.’

To him that excelleth a Pſalme or ſong of Dauid, being a thankeſgiuing to God
for his benefites in the three ſtates, Eccleſiaſticall, Politicall, &
Oeco­nomicall.

### 4.1. THE ARGVMENT.

LIke as God by his vnmeaſurable wiſedom & good­neſſe ordained three degrees of
life; namely, The [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=15) miniſtery of the
goſpel, whereby an actuall church is ga­thered;The effect of this Pſalme. The
politike Magiſtrate a preſeruer of diſcipline and peace, and Matrimonie, which
is a wel-ſpring vn­to the Church and gouernment:A thankeſgiuing to God for the
eſtate eccleſiaſti­call,  [...] & oe [...]nom [...]call. ſo this Pſalme giueth
God thankes for all his benefites neceſſary for the bo­dy and the ſoule, for
the gift of his word, and gathering of his Church, for peace, wherein
gouernements doe flouriſh, and finally neede of doctrine, as the chiefeſt, but
alſo of his daily bread in which phraſe, peace, li­uing, and other aſſiſtant
helpes are contained. And to the end that Prayer and Thankeſgiuing for theſe
be­nefites may become more feruent, let vs fore-caſt, and propone in our
mindes the confuſions and troubles of all degrees, which not onely riſe from
mans ignorance and negligence, but alſo are mightily increaſed of the diuell
as moſt cruell enemy vnto all goodneſſe. And the corruption of the firſt order
or degree is in deede Hereſie troubling the church with ſtrange opinions of
God and counterfeit worſhippings.Three degr [...] of enemies to thoſe ſtates.
This plague is 1 moſt hurtful of all, becauſe it both diſhonoureth God, and
brings to wretched mankind darkeneſſe, and as it were a certaine night of
errours and dangers. The cor­ruptions of the ſecond order are Battell and
Sedition, which when once they are begun, are found the whole 2 forme of
miſchiefe. For there wiſedom is driuen quite out of place, and violence workes
all miſchiefe. There Gods and mans lawes moſt impudently are broken. But the
greatnes of theſe miſchiefs paſſeth al eloquēce of ſpeech. The confuſions of
the third degree, are in­felicitie of marriages and children, and the
manifolde 3 loſſes and plagues happening in houſholdes and their buſines. For
like as there is nothing ſweeter vpon earth then peaceable matrimony, ſo
ſorrowfull miſchiefes in matrimony is diſcord, which hindreth the bringing vp
of children, and the increaſe of houſhold matters.

We conſidering this maſſe of miſchiefes outraging [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=16) in the Church,
gouernement, and houſhold affaires, let vs moſt feruently craue of God, both
the remouing of that which is euill, and placing of that which is good, and
for the reſidue of the chiefeſt benefites, namely, of the pure doctrine of the
goſpel, peace, and liuing, let vs giue thankes vnto God: and in that behalfe
let vs fol­low Dauids example, who in this Pſalme, with a thank full minde and
vtterance of tongue aduaunceth Gods benefites, eccleſiaſticall, politicall,
and oeconomicall; & with an excellent method beginneth a thankeſgiuing, from
crauing forgiuenes of ſinnes: foraſmuch as al the confuſions of the three
orders touching which I haue ſpoken, are nothing elſe but moſt grieuous
puniſh­ments for ſinne.

### 4.2. The Pſalme and expoſition thereof.

Verſe 1

Thou O God, art praiſed in Sion; and vn­to thee ſhall the vow be performed in
Ieruſa­lem.

THat which Cicero ſaide of Eurypides; that euery one of his verſes was a
ſeuerall te­ſtimony; the ſame may much more truely be ſaide of the Pſalmes:
wherein not one­ly euery verſe, but alſo all and euery word and wordes haue in
them very much weight and moment. For let vs, if it pleaſe you, call here to
account the wordes of the firſt verſe.

To thee (ſaith he) the creator and preſeruer of the three Hierarchies, that
is, of the Church, Policie, and Oecono­my, be rendred glory, praiſe and honour
for euer and euer, ſo long as no ſpace of time may fully deſcribe. Thou arte
to be magnified with word and writings of all men for thy inſtitution and
preſeruation of the chiefeſt things, wherein ſhine thy wiſedome, goodneſſe,
and righteouſneſſe. For [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=16) whereas nothing
may be more excellent then order, who maruelleth not by right, that mankinde
is by Gods proui­dence moſt wiſely diſtributed into three degrees or orders as
it were: and certes to this end, that the true knowledge of God ſhould be of
euery one according to their vocation preſerued and aduanced. For as it is
ordained that Phyſi­tians do teach, that is, by the prouidence of the workeman
to be directed vnto a certaine rule, and to a certaine ende. And how great
goodneſſe is that, where theſe three eſtates (as I may ſo ſay) are not
ouerthrowne by the outrages of the Deuil and the Worlde, but are by God
effectually preſerued and defended: for albeit our vnthankefulneſſe deſerue
the vniuerſall deſtruction of our churches, policies and matrimoniall eſtate;
yet God (ſuch is his goodneſſe) doth withſtand infinit moleſtations and
generall hauocke, then which nothing may be thought or conceiued more
greeuous? Laſt of all the iuſtice of god ſhineth and is ma­nifeſtly ſeene in
the puniſhments of Heretikes and ſediti­ous perſons. The hiſtorie of the
tragicall end of Arrius is knowne. But no leſſe are knowne the hiſtories
touching the puniſhing of ſeditious perſons, whoſe laſt end agreeth with the
rule Matth. 26.52. He that taketh the ſword (namely not giuen him by the
lawes) ſhall periſh with the ſword.) Theſe puniſhments declare that god is a
iuſt Iudge deſtroying things contrary to his order. But why in this place is
added before the wordes [praiſed in Sion] after ſome tranſlation [in ſilence.]
Becauſe, as Iſaias ſaith 30.15. The churches ſtrength conſiſteth in
qui­etneſſe and confidence. That is, in patience and hope of Gods helpe. And
S. Paule willeth the church, To pray without wrath, or doubting, 1. Timot.
2.8. That is, without grudging againſt God, ſuch as for moſt part ap­peareth
amongſt men in a great violence of tempeſts and concourſe of calamities; and
without Academicall doub­ting touching the wil of God: yet howe hard a thing
it is to performe both, the godly ones do finde by experience in [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=17) great calamities
and temptations wherein they ſeeme to be forſaken or caſt away from God. But
here is required a meanes of godlineſſe, and this is the way whether it bee
eaſie or hard, by this muſt we needes go. And if any man ſeeke for any other,
let him call vpon Fortune, as ſome do vſe to ſay: for it liketh me to borrow
the ſame wordes in this place, which Plato vſeth in Epimaenides, praiſing the
ſtudies of the doctrine touching numbers, figures, and heauenly motions.

Againe, ſome man would peraduenture aſke, why ma­keth hee mention of Sion?
Verely to bring vs downe to the teſtimonies wherein god made himſelfe knowne:
for, like as Sailers direct their courſe vnto the little ſtar Cy­noſura; ſo
let vs bend our mindes and eies vnto gods ma­nifeſting of himſelfe: and as in
the old teſtament the pray­er of the godly ones was tied vnto the Arke of the
coue­nant: ſo now the whole world is Sion, according to that ſaying Iohn 4 23.
True worſhippers ſhal worſhippe the Father in ſpirit and in trueth. For now
the Propi­ciator, or mercifull Sauiour (whom the golden table laid vpon the
arke did ſignifie) is prepared or ſet downe before the face of all the people:
as Simeon ſingeth moſt ſweetely, verſe 3.

Alſo that may be demaunded, touching what vowe the pſalme may here ſpeake,
ſaying, [Vnto thee ſhall the vow be performed.] The anſwere is moſt plaine,
that the vowe in this place ſignifieth the couenant of the firſt precept, or
the promiſe made in our baptiſme: for like as the firſt commaundement
rehearſeth vnto vs dueties tou­ching Feare and Faith: ſo Baptiſme bindeth vs
vnto the acknowledgement and prayer of the true God, as Peter ſaith, 1. Pet.
3.21. Baptiſme is the promiſe of a good conſcience towards God by the
reſurrection of Chriſt. For Baptiſme is a mutuall league wherein god receiueth
vs for his ſonnes ſake, and indueth vs with his holie ſpi­rite: and nowe
againe promiſe perpetuall due obedience [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=17) and true
woorſhippe vnto Almightie God.

Verſe 2

Thou that heareſt the prayer [...] vnto thee ſhall all fleſh come.

There was in Creet an image of Iupiter without ears, which doubtles ſome
Epicure had placed: euen to ſignifie that mens prayers are neglected of God.
Againſt this fu­ry the pſalme ſetteth downe a conſtant affirmation: yea he
ſaith, as it were, our God is neither dumbe, nor deafe, but hath made himſelfe
knowne both by his word, and notable teſtimonies, and alſo in purpoſe and
euent prooueth that he heareth the praiers and ſighings of the godly ones. And
leſt any man ſhould thinke that there is reſpect of perſons with God, he ſaith
expreſly, that all fleſh ſhall come vn­to thee: That is, all men ſhal eaſily
come vnto God, and that no mans minde is ſo ready to receiue, as God is rea­dy
and diligent to giue benefites. Whereas then wee doe not obtaine nor attaine
vnto all things that comes to paſſe by our fault, and not by gods: for
although he willingly heareth vs, without grudging & loathing: yet our hearts
waxe too cold in praying: therefore let vs not accuſe God, who is liberall
towards all men, but our owne coldeneſſe, and our ſlouthfulnes which ſcarcely
aſketh any thing faint­ly, much leſſe can it ſtrongly knocke at the gates of
God, or complaine doubtfully and earneſtly, that God hideth himſelfe. But let
there be alwayes in our heartes, eares, and tongues ſounding and reſounding
this moſt ſweete title, wherewith the pſalme aduanceth God. Hee ſaieth, God is
not onely a hearer, but alſo a full hearer of our prayer: whereby it followeth
that wee are not onely ſu­ters, but full ſuters: So in the one hundred and
twentie pſalme, and in the firſt verſe it is ſaide: When I cryed vnto the
Lorde in my trouble, hee heard me fully. Let vs therefore imprint this title
no otherwiſe in our mindes, then the image of the ſeale is printed vpon waxe,
that wee [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=18)
may moſt ſtedfaſtly beleeue that our praiers are receiued, and heard at full.

Verſe 3

My miſdeedes preuaile againſt me, O bee thou merciful vnto our ſinnes.

The Pſalme taketh away the chiefeſt impediment of prayer: for this obiection
troubleth men in time of their praying, to wit, Iohn the ninth chapter, God
heareth not ſinners. I am a ſumer, with what face then ſhall I come vnto god,
who is angrie with ſinne [...] God is a con­ſuming fire, That is, puniſhing
and deſtroying the guil­tineſſe of the offence. Dauid graunteth the minor, and
feeleth ſinne by the lawe to be made ſinne mightily, as ap­peareth in the
ſeuenth chapter of the epiſtle of the holy A­poſtle ſaint Paul to the Romanes,
but therewithall hee craueth forgiueneſſe of ſinne, promiſed in the goſpell:
and ſuch ſinners truely repenting and crauing forgiuenes, ſhall without doubt
be heard. Let vs therefore learne by this verſe, what rule ſerueth beſt to
beginne our prayer by: namely, the confeſſion of ſinne, which is voide of
diſſimu­lation, and a feruent praier for remiſſion of ſinnes. For, before all
petitions, prayer touching forgiuenes of ſinnes, ought firſt to ſhine forth,
as elſe-where is often time ſaid▪ Hitherto is recited the beginning of the
pſalme, now com­meth he vnto the thankeſgiuing.

Verſe 4

Bleſſed is the man whome thou chuſeſt and receiueſt vnto thee: He ſhall dwell
in thy court, and ſhal be ſatisfied with the pleaſures of thy houſe, euen of
thy holy temple.

He giueth god thankes for the miniſtery of his worde [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=18) whereby an
eternall church is gathered vnto god: for hee calleth the church of god, the
congregation wherein ſound­eth the preaching of the goſpel, and wherein God is
true­ly called vpon. To be a citizen of this congregation is the chiefeſt and
greateſt benefit vpon earth: Becauſe by his word god maketh himſelfe knowne
vnto vs, comforteth vs, and with his holy ſpirit gouerneth vs, leſt we ſhoulde
(being quailed with temptations and calamities) vtterly deſpaire in our
ſelues. But as in Dauids time god dwelt in the tabernacle, and afterwardes in
the Temple of Salo­mon; So now god dwelleth in the whole world; where­ſoeuer
thankefull praiſe is ſpread of Chriſt. O the im­menſe goodneſſe of God▪ who
hath not onely choſen the Iewes, but alſo the Gentiles vnto euerlaſting
ſalua­tion, and hath called them to the ſocietie of the true church. Hereupon
we may reaſon by a contrary poſition, as in the eight chapter to the Romanes,
and the fourteenth verſe, Whome hee hath choſen, thoſe hee hath called.
Therefore al which are not called, are not choſen: for it is ſure, that the
choſen ones are no where to be ſought for, but in the ſocietie of them that
are called, that is, of them which retaine the foundation, and do not
ſtubbornely defend wor­ſhipping of idolles. But what are the pleaſures of the
houſe and temple of God? God hath giuen vnto his church excellent pleaſures,
his ſonne Chriſt, faith which o­uercommeth al dangers, right good works, the
holyghoſt, vnderſtanding of the ſcripture, peace of conſcience, and other
benefites which are innumerable.

Verſe 5

Thou ſhalt ſhew vs woonderfull things in thy righteouſneſſe, O God of our
ſaluation: thou that arte the hope of all the endes of the earth, and of them
that remaine in the broad ſea.

He ioyneth vnto thankeſgiuing, a prayer very neceſſary, [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=19) wherein he
craueth that god would preſerue the miniſtery, and confirme that which hee
hath begunne in vs. For the doctrine touching Iuſtification is wonderfull,
that is, put or placed far beyond and aboue the capacitie of mans
rea­ſon.Doctrine of Iuſtification. Therefore vnto the Iewes it is an offence,
and to the Gentiles fooliſhneſſe, 1. Corinth. 1. For, what I pray you ſeemeth
more abſurd, then that man ſhoulde be iuſt before god, not by his owne, but by
an others obe­dience, nor by his owne, but by anothers merite, eſpecially
ſeeing the law requireth our workes? Hereof grow thoſe clamours of our
aduerſaries, The doctrine of faith is the corruption of manners, and libertie
of diſcipline. Againe, Men, when they heare this doctrine are made more ſlowe
to liue well and bleſſedly. But the godly ones doe know where faith alone
raigneth, and what muſt be eſteemed of workes: for in that place where it is
hand­led touching remiſſion of ſinnes, and reconciliation wyth god: and
touching attainement vnto euerlaſting life, our workes are no other thing but
the filthineſſe of dogges, ſo farre as pertaineth vnto merite, and the cauſe
of Iuſtifica­tion. In this circle (if I may ſo ſay) the alone Mediator beareth
all the rule, and hath the preeminence, whom faith acknowledgeth and taketh
hold vpon, and beleeueth, that for his ſake onely, wee are freely by God
receiued into fa­uour, and are indued with life euerlaſting, as theſe ſayings
following doe witneſſe, Romanes the third chapter and foure and fiue and
twentie verſes, All are iuſtified free­ly by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Chriſt Ieſus: whome God hath ſet foorth to be a re­conciliation
through ſaith in his blood. Alſo 1. Co­rinth. 1\. Yee are of him in Chriſt
Ieſus, who of God is made vnto vs, wiſedome and righteouſneſſe, and
ſan­ctification and redemption: That hee that reioyceth ſhould reioyce in the
Lord, verſ. 30, 31. Moreouer, 1. Corinth. 4.4. I know nothing by my ſelfe, yet
am I not thereby iuſtified, but he that iudgeth me is the Lorde:

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=19)But after
that we haue obtained forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, alſo reconciliation ioy [...]ed
with the gift of the holy ghoſt, and life euerlaſting, and doe againe go out
of the holie of holieſt, there good workes are not in vs as it were
filthi­neſſe of dogges, but (by faith firſt ſhining forth)▪ are made
worſhippings of God, and ſacrifices of thankes giuing which God wil haue
rendered vnto him, that with his obe­dience we may declare our thankfulneſſe,
& inuite others by our example to the honouring of God. To this pur­poſe ſaith
Paul. Gal 6\. But let euery man proue his own worke, and then ſhall hee haue
reioycing in himſelfe, and not in another. And 2\. Cor. 1\. For our reioycing
is this, the teſtimonie of our conſcience, that in ſimplici­tie and godly
pureneſſe, and not in fleſhly wiſedome, but by the grace of God we haue had
our conuerſation in the world, and moſt of all to you wardes. Let this thing
therefore remain in this cauſe, which cannot be chan­ged: Chriſt only is the
ſaluation of God; Againe, as Symcon ſingeth, A light to lighten the Gentiles
and the glorie of the people of Iſrael. But ſeeing the puritie and ſimplicitie
of this doctrine cannot by mans alone diligence be retained in vſe, let vs
moſt feruently craue of God: That he would not only the guide and giuer, but
alſo the performer and effecter, of this doctrin, and ſeale the ſame thorowly
in our heartes, that we forgoe not the word it ſelfe, or the naturall meaning
of the word.

Verſe 6

Which in his ſtrength ſetteth faſt the mountaines, and is girded about with
power.

He giueth thankes for the inſtitution and preſeruation of the eſtate
politicke:A thankeſgiuing to God for the preſeruation of the prince and
preſent ſtate of gouernment. For the mountaines by an vſuall figure ſignifie
kingdomes, and dominions: As in Ieremie, the 51.25. Babylon is called a
deſtroying mountaine, Theſe mountaines hath not mans wiſedome and power [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=20) ordeined, but in
the order of gouernmentes there ſhineth wiſedome, in puniſhmentes Iuſtice, and
in preſeruing thē the goodneſſe and power of God. For moſt wiſely & moſt
truely is it ſaid by Plato: Vbi non Deus ſed mortalis ali­quis dominatur, ibi
malorum & aerumnarum nullum eſſe effugium: Whereas, not God, but ſome mortall
man beareth rule, there can be no eſcape from miſchief and miſeries. And Iohn
Baptiſt ſaith, A man can receiue no­thing except it be giuen him frō heauen,
cap. 3\. ver. 27. That is no gouernment is happy and wholeſome, except it be
ordered and helped by God: For humane helpes are more weake then that they are
able to conſerue or keepe the policies or eſtates. And that I be not here ſo
long in a thing manifeſt, I will be content with one only ſaying of Cicero,
which is extant in his oration for Rabirius: Deo­rum ope & auxilio multo magis
haec Reſpublica, quam ra­tione hominum & conſilio, gubernatur: Eſſet enim
impoſ­ſibile politicam ſocietatem in tantis confuſionibus & furo­ribus hominum
durare, niſi Deus eam ſua potenti dextera tueretur. The Common-wealth is much
more gouer­ned by the aid and helpe of God, then by the counſell and reaſon of
men. For it were a thing impoſsible that the politicke ſocietie of man ſhoulde
endure or holde out in ſo great confuſions and outrages of men, except God
with his mightie right hand did defend the ſame.

Verſe 7

Which ſtilleth the raging of the ſea, and the noyſe of the waues, and the
madneſſe of his people.

He compareth the warres and the ſeditious vnto the ra­ging of the ſea, and
noiſe of the waues: For like as theſe raging ſeas and noyſe of the waues are
not in our power to pacifie: ſo there ſhoulde be no end of warres and
ſedi­tiōs, except God did extinguiſh the burning brands of ſuch great fires.
God repreſſed Tha [...] [...]o, Sennacherib and At­tilas. [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=20) He ouerthrewe and
appeaſed the tumult of the baſe countrey people, which men thought woulde haue
vtterly deſtroied Germany. Therefore is peace the gift of God moſt worthy of
admiration and eſtimation.

Verſe 8

They alſo that dwel in the vtmoſt partes of the Earth ſhalbe afraide at thy
tokens thou that makeſt the outgoinges of the euening and the morning to
praiſe thee.

He calleth (tokens of God) the puniſhmentes where­with Tyrantes and Seditious
perſons are puniſhed: for they fall not headlong into puniſhment by chaunce,
but theſe ſo great calamities are the workes of Gods iuſtice, which do
admoniſh others af repentance and of the future iudgement: And he reciteth
alſo benefites of peace,The bleſsings of peace. wher­in not onely they whom
nature hath giuen vnderſtanding, but euen the very houſes and fieldes mee
thinketh doe re­ioyce. For in peace, marriages are had in reuerence, cau­ſes
are handled in the court, traffique and buying and ſel­ling are dayly
frequented, the fieldes are tilled,The miſcries of warres. yt grounds are
fruitful, orchardes and vinyardes doe bring forth in­creaſe and ſtore:
Finally, all thinges are full of ioy and gladnes in harueſt time, and in
Autumne. Contrariwiſe, in warres is euery where lamentable loſſe, feare, and a
great deſcription of death. For as Plautus the poet ſaith, Vbicunque rebus
commotis tanquam mari ſtratiotici, mores, inundant ibi, pietas, religio▪ bonae
artes, cultus, honeſtatis eliditur at (que) interit. Facultatum enim & rei
familiaris naufragia, ipſa (que) mors etiam tum laeuiſsima ſunt mala. Na­tura
& legum  [...]ura violantur, non iuſiurandum ſeruatur, Inſtituta maiorum
conculcantur. A notable ſaying of Plautus the Heathen poet▪ Foris omnia ſunt
expoſitae praeſentibus periculis. Domus autem quae debebat cui (que) eſſe
tutiſsimum refugium ea rapinis & iniurijs externorum pa­tet. Non ibi dominorum
ius & dignitas defendi, non pro­tegi liberorum caſtitas poteſt. Talia infelix
bellum efficit. [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=21) Wherſoeuer the
ſtates of countries are troubled, mens lewd liues flowe ouer with miſchiefes
(as it were in a troubleſom raging ſea) there godlineſſe, religion, good
ſciences, and the regard of honeſtie vtterly periſh and decay: for the loſſes
and ſpoiles of mens goodes, and houſhold ſtuffe, yea and death it ſelfe are
then thought moſt light and ſlender miſhaps. The ordinances of na­ture and of
the lawes are violated, neither faith, nor firme promiſes kept, the
inſtitutions of the elders, are reſiſted, all things are euery where laid open
for pre­ſent dangers. The houſe which ought to be moſt ſafe refuge for euery
inhabitant, the ſame ſtandeth open for the ſpoiles and iniuries of ſtrangers.
There can nei­ther the owners intereſt nor dignitie be defended, nor the
chaſtitie of his children be protected. Vnfortu­nate warres cauſe ſuch
miſeries.

Verſe 9

Thou viſiteſt the earth and bleſſeſt it; thou makeſt it very plenteous.

Verſe 10

The riuer of God is full of water; thou prepareſt their corne, for ſo thou
proui­deſt for the earth.

Verſe 11

Thou watereſt her furrows, thou ſendeſt raigne into the little vallies
thereof; thou makeſt it ſoft with the drops of raine, and bleſſeſt the
increaſe thereof.

The laſt verſes of this Pſalme conteine a Thankeſgi­uing for huſbandry and
ſuſtenance of foode for man. For we muſt not imagine, that God goes quite away
from his worke, and that the creature is left only to his owne gouernment,
like as the Carpenter leaueth his ſhip ready builded for the Seas, to be
gouerned by the Sailers: But wee muſt perſwade our ſelues in this that God
alwaies is preſent with his worke, & plaieth the part of a diligent
huſbandman, who walking about his grounds, ouerſeeing [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=21) them himſelf,
leaues the print of his feete to be ſeene: For not by chance, or by natures
order only is the earth made fruitfull euery yeare, but the bleſſinges of God
are the fruitfulneſſe of the earth, and the chaunges of times and ſeaſons made
fit for the ripening of fruites, as in 1\. Cor. 3.7. Paul ſaith, Neither is he
that planteth any thing, nei­ther he that watereth, but god that giueth the
increaſe. And that indeed by Gods graunt and gift our ſuſtentation is giuen
vnto vs, thoſe moſt ſweet wordes doe witneſſe, Verſe 10. The riuer of God is
full of water. For hee compareth our groundes, orchardes and vineyardes vnto
an euerlaſting riuer which is neuer made drie: And he cal­leth it expreſſely,
The riuer of God, becauſe hee woulde refute our imagination which faineth that
by our induſtry we are able to get ſufficient ſuſtentation.

Verſe 12

Thou crowneſt the yeare with thy good­neſſe.  [...]. part.

In this Verſe hee comprehendeth all benefites which God ſendeth vs, in the
Spring time, Summer, Autumne, The monthly and fruitfull proper­ties throughout
the yeare. and Winter. For March giues vs violets, April graſſe, May ▪ plentie
of floures, butter, honnie, milke, and cheeſe, Iune and Iuly, hay, Auguſt,
corne, September, apples; October, new wine: The other monethes doe yeeld vs
as it were by Gods direction, birdes, connies, fiſh, & fleſh of all ſortes.
Now thinke with your ſelf how great the good­neſſe of God is, that he giueth
vs the increaſe of ſo many, ſo diuers and ſo ſweet things for ſuſtentation of
our body; and the ſame not at one time of the yeare, to the end wee may alway
be delighted with noueltie and plentie of all thinges.

Verſe 12.2. pars.

And thy cloudes drop fatneſſe.

The cloudes are taken for the ſteps of the Lord, in the heauens, which (as
writers of huſbandry affirme) do make [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=22) fat the field:The
cloudes di­  [...]ill the dewes from heauen. So God ſendeth not forth
ſeruantes to ouer­looke his groundes, but hee vieweth them with his owne eies,
and treadeth them with his owne feete, becauſe they ſhall take no harme.

Verſe 13.

They ſhall drop vpon the dwellings of the wilderneſſe: and the little hilles
ſhall reioice on euery ſide.

Verſe 14

The ſolds ſhal be full of ſheepe: the vallies alſo ſhall ſtand ſo thicke with
corne, that they ſhall laugh and ſing.

The places of the wilderneſſe, are the villages & waſte groundes,The benefites
which the ea [...]th bringeth vs. which are farre diſtant from Cities. Theſe
alſo haue the wealth of the countrey, as for example, milke, butter, cheeſe,
egges, hennes, &c. The hilles are compaſ­ſed with Vines: In paſture groundes,
whole flockes doe feed: The vallies are full of corne. All theſe benefites doe
cheere and reioyce our minds, both becauſe they are beau­tifull in our eyes,
and alſo becauſe they are moſt beneficial for our vſe: And here the concluſion
of this Pſalme.

## 5\. PSAL. 66. ‘Iubilate Deo omnis terra, &c.’

A Pſalme of Dauid, to him that excelleth vpon Which was ei­ther a muſicall
inſtrument or a ſolemn tune vnto the which th [...]s Pſalme was ſung,
A­lamoth, a ſong committed to the ſons of Korah.

### 5.1. THE ARGVMENT.

DAuid in this Pſalme giueth not only thankes vnto God for publicke & priuate
deliuerances: but alſo [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=22) by his example
exhorteth the whole church of God, and all the godly ones, that they would
with thankful voice publiſhe abroad the noble teſtimonies of Gods preſence:The
effects of the Pſalme,  [...]ratula­t [...]ie and Exhor­tatorie▪ For albeit
God is preſent with all his crea­tures (ſo farre as to the preſeruing of the
ſubſtance of them appertaineth) ſo long vntill they be preſerued: yet
notwithſtāding, he is otherwiſe preſent with per­ſons regenerate, not onely
preſeruing the ſubſtances, but alſo by his Sonne, and holy Spirite, beginning
in them new light and righteouſneſſe. Touching this degree of Gods preſence in
the true Church: memo­rable is this ſaying of S Auguſtine: Deus eſt vbique per
diuinitatis praeſentiam, S. Auguſtines ſaying, touching Gods preſence with his
people. vt non vbique eſt per habita­tionis gratiam ſed in ſolis tantummodo
fidelibus. God is e­uery where by the preſence of his godhead, but God is not
euery where dwelling by grace, but in the alone faithful ones only: And howe I
pray you doth hee de­fend and preſerue the whole body of his Church, al­though
ſome members of her be perſecuted either by temptation of abiectiō, or by
confeſsion of their faith? For theſe great benefites, I giue thankes vnto God
the eternall father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and I beſeech him with all my
whole heart, that for his ſonnes ſake our Lord Ieſus Chriſt (for vs crucified
and raiſed from death to life) hee woulde henceforth and for euer go­uerne vs
with his holy ſpirite, Amen.

### 5.2. The Pſalme and Expoſition therof.

Verſe 1

O be ioyfull in God all yee landes; ſing praiſes vnto the honour of his name,
make his praiſe to be glorious.

Verſe 2

Say vnto God, O how wonderfull art thou in thy workes: thorough the greatneſſe
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=23) of thy
power ſhall thine enemies be found liers vnto thee.

Verſe 3

For all the world ſhall worſhip thee, ſing of thee, and praiſe thy name.

Verſe 4

O come hither and beholde the workes of God: howe woonderfull hee is in his
do­ing towardes the children of men.

TRuly ſpake one of the ancient writers, Raram eſſe ho­  [...]oram & breuē
moram laetitiae ſpiritualis, quae Deum ar­dent [...]r, ſyncere & ſuauiter
celebrat: Seldome comes the houre, and ſhort is the ſtay of ſpirituall
gladneſſe, which feruently and ſweetly worſhippeth God: For our heartes are
too colde in ſetting forth Gods benefites and the multitude of conflictes and
dangers hindereth the ſinceritie and ſweetneſſe of thankeſgiuing. Let vs
there­fore acknowledge and bewaile this our coldneſſe, and craue of God with
his ſpirite of grace and praiers hee would kindle in vs true thankfulneſſe.
And although the beginning of the Pſalme conſiſteth in a propoſition
exhor­tatory: Yet there is placed in the ſame a little clawſe, which is not to
be neglected. viz. Verſe 2\. In the greatnes of thy power ſhall thine enemies
be found liers. This conſolation let vs fix faſt within the depth of our
heartes, and now let vs ſet the ſame before vs in our preſent dan­gers. Great
is the power of the Turkiſh tyrantes, great are the furies of the Pope and his
Champions, but they ſhalbe found liers: That is, the purpoſes and practiſes of
theſe enemies ſhalbe diſappointed, ſo far as to the effect of the matter it
may appertaine: For they ſhall neither de­ſtroy the kinde of doctrine
deliuered from God, nor yet the whole Church, as it is ſaid, Acts. 5.39. That
which is of God ſhall not be deſtroied.

Verſe 5

He turned the ſea into dry land▪ ſo that they went through the water on foot,
there did we reioyce thereof.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=23)Seeing the
circumſtances doe bring a ſpeciall light vn­to hiſtories I will briefly ſpeake
touching the place and time of that wonderful tranſporting of the people of
Iſra­el by the riuer of Iordan:An explanatio [...] of the myracle how, when,
and where the Iſ [...]ae­lites paſsed ouer Iordan. for albeit wee are mooued
with conſideration when we reade and heare that the people of Iſrael could not
paſſe ouer that water, vntill by gods po­wer the courſe thereof being ſtayed
gaue ſafe paſſage to al the company by drie ſteps: yet if wee conſider the
circum­ſtances in wondering at Gods worke, we ſtand as it were made vtterly
amaſed: for firſt ſome light ſhal appeare vn­to the hiſtorie, if a man be
inſtructed that the Iſraelites paſſed on that ſide of the countrey by the
riuer Iordan, which was neere vnto the citie of Iericho ſometime moſt
flouriſhing; whereas not farre thence the ſame riuer run­neth into the dead
ſea, being firſt increaſed with very many little riuers and floods, which
diſcharge their fulneſſe into the ſame. Wherefore it muſt needes ſeeme, that
the ſtreame was there much more broader and deeper then it was in other places
neerer to the chanell or ſprings there­of: ſo the deſcription of the place
makes more famous the greatnes of the wonder, and of gods goodneſſe. Againe,
if a man conſider alſo the other circumſtance; namely, the time of that ſame
wonderfull paſſage ouer Iordan, we ſhal ſee yet euen in this circumſtance, the
power and goodneſſe of god more notably manifeſted: for we reade in Ioſhuah
chap. 3\. That the people was carried ouer that place in the firſt moneth of
the yeare as the Hebrewes ac­counted, which aunſwereth almoſt to our Aprill,
which was the beginning of their harueſt, what time Iordan was wont euery
yeere to runne ouer the brimme,Dauid Chytraeus in his chronicle reporteth this
to be done in the yere of the world 2493. and (before Chriſt was bapti­
[...]d by S. Iohn in the ſame Iorden) iuſt 150 [...]. yeeres. ſo that it
fil­led, not onelie both riuers, but alſo paſſed ouer, and out of the ſame.
But this ſame Iordan, before this time an in­uincible wall, namely, running
and flowing ouer with ful brimme, did God make to giue way for his people, ſo
as the water ſtanding and gathering vpon an exceeding great height aboue
towards the ſpring, and the other water be­lowe [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=24) running into the
lake Aſphaltite, the Iſraelites might paſſe thorow Iorden with drie feete. So
alſo the conſideration of the time very much augmentes the great­nes of the
myracle. For the church ſo liueth alwayes, e­uen as the people iournieng
through the red ſea, and by the riuer Iordan: for as that ſame terrible huge
heape of wa­ter gathered vnto an exceeding height alwayes threatned
deſtruction to the paſſengers: ſo the church is neuer with­out great dangers:
but like as Ioſua tranſported the peo­ple by Iordan into the land of promiſe,
ſo the ſonne of god the true captaine and guyde of his church, bringeth vs
through the middeſt of death and great calamities of this world, into life
euerlaſting.

Verſe 6

Hee ruleth with his power for euer: his eyes behold the people, and ſuch as
will not beleeue, ſhal not be able to exalt themſelues.

Heere is a notable deſcription, attributing vnto God immenſe and eternall
power, and affirming that God ca­reth for mankinde: for like as hee made of no
thing all things: ſo thenceforth he hath beene willingly preſent at his worke,
and either helpeth the order of ſecond cauſes, or hindereth them, or
altogether changeth them.

Non igitur eſt Deus noſter numen,

Parcarum carcere clauſum:

Our God then is no ſuch god at all,

as Death ſhuts vp in his priſon wall.

Ipſe poteſt Solis currus inhibere volantes,

Ipſe velut ſcopulos flumina ſtare iubet:

The ſhining Sunnes ſwift race he ſtaies,

And makes floudes ſtand like rockes in ſeas.

And although many are the teſtimonies of Gods pro­uidence: yet the iuſtice of
God is ſpecially ſeene in his pu­niſhments: [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=24) for by vſuall
rules, grieuous puniſhments alwayes are companions of grieuous
offences:Herodotus lib.  [...] ▪ and the examples of Tyrants are ſo vſuall as
the Poet crieth out:

Ad generum Cereris, fine caede & vulnere pauc [...],

Iuuenal. Satyr. 1 [...]

Deſcendunt reges, & ſicca morte tyranni:

Vnto Dame Ceres ſonne in lawe few kings go downe we ſee,

From death, or wound, or tyrants, with a drie death ſcape ſcot fr6ee.

And Claudianus the Poet confeſſeth that hee was by Ruffinus his puniſhment,
vehemently confirmed againſt doubting of gods prouidence in theſe verſes.

Saepe mihi dubium traxit ſententia mentem,

Claudianus lib, 1▪

Curarent Superi terras, an nullus ineſset

Rector, & incerto fluerent mortalia caſu, &c.

Poſtea.

Abſtulit hunc tandem Ruffini paena tumultum,

Abſolu [...]tque deos, iam non ad culmina rerum,

Iniuſtos cr [...]uiſſe quaror: Tolluntur in altum

Vt lapſu grauiore ruant, &c.

In Engliſh thus:

This ſentence oft in doubt hath drawne my minde,

Whether that the gods had of the earth regard:

Or that there were no gouernor aſsignde,

Or humane matters ranne by hap hazard, &c.

Afterwards.

But this ſame doubt Ruffinus death did cleere.

Pardoning the gods: That people now vniuſt:

(I ſay) clime not ſo high, but lift vp heere,

With greater fall, they downe lie in the duſt.

Verſe 7▪

O praiſe our God (yee people) and make the voyce of his praiſe to be heard.

Verſe 8

Which holdeth our ſoule in life, and ſuf­fereth not our feete to ſlip.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=25)He
repeateth the propoſition exhortacorie, and laieth vn­to the ſame a new
reaſon: becauſe he ſaith the Lord is the author and fountaine of life, not
onely of that life heere which is common vnto vs with plantes and other liuing
creatures, and which is the paſſage to death, but of that life alſo which
alone is to be named a life. For as it is ſaid in Deut. 30.20. The great oddes
betweene this life and the life euer­laſting. For he is our life, and the
length of our dayes, in him we are, liue, and mooue. And as it is ſaid in the
17. chapter of the Actes, For in him wee liue, and moue, and haue our being,
verſe 28. But ſeeing this life figuratiue is not ſtedfaſt to continue long,
but ſcarce for one day (for reckon our longeſt age with eternitie) we ſhall be
found almoſt in the ſame ſhortneſſe of life, as A­riſtotle ſaith, the ſilly
wormes of the earth do liue but one day) God (ſuch is his goodnes) doth alſo
impart vnto vs the fellowſhip of life euerlaſting, then which no thing may be
thought better, nor more abundant in all bleſſings. In the meane while, He
ſuffereth not our feete to ſlip: that is, he gouerneth vs with his holy
ſpirit, leſt we ſhould fall headlong into epicureall furies, or other
fanaticall errors. This gouernement, if any do thinke it to be a ſlender
bene­fit, they are more fooliſh then the Thracians, which as A­riſtotle
writeth, coulde not in numbering reckon any fur­ther then fiue onely.

Verſe 9

For thou, O God haſt prooued vs, thou al­ſo haſt tried vs like as ſiluer is
tried.

Verſe 10

Thou broughteſt vs into the ſnare, and laideſt trouble vpon our loynes.

Verſe 11

Thou ſufferedſt menne to ride ouer our heades: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughteſt vs out into a wealthy place.

As ſaint Paul ſaith, Rom. chap. 5. verſe 2\. We reioyce not vnder the hope o
[...] the glory of God onely: but alſo wee reioyce in tribulations, knowing
that tribulation [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=25) bringeth forth
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope: And hope maketh not
aſhamed, The reioycing of the faithfull, euen in greateſt dan­gers three
wayes▪ be­cauſe the loue of God is ſhed abroade in our heartes by the holy
ghoſt which is giuen vnto vs, verſes 2, 3, 4, 5. As if he ſaide, we eſteeme it
a thing to be reioyced of, not onely to haue ful deliuerance from ſinne and
death, but al­ſo when wee performe obedience vnto God in our calami­ties. For
firſt we our ſelues which endure calamities, do 1 more feruently call vpon god
then others doe, which are in proſperitie. Next of all, in this obedience we
do make our 2 ſelues knowne to ſerue God, not for pleaſure or profite ſake,
but for the regarde of his glorie. Thirdly, our cala­mities 3 are teſtimonies
touching the doctrine which we profeſſe, and that immortalitie which ſhall
followe after this life: for what wiſe man is he,  [...]hat for imaginations
of o­pinions, or trifling matters to ſpeake of, would bring his life into
danger? Furthermore, who would without hope of better life caſt downe his body
to death, or by wound re­ceiued die a faire death? No man dieth willingly, yea
though hee knowe hee ſhould ſuffer iuſt puniſhment by the lawes. Therefore the
afflictions of the holy ones, are not onely exerciſes of faith and prayer, but
alſo teſtimo­nies of two moſt ſpeciall things, namely, of Doctrine and
Immortalitie. Laſt of all, the holy ones by their exam­ple, confirme the weake
ones, and mooue others vnto the acknowledgement of the true God.

Verſe 12

I will goe into thy houſe with burnt offe­rings, and will pay thee my vowes
which I promiſed with my lippes, and ſpake with my mouth when I was in
trouble.

Verſe 13

I will offer vnto thee fat burnt ſacrifices with the incenſe of Rammes: I wil
offer bul­lockes and goates.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=26)It is an
vſual thing in this life of lewd men which Pin­darus the poet ſaieth,

Vnthankefulnes of mankind.

Ʋetus gratia dormit & homines ſunt immemores:

Olde grace and fauour ſleepeth,

And man little in minde keepeth.

And many are ſo falſe of faith, that the earneſt vowes which they made in
their miſeries, they trifle out with vn­godly mockery. There is extant an
apologie of one ſuf­fering ſhipwracke, who when amongſt flouds and ſtormes he
had promiſed vnto god a recompence aboue his degree, afterwards, comming to
ſhoare, laughing ſaide, he ſawe no man claime that he promiſed, and that hee
could pacifie God with a ſalt cake▪ Such vnthankefulnes is not in Da­uid, who
both acknowledgeth by whome he is preſerued, and performeth promiſed
thankfulneſſe with a good faith. And I haue often ſaide that Leuiticall
ſacrifices were not therefore ordained, to take away ſinnes, but to be ſignes
of the promiſe touching the Deliuerer that ſhoulde come, and markes diſcerning
this people from other ſectes. Al­ſo that they might be meanes to ſtrengthen
the miniſterie. Dauid therefore offereth bullockes and goates,Dauids
thanke­fulneſſe. not being bewitched with a phariſaicall opinion, but
vnderſtanding thoſe endes, whereof I haue briefly ſpoken. Let vs nowe that the
policie and temple of the Iewes is deſtroyed, of­fer vnto god the calues of
our lippes, that is, thankeſgiu­ing and confeſſion, and let vs walke in our
vocation for the glorie of God.

Verſe 14

O come hither and hearken all yee that feare God: and I will tell you what he
hath done for my ſoule.

Verſe 15

I called vnto him with my mouth, and gaue him praiſes with my tongue.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=26)Verſe 16

If I encline vnto wickedneſſe with my heart, the Lorde wil not heare me.

Verſe 17

But God hath heard me: and conſidered the voyce of my prayer.

Verſe 18

Praiſed be God which hath not caſt out my prayer, nor turned his mercy from
me.

Hitherto hath he celebrated the publique deliuerances of the church: nowe
makes hee mention of priuate deliue­rances to the end he would increaſe and
confirme in others faith, prayer, and hope of deliuerance: for as one ſaide
elegantly, The examples of godly perſons are towers builded vpon the wall of
faith. Alſo this place teacheth, that god ſeeth the ſighings of our heartes,
and diſcerneth hypocriſie from true prayer. For prayer is not heard ex­cept it
be made in ſpirit and trueth. And hee can not pray which hath in him an errour
ſtriuing with faith, or goeth on forwardes in ſinning againſt conſcience:
becauſe it is written in the firſt epiſtle of the holy apoſtle Saint Paule,
the ſixt chapter and the twelft verſe Fight the good fight, hauing faith and
good conſcience. Againe, God heareth not ſinners which do not repent them of
their ſinnes. And it is ſaide in the firſt epiſtle of Saint Iohn the third
chap­ter, If our heart condemne vs not, then haue wee bold­neſſe towardes God:
that whatſoeuer we aske wee re­ceiue of him, &c. verſ. 21. and 22. Let vs
therefore walke wiſely, not as fooles; that wee may rightly call vpon God.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=27)

## 6\. PSAL. 67. ‘Deus miſereatur nostri.’

To him that excelleth on Neginoth, a Pſalme, or Song, or Prayer for the Church
to obtaine the fauour of GOD; that his iudgementes may bee knowne throughout
the world, and for the com­ming of his vniuerſall kingdome vnder Chriſt Ieſus.

### 6.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THere is extant a moſt ſweete ſentence in the firſt epiſtle of ſaint Paul vnto
Timo­thie the third chapter and the ſixteenth verſe, which containeth the
effect of this Pſalme; Without controuerſie great is the myſterie of
godlineſſe, which is, God is manifeſted in the fleſh, iuſtified in the ſpirit,
ſeene of angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world and
receiued vp in glory. For thinke with your ſelfe what a thing it is that the
Sonne of God being conſubſtantial and coequall with his Father,The humanitie
and diuinitie of Chriſt the Sonne of God. hath not taken away the equalitie of
God, that is, hath not abuſed his power againſt his vocation, but hath debaſed
himſelfe, taking vpon him the forme of a ſeruant, that is, nature of man,
hauing all the ſtrength and deſires proper to nature, onely without ſinne, and
at length was made obedient vnto death e­uen to the death of the Croſſe.
Againe, this Meſ­ſias for vs crucified and raiſed from death to life, is
[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=27) endewed
with notable, and vnfallible teſtimonies of the holy ghoſt: for publickly doth
the holy ghoſt beare witneſſe touching the perſon and benefites of this Lord,
not only by the preaching of the Apoſtles, but alſo by new ſtrange and
vnuſuall miracles, which were the Seales of doctrine: and publickly martyrs
and other the godly ones haue felt ioy to bee enlight­ned in the
acknowledgement of Chriſt, which is the vanquiſher of death. And where he
addeth that Chriſt was ſeene of Angels, let not that bee vnderſtood of an idle
or vaine contemplation, but of that ſence or mea­ning whereof S. Peter
ſpeaketh: that is, To whom the Angels and powers and might are ſubiect. For
although we earthly perſons doe not greatly maruell at the co­pulation of the
two natures in Chriſt: yet Aungels which are the moſt wiſeſt ſpirites and
alwaies (as S. Math, ſaith, Behold the face of the father, Math. 18.10.) being
aſtoniſhed with maruelling at this myſterie, ſtād amazed and cannot take
pleaſure inough with behol­ding it. For, what is more maruellous, then that
fleſhe of our fleſhe, and bone of our bones ſhoulde ſit at the right hand of
God? This myſterie as the Poet ſaith,

I'ts not enough we once it ſee,

It vayles we ſtill  [...]t viewing be.

Furthermore what is ſo much to bee maruelled at, as that the Goſpel touching
Chriſt, is not only preached vnto the Gentiles, but alſo that the effectes of
faith are left in many mens heartes: Wee doe leſſe maruell that the doctrine
of the goſpel is ſpred amongſt the Iewes, in whom there haue alwaies remained
ſome of the doctrines of the Prophets and honeſt Diſciples. But whereas this
pearle is caſt vnto the Gentiles, ſeperated from the policie of Iſrael, which
were nothing but hogges and dogges,The Gentiles for their vnthankful­neſſe,
compared vnto hogges and dogges▪ that indeed is moſt worthy of ad­miration.
For the Ethnikes or heathen people hauing forſaken the doctrine of the
fathers, haue deuiſed [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=28) Idols without
end, and haue polluted themſelues with all vices and ſinnes whereof the
filthineſſe is ſuch, that I eſchew and tremble with feare to ſpeake of them.
Neither indeed muſt wee maruell leſſe that the Apo­ſtles being furniſhed with
no power, and deſtitute of all humane helpes within a ſmall time haue gathered
vnto God out of this rable of mankinde, an euerlaſting Church. For, that I may
ſay nothing of the miſerable and weake outward eſtate of the Apoſtles, which
eſtrangeth in a ſort many from the goſpel, who would not by right maruel that
the ſame kind of doctrine or­dained farre aboue and beyond the reach of mans
rea­ſon, and ioyned with greateſt dangers could take root, yea and ſpread
abroad alſo, amongſt ſo many and di­uers impedimentes? For ſome doe deride the
goſpel, as it were a monſtrous fable, and ſcoffe at this opinion, which
affirmeth that the death of a man crucified, was the cauſe and merite of
Iuſtification before God, and of life euerlaſting. Others doe iudge this new
doctrine to be the fire brand and trumpets of ſeditions. But Hy­pocrites which
are in loue with their owne righteouſ­neſſe,Hypocrit [...]. doe much more
bitterly hate the goſpel, as it were the corruption of good maners, and the
liberty of diſcipline. Therefore although the thinking heereof ſeemed hard and
almoſt impoſsible wherewith wee muſt withſtand ſo many diſeaſes togither: yet
the A­poſtles, the ſonne of God guiding them, and the holie Ghoſt accompanying
them within 40. yeares ſpace haue culled and choſen out of mankinde, a good
and great part of the Church, in ſpite of the diuels, & their inſtrumentes.
Laſt of al, the ſonne of God is taken vp in glory, that is: He was from death
gloriouſly reſto­red vnto life, and when hee had ſhewed himſelfe fami­liarly
for the whole ſpace of 40. daies vnto his Apo­ſtles, he aſcended into heauen
and nowe ſitteth at the righthand of his father, giuing vs his holy ſpirite,
and [[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=28) other
neceſſarie giftes for the body and the ſoule. Da­uid thinking vpon ſo great
matters praieth moſt fer­uently, that the Meſsias euen at the firſt time would
come vpon earth, deſtroy the workes of the diuell, ſin, and death; and vnto
his church gathered from both Iewes and Gentiles, would reſtore, life and
righteouſ­neſſe euetlaſting.

### 6.2. The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

Verſe 1

God be mercifull vnto vs and bleſſe vs: and ſhew vs the light of his
countenance, and be mercifull vnto vs.

Verſe 2

That thy way may bee knowne vpon earth: thy ſauing health among all nations.

BY the law ſaith S. Paul, commeth the acknowledg­ment of ſin, and the law
worketh wrath. Rom. 3.20. For there is a ſpirituall iudgement accuſing all
ſinnes in men; Inward, and outward, and denouncing the wrath of God: according
to that ſaying. Deut. 26▪27. Difference of the law, and the goſ­pel. Curſed be
euery one, &c. But in the goſpel there is reuealed the mercy of God, and the
bleſſing is promiſed by, & through, and for Chriſtes ſake: that is, full
deliuerance from ſinne and death, and the reſtoring of righteouſnes and life
euer­laſting. Wherefore Dauid looking into the glaſſe of the law, and therein
beholding ſinne and the wrath of God, craueth that God woulde ſend his ſonne
as a moſt ſure pledge of mercie, and to bleſſe vs with all ſpirituall and
heauenly bleſſing, and to loue vs for his beloued ſonnes ſake. For then doth
God with a cheerefull and louely countenance looke vpon vs, when hee
reconcileth vs vnto him in Chriſt, not imputing vnto vs our ſinnes, & loueth
vs with the ſame fatherly affection wherwith. This foun­dation once laid, that
is, we acknowledge the mediatour, and receiuing by his meanes, and for his
ſake forgiueneſſe [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=29) of ſinnes and
reconciliation, wee may cry aloud with that moſt holy old Simeon: Now Lord
letteſt thou thy ſer­uaunt depart in peace according to thy word: For mine
eies haue ſeene thy ſaluation; which thou haſt prepa­red before the face of
all people: To bee a light to lighten the gentiles, and to be the glorie of
thy people Iſrael. But ſeeing the ſayinges of Iſaias (wherein Chriſt is called
the ſaluation of God) are knowne vnto all men, they ſeeme not needfull for me
heere to recite them at this time.

Verſe 3

Let the people praiſe thee (O God:) yea let all the people praiſe thee.

Verſe 4

O let the nations reioice and be glad: for thou ſhalt iudge the folke
righteouſly, and gouern the nations vpon earth.

Verſe 5

Let the people praiſe thee O God, let all the people praiſe thee.

Quod latet ignotum eſt, ignoti nulla cupid [...]. That which is kept cloſe, is
not knowne, the thing vnknowne no man deſireth: How ſhall they beleeue if they
heare not, Howe ſhall they heare, if none doe teach? Hee therefore craueth of
God, not only to ſend his ſonne, but alſo to aduaunce the goſpel, whereby is
gathered vnto the ſonne an euerla­ſting inheritance both from amongſt the
Iewes and Gen­tiles. And I haue ſpoken in the argument, as alſo elſe­where how
great a benefite the calling of the nations is to the ſocietie of the true
Church, and vnto life euerlaſting. And there is not any vice or wickedneſſe,
wherewith the Ethnickes or heathen people haue not wickedly and fil­thily
defiled themſelues. For they haue deuiſed a great number of Gods, they haue
called vpon dead men, they haue ſlaine men for their ſacrifices they haue
mixed their luſts with ſacr [...]fices,The wickedneſſe of the heathen people
in time paſt. and finally all kindes of mi [...]chiefes as it were furies ſent
out of hell, haue wandered euerie where. Whereas then ſuch outcaſtes are
cooptate or cho­ſen and regenerate of God into the ſocietie of the
euerla­ſting [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=29) Church, that
ought all mens mindes and tongues celebrate or haue reuerence.Their
regenera­tion by Chriſt in the time of grace. For if God ſhould deale with
ſeuere iudgement towardes blinde and miſerable perſons he might or ſhould haue
ſtricken downeright all men with the thunderclap of his wrath, and cauſed the
ground to ſwallow them vp into euerlaſting deſtruction. But he in his
wrathfull diſpleaſure thinking vpon his mercy, hath not brought vs vtterly to
nothing, nor caſt away this our wretched lumpe of ours into euerlaſting
tormentes, but with an vnſpeakeable equitie and lenitie, hath graunted vs a
ſpace to turne vnto him, and hath giuen vs Teachers which might call vs backe
from our errour and idolatry, vnto true acknowledgement of God, & to the right
vſe of calling vpon him. Therefore let euery one ſay with Iere­mie, Lamentat.
3.22. It is the mercies of God, that wee are not conſumed. And againe with the
patriarck Iacob. I am vnworthy O Lord of all thy mercies beſtowed vpon me,
Geneſ. 32.9, 10.

Verſe 6

Then ſhal the earth bring forth her increaſe: and God euen our owne God ſhall
giue vs his bleſsing.

Verſe 7

God ſhall bleſſe vs, and all the endes of the world ſhall feare him.

In the latter verſes are two notable places, one of the efficacie of the
miniſterie of the goſpell: an other of the myſterie of the Trinitie. Truely
the teachers and prea­chers of the goſpel ſeeme to profite no more therein
then as the prouerbe is) The Oxen plowing vpon the ſand, or as he that rolleth
a ſtone vp againſt a hill. But that the labour of them which teache in the
church is not in vaine, theſe ſayings doe witneſſe, Iſay 55.10.11. Surely as
the raigne commeth downe, and the Snow from heauen, and returneth not thither,
but watereth the earth, and maketh it to bring forth, and budde, that it may
giue ſeed to the ſower and bread vnto him that eateth: So [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=30) ſhall my word be
that goeth out of my mouth, it ſhall not returne vnto me void, but it ſhall
accompliſhe that which I will, and it ſhall proſper in the thing whereto I
ſent it. The fruitfull  [...] of Prea­chi [...]g. In the firſt Pſalme 3.
verſe. A Tea­cher of the Goſpel is cōpared vnto a fruitfull tree, Which
bringeth forth ſweete and whole ſome fruites. In the 15. of S. Iohns Goſpel,
16▪ verſe, the ſonne of God ſaith: I haue ordained you that yee doe go and
bring forth fruite and that your fruite remaine. &c. That is, the la­bours of
them which teach▪ ſhall not only for a ſmall time profite mankinde, but ſhal
gather vnto God an euerlaſting Church: and the ſame Doctors or Teachers ſhall
haue their euerlaſting rewardes. With theſe and ſuch like ſay­inges, let godly
teachers comfort themſelues, and let them not forſake their ſtanding, by
reaſon they finde con­tempt of the word, now and then alſo pouerty,
baniſhmēts and other daungers, but let them go with merry and ioy­full
mindes, and with hope lighten their damages. But not in vaine, nor without
good cauſe is The name of God here repeated thrice. For although there is one
diuine eſſence: yet notwithſtanding there are three perſons of this Godhead,
namely the Eternall father, who ſent his ſonne to take our humane nature vpon
him:One God in eſ­ſence 3. diſtinct perſons. The ſame ſonne who is called by
Iohn. 1. cap. verſe 1. the word; and by Iſayas cap. 7.14. cap. 8.8. & Mat.
1.23. Immanuel: and The holy Ghoſt proceeding from them both. And al­though
vngodly and prophane perſons doe deride vs ſo beleeuing and ſpeaking: yet
notwithſtanding mens minds muſt with teſtimonies of diuine manifeſtations be
ſo con­firmed, that they which defend contrary opinions may by vs be both
deſpiſed and refuted. For there can bee made no true praier without
conſidering of the difference in theſe three perſons. Let our minde therefore
be directed vnto this true God, who made himſelfe knowne by ſending his ſonne
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt for our ſakes crucified and raiſed from death to life.
And truely let vs expreſſe in the [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5457&page=30) beginning of our
prayer the perſons by name, and let vs conſider what is the property of ech of
them, that may be diſcerned from all creatures, and let our true prayer bee
diſcerned from the praier of the heathen, and although it is here meant, that
the reuiuing is giuen and made by all the three perſons, yet this is done by
order: The ſonne who gathereth a Church immediately by the preaching of the
goſpel moueth our hearts, ſheweth the Father, and giueth the holyghoſt:
Therfore ſaith this pſalme in the laſt verſe, God ſhall bleſſe vs, that is,
Emanuel God with vs, the ſonne of God, who tooke vpon him our nature to become
our mediator, redeemer, iuſtifier and ſauiour. Againe the euerlaſting high
prieſt of the church, alwayes making in­terceſſion for vs giuing the word of
the goſpel and remiſſi­on of ſinnes. Alſo a king he is, gathering, keeping,The
effectuall bleſsings of God in Trinitie. and preſeruing, and protecting his
church, giuing his holie ſpirit, and reſtoring vs to life and righteouſneſſe
euerlaſt­ing. The euerlaſting Father then bleſſeth or reuiueth vs, the Guyde,
the Sonne, as the Giuer, and the holighoſt, as the performer. That is, the
euerlaſting Father is the fountaine of all benefites, becauſe he made the
decree tou­ching our redemption teſtifying of the ſame publikely in the
miniſterie of the goſp [...]ll, and priuately in the heartes of them which are
conuerted vnto God, and which doe ſupport and comfort themſelues with the
voyce of the go­ſpel. I haue ſpoken touching ſo great matters, not as I ought,
but, as I could: for as a certaine godly Emperour ſaid, We ſpeake not ſo much
as we ought, but ſo much as we are able.

FINIS.

> Praiſed be God.

[Home](/)

Strigel, Victorinus, 1524-1569.. Date: 1596  

