## (unknown project)

# A fift proceeding in the harmony of King Dauids harpe That is to say, a
godly and learned exposition of 5. other moe [sic] psalmes of the princely
Prophet Dauid: beginning with the 68. and ending with the 72. psalme, being
the last part of the first tome, or one halfe of the booke of psalmes. Written
in Latin by the reuerend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius: professor of diuinity
in the Vniuersity of Lipsia in Germanie. Anno. 1576. Translated into English
by Richard Robinson citizen of London. 1594. Seene, and allowed. — Hypomnēmata
in omnes Psalmos Davidis. Psalm 68-72. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=1)

A FIFT PROCEEDING in the Harmony of King Dauids Harpe.

That is to ſay, a godly and learned Expoſition of 5. other moe Pſalmes of the
princely Prophet Dauid: beginning with the 68. and ending with the 72\.
Pſalme, being the laſt part of the firſt Tome, or one halfe of the booke of
Pſalmes.

Written in Latin by the reuerend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius: profeſſor of
Diuinity in the Vniuerſity of Lipſia in Germanie. Anno. 1576.

Tranſlated into Engliſh by Richard Robinſon Citizen of London. 1594.

Seene, and allowed.

Pſalme 36. verſe 10.O continue forth thy louing kindneſſe to them that know
thee: and thy righteouſneſſe vnto them that are true of hart.

Pſalme 37. verſe 35.Hope thou in the Lord and keepe his way, and he ſhall
promote thee: that thou ſhalt poſſeſſe the land, when the vngodly ſhal periſh
thou ſhalt ſee it.

AT LONDON, Printed by P.S. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be ſold at his ſhop
vnder S. Dunſtons Church in the Weſt. 1598.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=2)

## To the Right Reuerend father in God, Richard by Gods prouidence Biſhop of
London; To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Saltonſtall Knight, Lord Maior of
London; and to the Right worſhipful his Brethren the Alder­men and Sheriffes
of the ſame City: grace, mercy, peace and plenitude of temporall and eternall
beati­tude in the ſacred Trinity.

OUR Lord and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus (right reuerend Father in God, honorable
Lord,Iohn. 14. 6 and right worſhipful Patrons) as hee rightly called himſelfe
the way, the truth, and the life of all faithfull beleeuers and good liuers,
and was ſo in deed: the way by example not er­ring; the truth, by promiſe not
failing; and the life by reward neuer en­ding: ſo on a time aſcending up a
certaine hill (after he had in a prolix ſermon inſtructed his Diſciples, and a
multitude of others his follow­ers in the way, truth, and life of perfect
bleſſedneſſe vpon earth, and the fruitfull effects thereof in the life
euerlaſting) ſaid vnto them; yee are the ſalt of the earth, & the light of the
world: Matth. 5. 13 14 As it might well ſeeme attributing the first title
(ſalt of the earth) vnto his diſciples, as they which (with the table of the
Teſtament) deliuering ſincere doctrine, & it (with the pot of Manna)
miniſtring the ſacraments by Chriſts inſti­tution (ſeaſoning the ſoules of
Gods ſeruants) and (with Aarons rod) executing diſcipline vpon diſordered
liuers within the Church: And by the ſecond title, light of the world, fully
attributing vnto temporal magiſtrates (as to the learned in the lawes divine &
humane) the light of righteouſnes, ſword of truth, and ballance of iuſtice,
with iudgement to cheriſh the good and puniſh the euill liuers in the common
wealth. And ſo making of both a bleſſed and happy coniunction or
incorporati­on of good gouernement, hee added hereunto this rare and notable
con­cluſion, A citty that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid: ſignifieng thereby a
Citty ſo gouerned, is a right Hieropolis or ſacred Citty; and a king­dome ſo
adminiſtred is a right Hierarchia or ſacred principalitie, knowne, beloued of
friends; feared and made famous among enemies both neare and far off. Such in
truth (bleſſed bee the true omnipotent and immortall God) hath been the happy
ſtate of this citty of London, yea and whole kingdome of England, though low
inſituation, yet high in acceptation with God and good people of all nations:
vnto which as I a poore member thereof (God be my witnes, defender, Iudge, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=3) reuenger)
haue alwaies wiſhed well in goodwill, goodworde, and good workes (to my poore
power,) ſo eleuen yeares nowe paſt I ſignified the ſame ſpecially by
tranſlating the learned Vrbanus Rhegius his godlie expoſition vpon the 87.
Pſalme, intituled the Solace of Sion and ioy of Ieruſalem; and dedicating the
ſame vnto the then Right Honora­ble Sir George Barne Knight, Lord Maior of
this Citty, who thank­fully accepted my good wil therein. For it carried this
credit with it, Her foundations are vpon the holy hils, and holy, innocent and
the beſt members of this our Church and common wealth have profited thereby I
doubt not: But nowe if there bee any vnholy, nocent and bad perſoyet
remaining, either within or without the gates of that Hieru­ſalem or viſion of
peace, (as God which once promiſed to ſearch it doth beſt ſee;Sopho. 1. 12 for
man ſeeth not as God ſeeth. 1. Sam. 16. 7.) whether he be a forger of
falſhood. Iere. 10. 14 ſlanderous ſeruant. Pro. 13. 5. euill nurtured child.
Ecclus. 22. 7. and ſo a carnall maſter, Iohn. 3. 10. and a careleſſe parent,
1. Tim. 5. 8. with blinde ſeer and deafe hearer, Eſay. 42\. 8. (whereof too
many I haue found as I can conuince) I pray to God humbly and hartely theſe
either ſpeedely (if it be his hea­uenly holy will) to conuert by doctrine and
diſcipline in the church; or (if ſo they will not bee conuertible) at his good
pleaſure, in his iuſtice and iudgement, to ſubuert them perſeuering in their
malignities in­flexible. In the meane time with all humble and hartifull duty
I commend this my preſent poore labour to the aduancement of Gods glory
ineffable, hir maieſties continuall honour, and your honours and worſhips
fauorable protection; firſt as vnto that Aaron whoſe ſincere doctrine with
example of life, and diſcipline as your rod (which God long make to bud and
bloſſome in bleſſednes,) and conſequently as vnto that Mercury which tuning
this my harp in right concord of goodwil (as I deliuer it / may ſende the
ſweete ſolace thereof from your ſincere breſts, not vnto an earthly Apollo to
regratifie you with an earthlie ſcepter, but to the heauenly Iehoua, who may
beſt rewarde you with all abundance of heauenly happines in the life
euerlaſting, which God for his ſonne Chriſts ſake grant vnto your honors and
worſhips.

At my poore houſe in S. Brides pariſh in fleetſtreet, this 24. of Auguſt.
1598.

Your honorable good Lordſhips, and worthy worſhips, humble poore Orator.
Richard Robinſon, Cittizen of London.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Reuerend father in God, Richard by Gods prouidence Biſhop of London; To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Saltonſtall Knight, Lord Maior of London; and to the Right worſhipful his Brethren the Aldermen and Sheriffes of the ſame City: grace, mercy, peace and plenitude of temporall and eternall beatitude in the ſacred Trinity.
  * 1\. TO HIM THAT EXCELLETH. A Pſalme or Song of Dauid demonſtratiue touching the wonderfull mercies of God towardes his Church, in reſpect of his pormiſes, graces, and victories which he giueth her: and it is exhortatorie: that his Church ſhould therefore prayſe God for euer.
    * 1.1. ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.
  * 2\. To him that excelleth vpon Shoſhanim. A Pſalme of Dauid: a Figure of Chriſt, perſecuted by his enemie. Saluum me fac Deus quoniam, &c:
    * 2.1. ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.
  * 3\. To him that excelleth. ¶ A Pſalme of Dauid: to put him in rememberance for his deliuerance.
    * 3.1.  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.
  * 4\. A Pſalme of Dauid.
    * 4.1.  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.
  * 5\. ¶ A prayer compoſed by Dauid as touching the proſperitie of Salomons Kingdom: which was a figure of Chriſt, and his euerlaſting kingdome, 1. Kinges. 3.
    * 5.1.  ❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=3)

PSALME. LXVIII.‘Exurgat Deus & diſsipentur Inimici, &c.’

## 1\. TO HIM THAT EXCELLETH.  
A Pſalme or Song of Dauid demonſtratiue touching the wonderfull mercies of God
towardes his Church, in reſpect of his pormiſes, graces, and victories which
he giueth her: and it is exhortatorie: that his Church ſhould therefore prayſe
God for euer.

The Argument.

THIS Pſalme is a glorious and plentifull prophecie, touching the reſurrection
and triumph of Chriſt in his aſcenſion, touching his gift of the holy ghoſt,
his gathering of the Church by the miniſtry of the Apo­ſtles, the deſtruction
of the Iewiſh policy or ſtate, and the bene­fits of his new and euerlaſting
kingdome. And like as the fine verſes of Poets do edifie, vttered from a
ſincere and ſacred breſt: So no doubt of it, Dauids penne in the writing of
this Pſalme was filled with ſpirituall ioy, which exceedeth all capacitie and
conſideration of man: For he vſeth not a ſimple kinde of phraſe deſcribing the
magnificence of Chriſtes kingdome, but moſt e-legantly with figures hee
deſcribeth euen as it were the trium­phant [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=4) pompe of this
King: For he frameth his beginning of im­pracation or curſing, and of
gratulation or reioycing: For hee curſeth the enemies of Chriſt; but he
reioyceth at the welfare of the godly ones. The declaration of the Pſalme
comprehendeth the deſcription of the pompe, The Lord commeth and bring­eth
with him his hoaſt of them which preach the Goſpell: Out of theſe are
deſcribed the Apoſtles and Biſhops as it were Prin­ces of prouinces or
countries, which do comfort and refreſh theſe countries afflicted and
perſecuted: The Lord aſcendeth vpon high, hee leadeth in his triumph the
captiues, hee diſtributeth his gifts vnto his ſoldiours and people, and
threatneth puniſhment vnto his enemies: The people go before, and one commeth
af­ter which ſingeth the ſong of triumph. This is almoſt the ſcope of this
Pſalme: which let the godly ones reade not ſo much for the wonderfull and
delectable diuine excellencie of eloquence wherewith it aboundeth.

### 1.1. ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

#### 1.1.1.

Verse. 1

Let God ariſe, and let his enemies bee ſcattered; Let them alſo that hate him
flee before him.

Verse. 2

Like as the ſmoake vaniſheth, ſo ſhalt thou driue them away: and like as the
waxe melteth at the fire, ſo let the vngodly periſh at the preſence of God.

LIKE as the next Pſalme following deſcribeth Chriſt humbled upon the Croſſe;
and (by reaſon of our ſinnes) ſirtuing with moſt bitter ſorrowes: in this
Pſalme ſetteth forth Chriſt riſen from [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=4) death to life and
gloriouſly ſitting at the right hande of his Father:The glorious effectes of
Chriſts reſur­rection. He beginneth then with the effects of the moſt ioy­full
reſurrection of Chriſt; namelie by the deſtruction and ſcattering abroad of
his enemies, and by the reuiuing or re­ſtoring of his church: as if he ſaid,
when Chriſt was dead and buried, not onlie the blind and raging Iewes leaped
for ioy, but alſo the Deuill and his companions, namelie ſinne and death,
triumphed at full, as if Chriſt ſhoulde ſo for euer re­maine in the graue. But
this graund guide of life the third daie riſing againe had a glorious triumph
ouer the Iewes, and the whole kingdome of the Deuill, often times repeating
that ſaying of the Prophet Oſea cap. 13. 14. O death I will be thy death, O
graue I will be thy deſtruction. For although the ſtubborne and vncurable
Iewes carried ſtately mindes as then, and reſiſted the Apoſtles with a
malignant counte­nance: yet in the xl. yeare after Chriſtes reſurrection, they
ſuffered grieuous and iuſt puniſhmentes for their outrages. And the kingdome
of the deuill, ſinne and death is ſo broken and cruſhed in peeces by Chriſt,
that it can bring no danger vnto the godlie ones: Let vs therefore with S.
Paule ſing this triumph ſong 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy ſting, O
graue where is thy victory? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the ſtrength of
ſinne is the Law: But thankes be to God which hath giuen vs victory, through
our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. verſe 56\. 57. And what is more elegant then the
deſcribing of theſe ene­mies which he here vſeth, comparing them unto ſmoke
and ware? Great is the pride of ſmoke when it burſteth out of the top of the
chimney and his ſpreading heat couereth the ayre. So an Image of waxe maketh
both a terrible shew of gra­uitie  [...] of hardnes; but as the ſmoke which
ſéemeth to pearce the verie firmament is ſcattered by the wind here and there:
and as the image of ware laide to the fire melteth quite a­waie: So the
enemies of the Goſpell and of the Church (by the breath of Chriſtes mouth,
which is both winde and flame) are either healed, or taken vtterlie awaie and
deſtroied alto­gether: So in like maner, Athanaſius compared Iulian the [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=5) Apoſtat vnto a
little cloud, whome the Sunne within a while after ſhould ſo driue away and
vanquiſh, that no man ſhould ſée anie trace therof more: With theſe debaſings
and down­falles of the enemies of the goſpell and of the church agreeth that
ſentence of Iſay ca. 51. 7. Feare ye not the reproch of men; neither be yee
afraide of their rebukes. verſe 8. For the moath ſhall eate them vp like a
garment, and the worme ſhall eat them like wooll.

#### 1.1.2.

Vers. 3

But let the righteous be glad and reioyce before God: Let them alſo be merry
and ioyfull.

An other effect of Chriſts reſurrection, is the reuiuing or reſtoring of his
Church: for as Saint Paule ſaith, Rom. 14. 17. The kingdome of God is not
meate and drinke, but righte­ouſneſſe, peace and ioy in the holie Ghoſt. It is
indéed Righte­ouſneſſe, as thus: frée remiſſion of ſinnes, reconciliation with
God,The ioy of the faithfull in the triumph of Chriſt. and free acceptation
vnto life euerlaſting. It is Peace thus: Tranquillitie of heart riſing from
faith, hope & a good conſcience. Finallie, it is Ioy, thus: Conſolation, which
is the vanquiſher of all feares and doubtings: All theſe benefites are the
effects of Chriſts paſſion and reſurrection, which ſaint Paule acknowledgeth,
Phil. 3. 12. He hath not yet attained vn­to, but he tooke(he ſaide) the right
courſe whereby he might at­taine vnto this reach of wiſdome. The ſame thing
let vs alſo confeſſe and craue of God, that hee would illumine and in­creaſe
in our hearts this light acknowledging the benefites of Chriſt.

#### 1.1.3.

Verse. 4

O ſing vnto God, and ſing praiſes vnto his name: mag­nifie him that rideth
vpon the heauens, as it were vpon an horſe: praiſe him in his name, yea and
reioyce be­fore him.

Not only in the heart (ſaith Dauid) let true knowledge of Chriſt ſhine,
whereto is ioyned ſpirituall ioy, but let the toong [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=5) alſo magnifie this
Lord riſen from death to life, and raig­ning for euer: who though he be the
ſonne of Dauid after the Sencalogie, yet is hee declared the Sonne of God by
his ri­ſing from death to life, and by ſending his holie ſpirit, as in Rom.
cap. 1. ver. 3\. 4 it is ſaid, This Lords diuinitie vnited to his humanitie,
and his victorie, triumphes, and benefits, ſee that ye honor (ſaith Dauid) and
in them reſt and ſweetlie re­poſe your ſelues For he doth not thumpe nor
thunder it out, but is carried faire and ſoftlie, and ſuffereth ſuters to haue
eaſie acceſſe vnto him. Let no man therefore be driuen from him, but let all
and euerie one come vnto this Lord, truſting in his moſt ſwéete promiſe, who
ſaith, Matth. 11, 28. Come vnto me all ye that labour, and are laden, and I
will refreſh you. And where he ſaith, Magnifie him that rideth vpon the
hea­uens, that maie be vnderſtoode, Make your way before him, and is ſpoken as
touching our true repentance not fained with amendment of life: for the firſt
ſtep vnto health is, To know the diſeaſe, and ſeeke a Phiſition. But
contrariwiſe, it is a heauie ſigne, if the minde being ſicke, know neither the
diſeaſe, nor looketh for phiſicke. Let vs therefore acknow­ledge our maladies,
namely, ſin and death, and let vs craue to haue right medicine laide to theſe
miſeries by the phiſiti­on and ſheepheard of our ſoules, euen the ſonne of
God, who came therefore into the world, to ſaue ſinners.

#### 1.1.4.

Vers. 5

He is a father of the fatherleſſe, and defendeth the cauſe of the widowes:
euen God in his holy habitation.

Although the Church is doubtleſſe in the world a widowe, and an Orphane (for
ſhe is both of enemies cruellie perſecu­ted,The Church is as a widow and
orphane in the world, yet com­forted and de­fended by Chriſt. and of falſe
friends forſaken) yet the ſonne of God lea­ueth her not without defence and
ſuccour, but partly nouri­ſheth her with inward conſolation (which is called
here, His holie habitation,) and partly he prouideth for her ſome reſting
place for ſuccor, and giueth her Halcion daies, that ſhe may happily nauriſh
and bring up her birds. Hither to pertaineth [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=6) that notable
ſaying of the ſonne of God, Ioh. 14. ver. 16, 18 I will not leaue you
comfortleſſe, but I will come vnto you: I will aske my father, and he ſhall
giue you another comforter, e­uen the ſpirit of truth, which ſhal abide with
you for euer.

And whatſoeuer is true touching the whole bodie, the ſame may in like maner
bee applied of all the members thereof: For to let paſſe the examples of other
Orphnaes, and ſpeak of my ſelfe, ſurely euen me (who haue beene left an
Orphane euen from the verie thirde yeare of my age) hath Chriſt the ſonne of
God ſuccoured and helped, not onely with things neceſſarie for my bodie, as
meate and drinke, defence from harme, good health, and honeſt reſidence or
dwelling place a­mong men, &c. but alſo vnto theſe adding greater benefites,
as for example, bringing me out of the kingdome of darke­neſſe, and
tranſlating me into the kingdome of this ſonne of God, wherein wee haue by his
blood full remiſſion of our ſinnes: To the end therefore a publique teſtimonie
of my thankfulneſſe may appeare, I giue vnto this father of Or­phans, & Iudge
of widowes cauſes, ſo great thanks as my mind is able to conceiue for his
cheriſhing and mainteining of mee ſo manie yeares, and for his benefits
neceſſarilie be­ſtowed vpon me, both for, my bodie and ſoule which in the life
to come euerlaſting, I ſhall more feruently commemo­rate, and magnifie his
name therefore.

#### 1.1.5.

Vers. 6

He is the God that maketh men to bee of one mind in an houſe, and bringeth the
priſoners out of captiuity: but letteth the runnagates continue in
ſcarceneſſe.

Chriſt (in the 9. cap. of Iſay, verſ. 6.) is called not without cauſe, The
euerlaſting father, becauſe in all ages by the mini­sterie of his worde and
ſacraments, hee regenerateth many vnto life euerlaſting, whom the Church
foſtereth and brin­geth vp, and ſo is shee made of a barren or ſolitarie
woman, a mother of manie children: according to the propheſie of Iſay. Cap.
54. verſe 1. Reioyce O barren that diddeſt [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=6) not beare, breake
foorth into ioy and 'reioyce, thou that diddeſt not trauell with childe, for
the deſolate hath mo chil­dren then the married wife hath. Of this conſolation
the godlie ones haue néede,The Lord is carefull for the deliuerāce of his
ſeruants. leaſt they take offence at the ſmall number of true beleeuers, and
the great number of other ſectes. Alſo this Lord in time conuenient ſetteth
Captiues at libertie, that is, not in ſuch ſort as we thinke, but in his
meruailous prouidence, as in the 4 Pſalme it is ſaide, The Lord knoweth how to
deliuer his holy one, verſe 3\. And the pri­ſon out of which we are deliuered,
as S. Paule ſaith 2 Cor. 7. 5. Are inward feares, &c. outwarde fightings. For
the godlie ones for moſt part are toſſed with inwarde and outwarde ſtormes of
calamities, and at length getting out of the great ſtormes of trouble do ſee
their wiſhed hauen:But altogether neglecteth the vngodly ones. But the
vn­godlie ones and diſobedient perſons hee deſpiſeth as the baſe gotten
children of this worlde, neither chaſteningnor com­forting them till they come
to vtter deſtruction.

#### 1.1.6.

Verse 7

O God, when thou wenteſt forth before the people: when thou wenteſt through
the wildernes:

Verse 8

The earth ſhooke, and the heauens dropped at the pre­ſence of God: euen as
Syna alſo was moued at the pre­ſence of God, which is the God of Iſraell.

Verse 9

Thou O God ſenteſt a gratious raigne vppon thine in­heritance: and refreſhed
it when it was weary.

Hitherto hath hee made the hearer or learner attentiue and docible, as in
beginnings it is a thing vſuall: nowe go­eth he to the height of the cauſe,
namelie into the place men­tioning of Chriſt and the Goſpell, and compareth
the publi­ſhing of the lawe, with the propagation of the goſpell, where he
ſaith, When thou publiſhedſt the lawe, the earth was in one place moued, and
the heauens dropped at thy preſence: But now that the goſpell by preaching is
ſpread abroad of the A­poſtles, all the whole earth is moued: as in Haggias
the Pro­phet it is ſaid cap. 2. verſe 7. Yet a little while & I wil ſhake the
[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=7) heauens,
the earth, the ſea, and the drie land, &c. and a graci­ous raine is powred
vpon all parts of the world, where by the Church is gathered both from among
the Iewes and Gen­tiles, and is watered as it were the inheritance of God. And
what is there more ſweete, then that the preaching of the Goſpel is not onely
compared vnto thunder,A ſweet Alle­gorie of the preaching of the Goſpel, how
it is cōpa­red vnto thun­der and raine. but vnto raine alſo? For like as the
earth bringeth forth fruit, partlie made warme with the heate of the ſunne,
and partly watered with raine and waters: So the Church is refreſhed and
recreated of the holie Ghoſt by the miniſterie of the Goſpell. Let no man
therefore kéepe backe this raine from his Orchardes, but let euen all our
furrowes, and glebe landes receyue the ſame with great deſire: That is, let
our hearts without loa­thing and ſurfetting heare the doctrine of the Goſpel,
that they may take thereby moſt ample fruit and profite. Tou­ching which ſaint
Paule ſpeaketh Rom. 1. 16. The Goſpell is the power of God vnto ſaluation for
al that beleeue. Further, more Chriſt is here called the God of Sinay, & of
Iſrael, by rea­ſon of the teſtimonies of his manifeſtations or appearings made
in mount Sinay, and in this people: For the pollicie or gouernment of Moyſes
was no other thing, but a ſtorehouſe of diuine appearences and witneſſes.

#### 1.1.7.

Verſ. 10 Thy congregation ſhall dwell therein: for thou O God of thy goodnes
haſt prouided for the poore.

Chriſt is our ſheepheard becauſe hee teacheth vs,Chriſt the ſhepheard of our
ſoules. comfor­teth, gouerneth and defendeth vs, healeth vp our woundes, and
finallie carieth vs lying as it were vpon his ſhoulders; not pretermitting
anie kinde of dutie which a faithfull ſhéep, heard might vſe, or is able to
beſtowe upon ſillie and weake ſhéepe: Let vs therefore remember in our dailie
prayer that we are the ſhéepe of this ſhéepheard, and let vs run for ſuccour
vnto him; and let vs craue helpe, gouernement and defence of and from him: But
touching this purpoſe I haue ſpoken ſufficiently inough in the xxiii. Pſalme.

#### 1.1.8.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=7)

Verse. 11

The Lord gaue the word; great was the company of the Preachers.

S. Paule in the 3. Gal. 19\. and Heb. 2\. verſe 2. ſaith,The publiſhing of the
law and preaching of the Goſpell. The lawe was giuen by the miniſtry of
Angels, but the preaching of the Goſpel was immediatly publiſhed by the ſonne
of God, and commended to his Apoſtles as an excellent gift and treaſure of
great price. For although the world outraglouſlie deſpiſe the preachers and
teachers of the Goſpell, and iudgeth them as S Paule ſaith 1. Cor. 49. as
gaſing ſtockes vnto the worlde: yet in verie truth, the chiefeſt and greateſt
bleſſing vppon earth is, when men may heare the preachers and teachers ſtirred
vp by God to aduance and ſet forth the doctrine of the Goſpell, wherein true
acknowledgement of God and pray­er vnto him are ſhewed, which are the
conſolation of mens mindes and direct rules of good life.

#### 1.1.9.

Verse 12

Kings with their armies did flee and were diſcomfi­ted: and they of the
houſhold deuided the ſpoile.

Chriſt our Sauiour in the 9. cap. of S. Markes Goſpell verſe 49\. giueth
charge vnto the Apoſtles and to the teachers of the goſpell,The ſalt of the
earth purity of doctrine▪ and the vnity of the teachers. That they haue ſalt
in themſelues; that is, to re­taine the puritie of doctrine, and to be at
vnitie and concord amongſt themſelues. And in S. Iohns Goſpell cap. 17. verſe
17. & 21\. Chriſt in his agonie praieth, that, God would ſanc­tifie vs in his
truth: and make vs to be one in him: For the chiefe ornaments of Gods church
are purity of doctrine, and concord of teachers: So in this place the Pſalme
affirmeth, that the Apoſtles ſhoulde be all of one minde, and not trouble
their godlie conſent with Ambition or other fooliſh deſi [...]es. But how rare
a thing ſuch concord is amongſt the other teachers, not onlie ancient
hiſtories, but alſo the examples of this age ſufficientlie declare. Euſebius
biſhop of Caeſ [...]ia ſorrowed in ſeeing Baſill to proſper, and oppreſſed him
what hee could. [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=8) Betwéen
Epiphanius and Chryſoſtome there was ſuch a con­tention and
controuerſie,Examples of hurtful emu­lation, euen in the ancient Biſhops of
the Church. that Epiphanius in heate of anger ſaid, Thou ſhalt not die O
Chryſoſtome within thy iuriſdiction. And Chryſoſtome made and anſwere, That
Epiphanius ſhould not return aliue into his country. To theſe curſings or
gainſayings the euent it ſelfe anſwered. For Epiphanius ſayling into the Ile
of Cyprus died before he came thither: & Chryſoſtome not long after was
baniſhed his Country. S. Hierome framed his inuectiue againſt Ruffinus with
whom hee liued manie yeares moſt louinglie and moſt familiarlie. But why do I
recite olde examples, ſéeing this our age aboundeth with ſuch examples?

For like as with Epaminundas prince of Thebes the liberty or freedome of his
country was alſo buried, and vtterlie ex­tinguiſht: euen ſo, when D: Luther
departed this life and was buried,Diſcord ari­ſing felſe brethren. then alſo
ceaſed the concord of teachers. For nowe, Some not with learned ſpeach
cōtend: But with euil tearms their cauſe defend; as the Poet Ennius ſaith.
And the teachers, like vnto Cadmeys brethren, ſtriue one againſt another with
hatred, ambition and ſlanders. Therefore more are the ſubtle deceits of falſe
brethren to be feared, then the enterpriſes and practi­ſes of our enemies. But
I cut ſhort this complaint, and I beſeech God to cure our wounds and to
reſtore vnto his Church a godly and proſperous concord. Why the Apo­ſtles and
good Biſhops are called Kings with their hoaſts. And further it is not indeed
a thing obſcure to conſider why the Apoſtles and Biſhoppes are here called
[Kinges with their hoaſts] becauſe they fight the battels againſt the Diuels
and their inſtrumentes; and are furniſhed not with braſen péeces, but with the
word and prayer. For the ſonne of God armeth and ſetteth forth his ſoldiours
with a mouth and wiſedome, which all the ene­mies are not able to reſiſt, Luke
21\. 15.Verſes 4. 5. 6 And as S. Paule ſaith, 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6. The weapons
of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty to caſt downe holds, which bringeth
to captiuity e­uerie thought vnto the obedience of Chriſt, and hauing ready
the vengeance againſt all diſobedience, &c. Finally, [they of the houſhould]
That is, the ſpouſeſſe or church of the ſon of God.

#### 1.1.10.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=8)

Verse 13

Though ye haue line among the pots: yet ſhall ye be as the winges of a Doue,
that is couered with ſiluer wings, and her feathers like gold.

He compareth the teachers of the goſpell vnto Doues of diuers colours, becauſe
of the diuerſitie of giftes: For one excelleth in the knowledge of languages,
an other hath the giftes of interpretation, another iudgeth right ſoundlie the
controuerſies touching opinions. Finallie, The holie ghoſt giueth vnto euery
one ſome gifts, Teachers of the Goſpell compared vn­to doues, for the
diuerſity of their gifts. for the building vp of the church as S. Paule ſaith,
1. Cor. 12\. 28. He alſo here alludeth vnto the ſimplicitie of Doues, as
Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 10. 16. Be ye ſim­ple as Doues. For the Doue is without
gall, hurteth not with her bill, and hath harmeleſſe clées. Furthermore, like
as Goſhawkes and kites do aſſault and deuoure ſillie Doues: So tyrants
practiſe all meanes they can vtterlie to ſubuert all godlie teachers. The
Church therefore is an hoaſt of doues, which are laide open for all the
weapons of tyrants.

But if anie man in this place had rather applie the mix­ture of ſiluer and
golden colour, vnto that ſhewe which poli­ſhed or bright ſhining armour, and
warlike furniture hath, with Enſignes and weapons diſplaied in tents where
fields are fought. Againſt this I nothing contend any waie.

#### 1.1.11.

Verse 14

When the almighty ſcattered Kings for their ſake: then were they as white as
ſnow in Salmon.

This verſe admoniſheth the Reader of two thinges:The vocation or calling of
the Miniſter. The firſt touching the vocation of miniſters, concerning which
in 10. Rom. 15\. it is ſaide, How ſhall they preach except they be ſent? And
in 9. Matth. 9\. 38. Chriſt ſaieth, Pray ye vnto the Lord of the harueſt, that
hee would thruſt forth workemen into the harueſt. Let vs therefore
acknowledge, that the mini­ſters which deliuer ſound doctrine, are the
excellent and ſin­gular giftes of God, and as it were the mothers own breſts
[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=9) wherewith
ſhe giueth vs ſucke. Secondlie, let vs learn what is the effects of the
goſpell: namelie to reſtore light by dri­uing awaie moſt filthie darkeneſſe,
ſuch as are heathen and popiſh errors:The 3. effects of the Goſpell. Therefore
S. Peter compareth 2. Pet. 1\. 19. the ſcriptures propheticall vnto a lanterne
with a candle giuing light in a darke place. And this our Prophet Dauid ſaith,
Pſal. 1 19. Patt. 10. verſſe 1. Thy word (O Lord) is a Lanthorne vnto my
feete, and a light vnto my ſteps. For without this light men doe wander in
greateſt darkneſſe of error, and in the ignorance of the chiefeſt matters. For
no man (except Gods word firſt giue him light) knoweth the eſſence & will of
God; no man rightly repenteth him, neither doth any mā rightly call vpon
God,Iohn. 12. 35. Except he follow the guide and good gouern­ment of Gods
word. Let vs then walke in the light while wee haue light, leaſt the
darkeneſſe do oppreſse vs. Then which caſe nothing can be thought more
ſorrowfull.

#### 1.1.12.

Verse 15

As the hill of Baſan, ſo is Gods hill; euen an high hill as the hill of Baſan.

Verse 16

Why hop ye ſo ye high hils? This is Gods hill, in the which it pleaſeth him to
dwell: yea the Lord will a­bide in it euer.

The firſt effect of the goſpell, as I ſaid, is a light ſhewing the true
acknowledgement and prayer unto God:The 2. effect of the Goſpell. The other
fruit is fatnes, that is a conſolation to bee oppoſed againſt ſinne and death:
For they which are deſtitute of this fatneſſe they muſt néeds waxe leane: that
is, he plunged into deſpe­ration. For Philoſophicall conſolations are nothing
but idle pratings and  [...]anlings, and do heale the ſcarres onely but not
the wounds: wherefore ſéeing Philoſophie may confeſſe her darkeneſſe, and
acknowledge her leaneneſſe, let vs ſeeke for the fat hill bringing forth
effectual and wholeſome remedies for our ſorrowes.

And ſuch a hill is the true Church, which embraceth and profeſſeth the
doctrine deliuered from God, and ſhewing [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=9) conſolations
healing the wounds of the heart.

The third effect or fruit of the Goſpell,The 3. effect of the Goſpell. is,
that they which with saith and good conſcience embrace this doctrine, profeſſe
the ſame, and practiſe to propagate or aduance the ſame, are made according to
the ſaying in the 14. v. 23\. of ſaint Iohns Goſpel, The Temples and dwelling
places of God: Namelie, If anie man loue mee he will keepe my worde, and my
Father will loue him, and we will come vnto him and make our dwel­lings with
him.

But in other ſects doth not God dwell, but he hateth and deteſteth them, yea
though they he high hilles, that is, though they excell others in dominions
and politicall glorie. Of this doctrine and conſolation haue we now need
eſpeciallie, leaſt our minds taking offence, and being carried awaie with
ad­miration at the power and ſucceſſe of the Turkiſh nation, do decline or
ſtart away from God: And let not us iudge by for­tune (but by the worde of
God) which is the true Church of God, and let vs become & remaine Citizens of
the ſame yea although all feares, and all daungers ſhoulde hang ouer our
heades.

#### 1.1.13.

Vers. 17

The Charets of God are twentie thouſand, euen thou­ſands of Angels: and the
Lord is among them as in the holie place of Sinay.

Salomon ſaith well Prou. 14. 28. The multitude of the peo­ple is the honour of
the Prince. The exceeding great traine of Chriſt our tri­umphant king. So here
he addeth vnto this victorious king an excéeding great train, namely the
church of the Fathers, Prophets, and Apoſtles, and theſe remnants now in the
olde age of the Church: for they go before the cha­riot of Triumph; we ſillie
ſoules follow the ſame, and yet are we fellowes and companions of this
glorious triumph, then which benefite nothing may bee thought better or more
wiſhfull.

#### 1.1.14.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=10)

Vers. 18

Thou art gone vp on high, thou haſtled captiuitie cap­tiue, and receiued gifts
for men: yea euen for thine ene­mies, that the Lord God might dwell among
them.

Like as Paulus Emilius aſcended vp into the Capitoll to giue thankes vnto
Iupiter, led Perſcus as his priſoner in the triumph, and gaue vnto his owne
aſſociates large giftes of ſpoyles: ſo the ſonne of God is aſcended into
heauen, and in his triumphant pompe gloriouſslie ſhewed his priſoners the
princes of darkenes tied in Chaines, and dealt moſt ample benefites vnto the
Apoſtles, and to the vniuerſall Church.

But ſéeing this verſe of all other in this Pſalm ſhineth like a precious ſtone
of rare vertue, let the waightines of all the wordes be moſt diligentlie
conſidered. And firſt indéede let the article touching Chriſtes aſcenſion into
heauen be vnder­ſtoode according to the declaration of the godlie olde rule.
Athanaſius in his diſputation againſt Arius, The ſaying of Athanaſius,
(a­gainſt Arius) of the aſcenſi­on of Chriſt: ſaith thus. Eius eſt ire &
venire qui aliquibus locorum terminis circumſcribitur, & eum in quo erat
deſerens locum ad eum vbi non erat, veniat. Ce­terum verbi diuinitas vniuerſa
implens nullis locorum terminis concluditur, ſicut nihil eſt vndediſeedat, it
a nihil eſt quo veniat, &c. In Engliſh thus. It is for him to go and come, who
is preſcribed for certaine places limited, and forſaking that place wherein he
was, that he may come thither where hee was not: but the Godhead of the worde
filling all places, is not preſcri­bed to any limits of places: for as it is
not material from whence it departed, ſo is it not materiall whither it
commeth. And ſo ſpeaketh Cyprian in his rehearſall of the Créed. Aſcendit ad
coelis non vbi verbum Deus, antea non fuerat, quippe qui erat ſem­per in
coelo, & manebat cum Patre; ſed vbi verbum caro factum antea non ſedebat. That
is: He aſcendeth vp to the heauens, not where God the worde was not before,
becauſe hee was alwayes in heauen, and remained with the Father, but where the
worde become fleſh, fate not before.

[Thou haſt led captiuitie captiue] That is:The deliue­rance of the captiues.
thou half redée­med mankind, or reduced him into his olde libertie and
dig­nitie [[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=10)
when he was holden captiue of the Diuell, that Lord of death and ſin; as in
the 2. cap. 14 to the Hebrewes, it is ſaid; And haſt led thy enemies captiue
in the triumph, according to that notable ſaying extant in the 2. Coloſſ.
15.The captiuing of the enemies and the ſpoi­ling of them. Spoyling the
Principalities and powers, haſt made a ſhew of them openly, and haſt triumphed
ouer them, &c. So often then as feare of death and dangers of hell do ruſh
togither vpon vs, and the deuill with innumerable ſleights aſſaulteth vs, let
vs be conuerted in minde and thought vnto this triumph, and let vs craue that
this captaine and conquerour would treade downe ſa­than vnder our feete, and
would giue vs victorie againſt ſin and death.

The latter particle reſteth touching gifts. [Thou haſt re­ceiued gifts for
men.] The ſpeciall gift of this triumph is, The holie Ghoſt powred out with a
manifeſt light vpon the Apo­ſtles, and their ſcholers: Touching this gift,
ſaint Peter in the 2. cap. Acts. ver. 33\. ſaith. He being exalted at the
right hande of God, receiuing the promiſe of the holy Ghoſt from the Father,
hath poured out this which yee nowe ſee and heare. O the ex­céeding great
goodnes of God, powring out his ſpirit vpon all fleſh. Sine  [...]uius numine
nihil eſt in homine nihil eſt innoxium. Without whoſe diuine grace in man,
nought well hee doth, nor well he can: As the Church ſingeth godlilie. And
although Paule applieth this particle vnto the miniſterie of the Goſ­pel,
which is the inſtrument of the holie ghoſt, yet may it bee rightlie applied
vnto all gifts neceſſarie for the bodie and the ſoule: amongſt which is not
the laſt gift the ſtabilitie of his Church, and ſubduing of his enemies, which
are ſo brideled and reſtrained by Chriſt. that they cannot outrage nor hurt ſo
fore as they would. Whereas then all the world is not full of Turkiſh tyranie,
and beaſtly cruelty, but that as yet there is a holie ſeede; that muſt not we
aſcribe and attribute vnto humane enterpriſes and defences, but vnto the
triumph of the ſonne of God. But ſo great is the plentie and abundance of
effect in this little verſe, that it can not bee conſidered or deſcribed with
anie eloquence, I do therefore paſſe on to the [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=11) reſt which
remaine in this Pſalme.

#### 1.1.15.

Vers. 19

Prayſed bee the Lord dayly, euen the God which hel­peth vs, and powreth his
benefits vpon vs.

Vers. 20

He is our God▪ euen the God of whom commeth ſalua­tion: God is the Lord by
whom we eſcape death.

Séeing Goſpell is a witneſſe of the croſſe, hee com­forteth the Church
burdened with the croſſe, by reaſon of our confeſſion,A comfort vn­to the
Church burdened with the croſſe. and the remnants of ſinne. But a ſpeciall
conſo­lation is the promiſe of Gods preſence and helpe in calami­ties: Alſo
his mitigation and deliuerance from the ſame. And it is a ſpeciall
deliuerance: whereas by Iordan, that is, by the miſeries of this life the
ſonne of God leadeth vs into the land of Canaan, that is, into the life
euerlaſting. But the whole doctrine touching cauſes and remedies of humane
mi­ſeries is elſewhere plentifullie expounded. He that will may from thence
borrow more matter. For we do not now write of places, but we interpret
Pſalms, and leaſt this Commen­tarie appeare too much in matter, we are
contented with the direction of thoſe places which are extant in all mens
hands.

#### 1.1.16.

Vers. 21

God ſhal wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy ſcalpe of ſuch a one as
goeth on ſtill in his wickednes.

Vers. 22

The Lord hath ſaid I will bring my people againe, as I did from Baſan: mine
owne will I bring againe, as I did from the deepe of the ſea.

Vers. 23

That thy foote may be dipped in the blood of thine e­nemies: and that the
tongue of thy dogges may be red through the ſame.

He addeth vnto the deſcription of the triumphant pompe a prophecie touching
the deſtruction of the Iewiſh nation for their blinde obſtinacie,A prophecie
touching the deſtruction of the Iewiſh nation. ſtriuing & ſetting themſelues
againſt the Goſpel: And this prophecie agréeth with the ſaying of Chriſt,
Luke. 19. 44. All thoſe things ſhall come vpon thee, be­cauſe [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=11) thou haſt not
known the time of thy viſitation. Nowe in­déed it is ſufficientlie apparant
that the Iewes (for their con­tempt of Chriſt) hauing loſt their kingdome and
prieſthoode, do wander in perpetuall baniſhment, and are the moſt miſe­rable
perſons of all others vppon whome the ſunne ſhineth. And although the greateſt
multitude of the Iewes be with tragicall puniſhments oppreſſed, yet
notwithſtanding out of this ſkum of mankinde God hath culled or picked out
ſome remnantes, as in the 2. cap. Actes: When Peters prea­ching was heard,
3000. Iewes were conuerted vnto Chriſt: and in the next yeare after the
reſurrection of Chriſt, Paule the apoſtle was conuerted: And there is extant
in the 11. cap. of S. Paule to the Rom. 27\. a prophecie touching the
downe­fall of the Chruch of the Gentiles, and of the conuerſion of the Iewes.

#### 1.1.17.

Verse 24

It is well ſeene, O God, how thou goeſt, howe thou my God and King goeſt in
thy ſanctuary.

Verse 25

The ſingers go before, the minſtrels follow after: in the midſt are the
Damſels playing with the timbrels.

He returneth vnto the triumphant pompe, whoſe orna­ment was muſicke:The ſweete
ioies of this triumph. For the greeke  [...] hath his name  [...], that is, by
the deſcription of a figs leafe, and the foote Iambus in verſe. For nothing is
more ſwéete then victorie, and the foote Iambus is moſt ſpeciallie applied
vnto the following of enemies which are led captiues in the triumph. And what
maner of ſong, the people both going before and alſo following the chariot
ought to ſing, S. Paul in the 5. Epheſ. v. 19\. and 4. Coloſſ. verſe 2\. there
preſcri­bing the rule of ſpirituall muſicke teacheth vs at large.

#### 1.1.18.

Verse 26

Giue thankes O Iſraell, vnto God the Lorde in the congregations from the
ground of thy hart.

This little verſe is ſhort, but it admoniſheth the Reader [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=12) touching the
greateſt matters: God will not haue vs to ſerue him with the ſacrifice to
Ceres ſhut vp in cloſe place of vs. For as Chriſt ſaith, Matth. 5. 15. No man
lighteth a can­dle, and afterwards putteth it vnder a buſhell: A
thankeſgi­uing of the church for the victory by Chriſt obtai­ned. But he will
haue the church to bee a viſible congregation and to haue honeſt meetinges
publikelie, wherein the preaching of the Goſpell maie ſound and hee heard
touching the ſonne of God. And therfore doth he with a meruailous power ſaue,
yea and ſhall preſerue his church in honeſt congregations: and he wil haue
euerie man to helpe and maintaine the preſeruation of theſe publique méetings,
that the miniſtery of teaching maie bee preſerued. There will God haue a
common praier and thankeſgiuing to be made, there will hee haue confeſſion to
be ſhewed: which kind of doctrine euerie man may embrace. And he biddeth vs to
take the doctrine of the church not out of the ceſterns of mans traditions,
nor out of Ariſtotles E­thickes, but out of the holie and ſacred fountaines of
Iſraell, that is, from the Prophets and Apoſtles: for all other ſectes without
the true church, do onelie teach a particle of the law, touching externall and
ciuill duties, and ſome of them do bring with them other worſhippings of
Idols. But they are altogether ignorant of the ſonne of God and of his
gos­pell, that is the promiſe of the free remiſſion of ſinnes, alſo of our
reconciliation, and of our inheritance of life euerla­ſting to be giuen vs by
faith in the ſonne our Mediator. But the Church draweth out of the welſpring
of Iſrael the ſound, perfect and vncorrupt doctrine of the law and the
goſpell, and the pure knowledge of the ſonne of God for vs crucified and
raiſed from death to life.

#### 1.1.19.

Verse. 27

There is little Beniamin their ruler, and the Princes of Iuda their Counſaile:
The princes of Zabulon and the princes of Nephthaly.

Although the world do iudge the Apoſtles to be miſerable wandring perſons, and
hateth and curſeth them as gaſing [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=12) ſtocks, & the
ofscourings of the world, 1. Cor. 49\. 13. yet the ho­lie ghoſt adorneth theſe
miniſters with the moſt praiſe wor­thy title of princes: For the Apoſtles haue
the teſtimonie of the holie ghoſt, that they do not erre in doctrine:The order
of the Apoſtles marching as Princes in the tryumph of Chriſt. Theſe Cap­taines
do other teachers and preachers in the church followe; vnto whom no credit
muſt bee giuen, except their confeſſion do agrée with the foundation of the
Apoſtles as S. Paule ſaith 2. Epheſ. 20. And are built vpon the foundation of
the Prophets & Apoſtles, Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe being the chiefe corner ſtone.

But why doth he here ſaie [There is little Beniamin their ru­ler] Certes, it
may ſignifie that only of all the Apoſtles; Paul being borne of the tribe of
Beniamin, a great and good part of the Church ſhould be gathered out of Europe
and Aſia: I ſtand not to be preciſe, touching the ſpeciall dignitie of anie
apoſtle, but I reuerence them al as the inſtruments of God ſounding forth the
preaching of the goſpell throughout all the world: And yet cannot this bee
denied that Paule himſelfe with a liuelie voice witneſſeth of himſelfe, and
letting paſſe moſt vpright teſtimonies of others: He did greater thinges then
the other Apoſtles, like as he himſelfe not vntruly glo­rieth, Let vs
therefore giue thankes to God for this excel­lent Organ or inſtrument, and
like little hounds let vs licke vp the crums falling from Paules table, which
are full of ex­cellent words and ſentences.

#### 1.1.20.

Verse. 28

Thy God hath ſent forth ſtrength for thee: Stabliſh the thing (O God) that
thou haſt wrought in vs.

Firſt, in this verſe let the miſterie of the Trinitie be well marked: For like
as in 45. Pſal, the perſons of the godhead are diſcerned, where he ſaith in
the 8. ver. of the pſal. There­fore God euen thy God hath anointed thee with
oyle of glad­nes aboue thy fellowes, So in this place is the Meſſias
cléere­lie and perſpicuouſlie diſtinguiſhed from the eternall father. Here he
saith [Thy God hath ſent forth ſtrength] that is, thy eternal father (from
whom thou art ſent to publiſh and preach [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=13) the goſpell and
to redéeme mankind) hath inſtituted and ra­tified thy kingdome:The ſtability
and felicity of Chriſts church & kingdom. it ſhall therefore ſtand immoueable,
and ſhall not be weakened by anie force, neither ſhall it by anie meanes
poſſible be remoued out of place. Of this conſolati­on ſtoode the church in
neede when Diotleſian and the other tyrants ruled and raigned, who ſeemed to
doe what they could vtterlie to race out the name of Chriſt from the memo
[...]ie of all poſteritie: For writers affirm [...] when Diocleſian raigned
there were euerie daie at the leaſt xx. godlie perſons put to death in the
Cittie Alexandria, for profeſſion of the goſpell. And now alſo in this olde
age of the church, the Church like­wiſe needeth the ſame conſolation: For from
the Eaſt  [...]arts the Turkiſh tyrant aſſaulteth her, and from the Weſt parts
the Pope armed and fortified with the defence and cruelty of manie kings
vexeth her.

What is then remaining where with we maie defend our ſelues from this Turkiſh
and Popiſh outrage, but this moſt ſtrong wall [Thy God hath ſent forth
ſtrength for thee: Sta­bliſh the thing O God, that thou haſt wrought in vs:]
For ſee­ing God is the guide and giuer of this kingdome, doubtleſſe he will be
alſo the effecter and worker in vs, and he only will be the foundation
thereof. Neither indéed let this praier and promiſe be vnderſtood onelie
touching the whole bodie of the Church, but let it alſo bee applied unto
euerie particular member; and let it alwaies ſound in our mindes, eares and
tongues. Let vs dailie with ſeruent ſighing ſaie. Seeing O God thou haſt
tranſlated vs out of the kingdome of darkeneſſe into the kingdome of thy
light, and that theſe beginnings of life euerlaſting are diuers waies
aſſaulted, partely by the Diuell, partly by the world, and partly of our own
fleſh (in which word I comprehend our wandring opinions and affections) I
humbly beſeech thee that thou wouldſt eſtabliſh that benefit thou haſt begun
in vs, and defend vs againſt our enemies domeſticall and externall. For as he
that buildeth anie thing doth not onlie frame the foundations, but goeth
forwarde in ſetting vp the whole building whatſoeuer it be: So God will not
haue vs [[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=13)
begin our conuerſions and turnings vnto him, but much more will he haue our
ſaluation to bee perfected by him: for as it is ſaid, 2. Phil. 13. It is God
that worketh in vs the will and the deed euen of his good pleaſure, to the
ende ſome acceptable ſeruices may be done vnto him.

#### 1.1.21.

Vers. 29

For thy temples ſake at Ieruſalem: ſo ſhall kings bring preſents vnto thee.

He foreſheweth hereby,Dauids pro­phecie of kings and prin­ces which ſhuld be
patrones of the Church. that ſome kings and princes ſhall be aſſociates of the
true church, nurſing fathers of them which teach and learne in the ſame, and
ſhall ſurely be made mem­bers of life euerlaſting. For although Religion do
bring forth Riches, as one ſaith elegantlie, yet the daughter like an
vn­thankefull Stockedoue hath deuoured her mother. For the Biſhops in ſome
ages haue not béene ſo vpright or ſincere, as that their eſtate of life might
agrée with their calling: that is, they taught not the Goſpel ſoundlie, nor
adminiſtred the Sacraments rightlie: no, they cared not for edifying the
people with true doctrine, but became ſtately Lords in kings courts, and being
ordained to ſacred buſines, they intermed­led themſelues with prophane matters
nothing agreeable to their calling. Therefore both of theſe are beſt, Meane
wealth, and meane pouertie, in ſuch like perſons.

#### 1.1.22.

Vers. 30

When the companie of the ſpearemen, and multitude of the mightie are ſcattered
abroad among the beaſtes of the people: (ſo that they humblie bring peeces of
ſiluer) and wh [...]n he hath ſcattered the people that de­light in warre.

He addeth vnto this prophecie of the calling of the Nati­ons a heauie
effect,Dauid denoūs­ceth a downfal and deſtructiō of Antichriſt, and his
cruel bloody beaſtly▪ warriours. touching the kingdom of Antichriſt, whoſe
chiefeſt members, and as it were twinnes at one birth borne 900. yeares agone,
are the Pope and Mahomet: Theſe hee compareth vnto mightie ſtrong Bulles
treading vnder foote [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=14) the true
doctrine, and true worſhippings of God, for to eſta­bliſh their owne power.
Againſt theſe is this Verſe, as if we in our time ſhould now ſay: O God
reſtraine and ouerthrow the practiſes of theſe, leaſt the true knowledge of
thy moſt holie name be extinguiſhed in mankind: For thy name, for thy name
ſake, O God do thou this, that thou bee not blaſphemed: Helpe vs O God our
Sauiour, and for the glorie of thy names ſake deli­uer vs, and be mercifull
vnto our ſinnes for thy names ſake, leaſt at any time the Gentiles do ſay vnto
vs: Where is nowe thy God? Pſal. 79\. 10.

#### 1.1.23.

Vers. 31

Then ſhall the Princes come out of Egypt: The Mo­rians land ſhall ſoone
ſtretch out her hands vnto God.

This is a notable prophecie touching the calling of the Gentiles: and I haue
often elſewhere ſaide,Dauid reciteth a prophecie touching the calling of the
Gentiles to the church of God. that the Reader is to be put in minde of the
chiefeſt matters, ſo often times as the Prophets doe make mention touching the
calling of the Gentiles. For firſt, this calling is a notable teſtimonie
implying that ſaying of ſaint Paule, Rom. 5. 15. 20. Grace oueraboundeth aboue
ſinne. For if ſo great force or effect were not procéeding from the louing
ſauour and mercie of God, he would not haue receyued into fauour nations
polluted with Idolatrie, lusts, and other moſt filthie and foule ſinnes, which
are partlie ſo filthie, and partlie ſo flagitious, that they ſeeme euen
filthie to ſpeake of them.

Secondlie, the ſame calling of the Gentiles witneſſeth that the promiſe of the
Goſpel is vniuerſall, & pertaineth vnto all perſons that do trulie call vpon
God: for in God there is no courtlike reſpect of perſons, but God is indéede
equall to the equall: that is to them which trulie repent, and flie vn­to the
Mediator. Touching this conſolation mo things are ſpoken by Paul, Rom. 10.
verſes, 6, 10, 11, 13, 14. Finally this ſelfe ſame vocation of the Gentiles
refuteth the Phariſaical opinion, which imagineth that ceremonies are
righteouſnes before God: for the Gentiles are by God receyued into fauor
[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=14) without
Circumciſion, and other ceremonies of Moſes.

#### 1.1.24.

Vers. 32

Sing vnto God, O yee kingdomes of the earth: O ſing prayſes vnto the Lord.

Vers. 33

Which ſitteth in the heauens ouer all from the begin­ning: lo he doth ſend out
his voice, and that a migh­tie voyce.

Vers. 34

Aſcribe ye the power vnto God ouer Iſraell: his wor­ſhip and ſtrength is in
the cloudes.

The Epilogue or latter part of the Pſalme is an exhorta­tion: for he exhorteth
all degrées of men vnto Thankeſgiuing: As if he ſaid,The Epilogue or
concluſion of this Pſalme, is a general ex­hortation vnto thanksgiuing for
manifold benefites. ſéeing the benefits of this king are ſo great, meet it is
that hee bee honoured and magnified with all ſpeech and writing: [O ſing
prayſes vnto God] that is acknowledge yee his wiſedome, righteouſneſſe and
mercie: It is Mercie, that we are not conſumed, and brought into nothing, nor
caſt a­way amongſt the Diuels after our firſt fall. It is Righteouſ­neſſe,
that there is no forgiuenes of ſinnes without an equall recompence and
redemption equiualent. This when no crea­ture is able to pay, it is decreed by
his wonderfull wiſedome that his ſonne ſhould pay the ranſome for vs. For God
decli­neth not from his righteouſnes, and yet by his wonderfull wiſedome doth
hee temper his righteouſneſſe with mercie. As by the Prophet Oſeas, cap. 11.
9. I might indeed iuſtlie de­ſtroy thee, but I will not exerciſe the furie of
my wrath: becauſe I am God and not man, the holy one in the middes of thee.
Nei­ther indéed here muſt I paſſe with ſilence the particle contai­ning a
teſtimonie of the efficacie of the Goſpell. [He ſhal ſend out his voyce, and
that a mightie voice.] as if he ſaid. The prea­ching of the Goſpel ſhall not
be a vaine ſound of ſpéech: but it ſhall be as ſaint Paule ſaith moſt
ſwéetlie. Rom. 1. 16. and 2. Cor 3\. 3. The power of god vnto ſaluation for al
that beleeue: and the miniſterie of the ſpirit of life, &c.

#### 1.1.25.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=15)

Vers. 35

O God wonderfull art thou in thy holy places: euen the God of Iſrael, he will
giue ſtrength and power vnto his people: Bleſſed be God.

In concluſion, he teacheth that Gods Church is by mar­ueilous meanes gouerned,
preſerued, and defended; as in the 4. Pſal. 3\. it is ſaid: The Lord hath
choſen vnto himſelfe the man that is godlie. For when we ſeeme to bee weak,
then are wee ſtrong. For, the power of God is made ſtrong in our infirmitie.
And to let paſſe other things: In quietneſſe and hope conſiſteth our ſtrength,
&c.

## 2\. To him that excelleth vpon Of Shoſha­nim, reade Pſal 45. Shoſhanim.  
A Pſalme of Dauid: a Figure of Chriſt, perſecuted by his enemie. ‘Saluum me
fac Deus quoniam, &c:’

The Argument.

THis Pſalme is memorable in the writings of the E­uangeliſts and Apoſtles. For
Saint Iohn the Euan­geliſt in his 2. 15. 19. cap. citeth three verſes out of
this Pſalme: And Peter the Apoſtle ſpeaking of the puniſhment which Iudas the
traitor had, vſeth in 1. cap. 18. Act. the wordes of this Pſalme. Finallie,
Paule in the 11. and 15. cap. Rom. ſpeaketh of this pſalme in many wordes: And
it is a pro­phecie touching the paſſion of Chriſt, and the horrible
pu­niſhments of the Iewiſh nation; and of the proper worſhip ap­pertaining to
the Church of the new Teſtament.A threefolde Meditation of this Pſalme. But it
is a three­fold Meditation vpon the paſſion of the Sonne of God: one of [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=15) inſtruction, an
other ſpiritual, & the third of example or imitatiō.

The inſtructiue meditation, is to read much and often the in­terpretations
which are extant in the Euangeliſts,The inſtruc­tiue meditatiō. touching the
paſsion of this Lord, and to confer them with the hiſtories of the Prophets;
that this conference of the hiſtories and prophecies might confirme in our
minds an aſſent, whereby we might em­brace this article. But whereas in
hiſtories wee muſt not onelie looke for the euentes, but much more the cauſes
of the euents muſt bee ſought for this meditation comprehendeth alſo a
con­ſideration of the cauſes, for which the Meſsias was made a ſacri­fice and
Redeemer. For it is needefull that the cauſes of ſo great a matter bee neither
ſlender nor fained, but great and weightie cauſes, which we ſhall thorowly
beholde when God ſhall be all in all. Now let vs diligently learne the
elements which are de­liuered in the worde, and let vs craue of God that hee
would go­uerne with his holy ſpirit, our purpoſe vndertaken touching the
greateſt matters.

And although ſome vnlearned perſons fondly diſpute, yt God ſeeing he is
omnipotent, could reſtore mankinde into his ancient liberty and dignity by
other maner of means: yet let vs ſo hold it determined yt god doth not any way
decline frō his righteouſnes which thing ſith ſo it is, God muſt not only
haue his place of mercy, but alſo of righteouſnes attributed vnto him,
touching his ſe­cret prouidence in the redeeming of mankind. As therefore the
immenſe mercy of God would not beholde the vniuerſall death and deſtruction of
our nature, according to that ſaying of Iere­my, Lament. 3. cap. 22. It is the
mercy of the Lorde that we are not conſumed: So the eternall and vnchangeable
righteouſneſſe of God required a ſatisfaction for the offence and for the
puniſh­ment. For the Law of God which is a rule of iuſtice in God, diſ­cerneth
good and euill, and bindeth the reaſonable creature to become conformable to
that rule, and denounceth horrible deſtruction vnto all thinges which are
contrary to that rule. Wherefore ſeeing the ranſome pacifieng the wrath of
God, and ſatisfieng the righteouſneſſe of God, could neither bee paide by
Angels nor by any other creature, becauſe the malice of ſinne is infinit, and
no creature is able to endure the wrath of God, it is [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=16) by Gods
wonderfull wiſedome decreed; that the ſecond perſon of the Godhead which is
called the word ſhould take vpon him the nature of man, and ſhould ſatisfie
the lawe of God for the fault and puniſhment in mankind: That is, that he,
which knew no ſinne, ſhould take vpon him to redeeme vs from ſinne, that by
him we might bee made the righteouſneſſe of God. In this decree, with
admiration whereof the very Angels ſtand amazed at, do ſhine the
righteouſneſſe and mercie of God: alſo the vn­ſpeakeble humility and loue of
God towardes vs. For there is no remiſsion of ſinnes graunted, without
recompence and ſatis­faction made. For, thinke, I pray you, howe great the
force of Gods wrath is againſt ſinne, when he could not be pacified with any
other ſacrifice, but by the paſsion and death of the immacu­late Lambe: And we
indeed by the greatneſſe of this remedie may eſteeme the greatneſſe of our
ſickneſſe and ſore. For, as Hippocrates ſaith,The ſaying of Hippocrates. vnto
extream diſeaſes we muſt lay extreame re­medies. Againe, how great mercy is
there in God not ſparing his only begotten ſonne, but giuing him for vs all,
and giuing vs with him all things alſo? The ſonne of God adorning and
amplifieng this mercy ſaith, Iohn 3. 16. So God loued the world that hee ſent
his onely begotten ſonne, that euery one which beleeueth in him ſhould not
periſh, The ſaying of Clement B. of Alexandria. but haue life euerlaſting.
Notably therefore ſaith Clement B. of Alexandria: Man is beloued of God: For,
how ſhould he not bee beloued, for whoſe ſake the onely begotten ſonne of God
was ſent from the boſome of his father?

What ſhall I ſay of the humility of the Sonne, turning vpon himſelfe the
reproches of other men, and for the loue he bare to­wards his church, for
whoſe ſake he put on the ſhape of a ſeruant and was by all meanes tempted,
like as we are tempted (except with ſinne onely) that he bring and repoſſeſſe
this his ſpouſeſſe into her ancient liberty.Pontanus. Pontanus telleth, that
in his time there was a cettaine husband-mans wife carried away by the Pirates
of Tuneta, and when her husband heard of this matter, hee leapt into the ſea,
and beſought the Pyrats with great deſire, that they would alſo carry him away
with his wife: they maruailing at the faith and mind of the man, tooke him
alſo with them, and when [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=16) they arriued at
Tuneta, and had openly ſhewed their prize, they declare vnto the King a rare
and memorable acte; who though he were a Prince barbarous and enemy to
Chriſtianity, yet mer­ueiling and perceiuing the vertue of the man, did ſet
him and his wife both at liberty, and commaunded them to bee regiſtred as of
the number of thoſe which were the guard of his perſon. So the ſonne of God
leaped from high and heauenly beatitude into the ſea of our miſchiefes and
miſeries, and of free became bond­man, of rich poore, that by his virtue and
power hee might ob­taine liberty for vs, and coopt vs into the ſociety of
heauenlie bleſsings: Let vs therefore be aſhamed of our pride and impa­tience,
wherein we diſdaine to ſuffer ſome ſorrowe to profit the Church thereby.

The ſpirituall meditation of the paſsion of the ſonne of God conſiſteth in
Feare and in Faith: The ſpiritual meditation of this Pſalme. Feare is to
tremble with ac­knowledgement of Gods wrath againſt ſinne, whoſe ſpeciall
teſtimony is the death of the ſonne of God. For although the threatnings added
vnto the Law, and horrible examples of pu­niſhments and feares of conſcience
doe ſhew the iudgements of God deſtroying contemptuous perſons: yet if we
looke well in­to this glaſſe of Chriſt crucified, wee ſhall ſee a far more
euident ſigne of Gods horrible wrath, For, ſeeing God could not be pa­cified
with the obedience of anie creature, but did decree that his Sonne ſhould be
the propitiator or attonement maker in his bloud, as S. Paule saith:

Aſſuredly me muſt confeſſe that great, earneſt, and vnſpeake­able is the wrath
of God againſt ſinne. And leaſt this acknow­ledgement of Gods wrath ſhould
leaue in our minds the ſtinges or darts of ſeruile feare, which is a ſorrowe
without faith, and a grudging againſt God, and a horrible fleeing from God, as
was in Saule and Iudas, let faith take roote in vs, whereby the hart is
ſtirred vp in the acknowledgement of Gods mercie promiſed for his ſonnes ſake.
For, ſeeing God hath not ſpared his only be­gotten ſonne, but giuen him for vs
all, ſurely it cannot otherwiſe be, but with him alſo he will giue vs all
thinges: Therefore ſpiri­tuall meditation, is not only to knowe the hiſtory
touching the [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=17) paſsion, and to
beleeue the ſame; but alſo to feele in our hart ſor­rowes and conſolations.

The exemplary or imitatiue meditation of Chriſtes paſsion is to follow the
humility and patience of Chriſt,The exempla­ry meditation. as S. Peter ſaith,
1 Pet 2 21. Chriſt ſuffered for vs leauing vs an example, that wee ſhould
follow his ſteps. And although none of vs in this our imbe­cility or weakenes
is able to follow the example of Chriſt, yet notwithſtanding let there bee
ſome lineaments agreeable in vs with this Image of imitating Chriſt.

### 2.1. ❧The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

#### 2.1.1.

Verse 1

Saue me O God, for the waters are come in euen vnto my ſoule.

Verse 2

I ſticke faſt in the deepe myre, where no grounde is: I am come into deepe
waters, ſo that the flouds runne o­uer mee.

Verse 3

I am weary of crying, my throate is drie: my ſight fai­leth me, for waiting ſo
long vpon my God.

SOme men do merueile whie the Euangelistes write,The firſt part of this Pſalme
is a praier to the 31. verſe. That the ſonne of God was grieued with ſorrow
and vexed in mind, when he was in the Or­chard: ſeeing it ſeemeth a thing
vnméete for a strong, graue and constant perſon, to weepe and waile and ware
pale with feare of death, as women vſe to do. For of Hercules addreſſing to
caſt himſelfe into a bur­ning fire, Seneca ſaith thus.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=17)

Quis ſic triumphans laet us in curruſtetit

Victor?

Senecas verſes of Hercules.

Quis illo gentibus vultu dedit

Leges tyrannus? quanta paxobitium tulit

Vultus petentis astra, non ignes erant,

Who did ſo ioufull victor triumph make?

What Tyrant with ſuch auſtere countenance?

Preſcribed lawes to Nations for their ſtate,

How great a peace toth' skies did him aduance,

No fiers they were.

But let vs knowe, that Christ vare upon him a greater burthen then Hercules
did: for he was not in anguiſh and ver­ation of minde for death onelie,Chriſt
bare vpon him the burthen of all our ſinnes. and for thinking vpon the
tormenting of his bodie, but he felt the wrath of God to bee turned vpon him
against mine, thine, and all mens ſinnes. This féeling of Gods wrath ſore
vexed and grieued his most sacred breast. For although euerie creature groneth
and mo­neth when it is burthened aboue the abilitie of bearing the ſame, yet
the greatneſſe of this burthen, expreſſed in Chriſt not onelie teares, but
also drops of water and blood mingled togither, which the Grecians call
[...]. Therfore omitting diſputations, let vs tremble with feare in
acknowledgement of Gods wrath againſt our ſinnes, and with the Prophet Iſay
let vs saie: Surely he hath borne our infirmities, and caried our ſorrowes,
&c. He was wounded for our tranſgreſſions, hee was broken for our iniquities,
the chaſtiſement of our peace was vpon him, and with his ſtripes we are
healed. ſay. 53. verſes 4, & 5.

#### 2.1.2.

Vers. 4

They that hate me without a cauſe are mo then the haires of may head: they
that are mine enemies and would de­ſtroy me guiltleſſe are mightie: I paide
them the things that I neuer tooke.

The former thrée verses contained a description of feares inwardlie in his
heart: This verse ſetteth forth his outward [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=18) enemies: As in
truth for moſt part alwayes inward feares, and outward fightings and hostile
inuaſions do méete togi­ther. But we are admoniſhed by this ſaying [They that
hate me without cauſe, &c.] that we ſuffer not as murtherers and theeues, &c.
but like vnto Chriſtians, &c. 1. Pet. 4\. 15, 16. That is, for the confeſſion
of the Goſpel. And there is a notable ar­dent affect in the particle [without
a cauſe:] As if he had ſaid, They hated me not only as one neither guilty of
ſin, nor hur­ting them, but alſo moſt feruentlie coueting to do them good,
yéelding with great humilitie, and taking vpon my ſelfe the puniſhments which
they temſelues deſerued, not ſéeking any reuenge, but rather with great ſorrow
deploring or be­wailing their wilfull obſtinacie and deſtruction: For this
great good will, and full of sorrow and lamentation for them, and earneſt
deſire to do them good, do I beare this hatred. Let Teachers, or Preachers
conſider this figure, and let them know that it is a common diſeaſe almoſt in
all mankinde to be vn­thankfull,Preachers of­times very, vn­thankfully delt
with of thoſe whom they haue beſt de­ſerued of. and let them for their great
good will and great be­nefits ſuffer with patience to haue euill will, hatred,
repro­ches, and other miſchiefes rendred them; like as all Hyſtories are full
of examples of vnthankfulneſſe: The Citie of Athens kept Miltiades in priſon
almoſt euen to his verie death: and baniſhed Ariſtides, Themiſtocles, and
Cimon, who had well de­serued of the ſame Citie. Finallie, there is an
infinite num­ber of ſuch,Examples of the heathen, moſt vertuous perſons. whose
examples maie admoniſh vs, that we for Gods cauſe be carefull to do well, not
for reward of man, and that we be not dismaid when mens indeuours and duties
are not anſwerable to our good will and deſeruings. And that particle must we
diligently conſider, where he ſaith: [I paide them the things that I neuer
tooke] That is, he hath peformed our duties: for euerie bond is cancelled and
made voide when the debt is paid: neither is it materiall whether he that
oweth the debt do pay it, or an other for him. Then this our Redee­mer tooke
quite away, or rather fruſtrated our obligation wherein wee were bound to the
curſe of the lawe and euerla­sting puniſhments, becauſe he performed for vs
the dutie by [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=18) vs owing to the
lawe, according to that ſaying, Galat. 3. 13. Chriſt being made a curſe for
vs, redeemed vs from the curſe of the lawe.

#### 2.1.3.

Vers. 5

God thou knoweſt ſimpleneſſe: and my faultes are not hid from thee.

How great humilitie was that, where Chriſt proſtrating himſelfe before his
father did beare his wrath, as if he had pol­luted himſelfe with the moſt
heinous ſins of all men? This is no Rhetoricall ſpéech nor vaine
amplification, but indeed ſuch was the ſorrow of Chriſt taking vpon him the
wrath of God, as if he himſelfe had committed theſe our ſinnes. But who can at
full declare the greatneſſe of this humilitie? Where the ſonne of God yéeldeth
himſelfe as a guiltie perſon in ſo great and grieuous ſinnes. This humilitie
doth Paule with excellent wordes thus deſcribe 2. Cor. 5. 21. Him that knewe
no ſinne made hee ſinne for vs, that by him we might bee made the
righteouſneſſe of God. Moſt trulie ſaid Ariſtotle: Iuſtitiam eſſe Heſpero &
Lucifero formoſiorem. Ariſtotles ſay­ing of iuſtice. Iuſtice is more
beautifull farre, then the morning or the euening ſtarre. For there is
no­thing better nor more excellent then the congruencie with the whole law,
which is a rule of righteouſneſſe in the will of God: Contrariwiſe, nothing is
more filthie then ſinne where­with God is horriblie angrie: For the Sonne of
God taketh and turneth vnto himſelfe this deformitie, and beſtoweth vp­on vs
his obedience, that by his meanes wee might be righ­teous before God. But the
excellencie of this purpoſe in God, can neither the eloquence of Angels, nor
of men, ſufficientlie diſclose or manifeſt vnto vs: I do therefore exhort the
reader, to conſider the ſame diligently, and to giue thankes vnto Chriſt Ieſus
the ſonne of God for his wonderfull humilitie and ſeruent love towards vs.

#### 2.1.4.

Vers. 6

Let not them that truſt in thee O Lord of hoſtes bee a­ſhamed for my cauſe:
let not thoſe that ſeeke thee be [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=19) confounded
through me, O Lord God of Iſrael.

Vers. 7

And why? for thy ſake haue I ſuffered reproofe: ſhame hath couered my face.

The ſonne of God in this verſe applyeth his ſacrifice vn­to the Church: for it
belongeth unto the Prieſts dutie, not onelie to offer ſome thing, but he muſt
haue therwith a mind to pray for him touching whom the ſacrifice is made, and
teſti­fying that for his ſake he performeth this obedience. There­fore that
theſe wordes in this place, and in the 17. cap. ver. 19, of S. Iohn, are
recited by Chriſt the ſon of God, we are faith­fullite to remember: I (ſaith
he) do ſanctifie my ſelfe for them, that euen they alſo might be ſanctified in
the truth. Againe, verſ. 9. I pray not for them onelie, but for all thoſe
which shall beleeue in me for my wordeſake. Here doth Chriſt openlie affirme
that his ſacrifice is effectuall, not onlie for his Apoſtles, but for all them
that embrace the goſpell. But this application muſt we firmelie take holde
vpon by faith, and wee muſt beleeue that the fruite of this ſacrifice
perteineth vnto vs, and that by meanes of this ſacrifice the wrath of god is
vnfainedlie pa­cified towardes vs, yea, that we are receiued into gods
fa­uour, heard and ſaued by him. Therefore ſaith Paule, Rom. 3. 34. We are
freely iuſtified by his grace through the redemption which is in Chriſt Ieſus,
whom God hath ordained our propitia­tor (or mercifull Sauiour,) by faith in
his blood. So (ſaith he) is he thy mercifull Sauiour, when thou beleeueſt that
by means of his ſonne Chriſtes death, god is pacified with thee. This doctrine
of application let vs for euer, and with ſpeciall care remember.

#### 2.1.5.

Vers. 8

I am become a ſtranger vnto my brethren: euen an ali­ant vnto my Mothers
children.

Vers. 9

For the zeale of thine houſe hath euen eaten mee: and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee are fallen vpon mee.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=19) The worde
zeale ſignifieth a diſpleaſure in vs driuing a­waie the iniurie from that
which we loue,The godlie zeale which Dauid had for the aduance­ment of Gods
glory. or ſtriuing that the perſon whom we loue be not taken awaie form vs: As
when Sampſons wife was taken from him, euen he a man of moſt mightie courage,
conceiued great ſorrowe and diſpleaſure, that for the loue he bare to his
wife, he woulde either plague and ſcourge the Philiſtians, or elſe haue her to
him home a­gaine. Alſo by this zeale are manie motions or rather paſſi­ons of
the minde intermixed in men like as Virgill ſaieth:Vrigils verſe. Scipios
zeale for his country Mixta eſt Inſania luctu, Euen with verie mourning mood,
is mixed motion mad or wood: And the Poet Ouid, with nota­ble wordes
deſcribeth this mixture of affections, where hee ſaith: Cor dolet atque it a
mixtus abundat amor. The heart of louers ſorroweth ſore, and loue abounds by
mixture more. So Scipio was in perſon preſent, at thrée battles where he ſaine
his country ouercome. Theſe ouerthrowes brought him both great ſorrow and
enflamed his anger to reſtore the ancient glorie of this countrie and to
ſubdue or repreſſe Annibal. This great affection or rather paſſion did Chriſt
feele in ſuffering aduerſitie,The ſeruent zeale of our ſauiour Chriſt for our
ſalua­tion. which he muſt and would needes beare to reſtore the glorie of his
eternall father, and to deliuer his Church, which he loued feruentlie, and
knew the would not be other­wiſe deliuered except the himſelfe ſhould be made
a ſacrifice for her. Therefore ſaith he in this 9. verſe: The zeale of thine
houſe hath euen eaten me: That is, conſumeth me; in that I haſard my life for
deliuerance of the congregation which I loue: and to vanquiſh and ouercome
thoſe reproches where­with God is agréeued, which bring me great ſorrow and
pro­uoke my anger against the balſphemous perſon.

#### 2.1.6.

Verse 10

I wept and chaſtened ſelfe with faſting; and that was turned to my reproofe.

Verse 11

I put on ſackloth alſo; and they ieſted vpon me.

Verese 12

They that ſit in the gate ſpeak againſt me: and the drunkards make ſongs vpon
me.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=20) Well it
is ſaid by Auguſtine: Bona conſcientia mihi mea cau­ſa opus eſt, ſedbona fama
opus eſt propter proximum. S. Auguſtines ſaying tou­ching a good conſcience &
a good name. I had néed in anie my cauſe to haue a good conſcience; but I haue
néede of a good name, by reaſon of my neighbor: For although a guilt­leſſe
conſcience maie well ſcorne lying reportes, ſo far as to the effect of the
cauſe apperteineth, becauſe the knoweth that Truth at length wil haue ye
victory ouer ſclanders: yet ye vertuous or noble mind is ſore grieued with the
lewd iudgments of men, and had rather ſuffer great puniſhments in the bo­die,
then to heare the poiſonfull backbitings ſtickled on with popular and
plawſible arguments. Wherefore, ſéeing Chriſt was tempted by all means as we
are tempted (except ſinne onelie) let vs not maruell that his moſt ſacred
breſt was vex­ed and diſquieted touching the peruerſitie of mens iudge­ments,
which are more fleeting then the flowing ſtreames: For looke whither fortune
leadeth, thither listeth the will of men. And the thing it ſelfe ſheweth that
enterpriſes are bal­lenced or ratified by the euents: For if anie man haue
once good ſucceſſe in anie thing,The blind af­fection of man, hee is by and by
counted a wiſe man: But if the world go awrie with him, then euerie man
reprehendeth him. But I omit to be here longer diſputing vpon a thing ſo
manifeſt: whereof wee ſee dailie example in our life time.

#### 2.1.7.

Verse 13

But Lord I make my praier vnto thee, in an acccep­table time.

Verse 14

Heare me O God in the multitude of thy mercy: euen in the truth of thy ſaluati
[...]n

Verse 15

Take me out of the mire, that I ſinke not, and let me be deliuered from them
that hate me, and out of the deepe waters.

Verse 16

Let not the water ſhould drowne me, neyther let the deepe ſwallowe me vp: and
let not the pit ſhut her mouth vpon me.

Verse 17

Heare me O Lorde, for thy louing kindneſſe is com­fortable: Turne thee vnto me
according to the mul­titude [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=20) of thy mercies.

Verse 18

And hide not thy face from thy ſeruaunt, for I am in trouble, O haſt thee, and
heare me.

Verse 19

Draw nigh vnto my ſoule and ſaue it, Oh deliuer mee becauſe of mine enemies.

Chriſt teacheth vs by his example, which is the gate, the tower,Chriſt is ye
gate and the tower altar of refuge for vs to runne vnto with har­ty and humble
praier. and altar for the godlie ones, whereunto they maie ſafelie runne for
refuge, when they are toſſed with diuers ſtormes in this life: For as Salomon
ſaith, Prouerbs cap. 18 10. The name of the Lord is a ſtrong tower, &c. That
is, true praier, whereunto the iuſt perſon fleeing is deliuered. So of­ten
therefore as all maner feares and dangers fall vpon vs, let vs not ſéeke after
vnlawfull remedies for our ſorrows, ut let vs craue of God inward conſolation
and deliuerance or mitigation of calamities according to Gods prouidence. He
that obeieth and ſubmitteth himſelfe to this rule, hee in verie deede ſhall
finde, by proofe that praier vnto God is not a vaine ſound, but obtaineth
greater thinges then anie man dare aſke or looke for. Ioſeph when he was in
priſon,Ioſephs praier. wrong­fullie caſt (vpon the ſiniſter ſuſpicion of
adultery) doubtleſſe aſked not of God in his praier the ſecond roome or place
in dignitie next to the king, neither gold nor riches; but onelie defence of
his life and good name, and the bringing of him againe into his Country, out
of which through the vngodlie and wicked practiſe of his brethren he was
baniſhed: But he obtained of God not onelie wiſhed benefits, but alſo thinges
greater then thoſe: for of a ſeruant, and in déede a captiue or priſoner, he
was made the chiefeſt counſellor and gouernour of the moſt flouriſhing
kingdome of Egypt; yea, and ſuc­coured his father Iacob with all houſhold, and
kept them in greateſt penurie and famine fo foode.Daniels Praier. So when
Daniell was caſt among the Lions, he deſired not of God to be a go­uernour of
countries, nor to haue deuine giftes of reuelati­ons touching greateſt
matters; and yet was hee ſo by God deliuered, that he afterwards ruled and
gouerned the whole [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=21) country of
Suſian, and enioyed the gift of Gods wiſedome reuealing hidden myſteries:
namelie the ſure and certain de­cription of time appointed for the comming of
the promiſed Redéemer, and the hiſtorie of the church or congregation of
Chriſt, and gouernements of kingdoms euen vnto the verie end of the world.

Let theſe examples of Gods promiſes ſtir vs vp vnto prai­er, and let not the
cogitation of our vnworthines diſcourage vs: Séeing Daniel and all the holie
ones euen from the ve­rie beginning of the worlde made their praiers vnto God,
not in confidence of their owne worthineſſe, but in the con­fidence of the
mercie promiſed for Chriſtes ſake; and for this Lordes ſake (who ſaith, Iohn
16. 23. Verely, verely I ſay vnto you, whatſoeuer you ſhall aske my father in
my name hee will giue it you) they are heard, and obtaine their petitions.

For ſo Daniel praieth, cap 9. 17 Wee poure out our prayers before thee, not in
our righteouſneſſe, but in thy manifold mer­cies, heare vs for the Lords ſake.
And the ſame forme of praier is in the 17. verſe of this pſalme before
recited: Heare me O Lorde, for thy louing kindneſſe is comfortable; according
to the multitude of thy mercies, turne thee vnto me. Let vs therefore ſet
against out vnworthineſſe the preceptes and promiſes of God: Thou O God haſt
commanded praier to bee made, and wilt of vs in this maner be worſhipped and
honoured: I acknowledge then that I am bound to obay thy commande­ment.It is
Gods com­mandement and will that we ſhould pray vnto him, and his promiſe is
aſſured per­formance. For although I am vnworthie, yet thy commande­ment and
thy will is worthie, whereunto I yeeld; thy promi­ſes worthie whereunto I
agree, and repoſe my full truſt in the ſame. Wherfore I make my praier vnto
thee, not truſting in my worthineſſe, but in the worthineſſe of the name of
thy ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, and of God the father which commandeſt and promiſeſt
performance of that which I pray for.

#### 2.1.8.

Vers. 20

Though haſt knowne my reproofe, my ſhame, and my diſhonour, mine aduerſaries
are all in thy fight.

Vers. 21

Thy rebuke hath broken my heart, I am full of hea­uineſſe: [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=21) I looked for
ſome to haue pitie on mee, but there was no man, neither found I anie to
comfort me.

Vers. 22

They gaue mee gall to eate, and when I was thirſtie, they gaue me vinegar to
drinke.

He addeth vnto his prayer a complaint of the falſehoode of his friends, and
euill reioycing which his enemies haue at his calamities. Seeing then that
there is likelie familiaritie betwéene the head and the members, let vs not
maruell if the ſame thing chance vnto the Church: for the in her calamities is
both forſaken of her friends, and cruellie aſſaulted of her enemies. Like as
certaine yeares agone we haue ſéene (not without great ſorrow) manie examples
thereof. But ad­mit it be ſo, that we ſpeake not of the Church: ſhall I ſay
how much Dauids prophecie (here deſcribing the laſt act of Chriſts paſſion)
liketh me. For the Euangeliſt Saint Iohn declareth,The laſt act of Chriſts
paſſion Cap. 19. verſes 29. 30. How Chriſt the ſonne of God hanging vpon the
Croſſe, when he had firſt taſted the Vinegar giuen him by the Souldiours,
cried out, It is finiſhed; and bowing his head, gaue vp the ſpirit. This
conſonancie of this prophecie which Dauid hath, and that Hyſtorie of ſaint
Iohns Goſpell maie confirme vs againſt the venemous doubting which ſome haue
touching the certainite of the doctrine from God deli­uered vs. For ſéeing the
euent anſwereth not in breadth, but in ſtreitneſſe vnto the predictions or
foretellings of the Pro­phets: it is not to be doubted, that the whole
doctrine of the Prophets is true, and procéeding from God.

#### 2.1.9.

Vers. 23

Let their table bee made a ſnare to take themſelues withall: and let the
things that ſhould haue beene for their wealth, be vnto them an occaſion of
falling.

Vers. 24

Let their eies bee blinded that they ſee nor: and euer bow downe their backes.

Vers. 25

Powre out thine indignation vpon them: and let thy wrathfull diſpleaſure take
holde of them.

Vers. 26

Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwelt in [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=22) their tents.

Vers. 27

For they perſecute him whom thou haſt ſmitten: and they  [...]alke howe they
may vexe him, whom thou haſt wounded.

Vers. 28

Let them fall from one wickedneſſe vnto another: and not come into thy
righteouſnes.

Vers. 29

Let them be wiped out of the booke of the liuing: and not be written among the
righteous.

Vers. 30

As for me when I am poore and in heauines: thy helpe O God ſhall lift me vp.

HItherto,The 2. part of this Pſalme containing a curſe againſt the enemies of
Chriſt the firſt part of the Pſalme, (namelie a prayer full of moſt ſorrowfull
affections) is expounded: Nowe followeth the ſecond part, wherein Chriſt
reckoneth vp a­gainſt the blaſphemous Iewes dire and grieuous matters: When we
read this curſing, let vs tremble with feare in all our bodie, and let vs
ſcare the wrath of God which is bent a­gainst the contempt of the Goſpell:
for, If God ſpare not the naturall branches, how much leſſe will he ſpare the
wilde bran­ches? Rom. 11\. 20. 24. 1 And the firſt degrée of puniſhments for
deſpiſing the Goſpel is furie and blindnes,Fiue degrees of puniſhmēts
inflicted vpon the Iewes and wherefore. which wickedly corrupteth the natiue
meaning of the worde. The impuden­cie and ſawcineſſe of the Iewes of late
dayes is knowne in peruerting the ſayings of the Prophets: As when they
inter­pret the 9. ca. of Iſay, they imagine that the Prophet ſpeaketh there of
Ezechias king of Iuda. With the ſame face do they bragginglie ſtriue that the
ſame Prophet in the 53 cap. prea­cheth not of the Meſſias or Sauiour that was
to come, but of the Iewiſh people. So where they buſie themſelues vpon the
ninth chapter of Daniel, then peruert with their horrible ignorance and
impietie, the race of the kings of the Perſi­ans, ſo as by all meanes they do
but trifle out the prophecie of Daniel. Finallie, the vniuerſall writing of
the Pro­phets, which was ſometime a table furniſhed for this people with moſt
wholeſome meates, is now by their blaſphemies no other thing but a ſnare and
offence of falling, as in this [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=22) 23\. verſe is
ſaid. 2 The ſecond degree of puniſhment, is perpetuall thraldome, and moſt
miſerable; for although now and then they haue put in practiſe with warres to
recouer their Countrey, and restore their Church and policie, yet by Gods
prouidence being ouerthrowne, they acknowledged themſelues but to rol the
ſtone with Syſiphus, & to play at the dice vpon a broken boord, that is, to be
vtterly conſumed with vaine contention. 3 The third degree is the wrath of God
which they cannot by anie meanes eſcape. 4 The fourth de­gree, was the moſt
ſorrowfull deſtruction of their gouerne­ment, and of their Temple. 5 The fifth
degree is, that ſins are puniſhed with ſinnes: for they are euerie day more
then other become like mad dogs, howling, ſtirring vp and hea­ping vp ſinnes
and offences. 6 The ſixt and laſt degree, is the depriuing of them of the
life, and righteouſneſſe euerla­ſting. For according to that ſaying of ſaint
Iohn: He that beleeueth not in the Sonne hath not life, but the wrath of God
reſteth vpon him. This plague O God vouchſafe thou to turn quite away from vs.

#### 2.1.10.

Vers. 31

I will praiſe the name of God with a ſong: and magni­fie it with thanksgiuing.

Vers. 32

This alſo ſhall pleaſe the Lord better: then a bullocke that hath hornes and
hooffes.

THe thirde and laſt part of this Pſalme is a thankeſgi­uing, which inſtructeth
the reader touching the abroga­tion of Moſes ceremonies: The Prophet ſaith
here,The 3. and laſt part of this Pſalme contai­ning a thanks­giuing by
Da­uid, or rather by Chriſt, and the maner thereof in 3. degrees. Hee will not
offer vnto God the blood of Bulles and Calues, but the true ſignification of
thankfulnes, wherewith God is more pleaſed and delighted, then with the
Ceremonies of Leueticall ſacrifices. Well do the Lawiers ſay: Ceſſante ratione
legis, ceſſareipſam legem. When the reaſon or cauſe of the lawe ceaſſeth, then
alſo ceaſſeth the verie law it ſelfe. And the ſpeciall reaſon or cauſe for
which the Lord God ordained theſe ceremonies, was that they ſhould be tipes or
figures of one onelie ſacrifice taking [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=23) away the ſinnes
of the world. When this ſacrifice was once offered, then by good right and
reaſon ceaſed the Leuiticall ſacrifice. But what time the Leueticall
prieſthood flouriſhed, the ſlaughter and ſacrificing of beaſts without faith
and mo­rall obedience pleaſed not God anie thing at all. For it is not inough
to do the workes by God commanded, except they be done in ſuch order, as the
wiſedome of God hath ordained. Nowe then it appeareth plainlie, that Faith is
the founda­tion of all worſhippings, according to that ſaying of ſaint Paule,
Rom. 14. 23. Whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, 2 The ſecond and next degree
is morall obedience, which containeth loue and other vertnes, according to the
commaundements 3 The third degree is the vſe of ceremonies, which (as I ſaid)
pleaſe not God, except there be firſt a foundation laid, that is, a Pediator
acknowledged, and that remiſſion of ſinnes bee had for his ſake,
reconciliation to God, and morall obedience begun anew in the heart of man.
This order of workes doe manie Sermons if the prophets lay open vnto vs: As
Iſay ſaieth, Cap. 1. 11. I will none of your burnt offerings, &c. But rather,
verſ. 17. Seeke ye iudgement and relieue the oppreſſed, &c. Againe, the ſame
Iſay in the 58. cap. 7. Breake thy breade vnto the hungrie, &c. And the
prophet Micheas, cap. 6. 7. Will the Lord be pleaſed with thouſands of Rammes,
&c? Hee hath ſhewed thee O man what is good, and what the Lorde re­quireth of
thee, ſurelie to doe iuſtly, and to loue mercie, and to humble thy ſelfe to
walke with thy God, ver. 8\. And the Prophet Zacharias ſayth, cap. 7\. 6. When
yee did eate, and when yee did drinke, did yee not eate for your ſelues, and
drinke for your ſelves? Thus ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, execute true
iudge­ment, and ſhewe mercie and compaſſion euerie man to his bro­ther,
oppreſſe not the widow nor the fatherleſſe, the ſtranger, nor the poore, and
let none of you imagine euill againſt his brother in your heart, verſes, 9.
and 10, &c.

#### 2.1.11.

Vers. 33

The humble ſhall ſee this and bee glad: ſeeke ye after God and your ſoule
ſhall liue.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=23) The
chiefe bleſſings which the reaſonable or ſenſible crea­ture hath, are Wiſdome,
righteouſneſſe, and ioie in God. Theſe bleſſings being loſt by Adams
tranſgreſſion,The bleſſings loſt by Adam are in and by Chriſt reſto­red vnto
vs. Chriſt againe by his paſſion and reſurrection hath reſtored vnto vs: For
he died for our ſinnes and roſe againe for our righteouſ­neſſe, that is,
through his obedience which he performed in ſuffring his death he deliuered
the church from euils; name­ly from Gods wrath, the curſe of the lawe, ſinne,
euerlaſting death, and the tyrannie of the deuill. But if he had remained
ſtill in death, and in the graue, (which was a thing impoſſi­ble) he had not
reſtored thoſe bleſſings vnto vs, which are op­poſed and ſet againſt moſt
grieuous euils. To the end ther­fore, that deliuerance ſhould not be onelie
the remoouing of euill from vs, but alſo the placing of benefits for vs: he
roſe againe from death the third daie, and making his glorious triumph, and
beginning his euerlaſting kingdome in vs, he reſtoreth vs vnto righteouſneſſe
and life euerlaſting: as Da­niel in the 9. cap. 24. verſe ſaith, Seuenty weeks
are determined vpon thy people, and vpon thy holy citie, to finiſh the
wicked­neſſe, to ſeale vp the ſinnes, to reconcile the iniquitie, and to bring
in euerlaſting righteouſneſſe, &c. But although this de­ſtinction of the
effects of the paſſion and reſurrection of Chriſt ſeeme vaine vnto manie men:
yet notwithſtanding ſeeing the Apoſtle S. Paule ſo often ſpeaketh hereof, (and
ſpeciallie in the 3. cap. Philippians 10. verſe. That I may knowe him and the
vertue of his reſurrection, and the fellowſhip of his afflictions and be made
conformable vnto his death, &c.) let vs without feare of cauilling follow the
ſpeech or ſaying of Paule, and let vs know that we muſt conſider both the
merit and efficacie of Chriſt crucified, and riſen from death to life: Like as
Paul in 5. Rom. 6. ioyneth together grace, and the gift by grace. And S: Iohn
Baptiſt ſaith, 1. cap. verſe 17. by Chriſt came grace and truth. Theſe are not
ſpoken to corrupt the article of iuſti­fication, wherein we diſcerne wiſelie
imputation from gifts, and expreſlie do affirme that we haue remiſſion of
ſinnes and reconciliation with God, and imputation of righteouſneſſe [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=24) for the onelie
obedience and merit of Chriſt: but ſo that the full and whole benefit of
Chriſt be not thereby obſcured: which is not onelie imputation, but alſo a
reuiuing and raiſing a­gaine from death to life and glorie euerlaſting. To be
briefe: it is one thing to ſpeake of the article of iuſtification, and an
other thing to ſpeake of the whole kingdome of Chriſt,Gratiae priuati­ur &
poſitiuae. which containeth (as the ancients do ſpeake) graces priuatiue and
poſitiue; that is, not onelie deliuerances from euils, but alſo reſtorings
vnto or giftes of euerlaſting bleſſinges. But ſo often as wee diſpute of theſe
matters, in Churches and Schooles, let vs follow Paules rule which biddeth vs,
2. Tim. 2. 15. To deuide the word of truth aright: and not indirectlie to
confuſe or ſeparate the members from the bodie againſt the Analogie of the
faith, and againſt the ſimple and natiue meaning of euerie article. The
Article of iuſtification ad­mitteth no copulatiue,The diuers E­pithites of our
iuſtification by Chriſt. becauſe of the excluſiues ſo often re­peated: Freely,
without workes, without law, in the ſeede, not in the ſeeds: And the Article
touching the kingdom of Chriſt cannot be expounded without coupling together
grace, and the gifte by grace: neither doe theſe ſtriue betweene them­ſelues,
becauſe when wee ſeeke for conſolation in feares of conſcience, we do not
diſpute of giftes, but we are troubled touching remiſſion of ſinnes, and
reconciliation with God, which is onelie obtained by faith for Chriſtes ſake,
whome in his bloudſhedding, God hath ordained our mercifull re­deemer and
Sauiour. This is not the wiſedome of vaine and ſecure minde, but of the godlie
ones, who are mortified and quickened, yea brought downe into hell, and againe
are plucked as it were out of the iawes of hell.

#### 2.1.12.

Verse 34

For the Lord heareth the poore, and deſpiſeth not his priſoners.

Verse 35

Let heauen and earth praiſe him; the ſea and all that moueth therein.

Verse 36

For God will ſaue Syon, and build the cities of Iuda; that men may dwell there
and haue it in poſſeſsion.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=24)

Verse 37

The poſterity alſo of his ſeruants ſhall inherit it; and they that loue his
name ſhall dwel therein.

Theſe laſt verſes in this Pſalme need no long decalrati­on, or
interpretation:A concluſion. Exhortation, for they exhort euerie creature to
the aduauncing of the honour of God, and of his ſonne our Lord Ieſuſ Chriſt:
and they promiſe ſtabilitie vnto the Church, according to that ſaying Matth.
16. 18. The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her: Wherefore ſith it
needeth not to make long commentaries vpon matters ſo euident; I con­clude the
expoſition of this Pſalme; And I beſeech God to ſeale in the hartes of manie
men the natiue meaning of the articles of the Chriſtian faith, Amen.

## 3\. To him that excelleth.  
¶ A Pſalme of Dauid: to put him in re­memberance for his de­liuerance.

‘Deus in adiut orium meum intende.’

The Argument.

SHort indeede is this Song, The effects of this Pſalme are touching faith, and
the force thereof mightily ſha­ken by three meanes. but long is the effectuall
concluſion thereof; For it teacheth that by three Engins the walles of Faith
are mightely ſhaken, whereof, the firſt is greatneſſe of temptation and
calamities. The ſecond is multitude or concourſe of tempeſts or ſtormes: and
the third is the long continuance of theſe. For, whom doth not greatneſſe
ouercome, him the ſame multitude of calamities do weaken and bring low; but
whome [[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=25)
neither of theſe twaine doe ouermaſter, yet euen him doth long looking for
helpe vtterly diſcourage. Theſe all may be plainely ſeene in Iob, as it were
in a looking glaſſe: when worde was brought to this moſt holy man Iob of the
loſſe of all his ſubſtance and death of his children, whom his houſe ſlew when
it fell vpon them: Hee was ſo far from impatience, not ſhewing any token
thereof, that hee euen as it were praiſed God with a notable verſe ſaying,
cap. 1 verſe 21. If wee haue receiued good thinges of the handes of the Lord,
why ſhould we not alſo ſuffer euill thinges? The Lord hath giuen, Iobs
patience in his calami­ties. the Lord hath taken away, as it hath pleaſed the
Lorde, ſo is it come to paſſe: bleſſed therefore be the name of the Lord. But
this ſo holy man when hee could not bee remooued from his purpoſe with
greatneſſe of calamities, at the verie laſt of all, being vanquiſhed and ſore
broken with concourſe of aduer­ſities and with the long continuance thereof,
cryed out cap. 3. ver. 3. Let the day periſh wherein I was borne, and the
night, when it was ſaid, there is a man child conceiued, &c. He therfore that
ſtandeth let him take heed he fall not. For the diuell knoweth a thouſand
ſleights wherewith the wals and towers of faith (except they be by God
defended) may eaſilie be raced and ouerthrowne. And ſeeing there is much
danger in delay: This Pſalme three times rehearſeth a praier vnto God to
haſten his helping hand. verſe 1. Hast thee O God, &c. Haſt to helpe me O
Lord, v. 6. Thou art my helper and my redeemer (O Lord) make no long tarrying.
For al­thought it is not in our power to preſcribe God anie certaine meane or
certaine time of deliuerance: yet after a ſort, we muſt craue, that God woulde
euen at the very firſt inſtant (according to his prouidence) deliuer his
church, and the godly ones which are exerciſed in greateſt miſeries: This
indeed is not only to aske and ſeeke, but alſo to knocke: Or as the lawyers
vſe to ſay, to cite God peremptorily: And ſuch a ſearching for finding, and
knocking for opening, according to that moſt ſweet ſaying cea­ſeth to our moſt
wiſhful deſires: Aske and ye ſhal haue ſeeke and ye ſhall find, Matth. 7. 7. 8
knocke and it ſhall be opened vnto you. Thus much for the Argument of this
Pſalme.

### 3.1. [[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=25)
❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

#### 3.1.1.

Vers. 1

Haſte thee O God to deliuer mee: make haſt to helpe me, O God.

Vers. 2

Let them be aſhamed and confounded that ſeeke after my ſoule: let them bee
turned backeward and put to confuſion that wiſh me euill.

Vers. 3

Let them (for their reward) be ſoone brought to ſhame: that crie ouer me,
there, there.

LIke as when we take an oath (which is a kinde of taking God to witneſſe in
calling vpon him) we craue that God woulde bee witneſſe of our pro­miſe,The
effect of an oath. and a iuſt Iudge in puniſhing the partie which breaketh
promiſe: So in euerie our praier, wee muſt craue of God, that he would
confirme the worke that he hath begun in vs:The effect of prayer. and that hee
would deſtroy the workes of the diuell and his inſtruments: As when we recite
theſe wordes, (Hallowed be thy name) we do not onelie craue that the glo­rie
of God maie bee made more excellent, both by the true doctrine, and by good
examples: but that alſo all wicked opi­nions in Religion, and lewde examples
in life, (by reaſon wherof the name of God amongſt ye nations is blaſphemed)
might euerie where be vtterlie extinguiſhed. So in like ma­ner Dauid craueth
helpe and defence in a good cauſe, and the ſubuerſion of his malicious cruell
enemies;Dauid praieth for defence frō God in a good cauſe, and for the
deſtruction of his enemies. whoſe diueliſh malice and euill cuſtome in working
miſchiefe was ſuch, that both their will was groedilie deſirous of hurting,
their tongue earneſtlie giuen to manifeſt the ſame, and their hands nights and
dayes prepared to ſhed the blood of the god­lie [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=26) lie ones.
Againſt theſe poyſonfull Aſpes prayeth Dauid here, for their euill ſucceſſe of
their enterpriſes, and (except they will bee ſpéedilie conuerted) for their
vniuerſall deſtruction. So let vs craue of God,We muſt pray to God to cut off
the Pope and Turke, the 2 ſtrong arms of Antichriſt. that hee would with his
mightie hand, reſtrain or vtterlie cut off both Pope and Turke the two ſtrong
armes of Antichriſt; and that he would not long de­ferre the execution of his
moſt iust iudgement, but that hee would make haſte to puniſh the enemie, for
the glorie of his names ſake.

#### 3.1.2.

Vers. 4

But let all thoſe that ſeeke thee bee ioyfull and glad in thee: and let all
ſuch as delight in thy ſaluation, ſay al­way, the Lord be praiſed.

Vers. 5

As for me I am poore and in miſerie: haſte thee vnto me, O God.

Vers. 6

Thou art my helper and my redeemer: Lord make no long tarrying.

Vnto the godlie ones which exerciſe faith in their dailic calamities and
dangers, theſe ſpeeches of Dauid are not ob­ſcure: [I am poore and in
miſerie:] That is, deſtitute of mans helpe and defences: Thou therefore, OGod,
bee my helper and deliuerer, and that indeed without tarrying helpe and ſaue
me, leaſt I perish or be ouercome of the cruell enemie: for thou knoweſt thine
owne creature, out infirmitie is knowne vnto thee. Thou knoweſt alſo that, the
Diuell goeth about and ſeeketh whom he may deuour and deſtroy, 2. Pet. 5\. 8.
Wherefore ſeeing thou art a faithfull God, do not thou ſuf­fer vs to be
tempted aboue our ſtrenght but giue with temp­tation an end, that me may be
able to endure that thou laieſt vpon vs.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=26)

## 4\. A Pſalme of Dauid.

‘In te Domine ſperaui, &c.’

The Argument.

ALthough certaine perſons too much louers of themſelues,A debaſing of mans
ſelf con­ceit in his own nature. do imagine in their mindes that they excell
in wiſdome and ſtrength the firſt flower of mankinde: yet notwithſtanding the
thing it ſelfe ſheweth that the nature of man as it were barren, is at this
day more weake and of leſſe ſtrength then it was in the beginning. For moſt
trulie is it ſaide of the learned ones: In prima eatate mundi regnaſſe
rationem gubernatricem, & inuentricem optimarum artium. Deinde ſucceſsiſſe
aetatem bella­tricem, in qua, armis imperia conſtituta ſunt, & quatuor
Monar­chiae orbem terrarum rexerunt. A deſcription of the 3. ages of the
world. In hac vero Senecta mundi domi­nars. That is: In the firſt age of the
world Reaſon ruled as go­uerneſſe and inuenter of good artes. After that
ſucceeded the warlike age, wherein by force of armes kingdomes were ordai­ned,
and the foure Monarchies ruled and gouerned al the world. But now in this olde
age of the worlde, concupiſcence reigneth: for, nature of man being now made
weaker, neither ſtudieth for wiſdome as they did of olde, neither taken vpon
her thoſe toy­ling labours of warfarre, which ſtrong men did in times paſt,
but as it were weakned in the ſinewes, ſeeketh after delites and plea­ſures.
This infirmitie of nature in vs doth the diuell more out­ragiouſlie aſſault at
this day,The diuel ſtirs vp tyrants and heritikes in the laſt olde age of the
world most wickedly weakning the ſtate thereof. and as it were leaning vpon a
ben­ding wall ſtirres vp Heretikes and tyrants, partlie with craft or guile,
and partlie with manifeſt violence to ouerthrow and vt­terlie deſtroy all the
holie ones, yea, and extinguiſh the name of Chriſt: whom this foreſaid deadly
enemie of ours well know­eth ſhall hereafter not long to come and iudge all
people, and [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=27) giue vnto his
Congregation euerlaſting bleſſings, and ſhall caſt away theſe diuels with all
the wicked ones into eternall deſtruc­tion and torments. Therefore now greater
and more difficult is our neceſſitie & cauſe, then euer it was at any time in
the church, becauſe wee haue againſt vs the skem and ende of the worlde: that
ſame extreame outrage of the Pope, and of the Turke: who (as D. Martin Luther
ſayeth) ſeeke to deuour vs. And I pray you how many trouble the Church now in
her olde age, with mouing vnneceſſarie or needleſſe diſputations, and like
peeuiſh olde women dauncing out of order ſtirre vp a great duſt, as the Greeke
Prouerbe ſaith. And others like wawling Cats running away out of this life
leaue an euill ſmell behind them. This maſſe of miſchiefes and miſeries, Dauid
foreſeeing to come in his time, craueth moſt feruentlie of God, that hee would
not forſake nor caſt away his Church in her extreame olde age, ſo fowly
de­formed: but that he would ſuccour and defende her againſt the Diuell, who
in the ende of his tyrannie rageth more cruelly. See­ing then Dauid foreſeeing
future ſtormes and tempeſtes in his time, made ſuch prayers for the ſhip which
bare the Church, of what minde behooueth it vs nowe at length to bee, who are
toſſed with the verie ſame ſtormes. But the verie ſame thing happeneth vnto vs
which did to the Apoſtles, which neither vn­derſtoode the greatneſſe of
Chriſtes ſorrowes, nor are yet great­lie grieued in minde therewith: no rather
are wee ouercome with heauie ſleepe, as the Apoſtles were. Let vs therefore
cor­rect this ſecuritie and negligence, and let vs craue of God, that hee
would helpe, gouerne and ſtrengthen vs, leaſt either our careleſſe mindes fall
headlong into Epicureal contempt of God, or elſe being oppreſſed with the
burthen of calamities bee vtter­lie deſtroyed with deſperation, like as Ely,
Saule, and innume­rable others were.

### 4.1. [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=27)
❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

#### 4.1.1.

Verse 1

In thee O I orde haue I put my truſt; let me neuer bee put to confuſion: but
rid me and deliuer me in thy righ­teouſneſſe; encline thine eare vnto me and
ſaue me.

WHere as before in the II. Pſalme verſe 6. and 8.Two effects of this Pſalme.
theſe words are ſufficientlie expounded, I wil now onelie admoniſh the reader
touching the little worde [righteouſneſſe] which is vsed in ſome places
actiuelie, in other ſome places paſ­ſiuelie. The righteouſneſſe of God
manifeſ­ted in the lawe, is a will wherewith God preſcribeth vs to do thoſe
things which are right,The righteouſ­nes of God in the law. and after a
certaine gladneſſe of his reſteth well pleaſed with thinges rightlie done: and
will not haue contrarie thinges to be done by anie, but with an vnfeined
diſpleaſure repelleth and deſtroieth them: Tou­ching this righteouſneſſe▪ It
is ſaide in the 5 Pſalme verse 4. For thou art the God that haſt no pleaſure
in wickedneſse: nei­ther ſhall any euill dwell with thee▪ verſe 5. Such as bee
fooliſh ſhall not ſtande in thy ſight, for thou hateſt all them that worke
vanitie. verſe 6. Thou ſhalt deſtroy them that ſpeake leaſing, the Lord will
abhor both the bloudthirſty and deceiptful man.

The righteouſneſſe of God manifeſted without the Lawe,His righteouſ­nes in ye
goſpel. touching which both the Law and the prophets do beare wit­neſſe,
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=28) is the
frée remiſſion of ſinnes, reconciliation with God, and obtaining unto life
euerlaſting for Chriſtes ſake the mediator. He therefore craueth in this place
to be deli­uered in the righteouſneſſe of God, not indeed legall and ac­tiue,
but euangelicall and paſſiue, as if he ſaide: Though I maie ſurelie perſwade
my ſelfe that I am righteous, not in­deede by my owne worthineſſe, but thy
righteouſnes, that is for thy ſonnes ſake imputed vnto me: I alſo craue this
addi­tion, namely deliuerance and glorification according to the prouidence of
thy wiſedome; As it is ſaide, Rom. 8. 30. For whome he hath iuſtified, them
alſo hath he glorified.

That this, interpretation is neither fained, nor forged, the wordes of D.
Martin Luther vpon the 42. cap. of Geneſis doe witneſſe.D. Martin Lu­thers
ſaying vp­on the firſt verſe of this Pſalme. In times paſt (ſaieth he) when it
behooued me to reade and praie that part of the 71. Pſalme, verſe 1. (Rid mee
and deliuer me in thy righteouſneſſe) I trembled for feare in all the parts of
my bodie, and with all my whole heart I be­teſted that ſaying (Deliuer me not
thought I) in thy righteouſ­neſſe wherein thou art righteous actiuely:
Therefore paſsiuelie muſt I embrace and take holde of thy righteouſneſſe
wherewith I am juſtified. And a little after that hee ſaieth, In times paſt
when I came to thoſe propoſitions, (the righteouſneſſe of God, the worke of
God, thy worke, thy righteouſneſſe) they found me worke inough to deale
withall. Which if they be vnderſtood ac­tiuely, they are death, but paſsiuely
vnderſtoode, they are life and ſaluation.

#### 4.1.2.

Verse 2

Be thou my ſtrong holde, wherunto I may alway reſort: thou haſt promiſed to
helpe me, for thou art my houſe of defence and my caſtle.

Verse 3

Deliuer me (O my God) out of the hand of the vngod­lie, out of the hande of
the vnrighteous and cruell man.

All men are careleſſe in their doings ſo long as they haue a refuge and humane
ſuccours or defences: But when theſe [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=28) are once loſt,
verie manie are drowned in deſperation, and crie out with that Tyrant,
Deſertus ab amicis miſer pereo: Tyrants truſ­ting in mans helpe are
deſ­perately de­ceiued. Wretch that I am, forſaken of friend, I wretchedly
nowe my life do ende. But amongſt theſe rockes is faith ſafelie caried and
with great care ſhunneth both of them, namelie, ſecurity and deſperation. And
neither is ſhe puft vp or ſwelling proudlie in proſperitie, neither is the
diſcouraged in aduerſitie, but howſoeuer fortune fare with her, the beleeueth
ſhe hath God for her mercifull defender and deliuerer, and craueth of God
helpe and gouernement, and findeth by triall that God doth helpe her according
to his promiſes. Dauid had a moſt large kingdome and dominion furniſhed with
wealth, weapons for warre, and hoaſtes of men: but hee repoſeth not anie thing
at all the hope of his helpe in theſe defences: After­wardes, when hee was
baniſhed out of his kingdome hee was not diſcouraged in minde, but ſuccoureth
himſelfe with this conſolation. Pſalme 27. verſe 12. My father and my mother
haue forſaken me, but the Lord hath taken me vp. Theſe matters without ſome
vſe or exerciſe in them cannot be vn­derſtood. Therefore is the Church ſore
charged and burde­ned with the croſſe that faith maie,The Church ſore charged
and burdened with the croſſe in exerciſes of the croſſe, encreaſe and be
ſtronger, which in idleneſſe and pleaſures is vtterlie extinguiſht. But Dauid
here beſeecheth God to de­fend him not onelie againſt the violence of his
enemies, but alſo againſt the falſhoode of ſuch as he tooke to be his friends.
For a great deale more doe the domeſticall friendes hurt a man then outward
enemies do.

#### 4.1.3.

Verse 4

For thou O Lord, art the thing that I looke for, thou art my hope euen from my
youth.

Verse 5

Through thee haue I beene holden vp euer ſince I was borne: thou art he that
tooke me out of my mo­thers wombe, my prayſe ſhall be alwaies of thee.

He annexeth unto the propoſition thrée reaſons, whereof the firſt is deriued
from Gods promiſe, the ſecond from a former benefit, and the third from the
cauſe finall. No doubt [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=29) of it faith
beareth her ſelfe correlatiuelie to the promiſe of God: So often then as
mention is made of faith or hope, let vs call to minde the promiſe giuen from
God: The ſame then ſignifieth this verſe, Thou Lorde art my hope, and thou
Lord haſt promiſed me helpe and other neceſſarie benefits. So as afterwardes
hee calleth to minde the benefites done him before time, by reaſon whereof he
conceiueth aſſured hope of deliuerances in time to come. Thou (ſaith he) haſt
brought me out of my mothers wombe, and haſt beſtowed vpon mee of thy moſt
bountifull liberalitie manie other benefits. O. vouchſafe therefore to finiſh
and perfect vp the web of thy good will and working goodneſſe, and doe thou
neuer forſake me. Laſt of all Icraue and looke from thee defence againſt the
violence and guilefull dealings of mine enemies: not to the ende that I maie
liue all at pleaſure, but that I maie re­uerentlie honour thee in thy
benefits, and be a witness of thy true doctrine.

#### 4.1.4.

Verse 6

I am become as it were a monſter vnto many: but my ſure truſt is in thee.

Verse 7

O let my mouth bee filled with thy praiſe (that I may ſing of thy glory) and
honour all the day long.

He addeth vnto his praier an ardent affect of his ſtate. For like as S. Paule
ſaith. 1. Cor. 4. 9; The Apoſtles are counted for gazing ſtockes in the world:
So Eſayas the Prophet in his 8. cap. 18. verſe crieth out, Beholde, I and my
children whome the Lord hath giuen me, are as ſignes and as wonders in
Iſraell. Theſe complaintes do ſignifie how difficult and hard a thing it is
for vs to ſuffer the vnrighteous iudgementes of the world: for ſome doe
condemne vs of hereſie, other obiect vnto vs the crime Laeſae maieſtatis, or
as detractors of the ſu­preame authoritie.

But ſéeing then that godly men cannot without great ſo­rrow endure ſlanders or
reprochfull taunts though vninſt,When good men are vn­juſtly ſlaunde­red, it
behoo­ueth them to hold faſt the conſolations left them in the word of God,
againſt vnrighteous iudgements. it is needful that they holde faſt the
expreſſe conſolations a­gainſt [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=29) vnrighteous
iudgements, ſo as they map ouercome ſorrowe and beleeue that they are not for
ſuch vniuſt iudge­ments caſt away from god, or excluded from the true church.
Let us therefore euermore looke vpon theſe ſayings, viz. Pſal. 109. verſ. 27.
Let them curſe, but do thou bleſſe. Let my enemies be confounded, but let thy
ſeruant be glad and ioyfull. Iſay. 52. 7. Feare not ye the reproches of men.
Math. 5. Bleſſed are you when men reuile you, and preſecute you, and ſay all
maner of euill againſt you for my ſake, falſelie, verſ. 11\. And in ſuch
con­flicts let the difference betweene the true Church, and of that companie
bee knowne, which falſely arrogateth vnto them the title of the Church: when
it is moſt aſſured that the ene­mies of the truth are not the Church of God,
according to theſe ſayings, Iohn 10. 27. My ſheepe heare my voyce. But of the
enemies it is ſaid thus. Ioh. 10. 26. Ye are not of my ſheep. Againe, Iohn.
8\. 44. Ye are of your father the Diuell, &c.

#### 4.1.5.

Vers. 8

Caſt me not away in the time of age: forſake mee not when my ſtrength faileth
me.

Vers. 9

For mine enemies ſpeake againſt me, and they that lay waite for my ſoule take
their counſell togither, ſaying: God hath forſaken him, perſecute him and take
him, for there is none to deliuer him.

The firſt verſe is a principall propoſition of this pſalme,A principall
propoſition of this Pſalme, conſiſting in a Prayer and a Promiſe. which is not
onelie a praier, but alſo a promiſe, according to the rule, All praiers of the
holie Ghoſt are promiſes: But I pray you thinke how neceſſarie a prayer is
this: Like as in aged perſons all things are more faintlie ſeene in them: ſo
in this old age of the world, the Church is more weake & fuller of wrinckles
in her forehead then the hath had before time, becauſe ſhe is not onelie
grieued with infirmitie of her age, but is alſo fore worne and wrecked with
puniſhments which are increaſed by reaſon of her ſinnes. And againe the
out­rage of the diuels both the more ercaede, becauſe they know within a ſhort
time their iudgement draweth neare, wherein [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=30) their
filthineſſe ſhall be clearelie and openlie reuealed before all Angels and men.
Let vs therefore craue with moſt ſer­uent praier, that God would not caſt away
the remnants of the Church now in her old age, becauſe of her dotings and
o­ther blemiſhes: but ſeeing he knoweth that olde age had néed to haue
quietnes and reſt, that he would vouchſafe mercifullie to ſuccour, help and
comfort his Church now in extreame olde age; as he hath promiſed ſo to do,
Iſay. 46. verſe 3, and 4 Heare ye me houſe of Iacob, and all that remaine of
the houſe of Iſrael, which are borne of me from the wombe, and brought vp of
me from the birth. Therefore vnto olde age, I the ſame, euen I will beare you,
vntill the hoare haires: I haue made you, I wil alſo beare you. and I will
carie you, and I will deliuer you. Let vs with this promiſe comfort our
ſelues, when in theſe confu­ſions and ruines of kingdomes we being diſquieted,
do ſéeke where the Church ſhall remaine.

The latter of theſe two verſes is eaſilie to be vnderſtood of them which do
conſider the hyſtorie or ſtate of theſe daies: For, what ſleights hath not
Sathan exerciſed by his inſtru­ments the Tyrants and Hypocrites of our time,
to oppreſſe and extinguiſh the light of the refined and purified doctrine? He
mooueth ſeditions, he kindleth ciuill warres, he deuiſeth odde formes and
orders of fained reformation in religions and opinions of men, hee hath
troubled our congregations with vnnéedfull and vnneceſſarie diſputations.
Finallie, hee hath prepared and practiſed all manner of meanes which might
ſeeme to tend to the deſtruction of the truth. But like as the foming waues
daſhing and mounting vpon the rocks do with their owne force fall off againe
into the ſea, when the rocks ſtand firme and immooueable: ſo the miſchieuous
en­terpriſes & practiſes of Sathan (ſo much as to the effect of the cauſe
appertaineth) haue beene, are, and ſhall be redounding to no purpoſe,
according to theſe ſayings of Chriſt our Sa­uiour. Mat. 28. 20. Behold I am
with you euen vnto the end of the worlde. Againe, Mat. 16. 18. The gates of
hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her. Furthermore, Iohn. 10\. 28. No man ſhall
[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=30) take my
ſheepe out of my hands.

#### 4.1.6.

Vers. 10

Go not ſarre from me, O God, my God▪ make haſte to helpe me.

Vers. 11

Let them be confounded and periſh that are agaynſt my ſoule: let them be
couered with ſhame and diſho­nour that ſeeke to do me euill.

Such perſpicuitie there is in this praier, that he which will expound the ſame
with long Commentaries, ſhall ſéeme to lights a Candle euen at the midday:
Letting paſſe therefore diligence vnneceſſarie and needleſſe in this point, I
come to the verſes next following.

#### 4.1.7.

Vers. 12

As for me I will pacientlie abide alway: and will praiſe thee more and more.

Vers. 13

My mouth ſhall dayly ſpeake of thy righteouſneſſe and ſaluation: for, I know
none end thereof.

Vers. 14

I will go forth in the ſtrength of the Lorde: and will make mention of thy
righteouſnes onely.

Vers. 15

Thou O God haſt taught me from my youth vp vntill now: therefore will I tell
of thy wonderous workes.

The Church in her olde age promiſeth vnto God for his defence and preſeruation
of her ſome recompence: namelie,The Church in her old age thankfull vnto God.
Confeſſion and propagation of the true doctrine: And euen this is ſpecially to
be obſerued, that thée affirmeth ſhe will not be the aduancer of her owne
righteouſneſſe, but of the righteouſnes of God, according to that ſaying 1.
Cor. 3. 1. He that reioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lord. Againe where he
ſaith, 3. Phil. 9. That I may be found in him, not hauing my owne
righteouſneſſe which is of workes, but that which is from God by faith in
Chriſt. This pronounced praiſe (as elſe where is of­ten ſaid) attributeth vnto
God and his ſonne Chriſt true glo­rie, and ſetteth downe firme conſolation
vnto our conſcien­ces, and diſcerneth the church from other ſects which
mar­uaile [[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=31)
at nothing, but the figge leafe (that is) a wretched and vncleane hypocriſie
of outward works: And truely when I reade theſe verſes, it ſeemeth to me that
the holie ghoſt fore­propheſied in them the refining or purifying of the
doctrine which in this age hath beene made by the miniſtrie of the re­uerend
D. Martin Luther. For which let vs bee thankfull vnto God, and the ſame as an
excellent gift and treaſure of great price, left vs by the power of the holie
ghoſt, faithfullie kéepe, that it may paſſe and procéed vnto our proſteritie,
pure and vncorrupt without anie our default therein.

#### 4.1.8.

Vers. 16

Forſake mee not O God in mine olde age: when I am gray headed, vntill I haue
ſhewed thy ſtrength vn­to this generation: and the power to them that are yet
for to come.

The repetitions in Pſalms are not vaine repetitions of the ſame things,A
prayer for the Church in her old age. but ſignes of moſt feruent affects or
motions of the mind. For what thing is it that with greater force of mind can
be craued. of God, then that he would not ſuffer the Church his ſpouſe now in
her extreame olde age (almoſt dotage, for or by reaſon of her manifold
deformities) to be either forſaken or caſt out of his fauour? Wherefore it is
not inough that we make theſe prayers once, but that we do repeate them
dailie, yea euerie moment, and truelie for this cauſe, that there may be a
propagation or publiſhing of doctrine in the poſteritie: for like as God
graunteth vnto the Halcion bird the quietneſſe and calmeneſſe of the ſea to
hatch and bring forth their yong ones, ſo muſt we pray that God in the ruines
and confuſions of kingdomes in the latter age of the world, would preſerue his
church and miniſtrie, that in time to come there want no publiſhers of the
moſt mightie workes of God.

#### 4.1.9.

Vers. 17

Thy righteouſneſſe O God is verie high: and great things are they that thou
haſt done: O God who is like vnto thee?

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=31) This
ioyfull conluſion which the Prophet here hath, maie more eaſilie be
vnderſtoode;The great mercy of God a­boue mans merit. if we conſider the
hiſtorie of the Church from the beginning when Adam and Eua had tranſ­greſſed,
and could not be helped by the meanes of anie crea­ture: God of his immenſe
grace and goodneſſe publiſhed a promiſe touching the Redéemer which ſhoulde
come: which when theſe our parentes heard, they vnderſtoode that they ſhould
bee receiued againe into Gods fauour and brought a­gaine from euerlaſting
death.

Afterwardes when all mankinde miſerablie periſhed in the vniuerſall deluge,
God according to his wonted goodnes preſerued Noah and his wife and familie,
that they ſhoulde yet ſcape the daunger of the floud, and remaine the young
plantes of the Church. And that I maie for breuitie ſake o­mit particular
deliuerances, howe glorious was the bring­ing and deliuering of the Iſraelites
out of Egypt? And no leſſe glorious was the bringing backe againe of the ſame
people from out of Babilon, and the reſtoring of them into their ancient
ſtate. What ſhall I ſaie of the church gathe­red from out of the whole world,
by the miniſterie of the A­poſtles? What ſhall I ſpeake of the continuall
preſeruation and defence of this little flocke againſt the violence of
Ty­rants and wicked deceipts of heretickes▪ The reſtoring of the church in the
latter daies compa­rable to the deliuerances by God in for­mer ages. And that
I would not repeat all ſtories, I will cōprehend in briefe (for ſo I
pur­poſed) this laſt reſtoring of the goſpell euen by God effected, (maugre
the malice and repugning thereagainſt all the gates of hell) to be no leſſe
worthie of admiration then other deliuerances of the church, mentioned in the
hiſtories of the Prophets and Apoſtles: Theſe and other thinges innume­rable
when we call to minde, it cannot be otherwiſe, but we muſt needes crie out
with Dauid in this verſe. Howe great thinges are they O God which thou haſt
done: O God who is like vnto thee?

#### 4.1.10.

Verse. 18

O what great troubles and aduerſities haſt thou ſhewed me? and yet diddeſt
thou turne and refreſh [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=32) mee: yea and
broughteſt mee from the depth of the earth againe.

Verse 19

Thou haſt brought me to great honour and comfor­ted me on euery ſide.

The hiſtorie of the Church doth ſpeciallie ſet forth this in­terchange of
temptations & conſolations. The church of the people of Iſraell had ſome reſt,
peace, and quietneſſe in the time of K. Salomons raigne, but a little while
after when the Kingdome was deuided, there followed continuall ciuill warres,1
Kinges. 10 1 K [...]ngs 12 2  [...] 13 40 vntill the tenne Tribes were by
Salmanazar carri­ed a waie into exilement: The two other Tribes had great
tryall of diuers changes, calamities and deliuerances euen vntill the comming
of our Sauiour Chriſt. But the church of the newe Teſtament, being firſt
grieuouſlie afflicted by Tyrantes, next of heretickes, and afterwardes by
Anti­chriſt, hath had thenceforth ſome ſpace of breathing: So let vs not doubt
but the Church of this laſt age toſſed and tur­moiled with diuers ſtormes and
ſurging ſeas,The church in the latter age ſhal at length deſcry and at­taine
vnto the port of life euerlaſting. ſhall hereaf­ter (not verie long to,
getting out of theſe great troubles) deſire and attayne vnto the porte of
euerlaſting life.

#### 4.1.11.

Verse 20

Therefore will I praiſe thee and thy faithfulneſſe, O God, playing vpon an
Inſtrument of muſicke: vnto thee will I ſing vpon the harpe, O thou holie one
of Iſraell.

Verse 21

My lips will bee faine when I ſing vnto thee: and ſo will my ſoule whom thou
haſt deliuered.

Verse 22

My tongue alſo ſhall talke of thy righteouſneſſe al the day long: for they are
confounded and brought vnto ſhame that ſeeke to do me euill.

Oftentimes in the Pſalmes Dauid keepeth theſe degrees of order, Beleeuing, he
is tempted, tempted he prayeth praying he is deliuered, and being deliuered he
giueth thanks vnto God: So the Church beholding the deſtruction of her enemies
or [[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=32) their
purposes diſappointed, with ioyfull minde and mouth magnifieth and praiſeth
God, who knoweth howe to deliuer his out of temptation.

## 5\. ¶ A prayer compoſed by Dauid as touching the proſperitie of Salomons
Kingdom: which was a figure of Chriſt, and his euerlaſting kingdome, 1.
Kinges. 3.

‘Deus iudicium tuum Regi da.’

The Argument.

TIS Pſalme with great excellencie of wordes preacheth of the perſon and office
or of Chriſtes kingdome,The effects of this Pſalme with a refuta­tion of the
Iewes contrary opinion in two points. of the calling of the Gentiles, of the
worſhipping in the newe Teſtament, and of the Croſſe which the Church muſt
beare. But firſt, to beginne with all the Iewes muſt bee refuted, which with a
blinde wilfull boldneſſe contend that this Pſalme muſt not bee vnderſtoode
touching Chriſt, but touching Salo­mon.1 And trulie the firſt refutation may
bee taken from the li­mits and long continuance of his Kingdome, touching
whome the Pſalme ſpeaketh: For he expreſly affirmeth in verſe 5. That the
limits or boundes of his kingdome extend from the riſing to the ſetting of the
Sunne, and this King ſhall rule and raigne verſe. 17. in all poſterities
without end. Becauſe therefore it appeareth ſuf­ficiently that neither Salomon
nor any other King had euer anie Kingdome ſo largely limited and bounded, and
that all and e­uerie kingdome in the worlde haue their fatall periods: Let vs
[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=33) here then
confeſſe it to be moſt euident, theſe things cannot bee ſpoken of any other
King, but of the promiſed Sauiour Chriſt Jeſus. Of this Argument ſuch is the
perſpicuity, that if the Iewes woulde burſt themſelues with vaine contention
therein, they 2 cannot ſay ſo much as a word againſt it. The ſecond
refutati­on is taken from the ſtability of peace, touching which it is ſaide
in verſe 7. In his time ſhall the righteous flouriſh: yea and aboun­dance of
peace ſo long as the moone appeareth: And wee knowe that the latter ende of
King Salomns raigne was vnquiet and troubleſome as the hiſtorie of the 1. lib.
Regum cap. 11\. maketh mention: Therefore are the commentaries of the Iewiſh
Ra­bines far wide from the ſcope of this Pſalme. But leaſt I ſeeme to be too
long in a thing ſo manifeſt and plain, I will be content with the teſtimonie
of the Caldean tranſlation, which inter­preteth this Pſalme as touching the
promiſed Sauiour, Chriſt Ie­ſus. This ground of the matter being thus
ordained, wee muſt thenceforth ſeeke who is the ſauiour: for the Iewes looke
for a Guide and a reſtorer of their kingdome, ſuch a one as Hercules or Cyrus,
or Auguſtus. The vayne dreames of the Iewes. And ſuch a one doth Mahomet
beleeue that Chriſt was; and ſo haue manie heretickes alwaies thought and held
opinion, as Somoſatenus▪ Neſtorius and others.

And I feare that euen this philoſophie ſtirres vp great tumults in the mindes
of manie men at this day: But let the godlie ones fully beleeue, wee muſt ſo
eſteeme of God, euen as hee himſelfe inſtructeth vs in his teſtimonies. Theſe
do affirme that there is not onely in Chriſt humaine nature, but alſo the
verie diuine eſ­ſence of the ſonne of God, which Saint Iohn calleth, cap. 1.
verſ. 1. The worde which is the image of the eternall father. This Pſalme
diſcerneth Chriſt the ſa­uior from all other ſouerainty for euer And that for
breuitie ſake I may omit other teſtimonies, certainlie this Pſalme diſcerneth
Chriſt from Moſes, and other great perſo­nages, when he ſaith that the Sauiour
ſhall liue for euer, and bee alwayes prayed vnto and worſhipped, as in the 17.
verſe. His name ſhall remaine vnder the Sunne among the poſterities. which
ſhall bee bleſſed through him. Againe, verſe. 5. They ſhall feare thee as long
as the Sun and the Moone endureth, from one genera­tion to another. Laſt of
all, verſe 12. All kings ſhall fall downe be­fore [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=33) him: all nations
ſhall do him ſeruice for euer. In these words is his eternitie moſt euidently
deſcribed: Before the Sunne: that is, before the ſhining Sunne in the heauens
was created, hee was the Sonne of God For the Hebrew Text vſeth in this place
a no­table worde, ſignifying doubtleſſe that the Sonne of God was borne before
anie Sunne ſhined in the worlde. Againe alſo it affirmeth manifeſtlie, that
this Sauiour muſt alwayes bee called vpon, yea, when he is not ſeene with our
eyes. He ſpeaketh not here then of the geſtures of the bodies, which with
reuerence is vſed towards them, but by them towardes Chriſt; and hee ſpea­keth
generallie of all good mindes, which do craue of the ſame our Sauiour Chriſt,
that he would haue mercie vpon vs, and bee our Mediator vnto his father, that
he would forgiue vs our ſinnes, giue vs his holie ſpirit and life euerlaſting,
and bee our defender and helper in the daungers of this life againſt the
furies of the Diuels, and the wicked ones in this worlde. Such a kind of
pray­er yeeldeth rightlie omnipotencie vnto the Sauiour, and wit­neſſeth that
he is God. But y• indeed his kingdom is not a world­lie policie, but
ſpirituall and eternall. Theſe Arguments do con­firme the ſame. The benefite
of the Sauiour pertaineth vnto the vniuerſall Church, from the beginning of
the world vnto the end of the ſame. Now if the kingdome of Chriſt had bin
politike, it ſhould not haue brought anie profit or vtilitie vnto the Fathers
and Prophets which haue departed out of this life, before the cō ­ming of the
Sauiour. Therefore nothing ſhoulde their prayers and hope differ in this caſe
from the dreame of the golden fiſh, wherof the fiſher reioyced, as Theocritus
reporteth, Adde here­vnto a moſt ample promiſe of the calling of the Gentiles,
which ſhould be vaine and ridiculous, if the Iewes onely ſhould carrie all the
ſtately port and beare rule, and the Gentiles bee brought into bondage as
their ſlaues. But of all others chieflie the ſayings of the Prophets confirme
this opinion which wee would attaine vnto,The predicti­ons of the pro­phets
touching Chriſts ſuffe­ring for mans ſaluation. becauſe they preach of the
death and reſurrection of the Sauiour. D [...]niel ſayeth plainlie, cap. 9.
verſ. 26. Chriſt ſhall bee ſlaine. And Iſayas ſayeth, cap. 35. 10. He ſhall
lay downe his ſ [...]ule for ſinne. Ergo, he ſhall not haue anie corporall
rule or gouernment [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=34) in this life.
Theſe and manie other ſuch like when we read, may we doubt any thing, but that
the Iewes and others (drea­ming of the kingdome of Chriſt to be politicall)
are wrapped in the greateſt error, and blinded in the ignoraunce of the
greateſt matters? Alſo manie were woont to aske of vs what were the be­nefites
of Chriſts kingdom: Touching this queſtion the Pſalme maketh anſwere: That the
Sauiour of the worlde ſhall not giue riches and Countries, but Righteouſneſſe
and Peace. But Righ­teouſneſſe ſignifieth in this place Forgiuenes of ſinnes,
and re­conciliation with God, or imputation vnto righteouſnes, or ac­ceptation
vnto life euerlaſting: wherewith after our reſurrection ſhall be ioyned full
and perfect newneſſe inflamed with ſpiritu­all motions, ſuch as the lawe of
God requireth. This true righte­ouſnes differeth infinitelie from diſcipline,
which is onely a ſha­dow of outward workes, and a miſerable and vncleane
hypocri­ſie, Peace in this place may not bee vnderſtoode of a politike peace,
which is nothing but a vaine name, as Plato ſaith: but it muſt be vnderſtood
touching the true conſolation and tranqui­litie of mindes, which is the
ouercommer of death. For true it is which Chriſt our Sauiour ſaid: Iohn. 16.
In the world you ſhal haue affliction, but by me Peace. 33. Be ye of good
courage, I have ouer­come the worlde, ibidem. Laſt of all let the ſayinges
touching the calling of the Gentiles, the worſhippings of the newe Te­ſtament,
and Croſſe of the Church, bee conſidered in this Pſalme. For it interpreteth
the promiſe deliuered vnto Abra­ham, Gene. 22. 17. In thy ſeede ſhall all
nations bee bleſſed. And it witneſſeth that the worſhipping of God in the new
Teſtament ſhall not be circumciſion or Leuiticall ſacrifices, but praiers and
thankeſgiuings. As here in the 12. verſe, They ſhall praiſe him for euer. He
alſo addeth a particle wherein not obſcurely he ſig­nifieth the Church ſhall
bee ſubiect vnto the Croſſe: As in verſe 14\. Precious (ſaith he) is the bloud
of them in the Lords ſight. Let theſe ſeeme to be ſufficiently ſpoken touching
the Argument of this 72. Pſalme: Now let vs heare the Prophet Dauid
excellently prophecying and preaching of Chriſt Ieſus the Sauior that was and
is to com [...] ▪

### 5.1. [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=34)
❧ The Pſalme and Expoſition thereof.

#### 5.1.1.

Vers. 1

Giue the king thy iudgements (O God:) and thy righte­ouſnes vnto the kings
ſonne.

WHat maner of ſpeaker Thucidides was in his D­rations, ſuch a one is the
Prophet Dauid in his Pſalms: ſo plentifull hee is in copie of matters,The
excellen­cie of Dauids art oratoricall in compiling in 4. poynts. that the
multitude of his wordes almoſt are ſup­plied with as manie ſentences.
Furthermore, ſo apt and ſtrict he is in wordes, that a man cannot tell whether
the things are with ſpéech, or the wordes with ſentences more beautified. For
I pray you conſider how many great mat­ters are included in one litle verſe.
For first he teacheth what a one God is, namelie a iust iudge, that is
allowing things well done, and diſallowing and deſtroying the contrarie. And
ſurely ſuch a God he is, according to the law: but indéede ac­cording to the
Goſpell, he is not onelie iuſt in accuſing of ſin, but alſo he maketh vngodlie
ones become iuſt. which are juſt by faith in Chriſt, as it is ſaid, Rom.
[...]. Secondlie, he aduerti­ſeth the Reader touching the myſterie of the
Trinitie. For it is the euerlaſting Father which deliuereth out of his power
into the hands of his Son, both iudgemeent & iuſtice. The ſon receiueth the
power deliuered vnto him from  [...]is fa [...]her, ac­cording to that ſaying,
Ioh. 5. 22. The Father iudgeth no man, but hath giuen all iudgement vnto his
Sonne, which wee muſt ſo vnderſtand touching the firſt comming of Chriſt, that
the fa­ther iudgeth not alone, but by his ſonne hee iudgeth and maketh his
iudgement knowne: For by his Sonne hee maketh his Goſpell knowen, preſerueth
the miniſterie, [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=35) and giueth the
holie Ghoſt. But touching his ſecond com­ming,The ſentence of Saint Au­guſtine
cited by Proſperus. let vs hold faſt that notable ſaying of Auguſtine cited by
Proſperus, Senten. 337\. Although the Father neuer depar­teth from the ſonns,
yet is it not ſaide that hee ſhall come to iudge the quicke and the dead, but
the ſonne ſhall iudge them, becauſe there neither the deitie of the Father,
nor of the ſonne ſhall be ſéene, but that forme or likenes of the ſonne which
he hath vnited vnto him by the myſterie of his incarnation. The ſame forme or
likenes in him then ſhall be Iudge, which ſtood before the Iudge; the ſame
ſhall iudge which hath bin iudged, that the wicked ones may beholde his
glorie, againſt whoſe clemencie they haue grudged. Such a Iudge therefore
ſhall he appeare, as he may bee ſeene both of them whom hee ſhall crowne, and
of them whom he ſhall condemne. But the Fa­ther ſhall not then appeare,
becauſe he tooke not vpon him the ſhape of a ſeruant, but vnto his Sonne who
was alſo made Man, hath be giuen all power of iudgement. Thirdly, this firſt
verſe confirmeth the Reader to acknowledge Chriſt, not one­lie to be the ſon
of Dauid after the fleſh, but alſo the verie ſon of God. For God giueth not
his glorie vnto anie other, as Eſaias 42\. ſaith. Seeing then he deliuereth
vnto this Sauiour both his iudgement and his iuſtice, we muſt no time doubt
but that the Sauiour is trulie, and by nature God. Fourth­lie, this verſe
teacheth vs what are the benefities of this Sa­uiour; for iudgement by the
phraſe of the ſcripture ſignifieth a remoouing of euill, and the placing of
that which is good, and righteouſnes is the following of vertue, the eſchuing
of vice. Therefore the benefites of this ſauiour, are Deliuerance from ſinne,
eternall death and tyrannie of the Diuell. the gathering of the Church by the
miniſterie of the Goſpell, the gift of the holie Ghoſt, Our excellent benefits
by Chriſt our Sauiour, defence and preſeruation of the remnants of the Church
in this life, and finally the riſing of the godly ones from death vnto life
euerlaſting. You ſee then what a pithie and profound Ora­tor Dauid is here,
and what great efficacie and value euerie worde of his hath.

#### 5.1.2.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=35)

Verse 2

Then ſhall hee iudge the people according vnto right, and defend the poore.

There is a diuerſe vſe of the worde iudgement, A diuerſe vſe of the worde
iudgement and in ex­pounding, to obſerue the ſame varietie it is profitable:
ſom­time it ſignifieth, The taking awaie of euill, as when it is ſaide in the
119. Pſalme, part 12. verſe 1. I haue done iudge­ment and iuſtice, that is, I
haue eſchewed thinges forbidden, and done thinges commanded: in other places
it ſignifieth Gouernement: So the gouernors of Gods people, are cal­led
Iudges. Laſt of all, to let paſſe other ſignifications, it is taken for
mitigation of extreame law, as in Ierem. 10. Cor­rect me O Lorde in thy
iudgement, not in thy wrath, leaſt I bee brought vnto nothing: That is,
mitigate the paines which I haue deſerued. do not deale with me according to
the exire­mitie of the law. This Grammaticall admonition if we rightlie
conſider, this ſecond verſe is eaſilie expounded: As if he ſaid,Dauids verſe
interpreted touching the firſt & ſecond comming of Chriſt the chiefe Iudge. I
craue of God that he would ſende the promiſed deliuerer, that hee would
gouerne his people in his righte­ouſneſſe; that is, in aboliſhing ſinne and
death; that he would reſtore vnto his church righteouſneſſe and life
euerlaſting: [And defend the poore] as if he ſaid, Hee will not deale
ex­tremelie with ſuters, or poore in ſpirit, but he will take vpon him to
defend their cauſe, hee will maintaine them againſt their accuſers, and hee
will ſtrengthen them and ſtaie them frée and diſcharged in iudgement: Hee will
alſo repreſſe the rage of the Deuill, Tyrants and fanaticall perſons: and he
will mitigate the thraldome of the bodies of his ſeruantes captiued.

#### 5.1.3.

Verse 3

The mountaines alſo ſhall bring peace, and the little hils righteouſneſſe vnto
the people.

The mountaines and little hilles are the churches or con­gregations and their
miniſters: Theſe bring peace in righte­ouſneſſe; [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=36) that is, they
teach,The peaceable eſtate of the Chucrch. That being iuſtified by faith wee
haue peace with God: For, Who ſhall accuſe the Elect ones of God? ſhall God,
which iuſtifieth? who is it that ſhall con­demne? is it Chriſt, who died, yea
and roſe againe, who ſitteth at the right hand of God and maketh interceſſion
for vs? And a­gaine, Iohn. 5. He that hath my word and bleeueth in him that
ſent me hath life euerlaſting, and commeth not into iudgement, but goeth by
death vnto life. For this righteouſnes and peace, let vs giue ſo great thankes
vnto God as the whole ſcope of our liuelie hart can conceiue, and let vs
eſchew all contrarie opinions and religions which trouble this peace.

#### 5.1.4.

Verse 4

He ſhall iudge the ſimple folke by their right, defend the children of the
needie, and puniſh the wrong doer.

Theſe are ſpeaches Correlatiues as the Logicians vſe thus to ſaie.The maner of
Chirſts king­dome gover­ned by his iu­ſtice & iudge­ment. The king and his
people, &c. Now then here bee deſribeth the people of this king: and the
deſecription agree­eth with the ſaying of Sophonias 3. 12. I will leaue in the
midſt of thee a needy and poore congregation; yet truſting in the name of the
Lord. For the church liueth an exile in the world. and in deede as S. Paule
ſaith, 2. Cor.7. tryeth outwarde figh­tinges and feeleth inwarde feares:
Therefore both maner of waies it is a congregation poore and néedefull, not
onely be­cause it is deſtritute of humane helpes, but alſo becauſe it ca­rieth
about in the heart ſorrowes and feares riſing from ac­knowledgement of ſinne,
and the wrath of God: but there is a two fold kind of conſolation ſet downe;
one as the Pſalme affirmeth, The Sauiour ſhall heale the woundes of the hart
according to that ſaying, Matth. 11. 28. Come vnto me all ye which labour and
are laden, and I will refreſh you. The other in that he threatneth
puniſhmentes vnto backbiters, & ſlande­rers, which inflameth mindes of kinges
and princes againſt the Chruch. This concluſion ſith it is neceſſarie for the
vni­uersall Chruch, euen then ſpeciallie is it ſo in the behalfe of poore
people and Orphanes, which are made open praies [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=36) for all
backbiters and ſlaunderers.

#### 5.1.5.

Verse 5

They ſhall feare thee as long as the Sunne and moone endureth: from one
generation to another.

To feare God by an vſuall phraſe of the ſcripture, ſignifi­eth not onelie to
feare the wrath and iudgement of God,How Chriſt the Sauiour is to be honored
in his kingdom but alſo in a ſort to ſerue or worſhip God: And the feare of
God ſignifieth all the worſhip done vnto God, or all the obedience due vnto
God. This verſe teacheth vs then that Christ the ſauiour is not honoured with
expences or outwarde pompe, nor tragedies of captiues, but with duties by vs
done, tou­ching which the lawe morall preacheth, and therewith affir­meth that
the Church ſhall not bee vtterlie deſtroied in this world. This promiſe ought
to bee acceptable vnto the god­lie ones, eſpeciallie when the turkiſh armies
are within their beholding; which practiſe no other thing but to deſtroie the
preaching of the goſpell, and ſcatter abroad the congregation of Gods Church.
And although ſome diſpute whether the kingdome at Chriſt be euerlaſting,
ſeeing Paule ſaith, 1. Cor. 15. 24. Then ſhall the ſonne deliuer the kingdome
vnto the fa­ther: Yet the kingdome of the ſonne without all doubting is
euerlaſting, becauſe in all eternitie, hée raigneth together with the father
and the holie ghoſt, and remaineth the heade of the church: And whereas Paule
ſaith, 1. Cor. 15. 24. That the ſonne in the laſt day of the worlde ſhall
deliuer the kingdome vnto the father; let that be vnderſtoode thus: The ſonne
shall bring vnto the Father the Church gathered throughout all mankinde, and
then all the whole godhead ſhall be ſeene in preſence and ſhall raigne, not by
the miniſterie of the goſpel, but immediatly or without anie meane. With this
ſimple vnderſtanding let vs be contented, leaſt we ſéeme to ſeeke to be more
wiſe then it behooueth vs.

#### 5.1.6.

Verse 6

He ſhal come down like the raine into fleece of wool; euen as the drops that
water the earth.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=37) There is
no doubt but the prophet doth allude in this verſe vnto the hiſtorie of Gedeon
which is recited in lib. Iudicum. 6.The applicati­on of Daulds verſe, firſt to
Gedeons, and ſecondly to Chriſt his victorie. and 7. chapters. But other
interpreters do applie this figure taken out of the hiſtory of Gedeon, another
waie: For ſome doe refer it vnto the birth of the ſon of God borne of the
vir­gne: as the meaning might thus be, Chriſt like vnto the deaw of heauen was
conceiued by the holy ghoſt in the wombe of the virgin Mary, without all ſpot
of ſinne. This interpretation, though I reiect not, ſéeing it agréeth with the
analogy or rule of faith: yet I do more allowe the application thereof vnto
the kingdome of Chriſt: For like as graſſe reuiueth and re­freſheth his colour
when the deawe falleth vpon it; ſo our hearts, when we heare the preaching of
the goſpell conceiue new comfort, which is the beginning and taſte of life
euerla­sting. Againe alſo, that similitude maie well bee conſidered herein
which in the ſame hiſtorie is ſet downe: Before Chriſt was borne the ſinagogue
was a fleece of wool wet with heauen­lie dewe: Now the drie lande, that is,
the Gentiles are watered with this dewe. What ſhall I ſaie of the wonderfull
and al­moſt incredible victorie of Gedeon? vnto whom Eſayas in the 9. chapter
compareth the triumph of Chriſt: For as Gede­on leaueth forth a ſlender hoaſt
againſt the huge multitude of his enemies, and yet by God obtained the
victorie: ſo wee wretched and weake ſoules following the gouernement and good
guide of the ſonne of God our Captaine Chriſt, in the onelie preaching of the
goſpell which we profeſſe, and with the ſparke of faith ſhining in miſeries,
doc ouercome moſt mightie enemies. viz. ſinne, death, and the deuill. But this
fi­gure verie well and excellentlie doth Doct. Martin Luther ſet forth in his
expoſition vppon the ninth chapter of Eſay: Hee therefore that will may read
thereof in that place.

#### 5.1.7.

Verse 7

In his time ſhall the righteous flouriſh: yea and abun­dance of peace ſo long
as the moone endureth.

He repeateth a ſermon as it were of the effects of Christs [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=37)
kingdome,Righteouſnes and peace two effects of chriſt his kingdome, namelie
righteouſneſſe and peace: In the Church ſhall both righteouſneſſes flouriſh:
the one of Faith, whereby the perſon is accepted and pleaſing vnto God, fréely
for the Mediators ſake. The other of a good conſcience, touching which let vs
hold faſt that moſt ſwéete ſaying of Nazianzen. Nihil exhilarat nos ita vt
conſcientia pura & ſpes bona. Nothing ſo much reioyceth vs as a pure
conſcience, and a good hope. And where hee ſaith, (abundance of peace. &c.)
that is tranquilitie of the heart riſing from faith, hope, and a good
conſcience.

Nowe conſider what a thing it is not to be pluckt away from God, and to be
able to haue acceſſe vnto God, to call vp­on him, craue and looke for helpe of
him, as in the 1. Epiſt. 3. cap. and 20. verſ. of ſaint Iohn. it is ſaid, If
our heart condemne vs not, then haue we boldness towardes God. But the
particle touching the eternitie of peace muſt not be at a bluſh, as wee ſay,
but throughlie looked vpon. For it containeth moſt ſweet conſolation, which
Iſayas expreſſeth, cap. 54 ver. 10\. in theſe wordes, The hilles ſhall be
mooued, and the little hilles ſhall tremble, but my mercie ſhall not depart
from thee, neither ſhall the couenant of my peace fall away, ſaith thy
mercifull Lorde: That is, though down-falles of kingdomes ſhall ſhake and
terrifie the Church verie ſore, yet my couenant that I haue made with my
Church ſhall be firme, for euer ratified and vnmooueable. Let vs be quietlie
contented with this league or couenant. yea though the whole world fruſhed
togither fall downe about vs.

#### 5.1.8.

Vers. 8

His dominion alſo ſhall bee from the one ſea to the o­ther: and from the flood
vnto the worlds end,

A great diffe­rence between the bounds of Chriſts king­dom, and the kingdoms
of earthly Prin­ces, namely iſ ſixe points

The kings of Babylon and Perſia held in their power ve­rie rich kingdoms: but
theſe kingdoms were included with­in the limits of Aſia; Alexander the great
ioined ſome part of Europe vnto the Empire of Aſia: The Romane Empire
grea­teſt of all others, was extended no further then Euphrate: Fi­nally, no
gouernment in ye whole world was contained in the [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=38) proper
iuriſdiction: wherefore ſeeing Chriſtes kingdome is comprehended within the
ſame boundes wherein the whole world is comprehended, doubtles we muſt
confeſſe that this kingdome is not a worldlie Empire, like as the Iewes do
dream. But peraduenture ſome man would ask what maner of kingdom, the kingdom
of Chriſt is? There is nothing that we may so eaſily expresse. The kingdome of
the Chriſt in this life; is to kéepe and reſtore the miniſterie of the
Gospell: alſo to gather and reuiue the Church with his worde and holie ſpirit
giuen, and to protect her wonderfullie againſt the diuels and tyrants, & after
this life to raiſe her members vp from death to life, and bring them to his
eternall Father. Out of this de­scription maie be taken the difference of
Chriſtes kingdome and a politike kingdome. Alſo they differ in obiects, in
bene­fites, in forme of gouernment, glorie, defences, and stabilitie: for,
firſt the politike power gouerneth the part which is moue­able, and brideleth
the externall members, that they may re­maine within their duties: but the
kingdome of Christ not onelie gouerneth externall manners, but reprehendeth
and healeth the hearts, as in Iſay, 61. ver. 1. To binde vp the bro­ken
hearted. Secondlie, the chiefe benefits of politike power are discipline and
peace of bodies: but the ſpirituall and eter­nall benefits of this kingdome,
are righteouſneſſe and peace of conſcience before God. Thirdlie, they differ
in forme go­uernment: for other kings and princes chuſe fit miniſters to beare
authoritie in the Common-wealth, endued with wiſe­dome and eloquence: but
Chriſt chooſeth the fooliſh things of this world to confound the wiſedome of
the wiſe: or as the 8, Pſalme, ver. 2\. ſaieth. Out of the mouth of verie
babes and ſuck­lings, he hath made perfect his kingdome. Moreouer they differ
in forme of execution, as in defence, and punishments: for the politike power
defendeth his ſubiects with weapons, and puniſheth diſobedient persons with
corporall force, or with the ſworde: but Chriſt by the preaching of the
Goſpell giueth euerlaſting benefits, remiſſion of ſinnes, the holie Ghoſt, and
life euerlaſting, and puniſheth diſobedient persons, not with [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=38) corporall force,
but with his worde, namelie lawfull excom­munication. Fourthlie, they differ
in glorie: for the glorie of gouernments is in the excellencie of counſell in
ciuill or peaceable gouernment, and in valiancie and good successe in warre:
but the proper glorie of the Church in this life is, true knowledge of God,
prayer, profeſſion of the true doctrine, and perpetuall preſeruation of the
Church, although ſhee bee perſecuted in ſome members. The greatnes of minds in
o­uercomming or vanquiſhing all inticements and terrifying torments of the
wicked, the ornament of manie vertues wherein the preſence of God is perceiued
and ſeene. Fiftlie, the defences of a politike kingdome are hoaſts of men, and
ri­ches neceſſarie in charges of domeſticall affaires & to main­taine warres
abroad: but the Church is not defended with viſible helpes, but is gouerned by
the ſonne of God, and hath the Angels her ſuper intendents or watchmen.
Laſtlie, they differ in ſtabilitie: for all politike gouernements haue their
end and limit of time: but of this kingdome there shall bee none end, becauſe
the king in eternall, and he giueth vnto his people eternall life, which is
here begun, and shall be accom­plished after the reſurrection. These things
muſt bee often re­cited touching the difference betweene Chriſts kingdome, and
politike kingdomes: not onelie to refuſe the Iewes, but e­uen to inſtruct vs
alſo, leaſt the conſolation & inuocation vp­on the Sonne of God, and our
exerciſes of faith be obſcured or darkened with politike imaginations. For the
eyes being bent vpon politike benefits (when they are once gon) do think that
the church is but a caſtaway from god. This imagination muſt we refuſe, and
ſtedfaſtlie, beleeue, that true beléeuers are not therfore, caſt away from the
ſonne of God, no though they be in the middes of punishments or torments: for
as ſaint Paule ſaith, We ſtand, and reioyce vnder the hope of the glorie of
God not onelie, but alſo We reioyce in tribulations, &c. Rom. 5. verſes, 2. &
3.

#### 5.1.9.

Vers. 9

They that dwell in the wildernes, ſhall kneele before [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=39) him: his enemies
ſhall licke the duſt.

Vers. 10

The kings of Tharſhis and of the Iſles ſhall bring pre­ſents: the kings of
Arabia and Saba ſhall bring gifts.

Vers. 11

All kings ſhall fall downe before him: all nations ſhall do him ſeruice.

He amplifieth the maieſtie of Chriſts kingdome: the in­habitants of the
wildernes (ſaith he) ſhall not onelie be peti­tioners vnto this king, but euen
they alſo which dwell in faire and ſumptuous houſes, which are garnishcd with
coſtly works and pictures: and neither ſhall his friends but euen his ene­mies
also humble themſelues and fall down before this Lord. What shall I say of the
kings which ſhall be nurſing fathers of Christs kingdome:Of kings and Queenes,
the nurſing fathers and mothers of the Church from the be­ginning. for in all
ages from the firſt beginning of mankind there haue béene, are, & ſhalbe ſome
magiſtrates choſen of God vnto euerlaſting ſaluation, and called vnto the
ſocietie of the true Church, as Nebuchadnezar, and Euilmero­dach in the
kingdome of Babylon, Darius Medus, Cyrus, and Artaxerxes with the long, hande
ſo called, in the kingdome of Perſia: and Conſtantine, Valentinian,
Theodoſius, Charles the great, and certeine other in the Empire of Rome. For
as in that saying, 3. Mat. 5. ver. All Iurie went out vnto Iohn Baptiſt, is
the figure Synecdoche, (i. part for the whole) ſo in this verſe [All kings
ſhall fall downe before him] the vniuerſall particle muſt be reſtrained. For
it both not ſignifie that all kings ſhal become the friends of Chriſt, but
ſome cut of all kingdomes. Now sée I pray you, howe great a glorie it may bee,
that not onlie obſcure and baſe perſons ſhall embraſe the preaching of the
Gospel, but euen mightie kings and Monarches: Alſo vn­to thoſe kings which are
conuerted to Chriſt ſhall nothing be attributed more glorious, then that they
are reputed & called citizens and members of the true Church of Chriſt.

#### 5.1.10.

Vers. 12

For he ſhall deliuer the poore when he crieth: the needy alſo and him that
hath no helper.

Vers. 13

He ſhal bee fauourable to the ſimple and needie: and ſhall preſerue the ſoules
of the poore.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=39)

Verse 14

He ſhall deliuer their ſoules from falſhood and wrong: & deare ſhall their
bloud be in his ſight.

This is a moſt ſwéet and delectable reason of the former next verſes: As if he
ſaid, therefore ſhall they fall down and worſhip him, becauſe he helpeth them
that call vpon him, when they are forſaken of earthlie creatures. This
ſentence is greatlie ſet forth in the example of our firſt parents. Adam and
Eua after their fall could neither be helped by Angels,The great mercie of God
in ſending his ſon Chriſt to deli­uer the di­ſtreſſed. their own deuiſes, nor
yet by anie other creature: Here commeth Chriſt the ſonne of God from his
ſecret ſeat, receiueth offenders into fauour, and giueth them life. So
afterwards followed innumerable eramples of this Lordes benefits beſides and
without ſecond causes: as when he preſerued Noah in the deluge: when he ſa­ued
Ioſeph whom his brethren would haue ſlain: when he made an open waie for the
people of Iſraell to paſſe through the red ſea: and afterwards performed manie
benefits vnto them be­ſides and without all ſecond cauſes or meanes. Like as
he de­fended Dauid againſt Golias, and others: as he ſaued the 3. men in the
burning ouen: Daniell amongſt the Lions, and Ionas in the whales belly: And al
men which call vpon God, may declare and speak of some deliuerances which they
haue had; when they haue béene manifeſtlie preſerued beſides and without
ſecond cauſes. Furthermore, whereas the church is for moſt part rent in péeces
with diſcords of opinions and féeleth the crueltie of ty­rants; this pſalme
promiſeth her deliuerance from the wicked craft of hereticks,The applicati­on
of the fable touching the viper and the palme. and violence of Nero,
Diocleſian and ſuch like tyrants. But truly when I thinke vpon this verſe the
fable of the Viper and the palme commeth into my minde: For like as the viper
is with the palme leaues nourished, and with the ſame againe deſtroyed: ſo
Heretikes abuſing the ſcripture are refuted by the teſtimonies of ſcripture
rightly conferred: as al­though Samoſatenus corrupteth the firſt chapter of S.
Iohns goſ­pel; yet in the courſe of the ſame ſermon & conference of other
teſtimonies he may be euidently refuted or conuinced. But as vnto Tyrants
appertaineth this Pſalme in this place doth no­tably comfort vs; He ſhall
deliuer their ſoules from falſhoode and wrong, &c. That is, he ſhall inflame
their hearts with ioy and gladnes the vanquiſher of death, and ſhall giue them
life euer­laſting, [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=40) according to
that ſaying, Iohn. 10. 28. I giue vnto them euerlaſting life. And their blood
ſhall be precious, becauſe tyrants ſhall ſuffer great & iuſt torments for
their crueltie vſed againſt the godlie ones: and partlie becauſe by this
teſtimonie of their death the truth of Chriſts doctrine is ſealed and
confirmed. But inaſmuch as elſewhere I haue often ſpoken touching the
pu­niſhments for tyrants, and the ſufferings of Martyrs, nowe I willinglie
omit the recitall of them in this place.

#### 5.1.11.

Vers. 15

He ſhal liue, and vnto him ſhall be giuen of the golde of Arabia: prayers
ſhall be euermade vnto him, and daylie ſhall he be praiſed.

We do remember that D. Martin Luther oftentimes ſaid: In the olde Teſtament
there is a notable witnes of the God­headTouching the eternail god­head of
Chriſt, and the royal­tie of his euer­laſting king­dome. of the Sauiour
promiſed; which affirmeth that he was cal­led vpon, & by this propertie the
ſame ſauiour is there diſcer­ned from other Prophets. That moſt graue witnes
was by ſome complained to be obſcured & weakned by tranſlating the ſame
inuocation vnto other men. And for that one cauſe (ſaide he) the cuſtome of
praying vnto others was to bee disallowed. But where the Prophet Dauid
affirmeth here, that this Sauiour ſhall liue, &c. Let that be vnderſtoode in
that meaning touching which Chriſt ſaith, Iohn, 14. 19. I liue, and you ſhall
liue. That is, like as I of mine owne power do liue, ſéeing that I am
con­ſubſtantiall with the father, and ſecond perſon in deitie: ſo by my merit,
and through my effectuall working you ſhall liue al­ſo: for I in dying haue
deſtroied death, and in riſing againe haue reſtored life, as in the old godly
verſe the Church ſo ſing­eth: Yea I will raiſe vp againe your bodies from
death, and theſe euen counited with your ſoules, I will adorne with gifts
agréeable vnto the ſtate of life euerlaſting.

#### 5.1.12.

Vers. 16

There ſhall bee an heape of corne vpon the earth, high vpon the hilles: his
fruit ſhall ſhake like Libanus, and ſhal be greene in the citie like graſſe
vpon the earth.

He compareth the fruitfulneſſe of the Church or kingdome of Chriſt vnto the
moſt lightſom flouriſhing corne,The floriſhing ſtate of the Church with
puritie of doc­trine & cōcord of the Church. which is an­ſwerable to the
huſbandmans praier and expectation. For as the thicke growing corne delighteth
the beholders: ſo there is no ſight more pleaſant then to ſee the flouriſhing
Churches, wherein vnto the puritie of doctrine preached, the concorde of
[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=40) the
teachers is adioined or annexed. There is a great force in the Nowne Bar:
which ſignifieth moſt pure wheate: as if hee ſhould ſay; In the Church of
Chriſt ſhall not beare ſway anie vaine chaffe of humne traditions, which haue
no iuice in them: but wheat ſhall flouriſh, which with the body of man hath
great affinitie: for euē as of liuely wheat, the beſt blood is increaſed: ſo
the Goſpel deliuered without corruption, bringeth to the godly ones firme
conſolation.

#### 5.1.13.

Vers. 17

His name ſhall endure for euer, his name ſhall remaine vnder the Sun among the
poſterities, which ſhal be bleſſed through him: and all the heathen ſhall
praiſe him.

This verſe gliſtereth moſt clearelie like a notable precious ſtone throughout
the whole Pſalme;The euerla­ſting renowme of Chriſt, God and man eter­nal king
of the faithfull, and their euerla­ſting bleſſed­nes in and by him. for it
teacheth the reader touching the divine nature and benefits of the ſauior, and
tou­ching the calling of the Gentils. It cleerelie affirmeth that this lord
hath alwaies bin, as he himſelfe ſaith. Iohn. 8. 5. 8. Before Abraham was I
am. And he vſeth the word (Linnon) the genera­tion of the ſon from the father
eternall. And therefore Micheas ſaith, 1, Mic. 3. This our deliuerer went
forth before the daies of the world: That is, hee was the sonne of God before
he tooke vpon him nature of man. Let vs beleeue therefore being confirmed with
theſe & like teſtimonies, that the Sauiour is God indeed, and by nature the
ſon of God, light of light, as in the Creed it is ſaid. But although there be
manie deſcriptions which teach why and for what cauſe the ſon was ſent: yet
the effect of the matter is brieflie in the worde [Bleſſed] ſignified. And for
that by the wanting of any thing, the ſame may bee better eſtéemed which we
haue, as by darknes light, let vs ſee what the curſe is. All mankind after our
firſt fall was ouerthrowne with the curſe of the law: that is, of gods wrath,
& of euerlaſting death by reaſon of ſin: as Paule ſaith, Epheſ. 2, ver. 3. We
were by nature the chil­dren of wrath, euen as others were. This curſe when no
creature could take away or blot out, the ſonne of God tooke vpon him­ſelfe,
both the wrath of God and our puniſhments, that his fa­ther might be at peace
with vs. So Paule Gal. 3\. 8. interpreteth the promiſe giuen to Abraham: In
thy ſeed ſhal al the Gentiles be bleſſed. Chriſt became accurſed for vs, and
redeemed vs from the curſe, that we might obtaine the bleſſing of Abraham,
Laſt of all let the particle be conſidered touching the calling of the
Gen­tiles. [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=41) in this verſe,
The poſterities ſhall be bleſſed in him, and all the heathen ſhall praiſe him.
For the calling of Gentiles is a notable teſtimonie of Paules affirmattion,
wherein it is ſaide, Rō 5. 15. Grace oueraboundeth aboue ſin: for no man can
with­out ſome humbling of his mind read the examples of miſchief ſtriuing with
the firſt and ſecond table, wherein the Ethnickes wickedlie and filthily with
great raſhnes and impudencie are defiled Let vs therefore giue God thankes
that hee receiueth ſuch caſtawayes into ſauour, and coopteth them into the
ſocie­tie of Chriſts kingdome.

#### 5.1.14.

Vers. 18

Bleſſed be the Lord God, euen the God of Iſrael, which onely doth wonderous
things.

Ver. 19

And bleſſed be the name of his maieſtie for euer: and al the earth ſhall be
filled with his maieſtie, Amen, Amen.

It liketh me well in this place to ſet downe the words of D. Luther, The
myracle of myracles in the Meſſias Chriſt, God & man, king im­mortall.
expounding the 7. ca. of the prophet Mic: Like as the de­liuerance in the new
teſtament is by many waies greater and more excellēt then that which was out
of Egypt: ſo are the new miracles by infinite meanes farre greater then the
olde: for what might be more wonderfully ſaid, then that ſon of God take upon
him nature of man, and was borne of a virgin? What is more to be amazed at,
then when the ſon of god wraſt­ling, with death and Sathan, ſuffered himſelfe
to be ouercome, laieth downe his life before theſe enemies, and while he is
ouer­come, conquereth? So a ſpeciall miracle it is, that Chriſt, dying like a
man vpon the croſſe, did the third day riſe againe from death and (out of the
graue cloſed vp) after this with immortall fleſh aſcended vnto heauen, and
ſitteth at the right hand of God: what may be like notablie ſaid, yea or
thought of any other miracles in reſpect of theſe? There­fore belſſed be God,
who onelie doth theſe and other myracles. So be it.

FINIS.

Here end the prayers of Dauid the ſonne of Iſhai.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=13845&page=41)

[Home](/)

Strigel, Victorinus, 1524-1569.. Date: 1598  

