## (unknown project)

# A new enterlude, neuer before this tyme imprinted, entreating of the life
and repentaunce of Marie Magdalene not only godlie, learned and fruitefull,
but also well furnished with pleasaunt myrth and pastime, very delectable for
those which shall heare or reade the same. Made by the learned clarke Lewis
Wager. The names of the players. Infidelitie the vice. Marie Magdalene. Pride
of life. Cupiditie. Carnall concupiscence. Simon the Pharisie. Malicious
iudgement. The lawe. Knowledge of sinne. Christ Iesus. Fayth. Repentaunce.
Iustification. Loue. Foure may easely play this enterlude. — Life and
repentance of Marie Magdalene

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=1)

A new Enterlude, neuer before this tyme imprinted, entreating of the Life and
Repentaunce of Marie Magdalene: not only godlie, learned and fruitefull, but
also well furnished with plea­saunt myrth and pastime, very delectable for
those which shall heare or reade the same. Made by the learned clarke Lewis
Wager.

The names of the Players.

  * Infidelitie the Uice.
  * Marie Magdalene.
  * Pride of life.
  * Cupiditie.
  * Carnall Concupiscence.
  * Simon the Pharisie.
  * Malicious Iudgement.
  * The Lawe.
  * Knowledge of sinne.
  * Christ Iesus.
  * Fayth.
  * Repentaunce.
  * Iustification.
  * Loue.

Foure may easely play this Enterlude.

Imprinted at London, by Iohn Charlevvood, dwelling in Barbican, at the signe
of the halfe Eagle and the Key. Anno. 1566.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Prologue.
  * 2\. An Enterlude of the Repentance

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=2)

## 1\. The Prologue.

Nulla tam modesta felicitas est

Quae malignantis dentes vitare possit.

NO state of man, he it neuer so modest,

Neuer so vnrebukeable and blamelesse,

No person, be he neuer so good and honest▪

Can escape at any season now harmelesse,

But the wicked teeth of suche as be shamelesse,

Are ready most maliciously him for to byte,

Like as Ualerius in his fourth booke doth write.

We and other persons haue exercised

This comely and good facultie a long season,

Which of some haue bene spitefully despised,

Wherefore I thinke they can alleage no reason,

Where affect ruleth, there good iudgemēt is geason.

They neuer learned the verse of Horace doubtles,

Nec tua laudabis  [...]dia, aut aliena reprehendes,

Thou shalt neither praise thyne owne industrie,

Nor yet the labour of other men reprehend,

The one procedeth of a proude arrogancie,

And the other from enuie, which doth discommend,

All thyngs that vertuous persons doe intend.

For euill will neuer said well, they do say,

And worse tungs were neuer heard before this day.

I maruell why they should detract our facultie:

We haue ridden and gone many sundry waies,

Yea, we haue vsed this feate at the vniuersitie,

Yet neither wise nor learned would it dispraise:

But it hath ben perceiued euer before our dayes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=3)That foles
loue nothing worse thā foles to be called,

A horse will kick if you touche where he is galled.

Doth not our facultie learnedly extoll vertue?

Doth it not teache, God to be praised aboue al thing▪

What facultie doth vice more earnestly subdue?

Doth it not teache true obedience to the kyng?

What godly sentences to the mynde doth it bryng?

I saie, there was neuer thyng inuented

More worth, for mans solace to be frequented,

Hipocrites that wold not haue their fautes reueled

Imagine slaunder our facultie to let,

Faine wold they haue their wickednes still concealed

Therfore maliciously against vs they be set,

O (say they) muche money they doe get.

Truely I say, whether you geue halfpence or pence,

Your gayne shalbe double, before you depart hence.

Is wisedom no more worth than a peny trow you?

Scripture calleth the price therof incomparable.

Here may you learne godly Sapience now,

Which to body and soule shal be profitable▪

To no person truly we couet to be chargeable,

For we shall thinke to haue sufficient recompence,

If ye take in good worth our simple diligence.

In this matter whiche we are about to recite,

The ignorant may learne what is true beleue,

Wherof the Apostles of Christ do largely write,

Whose instructions here to you we wil geue,

Here an example of penance the heart to grieue,

May be lerned, a loue which from Faith doth spring,

Authoritie of Scripture for the same we will bring.

Of the Gospell we shall rehearse a fruietfull story,

Written in the .vii. of Luke with wordes playne

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=3)The storie of
a woman that was right sory

For that she had spent her life in sinne vile and vain,

By Christes preachyng she was conuerted agayn,

To be truly penitent by hir fruictes she declared,

And to shew hir self a sinner she neuer spared.

Hir name was called Mary of Magdalene,

So named of the title of hir possession,

Out of hir Christ reiected .vii. spirites vncleane,

As Mark and Luke make open profession.

Doctours of high learnyng, witte, and discretion,

Of hir diuers and many sentences doe write,

Whiche in this matter we intend now to recite.

Of the place aforesaid, with the circumstance,

Onely in this matter (God willing) we will treate.

Where we will shewe that great was hir repentance,

And that hir loue towards Christ was also as great.

Hir sinne did not hir conscience so greuously freate,

But that Faith erected hir heart again to beleue,

That God for Christs sake wold all hir sins forgeue.

We desire no man in this poynt to be offended,

In that vertues with vice we shall here introduce,

For in men and women they haue depended:

And therfore figuratiuely to speake, it is the vse.

I trust that all wise men will accept our excuse.

Of the Preface for this season here I make an ende,

In godly myrth to spend the tyme we doe intende.

The ende of the Preface.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=4)

## 2\. An Enterlude of the Repentance

Here entreth Infidelitie the vice.

Infideli­tie.

WIth heigh down down and downe a down a,

Saluator mundi Domine, Kyrieleyson,

Ite Missa est, with pipe vp Alleluya.

Sed libera nos à malo, and so let vs be at one.

Then euery man brought in his owne dishe,

Lord God we had wonderfull good fare,

I warrant you there was plentie of fleshe and fishe,

Go to, I beshrew your heart and if you spare.

A gods name I was set vp at the hye deace,

Come vp syr, sayd euery body vnto me:

Like an honest man I had the fyrst meace,

Glad was he that might my proper person see.

When we had dined, euery man to horsebacke,

And so vp vnto the mount of Caluarie,

I trow you neuer heard of suche a knacke,

Muche woe had some of vs to scape the pillorie.

But when we came to hye Ierusalem,

Who then but I maister Infidelitie?

Mary I was not so called among them,

No, I haue a name more nigher the veritie.

In Iurie, Moysaicall Iustice is my name,

I would haue them iustified by the lawe,

It is playne infidelitie to beleue the same,

What then? from the faithe I doe them withdraw.

There is one come into the countrey of late,

Called Christ the sonne of God, the Iewes Messias

Of the kyngdome of God he begynneth to prate,

But he shall neuer bryng his purpose to passe,

No, I Infidelitie stick so much in the Iewes harts,

That his doctrine and wonders they wyl not beleue,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=4)I warant that
the chiefe rulers in these partes,

Will deuise somewhat his body to mischeue.

Infidelitie, no beware of me Infidelitie,

Like as Faith is the roote of all goodnesse,

So am I the head of all iniquitie,

The well and spryng of all wickednesse.

Mary syr, yet I conuey my matters cleane,

Like as I haue a visour of vertue,

So my impes, whiche vnto my person do leane,

The visour of honestie doth endue.

As these, Pride I vse to call cleanlynesse,

Enuie I colour with the face of prudence,

Wrathe putteth on the coate of manlynesse,

Couetise is profite in euery mans sentence.

Slouth or idlenesse I paint out with quiete,

Gluttonie or excesse I name honest chere,

Lechery vsed for many mens diete,

I set on with the face of loue both farre and nere.

How saie you to Infidelitie once agayne?

Infidelitie all mens heartes doe occupie:

Infidelitie now aboue true Faith doth remayne,

And shall do to the worldes ende, I thinke verily.

Yea, that same Messias doth many things,

Yet I will so occupy the rulers myndes,

Bothe of byshops, phariseys, elders and kyngs,

That fewe or none of them shalbe his frendes.

Here entreth Mary Magdalene, triflyng with her garmentes.

Marye Magda­lene.

I beshrew his heart naughtye folishe knaue,

The most bungarliest tailers in this countrie,

That be in the worlde I thinke, so God me saue,

Not a garment can they make for my degree.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=5)Haue you euer
sene an ouerbody thus sytte?

Nowe a mischief on his dronken knaues eare▪

The knaues drynke till they haue lost theyr wytte,

And then they marre vtterly a bodies geare.

I had liefer than .xx. shillings by this light

That I had him here now in my fume and heate.

What, I am ashamed to come in any mans sight,

Thinke you in the waste I am so great?

Nay by gis twentie shillings I dare holde,

That there is not a gentlewoman in this land,

More propre than I in the waste I dare be bolde,

They be my garmentes that so bungarly do stand.

Beshrew his heart once agayne with all my hart,

Is this geare no better than to cast away?

Let hym trust to it, I will make him to smart.

For marryng of my geare he shall surely pay.

Infide­litie.

God forbyd mistresse Mary, & you so tender & yong

For marryng of your geare he is greatly to blame.

Mary.

What haue you to do, holde your bablyng tong,

Haue you any thyng to doe with the same?

Infide­litie.

These vnhappy tailors I trowe be acurst,

Most cōmonly when they make gentlewomēs geare

In the myddes they set the piece that is worst.

Yea that is the fashion of them euery where.

The worst piece is in the mydst of your garment,

And it is pieced into it so vnhappily,

That by my trouthe it is past amendement,

Meddle with it, and you spyll it vtterly.

Mary.

Speake you in ernest, or I pray you do you mock▪

Trow you that my garment can not be amended?

Infide­litie.

Mock? I know that you come of a worshipful stock

He that mocketh you ought to be reprehended.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=5)Of taylers
craft I tell you I haue some skill,

And if I shold medle with ye pece that is in the midst,

I should make it worse or at the least as yll:

Therfore to let it alone as it is, I iudge it best,

Naught it is, and so you may weare it out,

Though it be new, it will be soone worne.

Mary.

It were almose to hang suche a foolishe loute,

All they that see me now, will laugh me to scorne,

No gentlewoman is ordred in this wyse,

My maydens on the other side are suche sluts,

That if I should not for myne owne clothes deuise,

Within a while they would not be worth a couple of nuts

Infide­litie.

Of my trouth it wer pitie in myne opinion

But that your geare should be well trimmed,

For you are well fauoured, and a pretie mynion,

Feate, cleane made, wel compact, and aptly lymmed.

In Ierusalem there is not I dare say,

A sweter countenance, nor a more louyng face,

Freshe and flourishyng as the floures in May,

I haue not sene a gētlewomā of a more goodly grace

Your parents I know, were very honorable,

Whiche haue left you worshipfully to lyue here,

And certainly I iudge it very commendable.

That with your owne you can make good chere.

Mary.

I thanke you for your good worde gentle friend,

And forasmuch as you did know my parentes,

I can no lesse doe than loue you with all my mynd,

Redy to do you pleasure at your cōmandementes.

Infide­litie.

Verba puellatum foliis leuiora caducis,

The promise of maidens, the Poet doth say,

Be as stable as a weake leafe in the wynde,

Like as a small blast bloweth a feather away,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=6)So a faire
word truely chaungeth a maidens mynd.

Forsothe I thanke you, O louyng worme, good lord,

Yea, I knew your fathers state and condition,

The nobilitie of Iurie can beare me record,

That he was a man of a worshipfull disposition.

I wis mystresse Marie, I had you in myne armes,

Before you were .iii. yeares of age without doubt,

I preserued you many tymes from sore harmes,

Which in your childhode your enimies went about.

A gentlewoman of noble byrth as I doe thinke

Should haue seruants alwais at her cōmaundemēt,

You are able to geue to many both meate and drinke,

Yea honest wages, and also necessary raiment.

Mary.

I perceiue right well that you owe me good will,

Tendryng my worshipfull state and dignitie:

You see that I am yong and can little skill

To prouide for myne owne honor and vtilitie.

Wherfore I pray you in all thyngs counsell to haue,

After what sort I may leade a pleasant life here,

And looke what it pleaseth you of me to craue,

I will geue it you gladly, as it shall appere.

Infide­litie.

Say you so mistresse Mary, wil you put me in trust

In faith I will tell you, you can not trust a wiser,

You shall liue pleasantly, euen at your hearts lust,

If you make me your counseller and deuiser.

Remember that you are yong and full of dalliance

Lusty, couragious, fayre, beautifull and wise.

I will haue you to attempt all kyndes of pastance,

Usyng all pleasure at your owne heartes deuise.

Do you thinke that it is not more than madnesse,

The lusty and pleasant life of a mans youth,

Miserably to passe away in study and sadnesse,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=6)It is extreme
foly mistresse Mary for a truth.

Be ye mery, and put away all fantasies,

One thyng is this, you shal neuer be yonger in dede,

Your bodily pleasure I would haue you to exercise,

Sure you are of worldly substance neuer to nede.

Mary.

Certainly my parents brought me vp in chyldhod,

In vertuous qualities, and godly literature,

And also they bestowed vpon me muche good

To haue me nourtred in noble ornature.

But euermore they were vnto me very tender,

They would not suffer the wynde on me to blowe,

My requests they would always to me render,

Wherby I knew ye good will that to me they did owe.

At their departing, their goodes they distributed

Among vs their children, whom they did well loue.

But me as their dearlyng, they most reputed,

And gaue me the greatest part, as it did behoue.

Infide­litie.

Puellae pestis, indulgentia parentum,

Of parentes the tender and carnall sufferance,

Is to yong maidens a very pestilence.

It is a prouocation and furtherance,

Unto all lust and fleshly concupiscence.

O mistresse Mary, your parentes dyd see,

That you were beautifull and well fauoured:

They did right well as it semeth me,

That so worshipfully they haue you furthered.

As I vnderstand, you haue in your possession

The whole castel of Magdalene, with the purtenāce,

Which you may rule at your discretion,

And obtaine therby riches in abundance.

O what worldly pleasure can you want,

What commodities haue you of your owne?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=7)About
Ierusalem is not suche a plant,

As to me and many other is well knowen,

It were decent I saye, to vse the fruition

Of suche richesse as is left you here,

You neuer heard in any erudition,

But that one with his own should make good chere.

Mary.

By my trouth so would I, if I perfectly knew

Which way I should good chere makyng begyn,

A lusty disposition from me doth ensue:

But without councell, I am not worth a pyn.

Infide­litie.

Councell? in you shall want no councell in dede,

I know where a certayne company is,

Whiche can geue suche councell in tyme of nede,

That you folowyng them can neuer spede amys.

Mary.

Nowe I pray you helpe me to that company,

And looke what I am able to do for your pleasure,

You shall haue it I promise you verily,

Yea, whether it be landes, golde, or treasure.

Infide­litie.

The truth is so, they whom nowe I speake of,

Are persons of great honor and nobilitie,

Felowes that loue neither to dally nor scoffe,

But at once will tell you the veritie.

Mary.

Men of honour say you? tell me I you desire,

Can you cause them trowe you shortly to be here?

I wyll goe and prouide some other attire,

That accordyng to my byrthe I may appere.

Infide­litie.

Byrth? faith of my body, you are well arayde,

I warrant you with these clothes they wil be content

They had liefer haue you naked, be not afrayde,

Then with your best holy day garment.

Mary.

You are a mery man in dede, you are a wanton,

I will go and returne agayne by and by,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=7)As I am, I
would with all my heart be known,

So that I might be plesant to euery mans eye.

Infide­litie.

I pray you heartily that I may be so bold

To haue a kisse or two before you doe depart,

Mary.

If a kisse were worth a hundred pound of gold,

You should haue it euen with my very heart.

Exit.

Infide­litie.

I thanke you mistresse Mary by my maydenhood,

Lord what a pleasant kysse was this of you?

Take her with you, I warant you wil neuer be good

She is geuen to it, I make God auow.

And I trow I shall helpe to set her forward.

Shortly my ofspryng and I shall her so dresse,

That neither law nor prophets she shall regard,

No though the sonne of God to her them expresse.

Infidelitie is my name, you know in dede,

Proprely I am called the Serpents sede,

Loke in whose heart my father Sathan doth me sow

There must all iniquitie and vice nedes growe,

The conscience where I dwell is a receptacle,

For all the diuels in hell to haue their habitacle,

You shall see, that Maries heart within short space,

For the diuell hym self shall be a dwellyng place,

I will so dresse her, that there shall not be a worse.

To her the diuell at pleasure shall haue his recourse.

I will go and prepare for her such a company,

As shall poison her with all kyndes of villanie.

Here entreth Pride of lyfe, Cupiditie, and Carnall Concupiscence.

Pride.

Whether arte thou goyng nowe Infidelitie▪

Infide­litie.

Pride of Life now welcom, the spryng of iniquitie,

O pride of life, thou neuer vsest to go alone,

Geue me your handes also I pray you one by one.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=8)Welcome pride
of life with my whole heart & mynde,

And thou art welcome Cupiditie myne owne friend:

What, mynikin carnall concupiscence,

Thou art welcome heartily by my conscience.

Pride.

To see thee mery Infidelitie I am right glad.

Cupiditi

When Infidelitie is in health, I can not be sad.

Carnall cōcupis­cence.

Infidelite? O Infidelitie, myne owne infidelitie,

I am glad to see thee mery now for a suretie,

I maruell what thou dost in this place alone,

I thought that out of Iurie thou hadst ben gone.

Infide­litie.

Out of Iurie? no carnall lust to thee I may tell

That with the chief princes now I do dwell:

The bishops, priestes and pharisies do me so retayne,

That the true sense of the lawe they do disdayne.

Pride of lyfe.

In faith there is some knauery in mynde,

That here by thy selfe alone we doe thee fynde.

Cupiditi

Infidelitie in our fathers cause is occupied,

As within a while it shall be verified.

Infide­litie.

Am I▪ you would say so if ye knew all,

I was goyng forth you to call,

Know you not a wenche called Mary Magdalene?

Pride.

Do I know hir? she is a prety wenche and a cleane.

Since she had discretion hir haue I knowne,

Mary Magdalen (quod he) in dede she is myne own

It is as proude a litle gyrle truely I thinke,

As euer men sawe in this world eate or drinke.

Cupiditi

And somwhat to do with hir now and then I haue

I allure hir for hir owne profite alway to saue.

I haue dressed hir so well truely I beleue,

That alredy for Gods sake nothyng she will geue.

Earnall concu.

For my part in hir I haue kindled such a fyre,

That she beginneth to burn in carnall desyre.

Infide­litie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=8)

Tushe, as yet you haue but hir mynde moued,

Whom she may forsake if she be reproued:

But I would haue hir cleaue vnto you so fast.

That she shall not forsake you while her life doth last

Pride.

If thou be once rooted within the hart,

Then maist thou make an entrance by thy craft & art

So that we may come into hir at pleasure,

Fillyng hir with wickednesse beyond all measure.

In vs toure without faile be contained

As many vices as euer in this world raigned.

Now if we by thy meanes may in hir remain,

She shall be sure all kyndes of vices to contain.

Car. con

Within my selfe you know that I contain a sort,

Whiche by name before you here I wil report.

My name is carnall concupiscence or desyre,

Which all the pleasures of the fleshe doth require.

First the fleshe to nourishe with drinke and meate

Without abstinence like a beast alway to eate,

To quasse and drinke when there is no necessitie,

Ioying in excesse, bealy chere, and ebrietie.

I containe in my selfe all kynd of lecherie,

Fornication, whoredom, and wicked adulterie,

Rape, incest, sacrilege, softnesse, and bestialitie,

Blyndnesse of mynde, with euery suche qualitie,

Inconstancie, headinesse, and inconsideration,

After the heartes poyson and filthy communication,

So then to the hate of God I do them bryng,

Causyng a loue in himself inordinatly to spryng.

These and suche like I containe in my person.

Thus you see that carnall lust goeth neuer alone.

Infide­litie.

Thou hast reckned an abhominable rable,

Where thou dwellest, the deuyll may haue a stable.

Cupiditi

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=9)

With thee I may boldly compare I trow,

For as many vices in me as in thee do grow.

You know that my name is called Cupiditie,

Whom Scripture calleth the roote of all iniquitie,

Infidelitie in dede is the seede of all syn,

But cupiditie openeth the gate, and letteth hym in:

I conteyne theft, deceate in sellyng and bying,

Periurie, rapine, dissimulation, and lying.

Hardinesse of heart otherwise called inhumanitie,

Inquietnesse of mynde falshode and vanitie,

In me is all vengeance enuie rankor and yre.

Murder, warre, treason, and gredie desyre.

I conteyne the wicked vices of vsurie,

Dice and card playing with all kynd of iniurie.

What mischief was there euer yet or synne,

But that cupiditie dyd it first of all begynne?

Infide­litie.

There can not be a more fylthy place in hell,

Than that is, where as cupiditie doth dwell.

Cupiditi

Yea, there is impietie, the contempt of Gods lawe,

His worde is no more regarded than a vile strawe.

Pride of lyfe.

You contayne vices very wicked in dede,

But how wicked is he, frō whom al syn doth procede:

The beginning of syn, which doth mā frō god deuide

Scripture calleth it nothyng els but pride.

For I my selfe not onely conteyne you three,

But all vices in you, and that in euery degree,

Pride despiseth God, and committeth idolatrie

To God and man Pride is a very aduersarie,

I am full of boastyng, arrogancie, and vainglorie,

Enuious, and of all other mens wealth right sory:

Pride causeth obstinacie, and disobedience,

Yea, it engendreth idlenesse and negligence,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=9)The truth of
Gods prophets through tirāts of pride

Hath euer vnto this day ben cast asyde:

The men of God pride hath spitefully reputed,

And with tirants alway the same persecuted.

Pride would neuer suffer any vertue to raigne,

But oppressed it with great malice and disdaine.

In a short summe & fewe wordes you shall know all,

Pride caused Lucifer from heauen to hell to fall.

Yea pride lost mankynd, and did him so infect,

That God from his fauour dyd him away reiect,

Where as pride is, a token it is euident,

That all other vices be euen there resident.

Infide­litie.

Where as you and all your ofspryng doth dwell,

There is a place for all the diuels in hell:

And playne it is, where as is suche fylthy sinne,

There euen in this world their hell doth begynne.

By such time as with vs Mary be furnished,

With the deuill him self she shall be replenished.

Pride.

In our tragedie we may not vse our owne names,

For that would turne to al our rebukes and shames.

Infide­litie.

Pride with all thy abhominable store,

At this tyme must be called Nobilitie and honor.

Cupiditi

Uery well, for these women that be vicious,

Are alwais high mynded and ambicious.

Concu­piscence▪

Neuer woman that could play a harlots part,

Was either humble, or yet meke in hart.

Infide­litie.

Yea and the same loued alway cupiditie,

Therfore thy name shall be called Utilitie.

Pryde.

For hym a better name you could not expresse,

For yll disposed women are alway mercylesse.

Car. concupiscēce

They are alwais scraping, clawing, & gathering,

To maintaine their liues in wickednesse and synne.

Infide­litie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=10)

Carnall concupiscence shalbe called pleasure,

And that pretie Marie loueth beyond all measure.

Pride.

Infidelitie may not be called infidelitie.

Infide­litie.

No, we will worke with a litle more austeritie,

Infidelitie for diuers respectes hath names diuers,

Of the which some of thē to you I purpose to reherse

With bishops, priests, scribes, seniors and pharisies,

And with as many as be of the Iewes degrees,

I am called Legall Iustice commonly:

For why by the lawe them selues they do iustifie.

It is playne Infidelitie so to beleue:

Therfore there, suche a name to my selfe I do geue.

I haue a garment correspondent to that name,

By the which I walke among them without blame.

With publicans and sinners of a carnall pretence,

I am somtime called coūsel, and somtime Prudence.

I cause them the wisedome of God to despise,

And for the fleshe and the world wittily to deuise,

Prudence before Marie my name I will call.

Which to my suggestions will cause hir to fall:

A vesture I haue here to this garment correspondēt,

Lo here it is, a gowne I trowe conuenient.

Pride.

For our honor I pray thee heartily doe it weare.

Infide­litie.

Mary did talke with me before in this geare,

But bicause she shall the sooner to me apply,

put on a gowne & a cap.

I will dresse me in these garments euen by and by.

How thynke you by me now in this aray?

Mary loueth them I tell you, that vse to go gay.

Cupiditi

Then hadst thou nede to mend thy folysh coūtenāce

For thou lookest like one that hath lost his remēbrāce

Car. concupiscece

With the one eye ouermuch thou vsest to winke,

That thou meanest som fraude therby they wyl think

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=10)He that
loketh with one eie, & winketh with an other,

I would not trust (say they) if he were my brother.

Infide­litie.

Lyke obstinate Friers I temper my looke,

Which had one eie on a wench, and an other on a boke

Passion of God, behold, yonder commeth Marie.

See that in your tales none from other do varie.

Pride.

It is a pretie wenche that it is in dede,

Muche to intreate her, I thynke we shall not nede.

Cupiditi

No, for I thinke she is yll inough of hir selfe,

She seemeth to be a proude little elfe.

Car. concupiscēce

I pray you behold how she trimmeth her geare?

She would haue all well about her euery where.

Mary.

Maidēs (quod she?) there is no gētlewomā I wene

So accumbred as I am, for such were neuer sene:

Fie on them in good faith they are to badde,

They would make some gentlewoman stark madde.

Like as I put of my geare, so I do it fynde,

And I can not tel how oft I haue told thē my mynd,

By the faith of my body if they do not amende,

To lay them on the bones surely I do intend.

Infide­litie.

Maxima quaequae domus, seruis est plena superbis,

Euery great house, as the Poet doth say,

Is full of naughtie seruantes both night and day.

Mary

You say truth sir in dede, what old acquaintance?

Now forsoth you were out of my remembrance:

You haue changed your aray since I was here,

I am glad to see you mery and of a good chere.

Infide­litie.

And I of yours mistresse Mary with hart & mynd

It is a ioy to see a gentlewoman so louyng and kynd

Shall I be so bold to kisse you at our metyng?

Mary.

What else? it is an honest maner of greetyng.

Infideli▪

Pleaseth it you to byd these gentlemen welcome?

Mary.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=11)

Yea forsoth, are they heartily all and some.

I will kysse you all for this gentlemans sake,

He is a friend of myne as I do hym take.

Pride.

He is in dede, you may be sure mistresse Mary,

There is no man lyuyng can say the contrary.

Cupiditi

He hath ben diligent to seke vs togither,

And for your sake he hath caused vs to come hither.

Car. concupiscēce

I dare say thus much, that he is your friende,

For he loueth you with his whole heart and mynde.

He hath ben diligent about your cause,

As it had bene his owne, and would neuer pause,

Till he had performed his desired request.

Mary.

Which I am able to say is very honest.

A gentle friend at so little acquaintance,

Will you  [...]ooke so much vnto my furtherance?

It seemeth then if by me you had ben benefited,

You would haue my kyndnesse gently requited.

Infide­litie.

Quo magis tegitur, magis aestuat ignis

The more closely that you kepe fyre, no doubt

The more feruent it is when it breaketh out.

Mary.

Wel friend, I know what you meane by that verse

What I wil do for you at this tyme I wil not reherse

But in one thyng truly I am muche to blame,

That all this tyme I haue not inquired your name.

Infide­litie.

Swete mistresse Mary, I am called Prudence,

Or els Counsell, full of wisedome and science,

Here vnto you, honorable Honor I haue brought,

A person alway to be in your mynde and thought,

And this person is named Utilitie,

Uery profitable for your commoditie,

Pleasure is the name of this Mynion,

Conuenient for you forsothe in myne opinion.

Mary.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=11)

Prudence, Honor, Utilitie, and Pleasure,

Oh who would desyre in this world more treasure,

Gramercy heart of gold for your great payne,

Truly of necessitie, I must kisse you once agayne.

Infide­litie.

Will you so? that is the thyng that haue I wold,

Euery kisse to me is worth a crowne of golde.

Pride.

Leaue kissyng, & treate we of matters more ernest.

Let vs reason of thyngs concerning your request.

Honor is my name, a qualitie for you requisite,

Or rather of honor I am an appetite:

On the which must be all your meditation,

With the hearts courage and myndes eleuation:

I tell you this desyre must be euer next your hart.

Infide­litie.

Nay hoa there, backare, you must stand apart,

You loue me best I trow, mystresse Mary.

Mary.

For a hundred pound I would not say the contrary

And in token Prudence that I loue you best,

Here I ioyn you next vnto my heart and breast.

Cupiditi

If ye embrace one, you must all embrace,

For our vse is to dwell all in one place.

Concu­piscence.

Tushe from our purpose alway we do digresse,

Let euery one of vs his qualities expresse.

Infide­litie.

Agreed, mistresse Mary heare you my counsell.

First, all thought from your heart you must expell.

Trouble not your selfe with any fantasies,

Neuer attend you to the lawe nor prophecies.

They were inuented to make fooles afrayd,

Heare them not, for they will make you dismayd.

God? tushe, when was God to any man sene,

I had not ben now aliue, if any God had bene.

Pryde.

Homo homini Deus.

Man, is God to man this matter is playne,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=12)And beleue
you that none other God doth raigne.

Cupiditi

Man is the begynnyng of his owne operation:

Ergo then of none other gods creation,

Man is his owne God therfore with vtilitie,

Let hym labour here to lyue in felicitie.

Concu­piscence:

Of many ladies I am certaine you haue hard,

Which the people as goddesses dyd regard:

And why▪ this was the cause truly in my iudgement,

They had all pleasure here at theyr cōmaundement,

So that they liued in ioy wealth and prosperitie,

Usyng all pleasures for their owne commoditie.

Infide­litie.

To be a goddesse your selfe truely you must beleue,

And yt you may be so, your mind therto you must geue

All other gods beside your selfe you must despise,

And set at nought their Scripture in any wise.

Pride.

How say you M. Mary do we not gree all in one?

Infideli.

Surely M. Mary we will make you a Goddesse anone.

Mary.

You please me excedingly well verily,

Persons you are of great witte and policie.

Pride.

You must be proude, loftie, and of hye mynde,

Despise the poore, as wretches of an other kynde:

Your countenance is not ladylike inough yet.

I see well that we had nede to teache you more wit.

Let your eies roll in your head, declaryng your pride,

After this sort you must cast your eies aside.

Mary.

How thinke you by this maner of countenance?

Pride.

Conueniēt for such as be not of your acquaintance.

Cupiditi

I doubt not but she will do right well hir part,

By that tyme that all we be fast within hir hart,

Carnall concu.

Marke the garmentes of other in any wise,

And be you sure of one of the newest guise.

Your haire me thynke is as yelow as any gold,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=12)Upon your
face layd about haue it I wold.

Sometime on your forehead the breadth of an hand,

Somtime let your attire vpon your crowne stand,

That all your haire for the most part may be in sight,

To many a man a fayre haire is a great delight.

Infide­litie.

In sommer time now and then to kepe away flies,

Let some of that faire haire hang in your eies:

With a hotte nedle you shall learne it to crispe,

That it may curle together in maner like a wispe.

Mary.

By my trouth you are a merrie gentleman,

I will follow your counsell as much as I can.

Pride.

By your eares somtimes with pretie tusks & toyes

You shall folde your haire like Tomboyes.

It becommeth a yong gentlewoman be ye sure,

And yong men vnto your loue it will allure.

Cupiditi

If the colour of your haire beginneth for to fade,

A craft you must haue▪ that yellow it may be made,

With some Goldsmyth you may your selfe acquaint,

Of whō you may haue water your haire for to paint.

Concu­piscence.

Besydes Goldsmythes water, there is other geare,

Uery good also to colour agayne the heare,

Yea, if you were not beautifull of your vysage,

A painter could make you to apere wt a lusty courage

And though you were as aged as any creature,

A Painter on your face would set such an ornature,

That you should seeme yong and very faire,

And like one whose beautie doth neuer dispaire.

Infide.

M. Mary, had you neuer ye smal por in your youth?

Pryde.

You are a mad fellow Prudence, of a truth.

Marie.

I pray you M. Prudence▪ wherfore ask you that?

Pride.

It is l [...]ke that in you he hath spied somewhat

Car. con

Alas good gentlewoman, she blushes like coles.

Infide­litie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=13)

In dede about her nose there be little prety holes,

Therfore I thynk that she hath had the pockes,

I meane good faith without any gaudes or mockes.

Mary.

If there be any fautes in my face verily,

For money I trust shortly to haue remedy.

Pride.

Mistresse Mary there is not a fayrer in this town.

Infideli.

Yea by saint Anne she is louely in color, but brown.

Car. concupiscēce

If she be not content with that natiue colour,

A painter will set on one of more honour.

Infide­litie.

I haue known painters that haue made old crones

To appeare as pleasant as little prety yong Iones.

Pride.

Let vs returne agayne to our ornamentes,

I would haue you pleasant alway in your garments

Upon your forhead you must weare a bon grace,

Which like a penthouse may com farre ouer your face,

And an other from your nose vnto your throte,

Of veluet at the least, without spot or moate,

Your garments must be so worne alway,

That your white pappes may be seene if you may.

Cupiditi

If yong gentlemen may see your white skin,

It will allure them to loue, and soone bryng them in.

Concu­piscēce.

Both damsels and wiues vse many such feates,

I know them that will lay out their faire teates,

Purposely men to allure vnto their loue,

For it is a thyng that doth the heart greatly moue.

At such sights of women I haue known men in dede

That with talking & beholding their noses wil blede▪

Through great corage moued by such goodly sights▪

Labouring the matter further with al their myghts.

Mary.

Your wordes do not onely prouoke my desire,

But in pleasure they set my heart on fyre.

Infideli.

Sometime for your pleasure you may weare a past▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=13)But aboue all
th [...]n is gyrd your self in the waste,

Upon your ouer body you may nothyng els weare,

But an vnliued garment without any other geare.

Let your body be pent, and togither strained,

As hard as may be, though therby you be pained.

Pride

Use will make the thyng easy there is no doubt.

[...]

Yea pardie gentlewomen vse it now all about.

Infi [...]litie

Your nether garmēts must go by gymmes & ioynts

Aboue your buttocks thei must be tied on wt points.

Some women a doublet of fyne lynnen vse to weare

Unto the which they tye theyr other nether geare,

With wiers & houpes your garments must be made,

Pleasure your mynion shall shew you in what trade.

[...]

In the wast I wil haue ye as small as a wand.

Yea so smal, that a man may span you with his hand.

Infideli

It skilleth not though in the buttocks you be great

Car. con

No for there she is like many tymes to be beate.

Marie.

Well wantons well, are ye not ashamed?

Pryde.

In dede mistresse, they are worthy to be blamed.

You must reioyce in your richesse and good,

And set muche by your kynrede and noble blood:

Boast of them, and when of them you do talke,

Of their cōmendatiōs let your tong euermore walk.

Daily thus, my lord my father, or mi lady my mother

My lorde my vncle, and my maister my brother.

Mary.

I promise you I come of a stocke right honorable,

Therfore my talk of them can not be to cōmendable.

Infide­litie.

It is a stock (they say) right honorable and good,

That hath neither these nor whore in their blood.

No more words: how say you M. here by pleasure?

Mary.

Forsoth swete heart. I loue him beyond al measure.

Infideli

Body of god, for this al this while haue I wrought?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=14)By your
smirking loke ofttimes on him so I thought

What do you loue hym better than you loue me?

Mary.

Which of you I should loue best truly I can not se.

Infide­litie.

This is a true prouerbe, and no fained fable,

Few womens words, be honest, constant, and stable.

Concu­piscēce.

Truly M. Mary if ye loue me, ther is nothing lost,

Loue they say, ieopardeth all, and spareth for no cost.

Voluptas autem est sola quae nos vocet ad se,

Et aliciat suapte natura,

Pleasure sayth one man, of his owne nature,

Allecteth to hym euery humayn creature:

Now what person soeuer doth pleasure hate,

As a beast is to be abiected both early and late.

Let me haue a worde or two in your eare.

How say you by that, like you not that pretie geare?

Mary.

Ha, ha, ha, you are a fond body pleasure verily.

Infide­litie.

Doth he not moue you to matrimonie?

Take hede that he bryng you not to suche dotage,

For many incommodities truely be in mariage.

Cupiditi

Semper habent lites, alter (que) iurgia lectus,

In quo nupta iacet minimum dormitur in illo,

The bedde wherin lieth any maried wife,

Is neuer without chidyng, braulyng, and strife,

That woman shall neuer sleape in quiete,

Which is maried contrary to hir diete.

Pride.

Of all bondage truely this is the ground,

A gentlewoman to one husband to be bound.

Car. con

Tushe mistresse Mary, be ye not in subiection,

Better it is to be at your owne election.

What thyng in this world excelleth libertie?

Neither gold nor treasure for a suretie.

Take you now one, and then an other hardely,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=14)Such as for
the tyme will to you louyngly apply.

Mary.

That will be a meane truly to lese my good name.

And so among the people I shal suffer blame.

Infide­litie.

Ye shal not kepe my counsel, if ye can not kepe your own

Can you not make good chere, but it must be known?

Concu­piscence.

As touching that, I will be to you suche a meane,

As shal teache you alwais to conuey the matter clene

Pride.

Take you none but gentlemen with veluet coates,

It is to be thought, that they ar not without groates

Cupiditi

In any wise see that your louers be yong and gay,

And suche fellowes as be well able to pay.

Mary.

Nay truely if I should attempt any such geare,

I would take where I loued alway here and there.

Concu­piscence:

Spoken like a worthy swete gyrle by the masse,

I warant all this geare will well come to passe.

Infide­litie.

You must euer haue a tongue well fyled to flatter,

Let your garmentes be sprinkled with rose water.

Use your ciuet, pommander, muske, which be to sell,

That the odor of you a myle of, a man may smell,

With swete oyntments such as you can appoynt,

Use you euermore your propre body to anoynt.

Concu­piscence.

With fine meats & pure wines do your body norish

That will cause you in all pleasure to florishe:

And when one for your mynde you can espye,

Use a smylyng countenance and a wanton eye.

Pride.

Upon all suche as ye mynd not, looke you aloft,

To them that be not of your diet be you not soft.

Mary.

Ha, ha, ha, laugh▪ now I pray God I dye if euer I did se,

Such pleasant companions as you all be.

You speake of many thynges here of pleasure,

Which to vse truely requireth muche treasure.

Car. con

If you can wisely occupie this pretie geare,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=15)I will warant
you to get an hundred pound a yeare.

Infide­litie.

Hold vp the market, and let them pay for the ware,

Be euer catchyng and takyng, doe you not spare.

Mary.

I may vse daliance and pastyme a while,

But the courage of youth will soone be in exile.

I remember yet since I was a little foole,

That I learned verses when I went to schoole,

Which be these:

Forma bona fragilis est, quantum acce [...]t ad anno [...] ▪

[...]t minor, & spacio carpitur illa suo,

Nec semper viola, nec semper lilia florent,

Et riget amissa spina relicta rosa.

The pleasure of youth is a thyng right frayle,

And is yearely lesse, so that at length it doth faile,

The swete violets and lylies flourishe not alway:

The rose soone drieth, and lasteth not a day.

I see in other women by very experience,

That the tyme of youth hath no long permanence.

Infide­litie.

In good faith when ye ar come to be an old maude,

Then it will be best for you to play the baude.

In our countrey there be suche olde mother bees,

Which are glad to cloke baudry for their fees.

This is the order, such as wer harlots in their youth

May vse to be baudes euermore for a truth.

Pride.

When the courage of them is altogither past,

In age they vse to get their liuyng with such a cast.

Cupiditi

Tushe, your frends haue left you honest possessiōs,

Which you may imploy after suche discretions,

That a worshipfull state you may maintayne,

Besides that, with the other feate you may gayne.

Oppresse your tenantes, take fines, and raise rentes,

Hold vp your houses and lands with their contents.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=15)Bye by great
measure, and sell by small measure,

This is a way to amplifie your treasure:

Sell your ware for double more than it is worth,

Though it be starke nought, yet put it forth.

A thousand castes to enriche you I can tell,

If you be content to vse alway my counsell.

Mary.

Yes by the faith of my body, els I were not wise,

For my profite is your counsell and deuise.

Infide­litie.

How say you mistresse Mary, tell vs your mynde,

To embrace vs & loue vs can you in your heart fynd?

Mary.

Truly hart rote I loue you all .iiii. with al my hart,

Trusting that none of vs from other shall depart.

In token wherof, I embrace you in myne armes,

Trusting that you will defend me from all harmes.

Pride.

Will we? yea we will see so for your prosperitie,

That you shall lyue in ioy and felicitie.

Cupiditi

I will see that you shall haue good in abundance,

To maintaine you in all pleasure and daliance.

Concu­piscēce.

And new kyndes of pastyme I will inuent,

With the which I trust ye shal be content.

Infideli.

Mistresse Mary can you not play on ye virginals?

Mary.

Yes swete heart that I can, and also on the regals,

There is no instrument but that handle I can,

I thynke as well as any gentlewoman.

Infide­litie.

If that you can play vpon the recorder,

I haue as fayre a one as any is in this border,

Truely you haue not sene a more goodlie pipe,

It is so bigge that your hand can it not gripe.

Pride.

Will you be so good as to play vs a daunce?

And we wil do you as great pleasure it may chaunce.

Mary

Alas we haue no suche instrument here.

I knowe where you may haue all suche geare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=16)No
instrumentes nor pastime that you can require,

But I can bryng you vnto it at your desire.

Cupiditi

Will you take the payne to go before thither?

And mistresse Mary and we will come togither.

Infideli.

How say you mistresse Mary, are you content?

Mary.

Looke what you will do, I will therto assent.

Pride.

I thinke it best that we .iii. depart hence,

And let mistresse Mary com thither with Prudence.

Infide­litie.

Be it so, then you and I will come alone,

I trust that by the way we will make one,

Nay M. Mary we must haue a song of .iiii. partes

At your departyng to reioyce our mery hartes.

Cupiditi

The treble you shall maister Pleasure syng

So freshly that for ioy your heart shall spryng.

Utilitie can syng the base full cleane,

And Noble Honor shall syng the meane.

Infide.

Mistresse Mary will you helpe to syng a part?

Mary.

Yea swete heart with you with all my hart.

In faith we will haue a song of your name.

Infideli.

Come syrs, helpe I pray you to syng the same.

The sōg

Hey dery, dery, with a lusty dery,

Hoigh mistresse Mary, I pray you be mery.

Your pretie person we may compare to Lais,

A morsell for princes and noble kynges,

In beautie you excell the fayre lady Thais,

You excede the beautifull Helene in all thyngs,

To behold your face who can be wearie?

Hoigh mystresse Mary, I pray you be merie.

The haire of your head shyneth as the pure gold,

Your eyes as gray as glasse and right amiable,

Your smylyng countenance so louely to behold,

[...] all is moste pleasant and delectable,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=16)Of your
commendations who can be wearie?

Huffa mystresse Mary, I pray you be mery.

Your lyps as ruddy as the redde Rose,

Your teeth as white as euer was the whales bone,

So cleane, so swete, so fayre, so good, so freshe, so gay,

In all Iurie truely at this day there is none.

With a lusty voyce syng we Hey dery dery.

Huffa mistresse Mary, I pray you be mery.

Mary.

Suche pleasant cōpanions I haue not sene before,

Now I pray you let vs dwell togither euermore.

Pride.

To your heart we are so fast conglutinate,

That from thence we shall neuer be separate.

Cupidit▪

Yet from your syght at this tyme we will depart,

Assuryng you to remayn styll in our hart.

Car. concupiscēce

We thre will go before some thyng to prepare,

That shalbe to your commoditie and welfare.

Mary.

Fare you well my heartes ioy, pleasure, and blisse.

It is good maner at our departing to kisse.

Exeunt All thre:

Infide.

I must kisse to, if I tary styll.

Marie.

You shall haue kisses inough, euen when you will.

Infide­litie.

Gramercy in dede myne owne good louyng Iugge

It doth me good in myne armes you to hugge,

How say you now by these mynions?

Mary.

I say as you say in dede they are mynions,

And suche persons as long tyme I haue desired,

I thanke you, that for me you haue them inquired.

Infide­litie.

You must thinke on the counsell that they did geue,

They will performe their sayinges you shall beleue.

Mary.

I am not obliuious I warant you my freinde,

For I haue printed all their wordes in my mynde,

I haue determined by them to direct my life,

So that no man shalbe able to set vs at strife.

Infide­litie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=17)

Will you resort with me vnto Ierusalem?

There we shall be sure in a place to fynde them.

A banket they haue prepared for you I dare say,

Suche a one as hath not ben sene before this day.

Mary.

Alas why do they suche great cost on me bestow?

Infide­litie.

Truly bicause you their good hearts should know.

There is nothyng lost that is done for such a friende,

I wis mistresse Mary, I wold you knew al my mind

Mary.

Gentle Prudence if you haue any thyng to say,

Breake your mynd boldly to me as you go by ye way.

Infide­litie.

Will you come? you had nede to go but softly,

Take hede, for the way is foule and slipperie:

If neuer so litle backward you chaunce to slippe,

Up into your saddle forsoth I am redy to skippe.

Mary.

Go wanton, get you forth with sorow,

We shal be at Ierusalem I think to morow.

Exeunt.

Here entreth Symon the Pharisie, and Malicious Iudgement.

Simon ye pharisie.

I thought surely yt here we shold haue found him,

It was shewed me that he was here about in dede.

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

The last weke he was at the Citie of Naim,

And from thens I wote not whether he did procede.

Simon.

He did a maruellous act there, as we heard say,

For the which the people do him greatly praise:

Maruels he worketh almost euery day.

At Naim a dead chylde agayne he did rayse.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

All things he doth by the power of the great deuill,

And that you may see by his conuersation,

He kepeth company with suche as be euyll,

And with them he hath his habitation:

A frende of sinners, and a drynker of wyne,

Neuer conuersant with suche as be honest,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=17)Against the
law he teacheth a doctrine,

All holy Religion he doth detest,

The reuerend bishops and you the pharisies,

He calleth hipocrites, and doth you reuile,

So he doth the doctours and scribes of all degrees▪

Beside that, the Saboth also he doth defile.

He vseth as great blasphemie as euer was,

The sonne of the lyuyng God he doth hymself call,

He saith that he is the very same Messias,

Prophecied before of the Prophets all.

I promise you right worshipfull Simon,

Your temple, lawe, and people shal be made captiue,

If in this sort he be suffred alone,

And you shall lose all your prerogatiue.

Simon

We the fathers of the clergie diuers seasons,

About hym haue consulted together,

To destroy hym we haue alleaged reasons,

But many thyngs therin we do consider.

His doctrine is maruellous this is true,

And his workes are more maruellous doubtlesse,

If as yet we should chaunce hym to pursue,

Muche inconuenience might chaunce and distresse,

The people do hym for a great Prophete take,

He doth so muche good among them that be sicke,

That they wote not what on hym to make,

For he healeth bothe the madde and the lunatike.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Me thinke verily, that it doth you behoue,

Which are men of learnyng and intelligence,

His doctrine and miracles wisely to proue,

And whence he had them to haue experience.

Simon.

By my faith I wil tell you what was my pretence,

To haue bidden him to dyner this day I thought,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=18)Where we
would haue examined his science,

And by what power suche wonders he wrought.

But if I can not haue hym in my house this day,

I will appoynt an other day for the same cause.

Then will we appoint for hym some other way

If we fynd hym contrary to our lawes.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Ne credas tempori, trust not the tyme he doth say,

I feare that you will permitte hym to long:

There is euer peryll in muche delay,

Neuer suffre you to raigne ought that is wrong.

Simon.

Well, seyng that at this tyme he doth not appere,

I will returne hence as fast as I may,

Take you the payne a whyle to tary here

To see if he chance at any tyme to come this way,

Or if you here where he is resident,

Let vs haue worde as fast as euer you can.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

As concernyng your request I will be diligent,

To doe you pleasure euermore I am your man.

It shall cost me a fall I promise hym truely,

Except I bryng hym shortly to an ende.

Watche for hym will I, in all places duely,

I will know what the marchant doth intende.

A beggerly wretch, that hath not of his owne,

One house or cabyn wherin he may rest his heade:

His parents for poore laboring folks ar wel known,

And haue not ye things which shold stand thē in stede

No man knoweth where he lerned & went to schoole

And yet he taketh vpon hym to teache men doctrine.

But within a while he will proue him selfe a foole,

And come to vtter destruction and ruine.

Is he able, thynke you, to withstande,

So many bishops, priestes, and pharisies,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=18)Great learned
men, and seniors of the lande,

With other people that be of their affinites?

His foly by his presumption he doth declare,

A while we are content that he doth raigne.

But I trust to make him wearie of his welfare,

If I may see hym in this countrey agayne.

Infide­litie.

Ha, ha, ha, laugh quod he? laugh I must in dede,

I neuer sawe a bolder harlot in my life,

To prompt hir forward we shall not nede,

No poynt of synne but that in hir is rife.

Malicioꝰ iugem [...]t

Infidelitie? what a diuell doest thou here?

I had not knowen thee but by thy voyce.

Infide­litie.

Malicious iudgement I pray thee what chere,

To see thee mery at my heart I doe reioyce.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

What a diuell meanest thou by this geare?

This garment is not of the wonted fashion.

Infide­litie.

For euery day I haue a garment to weare,

Accordyng to my worke and operation,

Among the Pharisies, I haue a Pharisies gown,

Among publicans and synners an other I vse,

I am best I tell thee now, both in citie and towne,

And chiefly among the people of the Iewes.

This is the cause their Messias, whō Christ they call

Is come into the world, sinners to forgeue.

Now my labour is both with great and small,

That none of them do hym nor his wordes beleue.

The bishops & pharisies I make ye more hard harted

The synnes of them that are disposed to synne,

I augment, so that they can not be conuerted,

So that hard it will be any grace to wynne.

Malicioꝰ iudge:

Among them Malicious iudgemēt is not my name

The true intellection of the law they doe me call,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=19)Carnally I
cause them to vnderstand the same,

And accordyng to their owne malice to iudge all.

Infide­litie.

Thou knowest that among thē I am Iustice lega.

For by the dedes of the law they will be iustified,

So that the doctrine of the Messias euangelicall,

Shalbe despised, and he therfore crucified.

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

The reuerend father Simon the Pharisie,

To haue spoken with him, euen now was here:

Under the pretence of frendship and amitie,

He would bid him to diner, and make him good chere,

Not for any good-will that to hym he doth owe,

But to proue his fashion, learnyng, and power.

Good will quod he▪ No, no that I do know.

Infide­litie.

For yf they durst, he should die within this houre.

But let this passe, I will tell thee what I haue done,

Knowest thou not a wench called Mary Magdalene

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Yes mary, I dyd see her yesterday at noone.

A pretie wenche she is in deede and a cleane.

Infide­litie.

I haue brought her now into suche a case,

That she is past the feare of God and shame of man,

She worketh priuily in euery place,

Yea and prouoketh other therto now and than,

I would thou dydst see hir disposition,

Thou hast not sene hir like I think in thy dayes.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

If she haue tasted of thy erudition,

I doubt not but she knoweth all wicked ways,

To se her fashion I would bestowe my forty pence,

But at this tyme I can no longer tary here,

About my busynesse I must depart hence,

Seekyng for the same Christ both farre and nere.

Infideli.

Uery little I hope for his commoditie.

To doe hym any good doest thou intende?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=19)Thou knowest
my mynde right well Infidelitie▪

What nede we any more tyme to spende?

Farewell, thou wilt come to  [...]er to day,

Maister Symon will haue him if it be possible.

Infide­litie.

Thou knowest that I dwell with such men alway,

For in his heart I am euen now inuisible.

Well remembred, yet I must prouide a garment

Agaynst that I come to my master Symon,

About the which the preceptes of the testament

Must be written in order one by one.

Nowe will I returne to my minion againe

I may not from hir be away absent.

If hir companie I should a litle refraine,

I knowe well that she would not be content.

Mary

Horeson, I beshrowe your heart, are you here?

I may doe what I will for you.

Infide­litie.

Huffa mistresse Mary, are you so neare?

I thought otherwise I make God auowe.

I pray you let me haue a worde in your eare,

I promise you he is a mynion felowe.

By my faith I thought that you had ben there,

For I sawe when you dyd hym folow.

Mary▪

By my faith Prudence you haue a false eye▪

A body can neuer so secretely worke,

But that theyr daliance you will espie,

I trowe for the nones you lye in corners and lurke.

But sirra, how say you to hym in the flaren beard?

That is a knaue that horeson, wote you what he did▪

In my life was I neuer worse afrayde,

When I came to bed, I found him there hid.

Out alas, quod I, here is some yll spirite,

A swete sauour of muske and ciuet I smelt,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=20)Come and lye
with me Mary quod he, this night,

Then I knew who it was, when his beard I felt.,

Infide­litie.

I beshrew your hearts, whore & thefe wer agreed

You knew the spirit wel inough before you cam there

I am sure, that so honestly he had you feed,

That the reward dyd put away the feare.

Mary.

Good lord, who is this that yonder doth come?

What meane the tables that be in his hand?

Infide­litie.

Come asyde a little, and geue hym roume,

And what he is anone we shall vnderstand.

The Lawe.

The Lawe of God at this tyme I do represent,

Written with the fynger of God in tables of stone,

Wherby the people might know their lord omnipotēt

And how that he is the Lord God alone.

A peculiar people to him selfe he had elected,

Comming of the stocke of faithfull Abraham,

Whom by the lawe he would haue directed,

After that out of Egypt from Pharao they came.

In me as in a glasse it doth plainly appere,

What God of his people doth require,

What the peoples duetie is, they may see here,

Which they owe vnto God in paine of hell fyre.

In me is declared the same iustice,

Whiche vnto God is acceptable,

Mans synne is here shewed, and proude enterprise,

Wherby he is conuicted to paines perdurable.

It was necessary and it dyd behoue,

Considering mans pride and temeritie,

Whiche was dronke and blynde in his owne loue,

To make a lawe to shewe his imbecillitie.

Except the lawe had rebuked his vanitie,

So much he would haue trusted in his own strength

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=20)And beleued,
that through ye power of his humanitie,

He might haue obteined saluation at length.

Wherfore as I sayd to a glasse compared I may be,

Wherin clerely as in the sunne lyght,

The weakenesse and sinne of him self he may se,

Yea and his owne damnation as it is ryght.

For the curse of God foloweth synne alway,

And damnation foloweth malediction:

By this it appereth as cleare as the day,

That my office is to fyll the mynde with affliction,

I am a ministration of death workyng yre,

I shewe Gods request, and mans vnabilitie,

I condemne hym for synne vnto eternall fyre,

I fynde not one iust of mans fragilitie.

Mary.

O Prudence, heare you not what the law doth say,

Excedingly it pricketh my conscience.

I may crie out alas nowe and welaway,

For I am damned by Gods owne sentence.

Infide­litie.

Prick of cōsciēce, quod she? it pricketh you not so sore

As the yong man with the flaxen beard dyd I thinke

What a diuell about him here do you poare.

If euer I see any suche, I pray God I synke.

The more you loke on him, ye worse like him you shal.

Come away, come away from him for very shame.

And in dede will you be gasyng on him styll?

If you repent not this, let me suffer blame.

Mary.

O frend Prudence, doe you see yonder glasse?

I will tell what therin I doe see:

I can not speake for sorowe, now out alasse,

All men for synne by Gods sentence damned be.

The spirite of God speaketh by kyng Salomon,

That no man on earth lyueth without synne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=21)Dauid saith
there is none good, no not one,

No not a child that this day doth his life begynne.

Nowe synne I see requireth eternall damnation,

If a childe be damned that is but a day olde,

Alas, where then shall be my habitation?

Whiche hath done more synnes than can be tolde.

The Lawe.

Yea woman, God doth not onely prohibite the dede,

But he forbiddeth the lust and concupiscence,

Therfore thy heart hath great occasion to blede,

For many lustes and dedes hath defiled thy cōscience.

Infide­litie.

Body of God, are you so madde him to beleue▪

These thyngs are written to make folkes afrayde,

Will ye to him or to me credence geue?

Or to your frends, by whom you wer neuer dismaid▪

And I put case that the wordes nowe were trewe,

He speaketh of men, but no women at all,

Women haue no soules, this saying is not newe,

Men shall be damned, and not women which do fall.

the Law

By this terme man, truely in holy Scripture,

Is vndertake both man, woman, and child in dede,

Yea as many of both kyndes as be of mans nature,

Whiche procede of Adam the first parents sede.

Enter know­ledge of Sinne.

By the Lawe commeth the knowledge of synne,

Whiche knowledge truely here I represent,

Whiche freate and byte the conscience within,

Causyng the same euermore to lament.

I am euermore before the conscience sight,

Shewyng before hym his condemnation,

So that by the dedes of the law, or by his own might

He can not attaine vnto saluation.

Infide­litie.

Lo Mary, haue ye not sponne a fayre threde?

Here is a pocky knaue, and an yll fauoured,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=21)The deulll is
not so euill fauoured I thinke in dede,

Corrupt, rotten, stinkyng, and yll sauoured.

It is not possible truly to declare here,

Know­ledge of synne.

The horrible, lothsome, and stinkyng vilitie,

Which before the eyes of God doth appere,

Committed by this wretched womans iniquitie.

Mary.

Now wo be to the time that euer I was borne,

I see that I am but a damned deuill in hell,

I know that there with diuels I shall be torne,

And punished with more pains than my tong can tell

O blessed Lawe shew me some remedy,

The Prophete calleth thee immaculate and pure,

Thou of thy selfe in many places doest testifie,

That the kepers of thee are alway safe and sure.

He that obserueth all thyngs written in me,

the Law

Shall liue in them, as Moyses doth expresse:

But neuer man yet in this world I dyd see,

Which dyd not the contentes in me transgresse.

It is beyond all mans possibilitie,

To obserue any commaundement in me required,

Therby appeareth his weaknesse and fragilitie,

Hapned through sinne, that against God he cōspired.

The power of the law is mans synne to declare,

Know­ledge of synne.

And to shew his damnation for the same,

But to giue saluation for the soules welfare,

The lawe doth no suche promise any tyme proclame.

Mary

If there be no more comfort in the lawe than this,

I wishe that the lawe had neuer ben made:

In God I see is small mercy and Iustice,

To entangle men, and snarle them in such a trade.

Infide­litie.

I can you thanke for that Mary in dede:

Well spoken, an vniust God do you esteme.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=22)Euen from the
heart that sentence dyd procede,

Feare not, their vniust God do you blaspheme:

You see no remedy but vtter damnation.

Folowe my counsell, and put care away,

Take here your pleasure and consolation,

And make you mery in this worlde while you may.

Of one hell I would not haue you twayne to make:

Be sure of a heauen while you dwell here,

Refresh your self, and al pleasure doe you take,

Plucke vp a lusty heart, and be of a good chere.

Mary.

O this knowledge of synne is so in my syght,

That if I should dye truely I can not be mery.

Infide­litie.

We will ridde the knaue hence anon by this light.

Or else of his life I will soone make him wearie.

the Law

O synner, from thy heart put that infidelitie,

Which hath drowned thee already in the pit of hell,

Trust thou in Gods might and possibilitie,

Wherof neither angell nor man is able to tell.

Know­ledge of synne.

That thing in dede, whiche to man is impossible,

Is a small thyng for God to bryng to passe,

This mercy to all senses is comprehensible,

Which he will declare by his holy Messias.

the Law

That thing which I cā not do through my infirmity

God is able by his son to perform in tyme appointed,

All my contentes be shadowes of his maiestie,

Whom now in this tyme God hath anoynted.

Know­ledge of synne.

That Messias alone onely shall the law fulfill,

And his fulfilling shall be in suche acceptation,

That God for his sake shall pardon mankyndes yll,

Acceptyng his offeryng for a full contentation.

the Law

That Messias is the stone spoken of before,

Which of vayne builders should be refused,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=22)Yet he shall
be the corner stone of honour,

Which in the building of gods tēple shal be vsed.

And all that trust in hym with true beleue,

Know­ledge of Sinne.

That he is very God and man, into this world sent,

God will all their synnes for his sake forgeue,

So that they can be contrite and repent.

Mary.

I euer beleued yet vnto this day,

That God was able of nothyng all things to make,

And as well I beleue also that he may,

Forgeue, and mercy vpon synners take,

But seyng that he hath made a determination,

By a law that none shall be saued good or badde,

Then he that would looke for any saluation,

Truly I take hym ten tymes for worse than madde.

Infide­litie.

He that will not the kepers of the law saue,

Which obserue diligently his commaundementes,

Much lesse truly on them mercy he will haue,

Which haue contemned all his words & iudgements.

Wel Mary, I haue condemned thee vnto hell fyre,

the Law

Yet not so condemned thee, but if thou canst beleue

In that Messias, which for thee doth enquire,

There is no doubt but thy sinnes he will forgeue.

Thy sore is knowen, receiue thy salue and medicine,

I haue the sicke to the leache, geue good eare,

Hearken diligently vnto his good discipline,

And he will heale thee, doe nothyng feare.

Exit.

Let me fele your poulses mistresse Mary be you sick

Infide­litie.

By my trouth in as good tēpre as any woman can be

Your vaines are full of bloud, lusty and quicke,

In better taking truly I did you neuer see.

The body is whole, but sick is the conscience,

Know­ledge of synne.

Which neither the law nor man is able to heale,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=23)It is the
word of God receyued with penitence,

Like as the boke of wisedome doth plainly reueale.

Infide­litie.

Conscience? how doth thy conscience litle Mall?

Was thy conscience sicked, alas little foole?

Hooreson fooles, set not a pynne by them all,

Wise inough in dede, to folowe their foolishe schoole,

You bottell nosed knaue, get you out of place,

Auoyde stinkyng horeson, a poyson take thee,

Hence, or by God I will lay thee on the face,

Take hede that hereafter I doo you not see.

Though I appere not to hir carnall syght,

Know­ledge of synne.

Yet by the meanes that she knoweth the lawe,

I shall trouble hir always both day and night,

And vpon hir conscience continually gnawe.

Infide­litie.

What chere? nowe is here but we twayne alone,

Be mery mistresse Mary, and away the mare,

A murreyn go with them, now they be gone,

Plucke vp your stomacke, and put away all care.

Mary.

O maister Prudence, my heart is sore vexed,

The knowledge of synne is before me alway:

In my conscience I am so greuously perplexed,

That I wote not what to doe truly nor say.

Here entreth Christ Iesus

Infide­litie.

Benedicite, arte thou come with a vengeance▪

What wilt thou do? Mary, doe you loue me?

My wordes print well in your remembrance,

To yonder felowes saying doe you neuer gree.

Christ Iesus.

Into this worlde God hath sent his owne,

Not to iudge the world, or to take vengeance,

But to preache forgeuenesse and pardon,

Through true faith in hym, and perfect repentance.

The sonne of man is come to seke and saue,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=23)Suche persons
as perishe and go astraye,

God hath promised them lyfe eternally to haue,

If they repent, and turne from theyr euill way,

The kyngdom of heauen is at hand, therfore repent,

Amende your lyues, and the Gospell beleue,

The sonne of God into this world is sent,

To haue mercy on men, and theyr synnes to forgeue.

Mary.

O here is the Messias, of whom we haue harde,

What say you Prudence is not this same he?

Infide­litie.

A Mary, do you my wordes no more regard,

You haue a waueryng witte now well I doe see,

Is not this a lyke person, the sonne of God to be,

And the Messias whiche the worlde should saue?

He is a false harlot you may beleue me,

Whome you shall see one day handled like a knaue.

If the lawe of God published by Moyses,

Be not able to bryng men to saluation,

Muche lesse suche a wretched man doubtlesse,

Can do ought for your soules consolation.

Tushe take one heauen in this present world here,

You remember what before to you I haue sayd:

Pluck vp your heart wenche, and be of good there,

Neuer regard his words, tushe, be not afrayd.

Mary.

The lawe hath set my synnes before my syght,

That I can not be mery, but am in despaire:

I know that God is a Iudge, equall and right,

And that his lawe is true, pure, cleane and fayre,

By this law am I condemned alredy to hell.

The wordes he hath spoken must be fulfilled:

Of myrth and ioy it is but foly to tell,

For I perceiue that both body and soule be spilled.

Christ

Like as the father raiseth the dead agayne,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=24)And vnto life
doth them mercifully restore:

So the sonne quickeneth the dead it is playne,

And geueth them a life to liue euermore,

Uerily verily I say, he that heareth my voyce,

And beleueth on him that hath me sent,

Shall haue euerlastyng life therin to reioyce,

And shall not come into damnable torment.

But the same passe from death vnto lyfe,

Repent, and trust in Gods mercy for my sake.

With the sinnes of the world be at debate and strife,

And vnto grace my heauenly father will you take.

All they whom the law condemneth for synne,

By faith in me, I saue and iustifie,

I am come sinners by repentance to winne,

Christe speaketh to Mary

Like as the Prophet before did prophecie.

Thou woman, with mercy I do thee preuent,

If thou canst in the Sonne of God beleue,

And for thy former lyfe be sory and repent,

All thy sinnes and offences I doe forgeue.

Infide­litie.

Who is the sonne of God sir, of whom do ye talke?

Which hath this power wherof you do boast,

It is best for you out of this countrey to walke,

And neuer more be sene after in this coast.

The sonne of God quod he? This is a pride in dede.

Trowest thou that the father can suffer this?

They come of Abrahams stocke and holy sede,

And thou saiest that they beleue all amisse.

Christ.

Auoide out of this woman thou Infidelitie,

With the .vii. diuels which haue hir possessed,

I banish you hence by the power of my diuinitie,

For to saluation I haue hir dressed.

Infidelitie runneth away. Mary falleth flat downe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=24)Cry all thus
without the doore, and roare terribly.

Diuels.

O Iesus the Sonne of God euer liuing,

Why comest thou before the tyme vs to torment?

In no person for thee we can haue any abidyng,

Out vpon thee the sonne of God omnipotent.

Christ.

Arise woman, and thanke the father of heauen,

Which with his mercy hath thee preuented,

By his power I haue rei [...]cted from the spirits seuen,

Which with vnbelief haue thy soule tormented.

Mary.

Blessed be thy name O father celestiall,

Honor and glory be giuen to thee world without end,

O Lord, doest thou regard thus a womā terrestriall?

To thee what tong is able worthy thanks to repend?

O what a synfull wretche Lord haue I bene?

Haue mercy on me Lord, for thy names sake,

So greuous a sinner before this day was neuer sene

Uouchsafe therfore compassion on me to take.

Iesus Christ.

Canst thou beleue in God, the maker of all thing,

And in his onely sonne, whom he hath sent?

Mary.

I beleue in one God, Lord and heauenly kyng,

And in thee his onely sonne with hearty intent.

Good Lord I confesse that thou art omnipotent,

Helpe my slender beliefe and infirmitie:

My faith Lord is waueryng and insufficient,

Strēgth it I pray the with the power of thy maiesty.

No man can come to me, that is, in me beleue,

Christ▪ Faith: repētāce entreth.

Except my father draw hym by his spirite.

Behold Faith and Repentance to thee here I geue,

With all other vertues to thy health requisite.

Note well the power of Gods omnipotencie:

Faith.

That soule which of late was a place of deuils,

He hath made a place for him self by his clemencie,

Purgyng from thence the multitude of euils.

Repen­tance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=25)

The mercy of Christ thought it not sufficient,

To forgeue hir synnes, and deuils to pourge,

But geueth hir grace to be penitent,

That is, hir soule euer after this day to scourge.

The vertue of Repentance I do represent,

Which is a true turnyng of the whole lyfe and state,

Unto the will of the lord God omnipotent,

Sorowing for the sinnes past with displesure & hate.

That is to say, all the inward thoughts of the hart

And all the imaginations of the mynde,

Which were occupied euill by Sathans arte,

Must hence forth be turned after an other kynd.

Dauid my father on his synnes did alway thinke,

Howe horrible they were in God almighties sight,

Teares were his sustenance, yea both meat & drinke,

His hole meditation was in heauen both day & night

So that Repentance is described in Scripture,

To be a returnyng from syn with all the soule & hart,

And all the life tyme in repentyng to endure,

Declaring the same with the senes in euery part.

As thus, like as the eyes haue ben vaynly spent

Upon worldly and carnall delectations,

So henceforth to wepyng and teares must be bent,

And wholly giuen to godly contemplations.

Likewise as the eares haue ben open alway

To here the blasphemyng of Gods holy name,

And fylthy talkyng euermore night and day,

Nowe they must be turned away from the same.

And glad to heare the Gospell of saluation,

How God hath mercy on them that doe call,

And how he is full of pitie and miseration:

Raisyng vp suche agayne as by synne dyd fall.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=25)The tong
which blasphemie hath spoken,

Yea and filthily, to the hurt of soule and body:

Wherby the precepts of God haue ben broken,

Must hence forth praise God for his mercy daily.

Thus like as all the members in tymes past,

Haue ben seruantes of vnrighteousnesse and synne,

Now Repentance doth that seruice away cast,

And to mortifie all his lustes doth begynne.

True repentance neuer turneth backe agayn:

For he yt laieth his hād on the plough, & loketh away,

Is not apt in the kingdom of heauen to raigne,

Nor to be saued with my sainctes at the last day.

Mary.

O Lorde without thy grace I do here confesse,

That I am able to do nothyng at all,

Where it pleaseth thee my miserie to redresse,

Strength me now that hence forth I do not fall.

Graunt me Lord suche a perfect repentance,

And that I looke no more back, but go forward still,

Put my miserie euermore into my remembrance,

That I may forthinke my life that hath ben so yll.

Fayth.

The holy vertue of Faith I do represent,

Ioyned continually with repentance:

For where as the person for synne is penitent,

There I ascertain him of helth and deliuerance.

Wherfore I am a certaine and sure confidence,

That God is mercifull for Christ Iesus sake:

And where as is a turnyng or penitence,

To mercy he will the penitent take:

Faith therfore is the gyft of God most excellent,

For it is a sure knowledge and cognition

Of the good will of God omnipotent,

Grounded in the word of Christes erudition,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=26)This faith is
founded on Gods promission,

And most clerely to the mynde of man reuealed,

So that of Gods will he hath an intuition,

Which by the holy ghost to his heart is sealed.

Repen­tance.

This Faith with the word hath such propinquitie,

That proprely the one is not without the other,

Faith must be tried with the word of veritie,

As the chyld is by the father and mother.

Iesus Christ.

Yea truly, if this faith do from Gods word decline,

It is no faith, but a certayn incredulitie,

Which causeth the mynd to wāder in strange doctrine

And so to fall at length into impietie.

Faith.

The word to a glasse compare we may,

For as it were therin, Faith God doth behold,

Whom as in a cloude we loke vpon alway,

As hereafter more plainly it shal be told.

Mary.

My heart doth beleue, and my mouth doth publish.

That my lord Iesus is the sonne of God eternall.

I beleue that my soule shall neuer perysh,

But raigne with him in his kyngdom supernall.

Repen­tance.

The operation of Faith is not to enquire

What God is as touchyng his propre nature,

But how good he is to vs to know faith doth desyre,

Which thing appereth in his holy Scripture.

Faith.

It is not inough to beleue that God is true only,

Which can neuer lie, nor deceaue, nor do yll:

But true faith is persuaded firmly and truely,

That in his word he hath declared his will.

And also what soeuer in that word is spoken,

Faith beleueth it as the most certaine veritie,

Which by his spirit he doth vouchsafe to open

To all such as seke hym with all humilitie.

Repen­tance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=26)

Christ the sonne of God here hath promised,

Forgiuenesse of synnes to you syster Mary,

Of his owne mercie this to do he hath deuised,

And not of your merites, thus you see plainly.

If in this promise you be certain and without doubt.

Beleuing that the word of his mouth spoken

He is able, and also will do and bryng about,

Then that you haue Faith it is a token.

Mary

O Iesu, graunt me this true faith and beleue,

Lord I see in my self as yet imperfection:

Uouchsafe to me thy heauenly grace to geue,

That it may be my gouernance and direction.

Christ

Mary my grace shall be for thee sufficient,

Goe thy way forth with faith and repentance,

To heare the Gospell of health be thou diligent,

And the wordes therof beare in thy remembrance.

Faith.

Though in person we shall no more appeare,

Yet inuisibly in your heart we will remayne.

Repen­tance.

The grace of God shal be with you both far & nere,

Wherby from all wickednesse I shall you detaine.

Mary.

Honor, praise, and glory to the father eternall,

Thankes to the sonne, very god and very man,

Blessed be the holy gost, with them both coequall,

One god, which hath saued me this day from Sathā

Exeunt.

Christ

I thank thee O father, O lord of heuē, earth, & of al

That thou hast hidden these things from the sapient,

And hast reuealed them to the litle ones and small,

Yea so it pleased thee O father omnipotent.

All things of my father are committed vnto me,

And who the sonne is, none but the father doth knew

No mā but the sonne knoweth who ye father shold be,

And he to whom the sonne wil reueale and showe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=27)Come vnto me
all you that with labor are op [...]essed,

And are heauy laden, and I will you comfort,

Dispaire not for that you haue transgressed,

But for mercy do you boldly to me resort.

My yoake vpon your neckes do you gladly take,

And learn of me, for I am lowe and meke in hart,

And you shal fynd rest for your soules neuer to slake,

My yoake and burden is light in euery part.

I came not into the world, the righteous to call,

But the synfull persons vnto repentance:

The whoale haue no nede of the physition at all,

But the sicke haue nede of deliuerance.

Uerily I say vnto you, that the angels,

Haue more ioy in one synner that doth repent,

Than in many righteous persons else,

Which are no sinners in their iudgement.

Here entreth Symon the Pharisie, and malicious Iudgement, Symon biddeth Christ
to dynner.

Symon.

God spede you syr heartily, and well to fare,

I reioyce much that I chaunce you here to fynde,

In good soth I was sory, and toke muche care

That I had no tyme to declare to you my mynde.

We know that you do much good in the countrey here

Wherfore the liuyng God is glorified:

You heale the sicke persons both farre and nere,

Like as it hath ben credibly testified:

Christ.

My father euen vnto this tyme worketh truely,

And I work according to his commandement & wil,

The sonne can do nothyng of hym selfe duely,

But that he seeth the father doyng alway still.

Whatsoeuer the Father doth, the sonne doth the same,

For the father doth the sonne entierly loue,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=27)And sheweth
him al things to the praise of his name,

And shal shew him greter works thā these as you shal proue

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Lo sir, what nede you haue more testimonie

You heare that he doth him self the sonne of God call,

Doth not the law condemne that blasphemie:

Commaunding such to be slaine great and small?

Symon.

For a season it behoueth vs to haue pacience,

I shewed you the reason wherfore of late:

At this season I pray you do your diligence,

And semble rather to loue hym than to hate.

Shall it please you syr, this day to take payne

With me at my house to take some repast,

You shal be welcome doubtlesse I tell you playne,

No great puruiance for you I entend to make.

Christ.

My meate is to doe his will that hath me sent,

But syr I thanke you of your great curtesy,

To come to you I shall be very well content,

So that you will appoynt the houre stedily.

Symon.

All things be in maner ready I thinke verily,

In the meane season in my gardein we will walke.

Take the paines to go with me, I pray you heartily,

Till dinner be ready, of matters we will talke.

Christ

With a good will I will waite vpon you,

Pleaseth it you to go before, you know the way.

Symon.

Sirr [...], you see how that we are appointed now,

Make all thyngs ready without delay.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Sir I will go about as fast as I may,

In good fayth I would that I might haue my will:

I would prepare for hym a galowes this day,

Upon the whiche I desyre his bloud to spill.

Infide­litie.

A vengeance take hym thefe, is he gone?

From Mary Magdalene he did me chace:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=28)From Symon
the Pharisie he will driue me anon,

So that no where I shal be able to shew my face.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Nay, we are so surely fixed in the Pharisies mynde,

That his blasphemous words can not driue vs thēce

Womens heartes turne oft as doth the wynde,

And agayne of the law they know not the sence,

In malice I haue made them all so blynde,

That they iudge nothyng in Christ aryght:

To the letter of the law so fast I do them bynde,

That of the spirite they haue no maner of light.

Infide­litie.

I will tell thee Malicious Iudgement,

His wordes be of suche strength and great power,

That the diuell hym self and all his rablement,

He is able to expell, and vtterly to deuoure.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Tushe hyde thy self in a Pharisies gowne,

Suche a one as is bordered with the cōmaundemēts

And then thou maist dwel both in citie and in towne.

Beyng well accepted in all mens iudgements.

Infide­litie.

As for a gowne, I haue one conuenient,

And lo here is a cappe agreing to the same.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

As thou saiest, that geare is very ancient,

I warant thee now to escape all blame,

Mary of one thyng thou must take good hede,

As nere as thou canst let him not behold thy face,

Doubt thou not, but he shall haue his mede,

If I remayne with the Iewes any space.

Infide­litie.

And as for the reuerend byshop Cayphas,

With all the Aldermen of Ierusalem.

Will helpe to bryng that matter to passe,

For I am like for euer to dwell with them.

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

The same Christ dineth with Simon to day,

Who commanded to prepare the table in all hast,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=28)Helpe to make
all ready, and the cloth to lay,

For surely here he purposeth to take his repast.

Infide­litie.

By God he shall haue soure sause it may hap,

Do thy parte, and surely I purpose to watche,

It shal be hard, but we will take hym in a trap,

He shall fynde hym here that will hym matche.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Go and fetche trenchers, spoones, salt and bread,

See whether the cookes be ready also I pray thee.

They will come to dynner I dare lay my head,

Before that all things prepared well shall be.

Infide­litie.

A straw, all this geare wyll quickly be doone,

The cookes be ready also I am sure.

Let me see, byr lady it is almost noone,

I maruell that they can so long fastyng endure.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Yonder they come, turne thy face out of sight,

Thou must make curtesy downe to the ground.

Infide­litie.

I would he were hanged by God and by this light.

For neuer before this day was I thus bound.

Symon.

Sir now are you welcome, I pray you come nere,

Fetche in meate syrs, I pray you quickly.

I promise you I byd you for no good chere,

But such as it is, you ar welcome hartily.

Infide­litie.

Pleaseth it you to washe syr, here is water,

Let not yonder beggerly felow wash with you,

Symon.

Can you not a while dissemble the matter?

It is no tyme to talke of suche geare now.

Will you sit sir, bryng hither a cushion and a stoole.

Set it down I say there, there at the tables ende.

Infideli.

Here is a businesse with a beggerly foole.

It greueth me the tyme about him to spende.

Go to, you are welcome hitherto my maister Simon

Thinke your self at home in your owne place.

Christ.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=29)

I thanke you sir, I will syt downe euen anone,

But first we will prayse God, and say our grace.

Blessed art thou heauenly father, which of thy mercy

Hast made man to thyne owne image and similitude

Which through Sathans wicked malice and enuie

Was spoiled of thy grace and of ghostly fortitude.

But at this tyme of thy mercy appointed,

Thou hast looked on man, of thy compassion,

And sent thyne owne sonne with thy spirit anoynted,

Which for his synne shall make satisfaction.

Let all creatures praise thee for their creation,

Glory to thy name for their preseruation,

Laude and honour to thee for their restauration,

All thankes to thee for eternall saluation,

Simon.

I pray you sitte downe, I pray you heartily,

You are welcom, I pray you eate such as is here,

Go to, I would not haue you to make any curtesy,

I am sory that for you I haue no better chere.

Infide­litie.

It is simple chere as you say in dede,

It is to good for him by the Masse,

Haie is good ynough for hym theron to feede,

Or for any such foolishe asse.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Marke you not what in his grace he dyd say?

Thou hast sēt thy sonne anointed with the holy ghost

By these words euidently vnderstand we may,

That to be the son of God of him selfe he doth boast.

Simon.

Wherof doe you .ii. talk what is the matter,

Is there any thing that doth grutch your conscience?

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

This is the truth of our talke yea I wil not flatter,

Your gest said a word wherof I wold haue ītelligēce

He thanked God at this tyme nowe appointed,

That on mens synnes he had pitie and compassion,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=29)And hath sent
his sonne with his spirite anointed,

Which for his sinne should make satisfaction.

Hath God into this world sent his owne sonne?

Or who is the sonne of God I wold be glad to know

Like as now he speaketh, so oft tymes he hath done,

The tyme and place I am able to showe.

Symon.

I pray you my guest his mynde do you satisfie,

It is said, that the sonne of God you do your self call.

Christ.

I am come into this world the truth to testifie,

Wherof the scripture and the Prophets do witnes all

If I of my self should beare testimonie,

My witnesse of you should not be taken as true,

But there is an other that witnesseth of me verily.

And I know that his testimonie is true.

Of man truely no testimonie do I take:

But I speake these wordes that saued you myght be.

The sonne of God is sent hither for your sake,

Whom in the glorie of his maiestie you shall se.

The workes which to me the father doth geue,

That I may doe them, those workes to you I say,

Beare witnesse, if you haue the grace to beleue,

That the father hath sent me into the world this day.

Besides these workes, the father that hath me sent,

Hath by many scriptures of me testified:

By the whiche the matter is euident,

That my wordes spoken before are verified.

But the father you haue neuer heard speaking,

And what he is by faith you haue neuer sene:

His word you haue not in you remayning.

Therfore to him whom he hath sēt faithful you haue not bē

Serch yt scriptures, for you thīk in your mind

That in them you shall obtaine life eternall,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=30)Them to beare
witnesse of me you shall fynde,

How I am the sonne of the liuyng God immortall.

Symon.

Wel sir, you ar welcom, I wold not haue you to thīk

That I did byd you hither to tempt or to proue,

But that I would haue you both to eate and drinke,

Euen as my entier friend, and for very loue.

Wherfore any thing that is here done or sayd,

Shalbe layd vnder foote, and go no further,

For surely if your wordes should be betrayd,

As a blasphemer the people would you murder,

Christ.

You know that there is .xi. houres in the day

And night commeth not till the .xii. houres be expired

It is not in mans power my life to take away,

Till the houre commeth of my father required.

Infide­litie.

Under the foote quod hee if I kepe counsell,

I would I were hanged vp by the very necke.

Fye on hym horeson traitour and very rebell,

Hear you not how god him self he beginneth to check?

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Though maister Symon doth but few wordes say

Yet I warrant you he beareth this geare in mynde,

Doubt thou not but he will fynde suche way,

That he shal be ryd and as many as be of his kynde.

Simon.

Go to I pray you, alacke you eate no meate:

You see that at this tyme we haue but plaine fare.

Christ

When we haue sufficient before vs to eate,

Let vs thanke God, and put away all care.

Mary Magda­len sadly apparel­led.

The more that I accustom my self with repentance,

The more I see myne owne synne and iniquitie,

The more knowledge therof, the more greuance,

To a soule that is conuerted from hir impietie.

To all the worlde an example I may be,

In whom the mercy of Christ is declared,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=30)O Lord, what
goodnesse dydst thou in me see?

That thus mercifully thou hast me spared.

What goodnesse? nay rather what a rable of euils,

Full of wickednesse, like one past all grace,

Replenished with a multitude of deuils,

Which as in hell in my soule had their place.

These were the merites and dedes that I had,

Onely thy vnspeakable mercy did me preuent:

And though that my life hath bene so bad,

Yet thou wilt no more but that I should repent.

O who shall geue me a fountayne of teares,

That I may shed abundantly for my synne?

This voice of the Lord alwais soūdeth in myn eares

Repent, repent, and thou shalt be sure heauen to wyn

He saith also, do the fruictes of Repentance.

O Lord, who is able those worthy fruictes to do?

I am not able to doe sufficient penance,

Except thy grace good Lord, do helpe me therto.

But like as the parts of my body in tymes past,

I haue made seruants to all kynd of iniquitie,

The same iniquitie away for euer I do cast,

And will make my body seruant to the veritie.

This haire of my head which I haue abused,

I repute vile and vnworthie to wipe my lordes fete,

No obsequie therwith of me shalbe refused,

To do my Lord Iesus seruice, as it is most mete.

These fleshly eies which with their wanton lookes,

Many persons to synne and vice haue procured.

They haue ben the diuels volumes and bookes,

Which from the seruice of God haue other allured.

Nowe you synfull eyes shed out teares and water,

Wash the Lords fete with thē whō you haue offended

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=31)To shew such
obsequie to hym it is a small matter,

Which by his grace hath my synfull life amended.

O wretched eies can you wepe for a thing temporall,

As for the losse of worldly goodes and parents,

And can you not wepe for the lorde celestiall?

Which losse incomparably passeth all detrimentes.

With this oyntment most pure and precious,

I was wont to make this carkas pleasant and swete

Wherby it was made more wicked and vicious,

And to all vnthriftynesse very apt and mete.

Now would I gladly this oyntment bestowe,

About the innocent feete of my sauiour,

That by these penitent fruictes my lord may know

That I am right sory for my sinfull behauiour.

All my worldly substance abused before,

And through vnbelief of synne made instruments,

Now will I bestow them onely to his honor,

In helpyng hym, and for his sake other innocents.

I shall not ceasse to seeke till my lord I haue found,

He is in the house of Symon I heard say,

The house standeth on yonder same ground:

It was told me that he dyneth there to day.

I was not ashamed to synne before the Lordes sight

And shal I be ashamed before mā the same to cōfesse?

To my Lord Iesus, now forth will I go right,

Acknowledgyng to him my penitent heart doubtlesse

Let Marie creepe vnder the table, abydyng there a certayne space behynd, and
doe as it is specified in the Gospell. Then Malicious Iudgement spea­keth
these wordes to Infidelitie.

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

Lo syr, what a felow this is, it doth appere,

If he were suche a prophet, as of him self he doth say,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=31)He would know
what maner of woman this same is here.

A sinner she is, he can not say nay.

Infide­litie.

A sinner quod he? yea she is a wicked sinner in dede

This is she, from whom he did me expell,

Behold, how boldly after hym she doth procede,

A harlot she is truly I may tell you in counsell.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Yea and yet to touche hym he doth her permit,

Which is agaynst the law for persons defiled,

Ought not among the iust to intromit,

But from their company should be exiled.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

I pray you see, how busy about hym she is,

She washeth his feet with teares of hir eyes,

Heigh, mary yonder is like to be nothyng amisse.

Behold, she anoynteth him to driue away flies.

Trow you ye maister Symon thinketh not somwhat?

Yes I hold you a groate, though he say nothing.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

He is not content I warant you that,

Which thyng you may see by his lookyng.

Symon.

Syrs, take away here, we will no more now,

This fyrst: Are you in such things to be tought?

What meane you, wherabout do you looke,

I maruell wherabout you do occupy your thought.

Iesus Christ.

Simon, the truth is so, I haue a thing in my mynd

Which vnto you I must nedes expresse and say.

Simon.

Maister, say what you will, wordes are but wynde,

I will heare you truely, as paciently as I may.

Christ

There were two detters, whom I dyd well know,

Whiche were in debt to a lender that was thriftie:

The one fiue hundred pence truely did owe,

And the other ought not aboue fiftie:

Neither of these debters had wherwith to pay,

Wherfore the lender forgaue both, as it dyd behoue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=32)Nowe
according to your iudgement I pray you say,

Which of these detters ought the lender most loue▪

Symon.

Mary, he to whom most was forgiuen I suppose,

In few wordes truly you haue heard my sentence.

Christ.

You haue rightly iudged, and to the purpose.

Absoluyng my question like a man of science,

See you this woman? I know that in your hertes

You condemne her as a synner very vnmete

To enter among you, and to touche any partes,

Of my body, yea either head or feete:

Saying among your selues, if this were a Prophet,

He would know what maner a woman this is

Which thus commeth in while we be at meate,

A sinner she is, and hath done greatly amisse.

I say vnto you, that into this world▪ I am come

To call suche great detters vnto repentance,

The iust, which in their cōceits owe but a small sūme

Haue no nede of their creditours deliuerance.

Infide­litie.

What a thief is this? he iudgeth our masters thoght,

If we destroy hym not, he will surely marre all.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

I euer sayd that he was worse than nought,

But among vs puruey for him we shall.

Symon.

Sir, you take vpon you very presumptuously,

I haue bydden you vnto my house here of good will,

And you reason of matters here contemptuously:

But take your pleasure, it shall not greatly skill.

Christ.

I say vnto you, that for this cause was I borne,

To beare witnesse vnto the veritie,

I see who be hypocrites full of dissemblyng scorne,

And who be persons of faith and simplicitie.

Where as you thinke you haue done me pleasure,

In bidding me to eate and drinke with you here,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=32)Your intent
was to shew your richesse and treasure,

And that your holynesse might to me appeare.

But this woman hath shewed to me a little obsequie:

For these gestures whiche she sheweth to me,

Procede from a true meanyng heart verily,

As by her humilite plainly you may see.

When I came into your house the truth to say,

You gaue me no water to washe my feete withall,

This woman hath washed them here this day,

With the teares of her eies which on them did fall,

With the haire of hir head she hath wiped the same,

Thinking all other clothes therto ouer vile,

Horrible in hir fight is hir synne and blame,

Thinkyng hir self worthy of eternall exile.

You gaue me no kisse as the maner of the countrey is

But this woman since the tyme that I came in,

Would not presume my head or mouth to kisse,

But my feete, lamenting in hir heart for hir syn.

My head you did not anoynt with oyle so swete,

As men of this countrey do their guestes vse,

But with most precious balme she anointed my fete,

No cost about that oyntment she doth refuse.

Blessed are they, as the Prophete doth say,

Whose sinnes are forgiuen & couered by Gods mercy,

Not by the dedes of the lawe as you thinke this day.

But of Gods good will, fauour and grace freely.

At this womans synne you do greatly grutche,

As though your selues were iust holy, and pure,

But many sinnes are forgiuen hir, bicause she loued muche

And of the mercy of God she is sure.

He to whom but a little is remitted in dede,

Loueth but a little, we se by experience:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=33)All haue
sinned, and of Gods glory haue nede.

Therfore humble your selues with penitence.

I say to thee woman, thy synnes are forgeuen all,

God for my sake will not them to thee impute:

For strength to continue, to hym do thou call,

And see that thankes thou do to hym attribute.

Mary.

The mercy of God is aboue all his workes truely,

What is it that God is not able to bryng to passe?

I thanke thee Lord Iesu for thy great mercy,

Thou art the sonne of the liuyng God, our Messias.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

Now say you by this, here is a greater matter yet,

He forgiueth synnes, as one with God equall.

Infide­litie.

And he may perceiue truely, that hath any wit,

That he is but a man wretched and mortall.

Christ.

Woman I say, thy faith hath saued thee go in peace:

Now art thou pacified in thy conscience,

Through thy faithe, I doe all thy sinnes releace,

Assuryng thee to haue mercy for thy negligence.

Mary.

O ioyfull tydynges, O message most comfortable,

Let no sinner be he neuer in so great dispaire.

Though he were synfull and abhominable,

Let him come, and he will make hym faire.

Blessed be the Lord of such compassion and pitie,

Praise we his name with glorie and honor,

I shall declare his mercy in towne and citie.

Thankes be to thee my Lord now and euermore.

Symon.

I see the wordes whiche I haue heard, proued true.

Men say that you are new fangled, and friuolous,

Goyng about the law and our rulers to subdue,

Introducyng sectes perillous and sedicious.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

I can no longer containe, but must say my mynde,

In dede it is so, for by his diuelishe erudition,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=33)Which he
soweth among the people of our kynde,

At length they will make a tumult and sedition.

Such blasphemy since the beginning was not heard,

That, a man shal call him self Gods naturall sonne,

To condemne the law of God he is not afeard,

Despisyng all things that our fathers haue done.

Infide­litie.

Pleaseth it you reuerend father, to geue me licence

To say my mynde to this blasphemerand thiefe,

In fewe wordes you shall haue my sentence:

Of all heretikes I iudge hym to be the chiefe.

Perceiue you not how he doth begyn?

He commeth to none of the princes and gouerners,

But a sort of synners he goeth about to wyn:

As publicans, whores, harlots, and vniust occupiers.

Them he preferreth before such men as you be,

Saying, that they before you shall be saued.

An honest man in his company you shall not see,

But euen them, which haue them selues yll behaued.

Much good doe it you, here is sause for your meate.

Maister Simon, looke vpon this felow in season,

For in continuance he will worke such a feate,

That you shall not release with all your reason.

Christ.

O Symon, put away that Malicious iudgement,

Which in your heart you do stubbornly contayne,

You shall not perceyue Gods commandement,

As long as he in your conscience doth remayne.

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

Lo syr now that God he hath blasphemed,

Now his law he doth contemne and despise,

The Iustice therof of hym is nothyng estemed,

To destroy the same vtterly he doth deuise.

Symon.

Thinke you vs ignorant of gods law and will,

Which vpon our garments do them weare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=34)Who but we
doe the law of God fulfill,

For his precepts with vs in all places we beare.

Christ.

To fulfill the law requireth Gods spirite,

For the law is holy, iust, and spirituall,

Of loue to be obserued it is requisite,

And not of these obseruances externall.

As long as you haue this malicious iudgement.

Accompanied with Infidelitie,

I say you can not kepe Gods commaundement,

Though you shew an outward sanctitie.

Infide­litie.

Lo syr here he calleth me Infidelitie,

And you know that I am called Legal Iustification

You heare that it was spoken by Gods maiestie,

That a man shall liue by the lawes obseruation.

An honest guest, come out dogge, yea mary,

Good maners thus to taunt a man at his table:

But with fooles it is follie to vary,

His wordes be taken but as a tale or a fable.

Symon.

Away with this geare, how long shall we syt here?

At once: We haue somewhat els to do I thinke.

Christ.

Thankes be to thee O Father, for this chere,

Thankes be to thee for our repast of meate & drinke.

Now sir, you shall licence me to depart,

And the heauenly Father might illumine your mynd

Expellyng this infidelitie from your hart,

Which with Malicious iudgemēt kepeth you blynd.

Symon.

Fare ye well: for me you shall no countes render,

All shall be layd vnder the feete that is here spoken.

Infide.

Though you forget it, yet we purpose to remember

Exit.

You know the way, go I pray you, the doore is open.

Malicioꝰ iudge.

For Gods sake syr, you and such as you be,

Looke vpon this felow by myne aduise:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=34)For what he
goth about all you may see,

Yea you haue had warnyng of hym twise or thrise.

Infide­litie.

All the multitude beginneth after him to ronne,

You see hym and know his doctrine and opinion,

If you suffer hym till more people he hath wonne,

Strangers shall come and take our dominion.

Haue you not heard his open blasphemie?

The sonne of God he presumeth him self to name,

The Iustice of the lawe he condemneth vtterly,

To suffer him to lyue will turne to your shame.

Symon.

It shall behoue you to dog him from place to place,

Note whether openly he teache suche doctrine:

If he doe, accuse hym before his face,

For I will cause the byshops hym to examine.

And where as he willeth you vs to expell,

Infide­litie.

Callyng vs wicked nicknames at his pleasure,

He goeth about to make you to rebell

Against God & his lawes, as he doth without mesure

Malicioꝰ iugemēt

For my part I wil watche hym so narowly,

That a word shall not scape me that doth sounde

Agaynst you the fathers, that liue so holyly,

But to accuse hym for it a way shalbe found.

Symon.

Well the tyme of our euenyng seruice is at hand,

We must depart, the sacrifice to prepare.

Infideli.

Exeunt.

If you depart, we may not here ydle stande,

For to wayte vpon you at all tymes ready we are.

At my beyng here euen now of late,

It pleased my Lord Iesus of his great mercy

Mary: entreth with Iustificatiō

To speake sentences here in my presence.

Of the which I haue no perfect intelligence,

The fyrst is: Many sinnes are forgiuen hir sayd he,

Because she hath loued much, meanyng me,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=35)I pray you
most holy Iustification,

Of this sentence to make a declaration.

Iustificaion.

A question right necessary to be moued,

For therby many errors shall be reproued,

It were a great errour for any man to beleue

That your loue dyd deserue that Christ shold forgeue

Your synnes or trespasses, or any synne at all:

For so to beleue is an errour sanaticall.

And how can your loue desyre forgiuenesse of your yl

Seing that the law it is not able to fulfill?

The law thus commaundeth as touchyng loue:

Thou shalt loue thy Lord God as it doth behoue,

With al thy hert, with al thy soule, & wt al thy strēgth,

And thy neighbor as thy self. He saith also at length:

There was neuer man borne yet that was able,

To performe these preceptes iust, holy, and stable,

Saue onely Iesus Christ, that lambe most innocent

Which fulfilleth the law for suche as are penitent:

But loue foloweth forgiuenesse of synnes euermore,

As a fruict of faith, and goth not before,

In that parable which vnto you he recited,

Wherin he declared your sinnes to be acquited,

He called you a detter not able to pay.

Then your loue paid not your dets perceiue you may

The forgiuenesse of your sinnes you must referre,

Only to Christes grace, then you shall not erre.

Of this thing playn knowledge you may haue

In these wordes go in peace thy fayth doth thee saue.

So by faith in Christ you haue Iustification

Frely of his grace, and beyond mans operation,

The which Iustification here I do represent,

Which remayn with all suche as be penitent.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=35)Here commeth
loue a speciall fruicte of Faith,

As touchyng this, heare mekely what he saith.

Mary.

O how much am I vnto Iesus Christ bound,

In whom so great mercy & goodnesse I haue found?

Not onely my synfull lyfe he hath renued.

But also with many graces he hathe me endued,

Loue entreth.

I am named loue, from true faith procedyng,

Where I am, there is no vertue nedyng,

Loue commyng of a conscience immaculate,

And of a faith not fained nor simulate,

Is the end of the law as Scripture doth say,

And vnto eternall felicitie the very path way:

This loue grounded in Faith, as it is sayd,

Hath caused many euyls in men to be layd.

For where as the loue of God in any is perfite,

There in all good workes is his whole delite.

This true loue with Mary was present verily,

When to Christ she shewed that obsequie,

But this loue dyd procede from beleue,

When Christ of his mercy dyd hir sinnes forgeue,

Loue deserued not forgeuenesse of sinnes in dede,

But as a fruite therof truely it did succede.

Iustification.

Of this matter we might tary very long,

But then we should do our audience wrong,

Which gently hath heard vs here a long space,

Wherfore we will make an end nowe by Gods grace,

Praying God that all we example may take

Of Mary, our synfull lyues to forsake:

And no more to looke backe, but to go forward still

Folowyng Christ as she did and his holy will.

Loue.

Such persons we introduce into presence,

To declare the conuersion of hir offence.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=36)Fyrst, the
lawe made a playne declaration,

That she was a chylde of eternall damnation:

By hearyng of the law came knowledge of synne,

Then for to lament truely she dyd begynne.

Nothyng but desperation dyd in hir remayne,

Lokyng for none other comfort but for hell payne.

But Christ whose nature is mercy to haue,

Came into this world synners to saue,

Which preached repentance synnes to forgeue,

To as many as in hym faithfully dyd beleue.

By the word came faith, Faith brought penitence,

But bothe the gyft of Gods magnificence.

Thus by Faith onely, Marie was iustified,

Like as before it is playnly verified,

From thens came loue, as a testification

Of Gods mercy and her iustification.

Mary.

Now God graunt that we may go the same way,

That with ioy we may ryse at the last day,

To the saluation of soule and body euermore,

Through Christ our Lord, to whom be all honor.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=11868&page=36)

[Home](/)

Wager, Lewis, fl. 1566.. Date: 1566  

