## (unknown project)

# A stay against straying. Or An answer to a treatise intituled: The
lavvfulnes of hearing the ministers of the Church of England. By John
Robinson. Wherein is proved the contrarie, viz: The unlawfulnes of hearing the
ministers of all false Churches. By John Canne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=1)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=1)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=2)

A Stay againſt Straying.

OR, An Anſ [...] to a Treatiſe, intituled: The La [...]fulnes of hearing the
Miniſters of the Church of England.

By JOHN ROBINSON.

Wherein, Is proved the contrarie, viz. The unlawfulnes of hearing the
Ministers of all falſe Churches. By JOHN CANNE.

ESA. 57. 14.

And he ſhall ſay  [...] ye up  [...] prepare the way, take up the  [...] way
of my people.

_[coat of arms or blazon]_

Printed in the Yeare 1639.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=3)

## ERRATA.

P. 2, l. 1. read they. l. 39. the wanting. P. 5, l. 28, r. Calfes. P. 11, l.
38, r. Miniſtry. P. 52, l. 6, r. doer. P. 57, l. 25, r. Claidon. P. 59, l. 11,
r. reſorted. P. 83, l. 16, r. follie. P. 86, l. 2, r.  [...] P. 88, l. 30, r.
dicit. P. 120, l. 2, r. ſtreathned.

For other faults, if thou findeſt any, I deſire that thy love may be ſuch as
to amend them thy ſelfe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=3)

## To all ſuch as deſire to receive and follovv the truth in Love, and vvith
holines; The feeling aſſurance of life and peace, be vviſhed in Ieſus Christ.

Men Fathers and Brethren:

WHAT the Lord ſaith, touching the revealing of the Man of ſinne, 2 Theſ. 2, 8.
and the conſuming of him by the brightnes of Chriſts comming: We may ſee
(bleſſed be God for it) now accompliſhed in a great meaſure. For whereas in
times paſt, many of the Profeſſors, have uſed both their tongues and pennes,
to plead for their Pariſh-Churches, Miniſterie and Worſhipp; They now (beeing
of ſounder mindes, and better informed) let thoſe things fall: Inſomuch, as
there are few (if any) except Formaliſts and Familiſts (virtutem qui verba
putant, ut lucum ligna, as Horace ſpeaketh) and men of corrupt minds, vvho
ſuppoſe that gaine is god­lines; That will appeare in the defence thereof. So
that in likely­hood, for the time to come, there wilbe little uſe, for any
man, to write any more, againſt that Church-ſtate, Miniſter ie, Worſhip &
Government, ſeeing the falſnes thereof, is now ſeene and acknow­ledged, of the
honeſter and better ſort every where.

Notwithſtanding as Pharoah uſed ſundry meanes, to ſtay Iſraell ſtill in Egypt,
after he ſaw them deſirous to depart▪ So doth Satan labour what hee can, to
hold Gods people in ſpirituall thraldome, after he perceives they are willing
to obey Gods call, and come out of it.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=4) And that he
may bring to paſſe what he deſireth, hee uſeth moſt effectuall deluſions &
deep deceits: Well knowing that the ſnares which he laid in our forefathers
blind and ignorant dayes, are now out of date, and will not ſerve the turne,
to beguile many people withall; But he muſt more tranſforme himſelfe into an
Angell of Light; I ſay, uſe more artificiall and craftie deviſes, then
for­merly he hath done.

It is ſaid of Praxiteles Clemen: Alex  [...]in protrept. the Painter, that hee
made the ſillie people worſhip the Image of his ſtrumper, under the title and
pre­tence of Venus. Now ſure I am, in thoſe dayes, there are ſome, who under
the name of Gods vvorſhip, doe cauſe many people to worſhip Satan and
Antichriſt; And that men may the eaſier and ſooner be perſwaded to it; they
ſet forth their lies and vanities in as plauſible & faire away as can be.

What man would ſeeme to deale ſo plainly as a Iugter: Hee will ſtrike up his
ſleeves and make bare his armes, and open his hands and fingers, and lay all
things before thee, and bid thee behold, and thou wouldſt thinke him to be a
man of a faire carriage, and not imagine thou couldſt poſſiblie be deceived;
And yet indeed, his whole ſkill and ſeeking, is nothing elſe but to deceive,
and the more ſimplie and plainly he would ſeeme to deale, the ſooner and
eaſier he doth beguile thee. For thou ſhalt thinke thou ſeeſt all, and ſeeſt
nothing; Feeleſt it ſenceablie with thy fingers, holdeſt it faſt, canſt not
looſe it, and yet ſhall open thy hand and finde nothing.

The paſſages of ſome men, in points of Religion, are carried much after ſuch a
ſort: For one would thinke, to heare the ſmooth­nes of their tale, and what
integritie and plainnes they doe pro­feſſe; That it is all Goſpell they
ſpeake, and that their cauſe, is cleare, and nothing is to be ſaid to the
contrarie: Notwithſtanding when another comes forth, and replies againſt them,
rips up their tale, weighs their reaſons, diſcloſeth the errour and weaknes of
their pleading. Men wonder at their owne ſimplicitie and igno­rance, and that
ever they ſhould be ſo fond as to beleeve them. But ſeeing I am now to deale
only in the point of hearing of falſe Miniſters: I will not therefore ſtep out
of the beaten way to take in any by-diſcourſe; Only I thinke good to certifie,
that I mar­vaile, that ſuch men who walke not as we doe in Church-way, but
thinke us to cenſorious and over juſt: Why they doe not publickly anſwer our
grounds and arguments publiſhed to the world, and ſo prove their nevv
Principles in as faire and open a way; that either
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=4) we may come
to them, finding them to walke more agreeable to the Scriptures, or ſhew our
reaſons to the contrarie.

For the matter here in controuerſie: That the Reader may pro­fit the more by
it, there are 5 things, which J deſire him to doe. 1. When thou ſetteſt thy
ſelfe to read, ſet thy ſelfe as in Gods preſence, looke on with a ſingle and
impartiall eye; weigh the arguments well on both ſides, not by ſhewes and
ſhifts, but by the juſt Ballance of the incorruptible and unchangable Word of
God; In judging, judge I beſeech thee righteous judgment; and let the truth be
deare to thy ſoule; and doe not ſide with any ſide, becauſe thy minde gives
thee, it leadeth moſt to eaſe, credit, profit plea­ſure, or ſuch wordly
reſpects, but to that which moſt tendeth to the glorie of Gods great name, the
purity of religion, and to the moſt comfort and peace of thy own conſcience.

2\. I would have thee to live by thy owne faith, and not build upon anothers
fancie, it is a great fault in ſome, in that they ſee nothing, but by other
mens eyes. What this man, or ſuch a man holdeth, that is their beleife; And
beſides this, they can give no more reaſon for what they hold, then the Parrat
of her ſpeaking. I need not goe farre for proofe; The point in controverſie
cleares it ſufficient­ly. For as oneGalen: Claſ. 2. lib. de cuiuſq: a­nimi
pec­cat▪ notitia at que me­dela. well ſaith: That which a credible perſon
telleth, is eaſilie thought credible by ſuch as are well perſwaded of him.
What hath drawn many unto this practice of Hearing unlawfull Mini­ſters? But
taking the thing upon truſt, without due triall and exa­mination. Sure I am,
had men meaſured it by the Goulden Read of the Scriptures, they would ſoon
have perceived, that it was never ſet apart by Gods appointment, for the
ſpirituall building.

3\. Be not wiſe in thy ovvne eyes. But rather deny thy ſelfe in thy own
judgment, vvill, affection, reaſon, &c. And be contented to bee guided by the
alone Word of God. What is the reaſon that ſome men doe ſeeke after the truth,
as a coward doth his enemie, loath to find him? But becauſe loving their owne
conceit (as Apes their yong ones) beyond meaſure, they are not willing to
heare of any thing that is ſaid againſt it.

We ſee in nature, he that will heare well, muſt ſtopp his breath; It is ſo in
things ſpirituall: if a man will not keep in his breath, I meane ſet aſide
conceitednes & ſelfe-love, & be willing to embrace the truth, though it be
contrarie to that which he formerly held he ſhall not profit by any thing, he
heareth or readeth, but like Pha­roahs [...] kine remaine lean & ilfavored
ſtill.

Things in the earth will grow as they find roome; A Light in the dampes of
mines, goeth out: Thus ſtands the caſe with men,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=5) when any good
helpe is pur into their hands: If their hearts then, be free of ſelfe-love,
ſpirituall pride, perſonall prejudice, baſe deſire of vaine glorie and humaine
applauſe, &c. They will profit by it; Contrariwiſe if their hearts, like a
deepe hole, be full of thoſe filthy Foggs & Miſts, the truth then (how
clearely ſoever it ſhine) will dampe & quench in them, as a light in the mines
of the earth.

4.Civile dig. 4. de legib. Se­natuſ (que) conſult: Whereas the Civil Lavv
ſaith, it is uncivil for any man not ha­ving vveighed the vvhole Lavv, to give
advice or judgement ſome one parcel of it, alone propoſed. I doe therefore
intreat the Reader, to forbeare his Cenſure, till he have read the whole booke
over. And if it be ſo, that he thinkes, in ſome point I have erred (as who
liveth & erreth not) I would not have him, for ſuch a particular fayling to
condemne the whole. But let that beare its owne burden, and let the reſt be
received, as (after due trial) the ſame ſhalbe found agreeable to the Word of
God.

I ſpeake not this, as beeing privy to any known crime this way; But becauſe I
am privy to many known wants & great weakneſſes in my ſelfe. Beſides, it is
the manner of ſome, if they can ſpy ſome thing not well handled in another
mans writing, to take ſuch ad­vantage, as hereby they ſeeke to bring the whole
under reproofe and condemnation. Of this ſhalbe all their talke, at this they
will gird and jeſt; not beeing able in the meane time to take away the force
of any one of the maine arguments. Neither indeed dare to attempt it, but like
the ſnaile keepe in their hornes.

5\. I thinke good to ſpeake here a little concerning the manner of this
anſwer. And that no man may be offended as it; I doe pro­feſſe in the Word of
truth, that it hath much greeved me all along the diſcourſe, to ſpeake ſo much
of the Treatiſer, whoſe learning I doe much reverence; But the cauſe beeing
the Lords, and I ſeeing how much it lay upon me, to take away the Maſkes and
viſards, whereby many have been deceived, I have done my beſt to ſhew the
abſurdities, contradictiōs, unſkilfulnes & daungerouſnes of that Treatiſe.
And for this not ſparing but ſpeaking home, I have had ſome reaſons for it, as
partly here follow.

1\. Becauſe the Booke containes a pernitious & moſt hurtfull er­rour; and by
how much it is caried forth, under a colourable ſhew of a pious and godly
practice, by ſo much the more hath it cauſed many greevious & long laſting
miſeries. I know there are many viler errours dayly maintained; But if we
reſpect mens walking in the Holie Order of the Goſpell, this is a main
ſtumbling block & barre in the way to it: There are ſome humours, which ſome
where placed in the body, are quiet and doe little hurt, but in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=5) other places,
ſpecially in the paſſage, they doe much miſchiefe. This er­rour, is as a
corrupt humour, fallen into the paſſage of the bodie, the Church; and
therefore it muſt needs be the more perilous.

2\. I have ſpoken the more plainely againſt it, becauſe they ſay, there are
manie in England and in other Countries, who hold it unlawfull to be preſent
at their divine ſervice, and to receive the Sacraments in the Pariſh-Churches;
and yet thinke it lawfull to heare the Miniſters of that Church. Now, if ſuch
men have (as had David) tender hearts, and hearts that will ſmite them for a
little; They will ſurely come off from this too. Seeing I have here proved,
that the ground they build on, is very ſand, and their pleading for it, wants
both Religion & reaſon.

3\. Such a general fame is gone forth of the booke, as to be ſo learned­ly &
abſolutely done, that it gives all men ſatisfaction (ſome few riged ſpirits
only excepted) & that no man would ever be able to make any ſound reply to it.
And for my ſelfe, I have been by name chalenged (as it were) to anſwer, with
much baſe inſulation, as if I d urſt rather eate my pen, then put my pen to
write againſt it. And this both before my thoughts were ſetled on thing, and
ſince too. Now, whether the worke be according to the praiſe of it, let all
indifferent men judge.

4\. Seeing it is given out (but me thinkes it ſhould not be true) that there
are ſome learned men, which plead for the Hearing of falſe Mi­niſters; and
upon the Treat. grounds; I have therefore diſcovered the ſleightnes of it (to
ſay no worſe) the more: That ſuch (if there be any ſuch) may ſee their errour;
If not, reply if they pleaſe & when they wil.

But for the perſon, or perſons that ſhall reply; Theſe 3 things I deſire may
be conſidered: 1. That they change not the ſtate of the queſtion; which is
not, whether it be lawfull to heare the Miniſters of the church of England, or
of Rome, or of any Church; But taking it granted, a Church to be falſe, & the
Miniſterie Antichriſtian; vvhether Hearing in ſuch a caſe be lawfull; For the
queſtion now ſtands thus, & no otherwiſe.

2\. J exſpect an anſwer, in a more honeſt & fairer way, then I had the laſt
time namly, by a ſort of gnats, It hath beē objec­ted as I heare, that I
ſhould anſwere dead mē ▪ now how ſo ever it is wel known that my former booke
was both finiſh ed and at the Preſſe, before Dr. Ames death: yet ſay I had
writen af­ter his death: doe not all mē know, that in points of differē
­ces, we haue re­ſpect to the matter it ſelf, & no to any per­ſon on ei­ther
ſide holding the ſame▪ whom I felt but never ſaw: the Law of God and Light of
Nature teacheth.

Quod tibi vis fieri, hoc facias & alteri.

Indeed it is a very unbeſeeming thing, that men who doe profeſſe Religion &
learning, ſhould diſgrace other mens worke, behinde their backs, ſhunning in
the meane time the open light, whereby their deeds might be made manifeſt. As
for ſuch Replyers, whoſe arguments are Trencher-ſquibs, and reach only as farr
as to the end of the tableNot ſoe farr as to pen, Inke & paper, to anſwer in a
faire & honeſt way.; well they may ſatisfie men of the ſame humours; But with
men fearing God they ſhall finde no acceptance.

3\. I exſpect plaine dealing; Truth is like the glaſſie ſea before the throne,
which is bright, cleare, not a clouded bodie or covered with the vailes of
mens fond fantiſies & dreames. Let ſuch Childiſh toyes be kept for Children. I
require the voyce of the Shepheard, read it me out of the Pro­phets
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=6) ſhew it me
out of the Pſalmes, read it out of the Law or Goſpell. For without this mens
judgments have no credit.Ego vo­cem paſto­ris requiro, lege haec mihi de
Prophetis, lege de pſalmo; re­cita de le­ge; recita de Evan­gelio; re­cita de
Apoſtolo. Auguſt. de Paſtorib. cap. 14.

Before I end my ſpeach, I thinke good to mention you my Brethren, with whom I
am in ſpeciall communion, & over vvhom the Holy Ghoſt hath made me overſeer.
This anſwer will ſerve to cleare us, from ſuch untrue reports, as ſome
malitiouſly have rayſed up, as if we were decli­ned from our ancient
profeſsion, Now, what we hold concerning the fallacies & fantaſies newly
broached, I deſire all the Churches of God, here to take knowledge off, for
our clearing & juſtification.

I thought when J firſt began with this Treatiſe, in ending of it, to have
ended with publick controverſies; and ſo have followed a more quiet kind of
ſtudie; But ſeeing, what the truth ſuffers in regard of ad­verſaries to it on
both ſides, the love of God conſtraineth me not to be ſilent, but according to
that meaſure which the Lord hath dealt unto me, & as my ſmal abilities are, to
cōtend for the faith, againſt dexteriores & ſineſteriores, adverſaries on
both hands, & to deliver it from the evill report which both have ſought to
bring upon it.

And as I have made way now for Gods people, to enter into the ſweet order of
the Goſpell & covenant o [...] the Lord; So J purpoſe very ſpeedi­ly to
publiſh ſomething for their ſtay and preſervation therein.

You know (my Brethren) for the diviſions of Reuben are great thoughts of
heart. Lord, how are we ſpoken of in Gath & Aſkalon, for the rents & Schiſmes
amongſt us. In truth, I doe not know, for what our profeſſion, is beholding
unto, in reſpect of ſome men, but only to be diſpiſed & re­proached for their
idle & giddle courſesOf cer­taine tur­bulent ſpi­rits it is ſaid: Illis quieta
movere magna merces videbatur. Saluſt. They thought the very diſturbāce of
things quietly eſtabliſhed an hyre ſufficiently to ſet them on worke. But that
the truth of God may no longer ſuffer, but the ſinne & ſhame lie where it
ought; I will by the good hand of God aſſiſting me, cleare our Religion, as
that it leads not to Schiſmes & Church-breakings; but ſuch things are rootes
of bit­ternes & curſed taires, planted & ſowed by the Envious man, in the
un­ſanctified hearts of ungodly people; Beſides, I purpoſe to ſhew from the
Word of God, why men ought to keep themſelves with true Churches. Howbeit, in
their opinions very corrupt, & how. Againe, how farre particular men have
libertie to deale with a Church; & when they are to reſt, & how, a why;
Moreover, how farre a Church-Covenant binds every member of the body to that
bodie; & wherefore there muſt not be diviſions, neither from, nor in the
bodie. Againe, in caſe there be a diviſion in Church, I wil ſhew by what
ſignes & tokens, the Church may be known from the Schiſmaticks. In a word, I
will ſhew how farre the Office of the Elderſhip extendeth in matter of
Government; and how farre obedience is due unto them of the people. Theſe
things & many more of the like nature, you ſhall ſhortly ſee them handled; For
J pur­poſe to publiſh a large Treatiſe of Eccleſiaſticall Politie, even the
whole externall regiment of the Church of God. And thus commending you to God,
J take my leave; and will during life alwayes reſt

Amſterdam, Moneth 1. day 28. 1639.

Yours in what he can, to doe you ſervice I. C.

## Table of contents

  * ERRATA.
  * To all ſuch as deſire to receive and follovv the truth in Love, and vvith holines; The feeling aſſurance of life and peace, be vviſhed in Ieſus Christ.
  * 1\. A STAY AGAINST STRAYING, OR A Reply to a Treatiſe publiſhed in the defence of hearing Antichriſtian Miniſters.
    * 1.2. AN Anſvver unto the Treatiſe.
      * 1.2.1. SECT. 1.
      * 1.2.2. SECT. 2.
      * 1.2.3. SECT. 3.
      * 1.2.4. SECT. 4.
      * 1.2.5. SECT. 5.
      * 1.2.6. SECT. 6.
      * 1.2.7. SECT. 7.
      * 1.2.8. SECT. 8.
      * 1.2.9. SECT. 9.
      * 1.2.10. SECT. 10.
      * 1.2.11. SECT. 11.
      * 1.2.12. SECT. 12.
      * 1.2.13. SECT. 13.
      * 1.2.14. SECT. 14.
      * 1.2.15. SECT. 15.
      * 1.2.16. SECT. 16.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=6)

## 1\. A STAY AGAINST STRAYING, OR A Reply to a Treatiſe publiſhed in the
defence of hearing Antichriſtian Miniſters.

### 1.1.

#### 1.1.1. SECTION I.  
An anſvver to the nameles Epistoler.

HOwſoever the publiſher of the Treatiſe hath thought it fit to conceale his
name:it is que­ſtion, vvhethe [...] he vvere not a ſhamed, to put his name to
it. a. pro: 27. 14. yet he hath prefixed to it, a large preface, wherein with
a Loud voyce a he bleſſeth the authour, his friend, and the worke it ſelfe,
and ſeekes by manie unchriſtiā ſpeaches, to diſgrace ſome men what he can,
inregard they Zealouſlie oppoſed his new minion Idol.

Three reaſons he giues, why (after 9. yeares concealement,) he hath now
Publiſhed the booke▪ firſt the large abilities of the author a boue many
others. &c.

Anſw: 1. this ground is ſandy, and he ſpeakes (Ar [...] [...]) [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=7) beſides the
matter: For howſoeuer we confeſſe, that the Author, was a godlie & learned
man: notwith ſtanding it followes not, that whatſoeuer he ſaid, it was
therfore true, & neceſſarilie to be publi­ſhed. Without offence that fitlie
may be applyed to him, which a learned writer, writes of Chriſoſtome, Cal
[...]ehil Trea­tiſe of the Croſſe pag. 26. he was not without his fault. his
goulden mouth wherin he paſſed others, had otherwhile leaden wordes, which
yeelded to errour & abuſe of the time.

2\. Had the Piſtler reſpected (as he ſhould) the authors large abili­ties, he
would not haue made that booke ſo commō as he hath done, to the mans great
diſhonour. When one Pammachius Ieroms  [...] Epiſt: ad pamm: a Learned Man,
vnderſtood that Hierome, had writen ſome thinges amiſſe, againſt Iovinian, he
ſought to ſuppreſſe all the Copies, & to haue them con­cealed, till the faults
therein were corrected. If the Publiſher Let ſuch as had a hand this vvay
thinke of Chriſts vvorde [...] in mat. 18. 7. vvo [...] to them by vvhome
of­fences come. or others, had ſo don with that firſt copie which they found
in his ſtudie, they had don wel, & manifeſted good affection to the author:
but in that they cauſed ſo vile a thing to be ſpread abroad, they did ill, &
were his enemies. And here I thinke of that ſentence in Eccleſ: 10\. 1. dead
flies cauſe the oy [...]ēt of the Apothecary to ſend foorth a ſtinking
ſauour: ſo doth a little folly, him that is in reputation for wiſedome and
honour. I acknowledge to Gods glory, and the Treatiſers due Prayſe, that there
are in print of his, ſundry fruitfull treatiſesSpecially his Iuſtification of
ſeparation. a booke ſo ſuf­ficientlie pen­ned as no Adverſary hether­to durſt
reply.: but certanelie this publiſhed ſince his death, is like the wild gourd
in the Pottage, a cheife cauſe that the former are the leſſe accepted with the
godlie. It is true therfore as Ferus ferus Annot. in Eccleſic; 10. v. 1. fol.
95. 2 [...] Chro: 19. 12. 1. King:  [...]. 46. ſayth one fault depriues men of
many fauours. Iehoſaphats neere affinitie with Ahabs houſe, marvelouſlie
eclipſed his other vertues: ſo the Treat: his pleading for Antichriſtian
Preiſts, & the hearing of them, lies as a great blott vpon him. But what ſhall
I ſay, there is no man that liueth & ſinneth not. Wiſe men doe not thinges
ſomtimes wiſelie.Nemo morta­  [...] omnibus  [...] ſapit▪ plin.

3\. It is a weake ground to perſwade men to embrace any doctrine from the
large abilities of ſome perſons holding it: for we are char­ged, not to
beleeue what an Angel from heauens Gal. 1. 8. ſhould teach us, if he ſpeake
not according to the Oracles of God. The imitators of Al­exander thought it
not enought, to follow him in his vertues, but in his ſtouping & other
geſtures. But chriſtians haue learned to doe better: to wit,In a certaine
ſermon vvhich he made to▪ young men. to leaue all men (be he kinge, miniſter,
maiſter &c) where they leaue the truth. Baſil for this purpoſe vſeth a fine
ſimilitude; we muſt (ſayth he) be pertakers of other mens ſayings, after the
manner of bees: they fly not to all flowers, nor where they ſitt, doe the
cropp them quite away, but take only ſo much, as ſufficeth to their honie
making: ſo we, (if we wilbe wiſe) muſt take from others, ſo much as is ſound,
& agreable to truth, & for the reſt not meddle with it.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=7) His ſecond
reaſon is, the worth of the worke. For it were (ſaith he) great I ittie It
ſeemes the 9. yeares before he prin­ted it he vvan­ted pitty. that ſuch a
worke as this ſhould be concealed: And ther­fore he tels vs in the title page,
he hath publiſhed it for the common good. And in the concluſion of the
preface, deſires the Lord, to make the whole worke (for the generall good now
ſet foorth) profittable to thoſe that loue the truth.

Anſw: 1. The thinges that are not faire, ſeeme faire to him that is in loue.
Theocrit▪ i [...] Bucoliaſt. So Daphius, in the poet ſaith to Polephemus. It
is iuſt ſo with ſuperſtitious men, they thinke paſſinge well of their vaine in
venti­ons, howbeit they have no reaſon for it.

And ſurely, were it not, but that this man is Fallen exceſſiuelie in loue with
the Treatyſe, Quid non cogit amer. martial, l. 4. Encolp he would not ſo
applaud it, much leſſe haue been at the charge of the printing. But what may
be reaſō, that he & others, are ſo in loue with it? if they would anſwere
here [bona fide,] my mind giues mee, they would ſay as Samſon did when he
deſired to take a wife of the vncircumciſed Philiſtines: ſhe pleaſeth me well
Iudg: 14. 3. So theſe covet to be vnequallie yoaked with this harlot-hearing:
be­cauſe it pleaſeth them wel. & why ſo? oh it leads them vnto an eaſie &
plauſible walkinge: they haue a tricke now to deceiue the Prelates, & to
ſhunne Perſecution for the croſſe of Chriſt.

2\. Touching a common good, this is the common pretence of all deceiuers,Pro;
1, 11. 12 1. Pet. 2. 19. Eze. 12. 22. and the ſame as old almoſt as the world:
for the Devil uſed it,Gen. 3, 2. 30. to beguile the woman in Paradiſe ſaying
God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof ye ſhalbe as Gods. He rea­ſoneth
here (as Pareus Comment: in Gen: c. 3. v: 5. p. 115. Tom: 1. obſerveth on the
place) to this effect that which wilbe for your good,Duaran: di­ſtinct: 8.
Field of the Church. l. 3. p. 157. 158. San­ders de viſib: m [...]n: lib: 5.
ought not to be omitted: But the eating of the forbidden fruit wilbe ſo: (for
yee ſhalbe as Gods:) Therefore, &c.

And the childrē of this wicked one, haue ſince in this followed their fathers
ſtepts: for what lies & beaſtlie vanities are there extant, but the authors in
publiſhing of them, haue profeſſed an ayming at Publick profitt? Was not the
Hierarchie that monſtrous monſter, cunningly erected at firſt (& to this day
juſtified) vnder couler of common good: 22\. Gui [...]. hard l. 4. c. 6. ſun.
Lomb. l. 4. Rhem in 1. Cor. 14. Soct. l. namelie to Preſerue the vnitie &
peace of the Church: for the auoyding of ſchiſines and factions and that there
may be no Tyranny or oppreſſion among brethren. The like may be ſaid of the
maſſe, merits, purgatorie,2 [...]. Qu [...]ſt. 1. art 1. Poli­dor l. 6. c. 12.
invent: pilgrimages, bowing at Altars, praying to Angels, wor­ſhipping of
Images, Croſſes, Pardons, Holie oyle, Faſts, Feaſts, abſolution by preiſts,
prayer in an vnknowne tongue: & the reſt of the filthy traſh & dung in
Babilō:Allexan ab. Allexxan: l 3. doe not the couetuous marchants of that
ſee, tel theire chapmen all is for common good: [ſeSotus l. 4 diſtinct 43. art
3. Bellarm. de purgat. l. 2. c. 17. Thomas Aquin:  [...] diſt: their Bookes]
Not but their bels in the tower, and the croſſe on the ſtee­ple, are ſet vp
vnder a pretence of common good: the one beeing to driue away euil ſpirits▪ &
the other to keepe the Church from bur­ninge, [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=8) To vel vs
therefore of common good, we tel him, Plus aloēs. quam mellis habet. Iuvenal:
Sat: 6.. This is but a cunning bait, which impoſters for­merlie have vſed, to
draw ſimple people into a ſnare. But to keepe our ſelues from it, we need goe
no further, then to a ſaying of an Ethnicke: That onlie are we to eſteeme good
& profittable, which we ſee to be right and lawfull Nihil vtile, quod non idem
iuſtum et hone­ſtum. Cic: De Offic li [...]: 3..

But ſeeing the thinge he pleads for, is moſt vnrighteous, (for it tends to the
diſhonour of Gods great name, the diſcredit of the goſpel, the keeping backe
of many from receyuing the loue of the truthVVitne ſie many in England, vvhich
hold the pariſh Churcher falſe, and yet goe thether to heare, beeing miſled by
this Treat:) great pitty it was, ſo corrupt a thinge euer ſaw the light, but
rather had periſhed in the birth, or at leaſt, upon the firſt ſight of it, the
finders had burned it, as the bookes mentioned in Act: 19\. 19. For ſo a great
deale of common hurt had beē prevented in the Churches of God, and in the
world too, Woe vnto them that call euil good. Eſa. 5. 20..

His third reaſon is, to preſerue the Churches priuileidge: defend Chriſts
cauſe againſt the enemies of God, which ayme at the vtter ruinating of the
Church, & labour to rent it in peeces, &c.

Anſw, The Romanes [as it is reportedVarre.) keept in Capitolio certaine dogs &
Geeſe, which by their barking, & gagling ſhould giue warning in the night, of
theeues that entered in but if they cryed out in the day time, when there was
no ſuſpicion, their legs were to be broken of, becauſe they cryed when there
was noe cauſe. If the Publiſhers contēding here, be [Doctrinsa va­na eſt,
rati [...] ut acceſſerit. Tull: as he ſayes himſelfe] to preſerue the churches
pri­vileidge. & the thinge certaine which he chargeth his brethren with: to
weet, that they were the troblers of Iſrael. let him then ( [...] Suidas:) we
are the laurel. But if he be erronious in the one, & a falſe accuſer in the
other, I hope among the godly wiſe, he ſhall haue his demerit accordinly. To
the matter.

Firſt that hearing of falſe miniſters is a privileidge of Gods Church, I denie
it, this is but the froth of his owne lips, neither ſoled nor ſaue­rie: as wel
he may ſay, that whoredome is a womans priviledge: theift a ſervants:
rebellion a ſubjects: diſobedience childrens: reaſon and ground there is
alike. And to proue this, thus I reaſon.

What ſoeuer God hath beſtowed vpon his Church as her priviledge, the ſame is
to be found in his word: But it is not mentioned there, that true beleeuers
(as their priviledge) ought to heare Antichriſtian Teachers: Ergo: &c.

The propoſition is vnqueſtionablie certaine by theſe ſcriptures. Pſa: 19. 7.
2. Timot 3. 15. 16. Eſa. 8 20. Iohn. 15. 17. Act. 20. 27.

Beſides this is the vnanimous conſent of learned writers. The ſcrip­tures
(ſayth AthanatiusCont, Gent. In Iohn. hom. 49.) doe helpe vs with the
knowledge of euerie truth. Here (ſaith Auguſtine f.) we find whatſoeuer is to
be don, or not [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=8) don Allthings
(ſayth ChriſoſtomeComment: in 2 Theſe: 2.) that are meet to be knowne, in Gods
word are manifeſted. The ſame ſayth Iuſtine In Apol: 2. et. inſt. Stror [...].
l. 6., Clemens 2\. Lib. 2. e. l. Paraeus Diſput. Aphoriſ iu Bellarm de verb.
dei. Aphor. 1. Polanus, Synt. theol. lib. 1. C. 46., Cartwright Anſvv. to the
Rhem on Heb. 9 ſec [...]. 2., B, Hall Rom. irrecon. ſect. 16., D. Iames
Manuduct. to divinit. Pag. 1.. & others. The Aſſumption is proved thus: If the
hearing in queſtion be condemned in ſcripture: then it is no priviledge of the
Church: but the firſt is true. therfore the ſecond.

The firſt part which is only controverſall is evident & cleare by theſe
ſcriptures. Levit. 17. 3. 4. deu. 12. 5. Pro. 5. 8. Hoſ. 4. 15. Mat. 7\. 15.
2. Cor. 7. 15. 16. 17. Reuel: 18. 4. Son. 1. 6. 7. To this all ſorts of
writers aſcent. Zanchie Explicat. in Philp. c. 3. ver. 2, pag. 17 4. Tom. 4.
on philip. 3. 2. Beware of doggs: Writes thus: Tales doctores, qui teſtimonium
non habent ab Apoſtolis, Apoſtoliciſque viris atque eccleſijs: nempe ſumma
diligentia ac ſtudio curandum eſſe, vt eos obſervemus, cognoſcamus, et
fugiamus: Such Teachers as haue not their authortie, From the Apoſtles, and
Apoſtoli­cal men, & true churches, we ought with great ſtudie and care to
obſerue, know, & auoyd them. The AuthorsAdmon.  [...]. pag. 27. of the
Admonition to the parliament affirme: Whoſoeuer preacheth by an vnlawfull
calling he may not be heard: noe, though he ſpeake the truth, no more then the
Devil was to be ſuffered, howbeit he preached Christ. As God (ſayth One T. C.
repl. 1. p. 83. 155.) hath ordained that the word ſhould be preached, ſo alſo
in what order & by whome: And therfore as we care for the truth, ſo we muſt of
whome we receiue it. So judicious Rolloc:Comment. in 1 Theſ. 5. 21. l. P.
228.: Non audiendi et explorandi ſunt, niſi qui antegreſtam ad id vocationē
habent aliquam. They are not to be heard & tryed, who haue not a lawfull fore-
gooing calling to the mini­ſterie. And of the ſame iudgment, is Rivetus,
Comment. in pſa. 16. pag. 52, muſculus Comment. in Mat. 7. 15., Oeco­lampadius
Comment. in Eſa. c. 2. ſol. 20., Calvin in Pſal. 16., Fenner Interpretat. Son.
chap. 1,  [...]. 6. 7., Lation Syons Plea. pag. 283.: yea the papiſts in this
point are ſounder then either the Piſtler or his Leader.: Paul,The Popes firſt
Breue, da­ted in the years 1606,, the fift, in a certaine Bull ſent to his
Calues in England (Catholikes I­might haue ſaid) chargeth them by all meanes,
not to goe to the pariſh Churches, or heare their ſermons, leaſt they incurre
the wrath of God. The RhemiſtsAnnot in 1. Cor. 10. ſest, 21 ſay the like: ſo
the Doway tranſlators. & adde thus: Such as goe vnto falſe Churches, are to be
counted of that ranke Paul ſpeakes of, in Tit. 1. Vit. who confeſse they know
God but in workes deny. him.In 1 king. chap. 5. v. 19..

For the munition therfore which he ſpeakes of here, if this ſinſull hearing be
his beſt, to preſerue Gods Church from the attempts of adverſaries. Let him
keepe it himſelf: for we know (oh that we had neuer knowne it) by vnhappy
experience, the uſe & nature of it. As the Iewes of old by taking the
Aegyptians for their munition Eſa. 30. 2. 3., where it hath entertainment, a
very fyer-brand that conſumeth the building: a Gangrene that ſtayes not in one
place but corrupteth by [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=9) degrees the whole
body, & kils ItFernel, Amb. phyſiolog. l, 7.  [...] p 6 [...].: in a word it
is as the wild Bore of the foreſt, which waſteth the Lords vineard.VVitneſſe
the Church of Lei­den vvhe by this meanes novv ſits ſol [...]ta­ry, that vvas
full of people. thy Calſe O Sa­maria hath caſt thee off. hoſ. 8. 5.

The Butler talkes of Athalias ſpirit, & compares his oppoſites to her, but
ſurelie were not his eyes blinded, with the vnlawfull loue of his deare
Delilah, he might ſee that the ſimilitude holds better another way. Did not
that wicked woman occaſion trobles in Iſrael,2 King. 11. by ſeekinge to put
downe their right kinge, & ſet vp her ſelfe (a vſurper & murderer) in the
place of him: now what elſe (ſpeake on your cre­dit) hath this idolatrous
hearing don, ſince the time it was hatched? but like the thinge that God
hates, ſowed diſcord among brethren, Pro. 6. 19. & why? becauſe it tendeth to
the putting downe, of our true king Chriſt Ieſus, & to rayſe vp Antichriſt
againe, that bloodie Tirant.

2\. Touchinge the perſonall wronge here offered to his oppoſites: as naming
them the enemies of God, church renters, ſchiſme-makers: matching them with
moſt notorious ſinners: & publiſhinge to the world private thinges purpoſelie
to diſgrace them. I thinke this not worthy of anſwere: the men are now at
reſt: beſides ſuch was their good walking when they liued, as that his
vncharitable tongue and pen, cannot weakē their wel deſerued praiſe, among
the ſaints that knew them. Notwithſtanding ſober words would better haue
becom­med him. Is this religion? is this conſcience? is this charitie? To tell
in the eares of the world priuate things againſt brethren. Methinkes the man
ſhould bluſh at it: ſpecyallie beeing reputed (or at leaſt would be) one of
large Charitie, tantane ani­mis caleſtibus  [...]rae, Aneid. l. 1. and a great
reprouer of others for raſh cen­ſuringe: Now knowes he not what an odious
thinge it is, to condemne that thinge in another, wherein he himſelfe in the
meane time is a tranſgreſſor, this not onlie lies vnder the iuſt reproofe of
the ſcrip­tures.Mat 7. 3 4. Rom 1. 21. But alſo condemned by heathens. It is
note of follie (ſaith Tully) eſt enim pro­prium ſtulriti [...] aleg [...]ru
[...] vitiae cernere obliviſ­ſi ſuorum. Tul: de offi [...]. l. 3. to ſee
another mans faults & forgett oure owne, foe in the Poet.

Turpe eſt doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipſum.

But it is no new thinge, for ſuch as are earneſtlie zealous for the churches
reformation, that all thinges may be there according to the divine patterne,
to be tongue-bitten by innovators & corruptors of religion: for ſo were the
Prophets vſed, [...] King. 18. 18 Eze: 4. 15. Ame 7. 10. ſo was ChriſtLuk. 23.
25. Ieh. 19. 12. &Act 19. 12. Act. 17. 6. Act. 24. 6. his Apoſtles ſerued by
the Iewes. So in ages after, Conſtantine S [...]zomen: l. 1. c. 8. was accuſed
as a pervertor of Gods order, becauſe he furthered and follow­ed chriſtianity.
Other goodmen wanted not thier croſſe this way, but were alwayes reuiled with
moſt words of reproach, & deemed of their adverſaries the vileſt perſons of
the earth. When the Scythians as Juſtine Juſt. l. 2. reports ſaw they could
not overcome their enemies with weapons: they laid them aſide & tooke vp
whips. Men in errour doe ſo: finding in ſcriptures nothinge for them, they
make whips [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=9)
with their tongues: that is, ſlaunder allwayes their oppoſites with hereſie;
ſchiſme, pride, obſtinacy, diſloyalty, ſedition, et quid non: hoping to get
that by rayling, of which they haue no  [...] to get by reaſoning.Such a one
he ſeemes to be▪ that hath ſett forth the Nevv Engliſh Canaon. the prophane
Iſmael ſeekes to diſgrace the truth by ſcoff­ing at it. As he loued curſing,
ſo let it come un­to him as he­delighted not in bleſsing, ſo let it be farre
from him pſa: 109, 17.

3\. But to ſpeake a litle of the accuſation it ſelfe: How ſoeueuer I will not
meddle with their diviſiō, neither iuſtifie his oppoſites in the man̄er of
their departure: not withſtanding, al though he wipe his mouth, & would make
others, cheife authors of the breach: yet the truth is, he & ſuch which went
ordinarilie unto falſe churches, with ſuch as iuſtified and abetted ſo vile a
practice, were principallie the inſtru­ments, of that great ſcandall. It is a
receiued Tenent amongſt the learned: Such are the cauſers of contention, that
bringe new doctrines into the Churches of God.

Commen. in Rom. 16. 17. 18. ot. 1 Cor. 1. p. 7. Pareus deſcribes the authors
of diſſentions, to be men that adulte­rate pure doctrine by humane inventions,
violate the diſcipline of the Church, & ſeeke by ſugred words, & counterfeit
zeale to pervert others. To the ſame effect writes Gaulter,Comment. in Rom:
16. 17. Mornaeus,lib: de Eceleſ. l. 2. Martyr,de Calib et vot: cont. Smit.
Morton, f Parker:On the Croſſed pa. 2. c. 9. ſect. 3 p. 116 yea ſome Papiſts
too, as CaſsanderDe Rora. Ece­leſ. art, 7. & others.

To apply this, ſeeing the Publiſher and others with him, haue com­mitted
apparent idolatry, meantained it in the Church, & ſought thereby, to pervert
the right wayes of the Lord, and to draw the ſin­cere into errour & ſinne: it
muſt follow neceſſarilie, that the ſtrife & contention which hath fallen out
vpon it, either among brethren of their owne congregation or elſe where, came
cheiflie by their occa­tion, & meanes.

For the exclamation therefore, which he and others take vp againſt the
godlie,Apol. l. 2. for their contentions, I mind it truly, as a great
prophanes in them. We would count him a moſt vile perſon, that would doe
whatſoeuer he could, to make another angry, and when he ſaw him ſo, would
reproach him for it, blaze it abroad, ſpeake of it behind his back, to his
great diſgrace. It were happy for ſome if they had ne­uer abuſed Gods people
this way, by ſeeking (as it were) to anger them in hearing vnlawfull
miniſters, marying their wiues by Popiſh licenſes, thorow juſtifying halters &
neuters, comunicating ſpiritu­ally with Antichriſtians: & other ſuch muddy
ſtuffe found the valy: & afterwards perceuing them to be ſtirred hereat, cry
out with a full mouth. oh what a contentious people are they, oh how
ſcandalous, better for aman to walke alone, then with ſuch a compaine. And
this ſhalbe publiſhed in Gath & Aſkelon, that the enemies of the Lord may
re­joyſe & triumph.A ſeru [...] that runns avvaye  [...] of his maiſter.

But good it were, that theſe make bates did conſider of that great day, in
which Chriſt ſhall appeare in the brightnes of his father, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=10) to auenge the
quarle of his leaſt commaundement? when God ryſeth Ioh 31. 14. vp, wh [...]
[...] they anſwere him? what will they ſay, when he ſhall not only cl [...]ge
them, with idolatrie & covenant-breaking. But alſo to be the cauſe, & ground
of the diuiſions, & ſchiſmes in his churches: by meanes whereof, his name was
blaſphemed, the ſoules of the righte­ous greeued, the truth ſlaundered, the
weake ſcandalized, & the wic­ked hardened in euil.

It is ſure [as ſome doe obſeruePareus in Rom: 14. ver: 13. pag. 469.] that a
more greeuious puniſh­ment is reſerued for them which cauſe others to offend,
then for they which doe ſuch things themſelves. Thus the ſerpent was puniſhed
more then Eue, ſhe more then Adam: ſo lezebel felt heauier & deeper judgment
then Ahab. To ſinne hath not ſo much perdition in it as to induce others to
ſinne, ſo Chriſoſtome.Peccare non tantum in ſe per litionis habet quantum quod
reliqia ad peccandum in­ducuntur. hom. 25 in Epiſt: ad Rom. in mor. ad locum.

Who is wiſe, that he may vnderſtand theſe things, & prudent that he may take
knowledge of them: ffor the wayes of Jehouah are righte­ous, & the iuſt ſhall
walke in them, but theVVhen at the day of Iudgment it ſo [...]lbe laid to
their charge that they haue giuen ſcandal, they vvill vviſh rather to haue
been drovv­ned Parre on Rom: chap. 14. v. 13. p. 173. rebels ſhall fall in
them.

#### 1.1.2. SECTION 2.

THus [Reader] thou haſt ſeen the reaſons, why the Treatiſe was publiſhed: Now
in the next place the Epiſtoler in­treats thee, to take notiſe of two things:
1. That this practice of hearing vnlawfull miniſters, Is not againſt any
article of ſayth, which is by the Church profeſſed whereof the author of this
treatiſe was paſtor.

Anſwer 1. Nay ſtay there, that is not ſo, for in Article 31. of our
profeſſion, (conſented vnto by maiſter Robinſon Iuſtification of Separat: pag:
123,) this thinge is abſolutelie condemned. We, ſpeakinge there of
Antichriſtian Aſ­ſemblies profeſſe, that the faythfull may not haue any
ſpirituall cōmunion in their publick adminiſtrations. And for proofe thereof,
theſe ſcrip­tures are alleagedReu: 18. 3. 4. Hoſ: 4. 14. 15. 1 Cor: 10 14. 17
2 cro: 6. 14. 15. Son. 1. 6. 7.. But ſayth he in the ſame place, this is no
act of communion. I anſwere, our Chriſtian prediceſſours ſo vnderſtood it, and
ſo doe the faithfull generally to this day: beſides this new de­uiſe wants, as
truth ſo common ſence: for it is, as if one ſhould affirme, that he eates and
drinkes, but partaketh not in the things he uſeth.Hoccine credibile eſt, aut
memorabile Teren. And: Act. 4. ſo. 1:  [...].

But it may be he thinkes the following lines will helpe him. If hearing
ſimplie were an act of communion, then euery heretique, or Atheiſt, or
whatſoeuer he were, that ſhould come into the church, ſhould haue communion,
which if it were true, it were good that euery [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=10) Church that will
auoyd Communion with prophane men to meete in priuate, and then ſhutt the
doore, when their own companie is mett together, or elſe I cannot ſee,Nevv you
may, if you ſhutt  [...] et your eyes againſt the lig [...] a Regula  [...]
eſt diſtin­guere aliter om­nia quae a ſo invicem Poſſum ſeperari. how they can
auoyd commu­nion with wicked men,

Anſw. It is a certane rule (as Logicians teach) thinges are really to be
diſtinguiſhed, which in themſelues are to be ſeparated each from other. The
ignorance of this diſtinction, is a maine cauſe (as I haue obſerued) of ſome
mens erring in this point of hearing: ffor they thinke, (as the Piſtler here
vnwiſelie writes) that if members of true Churches haue not communion with the
vnbeleeuers which come vnto their meetings: that then it will follow, that
they may be preſent in falſe Churches in time of publick exerciſe, and yet
haue no communion.Melano. l. 4. diſtinct. Syſte­mat. theol. 1. c 4 P. 58.

To reply breifly: (for I purpoſe to ſpeake more largely of this in an other
place) There is beſides Church communion, a com­munion in the ordinances of
the Church: as in the ſtate it ſelfe, miniſterie, worſhip, Gouernment:
Howſoeuer therfore a man be no member actually, of ſuch, or ſuch a body: And
ſo in that reſpect (to ſpeake properly) he hath no Church communion: yet
beeing there a worſhipper, he communicates in the actions don, I ſay whether
they are good or euill.

The chriſtian Corinthians were ſeparated formally from the Heathen-ſtate, and
conſtituted in a true Church-ſtate: notwith­ſtanding Paul ſayth,1 Cor. 10.
that ſuch among them, as went vnto Idol Temples, had there communion: as how?
not Church commu­nion, but they communicated in the euils there practiſed.
They communicated asComment. 1 Cor. 10. ver. 18. pag. 640. Pareus layth with
idols, or as Ieromeon the ſame place. phraſeth it, the participation of
devils. To be ſhort according to Bezas ciuſdem cultus ac ſacri­ficij ſunt
con­ſcij, ſiue in eodem ſacri ficio conſortes, ac ſocij, ac ejus quaſivin­culo
in eadem religione cop [...] ­lati. interpretation, they were guilty of the
ſame ſeruiſe & ſacrifice, or were companions and conſorts therein, and coupled
themſelues (as it were) in the ſame religion.

To apply this to our point in controuerſie, If an Heretick Atheiſt, or
whatſoeuer he be, come to our Churches, we acknow­leidge he hath communion: to
weet, in the ordinances: how be it no Church communion, that is, no communion
in, or with the ſaints gathered into the faith and order of the Goſpel: ſo in
gooing vnto vnlawfull Aſſemblies, if a man be no member, his commu­nion there,
is not with the people in that ſtate, but in the hu­mane inventions:Beza Anno
[...] in 1. Cor. 10. 1, pag. 137. that is the Idol Church, wil-worſhip, falſe
miniſterie, and other ſuch abominations: And this common rea­ſon ſheweth, for
he that is not a member of a Corporation, may [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=11) yet communicate,
in the adminiſtrations thereof, howbeit (true it is (in, or with the body he
doth it not.

We need not therfore ſhut our doores againſt any perſon, for there followes no
daunger, by their comming vnto vs:  [...]for how­ſoeuer [as I ſaid] they haue
communion, yet not with vs, but rather in the thinges practiſed with vs. Now
what can the Piſtler hence conclude? only thus: [vnleſſe he be Graculus inter
muſas ‡] If I may doe a lawfull thinge, then I may doe an vnlaw­full thinge:
Jf a foreiner may pertake in the ciuil iuſtice of true magiſtrates, then he
may ſo doe, in the ſinfull adminiſtrations of Rebels and Traitors. I wrong him
not: for his reaſoning and this [ [...]] is all one in ſubſtance: If it be
lawfull to com­municate in a true Church,Omnia idem pului [...], Lucian. with
Chriſts miniſterie and worſhip; then a man may lawfully communicate in a falſe
Church with Antichriſts miniſterie and worſhip. I could ſay more, but I am
loth to diſcouer his nakednes too farre. But no maruaile when men leaue the
way of truth if fooliſh and falſe thinges doe fol­low,

2\. But admit this hearing were not againſt any article of our Churches? what
is the note, that the Reader muſt then obſerue: Surelie vnleſſe the Epiſtoler
would be noted for nonſence, we muſt needs conceiue, that he holds, as the
PapiſtsBellarm [...]de c Rom. po [...]: l. 4. 1. 4. Rhemiſt. n Luk. 18. ſect▪
4▪ doe: to wit, that the Church cannot erre: and therefore we muſt beleeue as
the Church beleeues. But are you in good earneſt? wel, we will ſo take it,
till we are better informed. In the meane time take you notiſe what the Lord
ſaithEſa: 8: 20, To the Law and to the Teſtimony: Serm,: de [...]em  [...]. if
they ſpeake not according to this word, it is becauſe there is no light in
them,

Take notiſe alſo, what AuguſtineIuſt mart. cont: tryph [...] ſayth: we ought
to beleeue a Church, but not in a Church, becauſe the Church is not God, but
the houſe of God. To the like purpoſe others: Neither Paſtor, Councell,B:
Bilſon. par 2. p. 266 or Angel, ought in point of faith to be receiued, I ſay
not againſt, but without or beſides the ſcriptures. Theſe k are only ſafe.
&Hilar: in pſa 86. to be credited▪ for humaine pra [...]pts they want
weight:Lactan: l 3. c 17. they bind not.Id cont: Faiſt: l. 23. ego ſoli
ſcripturae fido ſaid TheodoretZ [...]nch. de Tripl. Epiſ. p▪ 103.. J giue
truſt to the ſcripture alone. And ſome papiſts in words ſay no leſſe: as
Thomas of Aquine, l 9 art. vlt. Abbas, Deelect cap, ſignificasti. pan [...]
[...] Gerſon, In locchi P [...]pper. Mech­  [...]inien [...]. Picus Mirandula.
Quaeſt  [...]an Pa ſu [...]. con. Occam, Dial. l.  [...]. p. 1. c. 28. P. Pi
[...]s the ſecond Abba [...] Veſperſ [...]n [...]is:? p. 443. and Others.

In concluſion then, ſeeing the hearing of vnlawfull Miniſters, is flat againſt
ſcripture articles, (as we ha [...]e partly manifeſted, and God willing, more
will doe) we  [...] muſt  [...] as Ierome▪ in Mat. 23 ſpeakes) [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=11) it, though it
ſhould in the meane time be iuſtified and practiſed by many Churches and
people.

The ſecond thing, which he deſires may be noted is, that this hearing was not
in the iudgement of the Church eſteemed as a thinge that might not be borne
with all.

Anſw: 1: The doctrine of the Nicolaitans (which wasTrenan▪ l. 1▪ 27. Epiphanc.
1. Tom. 1. E [...] 3\. 29. that a­dulterie and fornication were no ſinnes, and
that men might communicate with the ſacrifices of Idolaters, in their idol
tem­ples) was not in the iudgment of the Churches at Pergamos, and Thyatira
eſteemed as a thing that might not be borne withall: was the ſame therfore
good? indeed ſuch a concluſion we muſt either here gather from his wordes: or
conclude he knew not well what he wrote.

2\. To the iudgement of that Church, when they wrote to London: I may oppoſe
their former and better iudgment: ffor with reverence to the Phraſe, from the
beginning this was not ſoe: ffor in their conſtitution, and many yeares after,
they heldRemember therfore from vvh [...]nce thou art fallen, and repent, and
doe the firſt vvor­kes. Reu. 2. 5. hearing of vnlawfull Miniſters a very
vnlawful practiſe.

And ſo much appeares in ſundry paſſages Publiſhed to the world by the Paſtor
himſelfe. And for the Readers better ſatiſ­faction, I thinke it not amiſſe to
ſert downe their Owne words,

ThoſeMunumiſſion to a manuduc­tion pag. 5. who partake in the worke of
Preaching of one ſent by the Bp: DOE PARTAKE IN WHAT LYETH JN THEM IN THE
AVTHORITY OF THE SENDER. Againe The authorite of Miniſters in their
Pariſhionall Churches,c Page. 4. may not be, by Gods people partaken with, no
not in actions other­wiſe Lawfull, vnder the paines of Babilons Plagues.
Againe in another booke Religious Communion pag. 20. thus they write: Let all
them that feare God, conſider, that when they come to worſhip in the Pariſh
Aſſem­blyes, they joyne themſelues where God hath not joyned them, and doe
acknowledge that ſocietie for the Church of God, and commu­nion of ſaints,
which he hath not ſanctifyed for that purpoſe, and in ſaying ourfather with
them, they acknowledge them, for the children of God, who in the perſwation of
their conſciences are of their father the divel. And in the ſame booke a
little after: pag. 32. Their very adminiſtrations by vnlawfull calling, are
the ſinnes, and ſo to PARTAKE WITH THEM IN THEIR ADMINISTRATIONS, IS TO
PARTAKE WITH THEM IN THEIR SINNES: contrary to. Timot. 5. 22. Reu. 14. 4. In
their anſwere to, Maiſter Barnerds booke, thus they [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=12) write largeſie
of this point. Juſtification of Separat: pag. 78. 79. 80.  [...]e alſo page
17. 162. 276. 433. Some of which, is as follow­eth.

But the thing which moſt grieves Mr. B▪ and at which he hath greateſt
indignation Pap. 62. is, that we will not heare his ſermons though he preach
nothing but the true word of God. And ſo he deſires to heare of vs, where the
hearing of the true word of God onely preached is ſinn and forbidden by
Chriſt, or the Prophets or Apoſtles.

For anſwer hereof I would know first whether Mr. B. ſpeaking here and in many
other places, of the true Word of God, do means that God hath a true word and
a falſe word, or rather bewray not an accuſing conſcience, that they in
England have not the true word truely taught, that is, in a true office of
Miniſtery?

Now for the demaund (referring the reader for more full ſatiſfaction to that
which hath bene publiſhed at large by others) I do anſwer, that as it was
vnlawfull toN [...]mb. 16. 2. C [...]. 26. 1 King. 12. communicate with Corah
or with vzziah though they offered true ſacrifices, ſo IS IT VNLAWFVL▪ TO
COMMƲNICATE WITH ADEVISED MINSTERY, WHAT TRƲTH SOEVER IS TAVGHT IN IT.

Secondly the Lord hath promiſed no bleſſing to his word but in his owe
ordinance, though by his ſuperaboundand mercy he oft tymes vouchſafe that
which no man can chalendg by any ordinary promiſe

Thirdly * no man may partake in other mens ſinns, [...]m. 5. 12. but euery
Ministery eyther deviſed or vſurped is the ſinn of him which exerci­ſeth
it.Rev. 18. 4. And as no good ſubject would aſſist or communicate with any
perſon in the administration of civil Justice to the Kings ſubjects, (no not
though he administred the ſame never ſo equally and indiffer­rently) except
the ſame perſon had commiſſion from the King ſo to do: ſo neyther ought the
ſubjects of the kingdome of Christ to partake with any perſon whomſoever in
the diſpenſation of any ſpirituall thing: (though in it ſelf never ſo holy)
withot ſufficient warrant and com­miſſion from the moſt abſolute and
ſovereigne King of his Church Chriſt Ieſus. And where Mr. B. ſpeaks of
hea­ring the true word of God only preached, he intimates therin, that if we
would heare him preach it would ſatiſfy him well▪ [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=12) and ſo teacheth
vs with himſelfe and others to make a ſchiſme in the Church, in vſing one
ordinance and not an other.

It is all one whether a man communicate with the miniſter in his pulpit or
with the Chauncelor in his conſiſtory, both of them minister by the ſame power
of the Biſhop. The Chauncelor may iudge justly, & who knowes whither or no the
Miniſter will teach truely? And if he doe not, but ſpeak the viſion of his
owne heart, what remedy hath the Church, or what can they that hear him do?
May they rebuke him openly according to his ſin, and ſo bring him to
repentance? or muſt they not beare his errors yea his hereſyes alſo during the
pleaſure of the Biſhops, even their Lord, & his?

And would you Mr. B. be content your people ſhould heare a maſſe-Priest or
Jeſuite, though he profeſſed as loud as you do, that he would teach the true
word of God? And think not ſcorne of the match, for you haue the ſelfe ſame
office with a maſſe Preiſt though refyned. If he be ordayned by a Biſhop
(though it be the Biſhop of Rome) he may mi­niſter in any Church of England by
vertue of that ordination. And­beſides maſſe-Preiſts preach ſome and thoſe the
mayne truthes, and the Miniſters in England neither do nor dare preach all, no
nor ſome which (it may be) the others do.

Is it not better then for the ſervants of the L. Ieſus to exerciſe and aedify
themſelves according to the model of grace receaved, though in weaker meaſure,
then to be ſo ſimple as to come to your feaſts, though you cry never ſo loud
vnto them, thinking that becauſe your ſtoln waters are ſweet, and your hidden
bread pleaſant, that they have no power to paſſe by, but muſt needs become
your gueſts?

And here (to uſe the Piſtlers words,) it is wel to be marked by the Reader,
how the Church when theſe thinges were written, en­ioyed as a Paſtor, ſo a
iudicious Ruling Elder too, and their com­pany greater by farre then it was,
when that letter was framed.

Such as write of the Government of Common-wealths doe hold it for a rule, that
to redreſſe abuſes in any State, a bet­ter Way cannot be taken, then to haue
thinges brought to their firſt inſtitution. Hence it is, that the Venetians,
haue a ſupreame Magiſtracie, which they call A Syndicate that once in a few
yeares,  [...] ſurvey [...] all the Offices and dignities in their [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=13) wealth that ſo
all things may continue and ſtand entyre, according to the rules and precepts
of their firſt Conſtitutions and Ordi­nances.

If the Piſtler had deſired the common good of that Church: he would haue
ſought, to haue had thinges reduced to their primitiue Originall, and good
beginning: and not Mention as he doth, their depriuations, declinations,
departuresſer [...]en [...] qualitas vi [...]i dignoſcitur.: as a rule for all
Poſterity to meaſure their faith and actions by. It is an infallible maxime,
(as D: Vſher De Chriſtia­nor Eccl. ſucceſs. et ſtat [...] cap. 1. pag. 19. and
other obſerue out of Tertullian Id verum quodcunque primum. id adultorum quod
cunque poſteri­us.) whatſoeuer is firſt, that is trueſt, and what comes after
is adulterate. The firſt in any kind, or ſort of thinges is trueſt and beſt:
ſo Feild.

3\. But admitt there were many that held this hearing lawfull, and ſoo haue
don along time, what of this; is the thing he better for that? in no wi
[...]e: For not cuſtome or multitudes muſt be followed, but the truth of Gods
word. Walke ye not in the ſtatutes of your fathers, I. Of the Church. l. 2. c.
5. p. 49. neither Obſerue their iudgments, nor defi [...]e your ſelues with
their idols Ezech. 20. The like precept we haue, in 3:  [...]ch: 11. Follow
not that which is euil, but that which is good.

Cyprian and others of the Fathers (as they are called) ſpeake wel to this
purpoſe: we mustNon debemus attende [...]e quid alius ante nos f [...]cerit
aut faci­endum putaue­rit ſed quid ante omnes eſt Chriſtus prior fecerit. Cyp
[...] E­piſt. 63. not regard what others did be fore vs, or thought fitt to be
don, but what Christ did who was before all. We Mustnon eſt de conſuetudene
praeſcribendum ſed ratione vin cendum. Epiſt. 74. not preſcribe vpon custome,
but perſwade by reaſon. WhatſoeuerTertullian lib de vi [...]g: ſauoreth
against the truth, it is hereſie be the practice thereof, neuer ſo ancient.
Non illa tantum in religione fugienda, quae Verbo dei adverſantur: ſed ea
etiam quae verbo dei, non ſunt praeſcripta, etiamſi ab acutiſſimis hominibus
excogitata, a doctiſſimis defenſa, et diuturna conſu etudine recepta. Not only
in religion muſt we auoyd all thinges contrary to the word of God; but alſo
whatſoeuer is not therein preſcribed:o Polanus Comment: in Ezec: 20 pag: 481.
yea howbeit the ſame ſhould be deuiſed by the acutest men, defended by the
moſt learned, and receiued by long cu­ſtome.

Then we ſerue God,p. Fox Act. and mon: p. 18 29. when in his worſhip, we
follow his word, and not mans fantaſies, cuſtome, multitude &c: ſo Bradford
the martyr.

Thus we haue (according to his intreatie) taken a vew of his [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=13) two thinges, the
which are ſo vaine and frivelous, as indeed deſerued no anſwere. yet leaſt any
of that faction ſhould thinke we paſſed them over without any examintion,
becauſe we feared the weight and force thereof: I haue breiflie replyed: and
deſire the humble and godly Reader, to con [...]ider what both haue written.

#### 1.1.3. SECTION: 3.

[...]The Epiſtoler hauing ended his two obſeruations, prepareth now himſelfe
in the next place (in earneſt) for diſputati­onDulce bell [...] in expertis.:
And firſt of all, (after ſome ſpitefull words caſt on his oppoſites,) like
Thraſo in Terence (who thought himſelfe a none-ſuch, o. Metuebant omnes iam
me. in Eunuch: and thereupon boaſtingly prayſeth himſelfe: They are all
affraid of me, Act: 3. ſc. 1. as if he had don ſome great pe [...]ce [...] of
ſeruice,) he daringlie prouokes who Et calum territat armis. Virg. in Ae­neid:
will to reply, if their stomacks ſerue. And becauſe he will ſpeake (omiſſis
nugis) to the purpoſe indeed. He vndertakes to handle the point in
controverſie me­thodicallie: that is, to propound firſt his oppoſites
obiections. And afterwards to giue ſome anſwere to them,

Firſt (ſayth he) they obiect & ſay that we hould the Church of England to be a
falſe Church, and the miniſters thereof to be Antichristian, and yet we goe
thither to worſhip, and this ſay they is abſurd.

His anſwere hereto is: Before wee anſwere directlie to this obiection, we
ſhall intreat the Reader, and themſelues to conſider of what followes.

Anſw: we read of one Doria the Admiral of Genua, that fighting at ſea againſt
the Saraſens, he fetched his courſe ſo farre about to gaine the wind, that he
could neuer come to ſtrike a blow before the battle was ended. The Epiſt: is
here fallen into ſuch a wild and wandring courſe, for ſeeking to get ſome
advantage by windy wordes, he goes quite away from the thing which he
propounded, and comes not againe to ſpeake either much or little of it.

But no maruaile our new maiſter It ſeemes the Piſt: is one of Antontes
ſcho­lers mentioned in Tullie, vvho vviſheth men if they be trob­led about a
hard queſtion to ſay nothing to it. hath ſhewed vs ſuch a trick:Cic, de orat,
l. 2, the truth is (as oneD. Couel, Church Gouer­ment. c, 1, p▪ 5, ſpeakes in
the like caſe) he made the obiection ſtronger then he was able to anſwere:
Better therfore to be ſilent then light a candle to diſcouer his owne
nakednes.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=14) But it
may be he, or others of that ſide, wilbe the more wil­ling to reply, if they
ſhall ſe this argument laid downe in ſome better forme. If that will doe it,
we will doe our beſt to make way for them. Thus then we reaſon.

To worſhip God in any other way or manner, then he hath in his word
preſcribed, is vnlawfull:

But to heare Antichristian Miniſters in falſe Churches, is to worſhip God in a
way and manner which he hath not preſcri­bed:

Therefore it is a ſinne to doe it.

The maior no man dares deny I aſſure my ſelfe: For it is manifeſt and certane
by the whole courſe of the ſcriptures. Deu: 12. 8. Leuit. 10. 20. pſa: 119:
133: Mic. 7. 18: Hoſ: 9\. 15 Ihon 4. 23. mat. 15. 3. 4. Coloſ 2, 8. 2 Ioh.
16\. 17.

Moreouer all ſorts and ſects of writers acknowledge this For a truth.
ZanchyExplicat: in Coloſs: 2 [...] 23\. pag.  [...]19\. To [...]. 4, ſaith,
Deus et ſolus vult coli, et eo ſolo cultu, quem ipſe inſtituit. God wil be
worſhipped alone, and with that worſhip alone, which he himſelfe hath
appointed. So writes Luther,Comment. in Galat. Cap. 6. pag, 871. Omnis talis
religio, qua colitur deus ſine verbo et mandato eius, idolatria eſt, et quo ea
eſt ſanctior et ſpiritualior in ſpeciem, hoc pernicior et p [...]ſtilentior
eſt.

All ſuch religion wherein God is worſhipped without his word & precept, it is
idolatrie, and the more holy and ſpirituall the ſame is in ſhew, the more
daungerous & pernitious it is.

Brentius Qui [...]unque cultus  [...] tam aut ver­bum  [...] ta tum ab
[...]ſt,  [...] vt ma­jor [...]m ab [...]t  [...] [...]pſi  [...] cap.  [...],
[...]0, 2▪ a man of rare learning among the followers of Luther ſayth;
whatſoeuer worſhip is ſett vp without the com­maundement or word of God, it is
ſo farre from beeing acceptable to him, that a greater abomination thou canſt
not put upon him. the like ſaith Chriſoſtome Etenim quod fit iuxta dei
volūtatem quamvis videatur improbum eſſ [...], tamen omnino deo gratum est,
et accceptum: contra, Quod fit praeter dei voluntatem, quanquam exiſtimatur
[...] deo, tamen eſt omnium peſſimum et iniquiſſimum. Of a truth that which is
[...] according to the will of God, although it ſeeme to be wicked, yet it is
altogether pleaſant & acceptable  [...]o him: [...] Contrariwiſe whatſoeuer is
don beſides the will of God, [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=14) & otherwiſe then
he will haue it don: though it be eſteemed as a thing acceptable to him, yet
it is of all other the worſt and moſt wicked.

Famous Iunius Election  [...]n Ion: cap. 3.  [...]. 48. writes ſo too, God
will not be worſhipped either for matter or manner, but in his owne way. And
this is the iudgment of Calvin, Inſtit. l 4. c. 10 Sect. 30. Chemnitius, Exam.
par. 1 pag. 82. Cha [...]ſanio, Loc. comm. pag 328 Aretius, Exam Theol. pag.
42▪ Piſcator, In deu. 12▪ Obſerv. 4. Keckerman, Syſtem. The [...]l. pag. 401
Trelca [...]ius, Loc. comm. pag. 10▪ D. Fu [...]ke, Refutat. of Raſtel. pa.
339 D. Androwes: Catach: upon the ſecond comt: B. Jewell, Repl. to Hard. Art.
1. diviſ. 29. pag. 604 and others.

Touching the minor or ſecond part, I may ſpare all proofes, and ſend them to
their own conſciences, For confirmation and conuic­tion.

For: 1: That this hearinge is a worſhip, the ſame is manifeſt and cleare to
any that haue an eye of reaſon, and any light of religion ſhining in them:
None to my knowledge (ſaving a poo­piſh Paraſite Hovvſon. Serm  [...]n Pſal.
118. pag. 78 or two) euer held otherwiſe, And they by men of better
iudgmentDr. La [...]ton▪ in Syons Plea▪ p. 327. haue been ſharpely blamed for
it.

Againe, that this worſhip is don in a way and manner which the Lord neuer
appointed, it is as cleare as the ſunne at noone day, & cannot with any modeſt
face be denyed.

The Treatiſer Pag. 37▪ confeſſeth that it is no perticular Ordinance left by
Chriſt: marke that: and, in another place,Iuſtificat▪ Se­parat p. 93, 94 a
falſe Church, ſayth he, is a real and ſubſtantial idol.

Alſo Re [...]giour cō ­munion. p. 37 Every ſuch Government & miniſtery, as is
not commaunded by God and Chriſt, is an idol forbidden in the ſecond
commaun­dement: & all ſubiection to it, is a bowing downe to an idol.

To compare now all this, firſt with the ſcriptures: Is the Church an idol,
Abridgement p.  [...]3 the miniſtery an idol, the Government an idol &c. In
the words then of the Prophet: Hoſ. 14,  [...] what haue we doe any more with
idols? what agreement hath the Temple of God with idols  [...] 2 Cor. 6▪ 14
For we are the Temple of the living God? Is it not ſaid: Little children keepe
your ſelues from idoles. Againe, my dearelie Beloued flee from idolatrie. But
how? mente et corpore: (ſaith Pareus,) Comment▪ in 1 Cor. 10, ver. 14. pag.
614 in mind & body, that is the worſhip & reverence of Idols: And to flee
idolatrie, is not only to abſteane from it, but with all the heart to auoyd
it, as an abominable thinge & a moſt hurtfull plague.

Againe, a little after on the ſame place, whoſoever  [...] a chriſti­an, it is
neceſsarie that he be carefull, to keepe himſelfe from all idolatriè, & the
occaſions, kinds, and inſtruments thereof: ſo he.

2\. To compare their former poſitions, with the doctrines taugh [...] vs by
learned men. Iunius Sacrifica [...]ur autem da [...] ­nibus fi a [...]a  [...]
­co aut  [...]tù & modo ſacrifica­tur, quam pra­ſcrip [...]it domi­nus. in his
notes vpon Leuit: 17▪ 17▪ [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=15) ſayth thus, men
ſacrifice to divels, if they ſacrifice either in any o­ther place or after
other rite or manner, then the Lord hath pre­ſcribed.

B: BabingtonComfortable notes upon Le­vit. 17. pag. 130. writing on theſe
words, what manſoeuer there be of the houſe of Iſrael, that killeth on oxe,
&c. And bringeth it not to the doore of the Tabernable, &c. ſayth: Hereby was
ſignifyed that only in the Church, by fayth in the cheife high prieſt Chriſt
Ieſus, ſacrifice and ſeruice accepted of God, is, and can be offered and don,
and no where elſe. And of this iudgment was Deu. 12, p. 178 Luther, Brentius,
Exegiſ. in Ioh: 4. Calvin, & others. Levit. 17.

Touching the high places 1 Kin. 12. 31 2 King. 12. 3 2 King. 4. 14 Ier. 1
[...]. 5. Eze. 6. 2 and 6. 25 of which we read often in ſcripture. The time
was when it was lawfull to offer ſacrifices vpon them, So writes Auguſtine Qua
[...]ſt. 36. in lib. Iudg., Druſius Ad diffic [...]l. loc. Deu. 12. cap. 68.
pag. 571., Rivetus Comment. in Hoſ. 4. 13. pag. 148., and others. And ſo much
our Learned Ainſworth in his Annotations vpon Leuit: 17\. 5. obſerueth out of
the Hebrew Rabbins. Before the Tabernacle was ſett vp, the high places were
lawfull, & the ſeruice was by the firſt borne: after the Tabernacle was
erected, the high places were vnlawfull and the ſeruice (was performed) by the
prieſts. Thalmud: Bab: in zebachim: chapt. 14.

Beſides the Fathers of old, many hundred yeares there wor­ſhipped Brint. Amos:
c. 7. pag. 43. almighty God, in ſpirit and truth. Notwithſtanding it was
Iſraels great ſinne ſo to doeAmos 7. 9▪. And the reaſon hereof is laid downe
by Zanchie Comment. in Hoſ. 4. 13. pag. 81.. Quia verba non habebant, cur
debere hoc facere, they had no divine precept for it: and wanting that,
idcirco fornicabantur, ſayth Mercer Comment. in Hoſ. 4. 13. pag. 42.: they
committed therefore Fornication. Here alſo it muſt be noted, that in theſe
places they worſhipped not idolsCalvin. pra­lect. in Hoſ. 4. but the true
God,Deum qui­dem col [...]bant pa [...]um▪ ſed  [...]li [...]i quam loco quem
[...]legerat: Iunius Ann [...]t. in 1 King. 12. v. 4. & the ſacrifices which
they there offered, were according to the law,1\. 50 their inten­tion and
meaning goodLavaterus in Ioſh: c. 22.  [...]om. 59. p. 70▪: and the reaſon why
they made choyſe of them, was out of deuotion, and for imitation ſake of the
Patri­archs Al [...]ed. prae­  [...]: 2. p. 370. cognit.  [...]eol, & quaſi
caelo propriora Brentius Comment. in Amo: 7. p▪ 42 O [...]mp. in Hoſ. 4. 13.,
as beeing neerer to Heauen and the like.

Now if it were a fault in them, to cary the oblations vnder the law, to a
place (howbeit ſomtimes lawfull, and where their god­lie anceſtors had before
trulie worſhipped) becauſe they had no commaundement ſo to doe: Then
certainlie more in fault are thoſe, which (with the worſhip of the Goſple)
goe, where it was neuer lawfull publicklie to ſerue God, and where their
fore­fathers neuer to this day, rightlie ſerved him: I meane to an idol-
Church, and there offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifices, in, by, and with an idol-
miniſterie: I ſay there beeing in the word of God no one [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=15) precept for it.

If the Piſtler can ſhew vs, what coulorably can be ſayd, for the iuſtification
of this latter: which the old idolatrous Iewes, could not ſay as wel, or
rather better in the defence of the for­mer.

Et eris mihi magnus Apollo.

In concluſion I ſhall deſire every chriſtian heart, vnto whome the Lord hath
given wiſdome, to conſider ſeriouſly of theſe things. If the Prophet, only for
his ciuil eating in a place prohibited, felt ſo ſore and greevious a
puniſhment: ah▪ what iudgements then, may all ſuch iuſtlie exſpect, who dare
eat ſpirituallie any where, againſt the expreſſe commaundement of God.

Was the Lord ſo zealous For the ordinances of the old law, to haue his people
obſerue as the ſubſtance, ſo euerie circum­ſtance: whether it reſpected the
place, the perſon, the time, or any other rite: and ſhall we thinke that now
he cares not, whe­ther men be preciſe & ſtrict in dooing all the particulars
be­longing to the worſhip of the new Teſtament.

Ought we not to beleeue, that as God hath commaunded vs to worſhipp him, that
is, to heare his word, receive the ſacra­ments & to vſe other his ordinances,
ſo he hath alſo called, and ſeparated vnto himſelf a Church, a communion of
ſaints and holie ones, in, and amongſt whome, thoſe holy things are to be
vſed: And that we are to looke in what fellowſhip and commu­nion we receive
the holie thinges of God as what the thinges are, we doe receive. In a word
ought we not to be perſwaded that as the legal ſacrifices out of the
Tabernacle or Temple, within whoſe circle they were preſcribed by the mouth of
God, were vnlawfullie offered: ſo all the ordinances and exerciſes of the
Church vnder the Goſpel, don out of a true conſtituted Church, are altogether
and euerie way ſinfull.

Vnto the place which the Lord your God ſhall chuſe out of all your tribes,Deu.
12. 5. 6. 7. 8. to put his Name there, euen vnto his habitation ſhall ye
ſeeke, and thither thou ſhalt come. And thither ye ſhall bring your burnt-
offrings, and your ſacrifices, and your tithes, and heaue offrings of your
hand, and your vowes, and your free-will offerings, and the firſtlings of your
heards and of your flockes. And there ſhall ye eate before the Lord your God,
and ye ſhall reioyce in all that you put your hand vnto, ye and your
houſholds, wherein the Lord thy God hath bleſſed thee. Ye ſhall not doe euery
man whatſoe­ver is right in his owne eyes.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=16) But
ſeeing the Epist [...]ler hath ſomething to ſay, we will now giue him audi
[...]nce: the ſumme of his long diſcourſe is this.

A Church may be ſaid to be falſe in diverſe reſpects, as first in reſpect of
outward order, when the ſame is not gathered according to the rule of Christ.

2\. In reſpect of faith and doctrine. To the latter we will not counſell any
man to goe: but onelie the other. Howbeit he confeſſeth this la [...]ter falſe
& Antichrictian.

Anſw:Eu ipides. 1: Pantheus in the poet * thought he ſaw two ſunnes in the
firmament, when there was indeed but one: it was the diſtraction in his head,
that made him ſo to thinke. I will not ſay, that the Piſt: when he wrote this
was in ſuch a diſtem­perature; But this I am ſure of, their conceptions are
both alike: For where (I pray you) doe yo [...] read in the ſcrip­tures, of
two kindes of Antichriſtian Churches; ſpeake out man? ſhewe vs the place, the
Chapter, the verſe: ingenious dealing requires it: As for your bare ſaying, it
is farre from proofe: To af­firme or denie (according to Ariſtotle Propter
no­ſtrurm affirma­re, vel negare, nihil in re ſe­quitur. De  [...]n­terp lib.
1. c. 6) is of no conſequence. That ſome falſe Churches in ſome thinges may be
leſſe: cor­rupt then others, this is poſſible; Notwithſtanding if we conſider
in what reſpect they are both falſe, that is, the ground & cauſe of their
Antichriſtiſme, or falſenes, heere we ſhall ſee no difference at all; Noe two
reſpects as the vnaduiſed man affir­meth.

For example, one harlott may committ more whoredome then another:
notwithſtanding as they are harlots both, ſo it is of one and the ſame ca
[...]ſe: namelie Fornication. The like may be ſpoken of other thinges, whether
Animals, vigetals, minerals: howſoeuer in goodneſſe or badnes they may differ,
I meane, as it reſpects degree,e Lib▪  [...]. de prop neceſſ c. 8 meaſure,
quantitie, &c. yet in the Genus or kind they are one, and no otherwiſe to be
conſidered. To this purpoſe writes A [...]uinas Aquinas 1 Sent. diſt. 9,
Scotus Super predi­cabili [...] Qua [...]t. 18▪, Porphirius Cap. 2. Sect. 32.,
Zarabel Kecker­man, Syſtemat. Log. l.  [...], c. 3. and others.

Beſides if that be true in the Philoſopher: Oppoſita ſunt ſinul in natura
Ariſt. Tropic. l. 6,  [...]num eſt, cutus contra­rium eſt m [...] ­lum. R
[...]ctor. l.  [...]. oppoſite thinges. in nature are alike. Againe, this is
good whoſe contrarie is euil: it muſt needs follow, vnleſſe the Piſt: be a
falſe Teacher, that as ſome Churches are viſiblie true, in reſpect of faith
and order: ſo others may be true too, hauing onlie outward [...] or­der albeit
the members thereof haue no faith at all. The [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=16) which aſtertion
is not to be anſwered, but abhorred.

2\. The ten Tribes which departed from the Lord, from his Temple, ſacrifices,
Preiſts, alter, and other holie ſignes of his preſence at Ieruſalem: from that
time, and ſtill after, were not Gods Church and people: ſo the ſcriptures
ſhew: Hoſ: 2, 2, 2 Chro: 15. 3. Ier: 3. 8, Hoſ. 13. 1. Amo: 9\. 7. This beeing
ſoe, I would gladlie know of the Piſt: in which of his two reſpects they were
a falſe Church? I take it he will ſay the latter: not only in reſpect of
outward order, but likewiſe in reſpect of fayth, and doc­trine.

If he grant this, as needes he muſt (vnleſſe he haue their ſpirit, whome the
Apoſtle1 Pet. 2, 10 termeth  [...] pro­ſumptuous and ſelfe-willed) note then
the conſequence: as his reſpects are fooliſh, ſo the Church he pleads for
hearing in, is falſe in both his two reſpects. The reaſon is; becauſe the
Iſraelites when they worſhipped at Dan and Bethel, were not in reſpect of
faith and doctrine (to vſe his termes) more corrupt then the other now is.

And becauſe he vndertakes nudo capite bare-faced and bould­lie to defend
Antichriſts cauſe: we ſhall exſpect in his next Piſtle-making ſome thing from
him, which hitherto no man hath attempted: that is, to anſwere Mr. Ainſworth:
I [...]roboam [...] [...] ­pology in his Arrovv a­gainſt idolatry. and the
non-conformiſts Courſe of Con­formity▪ p. 161, 162 who affirme that the
Apoſtate Jewes could juſtifie their way and courſe of religion: as well if not
bet­ter, then the other. In ſhort therefore, if he can ſhew vs what eſſentiall
truths his diſordered Church retaineth, or groſſe errours reiecteth, wherein
we cannot manifeſt that the other went as farre, For my part I will freelie
confeſſe my errour, in beeing a long time perſwaded omnia ſimilia that they
are both alike, & one no better then the other.

3\. Are the Lords ordinances with the Piſt: only matter of or­der? What is the
Church of Chriſt, his miniſterie, the right adminiſtrations of the Sacraments
& Cenſures, no points of fayth: oh fearefull ſaying. Not only is there wrong
here don to the ſcriptures, but alſo to many worthy Chriſtians: For were this
true, they haue ſunne in vaine, their ſuffrings haue been in­vaine: I meane,
our prediceſſors, and others, who haue ſuffered joyfullie the ſpoyling of
their goods, ſpilling of their blood, &c. I ſay for this, which according to
his writing is no point of faith and doctrine.

But we need not wonder, that Gods houſe and his Ordinances are thus ſlighted
of him? doe not all adulterers after they haue [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=17) ſett their
vncleane affections on ſtrangers, thinke meanlie of their own wiues, diſgrace
them what they can: ſo doe Idolaters, &c.

Now I doe not know (this gentleman excluded) one man that hath affirmed, that
the whole outward worſhipp of God to be no point of faith. Cartwright ſpeaking
of this, termes it the ſubſtance of the GoſpelT. C. l. 1, pag. 48 Pag. 26 And
in the ſame anſwere to Whitgyfe he writes thus: You ſay that in matters of
faith and neceſsarie to ſaluation it holdeth, which thinges you oppoſe
afterwards and ſett againſt matters of ceremonies, orders, diſcipline, and
Govern­ment: as though matters of diſcipline, and kind of government, were not
matters neceſſarie to ſaluation, and of faith. The caſe which you put whether
the Biſhop of Rome be head of the Church, is a matter that concerneth the
Government & kind of Government of the Church, aud the ſame is a matter that
toucheth faith, and that standeth vpon our ſaluation. Excommunication and
other cenſures of the Church, which are fore-runners vnto ex­communication,
are matters of diſcipline, and the ſame are alſo of Faith and Saluation. The
ſacraments of the Lord his Supper, and of Baptiſme are ceremonies, and are
matters of Faith, and neceſſarie to ſalvation.

So Fenner Difence of Eccleſ. diſcipl. pag. 33, certaine points of diſcipline,
are of neceſſitie to ſal­vation, in ſuch abſolute degree of neceſſitie, as is
of any ordinarie outward meanes. Of which ſore is the ministerie of the word,
and of the ſacraments, and of the cenſures of the Church.

Others of the Non-conformiſts. I could alleidge which ſay the ſame, as
ParkerDe pol. Ec­cleſ. l. 1, c. 11, pa. 30, TraverſeNeceſsitie of diſcip. p.
21., VdalDemonſt. diſcipl. pref., BainesDioceſ. Trial. pa. 50., BatesPa. 60
Yea and Conformiſts too; as BilſonPerpet: Go­vern. ch. 1, p. 3, WhitgyftTreat.
2, c. 1, diviſ. 2. pa. 80, SutcliftC [...]t. Bez. c. 2 p. 32, LoeCompl. of the
Church p. 60. Adde to theſe ScultingiusHierar. Anacr. l. 9. p. 1 the Papiſt.
Who cals Eccleſiaſticall Politie, the ſoule, joynts, and ſynews of the Church.

Beſides howſoever the Piſt: puts out the whole externall worſhip of God, from
beeing points of faith, yet the Reformed Churches in France Art. 25 and the
Low cuntries Art. 30 doe put this in, as an article of their faith. To be
ſhort, that which he cals order, is in the Trea­tiſers Iuſtif. ſepar: p. 348
opinion, abſolutely neceſſarie to the Church, an eſsentiall pro­pertie. And as
D. AmesDe conſc: l. 4 c 24. p. 214 ſaith, it cannot be a true Church that
wants it. For by this, the parts and members thereof are knit toge­ther. And
this is true, as in divinitie, ſo in Philoſophie. For Forme (according to
Ariſtotle 3 Phiſ: 3, 5)  [...] is the reaſon [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=17) of the eſsence.
Another: Euerie thing is ſenceable by matter and intelligible by forme.Averr:
in 1. de Calo. As thinges by the light are decerned: ſo we vnderſtand the
matter by its formeBoeth. de vnit.. It is a knowne Tenent. Forme guies to
things, being, diſtinction and operation. So Keckerman Syſt. Theol. l. 1. c.
17. p. 161, Timpler Metaph; l. 3, c. 2. Pr [...]bl. 71, 72., C [...]rlm C. 6,
pag. 35, Scallger Ex. 6, S. 3., and others.

4\. Seeing he holds it vnlawfull, to goe vnto any Church which is falſe in
reſpect of order and doctrine: it muſt needs follow, that all Antichriſtian
Aſſemblies are to be wholy left, becauſe they are falſe in both, theſe
reſpects.

And touching the Church of England here pleaded for, what notorious errours
and abuſes, ſhe mainteaneth and practiſeth, may be ſeen in her Convocation-
Canons, viſitations, Articles, the Engliſh maſse booke, their manner of making
of Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons. To let paſſe the many ſcoores, of
heatheniſh, Iewiſh, and poopiſh ſuperſtitions, which the Nonconformiſts See
Souldier of Barvvick. Table. haue in printed bookes branded her for.

And that the meaſure of her iniquitie,Syons pleà. may come to a ſpee­die
fulnes.Admonitions to the Parliament Altar of Da­maſcus, and o­ther of their
bookes. Let the Reader obſerue, the multitude of groſſe errours, which ſhe
hath added latelie to the former: And theſe not onelie in printed bookes, the
high commiſſion & ſermons in the court, city, vniverſity, & cuntry averred,
but alſo allowed them by publick authority: among ſundry other. Romiſh
erro­nious poſitions theſe.Sec Chovvne, Reeve, Pocklin­ton, Heylen, B. VVhite,
B. Mountagùe, Shelford, P [...]i­meroſe, Lau­rence, Studly, Coale from the
Altar, Biſhcp VVren, & other Prelates their viſitation Ar­ticles.

The Church of Rome is a true Church: That ſhe hath neuer erred in
fundamentals, no not in the worſe times; That perſonal ſucceſſion of Biſhops
is requiſite and eſſential to make a true Church; That the Archbiſhops and
Biſhops of England deriue their lineal ſucceſsions and Epiſcopal dignitie from
St. Peters Chaire, and the verie Sea of Rome, and that we ſhould not
acknowleidge them for Biſhops in caſe they either did not, or could not doe
ſoe. That the Pope of Rome or papacy is not the Anti­chriſt, nor Antichriſt
yet come, or reuealed; That Crucifixes and Images in Churches are lawfull, and
neceſſarie comlie orna­ments; That Chriſt is really preſent vpon earth on the
high Altar and Communion table; That Communion tables are Altars; Miniſters of
the Goſpel, Priects ſerving at the Altar, the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper,
the Sacrament of the Altar, and may yea ought ſo to be phraſed, That men ought
to bow to [[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=18)
Altars & Communion-tables, and to place & rayle them in Altar­wiſe at the eaſt
end of the Church, and come up to them, and receiue when there is a Sacrament,
and that Miniſters muſt read their ſe­cond ſeruiſe at them when there is none.
That auricular confeſſion to a Preiſt and abſolution are very fitting and
neceſſarie; That the Lords day is no Sabbath; That it is lewiſh to call it or
keepe it as a Sabbath; That it is not of divine, but humaine inſtitution, not
with in the morality of the 4. commaundement; That two howres only of it, is
to be ſanctified, not the whole day; That Moriſes, dauncing, ſports and
pastimes (yea labours of mens calling, not ſpeciallie prohibited by  [...]:
[...]maine lawes, even out of caſes of neceſſitie) are lawfull on it. That men
may fall totally & finally from Grace; That they haue freewill, and may
exactly fulfill the Law of God if they pleaſe them­ſelves; That men are
juſtified by workes, yea by charitie, and not by faith alone; That men are
elected from the foreſight of faith and workes, and reprobated only out of the
foreſight of their ſinnes; That there is a vniverſall grace given to all men
whereby they may be ſaued if they will; That Christ died alike for all men
whatſoeuer; That preaching is an extraordinary thingVVelfare the Biſhops vvho
are true to their ground, for it is an extraordinary thing vvith them to
proach. only for extraordinary times, and belonging to none but extraordinary
men; That one Sermon in a month is enough, and better then two a day; That
reading is properly prea­ching; That Archbiſhops & Biſhops Epiſcopall
juriſdiction and de­gree aboue other Miniſters is jure divino; That the
Miniſters know more then the Lay-people, the Biſhops more then the Miniſters,
the Archbiſhops more then the Biſhops; And therefore what ever the Miniſters
ſhall teach or preſcribe the people, what ever the Biſhops, the Miniſters &
people, what ever the Archbiſhops, the Biſhops, Mini­nisters & people too, are
bound to beleeve & obey without further queſtion or diſpute; That the Popes
Lawes, Decrees, & Canon Lawes are ſtill in force, & our Church ought to be
governed by them, & our Eccleſiaſticall Courts proceed lecally according to
them; That Biſhops have power to make & publiſh Articles, Canons, Injunctions,
Oathes, Rites, Ceremonies, in their owne names & rights, and to enforce both
Miniſters & people to obey them; That they may ſilence, ſuſpend &
excommunicate, (yea deprive & impriſon) Ministers at their [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=18) at their
pleaſure without any legall cauſe.

That Biſhops are not bound to preach ſo much, or ſo oft as other men, (though
they have greater wages, and ſo ſhould doe more worke.)

That they may Lawfully and laudablie neglect their ſpirituall func­tions, to
mannage temporall Offices and affaires, exerciſe both Swords at once, and rule
both Church and State together.

Now, that the Reader may be ſure, what I here ſet downe is true, let him
peruſe a Booke entituled the Quench-Coale, and there he ſhall finde all theſe
Aſſertions affirmed, in an Epiſtle written unto the King.

5\. Whereas he ſaith, in a Church that is falſe in reſpect of out­ward Order,
there may be taught many ſound and ſeaſonable truths.

This I grant, for Ieſuites and other Heretickes, deliver oft-times many true
Doctrines: And what of this, may we therefore Lawfully heare them? In no
cauſe; For as oneVſus est Nabucho­donoſor Muſicis Inſtrumē ­tis in erec­tione
ſta­tuae, ut ho­mines ad ejus hono­rem & veneratio­nem exci­taret. Pintus
Comment. in Dan. cap. 3. pag. 195. ſaith of the Muſicall In­ſtruments which
Nabuchadnezzar had in the plaine of Dura, they were brought thither, that men
thereby might be the ſooner drawne to honour and worſhip the goulden Image. So
truly are the Truths taught in falſe Churches, a bewitching Muſick to lead
people unto them, and to cauſe them to fall downe before the Idols of the
place, ſet up by Worldly Princes, againſt the expreſſe Commaundement of Ieſus
Chriſt.

Againe, howſover the Prieſts he pleads for, Preach ſometime ſound truths,
notwithſtanding otherwhile they ſpeake vaine and fooliſh things.

Mr. Fox Acts & Monum. pag. 1027 reports of one Hoſtius, who being in Gaunt,
was tould that a certaine Fryer there, uſed to preach good and ſound Doctrine:
But when he came to his Church, he heard him juſtifie Tranſubſtan­tion, and
nothing elſe.

And the like comes many times to paſſe, that men reputed rare Preachers, make
whole Sermons in defence of groſſe Idolatry, and ſpeake moſt reproachfully
againſt the way and worſhip of God.

This being ſo, I would know of the Piſt: if a man be preſent, when ſuch
blaſphemous Poſitions are delivered, whether he offend. If he ſay, No, then it
followes that a man may heare any one and any [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=19) where, and his
diſtinction between hearing this Prieſt, and not that, is (nihil adverſum)
impertinent and idle. If he ſay Yes, then it muſt follow (from his owne grant)
that no fal [...]e Miniſter is to be heard, unleſſe a man know before hand,
that he will not ſpeake perverſe things.

#### 1.1.4. SECTION. 4.

THat the Church here pleaded for, is Antichriſtian and falſe: the Epiſt: doth
acknowledge. Yet (ſaith he) that worſhipping of God, which conſiſteth in
hearing his Word, is warrantable for us to doe there: And ſo much he
undertakes to prove by this Argument.

That Preaching which ordinarily begits men to the faith of Chriſt, may
lawfully be heard.

But the Preaching of many Miniſters in the Church of England hath and doth
ordinarily beget men to the faith of Chriſt.

Therefore the Preaching of many Miniſters in England may law­fully be heard.

The firſt part of this ſillogiſme is proved out of Rom. 10. Where the Apoſtle
telling what is the ordinary way God uſed to beget men to the faith of Chriſt
telles us, it comes by hearing of the word of God preached, if faith comes by
hearing the Word of God preached (to wit, if that be the outward meanes) then
there is no queſtion but that a man may heare ſuch preaching, and any man may
bluſh for ſhame, that ſhall deny this: So that the major part of the Argument
is cleare:

And for the Minor parte they can not deny it, no more then a man at noon day
can deny the ſunne to ſhine: for if any man make queſtion whether faith comes
ordinarily by the preaching and hearing in England, it is a great queſtion
whether they euer had faith or no: yet becauſe ſome are ſo groſſe as to deny
this, we will therefore: proue the contrarie by this Argument: Ne puero
gladium.

That preaching and hearing which makes them which were altogether carnal, & ſo
not capable of a church eſtate, to become [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=19) ſaints & ſo fit
for a church-eſtate: That preaching muſt needs beget men to the faith.

But the preaching and hearing in England, made them that were unfit and
carnall to become ſaints, and ſo fit members to the true Church, which were
not ſo before.

Therefore the preaching in England and hearing the ſame doth beget men to the
faith. That the preaching and hearing in England hath done this: Witneſſe the
Church of Leyden and of Amſtelredam.

I cannot ſay of this mans Logick, as Ariſtotle [...]. did of Theodo­rus his
making of Epethites, it is his whole art. But rather if that be true, the Bird
E cantu dignoſci­tur avis. is knowen by her ſinging, then the Publiſher is
very unſkilfull this way.

Touching his Sillogiſme, the ſame is many waves peccant, as I ſhall make it
obvious and cleare in the particulars following.

1\. To reaſon from the effect of things is unſound and unconclude­able by the
Scriptures: This is, as if a man would ſay, the Midwives Exo. 1, 9 which lyed
unto Pharaoh, did mvch good to the Iſraelites: There­fore they did well to
Lie.

It hath been (ſaith CartwrightFirſt repl. a­gainſt D. Whitg. p. 79. the manner
alwayes of wiſe and learned men to eſteeme of things by the cauſes and not by
the event: And that eſpecially in matters of Religion. D. TwiſtThe Doc­trine
of the Synod of Dort & Arles re­duced to practice, p. 5. 6. in his reply to
the Arminians: cals it a ſtrange courſe, becauſe a thing is uſefull, therefore
it is to be concluded that it is true: And a litle after, they that doe ſuch
things manifeſt hereby (ſaith he) that their caſe is despe­rate, and that they
have very litle or no ground for their opinion out of the Word of God.

And this no doubt is moſt true, touching the Piſt: For were he able to prove
the hearing in queſtion lawfull, he would not have publiſhed (as here he doth)
ſo vaine a reaſon: Or rather indeed that which hath no weaght of reaſon in it.

Tertullian, De prae­ſcript. ad­verſ. hae­rec. Epiphanius, Haer. 38, p. 124.
Irenaeus L. 1. c. 16. and 17. and other Ancients: make mention of a Sect,
named Cains, which held that ludas did well to betray Chriſt: The reaſon they
render for it, is the ſame which the Piſt: here brings for the hearing of
falſe Miniſters: To wit, the [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=20) good effect
Quoniā per ipſum parata eſt nobis cru­cis ſalus, & per hoc propoſitum
ſupernorū revelatio., that followed upon it. Thus he gratifies vile
Hereticks, in raking up their old ground, to build his new errour upon.

2\. Seeing this practice of hearing, is condemned by the Scrip­tures: ſhould
it be granted (the which I deny) that ordinarilie their preaching begits men
to the faith: yet his propoſition is unſound: For no evill may be done that
good may come of it. Rom. 2, 8 No, not the leaſt to procure: he greateſt good;
that is a true ſaying: E malis nullum. May not I lend God a lieIob. 3, 7 for
his glorie: Much leſſe doe any other evill for any other whatſover. As well
the meanes (ſaith oneD. Sla­ter Expoſ. on Rom. 3, v. 8, pag. 308.) as the
meaning muſt be good. Hoſ. 4. 15, Mat. 7 Rev. 18 4 Son. 1, 7. So writes
Pareus, In Rom. 3. v. 8, ad bonum finem, bona & legitti­ma requi­rantur media.
Timpler, Exerc. Philoſ. Sect. de act. h [...]mā. nat. queſt. Lavater.
Cōment. Ioſh. c. 2, hom. 8, fol. 10. Vnto a good end, lawfull and good wayes
and meanes are required. The reaſon is, (D. Wil­let. Com­ment. in Rom. 3,
Queſt. 12, p. 154. Par: no ſinne is eligible; for whatſoever is eligible, and
to be made choſe off is good, but ſinne is no wayes good, for then it ſhould
not be ſinne.

Moreover, according to this mans Argument, men may commit Schiſmes and
Hereſies, for good comes of them; namelie, a clearer Illuſtration of
Orthodoxall verity: So they may lie, ſteale, committ adultery, &c. becauſe of
ſome following good effects: Which is the glorie of Gods wiſedome in his
mercie towards the elect, and juſtice upon the reprobates.

But this I know he likes not: Notwithſtanding his and it (pedes ad caput) for
the matter of reaſoning is all one: For thus he diſputeth; If the effects of
falſe Miniſters prove good: Then may they lawfully be heard: But the firſt is
true: Therefore the ſecond.

But ſtay, the conſequence followes not: For non mox bonum eſt, ex quo bonum
ſequitur; ſayth a judicious Writer. Comment, in 1 Cor. 11. We may not ſtraight
way ſay the thing is good, becauſe good followed of it.

As for the good effect it is not perſe, or  [...]: But ex accidente, as
LogiciansDioniſ. Areopag. c. 4, de divin. nom: Fr. Pieolomen. in Doct. Ethica
Rod. Goclen. cont. Philoſ. Theol. par. 3, p. 85, Keckerm. Syſt. log. l. 1, c.
13. phraſe it, By an accident. It cometh, ſayth Lyran, In Rom. 6, ver. 1, ex
bonitate Dei, qui bona elicit ex malis. The like ſayth Theodoret. Lib. de
providenc. fol. 85.) Deus malis ad bonum aliquod utitur. So Paez Cantic. Moyſ.
Text. 4. An̄ot. 1, p. 67. peccata a Deo ordi­nantur in bonum.

To conclude though in evils of puniſhment, we may chuſe a leſſer to ſhunne a
greater. Yet in evils of fault election hath no place. For DivinesDiſpute
againſt Eng. Popiſh Ceremon. part. 2, ch. 1, pag. 10, hold abſolutely, that no
thing which is evill in the uſe of it, may be done, either for prevention of
evill, or for any good what­ſoever, inter duo vel plura mala culpae ſayth
Alſted Theol, Caſ. cap: 12, p: 210, nullum eſt eli­gendum. And Pareus In Rom:
3, 8. the like: Nec ullum admittendum malum, ut even iat aliquod bonum, ſive
per ſe, ſive per accidens.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=20) 3\. The
maine drift and ſcope of his reaſon, is not onlie untrue; But indeed very
daungerous, to ſay no worſe of it, as rending to reſtraine people from hearing
the true Miniſters of Chriſt. And that this is ſo, I prove it thus. That
preaching which hath not, or doth not or­dinarily begit men to the Faith of
Chriſt, may not lawfully be heard. But the preaching of many true Miniſters in
their Congregations neither hath, nor doth ordinarily begit men to the Faith
of Chriſt; Ergo, &c.

If his Argument in the affirmative be true: Tam forma, quam ma­teria; To ſay
nothing of mood and figure. Then in the negative this is true alſo, according
to that knowne rule, parium par eſt ratio: There is alike reaſon of things
alike. So in the Philoſopher:Arist: Eth: c.  [...] Contrariorum eſt eadem
ratio. For inſtance, let it be in the affirmative thus; The godly pleaſe God;
Muſt it not on the contrarie follow: The ungodly diſpleaſe God.

To applie this: If this be a reaſon and ground, why ſome Mini­ſters ought to
be heard; Namely, becauſe true converſion ordinarily followeth their
Miniſterie. If this [I ſay] be a main cauſe that they ſhould be heard; Then
ſurely it muſt follow: Where ſuch effects of ordinary converſion appeare not;
There muſt be no hearing. I ſay ſuch Miniſters are to be rejected, be they in
their places never ſo pain­full and conſcionable.

This being ſo, marke the inference: Noah preached a 120 yeares, and yet there
followed no ordinarie converſion in the old World. The like may be ſaid of
Elias, Iſaiah, Ieremie, Ezechiel, and other Prophers; Therefore it was not
lawfull to heare them.

Hath not the Piſt: here ſhewed himſelfe an acute diſputer; For to build Babel,
he puls downe Bethel; To juſtifie falſe Prophets, he condemnes the true. In a
word, whiles he ſeekes to opē a doore unto the Synagogues of Satan, he
ſhutteth up the way & paſſage unto the Courts of the Lord of Hoaſt. Had he
thought on the WiſemansP [...]o: 16, 20 ſay­ing, I thinke he would not have
written ſo unaduiſedly. He that hand­leth a matter wiſely, ſhall find good.

4\. For the proofe of his Major, there is not one ſound ſentence in it.

For 1. touching the diſdiapaſon or il-favoured coupling of the matter. The
Scripture he alleadgeth is Rom. 10, verſ. 17. Fayth commeth by hearing the
Word of God. Now, what of this? His Argu­ment hence is not proved, neither
doth this place, Rom. 10\. look that way. For example, ſuppoſe I ſhould lay
downe this Poſition, the or­dinarie way to have right, between man and man, is
to ſeeke unto [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=21) the lawfull
Magiſtrate: Would any one (unleſſe he had Boeoticu [...]n ingenium) hence
inferre, that thoſe who had right ordinarilie done them by Vſurpers and
Tyrants, did well to take it.

2\. The hearing there mentioned, is not (as the Piſt: imagineth) a hearing
promiſcuouſly of all preachers, but it reſpects ſuch only, as (legitime
vocati) have a true outward calling to the Miniſterie. Thus Tertsllian Lib.
cōt. Mar­eien., Danaeus Commēt. in 1. Tim. 5 22., O [...]colampadius In Eſae
52, Mayer On Iam. 3, Doct 3, p. 179., Pareus On the place., Guiliaudus Id.,
Beza Jd., Piſcator In Rom. 10. Obſer. in ver. 17., and others underſtand the
place; Therefore ſhould his words be caſt into a forme, the very expreſſion
wilbe confutation enought; For ſo they muſt runne. If the Apoſtle, Rom. 10,
ſay, that the ordinarie meanes of mens converſion is by hearing the lawfull
Miniſters of the Goſpell; Then may unlaw­full Miniſters be heard; If he can
make it hang otherwiſe, he were beſt to doe it, and ſave his credit what he
can.

Thirdly, Paul Rom. 10, ſpeaketh of the ordinarie way, which God hath ordained
to begit faith; But the practice here ſtood for by the Publiſh. is quite
another thing: Even a tempting of God; For as the LearnedMuſcul. in Mat. 4,
Tom. 1, p. 47. Mol­ler. in Pſa. 78, v. 18. p. 684. P. Mart. Loc. Com. Claſ. 2,
c. 4, p. 209. Polan. Syntag. l. 9, c. 8, P. 596. well obſerve, God is tempted,
when men, leaving the ordinary and appointed meanes, uſe their owne deviſe; to
obtaine either spirituall or temporall good thereby.

That this hearing is ſo, we have in part proved, and more will, if God
permitt.

Now, for his Minor. 1\. All Sects doe boaſt of the effects of their Miniſterie
in converting men unto Chriſtianitie. Bellarmine De not. Eccleſ. lib. 4, c. 12
tels us, that Iew [...]s Gentles, and Turkes too, are converted in multitudes
by their Church. AnotherMaſſe-Prieſts ſupplica­tion to the King, Sect. 31.
layes downe the particulars, viz. Beſsites, Dacians, Getes, Scythians, Morins,
Nervians, Armenians, Huns, Bur­gunnians, Scots, French Pictes, Bavartans, and
well nigh an hundred other Nations are there reckoned up. The Arrians in old
time ſayd Freculphus in Chronico Tom. 2, l. 4, c. 20. no leſſe: By their
Ministers the Gothes and others, were turned to the ſayth from Paganiſme. But
this is not proved or true, becauſe they ſay ſo.

2\. If it were needfull, I could bring their owne teſtimony againſt him. For
(to uſe Mr. RobinſonsJuſtificat. Separ. p. 51. words) there is nothing more
common both in the Sermons and Writings of the forewarder ſort, then their
complaints how litle good their preaching hath done. For Example, marke what
ſome Miniſters of good note among them doe affirme.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=21) This J
dare warrant (ſayth Mr. Gifford Countrie Divinity, fol. 48.) if it be not ſo
let me looſe both my eares, that goe through the Pariſhes of theſe graue and
learned Divines, and unleſſe ſuch as runne to ſuch their victuals other­where,
ye ſhall not find five among five ſkore, which are able to under­ſtand the
neceſſary grounds and principles of religion. Another Catho­like Con­ference,
p. 164. ſaith more: Were it not for the good Làwes of our Kingdome, which doe
conſtraine and compell men to make outward profeſſion, the greater number of
our people of all ſorts in this Iland, would makè none at all. Mr. NicholsP.
218. in his Plea of the innocent, reports, that conferring with the particular
perſons in his Pariſh (after he had preached ſome good ſpace among them) about
the means of ſalvation, of 400 Communicants be ſcarce found one, but that
thought and profeſſed a man might be ſaved by his owne weldoing, and that he
trusted he did ſo live, that by Gods grace he ſhould obtaine everlaſting life,
by ſerving God and good Prayers.

This being ſo, what credit is to be given to the Piſt: Minor. Seeing the men
he ſpeakes for, give in their evidence and witneſſe againſt him.

3\. Howſoever many liuing in jdola [...]rous places are converted; yet how
knowes he, that the preaching in queſtion doth it. For pri­vate men & wemon,
may & doe turne their neighbours from evil, & that ordinarilie: ſom [...]ime
by teaching, & witneſſing the truth, otherwhile by reading, talking,
conferring of the Scripture, informing their Children and family in the fayth.
And this the ScriptureLevit. k. 27, 28, Prov. 31. 26, Ma [...]. 3, 16, Mat.
18, 15, Iam. 5, 19, 20, 1 Cor. 14, 24, Act. 8, 4, 26, 1 Cor. 7. 16, Epheſ. 64,
Deu. 6, 7. ſhewes, and the Treatiſer Iuſtif. Sep. p. 457, acknowledgeth; D.
Fulke In Rom. 10, ver. 15, in his anſwer to the Rhemiſts, ſheweth out of
Ruffinus; how divers great Nations have beene converted by men and women out
of office: As a great Nation of the Indians, by Aedeſius & Frumentius; The
Country of Iberians by a captive woman.

And here by the way, this may ſerve to his demaund: Let them tell us where
they have received their faith? We anſwer, the wind bloweth where it liſtoth.
Sure we are, faith we had, when we left our un­ſanctified ſtandings there; But
if any ſhould hence affirme, that we had it by hearing falſe Miniſters, he
ſhould ſhew follie and raſhnes. Secret thingsDeu. 29, 29. belong to the Lord;
Quae ſupra nos nihil ad nos. AuguſtineMelius eſt dubitare de occultis, quam
litagare de incertis Lib, 8, c. 5. de Trinit. adviſeth us well: It is better
to doubt of ſecret things, then to ſtrive for uncertainè things.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=22) If the
Piſt: had minded this, I thinke he would not have written ſo peremptorie in a
matter unknowne.

4\. Where reads he in▪ Gods Booke, that men are named viſible ſaints, and
judged firt matter for Church eſtate, they being in the mean while actually
members of falſe Churches, and practiſe dayly groſſe idolatry.

I thinke with the Treatiſer Iuſtific. Separ. pag. 269., true viſible
Chriſtians, have Chriſt for their King, viſibly or in outward appearance, & ſo
far forth as men can judge: (For by viſible, we mean that which may be ſeen of
men, oppoſed to inviſible which only God ſeeth,) for Chriſt is not divided,
but looke to whom he is a Prieſt to ſave them, and a Prophet to teach them, to
the ſame perſons he is alſo a King to reigne over them.

That Chriſt then ſhould be ſaid to be a King, unto any people continuing
members of Antichriſts Kingdome: Or that ſuch ought to be deemed viſible
ſaints, and firt matter for a true Church, which live under a falſe
Miniſterie, Worſhip; and Government. For my part, as yet I cannot ſee reaſon
for it; But thinke the word is againſt it.Rev. 14, 45, Epheſ. 2, 20. Deu. 33,
3 Eſa. 4, 34, Rom. 1, 7. 1 Cor. 1, 2 Philip. 1. 1

If a man ſhould give up his name unto a Vſurper, take his part, obey his
precepts, joyne with him in rebellion and treaſon? May he for all this, be
counted (and that juſtly) a viſible good ſubject unto his King. To me it is
fide majus.

For his wordy and windy inſultation; That any man may bluſh for ſhame that
ſhall deny this; I paſſe it by, wiſhing him hereafter to lay things downe
according to allegata probata; Let the Scripture ſpeake Sanctis Scripturis non
loquē ­tibus quis loquitur; Ambr. de vocat. Gent. l, 2, c. 3, Tom. 2. in the
points between us: For without it, nothing is to be affirmedOmne quod loquimur
debemus affamare de Scripturis ſanctis. Hierom. in Pſ. 98 Tom. 8.: and beyond
it, nothing to be concludedNihil ultra quam ſacris literis proditum eſt
definiendum. Eraſm. in Hiliar.: Gods vvord alone is certaine, other proofes
uncertaine and falſe, if they diſcent from it.Solum Dei verbum certum: caetera
falſa ſi diſsentiāt. Ferus in Epiſt. ad Roma. c. 3. p. 303.

5\. Howſoever it is true (as Polanus Comment. in Ezech. cap. 16, pag. 365.,
Deering 23\. Lecture on Epiſtle to the Hebr., Whitaker Rom. Pont. Cont. 4
Quaeſt. 5, pag. 681., and others ſay) in a falſe Church by the preaching
there, ſome ſometimes are brought to the faith: yet (with theſe) I deny, that
this is an or­dinarie worke, but rather extraordinarie; The reaſon is, becauſe
their hearers generally by their Doctrines, are kept in blindnes, ido­latry,
[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=22)
wilworſhip, &c. So that they fit not members to true Churches, but unfit them
rather; For no ſooner ſee they a man to ſet his face that way, but they ſeeke
immediately, to keepe him from it (nolens volens) either by flatterie,
perſecution or the like.

Laſtly, if there be any weaght of reaſon in his words, they make then againſt
himſelfe, and quite overthrow his owne cauſe. And thus I prove it: No man can
lawfully heare falſe Miniſters, unleſſe he know before hand that they have and
doe ordinarily begit men to the faith: But ſuch fore-knowledge is not to be
had: Ergo, &c.

The propoſition is certaine by his owne grant; For the maine ground whereon
the whole weaght of his matter relyeth, is this, viz: that ſome Antichriſtian
Miniſters ought to be heard, becauſe they have and doe ordinarily begit men to
the Faith: Now, this muſt needs be underſtood of that which is viſible, for
otherwiſe (n [...]que Coe­lum neque terram attingit) he ſpeakes idly and from
the point.

The Aſſumption cannot poſſiblie be denyed, except men wilbe ſenceles; For who
can ſay upon certaine knowledge, that any falſe Miniſter in the world, hath
and doth ordinarily begit men to the faith. Thus the man is ſnared in his owne
words; And may ſay with the Poet: ‘Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis.’

Before I end this point, I thinke i [...] good to preſent here unto the
Readers view, one obſervation or two, from the Piſt: Argument.

1\. Howſoever he ſayth but litle, yet that which he ſayth is ſo ab­ſtruſe,
darke, full of evaſions and ſtarting holes, as a man cannot tell what to make
of it. He ſends us to the effect of preaching: But to what end is this? What
light? What information can a man take hence: conſidering that as God is the
Authour of true faith, ſo the time, inſtruments, meanes, &c. by which he
exhibiteth it unto man, is knowne only to himſelfe, and not to others of
others.

Indeed here we may obſerve a cleare difference between truth & falſehood;
Between Chriſts inſtitutions, and mans inventions. What­ſoever God will have
us to doe, or not doe, he layes downe the ſame openly, preciſely, manifeſtly:
All the wordsPro. 8. 9. of his mouth are plaine unto him that underſtandeth.
The ſpirit speaketh expreſly:1\. Tim. 4, 1. Non obſcurè, & in voluiè: Sed
manifeſtè, praecriptè, praeciſe, ſayth Guilia [...]dus.Com­ment. on good the
place. VVhereunto accordeth Augustine:Divinitus viſū eſt, ut ſacra Oracula
ſimplici & perſhicuo exararentur dictionu  [...]enere, ne praetendere quiſquam
poſſit nihil a ſe, in illis intelligs Ad vonſianum It was thought [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=23) good unto
Almighty God, that the Scriptures ſhould be penned in a ſimple and plaine kind
of ſpeach, leaſt any man ſhould pretend, that he could underſtand nothing in
them. Another Sam: Bachiler Serm. Campe Royall, p. 36. Gods Oracles are
plaine, and labour with no ambiguities, like thoſe of Pyrrhus, and Croe­ſus,
whereof no certaine meaning could be gathered.

That the truth is ſimple and plaine, Ethnickes by the light of na­ture, could
ſufficiently ſee into ſuch things. One of them touching this matter, ſaith
thus: Veritatis ſermo eſt ſimplex & apertus nec varijs indiget
explica­tionibus & amba­gibus; ſed iniuſta cauſa cum per ſe ſit morbida,
neceſſario indiget aſtutis pharmacis. Euripid. The truth is ſimple and plaine,
and needeth is not variety of windlaces and fe [...]chings of matter about the
buſh: But an evill cauſe in that it is ſick and deſeaſed, hath need to have a
cunning plaſter ſet unto it. Another Ariſto. of them hath theſe words: That
phraſe and forme of speaking hath truth in it, which is common and uſed of
all, having in it nothing craftily deviſed, neither cloking ſome other thing
then is profeſſed.

Contrariwiſe when Satan ſpeaketh by his inſtruments, he ſpeaketh ſo
ambiguouſly and clokedly, as fitly, that of Apollos Oracle may be applied to
it: [...].Quod ambiguis ambagi­bus reſpōſa conſulen­tibus da­ret. For one
knowes not how to take it, nor which way to apply it. Pertinently to this
purpoſe writes SibeliusDeſacri­fic. Abra. p. 56, 57.: Humaine Doctrines are
various and ambiguous, wrapped and foalded with abſtruſe labrynths of
opi­nions, whereby peoples minds are ſo troubled and tyred, that they can­not
plainly open themſelves, neither have any quietnes, or come to their deſired
end. But the Doctrine of God is right, that is, plaine and perspicuous, not
wrapped with un-even and crooked ſuttleries and de­luſions of Sophiſtrie,
neither leads us into by-pathes and errours; but bringeth peace to the
conſcience, ad removeth àll ſcruples and doubts: So he.

Sadeel Opera Theol Pref. de Meth. Theol. diſput. Error. 3. p. 8. writing of
deceivers, & the ſundry wayes they uſe to be­guile the ſimple: Notes them to
be men affecting darke ſayings, and ſeeking by miſts and fogges of ſtrange &
unfamiliar arguments, to blind their ſpirituall eyes, and puzzle their
underſtandings. And this is no late deviſe; For Auguſtine in his Booke of
Hereſies ma­keth mention of the Hereticks Marcitae, ſo named of one Marcus.
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=23) And
touching them, thus I find it written:Obſcu­riſſime & quibuſdā verborum
tanquam miſterio­rum in volueris utentes loqueban­tur de Deo, ut ſtuperēt
audientes homines, potius quā intellige­rent. They did ſpeake darkly, and
uſed ſuch a wrapping kind of words, that the hearers were rather aſtonied with
the ſtrangnes of the words, then edified with any underſtanding they had of
the meaning thereof.

The thing being thus, the Reader hence (as by a light) may gready helpe
himſelfe to diſcerne, on whoſe ſide the truth is, in the difference between
us. Our diſpute is about Church-hearing: We ſay, that Chriſtians are bound to
performe this ſervice unto God, in true conſtituted Churches; There (we ſay)
muſt men heare the whole Counſell of God, taught unto them, either by lawfull
Miniſters, or by Brethren out of office; For confirmation hereof, we can
produce many divine precepts; Alſo the Example and practice of our
fore­fathers from the firſt age of the word hitherto. Beſides, this is a
Poſition, ſo certaine and cleare, as it is holden in all Schooles, written
continually in Bookes, preached every day in Sermons, taught in all Churches:
So that (haec Momo ipſi ſatisfaciant) no body can ſpeake againſt it.Danaeus in
Auguſt. haer.

Our Oppoſites howbeit they grant us this, yet affirme that in falſe Churches
Antichriſtian Ministers may be heard alſo:Pag. 3. And this is not only (they
ſay) lawfull, but in ſome caſes neceſſary for all, of all Sects and ſorts of
Chriſtians, having opportunity and occaſion of ſo doing.

This indeed they ſay? But how prove they it to be true? Not by any law of God
taken out of the old or new Teſtament: For that they cannot doe; Not by any
holy mans Example, for they know there is none extant? Not by any ſound
conſequence rightly drawne from the Scripture, for (quid ſi Caelum ruat Teren.
in Heau­tont.) that is impoſſible. VVhat doe they then? as Ieremy Ier. 2, 13.
ſayth, they forſake the fountaine of living waters, and hew them out
ceſternes, broken cèſternes that can hold no waters.

They deviſe certaine obſtruſe, darke and ambiguous phraſes and diſtinctions:
As of naturall hearing in a Church, and of a hearing wherein there is
Communion: Of ſome Churches, falſe in respect of order: Others in reſpect of
fayth and order: of hearing falſe Miniſters, not (quatenus) as they are falſe
Miniſters, or their Miniſters, but as men gyfeed and the Biſhops Miniſters: of
certaine effects which followes mens teaching, &c.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=24) Thus
their proofes are only their bare and bould affirmation: For leaving the
Scriptures, they uſe Paralogiſmes, fond cavils, and falſe arguments. The which
courſe not only ſhewes an il caſe, but alſo manifeſteth, that the embracers
thereof, are either ignorant people who cannot judge of things that differ, or
ſome, that have ſome mens perſons in admiration: Or ſuch as are unwilling to
ſuffer afflic­tion with the people of God.

I could here mention ſome other deviſes in this kind; as an im­plicit Church-
covenant. A true outward calling which ſome have, to the Miniſtery from their
Congregation, but ſecret and unknowne either to the Miniſter or the people.

But I will at this time abſtaine from ſuch by-controverſies, and the rather
becauſe I ſhall have a firt occaſion to ſpeake hereafter of it; Namely, when
the Ʋndertakers have finiſhed their anſwer to my former Booke, and Mr.
Davenport publiſhed his many things that he hath to ſay againſt it. For ſo
much he inſinuateth in his Trea­tiſe betweene him and Mr. Pagit. Pag. 282 283.

2\. Obſerve againe, to what groſſe abſurdities his argument leadeth; For unles
it be only wind and vanitie, theſe ſweet collections muſt needs follow. 1. No
Miniſter comming newly to his place, is to be heard. 2. Before any are,
inquirie muſt be made, whether they or­dinarily begit men to the faith. 3. If
after triall it be found, that they doe not ſo, then they muſt not be heard
what true Doctrines ſo­ever they teach.

Is not this workman-like done? (ſay Reader) hath not the Piſt: (omne tulit
punctum) made the way cleare now, for the hearing of falſe Miniſters? Truely I
thinke, except a man be partiall in the point: And of his mind who ſaid:Non
perſuade bis e [...]i imſi perſuaſe­ris. Though you doe convince me, yet I
will not be convinced; He muſt acknowledge, that he hath made it doubt fuller
then ever it was, and ſuch as were not well ſatisfied formerly in the thing,
have enought here from his owne pen, to put them quite and wholy off.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=24)

#### 1.1.5. SECTION. 5.

THe Pist: having done with his Logick: comes in the next place to charge his
Oppoſites, with contradiction, abſurdi­ty, and ſpeaking little better then
Blasphemy. A great fault, if true; But how doth he prove it? They ſay, it is
not the Word of God, as it is preached in Antichriſtian Aſſem­blies.

Anſw. The Publiſh: had done well, if he had publiſhed out aſſer­tion (de manu
in manum,) truely and faithfully. But ſeeing he hath not done ſo, I will here
lay it downe; Thus it is: The word preched by falſe Miniſters, is not that
word unto which God hath promiſed a blèſſing of increaſe. Or it is not the
ordinary way and meanes which the Scriptures speakes of, to begit men to the
faith. Had he ſo al­leadged it, he might well have held his tongue, and not
talke ſo vain­ly as he doth, of Gods Word, if Mr. Canne ſhall preach it; And
none of Gods Word, if another doe preach the ſame. For our difference is not
about the Word ſimply, as it ſtands in ſillables and letters; But rather in
reſpects the time and place preached in, and the perſons preached by and to;
That is, as the one beeing an ordinance of Chriſt, the other of Antichriſt; As
the one (that is the word preached in a lawfull office) beeing like Mount
Gerizim under the bleſſing; The o­ther like Mount Ebol under the curſe.

I will expreſſe this paticular more fully in this manner, put the caſe, a
Companie of Rebels going apart, ſhould take with them the Statute-booke of the
Realme, and ſet up among them, one or more to adminiſter civil juſtice
according the contents thereo [...], now though no man can denie but this is
the Kings Law which they have, yet as they adminiſter it, ſo it is not his
Law, or more plainly, that is not his Law, which they adminiſter, neither may
any good ſubject in ſuch a caſe receive any adminiſtration at their hands.

The holy Veſſels in Babilon were the Lords ſtill, yet the Iſraelites there,
might not make any religious uſe of them; So in ſpirituall Ba­bilon, the Bible
there is Gods Booke; Nevertheleſſe the Godly are forbidden to goe thether, to
heare it, either read or taught to them.

We finde under the Law a difference between the Creatures, ſome [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=25) are ſaid to be
clean, others not; But how comes this? Not of them­ſelves, for ſo nothing is
evill or uncleane; (for all Gods Workes were created good; Gen. 1. ult. But in
reſpect of the uſe forbidden: So thouching Gods Word preached, in one reſpect
it is pure, in another not? How  [...]o? Not but the Word in itſelfe is ſtill
good and true. The difference is, becauſe of Gods Commaundement, he having as
flatly forbidden the uſe of it (taught or heard) in falſe Churches, as he did
ſome beaſts under the Law.I would haue the Piſt: to tell me, what
contradic­tion, ab­ſurditie, or blaſphemy it is to ſay: though Circumci­ſion
in it­ſelf were of God: yet as it was uſed in the falſe Church under the Kings
of Iſrael: It was none of Gods ordinance; If was Gods ordi­nance, if a true
Mi­nister in Gods Church admini­ſtred it; But if a Prieſt of Ieroboams making
did adminiſter the ſame, It was none of Gods Ordinance.

I wiſh therefore the Reader, to note in what reſpect we place our difference,
between the Word preached in a true Church and in a falſe Church; We ſay in
the one (that is in the true Church) it is cleane. In the other, we ſay it is
not: Nevertheleſſe, if it be con­ſidered, as God is the authour of the whole
Scripture; And as it containes words and ſentences, ſo we ſay, it is all
cleane and good; The reaſon then, why we ſay their preaching is uncleane, is
in the ſame reſpect, that ſome creatures were uncleane under the Law; Namely,
in reſpect of the uſe forbidden.

As the tree of knowledge of good and evill, hurt not of itſelfe, I mean the
fruit, but the tranſgreſſion after the commaundement, the thing in itſelfe
good, but the uſe forbidden; So Gods Word in falſe Churches (as that fruit) in
itſelfe is good, but the uſe there prohi­bited.

And becauſe the Publiſh: takes it ſo ill, that any difference ſhould be put
between the ſame word preached in Bethel and Babilon. I will (to appeaſe him)
adde one word more. As a falſe and forged Conſtitution, makes a Church a reall
and ſubſtanciall Idoll; So all that comes from it, is touched with the
Idolatry of that Conſtitution. This is a ruled opinion of many Divines, the
State makes all the pub­lick actions to be formally good or evill; For as the
Temple Matt. 23, 17, 19. ſanctifieth the gould, the Altar the offrings; So the
ordinances of the Church under the Goſpell, are ſanctified to us; That is (as
Bu­cer In Mat, 23, v. 17. truely ſpeaketh) in the uſe of them made lawfull to
us, in that they have their Ryſe, from a true and right Power.

Seeing then the Church in Queſtion, wants a right Conſtitution, it muſt
follow, that all ſpirituall actions done in it, (whether prayer, preaching
Sacraments, Cenſures) as they are there done, are none of Gods ordinances;
though true it is, in themſelves they are of God. Yet I ſay, as the Word is
there preached, the Sacraments there ad­miniſtred, [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=25) &c. So they are
not his; I ſay not his, though in outward performances they are practiſed, as
in true Churches. But of this more in another place.Jn de­fence of Object. 15.

Another thing for which he blames his Oppoſites, is, their miſap­plying the
Example of Nadab and Abihu; I will here ſet downe their words, as he reports
them, and his anſwer thereunto.

It was true incenſe which Nadab and Abihu tooke, to offer up to the Lord, but
becauſe they tooke ſtrange fire; and not the fire which was from the Altar, as
the Lord had appointed, therefore the Lord ſent a fire to deſtroy them: So ſay
they, it is the true Word of God, which is preached in England, but becauſe
they preach the ſame by an unlawfull office, therefore the Lord abhorres it: A
ſtranger collection I thinke can hardly be heard, for here ſtrange fire is
oppoſed to an un­lawfull outward calling; which nothing can be more abſurd,
for Nadab and Abihu had a true outward calling to Offer, they were the ſonnes
of Aaron (ſaith the text) therefore if any thing hence might be con­cluded, in
just proportion, it muſt be to the Doctrine taught, and not in the leaſt to
the calling: So that we may from thence gather thus much, that if a Miniſter
in regard of his outward calling true: ſhall teach any thing that is not from
the Lord, they are to expect Gods judgement for the ſame, and more cannot
hence be collected.

What Origen Non eſt periculum ut eis ſub­vertuntū ullus fide­lium, lib. 1
cont. Celſ. ſaid of Celſus workes, may fitly be applyed to this mans writings:
There is no daunger, leaſt any faithfull man ſhould be ſubverted by them; For
he talketh and not reaſoneth.

To anſwer: But are you in earneſt, ſpeake out aloud? Can no more be concluded?
What; will a little more be (aliena are) beyond the marke; So you ſay; But a
ſtranger collection I thinke can hardly be heard; Dicclare Teren. in And. For
I dare ſay, you are aloneSolus ſapit. here in your opinion; Learned men
generally give a more [...]large expoſition of the place.

The ſcope of that text, we are taught by an Engliſh Biſhop, Babing­ton, in his
Notes on that place: We may hence learne and ſettle in our hearts, with what
ſeveritie the Lord challengeth and defendeth his au­thoritie, in laying downe
the way and manner of his worſhip, not lea­  [...]ing it to any creature to
meddle with, but according to praeſcription and [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=26) appointment from
him. Content he is, that men ſhall make Lawes for humaine matters, &c. But for
his divine worſhip, he will praſ­cribe it himſelfe, and what he appointeth,
that must be done, and that only, or elſe Nadah and Abihu their puniſhment
exspected, that is, Gods wrath exſpected in ſuch manner as he ſhall pleaſe.

And this he learned of CalvinAlium ignom ſa­cris adhi­beri vetuit Deus, ut
adventi­ties omnes ritus ex­cluderet, ac doceret, ſe detesta­ri quic quid
aliū ­de profec­tum erat. diſcamus ergo ſic attendere ad Dei mandatum ne eius
cultum ullis ex­traneis Commen­tin vitie­mus. who upon the Place ſaith: God
forbad other Fyre, &c. to be uſed, that he might exclude all in­ventious
rites, and teach that he detested whatſoever was come from elſe-where. Let us
therefore learne ſo to attend to the Commaunde­ment of God, that we defile not
his worſhip with any far fetched de­viſes.

IuniusPecca­tum in eo fuiſse, q [...]od in ratione divini cultus non
attenderint ad mandatum Dei, &c. Anal, in loc. mentioning their ſinne, ſayth:
It was in that they kept not Gods Commaundement in the matter of his worſhip.
And a little after: They ſhould not have added of their owne any thing
thereto.

PiſcatorCultum Dei exten [...]um praeciſe ex Dei praeſcriptum exercendum eſse:
itaque non habet hic locum bena hominum intentio. from the place, rayſeth this
obſervation: The out­ward worſhip of God muſt be ſtrictly done according to
his Com­maundement: A good intention therefore hath here no place.

Mr. Attorſall alſo in his Commentarie upon Numb. 3. 4. doth largely declare
out of this Example, how God diſliketh and diſ­clameth mens deviſes in his
ſervice, as traſh, trumpery, and meere dotage. So Beda, Bruno, Brentius.
Pelargus, Chytraeus, Sarce­rius, S [...]rigelius, Aretius, Borrhaeus, and
other interpret the place.

And whereas he applyeth it to falſe Doctrine taught by one that hath his
outward calling true. He may ſay in the words of that boaſting City: k I am,
and there is none beſides me; For this is his owne deviſe, and it muſt live
and die with them.

The place beeing thus underſtood; Let us now ſee, if the ſame may not be (ab
uno de grammate) fithe applyed againſt this practice of Hearing. From the
place then I doe thus reaſon:

All will worſhip and ſuperſtition is ſinne.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=26) To heare
Antichristian Miniſters in their unlawfull aſſemblies is ſuperſtition and
will-worſhip.

Therefore it is ſinne to doe it.

The firſt Propoſition is grounded upon the fore-mentioned ex­ample: Levit.
10\. 1. 2. and the ſame is without exception. The ſecond Propoſition is thus
proved.

1.Lib. 1. vit. ex: cult: op­poſe. Col. 501. 502. From the nature of
ſuperſtition, which is, as Zanchy deſcribes it a taking into the worſhip of
God more then he requires in his worſhip.

Hence ſuperſtition (as ſome derive the word) is that which is done ſupra
ſtatutum; And in this reſpect the hearing in queſtion, is ſuperſtition, as
beeing uſed in Gods worſhip, upon no other ground but mans deviſe.

2\. According to the Schoolemen, Vel cui non debet, vel non e [...] modo quo
debet. that is Superſtition, when divine worſhip is not exhibited, either to
the perſon it ſhould be, or not in the way and manner as it ought. And this is
held to be a ſound truth by all Orthodoxal Writers.

Now,Aquin. 2. 20. q. 92. Art. 1. howſoever the Hearers of Falſe Miniſters doe
exhibit worſhip to God, yet it is not in the manner and way that they ſhould
worſhip him: And this is cleare by the Treatiſers owne confeſſion; For he
confeſſeth that the hearing which he pleads for,Pag. 37 is no particular
ordinance left by Christ. Againe, he ſaith: It were to be wiſhed, that no
Church Miniſterie were to be found which is not approveable by the Word of
God, notwithſtanding any good act performed by them that poſſes it.

If I am not deceived, in theſe words he deſtroyes what he built before: Is
this hearing no ordinance left us by Chriſt? Is the controverted Miniſterie ſo
evil a thing, as that every good Chri­ſtian is to pray for its rooting up? How
then can it be both law­full and in caſes neceſſary for all Sects and ſorts of
people to pertake with it. If this be not (ex diametro) croſſe worke, and
groſſe con­tradiction, I know not what is.

3\. This hearing cannot be free of ſuperſtition, in regard men are preſent at
falſe worſhip; The which preſence (as the Learned writePraeſen­tia eſt
communi­catio quae­dam in cultu, Slater. Epiſt. 1. ad Corinth. c. 10.) is a
certaine communion therewith.

4\. It is great ſuperſtition to approve, countenance, or give ho­nour to any
of the wayes of Antichriſt. They that are ſincere Chri­ſtians [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=27) (ſaith in
Cen­ſura cap. 9. fol. 471. Bucer) cannot abide any thing that is his. The
least ſhew (ſaith VigandusSynepſ. Antichriſt) to pleaſe either him or his
followers, is will worſhip. Of this judgement were IuniusJn Hoſ. 2. 16.,
MuſculusLoc. com. de  [...]radit. p. 421. 422., BezaTract. theol. vol. 3. pa.
210., MollerusIn Pſ. 16, Zepperusde Polit. p. 72., SadeelContr. Monachos p.
70., and others.

Now, me thinkes there ſhould not be a man ſo voyd of reaſon, as to ſay, that a
Miniſter of Antichriſt, as he is preaching by ver­tue of his Maſters
commiſſion, and under his ſeale and authori­ty, may even then be heard, and
yet no honour, no approbation, no countenance, nor any ſhew thereof, be given
unto Antichriſt therein.

5\. It is vitious and ſuperſtitious to ſimbolize with idolaters; The
ScripturesLevit. 18, 3. Deu. 12. 30. Exo. 23. 24. 2 Chro. 13 9. Levit. 19. 27.
28 forbidd it. And the Saints in all ages have care­fully ſhund it, as we
ſhall ſhew in another place. But this Hearing is no other; For idolaters in
this, are imitated in ſundry acts of their idolatrie; In ſo much as Papiſts
and Atheiſts too, may well twitt our balters in the words of the Samaritane
woman, how is it that thou beeing a Chriſtian joyneſt thy ſelfe to us
Antichriſtians? Is it not ſtrange that thou who profeſſeſt our Church to be
falſe, our Miniſterie unlawfull, our Church-government Popiſh, ſhouldeſt yet
come to us, and pertake in our adminiſtrations? Surely this argueth, that
either thou underſtandeſt not the prac­tice, which thy grounds lead thee too,
or elſe for ſome by reſpect; refuſeſt to walke accordingly to them.

6\. Superſtition is committed, when more eſtimation is had of a thing, more
dignitie and excellency placed in it, and more re­gard had to it, then God
alloweth or can ſtand with his will re­vealed in his Word; And ſo much Zanchy
Lib. 1. de vit. ext. cult. oppoſ. col. 504. 505. proves by ſundry in­ſtances;
In this regard alſo, hearing falſe Miniſters, is ſuperſti­cious, becauſe that
thing is honoured and embraced, which we finde not in the Scripture to be
lawfull: and thus an idol is ſet up, tanquam Deus ex parte, though not vt Deus
ſimpliciter.

Thus I have anſwered the Prefacer: Now, how he will take it, J know not.
Cotis, a Thraſian King, breaking ſome veſſels to pieces, was aſked a reaſon;
He anſwered, that he might not be moved to anger at another for doing of it.
Had the Epiſt: been ſo wiſe, as to have torne his writing himſelfe, and ſo not
publiſhed it, he would not (as it may be he now will) have been angry at
another for laying open the weakenes and vanity of it.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=27)

### 1.2. AN Anſvver unto the Treatiſe.

#### 1.2.1. SECT. 1.

WHen Satan cannot draw men to one extremi­tie, he ſeekes to bring them unto
another. The truth of this, the Holie Scriptures1 Cor. 5. 11. com­pare with 2
Cor. 2. 6, 7. not only ſhew, but ſundry examples alſo prove it in this preſent
age.

It is true (as the Treatiſer ſaith) there are many who affecting alienation
from others, Numb. 14 35, 45. make their differences as great, and their
adverſe opinion or prac­tice as odious as they can. Deut. 1, 42. 44. A moat
ſhalbe a beame with them, a knatt, a Camell. And hence through want of a take
heed, they become rejecters of perſons and things which they ought not.

Againe, on the other hand, there are not a few, who deſi­ring liberty, and
large walking, and to have the credit and love of all men, uſe all their witt,
ſkill, & power, to have great things (I meane evils and ſinnes) eſteemed ſmall
things: And what is ſmall, that nothing. That ſo they may finde a doore of
entry, to accord and agree with others in unlawfull prac­tiſes.

Here therefore is the wiſedome of the Saints, namely, that [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=28) they ſhunne both
theſe two extremities. Medium tenuere bea­ti. And for my part of this later
number, I ſhall, while I live, profeſſe my ſelfe (by Gods grace) be to both a
Companion & guide: That is, not at any hand to condemne what is to be
juſtified, neither to approve that thing which ought to be condemned.

There are two reaſons laid downe by the Treatiſer, where­fore he penned this
diſcourſe. 1. For the freeing of his owne conſcience. 2. The information of
other mens.

Anſw. 1\. J dare not thinke, but the Treatiſer when he fell firſt upon this
point of Hearing, ſpake as he thought of it, and did nothing but what his
minde gave him to be right and good: But this makes not the thing therefore
juſtifiable; For as Martyr ſaith:Lex Dei is regula conſcien­tiae. Loc. Comm.
Claſſ. 2. cap. 1. pag. 165. The Rule of our Conſcience muſt be the Law of God.
Gideons Ephod was erected with a well meaning minde, but it became a ſnare,
[...]udg. 8. 27. and a ſcandall, and an occaſion of great idolatrie, and the
overthrow and ruine of his whole familie. What hath this hearing been? but a
ſnare in Iſrael, an occaſion whereby many people have turned aſide from the
ſtreaght wayes of the Lord.

2\. I doe not ſee what ſatisfaction any man can have from his writing: Seeing
he hath not alleadged any one Sentence of Scripture to prove the point in
queſtion lawfull. Omne quod loquimur, debemus affirmare de Scriptur is
Sanctis: ſaith Hierom in Pſal. 98. Tom. 8\. But this he hath not done, onely
he tels us, that Hearing is a naturall action: Hearing is no Commu­nion, &c.
Now, where this ſo (which is not in the ſence he intendeth) yet it ſerves not
his turne in the leaſt.

If a Theefe, to cleare himſelfe, ſhould ſay, that he hath not ſtolen ſuch
particulars: Yet if he have done other things, he is a Theefe notwithſtanding.
So in this caſe, thought to heare falſe Miniſters, be not a ſinne in ſuch a
reſpect: Yet if it be in ſome other, the action is neither Lawfull nor
neceſ­ſarie.

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=28) And here
by the way, let me ſpeake a word to you, whoſe warrant for your going unto
unlawfull Aſſemblies, is only the Treatiſers writing: This J doe affirme and
will make good againſt all gainſayers, that if the thing could be juſtified,
yet for his part he hath not proved it ſo, but hath left the point it ſelfe
wholy un­touch'd, and taken up a by-thing.

Therefore what Alcibiades ſaid of the Athenians, I may well apply to you, You
take things from other men, not by triall, but by truſt, and doe them rather
of affection and will, then out of any ſure knowledge you have of the truth of
them.

That the Treatiſer made account to meet with Oppoſites, I marvaile not: Onely
I marvaile, ſeeing he fore-ſaw ſo much, that he had not done his worke to ſome
better purpoſe.

The firſt ſort of Oppoſites are ſuch who truly deſire,Treat: and care­fully
indeavour to have their whole courſe both in Religion, and otherwiſe, framed
by the holy and right Rule of Gods Word.

Anſw. Theſe cannot chuſe but be his Oppoſites, and that for 3. reaſons
ſpecially.

1\. Becauſe of his lightnes and inconſtancie in the matters of God: and for
that he ſeekes to build againe the thing which hee had before deſtroyed. What
he hath ſaid againſt this Hearing, the World is not ignorant of; and therefore
here is a fitt place to lay downe his own words, & to apply them to himſelf:
He ſucks up his former breath; and eates the words he had formerly uttered, as
though he had either forgotten what he wrote before, or cared not how he
croſſed himſelfe, ſo he might oppoſe us. Iuſtificat. of Separ. p. 276.

2\. Becauſe the drift and ſcope of his writing, thwarteth the truth, and
leadeth unto ſinne againſt the Lord.

3\. Cauſeth troubles in the Churches of God, and hinders ma­ny from receiving
the love of the truth.

But did the Treatiſer thinke, that the cloſeſt walkers with God, would oppoſe
him in this thing; Then it muſt needs follow, he made account, that the
looſeſt people for judgement & practice would be the embracers of it.

A ſecond ſort is of them,Treat: whoſe tender and ſcrupulous conſcience makes
them fearefull & jealous of everything that hath in it the leaſt appearance on
ſhew of evill, &c.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=29) Anſw. He
that will not fall into a deepe pit, will not come very neere to it in his
travell.

Gods people (ſaith TheodoretCōment. in Theſ. 5, 22.) must be ſo abhorrent
from evill, both in Doctrine and manners, that the ſhew of both ought to be
avoyded. And thus the Scriptures 1 Theſ. 5, 22. Iam. 1, 27. Iud. 23. Rev. 16,
18. preſſe, and the Saints Dan. 1, 8 Rev. 3, 4. Luke 1, 5. have practiſed.

For his diſtinction between things onely naturally good in their kinds and
uſe, and others morallie, &c. I ſee nothing in it, where­fore he ſhould deſire
the reader to take knowledge of it. For as for riches, credit of the World,
and outward peace, here inſtanced, as they are good things in themſelves, ſo
they may be deſired, and in a right way and courſe Lawfully ſought after.

For the other, namelie, Hearing of the Word, obedience to the Magiſtrate, &c.
In theſe things too, we muſt keepe our ſelves within the limits and bounds,
which God hath ſet us. For his phraſe of ſtreaning and gooing as neere the
Winde as may be, J hope he meant no ſtreaning of a good conſcience; If he did
not, then his counſell is of no uſe at all: except it could be proued, that
the Lord requires his people to heare in the way and manner hee pleads for: a
worke (ab Aſino lanam) not poſſibly to be done.

As there are ſome ſcrupulous in things amiſse touching outward Ordinances, and
yet faultie otherwayes: So I beleeve there are many not ſcrupulous in things
amiſse touching outward ordinances, and yet in their courſe of life, baſe and
ſcandalous enought.

But what of this, muſt not Gods Houſe and Ordinances be deare to our ſoules,
becauſe ſome mens converſation is not ac­cording to their profeſſion? God
forbid. For in the holieſt So­ciety upon Earth, it is poſſible that there
ſhould be wicked per­ſons. When there was but 4: in the World, one was a Kaan:
when 8. onely in the Arke, one was a Cham: Among the 12. one a Iudas. The
pureſt Wheate hath ſome chaffe with it; The faireſt garden ſome weeds in it;
Therefore let no man forbeare to practice any knowne truth for other mens lewd
lives; onely let them be care­full to doe well themſelves: Mourne for ſuch as
doe otherwiſe, and ſeeke by all due and lawfull meanes their Amendment. And
this is the burden, and no other, which the Lord layes upon them.

The laſt ſort he divides into 5 rankes; at which he either girds, or right-out
chargeth, with Hypocriſie, partialitie, pride, igno­rance, mallace, and the
like.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=29) It is
ſaid of Tamberlane Richard Knowles in the life of Baiazee that he raiſed warre
againſt Baiazet the fourth King of the Turkes, becauſe he refuſed to receive
cer­taine ſtrange Garments, which he ſent unto him. I beleeve, had theſe men,
embraced the Treatiſers opinion in this point of Hea­ring, they ſhould not
have heard him ſpeake ſo bitterly againſt them. But to the particulars.

Some are carried with ſo exceſſive admiration of ſome former guides in their
courſe,Treat. as they thinke is halfe Hereſy to call into question any of
their determinations, or prac­tiſes.

Anſw. Howſoever we muſt live by our owne faith; notwith­ſtanding we are not
lightly to eſteeme of the determinations and practiſes of our guides,
ſpecially when we know they are no reeds; but men ſtable and unchangeable in
the truth. He is a fooliſh traviler that will leave the way which he hath long
kept, unleſſe he be ſure, he is out. There is (as Polanus Cōment. in Ezech.
cap. 20. pag. 487. ſaith) a laudable imi­tation of Elders. That is, ſo farre
to follow them, as they are fol­lowers of Chriſt.

2\. J know none more faulty this way, then ſuch as have learned of him to
heare unlawfull Miniſters: For were not theſe men ſu­perſtitiouſly addicted to
his new deviſe, they would beware, how to reject (as they doe) the unanimous
judgement and practice of all Learned Men and true Churches, and follow the
blinde trodd of his ſingle opinion.

Such as lay downe rules to finde out the truth by, write thus: What the
FathersQuid-quid om­nes pari­ter uno codemque conſen­ſu, &c. Vincent:
Lirenenſ. cont. pro­phanos haeret. c. 4. all with one conſent have held and
written, is a neceſſary token to know the truth by.

Againe, D. Feild of the church, l. 3. c. 43, p. 175 Whatſoever hath beene
holden at all times, and in all places, by all Christians, that hath not beene
noted for novelty, ſingularity and diviſion is to be received as the undoubted
truth of God.

If theſe Aſſertions be true, the Treatiſers then is untrue. For not onely are
all old Writers againſt it, but the moſt Learned of later times: Yea (and let
it be minded) all Sects and ſorts of people, profeſſing Chriſtianitie, abhorre
it; J except onely Fa­miliſts: For they and he ( [...]dem in lud [...] docti,)
are for the pleading and practice here much alike.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=30) Some
againe are much addicted to themſelves as the former to others:Treat:
Conceiving in effect, though they will not profeſſe it, the ſame of their
Heads which the Papists doe of their Head the Pope, that they cannot erre or
be deceived. And this spe­cially in ſuch matters us for which they have
ſuffered trouble and affliction formerly.

Anſw. 1\. Wee are all more ready to blame faults in others, then to ſee our
owne and amend them. Had not the Treatiſer thought to well of himſelfe, I
doubt whether he would ſo lightly have ſingled himſelfe out, and become (as it
were) every mans oppoſite, Humble minds, are affraid to meddle with novelties:
but ſuch as ſeeke humane praiſe, imagine they cannot enought be obſerved,
unleſſe out of the dreggs of Sophiſtry, they raiſe ſome ſtrange quiddities,
whereby to croſſe truths generally received.

2\. That any man ſhould love and like a thing, becauſe it leads to
perſecution; That J cannot thinke; But this J thinke: There are ſome which doe
profeſſe & practice many things (and name­lie this of Hearing) on no better
ground or reaſon but hereby, to keep themſelves out of troubles.

There is alſo a third ſort who bend their force rather to the weak­ning of
other men in their courſes,Treat: then to the building up of them­ſelves in
their owne; halfe imagining that they draw neere enought to God, if they can
withdraw enought from other men.

Anſw. I cannot deviſe for what end the Treat. Aliquid latet quod non patet.
ſhould ſeeke thus to diſcover other mens nakednes, except it be, he thought
that the more vile and contemptible he made his Oppoſites ap­peare in the
Readers eye, the eaſier he would be won, to embrace this his opinion of
Hearing Antichriſtian Miniſters; a prittie trick; Much like that Leſſon of the
Cannon Lavv: Si non caſte tamen cause. But ſuch ſhifts profit not, for a godly
minde will ſearch and looke into the cauſe it ſelfe; and not on the perſons
either for, or againſt it.

To oppoſe a bad courſe, is meet and lawfull, and ſhould we be ſilent when we
are called to teſtifie againſt it, we ſhould make our ſelves hereby open
tranſgreſſours.

Touching the building up of our ſelves: This (as Iude Ver. 20. tea­cheth) muſt
be in our moſt holy faith. He that rayſeth up a Houſe with rotten ſtuffe, What
is there elſe in Babi­lon. will looſe his coſt and labour by it.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=30) I know
not what withdrawing he meanes from other men: if he intend a withdravving
from the Hearing of falſe Miniſters, then I anſwer, they doe well that doe it.
For if the Temple made with hands, defiled through idolatrie, was odious unto
God, how much more will he loth our Spirituall Temples (not made with hands)
if we ſuffer them to be polluted with filthy ſuperſtition. But ſo abſolutely
we ſhall doe, if we doe the thing which the Treat: here contends for.

A good man (ſaith AmbroſeLib 5. Epiſt. 30.) will be earneſt and Zealous
against idolatry.

Another ſaith: Brad­ſhavv on 2 Theſ. 2, p. 130. The better a man is, the more
carefull will he be to withdraw himſelfe from it. Theſe witneſſes are true.

Fourthly, there are ſome to be found ſo ſowred with modines and
diſcontentment,Treat. as they become unſociable: If they ſee no­thing
lamentable, they are ready to lament: If they reade any Bookes, they are onely
invectives specially against publicke Sa [...]es and Governours.

Anſvv. 1\. As to be unſociable, is inhumaine and brutiſh, ſo to be careleſſe
with whome we joyne in communion, is ſinfull and vicious. A traviler were
better goe alone, then have one in his company that ſhould rob him, and cut
his throat.

2\. This is not an age, which wants cauſe of juſt lamentation, conſidering not
onely the evils without, but what perverſe things are brought into the
Churches of God, whereby poore people are dayly deceived.

3\. That we ſhould looke into publicke States and Governours, there is reaſon
for it; and ſpecially, if the ſame be Eccleſiaſticall, for elſe, how can we
walke as men of knowledge, and hold faſt onely that which is good.

Lastly,Treat. ſome thinke to cover their owne both groſſer and more proper and
perſonall corruptions, under a furious march, not onely againſt the faylings,
but the perſons alſo failing of infirmity in matter of Church-order and
Ordinances.

Anſvv. I ſuppoſe by Church-ordinances and Order, he meanes the Miniſterie,
Worſhip, and Government under Antichriſt. Now, that ſome of ignorance ſubmit
to theſe things, there is nothing more certaine; notwithſtanding this gives
not allowance to o­thers [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=31) others (knowing
better) to doe ſo too. If there failing be of infir­mity, there is the more
hope of their reformation, I meane when they ſhall heare the truth taught, and
ſee the Teachers walke cloſely in it.

In concluſion, the Treat: pleas the Rhetorician, and makes a ſhew, as if he
could ſay more, but he will spare his oppo­ſites.

Anſvv. As for his minſing figure of extenuation (to let much paſſe) I like it
not; For he doth here no otherwiſe then if a Theeſe when he hath ſtript a man
out of all that he hath, would faine yet be counted mercifull, in that he doth
not murder him, or bind him as ſome others have done. Let any indifferent man
read his writing, and he will ſay, the Treat. hath not ſpared his oppoſites.
but ſhort at them arrowes of bitter words, and made them as odious and vile as
a man can doe. But bleſſed is he, that is not offended at the truth for ſuch
things.

#### 1.2.2. SECT. 2.

THE Objections undertaken to be anſwered by the Treatiſer, are (as he layes
them downe) of two ſorts: Some of them are framed upon ſuppoſition, that the
Ministers in that Church are in themſelves Lawfull and of God; But yet not to
be heard by reaſon of the abuſes & evils to be found in their administrations.
Others with-draw herein (and thoſe the more) upon the contrarie ſuppoſition:
to wit, that the very order and conſtitution of that Church and Miniſtery is
papall and unlawfull.

Anſvv. For the firſt I have nothing to ſay to it. It beeing a point beſide our
preſent diſpute. Againe, for my part, I am of his minde in the thing: that is,
to uſe his owne expreſſion:

Suppoſing a Church, and the Miniſterie, thereof eſſentially lawfull, it cannot
but be lawfull for the members of other Churches in generall union, and
aſſociation, with it to communicate there­with, in things lawfull, and
lawfully done: ſeeing the end of union is communion. God hath in vaine united
perſons, and ſtates to­gether. But he, who would have us receave the weake in
faith, [[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=31)
whom God hath receaved, would not have us refuſe the fallowſhip of Churches in
that which is good, for any weaknes in them, of one ſort or other. And this we
have ſo plainly and plentifully com­mended unto us, both by the Prophets, yea
by Chriſt himſelfe in the Iewiſh Church; and Apostles, and Apostolicall men in
the first Christian Churches; In which many errours and evils of all kindes
were more then manifeſt: and the ſame ofttimes both ſo farre ſpread, and
deeply rooted, as the reforming of them was ra­ther to be wiſhed then hoped
for: as that no place is left for doub­ting in that caſe by any, who deſire to
follow their holy steps in faith towards God, and charitie towards men, and
effectuall deſire of their owne edification.

What he here writes is ſurely true; for the Scriptures approve not of rending
away from true Churches for any corruption: I uſe the word any, becauſe ſo
long as we acknowledge the Church to be true (whatſoever her ſinnes are) a
ſeparation from all com­munion with it, is utterly unlawfull.

Our godly Prediceſſours had in them the zeale of God, and love of his
truth;Two things I would know of theſe mē 1. Whe­ther they thinke not that
the primitive Chriſtians were as zealous and ſincere as themſelves. 2. Whether
they thinke not, that the Churches from vvhome they ſeparate, have as fevv, if
not fevver corruptions, then ſuch Churches had, in vvhich the Apoſtles and
other godly people dayly communicated. But how ſhewed they it? Not by
forſaking their Brethren for offences, but in witneſſing againſt them, and
ſeeking their reformation. But now (ah that I could not ſay it) ſome men know
not how their zeale like Iehues may be ſeene of men, unleſſe they make publick
Schiſmes in Churches; and this many times, not for any ſinne, that they can
juſtly prove the Church to be in, but upon diſcontentment, and becauſe they
can­not have their way and will.

But of this no more now: For I purpoſe (if God ſpare my life) to ſet forth a
Treatiſe touching this very point.

The Treatiſer in pag. 23,Treat. would have us conſider distinctly of Religious
actions, according to the ſeverall Rankes in which they may rightly & orderly
be ſett. And how we ſhould conceive of them, a little after, he tels us thus:
Some ſuch actions are Religious only, as they are performed by Religious
perſons. And of [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=32) this ſort is
Hearing (and ſo Reading) of Gods Word. The Scriptures teach, and all confeſſe,
that Hearing of the Word of God goes before Faith, for Faith comes by Hearing,
as by an outward meanes. Hearing then beeing before Faith, and Faith before
all other acts of Religion inward or outward; it muſt needs follow, that
Hearing is not ſimply, or of it ſelfe a worke of Religion, and ſo not of
Religious Communion.

Anſw. That the Reader may the better perceive, how greatly the Treat: was
deceived in this matter of Hearing: as to thinke it not to be of Religious
Communion: [...] 1 Cor. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14. I will ſpeake here a little
touching the nature of Communion. Philip. 2 1. 1 Ich. 1, 3.

For the word: the Greeke koinoneo, ſignifies to have a part, or ſhare, in, or
with perſons and things, anſwerable to it, is the Hebrew Chabar, and imports a
conſociation, copulation, or mee­ting together.

Againe, Communion is three-fould; The firſt between God and Man; The ſecond
between Man and Man; The third between Man and actions; For the two later, the
ſame is either civill, or ſpirituall. I call that a civill Communion, when the
matter or ground of it is not in, & of it ſelfe divine and ſpirituall, but
earth­ly and temporall: For ſpirituall Communion, this is practiſed two wayes:
1. With perſons and things: 2. With things, and not perſons. Where there is a
foregoing joyning of people together in a ſpirituall outward ſocietie, or body
Pelitick, there is a Religious Communion with perſons and things. But where
this is not, there is a Communion with things, as the State it ſelfe, and the
adminiſtrations done by the power thereof. Howbeit, as I have ſaid elſe-where,
they have no Church communion, that is, to ſpeake properly, they have no
Communion with the perſons, who are not in Church-eſtate or union with them.

And that this is ſo, the Scriptures1 Cor. 10, 18. not only ſhew: but alſo the
deniall of it, leads unto groſſe abſurditie: For if a man communi­cate not,
in, and with the Worſhip he doth, then it muſt follow, that he neither helpes
himſelfe in performing true Worſhipp un­to God, nor hurts himſelfe to doe the
contrary; And ſo by this ground, it is all one whether I doe the one or other.
But of this we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeake more hereafter; Now to his
diſtinctions.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=32) 1\. It
cannot be proved, that Hearing and ſo Reading of Gods Word, are actions
Religious only, as they are performed by Reli­gious perſons.

This is not ſo: for it is not the perſon that makes the action Religious; The
reaſon is, if the action in it ſelfe be Religious, it muſt then be reputed a
Religious action, be the dore Religious or not.

That no man may miſtake me, let it here be obſerved, that actions are
Religious, either in reſpect of the matter alone, or the matter and manner
too. I confeſſe, it by a Religious action, we underſtand the later, that is, a
thing well done for matter and manner, in this ſence, none but Religious
perſons can performe Re­ligious actions.

But if by a Religious action, we meane the thing it ſelfe, and as (eo nomine)
it is to be diſtinguiſhed, from what is, civill, naturall, worldly; then I ſay
againe, it is a Religious action (and of this ſort is Hearing and ſo Reading
of Gods Word) howbeit performed by irreligious people.

2\. Whereas he ſaith, that Faith goes before all other asts of Religion inward
or outward.

This alſo is untrue: For men wanting faith (witneſſe Kaan, Ahab, Saul, Iudas)
may yet performe acts of Religion. The Scriptures here cited1 Timo. 1, 5. are
(extra organum) not to the point; For they doe not ſay,Rom. 10, 10. that Faith
goes before all acts of Religion; But thus, without faith, we cannot pleaſe
God by them. So then, note the difference between the Scriptures, and what he
inferreth from them.Gal. 2, 20.

Without faith all acts of Religion are without acceptation with God; So theſe
Scriptures; Ergo (ſaith he) faith goes before all acts of Religion.

To his miſ-applying here, J may well apply that in the Poet: ‘Ego de alijs
loquor,Lucan: tu respondere decepis.’

3\. Here is made true the ſaying in the Poet.Fallacia alia aliam tradit. One
falſehood or ſuttlety bringeth in another. Teren. in Andr. His needs muſt
follow, followes not, but it is an unſound inference from a falſe principle.
Hearing the Word of God, is more (though he deny it) then a naturall action.
[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=33) viz.
Religious and Spirituall; He reaſoneth a ſpecie ad genus ne­gative: becauſe
Hearing in ſome caſes is ſo, therefore it is ſo in all.

If it be his meaning, that Hearing is a naturall action, as it reſpects the
Organ or meanes, in, and by which a man receives the knowledge of what he
heares. Then it is true, according to that rule in Philoſophie Relata eſse
ſimul naturâ., Relations in nature are alike. But this is nothing to the
purpoſe.Ariſt. in Categ. Re­lat.

He that eates and drinkes bread and wine at the Lords Table; or ſpeakes to God
in prayer; performes naturall actions, I meane as the members of the bodie are
here uſed: But if wee conſider either the Sacrament or Prayer in the ſubject
or object thereof, ſo they are not naturall actions, but religious, and the
like is Hea­ring of the Word of God.

For his two reaſons, they are of no weight; For 1. though the light of nature
teacheth a man to liſten to another, yet this proves not, that it teacheth him
to Heare in the way and manner here pleaded for.

2\. Were it granted it did: yet might the action be Religious; For the light
of nature Rom. 1. 20, 21. Epictetus a Stoick writeth thus: It is before all
things to be learned that there is but one God; that he ruleth all things;
that he provideth for all; that what­ſoever vve doe, ſpeake, or thinke,
nothing can be hid from him; that vve ſhould vvorſhip him as our Creator and
Father, and the only authour of our felicity. Epictus apud Arrian., leadeth us
to ſundry divine duties, how­beit inſufficient to guide us in the right manner
of dooing them.

3\. I grant, a meere naturall man ought neceſsarily to heare Gods Word;
Notwithſtanding it will not follow, when he heares in a Church-way, that he
performes no Religious action. This is as if one ſhould ſay, becauſe a rebel
is no good ſubject, he cannot doe any civil ſervice to his Prince; I ſpeake
not of the ayme of his heart, but only of a formall dooing.

That which the Treatiſer unjuſtly layes as a fault on Mr. Iohnſon in pag. 23.
is moſt true of himſelfe in pag. 26, 27. to witt, a want of distinction
betweene things. It is ſo as hee ſaith, Preaching by ſome, and Hearing by
others, may be performed without any Religious Communion paſſing betweene the
perſons preaching or hearing.

This I ſay is right, but that which afterwards he makes one with it, is
different and otherwiſe; namely, that a man may heare a Miniſter teach
officially, and yet not have communion with the ſtate of the Teacher.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=33) I may
apply here againſt him, that in the civill Law, teſtes do­me ſtici houſehould
witneſſes are of no validitie. This is but his owne ſaying, ſaid over many
times, and indeed argueth more witt then truth, and ſopheſtry then ſincerity.

Scholers are taught out of the Topicks, that it is ill arguing a conſequenti,
when in two poſitions things utterly unlike, ſhalbe compared together, and the
one by no meanes can inferre the other.

I have proved before, that howſoever a man ſtand not in ſpiri­tuall and
politicall church communion with a Church and miniſ­tery thereof, yet he is
there a participant or communicant in, and with the ordinances, as with the
doctrines taught, ſo with the ſtate of the Teacher.

For the better clearing of this; Let vs in few words conſider, a Church ſtate,
Miniſtery, and adminiſtrations, make vp (as I may ſo ſay) the body of divine
worſhip. Now it is a knowne Maxime quidquid est pars partis, est etiam pars t
[...]tius. The hand is a part of the body, the finger a part of the hand, he
therefore that holds either my hand or finger toucheth my body. So in iuſt
pro­portion, hee that toucheth any part or member of the ſpiritual &
politicall body, hee toucheth the body or ſtate, bee the ſame true or falſe:
if true, his communion is lawfull: if falſe, he toucheth an uncheane thing,
and  [...]o [...] ſinneth againſt that precept in 1. Cor. 6\. 17.

To end this Section howſoever hearing of the word of God, lies in common for
all, for the good of all. Yet hath God appoin­ted away and order vnto all, how
to heare it. Food and rayment lies in common to all, for the good of all: What
of this, ſhall wee hence conclude it is noe matter by what meanes or courſe
men have it; indeed ſo he reaſoneth or elſe (Oleum et operam perdidit) he
ſpeaketh neither for himſelfe nor againſt vs. Mr. BainesDioce­ſen. triall. p.
7. writes well, no people can worſhip God in repairing to any Church, or
ministery without warrant of his word. Let the reader note it.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=34)

#### 1.2.3. SECT. 3.

THe Treatiſer for this oppoſities, hath framed 16: objecti­ons: the which (as
himſelfe ſaithPag. 13. he hath either heard from others, or could conceiue of
himſelfe, ooulerably againſt the practice by him propounded. The firſt is laid
downe thus:

No man may ſubmit his conſcience to be wrought vpon,Object. 1. by an
un­lawfull and antichriſtian ministery: neither hath God promiſed, or doth
affordTheſe vvords in a different letter, are the Treat. ovvne, and vve
diſ­claime them. any bleſſing upon it, neither can any have the ſanctified vſe
thereof.

His anſwere hereto is this. The office of the miniſtery workes not vpon the
conſcience of the hearer properly: the office gives onely power and charge to
the Teacher, to teach in ſuch aplace: it reſides in the perſon of the officer
alone, the communion lawful or unlawfull which any hath with it, is in regard
of the lawfull or unlawfull re­lation and vnion foregoing between the perſons,
and not in any wor­king of the office vpon the conſcience of any: God may and
doth bleſſe the truths taught faulſ miniſters.

Anſw. It was Heiroms Paulum quotieſ­cunque le­go videor mihi non verba
au­dire, ſed tonitrua: cont. Iovi­nian. cenſure of Pauls Epiſtles, that when
hee read them He thought he heard not words but Thunder. This cannot be well
applied to his reply here. For ſhould I ſpeake my conſcience, it is a meere
Phraſiologie, words without weight of reaſon.

1\. He denies our firſt aſſertion: But how cleares he it to the contrarie? As
is his ground, ſo are his proofes: Only bare ſaying: Sit pro ratione voluntas.

That the Office of the Miniſter, workes upon the Hearers con­ſcience; It is
certaine, and not to be denyed, without loſſe of credit, both to the perſon
and cauſe of the denyer in the eye of all reaſonable men:Exo. 28. For this is
evident by the Scriptures, whether we reſpect an Office true or falſe.Epheſ.
4, 11. 2 Theſ. 2, Rev. 9.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=34) Againe,
if it be conſidered, what we meane by the Office working upon the conſcience;
Common reaſon will prove it too: Our mea­ning is, that the ſtate or povver by
which he adminiſters, is herein ſubmitted too. As Magiſtrates are obeyed in
civill Juſtice, be­cauſe of their calling, and were it not for it, men could
not for conſcience ſake receive their adminiſtrations: So the conſcience of a
Hearer is brought in ſubjection to the ordinance of Hearing, even for the
Office ſake of him that teacheth; We intend here Miniſteriall teaching.

It is moſt certaine (ſaith one Mr. Peitry of the Mini­ſtery of the Church of
England: Pag. 37. 38.) Satan ruleth in the conſciences of men, not only by
falſe doctrine, but alſo by his falſe power and ordinances; His Kingdome of
darknes not only conſiſteth in the lies and falſe doctrine, and worſhip which
he hath coyned, but alſo in the falſe and Antichristian Ordinances, which he
hath invented for the ruling of his Idolatrous denne: And therefore the
Children and Saints of God ought to avoyd both the one and the other. So hee.

2\. It is not true, that the Office only gives power and charge to the Teacher
to teach in ſuch or ſuch a Church-ſtate. For properly it reſpects not that at
all, but rather the Office of the perſon gives him power to preach, pray,
adminiſter the Sacra­ments, &c. according to their Order and Canons. He that
that hath not a Church-ſtate to preach in, yet beeing ordained Preiſt, hath
power by his Office to doe the worke of a Preiſt any where. And ſo much the
Treat. Manu­miſ. to a Manu­duct, p. 70. in another Booke ac­knowledgeth: The
Office is the very ſtate and function con­ferred upon a man by his calling,
from which Office ariſeth imme­diate Note this. power, and charge to
adminiſter, and to performe the works of that Office: In the performance of
which workes the Office is executed &. power uſed.

And whereas he mentioneth here, the truths they teach: J grant theſe are from
God, but the Office which gives them power and charge to ſpeake them, is from
Antichriſt: And a ſpeciall Character or Marke (as the LearnedMr. Sy­mon on the
Rev. pag. 120. write) of the Beaſt. Thus ſaid Iohn Chaydon, Acts and
Monu­ments, E­dict. 5. pag. 588. a Martyr of Chriſt: The Biſhops licenſe to
preach the Word of God, is the true Character of the [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=35) Beast, that is
of Antichriſt. The like Mr. Bale On Re­vel chap. 14. 9., and others.

3\. Whereas he ſaith, the falſe Office reſides in the perſon of the Officer
alone; Here I might take that exception of the LawIn teſti­mon. dig: de
teſtibus againſt him. They who wander against the credis of their owne
Testimonies, are not to be heard. Againſt this, we have his owne teſtimony;
For thus he ſaithManu­miſs. to a manuduct. pag. 5. thoſe that pertake in the
worke of preaching of one, ſent by the Biſhops, doe pertake in what lyeth in
them in the authority of the ſender. And this is ſo in­deed. The ſinfull
Office of the Teacher, becomes his ſinne, who practiſeth will-worſhip with
him: For hereby hee enwraps himſelfe into the guilt of the Office; And this
thing by an­other is ſo clearely provedTreatiſe of the Mi­niſtery of the
church of Englād, by Fran: Iohnſon. Pag. 5, 6, 7, &c., as no man can deny it,
that hath any light of reaſon or Religion ſhining in him.

4\. What can be vainer ſaid (our enimies themſelves bee­ing Iudges) then to
ſay, God may and doth bleſſe the truths taught by falſe Miniſters: A poſſe ad
eſſe n [...]n valet conſequen­tia. To reaſon thus, is both againſt Logick and
Divinitie. To dispute (ſaith King Iames A ſpeech in Parlia­ment, an­no 1609.)
what God may doe, is blaſphe­my, but quid vult Deus, that divines may
Lawfully, and doe ordi­narily dispute and diſcourſe.

It never came into our hearts to thinke, that God may not bleſſe the Truths
taught by falſe Miniſters: But this we hold, he hath not in his Word promiſed
any bleſſing unto it. And in this Luther is with us. God bleſſeth not (ſaith
heCōment. in Galat. cap. 1. pag. 42., meaning by any ordinary promiſe) their
labour, who are not lawfully called to the Ministery.

The injunctionInjunc­tion 3. of Q. Elizabeth, ſet forth by publick au­thority,
is much to this purpoſe. Workes deviſed by mans fancie, (ſo is every unlawfull
Miniſterie, and condemned as Cart­wright Chriſt. Cate [...]h. of R [...]lig.
chap. 16. Pag. 98 ſaith in the ſecond commandement) have not only no promiſe
of reward for doing of them, but contrariwiſe great threat­nings &
maledictions of God.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=35) The
Treatiſer Iuſtifi­cat. of Se­par. pag. 79. was of this opinion too, when he
ſaid: The Lord hath promiſed no bleſſing to his Word, but in his owne
Ordinance, though by his ſuper abundant merey he oft-times vouchſafe that,
which no man can chalenge by any ordinarie promiſe.

And becauſe the Treat. is here ſo breife, a touch and away: As if our
Objection had no weaght; I will therefore lay the ar­gument downe in this
manner.

Such Churches, unto whome God hath made no promiſe in his Word, to bleſſe the
things there done; ought not by Gods people to be reſorted to.

But God in his Word hath made no promiſe to bleſſe the things done in a falſe
Church.

Therefore Gods people are not to goe unto falſe Churches.

The Propoſition cannot be excepted againſt: For 1. The Scriptures prove it
clearely.Ier. 23, 21, 22.

Againe, there is no duty charged upon us,Ex. 20, 24 but there is a bleſſing
promiſed,Pſa. 134, 3 & 147, 13. unto the due performance of it.

The aſſumption is as cleare, and thus we prove it.

If falſe Churches have not the promiſe of Gods preſence, they cannot from the
Word of God, exſpect his bleſſing upon what they doe. But the firſt is true:
Ergo the ſecond.

The Major, which is only controverſall, wee prove thus.

If every falſe Church be an IdollExo. 20. 45., and God require his people to
come out thenceRev. 18, 4., threaten to destroy itRev. 20. 8, 9., and will doe
it, and promiſe his preſence unto the true ChurchMat. 18. 20.: Then is he not
pre­ſent We mean ſuch a pre­ſence of God, as by his Word we can be ſure of it.
in the falſe: But the first is true, therefore the ſe­cond.

Here I might name ſundry learned Men, who give witnes to this thing. Chriſt
(ſaith RaynoldsDe Rom. Eccleſ. idolat. l. 2. c. 1. pag. 99. the Paſtor of his
Chruch, doth tell us, that he feeds not in Antichristian aſſemblies; in the
denne of Theeves, neither is it his will, that his flock ſhould there [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=36) reſt at noone:
But in the pleaſant pasture, by the ſtill waters, that is in the ſhadowes of
the true Chriſtian Churches, deteſting idolatry.

Another thus: They that doe uſurpe Miniſteriall function in the Church,Dr.
Sla­ter on Rom. 1. Pag. 8. cannot exſpect Gods bleſſing on their labour.
Do­ctor Ames layes it downe as a reaſon why a lawfull calling is neceſſary;
namely, that ſo they may exspect a bleſſing from God.

It is true which theſe men ſay, for our ground for Hearing in church way is
not becauſe the ſpeaker is a man gifted, able to open and apply the
ſcriptures. &c, But becauſe that which he doth is a a divine inſtitution, an
ordinance charged on vs, to practice, & to which God hath promiſed his
preſence and bleſſing.

Let our oppoſites ſhew vs where it is writen, that the gyfts and perſonall
graces of the man, is ſufficient to iuſtifie the hearing of himWe in­tend
Mi­niſteriall teaching. a Chap. 23 2. but rather the reaſon wherefore we he
are him, is, becauſe of the lawfull calling which he hath to adminiſter the
holy things of God.

Our Saviour as it appeares by Matthew approves of the hearing of the Scribes
and Phariſees; But upon what ground, not becauſe they were able to open and
apply, the doctrines of Faith by that Church profeſſed: but) as Piſcator ſaith
becauſe they were called and ordained of God, Adeo vo­cati at que conſtituti
ſu [...]t vt legem Mo­ſis in Sy­nagogis populo praelegant cumque ad  [...]
ob­ſervatio­nem ex­h [...]tentur. Analiſ. in Mat. 23, v. 2. that they ſhould
preach the Law of God in the Si­nagogues to the people, and exhort them to the
obſervation thereof-Aretius on the place ſaith the like and adds, their
calling bound the people to heare them.

Soe then here wee ſee that men, being lawfully called to the miniſtery are to
be heard howſoever in ſome qualifications defec­tive: but that ſuch who have
taken on a falſe office, are to be heard th [...]s I deny: and ever ſhall doe,
vntill they ſhew me ſome divine precept for it, as wee have for the other,
which is (Tantah horto fructus colligere▪) a thing that they can never doe.

For his phraſe Balaam-like to curſe: I paſſe it by: onely I thinke good to put
our oppoſites in mind, of that which is writen in I [...]ſh. 6. 26. Curſed be
the man before the Lord that raiſeth vp and buildeth the city lericho.

J am ſure, God of old-hath devoted Babilon to deſtructiō: let men therefore
ſee to it that they bring not themſelves vnder a greater curſe, by uſing their
pens and tongues, to riſe vp againe one part [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=36) of the Kingdome
of the beaſt which the Lord before had conſumed with the ſpirit of his mouth.

#### 1.2.4. SECT. 4.

THE Treatiſer frames our ſecond objection in this man­ner.

To heare ſuch a miniſter is to honour approve and vp­hold his office of
ministery.Object.

In confutation of this, thus he ſaith.

If this hee ſimply true then when the heatheniſh Athenians heard Paul
preach:Treat. or when an unbeleever comes into the Church aſſembly, an a
heares the preacher he approues, honours and vphold the office of the
ministery.

Anſvv: The virgins in Cypryans time granted, they walked with young men,
talked with them, went led with them, but when they came to the act, they
abſteyned.

The Treat. writings here, and in all the reſt of his Booke, is much to the
ſame purpoſe: He grants, that men may walke to the Harlots Houſe But the Word
of God for­bids it, Pro, 5, 7. Lyran ex­pounds this place of the falſe Church,
Tom. 2, p. 314., heare her told gueiſts, and yeeld to ſundry dallying geſtures
(as bowing the knee, uncovering the head, &c.) but when they come to the act
they muſt abſteane: What that learned manNon eſt locus don­dus Dia­bolo: Ne­mo
diu tutus periculo proximus, l. 1, c. 11. then anſwered, ſo doe I: No place
muſt be given to the Divell, no man is long ſafe, who is neere the point of
daun­ger. To the matter.

That our argument may appeare ſtrong; Secundam legem op­poſitionis (as the
Lawers terme is) we will put it downe in this forme.

To yeeld any approbation, liking, or reverence unto mens inſti­tution in the
exerciſe of Religion is a ſinne.

But in hearing Antichriſtian Ministers, there is approbation liking, aud
reverence yeelded unto mens inſtitution in the exerciſe of Religion.

Therefore it is a ſinne to doe it.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=37) The Major
cannot be denyed; for the ScripturesMat. 15, 19, Pſ. 16, 4 Coloſ. 2, 20, 21,
Deu 5, 9, 10, 1 Cor. 6▪ 17, Hoſ. 2, 16, Ex. 23, 13 teach us the very thing.
Beſides the moſt judicious Writers affirme ſo too.

God forbiddeth (ſaith Mr. IacobExpoſi­tion on Com. 2.) all approbation, liking
or reverence, though never ſo ſmall ſhewed towards any inſtitution and
inventions of men whatſoever in the exerciſe of Religion, yea all words either
of tongue or pen, tending to defend or excuſe ſuch hu­mane inventions in Gods
ſervice.

I might alleadge. CalvinSerm. 52, on Deu., MollerusIn pſ. 16, 4. p. 108.,
SmilerusIn Exo. fol. 90., MacabeusEnarrat. in Deu. 12, loc. 1. VrſinusExplic.
Catech. p 759. VigrandusSynopſ. Antichriſt, ZanchyDe re­dempt. fol.90., D.
AndrewOn the Com. 2., D. FulkConfut. of Allen. 378., PerkingsCatech. c. 16, p
96, Cartvvright, AinſvvorthAnnot. on Ex. 20 45., and others, who in their
writings af­firm the ſame.

The minor is as cleare: for 1. Jt is not poſſible that men can come unto
Antichriſtiā churches to worſhip God, but they muſt by their preſence there,
ſhew reverence & honour to the publick falſe ſtate and miniſtery.

Note what an Engliſh Prelate Determinat. Quaeſt. 7, p. 40. ſaith, it
appertaineth to the vertue of truth, that as a man ſheweth himſelfe by
externall ſignes, ſo he is indeed to be eſteemed.

The DowayAnnotat. in 2 King 5, 19, p. 771. tranſlaters of the Bible write
thus, ſuch as fre­quent, or repaire unto unlawfull aſsemblies, for the publick
ſervice of God, by their being there are to be reputed of the ſame religion,
or elſe deſſemblers: as it were to have noe care of religion, knowing God and
not glorifying him as God.

Cornelius a lapideIn Epiſt. 2. p. 505.) in his commentary on Iohn, ſaith,
falſe miniſters are favored and approved in their vnlawfull way, when they are
heard.

Chytraeus De Eu­chariſtia, p. 317, 318. handeleth largely this point, & from
1. Cor. 10\. 14. concludes, that all falſe Churches are to be left vtterly,
becauſe (ſaith he) a mans preſence there is an approbation of them, Rivetus
Comment. in Pſa. 16, p. 53. adds this: Etiam ſi nemo ad confeſſionem
adigeretur: Yea though a man came not thether for confeſſion ſake.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=37) If the
fathers thought that the Chriſtians could not weare garlants of bay, Tertull.
de corona milit. nor deck their houſes with leaves, and green bavves; Nor ſit
after they had prayed, nor reſt from their labour thoſe dayes that Pagans did,
nor keepe the firſt of every moneth as they did.Brac. z Tom. Can. 73. But they
ſhould countenance and honour heatheniſh ceremonies, and ſuperſtitions.

If theſe fathers (I ſay) conceived ſo, of theſe things, ſurely then vpon the
like, or better reaſon, may I conclude, that to goe unto falſe churches, and
there heare unlawfull Miniſters is, to ſhew ap­probation, liking, and
reverence vnto mens inſtitutions in the ex­erciſe of religion.

The Prophet HoſeaHoſ. 2. 13. reproves ſome, for kiſsing the Calues: But what
was this ſinne. PareusIn Hoſ. 13. 2. pag. 557. Tom. 1. ſaith it was, their
bodily pre­ſence at falſe worſhip, by which preſence they ſhewed aliking to
it. So Calvin. Praelect. in Hoſ. 13. 2. pag. 157.

Againe, the point is further cleared, in that idols by this prac­tice are
honoured. Obſerveable it is, whereas on Evangiliſt Ma [...]. 4. 9. See Pa­reus
on the place. (ſetting downe the Tempters words to Chriſt) ſaith, vvorſhip me:
AnotherLuk. 4. 7. hath it, vvorſhip before me: Shewing that it is all one to
worſhip before the Devill, or to worſhip him; Now, he is worſhipped, when
idols2 Chro. 11. 15. 1. Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. 1 Tim. 4. 1. are worſhipped,
or any falſe inſtitution are obſerved and practiſed: Yea (as Cartwright
Hiſtor. Chriſt lib. 1. pag. 14. ſaith) ta [...]etſi ex amino, aut
ſuperſtitione quadam deceptus hoc non faciant.

To apply this, the Treat grants, that a falſe Church is a real idol, apart of
Antichriſtiſme, and of the apostaſie of the man of ſinne; If ſo; then hearing
there, muſt needs be unlawfull, becauſe it is to worſhip before an idol, &
ſuch an idol as that the worſhip there done, iſſues from it, as the ſtreame or
river from the fountaine.

To the particulars of his reply. 1. For the Athenians hearing of Paul, it is
as impertinent a ſpeech as was ever uſed by a man of learning▪ For we diſpute
only of Church hearing, and not of what is occaſionall, and done out of
publick-ſtate, or Church-vvay. Wee never held it unlawfull, to heare any man
deliver the Word of God, as the circumſtances may be. But what of this: hence
the Treat, will inferre, that we may heare any where, and in any way.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=38) If
another ſhould have framed ſuch an anſwer to him, he would have ſaid, that
either he had not learn'd his Sopheſtry, or elſe thought he had to doe with
fooles; For he reaſoneth, ab eo quod eſt ſecundum quid ad ſimpliciter. Makes a
generall conſequence of that which is true in part.

2\. To ſay, if I approve of the Office ſimply, becauſe I heare the Officer
preach, then I much more approve of all the Doctrines which he delivers. This
is not ſo, nor ſo; For the Office is an institution, by which the Officer hath
power to adminiſter: And howſoever, we have our freedome to like or diſlike of
the adminiſtrations, as we ſee juſt cauſe for it: Yet by our joyning and
communion with them, we certainly approue of the ſtate it ſelfe, whether
lawfull or unlawfull; For Example:

If I come where the Majeſtrates are ſitting, and have civill juſtice there
adminiſtred to me; Albeit by this going of mine to their Court for judgement,
I really approve of the ſtate that they are in: yet J am not therefore
neceſſitated to approue of all the acts & concluſions they make, but may
diſlike them, if I ſee they are not as they ought to be.

The Corinthians, for ought I can ſee, reſorted unto the Feaſts of idols, upon
the ſame ground that the Treat. layes downe for hearing. They went not of
ſuperſtition; for they were to well in­ſtructed; and Paul in their perſon
brings forth an excuſe for them:1\. Cor.  [...]. 4. We know that an idol is
nothing. As if they ſhould ſay, we regard not what they have deviſed their
publicke falſe­ſtate concernes us not, for we have left it: We are in no
Church­communion with their Officers, our meaning is not to worſhip as they
doe, they intend one thing, we another. But did this ſatis­fie the Apoſtle?
Not in the leaſt; For he knew their private diffe­ring intention, was▪ but a
ſtrong fruit of the fleſh, monſtrous pre­ſumpt on, and a meere deluſion; For
their eating was not to be looked upon, and judged after their ſecret meaning.
But accor­ding to that publicke ſtate where they were.

And here I deſire the Reader to note the difference betweene Paul and the
Treat. Paul makes the ſinne of the Corinthians to be their reſorting to an
idol-ſtate; Not ſimply their eating (for tha [...] they might have done elſe-
where) but becauſe it was in, by, or from an inſtitution of the Devil.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=38) The
Treat. layes us downe a contrarie Doctrine, and tels us, a falſe Church-state,
is nothing: And Antichriſtian Officer nothing; And that we may lawfully
worſhip God in the one, and heare his Word preached by the other, provided we
be not in Church-communion with the Officer, &c.

Truely the difference here is great: For the Treat. cleares the Corinthians of
the thing for which the Apoſtle condemnes them. But I will not preſſe this
further now; Only what Auguſtine * ſaid of the learned Fathers, I may ſpeake
of the Treatiſ. in stead of him, or rather above him, Paul the Apostle commeth
to my mind, to him I runne, to him I appeale, from all ſorts of writers that
thinke otherwiſe.

For concluſion, if the falſe ſtate of a Church and Miniſterie de­file only the
members thereof: And as for other preſent worſhip­pers, they are blameles: Jf
this (I ſay) be a true ſaying, thē hath he vainely confind himſelfe to the
Miniſterie of the Church of England; For his Poſition will ſerve as well to
juſtifie hea­ring among Papiſts, Arrians, Sorcinians, Iewes, Turkes, &c. Yea
further, and to be preſent at any ſervice or worſhip they doe.

For what ſhould hinder, but according to this ground, a man may lawfully goe
to the Temples of the Saracens, and he are their Preiſts: conſidering they doe
deliver many materiall truths. As that God is true and righteous in all his
wayes a: [...] In Alcho ran Azoa­ra. 1.: The Creator of all things b: The
giver of every good gyft Azoar. 14. Ad that Ieſus Chriſt is the Sonne of Mary
Azoar. 11., the Meſſenger of God, and a true Prophet Azoar. 7..

If any object, but they utter many lies and blaſphemies. I an­ſwer, the
hearing ſimply of errours, corrupts not the Hearer: For ſo he conſents not to
them in judgement, not practice, but teſti­fieth againſt them, he delivers his
owne ſoule.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=39)

#### 1.2.5. SECT. 5.

THE Treatiſer layes downe our next OBJECTION thus:

By this then it ſeemes, a man may be preſent at any act of I­dolatrie, and doe
as others doe, that practice Idolatry, yet not approue of it. And ſo the three
Nobles in Danial needed not to have put themſelves upon ſuch pikes of daunger
as they did, for not falling downe as others did in the place.

To this he anſwereth: Treat: 1\. In preaching of the truths of the Gospell, no
idolatrous act is performed.

Anſw. I perceive it is an eaſie thing to conqueſt, if begging may procure one
that: But wee are no ſuch children as to give the cauſe ſo away.

1\. Therefore J ſay, in preaching of the truths of the Goſpell (viz: by a
falſe Miniſter, about which is our diſpute) an idolatrous act is performed;
And that the Reader may underſtand this thing the better: He is to conſider,
that divine worſhip is not to be deter­mined by a particular thing (howbeit in
it ſelfe good) but as all the eſſentiall parts belonging thereto (whether they
are perſons or things) are kept and obſerved.

The Church of Rome in Baptiſme uſeth water, and in the Sa­crament of the Lords
Supper, gives bread, and otherwhile wine too; doth this cleare their
adminiſtrations of idolatry? So runns the Treat: reaſoning: But wee cannot
receive it, for the Lord never ſpake ſo by him.

J thinke all men doe thinke, that Vzziah 2 Chro. 26. 16. committed an
ido­latrous act, when he invaded the Prieſts Office. But what made it ſo?
Tooke he unlawfull incenſe? No. Uſed he ſtrange fire? No. Offered he
prohibited ſacrifice, or upon a wrong Altar? No. Where then lay the fault? The
Scripture tels us it pertained not to him to burne incenſe unto the Lord, but
to the Sonnes of Aaron Ver. 18. To apply this, if his act were idolatrous,
becauſe he wanted a cal­ling, howbeit obſerved many truths of the Law; By the
ſame rea­ſon, the Church-acts of Antichriſtian Miniſters, are idolatrous; Yea
& as for the truths which they preach, this clears their acts no more [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=39) from idolatry;
then Vzziahs true incenſe and Altar, quitted him from tranſgreſſion.

It is truely ſaid of one Lavaret. in Joſh. 22. Hom 61. pag 7. We ought not to
conclude of an action, that it is good, becauſe it hath in it ſome thing which
in it ſelfe is ſo.

And this is true, as in divine things, ſo in humane too: For it is a knowne
Tenent of Philoſophers,Omne totum ſuis partibus ordinatur, menſure­tur &
de­termina­tur. the vvhole is compoſed, mea­ſured and determined of all the
parts.

Vnto the conſtitution of the whole (according to Ariſtotlec) is required
[...].

2\. As Iob Iob. 24.4. ſaith, vvho can bring a cleane thing out of an
un­cleane? Not one. The falſe Office by our Oppoſit [...]es is acknow­ledged
to be uncleane. Now, to deny that their Miniſteriall acts are not from thence,
is againſt common ſence. And this further may be amplyfied by that paſſage in
the Prophet,Hag. 2. 12 13. See Iunius on the place. where it is ſhewed, that
holy things are polluted by touching things un­cleane.Ariſt. 12. Met. 3, &
Lib. de Poet. cap. 7.

3\. If in preaching the truth (according to the point in queſtion) no
idolatrous act is performed: Then it will follow, that a man may remaine a
Miniſter of a falſe Church all his life time: Pro­vided, he only teach Note
that ſuch whom they call Lectu­rers, in ſome places only preach, and doe
nothing elſe: As I my ſelfe for ſome yeares ſtood ſō. the truths of the
Goſpell; Our reaſon is, for in this, if he doe no idolatrous act, then he
ſinneth not, & ſo Conſe­quently no juſt cauſe of his comming out from among
them. The vileneſſe of which thing, I leave to the Readers cenſure.

4, By the Treat: aſſertion, all uſurpers of civill Offices can juſti­fie
themſelves eaſily; For although they are inrtuders and Tra­tours: Yet ſeeing
their adminiſtrations are ſo and ſo: No Re­bellious Act is performed. I could
note here many more ſuch ab­ſurdities & inconſequences, tualoga in theologa,
as they cal them: but enough is ſaid; Conſidering the truth brings forth no
errour nor abſurditie by true conſequence. Neither doth one part con­tradict
another, as Auguſtine Scriptura ſancta in nulla parte diſcordat. De verb. dom.
2. & 11. well obſerveth.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=40) Let us
heare what he hath further to ſay: Treat. The Jewes after Chriſts death, and
the taking away and aboliſhing of the legall or­dinance thereby, circumciſed
their infants, and frequented the Temple for purification and other M
[...]ſaicall Ceremonies, as parts of Gods Worſhip, and ſtill remaining of
divine inſtitution. Paul alſo circumciſed Timothy, entred the Temple, and yet
did not ap­prove any manner of way of the errour and evill of the Iewiſh
worſhippers.

Anſw. It is truely ſaid of the Orators, there is nothing done ſo evill, but
with faire coulers a man may defend it. To alleadge the Legall Ordinances for
the juſtifying of this Hearing, is a poore ſhift, and ſhewes a deſperate caſe.
For 1. it is doubtfull to ſome, whether any did well to practice the Moſaicall
Ceremonies after our Lords ſuffering; I could name not a few, who ſay, it was
their failing that did ſo.

But 2. grant (and ſo I thinke) that yet the Iewiſh Rites were tollerable, I
ſay in reſpect of the time, of an indifferent nature, and therefore their
obſervation till further propagation of the Goſpell in offenſive, and in it
ſelfe not evill; And ſo thinkes Cal­vin Inſtit. l. 3 c. 19, Sect. 10. Bez
[...] Annot. in Act. 21, 27. P. Martyr Loc. Coō. in Claſ. 2, c. 4, pag. 200.,
Zanchy In prae­cept. 3, pag. 338., the Writers of the Cen­turies Cent. 1. l. 1
[...] pag. 416., the Rhemiſts In Act. 21 24.. God minding (ſaith Auguſtine Ad
Hie­rom. Epiſt. 16.) to have them honourably buried.

Now, what makes this for his purpoſe: if there be any agree­ment betweene this
Example and the thing he ſtands for, thus it muſt be: if it were lawfull for
Paul and others, to doe a thing which might be either done or not done,
according to circum­ſtances; then it is Lawfull to heare falſe Miniſters,
howbeit the practice be againſt the Word of God. I ſhall need ſay little more,
for if his beſt friends will but draw the curtaine and looke on both parts
with a ſingle and impratiall eye, they muſt without more adoe, confeſſe that I
have rightly applyd it, or they them­ſelves applyed to it, what we ſay
commonly, non cauſam pro cau­ſa; he takes that for defence of his cauſe, which
maketh naught to the purpoſe.

3\. To ſpeake a little further in this thing, (becauſe ſome of our Oppoſites
conceive it is much for them:) I deſire theſe few particulars may be
conſidered: 1. The Ceremonies whereof we ſpeake, had a neceſſarie uſe of
avoyding ſcandallAct. 15, 28. 2\. They were expedient for drawing of people
unto the faith & order of [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=40) the Goſpell1
Cor. 6, 20, 22.: 3. Of Gods owne inſtitution at firſt. 4. No part of worſhip.
5. During a time after Chriſts reſurrection in their nature indifferentRom: 14
16, Gal. 6 15.. 6. In the uſe of them it was not a hol­ding of conformity with
idolaters in their Ceremonies.

Contrary to this is the Hearing in queſtion. For it giveth of­fence to
Brethren, hinders many from entring into Church-eſtate; it hath no other
ground but mans invention, it is a ſpeciall part of divine worſhip, in it
ſelfe a practice ſinfull and unlawfull, and makes the obſervers like idolaters
in their idolatrous actions.

That which next followes, is his Wodden Reaſon of a Croſſe. I will ſert downe
his owne words.

To come neerer home,Treat: it is the cuſtome in Popiſh Countries, that all
that paſſe by a Croſſe, muſt in honour of it leave it on the right hand, as
they may doe, by reaſon of the placing of it, comming or going.D. Rai­nold
a­gainſt Hart. c: 1, diviſ: 2, pag: 46 Now, if I ride with others that way, I
may doe the thing that they doe, and keepe Company with them, and yet not
ho­nour the Croſſe.

Anſw. It was a common practice (as a wiſe and learned man obſerves) among
young Students, in the time of the Dunſes, that if in diſputation they were
brought to an inconvenience, were it never ſo abſurd: they would have a
diſtinction, though without braine or ſence.

I will not ſay, that the Trea. diſtinction here is ſenceleſſe, but this I ſay
(and will make it good) it is truthleſſe, beſides hurtfull and dangerous.

For to take the things as he layes it downe; that is, there are two wayes to
paſſe by a Croſſe, and I know there are in company ſome, who in honour of the
idol, will leave it on the right hand; Now in this caſe, if I ſhould ſilently
paſſe on that ſide with them, I ſhould offend, yea though I did it, for no
other cauſe, but to keepe on with my company.

My reaſons for it are theſe: 1. The practiſing of an indif­ferent thing,
wherein others ſuperſtitiouſly put holineſſe and ne­ceſſity, is an occaſion of
confirming and hardning of them in their ſuperſtition. Of this judgement were
the German Churches in the Confeſſion of Auſpnrg Harm. Confeſſ. pag. 222., and
Muſculus Loc. Com. pag. 422., Chyereus In Mat. p. 342, 343., Bucanus Loc. pag.
353. & 332., B. Jewell Defen. of Apol. p. 386., D. Whitaker Deſcript. pag.
483., and others.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=41) 2\. Gods
Word chargeth us to avoyd all appearance of evill, and condemnes all ſuch, as
with their bodies, and in outward ſhewLevit. 18. 34. and 19. 19 Exo. 23. 24.,
give any appearance to idolaters, of conforming them­ſelves to them in their
idolatrous actions; howſoever they doe it not with the ſame minde and intent
that the others doe. And this is affirmed by Bucer Com. in Mat. c. 18. fol.
143. 6., Polanus In E­zech. c. 16., Calvin In Le­vit. 19. pag. 207., B. Hooper
Ʋpon Ionas: Serm. 6. fol. 146., and others.

3.Deu. 14. 1. and 12. 4. 30. 31. Gē. 35. 5. I muſt pleaſe my neighbour to
edificationRom. 15. 2. 1 Cor. 8. 33.. Now marke it, if I yeeld him not due
helpe in fitt time and place, whereby to with-hold him from ſinne, I become
acceſſarie to the evill he doth, So write The [...]philact Com. in Rom. 15.,
D. Ames De con­ſcien. l. 5. c. 10. p. 282. and others.

4\. Here the Proverbe is fulfilled, Silence is conſent, For not on­ly by
words, workes and Examples, may a man become partaker of anothers ſinne; Verum
etiam ſilentio, & diſſimulatione vel conniventia, communionem poſſimus habere
cum aliorum peccatis, ſaith D. Ames in the fore-named place.

Another Danaeus Comment. in 1 Tim. c. 5. ver. 22. p. 339. thus: Agentes &
conſentientes pari paena puniun­tur, qui cum furibus pro fures habentur apud
Deum.

5\. If that paſſage in CalvinInstit. l. 3. c. 19. Sect. 11. be true, they give
offence who doe any thing unſeaſonably, raſhly, and out of order and place,
unto the hurt of others: then is not this thing voyd of ſcandall.

6\. Diſſimulation is a kinde of deniall of Chriſt. So ſaith Zan­chy Praecept.
3. pag. 554. Tom. 4. And Aquinas Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 3. art. 1. cals it
mendacium in factis. And that this is diſ­ſimulation: the diſcription of that
vice will make it evident. For according to Davena [...] Determ. quaect. 7.
pag. 40. that is diſſembling, cum aliquis per ſigna factorum contrarium eius
ſignificat quod in mente clauſum habet. And theſe reaſons may bee applyed
againſt the going with others to an idol-miniſterie, Church, Worſhip, &c, as
here unto a Croſſe.

The Treat. goes foreward thus: If I have just and reaſon­able cauſe of comming
or ſtanding before the Magistrate (to whom I owe civill honour) while he is
performing ſome act of idolatrie, in the ſtreets or elſe where; I may upon the
ſame ground, goe or ſtand uncovered by him, without just blame.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=41) Anſw. I
may ſay (as another ſaid D. Fulk. Confut. Rhem. on Philip. 2. 10. in a like
caſe) vvith ſuch respects, relations, and diſtinctions, all idolatry and will-
worſhip may be defended.

It greeves me truely, to ſee his fearefull retyring into the bat­tered workes
of the Familiſts: for howſoever he minſeth it, and would make his thread
ſomewhat fairer; notwithſtanding their web and warpe is one: for let the
doctrine of the Familiſts be peruſed, and it will appeare, it is all one here
with the Treatiſers. Men (ſay theySee a Booke ſet forth by Edmond Ieſſop.
a­gainſt A­nabapt.) upon occaſion may be bodily preſent where ido­latrie is
practiſed; yet ſo, as they loth the ſame, and keep their hearts to God only.
So they

What they (by Occaſion) do meane, and he by a juſt and reaſon­able cauſe, I
know not, neither doe I much deſire to know; but this I know, there can be no
reaſon given, that a man ſhould come where idolatry is practiſed, (be the
Magiſtrate preſent) and there in any outward ſignes and geſtures doe as the
reſt, ſecretly pro­poſing to himſelfe, not to give any honour to the falſe
worſhip, but to the Magiſtrate, to whome he owes civill vvorſhip.

If Namaan had beene of the Treat. judgement, he would not have queſtioned the
lawfulnes of going with his maiſter into the Houſe of Rinnon: For he had as
juſt and reaſonable a cauſe, as the Treat. I thinke could inſtance. Moreover,
he meant only in ap­plying himſelfe in civill ſervice to the King, and had
renounced before all ſuperſtitions of the Heathens, ſo that he would not bow
in reſpect of the idoll, for he deteſted it with his heart: Not­withſtanding
all this, to goe thither, he could not lawfully doe, I ſay upon no termes was
it lawfull for him, to doe any civill reve­rence and honour to the Magiſtrate▪
while he was performing acts of idolatry. And ſo, ſay Calvin In 2. King. 5.,
Martyr Loc. Cō. p. 199. and 643., Sedelius Commēt. in 2. King. 5.,
Bi­dembachius Id., Zanchy Praec. 3. p. 536., Muſculus In a dial. tranſlated
out of French into Engliſh, Virel Ground Rel. l. 2. p. 103., and others.

We are to ſerve God in the ſight of the world, and what wee thinke in our
hearts, that ſhould bee written (as it were) and ſeene in our foreheads. But
many now a dayes, make no con­ſcience of diſſembling in Religion, ſo it be for
ſome worldly ad­vantage; as that Iewd fellow profeſſeth in the Poet Teren. in
Phorm. Act. 3. Scen. 2., Non pu­det vanitatis, minime, dum ad rem.

But ſuch as deſire to walke ( [...] Gal. 2. 13.) with a right foot, can­not
[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=42) indure
it. Policarpus Euſeb. l. 4. c. 15. might have ſaved his life if hee would have
diſſembled before the Magiſtrate, but he ſaw it would have beene an appearance
of evill, and a diſcouragement to the breathren, and therefore ſpake boldly,
Christianus ſum.

Sozemon Hiſt. l. 5. reports that Iulian the Apoſtate calling all his
ſoul­diers before him, gaue to every one a grain of incenſe to caſt into the
fyer, and a peice of gould; they that were chriſtians, having alſo receaved
each man his inſence and gould; not vnderſtanding at the firſt that he was
performing any act of idolatry, but that the rite tended either to his owne
per [...]onall dignity, or to make ſome ſweet perfume; but hearing-afterwards
that this perfume was made unto the idols, they returned every one with his
gould againe, gaue it to him, deplored their overſight, though in ſo doo­ing
they endaungered themſelues of martyrdome.

The proteſtant princes of Auguſta, in the daies of Charles 5\. could not bee
wonne either by faire meanes of foule to ſtand by the Emperour vncovered while
he was performing ſom acts of ido­latry: For if they would have done ſo, there
eſtates, honour, li­berty, &c. would have beene granted to them.

I could preduce the examples of many others, who rather then they would come
and ſtand by the magiſtrate whilſt he was performing ſome act of idolatry and
there bow the knee, or vnc [...] ­ver the head and ſuffer both their krees and
head to be cut of; and good reaſon too: for ſuch a practice, is the high of
deluſion and deph of diſſimulatio: and as oneCalf hill on the Croſſe, fol.
185. truelie ſayth howſoever men flatter themſelves with a hidden opinion yet
the evident and appa­rent worke of capping bowing and kneeling, ſhewes that
the heart is unſound, and the dore a meere idolater. Bleſſed is he there­fore,
that condemneth not himſelfe in the thing he appro­veth.

In concluſion he ſaith: To apply theſe things to the Objection moved,Treat:
ſeeing no other cauſe could reaſonably be conceived of the Kings commaunding
ſuch a thing, or of their doing the thing at his commaundement, ſaue the
worſhipping of the idoll, in ſo doing they could not have eſcaped the iust
plaime of idolatry: But now I have iuſt cauſe more then one of my hearing, and
amongst the rest mine edification; & therefore cannot be challenged therein,
to appr [...] ­of the miniſters state, or ſtanding, beſidee that, as I
formerly anſwe­red here is none idolatrous act performed.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=42) Anſw. 1.
Thine owne mouth (ſaith Eliphaz in Iob Chap. 15, 6. condem­neth thee, and not
I: Yea thine owne lips teſtifie against thee. His application here, is indeed
againſt himſelfe: For Jf the 3: Nobles in Daniell, had committed idolatry in
falling downe before the idol [...] (yea howſoever they had not intended to
honour it) becauſe it was the knowne and publick intent of the ſetting up of
it, to be adored, and the Kings commaundement was that it ſhould be ſo: This
being ſo, then it followes, that ſeing falſe chur­ches and falſe miniſters are
real idols, ſet up by earthly Princes; & their knowne intent by publick
proclimation is, that all people within their dominions ſhould come to them,
bow before them, and by outward geſtures approue of them: This I ſay being ſo,
the concluſion is (certo certius) not lyable to exception, that whoſoever
comes, and bowes before thoſe idols, cannot e [...]cape the iuſt blame of
idolatry, howſoever in himſelfe, hee intendeth no ſuch thing.

And here let it bee obſerved (what wee even now ſaid) if a man performe an
action in a ſtate, and of publick nature, he is to be con­ſidered (in reſpect
of himſelfe) as is that ſtate, and according to the publick ordinances: For If
the ſtate, bee falſe, and the officer unlawfull, it is familiſme for him to
ſay, I knowe this ſtate, is ſet up a­gainſt the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and every
commer here to worſhip, according to the conſtitution, is an idolater: but I
will have in my ſelfe aſecret meaning from the reſt, and in this regard, I
cannot be accounted an approver of the ſtate, or that I doe any worſhip here,
as the ſame is publickly eſtabliſhed and intended it ſhould be don.

The learned condenme this, and ſtile it groſſe diſſimulation, and a mocking of
God. So Scarpius, Symphom proph. pag. 238. Caelius, A little Treat: to all
faith­full Chriſt. Hemingius, In Ephe. c. 5. Rivetus, In Pſa. 16 p. 53, 54.
Zanchy, in Comt; 3, p. 534; Mr. Philpot, Act. mon. pag; 2002; yea the thing is
ſo vile, as a PapiſtCalled the love of the  [...]oule; hath writen againſt it,
a whole treatiſe.

The authors of Pirth aſſembly write thus: Whereſoever the publick intent of a
Kirk is to worſhip the ſacrament, every private man following that intent, is
formallie an idolater: if his private in­tent be diverſe from the publick, yet
he is ſtill materially & interpre­tative an idolater.

What they ſay, wee ſay: and heare lies the difference be­tweene our oppoſites
and us. Wee both, grant the publick in­tent of a falſe Church, is, to have
their State, Worſhip, and Governe­ment, approved,x Pag. 49▪ But here is the
ods; they ſay, ſeing their private [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=43) intention, is
diverſe from the publick, they are not treſpaſſers with the publick: though in
publick they doe the ſame action. We on the contrary affirme, ſeeing the
publick intent of the Church, is to honour the idol, every private man
following that intent is formably an idolater: if his private intent be
diverſe from the pub­lick, yet he is ſtill materially and interpretatiue an
idolater.

Iſmenias (as the ſame authors note) ſtoping downe before the king of
Perſia,Ibid. to take up a ring, which hee of purpoſe let fall; was not
excuſed, becauſe this ſtoping in common vſe, was the adoring of the Kings of
Perſia: Let the godly reader conſider of it, take ad­viſe, and ſpeake his
mind.

2\. J deny, that any man hath iuſt cauſe to heare (in the way wee ſpeake of)
for his edefication. For what he ſaith here, he produceth neither ſcripture
nor reaſon, nor any authority but his own; as if his ipſe dixit, like the
popes ſentence were penitus definitiua, ab­ſolate difinitiue and to be reſted
in: but to vſe his owne wordesIuſtifi­cat. ſepa­rat. pag. 47. 48. ſeing he
ſoevveth himſelfe barren of Divine authority. I will proofe what I doe deny by
theſe reaſons.

1 Whatſoever Chriſt hath thought fitt to teach his Church & the inſtruments &
helps whereby, that hath hee fully ſet downe in his word2 Timot. 3 16▪ 17.
Act. 20. 27. Ioh. 20. 30. 31. 2 Pet. 1. 3.: ſoe that to acknowledge any other
meanes of edefication, then ſuch as he hath appointed, is to receiue another
Teacher into the Church beſides him, and to confeſſe ſome in perfection in
thoſe meanes which he hath ordained for our edefication; this argument is
brought againſt the vaine traditions of Rome and England by Gualter [...]n
Ha­bac. fol. 270., Lavater in 1. Chron. 10. 11., V [...]ſinus Catech. par. 3.
p. 758. 760., Polanus Partit. Theol. pag. 83 191▪, Ames [...], the authors of
the Abrigement [...], and it holds every way as firme and good in our diſpute.

P. Martyr ſpeakes [...] home to this point. For as much as God▪ is most wiſe,
he needs not our deviſe for inſtruments to ſtirr up faith in vs, which thing
no tradeſmā in this kind would indure; but would chuſe to himſelfe at his
owne pleaſure wha [...] hee ſhould thinke most fit, &c. How bold are theſe
[...] who w [...]ll P [...]aeſcribe to God after What manner and by  [...]
ſhall edefie  [...]s. Soe hee.

2 Seeing our diſcourſe  [...] [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=43) edefication,
which Chriſt the onely Teacher of his Church hath appointed, then is it is ſet
downe, by the appoſtle in Epheſ: 4\. 11. 12. 13. the reaſon is, becauſe Paul
there mentioneth all miniſ­teriall meanes for the perfect and complet building
of the Church from the firſt to the laſt: ſoe write, Fenner Sacr. Theol. c. 7,
p. 119., Laiton Syons p. 10., Piſcator Aphoriſm. loc. 20., Cartwright Repl. 1.
to Whitg. p. 85., Beza in Epheſ. 4, 10., Calvin inſtit. l 4 c. 1. Sect. 5,
Polanus Syntag. l. 10, & 11., and o­thers.

But  [...] thinke our Oppoſites wil not ſay, that Paul there inten­deth this
Hearing, as a meanes of our edification: Jf they ſhould, l the Treat: would be
againſt them, for hee confeſſeth it is not a­ny perticular ordinance left vs
by Chriſt. Ergo. &c.

3\. As Augustine ſaithMori fame, quā idolothytis veſci. de bono con­gug. c.
16. it is better to dy with famen, then to eate with Idolothites, Daniell
choſe rather to live upon pulſe, then to be fed, with the moſt delicate meats
from the kings table, ſeing they were ſuch meat as he ought not to eat. For he
knew (as oneOſiand. in Dan. 1. p. 367. writes on the place) Not by the power
of the meate, but by Gods divine bleſſing, is the body preſerved: To apply
this, ſeeing the Hearing ſtood for,p Pag. 37. is a ſpirituall eating with
idolaters: and men cannot receive the food without pollution; Our beſt courſe,
is to cōtent our ſelvs with what meanes of edefication, we find in Gods way,
be it much or little, I ſay not diſpiſe Zach. 4. 10. the day of ſmall things:
and the rather, conſidering, that it is not the meanes, but Gods bleſſing on
the meanes, that edefieth vs.

4: VVhoſoever takes to himſelfe, a practice, which is not grounded on Gods
word, and therein is ſtrict, he is juſt overmuch D. Gouge on Epheſ. 6, 14. and
preſumeth bove that which is writen: and this is their caſe who heare
unlawfull miniſters for edefication.

5\. Jt is not true, that a man being out of the falſe Church, and a viſible
member of a true, ſhould bee furthered in the way grace, by returning thither
to heare the word. Vpō better ground I may ſay, his grouth in knowledge and
ſincerity hereby wilbe hindered, and probably he in time drawne back to his
former vo­mit; or if he eſcape ſhip-wrack this way,Treat. 2. par. 4, p. 78.
yet to meet with ſuch heavy terrors of conſcience, as that his time after
wilbe ſpent with griefe, and his yeares with ſighing.

And here (chriſtian reader) I thinke fit; to make knowne unto thee,Cartvv.
Hom. in Eccleſ. 7, fol. 149. what happened about 7 yeares paſt in England,
there was a gentle man of warick ſheir, by name Mr Edward Grefwold, a­man very
religious, as many beſides my ſelfe can teſtifie: He and [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=44) I, being boſome
Freinds (or to uſe his owne common ſaying o [...] ­hearts being as Davids and
Ionathans, knitt together) vpon iuſt cauſe, wee both left the pariſh
aſſemblies. He afterward by the meanes of ſome crafty men, was perſwaded vnto
hearing a­gaine: vpon this he fell into great troble of ſpirit, and could have
no feeling aſſurance of any peace with God: remaining thus a­while, at length
he ſent a letter by his ſervant vnto me (the which I have kept a long time by
mee) in this letter he largely acknow­ledgeth his offence, and among other
paſſages writes thus: You, ah you are happy: but I by my fall am miſerable and
wretched: and for the preſent time, I feele my ſoule to bee no otherwiſe, then
if it were in hell: &c, ever ſince I went to their Aſſemblies I have ob­ſerved
the Lords hand againſt me: &c, wherefore I beſeech you by the mercices of God,
ſet a day apart for mee, and ſeeke the almighty by faſting and praying, that
the waterflood over flow mee not: &c. what his refreſhings were after this, J
cannot ſay, the report is, that to his changing, he had ſad & ſorrowfull
dayes: notwithſtan­ding I am confident, that his ſoule is with Chriſt in
paradiſe. As I am writing this, I thinke of the words in the ProphetPſal. 119
120. My fleſh trembleth for feare of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.
He that is wiſe will conſider of theſe things: For as oneHal. an­tiq. Rom. l.
11. ſaith providing before is better then repenting afterward.

It is no marvaile that falſe churches by ſome are called Officina ſcelerum, &
carnificina ſanctorum, ſhops of wickednes, and cham­bles of the ſaints; for
what can a tender conſcience expect in fre­quenting them, but indeed, pricks,
racks, and tortures. Aquila & Symmachus for the Hebrew Aven, which ſignifieth
the falſe ſtate vnder Jeroboam, render it in Greeke  [...], an vnprofi­table
houſe: and well they might for whoſoever goes to ſuch hou­ſes, he may be ſure
he ſhall loſe by it. And this is the judgment of Botſach Prompt. alleg. c. 21,
de miniſt., Lutz In Evāg; Dom. 8, post pent. p 339., Polanus In Ezech. 44▪
pag. 800., Pelargus d, and others. And whereas ſome put difference betweene
the Preachers there; as one ſayth e the beſt are the worſt: a Quaeſt. Evang in
Mat. 23. Motives to the king and ſtate, Pag. 32. For theſe as evill workers,
ſecretly, and by degrees, and with as little noyſe as may bee, ſeeke to keepe
people in errour and diſorder.

3\. The conſequence of his (therefore) concluſion, no logician can make it
good: For he argueth iuſt for all the world, as if one ‘ſhould ſay, Becauſe I
goe to the aſſize or ſeſſion for right or to ſchoole for education, therefore
I cannot be chalenged ther­in, [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=44) to approve of
the Iudge, Iuſtice, or maiſter their ſtate or ſtanding:’ J could goe on thus a
tribus ad centum, for there is no end of ſuch abſurdities; the very naming
whereof, is an­ſwere enought.

But to the point, the Treat here yeelds the cauſe; For if a man ſhall heare in
a falſe church for edefication; therein he approues directly of the ſtate, For
this is a ſure thing (and let it be noted) no adminiſtration performed in a
ſtate, and by a power and con­ſtituted office, can bee ſought,There are maine
difference betvveene a mans bare pre­ſence in a cōſtituted ſtat [...]; as
beeing there, un­avvares, unvvil­lingly, or by com­pulſion; & preſence there
of purpoſe to partake of the admi­ſtrations. deſired & receaved, but in ſo
do­ing, the doer (Ipſo facto) really approves of that ſtate, power, and office
be the ſame lawfull or unlawfull. And as for any mans ſay­ing to the contrary,
it is ſine capite fabula, a viſion of his own head, and will prove as good as
the miracles which Iamnes and Iambres wrought, even meanes to harden his owne
heart and ſome others, as they did Pharoahs by doing them.

Laſtly where as hee tels vs, Hee hath formerlie ſaid here is noe idolatrous
act performed, in ſtead of this twice ſodden Coleworth, I looked hee ſhould
have alleaged ſome Scriptures from whence this might have beene gathered, or
concluded at the leaſt, or brought ſome convincing argument, which might have
cleared it, or if none of thoſe, yet that he would have ſhewed ſome authori­ty
or author, which had ſoe written or ſpoken; but here is deepe ſilence; and we
muſt take all (pro confeſso,) vpon his bare word; but by his leave, wee
purpoſe to try his novelties, and not take them vpon truſt.

And howſoever I have ſaid enought before in confutation of this, yet I will
add a word more, and the rather, becauſe not only is this a main point between
vs, but alſo here is a ground laid, for groſſe idolaters, to iuſtifie their
evils by: For If in preaching of the truths of the Goſpel in a falſe Church
(ſay by a Pope, a Cardinall, an Arch-biſhop, a Lord-Biſhop, or any other enemy
of God) no ido­latry be done, then may a mā worſhip God in a way of his own
di­viſing blameleſſe. We have hitherto been inſtructed, that unto di­vine
worſhip two things are required, matter and manner, Firſt it muſt be a true
matter of worſhip, grounded on the word: Second­ly done in aright and lawfull
manner, order, forme, way, &c. and if either of thoſe be wanting, it cannot be
a reſonable ſervice; and of this judgement were Perkins, Jdolat. laſt times,
p. 674. 675. laſt volum. Brinſley, True vvatch, p 28. Elton On Co­loſ. p.
308., Dod, On the cōmand. 2. Hieron, On Pſa. 51, pag. 4. Bates, His booke
againſt Ceremonies, p. 191. Trailor, On Tit. c. 3. v. 10. p. 715. and others.
But according to [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=45) the Treat:
teaching the later here, is (etrivio) of noe vſe at all; for ſo a man preach
the truths of the Goſpell he doth no Idolatrous act; although in the mean time
he exerciſe an antichriſtian office; hence this muſt follow: viz, ſoe the
truth be preached it is no mat­ter whether the preacher bee ſent from
Antichriſt, or from Chriſt; nor whether he preach at Dan and Bethell, or at
Ieruſalem in the temple. For if the former committ no idolatrous act, hee is
then as blamles in his way, as the latter is in his. Better the Treat, had
ſpared his words, and lookd better to his anſwere, or eat them both, then to
blott paper, and abuſe the reader with ſuch unſound and hurt­fall aſſertions.

#### 1.2.6. SECT. 6.

OVr. 4. Objection is laid downe for vs thus: Hee that heares them preach,
heares them as ministers of the Church of Eng­land, and as ſent by the
Biſhops, and ſoe in hearing them heares & receaves them that ſent them:
according to that of our Saviour hee that heares you, heares me, and hee that
dispiſeth you, dispiſeth me, and hee that diſpiſeth mee diſpiſeth him that
ſent mee.

It was ſome addition to Davids 1 Sam 17▪ 51. victory over the Philistime, that
he ſlew him with his owne ſword. The ta [...]ke is very eaſie, to cō ­fute
all that the Treat: here writes againſt vs, by the engine of his owne
acknowledgements: For to ſay the truth, Howſoever hee frames Objections for
vs, yet originally they are his owne, and even word for word publiſhed by
himſelf in former books to the world: ſo that Obliquus curſus forgetting (as
it were) What he had before held and written, he makes himſelfe in this
controverſie his owne greateſt oppoſite.

Th [...]t this Objection can call no man Father, ſo properly as the Treat; Jt
is certane; for to my knowledge no man but himſelfe hath uſed it: Indeed he
hath done it, and applyed i [...]to the ſame purpoſe, that he brings it here
for us, that is, againſt the Hearing of unlavvfull Miniſters. His words are
theſeManu­miſſ: to a Manu­duct. pag: 9..

If it belong to the chief Prelates to call Miniſters, & that in calling them,
they give them power and authority (though no abſolute charge) to preach
according to the order of that Church; Then followeth it undeniably, that
thoſe Miniſters thus preaching doo [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=45) therein exerciſe
the Prelates power: And that it may be ſaid of the Miniſters, & Biſhops, as
Chriſt ſaid of his Diſciples and himſelfe, that whoſoever receives them that
are ſent, receives them that ſent them. In ſubmitting unto, or withdrawing
from him that is ſent by the King in a worke of his Office, men doe ſubmitt
unto, or with-draw from the King himſelfe, and his authority; So it is in all
estates and ſubordinations whether Eccleſiasticall or Civill; as every one
that is not dimme in himſelfe, may ſee by the light of na­ture. So writes the
Treat: Now let us ſee how he confutes himſelfe.

I grant the former part of the Objection,Treat: and account the de­nying of it
a point of Familiſme, ſeeing the Officers of publique states in the executing
of their offices, are to be esteemed according to the publick Lawes and Orders
of thoſe ſtates, and not according to any under hand courſe or intention
either by themſelves or others.

Anſw. A man that goes with a vaile before his eyes; comes now and then into
his waye, although he know it not. The Treat. in this walke about Hearing in
falſe Churches, is ſometimes cut, otherwhile in, he ſayes and unſayes; But ſo
farre as he ſpeakes the truth, he ſpeakes it againſt himſelfe: for his anſwer
here, it is no­thing but a yeelding the caſe, in ſome compaſſe and
circumlo­cution of words; and that the Reader may perceive it is ſo, I will
make it obvious and cleare to him by an argument or two; and firſt thus:

If to heare Antichriſtian Miniſters, be to ſerve God in, and by an ordinance,
way, or inſtitution, deviſed by idolaters, and with idolaters; Then is it
unlawfull.

But the firſt is true, therefore the ſecond.

The propoſition is undeniable by the Treat. owne confeſſion: For he grants
that  [...] courſe of hearing is no ordinance left us by Chriſt: Then  [...]
it muſt be from Antichriſt: Againe he profeſſeth▪ they  [...] as they preach,
and preach as Mini­ſters of the  [...] according to the publicke  [...] is, to
ſpeake  [...] forme re­ligious [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=46) worſhip to God,
in, and by a publick ordinance, way and ſtate which idolaters have invented,
and with idolaters.

This I ſay (aperto pectore) he grants to the full: And no mar­vaile, for to
deny it, were an audacious fiction, monſtrous unpa­relled preſumption▪ and
would marke a man out, for an Atheſti­call Familiſt, as perſpicuous as the
leproſie of Vzziah, which brake forth in his forehead.

The Aſſumption is as manifeſt; For 1. by the ScripturesDeu. 12. 30. Levit, 18.
3. Exo. 23. 24. Levit. 9, 27. 28. Deu. 14. 1 Levit. 19. 17. Gen. 35. 2. 3.
Eſa, 27. 9. wee are prohibited from all conformitie with idolaters in any of
their wayes, order, and manner of worſhip, and Religious Obſervations. It was
the cuſtomeHerodot. in Thalia: Becan. in analog. vet. & nov. Teſt. c. 15. of
the Arabians and other Heathens, in imi­tation of Dyoniſius, that is Bacchus,
to round the corners of their head; Now this the Iſraelites might not
doeLevit. 19. 27. (though in it ſelfe an indifferent thingCalvin. in Levit.
19. 17.) becauſe God would not have them to bee like idolaters.

This alſo may be further proved by the teſtimonie of learned men; For to have
any thing common with idolaters, or to ſerve God after any way of theirs; Or
to take up, and make uſe of any of their rites, orders, obſervations,
inſtitutions for to worſhipp God in, or by them: they hold to be unlawfull.
Yea howbeit a man be not in Eccleſiaſticall union with them. Thus have the old
Fathers affirmedTertull: de Coron. Milit. Greg. lib. 1. Epiſt. 44. ad Leon.
Theod▪ l. 1. c. 10. Auguſt. Epiſt. 86. ad Caſul.; So our later writers:
CalviniſtsPareus in 1 Cor. 10▪ 14. Bucer in Mat. 18. fol. 143. Beza Tract.
Theol. vol. 3. pag. 210., Luthe­ransCent. 4. c. 13 col. 406. Chemn [...]t.
Exam. Theol. Melanct. par. 2. pag. 491., formall ProteſtantsB. Iewell upon 1.
Theſ. 5. p. 219. Sulclief. Chal. pag. 62. in England, ReformiſtsPerth. aſſemb.
p. 55. 56. Alt. Damaſ. p. 539. PapiſtsBellar. de Monach. c. 40. & de effect.
ſacr. l. 2. c. 31. Sect. 10. Rhemiſt. annot. on 1. Cor. 6. 14. & 1\. Timot. 6.
Sect. 4. in Apoc. 1. 10., and SchoolemenAquin. 1. 2a. q. 102. Art. 6. c. 6.
m., yea many Iew-DoctorsSee Mr. Ainſworth in Levit. 19. 27., ſome
CouncilsToledo Can. 5. & 40\. Laod. c. 38. Brac. Can. 32. & 73., have thus
concluded, and the Cannon-LawDeer. Par. 2. Cauſ. 26. quaeſt. 7. c. 13. &c. 14.
&c. 17. ſpeakes ſo too.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=46) And here
I deſire the Reader to obſerve, that were the grounds true which he layes
downe for hearing: to wit, that there is no Religious Communion betweene the
perſons preaching and hea­ring; They cannot be chalenged to approve of the
Miniſters ſtate or ſtanding: They have no communion with the office of the
Mini­ſtery, &c. I ſay, were theſe things ſo, (which are not) yet would this
practice be found ſinfull; becauſe (as we have before ſhewed) herein men
worſhipp God in, or by a way and meanes, which idolaters have inſtituted.

Our ſecond argument is taken from the Treat. words fol­lowing, which are
theſe:Treat. I profeſſe I heare them, as Ministers of the Bb. ſending, and of
the Pariſhes ſent  [...]. Hence I argue thus:

He that heares the Ministers of the Bb. ſending, and of the Pariſhes ſent too:
hee heares (in the ſence of the Scriptures) falſe Prophets: But it is not
lawfull to heare falſe Prophets:

Therefore it is not lawfull to heare the Ministers of the Bb▪ ſen­ding, or of
the Pariſhes ſent too.

The Major is proved clearely in the defence of our 12. Objec­tion. The Minor
is certaine by theſe reaſons.

1\. The hearing of falſe Prophets is forbidden in the Word of GodEx. 20. 5.
Pro. 5. 8. Mat. 7 15. Philip. 3. 2. 1. Timot. 5. 22.. 2. The practice of it is
will-worſhipp Joh. 4. 23. Rom. 12. 1. 2. Mat. 15. 9▪ Col. 2. 23; the which is
vnacceptable to God. 3. It is to rebel againſt the Lord, and to ſeeke what is
in man, to uphold that thing which the Lord will caſt downe and conſume.Num.
16. 2 Theſ. 2. 10. 11. Rev. 18. 1. 2. 1 Sam. 15. 22. 4\. This is to embrace
the boſome of a ſtranger, & ſo to cōmitt ſpirituall whoredome againſt the
LordPro. 5. 20. Pſal. 106. 39.. 5. It defileth the name of GodEzech. 43. 7.
8.. 6. This is to hold conformi­tie with idolaters, and to be like them; The
which thing ought not to beLevit. 18. 3. and 19. 19. 27. 28. Exo. 23. 24. Deu.
12. 30. 32.. 7. It ſhewes that a man is not one of Chriſt ſheepe, but carnall
and unconvertedIoh. 10. 4. Eſa. 30. 22, & 27\. 9.. 8. It manifeſteth great
want of the love and zeale of God2 King. 23. 4. Rev. 2. 3. 4. Pſal. 119. 128.
Ioh. 2. 16.. 9. It is to ſerve Satan and Anti-Chriſt; as it is written: His
ſervants ye are vvhome ye obey 2 Chro. 11, 14. Rev. 9. 20..

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=47)

[...]

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=47)

[...]

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=48) 10\. It
defiles the ſouleEze. 20▪ 7 Laſtly, the doer hereby is expoſed, to the wrath
of GodRe. 144. 2. Theſ. 2. 8, 10..

Thus the Treat: like the Bee is drownd in his owne Honie; And truely pitty it
is, but all pleaders for Baal were alwayes thus en­tangled in their owne
words,Rev. 14▪ 9 Eze. 16. 54. according to that in Ovid.

Non eſt lex iuſtior ulla

Quam necis artifices arte peri [...]e ſua.

The Treat.Lib. 2. de arte a­mand. ſpeakes on thus: But not as my Miniſters,
either ſending,Treat: or ſent to, except I be of thoſe Pariſhes, or at leaſt
in Ec­cleſiaſticall Ʋnion with them.

Anſw. A man bent to declyning, is glad of every couler which he may pretend to
juſtifie him [...]el [...]e in declyning; It is a poore diſtinction, which he
uſe [...]h here to declyne the point in queſtion: For 1. what uſe was there to
tell us, He beares them not as his Mi­niſters; This well might have beene
ſpared, and ſomething ſaid, to warrant by Scripture the hearing of them at
all. If a woman be accuſed of adultery, and to excuſe her ſelfe, ſhall ſuy:
The adulterer is in no covenant or band with mee. Is this enought to cleare
her? No. I have proved before, that all religious per­formances in falſe
Churches, are idolatrous actions; Now then to worſhip God there, & for excuſe
to ſay, we are not in Eccleſiaſtical union vvith the ſtate or Miniſtery; I may
well ſay (lingua quo va­dit) it is idly ſpoken; and much like the Fryars plea,
vve are exempted Lord.

Againe, for his diſtinction, it is the ſame which Papiſts, and o­thers
alleadge, to juſtifie there idol-Ceremonies; They ſay, how ſo­ever theſe are
things, which Ievves & Pagans did be ore them, yet their end and reſpect in
doing them, is different. What is ſaid of ſome, in anſwer thereunto, I may
here ſay the like: To practice that thing in Gods worſhipp, which neither
directly nor conſe­quently is included in the word, is an open breach of Gods
Law, bee the doers meaning this or that.

What jealous or wife huſband, if his wife ſhould receive ſome love-tokens frō
a knowne adulterer & one that goes about to un­dermine her honeſtie; would
take it for a ſufficient excuſe, if ſhe ſhould ſay, I receive indeed ſuch
things from a knowne adulterer, and as he is an adulterer, but not wine &c.
The weight of the Treat: diſtinction, lies betweene meum & tuum; Hee pro
[...]eſſeth [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=48) to reciue love-
guifts from ſpirituall adulterers and as they are ſo, but not his.

Now I maruaile how his pen could drop ſuch poyſen, and he not ſmell the ſtinck
of it When he wrote it. I wiſh all men in all pla­ces, to take heed, that they
deceave not their owne ſoules by ſuch foliſh diſtinctions: for if ſuch things
will not ſtand before ſor-ry-man: how then before the greate God, Who is a
jealous huſband, and a conſuming fire.

Now let vs heare what followes in the Treat:Treat. By hearing and re­ceiving
there, Chriſt meanes properly the hearkening too, beleiving & obeying the
doctrine taught by the Apoſtles, which many diſpiſed, vn­to whome he oppoſeth
the former that heard it.

Anſw: He that cōes to the field without his weapon it is an argu­ment, he
meanes to ſave himſelfe by flying, and not by fighting. Whether the Treat: had
on any armour to fight with againſt this objection. I will not determine, but
this I ſay (and will abide by it) he flyes away from the poynt, and ſpeakes
nothing either for it, or againſt it: For 1. Were his diſtinction granted,
betweene hearing them as BB: Miniſters, and not as his. And againe that by
receiving the Apostles, Chriſt meanes properly hearking to, and obeying their
doctrines. I ſay ſuppoſe this (but I grant it not) yet doth not this take a
way the weight of our reaſon, nor in truth ſo much as touch it.

I ſhall expect that he who comes nex to the field, in the behalfe of
Antichriſtian Miniſters, doe prepare a better Anſwer to this ob­jection. And
that he may know, what he hath to confute, I will a litle inlarge the poynt.

1\. The Treat. in applying hearing & receiving to the doctrines of the
Apoſtles, doth not well; For the firſt only reſpects their tea­ching, the
latter their perſons; This is evident in the Text Mat. 10\. 14. whoſoever
ſhall not receiue you, and hea [...]e my words &c. Im­plying that Chriſt is
two wayes received, in the miniſterie of the Goſpel; viz. In the perſon of the
Teacher, and in the doctrines taught by him. And thus doe out beſt Expoſiters
vnderſtand the place. Caluine, Pareus, Piſcator, Aretius, Muſculus.

It is further to be noted, where Chriſt ſayh▪ he that receiveth you, receiveth
me &c. His meaning is that ſuch as hearken to, and o­bey the doctrines of his
Miniſters, therein doe acknowledge his authority, power & kingly office over
his Church, to appoynt her [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=49) lawes,I meane in
a worke of their  [...]f­fice. offices, ordinances; &c. and alſo the fathers
donation or the delivering up of the ſame into his ſonnes hand.

To apply this; As they who hearken vnto Chriſts miniſters; doe therein approue
of his lawfull power over his Church, & of the fathers guift this way to him;
ſoe contrariwiſe, ſuch as hearken * to Antichriſts Miniſters, doe therein
approue of Antichriſts vnlawfull power over the falſe Church, and the de­vils
Satan is the author of falſe miniſtries in the apoſtaſie of the man of ſin.
donation; or his putting of that power into his eldeſt ſons hands. If any ſay
we intend not ſo, I anſwere (Res ipſa aliud oſtendit) the actiō which they do
is ſo. quid verba audiam cum factae videam. And here that ſaying of a learned
(a) man is fulfulled: There are ſome▪ which deny that they worſhip Idolls, T.
C. Repl 1. p. 88. & 204. when in the meane time their owne doings chargeth
them with it: Now there are too many in thoſe daies groſly guilty this way.

His next words are, Lavat. in Ioſh. 22. Hom. 61. Treat. The Minisſters in the
Pariſhes, haue not the doctrines of the Goſpel from the Biſhops as they haue
their offices, but from God in his word.

Anſw. It was a lawEugin. Boron. Iure con­ſult. l. 1. p. 120. among the
Romanes, that whoſoever paſſed not into their Citty at the gates, but
attempted to break throw the walls, or to clyme over them, ſhould be put to
death. The Treat. in preſſing the hearing of the truths of the Goſpel, would
perſwade us, ſo we do receiue them, it is no matter whether it be by order or
diſorder, whether from the Miniſters; of Chriſt or Antichriſt. Whether in a
true Church, or in a falſe. But this counſell we cannot take, becauſe to our
knowledge, ther is a divine ſtatute in force againſt it: & therefore as we
muſt T. C. Repl. 1. p 155. care for the truth, ſo muſt we care of whom we haue
it: & he giues this reaſon. Ibid. p. 83. As God hath ordained that the truth
ſhould be preached, ſo alſo hath he ordained in what order, and by whom it
ſhould be preached. We may not therefore adventure Penry Exhort. to the
govern. of Wales pag. 46. to go vnto him for thoſe, things, which he hath no
commiſſion to deliver.

Suppoſe Carah or ſome other in that Conſpiraſy, ſhould haue ſaid thus: Come to
us yee men of Iſraell, and hearken to; beleeve and Obey the truths taught in
our Tents. If you object that our Calling [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=49) is anti-
Moſaicall and falſe: we anſwer, this cannot be any barre or let in the thing,
ſeeing the doctrines we teach are from God in his law.

J cannot ſee according to the Treat. arguing, how in ſuch a caſe they could
haue ſtaid without: for if we may go into the Sinagogues of Antichriſt; ſo the
Doctrines of the Goſpel be there preached? I would know then of our Oppoſites,
why an Iſraelite vpon the ſame ground (viz. to heare the Doctrines of the law)
might not haue gon with them rebels into their Tents. I beleeve if we come to
open termes, theſe will be found to be par pari things alike, and the one as
lawfull as the other, & both ſtarke naught.

But to come more neerer to the point, the thing which the Treat, harpes moſt
vpon, is, that they teach the truth: And our oppoſites vſe this as their
ſpeciall and main poſition viz. Where the truth is taught, there they may
lawfully heare. To diſcover their follow herein. J pray let it be minded what
was ſaid be­fore, As the hearing in queſtion, is a religious action, ſo to
haue it lawfull and good, the circumſtances perteyning to it, muſt neceſſarily
be obſerved, of which circumſtances the truth taught, is only one particular.
It is a received maxime both in di­vinity and Philoſophie, that circumſtances
make actions formally good or bad, ſo write Junius De pol., Aquinas 1a. 2a. q.
8. Art: 3▪, Camerius Praelect▪ Tom. 2. p. 49., and Burgeſse of the lawfullnes
of kneeling C. 1. confeſſeth they are intrinſecall and eſſentiall to actions,
and eſpecially making up there nature. Fed: Morellus vpon theſe words of
Seneca, k Scho. 2. Lib. refert quid, cui, quando, quare, ſaith that with­out
theſe circumſtances of things, perſons, time, place &c. facti ratio non
conſtat. Friar Ambroſius Caturinus Counc. l. 2 p. 224. following the doctrine
of Thomas, meanteyneth in the covnſell of Trent, that to do a-good worke the
concurrance of all circumſtances is neceſſary.

What theſe circūſtances or parts are, is ſhewd in that old verſ. ‘Quis, quid,
vbi, quibus auxilijs, cur, quomodo, quando.’ And to apply them to our point,
howſoever it be granted, that their teaching may be without vitium rei, yet in
it there is vitium perfōae, loci, ordinis, relationis, &c as the. Tr [...].in
a­letter to D. Ames pub­liſhed in Browniſts ſchiſ. phraſeth it elſe wher.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=50) 1\. The
Perſon deſigned is not lawfully called: now a falſe Office and a true worſhip
(are  [...]) they are no way compatible. 2. As it reſpects the place, (that is
the Idoll-Churchſtate) ſo it is to worſhip God there, where he hath forbid­den
men to worſhip him. 3. For the inſtruments and meanes, in this men make
themſelues beholding to Antichriſt, for his order, conſtitution, manner and
way to ſerue God in, and by. Now fye for ſhame, that any ſhould be ſo baſe, as
to ſcrape ac­quentance with that Babylonian whore, who is the greateſt enimy
that the Lord hath vpon the earth. I [...] is a most certaine  [...]igne
(ſaith oneEſtque merae pro­ditionis certiſſimum indicium ſi quis aliquē ex
ſuis, vi­deat, conci­lia clā cum hoſte cap­tantem aut in eius au­rem in­ſu
[...]ure antē. of a very traitour, when a man ſhall ſee one of his owne, take
ſecret counſell with his enimy, & whiſper him in the eare.

Touching the other circumſtances: viz. why, how, when: theſe all are alſo here
wanting, as I could inſtance in ſundry particu­lars, if need were. But to
winde vp all, & bring all the former into ſome fewer heads. the goodneſſe or
badneſſe of divine worſhip, is to be conſidered either in actu ſignato and quo
ad ſpe­cium: or in actu exercito and quo ad individium. Divine wor­ſhip is
ſaid to be ſpeciated by its object, and individuated, by its circumſtances:
when divine worſhip is good or evill, in reſpect. of the object of it. we ſay
it is good or evill, quo ad ſpeciem. when in reſpect of the circumſtances, we
terme it good or evill quo ad invidium. Cartewr. kiſt. ch. l. 1. p. 253. Now I
will not deny, but this hearing worſhip quo ad ſpecium, as God is made the
object of it, ſo it is right: but quo ad invidium, as it hath circumſtances
and parts, ſo it is a falſe worſhip: and this is ſo cleare a truth as no man
will deny it vnleſſe the denier will deny all religion and reaſon, all ſence'
and ſcinence. It is not ſufficient (ſaith Rivetus Com­ment, in Hoſ, 4, 14, p,
152, vnto thē true wor' ſhippe of God, that a man erres not in the object
which he ought to worſhip, that is, if he propoſe to himſelfe to worſhip the
true God, but alſo that, that manner bee exactly kept, which God hath
praſcri­in his law: from the tenour or rule whereof whoſoever in the leaſt
departeth the ſame cannot be held lawfull.

He endes thus: Treat. And ſo farre forth as a man heares, that is bear­ken
[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=50) too, &
reciues them by receiving it, he ſo farre bearkens too & receives Chriſt.
[...]

Anſw. This is ſpoken gratis, and without any foundation, and therefore not
more eaſily avouched then rejected. But ſay we grant that So farre forth
Chriſt is hearkened too, &c. yet doth not this hinder but So farre forth as he
heares in an Antichriſti­tian aſſembly and a falſe officer, [...] and
performes a religious wor­ſhip in away and manner which Idolaters haue
diviſed, &c. I ſay let his (ſo farre) ſtand, yet in theſe reſpects and
conſidera­tion, He ſo farre forth hearkens too and receiues Antichrist.

If I ſhould put over the Treat, reaſoning in ſpiriturl things, to things
civill and worldly: the very expreſſion of them, would make them odious: For
ſuppoſe aman ſhould vſe the helpe of a known ſorcerer, to recouer ſome loſt
gould or ſilver; & being afterward reproved for it, would reply, Seeing they
were good things & from God, hee did well therefore to get them in the way &
manner that hee tooke. Or if a theeſe offering certaine ſtollen goods, ſhould
perſwade another to receive them, becauſe how­ſoever he hath no right to give
ſuch things away, yet ſeing they are good, and from God, hee may take them
ſafely: for it is all one, whether they are received in away of falſe-hood &
theift, or by the Ieaue and grant of the true owner,

If theſe things appeare vile and abſurd, no otherwiſe is his reaſoning here,
if it be with the eye of Iudgment lookd vpon: the Prieſts for whom he pleads,
in the Scriptures are ſaid to be robbers and theeues, yea Spirituall ſorcery
is charged vpon them. But all this with the Treat. is nothing; For ſo they
deliver good things, the ſame may be received from them in a worke of their
office. But if a man ſtood before an earthly Iudge, accuſed of vſing a
forcerers aſſiſtance to recover his loſt mony [...] or for receiving goods
from a knowne theiſe, it would not free him to ſay, the things are good which
I tooke. Neither will it ex­cuſe men when they ſhall appeare before the
Iudgment ſeat of Chriſt, to ſay it was the truth which they heard, though not
in [[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=51) the
way and order, which the word taught them.

Be not deceived God is not mocked:Gal. 6, 7. for whatſoever a man ſow­eth that
ſhall he alſo reape.

#### 1.2.7. SECT. 7.

NOw we come to the 5 Objection, the which is laid down for us, by the Treat.
thus: Yet ſuch as heare them, haue com­munion with their office of Ministery,
what in them lyes.

It is the manner of ſome to ſet up markes, and afterwardes to ſhew their art,
in ſhooting of them downe againe. One would thinke that the Treat. former
writings againſt the hearing of falſe Miniſters, were written by him, to be
(as it were) his But marke, that thereby he might ſhew his ſkill and witt in
ſtriking downe the ſame afterwards. Touching the objecti­on which he here
frames for vs, & vndertakes the confutation of; It is his owne, and vnder his
owne hand, even word for word publiſhed to the world, and in defence of the
ſame thing which he brings it here for vs: as the Reader may ſee in his
manumiſſi on to a manuduction: pag. 5.

But to let this paſſe, hoping it was rather a ſlip in his penne, then a
downfall in his judgment: Let us ſee now how he hits the marke, his anſwer to
it is thus.

That is, they haue no communion at all with it, if it ly not in them to haue
any, as it doth not. If I hold vp my hand as high as I can, I touch heaven
with my finger, what in me lies, do I therefore at all touch it: if ſuch
thinke to haue, or that they haue any ſuch commu­nion, it is their errour and
Ignorance, but makes not the thing to be the more then if they thought not ſo.

This is all his anſwer (a capite vſque ad pedes) from head to foot. Vnto the
which I anſwer: 1. To his peremptory affir­mation, (they haue no communion at
al) may apply the ſaying fathered on the old Philoſopher multa dicti [...]ſed
pauca probat. Ple ſpeakes much, but proues little: For our parts (as I haue
ſaid) [[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=51) we
cannot take his bare ſaying, de iure et de fide, to bee a rule of faith to us,
For our conſciences are not (like Sampſons ſhoulders) ſtrong enough to beare
it,

2\. He dallies & deceives by a generall & ambigious terme of Communion: If it
be intended in the order & way of Church-ſtate, it is true then here is no
ſuch communion, as haue members gathered into a body politick. But if by the
word we vnder­ſtand ſuch a communion, as makes the hearer really pertaker of
the ſinne of the Officer; in this ſence here is a communion of fellowſhipp.
For 1. Hereby is allowance and approbation given vnto a work of darknes; I ſay
his very preſence there to heare, is an open countenancing of an vnlawfull
officer in an vnrght­teous courſe, tanquam legimae et ſacrae actionis
approbatio. As Davenat. deter [...] Quaeſt. 7. p 40. Slater Explic. Anal: in 1
Cor. C. 2 p. 92. and others note in the like caſe.

2\. It is apparent to a right diſcerning eye, that the miniſ­ters of
Antichriſt, in all acts of their miniſtery, do vſe ſuch waies and inventions
in worſhipping of God, as are not com­manded of God in his word, but be
deviſes of men. Now who­ſoever joynes with thē in the practice of ſuch
worſhip, becomes a pertaker of their ſinne and trangreſſion. Of this writes
Ioan. David. Veridi­cus Chriſ­tian. c, 28, p, 7. And the reaſon is, becauſe he
commits will-worſhip: for what is well-worſhip? but to worſhip God not after
his ap­pointment, but our owne. And hence was Ahaz an Jdolater, eo ipſo, for
that as P. Martyr Com­ment: in 2 Reg,  [...], 17 notes, he tooke the patterne
of an Alter from Idolaters to ſerue the true God, with it & by it.

3\. When Iſraell did eat with the Moabites, they did com­municate Ainſw;
Annot, on Numb, 25, 2, with them: but how was it? it was in that the meat
there given and taken, was in a publick way of a falſe in­ſtitution. This
holds proportionably true here: for we cannot ſeparate the falſe ſtate of the
office, from the adminiſtrations done by vertue of it, that is to make the
latter ſo ours, as not to be polluted in one reſpect or other with the foulnes
of the former. Zanchie Quicū  (que) facris ali cuius comunicat, is particeps
quo­  (que); fic ejus, ad cujus c  [...]emmuni onemha bendam et conferuan­dam
ſacra illa ſunt ordinata. de vitio, ext. cult [...]. Opp. l. 1. Theſ 11.
cleares this very well. Whoſoever communicateh in the holy things of another,
he is made partaker with him, for whoſe communion the holy things ordained,
are kept & obſerued.

3\. For his compariſon, it is ſoe farre fetch, as that it comes [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=52) not home to the
matter, but is an evill and idle wandring from it. When Saul fought to excuſe
himſelfe, he was demaunded of Samuell, 1 Sam. 15. quid ergo ſin vult vox
pecuduin aſtarum, what meaneth then the bleating of the ſheepe in my eares: we
may aſke the like of thoſe men, who ſay it is no ſinne to heare in falſe
Churches. what meanes your vncouering the head and bow­ing the knee before
idol? your keeping companie with Ido­laters in their publick worſhip? your
obſerving the time and comming to the place of their worſhip? your ſerving of
God in ſuch a way? is bring it to the text of the word, compare it with the
example of the Prophets, Chriſt & his Apoſtles, bring it to the practice of
the primitive Churches: it is quite differ­ing from it.

wee are ſure in a true Church, the bending of the kneePſalme 95. 6., & other
ſignes of reverence, is to giue honour and countinance to that ſtate. Now the
reaſon of contraries is a like, and there­fore as Calvin Comment. in 1 Corin.
15. ſaith, the ſame being done in a falſe Church, is no leſſe allowance and
approbation of it: J ſay againe every reverend ſubmiſſive geſture,Deut. 5 9
hoſ. 13. 12 Eze 18 6. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 18. as bowing downe, kneeling,
proſtrating, lifting vp of the eyes, and all other like lowly and louely
behaviour do appertain and lead to Idolatry.

Againe if the Ordinances of God, do aſſociate and ioyne the the faithfull with
God, then the obſervation of ſuperſtitious in­ſtitutions muſt needs linck men
to the ſociety of Idols, and ſo reaſoneth the ſaid Calvin Ibid. 2. 17. And for
any to ſay, they do not countinance ſuch Churches and Miniſteries, or they
will not; herein their acts giue their tongue the lie, for we are not to Iudge
of a worke,Non exarcana in­tentione o­perantis, ſed ex ma­nifeſta cō ­ditione
o­peris. Davan. Quaeſt. Determ. pag 40. by the ſecret intention of the doer,
but by the outward condition of the worke it ſelfe. For what Augustine Eo
dam­nabilius a­git, quia quod men­daciter a­git, ſic agit tamen, vt eum
populus vera­citer agere exiſtimet. De Civit. 16, C. 10. blames Senica the
Philoſopher, may be ſaid and truely applyed to theſe men, in this he did the
more wickedly becauſe what he did, he did lyingly, for he did it ſo, as that
the people though he did it truely. If the Corinthians ſinned, when they ſate
downe at the Idols table, becauſe they kept them company whoſe end was
ſuperſtitious, then it follows queſtio [...], that where the pub­lick end of a
people is to committ will, worſhip, whoſoever [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=52) hath any
fellowſhip with them, is partaker of the ſame vngod­lines. Now no man J dare
ſay, will affirme, that the publick end and intention of the people, is not to
allow, honour, and reverence, their falſe Church, miniſtery, Government &c,
there­fore howſoever ſome particulars, intend not ſo, yet ioyning with ſuch,
as ſo profeſſe and practice, they are guiltieSociety in ſinne bringeth
felloſhip in wrath. Forbes Com. in Rev. 18. pa 189. of the ſame ſinne, though
I will not ſay in meaſure & degree a like.

4\. Howſoever the compariſō here brought, proues nothing: yet ſo much there
is in it, as it overthrowes the cauſe he ſtands for. For be it granted, that a
man holding vp his hand as high as he can, doth not touch heaven materially,
yet vnderſtanding it in another way or ſence, he may be ſaid, and that truely
to do it.I deſire our oppo­ſites to ſpeake here ſin­cerely as of God, in the
ſight of God, whether a man bee leſſe bound to make vſe of any inſtitutiō of
Anti­chriſt, in divine worſhip: then bound, to joyn with a Harlot in any
practice of her vncleannes. As for example: ſuppoſe a man with a luſtful
deſire, put forth his hand after a woman who is locked vp, & ſo out of his
reach, doth he not touch her? yes ſaith Chriſt, and hath committed adultery
with her Mat. 5 28. Againe ſay he covet his neigh­bours monie, and lift vp his
hand as high as he can after it: doth he not touch it, though the ſame be out
of his reach? yes ſaith God, for he breakes the tenth commandementExod. 20. 7.
In ſhort, imagine, a mā treacherouſly minded, ſtreach forth his hand after
the Prince, doth the not touch him, albeit the other be out of his reach?
indeed Gods law and mans law too, ſo concludeth. Hence then I conclude thus;

Whoſoever lusteth after aspirituall harlot, committeth with her spirituall
adultery. But ſuch as heare the word in falſe Churches do ſo: Ergo, &c.

The later part of the argument, which is onely doubtfull, is proved by opening
and applying the ſimilitude thus. As they commit carnall whoredome, who haue
fellowſhip with harlots in any degree; kinde, or Practice of their whoredomes:
ſo in this cauſe, it muſt needs be ſpirituall adultery, to heare the word in
the way and manner we deſpute of: becauſe it is to haue a fellowſhip or
ſociety with the great whoorantichrist: I ſay it is to go all along with him
in ſome acts, orders, and deuices of his ſpi­rituall [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=53) whoredomes. And
what I here lay down, is laid downe by the beſt learned in all ages, viz. that
we muſt go out from idolaters, as not to be behoulding to them, for any of
their rites, or ders, inſtitutions: neither ſerve the Lord in, or by any
helpes, meanes, furtherances of their ſinfull devices, for to do otherwiſe, is
to commit ſpirituall adultery with them: ſo write Aguſtine Confeſ, lib 6, c.
2., Haeimo Com­ment. 1. Corin, c. 10. v, 17., Calvin Serm. on Levit. 19 27, p.
207., Bucer In cenſu [...]a c 9, fol. 4. 71,, Martyr Com­ment. on Iudg c. 2 v
3., Polanus Com­ment in Eze c 12 p 229, Pareus Com­ment. in Hoſ c. 2. 16, 17.,
Zanchus Com­ment, in Hoſ c. 16, 17., Ainſworth Arrow againſt I­dolat. c 2, p
8, Iacob Expo­fit; on cōm 2., Marburie Catech. on cōm 2, Bilſon Anſw. to the
A­pol. of the ſemin. p, 22. Ieſuitiſme par, 2, p, 515., D. Humfrey (a) and
others.,

5\. If a mans cauſe ſhould be judged, onely as his adverſary laies it down, it
would bee a great prejudice and loſſe to him. might we haue liberty to ſpeake
in our owne cauſe, we would bring in more exceptions againſt their delectable
thing Iſa. 44, 9, then the state of the officer, albeit the Treat, ſpeakes but
little elſe for vs.

For 1. In this kinde of hearing, men vndertake to doe an impoſſible thing that
is to ſerve two Maſters, viz Chriſt and An­tichriſt, and each oppoſite to
other, and requiring diverſe and contrary ſervice at on and the ſame timeſe a
booke intituled a light for the ig­norant or the 3. eſtates. ffor the firſt
com­mands that the doctrines of the Goſpell bee heard in a true Church, and
Taught by a lawfull miniſter, and forbids the con­trary, the later prohibiteth
what the former requireth, and re­quires that the word he heard, in a falſe
Church, and taught by an vnlawfull miniſter. Now whether it be right in the
ſight of God to obey Chriſt rather then Antichriſt judge ye. Acts 4, 19

2\. This is not only to ſimbolize with Idolaters, and to give ſpeciall honour
to Antichriſt, as we haue before proued: but alſo a reviving of an errour held
by certaine old Hereticks, as the Nicolaitans, Irenaen: l; 1; c. 27, Euſeb: l:
3, c, 29. Biſilides Cent, c, 5, p, 77., Helcheſaits Cent, 3, c, 4, p, 98.
Priſcillaniſts Cent, 4, c, 5, p, 403., &c. con­demned inſcripture, & by the
fathers which lived in them times. Their errour was, that Chriſtians in
worſhiping of God, might outwardly conform thēſelvs vnto the practice of ſuch
waies & means as Idolaters had diviſed, yet ſo, as they did inwardly &
ſecretly diſlike of the intentió & ends, which the others had in the
obſervatiō & uſe of them. Our oppoſites are here (manium [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=53) inania
conſilium) in judgment alike corrupt with thē. For though they daube it over
with more artificiall cunning, to make their, deluſion the ſtronger, yet for
their principles & maine grounds (aſpis a vipera) they are all one and alike,
as I ſhall make it good whenſoever any of them gives me occaſion to reply.

3\. It is ſuch an act of religion as the paltre petigree of it, is only
grounded vpon the witt and will of man, voyd of all ſcripture, yea indeed all
ſhew therof, & therfor by learned rightly ter­med a mocking of God Luther in
Amos c, 7 p. 134, groſse ſuperstition Lavarat in loſ. 22., great rebellion P.
Mart in 1 Sam. 15., & wichcraft.

4.ibid 2128. It is ſo vile a thing as our bleſſed Martyrs, would rather giue
their bodies to the fier then doe it. witneſſe, Thomas Reed Acts & Monum, pag;
2197, & his wife and daughter, Rafe Allerton bid 2 [...]08:, Iohn Fetty ibid
2256., Iohn Moyes ibid 2217:, John Hallingdale ibid 2222., Joan Waſt ibid
2134., Thomas Whut  [...]ll ibid 2029:, I fa­bell Foster ibid 2030. Iohn
Cavill ibid 2074., Thomas Spicer ibid 2092. Thomas Ha [...]land ibid 2099.,
Iohn Rough ibid 2226., Roger Barnard ibid 2098:, Adam Foſter ibid 2099.,
Robert Lawſon e, John Careleſſe ibid 2114., Alice Benden ibid 2167., Thomas
Harding ibid 1117;, William Tims ibid 2078., mother Sem [...]n & her Soaneibid
2234:, Angels wifeibid 2299., & many more. If any ſhould object but theſe went
not to the Church becauſe of the Maſſe: I anſwer; 1. they refuſed to goe
thither at all. 2. many of them ſhewed their diſlike againſt this Hearinge in
particular, and ſuffered for it greevious per­ſecution, as the Reader may ſee
in the places quoted.

5\. By this meanes men breake their vow which they haue vowed vnto God: Among
other vows vnder the Law, the Ievvs had one vvhich they named Cherem * that is
of the curſe, a vvord derived of Charam, to waſt, deſtroy, kill &c. and it
implied that ſuch a thing, vvas ſeperated and quite ſet of, and ſo a great
ſin, either to-touch it, or put it to any vſe aftervvards, Such a Ʋow doe all
the faythfull make, vvhen leaving Babilon, they plant their feete in the
pleaſant vvaies of Sion. Their promiſe then is, not to touch the vncleane
thing any more, but vtterly to forſake all the orders, cuſtomes, inſtitutions
vvaies and vvorſhip of anti­chriſtiſme, and to practice intirely and
onely,ibid 2099., both for matter & See P. Mart, Comment, in Iudg, c, 1; v;
17. 18. m 1 Cor. 10 14, Eſa: 2. 18. 20. [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=54) manner
whatſoever the Lord their God commandeth: Ther­fore in going back to make vſe
againe, of any of her conſtituti­ons, and diviſed meanes, whereby to worſhip
God: in this men certainly foreſweare themſelves, and ſoe are guilty of
fearefull perjury before the Lord.

6 It is a worſhip before Idols, and marke it, not accidentallie but purpoſely
preſent before them: and ſuch Idols, as haue a re­ligious state in the
worſhip: And to do this, is againſt the cleare tax of Scripture.Exo 20 5. 1.
Cor. 10. 20. Pſa. 106. 37.

And as Pareuscōment. in Hoſ [...]. 8 p 529. ſaith, is a post a ſie from God,
great Idolatry, very ſcandalous in it ſelfe, ahorible abomination in the Lords
ſight, and the end of it, cauſeth death and wrath eternally. Rivetus,còment.
in Hoſ. c. 4, p. 151. writing of the ſame thing, ads thus: Howſoever ſuch
worſhippers haue their minds voyd of ſuperſtition and intend to ſerue onely
the true God, yet in truth (ſaith he) this they do not, but worſhip and ſerve
the Deuill. AinſworthAnnot. in Exod. 20. 5. & Cartwright,Hiſto. Chriſt. lib.
1. pa. 140. ſay the ſame.

7\. In this men caſt themſelves vpon temptations,P. Mart loc. com. claſ. 2, c.
4 p. 209. Aret, in Mat. 4, 7, p. 155 and pro­voke the Lord ſo to wrath, as
juſtly he may give them up to ſa­tan & Antichriſt, for to blinde them and
harden their hearts.

8\. A tender conſcience by it wilbe wounded, & afterwards tanckle inwardly as
a thorne in the heele: in that it leads men to equivocation, diſſimulation,
reſervation, and in a kinde to a deniall of Chriſt, & to condemn themſelvs in
the things which they approve of. Davids heart ſmote him for a little.See
beefore in M. Greſ molds cauſe.

9\. It gives juſt cauſe of offenceMelan. in Evang feſt, mich▪ p. 552. vnto the
brethren weak & ſtrong, and lies as a ſtumbling block in their way to hinder
the due practice of Gods ordinances.

10\. By it Idolaters are cauſed to ſhut their eyes and harden Cornel. a lapide
in Epiſt. Ich. Secun p. 505. their hearts againſt the truth: and ſoe
conſequently held the longer and ſtronger in the ſnare of the Devill.

11\. Jt is for nature and kind the ſinne of the high places: For wherein did
the Iſralites offend that way. But becauſe (as Rive­tus, quod fi bi adoratio
nis loca arbitrio delegerint in Hoſ. 4. p. 146. ſaith) of their owne accord,
they made choyſe of them places for divine worſhip. Iunius Annot. levit, 17,
7. ſaith ſoe too: when they ſacrificed in [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=54) ALIO LOCO in any
other place then the Lord had preſcri­bed, it was offered to D [...]vils. I
will not here diſpute of the mate­riall place, I meane their temples of woode
and ſtone, whether Chriſtians in them may lawfully performe publicke worſhip:
But this I do affirme, and will ſtand to it, that it is every way as evill to
bring our spirituall offerings unto an Idoll [...]ſtate, and there in it, by
it, or with it, to preſent the ſame vnto God, as it was vn­lawfull for the
Iewes vnder the law, to offer in the places bee­fore named: ſome ſay,Lyran.
comment. in Amo. 5 27. the former is much worſe, becauſe the ſame was never
warrantable, whereas the other ſomtime was, as we haue elſe where noted. pag.
18\. 19.

12\. To conclude this practice takes away the croſſe of Chriſt & perſecution
for righteouſneſſe. It decks an adulterer with the ſpoile of the ſpouſe of
Chriſt. It maks ſchiſme in the Church in that men breake the order, and bounds
which God hath ſet in it.Melan, in Evan dom. 4. Advent. p 94. Maks way for
greater evils as apoſtacie from God, ſliding back to great vngodlines,Pare. in
Hoſ. 8. p. 592. and to bee corrupted in the ſubſtance of religion and purity
of Doctrine. And what ſhall I ſay more. Jt gratifies the Ieſuits in
commendingMaffeus In vita Ignat Laio­la. blind obedience. and argues great
preſumptiō & pride of heart, as if man were wiſer then God, & could deviſe
either ſome better meanes, or ſome other way for his edefication, then the
Lord hath preſcribedD. Wil­let Com­ment. in 1 Sam. 15. 23.

I do not know vvhat engine of vvit and art ſome men haue, to elude theſe
reaſons, and to batter them ſo dovvne, as to make a ſafe paſſage through for a
good conſcience; For my part I con­feſſe ſuch do goe bejoynd my line and
meaſure of faith, I dare not bevviſe aboue that vvhich is vvriten, it is
enough for mee to knovv and beleeve, that in this point vvee haue the vvord of
God vvith vs and for vs.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=55)

#### 1.2.8. SECT. 8.

OVr ſix Objection,Object. 6. as hee layes it downe for us is thus. If there be
no communion at all between the Teacher and taught, what profit then commeth
by ſuch hearing.

To this his anſwere is. Treat. The Church Officer feedes the ſtocke of Chriſt
over which he is ſet, as the object of his miniſtery. Such as come in, (beeing
not in Church vnion therewith) heares him ſo do­ing as a ſtander by heares mee
talke or dispute with another, &c, Here is communion onely in the effects of
the truths taught. It were vſurpation in any to pertake in a Church
previleidge (which the office of miniſtery is) that were not in Church state
firſt, & ſo if hearing imported Church Communion none but in Church members
might lawfully heare.

The Treat. anſwers, are much like to one that turnes him­ſelfe many times
about, but moves not out of the place. All that he ſaith is (Homoeologia) one
thing often ſaid over and o­ver. That is a change of the ſtate of the
queſtion, which is not a­bout Church-communion, but whether a beleever, when
hee heares a falſe miniſter in a worke of his office, doe ſuch an action as
can be proved lawfull by the word of God. Now to this (which is the maineSacra
ſcriptura tota vera, neceſſaria ſufficiens viatori conſequen dum finē ſuum:
nec eſt dubia via ſalu­tis. Ha­rum etiam explicatio & quantū adcreden da, &
quā tum ad ſperanda, et quan­tum ad o­peranda ex plica­tur, ex di­verſis
ſcripturae locis. Sco­tus in 1. ſent. quaeſt. thing) we finde nothing in the
Treatiſe, but much paper blotted  [...] about queſtions and ſtrifes of words,
which are indeed vaine and vnprofitable, & and whereof commeth envie, strife,
evill ſurmiſings, rather then edefying which is in faith ſo to doe.

Jf J ſhould ſay nothing to this, ſome would ſay there were ſome thing in it.
Therefore I anſwere. 1. It is a falſe kind of re­ſoning (which Logicians
condemne vnder the tearme, non cau­ſae vt cauſae) when a thing is ſpoken
either with limitation or without, to conclude more thē the proemiſſes: this
fault the Trea. commits here; For he would perſwade vs, that becauſe the
Church-officer & his flocke are relatives, therefore no man, not in Church
[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=55) vnion
hath relation to his office.M. Conſt. Cnrin. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1. R. Goclen. in
cōtr [...]v. log. p. 1, c. 18, Seal. c 93, de cauſ. Lat. But we are not
altogether ſuch novices, but know a little how to diſtinguiſh Sopheſtrie from
Philoſophie.

Touching Relation, the ſame may be conſidered, 1. in ordi­natione, 2\. in
applicatione. For the firſt, which is a Relation by order, or coniunctione,
that is, relatio per ſe, as LogiciansFon­ſec. 5. Me­taphy. c. 18 Quoeſt. 2,
Sect. 3. Timpl. Metap. l. 4. Phraſe it; Here now I grant in this kind of
Relation no man hath relation to the office of the Teacher, that is not in
Church-communion therewith. But for the ſecond, which is, relatio imperfecta,
or per accidens; Here I affirme that in this kind: The Hearer, howbeit not in
Church-estate, yet hath relation, to the Office of the Teacher, and ſo farr
forth is the object of his Mi­nisterie.

Ariſtotle Meta. l. 5, c. 5. ſpeaking of ſundry wayes of Relations unto perſons
and things, ſets downe theſe particulars: ‘ [...].’ So then, to goe where
unlawfull Miniſters teach, obſerve the time, hearken to their Doctrine, ſhew
the like outward ſub­miſſive geſtures and reverence that others doe, performe
di­vine worſhip there with them, and among them: This is to have relation to
the idol-state, both of Church and Miniſterie, if the Philoſopher ſpeake
truelie.

Againe, conſider a relation in the parts thereof. 1. Here is ſub­jectum, viz.
Hearing. 2. Fundamentum, i. e. a falſe-ſtate. 3\. Terminus, viz. ſuperſtition
(but our Oppoſites name it edifica­tion) 4\. Relatum, to weet, the speaker. 5.
Correlatum, viz. the Hearer.

And howſoever, it may be ſaid, that in reſpect of Church-union the Relation,
here is properlie in the two later, that is, between the Church-officer and
his Flock; notwithſtanding this cannot be denyed: But for the other kind and
way of Hea­ring, albeit it be not the Relation, yet it is in Relation, and
belongs reallie to the praedicament or matter of the Re­lation.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=56) I am
ſorry, that J am conſtrained to ſpeake ſo often of Phi­loſophie, but indeed I
can doe no leſſe, conſidering, that leaving the Word of God, he ſeeks to lead
men a ſtray, by abſtruſe and ambiguous diſtinctions, ſtrange and wrapping
words: Now, howſoever this may puzzel the underſtanding of ſome people, as not
able to apprehend the ſtrong deluſion, yet the truth is, let them be brought
to the rules and grounds of true Phi­loſophie, Vera Philoſo­phia cum S.
Theo­logia nuſ­quam pug­nat: & quod in Theologia verum eſt, etiam in
Philoſo­phia; & contra. Keckerm. diſput. Philoſ. p. 5 they are as unable to be
defended by art and rea­ſon this way, as by the Seriptures. Notwithſtanding I
doe deſire the perſon, whoſoever he ſhalbe that undertakes the cauſe here
againſt me, to prove what he ſaith by divine autho­ritie; For I would
willingly deale with him by that booke alone, as by the book of all truth;
Nay, I require Scripture, for without it, I ſhall beleeve nothing, though he
bring whole Cartloads of ſuch carnall caveling deviſes. But to pro­ceed.

2\. To apply the hearing in queſtion, to a ſtander by, that heares a man to
ſpeake occaſionallie, and in a private way: Here a­gaine, as in al the reſt,
he takes his ſcope without orbe or order; For where things are done, ex mero
alterius obſequio, by a power & institution, there can be no participation in
the admini­ſtrations thereof,M. Conſt. Cnirim. Metaph. l. 2. c. 1 but it is a
ſubmiſſion to the power, whether it be true or falſe. By ſuch a gloze, the
Corinthians might finelie have put of Pauls reproofe: Seeing we are not in
union with them, we can at their ſacrifice only as ſtanders by, and in a
pri­vate way: and ſo have no relation to the idol. But ſuch a ſhift would not
ſerve their turne; For whatſoever they did, it was to be determined, and
reputed, according to the publick acts, and not as themſelves vainelie
fantiſed: Socom­ment: in 1 Sam. c. 27 v. 4 Martyr, Chy­traeus, De Eu­chariſt.
p. 216 and others.

The time was, when the Treat. thought that there was uſePre­face before
religious Commun. of a distinction of Religious actions, into perſonall and
Church-actions; & how he underſtood it, he ſhewes afterwards: Treat. of
private Communion, pag. 10 in private I communicate onlie with the preſons and
perſonall [[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=56)
graces of holy men; in publique I communicate with their Church-ſtate and
order, as alſo with the publick Miniſtery, and in, and with it with the
Prelacy, whence it is.

The truth here, is never the worſe nor leſſe, howſoever he left it, for he
that joynes in the exerciſe and practice of publick actions, he muſt
neceſſarilie joyne himſelfe tō the State, Order, Ministerie, &c. in which,
and by which the ſame are per­formed.

3\. In this anſwer he plainly confutes himſelfe: For marke all Readers that
have ſence: In a true Church he grants, there is Communion between the Teacher
and taught, and the reaſon which he gives for it, is, becauſe the Flock is the
object of his Ministerie.

Now, if that in this way, make a Lawfull Communion; then by neceſſarie
conſequence, there can be no hearing in the other way, but muſt be an
unlawfull Communion; My reaſon is, be­cauſe the Office of a Preiſt, is not an
inſtitution of any one in­dependent bodie, but of univerſall Hyerarchicall
ſtate, and ex­tendeth it ſelfe too, and over all manner of perſons whatſoever,
I ſay ſo many, as doe congregate and bend an eare thereto.

If any ſhould object and ſay, but many of them, are Pariſh-Prieſts, and ſo
reſident in one place. I anſwer, this reſpects not the state of their Office
at all, but onlie imports a licence that ſome have from their Prelate, to doe
certaine ſervices ſpe­ciallie in this or that Aſſembly; not that their Office
of Preist­hood is here by anie way limited or circumſcribed, but is, (as we
ſaid before) univerſall and every where over Sea and Land: Hence then, everie
hearer muſt needs be the object of ſuch a Miniſterie, and ſo communicateth
therewith, if there be any weight of reaſon in the Treat. words. And here we
have verefied the old ſaying.

Ipſe ſibi nocet is alium qui laedere quaerit.

4\. Where he ſaith, here is communion only in the effects of the truths
taught. Here is another invention of his owne head, and makes true the
ſaying,Vno abſurdo dato, mille ſequuntur grant one abſurditie, and a thou­ſand
[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=57) will
follow. That the effects ſhould be dividuated from the working-cauſe, is
againſt the rules of reaſon,Cle­ment. Templ. Metaphy. l. 3, p. 251, 260. for
com­mon principles ſhew, that there is an eſſentiall connextion be­tween them,
and the former is to be conſidered for qualitie & kind, as the later is. Theſe
Canons are well known, as is the cauſe, ſo that which is cauſed of the doing
of the thing. Idem qua idem, ſemper fa­cit idem, Ariſt. l. 2. de Gen. &
corrupt. c. 10, A­gaine, Rodolph Goclen. c. 9 p. 90 as is the ſame, ſo alwayes
followes the ſame effect.

We ſpeake not here, of what may fall out by accident,Ariſt. 2 Topic. c. 9, 5,
31, but of things conſidered in themſelves.qualis cauſa tale cauſatum, And to
take it thus, and ſay, they effects are right and Lawfull, when the
inſtruments, and working-cauſes are wrong and unlawfull; Or to ſay, I may
communicate in the effects, and yet not with the inſtruments, or working-
cauſe. It is (caput vacuum cerebro) as vaine a thing as ever man held.

If a Traitor or Rebel ſhould ſet up one to be a Iudge, an­other a Major, &c.
and give them commiſſion to adminiſter, juſtice publicklie; Were it Lawfull
for any of the Kings ſub­jects to communicate in the effect of their
adminiſtrations, becauſe the ſame in it ſelfe was juſt? I ſay no: For it were
treaſon ſo to doe. And is it a leſſer offence, to offend God in a matter of
the like nature?

If a man may communicate in the effects of ſuch actions (ſay good in
themſelves) whoſe inſtruments and working-cauſes are unlawfull: I ſay, let
this be granted, there are few Idolaters, Adulterers, Theeves, Witches, but
will eaſilie excuſe themſelves. But as it is a Maxime in the civill Law,Fr.
Connanus Comment. juris civil. l. 5, c. 9; and grounded on the Law of
God.Mart. Azpilcue­ta Enchy­rio, c: 17, p. 330, cals it a breach of the 7.
[...] Commād. That to have any thing rightlie: juſt and lawfull inſtruments
muſt be uſed; So it is in this cauſe here; For howſoever God may uſe what
inſtru­ments he will: I ſay, bring his purpoſe to paſſe by what ſecon­dary
meanes he pleaſeth, yet hath he bound vs ſtraightlie, not to make uſe of any
unlawfull inſtruments or working-meanes, (whether it be Church, Ministerie,
Worſhip, or any Rite or Or­der) in hope thereby to have ſome good effects.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=57) And here
I deſire our Oppoſites to tell me, ſeeing as the Treat. Treat. of pub. commun.
p. 29. confeſſeth, that the Chancelour in the Conſiſtorie, and the Preist in
the Pulpit or Deſk, doth adminiſter by one and the ſame power: Namelie, that
of the Prelate; which, from, and by him, both the one, and other doth receive.
Why a man may not as well communicate in the effects of the adminiſtrations,
done by the Chancelour in his Conſiſtorie, ſo they are truths: As in the
effects of the truths taught by a Prieſt in his Pulpit or Deſk?

5\. Though hearing ſimplie imports not Church [...]communion: yet all hearing
in a Church-way, imports a juſtification and al­lowance of the ſtate, both of
the Church and Miniſterie, in which, and by which a man is taught. And this we
have alrea­die ſo proved, that unleſſe men reſolve not to yeeld to the truth,
which is moſt plaine, but to kick againſt the prick, and with Cavils,
Glozings, and facing out of things (like ſo many fovle feer to trouble the
cleane water) they muſt needs ſee, and ſay, that the Treat. in this point held
an errour.

#### 1.2.9. SECT. 9.

THe two next Objections, and his anſwers to them, are not worth the writing
downe. If any other, doe other­wiſe thinke, I wiſh much good it may doe him,
that can make any good of it. But I proceed to the 9. Ob­jection, which he
frames in this manner.

He that heares,Object. 9. appeares to have communion with the Church and
Miniſterie; and all appearance of evill is to be avoyded, 1. Theſ. 5. 22.

To this, Treat. thus he anſwereth: The Scripture is not to be under­stood of
all that appeares evill to others out of an erronious and deceived judgement,
&c. but it is meant either of the Doctrine in Proph [...]ſie, &c. or of that
which appeares evill to a right diſcerning eye. By this imagined expoſition I
might not hyre a houſe in a Pariſh, where I were not knowne: ſeeing thereby I
appeare a Pa­riſh member.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=58) Anſw.
1\. I know not in truth, what better to liken this anſwer, then to that
Nightingale, of whom a Lacedemonian Plutarch. in Apo­thed. lacon (when he had
plucked of her ſethers, and ſaw only a little Karkeſſe left) ſaid: Thou art a
voyce, and nothing elſe. The truth is, the utmoſt that he hath here ſaid, is a
meere colour of ſome thing, while nothing is to be found in it. For, what was
in the Objection, remaines ſtill virtualiter, for ought he hath ſaid to it, or
againſt it.

2\. If a man were to make a ſword for his enemie, he would ſet as little edge
upon it as could bee, for to ſave himſelfe. The Treat. in framing this, and
other Objections for us, is ſure to make them blunt enought, that ſo they may
the leſſe hurt him, and pro­fitt us.

But ſeeing we have the weapon now in our owne hands, wee will doe our beſt to
ſharpen it. Our argument therefore here, ſhalbe thus laid downe.

Whatſoever is an appearance of evill, to a right diſcerning eye, the ſame
ought to be avoyded.

But to heare unlawfull Miniſters in Antichriſtian Aſſem­blies, is an
appearance of evill, to a right diſcerning eye.

Therefore it is a ſinne to doe it.

The Propoſition is proved from 1. Theſſal. 5\. 22. and here granted by the
Treat. The Aſſumption is as certaine by theſe reaſons following.

For 1. This going to the place where they goe, and hearing as they doe, is an
occaſion whereby a man comes into a ſuſpition of idolatrie, and that he is of
the ſame mind with the reſt, whatſoever otherwiſe he pretendeth; And thus have
our Martyrs teſtified, as Smith Acts & Mo­nu. 1876., Bradford ibid. 1829., and
others. And that this is an appea­rance of evill, both Papiſts,Eckius Tom. 3.
in feſt. 5. Mich. p. 706. and Proteſtants (d), doe acknow­ledge it. Peters
adjoyning himſelfe to the Iewes. Gal. 2\. was oſten­tatio falſae opinion; is;
as Pareus Exer­cit. Theol. ib. 2, p. 111. ſaith, a ſhewing of the ſame er­rour
that they did, though his private meaning was other wiſe: So here.B. Iewell en
1. Theſ. 5. 22. p. 219 Cent. 2, l 2, c. 4.

2\. It is an appearance of evill, when men doe that, which cau­ſeth others to
feare they are unſound. But ſuch a feare is here juſtly cauſed; For many holy
men have counted theſe Table-Goſ­pellers Act. Monum. p. 1876, & 1829. and ſaid
they did it, to avoyd perſecution; And reputed this action much like the
Counſell in the prophane Orator. Servire temporibus apientis ſemperest
habitum. Tul. in Ant. It [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=58) is alwayes
thought great wiſedome to apply ones ſelf unto the times. The reaſon wherefore
Iohaſhaphat is blamed for his affinitie 2 Chro. 18. 1. with Ahab, was quia
ſcandalum dedit ſubjectis quaſs foris non improbaret idolatriam, quam domi
abrogaverit? This is their cauſe,Pareus Exer. Theol. l. 2 p. 101. who goe to
falſe Churches: It makes the Godlie to thinke, that their performances among
them, are not perfect; But that they have ſome ſineſter ends, both in comming
to them, and going back againe to the other.

3\. When idolaters ſee us preſent at their worſhip; they muſt needs hereby be
hardened and hartened in ſuperſtition; And this is another breach of that
precept in 1. Theſ. 5\. 22. It is obſerved of ſomeP. Mart. Loc: Com­mun. Claſ.
3, c. 2, p. 241. that Namaan might not doe any civill reverence in the Houſe
of Rimnon, leaſt through any appea­rance or ſhew of idolatrie, ſome might be
ſtrengthned by it, in falſe worſhipp.

Auguſtine Tom. 10 Hom. 6. writes very well to this purpoſe: Doe ye aſke me
(ſaith hee) how the Gentles may be won? How they may be called to ſalvation?
FORSAKE THEIR MEETINGS, let goe their toyes, and then if they agree not to our
truth, let them be aſhamed of their fewnes. This Counſell wee ſhall doe well
to follow; For there is not a readier way to bring people off, from their
idolatrie, then to let them alone Hoſ. 4 17. See Iunius on the place. as Gods
bids us; Keep away from all their humaine formes and faſhions of Religion, and
eſpeciallie ſuch as are round about us, and live amongſt us, as Cartwright
Reply 1. to Whitg: p. 131. excellently ſhewes.

4\. It hath a ſhew of evill, in that it is a matter of active ſcan­dall, and
giveth occaſion to our brother, to fall into that evill. whereof it hath
aſhew; to wit, that there is no juſt cauſe to ſe­parate from falſe Churches,
but that people may remaine members thereof: And howſoever, there be not here
an inten­tion in the doer, to draw another into ſinne, yet of itſelfeQuan­do
ipſum factum eſt tale, quod de ſui ratione habear, quod ſit inductivum ad
peccandum puta cum aliquis publice facit peccatum, vell quod habet
ſimilitudi­nem peccati. Aquin. 2. quest. 43. Art. 1. a. 4. this [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=59) is an
inducement to it; And gives another occaſion to fall. And ſo much in effect
writes Zanchy Explic. in 1 Theſ. 5. 22. p. 419, Tom 6., on the place.

5\. This is not without appearance of evill and ſcandall, becauſe hereby, men
ſeeke to uphold ſuch wayes and inventions in divine worſhip, as the Lord of
old hath ordained to deſtructionler 51. 26 2 The. 2 8. Rev. 18., Mer­decah
would not give countenance, nor reverence to one of that NationBrent. Comment.
in Heſt. c. 3, v 2., whoſe name God had appointed to be blotted out un­der
Heaven.

Wherfore did the Lord give ſo ſtraight a charge unto Iſra­el, to breake downe
AltarsDeu. 7, 5., groues high-places, &c. Ʋt ex eo intelligamus, becauſe,
ſaith JuniusAnal. in Deu. 12 p. 71. by this we ſhould under­ſtand, that they
were not to retaine any thing that concerneth either the ſubſtance or ſhew of
Idolatrie. CalvineCom­ment. in Eſa 27, 9. ſpeakes the very ſame: (So
deteſtable is idolatrie before God) Vt eius memoriam vult penitus deleri, ne
poſthàc ullum eius veſtigium appareat.) That he will have the very memorie of
it utterly to bee aboliſhed, leaſt any footstept thereof ſhould appeare
afterward.

Iacob aboliſhed out of his Houſe not only the idols, but the ear-ings, Gen.
35. 4. becauſe they were ſuperstitionis inſignia: Monuments of ſuperſtition;
As CalvinCom­ment. in Gen. 35 4., Monilia Idolis conſe­crata: Iewels
conſecrated to idols; As Pareusibid.: Res idolatriae per­tinentes: Things
appertaining to idolatrie, as Iuniusibid..

To be ſhort, would not God have the Iewes under the law, to countenance any
humaine deviſe, whether Miniſterie Numb. 8 22. 24. Numb. 4. 24, 31. & 1847,
Miniſtration, Altar, Sacrifice, Sacraments, either by word, Pſa. 16. Hoſ. 2,
16, 16, 17. writing, preſence, aſſembling togetherDeu. 16, 1, 6 1 King. 12,
32., obſerving the time, comming to the place, bowing downeDeu. 5, 9. Pſ. 95,
6. Hoſ. 13. 2. Eze. 18, 6. Neh, 10, 32. 37. Ex. 30, 16. Eze. 5, &c., kneeling,
lifting up the eyes, paying of tithes (g), Offerings, Contributions, &c. And
ſhall wee thinke that all theſe outward obſeruances, are novv out of uſe, and
that men in ſuch reſpects may publickly countenance the vvayes of Antichriſt.
As for ſuch, as ſo thinke, let them knovv, they are in errour and ſinne; And
as the Papiſts have condemned Montanus for an Heretick, and yet raetine among
them his vile opinions. So doe theſe men, embrace [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=59) the lies and
beaſtly vanities of H. N. that monſtrous Monſter, although in words they will
diſclaime all Familiſme.As cats loue not the Maſter of the houſ, but his
houſholds-goods: ſo many ſay they can̄ot abide the Pope, & yet loue his
houſhold ſtuffe to well.

Conſider what I ſay, and the Lord give you underſtan­ding.

For the inſtance, vvhich hee brings of hyring a Houſe in a Pariſh, it is
diſcrepant and impertinent, and ſo of no validitie. For, let Barnards
Conſi­rat. Eu­gen. l. 3. uſefull Canon be obſerved, an liceat, an deceat, an
expediat, vvee ſhall ſoon ſee, there is no agreement betvveen it, and the
thing he applies it to.

For firſt, the Law of God alloweth us, to live where wicked men doe; and to
have neceſſarie ſociety with them in civill things; And thus the godly in all
ages have practiſed. But let them ſhew us, where it is written, that we muſt
goe, unto their unlawfull-Church-meetings, and there worſhip God with them,
and among them. I aſke againe, who of the Saints hath done this? The Lordler.
15. 19. ſayth: Let them returne to thee, but returne not thou unto them.

2\. It is ſeemely that we dwell among them; and reciprocally give and take
earthly helpes each of other.Compoſ­ſeſſores mū di non er­roris. Wee muſt be
cò partners with them in the world but not in their er­rours, ſaith
Tertulliā. But in Religion we may not uſe any of their deviſes, as meanes and
furtherances of our edification.

Elias was carefull to repaire the Lords Altar; For as Martyr In his Comment.
on the place. ſaith, he judged it an unbefitting thing, and a great indignitie
to God and his truth, to Offer Sacrifice on Baals Altar. If men in thoſe dayes
had the Zeale of that good Prophet, they would ſcorne and loath to make uſe of
any thing that is Antichriſts. I ſay it againe, vvere men zealous for the Lord
God of Hoſts, they would feare to runne to falſe Churches and Miniſters to be
edified. Is it not becauſe there is not a God in Iſrael that ye goe.

3\. This alſo is behovefull and expedient, as the Apoſtle1 Cor. 5. 10. ſaith;
But the other is not ſo, as we have before proved. For Con­cluſion,
whereſoever I live, my conſtant abſence from their Church is an evident token,
that I have left them; But on the contrarie; if I goe thither to worſhip, this
gives them juſt cauſe to thinke that I approve of their unſanctified ſtanding;
Whoſoever therefore can make theſe two things hang together? I muſt needs ſay,
quid libet equolibet, of every thing hee can make any thing. But of this no
more now: let us hearken to what followes.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=60)

#### 1.2.10. SECT. 10.

THe next Objection is thus layd dovvne: None can heare without a Preacher:
None can preach, except he be ſent, Rom. 10. 14. 15. Therefore I cannot
Lawfully heare him, that hath not a Lawfull ſending.

His anſwer to it is: Treat. 1\. That Concluſion is neither in the Text nor
ſound. 2. I may Lawfully heare him that hath no Lawfull calling, as I have
formerly ſhewed. 3. The ſending there intended is Gods gracious worke of
providence in rayſing up men, by ena­bling and dispoſing them to preach, &c.
4. If faith came by the preaching of unlawfull Ministers, it followes
thereupon, that ſuch Preachers are ſent in the Apostles ſence. This is the
ſumme of his anſvver.

Anſw. It was a cunning trick, which Themoſtocles was once taught by a man of
Lacedemonia, that becauſe they might not take the Tables away, wherein a Law
was engraven; He ſhould therefore turne them up-ſide downe, which was as good
as to take them away altogether. Howſoever, the Treat: takes not from us the
Tables of holie Scriptures, wherein is written the Law of Chriſts Miniſters,
yet by a prittie deviſe, hee turnes them here up­ſide downe: Which is as good
as to take them quite away. J know what J ſpeake, and will ſtand to it; For if
this place, Rom. 10, 14, 15. reſpects not a true outward calling, but is to be
underſtood promiſcuouſly of all Miniſters, be their calling never ſo falſe,
divi­liſh, Antichriſtian. I ſay, if this Text be ſo to be interpreted, then
have not the Miniſters of God any more to ſay for the juſtification of their
ſtanding, then the Miniſters of Satan (I uſe Pauls phraſe2\. Cor. 11. 15.)
have to ſay for theirs. Yea moreover, hence the baſe Familiſts H. N. his
Ex­hort. to his Childr., and ſuch giddie-heads, who deny all outward calling
to particular men and ſay, every one that can preach the Word, are Miniſters
alike; Are juſtifiedHe that justifies the falſe claime of a uſurper▪ condemnes
the partie, whoſe title is right and good. in their moſt vile aſſertion. ☉
facinus horren­dum, ſancti viri.

But to cleare the Text from the Treat: falſe gloſſe; And by it, to prove the
truth, which we hold; I will here lay downe this argument.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=60) If Paul
by ſending,Proofe 1. Rom. 10, 14, 15. doth not at all intend un­lawfull
Ministers: Then are not unlawfll Miniſters to be heard: But the first is true,
therefore the ſecond.

The propoſition which needeth only to be cleared, may bee thus manifeſted:
Such as the Apostle intended, Rom. 10. ought and may Lawfully preach: But
Antichriſtian Miniſters, neither ought nor may Lawfully preach; Ergo, the
Apoſtle, Rom. 10, meanes not Antichriſtian Ministers.

The Major is moſt evident, and cannot be denyed by any that beares the face of
a Chriſtian. The Minor is cleare and certaine by theſe ScripturesHeb. 5; 4.
Numb. 16. 5, and 18, 7, 2 Chro, 26 18 Act. 14 23. ler. 23 21.. Beſides granted
of all, both Papiſts and Proteſtants. To wit, that it is great ſinne to
exerciſe any ſpirituall functiō or Miniſterie, without a true outward
calling. Of this judg­ment were Francis Ribera Com­ment. in Heb. 5, 4.,
Toletus In Joh. 10. pag: 597., Royardus Feria Ter: Poſt. Pent., Luther
Com­ment. in Gal. c. 1; v. 8. Pareus Com­ment; in Heb. 5. 4;, Piſcator ibid.,
Ames Caſ. Conſc. l. 4. c. 25. Slater, On Rom. 2. v. 3., Cartwright Repl. to
Whitg; p. 54 63., Wil­ſon Com­ment; on Rom. 10; v. 15., Bilſon Chur; Gov., &
others.

2\. If we may Lawfully communicate in, and with that Mini­ſtery, which the
Apostle ſpeaketh of, Rom. 10. 15. then he intends not here any unlawfull
Miniſterie. But the firſt is true; Ergo the later is true alſo.

The Propoſition cannot be doubted off. The Aſſumption wee prove by our
Oppoſites Confeſſion; For they grant, it is unlawfull to communicate in, and
with a falſe Office.

3\. If the Holy Ghoſt doth testifie that by ſending, Rom. 10. the true and
Lawfull Miniſters of Chriſt are intended: Then are not falſe and unlawfull
Miniſters intended in that place. But the firſt is true; Ergo the later is
true alſo.

The Propoſition is grounded on the words of the Text: How ſhall they preach,
except they be ſent? As it is written, how beautifull are the feet of them
that preach the Goſpell of Peace, and bring glad tytings of good things.

Theſe words are taken out of Eſa. 52\. 7. where the Prophet (ac­cording to the
interpretation of all Learned men upon the place) hath reference to the
Miniſters of Chriſt; I ſay, to ſuch only, whoſe outward calling (whether
extraordinarie or ordinarie) was Law­full and true.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=61) So
CyrillusCom­ment. in Eſa. 52. 7., Dionyſiusibid., Areulariusibid.,
Wigandibid., Hy­perius On the place., Bullingerusibid., Mollerusibid;,
Zwinglius (x), Marlora­tusibid;, Gualteibid;. Muſculusibid;, Vrſinusibid;,
Oecolampadius, and others.

The Aſſumption needs no proofe; except a man would make ſome queſtion, whether
it ſhould be day, when it is manifeſted to him, that it is not night.

4\. If unlawfull and falſe Ministers are not ſent from God; But from the
Devill and Antichrist; Then doth not the Apoſtle in Rom. 10. 15. intend falſe
and unlawfull Ministers; But the an­tecedent is true; Ergo, alſo the
conſequence.

The Major or antecedent is groundibid; on theſe ScripturesIer. 14: 14; Rev 9
3; and 13; 14; 15; 16 and 18; 15 17; 2 Theſ. 2; 3; 4; 2 Chro. 11. 15; Rev. 16.
3.. And among other reaſons layd downe by Zanchy Quia non mit­tuntur ab eo,
ſed a Diabolo. Explicat. Philip; 3. 1 p. 176; Tom. 4., wherefore un­lawfull
Miniſters  [...]h [...]uld be avoyded, he gives this for one; Becauſe God
ſends them not, but the Divell. So Cartwright ‡ Repl; to Whitg. p. 88; 204.
ſpeaking of the Hierarchy (vvhich comprehends all falſe Offices in the
Kingdome of the Beaſt) ſayth, it came out of the Bottomleſſe pitt of hell, and
from the Devill. Perkins Expoſ. Serm; mount. Mat 7; p. 239; vol. 2., Pareus
Comment; in Mat. 24. 23., Muſculus Comment, in Mat. 7., Latton Syons Plea.,
the Authors of the Admonitions to the Parliament Admon. 1., and others ſay ſo
too.

The Aſſumption is as manifeſt; For durſt any man affirme, that Miniſters not
ſent from God, but from Satan and Antichriſt, are here meant by the Apoſtle.

5\. Such have a promiſe of Gods gracious preſence with them, and of his
bleſſing on their labours and Ministerie, who are ſaid, Rom. 10. 15. to be
ſent; But unlawfull Miniſters have no ſuch promiſe of Gods preſence with them,
nor of his bleſsing on their labour and Mi­nisterie. Therefore by ſending Rom.
10. the Apoſtle intendeth not unlawfull Miniſters.

He that ſhould denye this argument, would ſhew more ſpight then wit; For both
pa [...]ts are as cleare as the Sunne at noon-day. For the other part of the
reaſon, there can be no exception againſt it; For ſeeing this place, which is
the foundation of their cauſe, is very Sand; the whole building (like a
tottering wall) muſt needs fall to the ground.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=61) 2\. For
his ſaying; He hath before ſhewed, that it is Lawfull to heare him that hath
no Lawfull calling.

I anſwer, I cannot finde this proved any where in his Booke; For I profeſſe in
the word of truth, I ſee little difference betweene his grounds for hearing in
falſe Churches; and the Nicolaitants reaſoning for eating in idol-Temples.

For thus they would plead:Euſeb: lib: 3; cap. 29; Ireuaen lib: 1. c. 25 Meats
and Drinkes are the good Creatures of God, and may be uſed in a civill way
Lawfully; Now we receive them no otherwiſe, whatſoever ends and reſ­pects
others have.

Convenient rebus nomina ſaepe ſuis.

What is the Treat. plea but the ſame: Hearing is a naturall action: And
although he heares falſe Miniſters, yet is not his private meaning to honour
the ſtate of the Office, as the reſt doe. Thus (Chius ad Coum) their Doctrines
are alike.

But doth not this in the meane time, ſhew a deſperate cauſe, which hath not
any authenticall records of the Holie Ghoſt. Vnder the ſhadow whereof, it can
find any ſhelter to ſhrowd it ſelfe.

What, in the whole Booke of GodEvange­licae & A­poſtolicoe literae, & veterum
Propheta­rum Ora­cula per­ſpicuè nos inſtituūt, quid opor­teat ſapere de
volun­tate, & ſenſu Dei. Ponentes ergo con­tentionē ex divini­tus inſpi­ratis
Ora­culis  (que)uae­ram is ſo­lutionem eorum, quae pro­ponuntur. Theod. lib.
1; c. 7. is there not one place of Scripture to be found? What, nothing in the
Prophets? Nothing among all the writings of Chriſt and of his Apoſtles? But it
muſt bee held up (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh  [...]) by the ſleight Epheſ. 4. 14;
of men, and cunning craftines, whereby they lay in wait to deceive.

Againſt this kind of reaſoning, I might here bring that excep­tion which
Tertullian De praeſcript: adverſ: haeret. did of old againſt his Oppoſites.
What hath Athens to doe with Jeruſalem, the Schoole of Philoſophie with the
Church of Chriſt.

Jn matters of faith men ſhould ſo weigh and conſider of things, as not to
write what reaſon, but what Religion, not what Philoſo­phers, but what the
Prophets and Apoſtles, not what fancie thinks, but what the Spirit of God doth
ſay.Senſus noſtri, & enarrationes ſine his teſtihus non habent fidem. Origen:
in Hierom. Hom. 1.

Indeed, if a man liſt to be contentions, he may finde ſomething to ſay to
every thing, though little to purpoſe to any thing; For what cauſe ſo bad, but
ſome will have a colour for it.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=62) Hath not
the Stewes of Rome found PatronsHar­ding in confutat. of the Apolog. Have not
ſome defended commones of WivesP. Cle­mens.; yea and worſe too; There­fore
with the Prophet this ſhall alwayes be my prayer: O let mee not vvander from
thy Commaundements; Remove from mee the vvay of Lying; And take not the Word
of Truth out of my mouth.

3\. For his Expoſition, it is drawen in by the haire of the head; And
well,Pſal. 119 10. 29. 43. it reſembleth a Shipmans hoſe, for you may apply it
to vvhat you wil, rather then to the point in hand. There is not a Wri­ter, I
am perſwaded, that ever gave ſuch a ſence of the place; As if wiſedome had
been borne with him▪ and ſhould dye with him.

I ſhall not ſteppe out of the way, to call in here a few well de­ſerving
audience of the Learned. Famous PareusCom­ment. in Rom. 10. 15. an
inter­preter one of a thouſand; upon the place writes thus: How ſhall they
preach, except they be ſent, why ſo? What hinders but he may preach that is
not ſent? indeed he may ſo to doe, but not as Gods meſſenger: For as no man is
the Kings Ambaſsa­dour, unleſſe he have his Commiſſion: So ſuch Preachers as
will declare in Gods name his mercies and benefits, ought neceſſarilie to be
ſent by him; For he rejecteth all them as intruders, which runne and teach
without his Commiſsion. Vnto the preaching there­fore of the Word, a calling
is required, &c. And though hee speake here properly of the Apostolicall
Commiſſion, which was extraordinarie. Notwithstanding it muſt alſo be
underſtood of or­dinarie Miniſters: For none is a Lawfull Preacher of the
Word, except God call him. Now, the Lord cals ſome immediately, as of old the
Prophets and Apoſtles. Others mediately by an outward calling of the Church.
So he. The very ſame Hyperius, Fa­gius, Ochinus, Toſſanus, Olevianus,
Grinaeus, Martyr, Rolloc, Hun­nius, Rungius, Brentius, and others on the
place.

Now, howſoever falſe Miniſters are not ſent of God, according to the intent of
the Apoſtle, Rom. 10\. 15. yet I confeſſe, he hath a ſpeciall guidance,
government and direction, both in their rayſing up, comming forth, and
preaching ſuch and ſuch truths, for the good of his elect in many places where
they come.

It is ſaid of Joſephs Brethren, that out of envy they ſold him to the
Midianites Gen. 4, 8.; and yet the Scripture elſe-where ſaithGen. 45. 3. 8.
Pſal. 105 17.; God ſent him into Egypt.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=62) Now,
ſurely the ſame God, which could uſe their mallace, by which he was ſold into
Egypt, for the corporall profit of his people there; he can uſe as well the
powerPareus in Com­ment. Gen: 45 7. p. 429. Tom. 1. of Antichriſt, (by which
the Miniſters of falſe Churches have their calling) for the ſpirituall comfort
and good of his choſen ones. And howſoever hee is no author of unlawfull
Miniſteries: Neither can it be properly ſaid that he ſends them: Yet he ſo
wiſely ordereth and diſpoſeth of them, that he brings to paſſe hereby his owne
purpoſe and will, to the prayſe of the glorie of his grace, in the propagation
of the Goſpell, to the converſation of many.

But let it here be remembred, that their places for all this, are not the
better, neither their adminiſtrations the more warrant­able; Nor any people
the more juſtifyed to heare them, then were Iacobs Sonnes to be juſtifyed in
what they did to their Brother, be­cauſe the Lord by it did them good.

That which God doth this way, is not of any promiſeCart­wright, Hom. in
Eccleſ. c. 3 fol 83. 84. that he hath made, but out of his ſuperabundant
grace, turning the ſinnes of his people (as the Apothecarie doth poyſen to
Medicines) to their profit and good.Things done by unlawfull inſtru­ments, ſo
farre as they reſ­pect the accompliſhment of Gods will and plea­ſure, either
in the ſafety of his Church trial of his Childrē &c. the Scripture
attribu­teth them to God; as author & doer; and ſo farre forth are moſt holie
workes; But ſo farre as they reſpect the action done, and inſtruments; they
are wicked workes, and they inſtruments are ſent from the Devill Pareus in
Hoſ. 8. p. 529.

Laſtly, that which he ſaith followes, it followeth not, but is ( [...]) a
Concluſion il-gathered. But I ſee it is an eaſie thing to conquer, if begging
will procure one that. Put caſe uſurpers of civill offices, ſhould by their
adminiſtrations profit ſome people; Muſt it follow therupon, that ſuch men are
ſent forth by the King? Indeed ſo it muſt be taken, or elſe the Treat:
expoſition is neither in the Text, nor ſound. But (cadet in curſu) he runnes
in vaine, as he hath done all the way before.

Before I end this Section, I deſire to aſke one thing of our Op­poſites.
Suppoſe there be a man whom they would heare, but know not vvhether ever any
converſion hath followed his preach­ing: May they in ſuch a caſe heare him or
no? If they ſay yes, then wherefore are the effects of falſe Miniſters made
the maine ground of hearing them? If they ſay no? Then hovv can they heare
any? Conſidering they knovv not certainly by vvhoſe preaching another is
converted. As is the way of an Eagle in the aire, ſuch is the way of an
adulterous Woman, it is hid and cannot be ſeen.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=63)

#### 1.2.11. SECT. 11.

THE 11. Objection is thus laid down: The ſheep of Chriſt heare his voyce, but
ſtrangers they will not heare: Joh. 10. 3. 8. 37.

He anſwereth: Chriſt doth not there ſpeake of the outward hearing, but of the
hearking unto; that is, as he expounds himſelfe, Verſ. 3. 4. 5. 14. 16. 26.
27. of the knowing and beleeving of his voyce, and following it, &c.

Anſw. It is a ſpeach of Auguſtine Ne ſitis multi Ma­giſtri diſ­ſentientes a
Doctrina vnici ma­giſtri Chriſti. in Lib. 1. de­traction.: Be not many
maſters, diſſenting from the Doctrine of Christ, our only Maſter.

The Counſell is good, for it is a great ſinne and hurtfull vice, to be raſh
and adventurous upon opinions, in matters of Religion, where men are not firſt
well informed in judgement, by true grounds of knowledge. Now truely I have
not ſeen in ſo ſhort a Tract. any man that hath more adventured to broach
private conceitsIn Ec­cleſia po­nitur ido­lum, quan do novum dogmaſta­tuitur.
Ier. in Her. 32., then the Treat: and to ſingle himſelfe out from all
wri­ters, ancient and moderne. As if his fancies like Oracles were to be lickd
up; and his  [...], he ſaid, as another Pythagoras Dio­gen. Laer. in Pythag.
muſt be reſted in; or as the Popes TraditionsCounc. Tren. Seſſ. 4. dec. 1. p.
11. di­ſtinct. 19. c. ſic omnes. to be received, as if Chrſt ſpake them. But
before I come to diſcover the nakednes of his anſwer, I will firſt from this
Scripture lay downe this ar­gument.

Such as Chriſt intenteth by ſtrangers in Ioh. 10. 5. may not Law­fully be
heard.

But Christ by strangers in Ioh. 10. 5. intendeth unlawfull Mi­nisters.

Ergo unlawfull Miniſters may not Lawfully be heard.

The Major is without controverſie. For 1. the Greeke  [...], is of that
plainenes, as no witt of man can put by the  [...]orce thereof; Properly it
imports a going after another bodilyMat. 4. 20. 22. 25. Mar. 1. 18. Ioh. 1.
37. 38. 40. Act. 11. 18.; as a Scholer followeth the Maſter to be taught.

2\. It cannot be ſhewedIf they can, let them. that words ſo generally laid
downe, as theſe, ( [...], &c.) [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=63) are uſed any
where to reſtraine a perſon only from beleeving the Doctrines of falſe
Teachers, and allowing him in meane time freely to heare them.

3\. Whereas Chriſt ſaith, they will flee from him, this muſt ſurely bee
underſtood, animo & corpore: For otherwiſe with reverence be it ſpoken: The
prohibition here were unneceſſa­rie and vaine: Conſidering if true Miniſters
ſhall erre in Doc­trine, wee muſt flie from it1\. Theſ. 5 21;. So then by this
Expoſition, there is nothing more meant of flying from strangers, then from
Chriſts owne Houſhold ſervants. The which to affirme is  [...], as the
Philoſopher ſaithAriſt. l. 2. Elench. c. 3., abſurd & idle.

Finallie, Learned Men generallie, underſtand it of flying with bodie and mind.
And ſo not to come neere the breath of unlawfull Miniſters. So Auguſtine De
verb. Dom. Serm. 49, Cyrill Com­ment. in Ioh: 10. l. 8; Tom. 1, Chryſoſtom
Hom. 83. in Ioh., Calvin Com­ment. in Ioh. 10. 5;, Hunnius ibid;, Zepperus
ibid. Toſſanus Com­ment. in I. 10. 5., Stumfius Poſtel: Alleg. Dom. 8. Poſt.
Tri­nit. p. 481, Royardus Hom: in ſeria tert. Pent., and others.

The Minor is undeniable, and proved 3. wayes. 1. By divinePro 2, 16 & 10, 20,
24. & 7\. 5 authoritie, which gives them often this title. 2. By their
agree­ment and likenes: in Scripture men are named ſtrangers in 4 reſpects. 1.
Of their ſtrange ſect.Mat. 17 25. Eſa. 62 8 2\. Of their ſtrange Re­ligion.
Mar 2 11. Pſ 81. 9; 3\. Strange Lawes.Iudg. 19, 12; Neb. 92. And laſtly, of
the ſtrange workLuk. 16, 12. and ſervice which they doe. This holds true here
in the caſe of unlawfull Miniſters; For 1. they are not citizens with the
ſaints and of the Houſhold of GodWe ſpeake not here of the inviſible Church,
but the true viſible. 2\. Their way and manner of ſerving God, is contrarie to
the rules and orders, which hee hath praeſcribed. 3. Their Canons and
Inſtitutions are none of his, but Satans and the Biſhops. 4\. In their
adminiſtrations (according. to their Service-Booke;) they ſerve not Chriſt,
but Antichriſt. Mali thripes, mali ipes.

3\. By the teſtimonie of Learned men, as Pareus Com­ment: in Hebr: 5, v. 4. p.
211., Pola­nus In Ezech. c 44; p 800., Danaeus Comment. in 1 Timot. 5, 22, p.
343;, Toletus in Ioh. 10, p. 597., Luther Enarrat. in Evang. Tom. 5, p. 158.,
Hoffmiſter Hom. in Evang: Dom. 9; Poſt Trinit., Guiliau­dus Comment. in Gal.
1, p. 241., Poligenarus Dom, 7, poſt pont in Evang: p. 26., Topiar In Evang;
Dom. 8; poſt. Trin; p. 73., Anton: Gonigſton Poſtil; Oct; poſt. pent; p. 175;,
the Rhemiſts Annot; in Ioh: 10; v. 5.. All theſe affirme, that vvhoſoever
taketh upon [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=64) him to preach
without a Lawfull ſending, commeth in, not by a Lawfull Election, and holy
Church Ordinance, but breaketh in againſt Order; By force and favour of men, &
by humane Lawes. he is a ſtranger, a thiefe, a murderer, according to Chriſt,
ſaying in Io. 10\. and thus have the old Writers expounded the place. As
Irenaeus L. 4. c. 4., Clem: Alexand. L. 1. Stromat. Cyprian Lib. 1. Epiſt. 6 &
76., Didymus In Ioh: 10., Ru­pertus In Ioh. 10., Theodorus ibid., and others.

To come now to the Treat: 1\. His whole anſwer is meerely a declyning from the
ſtate of the queſtion.

A negatione unius disparatorum ad poſitionem alterius non valet argumentatio.

He reaſoneth for all the World, as if one ſhould reaſon thus: A man may not
put in practice the bad Counſell of a murderer or thiefe; Ergo, he may heare
them. Chriſt (ſaith he) will not have us to beleeve and obey the unſound
Doctrines of ſtrangers; Ergo, he doth not ſpeake of the outward hearing of
them.

Diffido oculis meis, & identidem interrogo, an legerim, an vi­derimPlin.
Paneg.

I ſuſpect my ſight, I queſtion my Copie, I aſke of my ſelfe againe and againe,
could the Treat. write ſo unſkilfully; For if this be not a non-ſequitur, then
fooles cannot ſpeake Non­ſence.

2 His diſtinction betweene hearing and hearking, is much like to that of the
Papiſts Bel­larm. de Eccleſ. triumph. l. 1. c. 12., between Dulia and Latria.
The Scripture forbids worſhipping of angels: True ſay they, as Mediators,
Haſſels pro invo­cat. c. 19. p. 47. ſo it is unlawfull, otherwiſe not; Chriſt
bids us to fly from ſtrangers, and not to heare them: yea, ſaith he, as to
obey their Doctrine? other­wiſe we may follow them, and heare them; is not
this to preſume above that which is written? Surely, if men may take ſuch
bold­nes in expounding of the Scriptures, the groſſeſt Idolater may ex­cuſe
himſelfe eaſily.

3\. I grant that to heare is ſome time taken for beleeving, ap­proving,
following, &c But what of this? Will it therefore fol­low, that Chriſt in Ioh.
10, 5. doth not ſpeake of the outward hearing of ſtrangers.

I may ſafely proteſt his proofe here, is onely his bare opinionAnd ſo it is
all along the booke. And he argues ex non conceſsis: From that which is not
granted. I thinke no wiſe man will engage himſelfe to defend the conclu­ſion,
which cannot be defended.Ne co­nare quid fieri non poteſt.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=64) 4\.
Where he ſaith, the ſtrangers of whom Christ ſpeaketh, were of the true Church
and of Iſraell.

Jf his meaning be, that Chriſt here hath reſpect only to them, he is greatly
deceived. For he intendeth all ſtrangers, which in the ſence of the
Scriptures, either then were, or afterwards ſhould come into the world,
whether of the true Church & of Iſrael, or not.

It hath hitherto been a ruled caſe among divines, not to diſtin­guiſh where
the Word makes no diſtinction; But the Treat: keeps ſeldome this Canon; For as
Lizards, who out of the open field doe runne into Buſhes; So he leaves the
plaine Text, and literall ſence of the Scriptures; And turning their necks
cleane about,I heare that ſome ſay, that theſe later workes of the Treat. are
farre better then the firſt. Now, theſe ſay ſo, becauſe they lead to looſe
walking, and there­fore they like them the better. For other­wiſe they are
much worſe. Vn­les to prove a thing ſoundly by the Word of God: is not ſo good
as a bare and bold affirmation, makes them ſpeake what he pleaſeth; And by
this meanes neither dealeth with the Objectſon, nor cauſe of the Lord, as is
meet.I heare that ſome ſay, that theſe later workes of the Treat. are farre
better then the firſt. Now, theſe ſay ſo, becauſe they lead to looſe walking,
and there­fore they like them the better. For other­wiſe they are much worſe.
Vn­les to prove a thing ſoundly by the Word of God: is not ſo good as a bare
and bold affirmation

5\. Jt is a queſtion, whether the Godly in the Iewiſh Church, having by
hearing diſcovered the Scribes & Phariſes to be ſtran­gers, that is, falſe
Prophess, mought afterward heare them againe. The Treat See his justificat.
ſeparat. pag. 434. was once of the mind that they might not; and gave ſome
reaſons for itTo be lightly moved in Religion, is Childiſh weakenes, ſayth he:
divine & Mor. Obſerv. p. 44. It had been a happy thing, for the Church of God,
if he had not ſhewed ſuch a Childiſh weakenes.. But howſoever, the caſe is not
eaſily to be determined; conſidering the ſtate of that Church & time; Yet this
is cleare to all men of ſound judgment, that in the Churches now under the
Goſpell, falſe Prophets may not bee ſuf­fered; But after due and orderly
conviction, (beeing found ſo, and abſtinate) they are to be rejected, and ſo
no outward hearing of them any more. Of this judgment Camerius Comm. in. Apoc.
c. 3., Borrhaeus In Apoc. c. 3., Toſſanus In Mat. c. 7., Oecolampadius In Mat.
c. 7., and others

Laſtly, by his anſwere, all falſe Prophets may bee heard; For, if nothing make
a falſe Prophet, but (as hee ſayth) unſound Doctrine; And Chriſt doth not
forbid the out­ward hearing of ſuch; Then what I ſaid followes neceſſarilie.
Now, if this were true, Lord, in what a miſerable caſe were Gods people. But
it is neither ſo nor ſo; For the Scriptures ſhew the contrarie; beſides he
contradicts here himſelfe, and is ſo variable and unſetled in that thing. As
it may be ſaid of him as it was ſaid [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=65) Me­lanch. in
Cron. of Severus: Omnia fuit & nihil fuit. Hee turneth every way, and cannot
paſſe any way. He anglieth in all waters, and yet catch­eth nothing; he hath
ſpent all his oyle, in making a ſalve for the foule ſore Antichriſtian
Preiſts; and yet to ſay (as the truth is) hath left them in a worſe cauſeFor
they need not by his writing leave their unbleſſed ſtanding. For ſo they only
preach the truths of the Gospell. They ſinne not. And then what need is there
to lay downe their falſe Office. then he found them.

#### 1.2.12. SECT. 12.

THe 12\. Objection followes thus: The Scriptures of the Old and New Teſtament
warne Gods people of falſe Prophets; vvhich the Miniſters of that Church are,
having an unlawfull calling.

To this he thus replies: Treat. 1\. They warn not to hearken to them, nor to
beleeve them; But to try them, which without hearing them, cannot be done. Not
that all falſe Prophet are to be heard by all, that they might try them; For
that were to tempt God: But now I anſwerNot as Apollo anſwered the Iewes by
the Scriptures Act. 18. ult. for ſo he could not: ſeeing hee writes againſt
them. the Scriptures cited; which speake of Prophets in the true Church, which
were to be heard, till they were orderly re­preſſed, or at least plainly
diſcovered by their Doctrine heard to be ſuch.

Anſw. The ſouldiers which ſerved Marcus Antonius, fell unawares on an Herbe
Appian. de Bell. Parth., the vvhich greatly diſtempered their heads. To ſay,
vvhat my mind gives me, it vvas an unhappie thing, that ever the Treat. found
out this Wild gourd, for it much weakned his large abilities, and cauſed him
in this point, to be no more like the man, that he was, when he was againſt
it; Then an apple is like a nut.We cannot apply the ſaying in the Greeke
Proverbe to him  [...]. Our later thoughts be wiſer then our firſt. For here
he rather ſtriveth then teacheth; As Ierom. confeſſeth of himſelfe, beeing
reproved by ſome, for writing ſome thing against lovinian (as the Treat: doth
against us) by way of contention, rather then of Doctrine, Hierom, in Apolog.
ad Pammachiū pro libris adverſus Iovinian.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=65) Some
thing he would ſay here, but to profeſſe my owne igno­rance, I doe not
underſtand him.

For 1. he peremptorilie denies the whole Objection; and ſo con­quently
affirmes that all Falſe Prophets may be heard; yet pre­ſently with the ſame
breath, he unſayes what hee had ſayd before; And ſayes, all falſe Prophets are
not to be he heard by all; And within 4 lines after, lets both ſayings fall
againe, and ſayth, falſe Prophets, beeing diſcovered ſo to be, are not to bee
heard. This is ſo deepe and inextricable a riddle for me to unfould, that I
muſt confeſſe my ſelfe here Davus, not Oedipus. And therefore will leave it
for what it is, and come to the defence of our A [...]gument.

1.1 Cor. 6 15. Howſoever the Treat: in the point of hearing of falſe
Pro­phets, is off, and on, ſo that no bodie by his words can well tell, what
he held; yet, as I have before ſhewed,Pag. 81. Gods Word damnes it utterly.

And to the former reaſons, theſe may be added, 1, That the members of Chriſt,
and the members of Antichriſt, muſt not bee mingled together, but in all the
points of Religious Communion, as Prayer, Propheſie, Preaching, &c. be
ſeparated and apart. For to doe otherwiſe, is as great indignitie offered to
God, as to take the members of the bodie, and make them the members of an
Harlot.

2\. Jt Chriſt, who in thoſe laſt dayes ſpeakes evidently by his Goſ­pell and
Spirit, had judged it fit, that his Children ſhould goe unto falſe Churches,
he would certainlly have made known the ſame to them.Cirill obſerveth that
ſuch of the things done by Chriſt, are written, as the Wri­ters thought to be
ſuffi­cient for manners and Doc­trine. In Evang. Io. lib. 12. c. 68.

3\. This ſeemeth much to eclipſe the glorie of Chriſts wiſe­dome and
faythfulneſſe, in providing for the full and perfect in­ſtruction of his
people in his owne Miniſterie: That they ſhould nevertheleſſe (like an unchaſt
ſpouſe) goe out from, and make uſe of a ſtranger.An ho­neſt man would bee
aſhamed to be ſeen to be familiar with an Harlot.

Moreover, for the Learned, they are againſt all hearing of all falſe Prophets,
and ſpeake downe right, as the Word of God doth in the thing; I find in their
writings, no ſuch falſe and idle diſtinc­tion, as the Treat: deviſeth; namely,
that ſome falſe Prophets may be heard; Others not.

As for the weaker ſort Pag. 17., and leſſe able to diſcern of things that
differ: they muſt not heare them: but the ſtronger and wiſer may. As this is
the idea of his owne head, ſo for ought truly I [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=66) know he walkes
alone in it. For, I am ſure, Calvin Serm. againſt i­dol.. Muſculus Com­ment.
in Mat. 7. ver. 15.,In Mat 7. 15. Pareus Com­ment. in Pſal. 16, p. 52., Zanchy
Expli­cat. in Philip. 3. v. 1. p. 174 Tom. 4., Fenner interp. Son: ch; 1; v.
7, 8;, Palladius Poſtil; Dom. 8. Poſt. Trin; p. 256;, the Rhemiſts Annot. in 2
Cor. 6. 14; and 2 Ioh. 10., the Douay- tranſlatersNotes on pſ. 16; p. 56; & on
2 King: 5; p. 941;, &c. thoſe ſpeak other­wiſe; yea, and ſome Elder Writers
too. As Theodorus L. 4; c. 14., Chriſo­ſtome In Mat. 7, v. 15., Euſebius Lib.
4; c. 22., and others.

Theſe ſay (as I before ſaid) that no falſe Prophet is to be heard, by any
perſon whatſoever.

2\. For thoſe two Scriptures, Deu. 13. 1. 1 Ioh: 4\. 1. here brougth, to prove
it Lawfull, to heare unlawfull Miniſters: They are as fitly brought, as were
the two witneſſes brought againſt Chriſt, to prove him a tranſgreſſour.

For 1. the hearing, mentioned in thoſe places, reſpecteth only a true Church.

Againe, it concernes no hearing of falſe Prophets; but the godly are there
admoniſhed to examine the Doctrines delivered to thē in a right way and
order; And if they find any by teaching to bee a falſe Prophet, they are to
depoſe him, and afterwards not to heare him againePopulus Chriſtianus
detec­tis eorum erroribus fidem non habeat, aures ne praebeat, ſed tanquam
lupos fu­giat. Par: in Mat. 7. 15.; And thus our beſt Writers, interpret the
places: as Frantzius Imlerus, Orinaus, Danaeus, Bugenhagius, Selneccer,
Hunnius, Oecolampadius, and others.

Now, marke (good Reader) how this hangs together. If the Saints in a true
Church may heare one that is not known, to bee a falſe Prophet, but afterwards
by his unſound Doctrines plainly diſ­covereth himſelfe ſo to be; Then may they
goe unto a falſe Church, and heare one, whom they certainly know to be a falſe
Prophet before they goe, &c. The expreſſion of it is conviction enought.If it
be a fit thing to uſe a Touch-ſtone, for triall of coyn, and that finding the
ſame falſe, to refuſe it; then it is meet, to receive mony knowne to us to be
counterfeit, and falſe. If this be abſurd, ſo is the other too.

The Treat: goes thus foreward. 2\. No mans unlawfull outward calling, makes
him a falſe Prophet; Nor his outward law­full calling, a true; But his true or
falſe Doctrine only, makes him a true or falſe Prophet. A man may have a
Lawfull Office of Ministerie, and yet be a falſe Prophet: if he teach falſe
Doctrine; ſo he may be a true Prophet, if he teach the truth, though in
unlaw­full and Antichristian ſtate of Miniſterie.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=66) Anſvv. I
never ſaw in my life, an errour held by a man of lear­ning, that hath leſſe
brought to countenance it then this; For whereas others commonly doe quote
Scriptures (albeit ill applyed) & alleadge for themſelves the judgments of
other men. He goes not this way to worke; But as if he had to deale only with
Papiſts; we muſt take (as they muſt the PopesDiſtinc. 40, c. 51. Papa.
Decrees) his will for a reaſon, and meaſure things by the rules of his breaſt.

But ſurely ſuch kind of reaſoning will have little waight in the conſcience of
any truely fearing God. For they wilbe loath to leave an old faith for a new
fancie.

He ſayth, No mans unlawfull outward calling, makes him a falſe Prophet; But J
ſay, it doth; And the ProphetsNumb. 16. 2 Chro. 26. 1 King. 12. Son. 1 6. 7.
Jer. 14. 14. & 23\. 21 & 27\. 15, ChriſtMat. 7. 13., and his ApoſtlesHeb. 5.
4. Rev. 2. 2. ſay ſo too. Perkins Expoſit. on Chriſts ſerm: in the moūt. Mat.
7, v. 15. p. 239. vol. 3 is held among all the Godlie Learned or a ſoled and
judicious Writer; Now, what his judge­ment herein was, hee ſheweth it thus:
The firſt note vvhich we muſt make of a falſe Prophet is this; Namely, to come
on his owne head; and to preach not beeing ſent; And by this marke are falſe
Prophets noted, Jer. 14\. 14. I have not ſent them, neither did J commaund
them, and yet they Propheſied in my name.

And no leſſe doe theſe words of Chriſt import, they come unto you, that is of
themſelves, without a calling from God and his Church, So he.

What he ſayth, is ſaid of HieromCom­ment. in Mat. 7. in Ier. 14. 14.,
Chryſostome g, Cyrill in Mat. 7, Tom. 1., Pareus Comment. in Mat. 7, 15.,
Luther Enarrat. in Evang. Dom. Oct. Post. Trin: Tom. 5,, Pelargius Quaest.
Evang. p. 97., Aquinas In Comment: in Ier: 14, 14., Corvinus Post: in Sexageſ.
p. 54:, Bullin­ger Comment: in Ier: 14. 14., Ferus in Io. 10, p. 239.,
Guiliaudus In Epheſ. 1, p. 292., Bugenhagius Comment: in Jer: 14, 14., Toletus
In Jo: 10, p. 599., To­piar [...]ſt: Dom: S, Poſt: Trin: p. 73., Hoffmister
Homil. in Evang. Dom. 9, poſt:, and others.

Againe, if an unlawfull outward calling, make an unlaw­full Miniſter; then it
makes a falſe Prophet; For according to the Scriptures, it is all one thing,
only expreſſed in ſundrie tearmes.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=67) The
Treat.‡ Divine & Mor: Obſerv: pag: 60. tels us that their ſinne is great, and
full of pre­ſumption, who ſhorten and strengthen the Scriptures to make way
for their owne deviſes.

This fault he commits here himſelfe; For where the Scriptures take all for
falſe Prophets, which are unlawfull Miniſters, he (to make way for his owne
deviſe) will reſtraine the appellation to ſuch as erre only in Doctrine. And
thus he makes good the rule, which Logicians terme de omni & de nullo, as if
true in the general, but not in the particular; As if true, that all unlawfull
Miniſters in the ſence of the Scriptures, are falſe Prophets; yet ſuch as are
unlawfull Miniſters in reſpect of their unlawfull outward calling, are not
falſe Prophets.

Laſtly, I would know, whether Corah burning true inſence, and Ieroboams
Preiſts, offering true ſacrifices, were falſe Prophets: if they were, (as no
rationall man will denie,) then the other fol­loweth conſequently.

But J geſſe what cauſed this errour in the Treat: hee found in the Scriptures,
that ſome are falſe Prophets, becauſe of their falſe Doctrines; Hence hee
concluded, there were no other falſe Prophets; But it followes not, unleſſe a
man will ſay, he that robs a houſe, is a theife; Ergo, there are no theeves,
but Houſe-Robbers. The which thing, whoſoever holds, ſhalbe Paralogizer, a
deluder of his owne ſouleAnd this may ſerue for anſwer to the Pistle maker;
who inclo­ſing up of his E­piſtle, crows out; Like a Cock of the game that
hath beaten all his fel­lowes out of place, now let them tell us, where they
find in the Scripture, that men are named falſe Prophets, for want of a true
outward calling; Forſooth here we ſhew it, if you have eyes to ſee it, and
grace to uſe it well..

Touching the other point; he ſpeakes ( [...]) in con­ſideratelie, for to ſay,
No mans outward Lawfull calling makes him a true Prophet; For as in Wedlock a
woman is truely a wife immediatelie upon the action of her Lawfull marriage;
yea though ſhe ſhould afterward never doe the duties of a wife; So he is a
true Eccleſiaſticall Officer, incontinently upon his out­ward lawfull calling,
Let his practiſes afterwards be good or bad; The reaſon is, becauſe his
adminiſtrations after his calling, as prayer, preaching, &c. gives nothing to
the formall beeing of it; As I have ſhewed elſe-whereNeceſſit. Separ. p. 236..

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=67) His
words following are: Treat. BalaamNum. 22 & 25\. Ioſh. 13. 21. 2 Pet 2, 15.
16. Rev. 2 14. Num. 25. 5. 9. 10, &c. And chap. 24. 2 3, &c. was a falſe
Prophet, in curſing (in purpoſe) where God would have him bleſſe, and in
teach­ing Balak, to put a ſtumbling block before the people of Iſraell; and
yet a true Prophet in bleſſing Iſrael, by the ſpirit of Propheſie, and Word of
the Lord put into his mouth.

Anſw. Would men receive his ſayings, as they doe gould and ſilver, by due
triall and proofe, they ſhould find reaſon enought to refuſe them, & turn them
back; Now, for the falſenes of this Ea do­ceat Epiſ­copus quae a Deo
di­dicerit, non ex proprio corde. Let the B. teach thoſe things, which he hath
lear­ned of God; And not of his own heart or fancy.. My anſwer to it, ſhalbee
in the words of another man Atterſol hiſt. of Barak and Balaam. on Numb. 22.
p. 8 11.: We know no mean between true Prophets and falſe, for whoſoever is
not a true Prophet, is a falſe Prophet; and whoſoever is a falſe Prophet,
cannot be a true Prophet of God. He that is of God, is a true Prophet; He that
is of the Devill, is a falſe Prophet; Nei­ther doth theMarke this well, for it
ſhewes all the Treat: anſwer to be caecum inſom­nium, a vaine dreame and
nothing elſe. DELIVERIE AND UTTERANCE OF SOME TRUTH, MAKE HIM A TRUE PROPHET;
For then the Devill ſhould be a true Prophet, who ſometimes ſpeak­eth the
truth; albeit to a ſineſter end. And a little after, he con­cludeth thus:
Balaam was a uery Witch, a Wizard, a falſe Pro­phet, a true ſorcerer, famous
or rather infamous, for his Deviliſh Magick, which he practiſed among the
wicked idolatrous Nation, So Atterſol. And manie others write ſo too; As
IuniusAnnal Expli. Num. 22. p. 109., SymſonExpoſit. on 2 Pet. 2; v. 16; p.
372., FerusComment in Numb. 22. Canutusibid.; and before them, Origenibid.,
Greg Nazianzenibid., Baſilibid..

Againe, as hee writes againſt the truth; ſo againſt himſelfe. For in Pag. 70.
71.A Letter ſent to London, written by the Treat. he ſaith, to name men
idolaters, adulterers, murderers, &c. becauſe they doe ſome acts of idolatrie,
murder, theift, &c. agrees neither with Chriſtianitie, nor civility, but is a
conſequence and collection made without rule of Charitie,Hierom: diſtinct. 36.
ca. fin. or [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=68) ground of
Truth. Yet ſee (aliud ſtants, aliud ſedens,) How he is one while for the
thing, another while againſt it. Balaam de­livereth ſome truths: Therefore he
muſt be a true Prophet. But if another (cum Care Carizas) doe reaſon after the
ſame ſort, hee cals it (and that rightlie) a conſequence made without ground
of truth.Teſti­monium tuum, quod alie­na re leue eſt, hoc contra re grave, &c
Thine owne teſti­monie, which in another caſe is of ſmall weight, but this
a­gainſt thy ſelfe is of great mo­ment. Tull.

3\. Whereas Balaam in 2. Pet. 2\. 16. is ſaid to be a Prophet: the Apoſtle
meanes a falſe Prophet. And the like we read in other places2 Kin. 3. 13. Hoſ.
9. 8. See Iun. notes, on the place., not that the name (Prophet) is due to
them; But given them ironicallie, that is, becauſe they falſelie aſſume itNon
quibus hoc nomen vere con­gruebat, ſed qui illud arroganter & falſo ſibi
ſummebant. Bright [...]. Com­ment. in Cant. Cant. cap. 4. fol. 78. & 16\. T.
W. Expoſ. upon the Booke of the Cantic. pag. 18., glorie in the title, and
willinglie would be ſo reputed and taken. For the other Scriptures in the
margine, I know not for what end they were quoted, unleſſe to ſhevv the
rea­der, in how many places he may find the word Balaam, in the Old & New
Teſtament.

The Treat. goes on thus: He is a Prophet that speakes or de­clares a thing
paſt, preſent or to come. And to propheſie in our ſence, is nothing elſe but
to ſpeake to edification, exhortation and comfort. He that doth this is a true
Prophet; He that speakes the contrarie, a falſe.

Anſw. Men pleading for errour, are driven oft times to uſe that kind of
reaſoning, which in Scholes they call fallacia ex ignorantione veri Elenchi:
which is to change the ſtate of the queſtion, and to draw Concluſions
contrarie to the true rules of the axiomes, or propoſitions diſputed off. The
Treat. is fallen into this fault: For whereas our queſtion is onlie a­bout
hearing in Church-way, and of Church-Officers; Hee alters quite the ſtate of
the point; and ſpeakes of hearing at large. As if we ſhould queſtion, whether
Hearing ſimplie bee unlawfull; and not rather hearing with certaine adjuncts:
That is, in an Antichristian Church, of a falſe Miniſter, & the like.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=68) But to
come to his anſwer. 1. What it is to Propheſie in his ſence The Trea. wrote
once that no Scripture juſtines preaching out of a true Church; much leſſe in
a falſe Church; juſtificat: Separ: p. 73., I know not, neither doe I inquire
after. For it is ſuffi­cient for me to know what Propheſie is, and what true
Prophets are, in the ſence of the Scriptures.

In the Booke of God, I find true Prophets to be taken three wayes. 1.
Strictly, for one, who from the inward counſell of God could foretell things
to comeGen. 20. 17; Numb. 12 6; Deu. 18 55.. 2. For Lawfull Paſtors and
Teachers in the Churches of ChriſtMat. 10. 41. 1 Theſ. 5. 20; Rev 11, 6;. 3.
And more largely; For ſuch private members1 Cor. 14; Rom. 12. 6., of
particular Churches, as have re­ceived the gift of the interpretation of the
Scriptures, and ſo are able to ſpeake to edification; exhortation and comfort.
Of no other true Prophets doe I read in all the Scripture: Seing therfore the
Preiſts he pleads for, are not of any of theſe rancksQuae. in what ranck of
Prophets unlawfull Miniſters are; And un­der what Scripture they are
comprehended. I would haue a private Chriſtian aſke this queſtion of ſome
learned divine, whome hee knowes doth hold it lawfull to heare falſe
Miniſters. And it is very likely he will anſwer him by deepe ſilence.: Then
needs muſt they be falſe Prophets, and ſo conſequently not to bee heard.

2.Againe in p. 77. He ſayth, No mā teach­ed the Goſpell, but was a member of
a true Church. For the other part of his anſwer; Which is, hee that teacheth
falſe Doctrine, is a falſe Prophet. Here I thinke wee muſt take his meaning,
and leave his words; But what he meanes J know not; And therefore will caſt it
aſide; only here is a fitt place to propound a queſtion or two. 1 Whether to
hold, teach, and practice the errours and lies conteyned in their Canons,
Service-Booke, Bookes of Articles, and the Ordering of Bb. Preists and
Deacons, doe make a falſe Prophet. 2\. Whether to hide from the people the
knowledge of all the main truths, which con­cerne the outward regiment of
Chriſts viſible Church, make a falſe Prophet. 3\. Whether it bee Lawfull to
heare any falſe Pro­phet, known ſo to beThere is one queſtion more, viz.
whether the Lords Lawfull Preiſts, which ſerved at the Altar in Ieruſalem,
mought not as well urge their people to heare Ieroboams Preiſt at Dun and
Bethel; As the Miniſters novv under the Goſpell, to perſvvade men, to heare in
falſe Churches. If it bee not all one, ſhevv the difference.. The ſimple
beleeveth every word Pro. 14. 15.: But the prudent man looketh well to his
going.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=69) There is
nothing more in this anſwer, but a little girding at ſome mens perſons, and at
their exerciſe of Propheſie; to which J will ſay no more, but in the Poets
Iuve­nal. Sa­tyr. 2. words: ‘Dat veniam Corvis vexat Cenſura Columbas.’

#### 1.2.13. SECT. 13.

THE 13. Objection is laid downe in this manner: The Lords forbids Iudah going
to Gilgal, or to Bethel. Hoſ. 4. 15. 16.

Treat: The meaning is plaine, & the words expreſſe, that they were not to goe
thither to offend and play the Harlot, in joy­ning to idols, Ver. 15. 16. This
I grantNos qui Chri­ſtiano nomine gaudemus dicemus nos abjice­re Deos
a­lienos, & verum co­lere, cum pars ido­la defen­dat, ado­ret, colat, breviter
divinis honoribus pro ſequa­tur. La­var. in Joſh. c. 24 Hom. 71. p fol. 81. is
to be done in no place. But deny any ſuch thing to be done in the hearing by
mee pleaded for; The Scriptures every where forbid the going, or comming to
ſuch places, or perſons, as in, by, or with them ſome evill is done, to wit,
for the doing of any thing evill, or unlawfull in, or with them. This is all a
primo ad ultimum.

Anſvv. When Children find any hard words in their Leſſon; They wilbe ſure to
paſſe them quickly over; Hoping thereby to ſave themſelves. I muſt needs ſay,
the Treat. met here with a ſtrong argument; And therefore it is no wonder,
though he ſhew us a Scholers tricke: To wit, leave that ſpeedilie, the which
hee knew not how to anſwerSee the like anſwer to our 1. Object. It is Antonies
precept in Tullie, if men be troubled about a hard queſtion, to ſay no­thing
to it. De Orat. l. 2.. If the Reader doe not ſee the weak­nes of it (to ſay
the beſt of it) I will ſet before him a glaſſe to vew it in.

For 1. He makes himſelfe here an Oppoſite to ſcience. 2. To Conſcience. 3. To
the truth; And laſtly, to himſelfe. And firſt of the firſt: They vvere nor
(ſayth he) to goe thither to offend. J profeſſe in all good conſcience, my
deſire is not to pervert his meaning, but to underſtand it; But how to
underſtand it, J know [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=69) not; For his
ſpeach is much like the anſwer, which Pythius the Preiſt gave to Pyrrhus the
King Epire. Cicer. de divin.

‘Ajo te Ae [...]cida Romanos vincere poſse.’ An anſwer ſo dubious &
diſcrepant, as it cannot be gathered from it, whether He, or the Romanes
ſhould overcome. The Treat: anſwer is of the like ambiguitie and darknes; It
is an  [...], as the Philoſopher Ariſt. 1 Seph. 4., ſpeakes; For you cannot
directly ſay, whe­ther hee intends that Iudah might Law [...]ully heare
Ieroboams Preiſts at Dan and Bethell, or not. You may take it either way, or
no way; For it is (utroque nutans ſententia) a ſpeach like an Echo, and will
ſay whatſoever you will ſay before it.

But it is no marvaile,Hoc neque prophetae predicave­runt, ne­que Domi­nus
do­cuit neque Apoſtoli tradide­runt. Iren. l. 1. c. 1. though hee leaves the
matter thus in a doubtfull ſence. For I beleeve what Auguſtine Libe­rius
impro­bare non audio. ad Ian. Epiſt. 119. ſayth of him­ſelfe, was here true in
the Treat: hee durst not freely speake his judgement.

But in the meane time, this ſheweth a wretched cauſe; For whoſoever ſees his
cauſe to be good, hee will ſearch and weigh ra­ther what ſhould be ſaid
plainly and to the full: then what may be ſaid darkly and coulorable, and ſo
to put it off with a ſhift.

2\. If he meant to ſay any thing, his meaning then muſt needes be: that it was
lawfull for Judah to heare the Doctrines of the Law Preached at Dan and
Bethell by Ieroboams Preiſts. The which expoſitiō is an unſufferable
perverting of the TextSua ſi docere ve­lint, nolite audire, no­lite facire;
certe enim tales ſua quaerunt, non quae Ieſu Chriſti. Auguſt. in Iohan: Tract.
46., & leads unto great impietie; For to diſtinguiſh things in ſuch a ſort, is
for all the World, as if one ſhould ſay, the Law of God forbids adulte­rie;
True, but how? To ſatisfy luſt, not to begit Children, as Sejanus didTacit.
Annal: Lib. 4..

Againe, the Law of God forbids perjurie, as how? As it tends to the ſhedding
of innocent blood, but not to accommodate a freind, as Cicero merrily ſpeakes
of Clunius Pro Q. Raſſio Comaed.. I could multiplie inſtances this way of the
ſame nature with his expoſition: The Lord ſayth expreſly, goe not to Gilgal.
But how ſay our Oppo­ſites; As to Offer Sacrifices; but not to goe thither to
heare the Doc­trines of the Law preached by the Preiſts of Jeroboam. Is not
this horrible preſumption to contradictSua ſi docere ve­lint, nolite audire,
no­lite facire; certe enim tales ſua quaerunt, non quae Ieſu Chriſti. Auguſt.
in Iohan: Tract. 46. the plaine Word of God?

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=70) For to
eſtabliſh their owne inventions: What Hereſie held by any Heretick, may not by
ſuch bold diſtinctions be juſtified. I may ſay as a Learned man ſaythVerba
ſine crimi­mine ſunt, ſenſus in crimine.: The words are without fault, the
ſence is in fault.

Of this corrupt handeling of the Scriptures, BucerImpi­um eſſe, verba Christi
ultra pro­poſitum materiam extrahere. de regno Chriſti, l. 2. c. 29. p. 149.
writes judiciouſly, Hilari: de Trinit: lib. 2. and ſhewes what a wicked thing
it is, to applie the Word of God, beyond the propoſed matter. If it be an
unjuſt thing (ſaith he) to streatch the Doctrines and anſwers of a wiſe and
pruaent man, beyond the matter and queſtion unto which they are given; But
specially to apply them to the thing which he in­tendeth not, neither doth it
agree withall; Then much more is it, a vile thing to abuſe the Doctrines and
precepts of Christ in ſuch a manner, &c.

Of ſuch as doe ſo, that fitly may be ſaid, what Hierom Rhe­tius elo­quens
qui­dem eſt, ſed inep­tus inter­pres. Hie­ren. ad Mar­cellam: ſaith of one
Rheticius, they may be wiſe men, but are fooliſh inter­preters.

3\. If the Prophets had ſo meant (as the Treat: cloſely inſinuates, but durſt
not, it ſeemes ſpeake it out,) viz. that the Hearing of the Word preached by
Ieroboams Preiſts at Bethell, Dan and G [...]lgal, (able to open and applie
the Doctrines of fayth by that Church profeſſed) both Lawfull, and in caſes
neceſſarie for all, &c. They could eaſily have expreſſed itWe ought not ſo
much, as to know the things, which the Booke of the Law conteyneth not. Hilai:
in Pſal. 132. The Scripture de­nyeth it what it noteth not. Tertull. Lib, de
Monog.; For they were filled with Spirit of God in all wiſedome and Spirituall
underſtanding; But the truth is, in plaine expreſſions, they ſpeake the
contrarie. And unleſſe mens mindes be overcaſt in like ſort, as were the eyes
of Elymas, they cannot but ſee it.

But to preſſe them downe with authority, for the preventing of errour in the
ſimple, and for caveling in ſuch as deſire to contend. We will here ſet downe
the judgement of the moſt Learned, touching this thing. The Prophet (ſaith
ZanchyCom­ment. in Hoſ: 4, 15. p. 82.) ſayth not Sacrifice not at Bethel and
Gilgal, but ſimply and plainly com ye not thither, noting that they were
interdicted not onely from ſacri­ficing [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=70) there; BVT
JNDEED THAT THEY SHOVLD NOT THITHER COME AT ALL. Rivetus In Hoſ. 4. p. 156.
under­ſtands it of ſuch a keeping away: As that they might not be bodily
preſent at any ſpirituall exerciſe there performed. So Calvin Prae­lect. in
Hoſ. 4. p. 52. Pareus In Hoſ. 4. v. 14. p. 504. Tom. 4., Oecolampadius In Eſa.
2. l. 1. fol. 20., Lyra In Amo. 4. 4., Brocardus In Levit. 10. pag. 69.,
Luther In Amo. 4., Brentius In Amo. 4., Fabritius In Hoſ. 4., Mollerus In Hoſ.
4., Oſorius In Hoſ. 4., Shaddaeus In Amo. 4., Sedelius In Amo. 4., Cramerus In
Hoſ. 4. 15., and others.

Moreover, of the ſame judgement are the Iew Rabbines, as Mercer ibid: noteth.
He that deſires to ſee more, let him read what the Lovaniſts An­not. in
August. Brevic. Collat. cum Donatist: Collat. dici. 3. c. 9. And Annot. in
August: Poſt: Collation: ad Donatist: c. 20., have written about it.

4\. Jf we may not come, to ſuch places, or perſons, for the doing of any evill
and unlawfull thing with them, then I conclude from his owne mouth, that the
practice he pleads for, is ſinfull; And ſo I have alreadie manifeſted unto all
men, except ſome men will contend without cauſe, and againſt reaſon, out of a
Spirit of contention and contradiction.

#### 1.2.14. SECT. 14.

OUR 14\. Objection is thus framed: They that eat of the Sacrifice, partake of
the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. So they that re­ceive the Word, from an unlawfull
Officer, partake with his Office.

To which he thus anſwereth: Treat. I deny the conſequenceA Child can ſay ſo
much, but hee had need be no Child that ſhall prove ſo much:. The Office is
not to the Word, as the Altar is to the Sacrifice. The Al­tar makes the thing
to be offered actually to become a ſacrifice, which it was not before, ſave
only in destination; as Christ plainly teach­eth: ſaying the Altar ſanctifieth
the gift. But ſo doth not the Of­fice make that to become the Word of God,
which was not ſo actu­ally before.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=71) There
goes a ſtory amōg Scholers of AEſops deceiving Mercurie: He having promiſed
him one part of his Nutts, keeps all the meat to himſelfe, and delivers the
ſhels to the other. As the Treat: gives us here but halfe of the Argument, ſo
that halfe, is only the barke or outſide. For had he laid it downe (unum ad
unum) accor­ding to the ſcope of the place, and as we apply it, thus it ſhould
have been.

Such as did eat of the ſacrificed fleſh, taken off from the Altar under the
Law, approved of the Iewiſh worſhipPar. Comment. in 1 Cor. 10. ver. 15 18, and
ſhewed themſelves to be of the ſame ReligionCalv. in 1 Cor. 10. 18., Againe,
they which went unto the idol-Temples, and did there eate of the Heathen
Sa­crifices, joyned themſelves by this outward act to that ſociety and
ſuperſtition, So by juſt conſequence, whoſoever goeth unto falſe Churches, to
eate ſpiritually of any of the Sacrifices there admi­niſtred, in and by an
Antichriſtian ſtate of Miniſterie; Hee juſti­fieth Gui­liad. Com­ment. in 1
Cor. 10, 18. by his going, their idolatrous Church, Miniſterie vvor­ſhip, &c.
and makes himſelfe a will-worſhipper with the reſt; ac­cording to Pauls
Doctrine in the former Examples.See the Rhemiſt. on the place.

How they will chop this argument ſmall, that they may the ea­ſier ſwallow it,
I know not? But this I am ſure off; they cannot preſſe it downe with divine
authoritieAuſe­rantur de medio, quae ad­verſus nes invicem, non ex divinis
Canonicis libris, ſed aliunde recitamus. Auguſt. de unita: Ec­cleſ. cont.
Petilian. c. 3.. But either they muſt verba dare, as they ſpeake: and uſe
technas peiſeis, uncunning proofs: Or acknowledge it to be a truth, as in
truth it is.

To come to his anſwer, which is like a fagot of thornes, full of prickles,
bound up with ſtraw, the which by the fyre of Gods Word is quickly burned. 1.
He applies things here (aſchematiſton) very ilfavoredlie. The Office (ſaith
hee) doth not make that to be­come the Word of God, which was not ſo actually
before. True; Neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered, to become
that which it was not ſo actually before; For we know, before it was laid upon
the Altar, it was fleſh, but afterwards it became a Sacrifice. The ſame is
true concerning the Word; For howſoever the Office makes it not to become the
word of God: (as neither did the Altar make the thing to be offered to become
fleſh) yet by the Office it is made a Church-ſacrifice, the which it was not
ſo before.Daver­ba & de­cive ner­ves Perſius Sat: 4.

And here I deſire the Reader to obſerve, how diſorderly he ſets things downe.
The Altar makes the thing to be Offered, actu­allie to become a ſacrifice,
which it was not before.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=71) But ſo
doth not the Office make that to become the Word of God, which was not ſo
actually before.

Inguinis & Capitis, quae ſint diſcrimina neſcit.

What Child may not ſee the abſurditie of it? For all that hee could conclude
from the firſt aſſertion; unleſſe he would conclude nothing; was either thus:
The Office makes the Word of God to become a Church-ſacrifice, which it was
not before, but in deſtina­tion; Or thus: The Office makes not the Word of God
to be­come a Church ſacrifice, for it was ſo before This latter howſo­ever it
be voyd of truth, yet there would have been ſome ſence in it.Doe not thinke
that the Treat. wrote this Elenchum ſophiſticū ignorātly, but rather fore-
ſaw what in­conveniēce vvould fol lovv, if he ſhould let the argu­ment runn
out orderly and pro­portiona­bly. I be­leeve hee ſavv vvell enought, ſhould he
grant, that the Office makes the vvord to become a Miniſte­riall Church-
Sacrifice; This Scripture vvould ſtand in force againſt the thing they pleaded
for.

2\. For the place of Scripture, Mat. 23\. 19. the meaning is: As they had
erected an Altar, and dedicated it to the Lord, accor­ding to his appointment,
whereon to offer Sacrifices; So the things offered to God on it, and by it,
were after a ſort ſanctified by the Altar (f); That is, it made them publick
Church-ſervices, accep­table to the Lord. And the ſame is true of Chriſts
Miniſterie; As it is a divine inſtitution, given unto the Church, for the
performance of Holy things, ſo it ſanctifyeth the things, that is, makes them
to become Lawfull Miniſterial Church-Ordinances, with­out which they were not
ſo; Neither could they be ſo re­puted.

And this may be as applied alſo to a falſe Miniſterie; For as it is an
inſtitution of Satan and Antichriſt, to have their wicked deviſes adminiſtred;
So it defiles every adminiſtration, done in it, and by it; And for the
adminiſtrations, they are all falſe, unlawfull, Anti­chriſtian Church-
actions,† Quamvis Dei ſolius ſit ſanctificare; tamen aliquo modo quae
principalius Deo ſunt-conſecrata, ad ſe perti­nentia, ſanctificare dicuntur.
Muſcul. in Evang. Mat. c. 23 p. 477. Tom. 3. offered to the DevillHoc eſt
judicium Dei de quavis cultu & de de quavis Religione, quem non ſecundum
verbum eius exercetur: Non Deo ſed demonijs preſtatur. Pare. Com. in 1 Cor.
10. 20. Fingere enim falſum cultum, eſt falſum Deum fingere; quia tunc
fingitur falſa Dei volun­tas, & ſic falſus Deus. Par. in 1. Cor. 10. 7., and
other­wiſe to be taken.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=72) 3\.
Where he ſaith, the eating of the Sacrifices in Iſraell be­came their
Sacraments, and the Heathen ſacrifices were their Sa­craments: Howſoever, were
this ſo, it neither hurts us, nor helpes him. Yet I cannot ſee how it can be
ſo applyed. For 1. Circumciſion and the paſſeover were Iſraels Sacraments; And
therefore by Altar, their whole Religion and Worſhip is under­ſtood. As Zanchy
Alta­re pro tota religione & cultu accipitur. praecept. 3 p. 534. truely
obſerveth.

Againe, the Apoſtle prohibiteth not only the eating of the Heathen Sacraments,
but all going to their Temples, to doe any thing there, with them, or among
them; Yea, though it were not with any intent to performe a Religious Action.
SoReſpicit congreſſus &c. Com­ment. in Pſul. 16. p [...]g. 53. Ri­vetus.

4\. As meats conſidered in themſelves, may Lawfully be eaten any where, if it
be done without the offence of the weake, as Paul Teacheth at large, 1 Cor. 10
25 29. Yet if meats bee conſidered as they are offered to idols, and eaten in
the Idol [...]Temples in the honour of idols,See his juſtificat. of ſep. 94.
they be unlawfull. The like may be ſaid of the word, if we conſider it in it
ſelfe, the ſame may be preached Lawfully any where; But if the Word be
conſidered, as Antichriſt uſeth it,Diſtin­gue tem­pora & locus &
reconci­liabis ſcripturas. or rather abuſeth it, in ſetting up a falſe Church
and Mi­niſterie, to teach it in, and by; In this reſpect the Word is not
Law­fully preached; How oever here againe he inſinuateth the contra­rie.
Diſtinguiſh (ſaith Auguſtine k) times and places, and thou ſhalt reconcile the
Scriptures.

Laſtly, J deſire the Reader to make it well: Howſoever the Treat. hath ſaid
ſomething, yet nothing at all to the Objection: For he ſhould have proved,
that howſoever, they who did eate of the ſacrificed Beaſts of the Altar,
juſtified the Altar: And they which went to idol-Temples, honoured the idoll;
Yet now wee may Lawfullie take and eate the spirituall ſacrifices, which come
off from the Altar of falſe Churches, and falſe Miniſteries; And yet not
juſtifie the Altar, nor give any honour or conſent thereto; No nor any ſhew or
appearance thereofQuae: Whether ſuch as pretend to ground their prac­tice of
hearing on this Treatiſe: doe not ſhew either lightnes in not weighing what is
ſaid: Or ignorance in not diſcerning what they read: or wil­fulnes, in doing a
thing, for ſome by respect, pretending this Booke as a Cloak for it. Hic labor
hoc opus eſt.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=72) But it
may be, we ſhall heare hereafter of ſome other, that will ſay ſomething to it;
In the meane time we will wait for it, and proceed to the reſt.

#### 1.2.15. SECT. 15.

THE 15\. Objection we have thus framed: The places cal­led Temples and
Churches, having been built for idolatry, ſhould be aboliſhed; And therefore
are not to bee frequented, ſpecially beeing accounted and made holy place,
Deu. 12. 1.

Anſ. What is ſaid of ſome mens Sermons, I may ſay of the Treat: anſwer here,
the matter had been much better, if he had named no Text; For he toucheth not
the Objection at all; which is con­cerning Antichristian Temples, in the
unlawful uſe of them, but of the Lawfull Worſhip of God, in thoſe places, from
whence the idols and idolatries are removed. Now, howſoever J purpoſe not to
ſpeake of thoſe materiall places, in regard our exception lies rather againſt
their falſe Conſtitution, not of ſtones, but of people, yet this I doe
affirme, that as the idol-Temple in the uſe of Antichriſts idolatrous worſhip,
is a part of his falſe worſhip Page [...]. Arrow. ag. ſepa­rat. pag. 173.: So
they doe pollute in the uſe of ſuch worſhips, as are prac­tiſed in them. And
that they ſhould be deſtroyed, having been corrupted with idolatrie, there are
many Examples for it.Guag­ninus de Lituania Caſſtod. lib. 3. hist. Tripart. l.
9. So­zom. l. 5. Theodorit. l. 3. & l. 5 c. 20. 37. Euſeb. de vit. Conſt. lib.
5. c. 53 Socrat. l. 1 c. 14. August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 54. Cranz. Saxon.
c. 9. & 12\. Helmoldus in Sclaevorum Chron. 11. Cent. l. 2. c. 9. Cramer l.
15.

But to let theſe things paſſe, if we may have leave to put down our owne
argument, it ſhalbe thus.

If the falſe Churches of whom we diſputeThey hold as we doe, that the Church,
Ministerie, Worſhip, and Go­vernment of the Church of England, is
Antichriſtian and falſe, ſo that our difference is not, whether theſe things
are ſo, but beeing granted on both ſides, they are ſo: The question is,
whether we may Lawfully heare there or no. be that ſpirituall Ba­bilon,
mentioned in Revel. 18. 4. Then it is not Lawfull for Gods people to goe unto
them, to performe any spirituall or Religious ac­tion; and ſo conſequently not
to heare there.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=73) But the
firſt is true; Ergo the later is true alſo.

The Propoſition needs no proofe, becauſe our Oppoſites and we herein are of
opinion alike.

The Aſſumption is manifeſt by theſe reaſon. 1. The words in the Text prove it
plainely: Come out of her my people; That is, remove your ſelves from all
falſe Aſſemblies, covenant together to walke in all the wayes of God, ſerve
the Lord among your ſelves in  [...]pirit and truth, and returne not from
whence you are come. But repent rather that ye have ſuffered your conſciences
to be wrought upon by any unlawfull Offices. And thus doe they Learned
interpret the place; namely, of ſuch a comming out, as that we may not be
bodily preſent at any of their worſhipArto­paeus in Rev. 18. p. 198. Place.
Il­lyric. in Rev. 18 4.: Ne quidem ſpectatum, ſaith Pare [...]sCom­ment. in
Hoſ. 4. pag. 506. Tom. 1. no not ſo much as to be­hold it. Bullinger In
A­pocal. cap. 18. Concio 77. p. 241. in his Expoſition ſaith, we muſt flie
from their Temples, and not enter afterwards into them to doe any ſpiri­tuall
worſhip. So Rupertus, Theophanes, Lambertus, Winckel­manus, Wirth, Camerarius
Ribera, Leoninus, Conradus Brocardus, Capella, & others.

2\. Seeing a deviſed Conſtitution, is an idol, all that comes from it, is
taunted2 Cor 6. 1. Ioh. 5. 21 Zach. 11. 17. with the idolatrie of that
Conſtitution; and there­fore not to be touched, becauſe they are uncleane
things: A falſe Church-ſtate, is rightly likenedBotſac. Promp: Allegor. c. 21.
de Miniſi., to the Leproſie ſpread in the wals of the houſes of the Lepers,
becauſe of the pollutionIt is like that filthy Bird, which car­ries this
motto, contactu omnia  [...]oedat., which it cauſeth to perſons and things.
Take for inſtance a city or towne; If the civill ſtate or corporation, which
they have, bee u­ſurped, deviſed, or derived from a falſe power, all their
publick ad­miniſtrations are unlawfull, and every one partaking thereof,
of­fendeth; So all adminiſtrations done in a falſe Church, (whether prayer,
preaching Sacraments, Cenſures, &c.) are uncleane actions, and doe defile
every receiver; I ſay, becauſe of the idol-ſtate, which is deviſed out of mans
braine, and uſed as a meanes to ſerve God in it and by it.

As poyſon is caried from the fountaine to the Ceſterne, and from the root to
the branches; So from a falſe Conſtitution, (as from a poyſened fountaine and
roote,) a ſpirituall poyſon is car­ried and conveyed into every one of her
adminiſtrations. Nature teacheth this, where generation is betwixt  [...] of
one kind, the like doth ever bring forth the like; Neither can a Sheepe bring
ſorth a Wolfe, nor a Wolfe a Sheepe▪ but one nature is ever common to the
breeders and to the brood.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=73) This
holds true in the cauſe of a spirituall Harlot, as ſhe is a vi­perous body, ſo
ſhe begitts a brood of vipers: I ſay all the ordinan­ces, done after the
invention and will of Antichriſt, can no other wiſe be judged  [...]hen a
brood common to the nature of the breeders, that is the Devill and the Whore
of Rome, the Father & Mother that begat them.

3\. Becauſe the Lord hath not promiſed to them, his preſence and acceptance;
what the Lord may accept, or will, we diſpute not: Only this I ſay, whoſeoever
heares in a falſe Church, cannot by any promiſe that he hath in the Word of
God, exſpect Gods bleſſing on that which he doth; The reaſon is, becauſe a
true conſtitution of a Church, that is, where men are gathered together,
according to the Goſpell of Chriſt, is that only Lawfull Religious ſocietie,
or Communlon of Saints, wherein God wilbe honoured, whereby he wilbe ſerved,
and whereto he hath promiſed his preſence and ac­ceptance; So then, howſoever
we are not bound unto hearing in a true Church, neceſſitate medij, as if Gods
grace were tyed to the meanes this way; Yet as they ſay in Schooles,
neceſſitate praecepti, if we conſider Gods Commaundement, ſo wee are bound to
Church hearing, only in a true Church, and in no other Church can we exſpect
Gods preſence, promiſe and acceptance.

4\. Lots flying from Sodome, and Iſraels departure out of Egypt and Babilon,
ſhadowed outBul­ling. in Apocal. 18. Con. 78. Ciril in Eſa. c. 48. l. 5. Tom.
Zwin­plius Comment. in ler. c. 51. Chytraeus in Apoc. c. 18. our comming out
from Antichri­ſtian Aſſemblies; Now they came off wholie and fullie; And were
not one while out, and another while in againe. But made an intyre and
conſtant ſeparation.

That this may accord with the thing tipified; we muſt come quite away from
Sodome, Egypt, and Babilon ſpirituall. Not come neere the doore of the Harlots
Pro. 5. 2. 8, and Chap. 7. 24. 25. houſe, nor eate of her Offerings; as the
wiſe man ſpeaketh. We muſt not be one part of the day before the Lord in Sion,
and the other part at Dan & Bethell, worſhipping before the Calves. As the
Manner of ſome isCom­ponistae ergo, & tempera­tura vel ferrumi­natio eo­rum
Deo ita diſci­plent, ut fasti lium ei ingenerant, abominationi ſint, & abdicet
eos. Bulling: Com: in Apocal. c. 3. Con. 20. pag. 57. I ſpeake it to their
ſhame.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=74) 5 In
hearing there, men doe countenance, that falſe-ſtate: As he that receives
ſtolē goods of a theife juſtifies him: ſoPro. 17 15. &c. 6. It is a ſtrong
preſumption they are not Gods people: Rev. 18. 4. ſpeciallie when they ſtay in
Babilon after many warnings to come out. 7. Such as will not leave Babilons
ſinnes, muſt looke for her plagues and judgements.Forbes in Rev. 14 p. 135

And ſo ſayth the Treat. Mànu­miſſ: to a Manu: pag. 4. The authority of
Ministers in their Parochiall Pariſhes, may not be by Gods people partaken
with, (no not in actions otherwiſe Lawfull) under the paines of Babilons
plagues.

Before I end this Section, it will not be amiſſe, to examine what our
Oppoſites doe ſay, beeing preſſed with the authoritie of this Scripture.

Their plea is that which the Treat.Pag. 3. & 64. hath taught them, viz: So
they ſequester and withdraw themſelves from all Communion. with the
Hierarchicall Order of Church Government and Mi­niſterie, there establiſhed,
they may Lawfully heare, and are come out of Babilon ſo farre as the Lord
requireth.

Anſvv. 1\. They have no reaſon for all this they ſay, nor au­thoritie but
their owne.

2\. What they ſay, is a groſſe contradiction, and meere non­ſence; For it is,
for all the World, as if one ſhould ſay. Be thou joyned to an Harlot, and be
not joyned; Be ye partakers of other mens ſinnes, and be not; Have no
fellowſhip with the unfruitfull workes of darknes, and yet have. Magna inter
molles concordia; This and theirs is all one: Withdraw your ſelves from the
His­rarchicall Order and Miniſterie, and yet heare: As if men in hearing are
not ſo farre from withdrawing frō the Hierarchical Order & Miniſterie, that
by the verſe action they joyn themſelvs to it, are partakers of it, and have
fellowſhip with it; As I have before ſhewed and proved.What deceiver ever
taught men to commit ſinne in plaine expreſſion, that it was ſo; But rather
under termes of the contrarie perſwaded them to it. Nicolaitas contagia,
cultus idolorum, ſcortationes, adulteria & omnes libidines, pro adiopho­is
habuiſſe. Euſeb. lib. 3. cap. 29 Irenaen. l  [...] ▪ c. 27.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=74) 3\. Such
diſtinctions as theſe are the wiles of Ieſuits, (q) D. Rayn. de idolat. p.
348. as ſome Learned Men have well obſerved. Yea the truth is, out of this
quiver all Hereticks draw their arrowes. For let a Familiſt bee preſſed with
ſuch Scriptures as theſe. Fly idolatrie, keepe your ſelves from idols, &c. How
will he anſwer? By a diſtinctionTo up­hold the Hereſies of H. N. this is one
ſpeciall & principall practice, that the hiſtorie & native ſence of the Word
of God is altogether neglected of him, and in ſteed ther­of, is enter­tained
an allegoricall and baſtar lie con­ſtruction, fooliſh & fond di­ſtinctions,
which thing ut­terly de­faceth the certainty of the ſacred Scripture, & maketh
no other thing of it, thē a noſe wax. J. knew ſtub againſt the hereſies of H.
N. p. 61, the bodie is not meant, but the mind only; When we alleadge to our
Oppoſites, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, what is their anſwer? by the
ſame diſtinction, to come out from hearing it is not meant, but this and that,
and I know not what. Behold here how they reaſon alike, and reſemble thoſe
two, of whom the Poet ſpeaketh:

Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus.

One looking asit were babies in anothers eyes.

4\. This is to gratifie the errour of Montanus Diſcipuli Montani dicunt
paracletum plura in Montano dixiſſe, quam Chriſtum in Evangelio protuliſſe:
Nec tantum plura, ſed etiam meliora atque majora. Epipha: lib. 1. Haere. 27.
Tentull: de praeſcript., who pro­feſſed, that he knew more then the Apoſtles.
Now, I am ſure John the Diſciple whom Ieſus loved, knew nothing of this
diſtinction; to weet, how to come out of Babilon, in one reſ­pect, and yet in
another to ſtay there ſtill; For, had he known it, ſurely he would have taught
it; ſpecially it beeing ſuch a weaghtie point, as (ſaith the Treat:) is both
Lawfull, and upon occaſion neceſſarie for all of all Sects and ſorts of
Christians.

Were our Oppoſites of that Companie, who are called by the name of Apoſtles, I
ſhould thinke that they thought themſelves to be ſome new Apoſtles indeed.

5\. When the words of a Text are plaine, agree with the circum­ſtances of the
place, with the Analogie of ſayth, and with other Scriptures; For men then, to
leave the native ſence, and to force a ſence contrarie to that which the
letter expreſſeth, It is ( [...], to wreſt the Scriptures, and not to expound
them by the true rules and Canons of Divinitie.2 Pet. 3. 6. So Auguſtine Lib.
2. de Doct. Chriſt. c. 31., Hie­ron. Comment. in Am. 4., Keckerman Rhet.
Eccleſ. l. 1., Perkins Prophetia c, 2. de modis inter pretendi., & others.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=75) But ſo
doe theſe men, For whereas this Scripture ſpeakes of leaving all the
adminiſtrations in falſe Churches. And this well a­grees with the ſcope and
drift of the place, with the rules of faith, and with other Scriptures;
Notwithſtanding againſt the literall ſence, they peremptorie ſay, that mē
muſt not leave all the admini­ſtrations in falſe Churches; But heare there
Antichriſtian Miniſters; how be it, this is no more expreſſed, then their
Sacraments, or Ser­vice-Booke. Quaer. Why a Fa­miliſt u­ſing the libertie &
boldnes that theſe men doe, may not ſay, and prove it as well, that there is
not comming out of the outward man here meāt at all

6\. As their diſtinction is untrue, ſo it is alſo new; For we find no ſuch
Doctrine in other mens writings; whether Calviniſts Par. in Rev. 18. 4,
Lu­therans Brent. in Exegeſ. Ioh. 4., Papiſts Doway Tranſl. in Pſal. 26. p.
56.. Beſides the martyrsPag. 93, firſt and laſt would not receive it, leaſt to
ſave their lives, they ſhould loſe their ſoules. It was the anſwer of Fredrick
the Duke of Saxonie. Who beeing priſoner to Charles 5\. was promiſed
releaſement & reſti­tution of dignitie, if he would goe to the falſe Church;
Summum in terris Dominum agnoſco Caeſarem: in Coelis Deum. I am ready to yeeld
to the Emperour in civill accommodations; But in Hea­venly things I
acknowledge but one Maſter. Chriſt is more wel­come to me in bonds, then
Caeſars honour without Chriſt. The like did the Prince of Condee; yea the
zeale of Q: Marie may condemn our Oppoſites; For ſhe would not heare B:
Ridlies Sermon, be­cauſe ſhe thought he was no Lawfull Miniſter.

I remember what Diogenes At ma­lo inquit ſal Athinis lingere, quam Cra­ternm
frui magnifice inſtructa menſa. Diog. La­ret. invit. Diog. lib. 6 c. 2. ſaid
to Craterus, one of Alexan­ders cheife Captaines, who beeing a man of great
wealth, invited the Philoſopher, to abide with him, promiſing him great
enter­taynment;Sleid. But he replyed that he had rather lick ſalt in Athens,
then fare delicately with Craterus. Preferring libertie, albeit accom­panied
with povertie, before the delicates of rich men, where free­dome is
diminiſhed. This we may apply to all upright men, they will more eſteeme of
the meanes, which they finde in Gods way, and which they may enjoy with
libertie of conſcience: (how little ſoever it be, and what afflictions ſoever
accompanie it.) Then the the large entertainment, which falſe Miniſters
promiſe them in the wayes of Antichriſt, unto the enſlaving of their
conſciences, and lo­ſing of that pretious libertie, which Chriſt hath
purchaſed for them with his owne blood.

#### 1.2.16. SECT. 16.

OUR laſt Objection is laid downe thus: Seeing whatſoever is not of faith is
ſinne, what word of God, and ſo of faith, is there for this practise.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=75) To which
he thus replies: Treat. Every Scripture that either commaunds the hearing of
Gods Word,Mat. 7, 24. Luk. 11, 28. or promiſeth a bleſſing to them that heare
and keepe it; Or that commaunds me to edifie and build up my ſelfe: To obey
the Magiſtrate; or to follow after peace;1 Pet. 2, 5 Or to prevent offences;
warrants, and in caſes enjoyns this practice.Tit. 3, 1, Heb. 12, 14.

Anſw. He that can make anything of this anſwer, I will ſay of him, as they ſay
of the Pope Papa ex nihilo po­test facere aliquid. Extra. de Tranſla­tione
Epiſ­copi quan­to in Gloſſ. Ext. de conceſſ: praebendae propoſuit: in Gloſſ:;
Of nothing he can make ſomething. For indeed it is as frothy & unſoled a
ſpeach, as can be expreſſed. And if it carrie any force with it, 1 Cor. 10,
32. the frame muſt ſtand thus: If the Scriptures commaund the hearing of Gods
Word, promiſe them a bleſſing which keepe it; Commaund men to obey the
Magiſtrate; follow after peace, prevent offences; Then they warrant and
en­joyne them to heare unlawfull Miniſters in falſe Churches. (In eo­dem
haeſitat luto.) Jt is either thus, or it is nothing.

He reaſoneth here like one whom I well knew, who having accuſed another,
alleadged 2. or 3. Sentences of Scriptures, for to prove his chardge; Now all
men know, that the Scriptures could not teſtifie and witnes, that the perſon
had ſo ſayd or done; But only condemned ſuch a fact, if it had been proved.

To as good purpoſe is this anſwer; He ſaith the Word of God commaunds us to
edifie our ſelves, obey the Magiſtrate, follow after peace, &c. And hence
verie handſomely concludeth, that the Word warrants this practice. He might
have cited all the precepts in the old and new Teſtament, and from everie one
of them, as wiſely have inferred this practice.

But the Reader needs not wonder to ſee the Scriptures ſo al­leadged, for the
truth is, either our Oppoſites muſt ſo apply them; Or leave them out;
Conſidering there are not any authenticall records of the Holy Ghoſt, neither
any inevitable conſequence grounded upon the ſame, to be produced for the
juſtification of this practice. As for the 3. firſt precepts: (viz. the
Hearing of the Word, with a promiſe of Gods bleſsing to it, and how wee are to
be edified:) J have already ſpoken off; And therefore doe now paſſe them by.

To anſwer the other places: 1. He ſaith, Our obedience to the Magiſtrates doth
warrant and enjoyne this practice.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=76) I
anſwer, we are not (throught Gods mercie) ſo ignorant of our dutie this way;
But we know wherein our obedience conci­ſteth, and how it is to be limited in
things Lawfull Parr. Expoſit. on Rom. 13. v. 1. p. 6. and not con­trarie to
the Word of God. As for the Oath of our Allegeance Cartw. Hom. in Eccleſ. c. 8
fol. 195, 166. to them, it binds us not ſimplie, but in the Lord; For we are
entered ſo ſtrictly into a Covenant with God, as no authoritie of Man or
Angell can breake it.Obliga­tio haec tam arcta eſt, ut nul­lius crea­turae
im­perio poſſit ullo modo ſolui. Ame: de conſc. lib. 1 c. 3; p. 6.

Now, we are ſure it is againſt Gods Law, that Magiſtrates either of themſelves
or by others, ſhould deviſe falſe wayesBucer de regno Chriſt. lib. 1, c. 1, 2,
3. Martyr. in Iudg. 19., as Churches, Miniſteries, Worſhipp, Diſcipline, &c.
For to ſerve Ieſus Chriſt in, and by them. But ſay they doe? We ſay then wee
muſt not give any approbationBaſt. Caſtalion Annot. in 1 Cor. 8., honour, or
allow­ance unto them; No not ſo much as with our outward preſence and bodily
geſture: For as their inſtitutions are reall and ſubſtanciall idols, ſo they
are by bodily preſence and outward geſtures 3. wayes honoured and reverenced.
Genuflectione, capitis apertione, & corporis inclinatione. By kneeling on the
knee, uncovering of, the head, and bowing of the bodieZanch. de redēpt. lib.
1. p. 401.

To be ſhort, this our refuſing to doe their unlawfull commaunds, is no
diſobedience at allperkins Comment. on Heb. 11 v. 23. Pareus Comment. in Hoſ.
5, pag. 514. Tom. 1\. Taylor on Tit. 3. p. 549., becauſe the fift
Commaundement, in this caſe ceaſeth to bind, and gives place to the
Commaunde­ments of the firſt Table which are greater. Some Papiſts are ſo
reaſonable in this thing, as they ſay the Pope is no further to bee obeyed and
followed, then it may be done without ſinne. So Felinus De Reſcriptis: Si
quando ver: ſed nunquid. Hoſtienſis De Conceſſ: praebend. propoſuit.,
Alphonſus de Caſtro Adverſ. hoereſ. lib. 1, c. 7., & others. A reaſon for it
is given by Ambroſe Comment. in 1 Cor. 7: They are the ſlaves of men, that
make themſelves ſubject to mens ſuperſtitions.

2\. He ſaith, Every Scripture that commaunds them to follow after peace,
warranteth and enjoynoth this practice.

Anſw. Our concord and unitie with men, muſt be held, (uſque ad aras,) not in
errour and ſinne, but in truth and goodnesParr: Expoſ. on Rom. 15. 6. p. 250.
For if it be otherwiſe, it is no peace but warre Orig. in Rom. 15. 5. Cyprian
de lapſis Serm. 5.; Yea a mutual conſpi­racie againſt Chriſt. I confeſſe, the
name of peace Cicer. Philipp. 12., is ſweet, the thing it ſelfe both pleaſant
and deſireable. But this is when it [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=76) is with Puritie
& Holines Zach. 8, 19. Rom. 15. 4 Heb. 12. 14. Chry­ſoſt. Hom. 30. in Heb. 12,
Tom. 3 p. 64. nihil laeden pietatem, according to pietie, & in the Lord. If
peace ſhould be made (as the Treat: here would have it) with Antichriſt and
his adherents, that is, to worſhip God, in, with, and by their falſe Church
and Miniſterie, it would be like the peace with Antonie Cicer. Philipp. 12.
and his Mates, that is not a peace, but an agreement of ſlaverie to them; Yea
truely of great impiety. Wherefore as Agamemnon (in a Greeke PoetEurip:
Iphigen. in aulid. did anſwer his Brother, of whom he was requeſted to ſhew
him­ſelf a brother, in giving his cōſent to a wicked act. So doe J anſwer the
Treat my Brother, who would have me to joyne with others in the fellowſhip of
falſe Chùrches & Miniſters.

[...].

My witts with thee J would retain,

But mad to be I doe not mean.

Me­lancth. in Rom. 14.

3\. For this place, 1 Cor. 10, 32. which ſpeaketh of the preven­ting of
ſcandals; It is as fitly brought, as if a man defending adul­terie, ſhould
bring for it, the words of the 7. Commaundement, Thou ſhalt not committ
adulterie. For what is more directly againſt the thing he pleads for then it,
if we conſider the many offences which are cauſed by it; And that the Reader
may ſee how forceably the place is, to overthrow his owne cauſe. I will ſpeake
here little touching offences.

The word  [...] in Greeke, hath the ſignification * of breaking a Rule, Order,
or inſtitution. In Hebrew it is named Miceſol of halting, or cauſing another
to tripp or fall by ſomething caſt in his way. The Chaldee Takul, and Sireak
Cheſhela, is of the like derivation.

In the Arabian tongne the word is Shuch ſo named of unſetling another. In
propriety of ſpeach, it ſignifies the crooked peece in a trap, to which the
bayt is tyed; at which a Mouſe, Rat, Wolfe, or any other vermine biting, the
trapp falls down & catcheth the beaſt.

According to Tertullian, a ſcandall is Example of a thing not good, but evill,
leading or emboldening unto ſinne. Or thus it may be: It is a Word or deed,
either evill in it ſelfe, or in appearance gi­ving occaſion of falling to
others. Daven. Quaeſt. 7. p. 40. Aquin. 2. Qu 43.

Againe, Touching offences, they are given 10. wayes. 1. When falſe Worſhip is
practiſedEze. 23 33. Pelarg Quaeſt. Evang. in Mat. 18. p. 205. polan. Syn­tag.
Theol. l. 6, c. 3. p. 339.. 2. Bad counſell givenMat. 23, 22. Hunnius in Mat.
c. 18. p. 606. Me­lancth. in Evang. feſt. 5. Mich. p. 552.. 3. Weake
Chriſtians cauſed to goe a ſtrayWillet. on Rom. 14. Quaeſt. 3. p. 641.. 4. The
ſtronger greevedEckius Hom. feſt. Mich. p. 700. Tom. 5.. [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=77) 5\. Evill men
hardened in ſinneZanch: prae: 3; p. 539. Aret: in Mat: 18; p: 643. 6. New
opinions broachedPareus in Rom: 14 v. 13; p: 173. 7\. The Goſpell cauſed to be
evill ſpoken offEze: 36 Cent: 1, l: 2; c. 4; p: 448:. 8. Our duties neglected
to the BrethrenAmes de Conſc: l. 5; c. 11; p: 286, 287; Chri­ſost: in 2 Dom:
ad­vent: p: 309. Tō 6. 9. Ill Example ſhewedAuguſt; cont: Adi­mant: c. 14
fol. 136, 6,. 10. Conſent or approbation given to unlawfull thingsPer­kins on
1 Mat: 5; p. 58, Tō: 3.

The hearing ſtood for, cauſeth ſcandals in everie one of theſe parti­culars;
For it breaketh the Holie Order See Par: Ri­vet: Cal­vin, Mer­cer; Com­ment;
in Hoſ: 5, 10;, which the Lord hath ſet and ſetled in his houſe; makes way
unto down-right halting between Chriſt & Antichriſt; drawes many aſide from
their former carefull walking. And ſooke as whē a man ſets up & baits a trap,
we ſay now woe to rats & mice; woe to Foxes, Wolves & the baggage vermine; So
when this ſcandalous ſnare was firſt laid, men might have ſaid, woe, woe, woe,
con­ſidering how many would be enſnared, catched, deſtroyed, and killed
thereby. Againe, what is it, but a will-worſhip, a pernitious & moſt hurt­full
advice; a readie way to perſwade weake onesDaven; Quaeſt▪ 7; p: 40., to thinke
that the falſe Church is not ſo bad, but that they may goe back unto it. Hence
are many righteous hearts made ſad: Idolaters countenanced & made beleeve,
that ſuch as come to their worſhip, doe like their way well en­ough [...] in
their hearts, but for ſome by reſpects differ a litle from them.

For the practice it ſelfe, it is that which Paul never planted Chri­ſoſt: de
in comp: nat. Dei Hō: 3. nor Apollo watered, nor God increaſed: Of it I
cannot ſay as one ſaid in So­phocles Soph. Anti.: It is no Child of two dayes
or yeares birth, but hath been, no man knoweth how long ſince. For if we looke
beyond the Treat: there wilbe found no footſteps of it, either in the Exāple
of former churches, or among the Orders, rules, & commaundements of our
Saviour Ieſus Chriſt & his Apoſtles, or in any learned mans writing; either
ancient or moderne; So that I may ſay of it, as oneLeo Epiſt: 97; c. 3; ſaid,
How are th [...]ſe new de­viſes brought in, that our forefathers never knew▪

To be ſhort, our Profeſſion for it lies under contempt & reproach; witnes, Mr.
Pagets, Arrow ag: Bro [...]; p. 59. paſſage in his booke againſt us, where he
ſcoffi­ngly writes, that the Treat. firſt book, being his Iuſtification of
ſeparation, ſick of Iehorams incurable deſeaſe, the guttes of it fall one day
by day, yea he openly plucks out ſome of the bowels thereof with his owne
hands.

Againe, what watch can the Saints keepe each over other, when ſome are in the
true Church, other at the ſame time in the Sinagogues of Antichriſt. Finally,
ſeeing we have not one Example for it in all the Scriptures, we may wel ſay,
it is a bad Example; and he that alloweth of it, allowes that which the Lord
never allowed. For the reſt in his wri­ting, ſeeing it concerneth not the
point in hand; I will not therefore meddle with it. But for the preſent will
here conclude; deſiring the Lord to ſhew mercie to ſuch as have offended in
this hearing of falſe Mini­ſters; & with the right hand of his power to rayſe
them out of this pit; and to keep the feet of his ſaints from falling into
this or the like ſnare.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=77)

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=78)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15565&page=78)

[...]

[Home](/)

Canne, John, d. 1667?. Date: 1639  

