## (unknown project)

# Anacreon done into English out of the original Greek — Anacreontea. English.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=1)

ANACREON Done into English Out of the Original Greek.

Nec quicquid olim lusit Anacreon

Delevit aetas—

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield Printer to the University, for Anthony Stephe
[...] Bookseller near the Theatre, 1683.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=2)

## THE PREFACE.

THE Great Inducement that drew on my Genius to this bold at­tempt, was the
desire of communicating to the World those hidden Sweets, that pretty
Diversion that long time lay un­discover'd in this Author; as also the
tempting Pattern set by the unimitable Mr. Cowley: where he has rendred part
of this Author so lively in an English dress, that I began to esteem it of
allmost equal Beauty with the Original. But when I consider'd the loss of
those many Infinua­ting advantages the Author had over the Ears of his
Auditors; To whom the Un­accessible Graces of that Language, the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=3) Delicacies of
his Wit and Stile, dish'd up with all the Tickling Art of Musick, could not
but yield a very pleasant Gust. And now that the same Copied out in a less
co­pious Tongue, and without that  [...]ddition­ary [...]uty of the Attuning
Harp, which was customary in those days, should equally relish with us; I am
apt to conclude next of Kin to an Impossibility.

To supply therefore these defects; I have in a Looser Method, but according to
the forementioned Pattern▪ English'd this Au­thor with a Parallel fancy of my
own here and there interwoven, but as I d [...]re aver, nothing derogatory to
the sense of▪ the Au­thor; And however this Method may seem to some to be
onely the wanton Sallies of a ranging Fancy, and the too licentious play of a
Poetical Mind; yet I can easily satisfy my self that tis nothing but what is
authorized by Mr. Cowley nothing but what is adapted to his Model; which
who­ever [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=3)
takes the pains to read will at first sight discover, when he views his Verses
here interserted; which at first I design'd to have put in different
Characters, but after­wards I recalled those thoughts, knowing that no one
could be a pretender to Poetry, who is wholy, Ignorant of his Works, or cannot
with a Cursory glance discern his finer strokes from my mean Endeav­ours. I
must confess I am willing to Patronize this fluenter kind of Version which I
cannot call properly either Imita­tion or Translation but rather impute it to
be somewhat which as yet wants a Name.

Neither do I look upon this to indulge too much Liberty, but onely to grant a
freer Range to sense and Reason: I profess my self an utter Enemy to the too
narrow tye of a verbal Translation, and when I chance to spy an Author of this
kind who has sla­vishly confined himself to the least Particle
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=4) of his
Original; Methinks it looks as if not onely the Motion of the Body (ac­cording
to Des-Cartes opinion) but that of the Mind too was performed by Me­chanism;
All his uneasie production seems so forc'd, so much strived for, as if his Wit
like the Goddess of it could not be produc'd without the Labour of the Brain;
And this methinks is the ready way of Burlesquing both himself and the
Au­thor.

This gross failure I have made it my business all along to avoid, and have
af­fected a decent Naturallness, so that my Love Verses might run as soft and
easie as the Subject; my Rants and Drunken Songs might be so far
proportionable, as to seem the hectoring Efforts of a Debouchè; in which I am
afraid I have been guilty of the most Errata's because being not well
ac­quainted with those vices, I was forced to preposses my mind with a
debauch'd fan­cy
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=4) and then
write with all the extravagancy of Thought.

But now lest some Novice in Poetry should pretend to Criticize upon the
un­evenness of the Verse, I must be bold  [...] to tell him, that I esteem it
the greatest Excellency; and am strangely taken with Horace for observing this
Idiom in his Sermo's, where his sense is not con­fined to an affected
smoothness but seems undesignedly to happen into Verse; *Plat [...] Lib. 3. de
Rep. Page 400. and as if he took Plato's Opinion in this case for a Standard,
when he tells us, that the Verse ought to observe those Cadencies required by
the sense, and to be squared to that; and not the Sense to the Verse. This
therefore is sufficient plea for those seeming Errors, which might trapan an
unjudieio [...]s Reader into false Criticisms.

And as for the common Expressions I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=5) have made use
of in this Piece, they were altogether designed; and not on purpose to help
out with unseemly Bodges the de [...]i­cient Rhime, but to avoid that
reprehension, the Tragaedians of old lay under according to the sentiments of
Ariphra­des, *Aristot. de Ar [...] po. cap. 22. who condemned em for deviating
from the usual Di­alect of Speaking. Which indeed in my opni­on is no small
failure; and Aristotle himself ownes that they derogated much from his  [...]
or property belonging to Poe­sie.

As for the licentious gingling of the Rhymes, no one will have reason to judge
it an Innovation, if he does with a nice scrutiny examine into some of the
Verles in an Ode here imitated by the Auhor of the Satyrs against the
Jesuites: and I am very willing to favour this way and could allmost wish
blank Verse were much in­vogue, knowing very well it would give
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=5) the Fancy
fairer play, being not imprisoned withing the narrow limits of Rhyme; thus far
I have apologiz [...]d for those licenses I have here indulged my self; and
that no one after this might Cavil at the design of this Piece, where vice
seems to be so gaw­dily apparalled on purpose to draw over some to be its
Proselytes, I would have the Reader know that this is far from the intent of
the Author, who onely de­signed it as an innocent recreation to divert the
Mind after it has been  [...]eized with the long fatigue of Business, and to
fill up those vacant hours appropriated to Mirth; and also with insinuating
delight to please the Ladies: for whom great part of this Book (viz. That
product, those ena­mou [...]ing features of Love so prettily de­lineated by
this Author) was peculiarly intended: in rendring which the onely thing I have
to glory in is; that whereas I have had such enticements to use a wan­tonness
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=6) of Speech,
and in the plainness of Language to display the Ladies Naked; yet I have been
so decently Modest, as not to admit of one expression that may adul­terate the
chastest thoughts of a Nun, or exact a Blush from the most reserved of that
Sex. I shall only now desire the La­dies favourably to accept this, and bless
it with their Approbation; then I shall be exempted from the fear of any ill-
na­tured Critieks, being well assured that as for the Generality of men they
are so much theirs, so much bound in Cmplaisance to Will and Nill the same,
that to dislike what the Ladies approve, were in some Measure to contradict
themselves. From these therefore I beg that my applause may be uttered with
all the Emphasis of a Smile; yet this alas would be too much, and onely render
me more unhappy; I should then begin to envy even my own work, and account it
my happier Rival;
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=6) nor could I
propose to my self any other means of satisfaction, then by wishing they would
by a kind Metonymie accept the Author for his Book.

S. B.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=7)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=7)

## The Life of ANACREON.

ANACREON was a Poet famous for Lyriques amongst the Graecians, and ac­cording
to Strabo an Inhabitant of the City Teios; whence he took the denomination of
Te [...]us, and whence we read in Ovid Teia Mu­  [...] about whose Parents the
Antiquarians are of different Opinions, and seem dubious on whom to confer
that Honour. Some would have his Father to be Scythinus, others Eumelus,
others say his name was Parthemus or Aristocri­tus▪ I shall not therefore
endeavour to recon­cile these differences, but were I to guess at his
Genealogy, byass'd by the delicious Wantonness of his Stile: I should be apt
to conjecture, that Bacchus had sometime stoln the Marriage-Sweets of Venus,
and palliated his crime with this off­spring.

His life was a continued Scene of Delight, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=8) his Body
seemed, instead of a Soul, to be infor­med with nothing but Love. He was much
en­slaved with the Masculin Love of a Beautiful Boy named Bathyllus; as we may
easily appre­hend by his often mentioning of him through­out his whole Book,
as also by that of Ho­race.

Non aliter Samio dicunt arsisse Bathyllo

Anacreonta Teium.—

Nor was he less enamoured with the powerful charms of his Mistress Eurypile;
for whose af­fection he determined his Genious so to Love-Verses, that Cicero
says of him, His Poetry is all ore a treatise of Amours. Which I am apt to
imagine a mistake, knowing that Bacchus equal­ly shares in it, and he never
separated those two chief Ingredients of an Epicurean's happiness, Women and
Wine. To the Latter of these he seemed to owe all his Enthusiasm, all the
youth­ful vigour of his Old Age: he was so actuated, so enlivened with this,
as if, when his own Spir­its decayed, Those of Wine became vital. He was much
addicted to the vice of Drinking, whence he was reproachfully entituled by
some  [...], and the Athenians (as Pansanias re­lates
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=8) in his
description of Greece) erected his Statue in a Drunken posture. There goes a
very pleasant Story of him, that once having took a Cup too much of the
Creature, he came staggering homewards through the Market place, and
[...]eeling against a Nurse with a Child in her Arms named Cleobulus, he had
almost beat her down; nor did he c [...]ave her pardon for this Offence, but
injured her as much afterwards wich a scornful, hectoring reply: upon which
the Nurse begged that the Justice of Heaven would take it into consideration,
and prayed that he might be hereafter with all the Tyranny of af­
[...]ectionate Passion as much endeared to the Child  [...]s now he abhorred
it.

Now after Cleobulus was past his Infancy, he  [...]ecame so strangely
beautiful, that Nature seem­  [...]d extravagant in bestowing all her charms
upon  [...]ne face; and the Gods being mindful of the  [...]urse's request
inflicted upon Anacreon the sweet [...]evenge of Love, as appears in some of
his mai­  [...]ed pieces, where he draws up this Petition to  [...]he God of
Love.

Tu propitius  [...]neras exaudi preces,

Fave Cleobulo, suscipe amorem meum.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=9)But Athenaeus
is of Opinion that this Poet was not so much given to debauchery and seems
[...]o clear him from the crime of Drunkenness; when he says, ▪  [...] Lib.
10. Dei [...]: Fol. 429. that he onely played the Counterfeit as much in
compo­sing his drunken Songs, as I have in translating them.

As▪ for the other part of his Verses▪ those L [...]es of Love, and b [...]s
for delight, they seem by a kind of Sympathy to be co [...]le to his Life, and
maintain an equal Correspondence with Mitth and Pleasure: so that by the
lusciousness of his Stile, and neatness of Wit, he got himself no small
re­pute amongst the Ancients; some of which dig­nified him with the title of
the delicious Anacrean, the Honey-Poet; And Plato, though a very nice
Philosopher who allows of no pleasure but that in the Abstract; who terms the
gross enjoyment of the sensual Appetite a Brute delight,  [...]nd ac­counts
that refined bliss the Marriage of Souls a property onely entailed on
Rationalls; yet he was so overswayed with the Poetical Philtres of of
Anacreon, as to sign his approbation of a more substantial delight in
gratifying the Senses, and abandon that aerie notion of pleasure, as a sha­dow
of Solid joy, a mere creature of  [...]ancy;
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=9) when he calls
this Author the wise Anacreon: Whose Moralls tell us he was a great Abetter of
Epicurism, he placed his Summum Bonum in the gross embraces of delight and all
his Actions tended to that as to their Centre; he pronoun­ced to his Mind the
Poets Requiem, Aetate frue­re, Enjoy thy Life; and if any hour slipped away
without Mirth he accounted it mispent, and himself guilty of the crime of
Idleness; he aban­doned all gravity and Wisdom as bold Incroachers upon the
liberties of Pleasure; Business was a mere stranger to his mind, nor did ever
the tur­bulent thoughts of that discompose the calmness of his Breast: Nay
what most of all commands our Admiration is, that when he was under the severe
Discipline of Age when nothing is becom­ing but to be Morose, and commence a
Dissenter in Jollity; to see how Love overpower'd all these Tyrants, and a
Smile could pry out some kind cranies to peep through his wrinkled looks, how
he could be capable at this Winter of his Life to be inflamed with Love!

As if Nature had priviledg'd in him, a familiar Society, a friendly
Neighbourhood betwixt two Contraries, Heat and Cold. I am apt methinks now to
credit the theft of Prometheus, or sub­scribe to the tenet os Heraclitus
Physicus, that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=10) his Soul
owed its being to fire: when I see it so often flash out in wanton sparks of
Love, and be­tray the flame within, when he writes with all the heat of
Passion: But tis said besides these Love-Songs he composed several Elegies,
and Iambicks, and several other Pieces of Poetry, which the World hath not
been so happy to retain.

The time he lived in is ambiguons: Eusebius records it in the LXI Olympiad,
Suidas in the LXII, and makes him Cotemporary with Poly­crates a Tyrant at
Samos; His Verse so mollified the harsh temper of that Prince, and as it were
ci­vilized his brutal Disposition, that he became no small favourite of his;
But others are of Opini­on, that he flourished under the Reign of Cyrus and
Cambyses, and that not being able to suffer the Tyranny of the Persians, he
betook himself to Abdera a City in Thrace whose sometime inhabiting there
might attone for the Epidemical Disease of that people, Dullness: here he long
time enjoyed the sweets of a quiet Life, attended with content and mirth the
gay retinue of a Po­et; and in the LXXXVth year of his Age died being choaked
with a Grape-stone, upon whose death we have this Elegy out of Caelius.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=10)

ATte Sancte Senex a [...]us sub Tartara misit,

Cygneae clausit qui tibi vocit iter:

Vos Hederae tumulum, tumulum vos cingite Lauri

Hoc Rosa perpetuo uernet odora lo [...]o;

At vitis procul hinc, procul hinc odiosa face ssat,

Quae dirae causam protulit una necis;

Creditur ipse minus vitem nunc Bacchus amare

In vatem tantum quae fuit ausa nefas.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=11)

English't thus.

HAil Bard triumphant, whose melodious breath

A Grape-stone stopp'd, the Thunder-bolt of death.

Let Ivie now thy envied Tomb surround,

And let it be with thy own Laurels crown'd;

Let grateful Roses od'rous offerings bring,

And here enjoy an everlasting Spring;

But hence, far hence be plac'd the treach'rous Vine,

That made immortal Thee to death re [...]gn;

Bacchus self hates it now, 'tis thought, and grieves

T' has kill'd a Poet in whose Verse it lives.

## Table of contents

  * THE PREFACE.
  * The Life of ANACREON.
  * 1\. ANACREON Translated out of the Original Greek.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=11)

## 1\. ANACREON Translated out of the Original Greek.

I. Love.

I'll sing of Heroes, sing of Kings;

In mighty Numbers, mighty things.

Begin my Muse; but lo the strings

To my great Song rebellious prove;

The Strings will sound of nought but Love;

I broke them all, and put on new;

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=12)'Tis this
or nothing sure will do.

These sure (said I) will me obey;

These sure Heroick Notes will play.

Strait I began with with thundering Jove.

And all the immortal Powers, but Love,

Love smil'd, and from my enfeebled Lyre

Came gentle Airs, such as inspire

Melting Love, soft de [...]re.

Farewell then Heroes, farewell Kings,

And mighty Numbers, mighty Things;

Love tunes my Heart just to my Strings.

II. Beauty.

LIberal Nature did dispense

To all things Arms for their defence;

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=12)And some
she Arms with sinewy force,

And some with swiftness in the course;

Some with hard Hoofs, or forked Claws,

And some with Horns, or tusked Jaws.

And some with Scales, and some with Wings,

And some with Teeth, and some with Stings.

Wisdom to Man she did afford,

Wisdom for Shield, and Wit for Sword.

What to Beauteous Woman-kind,

What Arms, what Armour has she assign'd?

Beauty is both; for with the Fair

What Arms, what Armour can compare?

What Steel, what Gold, or Diamond,

More Impassible is found?

And what Flame, what Lightning e're

So great and active force did bear?

They are all Weapon, and they dar [...]

Like Porcupines from every part.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=13)Who can
alas, their strength express,

Arm'd when they themselves undress,

Cap-a-pe with Nakedness?

III. Cupid or the Cunning Beggar.

ORe all when Night had silence spread,

Chain'd down by sleep and all lay dead,

When Moon and Stars below did rest,

With former watchings much opprest;

When even Thought in peace was lain;

And the Old Nothing seem'd to reign;

A pretty Boy at door did wait,

And me for Lodging much intreat,

Complaining long of cold and wet.

I am says he a fatherless,

And hungry Child in much distress:

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=13)My Mother
to some neighb'ring Town

To beg relief for us is gone,

Left me and Innocence alone.

Good Sir, if the kind Gods you love,

Let me, poor me your pitty move.

Twas here he stopt; and down his Face

Methought the Tears did flow apace,

His formal Cant I soon believ'd,

And thought that I his Tears perceiv'd.

Compassion came from every part,

And pleaded strongly in my Heart;

My Heart, which its own ills desir'd,

And even I my self conspir'd.

I rose and strook a Light, then strait

With Pious hast unlock'd the Gate;

(So headlong to our Fate we fly,

So fond are we of Misery.)

I saw the Youth, 'twas wondrous fair,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=14)His Eyes
did like two Stars appear,

His Limbs upon each other shone,

And made a Constellation;

But heats as yet I must not feel,

With Wings he did himself conceal,

(For know with Pomp and Leisure he

Prepar'd at length to Murder me.)

His Darts and Bow did seem around

To hang, as Play-things newly found;

Destruction then with kind intent

I modishly did Complement,

I warm'd his hands with mine, but see

Two fires did back upon me  [...]lie;

For though more cold then Flint he came,

He had like that a secret flame.

His Hair was wet, but even then

Some glimmering beauties did remain;

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=14)At length
the Curls in order lay,

'Ore which (that led my Soul away)

Millions of little Loves did play:

I call'd him Ganymede, I'de swear

That Cupid was not half so fair:

Nay, that I might my kindness shew,

I think I hugg'd and kist him too.

Cheer'd thus, warm Life came up again,

And all in every part did reign;

All discontent and cares did cease,

His Bow-strings th' onely thing amiss;

So prettily he strait forgot,

Each grave and unbecomming thought.

Lets try says (affecting strait

A meekly look, the greatest cheat)

Lets try; if'gainst my Bow th' unkind

Heav'ns, rage and malice have design'd.

[...]re to the head the Dart was drawn,

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=15)And here
the mighty God was shewn;

For (Oh) in my unwary Breast

Death and the Fatal Steel did rest!

Impatient Sense and Nature dies,

And Love alone a Life supplies.

The grinning Boy augments my pain,

With Drolls and Sc [...]ffs he wounds again.

Landlord, he cries, my Bow you see

Is much above an Injury.

All ills against your Heart were meant,

Kind ills which Heavn and Cupid sent.

And you to me that warmth did give,

A double gift do back receive;

I grant (my gratitude to prove)

That thou shall scorch and burn with Love.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=15)

IV. The Epicure.

UNderneath this Myrtle shade,

On Flowrie beds supinely laid,

With od'rous oyls my head o'reflowing,

And around it Roses growing,

What should I do but drink away

The heat, and troubles of the Day?

In this more then Kingly state,

Love himself shall on me wait.

Fill to me Love, nay fill it up;

And mingled cast into the Cup

Wit, and Mirth, and noble Fires,

Vigorous Health, and gay Desires.

The Wheel of Life no less will stay.

In a smooth than rugged way.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=16)Since it
equally doth flee,

Let the Motion pleas [...]nt be.

Why do we precious Oyntments shower,

Nobler Wines why do we pour,

Beauteous Flowers why do we spread,

Upon the Monuments of the Dead?

Nothing they but Dust can show,

Or Bones that has [...]en to be so.

Crown me with Roses whilest I live,

Now your Wines and Oyntment give,

After death I nothing crave,

Let me Alive my pleasures have,

All are Stoicks in the Grave.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=16)

V. The Rose

PRetty Rose, Thou gawdy Flower,

Sacred to Love's mighty power,

Whence there's no Lover ever seeks,

But finds Thee in his Mistres Cheeks,)

Thee thy Red Jolly looks design

The fit Companion of Wine;

Crown'd thus, we'll drink and merry be,

Till we look gay and Red like Thee.

Queen of all the Flowers that wear

The Liv'rie of the painted year.

Thou Lovely Darling of the Spring,

How doest thou short-lived glories bring,

How doest thou vex us, but in this,

That thy Life no longer is.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=17)Thee the
Gods love, hence they design

To draw thee fresh with Paint divine,

And in thy Reds strive to display

The blushing Infancy of Day.

The God of Love more lovely now,

Adorns with thee his comely brow,

When with the Graces dauncing, he

Sees nothing there so fair as thee:

Then prithee let me Roses have,

A Rosie Chaplet's all I crave;

For which, Thou God of Wine, each day

I'll thee in Drunken Carols pay;

And when the beauteous Roses spread

Their Ruby lustre round my Head;

How shall one Dear She, and I,

In Mirth and Gallantry comply;

Free from care, free from strife,

We'll daunce the pleasant Maze of Life.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=17)

Another.

WHilst Roses round our Temples twine,

The envy of the Rosie Wine,

In which we cares and business bury;

Thus we live, thus live merry;

The Beauteous Virgins dance a round

At the Harps no less charming sound,

Their wanton Ivie wands too they

As Badges of their Mirth display:

(That twining Plant seems to prove

The fittest Emblem of their Love.)

See how each Harmonious Boy

Does sometimes Daunce, and sometimes Play;

They Sing and Daunce away their prime,

And by such Motions measure Time;

Love himself makes up the Quire,

Venus does with soft Airs inspire.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=18)That
sprightly God, the God of Wine,

Pours New life through every Vein.

All's Mirth: even now the  [...]rave, and Sage

Curse the dull awkerdness of Age.

This the true life, this sure must be,

Since Life it self's but Harmony.

VI. The Wound.

WHen once I did rebellious prove,

Nor own'd the S [...]reingty of Love.

Love smil'd, and strait he took in hand

His all commanding Purple Wand,

Which kindly forc'd me to obey,

And through strange Paths with Love to stray.

We pass'd ore sweetest flowrie Plains,

And through swift Amorous curled Streams,

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=18)Where even
sensl [...]s [...] things I saw,

Did pay obeysance to Love's Law.

Kind Reeds did to each other move,

The Waters self seem'd warm with Love.

Even Brambles our approach to greet,

Did in kind rough embraces meet.

Thus as I pas'd and well did spy

How all Things, All Things Lov'd but I,

A pretty spangled glittering Foe,

Too gay I thought to wound me so,

A Snake with's Sting did life betray,

My Heart had almost fled away.

But Cupid call'd it back, I see

All Hearts at his disposal be.

Who nodding check'd my stubborn pride,

And thus at length began to chide.

No matter what those fools sustain

Who account Love the greatest pain,

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=19)Which but
once tried, none e're did wish

That so much dreaded pain to miss.

VII. The Dream.

AS on a Purple Quilt I chofe

By Night to take my sweet repose,

Where dewie Sleep fell on my breast,

And all my cares lay calm'd in Rest,

My wanton Fansie sporting lay,

And call'd my roving Thoughts to play.

Who in their sport and am'rous flight

Made up this Landskip of delight.

Methoughts (but oh 'twas but a Dream)

I wandring spied a spotless train

Of beauteous Virgins, where each face

Provok'd enough to th' amorous chase.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=19)Strait the
coy Phantoms fled away,

Not would for my kind Courtship stay.

I follow'd strait, but lo hard by

A Troop of gallant Youths did ly.

Who there would fain have rival'd me,

And forc'd me back with railery,

Yet this alas but fann'd the fire,

And added Wings to my desire.

Methoughts I made the greater hast,

And seiz'd the amorous Prey at last.

And then I proffer'd at a Kiss,

But wak'd in the Interim of bliss.

Curse on my Eys that open'd day,

And chas'd those pleasant Forms away.

My Eyes, that now will useless be,

If I such sights may sleeping see.

Thus raving I lay down, and then

I onely wish'd to Dream ag'en.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=20)

VIII, The Dove.

TEll me, Lov's Envoy, prithee do

Whither dost this Journey go

Or whence did'st this sweet voyage take,

Through perfum'd Air which thy Wings make.

Which with their wanton fannings spread,

Such Odours, as embalm the Dead.

Such Odours, as I'de almost Swear

Zephyrus Gales not sweeter are,

When with some Rose he has bin at play,

And kist its fragant Life away.

The Dove reply'd, what's this to Thee?

I carry Anacreon's Embassie;

Which he with courteous kind intent

Has to his Lov'd Bathyllus sent.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=20) Bathyllus
whose fair face does prove

The Potent Monarchy of Love.

Tis true I once was Venus slave,

Nor carry'd ought but what She gave,

Who for a Love-Toy, for a Song

Sold me to her Anacreon.

Whom now I serve you see, and bear

These his Love Letters through the Air;

Which soft as mine own Feathers are.

For which good Office kindly he

My hated freedom proffers me.

But all the freedom which I crave

Is that I still may be his Slave.

For why should I, tell me why,

Range through the Desart of the Sky?

Or make some Mountains top my Seat

To fit and moan for want of meat;

Or when the year does bounties yield,

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=21)And Fruits
enrich each Painted Field,

Why should I course Berries eat,

Rough as the Brambles where I sit?

Where all my Victuals drest must be

By Natures homely Cookery.

When I can here as freely stand,

And peck out of Anacreons hand.

Delicious Crumbs, such as be

The sweet effects of Luxury.

And gulp such Wine, as he himself

Drinks when he names Bathyllus health:

And when I'me drunk with this, I play

And dance and revel all the day.

But when all things do silence keep,

And the still Night invites to  [...]leep,

I on his Harp reposingly,

And dream of nought but Harmony.

This Sir is all, this is the brief

Account of my Voluptuous life.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=21)Go with
this Narrative content,

Youv'e made me already impertinent.

That you your self will say anon,

[...]'me Dove in all parts, but my Tongue.

IX. Cupid in Wax.

A Friend of mine expos'd to sale

A Waxen piece, wrought wondrous well.

The God of Love was form'd in this

Soft as he by Nature is.

Where Art so much of life did give,

The smiling Image seem'd alive.

Pleas'd at the sight, I ask'd the price

Of this well imitated piece.

My Friend reply'd, Sir what you please,

I'le thank you too for the release.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=22)For I'me
no Artist truth to tell,

But Love at any rate I'de sell,

With painted Arrows, painted Bow,

Which make a real dreadful show.

I dare not longer Cupid trust,

Brother to insatiable Lust.

Nay then by your leave Sir, I cry'd,

If you'd be of this torment rid,

Think not to vend the ware, but know

That you must buy your Chapman too.

Come hang't give me a Groat, Il'e take

The Image home, but for Heav'ns sake

Prithee Love my breast inspire,

And kindle vigorous desire.

Or else in flames far above

All the extremities of Love,

Thy stubborn Form shall soon decay,

The Waxen God shall melt away.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=22)And if
thou this deniest to me,

The fire shall thy Sole  [...]uine be.

X. Age.

OFt am I by the Woman told

Poor Ana [...]reon thou grow'st old.

Look how thy Hairs are falling all,

Poor Anacreon how they fall.

Whether I grow old or no

By th' effects I do not know,

This I can tell without being told,

Tis time to live, if I grow old.

Tis time short pleasures now to take

Of little life the best to make,

And manage wisely the last Stake

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=23)

XI. The Swallow:

FOolish Prater what  [...]'st thou

So early at my Window do,

with thy tuneless Serenade;

Well't had been had Tereus made

Thee, as Dumb as Philomel,

There his Knife had done but well.

In thy undiscovered Nest,

Thou dost all the Winter rest,

And dreamest o're thy Summer joys,

Free from the stormy seasons noise.

Free from th [...] thou'st done to me,

Who disturbs or seeks out Thee?

Had'st thou all the charming notes,

Of the VVoods Poetick Throats

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=23)All thy
Art could never pay

What thou'st hast ta'ne from me away,

Cruel Bird thou'st ta'ne away,

A Dream out of my arms to day.

A Dream, that ne're must equall'd be,

[...]y all that waking Eyes may see.

Thou this damage to repair

Nothing half so sweet or fair,

Nothing half so good can'st bring,

Though men say, Thou bring'st the Spring.

XII. A Rant.

THat Noble Soul, the Phrygian Boy

Damn'd all Sense, a useless Toy.

When with the Goddess big he reel'd,

And bravely roar'd it in the Field.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=24)Where
Mountains listned to his voice,

And Eccho'd back the Drunken noise.

Thus, Thus of old th' inspir'd Men,

Drank Bumpers up of Hypocrene.

Till Frensie-strook they did begin,

To fancy some mad God within,

They soar'd above all common Sense,

Wing'd with a Drunken Excellence.

And all their ventrous rage let fly,

In Dithyrambick Poetry.

Whilst these, these my Examples be,

I'll curse all dull Sobriety.

Fill'd with Wine's delicious charms,

Fill'd with a Mistress in my Arms,

My Passion uncontroul'd shall rove,

Doubly debauch'd with Wine, and Love.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=24)

XIII. The Duel.

YEs I will Love then, I will Love,

I will not now Loves Rebel prove.

Though I was once his Enemy,

Thoug ill-advis'd and stubborn I

Did to the Combate him defie.

An Helmet, Spear, and mighty Shield

Like some New Ajax I did wield,

Love in one hand his Bow did take,

In th' other hand a Dart did shake,

But yet in vain the Dart did throw,

In vain he often drew the Bow,

So well my Armour did refist,

So oft by slight the Blow I mist.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=25)But when I
thought all danger past,

His Quiver empty'd quite at las [...].

Instead of Arrow or of Dart

He shot Himself into my heart.

The living, and the killing Arrow

Ran through the Skin, the Flesh, the Blood,

And broke the Bones, and scorcht the Marrow;

No Trench, or Work of Life withstood:

In vain I now the Walls maintain,

I set out Guards and Scouts in vain

Since th' Enemy does within remain.

In vain a Breast plate now I wear,

Since in my Breast the Foe I bear:

In vain my Feet their swiftness try,

For from the Body can they fly?

XIV. The Drunkard:

FIll the Bowl with rosie Wine,

Around our Temples Roses twine,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=25)And let us
chearfully a while,

Like the Wine and Ro [...]es smile.

Crown'd with Roses we contemn

Gyges wealthy Diadem.

To day is ours, what do we fear,

To day is Ours, we have it here.

Let's treat it kindly, that it may

Wish at least with us to stay.

Lets banish Business, banish Sorrow,

To the Gods belongs To Morrow.

XV. My Fate:

LEt other Poets build their glory,

On the ruin'd Trojans Story

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=26)Ill
neither Sing of this or that,

Or the mighty Thebans fate,

Though I was sure to Sing withall,

In such sweet Numbers as might call

The stones again into a Wall.

Nobler Themes My Breast inspire,

Nobler Songs provoke my Lyre:

Nobler Wars, such as be

Wag'd by a disdainful she.

Though I should stand where Canons roar,

'Tis She alone can wound me more

I have try'd by Land and Sea enough,

I am all Weapons, but loves proof;

Love, who in Ambuscado lies

All armed in my Mistress eyes.

Each glance of her shoots forth a Dart,

And every look commands a heart.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=26)

XVI. The Cup.

MAke me a Bowl, a mighty Bowl

Large as my capacious Soul.

Vast as my thirst is, let it have

Depth enough to be my Grave.

I mean the Grave of all my care,

For I intend to bury't there.

Let it of Silver sashion'd be,

Worthy of Wine, Worthy of me.

Worthy to adorn the Spheres,

As that bright Cup amongst the Stars.

That Cup, which Heav'n deign'd a place

Next the Sun, its greatest grace.

Kind Cup, that to the Stars did go

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=27)To light
poor Drunkards here below,

Let mine be so and give me light,

That I may drink and revel by't.

Yetdraw no shapes of Armour there,

No Cask, nor Shield nor Sword, nor Spear.

Nor Wars of Thebes▪ nor Wars of Troy,

Nor any other Martial Toy,

For what do I vain Armour prize,

Who mind not such rough exercise,

But gentler Sieges, softer Wars,

Fights that cause no Wounds nor Scars.

I'll have no Battles on my Plate,

Lest sight of them should brawls create,

Lest that provoke to Quarrels too,

Which Wine it self enough can do

Draw me no Constellation [...] there,

No Ram, nor Bull, nor Dog, nor Bear,

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=27)Nor any of
that monstrous Fry,

Of Animals which stock the Sky.

For what are Stars to my design,

Stars, which I when Drunk out shine

Outshone by every drop of Wine.

I lack no Pole star on the Brink,

To guide in the wide Sea of Drink.

But would for ever there be tost,

Wish no Haven, seek no Coast.

Yet gentle Artist, if thou'lt try

Thy Skil, then draw me, (let me see)

Draw me first a spreading Vine,

Make it's Arms the Bowl entwine.

With kind Embraces such as I,

Twist about my loving She.

Let its Bows o're-spread above

Scenes of Drinking, Scenes of Love.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=28)Draw next
the Patron of the Tree,

Draw Bacchus and soft Cupid by,

Draw them both in Toping shapes,

Their Temples crown'd with cluster'd Grapes.

Make them lean against the Cup,

As twere to keep their Figures up.

And when their reeling Forms I view,

I'll think them Drunk, and be so too.

The Gods shall my Examples be,

The Gods thus Drunk in Effigy.

Another.

HEre Artist all thy Skill impart,

With Richest Metal, Richer Art,

Make me a Bowl brighter far,

Then Heav'ns Cup gilt with many a Star,

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=28)That Cup
to which we'll nothing owe,

Tis This shall influence us below.

In various Colours, various dress,

Here thy rich Workmanship express.

First let the flowrie Spring appear,

The Drinking Season of the year.

When every verdant Rose Tree still

Of dewie-Nectar drinks it's fill.

And when't has long carousing stood,

Breaks out into many a Bud.

Buds, which once op'd, will blush to be

The Effects of Insobriety.

Then let these Infant Roses shine,

As if they borrow'd from the Wine

A Drunken redness, thus to be

The Emblems of good Company.

And to make up the tempting show

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=29)Let Wine
in Streams seem to flow.

And in feign'd Riv'lets rowl along,

Enough to Fuddle Lookers on.

But prithee Artist, above all

Draw no Aegyptian Festival.

Make no Deaths-heads the Living fright,

Or check their Mirth, curb their delight,

But rather let young Bacchus here

In all his stagg'ring shapes appear.

Draw Venus with hands lifted up

As 'twere to Minister the Cup.

With all her She adorers too,

Where each shall Hebe's office do.

Then draw the lovely amorous Boy,

But make him lay his Arrows by.

He'll here no Bow, no Arrows want

Whilst Wine it self's Praedominant.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=29)Next
spread around the Mantling Vine,

And let it the rich Bowl entwine

With cluster'd Grapes, such as may

Call the Birds once more away,

Flattring 'em with a painted Prey.

And underneath the pleasant shade,

(If any by this Tree is made)

Make all the smiling Graces play,

Melting their softer hours away.

Let 'em inspir'd nimbly move,

Some with Wine, some with Love.

Draw last of all good Company,

Such as may Phaebus place supply.

Phaebus who though he above shines bright,

Seemingly drunk with reeling light,

Should he but our Revels know,

Would rather choose his Heav'n below.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=30)Would
rather chuse to light us here

And make the circling Bowl his Sphere.

Would rather have, when day is done,

Our Wine, his Western Ocean.

XVII. Drinking.

THe thirsty Earth soaks up the Rain,

And drinks, and gapes for Drink again.

The Plants suck in the Earth and are

With constant drinking fresh and fair.

The Sea it self, which one would think

Should have but little need of Drink

Drinks ten thousand Rivers up,

So fill'd that they o'reflow the Cup.

The busie Sun (and one should guess

By's drunken fiery face no less)

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=30)Drinks up
the Sea, and when h'as done,

The Moon and Stars drink up the Sun,

They drink and dance by their own light.

They drink and revel all the night,

Nothing in Natures's sober found,

But an Eternal Health goes round.

Fill up the Bowl then, fill it high,

Fill all the Glasses there, for why

Should every Creature drink but I,

Why, Men of Morals, tell me why?

XVIII. The [...]ish to his Mistress.

I'Me told how Bodies change their State

By the shuffling hand of Fate;

Which when once dispos'd to play

Does some strangely convey

And steal 'em from Themselves away.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=31)Here it
leaves one, when life is gone,

In wondring postures made a Stone.

Another there stands doubting yet

Whether to trust her Wings or Feet,

Amidst these Scenes of Changes now

Should the Gods my wish allow,

Thy happy Looking-glass I'de be,

That thou might'st always gaze on me,

Where thou might'st spy, (was my Breast clear)

Thy self, thy very self is there.

I'de wish my Thread of Life were spun

Into t [...]y rich and precious Gown.

That I might to Embraces hast,

And clasp my Love about the wast.

Or let me in pure Riv'lets flow,

Which when thou bath'st will brighter show.

Or let me in sweet Essence dy,

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=31)And here
exhale my O'drous breath

Whilst I thy limbs perfuming lye,

Who could wish a sweeter death?

Or let the Heav'ns to exceed my wish

And urge it on to greater bliss,

Make me your Necklacé, Shape, or Shoe,

Nay any thing that belongs to you.

XIX. Heat.

FIll, kind Misses, fill the Bowl,

And let the Wine refresh my Soul.

For now the thirsty heat of day

Has almost drunk my Life away;

VVhole flouds of sweat will scarce fuffice,

It drinks, and still new flouds arise:

It drinks, till I my self grow dry,

And can no longer flouds supp [...]y.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=32)Now then
my Heat, releive,

And now your Cooling Garlands weave,

Cooling Garlands, such as may

Invite refreshing VVinds to play,

And chase the Tyrant Heat away.

But this I doe perhaps youle guess

Because I mean to Love you less;

Or do't because I'de hence remove

All the flames and heat of Love.

Foolish Girls, perhaps you know

This to the Body good may doe;

But Love can no abatement find,

Love's the High-Feaver of the Mind.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=32)

XX. Solitude.

GRant me ye Gods the Life I love,

And lend to me a shady Grove:

There let the Trees Verdant Hair

Sport with each kind blast of air.

Let Birds the Choristers of the wood

Sing all that's pleasant, all that's good.

Make some liquid silver stream

In soft whisperings court the Plain.

And let me here Flowers behold

Fringing its banks with native Gold.

Then tell ye Gods, tell if ye can

VVhat Prince, what great unhappy man

VVould not thus a Cell prefer,

And chuse to live an Hermit here.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=33)

XXI. Gold.

IF all the sorcerie of Gold,

That which can all things els [...] wi [...]hold,

Could but prorogue the fatal day,

Or cou [...]t one fleeting minutes stay▪

No doubt I should a Miser be,

And hugg the Ore as much as he.

Nor should I count it then amiss

That this his Life, this his all is.

But since there's nought, early or late

Can brib [...] inexorable Fate,

Since all must go one common way,

The ri [...]hest and the poorest Clay.

Why does the Mi [...]d up store,

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=33)Why does
he drudg for useless Ore?

Tis all at best a gilt deceit,

All but a pleasant life's worst cheat.

Then since tis so, I'll pleasures take,

And of my time the best I'll make.

Smiling Mirth, gay Jollitry

Shall treat each hour that passes by:

Nay I will Love, and then each day

Even Time it self will wish to stay▪

Thus my short life shall pleasant be,

Thus I shall longer live then he.

XXII. Life.

NAture sent us all abroad,

Directing us a narrow Road;

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=34)The
slippry Road of Life, which men

Once pass, and nere begin ag'en.

O▪re Hedge and Ditch Hope leads e'm on,

And talks of pleasant Fields to come,

But see th' inchanted grounds are gone.

How many years I've passed ore

Tis known, but what remaineth more,

Or when Death takes the Trav'lers in,

Tis hidden, sacred, and u [...]een:

Well then since all things doubtful are

And there are Gods we know not where,

Fill up the Bowl we'll dance and sing

Till Nature does true knowledg bring.

And thus, my Friends we'll joys receive,

And thus we'll  [...]nd the way to live.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=34)

XXIII. The careless Companion.

WHilst the Cup walks nimbly round,

All my Cares in that lye drown'd.

I banish Business to the great,

Business the great man's Favourite.

Business shall now no more molest

The even temper of my Breast:

For since my Age does downwards bend,

Why should I hasten to my end,

Why should I thinking on my Fate,

Thus my Sorrows Antedate?

Fill then my Boy, come fill it up.

I'll bury all cares in this Cup.

For whilst the Cup walks nimbly round,

All my Cares in that lye drown'd.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=35)

Another.

WHilst I carouse, all my cares sink

Into the vast Sea of Drink;

Methinks I Craesus then despise,

With all his useless Treasuries,

Richer far in that bright Coin,

That sparkles in each Glass of Wine;

And what I like better still,

All that Gold is potable.

Tis that has rais'd a precious thought,

And me to fansied Riches brought;

To me thus rich, all things below

Do but meer empty Trifles show.

With Garlands deck'd I roar, and sing,

Greater▪ than the greatest King.

Methinks I laugh at Honour▪s cheat

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=35)That so
imposes on the Great.

I laugh at all the small renown,

That dimly glimmers on a Crown.

Let others now to Wars repair,

And seek for flutt'ring Honour there.

Charge me a Cup Boy, prime it well,

Tis this shall all my Foes repell:

Charge all the Goblets there, for wh [...]

Death stealing on methinks I spy;

But I'll forestall his great design

And be dead drunk before with Wine.

XXIV. In the Praise of Bacchus.

WHilst Bacchus Temple in my Breast

By the Mighty God's possest,

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=36)That God
who first from Lightning came,

Now brisk and active as the same,

He does with Mirth my Mind inspire

And tunes my Heart just to his Choir.

My chearful Pulse beat more strong,

My Bloud in Numbers skips along.

Drunk thus methinks I'me in a Trance,

And all my body's but one Dance.

Methinks I hear Venus rehearse

Some charming Song, some dancing Verse.

That kindly moves (methinks I see)

My trembling Nerv's by Sympathy.

Which dance afresh, by Wine and Love,

Thus I like a Machin move.

Now let the Learn'd say what they can,

Musick is the Soul of Man.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=36)

XXV. His Mistresses Picture.

DRaw, some Apelles, Draw me here

Her who is the onely fair.

She's fled; but in my breast I find

She has left her self behind.

Thy Colours then make ready all,

And copie thus the Original.

First draw her Hair black as the Night,

In which all Lovers take delight.

And if the Wax will Odours bear

Perfumes, that owe more sweets to her,

Draw her High Forehead (let me see)

Whiter then whitest Ivory.

Then paint each brown declining Brow,

That serve so oft for Cupids Bow:

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=37)Who when
with killing strives to please,

Will onely then make use of these.

[...]ut lest these comely loving pair

Of Arches, meet into one Fair:

At a small distance let 'em show,

They wou'd be one, and are scarce two:

Below these if thou canst display,

Of her two Eys the double day,

Where dazling Lightning seems to play.

Like Lightning they glide through the Skin,

And wound the Heart that's lodg'd within.

But to add all their Graces too,

Let 'em like Pallas's be Blew,

Which more than ere her Gorgon slew,

Let 'em such charming glances dart,

As Venus when she wounds a Heart.

This being done: her Cheeks next view,

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=37)Where (if
you'd imitate the true)

Steal Blushes from the Rosie Morn,

(Such even such her Cheeks adorn)

And mingle with the streaming light,

That paints the Milkie way so white.

Mean while her cherry Lips don't miss,

That tempt our tasting in a Kiss;

Lips that like Suada's still dispence,

The sweet Conserv's of Eloquence.

Her Chin and Neck in white array,

Where all the Graces dance and play.

And last of all let her be,

Veil'd in a Dress as gay as she;

But let that Little part be bare,

That where all Woman does appear:

Now the Draught finish'd; now I find

She's drawn so lively to my Mind▪

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=38)That what
she wo'nt, (le [...]t my heart break,)

The Picture's self, I think, will speak.

XXVI. Bathyllus.

IF Painter thou true Life can'st draw,

Now, now, my fair Bathyllus shew.

On's Hair a charming blackness lyes,

And even thence a light does rise.

Make wandring little Curls to dance

In a well ordered Negligence.

His High Forehead bright as the Morn

Black, narrow, Eye-brows do adorn.

Through which, as from a Bow that's bent▪

Sha [...]p Arrows from his Eyes are sent.

To my Heart let them a passage bore,

And make me love him more.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=38)Make
fierce, black eyes, that Thousands slew,

Yet make 'em kind and courteous too.

This Angry part by Mars was sent,

This Mildness here by Venus lent.

That down th' Admirer drives,

And this the Criminal forgives.

His Cheeks with Youth and Blushes drest,

By fairest Apples are exprest.

Let modesty o're all command,

Else the piece will blush to mend your hand.

His Red, plump Lips and little Mouth

Will puzzle and torment us both.

Pretty, Delicious,—oh they've outgone

All Art, and all Description

But let sweet smiles around 'em play,

And there becoming moistures lay,

To them let Eloquence be joyn▪d,

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=39)As if for
Rhetorick design'd.

They must at least a Motion make,

And even Silence seem to speak.

Like that of the Spheres let it be,

A sweet but unheard Harmony.

And in this charming Face, let all

Be stately and Majestical.

Ore's slender, Ivory Neck I'll pass,

And with more joy do downwards hast.

His Breast is full in every part,

For it contains Anacreon's Heart.

Smooth are his hands, both long and White,

Which Kisses must from all invite.

Here through blew veins pure bloud does glide▪

Here on it of't the Soul does ride.

To this fair place orejoy'd it runs,

Long stays it makes, and quick returns.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=39)His large,
big Belly all approve▪

Tis in Drunk'ness graceful and in Love.

His Thighs to Marble I'de compare,

But that they soft and tender are

Loose quivering flesh in Whiteness lies,

And stiff cold Age with fire supplies.

Let there be now a thin slight shade,

Or Anything or Nothing made.

An inward tickling onely draw,

And Love's fi [...]st pleasant Itchings shew,

Even now let flowing Nature try

To pass the bounds of Chastity.

But see your Art is too unkind,

It does not show the Charms behind

Charms, that seem now lovelier far,

[...]cause they hidden are.

On him I will not Feet bestow.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=40)For lovèrs
never look so low.

I onely this of you shall claim,

That you'd the piece Apollo name.

And if you e're Apollo see,

Call't Bathyllus in Effigy:

For Both are Gods, both lov'd by me.

XXVII. The Captive.

IN Chains of Flowers made

The Muses Love did lead.

Intreating Beauty that she'de take

The Prisoner which she first did make.

Though Venus su'd for Liberty,

And wish'd that he might all obey,

Admire sometimes Deformity.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=40)For that
of Pride had store,

And Aegypt Monsters did adore

Fancy made wrinkled faces fair,

And Hills and Dales fine Prospects are.

But though to Love enlargment's brought,

Dear Captivity he sought.

All salvage Wildness nobly scorn'd,

And to Beauty, Beauty he return'd.

XXVIII. The Jolly Drunkard.

STand of, my Thirst can never cease,

I'll drink it all, though Bottomless.

Heav'n shan't show the Soul, nor Hell

That me in Madness dares excel.

Two Graecian Sparks tis true

Their ill natur'd Mothers slew,

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=41)Then stark
and raving mad did run,

Because the brave exploit was gone

And never could again be done.

But I that am contented well

With harmless drink and Whoring still,

That ne're an angry Rival kill'd,

Nor prying Cuckolds bloud e're spill'd,

I that in Claret do delight,

And drink such bloud with appetite,

Beyond an Extasie can fly,

And stare and rave more decently.

Let Heav'n then show the Soul, or Hell

That me in Madness dares excel.

A Lovely sight it was,

When Ajax through the Troops did pass,

Through Hills of Wool fierce Anger shot,

And in the Sheep his Graecians sought.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=41)O're
Northern Alps he seem'd to fly,

And through the Snow to cut his way.

Of, heavy senses he complains,

And throws down th' useless weight of Brains.

Stout Hercules did mount with pride,

And in his Rage was Deify'd.

He strait shook of the fleshly load,

He first grew mad and then a God.

See then after this draught of Wine,

His Star I'll strait outshine;

A Nature I will have like his,

And thus an Apotheosis.

Here, here Perfection is exprest,

Madness with new madness is possest.

Let Heav'n then show the Soul or Hell,

That dares in Madness me excel.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=42)

XXIX. The Account.

WHen all the Stars are by thee told,

(Those endless sums of heav'nly Gold

Or when the Hairs are reckon d all,

From fickly Autums head that fall.

Or when the drops that make the Sea,

Whilst all her Sands thy Counters be,

Thou then, and thou alone must prove

Th' Arithmetician of my Love.

An Hundred Loves at Athens score,

At Corinth write an Hundred more.

Fair Corinth does such Beauties bear,

So few is an escaping there.

Write then at Chios Seventy three,

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=42)Write me
at Lesbos (let me see)

Write me at Lesbos Ninety down,

Full Ninety Loves and half a one.

And next to these let me present

The fair Jonian Regiment,

And next the Carian Company

Five hundred both Effectively.

Three Hundred more at Rhodes and Crete

Three Hundred 'tis I'me sure complete.

For Arms at Crete each Face does bear▪

And every Ey's an Archer there.

Go on, this stop why dost thou make.

Thou think'st perhaps that I mistake,

Seems this to thee to great a Summ,

Why many Thousands are to come.

The mighty Xerxes could not boast

Such different Nations in his Host.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=43)On, for my
love (if thou be'st weary)

Must find some better Secretary.

I have not yet my Persian told

Nor yet my Syrian Loves enroll'd,

Nor Indian nor Arabian

Nor Cyprian Loves nor African,

Nor Scythian nor Italian flames,

There's a whole Map behind of Names.

Of gentle Loves in the temperate Zone,

And cold one's in the Frigid one.

Cold frozen Loves, with which I pine

And parched Loves beneath the Line.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=43)

XXX. The Swallow.

BEloved Bird, who as you fly

Our Spring bring up, or lead away:

Whom Swains that doubt if Winter's done

Trust rather then the Sun;

That in the Summer build'st thy Nest,

And many Thou's are strait encreas't;

That when ill—natur'd Colds appear,

Do'st from the stormy World retire,

And then with pleasant Sleep opprest,

I ong with thy Sons and Daughters rest:

See, how unreasonable is Love,

That from my Heart will never move,

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=44)That every
Minute builds,

With Love and every corner fills.

That Heats or Colds will nere refuse,

Heats or Colds new Births produce.

The young Ones here unfeather'd lye,

And wish for Cupid Wings to fly.

Some in the Egg unformed lay,

Their own warmth to Life works out away.

Half hatched are some, and do receive

But half a Soul, are half alive.

All gape for Food, and All

The Mother Love with chirpings call.

His tuneless Notes each one does try,

And All within is Harmony.

Bred up, they strait together meet,

And each Ten Thousand does beget.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=44)In short
so many Loves do rest,

Within my sad tormented Breast,

By one Tongue they can't be all exprest.

XXXI. To his Young Mistriss.

BEcause Forsooth you'r young and  [...]air,

And fresher then the Rose appear,

Gray Hairs you treat with scornful Eye,

And leave me most unmannerly.

Sweet-heart, these Ashes do contain

Embers, that strive to flame again.

And Aetna that on's Top has Snow,

Feels warmth and fire below.

With Roses whitehair'd Lillies shine,

And in a Garland joyn,

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=45)They
lock't in close embraces lye,

And kiss and hugg most decently.

XXXII. Upon Europa.

THis Bull, my Boy▪ sure is some  [...]e,

Who in disguise is making Love.

Methinks through his guilt Horns I spy,

The brightness of the Deity.

His Front does no curl▪d fierceness wear,

All Heav'n does in his Looks appear,

His very Looks speak him a God,

Who now has left the blest abode.

Nay whence I more of credit take,

Europa's mounted on his back.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=45) Europa
who outshines by far

All his beauteous Harlot's there,

Though each Harlot's made a Star.

Methinks I see him now convey

The Nymph, through the wondring Sea,

Whose Chystal Waves swell here and there,

Seemingly proud of what they bear.

He now like Oars his feet does ply,

And rowes through the watry Sky,

Tis Jov [...] I mean, for sure no Beast

Half so happy, half so blest,

Wafted a Virgin ore the Seas,

And left his Lowing Mistresses.

Nay none of all the Gods above▪

But he, nor he were't not for Love.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=46)

XXXIII. The Vain Advice.

TAlk not to me of Schoolmens Rules,

Those Antiquated, pious Fools,

Who gravely preach of this or that,

Of the Stoicks Chain of Fate.

I hate each sober, groveling thought,

That's from their musty Morals brought.

To those whom vice and youthful rage,

Has turn'd ore to decrepit Age,

Perhaps this Talk may Rhetorick be,

But prithee Fool what i'st to me!

Drinking my sole Precept is,

And my Life is link'd to this.

Then teach how I may Drunk commence,

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=46)Above the
low Intreagues of Sense.

Or to raise the Frensie high,

Bless it with Loves Debauchery.

For since my Head can nothing show,

But aged Frosts or Winter Snow,

Since Life may'nt till to Morrow stay,

Give me the man that lives to day.

Then fill the Glass Boy, fill the Cup

I'le squeeze it to the last drop.

Do'nt this attendance grudging give,

To the small remainds I have to live.

I now have but short time to crave;

All lye silent in the Grave.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=47)

XXXIV. The Spring.

SEe how Nature's self a [...]gay

Ushers in the Springs new Day.

At whose approach, the Graces wear

Fresh honours on their flowing Hair,

With Roses deckt, whose Leaves infold

Smiling Crowns of studded Gold.

Nothing now does Mirth annoy,

Nothing stops the coming Joy;

The busie Winds that us'd to stit

The Waves, and raise a watry War;

Unwillingly to Rocks repair,

And wast themselves in murmers there.

The rugged'st Sea it self awhile

Smooths it's rough looks, and seems to smile:

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=47)See how
the Ducks with wanton play

[...]n their green Lakes sport all the day,

The prudent Crane with full career

Comes sailing through the floating Air.

And with her wish'd return does bring

Tidings of th' approaching Sp [...]ing.

The Sun now all ore Eye delights

Himself, in Natures painted sights.

His bounteous Rays lavishly guild

The lowest Shrubs, the meanest Field:

The sullen Clouds now post away,

Nor interrupt the chearful day:

Or what remain dissolve in Showers,

And bless their fall upon the Flowers.

Tis now, the Country Farmers strive

T' enjoy the Sun-shine of a life.

Here one endeavouring, we see,

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=48)With
curious Art to prune the Tree▪

Anothet there checks in time

The wanton growth of the spreading Vine.

Tis now the Earth with Herbs is bless'd,

And in it's rich green Mantles dress'd.

The Olive now luxuriant grows,

And all its verdant Riches shows:

Now full blown Roses in their prime

Embrace the Bowl that foams with Wine.

See now some loaded Trees expressing

Th' extravagant Springs over blessi [...]

Each Field, each Garden seems to call

Nature profuse and Prodigal.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=48)

XXXV. The Old Man.

OLd as I am I can contain

More Wine than a younger brain.

An Hogshead for a Wand I wave,

And in a newer fashion rave.

I reel into a Dance, while there

My drunken Hickups Musick are.

I fight, twelve in a Hand begins

The Battle, and Anacreon wins:

More honour, more I do desire,

Present again, and still give fire.

Thus Sack, my Boy, will on us wait,

And thus its Souldiers animate.

I'me Old tis true, but see

How Active age can be,

Silenus is a Drone to me.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=49)

XXXVI. The Enjoyment:

WHen the Vines pleasant Juice

Into my Mind does Mirth infuse;

With a rage, far beyond all

That ere was term'd Poetical;

My new-rais'd Genius soars up high,

And vents it self in Poetry.

When the Vines pleasant Juice

Into my Mind does Mirth Infuse:

Wisdom that grave Impertinence,

And all the busie thoughts of Sense,

All the Distractions of Wit,

I to the rough Winds commit.

Winds that to Sea my troubles bear,

And leave 'em to raise Tempests there.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=49) When the
Vines pleasant Juice,

Into my Mind does Mirth infuse;

Rapt in a Drunken Extasie

Through perfum'd Air I seem to fly;

And by the Journeying of Thought

Am to a strange pleasant Somewhere brought,

When the Vines pleasant Juice,

Into my Mind does mirth infuse,

And when rich Garlands Crown my Hair,

Gemm'd with Flowers here and there;

I lavishly begin to praise

A Quiet Life's Golden days.

When the Vines pleasant Juice

Into my Mind does mirth infuse,

When Essence round my head does flow,

And I hugg a Mistress too;

Venus alone my Lyre does move,

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=50)My Song is
all employ'd on Love.

When the Vines pleasant Juice

Into my mind does mirth infuse,

And I drink a chearful Cup,

Which Summons all my Spirits up;

How do the Jocund Girls enhance

My joys, in a continued Dance.

When the Vines pleasant Juice

Into my mind does mirth infuse,

To Day is mine, I'll live to day,

Tis what the Gods can't take away.

To Day shan't pass away by stealth,

To Day is all my ready wealth:

For the Remainds of Lifes short date,

Are all but in the gift of Fate.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=50)

XXXVII. Cupid wounded.

AS Cupid once with wanton play

Amidst the Rose-trees sporting lay

Nor did the Chymist Bee behold

Extracting there his liquid Gold.

The busie Animal by chance

Stung him with his little Lance.

Wounded thus, th' impatient Child

Orecome by Passion strait grew wild;

He sighing strait fled through the Air,

And scatter'd some vain murmers there.

And when he came to the Paphian Court,

Where's Mother Venus did resort;

I'me kill'd, I'me kill'd faintly (he cry'd)

(And strait his Tears flow'd in a Tide)

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=51)Mother (he
cry'd) I'me now undone,

See, see my life is almost gone.

A small wing'd Serpent with his Dart

Hath stung me to the very heart;

I know not well its name (let's see)

I think the Plowmen call't a Bee.

The Queen of Love reply'd, my Boy

If such a Sting can Life destroy;

Think but what pain thy Arrows cause,

And how thou doubly kill'st with those.

XXXVIII. An Hymn to the God of Wine.

LEt's drink, let's sing, but with design

In Hymns to praise the God of Wine.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=51)The God,
that seated in the head,

First in Numbers taught us how to tread.

That makes the unskilful sing, and be

A Wit, and of't good Company.

The God, that always was design'd

To be to Venus joyn'd.

That heats us in our amorous fights,

And whets our whoring appetites.

Who swearing first did institute,

And Drunkenness as his Attribute.

The God that friends creates,

And drowns all strife, and fierce debates.

Here Sorrow knows not how to weep,

And watchful Grief is rock't asleep.

Wine like a Sea within him spreads,

And like an Island stands his heart,

Care the depth and danger dreads,

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=52)And wisely
backward does depart.

Purge Sorrows then away; you see,

You see the Sov'reign remedy.

Lets laugh to day, for Life is blind

And to Morrow may not find,

Time's more unconstant then the Wind.

Lead up a dance, and when you make

A Step, then then a brimmer take:

That pretty Toy a Girl seek out,

With her frisk and sport about;

Sigh, smile, kiss, hug, then shew

What well digested Wine can do.

To those our cares we will dispense,

Whom affliction teaches Sense.

We more cheaply know,

Drink, and sing, and reel abroad,

For what else should we do,

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=52)But praise
the best the greatest God?

XXXIX. Of Himself.

ORecharg'd with Wine a Dance I love,

And that all things may move

In different Figures, as of  [...]ld,

The first confused Atoms rowl'd.

The Harp with Wine all over wet,

Its Hearers must intoxicate;

But still the Ladies I would please,

With Riddles, and Cross purposes.

My Heart fierce Anger never tore,

Kind Love had seiz'd it all before;

Scolding and Noise I always fly,

Chief Enemies to good company.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=53)I hate all
intestine Jarrs,

All fierce unnatural Wars.

Which rudely Pots, and Flagons raise,

And onely in confusion cease.

Of Heav'n a Handsome Girl I crave,

Good Wine, and Musick; then

(Life gone) into her Lap my Grave

I'll fall the best of men.

And there in peaceful softness lye,

Melted with Love and Harmony.

XL. The Grasshopper.

HAppy Insect, what can be

In happiness compar'd to Thee?

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=53)Fed with
nourishment divine,

The dewy Morning's gentle Wine;

Nature waits upon thee still,

And thy verdant Cup does fill;

Tis fill'd wherever thou doest tread,

Nature self's thy Ganymede.

Thou dost drink, and dance, and fing;

Happier then the happiest King!

All the Fields which thou dost see,

All the Plants belong to Thee,

All that Summer Hours produce,

Fertile made with early Juice.

Man for Thee does Sow and Plow;

Farmer He and Landlord Thou!

Thou dost innocently joy,

Nor does thy Luxury destroy.

The Shepherd gladly heareth thee

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=54)More
Harmonious than He.

Thee Countrey Hinds with gladness hear,

Prophet of the ripened year!

Thee Phaebus loves and does inspire;

Phaebus is himself thy Sire.

To thee of all thing▪ upon Earth,

Life is no longer then thy Mirth.

Happy Insect, happy Thou,

Dost nether Age nor Winter know.

But when thou'st drunk, and danc'd, and sung▪

Thy fill, the flowry Leaves among,

(Voluptuous, and wise withal,

Epicurean Animal)

Satiated with thy Summer feast,

Thou retir'est to endless Rest,

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=54)

XLI. The Dream expounded.

ONce in my Dream I seem'd to fly,

From I know not what, I know not why;

Nor did the Heaviness of Sleep

Constrain my fleeting Thoughts, or keep

My Fancy back, but through the Air

I seem'd to post with full career.

The amorous Boy pursu'd me strait,

Though hinder'd by unusual weight,

He did his flight so contrive,

He soon oretook the Fugitive.

Now what I may deduce from hence,

What Mystical, what hidden Sense

Is couch'd in this, I know not well;

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=55)Yet this
my Fancy seems to tell:

That I, who admir'd every Face,

Was taken with each little Grace;

With one, because Slender and Pretty,

Another Fair, another Witty;

From all these potent Tyrants free,

Must but by one now conquer'd be;

Nor is it strange, She's All to me.

XLII. Upon Cupid's Darts.

AS Vulcan at his Anvile stood

Forging Love's Darts, gentle and good,

Of red-hot Steel; which did retain

Some Sparks, that use to burn again;

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=55) Venus in
Hony dip't 'em all.

And Love allay'd the Sweets with Gall.

When furious Mars return'd from fight,

Without the least glimm'ring of delight.

No smiling Looks, no unusual Grace

Disturb'd the Majesty of his face.

In's dreadful hand a Spear he bore

The rougher Instrument of War.

And laughing took up Love's light Dart▪

(But little thought it caus'd such smart)

This is, said h [...], a pret [...]y Toy,

A Play-thing fit for such a Boy;

Cupid at length made this reply,

Sir, if you please, the lightness try;

With that he shot the new-made Arrow,

Which pierc'd him to the Marrow,

And wounded deep: Venus smil'd

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=56)To see the
God of War beguil'd.

Who vainly pray d; hence, hence remove

The Dart, I feel enough of Love.

No, no, Love cry'd your pain enjoy,

You know my Arrow's but a Toy.

XLIII. Upon Gold.

A mighty pain to Love it is,

And 'tis a pain that pain to miss

But of all pains the greatest pain

It is to Love, but love in vain.

Vertue now, no [...] noble Blood,

Nor Wit by Love is understood,

Gold alone does Passion move,

Gold monoplizes Love.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=56)A Curse on
her, and on the man,

Who this Traffick first began.

A Curse on him who found the Ore

A Curse on him who digg'd the store.

A Curse on him who did resine it,

A Curse on him who first did coyn it.

A Curse, all Curses else above,

On him who us'd it first in Love.

Gold begets in Brethren hate,

Gold in Families debate:

Gold does Friendship separate,

Gold does Civil Wars create,

These the smallest harms of it,

Gold, alas does Love beget.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=57)

XLIV. Pleasant Old Age.

I Love the man, whom froward Age

Can in its Quarrels nere engage.

Who as merrily to his Evening's come,

As if Life's short Day [...]ere but begun.

I love the Young Gallant, who knows

What to his early years he owes.

Who frequents Balls, and strives t'outdo,

What th' height of Na [...]re prompts him to.

Tis this, tis this pleases the man,

Who has almost ou [...]v'd his span.

Who in a Dance is often old,

And by's gray Hairs he now grows old.

He now grows Old; but when all's done

His Mind is ever, ever Young.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=57)And what
his Body can't do then.

His youthful thoughts act o're ag'en.

XLV. The Drunkard's delight.

GIve me Homer's tuneful Lyre,

Let its sound my breast inspire

With no troublesome delight,

Of the Trojans well sung Fight.

I et it play no Conquests here,

But its own Conquests or'e the Ear.

This I'll strike, on this I'll play,

And in soft Musick spend the day.

Bring the Cups, where we receive

What Laws the awful mark does give.

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=58)I'll fill
'em fair, I'll drink 'em all,

Till I grow mad, and Whymsical;

Till Nothing's sober in me found,

But I stagg'ring dance around.

My Joyful Harp, in Complaisance,

With trembling Strings shall sing and dance.

Then some new Rant I'll sing; and cry

Defiance to Sobriety.

XLVI. The Effects of Wine.

THe Youth who nobly stands his ground,

Who never baulks A Brimmer round.

Who in Dancing does delight,

Is Bacchus only Favourite.

Patron of each brave design,

Who giv's us Philtres in our Wine,

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=58)Who makes
us loue in spight of Fate,

And doubly burn with Wine and that;

Wine that to the Grape Tree ows

Its Purple Streams with which it flows;

Wine that keeps its Patients free,

From each daring Maladie.

Wine is our Doctor all the year,

We no assaults of Sickness [...]ear;

But wisely rave with decent rage,

Free from the Disease of Age,

Free from Diseases of the Mind,

Till another year grows kind,

And brings again our health, new Wine.

XLVII. Advice to a Painter.

PRi [...]hee, Painter, do but hear,

How my Lyre courts thine Ear;

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=59)How it
does all it Charms employ,

And ravishes with speaking Joy!

Let the Bacchae their Pipes blow,

Which to hoarse Air their Musick owe.

Sweeter Accents far rebound

From the Harps smooth tongue'd sound.

Therefore add to my delight,

And draw some pleasant curious sight;

Ore some Countrey, ore some Isle,

I et simpring Colours cast a smile;

Let thy Pencil now outdo

What Peace in all its charms can shew,

(And if the Wax be'nt too unkind

But proves prop [...]ious to my mind)

Let some Love-Intreagues appear

And be the onely Varnish here.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=59)

XLVIII. Venus Engrav'd on a Dish.

SEe by some hand Industrious grown,

By some ventrous Art is shown,

In a Dish the Ocean!

Whose Margin counterfeits a Shore,

The well-wrought Sea seems to roar;

So much the Waters seem to flow,

You'd think the Metal running too;

Amidst these Waves I Venus spy,

Some Artist's Fancy mounted high,

Stole the Idea from the Sky.

From whence he drew her Limbs so bright,

Clad but in thin wrought Rays of Light;

She with unwieldy joy does pleas [...]

In her killing Nakedness.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=60)Nor do
the happier Waves conceal

But what 'twere impious to reveal;

And but with prudent Secresie

Prevent th' Adul'try of the Eye.

See how she treads the marbl'd way!

And darts around a glorious day,

Like Nymphs that o're the Ocean play.

And when she wantons in the Seas,

And rows ore Chrystal Palaces;

The smitten Waves rowl along.

(Happy's the Foremost in the throng)

With eager joy, meaning no harm

They allmost crowd into a Storm.

And about her Rosie Wast

Their curl'd embraces cast.

Whilst she her various Colours strows,

And Paints the Path where e're she rows;

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=60)Such
colonrs white-fac'd Lillies spread

Mixt with the Carnation's red;

Such Venus is all-ore. But see

How the bended Dolphins play!

How they dance along the Tide,

On whom the little Cupids ride;

And in their dimpl'd looks express

Their mutual Happiness:

The little Fishes with quick glance

Show their guilt Coats, they skip, and dance;

Thus they speak joy for want of tongue,

Nature in vain has made 'em dumb;

Venus smiles too, and does appear

So Nat'ral, as if born ev'n here.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=61)

XLIX. The Grapes:

TO us the Vine its store does give,

And we with eagerness receive▪

Young Men and Maids together come

And bring the weighty Treasures home;

Whole Vineyards in one Vessel lay,

And true Wine from th' Trees is born away,

But if we owe a Birth to Art,

And Midwife force must Act a part,

A Secresy the deed requires,

And every Virgin strait retires.

For Men alone the Grapes do tread,

And Wine's by skilful Drunkards made;

To Song and Dance the God does yield,

And all things are with Bacchus fill'd.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=61)With
sparkling fires crown'd he stands,

And all our Eyes commands;

On his Streams like a Sea-God lyes,

That from the Deep did lately rise.

Old men, as they walk along

Do tast, and see, and strait grow young.

Their Crutches gone, they dance, and play;

Whilst Age, and gray Hairs drop away.

The Younger men look Red

With thoughts of Wine, and Love; which feed

Upon each other, and do thrive

With long Enjoyments kept alive.

Under a Myrtle shade

Or'ecome by sleep a Nymph is lay'd;

That nere a proffer'd bliss declin'd,

In Dream, still thoughts to thoughts were kind.

Thus all Women will, but few

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=62)Dare act
awake what then they'd do.

For now of fierce disdain,

The affronted Youth does long complain,

Is every Minute kill'd.

Sees more than all, because conceal'd,

And strongest struglings seem to yield

But since all Courtship was in vain,

He strove by Storm the Fort to gain,

He plunder'd, ravisht, and lead on

His force, and man'd the Garrison.

He thanked the Grapes that courage sent,

That made him bold and impudent.

L. The Rose.

NAked the Spring would seem, and bear,

If Roses did not dress the year;

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=62)The Rose
that to the Gods presents

It self, sweeter then Frankincense.

The Joy of man, who gently lay'd

Upon a Rosie Bed;

That and the Graces round him move,

And deck, and bless his hours of Love.

The Rose, where none designs amiss,

If he does that or Venus kiss.

This Plant the Poets strive to praise,

And would for this exchange their Bays.

Through Files of Pikes and Bryars, we

Push on our hands most willingly.

But the Rose when gather'd wounds does heal

And we then onely Roses feel.

Insipid is our Mirth, and flat,

If these our Wits do'nt animate;

At Bacchus feasts for dead though lain,

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=63)With
these refresh'd we drink again,

All things are in perfection great,

If they the Rose but imitate.

The winged Morning climbs the Sky,

And her Rosie-Fingers does display,

Bright onely by a Simile.

Each Nymph a strict Beholder seeks,

Proud of this Colour in her Cheeks.

Loves Rosie-Goddess he [...]e does sit,

More Lovely by that Epithet.

In short a Med'cine tis,

For all I [...]ls and Sicknesses.

He that its vertues understands,

will beggar all Physitians;

Nay in the Grave 'twill lay,

A [...]d keep hungry Time away:

Perfume the Carkass, and preserve;

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=63)Whilst
almost Death and Worms do starve.

When Venus first from the Sea's Womb

In Beauty cloath'd did come;

And watry Mountains stop'd to see

The naked newborn Prodigy.

When armed Pallas from the head

Of teeming Jove was lead;

Then sprang the Rose, 'twas then

Our Goddess first did reign;

Strange and wonderful her birth

Amaz'd her Mother Earth.

Of this the Gods did first deb [...]te,

And in Heaven a Council sate.

All did Nectar on a Bramble drop,

And soon the Rose leapt up.

It first on Bacchus smil'd, then strait

Did it self to Bacchus dedicate.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=64)

LI. Grown Young.

WHen some brisk, and airy Scene,

Does my Opticks entertain

With frisking Lads who their lives sooth,

And nobly spend th'  [...]state of Youth;

The Wantons, Pimps for fond delight,

Provoke my feeble sight,

My sight; which by some magick Art

Scatters Youth thro' ev'ry part.

My cripp [...]'d feet in steps advance,

And wonder why they dance.

And whilst they in these sports engage,

Forget the clumsiness of Age.

Now th [...]n, Cybelle, round my head

Garlands of new-blown Roses spread;

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=64)In this
Princely posture strait

Let some Boy on me wait,

Let him, to favour my design,

Push it on with lively Wine;

Then let him stand amaz'd, to see

How I young and active be!

How Jollily my Life does pass!

How I'me disposed to take a Glass;

Dispos'd to break a youthful Jest,

Dispos'd to frolick with the best.

LII. The Mark.

NOthing undistinguish'd lies,

Or cheats the sight in false disguise;

A Mark is stamp'd on all, that we

May in each a Dif [...]rence see;

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=65)Th
[...]wandring Horse does keep

A Superscription on the Hip:

The P [...]thian by his Turbant's known,

A Lover by his Heart is shown;

Nor does the hidden Mark raise doubt,

But oft in blushes Sallies out;

And oft the Flame that brands his Breast,

Is by his Tell-tale Looks exprest.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55943&page=65)

[Home](/)

Date: 1683  

