## (unknown project)

# A Collection of poems written upon several occasions by several persons with
many additions, never before in print.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=1)

A Collection OF POEMS Written upon several OCCASIONS By several PERSONS.

With many Additions, Never before in Print.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Collins and Iohn Ford in Fleet­street, and Will.
Cademan at the Popes  [...] New-Exchange Stra [...]d. 1673.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE TABLE
  * 2\. THE TEMPLE OF DEATH.
  * 3\. To CELIA.
  * 4\. ANSWER:
  * 5\. To CELIA.
  * 6\. To CLORIS.
  * 7\. To a Lady, who told him he could not Love.
  * 8\. To CLORIS.
  * 9\. A Farewel to Love.
  * 11\. EPILOGUE To every Man in his humour.
  * 12\. To a very Young Lady.
  * 13\. The forsaken Mistress. DIALOGUE.
  * 14\. The Divided Heart.
  * 15\. TO Mr J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian.
  * 16\. Virtues Vrania.
  * 17\. Silvia.
  * 18\. To Celia
  * 19\. The Submission.
  * 20\. Constancy.
  * 21\. The Indifference.
  * 22\. A Pastoral Dialogue.
  * 23\. To a Lady, who fled the sight of him.
  * 24\. To a Lady, asking him how long he would love her.
  * 25\. SONG.
  * 26\. TO HER EXCELLENCE, THE Marchioness OF NEW-CASTLE, After the Reading of Her incomparable POEMS.
  * 27\. EPILOGUE TO TARTUFF, Spoken by Himself,
  * 28\. The Imperfect Enjoyment.
  * 29\. A PROLOGUE Spoken at the opening of the DUKE'S NEW PLAY-HOUSE.
  * 30\. Falling in love with a Stranger at a Play.
  * 31\. Indifference excused.
  * 32\. The Platonick.
  * 33\. To a Devout Young Woman.
  * 34\. SONG.
  * 35\. TO CLORIS.
  * 36\. SONG.
  * 37\. SONG
  * 38\. A Dialogue between Amintas and Celia.
  * 39\. SONG.
  * 40\. SONG.
  * 43\. SONG
  * 44\. DISTICH.
  * 46\. SONG
  * 47\. SONG.
  * 48\. SONG.
  * 49\. SONG.
  * 50\. SONG.
  * 51\. SONG.
  * 52\. SONG
  * 53\. SONG. The Ballers Life,
  * 54\. SONG.
  * 55\. To Celia.
  * 56\. To CELIAE
  * 57\. SONG.
  * 58\. SONG.
  * 59\. SONG.
  * 60\. SONG.
  * 61\. SONG.
  * 62\. A PANEGYRICK sent by a Gentleman, with his Picture to his Mystriss.
  * 63\. A LETTER sent from a Gentleman to his Friend.
  * 64\. A Memento Mori.
  * 65\. A NEW SONG.
  * 66\. The Pot Rapsodes.
  * 67\. SONG.
  * 68\. SONG.
  * 69\. To CHLORIS.
  * 70\. OC•AVIO to PORTIA.
  * 71\. SONG.
  * 72\. SONG.
  * 73\. SONG.
  * 74\. SONG to LUCINDA.
  * 75\. To his Mistriss.
  * 76\. SONG.
  * 77\. To FLORIDA.
  * 78\. The distracted LOVER to the Ayre of Awake all ye dead.
  * 79\. To LAURINDA.
  * 80\. Prologue to the Impertinents acted at the Middle TEMPLE.
  * 81\. Prologue at Oxford.
  * 82\. PROLOGUE to t•e Ordi•ary.
  * 83\. EPILOGUE to the Ordinary.
  * 84\. A Prologue spoken at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.
  * 85\. To the Audience.
  * 86\. Spoken by the Lady Elizabeth Howard.
  * 87\. Another Prologue spoke at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.
  * 88\. A SONG.
  * 89\. SONG.
  * 90\. A SONG.
  * 91\. A SONG in the Dutch-Love•.
  * 92\. SONG.
  * 93\. Song on the London Ladies

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=2)

## 1\. THE TABLE

THe Temple of Death

    Page [...]
To Ce [...]ia. You tell me, Celia, you approve.

    14
Answer  [...], I wish as well as you

    18
To Celia ▪ Princes make Laws, by which

    19
To Cloris, Cloris, I justly am be [...]ray [...]d

    21
To a Lady, who told him, he could not Love

    22
To Cloris, Cloris, you live ador'd by all

    24
A farewel to Love

    27
Song Though, Phillis, your prevailing Charms

    28
Epilogue, to every Man in his humour

    29
To a very  [...]o [...]ng Lady

    32
The Forsaken Mistress

    33
The Divided Heart

    36
To M. J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian

    37
[...] Urania

    40
To S [...]lvi T [...]e Nymph that undoe [...] me

    41
To Celia. As in those Nations where

    42
The Submission

    43
C [...]nstancy

    44
T [...]e  [...]d [...]fference

    46
A Pastor [...]l Dialogue

    49
To a Lady, who fled the sight of him

    52
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=3)To a Lady who
askt him how long he would Love her

    53
Song. Tell me no more you love in vain

    54
To the Marchioness of New Castle, on her Poems

    56
Epilogue to Tartuff

    5 [...]
The Imperfect Enjoyment

    61
Prologue at the opening of the D [...]ke's New Play-House

    65
Falling in Love with a Stranger at a Play

    67
Indifference excused

    69
T [...]e Platonick

    71
To a D [...]vout Young Woman

    73
Song. When Aur [...]lia first became

    74
To Cloris Cloris, I cannot say your Eyes

    76
Song. A [...]relia, art thou mad

    77
Song. Love still has something of the Sea

    79
A Dial [...]gue between Amintas and Celia

    82
Song. Get you gone, you will undo me

    85
Song. Phillis, you have enough enjoy'd

    88
Song. Madam, for your Commands to stay

    89
Awake my Eyes, at night my thoughts pursue

    90
Song Phillis, lets shan the Common Fate

    ib.
Distich

    92
The painted Apples that adorn

    ib.
Song. Not Celia, that I juster am

    94
Thirsis, no more against my flame advise

    95
Song. I ask not my Celia would love me again

    97
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=3)Song Drink
about till the day finde us

    98
Song Walking among thick shades alone

    99
Song. As I sat thoughtfull in a shade

    102
[...]ong. The Grave my Envy now begets

    106
The Ballers Life, A S [...]ng

    108
Song When Cold De [...]p [...]i [...]

    109
To Celia. Celia. the faithful servant you disown,

    116
To Celia. All things submit themselves to your Com­mands

    113
As he la [...] in the Plain, his Arm

    116
Song. How charming are those pleasant.

    118
Song. Give o're foolish heart, and make haste.

    120
Song. With so much ingrateful Swains

    121
Song: Dear Am [...]nda, in vain you so coily.

    127
A Panegyrick sent by a Gentleman to his Mystress with his Picture.

    124
A Letter sent from a Gentleman to his Friend.

    12 [...]
A Memento Mori.

    134
Song. Of  [...]ll the brisk Dancers.

    135
The Pot Rapsodes.

    136
Song. It is not. Chloris:

    137
Song. Ah, Chloris.

    140
Song, To Chloris

    141
Octavio to Portia

    142
Song. When as my Thirsis

    144
Song. Though Damon.

    148
Song. If thou boast

    149
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=4)Song. To
Lucinda.

    150
To  [...] Mystress

    152
So [...]g. Fa [...]th, now my Dear

    154
To  [...].

    155
The distract [...]d Lover to the Ayre of, Awake all ye  [...].

    156
To La [...]rinda

    1 [...]8
Prologue to the Impertinent, Acted at the Mid [...]le Temple

    159
Prologue at Oxford

    161
Prologue to the Ord [...]ary.

    163
Epilogue to the Ordinary

    166
A Prologue spoken at Court to the Emp [...]ress of Mo­rocco

    168
A Part spoken by the Lady Elizabeth Howard.

    170
Another Prologue spoken at Court to the Emperess of Morocco

    1 [...]2
Song. Forgive me. Jove.

    175
Song. A [...]! cruel eyes

    176
Song. Nay Let me alone

    177
Song. In the Dutch Lover

    1 [...]8
Song. O [...] the time that is past

     [...]8
Song. On the London Ladies

    183

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=4)

## 2\. THE TEMPLE OF DEATH.

IN those cold Climates where the Sun appears

Unwillingly, and hides his face in tears,

A dreadful Vale lies in a Desart-Isle,

On which indulgent Heaven did never smile.

There a vast Grove of aged Cypress Trees,

Which none without an awful horrour sees,

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=5)Into its
wither'd arms dep [...]iv'd of leaves,

Whole flocks of ill-presaging Birds receives;

Poysons are all the plants the soyl will bear,

And Winter is the only season there.

Millions of graves cover the spacious field,

And springs of blood a thousand Rivers yield,

Whose streams opprest with carcases and bones,

Instead of gentle murmurs, pour forth groans.

Within this Vale a famous Temple stands,

Old as the Universe which it commands;

Round is its figure, and four Iron Gates

Divide the World by order of the Fates.

There come in crouds doomd to one common grave

The young, the old, the Monarch and the Slave.

Old age, and pains which Mankind most deplores,

Are faithful Keepers of those sacred doors;

All clad in mournful blacks, which also load

The sacred walls of this obscure abode,

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=5)And Tapers
of a pitchy substance made,

With clouds off noak increase the dismal shade▪

A Monster void of Reason and of Sight,

The Goddess is that sways this Realm of Night▪

Her Power extends o're all things that have breath,

A cruel Tyrant, and her name is Death.

The fairest object of our wondring eyes

Was newly offer'd up her sacrifice;

Th' adjoyning places where the Altar stood,

Yet blushing with the fair Almeria's blood.

When sad Melintus, whose unhappy flame

Is known by all that ere converst with fame;

His mind possest with fury and despair,

Within the sacred Temple made this prayer:

Great Deity ▪ who in thy hands dost bear

That rusty Scepter which poor Mortals fear,

Who wanting eyes thy self respectest none;

And neither spar'st the Lawrel nor the Crown,

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=6)Oh! thou
whom all Mankind in vain withstands,

Each of whose blood must one day stain thy hands:

Oh, thou that every eye which sees the light,

Closest again in an eternal night,

Open thy ears, and hearken to my grief,

To which thy Power alone can give relief;

I come not hither to prolong my fate,

But wish my wretched life a shorter date:

And that the Earth would in its bowels hide

A soul which Heaven invades on every side;

That from the sight of day I might remove,

And might have nothing left me but my love.

Thou only Comforter of Mindes opprest,

The Port where wearied spirits are at rest;

Conductet to Illysium, take my life,

My brest I offer to thy sacred knife:

So just a grace deny not, nor despise

A willing, though a worthless, sacrifice.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=6)Others their
frail and mortal state forgot,

Before thy Altars are not to be brought

Without constraint: the noise of dying rage,

Heaps of the slain of every sex and age,

The blade all reaking in the gore it shed,

With several heads and arms confus'dly spread,

The rapid flames of a perpetual fire,

The groans of wretches ready to expire:

This Tragick Scene makes them in terrour live,

Till that is forc'd which they should freely give;

Yielding unwillingly what Heaven wil [...] have,

Their fears eclipse the glory of their Grave.

Before thy face they make undecent moan,

And feel an hundred deaths in fearing one;

The flame becomes unhallowed in their br [...]st,

And he a Murtherer who was a Priest;

His hands profan'd in breaking Natures chain,

By which the body does the fool detain:

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=7)But against
me thy strongest forces call,

And on my head let all the tempest fall;

No shrinking back shall any weakness shew.

And calmly I'le expect the fatal blow.

My limbs no trembling, in my mind no fear,

Plaints in my mouth, nor in my eyes a tear.

Think not that time, our wonted sure relief,

That universal cure for every grief,

VVhose aid so many Lovers oft have found,

VVith like success can ever heal my wound:

Too weak's the Power of Nature, or of Art,

Nothing but death can ease a broken heart.

And that thou mayst behold my helpless state,

Learn the extreamest rigour of my fate:

Amidst th'innumerable beauteous Train

Paris, the Queen of Cities, does contain

The fairest Town, the greatest, and the best,

So fair Almeria shin'd above the rest.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=7)From h
[...]r bright eyes to feel a hopeless flame,

Was of our youth the most ambitious aim;

Her chains were marks of honour to the brave,

She made a Prince whe [...]e're she made a S [...]av [...].

Love, under whose tyrannick power I gr [...]an,

Shew'd me this B [...]auty ere ' [...]was fully blown;

Her doubtf [...]l hand, and her anpractis'd look,

Their first assurance from my Conquest took;

By wounding me she lea [...]t the fatal Art,

And the first sigh she had was from my heart.

My eyes with tears wetting her snowy arms,

Render'd the tribute due unto her charms:

But as I soonest of all Mortals paid

My vows, and to her beauty al [...]rs made,

So amongst all those slaves that sigh'd in vain,

She thought me only worthy of her chain.

Lov [...]s heavy burden, my submissive heart

Endur'd not long before the bore her part,

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=8)My violent
flame melted her frozen brest,

And in soft sighs her pity she exprest

Her gentle voice allayd my raging pains,

And her fair hands sustain'd me in my chains

Tears from her eyes attended on my moan,

And they lookt kindly upon me alone.

My hopes and dangers were less mine then hers,

Those filled her soul with joys, and these with tears.

Our hearts united had the same desires

And both alike burn'd with impatient fires▪

Too faithful Memory, I give thee leave

Thy wretched Master kindly to deceive.

Make me not once possessor of her charms▪

Let me not find her languish in my arms

Past joyes are now my cruel fancies Theams,

Make all my happy nights appear but dreams.

Let not those scenes before my eyes be brought,

But hide her love from my tormenting thought

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=8)And in its
place disdainful beauty shew,

I [...] thou would'st not be cruel, make her so,

And something to abate my deep despair,

Oh let her seem less gentle, or less fair.

But I in vain flatter my wounded mind,

Never was Nymph so lovely, or so kind.

No cold repulses my desires supprest,

I seldom sigh'd but on Almeria's brests.

Of all the passions which mankind destroy,

I only felt excess of love and joy.

Numberless pleasures charmed my sence, and they

Were as my love, without the least allay:

As pure, alas, but not so sure to last,

For, like a pleasant dream they all are past.

From Heaven her beauty like fierce lightning came

which breaks through darknes with a glorious flame

A while it  [...]hines, a while our sight it chears,

But soon the sh [...]rt-liv'd comfort disappears,

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=9)And thunder
follows, whose resistless rage

None can withstand, and nothing can asswage.

So oft the light which those bright flashes gave,

Serves to conduct us only to our Grave.

When I had first begun Love's joys to taste,

Those full rewards for fears and dangers past,

A Fever seiz'd her, and to nothing brought

The richest work that ever Nature wrought.

All things below, alas, uncertain stand

The firmest Rocks are plac'd upon the Sand:

Under this Law both Kings and Crowns must be [...]

For no beginning is without an end.

A sacrifice to Time Fate dooms us all,

And at the Tyrants feet we daily fall;

Time, whose bold hand alike does bring to dust

Mankind, and Gods in which Mankind does trust:

Though now her wasted spirits begin to faint,

Her patience ties her tongue from all complaint,

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=9)And in her
heart as in a Fort remains,

But yet at last yields t [...] her resistless pains.

Thus while the Fever amorous of his prey,

Through all her veins makes his delightful way [...]

Her Fates like Semile's, the Flames destroy

That beauty they too eagerly enjoy.

Her charming face is in its Spring decay'd,

Pale grows the Roses, and the Lillies fade.

Her skin has lost that  [...]ustre, which surpast

The Sun's, and did deserve as long to last;

Her eyes, which us'd to pierce the hardest hearts,

Are now disarm'd of all their flames and darts;

Those Stars n [...]w heavily and slowly move,

And sorrow triumphs in the Throne of Love.

The Fever every moment more prevails,

Its rage her body fee [...]s, and Tongue bewails▪

She who [...]e disdain so many Lovers prove,

Sighs new for Torment, as they  [...]gh for Love,

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=10)And with
loud crys, which rend the neighb'ring air

Wounds my sad heart, and wakens my despair.

Both gods and men I charge now with my loss,

And wild with gries, my thoughts each other cross

My heart and tongue labour in both extreams,

That sends up humble prayrs, while this blasphemes

I ask their help whose Power I defie,

And mingle sacriledge with Piety.

But that which do's still more perplex my mind,

To love her truly, I must seem unkind;

So unconcern'd a face my sorrow wears,

I still restrain unruly floods of tears.

My Eyes and Tongue put on dissembling forms

I shew a calmness in the midst of storms.

I seem to hope, when all my hopes are gone,

And almost dead with grief, discover none.

But who can long deceive a loving eye,

Or with dry eyes behold his Mistress dye?

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=10)When
Reason had with all its terrours brought

Th [...] approaching danger nearer to my thought▪

Off on a sudden fell the forc't disguise,

And shew'd a sighing heart in weeping eyes,

My apprehensions now no more confin'd,

Expos'd my sorrows, and betrayd my mind,

The fair afflicted, Soan perceives my tears,

Explains my sighs, and thence concludes my fears,

With sad presages of her hopeless case,

She reads her Fate in my dejected Face,

Then feels my torment, and neglects her own,

While I am senfi [...]e of hers alone;

Each does the others burden kindly bear,

I fear her Death, and the bewa [...]ls my fear▪

Although we suffer under Fortunes darts,

'Tis those of Love alone which reach our hearts.

Mean-while the Fever mocks at all our fears,

Grows by our sighs, and rages at our tears;

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=11)Those vain
effects of our as vain desire,

Like Wind and Oyl increase the fatal fire.

Almeria feeling th'unjust destinies

About to shut her lips, and close her eyes,

Weeping, in mine put her fair trembling hand,

And with these words I scarce could understand;

Her Passion in a dying voice express'd

Half: and her sighs, alas, made out the rest.

'Tis past, this pang Nature forsakes the strife,

Thou must thy Mystriss lose, and I my Life.

I die, but dying thine, the Fates may prove

Their Conquest over me, but not my Love;

Thy Memory, my Glory, and my pain,

In spight of Death it self, shall still remain,

Ah! Dear Melintus, my hard Fate denies

That hope is the last thing which in us di [...]s:

From my grievd brest all those soft thoughts are fled

And love survives, although my hope is dead;

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=11)Yyield my
life, but keep my Passion yet,

And can all thoughts but of Melintus quit.

My flame in [...]reases as my strength decayes,

Death, that puts out the light, the heat does raise,

Which leavs me not, though I from hence remove

I lose my Lover, but I keep my Love.

The figh which sent forth that last tender word,

Up towards the Heavens like a bright meteor soar'd

And the kind Nymph bereft of all her Charms,

Falls cold and breathless in her Lovers Arms,

VVhich shews, since Death deny'd him then relief;

That 'tis in vain men hope to die with grief.

Goddess, that now my Fate has understood,

Spare but my tears, and freely take my blood,

Here let me end the story of my cares,

My grief it self enough the rest declares▪

Thou seest by all my misery thus display' [...] ▪

VVhether I ought not to implore thy aid,

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=12)Thus to
survive a guilt upon me draws,

And my sad wishes have too just a caus [...]

Come then, my only hope, in every place,

Thou visitest, men tremble at thy face,

And fear thy name, once let thy fatal hand

Destroy a Swain, that doth the blow demand.

Vouchsafe thy Dart, I need not one of those,

With which thou dost unwilling Kings depose,

Thy weakest my desir'd release will bring,

And free my Soul already on her wing.

## 3\. To CELIA.

YOu tell me, Celia, you approve,

Yet never must return my love▪

An answer that my hope destroys,

And in the cradle wounds our joys;

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=12)To kill at
once what needs must die,

None would to birds and beasts deny

How can you than s [...] crue [...] prove,

As to preserve, and  [...]rture love.

That beauty Nature kindly meant

For her own pride, and our content;

Why should the Tyrant honour make

Our greatest torment▪ let us break

His yoke, and that base power dis [...]ain,

Which only keeps the good in pain.

In Love and War th' Impostor  [...]o's

The best to greatest harms expose.

Come then, my Ce [...]a, let's no more

This Devil for a God adore;

Like foo [...]ish Indians we have been,

Whose whole Religion is a sin▪

If we the Laws of Love had kept,

And not in d [...]eams of Hon [...]ur slept,

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=13)He wou'd
have surely, long ere this,

Have crown'd us with the highest bliss;

Our Joy had then been as compleat,

As now our Folly has been great:

Let's lose no time then, but repent,

Love wlecome's best a Penitent.

## 4\. ANSWER:

THirsis, I wish, as well as you,

To Honour there were nothing due▪

Then would I pay my debt of love

In the same coin that you approve;

Which now you must in friendship take,

Tis all the payment I can make;

Friendship so high, that I must say,

Tis rather love with some allay.

And rest contented, since that I

As well my self as you deny.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=13)Learn then
of me bravely to bear

The want of what you hold most dear;

And that which Honour does in me,

Let my example work on thee.

## 5\. To CELIA.

PRinces make laws by which their subjects live

And the high gods rules for their worship give

How should poor Mortals else a service find

At all proportion'd to their mighty Mind?

Had it been left to us, each one would bring,

Of what he lik'd himself, an offering;

And with unwelcom zeal perhaps displease

Th' offended Deity he would appease.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=14)All powers
but thine this mercy do allow,

And how they wou'd be serv'd themselves do shew

A rude Barbarian wou'd his captiv'd fo

Fully instruct in what he'd have him do.

And can it be, my Celia, that Lov [...]

Less kind then War shou'd to the vanquisht prove;

Say, cruel Fair, then, would you that my flame

Shou'd for a while move under friendships name;

Or may it boldly like it self appear,

And its own tale deliver to your ear,

Or must it in my tortur'd bosome live

Like fire in quiet flints, and no light give;

And only then humbly send forth a small

Spark, when your self does on that subject fall;

My passion can with any laws comply,

And for your sake do any thing, but die.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=14)

## 6\. To CLORIS.

Cloris, I justly am betray'd

By a design my self had laid,

Like an old Rook, whom in his cheat

A run of Fortune does defeat.

thought at first with a small sum

Of love, thy heap to overcome;

Presuming on thy want of art,

Thy gentle and unpractis'd heart.

But naked Beauty can prevail,

Like open force, when plots do fail.

Instead of that thou hast all mine,

And I have not one stake of thine:

And, like all winners, do'st discover

A willingness to give me over.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=15)And though
I beg, thou wilt not now;

'Twere better thou should'st do so too

For I so far in debt shall run,

Even thee I shall be forc't to shun.

My hand, alas, is no more mine,

Else it had long ago been thine,

My heart I give thee, and we call

No man unjust that parts with all.

What a Priest says moves not the mind,

Souls are by love, not words, combin'd.

## 7\. To a Lady, who told him he could not Love.

MAdam, though meaner Beauties might,

Perhaps, have need of some such slight;

Who to excuse their Rigour, must

Say they our passions do mistrust,

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=15)And that
they wou'd more pity shew,

Were they but sure our loves were tru [...].

You shou'd those petty Arts despise,

Secure of what is once your prize,

We to our Slaves no frauds address,

But as they are our minds express.

Tell me not then I cannot Love,

Say, rather, you it ne're can move;

Who can no more doubt of your charms,

Then I resist such pow'rful arms:

Whose numerous force that I withstood

So long, was not through any hope I cou'd

Escape their pow'r, but through despair,

Which oft makes Courage ont of fear.

I trembling saw how you us'd those

Who tamely yielded without blows:

Had you but one of all them spar'd,

I might, perhaps, have been ensnar'd,

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=16)And not
have thus, e're I did yield,

Call'd Love's whole Force into the Field.

Yet now I'm Conquer'd I will prove

Faithful as they that never strove.

All flames in matter where too fast

They do not seize, the longer last.

Then blame not mine for moving slow

Since all things durable are so.

The Oak that's for three hundred years

Design'd in growing, one out-wears.

Whilst flowers for a season made

Quickly spring up, and quickly fade,

## 8\. To CLORIS.

CLoris, you live ador'd by all,

And yet on none your favours fall.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=16)A stranger
Mistress ne're was known▪

You pay us all in Paying none.

We him of avarice accuse,

Who what he has does fear to use

But what disease of mind shall I

Call this thy hated penury?

Thou wilt not give out of a store,

Which no profuseness can make poor.

Misers, when dead, may make amends.

And in their Wills enrich their friends;

But when thou dy'st, thy Treasure dies,

And thou canst leave no Legacies.

What madness is it then to spare,

VVhen we want power to make an Heir?

Live, Cloris, then at the full rate,

Of thy great Beauty; and since Fate

To Love, and Youth, is so severe;

Enjoy'm freely while th'art here.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=17)Some
caution yet I'de have thee use,

Whene're thou dost a servant chuse.

We are not all for Lovers fit,

No more then Arms or Arts of Wit.

For Wisdom some respected are,

Some we see pow'rful at the Bar;

Some for Preferment waste their time

And the steep Hill of Honour climb;

Others of Love their business make,

In Love their whole diversion take.

Take one of those, for in one brest

Two passions live but ill at rest:

And even, of them, I'de have thee fly

All that take flame at every eye.

All those that light and faithless are,

All that dare more then think thee fai [...]

Take one of Love who nothing says,

And yet whom every word betrays.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=17)Love in
the cradle pretty shews,

And when't can speak unruly grows.

## 9\. A Farewel to Love.

ONce more Loves mighty chains are broke,

His strength and cunning I defie,

Once more I have thrown off his yoke,

And am a man, and do despise the Boy.

Thanks to her pride, and her disdain,

And all the follies of a scornful mind,

I had ne're possest my heart again,

If fair Miranda had been kind.

Welcome fond wanderer, as ease

And plenty to a wretch in pain,

That worn with want and a disease,

Enjoys his health and all his friends again.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=18)Let others
waste their time and youth,

VVatch and look pale, to gain a peevish maid,

And learn too late this dear-bought truth,

At length they're sure to be betray'd.

## 10\.

THough, Phillis, your prevailing charms

Have forc'd me from my Celia's arms

That kind defence against all powers,

But those resistless eyes of yours:

Think not your conquest to maintain,

By rigour and un [...]ust disdain;

In vain, fair Nymph, in vain you strive

For love does seldom hope survive.

My heart may languish for a time,

Whilest all your Glories in their prime

Can justifie such cruelty.

By the same force that conquer'd me,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=18)When age
shall come, at whose command

Those troops of beauties must disband;

A Tyrants strength once took away,

What slave so dull as to obey!

## 11\. EPILOGUE  
To every Man in his humour.

IN treaty shall not serve nor violence▪

To make me speak in such a Playes defence.

A Play where Wit and Humour do agree

To break all practis'd Laws of Comedy:

The Scene (what more absurd) in England lies,

No Gods descend, nor dancing Devils rise;

No captive Prince from nameless Country brought

No battel, nay, there's not a duel fought.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=19)And
something yet more sharply might be said,

But I consider the poor Author's dead;

Let that be his excuse— Now for our own,

VVhy— Faith, in my opinion, we need none.

The parts were fitted well; but some will say,

Pox on 'em Rogues what made 'em chuse this Play?

I do not doubt but you will credit me,

It was not choice, but meer necessity;

To all our writing friends, in Town, we sent,

But not a VVit durst venture out in Lent;

Have patience but till Easter-Term, and then

You shall have Jigg and Hobby-horse agen.

Here's Mr. Matthew, our domestique VVit,

Does promise one of the ten Plays h'as writ;

But since great bribes weigh nothing with the just

Know, we have merits, and in them we trust;

VVhen any Fasts, or Holy-days, defer

The publick labours of the Theatre,

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=19)We ride
not forth although the day be fair,

On ambling Tit to take the Suburb-air,

But with our Authors meet, and spend that time

To make up quarrels between sence and rhyme.

Wednesdays and Fridays constantly we sate

Till after many a long and free debate,

For divers weighty reasons 'twas thought fit,

Unruly sence shu'd still to rhyme submit.

This the most wholesom Law we ever made.

So strictly in this Epilogue obey'd,

Sure no man here will ever dare to break.

Enter Johnson's Ghost.

Hold, and give way, for I my self will speak,

Can you encourage so much insolence,

And add new faults still to the great offence

Your Ancestors so rashly did commit

Against the mighty Powers of Art and Wit?

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=20)When they
condemn'd those noble works of mine

Sejanus, and my best lov'd Cataline:

Repent, or on your guilty heads shall fall

The curse of many a rhyming Pastoral:

The three bold Beauchamps shall revive again,

And with the London Prentice conquer Spain

All the dull follies of the former age

Shall rise and find applause upon this Stage.

But if you pay the great arrears of praise,

So long since due to my much injur'd Plays,

From all past crimes I first will set you free,

And then inspire some one to write like me.

## 12\. To a very Young Lady.

SWeetest bud of Beauty, may

No untimely frost decay

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=20)Th' early
glories which we trace,

Blooming in thy matchless face;

But kindly opening, like the Rose,

Fresh beauties every day disclose,

Such as by Nature are not shewn

In all the blossoms she has blown:

And then what conquest shall you make,

Who hearts already dayly take;

Scorcht in the Morning with thy beams,

How shall we bear those sad extreams

Which must attend thy threatning eyes

When thou shalt to thy Noon arise

## 13\. The forsaken Mistress. DIALOGUE.

Phil.

TEll me, gentle Strephon, why

You from my Embraces fly;

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=21)Does my
love thy love destroy;

Tell me, I will yet be coy.

Stay, O stay, and I will feign

(Th [...]gh I break my h [...]art) disdain;

But lest I too unkind appear,

For ev'ry frown ile shed a tear.

And if in vain I court thy love,

Let mine, at least, thy pity move:

Ah while I scorn, vouchsafe to woo,

Methinks you may dissemble too.

Str.

Ah Phillis, that you wou'd contrive

A way to keep my love alive,

But all your other charms must fail,

When kindness ceases to prevail.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=21)

Alas! no less then you, I grieve,

My dying flame has no reprieve,

For I can never hope to find,

Shou'd all the Nymphs I court be kind,

One Beautie able to renew

Those pleasures I enjoy in you,

When Love and Youth did both conspire

To fill our breasts and veins with fire.

'Tis true, some other Nymph may gain

That heart which merits your disdain,

But second Love has still allay,

The joys grow aged, and decay.

Then blame me not for losing more

Then Love and Beauty can restore:

And let this truth thy comfort prove,

I wou'd, but can no longer love.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=22)

## 14\. The Divided Heart.

AH! Celia, that I were but sure

Thy l [...]ve, like mine, cou'd still endure;

T [...]at time and absence, which distroy

The cares of Lovers, and their joy,

Cou'd never rob me of that part

Which you have giv'n me of your heart;

[...]ers unenvy'd might possess

Whole hearts, and boast that happiness.

Twas nobler Fortune to divide

The Roman Empire in her pride

[...]en on so [...]e low and barb'rous Throne,

[...] p [...]a [...]'d, to rule alone.

Love only from thy heart exacts

The several d [...]bts thy face contracts,

And by that new and juster way

[...]cures thy Empire and his sway▪

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=22)Fav'ring
but one he might compel

The hopeless Lover to rebel.

But shou'd he other hearts thus share,

That in the whole so worthless are,

Shou'd into several squadrons draw

That strength which kept entire cou'd awe,

Men would his scatter'd powers deride,

And conqu'ring Him those spoils divide.

## 15\. TO Mr J. N. on his Translations out of French and Italian.

WHile others toil our Country to supply

With what we need only for Luxury,

Spices, and Silk, in the rich East provide,

To glut our Avarice and feed our pride

You forreign learning prosperously transmit,

To raise our Virtue; and provoke our Wit.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=23)You
[...]orreign learning prosperously transmit,

To raise our Vertue, and provoke our Wit.

Such brave designs your gen'rous soul inflame

To be a bold Adventurer for Fame;

How much oblig'd are Italy and France,

While with your voice their Musick you advance?

Your growing Fame with Envy can oppose,

Who sing with no less art then they compose;

In these attempts so few have had success,

Their Beauties suffer in our English dress:

By artless hands spoil'd of their native air,

They seldom pass from moderately fair:

As if you meant these injuries to atone,

You give them charms more conqu'ring then their own

Not like the dull laborious Flatterer,

With secret art those graces you confer.

The skilful Painters with slight stroaks impart,

That subtil beauty which affects the heart.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=23)There are
who publickly profess they hate

Translations, and yet all they write translate:

So proud, they scorn to drive a lawfull trade,

Yet by their wants are shameless P [...]rates made▪

These you incense, while you their thefts reveal

Or else prevent in what they meant to steal

From all besides; you are secure of praise,

But you so high our expectation raise,

A gen [...]ral discontent we shall declare,

If such a workman only shou'd repair.

You to the dead your Piety have shewn,

Adorn'd their monuments, now build your own:

Drawn in the East, we in your lines may trace

That Genius which of old inspir'd the place:

The banish'd Muses back to Greece you bring,

Where their best airs you so divinely sing;

The world must own they are by you restor'd

To sacred shades, where they were first ador'd.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=24)

## 16\. Virtues Vrania.

HOpeless I languish out my days,

Struck with Urania's conqu'ring eyes:

The wretch at whom she darts these rayes

Must feel the wound untill he dies.

Though endless be her cruelty,

Calling her beauties to my mind,

I bow beneath her tyranny,

And dare not murmur she's unkind

Reason this tamness does upbraid,

Proff [...]ing to arm in my defence;

But when I call her to my aid,

She's more a Traitor then my sense.

No sooner I the warr declare

But strait her succour she denies,

And joyning forces with the fair,

Confirms the conquest of her ey [...]s.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=24)

## 17\. Silvia.

THe Nymph that undoes me, is fair & unkind

No less then a wonder by Nature design'd;

She's the grief of my heart, the joy of my eye,

And the cause of a flame that never can die.

Her mouth from whence wit still obligingly flows

Has the beautiful blush, and the smell of the rose;

Love and destiny both attend on her will,

She wounds with a look, with a frown she can kill

The desperate Lover can hope no redress,

Where beautie and rigour are both in excess;

In Silvia they meet, so unhappy am I,

Who sees her most love, & who loves her must die.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=25)

## 18\. To Celia

AS in those Nations where they yet adore

Marble and Cedar, and their aid implore,

'Tis not the Workman, nor the precious Wood,

But 'tis the Worshipper that makes the God:

So, cruel Fair, though Heaven has giv'n thee all

We Mortals (Virtue, or can Beauty) call,

Tis we that give the Thunder to your frowns,

Darts to your Eyes, and to our selves the wounds.

Without our Love, which proudly you deride,

Vain were your Beauty, and more vain your Pride▪

All envy'd beings that the world can shew,

Still to some meaner thing their greatness ow;

Subjects make Kings, and we (the numerous Train

Of humble Lovers) constitute thy Reign.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=25)This
difference only Beauties Realm may boast;

Where most it favours, it enslaves the most

And they to whom it is indulgent found,

Are ever in the rudest fetters bound.

What Tyrant yet, but thee, was ever known,

Cruel to those that serv'd to make him one.

Valour's a Vice, if not with Honour joyn'd,

And Beauty a Disease, when 'tis not kind.

## 19\. The Submission.

AH! Pardon, Madam, if I ever thought

Your smallest favors could too dear be bought

And the just greatness of your Servants flame

I did the poorness of their spirits name;

Calling their due attendance, Slavery,

Your power of Life and Death, flat Tyranny;

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=26)Since now
I yield, and do confess there is

No way too hard that leads to such a bliss.

So when Hippomanes beheld the Race,

Where loss was Death, and Conquest but a Face,

He stood amazed at the fatal strife,

Wondring that Love shou'd dearer be then Lise

But when he saw the Prize, no longer staid,

But through those very dangers sought the Maid,

And won her too: O may his Conquest prove

A happy Omen to my purer Love,

Which, if the honour of all Victory

In the resistance of the Vanquisht lie,

Though it may be the least regarded Prize,

Is not the smallest Trophy of your eyes.

## 20\. Constancy.

FEar not, my Dear, a slame can never die,

That is once kindled by so bright an eye:

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=26)Look on
thy self, and measure thence my love

Think what a passion such a form must move;

For though thy Beauty first allur'd my sight,

Yet now I look on it but as the light

That led me to the treasury of thy mind,

Whose inward virtue in that feature shin'd.

That knot (be confiden [...]) will ever last,

Which Fancy ty'd, and Reason has made fast;

So fast, that time (although it may disarm

Thy lovely face) my faith can never harm;

And age, deluded when it comes, will find

My love remov'd, and to thy soul assign'd.

The passion I have now shall ne're grow less,

No, though thy own fair self should it oppress

I could e'en hazard my Eternity,

Love but again, and▪ twill a Heaven be.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=27)

## 21\. The Indifference.

THanks, fair Urania, to your scorn,

I now am free as I was born▪

Of all the pain that I endur'd

By your late coldness, I am c [...]r'd.

[...]n losing me, proud Nymph, you lose

The humblest Slave your Beauty knows,

In losing you, I but throw down

A cruel Tyran [...]t from her Throne.

[...] must confess I ne're could fin [...]

Your equal, or in shape, or mind.

Y'ave beauty, wit, and all things know,

But where you shou'd your love bestow.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=27)

[...] unawares my freedom gave,

And to those Tyrants grew a Slave;

But would y'ave kept what you have won,

You should have more compassion shewn.

Love is a burthen, which two hearts,

When equally they bear their parts,

With pleasure carry▪ but no one,

Alas, can bear it long alone.

[...]'m not of those who co [...]rt their pain,

And make an Idol of  [...];

My hope in Love does ne're exp [...]re,

But I lose also the desire.

Nor yet of those, who ill receiv'd,

Would gladly have str [...]nge things believ'd

And if your heart you do  [...]ef [...]nd,

Their force against your honour bend▪

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=28)

Who e're does make his Victor less,

His own low weakness does confess;

And whiles her pow'r he does defame,

He poorly doubles his own shame.

Even that malice does betray,

And speak concern another way:

And all such scorn in men is but

The smoke of fires ill put out.

He's still in torment whom the rage

To detraction does engage;

In Love Indifference is sure

The only sign of perfect cure.

Yet, cruel Fair, if thou canst prove

As happy in some other love,

As I could once have done in thine,

The Sun on happier does not shine.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=28)

## 22\. A Pastoral Dialogue.

Thirsis.

STrephon! O Strephon! once the jolliest Lad

That with shrill Pipe did ever Mountain glad

While'ome the formost at our Rural Playes,

The Pride and Glory of our Holy-days:

Why dost thou now s [...]t musing all alone;

Teaching the Turtles yet a sadder groan▪

Swel'd with thy Tears, why does the neighb'ring Broo [...]

Bear to the Ocean what she never took?

Why do our Woods, so us'd to hear thee Sing▪

With nothing now but with thy Sorrows ring?

Thy Flocks are well and fruitful, and no Swain

Then thee more welcome to the Hill or Plain.

Strephon.

No loss of these, or care of those are left,

Hath wretched Strephon of his peace berest,

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=29)I could
invite the Wolf, my cruel Guest,

And play unmovd while he on all did feast;

I could endure that every Swain out-run,

Out-threw, out wrestl'd, and each Nymph shou'd shun

The hapless Strephon: But the Gods, I find,

To no such trifles have this Heart design'd;

A feller grief, and sadder loss, I plain,

Then ever Shepherd, or did Prince, sustain;

Bright Galatea, in whose matchless face

Sateru al nnocence with heavenly grace,

In whose no less to be adored mind,

With equal light, even distant virtues shin'd,

Chaste, without pride; though gentle, yet not soft;

Not always cruel, nor yet kind too oft:

Fair Goddess of these Fields, who for our sports,

Though she might well become despised Courts,

Belov'd of all, and loving one alone,

Is from my sight, I fear, for ever gone;

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=29)Now I am
sure thou wondrest not, I grieve:

But rather art amazed that I live.

Thirsis,

Thy case indeed is pitiful, but yet

Thou on thy loss too great a price dost set;

Women, like days are, Strephon, some be far

More bright and glorious then others are;

Yet none so wonderful were ever seen,

But by as fair they have succeeded been.

Strephon,

Others as fair, and may as worthy prove,

But sure I never shall another love;

Her bright Idea wanders in my thought,

At once my Poyson, and my Antidote;

The Stag shall sooner with the Eagle soar,

Seas leave their Fishes naked on the shoar;

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=30)The Wolf
shall sooner by the Lambkin die,

And from the Kid the hungry Lion flie,

Then I forget her face; what once I love,

May from my eyes, but not my heart remove.

## 23\. To a Lady, who fled the sight of him.

IF I my Celia cou'd perswade

To see those wounds her eyes have made,

And hear whilst I that passion tell,

Which, like her self, does so excel,

How soon we might be freed from care!

She need not fear, nor I despair.

Such Beauty does the Nymph protect,

That all approach her with respect;

And can I offer violence

Where love does joyn in her defence?

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=30)This guard
might all her fears disperse,

Did she with Savages converse.

Then my Celia wou'd surprize

With what's produc'd by her own eyes;

Those matchless flames which they inspire

In her own Breast, shou'd raise a fire

For Love, but with more subtil Art,

As well as Beauty charms the Heart.

## 24\. To a Lady, asking him how long he would love her.

IT is not, Celia, in our power

To say how long our love will last,

It may be we within this hour

May lose those joys we now do taste;

The Blessed, that immortal be,

From change in love are only free.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=31)Then,
since we mortal Lovers are,

Ask not how long our love will last▪

But while it does, let us take care

Each minute be with pleasure past;

Were it not madness to deny

To live, because w'are sure to die;

## 25\. SONG.

TEll me no more you love; in vain,

Fair Celia, You this passion feign;

Can they pretend to love, who do

Refuse what Love perswades them to;

Who once has felt his active flame,

Dull Laws of Honour will disdain;

You wou'd be thought his Slave, and yet

You will not to his pow'r submit.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=31)More cruel
then those Beauties are,

Whose coyness wounds us to despair;

For all the kindness which you shew,

Each smile and kiss which you bestow,

Are like those cordials which we give

To dying men, to make them live▪

And languish out an hour in pain;

Be kinder, Ceiia, or disdain.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=32)

## 26\. TO HER EXCELLENCE, THE Marchioness OF NEW-CASTLE, After the Reading of
Her incom­parable POEMS.

Madam,

WIth so much wonder we are struck

When we begin to read your matchless Book,

A while your own excess of merit stays

Our forward Pens, and does suspend your Praise,

Till time our minds does gently recompose,

Allays this wonder, and our duty shews,

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=32)Instructs
us how your Virtues to proclaim,

And what we ought to pay to your Great Fame;

Your Fame, which in your Country has no bounds,

But wheresoever Learning's known resounds.

Those Graces Nature did till now divide,

Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,

Are joyn'd in you; and all to you submit,

The brightest Beauty, and the sharpest Wit.

No Faction here, or fiery Envy sways,

They give you Myrtle, while we offer Bays.

What Mortal dares dispute those Wreaths with you

Arm'd thus with Lightning, and with Thunder too?

This made the Great Newcastle's Heart your Prize,

Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious eyes

Had only pow'r his Martial Mind to tame,

And raise in his Heroick Breast a Flame:

A Flame, which with his Courage still aspires

As if immortal Fuel fed those Fires:

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=33)This
Mighty Chief, and your Great Self made One,

Together the same Race of Glory run;

Together in the Wings of Fame you move,

Like yours, his Virtue: and like yours, his Love.

While we your Praise endeav'ring to rehearse,

Pay that great Duty in our humble Verse,

Such as may justly move your Anger, You,

Like Heaven, forgive them, and accept them too

But what we cannot, your brave Hero payes,

He builds those Monuments we strive to raise:

Such as to after-Ages shall make known,

While he records your Deathless Fame, his own.

So when an Artist some rare Beauty draws,

Both in our wonder share, and our applause:

His skill from Time secures the Glorious Dame,

And makes himself immortal in her Fame.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=33)

## 27\. EPILOGUE TO TARTUFF, Spoken by Himself,

MAny have been the vain attempts of Wit

Against the still-prevailing Hypocrite:

Once, and but once, a Poet got the day,

And vanquish'd Busy in a Puppet-play:

But Busy rallying, arm'd with zeal, and rage,

Possest the Pulpit, and pull'd down the Stage.

To laugh at English Knaves is dang'rous then,

While English Fools will think them honest Men:

But sure no zealous Brother can deny us

Free leave with this our Monsieur Ananias.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=34)A Man may
say, without being call'd an Atheist,

There are Damn'd Rogues among the French and Papist

That fix Salvation to short band and Hair,

That belch and snuffle to prolong a Pray'r?

That use t'enjoy the Creature to express

Plain VVhoring, Gluttony, and Drunkenness?

And in a decent way perform them too,

As well, nay better far, alas, then you;

Whose fleshly failings are but Fornication,

We godly phrase it, Gospel-Propagation,

Just as Rebellion was call'd Reformation.

Zeal stands but Centr'y at the Gate of Sin,

Whilst all that have the Word pass freely in

Silent, and in the dark, for fear of Spies,

You march, and take Damnation by surprize,

There's not a roaring Blade in all this Town

Can go so far tow'rds Hell for half a Crown,

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=34)As I for
six Pence, for we know the way;

For want of Guides Men often go astray:

Therefore give ear to what I shall advise,

Let every married Man, that's grave and wise,

Take a Tartuff, of known ability,

To teach and to instruct his Family,

Who may so settle lasting Reformation,

First get his Son, then give him Education.

## 28\. The Imperfect Enjoyment.

AFter a pretty amorous discourse,

She does resist my love with pleasing force;

Mov'd not with Anger, but with Modesty,

Against her will she is my Enemy.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=35)Her eyes
the rudeness of her Arms excuse,

Whilst those accept what these seem to refuse;

To ease my passion, and to make me blest,

Th'obliging smock falls from her whiter breast;

Then with her lovely hands she does conceal

Those wonders Chance so kindly did reveal;

In vain, alas, her nimble fingers strove

To shield her Beauties from my greedy Love;

Guarding her Breasts, her Lips she did expose,

To save a Lilly she must lose a Rose;

So many charms she has in ev'ry place,

A hundred hands cannot defend each Grace.

Sighing at length her force she does recal,

For since I must have Part, she'll give me All.

Her arms the joyful Conqueror embrace,

And seem to guide me to the fought-for place.

Her love is in her sparkling eyes exprest,

She falls o'th' bed for pleasure, more then rest.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=35)But Oh,
strange passion! Oh, abortive joy!

My zeal does my devotion quite destroy

Come to the Temple where I shou'd adore

My Saint, I worship at the sacred door;

Oh, cruel chance! the Town which did oppose

My strength so long, now yields to my dispose;

When, overjoy'd with victory, I fall

Dead at the foot of the surrender'd wall

Without the usual Ceremony, we

Have both fulfill'd the am'rous mystery

The action which we shou'd have joyntly done,

Each has unluckily perform'd alone;

The Union which our Bodies shou'd enjoy,

The Union of our eager souls destroy.

Our flames are punish'd by their own excess,

W'd had more pleasure had our Loves been less;

She blush'd and frown'd, perceiving we had done;

The sport she thought we scarce had yet begun;

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=36)Alas, said
I, condemn your self, not me,

This is th'effect of too much modesty.

Hence with that peevish virtue, the delight

Of both our Victories was lost i'th fight;

Yet from my shame your glory does arise,

My weakness proves the vigour of your eyes;

They did consume the Victim, ere it came

Unto the Altar, with a purer flame:

Phillis, let then this comfort ease your care,

Y'ad been more happy had you been less fair.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=36)

## 29\. A PROLOGUE Spoken at the opening of the DUKE'S NEW PLAY-HOUSE.

TIs not in this as in the former Age,

When Wit alone suffic'd t'adorn the stage;

When things well said an Audience cou'd invite,

Without the hope of such a Gaudy Sight:

What with your Fathers took wou'd take with you

If Wit had still the Charm of being New;

Had not enjoyment dull'd your appetite,

She in her homely dress wou'd yet delight;

Such stately Theatres we need not raise,

Our Old House wou'd put off our dullest Plays.

You Gallants know a fresh Wench of sixteen

May drive the Trade in honest Bombarine

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=37)And never
want good Custom, shou'd she lie

[...]n a back-Room, two or three stories high:

But such a Beauty as has long been known,

Though not decay'd, but to Perfection grown,

Must, if she mean to thrive in this leud Town,

Wear Points, lac'd Petticoats, and a rich Gown;

Her Lodgings too must with her Dress agree,

[...] with Damask, or with Tapestry;

H [...]e China, Cabinets, and a great Glass,

To  [...]rike respect into an Am'rous Ass.

Without the help of Stratagems and Arts,

An old Acquaintance cannot touch your Hearts.

M [...]thinks 'tis hard our Authors shou'd submit

So tamely to their Predecessors wit,

[...]nce, I am sure, among you there are few

Wou'd grant your Grand-fathers had more then you

But hold! I in this business may proceed too far,

And raise a storme against our Theatre;

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=37)And then
what wou'd the wise Adventures say,

Who are in a much greater fright to day

Then ever Poet was about his Play?

Our apprehensions none can justly blame,

Money is dearer much to us then Fame:

This thought on, let our Poets justifie

The Reputation of their Poetry;

We are resolv'd we will not have to do

With what's between those Gentlemen and you.

Be kind, and let our House have but your praise,

You'r welcome every day to damn their Plays

## 30\. Falling in love with a Stranger at a Play.

FAIR Amarillis, on the Stage, whilst you

Behold a seigned love you gave a true;

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=38)I like a
Coward in the Amorous War,

Came only to look on, yet got a Scar;

Fixt by your eyes, I had no power to flie,

They held me whil'st you gain'd the Victory:

I thought I safely might my sight content,

To which the power to like (not love) I lent;

And if I ventur'd on some slight Discourse,

It should be such as could no passion nurse:

Led by the treacherous lustre of your eyes,

At last I plaid too near the Precipice:

Love came disguis'd in wonder and delight▪

And I was conquer'd e're I knew him right;

Your words fell on my passion like those showers;

Which swell and multiply the rising flowers;

Like Cupid's self, a God, and yet a child,

Your looks at once were awful, and yet mild:

Me thoughts you blush'd, as conscious of my flame,

Whil'st your strict vertue did your beauty blame:

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=38)But rest
secure; y'are from the guilt as free,

As Saints ador'd from our Idolatry;

And Love a Torment doe's for me prepare,

Beyond your rigour in my own despair.

## 31\. Indifference excused.

LOve, when 'tis true, needs not the aid

Of sighs nor tears to make it known;

And to convince the cruel'st Maid,

Lovers should use their love alone:

Into their very looks 't will steal;

And he that most will hide his flame

Doe's in that care his pains reveal,

Silence it selfe can love proclam:

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=39)

This Aurelia made me shun

The paths that common lovers tread:

Whose guilty passions are begun,

Not in their Hearts, but in their Head.

I cou'd not sigh, and with cross'd arms

Lament your Rigour and my Fate,

Nor tax your beauty with such charms

As men adore, and VVomen hate:

But careless live, and without Art,

Knowing my love you must have spi'de,

And thinking it a foolish part,

To strive to shew what none can hide.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=39)

## 32\. The Platonick.

FAIR Octavia, you are much too bla [...]

To blow the fire, and wonder at the

I did converse, 'tis true, so far was mine;

But that I lov'd, and hop'd, was wholly thine;

Not hop'd, as others do, for a return,

But that I might without offending burn.

I thought those eyes which every hour

Could not remember all the wounds they

Forgotten in the crowd I wisht to lie,

And of your coldness, not your anger, die;

Yet since you know I love, 'tis now no time

Longer to hide, let me excuse the crime;

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=40)Seeing
what laws I to my passion give,

Perhaps you may consent that it should live,

First, it never shall a hope advance

Of waiting on you, but by seeming chance,

I at a distance will adore your eyes,

As awful Persians do the Eastern Skies,

I never will presume to think of Sex,

Norwith gross thoughts my deathless love perplex

I tread a pleasant path without design;

And to thy care my happiness resign,

From Heaven it self thy beauty cannot be

A freer gift then is my love to thee.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=40)

## 33\. To a Devout Young Woman.

PHillis this mighty zeal asswage,

You over-act your part;

The Martyrs at your tender Age,

Gave Heaven but half their heart.

Old men (till past the pleasure) ne're

Declaim against the sin,

'Tis early to begin to fear

The Devil at fifteen.

The World to Youth is too severe,

And like a treacherous light,

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=41)Beauty the
Actions of the fair

Exposes to their sight.

And yet this World, as old as 'tis,

Is oft deceiv'd by't too;

Wise Combinations seldom miss,

Let's try what we can do.

## 34\. SONG.

WHEN Aurelia first became

The Mistress of his heart,

So milde and gentle was her reign,

Thirsis in hers had part.

Reserves and care he laid a side,

And gave his Love the Reins;

The headlong course he now must bide,

No other way remains.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=41)

At first her cruelty he fear'd,

But that being overcome,

No second for a while appear'd,

And he thought all his own:

He call'd himself a happier  [...]

Then ever lov'd before;

Her favours still his hopes out-ran;

What Mortal can have more?

Love smil'd at first, then looking gra [...]

Said, Thirsis leave to boast;

More joy then all her kindness gave,

Her fickleness will cost.

He  [...]poke, and from that fatal time,

All Thirsis did, or said,

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=42)Appear'd
unwelcome, or a crime,

To the ungrateful Maid.

Then he despairing of her heart,

Would fain have had his own

Love answered, such a Nymph could part

With nothing she had won▪

## 35\. TO CLORIS.

CLoris, I cannot say, your eyes

Did my unwary heart surprize,

Nor will I swear it was your face,

Your shape, or any nameless grace;

For you are so entirely fair,

To love a part injustice were;

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=42)No
drowning man can know which drop

Of water his last breath did stop;

So when the stars in Heaven appear,

And joyn to make the Night look clear,

The Light we no one's Bounty call,

But the united work of all;

He that both lips, or hands adore,

Deserves them only, and no more;

But I love all, and every part,

And nothing less can ease my heart.

Cupid, that Lover weakly strikes,

Who can express what 'tis he likes.

## 36\. SONG.

AUrelia, art thou mad

To let the World in me

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=43)Envy joyes
I never had,

And censure them in thee.

Fill'd with grief for what is past,

Let us at length be wise,

And the Banquet boldly tast,

Since we have paid the price.

Love does easie souls despise,

Who lose themselves for toyes,

And escape for those devise,

VVho tast his utmost joyes.

To be thus for Trifles blam'd,

Like theirs a folly is,

VVho are for vain swearing damn'd,

And knew no higher bliss.

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=43)

Love should like the year be crown'd,

With sweet variety;

Hope should in the Spring be found

Kind fears, and jealousie.

In the Summer flower should rise,

And in the Autumn Fruit;

His Spring doth else but mock our eyes,

And in a scoff salute.

## 37\. SONG

LOve still has something of the Sea,

From whence his Mother rose;

No time his Slaves from doubt can free,

Nor give their thoughts repose:

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=44)

They are becalm'd in clearest dayes,

And in rough weather tost;

They wither under cold delayes,

Or are in tempests lost.

One while they seem to touch the Po [...],

Then straight into the Main,

Some angry Wind in cruel sport,

Their Vessel drives again.

At first, disdain and pride they fear,

Which if they chance to scape,

Rival [...] and falshood soon appear

In a more dreadful shape.

By such degrees to joy they come,

And are so long withstood,

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=44)So slowly
they receive the summe,

It hardly does them good.

Tis cruel to prolong a pain;

And to defer a Bliss,

Believe me, gent [...] Hermione,

No less inhumane is.

An hundred thousand oaths your fears,

Perhaps would not remove;

And if I gaz'd a thousand years,

I could no deeper love.

'Tis fitter much for you to guess,

Then for me to explain;

But grant, O grant that happiness

Which only does remain.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=45)

## 38\. A Dialogue between Amintas and Celia.

Celia.

AMintas I am come alone

According as I said;

But whither is thy Honour flown?

I fear I am betray'd:

Thy looks are chang'd, and in the place

Of innocent desires,

Methinks I see thy eyes and face

Burn with unusal fires.

Amintas.

See's not my Celia Nature wear

One Countenance in the Spring,

And yet another shape prepare,

To bring the Harvest in?

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=45)Look on
the Eagle, how unlike

He to the Egg is found,

When he prepares his Pownce to strike

His Prey against the ground;

Fears might my Infant Love become;

Twere want of kindness now,

Should modesty my Hope benum,

Or check what you allow

Celia.

Amintas hold, what could you worse

To worst of Women do?

Ah! how could you a passion nurse,

So much my Honours Foe?

Amintas.

Make not an idol of a Toy,

Which every breath can shake,

Which all must have, or none enjoy,

What course so e're we take:

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=46)Whil'st
Women hate, or Men are vain,

You cannot be secure;

What makes my Celia then a pain

So fruitless to endure?

Celia.

Could I the World neglect for the e,

Thy love, though dear it cost,

In some unkind conceit of me,

Would be untimely lost:

Thou would'st thy own Example fear,

And every heedless word

I chance let fall beyond thy care,

Would some new doubt afford.

Amintas.

If I am jealous, 'tis because

I know not where you love;

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=46)With me
fulfil Loves gentle Laws,

And all my fears remove.

Celia.

Women, like things, at second hand,

Do half their value lose,

But whilst all Courtship they withstand,

May at their pleasure choose.

Amintas.

This were a fine Discourse, my Dear,

If we were not alone;

But now Love whispers in my ear,

There's somewhat to be done.

She said she never would forgive,

He kissing, swore she should;

And told her she was mad to strive

Against their mutual good.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=47)What
farther past, I canot tell,

But sure not much amiss;

He vow'd he lov [...]d her dearly well,

She answered with a kiss.

## 39\. SONG.

GEet you gone, you will undo me,

If you love me, don't pursue me;

Let that inclination perish,

Which I dare no longer cherish;

It does of late so fast prevail,

It must go now or not at all:

For should it gather farther strength,

'Twould give my Honour Laws at length:

With harmless thoughts I did begin,

But in the Crowd Love entred in;

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=47)I knew him
not he was so gay,

So innocent and full of play;

At every hour, in every place,

I neither saw; nor form'd your face;

All that in Playes was finely writ,

My thoughts for you, and me were fit.

My Dreams at night were all of you,

Such as till then I never knew:

I sported thus in young desire,

Chear'd with light, free from his fire:

But now his Teeth and Claws are grown,

Let me the Fatal Lion shun;

You found me harmless, leave me so;

For were I not, you'd leave me too.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=48)

## 40\. SONG.

PHillis, you have enough enjoy'd

The pleasures of Disdain;

Methinks your pride shou'd now be cloy'd,

And grow it self again:

Open to Love your long shut Brest,

And entertain it's sweetest Guest.

Love that can heal the wounds he gives,

And can ill usage slight;

May laugh at all that Fate contrives,

Full of it's own delight,

For in his Chains w'are happier far,

Then Kings themselves without 'em are.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=48)

Leave then to tame Philosophy

The joyes of quietness;

With me into Loves Empire fly,

And taste my happiness:

Where even Tears and Sighs can show,

Pleasures the cruel never know.

## 41\.

MADAM, for your Commands to stay,

Is the mean duty of a Wretch,

Whose service you with wages pay:

Lovers should at occasion catch,

Not idly wait till it be brought,

But with the deed o'retake your thought;

Honour and Love let them give o're,

Who do their duty, and no more.

## 42\.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=49)

AWake my Eyes, at night my thoughts pur­sue

Your Charming Shape, & find it ever new

If I my weary breast to sleep resign,

In gaudy Dreams your love and beauty shine [...] ▪

Dreams with such Extasies Pleasures fill'd,

As to those joyes they seem can only yield:

Nor do they yield perhaps, wou'd you allow,

Dear Flavia, that I once might know.

## 43\. SONG

PHillis, let's shun the common Fate,

And let our love never turn to hate;

I'le dote no longer then I can,

Without being call'd a faithless Man,

VVhen we begin to want Discourse,

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=49)And
kindness seems to tast f force,

As freely as we met, we'le part,

Each one possest of their own heart.

Thus whil'st grave Fools themselves undo,

We'll Game, and give off Savers too:

So equally the match we'll make,

Both shall be glad to draw the stake.

A smile of thine shall make my bliss;

I will enjoy thee in a kiss

I'le love and hate just where you do,

And for't no other reason know.

When from this height my love does fall

Wee'l bravely scorn to love at all:

If thy affection first decay,

I'le the whole blame on Nature lay.

Alas what Cordial can remove,

The hasty Fate of dying Love?

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=50)I'le
grieve as for a friend deceas'd

And with the next as well be pleas'd:

Thus we will all the World excel,

In loving, and in living well.

## 44\. DISTICH.

ALthough no Art the Fire of Love can tame

'Tis oft extingiush't by an equal flame.

## 45\.

THE painted Apples that adorn,

Of yon'd fair Tree, the Airy top,

And seems our dull approach to scorn,

From their weak Stalk must one day drop;

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=50)And out of
reach of Mortals plac't,

Be the vile food of Worms at last;

Thus ends of Humane things the Pride,

Born down Times ever-flowing Tide.

Thy Matchless Beauty, that we all

Now with such heat and passion court,

Though kept from worthy Lovers, shall

Confess its Tyranny but short:

Then do not Love with Anger meet,

Nor cruel be, to seem discreet:

Shunning what Nature does intend,

Things seldom meet a Nobler  [...]nd.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=51)

## 46\. SONG

NOt Celia that I juster am,

Or better then the rest

For I would change each hour like them,

Were it my interest.

But I am ty'd to very thee,

By every thought I have

Should you my heart but once set free,

I would be no more slave.

All that is Woman is ador'd:

In thy dear self I find:

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=51)For your
whole Sex can but afford.

The handsome and the kind.

Why then should I seek farther store,

And still make love anew?

VVhen change it self can give no more,

'Tis easie to be true.

## 47\. SONG.

THirsis no more against my flame advise,

But let me be in love, and be you wife;

Here end, and there begin a new address,

Pursue the vulgar, easie happiness:

Leave me to Amaranta, who alone

Can in my sullen heart erect her Throne:

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=52)know as w
[...]ll as you 'tis mean to burn,

For one who to our  [...]lame makes no return:

But you like me know not those conquering eyes,

Which mock prevention by a quick surprize:

And now like a hurt Deer, in vain I start,

From her, that in my breast has hid the Dart.

Though I can never reach her Excellence,

Take somewhat in my hopeless Loves defence.

Her Beauty is her not esteemed VVealth,

And Graces move about her eyes by stealth;

Vertue in others, the forc't Child of Art

Is but the constant temper of her Heart:

All charms her Sex so often courts in vain,

(Like Indian Fruit, which our cold Earth disdain)

I [...] her grow wild, as in their Native Air;

And she has all perfection without care.

O Loves harms she has a gentle sense,

[...] Beauty else would clogg her innocence:

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=52)Like a
wise Prince she rules her servants so,

That neither want nor Luxury they know;

None vainly hoping what she may not give,

Like humble slaves at small expence we live:

And I the wretched comfort only share,

To be the last whom she will bid despair.

## 48\. SONG.

I Ask not my Celia would love me again,

In its own pleasure my love is pay'd;

I'le find such excuses for all her disdain,

That shortly to frown I'le make her afraid.

Her neglect of me, of her self I'le think care;

Her cruelty, I her strict Vertue will name;

When least kind she seems, I'le believ her most near

And call her refusal, but a Virgins Fame.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=53)

Thus all that was wont heretofore to cure love,

In me shall increase, and stir up the fire;

I'le make her at last some kind remedy prove,

Since all others but increase my desire.

Whil'st no man enjoyes that which I court in vain,

And Celia to none is kinder then me;

To  [...] Honour I'le yield, and never complain,

But dy [...] at her feet, if so it decree.

## 49\. SONG.

DRink a bout till the day find us,

These are pleasures that will last,

L [...]t no foolish passion blind us

Joys of Love make too much hast.

Maids are long ere we can win 'um,

And our Passions wast the while;

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=53)In a B
[...]er Glass we'l begin 'um,

Let some Fool take th' other toy.

Yet we will have store of good Wenches,

Whom their own high bloods shall court,

After two or three good Drenches,

To out-do them at the Sport;

Joyning thus both Mirth and Beauty,

To make up our full delight:

In Wine and Love we pay our Duty

To each friendly coming night.

## 50\. SONG.

WAlking among thick shades alone,

I heard a dying voice

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=54)Which
sighing  [...]aid, now she is gone

I'le make no second choice.

I look't and saw it was a Swain,

VVho to the flying wind,

Did of some Neighbouring Nymph complain,

Too fair, and too unkind.

He told me how he saw her first,

And with what gracious eyes,

And gentle speech that flame she nurst,

VVhich since she did despise.

[...] Vows she did as fast receive,

[...] could breath 'em to her;

[...] in her Eyes proclaim'd her leave,

That he alone should woo her.

They feed their flocks still near one place,

And at one instant me [...]

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=54)He gazing
on her lovely face,

Fell deeper in the Net.

She seem'd of her new Captive glad,

Proud of his Bondage he;

No Lover e're a prospect had

Of more felicity▪

But the false Maid, or never lov'd,

Or gave so quickly o're;

E're his was to the heighth improv'd,

Her kindness was no more.

Even her dissemblings she let fall,

And made him plainly see,

That though his heart she did enthrail,

Her own was ever free.

Now least his care should pity move,

She shuns his very sight;

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=55)And leave
him to that hopeless love,

She did create in spight.

Her name I could not make him tell,

Though vowing him my aid;

He said he never would reveal,

In Life, nor Death, the Maid.

Then a wild look the Shepherd cast,

And falling underneath

A Beach, where he had seen her last,

Resign'd his  [...]most breath.

## 51\. SONG.

AS I sat thoughtful in a shade,

There I spied a loving pair,

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=55)VVho
closely by each other lay'd,

Past their time in softer care:

While she look't sadly on the ground,

On her Eyes the Youth's were fix't;

In which me thought he gladly found

Jealousie with kindness mixt:

But his soon dull and heavier grew,

When she rais'd her drooping Head,

And told him, since he was untrue,

With his Faith her Love was fled.

Though Jealousie be full of pain,

Constant Love can suffer more:

The death of yours, sayes the griev'd Swain,

Shews it was but weak before.

The Nymph replyed, since you can prove

False to one so kind as I,

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=56)Alass,
how hard is it to love

And how easie 'tis to dy!

He answered, and did gently seise,

Her fair hand he did adore;

Since you can dy with so much ease,

You can love me still with more.

Disguise not then your tender heart,

Fear I should anothers be,

Betrayes, in spight of all your Art,

That you were born for only me.

Like gentle Dew on wither'd leaves,

Love is lost on almost all:

But the fresh Flower with joy receives

That which there would vainly fall:

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=56)

To fairest Nymphs Love adds a grace,

And no kind one can be foul;

Love gives a Beauty to the  [...]ace,

And a softness to the Soul.

Since therefore fain'd inconstancy,

With the world deceives you too,

Henceforth my flame shall rather be

Seen by all, then not by you.

As by some waters purling noise,

Oft repose we soonest find;

So these fond Turtles murmuring joyes,

Rock't asleep my restless mind.

Which I from this blest couple brought.

Freed from all my duller care;

But, in i [...] pl [...]ce, ala [...]s, I thought

Him too happie▪ Her too fair.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=57)

## 52\. SONG

The Grave my envy now beget,

That did my pity move;

Who, by the right of wanting Wit

Are free from cares of love.

Turks honour Fools, because they are

By that defect secure▪

From slavery, and toils of War,

Which all the rest endure.

So I, that suffer cold neglect,

And wounds from Celia's Eyes,

Begin extreamly to respect

These Fools, that seem so wis [...].

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=57)

Tis true, they set their silly hearts

On things of no delight;

To pass all day for men of parts,

They pass alone the night:

But Celia never breaks their rest;

Such servants she disdains;

And so the Fops are dully blest,

While I endure her chains.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=58)

## 53\. SONG. The Ballers Life,

THEY have too many hours, that employ 'em

About Business, Ambition, or News,

While we that know how to enjoy 'em,

Wish in vain for the time which such Block­heads misuse:

They that toyl in impertinent care,

May strive to be often at leasure;

They cannot be worse then they are;

But we whose business is pleasure,

Have never a moment to spare.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=58)With
dangerous Damsels we dally,

Till we come to a closer dispute;

And when we no more Forces can rally,

Our kind foes give us leave to retire and recruit;

Then drooping to Bacchus we fly,

Who Nobly regarding our merits,

VVith succours always is nigh;

And thus reviving our spirits,

We love, and we drink till we die.

## 54\. SONG.

WHEN cold despair

Would quench my passion, and end all my care,

Then gentle words, and gentle sighs recall

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=59)My
vanishing hopes which fain would stay;

But stranger fears soon drives my hopes away;

And back again to grief I fall▪

Her favour thus, like Cordials given in vain

To dying men, does but prolong my pain.

Ah Gloriana, why

Like all your other Lovers may not I

Have leave, alas, soon to despair and dy?

Be rather cruel, then but kind in part,

Hide those soft looks, or shew as soft a heart.

## 55\. To Celia.

Celia, the faithful servant you disown,

Wou'd in obedience keep his love unknown

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=59)But
bright Idea's such as you inspire,

We can no more conceal, than not admire;

My heart at home, in my own brest did dwell

Like humble Hermit in a peaceful Cell,

Unknown, and undisturb'd, it rested there,

Stranger alike to hope, and to dispair:

But Loves Tumultuous Train do [...]s now invade

The sacred quiet of this hollowed shade,

His fatal flame shine out to every eye,

Like blazing Comets in a VVinter Sky.

Fair and severe like Heav' [...] you injoyn,

Commands that seem [...] [...] your own design;

Forbidding what your  [...] us to:

Since if from Heavenly power you will allow,

That all  [...]ur faculty  [...] [...]lain,

What  [...]re we will, is that the Gods ordain;

But they and y [...]u,  [...]ights without Limit have.

Over y [...]ur Creatures, and more yours, your sl [...]ve:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=60)And I am one,
born only to admire,

To humbl [...] 'ere to hope, scar [...]e to desire,

A thing whose  [...]liss depends upon your will;

Who cou [...]d be proud, you'd deign to use him ill,

How can my passion in  [...]it your offence,

That challenges so little recomp [...]nce▪

Let me but ever love, and ever be

The Example of your power and cruelty;

Since so much s [...]orn does in your brest reside,

Be more indulgent to its Mother, Pride;

Ki [...] all y [...]u strike, and trample on their Craves,

But own the Fates of your neglected slaves:

When in the crowd yours undistinguish'd lyes,

You give away the Triumph of your Eyes:

Permi [...] me then to glory in my Chains,

My fruitless sighs, and my unpitied pains:

Perhaps obtaining this, you'll think I find

[...] Mercy then your Anger has [...]d sig [...]d,

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=60)But Love
has carefully contriv'd for me,

The last perfection of Misery▪

For to my State those hopes of Common peace,

Which Death affords to every Wretch, must cease

My worst of Fates attends me in my Grave,

Since, dying, I must be no more your Slave.

## 56\. To CELIAE

ALL things submit themselvs to your command,

Fair Celia, when it does not Love withstand;

The power it borrowed from your eyes alone,

All but himself would yield to who has none;

Were he not blind, such are the Charmes you have

He'd quit his Godhead to become your Slave.

Be proud to act a Mor [...]a [...] Heroes part,

And thr [...]w himse [...]f for Fame on his own Dart?

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=61)But Fate
hath otherwise dispos'd of things,

In different Bonds subjecting Slaves, and Kings.

That Fate (like you, resistless) does ordain

That Love alone should over Beauty Reign.

By Harmony the Universe does move;

And what is Harmony, but mutual Love?

See gentle Brooks, how quietly they glide,

Kissing the rugged Banks on either side,

Whilst in their Christal Stream at once they show,

And with them feed the Flowers which they bestow;

Though prest upon by their too rude embrace,

In gentle murmurs they keep on their pace

To their Lov'd Sea; for even streams have desire

Cool as they are, they feel Love's pow'rfull fires.

And with such passion, that if any force

Sto [...] or molest [...]um in their Am'rous course,

They swell with rage, break down, and ravage ore

The B [...]nks they kiss'd, the flowers they sed before.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=61)Who would
resist an Empire so Divine,

Which Universal Nature does enjoyn?

Submit then Celia er'e you be reduc'd,

For Rebels vanquisht once, are vil [...]ly us'd.

And such are you, when e're you dare obey

Another passion, and your Love be [...]ay.

You are Loves Citadels, by you he reigns,

And his proud Empire o're the World maintains;

He trusts you with his Stratage [...]s and Arms,

His frowns, his smiles, & all his conquering charms.

Beauty's no more but the dead S [...]yl which Love

Mannures, and does by wise Commerce improve;

Sayling by Sighes through Seas of tears, he sends,

Courtship from Forraign hearts: For your own ends▪

Cherish a Trade; for as with Indians we

Get Gold and Jewels for our Trumpery,

So to each other for their useless  [...]oyes,

Lovers afford Inestimab [...]e J [...]yes:

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=62)But if
you're  [...]ond of Trisles, be, and starve,

Your Gugaw Reputation preserve;

Live upon Modesty and empty Fame,

Foregoing Sense, for a fantastick Name.

## 57\. SONG.

As he lay in the Plain, his arm under his head

And his Flock feeding by, the fond Celadon said

Love's a sweet passion, why does it torment?

[...] a bitter (said he) whence are Lovers content

Since I suffer with pleasure, why should I complain

Or g [...]eve at my Fate, when I know, 'tis in vain

Y [...]t so pl [...]asing the pain is, so soft is the Dart,

That at once it both wounds me, & tickles my heart

To my self I sigh often without knowing why;

And w [...]ence ab [...]t from Phillis, m [...] thinks  [...] could die;

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=62)But oh!
what a pleasure still follows my pain;

When kinde Fortune do's help me to see her again.

In her eyes (the bright Stars that foretel what's to come,

By soft stealth now and then I examine my doom.

I press her hand gently, look languishing down,

And by passionate silence I make my love known.

But oh! how I'm blest when so kind she do's prove,

By some willing mistake to discover her love;

When in striving to hide, she reveals all her flame,

And our Eyes tell each other what neither dare name

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=63)

## 58\. SONG.

HOw Charming are those pleasant pains

Which the successfull Lover gains!

Oh! how the longing Spirit flies,

On scorching sighes, from dying eyes?

Whose intermixing Rayes impart,

Love's welcome Message to the heart.

Then, how the active Pulse grow'n warm,

To every sense gives the Alarm!

But oh! the Raptures, and the Qualms,

When Love unites the melting Palms!

What extasies! what hopes and fears!

What pretty talk, and am'rous t [...]ars

To these, a thousand Vowes succeed,

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=63)

And then, oh H [...]avens the secret deed!

When sense and Soul are bath'd in bliss,

Think, dear Aminda! think on this;

And curse those hours, we did not prove

The ravishing delights of Love.

## 59\. SONG.

GIve or foolish heart, and make hast to despair,

For Daphne regards not thy vows nor thy prayer

When I plead for thy passion, thy pains to prolong,

She courts her Ghittar, and replies with a Song;

No more shall true L [...]vers thy Beanty adore,

Were the Gods so sever [...] ▪ men would worship no more.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=64)

No more will I wait like a Slave at thy dore,

I'le spend the cold nights at thy window no more:

My lungs in long sighs I no more will exhale,

Since thy Pride is to make me grow sullen and pale;

No more shall Amintas thy pity implore,

Where the Gods so ingrate, men would worship no more.

No more shall thy Frowns or free humor perswade,

To court the fair Idol my Fancy has made;

When thy Saints so neglected, their follies give o're

Thy Deity's lost, and thy Beauty's no more.

No more, &c.

How weak are the Vows of a Lover in pain,

VVhen flatter'd by hope, or oppress'd by disdain?

No sooner my Daphne's bright Eyes I review,

But all is forgot, and I vow all anew;

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=64)No more
cruel Nymph I will murmure no more,

Did the Gods seem so fair, men would worship them more.

## 60\. SONG.

WIth so much ease ingrateful Swains,

Your faithless vows have cur'd your pains

You think by those your perjuries betray'd,

That all ar [...] false, or else may so be made?

And ev'ry smile or pleasing word proclaimes,

The coldest Nymph an off [...]ing to your flames.

Vain S [...]epherd know that now's the time

To  [...]ff [...]r for thy boasted crime:

Repeated Vows with me less credit find,

Then smiling Sea's, or the uncertain Wind.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=65)Deep
Sighs and frequent tears as things of course,

So common are that they have lost their force.

Thy Passions Truth will best appear

Disguis'd in doubts and guilty fear;

When all the Heart and careful Tongue conceal,

The Sense disorder'd, and the Eyes reveal;

Such dark confusion makes the flame shine bright,

So stars are best discern'd through shades of night.

One stol'n look can better woe,

Then Sighs and Tears and Vowes can doe.

The falsest Hearts like empty Vessels found,

But may thy feign'd; become a real wound,

That thy severer Pennance may declare

How great mens crimes, and womens virtues arse.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=65)

## 61\. SONG.

DEar Aminda, in vain you so coily refuse,

What nature and Love do inspire;

That formal old way which your Mother did use,

Can never confine the desire

It rather adds Oyl to the fire.

When the tempting delights of woing are lost,

And pleasure's a Duty become;

We both shall appear, like some dead Lovers ghost,

To frighten each other from home;

And the Genial bed like a Tombe.

Now, low at your feet your fond Lover will lye,

And seek a new Fate in your eyes;

One Amorous smile will exalt him so high,

He can all but Aminda despise;

Then change to a frown, and he dies.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=66)

To love, and each other, we'll ever be true;

But to raise our Enjoyments by Art,

We'll often fall out, and as often renew,

For to wound and cure the smart,

Is the pleasure which captives the Heart

## 62\. A PANEGYRICK sent by a Gentleman, with his Picture to his Mystriss.

Go, Envied Picture. With her leave, presume

To go where banish'd I must never come.

Thou art not from Orinda's Eyes debar'd;

She doom'd the substance, but the shadow spar'd;

How different is my punishment to theirs.

Who for their fins are sent to offer Prayers▪

And visit Saints at some far distant shrine?

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=66)But my
hard pennance is to stay from mine.

Yet this may freely pass she's pleas'd to grant

My Deputy may visit my fair Saint:

My Duty to my Picture I resign,

The Pilgrim That, but the Devotion's Mine.

Since I'm debarr'd the freedom to be just,

To this small Envoy I my vows intrust.

This dumb Sollicitour plac'd in my stead,

May minde you of that cause, it cannot plead.

Whene're you look on this, think on my state,

And let my Offering be my Advocate.

But go thou false Diss [...]mbler. For each Line,

Which while with her kind Presence blest, was mine;

Now in her absence no Resemblance bears,

To look like Me it wants my Griefs and Tears.

Wanting her presence, all my looks and sence,

Which were employ'd t' admire her Excellence.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=67)She gon,
are grown so stupid and so dull

My shadow wants a Body, I a Soul

To him that Loves the gentle Fates allow

A Constancy in all things but his Brow.

He may look Dull, or Gay; be Mean, or Brave,

As he's a happy or a wretched Slave,

Who then Paints Me —

Must draw me in my Chains, each Feature mould

Just as the state I with my Conq'r [...]ur hold.

And to describe each Line must look on You:

Beauty that can make Shadows False, or True.

However go, and her fair Hand salute.

Thy want of Merits she will ne' [...]e dispute

So much of Heav'n reigns in her Generous Heart

She can give Honours though to undesert.

If my best Hopes prove true, and she prove Kind,

Thou from her Favours mayst Preserment find.

She may v [...]uchsafe to wear thee at her Brest.

Thus Worn, thus Ray [...]d, thus honour'd, & thus Blest

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=67)Had it
but half the Love and flames I felt,

I would burst the Chrystal, and the Gold would melt

And at th' approach of so sublime a Bliss,

Break through its Prison walls to force a Kiss

But oh that Blessing's not for souls and Sence

Her Virtues cherish nought but Innocence.

Dull Picture cold and senceless as thou art,

Thou mayst press neare her Bos [...] me and her Heart.

That Rape is not for Flesh and Blood design'd,

Her Smile's too great a bl [...]ssing for Mankind.

Though thou'rt a poor  [...]ow Present, yet that Seat

Her B [...]some w [...]l [...] en [...]t [...]l thee Rich and Great.

Thy cancel [...] Imperfections then are ceast.

The Sacred L [...]dging Con [...]e [...]rates the Guest.

Thy Price is from my Entert [...]nment given,

T'is the He [...]ven makes the S [...]in [...]s,  [...]no [...] they Heavn

T'is thy Ex [...]ted  [...]e thy Worth declares,

Base Mete [...]s t [...]us w [...]en  [...] high▪  [...]em Stars.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=68)From her
fair Hand thy borrowed Lustre hold,

She can lend value to thy worthless Gold.

But if her favours can the Gift advance,

How much would they the Offerers worth in hance?

I'de tell her, (were it not a thought I find

Too large to be to breath and words confin'd)

How blest, how proud, how glorious I should be;

How Generous, how Divine, how Charming she,

To make her Acts of Grace thus near of Kin,

To wear this at her Breast, and Me within.

## 63\. A LETTER sent from a Gentleman to his Friend.

DEAR Iack! I wonder what a devil

Obliges thee to be so Civil,

Thus long to stay in Countrey-village,

To minde thy Fathers Ploughs and Tillage,

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=68)When we,
in Town, for our diversion,

Drink hard, sometimes, to cure a Tertian,

And twenty other things, as Hector

And VVench, which (Iack) thou mayst conjecture;

VVe want thee, 'Faith, to help us out here,

VV'are damnably put to the Rout-here;

For t'other day seven Bacchanalians

Fell briskly on us, they were Aliens;

And to those jolly Rites inur'd,

We drunk while drink could be endur'd;

Sev'n Brimmers in a Hand went round,

In which sev'n worthy Wights were drown'd

Poor Shallow Ned that night lay rough,

And ever since has had a Cough.

Which makes Him bark like angry Puppy,

'Gainst those who such large doses sup-ye;

But wenching He do's much delight in,

And is esteem'd an Arrant Knight in;

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=69)Besides,
the Rogue do's know some women

That are not Whores, I mean not common.

To one of which, who he protested

Was with all Ornaments invested.

He led me—

When rest from drink had lent me leisure,

A Miss for wedlock (Iack) not pleasure.

I laugh'd in sleeve to think the Youngster

Imagin'd I would keep a Long-stir.

With Complements as for my life,

And all to yoke my self with wife;

Though as I live I still must own,

Her beauty might become a Throne;

But I, like Rogue, indoctrinated,

In such Intrigues devoutly prated

Much modish Nonsence; which as good hap,

Or Love wou'd have it, stir'd her blood up

With such delight that all our discourse

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=69)Was from
our eyes, where Love had's Course.

So free that kisses were as common,

As those we give to naughty woman,

And mingled palms had bred such heat,

That all our Love came out in sweat.

Of which I this took Notice— Dammee

Madam, said I, your hands are Clammy.

She blush'd and look'd as if displeas'd

—When I to mend the matter—

Laugh'd at my impudence, and this pleas'd.

But I'le be short, this my first visit,

So well, on my part did solicit.

That ere months end to me, a whole-age

I of my Miss had better Knowledge.

But now methinks I see thy Grotto

Where on's inscrib'd the antient Motto.

Which us'd to me to be thy Story,

Debauch'd Young men, Memento Mori.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=70)And now—

That thou mayst see I make no waste on't.

I have thought fit to give th' a Tast on't.

## 64\. A Memento Mori.

AH! the sad houre

When friends shall loure

And say, He's breathing now his last,

When thoughts of Love and Drink are past;

When Tyrant Death usurps that brain,

Where little Maggot us'd to reign;

And with its damn'd unmodish Witches,

Pulls out the flame of my Caprici's;

And with ill tasts that Mouth's infecting,

Which Cheats in Wine was still detecting,

When 'stead of Frontigniac or Champaign,

They give me juice of E La Campane ▪

And 'stead of Songs and bawdy Verses,

One Hopkins's damn'd Rime rehearses;

Another, he falls on his Knees;

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=70)That,
that alone is a Disease!

For (Iack) thou knowst I ne're could pray,

Unless 'twere on a Holiday;

When Organ, Voice and Violin,

Wheedles our wicked thoughts from sin;

And then methinks I am in Heaven,

With Bacchus drinking Brimmers seven.

When Pan and Phoebus make us Musick,

Without which, praying wou'd make you-sick:

But without Complement or Pray'r,

Which are but words, and words but Air▪

Bacchus will take me to his Table,

And seat me 'midst the jolly Rabble.

## 65\. A NEW SONG.

OF all the brisk Dancers my Saleena for me,

For I love not a woman unless she be free;

The affection that I to my Mystriss do pay,

Grows weary unless she do meet me half-way:

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=71)There can
be no pleasure till humour do hit,

Then Jumping is as good as affection in wit.

No sooner I came, but she lik'd me as soon;

No sooner I ask'd but She graunted my boon.

And without a preamble, a Portion or Joynter,

She promis'd to meet me, where ere I appoint her,

So we struck up the Match, and Embraced each other

Without the consent of Father or Mother.

Then away with the Lady that's Modest and Coy

Let her end be the pleasure that we do enjoy.

Let her tickle her Fancy with secret delight,

And refuse all the day what she longs for at night.

I believe my Sallena say they are all mad

To pick on dry bones while flesh may be had.

## 66\. The Pot Rapsodes.

ILe leave the dish and hugg the Glasse,

Whatere's the meat give me the sauce:

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=71)Who
swallows Crit, and never drinks

Slike him that speaks before he thinks,

Meat's but a gross parenthesis,

No essence, but in liquid bliss.

Iove were a mortal were it not,

Hee's deified by the Pot;

Europa sat not on his Back,

Had he not swam through Seas of Sack.

I'le mount my thoughts to Giant height

I'm Constellation in conceit.

I'le pluck down Sol, and mount his Sphere,

Then sullen Daphne shall appear;

And seeing me grasp Pboebus rayes,

Shall cringe and crown me with her Bayes

I'le rape the Moon; it shall be said,

Cynthia 'th chang'd the name of Maid.

Her twinkling Girles shall all be ta'ne,

No Virgin left to bear her train.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=72)Thus
Conquering Sun, Moon and Stars,

With gods themselves I'le wager Warrs.

Or if on Earth my Minde can rest,

I'le be a Monarch at the least.

Our dull Plebeians shall grow quicker,

Rinc [...]ng their muddy brains in liquor:

The Miser then shall scatter Cash,

For Wine shall change his Balderdash;

And sing, and drink, and sing,

Till every subject turn a King.

The Conquer'd Gods shall make us legs,

Intreating they may sip the dregs.

Thus will we tipple till the World

Into Oblivion is hurl'd,

And when we seel Old-Age doth come;

We'll post into Elyzium,

And there our chiefest Joy shall be

To think of past Felicitie.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=72)

## 67\. SONG.

IT is not, Chloris, your disdain

Can ever cover with despair,

Or in cold Ashes hide that care;

Which I have fed with so long pain,

I may perhaps my Eyes refrain,

And fruitless words no more impart,

But yet still serve, still serve you in my heart.

What though I spend my hapless days

In finding Entertainments out,

Careless of what I go about:

Or seek my peace in skilful ways,

Applying to my Eyes new Rayes

Of Beauty and another flame,

Unto my heart, my heart is still the same.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=73)

'Tis true, that I could love no sace▪

Inhabited by cold disdain,

Taking delight in others pain.

Your looks are full of native grace,

Scorn there, by chance, alone has place;

And 'tis my hope I may in time remove,

This scorn one day, One day by endless Love.

## 68\. SONG.

AH Chloris wou'd the Fates allow

We still might love as we love now,

The world has no such  [...]oyes in store,

Fancy it self can wish no more.

For nothing sure so sweet can prove,

As pleasures of b [...]ginning Love.

But Love when to his height arriv'd,

Of all our Joyes is shortest liv'd;

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=73)His
Morning past he sets so soon,

That none can find his afternoon,

And of that little time is lent,

Half in unkindness is mispent.

Since Face to Love so shore life gives,

And Loves so tender while he lives.

Let us remove mean doubts away,

So to prevent his first decay;

Like Vines, no second wound, Love bears

But weeps away his life in Tears.

## 69\. To CHLORIS.

CHloris, since you my passion know,

And ev' [...]y  [...]k my Love  [...]oes  [...]how,

Sin [...] [...]est w [...]ich so  [...]ng did  [...]way,

To your soft  [...] gives  [...]y;

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=74)A slave
to all the Motions of your Will,

Why would you have me pine and languish still.

I know you cannot love to see

The many pains that torture me,

When at your feet my self I lay,

You always turn your eyes away:

Beauty a softness from its Nature takes,

Which cannot look upon the wounds it makes▪

Nor can your tender breast yet be

From all Arrests of Passion free:

No, 'tis some happier Love, I fear,

Has taken up the Lodgings there▪

While like an importuning Beggar, I

Turn'd out of doors, must thenceforth starve & die

## 70\. OC [...]AVIO to PORTIA.

MAY the bright Portia, to whose sway

So many Lovers yield each day,

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=74)Not be
displeas'd, if even to her

Octavio dares his hopes prefer:

And vows none else had e're the pow'r

To make him love above an houre:

'Tis you have found at once the Art,

To conquer and reform his heart.

Too much 'twas giv'n t'inconstancy before,

But now 'tis so well plac'd,  [...]ill change no more.

Your scorn can ne're put  [...]ut  [...]hat Fire,

VVhich your more pow [...]ul Eyes  [...]spire.

Be as dis [...]ainfu [...] [...] will,

He'le s [...]ff [...]r a [...] [...]n [...] [...]ove you still.

Yet do not you im [...]erious grow,

Because his humble flames you kn [...]w:

Nor o're your  [...]lave with rigour  [...]eign,

Because he cannot break his chain.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=75)

Like Kings, who never treat their Subjects well

When they are once assur'd they can't rebel.

He hopes like all great Beautyes you,

Take pleasures only to subdue,

All hearts to love, but won't think fit,

To torture Slaves that bow to it;

So some brave Hero seeks to kill,

By all the wayes of force and skill.

While his pro [...]d foe maintains the strife,

But gives him, when he yield, his life.

Hearts that are hardn'd against threat [...]ing steel,

The gentle touches of compassion feel.

## 71\. SONG.

WHen as my Thirsis first did view me,

With languishing and charming eyes,

With many a sigh he seem'd to wooe me.

And did my foolish heart surprize,

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=75)With
those false looks that are in fashion,

But I my folly loath to own,

striving to hide that rising passion;

Care to concea [...] it made it known

For the brisk youth did so [...] discover

A mighty tumult in my face.

All the disorder of a Lover,

When Passions combate in that place;

Emboldn'd then he streight drew nigh me

With gentle sweetness  [...]n  [...]is eyes▪

Saying, fair Celia, do not fly me,

Or my poor humble heart  [...]espise.

A Tribute which I ne're did pay  [...]et,

To any Nymph upon the Plain,

And should you cruelly betray  [...]

But oh! that caution was in vain;

Yet said I love will soon be flying,

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=76)VVhich in
a moment has its Birth,

As the too early Flow'rs are dying,

The very minute they come forth.

My Love said he from Fate arising,

I can no more quit then avoid:

But Love, produc'd from flow advising,

By the same means might be destroy'd.

That which I have for that bright face, is

A sympathy, not lazie love.

The steel the Loadstone thus embraces,

And of it self will ne're remove.

Then many am'rous Vows he uses,

To vouch his constancy and truth.

Hard is that heart that once refuses

To love and trust the lovely Youth.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=76)He playes
then with my dangling Tresses,

And humbly ga [...]e on my face.

Kisses my hand, my breast he presses,

Ala's, with too bewitching Grace.

My blood grew  [...]hill, my heart too panting,

Like the gen [...] Murm [...]ring D [...]ve [...];

The skillful Youth no  [...]ing wanting

That fatal minute soon improves.

He gently then lays me down by him,

And many winning O [...]ths he swore,

Asking what I  [...]ou'd not deny him,

He had subdu'd me so before.

Ah then he rob'd me of that treasure,

Which ne're can be rei [...]r'd again.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=77)But Oh
the pain, yet Oh the pleasure,

And Oh that both might still remain.

But soon alas from me h [...] parted,

And now in vain I make my moan,

Since m [...] he sa [...]ly has d [...]s [...]rt [...]d;

I'le sigh, and pine and dy [...] alone.

## 72\. SONG.

THough Damon is haughty  [...]and seems to de­spise,

The f [...]tte [...]s he lately has w [...]rne,

Yet  [...]e k [...]ws in  [...]is soul that his Phillis's eyes;

Were she willing coul [...] conquer his scorn

Then let not presumption so blind thee fond Damon

To think that this  [...]umour shall e're bring my flame on

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=77)If he had
been humble, obliging and free,

Perhaps I had pity'd his pain,

B [...]t sin [...] pride and Inconstancy in him I see;

He shall know H' has but lengthen'd his chayn.

For now I perceive what the Fop does endeavour

My Arts shall detain him my Captive for ever.

## 73\. SONG.

If thou boast an Empire Cupid,

Why do'st thou permit thy State;

Cowardlike as blind as stupid;

To be rul'd by a greater Fate.

Fate in thy affairs seems rectour,

Lovers spite of thee may fall,

Lasse poor child th' ar [...] no Proctor;

Fate is Governour of a [...]l.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=78)Neither
have thine Arrows power,

Since it was my Celia's eyes,

Blasted me thou canst not bow her,

Save with me she sympathize.

Nor e're was that yet procured

By thine, but b' a nat'ral Art.

Nature 'twas that first inured,

Joyning bodies, well as hearts.

## 74\. SONG to LUCINDA.

LUcinda, since we have confess'd

To each other, each others love,

Why should our flames be still suppress'd,

And not to Action move.

Both kindled at the first kind Enterview,

And both with equal care and vigour grew.

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=78)Mine
scorch'd and scorch'd, nor durst your passion say,

You lov'd till forc'd they did themselves betray.

Now let us study to improve

Our Passions with that fire,

That may not quickly waste our love,

But still preserve desir [...].

And silently enjoy at such a rate,

That distance may our Fancies recreate;

Dealing our Loves with that equalitie,

As born together, so their Deaths may be.

Lucinda shall but whisper'd be,

Us'd as the Names of Saints;

And call'd on as a Deity

To satisfie Complaints.

No other wishes dare attempt my breast,

Now 'tis with bright Lucinda so possess'd.

She fills my thoughts with glory, then I'le cry

Lucinda loves; Lucinda! so do I.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=79)

## 75\. To his Mistriss.

A Flame as sacred as the vowes of those,

Who to devotion do their lifes dispose.

My love has nourish'd and to you,

It is an off'ring due.

And with you let it burne,

Though I may hope but small return;

Yet may my doubtfull thoughts have rest,

To know 'tis harbour'd in your breast.

Where is but kindly cherish'd I'le not fear,

But it may kindle the like passion there.

A flame it is as chast as your own thought,

Free from the vices Nature would have taught;

Refin'd by virtues that attend,

A Lover and a friend.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=79)With
freedom then you may receive,

What with such Innocence I give;

And if some heat from you't procures,

Ther's still no fear of hurting yours.

For in that Love no poyson is conv [...]y'd,

Where friendship is the chief ingredient m [...].

My love thus lodg'd I could contented live,

But when I think how true how much I give;

Your gen'rous mind bids me expect,

From you the like effect.

Then fear not boldly to bestow,

Your love where you in reason owe.

For that and Justice too will say,

It is a debt you ought to pay;

But if your inclination disapprove,

My resolution shall be still to love.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=80)

## 76\. SONG.

FAith now my dear I must prevaile,

I know you'l not deny me,

For if I wait another gale;

This fortune then may fly me.

Come let's enjoy, I am resolv'd,

There is no danger near us

Safe as in Rocks w'are here involv'd,

Where none can 'spy nor hear us.

The pleasant murmures of the Trees,

Our gentle whispers smother,

And since no Sun nor Moon can see,

Wee'l wink at one another.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=80)

Silent and vigorous wee'l be,

As Birds in our imbraces,

I neither will nor shalt thou see

The Language of our faces.

Our souls alone shall have discourse,

Till ev'ry sence is stupid;

And w'are inspir'd by a fresh force

To propagate a Cupid.

## 77\. To FLORIDA.

FLorida, why wilt thou marry,

Now the World is grown so wide,

Liberty wou'd have you tarry,

Till Convenience make you Bride.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=81)Husband
is a word sounds dully,

Fit for gravity and Age,

Dear, my life, my joy, my bully,

Are the words that more ingag [...].

I'de not have thee out of fashion,

Whilst thy youth and beauty holds,

But to most have equal passion;

And to some stark kind and cold.

Humour in the greatest lovers,

Is allow'd t' admit of change,

Since the wise do shoot at revers;

'Tis no crime for us to range,

## 78\. The distracted LOVER to the Ayre of Awake all ye dead.

IM'e now in love, but Oh but Oh,

How severe are th' effects th [...]t from thence do fl [...]w.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=81)Diseases
are trifles to their cruelty,

Those create but a pain, these misery;

Distracted souls so made by Love,

Are blest they cannot disapprove.

The harsh practices that fate on them do's throw,

Whom lov's little God by his power brings to woe;

Then cruel she, or come or come,

And allot me thy breast, or a tomb, a tomb.

'Tis nobler far to kill, to kill

A condemn'd stave then to keep him still;

With his breast full of horrour expecting then,

Ev'ry moment a death, yet knows not when.

Conquest delay'd in none is brave,

When they may give a suddain gr [...]ve.

To those that are cloath'd in black despair,

Delayes like some poisons corrosive are,

Then once more send thine eye, theine eye,

That will sure [...]y destroy, and I dye I dye.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=82)

## 79\. To LAURINDA.

LAurinda, thou canst shew alone

More Beauty then was ever shown,

I've rov'd and find no smiles,

T' express thine eyes by, but thine eyes

Angels we see not but by thee,

We may conclude such creatures be.

Where then we do so much perf [...]ction find,

We know that body must have such a mind;

Thou needst no Arts nor Artifice,

For Ornaments but this is this.

And mayst thy self, thy self prefer

In Church, or Court, or Theatre,

VVhere needfull Females shew their tricks

As nature too had Hereticks;

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=82)And this
with care so plainly have devis'd

As if 'twere glorious to be so disguis'd.

Happy Laurinda where the gall

Of cancker'd t [...]ngues can never fall,

Whose thoughts are fed with V [...]stall fire,

And whom both Sexes do admire.

'Tis you I love beyond degree,

Yet allmost think it blasphemie

But if a Deity can to Love incline,

Kill me to say the blessing's mine.

## 80\. Prologue to the Impertinents acted at the Middle TEMPLE.

THe Author of this Play comes to receive,

His final doom which only you can give:

Th' ill-judging Town has favour'd what he writ

Yet what so er'e they do it is not fit,

'T should pass for current 'till you licence it.

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=83)Though
they their favour to him did allow,

He may be found a Malefactor now;

But to your Judgment he must humbly bow.

He by your common law condemn'd must be,

But for releif flies to your Chauncerie.

He fears your Justice when you know that he,

A Member of this learn'd Society▪

Lest fruitfull Law for barren Poetry,

Yet (Fathers of the Law) if ye will please,

T' unbend your cars, & give your minds some ease

From all the weights which they have born ere while,

He hopes the mirth in's Play may gain your smile.

And he's not so far gone but that he may,

Plead once before you in a nobler way.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=83)

## 81\. Prologue at Oxford.

YOur most obliging kindness one year shown

A second time has brought your Servants down

From the tumultuous and unlearned Town,

Where Pride and Ignorance in a full cry,

Dare all the Pow'rs of Art and Wit defie:

To the calme dwellings of the Muses here,

Where all things soft and gentle do appear.

When sacred Learning flourishes in peace,

And without noyse each moment does encrease;

Hither we come and with such pleasure too,

As we can never hope t' afford to you.

And yet with this we cannot be content,

But you must pay for our divertisement:

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=84)A Lover
thus to's Mistriss does impart,

The treasure of his purse as well as heart;

For that of which She has an equal part,

VVhat pleasure is it to give you delight,

When most of you are fit to Judge and write.

Here none t' appear fantastick take great pains,

Or under huge white Perr'wigs have no brains;

No blustring Bullyes come in here half drunk,

For Chyna Oranges and love to Punck;

To fly at Vizard Masks talk Nonsence loud,

And with their noise out-vye Bear-baiting Croud

Poets should be above such Judges rais'd,

To be condemn'd by such is to be prais'd:

But to his Nursery of Art and Wit,

Our Poets humbly all their Pens submit.

To you what 'ere they can invent is due,

Since all that's Wit and Art is taught by you.

Thus Inland Brooks into the Ocean flow,

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=84)To which
their streams & f [...]n [...]i [...]s too they ow

But Po [...]ts must their empti [...]ess  [...]e  [...]e,

Who can but give what they receiv'd before.

## 82\. PROLOGUE to t [...]e Ordi [...]ary.

FR [...]m you g [...]ve men of  [...]n [...]s and  [...]f trade

W [...]o w [...]re f [...]r indust [...]y, n [...] pl [...]sure, made

We  [...]eldom do imp [...]o [...]e, or h [...]pe for aid.

F [...]r w [...] bu [...] rarely  [...]re  [...]bligd by y [...]u,

Y [...]u com [...] but when y [...]v [...] no [...]i [...]g else to do;

[...] fi [...]es, our Wit to yo [...] n [...]e [...]s no  [...]x [...]us
[...],

For you all Wit do l [...]ke a Mystri [...]s u [...]e;

A thing you sel [...]m  [...]e, w [...]ile some are cloy'd

With Wit, as with a Wise too o [...]t enj [...]y'd;

Nay, you will think that Wit which is  [...]o [...],

A Quibble, or a little Punn takes  [...];

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=85) [...]
[...]llness does men for business prepare,

Whi [...] Wit delights in ease, and hates all care

But to the young brisk men who think it fit,

To spend no Afternoon but in the Pit,

Whether we will or no we must submit.

Some come with lusty Burgundy half-drunk,

T'eat China Oranges, make love to Punk;

And briskly mount a bench when th' Act is done,

And comb their much-lov'd Pe [...]iwigs to the tune,

And can sit out a Play of three houres long,

Minding no part of't but the Dance or Song;

These are our trusty friends, but some there are,

Most bloody Judges, who no Poets spare;

But I have heard som [...] injur'd Authors say,

That th [...]se m [...]st parlou [...] [...]e [...]ers of a  [...]ay,

With littl [...] Wit which they so much employ,

Which by R [...]fl [...]ction only th [...]y enjoy,

Would even those from whom they took't destroy.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=85)So does
the fam'd E [...]lightne [...] of the Night,

Ecli [...]se the Sun, from whom sh'ad all her light;

And these Mock  [...] hiss and whistle loud,

And with their noise cut-vie Bear-baiti [...]g Croud.

But Ladies, you are sweet, and soft, and fair,

And will the Poet and the Actors spare;

But b [...]sy men and Sparks are welcome now,

T [...]e little Miss [...]s and great Ladies too,

You altogether make a Noble S [...]ow.

Y'ave paid fo [...]'t, and whatever Poets say,

Think or say what you please of this our Pl [...]y.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=86)

## 83\. EPILOGUE to the Ordinary.

OUR PROLOGUE huff [...], but we are  [...]umo [...] [...]ow,

An [...] [...]ar  [...] sto [...]me which hangs upon eac [...] brow,

S [...]in S [...]a fig [...]ts at first s [...]me have been b [...]ld,

VVho in the h [...]at took sh [...]lter in the H [...]ld:

But now the danger of your  [...]hunder's nigh,

VVe have no refuge, but to m [...]rcy fl [...]:

We yield our s [...]lves, an [...] you so gen'rous  [...]e,

S [...]bmitti [...]g foes, th [...]u [...]h  [...] s [...] great, you'l s
[...]are.

Gal [...]ants if y'are off [...]nded at our P [...]ay,

And think w [...]have c [...]urs [...]y treated  [...]u to day:

Think what a [...]f mi [...]e there is now of Wit,

And that w [...] b [...]ing the b [...]st that we ca [...] g [...]t;

We are poor Farmers, and make homely  [...]are,

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=86)Whi
[...]e  [...]r  [...]i [...]h La [...]dlor [...]s may great Fea [...]ts
pre­pare;

Bu [...] their R [...]venu [...] n [...]w is almost sp [...]nt,

A [...]d you wi [...] little wit must b [...] c [...]t [...]n [...]:

N [...]nsenc [...] sh [...]l [...] wear th [...] g [...]y disg [...]i [...] o
[...] R [...]ime,

And though not understo [...], sh [...]l swee [...]ly clime:

N [...]w emp [...]y shows must want  [...]f se [...] supply,

A [...]g [...]ls shall dance, and  [...] VVitches fly:

You sh [...]ll have  [...], t [...]n [...]e & [...]ig [...]t [...]ing too

An [...] Co [...]jar  [...]s raise s [...]its to your view:

The upp [...]r G [...]ll'ri [...] sh [...] have t [...]eir desire,

Who love a Fool, a D [...]vi [...] an [...] a  [...]ia:

Damn'd Plays shal [...] b [...] a  [...] wit [...] m [...]g [...]ty s [...]en
[...]s

And Fustian shall b [...] sp [...]k [...] i [...] [...]ge Machines:

And we w [...] [...]urling  [...]r [...]ams  [...] w [...]rks show

And you m [...]y l [...]ve t [...] [...] it  [...],

S [...] Poets s [...]ve th [...]ir wit  [...].

This all our S [...]r [...]blers can  [...] wi [...]h  [...]as [...].

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=87)T
[...]kle the fools, though not the Witty please▪

I [...] you  [...]xp [...]ct  [...]ue Com [...]dy agen,

That repres [...]nts not Monst [...]rs, but shows men;

Your exp [...]ctation will be cross'd, we fear,

For we have little hope to see such here.

## 84\. A Prologue spoken at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.

THE mighty Army now assembl [...]d here,

Of dreadful Criticks w [...]ll might make us fear;

But, Sir, to your Protection we retire;

No Fo [...] (we know) will at your quarters fire,

Though n [...]'re so bad, if you but grace our P [...]ay,

VVe and our Poet shall be safe to day:

Y [...]ur Royal stamp can make all money pass,

And none da [...]es c [...]ip your Coin, tho' but of brass:

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=87)Our
valiant Hero's, like their Ladies, quake,

And they (poor souls) all wish they now could take

Morocco's deepest black their Cheeks to hide,

That wh [...]n th [...]y blush, it might by none be spy'd.

Like bashful Brides call'd to the Marriage bed,

They can't go back, and dare not forward  [...]read;

But you, great Sir, may soon remove their f [...]are,

And ease those hearts where you've the greatest share.

Y [...]u with a smile can troubled minds assure,

As with a Touch you sickly b [...]i [...]s cure.

## 85\. To the Audience.

Now Gallants, somthing should to you be said:

But B [...]auty better much then Wi [...] can plead:

None will this fair Petitioner withstand;

I can but only beg; She, may command.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=88)

## 86\. Spoken by the Lady Elizabeth Howard.

As tiu'rous  [...]v [...]rites that have slighted long

A Fa [...]tion, which at last they finde grow strong,

Think with themselvs how they b [...]time may close

And make a Peac [...] with th [...] i [...] [...]revailing foes:

So ou [...] young Ladies almost dead with fear,

Reflection  [...]l they m [...]y have anger'd here:

And with a fl [...]tt [...] ri [...]g Prologu [...] would  [...]xcuse

T [...] [...] rigour which th [...]y once did use.

This humbl [...] Erran [...] I am sent to do [...],

Bu [...] it woul [...] ill b [...]c [...]me  [...] to woo,

No [...] shall we need  [...]t sure to such as you.

M [...]thinks you should not r [...]il at us to day,

And you are too gallant to minde the Play.

But though you do, we hope at last each scene

VVhere we shall act, will tak [...], tho' ne're so mean.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=88)In a fine
[...]adies Mouth all fine will show,

As wi [...]s blow sweet when they through Gar­dens blow.

Use w [...]ll the Power we put into your hands,

And know, long at i [...]s height no Empire stands.

You were at ours, we at your mercy now,

And must like Vassals to our Vassals bow;

Y [...]t my brisk Monsieurs, be not too severe,

Y'ave but a little time to dominere,

And every Jest of yours may cost you dear:

'Tis b [...]t  [...]ik Royal slav [...]s, this night you reign:

The Play once done, we shall be crown'd again,

And you, poor Captives, must resume your  [...]hain.

Then do your w [...]rst, we will the shock abide,

You can at most but a f [...]ign'd Love deride,

VVhen in good earnest you shall come to woo,

It will be then our tu [...]n to laugh at you.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=89)

## 87\. Another Prologue spoke at Court to the Emperess of Morocco.

WIT has of late took up a trickt' appear,

Unmannerly, or at the b [...]st severe:

And Poets share the Fa [...]e by which we fall,

VVhen kindly we attempt to please you all.

'Tis hard, your scorn should against such prevail,

Whose ends are to divert you, tho' they fail.

You Men would think it an ill-natur'd Jest,

Should we laugh at you when you did y [...]ur best.

Then rail not here, though you see reason for't

If Wit can finde it self no better sport.

Wit is a very foolish thing at Court.

VVit's bus'ness is to please, and not to fright,

'Tis no Wit to be always in the right,

You'l find  [...] none, who dare be so to night.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=89)Few so
ill-bred will venture to a Play,

To spy out faults in what we VVomen say

For us no matter what we speak, but how,

How kindly can we say— I hate you now.

And for the men, if you'l laugh at'em, do;

T [...]y minde themselves so much, they'll ne're minde you—

But why do I descend to lose a Prayer

On those small Saints in Wit, the God sits there.

T [...] you (Great Sir) my Message hither tends,

From Youth and Beauty your Allies and Friends.

See my  [...]redentials written in my Face,

They challenge your Protection in this place,

And hither come with such a force of charmes,

As may give Check even to your prosp'rous  [...]rmes:

Millions of Cupids hovering in the Rear,

Like Eagles following, fatal Troops appear.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=90)All
waiting for the slaughter, which draws nigh.

Of those bold Gazers, who this Night must dy.

Nor can you  [...]ca [...]e our soft Cap [...]ivitie,

From which old Age alone must s [...]t you free.

Then tremble at the fatal Cons [...]qun [...]—

Si [...]ce, 'tis well known for y [...]ur own part (Great Prince)

'Gainst us you still have ma [...]e a weak d [...]fenc [...]—

Be gen'rous, and wise, and take our part;

Remember we have eyes, and you a heart.

Else you may find, too late, that we are things

Born to kill vassals, and to conquer Kings.

But oh! to what vain Conquest I pretend,

VVhilst Love is our Commander, and your Friend.

Our victory your Empire more assures,

For Love will ever make the Triumph yours.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=90)

## 88\. A SONG.

FOrgive me Jove!

Or, if there be a kinder god above,

Forgive a Reb [...]l to the Power of Love:

H [...]r me (kind Cupid) and acc [...]pt my Vow,

Min [...], who  [...]e voutly at t [...]y Altar Bow;

O! hear me now:

Dorinda [...]ear, and w [...]at Ive done amiss

Pardon, and seal that pardon with a Kiss.

Stay! methinks the melting Saint,

Kindly Ecchoes my complaint;

Look! I fancy I descry

Pi [...]y dropping from her eye;

Ha [...]k! she says Philander live,

All thy Errours I forgive:

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=91)And now,
ah me! to repent I begin,

That against so much goodness I ever should Sin;

But never again, oh! never will I,

Offend my Dorinda, for sooner I'le dye.

## 89\. SONG.

AH Cruel Eyes! that first enflam'd

My poor resistless heart;

That, when I would my thoughts have blam'd they still encrease the smart:

What pow, r above

Creates such Love.

To languish with desire▪

May some disdain

Encrease my pain,

Or may the flame expire.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=91)And yet I
die to think how soon

My wishes may return,

If slighted, and my hopes once gone,

I must in silence mourn:

T [...]en Tyrannels

D [...] but express,

The Mystry of your pow'r,

' [...]s as s [...]on said.

You'll l [...]ve and wed

As studying for' [...] an hour.

I yield to Fate, though your fair eyes

Have made the pow'r your own;

'Twàs they did first my heart surprize,

Dear Nymph 'twas they alone:

For honour's sake,

Your h [...]art awake,

And let your pity move:

[...] in  [...]spair

O [...] on so fair,

I bid adi [...]u to Love.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=92)

## 90\. A SONG.

NAy! let me alone, protest I'le be gone▪

'Tis a folly to think I [...]le be subject to One:

Never hope to Co [...]sine

A Young Gallant to dine,

Like a Sch [...]lar of Oxford, on naught but the Loyn,

For, after Enjoyment, our Bellies are full;

And the same dish again makes the Appetite dull.

By your Wantoning Art;

Of a Sigh, and a Start,

You endeavour, in vain, to inveigle my heart?

For the Pretty Disguise

Of your Languishing Eyes,

Will never prevail with my Sinews to rise:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=92)And 'twas
never the Mode, in an Amorous  [...]

When a Lover has din'd, to perswade him to  [...]

Faith Betty the Jest

Is almost at the best,

Tis only variety makes up the Feast?

For when we've enjoy'd;

And with pleasures are cloy'd?

The vows, that we made to love, ever are  [...]

And you know, pretty Nymph, it was ever  [...]

That a meal should be made of a Relishing  [...]

## 91\. A SONG in the Dutch-Love [...].

AMintas bid me to a Grove,

Where all the Trees did shade us,

The Sun it self, though it had strove,

It could not have betray'd us,

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=93)The
place, secur'd from Humane eyes,

No other fear allows,

But, when the Wind doth gently rise,

To kiss the yeilding boughs.

(2)

Down there we sat upon the Mosse,

And did begin to play,

A thousand wanton tricks to passe

The heat of all the day;

A many kisses he did give,

And I return'd the same,

Which made me willing to receive.

That which I dare not name.

(3)

His Charming Eyes no Aid requir'd

To tell their am'rous tale;

On her that was already fir'd,

'Twas easie to prevail:

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=93)He did
but kisse, and clasp me round,

Whilst those his thoughts expressd,

And laid me sof [...]ly on the ground,

Oh [...] who can guess the rest.

## 92\. SONG.

O The time that is past,

When she held me so fast,

And declar'd that her honour no longer could last,

When no light, but her languishing eyes did ap­pear

To prevent all excuses of blush [...]s and fear.

When she sigh'd and unlac'd,

With such trembling and haste,

As if she had long'd to be closer embrac'd,

My Lips the sweet pleasure of K [...]sses enjoy'd,

While my hand was in search of hid treasure em­ploy'd.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=94)My heart
set on fire

VVith the flames of desire,

[...] pursu'd what she seem'd to require;

[...] she cry'd, for pity sake, change your ill mind,

[...] Amintas be civil, or I'le be unkind,

Dear Amintas, she cries,

Then casts down her eyes,

[...] in Kisses she gives, what in words she denies,

[...] of my Conquest I purpos'd to stay

[...] free consent had more sweetned the prey.

But too late I begun

For her passion was done;

[...] Amintas, she cries, I will never be won:

[...], and your Courtship, no pity can move,

[...]'ve slighted the Critical minute of Love.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=94)

## 93\. Song on the London Ladies

(1)

TIme was, thou must dwindle thy mony and time

And, the dearest of all thy vigour, and prime

To Court a coy Mistris, that long'd for't as much

As thou couldst desire to give her a touch:

But now the rate's known; the best will turn up

Foe a Guiny, a Pullet, and t'other old cup:

A World 'tis of pleasure, one Necklace of Pearl,

Will conjure the richest, or modestest Girl.

(2)

All Trade is for gain, all Commodities sold,

Fear not; for thy coyn thou mayst justly be bold.

A pox on fine words; the contemplative fool

Talks of Love, and of flame; an oh! what mis-rule,

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=95)These
keep in his heart: now a sigh, then a groan;

And her very jeca's sufficient alone

To fill him with raptures, sweet dreams, and what not!

VVhen alas! all the while her flames are as hot.

(3)

In company with her, each glance drops a Charm,

And she gives him her hand, to keep him still warm;

For this is the man she designes her lewd life,

To cloak with the serious name of a Wife:

To the modest all distance, with those that are free

She can tickle, and kiss, and kinder yet be:

Adieu to fond Courtship, all Arguments lie,

In the briskest assault, when the pockets let flie.

(4)

Love is banish'd the world, and vertue is gone

To some private recess, to lament all alone;

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58573&page=95)For now
she grows barren, and none of her race

Can be found either with, or without a good face:

To the Ma [...], to the Park, to the Pit, or the Box;

Where you will, you can't miss: there's meat for the Cocks.

And thus will it be, for old Eve at the first,

And her Daughters e're since have made all Men accurst.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Date: 1673  

