## (unknown project)

# A sermon preached before the King & Queen at Whitehall, June the Ist. 1690
by Robert Grove ...

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=1)

A SERMON, Preached before the King & Queen AT WHITEHALL. June the 1ſt. 1690.

By Robert Grove, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to their MAJESTIES.

Publiſhed by their Majeſties ſpecial Command.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Biſhops Head in St. Paul's Church-
yard. 1690.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=2)

## Table of contents

## 1\.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=2)

1 John II. 15.‘Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.
If any man love the world, the love of the Fa­ther is not in him.’

LOVE is the moſt powerful of all the Paſſions of the Soul; and that which does
moſt ef­fectually byaſs and incline the Mind unto any Object it happens to be
placed upon. And there are two things in the general that do moſt earneſtly
court us, and one of them is always ſure to win our Affections. God himſelf,
out of his Infinite tenderneſs to the Sons of Men, is pleas'd ſo far to
condeſcend, [[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=3)
as to woo and beſeech us to be recon­ciled unto him: And he enforces his ſuit
by the real propoſal of Peace and Honour, Glory and Immortality, and
Everlaſting Joys. And on the other ſide, the world too; that ſtrives to gain
the greateſt in­tereſt in our Hearts, and endeavours to work upon us by the
vain promiſes of ſome tranſitory Pleaſures; a little Wealth, and a certain
kind of Happineſs, which it pretends it can beſtow upon us out of hand: And if
we harken to the one of theſe, we ſhall become Sober, Good, and Holy Men, and
ſhall be ſure at the laſt not to loſe our Reward: But if we give ear to the
other, we ſhall grow vain and wicked in our imaginations, eager and reſt­leſs
in the purſuit of ſhadows and trifles, and in the end we ſhall be moſt
certain­ly defeated of all our fooliſh hopes; ſo that our love, according as
it is diverſly plac'd, becomes the Original of all the Good and Evil in the
world, and of that Happineſs or Miſery that is conſequent up­on [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=3) them; and the
whole of Moral Divinity does in ſome ſort depend upon the due ma­nagement and
regulation of this one Paſ­ſion. And becauſe the Vanities of this preſent
world are very apt to inſinuate themſelves into our Affections, and get too
great an intereſt in them, we may eaſily underſtand what Reaſon we have to be
always mindful of the ſerious Caution and Exhortation of the holy Apoſtle,
which I have read unto you; Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
For the better Explication and Improvement of which words, I ſhall diſcourſe
ſomething briefly upon theſe five general Heads: And ſhew,

  * 1\. Firſt, What is here meant by the world, and the things that are in it.
  * 2\. Secondly, How far it may be lawful for us to love them.
  * 3\. Thirdly, What kind of love of them it is which is here forbidden.
  * [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=4) 4\. Fourthly, That ſuch a love of them is inconſiſtent with the love of God.
  * 5\. Fifthly, and laſtly, I ſhall lay down ſome Directions how to avoid this ir­regular and inordinate love of the world.

I. Firſt, What is here meant by the World, and the things that are in the
World. And there can be no doubt, but that according to the uſual phraſe of
the holy Scriptures, we are to underſtand this inferiour and ſublunary world;
the Earth which we do for the preſent inhabit; this place, where Labours and
Sorrows have taken up their abode, ever ſince the fall of Man. And the things
of the world are the various Objects of our Senſes; the ſeveral Toys and
Vanities that are wont to charm our deluded Fancies and Appe­tites. They are
very commonly, and well enough divided into Pleaſures, Profits, and Honours;
for this is the ſum total of all earthly Enjoyments; this is the utmoſt [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=4) that the Carnal
Man deſires, and this is all that the world is able to give. St. John, in the
words that immediately follow my Text, deſcribes theſe things by the effects
which they too often have upon us, when he calls them the luſt of the fleſh,
and the luſt of the eyes, and the pride of life; and tells us that this is all
that is in the world; that is, There is nothing elſe there, but what may
occaſionally excite and foment ſuch inclinations as theſe: Nothing but what
may either prompt us to Senſuallty and In­temperance; or make us guilty of
Cove­touſneſs and Injuſtice; or ſwell us up with ambitious and aſpiring
thoughts. Such is the world, and ſuch are all the things that are in it.

II. Let us in the ſecond place conſider, how far it may be lawful for us to
love theſe things: For they are not abſolutely Evil in themſelves, but may
ſometimes be made ſo unto us, by our abuſe of them; but God created them all
for good purpo­ſes; and therefore we may love them in [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=5) ſome meaſure
without offence, if we be but careful to obſerve theſe and the like Cau­tions:

1\. Firſt, we muſt love them but accord­ing to the nature and uſefulneſs of
them. Every Creature of God is good; and eve­ry degree of goodneſs does
naturally re­quire a ſutable degree of love; and our love is then reaſonable,
and ſuch as becomes wiſe and ſober men, when we do, as much as may be,
proportion our affections to the worth and dignity of the Object. God
therefore being infinitely good, our love to him, as far as is poſſible, ought
likewiſe to be boundleſs and immenſe, ſtretched out, and extended to the very
utmoſt capacities of our Souls. And for other things, it is lawful for us to
love them too, ſo far as they do participate of that Supreme and So­veraign
Goodneſs. The real Perfection of the Object ought to be the ſtanding Mea­ſure
whereby we ſhould always limit and re­gulate our love. And if we do but
careful­ly obſerve this Rule, there is nothing that [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=5) God has made which
may not afford us ſome innocent delight or advantage. The very Pleaſures of
Senſe, wherein men are ge­nerally the moſt apt to offend, and run in­to
exceſs, yet theſe, if they be duly circum­ſcribed, and kept within the bounds
which the Laws of God and Nature have ſet them, may be harmleſs, and
allowable. Riches may be lawfully deſired by us, as they ſerve the neceſſities
and conveniencies of this mortal life; as they may make our Charity more
uſeful and beneficial unto others; and as they maintain that difference of
Degrees and Quality amongſt men, which is abſo­lutely neceſſary to the
preſervation of good Order and Government in the world. Ho­nour is not wholly
to be deſpiſed, as it is a Tribute which ought to be paid to great and
virtuous Actions; as it confirms the teſti­monies of our own Conſciences; and
as it gives us many opportunities of doing good, which we could not have
without the aſſi­ſtance of a clear and ſpotleſs Reputation. And in ſuch a
manner as this we are not [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=6) forbidden to love
the things of the world: and if any man will make it his choice, to rid his
Soul wholly of all earthly concerns, to make the more room for the love of
God, and the continual exerciſe of devotion; this indeed may be an act of
heroical piety in him; but yet thoſe that love theſe things, with that
limitation which I have now laid down, are not therefore to be condemned.

2\. Secondly, in our love to the world, and the things of it, we muſt have a
regard to the duration and continuance of them. If they were of infinitely
greater value than they are, yet we know that it is but a very little while
that we can enjoy them. All things here below are perpetually in moti­on, they
are toſſed to and fro like the waves of the Sea: They are expoſed to ten
thou­ſand caſualties and diſaſters, that are ready every moment to ſnatch them
out of our hands. Or if poſſibly we ſhould be ſo for­tunate as to eſcape all
theſe, yet we are ſure that we our ſelves are haſting continually towards the
Grave, and that it cannot be [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=6) long before we
muſt go away hence, and be ſeen no more. There is nothing here to be depended
upon. However proſperous our condition may be for the preſent, the whole ſcene
of Affairs may be ſuddenly changed. The cleareſt day may be preſently
overcaſt, and the brighteſt Sun may ſet in a Cloud. Our Eſtates may be loſt,
our Friends may forſake us, our Children may dye, our Plea­ſures will decay,
our Credit and Eſteem a­mongſt men may be quickly blaſted by a ſlanderous
tongue, and end in ignominy and diſgrace: However, it cannot be avoided but
that our Pomp and our Honour, and all that we have, muſt at laſt be laid down,
and covered in the duſt. And ſince then that the good things of this world are
known to be ſo very tranſient and uncertain in their own nature, we may love
them, provided our love be ſuited to the condition of the things themſelves;
it muſt not be a ſettled, fixed, and unmoveable love. We muſt conſider that
they are rather lent, than given us; and we ſhould be as ready to reſtore,
[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=7) as we were
to receive them. We muſt chearfully deliver up all our earthly Con­cerns to
the wiſe and gracious diſpoſal of Almighty God. A Stoical Apathy is more
indeed than is required of us. The true Chriſtian may be ſomething delighted
with temporal Bleſſings, and not altogether in­ſenſible of worldly
misfortunes; but then the pleaſure he takes in the enjoyment of them is ſober
and temperate, and the grief he conceives at the parting with them is not
exceſſive. He is a little delighted with the Gourd while it flouriſhes, but he
does not fret and grow angry when it withers away. He enjoys the world with
moderation, and lets it go without any anxious and deſpond­ing thoughts.

3\. Thirdly, We muſt be careful that the love of any thing in the world be
never more prevalent with us than the love of God. The moſt incomprehenſible
Excellencies of his Divine Nature do command us to reve­rence and admire him;
and the unſpeakable Benefits he has already beſtowed, and the [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=7) many Bleſſings
which he is continually heap­ing up on us, and the glorious Promiſes which he
has made us of Life and Salvation, are the ſtrongeſt obligations imaginable
for us to return unto him the greateſt vigour and intenſeneſs of our
Affections. And when ſuch a love of our Maker has gotten the ſu­preme power
and ſoveraignty in our Hearts, ſo that our minds are effectually ſwayed and
inclined as they are directed by that, then ſome lower degree of complacency
may be allow'd to theſe inferiour things without of­fence. Our love of the
world is not ſinful when it is kept within the juſt bounda­ries that I have
now preſcribed; when we love it but according to the nature and du­ration of
it, and always with ſubmiſſion to the love of God.

III. And from theſe things which I have now briefly diſcours'd, it may plainly
ap­pear, What kind of love of the world it is which is here forbidden, which
was the third general thing that I laid down.

1\. And, Firſt, Therefore our love of the [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=8) world is
unlawful, when we love it beyond the natural worth and value of it. And this
does manifeſtly diſcover it ſelf, when our deſires after it are violent and
impetuous; when we are impatient in the purſuit, and intemperate in the
enjoyment; when we are ſo paſſionately bent upon our pleaſures, as if theſe
ſordid and muddy delights were the only or the chiefeſt happineſs we did
ex­pect; when we are ſo extremely fond of be­ing rich and great, that we are
reſtleſs and uneaſie with a competent Eſtate, and a mo­derate Fortune ſeems a
burden unto us; when we are ſo tranſported with any de­gree of Honour and
Eminency we may chance to attain, that we are preſently fill'd with lofty and
fooliſh imaginations; when we envy our Superiors, deſpiſe our Equals, and look
down with ſcorn and diſdain upon our Inferiors. When we find our ſelves to be
thus diſpoſed in any of theſe or the like inſtances, it is a ſign that our
Affections for the world are irregular and extravagant, a great deal bigger
than the things deſerve. [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=8) And when they are
ſo, they become the immediate and neceſſary cauſes of all the miſeries and
miſchiefs that ever do or can befal us. They are theſe that puſh Men forward
to all the acts of wickedneſs and folly, and hurry them on to their own
de­ſtruction. They are theſe that tempt the licentious Epicure to all his
Debaucheries; that make him run with greedineſs into all manner of exceſs;
that provoke him to break down the incloſures that God has made, and lye in
wait to defile his Neigh­bour's Bed. They are theſe that beſot the Covetous
Wretch with a different ſort of ſenſuality, and make him drunk with the tears
of Widows and Orphans; that turn him into a kind of moral Cannibal, that even
tears and devours the fleſh of the Poor. They are theſe that are the real
occaſions of all the Murder, and Rapine, and Deſolati­on that we daily ſee or
hear of in the world; the moſt furious and bloody Wars and mi­litary
executions, in which ſo many inno­cent Mens lives are thrown away, and ſo
[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=9) many
thouſand Families moſt miſerably ru­ined, are frequently nothing elſe but the
tragical effects of a mind ſwollen and di­ſtemper'd with Cruelty and Ambition.
Such are the lamentable conſequences that do na­turally follow the immoderate
love of any worldly thing. For our earthly Paſſions are like a River; while
they keep themſelves with­in their proper Channel, they ſlide along gently,
and obſerve a regular courſe, and may make our lives both pleaſant and
fruit­ful; but when they begin to ſwell and grow turbulent, and overflow their
Banks, there is nothing then to be expected but a flood and inundation of all
manner of ſin.

2\. Secondly, Our love of the world is faul­ty again, when we do not conſider
the ſhort continuance of it, and how little a while it is that we can poſſibly
enjoy it. And in this the ſtrange inadvertency of the gene­rality of Men is
much to be admited. In their proſperity they are apt to think that they ſhall
never be moved; and live as if they were not Strangers and Pilgrims, but
[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=9) that they
had a ſure and ſettled dwelling here upon Earth. The experience of every day
is enough to convince them how ridicu­louſly they are miſtaken: they ſhould
there­fore reſtrain their love to theſe fading Vani­ties, and make it as
temporary as the Objects of it are; for it is abſurd and unreaſonable to have
permanent and immortal affections for tranſient and periſhable things. The
Branches ſhould wither and die when the Root is decayed from whence they did
ſpring. It lays a certain foundation for per­petual diſquietude and anguiſh of
mind, to have vigorous deſires remaining in us, when every thing that ſhould
give them any ſatis­faction is irreparably loſt. St. John tells us, v. 17\.
that the world paſſeth away: and there­fore our love for it ſhould paſs away
with it; or elſe in ſtead of giving us any content­ment and delight, as we
might vainly hope, it will ſerve for nothing but to gall and tor­ment us.

3\. Thirdly, The love of the world is for­bidden when it has a greater power
upon us [[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=10)
than the love of our Maker has. And we may certainly judge that the caſe is
thus, when ever we are tempted and prevailed up­on to ſin againſt God, by the
propoſal of any preſent Pleaſure or Advantage. As when we ſhall dare to be
guilty of Injuſtice or Op­preſſion, to encreaſe our Fortunes, and ad­vance our
ſelves to ſome farther degree of Wealth or Honour; when we will venture to run
into exceſs of Wine, to gratifie a brutiſh appetite, or pleaſe an unreaſonable
and ſenſeleſs humour. This is an infallible argument that the love of worldly
things has got the dominion in our hearts, when we do thus prefer them before
our eternal Concerns, and chuſe rather to offend a gra­cious God, than to
diſoblige an unruly Luſt. 'Tis exceeding ſtrange that the love of any thing
elſe ſhould have a more forceable in­fluence upon our Affections, and move us
more powerfully than the love of infinite Goodneſs can. But, alas! we find it
very often too true: The leſſer Magnet draws the Iron from the embraces of the
greater: [[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=10)
We forſake our God, and ſtick cloſe to our Vanities; we let go the hope we
might have in the Almighty, and cling faſt to every tri­fle. Scarce an
impotent Paſſion can ſtart up in our hearts, but it ſhall be more readily
obey'd than the Great Majeſty of Heaven and Earth. And this muſt needs provoke
him to the higheſt degree of diſpleaſure; not to ſee us take ſome delight in
the good things of this life which he has given us; for this we may lawfully
do, as has been ſaid before; but to obſerve that our minds are ſo engaged upon
them, that we neglect his Commandments for their ſakes, and pay that homage
and obedience unto them that can be due only to Him. And therefore thoſe lewd
perſons that are deſcrib'd by the holy Apoſtle, Rom. 1\. are ſaid, v. 25\. to
have ſerved the creature more than the Creator. And thoſe upon whom that black
Character is fix'd in the beginning of 2 Tim. 3\. you ſhall find, v. 4\. that
they were lovers of pleaſures more than lovers of God. And thus may [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=11) you ſee what
kind of love of the world it is which is here forbidden.

IV. I come, Fourthly, to ſhew, but very briefly, that ſuch a love of it is
inconſiſtent with the love of God. This will ſtand in need of no further
proof, but only to con­ſider that God and the world are in them­ſelves of a
very different Nature, and do command us clean contrary things; and we can no
more love theſe two in the ſame eminent degree, than we can bear allegiance to
ſeveral Princes, whoſe Intereſts are con­tinually claſhing, and that are
frequently in open hoſtility one with the other. For God commands us to
abſtain from fleſhly Luſts, and to taſte of worldly Delights with great
caution and ſobriety; Senſuality perſwades us to give the reins to our
Appetites, to take our fill, and even cloy our ſelves with car­nal Pleaſures:
God commands us to be li­beral and open-handed to thoſe that are in want, and
eſpecially to be ſure that we do no wrong nor injuſtice to our Neighbour;
[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=11)
Covetouſneſs adviſes us by any means to hold our own; not to be moved with the
cries and groans of the needy, and if we can but increaſe our ſtore, never
matter how we do it, tho it ſhould be with the utter ruine of many a poor,
diſtreſſed, helpleſs Creature: God commands us to ſubmit our ſelves to be
diſpos'd of by him, and to be contented with the Portion his Provi­dence has
allotted us; Pride will be ſtill aſpiring, and egging us on to ſeek after
greater Honours; it is querulous and im­patient, always diſſatisfi'd with the
ſtate it is in. Theſe are a few ſhort inſtances of ſome of thoſe things which
God and the world do ſeverally require of us; and which of theſe two we love
the beſt, his Com­mands we ſhall be ſure the moſt readily to obey: For both we
cannot, unleſs we had the art of reconciling Contradictions, un­leſs we could
be ſober and intemperate, kind and hard-hearted, upright and unjuſt, hum­ble
and proud, both at once. Light and Darkneſs may ſooner agree, than ſuch
oppo­ſite [[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=12)
diſpoſitions can be entertain'd together in the ſame Breaſt, at the ſame time.
This repugnancy is plainly declared, Jam. 4\. 4. know ye not that the
friendſhip of the world is enmity with God? Whoſoever therefore will be a
friend of the world is the enemy of God. And of this too we are to underſtand
thoſe expreſſions of our bleſſed Saviour, Mat. 6\. 24. No Man can ſerve two
Maſters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or elſe he will
hold to the one, and deſpiſe the other. Ye cannot ſerve God and Mammon. It is
im­poſſible to hold the Scale ſo even, and bal­lance our affections ſo very
equally betwixt God and the world, but that one ſide will always preponderate;
and how much weight ſoever we add unto that, ſo much of neceſ­ſity muſt be
taken from the other. The love of God will decay and grow leſs, in the ſame
proportion that the love of the world encreaſes in us: And again, as our minds
are more ſtrongly bent upon divine and heavenly Objects, the leſs careful and
ſoli­citous ſhall we be about temporal things. [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=12) And thus have we
ſeen what is meant by the world; what love of it may be lawful, and what is
here forbidden, and that this is in­conſiſtent with the love of God.

V. I come now to the Fifth and laſt thing, to lay down ſome Directions how to
avoid this irregular and inordinate love of the world. And to this end,

1\. Firſt, We ſhould labour to get a true notion and eſtimate of things: For
we are commonly miſtaken; the world impoſes upon our Imaginations, it cheats
us into an unreaſonable fondneſs, before we can tell what it is with which we
are ſo ſtrangely enamoured. It makes early impreſſions up­on our tender years,
and inſinuates into us beſore we arrive at any ripeneſs of Judg­ment: It is
always preſent with us, and per­petually beating upon our ſenſes, making a
noiſe in our ears, and diſplaying all its gaudery before our eyes. It
poſſeſſes our minds in ſuch a manner that it will not give [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=13) us leiſure to
conſider ſeriouſly of any thing elſe. And no wonder then, that they that know
nothing of the ſubſtance, ſhould be mightily taken with ſuch a ſhadow of
hap­pineſs. But we ſhould be of another mind, if we were truly ſenſible of the
wonderful excellency of that bleſſed ſtate which God has prepared for thoſe
that love him; and how empty and inſignificant all things are which we can
ever hope to enjoy here. For our love of any thing is always meaſured by the
opinion we have of the goodneſs of it. And we ſhould never love the world
much, if we did but rightly underſtand what it were.

2\. Secondly, When we have gotten right apprehenſions of theſe things, we
ſhould be often rowling them over in our thoughts, and meditate upon them,
till our hearts be affected with a due ſenſe of them, and then compare them
together, and judge impar­tially what it is that does really deſerve the
greateſt ſhare of our love. It is the want of [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=13) this that cauſes
ſo many to ruſh heedleſly in­to deſtruction. For if the miſerable World­ling
did but ſit down and compute how little he is like to gain at the laſt by the
treaſures of unrighteouſneſs; if the idle Senſualiſt did but think with
himſelf how dearly he muſt pay for his ſtoln pleaſures; if the proud and
ambitious man would be pleas'd to con­ſider that he pawns his ſoul for a puff
of air; they might all poſſibly be inclin'd to more ſo­ber thoughts, and
moderate deſires. For 'tis altogether incredible that any one that is not
under the power of a perfect frenzie, ſhould deliberately make ſuch a fooliſh
exchange, and caſt away the hopes of a bleſſed Eternity for the unſatisfactory
purſuit of ſome fading impertinencies, which ſhall be certainly con­cluded
with everlaſting Miſeries.

3\. Thirdly, We ſhould firmly reſolve to act agreeably to the judgment we have
made. This is the greateſt ſecurity we have; with­out this it is not
ſufficient to have right ap­prehenſions, and ſome good inclinations [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=14) We may know well
enough that the world is nothing but a grand Impoſtor, a great Ma­gician that
inchants our minds, and deludes our ſenſes with falſe appearances; and we may
have ſome faint wiſhes that we might be delivered from the power of theſe
Charms: but this notwithſtanding we may be born down by the ſtream, and
hurried away by the violence of temptation, or allured by the importunity of
ſome pleaſing paſſion. To theſe dangers therefore we muſt oppoſe our greateſt
ſtrength, and arm our minds with a ſteddy reſolution to act conformably to the
determinations of our Conſcience. This may preſerve us upright and intire in
the midſt of all aſſaults: For when it is aſſiſted by the grace of God, there
is nothing able to over­power the will of a man.

4\. Fourthly, We ſhould herein exerciſe a kind of ſelf denial, and abridge our
ſelves ſometimes of ſome delights we might have innocently taken. We ſhould
not always go to the extreme point of our liberty, nor [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=14) uſe the utmoſt
freedom that might be given us, even in lawful things. This will keep our
Appetites within compaſs, and bring them into better obedience.: For when they
have been uſed to be conſtantly gratifi'd, they grow the more craving; they
run after their ſeveral Objects with the greater impa­tience, and will be very
apt to tranſgreſs their bounds: But when they are curb'd and reſtrain'd, they
become gentle and tractable, and reſign themſelves quietly to the conduct of
our Reaſon; and they can­not be in ſuch danger of being carried in­to any
extravagance, when they are not ſuffered to go to the extremity of what is
lawful. Some voluntary abſtinencies are a good guard upon the Soul: He that
would love the world no more than he ſhould, muſt not always uſe it ſo much as
he might.

V. Laſtly We ſhould addreſs our ſelves frequently to Almighty God by
Supplication [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=15) and Prayer. This
is the only way to pro­cure that Grace, which is abſolutely neceſ­ſary to
enable us to overcome the world; and beſides that, it will likewiſe acquaint
us with Heavenly things, and make them more familiar and pleaſant to our
thoughts. And when, by this holy entercourſe with our Maker, we ſhall have
attained any reliſh for Spiritual Joys, we ſhall quickly deſpiſe all thoſe
fulſom and unmanly Plea­ſures we admired before. We ſhall ſoon perceive that
there is no compariſon be­twixt Earth and Heaven; and that the Crowns of Glory
which we expect, do infinitely outſhine all the glittering Vani­ties of the
world. And we ſhall love God above all, and all things elſe for him; or rather
we ſhall love him in them, by loving them only as the Effects and Ema­nations
of his Goodneſs and Wiſdom, ac­knowledging his Bounty, and praiſing his Name
for whatever we enjoy: And ſo ſhall the love of the world be loſt and [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=93829&page=15) ſwallowed up in
the love of God, till at length it be compleat, and conſummated in his
Heavenly Kingdom: Of which God of his Infinite Mercy make us all partakers,
through Jeſus Chriſt our Lord: Amen.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Grove, Robert, 1634-1696.. Date: 1690  

