## (unknown project)

# Miscellanies by the Right Noble Lord, the late Lord Marquess of Halifax —
Works. Selections. 1700

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=1)

Miſcellanies BY The Right Noble LORD, The Late Lord Marqueſs OF HALIFAX. VIZ.

  * I. Advice to a DAUGHTER.
  * II. The Character of a TRIMMER.
  * III. The Anatomy of an EQUIVALENT.
  * IV. A Letter to a DISSENTER.
  * V. Cautions for Choice of PARLIA­MENT MEN.
  * VI. A Rough Draught of a NEW MO­DEL at SEA.
  * VII. Maxims of STATE, &c.

LONDON: Printed for Matt. Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in Weſtminſter-Hall.
1700.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=2)

## Sacellum Appollinare.  
A Funeral POEM TO THE MEMORY OF THAT Great Patriot and Stateſman, GEORGE, LATE
Marquiſs of HALLIFAX.

AS HEAVEN it Self's on Empire's Axis roll'd,

(For God-Head's but Dominion Uncon­trould;)

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=3) So the
Crown'd Head, the Sublunary JOVE,

Does, in his Loyal Orb of Glory, move;

With all his Bolts of Fate, in his High-Poſt

Of Sovereign Pow'r, the Weilded Thunder boaſt.

But, in the higheſt tow'ring Flight of KINGS,

'Tis the Great Stateſman plumes their Ea­gles Wings;

They move the Great MACHINE▪ He Sets the Springs.

And thus, whilſt Pregnant EMPIRE's La­bouring Head

With ſome vaſt Off-ſpring Teems; the Stateſ­man's Aid,

To bring the Fair Divine Minerva forth,

Is call'd the Great Lucina to the Birth.

Wiſdom and Counſel! 'Tis their Min'ſtring Ray,

Thoſe Bright CROWN-Genij, Cheer th' Imperial Sway:

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=3) The Harmony
of WORLDS is only Theirs;

Empire but Guides, 'tis They that Tune the Sphere:

Counſel, in Church or State, the Warmth, by Whom

Aaron's and Moſes's Budding Wands both Bloom:

Thus MONARCHY, what, tho' She Reigns Alone,

'Tis by her Argus-Eyes She Guards her Throne:

Her Lights an Hundred, tho' her Hand's but One.

Of thoſe Rich Lights, Great HALLIFAX ſhin'd there;

In Pow'rs whole Conſtellation, None more Fair:

In Calms or Storms, in every varying Gale,

The Furl'd, the Hoyſted, or the Slacken'd Sail;

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=4) The Helm to
Manage, or the Mates to Cheer,

No Pilot-Hand cou'd ever Worthier Steer:

TRUST, the Magnetick Load-Star of his Soul;

And FAITH, and ZEAL, his Needles to the Pole.

The Studied World was his Long Theam, and All

The Politick Movements of the Mighty Ball:

Yes, the Old World He had Fathom'd o're and o're;

Nay, had there been yet Vnknown Globe's t' explore,

To give that Head, that Reach, thoſe Depths, their Due,

He had ſtood a Fair Columbus, for the New.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=4) In SENATES,
There, with all his Brighteſt Beams,

Not Michael, to th' Embattl'd Seraphims,

A Mightier Leading CHIEF: Oraculous Senſe!

Victorious Right! Amazing Eloquence!

All from that cleareſt Organ ſweetly Sung:

From that bold ENGLISH CICERO's Silver Tongue,

Well might Great TRUTH, and Genuine Juſtice flow;

For he Lookt Vpward, when he Talkt Below:

Up to ASTRAEA, Heav'ns tranſlated Pride,

Her Righteous Ballance his Great Standard Guide.

In Redreſs'd Wrongs, and Succour'd Rights APPEAL,

No Hand, in the Judiciary Scale,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=5) More
Weigh'd and Pois'd, than HALLI­FAX alone;

Ev'n Half the Great Tribunal, was his Own.

But, in that more Exalted Patriot-Cauſe,

The Moulding of thoſe Stamps Imperial, Laws;

Then, when the whole Divinity of Pow'r,

In her Collective Strength, that Lab'ring Hour,

In her All-wiſe Conſulting Providence,

Sits, ſome New Fair Creations to Commence;

In that High Work, for the Great FIAT Fixt,

No Hand like His, the Sovereign ELE­MENTS mixt.

This Fam'd GAMALIEL in the Great State-Schools,

Thus by unerring PRUDENCE Sacred Rules,

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=5) No wonder,
on that Card'nal Hinge He mov'd;

In Pow'r-Craft Skill'd, that Bold Arts-Maſter prov'd:

The Great Performing Part He had Study'd thro',

And no leſs Learnt the Greater Duty too.

The Publick Spirit, and the Active Soul,

More Lively Warmth, than e're Prometheus ſtole,

Thoſe Champions both of Earth and Heav'n's Juſt Right,

Bound by their Great Indenture Tripatite,

Their equally divided FAITH muſt bring,

Betwixt their GOD, their Country, and their King.

In Pow'r and Truſt, thro' his whole Life's long Scene,

Never did Honour wear a Hand more Clean:

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=6) He from the
Iſrael Prophet's Copy drew;

The Suppliant Naaman for his Grace might ſue.

Diſtreſs, 'tis true, his Succour ne'r cou'd lack—

But then her Laded Chariots muſt go Back.

No Syrian Bribe was on his Shoulders worn;

That Tainted Robe ſuch TRUTH and VIRTUE ſcorn.

Thus, like the Eden Pair, Why is Truth drawn

A Naked Beauty, in Tranſparent Lawn?

Yes, 'till her Innocence, for Imp'ious Gold,

That Tempting, Falſe Heſperian Apple, Sold;

'Tis from that Fall, Original Blushes came;

'Twas Then She wanted Fig-Leaves for her Sh [...]me.

A Bribe! That moſt loath'd Thought! Ev'n his whole Roof,

His humbleſt Menials, that Temptation-Proof,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=6) (So Fair
their Leading LORD's Example ſtands)

Oblige with Frank Full Hearts, but Empty Hands.

His Favours in that Generous Current run,

As Providence vouchſafes Her Rain and Sun.

His Favours Cheaper ev'n than Heav'n's conferr'd:

For, though, like Heav'n, th' Imploring Pray'r He heard;

Yet no Thankſgiving Offrings Return'd:

To his Kind GRACE, no Gumms nor In­cenſe burn'd.

Ay, and 'twas Nobly Brave! What can more high,

Than an Vnmercinary Greatneſs fly?

If ought his Obligations muſt Defray,

He rather choſe that Heav'n, than Man ſhould Pay:

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=7) Yes, with
a Fair Ambition, Juſt Diſdain,

Scorn'd leſs than JOVE, his Golden Show'rs ſhou'd Rain▪

And well ſo High, that Fair Ambition tow'r'd;

For HALLIFAX ſo Scorn'd and JOVE, ſo Show'r'd:

Whil'ſt that vaſt Affluence Warm'd his Fruit­ful Soyl,

'Till his Rich Glebe, and Loaded Harveſt Pile,

With that Increaſe▪ that Milky Canaan flow'd:

Proſperity thus Reap'd, where Virtue Sow'd.

NATURE and FORTUNE, Here, both Rivals join'd,

Which to their darling HALLIFAX, more Kind,

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=7) Should
heap the Ampler Maſs: Nature her more

Refin'd, and Fortune in her Courſ [...]r Oar.

The World but Smil'd, where Heav'n had Smil'd before.

Great Bleſſings, when by Greater MERIT ſhar'd,

(Not Providence's Gift, but her Reward,)

Are all Heav'n's Faireſt Blazon▪ Nobleſt Pride;

Th' Eternal DISPENSATION Juſtifi'd.

The Righteous Diſtribution ought no leſs:

So Great 'tis to Deſerve, and then Poſſeſs.

Nor in Proud Courts, nor States alone, that Great

Dictator! Ev'n in the DESPOTIC Seat▪

In His own narrower Domeſtic Sway,

His Houſhold Sweat Penates deckt ſo Gay;

To VICE, like Hannabal to Rome, that ſworn

Eternal Foe; and VIRTUE's Champion born:

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=8) To his own
Filial Nurſery, ſo Kind

A FATHER, with thoſe Leading Lights, He ſhin'd:

HONOVR, ſo Lovely by that Pencil drawn,

The Early Phoſphor to their Morning Dawn:

So Fam'd his equally Paternal Care▪

T' Inſtruct the Great, and to Adorn the

His Ad­vice to a Daughter.

Fair.

Thus BEAUTY's Toilet ſpread ſo all Di­vine,

Her Cabinet Jems ſo Furniſht from That MINE;

The Virgin, and the Bridal Coronet,

Were, by Kind HALLIFAX, ſo richly Set;

VIRTUE and INNOCENCE at that full View,

As ev'n th' Original Eden Lanſchape drew:

All her whole Hierarchy of Graces; not

One leaſt Enamell'd Heav'nly Spark forgot;

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=8) Each Star
in the whole Feminine Renown,

From, Caſſiopaea's CHAIR, to Ariadne's CROWN.

In the Rich Furniture of that Fair MIND,

Thoſe dazling Intellectual Graces ſhin'd,

To draw the Love and Homage of Man­kind;

Nothing cou'd more than his firm FRIEND­SHIP Charm:

Cheerful, as Bridal-Songs; as South-Suns, Warm;

And Fixt, as Northern-Stars: When e're He daign'd

The Solemn Honour of his Plighted Hand,

He ſtood a more than Second Pylades;

Vnſhaken, as Immutable DECREES.

But whilſt theſe vaſt Perfections I Recount,

The Heights to which thoſe Soaring Glories mount:

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=9) My Muſe
thus rapt into that Cheerful Sphear;

Is This her Wailing Dirge? her Funeral Tear?

For his Sad DEATH, to Draw his Glorious LIFE!

Paint Lights for Shades, and Ecſtocies for Grief!

Are Theſe the Melancholy Rites She brings,

Fit Ayrs to Tune the Mournful Theme She ſings!

Yes, the True Mouruer's in th' Hiſtorian Play'd:

What's Preſent Grief, but Paſt Delight Diſ­play'd?

Counting what once was Ours, we need no more:

To Sum th' Enjoyment, does the Loſs Deplore.

Beſides, What all our Sable Cavalcade,

To the Great DEAD, our Darkeſt Funeral Shade?

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=9) T'
Illuſtrious Virtue, Grief's an Eaſy Debt;

Her Glorious Amulet but Cheaply Set:

She finds the Diamond, and We the Jet.

When Learning, Wiſdom, Eloquence, Ex­pire,

And the Great SOULS, (Sparks of Ce­leſtial Fire)

Back to their Elemental Sourſe Retire:

To ſuch Rich DUST, in vain we Pyramids Rear;

For Mauſoloeum's are but Pageants there.

What's a poor Short-liv'd Pile of Crumbling Earth,

A Mould'ring Tomb, t' Apollinary WORTH?

Worth, that ſo far from ſuch a Narrow Bound,

Spreads a Large Field! Moves th' Vniverſal Round!

Fills every Tongue! Thus what no Vrn contains,

The World's the Casket to thoſe Great RE­MAINS.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=10) Nor let
Poetick Vanity Rehearſe

Her Boaſted Dreams, Her Miracles of VERSE:

Think, in ſome poor Recorded EPITAPH,

That Shallow Page of Braſs, or Marble Leaf;

Or in ſome more Voluminous Folio Pile,

A Davideis, or Arthur's Sweating Toil,

Some Sacred WORTHY's Deathleſs Fame t' Enſtal;

Rais'd by her Lyres, like the Old Theban Wall.

No; when Great NAMES ne'r Dye That Work alone,

Is all a Fair Creation of Their Own.

True GLORY Shines by her Own Lighted Beam:

'Tis not the Muſes's Song, but Muſe's THEAM:

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=10) When in
Great HALLIFAX, WIT's Pantheon fell,

And Death now huſht that Silenc'd ORA­CLE;

From Fair Eliza's Hallowed

Weſtmin­ſter-School.

Heli­con-Walls,

Methinks, I hear a Fatal Summon calls:

When, lo! the Delphick

Dr. Buſ­by, who the ſame ſame Day.

SEER, that Reverend Bard

Of Sacred Literature's rich Fount, prepar'd

Th' Expiring HALLIFAX, in Death to wait.—

No leſs Attendant on his Funeral State,

Fate to that ever Honour'd HEAD cou'd owe:

LEARNING it ſelf muſt ſhake, at ſuch a Blow.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=11) But, tho'
with all this Mine of Learning ſtor'd;

He Liv'd, and Dy'd, no Niggard of that Hoard:

Witneſs His own Long Pious Found­ed

His Free-School Foun­dations.

Piles,

Where Nurtur'd ARTS, by His Auſpicious Smiles,

Tune their Young Voices to the Muſe's Song,

Nerv'd by his HAND to Books, and Virtue, ſtrong.

Thus, as th' Old Iſrael Patriarch, to his once

Illuſtrious Twelve▪ HE to His Hundred Sons▪

His Fruitful CHARITY's Adopted Race,

(With all his Tendereſt Diffuſive Grace,)

Doals, with a True Paternal Glory crown'd,

His Living and His Dying Bleſſing round.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=11) Yes, from
that Hand, the Scatter'd Bread muſt fall;

He Furniſhes thoſe Numerous Pencils, all

To Copy from his Great Original:

Reſolv'd, if poſſible, Reſolv'd t' Inſpire,

To this Young Nurſery, His Cheriſht Choire,

His own Rich Soul, their Tranſmigated Fire.

But, why (if 'tis not a too Bold Offence,

To dare Expoſtulate with OMNIPO­TENCE,)

Why ſhould Prodigious Worth, from th' Orb it warm'd,

Snatch'd from the Soyl it cheriſht, Eyes it charm'd

From its Deſerted Charge, unkindly Fly,

Quit th' Earth it Bleſt, Impoveriſh Worlds, and Dye?

No, the Kind Heav'ns, in Mercy, to Rebate

That Mighty Loſs, the too keen Edge of Fate,

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=12) Have
circled Virtue in a Fence ſo High,

As ſtands ſo ſafe, it knows not how to Die;

But Founds its own Proud Immortality.

For, as ſome Lofty Ceder, long had ſtood

The Land-mark of the Plain, and Glory of the Wood;

Till the Dread Voice of Fate, Heav'n's An­gry Blaſt,

The Bolt of the Deſtroying Thunder caſt,

All the tall PRIDE lies Fal'n.— Yet ſtill ſome Shoot,

Some tender Scyen from the Sacred ROOT,

By it's Nutrimental PARENT-Succours fed,

Springs, Grows, Spreads, Flouriſhes; till th' Uprear'd Head,

Do's t' all its Great Original HEIGHTS improve,

A Second Pearch for the Fair Bird of JOVE.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=12) So may
Great HALLIFAX Himſelf Survive;

Thus Fall, and thus his Deathleſs Virtues Live:

LIVE in his Fair SUCCESSION, ever Bleſt;

Whil'ſt Honour Builds it own Rich PHAE­NIX Neſt.

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=13)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=13)

### 1\. THE Lady's New-Year's-Gift: OR, ADVICE TO A DAUGHTER.

Dear Daughter,

I Find, that even our moſt pleaſing Thoughts will be unquiet; they will be in
motion; and the Mind can have no reſt whilſt it is poſſeſs'd by a dar­ling
Paſſion. You are at preſent the chief Object of my Care, as well as of my
Kindneſs, which ſometimes throweth me into Viſions of your being happy in the
World, that are better ſuited to my partial Wiſhes, than, to my reaſonable
Hopes for you. At other times, when my Fears pre­vail, [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=14) I ſhrink as if I
was ſtruck, at the Proſpect of Danger, to which a young Woman muſt be expos'd.
By how much the more Lively, ſo much the more Lia­ble you are to be hurt; as
the fineſt Plants are the ſooneſt nipped by the Froſt. Whilſt you are playing
full of Innocence, the ſpitefull World will bite, except you are guarded by
your Caution. Want of Care therefore, my dear Child, is never to be excus'd;
ſince, as to this World, it hath the ſame effect as want of Vertue. Such an
early ſprouting Wit requireth ſo much the more to be ſheltred by ſome Rules,
like ſomething ſtrew'd on tender Flowers to preſerve them from being blaſt­ed.
You muſt take it well to be prun'd by ſo kind a Hand as that of a Father.
There may be ſome bitterneſs in meer Obedience: The natural Love of Liberty
may help to make the Commands of a Parent harder to go down: Some inward
reſiſtance there will be, where Power and not Choice maketh us move. But when
a Father layeth aſide his Authority, and perſuadeth only by his Kindneſs, you
will never anſwer it to Good Nature, if it hath not weight with you.

A great part of what is ſaid in the following Diſcourſe may be above the
pre­ſent [[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=14)
growth of your Underſtanding; but that becoming every day taller, will in a
little time reach up to it, ſo as to make it eaſie to you. I am willing to
begin with you before your Mind is quite form'd, that being the time in which
it is moſt capable of receiving a Colour that will laſt when it is mix'd with
it. Few things are well learnt, but by early Pre­cepts: Thoſe well infus'd,
make them Na­tural; and we are never ſure of retain­ing what is valuable, till
by a continued Habit we have made it a Piece of us.

Whether my skill can draw the Picture of a fine Woman, may be a queſtion: but
it can be none, That I have drawn that of a kind Father: If you will take an
exact Copy, I will ſo far preſume up­on my workmanſhip, as to undertake you
ſhall not make an ill Figure. Give me ſo much Credit as to try, and I am ſure
that neither your Wiſhes nor mine ſhall be diſappointed by it.

#### 1.1. RELIGION.

THe firſt thing to be confidered, is Religion. It muſt be the chief Ob­ject of
your Thoughts, ſince it would [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=15) be a vain thing
to direct your Behaviour in the World, and forget that which you are to have
towards him who made it.

In a ſtrict ſenſe, it is the only thing neceſſary: you muſt take it into your
Mind, and from thence throw it into your Heart, where you are to embrace it ſo
cloſe as never to loſe the Poſſeſſion of it. But then it is neceſſary to
diſtinguiſh between the Reality and the Pretence.

Religion doth not conſiſt in believing the Legend of the Nurſery, where
Chil­dren with their Milk are fed with the Tales of Witches, Hobgoblings,
Prophe­cies, and Miracles. We ſuck in ſo gree­dily theſe early Miſtakes, that
our riper Vnderſtanding hath much ado to cleanſe our Minds from this kind of
Traſh: The Stories are ſo entertaining, that we do not only believe them, but
relate them; which makes the diſcovery of the Truth ſomewhat grievous, when it
makes us loſe ſuch a Field of Impertinence, where we might have diverted our
ſelves, beſides the throwing ſome ſhame upon us for having ever received them.
This is mak­ing the World a Jeſt, and imputing to God Almighty, That the
Province he aſſigneth to the Devil, is to play at Blind­mans-buſf, and ſhew
Tricks with Man­kind; [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=15) and is ſo far
from being Religion, that it is not Senſe, and hath right only to be call'd
that kind of Devotion, of which Ignorance is the undoubted Mother, without
competition or diſpute. Theſe Miſtakes are therefore to be left off with your
Hanging ſleeves; and you ought to be as much out of countenance to be found
with them about you, as to be ſeen playing with Babies at an Age when other
things are expected from you.

The next thing to be obſerv'd to you, is, That Religion doth as little conſiſt
in loud Anſwers and devout Convulſions at Church, or Praying in an
extraordinary manner. Some Ladies are ſo extream ſtirr­ing at Church, that one
would ſwear the Worm in their Conſcience made them ſo unquiet. Others will
have ſuch a Divided Face between a Devout Goggle and an In­viting Glance, that
the unnatural Mixture maketh even the beſt Looks to be at that time
ridiculous. Theſe affected Appearances are ever ſuſpected, like very ſtrong
Per­fumes, which are generally thought no very good Symptoms in thoſe that
make uſe of them. Let your earneſtneſs therefore be reſerv'd for your Cloſet,
where you may have God Almighty to your ſelf: In Pub­lick be ſtill and calm,
neither undecent­ly [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=16) Careleſs, nor
Affected in the other Ex­tream.

It is not true Devotion, to put on an angry Zeal againſt thoſe who may be of a
differing Perſuaſion. Partiality to our ſelves makes us often miſtake it for a
Duty, to fall hard upon others in that caſe; and being puſh'd on by Self-
conceit, we ſtrike without mercy, believing that the Wounds we give are
Meritorious, and that we are fighting God Almighty's Quarrel; when the truth
is, we are only ſetting out our ſelves. Our Devotion too often breaketh out
into that Shape which moſt agreeth with our particular Temper. The Cholerick
grow into a hardned Severity againſt all who diſſent from them; ſnatch at all
the Texts of Scripture that ſuit with their Complexion; and becauſe God's
Wrath was ſome time kindled, they con­clude, That Anger is a Divine Vertue;
and are ſo far  [...]rom imagining their ill natur'd Zeal requireth an
Apology, that they value themſelves upon it, and triumph in it. Others, whoſe
Nature is more Credu­lous than ordinary, admit no Bounds or Meaſure to it;
they grow as proud of extending their Faith, as Princes are of enlarging their
Dominions; not conſider­ing that our Faith, like our Stomach, is [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=16) capable of being
over-charg'd; and that as the laſt is deſtroy'd by taking in more than it can
digeſt, ſo our Reaſon may be extinguiſh'd by oppreſſing it with the weight of
too many ſtrange things; eſpe­cially if we are forbidden to chew what we are
commanded to ſwallow. The Me­lancholy and the Sullen are apt to place a great
part of their Religion in dejected or ill-humour'd Looks, putting on an
un­ſociable Face, and declaiming againſt the Innocent Entertainments of Life,
with as much ſharpneſs as they could beſtow up­on the greateſt Crimes. This
generally is only a Vizard, there is ſeldom any thing real in it. No other
thing is the better for being Sowre; and it would be hard that Religion ſhould
be ſo, which is the beſt of things. In the mean time it may be ſaid with
truth, That this ſurly kind of Devotion hath perhaps done little leſs hurt in
the World, by frighting, than the moſt ſcandalous Examples have done by
infect­ing it.

Having told you, in theſe few Inſtances, to which many more might be added,
what is not true Religion; it is time to deſcribe to you, what is ſo. The
ordinary Definitions of it are no more like it, than the common Sign-poſts are
like the Princes [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=17) they would
repreſent. The unskilful Daw­bers in all Ages have generally laid on ſuch ill
Colours, and drawn ſuch harſh Lines, that the Beauty of it is not eaſily to be
diſcerned: They have put in all the for­biddng Features that can be thought
of; and in the firſt place, have made it an irreconcilable Enemy to Nature;
when, in reality, they are not only Friends, but Twins, born together at the
ſame time; and it is doing violence to them both, to go about to have them
ſeparated. Nothing is ſo kind and ſo inviting as true and unſophiſticated
Religion: Inſtead of impoſing unneceſſary Burdens upon our Nature, it eaſeth
us of the greater weight of our Paſſions and Miſtakes: Inſtead of ſubduing us
with Rigour, it redeemeth us from the Slavery we are in to our ſelves, who are
the moſt ſevere Maſters, whilſt we are under the Uſurpation of our Ap­petites
let looſe and not reſtrain'd.

Religion is a chearful thing, ſo far from being always at Cuffs with Good
Humour, that it is inſeparably united to it. No­thing unpleaſant belongs to
it, though the Spiritual Cooks have done their unskilful part to give an ill
Reliſh to it. A wiſe Epicure would be Religious for the ſake of Pleaſure; Good
Senſe is the Foundation [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=17) of both; and he
is a Bungler who aimeth at true Luxury, but where they are join'd.

Religion is exalted Reaſon, refin'd and ſiſted from the groſſer parts of it:
It dwelleth in the upper Region of the Mind, where there are feweſt Clouds or
Miſts to darken or offend it: It is both the Foun­dation and the Crown of all
Vertues: It is Morality improv'd and rais'd to its height, by being carried
nearer Heaven, the only place where Perfection reſideth. It cleanſeth the
Vnderſtanding, and bruſh­eth off the Earth that hangeth about our Souls. It
doth not want the Hopes and the Terrors which are made uſe of to ſupport it;
neither ought it to deſcend to the borrowing any Argument out of it ſelf,
ſince there we may find every thing that ſhould invite us. If we were to be
hired to Religion, it is able to out-bid the corrupted World, with all it can
offer to us, being ſo much the Richer of the two, in every thing where Reaſon
is admitted to be a Judge of the Value.

Since this is ſo, it is worth your pains to make Religion your choice, and not
make uſe of it only as a Refuge. There are Ladies, who finding by the too
viſible decay of their good Looks, that they can ſhine no more by that Light,
put on the [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=18) Varniſh of an
affected Devotion, to keep up ſome kind of Figure in the World. They take
Sanctuary in the Church, when they are purſued by growing Contempt which will
not be ſtopt, but followeth them to the Altar. Such late penitence is only a
diſguiſe for the tormenting grief of being no more handſome. That is the
killing thought which draweth the ſighs and tears, that appear outwardly to be
applied to a better end.

There are many who have an Aguiſh Devotion, Hot and Cold Fits, long
Inter­miſſions, and violent Raptures. This un­evenneſs is by all means to be
avoided. Let your method be a ſteady courſe of good Life, that may run like a
ſmooth Stream, and be a perpetual Spring to fur­niſh to the continued Exerciſe
of Vertue. Your Devotion may be earneſt, but it muſt be unconſtrained; and
like other Duties, you muſt make it your Pleaſure too, or elſe it will have
very little efficacy. By this Rule you may beſt judge of your own Heart.
Whilſt thoſe Duties are Joys, it is an Evidence of their being ſincere; but
when they are a Penance, it is a ſign that your Nature maketh ſome reſiſtance;
and whilſt that laſteth, you can never be entirely ſecure of your ſelf.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=18) If you
are often unquiet, and too nearly touch'd by the croſs Accidents of Life, your
Devotion is not of the right Stan­dard there is too much Allay in it. That
which is right and unmixt, taketh away the Sting of every thing that would
trou­ble you: It is like a healing Balm, that extinguiſheth the ſharpneſs of
the Bloud; ſo this ſofteneth and diſſolveth the An­guiſh of the Mind. A devout
Mind hath the Privilege of being free from Paſſions, as ſome Climates are from
all venomous kind of Creatures. It will raiſe you above the little Vexations
to which others for want of it, will be expos'd, and bring you to a Temper,
not of ſtupid Indifference, but of ſuch a wiſe Reſignation, that you may live
in the World, ſo as it may hang about you like a looſe Garment, and not tied
too cloſe to you.

Take heed of running into that com­mon Error, of applying God's Judgments upon
particular Occaſions. Our Weights and Meaſures are not competent to make the
Diſtribution either of his Mercy or his Juſtice: He hath thrown a Veil over
theſe things, which makes it not only an Im­pertinence, but a kind of
Sacrilege, for us to give Sentence in them without his Commiſſion.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=19) As to
your particular Faith, keep to the Religion that is grown up with you, both as
it is the bed in it ſelf, and that the reaſon of ſtaying in it upon that
Ground is ſome­what ſtronger for your Sex, than it will perhaps be allow'd to
be for ours; in re­ſpect that the Voluminous enquiries into the Truth, by
Reading, are leſs expected from you. The Beſt of Books will be di­rection
enough to you not to change; and whilſt you are fix'd and ſufficiently
con­firm'd in your own Mind, you will do beſt to keep vain Doubts and Scruples
at ſuch a di­ſtance that they may give you no diſquiet.

Let me recommend to you a Method of being rightly inform'd, which can never
fail: It is in ſhort this. Get Vnderſtanding, and practiſe Vertue And if you
are  [...]o Bleſ­ſed as to have thoſe for your Share, it is not ſurer that
there is a God, than it is, that by him all Neceſſary Truths will be revealed
to you.

#### 1.2. HVSBAND.

THAT which challengeth the place in your Thoughts, is how to live with a
Husband. And though that is ſo large a Word, that few Rules can be fix'd to it
which [[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=19) are
unchangeable, the Methods being as va­rious as the ſeveral Tempers of Men to
which they muſt be ſuited; yet I cannot omit ſome General Obſervations, which,
with the help of your own may the better direct you in the part of your Life
upon which your Happineſs moſt dependeth.

It is one of the Diſadvantages belonging to your Sex, that young Women are
ſeldom permitted to make their own Choice; their Friends Care and Experience
are thought ſafer Guides to them, than their own Fan­cies; and their Modeſty
often forbiddeth them to refuſe when their Parents recom­mend, though their
inward Conſent may not entirely go along with it. In this caſe there remaineth
nothing for them to do, but to endeavour to make that eaſie which falleth to
their Lot, and by a wiſe uſe of every thing they may diſlike in a Husband▪
turn that by degrees to be very ſupporta­ble, which, if neglected, might in
time beget an Averſion.

You muſt firſt lay it down for a Foun­dation in general▪ That there is
Inequality in the Sexes, and that for the better Oeco­nomy of the World, the
Men, who were to be the Law-givers, had the larger ſhare of Reaſon beſtow'd
upon them; by which means your Sex is the better prepar'd [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=20) for the
Compliance that is neceſſary for the better performance of thoſe Duties which
teem to be moſt properly aſſign'd to it. This looks a little uncourtly at the
firſt appearance; but upon Examination it will be found, that Nature is ſo far
from be­ing unjuſt to you, that ſhe is partial on our ſide. She hath made you
ſuch large Amends by other Advantages, for the ſeem­ing Injuſtice of the firſt
Diſtribution, that the Right of Complaining is come over to our Sex. You have
it in your power not only to free your ſelves, but to ſub­due your Maſters,
and without violence throw both their Natural and Legal Autho­rity. at your
Feet. We are made of differ­ing Tempers, that our Defects may the better be
mutually ſupplied: Your Sex wanteth our Reaſon for your Conduct, and our
Strength for your Protection: Ours wanteth your Gentleneſs to ſoften, and to
entertain us. The firſt part of our Life is a good deal ſubjected to you in
the Nurſery, where you Reign without Competition, and by that means have the
advantage of giving the firſt Impreſſions. Afterwards you have ſtronger
Influences, which, well manag'd, have more force in your behalf, than all our
Privileges and Juriſdictions can pre­  [...]end to have againſt you. You have
more [[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=20)
ſtrength in your Looks, than we have in our Laws, and more power by your
Tears, than we have by our Arguments.

It is true, that the Laws of Marriage, run in a harſher ſtile towards your
Sex. Obey is an ungenteel word, and leſs eaſie to be digeſted, by making ſuch
an unkind diſtinction in the Words of the Contract, and ſo very unſuitable to
the exceſs of Good Manners, which generally goes before it. Beſides, the
univerſality of the Rule ſeem­eth to be a Grievance, and it appeareth
reaſonable, that there might be an Exemp­tion for extraordinary Women, from
ordi­nary Rules, to take away the juſt Excep­tion that lieth againſt the falſe
meaſure of general Equality.

It may be alledged by the Counſel re­tained by your Sex, that as there is in
all other Laws, an Appeal from the Letter to the Equity, in Caſes that require
it▪ It is as reaſonable, that ſome Court of a larger. Juriſdiction might be
erected, where ſome Wives might reſort and plead ſpecially. And in ſuch
inſtances where Nature is ſo kind, as to raiſe them above the level of their
own Sex, they might have Re­lief, and obtain a Mitigation in their own
particular, of a Sentence which was given generally againſt Woman kind. The
cauſes [[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=21) of
Separation are now ſo very courſe, that few are confident enough to buy their
Li­berty at the price of having their Mode­ſty ſo expoſed. And for diſparity
of Minds, which above all other things requireth a Remedy, the Laws have made
no proviſion; ſo little refin'd are numbers of Men, by whom they are compil'd.
This and a great deal more might be ſaid to give a colour to the Complaint.

But the Anſwer to it, in ſhort is, That the Inſtitution of Marriage is too
ſacred to admit a Liberty of objecting to it; That the ſuppoſition of yours
being the weaker Sex, having without all doubt a good Foun­dation, maketh it
reaſonable to ſubject it to the Maſculine Dominion; That no Rule can be ſo
perfect, as not to admit ſome Exceptions; But the Law preſumeth there would be
ſo few found in this Caſe, who would have a ſufficient Right to ſuch a
Privilege, that it is ſafer ſome Injuſtice ſhould be conniv'd at in a very few
Inſtances, than to break into an Eſtabliſhment, upon which the Order of Humane
Society doth ſo much depend.

You are therefore to make your beſt of what is ſettled by Law and Cuſtom, and
not vainly imagine, that it will be changed for your ſake. But that you may
not be [[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=21)
diſcouraged, as if you lay under the weight of an incurable Grievance, you are
to know, that by a wiſe and dexterous Conduct, it will be in your power to
relieve your ſelf from any thing that looketh like a diſad­vantage in it. For
your better direction, I will give a hint of the moſt ordinary Cauſes of
Diſſatisfaction between Man and Wife, that you may be able by ſuch a Warn­ing
to live ſo upon your Guard, that when you ſhall be married, you may know how
to cure your Husband's Miſtakes, and to prevent your own.

Firſt then, you are to conſider, you live in a time which hath rendred ſome
kind of Frailties ſo habitual, that they lay claim to large Grains of
Allowance. The World in this is ſomewhat unequal, and our Sex ſeem­eth to play
the Tyrant in diſtinguiſhing partially for our ſelves, by making that in the
utmoſt degree Criminal in the Woman, which in a Man paſſeth under a much
gentler Cenſure. The Root and the Excuſe of this Injuſtice is the Preſervation
of Families from any Mixture which may bring a Blemiſh to them: And whilſt the
Point of Honour con­tinues to be ſo plac'd, it ſeems unavoidable to give your
Sex, the greater ſhare of the Penalty. But if in this it lieth under any
Diſadvantage, you are more than recom­pens'd, [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=22) by having the
Honour of Families in your keeping. The Conſideration ſo great a Truſt muſt
give you, maketh full amends; and this Power the World hath lodged in you, can
hardly fail to reſtrain the Severity of an ill Husband, and to im­prove the
Kindneſs and Eſteem of a good one. This being ſo, remember, That next to the
danger, of committing the Fault your ſelf, the greateſt is that of ſeeing it
in your Husband. Do not ſeem to look or hear that way: If he is a Man of
Senſe, he will re­claim himſelf; the Folly of it, is of it ſelf ſufficient to
cure him: if he is not ſo, he will be provok'd, but not reform'd. To
expoſtulate in theſe Caſes, looketh like declaring War, and preparing
Repriſals; which to a thinking Husband would be a dangerous Reflexion.
Beſides, it is ſo courſe a Reaſon which will be aſſign'd for a Lady's too
great Warmth upon ſuch an occaſion, that Modeſty no leſs than Prudence ought
to reſtrain her; ſince ſuch an undecent Complaint makes a Wife much more
ridi­culous, than the Injury that provoketh her to it. But it is yet worſe,
and more unskil­ful, to blaze it in the World, expecting it ſhould riſe up in
Arms to take her part: Whereas ſhe will find, it can have no other Effect,
than that ſhe will be ſerved up in all [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=22) Companies, as
the reigning Jeſt at that time; and will continue to be the common
Enter­tainment, till ſhe is reſcu'd by ſome newer Folly that cometh upon the
Stage, and driveth her away from it. The Imperti­nence of ſuch Methods is ſo
plain, that it doth not deſerve the pains of being laid open. Be aſſur'd, that
in theſe Caſes your Diſcretion and Silence will be the moſt pre­vailing
Reproof. An affected Ignorance, which is ſeldom a Vertue, is a great one here:
And when your Husband ſeeth how unwill­  [...]ng you are to be uneaſie, there
is no ſtronger Argument to perſwade him not to be unjuſt to you. Beſides, it
will naturally make him more yielding in other things: And whether it be to
cover or redeem his Offence, you may have the good Effects of it whilſt it
laſteth, and all that while have the moſt reaſonable Ground that can be, of
preſuming, ſuch a Behaviour will at laſt entirely convert him. There is
nothing ſo glorious to a Wife, as a Victory ſo gain'd: A Man ſo reclaim'd, is
for ever after ſub­jected to her Vertue; and her bearing for a time, is more
than rewarded by a Triumph that will continue as long as her Life.

The next thing I will ſuppoſe, is, That your Husband may love Wine more than
is convenient. It will be granted, That [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=23) though there are
Vices of a deeper dye, there are none that have greater Deformity than this,
when it is not reſtrain'd: But with all this, the ſame Cuſtom which is the
more to be lamented for its being ſo gene­ral, ſhould make it leſs uneaſie to
every one in particular who is to ſuffer by the Effects of it: So that in the
firſt place, it will be no new thing if you ſhould have a Drunkard for your
Husband; and there is by too frequent Examples evidence enough, that ſuch a
thing may happen, and yet a Wife may live too without being miſerable. Self-
love dictateth aggravating words to every thing we feel; Ruine and Miſery are
the Terms we apply to whatever we do not like, forgetting the Mixture allotted
to us by the Condition of Human Life, by which it is not intended we ſhould be
quite exempt from trouble. It is fair, if we can eſcape ſuch a degree of it as
would oppreſs us, and enjoy ſo much of the pleaſant part as may leſſen the ill
taſte of ſuch things as are unwelcome to us. Every thing hath two Sides, and
for our own eaſe we ought to direct our Thoughts to that which may be leaſt
liable to exception. To ſall upon the worſt ſide of a Drunkard, giveth ſo
un­pleaſant a proſpect, that it is not poſſible to dwell upon it. Let us paſs
then to the [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=23) more favourable
part, as far as a Wife is concern'd in it.

I am tempted to ſay (if the Irregularity of the Expreſſion could in ſtrictneſs
be juſtified) That a Wife is to thank God her Husband hath Faults. Mark the
ſeeming Paradox my Dear, for your own Inſtructi­on, it being intended no
further. A Huſ­band without Faults is a dangerous Obſerv­er; he hath an Eye ſo
piercing, and ſeeth every thing ſo plain, that it is expos'd to his full
Cenſure. And though I will not doubt but that your Vertue will diſappoint the
ſharpeſt Enquiries; yet few Women can bear the having all they ſay or do
re­preſented in the clear Glaſs of an Under­ſtanding without Faults. Nothing
ſoftneth the Arrogance of our Nature, like a Mix­ture of ſome Frailties. It is
by them we are beſt told, that we muſt not ſtrike too hard upon others,
becauſe we our ſelves do ſo often deſerve Blows: They pull our Rage by the
Sleeve, and whiſper Gentle­neſs to us in our Cenſures, even when they are
rightly applied. The Faults and Paſſions of Husbands bring them down to you,
and make them content to live upon leſs unequal Terms, than Faultleſs Men
would be willing to ſtoop to; ſo haughty is Mankind till humbled by com­mon
[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=24)
Weakneſſes and Defects, which in our corrupted State contribute more to­wards
the reconciling us to one another, than all the Precepts of the Philoſophers
and Divines. So that where the Errors of our Nature make amends for the
Diſadvantages of yours it is more your part to make uſe of the Benefit, than
to quarrel at the Fault.

Thus in caſe a Drunken Husband ſhould fall to your ſhare, if you will be wiſe
and patient, his Wine ſhall be of your ſide; it will throw a Veil over your
Miſtakes, and will ſet out and improve every thing you do, that he is pleaſed
with. Others will like him leſs, and by that means he may perhaps like you the
more. When after having dined too well, he is received at home without a
Storm, or ſo much as a re­proaching Look, the Wine will naturally work out all
in Kindeneſs, which a Wife muſt encourage, let it be wrapped up in never ſo
much Impertinence. On the other ſide it would boil up into Rage, if the
mi­ſtaken Wife ſhould treat him roughly, like a certain thing called a kind
Shrew, than which the World, with all its Plenty, can­not ſhew a more
Senſeleſs, ill-bred, forbid­ding Creature. Conſider, that where the Man will
give ſuch frequent Intermiſſions [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=24) of the uſe of
his Reaſon, the Wife inſen­ſibly getteth a Right of Governing in the Vacancy,
and that raiſeth her Character and Credit in the Family, to a higher pitch
than perhaps could be done under a ſober Husband, who never putteth himſelf
into an Incapacity of holding the Reins. If theſe are not intire Conſolations,
at leaſt they are Remedies to ſome Degree. They can­not make Drunkenneſs a
Vertue, nor a Hus­band given to it a Felicity; but you will do your ſelf no
ill office in the endeavouring, by theſe means, to make the beſt of ſuch a
Lot, in caſe it ſhould happen to be yours, and by the help of a wiſe
Obſervati­on, to make that very ſupportable, which would otherwiſe be a Load
that would op­preſs you.

The next Caſe I will put is that your Husband may be Cholerick or Ill-
humour'd. To this it may be ſaid, That paſſionate Men generally make amends at
the Foot of the Account. Such a Man, if he is an­gry one day without any
Senſe, will the next day be as kind without any Reaſon. So that by marking how
the Wheels of ſuch a Man's Head are uſed to move, you may eaſily bring over
all his Paſſion to your Par­ty. Inſtead of being ſtruck down by his Thunder,
you ſhall direct it where and up­on [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=25) whom you ſhall
think it beſt applied. Thus are the ſtrongeſt Poiſons turn'd to the beſt
Remedies; but then there muſt be Art in it, and a skilful Hand, elſe the leaſt
bungling maketh it mortal. There is a great deal of nice Care requiſite to
deal with a Man of this Complexion. Choler proceed­eth from Pride, and maketh
a Man ſo partial to himſelf that he ſwelleth againſt Contra­diction; and
thinketh he is leſſened if he is oppoſed. You muſt in this Caſe take heed of
increaſing the Storm by an unwary Word, or kindling the Fire whilſt the Wind
is in a Corner which may blow it in your Face: You are dextrouſly to yield
every thing till he beginneth to cool, and then by ſlow degrees you may riſe
and gain upon him: Your Gentleneſs well timed, will, like a Charm, diſpel his
Anger ill plac­ed; a kind Smile will reclaim, when a ſhrill pettiſh Anſwer
would provoke him; rather than fail upon ſuch occaſions, when other Remedies
are too weak, a little Flattery may be admitted, which by being neceſſa­ry,
will ceaſe to be Criminal.

If Ill. Humour and Sullenneſs, and not open and ſudden Heat is his Diſeaſe,
there is a way of treating that too, ſo as to make it a Grievance to be
endured. In order to if, you are firſt to know, that naturally [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=25) good Senſe hath
a mixture of ſurly in it: and there being ſo much Folly in the World, and for
the Moſt part ſo triumphant, it giveth frequent Temptations to raiſe the
Spleen of Men who think right. There­fore that which may generally be call'd
Ill-Humour, is not always a Fault; it be­cometh one when either it is wrong
ap­plied, or that it is continued too long, when it is not ſo: For this Reaſon
you muſt not too haſtily fix an ill name upon that which may perhaps not
deſerve it; and though the Caſe ſhould be, that your Husband might too ſowerly
reſent any thing he diſliketh, it may ſo happen, that more Blame ſhall belong
to your Miſtake, than to his Ill-Humour. If a Husband be­haveth himſelf
ſometimes with an Indiffe­rence that a Wife may think offenſive, ſhe is in the
wrong to put the worſt ſence upon it, if by any Means it will admit a better.
Some Wives will call it Ill-humour if their Husbands change their Style from
that which they uſed whilſt they made their firſt Addreſſes to them: Others
will allow no Intermiſſion or Abatement in the Expreſſions of Kindneſs to
them, not enough diſtinguiſhing Times, and forget­ting that it is impoſſible
for Men to keep themſelves up all their Lives to the height [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=26) of ſome
extravagant Moments. A Man may at ſome times be leſs careful in little things,
without any cold or diſobliging Reaſon for it; as a Wife may be too ex­pecting
in ſmaller matters, without draw­ing upon her-ſelf the inference of being
unkind. And if your Husband ſhould be really ſullen, and have ſuch frequent
Fits, as might take away the excuſe of it, it concerneth you to have an Eye
prepared to diſcern the firſt Appearances of Cloudy Weather, and to watch when
the Fit go­eth off, which ſeldom laſteth long if it is let alone. But whilſt
the Mind is ſore, eve­ry thing galleth it, and that maketh it neceſſary to let
the Black Humour begin to ſpend it ſelf▪ before you come in and ven­ture to
undertake it.

If in the Lottery of the World you ſhould draw a Covetous Husband, I confeſs
it will not make you proud of your good Luck; yet even ſuch a one may be
en­dured too, though there are few Paſſions more untractable than that of
Avarice. You muſt firſt take care that your Defini­tion of Avarice may not be
a Miſtake. You are to examine every Circumſtance of your Husband's Fortune,
and weigh the Reaſon of every thing you expect from him before you have right
to pro­nounce [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=26) that ſentence.
The Complaint is now ſo general againſt all Husbands, that it giveth great
ſuſpicion of its being often ill-grounded; it is impoſſible they ſhould all
deſerve that Cenſure, and therefore it is certain, that it is many times
miſap­plied. He that ſpareth in every thing is an inexcuſable Niggard; he that
ſpareth in nothing is as inexcuſable a Madman. The mean is, to ſpare in what
is leaſt neceſſa­ry, to lay out more liberally in what is moſt required in our
ſeveral circumſtances. Yet this will not always ſatisfie. There are Wives who
are impatient of the Rules of Oecomomy, and are apt to call their Husband's
Kindneſs in queſtion, if any other meaſure is put to their expence than that
of their own Fancy. Be ſure to avoid this dangerous Error, ſuch a partiality
to your Self▪ which is ſo offenſive to an un­derſtanding Man, that he will
very ill bear a Wife's giving her ſelf ſuch an injurious preference to all the
Family, and whatever belongeth to it.

But to admit the worſt, and that your Husband is really a Cloſe-handed Wretch,
you muſt in this, as in other Caſes, endea­vour to make it leſs afflicting to
you; and firſt you muſt obſerve ſeaſonable hours of ſpeaking. When you offer
any thing [[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=27)
in oppoſition to this reigning Humour, a third hand and a wiſe Friend, may
often prevail more than you will be allowed to do in your own Cauſe. Sometimes
you are dexterouſly to go along with him in things, where you ſee that the
niggardly part of his Mind is moſt predominant, by which you will have the
better opportunity of perſwading him in things where he may be more
indifferent. Our Paſſions are very unequal, and are apt to be raiſed or
leſſen­ed, according as they work upon different Objects; they are not to be
ſtopped or re­ſtrained in thoſe things where our Mind is more particularly
engaged. In other mat­ters they are more tractable, and will ſome­times give
Reaſon a hearing, and admit a fair Diſpute. More than that, there are few Men,
even in this inſtance of Ava [...]ice, ſo intirely abandoned to it, that at
ſome hours, and upon ſome occaſions, will not for­get their natures, and for
that time turn Pro­digal. The ſame Man who will grudge him­ſelf what is
neceſſary, let his Pride be raiſed and he ſhall be profuſe; at another time
his Anger ſhall have the ſame effect; a fit of Vanity, Ambition, and ſometimes
of Kind­neſs, ſhall open and inlarge his narrow Mind; a Doſe of Wine will work
upon this tough humor, and for the time diſſolve it. Your [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=27) buſneſs muſt be,
if this Caſe happeneth, to watch theſe critical moments, and not let one of
them ſlip without making your ad­vantage of it; and a Wife may be ſaid to want
skill, if by theſe means ſhe is not able to ſecure her ſelf in a good meaſure
a­gainſt the Inconveniences this ſcurvy qua­lity in a Husband might bring upon
her, except he ſhould be ſuch an incurable Mon­ſter, as I hope will never fall
to your ſhare.

The laſt ſuppoſition I will make, is, That your Husband ſhould be weak and
incom­petent to make uſe of the Privileges that belong to him. It will be
yielded, that ſuch a one leaveth room for a great many Objections. But God
Almighty ſeldom ſendeth a Grievance without a Remedy, or at leaſt ſuch a
Mitigation as taketh away a great part of the ſting, and the ſmart of it. To
make ſuch a Misfortune leſs hea­vy you are firſt to bring to your
Ob­ſervation, That a Wife very often maketh better Figure, for her Husband's
making no great one: And there ſeemeth to be lit­tle reaſon, why the ſame Lady
that chuſeth a Waiting-Woman with worſe Looks, may not be content with a
Huſband with leſs Wit; the Argument being equal from the advantage of the
Compariſon. If you will [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=28) be more aſhamed
in ſome Caſes, of ſuch a Husband, you will be leſs afraid than you would
perhaps be of a wiſe one. His Vnſeaſonable Weakneſs may no doubt ſometimes
grieve you, but then ſet againſt this, that it giveth you the Dominion, i
[...] you will make the right uſe of it. It is next to his being dead, in
which Caſe the Wife hath right to Adminiſter; therefore be ſure, if you have
ſuch an Idiot, that none, except your ſelf, may have the benefit of the
forfeiture; Such a Fool is a dangerous Beaſt, if others have the keep­ing of
him; and you muſt be very undex­terous if when your Husband ſhall reſolve to
be an Aſs, you do not take care he may be your Aſs. But you muſt go skil­fully
about it and above all things, take heed of diſtinguiſhing in publick, what
kind of Husband he is: Your inward thoughts muſt not hinder the outward
payment of the conſideration that is due to him: Your ſlighting him in
Company, beſides that it would, to a diſcerning By ſtander, give too great
encouragement for the making nearer applications to you, is in it ſelf ſuch an
undecent way of aſſuming, that it may provoke the tame Creature to break
looſe, and to ſhew his Dominion for his Credit, which he was content to forget
for his [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=28)
Eaſe. In ſhort, the ſureſt and the moſt approved method will be to do like a
wiſe Miniſter to an eaſie Prince; firſt give him the Orders you afterwards
receive from him.

With all this, that which you are to pray for, is a Wiſe Husband, one that by
knowing how to be a Maſter, for that ve­ry reaſon will not let you feel the
weight of it; one whoſe Authority is ſo ſoften'd by his Kindneſs, that it
giveth you eaſe without abridging your Liberty; one that will return ſo much
tenderneſs for your Juſt Eſteem of him, that you will never want power, though
you will ſeldom care to uſe it. Such a Husband is as much a­bove all the other
Kinds of them, as a rational ſubjection to a Prince, great in him­ſelf, is to
be preferr'd before the diſquiet and uneaſineſs of Vnlimited Liberty.

Before I leave this Head, I muſt add a little concerning your Behaviour to
your Husband's Friends, which requireth the moſt refined part of your
Underſtanding to acquit your ſelf well of it. You are to ſtudy how to live
with them with more care than you are to apply to any other part of your Life;
eſpecially at firſt, that you may not ſtumble at the firſt ſetting out. The
Family into which you are grafted [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=29) will generally
be apt to expect, that like a Stranger in a Foreign Country, you ſhould
conform to their Methods, and not bring in a new Model by your own Authori­ty
The Friends in ſuch a Caſe are temp­ted to riſe up in Arms as againſt an
un­lawful Invaſion, ſo that you are with the utmoſt Caution to avoid the leaſt
appear­ances of any thing of this Kind. And that you may with leſs difficulty
afterwards give your Directions, be ſure at firſt to re­ceive them from your
Husband's Friends. Gain them to you by early applying to them, and they will
be ſo ſatisfied, that as nothing is more thankful than Pride, when it is
complied with, they will ſtrive which of them ſhall moſt recommend you; and
when they have helped you to take Root in your Husband's good Opinion, you
will have leſs dependence upon theirs, though you muſt not neglect any
reaſonable means of preſerving it. You are to conſider, that a Man govern'd by
his Friends, is ve­ry eaſily inflamed by them; and that one who is not ſo,
will yet for his own ſake expect to have them conſider'd. It is eaſily
improved to a point of Honour in a Hus­band, not to have his Relations
neglected; and nothing is more dangerous, than to raiſe an Objection, which is
grounded up­on [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=29) Pride: It is the
moſt ſtubborn and laſt­ing Paſſion we are ſubject to, and where it is the
firſt cauſe of the War, it is very hard to make a ſecure Peace. Your Cauti­on
in this is of the laſt importance to you.

And that you may the better ſucceed in it, carry a ſtrict Eye upon the
Impertinence of your Servants; take heed that their Ill-humour may not engage
you to take Ex­ceptions, or their too much aſſuming i [...] ſmall matters,
raiſe Conſequences which may bring you under great Diſadvantage. Remember that
in the caſe of a Royal Bride, thoſe about her are generally ſo far ſuſpect­ed
to bring in a Foreign Intereſt, that in moſt Countries they are inſenſibly
reduced to a very ſmall number, and thoſe of ſo low a Figure, that it doth not
admit the be­ing Jealous of them. In little and in the Proportion, this may be
the Caſe of every New married Woman, and therefore it may be more adviſeable
for you, to gain the Ser­vants you find in a Family, than to tie your ſelf too
faſt to thoſe you carry into it.

You are not to overlook theſe ſmall Re­flections, becauſe they may appear low
and inconſiderable; for it may be ſaid, that as the greateſt ſtreams are made
up of the ſmall drops at the head of the Springs from whence they are derived,
ſo the greater [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=30) circumſtances of
your Life, will be in ſome degree directed by theſe ſeeming trifles, which
having the advantage of being the firſt acts of it, have a greater effect than
ſingly in their own nature they could pre­tend to.

I will conclude this Article with my Ad­vice, That you would, as much as
Nature will give you leave, endeavour to forget the great Indulgence you have
found at home. After ſuch a gentle Diſcipline as you have been under, every
thing you diſlike will ſeem the harſher to you. The tenderneſs we have had for
you, My Dear, is of another nature, peculiar to kind Pa­rents, and differing
from that which you will meet wi [...]h firſt in any Family into which you
ſhall be tranſplanted; and yet they may be very kind too, and afford no
juſtifiable reaſon to you to complain. You muſt not be frighted with the firſt
Appea­rances of a differing Scene; for when you are uſed to it, you may like
the Houſe you go to, better than that you left; and your Husband's Kindneſs
will have ſo much advantage of ours, that we ſhall yield  [...] all
Competition, and as well as we love you, be very well contented to Surrender
to ſuch a Rival.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=30)

#### 1.3. HOVSE, FAMILY, and CHILDREN.

YOU muſt lay before you, My Dear▪ there are degrees of Care to recom­mend your
ſelf to the World in the ſeveral parts of your Life. In many things, though
the doing them well may raiſe your Credit and Eſteem, yet the omiſſion of them
would draw no immediate reproach upon you: In others, where your duty is more
particular­ly applyed, the neglect of them is amongſt thoſe Faults which are
not forgiven, and will bring you under a Cenſure, which will be much a heavier
thing than the trouble you would avoid. Of this kind is the Go­vernment of
your Houſe, Family, and Chil­dren, which  [...]ince it is the Province
allotted to your Sex, and that the diſcharging it well, will for that reaſon
be expected from you, if you either deſert it out of Lazineſs, or manage it
ill for want of skill, inſtead of a Help you will be an Incumbrance to the
Fa­mily where you are placed.

I muſt tell you, that no reſpect is laſting, but that which is produced by our
being in ſome degree uſeful to thoſe that pay it. Where that faileth, the
Homage and the [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=31) Reverence go
along with it, and fly to o­thers where ſomething may be expected in exchange
for them. And upon this prin­ciple the reſpects even of the Children and the
Servants will not ſtay with one that doth not think them worth their Care, and
the old Houſe-keeper ſhall make a bet­ter Figure in the Family, than the Lady
with all her fine Cloaths, if ſhe wilfully re­linquiſhes her Title to the
Government. Therefore take heed of carrying your good Breeding to ſuch a
height, as to be good for nothing, and to be proud of it. Some think it hath a
great Air to be above trou­bling their thoughts with ſuch ordinary things as
their Houſe and Family; others dare not admit Cares for fear they ſhould
haſten Wrinkles? miſtaken Pride maketh ſome think they muſt keep themſelves
up, and not deſcend to theſe Duties, which do not ſeem enough refined for
great Ladies to be imploy'd in; forgetting all this while, that it is more
than the greateſt Princes can do, at once to preſerve reſpect, and to neglect
their Buſineſs. No Age ever erected Altars to inſignificant Gods; they had all
ſome quality applied to them to draw worſhip from Mankind; this maketh it the
more unreaſonable for a Lady to ex­pect to be conſider'd, and at the ſame time
[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=31) reſolve
not to deſerve it. Good looks alone will not do; they are not ſuch a laſting
Tenure, as to be relied upon; and if they ſhould ſtay longer than they uſually
do, it will by no means be ſafe to depend upon them: For when time hath abated
the violence of the firſt liking, and that the Napp is a little worn off,
though ſtill a good degree of kindneſs may remain, Men recover their ſight
which before might be dazell'd, and allow themſelves to object as well as to
admire.

In ſuch a Caſe, when a Husband ſeeth an empty airy thing ſail up and down the
Houſe to no kind of purpoſe, and look as if ſhe came thither only to make a
Viſit. When he findeth that after her Empti­neſs hath been extreme buſie about
ſome very ſenſeleſs thing▪ ſhe eats her Break­faſt half an hour before Dinner,
to be at greater liberty to afflict the Company with her Diſcourſe; then
calleth for her Coach, that ſhe may trouble her Acquain­tance, who are already
cloy'd with her: And having ſome proper Dialogues ready to diſplay her Fooliſh
Eloquence at the top of the Stairs, ſhe ſetteth out like a Ship out of the
Harbour, laden with trifles and cometh back with them: at her return ſhe
repeateth to her faithful waiting Wo­man, [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=32) the Triumphs of
that day's Imper­tinence; then wrap'd up in Flattery and clean Linen, goeth to
Bed ſo ſatisfied, that it throweth her into pleaſant Dreams of her own
Felicity. Such a one is ſeldom ſerious but with her Taylor; her Children and
Family may now and then have a random thought, but ſhe never taketh aim but at
ſomething very Impertinent. I ſay, when a Husband, whoſe Province is without
Doors, and to whom the Oeco­nomy of the Houſe would be in ſome degree
Indecent, findeth no Order nor Quiet in his Family, meeteth with Com­plaints
of all kinds ſpringing from this Root; The Miſtaken Lady, who thinketh to make
amends for all this, by having a well-choſen Petty Coat, will at laſt be
convinced of her Error, and with grief be forced to undergo the Penalties that
belong to thoſe who are willfully Inſigni­ficant. When this ſcurvy hour cometh
upon her, ſhe firſt groweth Angry; then when the time of it is paſt, would
per­haps grow wiſer, not remembring that we can no more have Wiſdom than
Grace, whenever we think fit to call for it. There are Times and Periods fix'd
for both; and when they are too long neglected, the Puniſhment is, that they
[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=32) are
Irrecoverable, and nothing remaineth but an uſeleſs Grief for the Folly of
hav­ing thrown them out of our power. You are to think what a mean Figure a
Wo­man maketh, when ſhe is ſo degraded by her own Fault; whereas there is
no­thing in thoſe Duties which are expected from you, that can be a leſſening
to you, except your want of Conduct makes it ſo. You may love your Children
without liv­ing in the Nurſery, and you may have a competent and diſcreet care
of them, with out letting it▪ break out upon the Compa­ny, or expoſing your
ſelf by turning your Diſcourſe that way, which is a kind of Laying Children to
the Pariſh, and it can hardly be done any where, that thoſe who hear it will
be ſo forgiving, as not to think they are overcharged with them. A Woman's
tenderneſs to her Chil­dren is one of the leaſt deceitful Evidences of the
Vertue; but yet the way of ex­preſſing it, muſt be ſubject to the Rules of
good Breeding: And though a Woman of Quality ought not to be leſs kind to
them, than Mothers of the Meaneſt Rank are to theirs, yet ſhe may diſtinguiſh
her ſelf in the manner, and avoid the courſe Methods, which in Women of a
lower ſize might be more excuſable. You muſt be­gin [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=33) early to make
them love you, that they may obey you. This Mixture is no where more neceſſary
than in Children. And I muſt tell you, that you are not to expect Returns of
Kindneſs from yours, if ever you have any, without Grains of Allowance; and
yet it is not ſo much a defect in their good Nature, as a ſhortneſs of Thought
in them. Their firſt Inſufficiency maketh them lean ſo en­tirely upon their
Parents for what is ne­ceſſary, that the habit of it maketh them continue the
ſame Expectations for what is unreaſonable; and as often as they are denied,
ſo often they think they are in­jured: and whilſt their Deſires are ſtrong,
and their Reaſons yet in the Cradle, their Anger looketh no farther than the
thing they long for and cannot have; And to be diſpleaſed for their own good,
is a Max­im they are very  [...]low to understand: So that you may conclude,
the firſt Thoughts of your Children will have no ſmall Mix­ture of Mutiny;
which being ſo natural, you muſt not be angry, except you would increaſe it.
You muſt deny them as ſel­dom as you can, and when there is no avoiding it,
you muſt do it gently; you muſt flatter away their ill Humour, and take the
next Opportunity of pleaſing [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=33) them in ſome
other thing, before they either ask or look for it: This will ſtrengthen your
Authority, by making it ſoft to them; and confirm their Obedi­ence, by making
it their Intereſt. You are to have as ſtrict a Guard upon your ſelf amongſt
your Children, as if you were amongſt your Enemies. They are apt to make wrong
Inferences, to take Encou­ragement from half Words, and miſap­ply what you may
ſay or do, ſo as either to leſſen their Duty, or to extend their Liberty
farther than is convenient. Let them be more in awe of your Kindneſs than of
your Power. And above all, take heed of ſupporting a Favourite Child in its
Impertinence, which will give Right to the reſt of claiming the ſame
Privi­lege. If you have a divided Number, leave the Boys to the Father's more
peculiar Care, that you may with the greater Juſtice pre­tend to a more
immediate Juriſdiction over thoſe of your own Sex. You are to live ſo with
them, that they may never chuſe to avoid you, except when they have of­fended;
and then let them tremble, that they may diſtinguiſh: But their Penance muſt
not continue ſo long as to grow too ſowre upon their Stomachs, that it may not
harden in ſtead of correcting them: The [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=34) kind and ſevere
Part muſt have their ſe­veral turns ſeaſonably applied; but your Indulgence is
to have the broader mix­ture, that Love, rather than Fear, may be the Root of
their Obedience.

Your Servants are in the next place to be conſidered; and you muſt remem­ber
not to fall into the miſtake of thinking, that becauſe they receive Wages, and
are ſo much Inferiour to you, there­fore they are below your Care to know how
to manage them. It would be as good Reaſon for▪ a Maſter Workman to deſpiſe
the Wheels of his Engines, becauſe they are made of Wood. Theſe are the Wheels
of your Family; and let your Di­rections be never ſo faultleſs, yet if theſe
Engines ſtop or move wrong, the whole Order of your Houſe is either at a
ſtand, or diſcompoſed. Beſides, the Inequality which is between you, muſt not
make you forget, that Nature maketh no ſuch diſtinction, but that Servants may
be looked upon as humble Friends, and that Returns of Kindneſs and good Vſage
are as much due to ſuch of them as deſerve it, as their Service is due to us
when we require it. A fooliſh haughtineſs in the Style of ſpeaking, or in the
manner of com­manding them, is in it ſelf very undecent; [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=34) beſides that it
begetteth an Averſion in them, of which the leaſt ill Effect to be expected,
is, that they will be ſlow and careleſs in all that is injoyned them: And you
will find it true by your Experience, that you will be ſo much the more
obey­ed as you are leſs Imperious. Be not too haſty in giving your Orders, not
too an­gry when they are not altogether obſerv­ed; much leſs are you to be
loud, and too much diſturbed: An evenneſs in di­ſtinguiſhing when they do well
or ill, is that which will make your Family move by a Rule, and without Noiſe,
and will the better ſet out your Skill in conducting it with Eaſe and Silence,
that it may be like a well diſciplin'd Army; which know­eth how to anticipate
the Orders that are fit to be given them. You are never to neglect the Duty of
the preſent Hour, to do another thing, which though it may be better in it
ſelf, is not to be unſeaſonably preferred. Allot well cho­ſen Hours for the
Inſpection of your Fa­mily, which may be ſo diſtinguiſhed from the reſt of
your Time, that the neceſſary Cares may come in their proper Place, without
any Influence upon your good Humour, or Interruption to other things. By theſe
Methods you will put your ſelf [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=35) in poſſeſſion of
being valued by your Ser­vants, and then their Obedience will natu­rally
follow.

I muſt not forget one of the greateſt Articles belonging to a Family, which is
the Expence. It muſt not be ſuch, as by failing either in the Time or meaſure
of it, may rather draw Cenſure than gain Ap­plauſe. If it was well examined,
there is more Money given to be laughed at, than for any one thing in the
World, though the Purchaſers do not think ſo. A well-ſtated Rule is like the
Line, when that is once paſs'd we are under another Pole; ſo the firſt
ſtraying from a Rule, is a ſtep towards making that which was before a Vertue,
to change its Nature, and to grow either into a Vice, or at leaſt an
Im­pertinence. The Art of laying out Mo­ney wiſe'y, is not attained to without
a great deal of thought; and it is yet more difficult in the Caſe of a Wife,
who is ac­countable to her Husband for her mi­ſtakes in it. It is not only his
Money, his Credit too is at Stake, if what lyeth under the Wife's Care is
managed, either with undecent Thrift, or too looſe Pro­fuſion. You are
therefore to keep the Mean between theſe two Extremes, and it being hardly
poſſible to hold the Ba­lance [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=35) exactly even,
let it rather incline to­wards the Laberal ſide as more ſuitable to your
Quality, and leſs ſubject to Reproach. Of the two a little Money miſpent is
ſoon­er recovered, than the Credit which is loſt by having it unhandſomely
ſaved; and a Wiſe Husband will leſs forgive a ſhame­ful piece of Parcimony,
than a little Extra­vagance, if it be not too often repeated. His Mind in this
muſt be your chief Di­rection; and his Temper, when once known, will in great
meaſure, juſtifie your part in the management, if he is pleaſed with it.

In your Clothes avoid too much Gau­dy; do not value your ſelf upon an
Im­broidered Gown; and remember, that a reaſonable Word, or an obliging Look,
will gain you more reſpect, than all your fine Trappings. This is not ſaid to
reſtrain you from a decent Compliance with the World, provided you take the
wiſer, and not the fooliſher part of your Sex for your Pattern. Some
diſtinctions are to be allowed, whilſt they are well ſuited to your Quality
and Fortune, and in the di­ſtribution of the Expence, it ſeemeth to me that a
full Attendance, and well choſen Ornaments for your Houſe, will make you a
better Figure▪ than too much glittering in [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=36) what you wear,
which may with more eaſe be imitated by thoſe that are below you. Yet this
muſt not tempt you to ſtarve every thing but your own Ap­partment; or in order
to more abundance there, give juſt cauſe to the leaſt Ser­vant you have, to
complain of the Want of what is neceſſary. Above all, fix it in your thoughts,
as an unchangeable Maxim, That nothing is truly fine but what is fit, and that
juſt ſo much as is proper for your Circumſtances of their ſeveral kinds, is
much finer than all you can add to it. When you once break through theſe
bounds, you launch into a wide Sea of Extrava­gance. Every thing will become
neceſſa­ry, becauſe you have a mind to it; and you have a mind to it, not
becauſe it is fit for you, but becauſe ſome body elſe hath it. This Lady's
Logick fetteth Rea­ſon upon its Head, by carrying the Rule from things to
Perſons; and appealing from what is right to every Fool that is in the wrong.
The word neceſſary is miſerably applyed, it diſordereth Families, and
o­verturneth Governments by being ſo abuſed. Remember that Children and Fools
want every thing becauſe they want Wit to di­ſtinguiſh: and therefore there is
no ſtrong­er Evidence of a Crazy Vnderſtanding, [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=36) than the making
too large a Catalogue of things neceſſary, when in truth there are ſo very few
things that have a right to be placed in it. Try every thing firſt in your
Judgment, before you allow it a place in your Deſire; elſe your Husband may
think it as neceſſary for him to deny, as it is for you to have whatever is
unrea­ſonable: and if you ſhall too often give him that advantage, the habit
of refuſing may perhaps reach to things that are not unfit for you.

There are unthinking Ladies, who do not enough conſider, how little their own
Figure agreeth with the fine things they are ſo proud of. Others when they
have them will hardly allow them to be viſible; they cannot be ſeen without
Light, and that is many times ſo ſawcy and ſo pry­ing, that like a too forward
Gallant it is to be forbid the Chamber. Some, when you are uſhered into their
Dark Ruelle, it is with ſuch ſolemnity, that a Man would ſwear there was
ſomething in it, till the Vnskilful Lady breaketh ſilence, and beginneth a
Chat, which diſcover­eth it is a Puppet play with Magnificent Scenes. Many
eſteem things rather as they are hard to be gotten, than that they are worth
getting: This looketh as if they [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=37) had an Intereſt
to purſue that Maxim, becauſe a great part of their own value dependeth upon
it. Truth in theſe Caſes would be often unmannerly, and might derogate from
the Prerogative, great La­dies would aſſume to them ſelves, of be­ing diſtinct
Creatures from thoſe of their Sex, which are inferiour, and of leſs dif­ficult
acceſs.

In other things too, your Condition muſt give the rule to you, and there­fore
it is not a Wife's part to aim at more than a bounded Liberality; the far­ther
extent of that Quality (otherwiſe to be commended) belongeth to the Husband,
who hath better means for it. Generoſi­ty wrong placed becometh a Vice. It is
no more a Vertue when it groweth into an Inconvenience, Vertues muſt be
inlarg­ed or reſtrained according to differing Cir­cumſtances. A Princely Mind
will undo a private Family: Therefore things muſt be ſuited, or elſe they will
not deſerve to be Commended, let them in themſelves be never ſo valuable: And
the Expectations of the World are beſt anſwered when we acquit our ſelves in
that manner which ſeemeth to be preſcribed to our ſeveral Conditions, without
uſurping upon thoſe Duties, which do not ſo particularly be­long to us.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=37) I will
cloſe the conſideration of this Article of Expence, with this ſhort word. Do
not fetter your ſelf with ſuch a Re­ſtraint in it as may make you Remark­able;
but remember that Vertue is the greateſt Ornament, and good Sence the beſt
Equipage.

#### 1.4. BEHAVIOUR and CON­VERSATION.

IT is time now to lead you out of your Houſe into the World. A Dangerous ſtep;
where your Vertue alone will not ſecure you, except it is attended with a
great deal of Prudence. You muſt have both for your Guard, and not ſtir
without them. The Enemy is abroad, and you are ſure to be taken, if you are
found ſtragling. Your Behaviour is therefore to incline ſtrongly towards the
Reſer­ved part; your Character is to be im­moveably fixed upon that Bottom,
not excluding a mixture of greater freedom, as far as it may be innocent and
well timed. The Extravagancies of the Age have made Caution more neceſſary;
and by the ſame [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=38) reaſon that the
too great Licence of ill Men hath by Conſequence in many things reſtrained the
Lawful Liberty of thoſe who did not abuſe it, the unjuſtifiable Free­doms of
ſome of your Sex have involv­ed the reſt in the Penalty of being reduced. And
though this cannot ſo alter the Na­ture of things, as to make that Criminal,
which in it ſelf is Indifferent; yet if it maketh it dangerous, that alone is
ſufficient to juſtifie the Reſtraint. A cloſe behaviour is the fitteſt to
receive Vertue for its con­ſtant Gueſt, becauſe there, and there only, it can
be ſecure. Proper Reſerves are the Outworks, and muſt never be deſerted by
thoſe who intend to keep the Place; they keep off the poſſibilities not only
of be­ing taken, but of being attempted; and if a Woman ſeeth Danger tho at
never ſo remote a Diſtance, ſhe is for that time to ſhorten her Line of
Liberty. She who will allow her ſelf to go to the utmoſt Extent of every thing
that is Lawful, is ſo very near going farther, that thoſe who lie at watch,
will begin to count upon her.

Mankind, from the double temptation of Vanity and Deſire, is apt to turn every
thing a Woman doth to the hopeful ſide; and there are few who dare make an
im­pudent [[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=38)
Application, till they diſcern ſome­thing which they are willing to take for
an Encouragement. It is ſafer therefore to prevent ſuch Forwardneſs, than to
go about to cure it. It gathereth Strength by the firſt allowances, and
claimeth a Right from having been at any time ſuffered with Im­punity.
Therefore nothing is with more care to be avoided, than ſuch a kind of
Civility as may be miſtaken for Invitati­on; and it will not be enough for you
to keep your ſelf free from any criminal Engagements; for if you do that which
either raiſeth Hopes or createth Diſcourſe, there is a Spot thrown upon your
Good Name; and thoſe kind of Stains are the harder to be taken out, being
dropped up­on you by the Man's Vanity, as well as by the Woman's Malice.

Moſt Men are in one ſence Platonick Lovers, though they are not willing to own
that Character. They are ſo far Philoſo­phers, as to allow, that the greateſt
part of Pleaſure lieth in the Mind; and in pur­ſuance of that Maxim, there are
few who do not place the Felicity more in the Opinion of the World, of their
being proſpe­rous Lovers, than in the Bleſſing it ſelf, how much ſoever they
appear to value it. The being ſo, you muſt be very cautious not to [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=39) gratifie theſe
Cameleons at the price of bringing a Cloud upon your Reputation▪ which may be
deeply wounded, tho your Conſcience is unconcerned.

Your own Sex too will not fail to help the leaſt Appearance that giveth a
Handle▪ to be ill-turned. The beſt of them will not be diſpleaſed to improve
their own Value, by laying others under a Diſadvan­tage, when there is a fair
Occaſion give for it. It diſtinguiſheth them ſtill the more their own Credit
is more exalted, and, like a Picture ſet off with Shades, ſhineth more when a
Lady, either leſs Innocent, or le [...] Diſcreet is ſet near, to make them
appear ſo much the brighter. If theſe lend thei [...] Breath to blaſt ſuch as
are ſo unwary as to give them this Advantage, you may be ſure there will be a
ſtronger Gale from thoſe, who, beſides Malice or Emulation have an Intereſt
too, to ſtrike hard upon a Vertuous Woman. It ſeemeth to them, tha [...] their
Load of Infamy is leſſened, by throw­ing part, of it upon others: So that they
will not only improve when it lieth in thei [...] way, but take pains to find
out the leaſt miſtake an Innocent Woman committeth, i [...] Revenge of the
Injury ſhe doth in leading a Life which is a Reproach to them. With theſe you
muſt be extreme wary, and nei­ther [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=39) provoke them to
be angry, nor invite them to be Intimate.

To the Men you are to have a Behaviour which may ſecure you, without
offend­ing them. No ill-bred affected Shyneſs, nor a Roughneſs, unſuitable to
your Sex, and unneceſſary to your Vertue; but a way of Living that may prevent
all courſe Raille­ries or unmannerly Freedoms; Looks that forbid without
Rudeneſs, and oblige with­out Invitation, or leaving room for the ſawcy
Inferences Men's Vanity ſuggeſteth to them upon the leaſt Encouragements. This
is ſo very nice, that it muſt engage you to have a perpetual Watch upon your
Eyes, and to remember, that one careleſs Glance giveth more advantage than a
hun­dred Words not enough conſidered; the Language of the Eyes being very much
the moſt ſignificant, and the moſt obſerved.

Your Civility, which is always to be pre­ſerved, muſt not be carried to a
Compliance, which may betray you into irrecoverable Miſtakes. This French
ambiguous word Complaiſance hath led your Sex into more blame, than all other
things put together. It carrieth them by degrees into a certain thing called a
good kind of Woman, an eaſie Idle Creature, that doth neither Good nor Ill but
by chance, hath no Choice, but [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=40) leaveth that to
the Company ſhe keepeth▪ Time, which by degrees addeth to the ſig­nification
of Words, hath made her, accord­ing to the Modern Stile, little better than
one who thinketh it a Rudeneſs to deny when civilly required, either her
Service in Perſon, or her friendly Aſſiſtance, to thoſe who would have a
meeting, or want a Con­fident. She is a certain thing always at hand, an eaſie
Companion, who hath ever great Compaſſion for diſtreſſed Lovers: She cenſureth
nothing but Rigor, and is never without a Plaiſter for a wounded Reputation,
in which chiefly lieth her Skill in Chirur­gery; She ſeldom hath the Propriety
of any particular Gallant, but liveth upon Bro­kage, and waiteth for the
Scraps her Friends are content to leave her.

There is another Character not quite ſo Criminal, yet not leſs Ridiculous;
which is that of a good-humour'd Woman, one who thinketh ſhe muſt always be in
a Laugh, or a broad Smile, becauſe Good-humour is an obliging Quality;
thinketh it leſs ill-manners to talk Impertinently, than to be ſilent in
Company. When ſuch a prating Engine rideth Admiral, and carrieth the Lantern,
in a Circle of Fools, a cheerful Con­comb coming in for a Recruit, the
Chattering of Monkeys is a better noiſe than ſuch a [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=40) Concert of
ſenceleſs Merriment. If ſhe is applauded in it, ſhe is ſo encouraged, that,
like a Ballad ſinger, who if commanded, breaketh his Lungs, ſhe letteth her
ſelf looſe, and overfloweth upon the Compa­ny. She conceiveth that Mirth is to
have no intermiſſion, and therefore ſhe will car­ry it about with her, though
it be to a Funeral; and if a Man ſhould put a fa­miliar Queſtion, ſhe doth not
know ve­ry well how to be angry, for then ſhe would be no more that pretty
thing called a Good humour'd Woman. This neceſſity of appearing at all times
to be ſo infinitely pleaſed is a grievous miſtake; ſince in a handſom Woman
that Invitation is unneceſſa­ry; and in one who is not ſo, ridiculous. It is
not intended by this, that you ſhould forſwear Laughing; but remember, that
Fools being always painted in that poſture, it may fright thoſe who are wiſe
from doing it too frequently, and going too near a Copy which is ſo little
inviting, and much more from doing it loud, which is an unnatural Sound and
looketh ſo much like another Sex, that few things are more offenſive. That
boilterous kind of Jollity is as contrary to Wit and Good Manners, as it is to
Modeſty and Vertue. Beſides, it is a courſe kind of quality, that throweth a
[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=41) Woman
into a lower Form, and degradeth her from the Rank of thoſe who are more
refined. Some Ladies ſpeak loud and make a noiſe to be the more minded, which
looketh as if they beat their Drums for Volunteers, and if by misfortune none
come in to them, they may, not without rea­ſon, be a good deal out of
Countenance.

There is one thing, yet more to be avoided, which is the Example of thoſe who
intend nothing farther than the Va­nity of Conqueſt, and think themſelves
ſecure of not having their Honour tainted by it. Some are apt to believe their
Ver­tue is too Obſcure, and not enough known, except it is expoſed to a
broader Light, and ſet out to its beſt advantage, by ſome publick Trials.
Theſe are dangerous expe­riments, and generally fail, being built up­on ſo
weak a foundation, as that of a too great Confidence in our ſelves. It is as
ſafe to play with Fire, as to daily with Gal­lantry. Love is a Paſſion that
hath Friends in the Garriſon, and for that reaſon muſt by a Woman be kept at
ſuch a diſtance, that ſhe may not be within the danger of doing the moſt uſual
thing in the World which is conſpiring againſt her Self: Elſe the humble
Gallant, who is on­ly admitted as a Trophy, very often be­cometh [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=41) the Conquerour;
he putteth on the ſtyle of victory, and from an Admirer groweth into a Maſter,
for ſo he may be called from the moment he is in Poſſeſſi­on. The firſt
Reſolutions of ſtopping at good Opinion and Eſteem, grow weak­er by degrees
againſt the Charms of Courtſhip skilfully applied. A Lady is apt to think a
Man ſpeaketh ſo much reaſon whilſt he is Commending her, that ſhe hath much
ado to believe him in the wrong when he is making Love to her: And when
beſides the natural Inducements your Sex hath to be merciful, ſhe is bribed by
well choſen Flattery, the poor Creature is in danger of being caught like a
Bird liſtening to the Whilſtle of one that hath a Snare for it. Conqueſt is ſo
tempting a thing, that it often maketh Women miſtake Men's Submiſſions; which
with all their fair Appearance, have generally leſs, Reſpect than Art in them.
You are to remember, that Men who ſay extreme fine things, many times ſay them
moſt for their own ſakes; and that the vain Gal­lant is often as well pleaſed
with his own Compliments, as he could be with the kindeſt anſwer. Where there
is not that Oſten­tation you are to ſuſpect there is Deſign, And as ſtrong
perfumes are ſeldom uſed [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=42) but where they
are neceſſary to ſmother an unwelcome ſcent; ſo Exceſſive good Words leave
room to believe they are ſtrewed to cover ſomething, which is to gain
ad­mittance under a Diſguiſe. You muſt there­fore be upon your Guard, and
conſider, that of the two, Reſpect is more danger­ous than Anger. It puts even
the beſt Un­derſtandings out of their place for the time, till their ſecond
thoughts reſtore them; it ſtealeth upon us inſenſibly, throweth down our
Defences, and maketh it too late to reſiſt, after we have given it that
advantage. Whereas railing goeth away in ſound; it hath ſo much noiſe in it,
that by giving warning it beſpeaketh Caution. Reſpect is a ſlow and a ſure
Poiſon, and like Poiſon ſwelleth us within our ſelves. Where it prevaileth too
much, it groweth to be a kind of Apoplexie in the Mind, turneth it quite
round, and after it hath once ſeized the underſtanding, becometh mortal to it.
For theſe reaſons, the ſafeſt way is to treat it like a ſly Enemy, and to be
perpetually upon the watch againſt it.

I will add one Advice to conclude this head, which is that you will let every
ſeven years make ſome alteration in you towards the Graver ſide, and not be
like the Girls of Fifty, who reſolve to be always Young, [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=42) whatever Time
with his Iron Teeth hath determined to the contrary. Unnatural things carry a
Deformity in them never to be Diſguiſed; the Livelineſs of Youth in a riper
Age, looketh like a new patch upon an old Gown; ſo that a Gay Matron, a
cheer­ful old Fool may be reaſonably put into the Liſt of the Tamer kind of
Monſters. There is a certain Creature call'd a Grave Hobby-Horſe, a kind of a
ſhe Numps, that pretendeth to be pulled to a Play, and muſt needs go to
Bartholomew-Fair, to look after the young Folks, whom ſhe only ſeemeth to make
her care, in reality ſhe taketh them for her excuſe. Such an old Butterfly is
of all Creatures, the moſt ri­diculous, and the ſooneſt found out. It is good
to be early in your Caution, to avoid any thing that cometh within diſtance of
ſuch deſpicable Patterns, and not like ſome Ladies, who defer their
Converſion, till they have been ſo long in poſſeſſion of being laughed at,
that the World doth not know how to change their ſtyle, even when they are
reclaimed from that which gave the firſt occaſion for it.

The advantages of being reſerved are too many to be ſet down, I will only ſay,
that it is a Guard to a good Woman, and a Diſguiſe to an ill one. It is of ſo
much uſe [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=43)
to both, that thoſe ought to uſe it as an Ar­tifice, who refuſe to practiſe it
as a Ver­tue.

#### 1.5. FRIENDSHIPS.

I Muſt in a particular manner recom­mend to you a ſtrict Care in the Choice of
your Friendſhips. Perhaps the beſt are not without their Objections, but
however, be ſure that yours may not ſtray from the Rules which the wiſer part
of the World hath ſet to them. The Leagues Offenſive and Defenſive, ſeldom
hold in Poli­ticks, and much leſs in Friendſhips. The violent Intimacies, when
once broken, of which they ſcarce ever fail, make ſuch a Noiſe; the Bag of
Secrets untied, they fly about like Birds let looſe from a Cage, and become
the Entertainment of the Town. Beſides, theſe great Dearneſſes by degrees grow
Injurious to the reſt of your Acquain­tance, and throw them off from you.
There is ſuch an Offenſive Diſtinction when the Dear Friend cometh into the
Room, that it is flinging Stones at the Company, who are not ape to forgive
it.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=43) Do not
lay out your Friendſhip too laviſh­ly at firſt, ſince it will, like other
things, be ſo much the ſooner ſpent; neither let it be of too ſudden a growth;
for as the Plants which ſhoot up too faſt are not of that continuance, as
thoſe which take more time for it; ſo too ſwift a Progreſs in pouring out your
Kindneſs, is a certain Sign that by the Courſe of Nature it will not be long-
lived. You will be reſponſi­ble to the World, if you pitch upon ſuch Friends
as at the time are under the weight of any Criminal Objection. In that caſe
you will bring your ſelf under the diſad­vantages of their Character, and muſt
bear your part of it. Chuſing implieth Approv­ing; and if you fix upon a Lady
for your Friend againſt whom the World ſhall have given Judgment, 'tis not ſo
well na­tur'd as to believe you are altogether a­verſe to her way of living,
ſince it doth not diſcourage you from Admitting her into your Kindneſs. And
Reſemblance of Inclinations being thought none of the leaſt Inducements to
Friendſhip, you will be looked upon at leaſt as a Well-wiſher if not a Partner
with her in her Faults. If you can forgive them in another, it may be preſumed
you will not be leſs gentle to your ſelf; and therefore you muſt not [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=44) take it ill, if
you are reckoned a Croupiere, and condemned to pay an equal Share with ſuch a
Friend of the Reputation ſhe hath loſt.

If it happeneth that your Friend ſhould fall from the State of Innocence after
your Kindneſs was engaged to her, you may be ſlow in your belief in the
beginning of the Diſcovery: But as ſoon as you are con­vinced by a Rational
Evidence, you muſt, without breaking too roughly, make a far and a quick
Retreat from ſuch a Miſtaken Acquaintance: Elſe by moving too ſlowly from one
that is ſo tainted, the Contagion may reach you ſo far as to give you part of
the Scandal, though not of the Guilt. This Matter is ſo nice, that as you muſt
not be too haſty to joyn in the Cenſure upon your Friend when ſhe is accuſed,
ſo you are not on the other ſide to defend her with too much warmth; for if
ſhe ſhould happen to deſerve the Report of Common Fame, beſides the Vexation
that belongeth to ſuch a miſtake, you will draw an ill ap­pearance upon your
ſelf, and it will be thought you pleaded for her not without ſome
Conſideration of your ſelf. The Anger which muſt be put on to vindicate the
Re­putation of an injured Friend, may incline the Company to ſuſpect you would
not be [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=44) ſo
zealous, if there was not a poſſibility that the Caſe might be your own. For
this reaſon you are not to carry your dearneſs ſo far, as abſolutely to loſe
your Sight where your Friend is concerned. Becauſe Malice, is too quick
ſighted, it doth not fol­low, that Friendſhip muſt be blind: There is to be a
Mean between theſe two Ex­tremes, elſe your Exceſs of Good Nature may betray
you into a very ridiculous Fi­gure, and by degrees who may be preferr'd to
ſuch Offices as you will not be proud of. Your Ignorance may leſſen the Guilt,
but will improve the Jeſt upon you, who ſhall be kindly ſollicitous to procure
a Meeting, and innocently contribute to the ills you would avoid: Whileſt the
Con­triving Lovers, when they are alone, ſhall make you the Subject of their
Mirth, and perhaps (with reſpect to the Goddeſs of Love be it ſpoken) it is
not the worſt part of their Entertainment, at leaſt it is the moſt laſting, to
laugh at the believing Friend, who was ſo eaſily deluded.

Let the good Sence of your Friends be a chief Ingredient in your Choice of
them; elſe let your Reputation be never ſo clear, it may be clouded by their
Impertinence. It is like our Houſes being in the Power of a Drunken or a
Careleſs Neighbour; on­ly [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=45) ſo much worſe,
as that there will be no Inſurance here to make you amends, as there is in the
Caſe of Fire.

To conclude this Paragraph; If Forma­lity is to be allowed in any Inſtance, it
is to be put on to reſiſt the Invaſion of ſuch forward Women as ſhall preſs
themſelves into your Friendship, where if admitted, they will either be a
Snare or an In­cumbrance.

#### 1.6. CENSVRE.

I will come next to the Conſideration, how you are to manage your Cenſure; in
which both Care and skill will be a good deal required. To diſtinguiſh is not
only natural but neceſſary; and the Effect of it is, That we cannot avoid
giving Judgment in our Minds, either to abſolve or to condemn as the Caſe
requireth. The Difficulty is, to know when and where it is fit to proclaim the
Sentence. An Averſion to what is Criminal, a Contempt of what is ridiculous,
are the inſeparable Companions of Underſtanding and Vertue; but die letting
them go farther than our own Thoughts, hath ſo much danger in it, that though
it [[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=45) is
neither poſſible nor fit to ſuppreſs them intirely, yet it is neceſſary they
ſhould be kept under very great Reſtraints. An un­limited Liberty of this kind
is little leſs than ſending a Herald and proclaiming War to the World, which
is an angry Beaſt when ſo provoked. The Conteſt will be unequal; though you
are never ſo much in the right; and if you begin againſt ſuch an Adversary, it
will tear you in pieces, with this Juſtification, That it is done in its own
defence. You muſt therefore take heed of Laughing, except in Company that is
very ſure. It is throwing Snow-balls againſt Bullets; and it is the
diſadvantage of a Woman, that the Malice of the World will help the Brutality
of thoſe who will throw a ſlovenly Vntruth upon her. You are for this Reaſon
to ſuppreſs your Impa­tience for Fools; who beſides that they are too ſtrong a
Party to be unneceſſarily pro­voked, are of all others, the moſt dan­gerous in
this Caſe. A Blockhead in his Rage will return a dull Jeſt that will lie
heavy, though there is not a Grain of Wit in it. Others will do it with more
Art, and you muſt not think your ſelf ſecure becauſe your Reputation may
perhaps be out of the reach of Ill will; for if it findeth that part guarded,
it will ſeek one which is [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=46) more expoſed. It
flieth, like a corrupt Hu­mour in the Body, to the weakeſt Part. If you have a
tender Side, the World will be ſure to find it, and to put the worſt Colour
upon all you ſay or do, give an Aggravation to every thing that may leſſen
you, and a Spiteful turn to every thing that might recommend you. Anger laieth
open thoſe Defects which Friendſhip would not ſee, and Civility might be
willing to forget. Malice needeth no ſuch Invitation to encourage it, neither
are any Pains more ſuperfluous than thoſe we take to be ill ſpoken of. If
Envy, which never dy­eth, and ſeldom ſleepeth, is content ſome­times to be in
a Slumber, it is very unskilful to make a noiſe to awake it.

Beſides, your Wit will be miſapplied if it is wholly directed to diſcern the
Faults of others, when it is ſo neceſſary to be often uſed to mend and prevent
your own. The ſending our Thoughts too much abroad, hath the ſame Effect, as
when a Family never ſtayeth at home; Neglect and Diſor­der naturally
followeth; as it muſt do within our ſelves, if we do not frequently turn our
Eyes inwards, to ſee what is amiſs with us, where it is a ſign we have an
un­welcome Proſpect, when we do not care to look upon it, but rather ſeek our
Con­ſolations [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=46) in the Faults of
thoſe we converſe with.

Avoid being the firſt in fixing a hard Cen­ſure, let it be confirmed by the
general Voice, before you give into it; Neither are you then to give Sentence
like a Magiſtrate, or as if you had a ſpecial Authority to beſtow a good or
ill Name at your diſcretion. Do not dwell too long upon a weak Side, touch and
go away; take pleaſure to ſtay longer where you can commend, like Bees that
fix only upon thoſe Herbs out of which they may extract the Juice of which
their Honey is compoſed. A Vertue ſtuck with Briſtles is too rough for this
Age; it muſt be adorned with ſome Flowers, or elſe it will be unwillingly
entertained; ſo that even where it may be fit to ſtrike, do it like a Lady,
gently; and aſſure your ſelf, that where you care to do it, you will wound
others more, and hurt your ſelf leſs, by ſoft Strokes, than by being harſh or
vio­lent.

The Triumph of Wit is to make your good. Nature ſubdue your Cenſure; to be
quick in ſeeing Faults, and ſlow in expoſing them. You are to conſider, that
the in­viſible thing called a Good Name, is made up of the Breath of Numbers
that ſpeak well of you; ſo that if by a diſobliging Word [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=47) you ſilence the
meaneſt, the Gale will be leſs ſtrong which is to bear up your Eſteem. And
though nothing is ſo vain as the eager purſuit of empty Applauſe, yet to be
well thought of, and to be kindly uſed by the World, is like a Glory about a
Womans Head; 'tis a Perfume ſhe carrieth about with her, and leaveth where-
ever ſhe go­eth; 'tis a Charm againſt Ill-will. Malice may empty her Quiver,
but cannot wound; the Dirt will not ſtick, the Jeſts will not take; Without
the conſent of the World a Scandal doth not go deep; it is only a ſlight
ſtroak upon the injured Party and returneth with the greater force upon thoſe
that gave it.

#### 1.7. VANITY AND AFFECTATION.

I Muſt with more than ordinary earneſtneſs give you Caution againſt Vanity, it
be­ing the Fault to which your Sex ſeemeth to be the moſt inclined; and ſince
Affecta­tion for the moſt part attendeth it, I do not know how to divide them.
I will not call them Twins, becauſe more properly Vanity is the Mother, and
Affectation is the Darling Daughter; Vanity is the Sin, and [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=47) Affectation is
the Puniſhment; the firſt may be called the Root of Self-Love, the o­ther the
Fruit. Vanity is never at its full growth till it ſpreadeth into Affectation,
and then it is compleat.

Not to dwell any longer upon the de­finition of them, I will paſs to the means
and motives to avoid them. In order to it, you are to conſider, that the World
challengeth the right of diſtributing Eſteem and Applauſe; ſo that where any
aſſume by their ſingle Authority to be their own Carvers, it groweth angry,
and never faileth to ſeek Revenge. And if we may meaſure a Fault by the
greatneſs of the Penalty, there are few of a higher ſize than Vanity, as there
is ſcarce a Puniſhment which can be heavier than that of being laughed at.

Vanity maketh a Woman tainted with it, ſo top full of her ſelf, that ſhe
ſpilleth it upon the Company. And becauſe her own thoughts are intirely
imployed in Self-Contemplation; ſhe endeavoureth, by a cruel Miſtake, to
confine her Acquaintance to the ſame narrow Circle of that which only
concerneth her Ladiſhip, forgetting that ſhe is not of half that Importance to
the World, that ſhe is to her ſelf, ſo miſtaken ſhe is in her Value, by being
her own Ap­praiſer. [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=48) She will fetch
ſuch a Compaſs in Diſcourſe to bring in her beloved Self, and rather than
fail, her fine Petty-Coat, that there can hardly be a better Scene than ſuch a
Tryal of ridiculous Ingenuity. It is a Pleaſure to ſee her Angle for
Commenda­tions, and riſe ſo diſſatisfied with the Ill-bread Company, if they
will not bite. To obſerve her throwing her Eyes about to fetch in Priſoners,
arid go about Cruizing like a Privateer, and ſo out or Countenance, if ſhe
return without Booty, is no ill piece of Comedy. She is ſo eager to draw
re­ſpect, that the always miſſeth it, yet think­eth it ſo much her due, that
when ſhe faileth ſhe groweth waſpiſh, not conſider­ing, that it is impoſſible
to commit a Rape upon the will; that it muſt be fairly gain­ed, and will not
be taken by Storm; and that in this Caſe, the Tax ever riſeth higheſt by a
Benevolence. If the World inſtead of admiring her Imaginary Excellen­cies,
taketh the Liberty to laugh at them, ſhe appealeth from it to her ſelf, for
whom ſhe giveth Sentence, and proclaimeth it in all Companies. On the other
ſide, if incou­raged by a Civil Word, ſhe is ſo obliging, that ſhe will give
thanks for being laughed at in good Language. She taketh a Com­pliment for a
Demonſtration, and ſetteth it [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=48) up as an
Evidence, even againſt her Look­ing-Glaſs. But the good Lady being all this
while in a moſt profound Ignorance of her ſelf, forgetteth that Men would not
let her talk upon them, and throw ſo many ſenſeleſs words at their head, if
they did not intend to put her Perſon to Fine and Ranſom, for her
Impertinence. Good words of any other Lady, are ſo many Stones thrown at her,
ſhe can by no means bear them, they make her ſo uneaſie, that ſhe cannot keep
her Seat, but up ſhe riſeth and goeth home half burſt with Anger and Strait-
Lacing. If by great chance ſhe ſaith any thing that hath ſence in it, ſhe
ex­pecteth ſuch an Exceſſive rate of Commenda­tions, that to her thinking the
Company ever riſeth in her Debt. She looketh upon Rules as things made for the
common Peo­ple, and not for Perſons of her Rank; and this Opinion ſometimes
tempteth her to Extend her Prerogative to the diſpencing with the
commandments. If by great For­tune ſhe happeneth, in ſpite of her Vanity, to
be honeſt, ſhe is ſo troubleſome with it, that as far as in her lieth, ſhe
maketh a ſcur­vy thing of it. Her bragging of her Vertue, looketh as if it
coſt her ſo much pains to get the better of her Self, that the In­ferences are
very ridiculous. Her good Hu­mour [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=49) is generally
applied to the laughing at good Senſe. It would do one good to ſee how
heartily ſhe deſpiſeth any thing that is fit for her to do. The greateſt part
of her Fancy is laid out in chuſing her Gown, as her Diſcretion is chiefly
imploy'd in not paying for it. She is faithful to the Faſhion, to which not
only her Opinion, but her Senſes are wholly reſigned: ſo obſequious ſhe is to
it, that ſhe would be ready to be reconciled even to Vertue with all its
Faults, if ſhe had her Dancing Maſter's Word that it was practis'd at Court.

To a Woman ſo compos'd when Affecta­tion cometh in to improve her Character,
it is then raiſed to the higheſt Perfection. She firſt ſetteth up for a Fine
thing, and for that Reaſon will diſtinguiſh her ſelf, right or wrong, in every
thing ſhe doth. She would have it thought that ſhe is made of ſo much the
finer Clay, and ſo much more ſifted than ordinary, that ſhe hath no common
Earth about her. To this end ſhe muſt neither move nor ſpeak like other Women,
becauſe it would be vulgar; and therefore muſt have a Language of her own,
ſince ordinary Engliſh is too courſe for her. The Looking-gloſs in the Morning
dictateth to her all the Motions of the Day, which by how much the more
ſtudied, [[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=49)
are ſo much the more miſtaken. She com­eth into a Room as if her Limbs were
ſet on with ill-made Screws, which mak­eth the Company fear the pretty thing
ſhould leave ſome of its artificial Perſon upon the Floor. She doth not like
her ſelf as God Almighty made her, but will have ſome of her own Workmanſhip;
which is ſo far from making her a better thing than a Woman, that it turneth
her into a worſe Creature than a Monkey. She falleth out with Nature, againſt
which ſhe maketh War without admitting a Truce, thoſe Moments excepted in
which her Gallant may recon­cile her to it. When ſhe hath a mind to be ſoft
and languiſhing, there is ſomthing ſo unnatural in that affected Eaſineſs,
that her Frowns could not be by many degrees ſo forbidden. When ſhe would
appear un­reaſonably humble, one may ſee ſhe is ſo exceſſively proud, that
there is no enduring it. There is ſuch an impertinent Smile, ſuch a ſatisfied
Simper, when ſhe faintly diſowneth ſome fulſom Commendation a Man hapneth to
beſtow upon her againſt his Conſcience, that her Thanks for it are more
viſible under ſuch a thin Diſguiſe, than they could be if ſhe ſhould print
them. If a handſomer Woman taketh any liberty of Dreſſing out of the ordinary
[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=50) Rules the
miſtaken Lady followeth, with­out diſtinguiſhing the unequal Pattern, and
maketh her ſelf uglier by an example miſ­placed; either forgetting the
Privilege of good Looks in another, or preſuming, with­out ſufficient reaſon
upon her own. Her Diſcourſe is a ſenſeleſs Chime of empty Words, a heap of
Compliments ſo equally applied to differing Perſons, that they are neither
va­lu'd nor believ'd. Her Eyes keep pace with her Tongue, and are therefore
always in motion. One may diſcern that they ge­nerally incline to the
compaſſionate ſide, and that, notwithſtanding her pretence to Ver­tue, ſhe is
gentle to diſtreſſed Lovers, and Ladies that are merciful. She will repeat the
tender part of a Play ſo feelingly, that the Company may gueſs, without
Injuſtice, ſhe was not altogether a diſintereſſed Specta­tor. She thinketh
that Paint and Sin are concealed by railing at them. Upon the latter ſhe is
leſs hard, and being divided between the two oppoſite Prides of her Beauty and
her Vertue, ſhe is often tempt­ed to give broad Hints that ſome body is dying
for her; and of the two ſhe is leſs unwilling to let the World think ſhe may
be ſometimes profan'd, than that ſhe is never worſhipped.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=50) Very
great Beauty may perhaps ſo dazle for a time, that Men may not ſo clearly ſee
the Deformity of theſe Affectations; But when the Brightneſs goeth off, and
that the Lover's Eyes are by that means ſet at liberty to ſee things as they
are, he will naturally return to his Senſes, and recover the Miſtake into
which the Lady's good Looks had at firſt engaged him. And be­ing once
undeceived, ceaſeth to worſhip that as a Goddeſs, which he ſeeth is only an
artificial Shrine moved by Wheels and Springs, to delude him. Such Women
pleaſe only like the firſt Opening of a Scene, that hath nothing to recommend
it but the being new. They may be compared to Flies, that have pretty ſhining
Wings for two or three hot Months, but the firſt cold Weather maketh an end of
them; ſo the latter Seaſon of theſe fluttering Creatures is diſmal: From their
neareſt Friends they receive a very faint Reſpect; from the reſt of the World,
the utmoſt degree of contempt.

Let this Picture ſupply the place of any other Rules which might be given to
pre­vent your reſemblance to it, The Defor­mity of it, well conſidered, is
Inſtruction enough; from the ſame reaſon, that the ſight of a Drunkard is a
better Sermon a­gainſt [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=51) that Vice, than
the beſt that was ever preach'd upon that Subject.

#### 1.8. PRIDE.

AFter having ſaid this againſt Vanity, I do not intend to apply the ſame
Cen­ſure to Pride, well placed, and rightly de­fined. It is an ambiguous Word;
one kind of it is as much a Vertue, as the other is a Vice: But we are
naturally ſo apt to chuſe the worſt, that it is become dange­rous to commend
the beſt ſide of it.

A Woman is not to be proud of her fine Gown; nor when ſhe hath leſs Wit than
her Neighbours, to comfort her ſelf that ſhe hath more Lace. Some Ladies put
ſo much weight upon Ornaments, that if one could ſee into their Hearts, it
would be found, that even the Thought of Death is made leſs heavy to them by
the con­templation of their being laid out in State, and honourably attended
to the Grave. One may come a good deal ſhort of ſuch an Ex­tream, and yet
ſtill be ſufficiently Imperti­nent, by ſetting a wrong Value upon things,
which ought to be uſed with more in­difference. A Lady muſt not appear
ſol­licitous [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=51) to ingroſs
Reſpect to her ſelf, but be content with a reaſonable Diſtribution, and allow
it to others, that ſhe may have it returned to her. She is not to be
trou­bleſomly nice, nor diſtinguiſh her ſelf by being too delicate, as if
ordinary things were too courſe for her; this is an unman­nerly and an
offenſive Pride, and where it is practiſed, deſerveth to be mortified, of
which it ſeldom faileth. She is not to lean too much upon her Quality, much
leſs to deſpiſe thoſe who are below it. Some make Quality an Idol, and then
their Reaſon muſt fall down and Worſhip it. They would have the World think,
that no amends can ever be made for the want of a great Title, or an ancient
Coat of Arms: They imagine, that with theſe advantages they ſtand up­on the
higher Ground, which maketh them look down upon Merit and Vertue, as things
inferiour to them. This miſtake is not only ſenſeleſs, but criminal too, in
putting a greater Price upon that which is a piece of good luck, than upon
things which are valuable in themſelves. Laughing is not enough for ſuch a
Folly; it muſt be ſe­verely whipped, as it juſtly deſerves. It will be
confeſſed, there are frequent Temptations given by pert Vpſtarts to be angry,
and by that to have our Judgments corrupted in [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=52) theſe Caſes: But
they are to be reſiſted; and the utmoſt that is to be allowed, is, when thoſe
of a new Edition will forget themſelves, ſo as either to brag of their weak
ſide, or to endeavour to hide their Meanneſs by their Inſolence, to cure them
by a little ſeaſonable Raillery, a little Sharp­neſs well placed, without
dwelling too long upon it.

Theſe and many other kinds of Pride are to be avoided.

That which is to be recommended to you, is an Emulation to raiſe your ſelf to
a Character, by which you may be diſtin­guiſhed; an Eagerneſs for precedence
in Vertue, and all ſuch other things as may gain you a greater ſhare of the
good opini­on of the World. Eſteem to Vertue is like a cheriſhing Air to
Plants and Flowers, which maketh them blow and proſper; and for that reaſon it
may be allowed to be in ſome degree the Cauſe as well as the Re­ward of it.
That Pride which leadeth to a good End, cannot be a Vice, ſince it is the
beginning of a Vertue; and to be pleaſed with juſt Applauſe, is ſo far from a
Fault, that it would be an ill Symptom in a Wo­man, who ſhould not place the
greateſt part of her Satisfaction in it. Humility is no doubt a great Vertue;
but it ceaſeth to [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=52) be ſo, when it
is afraid to ſcorn an ill thing. Againſt Vice and Folly it is becoming your
Sex to be haughty; but you muſt not carry the Contempt of things to Arrogance
towards Perſons, and it muſt be done with fitting Diſtinctions, elſe it may be
Inconvenient by being unſeaſonable. A Pride that raiſeth a little Anger to be
out-done in any thing that is good, will have ſo good an Effect, that it is
very hard to allow it to be a Fault.

It is no eaſie matter to carry even be­tween theſe differing kinds ſo
deſcribed; but remember that it is ſafer for a Woman to be thought too proud,
than too familiar.

#### 1.9. DIVERSIONS.

THE laſt thing I ſhall recommend to you, is a wiſe and a ſafe method of uſing
Diverſions. To be too eager in the purſuit of Pleaſure whilſt you are Young,
is dangerous; to catch at it in riper Years, is graſping a ſhadow; it will not
be held. Beſides that by being leſs natural it grow­eth to be indecent.
Diverſions are the moſt properly applied, to eaſe and relieve thoſe who are
Oppreſſed, by being too much im­ployed. [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=53) Thoſe that are
Idle have no need of them, and yet they, above all others, give themſelves up
to them. To unbend our Thoughts, when they are too much ſtretched by our
Cares, is not more natural than it is neceſſary, but to turn our whole Life
into a Holy day, is not only ridicu­lous, but deſtroyeth Pleaſure inſtead of
pro­moting it. The Mind like the Body is tired by being always in one Poſture,
too ſerious breaketh, and too diverting looſeneth it: It is Variety that
giveth the Reliſh; ſo that Diverſions too frequently repeated, grow firſt to
be indifferent, and at laſt tedious. Whilſt they are well choſen and well
timed, they are never to be blamed; but when they are uſed to an Exceſs,
though very In­nocent at firſt, they often grow to be Cri­minal, and never
fail to be Impertinent.

Some Ladies are beſpoken for Merry Meetings, as Beſſus was for Duels. They are
ingaged in a Circle of Idleneſs, where they turn round for the whole Year,
with­out the Interruption of a ſerious Hour, They know all the Players Names,
and are Intimately acquainted with all the Booths in Bartholomew-Fair. No
Soldier is more Obe­dient to the ſound of his Captain's Trumpet, than they are
to that which ſummoneth them to a Puppet-Play or a Monſter. The [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=53) Spring that
bringeth out Flies, and Fools, maketh them Inhabitants in Hide-Park; in the
Winter they are an Incumbrance to the Play Houſe, and the Ballaſt of the
Drawing-Room. The Streets all this while are ſo weary of theſe daily Faces,
that Men's Eyes are over-laid with them. The Sight is glut­ted with fine
things, as the Stomach with ſweet ones; and when a fair Lady will give too
much of her ſelf to the World, ſhe grow­eth luſcious, and oppreſſeth inſtead
of plea­ſing. Theſe Jolly Ladies do ſo continually ſeek Diverſion, that in a
little time they grow into a Jeſt, yet are unwilling to re­member, that if
they were ſeldomer ſeen they would not be ſo often laughed at. Be­ſides they
make themſelves Cheap, than which there cannot be an unkinder word beſtowed
upon your Sex.

To play ſometimes, to entertain Compa­ny, or to divert your ſelf, is not to be
diſallowed, but to do it ſo often as to be called a Gameſter, is to be
avoided, next to the things that are moſt Criminal. It hath Conſequences of
ſeveral kinds not to be en­dured; it will ingage you into a habit of Idleneſs
and ill hours, draw you into ill mix­ed Company, make you neglect your
Civili­ties abroad, and your Buſineſs at home, and impoſe into your
Acquaintance ſuch as will do you no Credit.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=54) To deep
Play there will be yet greater Objections. It will give Occaſion to the World
to ask ſpiteful Queſtions. How you dare venture to loſe, and what means you
have to pay ſuch great ſumms? If you pay exactly, it will be enquired from
whence the Money cometh? If you owe, and eſpecially to a Man, you muſt be ſo
very Civil to him for his forbearance, that it layeth a ground of having it
farther improved; if the Gentleman is ſo diſpoſed; who will be thought no
unfair Creditor, if where the Eſtate ſaileth he ſeizeth upon the Perſon.
Beſides if a Lady could ſee her own Face upon an ill Game, at a deep Stake,
ſhe would certainly forſwear any thing that could put her looks under ſuch a
Diſadvantage.

To Dance ſometimes will not be imputed to you as a fault; but remember that
the end of your Learning it, was, that you might the better know how to move
gracefully. It is only an advantage ſo far. When it goeth beyond it, one may
call it excelling in a Mi­ſtake, which is no very great Commenda­tion. It is
better for a Woman never to Dance, becauſe ſhe hath no skill. in it, that to
do it too often, becauſe ſhe doth it well. The eaſieſt as well as the ſafeſt
Method of doing it, is in private Companies, amongſt particular Friends, and
then careleſly, like a [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=54) Diverſion,
rather than with Solemnity, as if it was a buſineſs, or had any thing in it to
deſerve a Month's preparation by ſerious Con­ference with a Dancing-Maſter.

Much more might be ſaid to all theſe Heads, and many more might be added to
them. But I muſt reſtrain my Thoughts, which are full of my Dear Child, and
would overflow into a Volume, which would not be fit for a New-Years-Gift. I
will conclude with my warmeſt Wiſhes for all that is good to you. That you may
live ſo as to be an Ornament to your Family, and a Pattern to your Sex. That
you may be bleſſed with a Husband that may value, and with Children that may
inherit your Vertue; That you may ſhine in the World by a true Light, and
ſilence Envy by deſerving to be eſteemed; That Wit and Vertue may both
conſpire to make you a great Figure. When they are ſeparated, the firſt is ſo
empty, and the other ſo ſaint, that they ſcarce have right to be commended.
May they therefore meet and never part; let them be your Guardian Angels, and
be ſure never to ſtray out of the diſtance of their joint protection. May you
ſo raiſe your Character, that you may help to make the next Age a better
thing, and leave Poſterity in your Debt for the advantage it ſhall re­ceive by
your Example

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=55) Let me
conjure you, My Deareſt, to com­ply with this kind Ambition of a Father, whoſe
Thoughts are ſo ingaged in your behalf, that he reckoneth your Happineſs to be
the greateſt part of his own.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=55)

THE CHARACTER OF A TRIMMER HIS OPINION OF

  * I. The Laws and Govern­ment.
  * II. Proteſtant Religion.
  * III. The Papiſts.
  * IV. Foreign Affairs.

Corrected and Amended.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=56)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=56)

### THE PREFACE.

IT muſt be more than an ordinary provoca­tion that can tempt a Man to write in
an Age over-run with Scribblers, as Egypt was with Flies and Locuſts: That
worſt Vermin of ſmall Authors has given the World ſuch a Surfeit, that inſtead
of deſiring to Write, a Man would be more inclin'd to wiſh, for his own eaſe,
that he could not Read; but there are ſome things which do ſo raiſe our
paſſions, that our Reaſon can make no Reſiſtance; and when Madmen, in two
Extreams, ſhall agree to make common ſenſe Treaſon, and joyn to fix an ill
Character upon the only Men in the Na­tion who deſerve a good one; I am no
longer Maſter of my better Reſolution to let the World alone, and muſt break
looſe from my more reaſonable Thoughts, to expoſe theſe falſe Coyners, who
would make their Copper Wares paſs upon us for good Payment.

Amongſt all the Engines of Diſſention, there has been none more powerful in
all Times, than the fixing Names upon one another of Contumely and Reproach,
and the reaſon is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=57) plain, in
reſpect of the People, who tho' gene­rally they are uncapable of making a
Syllogiſm or forming an Argument, yet they can pro­nounce a word; and that
ſerves their turn to throw it with their dull malice at the Head of thoſe they
do not like; ſuch things ever begin in Jeſt, and end in Blood, and the ſame
word which at firſt makes the Company merry, grows in time to a Military
Signal to cut one anothers Throats.

Theſe Miſtakes are to be lamented, tho' not eaſily cured, being ſuitable
enough to the cor­rupted Nature of Mankind; but 'tis hard, that Men will not
only invent ill Names, but they will wreſt and miſinterpret good ones; ſo
afraid ſome are even of a reconciling ſound, that they raiſe another noiſe to
keep it from being heard, leſt it ſhould ſet up and encou­rage a dangerous
ſort of Men, who prefer Peace and Agreement, before Violence and Confuſion.

Were it not for this, why, after we have played the Fool with throwing Whig
and Tory at one another, as Boys do Snow-Balls, do we grow angry at a new
Name, which by its true ſignification might do as much to put us into our
Wits, as the other has done to put us out of them?

This innocent word Trimmer ſignifies no more than this, That if Men are
together in a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=57) Boat, and
one part of the Company would weigh it down on one ſide, another would make it
lean as much to the contrary; it happens there is a third Opinion of thoſe,
who conceive it would do as well, if the Boat went even, with­out endangering
the Paſſengers; now 'tis hard to imagin by what Figure in Language, or by what
Rule in Senſe this comes to be a fault, and it is much more a wonder it ſhould
be thought a Hereſy.

But ſo it happens, that the poor Trimmer has now all the Powder ſpent upon him
alone, while the Whig is a forgotten, or at leaſt a neglected Enemy; there is
no danger now to the State (if ſome Men may he believed) but from the Beaſt
called a Trimmer, take heed of him, he is the Inſtrument that muſt deſtroy
Church and State; a new kind of Monſter, whoſe deformity is ſo expos'd, that,
were it a true Picture that is made of him, it would be enough to fright
Children, and make Wo­men miſcarry at the ſight of it.

But it may be worth the examining, whe­ther he is ſuch a Beaſt as he is
Painted. I am not of that Opinion, and am ſo far from thinking him an Infidel
either in Church or State, that I am neither afraid to expoſe the Articles of
his Faith in Relation to Govern­ment, nor to ſay that I prefer them before any
other Political Creed, that either our an­gry
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=58) Divines, or
our refined States-men would impoſe upon as.

I have therefore in the following Diſcourſe endeavour'd to explain the
Trimmer's Princi­ples and Opinions, and then leave it to all diſcerning and
impartial Judges, whether he can with Juſtice be ſo Arraign'd, and whether
thoſe who deliberately pervert a good Name, do not very juſtly deſerve the
worſt that can be put upon themſelves.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=58)

### 1\. THE Trimmer's Opinion. OF THE LAWS AND GOVERNMENT.

OUr Trimmer, as he has a great Ve­neration for Laws in general, ſo he has more
particular for our own, he looks upon them as the Chains that tye up our
unruly Paſſions, which elſe, like wild Beaſts let looſe, would reduce the
world into its firſt State of Barbariſm and Hoſtility; the good things we
injoy, we owe to them; and all the ill things we are freed from is by their
Protection.

God himſelf thought it not enough to be a Creator, without being a Lawgiver,
and his goodneſs had been defective towards mankind in making them, if he had
not [[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=59)
preſcribed Rules to make them happy too.

All Laws flow from that of Nature, and where that is not the Foundation, they
may be legally impos'd, but they will be lame­ly obeyed: By this Nature is not
meant that, which Fools and Madmen miſquote to juſtify their Exceſſes; it is
innocent and uncorrupted Nature, that which diſpoſe [...] Men to chuſe Vertue,
without its being preſcribed, and which is ſo far from in­ſpiring ill thoughts
into us, that we take pains to ſuppreſs the good ones it infuſes.

The Civilized World has ever paid t [...] willing ſubjection to Laws, even
Conque­rors have done homage to them; as the Romans, who took Patterns of good
Laws even from thoſe they had ſubdued; and at the ſame time that they
Triumph'd over an enſlav'd People, the very Laws of that place did not only
remain ſafe, but became Victorious; their new Maſters, inſtead of ſuppreſſing
them, paid them more reſpect than they had from thoſe who firſt made them: and
by this wiſe method they ar­rived to ſuch an admirable Conſtitution of Laws,
that to this day they Reign by them; this Excellency of them Triumphs ſtill,
and the World pays now an acknow­ledgment of their obedience to that Mighty
[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=59) Empire,
though ſo many Ages after it is diſſolved; and by a later inſtance, the Kings
of France, who, in practice uſe their Laws pretty familiarly, yet think their
Picture is drawn with moſt advantage up­on their Seals, when they are placed
in the Seat of Juſtice; and tho' the Hieroglyphick is not there of ſo much uſe
to the People as they would wiſh, yet it ſhews that no Prince is ſo Great, as
not to think fit, for his own Credit at leaſt, to give an outward, when he
refuſes a real worſhip to the Laws.

They are to mankind that which the Sun is to Plants, whilſt it cheriſhes and
preſerves 'em. Where they have their force and are not clouded or ſuppreſt,
every thing ſmiles and flouriſhes; but where they are darkened, and not
ſuffered to ſhine out, it makes every thing to wither and decay.

They ſecure Men not only againſt one another, but againſt themſelves too; they
are a Sanctuary to which the Crown has occaſion to reſort as often as the
People, ſo that it is an Intereſt as well as a Duty to preſerve them.

There would be no end of making a Panegyrick of Laws; let it be enough to add,
that without Laws the World would become a Wilderneſs, and Men little leſs
than Beaſts; but with all this, the beſt [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=60) things may come
to be the worſt, if they are not in good hands; and if it be tr [...] that the
wiſeſt Men generally make the Laws, it is as true, that the ſtrongeſt do often
Interpret them: and as Rivers belong as much to the Channel where they run, as
to the Spring from whence they firſt riſe, ſo the Laws depend as much upon the
Pipes thro' which they are to paſs, as upon the Fountain from whence they
flow.

The Authority of a King who is Head of the Law, as well as the Dignity of
Publick Juſtice, is debaſed, when the clear ſtream of the Law is puddled and
diſturbed by Bunglers, or convey'd by unclean Inſtru­ments to the People.

Our Trimmer would have them app [...] in their full luſtre, and would be
grieved to ſee the day, when, inſtead of ſpeaking with Authority from the
Seats of Juſtice, they ſhould ſpeak out of a Grate, with a lamenting voice
like Priſoners that deſle to be reſcu'd.

He wiſhes that the Bench may have a Natural as well as a Legal Superiority to
the Bar; he thinks Mens ab [...]lities very much miſplac'd, when the Reaſon of
him that pleads is viſibly too ſtrong for thoſe who Judge and give Sentence.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=60) When thoſe
from the Bar ſeem to dictate to their Superiours upon the Bench, their Furrs
will look ſcurvily about them, and the reſpect of the World will leave the
bare Character of a Judge, to follow the Eſſen­tial knowledge of a Lawyer, who
may be greater in himſelf, than the other can be with all his Trappings.

An unconteſted Superiority in any Call­ing, will have the better of any
diſtinct Name that Authority can put upon it, and there­fore if ever ſuch an
unnatural Method ſhould be introduc'd, it is then that Weſt­minſter-Hall might
be ſaid to ſtand upon its Head, and though Juſtice it ſelf can never be ſo,
yet the Adminiſtration of it would be rendred Ridiculous.

A Judge has ſuch power lodg'd in him, that the King will never be thought to
have choſen well, where the voice of Mankind has not before-hand recommended
the Man to his Station; when Men are made Judges of what they do not
under­ſtand, the World cenſures ſuch a Choice, not out of ill will to the Men,
but fear to themſelves.

If the King had the ſole power of chuſing Phyſicians, Men would tremble to ſee
Bun­glers preferred, yet the neceſſity of taking Phyſick from a Doctor, is
generally not [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=61) ſo great as that
of receiving Juſtice from a Judge; and yet the Inferences will be very ſevere
in ſuch caſes, for either it will be thought that ſuch Men bought what they
were not able to deſerve, or which is as bad, that Obedience ſhall be look'd
upon as a better Qualification in a Judge, than Skill or Integrity, when ſuch
ſacred things as the Laws are not only touch'd, but guided by prophane hands;
Men will fear that out of the Tree of the Law, from whence we expect Shade and
Shelter, ſuch Workmen will make Cudgels to beat us with, or rather that they
will turn the Canon upon our Properties, that were in­truſted with them for
their Defence.

To ſee the Laws Mangled, Diſguiſed, Speak quite another Language than their
own, to ſee them thrown from the Dig­nity of protecting Mankind, to the
diſ­graceful Office of deſtroying them; and notwithſtanding their Innocence in
them­ſelves, to be made the worſt Inſtruments that the moſt refined Villany
can make uſe of, will raiſe Mens Anger above the power of laying it down
again, and tempt them to follow the Evil Examples given them of Judging
without Hearing, when ſo-pro­voked by their deſire of Revenge. Our Trimmer
therefore, as he thinks the Laws [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=61) are Jewels, ſo he
believes they are no better ſet, than in the conſtitution of our Engliſh
Government, if rightly underſtood, and carefully preſerved.

It would be too great Partiality to ſay they are perfect or liable to no
Objection; ſuch things are not of this world; but if they have more
Excellencies and fewer Faults than any other we know, it is enough to
recommend them to one E­ſteem.

The Diſpute, which is a greater Beauty, a Monarchy or a Common-wealth, has
laſted long between their contending Lov­ers, and (they have behav'd
themſelves ſo like Lovers, who in good Manners muſt be out of their Wits,) who
uſed ſuch Figures to exalt their own Idols on either ſide,. and ſuch angry
Aggravations, to reproach one another in the Conteſt, that moderate men have
in all times ſmil'd upon this eagerneſs, and thought it differ'd very little
from a downright Frenzy: we in England, by a happy uſe of the Controverſie,
conclude them both in the wrong, and reject them from being our Pattern, not
taking the words in the utmoſt extent, which is a thing, that Monarchy, leaves
men no Liberty, and a Common-wealth ſuch a one, as allows them no Quiet.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=62) We think
that a wiſe Mean, between theſe barbarous Extreams, is that which ſelf-
Preſervation ought to dictate, to our Wiſhes; and we may ſay we have attained
to this Mean in a greater meaſure, than any Nation now in being, or perhaps
any we have read of; tho never ſo much Cele­brated for the Wiſdom or Felicity
of their Conſtitutions: We take from one the too great power of doing hurt,
and yet leave enough to govern and protect us; we take from the other, the
Confuſion, the Parity, the Animoſities, and the Licenſe, and yet reſerve a due
care of ſuch a Liberty, as may conſiſt with Mens Allegiance; but it being
hard, if not impoſſible, to be exactly even, our Government has much the
ſtronger Biaſs towards Monarchy, which by the general Conſent and Practiſe of
Man­kind, ſeems to have Advantage in diſ­pute againſt a Common-wealth; The
Rule of a Common-wealth are too hard for the Bulk of Mankind to come up to;
that Form of Government requires ſuch a ſpirit to carry it on, as do's not
dwell in great Numbers, but is reſtrained to ſo very few eſpecially in this
Age, that let the Method appear never ſo much reaſonably in Paper they muſt
fail in Practice, which will eve [...] be ſuited more to Mens Nature as it is
than as it ſhould be.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=62) Monarchy
is lik'd by the People, for the Bells and the Tinſel, the outward Pomp and
Gilding, and there muſt be milk for Babes, ſince the greateſt part of Mankind
are, and ever will be included in that Liſt; and it is approv'd by wiſe and
thinking Men, (all Circumſtances and Objections impartially conſider'd) that
it has ſo great an advantage above all other Forms, when the Adminiſtration of
that Power falls in good hands; that all other Governments look out of
Countenance, when they are ſet in Competition with it. Lycurgus might have
ſav'd himſelf the trou­ble of making Laws, if either he had been Immortal, or
that he could have ſecur'd to Poſterity, a ſucceeding Race of Princes like
himſelf; his own Example was a better Law, than he could with all his skill
tell how to make; ſuch a Prince is a Living Law, that dictates to his
Subjects, whoſe thoughts in that caſe never riſe above their Obedience, the
Confidence they have in the Vertue and Knowledge of the maſter, preventing the
Scruples and Apprehenſions to which Men are naturally inclin'd, in relation to
thoſe that govern them; ſuch a Magiſtrate is the Life and Soul of Juſtice,
whereas the Law is but a Body and a dead one too, without his Influence to
give it warmth and vigour, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=63) and by the
irreſiſtible Power of his Virtue, he do's ſo reconcile Dominion and
Allegi­ance, that all diſputes between them are ſilenced and ſubdued, and
indeed no Monar­chy can be Perfect and Abſolute without exception, but where
the Prince is Superior by his Vertue, as well as by his Character and his
Power; ſo that to ſcrew out Prece­dents and unlimited Power, is a plain
dimi­nution to a Prince that Nature has made Great, and who had better make
himſelf a glorious Example to Poſterity, than borrow an Authority from Dark
Records, raiſed out of the Grave, which beſides their Non­uſage, have always
in them matter of Con­troverſie and Debate, and it may be; affirm­ed, that the
inſtances are very rare of Princes having the worſt in the diſpute with their
People, if they were Eminent for Juſtice in time of Peace, or Conduct in time
of War, ſuch advantage the Crown giveth to thoſe who adorn it by their own
Perſonal Vertues.

But ſince for the greater Honour of Good and wiſe Princes, and the better to
ſet off their Character by the Compa­riſon, Heaven has decreed there muſt be a
mixture, and that ſuch as are perverſe and inſufficient, or at leaſt both, are
per­haps to have their equal turns in the [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=63) Government of
the World, and beſides, that the Will of Man is ſo various, and ſo unbounded a
thing, and ſo fatal too when joined with Power miſapply'd; it is no wonder if
thoſe who are to be govern'd, are unwilling to have ſo dangerous as well as ſo
uncertain a Standard of their Obedience.

There muſt be therefore Rules and Laws: for want of which, or at leaſt the
Obſer­vation of them, it was as Capital for a Man to ſay that Nero did not
play well up­on the Lute, as to commit Treaſon, or Blaſpheme the Gods. And
even Veſpaſian himſelf had like to have loſt his Life, for ſleeping whilſt he
ſhould have attended and admir'd that Emperours Impertinence upon the Stage.
There is a wantonneſs in great Power that Men are generally too apt to be
corrupted with, and for that Reaſon, a wiſe Prince, to prevent the temptation
ariſing from common frailty, would chooſe to Govern by Rules for his own Sake,
as well as for his Peoples, ſince it only ſecures him from Errors, and does
not leſſen the real Authority, that a good Magiſtrate would care to be
poſſeſs'd of; for if the Will of a Prince is contrary either to Reaſon it
ſelf, or to the univerſal Opinion of his Subjects, the Law by a kind reſtraint
reſcues [[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=64)
him from a diſeaſe that would undo him; if his will on the other ſide is
reaſonable or well directed, that Will immediately becomes a Law, and he is
arbitrary by an eaſie and natural Conſequence, without taking pains, or
overturning the World for it.

If Princes conſider Laws as things im­pos'd on them, they have the appearance
of Fetters of Iron, but to ſuch as would make them their choice as well as
their practice, they are Chains of Gold; and in that reſpect are Ornaments, as
in others they are a defence to them, and by a Com­pariſon, not improper for
God's Vicege­rents upon Earth; as our Maker never Commands our obedience to
any thing, that as reaſonable Creatures we ought not to make our own Election;
ſo a good and wiſe Governour, tho' all Laws were abo­liſh'd, would by the
voluntary direction of his own Reaſon, do without reſtraint the very ſame
things that they would have en­joyned.

Our Trimmer thinks that the King and Kingdom ought to be one Creature, not to
be ſeparated in their Political Capacity; and when either of them undertake to
act a part, it is like the crawling of Worms after they are cut in pieces,
which cannot [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=64) be a laſting
motion, the whole Creature not ſtirring at a time. If the Body has a dead
Palſie, the Head cannot make it move; and God hath not yet delegated ſuch a
healing power to Princes, as that they can in a moment ſay to a Languiſhing
People oppreſs'd and in deſpair, take up your Beds and walk.

The Figure of a King, is ſo comprehen­ſive and exalted a thing, that it is a
kind of degrading him to lodge that power ſe­parately in his own Natural
Perſon, which can never be ſafely or naturally great, but where the People are
ſo united to him as to be Fleſh of his Fleſh, and Bone of his Bone; for when
he is reduc'd to the ſingle definition of a man, he ſinks into ſo low a
Character, that it is a temptation upon Mens Allegiance, and an impairing that
veneration which is neceſſary to preſerve their Duty to him; whereas a Prince
who is ſo joined to his people that they ſeem to be his Limbs, rather than his
Subjects, Cloathed with Mercy and Juſtice rightly apply'd in their ſeveral
places, his Throne ſupported by Love as well as by Power, and the warm wiſhes
of his devoted Sub­jects, like never-failing Incenſe, ſtill aſcen­ding towards
him, looks ſo like the beſt Image we can frame to our ſelves of God [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=65) Almighty, that
men would have much ado not to fall down and worſhip him; and would be much
more tempted to the Sin of Idolatry, than to that of Diſobe­dience.

Our Trimmer is of Opinion, that there muſt be ſo much Dignity inſeparably
an­nexed to the Royal Function, as may be ſufficient to ſecure it from
inſolence and contempt; and there muſt be Conde­ſcenſions from the Throne,
like kind ſhow­ers from Heaven, that the Prince may look ſo much the more like
God Almighty's Depu­ty upon Earth; for power without love hath a terrifying
aſpect, and the Worſhip which is paid to it is like that which the Indians
give out of fear to Wild Beaſts and Devils: he that fears God only becauſe
there is an Hell, muſt wiſh there were no God; and he who fears the King, only
becauſe he can puniſh, muſt wiſh there were no King; ſo that without a
principle of Love, there can be no true Allegiance, and there muſt remain
perpetual Seeds of Reſiſtance againſt a power that is built upon ſuch an
unnatural Foundation, as that of fear and terrour. All force is a kind of
ſoul-Play, and whoſoever aims at it himſelf, does by implication allow it to
thoſe he plays with; ſo that there will be [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=65) ever Matter
prepared in the minds of Peo­ple when they are provoked, and the Prince, to
ſecure himſelf muſt live in the midſt of his own Subjects, as if he were in a
Conquer'd Country, raiſe Arms as if he were immediately to meet or reſiſt an
In­vaſion, and all this while ſleep as unquietly from the fear of the
Remedies, as he did before from that of the Diſeaſe; it being hard for him to
forget, that more Princes have been deſtroyed by their Guards than by their
People; and that even at the time when the Rule was Quod Principi placuit Lex
eſto: the Armies and Praetorian Bands which were the Inſtruments of that
unruly Power, were frequently the means made uſe of to deſtroy them who had
it. There will ever be this difference between God and his Vicegeren [...]s,
that God is ſtill above the Inſtruments he uſes, and out of the danger of
receiving hurt from them; but Princes can never lodge Power in any hands,
which may not at ſome time turn it back upon them; for tho' it is poſſible
enough for a King to have power to ſatisfy his Ambition; yet no Kingdom has
Money enough to ſa­tisfie the avarice of under-Work-men, who learn from that
Prince who will exact more than belongs to him, to expect from him much more
than they deſerve, and grow­ing [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=66) angry upon the
firſt diſappointment, they are the Devils which grow terrible to the Conjurers
themſelves who brought them up, and can't ſend them down again; And beſides
that there can be no laſting Radical Security, but where the Governed are
ſatisfied with the Governours. It muſt be a Dominion very unpleaſant to a
Prince of an elevated Mind, to impoſe an abject and ſordid ſervility, inſtead
of receiving the willing Sacrifice of Duty and Obedi­ence. The braveſt Princes
in all times, who were uncapable of any other kind of fear, have fear'd to
grieve their own Peo­ple; ſuch a fear is a glory, and in this ſenſe 'tis an
infamy not to be a Coward: So that the miſtaken Heroes who are void of this
generous kind of fear, need no other ag­gravation to compleat their ill
Characters.

When a Deſpotick Prince has bruiſed all his Subjects with a ſlaviſh Obedience,
all the force he can uſe cannot ſubdue his own fears; Enemies of his own
Creation, to which he can never be reconciled, it being impoſſible to do
injuſtice and not to fear Revenge: there is no cure for this fear, but the not
deſerving to be hurt, and there­fore a Prince who does not allow his thoughts
to ſtray beyond the Rules of Ju­ſtice, has always the bleſſing of an inward
[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=66) quiet and
aſſurance, as a natural effect of his good Meaning to his People, and tho he
will not neglect due precautions to ſe­cure himſelf in all Events, yet he is
unca­pable of entertaining vain and remote ſuſpi­cions of thoſe, of whom he
reſolves never to deſerve ill.

It is very hard for a Prince to fear Rebel­lion, who neither does, nor intends
to do any thing to provoke it; therefore too great a diligence in the
Governours, to raiſe and improve dangers and fears from the People, is no very
good Symptom, and naturally begets an inference that they have thoughts of
putting their Subjects Al­legiance to a Tryal; and therefore not without ſome
Reaſon fear before hand, that the Irregularities they intend, may raiſe Men to
a Reſiſtance.

Our Trimmer thinks it no advantage to a Government, to endeavour the
ſuppreſ­ſing all kind of Right which may remain in the Body of the People, or
to employ ſmall Authors in it, whoſe Officiouſneſs or want of Money may
encourage them to write, tho' it is not very eaſie to have Abi­lities equal to
ſuch a Subject; they forget that in their too high ſtrained Arguments for the
Rights of Princes, they very often plead againſt humane Nature, which will
[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=67) always
give a Biaſs to thoſe Reaſons which ſeem of her ſide; it is the People that
Reads thoſe Books, and it is the People that muſt judge of them; and therefore
no Maxims ſhould be laid down for the Right of Go­vernment, to which there can
be any Rea­ſonable Objection; for the World has an Intereſt, and for that
Reaſon is more than ordinary diſcerning to find out the weak ſides of ſuch
Arguments as are intended to do them hurt; and it is a diminution to a
Government, to Promote or Counte­nance ſuch well affected miſtakes which are
turned upon it with diſadvantage, when­ever they are detected and expos'd; and
Naturally the too earneſt Endeavours to take from Men the Right they have,
tempt them, by the Example to Claim that which they have not.

In Power, as in moſt other things, the way for Princes to keep it, is not to
graſp more than their Arms can well hold; the nice and unneceſſary enquiring
into theſe things, or the Licenſing ſome Books, and ſuppreſſing ſome others
without ſufficient Reaſon to Juſtifie the doing either, is ſo far from being
an Advantage to a Govern­ment, that it expoſes it to the Cenſure of be­ing
Partial and to the ſuſpicion, of having ſome hidden deſigns to be carried on
by theſe unuſual methods.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=67) When all
is ſaid, there is a Natural Rea­ſon of State, and undefinable thing, groun­ded
upon the Common Good of Mankind▪ which is immortal, and in all Changes and
Revolutions, ſtill preſerves its Original Right of ſaving a Nation, when the
Letter of the Law perhaps would deſtroy it; and by whatſoever means it moves,
carrieth a Power with it, that admits of no oppoſition, being ſupported by
Nature, which inſpires an immediate conſent at ſome Critical times into every
individual Member, to that which viſibly tendeth to preſervation of the whole;
and this being ſo, a Wiſe Prince inſtead of Controverting the right of this
Reaſon of State, will by all means endea­vour it may be of his ſide, and then
he will be ſecure.

Our Trimmer cannot conceive that the Power of any Prince can be laſting, but
where 'tis built upon the foundation of his own unborrowed vertue, he muſt not
only be the firſt Mover and the Fountain, from whence the great Acts of State
originally flow, but he muſt be thought ſo to his Peo­ple that they may
preſerve their veneration for him; he muſt be jealous of his Power, and not
impart ſo much of it to any about him, as that he may ſuffer an Eclipſe by it.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=68) He cannot
take too much care to keep himſelf up, for when a Prince is thought to be led
by thoſe, with whom he ſhould onely adviſe, and that the Commands he gives are
tranſmitted through him, and are not of his own growth; the World will look
upon him as a Bird adorned with Feathers that are not his own, or conſider him
rather as an Engine than a living Creature; beſides, 'twould be a
Contra­diction for a Prince to fear a Common­wealth, and at the ſame time
create one himſelf, be delegating ſuch a Power to any Number of Men near him,
as is inconſiſtent with the Figure of a Monarch: it is the worſt kind of Co-
ordination the Crown can ſubmit to; for it is the exerciſe of Power that draws
the reſpect along with it, and when that is parted with, the bare Chara­cter
of a King is not ſufficient to keep it up; but tho' it is a diminution to a
Prince, to parcel out ſo liberally his Power amongſt his Favourites, it's
worſe to divide with any other Man, and to bring himſelf in Competition with a
ſingle Rival; a Partner in Government is ſo unnatural a thing, that it is a
ſquint-ey'd Allegiance that muſt be paid to ſuch a double bottom'd Monarchy.
The two Czars of Muſcovy are an Example that the more civiliz'd part of the
World [[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=68)
will not be proud to follow, whatſoever Gloſs may be put upon this method, by
thoſe to whom it may be of ſome uſe, the Prince will do well to remember, and
re­flect upon the Story of certain Men who had ſet up a Statue in Honour of
the Sun, yet in a very little time they turned their backs to the Sun, and
their Faces to the Statue.

Theſe Myſtical Unions are better plac'd in the other World, than they are in
this, and we ſhall have much ado to find, that in a Monarchy Gods Vicegerency
is dele­gated to more Heads than that which is anointed.

Princes may lend ſome of their Light to make another ſhine, but they muſt
ſtill preſerve the ſuperiority of being the brigh­ter Planet, and when it
happens that the Reverſion is in Mens Eyes, there is more care neceſſary to
keep up the Dignity of Poſſeſſions, that Men may not forget who is King,
either out of their hopes or fears who ſhall be. If the Sun ſhou'd part with
all his Light to any of the Stars, the Indi­ans would not know where to find
their God, after he had ſo depoſed himſelf, and would make the Light (where-
ever it went) the Object of their Worſhip.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=69) All
Uſurpation is alike upon Soveraignty, its no matter from what hand it comes;
and Crowned Heads are to be the more Circumſpect, in reſpect Mens thoughts are
naturally apt to ramble beyond what is preſent, they love to work at a
diſtance, and in their greedy Expectations; which their minds may be fill'd
with of a new Maſter, the old one may be left to look a little out of
Countenance.

Our Trimmer owns a Paſſion for liberty, yet ſo reſtrained, that it does not in
the leaſt impair or taint his Allegiance, he thinks it hard for a Soul that
does not love Liberty, ever to raiſe it ſelf to another World he takes it to
be the foundation of all vertue, and the only ſeaſoning that gives a reliſh to
life, and tho' the lazineſs of a ſlaviſh ſubjection, has its Charms for the
more groſs and earthly part of Mankind, yet to men made of a better ſort of
Clay, all that the World can give without Liberty has no taſte; it is true,
nothing is ſold ſo cheap by unthinking men, but that does no more leſſen the
real value of it, than a Country Fellows Ignorance does that of a Diamond, in
ſelling it for a Pot of Ale. Liberty is the Miſtreſs of Mankind, ſhe has
powerful Charms which do ſo dazzle us, that we find Beauties in her which
perhaps [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=69)
are not there, as we do in other Miſtreſſes; yet if ſhe was not a Beauty, the
World would not run mad for her; therefore ſince the reaſona­ble deſire of it
ought not to be reſtrain'd, and that even the unreaſonable deſire of it cannot
be entirely ſuppreſs'd, thoſe who would take it away from a People poſſeſſed
of it, are likely to fail in the attempting, or be very unquiet in the keeping
of it.

Our Trimmer admires our bleſſed Con­ſtitutions, in which Dominion and Liberty
are ſo well reconciled; it gives to the Prince the glorious Power of
commanding Free­men, and to the Subject, the ſatisfaction of ſeeing the Power
ſo lodged, as that their Liberties are ſecure; it do's not allow the Crown
ſuch a Ruining Power, as that no graſs can grow where e're it treads, but a
Cheriſhing and Protecting Power; ſuch a one as hath a grim Aſpect only to the
offending Subjects, but is the joy and the Pride of all the good ones; their
own inte­reſt being ſo bound up in it, as to engage them to defend and ſupport
it; and tho in ſome inſtances the King is reſtrain'd yet no­thing in the
Government can move with­out him; our Laws make a diſtinction between
Vaſſalage and Obedience; between devouring Prerogatives, and a licentious
un­governable Freedom: and as of all the [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=70) Orders of
Building, the Compoſite is the beſt, ſo ours by a happy mixture and a wiſe
choice of what is beſt in others, is brought into a Form that is our Felicity
who live under it, and the envy of our Neighbour that cannot imitate it.

The Crown has power ſufficient to protect our Liberties. The People have ſo
much Liber­ty as is neceſſary to make them uſeful to the Crown.

Our Government is in a juſt proportion, no Tympany, no unnatural ſwelling
either of Power or Liberty; and whereas in all overgrown Monarchies, Reaſon,
Learning, and Enquiry are hang'd in Effigy for Mu­tineers; here they are
encouraged and cheriſhed as the ſureſt Friends to a Govern­ment eſtabliſh'd
upon the Foundation of Law and Juſtice. When all is done, thoſe who look for
Perfection in this World, may look as the Jews have for their Meſſias, and
therefore our Trimmer is not ſo unrea­ſonably Partial as to free our
Governments; and from all objections, no doubt there have been fatal Inſtances
of its Sickneſs, and more than that, of its Mortality, for ſometime, tho' by a
Miracle, it hath been reviv'd again: but till we have another race of Mankind,
in all Conſtitutions that are bounded, there will ever be ſome matter [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=70) of Strife, and
Contention, and rather than want pretenſions, Mens Paſſions and Inte­reſts
will raiſe them from the moſt incon­ſiderable Cauſes.

Our Government is like our Climate▪ there are Winds which are ſometimes loud
and unquiet, and yet with all the Trouble they give us, we owe, great part of
our Health unto them, they clear the Air, which elſe would be like a ſtanding
Pool, and in ſtead of Refreſhment would be a Diſeaſe unto us.

There may be freſh Gales of aſſerting Liberty, without turning into ſuch
ſtorms of Hurricane, as that the State ſhould run any hazard of being Caſt
away by them; theſe ſtruglings which are natural to all mix­ed Governments,
while they are kept from growing in Convulsions, do by a mutual agitation from
the ſeveral parts, rather ſup­port and ſtrengthen, than weaken or maim the
Conſtitution; and the whole frame, inſtead of being torn or diſjointed, comes
to be the better and cloſer knit by being thus exerciſed; but what ever faults
our Government may have, or a diſcerning Cri­tick may find in it, when he
looks upon it alone; let any other be ſet againſt it, and then it ſhews its
Comparative Beauty; let us look upon the moſt glittering outſide of unbounded
Authority, and upon a nearer [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=71) enquiry, we
ſhall find nothing but poor and miſerable deformity within; let us ima­gine a
Prince living in his Kingdom, as if in a great Gally, his Subjects tugging at
the Oar, laden with Chains, and reduced to real Rags, that they may gain him
imaginary Lawrels; let us Repreſent him gazing among his Flatterers, and
receiving their falſe Worſhip, like a Child never Contradicted, and therefore
always Cozen'd [...] or like a Lady complemented only to be abuſed, condemned
never to hear Truth▪ and Conſequently never to do Juſtice, w [...]l­lowing in
the ſoft Bed of wanton and un­bridled Greatneſs, not leſs odious to the
Inſtruments themſelves, than to the Ob­jects of his Tyranny; blown up into an
Ambitious Dropſy, never to be ſatisfied by the Conqueſt of other People, or by
the Oppreſſion of his own; by aiming to be more than a Man, he falls lower
than the meaneſt of 'em, a miſtaken Creature, ſwell­ed with Panegyricks, and
flattered out of his Senſes, and not only an Incumbrance, but a Nuiſance to
Mankind, a hardened and unrelenting Soul, and like ſome Creatures that grow
fat with Poiſons, he grows great by other Mens Miſeries; an Ambitious Ap [...]
of the Divine Greatneſs, an unruly Gyant that would ſtorm even Heaven it ſelf,
but [[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=71) that
his ſcaling Ladders are not long e­nough; in ſhort, a Wild and devouring
Creature in rich Trappings, and with all his Pride no more than a Whip in God
Al­mighty's hand, to be thrown into the Fire when the World has been
ſufficiently ſcour­ged with it: This Picture laid in right Co­lours would not
incite Men to wiſh for ſuch a Government, but rather to acknowledge the
happineſs of our own, under which we enjoy all the Privilege Reaſonable Men
can deſire, and avoid all the Miſeries many o­thers are ſubject to; ſo that
our Trimmer would keep it with all its faults, and does as little forgive
thoſe who give the occaſi­on of breaking it, as he does thoſe that take it.

Our Trimmer is a Friend to Parliaments, notwithſtanding all their faults, and
exceſ­ſes, which of late have given ſuch matter of Objection to them; he
thinks that tho' they may at ſometimes be troubleſome to Authority, yet they
add the greateſt ſtrength to it under a wiſe Adminiſtration; he believes no
Government is perfect ex­cept a kind of Omnipotence reſide in it, to exerciſe
upon great Occaſions: Now this cannot be obtained by force alone upon People,
let it be never ſo great, there muſt be their conſent too, or elſe a Nation
[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=72) moves
only by being driven, a ſluggiſh and conſtrained Motion, void of that Life and
Vigour which is neceſſary to produce great things, whereas the virtual Conſent
of the whole being included in their Repreſenta­tives, and the King giving the
ſanction to the united ſenſe of the People, every Act done by ſuch an
Authority, ſeems to be an effect of their choice as well as a part of their
Duty; and they do with an eager­neſs, of which Men are uncapable whilſt under
a force, execute whatſoever is ſo en­joyned as their own Wills, better
explained by Parliament, rather than from the ter­rour of incurring the
Penalty of the Law for omiting it, and by means of this Politi­cal
Omnipotence, what ever Sap or Juice there is in a Nation, may be to the laſt
drop produc'd, whilſt it riſes naturally from the Root; whereas all power
exercis'd without conſent, is like the giving Wounds and Gaſhes, and tapping a
Tree at unſea­ſonable Times, for the preſent occaſion, which in a very little
time muſt needs de­ſtroy it.

Our Trimmer believes, that by the ad­vantage of our Situation, there can
hardly any ſuch ſudden Diſeaſe come upon us, but that the King may have time
enough left to conſult with his Phyſicians in Parlia­ment; [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=72) pretences indeed
may be made, but a real neceſſity ſo preſſing, that no delay is to be
admitted, is hardly to be imagin'd, and it will be neither eaſie to give an
in­ſtance of any ſuch thing for the time paſt, or reaſonable to Preſume it
will ever hap­pen for the time to come: but if that ſtrange thing ſhould fall
out, our Trimmer is not ſo ſtreight-lac'd, as to let a Nation die, or to be
ſtifled, rather than it ſhould be help'd by any but the proper Officers. The
Caſes themſelves will bring the Remedies along with them; and he is not afraid
to allow that in order to its preſervation, there is a hidden Power in
Government, which would be loſt if it was deſigned, a certain Myſtery, by
virtue of which a Nation may at ſome Critical times be ſecur'd from Ruine, but
then it muſt be kept as a My­ſtery; it is rendred uſeleſs when touch'd by
unskilfull hands: and no Government ever had, or deſerv'd to have that Power,
which was ſo unwary as to anticipate their claim to it: Our Trimmer cannot
help thinking it had been better, if the Triennial Act had been obſerv'd;
becauſe 'tis the Law, and he would not have the Crown, by ſuch an Ex­ample,
teach the Nation to break it; all irregularity is catching, it has a
Contagi­on in it, eſpecially in an Age, ſo much [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=73) enclin'd to
follow ill Patterns than good ones.

He would have a Parliament, becauſe 'tis an Eſſential part of the
Conſtitution, even without the Law, it being the only Provi­ſion in
extraordinary Caſes, in which there would be otherwiſe no Remedy, and there
can be no greater Soleciſm in Government, than a failure of Juſtice.

He would have had one, becauſe nothing elſe can unite and heal us, all other
Means are meer Shifts and Projects, Houſes of Cards, to be blown down with the
leaſt Breath, and cannot reſiſt the Difficulties which are ever preſum'd in
things of this kind; and he would have had one, becauſe it might have done the
King good, and could not poſſibly have done him hurt, with­out his conſent,
which in that Caſe is not to be ſuppoſed, and thereſore for him to fear it, is
ſo ſtrange and ſo little to be com­prehended, that the Reaſons can never be
preſum'd to grow in our Soyl, or to thrive in it when Tranſplanted from any
other Country; and no doubt there are ſuch irre­ſiſtible Arguments for calling
a Parliament, and tho it might, be deny'd to the unman­nerly mutinous
Petitions of men, that are malicious and diaffected, it will be grant­ed to
the ſoft and obſequious Murmurs of [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=73) his Majeſty's
beſt Subjects, and there will be ſuch Retorick in their ſilent Grief, that it
will at laſt prevail againſt the Artifices of thoſe, who either out of Guilt
or Intereſt, are afraid to throw themſelves upon their Country, knowing how
ſcurvily they have uſed it; that day of Judgment will come, tho we know
neither the day nor the hour. And our Trimmer would live ſo as to be pre­pared
for it, with full aſſurance in the mean time, that the lamenting Voice of a
Nati­on cannot long be reſiſted, and that a Prince who could ſo eaſily forgive
his People when they had been in the wrong, cannot fail to hear them when they
are in the right.

#### 1.1. The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Proteſtant Religion.

REligion has ſuch a Superiority above other things, and that indiſpenſable
Influence upon all Mankind, that it is as neceſſary to our Living Happy in
this World, as it is to our being Sav'd in the next, without it man is an
abandon'd Creature, one of the worſt Beaſts Nature hath produc'd, and fit ònly
for the Society of Wolves and Bears; therefore in all Ages [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=74) it has been the
Foundation of Government: and tho' falſe Gods have been impos'd upon the
Credulous part of the World, yet they were Gods ſtill in their Opinion, and
the Awe and Reverence Men had to them and their Oracles, kept them within
bounds towards one another, which the Laws with all their Authority could
never have effect­ed without the help of Religion; the Laws would not be able
to ſubdue the perverſe­neſs of Mens Wills, which are Wild Beaſts, and require
a double Chain to keep them down; for this Reaſon 'tis ſaid, That it is not a
ſufficient ground to make War upon a Neighbouring State, becauſe they are of
another Religion, let it be never ſo differing: yet if they Worſhip'd nor
Ac­knowledg'd any Deity at all, they may be Invaded as Publick Enemies of
Mankind, becauſe they reject the only thing that can bind them to live well
with one another; the conſideration of Religion is ſo twiſted with that of
Government, that it is never to be ſeparated, and tho the Foun­dations of it
ought to be Eternal and Un­changeable, yet the Terms and Circum­ſtances of
Diſcipline, are to be ſuited to the ſeveral Climates and Conſtitutions, ſo
that they may keep men in a willing Acquieſcence unto them, without
diſcom­poſing [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=74) the World by
nice diſputes, which can never be of equal moment with the publick Peace.

Our Religion here in England ſeems to be diſtinguiſhed by a peculiar effect of
God Almighty's goodneſs, in permiting it to be introduc'd, or rather reſtored,
by a more re­gular Method than the Circumſtances of moſt other Reformed
Churches, would al­low them to do, in relation to the Govern­ment; and the
Dignity with which it has ſupported it ſelf ſince, and the great Men our
Church hath produced, ought to re­commend it to the eſteem of all Proteſtants
at leaſt: Our Trimmer is very partial to it, for theſe Reaſons, and many more,
and de­ſires that it may preſerve its due Juriſdicti­on and Authority? ſo far
he is from wiſhing it oppreſſed by the unreaſonable and malici­ous Cavils of
thoſe who take pains to raiſe Objections againſt it.

The Queſtions will then be, how and by what Methods this Church ſhall beſt
ſupport it ſelf (the preſent Circumſtances conſider'd) in relation to
Diſſenters of all ſorts: I will firſt lay this for a ground, That as there can
be no true Religion with­out Charity, ſo there can be no true hu­mane prudence
without bearing and con­deſcenſion: This Principle does not extend [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=75) to oblige the
Church always to yield to thoſe who are diſpoſed to Conteſt with her, the
expediency of doing it is to be conſidered and determined according to the
occaſion, and this leads me to lay open the thoughts of our Trimmer, in
reference firſt, to the Proteſtants, and then to the Popiſh Recuſants.

What has lately hapned among us, makes an Apology neceſſary for ſaying any
thing that looks like favour towards a ſort of Men who have brought themſelves
under ſuch a diſadvantage.

The late Conſpiracy hath ſuch broad Symptoms of the diſaffection of the whole
Party, that upon the firſt reflections, while our thoughts are warm, it would
almoſt per­ſwade us to put them out of the protection of our good Nature, and
to think that the Chriſtian Indulgence with our compaſſion for other Mens
Sufferings, cannot eaſily deny, ſeems not only to be forfeited by the ill
appearances that are againſt them, but even becomes a Crime when it is ſo
miſ­applied; yet for all this, upon ſecond and cooler thoughts, moderate Men
will not be ſo ready to involve a whole Party in the guilt of a few, and to
admit inferences and Preſumptions to be Evidence in a Caſe, where the Sentence
muſt be ſo heavy, as it [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=75) ought to be
againſt all thoſe who have a fixed reſolution againſt the Government
eſtabliſhed? beſides [...] Men who act by a Principle grounded upon Moral
Vertue, can never let it be clearly extinguiſhed by the moſt repeated
Provocations; if a right thing agreeable to Nature and good Senſe takes root
in the heart of a Man, that is impartial and unbyaſs'd, no outward.
Circumſtances can ever deſtroy it; it's true, the degrees of a Mans Zeal for
the Proſecu­tion of it may be differing, faults of other Men, the
conſideration of the publick, and the ſeaſonable Prudence by which Wiſe Men
will ever be directed, may give great Al­lays; they may leſſen and for a time
per­haps ſuppreſs the exerciſe of that, which in general Propoſition may be
reaſonable, but ſtill whatever is ſo will inevitably grow and ſpring up again,
having a Foundation in Nature, which is never to be deſtroy'd.

Our Trimmer therefore endeavours to ſeparate the deteſtation of thoſe who had
either a hand or a thought in the late Plot, from the Principle of Prudential
as well as Chriſtian Charity towards Mankind, and for that reaſon would fain
uſe the means of reclaiming ſuch of the Diſſenters as are not incurable, and
even bearing to a degree thoſe that are as far as may con­ſiſt [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=76) with the Publick
Intereſt and Security; he is far from juſtifying an affected ſepara­tion from
the Communion of the Church, and even in thoſe that mean well, and are
miſtaken, he looks upon it as a Diſeaſe that has ſeized upon their Minds, very
troubleſome as well as dangerous, by the Conſequence it may produce: he does
not go about to excuſe their making it an indiſpenſable duty, to meet in
numbers to ſay their Prayers, ſuch meetings may prove miſchievous to the State
at leaſt; the Laws which are the beſt Judges, have determined that there is
danger in them: he has good nature enough to lament that the perverſ­neſs of a
Part ſhould have drawn Rigorous Laws upon the whole Body of the Diſ­ſenters,
but when they are once made no private Opinion muſt ſtand in Oppoſition to
them; if they are in themſelves reaſona­ble, they are in that reſpect to be
re­garded, even without being enjoyned, if by the Change of Time and
Circum­ſtances they ſhould become leſs reaſonable than when they were firſt
made, even then they are to be obey'd too, becauſe they are Laws, till they
are mended or repealed by the ſame Authority that Enacted them.

He has too much deference to the Con­ſtitution of our Government, to wiſh for
[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=76) more
Prerogative Declarations in favour of ſcrupulous Men, or to diſpence with
Penal Laws in ſuch manner, or to ſuch an end, that ſuſpecting Men might with
ſome rea­ſon pretend, that ſo hated a thing as Perſe­cution could never make
way for it ſelf with any hopes of Succeſs, otherwiſe than by preparing the
deluded World by a falſe proſpect of Liberty and Indulgence. The inward
Springs and Wheels whereby the Engine moved, are now ſo fully laid open and
expos'd that it is not ſuppoſable that ſuch a baffled Experiment ſhould ever
be tryed again, the effect it had at the time, and the Spirit it raiſed, will
not eaſily be forgotten, and it may be preſum'd the re­membrance of it may
ſecure us from any more attempts of that Nature for the future; we muſt no
more break a Law to give Men eaſe, than we are to Rifle an Houſe with a devout
intention of giving the plunder to the Poor; in this caſe, our Compaſſion
would be as ill directed, as our Charity in the other.

In ſhort, the veneration due to the Laws is never to be thrown off, let the
pretences be never ſo ſpecious; yet with all this he cannot bring himſelf to
think, that an ex­traordinary diligence to take the uttermoſt penalty of Laws,
upon the poor offending [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=77) Neighbour, is of
it ſelf ſuch an all ſuffici­ent vertue, that without any thing elſe to
recommend Men, it ſhould Entitle them to all kind of Preferments and Rewards;
he would not detract from the merits of thoſe who execute the Laws, yet he
cannot think ſuch a piece of ſervice as this, can entirely change the Man, and
either make him a better Divine, or a more know­ing Magiſtrate than he was
before, eſpe­cially if it be done with a partial and un­equal hand in
Reverence to greater and more dangerous Offenders.

Our Trimmer would have thoſe miſtaken Men ready to throw themſelves into the
arms of the Church, and he would have thoſe arms as ready to receive them that
ſhall come to us; he would have no ſupercilious look to fright thoſe ſtrayed
Sheep from coming into the Fold again; no ill-natur'd maxims of an Eternal
ſuſpicion, or a belief that thoſe who have once been in the wrong can never be
in the right again; but a viſible preparation of mind to re­ceive with joy all
the Proſelytes that come amongſt us, and much greater earneſtneſs to reclaim
than puniſh them: It is to be confeſſed, there is a great deal to forgive, a
hard task enough for the Charity of a Church ſo provoked; [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=77) but that muſt
not cut off all hopes of being reconciled, yet if there muſt be ſome anger
left ſtill, let it break out into a Chriſtian Revenge, and by being kinder to
the Chil­dren of Diſobedience than they deſerve, let the injur'd Church
Triumph, by throwing ſhame and confuſion of face upon them; there ſhould not
always be Storms and Thunder, a clear Sky would ſometime make the Church look
more like Heaven, and would do more towards the reclaiming thoſe wanderers,
than a perpetual terrour, which ſeemed to have no intermiſſion; for there is
in many, and particularly in En­gliſh Men, a miſtaken pleaſure, in reſiſt­ing
the dictates of Rigorous Authority; a Stomach that riſeth, againſt a hard
impo­ſition, nay, in ſome, raiſe even a luſt in ſuffering from a wrong point
of Honour, which does not want the applauſe, from the greater part of Mankind,
who have not learnt to diſtinguiſh; conſtancy will be thought a virtue even
where it is a mi­ſtake; and the ill Judging World will be apt to think that
Opinion moſt right, which produces the greateſt number of thoſe who are
willing to ſuffer for it; all this is prevented, and falls to the ground, by
uſing well-timed Indulgence; and the ſtubborn Adverſary who values himſelf
upon [[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=78) his
Reſiſtance whilſt he is oppreſs'd, yields inſenſibly to kind Methods, when
they are apply'd to him, and the ſame Man natu­rally melts into Conformity,
who perhaps would never have been beaten into it. We may be taught by the
Compaſſion that attendeth the moſt Criminal Men when they are Condemned, that
Faults are much more natural things than Puniſhments, and that even the moſt
neceſſary acts of ſeveri­ty do ſome kind of violence to our Nature, whoſe
Indulgence will not be confined with­in the ſtrait bounds of inexorable
Juſtice; ſo that this ſhould be an Argument for gentleneſs, beſides that it is
the likelieſt way to make theſe Men aſham'd of their Separation, whilſt the
preſſing them too hard, tends rather to make them proud of it.

Our Trimmer would have the Clergy ſupported in their Lawful Rights, and in all
the Power and Dignity that belongs to them, and yet he thinks that poſſibly
there may be in ſome of them a too great eagerneſs to extend the
Eccleſiaſtical Juriſ­diction; which tho it may be well intend­ed, yet the
ſtraining of it too high has an appearance of Ambition that raiſes mens
Objections to it, and is far unlike the Apo­ſtolick Zeal, which was quite
otherwiſe [[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=78)
employ'd, that the World draws inferences from it, which do the Church no
ſervice.

He is troubled to ſee Men of all ſides ſick of a Calenture of a miſtaken
Devotion, and it ſeems to him that the devout Fire of miſtaken Charity with
which the Primi­tive Chriſtians were inflam'd, is long ſince extinguiſh'd, and
inſtead of it a devouring Fire of Anger and Perſecution breaks out in the
World; we wrangle now one with another about Religion till the Blood comes,
whilſt the Ten Commandments have no more authority with us, than if they were
ſo many obſolete Laws or Proclamations out of date; he thinks that a Nation
will hardly be mended by Principles of Religi­on, where Morality is made a
Hereſy; and therefore as he believes-Devotion miſ­placed when it gets into a
Conventicle, he concludes that Loyalty is ſo too, when lodg'd in a Drunken
Club; thoſe Vertues deſerve a better Seat of Empire, and they are degraded,
when ſuch Men undertake their defence, as have too great need of an Apology
themſelves.

Our Trimmer wiſhes that ſome know­ledge may go along with the Zeal on the
right ſide, and that thoſe who are in poſſeſ­ſion of the Pulpit, would quote▪
at leaſt ſo often the Authority of the Scriptures as [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=79) they do that of
the State; there are many who borrow too often Arguments from the Government;
to uſe againſt their Ad­verſaries, and neglect thoſe that are more proper, and
would be more powerful; a Divine grows leſs, and puts a diminution on his own
Character, when he quoteth any Law but that of God Almighty, to get the better
of thoſe who conteſt with him; and it is a ſign of a decay'd Con­ſtitution,
when Nature with good diet can­not expel noxious Humours without calling
Foreign Drugs to her Aſſiſtance; So it looks, like want of health in a Church,
when inſtead of depending upon the power of that Truth which it holds, and the
good Exam­ples of them that teach it, to ſupport it ſelf, and to ſuppreſs
Errors, it ſhould have a perpetual recourſe to the ſecular Autho­rity, and
even upon the ſlighteſt occaſions.

Our Trimmer has his Objections to the too buſy diligence, and to the overdoing
of ſome of the diſſenting Clergy, and he does as little approve of thoſe of
our Church, who wear God Almighty's Li­veries, as ſome old Warders in the
Tower do the King's, who do nothing in their place but receive their Wages for
it; he thinks that the Liberty of the late times gave men ſo much Light, and
diffuſed it ſo [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=79) univerſally
amongſt the people, that they are not now to be dealt with, as they might have
been in Ages of leſs enquiry; and therefore in ſome well choſen and dear­ly
beloved Auditories, good reſolute Non­ſence back'd with Authority may prevail,
yet generally Men are become ſo good Judges of what they hear, that the Clergy
ought to be very wary how they go about to impoſe upon their Underſtandings,
which are grown leſs humble than they were in former times, when the Men in
black had made Learning ſuch a ſin in the Laity, that for fear of offending,
they made a Conſci­ence of being able to read; but now the World is grown
ſawcy, and expects Reaſons, and good ones too, before they give up their own
Opinions to other Mens Dictates, tho never ſo Magiſterially deliver'd to them.

Our Trimmer is far from approving the Hypocriſie, which ſeems to be the
reign­ing Vice amongſt ſome of the Diſſenting Clergy, he thinks it the moſt
provoking ſin Men can be guilty of, in Relation to Heaven, and yet (which may
ſeem ſtrange) that very ſin which ſhall deſtroy the Soul of the Man who
preaches, may help to ſave thoſe of the Company that hear him, and even thoſe
who are cheated by the falſe Oſtentation of his ſtrictneſs of life, may [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=80) by that Pattern
be encouraged to the real Practice of thoſe Chriſtian Vertues which he does ſo
deceitfully profeſs; ſo that the deteſtation, of this fault may poſſibly be
car­ry'd on too far by our own Orthodox Di­vines, if they think it cannot be
enough expreſs'd without bending the Stick another way; a dangerous Method,
and a worſe Extream for Men of that Character, who by going to the outmoſt
line of Chriſtian Liberty, will certainly encourage others to go beyond it: No
Man does leſs approve the ill-bred Methods of ſome of the Diſſen­ters, in
rebuking Authority, who behave themſelves as if they thought ill manners
neceſſary to Salvation; yet he cannot but diſtinguiſh and deſire a Mean
between the ſawcyneſs of ſome of the Scotch Apoſtles, and the undecent
Courtſhip of ſome of the Silken Divines, who, one would think, do practice to
bow at the Altar, only to learn to make the better Legs at Court.

Our Trimmer approves the Principles of our Church, that Dominion is not
founded in Grace, and that our Obedience is to be given to a Popiſh King in
other things, at the ſame time that our Compliance with him in his Religion is
to be deny'd; yet he can­not but think it a very extraordinary thing if a
Proteſtant Church ſhould by a voluntary [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=80) Election, chuſe
a Papiſt for their Guardian, and receive Directions for ſupporting their
Religion, from one who muſt believe it a Mortal Sin not to endeavour to
deſtroy it; ſuch a refined piece of Breeding would not ſeem to be very well
plac'd in the Clergy, who will hardly find Precedents to juſtify ſuch an
extravagant piece of Court­ſhip, and which is ſo unlike the Primitive Methods,
which ought to be our Pattern; he hath no ſuch unreaſonable tenderneſs for any
ſorts of Men, as to expect their faults ſhould not be impartially laid open as
often as they give occaſion for it; and yet he cannot but ſmile to ſee that
the ſame Man, who ſets up all the Sails of his Rhetorick, to fall upon
Diſſenters; when Popery is to be handled, he does it ſo gingerly, that he
looketh like an Aſs mumbling of Thiſtles, ſo afraid he is of letting himſelf
looſe where he may be in danger of letting his Duty get the better of his
Diſcretion.

Our Trimmer is far from reliſhing the impertinent wandrings of thoſe who pour
out long Prayers upon the Congregati­on, and all from their own Stock, which
God knows, for the moſt part is a bar­ren Soil, which produces weeds inſtead
of Flowers, and by this means they ex­poſe Religion it ſelf, rather than
promote [[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=81)
Mens Devotions: On the other ſide, there may be too great Reſtraint put upon
Men, whom God and Nature hath di­ſtinguiſhed from their Fellow Labourers, by
bleſſing them with a happier Talent, and by giving them not only good Senſe,
but a powerful Utterance too, has ena­bled them to guſh out upon the
atten­tive Auditory, with a mighty ſtream of Devout and unaffected Eloquence;
when a Man ſo qualified, endued with Learning too, and above all, adorn'd with
a good Life, breaks out into a warm and well de­liver'd Prayer before his
Sermon, it has the appearance of a Divine Rapture, he raiſes and leads the
Hearts of the Aſſembly in another manner, than the moſt Com­pos'd or beſt
Studied Form of ſet Words can ever do; and the Pray-wees, who ſerve up all
their Sermons with the ſame Gar­niſhing, would look like ſo many Statues, or
Men of Straw in the Pulpit, compar'd With thoſe who ſpeak with ſuch a powerful
Zeal, that men are tempted at the moment to believe Heaven it ſelf has
dictated their words to 'em.

Our Trimmer is not ſo unreaſonably in­dulgent to the Diſſenters, as to excuſe
the Irregularities of their Complaints, and to approve their threatning
Stiles, which are [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=81) ſo ill-ſuited to
their Circumſtances as well as their Duty; he would have them to ſhew their
Grief, and not their Anger to the Government, and by ſuch a Submiſſion to
Authority, as becomes them, if they cannot acquieſce in what is impoſed; let
them deſerve a Legiſlative Remedy to their Sufferings, there being no other
way to give them perfect redreſs; and either to ſeek it, or pretend to give it
by any other Method, would not only be vain, but Cri­minal too in thoſe that
go about it; yet with all this, there may in the mean time be a prudential
Latitude left, as to the man­ner of preventing the Laws now in force againſt
them: The Government is in ſome degree anſwerable for ſuch an Adminiſtra­tion
of them, as may be free from the Cen­ſure of Impartial Judges; and in order to
that, it would be neceſſary that one of theſe methods be purſued, either to
let looſe the Laws to their utmoſt extent, without any Moderation or
Reſtraint, in which at leaſt the Equality of the Government would be without
Objection, the Penalties being exacted without Remiſſion from the Diſ­ſenters
of all kinds; or if that will not be done (and indeed there is no Reaſon it
ſhould) there is a neceſſity of ſome Conni­vance to the Proteſtant Diſſenters
to exe­cute [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=82) that which in
Humanity muſt be al­lowed to the Papiſts, even without any leaning towards
them, which muſt be ſup­poſed in thoſe who are or ſhall be in the
ad­miniſtration of publick Buſineſs; and it will follow that, according to our
Circumſtan­ces, the diſtribution of ſuch connivance muſt be made in ſuch a
manner, that the greateſt part of it may fall on the Prote­ſtant ſide, or elſe
the Objections will be ſo ſtrong, and the Inferences ſo clear, that the
Friends, as well as the Enemies of the Crown, will be ſure to take hold of
them.

It will not be ſufficient to ſay that the Papiſts may be conniv'd at, becauſe
they are good Subjects and that the Proteſtant Diſſenters, muſt ſuffer becauſe
they are ill ones; theſe general Maxims will not con­vince diſcerning Men,
neither will any late Inſtances make them forget what paſſed at other times in
the World; both ſides have had their Turns in being good and ill Subjects. And
therefore 'tis eaſie to imagine what ſuſpicions would ariſe in the preſent
conjuncture, if ſuch a partial Argu­ment as this ſhould be impos'd upon us;
the truth is, this Matter ſpeaks ſo much of it ſelf, that it is not only
unneceſſary, but it may be mannnerly to ſay any more of it.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=82) Our
Trimmer therefore could wiſh, that ſince notwithſtanding the Laws which deny
Churches to ſay Maſs in; even not only the Exerciſe, but alſo the Oſtentation
of Popery is as well or better performed in the Chappels of ſo many Foreign
Miniſters, where the Engliſh openly reſort in ſpight of Proclamations and
Orders of Council, which are grown to be as harmleſs things to them, as the
Popes Bulls and Excommu­nications are to Hereticks who are out of his reach; I
ſay he could wiſh that by a ſeaſonable as well as an equal piece of Juſtice,
there might be ſo much conſideration had of the Proteſtant Diſſenters, as that
there might be at ſometimes, and at ſome places, a [...] Veil thrown over an
Innocent and retired Conventicle, and that ſuch an Indulgence might be
practis'd with leſs prejudice to the Church, or diminution to the Laws; it
might be done ſo as to look rather like a kind Omiſſion to enquire more
ſtrictly, than an allow'd Toleration of that which is againſt the Rule
eſtabliſhed.

Such a skilful hand as this is very Ne­ceſſary in our Circumſtances, and the
Go­vernment by making no ſort of Men entire­ly deſperate, does not only ſecure
it ſelf from Villainous attempts, but lay ſuch a Founda­tion for healing and
uniting Laws, when [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=83) ever a
Parliament ſhall meet, that the Seeds of Differences and Animoſities between
the ſeveral contending ſides may (Heaven con­ſenting) be for ever deſtroy'd.

#### 1.2. The Trimmer's Opinion concerning the Papiſts.

TO ſpeak of Popery leads me into ſuch a Sea of Matter, that it is not eaſie to
forbear launching into it, being invited by ſuch a fruitful Theme, and by a
variety never to be exhauſted; but to confine it to the preſent Subject, I
will only ſay a ſhort word of the Religion it ſelf; of its influences here at
this time; and of our Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to our man­ner of living
with them.

If a Man would ſpeak Maliciouſly of this Religion, one may ſay it is like
thoſe Diſ­eaſes, where as long as one drop of the infection remains, there is
ſtill danger of having the whole Maſs of Blood corrup­ted by it. In Swedeland
there was an ab­ſolute cure, and nothing of Popery heard of, till Queen
Chriſtina, (whether mov'd by Arguments of this or the other World, may not be
good Manners to enquire) [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=83) thought fit to
change her Religion and Country, and to live at Rome, where ſhe might find
better judges of her Virtues, and leſs ungentle Cenſures of thoſe Princely
Liberties, to which ſhe was ſometimes diſ­poſed, than ſhe left at Stockholme;
where the good breeding is as much inferior to that of Rome in general, as the
Civility of the Religion. The Cardinals having reſcued the Church from thoſe
Clowniſh Methods the Fiſhermen had firſt introduc'd, and mended that Pattern
ſo effectually, that a Man of that Age, if he ſhould now come into the World,
would not poſſibly know it.

In Denmark the Reformation was entire; in ſome States of Germany, as well as
Geneva, the Cure was univerſal; but in the reſt of the World where the
Proteſtant Religion took place, the Popiſh humour was too tough to be totally
expell'd, and ſo it was in England; tho' the Change was made with àll the
advantage imaginable to the Reformation, it being Countenanc'd and introduc'd
by Legal Authority, and by that means, might have been perhaps as perfect as
in any other Place, if the ſhort Reign of Edward the 6th, and the ſucceſſion
of a Popiſh Queen had not given ſuch advantage to that Religion, that it has
ſubſiſted ever [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=84) ſince under all
the hardſhips that have been put upon it; it has been a ſtrong Compact Body,
and made the more ſo by theſe Sufferings; it was not ſtrong enough to prevail,
but it was able, with the help of foreign ſupport, to carry on an Intereſt
which gave the Crown trouble, and to make a conſiderable (not to ſay
dangerous) Figure in the Nation; ſo much as this could not have been done
without ſome hopes, nor theſe hopes kept up without ſome reaſona­ble grounds:
In Queen Elizabeth's time, the Spaniſh Zeal for their Religion, and the
Revenge for 88, gave warmth to the Pa­piſts here, and above all the Right of
the Queen of Scots to ſucceed, was while ſhe lived ſufficient to give them a
better pro­ſpect of their Affairs: In King James's time their hopes were
ſupported by the Treaty of the Spaniſh Match, and his gentleneſs towards them,
which they were ready to interpret more in their own Favour, than was either
reaſonable or became them, ſo little tenderneſs they have, even where it is
moſt due, if the Intereſt of their Religion comes in competition with it.

As for the late King, tho he gave the moſt glorious Evidence that ever Man did
of his being a Proteſtant, yet, by the more than ordinary Influence the Queen
was [[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=84)
thought to have over him, and it ſo hap­pening that the greateſt part of his
Anger was directed againſt the Puritans, there was ſuch an advantage to Men
diſpos'd to ſuſpect, that they were ready to interpret it a leaning towards
Popery, without which handle it was Morally impoſſible, that the ill-affected
part of the Nation could ever have ſeduc'd the reſt into a Rebellion.

That which help'd to confirm many well meaning Men in their Miſapprehenſions
of the King, was the long and unuſual inter­miſſion of Parliaments; ſo that
every year that paſſed without one, made up a new Argument to increaſe their
Suſpicion, and made them preſume that the Papiſts had a principal hand in
keeping them off; This raiſed ſuch Heats in Mens Minds, to think that Men who
were obnoxious to the Laws, inſtead of being puniſhed, ſhould have Cre­dit
enough to ſerve themſelves; even at the price of deſtroying the Fundamental
Con­ſtitution; that it broke out into a Flame, which before it could be
quenched, had al­moſt reduc'd the Nation to Aſhes.

Amongſt the miſerable Effects of that unnatural War, none hath been more fatal
to us, than the forcing our Princes to breathe in another Air, and to receive
the early im­preſſions of a Foreign Education; the Bar­barity [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=85) of the Engliſh,
towards the King and the Royal Family, mighty very well tempt him to think the
better of every thing he found abroad, and might-naturally produce more
gentleneſs, at leaſt, towards a Religion by which he was hoſpitably received,
at the ſame time that he was thrown off and Per­ſecuted by the Proteſtants,
(tho' his own Subjects) to aggravate the Offence. The Queen Mother, (as
generally Ladies do with Age) grew moſt devout and earneſt in her Religion;
and beſides, the temporal Re­wards of getting larger Subſidies from the French
Clergy, ſhe had Motives of another kind, to perſwade her to ſhew her Zeal; and
ſince by the Roman Diſpenſatory, a Soul converted to the Church is a Soveraign
Re­medy, and lays up a mighty ſtock of merit, ſhe was ſolicitous to ſecure her
ſelf in all Events, and therefore firſt ſet upon the Duke of Gloceſter, who
depended ſo much upon her good will, that ſhe might for that reaſon have been
induc'd to believe, the Conqueſt would not be difficult; but it ſo fell out,
that he either from his own Con­ſtancy, or that he had thoſe near him by whom
he was otherways advis'd, choſe ra­ther to run away from her importunity, than
by ſtaying to bear the continual weight of it: It is believ'd ſhe had better
ſucceſs [[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=85)
with another of her Sons, who, if he was not quite brought off from our
Religion, at leaſt ſuch beginnings were made, as made them very eaſie to be
finiſh'd; his being of a generous and aſpiring Nature, and in that reſpect,
leſs patient in the drudgery of Argu­ing, might probably help to recommend a
Church to him, that exempts the Laity from the vexation of enquiring; perhaps
he might (tho by miſtake) look upon that Religion as more favourable to the
enlarged Power of Kings, a conſideration which might have its weight with a
young Prince in his warm blood, and that was brought up in Arms.

I cannot hinder my ſelf from a ſmall di­greſſion, to conſider with admiration,
that the old Lady of Rome, with all her wrinkles, ſhould yet have Charms, able
to ſubdue great Princes; ſo far from handſome, and yet ſo imperious; ſo
painted, and yet ſo pre­tending; after having abus'd, depos'd, and murther'd
ſo many of her Lovers, ſhe ſtill finds others glad and proud of their now
Chains; a thing ſo ſtrange) to indifferent Judges, that thoſe who will allow
no other Miracles in the Church of Rome, muſt needs grant that this is one not
to be conteſted; ſhe ſits in her Shop, and ſells at dear Rates her Rattles and
her Hobby-Horſes, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=86) whilſt the
deluded World ſtill continues to furniſh her with Cuſtomers.

But whither am I carried with this Con­templation? it is high time to return
to my Text, and to conſider the wonderful man­ner of the Kings coming home
again, led by the hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of his own People,
who receiv'd him, if poſſible, with Joys equal to the Bleſſing of Peace and
Union which his Re­ſtauration brought along with it; by this there was an end
put to the hopes ſome might have abroad, of making uſe of  [...] leſs happy
Circumſtances, to throw him into Foreign Intereſts and Opinions, which had
been wholly inconſiſtent with our Re­ligion, our Laws, and all other things
that are dear to us; yet for all this ſome of thoſe Tinctures and impreſſions
might ſo far re­main, as tho' they were very innocent in him, yet they might
have ill effects here, by ſoftning the Animoſity which ſeems ne­ceſſary to the
Defender of the Proteſtant Faith, in oppoſition to ſuch a powerful and
irreconcilable an Enemy.

You may be ſure, that among all the ſorts of Men who apply'd themſelves to the
King at his firſt coming home, for his Pro­tection, the Papiſts were not the
laſt, no [...] as they fain would have flatter'd themſelves, [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=86) the leaſt
welcome; having their paſt Suffer­ings, as well as their preſent Profeſſions
to recommend them; and there was ſome­thing that look'd like a particular
Conſide­ration of them, ſince it ſo happened, that the Indulgence promiſed to
Diſſenters at Breda, was carried, on in ſuch a manner, that the Papiſts were
to divide with them, and tho' the Parliament, notwithſtanding its Reſignation
to the Crown in all things, re­jected with ſcorn and anger a Declaration
fram'd for this purpoſe, yet the Birth and ſteps of it gave ſuch an alarm,
that Mens ſuſpicions once raiſed, were not eaſily laid aſleep again.

To omit other things, the breach of the Tripple League, and the Dutch War with
its appurtenances, carried Jealouſies to the higheſt pitch imaginable, and fed
the hopes of one Party, and the fears of the Other to ſuch a degree, that ſome
Critical Revoluti­ons were generally expected, when the ill ſucceſs of that
War, and the Sacrifice France thought fit to make of the Papiſts here, to
their own intereſt abroad, gave them ano­ther Check; and the Act of enjoyning
the Teſt to all in Offices, was thought to be no ill Bargain to the Nation,
tho' bought at the Price of 1200000 pound, and the Mo­ney apply'd to continue
the War againſt the [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=87) Dutch, than
which nothing could be more unpopular or leſs approved. Notwithſtand­ing the
diſcouragements, Popery is a Plant that may be mowed down, but the Root will
ſtill remain, and in ſpite of the Laws, it will ſprout up and grow again;
eſpecial­ly if it ſhould happen that there ſhould be Men in Power, who in
weeding it out of our Garden, will take care to Cheriſh and keep it alive; and
tho' the Law for exclud­ing them from Places of Truſt was tolerably kept as to
their outward Form, yet there were many Circumſtances, which being improved by
the quick-ſighted Malice of ill affected Men, did help to keep up the World in
their ſuſpicions, and to blow up Jealouſies to ſuch a height both in and out
of Parliament, that the remembrance of them is very unpleaſant, and the
Example ſo extravagant, that it is to be hop'd no­thing in our Age like it
will be re-attempted; but to come cloſer to the Caſe in queſtion in this
Condition we ſtand with the Papiſts, what ſhall now be done according to our
Trimmer's Opinion, in order to the better Bearing this grievance, ſince as I
have ſaid before, there is no hopes of being entirely free from it; Papiſts we
muſt have among us, and if their Religion keep them from bringing honey to the
Hive, let the Govern­ment [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=87) try at leaſt by
gentle means to take away the Sting from them. The firſt Foundation to be laid
is, that a diſtinct Con­ſideration is to be had of the Popiſh Clergy, who have
ſuch an eternal Intereſt againſt all accommodation, that it is a hopeleſs
thing to propoſe any thing to them leſs than all; their Stomachs have been ſet
for it ever ſince the Reformation, they have pinned themſelves to a Principal
that admits no mean: they believe Proteſtants will be damn'd, and therefore by
an extraordinary Effect of Chriſtian Charity, they would deſtroy one half of
England that the other might be ſaved; then for this World, they muſt be in
poſſeſſion for God Almighty, to receive his Rents for him, not to accompt till
the Day of Judgment, which is a good kind of Tenure, and ye cannot well blame
the good Men, that will ſtir up the Laity to run any hazard in order to the
getting them reſtor'd. What is it to the Prieſt, if the deluded Zealot undoes
himſelf in the Attempt? he ſings Maſſes as jollily, and with as good a Voice
at Rome or St. Omers as ever he did; is a ſingle Man, and can have no wants
but ſuch as may be eaſily ſup­ply'd, yet that he may not ſeem altogether
inſenſible, or ungrateful to thoſe that are his Martyrs, he is ready to aſſure
their [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=88)
Executors, and if they pleaſe, will procure a Grant ſub Annulo Piſcatoris,
that the good Man by being changed, has got a good Bargain, and ſav'd the
ſinging of ſome hundred of years, which he would elſe have had in Purgatory.
There's no Cure for this Order of Men, no Expedient to be propos'd, ſo that
tho the utmoſt ſe­verity of the Laws againſt them, may in ſome ſort be
mitigated, yet no Treaty can be made with Men who in this Caſe have left
themſelves no free Will, but are ſo muffled by Zeal, tyed by Vows, and kept up
by ſuch unchangeable Maxims of the Prieſthood, that they are to be left as
deſperate Patients, and look'd upon as Men that will continue in an Eternal
State of Hoſtility, till the Nation is entirely ſubdued to them. it is then
only the Lay Papiſts that are capable of being treated with, and we are to
examine of what temper they are, and what Arguments are the moſt likely to
prevail upon them, and how far 'tis adviſeable for the Government to be
Indulgent to them; the Lay Papiſts gene­rally keep their Religion, rather
becauſe they will not break Company with thoſe of their Party, than out of any
ſettled Zeal that hath Root in them; moſt of them do by the Mediation of the
Prieſts Marry amongſt [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=88) one another, to
keep up an Ignorant Poſi­tion by hearing only one ſide; others by a miſtake
look upon it as the Eſcutcheo [...]s of the more Antient Religion of the two;
and as ſome Men of a good Pedigree, wi [...] deſpiſe meaner Men, tho' never ſo
[...] ſuperior to them by Nature, ſo theſe under [...] value Reformation as an
Upſtart, and think there is more Honour in ſupporting an old Errour, than in
embracing what ſeems to them to be a new Truth; the Laws have made them Men of
Pleaſure, by excluding them from Publick Buſineſs, and it happen [...] well
they are ſo, ſince they will the more eaſily be perſwaded by Arguments of Eaſe
and Conveniency to them; they have not put off the Man in general, nor the
Engliſh­man in particular, thoſe who in the la [...]e ſtorm againſt them went
into other Coun­tries, tho they had all the Advantage that might recommend
them to a good Reception, yet in a little time they choſe to ſteal over again,
and live here with hazard, rather than abroad with ſecurity. There is a Smell
in our Native Earth, better than all the Perfumes in the Eaſt; there is
ſomething in a Mother, tho never ſo Angry, that the Children will more
naturally truſt Her, than the Studied Civilities of Strangers, let them be
never ſo Hoſpitable; therefore [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=89) 'tis not
adviſeable nor agreeing with the Rules of Governing Prudence, to provoke Men
by hardſhips to forget that Nature, which elſe is ſure to be of our ſide.

When theſe Men by fair Uſage are put again into their right Senſes, they will
have quite differing Reflections from thoſe which Rigour and Perſecution had
raiſed in them: A Lay Papiſt will firſt conſider his Abby-Lands, which
notwithſtanding whatever has or can be alledged, muſt ſink conſiderably in the
Value, the moment that Popery prevails; and it being a diſputable Matter,
whether Zeal might not in a little time get the better of the Law in that
caſe; a con­ſidering Man will admit that as an Argu­ment to perſwade him, to
be content with things as they are, rather than run this or any other hazard
by Change, in which perhaps he may have no other Advantage, than that his new
humble Confeſſor may be rais'd to a Biſhoprick, and from thence look down
ſuperciliouſly upon his Patron, or which is worſe, run to take Poſſeſſion for
God Almighty of his Abby, in ſuch a manner as the uſurping Landlord (as he
will then be called) ſhall hardly be admitted to be ſo much as a Tenant to his
own Land's, leſt his Title ſhould prejudge that of the Church, which will then
be the Language; [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=89) he will think
what diſadvantage 'tis to be looked upon as a ſeparate Creature, depend­ing
upon a Foreign Intereſt and Authority, and for that reaſon, expos'd to the
Jealouſie and Suſpicion of his Country-men; he will reflect what Incumbrance
it is to have his Houſe a Paſture for hungry Prieſts to graze in, which have
ſuch a never-failing In­fluence upon the Fooliſh, which is the greateſt part
of every Man's Family, that a Man's Dominion, even over his own Children, is
mangled, and divided, if not totally undermin'd by them; then to be ſubject to
what Arbitrary Taxes the Popiſh Convocation ſhall impoſe upon them for the
carrying on the Common Intereſt of that Religion, under Penalty of being
mark'd out for half Hereticks by the reſt of the Party; to have no ſhare in
Buſineſs, no op­portunity of ſhewing his own Value to the World; to live at
the beſt an uſeleſs, and by others to be thought a dangerous Mem­ber of the
Nation where he is born, is a burthen to a generous Mind that cannot be taken
off by all the Pleaſure of a lazy un­manly life, or by the nauſeous enjoyment
of a dull Plenty, that produceth no good for the Mind, which will be
conſidered in the firſt place by a Man that has a Soul; when he ſhall think,
that if his Religion, [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=90) after his wading
through a Sea of Blood, come at laſt to prevail, it would infinitely leſſen,
if not entirely deſtroy the Glory, Riches, Strength and Liberty of his own
Country. And what a Sacrifice is this to make to Rome, where they are wiſe
enough to wonder there ſhould be ſuch Fools in the World, as to venture,
ſtruggle, and contend, nay even die Martyrs for that which, ſhould it ſucceed,
would prove a Judgment inſtead of a Bleſſing to them; he will conclude that
the advantages of throwing ſome of their Children back again to God Almighty
when they have too ma­ny of them, are not equal to the Inconve­niencies they
may either feel or fear, by continuing their ſeparation from the Reli­gion
eſtabliſhed.

Temporal things will have their weight in the World, and tho Zeal may prevail
for a time, and get the better in a Skirmiſh, yet the War ends generally on
the ſide of Fleſh and Blood, and will do ſo till Man­kind is another thing
than it is at preſent: And therefore a wiſe Papiſt in cold Blood, conſidering
theſe and many other Circum­ſtances, which 'twill be worth his pains to ſee if
he can unmuffle himſelf from the Mask of Infallibility, will think it
reaſona­ble to ſet his Impriſon'd Senſes at Liberty, [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=90) and that he has
a right to ſee with his own Eyes, hear with his own Ears, and judge by his own
Reaſon; the conſequence of which might probably be, that weighing things in a
right Scale, and ſeeing them in their true Colours, he would diſtinguiſh
between the merit of ſuffering for a good Cauſe, and the fooliſh oſtentation
of drawing in­conveniences upon himſelf; and therefore will not be unwilling
to be convinc'd that our Proteſtant Creed may make him  [...] in the other
World, and the  [...] this. A few of ſuch wiſe Proſelytes would by their
Example draw ſo many after them, that the Party would inſenſibly melt away,
and in a little time, without any angry word, we ſhould come to an Uni­on,
that all Good Men would have Rea­ſon to rejoyce at; but we are not to pre­ſume
upon theſe Converſions, without preparing Men for them by kind and
re­conciling Arguments; nothing is ſo againſt our Nature, as to believe thoſe
can be in the right who are too hard upon us; there is a deformity in every
thing that doth us hurt, it will look ſcurvily in our Eye while the ſmart
continues, and a Man muſt have an extraordinary Meaſure of Grace, to think
well of a Religion that reduces him and his Family to Miſery; [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=91) in this reſpect
our Trimmer would conſent to the mitigation of ſuch Laws as were made, (as
it's ſaid King Henry VIII. got Queen Elizabeth) in a heat againſt Rome: It may
be ſaid that even States as well as private Men are ſubject to Paſſion; a juſt
indignation of a villainous Attempt produ­ces at the ſame time ſuch Remedies,
as perhaps are not without ſome mixture of Revenge, and therefore tho time
cannot Repeal a Law, it may by a Natural Effect ſoften the Execution of it;
there is leſs danger to Rouſe a Lyon when at Reſt, than to awake Laws that
were intended to have their time of Sleeping, nay more than that, in ſome
Caſes their Natural periods of Life, dying of themſelves without the Solemnity
of being revok'd, any otherwiſe than by the common conſent of Mankind, who do
ceaſe to Execute, when the Rea­ſons in great Meaſure fail that firſt Created
and Juſtify'd the Rigour of ſuch unuſual Pe­nalties.

Our Trimmer is not eager to pick out ſome places in Hiſtory againſt this or
any other Party; quite contrary, is very ſol­licitous to find out any thing
that may be healing, and tend to an Agreement; but to preſcribe the means of
this Gentleneſs ſo as to make it effectual, muſt come from [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=91) the only place
that can furniſh Remedies for this Cure, viz. a Parliament; in the mean time,
it is to be wiſhed there may be ſuch a mutual calmneſs of Mind, as that the
Proteſtants might not be ſo jealous, as ſtill to ſmell the Match that was to
blow up the King and both Houſes in the Gun-powder Treaſon, or to ſtart at
every ap­pearance of Popery, as if it were juſt taking Poſſeſſion. On the
other ſide, let not the Papiſts ſuffer themſelves to be led by any hopes, tho
never ſo flattering, to a Confi­dence or Oſtentation which muſt provoke Men to
be leſs kind to them; let them uſe Modeſty on their ſides, and the
Pro­teſtants Indulgence on theirs; and by this means there will be an
overlooking of all Venial Faults, a tacit connivence at all things that do not
carry Scandal with them, and would amount to a kind of Natural Diſpen­ſation
with the ſevere Laws, ſince there would be no more Accuſers to be found, when
the occaſions of Anger and Animoſity are once remov'd; let the Papiſts in the
mean time remember, that there is a re­ſpect due from all leſſer numbers to
greater, a deference to be paid by an Opinion that is Exploded, to one that is
Eſtabliſhed; ſuch a Thought well digeſted will have an influence upon their
Behaviour, and pro­duce [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=92) ſuch a Temper as
muſt win the moſt eager Adverſaries out of their ill Humour to them, and give
them a Title to all the Favour that may be conſiſtent with the Publick Peace
and Security.

#### 1.3. The Trimmer's Opinion in Relation to things abroad.

THE World is ſo compos'd, that it is hard, if not impoſſible, for a Nation not
to be a great deal involv'd in the fate of their Neighbours, and tho by the
felici­ty of our Situation, we are more Indepen­dant than any other People,
yet we have in all Ages been concern'd for our own ſakes in the Revolutions
abroad. There was a time when England was the over-balancing Power of
Chriſtendom, and that either by Inheritance or Conqueſt, the better part of
France receiv'd Laws from us; after that we being reduc'd into our own Limits,
France and Spain became the Rivals for the Univerſal Monarchy, and our third
Power, tho in it ſelf leſs than either of the other, hapned to be Superiour to
any of them, by that choice we had of throwing the Scales on that ſide to
which we gave [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=92) our Friendſhip.
I do not know whether this Figure did not make us as great as our former
Conqueſt, to be a perpetual Um­pire of two great contending Powers, who gave
us all their Courtſhip, and offer'd all their Incenſe at our Altar, whilſt the
Fate of either Prince ſeemed to depend upon the Oracles we delivered; for the
King of England to ſit on his Throne, as in the Su­pream Court of Juſtice, to
which the two great Monarchs appeal, pleading their Cauſe, and expecting their
Sentence▪ declaring which ſide was in the right, or at leaſt if we pleas'd
which ſide ſhould have the bet­ter of it, was a piece of Greatneſs which was
peculiar to us, and no wonder if we endeavour to preſerve it, as we did for a
conſiderable time, it being our Safety, as well as Glory, to maintain it; but
by a Fatality upon our Councils, or by the re­fin'd Policy of this latter Age,
we have thought fit to uſe induſtry to deſtroy this mighty Power, which we
have ſo long en­joyed; and that equality between the Two Monarchs, which we
might for ever have preſerved, has been chiefly broken by us, whoſe Intereſt
it was above all others to maintain it; when one of them, like the overflowing
of the Sea, had gained more upon the other than our convenience, or [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=93) indeed our
ſafety, would allow; inſtead of mending the Banks, or making new ones, we our
ſelves with our own hands helpt to cut them, to invite and make way for a
farther Inundation. France and Spain have had their ſeveral turns in making
uſe of our Miſtakes, and we have been formerly as deaf to the Inſtances of the
then weaker part of the World to help them againſt the Houſe of Auſtria, as we
can now be to the Earneſt­neſs of Spain, that we would aſſiſt them againſt the
Power of France. Gondamar was as ſawey, and as powerful too in King James his
Court, as any French Ambaſſadour can have been at any time ſince, when Men
talk as wrong then on the Spaniſh ſide, and made their Court by it, as well as
any can have done ſince by talking as much for the French; ſo that from that
time, inſtead of weighing in a wiſe Balance the power of either Crown, it
looks as if we had learnt only to weigh the Penſions, and take the heavieſt.

It would be tedious, as well as unwel­come, to recapitulate all our wrong
ſteps, ſo that I will go no farther than the King's Reſtauration, at which
time the Balance was on the ſide of France, and that by the means of Cromwell,
who for a ſeparate Intereſt of his own had ſacrificed that of the Nation, by
joining with the ſtronger [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=93) ſide, to
ſuppreſs the Power of Spain, which he ought to have ſupported. Such a Me­thod
was natural enough to an Uſurper, and ſhew'd he was not the Lawful Father of
the People, by his having ſo little care of them; and the Example coming from
that hand, one would think ſhould, for that Reaſon, be leſs likely to be
follow'd. But to go on, home comes the King, fol­lowed with Courtſhips from
all Nations abroad, of which ſome did it not only to make them forget how
familiarly they had us'd him when he was in other Circum­ſtances, but to
beſpeak the Friendſhip of a Prince, who beſides his other Greatneſs, was yet
more conſiderable by being re-eſta­bliſhed by the love of his people. France
had an Intereſt either to diſpoſe us to ſo much good will, or at leaſt to put
us into ſuch a Condition, that we might give no Oppoſition to their Deſigns;
and Flanders being a perpetual Object in their Eye, a laſting Beauty for which
they have an in­curable paſſion, and not being kind enough to conſent to them,
they meditated to commit a Rape upon her, which they thought would not be
eaſie to do, while England and Holland were agreed to reſcue her, when-ever
they ſhould hear her cry out for help to them; to this end they [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=94) put in practice
Seaſonable and Artificial Whiſpers, to widen things between us, and the
States. Amboyna and the Fiſhery muſt be talk'd of here; the freedom of the
Seas, and the preſervation of Track muſt be inſinuated there; and there being
combuſtible matter on both ſides, in  [...] little time it took Fire, which
gave thoſe that kindled it, ſufficient cauſe to ſmile and hug themſelves, to
ſee us both fall into the Net they had laid for us. And it is obſer­vable and
of good example to us, if we wil [...] take it, That their Deſign being to ſet
[...] together at Cuffs to weaken us, they kept themſelves Lookers on till our
Victori [...] began to break the Balance; then the King of France, like a wiſe
Prince, was reſolved to ſupport the beaten ſide, and would no more let the
Power of the Sea, than we ought to ſuffer the Monarchy of Europe, to fall into
one hand: In purſuance to this he took part with the Dutch, and in a little
time made himſelf Umpire of the Peace between us; ſome time after, upon
pretence of his Queen's Title to part of Flanders [...] by Right of
Devolution, he falls into i [...] with a mighty Force, for which the Spani­ard
was ſo little prepared, that he made a very ſwift Progreſs, and had ſuch a
Tor­rent of undiſputed Victory, that England [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=94) and Holland, tho
the Wounds they had given one another were yet green; being ſtruck with the
apprehenſion of ſo near a danger to them, thought it neceſſary, for their own
defence, to make up a ſudden League, into which Sweden was taken to interpoſe
for a Peace between the two Crowns.

This had ſo good an effect, that France was ſtopt in its Career, and the Peace
of Aix le Chapelle was a little after concluded. 'Twas a forc'd put; and tho
France wiſely diſſembled their inward diſſatisfaction, yet from the very
moment they reſolv'd to un­ty the Triple knot, whatever it coſt them; for his
Chriſtian Majeſty, after his Con­quering Meals, ever riſes with a ſtomach, and
he lik'd the Pattern ſo well, that it gave him a longing deſire to have the
whole Piece. Amongſt the other means uſed for the attaining this end, the
ſending over the Dutcheſs of Orleans, was not the leaſt pow­erful; ſhe was a
very welcome Gueſt here, and her own Charms and Dexterity joined with other
Advantages, that might help her perſwaſions, gave her ſuch an Aſcendant, that
ſhe ſhould hardly fail of ſucceſs. One of the Preliminaries of her Treaty, tho
a trivial thing in it ſelf, yet was conſidera­ble in the Conſequence, as very
ſmall cir­cumſtances [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=95) often are in
relation to the Go­vernment of the World. About this time a general Humour, in
oppoſition to France, had made us throw off their Faſhion, and put on Veſts,
that we might look more like a diſtinct People, and not be under the ſervility
of imitation, which ever pays a greater deference to the Original; than is
conſiſtent with the Equality all Independent Nations ſhould pretend to; France
did not like this ſmall beginning of ill Humours, at leaſt of Emulation, and
wiſely conſidering that it is a natural Introduction firſt to make the World
their Apes, that they may be afterwards their Slaves. It was thought that one
of the Inſtructions Madam brought along with her, was to laugh us out of theſe
Veſts, which ſhe performed ſo effectually, that in a moment, like ſo many
Footmen who had quitted their Maſters Livery, we all took it again, and
returned to our old Service; ſo that the very time of doing it gave a very
critical Advantage to France; ſince it lookt like an Evidence of our returning
to their Intereſt, as well as to their Faſhion, and would give ſuch a diſtruſt
of us to our new Allies, that it might facilitate the diſ­ſolution of the
knot, which tied them ſo within their bounds, that they were very impatient
till they were freed from the re­  [...]aint.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=95) But the
Lady had a more extended Com­miſſion than this and without doubt we double-
laid the Foundation of a new ſtrict Alliance, quite contrary to the other, in
which we had been ſo lately engag'd. And of this there were ſuch early
appearances, that the World began to look upon us as fal­ling into Apoſtacy
from the common Inte­reſt. Notwithſtanding all this, France did not neglect at
the ſame time to give good words to the Dutch, and even to feed them with
hopes of ſupporting them againſt us, when on a ſudden, that never to be
for­gotten Declaration of War againſt them comes out, only to vindicate his
own Glory, and to revenge the Injuries done to his Bro­ther in England, by
which he became our Second in this Duel; ſo humble can this Prince be, when at
the ſame time he does more Honour than we deſerve, he lays a greater ſhare of
the blame upon our Shoul­ders, than did naturally belong to us; the
particulars of that War, our part in it while we ſtaid in it, and when we were
out of breath, our leaving the French to make an end of it, are things too
well known to make it neceſſary, and too unwelcome in themſelves to incite me
to repeat them; only the wiſdom of France is in this to be obſerv'd, That when
we had made a ſepa­rate [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=96) Peace, which
left them ſingle to op­poſe the united Force of the Confederates, they were ſo
far from being angry, that they would not ſhew ſo much as the leaſt coldneſs,
hoping to get as much by our Mediation for a Peace, as they would have
expected from our Aſſiſtance in the War, our Circumſtances at that time
conſidered; This ſeaſonable piece of Indulgence in not reproach­ing us, but
rather allowing thoſe Neceſſities of State which we gave for our Excuſe, was
ſuch an engaging Method, that it went a great way to keep us ſtill in their
Chains, when, to the Eye of the World, we had abſo­lutely broke looſe from
them: And what paſs'd afterwards at Nimeguen, tho the King's Neu­trality gave
him the outward Figure of a Me­diator, it appear'd that his Interpoſition was
extremely ſuſpected of Partiality by the Con­federates, who upon that Ground
did both at and before the Concluſion of that Treaty, treat his Miniſters
there with a great deal of neglect in his Peace as well as that in the
Py­renean and Aix le Chapelle, the King of France, at the Moment of making it,
had the thought of breaking it; for a very lit­tle time after he broach'd his
Pretenſi­ons upon Aloſt, which were things that if they had been offer'd by a
leſs formidable hand, would have been ſmiled at; but ill [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=96) Arguments being
ſeconded by good Armies, carry ſuch a power with them, that naked ſenſe is a
very unequal Adverſary. It was thought that theſe aiery Claims were chiefly
rais'd with the proſpect of getting Luxen­burg for the Equivalent; and this
Opinion was confirm'd by the blocking it up after­wards, pretending to the
Country of Chi­may, that it might be entirely ſurrounded by the French
Dominions, and it was ſo preſſed that it might have fallen in a little time,
if the King of France had not ſent Orders to his Troops to retire, and his
Chriſtian Generoſity which was aſſign'd for the reaſon of it, made the World
ſmile, ſince it is ſeen how differently his devout Zeal works in Hungary: that
ſpecious Rea­ſon was in many reſpects ill-tim'd, and France it ſelf gave it ſo
faintly, that at the very time it look'd out of Countenance; the true ground
of his Retiring is worth our obſervation; for at the inſtance of the
Confederates, Offices were done, and Me­morials given, but all ineffectual
till the word Parliament was put into them; that powerful word had ſuch an
effect, that even at that diſtance it rais'd the Seige, which may convince us
of what efficacy the King of England's words are, when he will give them their
full weight, and threaten with his [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=97) Parliament; it
is then that he appears that great Figure we ought to repreſent him in our
Minds, the Nation his Body, he the Head, and joined with that Harmony, that
every word he pronounces is the Word of a Kingdom: Such words, as appears by
this Example, are as effectual as Fleets and Armies, becauſe they can create
them, and without this his word ſounds abroad like a faint Whiſper, that is
either not heard, or (which is worſe) not minded. But tho France had made this
ſtep of for­ced Compliance, it did not mean to leave off the purſuit of their
pretenſions; and therefore immediately propoſed the Arbi­tration to the King;
but it appear'd, that notwithſtanding his Merit towards the Con­federates, in
ſaving Luxenburg, the remem­brances of what had paſſed before, had left ſuch
an ill taſte in their Mouths, that they could not Reliſh our being put into a
Con­dition to diſpoſe of their Intereſts, and there­fore declin'd it by
inſiſting upon a general Treaty, to which France has ever ſince con­tinued to
be averſe; our great earneſtneſs alſo to perſwade the Confederates to conſent
to it, was ſo unuſual, and ſo ſuſpicious a method, that it might naturally
make them believe, that France ſpake to them by our Mouth, and for that
Reaſon, if there has [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=97) been no other,
might hinder the accepting it; and ſo little care hath been taken to cure
this, or other Jealouſies the Confe­derates may have entertain'd, that quite
contrary, their Miniſters here every day take freſh Alarms, from what they
ob­ſerve in ſmall, as well as in greater Circum­ſtances; and they being apt
both to take and improve apprehenſions of this kind, draw ſuch Inferences from
them, as make them entirely deſpair of us.

Thus we now ſtand, far from being In­nocent Spectators of our Neighbours
Ru­ine, and by a fatal miſtake forgetting what a Certain Fore-runner it is to
our own▪ and now it's time our Trimmer ſhould tell ſomething of his Opinion,
upon this pre­ſent State of things abroad, he firſt profeſ­ſes to have no
Biaſs, either for or againſt France, and that his thoughts are wholly directed
by the Intereſt of his own Coun­try; he allows, and has read that Spain uſed
the ſame Methods, when it was in its heighth, as France doth now, and
therefore it is not Partiality that moves him; but the juſt fear which all
reaſonable Men muſt be poſſeſs'd with, of an over-growing Pow­er; Ambition is
a devouring Beaſt, when it hath ſwallow'd one Province, inſtead of being
cloyed, it has ſo much the greater [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=98) Stomach to
another, and being fed, becomes ſtill the more hungry; ſo that for the
Con­federates to expect a ſecurity from any thing but their own united
ſtrength, is a moſt miſerable fallacy; and if they cannot reſiſt the
Incroachments of France by their Arms, it is in vain for them to dream of any
other means of preſervation; it would have the better grace, beſides the
ſaving ſo much Blood and Ruin, to give up all at once; make a Preſent of
themſelves, to ap­peaſe this haughty Monarch, rather than be whiſper'd,
flatter'd, or cozened out of their liberty. Nothing is ſo ſoft as the firſt
applications of a greater Prince, to engage a weaker, but that ſmiling
Countenance is but a Vizard, it is not the true Face; for as ſoon as their
turn is ſerv'd, the Court­ſhip flies to ſome other Prince or State, where the
ſame part is to be acted over again, leaves the old miſtaken Friend, to
Neglect and Contempt, and like an inſo­lent Lover to Caſt off Miſtreſs,
Reproa­ches her with that Infamy, of which he himſelf was the Author, Sweden,
Bavaria, Palatine, &c. may by their Freſh Exam­ples, teach other Princes what
they are reaſonably to expect, and what Snakes are hid under the Flowers the
Court of France ſo liberally throws upon them, whilſt they [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=98) can be uſeful.
The various Methods and deep Intrigues, with the differing Notes in ſeveral
Countries, do not only give ſuſpi­cion, but aſſurance that every thing is put
in Practice, by which univerſal Monarchy may be obtain'd. Who can reconcile
the withdrawing of his Troops from Luxenburg, in conſideration of the War in
Hungary, which was not then declared, and preſently after encouraging the Turk
to take Vienna, and conſequently to deſtroy the Empire? Or who can think that
the Perſecution of the Poor Proteſtants of France, will be ac­cepted of God,
as an Atonement for ha­zarding the loſs of the whole Chriſtian Faith? Can he
be thought in earneſt, when he ſeem'd to be afraid of the Spaniards, and for
that reaſon muſt have Luxenburg, and that he cannot be ſafe from Germany,
un­leſs he is in poſſeſſion of Strasburg? All In­juſtice and Violence muſt in
it ſelf be grie­vous, but the aggravations of ſupporting 'em by falſe
Arguments, and inſulting Rea­ſons, has ſomething in it yet more provo­king
than the Injuries themſelves; and the World has ground enough to apprehend,
from ſuch a Method of arguing, that even their Senſes are to be ſubdu'd as
well as their Liberties. Then the variety of Argu­ments uſed by France in
ſeveral Countries [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=99) is very
obſervable: In England and Denmark, nothing inſiſted on but the Greatneſs and
Authority of the Crown; on the other ſide, the Great Men in Poland are
com­mended, who differ in Opinion with the King, and they argue like Friends
to the Privilege of Dyet, againſt the ſeparate Power of the Crown: In Sweden
they are troubled that the King ſhould have chang'd ſomething there of late,
by his ſingle Au­thority, from the antient and ſettled Au­thority and
Conſtitutions: At Ratis bone, the moſt Chriſtian Majeſty taketh the Li­berties
of all the Electors, and free States, into his Protection, and tells them the
Em­perour is a dangerous Man, an aſpiring He­ro, that would infallibly devour
them, if he was not at hand to reſiſt him on their behalf; but above all in
Holland, he has the moſt obliging tenderneſs for the Com­mon-wealth, and is in
ſuch diſquiets, leſt it ſhould be invaded by the Prince of Orange, that they
can do no leſs in gratitude, than undo themſelves when he bids them, to ſhow
how ſenſible they are of his exceſſive good Nature; yet in ſpight of all theſe
Con­tradictions, there are in the World ſuch re­fin'd States-men, as will upon
their Credit affirm the following Paradoxes to he real truth; firſt that
France alone is ſincere and [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=99) keeps its Faith,
and conſequently that it is the only Friend we can rely upon; that the King of
France, of all Men living, has the leaſt mind to be a Conqueror; that he is a
ſleepy, tame Creature, void of all Ambition, a poor kind of a Man, that has no
farther thoughts than to be quiet; that he is charm'd by his Friendſhip to us,
that it is impoſſible he ſhould ever do us hurt, and therefore tho Flanders
was loſt, it would not in the leaſt concern us; that he would fain help the
Crown of England to be abſolute, which would be to take pains to put it into a
condition to oppoſe him, as it is, and muſt be our Intereſt, as long as he
continues in ſuch an overballancing Power and Greatneſs.

Such a Creed as this, if once receiv'd, might prepare our belief for greater
things, and as he that taught Men to eat a Dagger, began firſt with a Pen
knife; ſo if we can be prevail'd with to digeſt the ſmaller Miſtakes, we may
at laſt make our ſtomachs ſtrong enough for that of Tranſubſtantiation. Our
Trimmer cannot eaſily be converted out of his ſenſes by theſe State
Sophiſters, and yet he has no ſuch peeviſh Obſtinacy as to reject all
Correſpondence with France, becauſe we ought to be apprehenſive of the too
great power of it; he would not [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=100) have the kings
Friendſhip to the Confede­rates extended to the involving him in any
unreaſonable or dangerous Engagements, neither would he have him lay aſide the
conſideration of his better eſtabliſhment at home, out of his exceſſive Zeal
to ſecure his Allies abroad; but ſure there might be a Mean between theſe two
oppoſite Ex­treams, and it may be wiſh'd that our Friendſhip with France
ſhould at leaſt be ſo bounded, that it may conſiſt with the humour as well as
the Intereſt of England. There is no Woman but has the fears of contraictng
too near an intimacy with a much greater Beauty, becauſe it expoſes her too
often to a Compariſon that is not advantageous to her; and ſure it may be­come
a Prince to be as jealous of his Dig­nity, as a Lady can be of her good looks,
and to be as much out of Countenance, to be thought an humble Companion to ſo
much a greater Power; to be always ſeen in an ill Light, to be ſo darkned by
the brightneſs of a greater Star, is ſome­what mortifying; and when England
might ride Admiral at the head of the Confede­rates, to look like the
Kitching-Yatch to the Grand Louis, is but a ſcurvy Figure for us to make in
the Map of Chriſtendom; it would riſe up in our Trimmer's ſtomach▪ [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=100) if ever (which
God forbid) the power of calling and intermitting Parliaments here, ſhould be
transferred to the Crown of France, and that all the opportunities of our own
ſettlements at home ſhould give way to their Projects abroad; and that our
Intereſts ſhould be ſo far ſacrific'd to our Compliance, that all the
Omnipotence of France can never make us full amends for it In the mean time,
he ſhrinks at the diſmal proſpect he can by no means drive away from his
thoughts, that when France has gather'd all the fruit ariſing from our
Mi­ſtakes, and that we can bear no more with them, they will cut down the Tree
and throw it into the fire; for all this while, ſome Superfine States-Men, to
comfort us, would ſain perſwade the World that this or that accident may ſave
us, and for all that is or ought to be dear to us, would have us to rely
wholly upon Chance, not conſidering that Fortune is Wiſdoms Crea­ture, and
that God Almighty loves to be on the Wiſeſt as well as the Strongeſt ſide;
therefore this is ſuch a miſerable ſhift, ſuch a ſhameful Evaſion, that they
would be laught to death for it, if the ruining Con­ſequence of this Miſtake
did not more diſ­poſe Men to rage, and a deteſtation of it.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=101) Our
Trimmer is far from Idolatry in o­ther things, in one thing only he comes near
it, his Country is in ſome degree his Idol; he does not Worſhip the Sun,
be­cauſe 'tis not peculiar to us, it rambles about the World, and is leſs kind
to us than o­thers; but for the Earth of England, tho perhaps inferior to that
of many places abroad, to him there is Divinity in it, and he would rather
dye, than ſee a piece of Engliſh Glaſs trampled down by a Foreign Treſpaſſer:
He thinks there are a great ma­ny of his mind, for all plants are apt to taſte
of the Soyl in which they grow, and we that grow here, have a Root that
pro­duces in us a Stalk of Engliſh Juice, which is not to be changed by
grafting or foreign infuſion and I do not know whether any thing leſs will
prevail, than the Modern Experiment, by which the Blood of one Creature is
tranſmitted into another; ac­cording to which, before the French can be let
into our Bodies, every drop of our own muſt be drawn out of them.

Our Trimmer cannot but lament, that by a Sacrifice too great for one Nation to
another, we ſhould be like a rich Mine, made uſeleſs only for want of being
wrought, and that the Life and Vigour which ſhould move us againſt our Enemies
is miſerably [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=101) apply'd to tear
our own Bowels; that being made by our happy ſituation, not only ſafer, but if
we pleaſe greater too, than other Countries which far exceed us in ex­tent;
that having Courage by Nature, Learning by Induſtry, and Riches by Trade, we
ſhould corrupt all theſe Advantages, ſo as to make them inſignificant, and by
a fatality which ſeems peculiar to us, miſplace our active rage one againſt
another, whilſt we are turn'd into Statues on that ſide where lies our
greateſt danger; to be un­concern'd not only at our Neighbours ruine but our
own, and let our Iſland lie like a great Hulk in the Sea, without Rudder or
Sail, all the Men caſt away in her, or as if we were all Children in a great
Cradle, and rockt aſleep to a foreign Tune.

I ſay when our Trimmer repreſenteth to his Mind, our Roſes blaſted and
diſco­lour'd, whilſt the Lilies Triumph and grow Inſolent, upon the
Compariſon; when he conſiders our own once flouriſhing Lawrel, now withered
and dying, and nothing left us but a remembrance of a better part in Hiſtory,
than we ſhall make in the next Age: which will be no more to us than an
Eſcutcheon hung upon our Door when we are dead; when he foreſees from hence,
growing Infamy from abroad, confuſion [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=102) at home, and
all this without the poſſibility of a Cure, in reſpect of the voluntary
fet­ters good Men put upon themſelves by their Allegiance without a good
meaſure of preventing Grace, he would be tempted to go out of the World like a
Roman Philo­ſopher, rather than endure the burthen of Life under ſuch a
diſcouraging Proſpect. But Miſtakes, as all other things, have their Periods,
and many times the neareſt way to Cure, is not to oppoſe them, but ſtay till
they are cruſht with their own weight: for Nature will not allow any thing to
continue long that is violent; violence is a wound, and as a wound, muſt be
curable in a little time, or elſe 'tis Mortal; but a Nation, comes near to be
Immortal, therefore the wound will one time or another be cured, tho perhaps
by ſuch rough Me­thods, if too long forborn, as may even make the beſt
Remedies we can prepare, to be at the ſame time a Melancholy Con­templation to
us; there is but one thing (God Almighties Providence excepted) to ſupport a
Man from ſinking under theſe afflicting thoughts, and that is the hopes we
draw ſingly from the King himſelf▪ without the mixture of any other
conſide­ration.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=102) Tho the
Nation was laviſh of their Kind­neſs to him at his firſt coming, yet there
remains ſtill a ſtock of Warmth in Mens Hearts for him.

Beſides the good Influences of his happy Planet are not yet all ſpent, and tho
the Stars of Men paſt their youth are generally declining, and have leſs Force
like the Eyes of decaying Beauties, yet by a Bleſſing pe­culiar to himſelf, we
may yet hope to be ſav'd by his Autumnal Fortune; He has ſomething about him
that will draw down  [...] healing Miracle for his and our Delive­rance; a
Prince which ſeems fitted for ſuch in offending Age, in which Mens Crimes have
been ſo general, that the not forgiving his People has been the deſtroying of
them, whoſe Gentleneſs gives him a natural Do­minion that hath no bounds, with
ſuch a noble mixture of Greatneſs and Conde­ſcention, an engaging Look, that
diſarms Men of their ill Humors, and their Re­ſentments; ſomething in him that
wanteth a Name, and can be no more defined than it can be reſiſted; a Gift of
Heaven, of its laſt finiſhing, where it will be peculiarly kind; the only
Prince in the World that dares be familiar, or that has right to tri­umph over
thoſe forms which were firſt in­vented to give awe to thoſe who could not
[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=103) judge,
and to hide Defects from thoſe that could; a Prince that has exhauſted himſelf
by his Liberality, and endanger'd himſelf by his Mercy; who out-ſhines by his
own Light and natural Virtues all the varniſh of ſtudied Acquiſitions; his
Faults are like Shades to a good Picture, or like Allay to Gold, to make it
the more uſeful, he may have ſome, but for any Man to ſee them through ſo many
reconciling Virtues, is a Sacrilegious piece of ill nature, of which no
generous Mind can be guilty; a Prince that deſerves to be lov'd for his own
ſake, even without the help of a Compariſon; our Love, our Duty, and our
Danger, all join to cement our Obedience to him; in ſhort whatever, he can do,
it is no more poſſible for us to be angry with him, than with a Bank that
ſecures us from the raging Sea, the kind Shade that hides us from the
ſcorching Sun, the welcome Hand that rea­ches us a Reprieve, or with the
Guardian Angel, that reſcues our Souls from the de­vouring Jaws of wretched
Eternity.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=103)

#### 1.4. CONCLUSION

TO Conclude, our Trimmer is ſo fully ſatisfy'd of the Truth of theſe
Prin­ciples, by which he is directed, in reference to the Publick, that he
will neither be He­ctored and Threatned, Laught, nor Drunk out of them; and
inſtead of being conver­ted by the Arguments of his Adverſaries to their
Opinions, he is very much confirmed in his own by them; he profeſſes ſolemnly
that were it in his Power to chuſe, he would rather have his Ambition bounded
by the Commands of a Great and Wiſe Maſter, than let it range with a Popular
Licence, tho' crown'd with ſucceſs; yet he cannot commit ſuch a Sin againſt
the glorious thing call'd Liberty, nor let his Soul ſtoop ſo much below it
ſelf, as to be content with­out repining to have his Reaſon wholly ſub­du'd,
or the Privilege of Acting like a ſen­ſible Creature, torn from him by the
impe­rious Dictates of unlimited Authority, in what hand ſoever it happens to
be plac'd. What is there in this that is ſo Criminal, as to deſerve the
Penalty of that moſt ſingular Apophthegm, A Trimmer is worſe than a Re­bel?
What do angry men ail to rail ſo againſt [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=104) Moderation,
do's it not look as if they were going to ſome very ſcurvy Extreme, that is
too ſtrong to be digeſted by the more con­sidering part of Mankind? Theſe
Arbitrary Methods, beſides the injuſtice of them, are (God be thanked) very
unskillful too, for they fright the Birds, by talking ſo loud, from coming
into the Nets that are laid for them; and when Men agree to rifle a Houſe,
they ſeldom give warning, or blow a Trumpet; but there are ſome ſmall States-
Men, who are ſo full charg'd with their own Expectations, that they cannot
con­tain.

And kind Heaven by ſending ſuch a ſea­ſonable Curſe upon their undertakings,
has made their ignorance an Antidote againſt their Malice; ſome of theſe
cannot treat peaceably, yielding will not ſatiſfy them, they will have men by
ſtorm; there are others, that muſt have Plots, to make their Service more
neceſſary, and have an Inte­reſt to keep them alive, ſince they are to live
upon them; and perſwade the King to retrench his own Greatneſs, ſo as to
ſhrink into the head of a Party, which is the be­traying him into ſuch a
Unprincely mi­ſtake, and to ſuch a wilful diminution of himſelf, that they are
the laſt Enemies he ought to allow himſelf to forgive; ſuch [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=104) Men, if they
could, would prevail with the Sun to ſhine only upon them and their Friends,
and to leave all the reſt of the World in the dark; this is a very unuſual
Monopoly, and may come within the Equi­ty of the Law, which makes it Treaſon
to Impriſon the King, when ſuch unfitting bounds are put to his Favour, and he
con­fin'd to the narrow limits of a particular ſet of Men, that would incloſe
him; theſe Honeſt and only Loyal Gentlemen, if they may be allow'd to bear
Witneſs for them­selves, make a King their Engine, and de­grade him into a
property at the very time that their Flattery would make him believe they paid
Divine Worſhip to him; beſides theſe there is a flying Squadron on both ſides,
that are afraid the World ſhould a­gree, ſmall dabblers in Conjuring, that
raiſe angry Apparitions to keep Men from being reconcil'd, like Waſps that fly
up and down, buz and ſting to keep Men unquiet; but theſe Infects are commonly
ſhort-liv'd Crea­tures, and no doubt in a little time Man­kind will be rid of
them; they were Gy­ants at leaſt who fought once againſt Hea­ven, but for ſuch
Pigmies as theſe to con­tend againſt it, is ſuch a provoking Folly, that the
inſolent Bunglers ought to be laught and hiſt our of the World for it; they
[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=105) ſhould
conſder there is a Soul in that great body of the People, which may for a time
be drowzy and unactive, but when the Le­viathan is rouz'd, it moves like an
angry Creature, and will neither be convinc'd nor reſiſted: the People can
never agree to ſhew their united Powers, till they are extremely tempted and
provoked to it, ſo that to ap­ply Cupping-Glaſſes to a great Beaſt natu­rally
diſpos'd to ſleep, and to force the Tame thing whether it will or no to be
Va­liant, muſt be learnt out of ſome other Book than Machiavil, who would
never have preſcrib'd ſuch a prepoſterous Method. It is to be remembred, that
if Princes have Law and Authority on their ſides, the Peo­ple on theirs may
have Nature, which is a  [...]ormidable Adverſary; Duty, Juſtice, Re­ligion,
nay, even Humane Prudence too, bids the People ſuffer any thing rather than
reſiſt; but uncorrected Nature, where e're it feels the ſmart will run to the
neareſt Re­medy, Mens Paſſions in this Caſe are to be conſider'd as well as
their Duty, let it be never ſo ſtrongly enforc'd, for if their Paſſi­ons are
provok'd, they being as much a part of us as our Limbs, they lead Men in­to a
ſhort way of Arguing, that admits no diſtinction, and from the foundation of
Self-Defence, they will draw Inferences, that [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=105) will have
miſerable effects upon the quiet of a Government.

Our Trimmer therefore dreads a general diſcontent, becauſe he thinks it
differs, from a Rebellion, only as a Spotted Fever does from the Plague, the
ſame Species under a lower degree of Malignity; it works ſe­veral ways;
ſometimes like a ſlow Poyſon that has its Effects at a great diſtance from the
time it was given, ſometimes like dry Flax prepared to catch at the firſt
Fire, or like Seed in the ground ready to ſprout up­on the firſt Shower; in
every ſhape 'tis fa­tal, and our Trimmer thinks no pains or precaution can be
ſo great as to prevent it.

In ſhort he thinks himſelf in the right, grounding his Opinion upon that
Truth, which equally hates to be under the Op­preſſions of wrangling Sophiſtry
of the one hand, or the ſhort dictates of miſtaken Au­thority on the other.

Our Trimmer adores the Goddeſs Truth, tho' in all Ages ſhe has been ſcurvily
uſed, as well as thoſe that Worſhipped her; 'tis of late become ſuch a ruining
Virtue, that Mankind ſeems to be agreed to command and avoid it; yet the want
of Practice which Repeals the other Laws, has no influ­ence upon the Law of
Truth, becauſe it has root in Heaven, and an Intrinſick value [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=106) in it ſelf,
that can never be impaired; ſhe ſhews her Greatneſs in this, that her Ene­mies
even when they are ſucceſsful are a­ſham'd to own it; nothing but Power full
of Truth has the prerogative of Trium­phing, not only after Victories, but
inſpite of them, and to put Conqueſt her ſelf out of Countenance; ſhe may be
kept un­der and ſuppreſt, but her Dignity ſtill re­mains with her, even when
ſhe is in Chains; Falſhood with all her Impudence, has not enough to ſpeak ill
of her before her Face, ſuch Majeſty ſhe carries about her, that her moſt
proſperous Enemies are fain to whiſper their Treaſon; all the Power upon Earth
can never extinguiſh her; ſhe has liv'd in all Ages; and let the Miſtaken Zeal
of prevai­ling Authority, Chriſten any oppoſition to it, with what Name they
pleaſe, ſhe makes it not only an ugly and unmannerly, but a dangerous thing to
perſiſt; ſhe has lived ve­ry retired indeed, nay ſometime ſo buried, that only
ſome few of the diſcerning part of Mankind could have a Glimpſe of her; with
all that ſhe has Eternity in her, ſhe knows not how to die, and from the
darkeſt Clouds that ſhade and cover her, ſhe breaks from time to time with
Triumph for her Friends, and Terrour to her Enemies.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=106) Our
Trimmer therefore inſpired by this Divine Virtue, thinks fit to conclude with
theſe Aſſertions, That our Climate is a Trim­mer, between that part of the
World where men are Roaſted, and the other where they are Frozen; That our
Church is a Trimmer between the Phrenzy of Platonick Viſions, and the
Lethargick Ignorance of Popiſh Dreams; That our Laws are Trimmers, be­tween
the Exceſs of unbounded Power, and the Extravagance of Liberty not enough
re­strained; That true Virtue has ever been thought a Trimmer, and to have its
dwel­ling in the middle between the two Ex­treams; That even God Almighty
him­ſelf is divided between his two great At­tributes, his Mercy and his
Juſtice.

In ſuch Company, our Trimmer is not aſham'd of his Name, and willingly leaves
to the bold Champions of either Extream, the Honour of contending with no leſs
Ad­verſaries, than Nature, Religion, Liberty, Prudence, Humanity and Common
Senſe.

# 3\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=107)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=107)

### 1\. THE ANATOMY OF AN EQUIVALENT.

I. THE World hath of late years ne­ver been without ſome extraordi­nary Word
to furniſh the Coffee-Houſes and fill the Pamphlets. Sometimes it is a new one
invented, and ſometimes an old one revived. They are uſually fitted to ſome
preſent purpoſe, with in­tentions as differing as the various deſigns ſeveral
parties may have, either to delude the People, or to expoſe their Adverſaries:
They are not of long continuance, but af­ter they have paſſed a little while,
and that they are grown nauſeous by being ſo often repeated, they give place
to ſomething that is newer. Thus after Whig, Tory, and Trimmer have had their
time, now they are dead and forgotten, being ſupplant­ed by the word
Equivalent, which reign­eth in their ſtead.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=108) The Birth
of it is in ſhort this: After many repeated Eſſayes to diſpoſe Men to the
Repeal of Oaths and Teſts, made for the ſecurity of the Proteſtant Religion,
the general averſion to comply in it was found to be ſo great, that it was
thought adviſeable to try another manner of at­tempting it, and to ſee whether
by putting the ſame thing into another Mould, and ſoftning an harſh
Propoſition by a plauſible Term, they might not have better ſucceſs.

To this end, inſtead of an abſolute quit­ting of theſe Laws, without any
Condition; which was the firſt Propoſal; now it is put into gentler Language,
and runneth thus; If you will take away the Oaths and Teſts, you ſhall have as
good a thing for them. This put into the faſhionable Word, is now called an
Equivalent.

II. So much to the Word it ſelf. I will now endeavour in ſhort to examine and
explain, in order to the having it fully un­derstood, Firſt, What is the
nature of a true Equi­valent; and In the next place, What things are not to be
admitted under that denomination.

I ſhall treat theſe as general Propoſitions, and though I cannot undertake how
far they may be convincing, I may ſafely do it [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=108) that they are
impartial; of which there can be no greater evidence than that I make nei­ther
Inference nor Application, but leave that part entirely to the Reader,
according as his own Thoughts ſhall direct and diſ­pose him.

III. I will firſt take notice, that this Word, by the application which hath
been made of it in ſome modern inſtances lieth under ſome Diſadvantage, not to
ſay ſome Scandal. It is tranſmitted hither from France; and if as in moſt
other things that we take from them, we carry them be­yond the Pattern, it
ſhould prove ſo in this, we ſhould get into a more partial ſtile than the
principles of Engliſh Juſtice will I hope ever allow us to be guilty of.

The French King's Equivalents in Flan­ders are very extraordinary Bargains;
his manner of propoſing and obtaining them is very differing from the uſual
methods of equal dealing. In a later inſtance, Denmark, by the encouragement
as well as by the ex­ample of France, hath propos'd things to the Duke of
Holſtein, which are called Equiva­lents, but that they are ſo, the World is
not yet ſufficiently convinc'd, and proba­bly the Parties concern'd do not
think them to be ſo, and conſequently do not appear to be at all diſpoſed to
accept them. [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=109) Princes enjoyn
and preſcribe ſuch things when they have Strength and Power to sup­ply the
want of Arguments; and according to practice in theſe Caſes, the weaker are
never thought to have an ill Bargain, if they have any thing left them. So
that the firſt Qualification of an Equivalent, muſt be, that the Appraiſers be
indifferent, elſe it is only a Sound, there can be nothing real in it: For,
where the ſame party that propoſeth a Bargain, claimeth a Right to ſet the
Value; or which is worſe, hath power too to make it good, the other may be
forced to ſubmit to the Conditions, but he can by no means ever be perſwaded
to treat upon them.

IV. The next thing to be conſider'd is that to make an Equivalent in reality
an equal thing in the Propoſer, it muſt be a better thing than that which is
required by him; juſt as good is ſubject to the hazard of not being quite ſo
good: It is not eaſie to have ſuch an even hand as to make the Value exactly
equal; beſides, according to the Maxim in Law, Melior conditio poſſiden­tis▪
the Offer is not fair, except the thing offered is better in value than the
thing demanded. There muſt be allowance for removing what is fixed, and there
muſt be ſomething that may be a juſtification for [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=109) changing. The
value of things very often dependeth more upon other circumſtances, than upon
what is meerly intrinſick to them; therefore the calculation muſt be made upon
that foot, perhaps in moſt caſes; and particularly the want which one of the
parties may have of the thing he requireth, maketh it more valuable to him
than it is in it ſelf. If the party propoſing doth not want the thing he would
have in Exchange, his requiring it is Impertinent: If he doth, his want of it
muſt go into the appraiſement, and by conſequence every Propoſer of an
Equivalent muſt offer a bet­ter thing, or elſe he muſt not take it unkind­ly
to be refuſed, except the other party hath an equal want of the ſame thing,
which is very improbable, ſince naturally he that vanteth moſt will ſpeak
firſt.

V. Another thing neceſſary to the ma­king a fair Bargain is, that let the
parties who treat, be they never ſo unequal in them­ſelves, yet as to the
particular thing propo­sed, there muſt be an exact equality, as far as it
relateth to the full Liber [...]y of taking or refusing, concurring or
objecting, without any conſequence of Revenge, or ſo much as Diſ­ſatisfaction;
for it is impoſſible to treat where it is an Affront to dliffer; in that caſe
there is no mean between the two extreams, [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=110) either an open
Quarrel or an intire Submiſ­ſion; the way of Bargaining muſt be equal▪ elſe
the Bargain it ſelf cannot be ſo: For ex­ample, the Propoſer is not only to
uſe equal terms as to the matter, but fair ones in the manner too. There muſt
be no intimations of Anger in caſe of refuſal, much leſs any open Threatning.
Such a Stile is ſo ill sui­ted to the uſual way of Treating, that it looketh
more like a Breach of the Peace, than the making a Bargain. It would be yet
more improper and leſs agreeing with the nature of an Equivalent, if whilſt
two Men are chaffering about the Price, one of them ſhould actually take the
thing in que­ſtion at his own rate, and afterwards deſire to have his
poſſeſſion confirmed by a formal Agreement; ſuch a proceeding would not only
deſtroy that particular contract, but make it impoſſible to have any other,
with the party that could be guilty of ſuch a practice.

VI. Violence preceding deſtroyeth all Con­tract, and even thô the party that
offereth it ſhould have a right to the thing he ſo ta­keth, yet it is to be
obtained by legal means, elſe it may be forfeited by his irregularity in the
purſuit of it: The Law is ſuch an Ene­my to Violence, and ſo little to be
reconciled to it, that in the Caſe of a Rape, the Pu­nishment [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=110) is not taken off
though the party injured afterwards conſenteth. The Juſtice of the Law hath
its eye upon the firſt act, and the Maxim of Volenti non fit injurial, doth
not in this caſe help the Offender, it being a plea ſubſequent to the Crime,
which maketh it to be rejected as a thing wrong dated and out of time.

In taking away Goods or Money it is the ſame thing. The party robbed, by
gi­ving them afterwards to the taker, does not exempt him from the Punishment
of the Violence: Quite contrary, the Man from whom they were taken is
puniſhable, if he doth not proſecute. If the caſe ſhould be, that a Man thus
taking away a thing with­out price, claimeth a right to take it, then whether
it is well or ill founded is not the Question; but ſure, the party from whom
it is ſo taken, whilſt he is treating to Sell or Exchange it, can never make a
Bargain with ſo orbitrary a Chapman, there being no room left after that to
talk of the Va­lue.

VII. To make an equal Bargain there muſt be a liberty of differing, not only
in every thing that is really eſſential, but in every thing that is thought ſo
by either party, and moſt eſpecially by him who is in poſſeſſion of the thing
demanded: His Opinion muſt [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=111) be a Rule to
him, and even his Miſtake in the Value, though it may not convince the Man he
hath to deal with, yet he will be juſtified for not accepting what is offered,
till that Miſtake is fairly rectified and over­ruled.

When a Security is deſired to be changed, that ſide which deſireth it muſt not
pretend to impoſe upon the other, ſo as to dictate to them, and tell them
without debate, that they are ſafe in what is propoſed, ſince of that the
Counſel on the other ſide muſt certainly be the moſt competent Judges. The
hand it cometh from is a great Circum­ſtance, either to invite or diſcourage
in all matters of Contract: the Qualifications of the Party offering muſt ſute
with the Propo­ſition it ſelf, elſe let it be never ſo fair, there is ground
for Suſpicion.

VIII. When Men are of a temper, that they think they have wrong done them, if
they have not always the better ſide of a Bargain: If they happen to be ſuch
as by experience have been found to have an ill Memory for their Word. If the
Character they bear, doth not recommend their Ju­ſtice, where-ever their
Intereſt is concern'd. In theſe caſes, thinking Men will avoid deal­ing, not
only to prevent ſurprize, but to cut off the occaſions of difficulty or
diſpute.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=111) It is yet
more diſcouraging, when there are, either a precedent Practice, or ſtanding
Maxims of groſs Partiality, in aſſuming a privilege of exemption from the
uſual methods of equal dealing.

To illuſtrate this by an Inſtance▪ Sup­poſe that in any caſe, the Church of
Rome ſhould have an Intereſt to promote a Bar­gain; let her way of dealing be
a little examin'd, which will direct thoſe with whom ſhe treateth, how far
they are to rely upon what ſhe propoſeth to them. We may begin with the
Quality in the World, the leaſt conſiſting with equal dealing, viz. An
incurable Partiality to herſelf; which, that it may arrive to its full
per­fection, is crowned with Infallibility. At the firſt ſetting out, ſhe
maketh her ſelf uncapable of dealing upon terms of Equali­ty, by the Power ſhe
claimeth of binding and looſing, which hath been ſo often ap­plyed to
Treaties, as well as to Sins.

If the definition of Juſtice is to deal equal­ly, ſhe cannot be guilty of it
without be­traying her Prerogative, and according to her Principles, ſhe
giveth up the Superiori­ty derived to her by Apoſtolical Succeſſion, if ſhe
degradeth her ſelf ſo as to be judged by the Rules of common Right, eſpecially
of the Bargain ſhould be with Hereticks, who [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=112) in her Opinion
have forfeited the claim they might otherwiſe have had to it.

IX. Beſides, her Taſte hath been ſo ſpoil­ed by unreaſonable Bargains, that
ſhe can never bring down her Palate to any thing that is fair or equal. She
hath not only judg'd it an Equivalent, but a great Bar­gain for the other
ſide, to give them Ab­ſolutions and Indulgence for the real Pay­ment of great
Sums, for which ſhe hath drawn Bills to have them repayed with Intereſt in
Purgatory.

This Spiritual Bank hath carried on ſuch a Trade upon theſe advantageous
Terms, that it can never ſubmit to the ſmall Pro­fits an ordinary Bargain
would produce.

The ſeveral Popes have in exchange for the Peter-Pence, and all their other
Rents and Fines out of England, ſent ſanctified Roſes, Reliques, and other
ſuch Wonder-working Trifles. And by virtue of their Character of Holy Fathers,
have uſed Princes like Children, by ſending them ſuch Rattles to play with,
which they made them buy at extravagant Rates; beſides which, they were to be
thankful too, in to the bargain.

A Chip of the Croſs, a piece of St. Lau­rence's Grid-iron, a Hair of St.
Peter, have been thought Equivalents, for much more [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=112) ſubſtantial
things. The Popes being Ma­ſters of the Jewel-Houſe, have ſet the Rates upon
them, and they have paſſed; though the whole Shop would not take up the va­lue
of a Bodkin in Lombardſtreet upon the credit of them.

They are unconſcionable Purchaſers, for they get all the Money from the living
by praying for them when they are dead. And it is obſervable, that the
Northern part of Chriſtendom, which beſt underſtandeth Trade, were the firſt
that refuſed to make any more Bargains with them; ſo that it looketh as if the
chief quarrel to the He­reticks was not as they were ill Chriſtians, but as
they were unkind Merchants, in ſo diſcourteouſly rejecting the Commodities of
the growth of Rome.

To conclude this Head, There is no bar­tering with Infallibility, it being ſo
much above Equality, that it cannot bear the Indignity of a true Equivalent.

X. In all Bargains there is a neceſſity of looking back, and reflecting how
far a preſent propoſal is reconcilable with former practice; For Example, if
at any time a thing is offered, quite differing from the Arguments uſed by the
Propoſer, and inconſiſtent with the Maxims held out by him at other times. Or
in a Publick [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=113) caſe, if the
ſame men who promote and preſs a thing with the utmoſt violence, do in a
little time after with as much vio­lence preſs the contrary, and profeſs a
det­eſtation of the very thing, for which they had before imployed all their
Intereſt and Authority. Or if in the caſe of a Law already made, there ſhould
be a privilege claimed to exempt thoſe from the obliga­tion of obſerving it,
who yet ſhould after­wards deſire and preſs to have a new Law made in exchange
for the old one, by which they would not be bound; and that they ſhould
propoſe a ſecurity by a thing of the very ſame nature as that which they did
not allow to be any before. Theſe Incohe­rences muſt naturally have the effect
of raiſing ſuſpicion, or rather they are a certain proof, that in ſuch
circumſtances it is irra­tional for men to expect an effectual Equi­valent.

XI. If whatſoever is more than ordinary is ſuſpicious, every thing that is
unnatural is more ſo: It is only unneceſſary but unnatural too to perſwade
with violence what it is folly to refuſe; to puſh men with eager­neſs into a
good bargain for themſelves, is a ſtile very much unſuitable to the nature of
the thing. But it goeth further and is yet more abſurd, to grow angry with
[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=113) men for
not receiving propoſal that is for their advantage; Men ought to be content
with the Generoſity of offering good bar­gains, and ſhould give their
compaſſion to thoſe who do not underſtand them: but by carrying their good
nature ſo far as to be Cholerick in ſuch a caſe, they would follow the example
of the Church of Rome, where the definition of Charity is very extraordi­nary.
In her Language, the Writ de Hae­retico Comburendo is a Love letter, and
burn­ing men for differing with them in Opini­on, howſoever miſcalled Cruelty,
is as they underſtand it, the perfection of flaming Cha­rity.

When Anger in theſe caſes laſteth long, it is moſt probable that it is for our
own ſakes; Good nature for others is one of thoſe Diſeaſes that is cured by
time, and eſpecially where it is offered and rejected; but for our ſelves it
never faileth, and can­not be exſtinguiſhed but with our life. It is fair if
men can believe that their friends love them next to themſelves, to love them
better is too much; the Expreſſion is ſo unnatural that it is cloying, and men
muſt have no ſenſe, who in this caſe have no ſuspicion.

XII▪ Another Circumſtance neceſſary to a fair bargain is, That there muſt be
open­neſs [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=114) and freedom
allowed, as the effect of that Equality which is the foundation of
Contracting. There muſt be full liberty of objecting, and making doubts and
ſcr [...]ples: If they are ſuch as can be anſwered, the party convinced is ſo
much the more con­firmed and incouraged to deal, inſtead of being hindred by
them; but if inſtead of an anſwer to ſatisfy, there is nothing but anger for a
reply, it is impoſſible not to conclude that there is never a good one to
give; ſo that the objection remaining with­out being fully confuted, there is
an abſo­lute bar put to any further Treaty.

There can be no dealing where one ſide aſſumeth a privilege to impoſe, ſo as
to make an offer and not bear the examination of it, this is giving judgment
not making a bargain. Where it is called unmannerly to object, or criminal to
refuſe, the ſureſt way is for men to ſtay where they are, rather than treat
upon ſuch diſadvantage.

If it ſhould happen to be in any Country where the governing power ſhould
allow men Liberty of Conſcience in the choice of their Religion, it would be
ſtrange to deny them liberty of ſpeech in making a bargain. Such a
contradiction would be ſo diſcourag­ing, that they muſt be unreaſonably
ſanguine, who in that caſe can entertain the hopes of a fair Equivalent.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=114) XIII.
And equal Bargain muſt not be a Myſtery nor a Secret. The purchaſer or
pro­poſer is to tell directly and plainly, what it is he intendeth to give in
Exchange for that which he requireth. It muſt be view­ed and conſidered by the
other party, that he may judge of the value; for without knowing what it is,
he cannot determine whether he ſhall take or leave it. An aſ­ſertion in
general, that it ſhall be as good or a better things, is not in this a
ſuffi­cient excuſe for the miſtake of dealing upon ſuch uncertain terms. In
all things that are dark and not enough explained, ſuſpicion naturally
followeth: A ſecret generally im­plieth a defect or a deceit; and if a falſe
light is an objection, no light at all is yet a greater. To pretend to give a
better thing, and to refuſe to ſhew it, is very near ſaying it is not ſo good
a one; at leaſt ſo it will be taken in common conſtruction. A Myſtery is yet a
more diſcouraging thing to a Proteſtant; eſpecially if the Pro­poſition ſhould
come from a Papiſt; it being one of his great Objections to that Church, that
there are ſo many of them Inviſible and Impoſſible, which are ſo violently
thruſt upon their underſtandings, that they are overlaid with them. They think
that ratio­nal creatures are to be convinced only by [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=115) reaſon, and
that reaſon muſt be viſible and freely expoſed; elſe they will think
them­ſelves uſed with contempt inſtead of equality, and will never allow ſuch
a ſuſpected ſecrecy to be a fit preface to a real Equivalent.

XIV. In matters of Contract not only the preſent value, but the contingences
and conſequences, as far as they can be fairly ſuppoſed, are to be conſidered.
For Ex­ample, if there ſhould be poſſibility, that one of the Parties may be
ruined by accept­ing, and the other only diſappointed by his refuſing; the
conſequences are ſo extreamly unequal, that it is not imaginable, a man ſhould
take that for an Equivalent, which hath ſuch a fatal poſſibility at the heels
of it.

If it ſhould happen in a publick caſe, that ſuch a propoſal ſhould come from
the minor part of an Aſſembly or Nation, to the greater; It is very juſt, that
the hazard of ſuch a poſſibility ſhould more or leſs likely fall upon the
leſſer part, rather than upon the greater; for whoſe ſake and advantage things
are and muſt be calculated in all publick Conſtitutions. Suppoſe in any mixed
Government, the chief Magiſtrate ſhould propoſe upon a condition, in the
Senate, Diet, or other Supreme Aſſembly, either to Enact or Abrogate one or
more Laws, by which a poſſibility might be let in of deſtroy­ing [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=115) their Religion
and Property, which in o­ther language ſignifieth no leſs than Soul and Body;
where could be the Equivalent in the caſe, not only for the real loſs, but
even for the fear of loſing them? Men can fall no lower than to loſe all, and
if loſing all de­ſtroyeth them, the venturing all muſt fright them.

In an inſtance when Men are ſecure; that how far ſoever they may be over-run
by Violence, yet they can never be un­done by Law, except they give their
aſ­ſiſtance to make it poſſible, though it ſhould neither be likely nor
intended, ſtill the conſequence which may happen is too big for any preſent
thing to make amends for it. Whilſt the world Poſſible remain­eth, it muſt
forbid the bargain. Where-ever it falleth out therefore, that in an Exam­ple
of a public nature, the Chan [...]ing, Enacting, or Repealing a Law, may
na­turally tend to the miſplacing the Legiſla­tive power in the hands of thoſe
who have a ſeparate intereſt from the body of a People, there can be no
treating, till it is demonſtrably made out, that ſuch a con­ſequence ſhall be
abſolutely impoſſible; for if that ſhall be denied by thoſe who make the
propoſal, if it is becauſe they cannot do it, the motion at firſt was very
unfair. [[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=116)
If they can and will not, it would be yet leſs reaſonable to expect that ſuch
partial deal­ers would ever give an Equivalent fit to be accepted.

XV. It is neceſſary in all dealing to be aſſured in the firſt place, that the
party propoſing is in a condition to make good his Offer; that he is neither
under any for­mer Obligations or pretended Claims, which may render him
uncapable of performing it; elſe he is ſo far in the condition of a Minor,
that whatever he diſpoſeth by ſale or exchange may be afterwards reſumed, and
the Contract becometh void, being originall [...] defective, for want of a
ſuffici­ent legal power in him that made it.

In the caſe of a ſtrict Settlement, where the party is only Tenant for life,
there is no poſſibility of treating which one under ſuch fetters; no purchaſe
or exchange of Lands or any thing elſe can be good, where there is ſuch an
incapacity of making out a Title; the intereſt veſted in him being ſo limited,
that he can do little more than pronounce the words of a Contract, he can by
no means perform the effect of it.

In more publick inſtances, the impoſſibili­ty is yet more expreſs; as ſuppoſe
in any Kingdom, where the people have ſo much liberty left them, as that they
may make [[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=116)
Contracts with the Crown, there ſhould be ſome peculiar rights claimed to be
ſo fix­ed to the Royal Function, that no King for the time being could have
power to part with them, being ſo fundamentally tied to the Office, that they
can never be ſepa­rated. Such Rights can upon no occaſion he received in
exchange for any thing the Crown may deſire from the People: That can never be
taken in payment, which can­not lawfully be given, ſo that if they ſhould part
with that which is required upon thoſe terms, it muſt be a gift, it cannot be
a bargain.

There is not in the whole Dictionary a more untractable word than Inherent,
and leſs to be reconciled to the word Equivalent.

The party that will Contract in ſpight of ſuch a Claim, is content to take
what is impoſſible to grant, and if he complaineth of his Diſappointment, he
neither can have Remedy, nor deſerveth it.

If a Right ſo claimed hapneth to be of ſo comprehenſive a nature, as that by a
clear inference it may extend to every thing elſe, as well as to the
particular matter in queſti­on, as often as the Supream Magiſtrate ſhall be ſo
diſpoſed, there can in that caſe be no treating with Prerogative that
ſwallow­eth all the Right the People can pretend to; [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=117) and if they
have no right to any thing of which they are poſſeſſed, it is a Jeſt and not a
Bargain, to obſerve any Formality in parting with it.

A Claim may be ſo ſtated, that by the power and advantage of interpreting, it
ſhall have ſuch a murthering eye, that if it look­eth upon a Law, like a
Baſilisk, it ſhall ſtrike it dead: Where is the poſſibility of Treating, where
ſuch a Right is aſſumed▪ Nay, let it be ſuppoſed that ſuch a Claim is not well
founded in Law, and that upon a free diſquiſition it could not be made out;
yet even in this caſe, none that are well adviſed will conclude a Bargain,
till it is fully ſtated and cleared, or indeed, ſo much as engage in a treaty,
till by way of prelimi­nary all poſſibility ſhall be remov'd of any trouble or
diſpute.

XVI. There is a collateral circumſtance in making a Contract, which yet
deſerveth to be conſidered, as much as any thing that belongeth to it; and
that is the character and figure of the parties contracting; if they treat
onely by themſelves, and if by others, the Qualifications of the Inſtruments
they em­ploy.

The Propoſer eſpecially, muſt not be ſo low as to want credit. nor ſo raiſed
as to carry him above the reach of ordinary deal­ing. [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=117) In the firſt,
There is ſcandal, in the other danger. There is no Rule without ſome
Exception, but generally ſpeaking the means ſhould be ſuited to the end, and
ſince all Men who treat, pretend an equal bargain, it is deſirable that there
may be equality in the perſons as well as in the thing.

The manner of doing things hath ſuch an influence upon the matter, that Men
may gueſs at the end by the inſtruments that are uſed to obtain it, who are a
very good direction how far to rely upon or ſuſpect the ſincerity of that
which is propoſ­ed. An Abſurdity in the way of carrying on a Treaty, in any
one Circumſtance, if it is very groſs, is enough to perſwade a thinking Man to
break off, and take warn­ing from ſuch an ill appearance. Some things are ſo
glaring that it is impoſſible not to ſee, and conſequently not to ſuspect
them; as ſuppoſe in a private caſe, there ſhould be a Treaty of Marriage
between two Honourable Families, and the pro­poſing ſide ſhould think fit to
ſend a Woman that had been Carted, to perſwade the young Lady to an
approbation and conſent; the unfitneſs of the Meſſenger muſt naturally diſpoſe
the other party to diſtruſt the Meſ­ſage, and to reſiſt the temptation of the
beſt Match that could be offered, when con­veyed [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=118) by that hand,
and uſhered in by ſuch a diſcouraging preliminary.

In a publick inſtance the ſuſpicion ariſing from unfit Mediators, ſtill
groweth more reaſonable in proportion, as the conſequence is much greater of
being deceived. If a Jew ſhould be employed to ſollicite all ſorts, of
Chriſtians to unite and agree; the contra­riety of his profeſſion, would not
allow Men to ſtay till they heard his Arguments, they would conclude from his
Religion, that ei­ther the Man himſelf was mad, or that he thought thoſe to be
ſo, whom he had the Im­pudence to endeavour to perſwade.

Or ſuppoſe an Adamite ſhould be very ſollicitous and active, in all places,
and with all ſorts of Perſons, to ſettle the Church of England in particular,
and a fair Liberty of Conſcience for all Diſſenters; though no­thing in the
World has more to be ſaid for it than Naked Truth, yet if ſuch a Man ſhould
run up and down without Cloaths, let his Arguments be never ſo good, or his
Commiſſion never ſo Authentick, his Figure would be ſuch a contradiction to
his buſineſs, that how ſerious ſoever that might be in it ſelf, his
interpoſition would make a Jeſt of it.

Though it ſhould not go ſo far as this, yet if Men have contrarieties in their
way of [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=118)
living not to be reconciled; as if they ſhould pretend infinite zeal for
liberty, and at that time be in great favour and imployed by thoſe who will
not endure it.

If they are affectedly ſingular, and con­form to the generality of the World
in no one thing, but in playing the knave.

If demonſtration is a familiar word with them, moſt eſpecially where the thing
is  [...]mpoſſible.

If they quote Authority to ſupply their want of ſenſe, and juſtifie the value
of their Arguments, not by reaſon, but by their being paid for them, (in
which, by the way, thoſe who pay them have probably a very melancholy
Equivalent.) If they brandiſh a Prince's Word like a Sword in a Crowd, to make
way for their own imper­tinence; and in diſpute, as Criminals former­ly fled
to the Statue of the Prince for San­ctuary; if they ſhould now, when baffled,
creep under the protection of a Kings Name, where out of reſpect they are no
farther to be purſued.

In theſe caſes; Though the propoſitions ſhould be really good, they will be
cor­rupted by paſſing through ſuch Conduits▪ and it would be a ſufficient
Miſtake to en­ter into a Treaty; but it would be little leſs than Madneſs from
ſuch hands to expect an Equivalent.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=119) XVII.
Having touched upon theſe parti­culars as neceſſary in order to the ſtating
the nature of an equal Bargain, and the Circumſtances belonging to it, let it
now be examined in two or three inſtances▪ what things are not to be admitted
by way of Contract, to paſs under the Name of an Equivalent.

Firſt, Though it will be allowed, that in the general corruption of mankind,
which will not admit Juſtice alone to be a ſuffi­cient tie to make good a
Contract, that a Puniſhment added for the breach of it, is a fitting or rather
a neceſſary Circum­ſtance; yet it does not follow, that in all caſes, a great
Penalty upon the party offend­ing is an abſolute and an entire Security. It
muſt be conſidered in every particular caſe, how far the Circumſtances may
ratio­nally lead a Man to rely more or leſs upon it.

In a private inſtance, the Penalty inflict­ed upon the breach of Contract muſt
be firſt, ſuch a one as the party injured can en­force, and Secondly, ſuch a
one as he will enforce, when it is in his power.

If the Offending party is in a capacity of hindring the other from bringing
the Ven­geance of the Law upon him. If he hath ſtrength or privilege
ſufficient to over rule [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=119) the Letter of
the Contract; in that caſe, a Penalty is but a Word, there is no con­ſequence
belonging to it. Secondly, The forfeiture or puniſhment muſt be ſuch as the
Man aggrieved will take; for Example, if upon a Bargain, one of the Parties
ſhall ſtipulate to ſubject himſelf, in caſe of his failure to have his Ears
cut, or his Noſe ſlit by the other, with ſecurity given, that he ſhall not be
proſecuted for executing this part of the Agreement; the Penalty is no doubt
heavy enough to diſcourage a Man from breaking his Contract; but on the other
ſide it is of ſuch a kind, that the other how much ſoever he may be provo­ked,
will not in cold Blood care to inflict it. Such an extravagant Clauſe would
ſeem to be made only for ſhew and found, and no Man would think himſelf ſafer
by a thing which one way or other is ſure to prove ineffectual.

In a publick Caſe, Suppoſe in a Govern­ment ſo conſtituted that a Law may be
made in the nature of a Bargain, it is in it ſelf no more than a dead letter,
the life is given to it by the execution of what it con­taineth; ſo that let
it in it ſelf be never ſo perfect, it dependeth upon thoſe who are intruſted
with ſeeing it obſerved.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=120) If it is
in any Country, where the chief Magiſtrate chuſeth the Judges, and the Jud­ges
interpret the Laws; a Penalty in any one particular Law can have no effect but
what is precarious. It may have a loud voice to threaten, but it has not an
hand to give a blow; for as long as the Governing Pow­er is in poſſeſſion of
this Prerogative, let who will chuſe the Meat, if they chuſe the Cooks, it is
they that will give the taſt to it. So that it is clear that the rigour of a
Penalty will not in all caſes fix a Bargain, neither is it Univerſally a true
Poſition, that the increaſe of puniſhment for the breach of a new Law, is an
Equivalent for the con­ſent to part with an old one.

XVIII. In moſt Bargains there is a refe­rence to the time to come, which is
there­fore to be conſidered as well as that which cometh within the compaſs of
the preſent valuation.

Where the party Contracting, hath not a full power to diſpoſe what belongeth
to him or them in Reverſion, who ſhall ſuc­ceed after him in his Right; he
cannot make any part of what is ſo limited, to be the condition of the
Contract. Further, he cannot enjoyn the Heir or Succeſſor to for­bear the
exerciſe of any Right that is in­herent to him, as he is a Man; neither can
[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=120) he
reſtrain him without his own conſent, from doing any act which in it ſelf is
lawful, and liable to no objection. For Example, A Father cannot ſtipulate
with any other Man, that in Conſideration of ſuch a thing done, or to be done,
his Son ſhall never Marry; becauſe Marriage is an Inſtitution Eſtabli­ſhed by
the Laws of God, and Man, and therefore no body can be ſo reſtrained by any
power from doing ſuch an act, when he thinketh fit, being warranted by an
Authority that is not to be controuled.

XIX. Now as there are Rights inherent in Mens perſons in their ſingle
capacities, there are Rights as much fixed to the Body Politick, which is a
Creature that never dieth. For inſtance, There can be no Government without a
Supreme Power, that Power is not always in the ſame hands, it is in different
ſhapes and dreſſes, but ſtill where-ever it is lodged, it muſt be unlimit­ed:
It hath a juriſdiction over every thing elſe, but it cannot have it above it
ſelf. Su­preme Power can no more be limited than Infinity can be meaſured;
becauſe it ceaſeth to be the thing; its very being is diſſolved, when any
bounds can be put to it.

Where this Supreme Power is mixed, or divided, the ſhape only differeth, the
Argu­ment is ſtill the ſame.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=121) The
preſent State of Venice cannot re­ſtrain thoſe who ſucceed them in the ſame
power, from having an entire and unlimit­ed Sovereignty; they may indeed make
preſent Laws which ſhall retrench their preſent Power, if they are ſo
diſpoſed, and thoſe Laws if not repealed by the ſame autho­rity that enacted
them, are to be obſerved by the ſucceeding Senate till they think ſit to
Abrogate them, and no longer; for if the Supreme Power ſhall ſtill reſide in
the Senate, perhaps compoſed of other Men, or of other minds (which will be
ſufficient) the neceſſary conſequence is, that one Senate muſt have as mach
right to al­ter ſuch a Law, as another could have to make it.

XX. Suppoſe the Supreme Power in any State ſhould make a Law, to enjoyn all
ſub­ſequent Law-makers to take an Oath never to alter it, it would produce
theſe following Abſurdities.

Firſt, All Supreme Power being inſtituted to promote the ſafety and benefit,
and to prevent the prejudice and danger which may fall upon thoſe who live
under the protecti­on of it; the conſequence of ſuch an Oath would be, that
all Men who are ſo truſted, ſhall take God to witneſs, that ſuch a Law once
made, being judged at the time [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=121) to be
advantageous for the publick, though afterwards by the viciſſitude of times,
or the variety of accidents or intereſts, it ſhould plainly appear to them to
be de­ſtructive, they will ſuffer it to have its courſe, and will never repeal
it.

Secondly, If there could in any Nation be found a ſet of Men, who having a
part in the Supreme legiſlative Power, ſhould as much as in them lieth, betray
their Country by ſuch a criminal engagement, ſo directly oppoſite to the
nature of their Power, and to the Truſt repoſed in them. If theſe Men have
their power only for life, when they are dead ſuch an Oath can o­perate no
farther; and tho that would be too long a Leaſe for the life of ſuch a Monſter
as an Oath ſo compoſed, yet it muſt then certainly give up the Ghoſt. It could
bind none but the firſt makers of it, another generation would never be tied
up by it.

Thirdly, In thoſe Countries where the Supreme Aſſemblies are not conſtant
ſtand­ing Courts, but called together upon occa­ſions, and Compoſed of ſuch as
the People chuſe for that time only, with a Truſt and Character that remaineth
no longer with them than till that Aſſembly is regularly diſſolved, ſuch an
Oath taken by the Mem­bers [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=122) of a Senate,
Diet, or other Aſſembly to choſen, can have very little effect, be­cauſe at
the next meeting there may be quite another ſet of Men who will be under no
Obligation of that kind. The eternity intended to that Law by thoſe that made
it, will be cut off by new Men who ſhall ſucceed them in their power, if they
have a differing Taſte, or another Intereſt.

XXI. To put it yet farther, Suppoſe a Clauſe in ſuch a Law, that it ſhall be
criminal in the laſt degree for any Man choſen in a ſubſequent Aſſembly, to
propoſe the repealing of it; and ſince nothing can be Enacted which is not
firſt propoſed, by this means it ſeemeth as if a Law might be Created which
ſhould never die. But let this be Examined.

Firſt, ſuch a clauſe would be ſo de­ſtructive to the being of ſuch a
Conſtitution, as that it would be as reaſonable to ſay, that a King had right
to give or ſell his King­dom to a foreign Prince, as that any num­ber of Men
who are entruſted with the Su­preme Power, or any part of it, ſhould have a
right to impoſe ſuch Shackles▪ upon the Liberty of thoſe who are to ſucceed
them in the ſame Truſt. The ground of that Truſt is, that every Man who is
choſen into ſuch an Aſſembly, is to do all that [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=122) in him lieth
for the good of thoſe who choſe him: The Engliſh of ſuch a Clauſe would be,
that he is not to do his beſt for thoſe that choſe him, becauſe though he
ſhould be convinc'd that it might be very fatal to continue that Law, and
therefore very ne­ceſſary to repeal it, yet he muſt not repeal it, becauſe it
is made a Crime, and attended with a Penalty.

But ſecondly, to ſhew the emptineſs as well as injuſtice of ſuch a Clauſe, it
is clear, that although ſuch an Invaſion of Right ſhould be impoſed, it will
never be obeyed: There will only be Deformity, in the Mon­ſter, it will
neither ſting nor bite. Such Law-givers would only have the honour of
attempting a contradiction which can ne­ver have any ſucceſs; for as ſuch a
Law in it ſelf would be a Madneſs, ſo the Penalty would be a Jeſt; which may
be thus made out.

XXII. A Law that carrieth in it ſelf Rea­ſon enough to ſupport it, is ſo far
from want­ing the protection of ſuch a Clauſe, or from needing to take ſuch an
extraordinary receipt for long Life, that the admitting it muſt certainly be
the likelieſt and the ſhorteſt way to deſtroy it; ſuch a Clauſe in a Law muſt
imply an opinion that the greateſt part of mankind is againſt it, ſince it is
im­poſſible [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=123) ſuch an
exorbitance ſhould be done for its own ſake; the end of it muſt be to force
Men by a Penalty, to that which they could not be perſwaded to, whilſt their
Rea­ſon is left at liberty. This Poſition being granted, which I think can
hardly be deni­ed, put the caſe that a Law ſhould be made with this imaginary
Clauſe of Immortality, after which another Aſſembly is choſen, and if the
majority of the Electors ſhall be againſt this Law, the greater part of the
Elected muſt be ſo too, if the choice is fair and re­gular; which muſt be
preſumed, ſince the ſuppoſition of the contrary is not to come within this
Argument. When theſe Men ſhall meet, the Majority will be viſible be­forehand
of thoſe who are againſt ſuch a Law, ſo that there will be no hazard to any
ſingle Man in propoſing the Repeal of it, when he cannot be puniſhed but by
the Majority, and he hath ſuch a kind of aſſur­ance as cometh near a
Demonſtration, that the greater Number will be of his mind, and conſequently,
that for their own ſakes they will ſecure him from any danger.

For theſe Reaſons, where-ever in order to the making a Bargain, a Proposition
is advanc'd to make a new Law, which is to  [...]ye up thoſe who neither can
nor will be bound by it, it may be a good Jeſt, but it will never be a good
Equivalent.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=123) XXIII.
In the laſt place, let it be examin­ed how far a Promiſe ought to be taken far
a Security in a Bargain.

There is great Variety of Methods for the Security of thoſe that deal,
according to their Diſpoſitions and Intereſts; ſome are binding, others
inducing circumſtances, and are to be ſo diſtinguiſhed.

Firſt, Ready Payment is without excepti­on, ſo of that there can be no
diſpute; in default of that, the good Opinion Men may have of one another is a
great ingredient to ſupply the want of immediate Perform­ances. Where the
Truſt is grounded upon Inclination only, the Generoſity is not al­ways
return'd; but where it ſpringeth from a long Experience it is a better
foundation, and yet that is not always ſecure. In ordi­nary dealing, one
Promiſe may be an Equi­valent to another, but it is not ſo for a thing
actually granted or conveyed; eſpe­cially if the thing required in exchange
for it, is of great value, either in it ſelf or in its conſequences. A bare
Promiſe as a ſingle Security in ſuch a caſe is not an equal pro­poſal; if it
is offered by way of addition, it generally giveth cauſe to doubt the Title is
crazy, where ſo ſlender a thing is brought in to be a ſupplement.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=124) XXIV.
The Earneſt of making good a Promiſe, muſt be ſuch a behaviour preceding; as
may encourage the party to whom it is made to depend upon it: Where inſtead of
that, there hath been want of Kindneſs; and which is worſe an Invaſion of
Right, a Promiſe hath no perſwading force; and till the Objection to ſuch a
Proceeding is forgot­ten, (which can only be the work of time) and the Skin is
a little grown over the ten­der part, the Wound muſt not be touch'd. There
muſt be ſome Intermiſſion at leaſt to abate the ſmart of unkind uſage, or elſe
a Promiſe in the Eye of the party injur'd is ſo far from ſtrengthening a
Security, that it raiſeth more doubts, and giveth more juſti­fiable cauſe
ſuſpect it.

A Word is not like a Bone, that be­ing broken and well ſet again, is ſaid to
be ſometimes ſtronger in that very part: It is far from being ſo in a Word
given and not made good. Every ſingle Act either weakeneth or improveth our
Credit with o­ther Men; and as an habit of being juſt to our Word will
confirm, ſo an habit of too freely diſpenſing with it muſt neceſſarily deſtroy
it. A Promiſe hath its effect to perſwade a Man to lay ſome weight upon it,
where the Promiſer hath not only the power, but may reaſonably be ſuppoſed to
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=124) have the
will of performing it; and further, that there be no viſible intereſt of the
party promiſing to excuſe himſelf from it, or to evade it.

All Obligations are comparative, and where they ſeem to be oppoſite, or
between the greater and the leſſer, which of them ought to have precedence in
all reſpects every man is apt to be his own Judge.

XXV. If it ſhould fall out that the Pro­miſer with full intent at the time to
per­form, might by the interposition of new Arguments, or differing Advice
think him­ſelf oblig'd to turn the matter of Conſcience on the other ſide, and
ſhould look upon it to be much a greater fault to keep his word than to break
it; ſuch a Belief will untye the ſtricteſt Promiſe that can be made, and
though the Party thus abſolving himſelf ſhould do it without the mixture or
tempta­tion of private intereſt, being moved to it meerly by his Conſcience,
as then informed; yet how far ſoever that might diminiſh the Fault in him, it
would in no degree leſſen the inconveniences to the party who is diſappointed,
by the breach of an engage­ment upon which he relyed.

XXVI. A Promiſe is to be underſtood in the plain and natural ſenſe of the
words, and to be ſure not in his who made it, if it [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=125) was given as
part of a Bargain. That would be like giving a Man power to raiſe the value of
his Money in the payment of his Debt, by which, tho he paid but half or leſs,
be might pretend according to the letter to have made good the Contract.

The power of interpreting a Promiſe intire­ly taketh away the virtue of it. A
Mer­chant who ſhould once aſſume that privi­lege, would ſave himſelf the
trouble of mak­ing any more Bargains.

It is ſtill worſe if this Juriſdiction over a Man's Promiſe, ſhould be lodg'd
in hands that have Power to ſupport ſuch an extraor­dinary Claim; and if in
other Caſes, forbear­ing to deal upon thoſe terms is adviſable, in this it
becometh abſolutely neceſſary.

XXVII. There muſt in all reſpects be a full liberty to claim a Promiſe, to
make it reaſon­able to take it in any part of payment; elſe it would be like
agreeing for a Rent, and at the ſame time making if criminal to demand it.

A ſuperiority of Dignity or Power in the party promiſing maketh it a more
tender thing for the other party to treat upon that ſecurity. The firſt maketh
it a nice thing to claim, the latter maketh it a dif­ficult thing to obtain.

In ſome caſes, a Promiſe is in the nature of a Covenant, and then between
equal par­ties [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=125) the breach of
it will bear a Suit; but where the greatneſs of the Promiſer is very much
raiſed above the level of equality, there is no Forfeiture to be taken. It is
ſo far from the party grieved his being able to ſue or recover Damages, that
he will not be allowed to explain or expoſtulate, and inſtead of his being
relieved againſt the breach of Promiſe, he will run the hazard of being
puniſhed for breach of Good Man­ners▪ Such a Difficulty is putting all or part
of the Payment in the Fire, where Men muſt burn their Fingers before they can
come at it.

That cannot properly be called good pay­ment, which the party to whom it is
due may not receive with eaſe and ſafety. It was a Kings Brother of England
who refuſ­ed to lend the Pope money, for this reaſon, That he would never take
the Bond of one, upon whom he could not diſtrain.

The Argument is ſtill ſtronger againſt the Validity of a Promiſe, when the
Contract is made between a Prince and a Subject. The very offering a Kings
Word in Mort­gage is rather a threatning in caſe of refuſal, than an inducing
Argument to accept it; it is unfair at firſt, and by that giveth great­er
cauſe to be cautious, eſpecially if a thing of that value and dignity as a
Kings Word [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=126) ought to be,
ſhould be put into the hands of State Brokers to ſtrike up a Bargain with it.

XXVIII. When God Almighty maketh Covenants with Mankind, His Promiſe is a
ſufficient Security, notwithſtanding his Su­periority and his Power; becauſe
firſt, he can neither erre nor do injuſtice. It is the only Exception to his
Omnipotence, that by the Perfection of his being he is in­capacitated to do
wrong. Secondly, at the in­ſtant of his Promiſe, by the extent of his
Fore­ſight, which cannot fail, there is no room left for the poſſibility of
any thing to inter­vene, which might change his mind. Laſt­ly, he is above the
receiving either Benefit or Inconvenience, and therefore can have no Intereſt
or Temptation to vary from his Word, when once he hath granted it.

Now though Princes are God's Vicege­rents, yet their Commiſſion not being ſo
large, as that theſe Qualifications are devolv­ed to them, it is quite another
caſe, and ſince the offering a Security implyeth it to be examined by the
party to whom it is propoſed, it muſt not be taken ill that Ob­jections are
made to it, even though the Prince himſelf ſhould be the immediate Pro­poſer.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=126) Let a
familiar Caſe be put; Suppoſe a  [...]rince, tempted by a Paſſion too ſtrong
[...]or him to reſiſt, ſhould deſcend ſo as to  [...]romiſe Marriage to one of
his Subjects,  [...]nd as Men are naturally in great haſte  [...]pon ſuch
occaſions, ſhould preſs to take poſſeſſion before the neceſſary Forms could
[...]e complyed with; would the poor Ladies Scruples be called criminal for
not taking  [...] Security of the Royal Word? Or  [...]ould her Allegiance be
tainted by her re­  [...]ing the ſacred Perſon of her Sovereign, becauſe he
was impatient of delay? Courte­  [...] in this caſe might perſwade her to
ac­cept it, if ſhe was ſo diſpoſed, but ſure the  [...] exerciſe of Power can
never claim it.

XXIX. There is one Caſe where it is more particularly a Duty to uſe very great
[...]tion in accepting the ſecurity of a Pro­  [...], and that is, when Men
are authorized and truſted by others to act for them. This  [...]tteth them
under much greater reſtraints, than thoſe who are at liberty to treat for
themſelves. It is lawful, though it is not  [...]rudent for any man to make an
ill Bar­gain for himſelf, but it is neither the one nor  [...]he other, where
the party contracting  [...]reateth on behalf of another, by whom he  [...]
intruſted. Men who will unwarily ac­  [...]ept an ill ſecurity, if it is for
themſelves, [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=127) forfeit their
own diſcretion, and undergo the Penalty, but they are not reſponſible to any
body elſe. They lie under the Mortification and the loſs of committing the
error, by which though they may ex­poſe their Judgment to ſome cenſure, yet
their Morality ſuffers no reproach by it.

But thoſe who are deputed by others to treat for them, upon terms of beſt
advan­tage, though the Confidence placed in them ſhould prevent the putting
any limits to their Power in their Commiſſion, yet the Condition implied if
not expreſſed, is that the Perſons ſo Truſted ſhall neither make an ill
Bargain, nor accept a ſlight Security.

The Obligation is yet more binding when the Truſt is of a Publick Nature. The
ag­gravation of diſappointing a Body of Men that rely upon them, carrieth the
Faul [...] as high as it can go, and perhaps no Crim [...] of any kind can
outdo ſuch a deliberate breach of Truſt, or would more juſtly mak [...] Men
forfeit the protection of humane So­ciety.

XXX. I will add one thing more upon this, Head, which is, that it is not alway
[...] a true Propoſition, that 'tis ſafe to rely upo [...] a Promiſe, if at
the time of making it, i [...] is the Intereſt of the Promiſer to make i [...]
good. This, though many times it is a [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=127) good
Inducement, yet it hath theſe Excep­  [...]ions to it. Firſt, if the Propoſer
hath at  [...]er times gone plainly againſt his viſible  [...]ntereſt, the
Argument will turn the other  [...]ay, and his former Miſtakes are ſo many
Warnings to others, not to come within the danger of any more: let the
Induce­ments to thoſe Miſtakes be never ſo great and generous, that does not
alter the Nature, they are Miſtakes ſtill.

Intereſt is an uncertain thing, It goeth and cometh, and varieth according to
times and circumſtances; as good build upon a Quickſand, as upon a preſumption
that Intereſt ſhall not alter. Where are the Men ſo diſtinguiſhed from the
reſt of Man­kind, that it is impoſſible for them to  [...]iſtake their
Intereſt? Who are they that  [...]ve ſuch an exemption from humane
[...]eailty, as that it can never happen to them not to ſee their Intereſt for
want of Under­derſtanding, or not to leap over it by ex­ceſs of Zeal.

Above all, Princes are the moſt liable to Miſtake; not out of any defect in
their Na­ture, which might put them under ſuch an unfortunate diſtinction;
quite contrary, the blood they derive from wiſe and great An­ceſtors, does
rather diſtinguiſh them on the better ſide; beſides that their great
Cha­racter [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=128) and Office of
Governing giveth a noble Exerciſe to their Reaſon, which  [...] very hardly
fail to raiſe and improve  [...] But there is one Circumſtance annexed their
Glorious Calling, which in this re­ſpect is ſufficient to outweigh all thoſe
Ad­vantages; it is that Mankind, divided in moſt things elſe, agree in this,
to conſpire in their endeavors to deceive and miſlea [...] them; which maketh
it above the power of humane underſtanding, to be ſo exactly guarded as never
to admit a ſurpriſe, and the higheſt applauſe that could ever yet be given to
the greateſt Men that ever wore a Crown, is that they were no oftner
de­ceived.

Thus I have ventur'd to lay down my thoughts of the Nature of a Bargain, and
the due Circumſtances belonging to an Equi­valent, and will now conclude with
thi [...] ſhort word. ‘Where Diſtruſting may be the cauſe of provoking Anger,
and Truſt­ing may be the cauſe of bringing Ruin the Choice is too eaſie to
need the being Explained.’

# 4\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=128)

A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon occaſion of His Ma­jeſties late Gracious
De­claration of Indulgence.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=129)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=129)

### 1\. A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon Occaſion of His Majeſties late Gracious
Declaration of In­dulgence.

SIR,

SINCE Addreſſes are in faſhion, give me leave to make one to you. This is
neither the Effect of Fear, Intereſt, or Reſentment; therefore on may be ſure
it is ſincere: and for that [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=130) reaſon it may
expect: to be kindly received. Whether it will have power enough  [...]
Convince, dependeth upon the Reaſon  [...] of which you are to judge; and upon
your Preparation of Mind, to be perſwaded by Truth, whenever it appeareth to
you. It ought not to be the leſs welcome, for coming from a friendly Hand, one
whoſe kindneſs to you is not leſſened by diffe­rence of Opinion, and who will
not let h [...] Thoughts for the Publick be ſo tied or confined to this or
that Sub-diviſion of Proteſtants, as to ſtifle the Charity, which, beſides all
other Arguments,  [...] at this time become neceſſary to ſerve us.

I am neither ſurprized nor provoked [...] [...] ſee that in the Condition you
were  [...] into by the Laws, and the ill Circumſtance [...] you lay under, by
having the Excluſ [...] and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were deſirous
to make your ſelves leſs un­eaſy and obnoxious to Authority. Me [...] who are
ſore, run to the neareſt Reme [...] with too much haſt to conſider all the
con­ſequences: Grains of allowance are to  [...] given, where Nature giveth
ſuch ſtrong [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=130) Influences. When
to Men under Suffer­ings it offereth Eaſe, the preſent Pain will  [...]rdly
allow time to examine the Reme­  [...]s; and the ſtrongeſt Reaſon can hard­ly
gain a fair Audience from our Mind, whilſt ſo poſſeſſed, till the Smart: is a
little  [...]layed.

I do not know whether the Warmth tha [...] naturally belongeth to new
Friend­ſhips, may not make it a harder Task for me to perſwade you. It is like
telling Lovers, in the beginning of their Joys, th [...] they will in a little
time have an  [...]. Such an unwelcome Stile doth not  [...]ly find Credit:
but I will ſuppoſe you  [...] not ſo far gone in your new Paſſi­on, but that
you will Hear ſtill; and there­fore I am under the leſs Diſcouragement,  [...]
I offer to your Conſideration two  [...]gs. The Firſt is, The Cauſe you have
[...] ſuſpect your new Friends. The Second, [...]e Duty incumbent upon you, in
Chri­ſtianity and Prudence, not to hazard the Publick Safety, neither by
deſire of Eaſe,  [...]or of Revenge.

To the Firſt: Conſider that notwith­ſtanding [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=131) the ſmooth
Language which is now put on to engage you, theſe new Friends did not make you
their Choice, but their Refuge: They have ever made their firſt Courtſhips to
the Church of Eng­land, and when they were rejected there they made their
Application to you in the ſecond place. The Inſtances of this might be given
in all times. I do not repeat them, becauſe whatſoever is unneceſſary, muſt be
tedious, the truth of this Aſſer­tion being ſo plain, as not to admit a
Di­ſpute. You cannot therefore reaſonably flatter your ſelves, that there is
any Incli­nation to you. They never pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to
uſher in Li­berty for themſelves under that ſhelter▪ I refer you to Mr.
Coleman's Letters, and to the Journals of Parliament, where you may be
convinced, if you can be ſo mi­ſtaken, as to doubt; nay, at this very hour,
they can hardly forbear, in the height of their Courtſhip, to let fall hard
Words of you. So little is Nature to be reſtrained; it will ſtart out
ſometimes, diſdaining to ſubmit to the Uſurpation of Art and In­tereſt.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=131) This
Alliance, between Liberty and In­fallibility, is bringing together the Two
moſt contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome doth not only
diſ­like the allowing Liberty, but by its Prin­ciples it cannot do it. Wine is
not more expreſly forbid to the Mahometans, than giving Hereticks Liberty to
the Papiſts: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, than Men
married before, and their Wife alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their kindneſs, would be a habit of Sin, of which they are
to repent, and their Abſolution is to be had upon no other terms, than their
promiſe to deſtroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, on­ly that you may
be the better ſqueezed it another time. There muſt be ſome­thing
extraordinary, when the Church of Rome ſetteth up Bills, and offereth
Plai­ſters, for tender Conſciences: By all that hath hitherto appeared, her
skill in Chirurgery lieth chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut off Limbs; but ſhe
is the worſt at healing, of any that ever pretended to it.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=132) To come
ſo quick from another Ex­tream, is ſuch an unnatural Motion, that you ought to
be upon your Guard; the other day you were Sons of Belial: Now, you are Angels
of Light. This is a vio­lent change, and it will be fit for you to pauſe upon
it, before you believe it: If your Features are not altered, neither is their
Opinion of you, what ever may be pretended. Do you believe leſs than you did,
that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? Sure you do not. See then, how
they treat both in Words and Writing, thoſe who entertain that Opi­nion.
Conclude from hence, how incon­ſiſtent their Favour is with this ſingle
Ar­ticle, except they give you a Diſpenſation for this too, and by a Non
Obſtante, ſecure you that they will not think the worſe of you.

Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes.
Popery now is the only Friend to Liber­ty; and the known Enemy to Perſecution:
The Men of Taunton and Tiverton, are a­bove all other Eminent for Loyalty. The
[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=132) Quakers
from being declared by the Papiſts not to be Chriſtians, are now made
Fa­vourites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are on a ſudden
grown the moſt accompliſhed Men of the King­dom, in good Breeding, and give
Thanks with the beſt Grace, in double refined Language. So that I ſhould not
wonder, though a Man of that Perſwaſion, inſpite of his Hat, ſhould be Maſter
of the Ceremonies. Not to ſay harſher words, theſe are ſuch very new things,
that it is impoſſible not to ſuſpend our Belief, till by a little more
Experience we may be inform'd whether they are Realities or Apparitions: We
have been under ſhame­ful miſtakes if theſe Opinions are true; but for the
preſent, we are apt to be incredulous; except we could be con­vinced, that the
Prieſts words in this caſe too, are able to make ſuch a ſud­den and effectual
change; and that their Power is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it
extendeth to alter the na­ture of all other things, as often as they are ſo
deſpoſed.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=133) Let me
now ſpeak of the Inſtruments of your Friendſhip, and then leave you to judge,
whether they do not afford mat­ter of Suſpition. No ſharpneſs is to be mingled
where Healing only is intended; ſo nothing will be ſaid to expoſe parti­cular
men, how ſtrong ſoever the Temp­tation may be, or how clear the Proofs to make
it out. A word or two in ge­neral, for you better caution, ſhall ſuf­fice:
Suppoſe then, for Argument's ſake, that the Mediators of this new Alliance,
ſhould be ſuch as have been formerly im­ployed in Treaties of the ſame kind,
and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Impower'd to give
En­couragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to ſuſpect them?

If they ſhould plainly be under En­gagements to one ſide, their Arguments to
the other ought to be received accord­ingly; their fair Pretences are to be
look­ed upon as part of their Commiſſion, which may not improbably give them a
Diſpen­ſation in the caſe of Truth, when it may bring a prejudice upon the
Service of thoſe by whom they are imployed.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=133) If there
ſhould be men who having for­merly had Means and Authority to per­ſwade by
Secular Arguments, have in pur­ſuance of that Power, ſprinkled Money amongſt
the Diſſenting Miniſters; and if thoſe very men ſhould now have the ſame
Authority, practice the ſame Methods, and Disburſe, where they cannot
otherwiſe per­ſwade: It ſeemeth to me to be rather an Evidence than a
Preſumption of the Deceit.

If there ſhould be Miniſters amongſt you, who by having  [...]allen under
Tempta­tions of this kind, are in ſome ſort enga­ged to continue their
Frailty, by the awe they are in leſt it ſhould be expoſed: The Perſwaſions of
theſe unfortunate Men muſt ſure have the leſs force, and their Argu­ments,
though never ſo ſpecious, are to be ſuſpected, when they come from Men who
have mortgaged themſelves to ſe­vere Creditors, that expect a rigorous
Ob­ſervation of the Contract, let it be never ſo unwarrantable.

If theſe, or any others, ſhould at this time Preach up Anger and Vengeance
againſt the Church of England; may it not with­out [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=134) Injuſtice be
ſuſpected, that a thing ſo plainly out of Seaſon, ſprinketh ra­ther from
Corruption than Miſtake; and that thoſe who act this Cholerick part, do not
believe themſelves, but only pur­ſue higher Directions, and endeavour to make
good that part of their Contract which obligeth them, upon a Forfeiture, to
make uſe of their inflaming Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would
be retrenched if they ſhould be Moderate: And therefore whilſt Violence is
their In­tereſt, thoſe who have not the ſame Argu­ments, have no reaſon to
follow ſuch a par­tial Example.

If there ſhould be Men, who by the load of their Crimes againſt the
Govern­ment, have been bowed down to com­ply with it againſt their Conſcience;
who by incurring the want of a Pardon, have drawn upon themſelves a neceſſity
of an entire Reſignation: Such men are to be lamented, but not to be believed.
Nay, they themſelves when they have diſchar­ged their Unwelcom Task, will be
in­wardly glad that their forced Endeavours do not ſucceed, and are pleaſed
when men [[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=134)
reſiſt their Inſinuations; which are far from being Voluntary or Sincere, but
are ſqueez­ed out of them by the weight of their be­ing ſo Obnoxious.

If in the heighth of this great dear­neſs by comparing things, it ſhould
hap­pen, that at this inſtant, there is much ſurer Friendſhip with thoſe who
are ſo far from allowing Liberty, that they al­low no Living to a Proteſtant
under them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument
will come home, and ſure it will afford ſufficient ground to ſuſpect. Apparent
Contradicti­ons muſt ſtrike us; neither Nature nor Reaſon can digeſt them:
Self-Flattery, and the deſire to Deceive our ſelves, to gra­tifie preſent
Appetite, with all their Pow­er, which is Great, cannot get the better of ſuch
broad Conviction, as ſome things carry along with them. Will you call theſe
vain and empty Suſpitions? have you been at all times ſo void of Fears and
Jealouſies as to juſtifie your being ſo unreaſonably Valiant in having none
upon this occaſion? Such an extraor­dinary [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=135) Courage at this
unſeaſonable time, to ſay no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

If then for theſe and a thouſand other Reaſons, there is cauſe to ſuſpect,
ſure your new Friends are not to dictate to you, or adviſe you; for inſtance,
The Addreſſes that fly abroad every Week, and Murther us with another to the
ſame; the firſt Draughts are made by thoſe who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Proteſtant Religion: and it is your part only to Write them
our fairer again.

Strange! that you who have been for­merly ſo much againſt Set Forms, ſhould
now be content the Prieſts ſhould Indite for you. The nature of Thanks is an
unavoidable conſequence of being plea­ſed or obliged; they grow in the Heart,
and from thence ſhew themſelves either in Looks, Speech, Writing, or Action:
No man was ever Thankful becauſe he was bid to be ſo, but becauſe he had, or
[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=135) thought
he had ſome Reaſon for it. If then there is cauſe in this Caſe to pay ſuch
extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without taking ſuch
pains to procure them; and it is unkindly done to Tire all the Poſt-Horſes
with carrying Circular Letters to ſolicite that which would be done without
any trouble or conſtraint: If it is really in it ſelf ſuch a Favour, what
needeth ſo much preſſing men to be thank­ful, and with ſuch eager
circumſtances, that where Perſwaſions cannot delude▪ Threatnings are employed
to fright them into a Compliance. Thanks muſt be vo­lantary, not only
unconſtrained, but unſolicited, elſe they are either Trifles or Snares, that
either ſignifie nothing, or a great deal more than is intended by thoſe that
give them. If an Inference ſhould be made, That whoſoever thank­eth the King
for his Declaration, is by that ingaged to Juſtifie it in point of Law; it is
a greater Stride than, I pre­ſume, all thoſe care to make who are perſwaded to
Addreſs: If it ſhall be ſup­poſed, that all the Thankers will be Re­pealers of
the TEST, whenever a Par­liament ſhall meet. Such an Expectation [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=136) is better
prevented before, then diſap­pointed afterwards; and the ſureſt way to avoid
the lying under ſuch a Scan­dal, is not to do any thing that may give a colour
to the Miſtake: Theſe be­ſpoken Thanks are little leſs improper than Love
Letters that were ſolicited by the Lady to whom they are to be di­rected: ſo,
that beſides the little ground there is to give them, the manner of getting
them doth extreamly leſſen their Value. It might be wiſhed that you would have
ſuppreſſed your impatience, and have been content for the ſake of Religion, to
enjoy it within your ſelves without the Liberty of a publick Ex­erciſe, till a
Parliament had allowed it; but ſince that could not be, and that the Artifices
of ſome amongſt you have made uſe of the Well-meant Zeal of the generality to
draw them into this Miſtake; I am ſo far from blaming you with that ſharpneſs
which perhaps, the Matter in ſtrictneſs would bear, that I am ready to err on
the ſide of the more gentle conſtruction.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=136) There is
a great difference between enjoying quietly the Advantages of an Act
irregularly done by others, and the going about to ſupport it againſt the Laws
in being: the Law is ſo Sacred, that no Treſpaſs againſt it is to be defended;
yet Frailties may in ſome meaſure be excuſed, when they cannot be juſtified.
The Deſire of enjoying a Liberty from which Men have been ſo long reſtrained,
may be a Temptation that their Reaſon is not at all times able to reſiſt. It
in ſuch a caſe, ſome Objections are leapt over, indifferent Men will be more
inclined to lament the Occaſion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilſt
it is covered with the Apolo­gy of a good Intention; but where to reſcue your
ſelves from the Seve­rity of one Law, you give a Blow to all the Laws, by
which your Re­ligion and Liberty are to be prote­cted; and inſtead of ſilently
receiving the Benefit of this Indulgence, you ſet up for Advocates to ſupport
it, you become voluntary Aggreſſors, and [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=137) look like
Counſel retained by the Prerogative againſt your old Friend Magna Charta, who
hath done nothing to deſerve her falling thus under your Diſpleaſure.

If the Caſe then ſhould be, that the Price expected from you for this
Li­berty, is giving up your Right in the Laws, ſure you will think twice,
be­fore you go any further in ſuch a loſing Bargain. After giving Thanks for
the Breach of one Law, you loſe the Right of Complaining of the Breach of all
the reſt; you will not very well know how to defend your ſelves when you are
preſſed; and ha­ving given up the Queſtion when it was for your Advantage, you
cannot re-call it when it ſhall be to your Prejudice. If you will ſet up at
one time a Power to help you, which at another time, by parity of Reaſon,
ſhall be made uſe of to deſtroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved
againſt a Miſchief you draw upon your ſelves, by being ſo unreaſonably
thankful. It is like calling in Auxilia­ries [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=137) to help, who
are ſtrong enough to ſubdue you: In ſuch a caſe your Complaints will come too
late to be heard, and your Sufferings will raiſe Mirth inſtead of Compaſſion.

If you think, for your Excuſe, to expound your Thanks, ſo as to re­ſtrain them
to this particular Caſe, others, for their Ends, will extend them further: And
in theſe differing Interpretations, that which is back'd by Authority will be
the moſt likely to prevail; eſpecially when by the Ad­vantage you have given
them, they have in truth the better of the Ar­gument, and that the Inferences
from your own Conceſſions are very ſtrong, and expreſs againſt you. This is ſo
far from being a groundleſs Suppoſi­tion, that there was a late Inſtance of
it, the laſt Seſſion of Parliament, in the Houſe of Lords, where the firſt
Thanks, though things of courſe, were interpreted to be the Approba­tion of
the Kings whole Speech, and a Reſtraint from the further Examinati­on of any
part of it, though never ſo [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=138) much diſliked;
and it was with diffi­culty obtained, not to be excluded from the liberty of
objecting to this mighty Prerogative of Diſpenſing, meerly by this innocent
and uſual piece of good Manners, by which no ſuch thing could poſſibly be
intended.

This ſheweth, that ſome Bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that
the Conſtitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured up­on a
Complement. Now that you have for ſome time enjoyed the Bene­fit of the End,
it is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The ſame Reaſon that
made you deſi­rous to get Liberty, muſt make your ſol­licitous to preſerve it;
ſo that the next Thought will naturally be not to en­gage your ſelf beyond
Retreat, and to agree ſo far with the Principles of all Religion, as not to
rely upon a Death-Bed Repentance.

There are certain Periods of Time, which being once paſt, make all Cauti­ons
ineffectual, and all Remedies deſpe­rate. [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=138) Our
Underſtandings are apt to be hurried on by the firſt Heats, which, if not
reſtrained in time, do not give us leave to look back, till it is too late.
Conſider this in the Caſe of your Anger againſt the Church of England, and
take warning by their Miſtake in the ſame kind, when after the late King's
Reſtauration, they pre­ſerved ſo long the bitter Taſte of your rough Uſage to
them in other times, that it made them forget their Intereſt, and ſacrifice it
to their Revenge.

Either you will blame this Procee­ding in them, and for that reaſon not follow
it, or if you allow it, you have no reaſon to be offended with them; ſo that
you muſt either diſmiſs your Anger, or loſe your Excuſe; except you ſhould
argue more partially than will be ſuppoſed of Men of your Mo­rality and
Underſtanding.

If you had now to do with thoſe rigid Prelates, who made it a matter of
Conſcience to give you the leaſt Indulgence, but kept you at an unchari­table
[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=139)
Diſtance, and even to your moſt reaſonable Scruples continued ſtiff and
inexorable, the Argument might be fairer on your ſide: but ſince the common
Danger hath ſo laid open that Miſtake, that all the former Haughtineſs towards
you is for ever extinguiſhed, and that it hath turned the Spirit of
Perſecution into a Spirit of Peace, Charity, and Condeſcen­ſion; ſhall this
happy Change only affect the Church of England? And are you ſo in love with
Separation, as not to be mov'd by this Example? It ought to be followed, were
there no other Reſon than that it is Vertue; but when beſides that, it is
become neceſſary to your Preſervation, it is impoſſible to fail the having its
Effect upon you.

If it ſhould be ſaid, that the Church of England is never humble but when ſhe
is out of power, and therefore loſeth the Right of being believed when ſhe
pretended to it: The An­ſwer is, Firſt, it would be an uncha­ritable
Objection, and very much miſ­timed; [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=139) an unſeaſonable
Triumph, not only ungenerous, but unſafe: So that in theſe reſpects it cannot
be urged, without Scandal, even though it could be ſaid with Truth. Secondly,
This is not ſo in Fact, and the Argument muſt fall, being built upon a falſe
Founda­tion; for whatever may be told you at this very Hour, and in the Heat
and Glare of your preſent Sun­ſhine, the Church of England can in a Moment
bring Clouds again; and turn the Royal Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off
the Stage with a Breath, if ſhe would give but a Smile or a king Word; the
leaſt Glimpſe of her Compliance would throw you back into the State or
Suffering, and draw upon you all the Arrears of Severity, which have ac­crued
during the time of this Kind­neſs to you, and yet the Church of England, with
all her Faults, will not allow her ſelf to be reſcued by ſuch unjuſtifiable
means, but chuſeth to bear the Weight of Power, rather than  [...]e under the
Burthen of being criminal.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=140) It
cannot be ſaid, that ſhe is un­provoked; Books and Letters come out every Day,
to call for Anſwers, yet ſhe will not be ſtirred. From the ſuppoſed Authors,
and the Stile, one would ſwear they were Underta­kers, and had made a Contract
to fall out with the Church of England. There are Laſhes in every Addreſs,
Challenges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet: In ſhort, the faireſt Occa­ſions
in the World given to quarrel; but ſhe wiſely diſtinguiſheth between the Body
of Diſſenters, whom ſhe will ſuppoſe to act as they do, with no ill Intent;
and theſe ſmall Skirmiſh­ers, pickt and ſent out to picqueer, and to begin a
Fray amongſt the Prote­ſtants, for the Entertainment as well as the Advantage
of the Church of Rome.

This Conduct is ſo good, that it will be ſcandalous not to applaud it. It is
not equal Dealing to blame our Adverſaries for doing ill, and not commend them
when they do well.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=140) To hate
them becauſe they perſe­cuted, and not to be reconciled to them when they are
ready to ſuffer, rather than receive all the Advantages that can be gained by
a Criminal Comply­ance, is a Principle no ſort of Chriſtians can own, ſince it
would give an Ob­jection to them never to be anſwer­ed.

Think a little who they were that promoted your former Perſecutions, and then
conſider how it will look to be angry with the Inſtruments, and at the ſame
time to make a League with the Authors of your Suffer­ings.

Have you enough conſidered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
ſtand in every Borough by Vertue of a Conge d'eſlire, and inſtead of Election,
be ſatisfied if you are Re­turned?

Will you in Parliament juſtifie the Diſpenſing Power, with all its
Conſe­quences, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=141) and Repeal the
Teſt, by which you will make way for the Repeal of all the Laws, that were
made to preſerve your Religion, and to Enact others that ſhall deſtroy it?

Are you diſpoſed to change the Li­berty of Debate into the Merit of
O­bedience; and to be made Inſtruments to repeal or enact Laws, when the Roman
Conſiſtory are Lords of the Arti­cles?

Are you ſo linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament ſhall offer you, if it ſhall not be ſo comprehenſive as to include
the Papiſts in it?

Conſider, that the implyed Conditi­ons of your new Treaty are no leſs, than
that you are to do every thing you are deſired, without exami­ning, and that
for this pretended Liber­ty of Conſcience, your real Freedom is to be
ſacrificed: Your former Faults hang like Chains ſtill about you, you are let
looſe only upon Bayl; the firſt [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=141) Act of Non-
compliance, ſendeth you to Jayl again.

You may ſee that the Papiſts them­ſelves do not relie upon the Legality of
this Power, which you are to ju­ſtifie, ſince the being ſo very earneſt to get
it eſtabliſhed by a Law, and the doing ſuch very hard things in order, as they
think, to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think that the
ſingle Power of the Crown is in this Caſe a good Foundation; eſpecial­ly when
this is done under a Prince, ſo very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty,
that he would think it a Diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceiveth it
ſtrong enough to go alone, to call in the Legiſlative help to ſtrengthen and
ſupport it.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reaſon, for
going ſo far as they did in their Compliance; and yet as ſoon as they ſtopped,
you ſee they are not only de­ſerted, but proſecuted: Conclude then from this
Example, that you muſt ei­ther [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=142) break off your
Friendſhip, or re­ſolve to have no Bounds in it. If they do not ſucceed in
their Deſign, they will leave you firſt; if they do, you muſt either leave
them, when it will be too late for your Safety, or elſe af­ter the ſqueazineſs
of ſtarting at a Sur­plice, you muſt be forced to ſwallow Tranſubſtantiation:

Remember that the other day thoſe of the Church of England were Trim­mers for
enduring you, and now by a ſudden Turn, you are become the Fa­vourites; do not
deceive your ſelves, it is not the nature of laſting Plants thus to ſhoot up
in a Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a Root
to give you a Continuance. It is not ſo long ſince, as to be forgotten, that
the Maxim was, It is impoſſible for a Diſſenter not to be a REBEL. Conſider at
this time in France, even the new Converts are ſo far from being imployed,
that they are diſarmed; their ſudden Change ma­keth them ſtill to be
diſtruſted, not­withſtanding that they are reconciled: [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=142) What are you to
expect then from your dear Friends, to whom, when ever they ſhall think fit to
throw you off again, you have in other times given ſuch Ar­guments for their
excuſe?

Beſides all this, you Act very un­skilfully againſt your viſible Intereſt, if
you throw away the Advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next
probable Revolution. Things tend na­turally to what you would have, if you
would let them alone, and not by an unſeaſonable Activity loſe the In­fluences
of your good Star, which pro­miſeth you every thing that is proſpe­rous.

The Church of England convinced of its Error in being ſevere to you; the
Parliament, when-ever it meeteth, ſure to be gentle to you; the next Heir bred
in the Country which you have ſo often quoted for a Pattern of In­dulgence; a
general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we muſt no more cut our ſelves off
from the Proteſtants abroad, but rather inlarge the Founda­tions [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=143) upon which we
are to build our Defences againſt the Common Enemy; ſo that in truth, all
things ſeem to con­ſpire to give you Eaſe and Satisfaction, if by too much
haſte to anticipate your good Fortune, you do not deſtroy it.

The Proteſtants have but one Article of Humane Strength, to oppoſe the Power
which is now againſt them, and that is, not to loſe the advantage of their
Numbers, by being ſo un­wary as to let themſelves be divi­ded.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince; our Objections to his Belief do not
hinder us from ſeeing his Ver­tues; and our not complying with his Religion,
hath no effect upon our Al­legiance; we are not to be laughed out of our
Paſſive-Obedience, and the Do­ctrine of Non-Reſiſtance; though even thoſe who
perhaps owe the beſt part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make
a Jeſt of it.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=143) So that
if we give no advantage by the fatal Miſtake of miſapplying our An­ger, by the
natural courſe of things, this Danger will paſs away like a ſhow­er of Hail;
fair weather will ſucceed, as lowering as the Sky now looketh, and all this by
plain and eaſie Receipt; Let us be ſtill, quiet, and undivided, firm at the
ſame time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws; and ſo long as we
continue this method, it is next to im­poſſible, that the odds of 200 to one
ſhould loſe the Bett; except the Church of Rome, which hath been ſo long
barren of Miracles, ſhould now in her declining Age, be brought to Bed of One
that would out-do the beſt ſhe can brag of in her Legend.

To conclude, the ſhort Queſtion will be, Whether you will join with thoſe who
muſt in the end run the ſame Fate with you? If Proteſtants of all ſorts, in
their Behaviour to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very reaſon it is fitter for them now to be
re­conciled. Our Diſ-union is not only [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=144) a Reproach, but
a Danger to us; thoſe who believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at
leaſt more Excuſe, to neglect all Secular Cau­tions; but for us, it is as
juſtifiable to have no Religion, as wilfully to throw away the Humane Means of
preſerving it. I am,

Dear Sir,

Your moſt Affectionate humble Servant, T. W.

# 5\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=144)

SOME CAUTIONS Offered to the CONSIDERATION Of Thoſe who are to Chuſe MEMBERS
TO SERVE in the Enſuing Parliament.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=145)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=145)

### 1\. Some Cautions offered to the Conſide­ration of thoſe who are to chuſe
Members to ſerve for the Enſuing Parliament.

I Will make no other introduction, than that it is hoped the Counties and
Bo­roughs will remember in general, That beſides other Conſequences, they will
have the Credit of a good Choice, or the Scan­dal that belongeth to an ill
one.

The Creators will be thought like their Creatures; and therefore an ill Choice
will either be a diſparagement of their Under­ſtanding, or their Morals.

There cannot be a fuller Approbation of a thing, than the Chuſing of it; ſo
that the fault of the Members choſen, if known be­fore-hand, will be judged to
be of the growth of that County or Borough, after ſuch a ſolemn Approbation of
them.

In ſhort, thoſe who ſend up their Repre­ſentatives to Weſtminſter, ſhould take
care they may be ſuch as will do them Right, and their Countrey Honour.

Now to the particulars.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=146) I. A very
extraordinary earneſtneſs to be choſen, is no very good Symptom: A de­ſire to
ſerve the Nation in Parliament, is an Engliſh Man's Ambition: Always to be
Encouraged, and never to be diſapproved.

A Man may not only be willing to ſtand, but he may declare that willingneſs to
his Friends, that they may aſſiſt him, and by all the means becoming a modeſt
and pru­dent Man, he may endeavour to ſucceed, and prevent the being
diſappointed in it.

But there is a wide difference between this and the raiſing a king of petty
War in the County or Corporation; entring the Liſts rather for a Combat than
an Election; throwing Fire-balls to put Men into heat, and omitting to ſpread
no Reports, whe­ther true or falſe, which may give an ad­vantage by laying a
Blemiſh upon a Com­petitor.

Theſe Methods will ever be ſuſpicious; it will never be thought a Natural
thing for Men to take ſuch extravagant pains for the meer ſake of doing good
to others.

To be content to ſuffer ſomething for a good end, is that which many would do
without any great repugnance: but where a Man can honeſtly propoſe nothing to
himſelf, except Troubles, Charge, and Loſs, by abſence from his own Affairs,
to be ſo [[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=146)
violent in the purſuit of ſo ill a Bargain, is not at all ſuited to the
languiſhing Virtue of Mankind ſo corrupted.

Such a ſelf-denying Zeal in ſuch a ſelf-ſeeking Age, is ſo little to be
imagin'd, that it may without injury be ſuſpected.

Therefore when theſe bluſtring Preten­ders come upon the Stage, their natural
Temper and other Circumſtances ought to be very well conſider'd, before Men
truſt them with the diſpoſal of their Money, or their Liberty.

And I am apt to believe, there could hardly be found one ſingle Man whoſe
other Qualifications would over-balance the Ob­jections that lie againſt ſuch
importunate Suitors.

II. Recommending Letters ought to have no effect upon Elections.

In this I muſt diſtinguiſh; for tho in ſtrictneſs perhaps there ſhould be no
Excep­tion; yet in compliance with long practice, and out of an Indulgence
that is neceſſary in a time when Mankind is too much looſe­ned from ſevere
Rules, to be kept cloſe up to them, Letters ſent only from Equal Men, doing
Good Men right by giving Evidence in their behalf, offering them as fitly
qua­lified, when they really are ſo, and freeing them from unjuſt Aſperſions,
may be ſtill al­lowed.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=147) The
Letters I mean, are from Men of Power, where it may be beneficial to com­ply,
and inconvenient to oppoſe.

Choice muſt not only be free from Force, but from Influence, which is a degree
of Force: There muſt be no difficulty, no apprehenſion that a Refuſal will be
ill taken, or reſented.

The Freeholders muſt be Freemen too; they are to have no Shackles upon their
Votes in a Election: and the Men who ſtand, ſhould carry their own Letters of
Recommendation about them, which are there good Character and Behaviour in the
World, without borrowing Evidence, eſpe­cially when it comes from ſuſpected
hands.

Thoſe who make uſe of theſe Epiſtles, ought to have no more advantage from
them, that the Muſcovites have from the Letters put into their hands, when
they are buried, to recommend them to St. Nicholas.

The firſt ſhould as little get admittance. for Men into the Parliament, as
theſe Let­ters can introduce the Bearers into Heaven.

The Scandal of ſuch Letters lieth firſt in the arrogant impoſing of thoſe that
write them, and next in the wretched Meanneſs of thoſe that need them.

Men muſt be fallen very low in their Credit, who upon ſuch an occaſion have
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=147) a
recourſe to Power to ſupport it: Their Enemies could not give ſtronger
Evidence of their not being fit for that which they pretend to. And if the
Electors judge other­wiſe, they will be pretty ſure in a little time to ſee
their Miſtake, and to repent it.

III. Non-Attendance in former Parlia­ments ought to be a Bar againſt the
Choice of Men who have been guilty of it.

It is one of the worſt kinds of Non-Re­ſidence, and the leaſt to be excuſed:
It is very hard that Men ſhould deſpiſe a Duty, which perhaps is the only
ground of the re­ſpect that is paid to them.

It is ſuch a piece of Sawcineſs for any one to preſs for the Honour of ſerving
in Parlia­ment, and then to be careleſs in Attending it, that in a Houſe where
there were ſo ma­ny Officers, the Penalty had not been im­proper to have
Caſhier'd them for not ap­pearing at the General Muſter.

If men forbear to come out of Lazineſs, let them be gratified by taking their
eaſe at Home without interruption; If out of ſmall Cunning to avoid
Difficulties, and to eſcape from the Inconvenience of Voting in Critical
Caſes, let them enjoy that deſpica­ble pitch of Wiſdom, and never pretend to
make a Figure where the Publick is to be ſerved.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=148) If it
would not be thought adviſable to truſt a Man immediately after he hath been
drawn out of a Gaol, it may be as rea­ſonable to look upon one who for his
Non­attendance in the Houſe hath been ſent for in Cuſtody, as a king of
Bankrupt, which putteth him upon unequal terms with thoſe who have been
aſſiduous in the diſcharge of their Duty.

They who thought fit in one Seſſion to neglect the Publick Buſineſs, may be
juſtly ſuſpected, by their ſtanding, in the next to intend their own.

Beſides theſe more deliberate Offenders, there are ſome who do not Attend even
when they are in the Houſe: abſent in their Thoughts for want of Comprehending
the Buſineſs that is doing, and therefore divert­ed from it by any thing that
is Trivial.

Such Men are Nuſances to a ſerious Aſ­ſembly; and when they are Numerous, it
amounteth almoſt to a Diſſolution; it being ſcarce poſſible for good ſence to
be heard, whilſt a noiſe is made by the buzzing of theſe Horſe flies.

The Roman Cenſors who degraded a Se­nator for yawning whilſt there was a
Debate, would have much more abundant matter here upon which they might
exerciſe their Juriſdiction.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=148) To
conclude this Head, There are ſo few that ever mended in theſe Caſes, that
after the firſt Experiment it is not at all reaſona­ble to take them upon a
new Tryal.

IV. Men who are unquiet and buſy in their Natures, are to give more than
ordi­nary proofs of their Integrity, before the E­lecting them into a Publick
Truſt can be juſti­fied. As a hot Summer breedeth greater ſwarms of Flies, ſo
an active time breedeth a greater number of theſe ſhining Gentlemen.

It is pretty ſure, That men who cannot allow themſelves to be at reſt, will
let no body elſe be at quiet. Such a perpetual Activity is apt by degrees to
be applied to the purſuit of their private intereſt. And their thoughts being
in a continual motion, they have not time to dwell long enough upon any thing
to entertain a ſcruple.

So that they are generally at full liberty to do what is moſt convenient for
them, without being fettered by any Reſtraints.

Nay further; Whenever it hapneth that there is an Impunity for Cheating, theſe
nim­ble Gentlemen are apt to think it a diſparage­ment to their Underſtandings
not to go into it.

I doubt it is not a wrong to the preſent Age, to ſay, that a Knave is a leſs
unpopu­lar Calling than it hath been in former times. And to ſay truth, it
would be in­gratitude [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=149) in ſome Men to
turn Honeſt, when they owe all they have to their Kna­very.

The People are in this reſpect unhappy; they are too many to do their own
buſineſs; their numbers, which make their ſtrength, are at the ſame time the
cauſe of their weak­neſs; they are too unweildy to move; and for this Reaſon
nothing can ever redeem them from this incurable Impotency: So that they muſt
have Solicitors to purſue and look after their Intereſts: who are too often
diſpoſed to diſpenſe with the Fidelity they owe to thoſe that truſt them;
eſpeci­ally if the Government will pay their Bills without Abatement.

It is better theſe Gentlement's dexterity ſhould be employed any where than in
Par­liament, where the ill conſequence of their being Members is too much
diffuſed, and not reſtrained to the County or Borough who ſhall be ſo unwary
as to Chuſe them.

V. Great Drinkers are leſs fit to Serve in Parliament than is apprehended.

Men's Virtue, as well as their Underſtand­ing, is apt to be tainted by it.

The appearance of it is Sociable and well-natur'd, but it is by no means to be
rely'd upon.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=149) Nothing
is more frail than a Man too far engaged in wet Popularity.

The habit of it maketh Men careleſs of their buſineſs, and that naturally
leadeth them into Circumſtances, that make them liable to Temptation.

It is ſeldom ſeen, That any Principles have ſuch a root, as that they can be
proof againſt the continual droppings of a Bottle.

As to the Faculties of the Mind, there is not leſs Objection; the vapours of
Wine may ſometimes throw out ſparks of Wit, but they are like ſcattered pieces
of Ore, there is no Vein to work upon.

Such Wit, even the beſt of it, is like paying great Fines; in which caſe there
muſt of neceſſity be an abatement of the conſtant Rent.

Nothing ſure is a greater Enemy to the Brain, than too much moiſture; it can
the leaſt of any thing bear the being continual­ly ſteeped: And it may be
ſaid, that Thought may be reſembled to ſome Crea­tures which can live only in
a dry Country.

Yet ſo arrogant are ſome men, as to think they are ſo much Maſters of
Buſineſs, as that they can play with it; they imagine they can drown their
Reaſon once a day, and that it ſhall not be the worſe for it; forget­ting,
that by too often diving the Underſtand­ing [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=150) at laſt groweth
too weak to riſe up again.

I will ſuppoſe this fault was leſs frequent when Solon made it one of his
Laws, That it was Lawful to Kill a Magiſtrate if he was found D [...]unk. Such
a Liberty taken in this Age, either in the Parliament or out of it, would do
terrible Execution.

I cannot but mention a Petition in the year 1647, from the County of Devon, to
the Houſe of Commons, againſt the un­due Election of Burgeſſes, who are ſtrong
in Wine and weak in Wiſdom.

The cauſe of ſuch Petitions is to be pre­vented by Chuſing ſuch as ſhall not
give handle for them.

VI. Wanting-Men give ſuch cauſe of ſuſpicion where ever they deal, that ſurely
the Chuſers will be upon their guard, as often as ſuch dangerous pretenders
make their application to them.

Let the behaviour of ſuch Men be never ſo plauſible and untainted, yet they
who are to pitch upon thoſe they are to truſt with all they have, may be
excuſed, if they do not only conſider what they are but what they may be.

As we Pray our ſelves we may not be led, into Temptation, we ought not by any
means to thruſt others into it; even [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=150) though our own
Intereſt was not concern­ed; And ſure when it is, the Argument hath not leſs
force.

If a Man hath a ſmall Eſtate, and a nu­merous Family; where it happeneth that
a Man hath as many Children as he hath Tenants, It is not a Recommending
Cir­cumſtance for his Election.

When it cometh to be the Queſtion with ſuch a Man, Whether he ſhall be Juſt to
the Publick, or Cruel to his Family? It is very poſſible the deciſion may be
on the ſide of Corrupted Nature.

It is a Complement to this Age, which it doth not deſerve, to ſuppoſe Men are
ſo ty'd up to Morality, as that they cannot be pinched out of it: eſpecially
now when it is called Starving not to be Embroidered, or ſerved in Plate.

The Men Choſen to ſerve their Coun­try, ſhould not be loaden with Suits that
may tempt them to aſſume Privileges; much leſs under ſuch Neceſſities as may
more immediately prepare them for Cor­ruption.

Men who need a Parliament for their own particular Intereſt, have more reaſon
to offer their Service than others have to accept of it. And though I do not
doubt, but there may be ſome whoſe Virtue would [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=151) triumph over
their Wants, let them be never ſo preſſing; yet to expoſe the Pub­lick to the
hazard of being deceived, is that which can never be juſtifi'd by thoſe that
Chuſe. And tho it muſt be allow'd poſſible for a wanting-Man to be honeſt, yet
it is impoſſible for a Man to be wiſe that will depend upon it.

VII. There is a ſort of Men that have a Tinſel-wit, which make them ſhine
a­mong thoſe who cannot judge.

Club and Coffee-houſe Gentlemen, Pet­ty Merchants of ſmall Conceits, who have
an Empty habit of prating without mean­ing; They always aim at Wit and
general­ly make falſe Fire.

Their buſineſs is leſs to learn, than to ſet themſelves out; which makes them
chuſe to be with ſuch as can only be Witneſſes of their ſmall Ingenuity,
rather than with ſuch as might improve it.

There is a ſubordinate Wit, as much inferior to a Wit of buſineſs, as a Fidler
at a Wake is to the lofty Sound of an Or­gan.

Men of this Size are in no degree ſuited to the buſineſs of redreſſing
Grievances, and making Laws.

There is a Parliament Wit to be diſtin­guiſh'd from all other kinds; thoſe who
[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=151) have it,
do not ſtuff their heads only with Cavils and Objections.

They have a deliberate and an obſerving Wit, a Head turned to Publick things;
Men who place a greater pleaſure in mend­ing a Fault than in finding it out.

Their Underſtanding directeth them to object in the right place, and not like
thoſe who go by no other Rule, than to con­clude, That muſt be the beſt
Counſel which was not taken.

Theſe Whole-ſale Judges ſhew ſuch a groſs and peeviſh Ignorance, that it
appear­eth ſo openly in all they ſay or do, That they give loud warning to all
conſidering Men, not to chuſe them.

VIII. The diſlike of ſlight Airy Men muſt not go ſo far, as to recommend
heavi­neſs in oppoſition to it, eſpecially where men are convicted of it by
Experience in former Seſſions.

As a lively Coxcomb will ſeldom fail to lay in his claim for Wit; ſo a
Block­head is apt to pretend, That his heavineſs is a proof of his Judgment.

Some have an univerſal Lethargy ſpread upon their Underſtanding without
excepti­on; others have an Inſufficiency  [...] hoc, as in ſome Caſes men have
[...] hanc; Theſe laſt can never ſo  [...] [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=152) thoughts to
publick Buſineſs, as to give the attention that is neceſſary to Comprehend it.

There are thoſe who have ſuch a thick Shell upon their Brains, that their
Igno­rance is impenetrable, and maketh ſuch aſtout reſiſtance againſt Common
Senſe, that it will never be ſubdued by it: True Heart of Oak, Ignorance that
will never­yield, let Reaſon beat never ſo hard upon it; and though their kind
Neighbours have at ſeveral Elections ſent them up to School again, they have
ſtill return'd the ſame in­curable Dunces.

There is a falſe Gravity that is a very ill ſymptom; and it may be ſaid, That
as Rivers, which run very ſlowly, have al­ways the moſt Mud at the bottom; ſo
a ſolid ſtiffneſs in the conſtant courſe of a man's Life, is a ſign of a thick
bed of Mud at the bottom of his Brain.

A dull man is ſo near a dead Man, that he is hardly to be ranked in the Liſt
of the Living; and as he is not to be buri'd whilſt he is half alive, ſo he is
as little to be im­ploy'd whilſt: he is half dead.

Parliaments are now grown to be quite other things than they were formerly.

In Ancient Times they were little more than Great Aſſizes; A Roll of
Grievances; [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=152) Magna Charta
confirmed; Privileges of Ho­ly Church preſerved; ſo many Sacks of Wool given,
and away.

Now there are Traps and Gins laid for the well-meaning Country-Gentleman; he
is to grapple with the Cunning of Men in Town, which is not a little improv'd
by being rewarded and encourag'd.

So that men whoſe good Intentions are not ſeconded and ſupported by ſome
degree of Ability, are as much the more danger­ous, as they are leſs criminal
than Cun­ning Knaves. Their honeſt Miſtakes, for want of diſtinguiſhing,
either give a Coun­tenance to, or at leaſt leſſen the Scandal of the injurious
things that are done to the Publick: and with leave ask'd for ſo odd an
expreſſion, Their Innocent Guilt is as miſchievous to the Laws and Liberties,
as the moſt deliberate Malice of thoſe that would deſtroy them.

IX. There is an Abuſe which daily in­creaſeth, of ſending ſuch to Parliament,
as are ſcarce old enough to be ſent to the Univerſity.

I would not in this reſtrain the Definiti­on of theſe Boys to the Age of
Twenty One: If my Opinion might take place, I ſhould wiſh that none might be
choſen into the Houſe of Commons under Thirty; [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=153) and to make
ſome Equality, I ſhould from the ſame Motives, think it convenient, That no
Lord ſhould have a Vote in Judi­cature under that Age.

But to leave this Digreſſion; I cannot ſee why the Chuſers ſhould not at leaſt
make it a Rule among themſelves, Not to ſend any Man to Repreſent them under
the Age of Twenty five, which is the time of Majority in moſt other places of
the world.

Surely it is not that we are Earlier plants than our Neighbours.

Such ſuppoſition could neither be juſtifi'd by our Climate, nor by the degree
of Lati­tude in which we are placed; I muſt there­fore attribute it to the
haſte our Anceſtors had (and not without reaſon) to free them­ſelves from the
Severity of Wardſhips.

But whether this, or any thing elſe, was the cauſe of our earlier ſtepping
into Man's Eſtate; ſo it is now, that according to our Laws, Twenty one is the
Age of Diſcretion; and the Young Man is then veſted with a Legal, how
defective ſoever he may be in his Natural Underſtand­ing.

With all this, there ought to be a differ­ence made between coming out of
Pupilage, and leaping into Legiſlatorſhip.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=153) It is
perhaps inconvenient enough that a man ſhould be ſo ſoon let looſe to deſtroy
his own Eſtate; but it is yet worſe, that he ſhould then have a Power of
giving away other men's.

The Law muſt make General Rules, to which there always will be ſome
Ob­jections.

If there were Tryers appointed to judge when Leading-Strings ſhould be left
off, many would wear them a very great while, and ſome perhaps with their Gray
Hairs; there being no ſmall number of Old Boys in all times and eſpecially in
this.

It is neceſſary therefore to make Excepti­ons to this General Rule, where the
Caſe ſo much requireth it, as it doth in the mat­ter in queſtion.

The ground of ſending theſe Minors to Parliament ought not to recommend the
Continuance of it to thoſe who are Lovers of Liberty; ſince it was by the
Authority and Influence of Great Men, that their Stripling Sons were firſt
receiv'd by the humble depending Boroughs, or the com­plying Counties.

They called it, as many do ſtill, the beſt School for Young Men. Now
Expe­rience hath ſhew'd us, that it is like a School only in this reſpect,
That theſe Young­ſters [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=154) when they are
admitted, deſerve to be whipp'd in it.

If the Houſe of Commons is a School, it muſt be for Men of riper Age; theſe
are too young to learn there, and being ele­vated by a miſtaken ſmattering in
ſmall Po­liticks, they grow too ſupercilious to learn any where elſe; ſo that
inſtead of impro­ving young promiſing Plants, they are de­ſtroy'd by being
miſplac'd.

If then they do themſelves hurt by it, it is ſurer yet that they do the Houſe
no good by coming into it.

They were not Green Geeſe that are ſaid to have ſav'd the Capitol; they were
cer­tainly of full Age, or elſe their Cackling could not have been heard, ſo
as to give warning.

Indeed it look'd of late, when the Faſhi­on was to have long continu'd
Parliaments, as if we might plant a Boy in the Houſe with a Proſpect that he
might continue there till he had Gray Hairs: And that the ſame Sapling might
have ſuch a Root, as that he might grow up to be Timber with­out being
remov'd.

If theſe Young Men had skill enough to pitch upon ſome Body in the Houſe, to
whom they might reſign their Opinion, and upon whoſe Judgment they might lean
with­out Reſerve, there might be leſs Objection.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=154) But to
ſpeak Truth, they know as little how to chuſe, as thoſe did who Elected them:
ſo that there is no other Expedient left, than the letting them alone.

One may ſay, generally ſpeaking, That a young Man being too ſoon qualifi'd for
the ſerious Buſineſs of Parliaments, would really be no good Symptom.

It is a ſign of too much Phlegm, and too little Fire in the beginning of Age,
if Men have not a little more heat than is conve­nient; for as they grow older
they will run a hazard of not having ſo much as is neceſ­ſary.

The Truth is, The vigour of Youth is ſoften'd and miſapply'd, when it is not
ſpent either in War or cloſe Studies; all other Courſes have an idle Mixture
that cometh to nothing, and maketh them like Trees, which for want of Pruning
run up to Wood, and ſeldom or never bear any Fruit.

To conclude this Head, it muſt be own'd, That there is no Age of our Life
which doth not carry Arguments along with it to hum­ble us: and therefore it
would be well for the Buſineſs of the World, if young Men would ſtay longer
before they went into it, and old Men not ſo long before they went out of it.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=155) X. Next
to theſe may be rank'd a ſort of ſuperfine Gentlemen, Carpet-Knights, Men
whoſe Heads may be ſaid to be only Appurtenances to their Perukes, which
in­tirely ingroſs all their Care and Applicati­on.

There Underſtanding is ſo ſtrictly appro­priated to their Dreſs; that no part
of it is upon pain of their utmoſt Diſpleaſure to be diverted to any other
uſe.

It is not by this intended to recommend an affected Clown, or to make it a
neceſſa­ry Qualification for a Member of Parlia­ment, that he muſt renounce
clean Linen or good Manners; but ſurely a too earneſt Application to make
every thing ſit Right a­bout them, ſtriketh too deep into their ſmall ſtock of
Thoughts to allow it Furniture for any thing elſe.

To do Right to theſe fine-ſpun Gentle­men, Buſineſs is too courſe a thing for
them, which maketh it an unreaſonable Hardſhip upon them to oppreſs them with
it; ſo that in tenderneſs to them, no leſs than out of care to the Publick, it
is beſt to leave them to their Taylors with whom they will live in much better
Correſpondence, when the Danger is prevented of their falling out a­bout
Privileges.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=155) XI. Men
of Injuſtice and Violence, in their private Dealings, are not to be truſted by
the People with a Commiſſion to treat for them in Parliament.

In the 4th of Edw. 3\. The King Com­mandeth in his Writs not to chuſe any
Knights who had been Guilty of Crime, or Maintenance.

Theſe warm Men ſeldom fail to run into Maintenance, taken in a larger Extent.

It is an unnatural Sound to come from a Man that is arbitrary in his
Neighbourhood, to talk of Laws and Liberties at Weſtmin­ſter; he is not a
proper Vehicle for ſuch Words, which ought never to be prophaned.

An habitual Breaker of the Laws, to be made one of the Law-makers, is as if
the Benches in Weſtminſter-hall ſhould be filled with Men out of Newgate.

Thoſe who are of this Temper cannot change their Nature out of reſpect to
their Countrey.

Quite contrary; they will leſs ſcruple to do Wrong to a Nation where no Body
ta­keth it to himſelf, than to particular Men to whoſe Reſentments they are
more im­mediately expoſed.

In ſhort they lie under ſuch ſtrong Objections, that the over-balance of
bet­ter Men cannot altogether purify an Aſſem­bly [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=156) where theſe
unclean Beaſts are admit­ted.

XII. Exceſſive Spenders and unreaſona­ble Savers are to be Excluded, being
both greedy from differing Cauſes.

They are both of them Diſeaſes of In­fection, and for that Reaſon are not to
be admitted into Publick Aſſemblies.

A prodigal Man muſt be, greedy becauſe he thinketh he can never ſpend enough.

The Wretch muſt be ſo, becauſe he will never think he can hoard enough.

The World firſt admireth Men's Wiſdom for getting Money, and then raileth at
them if they do not throw it away? ſo that the Prodigal Man is only the leſs
unpopular Ex­treme; he is every jot as well prepared as the Miſer to fall out
with his Morals, when once a good Temptation is offered him to lay them aſide.

On the other ſide, ſome Rich Men are as eager to overtake thoſe that are
Richer, as a Running horſe is to get to the Race-poſt, before the other that
contendeth with him.

Men often deſire to heap, rather becauſe others have more, than that they know
what to do with that which they covet with ſo much Impatience.

So that it is plain, the Fancy hath as great a ſhare in this imaginary
Pleaſure of Gathe­ring [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=156) as it hath in
Love, Ambition, or any other Paſſion.

It is pretty ſure, that as no Man was e­ver the Richer for having a good
Eſtate, if he did not look after it; ſo neither will he be the Honeſter if he
hath never ſo much.

Want of care will always create want of Money; ſo that whether a Man is a
begger becauſe he never had any Money, or be­cauſe he can never keep any, it
is all one to thoſe who are to truſt him.

Upon this head of Prodigality, it may be no unreaſonable Caution to be afraid
of thoſe who in former Service have, been ex­travagantly Liberal of the
Publick Money.

Truſting is ſo hazardous a thing, that it ſhould never be done but where it is
neceſ­ſary; ſo that when Truſtees are found up­on Tryal to be very Laviſh,
even without examining into the Cauſes of it, (which are generally very
ſuſpicious) it is a reaſonable part of preventing Wit to change Hands, or elſe
the Chuſers will pay the Penalty that belongeth to good Nature ſo miſplaced,
and the Conſequences will be attended with the Aggravation of their not being
made Wiſer by ſuch a ſevere and coſtly warning.

XIII. It would be of very great uſe to take a general Reſolution throughout
the Kingdom, That none ſhould be choſen for [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=157) a County but
ſuch as have either in Poſſeſ­ſion, or Reverſion, a conſiderable Eſtate in it;
nor for a Burrough, except he be Reſiant, or that he hath ſome Eſtate in the
County, in preſent or Expectancy.

There have been Eminent Men of Law who were of opinion, That in the Caſe of a
Burgeſs of a Town not Reſiant, the Court is to give Judgment according to the
Sta­tute, notwithſtanding Cuſtom to the con­trary.

But not to inſiſt now upon that, the prudential part is Argument enough to ſet
up a Rule to abrogate an ill Cuſtom.

There is not, perhaps, a greater Cauſe of the Corruption of Parliaments, than
by adopting Members, who may be ſaid to have no title by their Births.

The Juries are by the Law to be Ex­vicineto; And ſhall there be leſs care that
the Repreſentatives of the People be ſo too?

Sure the Intereſt of the County is beſt placed in the hands of ſuch as have
ſome ſhare in it.

The Outliers are not ſo eaſily kept with­in the pale of the Laws.

They are often choſen without being known, which is more like chuſing
Valen­tines, than Members of Parliament. The Mo­tive [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=157) of their
ſtanding is more juſtly to be ſuppoſed, that they may redreſs their own
Grievances which they know, than thoſe of the Countrey, to which they are
ſtrangers.

They are choſen at London to ſerve in Cornwall, &c. and are often Parties,
before they come to be Repreſentatives: One would think the Reproach it is for
a Coun­ty not to have Men within their own Cir­cle to ſerve them in
Parliament, ſhould be Argument enough to reject theſe Treſpaſ­ſers, without
urging the ill Conſequences in other Reſpects of their being admitted.

XIV. As in ſome Caſes it is adviſable to give a total excluſion to Men not
fitly qualified; ſo in others it is more proper to lay down a general Rule of
Caution, with allowance of ſome Exceptions, where Men have given ſuch proofs
of themſelves, as create a Right for them to be diſtinguiſhed.

Of this nature is that which I ſhall ſay concerning Lawyers, who, by the ſame
Reaſon that they may be uſeful, may be al­ſo very dangerous.

The Negligence, and want of Applicati­on in Gentlemen, hath made them to be
thought more neceſſary than naturally they are in Parliament.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=158) They
have not only ingroſſed the Chair of the Speaker, but that of a Committee is
hardly thought to be well filled, except it be by a Man of the Robe.

This maketh it worthy of the more ſe­rious reflection of all Gentlemen, that
it may be an Argument to them to quail­fy themſelves in Parliamentary
Learning, in ſuch a manner, as that they may rely upon their own Abilities, in
order to the ſerving their Countrey.

But to come to the point in queſtion; It is not without Precedent, that
Practiſing-Lawyers have been excluded from ſerving in Parliament; and, without
following thoſe Patterns ſtrictly, I cannot but think it reaſonable, that
whilſt a Parliament ſit­teth, no Member of Parliament ſhould plead at any Bar.

The Reaſon of it is in many reſpects ſtrong in it ſelf, and is grown much
ſtrong­er by the long ſitting of Parliaments of late; but I will not dwell
upon this: The matter now in queſtion being concerning Lawyers being Elected,
which I conceive ſhould be done with ſo much circum­ſpection, that probably it
would not often happen.

If Lawyers have great Practice, that ought to take them up; if not, it is no
[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=158) great
ſign of their Ability; and at the ſame time giveth a ſuſpicion, that they may
be more liable to be tempted.

If it ſhould be ſo in Fact, That no King ever wanted Judges to ſoften the
ſtiffneſs of the Laws that were made, ſo as to make them ſuit better with the
Reaſon of State, and the Convenience of the Government; it is no Injury now to
ſuppoſe it poſſible for Lawyers in the Houſe of Commons, ſo to behave
themſelves in the making of New Laws, as the better to make way for the having
their Robes lined with Fur.

They are Men uſed to argue on both ſides of a Queſtion; And if ordinary Fees
can inſpire them with very good Reaſons in a very ill Cauſe, that Faculty
exerciſed in Parliaments, where it may be better encouraged, may prove very
inconvenient to thoſe that chuſe them.

And therefore, without arraigning a Pro­feſſion, that it would be ſcandalous
for a man not to honour; one may, by a Suſpicion, which is the more excuſable
when it is in the behalf of the People, imagine that the habit of taking Money
for their Opinion, may create in ſome ſuch a forgetfulneſs to di­ſtinguiſh,
that they may take it for their Vote.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=159) They are
generally Men who by a labo­rious ſtudy hope to be advanced: They have it in
their Eye as a Reward for the Toil they undergo.

This maketh them generally very ſlow, and ill diſpoſed (let the Occaſion never
ſo much require it) to wreſtle with that Soil where Preferment groweth.

Now if the Suppoſition be in its ſelf not unreaſonable, and that it ſhould
happen to be ſtrengthen'd and confirm'd by Experi­ence it will be very
unneceſſary to ſay any more upon this Article, but leave it to the Electors to
conſider of it.

XV. I cannot forbear to put in a Caveat againſt Men ty'd to a Party.

There muſt in every body be a Leaning to that ſort of Men who profeſs ſome
Prin­ciples, more than to others who go upon a different Foundation; but when
a man is drowned in a Party, plunged in it be­yond his depth, he runneth a
great hazard of being upon ill terms with good Senſe, or Morality, if not with
both of them.

Such a man can hardly be called a Free-Agent and for that reaſon is very unfit
to be truſted with the Peoples Liberty, af­ter he hath given up his own.

It is ſaid, That in ſome part of the Indies they do ſo affect little Feet,
that they keep [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=159) them ſqueezed
while they are Children, ſo that they ſtay at that ſmall ſize after they are
grown Men.

One may ſay ſomething like this of Men lock'd up in a Party; They put their
Thoughts into ſuch a Narrow Mould, that they can never be enlarged nor
releaſed from their firſt Confinements.

Men in a Party have Liberty only for their Motto; in reality they are greater
Slaves than any body elſe would care to make them.

A Party, even in times of Peace, (tho againſt the Original Contract, and the
Bill of Rights) ſets up and continues the exerciſe of Martial Law: Once
inrolled, the Man that quitteth, if they had their will, would be hanged for a
Deſerter.

They communicate Anger to one ano­ther by Contagion: And it may be ſaid, that
if too much Light dazzleth the Eye­ſight, too much Heat doth not leſs weaken
the Judgment.

Heat reigneth in the Fancy; and Reaſon, which is a colder Faculty of the
Brain, tak­eth more time to be heard, than the other will allow.

The Heat of a Party is like the Burning of a Fever; and not a Natural Warmth,
evenly diſtributed to give Life and Vigor.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=160) There
was a time indeed when Anger ſhew'd a good ſign of Honeſty; but that Evidence
is very much weakned by In­ſtances we have ſeen ſince the Days of Yore: And
the Publick ſpirited Choler hath been thrown off within time of Memory, and
loſt almoſt all its Credit with ſome People, ſince they found what
Govern­ments thought fit to make their ſo doing a ſtep to their preferment.

A ſtrong bluſtring Wind ſeldom conti­nues long in one Corner.

Some men knock loud only to be let in; the Buſtle they make is animated by
their private Intereſt. The outward Blaze only is for Religion and Liberty:
The true laſt­ing Fire, like that of the Veſtals which ne­ver went out, is an
eagerneſs to get ſome­what for themſelves.

A Houſe of Commons compoſed of ſuch Men, would be more properly ſo many
Merchants incorporated in a Regular Com­pany, to make their particular
Adventures, than Men ſent from the People to ſerve and repreſent them.

There are ſome Splenetick Gentlemen who confine their favourable Opinion
with­in ſo narrow a compaſs, that they will not allow it to any man that was
not hanged in the late Reigns.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=160) Now by
that rule one might expect they ſhould reſcue themſelves from the
diſadvan­tage of being now alive; and by abdicat­ing a World ſo little worthy
of them, get a great Name to themſelves, with the ge­neral ſatisfaction of all
thoſe they would leave behind them.

Amongſt the many other ill conſequences of a ſtated Party, it is none of the
leaſt, that it tempteth low and inſignificant men to come upon the Stage, to
expoſe them­ſelves, and to ſpoil Buſineſs.

It turneth a Cypher into a Figure, ſuch a one as it is: A man in a Party is
able to make a noiſe, let it be never ſo empty a ſound.

A weak man is eaſily blown out of his ſmall ſenſes, by being muſter'd into a
Par­ty; he is flatter'd till he liketh himſelf ſo well, that he taketh it
extremely ill if he hath not an Employment.

Nothing is more in faſhion, than for men to deſire good Places, and I doubt
nothing is leſs ſo than to deſerve them.

From Nobody to ſomebody is ſuch a violent ſtride, that Nature, which hath the
Negative Voice, will not give its Royal Aſſent to it: So that when
inſufficient Men aim at being in buſineſs, the worſt of their Enemies might
out of malice to them, pray for their Preferment.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=161) There
could be no end, if one did not ſtop till this Theme had no more matter to
furniſh. I will only ſay, Nothing is more evident, than that the Good of the
Nation hath been ſacrificed to the Animo­ſities of the ſeveral Contending
Parties; and without entring into the diſpute which of them are more or leſs
in the right, it is pretty ſure, that whilſt theſe Oppoſite Sets of Angry Men
are playing at Foot-ball, they will break all the Windows, and do more hurt
than their pretended Zeal for the Nation will ever make amends for.

In ſhort, a man ſo engaged is retained before the people take him for their
Coun­cil; he hath ſuch a Reverſe for his Party, that it is not adviſeable for
thoſe who would chuſe him, to depend upon his Pro­feſſions. All Parties
aſſuming ſuch a Diſ­penſing Power, that by their Sovereign Authority they
cancel and diſſolve any Act or Promiſe that they do not afterwards approve.

Theſe things conſidered, thoſe who will chuſe ſuch men deſerve whatever
follow­eth.

XVI. Pretenders to Exorbitant Merit in the late Revolution, are not without
Ob­jections againſt them, when they ſtand to ſerve in Parliament. It would not
only be [[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=161)
a low, but a Criminal kind of Envy, to de­ny a diſtinguiſhing Juſtice to Men
who have been inſtrumental and active, when the Service of their Countrey
requir'd it. But there ought to be Moderation in men's Claims, or elſe it is
out of the Power of our poor Iſland to ſatisfy them. It is true, Ser­vice of
all kinds is grown much dearer, like Labourer's Wages, which formerly
occaſio­ned ſeveral Statutes to regulate them.

But now the men who only carried Mor­tar to the Building, when it is finiſhed,
think they are ill dealt with if they are not made Maſter-Workmen.

They preſently cry out, The Original Contract is broken, if their Merit is not
rewarded, at their own Rate too.

Some will think there never ought to be an end of their Rewards; when
indifferent Judges would perhaps be puzzled to find out the beginning of their
Merit.

They bring in ſuch large Bills, that they muſt be examin'd: Some bounds muſt
be put to men's Pretenſions; elſe the Nation, which is to pay the Reckoning,
will every way think it a ſcurvy thing to be undone, whether it be by being
over-run by our Ene­mies, or by the being, exhauſted by our Friends.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=162) There
ought therefore to be deductions where they are reaſonable, the better to
ju­ſtifie the paying what remaineth.

For example, if any of theſe paſſionate Lovers of the Proteſtant Religion
ſhould not think fit, in their manner of Living, to give the leaſt evidence of
their Mora­lity, their claims upon that Head might ſure be ſtruck off without
any Injuſtice to them.

If there are any who ſet down great Sums as a Reward due to their Zeal for
reſcuing Property from the Jaws of Arbitrary Power; their pretenſions may
fairly be rejected, if now they are ſo far from ſhewing a care and tenderneſs
of the Laws, that they look rather like Councel retained on the other ſide.

It is no leſs ſtrange, than I doubt it is true, that ſome Men ſhould be ſo in
Love with their dear Miſtreſs, Old England, with all her Wrinkles, as out of
an Heroick Paſ­ſion to Swim over to reſcue her from being Raviſh'd; and when
they have done the Feat, the firſt thing after Enjoyment is, that they go
about to Strangle her.

For the ſake of true Love, it is not ſit that ſuch ungentile Gallants ſhould
be too much encourag'd; and their Arrogance for having done well at firſt,
will have no right [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=162) to be excuſed,
if their ſo doing ill at laſt doth not make them a little more modeſt.

True Merit, like a River, the deeper it is the leſs noiſe it makes.

Theſe loud proclaimers of their own De­ſerts, are not only to be ſuſpected for
their truth, but the Electors are to conſider that ſuch meritorious Men lay an
aſſeſſment up­on thoſe that Chuſe them.

The Publick Taxes are already heavy enough without the addition of theſe
private Reckonings. It is therefore the ſafer way not to employ Men, who will
expect more for their Wages, than the miſtaken Borough that ſendeth them up to
Parliament could be ſold for.

XVII. With all due regard to the nobleſt of Callings, Military Officers are
out of their true Element when they are miſplaced in a Houſe of Commons.

Things in this World ought to be well ſuited. There are ſome Appearances ſo
un­natural, that men are convinc'd by them without any other Argument.

The very Habit in ſome Caſes, recom­mendeth or giveth Offence.

If the Judges upon the Bench ſhould, in­ſtead of their Furrs, which ſignifie
Gravity, and beſpeak Reſpect, be Cloathed like the Jockeys at New-Market, or
wear Jack-Boots [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=163) and Steenkirks;
they would not in reality have leſs Law, but Mankind would be ſo ſtruck with
this unuſual Object, that it would be a great while before they could think it
poſſible to receive Juſtice from Men ſo Accouter'd.

It is to ſome degree the ſame thing in this Caſe; ſuch Martial Habits, Blue-
Coats, Red Stockings, &c. make them look very unlike Grave Senators. One would
almoſt ſwear they were Creatures apart, and of a differing Species from the
reſt of the Body.

In former times, when only the Reſiant Shopkeeper was to Repreſent his
Corpora­tion (which by the way is the Law ſtill at this day) the Military
Looks of one of theſe Sons of Mars, would have ſtared the Quaking Member down
again to his Bur­rough.

Now the number of them is ſo encreaſed, that the Peaceable part of the Houſe
may lawfully ſwear they are in fear of their Lives, from ſuch an Awful
Appearance of Men of War.

It maketh the Room look like a Guard­houſe by ſuch an ill-ſuited mixture. But
this is only the out-ſide, the bark of the Argument; the root goeth yet deeper
a­gainſt Chuſing ſuch Men, whoſe Talents ought to be otherwiſe applied.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=163) Their
Two Capacities are ſo inconſiſtent, that Mens undertaking to ſerve both the
Cures, will be the cauſe in a little time, that we ſhall neither have Men of
War, nor Men of Buſineſs, good in their ſeveral kinds.

An Officer is to give up his Liberty to obey Orders; and it is neceſſarily
incident to his Calling that he ſhould do ſo.

A Member of Parliament is originally to be tender of his own Liberty, that
other Men may the better truſt him with theirs.

An Officer is to enable himſelf by his Courage, improved by Skill and
Expe­rience, to ſupport the Laws (if Invaded) when they are made; but he is
not ſuppoſ­ed to be at leiſure enough to underſtand how they ſhould be made.

A Member of Parliament is to fill his thoughts with what may beſt conduce to
the Civil Adminiſtration; which is enough to take up the whole Man, let him be
ne­ver ſo much raiſed above the ordinary Level.

Theſe two oppoſite Qualifications, being placed in one Man, make him ſuch an
am­biguous divided Creature, that he doth not know how to move.

It is beſt to keep Men within their pro­per Sphere; few Men have Underſtanding
[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=164) enough
exactly to fill even one narrow Circle, fewer are able to fill two; eſpecially
when they are both of ſo great compaſſ, and that they are ſo contrary in their
own Natures.

The Wages he hath as a Member, and thoſe he receiveth as an Officer, are paid
for Services that are very differing; and in the doubt which of them ſhould be
pre­ferrably performed, it is likely the greater Salary may direct him,
without the fur­ther inducements of complying moſt, where he may expect moſt
advantage by it.

In ſhort, if his dependance is not very great, it will make him a ſcurvy
Officer; if it is great, it will make him a ſcurvier Member.

XVIII. Men under the ſcandal of being thought private Penſioners, are too fair
a mark to eſcape being conſider'd, in re­ference to the point in Queſtion.

In caſe of plain Evidence, it is not to be ſuppos'd poſſible, that Men
convicted of ſuch a Crime ſhould ever again be Elected.

The difficulty is in determining what is to be done in caſe of ſuſpicion.

There are ſuſpicions ſo well grounded, that they may pretend to have the force
of proofs, provided the penalty goeth only [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=164) to the
forbearing to Truſt, but not extend­ing it ſo far as to Puniſh.

There muſt be ſome things plain and ex­preſs to juſtify the latter, but
Circumſtances may be ſufficient for the former: As where Men have had ſuch
ſudden Cures of their ill Humours, and oppoſition to the Court, that it is out
of the way of ordinary me­thods of recovery from ſuch Diſtempers, which have a
much ſlower progreſs; it muſt naturally be imputed to ſome Speci­fick that
maketh ſuch a quick alteration of the whole Maſs of Blood.

Where Men have raiſed their way of Living, without any viſible means to
ſup­port them in it, a ſuſpicion is juſtified, even by the Example of the Law,
which in caſes of this kind, though of an inferior nature, doth upon this
foundation not only raiſe Inferences, but inflict Puniſhments.

Where Men are immoral, and ſcandalous in their Lives, and diſpenſe familiarly
with the Rules by which the World is Govern'd, for the better preſerving the
bonds of human Society; it muſt be a confidence very ill placed, to conclude
it impoſſible for ſuch Men to yield to a Temptation well offer'd and purſu'd;
when, the truth is the habit of ſuch Bons vivants, which is the faſhionable
word, maketh a ſuſpicion ſo [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=165) likely, that it
is very hard not to believe it to be true.

If there ſhould be nothing but the gene­ral Report, even that is not to be
neglected.

Common Fame is the only Lyar that deſerveth to have ſome Reſpect ſtill
reſerv'd to it; tho ſhe telleth many an Untruth, ſhe often hits right, and
moſt eſpecially when ſhe ſpeaketh ill of men.

Her Credit hath ſometimes been carri­ed too far, when it hath gone to the
di­veſting men of any thing of which they were poſſeſs'd, without more expreſs
evi­dence to juſtify ſuch a proceeding.

If there was a doubt whether there ever was any Corruption of this kind it
would alter the Queſtion; but ſure that will not bear the being controverted.

We are told; That Charles the Fifth ſent over into England 1200000 Crowns to
be diſtributed amongſt the Leading Men, to encourage them to carry on
Elections.

Here was the Proteſtant Religion to be bought out for a valuable Conſideration
according to Law, though not according to Goſpel, which exalteth it above any
Price that can be ſet upon it.

Now, except we had reaſon to believe that the Vertue of the World is improv'd
ſince that time, we can as little doubt that [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=165) ſuch
Temptations may be offered, as that they may be receiv'd.

It will be owed, that there is to be a great tenderneſs in Suſpecting; but it
muſt be allow'd at the ſame time, that there ought not to be leſt in Truſting,
where the People are ſo much concern'd; eſpecially, when the Penalty upon the
Party ſuſpected goeth no further than a Suſpenſion of that Confidence, which
it is neceſſary to have in thoſe who are to repreſent the Nation in
Parliament.

I cannot omit the giving a Caution againſt admitting Men to be choſen, who
have Places of any value.

There needeth the leſs to be ſaid upon this Article, the truth of the
Propoſition being ſupported by ſuch plain Argumen [...]s.

Sure no Man hath ſuch a plentiful ſpring of Thought, as that all that floweth
from it is too much to be appled to the Buſineſs of Parliament.

It is not leſs ſure, that a Member of Par­liament, of all others, ought not to
be ex­empted from the Rule, That no Man ſhould ſerve two Maſters.

It doth ſo ſplit a Man's Thoughts, that no Man can know how to make a fitting
Diſtribution of them to two ſuch differing Capacities.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=166) It
expoſeth Men to be ſuſpected, and tempted, more than is convenient for the
Publick Service, or for the mutual good Opinion of one another, which their
ought to be in ſuch an Aſſembly.

It either giveth a real dependance upon the Government, which is inconſiſtent
with the neceſſity there is, that a Member of Parliament ſhould be diſengaged,
or at leaſt it hath the appearance of it, which maketh them not look like
Freemen, though they ſhould have virtue enough to be be ſo.

More Reaſons would leſſen the Weight of this laſt, which is, That a Bill to
this effect, commonly called the Self-Denying Bill, paſs'd even this laſt
Houſe of Commons.

A greater Demonſtration of the irreſiſti­ble ſtrength of Truth cannot poſſibly
be given; ſo that a Copy of that Bill in every County or Burrough, would
hardly fail of diſcouraging ſuch Pretenders from Standing, or at leaſt it
would prevent their Succeſs if their own Modeſty ſhould not reſtrain them from
attempting it.

XX. If Diſtinctions may be made upon upon particular Men, or Remarks fix'd
up­on their Votes in Parliament, they muſt be allow'd in relation to thoſe
Gentlemen, who for Reaſons beſt known to themſelves thought fit to be againſt
the Triennial Bill.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=166) The
Liberty of Opinion is the thing in the World that ought leaſt to be
controll'd, and eſpecially in Parliament.

But as that is an undoubted Aſſertion, it is not leſs ſo, That when Men Sin
againſt their own Light, give a Vote againſt their own Thought, they muſt not
plead Privi­lege of Parliament againſt the being arraign­ed for it by others,
after they are Convict­ed of it by themſelves.

There cannot be a Man▪ who in his De­finition of a Houſe of Commons, will
ſtate it to be an Aſſembly, that for the better re­dreſſing of Grievances the
People feel, and for the better furniſhing ſuch Supplies as they can bear, is
to continue, if the King ſo pleaſeth, for his whole Reign.

This could be as little intended, as to throw all into one Hand, and to
renounce the Claim to any Liberty, but ſo much as the Sovereign Authority
would allow.

It deſtroyeth the end of Parliaments, it maketh uſe of the Letter of the Law
to ex­tinguiſh the Life of it.

It is, in truth, ſome kind of Diſparage­ment to ſo plain a thing, that ſo much
has been ſaid and written upon it; and one may ſay, It is ſuch an Affront to
theſe Gentle­mens Underſtandings to cenſure this Vote only as a Miſtake, that,
as the Age goeth, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=167) it is leſs
Diſcredit to them to call it by its right Name; and if that is rightly
under­ſtood by thoſe who are to chuſe them, I ſup­poſe they will let them
exerciſe their Liberty of Conſcience at home, and not make Men their Truſtees,
who in this Solemn Inſtance have ſuch an unwillingneſs to ſurrender.

It muſt be own'd, That this Bill hath met with very hard Fortune, and yet that
doth not in the leaſt diminiſh the value of it.

It had in it ſuch a Root of Life, that it might be ſaid, It was not Dead but
Sleeped; and we ſee that the laſt Seſſion, it was re­vived and animated by the
Royal Aſſent, when once fully inform'd of the Conſe­quences, as well as of the
Juſtice of it.

In the mean time, after having told my Opinion, Who ought not to be Choſen:

If I ſhould be ask'd, Who ought to be, my Anſwer muſt be, chuſe Engliſhmen;
and when I have ſaid that, to deal honeſtly, I will not undertake that they
are eaſy to be found.

# 6\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=167)

A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA, 1694.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=168)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=168)

### 1\. A Rough Draught OF A NEW MODEL AT SEA, 1694.

I Will make no other Introduction to the following Diſcourſe, than that as the
Importance of our being ſtrong at Sea, was ever very great, ſo in our pre­ſent
Circumſtances it is grown to be much greater; becauſe, as formerly our Force
of [[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=169)
Shipping contributed greatly to our Trade and Safety. So, now it is become
indiſpen­ſibly neceſſary to our very Being.

It may be ſaid now to England, Martha, Martha, thou art buſy about many
things, but one thing is neceſſary to the Queſtion, What ſhall we do to be
ſaved in this World? There is no other Anſwer but this, Look to your Moate.

The firſt Article of an Engliſh-mans Po­litical Creed muſt be, That he
believeth in the Sea, &c. without that there needed no General Council to
pronounce him capable of Salvation here.

We are in an Iſland confin'd to it by God Almighty, not as a Penalty but a
Grace, and one of the greateſt that can be given to Mankind. Happy Confinement
that has made us Free, Rich, and Quiet; a fair Portion in this World, and very
well worth the preſerving, a Figure that ever hath been envied, and could
never be imi­tated by our Neighbours. Our Situation hath made Greatneſs abroad
by Land Con­queſts unnatural things to us. It is true, we made Excurſions, and
glorious ones too, which make our Names great in Hiſtory, but they did not
laſt.

Admit the Engliſh to be Giants in Cou­rage, yet they muſt not hope to ſucceed
in [[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=169) making
War againſt Heaven, which ſeem­eth to have enjoyned them to acquieſce in being
happy within their own Circle. It is no Paradox to ſay, that England hath its
Root in the Sea, and a deep one too, from whence it ſendeth its Branches into
both the Indies. We may ſay further in our preſent Caſe, That if Allegiance is
due to Protection, ours to the Sea is due from that Rule, ſince by that, and
by that alone, we are to be protected; and if we have of late ſuffered
Uſurpation of other Methods, con­trary to the Homage we owe to that which muſt
preſerve us. It is time now to re­ſtore the Sea to its right; and as there is
no Repentance effectual without Amend­ment, ſo there is not a moment to be
loſt in their going about it.

It is not pretended to launch into ſuch a Voluminous Treatiſe, as to ſet down
every thing to which ſo comprehenſive a Subject might lead me; for as the Sea
hath little leſs variety in it than the Land; ſo the Naval Force of England
extendeth it ſelf into a great many Branches, each of which are important
enough to require a Diſcourſe apart, and peculiarly applied to it: But there
muſt be preference to ſome Conſideration above others, when the weight of them
is ſo viſibly Superior that [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=170) it cannot be
conteſted. It is there, firſt, that the Foundations are to be laid of our
Naval Oeconomy; amongſt theſe, there is one Article which in its own Nature
muſt be allowed to be the Corner-ſtone of the Building.

The Choice of Officers, with the Diſci­pline and Encouragement belonging to
them. Upon this Head only, I ſhall then take the liberty to venture my Opinion
into the World, with a real Submiſſion to thoſe, who may offer any think
better for the advan­tage of the Publick.

The firſt Queſtion then will be, Out of what ſort of Men the Officers of the
Fleet are to be choſen; and this immediately leadeth us to the preſent
Controverſy be­tween the Gentlemen and the Tarpau­lins.

The uſual Objection on both ſides are too general to be relied upon.
Partiality and Common Prejudices direct moſt Mens Opinions, without entring
into the parti­cular Reaſons which ought to be the ground of it. There is ſo
much eaſe in aquieſcing in Generals, that the Ignorance of thoſe who cannot
diſtinguiſh, and the Largeneſs of thoſe who will not, maketh Men very apt to
decline the trouble of ſtricter Enqui­ries, which they think too great a price
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=170) for being
in the right, let it be never ſo valuable.

This maketh them judge in the Lump, and either let their Opinions ſwim along
with the Stream of the World, or give them up wholly to be directed by
Succeſs. The effect of this is, that they change their Minds upon every
preſent uneaſineſs, wanting a ſteady Foundation upon which their Judgment
ſhould be formed. This is a pearching upon the Twigs of things, and not going
to the Root. But ſure the Matter in queſtion deſerveth to be examined in
another manner, ſince ſo much depend­eth upon it.

To ſtate the thing impartially, it muſt be owned that it ſeemeth to lye
faireſt for the Tarpaulin: It giveth an Impreſſion that muſt have ſo much
weight as to make a Man's Opinion lean very much on that ſide, it carrieth ſo
much Authority with it, it ſeemeth to be ſo unqueſtionable, that thoſe are
fitteſt to Command at Sea, who have not only made it their Calling, but their
Element; that there muſt naturally be a prejudice to any thing then can be
ſaid againſt it. There muſt therefore be ſome Reaſon extraordinary to ſupport
the Argument on the other ſide, or elſe the Gentlemen could never enter the
Liſts [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=171)
againſt ſuch a violent Objection, which ſeemeth not to be reſiſted. I will
intro­duce my Argument with an Aſſertion, which as I take to be true almoſt in
all Caſes, ſo it is neceſſary to be explained and inforced in this. The
Aſſertion is, that there is hardly a ſingle Propoſition to be made, which is
not deceitful, and the ty­ing our Reaſon too cloſe to it, may in ma­ny Caſes
be deſtructive. Circumſtances muſt come in, and are to be made a part of the
Matter of which we are to judge; poſitive Deciſions are always dangerous, more
eſpecially in Politicks. A Man, who will be Maſter of an Argument, muſt do
like a skilful General, who ſendeth Scouts on all ſides, to ſee whether there
may not be an Enemy. So he muſt look round to ſee what Objections can be made,
and not go on in a ſtreight Line, which in the ready way to lead him into a
mi­ſtake.

Before then, that we conclude what ſort of Men are fitteſt to Command at Sea,
a Principle is to be laid down, that there is a differing Conſideration to be
had of ſuch a Subject-matter, as is in it ſelf diſtinct and independent, and
of ſuch a one as being a Limb of a Body, or a Wheel of a Frame, there is a
neceſſity of ſuiting it to the reſt, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=171) and preſerving
the Harmony of the whole. A Man muſt not in that Caſe reſtrain him­ſelf to the
ſeperate Conſideration of that ſingle Part, but muſt take care it may fall in
and agree with the Shape of the whole Creature, of which it is a Member.
Ac­cording to this Propoſition, which I take to be indiſputable, it will not I
hope appear an Affectation, or an extravagant Fit of un­ſeaſonable Politicks,
if, before I enter into the particular State of the preſent Queſtion, I ſay
ſomething of the Government of Eng­land, and make that the Ground-work of what
ſort of Men are moſt proper to be made uſe of to Command at Sea.

The Forms of Government to which England muſt be ſubjected, are either
Ab­ſolute Monarchy, a Commonwealth, or a Mixt Monarchy, as it is now; with
thoſe natural Alterations that the Exegency of Affairs may from time to time
ſuggeſt. As to Abſolute Monarchy I will not allow my ſelf to be tranſported
into ſuch Inve­ctives, as are generally made.againſt it; neither am I ready to
enter into the aggre­vating Stile of calling every thing Slavery, that
reſtraineth Men in any part of their Freedom: One may diſcern in this, as in
moſt other things, the good and bad of it. We ſee by too near an Iſtance, what
Fra [...]e [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=172) doth by it; it
doth not only ſtruggle with the reſt of Chriſtendom; but is in a fair way of
giving Law to it.

This is owing in great Meaſure to a Deſpotick and Undivided Power; the
un­controulable Authority of the Directive Councils maketh every thing move
with­out Diſorder or Oppoſition, which muſt give an advantage, that is plain
enough of it ſelf, without being proved by the melancholly Experience we have
of it at this time.

I ſee and admire this; yet I conſider at the ſame time, that all things of
this kind are comparative: That as on one ſide, without Government Men cannot
enjoy what belongeth to them in particular, nor can a Nation be ſecure, or
preſerve it ſelf in general: So on the other ſide, the end of Government
being, that Mankind ſhould live in ſome competent State of Freedom, it is very
unnatural to have the End de­ſtroyed by the Means that were originally made
uſe of to attain it. In this reſpect ſomething is to be ventured, rather than
ſubmit to ſuch a precarious State of Life, as would make it a Burthen to a
reaſonable Creature; and therefore, after I have own­ed the Advantages in ſome
kind of an un­limitted Government; yet, while they are [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=172) attended with ſo
many other diſcouraging Circumſtances, I cannot think but that they may be
bought too dear; and if it ſhould be ſo, that it is not poſſible for a State
to be Great and Glorious, unleſs the Subjects are wretchedly Miſerable. I am
aſhamed to own my low-ſpirited frailty in preferring ſuch a Model of
Government, as may agree with the reaſonable Enjoy­ment of a Free People,
before ſuch a one, by which Empire is to be extended at ſuch an unnatural
Price. Beſides whatever Mens Opinions may be one way or another, in the
general Question, there is an Argu­ment in our Caſe that ſhutteth the Door to
any Anſwer to it. (Viz.) We cannot ſub­ſiſt under a Deſpotick Power, our very
Being would be deſtroyed by it; for we are to conſider, we are a very little
Spot in the Map of the World, and make a great Figure only by Trade, which is
the Crea­ture of Liberty; one deſtroyed, the other falleth to the Ground by a
natural Conſe­quence, that will not admit a diſpute. If we would be meaſured
by our Acres, we are poor inconſiderable People; we are ex­alted above our
natural Bounds, by our good Laws, and our excellent Conſtitu­tion. By this we
are not only happy at Home, but conſiderable Abroad. Our Si­tuation, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=173) our Humour, our
Trade, do all concur to ſtrengthen this Argument. So that all other Reaſons
muſt give place to ſuch a one as maketh it out, that there is no Mean between
a Free Nation and No Nation.

We are no more a People, nor England can no longer keep its Name from the
mo­ment that our Liberties are extinguiſh'd; the Vital Strength that ſhould
ſupport us being withdrawn, we ſhould then be no more than the Carcaſs of a
Nation, with no other Security than that of Contempt; and to ſubſiſt upon no
other Tenure, than that we ſhould be below the giving Temp­tation to our
ſtronger Neighbours to de­vour us. In my Judgment, therefore, there is ſuch
a.ſhort Deciſion to be made upon this Subject, that in Relation to England, an
Abſolute Monarchy is as an unreaſonable thing to be wiſhed, as I hope it will
be impoſſible to be obtained.

It muſt be conſidered in the next place, whether England likely is to be
turn'd into a Commonwealth. It is hard at any time to determine what will be
the Shape of the next Revolution, much more at this time would it be
inexcuſably Arrogant to undertake it. Who can foreſee whether it will be from
without, or from within, or [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=173) from both?
Whether with or without the Concurrence of the People? Whether regu­larly
produced, or violently impoſed? I ſhall not therefore Magiſterially declare it
impoſ­ſible that a Commonwealth ſhould be ſettled here; but I may give my
humble Opinion, that according to all appearances, it is ve­ry improbable.

I will firſt lay it down for a Principle, That it is not a ſound way of
arguing, to ſay, That if it can be made out, that the Form of a Commonwealth
will beſt ſuit with the Intereſt of the Nation, it muſt for that reaſon of
neceſſity prevail.

I will not deny but that Intereſt will not lie, is a right Maxim, where-ever
it is ſure to be underſtood; elſe one had as good af­firm, That no Man in
particular, nor Man­kind in general, can ever be miſtaken. A Nation is a great
while before they can ſee, and generally they muſt feel firſt before their
Sight is quite cleared. This maketh it ſo long before they can ſee their
Intereſt; that for the moſt part it is too late for them to purſue it: If Men
muſt be ſuppoſed al­ways to follow their true Intereſt, it muſt be meant of a
New Manufactory of Man­kind by God Almighty; there muſt be ſome new Clay, the
old Stuff never yet made any ſuch infallible Creature.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=174) This
being premis'd, it is to be inquired, Whether inſtead of inclination, or a
leaning towards a Commonwealth, there is not in England a general diſlike to
it; if this be ſo as I take it to be, by a very great diſparity in Numbers; it
will be in vain to diſpute the Reaſon, whilſt Humour is againſt it, al­lowing
the weight that is due to the Argu­ment, which may be alledged for it; yet, if
the Herd is againſt it, the going about to convince them, would have no other
ef­fect than to ſhew that nothing can be more impertinent than good Reaſons,
when they are miſplaced or ill-timed.

I muſt obſerve, That there muſt be ſome previous Diſpoſitions in all great
Changes to facilitate and to make way for them: I think it not at all abſur'd,
I affirm That ſuch Reſolutions are ſeldem made at all, ex­cept by the general
Preparations of Mens Minds they are half made before, and it is plainly
viſible, that Men go about them.

Though it ſeemeth to me that the Argu­ment alone maketh all others
unneceſſary, yet I muſt take notice that▪ beſides what hath been ſaid upon
this Subject, there are cer­tain Preliminaries to the firſt building a
Commonwealth. Some Materials abſolutely neceſſary for the carrying on ſuch a
Fabick, which at preſent are wanting amongſt us, [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=174) I mean Virtue,
Morality, Diligence, or at leaſt Hypocriſy. Now this Age is ſo plain dealing,
as not to diſſemble ſo far as to an outward▪ Pretence of Qualities which ſeem
at preſent ſo Vnfaſhionable, and under ſo much Diſcountenance.

From hence we may draw a plain and na­tural Inference, That a Commonwealth is
not fit for us, becauſe we are not fit for a Commonwealth.

This being granted, the Suppoſition of this Form of Government of England,
with all its Conſequences as to the preſent Que­ſtion, muſt be excluded; and
Abſolute Mo­narchy having been ſo too by the Reaſons at once alledged, it will
without further Examination fall to a Mixt Government, as we now are. I will
not ſay, that there is never to be any Alteration; the Conſti­tution of the
ſeveral Parts that concur to make up the Frame of the preſent Govern­ment, may
be altered in many things, in ſome for the better, and in others, perhaps for
the worſe, according as Circumſtances ſhall ariſe to induce a Change; and as
Paſ­ſion and Intereſt ſhall have more or leſs In­fluence upon the Publick
Councils; but ſtill, if it remaineth in the whole ſo far a a mixt Monarchy,
that there ſhall be a re­ſtraint upon the Prince, as to the Exerciſe [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=175) of a Deſpotick
Power, it is enough to make it a Groundwork for the preſent Queſtion. It
appeareth then that a bounded Monar­chy is that kind of Government which will
moſt probably prevail and continue in Eng­land; from whence it muſt follow (as
hath been hinted before) that every conſiderable Part ought to be ſo compoſed,
as the better to conduce to the preſerving the Harmony of the whole
Conſtitution. The Navy is of ſo great Importance, that it would be diſpa­raged
by calling it leſs than the Life and Soul of Government.

Therefore to apply the Argument to the Subject we are upon; in caſe the
Officers be all Tarpaulins, it would be in reali­ty too great a tendency to a
Common­wealth; ſuch a part of the Conſtitution be­ing Democratically diſpoſed
may be ſuſpected to endeavour to bring it into that Shape; where the influence
muſt be ſo ſtrong, and the Suppoſition will be the more juſtifiable. In ſhort,
if the Maritim Force, which is the only thing that can defend us, ſhould be
wholly directed by the lower ſort of Men, with an intire Excluſion of the
Nobility and Gentry; it will not be eaſy to anſwer the Arguments ſupported by
ſo great a probabi­lity, that ſuch a Scheme would not only lean toward a
Domocracy, but directly lead us into it.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=175) Let us
now examine the contrary Propo­ſition, (viz.) that all Officers ſhould be
Gentlemen.

Here the Objection lierh ſo fair of its in­troducing an Arbitrary Government,
that it as little to be anſwered in that reſpect, as the former is in the
other. Gentlemen in a general Definition, will be ſuſpected to lie more than
other Men, under the Tempta­tions of being made Inſtruments of unlimit­ted
Power; their Relations, their Way of Living, their Taſt of the Entertainments
of the Court, inſpire an Ambition that gene­rally draweth their Inclinations
toward it, beſides the gratifying of their Intereſts. Men of Quality are often
taken with the Ornaments of Government, the Splendor dazleth them ſo, as that
their Judgments are ſurprized by it; and there will be al­ways ſome that have
ſo little remorſe for invading other Mens Liberties, that it ma­keth them leſs
ſolicitous to preſerve their own.

Theſe things throw them naturally into ſuch a dependance as might give a
danger­ous Biaſs; if they alone were in Command at Sea, it would make that
great Wheel turn by an irregular Motion, and inſtead of be­ing the chief means
of preſerving the whole [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=176) Frame, might
come to be the chief Inſtru­ments to diſcompoſe and diſſolve it.

The two further excluſive Propoſitions being neceſſarily to be excluded in
this Queſtion, there remaineth no other Expe­dient; neither can any other
Concluſion be drawn from the Argument as it hath been ſtated, than that there
muſt be a mixture in the Navy of Gentlemen and Tarpaulins, as there is in the
Conſtition of the Govern­ment, of Power and Liberty. This Mix­ture is not to
be ſo rigorouſly defined, as to ſet down the exact Proportion there is to be
of each; the greater or leſſer Num­ber muſt be directed by Circumſtances, of
which the Government is to Judge, and which makes it improper to ſet ſuch
Rounds, as that upon no occaſion it ſhall on either ſide be leſſened or
enlarged. It is poſſible the Men of Wapping may think they are in­jured, by
giving them any Partners in the Dominion of the Sea; they may take it unkindly
to be joſtled in their own Element by Men of ſuch a different Education, that
they may be ſaid to be of another Species; they will be apt to think it an
Uſurpation upon them, and notwithſtanding the In­ſtances that are againſt
them, and which give a kind of Preſcription on the other [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=176) ſide, they will
not eaſily acquieſce in what they conceive to be a hardſhip to them.

But I ſhall in a good meaſure reconcile my ſelf to them by what follows;
(viz.) The Gentlemen ſhall not be capable of bear­ing Office at Sea, except
they be Tarpau­lins to; that is to ſay, except they are ſo trained up by a
continued habit of living at Sea, that they may have a Right to be ad­mitted
free Denizens of Wapping Upon this dependeth the whole Matter; and in­deed
here lieth the difficulty, becauſe the Gentlemen brought up under the
Connivance of a looſer Diſcipline, and of an eaſier ad­mittance, will take it
heavily to be reduced within the Fetters of ſuch a New Model; and I conclude,
they will be extreamly averſe to that which they call an unreaſon­able Yoke
upon them, that their Original Conſent is never to be expected. But if it
appeareth to be convenient, and which is more, that it is neceſſary for the
Preſerva­tion of the whole, that it ſhould be ſo; the Government muſt be
call'd in Aid to ſup­preſs theſe firſt Boilings of Diſcontent; the Rules muſt
be impoſed with ſuch Autho­rity, and the Execution of them muſt be ſo well
ſupported, that by degrees their Impa­tience will be ſubdued, and they will
concu [...] [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=177) in an
Eſtabliſhment to which they will eve­ry day be more reconciled.

They will find it will take away the Ob­jections which are now thrown upon
them, of ſetting up for Maſters, without having even been Apprentices; or at
leaſt, without having ſerved out their Time.

Mankind naturally ſwelleth againſt Fa­vour and Partiality; their belief of
their own Merit maketh Men object them to a proſperous Competitor, even when
there is no pretence for it; but when there is the leaſt handle offered, to be
ſure it will be taken. So, in this Caſe, when a Gentleman is preferr'd at Sea,
the Tarpaulin is very apt to impute it to Friend or Favour: But if that
Gentleman hath before his Preferment paſſed through all the Steps which lead
to it, that he ſmelleth as much of Pitch and Tar, as thoſe that were Swadled
in Sail-Cloath; his having an Eſcutcheon will be ſo far from doing him harm,
that it will ſet him upon the advantage Ground: It will draw a real Reſpect to
his Quality when ſo ſupported, and give him an Influence, and and Authority
infinitely ſuperior to that which the meer Sea men can ever pre­tend to.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=177) When a
Gentleman hath learned how to Obey, he will grow very much fitter to Command;
his own Memory will adviſe him not to inflict too rigorous Puniſhments. He
will better reſiſt the Temptations of Au­thority (which are great) when he
reflecteth how much he hath at other times wiſhed it might be gently
exerciſed, when he was li­able to the Rigour of it.

When the undiſtinguiſh'd Diſcipline of a Ship hath tamed the young Maſterſhip,
which is apt to ariſe from a Gentleman's, Birth and Education. He then groweth
Proud in the right place, and valueth himſelf firſt upon knowing his Duty, and
then upon doing it.

In plain Engliſh, Men of Quality in their ſeveral Degrees muſt either reſtore
them­ſelves to a better Opinion, both for Mora­lity and Diligence, or elſe
Quality it ſelf will be in danger of being extinguiſhed.

The Original Gentleman is almoſt loſt in ſtrictneſs, when Poſterity doth not
ſtill fur­ther adorn by their Virtue. The Eſcutcheon their Anceſtors firſt got
for them by their Merit, they deſerve the Penalty of being deprived of it.

To expect that Quality alone ſhould waft Men up into Places and Imployments,
is as unreaſonable, as to think that a Ship, [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=178) becauſe it is
Carved and Gilded, ſhould be fit to go to Sea without Sails or Tackling. But
when a Gentleman maketh no other uſe of his Quality, than to incite him the
more to his Duty, it will give ſuch a true and ſettled Superiority, as muſt
deſtroy all Competi­tion from thoſe that are below him.

It is time now to go to the Probationary Qualifications of an Officer at Sea:
And I have ſome to offer, which I have digeſted in my Thoughts, I hope
impartially, that they may not be Speculative Notions, but things eaſy and
practicable, if the directing Powers will give due Countenance and
In­couragement to the Execution of them: But whilſt I am going about to ſet
them down, though this little Eſſay was made to no other End, than to
introduce them, I am upon better Recollection, induced to put a reſtraint upon
my ſelf, and rather retract the Promiſe I made at the begin­ning, than by
adviſing the particular Me­thods, by which I conceive the good End that is
aimed at may be obtained, to incur the Imputation of the thing of the World,
of which I would leaſt be guilty, which is of anticipating, by my private
Opinion, the Judgment of the Parliament, or ſeem­ing out of my ſlender Stock
of Reaſon to dictate to the Supream Wiſdom of the Na­tion. [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=178) They will, no
doubt, conſider the preſent Eſtabliſhments for Diſcipline at Sea, which are
many of them very good, and if well executed, might go a great way in the
preſent Queſtion. But I will not ſay they are ſo perfect, but that other may
be added to make them more effectual, and that ſome more Supplemental
Expedients may be neceſſary to compleat what is yet defective: And whenever
the Parliament ſhall think fit to take this Matter into their Conſideration, I
am ſure they will not want for their Direction, the Auxiliary Reaſons of any
Man without Doors, muchleſs of one, whoſe Thoughts are ſo intirely and
un­affectedly reſigned to whatever they ſhall determine in this, or any thing
elſe relating to the Publick.

# 7\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=179)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=179)

MAXIMS OF STATE.

By a late Perſon of Honour.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=180)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=180)

### 1\. MAXlMS OF STATE.

1\. THAT a Prince who falleth out with Laws, breaketh with his beſt Friends.

2\. That the exalting his own Authority above his Laws, is like letting in his
Ene­my to ſurprize his Guards: The Laws are the only Guards he can be ſure
will never run away from him.

3\. A Prince that will ſay he can do no Good, except he may do every thing;
teacheth the People to ſay, They are Slaves, if they muſt not do whatever they
have a mind to.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=181) 4\. That
Power and Liberty are like Heat and Moiſture; where they are well mixt▪ every
thing proſpers; where the are ſingle, they are deſtructive.

5\. That Arbitrary Power is like moſt other things, that are very hard, they
are alſo very apt to break.

6\. That the profit of Places ſhould be meaſured as they are more or leſs
conducing to the Publick Service; and if Buſineſs is more neceſſary than
Splendor, the,Inſtru­ment of it ought in Proportion to be better paid; that
the contrary Method is as im­pertinent, as it would be to let the.Car­ving of
a Ship coſt more than all the reſt of it.

7\. That where the leaſt uſeful part of the People have the moſt Credit with
the Prince, Men will conclude, That the way to get every thing, is to be good
for no­thing.

8\. That an extravagant Gift to one Man, raiſeth the Market to every body
elſe; ſo that in conſequence, the unlimitted Bounty of an unthinking Prince
maketh him a Beg­gar, let him have never ſo much Money.

9\. That if ordinary Beggars are whip'd, the daily Beggars in fine Cloaths
(out of a proportionable Reſpect to their Quality) ought to be hanged.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=181) 10\. That
Pride is as loud a Beggar as Want, and a great deal more Sawcy.

11\. That a Prince, who will give more to Importunity than Merit, had as good
ſet out a Proclamation to all his Loving Subjects, forbidding them to do well,
upon the pe­nalty of being undone by it.

12\. That a wiſe Prince will not oblige his Courtiers, who are Birds of Prey,
ſo as to diſoblige his People, who are Beaſt of Burthen.

13\. That it is ſafer for a Prince to Judge of Men by what they do to one
another, than that they do to him.

14\. That it is a groſs Miſtake to think, That a Knave between Man and Man,
can be honeſt to a King, whom of all other Men generally they make the leaſt
Scruple to deceive.

15\. That a Prince who can ever truſt the Man that hath once deceived him,
loſeth the Right of being Faithfully dealt with by any other Perſon.

16\. That it is not poſſible for a Prince to find out ſuch an Honeſt Knave, as
will let no body elſe Cheat him.

17\. That if a Prince does not ſhew an Averſion to Knaves, there will be an
Infe­rence that will be very Natural, let it be never ſo Unmannerly.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=182) 18\. That
a Prince who followeth his own Opinion to ſoon, is in danger of repenting it
too late.

19\. That it is leſs dangerous for a Prince to mind too much what the People
ſay, than too little.

20\. That a Prince is to take care that the greater part of the People may not
be angry at the ſame time; for though the firſt beginning of their Ill Humour
ſhould be againſt one another, yet if not ſtopt, it will naturally end in
Anger againſt him.

21\. That if Princes would Reflect how much they are in the Power of their
Mini­ſters, they would be more circumſpect in the Choice of them.

22\. That a wiſe Prince will ſupport good Servants againſt Mens Anger, and not
ſup­port ill ones againſt their Complaint.

23\. That Parties in a State generally, like Freebooters, hang out Falſe
Colours; the pretence is the Publick Good; the real Buſi­neſs is, to catch
Prizes; like the Tartars, where-ever they ſucceed, inſtead of Impro­ving their
Victory, they preſently fall upon the Baggage.

24\. That a Prince may play ſo long be­tween Two Parties, that they may in
time join together, and be in earneſt with him.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=182) 25\. That
there is more Dignity in open Violence, than in the unskilful Cunning of a
Prince, who goeth about to Impoſe upon the People.

26\. That the People will ever ſuſpect the Remedies for the Diſeaſes of the
State, where they are wholly excluded from ſeeing how they are prepared.

27\. That changing Hands without chang­ing Meaſures, is as if a Drunkard in a
Drop­ſey ſhould change his Doctors, and not his Dyet.

28\. That a Prince is to watch that his Reaſon may not be ſo ſubdued by his
Nature, as not to be ſo much a Man of Peace, as to be juſt in an Army; nor ſo
much a Man of War, as to be out of his Element in his Counſel.

29\. That a Man who cannot mind his own Buſineſs, is not to be truſted with
the King's.

30\. That Quality alone ſhould only ſerve to make a ſhew in the Embroidered
Part of the Government; but that Ignorance, though never ſo well born, ſhould
never be admit­ted to ſpoil the Publick Buſineſs.

31\. That he who thinks his Place below him, will certainly be below his
Place.

32\. That when Princes Examples ceaſeth to have the force of a Law, it is a
ſure [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=183) ſign
that his Power is waſting, and that there is but little diſtance between Men's
neg­lecting to Imitate, and their refuſing  [...] Obey.

33\. That a People may let a King fall, yet ſtill remain a People; but if a
King let his People ſlip from him▪ he is no longer King.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=183)

## Appendix A ADVERTISEMENT.

SInce the Death of the Inge­nious Tranſlator of theſe Eſſays, an imperfect
Tranſcript of the following Letter was in­tended for the Preſs, but having the
good fortune to meet with a more correct Copy, I thought my ſelf under a
neceſſity of Publiſh­ing it with this Third Editi­on, not only to do Juſtice
to his Memory, but to the Great Per­ſon he Choſe for his Patron.

M. G.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=184)

## Appendix B A Letter ſent by his Lordſhip to Charles Cotton, Eſq upon his
New Tranſlation and Dedication of Montaigne's Eſſays.

SIR.

I have too long delay'd my Thanks to you for giving me ſuch an obliging
Evidence of your Remembrance: That alone would have been a welcome Preſent,
but when join'd with the Book in the World I am the beſt entertain'd with, it
raiſeth a ſtrong deſire in me to be better known, where I am ſure to be ſo
much pleaſed. I have till now thought Wit could not be Tranſlated, and do
ſtill retain ſo much of that Opinion, that I believe it impoſſible, except by
one whoſe Genius cometh up to that of the Author. You have ſo kept the
Original Strength of his Thought, that it almoſt tempts a Man to believe the
Tranſ­migration of Souls, and that his being us'd to Hills, is come into the
Moore-Lands to Reward us here in England, for doing him
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=184) more Right
than his Country will afford him. He hath by your means mended his Firſt
Edition: To tranſplant and make him Ours, is not only a Valuable Acquiſition
to us, but a Juſt Cenſure of the Critical Im­pertinence of thoſe French
Scribblers who have taken pains to make little Cavils and Exceptions, to
leſſen the Reputation of this great Man, whom Nature hath made too big to
Confine himſelf to the Exactneſs of a Studied Stile. He let his Mind have its
full Flight, and ſheweth by a generous kind of Negligence that he did not
Write for Praiſe, but to give to the World a true Picture of himſelf and of
Mankind. He ſcorned affected Periods, or to pleaſe the miſtaken Reader with an
empty Chime of Words. He hath no Affectation to ſet him­ſelf out, and
dependeth wholly upon the Natural Force of what is his own, and the Excellent
Application of what he borrow­eth.

You ſee, Sir, I have kindneſs enough for Monſieur de Montaigne to be your
Rival, but no Body can pretend to be in equal Competition with you: I do
willingly yield which is no ſmall matter for a Man to do to a more proſperous
Lover; and if you will repay this piece of Juſtice with another,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=185) pray
believe, that he who can Tranſlate ſuch an Author without doing him wrong muſt
not only make me Glad but Proud of being his

Very humble Servant, Halli [...]ax.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52156&page=185)

[Home](/)

Halifax, George Savile, Marquis of, 1633-1695.. Date: 1700  

