## (unknown project)

# A choice manual, or Rare secrets in physick and chirurgery: collected, &
practised by the Right Honourable the Countesse of Kent, late deceased.
Whereto are added several experiments of the vertue of Gascon powder, and
lapis contra yarvam by a professor of physick. As also most exquisite ways of
preserving, conserving, candying &c. — Choice manuall

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=1)

ELIZABETH Late Countess of Kent.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=1)

A Choice Manual, Or Rare SECRETS IN PHYSICK AND CHIRURGERY: Collected, &
practised by the Right Honorable the Coun­tess of Kent, late deceased.

Whereto are added several Experiments of the Vertue of Gascons powder, and
La­pis contra Yarvam by a Professor of Physick. As also most exquisite ways of
Preserving, Conserv­ing, Candying, &c.

The Nineteenth Edition.

London, Printed for H. Mort­lock at the Phoenix in St. Pauls Churchyard. 1687.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=2)

### To the vertuous and most Noble Lady, Laetitia Popham, Wife of the
Honourable and truly Vali­ant Col. Alexander Popham.  
Thrice Noble and truly Vertuous Lady.

AFter mature deliberation, what to tender unto your acceptance worthy your
Pa­tronage, not [...]ing occurred more proba­ble than this small Manual; which
was once esteemed a rich Cabinet of knowledge, by a person truly Honou­rable.
May it auspiciously pro [...]ure but your Honourable friendly Esti­mation, and
then I doubt not, but it will find an universal acceptance amongst persons of
greatest Eminency. Sure I am, it may be justly deemed as a rich Magazine of
experience, ha­ving since taught the world its ap­proved excellency, yea, even
in many [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=3)
dangerous exigencies. All I humbly crave for the present is, my boldness may
be favourably excused; since 'twas my lawful ambition, thereby to avoid
ingratitude, for the many singular favours I have already re­ceived from your
endeared truly Ho­nourable Husband, my always true noble Friend, and most
happy Coun­try-man. God multiply his blessings upon all your noble Family, and
make you no less honourable here on Earth, than eternally happy here­after;
which shall be the daily prayer of him: whose highest Emulation, is,

In all due ways, abundantly to Honour and serve you, W. J.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=3)

### TO THE READER.

Courteous Reader,

WELL remembring that we are all born for the weal-publick good: I here tender
to thy perusal this small, and yet most excellent Treatise, Entitu­led, A
Choice Manual of Rare and Select Secrets in Physick: If thereby thou suck
abundance of Profit, I shall be superlatively glad, but if any, or perchance
many unlook­ed for mistakes, for want of a due application, bid thee entertain
contrary thoughts, the effect not answering thy curious expecta­tion, upon a
most serious reflex, know, that nothing is absolutely perfect, and withal,
that the richest and most sovereign Antidote may be often misapplied:
wherefore the fault not being mine, excuse and cease to censure: For which
just, and but reasonable favour, thou shalt deservedly oblige me,

Thine, W. J.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=4)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=4)

### A Table of the Contents.

A

  * FOR an Ague, pag. 27\. 64. 137. 146
  * For an Ach 28. 39. 59. 62. 120. 127
  * Aqua Composita 115\. 126. 136
  * For an Ach in the Back 128
  * For a tertian Ague 155
  * For the stinging of an Adder 156
  * Mr. Ashleys Ointment 162
  * For an Ach in the joints 164
  * The vertue of Aqua Bezar 191
  * Spirit of Confection of Alkermes its Vertues 196
  * Extract of Ambergreece ibid.

B

  * For a Bruise 10. 30. 56. 77. 95 104. 110
  * For restoring breath 110
  * A strengthening meat for the same 29
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=5) A Cordial for a break-fast 22
  * For the griping of the Belly 22
  * To clear the Blood 31
  * For burning of the back 33
  * For weakness of the back 34. 103
  * For a sore Breast 38
  * For a stinking Breath 39
  * For one that pisseth blood 48
  * For the Bone-ach 63. 149
  * For a burning by lightning 83
  * To stanch blood 85
  * For the black Jaundies 89
  * For burning with Gun-powder 96
  * A Plaister for the Back 115
  * To make Balm-water 144
  * For an inward bruising 110
  * For a blast 169
  * Balsamum 170

C

  * For a Consumption and Cough of the Lungs 1. 20. 25. 133. 179
  * To make a Jelly and Glister for the Cough 51
  * For an extream Cough and Cold 11. 34
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=5) China broth for a Consumption 23
  * Another broth for a Consumption 25
  * For Corns 51
  * For a Canker 52. 103. 118
  * For pain after Child-birth 68
  * For swollen Cods 69
  * For the Cholick 81
  * For all manner of Cuts 86
  * For a dead Child in a Woman 91
  * To Deliver a Child in danger 133. 157
  * To cool Choler 136
  * For the Cholick passion 137
  * For Children that are troubled with an extream Cough 143
  * For a Cold 168
  * Powder of Crabs claws 186
  * The Vertue of a root called Contra Yarva 188\. 189. 190
  * Vertues of spirit of Clary 191
  * Vertues of spirit of Comfrey 196

D.

  * For the Dropsie 31
  * For the biting of a mad Dog 63. 70. 157
  * Vertue of spirit of Diasatyrion 194

E

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=6)For all infirmities and diseases of the Eyes 30. 49. 50. 148
  * For a pin, and web, and redness in the Eye 36. 75. 147. 148
  * For the Emeroids 95. 128. 152
  * For Rheum at the Eyes 127. 131
  * For sore Eyes 172. 174. 175
  * Several Experiments made of the Coun­tess of Kents Powder 198

F

  * For Faintness 4
  * For Flegm 11
  * To know whether he that hath the Flux shall live or die 47
  * For the falling sickness 56. 172
  * For the bloody Flux 56. 174
  * To kill a Felon 65
  * To break a Felon 65. 122. 129
  * Oil of Foxes its Vertues 104
  * Jelly of Frogs 178
  * For a red Face 182

G

  * For the Gout 43. 91. 92
  * For the green-sickness 84
  * Gascons powder 198
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=6) Gascons powder by the Apothecaries 185

H

  * To make Horse-Raddish drink 7
  * To take away Hoarsness 13
  * To take away Head-ach ib.
  * A Cordial for the Heart 16. 17
  * For coldness in the Head 34
  * For the Hearing 44. 91. 122
  * For the breaking out of Childrens Heads 55
  * For the swelling of the Head with a fall 70
  * For a new Hurt 72
  * To cleanse the Head 74
  * For singing in the Head 91
  * For a heat or burning, or scalding 125
  * Oil of Hypericon 170
  * For a scald Head 173
  * For heat of the soles of the Feet 193

I

  * For the Itch 10. 174
  * Oil of St. Johns Wort 80
  * For a strain in the Joints 161

K

  * For Kibes 26. 112
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=7) The Countess of Kents powder 187

L

  * For the Liver 11
  * For a Lask 69. 95. 112. 118
  * Against grief of the Lungs 73
  * To cause easie Labour 77
  * To keep ones body Loose 181

M.

  * Against Melancholy 113
  * Aqua Mirabilis with the Vertues thereof 4. 5
  * To prevent Miscarrying 10
  * For the Mother 119. 153
  * The Vertues of Aqua Mariae 192
  * The Vertues of spirit of Mints 193
  * The Compositum of Oleum Magi­strale. 204

P

  * For the Plague 9. 154. 155. 180
  * For the Pleurisie 26. 74
  * For the dead Palsie 38. 102
  * A good Purge 59
  * For a pricking with a Nail or Thorn 96. 107. 117
  * To make the leaden Plaister 105
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=7) The vertue of the Plaister 106
  * For the Phthisick 121
  * For pricking and burning in the soles of the feet 125
  * For a Push 130
  * The best Paracelsus Salve 158
  * An excellent Plague-water 167
  * A Defensive Plaister against the Plague 168

R

  * Running of the Reins 35. 68. 82. 125. 168
  * Pectoral Rowls 37
  * For the Reins of the Back 61
  * For Rheum in the Head 95
  * For one that hath a Rupture 99. 100. 117
  * Vertues of flowers of Rosemary 192
  * Vertues of Spirit of Roses 194

S

  * For Stone in the Kidneys 75. 94
  * For a Stitch 62. 99
  * For Scabs 10
  * For the Scurvy 31
  * To strengthen the stomach 33. 150
  * For Sun-burn 35
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=8) For a Swelling 39. 51. 52. 53. 72. 115
  * For Spitting of blood. 46. 71
  * Against Surfeiting 60. 111. 175
  * For Sinews that are shrunk 93
  * Dr. Stevens Water. 65. 144
  * To cause one to sleep 71. 103. 119. 122
  * For pain in the Stomach 75
  * A Cordial for the Sea 78
  * For the Stone 81. 88. 94. 112. 134. 135
  * For an old Sore 89. 90. 101. 109. 128. 145
  * To make oil of Sage 87
  * For a Scald 97. 123. 152
  * To make oil of Swallows 116
  * A water for the Sight. 121
  * For the stiffness of Sinews 138
  * For the Spleen 151
  * Vertues of spirit of Saffron 103
  * Vertues of spirit of Strawberries 195

T

  * For stopping in the Throat 11
  * To distil Treacle Water 12
  * For a Tetter 97. 181
  * To keep Teeth clean 86
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=8) To cure the Gargee in the Throat 90
  * To quench thirst 120
  * For the Tooth-ach 88. 170
  * To fasten the Teeth ibid.
  * To make one take their meat 179
  * The Vertues of Aqua Theriacalis 193

V

  * How to stay Vomiting 33
  * How to stop the bleeding of a Vein 47
  * For a Vein ill smitten 48
  * For Vlcers 55
  * Flos Unguentorum 57
  * Against biting of venemous beasts 70
  * Against falling of the Vvula 183

W

  * A Cordial for wind in the stomach 147. 156
  * Restoratives for the same 16. 17. 18
  * For a green Wound 27. 54. 69. 70. 83. 109. 128. 132
  * For one that is Weak 42
  * To stanch bleeding of a Wound 46. 96. 168
  * For a Woman travelling with Child 48. 79
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=9) For a Wen 54
  * For cankered Wounds 62
  * Dr. Willoughbies Water 66
  * To draw an Arrow-head, or any Iron out of a Wound 69
  * For a Woman that hath her Flowers too much 91
  * To cause a Woman to have her sickness 94
  * To kill Worms. 94. 154
  * For the Wind-Cholick 102
  * For one that cannot make Water 114. 182
  * To take away Warts 121

Y

  * Yellow Jaundice 37

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=9)

### 1\. A Choice Manual, OR, RARE and SELECT SECRETS IN PHYSICK, By the Right
Honourable the Countess of KENT

#### 1.1. A very good Medicine for a Consum­ption and Cough of the Lungs.

TAke a pound of the best Ho­ney as you can get, and dis­solve it in a Pipkin,
then take it off the fire, and put in two pen­ny worth of flower of brimstone,
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=10) and a
pennyworth of powder of Elecampane, and 2 pennyworth of the flower of
Liquorice, and 2 pen­nyworth of red Rose-water, and so stir them together,
till they be all compounded together, and put it into a gally-pot, and when
you use it, take a Liquorish-stick, beaten at one end, and take up with it as
much almost as half a Walnut, at night when you go to bed, and in the morning
fasting, or at any time in the night when you are troubled with the Cough, and
so let it melt down in your mouth by degrees.

#### 1.2. Sir John Digbies Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.

Take a pound of the finest Ho­ney, and take 7 quarts of Conduit-water, set
them on the fire, and when it is ready to seeth, scum it, and still as the
froth rises, scum it, and put in 20 whole Cloves, and let them seeth softly
for the space of half an hour, and so bottle it up for [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=10) your use, and
drink it morning and evening, and at your meat, and use no other drink until
you are well.

#### 1.3. A Medicine for the falling sickness.

Take a penyweight of the powder of Gold, six pennyweight of Pearl, 6
pennyweight of Amber, 6 pen­nyweight of Coral, 8 grains of Be­zoar, half an
ounce of Piony seed, also you must put some powder of a dead mans Skull that
hath been an Anatomy, for a woman, and the powder of a woman for a man:
compound all these together, and take as much of the powder of all these, as
will lie upon a two-pence, for 9 mornings together in Endive water, and drink
a good draught of Endive water after it.

#### 1.4. For Cordials and Restoratives use these things following.

In any faintness take 3 drops of Oil of Cinnamon, mixed with a spoonful of
sirrup of Gilliflowers, and as much Cinnamon-water, drink this for a Cordial.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=11)

#### 1.5. Against Melancholy.

Take 1 spoonful of Gilliflowers, the weight of 7 Barly corns of Bever-stone,
bruise it as fine as flower, and so put into 2 spoonfuls of syrrup of
Gilliflowers, and take it four hours after Supper, or else four hours after
dinner, this will cheer the heart.

#### 1.6. If you be sick after meat use this.

Take of the best green Ginger that is preserved in syrrup, shred it into small
pieces, put it into a gally-pot, and put Cinnamon wa­ter to it; then after
dinner or sup­per eat the quantity of two Nut­megs upon a knifes point.

#### 1.7. Aqua Mirabilis.

Take three pints of White-wine, one pint of Aqua vitae, one pint of juice of
Celendine, one dram of Cardamer, a drachm of Mellilot-flowers, Cubebs a dram,
Galingal, Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, and Cloves of each a dram: mingle all these
together over-night, the [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=11) next morning set
them a stilling in a glass Limbeck. The Vertues. This water dissolveth
swelling of the Lungs, and being perished doth help and comfort them, it
suffereth not the blood to putrifie, he shall not need to be let blood that
useth this water, it suffereth not the heart-burning, nor Melancholy or
[...]egm to have dominion, it expel­  [...]eth Urine, and profiteth the
sto­mach, it preserveth a good colour, the visage, memory and youth, it
destroyeth the Palsie.

Take some 3 spoonfuls of it once or twice a week, or oftner, morn­ing and
evening, first and last.

#### 1.8. Another way to make Aqua Mirabilis.

Take Galingal, Cloves, Quibs, Ginger, Mellilip, Cardimomie, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, and of the juice of Celendine half a pint, adding the juice of
Mints and Balm, of each half a pint more, and mingle all the said spices being
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=12) beaten
into a powder, with the juice, with a pint of good Aqua vitae and 3 pints of
good White-wine, & put all these together in a pot, and let it stand all night
being close stopt, and in the morning distil it with as soft fire as can be,
the still being close pasted, and a cold still.

#### 1.9. A Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.

Take a good handful of Pellito­ry of the Wall, a handful of Me [...]d Parsley,
Saxifrage, a handful of wild Thyme, a handful of garden-Parsley, three
spoonfuls of Fen­nel seed six Horse-Radish-Roots sliced, then shred all these
toge­ther, put them in a gallon of new Milk, and let them stand & steep in a
close pot 1 whole night, and then still them, milk and all together, this must
be done in May or June, for then herbs are in their best state, & when it is
taken you must put two or three spoonfuls of this water, as much White-wine as
[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=12) Rhenish,
and if you please a little sugar, and so take it two days be­fore the change,
and two days after, and two days before the full, and two days after,
continuing taking the same all the year, and the pa­tient undoubtedly shall
find great ease, and void many stones, and much gravel, with little pain.

#### 1.10. To make Horse-raddish drink.

Take half a pound of Horse-raddish, then wash and scrape them very clean, and
slice them very thin-cross-ways on the root, then put them into six quarts of
small Ale, such as is ready for drinking, which being put into a pipkin close
covered, set on the embers, keeping it a little more than blood warm for
twelve hours; then take it off the fire, and let it stand to cool until the
next morning, then pour the clear li­quor into bottles, and keep it for your
use, drinking a good draught thereof in the morning, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=13) fasting two hours
after, and the like quantity at four in the after­noon, this drink is
excellent good against winds, as also for the scur­vy and dropsie, being taken
in time.

#### 1.11. An excellent Syrrup against Me­lancholy.

Take four quarts of the juice of Pearmains, and twice as much of the juice of
Bugloss and Bo­rage, if they be to be gotten, a drachm of the best English
Saf­fron, bruise it, and put it into the juice, then take two drachms of
Kermes small beaten to powder, mix it also with the juice; so be­ing mixt, put
them into an ear­then vessel, covered or stopt forty eight hours, then strain
it, and allow a pound of sugar to every quart of juice, and so boil it to the
ordinary height of a syrrup, after it is boiled, take one drachm of the spices
of Dramber, and two drachms of the spices of Diamar­gariton [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=13) frigidum, and so
sew the same slenderly in a linnen bag, that you may put the same easily into
the bottle of syrrup, and so let it hang with a thred out at the mouth of the
bottle, the spices must be put into the syrrup in the bag: so soon as the
syrrup is off the fire, whilst it is hot, then af­terwards put it into the
bottle, and there let it hang: put but a spoonful or two of Honey amongst it,
whilst it is boiling, and it will make the scum rise, and the syr­rup very
clear.

You must add to it the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the juice of Balm.

#### 1.12. An excellent Receipt for the Plague.

Take one pound of green Wal­nuts, half an ounce of Saffron, and half an ounce
of London Treacle, beaten together in a mortar, and with a little Carduus, or
some such water, vapour it over the fire till it come to an Electuary: keep
this [[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=14) in a
pot, and take as much as a Walnut, it is good to cure a Fea­ver, Plague, and
any infection.

#### 1.13. An excellent Cordial.

Take the flowers of Marigolds, and lay them in small spirit of wine; when the
tincture is fully taken out, pour it off from the flowers, and vapour it away
till it come to a consistence as thick as an Electuary.

#### 1.14. For a bruise or stitch under the Ribs.

Take five or six handfuls of Cab­bage, stamp it, and strain it, after it is
boiled in a quart of fair water, then sweeten it with Sugar, and drink it off
in a wine-glass in the morning, and at four in the after­noon, for five or six
days together, then take a Cabbage leaf, and be­tween two dishes stew it,
being wet first in Canary wine, and that lay hot to your side evening and
morning.

#### 1.15. An excellent Receipt for an Itch, or any foul Scabs.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=14) Take Fox
gloves, and boil a handful of them in posset-drink, and drink of it a draught
at night, and in the morning, then boil a good quantity of the Fox gloves in
fair running water, and anoint the places that are sore with the water.

#### 1.16. A Receipt good for the Liver.

Take Turpentine, slice it thin, and lay it on a silver or Purslane Plate,
twice or thrice in the oven with the bread till it be dry, and so make it into
powder, every day take as much as will lie on a six-pence in an Egg.

#### 1.17. For Flegm, and stopping in the throat and stomach. D. T.

Take oyl of Almonds, Linseed oyl, buds of Orange flowers, boil all these in
Milk, and anoint the stomach well with it, and lay a scarlet cloth next to it.

#### 1.18. For an extream cold and cough.

Take of Hyssop water 6 ounces, of red Poppy water four ounces, [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=15) six Dates, ten
Figs, and slice them small, a handful of Raisins of the Sun, the weight of a
shilling of the powder of Liquorish, put these into the aforesaid waters, and
let them stand 5 or 6 hours upon warm embers, close covered, and not boil,
then strain forth the wa­ter, and put into it as much sugar of Roses as will
sweeten it, drink of this in the morning, and at four of the clock in the
afternoon, and when you go to bed.

#### 1.19. To distil Treacle water.

Take one ounce of Harts-horn shaved, and boil it in three pints of Carduus
water till it come to a quart, then take the roots of Ele­campane, Gentian,
Cypress, Tor­mentil and of Citron rinds, of each one ounce, Borage, Bugloss,
Rose­mary flowers, of each two ounces, then take a pound of the best old
Treacle, and dissolve it in six pints of white-wine, and three pints of Rose-
water, so infuse all together, and distil it.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=15) It is
good to restore spirits and speech, and good against swooning, faintness,
agues and worms, and the small pox.

#### 1.20. Treacle-water.

Take three ounces of Venice Trea­cle, and mingle it in a quart of spirits of
wine, set it in Horse-dung 4 or 5 days, then still it in ashes or sand twice
over; after take the bottom which is left in the Still, and put to it a pint
of spirit of wine, and set it in the dung till the tincture be clean out of
it, and strain the clear tincture out of it, and set it on the fire till it
come to be a thick consistence, it must be kept with a soft fire. And so the
like with saffron.

#### 1.21. To take away Hoarsness.

Take a Turnip, cut a hole in the top of it, and fill it up with brown Sugar-
candy, and so roast it in the embers, and eat it with Butter.

#### 1.22. To take away the Head-ach.

Take the best Sallet oyl, and [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=16) the glass half
full with tops of poppy flowers which grow in the Corn, set this in the Sun a
fort­night, and so keep it all the year, and anoint the temples of your head
with it.

#### 1.23. For a Cough.

Take Sallet oyl, Aqua vitae, and Sack, of each an equal quantity, beat them
all together, and before the fire rub the soles of your feet with it.

#### 1.24. To make Jelly of Harts-horn.

Take a quart of running water, and three ounces of Harts-horn scraped very
fine, then put it into a stone Jug, and set the Jug in a ket­tle of water over
the fire, and let it boyl 2 or 3 hours until it jelly, then put into it 3 or 4
spoonfuls of Rose-water, or White-wine, then strain it: you may put into it
Musk, or Ambergreece, and sea­son it as you please.

#### 1.25. To make a Glister.

Take half a quart of new Milk, [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=16) or 3 quarters,
set it on the fire, and make it scalding hot, then take it off, and put it
into it the yolk of a new laid Egg beaten, two ounces of brown sugar-candy, or
black sugar, give it to the party blood-warm.

#### 1.26. Another.

Take the bone of a neck of Mut­ton or Veal clean washed, set it on the fire to
boyl in 3 pints of fair water, and when it is clean scum­med, then put in the
roots of Fen­nel and Parsley clean washed and scraped, of either of them, the
roots bruised, a handful of Cam­momil, and Mallows a handful, let all these
boyl together till half be wasted, then strain it, take 3 quar­ters of a pint
of this broth, brown sugar-candy two ounces, of oyl of Flax seed two ounces,
mingle all these together, and take it for a glister, blood-warm; when it is
in your bod [...], keep it half an hour, or three quarters of an hour, or an
hour if you can.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=17)

#### 1.27. A comfortable Cordial to chear the Heart.

Take one ounce of Conserve of Gilliflowers, four grains of the best Musk
bruised as fine as flower, then put it into a little tin pot, and keep it till
you have need to make this Cordial following, viz. Take the quantity of one
Nutmeg out of your tin pot, put to it one spoon­ful of Cinamon-water, and 1
spoon­ful of the syrrup of Gilliflowers, Ambergreece, mix all these toge­ther;
and drink them in the morn­ing fasting 3 or 4 hours, this is most comfortable.

#### 1.28. A Cordial for Wind in the sto­mach, or any part.

Take six or eight spoonfuls of Penniroyal-water, put into it four drops of oyl
of Cinamon, so drink it any time of the day, so you fast two hours after.

#### 1.29. Restorative.

Take a well flesht Capon from the barn door, and pluck out his [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=17) Intrails, then
wash it within with a little White-wine, then flea off all the skin, and take
out his bones, and take the flesh, only cut it in little pieces, and put it
into a little stone bottle, and put to it one ounce of white Sugar-candy, six
Dates slit, with the stones and piths taken out, one large Mace, then stop the
bottle up fast, and set it in a Chafer of water, and let it boyl three hours,
then take it out, and pour the juice from the meat, and put to it one spoonful
of red Rose-water, and take the better part for your break-fast four hours
before din­ner, and the other part at three a clock in the afternoon, being
blood-warm.

#### 1.30. Another Restorative.

Take half a pint of Claret wine, and half a pint of Ale, and make a Caudle,
with a new-laid Egg, put in half a Nutmeg cut into two pieces, then take it
off the [[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=18)
fire, and put in seven grains of Ambergreece, drink this for two break-fasts,
for it will increase blood and strength.

#### 1.31. Another Restorative.

Take two new laid Eggs, and take the whites clean from them, and put the yolks
both in one shell, then put in two spoonfuls of Claret wine, seven grains of
Am­bergreece small bruised, and a lit­tle Sugar-candy stir all these
toge­ther, and make them blood-warm, and sup them up for a breakfast three or
four hours before din­ner.

#### 1.32. Another Restorative.

Take a young leg of Mutton, cut off the skin and the fat, take the flesh being
cut into small pieces, and put it into a stone bot­tle, then put to it two
ounces of raisins of the Sun stoned, a large Mace, an ounce and half of Su
­gar-candy, and stop the bottle very close, and  [...]et it boyl in a Cha­fer
[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=18) three
hours, and so put the juice from the meat, and keep it in a clean glass, it
will serve for three breakfasts; or if he will he may take some at three a
clock in the afternoon being made warm.

#### 1.33. A Restoring Broth.

Take 2 ounces of China-roots, first slit very thin, then put it in a New
Pipkin with five pints of run­ning water being close covered, and set it upon
embers all night long, where it may be very hot, but not seeth, then put to
that water a great Cock Chicken, and when it is clean scummed, put in­to it
two spoonfuls of French Bar­ly, six dates slit, with the piths and stones
taken out, two ounces of raisins of the Sun ston'd, a large Mace, let all
these boyl together, till half be consumed, then take out the Cock, and beat
the flesh of it in a clean Mortar, and a little of the broth, then strain it
all to­gether throughout a hair Cul­lender, [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=19) then put in two
spoonfuls of red Rose-water, and sweeten it with white Sugar-candy, drink of
this broth, being made warm, half a pint in the morning early fasting, and
sleep after it if you can, drink a good draught at three of the clock in the
afternoon, this broth is very good for a Con­sumption, and the longer they
take it, it is the better.

#### 1.34. A strengthening Meat.

Take Potato roots, roast them or bake them, then pill them, and slice them
into a dish, put to it lumps of raw Marrow, and a few Currans, a little whole
Mace, and sweeten it with sugar to your tast, and so eat it instead of
buttered Parsnips.

#### 1.35. Broth for a Consumption.

Take 3 Marrow bones, break them in pieces, and boyl them in a gallon of water
till half be con­sumed, then strain the liquor through a Cullender, and let it
[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=19) stand
while it be cold, then take off all the fat clean and put the broth into a
pipkin, and put to it a good Cock-Chicken, and a knuckle of Veal, then put
into it the bottom of a white loaf, a whole Mace, two ounces of Raisins of the
Sun stoned, six Dates slit, let all these boyl together till half be consumed,
then strain it, instead of Almonds, take a few Pistachs kernels, and beat
them, and strain with your broths as you do Al­mond milk, and so sweeten it
with white sugar, and drink half a pint early in the morning, and at three a
clock in the afternoon, and so con­tinue a good while together, or else it
will do you no good.

#### 1.36. Another Cordial.

Take a preserved Nutmeg, cut it in four quarters, eat a quarter at a
breakfast, and another in the afternoon, this is good for the head and
stomach.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=20)

#### 1.37. A Cordial for a breakfast, fasting.

Eat a good piece of Pomeci­tron preserved, as big as your two fingers in
length and breadth, and so at 3 of the clock in the afternoon.

#### 1.38. A Restoring break-fast.

Take the brawn of a Capon, or Pullet, 12 Jordan Almonds blan­ched, beat them
together, and strain out the juice with a draught of strong broth, and take
for a breakfast, or to bedward.

#### 1.39. A Medicine for any griping of the Belly.

Take a pint of Claret wine, put to it a spoonful of Parsley-seed, and a
spoonful of sweet Fennel-seed, half a dozen cloves, a branch of Rosemary, a
wild Mallow root clean washt and scrapt, and the pith taken out, with a good
piece of Sugar, set this on the fire, and burn the Claret very well with all
these things in it, then drink a good draught of it in the morning fasting,
and at 3 a clock in the af­ternoon.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=20)

#### 1.40. To keep the Body Laxative.

Take half a pint of running wa­ter, put it in a new Pipkin with a cover, then
put into the water two ounces of Manna, and when it is dissolved, strain it,
and put to it four ounces of Damask Prunes, eight Cloves, a branch of
Rose­mary, let all these stew together while they be very tender, then eat a
dozen of them with a little of the liquor an hour before dinner or supper,
then take a draught of broth and dine.

#### 1.41. To make the China Broth for a Consumption.

Take China roots thin sliced two ounces, steep it 24 hours in eight pints of
fair water, letting it stand warm all the time, being close covered in an
earthen Pipkin, or Iron pot, then put to it a good Cockrel, or two Chickens
clean dressed, and scum it well, then put in five leaved Grass two handfuls,
Maiden-hair, Hearts-tongue, of ei­ther [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=21) half a handful
20 Dates sliced, 2 or 3 Mace and the bottom of a Manchet, let all these stew
toge­ther, until not above one quart re­mains; then strain it, and take all
the flesh, and sweet bones, beat them in a stone Mortar, and strain out all
the juice with the broth, then sweeten it with two ounces of white Sugar-candy
in powder, and take thereof half a pint at once, early in the morning warm,
and sleep after it if you can, and 2 hours before supper at your plea­sure;
when you steep the root, slice two drachms of white San­ders, and as much red
Sanders, and let them boyl in the broth.

#### 1.42. A Gentle Purge.

Take an ounce of Damask Ro­ses, eat it all at one time, fast, three quarters
of an hour after, then take a draught of Broth and dine.

#### 1.43. Another Purge.

Take the weight of 4 or 5 pence of Rubarb, cut it in little pieces, [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=21) and take a
spoonful or two of good Currans washt very clean, so min­gle them together,
and so eat them, fast an hour after, and begin that meal with broth, you may
take it an hour before if you will.

#### 1.44. Broth for a Consumption.

Take a coarse Pullet, and sow up the belly; and an ounce of the con­serves of
red Roses, of the con­serves of Borage and Bugloss flo­wers, of each of them
half an ounce, Pine Apple kernels, and Pistachs, of each half an ounce bruised
in a Mortar, 2 drachms of Amber powder, all mixed toge­ther and put in the
belly, then boil it in 3 quarts of water, with Agri­mony, Endive and Succory,
of each one handful, Sparrow-grass roots, Fennel-roots, Caper-roots, and one
handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned, when it is almost boy­led, take out the
Pullet and beat it in a stone Mortar, then put it into the liquor again, and
give it [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=22)
three or four walmes more, then strain it, and put to a little red Rose-water,
and half a pint of White-wine, and so drink it in a morning and sleep after
it.

#### 1.45. To prevent miscarrying.

Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown paper, the breadth and length
of a hand, lay it to the small of her back, then give her to drink a caudle
made of Muscadine, and put into it the husks of twenty three sweet Al­monds
dried, and finely powdered.

#### 1.46. For Boils, or Kibes, or to draw a Sore.

Take strong Ale, and boyl it from a pint to four spoonfuls, and to keep it, it
will be an Ointment.

#### 1.47. To make Cammomil Oyl.

Shred a pound of Cammomil, and knead it into a pound of sweet Butter, melt it,
and strain it.

#### 1.48. A Receipt for the Pleurisie.

Take three round Balls of Horse-dung, boyl them in a pint of [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=22) white wine till
half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, and
let the Pa­tient go to bed and drink this, then lay him warm.

#### 1.49. For an Ague.

Take a pint of Milk and set it on the fire, and when it boyls put in a pint of
Ale, then take off the curd and put in 9 heads of Carduus, let it boyl till
half be wasted, then to every quarter of a pint put a good spoonful of Wheat-
flower, and a quarter of a spoonful of gross Pep­per, and an hour before the
fit, let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint, and be sure to lye in a sweat
before the fit.

#### 1.50. An excellent Balm for a green Wound.

Take two good handfuls of English Tobacco, shred it small, and put it in a
pint of Sallet Oyl, and seeth it on a soft fire to sim­per, till the oyl
change green, then strain it, and in the cooling [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=23) put in two
ounces of Venice Tur­pentine.

#### 1.51. For an Ach.

Take of the best Gall, white-wine Vinegar, and Aqua vitae, of each a like
quantity, and boyl it gently on the fire till it grow clammy, then put it in a
glass or pot, and when you use any of it, warm it against the fire, rub some
of it with your hand on the aking place, and lay a linnen cloth on it, do this
mornings and even­ings.

#### 1.52. To make a Sear-cloth.

Virgins Wax, Sperma Ceti, Ve­nice Turpentine, oyl of white Pop­py, oyl of Ben,
oyl of sweet Al­monds.

#### 1.53. For Wind in the stomach, and for the Spleen.

Take a handful of broom, and boyl it in a pint of Beer or Ale till it be half
consumed, and drink it for the wind and the stomach, and for the Spleen.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=23)

#### 1.54. A most excellent water for a Consum­ption and Cough of the Lungs.

Take a running Cock, pull him alive, then kill him, when he is almost cold,
cut him abroad by the back, and take out the In­trails, and wipe him clean,
then cut him in quarters, and break the bones, put him into such a Still as
you still Rose-water in, and with a pottle of Sack, a pound of Currans, a
pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, a quarter of a pound of Dates, the stones
taken out, and the Dates cut small, two handfuls of wild Thyme, two handfuls
of Orgares, two hand­fuls of Pimpernel, and two hand­fuls of Rosemary, two
handfuls of Bugloss and Borage flowers, a pottle of new milk of a red Cow,
still this with a soft fire, put into the glass that the water doth drop into,
half a pound of Sugar candy beaten very small, one Book of leaf Gold cut small
[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=24) among the
sugar, 4 grains of Am­bergreece, 12 grains of prepared Pearl, you must mingle
the strong water with the small, and drink 4 spoonfuls at a time in the
morning fasting, and an hour before supper, you must shake about the glass,
when you drink it.

#### 1.55. For a Bruise.

Take six spoonfuls of Honey, a great handful of Linseed, bruise these in a
Mortar, and boyl them in a pint of Milk an hour, then strain it very hard, and
anoint your breast and stomach with it every morning, and evening, and lay a
red cloth upon it.

#### 1.56. The Eye water for the infirmities and diseases of the Eye.

Take of the distilled water of the white wild Rose, half a pound of the
distilled water of Celan­dine, Fennel, Eye-bright, and Rue, of each two
ounces, of Cloves an ounce and a half, of white Sugar-candy one drachm, of
Tutia pre­pared [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=24) these ounces,
pulverize all these ingredients each by them­selves, saving that you must
bruise the Camphire with your Sugar-candy, for so it breaks best, then mix all
the powders together in a Paper, put them in a strong glass, pour the
distilled, waters upon them, and three pints of the best French white wine
that can be had, shake it every day 3 or 4 times long together for a month,
and then you may use it: remember to keep it very close stopt. This is
verbatim as it was had from the Lord Kelley.

#### 1.57. A Medicine very good for the Dropsie or the Scurvy, and to clear
the Blood.

Take 4 gallons of Ale, drawn from the tap into an earthen Stand; when the Ale
is two days old, then you must put in of Brooklime, of Water-cresses, of
Water-mints with red stalks, of each four handfuls, half a peck of Scurvy-
grass, let all these be [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=25) clean picked,
and washed and dried with a cloth, and shred with a knife, and then put into a
bag, then put in the Ale and stop it close, so that it have no vent, stop it
with Ri [...] Paste; the best Scurvy-grass grow­eth by the water side, it must
be 7 days after the things be in, before you drink it. Take two quarts of
water, and put in 4 ounces of Gui­acum, two ounces of Sarsaparilla, one ounce
of Saxifrage, put it into a pipkin, and infuse it upon the embers for 12
hours, and then strain it, and put it into the Ale assoon as it hath done
working, this being added makes the more Caudle.

#### 1.58. For sore Eyes.

Take half a pint of red Rose-water, put therein 4 penny-worth of Aloe
succotrina, as much Bole­armoniack in quantity, let this lie 24 hours in
steep, then wash your eyes with it evenings and morn­ings with a Feather, and
it will help them.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=25)

#### 1.59. A Sirrup to strengthen the stomach, and the brain, and to make a
sweet breath.

Take Rinds while they be new, one pound of running water the value of 5 wine
pints, then seeth it unto 3 pints, then strain it, and with one pound of
Sugar, seeth it to a syrrup, and when you take it from the fire, put to it
four grains of Musk.

#### 1.60. For the burning in the back.

Take the juice of Plantain, and Womans milk, being of a Woman with Child, put
thereto a spoonful of Rose-water, and wet a fine cloth in the same, and so lay
it to your Back where the heat is.

#### 1.61. A very good Medicine to stay the Vomiting.

Take of Spear-Mints, Worm-wood, and red Rose leaves dried, of each half a
handful, of Rye-bread grated a good handful, boyl all these in red Rose-water
and Vinegar, till they be some­what [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=26) tender, then put
it into a linnen cloth, and lay it to the sto­mach as hot as you can endure
it, heating it 2 or 3 times a day with such as it was boyled in.

#### 1.62. For weakness in the Back.

Take Nep, and Clary, and the Marrow of an Oxes back, chop them very small,
then take the yolks of 2 or 3 Eggs, and strain them all together, then fry
them, use this 6 or 7 times together, and after it drink a good draught of
Bastard or Muscadine.

#### 1.63. To make a Cap for the pain and coldness of the Head.

Take of Storax and Benjamine, of both some 12 penny-worth, and bruise it, then
quilt it in a brown paper, and wear it behind on your head.

#### 1.64. To make pectoral Rouls for a Cold.

Take 4 ounces of Sugar finely beaten, and half an ounce of fear­ced Liquorish,
2 grains of Musk, and the weight of two pence of [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=26) the syrrup of
Liquorish, and so beat it up to a perfect paste, with a little syrrup of Hore-
hound, and a little Gum-dragon, being steeped in Rose-water, then roul them in
small Rouls and dry them, and so you may keep them all the year.

#### 1.65. For the Running of the Reins.

Take the pith of an Oxe that goeth down the back, a pint of red Wine, and
strain them toge­ther through a cloth, then boyl them a little with a good
quantity of Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg, and a large Mace, a quantity of
Am­bergreece, drink this first and last daily.

#### 1.66. For Sun-burn.

Take the juice of a Lemmon, and a little Bay-salt, and wash your hands with
it, and let them dry of themselves, wash them again, and you shall find all
the spots and stains gone.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=27)

#### 1.67. For a Pin, and Web, and red­ness in the Eye.

Take a pint of white Rose [...]water, half a pint of White-win [...] as much
of Lapis Calaminaris, as Walnut bruised, put all these in glass, and set them
in the Sun o [...] week, and shake the glass ever [...] day, then take it out
of the Sun and use it as you shall need.

#### 1.68. A special Medicine to pre­serve the Sight.

Take of brown Fennel, Honey suckles of the hedge, of wild Dal [...] sie-roots
picked, and washed, an [...] dried, of Peal-wort, of Eye-brigh [...] of red
Roses, the white clippe [...] away, of each of these a handfu [...] dry
gathered, then steep all thes [...] herbs in a quart or 3 pints of th [...]
best White-wine in an earthen [...]pot, and so let it lie in steep 2 or  [...]
days close covered, stirring it  [...] times a day, and so still it with
[...] gentle fire, making two distil [...]lings, and so keep it for your use
[...]

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=27)

#### 1.69. A proved Medicine for the Yellow Jaundies.

Take a pint of Muscadine, a pretty quantity of the inner bark of a Barbery
tree, 3 spoonfuls of the greenest goose dung you can get, and take away all
the white spots of it, lay them in steep all night, on the morrow strain it,
and put to it one grated Nutmeg, one penny-worth of Saffron dried, and very
finely beaten, and give it to drink in the morning.

#### 1.70. To make Pectoral Rouls.

Take one pound of fine Sugar, of Liquorish and Annise seed two spoonfuls,
Elecampane 1 spoon­ful, of Amber, and Coral, of each a quarter of a spoonful,
all this must be very finely beaten and searced, and then the quantity that is
set down must be taken, mix all these powders together well, then take the
white of an Egg, and beat it with a pretty quantity of Musk, then take a
[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=28) brazen
mortar very well scoure [...] and a spoonful or two of the Pow [...]ders, and
drop some of the Egg  [...] it, so beat them to a paste, the make them in
little rouls, and la [...] them on a place to dry.

#### 1.71. A plaister for a sore Breast.

Take crums of white bread, th [...] tops of Mint chopped small; an [...] boyl
them in strong Ale, and mak [...] it like a poultess, and when it  [...]
almost boyled, put in the powde [...] or Ginger, and oyl of Tyme; so spread it
upon a cloth, it wil [...] both draw and heal.

#### 1.72. A Medicine for the dead Palsie, and for them that have lost their
speech.

Take Borage leaves, Marrigold leaves, or flowers, of each a good handful, boyl
it in a good Ale Posset, the Patient must drink a good draught of it in the
morn­ing, and sweat; if it be in the arms or legs, they must be chafed for an
hour or two when they be grieved, and at meals they must [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=28) drink of no
other drink till their speech come to them again, and in winter, if the herbs
be not to be had, the seeds will serve.

#### 1.73. An approved Medicine for an Ach or Swelling.

Take the flowers of Cammomil, and Rose leaves, of each of them a like
quantity, and seeth them in White-wine, and make a Plai­ster thereof, and let
it be laid as hot as may be suffered to the place grieved, and this will ease
a pain, and asswage the swelling.

#### 1.74. An approved Medicine for a stinking Breath.

Take a good quantity of Rose­mary leaves and flowers, and boyl them in White-
wine, and with a little Cinnamon and Benjamin bea­ten in powder, being put
thereto, let the Patient use to wash his mouth very often therewith, and this
will presently help him.

#### 1.75. A good Broth for one that is weak.

Take part of a Neck of Lamb, [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=29) and a pretty
running Fowl, and set them on the fire in fair spring water, and when it
boyleth, scum it well, so done put in two large Mace, and a few Raisins of the
Sun stoned, and a little Fennel root, and a Parsly root, and let them boyl, if
the party be grieved with heat or cold in the stomach, if heat, put in two
handful of bar­ley boyled before in two waters, and some Violet leaves,
Sorrel, Succory, and a little Egrimony; if cold, put in Rosemary, Thyme, a
little Marrigold leaves, Borrage, and Bugloss, and boyl this from 4 pints to
less than one.

#### 1.76. A Receipt for Purging. D. T.

Take the leaves of new Sene 6 ounces, of chosen Rubarb one ounce and half,
leaves of Sage, and Dock roots, of each one ounce, of Barberries half an
ounce, Cin­namon, and Nutmeg of each an ounce, Annise-seeds and Fennel seeds,
of each six drachms, of Ta­marisk [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=29) half an ounce,
Cloves and Mace, of each half a drachm, beat them into a gross powder, and
hang them in a linnen bag, in six gallons of new Ale, so drink it fasting, in
the morning and at night.

#### 1.77. To comfort the stomach, and help windiness and Rheum.

Take of Ginger one penny-worth Cloves 4 penny-worth, Mace seven penny-worth,
Nutmeg 4 penny-worth, Cinnamon 4 penny-worth, and Galingal two penni-worth, of
each an ounce, of Cubebs, Cor­ral, and Amber, of each 2 drachms, of Fennel
seeds, Dill seed, and Car­raway seed, of each one ounce, of Liquorish and
Annise seeds, of each an ounce, all beaten into fine powder, 1 pound and a
half of fine beaten Sugar, which must be set on a soft sire, and being
dissolved the powders being well mixed therewith till it be stiff, then put
thereunto half a pint of red Rose-water, and mix them well toge­ther, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=30) and put it into
a gally pot, and take thereof first in the morn­ing, and last in the evening,
as much as a good Hasel Nut, with a spoonful or two of red Wine.

#### 1.78. To make a Callice for a weak person.

Take a good Chicken, and a piece of the neck end of Lamb or Veal, not so much
as the Chicken, and set them on the fire, and when they boil and are well
scummed, cast in a large mace, and the pieces of the bottom of a manchet, and
half a handful of French barly boiled in 3 waters before, and put it to the
Broth, and take such herbs as the party requireth, and put them in when the
broth hath boiled half an hour, so boil it from 3 and a half to 1, then cast
it through a strain­er, and scum off all the fat, so let it cool, then take 20
good Jordan almonds, or more if they be small, and grind them in a mortar with
some of the broth, or if you think your broth too strong, grind [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=30) them with some
fair water, and strain them with the broth, then set it upon a few coals and
season it with some Sugar, not too much, and when it is almost boiled, take
out the thickest, and beat it all to pieces in the mortar, and put it in
again, and it will do well, so there be not too much of the others flesh.

#### 1.79. For the Gout.

Take 6 drams of Ciriacostine fasting in the morning, and fast 2 hours after
it, you may roul it up in a Wafer, and take it as Pills, or in Sack, as you
conceive is most agreeable for the stomach; this proportion is sufficient for
a Wo­man, take 8 drams for a man, and take it every second day, until you find
remedy for it, it is a gentle purge that works only upon winds and water.

#### 1.80. The Poultess for the Gout.

Take a penny loaf of whitebread, and slice it, and put it in fair water, 2
Eggs beaten together, a handful [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=31) of red Rose
leaves, 2 pennyworth of Saffron dryed to powder, then take the bread out of
the water, and boyl it in a quantity of good milk, with the rest of the
ingre­dients, and apply it to the place grieved, as warm as you can well
endure.

#### 1.81. For them that cannot hear.

Put into their ears good dried Suet.

#### 1.82. A Soveraign water, good for many Cures, and the health of bodies.

Take a gallon of good Gascoign Wine, White or Claret; then take Ginger,
Galingal, Cardomon, Ci­namon, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Annise seeds, Fennel
seeds, Car­raway seeds, of each of them 3 drams, then take Sage, Mint, red
Rose leaves, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, wild Marjoram, Organy,
Pennymoun­tain, Pennyroyal, Cammomil, La­vendar, Avens, of each of them a
[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=31) handful,
then beat the spices small, and the herbs, and put all into the Wine, and let
it stand for the space of 12 hours, stirring it divers times: then still it in
a Limbeck, and keep the first water by it self, for it is best, then will
there come a second water, which is good, but not so good as the first, the
Virtues of this Water be these: It comforteth the Spirit Vital, and preserveth
greatly the Spirit Vital, and preserves the youth of man, and helpeth all
in­ward diseases coming of cold, and against shaking of the Palsie; It cureth
the contract of sinews, and helpeth the conception of the barren, it killeth
the worms in the belly, it killeth the Gout, it helpeth the tooth-ach, it
comfort­eth the stomach very much, it cur­eth the cold Dropsie, it breaketh
the stone in the back, and in the reins of the back, it cureth the Can­ker, it
helpeth shortly the stink­ing [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=32) breath; and
whosoever useth this water oft, it preserveth them in good liking; this water
will be better if it stand in the Sun all the Summer, and you must draw of the
first water but a pint, and of the se­cond as far as it will run, until the
whole gallon of wine and herbs be all done out, but the last water is very
small, and not half so good as the first; if you do draw above a pint of the
best water, you must have all things more as is aforesaid.

#### 1.83. To stench the bleeding of a wound.

Take a Hounds turd and lay it on a hot coal, and bind it thereto, and that
shall stench bleeding; or else bruise a long worm, and make powder of it, and
cast it on the wound; or take the ear of a Hare, and make powder thereof, and
cast that on the wound, and that will stench bleeding.

#### 1.84. For spitting of blood after a fall or bruise.

Take Bettany, Vervain, Nose-bleed, [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=32) and 5 leaved
grass, of each alike, and stamp them in a mortar, and wring out the juice of
them, and put to the juice as much Goats milk, and let them seeth together,
and let him that is hurt drink of it 7 days together till the waxing of the
Moon, and let him drink also Osmory and Comfry with stale Ale, and he shall be
whole.

#### 1.85. For to heal him that spitteth Blood.

Take the juice of Bettony, and temper that with good milk, and give the sick
to drink four days, and he shall be whole.

#### 1.86. For to know whether one that hath the Flux shall live or die.

Take a penny weight of Tresoile seed, and give him to drink in Wine or water,
and do this 3 days, and if it cease he shall live, with the help of Medicine,
if not, he shall die.

#### 1.87. For to stench the bleeding of a Vein.

Take Rue and seeth it in water, and after stamp it in a Mortar, and lay it on
the Vein, then take [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=33) Lambs wooll that
was never wa­shed, and lay that thereon, and that shall stench bleeding.

#### 1.88. For a Vein that is evil smitten.

Take Beans and peel away the lack, and seeth them well in Vi­negar, and lay
them on the Vein hot, in manner of a Plaister.

#### 1.89. For one that pisseth Blood.

Take and seeth Garlick in wa­ter, till the third part be wasted away, let him
drink of the water, and he shall be whole.

#### 1.90. For a woman travailing with Child.

Take and give her Tittany to drink in the morning; and she shall be delivered
without peril, or else give her Hysop with wa­ter that is hot, and she shall
be delivered of the child, although the child be dead and rotten, and anon
when she is delivered, give her the same without Wine, or bind the herb
Argentine to her nostrils, and she shall be soon deli­vered, or else Polipody
and stamp [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=33)
it, and lay that on the womans foot in manner of a Plaister, and she shall be
delivered quick or dead, or else give her Savory with hot water, and she shall
be delivered.

#### 1.91. Against surfeiting and digesting.

Take the bottom of a wheat loaf and toste it at the fire, till it be brown and
hard, and then take a good quantity of Aqua vitae, and put upon the same
roasted, and put it in a single linnen cloth, and lay it at the breast of the
Patient all night, and with the help of God he shall recover, and he shall
vo­mit or purge soon after.

#### 1.92. A water to comfort weak Eyes, and to preserve the sight.

Take a gallon and a half of old wheat, fair and clean picked from all manner
of soil, and then still it in an ordinary Still with a soft fire, and the
water that comes of it must be put in a glass, then take half a pound of white
Sugar-candy, and bruise it in a mor­tar [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=34) to powder, and
after 3 days, when the water hath been in a glass, then put in the powdered
Candy, then take an ounce of Lapis Tutia prepared, and put it into the glass
to the rest of the stuff, then take an ounce of Cam­phire and break it between
your fingers small, and put it into the glass, then stop the glass close, and
the longer it stands, the better it will be.

#### 1.93. For tender Eyes, or for Children.

Take a little piece of white Su­gar-candy as much as a Chesnut, and put it
into 3 or 4 spoonfuls of White-wine to steep, then take it out again and dry
it, and when it is dry, bruise it in a clean Mortar that tastes of no spice,
then put it upon a white Paper, and so hold it to the fire that it may be
thorow dry, and then search it thorow a little sieve.

#### 1.94. For hot and red Eyes.

Take slugs, such as when you [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=34) touch them will
turn like the pum­mel of swords, 12 or 16, shake them first in a clean cloth,
and then in another, and not wash them, then stamp them, and put 3 or 4
spoonfuls of Ale to them, and strain it through a dry cloth, and give it the
party morning and evening, first and last.

#### 1.95. For Corns.

Take fair water half a pint, Mer­cury sublimate a pennyworth, Al­lum as much
as a Bean, boil all these together in a glass Still, till a spoonful be
wasted, and always warm it when you use it, this water is also good for any
Itch, Tetter, Ring-worm or Wart.

#### 1.96. Searcloth for a Sore, or Sprane, or any swelling.

Take Vervain 7 ounces, of Sires 7 ounces, of Camphire 3 drams, of oyl of Roses
ten ounces, let the Wax and this Oyl boyl till the Wax be melted, then put in
your Sires finely beaten, stirring it on [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=35) the fire till it
look brown, then put in the Camphire finely beaten, and let it boyl 2 or 3
walms and then dip in your clothes.

#### 1.97. A Poultess for a Swelling.

Take a good handful of Violet leaves, and as much Grundsel, of Chickweed and
Mallows, half a handful, cut all these with a knife, and so seeth them well in
Conduit water, and thicken it with Barly meal, being finely sifted, and so
roul it sure, and lay it to the swel'd place, and shift it twice a day.

#### 1.98. To make a strong water good for a Can­ker or any old Sore, or to
eat any lump of flesh that groweth.

Take of Celendine a handful, of red Sage a handful, and of Wood-bind leaves a
handful, shred all these together very small, and steep them in a quart of
White-wine and a pint of water, letting it stand all night, and on the morrow
strain it, and put therein of Borax, and Camphire of each nine penny­worth,
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=35) and of
Mercury four pen­  [...]yworth, and set them on a soft fire, boyling softly
for the space of an hour, and when you will use it, warm a little of it, dip
in it a cloth, and lay it on the Sore, or dip it in any Cotton.

#### 1.99. To heal any Bruise, Sore, or Swelling.

Take two pound of Wax, and two pound of Rosin, and two pound and a half of
butter, and four spoonfuls of Flower, and two good spoonfuls of Honey, put in
your Wax, Rosin, and your Butter altogether, boyl all these together and
clarifie it, then put in two ounces of Carmerick, and when it hath thus boyled
a quarter of an hour, put a little water in a dish, and put it in, and let it
stand till it be cold, and when you will use it, you may melt it on a soft
fire, and put in your clothes, and make a Searcloth, and you may spread it
Plaister-wise to heal any wound.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=36)

#### 1.100. A Medicine for any wound old or new.

Take a pint of Sallet Oyl, and 4 ounces of Bees Wax, and two ounces of Stone
pitch, and two ounces of Rosin, and two ounces of Venice Turpentine, and one
pennyworth of Frankincense, and a handful of Rosemary tops, and a handful of
Tutsan leaves, and a handful of Plantain leaves; these herbs must be stamped,
and the juice of them put to the things aforesaid, and let them boyl toge­ther
about a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, this being done, put it into an
earthen pot, and when it is cold you may use it as you have occasion, and keep
it a year, a most excellent Medicine.

#### 1.101. A Medicine for a Wen.

Take black Soap and unquencht Lime, of each a like quantity, beat them very
small together, and spread in on a woollen cloth, and lay it on the Wen, and
it will con­sume it away.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=36)

#### 1.102. For breaking out of Childrens heads.

Take of White-wine, and sweet Butter alike, and boyl them toge­ther till it
come to a Salve, and so anoint the head therewith.

#### 1.103. For to mundifie, and gently to cleanse Vlcers, and breed new
flesh.

Take Rosin eight ounces, Colo­phonia four ounces, Era & Oliva, Ana one pound,
Adipis ovini, Gum Ammoniaci Opoponaci, Ana one ounce, fine Aeruginis aeris,
boyl your Wax, Colophoni and Rosin, with the Oyl together, then strain the
Gums, being first dissolved in Vinegar, and boyl it with a gentle fire, then
take it off, and put in your Verdigreece, and fine powder, and use it
according to Art.

#### 1.104. A Fomentation.

Take the liquor wherein Neats-feet have been boyled, with But­ter, and new
Milk, and use it in manner of a Fomentation.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=37)

#### 1.105. For the Falling-sickness, or Convulsions.

Take the dung of a Peacock make it into powder, and give s [...] much of it to
the Patient as wil [...] lie upon a shilling, in Succory-water fasting.

#### 1.106. For a Tetter, proceeding of a salt-hu­mour in the Breast and Paps.

Annoint the sore place with Tanners Owse.

#### 1.107. For the bloody Flux.

Take the bone of a Gammon o [...] Bacon, and set it up on end in the middle or
a Charcoal fire, and let it burn till it look like Chalk, and that it will
burn no longer, then powder it, and give the powder thereof unto the sick.

#### 1.108. A Plaister for all manner of bruises.

Take one pound of mede wax, and a quartern of Pitch, half a quartern of
Galbanum, and one pound of Sheeps tallow, shred them and seeth them softly,
and put to them a little White-wine, [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=37) or good Vinegar,
and take of Frankincense, and Mastick, of each half an ounce in powder, and
put it to, and boyl them together, and still them, till it be well relen­ted,
and spread this salve upon a mighty Canvas that will over­spread the sore, and
lay it thereon hot till it be whole.

#### 1.109. To make Flos Unguentorum.

Take Rosin, Perrosin, and half a pound of Virgin wax, Frankin­cense a quarter
of a pound, of Mastick half an ounce, of Sheeps tallow a quarter of a pound,
of Camphire two drams, melt that that is to melt, and powder that that is to
powder, and boil it over the fire, and strain it through a cloth into a bottle
of White-wine, and boyl it altogether, and then let it cool a little, and then
put there­to a quartern of Turpentine, and stir all well together till it be
cold, and keep it well, this Ointment is good for sores old and new, [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=38) it suffereth no
corruption in the Wound nor no evil flesh to be gendered in it, and it is good
for head-ach, and for all manner of Imposthumes in the head, and for wind in
the brain, and for Im­posthumes in the body, and for boyling ears and cheeks,
and for sauce flegm in the face, and for Sinews that be knit, or stiff, or
sprung with travel; it doth draw out a thorn, or iron, in what place soever it
be, and it is good for bi­ting or stinging of venemous beasts; it rotteth and
healeth all manner of Botches without, and it is good for a Fester and Canker,
and Noli me Tangere, and it draw­eth out all manner of a king of the Liver,
and of the Spleen, and of the Mervis, and it is good for a king and swelling
of many members, and for all members, and it ceaseth the flux of Menstrua, and
of Emeroids, and it is a special thing to make a fumed cloth to [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=38) heal all manner
of sores, and it searcheth farthest inward of any Ointment.

#### 1.110. An Ointment for all sorts of Aches.

Take Bettony, Cammomile, Ce­lendine, Rosemary, and Rue, of each of them a
handful, wash the herbs, and press out the water, and then chop or stamp them
very small, and then take fresh Butter unwashed and unsalted a quart, and
seeth it until half be wasted, and clarified, them scum it clean, and put in
of oyl of Olives 1 ounce, a piece of Virgins Wax, for to harden the Oyntment
in the sum­mer time, and if you make it in the winter, put into your Oint­ment
a little quantity of foot-fen­nel instead of the Virgins Wax.

#### 1.111. An excellent Syrrup to purge.

Take of Sena Alexandria one pound, Polipodium of the Oak 4 ounces,
Sarsaparilla two ounces, Damask Prunes 4 ounces, Gin­ger seven drams Annise
seeds one [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=39)
ounce, Cummin-seed half an ounce, Carraway seeds half an ounce, Cinnamon 10
drams, Aristolochia rotunda, Peonia, of each 5 drams, Rubarb one ounce,
Garlick six drams, Tamarisk two handfuls, boyl all these in a gallon of fair
water unto a pottle, and when the liquor is boyled half away, strain it forth,
and then put in your Rubarb and Agarick in a thin clean handkerchief, and tie
it up close, and put into the said liquor, and then put in two pound of fine
Sugar, and boyl it to the height of a syrrup, and take of it the quantity of
six spoonfuls, or more or less as you find it worketh in you.

#### 1.112. To make drink for all kind of Surfeits.

Take a quart of Aqua, or small Aqua vitae, and put in that a good handful of
Cowslip flowers, Sage-flowers a good handful, and of Rosemary flowers a
handful, [[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=39)
sweet Marjorum a little, Pellitory of the wall a little, Bettony, and Balm of
each a pretty handful, Cinnamon half an ounce, Nut­megs a quarter of an ounce,
Fen­nel seed, Annise seed, Coriander seed, Carraway seed, Grumwel seed,
Juniper berries of each a dram, bruise your spices and seeds, and put them
into your aqua or aqua vitae, with your herbs toge­ther, and put to that 3
quarters of a pound of very fine Sugar, stir them together, and put them in a
glass, and let it stand nine days in the Sun, and let it be stirred every day,
it is to be made in May, steep­ed in a wide mouthed glass, and strain'd out
into a narrow mouth'd glass.

#### 1.113. A Medicine for the Reins of the back.

Take Housleek, and stamp and strain it, then dip a fine linnen cloth into it,
and lay it to the reins of the back, and that will heal it.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=40)

#### 1.114. A Medicine for the Ach in the back.

Take Egrimony, and Mugwort both leaves and roots, and stamp it with old Bores
grease, and tem­per it with Honey and Eysell, and lay it to the back.

#### 1.115. For a Stitch.

Take Roses, and Cammomile, of each a handful, and oyl of Roses, and oyl of
Cammomile, of both to­gether a saucer full, and a quantity of Barly flower,
boyl all these to­gether in Milk, and then take a linnen bag, and put it
therein, and lay the plaister as hot as may be suffered where the stitch is.

#### 1.116. To make a salve for wounds that be cankered and do burn.

Take the juice of Smallage, of Morrel, of Waberb of each alike, then take the
white of Eggs, and mingle them together, and put thereto a little Wheat
flower, and stir them together till it be thick, but let it come near no fire,
but all cold, let it be laid on raw to [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=40) the sore, and it
shall cleanse the wound.

#### 1.117. A Medicine for a Bone-ach.

Take Brook-lime and Smallage, and Dasies, with fresh Sheeps tallow, and fry
them together, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the sore hot.

#### 1.118. For Sinews that are shrunk.

Take young Swallows out of the nest a dozen or 16, and Rosemary, Lavender, and
rotten Straw-berry leaves, strings and all, of each a handful, after the
quantity of the Swallows, the feathers, guts and all, bray them in a mortar,
and fry all them together with May Butter, not too much, then put it into an
earthen pot, and stop it close 9 days, then fry it again with May Butter, and
fry it well, and strain it well, when you shall use it, chafe it against the
fire.

#### 1.119. A water for the biting of a mad Dog.

Take Scabius, Matfiline, Yar­row, Nightshade, wild Sage, the [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=41) leaves of white
Lillies, of each a like quantity, and still them in a common Still, and give
the quanti­ty of 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the Wa­ter mingled with half a handful of
Treacle, to any man or beast that is bitten within 3 days after the biting,
and for lack of the wa­ter, take the juices of those herbs mingled with
Treacle, it will keep therefore from rankling, take Bittany, Egrimony, and
rusty Ba­con, and beat them fine together, and lay it unto the wound, and it
will keep it from rankling.

#### 1.120. A proved Medicine for any one that have an Ague in their breast.

Take the Patients own water, or any others that is very young, and set it on
the fire, put therein a good handful of Rosemary, and let it boyl, then take 2
red clothes, and dip them in the water, then nip it hard, and lay it on the
breast as hot as it may be endured, and apply it till you see the breast
[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=41) asswaged,
then keep it very warm.

#### 1.121. To kill a Fellon.

Take red Sage, white Sope, and bruise them, and lay it to the Fel­lon, and
that will kill it.

#### 1.122. To break a Fellon.

Take the grounds of Ale, and as much Vinegar, the crums of lea­vened bread,
and a little Honey, and boyl them altogether, till they be thick, and lay that
hot to the joynt where the Fellon is, and that will heal it

#### 1.123. Doctor Stevens Soveraign water.

Take a gallon of good Gascoign wine, then take Ginger, Galin­gal, Cancel,
Nutmeg, Grains, Cloves, Annise seeds, Carraway seeds, of each a dram, then
take Sage, Mints, red Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme Cammomile,
Lavender, of each an handful; then bray both Spices and Herbs, and put them
all into the Wine, and let them stand for 12 hours, divers times stirring
[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=42) them,
then still that in a Limbeck but keep that which you still first by it self,
for that is the best, but the other is good also, but not so good as the
first.

The Vertues of this water are these, It comforteth the Spirits Vital, and
helpeth the inward di­seases which come of cold; and the shaking of the
Palsie, it cureth the contraction of Sinews, and helpeth the conception of
Wo­men that be barren, it killeth worms in the boyd, it cureth the cold Cough,
it helpeth the tooth-ach, it comforteth the stomach, it cureth the cold
Dropsie, it help­eth the Stone, it cureth shortly a stinking breath, and whoso
useth this water enough but not too much, it preserveth him in good liking,
making him young.

#### 1.124. Doctor Willoughbies Water.

Take Galingal, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Mellilot, Cardaniome, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=42) and of the juice
of Celendine half a pint and mingle all these made in powder with the said
juice, and with a pint of good Aqua vitae, and three pints of good White-wine,
and put all these together in a Still of glass, and let it stand so all night,
and on the morrow still it with an easie fire as may be.

The Vertue is of secret nature, it dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs
without any grievance, and the same Lungs being wounded or perished it helpeth
and com­forteth, and it suffereth not the blood to putrifie, he shall never
need to be let blood that useth this Water, and it suffers not the heart to be
burnt, nor Melancho­ly or flegm to have dominion above nature, it also
expelleth the Rheum, and purifieth the stomach, it preserveth the visage or
me­mory, and destroyeth the Palsie, and if this water be given to a man or
woman labouring to­wards [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=43) death, one
spoonful reliev­eth. In the Summer time use once a week fasting the quantity
of a spoonful, and in winter two spoon­fuls.

#### 1.125. A Medicine for them that have a pain after their child-bed.

Take Tar; and fresh Barrows grease, and boyl it together, then take Pigeons
Dung, and fry it in fresh grease, and put it in a bag.

For the drink: Take a pint of Malmsey, and boyl it, and put Bay­berries and
Sugar in it, the Bay­berries must be of the whitest, and put therein some
Sanders.

Take some fair water, and set it over the fire, and put some ground Malt to
it, when they use these things they must keep their bed.

#### 1.126. For the running of the Reins.

Take Venice turpentine rolled in Sugar and Rose-water, swallow it in pretty
rolls, and put a piece of scarlet warm to your back.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=43)

#### 1.127. For Cods that be swollen.

Stamp Rue and lay thereto.

#### 1.128. To draw an Arrow-head, or other Iron out of a wound.

Take the juice of Valerian, in the which you shall wet a Tent, and put it into
the wound, and lay the same Herb stamped upon it, then your band or binding as
appertaineth, and by this means you shall draw out the Iron, and after heal
the wound as it requi­reth.

#### 1.129. A Plaister for a green wound.

Take Flower and Milk, and seeth them together till it be thick, then take the
white of an Egg and beat them together, and lay it to the wound, and that will
keep it from ranckling.

#### 1.130. For a Lask.

Take an Egg, and Aqua vitae, and boyl it with the Egg till it be dry; then
take Cinnamon and sugar and eat it with the Egg.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=44)

#### 1.131. For him that hath a bunch or knot in his head, or that hath his
head swollen with a fall.

Take one ounce of Bay salt, raw Honey 3 ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
intermingle all this well upon the fire, then lay it abroad upon a linnen
cloth, and thereof make a plaister, the which you shall lay hot to the head,
and it will altogether asswage the swel­ling, and heal it perfectly.

#### 1.132. Against the biting of any vene­mous Beast.

Assoon as the person feeleth himself bit with any venemous beast, or at least,
so soon as it is possible, let him take green leaves of a Fig-tree, and press
the milk of them 3 or 4 times into the wound: And for this also serveth
Mustard seed mingled with Vinegar.

#### 1.133. A perfect Remedy for him that is sore wounded with any Sword or
Staff.

Take Taxas barbatas, and stamp it, and take the juice of it, and if [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=44) the Wound bleed,
wipe it, and make it clean, washing it with White-wine, or water, then lay the
said juice upon the wound, and the herb whereof you take the juice, upon it,
then make your band, and let it abide on a whole day, and you shall see a
wonderful effect.

#### 1.134. A Bag to smell unto for Melancholy, or to cause one to sleep.

Take dry Rose leaves, keep them close in a glass which will keep them sweet,
then take powder of Mints, powder of Cloves in a gross powder, and put the
same to the Rose leaves, then put all these together in a bag, and take that
to bed with you, and it will cause you to sleep, and it is good to smell unto
at other times.

#### 1.135. For spitting of Blood.

Take the juice of Bettony tem­pered with Goats Milk, and drink thereof three
or four mornings to­gether.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=45)

#### 1.136. An Ointment for all sores, cuts, swell­ings, and heat.

Take a good quantity of Smal­lage, and Mallows, and put thereto 2 pounds of
Bores grease, 1 pound of Butter, and Oyl of Neats foot a quantity, stamp them
well toge­ther, then fry them, and strain them into an earthen pot, and keep
it for your use.

#### 1.137. Salve for a new Hurt.

Take the whitest Virgins wax you can get, and melt it in a pan, then put in a
quantity of Butter and Honey, and seeth them toge­ther, then strain them into
a dish of fair water, and work it in your hands, and make it in a round Ball,
and so keep it, and when you will use it, work some of it be­tween your hands,
and strike it upon a cloth, and lay it upon the sore, and it will draw and
heal it.

#### 1.138. Against the biting of a mad Dog, and the rage or madness that
followeth a man after he is bitten.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=45) Take the
blossoms or flowers of wild Thistles dried in the shade and beaten to powder,
give him to drink of that powder in White-wine half a Walnut shell full, and
in thrice taking it he shall be healed.

#### 1.139. Against the grief in the Lungs, and spitting of blood.

Take the Herb called of the Apothecary Vngula Caballina, in English, Colts
foot, incorporated well with the lard of a Hog chop­ped, and a new laid Egg,
boyl it together in a pan, and give it to the patient to eat, doing this nine
mornings, you shall see a marvel­lous thing, this is also good to make a man
fat.

#### 1.140. Against spitting of Blood by reason of some vein broken in the
breast.

Take Mice dung beaten into powder as much as will lie upon a groat, and put it
in a half a glass­ful of the juice of Plantane with a little sugar, and so
give the pati­ent [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=46) to drink thereof
in the morning before breakfast, and at nigh [...] before he go to bed,
continuin [...] the same, it will make him whol [...] and sound.

#### 1.141. For to cleanse the Head.

Take Pellitory of Spain, and chew the roots three days, a good quantity, and
it will purge the head, and do away the Ach, and fasten the teeth in the gums.

#### 1.142. A good remedy against the Pleurisie.

Open a white loaf in the middle new baked, and spread it will with Treacle on
both the halfs on the crum side, and heat it at the fire, then lay one of the
halfs on the place of the disease, and the other half on the other side of the
body directly against it, and so bind them that they loose not, nor stir,
leaving them so a day and a night, or until the Imposthume break, which I have
sometimes seen in two hours or less, then take away the bread, and immediately
the [[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=46)
Patient will begin to spit and void the putrefaction of the Impost­hume, and
after he hath slept a  [...]ittle, you shall give him meat, and with the help
of God he shall shortly heal.

#### 1.143. For a Pin, or Web in the Eye.

Take two or three Lice out of ones head, and put them alive into the eye that
is grieved, and so close it up, and most assuredly the Lice will suck out the
Web in the eye and will cure it, and come forth without any hurt.

#### 1.144. A Remedy to be used in a fit of the Stone when the water stops.

Take the fresh shells of Snails: the newest will look of a reddish colour and
are best, take out the Snails, and dry the shells with a moderate heat in an
oven after the bread is drawn, likewise take Bees and dry them so, and beat
them severally into powder, then take twice so much of the Bees powder as the
Snails, and mix them [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=47) well together,
keep it close co­vered in a glass, and when you use it, take as much of this
pow­der as will lie upon a six-pence, and put into a quarter of a pint of the
distilled water of Bean flowers, and drink it fasting, or upon an empty
stomach, and eat nor drink nothing, for 2 or 3 hours after.

This is good to cause the party to make urine, & bring away the gra­vel or
stone that causeth the stop­ping, & hath done very much good.

#### 1.145. A Syrrup for the pain in the Stomach.

Take 2 good handfuls of young Rue, boyl it in a quart of good White-wine
Vinegar till it be half consumed, so soon as it is through cold, strain it,
and put to every pint of the liquor a pound and a quarter of loaf-sugar, and
boil it till it come to a Syrrup, when you use it, take a good spoonful of
this in the morn­ing fasting, and eat nor drink no­thing for 2 or 3 hours
after. It is good for pain in the stomach that [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=47) proceeds of
windy vapours, and is excellent good for the Lungs and obstructions of the
Breast.

#### 1.146. Receipts for bruises, approved by the Lady of Arundel.

Take black Jet, beat it to powder and let the Patient drink it every morning
in beer till it be well.

#### 1.147. Another for the same.

Take the sprigs of Oak trees, and put them in paper, roast them, and break
them, and drink as much of the powder as will lie upon a six-pence every
morning, untill the Patient be well.

#### 1.148. To cause easie labour.

Take 10 or 12 days before her looking, 6 ounces of brown sugar-candy beaten to
powder, a quar­ter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, 2 ounces of Dates
un­stoned, sliced, half an ounce of Annise seeds bruised, a quarter of an
ounce of Cowslip flowers, one dram of Rosemary flowers, put them in a fine
lawn bag with a [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=48) flint stone that
it may sink into a pottle of White-wine, let it steep 24 hours, and after take
of it in the morning, and at 4 in the afternoon, and in the evening, the
quantity of a wine glass full.

#### 1.149. A Cordial for the Sea.

Take 1 ounce of syrrup of Clove-Gilliflowers, 1 dram of Confectio Alchermes,
an ounce and a half of Borrage water, and the like of Mint-water, 1 ounce of
Mr. Mount­fords water and as much of Cinna­mon water, temper all these
toge­ther in a Cordial, and take a spoon­ful at a time when you are at Sea.

#### 1.150. A Plaister to strengthen the Back.

Take 8 yolks of Eggs new laid, 1 ounce of Frankincense beaten into fine
powder, mingle them well together, put in as much Barly flower as will make it
thick for a Plaister, spread it on leather, lay it to the small of the back,
letting it lie nine hours, use four plaisters one after another, you [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=48) must slit the
plaister in the midst, so as it may not lie on the back bone.

#### 1.151. A present remedy for a woman with Child, that hath taken harm by a
fall, or fright, or any mischance.

To stay the Child, and streng­then it, take one ounce of Picke­rel jaws fine
beaten and searced, of Date stones, and Bole Armoni­ack, of each one ounce, of
Sanguis Draconis half an ounce, give of these, being well searced and ming­led
together, a French Crown weight in Muskadine or Malmsey, and let the woman
keep her self very warm.

#### 1.152. For a weak Back.

Take of red lead half a pound, of white lead half a pound, boyl these in three
pints of Sallet Oyl in a pipkin, stirring them con­tinually with a piece of
Iron, until it be of a gray colour, then rowl it up in rowls, and keep it for
your use.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=49)

#### 1.153. Oyl of Saint John's Wort.

Take a quart of Sallet Oyl, put thereto a quart of the flowers of St. Johns
Wort well picked, let them lie therein all the year, till the seeds be ripe,
the glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun or in water all the Summer
untill the seeds be ripe, then put in a quarter of St. Johns Wort seeds whole
and so let it stand 12 hours, then you must seeth the oyl 8 hours, the glass
being kept open, and the wa­ter in the pot full as high as the oyl is of
height in the glass, then when it is cold strain it, that the seeds may not
remain in the oyl, then put up the oyl for your use.

#### 1.154. A green Salve for an old Sore.

Take a handful of Groundsel, as much Housleek, of Marigold leaves a handful,
pick and wipe these Herbs clean, but wash them not, then beat all these herbs
in a wooden bowl as small as is possible then strain out all the juice, and
[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=49) put in a
quantity of Hogs grease, as much as two Eggs, beat all these together again,
then put in the juice again, and put in 10 Eggs, yolks and whites, 5 spoonfuls
of English Honey, and as much wheat flower as will make all this as thick as a
salve, and so stir it very well together, and put it close up in a pot that it
take no air, and so keep it for your use.

#### 1.155. A most excellent Powder for the Cho­lick and Stone.

You must take morning and evening before you go to bed, Sperma Ceti one ounce
and a half, Cloves and Mace 1 quarter of an ounce, Annise seeds, and Perstone,
of each 2 ounces, Cinnamon, and small Pepper of each 1 quarter of an ounce,
Date stones a quarter of an ounce, Liquorish, Fennel, and Sage, Bay-berries,
of each three quarters of an ounce, Acorns one quarter and half of an ounce,
Lilly roots two drachms, the white of [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=50) Oyster-shells
burned in the fire one quarter of an ounce, beat all these into fine powder,
and drink as much thereof in Ale or Beer as will lie on a six-pence, and fast
one hour or two after it; if the party be sore grieved, take one handful of
Parsly, and seeth it in Ale till half be sod away with 20 or 30 Prunes therein
strained, and put thereto two spoonfuls of this powder, and drink it mornings
and evenings somewhat warm.

#### 1.156. A present Remedy for the Running of the Reins.

Take an ounce of Nutmegs, half an ounce of Mastick, then slice the Nutmegs,
and put them in steep in Rose Vinegar all one night, then lay them in a dish
to dry before the fire, then take the Mastick, and lay it in Papers, and beat
it with a hammer very small, and put a little Coral well bea­ten unto it, and
as much Amber­grease, then mingle these things [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=50) together with
Sugar and make it pleasant to eat, and so take a good quantity morning and
evening.

#### 1.157. A Salve for a green wound.

Take 2 handfuls of water-Dit­tany, 2 handfuls of Rosemary shred very small, a
quarter of a pint of Turpentine, half a pound of yellow Wax, a quart of Sallet
Oyl, half a pint of White-wine, boyl all these together while the White-wine
be quite consumed, then it will be green and come to the height of a Salve.

#### 1.158. A proved Medicine for a burning or scalding by lightning or
otherwise.

Take Hogs grease, or sheeps trea­cles, and Alehoof, beat these very well
together, then take more Hogs grease, and boyl it to a Salve.

#### 1.159. To use it.

Annoint the place grieved with this ointment, and then lay upon the sore so
annointed, Colewort-leaves, which must be boyled very soft in water, and the
[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=51) strings
made smooth with beating them with a Pestle.

#### 1.160. A Powder for the Green Sickness, approved with very good suc­cess
upon many.

Take of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each one quarter of an ounce, beat them
severally, and then al­together very well, fine sugar very small beaten one
quarter of a pound, and then mix and beat them all four together, Pearl the
sixth part of half an ounce finely beaten, mingle it with the rest, and beat
them altogether again, the filing of Steel or Iron an ounce and a quarter,
sift it very fine, and mingle it with the rest, but if so small a quantity
will not serve, add a quarter more of the mettle, let it be sifted before you
weigh it: but if all this will not serve the turn, put in a little Rubarb, or
a little Aloe succatrina.

#### 1.161. The manner of using this Powder.

In the morning when you rise [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=51) take half a
spoonful of it, as much at four a clock in the afternoon, and as much when you
go to bed, walk or stir much after the first taking of it, I mean every
morn­ing and evening, fast one hour after the taking of it, or more, and then
eat some Sugarsops or thin broth.

#### 1.162. The Patients Diet.

She must forbear Oatmeal in broth or any other thing, Cheese, Eggs, Custards,
or any stopping meat: take care that this be not given to any woman that hath
con­ceived or is with Child.

#### 1.163. A Drink to stench Blood inwardly.

Take the juice of one handful of Shepherds purse, of Parsly, and Five-finger,
of each as much, take five slips of Egrimony, strain all these juices into the
milk of a red Cow, and drink thereof early and late warm.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=52)

#### 1.164. A Powder to keep the Teeth clean, and from being worm eaten.

Take Rosemary burned to ashes, Cuttles bone, Harts-horn burned to powder, Sal
Gemmae 12 penny weight, the flowers of Pomegra­nates, white Coral, of each a
six-penny weight, make all these into powder, and with a little Rosewa­ter,
and a Sage leaf, rub the teeth.

#### 1.165. A Salve to heal all manner of Sores and Cuts.

Take one pint of Turpentine, one pint of oyl of Olives a quarter of a pint of
running Water, nine branches of Rosemary, one ounce of unwrought Wax, 2 ounces
of Roses, seeth all these together in a little pan over the sire, let it seeth
until there arise a little white scum upon it, then stir it with a stick,
suffering it to boyl, until one quarter be consumed, then take it from the
fire, strain it through a coarse cloth, but it must be done quickly after it
be [[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=52) taken
from the fire for cooling, after you have strained it in an earthen pot, let
it cool, and keep it for your use.

#### 1.166. To make Oyl of Sage, good for the grief in any joynt, or for any
ach.

Take Sage and Parsley, seeth them in the oyl Olive, till it be thick and
green.

#### 1.167. A Medicine to purge and amend the Heart, Stomach, Spleen, Liver,
Lungs and Brain.

Take Alexander, Water-cresses, young Mallows, Borrage and Fen­nel roots pared,
Mercury, Harts-tongue, and Clare, and make of these Pottage.

#### 1.168. To drive infectious diseases from the heart.

Take Mithridate and Centory, of each 2 ounces, 8 spoonfuls of Dragon water,
one pint of White-wine, 7 spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, boyl altogether a little,
strain it, then set it on the fire again a little while, and drink of it
morning and evening.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=53)

#### 1.169. For the Tooth-ach.

Take Pepper and Grains, of each one ounce, bruise them, and compound them with
the water of the diseased, and make it of a good thickness, and lay it outward
on the cheek against the place grieved, and it will help it for ever after.

#### 1.170. Another.

Take dried Sage, make powder of it, burnt Allum, Bay salt dried, make all in
fine powder, and lay it to the tooth where the pain is, and also rub the gums
with it.

#### 1.171. For the Strangullion or the Stone.

Take the inner rind of a young ash, between 2 or 3 years of growth dry it to
powder, and drink of it as much at once, as will lie on a six-pence in Ale or
White-wine, and it will bring a present reme­dy; the party must be kept warm
two hours after it.

#### 1.172. For the Stone.

Take the stone that groweth within the gall of an Ox, grate [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=53) it, and drink of
it in White-wine, as much as will lie upon a six-pence at once, for want of
White-wine make a posset of Ale, and clarifie the Ale from the curd, then boyl
one handful of Pellito­ry therein, and drink of the pow­der with it.

#### 1.173. For the black Jaundies.

Take Earth-worms, wash them in White-wine, then dry them, and beat them into
powder, and put to a little Saffron, and drink it in beer.

#### 1.174. A drawing Salve for an old Sore.

Take Rosin half a pound bea­ten to powder; Sheeps tallow a quarter of a pound,
melt them to­gether, and pour them into a Ba­son of water, and when they
be­gin to cool a little, work them well with your hands in the wa­ter, and out
of the water, draw­ing it up and down the space of one hour till it be very
white, then make it up in rowls, and reserve [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=54) it to strike
thin plaisters upon old Sores.

#### 1.175. A Water to wash Sores withal.

Take Wormwood, Sage, Plan­tain leaves, of each one handful, Allum 2 ounces,
Honey 2 saucers full, boyl all these together in 3 pints of water till half be
consu­med, then strain it, and reserve that liquor to wash the sore withal.

#### 1.176. A Medicine to cure the Garget in the throat.

Take a pint of May butter, and put it on the fire in a posnet, and put into it
of the inner bark of Elder one good handful, and some Dasie roots, seeth it to
half the quantity, and strain it, and so keep it cool, take this ointment and
an­noint your throat, then take the ointment and strike a long plai­ster with
it very thick of the ointment, then strike upon the ointment the best Jane
treacle, and upon that strew gross pepper ve­ry thick, strike it on with a
knife, [[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=54)
warm the plaister, and bind it round your throat to your ears, re­new it once
a day with the oint­ment, and the treacle and pepper, and lay it on again,
before you use this ointment, scour your mouth and throat with the powder of
Roch Allum burned, mix it with the powder of Madder or Pepper.

#### 1.177. For the Hearing.

Take an Onion, take the core out of it, fill it with Pepper, slice it in the
midst, being first wrapt in a paper, and roasted in the embers, lay it to each
ear.

#### 1.178. For a dead Child in a womans Body.

Take the juice of Hysop, temper it in warm water, and give it the woman to
drink.

#### 1.179. For a Woman that hath her Flowers too much.

Take a Hares foot, and burn it, make powder of it, and let her drink it with
stale Ale.

#### 1.180. A Medicine for the Gout.

Take Tetberry roots, and wash [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=55) and scrape them
clean, and slice them thin, then take the grease of a Barrow hog, the quantity
of either alike, then take an earthen pot, then lay a lane of grease at the
bottom, then a lane of roots, then the grease again, and so roots and grease
till the pot be full, then stop the pot very close, and set it in a dunghil 21
days, then beat it al­together in a bowl, then boyl it a good while, then
strain it, and put in a pennyworth of Aqua vitae, then annoint the place
grieved ve­ry warm against the fire.

#### 1.181. A diet drink for the running Gout, Ach in the Joynts, and for all
in­fections.

Set 7 quarts of water on the fire, and when it boyleth, put therein four
ounces of Sarsaparilla, bruised and let it boyl 2 hours very softly, close
stopped or covered, then put in 4 ounces of Sene, 3 ounces of Liquorish
bruised, of Staecados, Hermodactyl, Epithymum, and of [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=55) Cammomil
flowers, of every one half an ounce, and so boyl all these two hours very
softly, then strain it, and keep it in a close vessel close stopped, when it
is cold, then boyl again all the aforesaid ingredi­ents in 7 quarts of water,
4 hours, with a soft fire close covered, then strain it, and keep it as the
other by it self, and take of the first a good draught one hour before you
rise in the morning, and a draught at the beginning of din­ner, and another at
supper, and go­ing to bed, and at all other times, drink of the latter when
you list, and eat no meat but dry roasted Mutton, Capon, Rabbet, without salt,
and not basted, but to your breakfast, a poached Egg, no bread but Bisket, or
dried crust, and at night Raisins of the Sun, and Bisket bread, drink no other
drink but this.

#### 1.182. A Plaister to heal any Sore.

Take of Sage, Herb-grace, of [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=56) each like
quantity, Ribwort, Plan­tain and Dasie roots, more than half so much of each
of them, with Wax, fresh Grease, and Ro­sin, make it a Salve, if the flesh
grow proud, then put always up­on the Plaister, before you lay it to the sore,
burnt Allum, and it will correct the flesh.

#### 1.183. To cause a woman to have her sickness.

Take Egrimony, Motherwort, Avens and Parsly, shred them small with oatmeal,
make Pottage of them with Pork, let her eat the Pottage, but not the Pork.

#### 1.184. For the Stone.

Take the green weed of the Sea, which is brought with Oysters, wash it, and
dry it to powder, drink it with Malmsey fasting.

#### 1.185. To kill worms.

Take Aloe succatrina 2 ounces, let it stand in a quart of Malmsey eight hours,
drink it morning and evening.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=56)

#### 1.186. For a hot Rheum in the Head.

Take Rose-water, Vinegar and sallet-oyl, mix them well together and lay it to
the head warm.

#### 1.187. For a Lask.

Take the nether jaw of a Pike, beat it to powder, and drink it.

#### 1.188. For an Itch or any scurf of the body.

Take Elecampane roots or leaves, stamp them; and fry them with fresh Grease,
strain it into a dish, and annoint the Patient.

#### 1.189. For one that is bruised with a fall.

Take Horse-dung, and sheeps­suet, boyl them together, and ap­ply it to the
same place, being laid upon a cloth.

#### 1.190. For the Emeroides.

Take Hops and Vinegar, fry them together, and put it into a little bag, and
lay it as hot as it may be endured, to the Funda­ment, divers bags one after
ano­ther, and let one continue at it.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=57)

#### 1.191. For one that is burned with Gun-powder or otherwise.

Take one handful of Ground­sel, twelve heads of Housleek, one pint of Goose
dung, as much Chickens dung, of the newest that may be gotten, stamp the Herbs
as small as you can, then put the dung into a mortar, tem­per them together
with a pottle of Bores grease, labour them to­gether half an hour, and strain
it through a Canvas bag with a cleft stick into an earthen pan, and use it
when need requireth, it will last two year.

#### 1.192. To heal a prick with a Nail or Thorn.

Take two handfuls of Celen­dine, as much Orpen, cut it small, and boyl it with
oyl Olive and un­wrought Wax, then strain it and use it.

#### 1.193. To stop the bleeding of a cut or wound.

Take Hop, stamp it, and put it into the wound, if Hop will not [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=57) do it, then put
to it Vinegar with the Hop.

#### 1.194. For a Scald.

Take the leaves of ground Ivy, three handful, Housleek one hand­ful; wash
them, and stamp them in a stone Mortar very small, and as you stamp them, put
in a pint of cream by little and little, then strain it, and put it in a pot
with a feather, take of this, and annoint the scalded place, and then wet a
linnen cloth in the same ointment, and lay it on the place, and over that rowl
other clothes.

#### 1.195. An Ointment for a Tetter.

Take Sal armoniack one ounce, beat it into fine powder, then mix it with sope,
and fresh grease, of each two ounces, make an oint­ment and annoint the place.

#### 1.196. For the singing in the Head.

Take one Onion cut out the core, and fill that place with the powder of
Cummin, and the juice of Rue, set on the top again, and [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=58) roast the Onion
in embers, then put away the outside, and put it in a cloth, wring out the
juice, take black wooll and dip it in, put this into thine ear where the
sing­ing is, and if it be on both sides, then serve one after another.

#### 1.197. A Drink for one that is weak, and misdoubting a Consumption.

Take 3 handfuls of Rosemary, bruise it a little, and close it in paste, bake
it in an Oven until it be well dried, then cut the paste, and take forth the
Rosemary, in­fuse it in 2 quarts of Claret wine, with two ounces of good
Treacle, 1 ounce of Nutmegs, of Cinna­mon and Ginger, of each half an ounce
bruised; let them stand in­fused 2 nights and one day, then distil it in a
Limbeck, drink here­of one spoonful or two next your heart.

#### 1.198. A Drink for the Plague.

Take red Sage, Herb-grace, Elder leaves, red Brier leaves, of [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=58) each one
handful, stamp them and strain them with a quart of White-wine, and then put
to it Aqua vitae, and Ginger, drink hereof every morning one spoonful, nine
morn­ings together, and it will preserve you.

#### 1.199. For a bruise or stitch.

Take the kernels of Walnuts and small Nuts, Figs, Rue, of each one handful,
white Salt the quantity of one Walnut, one race of Gin­ger, one spoonful of
Honey; beat them all together very fine, and eat of it three or four times
every day, make a plaister of it, and lay it to the place grieved.

#### 1.200. A Drink for one that hath a Rupture.

Take Comfrey one good hand­ful, wild Daisie roots as much, and the like of
knotted grass, stamp all these together, and strain it with Malmsey, and give
it to the Patient to drink morning and evening 9 days, blood warm; if it be a
man, that hath been long [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=59) so, he must lie
nine days upon his back, and stir as little as he can. If he be a child, he
must be kept so much lying as you may for nine days, if you think the drink
too strong for the child, give it him but 5 days in Malmsey, and the rest in
stale Ale; have care that the party have a good Truss, and keep him trussed
one whole year at the least.

#### 1.201. A Plaister for a Rupture.

Take the juice of Comfrey, wild Daisie-roots, and knotted grass, of each a
like quantity, fresh butter and unwrought Wax, of each a like quantity,
clarifie them seve­rally, then take of the roots of Comfrey, dry it, and make
powder of it, take the powder of Annise­seed, and Cummin-seed, but twice as
much Cummin-seed, as Annise; boyl these powders in the Butter and unwrought
Wax on a soft fire a good while, then put in your juice, let it boyl a walm or
[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=59) two, so
take it from the fire, stir it altogether till it be cold, take hereof and
spread it, and lay it to his Cods as hot as he can suffer it, and use this
till he be whole: this plaister is most excellent for a Child that is burst at
the Navel.

#### 1.202. GRATIOSA CURA. A Water for a Cut or a Sore.

Take Honey-suckles the knots nipt off, flowers of Celendine, flo­wers of red
Sage, of each three spoonfuls, Five-finger, Comfrey such as is to knit bones,
Daisies with the roots thereon, Ladder of Heaven, blossoms of Rosemary,
Setwel, Herb-grace, Smallage, red Roses with the knots on, or else red Rose
cakes, Adders-tongue of each of these one handful, seeth all together in six
gallons of water that runneth towards the East, until two gallons be sod in,
then strain them, and put to the water 3 quarts of English Honey, one pound of
Roch-allum, one [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=60) pennyworth of
madder, one penny­worth of long Pepper, seeth all together until one gallon be
consu­med, then cleanse the water.

#### 1.203. For the Wind Colick.

Take the flowers of Walnuts, and dry them to powder, and take of them in your
Ale or Beer, or in your broth as you like best, and it will help you.

#### 1.204. To make a soveraign Oyl of a Fox for the nummed Palsie.

Take a Fox new killed, cased and bowelled, then put into the body, of Dill,
Mugwort, Cammo­mil, Camepites, Southernwood, red Sage, Oliganum, Hop, Staecad,
Rosemary, Costmary, Cowslip flowers, Balm, Bettony, sweet Marjorum, of each a
good hand­ful, chop them small, and put thereto of the best Oyl of Castor,
Dill and Cammomil, of each 4 oun­ces, mix the herbs and oyls toge­ther, and
strow over them Aphro­nium a good handful, put them [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=60) all into the
Fox, and sew up his bel­ly close, and with a quick fire roast him, and the Oyl
that droppeth out, is a most singular Oyl for all Palsies or numness.
Approved.

#### 1.205. To comfort the brain, and pro­cure sleep.

Take brown bread crums, the quantity of one Walnut, one Nut­meg beaten to
powder, one dram of Cinnamon, put these into a Nap­kin with two spoonfuls of
Vine­gar, 4 spoonfuls of Rosewater, and one of Womans Milk.

#### 1.206. For the weakness in the Back.

Take the pith of an Ox back, put it into a pottle of water, then seeth it to a
quart, then take a handful of Comfrey, one handful of knotted grass, one
handful of Shepherds purse, put these into a quart of water, boyl them unto a
pint, with 6 Dates boyled therein.

#### 1.207. For a Canker in any part of the Body.

Take Fil-bird Nut-leaves, La­vender cotten, Southernwood, [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=61) Wormwood, Sage,
Woodbind leaves, sweet Brier leaves, of each a like quantity, of Allum and
Honey a good quantity, seeth all these till they be half sodden, wash the Sore
with it.

#### 1.208. For an old bruise.

Take one spoonful of the juice of Tansie, and as much Nip, two pennyworth of
Sperma Ceti, put it into a little Ale, and drink it.

#### 1.209. Oyl of Foxes, or Badgers, for Ach in the joints, the Sciatica,
diseases of the Sinews, and pains of the Reins and Back.

Take a live Fox or Badger of a middle age, of a full body, well fed, and fat,
kill him, bowel and skin him, some take not out his bowels, but only his
Excrements in his guts, because his guts have much grease about them, break
his bones small, that you may have all the marrow; this done, set him a
boyling in salt Brine, and sea water, and salt water of [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=61) each a pint and
a half, of oyl three pints, of salt 3 ounces, in the end of the decoction put
thereto the leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Dill, Organy, Marjorum, and Juniper
berries, and when he is so sodden that his bones and flesh do depart in
sunder, strain all through a strainer, and keep it in a vessel to make
Linaments for the Ach in the joynts, the Sciatica, diseases of the sinews, and
pains of the reins and back.

#### 1.210. To make the Leaden Plaister.

Take 2 pound and 4 ouuces of oyl Olive of the best, of good red Lead one
pound, white lead one pound well beaten to dust, twelve ounces of Spanish
sope, and incor­porate all these well together in an earthen pot, well glazed
be­fore you put them to boyl, and when they are well incorpora­ted, that the
sope cometh up­ward, put it upon a small fire of coals, continuing upon the
fire [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=62) the
space of an hour and a half, still stirring it with an Iron Ball upon the end
of a stick, then make the fire somewhat bigger, until the redness be turned
into a gray colour, but you must not leave stirring till the matter be turned
into the colour of oyl, or somewhat darker: then drop of it upon a wooden
trencher, and if it cleave not to the finger, it is enough: then make it up
into rowls, it will keep twenty years, the older the better.

#### 1.211. The virtue of the Plaister.

The same being laid upon the stomach, provoketh appetite, it taketh away any
grief in the sto­mach, being laid on the belly, is a present remedy for the
Cholick, and laid unto the reins of the back, it is good for the bloody Flux,
running of the Reins, the heat of the Kidneys, and weakness of the back: the
same healeth all swellings, bruises, and taketh away [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=62) ach, it breaks
Fellons, pushes, and other Imposthumes, and healeth them, the same draweth out
any running humours, without break­ing the skin, and being applied to the
fundament, it healeth any disease there growing, being laid on the head is
good for the Uvula, it healeth the head-ach, and is good for the eyes.

#### 1.212. For a pricking of a Thorn.

Take fine Wheat-flower, bolted, temper it with Wine, and seeth it thick, lay
it hot to the sore.

#### 1.213. A Medicine for the Plague.

Take a pint of Malmsey, and burn it well, then take about six spoonfuls
thereof, and put to the quantity of a Nutmeg of good Treacle, and so much
spice grains beaten, as you can take up with the tops of your 2 fingers, mix
it together, and let the party sick drink it blood-warm, if he be in­fected it
will procure him to cast, which if he do, give him as much [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=63) more, and so
still again and again, observing still some quantity till the party leave
casting, and so after he will be well: if he cast not at all, once taken it is
enough and probably it is not the sickness: after the party hath left casting,
it is good to take a competent draught of burnt Malmsie alone with Treacle and
Grains, it will comfort much.

#### 1.214. Another Medicine for the Plague.

Take of Setwel grated one root, of Jane Treacle two spoonfuls, of Wine Vinegar
3 spoonfuls, of fair water 3 spoonfuls, make all these more than luke-warm,
and drink them off at once well steeped to­gether, sweat after this six or
seven hours, and it will bring forth the Plague sore.

#### 1.215. To break the Plague sore.

Lay a roasted Onion, also seeth a white Lilly root in milk, till it be as
thick as a Poultess, and lay it to the same, if these fail, launce [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=63) the sore, and
so draw it and heal it with salves for Botches, or Biles.

#### 1.216. To make a Salve to dress any wound.

Take Rosin and Wax of each half a pound, of Deer suet, and Frankincense of
each one quarter of a pound, of Mastick in powder one ounce, boyl all these in
a pint of White-wine half an hour with a soft fire, and stir it in the boyling
that it run not over, then take it from the fire, and put thereto half an
ounce of Camphire in powder, when it is almost cold, put there­to one quarter
of a pound of Tur­pentine, after all these be mingled together, then put it
into White-wine; and wash it as you wash Butter, and then as it cools, make it
up in rowls.

#### 1.217. A most excellent Water for sore Eyes.

Take a quart of Spring water, set it upon the fire in an earthen Pipkin, then
put into it 3 spoon­fuls of white salt, and one spoonful [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=64) of white
Coperas, then boyl them a quarter of an hour, scum it as it doth boyl, then
strain it through a fine linnen cloth, and keep it for your use.

When you take it you must lie down upon the bed, and drop two drops of it into
your eye, so rest one quarter of an hour, not wiping your eyes, and use it as
often as need shall require.

If the eye have any pearl or film growing upon it, then take a handful of red
double Dasie leaves, and stamp them, and strain them through a linnen cloth,
and drop thereof one drop into your eye, using it three times.

#### 1.218. A Plaister for one that is bruised.

Take half a pint of Sallet Oyl or Neats-foot Oyl, half a pint of English
Honey, 2 or 3 pennyworth of Turpentine, a good quantity of Hogs grease, 2 or 3
pennyworth of Bole Armoniack, half a pint of strong Wine-vinegar, half a dozen
[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=64) of Egg-
shells, and all beaten very small, one handful of white Salt, put all these
together into an ear­then pot, stir and mingle them to­gether exceeding well,
then as much Bean-flower, or wheat-flow­er as will thicken it plaister-wise,
then with your hand strike it, on the grieved place once a day, and by Gods
help it will ease any sore that cometh by means of striking, wrinching,
bruising, or other kind of swelling that proceedeth of evil humours.

#### 1.219. Balm water for a Surfeit.

Take two gallons of strong Ale, and 1 quart of Sack, take 4 pound of young
Balm leaves, and shred them, then take 1 pound of Annise­seeds, and as much
Liquorish bea­ten to powder, put them all into the Ale and Sack to steep 12
hours, put it into a Limbeck and so still it, it is good for a surfeit of
choler, for to comfort the heart, and for an Ague.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=65)

#### 1.220. A Restorative Water in sickness, the Patient being weak.

Take 3 pints of very good new milk, and put thereto one pint of very good red
Wine the yolks of 21 Eggs, and beat them together, that done, put in as much
fine Manchet as shall suck up the Milk and Wine, then put the same into a fair
Stillory, and still it with a soaking fire, and take a spoonful of this water
in your Pottage or drink, and this in 1 or 2 Months will prevent the
Consumption.

#### 1.221. To make a Caudle to prevent the Lask.

Take half a pound of unblanched Almonds, stamp them, and strain it in a quart
of Ale, and set it on the fire, then take the yolks of four Eggs and make it
for a Caudle, and so season it with a good quantity of Cinnamon and Sugar, and
eat it every morning at breakfast.

#### 1.222. For one that cannot make water and to break the Stone.

Pare a Reddish root, and slice it [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=65) thin, & put it
into a pint of White-wine, and let it infuse 6 or 7 hours, then strain it and
set it on the fire; and put thereto 1 Parsley root, and one spoonful of
Parsley seed, and half a handful of Pellitory of the wall and seeth it until
half be wasted, and give it luke-warm to drink.

#### 1.223. A Diet against Melancholy.

Take Sene 8 ounces, Rubarb six drams, Polipody of the Oak, S [...]r­saparilla,
and Madder roots, of each four ounces, Annife-seeds, Fennel seeds Epithymum,
of each 1 ounce, Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each 2 ounces, Egrimony,
Scabious, and red Dock roots of each 1 handful; make them all small, and put
it in­to a long narrow bag or boulter, hang it in a vessel of Ale that
con­taineth 6 gallons, when it is a week old, drink it morning and evening for
the space of one fortnight, keep you all that time warm, and a good diet.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=66)

#### 1.224. A Syrrup to open the Liver.

Take Lungwort, Maidenhair, Egrimony, Scabious, of each one handful,
Chamepitis, Hysop, of each a dozen drops, Endive and Succory, of each 3 or 4
leaves, of young Fennel and Parsley, of each one root, one stick of Liquorish,
one spoonful of Barberries clean wa­shed, one spoonful of Annise seeds, 20
Raisins of the Sun stoned: boyl all these in a pottle of Water to a quart,
then strain it, and put there­to of the best Sugar one quarter of a pound,
Conserve of violets one ounce; and so boyl it as long as any scum arise, then
strain it again, and use this very warm.

#### 1.225. For one that cannot make water.

Take the seeds of Parsley, of red Fennel, of Saxifrage, of Carraways, of the
kernel of Hip berries, of each a like quantity, put in some powder of Jet,
mingle these, being beaten to powder well together, and drink it in stale Ale
lukewarm.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=66)

#### 1.226. To make Aqua Composita.

Take of Annise-seeds, and Li­quorish, bruised, of each half a pound, Thyme and
Fennel, of each half a handful, Calamint 2 handfuls, Coriander and Carraway
seeds bruised, of each two ounces, Rosemary and Sage, of each half a handful,
infuse these a whole night in 3 gallons of red Wine or strong Ale, then still
it in a Limbeck with a soft fire.

#### 1.227. An Ointment for a Swelling.

Take of Marsh Mallows, of worm­wood, of Smallage, of each one handful, boyl it
with one pound of the grease of a barrow Hog until it be very green, then
strain it and keep it very close. Lady Pawlet.

#### 1.228. A Plaister for the Back.

Take half a pint of Oyl of Roses, four ounces of white Lead ground into fine
powder, put your oyl into a clean Posnet, and set it on the fire, and when it
is warm, [[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=67)
put in your white Lead, ever stir­ing it, then put into it of your Wax one
quart, stir it until it be black, then take it from the fire, and in the
cooling put thereto two pennyworth of Camphire, of white sanders, and yellow
sanders, of each the weight of four pence, fine Bole & Terra sigillata, of
each 2 penniweight, in fine powder all, still stirring it till it be almost
cold, and so make it up in rouls: use it as need requires, for all weakness,
wasting, or heat in the Kidneys. Cranash.

#### 1.229. To make Oyl of Swallows.

Take one handful of Mother-Thyme, of Lavender-cotten, and Strawberry leaves,
of each alike, four Swallows, feathers and all to­gether well bruised, 3
ounces of Sallet oyl, beat the herbs, and the Swallows, feathers & all
together, until they be so small that you can see no feathers, then put in the
oyl, & stir them well together, and seeth them in a posnet, and [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=67) strain them
through a Canvas cloth, and so keep it for your use.

#### 1.230. For a Thorn, Fellon or Prick.

Take the juice of Fetherfew, of Smallage, of each one saucer full, put to it
as much of Wheat flower, as will make it somewhat thick, and put to it of good
black sope the quantity of a Walnut, mingle them together, and lay them to the
sore.

#### 1.231. A Drink for one that hath a Rupture.

Take the Comfit, otherwise cal­led Bonesel, a pretty handful, of Woodbitten as
much, Bread, Plan­tain, and leaves of Cammock, somewhat more than a handful,
of Vervain, as much as of the Cammock, of Dasie roots a small quantity, of
Elder tops, or young buds, the least quantity, stamp all these together and
put unto them, being stamped, one pint of pure White-wine, then strain it, and
drink of it morning and even­ing, one hour or more before [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=68) breakfast or
supper, a good draught blood-warm.

If it be a sucking Child, let the Nurse drink posset Ale of the aforesaid
drink, and let the Child suck immediately, if he be an old body let him take
it lying in his bed 9 days, if it may be conveni­ently, or otherwise to use no
strain­ing.

#### 1.232. For a Lask or Flux.

Take one quart of red Wine, as much running water, one ounce of Cinnamon,
seeth these half away, and give the Patient six spoonfuls to drink morning and
evening, if you think it be too harsh put in a piece of Sugar.

#### 1.233. A Lotion Water for the Canker.

Take one gallon of pure Water, four handfuls of Woodbine, of Marigolds and
Tetful, of each two handfuls, of Celendine, Rue, Sage, and Egrimony, of each
one handful, boyl all these to a quart, then strain it, and put thereto two
[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=68) great
spoonfuls of the best English Honey, and one ounce of Roch Allum, boyl them
all again as long as any scum ariseth, then take it off and put it in a close
bottle, and use it blood warm when need requires.

#### 1.234. For the Mother.

Take 3 or 4 handfuls of Fern that groweth upon a house, seeth it in Rhenish
Wine till it be well sodden, then put it in a linnen cloth, and lay it to her
Navel as hot as she may suffer it, four or five times.

#### 1.235. A Water for all old Sores.

Take Honey-suckles, Water Be­tony, Rosemary, Sage, Violet leaves, Elder
leaves, cut them all small together, and seeth them in a quart of running
water, put thereto two spoonfuls of Honey, and a little Allum.

#### 1.236. For one that hath a great heat in his Temples, or that cannot
sleep.

Take the juice of Housleek, and of Lettice, of each 1 spoonful, of [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=69) womans Milk six
spoonfuls, put them together, and set them upon a Chafing dish of Coals, and
put thereto a piece of Rose cake, and lay it to your Temples.

#### 1.237. To quench or slake your Thirst.

Take one quart of running wa­ter out of the brook, seeth it, and scum it, put
thereto 5 or 6 spoon­fuls of Vinegar, a good quantity of Sugar and Cinnamon, 3
or 4 Cloves bruised, drink it l [...]kewarm.

#### 1.238. For one that hath a great heat in his hands and stomach.

Take 4 Eggs, roast them hard, peel them, lay them in Vinegar 3 or 4 hours,
then let the sick man, hold in either hand one of them, and after some space
change them and take the other, and it will allay the heat.

#### 1.239. Against all Aches especially of a Womans breast.

Take Milk and Rose leaves, and set them on the fire, and put there­to [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=69) Oatmeal, and
oyl of Roses, boyl them till they be thick, and lay it hot under the sore, and
renew it so that it be always hot.

#### 1.240. For the Phthisick and dry Cough.

Take the Lungs of a Fox, beat them to powder, take of Liquorish and Sugar
candy a good quantity, a small quantity of Cummin, mix these all well
together, and put them in a bladder, and eat of it as often as you think good
in a day.

#### 1.241. To take away Warts.

Take Snails that have shells, prick them, and with the juice that cometh from
them rub the Wart every day for the space of 7 or 8 days, and it will destroy
them.

#### 1.242. A perfect Water for the sight.

Take Sage, Fennel, Vervain, Bettony, Eyebright, Pimpernel, Cinquefoil, and
Herbgrace, lay all these in White-wine one night, still it in a stillatory of
glass, this water did restore the sight of one [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=70) that was blind
three years before.

#### 1.243. To restore the Hearing.

Take Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Vervain, Marjoram, of each one handful, of Cammomil
two hand­fuls, stamp them, and mould them in Rie dough, make thereof one loaf,
bake it as other bread, and when it is baked, break it in the midst, and as
hot as may be suffer­ed, bind it to your ears and keep them warm and close one
day or more, after it be taken away, for­bear ye to take cold.

#### 1.244. For a Fellon in the Joints.

Take Rue, Featherfew, Bores grease, Leaven, Salt, Honey, six leaves of Sage,
shred them alto­gether small, then beat them toge­ther, and lay it to the sore
place.

#### 1.245. To comfort the Brains, and to procure sleep.

Take a red Rose-cake, three spoonfuls of White-wine Vine­gar, the white of one
Egg, three [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=70) spoonfuls of
Womans Milk, set all these on a Chafing dish of Coals, heat them, and lay the
Rose cake upon the dish, and let them heat together, then take one Nutmeg, and
strew it on the Cake, then put it betwixt two clothes, and lay it to your
forehead as warm as you may suffer it.

#### 1.246. A Medicine for a forehead with a Scald.

Take one peck of Shoomakers shreds, set them over the fire in a Brass pan, put
water to them and seeth them so long as any oyl will arise, and evermore be
scumming off the oyl, then take plantain, Ribwort, Housleek leaves, ground
Ivy, knotted grass, wild Borrage, Tutsan, Herb Bennet, Smallage, Setwel
leaves, of every one alike quantity, and beat them in a Mortar and strain
them, then take half a pennyworth of Rosin, half a pen­nyworth of Allum, a
little Virgins Wax, beat them, and put them in­to [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=71) a pan, and set
it over the fire, put thereto the Herbs and the oyl, let them seeth till all
be melted, then strain them into a pan, and stir them till they be cold, and
put it into a box for your use, when you dress your head, heat a little in a
saucer, annoint it every day twice, pull out the hairs that stand upright, and
with a linnen cloth wipe away the corruption.

#### 1.247. A Salve for a Green wound, or old Sore.

Take the leaves of green Ta­bacco two pounds, of Valerian two pound, beat them
very small, then strain them, and take the juice thereof, put one pound of
yellow Wax, one pound of Rosin, one pound of Deer suet, boyl them together
till they be very green, and when it is cold, put to it a quarter of a pound
of Turpentine, and keep it for your use.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=71)

#### 1.248. For the Running of the Reins. Approved.

Take the Roes of red Herrings, dry them upon the coals till they will beat to
powder, then give it to the patient to drink in the morning fasting, as much
as will lie upon a shilling in 5 spoonfuls of Ale or Wine, be he never so
weak.

#### 1.249. For the burning and pricking in the Soles of the Feet.

Take have a pound of Barrows grease, two handfuls of Mugwort chopped very
small, boyl it with the Barrows grease upon a soft fire by the space of 4
hours, then strain it from the Mugwort, and put it up in an earthen thing for
your use, and annoint your feet as you go to bed.

#### 1.250. A Medicine for any heat, burning, or Scalding. Approved.

Take half a pint of the best Cream you can get, and set it in a fair Posnet,
upon the fire, then [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=72) take two good
handfuls of Dasie roots, leaves and all, clean washed, and very finely shred,
put them in­to the same Posnet, and boil it up­on the fire until it be a clear
Oint­ment, then strain it through a cloth, and keep it for your use.

#### 1.251. To make Aqua Composita to drink for a Surfeit, or a cold stomach,
and to avoid Flegm and glut from the stomach.

Take one handful of Rosemary, one good root of Elecampane, one handful of Hop,
half a handful of Thyme, half a handful of Sage, 6 good crops of red Mints,
and as much of Pennyroyal, half a hand­ful of Horehound, six crops of
Marjarom, two ounces of Liquorish well bruised, and so much of An­nise seeds,
then take 3 gallons of strong Ale, and put all the aforesaid things, Ale and
Herbs, into a brass pot, then set them upon the fire, and set your Limbeck
upon it, and stop it close with paste, that there [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=72) come no air
out, and so keep it with a soft fire, as other Aqua vitae.

#### 1.252. For an Ach in the Joynts.

Take clarified Butter a quarter of a pound, of Cummin 1 pound, black sope a
quarter of a pound, 1 handful of Rue, sheep suet 2 ounces, Bay-salt 1
spoonful, bray these to­gether, then fry them with the gall of an Ox, spread
it on a plaister, and lay it on as hot as you can, and let it lie seven days.

#### 1.253. A Plaister to lay to the Head for a Rheum which runneth at the
Eyes.

Take the power of Rose leaves, Rose-water, and Bettony-water, of each a like
quantity, and a little Vi­negar, put your powders into the Water and Vinegar,
still them and temper them, and make them in a Plaister, and put to it a
little powder of Terra sigillata.

#### 1.254. A Water to be used with the Plaister above said for the same
purpose.

Take one quart of new Milk, two pound of green Fennel, a [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=73) quarter of a
pound of Eyebright [...] put the herbs and milk into a Stil [...]latory, cast
half an ounce of Cam [...]phire thereon, and with this wa [...]ter wash your
eyes and temples.

#### 1.255. For the Emeroides, approved.

Take a piece of tawny cloth [...] burn it in a Frying-pan to pow­der, then
beat it in a Mortar a fine as may be, searce it, then la [...] it on a brown
paper, and wit [...] spittle make it plaisterwise, and lay it to the place,
and truss it up with clothes.

#### 1.256. To break any Sore.

Take hot bread to the quantity of a farthing loaf, grate it, pu [...] thereto
sallet oyl 3 or 4 spoonfuls and a pint of Milk, and seeth then together to a
good thickness [...] spread it on a cloath, and lay it to the sore; instead of
sallet oyl yo [...] may use Deer suet.

#### 1.257. A Bath for an Ach in the Back, and Limbs.

Take Mugwort, Vervain, Fether [...]few, [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=73) Dill, Rosemary,
Burnet, Tun­hoof, Horehound, and white Mints, Senkel, and sage of each 1
hand­ful, seeth all these in 4 gallons of running water, and let it seeth till
1 gallon be wasted, then bath your legs 5 nights together.

#### 1.258. A Medicine for any Joynt that is numb with any Ach, approved.

Take Virgin Wax 1 ounce, Ver­digreece half a quarter of an ounce, Brimstone,
Sope, oyl of Eggs, of Allum, of Honey, of each a like quantity, temper them
all to­gether, and lay it upon the place grieved, somewhat warm.

#### 1.259. A Medicine for a Fellon of any Finger.

Take as much bay-salt as an Egg, wind it in gray paper, lay it in the embers a
quarter of an hour, then beat it in a Mortar very fine, then take the yolk of
a new laid Egg, beat it with this powder until it be very stiff, spread it
upon a cloth, [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=74) lay it upon the
joynt grieved 24 hours, and so dress it 3 times.

#### 1.260. For a Boil or Push.

Take the yolk of a new laid Egg [...] a little English Honey, put it into the
shell to the yolk, put in as much Wheat meal as will make it to spread, then
take 1 branch of Rue, and one of Fetherfew, shred them very fine, and put it
to the same medicine, stir them very well together, spread it upon a piece of
leather, and lay it to the place grieved.

#### 1.261. An Electuary to cause good digestion, and to comfort the stomach.

Take Setwel and Gallingal, of each three slices, Nutmegs, Gin­ger, and
Cinnamon, of each two slices, three Bay-berries sliced fine and husked, three
slices of Liquo­rish, half a spoonful of Annise­seeds clean dusted, one long
pep­per cut small, white pepper six grains, as much black pepper, beat them
all into a gross pow­der, [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=74) then put
thereto two grains of musk, one grain of Amber­greece, then take Mint-water
and Sugar, boyl them together, and when they are come to the right perfection
of thickness, put in those powders above mentioned in the cooling with a
little Conserve of Rosemary flowers; of this take the quantity of a Nutmeg,
half an hour before you eat or drink at meals.

#### 1.262. A Powder for the Rheum or sore Eyes.

Boyl one pint of Hop-water, made when the Hop is in the flour, till it be
scalding hot, then put into it half a pound of Li­quorish in very fine powder,
the water being taken from the fire, for the Liquorish must not boyl in the
water, stir them together till the water be clean consumed, then add to them
of Annise seeds, and Fennel seeds, of each half a pound made into very fine
pow­der through a searce, Angelica [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=75) roots,
Elicampane root, and leaves, add flowers of Eyebright made into very fine
powder, of each one ounce and a half, mingle these together, and so keep it
close, and when you eat of this powder, weigh out of the whole quantity two
ounces, whereunto add as much good Aqua vitae as will moi­sten it, or Angelica
water, or Rosa solis, to keep it from being musty, set it near the fire, eat
of these powders at any time as much as you may take up with a groat, and it
is special good for the Rheum, for cold or for sore eyes. Mr. Bend­low.

#### 1.263. A Salve for any Wound.

Take Rosin, Perosin, Wax, of each eight ounces, of sheeps suet, and
Frankincense, of each four ounces, one ounce of Mastick made in powder, boyl
all these in a pint of White-wine half an hour, then take it from the fire,
and put thereto half an ounce of [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=75) Camphire in
powder; when it is almost cold put thereto 4 ounces of Turpentine, and make it
up in rowls, but before it be rowled you must wash it up in running water. A.
T.

#### 1.264. How to deliver a Child in danger.

Take a Date stone, beat it into powder, let the woman drink it with Wine, then
take Polipody and emplaister it to her feet, and the Child will come whether
it be quick or dead, then take Cen­tory, green or dry; give it the Woman to
drink in Wine, give al­so the Milk of another Woman.

#### 1.265. A most singular Syrrup for the Lungs; and to prevent a
Consumption.

Take Egrimony, Scabious, Bor­rage, Bugloss, of each twenty leaves, Fole-foot,
Lungwort, Maiden-hair, of each half a handful, Succory and Endive, of each six
leaves, of Carduus Bene­dictus, Horehound, Nip, of each [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=76) four crops,
unset Hop, half a handful, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, Smallage root, of each
3 roots sliced, and the piths taken out, Elecampane 4 roots sliced, Iris roots
half an ounce sliced, Quince seeds one ounce, Liquo­rish three good sticks
scraped, and sliced small, twenty Figs sliced, Raisins of the Sun 1 good
hand­ful sliced, and the stones taken out. Boyl all these in a gallon of
running water till half be consu­med, then take it from the fire, and let it
settle, then strain it, and boyl it again with as much white Sugar as will
make it thick as Syr­rup, that it may last all the year.

#### 1.266. A Powder for the Stone.

Take Haws and Hips, of each a good handful, Ashen keys half a handful, 3 or 4
Acrons, the shells of three new laid Eggs, Grumwell seeds, Parsley seeds, of
each half an ounce, Perstone a good handful, Camock roots half a handful,
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=76) make all
these in fine powder, then put thereto two ounces of Sugar-candy beaten
something small, take a six-penny weight of this powder at a time in the
mor­ning fasting, and drink not after it one hour.

#### 1.267. For the Cholick and Stone.

Take 1 handful of Fili Pendu­la, of Rosemary, of Saxifrage, of Ivy growing on
the wall, of Harts-tongue, of Thyme, of Par­sley, of Scabious, of each 4
hand­fuls, of Marigolds one handful, of Marjorum 3 handfuls, of brown Fennel,
of Londebeese, of Sper­nits, of Borrage, of each 2 hand­fuls, of Maiden-hair 3
handfuls, still all these in May, keep it in a Glass till you have need of it,
then take of it five spoonfuls, and three of White-wine, and of clean powder
of Ginger half a spoon­ful, put these together and warm it lukewarm, and let
the Patient drink it in the morning 2 hours [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=77) before he rise
out of his bed, let him lay more clothes upon him, for it will provoke him to
sweat, after the sweat is gone, let him rise and walk whither he will.

#### 1.268. A good water to drink with wine, or without to cool Choler.

Take Borrage roots, and Succory roots of each two, wash and scrape them fair
and clean, and take out their cores, then take an earthen pot of two gallons,
fill it with fair spring water, set it on a fire of Charcoal, put the roots in
it, and 8 pennyworth of Cinnamon, when it beginneth to seeth, put into it 4
ounces of fine sugar, and let it seeth half an hour, then take it off, let it
cool, and drink thereof at your pleasure.

#### 1.269. How to make Aqua Composita for the Cholick and Stone.

Take strong Ale one month old, as many gallons as your pot will hold, and for
every gallon take two ounces of Liquorish, [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=77) and as much
Annise seeds, and of these Herbs following two hand­fuls of each to every
gallon, of Birch leaves, Burnet, Pasphere, Pellitory of the wall,
Watercres­ses, Saxifrage, Grumwell seeds, Filipendula, Pennyroyal, Fennel,
half a root of Elecampane, of Haws, of Hips, of Berries, of Brambles, and
Barberries of each half a pint, still them as you do other Aqua vitae.

#### 1.270. A Medicine for the Cholick passion.

Take the smooth leaves of Hol­ly, dry them, and make them into powder, of
Grumwell seed, and Box seed of each a little quantity, let the Patient drink
thereof.

#### 1.271. How to take away the servent shaking and burning of an Ague.

Take of the rind of the Wilding-tree, with the leaves in Summer, of each half
a handful, as much Bettony, 3 crops of Rosemary, seeth them in a quart of
posset-Ale to a pint, and let the sick [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=78) drink of this
as hot as he can, and so within 3 times it will ease him.

#### 1.272. For the hardness and stiffness of the Sinews.

Take 12 fledg'd Swallows out of the nest, kill them, beat them feathers and
all in a Mortar, with Thyme, Rosemary and Hop, then seeth them with May butter
a good while, then strain them through a strainer, as hard as you can, and it
will be an Ointment, take the strings that grow out of the Straw­berries and
beat them amongst the rest.

#### 1.273. How to stay the Flux.

Take white Starch made of wheat 2 or 3 spoonfuls, and take also new Milk from
the Cow, stir these together, and let them be warmed a little, and give it to
the party grieved in manner of a Glister, a present remedy.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=78)

#### 1.274. An approved Medicine for the Plague, called the Philosophers Egg:
It is a most excellent preservative against all poysons, or dangerous Diseases
that draw towards the Heart.

Take a new laid Egg, and break a hole so broad as you may take out the white
clean from the yolk, then take one ounce of Saf­fron, and mingle it with the
yolk, but be careful you break not the shell, then cover it with another piece
of shell so close as is possible, then take an earthen pot with a close cover,
with warm embers, so that it shall not be buried, and as those embers do cool,
so put in more hot; and do so for the space of two days, until you think it be
dry, for proof whereof you shall put in a pen, and if it come out dry it is
well, then take the Egg and wipe it very clean, then pare the shell from the
Saffron, and set it before the fire, and let it be warm, then beat it in a
Mortar [[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=79)
very fine, and put it by it self, then take as much white Mustard-seed as the
Egg and Saffron and grind it as small as meal, then searce it through a fine
Boulter, that you may save the quantity of the Egg so searced, then take a
quarter of an ounce of Dittany roots, as much Tormentil, of Nuces Vomicae one
dram, let them be dried by the fire, as aforesaid, then stamp these 3 last
severally, very fine in a Mortar, then mix them 3 well together, after that
take, as a thing most needful, the root of Angelica and Pimpernel, of each the
weight of six-pence, make them to powder, and mix them with the rest, then
compound therewith five or six scruples of Unicorns horn, or for want there­of
Harts horn, and take as much weight as all these fine powders come to, of fine
Treacle, and stamp it with the powders in a Mortar until it be well mixt, and
hang to [[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=79)
the pestle, and then it is perfectly made, then put the Electuary in a stone
pot, well nealed, and so it will continue 20 or 30 years, and the longer the
better.

#### 1.275. How to use this Electuary.

First when one is infected with the pestilence, let him take so soon as he
can, or ever the disease infect the heart, one crown weight in Gold of this
Electuary, and so much of fine Treacle, if it be for a man, but if it shall be
for a woman or child take less, and let them be well mixed together, and if
the disease come with cold, give him the Electuary with half a pint of White-
wine warm, & well mixed together, but if it come with heat, then give it him
with Plantain Water, or Well water, and Vinegar mixt together, and when he
hath drunk the same, let him go to his naked bed, and put off his shirt, and
cover him warm, but let his bed be well [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=80) warmed first, &
a hot double sheet wrapped about him, and so let him sweat 7, 8 or 10 hours,
as he is able to endure, for the more he doth sweat the better, because the
disease fadeth away with the sweat; but if he cannot sweat, then heat 2 or 3
Bricks or Tiles, and wrap them in moist clothes wet with water and salt, and
lay them by his sides in the bed, and they will cause him to sweat, and as he
sweateth, let it be wiped from his body with dry hot clothes, be­ing conveyed
into the bed, and his sweat being ended, shift him into a warm bed with a warm
shift & all fresh new clothes, using him very warily for taking of cold, and
let his clothes that he did sweat in, be well aired and washed, for they be
infectious; and let the keep­ers of the sick beware of the breath or air of
the party in the time of his sweating, therefore let her muffle her self with
dou­ble [[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=80)
old cloth, wherein is Worm­wood, Rue, Fetherfew, crums of sowr Bread and
Vinegar, and a little Rose-water, beat all these together, and put it into the
muf­fler made new every day while you do keep him, and let the sick party,
have of it bound in a cloth to smell on while he is in a sweat, then after do
it away, and take a new; and because he shall be faint and distempered after
his sickness, he shall eat no flesh, nor drink wine the space of nine days,
but let him use these Conservatives for his health, as Conserve of Bugloss,
Bor­rage and red Roses, and especially he shall drink 3 or 4 days after he
hath sweat morning and evening, 3 ounces of the juice of Sorrel mixed with an
ounce of Conserve of Sorrel, and so use to eat and drink whatsoever is
comfortable for the heart, also if one take the quantity of a Pea of the said
Ele­ctuary, with some good Wine, it [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=81) shall keep him
from the infection, therefore when one is sick in the house of the plague,
then so soon as you can give all the whole hou­should some of this Receipt to
drink, and his keeper also, and it shall preserve them from the infection, yet
keep the whole from the sick as much as you can, beware of the clothes and bed
that the sick party did sweat in.

#### 1.276. To make Balm Water.

Take 4 gallons of strong Ale & stale, half a pound of Liquorish, two pound of
Balm, two ounces of Figs, half a pound of Annise seeds, 1 ounce of Nutmegs,
shred the Balm and Figs very small, and let them stand steeping 4 and 20
hours, and then put it in a still, as you use Aqua vitae.

#### 1.277. To make Doctor Stevens Water.

Take one gallon of good Gas­coign Wine, of Ginger, Galingals Nutmegs, Grains,
Annise seeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=81) Sage, Mints,
red Roses, garden-Thyme, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Pennyroyal,
Cammomil, Lavender, of each one handful; bray your spices small, and chop the
herbs before named, and put them with the spices into the Wine, and let it
stand 12 hours, stirring it very often, then still it in a Limbeck closed up
with coarse paste, so that no air enter, keep the first water by it self, it
is good so long as it will burn.

#### 1.278. An Ointment for any strain in the Joynts, or any Sore.

Take 3 pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it in an Oven af­ter the bread
be drawn out, and let it stand 2 or 3 hours, then take the clearest of the
Butter, and put it into a Posnet, then take the tops of red Nettles as much as
will be moistned with the Butter and chop them very small, and put them into
the Butter, set it on the fire, and boyl it softly 5 or 6 hours, [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=82) and when it is
so boyled, put there­to half a pint of pure oyl Olive, and then boyl it very
little, and take it off, and strain it into an ear­then pot, and keep it for
your use.

If you think good, instead of Nettles only, you may take these herbs,
Cammomil, Rosemary, La­vender, Tunhoof, otherwise Ale­hoof, Five-finger,
Vervain and Nettle tops.

#### 1.279. For an Ague.

Take the inner bark of a Wal­nut tree, a good quantity, boyl it in Beer until
the Beer look black, and then take a good draught, and put it into a pot, then
take six spoonfuls of sallet Oyl for an ex­tream Ague, brew it to and fro in
two pots, then drink it, and let the party labour at any exercise until he
sweat, then let him lie down upon a bed very warm, until he hath done
sweating, this do three times when the Ague cometh upon him.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=82)

#### 1.280. A Powder against the wind in the Stomach.

Take Ginger, Cinnamon and Gallingal, of each 2 ounces, An­nise seeds, Carraway
and Fennel seeds, of each 1 ounce, long Pep­per, Grains, Mace and Nutmegs, of
each half an ounce, setwel half a dram, make all in powder, and put thereto 1
pound of white Su­gar, and use this after your meat, or before at your
pleasure; at all times it comforteth the stomach marvellously, carrieth away
wind, and causeth a good digestion.

#### 1.281. For a Pin and a Web in the Eye.

Take the white of an Egg, beat it to oyl, put thereto a quarter of a spoonful
of English Honey, half a handful of Daisie leaves, and in winter the roots,
half a handful of the inner rind of a young Ha­zle, not above one years
growth, beat them together in a Mortar, and put thereto 1 spoonful of Wo­mans
Milk, and let it stand infused [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=83) two or three
hours, and strain al [...] through a cloth, and with a feathe [...] drop it
into the eye thrice a day.

#### 1.282. For blood shotten, and sore Eyes coming of heat.

Take Tutty of Alexandria, o [...] Lapis Tutty 1 ounce, beat it unto fine
powder, and temper it with a quart of White-wine, put thereto 1 ounce of dried
Rose leaves, and boyl them all together with a soft fire until one half be
consumed, then strain it through a fine linnen cloth and keep it in a glass
and use it evening and morning, and put it into the sore eyes with a feather,
or your finger.

If the Tutty be prepared it is the better, which is thus done, steep the Tutty
in Rosewater, and let it lie half an hour, then take it forth, and lay it on a
white paper to dry, then take it when it is dry, steep it, and dry it again,
as before, twice or thrice, and then use it as before.

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=83)

#### 1.283. For an Ach in the Bones.

Take Southernwood, Worm­wood, and Bay leaves, of each one handful, one Ox
gall, one pint of Neats foot oyl, put all these toge­ther and let them stand 2
or 3 days, and let them boyl upon a very soft fire, then put in of Deers suet
a good quantity, strain them, and put them into a pot, and so an­noint the
Patient, put to this a good quantity of Tar, and as much Pitch as the bigness
of a Walnut and of the juice of Pimpernel a good quantity.

#### 1.284. For Children that are troubled with an extream Cough.

Take Hyssop water, and Fennel water, of each half a pint, of sliced Liquorish,
and sugar, of each a pretty quantity, seeth them easily over a good fire,
strain it, and let them take a little hereof an ounce, and often; you may
dissolve pellets therein, and you may annoint their chest with oyl of Almonds,
and a little Wax.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=84)

#### 1.285. A Medicine for sore Eyes.

Take red Fennel and Celendine, of each one handful, stamp and strain them,
that done take five spoonfuls of Honey, and white Copperas, the quantity of 1
Pea, Rose-water five spoonfuls, boyl all these together in an earthen pot,
skim it well, and clarifie it with the white of an Egg, this is an ex­cellent
Medicine to clear the sight of the Eye, if there be any thing in the Eye
superfluous to hinder the sight; but if there be nothing but heat, it is
nothing so good.

#### 1.286. To help one that is inwardly bruised.

Take of Borrage and red Sage, of each a handful, stamp these to­gether, and
strain them; and put thereto as much Claret Wine as the juice thereof, and let
the party drink it warm, and if it keep within him 24 hours after, he will
recover; if he be bound in the body, let him take 3 spoon­fuls [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=84) of Syrrup of
Damask Roses, and two spoonfuls of Sallet oyl, and drink it fasting, and an
hour after let the party take some warm broth.

#### 1.287. For the Spleen.

Take of Lavender, Fennel, Par­sley, Cammomil, Thyme, Worm­wood, Angelica, of
each one handful, of Sage, and Rue, one handful, of Annise seeds, and Fen­nel
seeds, of each one handful, of Cummin seeds, two handfuls, of Cloves four
spoonfuls, and of Mace two spoonfuls, gather these herbs in the heat of the
day, and dry them in the Sun two days, laying them very thin on a sheet and
bruise the seed grosly, and steep them in as much Sallet oyl as will cover all
these things, and somewhat more, and set them in the Sun ten days, which being
done, strain your oyl from your Herbs, and your spices, and then infuse once
again as before with [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=85) Herbs and
Spices in like manner, add to this oyl that infused or strained, and bitter
Almonds, and oyl of Capers half a pint, then take a quarter of a spoonful of
the said oyl, and put in your hands, your hands being warm, rub them together,
and annoint and rub the Patient grieved with both your hands, the one on the
right side, the other on the left, from the loyns down to the bottom of the
belly, drawing your hands as hard as you can, and make them to meet at the
bottom of the belly, and continue in continual rubbing about a quarter of an
hour.

#### 1.288. For a Burning or Scald.

Take a quantity of sheeps suet, the white of Hen dung, and fresh grease, boyl
all these together, strain it, and annoint the party with a feather.

#### 1.289. For the Emeroids and Piles.

Take juice of Elder, May-but­ter, [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=85) and Deer-suet,
melt them, letting the juice and the butter simper, and then put the suet to
them; make them into Pills, and if you make a Suppository, you must put in
more Deers suet.

#### 1.290. For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose.

Take the ashes of green leaves of Holly, with half so much of the burnt powder
of Allum: blow with a quil into the place grieved, and it will help man,
child, or beast.

#### 1.291. A Remedy for the Mother.

When the Fit beginneth to take them, take the powder of white Amber, and burn
it in a Chafin­dish of coals, and let them hold their mouthes over it, and
suck in the smoke, and annoint their no­strils with the oyl of Amber, and if
they be not with child, take 2 or 3 drops of the oyl of Amber in White-wine
warm or cold, but the oyl of Amber must be taken inward but once a day, and
out­ward [[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=86)
as often as the fit taketh them.

#### 1.292. A Medicine for the Worms.

Take one pennyworth of Alloes, with the like quantity of Ox-gall, and
Mithridate, mix them toge­ther, and lay them on the Childs Navel upon a
Plaister.

#### 1.293. A Preservation against the Plague.

Take one dry Walnut, take off the shell and peel, cut it small, and with a
branch of Rue shred fine, and a little wine-vinegar and salt, put all into a
sliced Fig, take it up fasting, and then you may drink a little wormwood after
it, and go where you list.

#### 1.294. A Pill for those that are infected.

Taker of Aloes-succatrina half an ounce, of Myrrh, and English Saf­fron, of
each a quarter of an ounce, beat them into small powder, with Malmsey, or a
little Sack, or Di­oscoridon, make two or three small pills thereof, and take
them fasting.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=86)

#### 1.295. A Poultess to break a Plague-sore.

Take a white Lilly-root, and seeth it in a pennyworth of Lin­seed, and a
pretty quantity of Bar­rows grease, beat the Linseed first very soft,
afterwards beat all toge­ther in a Mortar, make thereof a Plaister.

#### 1.296. An Electuary for the Plague.

Take the weight of ten grains of Saffron, 2 ounces of the kernels of Walnuts,
2 or 3 Figs, 1 dram of Mithridate, and a few Sage leaves stampt together, with
a sufficient quantity of Pimpernel Water, make up all these together in a mass
or lump, and keep it in a glass or pot for your use, take the quan­tity of 12
grains fasting in the morning, and it will not only pre­serve from the
pestilence, but ex­pel it from the infected.

#### 1.297. Against a Tertian Ague.

Take Dandillion clean washed, stamp it, and put it in Beer, and let it stand
all night in the Beer, in the [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=87) morning strain
it, and put half a spoonful of Treacle into it, make it lukewarm, and let the
patient drink of it fasting upon his well day, and walk upon it as long as he
is able, this hath been appro­ved good for an Ague that com­eth every second
day.

#### 1.298. Against the Wind.

Take Cummin seed, and steep them in a Sack 24 hours, dry them by the fire, and
hull them, then take Fennel seed, Carraway seed, and Annise seed, beat all
these to­gether, and take every morning half a spoonful in Broth or Beer
fasting.

#### 1.299. Another.

Take Enula Campana, grate it, and drink half a spoonful fasting.

#### 1.300. For the sting of an Adder.

Take a head of Garlick, and bruise it with some Rue, add some Honey thereto,
and if you will, some Treacle, and apply it to the place.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=87)

#### 1.301. For the biting of a Dog.

Take Ragwort, chop it, and boyl it with unwasht butter to an Ointment.

#### 1.302. A Medicine for a woman that hath a dead Child, or for the after-
birth after deliverance.

Take Date-stones, dry them, and beat them to powder; then take Cummin seed,
Grain, and English Saffron, make them in powder, and put them all together in
like quan­tity, saving less of the Saffron than of the rest, then searce them
very finely, and when need is to drink it, take a spoonful at once, with a
lit­tle Malmsie, and drink it Milk­warm, it is good to bring forth a dead
Child, or for the after birth, or if the woman have any rising in her stomach,
or flushing in her face during her child-birth, the Date-stones with round
holes in the side, are the best; if you put a quantity of white Amber beaten
amongst the powder, it will be better.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=88)

#### 1.303. To make the best Paracelsus Salve.

Take of Litharge, of Gold and Silver, of each 3 ounces, and put to it one
pound and half of good Sal­let oyl, and as much of Linseed oyl, put it in a
large earthen ves­sel well leaded, of the fashion of a milk bowl, or a great
Bason, set it over a gentle fire, and keep it stir­ring till it begin to boyl,
then put to it of red lead, and of Lapis Cala­minaris, of each half a pound,
keep it with continual stirring, and let it boyl 2 hours, or so long till it
be something thick, which you may know by dropping a lit­tle of it upon a cold
board or stone, then take a Skillet, and put into it a pound of yellow Wax, as
much black Rosin, half a pound of Gum-sandrach, of yellow Am­ber, Olibanum,
Myr [...]h, of Aloes Hepatica, of both the kinds of Aristolochias round, and
long, of every of these in fine powder searced, one ounce, of Mammir one
[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=88) ounce
and a half, of oyl of Bayes, half a pound, of oyl of Juniper six ounces,
dissolve all these together in the aforesaid Skillet, and then put them to the
former Plaister, set it over a gentle fire; and keep it with stirring till it
boyl a little. Then take your five Gums, Popa­nax, Galbanum, Sapagenum,
Ammoniacum, and Bdellium, of each of these three ounces, which must be
dissolved in White-wine Vinegar, and strained, and the Vi­negar exasperated
from them be­fore you go about the Plaister, let there be 3 ounces of each of
them when they are thus prepa­red, then when the Plaister hath gently boyled,
about half the big­ness of a Nutmeg at a time, conti­nuing that order until
all the Gums be in and dissolved, then set it over the fire again, and let it
boyl a very little, but before it boyl, be sure that the Gums be all
dissol­ved, for else it will run into [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=89) lumps and
knots, after it hath boy­led a little, take it from the fire again, and
continue the stirring of it very carefully, and put it to these things
following, being in a rea­diness, take of both the Corals red and white, of
Mother of Pearl, of Dragons Blood, of Terra Lem­nia, of white Vitriol, of each
of them 1 ounce, of Lapis haematitis, and of the Loadstone, of each of them
one ounce and a half, of the flowers of Antimony two drams, of Crocus Martis
two drams, of Cam­phire one ounce, of common Tur­pentine half a pound, mix all
these together, but first let those things that are to be pounded, be
carefully done, and fully searced, then put them all together among the former
things, and again set it over the fire with a moderate heat and gentle, to
boyl till it be in the form of a plaister, which you may know by dropping it
on a cold piece of wood, or stone, or [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=89) iron, you must
also remember to keep it with continual stir [...]ing from the beginning to
the ending, when you make it up, let your hands, and the place you rowl it on,
be annointed with the oyl of Saint Johns Wort, and of each Worms and Juniper,
Cammomil, and Roses together, wrap it in Parchment or Leather, and keep it for
your use.

Memorandum, That the Cam­phire be dissolved in the oyl of Ju­niper, mix them
together with the Gum-sandrach, and put them in towards the latter end.

#### 1.304. An Ointment for any strain in the Joynts, or for any Sore.

Take 3 pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it into an Oven after the bread
be drawn out, and let it stand 2 or 3 hours, then take the clearest of the
Butter, and put into a Posnet, then take the tops of red Nettles, and chop
them very small, and put so many Nettles to [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=90) the Butter as
will be moistned with the Butter, and so set it on the fire, and boyl it
softly 5 or 6 hours, and when it is so boyled, put there­to half a pint of the
best oyl of Olive and then make it boyl a very little, and take it off, and
strain it into an earthen pot, and keep it for your use.

#### 1.305. Mr. Ashley's Ointment.

Take six pound of May Butter unsalted, one quart of Sallet oyl, four pound of
Barrows grease, one pound of the best Rosin, one pound of Turpentine, half a
pound of Frankincense; to this rate take these Herbs following, of each a
handful, videlicet, Smal­lage, Balm, Lorage, red Sage, La­vender, Lavender-
cotten, Herb­grace, Parsley, Comfrey, called Bo­neset, Sorrel, Laurel leaves,
Beech leaves, Lungwort, Marjorum, Rosemary, Mallows, Cammomil, Saint Johns
wort, Plantain, Al­heal, Chickweed, English Tobac­co, [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=90) or else
Henbane, Grunsel, Woundwort, Bettony, Egrimony, Carduus Benedictus, wild Wine,
or White-wine, called Brian, Adders Tongue, Mellilot drink all these Herbs
clean, wash them, strain them clean from the water, all these must be gathered
after the Sun rise, then stamp all these Herbs in a stone or wooden Mor­tar so
small as possible may be, then take your Rosin and beat it to powder with your
Frankincense, and melt them first alone, then put in your Butter, your Hogs
grease and oyl, and when all is melted, put in your Herbs, and let them all
boyl together half a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire, and leave
stirring of it in no wise a quarter of an hour after, and in that time that it
is from the fire, put in your Turpentine, and 2 ounces of Verdigrease very
finely beaten to powder; and when you put in your Turpentine and Verdigrease,
[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=91) stir it
well, or else it will run o­ver, and so stir it until it leave boy­ling: then
put it in an earthen pot, stopping the pot very close with a cloth and a board
on the top, and set it in a dunghil of horse muck 21 days, then take it up and
put it into a kettle, and let it boyl a little, taking heed that it boyl not
over, then strain all through a coarse cloth into an earthen or Gally pot, and
when all is strained, put to it half a pound of oyl of Spike, and cover the
pot close until you use it, and when you use it, make it warm in winter, and
use it cold in summer.

#### 1.306. An approved Medicine for an Ach in the Joynts whatsoever.

Take half a pound of Rosin, half a pound of Frankincense, Oliba­num and
Mastick, of each one ounce, Wax, Deers suet, Turpen­tine, of each 2 ounces,
Camphire 2 drams, beat the Olibanum, Ma­stick, Rosin and Frankincense, and
[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=91) Camphire
into powder, then put it in a brass Pan with a pottle of White-wine, and put
in the Wax and Deer suet into it, and when it doth boyl, put in your
Turpentine, and let it boyl a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire
and let it stand and cool until the next day, then work it with your hand to
work out the Wine, an­nointing your hands first with oyl, then make it up in
rowls, then as need will serve, take thereof and spread it with a warm knife
upon the fleshy side of a Sheeps skin, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
and take it not off until it fall off of it self, pricking the plaister full
of holes.

#### 1.307. A Searcloth to be used against Car­buncles, red Sores, Biles
Swellings, or any hot causes.

Take a wine pint of pure Sal­let oyl, and put into an earthen pot that is very
large, and set it upon a very soft fire of Charcoal, [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=92) and when it
beginneth to boyl, stir it with a Hasel stick of one years shooting, then put
into it 2 ounces of Venice Sope that is pure white, half a pound of red Lead,
one quarter of a pound of white Lead, letting it boyl very softly, stirring it
continually with this Hazel stick for the space of 2 or 3 hours, you shall
know when it is boyled by this; drop one drop thereof on a board, and it will
be stiff when it is enough, then take it from the fire, and put into it half
an ounce of oyl of Bayes, then let it boyl again a little, then let your
clothes be but of a reason­able size to dip them in it, then you must have two
sticks, which must be hollow in the middle, to strip the clothes through, then
lay them abroad until they be cold upon a board, then rowl them up and keep
them, and when you use them, lay them upon the place grieved, and let them lie
12 [[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=92)
hours, then take it off and wipe it, and lay the other side, and let that lie
as long.

#### 1.308. A Plague Water to be taken three times, for the first helpeth not.

Take a Gallon of White-wine, Ale or Beer, and to that quantity take a quarter
of a pound of each of these Herbs following, Rose-water a quarter of a pint,
Rue, Sage, Vervain, Egrimony, Bettony, Celendine, Carduus, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Scabious, Valerian, Wormwood, Dragons, Mugwort, all these Herbs
must you shred in gross together, and steep in the aforesaid liquor, the night
before you distil it in a Rose-water still, and then keep the first water by
it self, being the weaker, and there­fore fitter for Children; it helpeth all
Fevers, Agues and Plagues, be­ing thus taken, seven spoonfuls or thereabout of
the strongest blood warm, and give it to the party to drink in an Ague or
Fever, an [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=93) hour before the
fit come, and so to sweat, either by exercise, or in your bed, but your
stomach must be empty, and if it be taken for the Plague, then put it into a
little Diascordium or Mithridate.

#### 1.309. A Defensive Plaister.

Take the white of an Egg, and Bole Armoniack, spread it on lea­ther.

#### 1.310. A Syrrup for a Cold.

Take Colts foot Water, Hyssop water and Honey, put Liquorish, Annise seeds and
Elecampane, put thereto the juice of Fennel, and boyl them.

#### 1.311. To stay the bleeding of a wound.

Take Charcoal red hot out of the fire, and beat it to powder.

#### 1.312. A Poultess.

Take Milk, Oatmeal, and red Rose leaves and a little Deers suet.

#### 1.313. For the Running of the Reins.

Take Cups of Acrons, and grate them; and grate some Nutmeg: put this in Beer,
and drink it.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=93)

#### 1.314. For a Poultess.

Take Linseed and beat it to powder, boyl it in Milk with Mal­lows and Sheeps
suet.

#### 1.315. For a Blast.

Take a good quantity of Ver­vin, and boyl it in Milk, and wash the blast
therewith very well, then bind the herb very close to it some few hours, after
wash it again, the Milk being warmed, and so bind it up again, the oftner it
is done the better, and in a day or two it will be well, if it be taken before
it fester.

#### 1.316. Another.

Take a good quantity of Veri­con being green, with as much Dill, chop them
together, and boyl them in Boars grease as much as will cover them, and for
want thereof, so much May butter, and when they be boyled together, let them
stand 2 or 3 days, and then boyl it a little, and so strain it through a
cloth.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=94)

#### 1.317. A Balsamum.

Take in the latter end of Septem­ber good store of Honey suckle berries, and
put them in a body of a glass Still stopped, and set it in hot horse-dung 8
days, distil it in Balneo, then when you have drawn the water forth, pour the
water into the stuff again, stop it close, and put it into the dung 24 hours,
then set it in ashes, and di­stil both water and oyl with a great fire, as
much as will come forth, and at last separate the water from the oyl in
Balneo.

#### 1.318. To make an excellent oyl of Hypericon.

Take flowers, leaves and seed of Hypericon as much as you list, beat them
together, and infuse them in White-wine, that they may be covered therewith,
and set them in the Sun for ten days, then put thereto so much oyl-Olive as
all the rest do weigh, and let it stand ten days more in the Sun, but look
that you weigh [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=94) the Oyl to know
how much it is, then put thereto for every pound of Oyl two ounces of
Turpentine, and 1 dram of Saffron, and of Nut­megs, and Cloves of each half an
ounce, of Myrrh and Rosin of each 1 ounce, and of the root of Briony 2 ounces,
put them all in a Vessel of glass, and mix them well toge­ther, and set them
in a Vessel of hot water, and then set thereto a head of glass, and Receiver
well shut, and boyl it so long until no more will distil from it, which will
be about 24 hours, then take it out and strain it whilst it is hot, and keep
it in a Vessel of Glass, and when you first use it, heat it well, and apply it
upon a wound with­out using any tent at all; this is excellent for a green
wound, espe­cially if there be veins, sinews, or bones offended or cut, it
keep­eth wounds from putrefaction, it cleanseth them and easeth pain, and doth
incarnate and skin them, it [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=95) helpeth
bruises, pains, aches, or swelling in any part, and is won­derful good against
venom or poy­son.

#### 1.319. For the Falling sickness.

Take the roots of single Pionie, grate them, drink them, and wear some of them
about your neck.

#### 1.320. For the kibed Heels.

Take a Turnip, make a hole in the top of it, take out some of the pith, infuse
into that hole oyl of Roses, then stop close the hole, roast the Turnip under
the embers; when it is soft apply it plaisterwise warm to the kibe, bind it
fast.

Lapis Prunellae.

#### 1.321. A Medicine for sore Eyes.

Take one pound of Saltpeter, boyl it in a Goldsmiths earthen pot, with a very
hot fire round about it, let it boyl till it be very black and melted, then
take a quar­ter of an ounce, or 6 pennyweight of Roch-allum, and a quarter of
an ounce of Brimstone, break them [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=95) and put them in
the Saltpeter by little at once as it boyleth, and let it burn till the flame
go out of it self, then pour it in a brass Ladle, or into a Chafer, and so let
it stand till it be cold, and when you will use it, scrape it very fine with a
knife, and put a little of it to the sore eyes, hold down the eye-lids till
the pain be gone, then let the water drop out of the eye: This Medicine taketh
away the Pearl, Pin and Web in the eye, and all sores and blood-shed, it also
hel­peth the Toothach, being put in­to the hollow Tooth, with a little lint,
if the Tooth be not hollow, rub it outward: Finally, it helpeth a stinking
breath, being eaten in the morning fasting.

#### 1.322. For a Scald-head.

Take a handful of Grovers shreds, and a handful of Dock-roots, the pith taken
out, and boyl them in strong Ale until they be reasonable thick, and annoint
the head there­with.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=96)

#### 1.323. For a Bloody Flux.

Take Rubarb and roast it, then grind it to powder, and take as much as will
lie upon a six-pence, and keep warm that day, the next day eat conserve of
Roses, mixed with Coral, and drink that day if you will, posset Ale made of
Cam­momile.

#### 1.324. For the Itch.

Take a pound of Butter unwash­ed and unsalted, 3 good handfuls of red Sage,
and as much Brimstone beaten into powder, as a Walnut, boyl these well
together, and strain it, and put in half an ounce of Ginger beaten small.

#### 1.325. For sore Eyes.

Take new Hens-dung out of the nest, and put it into an Oven almost cold, let
it lie there all night, and take the white of it, and beat it be­ing dried,
and take as much of the powder of Ginger finely beaten, and put to that half
in like quan­tity of Sugar-candy, all which [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=96) all which must
be beaten very well and searced, then put it into the sore eyes every night,
and in the morning, and wash it out with water.

#### 1.326. A Water for sore Eyes.

Take a pint of fair running water, of wild Dasies, and 3 lea­ved grace, of
each a good hand­ful, wash the herbs very clean in a Cullender, and put them
into a clean skillet of water, let them boyl very well over the fire, until
the water look green, then take a little piece of Allum and put into the
water, and when it is boyling then tast of the water, and when it sticks to
the mouth, take as much honey as will make it very sweet, then after it hath
boyled a little while, take it off the fire; strain it and drop a little every
night into the eyes.

#### 1.327. An approved application against any Surfeit.

Take the bottom of a Muncorn­loaf, [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=97) cut it about an
inch thick, and as broad as the palm of your hand, toast it very well, then
take of Sallade Oyl and Claret-wine of each a like quantity, as much as will
wet the toast well & through­ly, warm it hot, then put the toast into it, when
the toast is well soaked, strew the powder of Cloves and Mace hereupon thick,
then apply it to the stomach of the Patient as warm as he can endure it, it
will purge upwards and downwards as often as you apply a fresh toast made as
afore­said, that may be applied so often as any one findeth their stomach ill
at ease, although then it will not purge, except in case of surfeit.

#### 1.328. A Medicine against the Plague.

Take of the root called Set-well the quantity of half a Walnut, and grate it,
of Treacle green, one good spoonful, of fair water 3 spoonfuls, make all these
more than lukewarm; and so drink them [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=97) off in bed, and
sweat six or seven hours, and in your sweat drink small Posset Ale made of
small drink as you need, but not till an hour and half after, the taking of
the Potion, and it will bring forth the Plague sore. If you cast the Medicine,
you may take it the second, third, or fourth time, by the whole, half, or less
mea­sure as your stomach will bear it: if any do take it and thereupon happen
presently amendment, or a rising or sore, you may think it to be the sickness,
for the nature of the Medicine is to prevent the Plague, and in others to
expell the Sore, if it be not taken too late, in which case the stomch will
not brook it easily, and after two or 3 times taking, if you minister it to
any, let it be at their first sickness, lest if their disease be other, they
may receive  [...] thereby.

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=98)

#### 1.329. Jelly of Frogs.

Take the Jelly of Frogs in March and still it in a Glass-still, it is a good
medicine to stop blood, and for the heat and redness of the face, and good to
cure green wounds.

#### 1.330. For the Tooth-ach.

Take Spearmints, and ground-Ivy, of each a handful, and a good spoonful of
Bay-salt, stamp all these very well together, and boyl them in a pint of the
strongest Vinegar that you can get, let these boyl all together until they
come to a quarter of a pint, then strain it, and put it into a glass, and stop
it very close, when your teeth do ake, take a spoonful of it blood warm, and
hold it in your mouth on that side the pain is.

#### 1.331. To make the Teeth stand fast.

Take Roots of Vervain in cold wine, and wash the Teeth there­with.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=98)

#### 1.332. For the perillous Cough.

Take white Hore-hound, stamp it, wring out the juice, and mingle it with
honey, and seeth it, and give it to the sick to drink, or else Sack, and
Garlick seed, and roast it in the fire, and take away the peelings and eat the
rest with Honey, or else take Sage, Rue, Cummin, and powder of Pepper, and
seeth all these together in honey, and make thereof an Electuary, and take
thereof a spoonful in the morning, and another at night.

#### 1.333. For a man that hath no tast in Meat or Drink.

Take a pottle of clear water, and a good handful of Dandilion, and put it in
an earthen pot, and seeth it till it come to a quart, and then take out the
herbs, and put in a good quantity of white Sugar, till you think it be
somewhat plea­sant, and then put it into a Vessel wherein it may cool, and
then take 20 or 30 Almonds, blanch [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=99) them and beat
them in a mortar, and when the water is cold put it to the Almonds, and strain
it through a clean Cipris bag with­out compulsion, and if it be thick let it
run through again, and so keep it in a vessel, and drink of it often, at all
times as you please.

#### 1.334. To preserve a man from the Plague.

Take Aloe Apaticum, and Aloe Succatrine, fine Cinnamon and Myrth, of each of
them 3 drams, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloe, Ma­stick, Bole Armoniack, of each of
them half a dram, let all these things be well stamped in a Mor­tar, then
mingle them together, and after keep them in some close vessel, and take of it
every mor­ning 2 penny weight, in half a glass full of White-wine, with a
little water, and drink it in the mor­ning at the dawning of the day, and so
may you by the grace of God, go safely into all infection of the air and
Plague.

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=99)

#### 1.335. For a Tetter or Ring-worm.

Take Mercury a quarter of an ounce, Camphire 1 penny weight make them into
powder, and rub them in a fair Porrenger, then take and mix them with the
water of the Wine 4 or 5 spoonfuls, stir them well together, then put as much
more water to that, then strain it through a cloth, and take Poppey seeds one
quarter of an ounce, beat that in a stone Mor­tar, with a spoonful of water of
the wine, putting a little and a little till you have spent the quantity of a
pint, then put to it half an ounce of the Milk of Co­kernut, so mix them well
toge­ther with your Receipt, and strain them as you make Almond Milk through a
fair cloth, then keep it in a glass for your use.

#### 1.336. To keep ones body loose whensoe­ver you need.

Take two ounces of syrrup of Roses, 1 ounces of Sene, one penny­worth [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=100) of Annise
seeds, one stick of Liquorish, one pint of Postern­water, seeth them all
together till it seeth to half a pint, then strain them forth, then boyl the
two ounces of syrrup of Roses, and drink it warm.

#### 1.337. For a red Face.

Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinnamon of either of them an even
proportion by weight, beat them into small powder, searce it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white paper, to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so
by even proportions in weight mingle them together in clean clarified Capons
grease, and temper them well together, until they be well mollified, and then
put in them a little Camphire to the quantity of a bean, and so put the whole
con­fection in a glass.

#### 1.338. For a young Child to make Water.

Boyl Organy in fair water, and lay it warm to the childs Navel.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=100)

#### 1.339. A Medicine for the falling of the Vvula into the throat.

Take a red Colwort leaf, where­of cut away the middle rind, then put the leaf
into a paper, and let it be burnt in hot Embers or Ashes, then take the leaf
out, and lay it hot on the crown of the bare head, and it will draw it up into
his place, and rid you of your pain.

#### 1.340. A Medicine for the heat of the soles of the feet, that cometh by
them or blood.

Take a quantity of Snails of the Garden and boyl them in stale Urine, then let
the Patient bathe and set his feet therein, and using that often, he shall be
cured.

#### 1.341. Gascon's own Powder.

Take of powder of Pearl, of red Corral, of Crabs eyes, of Harts horn, and
white Amber, of each one ounce, beat them into fine powder, and searce them,
then take so much of the black toes of the Crabs claws as of all the rest of
[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=101) the
powders, for that is the chief worker, beat them, and searce them finely as
you do the rest, then weigh them severally, and take as much of the toes as
you do of all the rest of the five powders, and mingle them well together, and
make them up in balls with jelly of Harts-horn, whereinto put or infuse a
small quantity of Saffron to give them colour, then let them lie till they be
dry and fully hard, and keep them for your use.

The Crabs are to be gotten in May or September, before they be boyled.

The dose is 10 or 12 grains in Dragon-water, Carduus water, or some other
cordial water.

The Apothecaries in their com­position of it, use to put in a dram of good
Oriental Bezar to the other powders, as you may see in the prescription
following.

This is thought to be the true composition invented by Gascon, [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=101) and that the
Bezar, Musk, and Ambergreece, were added after by some for curiosity, and that
the former will work without them as effectually as with them.

#### 1.342. The Apothecaries Gascon Powder, with the use.

Take of Pearls, white Amber, Harts-horn, eyes of Crabs, and white Corral, of
each half an ounce; of black thighs of Crabs calcined two ounces, to every
ounce of this powder put in a dram of Oriental Bezar; reduce them all into
very fine powder, and searce them, and with Harts-horn jelly, with a little
Saffron put therein, make it up into a paste, and make therewith Lozen­ges or
Trochisces for your use.

You must get your Crabs for this powder about May, or in September before they
shall be boy­led, when you have made them, let them dry and grow hard in a dry
air, neither by fire nor Sun.

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=102) Their
dose is ten or twelve grains, as before prescribed in the former page.

#### 1.343. The Powder prescribed by the Doctors in their last London
Dispensatory 1650. called the Powder of Crabs claws.

Take the prepared Pearls, eyes or stones of Crabs, of red Coral, or white
Amber, of Harts-horn, of Oriental Bezar-stone, of each half an ounce, of the
power of the black tops of the Crabs claws to the weight of all the former;
make them all into powder, ac­cording to Art, and with jelly made with the
skin or casting of our Vipers, make it up into small Tablets, or Trochisces
which you must warily  [...]ry, as before pre­scribed, and reserve for your
use.

[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=102)

#### 1.344. The Countess of Kents Powder, good against all malignant and
Pesti­lent Diseases, French Pox, Small Pox, Measels, Plague, Pestilence,
malignant or scarlet Fevers, good against Melancholy decoction of Spirits,
twenty or thirty grains thereof being exhibited in a little warm Sack, or
Harts-horn Jelly to a man, and half as much, or twelve grains to a child.

Take of the Magistery of Pearls, of Crabs eyes prepared, of white Amber
prepared, Harts-horn, Ma­gistery of white Coral: of Lapis Contra Yarvam, of
each a like quantity, to these powders infu­sed, put of the black tops of the
great claws of Crabs, the full weight of the rest, beat these all into very
fine powder, and searce them through a fine Lawn searce, to every ounce of
this powder add a dram of true Oriental Be­zar, make all these up into a lump,
or mass, with the jelly of [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=103) Harts-horn,
and colour it with Saffron, putting thereto a scru­ple of Ambergreece, and a
little Musk also finely powdered, and dry them (made up into small Trochisces)
neither by fire, nor Sun, but by a dry air, and you may give to a man twenty
grains of it, and to a child twelve grains.

#### 1.345. The Virtue of a Root called Contra Yerva, being made into a fine
Powder.

1\. It withstands the Plague be­ing taken in Treacle-water.

2\. It is good in all Pestilent diseases, taken in posset drink with Saffron.

3\. It is good against a Fever, taken in Carduus water.

4\. It is a great Antidote against all Poysons taken in Sallet oyl.

5\. It doth cure the bitting of a mad Dog, drunk in Rose Vinegar, and then
drink nothing else but spring water during the cure.

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=103) 6\. It
causeth a speedy delivery, given in Balm-water, Bettony wa­ter, or in burnt
wine.

7\. It doth take away the after­throws, given in the same liquors.

8\. It is good Cordial in all fits of the Mother given in Rue-water.

9\. It is very soveraign in swoun­ing fits, given in Sack, or Borrage water.

10\. It is very powerful to with­stand all melancholy, given in Sack.

11\. It doth help Convulsions in Children given in spring water.

12\. It helpeth the Worms gi­ven in Goats milk.

13\. It is good for a short breath, given in Rue-water.

14\. It helpeth the Head-pain, given in Rue-water, or Rosemary-water.

15\. It helpeth the yellow Jaun­dise, given in Celendine water.

16\. It is very powerful in the Palsie, given in Sage-water.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=104) 17\. It
is a good Antidote against the Gout, given in Sage-water.

18\. It withstandeth the growing of the Stone in the Reins, given in Rhenish
wine.

19\. It causeth a good and quiet sleep taken in White-wine.

20\. It is a great preserver of Health, and means of long life, taken
sometimes in Mede.

21\. It may be used as a Treacle or Bezar against Surfeits.

22\. It is a general good upon all occasions, and may be given at all times,
when you do not know what the disease is; in any of the aforesaid liquors.

The Dose for a man or woman is from one scruple to two scru­ples, and to a boy
or girl twelve or fourteen grains in convenient liquors.

### 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=104)

#### 2.1. THE EPISTLE.

Friend,

BEing given to understand, that you were Reprinting the Coun­tess of Kents
Manual; I thought good to communicate unto you, for the more accomplishment of
your next Impression, the Virtues of some select Cordial Spirits, of very
great use in weak and sickly Persons, which were first composed by Sir Walter
Raw­leigh, during his Imprisonment in the Tower, and dispersed by him to
di­vers worthy Personages, in their se­veral occasions and necessities, and
were imparted to me by Captain Sa­muel King, who lived long time with him in
the Tower, and in his Expeditions; this King being my lo­ving
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=105) friend, and
School-fellow both in Canterbury and Westminster Schools. I have also inserted
hereun­to certain Experiments of Gascons powder, or the Countesses, for their
operations are much of the same na­ture, which have many times with very happy
success been tried, upon se­veral persons by my self and divers others by my
directions, assuring my self it will be of very great use and benefit of such
persons as shall have need of such helps and comforts, and so I rest,

Your Friend W. J.

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=105)

#### 2.2. The Virtues of Aqua Bezar.

IT is good against contagious diseases, as Plague, Purples, spotted Fevers,
Small-Pox, and Measels.

The order to take it, is with Carduus Benedictus, or Angelica in posset Ale,
and so sweat moderate­ly upon the taking of it. It is good against Surfeits,
and easeth the stomach opprest with wind, crude flegm, and superfluities, and
helpeth digestion.

The dose is from two or three spoonfuls at one time.

#### 2.3. The Virtues of Spirit of Clary.

It is good to restore one in any weakness, chiefly of the back: It preserveth
against the Consumpti­on and Phthisick; it comforteth the heart, and
increaseth radical moi­sture. It also strengtheneth Child bearing women after
their deli­very.

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=106) The
dose is one or two spoonfuls morning and evening.

#### 2.4. The Virtue of Aqua Mariae.

It is good for all infirmities of the Spleen and to open the obstru­ctions
thereof, it comforteth the vital parts, and is good against all passions of
the heart; it preser­veth the meat in the stomach from putrefaction; it
helpeth digesti­on, and expelleth wind.

The dose is one spoonful at one time.

#### 2.5. The Virtues of Flowers of Rosemary.

It is good against all infirmities of the stomach, and to suppress all
offensive fumes rising up from thence to the head, keeping them down, and
helpeth memory, it openeth all stopping of the Liver and Milt, it preventeth
Vertigo, Scotomia, Palsies, Apoplexies, di­seases of that kind arising from
cold Humours, it breaketh wind, and easeth the Cholick.

The dose is 1 spoonful at 1 time.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=106)

#### 2.6. The Virtues of Spirit of Mint.

It is good for the stomach, and strengthens the retentive faculty, good
against vomiting, and all pas­sions of the heart, it comforteth the vital
spirits, and is good against the Consumption, it expelleth wind, and helpeth
digestion, and is an infallible help for all Melan­choly.

The dose is from one to two spoonfuls.

#### 2.7. The Virtues of Aqua Theriacalis.

It is good against all Diseases of the Spleen whatsoever; It pre­venteth and
helpeth contagions, and sudden oppressions and qualms of the heart.

The dose is one spoonful to pre­vent, and 3 to the infected, who ought to
sweat after taking it.

#### 2.8. The Virtues of Spirits of Saffron.

It is good to comfort the vital Spirits, passions, trembling, and pensiveness
of the heart, and helpeth all malignity oppressing [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=107) it, and
expelleth wind, suppres­seth rheums which arise from the Spleen, and go up to
the head, and openeth the obstructions of it: it is excellent against all
me­lancholy, and very good for wo­men in Travail, so it comforteth and
hasteneth delivery.

The dose is morning and even­ing one spoonful, for three days together.

#### 2.9. Virtues of Spirit of Roses.

It is good to open the obstru­ction of the Lungs, and prevent­eth Consumptions
and other in­firmities of that nature; it preser­veth from putrefaction, and
keep­eth the breath from being cor­rupted.

The dose is a spoonful at noon, at four in the afternoon, and as much at bed
time.

#### 2.10. The Virtue of the Spirit of Diasatyrion.

The Spirit made of Diasatyrion magis gretum, prescribed in the [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=107) last London
Dispensatory, com­forteth and much restoreth decay­ed nature, strengtheneth
the weak back, increaseth seed, and ad­vanceth generation, being taken thrice
a day a spoonful at a time, that is, in the morning fasting, at four in the
afternoon, and last at bedward, with this caution, that the weak parties
abstain from ve­nereal acts till after their first sleep.

The dose is one spoonful at one time.

#### 2.11. The Virtues of the Spirit of Strawberries.

It is excellent good to purifie and cleanse the blood; it preser­veth from,
and also cureth the yel­low Jaundies, and deoppilateth the obstruction of the
Spleen; it keep­eth the body in a sweet temperate­ness, and refresheth the
spirits.

The dose is a spoonful at a time, when need requireth any of those helps for
the aforesaid diseases.

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=108)

#### 2.12. Spirits of Confection of Alkermes its Virtues.

It is an excellent comforter of the Spirits vital, natural, and ani­mal, in
weak and delicate per­sons, and against all trembling pensiveness, and sudden
qualms of the heart.

The Dose is one spoonful at one time.

#### 2.13. The Virtues of Spirit of Comfrey.

It hath all the virtues which Spirit of Clary hath, only it is of greater
efficacy in inward hurts, bruises and ruptures.

The Dose is one spoonful at one time.

#### 2.14. Extract of Ambergreece.

Take a drachm of Amber­greece, grind it very small on a Painters stone, then
put it in a boult-head, then take of the best Spirit of Wine, either Ca­nary
or Maliga-Sack, half a pound, of Spirit of Clary two [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=108) ounces, mingle
them well together, and pour of the Menstrua one pint to this proportion of
Am­ber, see them to digest in a gentle Balneo about 8 hours, shaking it
together 3 or 4 times, then take it out, and being cold, pour it forth, and
put almost as much more of the mixed spirit, digested as before in a gentle
heat by Balneo, then put it forth to the first extracted, and add half as much
more Spirits the third time, and digest it again, and then have you extracted
all the special part of the Amber, and leave nothing but a black dead earth of
no value.

Then take a pint of the spirit of what Herb you will use, and dissolve therein
1 pound of pure white sugar candy, or at the least 12 ounces, very finely
powdered and searced through a fine Searcer, for the speedier resolution
there­of. It is best to dissolve it cold; this resolution must be twice
fil­tered [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=109) through a thin
cap paper to make it very perfectly clear; then take 3 parts of this dulcified
Spirit, to one of your Extracts of Amber drawn with spirit of Wine, then shake
them well to­gether, and let them stand in a square glass very close stopped,
until it shall be perfectly clear, 1 dram of this Extraction of Am­ber will
serve to dulcifie and make fit 2 quarts of spirits of Mints or Clary, or the
like, and give it a most excellent tast and efficacious virtues.

#### 2.15. Several Experiments made of the Countess of Kents, or of Gascons
Powder, by a Professor of Physick.

1\. A Child aged about 5 years, troubled much with flegm, and drawing on (as
the Parents con­ceived) to his end, with 10 grains of this powder exhibited in
a spe­cifical vehicle to the proportion of 1 spoonful, about 7 of the clock
[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=109) at
night, with the like Dose exhi­bited the next morning, was with­in 3 days
space perfectly recove­red, and went abroad.

2\. A Child aged about fourteen years, being suddenly surprized with dangerous
Fits, and trembling of the heart, with 12 grains of this Powder exhibited in a
spoon­ful of Aqua Theriacalis, was that very day recovered.

3\. A Stationers Child aged a­bout five years being suddenly ta­ken so ill,
that the Parents feared the life of their Child, with ten grains of this
Powder exhibited in a spoonful of Cordial spirit, being laid down, and well
covered (we suspected it would prove to be the small Pox) became within 2 or 3
hours somewhat chearful: and with this medicine continued once a day, the Pox
broke forth, and the Child mended.

4\. A Boy aged about sixteen, being taken with sudden qualms [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=110) about his
stomach and heart, with ten grains of this Powder exhi­bited in a spoonful of
Doctor Mountfords water upon his fit, and the like quantity exhibited again
when he went to bed, was the next day recovered.

5\. A Child about three years old, being troubled with grievous torments and
gripings in the bel­ly, with wind, with 9 grains of this Powder, exhibited
with ten drops of special Oyl against the Cholick, in a spoonful of stomach
Water, was eased in few hours.

6\. A Child about 7 years old, being troubled with Convulsion-Fits, with ten
grains of this pow­der, mixed with spirit of Castor, in a few spoonfuls of
black Cher­ry water, annointing the two neck veins near the ears, with a few
drops of oyl of Amber and Cloves, was suddenly recovered of his Fit.

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=110) 7\. A
Gentlewoman near forty years old, being oppressed with crude and flatuous
humours, so that her friends thought her de­parting, was with twelve grains of
this powder, and two drops of a Cordial Oyl, exhibited in a spoonful of
Cordial water, being had to bed, within three days recovered, and followed her
Do­mestick business.

8\. A Youth about twenty years old, much oppressed with wind and crudities of
the stomach, with 12 grains of this powder, exhi­bited in 2 drops of
specifical Cho­lick oyl, as in the fifth experi­ment, with a Cordial water was
speedily recovered.

9\. A young Maid about Eigh­teen years old, troubled with fits of the Mother,
and Convulsive fits, with twelve grains of this powder given her in a few
spoon­fuls of Piony water, gathered and distilled in due season, with [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=111) a drop of oyl
of Cinnamon, and two of Amber mingled together being held upright before a
warm fire, within four hours recovered out of her fit, and went up to her
chamber (though her teeth were set in her head, and small appearance of life,
but that only her feet were warm, was disco­vered in her.)

10\. A Gentlewoman aged about fifty, being very much troubled with flatuous
and crude humours oppressing the stomach, with six­teen grains of Gascon
powder, and with 3 drops of oyl of Oranges, duly prepared, exhibited in an
ounce of Aqua Theriacalis, being well shaken and mingled together, being
exhibited at two several times, that is at night when she went to bed,
disposing for rest, and betimes the next morning, found much ease and comfort,
and gain­ed some quiet rest that night, and shortly recovered.

[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=111) 11\. A
young Woman aged about four and twenty, not without some suspicion of the
Plague, having a rumor long while arising on her groin, with 3 several Doses
of Gascons Powder, exhibited at 3 evenings when she disposed for rest; by 12
grains for every dose in a spoonful of Treacle water, drinking every morning a
spoon­ful of spirit of Saffron for those 3 days together, was perfectly
re­covered, and followed her dome­stick business.

These and many other Experi­ments have I with good success tried, and with
Gods blessing re­covered divers several Patients.

This Powder is good against small Pox, Measles, spotted or purple Fever,
exhibited in specifi­cal waters fit for their several diseases; It is good in
swoonings and passions of the heart, arising from malignant vapours, or old
causes, as also in the Plague or [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=112) Pestilent
Fevers; always obser­ving to keep the persons upright warm, and well covered
after their taking it.

The Dose of this powder in Children, is from eight to twelve grains, in
persons more aged, from twelve to fourteen grains, but exhibit the Dose twice
or thrice if need require. In the Plague you may use a greater quantity, with
such medicines as are prescribed in the Child-bea­rers Cabinet, and it will
not be amiss to mingle it with some Aqua Theriacalis.

#### 2.16. The Composition of the Oyl called Oleum Magistrale, said to be
in­vented by one named Aparithus, a Spaniard; being special good to cleanse
and consolidate wounds, especially in the Head.

Take a quart of the best White-wine you can get; of pure Oyl [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=112) of Olives
three pound, then put thereto these flowers and herbs fol­lowing: of the
flowers and leaves of Hypericon half a pound; of Carduus Benedictus, of
Valerian, of the leaf Sage, of each a quarter of a pound; if it be possible,
take the leaves and flowers of every one of these, then let them all steep 24
hours in the aforesaid Wine and Oyl, the next day boyl them in a pot well
nealed, or in a copper vessel over a soft fire, un­til such time as the Wine
be all consumed, stirring it always with a spattle: after you have thus done,
take it from the fire, and strain it, and put to the straining a pound and a
half of good Venice Turpentine, then boyl it again upon a soft fire the space
of a quarter of an hour, then put thereunto of Olibanum five oun­ces, of Myrrh
3 ounces, of Sanguis Draconis one ounce, and so let it boyl till the Incense
and Myrrh be [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=113) melted, then
take it off, and let it stand until it be cold, then put it into a glass
bottle, and set it 8 or 10 days in the Sun, and keep it for your use.

This Oyl, the older it is, the better it is, it must be applied to the Patient
wounded as hot as may be endured, first washing the wound with White-wine,
boyled with a handful of Incense to com­fort, and wiping it clean with a
linnen cloth before you dress it, which must be if it come by any bruisings or
bitings twice a day, that is about eight of the clock in the morning in
winter, and at summer about nine in the morn­ing, and about four in the
after­noon, but if they be green wounds, you shall not need to change it again
until the next day, neither need the Patient to observe any precise diet.

[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=113)

### 3\. ADDITIONS.

#### 3.1. A rare Searcloth, with the Virtues.

TAke of oyl Olive one pound and a half, red Lead one pound and a half, of
white Lead one pound, Castle-soap 4 ounces, put your oyl Olive in a Pipkin,
and put thereto your Oyl of Bays, and your Castle soap: seeth these over a
gentle fire of embers, till it be well mingled, and melted together, then
strew a little red Lead and White, being mingled together in powder, still
stirring it with a spatler of Wood, and so strew in more of your Lead by
little and little till all be in, stir­ring it still by the bottom to keep it
from burning, for an hour and half together, then make the fire [[Page
208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=114) somewhat
bigger, till their red­ness be turned into a gray colour, but you must not
leave stirring it till the matter be turned into a perfect black colour, as
pitch, then drop a little upon a wooden Trencher, and if it cleave not to the
Trencher, nor your Finger, it is enough; then take the long linnen clothes,
and dip them there­in, and make your Sear-cloth thereof: they will keep twenty
years; let your powder of your Lead be searsed very fine, and shred the soap
small.

#### 3.2. The Virtues of this Searcloth, are;

Being laid to the stomach, it doth provoke Appetite, and ta­keth away any pain
in the sto­mach; being laid to the belly it is a present remedy for the
Cho­lick; being laid to the back, it is a present Remedy for the Flux, and
running of the Reins, heat of the Kidneys, and weakness of the Back; it
helpeth all Swellings [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=114) and bruises,
taketh away aches, it breaketh Fellons and other Im­posthumes, and healeth
them, it draweth out any running Humour, and helpeth them without break­ing of
the skin, and being applied to the Fundament helpeth any disease there; it
helpeth all old sores, and will be made in six hours.

#### 3.3. For a Surfeit.

Take 3 pints of Muskadine, one handful of Rue, one handful of red Sage; boyl
these together 3 or 4 walmes, take a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, half an
ounce of Ginger, 2 or 3 corns of long Pepper, beat them all together, and boyl
them until the 3 pints come to a quart; strain it, and put in it a quarter of
an ounce of Mith­ridate, half an ounce of London-Treacle, a quarter of a pint
of strong Angelica water, all these being well mixed together, put them up in
a Glass.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=115) It is
good for one that hath sur­feited to take 3 or 4 spoonfuls, keeping them very
warm in bed, the same quantity taken is good a­gainst the Small-pox, or
Measles.

It is good against the wind, or pain in the stomach, taking one spoonful in
the morning, or any Infection.

#### 3.4. An excellent Receipt against a Cough of a Consumption.

Take a quarter of a pound of the best Honey, a quarter of a pint of Conduit-
water, boyl them as long as any white scum ari­seth, and take it off, then
take a quarter of a pound of the best blew Currans, put them on the fire in a
pint of fair water: boyl them until they be tender, then pour the water from
them, and bruise them through a hair Sive, and put that Juice, and Honey
together: add to it one ounce of the powder of Liquorish, one [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=115) ounce of the
powder of Annise seeds; mix all these together, and put them in a Gally-pot,
and when it is cold tye it up; the party troubled may take of it upon the
point of a knife morning or even­ing, as often as the Cough taketh them.

#### 3.5. Lucantelion's Balsom, admirable for Wounds, and many other things.

Take of Venice Turpentine a pound, oyl Olive three pints, yellow Wax half a
pound, of na­tural Balsome one ounce, Oyl of St. Johns wort one ounce, of red
Saunders powdered an ounce, six spoonfuls of Sack: cut the Wax and melt it on
the fire, and then let it catch the fire, take it off, put in the Turpentine
to it, having first washed the Venice Turpentine thrice with Damask Rose-
water, and having mingled your Sallet oyl with the Sack, put also the oyl to
them, and put [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=116) them all on
the fire, and stir it till it begin to boyl, for if it boyl much, it will run
over speedily, then suffer it to cool for a night, or more, until the water
and wine be sunk all to the bottom, then make some holes in the stuff, that
the water may run out of it, which being done, put it over the fire again,
putting to it the Balsom and the oyl of St. Johns wort, and when it is melted,
then put the Sanders to it: stir it well that it may incorporate, and when it
first begins to boyl, take it off the fire, and stir it the space of 2 hours,
till it be grown thick, then put it up, and keep it for your use as most
precious, for thirty or forty years, or more.

#### 3.6. The Virtues.

1\. It is good to heal any wound inward or outward, being squir­ted warm into
the inward wound; being applied to an out­ward wound with fine lint, or [[Page
213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=116) Linnen,
anointing also those parts thereabouts, it not only taketh away the pain, but
also keepeth it from any inflammation, and also draweth forth all broken
bones, or any other thing that might putrifie or fester it, so that the brains
or inwards, as the Liver, Guts, or heart be not troubled, it will heal it in 4
or 5 days dressing, so that nothing be applied thereunto.

2\. It also healeth any Burning and Scalding, and healeth also any bruise or
cut, being first an­nointed with the said Oyl, and a piece of linnen cloth or
lint dipt in the same, being warmed and laid unto the place, it will heal it
without any scar remaining.

3\. It helpeth the head-ach by anointing the Temples and Nostrils therewith.

5\. It is good against the Wind-Cholick, or stitch in the Side, applied
thereto warm with hot clothes, morning and evening [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=117) together a
quarter of an ounce.

5\. It helpeth the biting of a mad Dog, or any other Beast.

6\. It is good against the Plague, anointing only the Nostrils, and the Lips
therewith in the morning before you go forth.

7\. It also healeth a Fistula, or Ulcer, be it never so deep, in any part of
the body, being applied as aforesaid is directed for a Cut.

8\. It is good against Worms, or Canker, being used as in a Cut, but it will
require longer time to help them.

9\. It is good for one infected with the Plague, or Measles, so as it be
presently taken in warm Broth, the quantity of a quarter of an ounce 4
mornings together, and sweat upon it.

10\. It likewise helpeth Dige­stion, anointing the Navel and Stomach therewith
when the party goeth to bed, it will stanch any Blood of a green Wound, [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=117) put in a
plaister of lint on it, and tye it very hard.

11\. The quantity of a Nutmeg in Sack blood-warm, and sweat therein, it
bringeth forth all man­ner of clotted Blood, and takes away all Aches.

12\. It also healeth the rose Gout and Scurvy.

13\. It helpeth all pains in Wo­mens breasts, all chops or Wolf that cometh
with a bruise.

14\. It helpeth the Small-pox, being anointed therewith without any Scar.

15\. It helpeth all Sprains and Swellings, and indeed I cannot tell what comes
amiss unto it.

#### 3.7. A most certain and proved Medi­cine against all manner of
Pesti­lence and Plague, be it never so vehement.

Take an Onion, and cut it overthwart, then make a little [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=118) hole in either
piece, the which you shall fill with fine Treacle and set the pieces together
as they were before: after this, wrap them in a sine wet linnen cloth, putting
it to roast, and covered in the embers or ashes, and when it is roasted
enough, press out all the juice of it, and give the Pati­ent a spoonful, and
immediately he shall feel himself better, and shall without fail be healed.

#### 3.8. How to make the Ointment of Tobacco, Jobertus.

Take of green Tobacco-leaves two pound, of fresh Hogs grease diligently washt,
one pound, bruise the herbs, and infuse it a whole night in red Wine, and then
let it boyl with the Hogs grease with a gentle fire, until the wine be all
consumed: then strain it, and add to the ointment the juice of Tobacco one
pound, good and clear Rosin four ounces, [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=118) then boyl it
again till the juice be consumed, adding towards the end, of round Birth-wort-
roots in powder two ounces, new Wax four ounces, or so much as is sufficient
to make it into an Oint­ment.

#### 3.9. The Virtues of it are these.

It cures all Tumours, Apost­humes, Wounds, Ulcers, Gun-shot, Botches, Itch,
stinging with Net­tles, Bees, Wasps, Hornets, or Venemous Beasts, Wounds made
with poysoned Arrows, all burn­ings and scaldings, although it be with Oyl, or
lightning, and that without any scar; it doth help all nasty, rotten,
stinking, putrified Ulcers, although they be in the legs where the hu­mours be
ready to resort most in Fistula's; although the bone be afflicted, it will
scale it with­out any instrument, and bring up [[Page
218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=119) the flesh from
the bottom; your Face being anointed with it, it taketh away suddenly all
redness, pimples, Sun-burns: A Wound dressed with this Ointment, it will never
putrifie, it will cure a Wound when no tent can search it; it cures the Head-
ach, the Temples being anointed there­with; the stomach being anoin­ted with
it, no infirmity will harbour there, no not Impost­humes, or Consumption of
the Lungs, the belly being anointed therewith; it helpeth the Cho­lick, and
Iliack passions, the Worms (and what not) too tedi­ous here to relate: it
helpeth the Emeroids, or Piles, it is the best Ointment in the World for all
sorts of Gouts whatsoever, and there can nothing come nigh unto it.

#### 3.10. A very good Conserve for the help of a Consumption and Cough.

Take half a pound of blew [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=119) Raisins, the
blackest sort is the best, and stone them, and skin them, and two ounces of
white Sugar-candy, and two ounces of Oyl of sweet Almonds, and bruise them
well, and when they be well incorporated together, use it to eat morning,
noon, and night.

#### 3.11. A very special Drink against a Consumption.

Take of Colts-foot, Hysop, Scabious, and Maidenhair, of each a handful, and a
quarter of a pound of Figs, and cut them in two pieces, and a quarter of a
pound of Raisins, and stone them, and take ten Dates and stone them, and so
boyl them in four quarts of fair water, and after it hath boyled a little, put
into it half an ounce of Liquorish scraped and bruised, and so let it boyl
till one quart be boyled away, then take it off, and when it is cold, strain
it into a pot, and [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=120) drink half a
pint each morning at four of the clock, and so much after dinner, at four of
the clock.

#### 3.12. For Worms in Children.

Wormseed boyled in Beer or Ale, and then sweeten it with cla­rified Honey, and
let them drink it.

#### 3.13. How to drive away the Yellows of the Face that is caused by the
over-flowing of the Gall. Approved.

Take a great white Onion, and make a hole in the top of it, and then put into
it the quantity of a Nutmeg of good Treacle, and then stop the hole again with
the said piece that is cut out of it, but mingle the Treacle with Saffron
powdered; this being done, roast the Onion in hot [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=120) Embers, being
wrapped up in wet paper, and when it is well roasted, wring out the juice
thereof hard, and give the party this drink in the morning, and sweat an hour
after it, and so continue for three months toge­ther, and then let the party
take a gentle purge, & Fiat.

#### 3.14. An excellent Medicine for the Dropsie, made for Queen Elizabeth by
Doctor Adrian and Doctor Lacy. Proved.

Take Polypodium, Spikenard, Squat, Ginger, Marjoram, Galin­gal, Setwel, ana a
pennyweight Sena leaves and cods, so much as all the rest grosly beaten; put
them into a bag, and hang it in an earthen pot of two gallons of Ale, and
every four days cover the pot with new Barm, and drink no other drink for six
days, and this shall purge all ill humours out of the body, neither will it
let the blood putrifie, nor [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=121) flegm to have
domination, nor Choler to burn, nor melancholy to have exaltation, it doth
en­crease Blood, and helpeth all evil, it helpeth and purgeth Rheum, it
defendeth the stomach, it preser­veth the body, and ingendreth a good colour,
comforts the sight, and nourisheth the mind.

#### 3.15. For the Dropsie that swelleth.

Eat Water-cresses, and Raisins, use it often, and it will send down the
Disease into the legs and feet, and when it is there, take the green bark of
Elder in the Winter, and the crops in summer, and boil them well in fair water
and Oat­meal, to a Poultess, and apply it to the grief, and this will heal it.

[[Page 223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=121)

#### 3.16. The Celestial Water the best in the World for the Eyes.

  * Aqua Celidonia,
  * Aqua Euphrasia,
  * Aqua Fenicula, 
    * Of each a quarter of a pint.
  * Lapis Calaminaris,
  * Lapis Tutia, 
    * Of each. a drachm.

#### 3.17. An Excellent Water for one that is near, or in a Consumption.

Take Milk three pints, red Wine one pint, twenty four yolks of new laid Eggs,
beat them very well together, then add so much white bread as will drink up
the Wine, and put to it some Cowslip flowers, and distil them, and take a
spoonful first and last in broth made of a Chicken, or Mutton, and in one
month it will cure any Consumption.

[[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=122)

#### 3.18. For to stay vomiting presently.

Take a little Mastick, and  [...] it upon a hot coal, and set a Fun­nel over
it, and receive the furne into your mouth, and let it go in­to your stomach,
Et fiat.

#### 3.19. Doctor Turcables green Balsom.

Take in the month of May, Rosemary-crops, Wormwood, Balm and Rue, ana two
ounces, red Sage and Bay-buds, ana four ounces, Sheeps-suet twelve ounces,
beat all these very well together in a stone Mortar, till it be all as a
Salve, then put it into a clean Pipkin well stopt, and set it for eight days
in a cold place, then put it all in a clean brass Chafer, and add to it a
pound of sweet Sallet Oil, and as many of the said Herbs as aforesaid well
brui­sed, and let them boil over a soft fire very softly, the space of an
hour, and stir them all the time with a wooden Spatula, then take them from
the fire, and pre­sently [[Page
225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=122) put into it an
ounce of Spike Oil, and stir them together, then with a spoon take off the
oily sub­stance from the Herbs, and then strain it into a Gally-pot and keep
it very close stopt, and set it in a cool place, it will keep good two or
three years.

#### 3.20. The Vertues are these.

The virtue of the said Balm is, in all perfection good to cure all that is
here under-written, and the said oil is good to cure any wounds either inward
or out­ward, proved. Being inward squirted into the said wounds warm; and
outward, being appli­ed with fine lint or linnen, and anointing all the parts
therea­bouts.

1\. It doth not only take away the pain, but it doth also keep it from
inflammation, and draweth forth also all broken bones, or any thing else that
may putrifie or fester, if the Brains, Heart, [[Page
226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=123) Guts, Liver be
not touched, it will heal in four or five times dres­sing, if no other thing
be applied thereunto.

2\. It healeth any burning or scalding by fire or water, or by any other
means, it healeth any.

#### 3.21. A most excellent Powder, much used by a Person of Quality, lately
de­ceased, with the Virtues.

Take Pearl Magistrale prepa­red, Coral red and white, prepa­red Amber,
prepared Harts-horn, of each half an ounce, Contra Yarva one ounce; mingle
them well together, then take three ounces of the black claws of Crabs before
they be sodden, they must be taken in June or July, the Sun being in Cancer,
mingle all well together, then put to it four ounces of white sugar candy
powdered, and mingle with the sugar-candy, Ambergreece, Musk Citron-seed
skinned, ana ten grains; beat the seeds, Sugar­candy [[Page
227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=123) and
Ambergreece by them­selves, very fine in a stone mor­tar, all the rest must be
passed through a fine Searce: then make a strong gelly of Harts-horn be­ing
boiled with White-wine, and infuse therein Saffron powdered, two drams, and
with this Jelly perfume the powder, being all mixt into a paste, so make it up
into little balls, and set them in a warm Oven to dry, and then put them up to
your use, the closer they be kept the better.

#### 3.22. The Vertue of this powder is most excellent.

1\. For to bring out the Small-Pox, or if they be come out, take ten grains in
Dragon-water each three hours, for nine hours.

2\. For the Plague, take ten grains in Dragon-water each three hours, for nine
hours, and sweat and keep your self warm.

3\. For a Hectick, take for nineteen days together, six [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=124) grains every
morning in Borrage water.

4\. For a Consumption, in Agri­mony-water, take six grains for 14 days
together.

5\. For the Cough of the Lungs, six grains, in half Bettony, and half Hysop-
water, for fourteen days.

6\. For an Ague or Fever, for three days, every third day take seven grains
every three hours, for nine hours, in Carduus-wa­ter.

7\. For poison twelve grains boiled in a little Milk.

8\. For a Woman that is sick after Labour, take seven grains every three
hours, for nine hours in Agrimony water.

9\. There is no Unicorns horn comparable to it in contagious times: it is good
to take five grains every morning in a little Sack.

10\. For the passion of the [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=124) heart, and
Convulsion fits, seven grains in Borrage-water, and it is a great preserver of
health, working only as a Cordial, and you may safely take ten, twelve,
four­teen, or sixteen, or eighteen or twenty grains at once for a full Dose.

11\. And if it be a great Fever, Small-Pox, Plague, Poyson, or for a Woman in
Labour, put into every Dose three grains of Bezoar-Oriental.

#### 3.23. How to strengthen the Back, and to make one lusty.

Take half a pint of Malmsey, and a handful of the pith of an Ox back, but take
the pith out from the skin, then take four or five stalks of Artichoaks, and
take the pith out of them, but first cut the stalks into pieces so long as
your finger, and then parboil them well, and then put [[Page
230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=125) it to the
other things, and boil it gently to a Jelly, and when you have done so, let it
be cold, and then eat it upon the point of a knife morning and evening, and at
any time of the day, so much as you shall think fitting, and if you would have
it pleasant, make it sweet with white Sugar-candy, but not with Sugar.

#### 3.24. For one that cannot make his Water.

Take Thyme, and stop it in Wine-vinegar one night or more, then take of this
three spoonfuls blood-warm, after that you have eaten, at morning, noon, and
night.

#### 3.25. How to help a stinking Breath that cometh from the Stomach.

Take two handfuls of Cummin seeds, and beat them to powder, [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=125) and seeth it
in a pottle of White-wine until half be boiled away, and then give the party a
good draught thereof first and last, morning and evening, as hot as he can
suffer it, and in fifteen or sixteen days it will help.

#### 3.26. For the Sciatica or the Gout, my Lord of Sussex Medicine, called
Flesh-Unguetors.

Take of Rosin half a pound, of Perofin half a pound, of Virgins-Wax four
ounces, of Olibanum four ounces, of Mastick half an ounce, of sheeps tallow,
or of Harts-tallow two ounces, of Cam­phire three drams, and of Tur­pentine
three ounces

#### 3.27. The way to make it.

First, beat all your Gums afore­said, every one by themselves, then take your
Tallow and your Wax, and set them together on the fire, that done, put in your
[[Page 232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=126) Rosin,
then your Olibanum, and last of all your Mastick: and when all is relented
together over a soft fire of Coals, then strain it through a thin Canvas cloth
into a pottle of White-wine, and then let them all boil together again until
half the Wine be wasted and sod away, then take it from the fire, and let it
cool, then afterward when it is almost cold, anoint your hands with the oil of
sweet Almonds, and work it up in rowls like wax rowls, and in the time of the
working thereof, cast in your Camphire, beaten in fine powder by it self
alone: this observed, that before you put in your Cam­phire into the Mortar
for to be beaten into powder, you must always beat in the same Mortar two or
three Almonds, for else your Camphire will not be made into powder.

[[Page 233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=126)

#### 3.28. The ordering of the same Medicine.

First, you must spread it upon a fine linnen cloth, plaisterwise, and so lay
it upon every joynt where the pain is, but before the laying of your Plaister,
you must anoint all your Joynts with the oil of Roses, and the stuff of your
Plaister must be half an inch thick, and according unto the property of the
same, you must let it stick and cling where you lay it, for the space of 9 or
10 days together, notwithstanding it doth put you to some pain or itch in the
mean time, yet you must in any wise let it lie on still, for it will both draw
out the sinews by little small pimples, and also heal it again, and this one
plaister must serve during all the time of your disease without any manner of
renewing. Prob. of witness by my Lord of Suffolk.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=127)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=127)

### 4\. A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE ADDITIONS.

B.

  * LUcanelions Balsom, admirable for Wounds, and many other things pag. 211
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=128) The Vertues 212. 213. 214. 215
  * Dr. Turcables green Balsom, with its Vertue 224. 225. 226
  * How to strengthen the Back 22 [...]
  * How to help a stinking Breath that cometh from the stomach 230

C

  * An excellent Receipt against a Cough of a Consumption 210
  * A very good Conserve for the help of a Consumption and Cough 218
  * A special drink against a Consumpti­on 219
  * An excellent Water for one that is near, or in a Consumption 223

D

  * An excellent Medicine for the Drop­sie, made for Queen Elizabeth, by Doctor Adrian, and Doctor La­cy 221
  * For the Dropsie that swelleth 222

E

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=128)The Celestial Water in the World for The Eyes 223

G

  * For the Gout 231

L

  * How to make one Lusty 229

P

  * A most certain and proved Medi­cine against all manner of Pesti­lence and Plague, be it never so vehement 215
  * A most excellent Powder much used by a Person of Quality late de­ceased, with its virtues 226. 227. 228. 229

S

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=129)A rare Sear-cloth, with its virtues 207. 208
  * For a Surfeit 209
  * For the Sciatica or the Gout, my Lord of Sussex Medicine, called Flesh-Unguetors, the manner of making and ordering the same 231. 232. 233

T

  * How to make the Oointment of Tobac­co, Jobertus, with its Virtues 216. 217

U

  * For to stay Vomiting presently 224

W

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=129)For Worms in Children 220
  * For one that cannot make his Water 230

Y

  * How to drive away the Yellow of the Face, that is caused by the over­flowing of the Gall 220

FINIS.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=130)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=130)

A True Gentlewomans DELIGHT. Wherein is contain'd all manner of COOKERY.

  * Together with 
    * Preserving,
    * Conserving,
    * Drying, and Candying.

Very necessary for all Ladies and Gentlewomen.

Published by W. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-yard,
1687.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=131)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=131)

### To the Virtuous and Most Hopeful Gentlewoman, Mrs. Anne Pile, Eldest
Daughter of the Honourable Sir Francis Pile Baronet, De­ceased.

Most Accomplisht Lady,

THE many singular Favours which I have received, not only from your worthy
self, but also from your thrice noble pro­genitors, justly oblige me by all
the duties of gratitude, to tender a just acknowledgment: I wish the same
heart, that for many and just causes truly honours, you, had any present
worthy your accep­tance. Now shall it be your singu­lar goodness to patronage
this small Treatise, which (if I mistake not) carries with it two parts,
Delight, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=132)
and Utility. I doubt not then, but that it will find a general accep­tance
among all those who are any way the least lovers of such plea­sing and all
delightful studies. I intend not to paraphrase upon its worth, its use, and
singular profit, which abundantly speaks it second unto none that hath been
publish­ed of the like nature: so hoping you will accordingly esteem of it, I
beg pardon for my boldness, and rest ever,

A true and faithful Honourer of Your transparent Virtues W. J.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=132)

### To the READER.

Friendly Reader,

HERE thou hast a small Treatise, entituled A True Gentlewomans De­light,
presented to thy view; be so courteous as to read before thou censure it. If
then the ef­fect be answerable to its name, I shall be right glad: If here be
any Error, it will be no error, but a singular token of thy ex­emplar humanity
to pass it by, and sign it with thy pardon, for which I engage my self,

Thine on the like occasion, W. L.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=133)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=133)

### A Table of the Contents.

A

  * TO make Apple Cream p. 3
  * To fry Apple Pies 16
  * To make an Artichoak-Pie 18
  * To make Angellets 21
  * To preserve Apricocks 44. 57
  * To make Apricock Cakes 44
  * To candy Apricocks 50
  * To make Cakes of Almonds 60
  * To preserve Angelica roots 68
  * To make Almond Butter 75
  * To make flesh of Apricocks 76
  * Lady of Arundels Manchet 117

B

  * To bake Beef like red Deer 19
  * To make fresh Broth 30
  * To pickle Broom buds 35
  * To make Buket-bread 49
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=134) To make paste of Barberries, or English Currans 52
  * How to make Pap of Barly 59
  * A Broth to drink 71. 73
  * A Broth to eat on fasting days ib.
  * How to stew Beef 75
  * How to boil Brawn 82
  * To boil a Gammon of Bacon ib.
  * To bake a Gammon of Bacon 95
  * To bake Fillets of Beef, &c, 94
  * How to souce Brawn 106
  * How to make Bonny Clutter 114
  * How to make drawn Butter 117

C

  * How to make a Crystal Jelly 2
  * How to make clouted Cream 4
  * How to make Quince Cream 5
  * How to make a fresh Cheese ib.
  * How to make Codling Cream 6
  * How to make Cheese-Cakes 9
  * How to make slipcoat Cheese 11
  * How to make Cheese-loaves 12
  * How to make Curd-Cakes 16
  * How to make a Chicken Pie 18
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=134) A good way to stew Chickens 31
  * How to pickle Cucumbers 33
  * To do Clove-gilli flowers up for Sallet­ting all the year 34
  * How to preserve Currans 41
  * How to make a Calves-foot Pie 66
  * To boil a Capon with Brewis 69
  * How to make a Spice Cake 70
  * How to boil a Chicken, &c. 72
  * To make a Caudle 74
  * To dry Cherries 79
  * To boil a Capon in white broth 81
  * To boil Chickens and Sorrel-sops 85
  * To stew Calves-feet 88
  * To stew cold Chickens 90
  * To make paste for a Custard 91
  * To bake Calves-feet 94. 123
  * To bake a Chicken Pie 96. 119
  * To fry a Chicken 104. 105
  * To make a tart of Cherries 112
  * To boil Cream 116
  * A Calves-head Pie for supper 124
  * A Frigasie of Chickens 132
  * To make a Cake 133
  * To souce a Calves-head 137

D

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=135)How to make a made Dish 15
  * How to make a forced Dish of any cold meat 26
  * How to make a forced Dish of a leg of Mutton or Lamb 27
  * How to boil a Duck 28. 139
  * How to preserve white Damsons 45
  * How to preserve Damsons 7. 57
  * How to make fine Diet-bread 56
  * How to boil a Duck with turnips 84

E

  * How to make Essings 65
  * How to souce Eels 107
  * How to souce an Eel 136

F

  * How to make a white Fool 7
  * How to make a Fool 8
  * How to make Furmenty 17
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=135) How to Candy all kind of Fruitrage, as Oranges, &c. 64
  * How to Candy all kind of Flowers, ib.
  * How to boil Flownders, &c. 76
  * How to boil divers kind of Fish 86
  * To bake a Florentine 98
  * To make Fritters 105
  * To marble Fish 110

G

  * To make a Goosberry Fool 7
  * To make a Goosberry Custard 8
  * To make Grout 36
  * To make Goosberry Tarts 40
  * To preserve Goosberries 42
  * To make Goosberry Cakes 43
  * To do Goosberries like Hops ib.
  * To preserve Grapes 47
  * To preserve Grapes to look clear and green 50
  * To make paste of Goosberries 52
  * To souce a Carp or Gurnet 70

H

  * To bake a Hare 95
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=136) To roast a Hare 99
  * To make a Tart of Hips 113
  * An Artichoak Pie 122

I

  * To make an excellent Jelly 1
  * To make a Jelly of Marmalet 37
  * To make a Junket 114

K

  * A Florentine of Kidneys 118

L

  * To make Leach 11
  * To make yellow Leach ib.
  * To fry a Coast of Lamb 28
  * To make Cakes of Lemons 48
  * To candy Lemons and Oranges 59
  * To make white Lemon Cakes 61
  * A Lamb Pye 120
  * A Lark Pye 125
  * A Frigasie of Lamb 131

M

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=136)To make Sauce for a Shoulder of Mut­ton 120
  * To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Thyme 20
  * To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters ib.
  * To boil a Leg of Mutton 32
  * To preserve Medlers 41
  * To make Makarooms 44
  * To preserve Mulberrries 45
  * To boil a Mallard, &c. 84
  * To stew a Mallard 88
  * To roast a Shoulder of Mutton 100
  * To roast a Leg of Mutton 101
  * To roast a Neck of Mutton 102
  * To roast a Chine of Mutton ib.
  * To roast a Gigget of Mutton 104
  * To make a Tart of Medlers 112
  * To scald Milk after the Western fa­shion 113
  * To harsh a Shoulder of Mutton 133
  * To make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes 134

N

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=137)To make broth for a Neats-tongue 70
  * To roast a Neats-tongue 100
  * A hot Neats-tongue for supper 127
  * A cold Neats-tongue Pye ib.

O

  * To pickle Oysters 36
  * How to make paste of Oranges and of Lemons 52
  * How to preserve Oranges 78
  * An Oyster Pie 122

P

  * How to make a Sack Posset 10
  * How to make black Puddings 22
  * How to make white Puddings ib.
  * How to make Almond Pudding 23
  * How to make a Pudding to bake 24
  * How to make a boil'd Pudding ib.
  * How to make a Cream Pudding to be boiled 25
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=137) How to pickle Purslain 34
  * How to make a Jelly of Pippins 38
  * To preserve Pippins white 46
  * To make Paste-Royal in Spice 53
  * To Candy Pears, Plumbs, &c. 54
  * To make Paste-Royal white, &c. 55
  * How to preserve Pomecitrons 62
  * How to make a very good Pye 67
  * How to make a fine Pudding 71
  * How to make a Ponado 74
  * How to souce a young Pig 76
  * How to dry Peaches 79
  * To boil a Pike in white broth 85
  * To stew a Pullen or Capon 90
  * To make Paste for a Pasty of Venison ib.
  * To make Paste for a Pye to keep long 91
  * To make Paste for buttered Loaves, 92
  * To make Paste for Dumplings ib.
  * To make Puff-Paste 93. 129
  * To make an Italian Pudding 97
  * To roast a Pig with a Pudding in the belly 101
  * To souce a Pig 106
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=138) To make a Tart of Green Pease 11 [...]
  * To make a Pippin Tart 113
  * To make a Pudding in haste 11 [...]
  * To make a Pudding in a Dish 11 [...]
  * To boil Pigeons 11 [...]
  * A Pork Pye 11 [...]
  * A Potato Pye for Supper 12 [...]
  * Pigeon or Rabbet Pye ib.
  * To make a Pudding 13 [...]

Q

  * To keep Quinces all the year 32
  * To preserve white Quinces 40
  * To make Quince-Cakes 46
  * To preserve Quinces red 48
  * To make flesh of Quinces 77
  * To bake Quinces or Wardens, &c. 95

R

  * To preserve Rasberries 40
  * To Candy Ringus Roots 63
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=138) To boil a Rabbet 83 139
  * To stew a Rabbet 89 139
  * To make a Tart of Rice 111
  * A Frigasie of Rabbets 132

S

  * To stew Sausages 28
  * To make Sugar-Cakes 66
  * To make Simbals 68
  * To make a Sallet of all manner of Herbs 87
  * To stew Steaks between two Dishes ib.
  * To stew Smelts or Flounders 89
  * To bake a Steak Pye 97
  * To make a Tart of Strawberries 112
  * A Skerry Pye 124

T

  * To make a Tansie 13
  * To make black Tart stuff 14
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=139) To make a yellow Tart stuff ib.
  * To make gallendine sauce for a Turkie 31
  * To stew Toruts 88
  * To bake a Turkie 90
  * To fry Tongues 105
  * To souce a Tench or Barbel 108

U

  * To make Cakes of Violets 48
  * To make Oil of Violets 62
  * To boil Veal 80
  * To bake chucks of Veal 96
  * To roast a Breast of Veal 99
  * To roast a Haunch of Venison 102
  * To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal 103
  * To souce a Breast of Veal 108
  * To souce a Fillet of Veal 109
  * To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison ib.
  * A Frigasie of Veil 131

W

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=139)To make a White-Pot 26. 115
  * To make White-broth with a Capon 29
  * To preserve green Walnuts 39
  * To make a Tart of Wardens III

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=140)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=140)

### 1\. A TRUE GENTLE WOMANS DELIGHT.

#### 1.1. To make an excellent Jelly.

TAKE three gallons of fair water, boil in it a knuckle of veal, and two Calves
feet slit in two with all the fat clear taken from between the claws, so let
them boil to a very tender jelly, keeping it clean scummed, and the edges of
the pot always wi­ped with a clean cloth, that none of the scum may boil in;
then strain it from the meat and let it stand all night, the next morning take
away the top, and the bot­tom, and take to every quart of this jelly, half a
pint of Sherry-Sack, half an ounce of Cinna­mon, and as much sugar as will
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=141) season
it, six whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these to­gether, then boil
it half an hour, and let it run through your jelly bag.

#### 1.2. To make a Crystal Jelly.

Take two Calves feet, slice them and lay them in fair spring water with a
knuckle of Veal, shift it in half a dozen waters, take out the fat betwixt the
claws, but do not break the bones, for if you do, the marrow of the bones will
strain the jelly, when they are soft, and pickt very clean, boil them very
tender in spring water; when they be boil­ed tender, take them up, and use
them at your pleasure to eat, let the broth stand in an earthen Pot or Pipkin,
till it be cold, then take away the bottom and the top, and put the clear into
a fair Pipkin, put into it half a pound of fair Sugar-candy, or other Sugar,
three drops of Oyl of Nut­meg, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=141) 3 drops of Oil
of Mace, and a grain of Musk, and so let it boil leisurely a quarter of an
hour, then let it run through a jelly-bag into a Gally-pot, when it is cold
you may serve it in little careless lumps being taken out with a childs spoon,
and this is the best way to make your Cry­stal-jelly.

#### 1.3. To make Apple-Cream at any time.

Take twelve Pippins, pare and slit them, then put them in a Skil­let, and some
Claret-wine, and a race of Ginger shred thin, and a little Lemon-peel cut
small, and a little Sugar. Let all these stand together till they be soft,
then take them off and put them in a Dish till they be cold, then take a quart
of Cream, boil it with a lit­tle Nutmeg a while, then put in as much of the
Apple stuff, to make it of what thickness you please, and so serve it up.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=142)

#### 1.4. To make a Trifle Cream.

Take some Cream and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, add Lemon-peel a little, then
take it off, cool it a little, and season it with a lit­tle Rose-water and
Sugar to your taste: let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put in
a little Runnet to make it come, then it is fit to eat.

#### 1.5. To make Clouted Cream.

Take 3 gallons of new Milk, set it on the fire till it boileth, make a hole in
the middle of the scum of the Milk, then take a pottle or 3 pints of very good
Cream, put it into the hole you made in the middle of the Milk, as it boileth,
and let it boil toge­ther half an hour, then put it in­to 3 or 4 Milk-pans, so
let it stand two days, if the weather be not too hot, then take it up in
clouts with a scummer, or a slice, and put it in that which you will serve it
in, if you like it seasoned, you [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=142) may put some
Rose-water be­tween every clout as you lay one upon another with your slice in
the Dish you mean to serve it in.

#### 1.6. To make Quince Cream.

Take the Quinces, and put them into boiling water unpared, then let them boil
very fast uncovered that they may not colour, and when they are very tender,
take them off and peel them, and beat the pap very small with Sugar, and then
take raw Cream, and mix with it, till it be of fit thick­ness to eat like a
Cream, but if you boil the Cream with a stick of Cinnamon, I think it the
bet­ter, it must stand till it be cold be­fore you put it to the Quinces.

#### 1.7. To make a fresh Cheese.

Take a pint of fresh Cream, set it on the fire, then take the white of six
Eggs, beat them very well, and wring in the juice of a good Lemon to the
whites, when the Cream seeths up, put in the [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=143) whites, and stir
it about till it be turned, and then take it off, and put it into the Cheese-
cloth, and let the whey be drawn from it, then take the curd, and pound it in
a stone-Mortar with a little Rose-water and Sugar, and put it in an earthen
Cullender, and so let it stand till you send it to the Table, then put it into
a dish, put a little sweet Cream to it, and so serve it in.

#### 1.8. To make a Codling Cream.

After your Codlings be through­ly cooled and yielded, put them into a silver
dish, and fill the dish almost half with Rose-water, and half a pound of
Sugar, boil all these liquors together until half be consumed, and keep it
stirring till it be ready, then fill up your dish with sweet Cream, and stir
it till it be well mingled, and when it hath boiled round about the dish, take
it up, sweeten it with Sugar, and serve it cold.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=143)

#### 1.9. How to make a Goosberry Fool.

Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean wa­ter, and boil
them till they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is, to the
value of a quart, take six yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rose-water, and
before you put in your Eggs, season it well with Sugar then strain your Eggs
and let them boil a little while, then take it up, put it in a broad dish, and
let it stand till it be cold, thus it must be eaten.

#### 1.10. How to make a white Fool.

Take a quart of Cream, and set it over the fire, and boil it with whole
Cinnamon, and sliced Nut­meg, and Sugar, then when it is al­most ready, take
the white of six Eggs well beaten with Rose-water, and scum off the froth from
them, and put it into the Cream, and boil it together a pretty while, then
season it, and take the whole spice out of it, and put it up in a [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=144) broad dish, and
when it is cold, then it must be eaten.

#### 1.11. To make a Goosberry Custard.

Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them till they be soft, then take
them out, and let them stand and cool, and then drain them, draw them with
your hand through a Canvas strainer, then put in a little Rose-water, Sugar,
and three whites, and stir them all together, put them in a Skillet, and stir
them apace, else they will burn, let them stand and cool a little while; take
them off, and put them in a glass.

#### 1.12. To make a Fool.

Take two quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boil, then take the
yolks of 12 Eggs, and beat them well with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of cold Cream;
before you put the Eggs into the hot Cream, take 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the Cream
out of the Skillet, and put into the Eggs, and stir it together, and then
[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=144) strain
the Eggs into the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring it all the time to keep it
from burning; then set it on the fire, and let it boyl a lit­tle while, but
keep it still stirring for fear of burning, then take it off and let it stand
and cool, then take 2 or 3 spoonfuls of Sack, and put it in the dish, and some
4 or 5 sippets, and put them in the dish, set the dish and sippets a drying,
and when they be dry, that they hang to the dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour
it in the dish soft­ly, because the sippets shall not rise up, this will make
three dishes: when it is cold, it is fit to be eaten.

#### 1.13. To make Cheese-cakes.

For the crust, take half a pint of flower, and 4 spoonfuls of cold water, and
3 parts of a quarter of a pound of Butter, beat and knead these together, and
put the paste asunder several times, then roul it square, and turn it over,
then take a pint of Cream, and 7 Eggs, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=145) and a quarter
of a pound of Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Cur­rans plumpt before you
put them in, and a whole Nutmeg grated on a knife, and some Pepper beaten, but
not too much, it must be gently boyled and stirred as you do butter'd Eggs,
the stuff must be cold, and then put in the Cof­fin, and so bake it.

#### 1.14. To make a Sack-Posset.

Take two quarts of pure good Cream, a quarter of a pound of the best Almonds,
stamp them in the Cream, and boyl Amber and Musk therein, then take a pint of
Sack in a Bason, and set it on a Chafing-dish till it be blood-warm, then take
the yolks of 12 Eggs, with 4 whites, and beat them very well together, and so
put the Eggs in­to the Sack, and make it good and hot, let the Cream cool a
little before you put it into the Sack, then stir all together over the coals,
till it be as thick as you [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=145) would have it,
if you take some Amber and Musk, and grind it small with Sugar, and strew it
on the top of the posset, it will give it a most delicate and pleasant tast.

#### 1.15. To make Leach.

Make your jelly for your Leach with Calves-feet, as you do your ordinary
jelly, but a little stiffer, and when it is cold take off the top and bottom,
and set it over the fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar, then take your
Turnsels, being well steept in Sack, and crush it and so strain it in your
Leach, and let it boyl to such a thickness, that when it is cold you may slice
it.

#### 1.16. To make yellow Leach.

Your yellow Leach is just the same, but instead of Turnsels, you must colour
it with Saffron, and when it is boyled enough, then put in your Saffron, and
not be­fore, it must not boyl in it.

#### 1.17. To make a slipcoat-Cheese.

Take five quarts of new Milk [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=146) from the Cow,
and 1 quart of water and 1 spoonful of Runnet, and stir it together, and let
it stand till it doth come, then lay your Cheese-cloth into the vate, and take
up your curd as fast as you can, with­out breaking, and put it to your Vate,
and let the whey soak out it self, when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth
on the top of it and 1 pound weight for one hour, then lay 2 pound weight for
an hour more, then turn him, when he hath stood 2 hours, lay three pound on
him for an hour more, then take him out of the Vate, and let him lie 2 or 3
hours, and then salt him on both sides, when he is salt enough, take a clean
cloth and wipe him dry, then let him lie a day or a night then put Nettles
under the upon him, and change them once a day, the Cheese will come to his
eating in 8 or 9 days.

#### 1.18. To make Cheese-Loaves.

Take the curds of a tender, new-milk [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=146) Cheese, and let
them be well pressed from the Whey, and then break them as small as you can
possible, then take crumbs of Man­chet and yolks of Eggs, with half the whites
and some sweet Cream, and a little fine flower, mingle all these together and
make a paste of it, but not too stiff, then make them into little Loaves, and
bake them, when they be baked, cut off the tops, and butter them, with Sugar,
Nutmeg and melted Butter, and put it in with a spoon, and stir it altogether,
then lay on all the tops, and sear them with scraped Sugar.

#### 1.19. How to make a very good Tansie.

Take 15 Eggs, & 6 of the whites, beat them very well; then put in some Sugar,
and a little Sack, beat them again and put about a pint or a little more of
Cream, then beat them again, then put in the juice of Spinage or of Primrose-
leaves to make it green, then put in some more Sugar, if it be not [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=147) sweet enough,
then beat it again a little, and so let it stand till you fry it, when the
first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet But­ter, it must be
stirred and fry­ed very tender, when it is fryed enough, then put it in a
dish, and strew some Sugar upon it, and serve it in.

#### 1.20. To make black Tart stuff.

To a dozen pound of Prunes take half a dozen of Maligo-Rai­sins, wash and pick
them clean, and put them into a pot of water, set them over the fire till all
these are like pulp, and stir them often lest they burn to, them take them
off, and let them be rub­bed through a hair Sive hard with your hands, by
little and lit­tle, till all be through, then season them to your taste with
searced Ginger.

#### 1.21. To make yellow Tart stuff.

Take 24 Eggs, & beat them with salt together, and put into it a quart [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=147) of seething
Milk, stirring it until it caudles, then take it off, and put it into a
napkin, hanging it up till all the whey be run through, when it is cold take
it and grind it in a stone-Mortar with Sack and Sugar to your taste, and
other­wise to make it look white, leave the yolks, and instead of Sack put in
Rose-water.

#### 1.22. To make a made Dish.

Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, beat them small, and in the beating of
them put in a lit­tle Rose-water to keep them from Oyling, strain them into
Cream, then take Artichoak bottoms, and Marrow, and boyl the redness of the
Marrow out, then take a quart of Cream, & boyl it with Dates, Rose-water and
Sugar, & when it is boy­led to a convenient thickness, take it off, and take
your Artichoaks and pare off the leaves and lay them into a dish, and some
Mar­row upon them, then pour some [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=148) Cream upon
them, then set it on coals till you serve it in.

#### 1.23. A Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton.

Take a few Oysters, and some sweet herbs, and an Onion, and a pint of White-
wine, and a little beaten Nutmeg, a little Salt and a large Mace, a little
Lemon pilled, and a little Sugar, a little leaker posset, if you have no
Oysters take Capers in the room of them, and some gravy of the Mutton.

#### 1.24. To fry Apple Pies.

Take Apples and pare them, and chop them very small, beat in a little
Cinnamon, a little Ginger, some Sugar and a little Rose-water, take your
paste, roul it thin, and make them up as big pasties as you please, to hold a
spoonful or a little less of your Apples, and so fry them with butter not too
hasty, lest they be burned.

#### 1.25. To make Curd Cakes.

Take a pint of Curd, four Eggs, take out two of the whites, put in [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=148) some Sugar, a
little Nutmeg, and a little flower, stir them well to­gether, and drop them
in, and fry them with a little butter.

#### 1.26. To make Furmenty.

Take a quart of sweet Cream, 2 or 3 sprigs of Mace, and a Nut­meg cut in half,
put it into your Cream, so let it boyl, then take your French-Barley or Rice,
being first washed clean in fair water three times and picked clean, then boyl
it in sweet Milk till it be tender, then put it into your Cream, and boyl it
well, and when it hath boyled a good while, take the yolks of 6 or seven Eggs,
beat them very well, to thicken on a soft fire boyl it, and stir it, for it
will quickly burn, when you think it is boyled enough sweeten it to your tast,
and so serve it in with Rose-water and Musk-sugar, in the same manner you make
it with Wheat.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=149)

#### 1.27. To make an Artichoak Pye.

Take the bottom of six Arti­choaks, being boyled very tender, put them in a
dish, and put some Vinegar over them, season them with Ginger, and Sugar, and
a little Mace whole, putting them into a Pye, and when you lay them in, lay
some Marrow and Dates sliced in, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom,
with good store o [...] Butter, so close the Pie, when it is half baked take a
dish of Sack, being boyled first with Sugar, and a Pill of Orange, put in into
your Pie, and set it in the Oven again till you use it.

#### 1.28. To make a Chicken Pie.

Make your paste with good store of Butter and yolks of Eggs and Su­gar, then
take six small Chickens, taking out the breast-bone, & trus­sing them round,
take 2 Nutmegs and a good quantity of Cinamon, & cut it in little pieces, take
2 yolks of Eggs, and beat them with six [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=149) spoonfuls of
Verjuice, then take your juice and Verjuice, & a little salt, stir them well
together, take a good deal of Butter, and wet it in the Verjuice, and put it
in the bel­lies of the Chickens, so lay them in the Pie with Butter under
them, then take half a pound of Currans washed and dried, so lay them on the
top of the Chickens, with a piece of Marrow, Barber­ries, Grapes, and good
store of But­ter and Sugar, as will season it, a little before you draw out
your Pie, put in Verjuice and Sugar, boyled together.

#### 1.29. To bake Beef like red Deer.

Take a pound of Beef and slice it thin, and half a pint of good wine Vinegar,
some 3 Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, 3 Nutmegs, pound them all together;
Pepper and Salt, according to your discretion, and a little Sugar, mix these
together, take a pound and a half of Suet, shred and beat it small in a
Mortar, [[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=150)
then lay a row of Suet, a row of Beef, strow your spices between every lane,
then your Vinegar, so do till you have laid in all, then make it up, but first
beat it close with a rowling pin, then press it a day before you put it in
your paste.

#### 1.30. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Thyme.

Draw your Shoulder of Mutton, and when it is half roasted save the gravy, and
cut a good deal of the inside of it, and mince it gross, and boyl it in a dish
with the gravy, and Thyme, Clarret-wine, and sliced Nutmeg, and when your
shoulder is roasted, lay it in the dish with sliced Lemon, but remember to
scotch your Mutton in roasting, as you do when you boyl it.

#### 1.31. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton▪ with Oysters.

When you open the Oysters, save the liquor, then season them with Pepper, and
a little Cloves, and Mace, and herbs finely chopped, and [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=150) the yolks of 2
or 3 Eggs chopped small and some Currans parboyled a little, then stuff your
Shoulder of Mutton thick with your Oysters, then season it and lay it to the
fire and roast it, then take the rest of your Oysters, & boyl them with a
little White-wine, and some But­ter, this is sauce for your shoulder of
Mutton, when your Oysters are opened, you may parboyl them in their own
liquor, then take them out and season them.

#### 1.32. To make Angellets.

Take a quart of new Milk and a pint of Cream, and put them toge­ther with a
little Runnet, when it is come well take it up with a spoon, & put it into the
Vate soft­ly and let it stand 2 days till it is pretty stiff, then slip it out
and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt enough, set
it a draying, and wipe them, and with­in a quarter of a year they will be
ready to eat.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=151)

#### 1.33. To make black Puddings.

Take your blood when it is warm, put in some salt, and when it is throughly
cold, put in your groats well pickt, and let it stand soaking a night, put in
the herbs which must be Rosemary, large Savory, Pennyroyal, Thyme, and Fennel,
then make it soft with putting of good Cream hot until the blood look pale;
then beat 4 or 5 Eggs, whites and all, and min­gle it, then season it with
Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Fennelseeds, then put good store of Beef-suet in your
stuff, and mince your fat not too small.

#### 1.34. To make white Puddings.

After the Humbles be very tender boyled, take some of the lights with the
hearts, and all the flesh and fat about them, pricking from them all the
sinews and skin, then chop the meat small as can be, then put to it a little
of the Liver v [...]ry finely searced, some [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=151) grated bread
searced, four or five yolks of Eggs, a pint of very good Cream, a spoonful or
two of Sack, a little Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves and Mace, a little Nutmeg, a few
Carraway-seeds, a little Rose-wa­ter mingled with a god deal of swines fat, a
little salt, roul it in rouls two hours before you go about it, let the fat
side of the skin be turned and steeped in Rose-wa­ter till you fill them.

#### 1.35. To make Almond Puddings.

Take a pound of Almonds blan­ched, and beat them very small with a little
Rose-water, boyl good Milk with a flake of Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg;
when it is boyled, take it clean from the spice, then take the quantity of a
penny loaf, grate it, and searce it through a Cullender, and then put it into
the Milk, and let it stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the Al­monds,
and 5 or 6 yolks of Eggs, and a little Salt & Sugar, what you [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=152) think fit, and
good store of Beef-suet, and marrow very finely shred.

#### 1.36. To make a Pudding to bake.

Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it in a quart of Cream, with a little Rose-
water, & break it very small; take 3 ounces of Jordan Almonds blanch'd, and
beaten small with a little Sugar, put in some 8 Eggs beaten, a Marrow-bone,
and 2 or 3 Pippins sliced thin, or any way, mingle these together, and put in
a little Ambergreece, if you please.

#### 1.37. To make a boyled Pudding.

Take a pint of Cream, or Milk, boyl it with a stick of Cinnamon a little
while, and take it off, & let it stand till it be cold, put in 6 Eggs, take
out 3 whites, beat your Eggs a little before you put them into the Milk, then
stir them together, then take a penny Roul, and slice it very thin, and let it
lie and soak, and then bray it very small, then put in some Sugar, and butter
your cloth before you put it in, it will [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=152) take but a
little while seething, and when you take it up, melt a little fresh Butter,
and a little Sack and Sugar, beat all these together and put it into the dish
with your Pud­ding to be served in.

#### 1.38. To make a Cream Pudding to be boyled.

Take a pint and a half of thick Cream, and boyl it with Mace, Gin­ger, and
Nutmeg quartered, then put to it 8 Eggs, with four whites beaten, and Almonds
blanch'd a pound, and strained in with the Cream, a little Rose-water, and
su­gar, and a spoonful of flower searced very fine, then take a thick napkin,
wet it, and rub it with flower, and tie the pudding up in it, boyl it where
Mutton is boyled, or in the Beef-pot; re­member to take out the whole spice
out of the Cream when it is boyled; the sauce for this Pudding is a little
Sack, Sugar, and a pretty piece of butter; you must blanch [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=153) some Almonds,
when they are blanched, cut every Almond in 3 or 4 pieces the long way, and
stick them up an end upon the Pudding very thick.

#### 1.39. To make a White-pot.

Take a pint and a half of Cream, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, a little Rose-
water, a few Dates sli­ced, a few Raisins of the Sun, six or 7 Eggs, and a
little large Mace, a sliced Pippin, or Lemon, cut sip­pet fashion for your
dishes you bake in, and dip them in Sack, or Rose-water.

#### 1.40. To make a forced dish of any cold Meat.

Take any cold meat and shred it small a little Cloves and Mace, and Nutmeg,
and 2 yolks of Eggs, a spoonful or two of Rose-water, a little grated bread, a
little Beef-suet shred small, make it up in Balls, or any fashion yo [...]
please, and boyl them in tried suet be­tween two earthen Dishes, your [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=153) suet must boyl
before you put in your meat, for sauce a little Butter, Verjuice, and Sugar.

#### 1.41. To make a forced dish of a Leg of Mutton or Lamb.

Take a Leg of Mutton or Lamb cut out the flesh, and take heed you break not
the skin of it, then parboyl it, and mince it with a little Beef-suet, put
into it a little sweet Herbs shred, 3 or 4 Dates sliced, a little beaten
Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mace, a few Currans, a little Sugar, a little Verjuice, 3
or 4 Eggs, mix them together, and put them in the skin, and set it in a dish
and bake it.

#### 1.42. To boyl a Calves-Head with Oysters.

Take the head, and boyl it with water and salt, a little White-wine, or
Verjuice, and when it is almost enough, then cut some Oysters, and mingle them
together, and a blade or two of Mace, a little Pepper, and Salt, and a little
liquor of the Oysters, then put it together, and [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=154) put it to the
Calves-head, and the largest Oysters upon it, & a slit Le­mon, and Barberries,
so serve it in.

#### 1.43. To fry a Coast of Lamb.

Take a Coast of Lamb, and par­boyl it, take out all the bones as near as you
can, and take 4 or 5 yolks of Eggs beaten, a little Thyme and sweet Marjoram,
and Parsly minced very small, and beat it with the Eggs, and cut your Lamb
into square pieces, and dip them into the Eggs and Herbs, and fry them with
butter, then take a little butter, White-wine and Sugar for sauce.

#### 1.44. To stew Sausages.

Boyl them in fair Water and Salt a little, for sauce boyl some Cur­rans alone,
when they be almost tender, then pour out the water, and put in a little
White-wine, Butter and Sugar.

#### 1.45. To boyl Ducks.

When they be half boyled, take a quart of the liquor and strain it, [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=154) and put a quart
of White-wine, and some whole Mace, Cloves, and Nut­megs sliced, and Cinnamon,
and a few Onions shred, a bundle of sweet Herbs, a few Capers, and a little
Camphire, when it is boyled, put some Sugar to season it withal.

#### 1.46. To make White-broth with a Capon.

Truss your Capons, and boyl them in fair water, and when they are half boyled,
take out 3 pints of the liquor, and put it into a quart of Sack, and as much
White-wine, and slice 2 ounces of Dates, half or quarterwise, as you please, a
little whole Mace, Cloves and Cinnamon, a Nutmeg sliced, of each a little
quantity, boyl the broth in a Pipkin by it self, until the Dates begin to be
tender, then put in the Marrow of two bones, and let it boyl a little, not too
much, then when your Ca­pons be near ready, break twenty Eggs, save the yolks
from the whites, and beat the yolks until [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=155) you may take up
a spoonful, and it will not run beside the spoon, then you must put a little
cold broth to him, and so strain them through a cloth, then take up some of
the hot broth to beat your Eggs, because else it will turn, let it have a walm
or 2 after the Eggs be in, but not seeth too much for fear it turns, then dish
your Capons, and pour your broth on them, and gar­nish your dish as your
please.

#### 1.47. To make stewed Broth.

Take a neck of Mutton, or a rump of Beef, let it boyl, and scum your pot
clean, thicken your pot with grated bread, and put in some beaten spice, as
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and a little Pepper, put in a pound of Currans, a
pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun, 2 pound of Prunes last of all, then
when it is stewed, so season it with a quart of Claret and a pint of Sack, and
some Sanders to colour [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=155) it, and a pound
of Sugar to sweeten it, or more if need be, you must seeth some whole spice to
garnish your dish withal, and a few whole Prunes out of your pot.

#### 1.48. To make Gallendine sauce for a Turkie.

T [...]ke some Claret-wine, and some grated bread and a sprig of Rose­mary, a
little beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some Sugar.

#### 1.49. An exceeding good way to stew▪ Chickens.

Take Chickens, fley them, and cut them in pieces corss-way, then put them in a
Pipkin or Skillet, and cover them almost with Pepper, and Mace, and water, so
let them stew softly with a whole Onion in it, till part of the li­quor be
consumed, then put in as much White-wine as will cover them again, take
Parsley, sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory with a little Thyme, and shred them
very small, and put them in, and let them [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=156) boyl till they
are almost enough, then put in a good piece of Butter.

#### 1.50. To boyl a Leg of Mutton.

Take a Leg of Mutton, and stuff it, for the stuffing, take a little Beef suet,
and a few sweet herbs, chop them small, and stuff it, then boyl it, and put in
a handful of sweet herbs, cut them small, min­gle a hard Egg amongst the
herbs, and stew it upon the Mutton, melt a little Butter and Vinegar, and put
into a dish, and send it in.

#### 1.51. To keep Quinces all the Year.

First, you must core them, and take out the kernels clean, and keep the cores
and kernels, and set over some water to boyl them, then put them in when you
set over the water, then let them boyl till they be a little soft, and then
take them up, and set them down till they be cold, then take the kernels and
stamp them, and put them into the same water they [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=156) were boyled in,
and let them boyl till they be thick, see you have as much liquor as will
cover the Quinces, and if you have not e­nough, take of the smallest Quin­ces,
and stamp them to make more liquor, and when it is boyled good and thick, you
must strain it through a coarse cloth, and when the Quinces be cold, then put
them into a pot, and the liquor al­so, and be sure the liquor cover them, you
must lay some weight upon them to keep them under, so cover them close, let
them stand 14 days and they will work of their own accord, and they will have
a thick rind upon them, and when they wax hoary or thick, then take it from
the liquor, for it will have a skin on it within a month or six weeks.

#### 1.52. To pickle Cucumbers.

Take the Cucumbers, and wash them clean, and dry them clean in a cloth, then
take some water, [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=157) vinegar, salt,
Fennel-tops, and some Dill-tops, and a little Mace, make it fast enough, and
sharp enough to the tast, then boyl it a while, and then take it off, and let
it stand and be cold, then put in the Cucum­bers, and lay a board on the top
to keep them down, and tye them close, and within a week they wil [...] be fit
to eat.

#### 1.53. To pickle purslain.

Take the Purslain, and pick it i [...] little pieces, and put it into a po
[...] or barrel, then take a little water vinegar and salt to your tast, it mu
[...] be pretty strong of the Vinega [...] and Salt, and a little Mace, an
[...] boyl all these together, and po [...] this liquor in seething hot into
the Purslain, and when it is cold, tie it close, but lay a little board on the
top to keep it down, and within a week or 2 it is fit to eat.

#### 1.54. To do Clove-Gilliflowers up for Salletting all the year.

Take as many Clove-Gilliflower [...] [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=157) as you please,
slip off the leaves, then strow some Sugar in the bottom of the Gally-pot that
you do them in, and then a lane of Gil­liflowers, and then a lane of Sugar,
and so do till all the Gilliflowers be done, then pour some Claret­wine into
them, as much as will cover them, then cut a piece of a thin board, and lay it
on them to keep them down, then tye them close and set them in the Sun, and
let them stand a month, or there­abouts, but keep them from any rain or wet.

#### 1.55. To pickle Broom-buds.

Take as many Broom-buds as you please, make linnen-bags, and put them in, and
tye them close, then make some brine with wa­ter and salt, and boyl it a
little, let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the
bags in it, and lay some weight on them, let it lye there till it look black,
then shift it again, so you must do [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=158) as long as it
looks black, you mu [...] boyl them in a little Cladro [...] and put them in
Vinegar a wee [...] or two, and then they will be  [...] to eat.

#### 1.56. To pickle Oysters.

Take your Oysters, and pic [...] them out of the shells, and save th [...]
liquor that cometh from them then take your Oysters one b [...] one, and wash
them clean out  [...]grist, then strain the liquor, an [...] take a quantity
of White-wine,  [...] a large Mace or two, and 2 or  [...] slices of Nutmeg, &
Pepper gros [...] beaten, and salt them, boyl it toge­ther, then put in your
Oysters, an [...] boyl them, then take the yolk of a [...] Egg, and beat it
well with Wine [...] vinegar, then take up your Oyster [...] and let them
cool, then put in yo [...] Egg, and let it boyl, take it off, le [...] it
cool, and put it up together.

#### 1.57. To make Grout.

Take some Wheat and Bea [...] and when you have made it int [...] [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=158) Malt, then
rittle it, take some water, or some small wort, and heat it scalding hot, and
put it into a Pail, then stir in the Malt, then take a piece of sowre leaven,
and stir it about, and cover it, and let it stand till it will cream, then put
in some Orange-pills, then put it over the fire, and boyl it, keeping it
stirring till all the white be gone.

#### 1.58. To make Jelly of Marmalet.

Take Quinces, and pare them, cut them into water into little pie­ces, and when
you have done all, then take them out of the water, and weigh them, and to
every pound of Quinces, take five quar­ters of a pound of Sugar, and half a
quarter, then put it into the Skillet, and put as much water, as will make it
pretty thin, then set it on the fire, and clarifie it with the white of an
Egg, and scum it off clear, then put in your Quinces, and let it boyl a pretty
space, and cover it close till it is pretty thick, [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=159) then leave
stirring it till it is thick enough for Marmalet, and take it off, and put it
in a glass, and do it with your knife in little works, when you have done let
it stand, your Posnet must boyl all the while, you must put in as much water
as will make it pret­ty thin, when it is boyled to a pretty good colour, then
strain it, and weigh it, then take of loaf­sugar, as much as it weighs, and
boyl it all together to a jelly, then pour it into your Marmalet glass, then
put it in a stove, and put some fi [...]e in every day.

#### 1.59. To make Jelly of Pippins.

Take Pippins, pare, quarter and core them, lay them in water, and when you set
them on the fire, shift them in another water, and put them in a skillet, and
put as much water as will cover them, and a little more, set them over the
fire, and make them boyl as fast as you can, when the Apples [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=159) are soft, and
the liquor tasts strong of the Apples, then take them off and strain them
through a piece of Canvas gently, take to a pound of juice a pound of Sugar,
then set it on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a Bason, and rince
your skillet again, set it on the fire, and when it is boyled up, then scum
it, and make it boyl as fast as you can, and when it is al­most boyled, put in
the juice of 3 Lemons strained through a cloth, if you will have Orange-pill,
pare it thin, that the white be not seen, and then lay it in the water all
night, then boyl them in the water till the pill be soft, then cut them in
long pieces, then put it into the syrrup, and stir it about, and fill your
glasses, and let it stand till it be cold, and then it is ready to eat.

#### 1.60. To preserve green Walnuts.

Take Walnuts, and boyl them till the water do tast bitter, then [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=160) take them off
and put them in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much Sugar as
they weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the
fire, and when they boyl up take them off and let them stand 2 days and boyl
them again once more.

#### 1.61. To preserve white Quinces.

Take a pound of Quinces, boyl them with the skin on, but core and pare them,
take a quarter of a pound of Sugar, with water no more than will wet the
Sugar, put the Quinces into it presently, boyl them as fast as may be, and
skin them, when the Syrrup is thick, take it up.

#### 1.62. To make Goosberry Tarts.

Take a pint of Goosberries, and put them into a quarter of a pound of Sugar,
and 2 spponfuls of water, and put them on the fire and stir them as you did
the former.

#### 1.63. To preserve Rasberries.

Take as many as you please, a [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=160) lay of Sugar,
and a lay of Rasber­ries, and so lay them into the Skil­let, and as much water
as you think will make Syrrup enough, and boyl them, and put two spoon­fuls of
water in, bescum it, take it off, and let it stand.

#### 1.64. To preserve Currans.

Part them in the tops, lay a lane of Currans, and a lane of sugar, and so boyl
them as fast as you do Rasberries, do not put in the spoon, but scum them,
boyl them till the syrrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and let them
stand till they be cold, and put them into a glass.

#### 1.65. To preserve Medlars.

Take the just weight of sugar as they weigh, to a pound of sugar put a pint
and half of water, scald them as long as the skin will come off, stone them at
the head, put the water to the sugar, and boyl it, and strain it, put in the
Medlars, boyl them apace, let [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=161) them stand till
they be thick, then take them off.

#### 1.66. To preserve Goosberries.

Take the fairest Goosberries you can get, with the stalks on, prick 3 or 4
holes in every one of them, then take the weight of them in Sugar, lay the
best part of the Su­gar in the bottom of a silver or pewter dish, then lay
your Goos­berries one by one upon it, strew some of the rest of the sugar upon
them, and put 2 spoonfuls of the water into half a pound, then set the
Goosberries on a Chafing-dish of coals, and let them stand un­covered,
scalding upon the fire a pretty while before they boyl, but not too long, for
then they will grow red, and when they be boy­ling, let them not boyl too
fast, when they be enough, put them up, you must put the rest of the sugar on
them as they boyl, and that will harden them, and keep them from breaking.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=161)

#### 1.67. To make Goosberry Cakes.

Pick as many Goosberries as you please, and put them into an earthen pitcher,
and set it in a ket­tle of water, till they be soft, and then put them into a
sive, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and
as much sugar as syrrup, first boyl the sugar to a Candy, and take it off, and
put in the juice, and set it on again till it be hot, and take it off, and set
them in press till they be dry, then they are ready.

#### 1.68. To do Goosberries like Hops.

Take pricks of black thorn, then take Goosberries, and cut them a little a
cross, take out the stones, put them upon the pricks, weigh as much sugar as
they weigh, and take a quart or a pint of water, and put into the sugar, and
let it boyl a while, then put in the Hops, let them stand and scald 2 hours
upon the coals till they be soft; then take out the Hops, and [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=162) boyl the syrrup
a while, then take it off, and put in the Hops.

#### 1.69. To preserve Apricocks.

First, stone them & weigh them, and take as much Sugar as Apri­cocks, put in a
Bason, some in the bottom, and some on the top, let them stand all night, set
them on the fire till they be scalding hot, then heat them twice more.

#### 1.70. To make Apricock Cakes.

Take as many Apricocks as you please, and pare them, put as much Sugar as they
weigh, take no more water than will melt the Sugar, then boil the Sugar and it
together, till they be pretty stiff, then take them off, and put them in
Saucers.

#### 1.71. To make Mackerooms.

Take half a pound of Almonds, put them in water, stamp them small, put in some
Rose-water, a good spoonful of flower, 4 Eggs, half a pound of Sugar; in the
bea­ting of the Eggs, put in the Al­monds; [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=162) heat the Oven
hot enough to bake a Custard, put them in, when you have taken them out, let
them stand till they be cold, they must be baked in earthen pans round, and
buttered very thin.

#### 1.72. How to preserve white Damsons Green.

Take white Damsons, scald them in water till they be hard, then take them off,
and pick as many as you please, take as much Sugar as they weigh, strew a
little in the bottom, put 2 or 3 spoonfuls of water, then put in the Damsons
and the Sugar, and boyl them, take them off, then let them stand a day or two,
then boyl them again, take them off, and let them stand till they be cold.

#### 1.73. How to preserve Mulberries.

Take as many Mulberries as you please, and as much Sugar as they weigh; first,
wet the Sugar with some juice of Mulberries, stir your Sugar together, then
put in [[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=163)
your Mulberries, then boyl them apace till you think they are boyl­ed enough,
then take them off, and boyl the syrrup a while, and put in the Mulberries,
let them stand till they be cold.

#### 1.74. To preserve Pippins white.

Take some Pippins, and pare them and cut them the cross way, and weigh them,
add to a pound of Sugar a pint of water, then put the Sugar to the water, and
then let it boyl a while, and then put in the Pippins, and let them boyl till
they be clear at the core, take them off and put them up.

#### 1.75. To make white Cheese Cakes.

Scald Quinces, and let them stand till they be cold, but not seethed till they
be tender enough, then take them off, and pare them, then scrape off the
softest, and do it through a sive, and then weigh as much Sugar as it doth
weigh, and beat it, and sift it into the Quinces, and stir it all together,
and set it on [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=163) the coals, and
stir it about, but let it not boyl at all, but let it stand and cool till it
be pretty thick, then take it off, & put it in glass saucers.

#### 1.76. To preserve Grapes.

Stamp and strain them let it set­tle a while before you wet a pound of Sugar
or Grapes with the juice, stone the Grapes, save the liquor, in the stoning,
take off the stalks, give them a boyling, take them off, and put them up.

#### 1.77. To preserve Damsons.

Take as many as you please, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh, and strew
some on the bot­tom, and some on the top, and you may wet the Sugar with some
syr­rup of Damsons, and a little wa­ter, then set them on the fire, and let
them stand and soak softly a­bout an hour, then take them off, and let them
stand a day or two, then boyl them till you think they be enough, take them
off, and put them up.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=164)

#### 1.78. To make Cakes of Lemons of Violets.

Take of the finest double refi­ned Sugar, beaten very fine, and searced
through fine Tiffany, and to half a silver Porringer of Su­gar, put to it two
spoonfuls of water, and boyl it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of
the hardest rinded Lemon, then stir it into your Sugar, put it into your
coffins or paper, and when they be cold, take them off.

#### 1.79. How to preserve Quinces red.

Take your Quinces, and weigh them to a pound, put a pound of Sugar, and half a
pint of water, put your water to your Sugar, and let it stand, your Quinces
must be scalded till they be tender, take them off, pare them, and core them,
but not too much, then put them into the Skillet where the Sugar is, then set
them on the fire, and let them boyl two hours, if it be not enough, boyl it a
little more, pour it to the Quinces, and stop it close.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=164)

#### 1.80. To make Bisket-Bread.

Take a pound and a half of white loaf Sugar, and so much flower, as much
Annise-seeds, Coriander-seed, and Carraway-seed as you please, and 12 Eggs, 3
whites left out, take the Sugar, and sift it fine, and the flower also, and
beat your Eggs a little, and mingle them well together with four spoon­fuls of
Damask-Rose water, beat them well together, and put in two spoonfuls more, and
beat it again about an hour and a half in all, then butter plate-Trenchers,
and fit them with stuff, scrape some Sugar on them, and blow it off again,
heat your Oven hot enough to bake a pye, and let the lid stand up a little
while to draw down the heat from the top, then take the lid down again, and
let it stand till it be cold, that you may suffer your hand in the bottom,
then set in the plates, and set up the lid again until they rise, then [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=165) take them out,
and loose them from the plates, and scrape the bottoms, and let them stand
four hours, then they be fit to eat.

#### 1.81. How to preserve Grapes to look clear and green.

Take a pound of Grapes with no stalks on them, when they do begin to be ripe,
then weigh as much double refined Sugar, bea­ten small, then take the Grapes
that are weighed, stone them at the place where the stalks are, pull off the
skin, and strew some Sugar in the bottom of the thing you do them in, and so
lay them in the Sugar you did weigh, till you have stoned and pilled them, and
so strew the Sugar upon them, and set them on the fire, and let them boyl as
fast as can be, till the syrrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and put
them up until they be cold.

#### 1.82. How to candy Apricocks.

Take your Apricocks, the fair­est, [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=165) and scald them,
and pill them, between two cloths crush the wa­ter softly out of them, as dry
as you can without too much flatting them, then take of sear­ced Sugar almost
as much as they weigh, and boyl it all together to a candy height; then take
it off the fire, and lay the Apricocks in it one by one, with a feather anoint
them over, then set them on a Chafing-dish of coals, and let them be thorough
sod, but not boyl, then take them off the fire, and set it on the Stove or
Oven blood-warm, and twice a day set them on the fire, and turn them once at
every heating, anoint them with a feather, and the same syrrup every time you
take them off the fire, this do till you see the syrrup begin to spattle, and
be full of eyes, then take them out of the syrrup, and lay them on glass-
plates, and dry them in a Stove or Oven, turning them a day or two [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=166) till they be
dry: white Pear-plumbs may be done thus.

#### 1.83. How to make Paste of Goosberries, or Barberries, or English
Currans.

Take any of these tender fruits, and boil them softly on a Chafing­dish of
coals, then strain them with the pap of a roasted Apple, then take as much
Sugar as it weighs, and boil it to a candy height, with as much Rose-water as
will melt the Sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot Sugar, and
let it boil leisurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as thick as
for Marmalet: then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into the Oven
upon 2 billets, that the glass may not touch the bottom of the Oven, for if it
do, it will make the paste rough, and so let it dry lei­surely, and when it is
dry you may box it up, and keep it all the year.

#### 1.84. How to make Paste of Oranges and Lemons.

Take your Oranges and Lemons [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=166) and set on the
fire 2 vessels of fair water at once, boil them, and then shift the water 7
times, that the bit­terness may be taken from them, slit them through the
midst, and take out the Kernels, and wring out all the water from them, then
beat them in an Alabaster Mortar, with the paps of 3 or 4 Pippins, then strain
it through a fine strai­ner, then take as much Sugar as that pap doth weigh,
being boiled to a candy height, with as much Rose-water as will melt the
Sugar, then put the pap of your Oranges and Lemons into the hot Sugar, and so
let it boil leisurely with stir­ring, and when you see it stiff as for
Manchet, the fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so set it in a Stove or Oven,
and when it is throughly dry, box it up for all the year.

#### 1.85. How to make Paste-Royal in Sauce

Take Sugar, the quantity of four [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=167) ounces, very
finely beaten and scarced, and put it into an ounce of Cinnamon and Ginger,
and a grain of Musk, and so beat it into paste, with a little Gum-dragon
steeped in Rose-water, and when you have beaten it into paste in a stone
Mor­tar, then roul it thin, and print it with your moulders, then dry it
before the fire, and when it is dry, box it up and keep it all the year.

#### 1.86. How to candy Pears, Plumbs, or A­pricocks, that they shall look as
clear as Amber.

Take your Apricocks & Plumbs, and give every one a cut to the stone, in the
notch, and then cast Sugar on them, and bake them in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet, close stopped, bake them in an earthen Platter, let them stand half
an hour, then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon Glass
plates, and so dry them; if you can get Glasses, made like Marmalet boxes to
lay over [[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=167)
them, they will be the sooner can­died; this is the manner to candy any such
fruit.

#### 1.87. How to make Paste-Royal white, that you may make Court Boles, Caps,
Gloves, Shooes, or any pretty thing in moulds.

Take half a pound of double re­fined Sugar, and beat it well, and searce it
through a fine Lawn, then put it into a fine Alabaster mortar, with a little
Gum-dragon steeped in a little Rose-water, and one grain of Musk, so beat it
in a Mortar till it comes to a pretty paste, then roul it thin with a roul
­ing-pin, and print it with your Moulders, like Gloves, Shooes, or any thing
else, and some you may roul very thin with a rouling-pin, and let it dry in an
ashen dish, otherwise called a Court Cup, and let it stand in the dish till it
be dry, and it will be like a saucer, you must dry them on a board far from
the fire, but you must not [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=168) put them in an
Oven, they will be dry in two or three hours, and be as white as snow, then
you may gild box and cup.

#### 1.88. How to make fine Diet-Bread.

Take a pound of fine Flower twice or thrice drest, and 1 pound & a quarter of
fine sugar finely bea­ten, and take 7 new laid Eggs, and put away the yolk of
1 of them and beat them very well, and put 4 or 5 spoonfuls of Rose-water
amongst them, and then put them in an Ala­baster or Marble mortar, and then
put in the flower and sugar by de­grees, & beat it or pound it for the space
of 2 hours until it be perfect­ly white, and then put in an ounce of Carraway-
seed, then butter your plates and sawcers, and put in of e­very one, and so
put them into the Oven: If you will have a glass and Ice on the top, you must
wash it with a feather, and then strew su­gar very finely beaten on the top
before you put it into the Oven.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=168)

#### 1.89. How to preserve Apricocks.

Take your Apricocks and put them into a skillet of fair water and put them
over the fire until they be something tender, then take them up out of the
water, and take a bodkin, and thrust out the stones at the top, and then pill
off their skins, and when you have done, put them into a silver dish or bason,
and lay Sugar very finely beaten over and under them, and put a spoonful or 2
of water unto them, and set them over a very soft fire until they be ready,
then take them up, and lay them into ano­ther dish a cooling, and if you see
good, boil the syrrup a little more, when they are cold, and the syr­rup
almost cold, put them up in a gally-pot or glass together.

#### 1.90. How to preserve Damsons.

Take a pound or something more of pure Sugar finely beaten, and then take a
pound of Damsons and cut a scotch in the side of each [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=169) of them, and
put a row of Sugar o [...] a silver dish or bason, and then lay in a row of
plumbs, and then cover it with Sugar, and so lay it in til [...] they be all
in, and then take two spoonfuls of clear wheat, and make a hole in the middle
of them, and set it over a soft fire, and look to  [...] carefully for fear
the Sugar should burn, and when the Sugar is all dis­solved, shake them
together, and stir them gently, and then set the [...] down and cover them
till they be cold; and when they be cold, s [...] them upon the coals again,
and then let them boil gently till they be ready; and when they are ready,
take them down, and take them every one by its stem, and cover them with the
skin as wel [...] as you can, and then put them al [...] one by one in a dish,
and if the syr­rup be not boiled enough, set it over, and let it boil a little
longer, and when the plumbs be cold, put them in a gally-pot, or glass, and
[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=169) pour the
syrrup to them, while it is a little warm, you must not for­get to take away
the skin of the plumbs as it riseth.

#### 1.91. How to make Pap of Barley.

Take Barley, and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break, then
put that liquor out, then put as much hot liquor to it as you put forth, and
so let it boil till it be very soft, then put it into a Cul­lender and strain
it, then take a handful of Almonds, and grind them very well with your Barley,
and some of the liquor, so season it with Sugar, and a little Rose-water, a
little whole Mace and Cinnamon, and boil them well together.

#### 1.92. How to candy Oranges and Lemons.

Take the peels of your Oranges and Lemons, the white cut away, and lay them in
water 5 or 6 days, shifting them twice every day, then seeth them till they be
very tender, then take them out of the water, and let them lie until [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=170) they be cold,
then cut them in small pieces square, the bigness of a penny or less, then
take to every 3, two ounces of Sugar, put to it a quantity of fair water, and
a less quantity of Rose-water, and make a syrrup thereof, then scum it ve­ry
clean, and put in your peels, and let them boil for the space of an hour, or
longer if you find your liquor wanting, you may put in more water at your
pleasure, then boil them a little space after with a little sharp fire,
stirring it al­ways for burning, then take it off the fire 3 or 4 times,
stirring them all the while, and set them off again until they be candied.

#### 1.93. How to make Cakes of Almonds.

Take 1 pound and a half of fine flower, of Sugar 12 ounces beaten very fine,
mingle them well to­gether, then take half a pound of Almonds, blanch them,
and grind them fine in a mortar, then strain them with as much Sack as will
[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=170) mingle
the flower, Sugar and Al­monds together, make a paste, bake them in an Oven
not too hot.

#### 1.94. How to make white Lemon-Cakes.

Take half a dozen of white Le­mons, the best you can get, then cut and pare
them, leave none of the yellow behind, then take a­way the sowre meat of it,
and reserve all the white, and lay it in water 2 days, then seeth it in fair
water till it be soft, then take it out and set it by till the water be gone
from it, then weigh it, and take twice the weight in Sugar, mince the white
stuff very fine, then take an earthen Pipkin, and put therein some fair water,
and some Rose-water? if you have a pound of Sugar, you must have half a pint
of water, of both sorts alike, let your water and sugar boil together, then
scum it, and put in the stuff, and so let them boil toge­ther, always stirring
it till it be [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=171) thick, it will
shew very thin, and when it is cold, it will be thick enough.

#### 1.95. To make Oyl of Violets.

Set the Violets in Sallet-oil, and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie 20 daies, then strain them again and put in other
fresh Violets, and let them stand all the Year.

#### 1.96. To preserve Pomecitrons.

Take Pomecitrons and grate off the upper skin, then slightly cut them in
pieces as you think good, lay them in water 24 hours, then set over a posnet
with fair water, and when it boils put them in, and so shift till you find the
water not to be bitter; then take them up, and weigh them, and to every pound
of Pomecitron put a pound and a quarter of Sugar, then take of your last water
a pint and quar­ter, set your water and sugar over the fire, then take two
whites of Eggs, and beat them with a little [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=171) fair water, and
when your sirrup begins to boil, cast in the same that riseth from the Eggs,
and so let it boil, then let it run through a clean fine cloth, then put in a
clean posnet, and when your sirrup begins to boil put in your Pome­citron and
let it boil softly 3 or 4 hours until you find your sirrup thick enough; be
sure you keep them alwaies under sirrup, and ne­ver turn them, take them up
and put them into your glass and when they be cold cover them.

#### 1.97. To Candy Ringus Roots.

Take your Ringus roots, and boil them reasonable tender, then pill them and
pith them, then lay them together, then take so much sugar as they weigh, and
put it into a posnet with as much Rose-water as will melt it, then put in your
roots, and so let it boil very softly until the Sugar be consumed into the
roots, then take them, and turn them, and shake [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=172) them till the
Sugar be dried up, and then lay them a drying upon a lattice of wyer, until
they be cold, in like sort you may candy any other Roots, what you please.

#### 1.98. To candy all kind of Fruitages, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons,
Lettice-stocks, Sugar-candy, such as the Comfit makers do candy the Fruits
with.

Take 1 pound of refined sugar and put it into a posnet with as much water as
will wet it, and so boil it till it come to a candy [...] height, then take
all your fruit being preserved and dried, then draw them through your hot
su­gar, and then lay them on your hurdle, and in 1 quarter of an hour they
will be finely candied.

#### 1.99. To candy all kind of Flowers in ways of Spanish Candy.

Take double refined Sugar, put it into a posnet with as much Rose-water as
will melt it, and put into it the pap of half a roasted
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=172) Apple, and
a grain  [...] let it boil till it come to a candy height, then put in your
flowers, being pick'd, and so let it boil; then cast them on a fine plate, and
cut it in waves with your Knife, then you may spot it with gold, and keep it.

#### 1.100. To make Essings.

Take 1 peck of Oatmeal-grout the greatest you can get, and the whitest, pick
it clean from the black, and searce out all the smal­lest, then take as much
evening-milk as will cover it and something more, boil it and cool it again
till it be blood-warm, then put it to the Oatmeal, and let it soak all night,
the next morning strain it from your Milk as dry as you can through a cloth,
then take three pints of good Cream, boil it with a Mace, and the yolks of 8
Eggs, when it is boiled put it into your stuff, then put in six Eggs more,
whites and yolks; season it with a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=173) [...]
quantity of Cinamon, Nut­meg, and Ginger, and a less quantity, of Cloves, and
Mace, put in as much sugar as you think will sweeten it, have good store of
Suet, shred small and forget not Salt, so boil them.

#### 1.101. To make Sugar-Cakes.

Take one pound of fine flower, one pound of sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take 7 or 8 yolks of Eggs, and if your flower be good
take one white or two as you shall think good, take 2 Cloves, and a pretty
piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rose-water all night, and heat
it almost blood-warm, temper it with the rest of the stuff, when the paste is
made, make it up with as much hast as you can, bake them in a soft oven.

#### 1.102. To make a Calves-foot Pye.

Take your Calves feet, boll them and blanch them, then boil them again till
they be tender, then
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=173) take out
all the bon [...] [...] with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, a [...] Cinnamon, as much
as you shall think good, then put in a good quantity of Currans and Butter,
bake your Pie in a soft Oven, and when it is baked take half a pint of White-
wine Vinegar, beat 3 yolks of Eggs, and put to the coals, season it with
sugar, and a little Rose-water, alwaies stirring it, then put it into your
Pie, and let it stand half a quarter of an hour.

#### 1.103. How to make a very good Pie.

Take the backs of four white Herrings watered, the bones and skin taken away,
then take so much Wardens in quantity pared and cored, half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun stoned, mince all these together, and season it with Cinna­mon and
Ginger, and when the Pie is baked, put in a little Rose-water, and scrape
sugar on it, if you put in Butter, then put in a handful of grated bread.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=174)

#### 1.104.  [...] Cimbals.

[...]ake fine flower dried, and as much sugar as Flower, then take as much
whites of Eggs as will make it paste, and put in a little Rose-water, then put
in a quanti­ty of Coriander-seed, and Annise seed, then mold it up in that
fashi­on you will bake it in.

#### 1.105. How to preserve Angelica Roots.

Take the Roots and wash them, then slice them very thin, and lay them in water
3 or 4 daies, change the water every day, then put the roots into a pot of
water, and set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the
water, then take a pound of roots, 4 pints of water, and two pound of sugar,
let it boil, and scum it clean, then put in the roots, it will be boiled
before the sirrup, then take them up, and boil the sirrup after, they will ask
you a whole daies work, for they must boil very softly, at St. Andrew's [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=174) time it is the
best time to do them in all the Year.

#### 1.106. To boyl a Capon with Brewis.

Take a Capon, and truss him to boil; then set on the fire a good quantity of
water, scum it very clean before you set on your Ca­pon, put a little water,
Savory and Thyme into the belly of it, and a little salt, and gross pepper,
when you have scummed it clean, cover it close to boil, then take a good
hand­ful of herbs, as Marigolds, Violet-leaves, or any such green herbs as you
shall think fit, wash them and set them on the fire with some of the uppermost
of the broth that boils the Capon, then put into it good store of Mace, and
boil it with the Capon, when the herbs be boiled and the broth very green, and
almost consumed away, take the uppermost of your Capon, and strain it
together, and scald your Brewis, and put it into a dish, and lay the Capon on
them.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=175)

#### 1.107. To make a Spice Cake.

Take one bushel of Flower, six pound of Butter, eight pound of Currans, two
pints of Cream, a pottle of Milk, half a pint of good Sack, 2 pound of Sugar,
2 ounces of Mace, 1 ounce of Nut­megs, 1 ounce of Ginger, twelve yolks, 2
whites, take the Milk and Cream, and stir it all the time that it boils, put
your hot seething milk to it and melt all the Butter in it, and when it is
blood warm, temper the Cake, put not your Currans in till you have made the
paste, you must have some Ale­yeast, and forget not salt.

#### 1.108. To make Broth of a Neats-tongue.

Take Claret-wine, grated bread, Currans, sweet Butter, Sugar, Cin­namon,
Ginger, boil them altoge­ther, then take the Neats-tongue and slice it, and
lay it on a dish upon sippets, and so serve it.

#### 1.109. To souce a Carp or Gurnet.

Take fair Water and Vinegar, [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=175) so that it may
be sharp, then take Parsly, Time, Fennel, and boil them in the broth a good
while, then put in a good quantity of Salt, and then put in your Fish, and
when it is well boiled, put the broth into a vessel and let it stand.

#### 1.110. To make a fine Pudding.

Take Crums of white bread, and so much fine flower, then take the yolks of
four Eggs, and one white, a good quantity of Sugar, take so much good Cream as
will temper it as thick as you would make pancake-batter, then butter your
pan, and bake it, so serve it casting some Sugar upon it; you must shred suet
very small and put it into it.

#### 1.111. To make a broth to drink.

Take a Chicken and a little of the neck of Mutton, and set them on, and scum
it well, then put in a large mace, and so let it boil while the Chicken be
tender, then take the Chicken out, and beat it all to [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=176) pieces in a
stone Mortar, and put it in again, and so let it boil from four pints to a
little more than half a pint, then cast it through a strainer, and season it.

#### 1.112. To boil a Chicken, or Partridge.

Take your Chicken, and set it a boiling with a little of the neck of Mutton,
and scum it well, then put in a Mace, and so let it boil down, and when it is
almost boi­led, have some few herbs parboi­led, as Lettice, Endive, Spinage,
Marigold-leaves, for note, these herbs are usually used to be boiled, which by
course will hold their co­lour in boiling, and put some of these aforesaid
herbs to the Chic­ken and Mutton, if you think your broth strong enough, take
out your Mutton, then you may put a little piece of sweet butter, and a little
Verjuice, and a very little Sugar, and Salt, so serve it in with sip­pets.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=176)

#### 1.113. A Broth to drink.

Take a Chicken, and set it on, and when it boils, scum it, then put in a Mace,
and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and boil it
well down, and bruise the Chicken, and put it in again, and it is a pretty
Broth; and to alter it, you may put in half a dozen Prunes, and leave out the
herbs, or put them in, so when it is well boiled, strain it, and season it.

#### 1.114. A Broth to eat on Fasting-days.

Take fair water, and set it a boi­ling, and when it is boiled, put to it so
much strained Oatmeal as you think will thicken it, and a large Mace, a
handful of Raisins of the Sun, as many Prunes, and as many Currans, if your
quantity require so boil it, and when it is boiled, sea­son it with salt &
sugar, and a piece of sweet butter if the time will allow it; and for an
alteration, when this broth is boil'd, put in a quan­tity [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=177) of Cream, and
it will do well.

#### 1.115. To make a Ponado.

The quantity you will make set on in a posnet of fair water, when it boils,
put a mace in, and a little piece of Cinnamon, and a hand­ful of Currans, and
so much bread as you think meet, so boil it, and season it with Salt, Sugar,
and Rose-water, and so serve it.

#### 1.116. To make a Caudle.

Take Ale the quantity that you mean to make, and set it on the fire, and when
it is ready to boil, scum it very well, then cast in a large mace, and take
the yolks of 2 Eggs, for 1 Mess, or one draught, and beat them well, and take
away the skin of the yolks, and then put them into the Ale, when it seetheth,
be sure to stir them well till it seeth again for a young-ling, then let it
boil a while and put in your Sugar, and if it be to eat, cut three or four
toasts of bread thin, and toast them dry, [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=177) but not brown,
and put them to the caudle, if to drink put none.

#### 1.117. To make Almond Butter.

Blanch your Almonds, and beat them as fine as you can with fair water 2 or 3
hours, then strain them through a linnen cloth, boil them with Rose-water,
whole mace and Annise-seeds, till the substance be thick, spread it upon a
fair cloth, draining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same cloth
some few hours, then strain it and season it with Rose-water and Su­gar.

#### 1.118. To stew Beef.

Take a good Rump of Beef, cut from the bones, shred Turnips and Carrots small,
and Spinage, and Lettice, put all in a pan, and let it stew 4 hours with so
much water, and a quart of White-wine as will cover it, when it is stewed
enough, then put in a Wine-glass full of Elder Vinegar, and serve it in with
sippets.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=178)

#### 1.119. To souce a young Pig.

Take a young Pig being scald­ed, boil it in fair water, and White-wine, put
thereto Bay-leaves, whole Ginger, and Nut­meg quartered, a few whole Cloves,
boil it throughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen pot.

#### 1.120. To boil Flownders or Pickerels after the French fashion.

Take a pint of White-wine, the tops of young Time and Rosema­ry, a little
whole mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Ver­juice, salt, and a piece
of sweet Butter, and so serve it, this broth will serve to boil fish twice or
thrice in, or four times.

#### 1.121. To make flesh of Apricocks.

Take Apricocks when they are green, and pare them, slice them, and take half
their weight in su­gar, put it to them, so put them in a Skillet, and as much
water as you think will melt the sugar, so [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=178) let them boil,
and keep them stir­ring till they be tender, and so take them off, and scum
them very clean, so put them forth of the skillet and let them stand, take as
much sugar as you had before, and boil them into a candy height, and then put
in your Apricocks and set them over a soft fire but let them not boil, so keep
them with oft stirring, till the syrrup begin to jelly, then put them in
glasses, and keep them for your use.

#### 1.122. To make flesh of Quinces.

Take Quinces, pare them, and core them, and cut them in halfs, boil them in a
thin syrrup till they be tender, then take them off, and let them lie in
syrrup; then take Quinces, pare and quarter them, take out the cores, put as
much water to them as will cover them, then boil them till they be very
tender, and then strain out the liquor clean from them, and take unto a pint
of [[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=179) that
liquor a pound of sugar, put as much water to the sugar as will melt it, then
boil it, to a can­dy height; then stir the Quinces that are in the syrrup as
thin as you can, when your sugar is at a full candy height, put in a pint of
the liquor, then set it over a soft fire, stirring it leisurely till the sugar
be dissolved, then put in half a pound of your slices, keeping it still
stirring, but not to boil, you must take the jelly of Quinces kernels that
have lain in water 2 or 3 hours, take 2 good spoonfuls of it, and put it to
the flesh, so keep it stirring leisurely till it begin to jelly upon the
spoon, then put it into thin glasses, and keep it in a stove.

#### 1.123. To preserve Oranges.

Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of sugar, pill the outward rind, and
inward white skin off, take juice of oranges, put them into the juice, boil
them half an hour, and take them off.

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=179)

#### 1.124. To dry Cherries.

Take the fairest Cherries, stone them, take to six pound of Cher­ries, a pound
of sugar, put them into a Skillet, straining the sugar among them, as you put
them in, then put as much water to them as will boil them, then set them upon
a quick fire, let them boil up, then take them off, and strain them very
clean, put them into an earthen pan or pot, let them stand in the liquor 4
days, then take them up and lay them several­ly one by one upon silver or
ear­then dishes, set them in an Oven after the bread is taken out, and so
shift them every day upon dry dishes, and so till they be dry.

#### 1.125. To dry Peaches.

Take Peaches and coddle them, take off the skins, stone them, take to four
pound of Peaches, a pound of sugar, then take a gal­ly pot and lay a lane of
Peaches, and a lane of sugar, till all be [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=180) laid out, then
put in half a pint of water, so cover them close, and set them in embers to
keep warm, so let them stand a night and a day, put them in a skillet, and set
them on the fire to be scalding hot, then put them into your pot again, and
let them stand 24 hours, then scald them again, then take them out of your
syrrup, and lay them on sil­ver dishes to dry, you may dry them in an Oven
when the bread is taken out, but to dry them in the Sun is better, you must
turn them every day into clear dishes.

#### 1.126. To boyl Veal.

Take Veal & cut it in thin slices, and put it into a pipkin with as much water
as will cover it, then wash a handful of Currans, and as much Prunes, then
take a Court­roul, and cut it in long slices like a Butchers skiver, then put
in a little Mace, Pepper and Salt, a piece of Butter, and a little [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=180) Vinegar some
crumbs of bread, and when it hath stewed 2 hours take it up and serve it.

#### 1.127. To boil a Capon in white broth.

Truss a Capon to boil, and put it into a pipkin of water, and let it boil 2
hours, and when it is boiled take up a little of the broth, then take the
yolks of Eggs, and beat them very fair with your broth that you take up, then
set it by the fire to keep warm, season it with grated Nutmeg, Sugar, and
Salt, then take up your Capon, and pour this broth on with a lit­tle sack, if
you have it, garnish it with sippets, and serve it, remem­ber to boil whole
Mace with your Capon, and Marrow if you have it.

#### 1.128. To boil a Capon or Chicken in white broth with Almonds.

Boil your Capon as in the other, then take Almonds, and blanch them, and beat
them very small, putting in sometimes some of [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=181) your broth to
keep them from boiling: when they are beaten small enough, put as much of the
uppermost broth to them, as will serve to cover the Capon, then strain it, and
wring out the sub­stance clear, then season it as be­fore, & serve it with
marrow on it.

#### 1.129. How to boil Brawn.

Water your Brawn 24 hours, wash and scrape it 4 or 5 times, then take it out
of the water, and lay it on a fair Table, then throw a handful of salt on
every collar, then bind them up as fast as you can, with Hemp, Bass or Incle,
then put them into your Kettle, when the water boileth, and when it boileth
scum it clean, let it boil until it be so tender that you may thrust a straw
through it, then let it cool until the next morning. By the souced meats you
may know how to souce it.

#### 1.130. How to boil a Gammon of Bacon.

Water your Gammon of Bacon [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=181) 24 hours, then
put it into a deep kettle, with some sweet Hay, let it boil softly 6 or 7
hours, then take it up with a scummer and a plate, and take off the skin
whole, then stick your Gammon full of Cloves, strew on some gross pep­per, and
cut your skin like sip­pets, then garnish your Gammon, and when you serve it,
stick it with bays.

#### 1.131. How to boil a Rabbet.

Fley and wash the Rabbet, & slit the hinder leg on both sides of the back-
bone, from the forward, and truss them to the body, set the head right up with
a skuer, right down in the neck, then put it to boiling, with as much water as
will cover it; when it boils, scum it, season it with Mace, Ginger, Salt and
Butter, then take a hand­ful of Parsley, and a little Time, boil it by it
self, then take it up▪ beat it with the back of a knife, then take up your
Rabbet, and put [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=182) it in a dish,
then put your herbs to your broth, and scrape in a Car­ret-root, let your
broth boil a lit­tle while, put in Salt, pour it on your Rabbet, and serve it
in.

#### 1.132. How to boil a Mallard with a Cabbage.

Half roast your Fowl, then take it off, and cast it down, then put it into a
Pipkin with the gravy, then pick and wash some Cabbage, and put to your
Mallard, with as much fair water as will cover it, then put in a good piece of
but­ter, and let it boil an hour, season it with pepper and salt, and serve it
upon sops.

#### 1.133. How to boil a Duck with Turnips.

Half roast her, then cover her with liquor, boil your Turnips by themselves,
half an hour, then cut them in cakes, and put them to your Duck with Butter
and Parsley chopt small, when it hath boiled half an hour, season it with
Pep­per and Salt, and serve it upon sops.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=182)

#### 1.134. How to boil Chickens, and Sorrel-sops.

Truss your Chickens, and boil them in water and salt very tender, then take a
good handful of Sor­rel, beat it stalks and all, then strain it, and take a
Manchet, & cut it in sippets, and dry them before the fire, then put your
green broth upon the coals, season it with Sugar, and grated Nutmeg, and let
it stand until it be hot, then put your sippets into a dish, put your Chickens
upon them, and pour sauce upon it, and serve it.

#### 1.135. How to boil a Pike in white Broth.

Cut your Pike in 3 pieces, and boil it with water and salt, & sweet herbs, let
it boil until it strain, then take the yolks of half a do­zen Eggs, and beat
them with a little Sack, Sugar, melted butter, and some of the Pikes broth,
then put it on the fire to keep it warm but stir it often lest it curdle, then
take up your Pike, and put the head and tail together, then cleave [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=183) the other
pieces in two, take out the back-bone, and put one piece on the one side, and
the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, then pour on your white
broth, garnish your dish with sippets and boiled parsley, and strew on pow­der
of Ginger, and wipe the edge of the dish round, and serve it.

#### 1.136. How to boil divers kinds of Fish.

Bat, Conger, Thornback, Plaice, Salmon, Trout or Mullet, boil any of these
with water, salt, and sweet herbs, when they boil, scum it ve­ry clean, then
put in vinegar, and let it boil till you think it is e­nough, your liquor must
be very hot of the salt, then take it off, you may let it stand 5 or 6 days in
the liquor, then if you would keep it longer, pour that liquor away, and put
water and salt to it, or soucing drink, you must remem­ber to let your Mullets
boil softly, and your Thornback and other fish very fast, you must blanch your
[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=183)
Thornback while it is warm, and when you serve any of those fishes, strew on
some green herbs.

#### 1.137. How to make a Sallet of all manner of Herbs.

Take your Herbs, and pick them clean, and the flowers, wash them clean, and
swing them in a strainer, then put them into a dish, and min­gle them with
Cucumbers and Le­mons sliced very thin, then scrape on sugar and put in
vinegar & oyl, then spread the flowers on the top, garnish your dish with hard
Eggs, and all sorts of your flowers, scrape on sugar, and serve it in.

#### 1.138. How to stew Steaks between two Dishes.

You must put Parsley, Currans, Butter, Verjuice, and 2 or 3 yolks of Eggs,
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and so let them boil toge­ther, and serve them upon
sops, likewise you may do steaks of Mutton or Beef.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=184)

#### 1.139. How to stew Calves feet.

Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in two, and put them into a Pipkin with
strong broth, then put in a little powder of Saffron, and sweet Butter,
Pepper, Sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let them stew an hour, put
in salt and save them.

#### 1.140. How to stew a Mallard.

Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it in little pieces,
then put it into a dish with the gravy, and a piece of fresh But­ter, and a
handful of Parsley chopt small with two or three Onions, and a Cabbage-
lettice, let them stew one hour, then season it with pepper, and salt, and a
little Ver­juice, then serve it.

#### 1.141. How to stew Trouts.

Draw your Trouts, and wash them, and then put them into a dish with White-
wine, and water, and a piece of fresh Butter, then take a handful of Parsley,
a little Thyme, [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=184) and a little
Savory; mince these small, and put to your Trouts with a little sugar, let
them stew half an hour, then mingle the yolks of 2 or 3 hard Eggs, and strew
them on your Trouts with Pepper and salt, then let them stew a quarter of an
hour and serve them.

#### 1.142. How to stew Smelts or Flounders.

Put your Smelts or Flounders into a deep dish with White-wine and water, a
little Rosemary and Thyme a piece of fresh Butter, and some large Mace, and
salt, let them stew half an hour, then take a handful of Parsley and boil it,
then beat it with the back of a knife, then take the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs, and
beat them stiff some of your fish broth, then dish up your fish upon sippets,
pour on your sauce, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.143. How to stew Rabbets.

Half roast it, then take it off the Spit, and cut it in little pieces, and put
it into a dish with the gravy, [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=185) and as much
liquor as will cover it, then put in a piece of fresh butter, and some powder
of Ginger, some Pepper and Salt, 2 or 3 Pippins minced small, let these stew
an hour, then dish them upon sippets.

#### 1.144. How to stew a Pullet or Capon.

Half roast it, then cut it in pieces, put it into a dish with the gravy, and
put in a little Cloves and Mace with a few Barberries or Grapes, put these to
your Pullet with a pint of Claret, and a piece of Butter, let these stew an
hour, dish them upon sippets & serve it.

#### 1.145. How to stew cold Chickens.

Cut them in pieces, put them into a pipkin of strong broth, and a piece of
Butter, then grate some bread and a Nutmeg, thicken your broth with it, season
your meat with gross Pepper, and Salt, dish it upon sippets, and serve it.

#### 1.146. How to make Paste for a Pasty of Venison.

Take almost a peck of Flower, [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=185) wet it with two
pound of Butter, and as much suet, then wet your Paste, put in the yolks of 8
or 10 Eggs, make reasonable light paste, then roul it and lay it on suet,
first lay a paper under your paste, then lay on your Venison, close it, pink
it, baste it with butter, and bake it, when you draw it out, baste it with
butter again.

#### 1.147. How to make paste for a Pye to keep long.

Your flower must be of Rie, and your liquor nothing but boiling water, make
your paste as stiff as you can, raise your coffin very high, let your bottom
and sides be very thick and your lid also.

#### 1.148. How to make past for a Custard.

Your liquor must be boiling wa­ter, make your paste very stiff, then roul out
your paste, and if you would make a great Tart, then raise it, and when you
have done cut the bottom a little from [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=186) the side, then
roul out a thin sheet of paste, lay paper under it, strew flower that it may
not stick to it; then put your coffin on it, of what fashion you will, then
dry it, and fill it, and bake it.

#### 1.149. How to make Paste for buttered Loaves.

Take a pottle of flower, put thereto Ginger, and Nutmeg, then wet it with
milk, yolks of Eggs, Yest, and Salt, then make it up into little loaves, then
butter a paper, and put the loaves on it, then bake them, and when they are
baked, draw them forth, and cut them in Cakes, butter them, then set them as
they were, scrape on sugar, and serve them.

#### 1.150. How to make Paste for Dumplins.

Season your flower with Pepper, Salt, and Yest, let your water be more than
warm, then make them up like Manchet, but let them be somewhat little, then
put them into your water when it boileth, [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=186) & let them boil
an hour, then butter them.

#### 1.151. To make Puff Paste.

Take a quart of flower & a pound and half of Butter, and work the half pound
of Butter dry into the flower, then put in 3 or 4 Eggs to it, and as much cold
water as will make it a little paste, then work it in a piece of a foot long,
then strain a little flower on the table, & take it by the end, beat it while
it stretch long, then put the 2 ends together, and beat it again, and so do 5
or 6 times, then work it up round, and roul it out broad, then beat your pound
of butter with a rouling pin that it may be light, then take lit­tle bits of
your butter, and stick it all over the paste, then fold up your paste close,
and coast it down with your rouling-pin, and roul it out again, and so do five
or six times, then use it as you will.

#### 1.152. To bake a Gammon of Bacon.

You must first boil it two hours before you stuff it, stuff it with [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=187) sweet herbs,
and hard Eggs chopt together with Parsley.

#### 1.153. To bake Fillets of Beef, or clods, in­stead of Red dear.

First, take your Beef, and lard it very thick, then season it with Pepper,
Salt, Ginger, Cloves and Mace good store, and a great deal more Pepper and
Salt than you would do to a piece of Venison, then close it, and when it is
ba­ked, put in some Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, and shake it well,
then stop the vent-hole, and let it stand three weeks before you spend it.

#### 1.154. How to bake Calves feet.

Season them with Pepper, Salt and Currans, when they be baked, take the yolks
of 3 or 4 Eggs, and beat them with Verjuice, or Vine­gar, Sugar, and grated
Nutmeg, put it into your Pie, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.155. How to bake a Turkie.

Take out his Bones and Guts, [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=187) then wash him,
then prick his back together again, then parboil him, season him with Pepper
and Salt, stick some Cloves in the breast of him, then lard him, and put him
into your Coffin with but­ter, in this sort you may bake a Goose, Pheasant or
Capon.

#### 1.156. To bake a Hare.

Take out his bones, and beat the flesh in a mortar with the Liver, then season
it with all sorts of spices, then work it up with 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs, then
lay some of it all over the bottom of the Pie then lay on some lard, and so do
until you have laid on all, then bake it well with good store of sweet butter.

#### 1.157. To bake Quinces or Wardens, so as the fruit look red, and the
crust white.

Your Wardens must be stewed in a pipkin with Claret-wine, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Cloves, then cover your pipkin with a sheet of paste, and let it stand in the
[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=188) Oven
five or six hours, then raise a Coffin of short paste put in your Wardens with
Sugar, and put it in­to the Oven, when it hath stood an hour, take it out and
wash it with Rose-water and butter, then scrape on Sugar and put it in a
quarter of an hour more, and it will be red upon the top, then scrape on sugar
and serve it.

#### 1.158. To bake Chucks of Veal.

Parboil 2 pound of the lean flesh of a Leg of Veal, mince it as small as
grated bread, with 4 pound of Beef-suet, then season it with Biskay, Dates and
Carraways, and some Rose-water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun, and Currans,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, then mingle them all together, fill your
pies and beat them.

#### 1.159. To bake a Chicken Pie.

Season your Chickens with nut­meg, salt, pepper, and sugar, then put them into
your coffin, then take some marrow and season with [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=188) the same spice,
then roul it in yoks of Eggs, and lay it on your Chicken, with minced Dates,
and good store of butter, then bake it, and put in a little sack, or
Muscadine, or White-wine and sugar, then shake it, scrape on sugar and serve
it.

#### 1.160. How to bake a Steak Pie.

Cut a Neck of Mutton in steaks, beat them with a Cleaver, season them with
Pepper, and Salt, and Nutmeg, then lay them on your Coffin with Butter and
large Mace, then bake it, then take a good quantity of Parsley, and boil it,
beat it as soft as the pap of an Apple, put in a quarter of a pint of
Vine­gar, and as much White-wine, with a little sugar, warm it well, and put
it over your steaks, then shake it, that the gravy and the liquor may mingle
together, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.161. To make an Italian Pudding.

Take Manchet, and cut it in [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=189) square pieces
like a Die, then put it to half a pound of Beef-suet minced small, Raisins of
the Sun the stones picked out, Cloves, Mace, minced Dates, Sugar, Mar­row,
Rose-water, Eggs and Cream, mingle all these together, and put it into a dish
fit for your stuff, in less than an hour it will be baked, then scrape on
sugar, & serve it in.

#### 1.162. How to make a Florentine.

Take the Kidney of a Loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a
Rabbet, mince any of these small, with the Kidney of a Loin of Mutton; if it
be not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Sugar, Cream,
Currans, Eggs and Rose-water, mingle these four together and put them into a
dish between two sheets of paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by
the brim of the dish, then cut it round about like Virginal Keys, then turn up
one, and let the other [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=189) lie, then pink
it, cake it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.163. To Roast a Breast of Veal.

Take parsley and Thyme, wash them, and chop them small, then take the yolks of
five or six Eggs, grated bread and Cream, mingle them together with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, Currans and Sugar, then raise up the skin of the breast of Veal,
and put it in your stuff, prick it up close with a Skuer, then roast it, and
bast it with butter, when it is roasted, wring on the juice of a Lemon, and
serve it.

#### 1.164. To roast a Hare.

Case your Hare, but cut not off her ears nor legs, then wash her, and dry her
with a cloth, then make a pudding, and put into her belly, then sow it up
close, then truss her as if she were running, then spit her, then take some
Cla­ret-wine, and grated bread, Sugar, and Ginger, Barberries, and butter,
boil these together for your sauce.

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=190)

#### 1.165. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton.

Roast it with a quick fire, that the fat may drop away, and when you think it
is half roasted, set a dish under it, and flesh it with a knife a-cross as you
do Pork, but you must cut it down to the bone on both the sides, till the
gravy run into the dish, baste it no more after you have cut it, put unto the
gravy half a pint of White-wine Vinegar, a handful of Capers and Olives, five
or six blades of Mace, a handful of Su­gar, and stew all these together, and
pour it on your meat.

#### 1.166. To roast a Neats-tongue.

Boil him and blanch him, cut out the meat at the butt-end, and mingle it with
Beef-suit as much as an Egg, then season it with Nutmeg, and Sugar, Dates,
Cur­rans, and yolks of raw Eggs, then put your meat to the Tongue, and bind it
with a Cawl of Veal or Mutton, then roast it, baste it [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=190) with butter,
save the gravy, and put thereto a little Sack or Mus­cadine, let it stew a
little while, then pour it in to your Tongues, and serve it.

#### 1.167. How to roast a Pig with a Pud­ding in his belly.

Fley a fat Pig, truss his head looking over his back, then tem­per as much
stuff as you think will fill his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick
it up close, when it is almost roasted, wring on the juice of a Lemon, when
you are ready to take it up, take four or five yolks of Eggs, and wash your
Pig all over, mingle your bread with a little Nutmeg, and Ginger, then dry it,
and take it up as fast as you can, let your sauce be Vinegar, Butter, and
Sugar, the yolk of a hard Egg minced, and serve it hot.

#### 1.168. How to roast a Leg of Mutton.

Cut holes in a Leg of Mutton, with a knife, then thrust in slices [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=191) of Kidney
suet, and stick it with Cloves, roast it with a quick fire, when it is half
roasted, cut off a piece underneath, and cut it into thin slices, then take a
pint of great Oysters with the liquor, 3 or 4 blades of Mace, a little
Vine­gar and Sugar, stew these till the liquor be half consumed, then dish up
your Mutton, pour on the sauce, and serve it.

#### 1.169. How to roast a Neck of Mutton.

Cut away the swag, and roast it with a quick fire, but scorch it not, baste it
with butter a quarter of an hour, after wring on the juice of half a Lemon,
save the gravy, then baste it with butter again, wring on the other half of
the Lemon, when it is roasted, dry it with Manchet, and grated Nutmeg, then
dish it, and pour on your sauce.

#### 1.170. To roast a Shoulder or Haunch of Veni­son, or Chine of Mutton.

Take any of the meats, and lard [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=191) them, prick
them with Rosemary, baste them with butter, then take half a pint of Claret-
wine, Cinna­mon, Ginger, Sugar, grated bread, Rosemary and Butter, let all
these boil together, until it be as thick as water-gruel, then put in a little
Rose-water and Musk, it will make your Gallentine taste very plea­santly, put
it on a fitting dish, draw off your meat, lay it into that dish, strew it with
salt.

#### 1.171. To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal.

Take Parsley, Winter-savory, and Thyme, mince these small with hard Eggs,
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Currans, work these together with raw yolks of
Eggs, then stuff your meat with this, roast it with a quick fire, baste it
with Butter, when it is roasted, take the gravy and put thereto Vinegar, Sugar
and But­ter, let it boil, when your meat is roasted, pour this sauce on it,
and serve it.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=192)

#### 1.172. To roast a Gigget of Mutton.

Take your Gigget with Cloves, and Rosemary, and lard it, roast it, baste it
with butter, and save the gravy, put thereto some Claret wine, with a handful
of Capers, season it with Ginger and Sugar, when it is boiled well, dish up
your Gigget, and pour on your sauce.

#### 1.173. To Fry a Chicken.

Boil your Chicken in water and Salt, then quarter them into a pan with sweet
butter, and let them fry leisurely, then put there­to a little Verjuice, and
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, the yolks of two or three raw Eggs, stir these
well together, and dish up your Chickens, pour the sauce up­on them.

#### 1.174. How to fry Calves feet.

Boil them, and blanch them, then cut them in two, then take good store of
Parsley, put thereto some yolks of Eggs, season it with [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=192) Nutmeg, Sugar,
Pepper, and Salt, then roul your Calves-feet in them, and fry them with sweet
butter, then boil some Parsley, and beat it very tender, put to it Vine­gar,
Butter and Sugar, heat it hot, then dish up your feet upon sip­pets, pour on
your sauce, scrape on some Sugar, and serve it hot.

#### 1.175. How to fry Tongues.

Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in thin slices, season them with Nutmeg,
Sugar, Cinna­mon, and Salt, then put thereto the yolks of raw Eggs, the core
of a Lemon cut in square pieces  [...]ike a Die, then fry them in spoon­fuls
with sweet Butter, let your sauce be White-wine, Sugar and Butter, heat it
hot, and pour it  [...] your Tongues, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.176. How to make Fritters.

Make your Batter with Ale, Eggs and Yest, season it with [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=193) Milk, Cloves,
Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, cut your Apples like Beans, then put your
Apples and Batter together, fry them in boiling Lard, strew on sugar, and
serve them.

#### 1.177. To souce Brawn.

Take up your Brawn while i [...] is hot out of your boiler, then co­ver it
with Salt, when it hath stood an hour, turn the end that was under upward,
then strew,  [...] salt upon that, then boil you [...] soucing-drink, and put
thereto  [...] good deal of salt, when it is cold  [...] put in your Bra [...]
with the Sa [...] that is about it,  [...]nd let it stan [...] ten days, then
change your so [...]cing drink, and as you change  [...] put in salt, when you
spend it,  [...] it be too salt, change it with fre [...] drink.

#### 1.178. To souce a Pig.

Cut off the head, and cut you [...] Pig into two sleaks, and take o [...] the
bones, then take a handful  [...] [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=193) sweet Herbs,
and mince them small, then season your Pig and Herbs with Nutmeg, Ginger,
Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then strew your Herbs on the inside of your Pig, then
roul them up like two Collars of Brawn, then bind them in a cloth fast, then
put them a boiling in the boiling-pot, put in some Vinegar and Salt, when they
are boiled very tender, take them off, let them stand in the same liquor 2 or
3 days, then put them into soucing-drink, and serve it with Mustard and Sugar.

#### 1.179. How  [...]ouce Eels.

Take 2 salt [...] [...]els, and fley them, cut them down the back, and take
out the bones, and take good store of Parsley, Thyme, and sweet Marjoram,
mince them small, sea­son them with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper and Salt, strew
your herbs in the inside of your Eels, then roul them up like a Collar of
Brawn, put them into a cloth, and [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=194) boil them
tender with salt and Vi­negar, when they are boiled, then take them up, let it
be in the pickle two or three days, and then spend them.

#### 1.180. How to souce a Breast of Veal.

Take out the bones of a Breast of Veal, and lap it in water 10 or 12 hours,
then take all manner of sweet herbs, and mince them small, then take a Lemon
and cut it in thin slices, then lay it with your herbs in the inside of your
breast of Veal, then roul it up like a Collar, and bind it in a cloth, and
boil it very tender, then put it in­to soucing-drink, and spend it.

#### 1.181. To souce a Tench or Barbel.

First cut them down the back, then wash them, and put them a boiling in no
more water than will cover them, when they boil, put in some Salt and Vinegar,
scum it very clean, when it is boiled enough, take it up, and put it into a
dish fit for the Fish, [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=194) then take out
the bones, pour on as much liquor as will cover it, with grated Nutmeg, and
powder of Cinnamon, when it is cold serve it.

#### 1.182. To souce a Fillet of Veal.

Take a fair Fillet of Veal, and lard it very thick, but take out the bones,
season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, then roul it up hard, let
your liquor be the one half White-wine, the other half water; when your liquor
boileth put in your meat, with Salt and Vinegar, and the peel of a Lemon, then
scum it very clean, let it boil until it be tender, then take it not up until
it be cold, and souce it in the same liquor.

#### 1.183. To marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison.

Stick any of these with Rose­mary and Cloves, then roast it, being first
joined very well, then baste it oft with water and salt, and when it is
throughly roasted take it up, and let it cool, then [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=195) take Claret-
wine and Vinegar, and as much water, boil it with Rosemary, Bayes, good store
of Pepper, Cloves, Salt; when it hath boiled an hour, take it off, and let it
cool, then put your meat into a Vessel, and cover it with this liquor and
Herbs, then stop it up close, the closer you stop it, the longer it will keep.

#### 1.184. To marble Fish.

Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts or Salmons, Mullets, Mackrels or any kind of
shell-fish, wash them and dry them with a cloth, then fry them with Sallade-
Oyl, or clarified Butter, fry them very crispe, then make your pickle with
Claret-wine and fair water, some Rosemary and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in
slices, and Pepper and Salt, when it hath boiled half an hour, take it off,
and let it cool, then put your fish into a Vessel, cover it with liquor and
spice, and stop it close.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=195)

#### 1.185. How to make a Tart of Wardens.

You must first bake your War­dens in a pot, then cut them in quarters, and
core them, then put them into your Tart, with sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger,
then close up your Tart, and when it is al­most baked, do it as your
Warden­pie, scrape on sugar and serve it.

#### 1.186. To make a Tart of green Pease.

Take green Pease, and seeth them tender, then pour them out into a Cullender,
season them with Saffron, salt, and sweet but­ter, and sugar, then close it,
then bake it almost an hour; then draw it forth, and ice it, put in a little
Verjuice, and shake it well, then scrape on sugar and serve it.

#### 1.187. How to make a Tart of Rice.

Boil your Rice, and pour it into a Cullender, then season it with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Ginger, and Pepper and Sugar, the yolks of 3 or 4 Eggs, then put it
into your Tart, with the juice of an Orange, [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=196) then close it,
bake it, and ice it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

#### 1.188. How to make a Tart of Medlars.

Take Medlars that are rotten, then scrape them, then set them upon a chafing-
dish of coals, sea­son them with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Ginger, let it boil well, and lay it on paste, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

#### 1.189. How to make a Tart of Cherries.

Take out the stones, and lay the Cherries into your Tart, with Su­gar, Ginger,
and Cinnamon; then close your Tart, bake it and ice it, then make a sirrup of
Muskadine, and Damask-water, and pour this into your Tart, scrape on sugar and
serve it.

#### 1.190. How to make a Tart of Strawberries.

Wash your Strawberries, and put them into your Tart, season them with Sugar,
Cinnamon, Gin­ger, and a little Red-wine, then close it, and bake it half an
hour, ice it, scrape on sugar and serve it.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=196)

#### 1.191. To make a Tart of Hips.

Take Hips and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them,
season them with su­gar, Cinnamon and Ginger, then close your Tart, bake it,
ice it, scrape on sugar, serve it.

#### 1.192. How to make a Pippin Tart.

Take fair Pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters and core them, then
stew them with Claret-Wine, Cinnamon and Ginger, let them stew half an hour
then pour them out into a Cullender, but break them not, when they are cold,
lay them one by one into the Tart, then lay on Sugar, bake it, ice it, scrape
on sugar, and serve it.

#### 1.193. How to scald Milk after the Western fashion.

When you bring your Milk from the Cow, strain it into an earthen pan, and let
it stand two hours, then set it over the fire [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=197) till it begin
to heave in the mid­dle, then take it off, but jog it as little as you can,
then put it into a room where it may cool, and no dust fall into it, this Milk
or Cream you may keep two or three days.

#### 1.194. To make a Junket.

Take Ewes or Goats milk, if you have neither of these, then take Cows-milk,
and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour
it out into a dish, and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and sugar, then
take some of your a­foresaid Cream and lay on it, scrape on sugar and serve
it.

#### 1.195. To make Cream Clutter.

Take milk, and put it into an earthen pot, and put thereto Runnet, let it
stand two days, it will be all in a curd, then season it with some sugar,
Cinnamon, and cream, then serve it, this is best in the hottest of the summer.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=197)

#### 1.196. To make a White-pot.

Take a quart of Cream, and put it over the fire to boil, season it with sugar,
Nutmeg, and Cinna­mon, Sack and Rose-water, the yolks of seven or eight Eggs,
beat your Eggs with Sack and Rose-water, then put it into your cream, stir it
that it curdle not, then pare two or three pippins, core and quarter them, and
boil them with a handful of Raisins of the Sun, boil them, tender, and pour
them into a cullender, then cut some sippets very thin, and lay some of them
in the bottom of the dish, and lay on half your Ap­ples, and curians, then
pour in half your Milk, then lay on more sippets, and the rest of your Ap­ples
and Raisins, then pour on the rest of your Milk bake it, scrape on sugar, and
serve it.

#### 1.197. How to make a Pudding in hast.

Take a pint of Milk, and put thereto a handful of Raisins of [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=198) the Sun, and
as many currans, and a piece of Butter, then grate Manchet, and Nutmeg also,
and put thereto a little flower; when your Milk boileth, put in your bread,
let it boil a quarter of an hour, and put in a piece of butter in the boiling
of it, and stir it al­ways, then dish it up, pour on butter and serve it.

#### 1.198. To make a Pudding in a dish.

Take a quart of Cream, put thereto a pound of Beef-suet min­ced small, put it
to your Milk, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Rose-water and Cinnamon, then take
some seven or eight Eggs, and beat them very well, then take a cast of
Manchets, and grate them, and put unto it, then mingle those together well,
then put it into a dish, and bake it, when it is baked, scrape on sugar, and
serve it.

#### 1.199. To boil Cream.

Take a quart of Cream, and [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=198) set it a
boiling with Mace, whilst your cream is boiling cut some thin sippets, then
take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, put them with Rose-water and sugar, and a
little of your cream, when your cream boileth take it off the fire, and put in
your Eggs, and stir it very fast that it curdle not, then put your sippets
into the dish, pour in your cream, and let it cool, when it is cold, scrape on
sugar and serve it.

#### 1.200. To draw Butter.

Take your Butter, and cut it into thin slices, put it into a dish then put it
upon the coals where it may melt leisurely, stir it osten, and when it is
melted, put in two or three spoonfuls, of water, or Vinegar, which you will,
stir them and beat it until it be thick.

#### 1.201. Lady of Arundels Manchet.

Take a bushel of fine Wheat-flower, twenty Eggs, three pound of fresh butter,
then take as [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=199) much salt and
barm as to the or­dinary manchet, temper it toge­ther with new Milk pretty
hot, then let it lie the space of half an hour to rise so you may work it up
into bread, and bake it, let not your Oven be too hot.

#### 1.202. To boil Pigeons.

Boil them in water and salt, take a handful of Parsley, as much Time stript,
two spoonfuls of Capers minced all together, and boil it in a pint of the said
liquor a quarter of an hour, then put in two or three spoonfuls of Ver­juice,
two Eggs beaten, let it boil a little, and put to a little Butter, when you
have taken it off the fire, stir this all together, and pour it upon the
Pigeons, with sippets round the dish.

#### 1.203. A Florentine of sweet-bread or Kidneys.

Parboil three or four Kidneys, and mince them small, season them with Nutmeg,
one stick of [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=199) Cinnamon, beat
as much Sugar as will sweeten it, and a penny loaf grated, and the marrow of
three bones in good pieces, and a quar­ter of a pound of Almond paste, a glass
of Maligo-sack, two spoon­fuls of Rose-water, a grain of Musk, and one grain
of Amber­greece, and a quarter of a pint of cream, three or four Eggs, and mix
all together, and make it up in puff paste, and bake it three quarters of an
hour.

#### 1.204. A Pork-pie.

Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg and Pepper, and salt, bake it
five hours in a round pie.

#### 1.205. A Chicken-Pie.

Scald and season your Chickens with Nutmegs, as much sugar as cinnamon,
pepper, and salt, then put them in your Pie, then put three quarters of
quartered Let­tice, and six Dates quartered and a handful of Goosberries, and
[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=200) half a
sliced Lemon, and 3 or four branches of Barberries, and a little butter, you
may use to four Chickens 3 marrow-bones rould in yolks of Eggs, and Ringo-
roots, and some preserved Lettuce, make a caudle, and put in when the pie
cometh out of the Oven, an hour and a half is enough to stand in the Oven.

#### 1.206. A Lamb Pie.

Take the same ingredients you did for the Chicken-pie, only leave out the
marrow, the Ringo-roots, and the preserved Lettuce, make your caudle of White-
wine, Verjuice and Butter, put it in when the pie comes out of the Oven.

#### 1.207. Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton.

Take a spoonful of Herbs, and as many Capers, half a pint of White-wine, half
a Nutmeg, and two Eggs; when it is boiled put a piece of but­ter to the gravy,
when is is boiled, take it off, and put the butter in.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=200)

#### 1.208. A Lumber-Pie.

Take three or four sweet-breads of Veal, parboil and mince them very small,
then take the Curd of a quart of Milk, turned with three Eggs, half a pound of
Al­mond-past, and a penny loaf gra­ted, mingle these together, then take a
spoonful of sweet herbs minced very small, also six oun­ces of Oringado, and
mince it, then season all this with a quar­ter of Sugar, and three Nutmegs,
then take five Dates, and a quar­ter of a pint of cream, four yolks of Eggs,
three spoonfuls of Rose­water, three or four Marrow-bones, mingle all these
together, except the Marrow, then make it up in long Boles, about the big­ness
of an Egg, and in every bole put a good piece of Marrow, put these into the
Pie; then put a quarter of a pound of butter, and half a sliced Lemon, then
make a caudle of White-wine, sugar and [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=201) Verjuice, put
it in when you take your Pie out of the Oven, you may use a grain of Musk and
Amber­greece.

#### 1.209. An Oyster Pie.

Season your Oysters with Nut­megs, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet herbs, your
Oysters being first thrown into scalding water, and parboiled, season them,
and put them into the Pie; put 2 or three blades of Mace, and half a sliced
Lemon, and the Marrow of two bones rouled in the yolks of Eggs, and some
butter, then let your Pie stand almost an hour in the Oven, then make a caudle
of Ver­juice, Butter and Sugar, put it in­to your Pie; when you take it out of
the Oven, you may use two Nutmegs to one quart of Oysters and as much pepper
as the quan­tity of 3 Nutmegs, but less Salt, and one spoonful of sweet herbs.

#### 1.210. An Artichoak-Pie.

Take the bottoms of boiled [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=201) Artichoaks,
and quarter them, and take the meat from the leaves, season it with half an
ounce of cin­namon, and half an ounce of beaten Nutmeg, and two ounces of
sugar, and put them into your Pie, and boiled marrow rouled in yolks of Eggs,
and six blades of large Mace, Lemon sliced, six quartered Dates, and a quarter
of a pound of Ringo-roots, half a pound of fresh but­ter, then let it stand in
the Oven one hour, and when you take it out, put a caudle into your Pie made
of White-wine, sugar and Verjuice.

#### 1.211. A Calves-foot Pie.

Mince your Calves-feet very small, then season them with two Nutmegs, and
three quarters of an ounce of cinnamon, 1 quarter of a pound of sugar, half a
pound of currans, two Lemon peels minced, ten Dates minced, 3 spponfuls of
Rose-water, and half a pound of fresh butter, bake it an hour, and [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=202) put a caudle
into it, made of White-wine, sugar, and Verjuice.

#### 1.212. A Skirret Pie.

Take a quarter of a peck of Skirrets blanched, and sliced, season them with
three Nutmegs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of sugar, and ten
quartered Dates, and the Marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, and
one quarter of a pound of Ringo-roots, and preserved Lettice, sliced Lemon,
four blades of mace, three or four branches of preserved Barberries, and half
a pound of Butter, then let it stand one hour in the Oven, then put a caudle
made of White-wind, Verjuice, butter and sugar, put in into the Pie when it
comes out of the Oven.

#### 1.213. A Calves-head Pie for Supper.

Boil your Calves-head almost enough, cut it in thin slices all from the bone,
season it with 3 beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=202) ounce of
Pepper, and as much salt as there is seasoning, then take a spoonful of sweet
herbs minced small, and two spoonfuls of su­gar, and two or three Arti­choak
bottoms boiled, and cut them in thin slices, and the Mar­row of two bones
rouled in yolks of Eggs, a quarter of a pound of Ringo-roots, & quarter of a
pound of Currans, then put it into your Pie, and put a quarter of a pound of
butter, and a sliced Lemon, three or four blades of mace, three or four
quartered Dates, let it stand an hour and more in the oven, then when you take
it out, put into it a caudle made of su­gar, White-wine, Verjuice and Butter.

#### 1.214. A Lark Pie.

Take three dozen of Larks, season them with Nutmegs, and half an ounce of
Pepper, a quar­ter of an ounce of mace beaten, then take the Lumber pye-meat,
[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=203) and
fill their bellies, if you will; if not, take half a pound of suet, and one
pound of Mutton min­ced, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, and six Apples
minced all together very small, then season it with a Nutmeg, pepper and salt,
and one spoonful of sweet Herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, one penny loaf
grated, a quarter of a pint of Cream, two or three spoonfuls of Rose-water,
three spoonfuls of Sugar, one or two spoonfuls of Verjuice; then make this in
boles, and put it in three bellies, and put your Larks in your Pie, then put
your mar­row rouled in yolks of Eggs upon the Larks, and large mace, and
sliced Lemon, and fresh butter, let it stand in the Oven an hour, when you
take it out, make your caudle of Butter, Sugar, and White-wine Vinegar, put it
into the Pie.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=203)

#### 1.215. A hot Neats-Tongue for Supper.

Boil your Tongue till it be tender; blanch it, and cut it in thin pieces,
season it with Nut­meg, and a quarter of an ounce of pepper, and as much salt
as seasoning, then take six ounces of Currans, season it all together, and put
it into the Pie, then put a Lemon sliced, and Dates and Butter, then bake it,
and let it stand an hour and half, then make a caudle of White-wine and
Verjuice, Sugar and Eggs, and put it in when you take it out of the Oven.

#### 1.216. A cold Neats-Tongue Pie.

Your Tongue being boiled, blanched and larded with Pork and Bacon, season it
with the same ingredients the Deer hath; that is, three Nutmegs, three ra­ces
of Ginger, half an ounce of Cloves and Mace together, and half an ounce of
Pepper, beat your spice all together, more salt [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=204) than
seasoning, and likewise lay in the liquor, bake it two hours, but put one
pound of butter in your Pie before you lid it.

#### 1.217. A Potato Pie for Supper.

Take three pound of boiled and blanched Potatoes, and three Nutmegs, and half
an ounce of Cinnamon beaten together, and three ounces of Sugar, season your
Potatoes, and put them in your Pie, then take the marrow of three bones rouled
in yolks of Eggs, and sliced Lemon, and large mace, and half a pound of
butter, six Dates quartered, put this into your Pie, and let it stand an hour
in the Oven, then make a sharp caudle of Butter, Sugar, Verjuice and White-
wine, put it in when you take your Pie out of the Oven.

#### 1.218. A Pigeon or Rabbet Pie.

Take one ounce of Pepper  [...] more salt, than season your Pige­ons or
Rabbet, and take two Nut­megs, [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=204) grated with
your seasoning, then lay your Rabbet in the Pie, and one pound of Butter; if
you heat the Pie hot: then put in two or three slices of Lemon, and 2 or 3
blades of Mace, and as many bran­ches of Barberries, and a good piece of fresh
butter melted, then take it and let it stand an hour and half, but put not in
the fresh but­ter till it comes out of the Oven.

#### 1.219. To make Puff-Paste.

Break 2 Eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roul it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much butter as past, and lay it in a
rank, and divide your butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at 5
seve­ral times, roul your paste very broad, then rake one part of the same
butter in little pieces all o­ver your paste, then throw a  [...]dful of
flower slightly on,  [...]en fold up your paste, and beat  [...]t with a
rouling-pin, so roul it out [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=205) again; thus do
five times, and make it up.

#### 1.220. A Pudding.

Take a quart of Cream, and two Eggs, beat them, and strain them into the
Cream, and grate in a Nutmeg and half, take 6 spoonfuls of flower, beat half a
pound of Almonds with some Cream, and put it into the cream, and mix this
together, boil your Pudding an hour and no more, first flower the Bag you put
it in, then melt fresh butter, and take sugar & Rose-wa­ter, beat it thick,
and pour it on the pudding, you may put to it a little Milk, and stick
blanched Al­monds and Wafers in it, add to the same pudding, if you will, a
penny-loaf grated, a quartern of Sugar, 2 Marrow-bones, 1 Glass of Maligo-
sack, six Dates minced, a grain of Ambergreece, a grain of Musk, 2 or 3
spoonfuls of Rose-water, bake the Pudding in little wood-dishes, but first
butter [[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=205)
them, your Marrow must be stuck to and again; then bake it half an hour, five
or seven at a time, and so set them in order in the dish, and garnish them
with a sprig in the middle, and wafers about it, strew Sugar about the branch,
and sliced Lemon, set four round, and one in the top.

#### 1.221. Frigasie of Veal.

Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rouling-pin, season it with
Nutmeg, Lemon, and Tyme, fry it slightly in a pan, beat 2 Eggs, and 1 spoonful
of Verjuice and put it into the pan, and stir it together, and dish it

#### 1.222. Frigasie of Lamb.

Cut your Lamb in thin slices, sea­son it with Nutmeg, Pepper, & Salt, mince
some Thyme, and Lemon, & throw it upon your meat, then fry it slightly in a
pan, then throw in 2 Eggs beaten in Verjuice & sugar in­to the pan, also a han
[...]ful of Goos­berries, shake it together and dish it.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=206)

#### 1.223. Frigasie of Chickens.

Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin
slices, season them with Thyme and Lemons minced, Nutmeg, and Salt, a handful
of Sor­rel minced, then fry it well with six spoonfuls of Verjuice, one
spoonful of Sugar, beat it toge­ther, so dish it with sippets about.

#### 1.224. Another Frigasie of Chickens.

Take the former ingredients, and add to it boil'd Artichoak bottoms with the
meat of the leaves, and a handful of scalded Goosberries, and boiled Skirrets
& Lettice tossed in butter and when they are boiled, and 2 spoonfuls of Sugar,
2 Eggs and Verjuice beaten together, and lay your Lettice upon your Chickens
as before, and sliced Lemon upon it, and sippets upon the Dish.

#### 1.225. A Frigasie of Rabbets.

Cut your Rabbets in small pie­ces, and mince a handful of Thyme, [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=206) and Parsly
together, and a Nutmeg, pepper and salt, season your Rab­bets, then take two
Eggs, and Verjuice beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and
dish it up in sippets.

#### 1.226. To hash a Shoulder of Mutton.

Half roast your Mutton at a quick fire, cut it in thin slices, stew it with
gravy, sweet Marjoram and Capers, and Onions, 3 Anchovies, Oysters, half a
Nutmeg, half a sli­ced Lemon; stir this altogether with the Meat, let it stew
till it be tender in a dish, then break 3 or four yolks of Eggs and throw it
in the dish with some butter, toste it well together, and dish it with
sippets.

#### 1.227. To make a Cake.

Take half a peck of flower, two pound and a half of Currans, 3 or 4 Nutmegs,
one pound of Almond paste, 2 pound of Butter, and one pint of Cream, three
spoonfuls of Rose-water, 3 quarters of a pound [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=207) of Sugar, half
a pint of Sack, a quarter of a pint of Yest, and six Eggs, so make it, and
bake it.

#### 1.228. To make a Leg of Mutton three or four Dishes.

Take a Leg of Mutton, cut out the flesh and the bone, but save the skin whole,
divide the meat in three pieces, and take the ten­derest, and cut in thin
slices, and beat it with a rouling-pin, season it with Nutmeg, pepper and
salt, & mince Thyme and Lemon-peel, fry it till it be tender, then beat 2
Eggs, with a spoonful of Verjuice, throw 2 Anchovies into the pan, shake it
all together, and put it into the dish with sippets round the Dish, being
drest with Barberries scalded, parsley and hard Eggs minced.

Another part of the same meat stew in a dish, with a little White-wine, a
little butter, and sliced Le­mon, one Anchovy, two Oysters, two baldes of
Mace, a little Thyme [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=207) on a branch,
and one whole Onion; take out the Thyme and the Onion when it is stewed; do it
all toge­ther on a Chafing-dish of coals till it be tender, then dish it,
garnish your dish with hard Eggs, and Barberries, and sliced Lemons, and
sippets round the dish.

Take another part of the same meat, mince it small with Beef suet, and a
handful of Sage, to 3 quarters of a pound of suet add one pound of meat, you
may use a spoonful of peper and salt, mix this all together, & stuff the skin
of the leg of Mutton hard, skuer it close, and spit it at a quick fire, and
well roast it in an hour.

Take another part of the same meat, then put in the pepper and salt with a
grated Nutmeg, some sweet Herbs, and a Lemon-peel minced, a penny-loaf grated,
one spoonful of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Raifins, and a quarter of
Currans, minced all together with [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=208) the meat and
the suet, and the rest of the ingredients, put to 2 spoon­fuls of Rose-water,
and as much salt as spice; then make it up in little long boles or roules, and
butter your dish, and lay them in with a round hole in the middle, set them in
an Oven half an hour, then pour the liquor which will be in the dish, and melt
a little but­ter, Verjuice and Sugar, and pour upon it, garnish your dish,
stick in every long roul, a flower of paste, and a branch in the middle.

#### 1.229. To souce an Eel.

Souce your Eel with a handful of salt, split it down the back, take out the
Chine-bone, season the Eel with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet herbs
minced, then lay a pack-thread at each end, and the middle roul up like a
Collar of Brawn, then boil it in water and salt, and vinegar, and a blade or
two of Mace, and half a sliced Lemon, boil it half an [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=208) hour, keep it
in the same liquor two or three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay
six or seven in a dish, with parsley, and Barberries, and serve it with
Vi­negar in saucers.

#### 1.230. To souce a Calves-Head.

Boil your Calves-Head in wa­ter and salt, so much as will cover it, then put
in half a pint of Vi­negar, a branch of sweet herbs, a sliced Lemon, and half
a pint of White-wine, two or three blades of Mace, and one ounce or two of
Ginger sliced; boil it all together till it be tender, keep it in the li­quor
2 or 3 days, serve it, the dish upright, and stick a branch in the mouth, and
in both eyes, garnish the dish with jelly of pickled cucumbers, and saucers of
Vinegar and jelly, and Lemon minced.

#### 1.231. A stewed Rabbet.

Cut your Rabbet in pieces, and season it with Pepper and Salt, Thyme, Parsley,
Winter-savoury, [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=209) and sweet-
Marjoram, three Ap­ples, and 3 Onions minced all toge­ther, stew it till it be
tender with Vinegar and water, put a good piece of butter in, stir it all
toge­ther in your dish, put sippets in the bottom, then serve it up with the
head in the middle of the dish with sippets in the mouth.

Lay your Pig in the same in­gredients as you did for your Calves-head, use the
same for a Capon, and the same for a Leg of Mutton.

#### 1.232. To boil Chickens.

Boil your Chickens in water and salt, and Wine-Vinegar, a blade of Mace, a
good handful of Endive, and as much Succory, two handfuls of Skirrets boiled,
and blanched, when the Chickens and these things are stewed, take a pint of
liquor up, and put to it a quart of White-wine, and one ounce and a half of
Sugar, and three Eggs to thicken it, a piece [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=209) of butter, and
lay them in the dish, and pour it on.

#### 1.233. To boil a Rabbet.

Boil it in water and Salt, mince Thyme and Parsley toge­ther, a handful of
each, boil it in some of the same liquor, then take three or four spoonfuls of
Verjuice, a piece of Irish Butter two or three Eggs, stir the Eggs together in
the liquor, set it upon the fire till it be thick, then pour it upon the
Rabbet, so serve it in.

#### 1.234. To boil a Duck.

Half roast your Duck with a quick fire, take as much Wine and water as will
cover her, take some Thyme and Parsley, and one handful of sweet marjoram, two
blades of mace, half a Le­mon sliced, stew these together half an hour without
Onions, take some of your liquor, and thicken it with 3 or 4 Eggs, two [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=210) or 3 spoonfuls
of Verjuice, a piece of Butter, and as much sugar as will lie upon it, dish
your Duck, and boil three or four slices of Lemon by it self, and hard Eggs
minced, put this upon your Duck, then pour your liquor upon it with
Barberries, so you may boil Pigeons with the same ingredi­ents, Plover or
Teal.

#### 1.235. A roasted Shoulder of Mutton.

When it is roasted, slash it, and carbonado it, take two spponfuls of Capers,
and a little Thyme, and Lemon minced, half a Nutmeg, two Anchovies, a quarter
of a peck of Oysters, mix all together, boil them one hour in strong broth and
White-wine, then pour it upon the meat, with hard Eggs minced, and sippets
round the dish, throw first salt on the meat, then the hard Eggs and sliced
Lemon and Barberries.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=34796&page=210)

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Kent, Elizabeth Grey, Countess of, 1581-1651.. Date: 1687  

