## (unknown project)

# The Noble fisher-man, or, Robin Hood's preferment shewing how he won a prize
on the sea, and how he gave one half to his dame, and the other to the
building of alms-houses : tune of, In summer time.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Noble Fiſher-man.
    * 1.2. The Second Part,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=110190&page=1)

## 1\. The Noble Fiſher-man.

Dr. Robin Hood's Preferment, ſhewing how he won a Prize on the Sea, and how he
gave one half to his Dame, and the other to the building of Alms-houſes. Tune
of, In Summer time.

_[figure]_

### 1.1.

IN Summer time when Leaves grow green,

when they grow both green and long,

Of a bold Out-low cal'd Robin Hood,

it is of him I ſing this Song.

When the Lilly Leaf and the Elephant,

doth bud and ſpring with a merry cheer,

This Out-law was weary of the wood-ſide,

and chaſing of the Fallow-Deer.

The Fiſher-men brave more money have,

then any Merchant two or three,

Therefore will I to Scarbrough go,

that I a Fiſher-man brave may he.

This Out-law called his merry men all,

as they ſat under the green-wood tree,

If any of you have gold to ſpend,

I pray you heartily ſpend it with me.

Now, quoth Robin, I'le to Scarbrough go,

it ſeems to be a very fair day,

Who took up his Inn at a widdow-womans touſe

hard by upon the waters grey.

Who asked him where wert thou born,

or tell to me where doſt thou fare [...]

I am a poor Fiſherman ſaid he thou,

this day intrapped all in care.

What is thy name thou fine Fellow?

I pray thee heartily tell it to me,

In mine own Country where I was born,

men call me, Simon over the Lee.

Simon, Simon, ſaid the good wife,

I wiſh thou mayſt well brook thy name,

The Out-law was ware of her courteſie,

and rejoye'd he had got ſuch a Dame.

Simon, wilt thou be my man?

and good round wages i le give thee,

I have as good a ſhip of mine own,

as any ſails upon the Sea.

Anchors and Plancks thou ſhalt want none,

Maſts and Ropes that are ſo long,

And if that you thus furniſh me,

ſaid Simon, nothing ſhall go wrong.

They pluckt up Anchor and away did ſail,

more of a day than two or three,

When others caſt in their baited books,

the bare lines into the Sea caſt be.

It will be long ſaid the Maſter then.

ere this long Lubber do thrive on the Sea.

Ile aſſure you he ſhall have no part of our fiſh,

for in truth he is no part worthy.

### 1.2. The Second Part,

to the ſame Tune.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

O Woe is me ſaid Simon then,

this day that ever I came here,

I wiſh I were in Plompton Park,

in chaſing of the Fallow Deer.

For every Clown laughs me to ſcorn,

and they by me ſet nothing at all,

If I had them in Plompton Park

I would ſet as little by them all.

They pluckt up Anchor and away did ſail,

more of a day then two or three,

But Simon eſpy'd a ſhip of war,

that ſailed towards them valourouſly.

O woe is me, ſaid the Maſter then,

this day that ever I was born,

For all our fiſh that we have got,

is every bit loſt and forlorn.

For yon French Robber on the Sea,

they will not ſpare of us one man,

But carry us to the Coaſt of France,

and lay us in the Priſon ſtrong.

But Simon ſaid, do not fear them,

neither Maſter take you any care,

Give me my bent bow in my hand,

and never o French-man will I ſpare.

Hold thy peace thou long Lubbber,

for thou art naught but brags and boaſt,

If I ſhould caſt thee Over-board,

there's but a ſimple Lubber loſt.

Simon grew angry at theſe words,

and ſo angry then was he,

That he took his bent bow in his hand,

and to the Ship-hatch go doth he.

Maſter, tye me to the Maſt (he ſaid)

that at my mark I may ſtand fair,

And give me my bent Bow in my hand

and never a French-man will I ſpare.

He drew his arrow to the very head,

and drew it with all might and main,

And ſtraight way in the twinkling of an eye,

doth the French-mans heart the arrow gain.

The French-man fell down on the Ship hatch,

and under the Hatches down below;

Another French-man that him did eſpy

the dead Corps into the Sea did throw.

O Maſter looſe me from the Maſt (he ſaid)

and for them all take you no care:

And give me my bent Bow in my hand

and never a French-man will I ſpare.

Then ſtraight they boarded the French ſhip

they lying all dead in their ſight:

They found within the Ship of War

twelve thouſand pound in money bright.

The one half of the Ship ſaid Simon then

i le give to my Dame and Children ſmall:

The other half of the ſhip i'le give

to you that are my fellows all.

But now beſpa  [...] the Maſter then

for ſo Simon it ſhall not be

For you have won it with your own hands

and the owner of it you muſt be.

It ſhall be ſo as I have ſaid

and with this gold for the oppreſt

An habitation I will build

where they ſhall live in peace and  [...]eſt.

## Appendix A

Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J.  [...]l [...]e.

[Home](/)

Date: 1674  

