## (unknown project)

# Orpheus Britannicus, A collection of all the choicest songs for one, two,
and three voices compos'd by Mr. Henry Purcell ; together with such symphonies
for violins or flutes, as were by him design'd for any of them, and a through-
bass to each song, figur'd for the organ, harpsichord, or theorbo-lute ... —
Vocal music. Selections

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=1)

Henricus Purcell. AEtat Suae 37. 95.

ὁυτος ἐκεινος

F Cloſterman pinx. R. White ſculp.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=1)

ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS.

A COLLECTION OF ALL The Choiceſt SONGS FOR One, Two, and Three Uoices,
COMPOS'D By Mr. Henry Purcell.

TOGETHER, With ſuch Symphonies for Violins or Flutes, As were by Him deſign'd
for any of them: AND A THROUGH-BASS to each Song; Figur'd for the Organ,
Harpſichord, or Theorbo-Lute.

All which are placed in their ſeveral Keys according to the Order of the
Gamut.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinſtall, for Henry Playford, in the Temple-Change,
in Fleet-ſtreet, MDCXCVIII.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=2)

### To the Honourable, The Lady HOWARD.

MADAM,

WEre it in the power of Muſick to abate-thoſe ſtrong Impreſſions of Grief
which have continued upon me ever ſince the Loſs of my dear lamented Husband,
there are few (I believe) who are furniſhed with larger or better ſupplies of
Com­fort from this Science, than he has left me in his own Compoſitions, and
in the Satisfaction I find, that they are not more valued by me (who muſt own
my ſelf fond to a Partiality of all that was his) than by thoſe who are no
leſs Judges than Patrons of his Performances. I find, Madam, I have already
ſaid enough to juſtifie the Preſumption of this Application to Your Ladiſhip,
who have added both theſe Characters to the many ex­cellent Qualities, which
make You the Admiration of all that know You. Your Ladiſhip's extraordinary
skill in Muſick, beyond moſt of either Sex, and Your great Goodneſs to that
dear Perſon, whom You have ſome­times been pleaſed to honour with the Title of
Your Maſter, makes it hard for me to judge whether he con­tributed more to the
vaſt Improvements You have made in that Science, or Your Ladiſhip to the
Reputa­tion he gain'd in the Profeſſion of it: For I have often heard him ſay,
That as ſeveral of his beſt Compoſitions were originally deſign'd for Your
Ladiſhip's Entertain­ment, ſo the Pains he beſtowed in fitting them for Your
Ear, were abundantly rewarded by the Satisfaction he has received from Your
Approbation, and admirable Performance of them, which has beſt recommended
both them and their Author to all that have had the happineſs of hearing them
from Your Ladiſhip.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=3) Another great
advantage, to which my Husband has often imputed the ſucceſs of his Labors,
and which may beſt plead for Your Ladiſhip's favourable Acceptance of this
Collection, has been the great Juſtneſs both of Thought and Numbers which he
found in the Poetry of our moſt refin'd Writers, and among them, of that
Honourable Gentleman, who has the deareſt and moſt deſerved Relation to your
Self, and whoſe Excellent Compoſitions were the Subject of his laſt and beſt
Per­formance in Muſick.

Thus, Madam, Your Ladiſhip has every way the juſteſt Title to the Patronage of
this Book, the Publi­cation of which, under the auſpicious Influence of Your
Name, is the beſt (I had almoſt ſaid the only) means I have left of Teſtifying
to the World, my deſire to pay the laſt Honours to its dear Author, Your
Lady­ſhip having generouſly prevented my intended Perfor­mance of the Duty I
owe to his Aſhes, by erecting a fair Monument over them, and gracing it with
an Inſcripti­on which may perpetuate both the Marble and his Me­mory. Your
Generoſity, which was too large to be confin'd either to his Life or his
Perſon, has alſo extend­ed it ſelf to his Poſterity, on whom Your Ladiſhip has
been pleas'd to entail Your Favours, which muſt, with all Gratitude, be
acknowledg'd as the moſt valua­ble part of their Inheritance, both by them,
and

YOUR LADISHIP's Moſt oblig'd, and moſt Humble Servant, Fr. Purcell.

[[Page iij]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=3)

### THE Bookſeller to the Reader.

WHereas this Excellent Collection was deſign'd to have been Publiſh'd ſome
conſiderable Time before now, the Reaſon of its delay, was to have it as
compleat as poſſibly it could be made, both in regard to the Memory of that
great Maſter, and the Sa­tisfaction of all that buy it. And to make amends to
thoſe Gentle­men and Ladies who ſubſcrib'd early to this Work, they will here
find an Addition of above Thirty Songs more than were at firſt propos'd, which
(conſidering the extraordinary charge of Paper, &c. at this time) is an
additional Expence to me, tho' I hope the Compleatneſs of the Work will
recompence my Care and Trouble. The Author's extraordinary Talent in all ſorts
of Muſick is ſufficiently known, but he was eſpecially admir'd for the Vocal,
having a peculiar Genius to expreſs the Energy of Engliſh Words, whereby he
mov'd the Paſſions of all his Auditors. And I queſtion not, but the Purchaſer
will be very well pleas'd in the Choice of this Collection, which will be a
great Satisfaction to

Your Humble Servant, Hen. Playford.

[[Page iv]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=4)

### An ODE on the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell. Written by Mr. Dryden.

I.

MArk how the Lark and Linnet Sing,

With rival Notes

They ſtrain their warbling Throats,

To welcome in the Spring.

But in the cloſe of Night,

When Philomel begins her Heav'nly Lay,

They ceaſe their mutual ſpight,

Drink in her Muſick with Delight,

And liſt'ning and ſilent, and ſilent and liſt'ning, and liſt'ning and ſilent
obey.

II.

So ceas'd the rival Crew when Purcell came,

They Sung no more, or only Sung his Fame.

Struck dumb they all admir'd the Godlike Man:

The God-like Man

Alas! too ſoon retir'd,

As he too late began.

We beg not Hell our Orpheus to reſtore;

Had he been there,

Their Sovereigns fear

Had ſent him back before.

The pow'r of Harmony too well they knew,

He long e're this had Tun'd their jarring Sphere,

And left no Hell below.

III.

The Heav'nly Quire, who heard his Notes from high,

Let down the Scale of Muſick from the Sky:

They handed him along,

And all the way He taught, and all the way they Sung.

Ye Brethren of the Lyre, and tunefull Voice,

Lament his lot, but at your own rejoyce.

Now live ſecure and linger out your days,

The Gods are pleas'd alone with Purcell's Layes,

Nor know to mend their Choice.

This Ode is Sett to Muſick by Dr. Blow, and may be bound up with this
Collection.

### Another Ode on the ſame occaſion. By a Perſon of Quality.

ACcord thy Bleſſing to my bold Deſign,

Thou beſt Inſpirer of Harmonious Grief;

Thou, who among the tunefull Nine,

In mournfull Melody art Chief.

In Muſick, wing'd with Sighs, I ſoar,

A ſecond Orpheus to deplore;

Second in Time, but Firſt in Fame;

To him blind Fiction gave a Name.

The truthleſs Tales, which ſrantick Poets tell

Of Thebes, and moving Stones, and Journeys down to Hell,

Were only Prophecies of Muſick's force, which we

Have wonderfully ſeen fulfill'd in Thee.

What mortal Harmony cou'd do

No Mortal ever knew,

Till thy tranſcendent Genius came,

Whoſe ſtrength ſurpaſs'd the Praiſes of Poetick flame:

Whoſe Raptures will for ever want a Name.

Out of thy Orb awhile

(Content to wander here below)

Thou did'ſt vouchſafe to bleſs our Iſle,

(With high Commands from Heaven, for ought we know)

To try ſeditious Jarrs to reconcile.

But Diſcord, in a frightfull form,

With all her Retinue of War,

The Drum, the Pulpit, and the Barr,

The croaking Crowds tumultuous noiſe,

And ev'ry hoarſe Out-landiſh voice,

Proclaim'd ſo loud th'impending Storm,

That frighted hence, thou didſt for Refuge fly,

To reaſſume thy Station in the Sky:

There Heavenly Carols to compoſe and ſing,

To Heavens harmonious King.

Where rapt in tranſports of Extatic Song,

Amidſt th' inſpir'd Seraphic throng,

Crown'd with Coeleſtial ever-blooming Bays,

Thou ſitt'ſt diſſolv'd in Hallelulahs.

### A Lamentation for the Death of Mr. Henry Purcell. Sett to Muſick by his
Brother, Mr. Daniel Purcell. The Words by N. Tate, Eſq;

I.

A Gloomy Miſt o'erſpreads the Plains

More Gloomy Grief the Nymphs & Swains;

The Shepherd breaks his tunefull Reed,

His pining Flocks refuſe to feed.

Silent are the Lawns and Glades,

[[Page v]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=4) The Hills,
the Vales, the Groves, the Dales,

All ſilent as Elizian Shades.

No more they Sing, no more Rejoyce,

Eccho her ſelf has loſt her Voice.

II.

A Sighing Wind, a Murm'ring Rill,

Our Ears with dolefull Accents fill:

They are heard, and onely they,

For ſadly thus they ſeem to ſay,

The Joy, the Pride of Spring is Dead,

The Soul of Harmony is fled.

Pleaſure's flown from Albion's Shore,

Wit and Mirth's bright Reign is o'er,

Strephon and Muſick are no more!

Since Nature thus pays Tribute to his Urn,

How ſhould a ſad, forſaken Brother mourn!

### An Ode for the Conſort at York-Buildings, upon the Death of Mr. Purcell.
By J. Talbot, Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

I.

WEep, all ye Muſes, weep o're Damon's Herſe,

And pay the grateful Honors of your Verſe:

Each mournfull Strain in ſaddeſt Accents dreſs,

His Praiſes, and your Sorrows to expreſs.

Ye Sons of Art, lament your Learned Chief

With all the Skill and Harmony of Grief;

To Damon's Herſe your tunefull Tribute bring,

Who taught each Note to ſpeak, and every Muſe to ſing.

II.

Hark! how the Warlike Trumpet groans,

The Warlike Trumpet ſadly moans,

Inſtructed once by Damon's Art

To warm the active Soldier's Heart,

To ſoften Danger, ſweeten Care,

And ſmooth the rugged Toils of War,

Now with ſhrill Grief, and melancholy Strains

Of Damon's Death, and Albion's Loſs complains.

The ſprightly Haut-boys, and gay Violin,

By Damon taught to charm the liſt'ning Ear,

To fill the ecchoing Theatre,

And with rich Melody adorn each Scene;

Forget their native Chearfulneſs,

Their wonted Air and Vigor to expreſs,

And in dead doleful Sounds a tuneleſs Grief confeſs.

" Weep all ye Muſes, weep o're Damon's Herſe,

" And pay the grateful Honors of your Verſe.

III.

Mark how the melancholy Flute,

Joins in ſad Conſort with the amorous Lute,

Lamenting Damon's hapleſs Fate:

From him they learn'd to tell the Lover's Care,

With ſoft Complaints to move the cruel Fair,

To calm her Anger, and to change her Hate.

The various Organ taught by Damon's hand

A holier Paſſion to command,

The roving Fancy to refine,

And fill the raviſh'd Soul with Charms divine;

Now in loud Sighs employs its tuneful Breath,

And bids each ſecret Sound conſpire

To mourn its darling Damon's Death,

And with conſenting Grief to form one num'rous Choir.

" Weep all ye Muſes, weep o're Damon's Herſe,

" And pay the grateful Honors of your Verſe.

IV.

Ceaſe, ceaſe, ye Sons of Art, forbear

To aggravate your own Deſpair:

Ceaſe to lament your Learned Chief

With fruitleſs Skill, and hopeleſs Grief;

For ſure, if Mortals here below

Ought of Diviner Beings know,

Damon's large Mind informs ſome active Sphere,

And circles in melodious Raptures there;

Mix'd with his Fellow-Choriſters above,

In the bright Orbs of Harmony and Love.

### The following Lines were deſign'd for Mr. Purcell's Monument; which being
ſup­ply'd by a better Hand, the Author of this Inſcription, in veneration to
the Memory of that Great Maſter, prefixes it to his Golden Remains.

Memoriae Sacrum H. P.

En! Marmor loquax

(Vix, heu! prae dolore)

Lacrymas ſtillatim ſudat;

Manes Purcelli ſacros,

Quiſquis es, Viator,

Siſte ac venerare.

Eheu! quàm ſubitò Orbis Harmonici

Procubuit Columen!

Angliacus ille Amphion, Orpheus, Apollo,

Deus Harmoniae Italo-Anglus,

Certè Corellius;

Artis Muſicae

Perquàm difficilis

Facilè Coryphaeus.

Per acuta Muſicae victor ibat ovans.

[[Page vi]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=5) Et placidâ
Animam compede alligavit.

Eheu! quàm brevi

Praecox marceſcit ingenium!

Invida quippe Natura Juvenem,

Arte ſeneſcentem, corripuit.

At—deſine tandem

Miſerantis quaerimoniae:

Non Omnis moritur,

Vivunt Symphoniae immortales.

Angelorum Chori Purcellum ſtipantes,

Nectaris immemores,

Mellitiores iſtos bibunt Aure ſonos:

Et plaudentes recinunt.

Vivent, in aeternum

Aeternúmque placebunt.

Abi, viator, &, ſi Muſicus, aemulare:

Sed calcibus humum levitèr preme,

No naſcentes atteras Roſas.

Johannes Gilbert A. M. Coll. Chriſt. Cantab.

### To the Memory of my Dear Friend Mr. Henry Purcell.

MƲSICK, the chiefeſt Good the Gods have giv'n,

And what below ſtill antedates our Heav'n,

Juſt like a Spirit, by a laſting Spell,

Conſin'd to Italy, did Ages dwell.

Long there remain'd a pleas'd & welcom Gueſt,

Lov'd beſt to live where beſt ſhe was expreſt.

By Glory led, at length to France ſhe came,

And there immortaliz'd great Luly's Name;

As yet a Stranger to the Britiſh Shore,

Till Lock, and Blow, deep learn'd in all her Lore,

And happy artfull Gibbons, forc't her o're.

Where with young Humphries ſhe acquainted grew,

(Our firſt reforming Muſic's Richelieu)

Who dying left the Goddeſs all to You.

There are, I own, a num'rous tunefull Throng,

Compoſing ſtill, though often in the wrong,

And with Old Air ſet forth a fine New Song.

Theſe to thy juſter Art have no pretence,

For if they make a Tune they mar the Senſe.

If ſparkling Air the taking Treble grace,

'Tis murder'd quite by the Ʋngodly Baſs.

Theſe to old Morly's Maxims counter run;

In Overtures rejoyce, in Jiggs they mourn:

Whilſt their too great Example, Mighty You,

That you might ſtill impartial Juſtice doe,

At once to Muſic, and the Muſes too;

Each Syllable firſt weigh'd, or ſhort, or long,

That it might too be Senſe, as well as Song.

Where e're thy well known Name with theirs is found,

Is as if Cowley, up with Quarles were bound.

Purcell! the Pride and Wonder of the Age,

The Glory of the Temple, and the Stage.

When I thy happy Compoſitions view,

The Parts ſo proper find, the Air ſo new,

Your Cadence juſt, your Accent ever true;

How can I e're enough the Man admire,

Who's rais'd the Britiſh o're the Thracian Lyre!

That Bard cou'd make the Savage-kind obey,

But thou haſt tam'd yet greater Brutes than they:

Who e're like Purcell cou'd our Paſſions move!

Who ever ſang ſo feelingly of Love!

When Thyrſis does in dying Notes complain

His hapleſs Love, and Phillis cold Diſdain;

Brib'd by the magic Sounds that ſtrike the Ear,

We Parties turn, and blame the cruel Fair;

But when you tune your Lyre to MartialLays,

In Songs Immortal, Mortal Hero's Praiſe;

Each Song its Hearers does to Hero's raiſe.

Hail! and for ever hail Harmonious Shade!

I lov'd thee Living, and admire thee Dead.

Apollo's Harp at once our Souls did ſtrike,

We learnt together, but not learnt alike:

Though equal care our Maſter might beſtow,

Yet only Purcell e're ſhall equal Blow:

For Thou, by Heaven for wondrous things de­ſign'd,

Left'ſt thy Companion lagging far behind.

Sometimes a HERO in an Age appears;

But ſcarce a PURCELL in a Thouſand Years.

By H. Hall, Organiſt of Hereford.

### To the Memory of his much lamented Friend Mr. Henry Purcell. By H. P.

HArk! what deep Groans torment the Air,

Is Nature ſunk into Deſpair;

Or does the trembling Earth deſcry

A fit of Falling-Sickneſs nigh?

O my Prophetick Fears! he's gone!

'Twas Nature's diapaſon'd Groan.

Harmonious Soul! took'ſt thou offence

At Diſcords here, and fled'ſt from hence?

Or in thy Sacred Raptures hear

The Muſick of Heavens warbling Sphere?

Then mounted ſtrait where Angels ſing,

And Love does dance on every String.

For Balms thou need'ſt not rob the Eaſt,

Nor ſtrip the Phoenix Spicy Neſt:

For, O my Friend, thy charming Strains

Perfume the Skies with ſweeter Grains.

Touch but thy Lyre the Stones will come,

And dance themſelves into a Tomb.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=5)

### A Table of the SONGS.  
Note, That ſuch Songs as are thus marked † were never before Printed.

A.

  * AH how ſweet it is to love Page. 3
  * † Ah me, to many Deaths 179
  * † Ah Belinda 193
  * † And in each Track of Glory 208
  * As ſoon as the Chaos 228

B.

  * Beſs of Bedlam 126
  * † Bacchus is a Power Divine 174
  * Blow Boreas, blow 185
  * Behold the Man 237

C.

  * Celia has a thouſand Charms 1
  * Ceaſe anxious World 12
  * Cinthia frowns when e'er I wo her 70
  * Come let us leave the Town 108
  * Celebrate this Feſtival 117
  * Celemene, pray tell me 216

D.

  * Dear, pretty Touth 79
  * Dulcibella 199

F.

  * † For Love ev'ry Creature 45
  * Faireſt Iſle of Iſles excelling 83
  * From Roſie Bow'rs, where ſleeps the God of Love 90
  * Fair Cloe my Breaſt ſo alarms 137
  * Fly ſwift ye Hours 181
  * † From folded Flocks 213

G.

  * † Gentle Shepherds, you that know 72

H.

  * How pleaſant is this flow'ry Plain 19
  * † Here's to thee Dick 57
  * Hark my Daridcar 148
  * Here the Deities approve 227

I.

  * If Muſick be the Food of Love 6
  * I look'd and ſaw within the Book of Fate 10
  * I ſee, I ſee ſhe flies me 33
  * † I came, and ſaw, and was undone 67
  * † If Prayers and Tears the Church of England 98
  * In vain, in vain againſt Love 102
  * I'll ſail upon the Dog-ſtar 122
  * I attempt from Love-Sickneſs 226

L.

  * Leave theſe uſeleſs Arts 37
  * Love thou art beſt of humane Joys 39
  * Lucinda is bewitching fair 88
  * Loſt is my Quiet 110
  * † Love arms himſelf in Celia's Eyes 131
  * Lovely Albina 133
  * Let Hector, Achilles 162
  * † Let Caeſar and Urania live 203
  * Love thou canſt hear 219
  * Let the dreadfull Engines 243

N.

  * No, Reſiſtance is in vain 155
  * Neſtor who did 210
  * Now the Maids and the Men 232

O.

  * Oh Lead me, lead me 84
  * Oh Solitude my ſweeteſt Choice 95
  * † O let me weep 194

S.

  * Soft Notes and gently rais'd 15
  * † Seek not to know what muſt not be reveal'd 29
  * † Sweeter than Roſes 86
  * She loves and ſhe confeſſes too 124
  * † Stript of their Green 129
  * Sing all ye Muſes 141
  * Sound a Parley 159
  * Since the Times are ſo bad 168
  * † Strike the Viol, touch the Lute 189
  * Since from my dear 190
  * See where repenting Celia lies 191
  * See how the fading Glories 223

T.

  * The Cares of Lovers 9
  * Two Daughters of this aged Streams 35
  * Though my Miſtreſs be 42
  * Tell me why my charming Fair 62
  * They ſay you're angry 81
  * There ne'er was ſo wretched a Lover 112
  * This Poet ſings the Trojan Wars 119
  * † Thy Genius lo from his ſweet Bed of Reſt 135
  * † This Nature's Voice 177

W.

  * Whilſt I with Grief did on you look 4
  * When Teucer from his Father fled 47
  * When firſt I ſaw the bright Aurelia's Eyes 76
  * When Myra ſings 104
  * † What a ſad Fate 165
  * Were I to chuſe the greateſt Bliſs 206

Y.

  * You twice Ten Hundred Deities 25
  * You ſay 'tis Love creates the Pain 52

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=6)

### BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Henry Playford at the Temple-Change in
Fleetſtreet.

ALL the Excellent Compoſitions of Mr. Henry Purcell, both Vocal and
Inſtru­mental, that have been publiſh'd (viz.) his Firſt Book of Twelve
Sonata's in Four Parts, fairly engraved. Price ſtitch'd 12 s.

—His Ayrs and Sonata's newly printed, in Four Parts, price of the Ayrs 15 s.
the So­nata's 10 s.

The Opera of Diocleſian, ſtitch'd 8 s.

Te Deum & Jubilate, in Score, price 2 s. 6 d.

A Choice Collection of Leſſons for the Harpſichord or Spinett, with
Inſtructions for Beginners, fairly engraved. The Second Edi­tion, price 3 s.

Theſe Six printed for Madam Purcell, and ſold for her by Henry Playford.

Harmonia Sacra, Firſt and Second Book, price of both bound 16 s. together.

The Second Book (wherein are ſeveral ex­cellent Songs of Mr. Henry Purcell's
not yet known to many) price ſtitch'd 4 s.

Orpheus Britannicus: or a choice Collection of his Songs, in One, Two and
Three Parts, with Symphonies for Flutes and Violins to ſome of them, price
bound 18 s.

Two Elegies on the Death of the late Queen, price ſtitch'd 1 s.

The Second Part of the Muſical Compani­on, containing all Mr. Purcell's choice
Catches, to which is now added a Sheet more never printed in the former
Editions, price ſtitch'd 2 s. 6 d.

An Introduction to the Skill of Muſick, the Thirteenth Edition: to which is
added the whole Art of Compoſition, made more plain and eaſie, by Mr. Henry
Purcell, price 2 s.

Mr. Henry Purcell's Picture exactly engra­ved, by Mr. White, price in a Frame
1 s. 6 d.

A Paſtoral on the Death of Mr. Henry Pur­cell, by J. G. M. A. price ſtitch'd 6
d.

An Ode on the Death of Mr. Purcell, the Words by Mr. Dryden, and Sett to
Muſick by Dr. Blow, price ſtitch'd 2 s.

Next Term will be publiſhed Dr. Blow's Firſt Book of Choice Songs. Alſo an
Addition of his Choice Leſſons for the Harpſichord or Spi­nett, engraven on
Copper Plates, will be added to the Second Part of Muſick's Handmaid: of which
timely notice will be given of its Publi­cation.

The Whole Book of Pſalms in Octavo, compo­ſed in Three Parts, by Mr. John
Playford, the Fourth Edition, is now in the Preſs and will be ſpeedily
publiſhed: price 3 s. 6 d.

Miſcellanea Sacra: Poems on Divine and Moral Subjects; the Second Edition,
with Additions of Poems, and Meditations in Proſe, Collected by N. Tate,
Servant to his Majeſty, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Single Songs in the Opera of Brutus of Al­ba, or Auguſta's Triumph: Sett by
Mr. Daniel Purcell, price 1 s.

Single Songs in the Opera of the World in the Moon, price 6 d.

Europe's Revels: Three new Songs, Sett by Mr. John Eccles, (viz.) the
Dialogue, the Raree-ſhew, and the Iriſh Howle, price 6 d.

The Parallel: an Eſſay on Friendſhip, Love and Marriage: by Sir H. S. price
ſtitch'd 6 d.

Oroonoko, a Tragedy: by Mr. Southerne, price 1 s. 6 d.

The Lover's Luck, a Comedy: by Mr. Dilks, price 1 s.

The She Gallants, a Comedy: price 1 s. 6 d.

The laſt New Play called Heroick Love, a Tragedy: Acted at the New Theatre in
Little Lincoln's-Inne Fields; both written by the Ho­nourable Geo-Greenvill,
Eſq; price 1. s. 6 d.

The Second Part of the Dancing-Maſter; to which is added a Sheet of 12 Dances,
beginning with a new Tune called Europe's Revells; in all 48 New Dances: price
ſt. 1 s.

A General Catalogue of all the Choiceſt Muſick-Books theſe 20 years; alſo
Rul'd Pa­per, and Books rul'd of ſeveral ſizes, with Books on all other
Subjects.

⁂ There will be ſpeedily publiſh'd a Se­cond Edition of Mr. Lenton's laſt
Three-Part Conſort, with an Additional Sheet for 2 Flutes, and a Through Baſs,
&c.

### 1\.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=6)

#### 1.1. A Song in the Rival-Siſters.

[...] CE╌lia has a thouſand, thouſand, thou╌ſand, Charmes; 'tis Heav'n, 'tis
Heav'n to lye with╌in— her Armes; while I ſtand gazing on her Face, ſome new,
and ſome reſiſtleſs grace, fills with freſh Magick all the place: while I
ſtand gazing on her Face, ſome new, and ſome re╌ſiſt╌leſs grace, fills with
freſh Magick a╌ll the place: [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=7) [...] But while
the Nymph I thus a╌dore, but while the Nymph I thus, I thus a╌dore, I ſhou'd
my wretched, wretched, wretched Fate deplore; for oh! Mir╌til╌lo, oh!
Mir╌til╌lo, have a care, have a care, her ſweetneſs is a╌bove compare, but
then ſhe's falſe, ſhe's falſe, but then ſhe's falſe, ſhe's falſe as well as
Fair; have a care, have a care, have a care Mir╌til╌lo, have a care
Mir╌til╌lo, have a care, have a care, have a care, have a care.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=7)

#### 1.2. A Song in Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr.

[...] AH! how ſweet, ah! how ſweet, how ſweet it is to Love; Ah! ah! ah! how
gay is young de╌ſire: And what plea╌ſing pain, and what plea╌ſing pain we
prove; when firſt, when firſt we feel a Lovers fire: pains of Love are
ſweet╌ter far, then all, all, all, all, all, all other pleaſures are; pains of
Love are ſwee╌ter far, then all, all, all, all other plea╌ſures are. are.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=8)

#### 1.3. A Song on Mrs. Bracegirdle's Singing (I Burn &c.) In the Second part
of Don-Quixote.

[...] WHilſt I with grief did on you look, whilſt I with grief did on you
look, when Love had tur╌n'd your Brain, from you, I, I, the con╌ta╌gion took,
from you, I, I, the con╌ta╌gion took, and for you, for you bor╌e the pain, for
you, for you bor╌e the pain: Mar╌cel╌la, then your Lo╌ver prize, and be not,
be not [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=8)
[...] be not too ſe╌vere; uſe well, uſe well the con╌queſt of your Eyes, for
Pride, Pride, Pride has coſt you dear. Am╌bro╌ſio treates your Flames with
ſcorn, and rack╌s your ten╌der mind, withdraw your Smiles, withdraw your
Smile╌s and Frowns re╌turn, and pay him, pay him, pay him in his kind, and pay
him, pay him, pay him in his kind. [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=9) [...] IF Muſick,
if Muſick be the foo╌d of Love, Sing on, ſing on, ſing on, ſing on, ſing,
ſi╌ng on, till I am fill'd with jo╌y, till I am fill'd with joy; for then my
liſtning Soul you mo╌.╌ve, for then my liſtning Soul you mo╌ve, you move, to
plea╌ſures that can never, ne╌ver [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=9) [...] cloy; your
Eyes, your Meen, your Tongue de╌clare, that you are Mu╌ſick ev'╌ry where; your
Eyes, your Meen, your Tongue de╌clare, that you are Mu╌ſick ev'╌ry where.
Pleaſures in╌vade both Eye and Ear, pleaſures invade both Eye and Ear, ſo
fier╌ce, ſo fier╌ce [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=10) [...]the
tranſports are, they wou╌nd, ſo fier╌ce the tranſports are, they wound, and
all my Sen╌ſes feaſted are, and all my Sen╌ſes feaſt╌ed are; tho' yet the
Treat is on╌ly Sound, tho' yet the Treat is on╌ly Sound, Sound, Sound, Sound,
Sound, Sound, is on╌ly Sound; ſure I muſt periſh, I muſt, I muſt pe╌riſh by
your Charms, unleſs you ſa╌ve me in your Armes.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=10)

#### 1.4. A Song, in Timon of Athens.

[...] THe Ca╌res, the Car╌es of Lo╌vers, their A╌lar╌mes, their Sighs, their
Tears have pow'r╌full Charms, and if ſo ſweet their Tor╌ment is, ye Gods, ye
Gods how Raviſh╌ing, ye Gods how Raviſh╌ing, how Raviſhing the bliſs, ſo ſoft,
ſo gen╌tle, ſo ſoft, ſo gen╌tle is their pain; [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=11) [...] 'tis ev'n
a plea╌ſure to com╌plain.

#### 1.5. A Song in the Indian Emperor.

[...] I Look'd, I look'd, and ſaw within the Book of Fate, where ma╌ny Days
did Low'r, when lo! when lo! one happy, happy Hour leapt up, leapt up, and
ſmil'd, leapt up and ſmi╌l'd, to ſave thy ſin╌king State. [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=11) [...] A Day
ſhall come, when in thy pow'r thy cru╌el Foes ſhall be; a Day ſhall come, when
in thy pow'r thy cru╌el Foes ſhall be; then ſhall the Land be free, and thou
in Peace, and thou in Pea╌ce ſhalt Reign, but take, Oh! oh! take that
op╌portu╌ni╌ty, which once re╌fus'd, will never, never, never, come a╌gain;
will never, never, never, never, never, never, never, come a╌gain.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=12)

#### 1.6. A Song on a Ground, the Words by Sir George Ethridge.

[...] CEaſe, anxious World, your fruit╌leſs Pain; ceaſe, ceaſe, ceaſe anxious
World, your fruit╌leſs Pain, to gra╌ſp for╌bidden Store; your ſtudy'd Labours
ſhall prove vain, your Alchy╌my un╌bleſt; whilſt Seeds of far more pre╌cious
Ore, are ripen'd, are ri╌pen'd in my Breaſt: My Breaſt, the Forge of happi╌er
Love, where my Lu╌cin╌da, my Lu╌cin╌da lies; and the rich Stock does ſo
improve, as ſhe her Art em╌ploys; that ev'╌ry Smile and Touch ſhe [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=12) [...] gives,
turns all to Golden Joys. Since then we can ſuch Treaſures raiſe, let's no
Expence re╌ſuſe; in Love let's lay out all our Days, how can we e're be Poore?
How can we e're be Poore? How can we e're be Poor, when ev'╌ry Bleſſing that
we uſe, be╌gets a thouſand more? When e'╌ry Bleſſing that we uſe, be╌gets a
thouſand more? When ev'╌ry Bleſſing that we uſe, be╌gets a thouſand more.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=13)

#### 1.7. A Seranading SONG.

[...]

SYmphony for two Flutes.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=13) [...]
SO╌ft Notes, and gent╌ly rais'd, leſt ſome har╌ſh ſound the fair Co╌rinna's
Reſt do rude╌ly wound; dif╌ſuſe a peace╌full calmneſs through each Part, touch
all the Springs of a ſo╌ft Virgin's Heart: Tune [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=14) [...] ev'ry
Pulſe, and kin╌dle all her Blood, and ſwell the tor╌ment of the li╌ving Flood;
gli╌de thro' her Dreams, and o're her Fan╌cy move, and ſtir up, ſtir up all
the I╌mages of Love.

Play the Trible of the Symphony then go on.

Thus fe╌ble Man does his advantage take, to gain in Sleep what he muſt loſe
a╌wake; when Night and Shades ſhut up Co╌rin╌na's Charms, then, then is the
prop'rſt time to take up Arms: But Night and Shades her Beau╌ties can't
con╌ceal, Night has pe╌cu╌liar Gra╌ces to re╌veal.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=14) CHORUS.
[...]

(Flute.)

Ten thouſand thouſand Rap╌tures de attend, ten thouſand thouſand, ten thouſand
thouſand Raptures, Ten thouſand thouſand Raptures do at╌tend, ten thouſand
thouſand Raptures de at╌tend, do do attend this time, too ſtrong for Fancy,
too ſtrong for Fancy and too full, and too at╌tend this time, too ſtrong for
Fancy, too ſtrong for Fancy, and too full, and full, too full for Rhime; too
ſtrong for Fan╌cy, and too full for Rhime. too full, too full for Rhime; too
ſtrong for Fan╌cy, and too full for Rhime. [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=15) [...]

SYmphony fo two FLUTES.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=15) [...] How
plea╌ſant is this flow╌ry Plain and Grove! What perfect Scenes of In╌no╌cence
and Love! As if the Gods, when all things here below were curs'd, reſerv'd
this place to [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=16) [...] let us
know, how beau╌ti╌full the World at firſt was made, e're Mankind by Am╌bition
was be╌tray'd. The hap╌py Swain in theſe e╌na╌mell'd Fields, poſ╌ſeſſes all
the Good, poſſeſſes all, all the Good that Plenty yields; pure without
mixture, as it firſt did come, from the great Trea╌ſu╌ry of Nature's Womb;
free from Di╌ſturbance here he lives at caſe, contented with a lit╌tle Flock's
encreaſe, and cover'd with the gen╌tle Wings of Peace. No Fears, no Storms of
War his Thoughts mo╌leſt [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=16) [...] Ambition
is a ſtranger to his Breaſt; his Sheep, his Crook, and Pipe, are all his
Store, he needs not, neither does he cover more. Oft to the ſi╌lent Groves he
does retreat, whoſe Shades de╌fend him from the ſcor╌ching Heat: In theſe
Re╌ceſ╌ſes unconcern'd he lyes, whilſt thro' the Boughs the whiſp'╌ring
Zephire flies, and the Woods Choriſters on ev'ry Tree, lull him aſleep, lull
him aſleep, with their ſwee╌t Har╌money. [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=17) [...]

CHORUS in Five Parts. [...] Ah happy, happy, hap╌py Life! Ah happy, happy,
happy, ah hap╌py Life! Ah bleſt Re╌ Ah happy, happy, hap╌py Life! Ah happy,
happy, happy, ah hap╌py Life! Ah bleſt Re╌ ╌treat, void of the Troubles, the
Troubles, that attend the Great! From Pride, and courtly Fol╌lies ╌treat, void
of the Troubles, the Troubles, that attend the Great! From Pride, and courtly
Follies [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=17)
[...] free, from all their gaudy, gau╌dy Pomps, and Va╌ni╌ty: No guilty Re╌
free, from all their gau╌dy Pomps, and Va╌ni╌ty: No guilty Re╌ ╌morſe does
their Pleaſure an╌noy, nor di╌ſturb the De╌lights of their in╌nocent Joy.
Crown'd ╌morſe does their Pleaſure an╌noy, nor di╌ſturb the De╌lights of their
in╌nocent Joy. [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=18) [...] Monarchs,
whom Ci╌ties and Kingdoms o╌bey, whom Ci╌ties and Kingdoms o╌bey, are not
Crown'd Monarchs, whom Ci╌ties and Kingdoms o╌bey, whom Kingdoms o╌bey, are
not half ſo con╌ten╌ted, are not half ſo con╌ten╌ted, or hap╌py as they. half
ſo con╌ten╌ted, are not half ſo con╌ten╌ted, or hap╌py as they.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=18)

#### 1.8. The Conjurers Song in the 3d. Act of the Indian-Queen.

[...] YOU twice ten hundred De╌i╌ties, to whom, to whom we daily Sacrifice; Ye
pow'rs, ye pow'rs that dwell with Fates below, and ſee what Men are doom'd to
doe; where Elements in diſ╌cord dwell, thou God of ſleep a╌ri╌ſe and tell;
tell great Zempoalla, what ſtrange, ſtrange Fate muſt on her diſ╌mall,
diſ╌mall Vi╌ſion wait. By the croaking of the Toad, in their Caves that make
a╌bode; by the Croaking of the Toad, [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=19) [...] in their
Caves that make a╌bode; Earthy Dun, Earthy Dun that pa╌nts for breath, with
her ſwe╌ll'd ſides full, fu╌ll, fu╌ll of death; By the Creſted Adders Pride,
by the Creſted Adders Pride, that a╌long the Cliffs doe gli╌de, by the Viſage,
by thy Viſage feir╌ce and black, by thy Deaths Head on thy [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=19) [...] back; by
thy twiſ╌ted Ser╌pents plac'd, for a Girdle rou╌nd thy Waſt; by the Hearts of
Gold that deck thy Breaſt, thy Shoulders and thy Neck; from thy Sleep╌ing
Manſion riſe, and open, and open thy un╌will╌ing Eyes. While bubbling Springs
their Mu╌ſick keep, while bubbling Springs their Mu╌ſick keep, that uſe to
Lull thee, uſe to Lull thee, Lull thee in thy [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=20) [...] Sleep,
that uſe to Lull thee, Lull thee, Lull thee, uſe to Lull thee, Lull thee in
thy Sleep.

#### 1.9. A Song with Hautboys.

SYmphony for HAUTBOYS.

[...] [[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=20)
[...]

(Hautboy.)

(Voice)

SEEK not to know what muſt not, what muſt not, muſt not be Re╌veal'd; Joy╌s
on╌ly flo╌w where Fate is moſt con╌ceal'd; too bu╌ſy Man [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=21) [...] too bu╌ſy
Man wou'd find his ſor╌rows more, if fu╌ture For╌tunes he ſhou'd know be╌fore:
for by that knowledge, for by that know╌ledge of his Deſtiny, he wou'd not,
wou'd not live at all, but al╌ways dye; Enquire not then, who, who ſhall from
Bonds be freed, who 'tis ſhall wear a [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=21) [...] Crown, or
who ſhall Bleed, ſhall Bleed: All, all muſt ſub╌mit, all muſt ſub╌mit to their
ap╌poin╌ted Doom, Fate and miſ▪ ╌fortune will too, too quick, quick╌ly come;
Let me no more, no more, no more with power╌full Charms be preſt, I am forbid
by Fate, [[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=22)
[...] I am forbid by Fate to tell, to tell the reſt: Let me no more, no more,
no more with power╌full Charms be preſt, I am for╌bid by Fate, I am for╌bid by
Fate to tell, to tell the reſt. [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=22) [...] I See, I
ſee ſhe fly's me, ſhe fly's me; I ſee, I ſee ſhe fly's me, ſhe fly's me,
fl╌y's me, ſhe fly's me ev'ry where, ſhe fly's me ev'ry where; her Eyes, her
Eyes, her Scorn, her Scorn diſ╌covers, but what's her Scorn, but what's her
Scorn or my Deſ╌pair, ſince 'tis my Fate, 'tis, 'tis my Fate, ſince 'tis, 'tis
my Fate, ſince 'tis my Fate to Love her, ſince 'tis my [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=23) [...] Fate to
Love her? Were ſhe but kind, kind, were ſhe but kind, kind, whom I a╌dore, I
might live lon╌ger, but not Lo╌ve more; were ſhe but kind, kind, were ſhe but
kind, kind, whom I a╌dore; I might live lon╌ger, live lon╌ger, but not Lo╌ve
her more.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=23)

#### 1.10. A Two Part SONG in King Arthur.

[...] TWo Daughters of this A╌ged ſtream are we, Two Daughters of this A╌ged
ſtream are we, Two Daughters two Daughters of this A╌ged ſtrea╌m are we, and
of this A╌ged ſtream are we, two Daughters of this A╌ged ſtream are we, both
our Sea╌green Locks have comb'd, and both our Sea╌green Locks have comb'd,
have and both our Sea╌green Locks have comb'd for yee, and both our Sea╌green
Locks have comb'd for yee; come, come, come, come Bathe with us an Hour or
two, come, comb'd for yee; come, come Bathe with us an Hour or two, come,
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=24) [...]
come, come, come Na╌ked in for we are ſo, what danger, what dan╌ger come,
come, come Na╌ked in for we are ſo, what dan╌ger fro╌m from a Na╌ked Foe?
come, come Bathe with us, come, come Bathe a Na╌ked Foe? come, come, come,
come Bathe with us, come, come Bathe and ſhare what Plea╌ſures in the Floods
ap╌pear; we'll and ſhare what Plea╌ſures in the Floods ap╌pear; we'll beat the
beat the Waters till they bound, we'll beat the Waters till they bound, and
cir╌cle Waters till they bound, we'll beat the Waters till they bound, and
cir╌cle [[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=24)
[...]roun╌d, and cir╌cle roun╌d, and cir╌cle roun╌d, and cir╌cle round.
roun╌d, and cir╌cle round.

#### 1.11. A Two Part SONG, in Epſome-Wells.

[...] LEave, leave theſe uſeleſs Arts, leave, leave theſe uſe╌leſs Arts in
loving; ſeeming Leave, leave theſe uſeleſs Arts, leave, leave theſe uſeleſs
Arts in loving; an╌ger and diſ╌dain: ſeeming an╌ger and diſ╌dain: [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=25) [...] Truſt,
truſt to Nature, gently, gently, gently mo╌ving, Nature Truſt, truſt to
Nature, gently, gently, gent╌ly mo╌ving, never, never, never, never, never,
never, never, never, never, never, ne╌ver pleads in Nature never, never,
never, never, never, never, ne╌ver, ne╌ver, ne╌ver pleads in vain; nothing,
nothing guides a Lovers paſſion, nothing guides a Lo╌vers paſſion, like, vain;
nothing, no╌thing guides a Lovers paſſion, nothing guides a Lovers paſſion,
like, like the Fair ones in╌cli╌nation, like the Fair ones in╌cli╌na╌tion.
like the Fair ones in╌cli╌nation, like the Fair ones in╌cli╌na╌tion.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=25)

#### 1.12. A Two Part SONG,

[...] LOve, thou art beſt, Love thou art beſt, Love thou art beſt of Humane
joys; our Love, thou art beſt, Love thou art beſt, thou art beſt of Humane
joys; chief╌eſt, chief╌eſt, chief╌eſt hap╌pi╌neſs be╌low; our chief╌eſt,
chief╌eſt hap╌pi╌neſs be╌low; all, all, all, all, all o╌ther Pleaſures; all,
all o╌ther, all o╌ther Pleaſures are but Toys, all, all o╌ther Pleaſures; all,
all o╌ther Pleaſures, all, all o╌ther Pleaſures are but Toys; all, all, all,
all are but Toys, Muſick without that is but Noi╌ſe; all, all, all are but
Toys, Muſick with╌out [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=26) [...] And
Beauty, that is but Noi╌ſe; And Beauty, Beauty, and Beauty, Beauty but an
empty ſhow, but an empty ſhow. Heaven who knew beſt what Men Beauty but an
empty ſhow, but an emp╌ty ſhow. Heaven who knew beſt what Men cou'd mo╌ve,
cou'd move, and raiſe his thoughts, and raiſe his cou'd mo╌ve, cou'd move, and
raiſe his thoughts, and raiſe his thoughts a╌bove the Brute; ſaid let him, let
him be, ſaid let him, let him be, and thoughts a╌bove the Brute; ſaid let him,
let him be, ſaid let him, let him be, and [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=26) [...] let him
Love; That, that, that, that alone, that, that a╌lone, muſt his let him Love;
That, that, that, that a╌lone, that a╌lone, that, that alone, muſt his Soul
improve; How╌e're Phi╌lo╌ſo╌phers diſ╌pute, that, that, that, Soul improve;
How╌e're Phi╌lo╌ſo╌phers diſ╌pute, that, that, that, that alone, that alone,
muſt his Soul improve; How╌e're Phi╌ that a╌lone, that a╌lone, that a╌lone,
muſt his Soul improve; How╌e're Phi╌ ╌lo╌ſo╌phers diſ╌pute ╌lo╌ſo╌phers
diſ╌pute.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=27)

#### 1.13. A Two Part SONG.

[...] THough my Miſtreſs be Fair, yet froward, yet froward ſhe's too, then
hang the dull Tho' my Miſtreſs be Fair, yet frow╌ard ſhe's too, then Soul,
then hang the dull Soul, that will offer, will of╌fer to Woo; but 'tis Wine,
brave hang the dull Soul, then hang the dull Soul, that will offer to Woe; but
'tis Wine, 'tis Liquor, 'tis Liquor, good Liquor, that's much more ſublime,
much briſ╌ker Wine, brave Wine, 'tis Liquor, good Liquor that's much more
ſublime, much brisker and quicker, much, much, much briſ╌ker and quicker; it
in Sparkles ſmiles on me, and quicker, much, much, much briſ╌ker and quicker;
it in Sparkles ſmiles on me, [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=27) [...] tho' ſhe
frown up╌on me: Then with Laugh╌ing and tho' ſhe frown up╌on me: Then with
Laugh╌ing and Quaffing, I'le Time and Age be╌guile, owe my Pimples and
Wrinkles, owe my Pimples and Quaffing, I'le Time and Age be╌guile, owe my
Pimples and Wrinkles, owe my Pimples and Wrinkles, to my Drink, and a Smile.
Come fill up, come fill up my Glaſs, and Wrinkles, to my Drink, and a Smile.
Come fill up my Glaſs, come fill up my Glaſs, and a╌pox on her Face; may it
never want Scars and Scratches, may it never want Scars and a╌pox on her Face;
may it never, may it never want Scars, want Scars and [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=28) [...] Scratches,
Waſh, Paint and Patches: Give me all my Drink╌ing Maga╌zine, Scratches, Waſh,
Paint and Patches: Give me all my Drink╌ing Ma╌ga╌zine, I'le blo╌w up the
Scornfull Quean; give me Bottles and Give me all, I'll blo╌w up the Scornfull
Quean; give me Jugs, and Glaſ╌ſes and Mugs, I'le hug 'em and tug 'em, I'le hug
'em and Bottles and Jugs, and Glaſſes and Mugs, I'le hug 'em, I'le hug 'em and
tug e'm, and Court 'em much more, than e're I did the pee╌viſh Girl be╌fore,
tug 'em, and Court 'em much more, than e're I did the pee╌viſh Girl be╌fore,
[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=28) [...]
than e're I did, than e're I did the pee╌viſh than e're I did the pe╌viſh
Gir╌l Girl be╌fore. be╌fore.

#### 1.14. A Two Part SONG,

[...] FOr Love ev'ry Creature is form'd, for For Love ev'ry Creature is form'd
by his Nature, for Love ev'ry Creature is Love ev'ry Creature, for Love ev'ry
Creature is form'd by his Nature: form'd, for Love ev╌'ry Creature is form'd,
is form'd by his Nature: [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=29) [...] No Joy╌es
are a╌bove the plea╌ſures No, no, no, no Joys are a╌bove the plea╌ſures of
Love, no Joys are a╌bove the pleaſures of Love, no of Love, no Joys are a╌bove
the pleaſures of Love, Joy╌es are a╌bove, no, no, no, no, no no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no Joy╌es are a╌bove, Joys are above, no, no, no, no, no, no Joys
are above the pleaſures, the pleaſures, the no, no, no, no, no, no, no Joys
are a╌bove the pleaſures, the pleaſures, the [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=29) [...] pleaſures
of Love. pleaſures of Love.

#### 1.15. A Two Part SONG.

[...] WHen Teucer from his Fa╌ther fled, and from the Shore of Sa╌la╌mine;
when When Teu╌cer from his Fa╌ther fled, and from the Shore, and Teu╌cer from
his Fa╌ther fled, and from the Shore of Sa╌la╌mine, and from the Shore of
Sa╌la╌mine; when Teucer from his Fa╌ther fled, and from the Shore of
Sa╌la╌mine; with a Poplar Wreath he crown'd his from the Shore of Sa╌la╌mine;
with a Poplar Wreath he [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=30) [...] Head, that
glow'd with the warmth of ge╌ne╌rous Wine; crown'd his Head, that glow'd with
the warmth of ge╌ne╌rous Wine; and thus to his and thus to his droo╌ping
Friends he ſaid, and thus to his droo╌ping Friends he ſaid, and thus to his
droo╌ping droo╌ping Freinds he ſaid, Chear up my Hearts, chear up my Friends
he ſaid, Chear up my Hearts, Hearts, your Anchors weigh; tho' Fate our Native
Soil de╌bar, chear up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh; tho' Fate our Native Soil
de╌bar, [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=30)
[...] Chance is a better, better Father far, Chance is a better, better Father
far; Chance is a better, better Father far, Chance is a better, better and a
bet╌ter Country, a bet╌ter, better Country is the Sea: Father far; and a
bet╌ter Country, a better Country is the Sea: Then chear up my Hearts, then
chear up my Hearts, your Anchors Then chear up my Hearts, then chear up my
Hearts, your Anchor. weigh. Come Plo╌w, my Mates, come Plo╌w weigh. Come
Plo╌w, my Mates, come Plo╌w, [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=31) [...] my Mates,
the wa╌try, wa╌try way, and fear not, and fear not, fear not my Mates, the
wa╌try, wa╌try way, and fear not, and fear not, fear not un╌der my Command; we
that have known, have known the worſt, we that have under my Command; we that
have known, have known the worſt, we that have known the worſt at Land, with
the morrow's Dawn, with the morrow's Dawn, we'll An╌chor known the worſt at
Land, with the morrow's Dawn, with the morrow's Dawn, we'll weigh: Let us
drink and drown our Cares a╌wa╌y, An╌chor weigh: Let us drink and drown our
Cares, let us [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=31) [...] let us
drink and drown our Cares a╌way, and drown our drink and drown our Cares
a╌way; let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us Cares, and drown our
Cares; let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink,
let us drink, let us drink and drown, and drown our Cares a╌way; les us drink
and drown, and drown our Cares a╌way; let us drink and drown, and drink and
drown, and drown our Cares a╌way; let us drink and drown, and drown our Cares
a╌way. drown our Cares a╌way.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=32)

#### 1.16. A DIALOGUE in King Arthur.

[...] YOU ſay 'tis Love creates the pain, of which ſo ſad╌ly you complain; and
yet wou'd fain engage my Heart, in that un╌ea╌ſy cru╌el, cru╌el part; but how
a╌las, how a╌las think you that I can bear the woun╌ds of which you die? how
a╌la╌s, how a╌las think you that I can bear the wounds of which you die? 'Tis
not my paſ╌ſion makes my care, but your indifference gives de╌ſpair; the
lu╌ſty Sun, the lu╌ſty Sun be╌gets [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=32) [...] no Spring,
till gen╌tle ſhow'rs, till gen╌tle ſhow'rs aſ╌ſiſtance bring, ſo Love that
ſcorches and deſtroys, till kind╌neſs aids, till kind╌neſs aids can cauſe no
joy; Love has a thouſand, thouſand, thouſand, thou╌ſand ways to pleaſe; Love
has a thouſand, thouſand, thouſand, thouſand ways to pleaſe, but more, more,
more, more, more, more, more to rob us of our eaſe, but more, more, more,
more, more, more, more to rob us of our eaſe; for wak╌ing nights [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=33) [...] and
care╌full days, from hours of plea╌ſures he re╌pays; But ab╌ſence ſoon, or
jea╌lous fears o're╌flows the joy, o're╌flows the joys with floods of Tears;
but ab╌ſence ſoon or jea╌lous ſears o're╌flows the joys, o're╌flows the joys
with floods of Tears: But one ſoft moment makes amends for all the tor╌ment
that attends, one ſoft moment makes a╌mends for all the tor╌ment that
at╌tends.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=33) CHORUS.
[...] Let us Love, let us Love, and to hap╌pineſs haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt, Let
us Love, let us Love, and to hap╌pineſs haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt; let us
Love, let us Love and to happineſs haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt; let us Love,
let us Love and to happineſs haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt, haſt, Age and Wiſ╌dom
comes too faſt; Youth for Lo╌ving was deſign'd, Youth for haſt, Age and
Wiſ╌dom comes too faſt; Youth for Lo╌ving was deſign'd, Loving, Youth for
Lo╌ving was de╌ſign'd; You be conſtant Youth for Loving, Lo╌ving was
de╌ſign'd; I'le be conſtant, you be kind, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=34) [...] I'le be
kind, I'le be kind, I'le be kind, kind, I'le, I'le be kind; Heav'n can give no
I'le be conſtant, I'le be conſtant, I'le be conſtant, I'le be kind; Heav'n can
give no grea╌ter grea╌ter bleſ╌ſing than faithfull Love, and kind, and king
poſ bleſſing, no grea╌ter bleſ╌ſing than faithfull Love, and ╌ſeſ╌ſing, than
faithfull Love, than faithfull Love, and kind, and kind poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing, and
kind, and kind poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing, than faithfull Love, and kind, and kind
poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing, and kin╌d, and kind, and kind poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing, kin╌d, and kind, and
kind poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=34)

#### 1.17. A Two Part SONG, the Words by Mr. Cowley,

[...] HEre, here's to thee Dick, this whi╌ning Love de╌ſpiſe; here, Here,
here's to thee Dick, here, here's to thee Dick, this whi╌ning here's to thee
Dick, this whining, whining Love de╌ſpiſe; pledge me, pledge me, my Love
de╌ſpiſe, this whining, whi╌ning Love deſpiſe; pledge me, here's to thee
Friend, here, here's to thee Dick, pledge me, and drink, drink, till thou
be'ſt wiſe: It ſparkles Dick, pledge me, my Friend, pledge me, and drink,
drink, till thou be'ſt, wiſe: It ſparkles brigh╌ter far than ſhe, 'tis pure,
'tis pure, and right without de╌ceit, and brigh╌ter far than ſhe, 'tis pure,
'tis pure, and right, without de╌ceit, and [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=35) [...] ſuch,
ſuch, no Woman e're will be, no, no, no, they're all ſo╌phi╌ſti╌cate, ſuch,
ſuch no Woman e're will be: no, no, they're all ſo╌phi╌ſti╌cate, they're all,
all, all ſophiſticate. With all thy ſervile paines, what can'ſt thou they're
all, all, all ſo╌phiſticate. With all thy ſervile paines, what win, with all
thy ſervile paines, what can'ſt, what can'ſt thou win, but an ill favour'd,
and un╌clean╌ly can'ſt thou win, with all thy ſervile paines, what can'ſt thou
win, but an ill favour'd, and un╌clean╌ly Sin? A thing, a thing, ſo vile, and
ſo ſhort╌liv'd, that Venus Joys, as well as Sin? A thing ſo vile, ſo vile, and
ſo ſhort╌liv'd, that Ve╌nus Joys, as well as [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=35) [...] ſhe, with
reaſon may be ſaid to be, from the neg╌le╌cted Foam deriv'd. Follies they ſhe,
with reaſon may be ſaid to be, from the neg╌le╌cted Foam deriv'd. Follies they
have, ſo number╌leſs in ſtore, that on╌ly he who loves them can have more;
neither their have, ſo num╌ber╌leſs in ſtore, that on╌ly he who loves them can
have more; neither their Sigh╌s, nor Tears are true, thoſe id╌ly blow, theſe
id╌ly fall; Sigh╌s, nor Tears are true, neither their Sigh╌s, nor Tears are
true, neither their Sigh╌s nor Tears are true, nothing like, nothing like to
ours at thoſe id╌ly blow, theſe id╌ly fall; nothing like, nothing like to ours
at [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=36) [...]
all, but Sighs and Tears, but Sighs and Tears, have Sex╌es too. Hear's to thee
a╌gain, all, but Sighs and Tears, but Sighs and Tears, have Sex╌es too. Here's
here's to thee a╌gain, thy ſenſeleſs Sor╌rows drown'd; here's to thee, thy to
thee a╌gain, here's to thee a╌gain, thy ſenſeleſs Sor╌rows drown'd, thy
ſenſe╌leſs Sor╌rows drown'd, let the Glaſs walk, 'till all things too go
rou╌nd, ſenſe╌leſs Sor╌rows drown, let the Glaſs 'till all things too go
rou╌nd, walk, 'till all things too go rou╌nd, 'till [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=36) [...] 'till all
things too go round: Again, again, again, again, 'till theſe two Lights be
all, all things too go round: Again, again, again, again, 'till theſe two
Lights be four, no Er╌ror here can dan╌ge╌rous prove; thy Paſſion Man deceiv'd
thee more, none four, no Er╌ror here can dan╌ge╌rous prove; thy Paſſion Man
deceiv'd thee more, none dou╌ble ſee like Men in love; none dou╌ble ſee, none
dou╌ble dou╌ble ſee, none dou╌ble ſee like Men in Love; none dou╌ble ſee like
Men in love. ſee like Men in love.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=37)

#### 1.18. A DIALOGUE in the Propheteſs.

[...] TEll me why, tell me why my Char╌ming Fair, tell me why, tell me why you
thus de╌ny me; can diſ╌pair, can diſ╌ſpair, or theſe ſighs and looks of care
make Co╌rin╌na e╌ver fl╌y me, e╌ver fly me? tell me why, tell me why my
Char╌ming Fair, tell me why you thus de╌ny me. O! Mir╌til╌lo you're a╌bove me,
I re╌ſpect but dare not Love ye. She who hears in╌clines to ſin, who par╌lies,
half [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=37)
[...] gives up the Town, and ra╌ve╌nous Love ſoon en╌ters in, when once the
Out╌work's bea╌ten down: Then my Sighs and Tears won't move ye, no, no, no,
no, no Mir╌til╌lo you're a╌bove me, I reſ╌pect, but dare not Love ye: no, no,
no, no, no, Mir╌til╌lo you're a╌bove me; I re╌ſpect, but dare not Love ye, I
re╌ſpect but dare not Love ye. Cou'd this lovely Charming Maid think
Mir╌til╌lo [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=38) [...] wou'd
deceive her? cou'd Corin╌na be afraid, ſhe by him ſhou'd be betray'd? No, no,
no, no, too well, too well I Love her, therefore can╌not be above her. Oh! oh!
oh! oh! let Love with Love be paid: My Heart, my Life, my Heart, my Life, my
all I give her: Let me now, now, now, let me now, now, now, ah! now, now, now,
re╌ceive her. Oh! how glad╌ly we be╌leive, when the Heart is too too willing;
can that look, that face deceive? can he take de╌light [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=38) [...] in
Killing? Ah! I dye, ah! I dye, I dye if you deceive me; yet I will, I will,
yet I will, I will be╌lieve ye. Ah! I die, ah! I die if you de╌ceive me; yet I
will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will be╌lieve ye.

CHORUS. [...] Oh: how glad╌ly we be╌lieve, when the Heart is too too willing;
can that Oh! how glad╌ly we be╌lieve, when the Heart it too too willing; can
that [[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=39)
[...] Look, that Face deceive? Can he take de╌light in killing? ah! I dye,
Look, that Face de╌ceive? Can he take de╌light in killing? ah! I ah! I dye, I
dye if you de╌ceive me; yet I will, I will, yet I will, dye, ah! I dye if you
de╌ceive me; yet I will, I I will be╌lieve ye; ah! I dye, ah! I dye, if you
de╌ceive me; will, I will be╌lieve ye; ah! I dye, I dye if you de╌ceive me;
yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will, be╌lieve
ye. yet I will, I will, yet, yet I will, I will, yet I will, I will be╌lieve
ye.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=39)

#### 1.19. The Thraldom, the Words by Mr. Cowley.

[...] I Came, I ſaw, and was undone, Lightning did thro' my Bones and Mar╌row
run; a pointed Pain pierc'd deep my Heart, a ſwift col╌d trem╌bling ſeiz'd on
ev'ry part; my Head turn╌'d round, nor cou'd it bear the Poiſon tha╌t was
entred there: So a de╌ſtroying Angel's breath blo╌ws in the Plague, and with
it haſty Death; ſuch was the pain, did ſo be╌gin, to the poor wretch when
Legion enter'd in: forgive me God I cry'd, for I flatter'd my ſelf I was to
dye; but quickly to my [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=40) [...] coſt I
found, I found 'twas cru╌el Love, 'twas cruel Love not Death had made the
wound; but quickly to my coſt I found, I found 'twas cru╌el Love, 'twas cru╌el
Love not Death had made the wound. Death a more gen'rous rage does uſe,
Quarter to all he Conquer's doth re╌fuſe, whilſt Love with Barbarous mercy
ſaves the vanquiſh'd Lives to make them ſlaves; whilſt Love with Barbarous
mercy ſaves the vanquiſh'd Li╌ves to make them ſlaves. I am thy ſlave, then
let me know, hard Maſter, the great [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=40) [...] task I
have to doe; who Pride and Scorn do un╌der╌goe, in Tem╌peſts and rou╌gh Seas
thy Galleys row, they Pant, and Groan, and Sigh, but find their Sig╌hs
encreaſe the an╌gry Wind; like an E╌gyptian Tyrant, ſome thou wea'╌rieſt out
in buil╌ding but a Tomb; others with ſad and ted╌'ous Art labour i'th Quarries
of a Sto╌ny Heart: Of all the works thou doſt aſſign, to all the ſev'ral
Slaves of thine, employ me migh╌ty Love to dig the Mine; of all the [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=41) [...] works thou
doſt aſ╌ſign, to all the Sev'ral Slaves of thine, employ me Migh╌ty Love to
dig the Mine.

#### 1.20. A SONG in the Double-Dealer.

[...] CInthia frowns when e're I Woe her, yet ſhe's vex'd, ſhe's vex'd if I
give o╌ver; much, much ſhe fears I ſhou'd, I ſhou'd undoe her, but much more,
but much more, much mo╌re to loſe her Lover; thus, thus in doubting ſhe
re╌fu╌ſes, and not Winning, and not Winning, thus, thus, [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=41) [...] thus ſhe
looſes; And not Winning, and not Winning, thus, thus, thus, thus, thus, thus
ſhe looſes; Prethee Cinthia look be╌hind you prethee Cinthia look behind you,
Age and Wrinckles, Age and Wrinckles will o'retake you; then, then too late,
too late, too late, then, then too late De╌ſire will find you; when the po╌w'r
does for╌ſake you; Think, think, oh! think, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=42) [...] think,
think, oh! think, oh! ſad con╌dition, to be paſt, yet wiſh, yet wiſh
fru╌ition; to be paſt, be paſt, yet wiſh, wiſh, wiſh fru╌ition, yet wiſh,
wiſh, wiſh fru╌ition.

#### 1.21. An Elegy on the Death of Mr. John Playford. Words by Mr. Tate.

[...] GEntle Shepherds, you that know the Charms of Tune╌full Breath, that
Harmony in Grie╌f can ſhow, La╌ment, La╌ment, for Pi╌ous The╌ron's Death!
Theron, the good, the friend╌ly Theron's gone! Theron, Theron, the good, the
friend╌ly The╌ [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=42) [...] ╌ron's
gone! ren╌ding Mountains, weep╌ing Fountains, groaning Dales,

Soft.

and ecchoing Vales,

Loud.

if you want Skill, will teach you how to moan, to moa╌n; ren╌ding Mountains,
weep╌ing Fountains, groaning Dales,

Soft.

and ecchoing Vales,

Loud.

if you want Skill, will teach you how to moan, to moa╌n; will teach, will
teach you how to moan.

Slow.

Could Innocence or Pi╌e╌ty, ex╌pi╌ring Life main╌tain; or Art pre╌vail on
De╌ſti╌ny, Theron ſtill, ſtill had grac'd the Plain, belov'd of Pan, and
[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=43) [...]
dear to Phae╌bus Train; Theron ſtill had grac'd the Plain, belov'd of Pan, and
dear to Phae╌bus Train. Muſes, bring your Ro╌ſes hither, ſtrew them gent╌ly on
his Hearſe; Muſes, bring your Ro╌ſes hither, ſtrew them gent╌ly on his Hearſe;
and when thoſe ſhort╌liv'd Glo╌ries wither, crown it with a laſting Verſe,
crown it with a la╌ſting Verſe; and when thoſe ſhort╌liv'd Glories wither,
crown it with a laſt╌ing Verſe. Roſes ſoon will fade away, Verſe and Tomb muſt
both de╌cay; yet Theron's Name in [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=43) [...] ſpight of
Fate's Decree, and end╌leſs Fame ſhall meet; no Verſe ſo du╌ra╌ble can be, nor
Ro╌ſes half ſo ſweet, nor Ro╌ſes half ſo ſweet.

CHORUS. [...] Then waſt no more, no more; then waſt no more in Sighs your
Breath, nor think his Then waſt no more, no more; then waſt no more in Sighs
your Breath, nor think his Fate was hard; there's no ſuch thing as Suddain
Death, to thoſe that al╌ways Fate was hard; there's no ſuch thing as Suddain
Death, to thoſe that al╌ways are pre╌par'd: Prepar'd like him by Har╌mo╌ny and
Love, are pre╌par'd: Prepar'd like him by Har╌mo╌ny and Love, [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=44) [...] to joyn at
firſt ap╌proach, to joyn at firſt approach the Sa╌cred Quire a╌bove; to to
joyn at firſt approach, at firſt approach the Sa╌cred Quire a╌bove; joyn at
firſt approach, to joyn at firſt ap╌proach, at firſt approach the Sa╌cred
Quire a╌bove. to joyn at firſt approach, to joyn at firſt approach the Sa╌cred
Quire a╌bove.

#### 1.22. A SONG in the 3d. Act of the Propheteſs.

[...] WHen firſt I ſaw the Bri╌ght Aure lia's Eyes, when firſt I ſaw the
Bri╌ght Aure╌lia's Eyes, a ſudden trem╌bling did my Limbs ſur╌prize, in ev'ry
Vain, in ev'ry Vain I [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=44) [...] felt a
tin╌gling, ting╌ling ſmart, and a co╌ld faintneſs, and a co╌ld faintneſs all
a╌rou╌nd my Heart, all a╌rou╌nd my Heart. But oh! oh! oh! oh! the piercing,
piercing, pier╌cing joy, but oh! oh! oh! oh! the plea╌ſing, plea╌ſing [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=45) [...] pain; and
oh! and oh! oh! oh! and oh!╌may both ten thou╌ſand Years, ten thou╌ſand Yea╌rs
re╌main, ten thou╌ſand Years re╌main, ten thou╌ſand Years re╌main.

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=45)

#### 1.23. A SONG in the Tempeſt, Sung by Mis Croſs.

[...] DEar, Dear, Pritty, Pritty, Prit╌ty Youth, Dear, Pritty, Pritty, Prit╌ty
Youth, unvail, unvail your Eye, unvail, unvail your Eye; how can you, can you
Sleep, how can you, can you Sleep, how can you, can you Sleep, when I, when I
am by, when I, when I am by? Were I with you all Night to be, methinks I
cou'd, methinks I cou'd, I cou'd from Sleep be free; me╌thinks I cou'd,
methinks I cou'd from Sleep, I cou'd from Sleep be free: [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=46) [...] a╌laſs,
a╌laſs my Dear, you'r Cold, Cold as Stone; you muſt no longer, no, no longer,
no, no longer, no, no longer, longer lye a╌lone; but be with me my Dear, my
Dear, Dear, Dear, but be with me my Dear, and I in each Arm, and I in each Arm
will Hugg you, Hugg you cloſe, will Hugg you, Hugg you cloſe, Hugg you cloſe
and keep you Warm, will Hugg you, Hugg you cloſe, will Hugg you, Hugg you
cloſe, Hugg you cloſe and keep you warm.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=46)

#### 1.24. The Rich RIVAL. Words out of Cowley.

[...] THey ſay you're angry, and rant migh╌ti╌ly, becauſe I Love the ſame as
you, a╌las! you're ve╌ry Rich 'tis true; but prethee Fool! what's that to Love
and me? Your Land and Money let that ſerve, and know you're more by that than
you de╌ſerve When next I ſee my Fair one, ſhe ſhall know how worth╌leſs thou
art of her Bed; and, Wretch, I'll ſtrike thee dumb, and dead with no╌ble
Verſe, not un╌der╌ſtood by you; while thy ſole Rhet'rick ſhall be Joynture and
Jewels, and our Friends a╌gree. [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=47) [...] Pox of
your Friends that dote and do╌mi╌neer, Lovers are bet╌ter Friends than they,
let's thoſe in o╌ther things o╌bey, the Fates, and Stars, and Gods muſt
go╌vern here: Vain name of Blood! in Love, let none ad╌viſe with a╌ny Blood,
but with their own; 'Tis that which bids me this bright Maid a╌dore, no o╌ther
Thought has had ac╌ceſs, did ſhe now beg, I'd Love no leſs; and were ſhe an
Empreſs, I ſhou'd Love no more. Were ſhe as juſt and true [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=47) [...] to me, ah,
ſim╌ple Soul! what wou'd become of thee.

#### 1.25. A SONG in King Arthur.

[...] FAireſt Iſle of Iſles Ex╌cel╌ling, Seat of Plea╌ſures and of Loves;
Ve╌nus here will chuſe her Dwelling, and for╌ſake her Cy╌prian Groves. Cu╌pid,
from his Fav'rite Nation, Care and En╌vy will Remove; Jea╌lou╌ſie, that
poy╌ſons Paſſion, and De╌ſpair that dies for Love.

II.

Gentle Murmurs, ſweet Complaining,

Sighs that blow the Fire of Love;

Soft Repulſes, kind Diſdaining,

Shall be all the Pains you prove.

Every Swain ſhall pay his Duty,

Gratefull every Nymph ſhall prove;

And as theſe Excell in Beauty,

Thoſe ſhall be Renown'd for Love.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=48)

#### 1.26. A SONG in Bonduca, Sung by Miſs Croſs.

[...] OH! Oh! lead me, lead me to ſome peace╌full Gloom, where none but
ſigh╌ing, none but ſigh╌ing, ſigh╌ing Lo╌vers come; where the ſhrill, the
ſhrill Trumpets never ſou╌nd; never, never, ſound, but one E╌ter╌nal Huſh, one
e╌ter╌nal Huſh goes round. There let me ſooth my plea╌ſing pain, there let me
ſooth my plea╌ſing pain, and never, never think of War, never, never think of
[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=48) [...]
War, never, never think of War, never, never, never, never, never, never think
of War a╌gain: what glo╌ry, what glo╌ry, what glo╌ry can, can a Lover have to
Conquer, to Con╌quer, yet be ſtill a ſlave; what glo╌ry, what glo╌ry can a
Lo╌ver have, to Conquer, to Conquer, to Conquer, yet be ſtill, ſtill a Slave,
yet, yet be ſtill, yet, yet be ſtill, yet, yet be ſtill, ſtill a Slave?

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=49)

#### 1.27. Sweeter than Roſes, a ſingle SONG.

[...] SWee╌ter then Ro╌ſes, or cool, coo╌l Ev'ning Breeze; Swee╌ter then
Ro╌ſes, or cool, cool Ev'╌ning Breeze on a war╌m Flow╌ry ſhore, was the Dear,
the dear, the dear, dear, de╌ar Kiſs; Firſt tre╌m╌bling, firſt tre╌mbling made
me, made me free╌ze, made me freeze; then ſhot like Fire, all, all, all, all
o're, then [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=49) [...] ſhot like
Fire, all, all, all, all, then ſhot like Fire, all, all, o're. What Magick has
Vic╌to╌rious Love, what Magick has Vic╌to╌rious, Love for all, all, all I
touch, all, all, all, all I touch or ſee; ſince that dear, dear, Kiſs I
hourly, hour╌ly [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=50) [...] prove,
all, all, all, all is Love, all, all, all, all, all, all is Love, all, all,
all, all, all is Lo╌ve all, all, all, all, all, is Lo╌ve, is Love to me.

#### 1.28. SONG Sung by Jemmy Bowen, at the opening the Old Play-houſe.

[...] LU╌cin╌da is Be╌witch╌ing Fair, Lu╌cin╌da is Be╌witch╌ing Fair, all
o're, a╌ll o're in╌ga╌ing is her Air; all o're, all o're, all o're in╌ga╌ging
is her Air; all o're, all o're in╌ga╌ging is her Air: In ev╌'ry Song
Lu╌cin╌da, Lu╌cinda, [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=50) [...]
Lu╌cin╌da's Fam'd, She is the Quee╌n of Love proclaim'd, to all, to all She
does, She does a Flame im╌part, ex╌pi╌ring Victims, ex╌pi╌ring, ex╌pi╌ring
Vic╌tims feel her Dart; Lu╌&c.

Firſt Strain again.

Strephon for her has Love ex╌preſt, Phi╌lan╌der ſighs, ſighs, ſighs too with
the reſt; Wrack'd, Wrack'd with Deſpair each one complains, un╌mo╌v'd,
un╌touch't, She all, She all, She all diſ╌dains. Lu╌&c.

End with the the firſt Strain from this mark. :S:

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=51)

#### 1.29. This was the laſt Song that Mr. Purcell Sett, it being in his
Sickneſs.

[...] FRom Roſie Bow'rs where Sleep's the God of Love, hither, hither ye
little waiting Cupids fly, fl╌y, fl╌y hither ye lit╌tle waiting Cu╌pids fly;
teach me, teach me in ſoft Me╌lodious Songs, to move with ten╌der, ten╌der
Paſſion, my Heart's, my Heart's dar╌ling Joy: Ah! let the Soul of Muſick Tune
my Voice, to Win dear Strephon, ah! ah! let the Soul of Muſick Tune my Voice
to Win dear Strephon, dear, dear, dear Strephon who my Soul en╌joys. Or if
more [[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=51)
[...] in╌flu╌encing is to be brisk and Ai╌ry, with a Step and a Bound, and a
Frisk from the Ground, I will Trip like a╌ny Fairy; As once on I╌da Dancing,
were three Ce╌leſtial Bodies, with an Air, and a Face, and a Shape, and a
Grace, let me Charm like Beauty's Goddeſs; with an Air, and a Face, and a
Shape, and a Grace let me Charm like Beauty's Goddeſs.

Slow.

Ah! ah! 'tis in vain, 'tis all, 'tis all, all in Vain, Death and De╌ſpair muſt
end the Fa╌tal pain; cold Deſpair, cold, cold, De╌ſpair diſguis'd like Snow
and Rain, falls, falls, falls [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=52) [...] on my
Breaſt, Bleak Winds in Tempeſts Blo╌w, in Tempeſts Blo╌w, my Veins all Shiver,
and my Fingers Glow, my Pulſe beats a Dead, Dead March; my Pulſe bea╌ts a
Dead, Dead March for loſt re╌poſe, and to a ſo╌lid lump of Ice, my poor, poor
fond Heart is froze. Or, ſay ye Pow'rs, ſay, ſay ye Pow'rs my Peace to Crown,
ſhall I, ſhall I, ſhall I Thaw my ſelf or drown? ſhall I, ſhall I, ſhall I
Thaw my ſelf or drown? a╌mongſt [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=52) [...] the
foaming Billows in╌creaſing, all with Tears I ſhed on Beds of Ooze, and
Chryſtal Pillows, lay down, down, down, lay down, down, down my Love╌ſick
Head; ſay, ſay ye Pow'rs, ſay, ſay ye Pow'rs my Peace to Crown, ſhall I, ſhall
I, ſhall I Thaw my ſelf or drown? ſhall I, ſhall I, ſhall I Thaw my ſelf, or
drown?

Quick.

No, no, no, no, no, I'le ſtraight run Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, that ſoon, that
ſoon my Heart will warm, when once the Senſe is fled, is fled, Love, Love, has
no pow'r, no, no, no, [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=53) [...] no, no
pow'r to Charm; Love has no pow'r, no, no, no, no, Love has no pow'r, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no pow'r to Charm: Wild thro'the Woods I'le fl╌y,
Wil╌d thro'the Woods I'le fl╌y, Robes, Locks ſhall thus, thus, thus, thus be
tore; a Thouſand, thouſand deaths I'le dye, a thouſand, thouſand deaths I'le
dye, e're thus, thus in vain, e're thus, thus in vain, thus in vain a╌dore.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=53)

#### 1.30. A Song on a Ground, the Words by Madam Phillips.

[...] H So╌li╌tude! my ſwee╌teſt Choice! Oh So╌li╌tude! Oh So╌li╌tude! my
ſwee╌teſt, ſweeteſt Choice! Places de╌vo╌ted to the Night, re╌mote from
Tumult, and from Noiſe, how ye my Reſt╌leſs Thoughts de╌light! Oh So╌li╌tude!
Oh So╌li╌tude! my ſwee╌teſt, ſweeteſt Choice! Oh Heavens! what Con╌tent is
mine, to ſee thoſe Trees, which have appear'd, from the Na╌ti╌vi╌ty of [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=54) [...] Time; and,
which all A╌ges have re╌ver'd, to look to day as freſh and green, to look to
day as freſh and green, as when their Beauty's firſt were ſeen? Oh! Oh how
a╌gree╌a╌ble a Sight theſe hanging Mountaines do ap╌pear, which th'un ╌hap╌py
wou'd in╌vite, to fi╌niſh all their Sorrows here; when their hard, their hard
Fate makes them endure, ſuch Woes, ſuch Woes, as on╌ly Death can Cure. Oh! Oh
how I So╌li╌tude a╌dore! Oh! Oh how I [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=54) [...] So╌li╌tude
a╌dore, that E╌lement of no╌bleſt Wit, where I have learn'd, where I have
learn'd A╌pollo's Love, without the pains, the pai╌ns, to ſtudy it: For thy
ſake I in Love am grown, with what thy fancy, thy fancy does purſue; but when
I think upon my own, I hate it, I hate it, for that reaſon too; becauſe it
needs muſt hinder me from ſeeing, from ſeeing, and from ſerving thee. Oh
So╌li╌tude! Oh how I So╌li╌tude A╌dore!

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=55)

#### 1.31. Sighs for our late Sovereign King Charles the Second.

[...] IF Pray'rs and Tears, the Shields the Church of England on╌ly bears, in
ſome great Ex╌igence of State, cou'd thoſe, cou'd thoſe have warded off the
blows of Fate, we had not fall'n, we had not ſunk ſo low under the gre╌vous
heavy weight, the preſſures of this day's ſa╌d o╌verthrow. Oh! Oh! how the
firſt amazing Blow bow'd down, bow'd down each Loyal Head, and as we
trem╌bling ſtood, fixt like a ſtanding Water all our Blood, in ev'ry Face you
might ſuch [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=55) [...] for╌rows
Read, that what the Prophet Wiſh'd but cou'd not ſhow, was in our mourn╌full
Land made good; all Eyes as Rivers ſwell╌'d, did ſtrangely o╌verflow, our
weepings ſeem'd increas'd in╌to a╌no╌ther Flood: Thus, thus Uni╌ver╌ſal was
our Grief, and in thoſe Agonies of our Souls, we lay till the kin╌d Heav'ns
roll╌'d the Cloud a╌way, and gave us ſome faint, ſome faint glim'rings of
re╌lief: The Waters then a╌bated [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=56) [...] for a
while, and welcome, wel╌come joy╌s hung hov╌'ring o're our drooping Iſle, Oh!
then, Oh! then, what Pi╌ous Groans, what Pi╌ous Sighs, the Church ſent up
be╌yond the yielding Skies; Lord ſave our King, ev'ry good Subject cries,
whilſt ev'ry bro╌ken Hearts Al╌tar and Sacrifice; Lord ſave the King was never
ſaid, with greater fer╌vency than now, not in the Chapel only, but the
Streets, no ſort of People cou'd you meet, but did De╌vout╌ly bow, and as
Devoutly Pray'd; and [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=56) [...] yet no
Phariſaick Hypocrites, in corners with well guided Zeal their Oriſons were
made; Al╌bion is now become a Holy Land, and wages Ho╌ly Warr to ſtay the
threat'╌ning Hand; Oh! Oh! that we might pre╌vail, ſuch well ap╌pointed
Numbers never us'd to fail, Oh! Oh! that we might prevail, Numbers of Old by a
Wiſe Prelate led, with Arms ſtretch't tow'rds Heav'n took the Field, no other
Weapons did thoſe Champions weild, but leavy Boughs (and Pray'rs no doubt,) we
Read to thoſe a [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=57) [...] mighty, a
mighty Conquerour did yeild, a╌laſswe'd Conquer'd too, but for our former
Crimes, Treaſons, Rebellions, Perjury's, wich all, with all the in╌i╌quities
of the Times, whole Legions doe againſt us riſe, theſe, theſe are the powers
that ſtrike the Kingdom dead, and now the Crown is fall'n, now the Crown is
fall'n from our Jo╌ſi╌ah's Head.

#### 1.32. A SONG in Henry the Second; Sung by Mrs. Dyer.

[...] IN vain, in vain, in vain, in vai╌n 'gainſt Love, in vai╌n I ſtrove,
Reaſon nor Honour, Reaſon nor Honour could its for╌ce [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=57) [...] re╌move;
Tho' Honour freſh objections brought, and each had won╌d'rous Senſe I thought,
each had won╌d'rous Senſe I thought: Yet Love, Love, Love more ſtro╌ng, yet
Love, Love, Love more ſtro╌ng, tho' not ſo wiſe, be╌lyes my Tongue in my fond,
my fond, my fo╌nd Eyes. One an╌ſwers faint╌ly no, no, no, but yes, oh yes, oh
yes, yes, yes, oh yes, oh [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=58) [...] yes, yes,
yes, oh yes, the laſt much lou╌der cry's.

#### 1.33. A Two Part SONG.

[...] WHen Myra Sing╌s, when Myra Sing╌s, When My╌ra Sing╌s, when Myra Sing╌s,
we ſeek thi'n╌chant╌ing we ſeek th'in╌chant╌ing Sound; [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=58) [...] Sound,
th'in╌chant╌ing Sound; and th'in╌chant╌ing Sound, bleſs the Notes, and bleſs
the Notes which doe ſo ſweet╌ly, ſo ſweet╌ly, ſo and bleſs the Notes, and
bleſs the Notes that doe ſo ſweetly, ſo ſweetly, ſo ſweet╌ly wound; what
Mu╌ſick, what Mu╌ſick needs muſt ſweet╌ly wound; what Mu╌ſick needs muſt dwell
up╌on that Tongue, whoſe ſpeech is Tunefull, whoſe ſpeech is Tunefull, is
dwell up╌on that Tongue, whoſe ſpeech is Tunefull, whoſe ſpeech is [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=59) [...] Tune╌full
as a╌no╌ther Song: Tune╌full as a╌no╌ther Song: Such Harmo╌ny, ſuch Wit, ſuch
Harmo╌ny, ſuch Wit, ſuch Such Harmony, ſuch Wit, ſuch Harmony, ſuch Wit, a
Face ſo Fair, ſo many, ſo many pointed Arrows who, who can Wit, a Face ſo
Fair, ſo many, ſo many point╌ed Arrows who, who can bear? the ſlave that from
her Wit, or Beau╌ty flyes, bear? the ſlave that from her Wit, or Beau╌ty
flyes, if ſhe but [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=59) [...] if ſhe
but reach him, but reach him with her Voice, reach him, but reach him with her
Voice, if ſhe but reach him if ſhe but reach him with her Voice; he dies, he
dies, he with her Voice; he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies,
he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies. dies, he dies, he dies, he dies, he dies,
he dies, he dies.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=60)

#### 1.34. Come let us leave the Town, a two Part SONG.

[...] COme, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us leave the Town;
Come, come, Come, come, come, come let us leave, let us leave the Town; come,
come, come, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us, let us leave Come,
come, come, come, come, come, come, come let us leave, let us, let us leave
the Town; And in ſome lonely place, where Crowds and Noiſe, where Crowds and
the Town; And in ſome lonely place, where Crowds, where Crowds and Noiſe were
never, never, never, ne╌ver known, re╌ſo╌lve Noiſe were never, never, never,
ne╌ver known, re╌ſo╌lve [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=60) [...] to ſpend
our days. In Pleaſant, Pleaſant Sha╌des, in to ſpend our days. In Pleaſant,
Pleaſant, Pleaſant, in Pleaſant, Pleaſant, Pleaſant, Pleaſant ſhades upon the
Graſs at Night our ſelves we'll lay, our days in harmleſs Pleaſant ſhades,
up╌on the Graſs at Night our ſelves we'll lay, our ſports ſhall paſs, our days
in harmleſs Sports, in harmleſs Sports ſhall paſs; thus days in harmleſs
Sports ſhall paſs, our days in harmleſs Sports ſhall paſs; thus Time ſhall
ſli╌de a╌way. Time ſhall ſli╌de a╌way.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=61)

#### 1.35. A Two Part SONG.

[...] LOſt is my Quiet for e╌ver, loſt is my Qui╌et for e╌ver, loſt Loſt is my
Quiet for e╌ver, e╌ver, loſt is my Quiet for e╌ver, for e╌ver loſt; loſt is my
Qui╌et for e╌ver, e╌ver, for e╌ver, for e╌ver, loſt is my Quiet for e╌ver, for
e╌ver, e╌ver, loſt is Life's hap╌pi╌eſt part; loſt all, all, all my ten╌der
En╌deavours loſt is Life's hap╌pi╌eſt part; loſt all, all my ten╌der
En╌deavours to tou╌ch an in╌ſen╌ſi╌ble to tou╌ch an in╌ſen╌ſi╌ble [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=61) [...] Heart.
But tho' my De╌ſpair is paſt curing, but tho' my De╌ſpair, Heart. But tho' my
De╌ſpair is paſt curing, but my De╌ſpair is paſt curing, and much unde╌ſerv'd
is my Fate; I'le ſhow by a tho'my De╌ſpair is paſt curing, and much undeſerv'd
is my Fate; patient en╌du╌ring my Love, I'le ſhow by a patient en╌du╌ring I'le
ſhow by a patient en╌during my Love is unmov'd, I'le ſhow by a patient my Love
is un╌mov╌'d, is unmov'd as her Hate. en╌du╌ring my Love is unmov'd as her
Hate.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=62)

#### 1.36. A Two Part SONG. The Words by Mr. Congreve.

[...] THere ne're, ne're was ſo wretched a Lover as I, ſo wretched, ſo
wretched, ſo There ne'er, ne'er was ſo wretched a Lover as I; there ne'er,
ne're was ſo wretched a Lover as I; wretched a Lover as I, ſo wretched, ſo
wretched, ſo wretched a Lover as I; whoſe whoſe hopes are for ever, for e╌ver,
for e╌ver pre╌vented: hopes are for ever, for ever, for ever, for ever, for
ever pre╌vented: I'me neither at I'me nei╌ther at re╌ſt re╌ſt [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=62) [...] when
A╌minta looks Coy, nor when ſhe looks kind, looks kind, looks kind, nor when
ſhe looks when A╌minta looks Coy, nor when ſhe looks kind, looks kind, looks
kind, nor when ſhe looks kind am contented: Her frowns give a pain, her frowns
give a pain, a kind am con╌tented: Her frowns give a pain, her frowns give a
pa╌in I'me un╌a╌ble to bear, the thoughts of e'm ſet me a trem╌bling, pain, a
pa╌in I'me un╌a╌ble to bear, the thoughts of e'm ſet me a trem╌bling, they ſet
me a they ſet me a [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=63) [...]
trembling, and her Smiles are a jo╌y trembling, and her Smiles are a jo╌y ſo
great, ſo great, ſo great, ſo great, that I fear, that I ſo great, ſo great,
ſo great, ſo great, that I fear, that I fear, that I fear, that I fear leſt
they ſhou'd be no more but diſ╌ſembling, leſt they ſhou'd be no fear, that I
fear leſt they ſhou'd be no more but diſſembling, leſt they ſhou'd be no more
but diſ╌ſembling. Then prithee A╌minta conſent and be kind; more but
diſ╌ſembling. A pox of this troubleſome, [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=63) [...] A pox of
this troubleſome, troubleſome Wooing, then prithee A╌minta con╌ſent
troubleſome Wooing, then prithee A╌min╌ta conſent and be kind, a pox of this
troubleſome, and be kind, a pox of this troubleſome, troubleſome Wooing, then
prithee A╌minta troubleſome Wooing, then prithee A╌minta conſent and be kind,
a pox of this trouble╌ſome, conſent and be kind, a pox of this troubleſome,
troubleſome Wooing, for I find I ſhall troubleſome Wooing, then prithee
A╌minta conſent and be kind, for I find I ſhall ne're be at peace in my Mind,
till once you and I have been do╌ing, been do╌ing, been ne'er be at peace in
my Mind, till once you and I have been do╌ing, been do╌ing, been [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=64) [...] do╌ing,
been do╌ing, been do╌ing, till once you and I have been do╌ing: for do╌ing,
been doing, been do╌ing, till once you and I have been do╌ing: for ſhame, for
ſhame, for ſhame let your Lover no lon╌ger com╌plain, complain, complain of
ſhame let your Lover no longer, no lon╌ger complain, complain, com╌plain of
u╌ſage that's hard, hard, hard, of u╌ſage that's hard, hard a╌bove meaſure,
but ſince I have u╌ſage that's hard, hard, hard, of u╌ſage that's hard, hard
a╌bove meaſure, but ſince I have carry'd, have carry'd ſuch loads of Love's
pain, now let me, now let me, now let me, now carry'd, have carry'd ſuch loads
of Love's pain, now let me, now let me, now [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=64) [...] let me,
now let me take Toll, now let me, now let me, now let me take Toll of the
pleaſure. let me, now let me take Toll, now let me, now let me take Toll of
the pleaſure.

#### 1.37. A SONG Sung before the Queen on Her Birth Day.

[...] CE╌lebrate this Fe╌ſti╌val, Ce╌lebrate this Fe╌ſtival, Ce╌lebrate this
Feſtival; 'Tis Sa╌cred, bid the Trum╌pets ceaſe, 'tis Sa╌cred, bid the
Trum╌pets ceaſe.

Turn over,

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=65) [...]
Kind╌ly Treat Ma╌ri╌a's Day, and your Ho╌mage 'twill re╌pay; Bequeathing
Bleſſings on our Iſle, the te╌dious Mi╌nutes to be╌guile; Till Conqueſt, till
Conqueſt, till Conqueſt to Ma╌ri╌a's Arms re╌ſtore; Peace and her He╌ro, Peace
and her He╌ro to de╌part no more, no, no more, no, no more, no, no mo╌re,
Peace and her He╌ro, Peace and her He╌ro to de╌part no more, no, no more, no,
no more.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=65)

#### 1.38. ANACREON'S Defeat.

[...] THis Po╌et ſi╌ngs the Tro╌jan Wars, a╌no╌ther of the Theban jarrs, in
rat╌ling Numbers, in rat╌ling Numbers, Verſe that da╌res; this Po╌et Si╌ngs
the Tro╌jan Wars, a╌nother of the The╌ban jarrs, in rat╌ling Numbers, in
rat╌ling Numbers, Verſe that dares. Whilſt I in [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=66) [...] ſoft and
hum╌ble Verſe, my own, my own Cap╌ti╌vi╌ties re╌hearſe; whilſt I in ſoft, in
ſo╌ft and hum╌ble Verſe, my ow╌n Cap╌ti╌vities rehearſe; I ſing my own
Defeats, which are not the E╌vents of Common War; I ſing my own Defeats, which
are not the E╌vents of Common War, which are not the E╌vents of Common War:
Not Fleets at Sea have vanquiſh'd me, nor Brigadeers, nor Ca╌val╌ry, nor Ranks
and Files, nor Ranks and Files of [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=66) [...]
In╌fan╌try; not Fleets at Sea have vanquiſh'd me, nor Bri╌gadeers, nor
Ca╌val╌ry, nor Ranks and Files, nor Ranks and Files of In╌fan╌try: No, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, A╌na╌cre╌on ſtil de╌ſies, all, all your
Ar╌til╌le╌ry Com╌pa╌nies; ſave thoſe encamp'd in kil╌ling, kil╌ling Eyes, each
Dart his Miſtreſs ſhoots he dyes, each Dart his Miſtreſs ſhoots he dyes.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=67)

#### 1.39. A SONG in the 4th. Act of the Fool's Preferment.

[...] I'Le Sail up╌on the Dog╌Star, I'le Sail up╌on the Dog╌Star, and then
purſue the Morning, and then purſue, and then purſue the Morning; I'le chaſe
the Moon till it be Noon, I'le chaſe the Moon till it be Noon, but I'le make,
I'le make her leave her Horning. I'le climb the Froſty Mountain, I'le climb
the Froſty Mountain, and there I'le Coyn the Weather; I'le tea╌r the Rain╌Bow
from the Sky, I'le tea╌r the Rain╌Bow from the [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=67) [...] Sky and
T╌ye, and Tye both ends to╌ge╌ther. The Stars pluck from their Orbs too, the
Stars pluck from their Orbs too, and crowd them in my Budget; And whether I'me
a Roar╌ing Boy, a Roar╌ing Boy, let a╌ll, let all the Nation judge it.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=68)

#### 1.40. A SONG upon a Ground.

[...] SHE Loves, and ſhe con╌feſ╌ſes too, there's then at laſt no more to do;
the hap╌py Work's en╌tire╌ly done, en╌ter the Town which thou haſt won: The
fruits of Conqueſt now, now, now be╌gin, I╌o, Tri╌umph, en╌ter in. What's
this, ye Gods! what can it be! re╌mains there ſtill an E╌ne╌my! Bold Honour
ſtands up in the Gate, and wou'd yet ca╌pi╌tu╌late. Have I o'recome all re╌al
Foes, and ſhall this Phantom me op╌poſe? [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=68) [...] Noi╌ſy
nothing, ſtalking Shade, by what Witchcraft wert thou made, thou emp╌ty cauſe
of ſo╌lid Harms? But I ſhall find out Counter Charms, thy Ai╌ry Devil╌ſhip to
remove from this Cir╌cle here of Love: Sure I ſhall rid my ſelf of thee, by
the Night's ob╌ſcurity, and ob╌ſcu╌rer ſecre╌cy. Un╌like to ev╌ry o╌ther
Spright, thou at╌tempt'ſt not Men to affright, nor appear'ſt, nor appear'ſt
but in the Light.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=69)

#### 1.41. BESS OF BEDLAM.

[...]FRom ſilent Shades and the E╌lizium Groves, where ſad de╌parted Spirits
mou╌rn their Loves from Chryſtall ſtreams, and from that Country where Jove
Crowns the Feilds with Flowers all the year, poor Senſe╌leſs Beſs, cloath'd in
her Raggs and fol╌ly, is come to cure her Love╌ſick Me╌lanchol╌ly: Bright
Cyn╌thia kept her Re╌vells late, while Mab the Fai╌ry Queen did Dance, and
O╌be╌ron did ſit in State, when Mars at Ve╌nus ran his Lance; In yonder
Cow╌ſlip lies my Dear, entomb'd in li╌quid [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=69) Gemms of Dew,
each day I'le wa╌ter it with a Tear, its fa╌ding Bloſſom to re╌new: For ſince
my Love is dead, and all my Joys are gone; poor Beſs for his ſake a Garland
will make, my Mu╌ſick ſhall be a Groan, I'le lay me down and dye with╌in ſome
hollow Tree, the Raven and Cat, the Owl and Bat, ſhall war╌ble for╌th my
E╌le╌gy. Did you not ſee my Love as he paſt by you? His two flaming Eyes, if
he come nigh you, they will ſcorch up your Hearts; Ladies be╌ware ye, leſt he
ſhou'd [[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=70)
dart a Glance that may enſnare ye; Hark! Hark! I hear old Charon bawl, his
Boat he will no longer ſtay, the Furies laſh their Whips and call, come, come
a╌way; come, come a╌way. Poor Beſs will return to the place whence ſhe came,
ſince the World is ſo Mad ſhe can hope for no Cure; for Lov'es grown a Bubble,
a Shadow, a Name, which Fools do ad╌mire, and Wiſe Men en╌dure. Cold and
Hungry am I grown, Am╌bro╌ſia will I feed up╌on, drink Nectar ſtill and Sing;
Who is con╌tent, does all Sorrow pre╌vent: And [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=70) [...] Beſs in
her Straw, whilſt free from the Law, in her thoughts is as great, great as a
King.

#### 1.42. A ſingle SONG, the Words by Mr. Motteux.

[...] STript of their green our Groves ap╌pear, our Vales lye bu╌ried deep in
Snow; the blow╌ing North controuls the Aire, a nipping cold chills all be╌low.
The Froſt has gla╌z'd our deep╌eſt ſtreams, Phoebus withdraw╌'s his kind╌ly
Beams, Phoebus withdraw╌'s his kind╌ly Beams. Yet Winter bleſt be thy return,
thou'ſt brought the Swain for [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=71) whom I us'd to
mourn; and in thy Ice with plea╌ſing flames we burn, and in thy Ice with
plea╌ſing Flames we burn.

2d. Verſe. Too ſoon the Suns re╌vi╌ving heat will thaw thy Ice and melt thy
Snow; Trum╌pets will ſound, and Drums will beat, and tell me the dear, dear
Youth muſt goe: Then muſt my wea╌k un╌wil╌ling Arms, reſign him up╌ to
ſtronger Charms, reſign him up╌ to ſtronger Charms: What Flowers, what Sweets,
what Beauteous thing, when Damon's gone, can eaſe or pleaſure bring? Win╌ter
brings Damon, Win╌ter is my Sprin╌g; Win╌ter bring Damon, Win╌ter is my
Spring.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=71)

#### 1.43. Love Arms himſelf, a ſingle SONG.

[...]LOve Arm╌s him╌ſelf in Celia's Eyes, when e're weak Rea╌ſon wou'd
re╌bell; Love Arm╌s himſelf in Ce╌lia's Eyes, when e're wea╌k Rea╌ſon wou'd
re╌bell; and ev'ry time I dare, I da╌re be Wiſe, a╌las, a╌las, a╌las, a╌las, a
deep╌er wound I feel, re╌peated thoughts, re╌peated thoughts preſent the ill,
which ſee╌ing I muſt ſtill, which [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=72) ſee╌ing I muſt
ſtill, I muſt ſtill, ſtill, ſtill endure; They tell me, they tell me, they
tell me Love has Darts to kill, and Wiſdom has no pow'r, and Wiſdom has no
pow'r, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, and Wiſdom has no pow'r, no pow'r to
cure. Then cruel, cruel Reaſon give me, give me, give me reſt; quit, quit in
my Heart thy fe╌ble hold, goe try thy Force, go try thy Force in Ce╌lia's
Breaſt, for that is diſingag'd and col╌d, that is diſ╌in╌gag'd and cold; there
all, all, all, there [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=72) all, all thy
Niceſt Arts em╌ploy; Confeſs thy ſelf, confeſs thy ſelf her Beau╌ty's Slave,
and argue whilſt ſhe may de╌ſtroy, how gre╌at, how gre╌at, how God╌like 'tis
to ſave.

#### 1.44. The laſt SONG Mr. Henry Purcell Sett before his Sickneſs.

[...] LOve╌ly, Lovely Al╌bi╌na, LOve╌ly, Lovely Al╌bi╌na's come, co╌me
a╌ſhore, to enter her juſt, juſt claim; Ten times more Char╌ming, Ten times
more Char╌ming [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=73) [...]than
be╌ſore; To her Im╌mor╌tal Fame. Fame. The Bel╌gick Ly╌on, as his brave,
brave, brave, the Bel╌gick Ly╌on, as his brave, brave, brave, this Beauty,
this Beauty will relieve, this Beauty, this Beauty will re╌lieve, will, will
relieve, for nothing, nothing, nothing but a mean blind Slave, can liv╌e, and
let her griev╌e, and let her grieve.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=73)

#### 1.45. SONG, Sung in the Play call'd, The Maſſacre in Paris.

[...] THy Genius lo! lo! from his ſweet Bed of reſt, adorn'd with Jeſſimin,
and with Ro╌ſes dreſt; the Pow'rs Divine has rais'd to ſtop thy Fate, a true
Repentance never, never comes too late, a true Repentance never, never comes
too late: So ſoon as Born ſhe made her ſelf a Shrowd, the fleecy Man╌tle of a
weep╌ing Cloud, and ſwift as thought her Ai╌ry Journey took, ſwi╌ft as thought
her Ai╌ry Journey took; her Hand Heav'ns Azure Gate with trem╌bling [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=74) [...] Struck;
the Stars did with a╌maze╌ment on her look, the Stars did with a╌mazement on
her look, did with a╌mazement on her look; She told thy Story in ſo ſad a
Tone, She told thy Story in ſo ſa╌d a Tone, the Angels ſtart from Bliſs and
ga╌ve a groan. But Charles be╌wate, Oh! dal╌ly not, Oh! dal╌ly not, be╌ware,
Oh! dal╌ly not with Heav'n; for af╌ter this no Pardon, no, no, no Par╌don
ſhall be giv'n; Oh! dally not, Oh! dal╌ly not [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=74) [...] with
Heavn'n, for af╌ter this, no, no, no Pardon ſhall be giv'n, no, no, no Pardon
ſhall be given.

#### 1.46. A Two Part SONG.

[...] FAir Clo╌e my Breaſt ſo a╌lar╌ms, from her Pow'r I no Fair Cloe my
Breaſt ſo a╌lar╌ms, from her Pow'r, from her Pow'r I no Refuge can find; If
a╌nother I take in my Arms, yet my Clo╌e, yet my Clo╌e is Refuge can find; If
a╌nother I take in my Arms, yet my Clo╌e is [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=75) [...] [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=75) [...] [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=76) [...] then in
my Mind: Unbleſt with the Joy, ſtill a Pleaſure I want, ſtill a Pleaſure I
then in my Mind: Un╌bleſt with the Joy, ſtill a Pleaſure I want, which none
but my Clo╌e, my Clo╌e can grant; let Clo╌e but want, which none but my Clo╌e,
my Clo╌e can grant; let Clo╌e but ſmi╌le, ſmi╌le, I grow ga╌y, and I I grow
ga╌y, and I feel my Heart ſpring with De╌light; on Clo╌e I cou'd gaze all the
day, all, all the feel my Heart ſpring with De╌light; on Clo╌e I cou'd gaze
all the day, all [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=76) [...] day, all,
all, all, all the day, all, all the day; on Clo╌e I cou'd gaze all the all the
day, all, all, all, all the day, all, all the day; on Clo╌e I cou'd gaze all
the day, and Clo╌e do wiſh for, and Clo╌e do wiſh for, and Clo╌e do wiſh for
each night. day, and Clo╌e do wiſh for, and Clo╌e do wiſh for, and Clo╌e do
wiſh for each night. Oh! Oh! did Clo╌e, Oh! Oh! did Clo╌e but Oh! Oh̄ did
Clo╌e, Oh! Oh! did Clo╌e but know how I Love, and the Pleaſure of Loving
a╌gain; my know how I Love, and the Pleaſure of Loving a╌gain; my Paſ╌ſion her
[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=77) [...]
Paſ╌ſion her Favour wou'd mo╌ve, my Paſ╌ſion her Favour wou'd Fa╌vour wou'd
mo╌ve, my Paſ╌ſion her Fa╌vour wou'd mo╌ve, mo╌ve, and in Prudence ſhe'd pi╌ty
my Pain: Good Nature and and in Prudence ſhe'd pi╌ty my Pain: Good Nature and
Int'╌reſt ſhou'd both make her kind, for the Joy ſhe might give, and the
Int'╌reſt ſhou'd both make her kind, for the Joy ſhe might give, and the Joy
ſhe might find. Joy ſhe might find.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=77)

#### 1.47. A SONG, Sung at the Knighting of Don-Quixote, in the 2d. Act.

[...] Sing, Sin╌g, all ye Muſes, Sin╌g, Sing, Sing, Sin╌g, all ye Mu╌ſes,
Sing, your Lutes ſtrike, ſtrike, ſtrike a╌roun╌d, Sing, your Lutes ſtrike,
ſtrike, ſtrike a╌roun╌d, your Lutes ſtrike a╌round; when a Soldier's the
ſto╌ry, when a your Lutes ſtrike around; when a Soldier's the ſto╌ry, when a
Soldier's the ſto╌ry, what Tongue can want ſound; when a Soldier's the Sto╌ry,
what Soldier's the ſto╌ry, what Tongue can want ſound; when a Soldier's the
ſto╌ry, what [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=78) [...] Tongue
can want ſound; who Danger diſdains, who Danger diſdains, Wou╌nds, Wounds,
Tongue can want ſound; who Danger diſdains, who Danger diſdains, Wou╌nds,
Wounds, Bruiſes and Pains, when the Honour of Fighting is all that he gains;
Rich Bruiſes and Pains, when the Honour of Fighting is all that he gains;
Profit comes eaſy, comes, ea╌ſy, ea╌ſy in Ci╌ties of Store, but the Gold is
earn'd hard where the Rich Profit comes ea╌ſy, ea╌ſy in Ci╌ties of Store,
Cannons do Ro╌ar, but the Gold is earn'd hard where the Cannons do but the
Gold is earn'd hard where the Cannons do Ro╌ar, do [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=78) [...] Roar;

Brisk Time.

Yet ſee how they run, how they run, how they run, how they run at the
Storming, the Roar; Yet ſee how they run, how they run at the Storming, the
Storming, the Storming, the Storming, the Storming a Town, thro' Blood, and
thro' Fire, to Storming, the Storming, the Storming, the Storming a Town,
thro' Blood, and thro' Fire, to take the Half Moon,

Soft.

thro' Blood, and thro' Fire to take the Half Moon; they take the Half Moon,
thro' Blood, and thro' Fire to take the Half Moon; Sca╌le the high Wall, they
Sca╌le the high they Sca╌le the high Wall, the high [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=79) [...] Wall,
whence they ſee others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall, whence they ſee o╌thers
Wall, whence they ſee others fall, fall, fall, fall, fall, whence they ſee
others fall; their Hearts precious Darling, bright Glo╌ry, bright fall; their
Hearts precious Darling, bright Glo╌ry, bright Glo╌ry pur╌ſuing, tho' Death's

Slow.

un╌der Foot and the Glo╌ry pur╌ſuing, tho' Death's under Foot and the Mine is
juſt blowing, It ſprings, it ſprings, it ſprings, it Mine is juſt blowing. Up
they Fl╌y, it [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=79) [...] ſprings
up they fl╌y, they fl╌y, yet ſprings, it ſprings, it ſprings, it ſprings, up
they fl╌y, more, more, more, more, more, yet more will ſup╌ply, as Bridegrooms
to yet more, more, more, yet more ſtill ſup╌ply, as Bride╌grooms to Marry they
haſ╌ten to die, they haſten to die; till Fate claps, Marry they haſ╌ten, they
haſten to die; till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, till Fate claps,
claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tydings brings, of the claps, claps her
Wings, till Fate claps, claps, claps her Wings, and the glad Tydings brings,
of the [[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=80)
[...] Breach being enter'd, and then, then, then, then, then, then, then
they'r all Kings: Then Breach being enter'd, and then, then, then, then, then,
then, then they'r all Kings: happy's She whoſe Face can win, then hap╌py's She
whoſe Face can win, can win a Then happy's She, then happy's She whoſe Face
can win, can win a Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State, they Range
about in State, like Gods, like Soldier's Grace, they Range about in State,
they Range about in State, like Gods, like Gods diſ╌poſing Fate; no Lux╌u╌ry
in Peace, nor Pleaſure in ex╌ceſs Gods diſ╌poſing Fate; no Lux╌u╌ry in Peace,
nor Pleaſure in ex╌ceſs [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=80) [...] can
par╌ral╌lel the joys, can pa╌ral╌lel the joys, the can par╌ral╌lel the joys,
can pa╌ral╌lel the joys, the Mar╌tial, Martial He╌ro Crown when fluſh'd with
Ra╌ge, Mar╌tial He╌ro Crown when fluſh'd with and forc'd by want, forc'd by
want, he Stor╌ms, Ra╌ge, and forc'd by want, he Stor╌ms, he he Stor╌ms a
wealthy Town. Stor╌ms a wealthy Town.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=81)

#### 1.48. A Dialogue in Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr.

[...] Let us goe, let us goe, let us HArk my Daridcar! hark we're cal'd, we're
cal'd, we're cal'd be╌low; let us goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe, let
us go to releive the care of lon╌ging goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe,
let us goe; Lovers in de╌ſpair; let us goe, let us goe, let us goe; let us
goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us goe,
let us goe, let us, let us goe: Merry, merry, merry, we let us goe, let us
goe, let us goe, let us goe, let us, let us goe: Merry, merry, merry we [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=81) [...] Sayle
form the Eaſt; half Tippl'd at the Rainbow Feaſt; in the bright Moonſhine
whilſt the Sayle from the Eaſt; half Tippl'd at the Rainbow Feaſt; Winds
whiſtle lou╌d; tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, in the bright Moonſhine,
whilſt the Winds whiſtle loud; tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy,
tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy; we mount, we mount, and we fl╌y, tivy, tivy,
tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy, tivy; we mount, we mount and we fl╌y, all racking
a╌long in a dawny white Cloud, and leſt our leap all racking a╌long in a dawny
white Cloud, [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=82) [...] from the
Sky ſhou'd prove too farr, and leſt our leap from the Sky and leſt our leap
from the Sky ſhou'd prove too farr, and leſt our leap ſhou'd prove too fa╌rr,
we'll ſli╌de, we'll ſlide on the back of a new fal╌ling from the Sky ſhou'd
prove too farr, we'll fli╌de, we'll ſlide on the back of a new falling Starr,
and drop, drop, drop from a╌bove, in a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly of Starr,
and drop, drop, drop from a╌bove, in a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly of Love; and
drop, drop, drop from a╌bove, in a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly of Love. Love;
and drop, drop, drop from a╌bove, in a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly, a gel╌ly of Love.
[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=82) [...]
But now the Sun's down, and the Element's Red, the Spirits of Fire againſt us
make Head; they muſter, they muſter, they muſter like Gnats in the Air: a╌las
I muſt leave thee my Oh ſtay! oh Fair, and to my light Horſemen re╌pair. A╌las
I muſt leave thee, ſtay! oh ſtay! ſtay, ſtay, oh ſtay, ſtay, ſtay; a╌las I
muſt leave thee, a╌las, a╌las I muſt leave thee, muſt leave thee my Fair.
[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=83) [...]
for you need not to fear'em, you need not to fear 'em to Night; the Wind is
for us and blo╌ws full in their ſight, and o're the wide Ocean we fi╌ght; like
leaves in the Autumn our Foes will fall down, and hiſs in the Water, and hiſs
in the Wa╌ter, and down: But their Men lye ſe╌curely in­trench'd [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=83) [...] in a
Cloud, and a Trumpeter, Hornet, a Trumpeter, Hornet to Battle, to Bat╌tle
ſounds lou╌d; no mortals that ſpye how we Tilt in the Sky, with wonder will
gaze and fear ſuch e╌vents as will ne're come to paſs, ſtay Then call me a╌gen
when the Battle is won. you to perform what the Man wou'd have done.

Turn over to the CHO

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=84) CHORUS.
[...] So ready, ſo ready and quick is a Spi╌rit of Air, to pi╌ty, to pi╌ty the
So realy, ſo ready and quick is a Spi╌rit of Air, to pity, to pi╌ty the Lover,
and ſuccour the Fair; that ſi╌lent and ſwift, ſi╌lent and ſwift, Lover, and
ſuccour the Fair; that ſi╌lent and ſwift, ſi╌lent and ſwift the lit╌tle ſoft
God, is here with a Wiſh, and is ſi╌lent and ſwift the lit╌tle ſoft God, is
here with a Wiſh, and is gone with a Nod, is here with a Wiſh, and is gone
with a Nod. gone with a Nod, is here with a Wiſh, and is gone with a Nod.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=84)

#### 1.49. A Two Part SONG.

[...] NO, no, no, no, no, no, re╌ſiſtance, re╌ſiſtance is but No, no, no, no,
no, no, re╌ſiſtance, re╌ſiſtance, re╌ſiſtance is but vain; no, no, no, no, no,
no, re╌ſiſtance, re╌ſiſtance is but vain, vain, vain; no, no; no, no, no, no,
re╌ſiſtance, re╌ſiſtance is but vain, vain, vain, vain, vain, re╌ſiſtance is
but vain; and on╌ly adds new weight, and vain, vain, re╌ſiſtance is but vain;
and on╌ly adds new on╌ly adds new weight, and on╌ly adds new weight to
Cu╌pid's weight, and on╌ly adds new weight, new weight, new weight to Cu╌pid's
[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=85) [...]
Chain; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, Chain; no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, re╌ſiſtance is
but vain; no, no, no, no, no, no, re╌ſi╌ſtance no, no, no, no, reſiſtance is
but vain; no, no, no, no, no, no, re╌ſi╌ſtance is but vain: A thouſand,
thouſand, thouſand, thouſand ways; is but vain: A thouſand, a thouſand,
thouſand, thouſand, thouſand ways; a thouſand, thouſand, thouſand, thouſand,
thouſand ways; a thouſand, thouſand, thouſand, thouſand [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=85) [...] thouſand,
thouſand Arts the Tyrant, the tyrant, the tyrant, the tyrant knows to
Cap╌ti╌vate ways, a thouſand Arts, the Tyrant, the tyrant, the tyrant knows to
Cap╌ti╌vates our hearts; And ſometimes our hearts; Sometimes he ſighs, he
ſigh╌s em╌ploys; tryes the U╌niver╌ſal Language of the Eyes; The fier╌ce with
The ſolt with ten╌derneſs de╌coys, fierce╌neſs he deſtroys. [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=86) [...]the ſoft
with ten╌der╌neſs de╌coys; He kills the ſtron╌g, He kills the ſtron╌g, he
kills the he kills the ſtron╌g with joy, with jo╌y, ſtron╌g with joy, with
jo╌y, he kills the ſtrong with joy; he kills the ſtrong with joy; the weak
with the weak with pain, the weak with pain. No, no, no, pain, the weak with
pain, the weak with pain. No, no,

End with firſt Strain from this  (vocal join) mark.

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=86)

#### 1.50. A Two Part SONG, in King Arthur.

[...] SOund a Par╌ly ye Fair and ſur╌ren╌der, ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound a
Par╌ly ye Sound, ſound, ſound, ſound, a Par╌ly ye Fair and ſur╌ren╌der, ſound
a Fa╌ir, a Par╌ly ye Fair and Surrender; ſet your ſelves and your Parly ye
Fair, found a Par╌ly ye Fair and ſur╌render; ſet your ſelves and your Lovers
at eaſe: He's a gratefull, a gratefull Of╌fender who plea╌ſure Lovers at eaſe:
He's a gratefull, a gratefull Of╌fender who pleaſure, who plea╌ſure dare
ſeize, but the whining pre╌tender, the dare ſeize, but the whining, the [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=87) [...] whineing
preten╌der is ſure to diſpleaſe: Sound a Par╌ly ye Fair and ſur╌ren╌der,
whineing preten╌der is ſure to diſ╌pleaſe: Sound, ſound, ſound, ſound a Parly
ye ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound a Parly ye Fair, ſou╌nd a Par╌ly ye Fair and
ſur╌ren╌der, ſound a Parly ye Fair, ſound a Par╌ly ye Fair and ſur╌render;
ſince the fruit of de╌ſire is poſſeſſing, 'tis un╌man╌ly to ſigh, 'tis
un╌manly Fair and ſur╌render; ſince the fruit of de╌ſire is poſſeſſing, 'tis
un╌man╌ly to ſigh, 'tis un╌manly to ſigh and complain; When we kneel for
re╌dreſſing, when we kneel for re╌dreſſing, to ſigh and com╌plain; When we
kneel for redreſſing, when we [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=87) [...]we mo╌ve
your diſ╌dain; Love was made for a kneel for re╌dreſſing we mo╌ve your
diſ╌dain; Love was Bleſ╌ſing, a Bleſ╌ſing, Love was made, Love was made for a
Bleſ╌ſing made, Love was made, Love was made for a Bleſ╌ſing, Love was made
for a Bleſ╌ſing, was and not for a Pain, Love was made for a Bleſ╌ſing made
for a Bleſ╌ſing and not for a Pain, Love was made for a and not for a Pain.
Bleſ╌ſing, was made for a Bleſ╌ſing and not for a Pain.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=88)

#### 1.51. Let Hector, Achilles, a two Part SONG.

[...] LET Hector, A╌chil╌les, and each brave Com╌man╌der, let Hector
A╌chil╌les, Let Hector A╌chil╌les, and and each brave Commander, with Caeſar
and Pompey, with Caeſar and each brave Commander, and each brave Commander,
with Caeſar and Pompey, with Pompey, and great, great, and great A╌lex╌ander;
all Nations and Kingdoms, all Nations and Caeſar and Pompey, and great, and
great A╌lex╌ander; all Nations and Kingdoms, all Kingdoms with Conqueſt
ſubdue, with Conqueſt, with Conqueſt ſub╌due, yet more than all Nations and
Kingdoms, with Conqueſt ſubdue, with Conqueſt, with Conqueſt ſub╌due, yet
[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=88) [...]
this, more, more, more, yet more than all this, yet more than all this, bright
more than all this, yet more than all this, yet more than all this, more,
more, bright Celia can do. For one ſin╌gle glance from her conquering Eyes,
will take 'em all Ce╌lia can do. For one ſin╌gle glance from her conquering
Eyes, will take 'em all Captive by way of Sur╌prize; the Trophies and Crowns
of their powerfull Arms, are ſacri╌fic'd Captive by way of Sur╌prize; the
Trophies and Crowns of their powerfull Arms, are ſacri╌fic'd all to Ce╌lia's
bright Charms; in Chains and in Tri╌umph, all to Ce╌lia's bright Charms; in
Ghains and in [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=89) [...] in Chains
and in Tri╌umph ſhe carries them all, and Tri╌umph ſhe carries them all, and
if ſhe but frown, then down, then down they all fall, down they fall, down
they fall, if ſhe but frown, then down, then down they all fa╌ll, down they
fall, dow╌n, down, down they all fall; in Chains and in Tri╌umph down they
fall, down, then down they all fall; in Chains ſhe carries them all, and if
ſhe but and in Tri╌umph ſhe carries them all, and if ſhe but [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=89) [...] frown,
then down they all fall, down they fall, down they fa╌ll, dow╌n, frown, then
down they all fa╌ll, down they fall, down they all fa╌ll, down, down they all
fall, down, down, down, down, down, down they all fall. down, then down they
all fall, down, down, dow╌n they all fall.

#### 1.52. What a ſad Fate, a two Part SONG.

[...] WHat a ſad, ſa╌d Fate is mine, is mine, is mine; what a ſad, ſa╌d Fate
is mine; my Love, my Love, my Love is my crime: [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=90) [...] my Love,
my Love, my Love is my crime? what a ſad, what a ſad, ſa╌d Fate is mine? or
why, why ſhou'd ſhe be, why, why ſhou'd ſhe be more ea╌ſy, more ea╌ſy, more
ea╌ſy, ea╌ſy, and free to a╌ll, than to me, to a╌ll than to me, to a╌ll than
to me, to [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=90) [...] a╌ll than
to me? But if by diſ╌dain, but if by diſ╌dain ſhe can leſ╌ſen my pain, 'tis
all, 'tis all, all, I im╌plore; to make me Love leſs, to make me Love leſs, or
her ſelf to Love more; more, more, to make me Love leſs, or her ſelf to Love
more.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=91)

#### 1.53. A Dialogue in the 4th. Act of the 2d. Part of Don-Quixote.

He.

[...]

SInce Times are ſo bad, I muſt tell you ſweet Heart, I'm thinking to leave off
my Plough and my Cart, and to the Fair Cit╌ty a Journey will goe, to better my
Fortune as other folk do; Since ſome have from Ditches, and courſe Leather
Breeches, been rais'd, been rais'd to be Rulers and wallow'd in Riches,
prithee come, come, come, come from thy Wheel, prithee come, come, come, come
from thy Wheel, for if Gypſies don't lye, I ſhall, I ſhall be a Governour too
e're I dye.

She.

Ah! Collin, ah! Collin, by all, by all thy late doings I find with [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=91) [...] ſorrow
and trouble, with ſorrow and trouble the Pri╌de of thy mind; our Sheep now at
random diſ╌order╌ly run, and now, and now Sundays Jacket goes e╌very day on:
Ah! what doſt thou, what doſt thou, what doſt thou mean? ah! what doſt thou,
what doſt thou, what doſt thou mean?

He.

To make my Shoos clean and foot it, and foot it to'th Court, to the King and
the Queen; where ſhewing my parts I pre╌ſerment ſhall win;

She.

Fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, fye, 'tis better, 'tis better for
us to Plough and to Spin; for [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=92) [...] as to the
Court when thou happen'ſt to try, thou'lt find nothing got there unleſs thou
can'ſt buy; For Money the Devil, the Devil and all's to be found, but no good
Parts minded, no, no, no, no good Parts minded, without the good Pound.

He.

Why then I'le take Arms, why then I'le take Arms, I'le take Arms, and follow,
and follow Allarms, hunt Honour that now a╌days plague╌ly Charms:

She.

And ſo loſe a Limb by a Shot or a Blow, and curſe thy ſelf af╌ter for leaving,
for leaving the Plough.

He.

Sup╌poſe I turn Gameſter?

She.

So Cheat and be Bang'd.

He.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=92) [...]

What think'ſt of the Road then?

She.

The Highway to be Hang'd.

He.

Nice Pimping how╌e╌ver yields profit for Life, I'le help ſome fine Lord to
a╌nother's fine Wife:

She.

That's dangerous too, a╌mongſt the Town Crew, for ſome of'em will do the ſame
thing by you; and then I to Cuckold ye may be draw'n in, faith Collin 'tis
better I ſit here and Spin, faith Collin 'tis better I ſit here and Spin.

He.

Will nothing prefer me, what think'ſt of the Law?

She.

Oh! while you live Collin keep out of that Paw.

He.

I'le Cant and I'le Pray.

She.

Ah! there's naught got [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=93) [...] ah!
there's naught got that way; there's no one minds now what thoſe Black Cattle
ſay; let all our whole care be our Farming af╌fair,

He.

To make our Corn grow, and our Ap╌ple Trees bear.

2 Voc.

[...] Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can ſhow, ſo I'le
to my Diſtaff; Ambition's, Am╌bition's a Trade no Contentment can ſhow, and
Ambition's, Ambition's a Trade, a Trade, a Trade no Contentment can ſhow, no,
no, no, I to my Plough; Ambition's, Am╌bition's a Trade no Contentment can
ſhow, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=93) [...] no, no,
no contentment can ſhow, no, no, no contentment can ſhow. no, no no, no, no
contentment can ſhow, no, no, no, no, no, no contentment can ſhow.

CHORUS.

[...] Let all our whole care be our Farming affair, to make our Corn grow and
our Ap╌ple Trees beare; Let all our whole care be our Farming affair, to make
our Corn grow and our Ap╌ple Trees bear; Am╌bition's, Am╌bition's a Trade, a
Trade no Content╌ment can ſhow, ſo I'le to my Diſtaff; Amb╌ition's,
Am╌bition's a Trade no Con╌tentment can ſhow, and Am╌bition's, Am╌bition's a
Trade, a Trade no Con╌tent╌ment can ſhow, no, no, no, I to my Plough;
Am╌bition's, Am╌bition's a Trade no Con╌tentment can ſhow, no, [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=94) [...] no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, contentment can ſhow, no, no, no, contentment can ſhow. no, no,
no, no, no contentment can ſhow, no, no, no, no, no, no, contentment can ſhow.

#### 1.54. Bacchus is a Pow'r divine, a ſingle SONG.

[...] BAcchus is a Pow'r di╌vine, for He no ſooner fills my Head with migh╌ty
Wine, but all my Caresreſign, and droop, and droop, then ſink, ſink down dead.
Then, then the plea╌ſing thoughts be╌gin, and I in Ri╌ches flow, at [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=94) [...] leaſt I
fancy ſo. And without thought of want I Sin╌g, I Sin╌g, ſtretch'd on the
Earth, my Head all a╌round, with Flowers Weav╌v'd in╌to a Garland Crown'd;
Then, then I be╌gin to live, and ſcorn what all the world can ſhow or give.
Let the bra╌ve Fools that fondly think of Honour, and delight to make a Noiſe,
a noiſe and Fi╌ght, go ſeek out War, whilſt I ſeek Peace, ſeek [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=95) [...] Peace,
whilſt I ſeek Peace, ſeek Peace and drink, whilſt I ſeek Peace, whilſt I ſeek
Peace, ſeek Peace and drink. Then fill my Glaſs, fill, fill it high, ſome
perhaps think it fit to fa╌ll and dye, but when the Bottles rang'd make War
with me, the Fighting Fool ſhall ſee, when I am ſunk, the diff'rence to lye
dead, and lye dea╌d Drunk; the Fighting Fool ſhall ſee, when I am ſunk, the
diff'rence to lye dead, and l╌ye dead drunk.

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=95)

#### 1.55. 'Tis Nature's Voice, a ſingle SONG.

[...] 'TIs Nature's Voice, 'tis Nature's Voice, thro' all the move╌ing Wood of
Creatures un╌der╌ſtood; the U╌ni╌ver╌ſal Tongue, the U╌ni╌ver╌ſal Tongue to
none of all her nume'rous Ra╌ce unknown, from her, from her it learnt the
migh╌ty, the migh╌ty, the migh╌ty Art to Cou╌rt the Ear, or ſtrike, or ſtri╌ke
[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=96) [...]
the Heart, at once the Paſſions to expreſs and mo╌ve, at once the Paſſions to
ex╌preſs, to ex╌preſs and mo╌ve; we hear, and ſtrait we grie╌ve or hate, and
ſtrait we grie╌ve or hate, re╌joy╌ce or╌Love: in un╌ſeen Chains it does the
Fan╌cy bin╌d, it does, it does the [[Page
179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=96) [...] Fa╌cy
bind, at once it Char╌ms the Senſe and Cap╌ti╌vates the Mind, at once it
Char╌ms the Senſe and Cap╌ti╌vates the Mind.

#### 1.56. Ah me too many Deaths, a ſingle SONG by Mr. J. Crown.

[...] AH╌me! Ah╌me! to many, many deaths, to many deaths decreed; to many,
ma╌ny deaths de╌creed; My Love to [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=97) [...] War, to
Wa╌r goes ev'ry day, my Love to Wa╌r goes ev'╌ry day; In ev'ry Wound of his I
bleed, I dy╌e the hour he goes a╌way; yet, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd hate him
ſhou'd he ſtay: Yet, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd hate
him ſhou'd he ſtay; yet, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd, yet I wou'd
hate him ſhou'd he ſtay.

II.

Ah me! to many Deaths decreed,

By Love or War, I hourly dye,

When I ſee not my Love I bleed;

Yet when I have him in my Eye,

He kills me with exceſs of Joy.

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=97)

#### 1.57. Fly ſwift ye Hours, a ſingle SONG.

[...] FLy— ſwift ye Hours fl╌y ſwift ye Hours, make haſt, make haſt, fl╌y,
make haſt, make haſt, fl╌y, fl╌y ſwi╌ft, thou la╌zy, la╌zy, la╌zY Sun, make
haſt, make haſt, make haſt, and drive the te╌dious Minutes on, the te╌dious
Minutes on, on: Bring back my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra, my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra to my ſight, bring
back my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra, my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra to my ſight, [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=98) [...] my
Bel╌vi╌de╌ra, than thy ſelf more bright, make haſt, make haſt, make haſt,
bring back my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra, my Bel╌vi╌de╌ra to╌my ſight, Swifter than Time my
ea╌ger Wi╌ſhes mo╌ve, ſwifter than Time my ea╌ger Wi╌ſher mo╌ve, my ea╌ger
Wiſhes move, and ſcorn the bea╌ten Paths, and ſcorn the bea╌ten Paths of
Vul╌gar Love, and ſcorn the be [...] [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=98) [...] Paths,
and ſcorn the beaten Pa╌ths of Vul╌gar Love, and ſcorn the beaten pa╌ths of
Vul╌gar Lo╌ve. Soft Peace is baniſh'd from my tor╌tur'd Breaſt, ſoft Peace,
ſoft Peace is baniſh'd from my tor╌tur'd Breaſt, Love robs my Days of Eaſe,
Love robs my Days of Eaſe, my Nights of Reſt; Love robs my Days of Eaſe, Love
robs my Days of Eaſe, my Nights, my Nigh╌ts of reſt. Yet tho'her cru╌el Scorn
pro╌vokes De╌ſpair, [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=99) [...] yet tho'
her cru╌el Scorn, her cru╌el Scorn pro╌vokes De╌ſpair, my Paſſion ſtill is
ſtrong, my Paſſion ſtill is ſtro╌ng, my Paſſion ſtill is ſtro╌ng, as ſhe is
fair; Still muſt I Love, ſtill bleſs the plea╌ſing Pain, ſtill ourt my Ruine,
ſtill, ſtill court my Ru╌ine, and em╌brace my Chain; ſtill court my Ruine,
ſtill, ſtill court my Ru╌ine, and em╌brace my Chain.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=99)

#### 1.58. The STORM, a ſingle SONG.

[...] BLow, blow Boreas, blow, and let thy ſur╌ly Winds make the Bil╌lows foam
and roar; thou can'ſt no Terror breed in valiant Minds, but ſpight of thee
we'l live, but ſpight of thee we'l live and find a Shoar. Then cheer my
Hearts, and be not aw'd, but kee╌p the Gun Room clear; tho' Hell's broke
looſe, and the Devils roar abroad, whilſt we have Sea╌room here, Boys, never
fear, never, never fear. Hey! how ſhe toſſes up! how far the mounting Top╌maſt
touch'd a Starr; the Meteors blaz'd as thro' the Clouds we came, and
Sa╌la╌mander [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=100) [...] like, we
li╌ve in Flame; but now, now we ſink, now, now we go down to the deep╌eſt
Shades be╌low. A╌las! a╌las! where are we now! who, who can tell! ſure 'tis
the low╌eſt Room of Hell, or where the Sea╌Gods dwell: With them we'll live,
with them we'll live and raign, with them we'll lau╌gh, and ſing, and drink
amain, with them we'll lau╌gh and ſing, and drink amain; but ſee, we mount,
ſee, ſee, we riſe a╌gain.

CHORUS. [...] Tho' Fla╌ſhes of Lightning and Tem╌peſts of Rain, do fierce╌ly
con╌tend Tho' Fla╌ſhes of Lightning and Tem╌peſts of Rain, do fierce╌ly
con╌tend [[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=100) [...] which
ſhall conquer the Maine; tho' the Captain does ſwear, in╌ſtead of a Pray'r,
and the which ſhall conquer the Maine; tho' the Captaine does ſwear, in╌ſtead
of a Pray'r, and the Seas is all Fire by the Daemons o'th' Air; we'll drink
and de╌fie, we'll drink and de╌fie Seas is all Fire by the Daemons o'th' Air;
we'll drink and de╌fie, we'll the mad Spi╌rits that fly from the Deep, to the
Sky, that fly, fl╌y, from the drink and de╌fie the mad Spi╌rits that fly from
the Deep to the Sky, that fl╌y from the Deep to the Sky, and ſi╌ng whilſt loud
Thunder, and ſi╌ng whilſt loud Thunder does Deep to the Sky, and ſi╌ng whilſt
loud Thun╌der, loud Thunder does [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=101) [...] bellow;
for Fate will ſtill have a kind Fate for the Brave, and ne're make his Grave
of a bellow; for Fate will ſtill have a kind Fate for the Brave, and ne're
make his Grave of a Salt╌water Wave, to drown, to drown, no, never to drown a
good Fellow; no, ne╌ver, Salt╌water Wave, to drown, to drown, no, never to
drown a good Fellow; no, ne╌ver, no, ne╌ver to drown a good Fellow; no ne╌ver,
ne╌ver to drown, ╌ne╌ver to drown a good Fellow; no, ne╌ver, no, ne╌ver to
drown, No, ne╌ver, no, ne╌ver to drown a good Fellow. No, ne╌ver, ne╌ver to
drown a good Fellow.

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=101)

#### 1.59. Strike the Viol, touch the Lute, a ſingle SONG.

[...] STrike the Vi╌ol, ſtrike the Vi╌ol, touch, touch, touch, touch, touch,
touch the Lute; wake the Harp, wake the Harp, wake the Harp, In╌ſpi╌re the
Flute, wake the Harp, In╌ſpi╌re the Flute: Sing your Pa╌tro╌neſ╌ſe's Praiſe,
ſing your Pa╌tro╌neſ╌ſe's Praiſe, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing, in cheer╌full and
har╌mo╌nious Lays.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=102)

#### 1.60. A SONG in the Propheteſs, or the Hiſtory of Diocleſian.

[...] SInce from my Dear, my Dear, my Dear, ſince from my Dear, my Dear, my
Dear, my Dear, my Dear A╌ſtre╌a's ſight I was ſo rude╌ly torn, my Soul has
never, never, never, has never, never, never known de╌light, un╌leſs it were
to mourn, to mourn, un╌leſs, un╌leſs, it were to mourn, mourn. But oh! a╌las,
a╌las, with weep╌ing Eyes, and bleeding, bleed╌ing Heart I [[Page
191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=102) [...] lye;
thinking on her, on her, whoſe abſence 'tis that makes me wiſh to dye, dye,
dye, dye, makes me, makes me wiſh to dye, dye, dye.

#### 1.61. A SONG in the Married Beau.

[...] SEE, ſee, ſee, ſee where re╌pen╌ting, where re╌pen╌ting Ce╌lia lies,
with bluſh╌ing Cheeks, with bluſh╌ing Cheeks, and mel╌ting Eyes; be╌moaning,
be╌moaning, in a mourn╌full, mourn╌full Shade, the ruins, the ruins in her
Heart and [[Page
192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=103) [...] Fame,
which ſin╌full, ſin╌full Love has made: Oh! Oh! Oh! let thy Tears, fair Ce╌lia
flo╌w, let thy Tears, fai╌r Ce╌lia flow, for, that Ce╌leſ╌tial wond╌'rous,
wond╌'rous, wond╌'rous dew, more gra╌ces on thee will be╌flow, than all, all,
than all, all, than all, all, than all, all thy Dreſſes, and thy Ar╌ts cou'd
doe.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=103)

#### 1.62. Ah! ah! ah! Belinda, a ſingle SONG.

[...] AH! ah! ah! ah! Be╌lin╌da, I am preſt with tor╌ment; Ah! ah! ah!
Be╌lin╌da I am preſt with tor╌ment not to be ex╌preſs'd: Ah! ah! ah!
Be╌lin╌da, I am pre╌ſt with tor╌ment; Ah! ah! ah! Be╌lin╌da I am pres'd with
tor╌ments not to be ex╌preſs'd. Peace and I are ſtrangers grown, Peace and I
are ſtrangers, ſtrangers grown, I Lan╌guiſh [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=104) [...] till my
grief be known, I Lan╌guiſh, till my grief be known, yet wou'd not, yet wou'd
not, wou'd not have it gue╌ſt. Peace and I are ſtran╌gers grown, Peace and I
are ſtran╌gers, ſtran╌gers grown.

#### 1.63. O, O let me Weep! a Two Part SONG.

[...]

VIOLIN.

[...] O, o let me, O, O let me, let me weep! [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=104) [...] O, O let
me, O, O let me, let me weep! O, O, O let me for ever, ever weep, for e╌ver,
for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for e╌ver weep! My Eyes no more, no more, no mo╌re,
[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=105) [...]
no more, no more ſhall wel╌come ſleep: I'le hide me, I'le hide me from the
ſight of Day, and ſigh, ſigh, ſigh my Soul a╌way. [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=105) [...] O, O let
me, O, O let me, let me weep! O, O let me, O, O let me, let me weep! O, O, O
let me for ever, ever weep, for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=106) [...] e╌ver
weep! He's gone, he's gone, he's gone, his loſs de╌plore; he's gone, he's
gone, he's gone, his loſs deplore, and I ſhall never, never, never, never,
never ſee him more; I ſhall never, never, [[Page
199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=106) [...] never
ſee him more, ſhall never, never, never ſee him more; I ſhall never, ſhall
never, ſhall never, ſhall never ſee him more.

#### 1.64. A Two Part SONG, the Words by Mr. Henly.

[...] D╌Ʋl╌ci╌bel╌la, Dulci╌bel╌la, when e're I ſue for a Kiſs; Dulci╌bel╌la,
Dulci╌ Dul╌ci╌bel╌la, Dulci╌bel╌la, ╌bella, when e're I ſue for a Kiſs,
re╌fuſing the Bliſs, cry's no, no, no, Dul╌ci╌bella, when e're I ſue for a
Kiſs, re╌fu╌ſing the Bliſs, cry's [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=107) [...] no,
cry's no, no, no, no, leave me, leave me, leave me A╌lex╌is, ah! what wou'd
you do, no, no, no, no, cry's no, no, no, no, leave me, leave me A╌lex╌is, ah!
what wou'd you do, ah! what wou'd you, ah! what wou'd you, what wou'd you do?
what wou'd you, ah! what wou'd you, what wou'd you, what wou'd you do? when I
when I tell her I'le go, ſtill ſhe cry's no, no, no, my A╌lex╌is, no, tell her
I'le go, ſtill ſhe cry's no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, my A╌lex╌is, no, no
my A╌lex╌is, ah! tell me not, tell me not ſo; ah! ah! ah! no, my A╌lex╌is, ah!
tell me not, tell we not ſo; ah! ah! ah! tell me not [[Page
201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=107) [...] tell me
not, tell me not ſo. Tell me fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, why ſo
ſo, ah! tell me not ſo. Tell me fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, why,
coming, why, why, why ſo coming, why ſo com╌ing, why ſo ſhy; why ſo why, why
ſo coming, why, why, why ſo coming, why, why, why ſo ſhy, why ſo kind, ſo
kind, ſo kind, ſo kind, and why, and why ſo coy; tell me fair one, tell me
kind, ſo kind, and why ſo coy, and why ſo coy; tell me fair one, tell me fair
one, tell me, tell me why, you'l neither let me Fig╌ht fair one, tell me, tell
me why, you'l neither let me Fig╌ht [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=108) [...] nor fly;
tell me nor fly: tell me fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, you'l
neither let me li╌ve, fair one, tell me fair one, tell me why, you'l neither
let me you'l li╌ve, you'l neither let me neither let me li╌ve nor dye. li╌ve
nor dye.

[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=108)

#### 1.65. Let Caeſar and Urania live, a Two Part SONG.

[...] LET Caeſar and Ʋ╌ra╌nia Let Caeſar and U╌ra╌nia live, live, let all
de╌ligh╌is the Stars can give, upon the Royal Pair let all de╌ligh╌ts that
Stars can give, deſcend, let all de╌ligh╌ts the Stars can give, upon the upon
the Royal Pair deſcend, let all de╌ligh╌ts the Stars can give, upon the Royal
Pair de╌ſcend: Let Caeſar and U╌ra╌nia live, let Ray╌al Pair deſcend: Let
Caeſar and U╌ra╌nia live, let all de╌ligh╌ts [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=109) [...] all
de╌ligh╌ts the Stars can give, upon the Royal Pair deſcend; the Stars can
give, upon the Roy╌al let all de╌ligh╌ts the Stars can give, upon the Roy╌al
Pair de╌ſcend; Pair deſcend, let all de╌ligh╌ts the Stars can give, up╌on the
Roy╌al Pair de╌ſcend; let Diſcord to the ſhades be driv'n, let Diſcord to the
ſhades be driv'n, while let Diſcord to the ſhades be driv'n, let Diſ╌cord to
the ſhades be driv'n Earth and Sky our Song at╌tend, and thus our Loy╌al Vows
aſ╌cend, while Earth and Sky our Song at╌tend, and thus our Loy╌al vows
aſ╌cend, [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=109) [...] and thus
our Loy╌al Vows aſ╌cend; O, O, O Preſerve 'em and thus our Loy╌al Vows
aſ╌cend; O, O, O Preſerve 'em Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em,
Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em, Pre╌ſerve 'em,
Heav'n; O, O, O, O Preſerve e'm, Pre╌ſerve 'em, Heav'n; O, O O, O Preſerve 'em
Pre╌ſerve 'em, O, Pre╌ſerve 'em Heav'n. O Preſerve 'em Heav'n.

[[Page 206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=110)

#### 1.66. Were I to chooſe the greateſt Bliſs, a Two Part SONG.

[...] WEre I to chooſe the grea╌teſt Bliſs, were I to chooſe the grea╌teſt
Bliſs, that Were I to chooſe, were I to chooſe the grea╌teſt Bliſs, that e're
in Love was known; 'twou'd be the high╌eſt of my Wiſh, t'en╌jo╌y e're in Love
was known; 'twou'd be the high╌eſt of my Wiſh, t'en╌jo╌y your Heart a╌lone:
Kings might poſ╌ſeſs their King╌doms your Heart a╌lone: Kings might poſ╌ſeſs
their Kingdoms free, and Crowns un╌en╌vy'd wear; they ſhou'd no Ri╌val have of
free, and Crowns un╌en╌vy'd wear; they ſhou'd no [[Page
207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=110) [...] me, no,
no, they ſhou'd no Ri╌val have of me, might I reign Ri╌val, they ſhou'd no
Ri╌val have of me, no, no, might I reign Monarch there; they ſhou'd no Ri╌val
have of me, no, no, Monarch there; they ſhou'd no Ri╌val have of me, no, no,
they they ſhou'd no Ri╌val, they ſhou'd no Ri╌val have of me, might ſhou'd no
Rival, they ſhou'd no Ri╌val ha╌ve of me, might I reign Mo╌narch there. I
reign Mo╌narch there.

[[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=111)

#### 1.67. And in each track of Glory, a Two Part SONG.

[...] ANd in each track of Glo╌ry, ſince, And in each track of Glo╌ry, and in
each track of Glo╌ry, ſince, ſince, of Glo╌ry, ſince, for their lov'd
Coun╌try, or their Prince. Princes that for their lov'd Coun╌try or their
Prince. Princes that hate, that hate Rome's Ty╌ran╌ny and joyn the Nations
right, with their own hate, that hate Rome's Ty╌ran╌ny and joyn the Nations
right, with their own [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=111) [...]
Roy╌al╌ty; none were more rea╌dy, none were more rea╌dy, none, none,
Roy╌al╌ty, none, none, none, none, none were more, none were more none, none,
none were more rea╌dy in di╌ſtreſs to ſave, no, none were more rea╌dy, none
were more ready in di╌ſtreſs to ſave, none were more Loy╌al, none, none, none,
none, none, none, none, none, none, none were more Loy╌al, none, none, none,
none, none, none, none, none, none were more Loy╌al, none, none more brave.
Loy╌al none, none more brave.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=112)

#### 1.68. Neſtor who did, a Two Part SONG.

[...] N Eſtor, who did to thrice Man's Age at╌tain; Neſtor, who did to thrice
Man's Neſtor, who did to thrice Man's Age at╌tain; Age at╌tain, by vaſt
Fx╌pe╌rience ſound, by vaſt Ex╌pe╌rience Neſtor, who did to thrice Man's Age
at╌tain, by vaſt Ex╌pe╌rience ſound, that found; that bu╌ſie States╌men did
Pro╌ject in vain, when Bumpers bu╌ſie States╌men did Pro╌ject in vain, paſs'd
not brisk╌ly round, when Bum╌pers paſs'd not brisk╌ly rou╌nd, when Bumpers
paſs'd not brisk╌ly round, when Bumpers paſs'd not briskly [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=112) [...]paſs'd
not brisk╌ly rou╌nd, rou╌nd, paſs'd not briskly, briskly round, when Bumpers
brisk╌ly, brisk╌ly round: paſs'd not brisk╌ly round, brisk╌ly, brisk╌ly round:
This Maxim then he to his Ma╌ſter gave, when he in Coun╌cil ſhould de╌bate;
This Maxim then he to his Ma╌ſter gave, when he in Council ſhou'd de╌bate; not
Tro╌jan╌like, to ſit moroſe, to ſit moroſe and grave, but drink, drink, but
not Tro╌jan╌like, to ſit moroſe, to ſit moroſe and grave, and ſo ſupport the
[[Page 212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=113) [...]
drink, drink, drink, but drink, and ſo ſupport the State, and ſo ſupport the
State, and State, and ſo ſupport the State; but drink, drink, but drink,
drink, drink, and ſo ſupport the ſo ſupport the State, but drink, drink,
drink, and ſo ſupport the State; but drink, but State; but drink, but drink,
drink, drink, and ſo ſupport the State; but drink, drink, but drink, and ſo
ſupport the State, and ſo ſupport the State; but but drink, but drink, drink,
and ſo ſupport the State, and ſo ſupport the ╌, drink, an╌d ſo ſupport the
State. State; but drink, and ſo ſup╌port the State.

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=113)

#### 1.69. For folded Flocks, a Three Part SONG.

[...] F╌Or fol╌did Flocks, and fruitfull Plains, the For folded Flocks, and
fruitfull Plains; the Shepherds and the Farmers Fair Bri╌tain all Shepherds
and the Farmers gains, the Shepherds and the Farmers gains, fair Britain all
gains, the Shepherds and the Far╌mers gains, fair Britain all, all, all, all,
all, a╌ll the World out╌vies: for folded Flocks and fruitfull all, all, all,
all, all, a╌ll the World out╌vies: fair Britain all, all all, all, all, all,
all, all, all the World out╌vies: fair Britain all, all, all [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=114) [...] Plains,
the Shepherds and the Farmers gaines; fair Britain, all, all, all, all, all
the all, all, all, all, all, all, all the World out╌vies, all, all, all, all
the all, all, all, all, all, all, all, all the World outvies, all, all, all,
all the World outvies: and Pan as in Ar╌ca╌dia reigns, and Pan as in Ar╌ca╌dia
reigns, where pleaſure World outvies: and Pan as in Ar╌ca╌dia reigns, and Pan
as in Ar╌ca╌dia reigns, where pleaſure World outvies: and Pan as in Ar╌ca╌dia
reigns, and Pan as in Ar╌ca╌dia reigns, where pleaſure mixt with pro╌fit lyes.
Tho' Iaſon's Fleece was fa╌m'd, was fam'd of mixt with pro╌fit lyes. Tho'
Iaſon's Fleece was fam'd, was fam'd of mixt with pro╌fit lyes. Tho' Iaſon's
Fleece was fa╌m'd, was fam'd of [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=114) [...] old, the
Britiſh Wool, the Britiſh Wool, is growing, growing Gold; no Mines can more,
no, no, no, old, the Britiſh Wool, the Britiſh Wool is growing, growing Gold;
no, no, no, no, old, the Britiſh Wool, the Britiſh Wool, is growing, growing
Gold; no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no Mines can more of
Wealth ſup╌ply, it keeps, it no, no, no Mines can more, no, no, no, no Mines
can more of Wealth ſup╌ply, it keeps, it no, no, no, no, no, no, no Mines can
more, can more of Wealth ſup╌ply, it keeps, it keeps the Peaſant from the
cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die. keeps the Peaſant from
the cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die. keeps the Peaſant
from the cold, and takes, and takes for Kings the Tyrian die.

[[Page 216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=115)

#### 1.70. A Dialogue in Oroonoko, Sung by the Boy and Girl.

He.

[...]

CE╌le╌me╌ne, pray tell me, pray, pray tell me Ce╌le╌me╌ne, when thoſe pritty,
prit╌ty, pritty Eyes I ſee; when my Heart beats, beats, beats, beats, in my
Breaſt; why, why it will not, it will not, why, why it will not let me reſt?
Why this trem╌bling, why this trem╌bling too all o're? Pains I never, Pains I
never, never, never felt be╌fore: And when thus I touch, when thus I touch
your Hand, why I wiſh, I [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=115) [...] wiſh, I
wiſh I was a Man?

She.

How ſhou'd I know more than you? Yet wou'd be a Woman too. When you waſh your
ſelf and play, I methinks cou'd look all day; Nay juſt now, nay, juſt now am
pleas'd, am pleas'd ſo well, ſhou'd you, ſhou'd you Kiſs me I won't tell,
ſhou'd you, ſhou'd you Kiſs me I won't tell; no, no I won't tell; no, no I
won't tell, no, no I won't tell; ſhou'd you Kiſs me I won't tell.

He.

Tho' I cou'd do that all day, and de╌ſire no bet╌ter play; Sure, ſure in Love
there's ſomething more, which [[Page
218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=116) [...] makes
Mam╌ma ſo bigg, ſo bigg be╌fore.

She.

Once by chance I hear'd it nam'd; don't ask what, don't ask what for I'm
a╌ſham'd: Stay but till you'r paſt Fi╌teen, then' you'll know, then, then
you'll know what 'tis I mean, then you'll know, then, then you'll know what
'tis I mean.

He.

How╌e╌ver, loſe not pre╌ſent Bliſs; but now we're a╌lone let's Kiſs, but now
we're a╌lone let's Kiſs, let's Kiſs.

She.

My Breaſts do ſo heave, ſo heave, ſo hea╌ve.

He.

My Heart does ſo pant, pant, pant. [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=116) [...]

She.

There's ſomething, ſomething, ſomething more we want, there's ſomething,

He.

There's ſomething, ſomething, ſomething more we want, there's ſomething,
ſomething, ſomething more we want. ſomething, ſomething more we want.

#### 1.71. Love thou can'ſt hear, a ſingle SONG. Words by Sir Robert Howard.

[...] L╌Ove thou can'ſt hea╌r, Love thou can'ſt hea╌r tho' thou art blind;
leave my Heart free, leave my Heart free, oh! pit╌ty me, oh! pit╌ty me, ſince
Clo╌ris is un╌kind; leave my Heart free, oh! pit╌ty me, oh! [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=117) [...] pit╌ty
me, oh!╌pit╌ty me, ſince Clo╌ris is un╌kind, oh!╌pit╌ty me, ſince Clo╌ris is
un╌kind. She is un╌con╌ſtant, ſhe is un╌con╌ſtant, ſhe is uncon╌ſtant as ſhe's
bright; ſhe is un╌con╌ſtant ſhe is un╌con╌ſtant, ſhe is un╌con╌ſtant [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=117) [...] as ſhe's
bright; her ſmi╌les on ev╌'ry Shep╌herd fall, her Smi╌les on ev'ry Shepherd
fall; And as the Sun, and as the Sun u╌ſes his light, ſhe vainly, ſhe vain╌ly
Loves to ſhine, ſhe vainly lo╌ves to ſhine on all; and as the Sun, and as the
Sun u╌ſes his light, ſhe vainly, ſhe vain╌ly loves to ſhine, ſhe [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=118) [...] vainly
lo╌ves to ſhine on all. I thought her fair like new faln Snow, I thought her
fair like new faln Snow, when white╌neſs in╌nocence in╌clos'd. Like that ſhe
ſul╌ly'd ſeems to ſhine, like that ſhe ſul╌ly'd ſeems to ſhow, when to Loves
melting, melting heat ex╌pos'd; like that ſhe ſul╌ly'd ſeems to ſhow, when to
Loves melting, melting heat ex╌pos'd; when to Loves mel╌ting, melting heat
ex╌pos'd. Love thou, &c.

Firſt Strain again.

[[Page 223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=118) [...]

Brisk Time.

The powerfull Char╌ms ſhall now be try'd, the powerfull Char╌ms ſhall now be
try'd; this Fu╌ry, this Fu╌ry from my Breaſt to chaſe, I'le ſummon's ſcorn,
revenge and pride; I'le ſummons, ſummons ſcorn, revenge and pride;

Slow.

at leaſt her Image, at leaſt her Image, her Image to deſace.

#### 1.72. See how the fading Glories, a ſingle SONG.

[...] SEE, ſee how the fa╌ding Glo╌ries of the Year, put on a youthfull Smile;
ſee, ſee how the fa╌ding Glories of the Year, put on a youthfull Smile; [[Page
224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=119) [...] to
welcom her Spight of the Dog╌Star's madneſs, her bright Eyes cre╌ate a Spring
of e╌ver bloom╌ing Joys, of ever bloom╌ing, bloom╌ing Joys; all Nature to her
Charms freſh Tri╌bute yields, making where e're ſhe comes E╌li╌zian Fields;
where Roſes proudly breath out all their Sweet, and bluſh out all their
Beau╌ty at her Feet; where Nightingales their own Love╌Songs lay by, and her
un╌i╌mi╌ta╌ble Gra╌ces try; while the [[Page
225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=119) [...] more
wan╌ton Hills and Groves re╌joyce, faintly to ec╌cho back her heav'n╌ly Voice,
faint╌ly to ec╌cho back her heav'n╌ly  [...] Voice.

CHORUS. But my Pains ra╌ge, but my Pains ra╌ge the But my Pains ra╌ge, but my
Pains ra╌ge the more near Pa╌ra╌diſe, Panthe╌a is to me a burn╌ing Glaſs of
Ice; Pan╌thea, more near Pa╌ra╌diſe, Panthe╌a is to me, Pan╌the╌a Pan╌the╌a,
is to me a burn╌ing Glaſs of Ice. is to me, is to me a burn╌ing Glaſs of Ice.

[[Page 226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=120)

#### 1.73. I attempt from Love's ſickneſs, a ſingle SONG.

[...] I Attempt from Love's ſickneſs to fl╌y in vain, ſince I am my ſelf my
own Feaver, ſince I am my ſelf my own Fea╌ver and Pain, No more now, no more
now fond Heart with Pride, no more ſwell, thou can'ſt not raiſe Forces, thou
can'ſt not raiſe Forces enough to re╌bell:

Firſt Strain again.

For Love has more Pow'r, and leſs Mercy than Fate, to make us ſeek ru╌in, to
make us ſeek ru╌in, and love thoſe that hate.

End with the firſt Strain.

[[Page 227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=120)

#### 1.74. Here the Deities approve, a ſingle SONG.

[...] H╌Ere the De╌i╌ties ap╌prove, here, here the De╌i╌ties approve the God
of Mu╌ſick and of Love, all the Talents they have lent you, all the Bleſſings
they have ſent you, pleas'd to ſee, to ſee what they be╌ſtow, live and thrive,
live and thrive ſo well be╌low; pleas'd to ſee, to ſee what they be╌ſtow, live
and thrive, live and thrive ſo well be╌low; all the Talents they have lent
you, all the Bleſſings they have [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=121) [...] ſent you
pleas'd to ſee, to ſee what they be╌ſtow, live and thrive, live and thrive ſo
well be╌low, pleas'd to ſee, to ſee what they be╌ſtow, live and thrive, live
and thrive ſo well be╌low.

#### 1.75. A Two Part SONG.

[...] AS ſoon as the Cha╌os, as ſoon as the As ſoon as the Cha╌╌os, Cha╌os was
made in╌to form, and the firſt, the fi╌rſt as ſoon as the Cha╌os wa╌s made
in╌to form, and the firſt, the [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=121) [...] race of
Men knew a good, knew a good from a harm; they quickly did joyn, they firſt
race of Men knew a good, knew a good from a harm; they quickly did joyn, they
quickly, they quickly did joyn, in a knowledge di╌vine, that the World's
chiefeſt Bleſſings were quickly, they quickly did joyn, in a knowledge
di╌vine, that the World's chiefeſt Bleſſings were Women and Wine, Women and
Wine, Women and Wine; that the World's chiefeſt Bleſſings were Women and Wine,
Women and Wine, Women and Wine; that the World's chiefeſt Bleſſings were Women
and Wine: Since when by ex╌ample, im╌proving de╌lights, ſince Women and Wine:
Since when by ex╌ample improving delights, ſince when by ex╌ample, ſince
[[Page 230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=122) [...]
when by example im╌proving de╌ligh╌ts, improving de╌lights, when by ex╌ample
im╌pro╌ving de╌ligh╌ts, improving de╌lights, Wine governs our Days, Love and
Beauty our Nights. And drink, drink, drink, and Wine governs our Days, Love
and Beauty our Nights. Love on then, love on then, drink, drink, drink; Love
on then, love on then, and drink, drink, drink, and drink, drink, drink, and
drink, drink, drink, Love on then, and drink, and drink, drink, drink, drink,
drink, drink, Love on then and drink, 'tis a fol╌ly to think of a drink,
drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink, love on then and drink; 'tis
a fol╌ly to think of a [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=122) [...] Myſtery
out of our reaches, be moral in thought, be moral in thought, to be mer╌ry's
Myſtery out of our reaches, be moral in thought, to be mer╌ry's no fault, tho'
an Elder the contra╌ry Preaches; for never, never, my no fault, tho' an Elder
the contra╌ry Preaches; for never, never my Friends, for never, never, never,
never, never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice, than when Friends, for
never, never, never, never, never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice, than
when Knaves wou'd ſeem Pious, when Knaves wou'd ſeem Pi╌ous, and Fools wou'd
ſeem Wiſe. Knaves wou'd ſeem Pious, when Knaves wou'd ſeem Pious, and Fools
wou'd ſeem Wiſe.

[[Page 232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=123)

#### 1.76. A Dialogue in the Fairy Queen, Sung by Mr. Reading, and Mrs.
Ayliff.

He.

[...]

NOW the Maids and the Men are making of Hay, we've left the dull Fools, we've
left the dull Fools and are ſtol╌len a╌way; then Mopſa no more be coy as
before, but let's merri╌ly, merri╌ly, merri╌ly, merri╌ly play; and Kiſs, and
Kiſs, and Kiſs, and Kiſs, and Kiſs the ſweet time a╌way.

She.

Why how now Sir Clown, why how now, what makes you ſo bold? I'd have ye, I'd
have ye to know I'm not made of that mold; I tell you a╌gain, a╌gain and
a╌gain, Maids muſt never, muſt never Kiſs no Men; no, no, no, no, [[Page
233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=123) [...] no, no
Kiſſing at all; no, no, no, no, no, no Kiſſing at all; I'le not Kiſs, till I
Kiſs you for good and all;

She.

No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,

He.

Not Kiſs you at all, not Kiſs you at all, not at no Kiſſing at all, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no Kiſſing at all? not Kiſs you at all; why
no, why no not at all? no, no, no, no, no, I'le not Kiſs, till I Kiſs you for
good and all. all, why no, no, no, no, no Kiſſing at all?

He.

ſhou'd you [[Page
234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=124) [...] give me
a ſcore, 'twou'd not leſ╌ſen your ſtore, then bid me, bid me chearful╌ly,
chearful╌ly Kiſs and take my fill, and take my fill, my fill of the Bliſs;

She.

I'le not truſt you ſo far I know you too well, ſhou'd I give you an Inch you'd
ſoon, you'd ſoon take an Ell; then Lord like you Rule and Lau╌gh, then Lord
like you Rule and Lau╌gh at the Fool; no, no, no, no, no, no Kiſſing at all,
no, no, no, no, no, no Kiſſing at all; I'le not Kiſs, till I Kiſs you for good
and all:

He.

So [[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=124)
[...] ſmall a Re╌queſt you muſt not, you cannot, you ſhall not de╌ny; nor will
I ad╌mit of a╌nother, a╌no╌ther re╌ply; you muſt not, you ſhall not de╌ny; you
muſt not, you can╌not, you ſhall not de╌ny.

She.

Nay what do you mean? nay what do you mean? O

He.

You muſt not, you ſhall not de╌ny; you muſt not, you ſhall not de╌ Fie, fie,
fie, fie; O fie, fie, fie, fie, nay what do you mean? Nay ╌ny, you muſt not
de╌ny, you muſt not, you ſhall not de╌ny, you muſt not, you [[Page
236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=125) [...] nay nay
nay, what do you, what do you can╌not, you ſhall not, you muſt not, you
can╌not, you ſhall not de╌ny, mean? O fie, fie, fie, fie, O fie, fie, fie,
fie, O fie, fie, you muſt not de╌ny, you muſt not, you ſhall not, you fie,
fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, O fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, can╌not, you ſhall not
de╌ny; you muſt not, you can╌not, you fie, fie, fie. ſhall not de╌ny.

[[Page 237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=125)

#### 1.77. A Dialogue in the Richmond Heireſs, Sung by Mr. Reading, and Mrs.
Ayliff.

He.

[...]

BEhold, behold the Man that with Gigan╌tick Might dares, dares, dares Combat
Heav'n a╌gain ſto╌rm, Joves bright Palace put the Gods to flig╌ht, Chaos renew
and make perpe╌tu╌al Night; Come on, come on, come on, come on ye Fighting,
Fighting fools, come on, come on, come on, come on ye Fighting, Fighting fools
that petty, petty Jars maintain, that petty, petty Jars main╌tain; I've all,
all the Wars of Europe, all the Wars of Europe in my Brain; I've all, all,
[[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=126) [...]
all the Wars of Europe in my Brain.

She.

Who's he that talks of War, when charming, charming Beau╌ty comes in, who's
ſweet, ſweet, ſweet Face di╌vine╌ly fair, e╌ter╌nal plea╌ſure, e╌ter╌nal
plea╌ſure, e╌ter╌nal plea╌ſure comes; when I appear, the Martial, Martial God
a Conquer'd Victim lyes; o╌beys each glance, each awfull nod, and dreads the
[[Page 239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=126) [...]
light╌ning of my killing Eyes; more, more than the fierceſt, the fierceſt, the
fierceſt thun╌der in the Skies.

He.

Ha! ha! now, now, now, now we mount up high, now, now we mount up high, the
Sun's bright God and I, Charge, Charge, Charge on the Azure, Charge on the
Azure dawns of am╌ple Sky, See, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee,
ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, how th'im ╌mortal ſpirits ru╌n; ſee, ſee, ſee,
ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee, ſee how th'im╌mortal [[Page
240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=127) [...] ſpirits
ru╌n; pur╌ſue, purſue, pur╌sue, purſue, purſue, purſue, purſue, purſue,
purſue, purſue, Drive e'm o're the burning Zone, drive e'm o're the burning
Zone, from thence come row╌ling down, come row╌ling down, and ſearch the Globe
below, with all the gulphy Main, to find my loſt, my wan╌dring ſenſe, my
wan╌dring Senſe a╌gain.

She.

By this disjoynted matter that crowds thy Pe╌ri╌cranium, [[Page
241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=127) [...] I nicely
have found, that thy Brain is not ſound, and thou ſhalt be, and thou ſhalt be
my Companion.

He.

Come, come, come, come, come, come, let us plague the World then; I em╌brace
the bleſt oc╌caſion, for by inſtinct I find thou art one of the kind, thou art
one of the kind, that firſt brought in, that firſt brought in Dam╌nation.

III.

She. My Face has Heaven Inchanted,

With all the Sky-born Fellows.

Jose preſs'd to my Breaſt, and my Boſom he kiſs'd,

Which made old Juno jealous.

IV.

He. I challeng'd Griſly Pluto.

But the God of Fire did ſhun me.

Witty Hermes I drub'd, round the Pole with my Club,

For breaking Jokes upon me.

Chorus of both.

Than Mad, very Mad, very Mad let us be,

For Europe does now with our Frenzy agree,

And all things in Nature are mad too as we.

V.

She. I found Apollo Singing,

The tune my Rage Increaſes;

I made him ſo blind, with a look that was kind,

That he broke his Lyre to pieces.

VI.

He. I drank a Health to Venus,

And the Mole on her white Shoulder.

Mars flinch'd at the Glaſs, and I threw't in his Face,

Was ever Heroe bolder?

VII.

She. 'Tis true, my dear Alcides,

Things tend to diſſolution,

The Charms of a Crown, and the Crafts of the Gown,

Have brought all to Confuſion.

VIII.

He. The haughty French begun it,

The Engliſh Wite purſue it.

She. The German and Turk ſtill go on with the Work,

He. And all in time will rue it.

Cho. Then mad, very mad, &c.

Turn over to the CHO

[[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=128) CHORUS.
[...] Then Mad ve╌ry Mad let us be, ve╌ry Mad, very Mad let us be, ve╌ry Then
Mad, very Mad, very Mad very Mad let us be, ve╌ry Mad, very Mad, very Mad,
very Mad, let us be, for Europe does now with our Frenzy a╌gree; and Mad, very
Mad, very Mad, very Mad, let us be, for Europe does now with our Frenzy
a╌gree; all things in Nature are Mad, Mad, Mad, and all things in Nature are
Mad, Mad, Mad, are and all things in Nature are Mad, Mad, Mad, and all things
in Nature are Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad too as we, are Mad too
as we. Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad, Mad, Mad, are Mad too as we, are Mad too as we.

[[Page 243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=128)

#### 1.78. A Two Part SONG.

[...] LEt the dreadfull Engines of e╌ter╌nal will, the Thun╌der Ro╌ar and
crook╌ed Lightning kill, my Rage is hot, is hot, is ho╌t as theirs, as fa╌tall
too, and dares as horrid, and dares as horrid, horrid ex╌e╌cu╌tion do: Or let
the Frozen North its ran╌cour ſhow, within my Breaſt, ſar, ſar grea╌ter
Tem╌peſts grow; de╌ſpair's [[Page
244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=129) [...] more
cold, more co╌ld than a╌ll the winds can blow. Can nothing, can no╌thing warm
me, can nothing, can no╌thing warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes;
yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lu╌cinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes,
Lucinda's Eyes; there, there, there, there, there Et╌na, there, there, there,
there Veſ╌ſuvio lyes, to fur╌niſh Hell with flames, that mount╌ing, mounting
reach the Skyes; Can [[Page
245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=129) [...] nothing,
can nothing warm me? can nothing, can nothing warm me? yes, yes, yes, yes,
Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes; yes, yes, yes,
yes, yes, Lucinda's Eyes. Ye pow'rs I did but uſe her name, and ſee how all,
and ſee how all the Meteors flame blew lightning flaſhes round the Court of
Sol, and now the Globe more feircely burns than once at Phaeton's fall. Ah!—
ah!— [[Page 246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=130)
[...] where, where are now, where are now, where are now thoſe flow╌'ry
Groves, where Zephir's fragrant Winds did play? ah! where are now, where are
now, where are now thoſe flow╌'ry Groves, where Zephir's fragrant Winds did
play? where guarded by a Troop of Loves, the fair, the fair Lu╌cin╌da ſleeping
lay; there Sung the Nightingale, and Lark, around us all was ſweet and gay, we
ne're grew ſad till is grew dark, nor nothing fear'd but ſhort╌ning day.
[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=130) [...] I
glow, I glow, I glow, but 'tis with hate, why muſt I burn, why muſt I burn,
why, why muſt I burn for this in╌grate? why, why muſt I burn for this
in╌grate? Cool, coo╌le it then, coo╌le it then, and raile, ſince nothing,
no╌thing will pre╌vaile. When a Woman Love pretends, 'tis but till ſhe gains
her ends, and for Better, and for Worſe, is for Marrow of the Purſe, where ſhe
Jilts you o're and o're, proves a [[Page
248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=131) [...] Slattern
or a Whore; this hour will teize, will teize and vex, will teize, will teize
and vex, and will Cuckold ye the next; they were all contriv'd in ſpight, to
tor╌ment us, not de╌light, but to Scold, to Scold, and Scratch, and Bite, and
not one of them proves right; but all, all are Witches by this light; And ſo I
fair╌ly bid 'em, and the World good night, good night, good night, good night,
good night, good night.

FINIS.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=131)

ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS.

A COLLECTION OF The Choiceſt SONGS, FOR One, Two, and Three Uoices.

COMPOS'D By Mr. Henry Purcell.

TOGETHER, With ſuch Symphonies for Violins or Flutes, As were by Him deſign'd
for any of them: AND A THROUGH-BASS to each SONG.

Figur'd for the Organ, Harpſichord, or Theorbo-Lute.

The Second BOOK, which renders the Firſt Compleat.

—Primo Avulſo non deſicit Alter

Aureus, et ſimili frondeſcit Virga Metallo.

Virg. Lib. Aen. 6.

LONDON: Printed by William Pearſon, for Henry Playford at His Shop in the
Temple-Change, Fleet-ſtreet.  [...].

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=132)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=132)

### To the Right Honourable Charles, Lord Hallifax, Auditor of His Majeſties
Exchequer, &c.

MY LORD,

I Shou'd be unjuſt to the Memory of the admired Purcell, and ſet too Small a
Value on His Works, ſhou'd I put them under any Patronage but Your own. For
Your Lordſhip has a Double Title to theſe Papers, both as You are the beſt
Judge, as well as the Greateſt Encourager of Poeſy and Muſick. 'Tis but fit
this Great Maſter of the Age, that has ſtood the Teſt of Your Judgment, ſhould
Claim Your Protection: Since no Greater Character can be given of any
Compoſition, than that it has pleas'd ſo Exquiſite a Taſte as Your Lordſhip's.

But I am not ſo vain, as to attempt a Panegyrick on Your Lordſhip, nor to
Expatiate on the ſeveral Excellencies of this Celebrated Author: Theſe are
Subjects for the Sublimeſt Pens, and are already tranſmitted to Poſterity.

But my deſign here, is to pay my Gratitude to Your Lord­ſhip, for the many
Favours I have receiv'd; In a Preſent whoſe own Worth, is its Apology, and
whoſe Native Graces will ren­der it Acceptable. And to add, if poſſible to the
Fame of Purcell, and Endear him more to the World: Which can be only done, by
prefixing the Name of Mountague to His Works.

My Lord,

I am Your Lordſhips moſt Humble and Obliged Servant, HENRY PLAYFORD.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=133)

### The Bookſeller to the READER.

THe late Publication of theſe Excellent Performances in Muſick is ſufficiently
aton'd for, by the Care that has been taken in the Collection of 'em; and I
cannot but think I have made amends enough to the Purchaſer in the Choice of
'em. The great Charge I have been at; the Diligence I have made uſe of to
obtain the Aſſiſtance of Friends, and the Dearneſs of Paper in which theſe
Admirable Com­poſures are tranſmitted to the Publick. are ſufficient Excuſes:
And I ſhall inſiſt upon that Subject no farther, Than that as I have been
al­ways employed in promoting the encreaſe of things of this Nature, and
contributed to the utmoſt towards their Encouragement, ſo I ſhall ſtill make
it my Endeavours to go on with ſo Laudable an Undertaking. I might indeed make
my Compliments in relation to the greatneſs of my Expences in being Beneficial
to the Publick, and Expoſe ſome People that build upon my Foundation; but as I
deſire the Readers Candour, it's my Buſineſs to make uſe of it in Reſpect to
others, only I ſhall take notice, I have more than enough Diſcouragement to
drop the purſute of Obliging my Country, ſince Foreigners meet with a
reception that is inconſiſtent with the Intereſt of one, that has the Honour
to be a Native. But let 'em Underſell me as long as they pleaſe, and
Tranſ­plant their Foreign Muſick into theſe Climates, the Judicious will be of
my ſide, when they make an Eſtimate of Mr. Purcell's Works, which are equal to
thoſe of the Beſt Maſters of Italy, and conclude, that I, who have now made a
compleat Collection of all his Choiceſt Performances, deſerve a better
Entertainment from the Hands of the Publick, than any Pretenders whatſoever.

H. P.

[[Page i]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=133)

### On the DEATH of the late Famous Mr. HENRY PƲRCELL, Author of the Firſt and
Second Books of Orpheus Britannicus.

MAke room ye happy Natives of the Sky,

Room for a Soul, all Love and Harmony;

A Soul that roſe to ſuch Perfection here,

It ſcarce will be advanc'd by being there.

Whether (to us by Transmigration given)

He once was an Inhabitant of Heav'n,

And form'd for Muſick, with Diviner Fire

Endu'd, Compos'd for the Celeſtial Choir;

Not for the Vulgar Race of Light to hear,

But on High-days to glad th' Immortal Ear.

So in ſome leiſure hour was ſent away,

(Their Hour is here a Life, a Thouſand Years their Day.

Sent what th' Aetherial Muſick was to ſhow,

And teach the wonders of that Art below.

Whether this might not be, the Muſe appeals

To his Compoſures, where ſuch Magick dwells,

As Rivals Heav'nly Skill, and human Pow'r ex­cels.

Vile as a Sign-poſt Dauber's Painting ſhow's,

Compar'd with Titian's Work, or Angelo's;

Languid and low, as Modern Rhime appears,

When Virgil's matchleſs Strain has tun'd our Ears,

So ſeem to him the Maſters of our Iſle,

His Inſpiration, theirs but Mortal Toil:

They to the Ear, he to the Soul does dive,

From Anger ſave, and from Deſpair revive:

Not the ſmooth Spheres in their Eternal Rounds,

The work of Angels, warble ſofter Sounds.

What is that Heav'n of which ſo much we hear

(The happy Region gain'd with Praiſe and Pray'r)

What but one unmoleſted Tranſport, which

No Notion, or Idea e'er cou'd reach?

As it appears in Viſion, 'tis but this,

To be oppreſt with Joy, and ſtrive with Bliſs!

Confounded with the Rays of ceaſeleſs day,

We know not what we think, or ſee, or ſay!

Endleſs Profuſion! Joy without decay!

So, when his Harmony arreſts the Far,

We loſe all thought of what, or how, or where!

Like Love, it warms, like Beauty, does controul,

Like hidden Magick ſeizes on the whole,

And while we hear, the Body turns to Soul!

From what bleſt Spring did he derive the Art,

To ſooth our Cares, and thus command the Heart!

Time liſt'ning ſtands to hear his artful Strain,

And Death does at the Dying, throw his ſhafts in vain;

Faſt to th' Immortal part the Mortal cleaves,

Nor, till he leave to Charm, the Body leaves.

Leſs Harmony than his, did raiſe of Old

The Theban Wall, and made an Age of Gold.

How in that Myſtick order cou'd he join

So different Notes! make Contraries combine,

And out of Diſcord, cull ſuch Sounds Divine.

How did the Seeds ly quickning in his Brain!

How were they born without a Parent's Pain?

He did but Think, and Muſick wou'd ariſe,

Dilating Joy, as Light o'erſpreads the Skies;

From an Immortal Source, like that, it came;

But Light we know,—this Wonder wants a Name!

What art thou? From what Cauſes doſt thou ſpring

O Muſick! thou Divine Myſterious thing?

Let me but know, and knowing, give me Voice to Sing.

Art thou the warmth in Spring that Zephire breaths,

Painting the Meads, and whiſtling thro' the Leaves?

The happy Seaſon that all Grief exiles,

When God is Pleas'd, and the Creation ſmiles?

Or ar't thou Love, that Mind to Mind imparts,

The endleſs Concord of agreeing Hearts?

Or ar't thou Friendſhip, yet a nobler Flame,

That can a dearer way make Souls the ſame?

Or ar't thou rather, which dos all tranſcend,

The Centre where at laſt the Bleſt aſcend;

The Seat where Halelujah's never end?

Corporeal Eyes won't let us clearly view,

But either thou art Heav'n, or Heav'n is you!

And thou my Muſe (how e'er the Criticks blame)

Pleas'd with his Worth, and faithful to his Fame,

Art Muſick while y'are hallowing Purcell's Name.

On other Subjects you Applauſe might miſs,

But Envy will it ſelf be Charmd with this.

How oft has Envy at his Ayrs been found

T' admire, enchanted with the Bliſsful ſound?

Ah! cou'd you quite forget his early Doom,

I wou'd not from the Rapture call you home:

But gently from your ſteepy height deſcend,

You've prais'd the Artiſt, and now mourn the Friend!

Ah moſt unworthy! ſhou'd we leave unſung

Such wondrous Goodneſs in a Life ſo young.

In ſpight of Practice, he this Truth has ſhown,

That Harmony and Vertue ſhou'd be one.

So true to Nature, and ſo juſt to Wit,

His Muſick was the very Senſe you Writ.

Nor were his Beauties to his Art confin'd;

So juſtly were his Soul and Body join'd,

You'd think his Form the Product of his Mind.

A Conqu'ring ſweetneſs in his Vizage dwelt,

His Eyes wou'd warm, his Wit like Lightning melt,

But thoſe no more muſt now be ſeen, and that no more be felt.

Pride was the ſole averſion of his Eye,

Himſelf as Humble as his Art was High.

Ah! let him Heav'n (in Life ſo much ador'd)

Be now as univerſally Deplor'd!

The Muſes Sigh'd at his approaching Doom,

Amaz'd and raving, as their own were come!

Art try'd the laſt Efforts, but cou'd not ſave—

But ſleep, O ſleep, in an unenvy'd Grave!

In Life and Death the nobleſt Fate you ſhare;

Poets and Princes thy Companions are,

And both of 'em were thy Admirers here.

There reſt thy Aſhes—but thy nobler Name

Shall ſoar aloft, and laſt as long as Fame.

Nor ſhall thy Worth be to our Iſle confin'd,

But flie and leave the lagging day behind.

[[Page ii]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=134) Rome
that did once extend its Arms ſo far,

Y'ave conquer'd in a nobler Art than War:

To its proud Sons but only Earth was giv'n,

But thou haſt triumph'd both in Earth and Heav'n.

And now Farewel! nor Fame, nor Love, nor Art,

Nor Tears avail!—we muſt for ever part!

For ever! diſmal Accent! what alone!

But that can tell our Loſs, or reach our Moan!

What term of Sorrow Preference dare contend?

What? but the tendereſt deareſt name of—Friend!

Hail him ye Angels to the Eliſian Shoar,

The nobleſt Freight that ever Charon bore,

Tho Orpheus and Amphion paſs'd before.

His Skill as far exceeds, as had his Name

Been known as long, he wou'd have done in Fame.

Tho the wide Globe for tuneful Souls you cull,

Hope no more ſuch,—the happy Quire is full.

The Sacred Art can here arrive no higher,

And Heaven it ſelf no further will Inſpire.

R. G.

### To my Friend, Mr. Henry Playford, on his Publication of Mr. Henry
Purcell's Orpheus Britannicus; Which is now render'd Compleat, by the addition
of this Second Book

AS when the God of Numbers charms the Throng,

And gives Melodious Tunes to every Song,

The Voice deals Inſpiration and Deſire

To ev'ry Muſe, to fill the Sacred Choir;

Each of the Nine, appears with her Applauſe,

And juſtifies the God and Muſick's Cauſe;

As ev'ry tender Accent gently moves,

And ſhews their Duty, as it ſhews their Loves;

Ev'n ſo muſt I with Infant Notes repair,

And wanting Judgment, prove I want no Care.

What Great Apollo does to us deny,

He let this Choſen Son of his enjoy:

We Poets ſow the ſeed of Fame in vain,

T' expect a Crop while we alive remain;

He puts us off till Death, and then will give,

When we are not permitted to receive.

Ah! who'd be pleas'd to have theſe Temples Crown'd

Whoſe Brains are loſt, and Heads are under ground.

But Purcell's Privilege was vaſtly more,

He planted all the Laurels which he wore,

And heard his wide Applauſe fly all around,

For ſtill his Fame did with his Muſick ſound.

All this to Purcell, but there's ſomething due

To Purcell's and Apollo's Friend, to you,

From injuries of Time you ſave his Lays,

And reſcue him from Fate, to claim our Praiſe.

Oh! cou'd you but the like return receive,

And have our Gratitude for what you give,

Rewarded for your Toil, exchange your Pains,

Not only for our Thanks, but for your Gains,

While Interloping French and Dutch oppoſe,

And ſhew themſelves both your and Muſick's Foes.

But it's in vain to hope, we're all abus'd,

Fond of the Riff-raff, which the World tefus'd:

Each Foreign Fool ſits wheedling in his Shop,

And Grinning entertains the thoughtleſs Fop,

Whoſe love for Trifles, makes him rove from Home,

And even hug Diſeaſes brought from Rome.

Let theſe, my Friend, a while purſue their Trade.

Your Province and your Right alone Invade,

Their feeble Malice but your Fame ſecures,

And Publiſhes both Purcell's Works and Tours.

P. K.

### To Mr. Henry Playford, on his Pu­bliſhing the Second Part of Or­pheus
Britannicus.

NExt to the Man who ſo Divinely Sung,

Our Praiſe, kind Playſord, does to thee belong,

For what you gave us of the Bard's before,

Vaſt Thanks were due, and now you merit more.

Tho' Purcell living, had our utmoſt Praiſe,

And dead, almoſt does Adoration raiſe,

Yet He, even He, had ſcarce preſerv'd a Name,

Did not your Preſs perpetuate his Fame,

And ſhew'd the coming Age as in a Glaſs,

What our all-pleaſing Britain's Orpheus was.

Go on my Friend, nor ſpare no Pains nor Coſt,

Let not the leaſt Motett of his be loſt;

Whoſe meaneſt Labours your Collections ſhow,

Excells our very beſt Performance now.

Duly each day, our young Compoſers Bait us,

With moſt inſipid Songs, and ſad Sonato's.

Well were it, if the World woul'd lay Embargo's

On ſuch Allegro's and ſuch Poco Largo's:

And would Enact it, There preſume not any,

To Teize Correlli, or Burleſque Baſſani;

Nor with Diviſion, and ungainly Graces,

Eclipſe good Senſe, as weighty Wiggs do Faces.

Then honeſt Croſs might Copper cut in vain,

And half our Sonnet-ſellers Starve again:

Thus while they Print their Prick'd-Lampoons to live,

Do you the World ſome piece of Purcell's give,

Such as the niceſt Critick muſt Commend,

For none dare Cenſure that which none can Mend.

By this my Friend, you'll get immortal Fame,

When ſtill with Purcell we read Playford's Name.

H. Hall, Organiſt of Hereford.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=134)

### BOOKS lately Printed, and Re-printed, for Henry Playford, at his Shop in
the Temple-Change Fleet-ſtreet.

AMphion Anglicus. A choice Collection of Songs for One, Two and Three Voices,
in Fol. By Dr. John Blow. Price Bound, 1 l. 1 s. 6 d.

Orpheus Britannicus. A Collection of the late Mr. Henry Purcell's Songs, for
One Two, and Three Voices, moſt of them Printed from his own Copies, in Two
Books; which makes the Collection Com­pleat. The 1ſt Vol. Price 1 l. The 2d.
Vol. 12 s. Or Bound both together, 1 l. 10 s.

Harmonia Sacra. A Collection of Divine Hymns, moſt of them Compoſed by the
late Mr. Henry Purcell, with an addition of two Divine Hymns, by Mr. Jer.
Clark and Mr. Crofts. Price of the ſecond Book, 4 s.

The whole Book of Pſalms in Three Parts, as they are Sung in Pariſh Churches.
Peice 3 s. 6 d.

The Divine Companion. A Collection of Hymns and Anthems, for One, Two, and
Three Voices; Compoſed for the Inſtruction of young Beginners, fit to be Bound
up with Playford's Pſalms in Three Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Introduction to the Skill of Muſick, the Fourteenth Edition with large
Additions, by John Playford, to which is added the whole Art of Compoſition by
the late Mr. Henry Purcell being done on the New Tyed Note, and more compleat
than ever before. Price Bound 2 s.

The Dancing Maſter, newly Re printed on the New Ty'd Note, with the Additions;
and made Compleat, having above 100 more Dances than the former Editions.
Price Bound, 3 s.

The Diviſion Violin, the firſt and ſecond Books, containing the Choiceſt
Diviſions and Grounds; En­graven upon Copper-Plates, newly Printed. Price of
the firſt, 2 s. 6 d. the Second, 1 s. 6 d.

Ap [...]llo's Banquet, newly Reviv'd; containing the New and eaſieſt
Inſtructions for the Treble-Violin; variety of the Beſt and Choiceſt Ayrs
Jiggs, Minuetts, Sarabrands, Chacones, and Cibels, and on­tains ſix times ſo
many Tunes as the little Engrav'd Books, it being the only Book for that
Inſtrument. Price Stitch'd, 1 s. 6 d.

Original Scotch Tunes, full of the Highlander Humour. The ſecond Edition,
Corrected and Enlarg'd. price Stitch'd, 6 d.

Wit and Mirth: Or Pills to Purge Melancholy; the firſt and ſecond Books,
containing all the Humours of the Town for ſeveral Reigns, in Ballads and
ſingle Songs; the whole being Delightful, entertain­ing, and Diverting. Price
bound together, 5 s. or ſingle, 2 s. 6 d.

The ſecond Book of the Pleaſant Muſical Companion: Being a choice Collection
of Catches; contain­ing the Moſt of the late Mr. Henry Purcell's, and ſome
other Eminent Maſters. Price Stitch'd. 2 s. Or Bound up with the firſt Books,
7 s.

The Treaſury of Muſick, Old and New, in Folio, being the Beſt Collection of
Song-Books for theſe Thirty Years laſt paſt.

Mercurious Muſicus: Or the Monthly Collection of new Teaching Sons, for the
Year, 1699. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The whle Collection for the Year 1701. Price 3 s. 6 d.

With all the Monthly Collections to July and Auguſt, for the Year, 1701.
September and October will be ſpeedily Publiſhed.

Mr. Morley's Ayrs in Three Parts. Price Stitch'd, 2 s. 6 d.

Miſcellanea Sacra. A Collection of Choice Poems on Divine Subjects. Collected
by N. Tate, Eſq; Price Bound, 2 s.

The Parallel: An Eſſay on Friendſhip.

Love and Marriage By Sir H. Shears. Price Stitch'd, 6 d.

A Sheet Engraven on Copper, being Directions for the Baſs-Viol. Price 6 d.

### Books in the Preſs, and will be ſpeedily Publiſhed.

THe Third Book of Wit and Mirth: Or Pills to Purge Melancholy. Being a
Collection of the beſt old and New Songs and Ballads, with the Tunes to each.
Price bound, 1 s. 6 d.

Dr. Blow's Choice Collection of Leſſons for the Harpſichord or Spinett, fairly
Engraven. Price Stitch'd, 1 s. 6 d.

Twenty four New Country Dances' never before Printed. Price Stitch'd, 6 d.

Likewiſe all ſorts of Ruled Paper, and Books of all Sizes, may be had Bound,
or ſold in Quires. With Books on all other Subjects.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=135)

### A Table of the SONGS Contain'd in this BOOK.

A.

  * AH! cruel Nymph, Page. 4
  * April who till now has mourn'd, 28
  * As Amoret and Thirſis lay, 50
  * Ah! how hapyy are we, 60
  * A Prince of glorious Race deſcended, 69
  * And Lo a Sacred fury ſweell'd her breaſt, 135

B.

  * Britain now thy Cares beguile, 32
  * Beneath a Poplers ſhadow lay me, 47
  * But Ah! how much are our Delights, 82
  * Brigantium Honour'd with a Race divine, 99

C.

  * Crown the Year and Crown the day, 1
  * Crown the Altar Deck the Shrine, 6
  * Come all ye Songſters of the Sky, 8
  * Come all to me, 87
  * Come let us agree, 91

F.

  * For tho' the Sun has all the Summers Glory 67
  * Fair Iris and her Swain, 153

G.

  * Genius of England, 121

H.

  * Hark! how all Things in one Sound Rejoyce, 17
  * Hark! the Ecchoing Air a Triumph Sings, 18
  * Here's the Summer ſprightly Gay, 24
  * Hark! how the Songſters of the Grove, 76
  * Hence with your triffling Deity, 80
  * Here ye Gods of Britain, 93
  * Hark each Tree it's ſilence breaks, 157

I.

  * I Lov'd fair Celia, 150
  * I ſpy Celia, 166
  * Julia, Julia, your unjuſt diſdain, 145

L.

  * Let the Fiſes and the Clarions, 20
  * Love in their little Veins Inſpires, 81
  * Let us Dance, let us Sing, 152

M.

  * May the God of Witt Inſpire the ſacred Nine, 9
  * My Prayers are heard, 48
  * Muſick for a while, ſhall all our cares beguile, 126
  * Many, many Days may She behold, 137
  * May her bleſt Example Chaſe, 151

N.

  * Next Winter comes Slowly, Pale Meager and Old, 26

O.

  * On the Brow of Richmond Hill, 128
  * Oh! Fair Cedaria, 147
  * Oh! the ſweet delights of Love, 175

P.

  * Pious Celinda goes to Prayers, 63

R.

  * Return Revolting Rebells, 88

S.

  * Scorn'd Envy Heer's nothing that thou conſt blaſt, 57
  * Sound the Trumpet beat the Warlike Drum, 73
  * See my many Colour'd Feilds, 25
  * Sing ye Druids, all your Voices raiſe, 96
  * So when the Glittering queen of Night 110
  * Sound Fame thy Brazen Trumpet ſound 129

T.

  * Thrice happy Lovers, 2
  * Thus the Gloomy world began to ſhine, 11
  * Thus the ever grateful ſpring, 22
  * The fatal hour comes on a pace, 30
  * To Arms, Heroick Prince, 39
  * Their looks are ſuch that mercy flows, 58
  * They tell us that you mighty Pow'rs above, 56
  * The Father Brave as e're was Dane, 70
  * The Baſhfull Thames, 102
  * The Pale and the Purple Roſe, 107
  * 'Tis Wine was made to rule the Day, 171

V.

  * Underneath this Mirtle ſhade, 141

W.

  * What can we poor Females do, 46
  * Wake Quivera, Wake, 52
  * Why ſhou'd Men quarrel here, 54
  * When a cruel long Winter has frozen the Earth, 64
  * Who can from Joy refrain, 66
  * When my Acmelia Smiles She Wounds me, 113
  * When Lovely Phillis thou art kind, 114
  * Wonderous Machine, 115
  * Why my Daphne, why complaining, 131

Y.

  * Young Thyrſis Fate ye Hills and Groves, 35
  * Ye gentle Spirits of the Air, 43
  * Yes Daphne in your Face, 16

The end of the Table.

### Advertiſement.

HAving a Collection of the Beſt Prints both Foreign and Domeſtick, as alſo
ſe­veral Curious Paintings for Cloſets, and Adornments of other Rooms: I
de­ſign for the future, to Sell at my Shop in the Temple-Change; where all
Perſons may be Accomodated at reaſonable Rates with all the New Prints as they
come forth. The Effi­gies of Dr. Blow, the late Mr Henry Purcell, and Mr.
Dryden in Frames at 1 s. 6 d. each, and 6 d. a peice in Sheets.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=135)

### 1\. ORPHEUS BRITANNICUS. The Second BOOK.

#### 1.1. (Crown the Year.) A ſingle SONG.

[...] CRown the Year, Crown the Year, and Crown the Day, while di╌ſtant
ſhoars, while di╌ſtant ſhoars, the Tri╌bute pay; while ne╌ver fail╌ing Thames
ſhall glide, while never, never, never fail╌ing Thames ſhall glide, with
Treaſures, and Pleaſures; with Treaſures, and Pleaſures renew'd with each
Tide; with Plea╌ſures, and Trea╌ſures renew'd with each Tide.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=136)

#### 1.2. An EPITHALAMIUM.

[...] THrice Happy, Thrice happy, Thrice happy, happy, happy Lovers, may you
be for ever, ever, ever, ever free; may you be, for ever, ever, ever, ever
free, from the torment╌ing Devil Jealouſie; from all the anxious ca╌res and
ſtri╌ſe that at╌ten╌ds a Married life. Thrice happy, thrice happy, thrice
happy, happy, happy, hap╌py, hap╌py Lovers, may you be, for [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=136) [...] ever,
ever, ever, ever, ever free: Be to one a╌nother true, Be to one a╌nother true,
kind to her, kind, kind to her as ſhe's to you; and ſince the errors, ſince
the er╌rors of the Night are paſt, may he be e╌ver, may he be e╌ver, may he be
e╌ver, e╌ver con╌ſtant, ſhe be e╌ver, ſhe be e╌ver, e╌ver, e╌ver Chaſt; may he
be ever, e╌ver Con╌ſtant, ſhe be e╌ver, ſhe be e╌ver, e╌ver, e╌ver Chaſt.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=137)

#### 1.3. (Ah! cruel Nymph.) A ſingle SONG.

[...] AH! cruel, cruel, ah! cruel Nymph, ah! ah! cruel Nymph! you give
deſpair, when with de╌li╌ght I ſhou'd approach thee, ſtill, ſtill with Sil╌via
you reproach me; Ah! cruel Nymph, ah! cruel Nymph, ſtill, ſtill, ſtill with
Silvia you re╌proach me, ſtill, ſtill, ſtill, ſtill with the de╌luding Fair:
Too long, too long I own, I own, too lon╌g ſhe has maintain'd her Conqueſt
when her Love was ſeign'd, but Charming [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=137) [...] Ai╌ry,
Humorous and Gay, Humorous, Humorous, Humorous, Humorous and Ga╌y, and Ga╌y;
you from my Eyes, you from my Eyes have dri╌ven the Miſt away; Charming,
Ai╌ry, Humorous, Humorous, Humorous and Ga╌y, and Ga╌y, and Ga╌y, you from my
Eyes, you from my Eyes have dri╌ven the Miſt a╌way.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=138)

#### 1.4. (Crown the Altar, Deck the Shrine.) A ſingle SONG.

[...] CRown the Al╌tar, Deck the Shrine, Crown the Al╌tar, Deck╌the Shrine,
Deck╌the Shrine; Be╌hold, be╌hold the Bright Se╌ra╌phick throng, the bright
Seraphick throng, prepare our Har╌mo╌ny to join, our Har╌mo╌ny to join; the
Sa╌cred Quire attend too long:╌Be╌hold, be╌hold the [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=138) [...] Bright
Se╌ra╌phick throng, the Bright Seraphick throng, pre╌pare our Har╌mony to
join, our Har╌mony to joi╌n, the Sa╌cred Quire attend to long╌Crown the al╌tar
Deck the Shrine, Crown the Al╌tar Deck╌the Shrine, Deck╌the Shrine, Deck╌the
Shrine.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=139)

#### 1.5. A SONG in the 2d. Act of the Fairy-Queen.

[...] COme all, come all, all, all, come all ye Song╌ſters of the Sky, Wake
and aſſemble, Wake and aſ╌ſem╌ble in this Wood; Come all, all, all, come all,
all, all ye Songſters of the Sky, Wake╌and aſ╌ſemble, Wake and aſ╌ſemble in
this Wood: But no ill bo╌ding Bird be nigh, no, none but the harm╌leſs and the
good; but no ill bo╌ding Bird be nigh, no, [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=139) [...] none but
the Harm╌leſs and the Good, no, none, no, none but the Harmleſs, none but the
Harmleſs and the Good, no, none, but the Harmleſs, and the Good.

#### 1.6. A SONG for Three Voices, in the Fairy Queen.

[...] MAy the God of Wit in╌ſpire the Sacred Nine, to bear a May the God of
Wit in╌ſpire the Sacred Nine, to bear a May the God of Wit in╌ſpire the Sacred
Nine, to bear a Part, and the Bleſſed Heav'nly Quire, ſhew the ut╌moſt of
their Art; Part, and the Bleſſed Heav'nly Quire, ſhew the ut╌moſt of their
Art; Part, and the Bleſſed Heavn'ly Quire, ſhew the ut╌moſt of thei. Art;
[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=140) Whilſt
Eccho, whilſt Eccho ſhall in ſounds remote, repeat each Note,

Ecco.

repeat each Note,

Softer.

each Note; Whilſt Eccho, whilſt Eccho ſhall in ſounds remote, repeat each
Note, repeat each Note, each Note; Whilſt Eccho, whlſt Eccho, ſhall in ſounds
remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each Note;

Vers.

whilſt Eccho,

Ecco.

whilſt Eccho,

Softer

Eccho,

Vers

whilſt Eccho,

Ecco.

whilſt Eccho,

Softer.

Eccho,

Vers.

ſhall in ſounds re╌mote, whilſt Eccho, whilſt Eccho, Eccho, whilſt Eccho,
whilſt Eccho, Eccho, ſhall in ſounds re╌mote, whilſt Eccho, whilſt Eccho,
Eccho, whilſt Eccho, whilſt Eccho, Eccho ſhall in ſounds re╌mote,

Ecco.

ſounds re╌mote,

Softer,

remote,

Vers.

repeat each Note,

Ecco.

repeat each Note,

Softer.

each Note,

Vers.

repeat each ſounds re╌mote, remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note, each
Note, repeat each ſounds remote, remote, repeat each Note, repeat each Note,
each Note, repeat each [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=140) Ecco. Softer.
Note,

Ecco.

re╌peat each Note,

Softer.

each Note. Note, re╌peat each Note, each Note. Note, re╌peat each Note, each
Note.

#### 1.7. A SONG in the 5th. Act of the Fairy Queen.

[...]

Trumpet.

THus, thus, thus thus the Gloo╌my World, at firſt be╌gan to Shine; Thus, thus,
thus, thus the [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=141) [...] Gloo╌my
World at firſt began to Shine; And from the Pow'╌r De╌vine, and from a Pow'╌r
Devine, a glory roun╌d, a glory roun╌d a╌bout it bur╌l'd; which made it
bright, which made it bright, and gave it [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=141) [...] gav╌e it
birth in light; which made it bright, which made it bright, and gave it, gav╌e
it birth in light:

Violin.

Then, then were all minds as pure, as pure as thoſe E╌the╌rial ſtreams; [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=142) [...] In
In╌nocence ſe╌cure, In In╌nocence ſe╌cure, not ſub╌ject to Extreams; there was
no place then, no place then for emp╌ty Fame, no cauſe for Pride, no cauſe for
Pride, Am╌bi╌tion want╌ed Aim, Am╌bi╌tion wanted Aim; there was no [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=142) [...] place
then, no place then for emp╌ty Fame; no cauſe for Pride, no cauſe for Pride,
Am╌bi╌tion want╌ed, Aim, Am╌bi╌tion

Trumpet.

wanted Aim. Thus, thus, &c.

(as before-)

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=143)

#### 1.8. SOLO. A ſingle SONG.

[...] YEs Daphne, yes Daphne, in╌your Face I find thoſe Charm╌s by which my
Heart's betray'd, then let not your diſdain un╌bind the Pris'ner, the Pris'ner
that your Eyes have made: She that in Love makes leaſt defence, woun╌ds c╌ver
with the ſu╌reſt Dart, Beauty may Cap╌tivate the Senſe, but Kindneſs, but
Kind╌neſs only gains the Heart, Heart.

II.

'Tis mildneſs, Daphne, muſt maintain,

the Empire that you once have won;

When Beauty does like Tyrants reign,

Their Subjects from their Duty run:

Then force me not to be untrue,

Leſt I compell'd by gen'rous ſhame,

Caſt off my Loyalty to you,

To gain a glorious Rebel's name.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=143)

#### 1.9. SOLO. A ſingle SONG.

[...] HArk! hark! how all things in one ſoun╌d re╌joyce, re╌joyce, re╌joy╌ce
re╌joy╌ce, re╌joyce. Hark!╌joyce. and the World ſeems to have one Voice, the
World ſeems to have one Voi╌ce, to have one Voice; Hark! hark! how all things
in one ſoun╌d re╌joyce, re╌joyce, [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=144) [...]
re╌joy╌ce, re╌ce rejoyce; rejoy╌ce, re╌joyce.

#### 1.10. SOLO. A ſingle SONG.

[...] HArk! hark! the ecch'ing Air a tri╌umph ſings, hark! the ecch'ing Air a
tri╌umph ſings, a tri╌umph, a tri╌umph, tri╌umph ſing╌s [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=144) [...] a
tri╌umph, triumph ſings, ſings. And all a╌round, and all a╌round plea╌s'd
Cupids clap their wings, clap, clap, clap, clap their wings; pleas'╌d Cupids
clap their wings; and all around, and all around plea╌s'd Cupids clap, clap,
clap, clap, clap their wings; clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap their
wings, plea╌s'd Cupids clap their wings, and all a╌wings.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=145)

#### 1.11. A SONG for Two Voices, in the Fairy Queen.

[...] LEt the Fifes and the Clarions, and ſhrill Trumpets ſound; let the Fifes
and the Let the Fifes and the Clarions and ſhrill Trumpets Clarions, and
ſhrill Trumpets ſound, ſound,— ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound,— ſound; Let the
Eiſes and the Clarions, and ſhrill Trumpets ſound, ſound,— ſound, ſound,
ſound, ſound: And the Arch of high ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound, ſound:
And the Arch of high Heav'n the Clangor re╌ſound, Heav'n, the Clangor reſound,
and the Arch of high Heav'n, the Clangor re╌ſoun╌d, and the Arch of high
Heav'n the Clangor reſound╌d, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=145) [...] reſoun╌d,
the Arch of high Heaven, the reſoun╌d, the Arch of high Heaven, the Clangor
reſound, re╌ſoun╌d, the Arch of high Clangor reſound, re╌ſoun╌d, the Arch of
high Heaven the Clangor reſound. Heaven the Clangor reſound.

#### 1.12. The Four SEASONS in the Fairy-Queen.

##### 1.12.1. Spring.

[...]

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=146)

[...] Thus the ever grate╌ful, Spring, Thus the ever grateful Spring, does her
yearly Tri╌bute bring, does her yearly Tri╌bute bring does, her yearly
Tri╌bute bring, does her yearly Tri╌bute bring; all your ſweets before him
lay, all your ſweets before him lay, then round his Al╌tar ſing and play, all,
all, all, all, all, all, all, your [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=146) [...] ſweets
before him lay, then round his Al╌tar ſing and play; then roun╌d his Al╌tar
ſing and play; Thus the e╌ver grateful Spring, does her yearly Tri╌bute bring,
does her yearly Tri╌bute bring, does her yearly Tribute bring, does her yearly
Tri╌bute bring.

##### 1.12.2. Summer.

[...] [[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=147)
[...] Her's the Summer Sprightly Gay, Smi╌ling Wanton Freſh and Fair, adorn'd
with all the Flowr's of May, whoſe various Sweets Perſume the Air; adorn'd
with all the Flowr's of May, Whoſe various Sweets Per╌fume the Air.

##### 1.12.3. Autum

[...] [[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=147)
[...] See, ſee my many couler'd Fields, ſee, ſee my many couler'd Fields, and
Loaded Trees my will o╌bey;╌bey. All the Fruit that Autumn yeilds, all the
Fruit that Au╌tumn yields, I of╌fer to the God of Da╌y; all the Fruit that
Autumn yields, I of╌fer to the God of Day; [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=148) [...] all the
Fruit that Autum yeilds, all the Fruit that Autum yeilds, I Offer to the God
of Day; All the Fruit that Autum yeilds, I Offer to the God of Day;

##### 1.12.4. Winter

[...] Next Winter comes ſlawly pale meager and old, thus [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=148) [...] trembling
with Age, and thus qui've╌ring with cold; benum'd with hard Froſts, and with
Snow cov'rd o're, benumb'd with hard Froſts, and with Snow cov'rd o're; prayes
the [[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=149)
[...] Sun to reſtore him, pray's the Sun to re╌ſtore him, and ſin╌gs as
be╌fore.

#### 1.13. SOLO in the late Queen's Birth-day.

[...] A╌Pril who till now, who till now, now, now, now, now, now, now; has
mourn'd, has mourn'd, claps, claps, claps for jo╌y his Sable Win╌gs; to ſee,
to ſee, to ſee, to ſee within his Orb return, the choiceſt [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=149) [...] Bleſſings
he cou'd bring, Maria's Birth╌day, Maria's, Birth╌day, Maria's Birth╌day,
Ma╌ri╌a's Birth╌day and the Spring; To ſee, to ſee, to ſee, to ſee with╌in his
Orb re╌turn, the Choiſeſt Bleſ╌ſings he cou'd bring: Maria's Birth╌day,
Maria's Birth╌day, Maria's Birth╌day, Mari╌a's Birth╌day and the Spring.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=150)

#### 1.14. A ſingle SONG.

[...] THe Fa╌tal Hour, the Fa╌tal Hour comes on, comes on a╌pace, which I had
rather di╌e than ſee; for when Fate ca╌lls you from this place, you go to
cer╌tain Mi╌ſery, you go to certain, cer╌tain Mi╌ſery. The thought does ſtab
me to the Heart, and gives me pan╌gs no word can ſpeak, it Wracks me, it
Wracks me in each Vi╌tal part; ſure, ſure when you go, ſure when you go, my
[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=150) [...]
Heart will break; ſure, ſure my Heart will break; ſince I for you ſo much, for
you ſo much en╌dure, may I not, may I not hope you will, you will believe,
'tis you a╌lone, 'tis you a╌lone theſe Wounds, theſe Wounds, theſe Wounds can
Cure, which are the Fountains of my Grief; 'tis you alone, you alone, you
a╌lone theſe Wounds can cure, which are the Fountains, are the Fountains of my
Grief.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=151)

#### 1.15. A SONG for Two Voices, on the Late Queens Birth-day.

[...] Britain now, BRi╌tain now, now, now, now, now, now, now thy Cares
beguile; now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now thy Cares beguile; Britain
now, Britain now, now, now, now, now, now, no╌w now, now, now, now, now, now
thy Cares beguile, now, now, now, now, now, no╌w thy Cares beguile, now, now,
now, now thy Cares beguile, now, now, now, now, now no╌w thy Cares beguile:
Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, the Day, the Day, thy Cares
beguile: Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, the Day, the [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=151) [...] the Day,
Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, the Day that Bleſs our Iſle, Bleſs, Bleſs; Day,
Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, Bleſs the Day, that Bleſs our Iſle, Bleſs,
Bleſs, Bleſs, the Day that Ble╌ſs our Iſle. Bleſs the Day that Bleſs our Iſle.

End with the firſt ſtrain.

#### 1.16. An ELOGY upon the Death of Mr. Thomas Farmer, B. M.

[...] YOung Thir╌ſis Fate ye Hills and Gro╌ves deplore, Thirſis, Thirſis, the
Pride of all the Plains, the Joy╌of Nymphs, and En╌vy, and En╌vy of the
Swains, the gentle Thir╌ſis is no more, the gen╌tle Thir╌ſis is no [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=152) [...] more, no
more, Oh! no more, the gen╌tle Thir╌ſis is no more. What, what makes the
Spring re╌tire, what, what, what, what makes the Spring re╌tire, and Groves
their Songs de╌cline? What, what, what, what makes the Spring re╌tire, what,
what, what, what makes the Spring re╌tire, and Groves their Songs de╌cline?

Soft.

What, what! Nature for her lov'd Thir╌ſis ſeems to pine, for her

Loud.

lov'd Thir╌ſis ſeems to pine; whoſe are╌ful Strains, and tune╌ful Lyre, made
the Spring [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=152) [...] bloom,
and did the Groves in╌ſpire, and did the Groves in╌ſpire; whoſe art╌ful
Strains, and tune╌ful Lyre, made the Spring bloom, and did— the

Soft.

Groves in╌ſpire, and did— the Groves in╌ſpire. What, what can the droop╌ing
Sons of Art, from this ſad hour, what, what can the drooping Sons of Art, from
this ſad hour impart, to cha╌rm the Cares of Life, and ea╌ſe the Lover's
ſmart, and

CHORƲS.

ea╌ſe the Lo╌ver's ſmart? While thus, thus in diſ╌mal Notes we mourn, and
While thus, thus in diſmall Notes we mour╌n, [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=153) [...] diſ╌mal
Notes we mourn, in diſ╌mal Notes we mourn, the skilful Shepherd's while thus
in diſ╌mal Notes we mourn, the skilful Shepherd's Urn; to the gla╌d, Skies, to
the gla╌d, the gla╌d Skies, his Urn; to the gla╌d Skies, his Harmony he bears,
and as he charm'd the Earth, and as he charm'd the Earth, as he charm'd
Harmony he bears, and as he charm'd the Earth, and as he charm'd, as he
charm'd the Earth, tranſports, tranſports the Spheres; and as he charm'd the
Earth, tranſports,  (repeat) the Spheres the Earth, tranſport's, tranſports
the Spheres; and as he charm'd the Earth, tranſports,  (repeat) the Spheres.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=153)

#### 1.17. A Trumpet Song, Sung by Mr. Bowen, in the (Libertine deſtroy'd.)

[...] TO Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms Hero╌ick Prince; to
Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=154) [...] Arms, to
Arms, to Arms He╌ro╌ick Prince; to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms, to Arms;
Glo╌ry, like Love, has pow'r╌ful Charms, Glo╌ry, like Love, has [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=154) [...] pow'r╌ful
Charms; let Glo╌ry, let Glo╌ry now thy Soul ingroſs, and recompence its
Ri╌vals loſs: bid Trumpets ſound, bid Trumpets ſound, ſou╌nd; and nothing,
nothing name but Battles, but Battles, but Bat╌tles, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=155) [...]
Con╌queſts, Tri╌umphs, Tri╌umphs Fame, Tri╌umphs, [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=155) [...] Tri╌umphs
Fame.

#### 1.18. A ſingle SONG.

[...] YE gen╌tle Spirits of the Air, ye gen╌tle Spirits of the Air; appear,
appear, appear, appear; prepare, prepare,╌prepare, pre╌pare; [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=156) [...] and joyn
your ten╌der Voices here, appear, appear, appear, appear, prepa╌re, prepare,
pre╌pare and joyn your ten╌der Voices here. Catch, catch a repeat, repeat,
repeat, repeat, repeat the trem╌bling ſounds a╌new repeat, repeat the
trem╌bling ſoun╌ds a╌new: Soft, ſoft, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=156) [...] ſoft as
her ſighs and ſw╌eet as Pearly dew, and ſw╌eet as Pearly dew; run,╌run╌new
Di╌vi╌ſion, run new Di╌vi╌ſion, and ſuch Meaſure keep, as when you lull, you
lull the God of Love a╌ſleep,╌as when you lull, you lull the God of Love
a╌ſleep.

Da Capo.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=157)

#### 1.19. A SONG for Two Voices.

[...] WHat can we, what can we poor Fe╌males do; when What can we, can we poor
Fa╌males do; when Preſſing, Teaſing, Preſſing, Teaſing Lovers ſue? What can
we, what can Preſſing, Teaſing, Preſſing, Teaſing Lovers ſue? What can we,
what can we poor, poor Females do? Fate affords no o╌ther way, but De╌ny╌ing,
we poor, poor Females do? Fate affords no o╌ther way, but De╌ny╌ing, or
Com╌ply╌ing, but De╌ny╌ing, or Com╌ply╌ing;

Firſt Strain again.

or Comyly╌ing, but De╌ny╌ing, or Com╌ply╌ing; [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=157) [...] And
Reſenting, or Conſenting, and Reſenting, or conſenting, does a╌like╌our Hopes
betray. And Reſenting, or Conſenting, or Conſenting does a╌like╌our Hopes
betray.

End with the firſt ſtrain.

#### 1.20. A Mad SONG.

[...] BEneath a Poplar's ſhadow lay me, no ra╌ging Fires will there diſ╌may

Soft.

me; near ſome ſilver Current lying, near ſome ſilver Current lying; Oh! oh!
under ſlee╌py Poppies dying: I ſwell╌and am bigger, I ſwell╌and am bigger than
Typhon e're was; with a ſtrong band of Braſs oh! bind me, oh! [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=158) [...] bind me
about! leſt my Boſom ſhou'd burſt, for the ſecret to paſs, and the Fu╌ry get
out, I cannot, I will not, I cannot, I will not be vex't any longer, while I
ra╌ge I grow weak, while I ra╌ge, while I ra╌ge I grow weak, and the Goddeſs
grows ſtronger.

#### 1.21. A Verſe out of the late Queen's Birthday SONG.

[...] MY Prayers or'e heard, Heav'n has at laſt beſtow'd the mighty, mighty—
Bleſſing which it long has ow'd; at length the Bount'ous Gods have ſent us
down, a Brightneſs ſecond [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=158) [...] on╌ly to
their own; I ſee the rou╌nd years ſucceſſive╌ly mo╌ve, to Ripen her Beauty,
and Crown them with Love: A Hero re╌nown'd in Vertue and Arms, ſhall wear the
ſoft Chain and ſubmit to her Charms; and Hy╌men and Hebe, and Hy╌men and Hebe
ſhall make it their Care, to pour all their joys╌on the Val'ant and Fair.
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=159) [...] AS
A╌mo╌ret and Thir╌ſis lay, as A╌mo╌ret, as A╌mo╌ret and As A╌mo╌ret and
Thir╌ſis lay as A╌mo╌ret and Thir╌ſis lay; Melting, melting, melting, melt╌ing
the hours in gen╌tle Thir╌ſis lay; Melting, melting, melt╌ing the hours in
gen╌tle play; Joyning, joyning, joyning Fa╌ces; Mingling Kiſ╌ſes, mingling
Kiſ╌ſes, play; Joyning, joyning, joyning Fa╌ces; Mingling Kiſ╌ſes, mingling
mingling Kiſ╌ſes, and ex╌chang╌ing harmleſs Bliſ╌ſes: Kiſ╌ſes, mingling
Kiſ╌ſes, and ex╌chang╌ing harmleſs Bliſ╌ſes: [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=159) [...] He
trem╌bling cry'd, with eager, ea╌ger haſt; let me, let me, He trem╌bling
cry'd, with eager, eager haſt; oh! let me Feed; oh! oh! let me, let me, let
me, let me Feed; oh! oh! let me, let me, let me, oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! let me
oh! oh! oh! let me, let me, let me, let me, Feed as well as Taſt; I dye, let
me, let me, ho! oh! oh! oh! let me Feed as well as Taſt; die, die, I die, die,
I die, I die if I'm not wholly Bleſt. I die, die, die, I die, I die if I'm not
wholly Bleſt.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=160)

#### 1.22. A ſingle SONG in the Indian Queen.

[...] WAke, wake, wake Qui╌ve╌ra, wake, our ſoft╌reſt muſt ceaſe; Wake, wake,
wake, Qui╌ve╌ra, wake,╌our ſoft╌reſt muſt ceaſe, and fly╌to╌gether, and
fly╌to╌ge╌ther with our Country's [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=160) [...] peace; no
more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no more, no,╌no
more muſt we ſleep, muſt we ſleep under Plan╌tain ſhade, which neither Heat
could peirce, nor Cold in╌vade; where bount'ous Nature never, never, never,
never, never, never fells de╌cay, and op'╌ning Buds, and op'╌ning Buds
drive╌fall╌ing Fruits a╌way.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=161)

#### 1.23. A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Bowen.

[...] VVHy, why, why, ſhou'd men quarrel, why, why ſhou'd men quarrel here,
where all, all, all, where all╌poſ╌ſeſs as much as they can hope for by
ſuc╌ceſs; [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=161) [...] none;
none can have moſt, none can have moſt where Nature is ſo kind, as to exceed,
as to exceed╌Man's uſe tho' not his Mind; why, why, why ſhou'd Men quarrel,
why, why ſhou'd Men quarrel here, where all, all, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=162) [...] all,
where all╌poſ╌ſeſs as much as they can hope for by ſuc╌ceſs, as much as they
can hope for by ſuc╌ceſs as much as they can hope, as much as they can hope
for by ſuc╌ceſs. [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=162) [...]

#### 1.24. A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman.

[...] SCorn'd Envy here's nothing, here's nothing that thou, that thou canſt
blaſt; Her glo╌ries, her glo╌ries are too bright, to be o're╌caſt; her
glo╌ries, her glo╌ries are too brigh╌t to be o're╌caſt.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=163)

#### 1.25. A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman.

[...] THeir looks are ſuch that Mercy flow╌s from thence, more gen╌tle,
gen╌tle then our Na╌tive innocence: By their pro╌tec╌tion let us, let us, let
us beg to live, they come not here to con╌quer but for╌give; by their
pro╌tec╌tion let us, let us, let us beg to live, they come not here to
con╌quer but for╌give, they come not here no con╌quer but for╌give.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=163)

#### 1.26. A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mrs. Croſs.

[...] THey tell us that you migh╌ty powers above, make Perfect your Joys and
your Bleſſings by Love; Ah! Why do you ſuffer, ah! why do you ſuffer the
Bleſſing that's there; to give a poor Lover ſuch ſad torments here, yet tho'
for my paſ╌ſion ſuch grief I en╌dure, my Love ſhall like yours, ſtill be
con╌ſtant and pure.

II.

To ſuffer for him gives an eaſe to my Pains,

There's joy in my Grief, and ther's freedom in Chains.

If I were Divine, he cou'd Love me no more,

And I in return, my Adorer Adore;

Oh! Let his dear life then (kind Gods) be your care,

For I in your Bleſſings have no other ſhare.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=164)

#### 1.27. A SONG in the Indian Queen, Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mr. Church.

[...] AH! ah! how hap╌py are we, are we, are we, ah! Ah! ah! ah! how hap╌py
are we, are we, are we, ah! ah! how hap╌py are we, from humane paſſions, from
humane paſ╌ſions ah! how hay╌py are we, from humane paſ╌ſions free: Ah! ah!
free: Ah! ah! ah! how hap╌py are we, thoſe wil╌d ah! ah! how hap╌py are we,
thoſe wil╌d [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=164) [...] Tenants
of the Breaſt; no never, never, no never, Tenants of the Breaſt; no never,
never, no never, never, never can diſturb our reſt; ah! never, no never,
never, never can diſturb our reſt; ah! ah! ah! how happy are we, are we, are
we, ah! ah! how happy are ah! how happy are we, are we, are we, ah! ah! how
hap╌py are we: Yet we pit╌ty, we pit╌ty, we pitty, tender Souls whome the
Tyrant we: Yet we pit╌ty, we pit╌ty, tender Souls whom the [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=165) [...] Love,
whom the Tyrant Love, whom the Tyrant Love con╌trouls; Tyrant Love, whom the
Tyrant Love, whom the Tyrant Love con╌trouls; Ah! ah! how hap╌py are we, from
humane Ah! ah! ah! how hap╌py are we, Paſſion, from humane Paſ╌ſion from
humane Paſ╌ſion free. free.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=165)

#### 1.28. A ſingle SONG, the Words by Mr. Congreve.

[...] PI╌ous Ce╌lin╌da goes to Pray'rs, if I but ask if I but ask the Favour;
and yet the ten╌der, ten╌der Fool's in Tears, when ſhe believes, when ſhe
be╌lieves I'll leave her: Wou'd I were, wou'd I were free from this reſtraint,
or elſe had hopes, or elſe had ho╌pes to win her; wou'd ſhe cou'd, wou'd ſhe
cou'd make of me a Saint, or I of her, or I of he╌r a Sinner; wou'd I cou'd,
wou'd I cou'd, oh! wou'd I cou'd make of her a Sinner.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=166)

#### 1.29. A SONG by Phoebus in the Fairy-Queen, which ſhou'd have been put
before the Four Seaſons of the Year, in Page 21.

Phoebus

[...]

Soft.

When a Cru╌el Long Winter has Fro╌zen the Earth, and Nature impriſon'd, ſeeks
in vain to be Free; and [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=166) [...] Nature
impriſon'd ſeeks╌in vain to be Free: I Dart forth my Beams to give all things
a Breath, make╌ing Spring for the Plants, ev'╌ry Flow'r and each Tree. 'Tis I
who give Life╌warmth and Vigour to all; ev'n Love who rules all things in
Earth Air and Sea, wou'd Languiſh and fade and to nothing, nothing would fall;
the World to its Chaos wou'd re╌turn, but for me.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=167)

#### 1.30. The following Five Verſes, are taken out of one of the Duke of
Glouceſter's Birth-Day SONGS.

[...] WHo, who can from Joy╌refrain? Who, who can from Joy╌refrain, this
Gay,╌this pleaſ╌ing, ſhining Wondrous Day? Who; Who can from Joy╌refrain, this
Gay.╌this [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=167) [...] pleaſing,
pleaſing ſhining wond'rous day; wond'╌rous, wond'╌rous, wond'rous, wond'rous,
wond'╌rous, wond'╌rous day, wond'╌rous, wond'╌rous day.

#### 1.31. The Second SONG for Two Voices.

[...] FOr tho' the Sun has all, has all his Summers Glo╌ries For tho' the Sun
has all, has all his Summers Glo╌ries on, has all, all, all, has all, all, all
his Summers Glories on; on, has all, all, all, all, all his Summers Glories
on; [[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=168)
[...] This day has brighter, brigh╌ter ſplendors, this day has brighter,
brigh╌ter This day has brighter, brigh╌ter Splendors, this day has brighter,
ſplendors, has brigh╌ter, brighter ſplendors brigh╌ter ſplendors, has
brigh╌ter, brighter ſplendors far, from a lit╌tle riſing Star, from a lit╌tle,
lit╌tle ri╌ſing Star— far, from a lit╌tle ri╌ſing Star, from a lit╌tle ri╌ſing
Star, from a lit╌tle, lit╌tle ╌, a lit╌tle ri╌ſing Star. ri╌ſing Star.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=168)

#### 1.32. SOLO. The Third SONG.

[...] A Prince, a Prince of Glo╌rious Race deſcend╌ed, at his hap╌py, hap╌py
Birth, at his hap╌py, hap╌py, hap╌py Birth at╌tend╌ed; A Prince, a Prince of
Glo╌rious race deſcended, at his happy happy Birth, at his hap╌py happy,
hap╌py Birth attended; With Ro╌ſy Smi╌ling hours, with Ro╌ſy Smi╌ling hours to
ſhow, he will Golden Days be╌ſtows, [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=169) [...] he will,
he will, he will, he will Golden days be╌ſtow, he will, he will, he will, he
will Golden Days be╌ſtow.

#### 1.33. The Fourth SONG with VIOLINS.

[...] THe Father Brave, the Father Brave as e're was Dane, as e're was Dane;
Whoſe Thundring, [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=169) [...]
Thundring; Thundring, Thundring Sword, whoſe Thundring, Thundring, Thundring,
Thundring Sword, has Thouſands, thouſands, has thouſands, thouſands,
thouſands, thouſands Slain, has thouſands, thouſands, has thouſands, thouſands
Slain, and made him, and [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=170) [...] made him
o'er half, o'er half Europe Reign; And made him, and made him o'er half Europe
Reign. The Father Brave, the Father Brave as e'er was Dane, as e'er was Dane,
as e'er was Dane.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=170)

#### 1.34. The Fifth SONG, with a Trumpet.

[...] SOun╌d the Trumpet, ſoun╌d, ſoun╌d, ſoun╌d the Trumpet Sound; And beat
the War╌like Drums, and beat the War╌like Drums; The Prince will be with
Lawrels Crown'd, the Prince will [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=171) [...] be with
Lawrels Crown╌d, be╌fore his Manhood comes; Ah! Ah! how pleas'd he is and Gay,
Ah! Ah! How pleas'd he is and Ga╌y, when the Trumpet Strikes his Ear, when the
Trumpet Strikes his Ear; Ah! Ah! how╌pleaſ╌'d he [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=171) [...] is and
gay; His hands like ſhak╌ing Lillies play; his hands like ſhake╌ing Lillies
play, and catch, and catch, and catch, and catch at ev╌'ry Sphear, and catch
╌at ev╌'ry Sphear.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=172)

#### 1.35. MUSICK in Timon of Athens. The Firſt SONG, with Flutes.

[...] HArk! hark how the Song╌ſters, hark! how the Songſters, how the Hark!
hark! hark! how the Song╌ſters, hark how the [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=172) [...]
Song╌ſters of the Grove; Sin╌g, Sin╌g Song╌ſters of the Grove; Sin╌g, Sin╌g,
Anthems to the God of Love. Hark! hark! hark! Anthems to the God of Love.
Hark! hark! hark! hark! [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=173) [...] hark!
hark! hark how each Am╌arous winged pair, with Love's great Praiſes, hark!
hark how each Am╌arous winged pair, with Love's great with Love's great
Prai╌ſes fill the Air; On ev╌'ry ſide the Praiſes, with Love's great Praiſes
fill the Air; On ev╌'ry ſide the Char╌ing [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=173) [...] Charm╌ing
ſound does from the hollow Woods, does from the hollow Woods, the ſound does
from the hollow Woods, does from the hollow Charming ſound does from the
hallow, hollow, hollow Woods re╌boun╌d; Woods, the Charming ſound does from
the hollow Woods reboun╌d; [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=174) [...] Does from
the hollow, hol╌how Woods re╌bound, does from the hollow, hollow, hollow,
hol╌low Woods rebound, re╌bound, rebound. re╌bound. [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=174) [...] LOve in
their little Veins in╌ſpires, Love in their lit╌tle Veins inſpires, their
Cher╌full Notes their ſoft de╌ſire, Love in their little ╌ſire while heat,
while heat make Budds and Bloſſoms ſpring; thoſe pretty, pretty Couples love
and ſing; But Winter puts out, puts out their deſire, and half the year they
want, they want Loves Fire; But Winter puts out, puts out their deſires, and
half the year they want, they want Loves Fire. But Fire. [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=175) [...] BUt ah!
but ah! how much are our delights more dear, more, more, more dear; But But
ah! but ah! how much are our delights more dear, more, more, more dear; But
But ah! but ah! how much are our delights more dear, more, more more dear; But
ah! but ah! how much are our delights more, more, more dear; For ah! but ah!
how much are our delights more, more, more dear; For ah! but ah! how much are
our delights more, more, more dear; for on╌ly human [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=175) [...] Only
Human kind, for on╌ly Human kind, For on╌ly Human kind; love, On╌ly Human
kind, for on╌ly Human kind, For on╌ly Human kind; love kind, for only Human
kind, for only Human kind; Love, love, love all the year, all, all, all, all,
all, all the year; For only all the year, all, all, all, all, all, all the
year; For on╌ly, only all the year, all, all, all, all, all, all the year; For
only, Human kind, love all the year. Human kind, love all╌the year. human
kind, love all the year.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=176)

#### 1.36. HAUTBOYS.

[...] Hence, hence, hence with your trifling Deity; a grea╌ter, grea╌ter
grea╌ter we a╌dore; Bacchus, Bacchus, Bacchus, Bacchus who [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=176) [...] allways,
allways keeps us Free;╌from that blind Childiſh Pow'r╌that allways, allways
keeps us free,—

Slow.

from that blind Childiſh Pow'r: Love makes you languiſh and look pale, and
ſneak and [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=177) [...] Sigh,
ſigh, ſigh and whine,

Brisk.

but over us no griefs prevail, No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no griefs prevail, while we have lu╌ſty Wine; no, no, no, no,
no, no, no griefs prevail, while we have lu╌ſty Wine, while we have lu╌ſty
Wine.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=177)

#### 1.37. A ſingle SONG with a SIMPHOMY.

[...] COme all, come all, come all, come all, come all to me, make haſte, make
haſte, make haſte, make haſte, make haſte, make haſte the ſweets of mu╌tual
paſ╌ſions taſte; Come all, come all, come all to me, come all, come all to me
and wear my Chains; [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=178) [...] the joys
of Love, the joys╌of Love without its pains; The joys of Love, the joy╌s of
Love without its pains.

#### 1.38. A SONG with Inſtruments.

[...] Return, return, revolting Rebells; return, where d'ye go, where d'ye go,
where d'ye go, d'ye [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=178) [...] know?
D'ye know, d'ye know, what Phantiſm 'tis miſleads you ſo: Return, return,
re╌volting Rebels return; Where d'ye go, where d'ye go, where d'ye go d'ye
know? D'ye know, d'ye know what Phantiſm 'tis m [...]ſleads you ſo, to grieve
and to care, to grieve and to [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=179) [...] care; To
Tyrannous Chains, to Tyrannous Chains, to doubt and diſpair; To Barbarous
Jea╌lou╌ſy, Barbarous jea╌lou╌ſy, mi╌ſe╌ry, Slavery; To Torments and pains,

Return, as before.

to Torments, Torments and pains.

Return, as before.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=179)

#### 1.39. A Two Part SONG between Cupid and Bacchus.

[...] COme let us a╌gree, come let us a╌gree, come let us a╌gree, come, come,
come, Come let us agree, come let us a╌gree, come let us a╌gree, come, come,
come, come, come, come, come let us agree; come, come, come, come, come, come,
come come, come, come, come, come, come let us agree; come, come, come, come,
come, come, come let us a╌gree; There are pleaſures di╌vine, there are
pleaſures di╌vine, let us a╌gree; There are pleaſures di╌vine, in in Love and
in Wine, in Love and in Wine, there are pleaſures di╌vine, Wine and in Love,
in Wine and in Love, there are pleaſures, are pleaſures di╌vine, [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=180) [...] in Wine
and in Love, in Love and in Wine, in Wine and in in Wine and in Love, in Love
and in Wine, in Wine and in Love, in Love and in Wine. Love, in Love and in
Wine.

#### 1.40. SONGS in Bonduca.

[...] Here ye Gods of Britain, here ye Gods of Britain; Here us this day;
[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=180) [...]
Let us not fall, let us not fall the Roman Eagles prey, clip, clip their
wings, clip, clip their wings clip, clip their Wings, or cha╌ſe 'em home; And
check the [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=181) [...] Tow'ring
pride of Rome; And check the Tow'ring pride of Rome, of Rome, of Rome, clip
their wings, or chaſe'em home, clip their wings or chaſe'em home, clip, clip
their wings [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=181) [...] or
chaſe'em home, and check the Tow'ring pride of Rome, of Rome, of Rome, of
Rome.

#### 1.41. A Symphony for Flutes to the following SONG.

[...]

Firſt Flute.

[...]

Second Flute.

[...] [[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=182)
[...] Sing, ſing, ſing, ſing ye Druids; ſing, ſing, ſing, Sing, ſing, ſing,
[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=182) [...]
ſing, ye Druids; All, all, all, all your Voi╌ces raiſe; All, all, all, all
your ſing, ye Druids; All, all, all, all your Voi╌ces raiſe; All, all all, all
your Voi╌ces raiſe; Sing, ſing, ſing, ſing, all, all your Voi╌ces raiſe╌to
Voi╌ces raiſe; Sing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing all your Voi╌ces raiſe╌to
Celebrate, to Celebrate di╌vine An da╌tes Praiſe; To Celebrate, to Celebrate
di╌╌vine Celebrate, to Celebrate di╌vine An╌da╌tes Praiſe; To Celebrate, to
Celebrate di╌vine An╌da╌tes Praiſe; Sing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing,
ſing di╌vine An╌da╌tes, An╌da╌tes Praiſe; Sing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing, ſing
di╌vine An╌da╌tes, di╌vine [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=183) [...] di╌vine,
di╌vine An╌da╌tes Praiſe; An╌da╌tes, di╌vine An╌da╌tes Praiſe; ſing, ſing,
ſing ye Druids; ſing, ſing, ſing ye Druids; ſing, ſing di╌vine ſing, ſing,
ſing ye Druids: ſing, ſing, ſing ye Druids; ſing ſing di╌vine╌An╌da╌tes
Praiſe; di╌vine╌An╌da╌tes Praiſe; An╌da╌tes, di╌vine An╌da╌tes, di╌vine
An╌da╌tes Praiſe; di╌vine An╌da╌tes, di╌vine, di╌vine An╌da╌tes Praiſe; [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=183) [...] Sing,
Sing, Sing ye Dru╌ids; Sing, Sing, Sing ye Dru╌ids, Sing, Sing di╌vine— Sing,
Sing, Sing ye Dru╌ids; Sing, Sing, Sing ye Dru╌ids, Sing, Sing
di╌vine╌An╌da╌tes Praiſe. ╌An╌da╌tes Praiſe.

#### 1.42. A VERSE for Two Voices in the Yorkſhire-Feaſt-Song.

[...] BRigantium Honour'd with a Race di╌vine, Brigantium Honour'd with a
Brigantium Honour'd with a Race di╌vine; gave Birth to the Vic╌rious Race
di╌vine, Brigantium Honour'd with a Race di╌vine; [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=184) [...]
Conſtantine, gave Birth to the Vic╌to╌rious to the Vic╌to╌ri╌ous Con
ſtan╌tine: Whoſe Collony, whilſt planted there, Con╌ſtan╌tine: Whoſe freſh
blooming Glo╌ries, ſtill, ſtill— re╌new'd Collony, whilſt planted there, freſh
blooming Glo╌ries ſtill re╌new'd the Year; whoſe Col╌lo╌ny, whoſe Col╌lo╌ny,
whilſt the Year; whoſe Col╌lo╌ny, whilſt plant╌ed there, [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=184) [...] plant╌ed
there, freſh Bloom╌ing Glo╌ries freſh Bloom╌ing Glo╌ries ſtill re╌new'd the
Year. ſtill renew'd the Year.

#### 1.43. A VERSE with Flutes in the Yorkſhire Feaſt-Song.

[...]

FLƲTES.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=185) [...]

[...] THe Baſhful Thames for Beauty ſo renown'd, in haſt ran by her pu╌ny
Town; and poor, and poor Auguſta was a ſham'd to own. The Baſhful Thames, for
Beauty ſo renown'd, in haſt ran by her pu╌ny Town; and [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=185) [...] poor,
and poor Auguſta was a ſham'd to own; Au gu╌ſta then did droo╌ping lye, did
drooping, drooping, droop╌ing lye; tho' now ſhe rears her Tow'ring Front ſo
high; tho' now ſhe rears her Tow'ring Front ſo high, her [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=186) [...]
Tow'╌ring Front ſo high; Au╌guſta then did droop╌ing lye, did drooping,
drooping, drooping lye; tho' now ſhe rears her Tow'ring Front ſo high; tho'
now ſhe rears her Tow'ring Front ſo high, her [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=186) [...]
Tow'╌ring Front ſo high, her Tow'╌ring Front ſo high.

#### 1.44. A VERSE with Violins in the Yorkſhire Feaſt-Song.

[...]

VIOLINS.

[...] [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=187)
[...] [[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=187)
[...] The pale and the pur╌ple Roſe, that af╌ter coſt ſo many, ma╌ny Blows, ſo
many, many Blows, ſo many, many Blows, when Eng╌liſh Ba╌rons ſought a Price
[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=188) [...]
ſo dear╌ly bought: By the Bold╌Worthies of the Shire, ſtill beſt by Sword and
Shield, defended were; by the Bold╌Worthies [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=188) [...] of that
Shire, ſtill beſt by Sword and Shield, de╌fend╌ed were, were.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=189)

#### 1.45. A VERSE with Violins in the Yorkſhire-Feaſt-Song.

[...] SO when the glit'ring Queen of Night, with black E╌clipſe is ſhadow'd,
is [[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=189)
[...] ſhadow'd ore, ore. The Globe that Swell╌s with Sullen Pride, her
Daz╌ling Beams to hide; does but a [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=190) [...] little,
a little, a little, a little time a╌bide, and then each Ray, and then each Ray
is Bright╌er, is Bright╌er than be╌fore, fore.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=190)

#### 1.46. A ſingle SONG.

[...] WHen my Ac╌me╌lia Smile╌s ſhe wounds me with a ſmooth Shaft that I
embrace; when ſhe ſpeaks, when ſhe ſpeaks, yet more con╌ſounds me, her Words
does ſli╌de with ſuch a Grace: From that ſoft Voice what can defend me? Such
live╌ly Sence does from it flow, all others Wit does now of╌fend me, ſince by
kind, ſince by kind Whiſ╌pers hers I know.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=191)

#### 1.47. A SONG for Two Voices.

[...] WHen love╌ly Phil lis thou art kind, nought but Raptures fill my Mind;
'tis Hen love╌ly Phillis thou art kind, nought but Raptures fill my Mind; 'tis
then I think thee ſo Divine, t'excell the migh╌ty Pow'r of Wine: But when thou
in╌ſult'ſt, then I think thee ſo Divine, t'excell the mighty Pow'r of Wine:
But but when thou in╌ſult'ſt, and lau╌ghs at my Pain, I waſh thee a when thou
inſult'ſt, and lau╌ghs at my Pain, I waſh thee a way with ſparkling Champaign;
ſo bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother, and drive out one way with
ſparkling Champaign; ſo bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother, and
[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=191) [...]
God, and drive out one God by the Pow'r, by the Pow'r of another. drive out
one God, and drive out, and drive out one God by the Pow'r of another.

II.

When Pity in thy Looks I ſee,

I frailly quit my Friends for thee;

Perſwaſive Love ſo charms me then,

My Freedom l'd not wiſh again.

But when thou art cruel, and heeds not my Care,

Streight with a Bumper I baniſh Deſpair;

So bravely contemn both the Boy and his Mother,

And drive out one God by the Pow'r of another.

#### 1.48. A SONG with Hautboys, on St. Cecilia's day 1692.

[...]

Hautboys.

WOnd'rous, wond'rous, wond'rous, Ma╌chine; [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=192) [...]
Wond'rous, wond'rous, wond'rous, wond'rous Ma╌chine, to thee, the warb╌ling
Lute, tho' us'd to Conqueſt muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd to
[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=192) [...]
yeild; muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd to yeild, muſt be
forc'd, muſt be forc'd to yeild, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd, muſt be
forc'd to yeild: With thee una╌ble, with thee un╌a╌ble, with the un╌a╌ble
[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=193) [...]
to di╌ſpute; Tho' us'd to Con╌queſt, tho' us'd to Conqueſt, is with thee
un╌a╌ble to diſ╌pute. [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=193) [...]
Wond'rous, wand'rous, wand'rous, wond'rous Ma╌chine, to thee, the warb╌ling
Lute, tho' us'd to Conqueſt muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd to
[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=194) [...]
yeild; muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd to yeild, muſt be
forc'd, muſt be forc'd to yeild, muſt be forc'd, muſt be forc'd muſt be forc'd
to yeild.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=194)

#### 1.49. A SONG in Donquixote, Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mrs. Cibber.

[...]

Trumpet.

GEnius of England from thy pleaſant Bow'r of Bliſs a╌ri╌ſe, and ſprea╌d thy
ſa╌cred Wings; Guard, guard from Foes the Brittiſh State, thou on whoſe ſmile
does wait, th'╌uncertain hap╌py Fate, of Monarchies and Kings.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=195)

[...]

Mrs. Cibber.

Then follow brave Boys, then follow brave Boys to the Wars, follow, follow,
follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow brave Boys to the
War╌s, [[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=195)
[...] follow, follow, follow brave Boys to the War╌s' the Lawrel you know's
the prize, the Lawrel you know's the prize: Who brings home the nobleſt, the
no╌bleſt, the no╌bleſt Scars, looks fine╌eſt [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=196) [...] in
Ce╌lia's Eyes; then ſha╌ke off the ſlothful Eaſe, let Glory, let Glory, let
Glo╌ry in╌ſpi╌re your Hearts; Re╌member a Soldier in War and in [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=196) [...] Peace,
remember a Soldier in War, in War and in Peace, is the no╌bleſt of all other
Arts: Re╌member, a Soldier in War and in Peace, re╌member a Soldier in War, in
War and in Peace, is the [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=197) [...] no╌bleſt
of all other Arts.

#### 1.50. A ſingle SONG in Edipus.

[...] MUSICK, Mu╌ſick for a while, ſhall all your Cares beguile; ſhall all,
all, all, ſhall all, all, all, ſhall all, your Cares beguile; wond╌'ring,
wond╌'ring how your Pains were eas'd, eas'd, eas'd, and dis╌dain╌ing [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=197) [...] to be
pleas'd, till A╌lec╌to free the Dead, till A╌lec╌to free the Dead, from their
E╌ter╌nal, E╌ter╌nal Band; till the Snakes drop, drop, drop, drop, drop, drop,
drop, drop, drop from her Head; and the Whip, and the Whip from out her Hand;
Muſick, Muſick for a while ſhall all your cares beguile; ſhall all, all, all,
all, all, all, all, ſhall all your cares be╌guile; all, all, all, all, all,
all, all, all, ſhall all, your cares be╌guile.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=198)

#### 1.51. A ſingle SONG.

[...] ON the Brow of Richmond Hill which Europe ſcarce can pa╌ral╌lel, ev'╌ry
Eye ſuch Wonders fill, to view the Proſpect round; where the Silver Thames
does gilde, and ſtately Courts are E╌di╌fi'd, Meadows deck'd in Summer's
Pride, with verdant Beauties Crown'd: Lovely Cynthia paſ╌ſing by, with
brighter Glo╌ries bleſt my Eye, Ah! then in vain, in vain, ſaid I, the Fields
and Flow'rs do ſhine; Nature in this Charming Place, cre╌a╌ted Pleaſure in
Exceſs, but all are Poor to Cynthia's Face, whoſe Features are Divine.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=198)

#### 1.52. A SONG with a Trumpet in Diocleſion.

[...] SOu╌nd Fame thy Brazen Trumpet ſound, ſound, ſound, ſoun╌d thy Brazen
Trumpet ſound: Stand, ſtand in the Centre, ſtand in the Centre of the
U╌ni╌verſe; and call, and ca╌ll the liſtning [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=199) [...] World
a╌round; while we in╌joy╌full Notes re╌herſe, in Art╌full Numbers, in Artfull
Numbers and well cho╌ſen Verſe; Great Di╌ocleſian's, Gre╌at Di╌o╌cle╌ſian's
Glory, [[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=199)
[...] Great Diocleſian's, Gre╌at Di╌o╌cle╌ſian's Glory, Gre╌at Di╌o╌cle╌ſian's
Glory.

#### 1.53. A DIALOGUE between Thirſis, and Daphne.

Thirſis.

[...]

WHY my Daphne, why complaining, and my Sghs and Tears diſdaining, ſince not
many hours are paſt; when with hands lift up to Heav'n, then our plighted
Faith was giv'n vowing they ſhou'd ever laſt, ſhou'd ever e╌ver, e╌ver laſt,
ſhou'd ever, e╌ver, e╌ver laſt.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=200)

[...]

Daphne.

Oh! ingrateful ſly Deceiver, and I, ea╌ſie, ea╌ſie fond Believer, to think,
that Man could e're be true! This to Eg╌la was a Token, witneſs all your Vows
are broken, and I, poor I, and I, poo╌r I'm undone by you.

Thirſis.

Could that falſe ma╌licious Creature, work up╌on your ea╌ſie Nature; could ſhe
ſay, That Gift was mine; No, that Garland Eg╌la gave me, but her Arts could
ne're enſlave me; No, no, my Life, my All, is thine, my All, All, All, my All
is thine.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=200)

Daphne.

[...]

Oh! how quick my Heart is beat╌ing! Oh! how quick, how quick, my Heart is
beat╌ing, ev'╌ry Pulſe the Joy re╌peating, the Joy re╌peating, the Joy
re╌peat╌ing; pleas'd to find my Swain ſo true, pleas'd to find my Swain ſo
true: Thir╌ſis is my on╌ly Treaſure, Thir╌ſis is my on╌ly Treaſure, Oh! I
Love, Oh! I Love be╌yond all meaſure, and wou'd quit the World for you.

CHORUS.

CHORƲS.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=201)

[...] Oh! how quick my Heart is beat╌ing! Oh! how quick, how quick, my Oh! how
quick my Heart is beat╌ing! Oh! how quick my Heart is beat╌ing, ev'╌ry Pulſe
the Joy re╌peating, the Joy re╌peating, the Heart is beating, ev'╌ry Pulſe the
Joy, the Joy re╌peating, the Joy, the Joy re╌peat╌ing; pleas'd to find my
Swain ſo true, pleas'd to Joy re╌peat╌ing; pleas'd to find my Nymph ſo true,
pleas'd to find, to find my Swain ſo true: Thirſis is my on╌ly Treaſure,
Thirſis is my find, my Nymph ſo true: Daphne is my on╌ly Treaſure, my on╌ly,
on╌ly [[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=201)
[...] on╌ly Treaſure, Oh! I love, Oh! I love, beyond all meaſure, Treaſure,
Oh! I love, Oh! I love, I love, beyond all meaſure, and wou'd quit the World
for you. and wou'd quit the World for you.

#### 1.54. A VERSE out of the late Queen's Birthday SONG.

[...] ANd low a ſacred Fu╌ry ſweel'd╌her breaſt, and the whole God her
lab'╌ring Soul poſ╌ſeſt; to lof╌ty Strains, to lof╌ty Strains, her tune╌ful
Lyre ſhe [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=202) [...] Strung,
thus, thus, thus, thus, thus the Goddeſs Play'd, and thus ſhe Sung: To lof╌ty
Strains, to lof╌ty Strains her tuneful Lyre ſhe Strung; and thus, thus, thus
the God╌deſs Play'd; and thus ſhe Sung; to lof╌ty Strains her tuneful Lyre ſhe
Strung; and thus, thus, thus, the God╌deſs Play'd, and thus, ſhe Sung.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=202)

#### 1.55. A VERSE out of the late Queen's Birthday-SONG.

[...] MA╌ny, many, many ſuch Days may ſhe be╌hold; many, many, Many, many,
many ſuch Days may ſhe be╌hold; many ſuch Days may ſhe behold; many, many,
many, many, many, many, many ſuch many, many, many ſuch Days may ſhe behold;
many, many, many, many, many, many Days may ſhe be╌hold; like the gla╌d ſuch
may ſhe behold; like the gla╌d Sun without de╌cay; [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=203) [...] Sun
without de╌cay; without, with╌out de╌cay. Many, many, like the gla╌d Sun
without de╌cay. many ſuch Days may ſhe be╌hold; many, many, Many, many, many
ſuch Days may ſhe be╌hold; many ſuch Days may ſhe behold; many, many, many,
many, many, many, many ſuch many, many, many ſuch Days may ſhe behold; many,
many, many, many, many, many Days may ſhe be╌hold; like the gla╌d ſuch may ſhe
behold; like the gla╌d Sun without de╌cay; [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=203) [...] Sun
with╌out de╌cay; with╌out, with╌out de╌cay: Like the gla╌d Sun with╌out
de╌cay; May Time that tear╌s, may Time that tear╌s, May Time that tear╌s, may
Time that tear╌s, where he lay's hold; On╌ly Sa╌lute her, on╌ly Sa╌lute her,
where he lay's hold; On╌ly Sa╌lute her, on╌ly ſa╌lute her, on╌ly Sa╌lute on╌ly
Sa╌lute her in his way; May Time that tear╌s, her, Sa╌lute her in his way; May
Time that [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=204) [...] may Time
that tear╌s, where he╌lay's hold; tear╌s, may Time that tear╌s, where he lay's
hold; On╌ly Sa╌lute— On╌ly Sa╌lute her, on╌ly Sa╌lute her, on╌ly Sa╌lute her
in his way; Sa╌lute her, on╌ly Sa╌lute her, only Sa╌lute her, Sa╌lute her in
his way; Sa╌lute╌her in his way. her in his way.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=204)

#### 1.56. The EPICURE.

[...] UN╌der╌neath this Myrtle Shade, on Flow'╌ry Beds Su╌pine╌ly N╌der╌neath
this Myrtle Shade, on Flow'╌ry Beds Su╌pine╌ly laid; with Od'rous Oyls my Head
o'erflowing, and a╌rou╌nd it Roſes laid; with Od'rous Oyls my Head
o'erflow╌ing, and a╌rou╌nd it Roſes growing: What ſhould I do but drink a╌way,
what ſhould I do but drink a╌way, growing: What ſhould I do but drink, drink
what ſhould I do but drink, drink a╌way, the Heat and Trou╌bles of the day,
the Heat and drink, drink, drink a╌way, the Heat and Trou╌bles of the day, the
Heat and [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=205) [...] Troubles
of the day. In this more than Kingly State, Love himſelf ſhall on me wait;
Troubles of the day. In this more than Kingly State, Love himſelf ſhall on me
wait; Fill to me, Love, nay fill it up, and mingled, ca╌ſt, caſt in╌to the
Fill to me, Love, nay fill it up, and mingled ca╌ſt in╌to the Cup, Wit and
Mirth Vig'rous Health, Vig'rous Health, and Gay Deſires. The Cup, and Noble
Fires, Vig'rous Health, Vig'rous Health, and Gay Deſires. The Wheel of Life no
leſs will ſtay, in a ſmooth than rugged Way; ſince it Wheel of Life no leſs
will ſtay, in a ſmoo╌th than rugged Way; ſince it, [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=205) [...]
e╌qual╌ly doth flee, let the Mo╌tion pleaſant be, let the Mo╌tion e╌qual╌ly
doth flee, let the Mo╌tion pleaſant be, let the pleaſant be, let the Mo╌tion
plea╌ſant be. Mo╌tion plea╌ſant be, let it plea╌ſant be.

Solus.

Why do we precious Ointments ſhow'r? Nobler Wines why do╌we pour? Beauteous
Flow'rs why do we ſpread, up╌on the Mo╌nu╌ments of the Dead? Nothing they but
Duſt can ſhow, or Bones that ha╌ſten to be ſo.

CHORUS

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=206) CHORƲS.
[...] Crown me with Ro╌ſes whilſt I live, now, now your Wine and Ointments
give: Crown me with Ro╌ſes whilſt I live, now, now your Wine and Ointments
give: Af╌ter Death I nothing crave, I nothing crave, let me a╌live my Pleaſure
have; Af╌ter Death I nothing, nothing crave, let me a╌live my Pleaſure have;
all, all are Sto╌icks, all, all are Sto╌icks in the Grave; all, all are all,
all are Stoicks, all all are Stoicks in the Grave; all, all are Sto╌icks in
the Grave. Stoicks in the Grave.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=206)

#### 1.57. A SONG for Two Voices.

[...] JUlia, Julia your un╌juſt diſ╌dain, moves, mo╌ves me, to com╌plain;
Julia, Julia, your unjuſt diſdain, moves, mo╌ves me to com╌plain; you, you,
you that Vow'd to be ſo true; a╌las, a╌las, a╌las, a╌las, a╌you, you, you that
Vow'd to be ſo true; a╌las, a╌las, a╌las, a╌las is falſe and Mar╌ri'd too;
cou'd I dri╌ve thoſe thoughts a╌las, is falſe and Marri'd too; cou'd I dri╌ve
thoſe thoughts a╌way; that rack me, rack me ev'╌ry day, by your, by your
un╌juſt In╌way; that rack me, rack me ev'╌ry day, by your, by your un╌juſt
In╌con╌ſtan╌cy; [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=207) [...] Oh! oh!
how happy, oh! oh! how happy, how ╌con╌ſtan╌cy; Oh! oh! oh! how happy, how
happy, oh! happy, oh! oh! how happy, how happy, ſhou'd I be; oh! oh! oh! how
happy, how happy, how hap╌py ſhou'd I be; oh! oh! oh! how happy, happy, happy,
happy, happy, ſhou'd I be; Oh! oh! oh! how oh! how happy, happy, happy, happy,
happy, ſhou'd I be; Oh! oh! oh! how happy, happy, happy, happy, happy ſhou'd I
be. happy, happy, happy, happy, happy ſhou'd I be.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=207)

#### 1.58. A ſingle SONG.

[...] OH! fair Cedaria, Oh!╌fair Cedaria hide thoſe Eyes, that Hearts Enough
have won; for who╌ſo╌ever ſees them die╌s; oh! ╌fair Ce╌da╌ria hide thoſe
Eyes, for who╌ſo╌ever ſees them die╌s, hide thoſe Eyes, for who╌ſo╌ever,
who╌ſo╌ever ſees them die╌s; and cannot, and cannot, cannot ruine ſhun: Such
Beauty and Cha╌rms are ſeen u╌ni╌ted in your face; [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=208) [...] Such
Beauty and Cha╌rms are ſeen u╌ni╌ted in your face, the prou╌deſt, the
prou╌deſt can't but own you, can't but own you Queen of Beauty; of Beauty, Wit
and Grace; Such Beauty and Cha╌rms are ſeen u╌ni╌ted in your face; the
Proudeſt, the Prou╌deſt can't but own you, the Prou╌deſt can't but own you,
can't but own you Queen of Beau╌ty, Wit, and Grace; The Proudeſt can't but own
you, Quee╌n [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=208) [...] of
Beau╌ty Wit, and Grace; then pi╌ty me, then pi╌ty me, who am your Slave; then
pi╌ty me, then pi╌ty pi╌ty me who am your Slave; and grant me, grant me a
Re╌prive, un╌leſs I may your Favour have, I can't, I can't one moment live; I
can't, I can't un╌leſs I may your Favour have, I can't, I can't one Mo╌ment
Live.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=209)

#### 1.59. A ſingle SONG.

[...] I Lov'd fair Ce╌lia, I Lov'd fair Ce╌lia, many, many, many years before
ſhe ſhew╌'d her Art,╌her Art; Her Beauty firſt, her Humor next, by tur╌ns; her
Beauty firſt, her Humor next, by tur╌ns engag'd my Heart. And when to theſe,
when to theſe ſhe Friendſhip joyn'd, her Char╌ms, her Char╌ms were ſo intire,
that with╌out [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=209) [...] being
Dull, and Blind, I cou'd none elſe, none, none, none, none, I cou'd none elſe,
no, none, no, none, no, none, none elſe ad╌mire.

#### 1.60. A SONG on the late Queen.

[...] MAy her Bleſt ex╌am╌ple, chaſe Vice in troops out of the Land; Fly╌ing
from her aw╌full Face, like trembling Ghoſts when day's at hand: May her He╌ro
bring us Peace, won with Ho╌nour in the Field; And our home╌bred Factions
ceaſe, He ſtill our Sword, and She our Shield:

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=210)

#### 1.61. A ſingle SONG.

[...] LET us Dance, let us Sing, let us ſi╌ng, whilſt our Life's in the
Spring; and give all, and give all, all, all, all, all to the great God of
Love: Let us Love. Let us Re╌vel, let us re╌vel and play, let us, let us
re╌vel and play, and re╌joy╌ce whilſt we may: Since old Time, ſince old Time
theſe de╌light╌ts will re╌move.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=210)

#### 1.62. A DIALOGUE between Thyrſis, and Iris.

[...] FAir I╌ris and her Swain, were in a ſhady Bow'r, where Thyrſis long in
vain had ſought the hap╌py hour; at length his hand advancing upon her Snowy
Breaſt, he ſaid; O kiſs me lon╌ger, and lon╌ger yet, and lon╌ger if you will
make me bleſt. An ea╌ſy yeilding Maid, by truſting is undone; our Sex is oft
betray'd by grant╌ing Love too ſoon; if you deſire to gain me, your ſuff'rings
to redreſs, pre╌pare to Love me longer, and lon╌ger yet and lon╌ger, before
you [[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=211)
[...] ſhall poſ╌ſeſs:

[Thyrſis.]

The little care you ſhow, of all my ſorrows paſt, makes Death appear too ſlow,
and Life too long to laſt; Fair I╌ris kiſs me kind╌ly, in pi╌ty of my Fate,
and kind╌ly ſtill, and kind╌ly ſtill before it be too late.

[Iris.]

You fondly court your Bliſs, and no advances make 'tis not for Maids to give,
but 'tis for Men to take: So you may kiſs me kind╌ly, and kind╌ly ſtill and
kind╌ly, and I will not re╌bell; but do not kiſs and tell, but do not kiſs and
tell, no ne╌ver kiſs and tell. And may I kiſs you [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=211) [...] Yes you
may kiſs me kindly, and kindly ſtill, and kindly ſtill, and kindly, and
kind╌ly, and kindly ſtill, and kindly, and will you not re╌bell? I will not
rebell. Yes you may kiſs me kindly ſtill, and kindly ſtill, and I will not
re╌bell? And may I kiſs you kindly, and kindly ſtill, and kindly ſtill, and
you will not re╌bell; but do not kiſs and tell, but do not kiſs and tell, no,
no, no, no, no, No, no, no, no, no, no, I'll never kiſs and tell, no, no, I'll
no, no, no, no, no, no, no I'll never, never, never, no, never, never, never,
no, never kiſs and tell. never kiſs and tell, no, no no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'll never, never, never I'll never, never, never kiſs and tell.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=212) CHORƲS.
[...] Thus at the height we Love and live and fear not, fear not to be Thus at
the height we Love and live and fear not, fear not to be poor: We give, and we
give, we give and we give, we give and we poor; We give and we give, we give
and we give, and give, till we can give no more: But what to day, will take
a╌way, to give, till we can give no more: But what to day, will take a╌way to
morrow, to mor╌row will re╌ſtore. morrow, to mor╌row will re╌ſtore.

End with the firſt Strain.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=212)

#### 1.63. A SONG on St. Cecilia's Day 1692.

[...]

Flutes.

Violins.

High Countratenor

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=213) [...]
Hark! hark! each Tree its Hark! hark! each Tree its ſi╌lence breaks; ſi╌lence
breaks; Hark! hark! each Tree its ſi╌lence Hark! each Tree its ſi╌lence [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=213) [...] breaks;
breaks; Hark! hark! each Tree its Hark! hark! each Tree its ſi╌lence ſi╌lence
breaks; Hark! [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=214) [...] breaks,
hark! hark! each Tree its ſi╌lence breaks; the Box and hark! each Tree its
ſi╌lence breaks; the Firr, to tal╌k, to talk, to talk, to Box and Firr, to
tal╌k, to talk, to talk, to tal╌k [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=214) [...] talk
be╌gin; Hark! hark! hark! hark! be╌gin; Hark! hark! hark! hark! hark! hark!
hark! this in the ſpright╌ly Vi╌o╌lin, [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=215) [...] That in
the Flute diſtinctly, di╌ſtinct╌ly ſpeaks, diſtinctly, di╌ſtinct╌ly ſpeaks;
That in the This in the Spright╌ly Vi╌o╌lin; [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=215) [...] Flute
di╌ſtinct╌ly, diſtinct╌ly di╌ſtinct╌ly ſpeaks; This in the ſpright╌ly Vi╌olin,
di╌ſtinct╌ly ſpeaks;

Inſtruments Reſt.

'Twas 'Twas Sympathy, 'twas [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=216) [...] Sympathy
their liſt'ning Brethren drew, 'twas Sym╌pathy, their Sympathy, 'twas
Sympathy, 'twas Sym╌pa╌thy their liſt'╌ning liſt'╌ning Brethren drew; when to
the Thracian Lyre with lea╌fy wings they Brethren drew; fle╌w; when to the
Thracian Lyre, when to the Thracian Lyre with lea╌fy wings they When to the
Thra╌cian Lyre with lea╌fy wings they fle— fle╌w, with leafy wings they fl—
[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=216) [...]
with lea╌fy wings they flew, when to the Thracian Lvre with lea╌fy ╌with leafy
wings they flew, when to the Thracian Lyre, with lea╌fy wings they fle╌w, with
leafy wings they flew, with wings they fle╌w, with lea╌fy wings they flew,
with leafy wings they flew. lea╌fy wings they flew.

Flutes.

Violins.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=217) [...]

#### 1.64. A SONG for Two Voices.

[...] I Celia Eyes me, Celia Eyes me, I approach her, but ſhe ſpy Celia, I ſpy
Celia, I approach her, I approach her, but ſhe fly╌'s me, I perſue, I perſue,
I perſue, I perſue, I per╌ſue; fly╌'s me; I perſue, I perſue, I per╌ſue;
[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=217) [...] I
perſue, I perſue; More coy, more coy, more, more coy I find her; I ſeem I
perſue, I perſue; More coy, more coy, more, more coy I find her; I ſeem
Colder, colder, colder, then, then, then ſhe's kinder, ſhe's kinder; then,
then, then ſhe's Colder, colder, colder, then, then, then ſhe's kinder, ſhe's
kinder; then, then, then ſhe's kinder, ſhe's kinder, then, then, then, then
ſhe's kinder: My words kinder, ſhe's kinder, then, then, then, then, ſhe's
kinder: Her Eyes Charme me, mov╌e her, and I love her, and I love her, I love
her, I ſhe Eſteems me, and I love her, I love her, I [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=218) [...] love
her; In not Bleſſing moſt, moſt ſhe Bleſſes; In not Bleſſing love her; In not
Bleſſing moſt, moſt ſhe Bleſſes, In not Bleſſing moſt, moſt ſhe moſt, moſt ſhe
Bleſſes, and not poſ╌ſeſ╌ſing, and not poſſeſſing, and not— Bleſſes, moſt ſhe
Bleſſes, and not poſſeſſing, and not poſſeſ╌ſing, and not— poſſeſſing, each,
each, each poſſeſſes; each, each poſſeſſes, each, each, each poſ╌╌ſeſſes,
poſſeſing, each, each, each poſſeſſes; each, each, each poſſeſſes, each, each,
each poſ╌ſeſſes, each, each poſſeſſes:

End here.

Now, now ſhe Bluſhes, now, now, now ſhe each, each, each poſſeſſes: [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=218) [...] Bluſhes;
ſhe wou'd leave me, but I ho╌ld her, I I grows bol╌der, but I ho╌ld her, I
hold her, I hold her, ho╌ld her; She grows ho╌ld her, I hold her; She grows
an╌gry, grows an╌gry, grows an╌gry, grows an╌gry, grows an╌gry; an╌gry, grows
an╌gry, grows an╌gry, grows an╌gry, grows an╌gry; I ap╌peaſe her, I appeaſe
her, I appeaſe her; I ap╌peaſe her, I appeaſe her, I appeaſe her; I am red╌er,
[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=219) [...]
[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=219) [...]
[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=220) [...]
[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=220) [...]
[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=221) [...]
Then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then,
then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then,
then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then, then I pleaſe her: then, then,
then, then, then I pleaſe her, then, then, then I pleaſe her: Her Eyes My
words mo╌ve her, and I love her, and I love her, Charme me, ſhe Eſteems me,
and I Love her, I love her, I love her. In &c. I love her, I love her. In not
Bleſſing &c.

End with the part, (Each poſſeſſes &c.)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=221)

#### 1.65. A Drinking SONG, With a Chorus for Three Voices.

[...] 'TIs Wine was made to Rule the Day, 'tis Wine, 'tis Wine, 'tis Wine;
'tis Wine was made to Rule the Day, and not the ſla'ring Sun; 'tis Love that
ſhou'd o're Night bear ſway, and not the ſil╌ly, ſil╌ly Moon; and not the
ſil╌ly, ſil╌ly Moon: Wine is th' amazement of the Old, that Bliſs wou'd fain
re╌trieve, and love the bus'neſs of the bold, that can Both joys re╌ceive:

CHORUS.

Turn over.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=222) CHORUS.
[...] Let my Queen live for e╌ver, for e╌ver, Let my Queen live for e╌ver, for
e╌ver, Let my Queen live for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for e╌ver, for for
e╌ver, for e╌ver, for for e╌ver, for e╌ver, and let's ſtill drink, drink, and
let's ſtill drink, drink French Wine; let my e╌ver, and let's ſtill drink,
drink, and let's ſtill etc. e╌ver, and let's ſtill drink, drink, and let's
ſtill drink, drink French Wine; Rage be Im╌mortal, let my Rage be Im╌mortal,
let my Rage be Im╌mor╌tal, let my Rage be Im╌mortal, let my Rage be Im╌mortal,
let my let my Rage be Immortal, let my Rage be Im╌mortal,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=222) [...] let
my Rage be Im╌mortal, and my Li╌quer di╌vine; let my Ra╌ge be Im╌mortal, and
my Li╌quer di╌vine; let my let my Rage be Im╌mortal, and my Li╌quer di╌vine;
Rage be Im╌mor╌tal, my Rage be Im╌mor╌tal, Rage be Im╌mortal, let my Rage be
Im╌mor╌tal, let my Ra╌ge be Im╌mortal, let my Rage be Im╌mortal and my Li╌quer
di╌vine. and my Li╌quer di╌vine. and my Li╌quer di╌vine. Inſus'd in Wine,
let's ſink to reſt, and Dream of what we Love;
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=223) [...]
Infus'd in Wine, let's ſink to reſt, and dream of what we Love: And ſince ſhe
may not be poſſeſt let's thus our wants improve; and ſince ſhe may not be
poſſeſt, let's thus our wants improve.

Chorus again.

Oh! lull me, Oh! lull me couch'd in ſoft re╌poſe; Oh! lull me, Oh! lull me,
couch'd in ſoft re╌poſe; and ſleep, ſleep ne'er from me take; Ex╌cept the Gods
will in╌ter╌poſe, and let me en╌jo╌y a╌wake.

End with the Chorus.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=223)

#### 1.66. A SONG for Two Voices.

[...] OH! the ſweet delights of Love, oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! the Oh! the ſweet
delights of Love, oh! oh! oh! oh! oh! the ſweet de╌lights of Love, Who, who
wou'd live, who, who wou'd live and ſweet de╌lights of Love, Who wou'd live,
who, who wou'd live, wou'd live and not enjoy e'm? I'de refuſe the Throne of
Jove, ſhou'd power╌or Ma╌jeſty, ſhou'd not enjoy e'm? I'de refuſe the Throne
of Jove, ſhou'd pow╌er pow╌er or Ma╌je╌ſty deſtroy e'm. or Ma╌je╌ſty deſtroy
e'm.

Firſt ſtrain again.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=224) [...]
Give me, give me, give me doubts, or give me, give me fears, give me, give me,
give me jealou╌ſies Give me, give me, give me, doubts, or give me, give me
fears, give me, give me, give me jealou╌ſies and Cares: But let Love, let Love
remove e'm, but let Love remove e'm, I ap╌prove and Cares: But let Love, but
let Love— remove e'm, I approve e'm, e'm, I approve e'm, I approve e'm. I
approve e'm, I— approve e'm.

End with the firſt ſtrain.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=94253&page=224)

[Home](/)

Purcell, Henry, 1659-1695.. Date: 1698  

