## (unknown project)

# A scourge for Poor Robin, or, The exact picture of a bad husband drawn to
the life, by an experienc'd female-hand, to revenge her injured sex, for the
abusive truth of the late character of a scold.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=1)

A SCOURGE FOR Poor Robin; OR, The Exact PICTURE OF A Bad Husband. Drawn to the
Life, by an expe­rienc'd Female-Hand, to Revenge her Injured Sex, for the
Abuſive Truths Of the late CHARACTER OF A SCOLD.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A SCOURGE FOR Poor Robin.
  * 2\. The Character of a Bad Husband.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=2)

## 1\. A SCOURGE FOR Poor Robin.

ON my Conſcience, this Poor Robin is more troubleſome, than a ſilenc'd
Preſ­byter; the Town can never be at Quiet for him, but he will ſtill be
Holding-forth his Pamphlets, and like a Man of Reformation, Hinting his Uſes
of Reproof; ſure he has got as many Lives as a Cat, and like her too, is
perpetual­ly Mewing and Scratching. But could the bold Fool think to ſtir a
Waſps-neſt, and not ſting his Fingers? or meddle with ſo terrible a Creature,
as he has repreſented a Scold, without expecting ſome Billinſ-gate Repartees?
How readily now could I call the Pragmatical Villain, more Ill-names than ever
Puritan beſtow'd on the Pope, or one Waterman upon another? deafen his Ears
with a [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=3)
Henbane Lurry, ſcratch out his Eyes, and be­queath his Guts to the uſe of a
Country-Fidler. But our Revenge ſhall be more Noble; and like prudent States,
we'll carry the War into the Ene­mies Country. We have obſerv'd how pleaſed
the Sots our Husbands were, with his late Raille­ry, how it tickled their
ſpleens at every period! That's right my Joan! quoth one, Exactly the Tricks
of my Old Woman! ſays another. Well, good Gentlemen! and what are your Tricks,
I pray, that occaſion ſuch our Reſentments. That the World may henceforth take
notice of them, and in juſtice al­low Looſers leave to ſpeak, we'll preſent it
with your True Pictures, all but your Horns; and they too, if you continue to
uſe us thus, ſhall not be long Inviſible.

## 2\. The Character of a Bad Husband.

A Bad Husband, is an inconſiderate piece of Sottiſh Extravagance; for though
he con­ſiſts of ſeveral Ill-Ingredients, yet ſtill Good-fel­lowſhip, is the
Cauſa ſine quâ non, and gives him the Ho-go: he is the Wiſe Mans ſcorn, the
Shirks [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=3)
Exchequer, and the Wheadling Hoſteſſes Honeſt Man; the Moth of an Eſtate, the
Shipwrack of a Family, or a Miſchief Three-ſtory high; for he ſcandalizes his
Anceſtors, ruines himſelf, and ſtrangles the hopes of all his Poſterity. He
throws away his Wealth as heartily as young Heirs, or old Philoſophers, and is
ſo eager of a Jail, or a Mum­pers Wallet, that he will not wait Fortunes
leiſure to undo him, but rides Poſt to Beggars-Buſh, and takes more pains to
ſpend Money, than Day-la­bourers to get it; whilſt ſtill his word is, Let's
not pinch whilſt we have it, ſince 'tis time enough to want when we have it
not.

He knows no difference between Prodigality and Liberality, but is ſo fooliſhly
free, that he dries up the Springs of Bounty, by cutting down the Banks, and
letting the Streams run waſte; if he pretend to Gentility, he thinks he can no
way make good that Ttile, but by paying (where­ever he comes) the whole
Reckoning; and every Raſkal that can but cry, My Noble Maſter, is Ma­ſter of
his Purſe; which Sucking Vermine conti­nually flutter about him as thick as
Flies in a Con­fectioners-ſhop. If he go to Market, 'tis but to purchaſe a
Fox, and two days after returns, having only truckt away his Corn for Drink,
and put off his Cattel to make himſelf a greater Beaſt.

His firſt buſineſs after Marriage, is to pay Ale-houſe-ſcores with his wives
Portion; and his next, to pawn her Clothes for ſupplies of freſh Debau­chery.
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=4) If he be a
Citizen, he counts his Shop a Priſon, till at laſt he is ſhopp'd in a Priſon
in­deed. He pretends always extraordinary buſi­neſs abroad, and muſt needs go
to the Exchange, when he has nothing to do there but change Shillings into
Sixpences, and reduce Guineys into Farthings. He ſtill cries, 'tis too ſoon to
go home yet, and will trudge a mile about rather than come near his own door,
for fear he ſhould be obliged to come in before his hour, which is Mid­night
or paſt; for if he go home before, he ſays he can never ſleep well. He is an
Hogſhead ſet on two ſtumps, fit for no uſe but to hold ſtrong Drink; and if he
be not at the Pot, is like a Fiſh out of water, that does nothing but gape: He
thinks Nature gave him a Mouth not ſo much to ſpeak, as to take off his
Liquor; and his onely enquiry is, Where dwells the beſt Sack and Claret? He is
a paſſionate lover of Mornings-draughts, which he generally continues till
Dinner-time; a rigid exacter of Num-Groats, and Collector-general for Foys and
Beverage: He admires the prudence of that Apothegm, Let's drink firſt, and
would rather ſell 20 per Cent. to loſs, than make a dry Bargain. You ſhall
infallibly finde him and his Tribe about the Fag-end of the day at
Rendezvouze, like a Conſtellation fixt in the lower Region of a known Tavern,
where their Noſes appear like Comets that evermore portend exceſſive drought:
They go in upon Parole not [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=4) to exceed Three-
pences; but ſeldome come out under an Half-Crown-Club; and their Noiſe (for
Diſcourſe you cannot call it) is more nonſenſical and impertinent than a She-
Quakers Sermon, or the tattles of an Vp-ſitting. Aſſoon as they are
accommodated with a private Room, an half Pint, (for ſo they modeſtly begin)
ſome clean Pipes, and a Jordan, their firſt Argument is, the goodneſs of the
Wine, which being voted a Flower, produces next a Bottle; and then News is the
ſubject of debate; or for want of that, who was moſt drunk the night before,
or reel'd home with the greateſt gravity and decorum. Though they live like
Publicans, yet they imitate Phariſees in their exactneſs of making clean the
inſide of the Glaſs; and their ſtricteſt Criticiſms are, See it go round, and
Take it off, Sir.

In this ſweet Society our truſty Trojan bears his part till he has not
diſcretion enough left to know at which end to light his Pipe; then
ſtag­gering away, (if he ſcape the Compter) 'tis for­ty to one but he meets
with ſome little Town-baggage, who picks his Pocket, and in requital beſtows
upon him a ſwinging Clap. In the mean time the good Woman at home ſits
lamenting till twelve at night over a piece of mouldy Bread, and a draught of
Rot-gut; and the Children are fain to go to bed without a Supper, becauſe the
vile Milkwoman is grown faithleſs: At laſt, when her pretious Huſband comes
with a breath that [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=5) ſtinks with Canary
and Tobacco, worſe than Hell of Brimſtone; he perhaps picks a cauſeleſs
quarrel, gives her a Remembrance with a Bed-ſtaff, that ſhe is forc'd to wear
the Northumberland Arms a week after; which the good-natur'd Soul muſt
ex­cuſe, by pretending an unlucky fall, or blaming an innocent Door-latch for
the injury▪ But put caſe he go peaceably to Bed, what comfort is to be
expected from ſuch a Swine? Were not a Woman better be Married to a Man-Drake,
or take a Broom-ſtaff for a Bed-fellow? yet this, forſooth, is our wit-leſs
Head, this the Tool we muſt Worſhip and Obey, this the ſage and mighty Animal
that Triumphs over us, as the weaker Veſſels; that notwithſtand­ing all theſe
Extravagancies of his own, reads Lectures to us of Good-houſwifry, and after
he has fool'd away ſeveral Guineys abroad, worſe than if he had made Ducks and
Drakes with them, comes home, and complains of the deſtruction of a Candles
end, for want of a Save-all, and rails at his Wives Improvidence, for not
managing more thriftily the Income of the Kitching-ſtuff­pot.

Since this is our Condition, Gentlemen, and that the beſt Arms Nature affords
us are our Tongues, I ſee no reaſon, why in ſo juſt a cauſe, we ſhould not
make uſe of them. This only we beg, reſtrain theſe Extravagants, or infringe
not our Antient Liberties; either inlarge your Bed­lams, or pull down your
Cucking-ſtools.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55388&page=6)

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1678  

