## (unknown project)

# XXVIII sermons preached at Golden Grove being for the summer half-year,
beginning on Whit-Sunday, and ending on the xxv Sunday after Trinity, together
with A discourse of the divine institution, necessity, sacredness, and
separation of the office ministeriall / by Jer. Taylor. — Sermons. Selections

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=1)

XXVIII SERMONS PREACHED AT GOLDEN GROVE; Being for the Summer half-year,
BEGINNING ON WHIT-SVNDAY, And ending on the xxv. Sunday after TRINITY.

TOGETHER WITH A Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness,
and Separation of the Office Ministeriall.

BY JER. TAYLOR, D. D.

QVI SEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. 1651.

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=2)

a recorder, how prudent an observer, how sedulous a practiser of holy
discourses she was, and that there­fore it was, that what did slide thorow her
ear, she was desirous to place before her eye, that by those windows they
might enter in and dwell in her heart But because by this truth I shall do
advantage to the following discourses, give me leave (my Lord) to fancy, that
this Book is derived upon your Lord­ship almost in the nature of a legacy from
her, whose every thing was dearer to your Lordship, then your own eyes, and
that what she was pleased to beleeve apt to minister to her devotions, and the
religions of her pious and discerning soul, may also be allowed a place in
your closet, and a portion of your retirement, and a lodging in your thoughts,
that they may incou­rage and instruct your practise and promote that
in­terest, which is and ought to be dearer to you then all those blessings and
separations with which God hath remarked your family and person.

My Lord, I confesse the publication of these Sermons can so little serve the
ends of my reputa­tion, that I am therefore pleased the rather to do it,
because I cannot at all be tempted, in so doing, to minister to any thing of
vanity. Sermons may please when they first strike the ear, and yet appear flat
and ignorant when they are offered to the eye, and to an understanding that
can consider at leisure. I remem­ber that a young Gentleman of Athens being to
an­swer for his life, hired an Orator to make his de­fence, and it pleased him
well, at his first reading;
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=2) but when the
young man by often reading it that he might recite it publikely by heart,
began to grow wea­ry and dspleased with it, the Orator bade him consider that
the Judges and the people were to hear it but once, and then it was likely,
they at that first instant might be as well pleased as he. This hath often
repre­sented to my mind the condition and fortune of Ser­mons, and that I now
part with the advantage they had in their delivery, but I have sufficiently
answe­red my self in that, and am at rest perfectly in my thoughts as to that
particular, if I can in any degree serve the interest of souls, and (which is
next to that) obey the piety, and record the memory of that dear Saint, whose
name and whose soul is blessed: for in both these ministeries, I doubt not but
your Lordship will be pleased, and account as if I had done also some service
to your self: your religion makes me sure of the first, and your piety puts
the latter past my fears. However, I suppose in the whole account of this
af­fair, this publication may be esteemed but like preach­ing to a numerous
Auditory, which if I had done, it would have been called either duty, or
charity, and therefore will not now so readily be censured for va­nity, if I
make use of all the wayes I can to minister to the good of souls: But because
my intentions are fair in themselves, and I hope are acceptable to God, and
will be fairly expounded by your Lordship, (whom for so great reason I so much
value) I shall not trou­ble you or the world with an Apologie for this so free
publishing my weaknesses; I can better secure my re­putation
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=3) by telling
men how they ought to entertain Sermons, for if they that read or hear, do
their duty aright, the Preacher shall soon be secured of his fame, and
untouched by censure.

1\. For it were well, if men would not inquire af­ter the learning of the
sermon, or its deliciousnesse to the ear or fancy, but observe its
usefulnesse, not what concerns the preacher, but what concerns them­selves,
not what may make a vain reflexion upon him, but what may substantially serve
their own needs, that the attending to his discourses may not be spent in vain
talk concerning him, or his disparage­ments but may be used as a duty and a
part of religi­on, to minister to edification and instruction. When S. John
reckoned the principles of evil actions, he told but of three, The lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. But there was then also in
the world (and now it is grown into age, and strength, and faction) another
lust, the lust of the ear, and a fift also, the lust of the tongue. Some
people have an insatiable appetite in hearing, and hear onely that they may
hear, and talk and make a party: They enter into their neighbours house to
kin­dle their candle, and espying there, a glaring fire, sit down upon the
hearth and warm themselves all day, and forget their errand, and in the mean
time, their own fires are not lighted, nor their families in­structed, or
provided for, nor any need served, but a lazie pleasure, which is uselesse and
imprudent. Hearing or reading sermons is, or ought to be in or­der
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=3) to practise,
for so God intended it, that faith should come by hearing, and that charity
should come by faith, and by both together we may be saved. For a mans ears
(as Plutarch cals them) are vir­tutum ansae, by them we are to hold and
apprehend vertue, and unlesse we use them as men do vessels of dishonour,
filling them with things fit to be thrown away, with any thing that is not
necessary, we are by them more neerly brought to God, then by all the sen­ses
beside. For although things placed before the eye affect the minde more
readily then the things we usually hear, yet the reason of that is, because we
hear carelesly, and we hear variety; the same species dwels upon the eye, and
represents the same object in union and single representment, but the objects
of the ear are broken into fragments of periods, and words, and syllables, and
must be attended with a carefull understanding; and because every thing
diverts the sound, and every thing cals off the understanding, and the spirit
of a man is truantly, and trifling; there­fore it is that what men hear, does
so little affect them, and so weakly work toward the purposes of vertue, & yet
nothing does so affect the minde of man as those voices to which we cannot
chuse but attend, and thun­der and all loud voices from Heaven rend the most
stony heart, and makes the most obstinate pay to God the homage of trembling,
and fear, and the still voice of God usually takes the tribute of love, and
choice, and obedience. Now since hearing is so ef­fective an instrument of
conveying impresses and ima­ges
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=4) of things,
and exciting purposes, and fixing reso­lutions, (unlesse we hear weakly and
imperfectly) it will be of the greater concernment that we be cu­rious to hear
in order to such purposes, which are per­fective of the soul, and of the
spirit, and not to dwell in fancy and speculation, in pleasures and trifling
ar­rests, which continue the soul in its infancy and child­hood, never letting
it go forth into the wisdom and vertues of a man. I have read concerning
Diony­sius of Sicily, that being delighted extremely with a Ministrel that
sung well, and struck his Harp dexterously, he promised to give him a great
reward, and that raised the fancy of the Man, and made him play better. But
when the musick was done and the man waited for his great hope, the King
dismissed him empty, telling him, that he should carry away as much of the
promised reward, as himself did of the Musick, and that he had payed him
sufficiently with the pleasure of the promise for the pleasure of his song:
both their ears had been equally delighted and the profit just none at all: So
it is in many mens hear­ing Sermons, they admire the Preacher, and he pleases
their ears, and neither of them both bear a­long with them any good, and the
hearer hath as little good by the sermon, as the Preacher by the ayr of the
peoples breath, when they make a noise, and ad­mire, and understand not. And
that also is a se­cond caution I desire all men would take.

2\. That they may never trouble the affairs of prea­ching and hearing
respectively, with admiring the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=4) person of any
man. To admire a preacher is such a reward of his pains or worth, as if you
should crown a Conqueror with a garland of roses, or a Bride with Laurell; it
is an undecency, it is no part of the re­ward which could be intended for him.
For though it be a good natur'd folly, yet it hath in it much danger, for by
that means, the Preacher may lead his hear­ers captive, and make them servants
of a faction, or of a lust; it makes them so much the lesse to be servants of
Christ, by how much they call any man Master upon earth; it weakens the heart
and hands of others, it places themselves in a rank much below their proper
station, changing from hearing the word of God, to admiration of the person
and faces of men, and it being a fault that falls upon the more easie natures
and softer understandings, does more easily abuse a man; and though such a
person may have the good fortune to admire a good man and a wise, yet it is an
ill disposition, and makes him liable to every mans abuse: Stupidum ho­minem
quâvis oratione percelli, said Heraclitus. An undiscerning person is apt to be
cozened by every oration: And besides this, That Preacher whom some do admire,
others will most certainly en­vy, and that also is to be provided against with
dili­gence, and you must not admire too forwardly, for your own sake, lest you
fall into the hands of a worse preacher, and for his sake, whom when you
admire you also love, for others will be apt to envy him.

3\. But that must by all men be avoided; for envy
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=5) is the worst
counsellour in the world, and the worst hearer of a wise discourse. I pity
those men who live upon flattery and wonder, and while they sit at the foot of
the Doctors chair, stare in his face, and cry  [...], rarely spoken, admirably
done, they are like callow and unfeathered birds, gaping perpetually to be fed
from anothers mouth, and they never come to the knowledge of the truth, such a
knowledge as is effective, and expressed in a pru­dent and holy life. But
those men that envy the preacher; besides that they are great enemies of the
Holy Ghost, and are spitefully evil because God is good to him, they are also
enemies to themselves. He that envies the honours, or the riches of another,
envies for his own sake, and he would fain be rich with that wealth which
sweats in his neighbours cof­fers, but he that envies him that makes good
sermons, envies himself, and is angry because himself may re­ceive the
benefit, and be improved, or delighted or instructed by another. He that is
apt fondly to ad­mire any mans person must cure himself by conside­ring, that
the Preacher is Gods minister and servant, that he speaks Gods word and does
it by the Divine assistance, that he hath nothing of his own but sin and
imperfection, that he does but his duty and that also hardly enough, that he
is highly answerable for his talent, and stands▪ deeply charged with the cure
of souls, and therefore that he is to be highly esteemed for the work sake,
not for the person; his industry and his charity is to be beloved, his ability
is to be ac­counted
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=5) upon another
stock, and for it, the preacher and the hearer are both to give God thanks,
but no­thing is due to the man for that, save onely, that it is the rather to
be imployed, because by it we may bet­ter be instructed, but if any other
reflexion be made upon his person, it is next to the sin and danger of Herod
and the people, when the  [...]sine Oration was made  [...], with huge fancy,
the people were pleased, and Herod was admired, and God was an­gry, and an
Angel was sent to strike him with death and with dishonour. But the envy
against a preacher is to be cured by a contrary discourse, and we must
re­member that he is in the place of God, and hath re­ceived the gift of God,
and the aids of the holy Ghost, that by his abilities God is glorified, and we
are in­structed, and the interests of vertue, and holy religi­on are promoted,
that by this means God who de­serves that all souls should serve him for ever,
is like­ly to have a fairer harvest of glory and service, and therefore that
envie is against him: that if we envie because we are not the instrument of
this good to o­thers, we must consider tha we desire the praise to our selves
not to God. Admiration of a man sup­poses him to be inferiour to the person so
admired, but then he is pleased so to be, but envie supposes him as low, and
he is displeased at it, and the envious man is not onely lesse then the other
mans vertue, but also contrary: the former is a vanity, but this is a vice,
that wants wisdom, but this wants wisdom and charity too, that supposes an
absence of some good,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=6) but this is a
direct affliction and calamity.

4\. And after all this, if the preacher be not despi­sed, he may proceed
cheerfully in doing his duty, and the hearer may have some advantages by every
Ser­mon. I remember that Homer sayes the woers of Pe­nelope laught at Vlisses,
because at his return he cal­led for a loaf, and did not, to shew his
gallantry, call for swords and spears; Vlysses was so wise as to call for that
he needed, and had it, and it did him more good then a whole armory would in
his case: so is the plai­nest part of an easie, and honest sermon, it is the
sin­cere milk of the word, and nourishes a mans soul, though represented in
its own naturall simplicity, and there is hardly any Orator, but you may finde
occasi­on to praise something of him. When Plato misliked the order and
disposition of the Oration of Lysias, yet he praised the good words, and the
elocution of the man. Euripides was commended for his fulness, Par­menides for
his composition. Phocilides for his easi­nesse, Archilochus for his argument,
Sophocles for the unequalnesse of his stile: So may men praise their Preacher,
he speaks pertinently, or he contrives wit­tily, or he speaks comely, or the
man is pious, or chari­table, or he hath a good text, or he speaks plainly, or
he is not tedious or if he be he is at least industrious, or he is the
messenger of God and that will not fail us, and let us love him for that; and
we know those that love can easily commend any thing, because they like every
thing: and they say, fair men are like angels, and the black are manly, and
the pale look like honey and the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=6) stars, and
the cro [...] nosed are like the sons of Kings, and if they be flat they are
gentle and easie, and if they be deformed they are humble, and not to be
despi­sed because they have upon them the impresses of divi­nity, and they are
the sons of God. He that despises his Preacher, is a hearer of arts and
learning, not of the word of God, and though when the word of God is set off
with advantages and entertainments of the better faculties of our humanity, it
is more usefull and of more effect, yet when the word of God is spoken tru­ly,
though but read in plain language, it will become the disciple of Jesus to
love that man whom God sends, and the publik order, and the laws have
imployed, ra­ther then to despise the weaknesse of him who deli­vers a mighty
word.

Thus it is fit that men should be affected and imploy­ed when they hear and
read sermons comming hither not as into a theatre, where men observe the
gestures and noises of the people, the brow and eyes of the most busie
censurers, and make parties, and go aside with them that dislike every thing,
or else admire not the things, but the persons: But as to a sacrifice, and as
unto a school, where vertue is taught and exercised, and none come but such as
put themselves under disci­pline, and intend to grow wiser, and more vertuous,
to appease their passion, from violent to become smooth and even, to have
their faith established, and their hope confirmed & their charity enlarged.
They that are otherwise affected do not do their duty but if they be so minded
as they ought, I and all men of my
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=7) imployment
shall be secured against the tongues and faces of men who are ingeniosi in
alieno libro, wit­tie to abuse and undervalue another mans book: And yet
besides these spirituall arts already reckoned, I have one security more, for
(unlesse I deceive my self) I intend the glory of God sincerely, and the
ser­vice of Jesus in this publication, and therefore being I do not seek my
self, or my own reputation, I shall not be troubled if they be lost in the
voyces of bu­sie people, so that I be accepted of God, and found of him in the
day of the Lords visitation.

My Lord, It was your charity and noblenesse that gave me opportunity to do
this service (little or great) unto reli­gion, and whoever shall find any
advantage to their soul, by reading the following discourse, if they know how
to blesse God, and to blesse all them that are Gods instruments in doing them
benefit, will (I hope) help to procure blessings to your Person and Family,
and say a holy prayer, and name your Lordship in their Letanies, and remember,
that at your own charges you have digged a well, and placed cisterns in the
high wayes, that they may drink and be refreshed, and their souls may blesse
you. My Lord, I hope this, even because I very much desire it, and because you
exceedingly deserve it, and above all, because God is good and gracious, and
loves to reward such a charity, and such a religion as is yours, by which you
have imployed me in the service of God, and in ministe­ries to your Family. My
Lord, I am most heartily, and for very many Dear obligations

Your Lordships most obliged, most humble, and most affectionate servant
TAYLOR.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=7)

## Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Num­ber, and Texts.

  * SErmon 1. 2. Of the Spirit of Grace. Folio 1\. 12. Rom. 8. ver. 9, 10.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. * And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the
Spirit is life, because of righteousnesse.

  * Sermon 3. 4. The descending and entailed curse cut off. fol. 27\. 40. Exodus 20. part of the 5. verse.

I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fa­thers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

6\. And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandements.

  * Sermon 5. 6. The invalidity of a late, or death-bed repentance. fol 52\. 66. Jerem. 13. 16.

Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darknesse, and before your
feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light, or, (lest
while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death, and make
it grosse darknesse.

  * Sermon 7. 8. The deceitfulnesse of the heart. fol. 80\. 92. Jerem. 17. 9.

The heart is deceitfull above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know
it?

  * Sermon 9. 10. 11. The faith and patience of the Saints: Or the righteous cause oppressed. fol. 104\. 119. 133. 1 Pet. 4. 17.

For the time is come that judgement must begin at the house of God: and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of
God?

18\. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungod­ly and the
sinner appear?

  * Sermon 12. 13. The mercy of the Divine judgements; or Gods method in curing sinners. fol. 146\. 159. Romans 2. 4.

Despisest thou the riches of his goodnesse, and forbearance, and long-
suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to re­pentance?

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=8)Sermon 14. 15. Of groweth in grace, with its proper instruments and signes. fol. 172\. 183 2 Pet. 3. 18.

But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory both now and for ever. Amen.

  * Sermon 16. 17. Of groweth in sin, or the severall states and de­grees of sinners, with the manner how they are to be treated. fol. 197\. 210. Jude Epist. ver. 22, 23.

And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire.

  * Sermon 18. 19. The foolish exchange. fol. 224\. 237. Matth. 16. ver. 26.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

  * Sermon 20 21. 22. The Serpent and the Dove, or a discourse of Christian Prudence. fol. 251\. 263. 274. Matth. 10. latter part of ver. 16.

Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmlesse as doves.

  * Sermon 23. 24. Of Christian simplicity. 289. 301. Matth. 10. latter part of ver. 16.

And harmlesse as doves.

  * Sermon 25. 26. 27. The miracles of the Divine Mercy. fol. 313\. 327. 340. Psal. 86. 5.

For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to all
them that call upon thee.

  * A Funerall Sermon, preached at the Obsequies of the Right Ho­nourable the Countesse of Carbery. fol. 357\. 2 Sam. 14. 14.

For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground which can­not be
gathered up again: neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise
means that his banished be not expelled from him.

  * A Discourse of the Divine Institution, necessity, sacrednesse, and separation of the Office Ministeriall.

## Table of contents

  * Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Number, and Texts.
  * 1\.  Sermon. I. VVHITSVNDAY OF THE SPIRIT OF GRACE.
  * 2\. Part II.
  * 3\.  Sermon. III. THE DESCENDING AND ENTAILED CVRSE Cut off.
  * 4\. The Intail of Curses cut off. Part II.
  * 5\. Sermon. V. THE Invalidity of a late, or deathbed Repentance.
  * 6\. The Invalidity of a death-bed Repentance. Part II.
  * 7\. Sermon. VII. THE DECEITFVLNESSE Of the HEART.
  * 8\. The deceitfulnesse of the Heart. Part II.
  * 9\. Sermon. IX. THE FAITH and PATIENCE OF THE SAINTS: OR The righteous cause oppressed.
  * 10\.  Sermon. X. The Faith and Patience of the SAINTS: OR The righteous cause oppressed. Part II.
  * 11\.  Sermon. XI. The Faith and Patience of the SAINTS: OR The righteous cause oppressed. Part III.
  * 12\. Sermon. XII. THE MERCY OF THE DIVINE IVDGMENTS; OR Gods Method in curing Sinners.
  * 13\.  Sermon. XIII. The mercies of the Divine Judgements. Part II.
  * 14\. Sermon. XIV. Of Growth in Grace.
  * 15\.  Sermon. XV. Of Growth in Grace. Part II.
  * 16\.  Sermon. XVI. Of Growth in Sinne, OR The severall states and degrees of Sinners, WITH The manner how they are to be treated.
  * 17\. Sermon. XVII. The severall states and degrees of Sinners, WITH The manner how they are to be treated. Part II.
  * 18\. Sermon. XVIII. THE FOOLISH EXCHANGE.
  * 19\.  Sermon. XIX. The foolish exchange. Part II.
  * 20\.  Sermon. XX. OF CHRISTIAN PRVDENCE.
  * 21\.  Sermon. XXI. Of Christian Prudence. Part II.
  * 22\. Sermon. XXII. Of Christian Prudence. Part III.
  * 23\.  Sermon. XXIII. OF CHRISTIAN SIMPLICITY.
  * 24\.  Sermon. XXIV. Of Christian Simplicity. Part II.
  * 25\.  Sermon. XXV. THE MIRACLES OF THE DIVINE MERCY.
  * 26\.  Sermon. XXVI. The Miracles of the Divine Mercy. Part II.
  * 27\. Sermon. XXVII. The Miracles of the Divine Mercy. Part III.
  * 28\.  Sermon. XXVIII. A FVNERAL SERMON, Preached at the Obsequies of the Right Honorable and most vertuous Lady, The Lady FRANCES Countesse of CARBERY Who deceased October the 9th. 1650. at her House Golden-Grove in CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.
    * 28.1. To the right Honorable, and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl of Carbery, Baron of Emlim and Molinger, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=8)

## 1\. A Sermon. I.SERM. I. B VVHITSVNDAY OF THE SPIRIT OF GRACE.

C 8\. Romans. v. 9. 10.‘But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so
be that the Spirit of God, dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. * And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin, but the Spirit is life, because of righteousnesse.’

D THe day in which the Church commemorates the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles was the first beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This was
the first day that the Religion was pro­fessed: now the Apostles first open
[...]d their com­mission, and read it to all the people. [The Lord gave his
Spirit] or [the Lord gave his word] and great was the company of the
Preachers. For so I make bold to ren­der that prophesie of David. Christ was
the word of God, verbum E aeternum but the Spirit was the word of God, verbum
Patefactum: Christ was the word manifested in the flesh; the Spirit was the
word manifested to flesh, and set in dominion over, and in hostility a­gainst
the flesh. The Gospel and the Spirit are the same thing; not in substance; but
the manifestation of the Spirit is the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and because he
was this day manifested, the Gospel was this day first preached, and it became
a law to us, calledRom. 8. 2. the [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=9) law of the Spirit
of life, that is, a law taught us by the Spirit, lead­ing A 1 us to life
eternal. But the Gospel is called the Spirit, 1. Because it contains in it
such glorious mysteries which were revealed by the immediate inspirations of
the Spirit, not onely in the matter it self, but also in the manner and powers
to apprehend them. For what power of humane understanding could have found
out, the incarnation of a God; that two natures [a finite, and an in­finite]
could have been concentred into one hypostasis (or person): that a virgin
should be a Mother, that dead men should live again, that the  [...], the
ashes of dissolved bones should become bright as the Sun, blessed as Angels,
swift in motion as thought,B clear as the purest Noone: that God should so
love us, as to be willing to be reconcil'd to us, and yet that himself must
dye that he might pardon us: that Gods most Holy Son should give us his body
to eat, and his bloud to crown our chalices, and his Spirit to sanctifie our
souls, to turn our bodies into temperance, our souls into mindes, our mindes
into Spirit, our Spirit into glory: that he who can give us all things, who is
Lord of Men and Angels, and King of all the Creatures should pray to God for
us without intermission: that he who reigns over all the world, should at the
day of judgement give up the Kingdom to God the Fa­ther,C and yet after this
resignation, himself and we with him, should for ever reign the more
gloriously: that we should be justified by Faith in Christ; and that charity
should be a part of faith; and that both should work as acts of duty, and as
acts of relation: that God should Crown the imperfect endeavours of his Saints
with glory, and that a humane act should be rewarded with an eternal
inheri­tance: that the wicked for the transient pleasure of a few minutes
should be tormented with an absolute eternity of pains: that the waters of
baptisme when they are hallowed by the Spirit shall purge the soul from sin:
and that the Spirit of a man shall be nou­rished D with the consecrated and
mysterious elements: and that any such nourishment should bring a man up to
heaven: and after all this, that all Christian People, all that will be saved
must be par­takers of the Divine nature; of the Nature, the infinite nature of
God, and, must dwell in Christ and Christ must dwell in them, and they must be
in the Spirit, and the Spirit must be for ever in them; these are articles of
so mysterious a Philosophy, that we could have inferred them from no premises,
discours'd them upon the stock of no naturall, or scientificall principles;
nothing but God, and Gods spirit could have taught them to us: and therefore
the Gospel is E Spiritus patefactus, 1 Cor. 12. 7. the manifestation of the
Spirit ad aedificatio­nem (as the Apostle calls it) for edification and
building us up to be a Holy Temple to the Lord.

2 2\. But when we had been taught all these mysterious arti­cles, we could not
by any humane power have understood them, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=9) A unlesse the
Spirit of God had given us a new light, and created in us a new capacity, and
made us to be a new creature, of another definition. Animalis homo, [...],
that is, as S. Jude expounds the word  [...], the animal, or the naturall man,
the man that hath not the Spirit cannot discern the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.
14. for they are spiritually discerned, that is, not to be understood but by
the light proceeding from the Sun of righteousnesse, and by that eye whose
bird is the Holy Dove, whose Candle is the Gospel;

B Scio incapacem te sacramenti, Impie

Non posse coecis mentibus mysterium

Prudent.

Haurire nostrum: nil diurnum nox capit.

He that shall discourse Euclids elements to a swine, or preach (as Venerable
Bede's story reports of him) to a rock, or talk Metaphysicks to a Bore, will
as much prevail upon his assembly as S. Peter, and S. Paul could do upon
uncircumcised hearts and ears, upon the indisposed Greeks, and prejudicate
Jews. An Ox will relish the tender flesh of Kids with as much gust and C
appetite, as an unspirituall, and unsanctified man, will do the discourses of
Angels, or of an Apostle, if he should come to preach the secrets of the
Gospel. And we finde it true by a sad experience. How many times doth God
speak to us by his ser­vants the Prophets, by his Son, by his Apostles, by
sermons, by spirituall books, by thousands of homilies, and arts of coun­sell
and insinuation; and we sit as unconcerned as the pillars of a Church, and
hear the sermons as the Athenians did a story, or as we read a gazet: and if
ever it come to passe that we tremble as Felix did, when we hear a sad story
of death, of righteousnesse, D and judgement to come, then we put it off to
another time, or we forget it, and think we had nothing to do but to give the
good man a hearing, and (as Anacharsis said of the Greeks, they used money for
nothing but to cast account withall; so) our hearers make use of sermons and
discourses Evangelical, but to fill up void spaces of our time; to help to
tell an hour with, or with­out tediousnesse: The reason of this is a sad
condemnation to such persons; they have not yet entertained the Spirit of God,
they are in darknesse: they were washed in water, but never baptized with the
Spirit; for these things are spiritually discerned. E They would think the
Preacher rude, if he should say they are not Christians, they are not within
the Covenant of the Gospel: but it is certain that the spirit of Manifestation
is not yet upon them; and that is the first effect of the Spirit, whereby we
can be cal­led sons of God, or relatives of Christ. If we do not apprehend,
and greedily suck in the precepts of this holy Discipline as aptly [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=10) as Merchants do
discourse of gain, or Farmers of fair har­vests,A we have nothing but the Name
of Christians; but we are no more such really, then Mandrakes are men, or
spunges are li­ving creatures.

3 3\. The Gospel is called Spirit, because it consists of Spiri­tual Promises,
and Spiritual precepts, and makes all men that em­brace it, truly to be
Spiritual men: and therefore S. Paul addes an Epithete beyond this,2 Cor. 3.
6. calling it a quickening Spirit, that is, it puts life into our Spirits,
which the law could not. The law bound us to punishment, but did not help us
to obedience, because it gave not the promise of Eternal life to its
Disciples. The Spirit, that is, the B Gospel onely does this: and this alone
is it which comforts affli­cted mindes, which puts activenesse into wearyed
Spirits, which inflames our cold desires, and does  [...] blows up sparks into
live coles, and coles up to flames, and flames to perpetual burn­ings: and it
is impossible that any man who believes, and considers the great, the
infinite, the unspeakable, the unimagi­nable, the never ceasing joyes, that
are prepared for all the sons and daughters of the Gospel should not desire
them; and un­lesse he be a fool, he cannot but use means to obtain them,
ef­fective, hearty pursuances. For it is not directly in the nature C of a man
to neglect so great a good; there must be something in his manners, some
obliquity in his will, or madnesse in his in­tellectuals, or incapacity in his
naturals that must make him sleep such a reward away, or change it for the
pleasure of a drunken feaver, or the vanity of a Mistresse, or the rage of a
passion, or the unreasonablenesse of any sin. However; this pro­mise is the
life of all our actions, and the Spirit that first taught it is the life of
our soules.

4 4\. But beyond this, is the reason which is the consummation of all the
faithful. The Gospel is called the Spirit, because by,D and in the Gospel, God
hath given to us not onely the Spirit of manifestation, that is, of
instruction and of Catechisme, of faith and confident assent; but the Spirit
of Confirmation or obsignation to all them that believe and obey the Gospel of
Christ; that is, the power of God is come upon our hearts, by which in an
admirable manner we are made sure of a glorious inheritance; made sure (I say)
in the nature of the thing; and our own persuasions also are confirm­ed with
an excellent, a comfortable, a discerning and a reasonable hope: in the
strength of which, and by whose ayde, as we do not doubt of the performance of
the promise: so we vigorously pur­sue E all the parts of the condition, and
are inabled to work all the work of God, so as not to be affrighted with fear,
or seduced by va­nity, or oppressed by lust, or drawn off by evil example, or
abused by riches, or imprison'd by ambition and secular designes: This the
Spirit of God does work in all his Servants; and is called [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=10) A the spirit of
obsignation, or the confirming spirit, because it confirms our hope, and
assures our title to life eternall; and by means of it, and other its
collateral assistances, it also confirms us in our duty, that we may not onely
professe in word, but live lives according to the Gospel. And this is the
sense of [the Spirit] mention [...]d in the Text: ye are not in the flesh, but
in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you: That is, if ye be
made partakers of the Gospel, or of the spirit of manifestation, if ye be
truly intitled to God, and have received the promise of the Father, then are
ye not carnal men; ye are spirituall, ye are in the Spirit: if ye have B the
Spirit in one sense to any purpose, ye have it also in another: if the Spirit
be in you, you are in it: if it hath given you hope, it hath also inabled and
ascertain [...]d your duty. For the Spirit of mani­festation will but upbraid
you in the shame and horrours of a sad eternity, if you have not the Spirit of
obsignation: if the Holy Ghost be not come upon you to great purposes of
holinesse, all other pretences are vain, ye are still in the flesh, which
shall never in­herit the kingdom of God.

In the Spirit] that is, in the power of the spirit; so the Greeks C call him
[...] who is possessed by a spirit, whom God hath filled with a coelestial
immission; he is said to be in God, when God is in him: and it is a similitude
taken from persons encompassed with guards; they are in custodiâ, that is, in
their power, under their com­mand, moved at their dispose, they rest in their
time, and receive laws from their authority, and admit visiters whom they
appoint, and must be employed as they shall suffer; so are men who are in the
Spirit, that is, they beleeve as he teaches, they work as he in­ables, they
choose what he calls good, they are friends of his friends, and they hate with
his hatred; with this onely difference, D that persons in custody, are forced
to do what their keepers please, and nothing is free but their wils; but they
that are under the com­mand of the Spirit, do all things which the Spirit
commands, but they do them cheerfully; and their will is now the prisoner, but
it is in liberâ custodiâ, the will is where it ought to be, and where it
de­sires to be, and it cannot easily choose any thing else, because it is
extreamly in love with this: as the Saints and Angels in their state of
Beatific vision, cannot choose but love God: and yet the liberty of their
choice is not lessen [...]d, because the object fils all the capaci­ties of
the will, and the understanding. Indifferency to an object is E the lowest
degree of liberty, and supposes unworthinesse, or defect in the object, or the
apprehension; but the will is then the freest and most perfect in its
operation, when it intirely pursues a good with so certain determination, and
clear election that the contrary evil cannot come into dispute or pretence:
Such in our proporti­ons is the liberty of the sons of God; it is an holy and
amiable cap­tivity to the Spirit; the will of man is in love with those
chains, [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=11)
which draws to God, and loves the fetters that confine us to the A pleasures
and religion of the kingdom. And as no man will com­plain that his temples are
restraind, and his head is prisoner when it is encircled with a crown: So when
the Son of God had made us free, and hath onely subjected us to the service
and dominion of the Spirit, we are free as Princes within the circles of their
Diadem, and our chains are bracelets, and the law is a law of liberty, and his
service is perfect freedom; and the more we are subjects, the more we shall
reign as Kings; and the faster we run, the easier is our burden, and Christs
yoke is like feathers to a bird, not loads, but helps to motion, without them
the body fals: and we do not pity B birds when in summer we wish them
unfeathered and callow, or bald as egges, that they might be cooler and
lighter: such is the load and captivity of the soul when we do the work of God
and are his servants, and under the Government of the spirit: They that strive
to be quit of this subjection, love the liberty of out-laws, and the
licentiousness of anarchy, and the freedom of sad widows and distressed
Orphans: For so Rebels and fools and children long to be rid of their Princes,
and their Guardians, and their Tu­tors, that they may be accursed without law,
and be undone with­out control and be ignorant and miserable without a teacher
and C without discipline. He that is in the Spirit is under Tutours and
Governours, untill the time appointed of the Father, just as all great Heirs
are; onely, the first seizure the Spirit makes, is upon the will. He that
loves the yoke of Christ, and the discipline of the Gospel, he is in the
Spirit, that is, in the spirits power.

Upon this foundation, the Apostle hath built these two propo­sitions. 1.
Whosoever hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, he does not belong
to Christ at all: he is not par­taker of his Spirit, and therefore shall never
be partaker of his D glory.

2\. Whosoever is in Christ, is dead to sin, and lives to the Spirit of Christ,
that is, lives a Spirituall, a holy and a san­ctifyed life. These are to be
considered distinctly.

1\. All that belong to Christ have the Spirit of Christ, Immedi­ately before
the ascension, our blessed Saviour bid his Disciples tarry in Jerusalem till
they should receive the promise of the Father, Whosoever stay at Jerusalem,
and are in the actuall Communion of the Church of God shall certainly receive
this promise. For it is made to you and to your children (saith S. Peter) and
to as many E as the Lord our God shall call, All shall receive the Spirit of
Christ, the promise of the Father, because this was the great instrument of
distinction between the Law and the Gospel, In the Law God gave his Spirit, 1.
to some; to them 2. extraregularly, 3. without solennity, 4. in small
proportions, like the dew upon Gideons [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=11) A fleece; a
little portion was wet sometime with the dew of hea­ven, when all the earth
besides was dry: And the Jewes calld it filia [...] voois, the daughter of a
voice, still, and small, and seldom, and that by secret whispers, and
sometimes inarticulate by way of enthusiasme, rather then of instruction, and
God spake by the Pro­phets transmitting the sound, as thorough an Organ pipe,
things which themselves oftentimes understood not. But in the Gospel, the
spirit is given without measure; first powred forth upon our head Christ
Jesus; then descending upon the beard of Aaron, the Fathers of the Church, and
thence falling like the tears of the B balsam of Judea upon the foot of the
plant, upon the lowest of the people. And this is given regularly to all that
ask it, to all that can receive it, and by a solemn ceremony and conveyed by a
Sa­crament: and is now, not the Daughter of a voice, but the Mo­ther of many
voices, of divided tongues, and united hearts, of the tongues of Prophets, and
the duty of Saints, of the Sermons of Apostles, and the wisdom of Governours;
It is the Parent of bold­ness, and fortitude to Martyrs, the fountain of
learning to Doctors, an Ocean of all things excellent to all who are within
the ship, and bounds of the Catholike Church: so that Old men and young C men,
maidens and boyes, the scribe and the unlearned, the Judge and the Advocate,
the Priest and the people are full of the Spirit, if they belong to God:
Moses's wish is fulfilled, and all the Lords people are Prophets in some sense
or other.

In the wisdom of the Ancient it was observed, that there are four great cords
which tye the heart of Man to inconvenience and a prison, making it a servant
of vanity, and an heir of corruption 1. Pleasure and 2. Pain. 3. Fear, and 4.
Desire.

[...]

D [...]

[...].

These are they that exercise all the wisdom and resolutions of man, and all
the powers that God hath given him.

[...]

[...]. said Agathon.

These are those evil Spirits that possess the heart of man & mingle E with al
his actions; so that either men are tempted to 1. lust by pleasure, or 2. to
baser arts by covetousness, or 3. to impatience by sorrow, or 4. to
dishonourable actions by fear: and this is the state of man by nature; and
under the law; and for ever till the Spirit of God came, and by four special
operations cur [...]d these four inconveniences and re­strained, or sweetned
these unwholesome waters.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=12) 1\. God
gave us his Spirit that we might be insensible of worldly A pleasures, having
our souls wholly fil [...]d with spiritual and heavenly relishes. For when
Gods Spirit hath entred into us and possessed us as his Temple, or as his
dwelling, instantly we begin to taste Man­na, and to loath the diet of Egypt;
we begin to consider concerning heaven, and to prefer eternity before moments,
and to love the pleasures of the soul, above the sottish and beastly pleasures
of the body. Then we can consider that the pleasures of a drunken meet­ing
cannot make recompence for the pains of a surfet, and that nights
intemperance; much lesse for the torments of eternity: Then we are quick to
discern that the itch and scab of lustful appetites is B not worth the charges
of a Surgeon, much lesse can it pay for the disgrace, the danger, the
sicknesse, the death, and the hell of lustfull persons; Then we wonder that
any man should venture his head to get a crown unjustly; or that for the
hazard of a victory, he should throw away all his hopes of heaven certainly.

A man that hath tasted of Gods Spirit can instantly discern the madnesse that
is in rage, the folly and the disease that is in envy, the anguish and
tediousnesse that is in lust, the dishonor that is in break­ing our faith, and
telling a lie; and understands things truly as they are; that is, that charity
is the greatest noblenesse in the world; that C religion hath in it the
greatest pleasures; that temperance is the best security of health; that
humility is the surest way to honour; and all these relishes are nothing but
antepasts of heaven, where the quintessence of all these pleasures shall be
swallowed for ever; where the chast shall follow the Lamb, and the virgins
sing there where the Mother of God shall reign; and the zealous converters of
souls, and labourers in Gods vineyard shall worship eternally where S. Peter
and S. Paul do wear their crown of righteousnesse; and the patient persons
shall be rewarded with Job, and the meek per­sons with Christ and Moses, and
all with God; the very expectati­on D of which proceeding from a hope begotten
in us by the spirit of manifestation, and bred up and strengthened by the
spirit of obsignation is so delicious an entertainment of all our reasonable
appetites, that a spirituall man can no more be removed, or intied from the
love of God, and of religion, then the Moon from her Orb, or a Mother from
loving the son of her joyes, and of her sorrows.

This was observed by S. Peter,1 Ep. 2. chap. ver. 5. [As new born babes desire
the sin­cere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be that ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious] When once we have tasted the grace of God,
the sweetnesses of his Spirit; then, no food but the food E of Angels, no cup
but the cup of Salvation, the Divining cup, in which we drink Salvation to our
God, and call upon the Name of the Lord with ravishment and thanksgiving; and
there is no greater externall testimony that we are in the spirit, and that
the spirit dwels in us, then if we finde joy and delight, and spirituall
pleasures in the greatest [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=12) A mysteries of
our religion; if we communicate often, and that with appetite and a forward
choice, and an unwearied devotion, and a heart truly fixed upon God, and upon
the offices of a holy worship. He that loaths good meat is sick at heart, or
neer it; and he that de­spises, or hath not a holy appetite to the foo [...]
of Angels, the wine of elect souls, is fit to succeed the Prodigal at his
banquet of sinne and husks, and to be partaker of the ta [...]le of Devis; but
all they who have Gods Spirit, love to feast at the supper of the Lamb, and
have no appetites but what are of the spirit, or servants to the spirit. I
have read of a spiritual person who saw heaven but in a dream, B but such as
made great impression upon him, and was represented with vigorous and
pertinacious phantasmes, not easily disbanding, and when he awaked he knew not
his cell, he remembred not him that slept in the same dorter, nor could tell
how night and day were distinguished, nor could discern oyl from wine, but cal
[...]d out for his vision again, Redde mihi campos meos floridos, columnam
auream, co­mitem Hieronymum, assistentes Angelos; Give me my fields again, my
most delicious fields, my pillar of a glorious light, my companion S. Jerome,
my assistant Angels; and this lasted till he was told of his duty, and matter
of obedience, and the fear of a sin had disincharm­ed C him, and caused him to
take care lest he lose the substance, out of greedinesse to possesse the
shadow.

And if it were given to any of us to see Paradise, or the third heaven (as it
was to S. Paul) could it be that ever we should love any thing but Christ, or
follow any Guide but the Spirit, or desire any thing but Heaven, or understand
any thing to be pleasant but what shall lead thither? Now what a vision can
do, that the Spirit doth certainly to them that entertain him. They that have
him re­ally and not in pretence onely, are certainly great despisers of the
things of the world. The Spirit doth not create, or enlarge our ap­petites D
of things below: Spirituall men are not designd to reign up­on earth, but to
reign over their lusts and sottish appetites. The Spirit doth not enflame our
thirst of wealth, but extinguishes it, and makes us to esteem all things as l
[...]sse, and as dung so that we may gain Christ; No gain then is pleasant but
goal [...]nesse, no ambition but longings after heaven, no revenge but against
our selves for sinning; nothing but God and Christ; Deus meus & omnia; and
date nobis am­mas, caetera vobis tollite (as the king of Sodom said to
Abraham) Secure but the souls to us, and take our goods. Indeed this is a E
good signe that we have the Spirit.

S. John spake a hard saying, but by the spirit of manifestation we are also
taught to understand it.1 Ep. 3. 9. ‘Whosoever is born of God doth not commit
sin, for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God.’ The seed of God] is the spirit which hath a plastic power to efform us
in similitudinem filiorum Dei, into the image of the sons of God; and as long
as this remains in us, while the Spi­rit [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=13) dwels in us We
cannot sin; that is, it is against our natures, our re­formed A natures to
sin: And as we say, we cannot endure such a po­tion, we cannot suffer such a
pain; that is, we cannot without great trouble, we cannot without doing
violence to our nature: so all spi­rituall men, all that are born of God, and
the seed of God remains in them, they cannot sin; cannot without trouble, and
doing against our natures, and their most passionate inclinations. A man, if
you speak naturally, can masticate gums, and he can break his own legs, and he
can sip up by little draughts, mixtures of Aloes and Rhubarb, of Henbane, or
the deadly Nightshade: but he cannot do this natu­rally, or willingly,
cheerfully or with delight. Every sin is against a B good mans nature he is
ill at case when he hath missed his usual pray­ers; he is amazd if he have
fallen into an errour; he is infinitely asha­med of his imprudence; he
remembers a sin, as he thinks of an ene­my, or the horrors of a midnight
apparition: for all his capacities, his understanding, and his choosing
faculties are filled up with the opinion and perswasions, with the love, and
with the desires of God: and this I say, is the Great benefit of the Spirit,
which God hath given to us as an antidote against worldly pleasures: And
therefore S. Paul joynes them as consequent to each other [For it is
impossible for those who were once enlightned, Hebr. 6. 4. and have tasted of
the C heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, &c.] First
we are enlightned in Baptisme, and by the Spirit of manifesta­tion, the
revelations of the Gospel: then we relish and taste interi­our excellencies,
and we receive the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of con­firmation, and he gives us a
taste of the powers of the world to come; that is, of the great efficacy that
is in the Article of eternall life to perswade us to religion and holy living:
then we feel that as the be­lief of that Article dwels upon our understanding
and is incorpo­rated into our wils and choice, so we grow powerfull to resist
sin by D the strengths of the Spirit, to desie all carnall pleasure, and to
sup­presse and mortifie it by the powers of this Article: [those are the
powers of the world to come.

2\. The Spirit of God is given to all who truly belong to Christ as an anidote
against sorrows, against impatience, against the evil accidents of the world,
and against the oppression and sinking of our spirits under the crosse. There
are in Scripture noted two births besides the naturall; to which also by
analogy we may adde 1 a third. The first is to be born of water and the
Spirit. It is  [...] one thing signified by a divided appellative, by two
substantives,E [water and the Spirit] that is, Spiritus aqueus, the Spirit
moving 2 upon the waters of Baptisme. The second is to be born of Spirit and
fire, for so Christ was promised to baptize us with the Holy Ghost and with
fire; that is, cum spiritu igneo, with a fiery spirit, the Spirit as it
descended in Pentecost in the shape of fiery tongues. And as [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=13) A the watry
spirit washed away the sins of the Church, so the spirit of fire enkindles
charity and the love of God,  [...] (sayes Plutarch) the Spirit is the same
under both the titles, and it enables the Church with gifts and graces: And
from these 3 there is another operation of the new birth, but the same Spirit,
the spirit of rejoycing,Rom. 15. 13. or spiritus exultans, spiritus laetitiae.
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in beleeving, that ye may
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. There is a cer­tain joy
and spirituall rejoycing, that accompanies them in whom the Holy Ghost doth
dwell; a joy in the midst of sorrow; a joy B given to allay the sorrows of
saecular troubles, and to alleviate the burden of persecution.1 Thess. 1. 6.
This S. Paul notes to this purpose. [And ye became followers of us and of the
Lord, having received the word in much af [...]liction with joy of the Holy
Ghost.] Worldly afflictions and spirituall joyes, may very well dwell
together; and if God did not supply us out of his storehouses, the sorrows of
this world would be mere and unmixt, and the troubles of persecution would be
too great for naturall considences. For who shall make him re­compence that
lost his life in a Duel, fought about a draught of wine, or a cheaper woman?
What arguments shall invite a man C to suffer torments, in testimony of a
proposition of naturall Philo­sophy? And by what instruments shall we comfort
a man who is sick, and poor, and disgrac [...]d and vitious, and lies cursing,
and de­spairs of any thing hereafter? That mans condition proclaims what it is
to want the Spirit of God, the Spirit of comfort. Now this Spirit of comfort
is the hope and confidence, the certain ex­pectation of partaking in the
inheritance of Jesus. This is the faith and patience of the Saints, this is
the refreshment of all wearied travellers, the cordiall of all languishing
sinners, the support of the scrupulous, the guide of the doubtfull, the anchor
of timorous D and fluctuating souls, the confidence and the staff of the
penitent. He that is deprived of his whole estate for a good conscience, by
the Spirit he meets this comfort, that he shall finde it again with ad­vantage
in the day of restitution: and this comfort was so mani­fest in the first
dayes of Christianity, that it was no infrequent thing to see holy persons
court a Martyrdom with a fondnesse as great as is our impatience, and
timorousnesse in every persecution. Till the Spirit of God comes upon us we
are  [...] inopis nos, atque pu­silli finxerunt animi; we have little souls,
little faith, and as little E patience; we fall at every stumbling block, and
sink under every temptation; and our hearts fail us, and we die for fear of
death, and lose our souls to preserve our estates, or our persons, till the
Spirit of God fills us with joy in beleeving: and a man that is in a great joy
cares not for any trouble that is lesse then his joy; and God hath taken so
great care to secure this to us, that he hath turn'd it into a precept,1
Thess. 5. 16. Rejoyce evermore; and Rejoyce in the Lord always, and [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=14) again, SERM. II.
I say rejoyce. But this rejoycing must be onely in the hope A that is laid up
for us,Rom. 12. 12. [...]; so the Apostle. Rejoycing in hope. For although God
sometimes maks a cup of sensible com­fort to overflow the spirit of a man, and
thereby loves to refresh his sorrows; yet that is from a secret principle, not
regularly given not to be waitd for, not to be prayed for, and it may fail us
if we think upon it: but the hope of life eternall can never fail us, and the
joy of that is great enough to make us suffer any thing, or to do any thing

—ibimus, ibimus

utcunque praecedes, supremum B

Carpere iter comites parati

To death, to bands, to poverty, to banishment, to tribunals, any whither in
hope of life eternall: as long as this anchor holds, we may suffer a storm but
cannot suffer shipwrack: And I desire you by the way to observe, how good a
God we serve, and how ex­cellent a Religion Christ taught, when one of his
great precepts is, that we should rejoyce and be exceeding glad? and God hath
gi­ven as the spirit of rejoycing, not a sullen, melancholy spirit, not the
spirit of bondage or of a slave, but the Spirit of his Son, consigning us by a
holy conscience to joyes unspeakable and full of C glory: And from hence you
may also infer that those who sink under a persecution, or are impatient in a
sad accident they put out their own fires, which the Spirit of the Lord hath
kindled, and lose those glories which stand behinde the cloud.

## 2\. Part II.

3\. THe Spirit of God is given us, as an antidote against evil D
concupiscences, and sinfull desires, and is then called the spirit of prayer
and supplication. For ever since the af­fections of the outward man prevail
[...]d upon the ruins of the soul, all our desires were sensuall, and
therefore hurtfull: for ever after, our body grew to be our enemy. In the
loosnesses of nature, and amongst the ignorance, or imperfection of Gentile
Philosophy, men used to pray with their hands full of rapine, and their mouths
of blood, and their hearts of malice; and they prayed according­ly, for an
opportunity to steal, for a fair body, for a prosperous E revenge, for a
prevailing malice, for the satisfaction of whatsoever they could be tempted to
by any object, by any lust, by any Devil whatsoever.

The Jews were better taught, for God was their teacher, and he gave the spirit
to them in single rayes. But as the spirit of ob­signation [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=14) A was given to
them under a seal, and within a veile; so the spirit of Manifestation or
patefaction was like the gem of a vine, or the bud of a rose, plain indices
and significations of life, and principles of juice and sweetnesse: but yet
scarce out of the doors of their causes; they had the infan­cy of knowledge;
and revelations to them were given as Catechisme is taught to our children;
which they read with the eye of a bird, and speak with the tongue of a bee,
and understand with the heart of a childe, that is, weakly and imperfectly:
and they understood so little; that 1. They 1 B thought God heard them not
unlesse they spake their prayers, at least efforming their words within their
lips: and 2. Their 2 forms of prayer were so few and seldome, that to teach a
forme of prayer, or to compose a collect was thought a worke fit for a
Prophet, or the founder of an institution. 3. Adde 3 to this that as their
promises were temporal, so were their hopes: as were their hopes so were their
desires; and according to their desires so were their prayers. And al­though
the Psalms of David was their Great office, and the C treasury of devotion to
their Nation (and very worthily) yet it was full of wishes for temporals,
invocations of GOD the Avenger, on GOD the Lord of Hosts, on God the Enemy of
their Enemies; and they desired their Na­tion to be prospered, and themselves
blessed, and distin­guished from all the world, by the effects of such
de­sires. This was the state of prayer in their Synagogue; save onely that it
had also this allay. 4. That their ad­dresses 4 to GOD were crasse, material,
typical and full of shadows, and imagery, paterns of things to come, and so in
D its very being and constitution was relative and imperfect. But that we may
see how great things the Lord hath done for us, God hath powred his spirit
into our hearts, the spirit of prayer and supplication, and now. 1. Christians
pray in their 1 spirit, with sighs and groans, and know that GOD who dwells
within them, can as clearly distinguish those secret accents, and read their
meaning in the Spirit as plainly as he knows the voice of his own thunder, or
could dis­cern the letter of the law written in the tables of stone by the
finger of God. 2. likewise the spirit helpeth our infirmities, 2 E for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought. That is, when God sends an affliction
or persecution upon us, we are indeed extreme apt to lay our hand upon the
wound and never take it off but when we lift it up in prayer to be delivered
from that sadnesse; and then we pray fervently to be cured of a sicknesse, to
be delivered from a Tyrant, to be snatched from the grave, not to perish in
the danger. But the [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=15) spirit of God
hath from all sad accidents drawn the veil of er­rour A and the cloud of
intolerablenesse, and hath taught us that our happinesse cannot consist in
freedom, or deliverances from per­secutions, but in patience, resignation, and
noble sufferance; and that we are not then so blessed when God hath turn'd our
scour­ges into ease and delicacy, as when we convert our very scorpions into
the exercise of vertues: so that now the spirit having helped our infirmities,
that is, comforted our weaknesses and afflicti­ons, our sorrows and impatience
by this proposition, that [All things work together for the good of them that
fear God] he hath taught us to pray for grace, for patience under B the
crosse, for Charity to our persecutors, for rejoy­cing in tribulations, for
perseverance and boldnesse in the faith; and for whatsoever will bring us
safely to Heaven.

3 3\. Whereas onely a Moses, or a Samuel, a David, or a Daniel, a John the
Baptist, or the Messias himself could describe and indite formes of prayer and
thanksgiving to the time and accent of Heaven, now every wise and good Man is
in­structed perfectly in the Scriptures (which are the wri­tings of the
spirit) what things he may, and what things he C must ask for.

4 4\. The Spirit of God hath made our services to be spiritual, intellectual,
holy, and effects of choice and religion, the consequents of a spiritual
sacrifice, and of a holy union with God: The prayer of a Christian is with the
effects of the spirit of Sanctification; and then we pray with the Spirit when
we pray with Holinesse, which is the great fruit, the principal gift of the
spirit. And this is by Saint James called [the prayer of faith] and is said to
be certain that it shall prevail. Such a praying with the spirit, when our
prayers are D the voices of our spirits, and our spirits are first taught,
then sanctified by Gods spirit, shall never fail of its effect; because then
it is, that the spirit himself maketh intercession for us: that is, hath
enabled us to do it upon his strengths, we speak his sense, we live his life,
we breath his accents, we desire in or­der to his purposes, and our persons
are Gracious by his Holi­nesse, and are accepted by his interpellation and
intercession in the act and offices of Christ. This is praying with the
spirit. To which by way of explication I adde these two annexes of holy
prayer, in respect of which also, every good man prayes with E the spirit.

5 5\. The spirit gives us great relish and appetite to our prayers and this
Saint Paul calls [serving of God in his spirit  [...] that is,Rom. 1. 9. with
a willing minde; not as Jonas did his errand, but as Christ did die for us, he
was straitned till [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=15) A he had
accomplished it. And they that say their prayers out of custome onely, or to
comply with external circumstances, or collateral advantages, or pray with
trouble and unwillingnesse, give a very great testimony that they have not the
spirit of Christ within them, that spirit which maketh intercession for the
Saints: but he that delighteth in his prayers, not by a sensible or phantastic
pleasure, but whose choice dwells in his prayers, and whose conversation is
with God in holy living, and praying accord­ingly, that man hath the spirit of
Christ, and therfore belongs to Christ; for by this spirit it is that Christ
prayes in Heaven B for us: and if we do not pray on earth in the same manner
according to our measures; we had as good hold our peace, our prayers are an
abominable sacrifice, and send up to God no better a perfume, then if wee
burned assa faetida, or the raw flesh of a murdered man upon the altar of
incense.

6\. The spirit of Christ and of prayer helps our infirmities,6 by giving us
confidence and importunity. I put them toge­ther. For as our faith is, and our
trust in God, so is our hope, and so is our prayer, weary or lasting, long or
short, not in C words, but in works, and in desires For the words of prayer
are no part of the spirit of prayer: words may be the body of it, but the
spirit of prayer alwayes consists in holinesse, that is in holy desires, and
holy actions: words are not properly capable of being holy; all words are in
themselves se [...]vants of things, and the holinesse of a prayer is not at
all concerned in the manner of its expression, but in the spirit of it, that
is, in the violence of its desires, and the innocence of its ends, and the
continu­ence of its imployment: this is the verification of that great
Prophecie which Christ made; that [in all the world the true D worshippers
should worship in spirit and in truth] that is, with a pure minde, with holy
desires, for spiritual things accord­ing to the minde of the spirit in
imitation of Christs intercessi­on, with perseverance, with charity, or love.
That is the spirit of God, and these are the spiritualities of the Gospel, and
the formalities of prayer as they are Christian and Evan­gelicall.

7\. Some men have thought of a seventh way, and explicate 7 our praying in the
spirit, by a mere volubilty of language: which indeed is a direct undervaluing
the spirit of God and E of Christ, the spirit of manifestation and
intercession; it is to return to the materiality and imperfection of the law,
it is to worship God in outward forms, and to think that Gods ser­vice
consists in shels and rinds, in lips and voices, in sha­dows and images of
things: it is to retire from Christ to Moses, and at the best, it is a going
from real graces to imaginary gifts: and [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=16) when praying
with the spirit hath in it so many excellencies, and A consists of so many
parts of holinesse, and sanctification and is an act of the inner man, we
shall be infinitely mistaken, if we let go this substance, and catch at a
shadow, and sit down and rest in the imagination of an improbable,
unnecessary, uselesse gift of speaking to which the nature of many men, and
the art of all learn­ed men, and the very use and confidence of ignorant men
is too abundantly sufficient. Let us not so despise the spirit of Christ as to
make it no other then the breath of our lungs. * For though it might be
possible that at the first, and when formes of prayer were few and seldome,
the spirit of God B might dictatethe very words to the Apostles, and first
Christi­ans; yet it follows not that therfore he does so still to all that
pretend praying with the spirit. For if he did not then, at the first, dictate
words (as we know not whether he did or no) why shall he be suppos [...]d to
do so now? If he did then; it follows that he does not now,; because his doing
it then, was sufficient for all men since: for so the formes taught by the
spirit were paternes for others to imitate in all the de­scending ages of the
Church. There was once an occasion so great that the spirit of God did think
it a work  [...]it for him to teach a C man to weave silke, or embroider gold,
or woke in brasse, (as it happened to Besaleel and Aholiab:) But then every
weaver or worker in brasse may by the same reason pretend that he works by the
spirit, as that he prayes by the spirit, if by prayer he means forming the
words. For although in the ease of work­ing it was certain that the spirit did
teach: in the ease of indit­ing or forming the words it is not certain whether
he did or no; yet because in both it was extraordinary (if it was at all) and
ever since, in both it is infinitely needlesse; to pretend the Spi­rit in
forms of every mans making (even though they be of D contrary religions, and
pray one against the other) it may serve an end of a phantastic and
hypochondriacal religion, or a secret ambition, but not the ends of God, or
the honour of the Spirit.

The Jews in their declensions to folly and idolatry did wor­ship the stone of
imagination, that is, certain smooth ima­ges in which by art magic pictures
and little faces were re­presented, Levit. 26. 1. declaring hidden things and
stoln goods; and God severely forbad this basenesse: but we also have taken up
this folly, and worship the stone of imagination: we beget imper­fect E
phantasmes and speculative images in our phansy, and we fall down and worship
them; never considering that the spirit of God never appears through such
spectres. Pray­er is one of the noblest exercises of Christian religion; or
ra­ther is it that duty in which all graces are concentred. Prayer is [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=16) A charity, it is
faith, it is a conformity to Gods will, a desiring ac­cording to the desires
of Heaven, an imitation of Christs interces­sion; and prayer must suppose all
holinesse, or else it is nothing: and therefore all that in which men need
Gods Spirit, all that is in order to prayer. Baptisme is but a prayer, and the
holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper is but a prayer; a prayer of sacrifice
repre­sentative, and a prayer of oblation, and a prayer of intercession, and a
prayer of thanksgiving: and obedience is a prayer, and begs and procures
blessings: and if the Holy Ghost hath sancti­fied the whole man, then he hath
sanctified the prayer of the B man, and not till then; and if ever there was,
or could be any other praying with the spirit, it was such a one as a wicked
man might have, and therefore it cannot be a note of distinction between the
good and bad, between the saints and men of the world. But this onely (which I
have described from the fountains of Scripture) is that which a good man can
have, and therefore this is it in which we ought to rejoyce; that he that
glories, may glory in the Lord.

Thus I have (as I could) described the effluxes of the Holy Spirit upon us in
his great chanels. But the great effect of them is C this; That as by the arts
of the spirits of darknesse, and our own malice our souls are turned into
flesh, (not in the naturall sense, but in the morall, and Theologicall) and
animalis homo is the same with carnalis, that is, his soul is a servant of the
passions and de­sires of the flesh, and is flesh in its operations and ends,
in its principles and actions: So on the other side, by the Grace of God, and
the promise of the Father, and the influences of the Holy Ghost, our souls are
not onely recovered from the state of flesh, and reduced back to the
intirenesse of animall operations, but they are heightned into spirit, and
transform [...]d into a new nature: And D this is a new Article, and now to be
considered.

S. Hierom tels of the Custome of the Empire; When a Ty­rant was overcome, they
us [...]d to break the head of his Statues, and upon the same Trunk, to set
the head of the Conquerour, and so it passed wholly for the new Prince: So it
is in the kingdom of Grace: As soon as the Tyrant sin is overcome, and a new
heart is put into us, or that we serve under a new head, instantly we have a
new Name given us, and we are esteemed a new Creation; and not onely changed
in manners, but we have a new nature within E us, even a third part of
essentiall constitution. This may seem strange; and indeed it is so: and it is
one of the great mysteri­ousnesses of the Gospel. Every man naturally consists
of soul and body: but every Christian man that belongs to Christ, hath more.
For he hath body, and soul, and spirit. My Text is plain for it. If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: and by [Spirit] is not meant
onely the graces of God, and his gifts en­abling [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=17) us to do holy
things: there is more belongs to a good man A then so. But as when God made
man, he made him after his own image, and breath'd into him the spirit of
life, and he was made in animam viventem, into a living soul; then he was made
a man: So in the new creation, Christ by whom God made both the worlds,
intends to conform us to his image, and he hath given us the spirit of
adoption, by which we are made sons of God; and by the spi­rit of a new life
we are made new creatures, capable of a new state, intitled to another manner
of duration, enabled to do new and greater actions in order to higher ends; we
have new affecti­ons, new understandings, new wils: Vetera transierunt, & ecce
om­nia B nova facta sunt; All things are become new: And this is called the
seed of God when it relates to the principle and cause of this production: but
the thing that is produced is a spirit, and that is as much in nature beyond a
soul, as a soul is beyond a body. This great Mystery I should not utter but
upon the greatest authority in the world, and from an infallible Doctor, I
mean S. Paul, who from Christ taught the Church more secrets, then all the
whole Colledge besides:1 Thess. 5. 23. [And the very God of peace sanctifie
you wholly, and I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be
preser­ved blamelesse unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.] We are C not
sanctified wholly, nor preserved in safety, unlesse besides our souls and
bodies, our spirit also be kept blamelesse. This distin­ction nice,Hebr.
[...]. 12. and infinitely above humane reason: but the word of God (saith the
same Apostle) is sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder the soul and the spirit: and that hath taught us to distinguish the
principle of a new life, from the principle of the old, the celestiall from
the naturall; and thus it is.

This spirit (as I now discourse of it) is a principle infused in­to us by God,
when we become his children, whereby we live the D life of Grace, and
understand the secrets of the Kingdom, and have passions and desires of things
beyond, and contrary to our naturall appetites, enabling us not onely to
sobriety (which is the duty of the body) not onely to justice, which is the
rectitude of the soul; but to such a sanctity as makes us like to God. * For
so saith the Spirit of God; Be ye holy as I am; be pure, be perfect, as your
heavenly Father is pure, as he is perfect: which because it cannot be a
perfection of degrees, it must be in similitudine na­turae, in the likenesse
of that nature which God hath given us in the new birth, that by it, we might
resemble his excellency, and E holinesse.2 Epist. 1. 4. And this I conceive to
be the meaning of S. Peter [Ac­cording as his divine power hath given unto us
all things that per­tain to life and godlinesse, (that is, to this new life of
godlinesse) through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and
vertue, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=17) A that by
these you might be partakers of the Divine nature (so we read it) But it is
something mistaken; it is not  [...], [The Di­vine nature] for Gods nature is
indivisible, and incommunicable; but it is spoken participativè, or per
analogiant, [partakers of a Divine nature] that is, of this new and God-like
nature, given to every person that serves God, whereby he is sanctified and
made the childe of God, and framed into the likenesse of Christ. The Greeks
generally call this  [...], a gracious gift, an extraordina­ry superaddition
to nature, not a single gift in order to single pur­poses; but an universall
principle, and it remains upon all good B men during their lives, and after
their death; and is that white stone spoken of in the Revelation;Apoc. 2. 17.
and in it a new name written, which no man knoweth but he that hath it: And by
this, Gods sheep at the day of judgement shall be discerned from goats: If
their spirits be presented to God pure and unblameable, this great  [...],
this talent which God hath given to all Christians to improve, in the banks of
grace and of Religion, if they bring this to God in­creased and grown up to
the fulnesse of the measure of Christ (for it is Christs Spirit,Philip. 1. 19.
and as it is in us, it is called, the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ)
then we shall be acknowledged for sons, C and our adoption shall passe into an
eternall inheritance in the por­tion of our elder Brother.

I need not to apply this Discourse: The very mystery it self is in the whole
world the greatest engagement of our duty that is imaginable, by the way of
instrument, and by the way of thankfulnesse.

Quisquis magna dedit voluit sibi magna rependi; He that gives great things to
us, ought to have great acknowledge­ments; and Seneca said concerning wise
men; That he that doth benefit to others, hides those benefits as a man layes
up great trea­sures D in the earth, which he must never see with his eyes,
unlesse a great occasion forces him to dig the graves, and produce that which
he buried; but all the while, the man was hugely rich, and he had the wealth
of a great relation: so it is with God and us: For this huge benefit of the
Spirit, which God gives us, is for our good, de­posited in our souls, not made
for forms and ostentation, not to be looked upon, or serve little ends, but
growing in the secret of our souls, and swelling up to a treasure, making us
in this world rich by title and relation, but it shall be produced in the
great necessi­ties of doomesday. In the mean time, if the fire be quenched,
the E fire of Gods Spirit, God will kindle another in his anger, that shall
never be quenched: but if we entertain Gods Spirit with our own purities, and
imploy it diligently, and serve it willingly, (for Gods Spirit is a loving
Spirit) then we shall really be turned into spirits. Irenaeus had a
proverbiall saying, Perfecti sunt qui tria sine querelâ Deo exhibent; They
that present three things right to God, [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=18) they are
perfect; that is, a chast body, a righteous soul, and a holy A spirit; and the
event shall be this, which Maimonides expressed not amisse, (though he did not
at all understand the secret of this my­stery:) The soul of a man in this
life, is in potentiâ ad esse spiri­tum, it is designed to be a spirit, but in
the world to come, it shall be actually as very a spirit as an Angel is: and
this state is expres­sed by the Apostle, calling it, [the earnest of the
spirit] that is, here it is begun, and given us as an antepast of glory, and a
principle of Grace; but then we shall have it in plenitudine

—regit idem spiritus artus

Orbe alio— B

Here, and there, it is the same; but here we have the earnest, there the
riches and the inheritance.

But then, if this be a new principle, and be given us in order to the actions
of a holy life, we must take care that we receive not the Spirit of God in
vain, but remember it is a new life; and as no man can pretend, that a person
is alive, that doth not alwayes do the works of life; so it is certain, no man
hath the Spirit of God, but he that lives the life of grace, and doth the
works of the Spi­rit, that is, in all holinesse, and justice, and sobriety.

Spiritus qui accedit animo, vel Dei est, vel Daemonis (said Tertul­lian.)C
Every man hath within him the Spirit of God, or the spirit of the devil. The
spirit of fornication is an unclean devil, and ex­tremely contrary to the
Spirit of God; and so is the spirit of malice or uncharitablenesse; for the
Spirit of God is the Spirit of love: for as purities Gods Spirit sanctifies
the body, so by love he pu­rifies the soul, and makes the soul grow into a
spirit, into a Di­vine nature. But God knows, that even in Christian
societies, we see the devils walk up and down every day, and every hour; the
devil of uncleannesse, and the devil of drunkennesse, the devil of malice, and
the devil of rage, the spirit of filthy speaking, and D the spirit of
detraction, a proud spirit, and the spirit of rebellion; and yet all call
[Christian. It is generally supposed, that unclean spirits walk in the night;
and so it used to be; for they that are drunk, are drunk in the night, said
the Apostle: but Suidas tels of certain Empusae, that used to appear at Noon,
at such time as the Greeks did celebrate the Funerals of the Dead; and at this
day some of the Russians fear the Noon-day Devil, which appeareth like a
mourning widow to reapers of hay and corn, and uses to break their arms and
legs, unlesse they worship her. The Pro­phet David speaketh of both
kindes:Psal. 91. Thou shalt not be afraid for E the terrour by night, and a
ruinâ & daemonio meridiano, from the Devil at noon thou shalt be free. It were
happy if we were so; but besides the solemn followers of the works of
darknesse, in the times and proper seasons of darknesse, there are very many
who act their Scenes of darknesse in the face of the Sun, in open defi­ance
[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=18) A of God,
and all lawes, and all modesty. There is in such men the spirit of impudence,
as well as of impiety. And yet I might have expressed it higher; for every
habituall sin doth not onely put us into the power of the devil, but turns us
into his very nature: just as the Holy Ghost transforms us into the image of
God.

Here therefore I have a greater Argument to perswade you to holy living, then
Moses had to the sons of Israel. Behold, I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing: so said Moses; but I adde, that I have upon the stock of
this Scripture, set before B you, the good Spirit and the bad, God, and the
devil: choose un­to whose nature you will be likened, and into whose
inheritance you will be adopted, and into whose possession you will enter. If
you commit sin, ye are of your father the Devil, ye are be­got of his
principles, and follow his pattern, and shall passe into his portion, when ye
are led captive by him at his will; and re­member what a sad thing it is to go
into the portion of evil and accursed spirits, the sad and eternall portion of
Devils. But he that hath the Spirit of God, doth acknowledge God for his
Father, C and his Lord, he despises the world, and hath no violent appetites
for secular pleasures, and is dead to the desires of this life, and his hopes
are spirituall, and God is his joy, and Christ is his pat­tern and his
support, and Religion is his imployment, and godli­nesse is his gain, and this
man understands the things of God, and is ready to die for Christ, and fears
nothing but to sin against God, and his will is filled with love, and it
springs out in obedience to God, and in charity to his brother: and of such a
man we can­not make judgement by his fortune, or by his acquaintance, by his
circumstances, or by his adherencies, for they are the appen­dages D of a
naturall man: but the spirituall is judged of no man: that is, the rare
excellencies that make him happy, do not yet make him illustrious, unlesse we
will reckon Vertue to be a great fortune, and holinesse to be great Wisedom,
and God to be the best Friend, and Christ the best Relative, and the Spirit
the hugest advantage, and Heaven the greatest Reward. He that knows how to
value these things, may sit down and reckon the felicities of him that hath
the Spirit of God.

The purpose of this Discourse is this; That since the Spirit of God is a new
nature, and a new life put into us, we are thereby E taught, and enabled to
serve God by a constant course of holy living, without the frequent returns
and intervening of such actions, which men are pleased to call sins of
infirmity. Whosoever hath the Spirit of God, lives the life of grace; The
Spirit of God rules in him, and is strong according to its age and abode, and
allows not of those often sins which we think unavoidable, because we call
them, naturall infirmities.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=19) [But if
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the A spirit is life
because of righteousnesse.] The state of sin is a state of death; the state of
a man under the law, was a state of bondage, and infirmity, (as S. Paul
largely describes him in the seventh Chap­ter to the Romanes) but he that hath
the Spirit is made alive, and free, and strong, and a conquerour over all the
powers, and vio­lencies of sin; such a man resists temptations, falls not
under the assault of sin, returns not to the sin which he last repented of,
acts no more that errour which brought him to shame and sorrow: but he that
falls under a crime, to which he still hath a strong, and vi­gorous
inclination, he that acts his sin, and then curses it, and then B is tempted,
and then sins again, and then weeps again, and calls himself miserable, but
still the inchantment hath confined him to that circle, this man hath not the
Spirit; for where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, there is no such
bondage and a returning folly to the commands of sin. But because men deceive
themselves with calling this bondage, a pitiable and excusable infirmity, it
will not be uselesse to consider the state of this question more
particular­ly, lest men from the state of a pretended infirmity, fall into a
reall death.

1\. No great sin is a sin of infirmity, or excusable upon that C stock. But
that I may be understood, we must know that every sin is in some sense or
other, a sin of infirmity. When a man is in the state of spirituall sicknesse
or death, he is in a state of infir­mity, for he is a wounded man, a prisoner,
a slave, a sick man, weak in his judgement, and weak in his reasoning,
impotent in his passions, of childish resolutions, great inconstancy, and his
purposes untwist, as easily as the rude conjuncture of uncombining cables, in
the violence of a Northern tempest: and he that is thus in infirmity, cannot
be excused; for it is the aggravation of the state of his sin; he is so infirm
that he is in a state unable to do D his duty. Such a man is a servant of sin,
a slave of the Devil, an heir of corruption, absolutely under command; and
every man is so, who resolves for ever to avoid such a sin, and yet for ever
falls under it: for what can he be but a servant of sin, who fain would avoid
it but cannot; that is, he hath not the Spirit of God within him; Christ dwels
not in his soul, for where the Son is, there is liberty: and all that are in
the Spirit are sons of God, and servants of righteousnesse, and therefore
freed from sin. But then there are also sins of infirmity, which are single
actions, intervening seldom, in litle instances, unavoidable, or through a
faultlesse ignorance.E Such as these are alwayes the allays of the life of the
best men; and for these Christ hath payd, and they are never to be account­ed
to good men, save onely to make them more wary, and more humble. Now
concerning these, it is, that I say; No great sin is a sin of excusable, or
unavoidable infirmity. Because whosoever [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=19) A hath received
the Spirit of God, hath sufficient knowledge of his duty, and sufficient
strengths of grace, and sufficient advertency of minde, to avoid such things
as do great and apparent violence to piety, and religion. No man can justly
say, that it is a sin of infirmity that he was drunk; For there are but three
causes of every sin (a fourth is not imaginable.) 1. If ignorance cause it,1
the sin is as full of excuse, as the ignorance was innocent. But no Christian
can pretend this to drunkennesse, to murder, to rebel­lion, to uncleannesse.
For what Christian is so uninstructed but that he knows Adultery is a sin? 2.
Want of observation, is the 2 B cause of many indiscreet and foolish actions.
Now at this gap ma­ny irregularities do enter and escape, because in the
whole, it is impossible for a man to be of so present a spirit, as to
consider, and reflect upon every word, and every thought: but it is in this
case in Gods laws otherwise then in mans: the great flies cannot passe thorow
without observation, little ones do; and a man can­not be drunk, and never
take notice of it; or tempt his neighbours wife before he be aware; therefore
the lesse the instance be, the more likely it is to be a sin of infirmity: and
yet if it be never so little, if it be observed, then it ceases to be a sin of
infirmity. C 3\. But because great crimes, cannot pretend to passe
undiscern­ably,3 it follows that they must come in at the door of malice, that
is, of want of Grace, in the absence of the Spirit; they destroy where ever
they come, and the man dies if they passe upon him.

It is true, there is flesh and blood in every regenerate man, but they do not
both rule: the flesh is left to tempt, but not to prevail. And it were a
strange condition, if both the godly and the ungodly were captives to sin, and
infallibly should fall into temptation, and death, without all difference,
saue onely, that the D godly sins unwillingly, and the ungodly sins willingly.
But if the same things be done by both, and God in both be dishonoured, and
their duty prevaricated, the pretended unwillingnesse is the signe of a
greater, and a baser slavery, and of a condi­tion lesse to be endured. For the
servitude which is against me is intollerable, but if I choose the state of a
servant, I am free in my minde,

—Libertatis servaveris umbram

Si quicquid jubeare velis—

E certain it is, that such a person who fain would, but cannot choose but
commit adultery, or drunkennesse, is the veriest slave to sin that can be
imagined, and not at all freed by the Spirit, and by the liberty of the sons
of God;—Tot rebus iniquis Parüimus vi­cti: veniaest haec sola pudoris,
Degenerisque metus, nil jam potuisse negari. Lucan. and there is no other
difference, but that the mistaken good man feels his slavery, and sees his
chains, and his fetters; but therefore it is certain that he is, be­cause he
sees himself to be a slave. No man can be a servant of [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=20) sin, and a
servant of righteousnesse at the same time, but every A man that hath the
Spirit of God, is a servant of righteousnesse; and therefore whosoever finde
great sins to be unavoidable, are in a state of death and reprobation, (as to
the present) because they willingly, or unwillingly (it matters not much,
whether of the two) are servants of sin.

2 2\. Sins of infirmity as they are small in their instance, so they put on
their degree of excusablenesse, onely according to the weaknesse, or infirmity
of a mans understanding: So far as men (without their own fault) understand
not their duty, or are pos­sessed with weaknesse of principles, or are
destitute and void of B discourse, or discerning powers, and acts, so far if a
sin creeps upon them, it is as naturall, and as free from a law, as is the
acti­on of a childe; But if any thing else be mingled with it, if it pro­ceed
from any other principle, it is criminall and not excused by our infirmity;
because it is chosen: and a mans will hath no in­firmity, but when it wants
the grace of God, or is mastered with pass [...]ons, and sinfull appetites:
and that infirmity is the state of un­regeneration.

3 3\. The violence or strength of a temptation is not sufficient to excuse an
action, or to make it accountable upon the stock of a C pitiable and innocent
infirmity; if it leaves the understanding still able to judge; because a
temptation cannot have any proper strengths but from our selves, and because
we have in us a principle of basenesse which this temptation meets, and onely
perswades me to act, because I love it. Joseph met with a temptation as
violent and as strong as any man: and it is certain there are not many
Christians but would fall under it, and call it, a sin of in­firmity, since
they have been taught so to abuse themselves, by sow­ing fig-leaves before
their nakednesse: but because Joseph had a strength of God within him, the
strength of chastity, therefore it D could not at all prevail upon him. Some
men cannot by any art of hell be tempted to be drunk; others can no more
resist an invita­tion to such a meeting, then they can refuse to die if a
dagger were drunk with their heart blood; because their evil habits made them
weak on that part: And some man that is fortified against revenge it may be
will certainly fall under a temptation to un­cleannesse: for every temptation
is great or small, according as the man is; and a good word will certainly
lead some men to an action of folly, while another will not think ten thousand
pound a considerable argument to make him tell one single lie, against his E
duty, or his conscience.

4 4\. No habituall sin, (that is) no sin that returns constantly, or
frequently, that is repented of, and committed again, and still repented of,
and then again committed, no such sin is excusable with a pretence of
infirmity: Because that sin is certainly noted, [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=20) A and certainly
condemned, and therefore returns, not because of the weaknesse of nature, but
the weaknesse of grace: the princi­ple of this, is an evil spirit, an
habituall aversation from God, a dominion and empire of sin: and as no man for
his inclination, and aptnesse to the sins of the flesh, is to be called
carnall, if he corrects his inclinations, and turns them into vertues: so no
man can be called spirituall for his good wishes, and apt inclinations to
goodnesse, if these inclinations passe not into acts, and these acts into
habits, and holy customs, and walkings, and conversation with God. But as
natural concupiscence corrected becomes the mat­ter B of vertue: so these good
inclinations, and condemnings of our sin, if they be ineffective and end in
sinfull actions, are the perfect signes of a reprobate, and unregenerate
estate.

The sum is this. An animal man, a man under the law, a car­nall man (for as to
this, they are all one) is sold under sin, he is a servant of corruption, he
falls frequently into the same sin to which he is tempted, he commends the
Law, he consents to it that it is good, he does not commend sin, he does some
little things against it, but they are weak and imperfect, his lust is C
stronger, his passions violent, and unmortified, his habits vitious, his
customs sinfull, and he lives in the regions of sin, and dies and enters into
its portion; But a spirituall man, a man that is in the state of grace, who is
born anew of the Spirit, that is regene­rate by the Spirit of Christ, he is
led by the Spirit, he lives in the Spirit, he does the works of God
cheerfully, habitually, vigorous­ly: and although he sometimes slips, yet it
is but seldom, it is in small instances: his life is such as he cannot pretend
to be justi­fied by works, and merit, but by mercy, and the faith of Jesus
Christ; yet he never sins great sins: If he does, he is for that pre­sent D
falne from Gods favour; and though possibly he may reco­ver, (and the smaller,
or seldomer the sin is, the sooner may be his restitution) yet for the present
(I say) he is out of Gods fa­vour. But he that remains in the grace of God,
sins not by any de­liberate, consultive, knowing act; he is incident to such a
surprize as may consist with the weaknesse, and judgement of a good man: but
whatsoever is, or must be considered, if it cannot passe without
consideration, it cannot passe without sin; and therefore cannot enter upon
him, while he remains in that state. For he that is in Christ, in him, the
body is dead by reason of sin; and the E Gospel did not differ from the Law,
but that the Gospel gives grace and strength to do whatsoever it commands,
which the Law did not; and the greatnesse of the promise of eternall life is
such an argument to them that consider it, that it must needs be of force
sufficient, to perswade a man to use all his faculties, and all his strength,
that he may obtain it: God exacted all upon this stock; God knew this could do
every thing: Nihil non in hoc prae­sumpsit [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=21) Deus (said one.)
This will make a satyr chast, and A Silenus to be sober, and Dives to be
charitable, and Simon Ma­gus himself to despise reputation, and Saul to turn
from a Per­secutor to an Apostle. For since God hath given us reason to
choose, and a promise to exchange, for our temperance, and faith, and charity,
and justice, for these (I say) happinesse, exceeding great happinesse; that we
shall be Kings, that we shall reigne with God, with Christ, with all the holy
Angels for ever, in fe­licities so great, that we have not now capacities to
understand it, our heart is not big enough to think it; there cannot in the
world be a greater inducement to engage us, a greater argument B to oblige us
to do our duty. God hath not in heaven a bigger ar­gument; it is not possible
any thing in the world should be bigger: which because the Spirit of God hath
revealed to us, if by this strength of his we walk in his wayes, and be
ingrafted into his stock, and bring forth his fruits, the fruits of the
Spirit, then we are in Christ, and Christ in us, then we walk in the spirit,
and the Spirit dwels in us, and our portion shall be there, where Christ by
the Spirit maketh intercession for us, that is, at the right hand of his
Father for ever, and ever. Amen.C D E

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=21)

## 3\. A Sermon. III.SERM. III. B THE DESCENDING AND ENTAILED CVRSE C Cut off.

Exodus 20. part of the 5. verse.

I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:

D 6\. And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandements.

IT is not necessary that a Common-wealth should give pensions to Oratours, to
disswade men from running into houses infected with the plague, or to intreat
them to be out of love with violent torments, or to create in men evil
opinions con­cerning famine, or painfull deaths: Every man E hath a sufficient
stock of self love, upon the strength of which he hath entertained principles
strong enough to secure himself against voluntary mischiefs, and from running
in­to states of death and violence. A man would think that this I have now
said, were in all cases certainly true; and I would to God it were. For that
which is the greatest evil, that which makes all [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=22) evils, that
which turns good into evil, and every naturall evil in­to A a greater sorrow,
and makes that sorrow lasting and perpetual; that which sharpens the edge of
swords, and makes agues to be fevers, and fevers to turn into plagues; that
which puts stings into ev [...]ry fly, and uneasinesse to every trifling
accident, and strings every whip with scorpions, (you know I must needs mean
sin) that evil, men suffer patiently, and choose willingly, and run after it
greedily, and will not suffer themselves to be di­vorced from it: and
therefore God hath hired servants to fight a­against this evil; he hath set
Angels with fiery swords to drive us from it, he hath imployed Advocates to
plead against it, he hath B made Laws and Decrees against it, he hath
dispatched Prophets to warn us of it, and hath established an Order of men,
men of his own family, and who are fed at his own charges, (I mean the whole
Order of the Clergy) whose office is like watchmen to give an alarum at every
approach of sin, with as much affright­ment as if an enemy were neer, or the
sea broke in upon the flat Countrey; and all this, onely to perswade men not
to be ex­tremely miserable, for nothing, for vanity, for a trouble, for a
dis­ease: for some sins naturally are diseases, and all others are na­turall
nothings, meer privations, or imperfections, contrary to C goodnesse, to
felicity, to God himself: And yet God hath hedged sin round about with thorns,
and sin of it self too, brings thorns: and it abuses a man in all his
capacities, and it places poison in all those seats and receptions where he
could possibly entertain hap­pinesse. For if sin pretend to please the sense,
it doth first abuse it shamefully, and then humours it: it can onely feed an
im­postume; no naturall, reasonable, and perfective appetite: and besides its
own essentiall appendages, and proprieties; things are so ordered that a fire
is kindled round about us; and every thing within us, above, below us, and on
every side of us, is an argu­ment D against, and an enemy to sin; and for its
single pretence, that it comes to please one of the senses, one of those
faculties which are in us the same they are in a Cow, it hath an evil so
com­municative, that it doth not onely work like poison, to the disso­lution
of soul and body; but it is a sicknesse like the plague, it in­fects all our
houses, and corrupts the air, and the very breath of heaven: for it moves God
first to jealousie, (and that takes off his friendship and kindnesse towards
us) and then to anger; and that makes him a resolved enemy; and it brings
evil, not onely upon our selves, but upon all our relatives; upon our selves,
and our E children, even the children of our Nephews, Ad natos natorum, & qui
nascentur ab illis, to the third and fourth generation: and therefore if a man
should despise the eye, or sword of man, if he sins he is to contest with the
jealousie of a provoked God: If he doth not regard himself, let him pity his
pretty children: If he [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=22) A be angry and
hates all that he sees, and is not solicitous for his children, yet let him
pitty the generations which are yet unborn; let him not bring a curse upon his
whole family, and suffer his name to rot in curses and dishonours; let not his
memory re­main polluted with an eternal stain: if all this will not deter a
man from sin, there is no instrument left for thats mans vertue, no hopes of
his felicity, no recovery of his sorrows and sicknesses; but he must sink
under the stroaks of a jealous God into the dis­honour of eternal ages, and
the groanings of a never ceasing sorrow.

B God is a jealous God] that is the first great stroke, he strikes a­gainst
sin, he speakes after the manner of men, and in so speaking we know, he that
is jealous is suspicious, he is inquisitive, he is im­placable. 1\. God is
pleased to represent himself a person very suspicious, both in respect of
persons and things. For our persons we give him cause enough: for we are
sinners from our Mo­thers womb; we make solemn vows and break them instantly;
we cry for pardon and still renew the sin; we desire God to try us once more,
and we provoke him ten times further: we use the means of grace to cure us,
and we turn them into vices and op­portunites C of sin; we curse our sins and
yet long for them ex­tremely; we renounce them publickly, and yet send for
them in private and shew them kindnesse: we leave little offiences, but our
faith and our charity is not strong enough to Master great ones; and sometimes
we are sham'd out of great ones, but yet entertain little ones; or if we
disdain both, yet we love to remember them, and delight in their past actions,
and bring them home to us, at least by fiction of imagination; and we love to
be betrayed into them; we would fain have things so ordered by chance or power
that it may seem necessary to sin, or that it may become excusa­ble, D and
dressed fitly for our own circumstances; and for ever we long after the flesh
pots of Egypt the garlick and the Onions; and we so little do esteeme Manna,
the food of Angels, we so loath the bread of Heaven, that any temptation will
make us return to our fetters and our bondage; and if we do not tempt our
selves, yet we do not resist a temptation, or if we pray against it, we desire
not to be heard; and if we be assisted, yet we will not work together with
those assistances; so that unlesse we be for­ced, nothing will be done; we are
so willing to perish, and so unwilling to be saved, that we minister to God
reason enough to E suspect us; and therefore it is no wonder that God is
jealous of us: We keep company with Harlots and polluted persons; we are kind
to all Gods Enemies, and love that which he hates; how can it be otherwise but
that we should be suspected? Let us make our best of it, and see if we can
recover the good opinion of God; for as yet we are but suspected persons. 2\.
And therefore God is [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=23) inquisitive; he
looks for that which he fain would never finde; A God sets spies upon us; he
looks upon us himself through the Cur­tains of a cloud; and he sends Angels to
espie us in all our wayes, and permits the Devil to winnow us and to accuse
us, and erects a Tribunal and witnesses in our own consciences, and he cannot
want information concerning our smalest irregularities. Sometimes the Devil
accuses, but he also sometimes accuses us falsly, either maliciously, or
ignorantly, and we stand upright in that particular by inno­cence; and
sometimes by penitence, and all this while our Consci­nence is our friend:
Sometimes our conscience does accuse us unto God; and then we stand convict by
our own judgement.B Sometimes, if our conscience acquit us, yet we are not
thereby justified: For, as Moses accused the Jews; so do Christ and his
Apostles accuse us, not in their personss, but by their works; and by their
words, by the thing it self, by confront­ing the laws of Christ, and our
practises. Sometimes the Angels who are the observers of all our works carry
up sad tidings to the Court of Heaven against us. Thus, two Angels were the
in­formers against Sodom; but yet these were the last; for before that time
the cry of their iniquity had sounded loud and sadly in Hea­ven; and all this
is the direct and proper effect of his jealousie; C which sets spies upon all
the actions, and watches the circumstances, and tel [...]s the steps, and
attends the businesses, the recreations, the publications, and retirements of
every man, and will not suffer a thought to wander but he uses means to
correct it's errour, and to reduce it to himself. For he that created us and
daily feeds us, he that intreats us to be happy, with an opportunity so
pas­sionate as if (not we, but) himself were to receive the favour; he that
would part with his onely Son from his bosome, and the embraces of eternity,
and give him over to a shameful and cursed death for us, Cannot but be
supposed to love us with D a great love, and to own us with an intire title,
and therefore that he would fain secure us to himself with an undivided
possession: and it cannot but be infinitely reasonable: for to whom else
should any of us belong, but to God? Did the world create us? Or did lust ever
do us any good: Did Sa­than ever suffer one stripe for our advantage? Does not
he study all the wayes to ruine us? Doe the Sun or the stars pre­serve us
alive? Or do we get understanding from the Angels? Did ever any joynt of our
body knit, or our heart ever keep one true minute of a pulse without God? Had
not we been ei­ther E nothing, or worse, that is, infinitely eternally
miserable, but that God made us capable, and then pursued us with arts and
devices of great mercy to force us to be happy? Great rea­son therefore there
is, that God should be jealous, lest we take any of our duty from him▪ who
hath so strangely deserved it [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=23) A all, and give
it to a creature, or to our enemy, who cannot be ca­pable of any. But however,
it will concern us with much caution to observe our own wayes, since we are
made a spectacle to God, to An­gels, and to Men: God hath set so many spies
upon us, the blessed Angels and the accursed Devils, good men and bad men, the
eye of Heaven, and eye of that eye, God himself, all watching lest we rob God
of his Honour, and our selves of our hopes; For by his prime intention he hath
chosen so to get his own glory, as may best consist with our felicity: His
great designe is to be glorified in our being saved. 3. Gods jealousie hath a
sadder effect then all this. B For all this is for mercy; but if we provoke
this jealousie if he findes us in our spiritual whoredoms, he is implacable,
that is, he is angry with us to eternity unlesse we returne in time: and if we
do, it may be he will not be appeased in all instances: and when he forgives
us he will make some reserves of his wrath; he will punish our persons, or our
estate; he will chastise us at home, or abroad, in our bodies, or in our
children; for he will visit our sins upon our children from generation to
generation: and if they be made miserable for our sins, they are unhappy in
such parents; but we bear the curse and the anger of God, even while they bear
his rod: God visits the C sins of the Fathers upon the children] That [...]s
the second Great stroke he strikes against sin, and is now to be considered.

That God doth so is certain; because he saith he doth; and 2 that this is just
in him so to do, is also as certain therefore because he doth it. For as his
lawes are our measures, so his actions, and his own will are his own measures.
He that hath right over all things, and all persons, cannot do wrong to any
thing. He that is essentially just, (and there could be no such thing as
justice, or justice it self could not be good, if it did not derive from him)
it is impossible for him to be unjust. But since God is pleased to D speak
after the manner of men, it may well consist with our duty to enquire into
those manners of consideration, whereby we may understand the equity of God in
this proceeding, and to be instru­cted also in our own danger, if we persevere
in sin.

1\. No man is made a sinner by the fault of another man without his own
consent. For to every one God gives his choice, and sets life and death before
every of the sons of Adam: and therefore this death is not a consequent to any
sin, but our own. In this sense it is true, that if the fathers eat sowre
grapes, the chil­drens E teeth shall not be set on edge: and therefore the sin
of Adam which was derived to all the world; did not bring the world to any
other death but temporall, by the intermediall stages of sick­ness, and
temporal infelicities: And it is not said that sin passed up­on all men, but
death, & that also no otherwise but  [...], in as much as al men have sinned;
as they have followed the steps of their father, so they are partakers of this
death. And therefore it is very [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=24) remarkable; that
death brought in by sin, was nothing superindu­ced A to man; man onely was
reduced to his own naturall conditi­on, from which before Adams fall he stood
exempted by super­naturall favour; and therefore although the taking away that
ex­traordinary grace, or priviledge was a punishment; yet the suf­fering the
naturall death, was directly none; but a condition of his creation, naturall,
and therefore not primarily evil; but if not good, yet at least indifferent.
And the truth and purpose of this observation will extend it self, if we
observe that before any man died, Christ was promised, by whom death was to
lose its sting, by whom death did cease to be an evil, and was, or might B be,
if we do belong to Christ, a state of advantage. So that we by occasion of
Adams sin, being returned to our naturall certainty of dying, do still even in
this very particular stand between the bles­sing and the cursing. If we follow
Christ, death is our friend; If we imitate the praevarication of Adam, then
death becomes an evil; the condition of our nature, becomes the punishment of
our own sin; not of Adams: for although his sin brought death in, yet it is
onely our sin that makes death to be evil: And I desire this to be observed,
because it is of great use in vindicating the Divine justice in the matter of
this question. The materiall part C of the evil came from our father upon us,
but the formality of it, the sting and the curse is onely by our selves.

2\. For the fault of others many may become miserable, even all or any of
those, whose relation is such to the sinner, that he in any sense may by such
inflictions be punished, execrable, or op­pressed. Indeed it were strange, if
when a plague were in Ethio­pia, the Athenians should be infected: or if the
house of Pericles were visited, and Thucydides should die for it. For although
there are some evils which (as Plutarch saith) are ansis & pro­pagationibus
praedita incredibili celeritate in longinquum penetran­tia, D such which can
dart evil influences, as Porcupines do their quils; yet as at so great
distances the knowledge of any confede­rate events must needs be uncertain: so
it is also uselesse, because we neither can joyne their causes, nor their
circumstances, nor their accidents into any neighbourhood of conjunction:
Relations are seldome noted at such distances; and if they were, it is
certain, so many accidents will intervene, that will out-weigh the efficacy of
such relations; that by any so far distant events, we cannot be instructed in
any duty, nor understand our selves reproved for any fault. But when the
relation is neerer, and is joyned under such a E head, and common cause, that
the influence is perceived, and the parts of it do usually communicate in
benefit, notices, or infe­licity (especially if they relate to each other, as
superiour and inferiour) then it is certain, the sin is infectious (I mean)
not onely in example, but also in punishment.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=24) A And of
this I shall shew. 1. In what instances usually it is so. 2. For what reasons
it is so, and justly so. 3. In what degree, and in what cases it is so. 4.
What remedies there are for this evil.

1\. It is so in kingdoms, in Churches, in families, in politicall,
artificiall, and even in accidentall societies.

When David numbred the people, God was angry with him; but he punished the
people for the crime; seventy thousand men died of the plague: and when God
gave to David the choice of three plagues, he chose that of the pestilence, in
which the meanest B of the people, and such which have the least society with
the acts and crimes of Kings are most commonly devoured, whilest the powerfull
and sinning persons by arts of physick, and flight, by provisions of nature,
and accidents are more commonly secured. * But the story of the Kings of
Israel hath furnished us with an example fitted with all the stranger
circumstances in this question. Joshuah had sworn to the Gibeonites (who had
craftily secured their lives, by exchanging it for their liberties:) Almost
500. yeers after, Saul in zeal to the men of Israel and Judah slew many C of
them. After this Saul dies, and no question was made of it. But in the dayes
of David there was a famine in the land three yeers together;2 Sam. 21. 14.
and God being inquired of, said it was because of Saul his killing the
Gibeonites. What had the people to do with their Kings fault? or at least, the
people of David with the fault of Saul? That we shall see anon: But see the
way that was appointed to expiate the crime, and the calamity. David took
seven of Sauls sons and hanged them up against the Sun, and after that God was
intreated for the land. The story observes one circumstance more: that for the
kindnesse of Jonathan, David spared Mephibosheth. D Now this story doth not
onely instance in Kingdoms, but in fami­lies too. The fathers fault is
punished upon the sons of the fa­mily; and the Kings fault upon the people of
his land, even af­ter the death of the King, after the death of the father.
Thus God visited the sin of Ahab, partly upon himself, partly upon his sons.1
King. 21. 29. I will not bring the evil in his dayes, but in his sons dayes
will I bring the evil upon his house. Thus did God slay the childe of
Bathsheba for the sin of his father David: and the whole fa­mily of Eli, all
his kinred of the neerer lines were thrust from the priesthood, and a curse
made to descend upon his children E for many ages, that all the males should
die young, and in the flower of their youth. The boldnesse and impiety of Cham
made his posterity to be accursed, and brought slavery into the world. Because
Amalek fought with the sons of Israel at Rephidim, God took up a quarrell
against the nation for ever. And above all ex­amples is that of the Jews, who
put to death the Lord of life, and made their nation to be an anathema for
ever, untill the day [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=25) of restitution.
His blood be upon us, and upon our children. If we shed A innocent blood, If
we provoke God to wrath, If we oppresse the poor, If we crucifie the Lord of
life again and put him to an open shame, the wrath of God will be upon us and
upon our children, to make us a cursed family, and who are the sinners, to be
the stock and ori­ginal of the curse; the pedigree of the misery shall derive
from us.

This last instance went further then the other of families and kingdoms. For
not onely the single families of the Jews were made miserable for their
Fathers murdering the Lord of life, nor also was the Nation extinguished alone
for the sins of their Rulers, but B the religion was removed; it ceased to be
God peoples; the syna­gogue was rejected, and her vail rent, and her privacies
dismant­led, and the Gentiles were made to be Gods people, when the Jews
inclosure was dispark [...]d. I need not further to instance this proposi­tion
in the case of National Churches, though it is a sad calamity that is fallen
upon the al seven Churches of Asia (to whom the spirit of God wrote seven
Epistles by Saint John) and almost all the Churches of Africa, where Christ
was worshipped, and now Ma­homet is thrust in substitution, and the people are
servants, and the religion is extinguished, or where it remains, it shines
like the Moon C in an Eclipse, or like the least spark of the pleiades, seen
but seldom, And that rather shining like a gloworm, then a taper enkindled
with a beam of the Sun of righteousnesse. I shall adde no more instances to
verifie the truth of this, save onely I shall observe to you, that even there
is danger in being in evil company, in suspected places, in the civil
societies and fellowships of wicked men.

—Vetabo, qui Cereris sacrum

vulgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem

sit trabibus, fragilem (que) mecum D

solvat phaselum,

Hor. l. 3. od. 2.

saepe Diespiter

Neglectus, in cesto addidit in tegrum

And it hapned to the Mariners who carried Jonah, to be in danger with a horrid
storme, because Jonah was there who had sinned a­gainst the Lord. Many times
the sin of one man is punished by the falling of a house or a wall upon him,
and then al the family are like to be crushed with the same ruine; so
dangerous, so pestilenti­al, so infectious a thing is sin, that it scatters
the poison of its breath to all the neighbourhood, and makes that the man
ought to be a­voided E like a person infected with the plague.

2 Next I am to consider why this is so, and why it is justly so? To this I
answer. 1. Between Kings and their people, Parents and their children there is
so great a necessitude, propriety and entercourse of nature, dominion, right
and possession, that they are by God [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=25) A and the laws
of Nations reckoned as their Goods, and their bles­sings. The honour of a King
is in the multitude of his people; and children are a gift that cometh of the
Lord; and happy is that man that hath his quiver full of them: and Lo thus
shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord; his wife shall be like the
fruitful vine by the wals of his house, his children like olive branches round
about his Table. Now if chil­dren be a blessing, then to take them away in
anger is a curse: and if the losse of flocks and herds, the burning of houses,
the blasting of fields be a curse; how much greater is it to lose our
children, and to see God slay them before our eyes, in hatred to our persons,
and B detestation and loathing of our basenesse. When Jobs Messengers told him
the sad stories of fire from Heaven, the burning his sheep, and that the
Sabeans had driven his Oxen away, and the Chaldeans had stolne his Camels;
these were sad arrests to his troubled spirit: but it was reserved as the last
blow of that sad execution that the ru­ines of a house had crush'd his Sons
and Daughters to their graves. Sons & daughters are greater blessings then
sheep & Oxen: they are not servants of profit as sheep are, but they secure
greater ends of blesssing; they preserve your Names; they are so many titles
of provision & providence; every new childe is a new title to Gods care of
that C family: They serve the ends of honour, of commonwealths, and Kingdoms;
they are images of our souls, and images of God, and therefore are great
blessings; and by consequence, they are great riches, though they are not to
be sold for mony: and surely he that hath a cabinet of invaluable jewels will
think himself rich though he never sells them. Does God take care for Oxen?
(said our blessed Saviour) much more for you: yea all and every one of your
chil­dren are of more value then many Oxen: when therefore God for your sin
strikes them with crookednesse, with deformity, with foolishnesse, with
impertinent and caytive spirits, with hasty or sud­den D deaths, it is a
greater curse to us, then to lose whole herds of cattel, of which (it is
certain) most men would be very sensi­ble They are our goods; they are our
blessings from God; there­fore we are striken, when for our sakes they dye:
Therefore we may properly be punished by evils happening to our Re­latives.

2\. But as this is a punishment to us, so it is not un [...]ust as to them, 2
though they be innocent. For all the calamities of this life are inci­dent to
the most Godly persons of the world; and since the King of E Heaven and earth
was made a man of sorrows, it cannot be called unjust or intolerable that
innocent persons should be pressed with temporal infelicities: onely in such
cases we must distinguish the misery from the punishment; for that all the
world dyes is a pu­nishment of Adams sin: but it is no evil to those single
persons that die in the Lord; for they are blessed in their death. Jonathan
was killed the same day with his Father the King; and this was a punish­ment
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=26) to Saul
indeed; but to Jonathan it was a blessing: for since A God had appointed the
kingdom to his neighbour, it was more ho­nourable for him to die fighting the
Lords battel, then to live and see himself the lasting testimony of Gods curse
upon his Father; who lost the Kingdom from his family by his disobedience.
That death is a blessing which ends an Honorable, and prevents an in­glorious
life. And our children (it may be) shall be sanctified by a sorrow, and
purified by the fire of affliction, and they shall re­ceive the blessing of
it; but it is to their Fathers a curse, who shall wound their own hearts with
sorrow, and cover their heads with a robe of shame, for bringing so great evil
upon their house.B

3 3\. God hath many ends of providence to serve in this dispensa­tion of his
judgements. * 1. He expresses the highest indignation a­gainst 1 sin; and
makes his examples lasting, communicative, and of great effect; it is a little
image of hell; and we shall the lesse wonder that God with the pains of
eternity punishes the sins of time, when with our eyes we see him punish a
transient action with a lasting 2 judgement. * 2. It arrests the spirits of
men, and surprises their loosenesses, and restrains their gaiety, when we
observe that the judgements of God finde us out in all relations, and turns
our com­forts into sadnesse, and makes our families the scene of sorrows,C and
we can escape him no where; and by sin are made obnoxious not alone to
personall judgements; but that we are made like the fountains of the dead sea,
springs of the lake of Sodom; in stead of refreshing our families with
blessings, we leave them brimstone and drought, and poison, and an evil name,
and the wrath of God, and a treasure of wrath; and their Fathers sins for
their portion and inheritance. * Naturalists say that when the leading goats
in the Greek Islands have taken an Eryngus or sea holly into their mouths, all
the herd will stand still, till the herds man comes and for­ces it out, as
apprehending the evil that will come to them all, if any of them especially
their Principals, tast an unwholesome plant:D and indeed it is of a General
concernment, that the Master of a family, or the Prince of a people, from whom
as from a fountain many issues do derive upon their Relatives, should be
springs of health and sanctity and blessing. It is a great right and propriety
that a King hath in his people, or a Father in his children tha [...] even
their sins can do these a mischiefe, not one­ly by a direct violence, but by
the execution of Gods wrath: God hath made strange bands and vessels, or
chanels of commu­nication between them, when even the anger of God shal be
convei­ed E by the conduits of such relations. That would be considered. It
binds them neerer then our new doctrine will endure: but it also binds us to
pray for them and for their Holinesse, and good Go­vernment, as earnestly as
we would be delivered from death, or sick­nesse, or poverty, or war, or the
wrath of God in any instance.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=26) A 3\.
This also will satisfie the fearfulnesse of such persons who think the evil
prosperous, and call the proud happy. No man can 3 be called happy till he be
dead; nor then neither, if he lived viti­ously: Look how God handles him in
his children, in his family, in his grand-children; and as it tells that
generation which sees the judgement, that God was all the while angry with
him; so it supports the spirits of men in the intervall, and entertains them
with the expectation of a certain hope; for if I do not live to see his sin
punished, yet his posterity may finde themselves accursed, and feel their
fathers sins in their own calamity; and the expe­ctation, B or belief of that,
may relieve my oppression, and ease my sorrows, while I know that God will
bear my injury in a lasting record, and when I have forgot it, will bring it
forth to judgement. The Athenians were highly pleased when they saw honours
done to the posterity of Cimon [a good man, and a rare citizen, but murde
[...]ed for being wise and vertuous] and when at the same time they saw a
decree of banishment passe against the children of Lacharis, and Aristo, they
laid their hands upon their mouthes, and with silence did admire the justice
of the Power above.

C The sum of this is; That in sending evils upon the posterity of evil men,
God serves many ends of providence, some of wise­dome, some of mercy, some of
justice, and contradicts none: For the evil of the innocent son is the fathers
punishment upon the stock of his sin, and his relation; but the sad accident
happens to the son upon the score of nature, and many ends of providence, and
mercy. To which I adde, that if any, even the greatest temporall evil may fall
upon a man [as blindnesse did upon the blinde man in the Gospel] when neither
he nor his parents have sinned; much more may it do so, when his parents have,
though he have not. For D there is a neerer, or more visible commensuration of
justice, be­tween the parents sin, and the sons sicknesse, then between the
evil of the son, and the innocence of father and son together. The
dispensation therefore is righteous and severe.

3\. I am now to consider in what degree, and in what cases, this is usuall, or
to be expected. It is in the Text instanced in the matter of worshipping
images. God is so jealous of his honour, that he will not suffer an image of
himself to be made, lest the image dishonour the substance; nor any image of a
creature to be worshipped, though with a lesse honour, lest that lesse swell
up in­to E a greater: and he that is thus jealous of his honour, and
there­fore so instances it, is also very curious of it in all other
particulars; and though to punish the sins of fathers upon the children, be
more solemnly threatned in this sin onely, yet we finde it inflicted
indiffe­rently in any other great sin, as appears in the former precedents.

This one thing I desire to be strictly observed: That it is with [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=27) much errour, and
great indiligence usually taught in this question,A that the wrath of God
descends from fathers to children onely in case the children imitate, and
write after their fathers copy; suppo­sing these words [in them that hate me]
to relate to the children. But this is expressely against the words of the
Text, and the exam­ples of the thing: God afflicts good children of evil
parents, for their fathers sins; and the words are plain and determinate: God
visits the sins of the fathers in tertiam & quartam generationem eorum qui
oderunt me; to the third generation of them, of those fa­thers that hate me:
that is, upon the great-grand-children of such parents. So that if the great-
grandfathers be haters of God, and B lovers of iniquity, it may intail a curse
upon so many generations, though the children be haters of their fathers
hatred, and lovers of God. * And this hath been observed even by wise men
among the Heathens whose stories tell, that Antigonus was punished for the
tyranny of his father Demetrius; Phyleus for his father Augeas; pious and wise
Nestor for his father Neleus: And it was so in the case of Jonathan, who lost
the Kingdom and his life upon the stock of his fathers sins; and the innocent
childe of David was slain by the anger of God, not against the childe, who
never had deserved it, but the fathers adultery. I need not here repeat what C
I said in vindication of the Divine justice; but I observed this, to represent
the danger of a sinning father, or mother, when it shall so infect the family
with curses, that it shall ruine a wise and an innocent son; and that vertue
and innocence which shall by God be accepted as sufficient through the Divine
mercy to bring the son to Heaven, yet it may be shall not be accepted to quit
him from feeling the curse of his fathers crime, in a load of tempo­rall
infelicities: And who but a villain would ruine and undo a wise, a vertuous,
and his own son? But so it is in all the world. A traytor is condemned to
suffer death himself, and his posterity D are made beggers, and dishonourable,
his Escutcheon is rever­sed, his arms of honour are extinguished, the noblesse
of his An­cestours is forgotten, but his own sin is not, while men by the
characters of infamy are taught to call that family accursed which had so base
a father. Tiresias was esteemed unfortunate because he could not see his
friends and children: the poor man was blinde with age: But Athamas and Agave
were more miserable, who did see their children, but took them for Lions, and
Stags; The parents were miserably frantick: But of all, they deplored the
misery of Hercules; who when he saw his children, took them for E enemies, and
endeavoured to destroy them. And this is the case of all vitious parents. That
a mans enemies were they of his own house, was accounted a great calamity: but
it is worse, when we love them tenderly, and fondly, and yet do them all the
despite we wish to enemies; But so it is, that in many cases we do more
mis­chief [[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=27)
A to our children, then if we should strangle them when they are newly taken
from their mothers knees, or tear them in pieces as Medea did her brother
Absyrtus; For to leave them to inherit a curse, to leave them an intaild
calamity, a misery, a disease, the wrath of God for an inheritance, that it
may descend upon them, and remark the family like their coat of arms, is to be
the parent of evil, the ruine of our family, the causes of mischief of them,
who ought to be dearer to us then our own eyes. And let us re­member this,
when we are tempted to provoke the jealous God: let us consider that his anger
hath a progeny, and a descending B line, and it may break out in the dayes of
our Nephews. A Greek woman was accused of adultery, because she brought forth
a Black-moor; and could not acquit her self till she had proved that she had
descended in the fourth degree from an Ethiopian: Her great Grand-father was a
Moor. And if Naturalists say true, that Ne­phews are very often liker to their
Grandfathers then to their Fa­thers; we see that the semblance of our souls,
and the character of the person, is conveyed by secret and undiscernable
conveyances. Naturall production conveyes originall sin; and therefore, by the
chanels of the body, it is not strange that men convey an heredita­ry C sin:
And lustfull sons are usually born to Satyrs; and mon­sters of intemperance to
the drunkards; and there are also here­ditary diseases: which if in the
fathers they were effects of their sin, as it is in many cases, it is
notorious that the fathers sin is pu­nished, and the punishment conveyed by
naturall instruments: so that it cannot be a wonder, but it ought to be a huge
affrightment from a state of sin; If a man can be capable of so much charity,
as to love himself in his own person, or in the images of his na­ture, and
heirs of his fortunes, and the supports of his family, in the children that
God hath given him. Consider therefore that D you do not onely act your own
tragedies when you sin, but you represent and effect the fortune of your
children; you slay them with your own barbarous and inhumane hands. Onely be
pleased to compare the variety of estates; of your own and your children. If
they on earth be miserable many times for their fathers sins, how great a
state of misery is that in hell which they suffer for their own? And how vile
a person is that father, or mother, who for a little money, or to please a
lust, will be a parricide, and imbrue E his hands in the blood of his own
children?

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=28)

## 4\. The Intail of Curses cut off.SERM. IV. A  
Part II.B

4\. I Am to consider what remedies there are for sons to cut off this intail
of curses; and whether, and by what means it is possible for sons to prevent
the being punished for their fathers sins? And since this thing is so perplext
and intri­cate, hath so easie an objection, and so hard an answer, looks so
like a cruelty, and so unlike a justice, (though it be infinitely just, and
very severe, and a huge enemy to sin) it cannot be thought but that there are
not onely wayes left to reconcile Gods proceed­ing to the strict rules of
justice, but also the condition of man to C the possibilities of Gods usuall
mercies. One said of old, Ex tar­ditate si Dij sontes praetereant, & insontes
plectant, justitiam suam non sic rectè resarciunt. If God be so slow to punish
the guilty, that the punishment be deferred till the death of the guilty
per­son; and that God shall be forced to punish the innocent, or to let the
sin quite escape unpunished▪ it will be something hard to joyn that justice
with mercy, or to joyn that action with justice. In­deed it will seem strange,
but the reason of its justice, I have already discoursed: If now we can finde
how to reconcile this to Gods mercy too, or can learn how it may be turned
into a mercy,D we need to take no other care, but that for our own particular
we take heed we never tempt Gods anger upon our families, and that by
competent and apt instruments, we indeavour to cancell the decree, if it be
gone out against our families; for then we make use of that severity which God
intended; and our selves shall be refreshed in the shades, and by the cooling
brooks of the Divine mercy; even then when we see the wrath of God breaking
out upon the families round about us.

1\. The first means to cut off the intail of wrath and cursings from a family,
is for the sons to disavow those signall actions of E impiety, in which their
fathers were deeply guilty, and by which they stained great parts of their
life, or have done something of very great unworthinesse and disreputation. Si
quis paterni vitij nascitur haeres, nascitur & poenae: The heir of his fathers
wicked­nesse, is the heir of his fathers curse; and a son comes to inherite a
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=28) A
wickednesse from his father three wayes. 1. By approving, or any wayes
consenting to his fathers Sin: As by speaking of it with­out regret, or shame;
by pleasing himself in the story; or by having an evil minde, apt to counsell
or do the like, if the same cir­cumstances should occur. For a son may
contract a sin, not onely by derivation, and the contagion of example, but by
approbati­on; not onely by a corporall, but by a virtuall contact; not one­ly
by transcribing an evil copy, but by commending it: and a man may have animum
leprosum in cute mundâ, a leprous and a polluted minde even for nothing, even
for an empty and inef­fective B lust. An evil minde may contract the curse of
an evil acti­on; and though the son of a covetous father prove a prodigall,
yet if he loves his fathers vice for ministring to his vanity, he is disposed,
not onely to a judgement for his own prodigality, but also to the curse of his
fathers avarice.

2\. The son may inherit his fathers wickednesse by imitation and direct
practise, and then the curse is like to come to pur­pose; a curse by
accumulation, a treasure of wrath: and then the children as they arrive to the
height of wickednesse by a speedy passage, as being t [...]rust forward by an
active example, by coun­tenance, by education, by a seldom restraint, by a
remisse disci­pline; C so they ascertain a curse to the family, by being a
perverse generation, a family set up in opposition against God, by conti­nuing
and increasing the provocation.

3\. Sons inherit their fathers crimes, by receiving, and en­joying the
purchases of their rapine, injustice, and oppression, by rising upon the ruine
of their fathers souls, by sitting warme in the furres which their father
stole, and walking in the grounds which are water'd with the tears of
oppressed orphanes, and wi­dows. Now in all these cases the rule holds. If the
son inherits D the sin, he cannot call it unjust, if he inherits also his
fathers pu­nishment. But to rescind the fatall chain and break in sunder the
line of Gods anger, a son is tied in all these cases to disavow his fa­thers
crime. But because the cases are severall, he must also in se­verall manners
do it.

1\. Every man is bound not to glory in, or speak honour of the powerfull and
unjust actions of his Ancestors▪ But as all the sons of Adam are bound to be
ashamed of that originall stain which they derive from the loins of their
abused Father, they E must be humbled in it, they must deplore it as an evil
Mother, and a troublesome daughter: so must children account it amongst the
crosses of their family, and the stains of their honour, that they passed
thorow so impure chanels, that in the sense of mora­lity as well as nature,
they can say to corruption, thou art my fa­ther, and to rottennesse, thou art
my mother. I do not say that sons are bound to publish, or declaim against
their father crimes, and [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=29) to speak of
their shame in Piazza's and before Tribunals; that in­deed A were a sure way
to bring their fathers sins upon their own heads, by their own faults. No:
Like Sem, and Japhet they must go backward, and cast a vail upon their
nakednesse and shame, lest they bring the curse of their fathers angry
dishonour upon their own impious and unrelenting heads. Noahs drunken­nesse
fell upon Chams head, because he did not hide the open­nesse of his fathers
follies: he made his father ridiculous; but did not endeavour either to amend
the sin, or to wrap the dishonour in a pious covering He that goes to disavow
his fathers sin by publishing his shame, hides an ill face with a more ugly
vizor and endeavours B by torches and phantastick lights, to quench the
burn­ing of that house which his father set on fire: These fires are to be
smothered and so extinguished. I deny not but it may become the piety of a
childe to tell a sad story, to mourn, and represent a reall grief for so great
a misery, as is a wicked father or mother; but this is to be done with a
tendernesse, as nice as we would dresse an eye withall; it must be onely with
designes of charity, of coun­sell, of ease, and with much prudence, and a sad
spirit: These things being secured, that which in this case remains is, that
with all entercourses between God and our selves, we disavow C the crime.

Children are bound to pray to God, to sanctifie, to cure, to forgive their
parents: and even concerning the sins of our forefa­thers, the Church hath
taught us in her Letanies, to pray that God would be pleased to forgive them,
so that neither we, nor they may sink under the wrath of God for them.
[Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Ours] in common and conjunction: And Da­vid
confessed to God, and humbled himself for the sins of his An­cestors and
Decessors: Our fathers have done amisse, and dealt wic­kedly,D neither kept
they thy great goodnesse in remembrance, but were disobedient at the sea, even
at the red sea. So did good King Josiah,2 King 32. 13. Great is the wrath of
the Lord which is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkned
unto the words of this book. But this is to be done between God and our
selves: or if in pub­like, then to be done by generall accusation; that God
onely may read our particular sorrows in the single shame of our families
registred in our hearts, and represented to him with humiliation, shame and a
hearty prayer.

2\. Those curses which descend from the Fathers to the children E by imitation
of the crimes of their progenitors, are to be cut off by special and personal
repentance, and prayer, as being a state di­rectly opposite to that which
procured the curse: And if the sons be pious, or return to an early and a
severe course of Holy living, they are to be remedied as other innocent and
pious persons are, who [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=29) A are sufferers
under the burdens of their Relatives, whom I shall con­sider by and by. Onely
observe this; that no publick or imaginative disavowings no ceremonial and
pompous rescission of our Fathers crimes can be sufficient to interrupt the
succession of the curse, if the children do secretly practise or approve what
they in pretence or ceremony disavow: and this is clearly proved (and it will
help to explicate that difficult saying of our B. Saviour,) Wo unto you▪ for
ye build the sepulchre of the Prophets and your Fathers killed them: Luke. 11.
47. true­ly ye beare witnesse that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for
they kil­led them and ye build their sepulchres: that is, the Pharisees were B
huge hypocrites, and adorned the monuments of the Martyr Pro­phets, and in
words disclaim [...]d their Fathers sin, but in deeds and de­signe they
approved it. 1. Because they secretly wish'd all such per­sons dead; colebant
mortuos quos nollent Superstites: In charity to themselves some men wish their
enemies in Heaven, and would be at charges for a monument for them, that their
malice and their power and their bones might rest in the same grave: and yet
that wish, and that expence is no testimony of their Charity but of their
anger. 2. These men were willing that the monuments of those Pro­phets should
remain and be a visible affrightment to all such bold C persons and severe
reprehenders as they were; and therefore they builded their Sepulchres to be
as beacons, and publications of dan­ger to al Honest Preachers. And this was
the account Saint Chryso­stome gave of the place. 3. To which also the
circumstances of the place concur. For they onely said, if they had lived in
their Fa­thers dayes they would not have done as they did; but it is certain
they approved it, because they pursued the same courses: and there­fore our
blessed Saviour calls them  [...],Mat. 23. 31. Not onely the children of them
that did kill the Prophets, but a Killing generation; the sin also descends
upon you, for ye have the same killing minde, D and although you honour them
that are dead, and cannot shame you; yet you designe the same usages against
them that are alive even against the Lord of the Prophets, against Christ
himself, whom ye will kil: and as Dion said of Caracalla [...] The man was
troublesome to all good men when they were alive, but did them honour when
they were dead: And when Herod had killed Aristobulus, yet he made him a most
magnificent funeral; & because the Pharisees were of the same humor, therefore
our blessed Saviour bids them to fil up the mea­sure of their Fathers
iniquity; for they still continued the malice, onely E they painted it over
with a pretence of piety, and of disavow­ing their Fathers sin; which if they
had done really, they being chil­dren of persecutors, and much lesse could the
adorning of the Prophets sepulchres have been just cause of a wo from Christ;
this being an act of piety, and the other of nature, inevitable, and not
chosen by them; and therefore not chargable upon them. He therefore that
[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=30) will to
reall purposes disavow his Fathers crimes; must do it hearti­ly A and humbly,
and charitably, and throw off all affections to the like actions. For he that
findes fault with his Father for killing Isaiah, or Jeremy, and himself shall
ki [...]l Aristobulus and John the Baptist; he that is angry because the old
Prophets were murdered, and shall imprison, and begger and destroy the new
ones; He that dis­avows the persecution in the primitive times, and honours
the me­mory of the dead Martyrs, and yet every day makes new ones; He that
blames the oppression of the Country by any of his predeces­sors, and yet
shall continue to oppresse his Tenants, and all that are within his gripe,
that man cannot hope to be eased from the curse B of his Fathers sins: He goes
on to imitate them, and therefore to fill up their measure, and to reap a full
treasure of wrath.

3\. But concerning the third; there is yet more difficulty. Those sons that
inherit their Fathers sins by possessing the price of their Fa­thers souls,
that is, by enjoying the goods gotten by their Fathers rapine, may certainly
quit the inheritance of the curse, if they quit the purchase of the sin, that
is, if they pay their Fathers debts; his debts of contract, and his debts of
justice; his debts of entercourse, and his debts of oppression. I do not say
that every man is bound to restore all the land which his Ancestors have
unjustly snatched:C for when by law the possession is established, though the
Grand­father entred like a thief, yet the Grand-child is bonae fidei
possessor, and may enjoy it justly: and the reasons of this are great, and
necessary; for the avoiding eternal suites, and perpetual diseases of rest and
conscience: because there is no estate in the world that could be enjoyed by
any man honestly, if posterity were bound to make restitution of all the
wrongs done by their progenitors. But although the children of the far removed
lines, are not obli­ged to restitution, yet others are; and some for the same,
some for other reasons.D

1▪ Sons are tied to restore what their Fathers did usurpe, or to make
agreement, and an acceptable recompence for it, if the case be visible,
evident and notorious, and the oppressed party de­mands it; because in this
case the law hath not setled the pos­session in the new tenant: or if a judge
hath, it is by injury; and there is yet no collateral accidental title
transferred by long pos­session, as it is in other cases: and therefore if the
son continues to oppresse the same person, whom his Father first injured, he
may well expect to be the heire of his Fathers curse, as well as of his
cur­sed purchase.E

2\. Whether by law and justice, or not, the person be obliged, nay although by
all the solemnities of law the unjust purchase be e­stablished, and that in
conscience the Grand-children be not obliged to restitution in their own
particulars, but may continue to enjoy it without a new sin; yet if we see a
curse descending upon the family [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=30) A for the old
oppression done in the dayes of our Grandfathers; or if we probably suspect
that to be the cause; then if we make resti­tution, we also most certainly
remove the curse: because we take away the matter upon which the curse is
grounded: I do not say, we sin, if we do not restore: but that, if we do not,
we may still be punished; The reason of this is clear and visible: For as
with­out our faults, in many cases we may enjoy those lands which our
forefathers got unjustly: so without our faults we may be punish­ed for them.
For as they have transmitted the benefit to us, it is but reasonable we should
suffer the appendant calamity. If we re­ceive B good, we must also venture the
evil that comes along with it: res transit cum suo onere. All lands and
possessions passe with their proper burdens. And if any of my Ancestors was a
Tenant, and a servant, and held his lands as a Villane to his Lord, his
posterity also must do so, though accidentally they become noble. The case is
the same If my Ancestors entred unjustly, there is a curse and a plague that
is due to that oppression and injustice; and that is the burden of the land,
and it descends all along with it: And al­though I by the consent of laws am a
just possessor, yet I am obliged C to the burden that comes with the land: I
am indeed another kinde of person then my Grand-father; he was an usurper, but
I am a just possessor; but because in respect of the land this was but an
accidentall change, therefore I still am liable to the burden, and the curse
that descends with it: but the way to take off the curse is to quit the title;
and yet a man may choose. It may be to loose the land would be the bigger
curse: but if it be not; the way is certain how you may be rid of it. * There
was a custome among the Greeks that the children of them that dyed of
consumptions or dropsies, all the while their Fathers bodies D were burning in
their funeral piles did sit with their feet in cold water, hoping that such a
lustration, and ceremony would take off the lineal and descending contagion
from the children: I know not what cure they found by their superstition; but
we may be sure, that if we wash (not our feet, but) our hands of all the
unjust pur­chases which our Fathers have transmitted to us, their hydropick
thirst of wealth shall not transmit to us a consumption of estate, or any
other curse. But this remedy is onely in the matter of injury, or oppression,
not in the case of other sins: because other sins were transient; and as the
guilt did not passe upon the children, so E neither did the exteriour and
permanent effect: and therefore in other sins (in case they do derive a curse)
it cannot be removed, as in the matter of unjust possession, it may be; whose
effect (we may so order it) shall no more stick to us then the guilt of our
fa­thers personal actions.

The summe is this. As Kingdoms use to expiate the faults of o­thers by acts of
justice: and as Churches use to remove the accur­sed thing from sticking to
the communities of the faithful, and the [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=31) sins of
Christians from being required of the whole Congregation,A by excommunicating
and censuring the delinquent persons: so the Heires and sons of families, are
to remove from their house the curse descending from their Fathers loins, by
1. Acts of disavow­ing the sins of their Ancestors, 2. By praying for pardon,
3. by be­ing humbled for them, 4. By renouncing the example and, 5. Quit­ting
the affection to the crimes, 6. By not imitaing the actions in Kinde, or in
semblance and similitude; and lastly, 7. By refusing to rejoyce in the ungodly
purchases in which their Fathers did amisse and dealt wickedly.

Secondly, But after all this, many cases do occur, in which we B finde that
innocent sons are punished: The remedies I have already discoursed of, are for
such children who have in some manner or other contracted and derived the sin
upon themselves. But if we inquire, how those sons who have no entercourse, or
affinity with their fathers sins; or whose fathers sins were so transient,
that no benefit or effect did passe upon their posterity, how they may
pre­vent, or take off the curse that lyes upon the family, for their Fa­thers
faults; this will have some distinct considerations.

1 1\. The pious children of evil Parents are to stand firme upon the
confidence of the Divine grace and mercy; and upon that per­suasion C to begin
to work upon a new stock. For it is as certain that he may derive a blessing
upon his Posterity, as that his Parents could transmit a curse: and if any man
by piety shall procure Gods favour to his Relatives and children, it is
certain that he hath done more, then to escape the punishment of his Fathers
follies. If sin doth abound, and evils by sin are derived from his Parents,
much more shall grace super abound, and mercy by grace. If he was in dan­ger
from the crimes of others, much rather shall he be secured by his own piety:
For if God punishes the sins of the fathers to four D generations, yet he
rewards the piety of fathers to ten, to hundreds, and to thousands. Many of
the Ancestors of Abraham were persons not noted for religion; but suffered in
the publike impiety, and al­most universal idolatry of their ages; and yet all
the evils that could thence descend upon the family, were wiped off; and God
began to reckon with Abraham upon a new stock of blessings and piety; and he
was under God, the Original of so great a blessing, that his family for 1500.
years together had from him a title to many favours; and what ever evils did
chance to them in the de­scending ages, were but single evils, in respect of
that treasure of E mercies which the fathers piety had obtained to the whole
nation. And it is remarkable to observe; how blessings did stick to them for
their fathers sakes, even whether they would or no. For first, his Grand-
childe Esau proved a naughty man, and he lost the great blessing which was
intailed upon the family; but he got, not a curse, but a lesse blessing: and
yet because he lost the greater bles­sing, God excluded him from being
reckoned in the elder time; [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=31) A for God
foreseeing the event, so ordered it that he should first lose his birth-right,
and then lose the blessing; for it was to be certain, the family must be
reckoned for prosperous in the pro­per line; and yet God blessed Esau into a
great Nation, and made him the Father of many Princes. Now the line of
blessing being reckoned in Jacob, God blessed his family strangely, and by
mira­cle, for almost five generations; he brought them from Egypt by mighty
signes and wonders; and when for sin they all died in their way to Canaan, two
onely excepted, God so ordered it, that they were all reckoned as single
deaths, the Nation still descen­ding B like a river whose waters were drunk up
for the beauvrage of an army, but still it keeps its name and current, and the
waters are supplied by showers, and springs, and providence. After this,
in­iquity still increased, and then God struck deeper, and spread curses upon
whole families: he translated the Priesthood from line to line, he removed the
Kingome from one family to another; and still they sinned worse; and then we
read that God smote almost a whole tribe; the tribe of Benjmin was almost
extinguished about the matter of the Levites Concubine: but still God
remembred his promise which he made with their forefathers, and that breach
was made up Af­ter C this we finde a greater rupture made▪ and ten tribes fell
into ido­latry, and ten tribes were carried captives into Assyria and never
came again: But still God remembred his covenant with Abraham, and left two
Tribes; but they were restlesse in their provocation of the God of Abraham;
and they also were carried captive: But still God was the God of their fathers
and brought them back, and placed them safe, and they grew again into a
Kingdom and should have remained for ever but that they killed one that was
greater then Abraham, even the Messias; and then they were rooted out, and the
old covenant cast off, and God delighted no more to D be called the God of
Abraham; but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. As long as God kept that
relation, so long for the fathers sakes they had a title and an inheritance to
a blessing: for so saith Saint Paul [As touching the election they are beloved
for the Fa­thers sakes.] Rom. 11. 28.

I did insist the longer upon this instance that I might remonstrate how great
and how sure, and how persevering mercies, a pious Father of a family may
derive upon his succeeding generations: And if we do but tread in the
footsteps of our Father Abraham, we E shall inherit as certain blessings. But
then I pray, adde these con­siderations.

1\. If a great impiety, and a clamorous wickednesse hath stain­ed the honour
of a family, and discomposed its title to the Divine mercies and protection,
it is not an ordinary piety that can restore this family. An ordinary, even
course of life, full of sweetnesse, and innocency will secure every single
person in his own eternal [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=32) interest: but
that piety which must be a spring of blessings, and A communicative to others,
that must plead against the sins of their Ancestors, and begin a new bank of
mercies for the Relatives; that, must be a great, and excellent, a very
religious state of life. A smal pension will maintain a single person: but he
that hath a nume­rous family, and many to provide for, needs a greater
providence of God, and a bigger provision for their maintenance: and a small
revenue will not keep up the dignity of a great house; especially, if it be
charged with a great debt: And this is the very state of the present question.
That piety that must be instrumental to take off the curse imminent upon a
family; to blesse a numerous posterity,B to secure a fair condition to many
ages, and to pay the debts of their Fathers sins, must be so large, as that
all necessary expences, and dutyes for his own soul being first discharged, it
may be re­markeable in great expressions it may be exemplar to all the
fa­mily, it may be of universal efficacie, large in the extension of parts,
deep in the intension of degrees: and then, as the root of a tree receives
nourishment, not onely sufficient to preserve its own life, but to transmit a
plastick juice to the trunk of the tree, and from thence to the utmost branch
and smallest gem that knots in the most distant part: So shall the great and
exemplar piety C of the father of a family, not onely preserve to the interest
of his own soul the life of grace, and hopes of glory, but shall be a
quick­ning spirit, active and communicative of ablessing, not onely to the
trunk of the tree to the body and rightly descending line, but e­ven to the
collateral branches, to the most distant relatives, and all that shall claim a
kinred, shall have a title to a blessing. And this was the way that was
prescribed to the family of Eli, upon whom a sad curse was intailed that there
should not be an old man of the family for ever, and that they should be
beggers, and lose the office of Priesthood: by the counsel of R. Johanan the
son D of Zacheus all the family betook themselves to a great, a strict and a
severe religion; and God was intreated to revoke his decree, to be reconciled
to the family, to restore them to the common con­dition of men, from whence
they stood separate by the displeasure of God against the crime of Eli, and
his Sons Hophni and Phinehas. This course is sure either to take off the
judgement, or to change it into a blessing; to take a way the rod, or the
smart and evil of it; to convert the punishment into a meer naturall, or
humane chance, and that chance to the opportunity of a vertue, and that vertue
to the occasion of a crown.E

2\. It is of great use for the securing of families, that every Master of a
family order his life so that his piety and vertue be as communicative as is
posible; that is, that he secure the religion of his whole family, by a severe
supravision and animadversion, and by cutting off all those unprofitable and
hurtful branches [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=32) A which load the
tree and hinder the growth, and stock & disimprove the fruit, & revert evil
juice to the very root it self. Calvisius Sabinus laid out vast sums of mony
upon his servants, to stock his house with learned men; and bought one that
could recite all Homer by heart; a second that was ready at Hesiod; a third at
Pindar; and for every of the Lyricks one: having this fancy that all that
learning was his own, & what soever his servants knew, made him so much the
more skilful. It was noted in the man for a rich and a prodigal folly: but if
he had chang'd his instance, & bought none but vertuous servants in­to his
house, he might better have reckoned his wealth upon their B stock, & the
piety of his family might have helped to blesse him, and to have increased the
treasure of the Masters vertue. Every man that would either cut off the title
of an old curse, or secure a blessing up­on a new stock, must make vertue as
large in the fountain as he can that it may the sooner water all his Relatives
with fruitfulnesse and blessings. And this was one of the things that God
noted in Abraham, and blessed his family for it, and his posterity. I know
that Abraham will teach his sons to fear me. When a man teaches his family to
know and fear God, then he scatters a blessing round about his habitation. And
this helps to illustrate the reason of the thing as well as to prove C its
certainty. We hear it spoken in our books of Religion, that the faith of the
parents is imputed to their children to good purposes, & that a good husband
sanctifies an ill wife, & a beleeving wife, an unbe­leeving husband; and
either of them makes the children to be sancti­fied▪ else they were unclean,
and unholy; that is, the very designing chil­dren to the service of God is a
sanctification of them; and therefore S. Hierom cals Christian children
Candidatos fidei Christianae: and if this very designation of them makes them
holy; that is, acceptable to God, intitled to the promises, partakers of the
Covenant, within the condition of sons; much more shall it be effectual to
greater bles­sings D when the Parents take care that the children shall be
actually pious, full of sobriety, full of religion, then it becomes a holy
house, a chosen generation, an elect family; and then there can no evil happen
to them, but such which will bring them neerer to God; that is, no crosse, but
the crosse of Christ; no misfortune, but that which shall lead them to
felicity: and if any semblance of a curse happens in the generations it is but
like the anathema of a sacrifice; not an accursed, but a devoted thing: for so
the sacrifice upon whose neck the Priests knife doth fall, is so far from
being accursed, that it helps to get a blessing to all that joyn in the
oblation: so every misfortune that shal E discompose the ease of a pious and
religious family shall but make them sit to be presented unto God; and the rod
of God shall be like the branches of fig-trees, bitter and sharp in
themselves, but pro­ductive of most delicious fruit: no evil can curse the
family whose stock is pious, and whose branches are Holinesse unto the Lord.
If any leaf, or any boughs shall fall untimely, God shall gather it up, and
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=33) place it
in his Temple, or at the foot of his throne; and that family A must needs be
blessed, whom infelicity it self cannot make accursed.

3\. If a curse be feared to descend upon a family for the fault of their
Ancestors; pious sons have yet another way to secure them­selves, & to
withdraw the curse from the family, or themselves from the curse; and that is,
by doing some very great & illustrious act of piety, an action in gradu
heroico (as Aristotle cals it) an heroicall acti­on. If there should happen to
be one Martyr in a family, it would reconcile the whole kinred to God, & make
him who is more inclined to mercy then to severity, rather to be pleased with
the Relatives of the Martyr, then continue to be angry with the Nephews of a
decea­sed B sinner. I cannot insist long upon this: But you may see it proved
by one great instance in the case of Phinehas, who killed an unclean Prince, &
turned the wrath of God from his people: he was zealous for God and for his
countreymen, & did an heroicall action of zeal: Wherefore (saith God) Behold I
give unto him my covenant of peace, Numb. 25. 12. and he shall have it, & his
seed after him, even the covenant of an ever­lasting priesthood; because he
was zealous for his God, & made an atone­ment for the children of Israel. Thus
the sons of Rechab obtain [...]d the blessing of an enduring and blessed
family, because they were most strict & religious observers of their fathers
precept, and kept it after C his death, & abstained from wine for ever; and no
temptation could invite them to taste it; for they had as great reverence to
their fa­thers ashes, as being children they had to his rod, & to his eyes.
Thus a man may turn the wrath of God from his family, & secure a bles­sing for
posterity, by doing some great noble acts of charity, or a re­markable
chastity, like that of Joseph; or an expensive, an effectio­nate religion and
love to Christ and his servants (as Mary Magdalene did). Such things as these
which are extraordinary egressions and transvolations beyond the ordinary
course of an even piety, God loves to reward with an extraordinary favour; and
gives it testimo­ny D by an extraregular blessing.

One thing more I have to adde by way of advice; and that is, that all parents
and fathers of families, from whose loyns a blessing or a curse usually does
descend, be very carefull, not onely generally in all the actions of their
lives (for that I have already pressed) but, particularly in the matter of
repentance; that they be curious that they finish it, & do it thorowly: for
there are certain  [...], leavings of repentance, which makes that Gods anger
is taken from us so imperfectly: and although God for his sake who died for
us, will pardon a returning sinner, & bring him to heaven through tri­bulation
E & a fiery triall; yet when a man is weary of his sorrow, & his fastings are
a load to him, & his sins are not so perfectly renoun­ced, or hated as they
ought, the parts of repentance which are left unfinished do sometimes fall
upon the heads, or upon the fortunes of the children. I do not say, this is
regular and certain, but some­times [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=33) A God deals
thus. For this thing hath been so, and therefore it may be so again: we see it
was done in the case of Ahab; he humbled himself and went softly, and lay in
sackcloth, and called for par­don and God took from him a judgement which was
falling hea­vily upon him: but we all know his repentance was imperfect and
lame: The same evil fell upon his sons; for so said God; I will bring the evil
upon his house in his sons dayes. Leave no arreares for thy posterity to pay;
but repent with an integral, a holy and excellent repentance, that God being
reconciled to thee thoroughly, for thy sake also he may blesse thy seed after
thee.

B And after all this, adde a continual, a servent, a hearty, a never ceasing
prayer for thy children, ever remembring when they beg a blessing, that God
hath put much of their fortune into your hands; and a transient formal [God
blesse thee] will not out-weigh the load of a great vice; and the curse that
scatters from thee by virtual con­tact, and by the chanels of relation, if
thou beest a vicious person: Nothing can issue from thy fountain but bitter
waters. And as it were a great impudence for a condemned Traitor to beg of his
injured Prince a province for his son, for his sake so it is an ineffective
blessing C we give our children, when we beg for them, what we have no title
to for our selves, Nay, when we can convey to them nothing but a curse. The
praier of a sinner, the unhallowed wish of a vit [...]ous Parent is but a poor
donative to give to a childe who suck'd poison from his nurse, and derives
cursing from his Parents. They are punished with a double torture in the shame
and paines of the damned, who dying Enemies to God have left an inventary of
sins and wrath to be divided amongst their children. But they that can truely
give a bles­sing to their children, are such as live a blessed life, and pray
holy prayers, and perform an integral repentance, and do separate from C the
sins of their Progenitors, and do illustrious actions, and begin the blessing
of their family upon a new stock; for as from the eyes of some persons, there
shoots forth a visible influence; and some have an evil eye, and are
infectious; some look healthfully as a friend­ly planet, and innocent as
flowers: and as some fancies convey pri­vate effects to confederate and
allayed bodyes; and between the ve­ry vital spirits of friends and Relatives
there is a cognation, and they refresh each other like social plants, and a
good man is a * friend to every Good man; and (they say) that an usuter knows
an usurer, [...]. Aris [...]ot. and one rich man another, there being by the
very man­ners E of men contracted a similitude of nature, and a communication
of effects: so in parents and their children there is so great a society of
nature and of manners, of blessing and of cursing, that an evil pa­rent cannot
perish in a single death; and holy parents never eat their meal of blessing
alone; but they make the roome shine like the fire of a holy sacrifice: and a
Fathers or a Mothers piety makes all the house festivall, and full of joy from
generation to generation. Amen.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=34)

## 5\. Sermon. V.SERM. V. A THE B Invalidity of a late, or death­bed
Repentance.C

13\. Jeremy 16.‘Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darknesse,
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for
light, or, (left while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of
death, and make it grosse darknesse.’

GOd is the eternall fountain of honour, and the D spring of glory; in him it
dwells essentially, from him it derives originally; and when an action is
glorious, or a man is honourable, it is because the action is pleasing to God,
in the relation of obe­dience or imitation, and because the man is honou­red
by God, or by Gods Vicegerent; and there­fore God cannot be dishonoured,
because all honour comes from himself; he cannot but be glorified, because to
be himself is to be infinitely glorious. And yet he is pleased to say, that
our sins di­shonour him, and our obedience does glorifie him. But as the Sun,E
the great eye of the world, prying into the recesses of rocks, and the
hollownesse of valleys, receives species, or visible forms from these objects,
but he beholds them onely by that light which pro­ceeds from himself: So does
God who is the light of that eye; he receives reflexes and returns from us,
and these he calls glorifi­cations [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=34) A of himself,
but they are such which are made so by his own gracious acceptation. For God
cannot be glorified by any thing but by himself, and by his own instruments,
which he makes as mirrours to reflect his own excellency, that by seeing the
glory of such emanations, he may rejoyce in his own works, because they are
images of his infinity. Thus when he made the beauteous frame of heaven and
earth, he rejoyced in it, and glorified himself, because it was the glasse in
which he beheld his wisedom, and Al­mighty power: And when God destroyed the
old world, in that also he glorified himself; for in those waters he saw the
image of B his justice; they were the looking glasse for that Attribute; and
God is said to laugh at, and rejoyce in the destruction of a sinner, because
he is pleased with the Oeconomy of his own lawes, and the excellent
proportions he hath made of his judgements, con­sequent to our sins. But above
all, God rejoyced in his Holy Son, for he was the image of the Divinity, the
character and expresse image of his person, in him he beheld his own Essence,
his wise­dom, his power, his justice, and his person, and he was that
ex­cellent instrument, designed from eternall ages to represent as in a double
mirrour, not onely the glories of God to himself, but al­so C to all the
world; and he glorified God by the instrument of obe­dience, in which God
beheld his own dominion, and the sanctity of his lawes clearly represented;
and he saw his justice glorified, when it was fully satisfied by the passion
of his Son; and so he hath transmitted to us a great manner of the Divine
glorification, being become to us the Authour, and the Example of giving glory
to God after the manner of men, that is, by well-doing, and pa­tient
suffering, by obeying his lawes, and submitting to his power, by imitating his
holinesse, and confessing his goodnesse, by remain­ing innocent, or becoming
penitent; for this also is called in the Text D[GIVING GLORY TO THE LORD OUR
GOD.]

For he that hath dishonoured God by sins, that is, hath denied, by a morall
instrument of duty, and subordination, to confesse the glories of his power,
and the goodnesse of his lawes, and hath dishonoured, and despised his mercy,
which God intended as an in­strument of our piety, hath no better way to
glorifie God, then by returning to his duty, to advance the honour of the
Divine Attributes in which he is pleased to communicate himself, and to have
entercourse with man. He that repents, confesses his owner­rour, E and the
righteousnesse of Gods lawes, and by judging him­self confesses that he
deserves punishment, and therefore that God is righteous if he punishes him:
and by returning, confesses God to be the fountain of felicity, and the
foundation of true, solid, and permanent joyes, saying in the sense and
passion of the Disci­ples, Whither shall we go? for thou hast the words of
eternall life: and by humbling himself, exalts God by making the proportions
[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=35) of
distance more immense, and vast: and as repentance does con­tain A in it all
the parts of holy life which can be performed by a re­turning sinner (all the
acts, and habits of vertue, being but parts, or instances, or effects of
repentance): so all the actions of a ho­ly life do constitute the masse and
body of all those instruments whereby God is pleased to glorifie himself. *
For if God is glori­fied in the Sunne and Moon, in the rare fabrick of the
honey­combs, in the discipline of Bees, in the oeconomy of Pismires, in the
little houses of birds, in the curiosity of an eye, God being pleased to
delight in those little images and reflexes of himself from those pretty
mirrours, which like a crevice in a wall thorow B a narrow perspective
transmit the species of a vast excellency: much rather shall God be pleased to
behold himself in the glasses of our obedience, in the emissions of our will
and understanding; these being rationall and apt instruments to expresse him,
farre better then the naturall, as being neerer communications of himself.

But I shall no longer discourse of the Philosophy of this ex­pression; certain
it is, that in the stile of Scripture, repentance is the great glorification
of God; and the Prophet, by calling the peo­ple to give God glory, calls upon
them to repent; and so expresses C both the duty and the event of it; the
event being [Glory to God on high, and peace on earth, and good will towards
men] by the sole instrument of repentance. And this was it which Joshuah said
to Achan,Joshuah 7. 19. [Give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
make confession unto him: that one act of repentance is one act of glorifying
God:Psal. 51. 4. and this, David acknowledged, Against the onely have I
sinned, ut tu justificeris, that thou mightest be justified, or cleared, that
is, that God may have the honour of be­ing righteous, and we, the shame of
receding from so excellent a perfection:Rom. 3. 4. or as S. Paul quotes and
explicates the place. Let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written,
that thou mightest be D justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when
thou art judged. But to clear the sense of this expression of the Prophet,
observe the words of S. John:Revel. 16. 9. and men were scorched with great
heat, and blasphemed the name of God who hath power over those plagues, and
they repented not to give him glory.

So that having strength and reason from these so many autho­rities, I may be
free to read the words of my Text thus, [Repent of all your sins before God
cause darknesse, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains] and
then we have here the duty of re­pentance,E and the time of its performance;
it must be  [...] a seasonable and timely repentance, a repentance which must
be­gin before our darknesse begin, a repentance in the day time, ut dum dies
est operemini, that ye may work while it is to day, lest if we stumble upon
the dark mountains, that is, fall into the ruines of [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=35) A old age, which
makes a broad way narrow, and a plain way to be a craggy mountain; or if we
stumble and fall into our last sicknesse, instead of health God send us to our
grave, and instead of light and salvation which we then confidently look for,
he make our state to be outer darknesse, that is, misery irremediable, misery
eternall.

This exhortation of the Prophet was alwayes full of caution and prudence, but
now it is highly necessary; since men who are so clamorously called to
repentance that they cannot avoid the necessi­ty of it, yet that they may
reconcile an evil life with the hopes of B heaven, have crowded this duty into
so little room, that it is al­most strangled and extinct; and they have lopped
off so many members, that they have reduced the whole body of it to the
di­mensions of a little finger, sacrificing their childhood to vanity, their
youth to lust, and to intemperance, their manhood to am­bition and rage, pride
and revenge, secular desires, and unholy actions; and yet still further,
giving their old age to covetousnesse and oppression, to the world, and to the
Devil; and after all this what remains for God and for Religion? Oh, for that,
they wll C do well enough; upon their death-bed they will think a few godly
thoughts, they will send for a Priest to minister comfort to them; they will
pray and ask God forgivenesse, and receive the holy Sacrament, and leave their
goods behinde them, disposing them to their friends and relatives, and some
Dole, and issues of the almes-basket to the poor; and if after all this they
die quiet­ly, and like a lambe, and be  [...]anoniz'd by a brib'd flatterer in
a funerall sermon, they make no doubt but they are children of the kingdom,
and perceive not their folly, till without hope of re­medy they roar in their
expectations of a certain, but a horrid eter­nity D of pains. * Certainly
nothing hath made more ample harvests for the Devil, then the deferring of
repentance upon vain confi­dences, and lessening it in the extension of parts,
as well as inten­sion of degrees, while we imagine that a few tears, and
scatterings of devotion are enough to expiate the basenesse of a fifty or
three­score yeers impiety. This I shall endeavour to cure, by shewing what it
is to repent, and that repentance implies in it the duty of a life, or of many
and great, of long and lasting parts of it; and then by direct arguments,
shewing that repentance put off to our death-bed is invalid and ineffectuall,
sick, languid, and impotent, E like our dying bodies and disabled faculties.

1\. First therefore, Repentance implies a deep sorrow, as the beginning and
introduction of this duty; not a superficiall sigh, or tear, not a calling our
selves sinners, and miserable persons; this is far from that godly sorrow that
worketh repentance; and yet I wish there were none in the world, or none
amongst us, who cannot remember that ever they have done this little towards
the [[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=36)
abolition of their multitudes of sins; but yet if it were not A a hearty,
pungent sorrow, a sorrow that shall break the heart in pieces; a sorrow that
shall so irreconcile us to sin, as to make us rather choose to die then to
sin, it is not so much as the begin­ning of repentance. But in Holy Scripture,
when the people are called to repentance, and sorrow (which is ever the
prologue to it) marches sadly, and first opens the seene, it is ever expressed
to be great,Ezek. 27. 31. clamorous and sad: it is called [a weeping sorely]
in the verse next after my text,Joel: 2. 13. [a weeping with the bitternesse
of heart; a turning to the Lord with weeping, fasting, and mourning; a weeping
day and night; the sorrow of heart; the breaking of the spirit; B the mourning
like a dove, and chattering like a swallow;] and if we observe the threnes and
sad accents of the Prophet Jeremy when he wept for the sins of his Nation, the
heart-breakings of David when he mourned for his adultery and murder, and the
bitter tears of Saint Peter when he washed off the guilt and base­nesse of his
fall, and the denying his Master; we shall be suffici­ently instructed in this
praeludium or introduction to repen­tance; and that it is not every breath of
a sigh, or moisture of a tender eye, not every crying [Lord have mercy upon
me] that is such a sorrow as begins our restitution to the state of grace and
C Divine favour: but such a sorrow that really condemnes our selves, and by an
active, effectual sentence declares us wor­thy of stripes and death, of sorrow
and eternall paines, and willingly endures the first to prevent the second;
and weeps and mourns, and fasts to obtain of God but to admit us to a
possibility of restitution: and although all sorrow for sins hath not the same
expression, nor the same degree of pungency and sensitive trou­ble (which
differs according to the temper of the body custome, the sexe,see Rule of II.
living. D. of repentance. p. 335. and accidental tendernesse) yet it is not a
Godly sorrow unlesse it really produce these effects; that is, 1. That it
makes us D really to hate, & 2\. actually to decline sin, and 3. produce in us
a fear fo Gods anger, a sense of the guilt of his displeasure; and 4. Then,
such consequent trouble as can consist with such apprehension of the Divine
displeasure: which if it expresse not in tears and hearty com­plaints, must be
expressed in watchings and strivings against sin, in confessing the goodnesse
and justice of God threatning or pu­nishing us, in patiently bearing the rod
of God, in confession of our sins, in accusation of our selves, in perpetual
begging of pardon, and mean and base opinions of our selves, and in al the
natural pro­ductions from these; according to our temper and constitution; it
E must be a sorrow of the reasonable faculty, the greatest in its kinde; and
if it be lesse in kinde; or not productive of these effects, it is not a godly
sorrow, not the exordium of repen­tance.

But I desire that it be observed, that sorrow for sins, is not Re­pentance;
[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=36) A not
that duty which gives glory to God, so as to obtain of him that he will
glorifie us. Repentance is a great volume of duty; and Godly sorrow is but the
frontispiece or title page: it is the harbinger or first introduction to it;
or if you will consider it in the words of Saint Paul: 2 Cor 7. [Godly sorrow
worketh repentance] sorrow is the Parent, and repentance is the product; and
there­fore it is a high piece of ignorance to suppose that, a crying out and
roaring for our sins upon our deathbed can reconcile us to God; our crying to
God must be so early, and so lasting, as to be able to teeme, and produce such
a daughter, which must live long, B and grow from an Embryo to an infant, from
infancy to childhood, from thence to the fulnesse of the stature of Christ,
and then it is a holy and a happy sorrow: but if it be a sorrow onely of a
death-bed, it is a fruitlesse shower, or like the rain of Sodom not the
beginning of repentance, but the kindling of a flame, the comencement of an
eternal sorrow. For Ahab had a great sorrow, but it wrought no­thing upon his
spirit, it did not reconcile his affections to his duty, and his duty to God.
Judas had so great a sorrow for betraying the innocent blood of his Lord, that
it was intolerable to his Spirit, and he burst in the middle: and if meer
sorrow be repentance, then C hell is full of penitents, for [there is weeping
and wailing, and gna­shing of teeth for evermore.

Let us therefore beg of God (as Calebs daughter did of her Fa­ther) dedisti
mihi terram aridam, da etiam & irrig [...]am, thou hast given me a dry land,
give me also a land of waters, a dwel­ling place in tears, rivers of tears, ut
quoniam non sumus digni ocu­los orando ad coelum levare, at simus digni oculos
plorando caecare, as Saint Austins expression is, that because we are not
worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven in prayer, yet we may be worthy to weep
our selves blinde for sin, the meaning is, that we beg sorrow of D God, such a
sorrow as may be sufficient to quench the flames of lust, and surmount the
hills of our pride, and may extinguish our thirst of covetousnesse; that is, a
sorrow that shall be an effective principle of arming all our faculties
against sin, and heartily set­ting upon the work of grace, and the persevering
labours of a holy life. * I shall onely adde one word to this: That our sorrow
for sin is not to be estimated by our tears, and our sensible expressions, but
by our active hatred, and dereliction of sin: and is many times unperceived in
outward demonstration. It is reported of the Mother of Peter Lombard, Gratian,
and Comestor, that she having E had three sons begotten in unhallowed
embraces, upon her death­bed did omit the recitation of those crimes to her
confessour; ad­ding this for Apology, that her three sons proved persons so
emi­nent in the Church that their excellency was abundant recom­pence for her
demerit: and therefore she could not grieve, be­cause God had glorified
himself so much by three instruments so [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=37) excellent; and
that although her sin had abounded, yet Gods grace A did superabound. Her
Confessor replied, at dole Saltem quod dolere non possis, grieve that thou
canst not grieve: and so must we, al­wayes fear that our trouble for sin is
nor great enough, that our sorrow is too remisse, that our affections are
indifferent; but we can onely be sure that our sorrow is a godly sorrow, when
it worketh repentance; that is, when it makes us hate and leave all our sin,
and take up the crosse of patience or penance: that is, confesse our sin,
accuse our selves, condemn the action by hearty sentence; and then, if it hath
no other emanation but fasting and prayer for its pardon, and hearty industry
towards its abolition, our sorrow is B not reproveable.

For, sorrow alone will not do it; there must follow a total dere­liction of
our sin; and this is the first part of repentance. Concern­ing which, I
consider, that it is a sad mistake amongst many that do some things towards
repentance, that they mistake the first ad­dresses, and instruments of this
part of repentance for the whole duty it self. Confession of sins is in order
to the dereliction of them; but then confession must not be like the unlading
of a ship to take in new stowage; or the vomits of intemperance, which ease
the stomack that they may continue the merry meeting: but such a con­fession C
is too frequent, in which men either comply with custome or seek to ease a
present load, or gripe of conscience, or are willing to dresse up their souls
against afestival, or hope for pardon up­on so easie terms: these are but
retirings back to leap the further into mischief; or but approaches to God
with the lips; no con­fession can be of any use, but as it is an instrument of
shame to the person, of humiliation of the man, and dereliction of the sin,
and receives its recompence but as it ads to these purposes: all other, is
like the bleating of the calves, and the lowing of the Oxen which Saul
reserved after the spoil of Agag: they proclaim the sin, but do nothing
towards its cure; they serve Gods end to make us just­ly D to be condemned out
of our own mouthes, but nothing at all towards our absolution. * Nay, if we
proceed further, to the great­est expressions of humiliation (parts of which I
reckon, fasting, praying for pardon, judging and condemning of our selves by
instances of a present indignation against a crime) yet unlesse this proceed
so far as to a total deletion of the sin, to the extirpation of every vitious
habit, God is not glorified by our repentance, nor we secured in our eternal
interest. Our sin must be brought to judgement, and like Antinous in Homer,
layed in the mids as the E sacrifice and the cause of all the mischief.

[...]

This is the murderer, this is the Achan, this is he that troubles I [...]
­rael; [[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=37) A
let the sin be confessed and carried with the pomps and solen­nities of sorrow
to its funeral, and so let the murderer be slain: But if after all the forms
of confession and sorrow, fasting, and hu­miliation, and pretence of doing the
will of God, we spare A­gag and the fattest of the cattel, our delicious sins,
and still leave an unlawful King, and a tyrant sin to reigne in our mortal
bo­dies, we may pretend what we will towards repentance, but we are no better
penitents then Ahab, no neerer to the obtain­ing of our hopes then Esau was to
his birthright, for whose re­pentance there was no place left though he sought
it carefully with tears.

B Well? let us suppose our penitent advanced thus far, as that he decrees
against all sin, and in his hearty purposes re­solves to decline it, as in a
severe sentence he hath condemned it as his betrayer and his murderer; yet we
must be curious for now onely the repentance properly begins) that it be not
onely like the springings of the thorny or the high way ground, soon up and
soon down: For some men when a sadnesse or an unhandsome accident surprizes
them, then they resolve against their sin, but like the goats in Aristotle
they give their milk no longer then they are C stung: as soon as the thorns
are removed, these men return to their first hardnesse, and resolve then to
act their first tempta­tion. Others there are who never resolve against a sin,
but ei­ther when they have no temptation to it, or when their appe­tites are
newly satisfied with it, like those who immediately after a full dinner
resolve to fast at supper, and they keep it till their appetite returnes▪ and
then their resolution unt [...]es like the cords of vanity or the gossamere
against the violence of the Northen winde. Thus a lustfull person fills all
the capa­city of his lust, and when he is wearied, and the sin goes off D with
unquietnesse and regret, and the appetite falls down like a horseleech when it
is ready to burst with putrifaction and an unwholsome plethory; then he
resolves to be a good man and could almost vow to be a Hermit, and hates his
lust, as Amnon hated his sister Thamar, just when he had newly acted his
unworthy rape; but the next spring tide that comes, every wave of the
temptation, makes an inrode upon the resolution and gets ground, and prevailes
against it more then his resolution pre­vailed against his sin: How many
drunken persons, how many E Swearers resolve daily and hourely against their
sin, and yet act them not once the lesse for all their insinite heape of
shame­fully retreating purposes * That resolution that begins upon just
grounds of sorrow and severe judgement, upon fear and love, that is made in
the midst of a temptation, that is inqui­sitive into all the means and
instruments of the cure, that prayes perpetually against a sin; that watches
continually against a [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=38) surprize, and
never sinks into it by deliberation; that fights A earnestly and carries on
the war prudently and prevailes by a ne­ver ceasing diligence against the
temptation; that onely is a pious and well begun repentance. They that have
their fits of a quartan, well and ill for ever, and think themselves in
per­fect health, when the ague is retired till its period returnes, are
dangerously mistaken. Those intervals of imperfect and fallaci­ous resolution,
are nothing but states of death: and if a man should depart this world in one
of those godly fits (as he thinks them) he is no neerer to obtain his blessed
hope, then a man in the stone collick is to health when his pain is eased for
the pre­sent,B his disease still remaining, and threatning an unwelcome
return. That resolution onely is the beginning of a holy re­pentance which
goes forth into act, and whose acts enlarge in­to habits, and whose habits are
productive of the fruits of a ho­ly life.

From hence we are to take our estimate, whence our reso­lutions of piety must
commence. He that resolves not to live well till the time comes that he must
die, is ridiculous in his great designe, as he is impertinent in his
intermedial purposes, and vain in his hope. Can a dying man to any real effect
resolve C to be chast? (for vertue must be an act of election, and chastity is
the contesting against a proud and an imperious lust, active flesh, and
insinuating temptation) And what doth he resolve against who can no more be
tempted to the sin of unchastity then he can re­turne back again to his youth
and vigour. And it is conside­rable, that since all the purposes of a holy
life which a dying man can make, cannot be reduced to act, by what law, or
rea­son, or covenant, or revelation are we taught to distinguish the
resolution of a dying man from the purposes of a living and vi­gorous person?
Suppose a man in his youth and health mooved D by consideration of the
irregularity and deformity, of sin, the danger of its productions, the wrath
and displeasure of Almightie God, should resolve to leave the puddles of
impurity, and walk in the paths of righteousnesse; can this resolution alone
put him into the state of grace; is he admitted to pardon and the favour of
God before he hath in some measure performed actually what he so reasonably
hath resolved? By no means. For, [resolution and purpose] is in its own nature
and constitution an imperfect act, and therefore can signifie nothing without
its performance and consummation. It is as a faculty is to the act, as spring
is to the E harvest, as feed time is to the Autumne, as Egges are to birds, or
as a relative to its correspondent; nothing without it. And can it be imagined
that a resolution in our health and life shall be ineffectual without
performance and shall a reso­lution barely such, do any Good upon our
deathbed? Can such [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=38) A purposes
prevail against a long impiety rather then against a young and a newly begun
state of sin? Will God at an easier rate pardon the sins of fifty or sixty
yeers, then the sins of our youth onely, or the iniquity of five yeers, or
ten? If a holy life be not neces­sary to be liv'd, why shall it be necessary
to resolve to live it? But if a holy life be necessary, then it cannot be
sufficient meerly to re­solve it, unlesse this resolution go forth in an
actuall and reall ser­vice. Vain therefore is the hope of those persons who
either go on in their sins; before their last sicknesse, never thinking to
return in­to the wayes of God, from whence they have wandred all their life, B
never renewing their resolutions and vows of holy living; or if they have, yet
their purposes are for ever blasted with the next violent temptation. More
prudent was the prayer of David, [Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my
strength before I go hence and be no more seen:] And something like it was the
saying of the Em­perour Charles the fifth, Inter vitae negotia & mortis diem
oportet spacium intercedere: When ever our holy purposes are renewed, unlesse
God gives us time to act them, to mortifie and subdue our lusts, to conquer
and subdue the whole kingdom of sin, to rise from our grave and be clothed
with nerves and flesh and a new skin, C to overcome our deadly sicknesses, and
by little and little to re­turn to health and strength; unlesse we have grace
and time to do all this, our sins will lie down with us in our graves. * For
when a man hath contracted a long habit of sin, and it hath been grow­ing upon
him ten or twenty, fourty or fifty yeers, whose acts he hath daily or hourly
repeated, and they are grown to a second nature to him, and have so prevailed
upon the ruines of his spirit, that the man is taken captive by the Devil at
his will, he is fast bound as a slave tugging at the oar, that he is grown in
love with his fetters, and longs to be doing the work of sin, is it likely
that D all this progresse and groweth in sin (in the wayes of which he runs
fast without any impediment) is it (I say) likely, that a few dayes or weeks
of sicknesse can recover him? [the especiall hin­drances of that state I shall
afterwards consider] but, Can a man be supposed so prompt to piety and holy
living, a man (I mean) that hath lived wickedly a long time together, can he
be of so ready and active a vertue upon the sudden, as to recover in a moneth,
or a week what he hath been undoing in 20, or 30 yeers? Is it so easie to
build, that a weak and infirm person, bound hand and E foot shall be able to
build more in three dayes, then was a building above fourty yeers? Christ did
it in a figurative sence; but in this, it is not in the power of any man so
suddenly to be recovered from so long a sicknesse. Necessary therefore it is,
that all these instru­ments of our conversion, [Confession of sins, praying
for their par­don, and resolutions to lead a new life] should begin, [before
our feet stumble upon the dark mountains,] lest we leave the work onely [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=39) resolved upon to
be begun, which, it is necessary we should in A many degrees finish if ever we
mean to escape the eternall dark­nesse: ‘For that we should actually abolish
the whole body of sin and death, that we should crucifie the old man with his
lusts, that we should lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth so easily
beset us, that we should cast away the works of darknesse, that we should
awake from sleep, and arise from death, that we should redeem the time, that
we should cleanse our hands and purifie our hearts, that we should have
escaped the corruption, (all the cor­ruption) that is in the whole world
through lust, that nothing of the old leaven should remain in us, but that we
be wholly a new B lump, throughly transformed and changed in the image of our
minde:’ these are the perpetuall precepts of the Spirit, and the certain duty
of man; and that, to have all these in purpose onely, is meerly to no purpose,
without the actuall eradication of every vitious habit, and the certain
abolition of every criminall adhe­rence, is clearly and dogmatically decreed
every where in the Scripture;Gal. 5. 24. For (they are the words of Saint
Paul) they that are Christs have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts: the work is actually done, and sin is dead, or wounded mortally,
be­fore they can in any sence belong to Christ, to be a portion of his C
inheritance:Gal. 6. 15. And He that is in Christ is a new creature. For in
Christ Jesus nothing can avail but a new creature: Gal. 5. c. nothing but a
Keep­ing the Commandements of God: 1 Cor. 7. 9. Not all our tears, though we
should weep like David and his men at Ziklag, till they could weep no more, or
the women of Ramah, or like the weeping in the valley of Hinnom, could
suffice, if we retain the affection to any one sin, or have any unrepented of,
or unmortified. It is true that a contrite and broken heart, God will not
despise. No, he will not. For if it be a hearty and permanent sorrow, it is an
excel­lent beginning of repentance; and God will to a timely sorrow D give the
grace of repentance: He will not give pardon to sorrow alone; but that which
ought to be the proper effect of sorrow, that God shall give. He shall then
open the gates of mercy, and admit you to a possibility of restitution; so,
that you may be within the covenant of repentance, which if you actually
per­form, you may expect Gods promise. And in this sense Con­fession will
obtain our pardon; and humiliation will be accepted; and our holy purposes,
and pious resolutions shall be accounted for; that is, these being the first
steps and addresses to that part of repentance, which consists in the
abolition of sins, shall be accepted E so far, as to procure so much of the
pardon, to do so much of the work of restitution, that God will admit the
returning man to a further degree of emendation, to a neerer possibility of
working out his salvation: but then if this sorrow, and confession, and strong
purposes begin then when our life is declined towards the West, [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=39) A and is now
ready to set in darknesse and a dismall night; because of themselves they
could but procure an admission to repentance, not at all to pardon, and
plenary absolution; by shewing that on our death-bed these are too late and
ineffectuall, they call upon us to begin betimes, when these imperfect acts
may be consummate, and perfected in the actuall performing those parts of holy
life, to which they were ordained, in the nature of the thing, and the
pur­poses of God.

Lastly, suppose all this be done, and that by a long course of strictnesse and
severity, mortification and circumspection we have B overcome all our vitious
and baser habits contracted and grown up­on us, like the ulcers and evils of a
long surfet, and that we are clean and swept; Suppose that he hath wept and
fasted, prayed and vowed to excellent purposes; yet all this is but the one
half of re­pentance; (so infinitely mistaken is the world, to think any thing
to be enough to make up repentance;) but to renew us, and restore us to the
favour of God, there is required far more then what hath been yet accounted
for. See it in the second of S. Peter, 1 Chap. 4, 5. vers. Having escaped the
corruption that is in the world thorough lust: C And besides this, giving all
diligence, adde to your faith vertue, to vertue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, and so on, to godlinesse, to brotherly
kindnesse, and to charity: These things must be in you and abound: This is the
summe totall of re­pentance; We must not onely have overcome sin, but we must
after great diligence have acquired the habits of all those Christian graces
which are necessary in the transaction of our affairs, in all relations to
God, and our neighbour, and our own person. It is not enough to say, Lord, I
thank thee I am no extortioner, no adulterer, not as this Publican; all the
reward of such a poe­nitent D is, that when he hath escaped the corruption of
the world, he hath also escaped those heavy judgements which threatned his
ruine.

Nec furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat

Servus; habes precium; loris non ureris, aio.

Non hominem occidi; non pasces in cruce corvos.

If a servant have not rob [...]d his Master, nor offered to fly from his
bondage, he shall scape the Furea, his flesh shall not be ex­posed E to birds
or fishes; but this is but the reward of innocent slaves; it may be we have
escaped the rod of the extermi­nating Angel, when our sins are crucifyed; but
we shall never enter into the joy of our Lord, unlesse after we have put off
the old man with his affections and lusts, we also put on the new man in
righteousnesse and holinesse of life. And this we are taught in most plain
doctrine by S. Paul [Let us lay aside the weight [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=40) that doth so
easily beset us;] that is the one half; and [then A it follows] Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us. Heb. 12. 1. These are the fruits
meet for repentance, spoken of by S. John Baptist; that is, when we renew our
first undertaking in baptisme, and return to our courses of innocence.

Parcus Deorum cultor, & infrequens,

Insanientis dum sapientiae consultus erro

Nunc retrorsum vela dare, atque iterare cursus

Cogor relictos— B

The sense of which words is well given us by S. John;Revel. 2. ‘Remember
whence thou art fallen, repent; and do thy first works.’ For all our hopes of
heaven rely upon that Covenant which God made with us in Baptisme; which is,
‘That being redeemed from our vain conversation, we should serve him in
holinesse and righteous­nesse all our dayes.’ Now when any of us hath
prevaricated our part of the Covenant, we must return to that state, and
redeem the intermedial time spent in sin by our doubled industry in the wayes
of grace: we must be reduced to our first estate, and make C some
proportionable returns of duty, for our sad omissions, and great violations of
our Baptismal vow. For God having made no covenant with us, but that which is
consigned in Baptisme; in the same proportion in which we retain, or return to
that, in the same we are to expect the pardon of our sins, and all the other
promi­ses Evangelicall; but no otherwise; unlesse we can shew a new Gospel, or
be baptized again by Gods appointment. He there­fore that by a long habit, by
a state and continued course of sin, hath gone so far from his baptismal
purity, as that he hath nothing of the Christian left upon him but his name;
that man hath much D to do to make his garments clean, to purifie his soul, to
take off all the stains of sin, that his spirit may be presented pure to the
eyes of God who beholds no impurity. It is not an easie thing to cure a long
contracted habit of sin: Let any intemperate person but try in his own
instance of drunkennesse; or the swearer in the sweetning his unwholesome
language: but then so to command his tongue that he never swear, but that his
speech be prudent, pious and apt to edifie the hearer, or in some sense to
glorifie God; or to become temperate, to have got a habit of sobriety, or
chastity, or humility, is the work of a life: And if we do but con­sider E
that he that lives well from his younger yeers, or takes up at the end of his
youthfull heats, and enters into the courses of a sober life early,
diligently, and vigorously, shall finde him­self after the studies and labours
of 20. or 30. yeers piety, but a very imperfect person: many degrees of pride
left unrooted up, [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=40) A many inroads
of intemperance, or beginnings of excesse, much indevotion and backwardnesse
in religion, many temptations to contest against, and some infirmities which
he shall never say he hath master'd; we shall finde the work of a holy life is
not to be deferred till our dayes are almost done, till our strengths are
de­cayed, our spirits are weak, and our lust strong, our habits con­firmed,
and our longings after sin many and impotent: for what is very hard to be
done, and is alwayes done imperfectly when there is length of time, and a
lesse work to do, and more abilities to do it withall: when the time is short,
and almost expired, and B the work made difficult and vast, and the strengths
weaker, and the faculties are disabled, will seem little lesse then absolutely
im­possible. * I shall end this generall consideration with the question of
the Apostle. If the righteous scarcely be saved, (if it be so diffi­cult to
overcome our sins, and obtain vertuous habits: difficult (I say) to a
righteous, a sober, and well living person) where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear? What shall become of him who by his evil life hath not onely
removed himself from the af­fections, but even from the possibilities of
vertue? He that hath lived in sin will die in sorrow. C D E

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=41)

## 6\. The Invalidity of a death-bed A Repentance.SERM. VI.  
Part II.B

BUt I shall pursue this, great and necessary truth, first; by shewing what
parts and ingredients of repentance are as­signed, when it is described in
holy Scripture. Secondly, by shewing the necessities, the absolute necessities
of a holy life, and what it means in Scripture to [live holily]. Thirdly, by
consider­ing what directions or intimations we have concerning the last time
of beginning to repent; and what is the longest period that C any man may
venture with safety: And in the prosecution of these particulars, we shall
remove the objections; those aprons of fig-leaves which men use for their
shelter to palliate their sin, and to hide themselves, from that, from which
no rocks or mount­ains shall protect them, though they fall upon them; that
is, the wrath of God.

First, That repentance is not onely an abolition, and extin­ction of the body
of sin, a bringing it to the altar, and slaying it before God and all the
people; but that we must also  [...] mingle gold and rich presents, the
oblation of good works,D and holy habits with the sacrifice, I have already
proved: but now if we will see repentance in its stature and integrity of
con­stitution described, we shall finde it to be the one half of all that
which God requires of Christians. Faith and Repentance are the whole duty of a
Christian. Faith is a sacrifice of the understand­ing to God: Repentance
sacrifices the whole will: That, gives the knowing; this, gives up all the
desiring faculties: That, makes us Disciples; this, makes us servants of the
Holy Jesus. Nothing else was preached by the Apostles, nothing was enjoyned as
the duty of man, nothing else did build up the body of Christian re­ligion.E
So that, as faith contains all that knowledge which is ne­cessary to
salvation: So repentance comprehends in it, all the whole practise and working
duty of a returning Christian: And this was the sum totall of all that Saint
Paul preached to the Gen­tiles, when in his farewell Sermon to the Bishops and
Priests of [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=41) A Ephesus, he
professed that he kept back nothing that was profitable to them; and yet it
was all nothing but this; [Repentance towards God, Acts. 20. 21. and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ] so that whosoever be­lieves in Jesus Christ, and
repents towards God must make his ac­counts according to this standard, that
is, to believe all that Christ taught him; and to do all that Christ
commanded: and this is re­marked in Saint PaulsHebr. 6. 1. Catechisme where he
gives a more particu­lar Catalogue of fundamentals: he reckons nothing but
Sacraments and faith; of which he enumerates two principal articles
[resur­rection of the dead, and eternal judgement] whatsoever is practi­cal, B
all the whole duty of man, the practise of all obedience is called [repentance
from dead works] which, if we observe the sin­gularity of the phrase, does not
mean [sorrow] For sorrow from dead works, is not sense; but it must mean
mutationem status, a conversion from dead works, which (as in all motions)
supposes two terms; from dead works, to living works, from the death of sin to
the life of righteousnesse.

I will adde but two places more, out of each Testament one; in which I suppose
you may see every lineament of this great duty C described, that you may no
longer mistake a grashopper for an Ea­gle, Sorrow and holy purposes, for the
intire duty of repen­tance. In the 18. of Ezek. 21. you shall finde it thus
described. [‘But if the wicked will turne from all his sins that he hath
commit­ted, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live, he shall not die.’] or as it is more fully described in
Ezek. 33. 14 [When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; If ‘he turn
from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if the wicked restore the
pledge, give again that he had robbed; walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall D not die.’] Here onely is
the condition of pardon; to leave all your sins, to keep all Gods statutes, to
walk in them, to abide, to pro­ceed, and make progresse in them; and this,
without the inter­ruption by a deadly sin, [without committing iniquity] to
make restitution of all the wrongs he hath done, all the unjust money he hath
taken, all the oppressions he hath committed, all that must be satisfied for,
and repayed according to our ability: we must make satisfaction for all injury
to our Neighbours fame, all wrongs done to his soul; he must be restored to
that condition of good things thou didst in any sense remove him from: when
this E is done according to thy utmost power, then thou hast repented truely,
then thou hast a title to the promise; thou shalt surely live, thou shalt not
die for thy old sins thou hast formerly committed. * Onely be pleased to
observe this one thing; that this place of E­zekiel is it which is so often
mistaken for that common saying, At what time soever a sinner repents him of
his sins from the bottom of his heart I will put all his wickednesse out of my
remembrance, saith [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=42) the Lord] For
although at what time soever a sinner does repent (as re­pentance A is now
explained) God will forgive him, and that, re­pentance as it is now stated
cannot be done [At what time soever] not upon a mans deathbed; yet there are
no such words in the whole Bible, nor any neerer to the sense of them then the
words I have now read to you, out of the Prophet Ezekiel. Let that therefore
no more deceive you, or be made a colour to countenance a perse­vering sinner,
or a deathbed penitent.

Neither is the duty of Repentance to be bought at an easier rate in the New
Testament. You may see it described in the 2 Cor. 7. 11. Godly sorrow worketh
repentance. Well? but what is that B repentance which is so wrought? This it
is, ‘Behold the self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulnesse it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what
indignation, yea what fear, ye what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what
revenge.’ These are the fruits of that sorrow that is effectual: these are the
parts of repentance; clearing our selves of all that is past, and great
carefulnesse for the future, anger at our selves for our old sins, and fear
lest we commit the like again, vehement desires of pleasing God, and zeal of
holy actions, and a re­venge upon our selves for our sins, called by Saint
Paul in a­nother C place,1 Cor. 11. 31. a judging our selves lest we be judged
of the Lord. And in pursuance of this truth, the primitive Church did not
admit a sinning person to the publike communions with the faith­full, till
besides their sorrow they had spent some years in an  [...] in doing good
works and holy living; and es­pecially in such actions which did contradict
that wicked incli­nation which led them into those sins whereof they were now
ad­mitted to repent. And therefore we find that they stood in the station of
penitents seven years, 13 years, and somtimes till their death, before they
could be reconciled to the peace of God, and his D Holy Church.

Scelerum si bene poenitet

eradenda cupidinis pravi sunt elementa

& tenerae nimis mentes asperioribus

Formandae studijs—Horat.

Hierocles.  [...]. See life of H. Jesus part. 2. disc. of Re­pentance.

Repentance is the institution of a philosophical and severe life, an utter
extirpation of all unreasonablenesse and impiety, and an addresse to, and a
finall passing through all the parts of holy living.

Now Consider whether this be imaginable or possible to be E done upon our
deathbed, when a man is frighted into an invo­luntary, a sudden and unchosen
piety;  [...], saith Hierocles. He that never repents till a violent fear be
upon him, till he apprehend himself to be in the jawes of death, ready to give
up his unready and unprepa­red [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=42) A accounts, till
he sees the Judge sitting in all the addresses of dreadfulnesse and Majesty,
just now (as he beleeves) ready to pro­nounce that fearfull and intolerable
sentence of [Go ye cursed into everlasting fire] this man does nothing for the
love of God, nothing for the love of vertue; It is just as a condemned man
re­pents that he was a Traytor, but repented not till he was arrested, and
sure to die. Such a repentance as this may still consist with as great an
affection to sin as ever he had; and it is no thanks to him, if when the knife
is at his throat, then he gives good words and flatters. But suppose this man
in his health, and the middest of all B his lust, it is evident that there are
some circumstances of action in which the man would have refused to commit his
most pleasing sin. Would not the son of Tarquin have refused to ravish Lucrece
if Junius Brutus had been by him? Would the impurest person in the world act
his lust in the market place? or drink off an intem­perate goblet if a dagger
were placed at his throat? In these cir­cumstances, their fear would make them
declare against the pre­sent acting their impurities. But does this cure the
intemperance of their affections? Let the impure person retire to his closet,
and Junius Brutus be ingaged in a far distant war, and the dagger C be taken
from the drunkards throat, and the fear of shame, or death, or judgement be
taken from them all, and they shall no more resist their temptation, then they
could before remove their fear; and you may as well judge the other persons
holy, and haters of their sin, as the man upon his death-bed to be penitent;
and rather they then he, by how much this mans fear, the fear of death, and of
the infinite pains of hell, the fear of a provoked God, and an angry eternall
Judge, are far greater then the appre­hensions of publike shame, or an abused
husband, or the poniard of an angry person.Cogimur à suetis animum suspendere
Atque Atque ut viva­mus, vivere desinimus. Co [...]l. Gal. These men then sin
not because they dare not, D they are frighted from the act, but not from the
affection, which is not to be cured but by discourse, and reasonable acts, and
hu­mane considerations; of which that man is not naturally capable who is
possessed with the greatest fear, the fear of death and dam­nation. If there
had been time to cure his sin, and to live the life of grace, I deny not but
God might have begun his conversion with so great a fear, that he should never
have wiped off its im­pression; Nec ad rem  [...]tinet ubi in  [...]pevet,
quod  [...] ut s [...]cret. but if the man dies then, dies when he onely
declaims against and curses his sin, as being the authour of his present fear,
and apprehended calamity; It is very far from reconciling him to E God, or
hopes of pardon, because it proceeds from a violent, un­naturall, and
intolerable cause, no act of choice, or vertue, but of sorrow, a deserved
sorrow, and a miserable, unchosen, una­voidable fear,

—moriensque recepit

Quas nollet victurus aquas—

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=43) He curses
sin upon his deathbed and makes a Panegyrick of vertue A which in his life
time he accounted folly, and trouble, and a need­lesse vexation.

Quae mens est hodie,

Hor. l. 4. od. 10.

cur eadem non puero fuit?

vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?

I shall end this first Consideration, with a plain exhorta­tion; that since
repentance is a duty of so great and giant-like bulk; let no man croud it up
into so narrow room, as that it be strangled in its birth for want of time and
aire to breath in. Let B it not be put off to that time when a man hath scarce
time enough to reckon all those particular duties which make up the integrity
of its constitution▪ Will any man hunt the wild boare in his garden, or bait a
bull in his closet, will a woman wrap her childe in her handkerchiefe, or a
Father send his son to school when he is 50 yeers old? These are undecencies
of providence, and the instru­ment contradicts the end; And this is our case.
There is no roome for the repentance, no time to act all its essentiall parts;
and a childe who hath a great way to go before he be wise, may defer his
studies, and hope to become very learned in his old C age, and upon his
deathbed, as well as a vitious person, may think to recover from all his
ignorances and prejudicate opinions, from all his false principles and evil
customs, from his wicked incli­nations and ungodly habits, from his fondnesses
of vice, and dete­stations of vertue, from his promptnesse to sin, and
unwillingnesse to grace, from his spiritual deadnesse and strong sensuality;
upon his deathbed (I say) when he hath no naturall strength, and as little
spirituall, when he is criminal and impotent, hardned in his vice, and soft in
his fears, full of passion, and empty of wisdom, when he is sick and amazed,
and timorous and confounded, and impatient, and extremely miserable.D

And now when any of you is tempted to commit a sin, remember, that sin will
ruine you unlesse you repent of it. * But this (you say) is no news, and so
far from affrighting you from sin, that God knows) it makes men sin the
rather. For therefore they venture to act the present temptation, because they
know, if they repent, God will forgive them; and therefore they resolve upon
both, to sin now, and to repent hereafter.

Against this folly I shall not oppose the consideration of their danger, and
that they neither know how long they shall live, nor E whether they shall die
or no in this very act of sinne; though this consideration is very materiall,
and if they should die in it, or before it is washed off, they perish; But I
consider these things. 1 That he that resolves to sin upon a resolution to
repent, by every act of sin, makes himself more uncapable of repenting, by
growing more in [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=43) A love with sin,
by remembring its pleasures, by serving it once more, and losing one degree
more of the liberty of our spirit: and if you resolve to sin now, because it
is pleasant, how do ye know that your appetite will alter? will it not appear
pleasant to you next week, and the next week after that, and so for ever? And
still you sin, and still you will repent; that is, you will repent when the
sin can please you no longer. For so long as it can please you, so long you
are tempted not to repent, as well as now to act the sin. And the longer you
lie in it, the more you will love it. So that it is in effect to say; I love
my sin now, but I will hereafter hate it; onely B I will act it a while
longer, and grow more in love with it, and then I will repent, that is, then I
will be sure to hate it, when I shal most love it. 2. To repent signifies to
be sorrowful, to be ashamed, and to wish it had never been done. And then see
the folly of this temptation. I would not sin, but that I hope to repent of
it, that is, I would not do this thing but that I hope to be sorrowful for
doing it, and I hope to come to shame for it, heartily to be ashamed of my
doings, and I hope to be in that condition, that I would give all the world I
had never done it; that is, I hope to feel and apprehend an e­vil infinitely
greater then the pleasures of my sin; & are these argu­ments C fit to move a
man to sin? what can affright a man from it, if these invite him to it? it is
as if a man should invite one to be a partner of his treason by telling him,
if you will joyn with me, you shal have all these effects by it; you shall be
hang'd, drawn and quarter'd, and your blood shall be corrupted, and your
estate forfeited, and you shall have many other reasons to wish you had never
done it: He that should use this Rhetorick in earnest, might well be accounted
a mad man: This is to scare a man, not to allure him, and so is the other when
we understand it truely. 3. For I consider, He that repents, wishes he had
never done that sin. Now I ask, does he D wish so upon reason, or without
reason? Surely, if he may when he hath satisfied his lust, ask God pardon, and
be admitted upon as easie termes for the time to come as if he had not done
the sin, he hath no reason to be sorrowful, or wish he had not done it. For
though he hath done it, and pleased himself by enjoying the plea­sure of sin
for that season, yet all is well again; and let him onely be carefull now, and
there is no hurt done, his pardon is certain. How can any man that understands
the reason of his actions and passions wish, that he had never done that sin
in which then he had pleasure, and now he feels no worse inconvenience. But he
that truely repents, E wishes, and would give all the world he had never done
it. Surely then his present condition in respect of his past sin hath some
very great evil in it, why else should he be so much troubled? True, and this
it is. He that hath committed sins after baptisme, is fallen out of the favour
of God, is tied to hard duty for the time to come, to cry vehemently unto God,
to call night and day for pardon, to be in [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=44) great fear and
tremblings of heart, lest God should never forgive A him, lest God will never
take off his sentence of eternal paines, and in this fear and in some degrees
of it he will remain all the dayes of his life, and if he hopes to be quit of
that, yet he knowes not how many degrees of Gods anger still hang over his
head; how many sad miseries shall afflict, and burne, and purifie him in this
world with a sharpnesse so poinant as to divide the marrow from the bones; and
for these reasons, a considering man that knows what it is to repent, wishes
with his soul, he had never sinned; and therefore grieves in proportion to his
former crimes, and present misery and future danger.B

And now, suppose that you can repent when you will, that is, that you can
grieve when you will, (though no man can do it, no man can grieve when he
please) though he could shed tears when he list, he cannot grieve without a
real, or an apprehended infelicity, but, suppose it, and that he can fear when
he please, and that he can love when he please, or what he please; that is,
suppose a man to be able to say to his palate, though I love sweet meats, yet
to morrow I will hate and loath them, and believe them bitter and distastful
things; suppose (I say) all these impssibilities, yet since, repentance does
suppose a man to be in a state of such real misery C that he hath reason to
curse the day in which he sinned, is this a fit argument to invite a man, that
is in his wits, to sin? to sin in hope of repentance? as if dangers of falling
into hell, and fear of the Divine anger, and many degrees of the Divine
judgements, and a lasting sorrow, and a perpetual labour, and a never ceasing
tremb­ling, and a troubled conscience and a sorrowful spirit were fit things
to be desired or hoped for.

The sum is this. He that commits sins shall perish eternally if he never does
repent. And if he does repent and yet untimely, he is not the better; and if
he does not repent with an intire, a per­fect D and complete repentance, he is
not the better: But if he does, yet repentance is a duty full of fears and
sorrow, and labour; a vex­ation to the spirit, an afflictive, paenal, or
punitive duty, a duty which suffers for sin, and labours for grace, which
abides and suf­fers little images of hell in the way to heaven; and though it
be the onely way to felicity, yet it is beset with thorns and daggers of
suf­ferance, and with rocks and mountains of duty. Let no man there­fore dare
to sin upon hopes of repentance: for he is a foole and a hypocrite, that now
chooses and approves, what he knows here­after he must condemn.E

2\. The second generall consideration is, The necessity, the absolute
necessity of holy living, ‘God hath made a Covenant with us,Rom. 12. 1. that
we must give up our selves, bodies and souls, not a dying, but a living, and
healthfull sacrifice.’ He hath forgiven all our old sins, and we have
bargained to quit them, from the time [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=44) A that we first
come to Christ, and give our names to him; and to keep all his Commandements.
We have taken the Sacramentall oath, like that of the old Romane Militia,
[...], we must beleeve, and obey, and do all that is commanded us, and keep
our station, and fight against the flesh, the world, and the devil, not to
throw away our mili [...]ary girdle, and we are to do what is bidden us, or to
die for it, even all that is bidden us, according to our power. For, pre­tend
not, that Gods Commandements are impossible. It is disho­nourable to think God
enjoyns us to do more then he enables us to B do; and it is a contradiction to
say, we cannot do all that we can: and [through Christ which strengthens me, I
can do all things, saith S. Paul,] however, we can do to the utmost of our
strength, and beyond that we cannot take thought; impossibilities enter not
into deliberation, but according to our abilities, and naturall powers,
assisted by Gods grace, so God hath covenanted with us to live a holy life.
[For in Christ Jesus nothing avayleth but a new creature, nothing but faith
working by charity, nothing but keeping the Com­mandements of God.] They are
all the words of S. Paul before quoted; to which he addes. [and as many as
walk according to this C rule, peace be on them and mercy.] This is the
Covenant, [they are the Israel of God] upon those peace and mercy shall abide;
if they be­come a new creature, wholly transformed in the image of their
minde; if they have faith, and this faith be an operative working faith, a
faith that produces a holy life, a faith that works by charity; if they keep
the Commandements of God, then they are within the Covenant of mercy, but not
else; for, in Christ Jesus nothing else avayleth. * To the same purpose are
those words Hebr. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holinesse, without
which no man shall see the Lord.] Peace with all men] implies both justice and
charity, D without which it is impossible to preserve peace: Holinesse]
im­plies all our duty towards God. universall diligence; and this must be
followed, that is, pursued with diligence, in a lasting course of life and
exercise, and without this, we shall never see the face of God. I need urge no
more authorities to this purpose; these two are as certain and convincing as
two thousand, and since thus much is actually required, and is the condition
of the Covenant; it is certain that sorrow for not having done what is
commanded to be done; and a purpose to do what is necessary to be actually
perfor­med, will not acquit us before the righteous judgement of God. E* [‘For
the grace of God hath appeared to all men, Tit. 2. 12. teaching us that
denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live godly, justly, and
soberly in this present world.’] for upon these termes alone we must [look for
the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour
Jesus Christ]. * I shall no longer insist upon this particular, but onely
propound it to your consideration, [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=45) To what purpose
are all those Commandements in Scripture, of A every page almost in it, [of
living holily, and according to the Commandements of God, of adorning the
Gospel of God, of walk­ing as in the day, of walking in light, of pure and
undefiled religion, of being holy as God is holy, of being humble and meek, as
Christ is humble, of putting on the Lord Jesus, of living a spirituall life,]
but that it is the purpose of God, and the intention and designe of Christ
dying for us, and the Covenant made with man, that we should expect heaven
upon no other termes in the world, but of a holy life, in the faith and
obedience of the Lord Jesus.

Now if a vitious person, when he comes to the latter end of his B dayes, one
that hath lived a wicked, ungodly life, can for any thing he can do upon his
death-bed, be said to live a holy life; then his hopes are not desperate; but
he that hopes upon this onely, for which God hath made him no promise, I must
say of him as Galen said of consumptive persons,  [...], the more they hope,
the worse they are; and the relying upon such hopes is an approach to the
grave, and a sad eternity.

Peleos & Priami transit, vel Nestoris aet as

& fuerat serum jam tibi desinere.C

Eja age, rumpe moras, quo te spectabimus usque

Dum quid sis dubitas,

Mart. l. 2. ep. 64.

jam potes esse nihil.

And now it will be a vain question to ask, whether or no God cannot save a
dying man that repents after a vitious life? For it is true, God can do it if
he please; and he can raise children to Abra­ham out of the stones, and he can
make ten thousand worlds if he sees good, and he can do what he list, and he
can save an ill living man though he never repent at all, so much as upon his
death-bed. All this he can do; but Gods power is no ingredient into this
que­stion:D we are never the better that God can do it, unlesse he also will;
and whether he will, or no, we are to learn from himself, and what he hath
declared to be his will in holy Scripture. Nay since God hath said, that
without actuall holinesse no man shall see God, God by his own will hath
restrained his power, and though abso­lutely he can do all things, yet he
cannot do against his own word. * And indeed the rewards of heaven are so
great and glorious, and Christ burden is so light, his yoke is so easie, that
it is a shamelesse impudence to expect so great glories at a lesse rate then
so little a service, at a lower rate then a holy life. It cost the Eternall
Son E of God his life blood to obtain heaven for us upon that condition, and
who then shall die again for us, to get heaven for us upon easier conditions.
What would you do if God should command you to kill your eldest son? or to
work in the mines for a thousand yeers together? or to fast all thy life time
with bread and water? were [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=45) A not heaven a
great bargain even after all this? and when God re­quires nothing of us but to
live soberly, justly, and godly, (which very things of themselves, to man are
a very great felicity, and neces­sary to his present well-being) shall we
think this to be a load, and an unsufferable burden? and that heaven is so
little a purchase at that price, that God in meer justice will take a death-
bed sigh or groan, and a few unprofitable tears and promises in exchange for
all our duty? Strange it should be so: but stranger that any man should rely
upon such a vanity, when from Gods word he hath no­thing to warrant such a
confidence. But these men do like the Ty­rant B Dionysius, who stole from
Apollo his golden cloak, and gave him a cloak of Arcadian home-spun, saying
that this was lighter in summer, and warmer in winter. These men
sacrilegiously rob God of the service of all their golden dayes, and serve him
in their hoary head, in their furs and grave clothes; and pretend that this
late service is more agreeable to the Divine mercy on one side, and humane
infirmity on the other, and so dispute themselves into an irrecoverable
condition, having no other ground to rely upon a death-bed, or late-begun-
repentance, but because they resolve to C enjoy the pleasures of sin, and for
heaven, they will put that to the venture of an after-game. These men sow in
the flesh, and would reap in the spirit, live to the Devil, and die to God,
and therefore it is but just in God that their hopes should be desperate, and
their craft be folly, and their condition be, the unexpected, unfeared
in­heritance of an eternall sorrow.

Lastly. Our last inquiry is into the time, the last or latest time 3 of
beginning our repentance. Must a man repent a yeer, or two, or seven yeers, or
ten, or twenty before his death? or what is the last period after which all
repentance will be untimely and ineffe­ctuall? D To this captious question I
have many things to oppose. 1. We have entred into covenant with God, to serve
him from the day of our Baptisme to the day of our death.Luke 1. 74. He hath
‘[sworn this oath to us, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered
from fear of our enemies, might serve him without fear in holinesse and
righteousnesse before him [all the dayes of our life’]. Now although God will
not  [...] forget our infirmi­ties, but passe by the weaknesses of an honest a
watchfull, & industri­ous person; yet the Covenant he makes with us is from
the day of our first voluntary profession, to our grave: and according as we E
by sins retire from our first undertaking; so our condition is inse­cure:
there is no other Covenant made with us, no new beginnings of another period;
but if we be returned, and sin be cancelled, and grace be actually obtained;
then we are in the first condition of pardon; but because it is uncertain when
a man can have ma­sterd his vices, and obtain'd the graces, therefore no man
can tell any set time when he must begin.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=46) 2\.
Scripture describing the duty of repenting sinners, names no A other time but
[today. To day if ye will hear his voyce harden not your hearts. 3\. The duty
of a Christian is described in Scripture, to be such as requires length of
time, and a continued industry. [Let us run with patience the race that is set
before us. Hebr. 12. 1. Ver. 3.] and [Con­sider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied, and faint in
your mindes.] So great a prepara­tion is not for the agony and contention of
an hour, or a day, or a week, but for the whole life of a Christian, or for
great parts of its abode. 4. There is a certain period and time set for our
re­pentance, and beyond that all our industry is ineffectuall. There is a B
day of visitation, our own day, and there is a day of visitation, that is Gods
day. This appeared in the case of Jerusalem. [O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou
hadst known the time of thy visitation, at least in this thy day.] Well! they
neglected it, and then there was a time of Gods visitation which was his day;
called in Scripture, [the day of the Lord] and because they had neglected
their own day, they fell into inevitable ruine: No repentance could have
prevented their finall ruine. And this which was true in a Nation, is also
clearly af­firmed true in the case of single persons. [‘Look diligently lest
any fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12. 16. lest there be any person among you
as Esau, C who sold his birth-right, and afterwards when he would have
inheri­ted the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for his
repen­tance though he sought it carefully with tears.’] Esau had time enough
to repent his bargain as long as he lived; he wept sorely for his folly, and
carefulnesse sate heavy upon his soul, and yet he was not heard, nor his
repentance accepted; for the time was past: And [take heed] saith the Apostle,
lest it come to passe to any of you to be in the same case. Now if ever there
be a time in which repentance is too late, it must be the time of our
death­bed, and the last time of our life: And after a man is fallen into D the
displeasure of Almighty God, the longer he lies in his sin without repentance
and emendation, the greater is his danger, and the more of his allowed time is
spent, and no man can antecedent­ly, or before-hand, be sure that the time of
his repentance is not past; and those who neglect the call of God, and refuse
to hear him call in the day of grace, God will laugh at them when their
cala­mity comes; they shall call, and the Lord shall not hear them. * And this
was the case of the five foolish virgins when the arrest of death surprized
them: they discovered their want of oil, they were troubled at it, they beg'd
oil, they were refused, they did E something towards the procuring of the oil
of grace, (for they went out to buy oil) and after all this stir the
bridegroom came be­fore they had finished their journey, and they were shut
out from the communion of the bridegrooms joyes.

Therefore concerning the time of beginning to repent, no man [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=46) A is certain but
he that hath done his work. Mortem venientem nemo hilaris excipit nisi qui se
ad eam diù composuerat, Epist. 30. said Seneca. He onely dies cheerfully who
stood waiting for death in a ready dresse of a long preceding preparation. He
that repents to day, repents late enough that he did not begin yesterday: But
he that puts it off till to morrow is vain and miserable.

—hodiè tam posthume vivere serum est Martial. l. 2. ep 90.

Ille sapit quisquis posthume vixit heri.

B Well! but what will you have a man do that hath lived wic­kedly, and is now
cast upon his death-bed? shall this man despair, and neglect all the actions
of piety, and the instruments of restitu­tion in his sicknesse? No. God
forbid. Let him do what he can then; It is certain it will be little enough:
for all those short gleames of piety, and flashes of lightning will help
towards the alleviating some degrees of misery; and if the man recovers, they
are good beginnings of a renewed piety: and Ahabs tears and hu­miliation,
though it went no further, had a proportion of a reward, C though nothing to
the portions of eternity. So that he that sayes, it is every day necessary to
repent, cannot be supposed to discou­rage the piety of any day: a death-bed
piety, when things are come to that sad condition may have many good purposes:
there­fore even then neglect nothing that can be done. Well! But shall such
persons despair of salvation? To them I shall onely return this. That they are
to consider the conditions which on one side God requires of us, and on the
other side, whether they have done accordingly? Let them consider upon what
termes God hath pro­mised salvation, and whether they have made themselves
capable D by performing their part of the obligation. If they have not, I must
tell them, that, not to hope where God hath made no promise, is not the sin of
despair, but the misery of despair. A man hath no ground to hope that ever he
shall be made an Angel, and yet, that not hoping, is not to be called,
despair: and no man can hope for heaven without repentance; And for such a man
to despair, is not the sin, but the misery. If such persons have a promise of
hea­ven, let them shew it, and hope it, and enjoy it; if they have no promise,
they must thank themselves, for bringing themselves in­to a condition without
the Covenant, without a promise, hopelesse E and miserable.

But will not trusting in the merits of Jesus Christ save such a man? For that
we must be tried by the word of God: In which there is no contract at all made
with a dying person that hath lived in Name a Christian, in practise a
Heathen: and we shall dishonour the sufferings and redemption of our blessed
Saviour, if we make them to be a Umbrello to shelter our impious and ungodly
living. [[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=47)
But that no such person may after a wicked life repose himself in A his
deathbed upon Christs merits, observe but these two places of scripture [Our
Saviour Jesus Christ who gave himself for us] what to do?Titus. 2. 14. that we
might lives as we list? and hope to be saved by his merits? No But ‘[that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works. These things speak and exhort,]’ saith Saint Paul. But
more plainly yet, in S. Peter [Christ bare our sins in his own body on the
tree. 1 Pet. 2 24.] To what end? [that we being dead unto sin should live unto
righteousnesse.] since therefore our living a holy life is the end of Christs
dying that sad and holy death for us, he that trusts on it to evil purpo­ses,B
and to excuse his vicious life, does (as much as lies in him) make void the
very purpose and designe of Christs passion, and disho­nours the blood of the
everlasting covenant: which covenant was confirmed by the blood of Christ: but
as it brought peace from God, so it requires a holy life from us.

But why may not we be saved as well as the thief upon the crosse?See life of
Je­sus. Disc. of Repentance. part. 2. even because our case is nothing alike.
When Christ dies once more for us, we may look for such another instance; not
till then. But this thiefe did but then come to Christ; he knew him not
be­fore; and his case was as if a Turk or heathen should be conver­ted C to
Christianity, and be baptized, and enter newly into the Co­venant upon his
deathbed. Then God pardons all his sins; and so God does to Christians when
they are baptized, or first give up their names to Christ by a voluntarie
confirmation of their bap­tismal vow: but when they have once entred into the
Covenant, they must performe what they promise, and to what they are ob­liged.
The thief had made no contract with God in Jesus Christ, and therefore failed
of none; onely the defaillances of the state of ignorance Christ paid for at
the thiefes admission. But we that have made a covenant with God in baptisme,
and failed of it all our D dayes, and then returne at night, when we cannot
work; have nothing to plead for our selves, because we have made all that to
be uselesse to us which God with so much mercy and miraculous wisdom, gave us
to secure our interest, and hopes of heaven.

And therfore let no Christian man who hath covenanted with God to give him the
service of his life, think that God will be an­swered with the sighs and
prayers of a dying man; for all that great obligation which lies upon us
cannot be transacted in an in­stant, when we have loaded our souls with sin,
and made them em­pty of vertue; we cannot so soon grow up to a perfect man in
Christ E Jesus. Arrian. Epictet l. 1. c. 15. [...] you cannot have an apple,
or a cherry, but you must stay its proper periods, and let it blossom and
knot, and grow and ripen, [and in due season we shall reap if we faint not]
(saith the Apostle) far much lesse may we expect that the fruits of
repentance, and the issues and degrees of holinesse shall [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=47) A be gathered in
a few dayes or houres.  [...]; you must not expect such fruits in a little
time, nor with little labour.

Suffer therefore not your selves to be deceived by false princi­ples, and vain
confidences; for no man can in a moment root out the long contracted habits of
vice, nor upon his deathbed make use of all that variety of preventing,
accompanying and persevering grace, which God gave to man in mercy; because
man would need it all, because without it he could not be saved; nor upon his
death­bed can he exercise the duty of mortification; nor cure his
drun­kennesse B then, nor his lust, by any act of Christian discipline; nor
run with patience; nor resist unto blood; nor endure with long sufferance; but
he can pray, and groan, and call to God, and re­solve to live well when he is
dying; but this is but just as the Nobles of Xerxes, when in a storm they were
to lighten the ship to preserve their Kings life, they did  [...] they did
their obeysance, and leaped into the sea: so (I fear) doe these men, pray and
mourn, and worship and so leap overboard into an ocean of eternal and
intolerable calamity. From which God deli­ver C us, and all faithful people.

Hunc volo laudari qui sine morte potest.

Mart. ep. l. 1.

Vivere quod propero pauper, nec inutilis annis

Da veniam, properat vivere nemo satis.

Differat hoc, patrios optat qui vincere census

Atria (que) immodicis arctat imaginibus.

Mart. l. 2. ep 90.

DE

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=48)

## 7\. Sermon. VII.SERM. VII. A THE B DECEITFVLNESSE Of the HEART.C

17\. Jeremy 9.‘The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperatly
wick­ed; D who can know it?’

FOlly and subtiltie divide the greatest part of man­kinde, and there is no
other difference but this, that some are crafty enough to deceive; Others
foolish enough to be cozened and abused: And yet the scales also turn, for
they that are the most craftie to cozen others, are the veriest Fools and most
of all abused themselves. They rob their neighbour of his mony, and E loose
their own innocency; they disturb his rest, and vex their own Conscience; they
throw him into prison, and themselves into Hell; they make poverty to be their
brothers portion, and damna­tion to be their own. Man entred into the world
first alone; but as soon as he met with one companion, he met with three to
cozen him; The Serpent, and Eve, and himself, all joyned; first to make him a
foole, and to deceive him, and then to make him miserable. [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=48) A But he first
cozened himself, giving himself up to believe a lie, and being desirous to
listen to the whispers of a tempting spirit, he sinned, before he fell, that
is, he had within him a false understand­ing, and a depraved will, and these
were the Parents of his disobe­dience, and this was the parent of his
infelicity, and a great occasion of ours. And then it was that he entred for
himself and his posterity into the condition of an ignorant, credulous, easie,
wilful, passio­nate, and impotent person; apt to be abused, and so loving to
have it so, that if no body else will abuse him, he will be sure to abuse
himself; by ignorance and evil principles, being open to an enemy, B and by
wilfulnesse and Sensuality, doing to himself the most un­pardonable injuries
in the whole world. So that the condition of Man, in the rudenesses and first
lines of its visage, seemes very mi­serable, deformed, and accursed.

For a man is helplesse and vain; of a condition so exposed to cala­mity, that
a raisin is able to kill him▪ any trooper out of the Egyp­tian army, a flie
can do it, when it goes on Gods errand; the most contemptible accident can
destroy him, the smallest chance affright him, every future contingency, when
but conside [...]ed as possible, can amaze him; and he is incompass'd with
potent and ma­licious C enemies, subtle and implacable: what shall this poor
help­lesse thing do? trust in God? Him he hath offended, and he fear him as an
enemy; and God knows, if we look onely on our selves, and our own demerits, we
have to much reason so to doe. Shall he rely upon Princes? God help poor
Kings: they rely upon ther Sub­jects, they fight with their swords, levy
forces with the [...] money, consult with their Counsels, hear with their
ears, and are strong onely in their union, and many times they use all these
things a­gainst them; but however, they can do nothing without them while they
live, and yet if ever they can die, they are not to be trust­ed to. Now Kings
and Princes die so sadly and notoriously; that it D was used for a proverbe in
holy scripture, ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. Who
then shall we trust in? in our Friend? Poor man! he may help thee in one
thing, and need thee in ten; he may pull thee out of the ditch▪ and his foot
may slip and fal into it himself; he gives thee counsel to choose a wife, and
himself is to seek how prudently to choose his religion▪ he counsels thee to
abstain from a duel, and yet slayes his own soul with drinking, like a person
void of all understanding he is willing enough to preserve E thy interest, and
is very carelesse of his own: for he does highly despise to betray or to be
false to thee, and in the mean time is not his own friend, and is false to
God, and then his friendship may be useful to thee in some circumstances of
fortune; but no security to thy condition. But what then? shall we relie upon
our patron, like the Roman Clients, who waited hourly upon their persons, and
daily upon their baskets, and nightly upon their lusts, and married [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=49) their
friendships, and contracted also their hatred and quarrels; A This is a
confidence will deceive us. For they may lay us by, justly or unjustly, they
may grow weary of doing benefits, or their fortunes may change, or they may be
charitable in their gifts and burthensom in their offices; able to feed you,
but unable to counsel you; or your need may be longer then their kindnesses,
or such in which they can give you no assistance; and indeed generally it is
so in all the instances of men: we have a friend that is wise; but I  [...]eed
not his counsel, but his meat; or my patron is bountiful in his largesses, but
I am troubled with a sad spirit; and money and presents do me no more ease,
then perfumes do to a broken B arme: we seek life of a Physician that dies,
and go to him for health, who cannot cure his own breath, or gowt; and so
become vain in our imaginations, abused in our hopes, restlesse in our
passions, impatient in our calamity, unsupported in our need, exposed to
e­nemies, wandring and wilde, without counsel and without reme­dy. At last
after the infatuating and deceiving all our confidences without, we have
nothing left us, but to return home, and dwell within our selves: for we have
a sufficient stock of self-love, that we may be confident of our own
affections, we may trust our selves surely; for what we want in skill, we
shall make up in diligence,C and our industry shall supply the want of other
circumstances: and no man vnderstands my own case so well as I do my self, and
no man will judge so faithfully as I shall do for my self; for I am most
concern'd not to abuse my self; and if I do, I shall be the lo­ser, and
therefore may best rely upon my self Alas! and God help us! we shall finde it
to be no such matter: For we neither love our selves well, nor understand our
own case, we are partial in our own questions, deceived in our sentences,
carelesse of our interests, and the most false, persidious creatures to our
selves in the whole D world: even the Heart of a man a mans own heart is
deceitful a­bove all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? And who
can choose but know it?

And there is no greater argument of the deceitfulnesse of our Hearts, then
this, that no man can know it all; it cosens us in the very number of its
cosenage: But yet we can reduce it all to two heads. We say concerning a false
man, trust him not for he will deceive you, and we say concerning a weak and
broken staffe, lean not upon it, for that will also deceive you. The man
deceives because he is false, and the staffe because it is weak, and the heart
E because it is both. So that it is deceitful above all things, that is,
fai­ling and disabled to support us in many things; but in other things where
it can, it is false and desperately wicked. The first sort of de­ceitfulnesse
is its calamitie, and the second is its iniquity, and that is the worst
Calamitie of the two.

1\. The heart is deceitfull in its strength; and when we have the [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=49) A groweth of a
Man, we have the weaknesses of a childe: nay more yet, and it is a sad
consideration, the more we are in age, the weak­er in our courage. It appears
in the heats and forwardnesses of new converts, which are like to the great
emissions of Lightning, or like huge fires, which flame and burn without
measure, even all that they can; till from flames they descend to still fires,
from thence to smoak, from smoak to embers, from thence to ashes; cold and
pale, like ghosts, or the phantastick images of Death. And the primitive
Church were zealous in their Religion up to the degree of Cherubins, and would
run as greedily to the sword of the B hangman, to die for the cause of God, as
we do now to the great­est joy and entertainment of a Christian spirit, even
to the receiving of the holy Sacrament. A man would think it reasonable that
the first infancy of Christianity should, according to the nature of first
beginnings, have been remisse, gentle, and unactive, and that ac­cording as
the object or evidence of faith grew, which in every Age hath a great degree
of Argument superadded to its confirmation; so should the habit also and the
grace, the longer it lasts & the more obiections it runs through, it still
should shew a brighter and more certain light to discover the divinity of its
principle; and that after C the more examples, and new accidents and
strangenesses of provi­dence, and daily experience, and the multitude of
miracles, still the Christian should grow more certain in his faith, more
refreshed in his hope, and warm in his charity; the very nature of these
graces increasing and swelling upon the very nourishment of experience, and
the multiplication of their own acts. And yet because the heart of man is
false, it suffers the fires of the Altar to go out, and the flames lessen by
the multitude of fuel. But indeed it is because we put on strange fire, & put
out the fire upon our hearths by letting in a glaring Sun beam, the fire of
lust; or the heates of an angry spirit, to D quench the fires of God, and
suppresse the sweet cloud of incense. The heart of man hath not strength
enough to think one good thought of it self, it cannot command its own
attention to a prayer often lines long: but before its end it shall wander
after some thing, that is to no purpose: and no wonder then that it grows
wea­ry of a holy religion, which consists of so many parts as make the
businesse of a whole life. And there is no greater argument in the world of
our spiritual weaknesse and falsnesse of our hearts in the matters of
religion, then the backwardnesse which most men have E alwayes, and all men
have somtimes to say their prayers: so weary of their length, so glad when
they are done, so wi [...]e to excuse and frustrate an opportunity; and yet
there is no manner of trouble in the duty, no wearinesse of bones, no violent
labours; nothing but begging a blessing, and receiving it; nothing but doing
our selves the greatest honour of speaking to the greatest person, and
greatest king of the world; and that we should be unwilling to do this, so
[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=50) unable to
continue in it, so backward to return to it; so without A gust and relish in
the doing it, can have no visible reason in the na­ture of the thing, but
something within us, a strange sicknesse in the heart, a spiritual nauseating
or loathing of Manna, something that hath no name; but we are sure it comes
from a weake, a faint, and false heart.

And yet this weak heart is strong in passions, violent in desires,
unresistable in its appetites, impatient in its lust, furious in anger; here
are strengths enough, one would think: But so have I seen a man in a feaver,
sick and distempered, unable to walk, lesse able to speak sence, or to do an
act of counsel; and yet when his feaver B hath boild up to a delirium, he was
strong enough to beat his nurse keeper and his doctor too; and to resist the
loving violence of all his friends, who would faine binde him down to reason
and his bed: And yet we still say he is weak and sick to death.  [...] for
these strengths of madnesse are not health,Arrian. but furiousnesse and
disease;  [...], It is weaknesse another way; And so are the strengths of a
mans heart; they are fetters and manacles; strong, but they are the cordage of
imprisonment, so strong, that the heart is not able to stir. And yet it cannot
but be a huge sadnesse, that the heart C shall pursue a temporal interest with
wit and diligence, and an un­wearied industry, and shall not have strength
enough in a matter that concerns its Eternal interest to answer one obiection,
to resist one assault, to defeate one art of the divel; but shall certainly
and infallibly fall when ever it is tempted to a pleasure.

This, if it be examined, will prove to be a deceit indeed, a pretence, rather
then true upon a just cause, that is, it is not a natural, but a moral & a
vicious weaknesse; and we may try it in one or two familiar instances. One of
the great strengths, shall I call it? or weaknesses of the heart is, that it
is strong, violent and passionate in D its lusts, and weak and deceitful to
resist any. Tell the tempted person, that if he act his lust, he dishonours
his body, makes him­self a servant to follie, and one flesh with a harlot, he
defiles the Tem­ple of God, and him that defiles a Temple will God destroy:
Tell him that the Angels who love to be present in the nastinesse and filth of
prisons, that they may comfort and assist chast souls, and holy persons there
abiding▪ yet they are impatient to behold or come neer the filthynesse of a
lustful person: Tell him, that this sin is so ugly, that the divels, who are
spirits, yet they delight to counterfeit the acting of this crime, and descend
unto the daughters E or sons of men, that they may rather lose their natures,
then not help to set a lust forward: Tell them these and ten thousand things
more; you move them no more, then if you should read one of Tullies orations
to a mule; for the truth is, they have no power to resist it, much lesse to
master it, their heart fails them [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=50) A when they meet
their Mistresse; and they are driven like a fool to the stocks, or a Bull to
the slaughter-house: And yet their heart de­ceives them; not because it cannot
resist the temptation, but because it will not go about it: For it is certain,
the heart can, if it list: For let a Boy enter into your chamber of pleasure,
and discover you folly, either your lust disbands, or your shame hides it; you
will not, you dare not do it before a stranger Boy; and yet that you dare do
it before the eyes of the All-seeing God, is impudence and folly, and a great
conviction of the vanity of your pretence, and the false­nesse of your heart.
If thou beest a man given to thy appetite, and B thou lovest a pleasant
morsell as thy life, do not declame against the precepts of Temperance, as
impossible: Try this once; abstain from that draught, or that dish. I cannot.
No? Give this man a great blow on the face, or tempt him with twenty pound,
and he shall fast from morning till night, and then feast himself with your
money, and plain wholesome meat. And if Chastity and Tempe­rance be so easie,
that a man may be brought to either of them with so ready and easie
instruments; Let us not suffer our hearts to de­ceive us by the weaknesse of
its pretences, and the strength of its C desires: For we do more for a Boy,
then for God; and for 20. pound, then Heaven it self.

But thus it is in every thing else; take an Hereticke, a Rebel, a person that
hath an ill cause to mannage; what he wants in the strength of his reason, he
shall make it up with diligence; and a person that hath Right on his side is
cold, indiligent, lazie, and unactive, trusting that the goodnesse of his
Cause will do it alone; But so, wrong prevails, while evil persons are zealous
in a Bad matter, and others are remisse in a Good; And the same person shall
be very industrious alwayes when he hath least reason so to D be. Thats the
first particular. The heart is deceitfull in the man­naging of its naturall
strengths; it is Naturally and Physically strong, but Morally weak, and
impotent.

2\. The Heart of man is deceitfull in making judgement con­cerning its own
Acts. It does not know when it is pleased or displeased, it is peevish and
trifling, it would and it would not, and it is in many Cases impossible to
know whether a mans heart desires such a thing or not. Saint Ambrose hath an
odde saying, Facilius inveneris innocentem, quam qui poenitentiam  [...]gne
egerit. It is easier to finde a man that hath lived innocently, then one that
E hath truly repented him, with a grief and care great according to the merit
of his sins. Now suppose a man that hath spent his younger yeers in vanity and
folly, and is by the grace of God ap­prehensive of it, and thinks of returning
to sober counsels, this man will finde his heart so false, so subtil and
fugitive, so secret and undiscernable, that it will be very hard to discerne,
whether he re­pents, or no. For if he considers that he hates sin, and
therefore [[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=51)
repents; Alas! he so hates it, that he dares not, if he be wise,A tempt
himself with an opportunity to act it: for in the midst of that which he calls
hatred, he hath so much love left for it, that if the sin comes again and
speaks him fair, he is lost again, he kis­ses the fire, and dies in its
embraces. And why else should it be necessary for us to pray, that we be not
lead into temptation? but because we hate the sin, and yet love it too well;
we curse it, and yet follow it; we are angry at our selves, and yet cannot be
with­out it; we know it undoes us, but we think it pleasant; And when we are
to execute the fierce anger of the Lord upon our sins, yet we are kinde-
hearted, and spare the Agag, the reigning sin, the B splendid temptation, we
have some kindnesses left towards it.

These are but ill signes How then shall I know by some infal­lible token, that
I am a true Penitent? What and if I weep for my sins? will you not then give
me leave to conclude my heart right with God, and at enmity with sin? It may
be so. But there are some friends that weep at parting; and is not thy weeping
a sor­row of affection? It is a sad thing to part with our long companion▪ Or
it may be thou weepest, because thou wouldest have a signe to cozen thy self
withall; for some men are more desirous to have a signe, then the thing
signified; they would do something to shew C their Repentance, that themselves
may beleeve themselves to be Penitents, having no reason from within to
beleeve so. And I have seen some persons weep heartily for the losse of six
pence, or for the breaking of a glasse, or at some trifling accident; and they
that do so cannot pretend to have their tears valued at a bigger rate then
they will confesse their passion to be when they weep, and are vexed for the
durting of their linnen, or some such trifle, for which the least passion is
too big an expence. So that a man can­not tell his own heart by his tears, or
the truth of his repentance by those short gusts of sorrow. How then? Shall we
suppose a D man to pray against his sin? So did Saint Austin, when in his
youth he was tempted to lust and uncleannesse, he prayed against it, and
secretly desired that God would not hear him: for here the heart is cunning to
deceive it self. For no man did ever heartily pray against his sin in the
midst of a temptation to it, if he did in any sence or degree listen to the
temptation: For to pray against a sin, is to have desires contrary to it, and
that cannot consist with any love, or any kindnesse to it. We pray against it,
and yet do it, and then pray again, and do it again; and we desire it, and yet
pray against the desires, and thats almost a contradiction: Now because E no
man can be supposed to will against his own will, or choose against his own
desires; it is plain that we cannot know whether we mean what we say, when we
pray against sin, but by the event; If we never act it, never entertain it,
alwayes resist it, ever fight against it; and finally do prevail; then at
length we may judge our [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=51) A own heart to
have meant honestly in that one particular.

Nay our heart is so deceitfull in this matter of Repentance, that the Masters
of spirituall life are fain to invent suppletory Arts and stratagems to secure
the duty. And we are advised to mourn, because we do not mourn, to be
sorrowfull because we are not sorrowfull. Now if we be sorrowfull in the first
stage, how happens it that we know it not? Is our heart so secret to our
selves? But if we be not sorrowfull in the first period, how shall we be so,
or know it in the second period? For we may as well doubt concerning the
sincerity of the second or reflex act of B sorrow, as of the first and direct
action. And therefore we may also as well be sorrowfull the third time, for
want of the just measure, or hearty meaning of the second sorrow, as be
sorrow­full the second time for want of true sorrow at the first; and so on to
infinite. And we shall never be secure in this Artifice, if we be not certain
of our naturall and hearty passion in our direct and first apprehensions.

Thus many persons think themselves in a good estate, and make no question of
their salvation, being confident onely because they are confident; and they
are so, because they are bidden to be so; C and yet they are not confident at
all, but extreamly timerous and fearfull. How many persons are there in the
world, that say they are sure of their salvation, and yet they dare not die?
And if any man pretends, that he is now sure he shall be saved, and that he
cannot fall away from grace; there is no better way to confute him, then by
advising him to send for the Surgeon, and bleed to death. For what should
hinder him? not the sin: for it cannot take him from Gods favour: not the
change of his condition: for he sayes he is sure to go to a Better: why does
he not then say  [...], like the Romane gallants when they decreed to die. The
D reason is plainly this. They say they are confident, and yet are ex­treamly
timerous; they professe to beleeve that Doctrine, and yet dare not trust it:
nay they think they beleeve, but they do not; so false is a mans heart; so
deceived in its own Acts, so great a stran­ger to its own sentence and
opinions.

3\. The heart is deceitfull in its own resolutions and purpo­ses: for many
times men make their resolutions onely in their un­derstanding, not in their
wills; they resolve it sitting to be done, not decree that they will do it;
And instead of beginning to be reconciled to God, by the renewed and hearty
purposes of holy E living, they are advanced so far onely, as to be convinced,
and apt to be condemned by their own sentence.

But suppose our resolutions advanced further, and that our Will and Choices
also are determined; see how our hearts deceive us. 1. We resolve against
those sins that please us not, or where temptation is not present, and think
by an over-acted zeal against [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=52) some sins to get
an indulgence for some others. There are some A persons who will be Drunk; The
Company, or the discourse, or the pleasure of madnesse, or an easie nature,
and a thirsty soul; something is amisse, that cannot be helped; But they will
make amends, and the next day pray twice as much. Or it may be they must
satisfie a beastly lust; but they will not be drunk for all the world; and
hope by their Temperance to Commute for their want of Chastity: But they
attend not the craft of their secret enemy, their Heart: for it is not love of
the vertue; if it were, they would love Vertue in all its Instances; for
Chastity is as much a vertue as Temperance, and God hates Lust as much as he
hates B Drunkennesse.Virtutem unam si amise­ris etsi [...]an [...]ui non
potest vir­tus, sed si unam consessus fueris te non habere, nullam te esse ha
[...]i [...]urum  [...]an nes [...]is? Cicer. But this sin is against my
health, or it may be it is against my lust, it makes me impotent, and yet
impatient, full of desire, and empty of strength. Or else I do an act of
Prayer, lest my conscience become unquiet, while it is not satisfied or
cozened with some intervals of Religion: I shall think my self a damned
wretch, if I do nothing for my soul; but if I do, I shall call the one sin
that remains nothing but my Infirmity; and therefore it is my excuse: and my
Prayer is not my Religion, but my Peace, and my Pretence, and my Fallacy.C

2\. We resolve against our sin, that is, we will not act it in those
circumstances as formerly: I will not be drunk in the streets; but I may sleep
till I be recovered, and then come forth sober; or if I be overtaken, it shall
be in Civill and Gentile company; Or it may be not so much; I will leave my
intemperance and my Lust too, but I will remember it with pleasure, I will
revolve the past action in my mind, and entertain my fancy with a moros
delectation in it, and by a fiction of imagination will represent it present,
and so be satisfied with a little esseminacy, or phanta­stick pleasure,
Beloved, suffer not your hearts so to cozen you,D as if any man can be
faithfull in much, that is faithlesse in a little. He certainly is very much
in love with sin, and parts with it very unwillingly, that keeps its Picture,
and wears its Favour, and de­lights in the fancy of it, even with the same
desire, as a most pas­sionate widow parts with her dearest husband, even when
she can no longer enjoy him: But certainly her staring all day upon his
picture, and weeping over his Robe, and wringing her hands over his children,
are no great signes that she hated him: And just so do most men hate, and
accordingly part with their sins.

3\. We resolve against it when the opportunity is slipped, and E lay it aside
as long as the temptation please, even till it come again, and no longer. How
many men are there in the world, that against every Communion renew their
vowes of holy living? Men, that for twenty, for thirty yeers together, have
been perpetually resol­ving against what they daily Act; and sure enough they
did beleeve themselves: And yet if a man had daily promised us a curtesie,
[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=52) A and
failed us but ten times, when it was in his power to have done it, we should
think, we had reason never to beleeve him more: And can we then reasonably
beleeve the resolutions of our hearts, which they have falsified so many
hundred times? We resolve against a religious Time, because then it is the
Custome of men, and the Guise of the Religion; Or we resolve when we are in a
great danger, and then we promise any thing, possible or impossi­ble, likely
or unlikely, all is one to us, we onely care to remove the present pressure,
and when that is over, and our fear is gone, and no love remaining, our
condition being returned to our first B securities, our resolutions also
revert to their first indifferencies: Or else we cannot look a temptation in
the face, and we resolve against it, hoping never to be troubled with its
arguments and im­portunity. Epictetus tells us of a Gentleman returning from
ba­nishment, in his journey towards home called at his house, told a sad story
of an Imprudent life, the greatest part of which being now spent, he was
resolved for the future to live Philosophi­cally, and entertain no businesse,
to be candidate for no employ­ment, not to go to the Court, not to salute
Caesar with ambitious attendancies, but to study, and worship the gods, and
die wil­lingly, C when nature, or necessity called him. It may be this man
beleeved himself, but Epictetus did not. And he had reason. For  [...].
Letters from Caesar met him at the doors, and invited him to Court, and he
forgot all his promises, which were warm upon his lips, and grew pompous,
secular, and ambitious, and gave the gods thanks for his preferment. Thus many
men leave the world, when their fortune hath left them, and they are severe
and philosophicall, and retired for ever, if for ever it be impossible to
return: But let a prosperous Sunshine warm and refresh their sadnesses, and
make it but possible to break D their purposes, and there needs no more
temptation; Their own false heart is enough; they are like Ephraim in the day
of Battell, starting aside like a broken Bow.

4\. The heart is false, deceiving and deceived in its intensions and designes.
A man hears the precepts of God injoyning us to give Alms of all we possesse;
he readily obeys with much cheer­fulnesse and alacrity; And his charity, like
a fair spreading tree, looks beauteously: But there is a Canker at the heart;
The man blowes a Trumpet to call the poor together, and hopes the
neigh­bourhood will take notice of his Bounty. Nay he gives Alms pri­vately, E
and charges no man to speak of it, and yet hopes by some Accident or other to
be praised both for his Charity and Humi­lity. And if by chance, the Fame of
his Alms comes abroad it is but his duty to let his light so shine before men,
that God may be glorified, and some of our neighbours be relieved, and others
edi­fied. But then to distinguish the intention of our heart in this [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=53) Instance, and to
seek Gods glory in a particular, which will also A conduce much to our
reputation, and to have no filthy adherence to stick to the heart▪ no
reflexion upon our selves, or no compla­cency and delight in popular noyses,
is the nicity of abstraction, and requires an Angel to do it. Some men are so
kind-hearted, so true to their friend, that they will watch his very dying
groans, and receive his last breath, and close his eyes; And if this be done
with honest intention, it is well: But there are some that do so, and yet are
vultures and harpyes, they watch for the Carcasse, and prey upon a Legacy. A
man with a true story may be malici­ous to his enemy, and by doing himself
right, may also do him B wrong: And so false is the heart of man, so clancular
and contra­dictory are its Actions and Intentions, that some men pursue vertue
with great earnestnesse, and yet cannot with patience look upon it in another:
It is Beauty in Themselves, and Deformity in the Other. Is it not plain, that
not the Vertue, but its Reputation is the thing that is pursued? And yet if
you tell the man so, he thinks he hath reason to complain of your malice or
detraction. Who is able to distinguish his fear of God from fear of
punishment? when from fear of punishment we are brought to fear God: And yet
the difference must be distinguishable in new Converts & old Disciples; C And
our fear of punishment must so often change its Circumstan­ces, that it must
be at last a fear to offend out of pure Love, and must have no formality left
to distinguish it from Charity: It is easie to distinguish these things in
Precepts, and to make the sepa­ration in the Schooles: The Head can do it
easily, and the Tongue can do it: But when the Heart comes to separate Alms
from Cha­rity, Gods glory from Humane praise, fear from fear, and sincerity
from Hypocrisie; it does so intricate the questions and confound the ends, and
blend and entangle circumstances, that a man hath reason to doubt, that his
very best Actions are fullied with some un­handsom D excrescencie something to
mak them very often to be cri­minal, but alwayes to be imperfect.

Here a man would think were enough to abate our confidence and the spirit of
pride, and to make a man eternally to stand upon his guard, and to keep as
strict watch upon his own heart, as upon his greatest enemy from without.
Custodi, libera me de meipso, Deus. It was S. Augustines prayer, Lord keep me,
Lord deliver me from my self. If God will keep a man, that he be not Felo de
se, that he lay no violent hands upon himself, it is certain nothing else can
do him mischief,  [...], as Agamemnon said, Neither E Jupiter, nor Destinies,
nor the Furies, but it is a mans self that does him the mischief. The Devil
can but Tempt, and offer a dag­ger at the heart, unlesse our hands thrust it
home, the Devil can do nothing, but what may turne to our advantage. And in
this sence we are to understand the two seeming Contradictories in [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=53) A Scripture,
Pray that ye enter not into Temptation, said our Blessed Saviour, and Count it
all joy when you enter into divers Temptations, said one of Christs Disciples.
The case is easie. When God suffers us to be tempted, he means it but as a
trial of our faith, as the exercise of our vertues, as the opportunity of
reward, and in such cases we have reason to count it all joy; since the Trial
of our faith worketh Patience and Patience experience, and experience causeth
hope, and hope maketh not ashamed: But yet for all this, pray against
temptations: for when we get them into our hands, we use them as blind men do
their clubs, neither distinguish person nor part; as soone they strike the B
face of their friends as the back of the Enemie; our hearts betray us to the
enemie, we fall in love with our mischief, we contrive how to let the lust in,
and leave a port open on purpose, and use arts to forget our duty, and to give
advantages to the Divel. He, that uses a temptation thus, hath reason to pray
against it; and yet our hearts does all this and a thousand times more: so
that we may ingrave upon our hearts the epitaph which was digged into Thiestes
grave­stone.

Nolite, inquit, hospites adire adme, ilico istic;

Ne contagio mea umbrave obsit,

C Tanta vis sceleris in corpore haeret.

There is so much falsenesse and iniquity in mans heart, that it de­files all
the members; it makes the eyes lustful, and the tongue slanderous; it fills
the head with mischief, and the feet with blood, and the hands with injury,
and the present condition of man with folly, and makes his future state apt to
inherit eternal miserie. But this is but the beginning of those throws, &
damnable impieties, which proceed out of the heart of man and defile the whole
con­stitution. I have yet told but the weaknesses of the heart; I shall the D
next time tel you the iniquities, those inherent Divels which pollute and
defile it to the ground, and make it desperately, wicked, that is, E wicked
beyond all expression.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=54)

## 8\. The deceitfulnesse of the Heart.SER. VIII. A  
Part II.

2  [...]:B It is the beginning of wisdom, to know a mans own weaknesses,Epict.
Arrian. and failings in things of greatest necessitie; and we have here so
many objects to furnish out this knowledge, that we finde it with the longest
and latest before it be obtained. A man does not begin to know him self till
he be old, and then he is well stricken in death: A mans heart at first being
like a plain table, unspotted indeed, but then there is nothing legible in it.
As soon as ever we ripen towards the imperfect uses of our reason, we write
upon this table such crooked characters, such imperfect C configurations, so
many fooleries; and stain it with so many blots, and vitious inspersions, that
there is nothing worth the reading in our hearts for a great while; and when
education and ripenesse, reason and experience, Christian philosophy and the
grace of God hath made fair impressions and written the law in our hearts with
the finger of Gods holy spirit, we blot out this handwriting of Gods
ordinances, or mingle it with false principles, and interlinings of our our
own; we disorder the method of God, or deface the truth of God; either we make
the rule uneven we bribe or abuse our guide, that we may wander with an
excuse. Or if nothing else will do it D we turn head and professe to go
against the laws of God. Our Hearts are blind; or our hearts are hardned: for
these are two great arguments of the wickednesse of our hearts: they do not
see, or they will not see the wayes of God; or if they do, they make use of
their seeing, that they may avoid them.

1 1\. Our hearts are blinde, wilfully blind. I need not instance in the
ignorance and involuntary nescience of men, though if we speak of the
necessary parts of religion, no man is ignorant of them with­out his own
fault: such ignorance is alwayes a direct sin, or the direct punishment of a
sin. A sin is either in its bosom, or in its retinue: But E the ignorance,
that I now intend, is a voluntary, chosen, delightful ignorance taken in upon
designe; even for no other end, but that we may perish quietly and infallibly.
God hath opened all the windows of Heaven, and sent the Sun of Righteousnesse
with glorious apparition, and hath dis­coverd [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=54) A the abysses of
his own wisdom, made the second person in the Trinity, to be the doctor and
preacher of his sentences and secrets, and the third person to be his
Amanuensis or scribe, and our hearts to be the Book, in which the doctrine is
written, and miracles and prophecies to be its arguments, and all the world to
be the verifi­cation of it: and those leaves contain within their folds all
that excellent morality, which right reason pickt up after the shipwrack of
nature; and all those wise sayings, which singly made so many men famous for
preaching some one of them; all them Christ ga­thered and added some more out
of the immediate book of Reve­lation: B So that now the wisdom of God hath
made every mans heart to be the true Veronica, in which he hath imprinted his
own lineaments so perfectly, that we may dresse our selves like God, and have
the aire and features of Christ our Elder-Brother; that we may be pure as God
is, perfect as our Father, meek and hum­ble as the Son, and may have the holy
Ghost within us, in gifts and Graces, in wisdom and holinesse. This hath God
done for us; and see what we do for Him. We stand in our own light, and quench
Gods: we love darknesse more then light, and entertain our s [...]lves C
accordingly. For how many of us are there, that understand no­thing of the
wayes of God; that know no more of the law of Je­sus Christ, then is remaining
upon them since they learned the chil­drens Catechisme? But amongst a thousand
how many can expli­cate and unfold for his own practise the ten Commandments;
And how many sorts of sins are there forbidden? which therefore passe in­to
action, and never passe under the scrutinies of repentance; because they know
not that they are sinnes? Are there not very many, who know not the particular
duties of meeknesse, and never consider concerning Long suffering? and if you
talk to them of growth in D Grace, or the spirit of obsignation, or the
melancholy lectures of the Crosse and imitation of, and conformitie to Christs
sufferings; or adherences to God, or rejoycing in him, or not quenching the
spirit; you are too deep learned for them. And yet these are duties set down
plainly for our practise, necessary to be acted in order to our Salvation. We
brag of light, and reformation, and fulnesse of the spirit: in the mean time
we understand not many parts of our dutie. We enquire into something that may
make us talk, or be talked of, or that we may tro [...]ble a Church, or
disturb the peace of mindes; but in things that concern Holy living and that
wis­dom E of God, whereby we are wise unto Salvation; never was any age of
Christendom more ignorant then we. For, if we did not wink hard we must needs
see, that obedience to supre [...] Pow­ers, Denying of our selves, Humility,
Peacefulnesse and Charity, are written in such Capital text letters, that it
is impossible to be ig­norant of them. And if the heart of man had not rare
arts to abuse the understanding, it were not to be imagined that any man
should [[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=55)
bring the 13. Chapter to the Romans to prove the lawfulnesse of A taking up
Armes against our rulers: but so we may abuse our selves at noon and go to
bed, if we please to call it midnight. And there have been a sort of wittie
men that maintained that snow was hot: I wonder not at the probleme; but that
a man should beleeve his paradox, and should let eternity go away with the
fallacie, and rather lose heaven then leave his foolish argument, is a signe
that wilfulnesse and the deceiving heart is the Sophister, and the great
ingredient into our Deception.

But that I may be more particular; the heart of man uses devices that it may
be ignorant.B

1\. We are impatient of honest and severe reproofe; and order the
circumstances of our persons and address that we shall never come to the true
knowledge of our condition. Who will endure to heare his curate tell him, that
he is Covetous, or that he is proud?  [...]. It is Calumny and Reviling if he
speak it to his head, and relates to his person: and yet if he speak onely in
general, every man neglects what is not recommended to his particular. But yet
if our Physitian tell us▪ you look well, Sir; but a Feaver lurks in your
spirits,  [...] drink Julips and abstain from flesh; no than thinks it shame
or calumny to be told so: but when C we are told that our liver is inflamed
with lust or anger; that our heart is vexed with envie; that our eyes rowl
with wantonnesse; And though we think all is well, yet we are sick, sick unto
death, & neer to a sad and fatal sentence▪ we shall think that man that tells
us so is impudent, or uncharitable; and yet he hath done him no more injury,
then a deformed man receives daily from his looking­glasse; which if he shall
dash against the wall, because it showes him his face just as it is; his face
is not so ugly as his manners. And yet our heart is so impatient of seeing its
own staines, that like the Elephant, it tramples in the pure streames, and
first troubles them,D then stoops and drinks, when he can least see his huge
defor­mitie.

2\. In order to this, we heap up teachers of our own, and they guide us, not
whither, but which way they please: for we are curi­ous to go our own way, and
carelesse of our Hospitall or Inne at night. A faire way, and a merry company,
and a pleasant easie guide will entice us into the Enemies quarters; and such
guides we cannot want. Improbitati occasio nunquam defuit. If we have a minde
to be wicked, we shall want no prompters; and false teach­ers at first
creeping in unawares have now so filled the pavement of E the Church, that you
can scarce set your foot on the ground, but you tread upon a snake. Cicero l.
7. ad Atticum, undertakes to bargain with them that kept the Sybils books,
that for a sum of money they shall expound to him what he please; and to be
sure, ut quidvis po­tius, quam Regem proferrent. They shall declare against
the govern­ment [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=55) A of kings, &
say, that the Gods will endure any thing rather then Monarchy in their beloved
republick. And the same mischief God complains of to be among the Jews; the
Prophets prophecie lies and my people love to have it so; and what will the
end of these things be? even the same that Cicero complain'd of,De Divinat. l.
2 Ad opinionem imperitorum fictas esse Religiones. Men shall have what
Religion they please, and God shall be intitled to all the quarrels of
cove­tous and Ambitious persons,  [...], as Demosthenes wit­tily complained of
the Oracle, An answer shall be drawn out of Scripture to countenance the
designe, & God made to Rebel against B his own Ordinances. And then we are
zealous for the Lord God of Hosts, and will live and die in that quarrel. But
is it not a strange cozenage, that our hearts shall be the main wheel in the
engine, and shall set all the rest on working? The heart shall first put his
own candle out, then put out the eye of reason; then remove the Land­mark, and
dig down the causeywayes, and then either hire a blinde guide, or make him so;
and all these Arts to get ignorance, that they may secure impiety. At first,
man lost his innocence onely in hope to get a little knowledge; and ever since
then left knowledge should discover his errour, and make him returne to
innocence, we C are content to part with that now, and to kow nothing that may
dis­cover or discountenance our sins, or discompose our secular de­signe. And
as God made great revelations and furnished out a wise Religion, and sent his
spirit to give the gift of Faith to his Church, that upon the foundation of
Faith he might build a holy life; now our hearts love to retire into
Blindnesse, & sneak under the covert of False principles, and run to a cheape
religion, and an unactive disci­pline, and make a faith of our own, that we
may build upon it ease and ambition and a tall fortune, and the pleasures of
revenge, and do what we have a minde to; scarce once in seven years denying a
D strong and an unruly appetite upon the interest of a just conscience and
holy religion. This is such a desperate method of impiety; so certain arts and
apt instruments for the Divel, that it does his work intirley, and produces an
infallible damnation.

3\. But the heart of man hath yet another stratagem to secure its iniquity by
the means of ignorance; and that is, Incogitancy or In­consideration. For
there is wrought upon the spirits of many men great impression by education,
by a modest and temperate nature, by humane Laws, and the customes &
severities of sober persons, and the fears of religion, and the awfulnesse of
a reverend man, E and the several arguments and endearments of vertue: And it
is not in the nature of some men to do an act in despite of reason, and
Religion, and arguments, and Reverence, and modesty, and fear; But men are
forced from their sin by the violence of the grace of God, when they heare it
speak. But so a Roman Gentleman kept off a whole band of souldiers, who were
sent to murther him; and [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=56) his eloquence
was stronger then their anger and designe: But sud­denly A a rude trooper
rushed upon him, who neither had, nor would heare him speak; and he thrust his
spear into that throat, whose musick had charmed all his fellows into peace
and gentlenesse. So do we. The Grace of God is Armour and defence enough
against the most violent incursion of the spirits, and the works of darknesse,
but then we must hear its excellent charms, and consider its reasons, and
remember its precepts, and dwell with its discourses. But this the heart of
man loves not. If I be tempted to uncleannesse, or to an act of oppression,
instantly the grace of God represents to me, that the pleasure of the sin is
transient, and vain, unsatisfying and B empty; That I shall die, and then I
shall wish too late, that I had never done it. It tells me that I displease
God who made me, who feeds me, who blesses me, who fain would save me. It
represents to me all the joyes of Heaven, and the horrours and amazements of a
sad eternity And if I will stay and heare them, ten thousand ex­cellent things
besides, sit to be twisted about my understanding forever. But here the heart
of man shuffles all these discourses in­to disorder, and will not be put to
the trouble of answering the ob­jections; but by a meer wildenesse of purpose
and rudnesse of C resolution ventures super totam materiam, at all, and does
the thing, not because it thinks it fit to do so, but because it will not
consider whether it be or no: it is enough that it pleases a present appetite,
and if such incogitancy comes to be habitual, as it is in very many men;
(first by resisting the motions of the holy spirit, then by quenching him,) we
shall find the consequents to be, first an In­differencie, then a dulnesse,
then a Lethargie, then a direct Hating the wayes of God; and it commonly ends
in a wretchlessenesse of spirit to be manifested on our death-bed; when the
man shall passe hence not like the shadow, but like the dog, that departeth,
with­out D sence or interest, or apprehension, or real concernment in the
considerations of eternity: and tis but just, when we will not heare our king
speak and plead, not to save himself, but us, to speak for our peace, and
innocency and Salvation, to prevent our ruine, and our intolerable calamity:
certainly we are much in love with the wages of death, when we cannot endure
to heare God cal us back; and stop our ears against the voice of the charmer,
charme he never so wisely.

Nay further yet; we suffer the Arguments of Religion to have so little
impression upon our spirits, that they operate but like E the discourses of
childhood, or the Problems of uncertain Philo­sophy: A man talks of Religion
but as of a dream, and from thence he awakens into the Businesses of the
world, and acts them deli­berately, with perfect Action and full Resolution,
and contrives, and considers, and lives in them: But when he falls asleep
again, or is taken from the Scene of his own employment and choice; [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=56) A then he dreams
again, and Religion makes such Impressions as is the conversation of a
Dreamer, and he acts accordingly. Theo­critus tells of a Fisherman that
dreamed he had taken  [...], a Fish of gold, upon which being over-joyed he
made a vow, that he would never fish more: But when he waked, he soon declared
his vow to be null, because he found his golden Fish was scaped away through
the holes of his eyes, when he first opened them. Just so we do in the
purposes of Religion; some­times in a good mood we seem to see Heaven opened,
and all the streets of Heavenly Jerusalem paved with gold and precious stones,
B and we are ravished with spirituall apprehensions, and resolve never to
return to the low affections of the world, and the impute adhe­rencies of sin,
but when this flash of lightning is gone, and we con­verse again with the
Inclinations, and habituall desires of our false hearts, those other desires
and fine considerations disband, and the Resolutions taken in that pious fit
melt into Indifferency, and old Customes. He was prettily and fantastically
troubled, who having used to put his trust in Dreams, one night dreamed, that
all dreams were vain; For he considered, If so, then This was vain, and then C
dreams might be true for all this: But if they might be true, then this dream
might be so upon equall reason; And then dreams were vain, because This dream,
which told him so, was true, and so round again. In the same Circle runs the
Heart of man; All his cogitations are vain, and yet he makes especiall use of
this, that, that Thought which thinks so, That is vain; and if That be vain,
then his other Thoughts, which are vainly declared so, may be Reall, and
Relied upon; And so we do. Those religious thoughts, which are sent into us,
to condemne and disrepute the thoughts of sin and vanity, are esteemed the
onely dreams; And so all  [...]hose D Instruments, which the grace of God hath
invented for the de­struction of Impiety, are rendred ineffectuall, either by
our direct opposing them, or (which happens most commonly) by our want of
considering them.

The effect of all is this, That we are ignorant of the things of God; we make
Religion to be the work of a few hours in the whole yeer; we are without fancy
or affection to the severities of holy Living; we reduce Religion to the
Beleeving of a few Articles, and doing nothing that is considerable; we Pray
sel­dome, and then but very coldly and indifferently; we Communi­cate E not so
often as the Sun salutes both the Tropicks; we pro­fesse Christ, but dare not
die for him; we are factious for a Reli­gion, and will not live according to
its precepts; we call our selves Christians, and love to be ignorant of many
of the Lawes of Christ: lest our knowledge should force us into shame, or into
the troubles of a holy Life. All the mischiefs that you can suppose to happen
to a furious inconsiderate person, running after the wilde-fires of [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=57) the night, over
Rivers and Rocks, and Precipices without Sun or A starre, or Angel or Man to
guide him: All that, and ten thousand times worse may you suppose to be the
certain Lot of him, who gives himself up to the conduct of a passionate blinde
Heart, whom no fire can warm, and no Sun enlighten; who hates light and loves
to dwell in the Regions of darknesse. Thats the first generall mis­chief of
the Heart; It is possessed with Blindnesse, wilfull and vo­luntary.

2 2\. But the Heart is Hard too. Not onely Folly, but Mischief also is bound
up in the Heart of man. If God strives to soften it with sorrow and sad
Accidents, it is like an Ox, it grows callow,B and hard. Such a heart was
Pharaohs. When God makes the clouds to gather round about us, we wrap our
heads in the clouds, and like the male-contents in Galba [...]s time,
Tristitiam simulamus Contumaciae propiores. We seem sad and troubled, but it
is dog­gednesse and murmur. Or else if our fears be pregnant, and the heart
yeelding, it sinks low into pusillanimity and superstition; and our hearts are
so childish, so timerous, or so impatient in a sadnesse, that God is weary of
striking us, and we are glad of it. And yet when the Sun shines upon us▪ our
hearts are hardned with that too, and God seems to be at a losse, as if he
knew not C what to do to us. Warre undoes us and makes us violent: Peace
undoes us and makes us wanton. Prosperity makes us Proud, Adversity renders us
Impatient; Plenty dissolves us and makes us Tyrants, Want makes us greedy,
liars, and rapacious.

[...]

[...];

Aristoph: [...]: Act. 5. Scen. 4.

No fortune can save that City to whom neither Peace nor Warre can do
advantage. And what is there left for God to mollifie our hearts, whose temper
is like both to wax and durt; whom fire hardens, and cold hardens; and
contradictory Accidents produce no change, save that the heart growes worse
and more obdurate D for every change of Providence? But here also I must
descend to particulars.

1\. The Heart of man is strangely Proud; If men commend us we think we have
reason to distinguish our selves from others, since the voice of discerning
men hath already made the separati­on. If men do not commend us, we think they
are stupid, and un­derstand us not, or envious and hold their tongues in
spite. If we E are praised by many, then Vox populi, vox Dei. Fame is the
voice of God. If we be praised but by few, then Satis unus, satis nullus. We
cry, these are wise, and one wise man is worth a whole herd of the People. But
if we be praised by none at all, we resolve to be even with all the world, and
speak well of no body, and think [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=57) A well onely of
our selves: And then we have such beggerly Arts, such tricks to cheat for
praise; we inquire after our faults and failings onely to be told we have
none, but did excellently, and then we are pleased; we rail upon our actions
onely to be chidden for so doing; and then he is our friend who chides us into
a good opinion of our selves; which however all the world can­not make us part
with. Nay, Humility it self makes us proud; so false, so base is the the Heart
of man. For Humility is so noble a vertue, that even Pride it self puts on its
upper Garment; And we do like those, who cannot endure to look upon an ugly or
a B deformed person, and yet will give a great price for a picture ex­treamly
like him. Humility is despised in substance, but courted and admired in
effigie. And Aesops picture was sold for two talents, when himself was made a
slave at the price of two Philippicks. And because Humility makes a man to be
honoured; Therefore we imitate all its garbs and postures, its civilities and
silence, its modesties and condescensions. And to prove that we are extreamly
proud in the midst of all this pagentry, we should be extreamly angry at any
man, that should say, we are proud; And thats a sure signe we are so. And in
the middest of all our Arts to seem Hum­ble, C we use devices to bring our
selves into talk; we thrust our selves into company; we listen at doors; and
like the great Beards in Rome, that pretended Philosophy and strict life,
[...], We walk by the Obelisk, and meditate in Piazza's, that they that meet
us may talk of us, and they that follow may cry out,  [...]; Behold! there
goes an excellent man! He is very prudent, or very learned, or a charitable
person, or a good housekeeper, or at least very Humble.

The Heart of man is deeply in love with wickednesse, and with nothing else:
Against, not onely the Lawes of God, but D against his own Reason, its own
Interest, and its own Securities. For is it imaginable, that a man who knows
the Lawes of God, the rewards of Vertue, the cursed and horrid effects of sin;
that knows and considers, and deeply sighes at the thought of the into­lerable
pains of Hell; that knowes the joyes of Heaven to be un­speakable, and that
concerning them there is no temptation, but that they are too big for man to
hope for; And yet he certainly beleeves, that a holy life shall infallibly
attain thither; Is it I say imaginable, that this man should for a transient
Action forfeit all this Hope, and certainly and knowing incur all that
calamity? Yea, E but the sin is pleasant, and the man is clothed with flesh
and blood, and their appetites are materiall, and importunate, and present;
And the discourses of Religion are concerning things spirituall, se­parate and
apt for spirits, Angels and souls departed. To take off this also; We will
suppose the man to consider, and really to be­leeve that the pleasure of the
sin, is sudden, vain, empty and [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=58) transient; that
it leaves bitternesse upon the tongue, before it is A descended into the
bowels; that there it is poison, and makes the Belly to swell, and the Thigh
to rot; That he remembers and actually considers, that as soon as the moment
of sin is past, he shall have an intolerable Conscience; and does at the
instant com­pare moments with Eternity, and with horrour remembers that the
very next minute he is as miserable a man as is in the world; Yet that this
man should sin? Nay, suppose the sin to have no plea­sure at all; such as is
the sin of swearing; Nay, suppose it really to have pain in it; such as is the
sin of Envy, which never can have pleasure in its actions, but much torment
and consumption of the B very heart; What should make this man sin so for
nothing, so a­gainst himself, so against all Reason and Religion and Interest,
without pleasure for no reward? Here the heart betrayes it self to be
desperately wicked. What man can give a reasonable account of such a man, who
to prosecute his revenge will do himself an injury, that he may do a lesse to
him that troubles him. Such a man hath given me ill language;  [...]; My head
akes not for his language, nor hath he broken my thigh, nor carried away my
land. But yet this man C must be requited. Well, suppose that. But then let it
be proporti­onable; you are not undone, let not him be so. Oh yes; for else my
revenge triumphs not. Well, if you do, yet remember he will defend himself, or
the Law will right him; at least do not do wrong to your self by doing him
wrong. This were but Prudence, and self-Interest. And yet we see, that the
heart of some men hath be­trayed them to such furiousnesse of Appetite, as to
make them willing to die, that their enemie may be buried in the same Ruines.
Jovius Pontanus tells of an Italian slave (I think) who being en­raged against
his Lord, watched his absence from home, and the D employment and inadvertency
of his fellow-servants: he locked the doors, and secured himself for a while,
and Ravished his Lady; then took her three sons up to the battlements of the
house, and at the return of his Lord, threw one down to him upon the pavement,
and then a second to rend the heart of their sad Father, seeing them weltring
in their blood and brains. The Lord begd for his third, and now his onely Son,
promising pardon and libertie, if he would spare his life. The slave seemed to
bend a little, and on condition his Lord would cut off his own Nose, he would
spare his Son. The sad Father did so, being willing to suffer any E thing,
rather then the losse of that Childe; But as soon as he saw his Lord all
bloody with his wound, he threw the third Son, and himself down together upon
the Pavement. The story is sad enough, and needs no lustre and advantages of
sorrow to represent it: But if a man sets himself down, and considers sadly,
he cannot easily tell upon what sufficient inducement, or what principle the
[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=58) A slave
should so certainly, so horridly, so presently, and then so eternally ruine
himself. What could he propound to himself as a recompence to his own so
immediate Tragedy? There is not in the pleasure of the revenge, nor in the
nature of the thing, any thing to tempt him; we must confesse our ignorance,
and say, that The Heart of man is desperately wicked; and that is the truth in
generall, but we cannot fathom it by particular compre­hension.

For when the heart of man is bound up by the grace of God, and tied in golden
bands, and watched by Angels, tended by those Nurse-keepers of the soul; it is
not easie for a man to wan­der; B And the evil of his heart is but like the
ferity and wildnesse of Lyons-whelps: But when once we have broken the hedge,
and got into the strengths of youth, and the licenciousnesse of an un­governed
age, it is wonderfull to observe, what a great inundati­on of mischief in a
very short time will overflow all the banks of Reason and Religion. Vice first
is pleasing, then it grows easie, then delightfull, then frequent, then
habituall, then confirmed, then the man is impenitent, then he is obstinate,
then he resolves never to Repent, and then he is Damned. And by that time he
is come half C way in this progresse, he confutes the Philosophy of the old
Mo­ralists; For they, not knowing the vilenesse of mans Heart not considering
its desperate amazing Impiety, knew no other degree of wickednesse but This,
That men preferred Sense before Rea­son, and their understandings were abused
in the choice of a tem­porall before an intellectuall and eternall good: But
they alwayes concluded, that the Will of man must of necessity follow the last
dictate of the understanding, declaring an object to be good in one sence or
other. Happy men they were, that were so Innocent; that knew no pure and
perfect malice, and lived in an Age, in which it was not easie to confute
them. But besides that, now the D wells of a deeper iniquity are discovered,
we see by too sad expe­rience, that there are some sins proceeding from the
heart of man, which have nothing but simple, and unmingled malice; Actions of
meer spite; doing evil, because it is evil; sinning without sen­suall
pleasures; sinning with sensuall pain, with hazard of our lives; with actuall
torment, and sudden deaths, and certain and present damnation; sins against
the Holy Ghost; open hostilities, and pro­fessed enmities against God and all
vertue. I can go no further; because there is not in the world, or in the
nature of things, a E greater Evil. And that is the Nature and Folly of the
Devil; he tempts men to ruine, and hates God, and onely hurts himself, and
those he tempts; and does himself no pleasure, and some say, he increases his
own accidentall torment.

Although I can say nothing greater; yet I had many more things to say, if the
time would have permitted me to represent the [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=59) Falsenesse and
Basenesse of the Heart. 1. We are false our selves,A and dare not trust God.
2. We love to be deceived, and are an­gry, if we be told so. 3. We love to
seem vertuous, and yet hate to be so. 4. We are melancholy and impatient, and
we know not why. 5. We are troubled at little things, and are carelesse of
greater. 6. We are overjoyed at a petty accident, and despise great and
eternall pleasures. 7. We beleeve things, not for their Reasons and proper
Arguments; but as they serve our turns, be they true or false. 8. We long
extreamly for things that are for­bidden us; And what we despise, when it is
permitted us, we snatch at greedily, when it is taken from us. 9. We love our
selves B more then we love God; and yet we eat poysons daily, and feed upon
Toads and Vipers, and nourish our deadly enemies in our bo­some, and will not
be brought to quit them; but brag of our shame, and are ashamed of nothing,
but Vertue, which is most honoura­ble. 10. We fear to die, and yet use all
means we can to make Death terrible and dangerous. 11. We are busie in the
faults of others, and negligent of our own. 12. We live the life of spies,
striving to know others, and to be unknown our selves. 13. We worship and
flatter some men, and some things, because we fear them, not because we love
them. 14. We are ambitious of C Greatnesse, and covetous of wealth, and all
that we get by it, is, that we are more beautifully tempted; and a troop of
Clients run to us, as to a Pool, whom first they trouble, and then draw dry.
15. We make our selves unsafe by committing wickednesse, and then we adde more
wickednesse to make us safe, and beyond pu­nishment. 16. We are more servile
for one curtesie, that we hope for, then for twenty that we have received. 17.
We enter­tain slanderers, and without choice spread their calumnies; and we
hugg flatterers, and know they abuse us: And if I should ga­ther the abuses,
and impieties, and deceptions of the Heart, as D Chrysippus did the oracular
Lies of Apollo into a Table; I fear they would seem Remedilesse, and beyond
the cure of watchfulnesse and Religion. Indeed they are Great and Many: But
the Grace of God is Greater; and if Iniquity abounds, then doth Grace
super­abound, and thats our Comfort and our Medicine, which we must thus use.

1\. Let us watch our hearts at every turn.

2\. Deny it all its Desires, that do not directly or by consequence end in
godlinesse: At no hand be indulgent to its fondnesses, and peevish appetites.E

3\. Let us suspect it as an Enemy.

4\. Trust not to it in any thing.

5\. But beg the grace of God with perpetuall and importunate prayer, that he
would be pleased to bring good out of these evils, and that he would throw the
salutary wood of the Crosse, the me­rits [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=59) A of Christs
death and passion, into these salt waters, and make them healthful and
pleasant.

And in order to the mannaging these advises, and acting the pur­poses of this
prayer; let us strictly follow a rule; and choose a Prudent and faithful
guide, who may attend our motions, and watch our counsels, and direct our
steps, and prepare the way of the Lord, and make his paths streight, apt and
imitable. For without great watchfulnesse, and earnest devotion, and a prudent
Guide, we shall finde that true in a spiritual sense, which Plutarch affirmed
of a mans body in the natural; that of dead Buls arise Bees; from B the
carcases of horses, hornets are produced; But the body of man brings forth
serpents. Our hearts wallowing in their own na­tural and acquired corruptions,
will produce nothing but issues of Hell, and images of the old serpent the
divel, for whom is provided the everlasting burning. C D E

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=60)

## 9\. Sermon. IX.SERM. IX. A THE B FAITH and PATIENCE OF THE SAINTS: OR C The
righteous cause oppressed.

1 Peter. 4. 17.‘For the time is come that judgement must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us what shall the end be of D them that obey not
the Gospel of God? 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shal the
ungodly and the sinner appear?’

SO long as the world lived by sense, and discourses of natural reason, as they
were abated with hu­mane infirmities, and not at all heighted by the spirit &
divine revelations, So long men took their accounts of good and bad by their
being pros­perous E or unfortunate: and amongst the basest and most ignorant
of men, that onely was accounted honest which was profitable: and he onely
wise that was rich; and that man beloved of God, who received from him all
that might sa­tisfie their lust, their ambition, or their revenge:

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=60)

A —Fatis accede deisque

& colefelices, miseros fuge sidera terra

ut distant & flamma mari, sic utile recto.

But because God sent wise men into the world, and they were treated rudely by
the world, and exercised with evil accidents, and this seemed so great a
discouragement to vertue, that even these wise men were more troubled to
reconcile vertue, and misery, then to reconcile their affections to the
suffering; God was pleased to enlighten their reason with a little beame of
faith, or else height­ned B their reason by wiser principles then those of
vulgar under­standings; and taught them in the clear glasse of faith, or the
dim perspective of Philosophy, to look beyond the cloud, and there to spie
that there stood glories behinde their curtain, to which they could not come
but by passing through the cloud, and being wet with the dew of heaven and the
waters of affliction. And accord­ding as the world grew more englightned by
faith so it grew more dark with mourning & sorrowes: God sometimes sent a
light of fire and pillar of a cloud and the brightnesse of an angel and the
lustre of C a star, and the sacrament of a rainbowe to guide his people
thorough their portion of sorrows, and to lead them through troubles to rest:
But as the Sun of righteousnesse approached towards the chambers of the East,
and sent the harbingers of light peeping through the curtains of the night,
and leading on the day of faith and bright­est revelation; so God sent degrees
of trouble upon wise and good men, that now in the same degree in the which
the world lives by faith and not by sense, in the same degree they might be
able to live in vertue even while she lived in trouble, and not reject so
great a beauty because she goes in mourning, and hath a black cloud of
cy­presse D drawn before her face: literally thus; God first entertain­ed
their services, and allured and prompted on the infirmities of the infant
world by temporal prosperity; but by degrees changed his method; and as men
grew stronger in the knowledge of God and the expectations of heaven, so they
grew weaker in their fortunes, more afflicted in their bodies, more abated in
their expectations, more subject to their enemies, and were to endure the
contradiction of sinners and the immission of the sharpnesses of providence
and di­vine Oeconomy.

First Adam was placed in a Garden of health and pleasure, from E which when he
fell, he was onely tied to enter into the covenant of natural sorrows which he
and all his posteritie till the flood run through: but in all that period they
had the whole wealth of the earth before them, they need not fight for empires
or places for their cattle to grase in; they lived long and felt no want, no
sla­very, no tyrannie, no war: and the evils that happened were sin­gle,
personal, and natural, and no violences were then done, but they [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=61) were like those
things which the law calls rare contingencies; for A which as the law can now
take no care, and make no provisions, so then there was no law; but men lived
free and rich and long, and they exercised no vertues but natural, and knew no
felicity but na­tural: and so long their prosperity was, just as was their
vertue, because it was a natural instrument towards all that which they knew
of happinesse, * But this publick easinesse and quiet, the world turned into
sin; and unlesse God did compel men to do themselves good they would undoe
themselves: and then God broke in upon them with a flood and destroyed that
generation, that he might be­gin the government of the world upon a new stock,
and binde B vertue upon mens spirits by new bands, endeared to them by new
hopes and fears.

Then God made new laws and gave to Princes the power of the sword, and men
might be punshed to death in certain cases, and mans life was shortened, and
slavery was brought into the world and the state of servants; and then war
began, and evils multiplied upon the face of the earth; in which it is
naturally certain, that they that are most violent and injurious prevailed
upon the weaker and more innocent; and every tyranny that began from Nimrod to
this day, and every usurper was a peculiar argument to shew that God be­gan C
to teach the world, vertue by suffering; and that therefore he suffered
Tyrannies and usurpations, to be in the world, and to be prosperous, and the
rights of men to be snatched away from the owners, that the world might be
established in potent and setled governments and the sufferers be taught al
the passive vertues of the soul. For so God brings good out of evil, turning
Tyranny into the benefits of Government, and violence into vertue, and
sufferings into rewards: and this was the second change of the world: personal
miseries were brought in upon Adam and his posterity, as a punish­ment of sin
in the first period: and in the second, publick evils were D brought in by
tyrants and usurpers, and God suffered them as the first elements of vertue,
men being just newly put to schoole to in­fant sufferings. But all this was
not much.

Christs line was not yet drawn forth: it began not to appear in what family
the King of sufferings should descend till Abrahams time, and therefore till
then there were no greater sufferings then what I have now reckoned. But when
Abrahams family was cho­sen from among the many nations, and began to belong
to God, by a special right, and he was designed to be the Father of the
Messias, then God found out a new way to trie him, even with a sound
af­fliction,E commanding him to offer his beloved Isaac; but this was accepted
and being intended by Abraham was not intended by God: for this was a type of
Christ, and therefore was also but a type of suf­ferings, excepting the
sufferings of the old periods and the sufferings of nature and accident, we
see no change made, for a long while [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=61) A after, but
God having established a law in Abrahams family did build it upon promises, of
health, and peace, and victory, and plenty, and riches: and so long as they
did not prevaricate the law of their God, so long they were prosperous: but
God kept a remnant of Cananites in the land like a rod held over them to vex
or to chastise them into obedience, in which while they persevered, nothing
could hurt them; and that saying of David needs no other sence, but the letter
of its own expression, I have been young and now am old, and yet saw I never
the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging their bread: The godly generally
were prosperous, and a good cause sel­dome B had an ill end, and a good man
never died an ill death, till the law had spent a great part of its time, and
it descended towards its declension and period; But that the great prince of
sufferings might not appear upon his stage of tragedies without some
fore­runners of sorrow, God was pleased to choose out some good men, and
honour them, by making them to become little images of suf­fering: Isaiah,
Jeremy, and Zachary were martyrs of the law; but these were single deaths;
Shadrac, Meshec, and Abednego were thrown into a burning furnace, and Daniel
into a den of lions, and Susanna was accused for adultery; but these were but
little ar [...]ests C of the prosperity of the Godly: as the time drew neerer
that Christ should be manifest, so the sufferings grew bigger and more
nume­rous: and Antiochus raised up a sharp persecution in the time of the
Maccabees, in which many passed through the red sea of blood into the bosome
of Abraham; & then Christ came: and that was the third period in which the
changed method of Gods providence was perfect­ed: for Christ was to do his
great work by sufferings, & by sufferings was to enter into blessednesse; & by
his passion he was made prince of the Catholickchurch, and as our Head was, so
must the members be: God made the same covenant with us, that he did with his
most holy D Son; & Christ obtaind no better conditions for us, then for
himself; that was not to be looked for; the servant must not be above his
master, it is well if he be as his Master: if the world persecuted him, they
will also persecute us; and from the dayes of John the Baptist, the kingdome
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: not the vio­lent
doers, but the sufferers of violence for though the old law was established in
the promises of temporal prosperity, yet the gospel is founded in temporal
adversity. It is directly a covenant of suffer­ings and sorrows; for now the
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: thats the sence and
designe of the text; and I in­tend, E it as a direct antinomy to the common
perswasion of tyrann­ous, carnal, and vicious men, who reckon nothing good,
out what is prosperous: for though that proposition had many degrees of truth
in the beginning of the law, yet the case is now altered; God hath established
its contradictory: and now every good man must look for persecution, and every
good cause must expect to thrive by [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=62) the sufferings
and patience of holy persons; and as men do well, and A suffer evil, so they
are dear to God: and whom he loves most, he afflicts most, and does this with
a designe of the greatest mercy in the world.

1\. Then, the state of the Gospel is a state of sufferings, not of temporal
prosperities, this was foretold by the prophets; a foun­tain shall go out of
the house of the Lord, Joel. 3. & irrigahit torrentem spi­narum; (so it is in
the vulgar latin) and it shall water the torrent of thorns; that is, the state
or time of the gospel. which like a tor­rent shall cary all the world before
it, and like a torrent shall be ful­lest in ill weather; and by its banks
shall grow nothing but thorns B and briers, sharp afflictions, temporal
infelicities and persecution. This sense of the words is more fully explained
in the book of the prophet Isa.Isaiah. 23. 3. upon the ground of my people
shall thorns and briers come up, how much more in all the houses of the city
of rejoycing; which prophecy is the same in the stile of the prophets, that my
text is in the stile of the Apostles: the house of God shall be watered with
the dew of heaven, and there shall spring up briers in it: judgement must
begin there: but how much more in the houses of the city of rejoycing how much
more amongst them that are at ease in Sion; that serve C their desires, that
satisfie their appetites, that are given over to their own hearts lust, that
so serves themselves, that they never serve God, that dwell in the city of
rejoycing; they are like Dives whose porti­on was in this life, who went in
fine linnen and fared deliciously every day; they indeed trample upon their
briers and thorns and suffer them not to grow in their houses; but the roots
are in the ground, and they are reserved for fuel of wrath in the day of
e­verlasting burning. Thus you see it was prophesied, now see how it was
performed: Christ was the captain of our sufferings and he began.D

He entred into the world with all the circumstances of poverty; he had a star
to illustrate his birth but a stable for his bed chamber, and a manger for his
cradle: the angels sang hymnes when he was born, but he was cold and cried,
uneasy and unprovided; he lived long in the trade of a carpenter, he by whom
God made the world had in his first years the businesse of a mean and an
ignoble trade; he did good where ever he went, and almost where ever he went
was abused; he deserved heaven for his obedience, but found a crosse in his
way thither; and if ever any man had reason to ex­pect fair usages from God,
and to be dandled in lap of ease, softnes E and a prosperous fortune, he it
was onely that could deserve that, or any thing that can be good. But after he
had chosen to live a life of vertue, of poverty, and labour, he entred into a
state of death; whose shame and trouble was great enough to pay for the sins
of the whole world: And I shall choose to expresse this mystery in the vvords
of scripture; he died not by a single, or a sudden death [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=62) A but he was
the Lambe slain from the beginning of the world: For he was massacred in Abel,
(saith Saint Paulinus) he was tossed up­on the waves of the Sea, in the person
of Noah; It was he that went out of his Countrey, when Abraham was called from
Char­ran, and wandred from his native soil: He was offered up in Isaac,
persecuted in Jacob, betrayed in Joseph, blinded in Sampson, affronted in
Moses, sawed in Esay, cast into the dungeon with Je­remy. For all these were
types of Christ suffering; and then his passion continued even after his
resurrection; for it is he that suf­fers in all his members; it is he that
endures the contradiction of B all sinners; it is he that is the Lord of life,
and is crucified again, and put to open shame in all the sufferings of his
servants, and sins of rebels, and defiances of Apostates, and renegados, and
vio­lence of Tyrants, and injustice of usurpers, and the persecutions of his
Church. It is he that is stoned in Saint Stephen, flayed in the person of
Saint Bartholomew, he was rosted upon Saint Lau­rence his Cridiron, exposed to
lyons in Saint Ignatius, burned in Saint Polycarpe, frozen in the lake where
stood fourty Martyrs of Cappadocia; Vnigenitus enim Dei ad peragendum mortis
suae sacra­mentum C consummavit omne genus humanarum passionum said Saint
Hilary. The Sacrament of Christs death is not to be accomplished, but by
suffering all the sorrows of humanity.

All that Christ came for, was, or was mingled with sufferings: For all those
little joyes which God sent, either to recreate his person, or to illustrate
his office, were abated, or attended with afflictions; God being more carefull
to establish in him the Cove­nant of sufferings, then to refresh his sorrows:
Presently after the Angels had finished their Halleluiahs, he was forced to
fly to save his life; and the air became full of shrikes of the desolate D
mothers of Bethlehem for their dying Babes. God had no sooner made him
illustrious with a voyce from heaven, and the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
him in the waters of Baptisme. But he was delivered over to be tempted and
assaulted by the Devil in the wildernesse: His transfiguration was a bright
ray of glory, but then also he entred into a cloud, and was told a sad story
what he was to suffer at Jerusalem: And upon Palme Sunday, when he rode
triumphantly into Jerusalem, and was adorned with the acclamations of a King,
and a God, he wet the Palmes with his tears, sweeter then the drops of Mannah,
or the little pearls of E heaven, that descended upon mount Hermon, weeping in
the midst of this triumph over obstinate, perishing, and maliciour Je­rusalem.
For this Jesus was like the rain-bowe which God set in the clouds as a
sacrament to confirm a promise, and establish a grace, he was half made of the
glories of the light, and half of the moisture of a cloud; in his best dayes
he was but half tri­umph, and half sorrow; he was sent to tell of his Fathers
mercies, [[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=63)
and that God intended to spare us; but appeared not but in the A company, or
in the retinue of a shower, and of foul weather: But I need not tell that
Jesus, beloved of God, was a suffering person: that which concerns this
question most, is that he made for us a covenant of sufferings: His Doctrines
were such as ex­pressely and by consequent enjoyne and suppose sufferings, and
a state of affliction; His very promises were sufferings, his beatitudes were
sufferings, his rewards, and his arguments to invite men to follow him, were
onely taken from sufferings in this life, and the reward of sufferings
hereafter.

For if we summon up the Commandements of Christ, we shall B finde humility,
mortification, self-deniall, repentance, renouncing the world, mourning,
taking up the crosse, dying for him, patience and poverty, to stand in the
chiefest rank of Christian precepts, and in the direct order to heaven: He
that will be my Disciple must deny himself, and take up his crosse and follow
me. We must fol­low him that was crowned with thorns and sorrows, him that was
drench [...]d in Cedron, nailed upon the Crosse, that deserved all good, and
suffered all evil: That is the summe of Christian Religion, as it
distinguishes from all the Religions of the world. To which we may adde the
expresse Precept recorded by Saint James,James 4. 10. [Be af­flicted C and
mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourn­ing, and your joy into
weeping.] You see the Commandements: Will you also see the Promises? These
they are. In the world yee shall have tribulation; in me ye shall have peace:
and through many tribulations, ye shall enter into heaven: and he that loseth
father and mother, wives, and children, houses, and lands for my Names sake
and the Gospel, shall receive a hundred fold in this life, with persecution:
thats part of his reward. [And he chastiseth every son that he receiveth; and
if you be exempt from sufferings, ye are bastards and not sons: These are some
of Christs promises: will D you see some of Christs blessings, Matth. 5. that
he gives his Church: Blessed are the poor: Blessed are the hungry and thirsty.
Blessed are they that mourn. Blessed are the humble. Blessed are the
persecuted: Of the eight Peatitudes, five of them have temporall misery and
mean­nesse, or an afflicted condition for their subject. Will you at last see
some of the reward, which Christ hath propounded to his ser­vants, to invite
them to follow him. When I am lifted up, I will draw all men after me: when
Christ is lifted up, as Moses lift up the serpent in the wildernesse, Phil. 1.
28. that is lifted upon the Crosse, then he will draw us after him. To you it
is given for Christ (sai [...]h Saint E Paul) when he went to sweeten and to
flatter the Philippians. Well, what is given to them? Some great favours
surely, true. It is not onely given that you beleeve in Christ, (though that
be a great matter) but also that you suffer for him, thats the highest of your
honour.James 5. 10. And therefore saith Saint James, My brethren, count it all
[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=63) A joy
when ye enter into divers temptations. And Saint Peter, Com­municating with
the sufferings of Christ rejoyce: 1 Pet. 4. 13. And Saint James again, We
count them blessed that have suffered: And Saint Paul when he gives his
blessing to the Thessalonians, he uses this form of prayer: Our Lord direct
our hearts in the charity of God, 2 Thess. 1. and in the pati­ence and
sufferings of Christ. So that if wee will serve the King of sufferings, whose
crown was of thorns, whose scepter was a reed of scorne, whose imperiall robe
was a scarlet of mockery, whose throne was the Crosse;Heb. 2. 10. We must
serve him in sufferings, in poverty of spirit, in humility, and mortification,
and for our reward we B shall have persecution, and all its blessed
consequents: Atque hoc est esse Christianum.

Since this was done in the green-tree, what might we expect should be done in
the dry: Let us in the next place consider how God hath treated his Saints and
servants, and the descending ages of the Gospel; That if the best of Gods
servants were followers of Jesus in this covenant of sufferings,1 Pet. 4. 12.
we may not think it strange concerning the fiery tryall, as if some new thing
had happened to us. For as the Gospel was founded in sufferings, we shall also
see it grow in persecutions: and as Christs blood did cement the corner C
stones and the first foundations; So the blood and sweat, the groans and
sighings, the afflictions and mortifications of saints, and martyrs did make
the superstructures, and must at last finish the building.

If I begin with the Apostles, who were to perswade the world to become
Christian, and to use proper Arguments of invitation, we shall finde that they
never offered an Argument of temporall prosperity: they never promised Empires
and thrones on earth, nor riches, nor temporall power, and it would have been
soon confuted, if they who were whipt and imprisoned, banished and D
scattered, persecuted and tormented, should have promised Sun­shine dayes to
others, which they could not to themselves: Of all the Apostles there was not
one that died a naturall death but one­ly Saint John;Tertul. S. Hieron. and
did he escape? Yes: But he was put into a Cauldron of scalding lead and oyl,
before the Port Latin in Rome, and scaped death by miracle, though no miracle
was wrought to make him scape the torture: And besides this, he lived long in
ba­nishment, and that was worse then Saint Peters chains: Sanctus Petrus in
vinculis, & Johannes ante portam latinam, were both dayes of Martyrdom and
Church Festivals: and after a long and E laborious life, and the affliction of
being detained from his crown, and his sorrows for the death of his fellow-
disciples, he dyed full of dayes and sufferings: And when Saint Paul was taken
into the Apostolate, his Commissions were signed in these words; I will shew
unto him how great things he must suffer for my Name: Acts 9. 15. and his
whole life was a continuall suffering: Quotidiè morior was [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=64) his Motto, I
die daily; and his lesson that he daily learned was to A know Christ Jesus and
him crucified; and all his joy was to rejoyce in the Crosse of Christ; and the
changes of his life were nothing but the changes, of his sufferings, and the
variety of his labours. For though Christ hath finished his own sufferings for
expiation of the world, yet there are  [...], portions that are behinde of the
sufferings of Christ which must be filled up by his body the Church; and happy
are they that put in the greatest symbol: for in the same measure you are
partakers of the sufferings of Christ, in the same shall ye be also of the
consolation. And therefore concerning S. Paul, as it was also concerning
Christ, there is nothing or but very little in B Scripture, relating to his
person and chances of his private life, but his labours and persecutions, as
if the holy Ghost did think nothing fit to stand upon record for Christ, but
sufferings.

And now began to work the greatest glory of the divine Provi­dence: here was
the case of Christianity at stake. The world was rich and prosperous, learned
and full of wise men, the Gospel was preached with poverty and persecution, in
simplicity of dis­course, and in demonstration of the Spirit: God was on one
side, and the Devil on the other; they each of them dressed up their city;
Babylon upon Earth, Jerusalem from above; the Devils city C was full of
pleasure, triumphs, victories and cruelty; good news and great wealth,
conquest over Kings, and making nations tribu­tary; They bound Kings in
chains, and the Nobles with links of iron, and the inheritance of the Earth
was theirs: the Romans were Lords over the greatest parts of the world; and
God permitted to the Devil the Firmament and increase, the wars and the
successe of that people, giving to him an intire power of disposing the great
changes of the world, so as might best increase their greatnesse and power:
and he therefore did it, because all the power of the Ro­mane greatnesse was a
professed enemy to Christianity: and on the D other side God was to build up
Jerusalem, and the kingdom of the Gospel: and he chose to build it of hewen
stone, cut and broken: the Apostles he chose for Preachers, and they had no
learning; women and mean people were the first Disciples, and they had no
power: the Devil was to lose his kingdom, and he wanted no ma­lice: and
therefore he stirred up, and as well as he could, he made active all the power
of Rome, and all the learning of the Greeks, and all the malice of Barbarous
people, and all the prejudice and the obstinacy of the Jews, against this
doctrine and institution; which preached and promised, and brought persecution
along with E it. On the one side there was scandalum crucis, on the other
patien­tia sanctorum, and what was the event? They that had overcome the
world, could not strangle Christianity. But so have I seen the Sun with a
little ray of distant light challenge all the power of darknesse, and without
violence and noise climbing up the hill, hath [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=64) A made night so
to retire, that its memory was lost in the joyes and spritefulnesse of the
morning; and Christianity without violence or armies, without resistance and
self-preservation, without strength or humane eloquence, without challenging
of priviledges, or fighting against Tyranny, without alteration of government,
and scandall of Princes, with its humility and meeknesse, with to­lerations
and patience, with obedience and charity, with praying, and dying, did
insensibly turn the world into Christian, and perse­cution into victory.

For Christ who began, and lived and died in sorrows, per­ceived B his own
sufferings to succeed so well, and that for suffering death, he was crowned
with immortality, resolved to take all his Disciples and servants to the
fellowship of the same suffering, that they might have a participation of his
glory; knowing, God had opened no gate of heaven but the narrow gate, to which
the Crosse was the key: and since Christ now being our High Priest in heaven,
intercedes for us by representing his passion, and the do­lours of the Crosse,
that even in glory he might still preserve the mercies of his past sufferings,
for which the Father did so delight in him: he also designes to present us to
God, dressed in the same C robe, and treated in the same manner, and honoured
with the marks of the Lord Jesus: He hath predestinated us to be conformable
to the image of his Son: And if under a head crowned with thorns, we bring to
God members circled with roses, and softnesse, and delicacy, triumphant
members in the militant Church God will reject us; he will not know us who are
so unlike our elder bro­ther: For we are members of the Lamb, not of the Lion,
and of Christs suffering part, not of the triumphant part: and for three
hun­dred yeers together, the Church lived upon blood, and was nou­rished with
blood; the blood of her own children: Thirty three D Bishops of Rome in
immediate succession, were put to violent and unnaturall deaths: and so were
all the Churches of the East and West built; the cause of Christ and of
Religion was advanced by the sword, but it was the sword of the persecutours,
not of re­sisters, or warriours: They were all baptized into the death of
Christ, their very profession and institution is to live like him; and when he
requires it, to die for him; that is the very formality, the life and essence
of Christianity. This I say lasted for three hundred yeers, that the prayers
and the backs, and the necks of Christians E fought against the rods and axes
of the persecuto [...]rs, and prevai­led till the Countrey, and the Cities,
and the Co [...]t it self was fil­led with Christians: And by this time, the
arm of Martyrs was vast and numerous, and the number of sufferers blunted the
hang­mans sword: For Christ first triumphed over the princes and pow­ers of
the world, before he would admit them to serve him; he first felt their malice
before he would make use of their defence, [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=65) to shew that it
was not his necessity that required it, but his grace A that admitted Kings
and Queens to be nurses of the Church.

And now the Church was at ease, and she that sucked the blood of the Martyrs
so long, began now to suck the milk of Queens: Indeed it was a great mercy in
appearance, and was so intended, but it proved not so. But then the Holy Ghost
in pursu­ance of the designe of Christ, who meant by sufferings to perfect his
Church, as himself was by the same instrument, was pleased now that
persecution did cease, to inspire the Church with the spirit of mortification
and austerity; and then they made Colleges of sufferers, persons who to secure
their inheritance in the world B to come, did cut off all their portion in
this, excepting so much of it as was necessary to their present being; and by
instruments of humility, by patience under, and a voluntary undertaking of the
Cro [...]e, the burden of the Lord, by self deniall, by fastings and
sackeloth, and pernoctations in prayer, they chose then to exercise the active
part of the religion, mingling it as much as they could with the suffering.

And indeed it is so glorious a thing to be like Christ, to be dres­sed like
the prince of the Catholick church, who was so a man of suf­ferings,C and to
whom a prosperous and unafflicted person is very un­like, that in all ages the
servants of God have put on the armour of righteousnesse, on the right hand,
and on the left, that is, in the sufferings of persecution, or the labours of
mortification, in pa­tience under the rod of God, or by election of our own;
by to­leration, or self denial, by actual martyrdom, or by aptnesse or
disposition towards it, by dying for Christ or suffering for him; by being
willing to part with all when he calls for it, and by parting with what we
can, for the relief of his poor members. For know this, there is no state in
the Church, so serene, no days so pros­perous,D in which God does not give to
his servants the powers and opportunities of suffering for him, not onely they
that die for Christ, but they that live according to his laws, shall finde
some lives to part with, and many wayes to suffer for Christ. To kill and
crucifie the old man, and all his lusts, to mortifie a beloved sin, to fight
against temptations, to do violence to our bodies, to live chastly, to suffer
affronts patiently, to forgive injuries and debts, to renounce all prejudice
and interest in religion, and to choose our side for truthes sake (not because
it is prosperous, but because it pleases God) to be charitable beyond our
power, to reprove our E betters with modesty and opennesse, to displease men
rather then God, to be at enmity with the world, that you may preserve
friend­ship with God, to denie the importunity and troublesome kindnesse of a
drinking friend, to own truth in despite of danger or scorn, to despise shame;
to refuse worldly pleasure when they tempt your soul, beyond duty or safety;
to take pains in the cause of religion, [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=65) A the labour of
love and the crossing of your anger, peevishnesse and morosity; these are the
daily sufferings of a Christian; and if we per­forme them well, wil have the
same reward and an equal smart and greater labour then the plain suffering the
hangmans sword. This I have discoursed, to represent unto you, that you cannot
be ex­empted from the similitude of Christs sufferings; that God will shut no
age nor no man from his portion of the crosse; that we cannot fail of the
result of this predestination, nor without our own fault be excluded from the
covenant of sufferings: judgement must begin at Gods house, and enters first
upon the sons and heirs of the king­dom; B and if it be not by the direct
persecution of Tyrants, it will be by the persecution of the devil, or
infirmities of our own flesh: But because this was but the secondary meaning
of the text, I re­turn to make use of all the former discourse.

1\. Let no Christian man make any judgement concerning his condition, or his
cause by the external event of things: for although in the law of Moses, God
made with his people a covenant of tem­poral prosperity, and his Saints did
binde the kings of the Am [...]rites, and the Philistines in chains, and their
nobles with links of iron, C and then, that was the honour which all his
Saints had; yet in Christ Jesus he made a covenant of sufferings: most of the
graces of Christi­anity are suffering graces, and God hath predestinated us to
suffer­ings: and we are baptised into suffering, and our very communi­ons are
symbols of our duty, by being the sacrament of Christs death and passion; and
Christ foretold to us tribulation, and promised onely that he would be with us
in tribulation, that he would give us his spirit to assist us at tribunals,
and his grace to despise the world, and to contemn riches, and boldnesse to
confesse every article of the Christian faith, in the face of armies and armed
ty­rants; D and he also promised that all things should work together for the
best to his servants, that is, he would out of the eater bring meat, and out
of the strong issue sweetnesse, and crowns and scepters should spring from
crosses, and that the crosse it self should stand upon the globes and scepters
of Princes; but he nev [...]r promised to his ser­vants, that they should
pursue Kings and destroy armies, that they should reign over the nations, and
promote the cause of Jesus Christ by breaking his commandments: The shield of
faith and the sword of the spirit, the armour of righteousnesse, and the
weapons of spiri­tual warfare, these are they by which christianity swelled
from a E small company, and a lesse reputation, to possesse the chaires of
Doctors, and the thrones of princes, and the hearts of all men. But men in all
ages will be tampering with shadows and toyes▪ The Apostles at no hand could
endure to hear that Christs kingdom was not of this world, and that their
Master should die a sad and shame­ful death; though that way he was to receive
his crown, and en­ter into glory: and after Christs time, when his Disciples
had taken [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=66) up the crosse
and were marching the Kings high way of sorrows,A there were a very great
many, even the generality of Christians, for two or three ages together, who
fell on dreaming that Christ should come and reign upon earth again, for a
thou­sand years, and then the Saints should reigne in all abundance of
temporal power and fortunes: but these men were content to stay for it, till
after the resurrection; in the mean time took up their crosse and followed
after their Lord, the King of sufferings: But now a dayes we finde a
generation of men, who have changed the covenant of sufferings into victories,
and triumphs, riches and pro­sperous chances, and reckon their Christianity by
their good for­tunes,B as if Christ had promised to his servants no heaven
hereaf­ter, no spirit in the mean time to refresh their sorrows; as if he had
enjoyned them no passive graces; but as if to be a Christian and to be a Turk
were the same thing, Mahomet entered and pos­sessed by the sword: Christ came
by the crosse, entered by humility, and his saints possesse their souls by
patience.

God was fain to multiply miracles to make Christ capable of being a man of
sorrows▪ and shall we think he will work miracles to make us delicate? He
promised us a glorious portion hereafter, to which if all the sufferings of
the world were put together, they C are not worthy to be compared, and shall
we with Dives choose our portion of good things in this life? If Christ
suffered so many things onely that he might give us glory, shall it be strange
that we shall suffer who are to receive this glory? It is in vain to think we
shall obtain glories at an easier rate, then to drink of the brook in the way
in which Christ was drenched. When the Devil appeared to Saint Martin in a
bright splendid shape and said he was Christ, he answered, Christus non nisi
in cruce apparet suis in hac vita. And when Saint Ignatius was newly tied in a
chain to be led to his martyr­dom, he cryed out, nunc incipio esse
Christianus: And it was obser­ved D by Minutius Felix, and was indeed a great
and excellent truth, omnes viri fortes quos Gentiles praedicabant, in
exemplum, aerumnis su­is inclytistoruerunt. The Gentiles in their whole
religion never pro­pounded any man imitable, unlesse the man were poor or
persecu­ted: Brutus stood for his countries liberty, but lost his army and his
life; Socrates was put to death for speaking a religious truth: Ca­to chose to
be on the right side, but happened to fall upon the op­pressed and the
injured; he died together with his party.

Victrix causa Deis placuit sed victa Catoni; And if God thus dealt with the
best of Heathens to whom he had made no cleare revelati­on E of immortal
recompences, how little is the faith and how much lesse is the patience of
Christians if they shall think much to suffer sorrows since they so clearly
see with the eye of faith the great things which are laid up for them that are
faithful unto the death. Faith is uselesse, if now in the midst of so great
pretended lights we [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=66) A shall not
dare to trust God unlesse we have all in hand that we de­sire; and suffer
nothing, for all we can hope for. They that live by sense have no use of
faith, yet our Lord Jesus concerning whose passions, the gospel speaks much,
but little of his glorifications, whose shame was publick, whose pains were
notorious, but his joyes and transfigurations were secret and kept private, he
who would not suffer his holy mother, whom in great degrees he exempted from
sin, to be exempted from many and great sorrows, certainly intends to admit
none to his resurrection, but by the doors of his grave, none to glory but by
the way of the crosse. If we be plan­ted B into the likenesse of his death, we
shall be also of his resurrection, else on no termes; Christ took away sin
from us, but he left us our share of sufferings; and the crosse which was
first printed up­on us in the waters of baptisme, must for ever be born by us
in penance, in mortification, in self-denial and in martyrdom, and toleration
according as God shall require of us by the chan­ges of the world, and the
condition of the Church.

For Christ considers nothing, but souls, he values not their estate or bodies,
supplying our want by his providence, and being secured that our bodies may be
killed, but can­not C perish so long as we preserve our duty and our
con­sciences. Christ our Captain hangs naked upon the crosse, our fellow
souldiers are cast into prison; torne with Lions, rent in sunder with trees
returning from their violent bend­ings, broken upon wheels, rosted upon
gridirons, and have had the honour not onely to have a good cause, but also to
suffer for it, and by faith not by armies, by pa­tience not by fighting, have
overcome the world; & sit anima mea cum Christianis, I pray God my soul may be
a­mong the Christians; and yet the Turks have prevailed up­on D a great part
of the Christian world, and have made them slaves, and tributaries, and do
them all spite, and are hugely prosperous; but when Christians are so, then
they are tempted and put in danger, and never have their duty and their
interest so well secured, as when they lose all for Christ and are adorned
with wounds, or poverty, change or scorn, affronts or revilings which are the
obelisks and tri­umphs of a holy cause. Evil men and evil causes had need have
good fortune and great successe to support their persons and their E
pretences; for nothing but innocence and Christianity can flou­rish in a
persecution. I summe up this first discourse in a word: in all the Scripture,
and in all the Authentick stories of the Church we finde it often, that the
Devil appeared in the shape of an Angell of light, but was never suffered so
much as to conterfeit a persecuted sufferer; say no more therefore as the
murmuring Israelites said; If the LORD be with us why [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=67) have these
evils apprehended us? for if to be afflicted be a signe A that God hath
forsaken a man, and refuses to own his religion, or his question, then he that
oppresses the widow, and murders the innocent, and puts the fatherlesse to
death, and follows providence by doing all the evils that he can, that is, all
that God suffers him, he I say is the onely Saint and servant of God: and upon
the same ground the wolf and the fox may boast when they scatter and devour a
flock of lambs and harmlesse sheep.B C D E

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=67)

## 10\. A Sermon. X.SER. X. B The Faith and Patience of the SAINTS: OR The
righteous cause oppressed.  
Part II.

C IT follows now that we inquire concerning the reasons of the Divine
Providence, in this administration of affairs, so far as he hath been pleased
to draw aside the curtain, and to unfold the leaves of his counsels and
predestination: and for such an in­quiry we have the precedent of the Prophet
Jeremy: Righteous art thou O Lord,Jerem. 12. 1, 2. when I plead with thee, yet
let us talk to thee of thy judgements: wherefore doth the way of the wicked
prosper? Where­fore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou hast
planted them, yea they have taken root: they grow, yea they bring forth fruit
Concerning which, in generall the Prophet Malachy gives this ac­count D after
the same complaint made. Mala. 3. 14. And now we call the proud happy, and
they that work wickednesse are set up, yea they that tempt God are even
delivered. They that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and a book of remem­brance was written before time for
them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name, and they shall be mine
(saith the Lord of Hosts) in that day when I binde up my jewels, and I will
spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him: Then shall ye return
and discern betwen the righteous, and the wicked, between him that ser­veth
God, and him that serveth him not. In this interval which is E a valley of
tears, it is no wonder if they rejoyce, who shall weep for ever; and they that
sow in tears shall have no cause to com­plain, when God gathers all the
mourners into his kingdom, they shall reape with joy.

For innocence and joy were appointed to dwel together for ever. And joy went
not first but when innocence went away, sorrow and [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=68) sicknesse
dispossessed joy of its habitation; and now this world A must be alwayes a
scene of sorrows, and no joy can grow here but that which is imaginary and
phantastick: there is no worldly joy, no joy proper for this world, but that
which wicked persons fancy to themselves, in the hopes and designes of
iniquity: He that covets his neighbours wife or land, dreams of fine things,
and thinks it a fair condition to be rich and cursed, to be a beast and die,
or to lie wallowing in his filthinesse: but those holy souls who are not in
love with the leprosie & the Itch for the pleasure of scratching, they know no
pleasure can grow from the thorns which Adam planted in the hedges of
Paradise; and that sorrow which was brought in by sin,B must not go away till
it hath returned us into the first condition of innocence: the same instant
that quits us from sin, and the failings of mortality, the same instant wipes
all tears from our eyes; but that is not in this world; In the mean time.

God afflicts the godly that he might manifest many of his attributes, and his
servants exercise many of their ver­tues.

Nec fortuna probat causas sequitur (que) merentes,C

sed vaga percunctos nullo discrimine fertur:

scilicet est aliud quod nos cogat (que) rogat (que)

Majus, & in proprias ducat mortalia leges.

For, without sufferings of Saints God should lose the glories of 1. Bringing
good out of evil: 2. Of being with us in tribulation, 3\. Of sustaining our
infirmities, 4 Of triumphing over the ma­lice of his enemies: 5. Without the
suffering of Saints, where were the exaltation of the crosse, the conformity
of the members to Christ their Head, the coronets of Martyrs? 6. Where were
the D trial of our faith? 7\. Or the exercise of long suffering? 8. Where were
the opportunities, to give God the greatest love? which can­not be but by
dying and suffering for him? 9. How should that which the world calls folly
prove the greatest wisdom: 10. and God be glorified by events contrary to the
probability and ex­pectation of their causes: By the suffering of Saints,
Christian re­ligion is proved to be most excellent whilst the iniquity and
cruel­ty of the adversaries proves the illecebra sectae as Tertullians phrase
is, it invites men to consider the secret excellencies of that reli­gion,E for
which and in which men are so willing to die: for that re­ligion must needs be
worth looking into, which so many wise and excellent men do so much value
above their lives and fortunes; 12. That a mans nature is passible, is its
best advantage: for by it we are all redeemed: by the passivenesse and
sufferings of our Lord and brother we were all rescued from the portion of
Devils; and by our suffering we have a capacity of serving God beyond that
[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=68) A of
Angels: who indeed can sing Gods praise with a sweeter note, and obey him with
a more unabated will, and execute his com­mands with a swifter wing, and a
greater power; but they cannot die for God; they can lose no lands for him;
and he that did so for all us, and commanded us to do so for him, is ascended
farre above all Angels, and is Heir of a greater glory. 13. Do this, and live,
was the covenant of the Law; but in the Gospel it is, suffer this, and live:
He that forsaketh house and land, friends and life, for my sake is my
disciple. 14\. By the sufferings of Saints God chastises their follies and
levities, and suffers not their errours to climbe up B into heresies, nor
their infirmities into crimes.

— [...]

Alteration makes a fool leave his folly. If David numbers the people of Judea,
God punishes him sharply and loudly: But if Augustus Caesar numbers all the
world he is let alone and prospers.

Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema.

And in giving physick we alwayes call that just, and sitting that C is usefull
and profitable: no man complains of his Physitians Ini­quity, if he burns one
part to cure all the body, if the belly be punished to chastise the floods of
humour, and the evils of a  [...]urfet: Punishments can no other way turn into
a mercy, but when they are designed for medicine; and God is then very
carefull of thy soul, when he will suppresse every of its evils, when it first
discom­poses the order of things, and spirits. And what hurt is it to thee if
a persecution draws thee from the vanities of a former prospe­rity, and forces
thee into the sobrieties of a holy life? What losse is it, what misery? Is not
the least sin a greater evil then the great D est of sufferings? God smites
some at the beginning of their sin: Others not till a long while after it is
done. The first cannot say, that God is slack in punishing; and have no need
to complain that the wicked are prosperous; for they finde that God is apt
enough to strike; and therefore that he strikes them, and strikes not the
other, is not de [...]ct of justice, but because there is not mercy in store,
for them that sin and suffer not: 15. For if God strikes the godly that they
may repent, it is no wonder that God is so good to his servants; but then we
must not call that a misery, which God in­tends E to make an instrument of
saving them. And if God forbears to strike the wicked out of anger, and
because he hath decreed death and hell against them, we have no reason to envy
that they ride in a gilded chariot to the gallows: But if God forbears the
wicked, that by his long sufferance they may be invited to repent­ance, then
we may cease to wonder at the dispensation, and argue comforts to the
afflicted Saints, thus; 1. For if God be so gracious [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=69) to the wicked,
how much more is he to the godly? And if sparing A the wicked be a mercy, then
smiting the godly being the expres­sion of his greater kindnesse; affliction
is of it self the more eligi­ble condition. If God hath some degrees of
kindnesse for the per­secutor, so much as to invite them by kindnesse, how
much grea­ter is his love to them that are persecuted? and therefore his
en­tercourse with them is also a greater favour: and indeed it is the surer
way of securing the duty; fair means may do it, but severity will fix and
secure it: fair means are more apt to be abused then harsh physick; that may
be turned into wantonnesse, but none but the impudent and grown sinners,
despise all Gods judgements; B and therefore God chooses this way to deal with
his erring ser­vants, that they may obtain an infallible and a great
salvation: and yet if God spares not his children, how much lesse the
re­probates? and therefore as the sparing the latter, commonly is a sad curse,
so the smiting the former is a very great mercy. 16 For by this Oeconomy God
gives us a great argument to prove the re­surrection, since to his saints and
servants he assignes sorrow for their present portion. Sorrow cannot be the
reward of vertue, it may be its instrument, and hand-maid, but not its reward;
and therefore it may be intermedial to some great purposes, but they C must
look for their portion in the other life: For if in this life onely we had
hope, then we were of all men the most miserable. It is Sain Pauls argument to
prove a beatificall resurrection: And we therefore may learn to estimate, the
state of the afflicted godly to be a mercy great, in proportion to the
greatnesse of that reward, which these afflictions come to secure and to
prove.

Nunc & damna juvant, sunt ipsa pericula tanti,

Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deos.D

It is a great matter, an infinite blessing to escape the pains of hell; and
therefore that condition is also very blessed which God sends us to create and
to confirm our hopes of that excellent mercy. 17. The sufferings of the saints
are the sum of Christian Philo­sophy; they are sent to wean us from the van
[...]les and affections of this world, and to create in us strong desires of
heaven, whiles God causes us to be here treated rudely, that we may long to be
in our Countrey, where God shall be our portion, and Angels our companions,
and Christ our perpetuall feast, and a never ceasing joy shall be our
condition and entertainment.Ecclus. 40. 1. O death, how bitter E art thou to a
man that is at ease and rest in his possessions: but he that is uneasie in his
body, and unquiet in his possessions, vexed in his person, discomposed in his
designes, who findes no pleasure, no rest here, will be glad to fix his heart,
where onely he shall have what he can desire, and what can make him happy. As
long [[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=69) A
as the waters of persecutions are upon the earth, so long we dwell in the Ark;
but where the land is dry, the Dove it self will be tempted to a wandring
course of life, and never to return to the house of her safety. What shall I
say more? 18 Christ nourish­eth his Church by sufferings. 19 He hath given a
single blessing to all other graces, but to them that are persecuted, he hath
promi­sed a double one.Matth. 5. 1 [...], &c. It being a double favour, first
to be innocent like Christ, and then to be afflicted like him. 20. Without
this, the miracles of patience, which God hath given to fortifie the spirits
of the saints would signifie nothing. Nemo enim tolerare tanta B velit sine
causâ, nec potuit sine Deo, as no man would bear evils without a cause, so no
man could bear so much without the sup­porting hand of God; and we need not
the Holy Ghost to so great purposes, if our lot were not sorrow and
persecution; and there­fore without this condition of suffering, the Spirit of
God should lose that glorious attribute of The Holy Ghost the Comforter. 21\.
Is there any thing more yet? Yes They that have suffered or forsa­ken any
lands for Christ, shall sit upon thrones and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel, so said Christ to his Disciples. Nay the saints shall C judge Angels,
(saith saint Paul) well therefore might Saint Paul say, I rejoyce exceedingly
in tribulation. It must be some great thing that must make an afflicted man to
rejoyce exceedingly; and so it was. For since patience is necessary that we
receive the promise, and tribulation does work this: For a short time it
worketh the consum­mation of our hope, even an exceeding weight of glory. We
have no reason to think it strange concerning the fiery triall, as if it were
a strange thing. It can be no hurt; the Church is like Moses bush, when it is
all on sire, it is not at all consumed, but made full of miracle, full of
splendour, full of God: and unlesse we can finde D something that God cannot
turn into joy, we have reason not onely to be patient, but rejoyce, when we
are persecuted in a righteous cause: For love is the soul of Christianity, and
suffering is the soul of love. To be innocent, and to be persecuted, are the
body and soul of Christianity. I John your brother, and partaker of
tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, said Saint John: those
were the titles and ornaments of his profession; that is, I John your fellow
Christian; thats the plain song of the former descant. He therefore that is
troubled, when he is afflicted in his outward man, that his inward man may
grow strong, like the birds E upon the ruines of the shell, and wonders that a
good man should be a begger, and a sinner be rich with oppression, that
Lazarus should die at the gate of Dives, hungry and sick, unpitied, and
un­relieved, may as well wonder, that carrion crowes should feed themselves
fat upon a fair horse, farre better then himself; or that his own excellent
body should be devoured by wormes, and the most contemptible creatures, though
it lies there to be converted [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=70) into glory;
That man knows nothing of nature, or providence, A or Christianity, or the
rewards of vertue, or the nature of its consti­tution, or the infirmities of
man, or the mercies of God, or the arts and prudence of his loving kindnesse,
or the rewards of heaven, or the glorifications of Christs exalted humanity,
or the precepts of the Gospel, who is offended at the sufferings of Gods
deerest servants, or declines the honour and the mercy of sufferings in the
cause of righ­teousnesse; For the securing of a vertue, for the imitation of
Christ, and for the love of God, or the glories of immortality. It cannot, it
ought not, it never will be otherwise, the world may as well cease to be
measured by time, as good men to suffer affliction.B I end this point with the
words of Saint Paul,Phil. 3. 15. Let as many as are per­fect, be thus minded,
and if any man be otherwise minded, God also will reveal this unto you, this,
of the covenant of sufferings, con­cerning which the old Prophets, and holy
men of the Temple had many thoughts of heart; but in the full sufferings of
the Gospel, there hath been a full revelation of the excellency of the
sufferings. I have now given you an account of some of those reasons, why God
hath so disposed it, that at this time, that is, under the period of the
Gospel, judgement must begin at the house of God, and they are either,  [...],
or imitation of Christs C [...], chastisements, or trials, martyrdom, or a
conformity to the sufferings of the Holy Jesus.

But now besides all the premises, we have another account to make concerning
the prosperity of the wicked: For if judgment first begin at us? what shall
the end be of them that obey not the Go­spel of God? that is the question of
the Apostle, and is the great instrument of comfort to persons ill treated in
the actions of the world. The first ages of the Church lived upon promises,
and prophecies; and because some of them are already fulfilled for ever, and
the others are of a continuall and a successive nature, and are D verified by
the actions of every day: Therefore we and all the following Ages live upon
promises and experience: and although the servants of God have suffered many
calamities, from the ty­ranny and prevalency of evil men their enemies, yet
still it is preserved as one of the fundamentall truths of Christianity; That
all the fair fortunes of the wicked are not enough to make them happy, nor the
persecutions of the godly, able to make a good man miserable; nor yet their
sadnesses arguments of Gods displea­sure against them. For when a godly man is
afflicted and dies, it is his work and his businesse; and if the wicked
prevail, that is,E if they persecute the godly, it is but that which was to be
expe­cted from them: For who are fit to be hangmen, and executio­ners of
publike wrath but evil and ungodly persons? And can it be a wonder that they
whose cause wants reason, should betake themselves to the sword? that what he
cannot perswade he may [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=70) A wrest? onely
we must not judge of the things of God by the mea­sures of men,  [...], the
things of men have this world for their stage, and their reward, but the
things of God relate to the world to come: and for our own particulars we are
to be guided by rule, and by the end of all, not by events intermedial, which
are varied by a thousand irregular causes. For if all the evil men in the
world were unprosperous (as most certainly they are) and if all good persons
were temporally blessed (as most certainly they are not) yet this would not
move us to become vertuous: If an angel should come from heaven, or one arise
from the dead and preach re­pentance, B or justice, and temperance, all this
would be ineffectu­all to those to whom the plain doctrines of God, delivered
in the Law and the Prophets will not suffice.

For why should God work a signe to make us to beleeve that we ought to do
justice; if we already beleeve, he hath comman­ded it, no man can need a
miracle for the confirmation of that which he already beleeves to be the
command of God: And when God hath expressely bidden us to obey every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, the King as supreme, and his deputies as sent by
him: It is a strange infidelity to think, that a rebellion against the
ordinance of C God, can be sanctified by successe and prevalency, of them that
destroy the authority, and the person, and the law, and the religion: The sin
cannot grow to its height if it be crushed at the beginning; unlesse it
prosper in its progresse, a man cannot easily fill up the measure of his
iniquity: but then that the sin swels to its fulnesse by prosperity, and grows
too big to be suppressed without a mi­racle, it is so far from excusing, or
lessening the sin, that nothing doth so nurse the sin as it: It is not vertue,
because it is prospe­rous, but if it had not been prosperous, the sin could
never be so great.

D —Facere omnia saevè

Non impunè licet, nisi dum facis.

A little crime is sure to smart, but when the sinner is grown rich, and
prosperous, and powerfull, he gets impunity.

Jusque datum sceleri—

But thats not innocence, and if prosperity were the voice of God to approve an
action, then no man were vitious, but he that is punished, and nothing were
rebellion, but that which cannot be E easily suppressed, and no man were a
Pirate but he that robs with a little vessell, and no man could be a Tyrant
but he that is no prince, and no man an unjust invader of his neighbours
rights, but he that is beaten and overthrown. Then the crime grows big and
loud, then it calls to Heaven for vengeance, when it hath been long a growing,
when it hath thrived under the Devils managing; when [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=71) God hath long
suffered it, and with patience in vain expecting the A repentance of a sinner:
he that treasures up wrath against the day of wrath, that man hath been a
prosperous that is an unpunished and a thriving sinner: but then it is the sin
that thrives not the man: and that is the mistake upon this whole question:
for the sin cannot thrive, unlesse the man goes on without apparent
punishment, and restraint. And all that the man gets by it is, that by a
continual course of sin, he is prepared for an intollerable ruine. The Spirit
of God bids us look upon the end of these men; not the way they walk or the
instrument of that pompous death. When Epami­nondas was asked, which of the
three was happiest, himself, Chal­rias,B or Iphicrates, bid the man stay till
they were all dead; for till then that question could not be answered. He that
had seen the Vandals besiege the city of Hippo, and have known the
barbarous­nesse of that unchristned people, and had observed that S. Augustine
withall his prayers and vows could not obtain peace in his own dayes, not so
much as a reprieve for the persecution, and then had observed S. Augustine die
with grief that very night, would have perceived his calamity more visible
then the reward of his piety and holy religion. When Lewis firnamed Pius went
his voyage to C Palestine upon a holy end, and for the glory of God to fight
against the Saracens and Turks, and Mamalukes, the world did promise to
themselves that a good cause should thrive in the hands of so holy a man: but
the event was far otherwise; his brother Robert was killed, and his army
destroyed, and himself taken prisoner, and the money which by his Mother was
sent for his redemption was cast away in a storm, and he was exchanged for the
last town the Christians had in Egypt, and brought home the crosse of Christ
upon his shoulder in a real pressure and participation of his Masters
sufferings. When Charles the fifth went to Algier to suppresse D pirates and
unchristned villains, the cause was more confident then the event was
prosperous: and when he was almost ruined in a pro­digious storme, he told the
minutes of the clock, expecting that at midnight, when religious persons rose
to Mattins, he should be eased by the benefit of their prayers: but the
providence of God trod upon those waters, and left no footstoops for
discovery: his navie was beat in pieces, and his designe ended in dishonour,
and his life almost lost by the bargain. Was ever cause more baffled then the
Christian cause by the Turks, in all Asia and Africa, and some parts of
Europe, if to be persecuted and afflicted be reckoned a calamity?E What prince
was ever more unfortunate then Henry the sixt of England, and yet that age saw
none more pious and devout, and the title of the house of Lancaster was
advanced against the right of York, for three descents; but then what was the
end of these things? the persecuted men were made Saints, and their memo­ries
are preserved in honour, and their souls shall reigne for ever; [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=71) A and some good
men were ingaged in a wrong cause, and the good cause was sometimes managed by
evil men, till that the suppres­sed cause was lifted up by God in the hands of
a young and pros­perous prince, and at last, both interests were satisfied in
the con­junction of two roses, which was brought to issue by a wonder­ful
chain of causes managed by the divine providence: and there is no age, no
history, no state, no great change in the world, but hath ministred an example
of an afflicted truth, and a prevailing sin: For I will never more call that
sinner prosperous, who after he hath been permitted to finish his businesse,
shall die, and perish mise­rably: B for at the same rate, we may envie the
happinesse of a poor fisherman, who while his nets were drying, slept upon the
rock and dreamt that he was made a King; on a sudden starts up, and leaping
for joy, fals down from the rock, and in the place of his imaginary
felicities, loses his little portion of pleasure, and in­nocent solaces, he
had from the sound sleep and little cares of his humble cottage.

And what is the prosperity of the wicked? to dwel in fine houses, or to
command armies, or to be able to oppresse their brethren, C or to have much
wealth to look on, or many servants to feed, or much businesse to dispatch,
and great cares to master; these things are of themselves neither good nor
bad; but consider: would any man amongst us, looking and considering before
hand, kill his lawful King to be heire of all that which I have named? would
a­ny of you choose, to have God angry with you upon these terms? would any of
you be a perjured man for it all? A wise man or a good, would not choose it:
would any of you die an A­theist that you might live in plenty and power? I
bel [...]ve you trem­ble to think of it. It cannot therefore be a happinesse
to thrive up­on D the stock of a great sin: for if any man should cont
[...]act with an impure spirit, to give his soul up at a certain day, it may
be 2 [...] years hence, upon the condition he might for 20. years have his
vain desires, should we not think that person infinitely miserable; eve­ry
prosperous thriving sinner is in the same condition; within these twenty
years, he shall be thrown into the portion of Devils, but shall never come out
thence in twenty millions of years. His wealth must needs sit uneasie upon
him, that remembers that within a short space he shall be extreamely
miserable; and if he does not re­member it, he does but secure it the more.
And that God defers E the punishment, and suffers evil men to thrive in the
opportuni­ties of their sin, it may and does serve many ends of providence,
and mercy, but serves no end that any evil men can reasonably wish or propound
to themselves eligible.

[...]ias said well to a vitious person, Non metuo ne non sis daturus paenas,
sed metuo neid non sim visurus, He was sure the man should be punished, he was
not sure he should live to see it: and though [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=72) the messenians
that were betrayed and slain by Aristocrates in the A battle of Cyprus, were
not made alive again, yet the justice of God was admired, and treason
infinitly disgraced, when twenty years after, the treason was discovered, and
the the traitor punished, with a horrid death. Lyciscus gave up the
Orchomenians to their enemies, having first wished his feet, which he then
dipt in wa­ter, might rot off, if he were not true to them; and yet his feet
did not rot till those men were destroyed, and of a long time af­ter; and yet
at last they did; slay them not O Lord lest my people forget it (saith David)
if punishment were instantly and totally inflicted, it would be but a sudden
and single document: but a slow B and lingring judgement, and, a wrath
breaking out in the next age, is like an universal proposion, teaching our
posterity, that God was angry all the while, that he had a long indignation in
his brest, that he would not forget to take veangeance: and it is a
demonstration, that even the prosperous sins of the present age, will finde
the same period in the Divine revenge when men see a judgement upon the
Nephevvs for the sins of their Grand-fa­thers, though in other instances▪ and
for sinnes acted in the dayes of their Ancestors.

We knovv that vvhen in Henry the eighth, or Edvvard the sixth C dayes, some
great men pulled dovvn Churches and built palaces, and robd religion of its
just incouragements, and advantages; the men that did it were sacrilegious;
and we finde also that God hath been punishing that great sin, ever since; and
hath displaied to so many generations of men, to three or four descents of
children, that those men could not be esteemed happy in their great for­tunes,
against whom God was so angry, that he would show his displeasure for a
hundred years together. When Herod had killed the babes of Bethlehem, it was
seven years before God called him to an account. But he that looks upon the
end of that man, would D rather choose the fat of the oppressed babes, then of
the prevailing and triumphing Tyrant: It was fourty years before God punished
the Jews, for the execrable murder committed upon the person of their King,
the holy Jesus; and it was so long, that when it did happen, many men
attributed it to their killing S. James their Bishop and seemed to forget the
greater crime, but non eventu rerum sed fide verborum stamus: we are to stand
to the truth of Gods word not to the event of things. Because God hath given
us a rule but hath left the judgement to himself; and we die so quickly, (and
God measures althings by his standard of eternity, and 1000 years E to God is
but as one day) that we are not competent persons to mea­sure the times of
Gods account, and the returnes of judge­ment. Job. 21. We are dead before the
arrow comes, but the man scapes not, unlesse his soul can die, or that God
cannot punish him. Du­cunt in bonis dies suos & in momento descendunt ad
infernum, thats [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=72) A their fate,
they spend their dayes in plenty, and in a moment descend in­to hell: in the
meane time they drink and forget their sorrow; but they are condemned they
have drunk their hemlock, but the poison does not work yet: the bait is in
their mouths, and they are sportive; but the hook hath strook their nostrils,
and they shall never escape the ruine; And let no man call the man fortunate,
be­cause his execution is deferd for a few dayes, when the very defer­ring
shall increase, and ascertain the condemnation.

But if we should look under the skirt of the prosperous and pre­vailing
Tyrant, we should finde even in the dayes of his joyes, B such allayes and
abatements of his pleasure, as may serve to repre­sent him presently
miserable, besides his final infelicities. For I have seen a young and
healthful person warm and ruddy under a poor and a thin garment, when at the
same time, an old rich person hath been cold, and paralytick, under a load of
sables and the skins of foxes; it is the body that makes the clothes warm, not
the clothes the body: and the spirit of a man makes felicity and content, not
any spoils of a rich fortune wrapt about a sickly and an uneasie soul.
A­pollodorus was a Traitor, and a Tyrant, and the world wondered to see a bad
man have so good a fortune; But knew not that he C nourished Scorpions in his
brest, and that his liver and his heart were eaten up with Spectres and images
of death; his thoughts were full of interruptions, his dreams of illusions,
his fancie was abused with real troubles, and phantastick images, imagining
that he saw the Scythians flaying him alive, his daughters like pillars of
fire dancing round about a cauldron in which himself was boyling, and that his
heart accused it self to be the cause of all these evils: And although all
tyrants have not imaginative and phantastick consciences, yet all tyrants
shall die and come to judgement; and such a man is not to be feared, nor at
all to be envied: and in the D mean time can he be said to escape, who hath an
unquiet consci­ence, who is already designed for hell, he whom God hates and
the people curse, and who hath an evil name, and against whom all good men
pray, and many desire to fight, and all wish him destroy­ed, and some contrive
to do it? is this man a blessed man? Is that man prosperous who hath stolen a
rich robe, & is in fear to have his throat cut for it, and is fain to defend
it with the greatest difficulty and the greatest danger? Does not he drink
more sweetly, that takes his beaverage in an earthen vessel, then he that
looks and sear­ches E into his golden chalices for fear of poison, and looks
pale, at every sudden noise, and sleeps in armour, and trusts no body and does
not trust God for his safety, but does greater wickednesse one­ly to escape a
while un punished for his former crimes? A [...]robi­bitur venenum, No man
goes about to poison a poor mans pitcher, nor layes plots to forrage his
little garden made for the hospital of two bee hives, and the feasting of a
few Pythagorean herbe eaters.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=73)

[...] A

[...]

They that admire the happinesse of a prosperous, prevailing Ty­rant,B know not
the felicities, that dwell in innocent hearts, and poor cottages and small
fortunes.

A Christian so long as he preserves his integrity to God and to religion is
bold in all accidents, he dares die, and he dares be poor; but if the
persecutor dies, he is undone. Riches are beholding to our fancies for their
value; and yet the more we value the riches, the lesse good they are, and by
an overvaluing affection, they be­come our danger and our sin: But on the
other side, death and per­secution loose all the ill, that they can have, if
we do not set an edge upon them by our fears and by our vices. From our selves
riches take their wealth, and death sharpens his arrows at our forges and we
may set their prices as we please; and if we judge by the spirit of God, we
must account them happy that suffer; And therefore that the prevailing
oppressor, Tyrant, or persecutor is in­finitly miserable, onely let God choose
by what instruments he will govern the world, by what instances himself would
be ser­ved,C by what waies he will chastise the failings and exercise the
duties, and reward the vertues of his servants. God some­times punishes one
sinne with another, pride with adultery, drunkennesse with murder,
carelesnesse with irreligion, idlenesse with vanity, penury with oppression,
irreligion with blasphemy, and that with Atheisme, and therefore it is no
wonder if he punishes a sinner by a sinner And if David made use of villains
and profli­gate persons to frame an armie; and Timoleon destroy [...]d the
Cartha­ginians by the help of souldiers, who themselves were sacrilegious; and
Physitians use the poison to expel poisons; and all common­wealths D take the
basest of men to be their instruments of justice and executions; we shall have
no further cause to wonder, if God raises up the Assyrians to punish the
Israelites, and the Egyptians to de­stroy the Assyrians, and the Ethiopians to
scourge the Egyptians, and at last his own hand shall separate the good from
the bad in the day of separation, in the day when he makes up his Iewels.

[...]

[...]

[...] E

[...]. Soph. Elect.

God hath many ends of providence to serue by the hands of vi­olent and vitious
men, by them he not onely checks the beginning errours, and approaching sins
of his predestinate, but by them he changes governments and alters kingdoms,
and is terrible among the [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=73) A sons of men:
for since it is one of his glories, to convert evil into good, and that good
into his own glory, and by little and little to open and to turn the leaves
and various folds of providence; it becomes us onely to dwell in duty, and to
be silent in our thoughts, and wa­ry in our discourses of God; and let him
choose the time when he will pr [...]e his vine, and when he will burn his
thorns: how long he will smite his servants, and when he will destroy his
enemies. In the dayes of the primitive persecutions, what prayers, how many
sighings, how deep groanes, how many bottles of tears did God gather into his
repository, all praying for ease and deliverances, B for Halcyon dayes and
fine sunshine, for nursing fathers and nursing mothers, for publick
assemblies, and open and solemn sacraments: And it was 3 hundred years before
God would hear their prayers: and all that while the persecuted people were in
a cloud, but they were safe and knew it not: and God kept for them the best
wine untill the last; they ventured for a crown and fought valiantly, they
were faithful to the death, and they received a crown of life, and they are
honored by God, by angels, and by men; whereas in all the pros­perous ages of
the Church, we hear no stories of such multitudes of Saints no record of them,
no honour to their memorial, to accident C extraordinary; scarce any made
illustrious with a miracle, which in the dayes of suffering were frequent and
popular. And after all our fears of sequestration and poverty, of death or
banishment, our prayers against the persecution, and troubles under it, we may
please to remember that twenty years hence (it may be sooner, it wil not be
much longer) all our cares and our troubles shall be dead, and then it shall
be enquired how we did bear our sorrows, and who inflicted them, and in what
cause, and then he shall be hap­py that keeps company with the persecuted, and
the persecutors shall be shut out amongst dogs and unbelievers.

D He that shrinks from the yoke of Christ, from the burden of the Lord, upon
his death-bed will have cause to remember, that by that time all his
persecutions would have been past, and that then there would remain nothing
for him, but rest and crowns and scep­ters. When Lysimachus, impatient and
overcome with thirst gave up his kingdom to the Getae, and being a captive and
having drank a lusty draught of wine, and his thirst was now gone, he fetched
a deep sigh and said, Miserable man that I am, who for so little pleasure, the
pleasure of one draught lost so great a King­dom such will be their case, who
being impatient of suffering, E change their persecution into wealth, and an
easie fortune they shall finde themselves miserable, in the separations of
eternity losing the glories of heaven for so little a pleasure, illiberali
[...] & ingra­te voluptatis causa as Plutarch calls it, for illiberal and
ungrate­full pleasure, in which when a man hath entred, he loses the rights
and priviledges and honours of a good man, and gets no­thing [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=74) that is
profitable and useful to holy purposes, or necessary A to any; but is already
in a state so hateful and miserable, that he needs neither God nor man to be a
revenger, having al­ready under his splendid robe, miseries enough to punish
and be­tray this hypocrisy of his condition: being troubled with the me­mory
of what is past, distrustful of the present, suspicious of the future, vitious
in their lives, and full of pageantry and out-sides, but in their death
miserable with calamities, real, eternal and in­supportable; and if it could
be other wise, vertue it self would be re­proached with the calamity.B

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...].

I end with the advice of Saint Paul, In nothing be terrified of your C [...]
Phil.  [...] D E

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=74)

## 11\. A Sermon. XI.SER. XI. B The Faith and Patience of the SAINTS: OR The
righteous cause oppressed.  
Part III.

[...] from dishonour. As long as they belong to God, it is necessary that they
suffer persecution, or sorrow, no rules can teach them to avoid that; but the
evil of the suffering, and the danger, must be declined, and we must use such
spirituall arts as are apt to turn them into health and medicine: For it were
a hard thing, first to be scourged, and then to be crucified; to suffer here,
and to pe­rish D hereafter; through the fiery triall, and purging fire of
afflicti­ons, to passe into hell: that, is intollerable; and to be prevented
with the following cautions, least a man suffers like a fool, and a
malefactour, or inherits damnation for the reward of his impru­dent suffering.

1\. They that suffer any thing for Christ, and are ready to die for him, let
them do nothing against him. For certainly they think too highly of martyrdom,
who beleeve it able to excuse all the evils of a wicked life. A man may give
his body to be bur­ned, E and yet have no charity; and he that dies without
[...]harity, dies without God, for God is love: And when those who fought in
the dayes of the Maccabees, for the defence of true Religion, and were killed
in those holy warres, yet being dead, were found having about their necks,
[...], or pendants, consecrated to idols of the Jamnenses, it much allayed the
hope, which by their dying in so good a cause was entertained concerning their
beati­ficall [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=75) resurrection.
He that overcomes his fear of death does well; A but if he hath not also
overcome his lust, or his anger, his baptisme of blood will not wash him
clean. Many things may make a man willing to die in a good cause: Publike
reputation, hope of re­ward, gallantry of spirit, a confident resolution, and
a mascu­line courage; or a man may be vexed into a stubborn and un­relenting
suffering: But nothing can make a man live well, but the grace and the love of
God. But those persons are infinitely con­demned by their last act, who
professe their religion to be worth dying for, and yet are so unworthy, as not
to live according to its institution. It were a rare felicity, if every good
cause could be B mannaged by good men onely; but we have found that evil men
have spoiled a good cause, but never that a good cause made those evil men
good and holy. If the Governour of Samaria had cruci­fied Simon Magus for
receiving Christian Baptisme, he had no more died a martyr, then he lived a
saint. For dying is not enough, and dying in a good cause is not enough, but
then onely we re­ceive the crown of martyrdom, when our death is the seal of
our life, and our life is a continuall testimony of our duty, and both give
testimony to the excellencies of the religion, and glorifie the grace of God.
If a man be gold, the fire purges him, but it burns C him if he be like
stubble, cheap, light, and uselesse: For martyr­dom is the consummation of
love: But then it must be supposed, that this grace must have had its
beginning, and its severall stages, and periods, and must have passed thorow
labour to zeal, tho­row all the regions of duty, to the perfections of
sufferings; and therefore it is a sad thing to observe, how some empty souls
will please themselves with being of such a religion, or such a cause, and
though they dishonour their religion, or weigh down the cause with the
prejudice of sin, beleeve all is swallowed up by one ho­nourable name, or the
appellative of one vertue: If God had for­bid D nothing but heresie and
treason, then to have been a loyall man, or of a good beleef, had been enogh;
but he that forbad rebellion, forbids also swearing, and covetousnesse,
rapine, and oppression, lying, and cruelty: And it is a sad thing to see a man
not onely to spend his time, and his wealth and his money, and his friends
upon his lust, but to spend his sufferings too, to let the canker-worm of a
deadly sin, devour his Martyrdom: He therefore that suffers in a good cause,
let him be sure to walk worthy of that honour, to which God hath called him;
Let him first deny his sins, and then deny himself, and then he may take up
his crosse and follow Christ; E ever remembring that no man pleases God in his
death, who hath walked perversely in his life.

2\. He that suffers in a cause of God, must be indifferent what the instance
be, so that he may serve God. I say, he must be indif­ferent in the cause, so
it be a cause of God, and indifferent in the [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=75) A suffering, so
it be of Gods appointment. For some men have a na­turall aversation to some
vices, or vertues, and a naturall affection to others. One man will die for
his friend, and another will die for his money: Some men hate to be a rebell
and will die for their Prince; but tempt them to suffer for the cause of the
Church, in which they were baptized, and in whose communion they look for
heaven, and then they are tempted, and fall away. Or if God hath chosen the
cause for them, and they have accepted it, yet themselves will choose the
suffering. Right or wrong, some men will not endure a prison; and some that
can, yet choose the hea­viest B part of the burden, the pollution and stain of
a sin, rather then lose their money; and some had rather die twice then lose
their estates once. In this our rule is easie. Let us choose God, and let God
choose all the rest for us, it being indifferent to us, whe­ther by poverty or
shame, by lingring or a sudden death, by the hands of a Tyrant Prince, or the
despised hands of a base usur­per, or a rebell, we receive the crown, and do
honour to God and to Religion.

3\. Whoever suffer in a cause of God, from the hands of cruell C and
unreasonable men, let them not be too forward to prognosti­cate evil and death
to their enemies; but let them solace them­selves in the assurance of the
divine justice, by generall considera­tion, and in particular, pray for them
that are our persecutours. Nebuchadnezzar was the rod in the hand of God
against the Tyrians, and because he destroyed that city, God rewarded him with
the spoil of Egypt; and it is not alwayes certain, that God will be angry with
every man, by whose hand affliction comes up­on us. And sometimes two armies
have met and fought, and the wisest man amongst them could not say, that
either of the Prin­ces D had prevaricated either the lawes of God,  [...]or of
Nations, and yet it may be some superstitious, easie, and half witted people
of either side, wonder that their enemies live so long! And there are very
many cases of warre concerning which God hath declared nothing: and although
in such cases, he that yeelds and quits his title rather then his charity, and
the care of so many lives, is the wisest and the best man; yet if neither of
them will do so, let us not decree judgements from heaven, in cases where we
have no word from heaven, and thunder from our Tribunals, where no voice of
God hath declared the sentence. But in such cases where E there is an evident
tyranny or injustice, let us do like the good Sa­maritan, who dressed the
wounded man, but never pursued the thief; let us do charity to the afflicted,
and bear the crosse with no­blenesse, and look up to Jesus, who endured the
crosse, and despised the shame; but let us not take upon us the office of God,
who will judge the Nations righteously, and when he hath delivered up our
bodies will rescue our souls from the hands of unrighteous judges. [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=76) I remember in
the story that Plutarch tels concerning the soul of A Thespesius, that it met
with a Prophetick Genius, who told him many things that should happen
afterwards in the world, and the strangest of all was this, That there should
be a King, Qui bonus cum sit, tyrannide vitam finiet: An excellent Prince, and
a good man should be put to death by a rebell and usurping power; and yet that
Prophetick soul could not tell that those rebels should within three yeers die
miserable and accursed deaths; and in that great prophecy recorded by Saint
Paul,2 Tim. 3. 1. That in the last dayes pe­rillous times should come, and men
should be traitours, and selvish, having forms of godlinesse, and creeping
into houses,] yet could B not tell us when these men should come to finall
shame and ruine; onely by a generall signification he gave this signe of
comfort to Gods persecuted servants,2 Tim. 3. 9. But they shall proceed no
further, for their folly shall be manifest to all men: that is, at long
running they shall shame themselves, and for the elects sake those dayes of
evil shall be shortned. But you and I may be dead first: And therefore onely
remember, that they that with a credulous heart, and a loose tongue are too
decretory, and enunciative of speedy judge­ments to their enemies, turn their
religion into revenge, and there­fore do beleeve it will be so, because they
vehemently desire it C should be so, which all wise and good men ought to
suspect, as lesse agreeing with that charity which overcomes all the sins, and
all the evils of the world, and sits down and rests in glory.

4\. Do not trouble your self by thinking how much you are afflicted, but
consider how much you make of it: For reflex acts upon the suffering it self,
can lead to nothing but to pride, or to impatience to temptation, or apostacy.
He that measures the grains and scruples of his persecution, will soon sit
down and call for ease, or for a reward; will think the time long, or his
burden great; will be apt to complain of his condition, or set a greater D
value upon his person. Look not back upon him that strikes thee, but upward to
God that supports thee, and forward to the crown that is set before thee; and
then consider, if the losse of thy estate hath taught thee to despise the
world? whether thy poor fortune hath made thee poor in spirit? and if thy
uneasie prison sets thy soul at liberty, and knocks off the fetters of a worse
captivity. For then the rod of suffering turns into crowns and scepters, when
every suffering is a precept, and every change of condition produ­ces a holy
resolution, and the state of sorrows makes the resolution actuall, and
habituall, permanent, and persevering. For as the E silk-worm eateth it self
out of a seed to become a little worm, and there feeding on the leaves of
mulberies, it grows till its coat be off, and then works it self into a house
of silk, then casting its pearly seeds for the young to breed, it leaveth its
silk for man, and dieth all white and winged in the shape of a flying
creature: So is [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=76) A the progresse
of souls: when they are regenerate by Baptisme, and have cast off their first
stains and the skin of worldly vanities, by feeding on the leaves of
Scriptures, and the fruits of the vine, and the joyes of the Sacrament, they
incircle themselves in the rich gar­ments of holy and vertuous habits; then by
leaving their blood, which is the Churches seed, to raise up a new generation
to God, they leave a blessed memory, and fair example, and are themselves
turned into Angels, whose felicity is to do the will of God, as their
imployments was in this world to suffer it; fiat voluntas tua is our daily
prayer, and that is of a passive signification; thy will be done B upon us:
and if from thence also we translate it into an active sence; and by suffering
evils increase in our aptnesses to do well, we have done the work of
Christians, and shall receive the reward of Martyrs.

5\. Let our suffering be entertained by a direct election, not by collateral
ayds and phantastick assistances. It is a good refreshment to a weak spirit to
suffer in good company: and so Phoeion encou­raged a timerous Greek condemned
to die; and he bid him be con­fident because that he was to die with Phocion;
and when 40. Mar­tyrs C in Cappadocia suffered, and that  [...] souldier
standing by came and supplyed the place of the one Apostate, who fell from his
crown▪ being overcome with pain, it added warmth to the frozen confessors, and
turnd them into consummate Martyrs. But if mar­tyrdom were but a phantastick
thing, or relyed upon vain accidents and irregular chances, it were then very
necessary to be assisted by images of things, and any thing, lesse then the
proper instruments of religion: But since it is the greatest action of the
religion, and relies upon the most excellent promises, and its formality is to
be an action of love, and nothing is more firmely chosen, (by an after
e­lection D(at least) then) an act of love; to support Martyrdom, or the duty
of sufferings, by false arches and exteriour circumstances, is to build a
tower upon the beams of the Sun, or to set up a wood­den ladder to climbe up
to Heaven; the soul cannot attain so huge and unimaginable felicities by
chance and instruments of fancy: and let no man hope to glorifie God and go to
Heaven by a life of sufferings, unlesse he first begin in the love of God, and
from thence derive his choice, his patience, and considence in the causes of
vertue and religion, like beams, and warmth, and influence, from the body of
the Sun. Some there are that fall under the burden, when they E are pressed
hard, because they use not the proper instruments in fortifying the will in
patience and resignation, but endeavour to lighten the burden in imagination;
and when these temporary sup­porters fail, the building that relies upon them,
rushes into coldnesse, recidivation, and lukewarmnesse: and among all
instances, that of the main question of the Text is of greatest power to abuse
impru­dent and lesse severe persons.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=77)

Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum A

Affirmat Selius, probatque

Quod se videt dum negat haec beatum.

When men choose a good cause, upon confidence that an ill one cannot thrive,
that is, not for the love of vertue, or duty to God, but for profit and
secular interests, they are easily lost when they see the wickednesse of the
enemy to swell up by impunity and successe to a great evil: for they have not
learned to distinguish B a great growing sin, from a thriving and prosperous
fortune.

Vlla si juris tibi pejerati

Poena Barine noeuisset unquam:

Dente si nigro fieret vel uno turpior ungui Crederem.

They that beleeve and choose because of idle fears, and unreasonable fancies,
or by mistaking the ac­counts of a man for the measures of God, or dare not
commit treason, for fear of being blasted, may come to be tempted when they
see a sinner thrive, and are scandalized all the way, if they C die before
him; or they may come to receive some accidentall hardnesses, and every thing
in the world may spoil such persons, and blast their resolutions. Take in all
the aids you can, and if the fancy of the standers by▪ or the hearing a cock
crow, can adde any collaterall aids to thy weaknesse, refuse it not; But let
thy state of sufferings begin with choice, and be confirmed with knowledge,
and rely upon love, and the aids of God, and the expecta­tions of heaven, and
the present sense of duty, and then the action will be as glorious in the
event, as it is prudent in the enterprise,D and religious in the prosecution.

6\. Lastly, when God hath brought thee into Christs school, and entered thee
into a state of sufferings, remember the advantages of that state: consider
how unsavoury the things of the world ap­pear to thee, when thou art under the
arrest of death; remember with what comforts the Spirit of God assists thy
spirit; set down in thy heart all those entercourses, which happen between God
and thy own soul; the sweetnesses of religion, the vanity of sins appearances,
thy newly entertained resolutions; thy longings after heaven, and all the
things of God, and if God finishes thy perse­cution with death proceed in
them; if he restores thee to the light E of the world, and a temporall
refreshment, change but the scene of sufferings into an active life, and
converse with God upon the same principles on which in thy state of sufferings
thou dost build all the parts of duty. If God restores thee to thy estate, be
not lesse in love with heaven, nor more in love with the world; let [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=77) A thy spirit be
now as humble as before it was broken, and to what soever degree of sobriety
or austerity, thy suffering condition did enforce thee, if it may be turned
into vertue, when God restores thee (because then it was necessary thou
shouldest entertain it by an after choice) do now also by a pra [...]election:
that thou mayest say with David, It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
for thereby I have learned thy commandments: and Paphnutius did not do his
soul more advantage when he lost his right eye, and suffered his left knee to
be cut for Christianity, and the cause of God, then that in the dayes of
Constantine and the Churches peace, he lived, (not in B the toleration, but)
in the active piety of a Martyrs condition; not now a confessor of the faith
onely, but of the charity of a Christi­an: we may every one live to have need
of these rules; and I do not at all think it safe to pray against it, but to
be armed for it: and to whatsoever degree of sufferings God shal call us, we
see what advantages God intends for us, and what advantages we our selves may
make of it. I now proceed to make use of all the former  [...]s­course, by
removing it a little further even into its utmost spiritual sense; which the
Apostle does in the last words of the text [If the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the wicked and the sinner C appear.]

These words are taken out of the proverbs * according to the translation of
the 70.11\. cha [...] 31. If the righteous scarcely  [...]s safe▪ where the
word  [...] implyes that he is safe; but by intermed [...] difficulties: and
[...]] he is safe in the midst of his persecutions they may disturb his rest,
and discompose his fancy, but they are like the firy char­riot to Elias; he is
encircled with fire and rare circumstances, and strange usages, but is carried
up to Heaven in a robe of flames: and so was Noah safe when the flood came;
and was the great type and instance too of the verification of this
proposition, he was D [...], he was put into a strange condition, per­petually
wandring, shut up in a prison of wood, living upon faith, having never had the
experience of being safe in flouds. And so have I often seen young and
unskilful persons sitting in a little boat, when every little wave sporting
about the sides of the vessel, and every motion and dancing of the barge
seemed a danger, and made them cling fast upon their fellows, and yet all the
while they wereas safe as if they sat under a tree, while a gentle winde
shaked the leaves into a refreshment, and a cooling shade: And the unskiful
un­experienced Christian shrikes out when ever his vessel shakes, think­ing E
it alwayes a danger, that the watry pavement is not stable and resident like a
rock; and yet all his danger is in himself, none at all from without: for he
is indeed moving upon the waters, but fast­ned to a rock; faith is his
foundation, and hope is his anchor and deathis his harbour, and Christ is his
pilot, and heaven is his coun­trey, and all the evils of poverty, or affronts
of tribunals: and e­vil [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=78) judges, of
fears and sadder apprehensions are but like the loud A wind blowing from the
right point, they make a noise and drive faster to the harbour: and if we do
not leave the ship and leap in­to the sea, quit the interests of religion and
run to the securities of the world, cut our cables, and dissolve our hopes,
grow impa­tient and hug a wave and die in its embraces, we are as safe at sea,
sa­fer in the storm which God sends us, then in a calm, when we are be
friended with the world.

2\. But  [...] may also signifie raro: If the righteous is seldom safe; which
implyes that sometimes he is, even in a temporal sense: God sometimes sends
Halcyon dayes to his Church, and when he pro­mised B Kings and Queens to be
their nurses, he intended it for a bles­sing; and yet this blessing does of te
[...]imes so ill succeed that it is the greater blessing of the two, not to
give us that blessing too freely: but  [...] this is scarcly done, and yet
sometimes it is, and God sometimes refreshes languishing piety with such
arguments, as comply with our infirmities, and though it be a shame to us to
need such allectives and infant gauds, such which the heathen world and the
first rudiments of the Israelites did need, God who pitties us and will be
wanting in nothing to us, as he corroborates our wil­ling C spirits, with
proper entertainments, so also he supports our weak flesh, and not onely
cheers an afflicted soul with beams of light, and antepasts and earnests of
glory, but is kinde also to our man of flesh, and weaknesse; and to this
purpose he sends thun­der-bolts from heaven upon evil men, dividing their
tongues, in­fatuating their counsels, cursing their posterity, and ruining
their families.

— [...] D

[...]

[...].

Sometimes God destroyes their armies, or their strong holds, Sometimes breakes
their ships, but this happens either for the weak­nesse of some of his
servants, and their too great aptnesse to be of­fended at a prosperous
iniquity, or when he will not suffer the e­vil to grow too great, or for some
end of his providence; and yet if this should be very often, or last long, God
knows the dan­ger, and vve should feel the inconvenience. Of all the types of
Christ onely Joshuah and Solomon vvere noted to be generally pro­sperous,E and
yet the fortune of the first was to be in perpetual vvar and danger, but the
other vvas as himself could vvish it, rich and peaceful, and powerful, and
healthful, and learned, and beloved, and strong and amorous, and voluptuous,
and so he fell, and though his fall was, yet his recovery vvas not upon
record.

And yet the vvorst of evils that happen to the godly is better, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=78) A temporally
better, then the greatest eternal felicity of the wicked: that in all senses
the question may be considerable and argumenta­tive; If the righteous scarcely
be saved where shall the ungodly appear? if it be hard with good men, with the
evil it shall be far worse. But see the difference. The godly man is timorous
and yet safe, tossed by the seas, and yet safe at anchor, impaired by evil
accidents and righted by divine comforts: made sad with a black cloud, and
re­freshed with a more gentle influence, abused by the world, and yet an heir
of heaven, hated by men, and beloved by God, loses one house and gets an
hundred, he quits a convenient lodging room B and purchases a glorious
countrey, is forsaken by his friends, but never by a good conscience, he fares
hardly and sleeps sweetly, he flies from his enemies, but hath no distracting
fears, he is full of thought, but of no amazement; It is his businesse to be
troubled, and his portion to be comforted, he hath nothing to afflict him, but
the losse of that which might be his danger, but can never be his good, and in
the recompence of this, he hath God for his father, Christ for his captain,
the holy Ghost for his supporter so that he shall have all the good which God
can give him, and of all that good he hath the holy Trinity for an earnest and
a gage, for his mainte­nance C at the present, and his portion to all
eternity. But though Paul and Silas sing psalms in prison and under the hang-
mans whips and in an earth-quake, yet neither the Jaylor nor the persecuting
Ma­gistrates could do so: For the prosperitie of the wicked is like a winters
sun, or the joy of a condemned drunkard, it is a forgetful­nesse of his
present danger, and his future sorrows, nothing but im­ginary arts of
inadvertency: he sits in the gates of the city and judges others, and is
condemned himself; he is honoured by the passers by, and is thought happy, but
he sighs deeply; he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them;
he commands an army D and is himself a slave to his passions; he sleeps
because he needs it, and starts from his uneasie pillows which his thoughtful
head hath discomposed; when he is waking he dreames of greatnesse, when he
sleeps he dreams of spectars and illusions; he spoils a poor man of his lamb,
and himself of his innocence and peace, and in every unjust purchase himself
is the greatest loser.

[...]

[...].

Hesiod

E For just upon his oppression or injustice, he is turned a Devil, and Gods
enemy, a wolf to his brother a greedy admirer of the baits of fishes, and the
bread of dogs, he is unsafe by reason of his sin: for he hath against him the
displeasure of God, the justice of the laws, the shame of the sin, the revenge
of the injured person; and God and men, the laws of nations and private
societies, stand upon [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=79) their defence
against this man; he is unsafe in his rest, amazed in A his danger, troubled
in his labours, weary in his change, esteem­ed a base man, disgraced and
scorned, feared and hated, flattered and derided, watched, and suspected, and
it may be, dies in the middle of his purchase, and at the end is a fool and
leaves a curse to his posterity.

[...].

Hesiod.

He leaves a generation of blacker children behinde him; so the B Poet
describes the cursednesse of their posterity, and their memo­ry sits down to
eternal ages in dishonour, and by this time let them cast up their accounts,
and see, if of all their violent purchases they carry any thing with them to
the grave but sin▪ and a guilty consci­ence and a polluted soul, the anger of
God and the shame of men; and what help shall all those persons give to thee
in thy flames who divide and scatter that estate, for which thou diedst for
ever.

Andire est operae pretium procedere recte C

Qui maechis non vultis, ut omni parte laborent:

vt que illis multo corrupta dolore voluptas

Atque haec rara cadat dura inter saepe pericla.

And let but a sober answer tel me if any thing in the world be more distant
either from goodnesse or happinesse, then to scatter the plague of an accursed
soul, as upon our dearest children; to make an universal curse; to be the
fountain of a mischief, to be such a per­son, whom our children and nephews
shall hate, and despise and D curse, when they groan under the burden of that
plague, which their fathers sins brought upon the familie. If there were no
other account to be given, it were highly enough to verifie the intent of my
text; If the righteous scarcely be saved, or escape Gods angry stroke, the
wicked must needs be infinitely more mise­rable;

[...]

[...]

[...]— E

Neither I, nor my son (said the oldest of the Greek poets) would be vertuous,
if to be a just person were all one as to be mi­serable. No, not onely in the
end of affaires, and at sun set, but all the day long the Godly man is happy,
and the ungodly and the sinner is very miserable.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=79)

Pellitur a populo victus Cato, tristior ille est,

Qui vicit, facesque pudet rapuisse Catoni

Namque hoc dedecus est populi, morumque ruina

Non homo pulsus erat: sed in uno victa potestas

Romanumque decus.

And there needs no other argument to be added, but this one great testimony;
that though the Godly are afflicted, and per­secuted, yet even they are
blessed and the persecutors are the most unsafe. They are essentially happy
whom affliction cannot B make miserable.

Quis curam neget esse te Deoruni

propter quem fuit innocens ruina?

But turns into their advantages, and thats the state of the Godly: and they
are most intolerably accursed, who have no portions in the blessings of
eternity, and yet cannot have comfort in the present purchases of their sin,
to whom even their sunshine brings a drought, and their fairest is their
foulest weather; and thats the portion of C the sinner and the ungodly. The
godly are not made unhappy by their sorrows: and the wicked are such whom
prosperity it self cannot make fortunate.

4 And yet after al this it is but  [...] not  [...] he scapes but hardly here:
it will be well enough with him hereafter Isaac dig­ged three wells: the first
was called contention, for he drank the waters of strife and digged the well
with his sword: the second well was not altogether so hard a purchase, he got
it with some trouble, but that being over, he had some room and his fortune
swelled, and he called his well [enlargement] but his third he called
[abundance] D and then he dipt his foot in oyl and drank freely as out of a
[...]river; every good man first sowes in tears, he first drinks of the bottle
of his own tears, sorrow and trouble, labour and disquiet, stri­vings and
temptations: But if they passe through a torrent, and that vertue becomes
easie and habitual, they finde their hearts en­larged and made spritely by the
visitations of God and refresh­ment of his spirit; and then their hearts are
enlarged, they know how to gather the down and softnesses from the sharpest
thi­stles.

[...],

E [...]

[...].

At first we cannot serve God, but by passions and doing violence to all our
wilder inclinations, and suffering the violence of tyrants and unjust persons.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=80)

— [...] A

[...].

The second dayes of vertue are pleasant and easie in the midst of all the
appendant labours; but when the Christians last pit is diged; when he is
descended to his grave, and finished his state of sorrowes and suffering, then
God opens the river of abundance, the rivers of life and never ceasing
felicities. And this is that which God pro­mised to his people.Esay. 54. 8. I
hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindnesse will I have
mercy on thee saith the Lord thy re­deemer; so much as moments are exceeded by
eternity and the sighing B of a man by the joyes of an angel, and a salutary
frown by the light of Gods countenance, a few groans by the infinite and
eternal Ha­lalujahs; so much are the sorrows of the godly to be undervalued,
in respect of what is deposited for them in the treasures of eterni­ty. Their
sorrows can die but so cannot their joyes: and if the bles­sed Martyrs and
confessors were asked concerning their past suf­ferings, & their present rest,
and the joyes of their certain expectati­on you should hear them glory in
nothing, but in the mercies of God and in the crosse of the Lord Jesus. Every
chaine is a raie of light, and every prison is a palace, and every losse is
the purchase of a king­dom,C and every affront in the cause of God is an
eternal honour, and every day of sorrow is a thousand years of comfort,
multipli­ed with a never ceasing numeration; dayes without night, joyes
without sorrow, sanctity without sin, charity without stain, pos­session
without fear, society without envying, communication of joyes without
lessening, and they shall dwell in ablessed countrey, wherean enemy never
entred, and from whence a friend never went away. Well might David say, funes
ceciderunt mihi in praeclaris, the cords of my tent, [my ropes and the sorrow
of my pilgrimage] fell to me in a good ground, and I have a goodly heritage;
and when per­secution D hewes a man down from a high fortune, to an even one,
or from thence to the face of the earth, or from thence to the grave, a good
man is but preparing for a crown, and the Tyrant does but first knock off the
fetters of the soul, the manacles of passion and de­sire, sensual loves and
lower appetites: and if God suffers him to finish the persecution, then he can
but dismantle the souls prison, and let the soul forth to flie to the
mountains of rest: and all the intermedial evils are but like the Persian
punishments; the execu­tioner tore off their haires and rent their silken
mantles and dis­composed their curious dressings, and lightly touched the
skin, yet E the offender cried out with most bitter exclamations, while his
fault was expiated with a ceremony and without blood: so does God to his
servants; he rends their upper garments, and strips them of their unnecessary
wealth, and tyes them to Physick, and salu­tary dicipline, and they cry out
under usages which have nothing, [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=80) A but the
outward sense, and opinion of evil, not the reall substance: But if we would
take the measures of images, we must not take the height of the base, but the
proportion of the members, nor yet measure the estates of men by their big
looking supporter, or the circumstance of an exteriour advantage, but by its
proper com­mensuration in its self, as it stands in its order to eternity: And
then the godly man that suffers sorrow and persecution ought to be re­lieved
by us, but needs not be pitied in the summe of affairs. But since the two
estates of the world are measured by time, and by eternity, and divided by joy
and sorrow, and no man shall have B his portions of joyes in both the
durations; the state of those men is insupportably miserable, who are fatted
for slaughter, and are crowned like beasts for sacrifice; who are feared and
fear, who can­not enjoy their purchases but by communications with others, and
themselves have the least share, but themselves are alone in the misery, and
the saddest dangers, and they possesse the whole porti­ons of sorrows: to whom
their prosperity gives but occasions to evil counsels, and strength to do
mischief, or to nourish a serpent, or op­presse a neighbour, or to nurse a
lust, to increase folly, and treasure up calamity: And did ever any man see,
or story tell, that any ty­rant C Prince kissed his rods, and axes, his sword
of justice, and his Imperiall ensignes of power? They shine like a taper to
all things but it self, but we read of many Martyrs who kissed their chains,
and hugged their stakes, and saluted their hangman with great en­dearments,
and yet abating the incursions of their seldom sins, these are their greatest
evils; and such they are, with which a wise and a good man may be in love: And
till the sinners and ungodly men can be so with their deep groans, and broken
sleeps, with the wrath of God, and their portions of eternity; till they can
rejoyce in death, and long for a resurrection, and with delight and a greedy
hope can D think of the day of judgement, we must conclude that their glasse
gems, and finest pageantry, their splendid outsides, and great po­wers of
evil, cannot make amends for that estate of misery which is their portion,
with a certainty as great as is the truth of God, and all the Articles of the
Christian Creed. Miserable men are they who cannot be blessed, unlesse there
be no day of judgement; who must perish unlesse the word of God should fail;
If that be all their hopes, then we may with a sad spirit and a soul of pity
inquire into the Question of the Text, Where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? Even there where Gods face shall never shine, where there shall be E
fire and no light, where there shall be no Angels, but what are many thousands
yeers ago turned into Devils, whereno good man shall ever dwell, and from
whence the evil and the accursed shall never be dismissed. O my God let my
soul never come into their counsels, nor lie down in their sorrows.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=81)

## 12\. Sermon. XII.SER. XII. A THE MERCY B OF THE DIVINE IVDGMENTS; C OR Gods
Method in curing Sinners.

2\. Romanes. 4.D‘Despisest thou the riches of his goodnesse, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to
repentance?’

FRom the beginning of Time till now, all ef­fluxes which have come from God,
have been nothing but emanations of his goodnesse, clo­thed in variety of
circumstances. He made man E with no other designe, then that man should be
happy, and by receiving derivations from his fountain of mercy, might reflect
glory to him. And therefore God making man for his own glory, made also a
paradise for mans use, and did him good to invite him to do himself a greater;
for God gave forth demon­strations [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=81) A of his power
by instances of mercy: and he who might have made ten thousand worlds, of
wonder and prodigy, and crea­ted man with faculties able onely to stare upon,
and admire those miracles of mightinesse, did choose to instance his power in
the effusions of mercy, that at the same instant he might represent him­self
desireable and adorable, in all the capacities of amability; that is, as
excellent in himself, and profitable to us. For as the Sun sends forth a
benigne and gentle influence on the seed of Plants, that it may invite forth
the active and plastick power from its recesse and secresie, that by rising
into the tallnesse and dimensions of a tree, it B may still receive a greater
and more refreshing influence from its foster-father, the prince of all the
bodies of light; and in all these emanations, the Sun its self receives no
advantage, but the honour of doing benefits; so doth the Almighty Father of
all the creatures: He at first sends forth his blessings upon us, that we by
using them aright, should make our selves capable of greater; while the giving
glory to God, and doing homage to him are no­thing for his advantage, but
onely for ours: our duties towards him being like vapours ascending from the
earth, not at all to re­fresh the region of the clouds, but to return back in
a fruitfull and C refreshing shower: And God created us, not that we can
increase his felicity, but that he might have a subject receptive of felicity
from him: thus he causes us to be born, that we may be capable of his
blessings; he causes us to be baptized, that we may have a title to the
glorious promises Evangelicall; he gives us his Son, that we may be rescued
from hell: and when we constraine him to use harsh courses towards us, it is
also in mercy: he smites us to cure a disease, he sends us sicknesse to
procure our health; and as if God were all mercy, he his mercifull in his
first designe, in all his instruments, in the way, and in the end of the
journey, and D does not onely shew the riches of his goodnesse to them that do
well, but to all men that they may do well: he is good to make us good; he
does us benefits to make us happy: and if we by despising such gracious rayes
of light and heat, stop their progresse and in­terrupt their designe, the
losse is not Gods but ours,; we shall be the miserable and accursed people:
This is the sense and para­phrase of my Text. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodnesse, &c. Thou dost not know, that is, thou considerest not that it is
for fur­ther benefit that God does thee this; the goodnesse of God is not E a
designe to serve his own ends upon thee, but thine upon him: The goodnesse of
God leadeth thee to repentance.

Here then is Gods method of curing man-kind, [...]. First goodnesse, or
inviting us to him by sugred words, by the placid arguments of temporall
favour, and the proposi­tions of excellent promises. Secondly  [...] at the
same time, al­though God is provoked every day, yet he does  [...], he
tolerates [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=82) our
stubbornnesse, he forbears to punish, and when he does begin A to strike,
takes his hand off, and gives us truce and respite. For so  [...] signifies
laxamentum, and inducias too. Thirdly  [...] still, a long putting off, and
deferring his finall destroying anger, by using all meanes to force us to
repentance; and this especially, by the way of judgements; these being the
last reserves of the Divine mercy, and how ever we esteem it, is the greatest
instance of the divine long sufferance that is in the world. After these
in­struments, we may consider the end, the strand upon which these land us,
the purpose of this variety, of these laborious and admira­ble arts, with
which God so studies and contrives the happinesse and B salvation of man; it
is onely that man may be brought by these meanes unto repentance, and by
repentance may be brought to eternall life: This is the treasure of the Divine
goodnesse, the great and admirable efflux of the eternal beneficence; the
[...], the riches of his goodnesse, which whosoever despises, despises
him­self and the great interest of his own felicity; he shall die in his
impenitence, and perish in his folly.

1\. The first great instrument, that God chooses to bring us to him is  [...],
profit, or benefit, and this must needs be first, for those instruments
whereby we have a being are so great mercies,C that besides that they are such
which give us the capacities of all other mercies, they are the advances of us
in the greatest instances of promotion in the world: For from nothing to
something is an infinite space, and a man must have a measure of infinite
passed up­on him, Before he can perceive himself to be either happy or
mi­serable: he is not able to give God thanks for one blessing, untill he hath
received many. But then God intends we should enter upon his service at the
beginning of our dayes, because even then he is before-hand with us, and hath
already given us great instan­ces of his goodnesse: What a prodigy of favour
is it to us, that D he hath passed by, so many formes of his creatures, and
hath not set us down in the rank of any of them, till we came to be paulò
minores angelis, a little lower then the angels: and yet from the meanest of
them God can perfect his own praise; The deeps and the snows, the hail and the
rain, the birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, they can and do
glorifie God, and give him praise in their capacity; and yet he gave them no
speech, no reason, no im­mortall spirit, or capacity of eternall blessednesse;
but he hath di­stinguished us from them by the absolute issues of his
predestina­tion, and hath given us a lasting and eternall spirit, excellent
organs E of perception, and wonderfull instruments of expression, that we may
joyn in consort with the morning star, and bear a part in the Chorus with the
Angels of light, to sing Alleluiah to the great Fa­ther of men and Angels.

But was it not a huge chain of mercies that we were not stran­gled [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=82) A in the
regions of our own naturall impurities, but were sustain­ed by the breath of
God, from perishing in the womb, where God formed us in secreto terrae, told
our bones, and kept the order of nature, and the miracles of creation; and we
lived upon that which in the next minute after we were born would strangle us
if it were not removed: but then God took care of us, and his hands of
providence clothed us and fed us. But why do I reckon the mer­cies of
production which in every minute of our being are alike and continued, and are
miracles in all senses but that they are com­mon and usuall? I onely desire
you to remember, that God made B all the works of his hands to serve him; and
indeed this mercy of creating us such as we are, was not to lead us to
repentance, but was a designe of innocence: he intended we should serve him as
the Sun and the Moon do; as fire and water do: never to prevaricate the laws
he fixed to us, that we might have needed no repentance. But since we did
degenerate, and being by God made better and more noble creatures then all the
inhabitants of the air, the water and the earth besides, we made our selves
baser and more ignoble then any: For no dog, crocodile, or swine was ever Gods
enemy, as we made our selves: yet then from thence forward, God be­gan C his
work of leading us to repentance, by the riches of his good­nesse. He causeth
us to be born of Christian parents, under whom we were taught the
mysteriousnesse of its goodnesse and designes, for the redemption of man: And
by the designe of which reli­gion repentance was taught to mankind, and an
excellent law given for distinction of good and evil; and this is a blessing
which though possibly we do not often put into our eucharisticall Letanies to
give God thanks for, yet if we sadly consider, what had become of us, if we
had been born under the dominion of a Turkish Lord, or in America where no
Christians do inhabite, where they worship the D Devil, where witches are
their priests, their prophets, their phisi­tians, and their Oracles, can we
choose but apprehend a visible no­torious necessity of perishing in those sins
which we then should not have understood by the glasse of a divine law, to
have decli­ned, nor by a revelation have been taught to repent of? But since
the best of men does in the midst of all the great advantages of lawes, and
examples, and promises, and threatnings do many things he ought to be ashamed
of, and needs to repent of, we can under­stand the riches of the Divine
goodnesse best, by considering that E the very designe of our birth and
education in the Christian religion is, that we may recover of, and cure our
follies by the antidote of repentance, which is preached to us as a doctrine,
and propoun­ded as a favour, which was put into a law, and purchased for us by
a great expence, which God does not more command to us as a du­ty, then he
gives us a blessing; For now that we shall not perish for our first follies,
but be admitted to new conditions, to be re­paired [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=83) by second
thoughts, to have our infirmities excused, and our A sins forgiven, our habits
lessened, and our malice cured after we were wounded, and sick, and dead, and
buried, and in the possession of the Devil; this was such a blessing, so great
riches of the Divine goodnesse, that as it was taught to no religion but the
Christian, revealed by no law-giver but Christ, so it was a favour greater
then ever God gave to the Angels and Devils: for although God was rich in the
effusion of his goodnesse towards them, yet they were not admitted to the
condition of second thoughts; Christ ne­ver shed one drop of blood for them,
his goodnesse did not lead them to repentance: but to us it was that he made
this largesse of his B goodnesse; to us, to whom he made himself a brother,
and suc­ked the paps of our mother; he paid the scores of our sin, and shame,
and death, onely that we might be admitted to repent, and that this repentance
might be effectuall to the great purposes of felicity and salvation: And if we
would consider this sadly, it might make us better to understand our madnesse
and folly in re­fusing to repent; That is, to be sorrowfull, and to leave all
our sins, and to make amends by a holy life. For that we might be admitted and
suffered to do so, God was fain to pour forth all the riches of C his
goodnesse: It cost our deerest Lord the price of his deerest blood, many a
thousand groans, millions of prayers and sighes, and at this instant, he is
praying for our repentance: nay he hath prayed for our repentance these 1600.
yeers incessantly, night and day, and shall do so till doomes-day, [He sits at
the right hand of God making intercession for us.] And that we may know what
he prayes for, he hath sent us Embassadours to declare the pur­pose of all his
designe, for Saint Paul saith, [We are Embassadours for Christ, as though he
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead to be reconciled to God.]
The purpose of our Embassy and D Ministery, is a prosecution of the mercies of
God, and the work of Redemption, and the intercession and mediation of Christ:
It is the work of atonement and reconciliation that God designed, and Christ
died for, and still prayes for, and we preach for, and you all must labour
for.

And therefore here consider, if it be not infinite impiety to de­spise the
riches of such a goodnesse, which at so great a charge, with such infinite
labour, and deep mysterious arts, invites us to repent­ance; that is, to such
a thing which could not be granted to us un­lesse Christ should die to
purchase it; such a glorious favour, that is E the issue of Christs prayers in
heaven, and of all his labours, his sor­rows, and his sufferings on earth: if
we refuse to repent now, we do not so much refuse to do our own duty as to
accept of a re­ward; it is the greatest and the dearest blessing that ever God
gave to Men, that they may repent, and therefore to deny it, or to de­lay it,
is to refuse health, brought us by the skill and industry of [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=83) A the
Physitian; it is to refuse liberty indulged to us by our gracious Lord; and
certainly we had reason to take it very ill if at a great expence we should
purchase a pardon for a servant and he out of a peevish pride or negligence
shall refuse it; the scorne payes it self, the folly is its own scourge and
sets down in an inglorious ruine.

After the enumeration of these glories, these prodigies of mercies & loving
kindnesses, of Christs dying for us, and interceding for us and merely that we
may repent, and be saved; I shall lesse need to instance those other
particularities wherby God continues, as by B so many arguments of kindnesse
to sweeten our natures and make them malleable to the precepts of love and
obedience, the twinne daughters of holy repentance; but the poorest person
amongst us, besides the blessing and graces already reckoned hath enough about
him, and the accidents of every day to shame him into repentance. Does not God
send his angels to keep thee in all thy wayes? are not they ministring spirits
sent forth to wait upon thee as thy guard? art not thou kept from drowing,
from fracture of bones, from madnesse, from deformities, by the riches of the
di­vine C goodnesse? Tell the joynts of thy body, dost thou want a fin­ger?
and if thou doest not understand how great a blessing that is, do but remember
how ill thou canst spare the use of it when thou hast but a thorn in it? The
very privative blessings, the blessings of immunity, safeguard, and integrity,
which we all enjoy deserve a thanksgiving of a whole life. If God should send
a cancer upon thy face or a wolf into thy brest, he if should spread a crust
of leprosie upon thy skin, what wouldest thou give to be but as now thou art?
wouldest thou not repent of thy sins upon that conditi­on? which is the
greater blessing to be kept from them, or to be D cured of them? and why
therfore shall not this greater blessing lead thee to repentance? why do we
not so aptly promise repentance when we are sick upon the condition to be made
well, and yet per­petually forget it when we are well? as if health never were
a blessing, but when we have it not; rather I fear the reason, is when we are
sick we promised to repent, because then we cannot sin the sins of our former
life; but in health our appetites return to their capacity, and in all the way
we despise the riches of the divine good­nesse which preserves us from such
evils which would be full of horror and amazement if they should happen to us.

E Hath God made any of you all chapfallen? are you affrighted with spectars
and  [...]llusions of the spirits of darknesse? how many earthquakes have you
been in? how many dayes have any of you wanted bread? how many nights have you
been without sleep? are any of you distracted of your senses? and if God gives
you meat and drink, health and sleep, proper seasons of the year, intire
senses and an useful understanding, what a great unworthynesse it is to be
[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=84)
unthankful to so good a God so benigne a Father, so gracious a A Lord? All the
evils and basenesse of the world can shew nothing baser and more unworthy then
ingratitude: and therefore it was not unreasonably said of Aristottle,  [...]
prosperity makes a man love God, supposing men to have so much humanity left
in them, as to love him from whom they have received so many fa­vours. And
Hippocrates said, that although poor men use to murmur against God, yet rich
men will be offering sacrifice to their Diety whose beneficiaries they are.
Now since the riches of the divine goodnesse are so poured out upon the
meanest of us all, if we shal re­fuse to repent, which is a condition so
reasonable, that God requi­ers B it onely for our sake and that it may end in
our felicity, we do our selves despite to be unthankful to God; that is, we
become mi­serable by making our selves basely criminal. And if any man with
whom God hath used no other method but of his sweetnesse and the effusion of
mercies, brings no other fruits but the apples of Sodom in return for all his
culture and labours; God wil cut off that unprofi­table branch that with Sodom
it may suffer the flames of everlast­ing burning.

[...] C

[...]

[...];

If here we have good things and a continual shower of blessings to soften our
stony hearts, and we shall remain obdurat against those sermons of mercy which
God makes us every day, there will come a time when this shall be upbraided to
us that we had not  [...] a thankful minde, but made God to sowe his seed upon
the sand or upon the stones, without increase or restitution. It was a sad
alarum which God sent to David by Nathan to up­braid D his ingratitude. I
anointed thee king over Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I
gave thee thy masters house and wives into thy bosom, and the house of Israel
and Judah, and if this had been too little, I would have given thee such and
such things, wherefore hast thou despised the name of the Lord? but how
infinitely more can God say to all of us then all this came to? he hath
anointed us kings and priests in the royal pri [...]sthood of Christianity; he
hath given us his holy spirit to be our guide, his angels to be our
protectors, his creatures for our food and raiment; he hath delivered us from
the hands of Sathan, hath conquered death for us, hath taken E the sting out
and made it harmlesse and medicinal, and proclai­med us heires of heaven,
coheires with the eternal Jesus, and if after all this, we despise the
commandment of the Lord, and de­fer and neglect our repentance, what shame is
great enough, what miseries are sharp enough, what hell painful enough for
such hor­rid [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=84) A ingratitude?
Saint Lewis the King having sent  [...]vo Bishop of Chartres, on an embassy,
the Bishop met a woman on the way, grave, sad, Phantastick & malancholy, with
fire in one hand and wa­ter in the other, he asked what those symbols ment,
she answered my purpose is with fire to burn Paradise, and with my water to
quench the flames of hell, that men may serve God without the incentives of
hope and fear, & purely for the love of God. But this woman began at the wrong
end: the love of God is not produced in us after we have contracted evil
habits, til God with his fan in his hand hath through­ly purged the floore,
till he hath cast out all the devils and swept B the house with the instrument
of hope and fear and with the at­chieuments and efficacy of mercies and
judgements. But then since God may truely say to us, as of old to his
rebellious people. Am I a dry tree to the house of Israel? that is, do I bring
them no fruit, do they serve me for nought, and he expects not our duty till
first we feel his goodnesse, we are now infinitely inexcusable to throw away
so great riches, to despise such a goodnesse.

However that we may see the greatnesse of this treasure, of good­nesse God
seldom leaves us thus: for he sees [be it spoken to the shame of our natures,
and the dishonour of our manners] he C sees that his mercies do not allure us,
do not make us thankful; but (as the Roman said), felicitate corrumpimur, we
become worse for Gods mercy: and think it will be alwayes holiday, and are
like the Christal of Arabia hardned not by cold, but made crusty and stubborn,
by the warmth of the divine fire, by its refreshments and mercies; therefore
to demonstrate that God is good indeed, he con­tinues his mercise still to us;
but in another instance▪ he is mer­ciful to us in punishing us, that by such
instruments we may be led to repentance which will scare us from sin; he
delivers us up to the paedagogy of the divine judgements, and there begins the
second D part of Gods method intimated in the word  [...] or forbearance▪ God
begins his cure by causticks, by incisions and instruments of vexation, to try
if the disease that will not yeild to the allectives of cordials and perfumes,
friction and baths, may be forced out by deleteries, scarifications, and more
salutary but least pleasing Physicke.

2\.  [...] forbearance, it is called in the text, which signifies lax­amentum
or inducias, that is, when the decrees of the divine judge­ments temporal are
gone out, either wholly to suspend the execu­tio [...] of them, which is
induciae, or a reprieve; or else when God hath E struck once or twice, he
takes off his hand, that is laxamentum, an ease of remission of his judgment,
in both these, although in judgement God remembers mercy, yet we are under
discipline, we are brought into the paenitential chamber; at least we are
shewed the rod of God▪ and if like Moses rod it turnes us into serpents, and
that we repent not but grow more Devils, yet, then it turnes into a rod again
and [[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=85)
finishes up the smiting or the first designed affliction.A

But I consider it first in general, the riches of the divine good­nesse is
manifest in beginning this new method of curing us, by se­verity and by a rod.
And that you may not wonder that I expound this forbearance to be an act of
mercy punishing, I observe that be­sides that the word supposes the method
changed, and it is a mer­cy about judgements, and their manner of execution;
it is also in the nature of the thing, in the conjunction of circumstances and
the designes of God, a mercy when he threatens us or strike us into
repentance.

We think that the way of blessings and prosperous accidents is B the finer way
of securing our duty, and that when our heads are anointed, our cups crowned,
and our tables full, the very caresses of our spirits will best of all dance
before the Ark, and sing perpetual Anthemes to the honour of our Benefactor
and Patron God; and we are apt to dream that God will make his Saints raigne
here as kings in a millenary kingdom, and give them the riches and fortunes of
this world, that they may rule over men and sing psalms to God for ever. But I
remember what Xenophanes saies of God.

[...].C

God is like to men neither in shape nor in counsel, he knowes that his mercies
confirm some, and encourage, more but they con­vert but few; alone they lead
men to dissolution of manners and forgetfulnesse of God, rather then
repentance: not but that mer­cies are competent and apt instruments of grace,
if we would; but because we are more dispersed in our spirits and by a
prosperous accident are melted into joy and garishness, and drawn off from the
sobriety of recollection. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. Many D are not able
to suffer and endure prosperity; it is like the light of the sun to a weak
eye, glorious indeed in it self, but not proporti­oned to such an instrument.
Adam himself (as the Rabbins say) did not dwell one night in Paradise, but was
poisoned with prosperity, with the beauty of his fair wife, and a beauteous
tree: and Noah and Lot were both righteous and examplary, the one to Sodom the
o­ther to the old world, so long as they lived in a place in which they were
obnoxious to the common suffering: but as soon as the one of them had scaped
from drowing, and the other from burning and were put into security, they fell
into crimes which have dishonou­red E their memories for above thirty
generations together, the crimes of drunkennesse and incest, wealth and a full
fortune make men licenciously vitious, tempting a man with power to act all
that he can desire or designe vitiously.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=85)

A Inde irae faciles—

Nam (que) ut opes nimias mundo fortuna subacto

Intulit, et rebus mores cessere secundis

—Cultus gest are decoros

vix nuribus rapuere mares: toto (que) accersitur orbe

Quo gens quae (que) perit.

Lucan.

And let me observe to you that though there are in the new B Testament many
promises and provisions made for the poor in that very capacity, they haveing
a title, to some certain circumstan­ces and additionals of grace and blessing,
yet to rich men our blessed Saviour was pleased to make none at all, but to
leave them invol­ved in general comprehensions and to have a title to the
special pro­mises, onely by becomming poor in spirit, and in preparation of
minde, though not in fortune and possession. How ever; it is hard for God to
perswade us to this, till we are taught it by a sad experi­ence, that those
prosperities which we think will make us serve God C cheerfully, make us to
serve the world and secular ends diligently and God not at all.

Repentance is a duty that best complies with affliction,  [...] is a
sym­bolical estate, of the same complexion and constitution; half the work of
repentance is done by a sad accident, our spirits are made sad, our gayeties
mortified, our wildnesse corrected, the water springs are ready to run over:
but if God should grant our desires, and give to most men prosperity, with a
designe to lead them to repentance, all his pompe and all his employment, and
all his affections and pas­sions, and all his circumstances are so many
degrees of distance D from the conditions and natures of repentance. It was
reported by Dio concerning Neros mother, that she often wished that her Son
might be Emperour, and wished it with so great passion that upon that
condition she cared not though her Son might kill her; Her first wish and her
second fear were both granted; but when she be­gan to fear that her Son did
really designe to murder her, she used all the art and instruments of
diversion that a witty and a power­full a timerous person, and a woman could
invent or apply. Just so it is with us, so we might have our wishes of
prosperity we promise to undergo all the severities of repentance; but when we
are landed up­on E our desire, then every degree of satisfaction of those
sensuali­ties is a temptation against repentance: for a man must have his
af­fections weaned from those possessions, before he can be reconciled to the
possibilities of repentance.

And because God knowes this well and loves us better then we do our selves,
therefore he sends upon us the 1. scrolls of vengeance, the hand writing upon
the wall to denounce judgement against us: for [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=86) God is so
highly resolved to bring us to repentance some way or o­ther,A that if by his
goodnesse he cannot shame us into it, he will try if by his judgements he can
scare us into it▪ not that he strikes al­wayes as soon as he hath sent his
warrants out,  [...] said Phi­lo. Thus God sent Jonas and denounced judgements
against Nini­veh; but with the  [...], with the forbearance of forty dayes for
the time of their escape if they would repent. When Noah the great preacher of
righteousnesse, denounced the flood to all the world, it was with the  [...]
with the forbearance of 120. years, and when the great extermination of the
Jewish nation, and their to­tal B deletion from being Gods people, was
foretold by Christ, and decreed by God, yet they had the  [...] of forty
years, in which they were perpetually called to repentance. These were
reprieves and deferrings of the stroke. But sometimes God strikes once and
then forbeares, and such are all those sadnesses which are lesse then death;
every sicknesse, every losse, every disgrace, the death of friends and neerest
relatives, sudden discontents; these are all of them the lowder calls of God
to repentance; but still, in­stances of forbearance.

Indeed many times this forbearance makes men impudent, it was C so in the case
of Pharaoh when God smote him, and then forbore; Pharaohs heart grew callous
and insensible till God struck again; and this was the meaning of these words
of God, I will harden the heart of pharaoh, that is, I wil forbear him, smite
him, and then take the blow off, Sic enim Deus induravit Pharaonis cor, said
Saint Ba­sil. For as water taken off from fire will sooner congeale and
be­come icy, then if it had not been attenuated by the heate: so is the heart
of some men, when smitten by God, it seemes soft and plyable, but taken off
from the fire of affliction, it presently becomes horrid, then stiff and then
hard as a rock of Adamant, or as the gates D of death and hell. But this is
besides the purpose and intention of the Divine mercy; this is an  [...], a
plain contradiction to the riches of Gods goodnesse; this is to be evill
because God is good; to burn with flames, because we are coold with water;
this is to put out the lamps of heaven, or (if we cannot do it) to put our own
eyes out, least we should behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and be enamoured
of his goodnesse, and repent and live. O take heed of despising this
goodnesse; for this is one of Gods latest arts to save us; he hath no way left
beyond this, but to punish us with a lasting judgement and a poinant
affliction. In the tomb of Teren­tia E certain lamps burned under ground many
ages together, but as soon as ever they were brought into the aire and saw a
bigger light, they went out, never to be reenkindled: so long as we are in the
retirements of sorrow, of want, of fear, of sicknesse or of any sad accident
we are burning and shining lamps, but when God [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=86) A comes with
his  [...], with his forbearance and lifts us up from the gates of death and
carries us abroad into the open aire, that we converse with prosperity and
temptation, we go out in darknesse: and we cannot be preserved in heat and
light but by still dwelling in the regions of sorrow: And if such be our
weaknesses, or our folly, it concerns us to pray against such deliverances, to
be afraid of health, to beg of God to conti­nue a persecution, and not to deny
us the mercy of an af­fliction.

And do not we finde all this to be a great truth in our selves? B are we so
great strangers to our own weaknesses and unworthi­nesse as not to remember
when God scared us with judgements in the neighbourhood, whence we lived in a
great plague, or if were ever in a storm, or God had sent a sicknesse upon us;
then we may please to remember that repentance was our bu­sinesse, that we
designed mountains of piety, renewed our holy purposes, made vows and solemn
sacraments to God to become penitent, and obedient persons; and we may also
remember without much considering, that assoon as God began to forbear C us,
we would no longer forbear to sin, but adde flame to flame, a heap of sins to
a treasure of wrath, already too big; being like Pharaoh, or Herod, or like
the oxe and mule, more hardy and callous for our stripes; and melted in the
fire, and frozen har­der in the cold, worse for all our afflictions, and the
worse for all Gods judgements; not bettered by his goodnesse, nor molli­fied
by his threatnings: and what is there more left for God to do unto us? He that
is not won by the sence of Gods mercy, can never finde any thing in God that
shall convert him; and he whom fear and sense of pain cannot mend, can never
finde any D argument from himself that shall make him wise; This is sad, that
nothing from without, and nothing from within shall move us; no­thing in
Heaven and nothing in Hell, neither love nor fear▪ gra­titude to God, nor
preservation of our selves shall make us to re­pent,  [...], that shall be his
final sentence: He shall never escape that ruine from which the greatest art
of God could not entice, nor his terrour scare him: he loved cursing
there­fore shall it happen to him, he loved not blessing, therefore shall it
be far from him.

Let therefore every one of us take the account of our lives E and read over
the sermons that God hath made us; besides th [...] sweet language of his
mercy, and his still voice from Heaven consider what voices of thunder you
have heard, and presently that noise ceased and God was heard in the still
voice agai [...]; What dangers have any of you escaped, were you ever assa
[...]ed by the rudenesse of an ill natur'd man? have you never had a dangerous
fall, and escaped it? did none of you ever scape [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=87) drowning, and
in a great danger saw the forbearance of God?A have you never been sick (as
your feared) unto death? or sup­pose none of these things hath happened, hath
not God threat­ned you all, and forborne to smite you? or smitten you, and
forborne to kill you? that is evident. But if you had been a Privado, and of
the Cabinet councel with your Angel Guardian, that from him you might have
known how many dangers you have escaped, how often you have been neer a ruine,
so neer, that if you had seen your danger with a sober spirit, the fear of it
would have half killed you; If he had but told you how often God had sent out
his Warrants to the exterminating B Angel, and our Blessed Saviour by his
intercession hath obtained a reprieve, that he might have the content of
rejoycing at thy con­version and repentance; If you had known from him the
secrets of that providence which governs us in secret, and how many thousand
times the Devil would have done thee hurt, and how often himself as a
ministring spirit of Gods goodnesse and forbear­ance, did interpose and abate,
or divert a mischief, which was falling on thy head, it must needs cover thy
head with a cloud of shame and blushing at that ingratitude, and that folly,
that neither will give God thanks, nor secure thy own well C being.

Hadst thou never any dangerous fall in thy intemperance? then God shewed thee
thy danger, and that he was angry at thy sin, but yet did so pity thy person,
that he would forbear thee a little longer, else that fall had been into thy
grave.

When thy gluttony gave thee a surfet, and God gave thee a remedy, his meaning
then was, that thy gluttony rather should be cured then thy surfet; that
repentance should have been thy reme­dy, and abstinence and fasting should be
thy cure: Did ever thy proud or revengefull spirit engage the upon a Duell, or
a vex­atious D Law-suit, and God brought thee off with life or peace? his
purpose then was, that his mercy should teach thee charity: and he that cannot
read the purposes of God written with the finger of judgement (for as yet his
whole hand is not laid on) either is consigned to eternall ruine, because God
will no more endea­vour his cure, or if his mercy still continues and goes on
in long-suffering, it shall be by such vexatious instruments, such causticks,
and corrosives, such tormenting and desperate medicaments, such which in the
very cure will soundly punish thy folly and ingrati­tude. For deceive not your
selves, Gods mercy cannot be made E a patron for any mans impiety: the purpose
of it is to bring us to repentance, and God will do it by the mercies of his
mercies, or by the mercies of his judgements: he will either break our hearts
into a thousand fragments of contrition, or break our bones in the ruines of
the grave and hell: And since God rejoyces in his mercy [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=87) A above all his
works, he will be most impatient that we shall despise that, in which he most
delights, and in which we have the greatest reason to delight, the riches of
that goodnesse which is essentiall, and part of his glory, and is communicated
to us, to bring us to repentance, that we may partake of that goodnesse, and
behold that glory.

## 13\. B Sermon. XIII.SER. XIII. The mercies of the Divine Judgements.  
C Part II.

[...]] long-suffering; in this one word are contained all the treasures of the
Divine goodnesse: here is the length and extension of his mercy, pertrahit
spiritum super nos Dominus, so the Syrian Interpreter reads, Luk. 18. 7. God
holds his breath: He retains his anger within him, lest it should come forth
and blast us: and here is also much of the Divine justice: For al­though God
suffers long yet he does not let us alone: he forbears to destroy us, but not
to punish us; and in both, he by many ac­cidents D gives probation of his
power; according to the prayer of the Wise man,  [...]; Wisd. 11. 24. Thou art
mercifull towards us all because thou canst do all things, and thou passedst
by the sins of men that they may repent. And that, God shall support our
spirit, and preserve our patience, and nourish our hope, and correct our
stubbornnesse, and mortifie our pride, and bring us to him whether we will or
no, by such gracious violences, and mercifull judgements which he uses
to­wards us as his last remedies, is not onely the demonstration of a E mighty
mercy, but of an almighty power: So hard a thing it is to make us leave our
follies and become wise, that were not the mer­cies of God an effective pity,
and clothed in all the way of its pro­gresse with mightinesse and power, every
sinner should perish irre­vocably. But this is the fiery triall, the last
purgatory fire, which God uses to burn the thistles, and purifie the drosse:
When the [[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=88)
gentle influence of a Sun-beam will not wither them, nor the weed­ing A hook
of a short affliction cut them out; then God comes with fire to burn us; with
the ax laid to the root of the tree: but then observe, that when we are under
this state of cure, we are so neer destruction that the same instrument that
God uses for remedy to us, is also prepared to destroy us; the fire is as apt
to burn us to ashes, as to cleansing, when we are so overgrown; and the ax as
in­strumentall to cut us down for fewell, as to square us for building in Gods
temple: and therefore when it comes thus far, it will be hard discerning what
the purpose of the ax is; and whether the fire means to burn, we shall know it
by the change wrought upon B our selves. For what Plato said concerning his
dream of Purga­tory is true here: Quicunque non purgatus migrat ad inferos,
jace­bit in luto: quicunque verò mitratus illuc accesserit, habitabit cum
Deis: He that dies in his impurities shall lie in it for ever, but he that
descends to his grave purged and mitred, that is, having quitted his vices, &
superinduens justitiam, being clothed with righteousnesse, shall dwell in
light and immortality. It is sad that we put God to such extremities, and as
it happens in long diseases, those which Physitians use for the last remedies
seldom prevail; and when con­sumptive persons come to have their heads shaven,
they do not of­ten C escape: So it is when we put God to his last remedies;
God indeed hath the glory of his patience, and his long-suffering, but we
seldom have the benefit and the use of it. For if when our sin was young, and
our strength more active, and our habits lesse, and vertue not so much a
stranger to us, we suffered sin to prevail upon us, to grow stronger then the
ruins of our spirit, and to lesson us into the state of sicknesse and
disability, in the midst of all those remedies which God used to our beginning
diseases: much more desperate is our recovery, when our disease is stronger
and our faculties weaker, when our sins raigne in us, and our thoughts of D
vertue are not alive.

However, although I say this, and it is highly considerable, to the purpose
that we never suffered things to come to this extremi­ty, yet if it be upon
us, we must do as well as we can: But then we are to look upon it as a designe
of Gods last mercy, beyond which, if we protract our repentance, our condition
is desperately miserable. The whole state of which mercy we understand by the
parable of the King reckoning with his servants that were in arrears to him:
One was brought to him, which owed him ten thousand ta­lents: but forasmuch as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him E to be sold, and his wife and
children, and all that he had, and payment to be made: The man you see was
under the arrest; the sentence was passed upon him, he was a condemned man;
but before the execution of it, he fell down and worshipped and said,  [...],
Lord suffer me longer a while; have patience with me and I will [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=88) A pay thee all.
This tells its meaning: this is a long-sufferance, by being a forbearance
onely of execution of the last sentence; a putting off damnation upon a longer
triall of our emendation; but in the mean time it implies no other ease, but
that together with his long-suffer­ance God may use all other severities and
scourges to break our un­tamed spirits, and to soften them with hammers; so
death be put off, no matter else what hardship and loads of sufferance we
have. Hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas, so Saint Austin prayed, Here O
Lord cut me, here burn me, spare me not now, that thou mayest spare me for
ever: And it is just like the mercy used to a mad man, B when he is kept in a
dark room and tamed with whips, it is a cruel mercy, but such as his condition
requires, he can receive no other mercy; all things else were cruelly
unmercifull.

I remember what Bion observed wittily of the punishment in­flicted upon the
daughters of Danaeus, whom the old Poets fained to be condemned in hell to
fill a bottomlesse tub with water, and to increase the pain (as they fancied)
this water they were to carry in sieves, and never to leave work till the tub
were full; It is well (sayes he) since their labour must be eternall, that it
is so C gentle, for it were more pains to carry their water in whole vessels▪
and a sad burden to go loaden to a leaking tub with unfruitfull labours: Just
so is the condition of these persons upon whom a wrath is gone out; it is a
sad sentence, but acted with a gentle in­strument; and since they are
condemned to pay the scores of their sins with the sufferance of a load of
judgements, it is well they are such as will run quite thorough them, and not
stick upon them to eternity. Omnes enim poenae non exterminantes sunt medici
[...]ales: All punishments whatsoever which do not destroy us, are intended to
save us; they are lancets which make a wound but to let forth D the venome of
our ulcers; when God slue twenty three thousand of the Assyrians for their
fornication, that was a finall justice up­on their persons, and consigned them
to a sad eternity: for beyond such an infliction there was no remedy. But when
God sent lions to the Assyrian inhabitants of Samaria, and the judgements
drave them to inquire after the manner of the God of the land, and they sent
for Priests from Jerusalem to teach them how to worship the God of Israel,
that was a mercy and a judgement too: the long forbearance of God who
destroyed not at all the inhabitants, lead the rest into repentance.

E 1\. And I must make this observation to you▪ That when things come to this
passe that God is forced to the last remedies of judgements, this long-
sufferance will little or nothing concern particular persons, but nations and
communities of men: for those who are smitten with judgement if God takes his
hands off again and so opens a way for their repentance by prolonging their
time; that comes under the second part of Gods method, the [...], or [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=89) forbearance;
but if he smites single persons with a small judge­ment,A that is, a long-
suffering not of him, but towards others: and God hath destroyed my neighbour
to make me repent, my neighbours time being expired and the date of his
possibility de­termined. For a mans death-bed is but an ill station for a
peni­tent, and a finall judgement is no good monitor to him, to whom it is a
severe executioner. They that perished in the gain-saying of Corah were out of
the conditions of repentance; but the peo­ple that were affrighted with the
neighbourhood of the judgement and the expresses of Gods anger manifested in
such visible remon­strances, they were the men called unto repentance. But
concern­ing B whole nations▪ or communities of men this long-sufferance is a
Sermon of repentance; loud, clamorous, and highly argumen­tative. When God
suffered the mutinies, the affronts, the base­nesse, and ingratitude, the
follies, and relapses of the children of Israel, who murmured against God ten
times in the wilder­nesse, God sent evil angels among them, and fiery
serpents, and pestilence, and fire from heaven, and prodigies from the earth,
and a prevailing sword of the enemies, and in all these accidents, although
some innocent persons felt the contingencies and variety of mortality, yet
those wicked persons who fell by the designe of C Gods anger, were made
examples unto others and instances of Gods forbearance to the Nation: and yet
this forbearance was such that although God preserved the Nation in being and
in title to the first promises, yet all the particular persons that came from
Egypt died in the wildernesse, two onely excepted.

2\. And I desire you to observe this, that you may truly estimate the arts of
the Divine justice and mercy: For all the world being one continuall and
intire argument of the Divine mercy, we are apt to abuse that mercy to vain
confidences and pre­sumption; First, mistaking the end, as if Gods mercy would
be D indulgent to our sin, to which it is the greatest enemy in the world, for
it is a certain truth that the mercy of God is as great an enemy to sin as his
justice is, and as Gods justice is made the hand-maid of his mercy to cure
sin, so it is the servant also and the instrument to avenge our despight and
contempt of mercy; and in all the way where a difference can be there, justice
is the lesse principall. And it were a great signe of folly and a huge mistake
to think our Lord and friends do us offices of kindnesse, to make themselves
more ca­pable of affronts; and that our fathers care over us, and provisi­ons
for us can tempt us to disobey them: The very purpose of all E those
emanations is, that their love may return in duty, and their providence be the
parent of our prudence, and their care be crow­ned with our piety, and then we
shall all be crowned, and shall return like the yeer, the ends into its own
circle; and the fathers and the children, the benefactours and the beneficiary
shall knit [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=89) A the wreath
and binde each other in the eternall inclosures and circlings of immortality,
* but besides the men who presume to sin because of Gods mercy, do mistake the
very end and designe of Gods mercy, they also mistake the Oeconomy of it, and
the manner of its ministration.

3 For if God suffers men to go on in sins and punishes them not, it is not a
mercy, it is not a forbearance; it is a hardning them, a consigning them to
ruine, and reprobation; and themselves give the best argument to prove it; for
they continue in their sin, they multiply their iniquity, and every day grow
more enemy to B God, and that is no mercy that increases their hostility and
en­mity with God. A prosperous iniquity, is the most unprosperous condition in
the whole world; when he slew them, that sought him, and turned them early and
enquired after God: but as long as they pre­vailed upon their enemies then
they forgat that God was their strength and the high God was their redeemer.
It was well observed by the Persian Embassadour of old, when he was telling
the King a sad sto­ry of the overthrow of all his army by the Athenians; he
addes this of his own; that the day before the sight, the young Persian
gallants being confident they should destroy their enemies, were drinking
drunk, and railing at the timerousnesse and fears of reli­gion, C and against
all their Gods, saying, there were no such things, and that all things came by
chance, & industry, nothing by the provi­dence of the supreme power. But the
next day when they had fought unprosperously and flying from their enemies,
who were eager in their pursuit, they came to the river strymon, which was so
frozen, that their boats could not lanch, and yet it began to thaw, so that
they feared the ice would not bear them. Then you should see the bold gallants
that the day before said there was no God, most timorously and superstitiously
fall upon their faces and begged of God that the river strymon might bear them
over from D their enemies. What wisdom and Philosophy and perpetual
expe­rience, and revelation and promises and blessings cannot do, a mighty
fear can; it can allay the confidences of a bold lust, and an imperious sin,
and soften our spirit into the lownesse of a Childe, our revenge into the
charity of prayers, our impudence into the blushings of a chidden girle; and
therefore God hath taken a course proportionable: for he is not so
unmercifully merciful, as to give milk to an infirm lust, and hatch the egge
to the bignesse of a coc­atrice: and therefore observe how it is, that Gods
mercy pre­vailes E over all his works; it is even then when nothing can be
dis­cerned, but his judgements. For as when a famin had been in Is­rael in the
dayes of Ahab for three years and a half, when the an­gry prophet Elijah met
the King and presently a great winde a­rose, and the dust blew into the eyes
of them that walked abroad, and the face of the heavens was black and all
tempest, yet then the [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=90) prophet was the
most gentle, and God began to forgive, and the A heavens were more beautiful,
then when the Sun puts on the brightest ornaments of a bridegrome going from
his chambers of the east: so it is in the Oeconomy of the divine mercy; when
God makes our faces black and the windes blow so loud till the cor­dage
cracks, and our gay fortunes split, and our houses are dressed with Cypresse
and yew, and the mourners go about the streets, this is nothing but the pompa
misericordiae, this is the funeral of oursins, dressed indeed with emblems of
mourning, and proclaimed with sad accents of death, but the sight is
refreshing, as the beauties of the field, which God hath blessed, and the
sounds are healthful B as the noise of a physitian.

This is that riddle spoken of in the psalme,Psal. 74. 9. Calix in manu Dom,
vini meri plenus misto; the pure impure, the mingled unmingled cup; for it is
a cup in which God hath poured much of his severi­ty and anger, and yet it is
pure and unmingled; for it is all mercy: and so the riddle is resolved, and
our cup is full and made more wholsome lymphatum crescit, dulcescit, laedere
nescit, it is some justice and yet it is all mercy; the very justice of God
being an act of mercy, a forbearance of the man, or the nation, and the
punishing the sin.C Thus it was in the case of the children of Israel, when
they ran af­ter the bleating of the idolatrous calves, Moses prayed
passionate­ly and God heard his prayer,Psal. 98. 8. and forgave their sin upon
them. And this was Davids observation of the manner of Gods mercy to them;
Thou wast a God and forgavest them, though thou tookest veangeance of their
inventions: for Gods mercy is given to us by parts; and to certain purposes;
sometimes God onely so forgives us, that he does not cut us off in the sin,
but yet layes on a heavy load of judgements: so he did to his people, when he
sent them to schoole under the discipline of 70 years captivity; somtimes he
makes a D judgement lesse and forgives in respect of the degree of the
infliction; he strikes more gently; and whereas God had designed it may be the
death of thy self or thy neerest relative, he is content to take the life of a
childe, and so he did to David when he forbore him. the Lord hath taken away
thy sin, thou shalt not die, neverthelesse the childe that is born unto thee
that shall die: sometimes he puts the e­vil off to a further day, as he did in
the case of Ahab, and Hezeki­ah: to the first he brought the evil upon his
house, and to the se­cond he brought the evil upon his kingdom, in his sons
dayes; God forgiving onely so as to respite the evil, that they should have E
peace in their own dayes. And thus when we have committed a sin, against God,
which hath highly provoked him to anger, even upon our repentance we are not
sure to be forgiven, so as we un­derstand forgivenes; that is, to hear no more
of it, never to be cal­led to an account; but we are happy, if God so forgives
us, as not to throw us into the insufferable flames of hell, though he smite
us [[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=90) A
still we groan for our misery till we chatter like a swallow (as Da­vids
expression is) and though David was an excellent penitent, yet after he had
lost the childe begotten of Bathsheba, and God had told him he had forgiven
him, yet he raised up his darling son against him, and forced him to an
inglorious flight, and his son lay with his Fathers concubins in the face of
all Israel: so that when we are forgiven, yet it is ten to one, but GOD will
make us to smart and roar for our sinnes, for the very disquietnesse of our
souls.

For if we sin and ask God forgivenesse and then are quiet, we B feele so
little inconvenience in the trade that we may more easily be tempted to make a
trade of it indeed. I wish to God that for every sin we have committed, we
should heartily cry God mercy and leave it, and judge our selves for it to
prevent Gods anger, but when we have done all that we commonly call
repentance, and when pos­sibly God hath forgiven us to some purposes, yet it
may be he punishes our sin when we least think of it; that sin which we have
long since forgotten. It may be for the lust of thy youth thou hast a
healthlesse old age; an old religious person long agoe complained, it was his
case.

C Quos nimis effraenes habui, nunc vapulo renes:

Sic luitur juvenis culpa dolore senis.

It may be thy sore eyes are the punishment of thy intemperance seven years
ago, or God cuts thy dayes shorter and thou shalt die in a florid age, or he
raises up afflictions to thee in thine own house, in thine own bowels, or hath
sent a gangren into thy estate, or with any arrow out of his quiver he can
wound thee, and the D arrow shall stick fast in thy flesh, although God hath
forgiven thy sin to many purposes. Our blessed Saviour was heard in all that
he prayed for (said the Apostle) and he prayed for the Jews, that crucified
him: Father forgive them for they know not what they do, and God did forgive
that great sin, but how far? whereas it was just in God to deprive them of all
possibility of receiving benefit from the death of Christ, yet God admitted
them to i [...], he gave them time and possibilities, and helps, and great
advantages to bring them to repentance; he did not presently shut them up, in
his final and eternal anger: and yet he had finally resolved to E destroy
their city and nation and did so, but forbore them forty years, & gave them al
the helps of miracles and sermons apostolical to shame them, and force them
into sorrow for their fault. And be­fore any man can repent God hath forgiven
the man in one degree of forgivenesse; for he hath given him grace of
repentance and taken from him that final anger of the spirit of reprobation:
and [[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=91) when
a man hath repented, no man can say that God hath forgi­ven A him to all
purposes, but he hath reserves of anger to punish the sin, to make the man
affraid to sin any more, and to represent that when any man hath sinned what
ever he does afterwards he shall be miserable as long as he lives, vexed with
its adherencies and its neighbour-hood, and evil consequence. For as no man
that hath sinned, can during his life ever returne to an integral and per­fect
innocence: so neither shall he be restored to a perfect peace, but must
alwayes watch and strive against his sinne, and alwayes mourn and pray for its
pardon, and alwayes finde cause to hate it by knowing himself to be for ever
in danger of en­during B some grievous calamity, even for those sinnes for
which he hath truely repented him, for which God hath in ma­ny gracious
degrees passed his pardon; this is the manner of the dispensation of the
divine mercy in respect of particular persons, and nations too.

But sometimes we finde a severer judgement happening upon a people, and yet in
that sad story, Gods mercy sings the triumph which although it be much to Gods
glory, yet it is a sad story to sin­ning people▪ 600000. sighting men besides
women and children, and decrepit persons, came out of Egypt and God destroyed
them C all in the wildernesse except Caleb and Joshuah, and there it was that
Gods mercy prevailed over his justice, that he did not destroy the nation; but
still preserved a succession to Jacob, to possesse the promise. God drowned
all the world except eight persons his mercy there also prevailed over his
justice, that he preserved a rem­nant to mankinde; his justice devoured all
the world, and his mercy which preserved but eight, had the honour of the
pre­vailing attribute. God destroyed Sodom, and the five cities of the plain,
and rescued but four from the flames of that sad burning, and of the four lost
one in the flight and yet his mercy prevailed o­ver D his justice, because he
did not destroy all.

And in these senses we are to understand the excellency of the divine mercy
even when he smites, when he rebukes us for sin, when he makes our beauty to
fail and our flesh to consume away like a moth fretting a garment, yet then
his mercy is the prevailing ingre­dient. If his judgements be but sines set
upon our heads accord­to the mercy of our old lawes, Salvo contenemento, so as
to pre­serve our estates, to continue our hopes and possibilities of hea­ven;
and all the other judgements can be nothing but mercies, excellent instruments
of grace arts to make us sober and wise, to E take off from our vanity to
restrain our wildnesses, which if they were left unbridled would set all the
world on fire, Gods judge­ments are like to censures of the Church in which a
sinner is deli­vered over to Satan to be buffetted that the spirit may be
saved; the result of all this, is, that Gods mercies are not, ought not,
cannot [[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=91) A
be, instruments of confidence to sin, because the very purpose of his mercy is
to the contrary, and the very manner of his Oecono­my and dispensation is such
that Gods mercy goes along in com­plection and conjunction with his
judgements; the riches of his forbearance is this, that he forbears to throw
us into hell, and sends the mercies of his rod to chide us unto repentance,
and the mercies of his rod to punish us for having sinned, and that when we
have sinned we may never think our selves secured, nor ever be reconciled to
such dangers and deadly poisons. This, this is the manner of the divine mercy.
Go now fond man, and because God is merci­ful B presume to sin, as heaving
grounds to hope that thou mayest sin and be safe all the way. If this hope
(shall I call it) or sordid flattery could be reasonable, then the mercies of
God would not leade us to repentance; so unworthy are we in the sense and
largenesse of a wide fortune and pleasant accident. For impu [...]ity was
never a good argument to make men to obey laws, quotusq [...]is (que)
reperitur qui impunitate proposita abstinere possit injurijs? Impunitas est
maxima peccandi illecebra said Cicero,Ossic. 3. and therefore the wisdom of
God hath so ordered the actions of the world that the most fruitful showres
shall be wrapped up in a cover of black clouds, C that health shall be
conveyed by bitter and ill tasted drugs, that the temples of our bodies shall
be purged by whips, and that the cords of the whip shall be the cords of love
to draw us from the intanglings of vanity and folly. This is the long
suffering of God, the last remedy to our diseased souls, and  [...], said
Phalaris, unlesse we be senselesse we shall be brought to sober courses, by
all those sad accidents and wholsome, but ill tasting mercies, which we feele
in all the course and the  [...]ccession of the divine long sufferance.

The use of all the premises is, that which Saint Paul expresses D in the text,
that we do not despise all this▪ and he onely despises not, who serves the
ends of God in all these designes of mercy, that is, he that repents him of
his sins. But the [...]e are a great many despisers, all they that live in
their sins, they that have more bles­sings then they can reckon houres in
their lives, that are courted by the divine favour and woed to salvation, as
if mankinde were to give, not to receive so great a blessing▪ all they that
answer not to so friendly summons, they are despisers of Gods mercies: and
although God overflows with mercies and does not often leave us to the onely
hopes of being cured by  [...]ctions and gen­tle E cataplasmes, but proceeds
further and gives us stibium or pre­pared steele, sharp arrows of his anger,
and the sword, and the hand of sicknesse, yet we are not sure of so much
favour as to be entertained longer in Gods hospital, but many be thrust forth
among the incurabili, Plutarch reports concerning swine that their optick
nervs are so disposed to turne their eyes down­wards [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=92) that they
cannot look upwards nor behold the face of hea­ven A unlesse they be thrown
upon their backs. Such Swine are we, we seldom can look up to heaven til God
by his judgements throws us upon our backs; till he humbles us & softens us
with showers of our own blood, and tears of sorrow: and yet God hath not
promised that he will do so much for us; but for ought we know as soon as
e­ver the devil enters into our swinish and brutish hearts we shall run down
the hill and perish in the floods and seas of intolerable mi­serie; And
therefore besides that it is a huge folly in us that we wil not be cured with
pleasant medicines, but must be longing for col­liquintida and for vomits, for
knives and poniards instead of the B gentle shoures of the divine
refreshments, besides that this is an im­prudence and sottishnesse, we do
infinitely put it to the venture whether we shall be in a saverable condition
or no, after the re­jection of the first state of mercies. But however, then
begins the first step of the judgement, and pungent misery, we are perishing
people, or if not, yet at the last, not to be cured without the abscision of a
member, without the cutting of a hand or leg; or the putting out of an eye: we
must be cut to take the stone out of our hearts, and that is a state of a very
great infelicity: and C if we scape the stone, we cannot escape the surgeons
knife; if we scape death, yet we have a sicknesse; and though that be a great
mercy in respect of death, yet it is as great a misery in respect of health:
and that is the first punishment for the despite done to the first, and most
sensible mercies: we are fallen into a sicknesse, that cannot be cured but by
disease and hard­ship.

But if this despite runs further, and when the mercies look on us with an
angry countenance, and that God gives us onely the mercy of a punishment, if
we despise this too, we increase D but our misery as we increase our sin: the
summe of which is this, that if Pharaoh will not be cured by one plague, he
shall have ten, and if ten will not do it, the great and tenth wave, which is
far bigger then all the rest, the severest and the last arrow of the quiver,
then we shall perish in the red sea, the sea of flames and blood, in which the
ungodly shall roule e­ternally.

But some of these despisers are such as are unmooved when God smites others;
like Gallio when the Jews took Softhenes and beat him in the pleading place,
he cared for none of these E things; he was not concerned in that interest;
and many Gallio's there are amongst us, that understand it not to be a part of
the divine method, of Gods long sufferance to strike others to make us afraid.
But however, we sleep in the midst of such alarums, yet know, that there is
not one death in all the neighbour-hood, but is intended to thee; every
crowing of the cock is to awake thee [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=92) A to
repentance: and if thou sleepest still, the next turn may be thine; God will
send his Angel as he did to Peter and smite thee on thy side, and wake thee
from thy dead sleep of sin and sottish­nesse. But beyond this, some are
despisers still, and hope to drown the noises of mount Sinai, the sound of
Canons, of thunders, and lightnings, with a counternoise of revelling and
clamorous roar­ings, with merry meetings; like the sacrifices to Moloch, they
sound drums and trumpets, that they might not hear the sad shrik­ings of their
children as they were dying in the cavety of the brazen idoll, and when their
conscience shrikes out or murmurs B in a sad melancholy; or something that is
dear to them is smit­ten, they attempt to drown it in a sea of drink, in the
heathenish noises of idle and drunen company; and that which God sends to lead
them to repentance, leads them to a taverne, not to refresh their needs of
nature, or for ends of a tolerable civility, or innocent purposes, but like
the condemned persons among the Levantines, they tasted wine freely that they
might die and be insensible. I could easily reprove such persons with an old
Greek proverb men­tioned by Plutarch,  [...]. You shall ill be cured of the
knotted Gout, if you have nothing else C but a wide shoe: But this reproof is
too gentle for so great a madnesse: it is not onely an incompetent cure, to
apply the plai­ster of a sin or vanity to cure the smart of a divine
judgement, but it is a great increaser of the misery, by swelling the cause to
big­ger, and monstrous proportions. It is just as if an impatient fool,
feeling the smart of his medicine, shall tear his wounds open and throw away
the instruments of his cure, because they bring him health at the charge of a
little pain,  [...]. He that is full of stripes and troubles, and decked round
about with thorns, he is neer to God; But he, that because he sits uneasily
when he D sits neer the King that was crowned with thorns, shall remove
thence, or strew flowers, roses, and Jessamine, the downe of thistles, and the
softest Gossamere, that he may die without pain, die quietly and like a lamb,
sink to the bottom of hell without noise, this man is a fool, because he
accepts death, if it arrest him in civil language, is content to die by the
sentence of an eloquent Judge, and prefers a quiet passage to hell, before
going to heaven in a storm.

That Italian Gentleman was certainly a great lover of his sleep, who was angry
with the lizard that wak't him, when a E viper was creeping into his mouth:
when the Devil is entring in­to us to poison our spirits, and steal our souls
away while we are sleeping in the lethargy of sin, God sends his sharp
messages to awaken us, and we call that the enemy, and use arts to cure the
remedy, not to cure the disease. There are some persons that will never be
cured, not because the sicknesse is incurable, but [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=93) because they
have ill stomacks and cannot keep the medicine:A lust so is his case that so
despises Gods method of curing him, by these instances of long-sufferance,
that he uses all the arts he can to be quit of his Physitian, and to spill his
physick, and to take cordials as soon as his vomit begins to work. There is no
more to be said in this affair, but to read the poor wretches sen­tence, and
to declare his condition. As at first, when he despised the first great
mercies, God sent him sharpnesses and sad acci­dents to ensober his spirits:
So now that he despises this mer­cy also, the mercy of the rod, God will take
it away from him, and then I hope all is well! Miserable man that thou art!B
this is thy undoing; if God ceases to strike thee because thou wilt not mend,
thou art sealed up to ruine, and reprobation for ever: The Physitian hath
given thee over, he hath no kindnesse for thee.Isai. 1. 4, 5. This was the
desperate estate of Judah. Ah sinfull na­tion, a people laden with iniquity,
they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel; why
should ye be siricken any more? This is the  [...], the most bitter curse, the
greatest ex­communication, when the delinquent is become a heathen and a
publicane, without the covenant, out of the pale of the Church; C the Church
hath nothing to do with them: for what have I to do with them that are
without? said Saint Paul: It was not lawfull for the Church any more to punish
them; and this court Christi­an is an imitation and paralell of the justice of
the court of hea­ven: When a sinner is not mended by judgements at long
running, God cuts him off from his inheritance and the lot of sons, he will
chastise him no more, but let him take his course and spend his portion of
prosperity, such as shall be allowed him in the great Oeconomy of the world.
Thus God did to his Vineyard which he took such pains to fence, to plant, to
manure, to dig, to cut,D and to prune: and when after all, it brought forth
wilde grapes, the last and worst of Gods anger was this,Isai. 5. 5. Auferam
sepem ejus, God had fenced it with a hedge of thorns, and God would take away
all that hedge, he would not leave a thorn standing, not one judgement to
reprove or admonish them, but all the wilde beasts, and wilder and more
beastly lusts, may come and devour it, and trample it down in scorn.

And now what shall I say, but those words quoted by Saint Peter in his
Sermon:Acts 13. 14. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; perish in
your own folly by stubbornesse and ingratitude. For it E is a huge
contradiction to the nature and designes of God; God calls us, we refuse to
hear; he invites us with fair promises, we hear and consider not; he gives us
blessings, we take them and un­derstand not his meaning: we take out the
token, but read not the letter: then he threatens us, and we regard not; he
strikes our neighbours, and we are not concerned; then he strikes us gently,
[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=93) A but we
feel it not; then he does like the Physitian in the Greek Epi­gram, who being
to cure a man of a Lethargy, locked him into the same room with a mad-man,
that he by dry beating him, might make him at least sensible of blows; but
this makes us in­stead of running to God, to trust in unskilfull Physitians,
or like Saul to run to a Pythonisse, we run for cure to a crime, we take
sanctuary in a pleasant sin; just as if a man to cure his melancholy should
desire to be stung with a Tarantula, that at least he may die merily; what is
there more to be done that God hath not yet done? he is forced at last to
break off with a Curavimus Ba­bylonem & non est sanata, we dressed and tended
Babylon, but B she was incurable; there is no help but such persons must die
in their sins, and lie down in eternall sorrow. C D E

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=94)

## 14\. Sermon. XIV.SER. XIV. A Of Growth in Grace.B

2 Pet. 3. 18.C‘But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Je­sus
Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.’

WHen Christianity like the day spring from the East, with a new light did not
onely inlighten the world, but amazed the mindes of men,D and entertained
their curiosities, and seized upon their warmer and more pregnant affe­ctions,
it was no wonder that whole Nati­ons were converted at a Sermon, and
mul­titudes were instantly professed, and their understandings followed their
affections, and their wills followed their understandings, and they were
con­vinced by miracle, and overcome by grace, and passionate with zeal, and
wisely governed by their Guides, and ravished with the sanctity of the
Doctrine, and the holinesse of their examples: And E this was not onely their
duty, but a great instance of providence, that by the great religion and piety
of the first Professors, Christianity might be firmly planted, and unshaken by
scandall, and hardened by persecution; and that these first lights might be
actuall Precedents for ever, and Copies for us to transcribe in all descending
ages of Christianity, that thither we might run to fetch [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=94) A oil, to
enkindle our extinguished lamps. But then piety was so universall, that it
might well be enjoyned by Saint Paul, that if a brother walked disorderly, the
Christians should avoid his company: He forbad them not, to accompany with the
Heathens that walked disorderly; for then a man must have gone out of the
world. But they were not to endure so much as to eat with, or to salute a
dis­orderly brother, an ill living Christian: But now if we should ob­serve
this canon of Saint Paul, and refuse to eat, or to converse with a
fornicatour, or a drunkard, or a perjured person, or cove­tous, we must also
go out of the world; for a pious or a holy person B is now as rare, as a
disorderly Christian was at first: and as Christi­anity is multiplied every
where in name and title, so it is destroyed in life, essence, and proper
operation; and we have very great reason to fear, that Christs name will serve
us to no end but to up­braid our basenesse; and his person onely to be our
Judge, and his lawes as so many bills of accusation, and his graces and helps
offered us, but as aggravations of our unworthinesse; and our ba­ptisme, but
an occasion of vow-breach; and the holy Communion, but an act of hypocrisie,
formality, or sacrilege; and all the pro­mises of the Gospel but as pleasant
dreams; and the threatnings C but as arts of affrightment; for Christianity
lasted pure and zea­lous, it kept its rules, and observed its own lawes for
three hun­dred yeers, or thereabouts; so long the Church remained a Vir­gin:
For so long they were warmed with their first fires, and kept under discipline
by the rod of persecution; but it hath declined almost fourteen hundred yeers
together; prosperity and pride, wantonnesse and great fortunes, ambition and
interest, false do­ctrine upon mistake, and upon designe, the malice of the
Devil, and the arts of all his instruments, the want of zeal, and a
weari­nesse of spirit, filthy examples, and a disreputation of piety and a D
strict life; seldome precedents, and infinite discouragements have caused so
infinite a declension of piety and holy living, that what Papirius Massonius
one of their own, said of the Popes of Rome; In pontificibus nemo hodiè
sanctitatem requirit, optimi putantur si vel levitèr mali sint, vel minus boni
quam caeteri mortales esse solent. No man looks for holines in the Bishops of
Rome; those are the best Popes who are not extremly wicked: the same is too
true of the greatest part of Christians: Men are excellent persons if they be
not traytors, or adulterous, oppressors, or injurious, drun [...] ­ards, or
scandalous, if they be not as this publican, as the vilest per­son E with whom
they converse:

Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus

Si reddat veterem cum totâ aerugine fllem

Prodigiosa fides & Thuscis digna libellis

Quaeque coronatâ lustrari debeat agnâ.

Juven. Sat. 13.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=95) He that
is better then the dregs of his own age, whose religion is A something above
prophanesse, and whose sobriety is a step or two from down right intemperance
whose discourse is not swearing, nor yet apt to edifie, whose charity is set
out in pity, and a gentle yerning and saying, [God help] whose alms are
contemptible, and his de­votion infrequent, yet as things are now, he is unus
è milibus, one of a thousand, and he stands eminent and conspicuous in the
valleys and lower grounds of the present piety; for a bank is a mountain upon
a levell: but what is rare and eminent in the manners of men this day would
have been scandalous, and have deserved the rod of an Apostle, if it had been
confronted with the fervours and B rare devotion and religion of our fathers
in the Gospel.

Men of old looked upon themselves as they stood by the ex­amples and
precedents of Martyrs, and compared their piety to the life of Saint Paul, and
estimated their zeal by the flames of the Boanerges, Saint James and his
brother: and the Bishops were thought reproveable as they fell short of the
ordinary government of Saint Peter, and Saint John; and the assemblies of
Christians were so holy, that every meeting had religion enough to hallow a
house and convert it to a Church; and every day of feasting was a Communion,
and every fasting day was a day of repentance and C alms; and every day of
thanksgiving was a day of joy, and alms: and religion begun all their actions,
and prayer consecrated them, and they ended in charity, and were not polluted
with designe: they despised the world heartily, and pursued after heaven
greedi­ly; they knew no ends but to serve God, and to be saved; and had no
designes upon their neighbours, but to lead them to God, and to felicity; till
Satan full of envy to see such excellent dayes, mingled covetousnesse, and
ambition within the throngs and con­ventions of the Church, and a vice crept
into an office, and then the mutuall confidence grew lesse, and so charity was
lessened; D and heresies crept in, and then faith began to be sullied, and
pride crept in; and then men snatched at offices, not for the work, but for
the dignity; and then they served themselves more then God and the Church;
till at last it came to the passe where now it is, that the Clergy live lives
no better then the Laity, and the Laity are stooped to imitate the evil
customes of strangers and enemies of Christianity; so that we should think
Religion in a good con­dition, so that men did offer up to God but the actions
of an ordi­nary, even, and just life, without the scandall and allayes of a
great impiety: But because such is the nature of things, that either E they
grow towards perfection, or decline towards dissolution; There is no proper
way to secure it but by setting its growth for­ward: for religion hath no
station, or naturall periods; if it does not grow better, it grows much worse,
not that it alwayes returns the man into scandalous sins, but that it
establishes and fixes him [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=95) A in a state of
indifferency and lukewarmnesse: and he is more averse to a state of
improvement, and dies in an incurious, ignorant and un­relenting condition.

But grow in grace] Thats the remedy, and that would make us all wise and
happy, blessed in this world, and sure of heaven: Concerning which, we are to
consider first; what the estate of grace is, into which every one of us must
be entred, that we may grow in it; secondly the proper parts, acts and offices
of growing in grace, 3. The signes, consequences, and proper significations,
by which if we can­not perceive the growing, yet afterwards we may perceive
that we B are grown, and so judge of the state of our duty, and concerning our
finall condition of being saved.

1\. Concerning the state of grace, I consider that no man can be said to be in
the state of grace, who retaines an affection to any one sin. The state of
pardon and the divine favour, begins at the first instance of anger against
our crimes, when we leave our fondnesses and kinde opinions, when we excuse
them not, and will not endure their shame; when we feele the smarts of a­ny of
their evil consequents; for he that is a perfect lover of sin, and is sealed
up to a reprobate sense, endures all that sin brings along C with it, and is
reconciled to all its mischiefes, can suffer the sick­nesse of his own
drunkennesse, and yet call it pleasure, he can wait like a slave to serve his
lust, and yet count it no disparage­ment; he can suffer the dishonour of being
accounted a base and dishonest person, and yet look confidently, and think
himself no worse. But when the grace of God begins to work upon a mans spirit,
it makes the conscience nice and tender and although the sin as yet does not
displease the man, but he can endure the flat­tering and alluring part, yet he
will not endure to be used so ill by his sin; he will not be abused and
dishonoured by it; But because D God hath so allayed the pleasures of his sin,
that he that drinks the sweet should also strain the dregs through his throat,
by de­grees Gods grace doth irreconcile the convert, and discovers, first its
base attendance, then its worse consequents, then the displea­sure of God,
that here commences the first resolutions of leaving the sin, and trying if in
the service of God, his spirit and the whole appetite of man may be better
entertained. He that is thus far entred shall quickly perceive the difference,
and meet argu­ments enough to invite him further; For then God treats the E
man as he treated the spies, that went to discover the land of pro­mise; he
ordered the year in plenty and directed them to a pleasant and a fruitful
place, and prepared bunches of grapes of a miracu­lous and prodigious
greatnesse that they might report good things of Canaan, and invite the whole
nation to attempt its conquest: so Gods grace represents to the new converts
and the weak ones in faith the pleasures and first deliciousnesses of
religion: and when [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=96) they come to
spie the good things of that way that leads to heaven,A they presently
perceive themselves eased of the load of an evil conscience, of their fears of
death, of the confusion of their shame, and Gods spirit gives them a cup of
sensible comfort, and makes them to rejoyce in their prayers, and weep with
pleasures ming­led with innocent passions, and religious changes; and although
God does not deal with all men in the same method, or in manners that can
regularly be described, and all men do not feele, or do not observe, or cannot
for want of skill discern such accidental sweetnesses, and pleasant grapes at
his first entrance into religion: yet God to every man does minister excellent
arguments of invi­tation,B and such that if a man will attend to them, they
will cer­tainly move either his affections or his will, his fancy or his
rea­son, and most commonly both: But while the spirit of God is doing this
work of man, man must also be  [...] a fellow worker with God, he must
entertain the spirit, attend his inspirati­ons, receive his whispers, obey all
his motions, invite him fur­ther, and utterly renounce all confederacy with
his enemy, sin; at no hand suffering any root of bitternesse to spring up, not
allow­ing to himself any reserve of carnal pleasure, no clancular lust, no
private oppressions, no secret covetousnesse, no love to this C world that may
discompose his duty; for if a man prayes all day and at night is intemperate
if he spends his time in reading, and his recreation be sinful; if he studies
religion, and practises self interest; if he leaves his swearing and yet
retaines his pride; if he becomes chast and yet remains peevish and imperious;
this man is not changed from the state of sin, into the first stage of the
state of grace: he does at no hand belong to God, he hath suffered him­self to
be scared from one sin, and tempted from another by in­terest, and hath left a
third, by reason of his inclination, and a fourth for shame, or want of
opportunity: But the spirit of God hath not D yet planted one perfect plant
there; God may make use of the acci­dentally prepared advantages▪ But as yet
the spirit of God hath not begun the proper and direct work of grace in his
heart, But when we leave every sin, when we resolve never to return to the
chaines, when we have no love for the world, but such as may be a servant of
God; then I account that we are entred into a state of grace, from whence I am
now to begin to reckon the commencement of this precept, grow in grace and in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2\. And now the first part of this duty is to make religion to be E the
businesse of our lives; for this is the great instrument, which will naturally
produce our growth in grace, and the perfection of a Christian. For a man
cannot after a state of sin be instantly a Saint: the work of heaven is not
done by a flash of lightning, or a dash of affectionate raine, or a few tears
of a relenting pity; God [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=96) A and his
Church have appointed holy intervals, and have taken por­tions of our time for
religion, that we may be called off from the world, and remember the end of
our creation, and do honour to God, and think of heaven with hearty purposes
and peremptory designes to get thither. But as we must not neglect those times
which God hath reserved for his service, or the Church hath pru­dently
decreed, nor yet act religion upon such dayes with forms and outsides, or to
comply with customs; or to seem religious; so we must take care that all the
other portions of our time be hallowed with little retirements of all
thoughts, and short conver­sations B with God; and all along be guided with a
holy intention, that even our works of nature may passe into the relations of
grace, and the actions of our calling may help towards the obtaining the price
of our high calling; while our eatings are actions of tempe­rance, our labours
are profitable our humiliations are acts of o­bedience, and our almes are
charity: our marriages are cha [...], and whether we eat or drink, sleep or
wake we may do all to the glory of God, by a direct intuition or by a reflex
act, by designe or by sup­plment, by fore sight or by an after election: and
to this purpose C we must not look upon religion as our trouble, and our hind
[...] ­rance; nor think almes chargeable or expensive; nor our fastings
vexatious and burdensom; nor our prayers a wearinesse of spirit; But we must
make these and all other the dutis of religion, our imployments, our care the
work and end for which we came into the world; and remember that we never do
the work of men, nor serve the ends of God, nor are in the proper imployment
and businesse of our life, but when we worship God or live like wise or sober
persons, or do benefit to our brother.

I will not turne this discourse into a reproofe, but leave it re­presented D
as a duty: Remember that God se [...] you into the world for religion; we are
but to passe through our pleasant fields, or our hard labours; but to lodge a
little while in our faire palaces or our meaner cottages; but to bait in the
way at our full tables or with our spare diet; but then onely, man does his
proper imployment, when he prayes and does charity, and mortifies his unruly
appetites, and restrains his violent passions, and be­comes like to God, and
imitates his holy Son, and writes after the coppies of Apostles, and Saints.
Then he is dressing himself for eternity, where he must dwell or abide, either
in an excellent be­atifical E country, or in a prison of amazment and eternal
horrour: And after all this, you may if you please call to minde, how much
time you allovv to God and to your souls every day, or every moneth, or in a
year if you please; for I fear the account of the time is soon made; but the
account for the neglect, vvill be har­der. And it vvill not easily be
ansvvered, that all our dayes and years are little enough to attend perishing
things, and to be svval­lowed [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=97) up in
avaritious and vain attendances, and we shall not at­tend A to religion with a
zeal so great as is our revenge, or as is the hunger of one meale. Without
much time, and a wary life, and a diligent circumspection, we cannot mortify
our sins, or do the first works of grace. I pray God we be not found to have
grown like the sinnews of old age, from strength to remisnesse, from thence to
dissolution, and infirmity and death; Menedemus was wont to say that the young
boyes that went to Athens the first year were wise men, the second year,
Philosophers, the third, Orators, and the fourth were but Plebeians and
understood nothing but their own ignorance.B

And just so it happens to some in the progresses of religion: at first they
are violent and active; and then they satiate all the appe­tites of religion;
and that which is left, is, that they were soon weary, and sat down in
displeasure, and return to the world and dwell in the businesse of pride, or
mony; and by this time they understand that their religion is declined, and
passed from the heats and follies of youth, to the coldnesse and infirmities
of old age; The remedies of which is onely a diligent spirit and a busie
religion▪ a great industry & a full portion of time in holy offices; that as
the Oracle said to the Cirrheans, noctes diesque belligeran­dum, C they could
not be happy unlesse they waged war night and day: that is, unlesse we
perpetually fight against our own vices; and repell our Ghostly enemies, and
stand upon our guard, we must stand for ever in the state of babes, in Christ,
or else return to the first imperfections of an unchristened soul, and an
unsanctified spi­rit. Thats the first particular.

2\. The second step of our growth in grace is, when vertues grow habitual, apt
and easie in our manners, and dispositions. For although many new converts
have a great zeal, and a busie spirit, apt enough as they think to contest
against all the difficulties of a D spiritual life, yet they meet with such
powerful oppositions from without, and a false heart within, that their first
heats are soon broken, and either they are for ever discouraged, or are
for­ced to march more slowly and proceed more temperately for ever after.

[...]

[...].

It is an easie thing to commit a wickednesse, for temptation and infirmity are
alwayes too neer us: But God hath made care and sweat, prudence and diligence,
experience and watchfulnesse, wis­dom E and labour at home, and good guides
abroad to be instruments and means to purchase vertue.

The way is long and difficult at first; but in the progresse and pursuit we
finde all the knots made plain, and the rough wayes made smooth.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=97)

A —jam monte potius

Now, the spirit of grace is like a new soul within him, and he hath new
appetites and new pleasures, when the things of the world grow unsavory and
the things of religion are delicious; when his temptations to his old crimes
return but seldom, and they prevail not at all, or in very inconsiderable
instances, and stay not at all, but are reproached with a penitentiall sorrow,
and speedy amendment; when we do actions of vertue quickly, frequently, B and
with delight: then we have grown in grace in the same de­gree in which they
can perceive these excellent dispositions. Some persons there are who dare not
sin: they dare not omit their hours of prayer; and they are restlesse in their
spirits till they have done; but they go to it as to execution; they stay from
it as long as they can, and they drive like Pharoahs charets with the wheels
off, sad­ly and heavily: and besides that such persons have reserved to
themselves, the best part of their sacrifice, and do not give their will to
God, they do not love him with all their heart; they are C also soonest
tempted to retire and fall off. Sextius Romanus re­signed the honours and
offices of the city, and betook himself to the severity of a Philosophical
life. But when his unusual diet and hard labour began to pinch his flesh, and
he felt his propositions smart, and that which was fine in discourse at a
Symposiack, or an Academical dinner, began to sit uneasily upon him in the
practise; he so despaired that he had like to have cast himself into the sea,
to appease the labours of his religion; Because he never had gone fur­ther
then to think it a fine thing to be a wise man: he would com­mend it, but he
was loth to pay for it at the price that God and D the Philosopher set upon
it. But he that his grown  [...] grace and hath made religion habitual to his
spirit, is not at ease but when he is doing the works of the new man, he rests
in religion and comforts his sorrows with thinking of his prayers, and in all
crosses of the world he is patient, because his joy is at hand to refresh him
when he list, for he cares not so he may serve God: and if you make him poor
here, he is rich there, and he counts that to be his proper service, his
worke, his recreation, and reward.

3\. But  [...]cause in the course of holy living, although the duty E be
regular and constant, yet the sensible relishes and the flowrings of
affections, the zeal and the visible expressions do not alwayes make the same
emission; but sometimes by designe, and some­times by order, somtimes by
affection we are more busie, more intire, and more intent upon the actions of
religion; in such ca­ses we are to judge of our growth in grace, if after
every interval of extraordinary piety, the next return be more devout and more
[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=98)
affectionate, the labour be more cheerfull and more active; and if A religion
returnes oftner and stayes longer in the same expressi­ons, and leaves more
satisfaction upon the spirit. Are your com­munions more frequent? and when
they are, do ye approach neerer to God? have you made firmer resolutions and
entertained more hearty purposes of amendment? Do you love God more dutifully
and your neighbour with a greater charity? do you not so easily return to the
world as formerly? are not you glad when the thing is done? do you go to your
secular accounts with a more weaned affection then before? if you communicate
well, it is certain, that you will still do it better: if you do not
communicate well,B every opportunity of doing it is but a new trouble, easily
excused, readily omitted, done because it is necessary, but not because we
love it: and we shall finde that such persons in their old age do it worst of
all; And it was observed by a Spanish Confessor, who was also a famous
preacher, that in persons not very religious, the confessions which they made
upon their deathbed were the coldest, the most imperfect, and with lesse
contrition then all that he had observed them to make in many years before.
For so the Canes of Egypt when they newly arise from their bed of mud and
slime of Nilus, start up into an equal and continual length, and are
inter­rupted C but with few knots, and are strong and beauteous with great
distances, and intervals: but when they are grown to their full length they
lessen into the point of a pyramis, and multiply their knots and joynts,
interrupting the finenesse and smoothnesse of its body: so are the steps &
declensions of him that does not grow in grace: at first when he springs up
from his impurity, by the wa­ters of baptisme and repentance, he grows
straight and strong, and suffers but few interruptions of piety, and his
constant cour­ses of religion are but rarely intermitted; till they ascend up
to a full age or towards the ends of their life, then they are weak and D
their devotions often intermitted, and their breaches are frequent, and they
seek excuses, and labour for dispensations, and love God and religion lesse
and lesse, till their old age instead of a crown of their vertue and
perseverance ends in levity and unprofita­ble courses; light and uselesse as
the tufted feathers upon the cane, every winde can play with it and abuse it,
but no man can make it useful. When therefore our piety interrupts its greater
and more solemn expressions, and upon the return of the great  [...] offices,
and bigger solemnities we finde them to come upon ou [...] spirits like the
wave of a tide, which retired onely because it was natural so E to do and yet
came further upon the strand at the next rolling; When every new confession,
every succeeding communion, eve­ry time of separation for more solemn and
intense prayer is bet­ter spent and more affectionate, leaving a greater
relish upon the spirit, and possessing greater portions of our affections, our
rea­son, [[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=98)
A and our choice, then we may give God thanks, who hath gi­ven us more grace
to use that grace, and a blessing to endeavour our duty, and a blessing upon
our endeavour.

4\. To discern our growth in grace, we must inquire concer­ning our passions,
whether they be mortified and quiet, comply­ing with our ends of vertue and
under command. For since the passions are the matter of vertue and vice
respectively, he that hath brought into his power all the strengths of the
enemy, and the forts from whence he did infest him, he onely hath secured his
holy walking with God. But because this thing is never perfectly B done, and
yet must alwayes be doing, grace grows according as we have finished our
portions of this work. And in this we must not onely inquire concerning our
passions, whether they be sinfull and habitually prevalent; for if they be, we
are not in the state of grace; But whether they return upon us in violences
and un­decencies, in transportation and unreasonable, and imprudent
ex­pressions; for although a good man may be incident to a violent passion,
and that without sin, yet a perfect man is not; a well-grown Christian hath
seldom such sufferings; to suffer such things sometimes may stand with the
being of vertue, but not with its C security: For if passions range up and
down and transport us fre­quently and violently, we may keep in our forts, and
in our dwel­lings, but our enemy is master of the field, and our vertues are
re­strained, and apt to be starved, and will not hold out long; a good man may
be spotted with a violence, but a wise man will not: and he that does not adde
wisedom to his vertue, the knowledge of Jesus Christ to his vertuous habits,
will be a good man but till a storm comes. But beyond this, inquire after the
state of your passions, in actions of religion: Some men fast to mortifie
their iust, and their fasting makes them peevish: some reprove a vice D but
they do it with much inpatience; some charitably give excel­lent counsell, but
they do that also with a pompous and proud spirit; and passion being driven
from open hostilities, is forced to march along in the retinue and troops of
vertue: And although this be rather a deception and a cosenage then an
imperfection; and supposes a state of sin rather then an imperfect grace; yet
be­cause it tacitly and secretly creeps along among the circumstances of pious
actions, as it spoils a vertue in some, so it lessens it in others, and
therefore is considerable also in this question.

And although no man must take accounts of his being in, or E out of the state
of grace, by his being dispassionate, and free from all the assaults of
passion, yet as to the securing his being in the state of grace, he must
provide that he be not a slave of passion, so to declare his growth in grace,
he must be sure to take the measures of his affections, and see that they be
lessened; more apt to be suppressed; not breaking out to inconvenience and
imprudencies, [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=99) not rifling our
spirit and drawing us from our usuall and more A sober tempers. Try therefore
if your fear be turned into caution, your lust into chast friendships, your
imperious spirit into prudent government, your revenge into justice, your
anger into charity, and your peevishnesse and rage, into silence and
suppression of language. Is our ambition changed into vertuous and noble
thoughts? can we emulate without envy? is our covetousnesse les­sen'd into
good husbandry, and mingled with alms, that we may certainly discern the love
of money to be gone? do we leave to despise our inferiours, and can we
willingly endure to admit him that excels us in any gift or grace whatsoever,
and to commend B it without abatement, and mingling allayes with the
commenda­tion, and disparagements to the man? If we be arrived but thus farre,
it is well, and we must go further. But we use to think that all disaffections
of the body are removed, if they be changed into the more tolerable, although
we have not an athletick health, or the strength of porters or wrastlers: For
although it be felicity to be quit of all passion, that may be sinfull or
violent; and part of the happinesse of heaven shall consist in that freedom;
yet our growth in grace consists in the remission and lessening of our
passi­ons: onely he that is incontinent in his lust, or in his anger, in his C
desires of money, or of honour, in his revenge, or in his fear, in his joyes,
or in his sorrows, that man is not grown at all in the grace and knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ: This onely; in the seruting and consequent judgement
concerning our passions, it will concern the curiosity of our care, to watch
against passions in the reflex act; against pride, or lust, complacency, and
peevishnesse attending upon vertue. For he was noted for a vain person, who
being over­joyed for the cure of his pride (as he thought) cried out to his
wife, Cerne Dionysia deposui fastum, behold I have laid aside all my pride:
and of that very dream the silly man thought he had reason to boast; D but
considered not that it was an act of pride, and levity besides. If thou hast
given a noble present to thy friend, if thou hast rejected the unjust desire
of thy Prince; if thou hast endured thirst and hunger for religion or
continence; if thou hast refused an offer like that which was made to Joseph,
sit down and rest in thy good conscience, and do not please thy self in
opinions, and phantastick noises abroad, and do not despise him that did not
do so as thou hast done; and reprove no man with an upbraiding circumstance:
for it will give thee but an ill return, and a contemptible reward, if thou
shalt over-lay thy infant-vertue, or drown it with a flood of E breast-milk.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=99)

## 15\. A Sermon. XV.SER. XV. B Of Growth in Grace.  
Part II.

C 5\. HE is well grown in, or towards the state of grace, who is more patient
of a sharp reproof, then of a secret flattery. For a reprehension contains so
much mortification to the pride and complacencies of a man; is so great an
affront to an easie and undisturbed person, is so empty of plea­sure, and so
full of profit, that he must needs love vertue in a great degree, who can take
in that which onely serves her end, and is displeasant to himself, and all his
gayeties. A severe repre­hender of anothers vice, comes dressed like Jacob
when he went to cozen his brother of the blessing: his outside is rough and
hairy, but the voice is Jacobs voice; rough hands, and a healthfull lan­guage
D get the blessing, even against the will of him that shall feel it; but he
that is patient, and even, not apt to excuse his fault, that is lesse apt to
anger, or to scorn him that snatches him rudely from the flames of hell, he is
vertues Confessor, and suffers these lesser stripes for that interest which
will end in spirituall and eter­nall benedictions.

They who are furious against their monitors are incorrigible: but it is one
degree of meeknesse to suffer discipline: and a meek man cannot easily be an
ill man, especially in the present instance: he appears, at least, to have a
healthfull constitution▪ he hath E good flesh to heal; his spirit is capable
of medicine, and that man can never be despaired of, who hath a disposition so
neer his health as to improve all physick, and whose nature is relieved by
every good accident from without. But that which I observe is, That this is
not onely a good disposition towards repentance, and restitution, but is a
signe of growth in grace, according as it becomes naturall, easie, and
habituall, Some men chide themselves for all their [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=100) misdemeanours,
because they would be represented to the cen­sures A and opinions of other
men, with a fair Character, and such as need not to be reproved: others out of
inconsideration sleep in their own dark rooms, and untill the charity of a
Guide, or of a friend draws the curtain and lets in a beam of light, dream on
untill the graves open, and hell devours them; But if they be cal­led upon by
the grace of God, let down with a sheet of counsels and friendly precepts,
they are presently inclined to be obedient to the heavenly monitions, but
unlesse they be dressed with cir­cumstances of honour and civility, with arts
of entertainment, and insinuation they are rejected utterly, or received
unwillingly:B Therefore although upon any termes, to endure a sharp reproof be
a good signe of amendment; yet the growth of grace is not properly signified
by every such sufferance: For when this dispo­sition begins, amendment also
begins, and goes on in proportion to the increment of this. To endure a
reproof without adding a new sin is the first step to amendments, that is, to
endure it without scorn, or hatred, or indignation. 2. The next is to suf­fer
reproof without excusing our selves: For he that is apt to ex­cuse himself is
onely desirous in a civill manner to set the reproof aside, and to represent
the charitable monitour to be too hasty in C his judgement, and deceived in
his information; and the fault to dwell there, not with himself. 3. Then he
that proceeds in this instance admits the reprovers sermon, or discourse,
without a pri­vate regret: he hath no secret murmurs, or unwillingnesses to
the humiliation, but is onely ashamed that he should deserve it: but for the
reprehension it self, that troubles him not; but he looks on it as his own
medicine, and the others charity. 4. But if to this he addes, that he
voluntary confesses his own fault, and of his own accord vomits out the loads
of his own intemperance, and eases his spirit of the infection, then it is
certain he is not one­ly D a professed and hearty enemy against sin, but a
zealous, and a prudent, and an active person against all its interest; and
never counts himself at ease but while he rests upon the banks of Sion, or at
the gates of the temple; never pleased but in vertue and religion: Then he
knows the state of his soul, and the state of his danger, he reckons it no
objection to be abased in the face of man, so he may be gracious in the eyes
of God: And that's a signe of a good grace, and a holy wisdom; That man is
grown in the grace of God, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Justus in principio sermonis est accusator sui, said the Wise man, The
righ­teous E accuseth himself in the beginning: that is, quickly, lest he be
prevented: And certain it is, he cannot be either wise or good that had rather
have a reall sin within him, then that a good man should beleeve him to be a
repenting sinner; that had rather keep his crime, then lose his reputation;
that is, rather to be so, then to [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=100) A be thought
so, rather be without the favour of God, then of his neighbour. Diogenes once
spied a young man coming out of a Tavern, or place of entertainment; who
perceiving himself ob­served by the Philosopher, with some confusion stepped
back a­gain, that he might (if possible) preserve his fame with that se­vere
person. But Diogenes told him, Quanto magis intraveris tan­to magis eris in
cauponâ: The more you go back, the longer you are in the place where you are
ashamed to be seen; and he that conceals his sin, still retains that which he
counts his shame, and his burden. Hippocrates was noted for an ingenious
person, that B he published and confessed his errour concerning the futures of
the head: and all ages since Saint Austin have called him pious, for writing
his book of retractations, in which he published his former ignorances and
mistakes, and so set his shame off to the world, invested with a garment of
modesty, and above half chan­ged before they were seen. I did the rather
insist upon this par­ticular, because it is a consideration of huge
concernment, and yet much neglected in all its instances and degrees. We
neither confesse our shame, nor endure it; we are privately troubled, and C
publikely excuse it; we turn charity into bitternesse, and our re­proof into
contumacy and scorne; and who is there amongst us that can endure a personall
charge? or is not to be taught his per­sonall duty, by generall discoursings,
by parable and apologue, by acts of insinuation and wary distances? but by
this state of persons we know the estate of our own spirits.

When God sent his Prophets to the people, and they stoned them with stones,
and sawed them asunder, and cast them into dun­geons, and made them beggers,
the people fell into the condition of Babylon, Quam curavimus & non est
sanata; We healed her (said D the Prophets) But she would not be cured:
Derelinquamus eam, that's her doom; let her enjoy her sins and all the fruits
of sin laid up in treasures of wrath against the day of vengeance and
retri­bution.

6\. He that is grown in grace, and the knowledge of Christ esteems no sin to
be little or contemptible; none fit to be cherished or indulged to. For it is
not onely inconsistent with the love of God, to entertain any undecency or
beginning of a crime, any thing that displeases him, but he alwayes remembers
how much it cost him to arrive at the state of good things, whether the grace
E of God hath already brought him: He thinks of the prayers and tears, his
restlesse nights, and his daily fears, his late escape, and his present
danger, the ruines of his former state, and the difficult and imperfect
reparations of this new; his proclivity and aptnesse to vice, and naturall
aversnesse and uneasie inclinations to the strictnesse of holy living; and
when these are considered truly, they naturally make a man unwilling to
entertaine any begin­nings [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=101) of a state of
life contrary to that which with so much dan­ger A and difficulty, through so
many objections and enemies he hath attained. And the truth is, when a man
hath escaped the dangers of his first state of sin, he cannot but be extreamly
unwilling to return again thither, in which he can never hope for heaven: (and
so it must be) for a man must not flatter himself in a small crime, and say as
Lot did when he begged a reprieve for Zoar, Alas Lord, is it not a little one
and my soul shall live? And it is not therefore to be entertained because it
is little; for it is the more without ex­cuse, if it be little; the
temptations to it are not great; the allure­ments not mighty; the promises not
insnaring, the resistance easie; B and a wise man considers, it is a greater
danger to be overcome by a little sin, then by a great one; a greater danger
(I say) not directly, but accidentally; not in respect of the crime, but in
re­lation to the person: for he that cannot overcome a small crime, is in the
state of infirmity, so great, that he perishes infallibly, when he is arrested
by the sins of a stronger temptation: But he that easily can, and yet will
not; he is in love with sin, and courts his danger, that he may at least kisse
the apples of Paradise, or feast himself with the parings: since he is by some
displeasing instru­ment affrighted from glutting himself with the forbidden
fruit,C in ruder and bigger instances: But the well-grown Christian is
cu­rious of his newly trimmed soul, and like a nice person with clean clothes,
is carefull that no spot or stain fully the virgin whitenesse of his robe:
whereas another whose albes of baptisme are sullied in many places with the
smoak and filth of Sodom and unclean­nesse, cares not in what paths he treads,
and a shower of dirt chan­ges not his state, who already lies wallowing in the
puddles of impurity; It makes men negligent and easie, when they have an
opinion or certain knowledge that they are persons extraordinary in nothing;
that a little care will not mend them; that another D sin cannot make them
much worse: But it is as a signe of a tender conscience, and a reformed
spirit, when it is sensible of every al­teration, when an idle word is
troublesom, when a wandering thought puts the whole spirit upon its guard;
when too free a merriment is wiped off with a sigh and a sad thought, and a
se­vere recollection, and a holy prayer: Polycletus was wont to say, That they
had work enough to do, who were to make a cu­ruious picture of clay and dirt,
when they were to take accounts for the handling of mud and morter: A mans
spirit is naturally carelesse of baser and uncostly materials; but if a man be
to work E in gold, then he will save the filings, and his dust, and suffer not
a grain to perish: And when a man hath laid his foundations in pre­cious
stones, he will not build vile matter, stubble and dirt upon it: So it is in
the spirit of a man; If he have built upon the rock Christ Jesus, and is grown
up to a good stature in Christ, he will [[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=101) A not easily
dishonour his building nor lose his labours, by an incu­rious entertainment of
vanities and little instances of sin; which as they can never satisfie any
lust or appetite to sin; so they are like a flie in a box of ointment, or like
little follies to a wise man, they are extreamly full of dishonour and
disparagement, they dis­array a mans soul of his vertue, and dishonour him for
cockle-shels and baubles, and tempt to a greater folly: which every man, who
is grown in the knowledge of Christ, therefore carefully avoids, because he
fears a relapse, with a fear as great as his hopes of hea­ven are, and knowes
that the entertainment of small sins do but en­tice B a mans resolutions to
disband, they unravel and untwist his holy purposes, and begin in infirmities
and proceed in folly, and end in death.

7\. He that is grown in grace pursues vertue for its own interest, purely and
simply without the mixture and allay of collateral de­signes, and equally
inclining purposes; God in the beginning of our returns to him entertains us
with promises and threatnings, the ap­prehensions of temporal advantages, with
fear and shame, and with reverence of friends and secular respects, with
reputation and coercion of humane laws and at first men snatch at the lesser
and C lower ends of vertue and such rewards are visible, and which God
sometimes gives in hand to entertain our weak, and imperfect de­sires: The
young Philosophers were very forward to get the precepts of their sect, and
the rules of severity, that they might dis­course with Kings, not that they
might reform their own man­ners; and some men study to get the ears and
tongues of the peo­ple, rather then to gain their souls to God; and they obey
good laws, for fear of punishment, or to preserve their own peace and some are
worse they do good deeds out of spite, and preach Christ out of envy, or to
lessen the authority and fame of others: some D of these lessen the excellency
of the act, others spoil it quite: it is in some, imperfect, in others,
criminal; in some it is consistent with a beginning infant-grace, in others it
is an argument of the state of sin and death: but in all cases, the well grown
Christian, he that improoves or goes forward in his way to heaven, brings
ver­tue forth, not into discourses and panegyrickes, but into his life and
manners; his vertue although it serves many good ends acci­dentally, yet by
his intention it onely suppresses his inordinate passions, makes him temperate
and chast, casts out his devils of E drunkennesse and lust, pride and rage,
malice and revenge▪ it makes him useful to his brother and a servant of God;
and al­though these flowers cannot choose but please his eye, and delight his
smell, yet he chooses to gather honey, and licks up the dew of heaven and
feasts his spirit upon the Manna, and dwells not in the collateral usages and
accidental sweetnesses which dwell at the gates of the other senses, but like
a Bee loads his thighs with [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=102) wax and his
bag with honey; that is, with the useful parts of ver­tue A in order to
holinesse and felicity. Of which the best signes and notices we can take will
be if we as earnestly pursue vertues which are acted in private, as those
whose scene lies in publick, If we pray in private, under the onely eye of God
and his ministring angels as in Churches; if we give our almes in secret
rather then in publick; if we take more pleasure in the just satisfaction of
our consciences, and securing our reputation; if we rather pursue in­nocence
then seek an excuse; if we desire to please God, though we lose our fame with
men; if we be just to the poorest servant as to the greatest prince, if we
choose to be among the jewels of B God though we be the  [...] the off-
scouring of the world; if when we are secure from witnesses and accusers and
not obnoxi­ous to the notices of the law, we think our selves obliged by
con­science, and practise, and live accordingly; then our services and
intentions in vertue are right▪ then we are past the twilights of con­version,
and the umbrages of the world, and walk in the light of God, of his word, and
of his spirit, of grace and reason, as be­cometh not babes, but men in christ
Jesus. In this progresse of grace I have not yet expressed, that perfect
persons should serve God C out of mere love of God and the divine
excellencies, without the considerations of either heaven or hell; such a
thing as that is tal­ked of in mystical Theology. And I doubt not but many
good per­sons come to that growth of Charity that the goodnesse and
excel­lency of God are more incumbent and actually pressing upon their spirit
then any considerations of reward: But then I shall adde this; that when
persons come to that hight of grace (or contempla­tion rather) and they love
God for himself and do their duties in order to the fruition of him and his
pleasure; all that, is but heaven in another sense, and under another name;
just as the mystical The­ologie D is the highest duty and the choicest parts
of obedience un­der a new method: but in order to the present, that which I
call a signification of our growth in grace, is a pursuance of vertue up­on
such reasons as are propounded to us, as motives in Christiani­ty (such as are
to glorifie God, and to enjoy his promises in the way, and in our country, to
avoid the displeasure of God, and to be united to his glories) and then to
exercise vertue in such parts and to such purposes as are useful to good life,
and profitable to our neighbours; not to such onely where they serve
reputation, or secular ends. For though the great Physitian of our souls hath
E mingled profits and pleasures with vertue to make its chalice sweet and apt
to be drank off, yet he that takes out the sweet ingredi­ent and feasts his
palate with the lesse wholsome part, because it is delicious, serves a low end
of sense or interest, but serves not God at all; and as little does benefit to
the soul: such a person is like Homers bird, deplumes himselfe to feather all
the naked callows [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=102) A that he
sees, and holds a taper that may light others to heaven, while he burns his
own fingers: but a well grown person, out of habit and choice out of love of
vertue and just intention goes on his jour­ney in straight wayes to heaven,
even when the bridle and coercion of laws or the spurs of interest or
reputation are laid aside and desires witnesses of his actions, not that he
may advance his fame, but for reverence and fear, and to make it still more
necessary to do holy things.

8\. Some men there are in the beginning of their holy walking with God, and
while they are babes in Christ, who are presently B busied in delights of
prayers, and rejoyce in publick communion, and count all solemn assemblies,
festival; but as they are pleased with them, so they can easily be without
them; It is a signe of a common and vulgar love onely to be pleased with the
company of a friend, and to be as well with out him, amoris at morsum qui verè
senserit, he that ha's felt the stings of a sharp and very dear affection is
impatient in the absence of his beloved object, the soul that is sick and
swallowed up with holy fire loves nothing else; all pleasures else seem
unsavory, company is troublesome, visitors are tedious, homilies of comfort
are flat and uselesse. The plea­sures C of vertue to a good and perfect man
are not like the per­fumes of Nard Pistick, which is very delightful when the
box is newly broken, but the want of it is no trouble; we are well e­nough
without it; but vertue is like hunger and thirst it must be satisfied or we
die; and when we feel great longings af­ter religion and faintings for want of
holy nutriment, when a fa­mine of the word and sacraments is more intolerable;
and we think our selves really most miserable, when the Church doors are shut
against us, or like the Christians in the persecution of the Vandals, who
thought it worse then death, that there Bishops were D taken from them; If we
understand excommunication, or Church censures (abating the disreputation and
secular appendages) in the sense of the spirit to be a misery next to hell it
self, then we have made a good progresse in the Charity and grace of God; till
then we are but pretenders, or infants, or imperfect, in the same de­gree in
which our affections are cold, and our desires remisse; For a constant and
prudent zeal is the best testimony of our mascu­line and vigorous heats, and
an houre of fervour is more plea­sing to God then a moneth of luke-warmnesse,
and indif­ferency.

E 9 But as some are active onely in the presence of a good object, but remisse
and carelesse for the want of it, so on the other side an infant grace is safe
in the absence of a temptation, but falls easily, when it is in presence: He
therefore that would understand if he be grown in grace, may consider if his
safety consists onely in peace, or in the strength of the spirit. It is good
that we will not seek out [[Page
190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=103) opportunities
to sin; but are not we too apprehensive of it, when A it is presented? or do
we not sink under when it presses us? can we hold our tapers neer the flames
and not suck it in greedily like Naphtha or prepared Nitre? or can we like the
children of the cap­tivity walk in the midst of slames and not be scorched or
consu­med,? Many men will (not like Judah) go into high wayes and untie the
girdles of harlots; But can you reject the importunity of a beautious and an
imperious Lady, as Joseph did we had need pray that we be not led into
temptation; that is, not onely into the pos­session, but not into the
allurements and neighbour-hood of it, least by little and little our strongest
resolutions be untwist, and crack B in sunder like an easie cord severed into
single threds: but if we by the necessity of our lives, and manner of living,
dwell where a temptation will assault us, then to resist, is the signe of a
great grace; but such a signe, that without it, the grace turns into
wantonnesse, and the man into a beast, and an angel into a Devil. R. Moses
will not allow a man to be a true penitent untill he hath left all his sin,
and in all the like circumstances refuses those temptations un­der which
formerly he sinned and died: and indeed it may hap­pen that such a trial onely
can secure our judgement concerning C our selves: and although to be tried in
all the same accidents be not safe, nor alwayes contingent, and in such cases
it is sufficient to resist all the temptations we have, and avoid the rest and
decree against all, yet if it please God we are tempted, as David was by his
eyes, or the Martyrs by tortures, or Joseph by his wanton Mistris, then to
stand sure and to ride upon the temptation like a ship upon a wave, or to
stand like a rock in an impetuous storm, thats the signe of a great grace and
of a well-grown Chri­stian.

10\. No man is grown in grace but he that is ready for every D work, that
chooses not his employment, that refuses no imposi­tion from God or his
superiour; a ready hand, an obedient heart, and a willing cheerful soul in all
the work of God and in every office of religion is a great index of a good
proficient in the wayes of Godlinesse. The heart of a man is like a wounded
hand or arme, which if it be so cured that it can onely move one way and
cannot turn to all postures and natural uses it is but imperfect, and still
half in health, and half wounded: so is our spirit; if it be apt for prayer
and close fisted in almes, if it be sound in faith and dead in charity, if it
be religious to God and unjust to our neigh­bour,E there wants some integral
part, or there is a lamenesse; and the deficiency in any one duty implyes the
guilt of all (said Saint James) and bonum ex integrâ causâ malum exquâlibet
particulari, e­very fault spoils a grace. But one grace alone cannot make a
good man. But as to be universal in our obedience is necessary to the being in
the state of grace: so readily to change imployment from [[Page
191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=103) A the better
to the worse, from the honourable to the poor, from use­full to seemingly
unprofitable, is a good Character of a well grown Christian, if he takes the
worst part with indifferency and a spi­rit equally choosing all the events of
the divine providence. Can you be content to descend from ruling of a province
to the keeping of a herd: from the work of an Apostle to be confined into a
pri­son, from disputing before Princes to a conversation with Shep­herds? can
you be willing to all that God is willing, and suffer all that he chooses as
willingly as if you had chosen your own for­tune? In the same degree, in which
you can conform to God, in B the same you have approached towards that
perfection whe­ther we must by degrees arrive in our journey towards heaven.

This is not to be expected of beginners; for they must be enticed with apt
imployments; and it may be, their office and work so fits their spirits, that
it makes them first in love with it, and then with God for giving it; and many
a man goes to heaven in the dayes of peace, whose faith, and hopes, and
patience would have been dashed in pieces, if he had fallen into a storm or
persecuti­on. Oppression will make a wise man mad (saith Solomon): there are C
some usages that will put a sober person out of all patience, such which are
besides the customes of this life, and contrary to all his hopes, and unworthy
of a person of his quality: and when Nero durst not die, yet when his servants
told him that the Senators had condemned him to be put to death more Majorum,
that is, by scourg­ing like a slave, he was forced into a preternatural
confidence, and fel upon his own sword; but when God so changes thy estate
that thou art fallen into accidents to which thou art no otherwise di­sposed,
but by grace and a holy spirit, and yet thou canst passe through them with
quietnesse, and do the work of suffering as well D as the works of a
prosperous imployment; this is an argument of a great grace and an
extraordinary spirit. For many persons in a change of fortune perish, who if
they had still been prosperous had gone to heaven; being tempted in a
persecution to perjuries and Apostacy and unhandsome complicances, and
hypocricy, and irreligion: and many men are brought to vertue, and to God, and
to felicity by being persecuted and made unprosperous: and these are effects
of a more absolute and irrespective predestinati­on; but when the grace of God
is great and prudent, and mascu­line, E and well grown, it is unalter'd in all
changes, save onely that every accident that is new and violent brings him
neerer to God, and makes him with greater caution and severity to dwell in
vertue.

11\. Lastly, some there are who are firme in all great and fore­seen changes
and have laid up in the store-houses of the spirit (reason and religion)
arguments and discourses enough to defend [[Page
192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=104) them against
all violencies and stand at watch so much, that A they are safe where they can
consider, and deliberate; but there may be something wanting yet; and in the
direct line, in the strait progresse to heaven, I call that an infallible
signe of a great grace, and indeed the greatest degree of a great grace, when
a man is pre­pared against sudden invasions of the spirit, surreptions and
ex­temporary assaults: Many a valiant person dares sight a battle who yet will
be timorous and surprised in a mid-night alarme; or if he falls into a river;
And how many discreet persons are there, who, if you offer them a sin, and
give them time to consider, and tell them of it before hand, will rather die
then be perjured, or tell B a deliberate lie, or break a promise; who (it may
be tell many sudden lies, and excuse themselves, and break their promises, and
yet think themselves safe enough; and sleep without either affrightments, or
any apprehension of dishonour done to their per­sons or their religion. Every
man is not armed for all sudden ar­rests of passions: few men have cast such
fetters upon their lusts and have their passions in so strict confinement,
that they may not be over run with a midnight flood or an unlooked for
inundation; He that does not start when he is smitten suddenly, is a constant
person: and that is it which I intend in this instance; that he is C a perfect
man and well grown in grace, who hath so habitual a resolution and so unhasty
and wary a spirit, as that he decrees up­on no act before he hath considered
maturely, and changed the sudden occasion into a sober counsel David by chance
spied Pathsheba washing her self, and being surprised, gave his heart away
before he could consider, and when it was once gone, it was hard to recover
it; and sometimes a man is betrayed by a sudden opportunity and all things
fitted for his sin ready at the door; the act stands in all its dresse, and
will not stay for an an­swear; and inconsideration is the defence and guard of
the sin,D and makes that his conscience can the more easily swallow it what
shall the man do then? unlesse he be strong by his old strengths, by a great
grace, by an habitual vertue, and a sober unmoved spirit, he falls and dies in
the death and hath no new strengths; but such as are to be imployed for his
recovery; none for his present guard; unlesse upon the old stock, and if he be
a well grown Christian.

These are the parts, acts, and offices of our growing in grace, and yet I have
sometimes called them signes; but they are signes, as eating and drinking are
signes of life, they are signes so as also E they are parts of life; and these
are parts of our growth in grace, so that a man can grow in grace to no other
purpose but to these or the like improvements.

Concerning which I have a caution or two to interpose. 1. The growth of grace
is to be estimated as other morall things are, not [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=104) A according to
the growth of things naturall: Grace does not grow by observation, and a
continuall efflux, and a constant proportion; and a man cannot call himself to
the account for the growth of every day, or week, or moneth; but in the
greater portions of our life, in which we have had many occasions and
instances to exercise and improve our vertues, we may call our selves to
ac­count; but it is a snare to our consciences to be examined in the growth of
grace in every short resolution of solemn duty, as against every Communion, or
great Festivall. 2. Growth in grace is not alwayes to be discerned either in
single instances, or in single gra­ces. B Not in single instances; for every
time we are to exercise a vertue, we are not in the same naturall
dispositions, nor do we meet with the same circumstances, and it is not
alwayes necessary that the next act should be more earnest and intence then
the former; all single acts are to be done after the manner of men, and
there­fore are not alwayes capable of increasing; and they have their termes
beyond which easily they cannot swell: and therefore if it be a good act and
zealous, it may proceed from a well grown grace, and yet a younger and weaker
person may do some acts as great and as religious as it; But neither do single
graces alwayes C affoord a regular and certain judgement in this affair; for
some persons at the first, had rather die then be unchast, or perjured: and
greater love then this no man hath, that he lay down his life for God: he
cannot easily grow in the substance of that act; and if other persons, or
himself, in processe of time do it more cheerful­ly, or with fewer fears, it
is not alwayes a signe of a greater grace, but sometimes of greater
collaterall assistances, or a better habit of body, or more fortunate
circumstances: for he that goes to the block tremblingly for Christ; and yet
endures his death certainly, and endures his trembling too, and runs through
all his infirmi­ties D and the bigger temptations; looks not so well many
times in the eyes of men, but suffers more for God, then those confident
Martyrs that courted death in the primitive Church; and therefore may be much
dearer in the eyes of God: But that which I say in this particular, is that a
smallnesse in one, is not an argument of E the imperfection of the whole
estate: Because God does not al­wayes give to every man occasions to exercise,
and therefore not to improve every grace; and the passive vertues of a
Christian are not to be expected to grow so fast in prosperous, as in
suffering Christians: but in this case we are to take accounts of our selves
by the improvement of those graces which God makes to happen of­ten in our
lives; such as are charity and temperance in young men, liberality and
religion in aged persons, ingenuity and humility in schollers, justice in
merchants and artificers, forgivenesse of inju­ries in great men, and persons
tempted by law-suits; for since ver­tues grow like other morall habits, by
use, diligence, and assiduity, [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=105) there where
God hath appointed our work and in our instances,A there we must consider
concerning our growth in grace, in other things we are but beginners: But it
is not likely that God will trie us concerning degrees hereafter, in such
things of which in this world he was sparing to give us opportunities.

3\. Be carefull to observe that these rules are not all to be under­stood
negatively, but positively, and affirmatively, that is, that a man may
conclude that he is grown in grace if he observes these characters in himself,
which I have here discoursed of; but he must not conclude negatively, that he
is not grown in grace, if he cannot observe such signall testimonies: for
sometimes God covers the B graces of his servants, and hides the beauty of his
tabernacle with goats hair, and the skins of beasts, that he may rather suffer
them to want present comfort, then the grace of humility; for it is not
necessary to preserve the gayeties and their spirituall pleasures; but if
their humility fails, (which may easily do under the sunshine of conspicuous
and illustrious graces) their vertues and themselves perish in a sad
declension. But sometimes men have not skill to make a judgement; and all this
discourse seems too artificiall to be tried by, in the hearty purposes of
religion. Sometimes they let passe much of their life, even of their better
dayes, without ob­servance C of particulars; sometimes their cases of
conscience are in­tricate, or allayed with unavoydable infirmities; sometimes
they are so uninstructed in the more secret parts of religion, and there are
so many illusions and accidentall miscariages, that if we shall conclude
negatively in the present Question, we may produce scru­ples infinite, but
understand nothing more of our estate, and do much lesse of our duty.

4\. In considering concerning our growth in grace, let us take more care to
consider matters that concern justice, and charity, then that concern the
vertue of religion; because in this there may D be much, in the other there
cannot easily be any illusion, and cose­nage. That is a good religion that
beleeves, and trusts, and hopes in God through Jesus Christ, and for his sake
does all justice, and all charity, that he can; and our Blessed Lord gives no
other descripti­on of love to God, but obedience and keeping his
commande­ment: Justice and charity are like the matter, religion is the form
of Christianity; but although the form be more noble and the principle of
life, yet it is lesse discernable, lesse materiall, and lesse sensible; and we
judge concerning the form by the matter, and by materiall accidents, and by
actions: and so we must of our reli­gion,E that is, of our love to God, and of
the efficacy of our prayers, and the usefulnesse of our fastings; we must make
our judgements by the more materiall parts of our duty, that is, by sobriety,
and by justice, and by charity.

I am much prevented in my intention for the perfecting of [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=105) A this so very
materiall consideration: I shall therefore onely tell you, that to these parts
and actions of good life, or of our growth in grace, some have added some
accidentall considerati­ons, which are rather signes then parts of it: Such
are. 1. To praise all good things, and to study to imitate what we praise, 2.
To be impatient that any man should excell us; not out of envy to the person,
but of noble emulation to the excellency; For so Themistocles could not sleep
after the great victory at Marathon purchased by Miltiades; till he had made
himself il­lustrious by equall services to his countrey. 3. The bearing of B
sicknesse patiently, and ever with improvement, and the ad­dition of some
excellent principle, and the firm pursuing it. 4. Great devotion, and much
delight in our prayers. 5. Fre­quent inspirations, and often whispers of the
Spirit of God prom­pting us to devotion, and obedience, especially if we adde
to this, a constant and ready obedience to all those holy invitations. 6.
Offering peace to them that have injured me, and the aba­ting of the
circumstances of honour, or of right, when either justice, or charity, is
concerned in it. 7. Love to the brethren. C 8 To behold our companions, or our
inferiours full of honour and fortune; and if we sit still at home and murmur
not, or if we can rejoyce both in their honour, and our own quiet, that's a
fair work of a good man; And now 9. After all this, I will not trouble you
with reckoning a freedom from being tempted, not onely from being overcome,
but from being tried: for though that be a rare felicity, and hath in it much
safety, yet it hath lesse honour and fewer instances of vertue, unlesse it
proceed from a confirmed and heroicall grace; which is indeed a little image
of heaven, and of a celestiall charity; and never happens signally D to any,
but to old and very eminent persons. 10. But some also adde an excellent habit
of body and materiall passions, such as are chast and vertuous dreams, and
suppose that as a disease abuses the fancy, and a vice does prejudice it; so
may an ex­cellent vertue of the soul smooth and Calcine the body, and make it
serve perfectly, and without rebellious indispositions. 11. Others are in love
with Mary Magdalens tears, and fancy the hard knees of Saint James, and the
fore eyes of Saint Peter, and the very recreations of Saint John. Proh! quam
virtute praeditos omnia de­cent! thinking all things becomes a good man; even
his gestures E and little incuriosities: And though this may proceed from a
great love of vertue, yet because some men do thus much and no more, and this
is to be attributed to the lustre of vertue, which shines a little thorow a
mans eye-lids, though he perversely winks against the light; yet as the former
of these two is too Metaphysi­call; so is the later too Phantasticall: he that
by the fore-going materiall parts and proper significations of a growing grace
does [[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=106)
not understand his own condition, must be content to work on A still super
totam materiam, without considerations of Particulars; he must pray earnestly,
and watch diligently, and consult with prudent Guides, and ask of God great
measures of his Spirit, and hunger and thirst after righteousnesse: for he
that does so, shall certainly be satisfied: and if he understands not his
present good condition, yet if he be not wanting in the down right endeavours
of piety, and in hearty purposes, he shall then finde that he is grown in
grace when he springs up in the resurrection of the just, and shall be
ingrafted upon a tree of Paradise, which beareth fruit for ever, Glory to God,
rejoycing to Saints and Angels, and eternall B felicity to his own pious,
though undiscerning soul.

Prima sequentem, honestum est in secundis

aut tertijs consistere. Cicero.

C D E

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=106)

## 16\. A Sermon. XVI.SER. XVI. B Of Growth in Sinne, OR C The severall states
and degrees of Sinners, WITH The manner how they are to be treated.

D Jude Epist. Ver. 22, 23.‘And of some have compassion, making a difference: *
And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.’

MAn hath but one entrance into the world, but a thousand wayes to passe from
thence; and as it is in the natural, so it is in the spiritual; nothing but
the union of faith and obedience E can secure our regeneration, and our new
birth, and can bring us to see the light of hea­ven: but there are a thousand
passages of turn­ing into darknesse; and it is not enough that our bodies are
exposed to so many sad infirmities and dishonoura­ble imperfections, unlesse
our soul also be a subject capable of so many diseases, follies, irregular
passions, false principles, accursed [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=107) habits and
degrees of perversnesse, that the very kindes of them A are reducible to a
method, and make up the part of a science: There are variety of stages and
descents to death; as there are diversity of torments, and of sad regions of
misery in hell, which is the centre and kingdom of sorrows. But that we may a
little refresh the sadnesses of this consideration; for every one of these
stages of sin. God hath measured out a proportion of mercy; for if sin
abounds, grace shall much more abound, and God hath concluded all under sin,
not with purposes to destroy us, but, Vt omnium misereatur, that he might have
mercy upon all; that light may break forth from the deepest inclosures of
darknesse, and B mercy may rejoyce upon the recessions of justice, and grace
may triumph upon the ruins of sin, and God may be glorified in the mi­racles
of our conversion, and the wonders of our preservation, and glories of our
being saved. There is no state of sin, but if we be persons capable (according
to Gods method of healing) of re­ceiving antidotes, we shall finde a sheet of
mercy spread over our wounds and nakednesse. If our diseases be small, almost
necessary, scarce avoidable, then God does, and so we are commanded to cure
them, and cover them with a vail of pity, compassion, and gentle remedies: If
our evils be violent, inveterate, gangrened C and incorporated into our nature
by evil customes, they must be pulled from the flames of hell with censures,
and cauteries, and punishments, and sharp remedies, quickly and rudely; their
dan­ger is present and sudden, its effect is quick and intolerable, and there
is no soft counsels then to be entertained; they are already in the fire; but
they may be saved for all that; so great, so infinite, so miraculous is Gods
mercy, that he will not give a sinner over, though the hairs of his head be
singed with the flames of hell; Gods desires of having us to be saved
continue, even when we be­gin to be damned; even till we will not be saved,
and are gone be­yond D Gods method, and all the revelations of his kindnesse.
And certainly that is a bold and a mighty sinner whose iniquity is sweld
beyond all the bulk and heap of Gods revealed loving kindnesse: If sin hath
sweld beyond grace and superabounds over it, that sin is gone beyond the
measures of a man; such a person is removed beyond all the malice of humane
nature, into the evil and spite of Devils, and accursed spirits; there is no
greater sadnesse in the world then this. God hath not appointed a remedy in
the vast treasures of grace for some men, and some sins; they have sinned like
the falling Angels; and having over run the ordinary evil E inclinations of
their nature, they are without the protection of the divine mercy; and the
conditions of that grace which was designed to save all the world, was
sufficient to have saved twenty. This is a condition to be avoyded with the
care of God and his Angels, and all the whole industry of man. In order to
[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=107) A which
end my purpose now is to remonstrate to you the several states of sin, and
death, together with those remedies which God had proportioned out to them,
that we may observe the evils of the least, and so avoid the intolerable
mischiefs of the greater, e­ven of those sins which still are within the power
and possibilities of recovery, lest insensibly we fall into those sins and
into those circumstances of person for which Christ never died, which the Holy
Ghost never means to cure, and which the eternal God ne­ver will pardon; for
there are of this kinde more then common­ly men imagine, whilest they amuse
their spirits with gaietyes B and false principles, till they have run into
horrible impieties, from whence they are not willing to withdraw their foot,
and God is re­solved never to snatch and force them thence.

1\. [Of some have compassion] and these I shall reduce to four heads or orders
of men and actions; all which have their proper cure proportionable to their
proper state, gentle remedies to the lesser irregularities of the soul. The
first are those that sin without observation of their particular state; either
because they are un­instructed in the special cases of conscience, or because
they do an evil against which there is no expresse commandment. It is a sad C
calamity, that there are so many milions of men and women that are entred into
a state of sicknesse and danger, and yet are made to believe they are in
perfect health; and they do actions concerning which they never made a
question whether they were just or no; nor were ever taught by what names to
call them. For while they observe that modesty is sometimes abused by a false
name and cal­led clownishnesse, & want of breeding; and contentednesse and
tempe­rate living is suppressed to be want of courage and noble thoughts; and
severity of life is called imprudent and unsociable; and simplici­ty and
hearty honesty is counted foolish and unpolitick, they are ea­sily D tempted
to honour prodigality and foolish dissolution of their estates with the title
of liberal and noble usages, timorousnesse is cal­led caution, rashnesse is
called quicknesse of spirit, covetousnesse, is fra­gality, amorousnesse is
society, and gentile; peevishnesse and anger is courage, flattery is humane,
and courteous; and under these false vails vertue slips away (like truth from
under the hand of the [...] that fight for her) and leave vices dressed up
withthe same imag [...]y, and the fraud not discovered, till the day of
recompences, when men are distinguished by their rewards. But so men think
they sleep free­ly when their spirits are loaden with a Lethargy and they call
E a hestick-feaver the vigour of a natural heat, tell nature changes those
lesse discerned states into the notorious images of death. Very many men never
consider whether they sin or no in 10000. of their actions, every one of which
is very disputable; and do not think they are bound to consider: these men are
to be pitied and instructed, they are to be called upon to use religion like a
daily [[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=108)
diet; their consciences must be made tender and their Catechis­me A enlarged;
teach them, and make them sensible and they are cured.

But the other in this place are more considerable; Men sin with­out
observation because their actions have no restraint of an expresse
Commandment, no letter of the law to condemn them by an ex­presse sentence.
And this happens, when the crime is comprehen­ded under a general notion
without the instancing of particulars; for if you search over all the
Scripture you shall never finde incest named and marked with the black
character of death; and there are diveres sorts of uncleannesse, to which
Scripture therefore gives B no name, because she would have them have no
being; And it had been necessary that God should have described all
particulars and all kindes, if he had not given reason to man. For so it is
fit that a guide should point out every turning, if he be to teach a childe or
a fool to return under his fathers roof: But he that bids us a­void
intemperance for fear of a feaver, supposes you to be suffici­ently instructed
that you may avoid the plague; and when to look upon a woman with lust is
condemned, it will not be necessary to adde, you must not do more, when even
the least is forbidden; C and when to uncover the nakednesse of Noah brought
an univer­sal plague upon the posterity of Cham, it was not necessary that the
law-giver should say, you must not ascend to your fathers bed, or draw the
curtains from your sisters retirements. When the A­thenians forbad to
transports figs from Athens, there was no need to name the gardens of
Alcibiades, much lesse was it necessary to adde that Chabrias should send no
plants to Sparta. What so ever is comprised under the general notion, and
partakes of the common nature and the same iniquity, needs no special
prohibition, unlesse we think we can mock God and elude his holy precepts with
an D absurd trick of mistaken Logick. I am sure that will not save us
harmlesse from a thunderbolt.

2\. Men sin without an expresse prohibition when they com­mit a thing that is
like a forbidden evil. And when Saint Paul had reckoned many works of the
flesh, he addes [and such like.] all that have the same unreasonablenesse &
carna [...]ty. For thus, poligamy is unlawful; for if it be not lawful for a
Christian to put away his wife and marry another (unlesse for adultery) much
lesse may he keep a first and take a second, when the first is not put away;
If a Christi­an may not be drunk with wine, neither may he be drunk with E
passion; if he may not kill his neighbour, neither then must he tempt him to
sin; for that destroyes him more: if he may not wound him, then he may not
perswade him to intemperance, and a drunken feaver; if it be not lawful to
cozen a man, much lesse is it permitted that he make a man a fool, and a
beast, and expo­sed to every mans abuse and to all ready evils. And yet men
are [[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=108) A
taught to start at the one half of these, and make no conscience of the other
half; whereof some have a greater basenesse then the other that are named, and
all have the same unreasonable­nesse.

3\. A man is guilty, even when no law names his action, if he does any thing
that is a cause or an effect, a part or unhandsome ad­junct of a forbidden
instance; he that forbad all intemperance, is as much displeased with the
infinite of foolish talk that happens at such meetings, as he is at the
spoiling of the drink and the destroy­ing the health. If God cannot endure
wantonnesse, how can he B suffer lascivious dressings, tempting circumstances,
wanton eyes, high diet? if idlenesse be a sin, then al immoderate mispending
of our time, all long and tedious games, all absurd contrivances how to throw
away a precious hour and a day of salvation also, are against God and against
religion. He that is commanded to be charitable it is also intended he should
not spend his money vainely, but be a good husband and provident that he may
be able to give to the poor, as he would be to purchase a Lordship, or pay his
daugh­ters portion: and upon this stock it is that Christian religion forbids
jeering, and immoderate laughter and reckon jestings amongst the C things that
are unseemly. This also would be considered.

4\. Besides the expresse laws of our religion, there is an universal line and
limit to our passions and designes, which is called the a­nology of
Christianity; that is, the proportion of its sanctity and strictnesse of its
holy precepts. This is not forbidden, but does this become you? Is it decent
to see a Christian live in plenty and ease and heap up mony and never to
partake of Christs passions, there is no law against a Judge, his being a
dresser of gardens or a gatherer of Sycamore fruits, but it becomes him not,
and deserves a reproof. If I do exact justice to my neighbour and cause him to
D be punished legally for all the evils he makes me suffer, I have not broken
a fragment from the stony tables of the law: but this is against the analogy
of our religion; It does not become a Disciple of so gentle a master to take
all advantages that he can. Christ, that quitted all the glories that were
essential to him, and that grew up in his nature when he lodged in his Fathers
bosom, Christ that suffered all the evils due for the sins of mankinde,
himself remain­ing most innocent, Christ, that promised persecution, injuries
and affronts as part of our present portion, and gave them to his Disci­ples
as a legacy, and gave us his spirit to enable us to suffer inju­ries; E and
made that the parts of suffering evils should be the mat­ter of three or four
Christian graces, of patience of fortitude of longa­nimity and perseverance;
he that of eight beatitudes made that five of them should be instanced in the
matter of humiliation and suf­fering temporal inconvenience, that blessed
Master was certainly desirous that his Disciples should take their crowns from
the crosse, [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=109) not from the
evennesse and felicities of the world; He intended A we should give something,
and suffer more things, and forgive all things, all injuries whatsoever; and
though together with this may consist our securing a just interest; yet in
very many circum­stances we shall be put to consider how far it becomes us, to
quit something of that, to pursue peace; and when we have secured the letter
of the law, that we also look to its analogy; when we do what we are striectly
bound to, then also we must consider what becomes us, who are disciples of
such a Master, who are in­structed with such principles, charmed with so
severe precepts and invited with the certainty of infinite rewards. Now
although this B discourse may seem new and strange, and very severe, yet it is
infinitely reasonable, because Christianity is a law of love, and vo­luntary
services; it can in no sense be confined with laws and strict measures; well
may the Ocean receive its limits, and the whole capacity of fire be glutted,
and the grave have his belly so full, that it shal cast up al its bowels and
disgorge the continual meal of so many thousand years; but love can never have
a limit; and it is indeed to be swallowed up but nothing can fill it but God,
who hath no bound. Christianity is a law for sons, not for servants; and God
that gives C his grace without measure, and rewards without end, and acts of
favour beyond our askings, and provides for us beyond our needs, and gives us
counsels beyond commandments, intends not to be li­mited out by the just
evennesses and stricken measures of the words of a commandment. Give to God
full measure, shaken together, pres­sed down, heaped up, and running over; for
God does so to us; and when we have done so to him, we are infinitely short of
the least measure of what God does for us; we are still unprofitable servants.
And therefore as the breaking any of the laws of Christianity provoks God to
anger, so the prevaricating in the D analogy of Christianity stirres him up to
jealousie: He hath rea­son to suspect our hearts are not right with him, when
we are so reserved in the matter and measures of our services: and if we will
give God but just what he calls for by expresse mandate, it is just in him to
require all of that at our hands without any a­batement & then we are sure to
miscarry. And let us remember that when God said he was a jealous God he
expressed the meaning of it to be, he did punish to the third and fourth
generation. Jelousie is like the rage of a man: but if it be also like the
anger of God, it is insupportable and will crush us into the ruines of our E
grave.

But because these things are not frequently considered, there are very many
sins committed against religion, which because the commandment hath not marked
men, refuse to mark, and think God requires no more. I am entred into a sea of
matter, which I must not now prosecute; but I shall onely note this to you
that it is [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=109) A but
reasonable, we should take accounts of our lives, by the propor­tions as well
as by the expresse rules, of our religion; because in hu­mane and civil
actions all the nations of the world use so to call their subjects to account.
For that which in the accounts of men is called reputation and publick
honesty, is the same which in religion we call analogy and proportion; in both
cases there being some things, which are besides the notices of laws, and yet
are the most certain consignations of an excellent vertue. He is a base person
that does any thing against publick honesty and yet no man can be punished if
he marries a wife the next day after his first wives funeral: and so B he that
prevaricates the proportions and excellent reasons of Christi­anity, is a
person without zeal, and without love: and unlesse care be taken of him he
will quickly be without religion. But yet these I say are a sort of persons
which are to be used with gentlenesse, and treated with compassion; for no man
must be handled rough­ly to force him to do a kindnesse: and coercion of laws
and seve­rity of Judges, serjeants and executioners are against offenders of
commandments; But the way to cure such persons is the easiest and gentellest
remedy of all others. They are to be instructed in all the parts of duty, and
invited forward by the consideration C of the great rewards which are laid up
for all the sons of God, who serve him without constraint, without measures
and allayes, even as fire burns, and as the roses grow, even as much as they
can, and to all the extent of their natural and artificial capacities For it
is a thing fit for our compassion, to see men fettered in the iron bands of
laws and yet to break the golden chains of love but all those instruments
which are proper to enkindle the love of God and to turn fear into charity are
the proper instances of that compassion which is to be used towards these men.

2\. The next sort of those who are in the state of sin, and yet to D be
handled gently and with compassion are those who entertain themselves with the
beginnings and little entrances of sin, which as they are to be more pitied
because they often come by reason of inadvertancy, and an unavoidable
weaknesse in many degrees, so they are more to be taken care of, because they
are underval­lued & undiscernably run into inconvenience; when we see a childe
strike a servant rudely, or jeere a silly person, or wittily cheat his play-
fellow, or talk words light as the skirt of a summer garment, we laugh and are
delighted with the wit and confidence of the boy; E and incourage such hopeful
beginnings; and in the mean time we consider not that from these beginnings he
shall grow up till he become a Tyrant, an oppressor, a Goat and a Traytor.
Nemo simul malus fit & malus esse cernitur; sicut nec scorpijs tum
innas­cuntur stimuli cum pungunt No man is discerned to be vitious so soon as
he is so, and vices have their infancy and their childe-hood and it cannot be
expected that in a childs age should be the vice [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=110) of a man; that
were monstrous as if he wore a beard in his cradle; A and we do not believe
that a serpents sting does just then grow when he stricks us in a vital part:
The venome and the little spear was there, when it first began to creep from
his little shell: And little boldnesses and looser words and wranglings for
nuts, and lying for trifles, are of the same proportion to the malice of a
childe, as impudence and duels and injurious law-suits, and false witnesse in
judgement & perjuries are in men. And the case is the same when men enter upon
a new stock of any sin; the vice is at first apt to be put out of countenance
and a little thing discourages it; and it a­muses the spirit with words, and
phantastick images, and cheape B instances of sin; and men think themselves
safe because they are as yet safe from laws, and the sin does not as yet out
cry the health­ful noise of Christs loud cryings and intercession with his
Father, nor call for thunder or an amazing judgement; but according to the old
saying the thornes of Dauphine will never fetch blood if they do not scratch
the first day: & we shal finde that the little undecencies and riflings of our
souls, the first openings and disparkings of our vertue differ onely from the
state of perdition, as infancy does from old age, as sicknesse from death; It
is the entrance into those regi­ons whether whosoever passes finally, shall
lie down and groan with C an eternal sorrow. Now in this case it may happen
that a compassion may ruine a man, if it be the pity of an indiscreet mother,
and nurse the sin from its weaknesse to the strength of habit and impudence;
The compassion that is to be used to such persons is the com­passion of a
Phisitian or a severe Tutor; chastise thy infant-sinne by discipline, and acts
of vertue; and never begin that way from whence you must return with some
trouble, and much shame, or else if you proceed, you finish your eternal
ruine.

He that means to be temperate and avoid the crime and disho­nour D of being a
drunkard must not love to partake of the songs or to bear a part in the
foolish scenes of laughter which destract wis­dome and fright her from the
company; And Lavina that was chaster then the elder Sabines, and severer then
her Philosophical guardian, was wel instructed in the great lines of honour
and cold ju­stice to her husband; but when she gave way to the wanton
ointments & looser circumstances of the Baie and bathed often in Avernus, and
from thence hurried to the companies and dressings of Lucrinus, she quenched
her honour, and gave her vertue and her body as a spoil to the follies and
intemperance of a young gentle-man. For E so have I seen the little purles of
a spring sweat thorow the bot­tom of a bank and intenerate the stubborn
pavement till it hath made it fit for the impression of a childes foot, and it
was despised like the descending pearls of a misty morning, till it had opened
its way, and made a stream large enough to carry away the ruines of [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=110) A the
undermined strand, and to invade the neighbouring gardens: but then the
despised drops were grown into an artificial river and an intolerable
mischief: so are the first entrances of sin, stop'd with the antidotes of a
hearty prayer, and checked into sobriety, by the eye of a Reverend man, or the
counsells of a single sermon: But when such beginnings are neglected and our
religion hath not in it so much Philosophy as to think any thing evil as long
as we can en­dure it, they grow up to ulcers and pestilential evils; they
destroy the soul by their aboad, who at their first entry might have been
killed with the pressure of a little finger.

B [...].

Those men are in a condition in which they may if they please pity themselves;
keep their green wounds from festering and un­cleanlinesse and it will heal
alone, non procul absunt, they are not far from the kingdom of Heaven, but
they are not within its portion; and let me say this, that although little
sins have not yet made our condition desperate but left it easily recoverable,
yet it is a condition that is quite out of Gods favour: although they are not
far ad­vanced in their progresse to ruine, yet they are not at all in the
state C of grace, and therefore though they are to be pitied and relieved
ac­cordingly, yet that supposes the incumbency of a present misery.

3\. There are some very much to be pitied and assisted because they are going
to hell and (as matters stand with them) they cannot,Seneca. or they think
they cannot avoid it. Quidam ad alienum dormiunt somnum ad alienum edunt
appetitum: amare & odisse (res omnium maximè liberas) jubentur. There are some
persons whose life is so wholly in dependance from others, that they sleep
when others please; they eat and drink according to their Masters appetite, or
intemperance: they are commanded to love or hate, and are not D left free in
the very Charter and priviledges of nature: Miserum est servire sub Dominis
parùm felicibus, for suppose the Prince or the Patron be vitious, suppose he
calls his servants to bathe their souls in the goblets of intemperance: if he
be also imperious (for such persons love not to be contradicted in their
vices) it is the losse of that mans fortune, not to lose his soul: and it is
the servants excuse and he esteems it also his glory, that he can tell a merry
tale, how his Master and himself did swim in drink, till they both talked like
fools, and then did lie down like beasts.

E —Facinus quos inquinat aequat. There is then no difference, but that the one
is the fairest bull and the master of the heard. And how many Tenents and
Relatives are known to have a servile conscience and to know no affirmation or
negation but such as shall serve their Land-lords interest? Alas the poor men
live by it, and they must beg their bread if ever they turn recreant, or shall
offer to be honest. There are some trades whose very foundations [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=111) is laid in the
vice of others; and in many others if a threed of de­ceit A do not quite run
thorow all their negotiations, they decay into the sorrows of beggery; and
therefore they will support their neighbours vice, that he may support their
trade: And what would you advise those men to do, to whom a false oath is
offered to their lips, and a dagger at their heart: their reason is surprized,
and their choice is seized upon, and all their consultation is arrested; and
if they did not prepare before hand, and stand armed with reli­gion, and
perfect resolutions, would not any man fall, and think that every good man
will say his case is pitiable. Although no tem­ptation is bigger then the
grace of God, yet many temptations are B greater then our strengths, and we do
not live at the rate of a mighty and a victorious grace.

Those persons which cause these vitious necessities upon their brethren will
lie low in hell; but the others will have but small comfort in feeling a
lesser damnation.

Of the same consideration it is, when ignorant people are Ca­techized into
false doctrine, and know nothing but such principles which weaken the nerves,
and enfeeble the joynts of holy living; they never heard of any other; those
that follow great and evil C examples; the people that are ingaged in the
publike sins of a kingdom wihch they understand not, and either must venture
to be undone upon the strength of their own little reasonings, and weak
discoursings, or else must go quâ itur, non quâ eundum est, there where the
popular misery hath made the way plain before their eyes, though it be uneven
and dangerous to their consciences. In these cases I am forced to reckon a
Catalogue of mischiefs; but it will be hard to cure any of them. Aristippus in
his dis­courses was a great flatterer of Dionysius of Sicily, and did own
doctrines which might give an easinesse to some vices, and knew D not how to
contradict the pleasures of his Prince; but seemed like a person disposed to
partake of them, that the example of a Phi­losopher, and the practise of a
King might do countenance to a shamefull life. But when Dionysius sent him two
women, slaves, fair, and young, he sent them back and shamed the easinesse of
his doctrine by the severity of his manners, he daring to be ver­tuous when he
was alone, though in the presence of him, whom he thought it necessary to
flatter, he had no boldnesse to own the vertue: So it is with too many; if
they be left alone, and that they stand unshaken with the eye of their
tempter, or the au­thority E of their Lord, they go whither their education or
their custome carries them: but it is not in some natures to deny the face of
a man, and the boldnesse of a sinner; and which is yet worse, it is not in
most mens interest to do it; these men are in a pitiable condition, and are to
be helped by the following rules.

1\. Let every man consider that he hath two relations to serve, [[Page
207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=111) A and he
stands between God and his Master, or his neerest relative: and in such cases
it comes to be disputed whether interest be pre­ferred; which of the persons
is to be displeased, God or my Master, God or my Prince, God or my Friend? If
we be servants of the man; remember also that I am a servant of God; adde to
this, that if my present service to the man be a slavery in me, and a ty­ranny
in him, yet Gods service is a noble freedom: And Apol­lonius said well. It was
for slaves to lie, and for free men to speak the truth. If you be freed by the
blood of the Son of God, then you are free indeed: and then consider how
dishonourable it is to lie, B to the displeasure of God, and onely to please
your fellow-ser­vant. The difference here is so great, that it might be
sufficient onely to consider the antithesis. Did the man make you what you
are? Did he pay his blood for you, to save you from death? Does he keep you
from sicknesse? True. You eat at his table; but they are of Gods provisions
that he and you feed of. Can your master free you from a fever, when you have
drunk your self into it? and re­store your innocence when you have forsworn
your self for his interest? Is the change reasonable? He gives you meat and
drink for which you do him service. But is not he a Tyrant, and an usur
[...]per, C an oppressor, and an extortioner, if he will force thee to give
thy soul for him? to sell thy soul for old-shoes, and broken bread? But when
thou art to make thy accounts of eternity, will it be taken for an answer, My
Patron, or my Governour, my Prince, or my Master, forced me to it? or if it
will not. Will he undertake a por [...]tion of thy flames? or if that may not
be, will it be in the midst of all thy torments, any ease to thy sorrows to
remember all the rewards and clothes, all the money, and civilities, all the
cheer­full looks, and familiarity, and fellowship of vices which in your life
time made your spirit so gay and easie? It will in the eternall D loads of
sorrow, adde a duplicate of groans and indignation, when it shall be remembred
for how base and trifling interest, and upon what weak principles we fell sick
and died eternally.

2\. The next advise to persons thus tempted is, that they would learn to
separate duty from mistaken interest; and let them be both served in their
just proportions, when we have learned to make a difference. A wife is bound
to her husband in all his just designes, and in all noble usages and Christian
comportments: But a wife is no more bound to pursue her husbands vitious
ha­treds, then to serve and promote his unlawfull and wandring loves: E It is
not alwayes a part of duty to think the same propositions, or to curse the
same persons, or to wish him successe in unjust de­signes: And yet the
sadnesse of it is, that a good woman is easily tempted to beleeve the cause to
be just, and when her affection hath forced her judgement, her judgement for
ever after shall carry the affection to all its erring and abused
determinations. A [[Page
208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=112) friend is
turned a flatterer if he does not know, that the limits of A friendship extend
no further then the pale and inclosures of reason and religion. No Master puts
it into his covenant that his servant shall be drunk with him, or give in
evidence in his Masters cause, according to his Masters scrolls: and therefore
it is besides and against the duty of a servant to sin by that authority; it
is as if he should set Mules to keep his sheep, or make his Dogs to carry
bur­dens▪ it is besides their nature and designe; and if any person falls
under so tyrannicall relation, let him consider how hard a Master he serves;
where the Devil gives the imployment, and shame is his entertainment, and sin
is his work, and hell is his wages. Take B therefore the counsel of the son of
Syrac.Ecclus. 4. 22. Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the
reverence of any man cause thee to fall.

3\. When passion mingles with duty, and is a necessary instru­ment of serving
God, let not that passion run its own course and passe on to liberty, and
thence to licence and dissolution: but let no more of it be entertained, then
will just do the work. For no zeal of duty will warrant a violent passion to
prevaricate a duty. I have seen some officers of Warre in passion and zeal of
their duty, have made no scruple to command a souldier with the dia­lect C of
cursing and accents of swearing, and pretended they could not else speak words
effective enough, and of sufficient authority; and a man may easily be
overtaken in the issues of his government; while his authority serves it still
with passion, if he be not curious in his measures, his passion will also
serve it self upon the autho­rity and over rule the Ruler.

4\. Let every such tempted person remember, that all evil comes from our
selves and not from others; and therefore all pretences and prejudices, all
commands and temptations, all opinions and ne­cessities, are but instances of
our weaknesse, and arguments of our D folly: For unlesse we listed, no man can
make us drink beyond our measures: And if I tell a lie for my Masters or my
friends ad­vantage, it is because I prefer a little end of money, or flattery
be­fore my honour and my innocence. They are huge follies which go up and down
in the mouthes and heads of men. [He that knows not how to dissemble, knows
not how to reigne. [He that will not do as his company does, must go out of
the world, and quit all soci­ety of men: We create necessities of our own, and
then think we have reason to serve their importunity. Non ego sum ambitiosus,
sed nemo aliter Romae potest vivere, non ego sumptuosus, sed urbs E ipsa
magnas impensas exigit. Non est meum vitium quod iracundus sum, quod nondum
constitui certum vitae genus adolescentia haec facit. The place we live in
makes us expensive, the state of life I have chosen renders me ambitious, my
age makes me angry or lustfull, proud or peevish. These are nothing else but
resolutions never to mend as long as we can have excuse for our follies, and
untill we [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=112) A can cozen
our selves no more. There is no such thing as a necessity for a Prince to
dissemble, or for a servant to lie, or for a friend to flatter, for a civil
person and a sociable, to be drunk: we cozen our selves with thinking the
fault is so much derivative from others, till the smart and the shame falls
upon our selves, and covers our heads with sorrow. And unlesse this gap be
stopped, and that we build our duty upon our own bottoms, as supported with
the grace of God, there is no vice but may finde a Patron; and no age or
re­lation, or state of life, but will be an engagement to sin: And we shall
think it necessary to be lustfull in our youth, and revengefull B in our
manhood, and covetous in our old age: and we shall perceive that every state
of men, and every trade and profession, lives upon the vices of others, or
upon their miseries; and therefore they will think it necessary to promote, or
to wish it. If men were tempe­rate, Physitians would be poor: and unlesse some
Princes were am­bitious, or others injurious, there would be no imployment for
souldiers. The Vintners retail supports the Merchants trade, and it is a vice
that supports the Vintners retail; and if all men were wise and sober persons,
we should have fewer beggers, and fewer rich; and if our Law-givers should
imitate Demades of Athens, C who condemned a man that lived by selling things
belonging to fu­neralls, as supposing he could not choose but wish the death
of men, by whose dying he got his living, we should finde most men ac­counted
criminalls, because vice is so involved in the affairs of the world, that it
is made the support of many trades and the businesse of great multitudes of
men: Certainly from hence it is that iniqui­ty does so much abound; and
unlesse we state our questions right, and perceive the evil to be designed
onely from our selves, and that no such pretence shall keep off the punishment
[...] the shame from our selves, we shall fall into a state which is onely
capable of com­passion D because it is irrecoverable: and then we shall be
infinitely miserable, when we can onely receive an u [...]lesse and
ineffective pi­ty. Whatsoever is necessary cannot be avoided: He therefore
that shall say, he cannot avoid his sin, is out of the mercies of this Text:
they who are appointed Guides, & Physitians of souls cannot to any purpose do
their offices of pity. It is necessary that we serve God, and do our duty, and
secure the interest of our souls, and be as care­full to preserve our
relations to God, as to our friend, or Prince. But, if it can be necessary for
any man, in any condition to sin, it is E also necessary for that man to
perish.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=113)

## 17\. Sermon. XVII.SER. XVII. A The severall states and degrees of Sinners,B
WITH The manner how they are to be treated.  
Part II.C

4\. THe last sort of them that sin, and yet are to be treated with compassion,
is of them that interrupt the course of an honest life with single acts of
sin, stepping aside and starting like a broken bowe; whose resolution stands
fair, and their hearts are towards God, and they sojourn in religion, or
ra­ther, dwell there; but that like evil husbands they go abroad, and enter
into places of dishonour and unthriftinesse. Such as these, all stories
remember with a sad character; and every narrative D concerning David which
would end in honour and fair report, is sullied with the remembrances of
Bathsheba: and the Holy Ghost hath called him a man after Gods own heart, save
in the matter of Vriah; there indeed he was a man after his own heart; even
then when his reason was stolne from him by passion, and his religion was
sullied by the beauties of a fair woman. I wish we lived in an age in which
the people were to be treated with, concerning renouncing the single actions
of sin, and the seldome interruptions of piety: Men are taught to say, that
every man sins in every acti­on he does; and this is one of the doctrines, for
the beleeving of E which he shall be accounted a good man; and upon this
ground it is easie for men to allow themselves some sins, when in all cases,
and in every action it is unavoidable. I shall say nothing of the 1 Question,
save that the Scripture reckons otherwise, * and in the 2 accounts of Davids
life reckon but one great sin, * and in Zachary and Elizabeth gave a testimony
of an unblameable conversation; [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=113) A* and
Hezekiah did not make his confession when he prayed to God in his sicknesse
and said he had walked uprightly before God, * and 3 therefore Saint Paul
after his conversion designed and laboured 4 hard, & therefore certainly with
hopes to accomplish it, that he might keep his conscience void of offence both
towards God and towards man, * and one of Christs great purposes is to present
his whole 5 Church pure and spotlesse to the throne of grace, and * Saint John
the 6 Baptist offended none but Herod, * and no pious Christian brought 7 a
bill of accusation against the holy Virgin Mother; * certain it is,8 that God
hath given us precepts of such a holinesse and such a B purity, such a
meeknesse and such humility as hath no pattern but Christ, no precedent but
the purities of God: and therefore it is intended we should live with a life
whose actions are not check­er'd with white and black, half sin and half
vertue: Gods sheep are not like Jacobs flock streaked and spotted: it is an
intire ho­linesse that God requires, and will not endure to have a holy course
interrupted by the dishonour of a base and ignoble action. I do not mean that
a mans life can be as pure as the Sun or the rayes of celestial Jerusalem; but
like the Moon in which there are spots; C but they are no deformity; a
lessening onely and an abatement of light, no cloud to hinder and draw a vail
before its face; but sometimes it is not so serene and bright as at other
times. Every man hath his indiscretions and infirmities, his arrests and
sudden incursions, his neighbourhoods and semblances of sin, his little
vidences to reason and peevish melancholy▪ and humorous Phantastick
discourses; unaptnesses to a d [...]out prayer, his fond­nesses to judge
favourably in his own cases▪ little deceptions, and voluntary and involuntary
cousena [...]es, ignorances and inadverten­cies, carelesse hours, and
unwatchful  [...]easons, but no good man ever D commits one act of adultery;
no godly man wil at any time be drunk or if he be, he ceases to be a godly
man, and is run into the con­fines of death, and is sick at he [...]t, and may
die of the sicknesse, die eternally. This happens more frequently in persons
of an infant piety, when the vertue is not corroborated by a long abode and a
confirmed resolution, and an usual victory and a triumphant grace, and the
longer we are accustomed to piety the more in­frequent will be the little
breaches of folly, and a returning sin. But as the needle of a compasse, when
it is directed to its be­loved star, at the first addresses waves on either
side, and seems E indifferent in his courtship of the rising or declining sun,
and when it seems first determined to the North, stands a while trembling, as
if it suffered inconvenience in the first fruition of its desires and stands
not still in a full enjoyment till after, first, a great variety of motion,
and then an undisturbed posture: so is the piety, and so is the conversion of
a man; wrought by degrees and several steps of imperfection; and at first our
choices are wavering, con­vinced [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=114) by the grace
of God and yet not perswaded, and then per­swaded A but not resolved, and then
resolved but deferring to be­gin, and then beginning, but (as all beginnings
are) in weak­nesse and uncertainty, and we flie out often into huge
indiscretions and look back to Sodom and long to return to Egypt; and when the
storm is quite over we finde little bublings and unevennesses upon the face of
the waters, we often weaken our own purposes by the returns of sin, and we do
not call our selves conquerours till by the long possession of vertues it is a
strange and unusual, and therefore an uneasy and unpleasant thing to act a
crime. When Polemon of Athens by chance coming into the schools of Xeno­crates
B was reformed upon the hearing of that one lecture, some wise men gave this
censure of him; peregrinatus est hujus animus in nequitiâ, non habitavit, his
minde wandred in wickednesse and travelled in it, but never dwelt there; the
same is the case of some men; they make inroads into the enemies countrey, not
like ene­mies to spoil, but like Dinah to be satisfied with the stranger
beau­ties of the land, till their vertues are defloured and they enter in­to
tragedies, and are possessed by death, and intolerable sorrows; but because
this is like the fate of Jacobs daughter and happens not by designe, but
folly, not by malice, but surprise, not by the C strength of will, but by the
weaknesse of grace, and yet car­ries a man to the same place whether a great
vice usually does, it is hugely pitiable, and the persons are to be treated
with compassion and to be assisted by the following considerations and
exercises.

First let us consider, that for a good man to be overtake in a single crime is
the greatest dishonour and unthriftinesse in the whole world. As a fly in a
box of ointment, so is a little folly to him who is accounted wise, said the
Son of Sirach: No man chides a fool for his weaknesses, or scorns a childe for
playing with flies and pre­ferring D the present appetite, before all the
possibilities of to mor­rows event: But men wondered when they saw Socrates
ride upon a cane; and when Solomon laid his wisdom at the foot of Pharaohs
daughter, and changed his glory for the interest of wan­ton sleep, he became
the discourse of heaven and earth: and men think themselves abused, and their
expectation cousened when they see a wise man do the actions of a fool, and a
good man seized up­on by the dishonours of a crime. But the losse of his
reputation is the least of his evil. It is the greatest improvidence in the
world to let a healthful constitution be destroyed in the surfet of one
night.E For although, when a man by the grace of God and a long endea­vour
hath obtained the habit of Christian graces, every single sin does not spoil
the habit of vertue, because that cannot be lost but as it was gotten, that
is, by parts, and succession, yet eve­ry crime interrupts the acceptation of
the grace, and makes the man [[Page
213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=114) A to enter
into the state of enmity, and displeasure with God. The habit is onely
lessened naturally, but the value of it is wholly taken away: and in this
sence is that of Josephus  [...] which Saint James well renders.2 Chap. 11. He
that keeps the whole law and offends in one point is guilty of all; that is,
if he prevaricates in any commandment, the transgression of which by the law
was capital, shall as certainly die as if he broke the whole law; and the same
is the case of those single actions which the school calls deadly sins, that
is, actions of choice in any sin that hath a name, and makes a Kinde & hath a
distinct matter. And sins B once pardoned return again to al the purposes of
mischief. If we by a new sin forfeit Gods former loving kindnesse. When the
righteous man turneth from his righteousnesse and commiteth iniquity, Ezek.
18. 24. all his righteousnesse that he hath done shall not be remembred, in
the tres­passe that he hath trespassed, and in the sin that he hath sinned, in
them shall he die. Now then consider how great a fool he is who when he hath
with much labour & by suffering violence contradict­ed his first desires; when
his spirit hath been in agony and care, and with much uneasinesse hath denied
to please the lower man, C when with many prayers and groans and innumerable
sighs and strong cryings to God with sharp sufferances and a long severity, he
hath obtained of God to begin his pardon and restitution, and that he is in
some hopes to return to Gods favour, and that he shall become an heire of
heaven▪ when some of his amazing fears and distracting cares begin to be taken
off, when he begins to think, that now it is not certain he shall perish in a
sad eternity, but he hopes to be saved and he considers how excellent a
con­dition that is, he hopes when he dies to go to God, and that he shall
never enter into the possession of Devils; and this state, which D is but the
twilight of a glorious felicity, he hath obtained with great labour and much
care, and infinite danger; that this man should throw all this structure down,
and then when he is ready to reap the fruits of his labours, by one indiscreet
action, to set fire upon his corn fields, and destroy all his dearly earned
hopes, for the madnesse and loose wandrings of an hour; This man is an
indiscreet gamester; who doubles his stake as he thrives, and at one throw is
dispossessed of all the prosperities of a luckie hand.

E They that are poor (as Plutarch observes) are carelesse of lit­tle things,
because by saving them, they think no great moments can accrue to their
estates, and they despairing to be rich, think such frugality impertinent: But
they that feele their banks swell, and are within the possibilities of wealth,
think it useful if they reserve the smaller minuts of expence, knowing that
every thing will adde to their heap; but then after long sparing, in one night
to throw away the wealth of a long purchase, is an imprudence [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=115) becoming none
but such persons who are to be kept under Tu­tors A and Guardians, and such as
are to be chastised by their servants, and to be punished by them whom they
clothe and feed.

— [...]

[...].

Hom. Ili.  [...]

These men sowe much, and gather little, stay long and return empty, and after
a long voyage they are dashed in pieces when their vessels are laden with the
spoils of provinces. Every B deadly sin destroyes the rewards of a seven years
piety; I adde to this, that God is more impatient at a sin committed by his
servants then at many by persons that are his enemies; and an uncivil an­swer
from a son to a Father, from an obliged person to a bene­factor is a greater
undecency, then if an enemy should storm his house or revile him to his head.
Augustus Caesar taxed all the world and God took no publick notices of it; but
when David taxed and numbered a petty province it was not to be expiated
without a plague; because such persons, besides the direct sin,C adde the
circumstance of ingratitude to God, who hath redeemed them from their vain
conversation and from death, and from hell, and consigned them to the
inheritance of sons and given them his grace and his spirit, and many periods
of comfort▪ and a certain hope and visible earnests of immortality; nothing is
baser then that such a person against his reason, against his interest,
against his God, against so many obligations, against his custome, against his
very habits and acquired inclinations should do an action.

Quam nisi Seductis nequeas committere Divis D

Which a man must for ever be ashamed of, and like Adam must run from God
himself to do it, and depart from the state in which he had placed all his
hopes, and to which he had designed all his labours. The consideration is
effective enough, if we sum up the particulars; for he that hath lived well
and then falls into a deli­berate sin, is infinitely dishonoured, is most
imprudent, most un­safe, and most unthankful.

2\. Let persons tempted to the single instances of sin in the midst E of a
laudable life, be very careful that they suffer not themselves to be drawn
aside by the eminency of great examples. For some think drunkennesse hath a
little honesty derived unto it by the exam­ples of Noah, and Adultery is not
so scandalous and intolerably dis­honorable, since Bathsheba bathed, and David
was defiled and [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=115) A men think a
flight is no cowardise, if a General turns his head and runs.

Pompeio fugiente timent

Well might all the gowned Romans fear when Pompey fled, and who is there that
can hope to be more righteous then David, or stronger then Samson, or have
lesse hypocrisy then Saint Pe­ter, or be more temperate then Noah? These great
examples bear men of weak discourses and weaker resolutions from the severity
B of vertues. But as Diagoras to them that shewed to him the votive garments
of those that had escaped shipwrack upon their prayers and vows to Neptune
answered, that they kept no account of those that prayed and vowed, and yet
were drowned: So do these men keep catalogues of those few persons who broke
the third of a fair life in sunder with the violence of a great crime, and by
the grace of God recovered and repented and lived; But they consider not
concerning those infinite numbers of men, who died in their first fit of
sicknesse, who after a fair voyage have thrown themselves o­ver C boord, and
perished in a sudden wildnesse, One said well, Si quid Socrates, aut
Aristippus contra morem et consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne arbitretur
licere. Magnis enim illi & divinis bonis hanc licenti­am assequebantur. If
Socrates did any unusual thing, it is not for thee who art of an ordinary
vertue to assume the same licence; For he by a divine and excellent life hath
obtained leave or pardon re­spectively, for what thou must never hope for,
till thou hast arri­ved to the same glories. First be as devout as David, as
good a Christi­an as Saint Peter, and then thou wilt not dare with designe to
act that, which they fell into by surprize; and if thou doest fall as D they
did, by that time thou hast also repented like them, it may be said concerning
thee, that thou dist fall and break thy bones, but God did heal thee and
pardon thee, Remember that all the damned soules shall bear an eternity of
torments for the pleasures of a short sinfulnesse; but for a single trasient
action, to die for ever, is an intolerable exchange and the effect of so great
a folly, that whosoever falls into and then considers it, it will make him mad
and distracted for ever.

3\. Remember, that since no man can please God or bE par­takers of any
promises, or reap the reward of any actions in the E returnes of eternity,
unlesse he performs to God an intir duty, according to the capacities of a man
so taught, and so tempted, and so assisted, such a person must be curious that
he be not cozened with the duties and performances of any one relation, 1.
Some there are that think all our religion consists in prayers and pub­lick or
private offices of devotion, and not in moral actions or entercourses of
justice and temperance, of kindnesse and friendships [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=116) of sincerity
and liberality, of chastity and humility, of repen­tance A and obedience:
indeed no humour is so easie to be coun­terfeited as devotion, and yet no
hypocrisy is more common a­mong men, nor any so uselesse as to God; for it
being an addresse to him alone who knows the heart and all the secret
purposes, it can do no service in order to heaven, so long as it is without
the power of Godlinesse, and the energy and vivacity of a holy life. God will
not suffer us to commute a duty, because all is his due; and religion shall
not pay for the want of temperance: if the de­voutest Hermit be proud, or he
that fasts thrice in the week be un­charitable once; or he that gives much to
the poor, gives also too B much liberty to himself, he hath planted a fair
garden, and invi­ted a wilde boar to refresh himself under the shade of the
fruit trees, and his guest being something rude hath disordered his para­dise,
and made it become a wildernesse, 2. Others there are that judge themselves by
the censures that Kings and Princes give con­cerning them, or as they are
spoken of by their betters, and so make false judgements concerning their
condition. For our bet­ters to whom we show our best parts, to whom we speak
with caution and consider what we represent, they see our arts and our
dressings, but nothing of our nature and deformities; Trust not C their
censures concerning thee, but to thy own opinion of thy self, whom thou
knowest in thy retirements and natural peevishnesse and unhandsome
inclinations, and secret basenesse, 3. Some men have been admired abroad, in
whom the wife and the servant never saw any thing excellent: a rare judge and
a good common-wealths man in the streets, and publick meetings, and a just man
to his neigh­bour, and charitable to the poor; for in all these places the man
is ob­served and kept in awe by the Sun, by light and by voices; But this man
is a Tyrant at home, an unkinde husband & ill Father, an impe­rious Master,Hic
ubi dissuetae sylvis in carcere clausae and such men are like prophets in
their own countreys,D not honoured at home and can never be honoured by God,
who will not endure that many vertues should excuse a few vices,Mansue vere
serae, & vul­tus posuêre mi­naces Or that any of his servants shall take
pensions of the De­vil, and in the profession of his service do his enemy
single ad­vantages.Atque homi­nem didicere pati si torrida parvus

4\. He that hath past many stages of a good life to prevent his be­ing tempted
to a single sin must be very careful that he never enter­tain his spirit with
the remembrances of his past sin,Venit in ora cruor, redeunt rabies (que),
fu­ror (que). nor amuse it with the phantastick apprehensions of the present.
When the Israelites fancied the sapidnesse and relish of the flesh pots they
longed to E tast and to return.

So when a Libian Tiger drawn from his wilder forragings is shut up and taught
to eat civil meat and suffer the authority of a man, he sits down tamely in
his prison and payes to his keeper fear and reverence for his meat: But if he
chance to come again [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=116) A and taste a
draught of warm blood, he presently leaps into his na­turall cruelty.

Admonitae tument gustato sanguine fauces,

Feruet & à trepido vix abstinet ira Magistro.

He scarce abstains from eating those hands that brought him di­scipline and
food: so is the nature of a man made tame and gentle by the grace of God, and
reduced to reason, and kept in awe by re­ligion and lawes and by an awfull
vertue is taught to forget those alluring and sottish relishes of sin: but if
he diverts from his path, and snatches handfuls from the wanton vineyards, and
remembers B the lasciviousnesse of his unwholesome food that pleased his
child­ish palate, then he grows sick again, and hungry after unwhole­some
diet, and longs for the apples of Sodom. A man must walk thorow the world
without eyes, or ears, fancy, or appetite, but such as are created and
sanctified by the grace of God; and being once made a new man, he must serve
all the needs of nature by the appetites and faculties of grace: nature must
be wholly a servant, and we must so look towards the deliciousnesse of our
religion, and the rayishments of heaven, that our memory must be for ever
uselesse to the affairs and perceptions of sin: we cannot stand, wee C cannot
live, unlesse we be curious and watchfull in this particular.

By these and all other arts of the Spirit, if we stand upon our guard, never
indulging to our selves one sin, because it is but o [...]e; as knowing that
one sin brought in death upon all the world, and one sin brought slavery upon
the posterity of Cham: and alwa [...]es fearing lest death surprize us in that
one sin; we shall by the gr [...]e of God, either not need, or else easily
perceive the effects and bles­sings of that compassion which God reserves in
the secrets of his mercy, for such persons whom his grace hath ordained and
dis­posed with excellent dispositions unto life eternall.

D These are the sorts of men which are to be used with compassi­on; concerning
whom we are to make a difference, making a dif­ference] so sayes the Text, and
it is of high concernment that we should do so, that we may relieve the
infirmities of the men, and relieve their sicknesses, and transcribe the copy
of the Di [...]ne mer­cy, who loves not to quench the smoaking flax, nor break
[...] bruised reed. For although all sins are against Gods Commandements,
di­rectly, or by certain consequents, by line, or by analogy, yet they are not
all of the same tincture and mortality.

E Nec vincit ratio tantundem ut peccet idemque,

Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti

Vt qui nocturnus Diuûm sacra legerit.

He that robs a garden of Coleworts, and carries away an arm­full of Spinage,
does not deserve hell as he that steals the Chalice from the Church, or
betrayes a Prince; and therefore men are di­stinguished accordingly:

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=117)

Est inter Tanaim quiddam socerumque Viselli.A

The Poet that Sejanus condemned for dishonouring the memory of Agamemnon, was
not an equall criminall with Cataline, or Grac­chus: and Simon Magus and the
Nicolaitans committed crimes which God hated, more then the complying of S.
Barnabas, or the dissimulation of S. Peter; and therefore God does treat these
persons severally: Some of these are restrained with a fit of sicknesse, some
with a great losse; and in these there are degrees, and some ar­rive at death.
And in this manner God scourged the Corinthians for their irreverent and
disorderly receiving the Holy Sacrament.B For although even the least of the
sins that I have discoursed of, will lead to death eternall, if their course
be not interrupted, and the disorder chastised, yet because we do not stop
their progresse instantly, God many times does, and visits us with
proportionable judgements, and so not onely checks the rivulet from swelling
in­to rivers and a vastnesse, but plainly tells us, that although smaller
crimes shall not be punished with equall severity as the greatest, yet even in
hell there are eternal rods as well as eternal scorpions; and the smallest
crime that we act with an infant-malice, and man­ly C deliberation, shall be
revenged with the lesser stroaks of wrath; but yet with the infliction of a
sad eternity. But then that we also should make a difference, is a precept
concerning Church discipline, and therefore not here proper to be considered,
but onely as it may concern our own particulars in the actions of repentance;
and our brethren in internal correction:

—assit

Regula quae poenas peccatis irroget aequas,

Nec seuticà dignum horribili sectere flagello.D

Let us be sure that we neglect no sin, but repent for every one, and judge our
selves for every one, according to the proportion of the malice, or the
scandall, or the danger. And although in this there is no fear that we would
be excessive; yet when we are to reprove a brother we are sharp enough, and
either by pride, or by animosity, by the itch of government, or the
indignation of an angry minde, we run beyond the gentlenesse of a Christian
Moni­tor; we must remember that by Christs law some are to be admo­nished
privately, some to be shamed and corrected publikely, and beyond these, there
is an abscission, or a cutting off from the com­munion E of faithfull people,
A delivering over to Sathan. And to this purpose is that old reading of the
words of my Text, which is still in some Copies,  [...]; Reprove them sharply,
when they are convinced, or separate by sentence. But be­cause this also is a
designe of mercy, acted with an instance of di­scipline, it is a punishment of
the flesh, that the soul may be saved [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=117) A in the day
of the Lord, it means the same with the usuall reading, and with the last
words of the Text, and teaches us our usage to­wards the worst of recoverable
sinners.

Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.] Some sins there are,
which in their own nature are damnable, and some are such as will certainly
bring a man to damnation; the first are cura­ble, but with much danger; the
second are desperate and irrecover­able; when a man is violently tempted, and
allured with an ob­ject that is proportionable and pleasant to his vigorous
appetite, and his unabated, unmortified nature, this man falls into death, B
but yet we pity him as we pity a thief that robs for his necessity: this man
did not tempt himself, but his spirit suffers violence, and his reason is
invaded, and his infirmities are mighty, and his aids not yet prevailing: But
when this single temptation hath prevai­led for a single instance, and leaves
a relish upon the palate, and this produces another, and that also is
fruitfull and swels into a family and kinred of sin, that is, it grows first
into approbation then to a clear assent, and an untroubled conscience, thence
into frequency, from thence unto a custome, and easinesse, and a habit, this
man is fallen into the fire. There are also some single C acts of so great a
malice that they must suppose a man habitually sinfull before he could arrive
at that height of wickednesse. No man begins his sinfull course with killing
of his Father or his Prince; and Simon Magus had preambulatory impieties; he
was covetous and ambitious, long before he offered to buy the Holy Ghost.

Nemo repente fuit turpissimus—and although such actions may have in them the
malice and the mischief, the disorder and the wrong, the principle and the
permanent ef­fect, of a habit and a long course of sin, yet because they never
or D very seldom go alone, but after the praedisposition of other h
[...]sher­ing crimes, we shall not amisse comprise them under the name of
habituall sins. For such they are, either formally or equivalently: and if any
man hath fallen into a sinfull habit, into a course and order of sinning, his
case is little lesser then desperate; but that little hope that is remanent
hath its degree according to the infan­cy or the growth of the habit. 1. For
all sins lesse then habitual, it is certain, a pardon is ready to penitent
persons: that is, to all that sin in ignorance, or in infirmity, by surprize,
or inadvertency, in smaller instances, or infrequent returns, with involuntary
acti­ons, E or imperfect resolutions,  [...], said Clemens in his Epistles:
Lift up your hands to Almighty God, and pray him to be mercifull to you in all
things when you sin unwillingly; that is, in which you sin with an imperfect
choice: for no man sins against his will directly, but when his understanding
is abused by an in­evitable, [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=118) or an
intolerable weaknesse, our wills follow their blind A guide, and are not the
perfect mistresses of their own actions, and therefore leave a way and
easinesse to repent, and be ashamed of it; and therefore a possibility and
readinesse for pardon. And these are the sins that we are taught to pray to
God that he would pardon, as he gives us our bread, that is, every day. For in
many things we offend all, said Saint James, that is, in many smaller matters,
in matters of surprize, or inevitable infirmity: And therefore Posi­dices
said, that Saint Austin was used to say, That he would not have even good and
holy Priests go from this world without the sus­ception of equall and worthy
penances: and the most innocent life B in our account is not a competent
instrument of a peremptory confidence, and of justifying our selves: I am
guilty of nothing, (said Saint Paul) that is, of no ill intent, or negligence
in preach­ing the Gospel, yet I am not hereby justified, for God it may bee
knows many little irregularities, and insinuations of sin: In this case we are
to make a difference; but humility, and prayer, and watchfulnesse, are the
direct instruments of the expiation of such sinnes.

But then secondly, whosoever sins without these abating circum­stances,C that
is, in great instances, in which a mans understanding cannot be cozened; as in
drunkennesse, murder, adultery, and in the frequent repetitions of any sort of
sin whatsoever, in which a mans choice cannot be surprized, and in which it is
certain there is a love of the sin, and a delight in it, and a power over a
mans resolutions; in these cases it is a miraculous grace, and an
extra­ordinary change, that must turn the current and the stream of the
iniquity: and when it is begun, the pardon is more uncertain, and the
repentance more difficult, and the effect much abated, and the man must be
made miserable that he may be accursed for ever.D

1\. I say his pardon is uncertain, because there are some sins which are
unpardonable, (as I shall shew) and they are not all named in particular, and
the degrees of malice being uncertain, the salvation of that man is to be
wrought with infinite fear and trembling. Acts 7. 22. It was the case of Simon
Magus, Repent and ask pardon for thy sin, if peradventure the thought of thy
heart may be forgi­ven thee. If peradventure;] it was a new crime, and
concerning its possibility of pardon no revelation had been made, and by
ana­logy to other crimes it was very like an unpardonable sin; for it was a
thinking a thought against the Holy Ghost, and that was next E to speaking a
word against him. Cains sin was of the same nature; It is greater then it can
be forgiven, his passion and his fear was too severe and decretory: it was
pardonable, but truly we never finde that God did pardon it.

2 2\. But besides this, it is uncertain in the pardon, because it may be the
time of pardon is passed, and though God hath par­doned [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=118) A to other
people the same sins, and to thee too sometimes be­fore, yet it may be he will
not now: he hath not promised par­don so often as we sin, and in all the
returns of impudence, aposta­cy, and ingratitude; and it may be thy day is
past, as was Jerusalems in the day that they crucified the Saviour of the
world.

3\. Pardon of such habitual sins is uncertain, because life is un­certain; 3
and such sins require much time for their abolition and ex­piation. And
therefore although these sins are not necessariò morti­fera, that is,
unpardonable, yet by consequence they become dead­ly, because our life may be
cut off before we have finished or per­formed those necessary parts of
repentance, which are the severe B and yet the onely condition of getting
pardon. So that you may perceive, that not onely every great single crime, but
the habit of any sin is dangerous; and therefore these persons are to be
snatched from the fire, if you mean to rescue them,  [...] if you stay a day,
it may be you stay too long.

4\. To which I adde this fourth consideration, that every de­lay 4 of return
is in the case of habitual sins an approach to desperati­on because the nature
of habits is like that of Crocodiles they grow as long as they live; and if
they come to obstinacy, or confirmation, they are in hell already, and can
never return back. For so the Pan­nonian C Bears, when they have clasped a
dart in the region of their Liver, wheel themselves upon the wound and with
anger and ma­licious revenge strike the deadly barbe deeper, and cannot be
quit from that fatal steel, but in flying bear along that which them­selves
make the instrument of a more hasty death: So is every vi­tious person struck
with a deadly wound, and his own hands forced it into the entertainments of
his heart. And because it is pain­full to draw it forth by a sharp and
salutary repentance he still rouls and turns upon his wound, and carries his
death in his bowels, where it first entered by choice, and then dwelt by love,
and at last shall finish the tragedy by divine judgements, and an unalterable
decree.

But as the pardon of these sins is uncertain, so the conditions of restitution
are hard, even to them who shall be pardoned: their par­don and themselves
too, must be fetched from the fire; water will not do it, tears and
ineffective sorrow cannot take off a habit, or a great crime.

O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina cadis,

Tolli flumineâ posse putatis aquâ.

E Bion seeing a Prince weep and tearing his hair for sorrow, asked if
baldnesse would cure his grief? such pompous sorrows may bee good indices,
Chap. 4. 1, 3. but no perfect instruments of restitution. Saint James plainly
declares the possibilities of pardon to great sins, in the cases of
contention, adultery, lust, and envy, which are the four great in­decencies
that are most contrary to Christianity; and in the 5. Chap. [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=119) he implies
also a possibility of pardon to an habitual sinner, whom A he calls,  [...],
one that erres from the truth, that is, from the life of a Christian, the life
of the Spirit of truth: and he addes, that such a person may be reduced and so
be pardo­ned, Cha. 4. ver. ult. though he have sinned long; he that converts
such a one, shall hide a multitude of sins: But then the way that he appoints
for the restitution of such persons is humilty, and humiliation, penances. and
sharp penitentiall sorrows, and afflictions, resisting the Devil, re­turning
to God, weeping and mourning, confessions and prayers, as you may read at
large in the 4. and 5. Chapters; and there it is, that you shall finde it a
duty, that such persons should be afflicted, and B should confesse to their
brethren; and these are harder conditions then God requires in the former
cases; these are a kinde of fiery tryall.

I have now done with my Text, and should adde no more but that the nature of
these sins is such that they may increase in their weight, and duration, and
malice, and then they increase in mischief, and fatality, and so go beyond the
Text. Cicero said well, Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi periculosa esse videtur &
lubrica. l. 4. Acad. Qu. The very custome of consenting in the matters of
civility is dangerous and slippery, and will quickly ingage us in er­rour, and
then we think we are bound to defend them, or else we C are made flatterers by
it, and so become vitious; and we love our own vices that we are used to, and
keep them till they are incurable, that is, till we will never repent of them;
and some men resolve ne­ver to repent, that is, they resolve they will not be
saved, they tread under foot the blood of the everlasting covenant; those
persons are in the fire too, but they will not be pulled out: concerning whom
Gods Prophets must say as once concerning Babylon, Curavimus & non est sanata,
derelinquamus eam, We would have healed them, but they would not be healed,
let us leave them in their sins, and they shall have enough of it; Onely this,
those that put themselves D out of the condition of mercy are not to be
endured in Christian societies; they deserve it not, and it is not safe that
they should be suffered.

But besides all this, I shall name one thing more unto you; for

—nunquam adeò foedis adeoquè pudendis,

Vtimur exemplis, ut non pejora supersint.

There are some single actions of sin of so great a malice, that in their own
nature they are beyond the limit of Gospel pardon: they are not such things
for the pardon of which God entered into cove­nant; because they are such sins
which put a man into perfect indispo­tisions,E and incapacities of entring
into, or being in the covenant. In the first ages of the world, Atheisme was
of that nature; it was against their whole religion; and the sin is worse now,
against the whole religion still, and against a brighter light. In the ages
after the flood idolatry was also just such another: for as God was known
first one­ly [[Page
223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=119) A as the
creator, then he began to manifest himself in special con­tracts with men, and
he quickly was declared the God of Israel and idolatry perfectly destroyed all
that religion, and therefore was ne­ver pardoned intirely; but God did visit
it upon them that sin­ned; and when he pardoned it in some degrees yet he also
punish­ed it in some; and yet rebellion against the supreme power of Mo­ses
and Aaron was worse; for that also is a perfect destruction of the whole
religion, because it refused to submit to those hands upon which God had
placed all the religion, and all the government. And now if we would know in
the Gospel what answers these precedent B sins? I answer, first the same sins
acted by a resolute hand and heart are worse now then ever they were: and a
third or fourth is also to be added; and that is Apostacy or or a voluntary
malicious renoun­cing the faith: The Church hath often declared that sin to be
unpar­donable: witchcraft or final impenitence, and obstinacy in any sin are
infallibly desperate: and in general, and by a certain parity of reason,
whatsoever does destroy charity or the good life of a Christi­an with the same
general venom and deletery as Apostacy de­stroyes faith; and he that is a
Renegado from charity, is as unpar­donable as he that returns to solemn
Atheisme or infidelity: for all C that, is directly the sin against the holy
Ghost, that is a throwing that away wherby onely we can be Christians, wherby
onely we can hope to be saved; to speak a word against the holy Ghost in the
Pha­risees, was declared unpardonable, because it was such a word which if it
had been true, or believed, would have destroyed the whole re­ligion; for they
said that Christ wrought by Beelzebub, and by con­sequence did not come from
God: He that destroyes al the whole order of Priesthood, destroyes one of the
greatest parts of the religi­on, & one of the greatest effects of the holy
Ghost: He that destroyes government destroyes another part; but that we may
come neerer D to our selves; to quench the spirit of God is worse then to
speak some words against him; to grieve the spirit of God is a part of the
same im­piety, to resist the holy Ghost is another part; and if we consider,
that every great sin does this in its proportion, it wo [...]d concern us to
be careful, lest we fal into presumptuous sins, lest they get the domini [...]
o­ver us; out of this that I have spoken you may easily gather what sort of
men those are, who cannot be snatched from the fire; for whom as S. John
saies, we are not to pray, and how neer men come to it that continue in any
known sin; if I should descend to particulars, I might E lay a snare to
scrupulous and nice consciences. This onely every con­firmed habitual sinner
does manifest the divine justice in punishing the sins of a short life with a
never dying worm, and a never quench­ed flame, because we have an affection to
sin that no time will dimi­nish, but such as would increase to eternal ages;
and accordingly as a­ny man hath a degree of love, so he hath lodged in his
soul a spark which unless it be speedily & effectively quenched will break
forth into unquenchable fire.

[[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=120)

## 18\. Sermon. XVIII.SER. XVIII A THE B FOOLISH EXCHANGE.C

Matthew 16. Ver. 26.‘For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?’

WHen the eternal mercy of God had decreed to res­  [...]ue D mankinde from
misery and infelicity, and so triumphed over his own justice, the excellent
wisdom of God resolved to do it in wayes con­tradictory to the appetites and
designes of man, that it also might triumph over our weaknesses and imperfect
conceptions. So God decreeing to glorifie his mercy by curing our sins, and to
exalt his wisdome by the reproof of our ignorance, and the representing upon
what weak and false principals, we had built our hopes and expectati­ons E of
felicity: Pleasure and profit, victory over our enemies, rich­es and pompous
honours, power and revenge, desires according to sensual appetites, and
prosecutions violent and passionate of those appetites, health and long life,
free from trouble, without poverty or persecution.

[[Page 225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=120)

A Hac sunt jucundissime Martialis

vitam quae faciunt beatiorem.

These are the measures of good and evil, the object of our hopes and fears,
the securing our content and the portion of this world; and for the other, let
it be as it may. But the Blessed Jesus having made revelations of an immortal
duration, of another world; and of a strange restitution to it, even by the
resurrection of the body, and a new investiture of the soul, with the same
upper garment, clarified, and made pure so as no Fuller on earth can whiten
it; B hath also preached a new Philosophy, hath cancelled all the old
principles, reduced the appetites of sence to the discourses of rea­son and
heightned reason to the sublimities of the spirit, teach­ing us abstractions,
and immaterial conceptions, giving us new eyes, and new objects, and new
proportions; For now, sensual plea­sures are not delightful, riches are
drosse, honours are nothing but the appendages of vertue, and in relation to
it are to receive their account; but now if you would enjoy life you must die,
if you would be at ease, you must take up Christs crosse, and con­form C to
his sufferings▪ if you would save your life, you must lose it, and if you
would be rich you must abound in good works, you must be poor in spirit and
despise the world, and be rich unto God; for whatsoever is contrary to the
purchases and affecti­ons of this world is an endearment of our hopes in the
world to come; and therefore he having stated the question so that either we
must quit this world or the other, our affections I mean, and adherencies to
this, or our interest and hopes of the other; the choice is rendered very
easie by the words of my text, be­cause the distance is not lesse then
infinite, and the comparison D hath terms of a vast difference, heaven and
hell, eternity and a mo­ment, vanity and real felicity, life and death
eternal, all that can be hoped for, and all that can be feared; these are the
terms of our choice; and if a man have his wits about him and be not drunk
with sensuality, and senslessenesse, he need not much to dispute before he
passe the sentence. For nothing can be given to us to recompe [...]ce the
losse of heaven, and if our soul [...] be lost, there is nothing remaining to
us whereby we can be happy.

What shall it profit a man? or what shall a man give? is there a­ny E exchange
for a mans soul? the question is  [...] of the nega­tive. Nothing can be given
for an  [...] or a price to satisfie for its losse.

The blood of the son of God was given to recover it or as an  [...] to God;
and when our souls were forfeit to him, no­thing lesse then the life and
passion of God and man could pay the price (I say) to God, who yet was not
concerned in the losse [[Page
226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=121) save onely
that such was his goodnesse, that it pitied him to see his A creature lost.
But to us what shall be the  [...]? what can make us recompence when we have
lost our own souls, and are lost in a miserable eternity? what can then
recompence us? not all the world, not ten thousand worlds, and of this that
miserable man, whose soul is lost is the best judge; For the qustion is  [...]
and hath a potential signification, and means  [...] that is sup­pose a man
ready to die condemned to the sentence of a horrid death, heightned with all
the circumstances of trembling and ama­zement, what would he give to save his
life? eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and all that a man hath will he give for
his life: and this B turned to a proverb among the Jews; for so the last words
of the text are,  [...]; which proverb being usu­ally meant concerning a
temporal death, and was intended, to re­present, the sadnesses of a condemned
person, our blessed Savi­our fits to his own purpose, and translates to the
signification of death eternal, which he first revealed clearly to the world;
and be­cause no interest of the world can make a man recompence for his life,
because to lose that, makes him incapable of enjoying the exchange (and he
were a strange fool who having no designe up­on immortality or vertue, should
be willing to be hanged for a C thousand pound per annum) this argument
increases infinitely in the purpose of our Blessed Saviour; and to gain the
world, and to lose our souls in the Christian sence is infinitely more
madnesse and a worse exchange then when our souls, signifie no­thing but a
temporal life; and because possibly the indefinite hopes of  [...]lysium or an
honorable name, might tempt some hardy per­sons to leave this world hoping for
a better condition ever among the heathens; yet no excuse will acquit a
Christian from madnesse, If for the purchase of this world he lose his
eter­nitie.D

Here then first we will consider the propositions of the exchange the world
and a mans soul, by way of supposition, supposing all that is propounded were
obtained; the whole world. Secondly we will consider what is likely to be
obtained really, and indeed of the world, and what are really the miseries of
a lost soul? For it is propounded in the text by way of supposition: If a man
should gain the world which no man ever did, nor ever can; and he that gets
most, gets too little to be exchanged for a temporal life. And third­ly I
shall apply it to your practise and make material considera­tions.E

1\. First, then suppose a man gets all the world, what is it that he gets? It
is a bubble, and a Phantasme, and hath no reality be­yond a present transient
use; a thing that is impossible to be enjoy­ed, because its fruits and usages
are transmitted to us, by parts and by succession; (He that hath all the
world, (if we can suppose [[Page
227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=121) A such a man)
cannot have a dish of fresh summer fruits in the midst of winter, not so much
as a green fig: and very much of its possessi­ons is so hid, so fugacious and
of so uncertain purchase, that it is like the riches of the sea to the Lord of
the shore, all the fish and wealth within all its hollownesses are his, but he
is never the better, for what he cannot get. All the shell fishes that produce
pearl, produce them not for him; and the bowels of the earth shall hide her
trea­sures in undiscovered retirements; so that it will signifie as much to
this great purchaser, to be intitled to an inheritance in the upper region of
the aire; he is so far from possessing all its riches, that he B does not so
much as know of them, nor understand the Philosophy of her minerals.

2\. I consider that he that is the greatest possessor in the world enjoyes its
best and most noble parts and those which are of most excellent perfection but
in common with the inferiour persons, and the most despicable of his kingdom.
Can the greatest Prince in­close the Sun, and set one little star in his
cabinet for his own use? or secure to himself the gentle and benigne influence
of any one constellation? Are not his subjects fields bedewed with the same C
showers that water his gardens of pleasure?

Nay those things which he esteems his ornament and his singula­rity of his
possessions, are they not of more use to others then to himself. For suppose
his garments splendid and shining like the robe of a cherub or the clothing of
the fields, all that he that wears them enjoyes, is that they keep him warm,
and clean and mo­dest; and all this is done by clean and lesse pompous vestmer
[...]s; & the beauty of them which distinguishes him from others, is made to
please the eyes of the beholders; and he is like a fair bird or the
meretricious painting of a wanton woman made wholly to be D looked on, that is
to be enjoyed by every one but himself and the fairest face and the sparkling
eye cannot perceive or enjoy their own beauties but by reflection. It is I
that am pleased with beholding his gayety, and the gay man in his greates
[...] bra­very is onely pleased because I am pleased with the sight: so
borrowing his little and imaginary complacency, from the delight that I have,
not from any inherency of his own pos­session.

The poorest Artizan of Rome walking in Caesars gardens, had the same pleasures
which they ministred to their Lord: and al­though E it may be he was put to
gather fruits to eat, from another place, yet his other senses were delighted
equally with Caesars: the birds made him as good musick, the flowers gave him
as sweet smells, he there sucked as good aire, and delighted in the beauty and
order of the place, for the same reason and upon the same per­ception, as the
prince himself: save onely that Caesar paid for all that pleasure vast summes
of money, the blood and treasure of a [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=122) province,
which the poor man had for nothing.A

3\. Suppose a man Lord of all the world, (for still we are but in supposition)
yet since every thing is received, not according to its own gteatnesse and
worth, but according to the capacity of the receiver, it signifies very little
as to our content; or to the riches of our possession. If any man should give
to a Lion a fair meadow full of hay, or a thousand quince trees, or should
give to the good­ly Bull, the master and the fairest of the whole heard, a
thou­sand fair Stags; If a man should present to a childe a ship laden with
Persian carpets, and the ingredients of the rich scarlet, all these being
either disproportionate to the appetite or to the understand­ing,B could adde
nothing of content, and might declare the freenesse of the presenter, but they
upbraid the incapacity of the receiver: and so it does if God should give the
whole world to any man; He knows not what to do with it; he can use no more
but according to the capacities of a man. He can use nothing but meat and
drink and cloths; and infinite riches that can give him changes of rai­ment
every day, and a full table, do but give him a clean trencher every bit he
eats, it signifies no more but wantonnesse, and variety to the same, not to
any new purposes; He to whom the world can be given to any purpose greater
then a private estate can mini­ster,C must have new capacities created in him;
He needs the un­derstanding of an Angel to take the accounts of his estate; He
had need have a stomach like fire or the grave: for else he can eat no more
then one of his healthful subjects, and unlesse he hath an eye like the Sun,
and a motion like that of a thought, and a bulk as big as one of the orbs of
heaven; the pleasures of his eye can be no greater then to behold the beauty
of a little prospect from a hill, or to look upon the heap of gold packt up in
a little room, or to dote upon a cabinet of Jewels better then which there is
no man that sees at all but sees every day; For not to name the beauties and D
sparkling diamonds of heaven, a mans or a womans or a haukes eye is more
beauteous and excellent, then al the Jewels of his crown. And when we
remember, that a beast who hath quicker senses then a man, yet hath not so
great delight in the fruition of any object, because he wants understanding
and the power to make reflex acts upon his perception, it will follow, that
under­standing and knowledge is the greatest instrument of pleasure, and he
that is most knowing hath a capacity to become happy, which a lesse knowing
prince or a rich person hath not: and in this onely a mans capacity is capable
of enlargement: but then although E they onely have power to relish any
pleasure rightly, who right­ly understand the nature and degrees and essences,
and ends of things, yet they that do so, understand also the vanity and the
un­satisfyingnesse of the things of this world so that the relish which could
not be great, but in a great understanding appears con­temptible, [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=122) A because its
vanity appears at the same time; the under­standing sees all, and sees thorow
it.

4\. The greatest vanity of this world is remarkable in this, that all its
joyes summed up together are not big enough to counterpoise the evil of one
sharp disease, or to allay a sorrow. For imagine a man great in his dominion
as Cyrus, rich as Solomon, victorious as David, beloved like Titus, learned as
Trismegist, powerful as all the Roman greatnesse, all this, and the results of
all this, give him no more pleasure in the midst of a feaver, or the tortures
of the stone, then if he were only lord of a little dish, and a dishfull of B
fountain water. Indeed the excellency of a holy conscience is a com­fort and a
magazine of joy, so great, that it sweetens the most bit­ter potion of the
world, and makes tortures and death not only tolerable, but amiable; and
therefore to part with this whose ex­cellency is so great, for the world that
is of so inconsiderable a worth as not to have in it recompence enough, for
the sorrows of a sharp disease, is a bargain fit to be made by none but fools
and mad men. Antiochus, Epiphanes & Herod the great & his grand child Agrippa,
were sad instances of this great truth; to every of which it hap­pened that
the grandeur of their fortune, the greatnesse of their C possessions, and the
encrease of their estate disappeared, and expired like Camphire at their
arrest, by those several sharp diseases, which covered their head with
Cypresse and hid their crowns in an inglo­rious grave.

For what can all the world minister to a sick person? If it repre­sents all
the spoils of nature and the choicest delicacies of land and sea. Alas his
appetite is lost, and to see a pibble stone is more pleasing to him: For he
can look upon that without loathing, but not so upon the most delicious fare
that ever made famous the Ro­man luxury. Perfumes make his head ake; if you
load him with D jewels, you presse him with a burden as troublesome as his
grave­stone: and what pleasure is in all those possessions, that cannot make
his pillow easie, nor tame the rebellion of a tumultuous hu­mour, nor restore
the use of a withered hand, or straighten a crooked finger: vain is the hope
of that man whose soul rests upon vanity, and such unprofitable possessions.

5\. Suppose a man lord of all this world, an universal Monarch, as some
princes have lately designed, all that cannot minister con­tent to him; not
that content which a poor contemplative man by E the strength of Christian
Philosophy, and the support of a very small fortune daily does enjoy. All his
power and greatnesse cannot com­mand the sea to overflow his shores or to stay
from the retiring to the opposit strand. It cannot make his children dutiful
or wise & though the world admired at the greatness of Philip the second's
fortune in the accession of Portugal and the East Indies to his
principalities, yet this could not allay the infelicitie of his family, and
the unhandsome­nesse [[Page
230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=123) of his
condition in having a proud and indiscreet and a vitious A young prince likely
to inherit all his greatnesse. And if nothing ap­pears in the face of such a
fortune, to tell all the world that it is spotted and imperfect; yet there is
in all conditions of the world, such wearinesse and tediousnesse of the
spirits, that a man is ever­more pleased with hopes of going off for the
present, then in dwelling upon that condition which it may be others admire,
and think beauteous, but none knoweth the smart of it, but he that drank off
the little pleasure, and felt the ill relish of the appen­dage. How many Kings
have groaned under the burden of their crowns, and have sunk down and died?
How many have quitted B their pompous cares, and retired into private lives,
there to enjoy the pleasures of Philosophy and religion, which their thrones
denied?

And if we consider the supposition of the Text, the thing will demonstrate it
self. For he who can be supposed the owner and purchaser of the whole world,
must either be a King or a private person. A private person can hardly be
supposed to be the man. For if he be subject to another, how can he be Lord of
the whole world? But if he be a King, it is certain, that his cares are
greater C then any mans, his fears are bigger, his evils mountainous, the
accidents that discompose him are more frequent, and sometimes intolerable:
and of all his great possessions he hath not the great­est use and benefit.
But they are like a great harvest which more labourers must bring in▪ and more
must eat of; onely he is the centre of all the cares, and they fix upon him;
but the profits run out to all the lines of the circle: to all that are about
him; whose good is therefore greater then the good of the Prince: Because what
they enjoy is the purchase of the Princes care; and so they feed upon his
cost.D

Privatusque magis vivam te Rege beatus.

Her. l 1. sat. 3.

Servants live the best lives; for their care is single, onely how to please
their Lord; but all the burden of a troublesome provi­dence, and ministration,
makes the outside pompous and more full of ceremony; but they intricate the
condition and disturb the quiet of the great possessor.

And imagine a person as blest as can be supposed upon the stock of worldly
interest; when all his accounts are cast up, he E differs nothing from his
subjects, or his servants, but in meer cir­cumstance, nothing of reality or
substance. He hath more to wait at his Table, or persons of higher rank to do
the meanest offices; more ceremonies of addresse, a fairer Escutcheon, louder
titles; But can his multitude of dishes make him have a good stomack, or does
not satiety cloy it: when his high diet is such, that he is not [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=123) A capable of
being feasted, and knows not the frequent delights, and oftener possibilities,
a poor man hath of being refreshed, while not onely his labour makes hunger,
and so makes his meat delicate; (and then it cannot be ill fare, let it be
what it will) but also his provision is such, that every little addition is a
direct feast to him, while the great owner of the world giving to himself the
utmost of his desires, hath nothing left beyond his ordinary, to become the
entertainment of his festival dayes, but more loads of the same meat.Rare
volte h [...] fame chista sempre à tavola And then let him consider how much
of felicity can this condition contribute to him. In which he is not further
gone beyond B a person of a little fortune, in the greatnesse of his
possession, then he is fallen short in the pleasures and possibility of their
enjoy­ment.

And that is a sad condition when like Midas all that the man touches shall
turn to gold: and his is no better to whom a perpe­tual full table not
recreated with fasting, not made pleasant with intervening scarcity ministers
no more good then a heap of gold does, that is, he hath no benefit of it, save
the beholding of it with his eyes. Cannot a man quench his thirst as well out
of an Urn or Chalice, as out of a whole River? It is an ambitious thirst, C
and a pride of draught that had rather lay his mouth to Euphra­tes then to a
petty goblet; but if he had rather, it addes not so much to his content, as to
his danger, and his vanity.

—eo fit

Plenior ut si quos delectet copia justo,

Cum ripâ simul vulsos ferat Aufidus acer.

For so I have heard of persons whom the river hath swept away, together with
the Turf they pressed when they stopped to drown D their pride rather then
their thirst.

6\. But this supposition hath a lessening tearm. If a man could be born heir
of all the world, it were something: But no man ever was so; except him onely
who enjoyed the least of it, the Son of man, that had not where to lay his
head: but in the supposition it is; [If a man could [gain] the whole world,]
which supposes labour and sorrow, trouble and expence, venture and hazard, and
so much time expired in its acquist and purchase, that besides the possession
is not secured to us for tearm of life, yet our lives are al­most expired,
before we become estated in our purchases. And in­deed E it is a sad thing to
see an ambitious, or a covetous person, make his life unpleasant, troublesome,
and vexatious, to grasp a power bigger then himself; To fight for it with
infinite hazards of his life, so that it is a thousand to one but he perishes
in the attempt, and gets nothing at all, but an untimely grave, a reproachfull
me­mory, and an early damnation. But suppose he gets a victory, and [[Page
232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=124) that the
unhappy party is but to begin a new game, then to see A the fears, the
watchfulnesse, the diligence, the laborious arts to secure a possession, lest
the desperate party should recover a despe­rate game: And suppose this with a
new stock of labours, danger and expence, be seconded by a new successe; then
to look upon the new emergencies, and troubles, and discontents among his
friends, about parting the spoil, the envies, the jealousies, the slanders,
the underminings, and the perpetuall insecurity of his condition; all this I
say, is to see a man take infinite pains to make himself mi­serable; but if he
will be so unlearned, as to call this gallantry, or a splendid fortune, yet by
this time when he remembers, he hath B certainly spent much of his time in
trouble; and how long he shall enjoy this he is still uncertain; he is not
certain of a moneth, and suppose it be seven yeers, yet when he comes to die,
and cast up his accounts, and shall finde nothing remaining, but a sad
remem­brance of evils, and troubles past, and expectations of worse,
infi­nitely worse, he must acknowledge himself convinced, that to gain all
this world is a fortune not worth the labour and the dangers, the fears, and
transportations of passions, though the souls losse be not considered in the
bargain.

But I told you all this while, that this is but a supposition C still, the
putting of a case, or like a fiction of love, nothing reall: for if we
consider in the second place, how much every man is like­ly to get really, and
how much it is possible for any man to get, we shall finde the account far
shorter yet, and the purchase most trifling and inconsiderable. For 1. the
world is at the same time enjoy­ed by all its inhabitants, and the same
portion of it by severall per­sons in their several capacities. A Prince
enjoyes his whole king­dom, not as all his people enjoyes it, but in the
manner of a Prince; the subjects in the manner of subjects. The Prince hath
certain Regalia beyond the rest; But the feudall right of subjects does D them
more emolument, and the Regalia does the Prince more ho­nour; and these that
hold the fees in subordinate right, transmit it also to their Tenants, and
beneficiaries, and dependants to publike uses, to charity, and hospitality;
all which is a lessening of the lords possessions and a cutting his river into
little streams, not that himself alone, but that all his relatives may drink
and be refreshed. Thus the Well where the woman of Samaria sate was Jacobs
Well, and he drank of it, but so did his wives, and his children, and his
cattel; so that what we call ours, is really ours, but for our portion of
expence and use; we have so little of it, that our E servants have far more,
and that which is ours is nothing but the title, and the care, and the trouble
of securing and dispensing; save onely that God whose stewards we all are,
will call such owners (as they are pleased to call themselves) to strict
accounts for their disbursments. And by this account the possession or
do­minion [[Page
233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=124) A is but a
word, and serves a fancy or a passion, or a vice, but no reall end of nature;
it is the use and spending it that makes a man, to all reall purposes of
nature to be the owner of it, and in this the lord and master have but a
share.

But secondly, consider how far short of the whole world the greatest Prince
that ever reigned did come. Alexander that wept because he had no more worlds
to conquer, was in his knowledge deceived, and bruitish, as in his passion; he
over-run much of Asia, but he could never passe the Ganges, and never thrust
his sword in the bowels of Europe, and knew nothing of America. And the B
[...], or the whole world began to have an appropriate sence, and was rather
put to the Romane Greatnesse as an honourable Ap­pellative then did signifie
that they were lords of the world, who never went beyond Persia, Egypt, nor
Britain.

But why do I talk of great things in this Question of the ex­change of the
soul for the world? Because it is a reall bargain, which many men (too many
God knows) do make, we must consider it as applicable to practice. Every man
that loses his soul for the purchase of the world, must not looke to have the
portion C of a King. How few men are Princes, and of those that are not born
so, how seldom instances are found in story, of persons  [...]at by their
industry became so? But we must come far lower yet. Thousands there are that
damne themselves, and yet their purchase at long-running, and after a base and
weary life spent, is but five hundred pounds a yeer; nay it may be they onely
cozen an easie person out of a good estate, and pay for it at an easie rate,
which they obtain by lying, by drinking, by flattery, by force; and the gain
is nothing but a thousand pound in the whole, or it may bee nothing but a
convenience. Nay how many men hazard their sal­vation D for an acre of ground,
for twenty pound, to please a ma­ster, to get a smile and a kinde usage from a
Superiour? These men get but little, though they did not give so much for it.
So little, that Epictetus thought the purchase deer enough, though you paid
nothing for it but flattery, and observance,  [...] Observance was the price
of his meal, and he paid too de [...]r for one that gave his birth-right for
it: but he that exchanges his soul for it, knowes not the vanity of his
purchase, nor the value of his losse. He that gains the purchase and spoil of
a kingdom hath got E that which to all that are placed in heaven or to a man,
that were seated in the paths of the Sun seem but like a spot in an eye, or a
Mathematical point, so without vastnesse that it seems to be with­out
dimensions. But he whose purchase is but his neighbours field, or a few unjust
acres, hath got that which is inconsiderable, below the notice and description
of the Map; for by such Hieroglyphicall representments, Socrates chid the
vanity of a proud Athenian.

[[Page 234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=125) 3\.
Although these premises may suffice to shew that the suppo­sed A purchase is
but vain, and that all which men use really to ob­tain, is lesse then trifles,
yet even the possession of it whatsoever it be is not meer and unmixt, but
allaid with sorrow and uneasi­nesse: the gain hath but enlarged our appetite,
and like a draught to an hydropick person, hath enraged his thirst; and still
that which he hath not is infinitely bigger then what he hath, since the first
enlargement of his purchase was not to satisfie necessity, but his passion,
his lust or his avarice, his pride or his revenge, these things cease not by
their fewell but their flames grow bigger, and the capacities are stretched,
and they want more then they B did at first. For who wants most, he that wants
five pound, or he that wants five thousand: And supposing a man naturally
suppor­ted, and provided for in the dispensations of nature there is no
dif­ference, but that the poor hath enough to fill his belly, and the rich man
can never have enough to fill his eye. The poor mans wants are no greater then
what may be supplied by charity; and the rich mans wants are so big, that none
but Princes can relieve them, and they are left to all the temptations of
great vices, and huge cares to make their reparations.C

Dives eget gemmis, Cereali munere pauper,

Sed cum egeant ambo pauper egens minus est.

If the greatnesse of the worlds possessions produce such fruits, vexation, and
care, and want, the ambitious requiring of great estates, is but like the
selling of a fountain, to buy a fever, a parting with content, to buy
necessity, and the purchase of an unhand­some condition, at the price of
infelicity.

4\. He that enjoyes a great portion of this world hath most commonly the allay
of some great crosse, which although some­times D God designes in mercy, to
wean his affections from the world, and for the abstracting them from sordid
adherencies and cohabi­tation, to make his eyes like stars, to fix them in the
orbs of hea­ven, and the regions of felicity, yet they were an inseparable
ap­pendant and condition of humanity. Solomon observed the vanity of some
persons, that heaped up great riches for their heirs, and yet knew not whether
a wise man or a fool should possesse them, this is a great evil under the Sun.
And if we observe the great crosses many times God permits in great families,
as discontent in mar­riages,E artificiall or naturall bastardies, a society of
man and wife like the conjunction of two politicks, full of state, and
ceremony, and designe, but empty of those sweet caresses, and naturall hearty
complications, and endearments, usuall in meaner and innocent persons, the
perpetuall sicknesse, fulnesse of diet, fear of dying, the abuse of
flatterers, the trouble and noise of company; the te­dious [[Page
235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=125) A
officiousnesse, of impertinent and ceremonious visits, the declension of
estate, the sadnesse of spirit, the notoriousnesse of those dishonours which
the meannesse of lower persons conceals, but their eminency makes us visible,
as the spots in the moons face, we shall finde him to be most happy, that hath
most of wis­dom, and least of the world, because he onely hath the least
dan­ger, and the most security.

5\. And lastly, his soul so gets nothing that wins all this world, if he loses
his soul, that it is ten to one but he that gets the one, therefore shall lose
the other; For to a great and opulent for­tune B sin is so adherent and
insinuating, that it comes to him in the nature of civility; It is a sad sight
to see a great personage under­take an action passionately and upon great
interest; and let him manage it as indiscreetly, let the whole designe be
unjust, let it be acted with all the malice and impotency in the world, he
shall have enough to tell him that he proceeds wisely enough, to be ser­vants
of his interest, and promoters of his sin, instruments of his malice and
actors of revenge. But which of all his relatives shall dare to tell him of
his indiscretion, of his rage and of his folly? he had need be a bold man and
a severe person, that shall tell him C of his danger; and that he is in a
direct progresse towards  [...]ell; and indeed such personages have been so
long nourished up in soft­nes flattery and effeminancy, that too often
themselves are im­patient of a monitor, and think the charity and duty of a
modest reprehension to be a rudenesse and incivility▪ that Prince is a wise
man that loves to have it otherwise; and certainly it is a strange civility
and dutifulnesse in friends and relatives, to suffer him to go to hell
uncontrolled; rather then to seem unmannerly to­wards a great sinner. But
certainly this is none of the least in­felicities of them who are Lords of the
world and masters of great D possessions.

I omit to speak of the habitual intemperance, which is too com­monly annexed
to Festival and delicious tables, where there is no other measure or restraint
upon the appetite, but its fulnesse and satiety, and when it cannot or dare
not eat more. Oftentimes it hap­pens, that the intemperance of a poor table is
more temperate and hath lesse of luxury in it, then the temperance of a rich.
To this are consequent all the evil accidents and effects of fulnesse; pride,
lust, wantonnesse, softnesses of disposition and dissolution of man­ners, huge
talking, imperiousnesse, despite and contempt of poor E persons, and at the
best it is a great temptation for a man to have in his power, whatsoever he
can have in his sensual desires: who then shall check his voracity or calm his
revenge or allay his pride or mortify his lust or humble his spirit? it is
like as when a lust­ful young and tempted person lives perpetually with his
amorous and delicious mistris, if he soapes burning, that is inflamed [[Page
236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=126) from within
and set on fire from without it is a greater miracle A then the escaping from
the flames of the furnace, by the three children of the captivity. And just
such a thing is the possessi­on of the world, it furnishes us with abilities
to sin and op­portunities of ruine, and it makes us to dwell with poisons and
dan­gers, and enemies.

And although the grace of God is sufficient to great personages, and masters
of the world, and that it is possible for a young man to be tyed upon a bed of
flowers and fastned by the arms and band of a curtesan and tempted wantonly
and yet to escape the danger and the crime, and to triumph gloriously: (for so
Saint Hierome B reports of a son of the king of Nicomedia) and riches and a
free fortune are designed by God to be a mercy and an opportunity of doing
noble things, and excellent charity, and exact justice, and to protect
innocence, and to defend oppressed people; yet it is a mercy mixt with much
danger; yet it is like the present of a whole vintage to a man in a hectick
feaver, he will be shrewdly tempt­ed to drink of it, and if he does, he is
inflamed and may chance to die with the kindnesse. Happy are those persons who
use the world and abuse it not, who possesse a part of it and love it for no C
other ends, but for necessities of nature, and conveniencies of per­son and
discharge of all their duty and the offices of religion, and in charity to
Christ and all Christs members; but since he that hath all the world cannot
command nature to do him one office extra­ordinary, and enjoyes the best parts
but in common with the poor­est man in the world, and can use no more of it
but according to a limited and a very narrow capacity, and whatsoever he can
use or possesse cannot out-weigh the present pressure of a sharp disease, nor
can it at all give him content without which there can be no­thing of
felicity; since a prince in the matter of usiing the world,D differs nothing
from his subjects, but in mere accedents and cir­cumstances, and yet these
very many trifling differences are not to be obtained but by so much labour
and care, so great expence of time and trouble, that the possession will not
pay thus much of the price, and after all this, the man may die two hours
after he hath made his troublesome and expensive purchase and is certain not
to enjoy it long.

Adde to this last, that most men get so little of the world that it is all
together of a trifling and inconsiderable interest, that they who have the
most of this world, have the most of that but in E title and in supreme
rights, and reserved priviledges, the real use descending upon others to more
substantial purposes; that the possession of this trifle is mixt with sorrow
upon other accidents, and is allayed with fear, and that the greatnesse of
mens pos­sessions increase their thirst, and enlarge their wants, by swelling
their capacitie, and above all, is of so great danger to a mans vertue [[Page
237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=126) A that a great
fortune and a very great vertue are not alwayes ob­served to grow together; He
that observes all this, and much more he may observe, will see that he that
gains the whole world hath made no such great bargain of it although he had it
for nothing, but the necessary unavoidable troubles in getting it; but how
great a folly is it to buy so great a trouble, so great a vanity, with the
losse of our pretious soules remains to be considered in the fol­owing parts
of the text.

## 19\. B Sermon. XIX.SER. XIX C The foolish exchange.  
Part II.

ANd lose his own soul or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul] And
now the question is finally stated, and the dis­pute D is concerning the sum
of affaires.

De morte hominis nulla est cunctatio longa.

And therefore when the soul is at stake, not for its tempo­ral, but for its
eternal interest, it is not good to be hasty in deter­mining, without taking
just measures of the exchange. Solomon had the good things of the world
actually in possession, and he tried the touch-stone of prudence and natural
value and found E them allayed with vanitie and imperfection, and wee that see
them wayed in the ballance of the sanctuary, and tryed by the touch-stone of
the spirit, finde them not onely light and unprofi­table but pungent and
dolorous, but now we are to consider what it is that men part with, and lose
when with passion and impo­tency they get the world and that will present the
bargain to be a huge infelicity. And this I observe to be intimated in the
word, [[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=127)
[lose] for he gives gold for cloth or pretious stones for bread A serves his
needs of nature, and loses nothing by it, and the merchant that found a pearle
of great price, and sold al that he had to make the purchase of it made a good
venture he was no loser, but here the case is otherwise, when a man gains the
whole world, and his soul goes in the exchange, he hath not done like a
merchant, but like a childe, or a prodigal, he hath given himself away, he
hath lost all that can distinguish him from a slave, or a miserable per­son,
he loses his soul in the exchange, for the soul of a man, all the world cannot
be a just price, a man may lose it or throw it away, but he can never make
good exchange, when he parts with this B Jewel, and therefore our blessed
Saviour rarely well expresses it by  [...] which is fully opposed to  [...]
gain, it is such an ill mar­ket a man makes as if he should proclaim his
riches, goods, ven­dible for a garland of thistles decked and trimmed up with
the stinking poppy.

But we shall better understand the nature of this bargain if we consider the
soul that is exchanged, what it is in it self, in order not of nature but to
felicity and the capacities of joy, secondly what price the Son of God payed
for it, and thirdly what it is to lose it, that is, what miseries and tortures
are signified by losing C a mans soul.

First if we consider what the soul is in its own capacity to happinesse, we
shall finde it to be an excellency greater then the sun; of an angelicall
substance, sister to a cherubin, an image of the divinity, and the great
argument of that mercy, whereby God did distinguish us from the lower form of
beasts and trees and minerals.

For so it was the scripture affirmes, that God made man after his own, image,
that is, secundum illam imaginem & ideam quam con­cepit ipse, not according to
the likenesse of any of those creatures D which were prexistent to mans
production; not according to any of those images or ideas whereby God created
the heavens, and the earth; but by a new form; to distinguish him, from all
other sub­stances; he made him by a new idea of his own, by an uncreated
exemplar; and besides that this was a donation of intelli­gent faculties, such
as we understand to be perfect, and essential▪ or rather the essence of God,
it was also a designation of him to a glorious immortality and a communication
of the rayes and reflecti­ons of his own essential felicities.

But the soul is al that whereby we may be, and without which we E cannot be
happy. It is not the eye that sees the beauties of the heaven, nor the ear
that hears the sweetnesses of musick, or the glad­tidings of a prosperous
accident, but the soul that perceives all the relishes of sensual and
intellectual perfections and the more noble and excellent the soul is the
greater and more savory are its per­ceptions; [[Page
233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=127) A and if a
childe beholds the rich Ermine, or the Diamonds of a starry night, or the
order of the world, or hears the dis­courses of an Apostle, because he makes
no reflex acts upon him­self, and sees not that he sees; he can have but the
pleasure of a fool or the deliciousnesse of a mule. But although the
reflection of its own acts be a rare instrument of pleasure or pain
respective­ly, yet the souls excellency is upon the same reason not percei­ved
by us, by which the sapidnesse of pleasant things of nature, are not
understood by a childe; even because the soul cannot re­flect far enough. For
as the Sun which is the fountain of light and B heat, makes violent and direct
emission of his rayes from himself but reflects them no further then to the
bottom of a cloud, or the lowest imaginary circle of the middle region, and
therefore receives a duplicate of his own heat; so is the soul of man, it
reflects upon its own inferiour actions of particular sense or general
understanding; but because it knows little of its own nature, the manners of
volition the immediate instruments of understanding, the way how it comes to
meditate, and cannot discern how a sudden thought arrives, or the solution of
a doubt, not depending upon preceding premises, C therefore above halfe its
pleasures are abated, and its own worth lesse understood; and possibly it is
the better, it is so. If the Ele­phant knew his strength, or the horse the
vigorousnesse of his own spirit, they would be as rebellious against their
rulers, as unreaso­nable men against government: nay the Angels themselves,
because their light reflected home to their orbs, and they understood all the
secrets of their own perfection, they grew vertiginous and fell from the
battlements of heaven. But the excellency of a humane soul shall then be truly
understood, when the reflection will make no distraction of our faculties, nor
enkindle any ir­regular D fires; when we may understand our selves without
danger.

In the mean this consideration is gone high enough when we un­derstand the
soul of a man to be so excellently perfect, that we can­not understand how
excellently perfect it is: that being the best way of expressing our
conceptions of God himself; and there­fore I shall not need by distinct
discourses to represent that the will of man is the last resort and sanctuary
of true pleasure, which in its formality can be nothing else but a conformity
of possession or of being to the will; that the understanding being the ch
[...]nel and E conveyance of the noblest perceptions feeds upon pleasure [...]
in all its proportionate acts, and unlesse it be disturbed by intervening sins
and remembrances, derived hence, keeps a perpetual festival; that the passions
are every of them fitted with an object, in which they rest as in their
centre; that they have such delight in these their proper objects, that too
often they venture a damnation, rather then quit their interest and
possession; but yet from these consi­derations [[Page
240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=128) it would
follow that to lose a soul, which is de­signed A to be an immense sea of
pleasures, even in its natural ca­pacities is to lose all that whereby a man
can possibly be, or be supposed happy; and so much the rather is this
understood to be an insupportable calamity, because losing a soul in this
sense, is not a meer privation of those felicities of which a soul is
naturally de­signed to be a partaker, but it is an investing it with contrary
objects, and crosse effects, and dolorous perceptions: For the will if it
mis­ses its desires, is afflicted, and the understanding when it ceases to be
ennobled with excellent things is made ignorant as a swine, dull as the foot
of a rock, and the afflictions are in the destitution of B their perfective
actions, made tumultuous, vexed and discom­posed, to the height of rage and
violence. But this is but the  [...] the beginning of those throes which end
not but in eternal in­felicity.

Secondly if we consider the price that the Son of God payed for the redemption
of a soul, we shall better estimate of it, then from the weak discourses of
our imperfect and unlearned Philosophy: not the spoil of rich provinces, not
the aestimate of kingdoms, not the price of Cleopatra's draught, not any thing
that was cor­ruptible or perishing; for that, which could not one minute
re­tard C the tearm of its own natural dissolution, could not be a price for
the redemption of one perishing soul. And if we list but to re­member and then
consider that a miserable, lost, and accursed soul does so infinitely
undervalue, and disrelish all the goods and riches that this world dotes on;
that he hath no more gust in them, or pleasure, then the fox hath in eating a
turfe; that if he could be imagined to be the Lord of ten thousand worlds, he
would give them all for any shaddow of a hope of a possibility of returning to
life again; that Dives in hell would have willingly gone on em­bassy to his
fathers house that he might have been quit a little from D his flames, and on
that condition would have given Lazarus the fee-simple of all his temporal
possessions, though he had once denied to relieve him with the superfluities
of his table, will soon confesse that a moment of time is no good exchange for
an eterni­ty of duration; and a light unprofitable possession is not to be put
in the ballance against a soul, which is the glory of the creation; a soul,
with whom God had made a contract, and contracted excel­lent relations, it
being one of Gods appellatives, that he is [the lo­ver of souls.]

When God made a soul, it was onely, faciamus hominem ad E imaginem nostram; He
spake the word and it was done; but when man had lost this soul which the
spirit of God breathed in him, it was not so soon recovered. It is like the
resurrection which hath troubled the faith of many who are more apt to
believe, that God made a man from nothing, then that he can return a man from
dust & [[Page 241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=128)
A corruption; but for this resurrection of the soul, for the reim­placing the
divine image, for the rescuing it from the devils power, for the reintitling
it to the kingdoms of grace and glory, God did a work greater then the
creation; He was fain to contract Di­vinity, to a span, to send a person to
die for us who of himself could not die, and was constrained to use rare and
mysterious arts, to make him capable of dying, he prepared a person
instrumen­tal to his purpose, by sending his Son from his own bosom, a per­son
both God and man, an aenigma to all nations, and to all scien­ces; one that
ruled over all the Angels, that walked upon the B pavements of heaven, whose
feet were clothed with stars, whose eyes were brighter then the Sun, whose
voice is louder then thun­der, whose understanding is larger then that
infinite space which we imagine in the uncircumscribed distance, beyond the
first orbe of heaven, a person to whom felicity was as essential as life to
God, this was the onely person that was designed in the eternal decrees of the
divine predestination to pay the price of a soul, to ransom us from death;
lesse then this person could not do it; for although a soul in its essence is
finite, yet there were many infinites which C were incident and annexed to the
condition of lost souls; For all which because provision was to be made,
nothing lesse then an in­finite excellence could satisfie for a soul who was
lost to infinite and eternal ages, who was to be afflicted with insupportable
and indeter­mined that is next to infinite paines, who was to bear the load of
an infinite anger from the provocation of an eternal God: and yet if it be
possible that infinite can receive degrees, this is but one half of the
abysse, and I think the lesser: for that this person who was God eternal,
should be lessened in all his appearances, to a span, to the little dimensions
of a man, and that he should really become D very contemptibly little,
although at the same time he was infinite­ly and unalterably great, that is
essential, natural and necessary felicity should turn into an intolerable,
violent and immense calamity to his person, that this great God should not be
admitted to pay the price of our redemption unlesse he would suffer that
horrid mise­ry, which that lost soul should suffer, as it represents the
glories of his goodnesse, who used such rare and admirable instruments in
actu­ating the designes of his mercy: so it shewes our condition to have been
very desperate, and our losse invaluable.

A soul in Gods account is valued at the price of the blood, and E shame, and
tortures, of the Son of God, and yet we throw it  [...]way for the exchange of
sins, that a man naturally is ashamed to own; we lose it for the pleasure, the
sottish beastly pleasure of a night: I need not say, we lose our soul to save
our lives; for though that was our blessed Saviours instance of the great
unreasonablenesse of men, who by saving their lives lose them, that is, in the
great ac­count of Dooms-day, though this (I say) be extreamly unrea­sonable,
[[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=129) yet
there is something to be pretended in the bargain,A nothing to excuse him with
God, but something in the accounts of timerous men; but to lose our souls with
swearing, that unpro­fitable, dishonourable, and unpleasant vice, to lose our
souls with disobedience, or rebellion, a vice that brings a curse, and danger
all the way in this life: To lose our souls with drunkennesse, a vice which is
painfull, and sickly in the very acting it, which ha­stens our damnation, by
shortning our lives; are instances fit to be put in the stories of fools and
mad-men; and all vice is a degree of the same unreasonablenesse, the most
splendid temptation, be­ing nothing but a prety well weaved fallacy, a meer
trick, a so­phisme,B and a cheating, and abusing the understanding; but that
which I consider here is, that it is an affront and contradiction to the
wisdom of God, that we should so slight and undervalue a soul, in which our
interest is so concerned; a soul which he who made it, and who delighted not
to see it lost, did account a fit purchase to be made, by the exchange of his
Son, the eternal Son of God. To which also I adde this additionall account,
that a soul is so greatly valued by God, that we are not to venture the losse
of it, to save all the world For therefore whosoever should commit a sin to
save kingdoms from perishing, or if the case could be put C that all the good
men, and good causes, and good things in this world, were to be destroyed by
Tyranny, and it were in our power by perjury to save all these, that doing
this sin would be so farre from hallowing the crime, that it were to offer to
God a sacrifice of what he most hates, and to serve him with swines blood: and
the rescuing all these from a Tyrant, or a hangman, could not be pleasing to
God upon those termes, because a soul is lost by it, which is in it self a
greater losse and misery, then all the evils in the world put together can
out-ballance; and a losse of that thing for which Christ gave his blood a
price: Persecutions and tempo­ral D death in holy men, and in a just cause,
are but seeming evils, and therefore not to be bought off with the losse of a
soul, which is a real but an intolerable calamity: And if God for his own sake
would not have all the world saved by sin, that is by the hazard­ing of a
soul, we should do well for our own sakes not to lose a soul for trifles, for
things that make us here to be miserable, and even here also to be ashamed.

3\. But it may be some natures, or some understandings care not for all this,
therefore I proceed to the third and most material consideration, as to us;
and I consider what it is to lose a soul?E which Hierocles thus explicates,
[...]. An immortall substance can die, not by ceasing to be, but by losing all
being well, by becomming miserable. And it is remarkable, when our blessed
Sa­viour gave us caution, that we should not fear them that can kill the
[[Page 243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=129) A body
onely, but fear him (he sayes not that can kill the soul) But  [...],Matth.
10. 27. him that is able to destroy the body, and soul in hell; which word
signifieth not death but tortures. For some have chosen death for sanctuary,
and fled to it to avoid intolerable shame, to give a period to the sence of a
sharp grief, or to cure the earthquakes of fear; and the damned perishing
souls shall wish for death, with a desire impatient as their calamity; But
this shall be denied them, because death were a deliverance, a mercy, and a
pleasure, of which these miserable persons must despair of for ever.

B I shall not need to represent to your considerations those ex­pressions of
Scripture, which the Holy Ghost hath set down to re­present to our capacities
the greatnesse of this perishing; choosing such circumstances of character as
were then usuall in the world, and which are dreadful to our understanding as
any thing: Hell fire] is the common expression; for the Eastern nations
accounted burnings the greatest of their miserable punishments: and burning
malefactours was frequent, [brimstone and fire] to Saint John Revel. 14\. 10.
calls the state of punishment, prepared for the Devil and all his servants, he
adding the circumstance of brimstone, for C by this time the Devil had taught
the world more ingenious pains, and himself was new escaped out of boiling oil
and brimstone, and such bituminous matter; and the Spirit of God knew right
well the worst expression was not bad enough,  [...], so our blessed Saviour
calls it, the outer darknesse, that is, not onely an abjection from the
beatifick regions, where God, and his Angels, and his Saints dwell for ever,
but then there is a positive state of misery expressed by darknesses,  [...],
as two Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Jude call it, The blacknesse of
darknesse for ever. In which although it is certain, that God whose Justice
there rules, D will inflict but just so much as our sins deserve, and not
superadde degrees of undeserved misery, as he does to the Saints of glory (for
God gives to blessed souls in heaven more, infinitely more then all their good
works could possibly deserve, and therefore their glory is infinitely bigger
glory then the pains of hell are great pains) yet because Gods Justice in hell
rules alone, without the al­layes and sweeter abatements of mercy, they shall
have pure and unmingled misery; no pleasant thought to refresh their
wearinesse, no comfort in an other accident to alleviate their pressures, no
wa­ters E to cool their flames; but because when there is a great cala­mity
upon a man, every such man thinks himself the most misera­ble; and though
there are great degrees of pain in hell, yet there are none perceived by him
that thinks he suffers the greatest; It follows that every man that loses his
soul in this darknesse is mi­serable beyond all those expressions which the
tortures of this world could furnish to the Writers of holy Scripture.

[[Page 244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=130) But I
shall choose to represent this consideration in that expres­sion A of our
blessed Saviour, Mark the 9. the 44. verse; which him­self took out of the
Prophet Esay, the 66. verse the 24. Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is
not quenched; this is the  [...], spoken of by Daniel the Prophet; for
although this expression was a prediction of that horrid calamity and
abscision of the Jewish Nation, when God poured out a full vial of his wrath
upon the crucifiers of his Son, and that this which was the greatest calamity
which ever did or ever shall happen to a Nation, Christ with great reason took
to describe the calamity of accursed souls, as being the greatest instance to
signifie the greatest torment: yet we must ob­serve B that the difference of
each state makes the same words in the several cases to be of infinite
distinction: The worm stuck close to the Jewish Nation, and the fire of Gods
wrath flamed out till they were consumed with a great and unheard of
destruction; till many millions did die accursedly, and the small remnant
became vaga­bonds, and were reserved, like broken pieces, after a storm, to
shew the greatnesse of the storm, and misery of the shipwrack; but then this
being translated to signifie the state of accursed souls, whose dying is a
continual perishing, who cannot cease to be, it C must mean an eternity of
duration, in proper and naturall signi­fications.

And that we may understand it fully, observe the places. In the 34. Esa. 8\.
The Prophet prophecies of the great destruction of Jerusalem for all her great
iniquities. It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the yeer of recompences,
for the controversie of Sion, and the streams thereof shall be turned into
pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become
burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoak thereof shall
go up for ever, from generation to gene­ration. It shall lie wast, none shall
passe thorow it for ever and ever. This is the final destruction of the
Nation; but this destruction shall D have an end, because the Nation shall
end, and the anger also shall end in its own period, even then when God shall
call the Jews into the common inheritance with the Gentiles, and all the sons
of God. And this also was the period of their worme, as it is of their fire,
The fire of the Divine vengeance upon the Nation; which was not to be
extinguished till they were destroyed, as we see it come to passe. And thus
also in Saint Jude, the Angels who kept not their first state, are said to be
reserved by God in everlasting chains un­der darknesse: which word
[everlasting] signifies not absolutely to eternity, but to the utmost end of
that period, for so it follows E [unto the judgement of the great day] that
[everlasting] lasts no longer; and in verse the seventh, the word [eternal] is
just so used: The men of Sodom and Gomorrha are set forth for an example
suf­fering the vengeance of [eternal fire,] that is, of a fire, which burned
till they were quite destroyed, and the cities and the coun­trey [[Page
245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=130) A with an
irreparable ruine never to be rebuilt, and reinhabi­ted as long as this world
continues. The effect of which obser­vations is this;

That these words [for ever, everlasting, eternal, the never-dying worme, the
fire unquenchable,] being words borrowed by our bles­sed Saviour and his
Apostles from the stile of the old Testament, must have a signification just
proportionable to the state in which they signifie; so that as this worme when
it signifies a temporal infliction meanes a worme that never ceases, giving
torment, till the body is consumed: So when it is translated to an immortall B
state, it must signifie as much in that proportion: that [eternal,] that
everlasting, hath no end at all: because the soul cannot be killed in the
natural sense, but is made miserable and perishing for ever; that is, the
worme shall not die so long as the soul shall be unconsumed: the fire shall
not be quenched, till the period of an im­mortall nature comes, and that this
shall be absolutely for ever with­out any restriction, appears unanswerably in
this, because the same (for ever) that is, for the blessed souls, the same for
ever, is for the accursed souls; but the blessed souls that die in the Lord,
hence­forth C shall die no more; death hath no power over them; for death is
destroyed, it is swallowed up in victory (saith Saint Paul) and there shall be
no more death, saith Saint John, Revel. 21\. 4. So that because for ever hath
no end, till the thing or the duration it self have end, in the same sense in
which the Saints and Angels give glory to God for ever, in the same sense the
lost souls shall suffer the evils of their sad inheritance; and since after
this death of nature, which is a separation of soul and body, there remains no
more death, but this second death, this eternal perishing of miserable
accursed souls, whose duration must be eternall; It follows that the worm of
con­science, D and the unquenchable fire of hell have no period at all; but
shall last as long as God lasts, or the measures of a proper eternity; that
they who provoke God to wrath, by their base, unreasonable, and sottish
practises, may know what their porti­on shall be in the everlasting
habitations: and yet suppose that Origens opinion had been true; and that
accursed souls should have ease and a period to their tortures after a
thousand years; I pray let it be considered, whether it be not a great
madnesse to choose the pleasures, or the wealth of a few years here, with
trouble, with danger, with uncertainty, with labour, with inter­valls E of
sicknesse, and for this to endure the flames of hell for a thousand yeers
together? The pleasures of the world no mar [...]an have for a hundred yeers,
and no man hath pleasure a hundred dayes together, but he hath some trouble
intervening: or at least a wearinesse and a loathing of the pleasure; and
therefore to en­dure insufferable calamities (suppose it be) for a hundred
yeers, without any interruption, without so much comfort as the light [[Page
246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=131) of a small
candle, or a drop of water amounts to in a fever, is a A bargain to be made by
no man that loves himself, or is not in love with infinite affliction.

If a man were condemned but to lie still, or to lie a bed in one posture
without turning, for seven yeers together, would he not buy it off with the
losse of all his estate? If a man were to be put upon the rack, for every day,
three moneths together, (suppose him able to live so long) what would he do to
be quit of his tor­ture? Wouldany man curse the King to his face, if he were
sure to have both his hands burnt off, and to be tormented with tor­ments
three yeers together? Would any man in his wits accept of B a hundred pound a
yeer for fourty yeers, if he were sure to be tormented in the fire for the
next hundred yeers together without intermission? Think then what a thousand
yeers signifie: Ten ages, the age of two Empires; but this account I must tell
you is infinite­ly short, though I thus discourse to you, how great fools
wicked men are, though this opinion should be true: A goodly comfort surely!
that for two or three yeers sottish pleasure, a man shall be infinitely
tormented but for a thousand yeers. But then when we cast up the minutes, and
yeers, and ages of eternity, the considera­tion it self is a great hell to
those persons who by their evil lives C are consigned to such sad and
miserable portions.

A thousand yeers is a long while to be in torment; we finde a fever of 21.
dayes to be like an age in length: but when the dura­tion of an intolerable
misery is for ever in the height, and for ever beginning, and ten thousand
yeers hath spent no part of its terme, but it makes a perpetual efflux, and is
like the centre of a circle, which ever transmits lines to the circumference;
this is a considera­tion so sad that the horrour of it and the reflexion upon
its abode and duration, make a great part of the hell; for hell could not be
hell without the despair of accursed souls; for any hope were a re­freshment,D
and a drop of water, which would help to allay those flames, which as they
burn intolerably, so they must burn for ever.

And I desire you to consider that although the Scripture uses the word [fire]
to expresse the torments of accursed souls, yet fire can no more equal the
pangs of hell then it can torment a ma­terial substance; the pains of
perishing souls being as much more afflictive then the smart of fire, as the
smart of fire is troublesome beyond the softnesse of Persian carpets, or the
sensuality of the A­sian Luxury: for the pains of hell; and the perishing or
losing of the E soul is to suffer the wrath of God,  [...], our God is a
consuming fire: that is the fire of hell, when God takes away all comfort from
us, nothing to support our spirit is left us, when sorrow is our food and
tears our drink; when it is e­ternal night without Sun or star, or lamp, or
sleep; when we burn [[Page
247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=131) A with fire
without light, that is, are loaden with sadnesse, without remedy or hope or
ease, and that this wrath is to be expressed, and to fall upon us, in
spiritual, immateriall, but most accursed, most pungent and dolorous
emanations, then we feel what it is to lose a soul.

We may guesse at it by the terrours of a guilty conscience, those verbera &
laeniatus, those secret lashings and whips of the extermi­nating Angel, those
thorns in the soul, when a man is haunted by an evil spirit; those butcheries
which the soul of a Tyrant, or a violent, or a vitious person, when he falls
in to fear or a­ny B calamity does feel, are the infinite arguments, that Hell
which is the consummation of the torment of conscience, just as man-hood is
the consummation of infancy or as glory is the perfection of grace, is an
affliction greater then the bulk of heaven and ea [...]th; for there it is
that God powrs out the treasures of his wrath and empties the whole magazin of
thunder bolts, and all the  [...]rmo­ry of God is imployed, not in the
chastising, but in the t [...]ment­ing of a perishing soul. Lucian brings in
Radamanthus tel [...]ing the poor wandring souls upon the banks of Elysium,
[...], for C every wickednesse that any man commits in his life when he comes
to hell he hath stamped upon his soul an invisible brand and mark of torment;
and this begins here, and is not canc [...]led by death [...] but there is
enlarged by the greatnesse of infinite and  [...]he aboads of eternity. How
great these tormens of conscience are here, let any man imagine that can but
understand what despair means: des­pair upon just reason: let it be what it
will, no misery can be greater then despair: and because I hope none here have
felt those horrors of an evil conscience, which are consignations to eternity,
you may please to learn it by your own reason, or els by the sad D instances
of story. It is reported of Petrus Ilosuanus. A Polonian School-master that
having read some ill managed discourses of ab­solute decrees and divine
reprobation, began to be Phantastick and melancholy and apprehensive that he
might be one of those many whom God had decreed for hell from all eternity;
from possible to probable, from probable, to certain, the temptation soon
carried him, and when he once began to believe himself to be a person
inevitably perishing, it is not possible to understand per­fectly, what
infinite fears, and agonies and despairs, what tremb­lings, E what horrors,
what confusion and amazement the poor man felt within him, to consider that he
was to be tormented extreme­ly without remedy even to eternal ages; This in a
short continu­ance grew insufferable, and prevailed upon him so far that he
hang­ed himself, and left this account of it or to this purpose in writing in
his study; I am gone from hence to the flames of hell, & have forced my way
thither being impatient to try what those great torments [[Page
248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=132) are which here
I have heard with an insupportable amazement: this A instance may suffice to
show what it is to lose a soul. But I will take off from this sad discourse;
onely I shall crave your attention, to a word of exhortation.

That you take care, lest for the purchase of a little, trifling,
incon­siderable portion of the world you come into this place and state of
torment. Although Homer was pleased to complement the beauty of Helena to such
a height as to say it was a sufficient price for all the evils which the
Greeks and Trojans suffered in ten years.

[...] [...]. Yet it was a more reasona­ble conjecture of Herodotus, that
during the ten years siege of Troy Helena for whom the Greeks fought was in
Egypt, not in the city, because it was unimaginable but that the Trojans would
have thrown her over the walls rather then for the sake of such a trifle, have
endured so great calamities, we are more sottish then the Trojans, if we
retain our Helena, any one beloved lust, any painted Devil, any sugar'd
temptation with, (not the haz­ard but) the certainty of having such horrid
miseries, such in va­luable C losses. And certainly its a strange stupidity of
spirit that can sleep in the midst of such thunder, when God speaks from
heaven with his lowdest voice, and draws aside his curtain, and shows his
ar­senal and his armory, full of arrows steeled with wrath, headed and
pointed, and hardned with vengeance, still to snatch at those ar­rows, if they
came but in the retinue of a rich fortune or a vain Mistris, if they wait but
upon pleasure or profit or in the reare of an ambitious designe.

But let not us have such a hardinesse against the threats and re­presentments
of the divine vengeance as to take the little imposts D and revenues of the
world, and stand in defiance against God and the fears of hell unlesse we have
a charm that we can be  [...] invisible to the judge of heaven and earth and
are impregna­ble against, or are sure we shall be insensible of the miseries
of a perishing soul.

There is a sort of men who because they will be vitious and Atheistical in
their lives, have no way to go on with any plaisance and without huge
disturbances, but by being also Atheistical in their opinions and to believe
that the story of hell is but a bug-bear to affright children and fools, easy
believing people to make them E soft and apt for government and designes of
princes; and this is an opinion that befriends none but impure and vicious
persons; others there are that believe God to be all mercy, that he for­gets
his justice, believing that none shall perish with so sad a ruine, if they do
but at their death-bed ask God forgivenesse and say they are sorry; but yet
continue their impiety till their house be ready [[Page
249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=132) A to fall;
being like the Circassians whose Gentlemen enter not into the Church till they
be threescore years old, that is, in effect till by their age they cannot any
longer use rapine: till then they hear ser­vice at their windows: dividing
unequally their life between sin and devotition, dedicateing their youth to
robbery, and their old age to a repentance without restitution.

Our youth, and our man-hood and old age are all of them due to God, and
justice and mercy are to him equally essential, and as this life is a time of
the possibilities of mercy so to them that neglect it, the next world shall be
a state of pure and unmingled justice.

B Remember the fatal and decretory sentence which God hath passed upon all
man-kinde [it is appointed to all men once to die and after death comes
judgement] and if any of us were certain to die next morning, with what
earnestnesse should we pray, with what ha­tred should we remember our sins,
with what scorn should we look upon the licentious pleasures of the world;
then nothing could be welcome unto us but a prayer book, no company but a
Com­forter and a Guide of souls, no imployment but repentance, no passions but
in order to religion, no kindnesse for a lust that hath undone us; and if any
of you have been arrested with alarmes of C death, or been in hearty fear of
its approach, remember what thoughts and designes then possessed you, how
precious a soul was then in your account and what then you would give that you
had despised the world, and done your duty to God and man, and lived a holy
life. It will come to that again and we shall be in that condi­tion in which
we shall perfectly understand, that all the things and pleasures of the world
are vain and unprofitable, and irkesome, and that he onely is a wise man who
secures the interest of his soul though it be with the losse of all this world
and his own life into the bargain. When we are to depart this life to go to
strange company D and stranger places, and to an unknown condition, then a
holy con­science will be the best security, the best possession, it wil be a
horror that every friend we meet shall with triumph upbraid to us the
sot­tishnesse of our folly. Lo this is the goodly change you have made, you
had your good things in your life time, and how like you the portion that is
reserved to you for ever? The old Rabbins those Poets of religion report of
Moses that when the courtiers of Pharaoh were sporting with the childe Moses
in the chamber of Pharaohs daughter, they presented to his choice an ingot of
gold in one h [...]d, and a cole of fire in the other; and that the childe
snatched at t [...]e coal, thrust it E into his mouth, and so singed and
parched his tongue, that he stam­mered ever after: and certainly it is
infinitely more childish in us for the glittering of the small gloworms and
the charcoal of worldly possessions, to swallow the flames of hell greedily,
in our choice: such a bit will produce a worse stammering then Moses had: for
so the a [...]ccursed and lost souls have their ugly and horrid dialect, they
[[Page 250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=133) roare
and blaspheme, blaspheme and roare for ever. And suppose God A should now at
this instant send the great Archangel with his trum­pet to summon all the
world to judgement, would not all this seem a notorious visible truth, a
truth, which you will then wonder that every man did not lay to his heart and
preserve therein actual, pious and effective consideration? let the trumpet of
God perpetually sound in your ears, surgite mortui, & venite ad judicium,
place your selves by meditation every day upon your death-bed, and remem­ber
what thoughts shall then possesse you; and let such thoughts dwell in your
understanding for ever, and be the parent of all your resolutions and actions.
The Doctors of the Jews B report, that when Absalom hanged among the oakes, by
the haire of the head, he seemed to see under him hell gaping wide, ready to
receive him, and he durst not cut off the hair that intangled him, for fear he
should fall into the horrid lake whose portion is flames and torment; but
chose to protract his miserable life a few minuts in that pain of posture, and
to abide the stroke of his pur­suing enemies: His condition was sad when his
arts of remedy were so vain.  [...] Soph. A condemned man hath but small
comfort to stay the singing of a long psalm, it is the case of every vitious
person.C

Hell is wide open to every impenitent persevering sinner, to e­very unpurged
person.

Noctes atque dies patet atri Janua Ditis.B

And although God hath lighted his candle and the lantern of his word and
clearest revelations is held out to us, that we can see hell in its worst
colours, and most horrid representments yet we run gree­dily after bables into
that praecipice which swallows up the greatest part of man-kinde; and then
onely we begin to consider, when all consideration is fruitlesse.

He therefore is a huge fool that heaps up riches, that greedily D pursues the
world, and at the same time, (for so it must be heaps of wrath to himself
against the day of wrath; when sicknesse & death ar­rests him, then they
appear unprofitable & himself extreamly mise­rable: & if you would know how
great that misery is you may take account of it by those fearful words and
killing Rhetorick of Scri­pture, It is a fearful things to fall into the hands
of the living God and who can dwell with the everlasting burning? That is, No
patience can abide there one houre where they must dwell for ever.E

[[Page 251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=133)

## 20\. A Sermon. XX.SER. XX. B OF CHRISTIAN C PRVDENCE.

Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16.‘Be ye therefore wise as serpents and
harmlesse as doves.’

D WHen our B. Saviour entailed a law & a condition of sufferings, & promised a
state of persecution to his servants, and withall had charmed them with the
bands & unactive chains of so many passive graces, that they should not be
able to stir against the vio­lence of Tyrants, or abate the edge of axes, by
any instrument, but their own blood; being sent forth as sheep among wolves,
innocent and silent, harmlesse, and defencelesse, certainly exposed to sorrow,
and uncertainly guarded in their persons; their condition seemed nothing else,
but a designa­tion E to slaughter: and when they were drawn into the folds of
the church, they were betrayed into the hands of evil men, infinitely and
unavoidably; and when an Apostle invited a proselyte to come to Christ, it was
in effect a snare laid for his life, and he could neither conceal his
religion, nor hide his person, nor avoid a captious question, nor deny his
accusation, nor elude the bloody [[Page
252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=134) arts of
Orators and informers nor break prisons, nor any thing but A die. If the case
stood just thus, it was well eternity stood at the outer doors of our life,
ready to receive such harmlesse people; but sure­ly there could be no art in
the designe, no pitying of humane weaknesses, no complying with the condition
of man, no allow­ances made for customs and prejudices of the world, no
inviting men by the things of men, no turning nature into religion; but it was
all the way a direct violence, and an open prostitution of our lives; and a
throwing away our fortune into a sea of rashnesse and credulity. But therefore
God ordered the affaires and necessities of religion in other wayes and to
other purposes. Although God B bound our hands behinde us, yet he did not tie
our understandings up: although we might not use our swords, yet we might use
our reason: we were not suffered to be violent, but we might avoid violence by
all the arts of prudence and innocence; if we did take heed of sin, we might
also take heed of men: & because in al conten­tions between wit and violence,
prudence & rudenesse, learning and the sword, the strong hand took it first,
and the strong head possessed it last: the strong man first governed, and the
witty man succee­ded him, and lasted longer; it came to passe that the wisdom
of C the Father hath so ordered it, that all his Disciples should overcome the
power of the Roman legions by a wise religion; and prudence and innocence
should become the mightiest guards; and the Christi­an although exposed to
persecution, yet is so secured that he shall never need to die But when the
circumstances are so or­dered that his reason is convinced that then it is fit
he should; fit (I say) in order to Gods purposes and his own.

For he that is innocent is safe against all the rods and the axes of all the
Consuls of the world, if they rule by justice; and he that is prudent will
also escape from many rudenesses and irregular vio­lences,D that can come by
injustice: and no wit of man, no go­vernment, no armies can do more; for
Caesar perished in the midst of all his legions and all his honours, and
against chance and irregu­larities there is no provision lesse then infinite,
that can give secu­rity; and although prudence alone cannot do this; yet
innocence gives the greatest title to that providence which onely can if he
pleases, and will if it be fitting. Here then are the two armes defensive of a
Christian: Prudence against the evils of men, Innocence against the evils of
Devils and all that relates to his kingdom.

Prudence fences against persecution, and the evil snares, against E the
opportunities and occasions of sin, it prevents surprizes, it for­tifies all
its proper weaknesses, it improves our talents, it does ad­vantage to the
kingdom of Christ and the interests of the Gospel, it secures our condition,
and instructs our choice in all the wayes and just passages to felicity, it
makes us to live profitably, and die wisely; and without it, simplicity would
turn to sillinesse, zeal [[Page
253]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=134) A into
passion, passion into fury, religion into scandal, conversa­tion into a snare,
civilities into temptation, curtesies into danger, and an imprudent person
falls into a condition of harmelesse, rich and unwary fools, or rather of
birds, sheep, and bevers, who are hunted and persecuted for the spoils of
their fleece, or their flesh, their skins, or their entrails, and have not the
foresight to avoid a snare, but by their fear and undefending follies are
driven thi­ther where they die infallibly.  [...]. Every good man is incircled
with many enemies, and dangers: and his vertue shall be rifled, and the
decency of his soul and spirit shall B he discomposed and turned into a heap
of inarticulate and disor­derly fancies, unlesse by the methods and guards of
prudence it be mannaged and secured.

But in order to the following discourse and its method, we are first to
consider whether this be, or indeed can be a commande­ment, or what is it? For
can all men that give up their names in baptisme, be enjoyned to be wise and
prudent? It is as if God would command us to be eloquent, or witty men, fine
speakers, or strait bodied, or excellent schollers, or rich men: If he please
to make us so, we are so; and prudence is a gift of God, a blessing of an
excellent nature, and of great leisure, and a wise opportuni­ty, C and a
severe education, and a great experience, and a strict ob­servation, and good
company; all which being either whol [...]y, or in part out of our power, may
be expected as free gifts, but can­not be imposed as commandments.

To this I answer, That Christian prudence is in very many in­stances a direct
duty; in some an instance and advice, in order to degrees and advantages:
where it is a duty, it is put into every mans power; where it is an advice it
is onely expected according to what a man hath, and not according to what he
hath not: and even D here, although the events of prudence are out of our
power, yet the endeavours and the observation, the diligence and caution, the
moral part of it, and the plain conduct of our necessary duty (which are
portions of this grace) are such things which God will demand in proportion to
the talent which he hath intrusted into our Banks. There are in indeed some
Christians very unwary and un­wise in the conduct of their religion, and they
cannot all help it, at least not in all degrees; but yet they may be taught to
do prudent things, though not to be prudent persons; if they have not the
pru­dence E of advice, and conduct, yet they may have the prudence of
obedience, and of disciples: and the event is this; without prudence their
vertue is unsafe, and their persons defenselesse, and their in­terest is
unguarded; for prudence is a hand-maid waiting at the pro­duction, and birth
of vertue: It is a nurse to it in its infancy, its patron in assaults, its
guide in temptations, its security in all porti­ons of chance and contingency:
And he that is imprudent, if he [[Page
254]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=135) have many
accidents and varieties, is in great danger of being none A at all, or if he
be, at the best he is but a weak and an unprofitable servant, uselesse to his
neighbour, vain in himself, and as to God, the least in the kingdom: his
vertue is contingent, and by chance, not proportioned to the reward of wisdom,
and the election of a wise religion.

[...]

[...].

No purchase, no wealth, no advantage is great enough to be B compared to a
wise soul, and a prudent spirit; and he that wants it, hath a lesse vertue,
and a defenselesse minde, and will suffer a mighty hazard in the interest of
eternity. Its parts and proper acts consist in the following particulars.

1\. It is the duty of Christian prudence to choose the end of a Christian,
that which is perfective of a man, satisfactory to rea­son, the rest of a
Christian, and the beatification of his spirit; and that is, to choose and
desire, and propound to himself heaven, and the fruition of God, as the end of
all his acts and arts, his designes and purposes. For in the nature of things
that is most eligible, and C most to be pursued, which is most perfective of
our nature, and is the acquiescence, the satisfaction, and proper rest of our
most rea­sonable appetites. Now the things of this world are difficult and
uneasie, full of thornes, and empty of pleasures, they fill a disea­sed
faculty, or an abused sense, but are an infinite dissatisfaction to reason,
and the appetites of the soul: they are short, and tran­sient, and they never
abide, unlesse sorrow like a chain be bound about their leg, and then they
never stir, till the grace of God and religion breaks it, or else that the
rust of time eats the chain in pie­ces: they are dangerous and doubtfull, few
and difficult, fordid and D particular, not onely not communicable to a
multitude, but not diffusive upon the whole man; there being no one pleasure
or object in this world, that delights all the parts of man: and after all
this, they are originally from earth, and from the creatures, onely that they
oftentimes contract alliances with hell and the grave, with shame and sorrow;
and all these put together make no great ama­bility, or proportion to a wise
mans choice: But on the other side, the things of God are the noblest
satisfactions to those desires, which ought to be cherished and swelled up to
infinite; their deli­ciousnesse is vast and full of relish, and their very
appendant thorns E are to be chosen, for they are gilded, they are safe and
medicinall, they heal the wound they make, and bring forth fruit of a blessed
and a holy life: The things of God and of religion are easie and sweet, they
bear entertainments in their hand, and reward at their back, their good is
certain and perpetual, and they make us cheer­full [[Page
255]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=135) A to day, and
pleasant to morrow; and spiritual songs end not in a sigh and a groan; neither
like unwholesome physick do they let loose a present humour, and introduce an
habitual indispositi­on: But they bring us to the felicity of God, the same
yesterday, and to day and for ever; they do not give a private and particu­lar
delight, but their benefit is publike, like the incense of the al­tar, it
sends up a sweet smell to heaven, and makes atonement for the religious man
that kindled it, and delights all the standers by, and makes the very air
wholesome; there is no blessed soul goes to heaven, but he makes a generall
joy in all the mansions where B the Saints do dwell, and in all the chappels
where the Angels sing: and the joyes of religion are not univocal, but
productive of rare and accidental, and praeternatural pleasures; for the
musick of holy hymnes delights the ear, and refreshes the spirit, and makes
the very bones of the Saint to rejoyce: and charity, or the giving alms to the
poor, does not onely ease the poverty of the receiver, but makes the giver
rich, and heals his sicknesse, and delivers from death; and temperance though
it be in the matter of meat, and drink, and pleasures, yet hath an effect upon
the understanding, C and makes the reason sober, and his will orderly, and his
[...]ffecti­ons regular, and does things beside, and beyond their natural and
proper efficacy; for all the parts of our duty are watered with the showers of
blessing, and bring forth fruit according to the influ­ence of heaven, and
beyond the capacities of nature.

And now let the voluptuous person go and try whether put­ting his wanton hand
to the bosome of his Mis [...]s will get half such honour as Scaevola put upon
his head, when he put his hand into the fire. Let him see whether a drunken
meeting will cure a fe­ver, or make him wise? A hearty and a persevering
prayer will. D Let him tell me, if spending great summes of money upon his
lusts will make him sleep soundly, or be rich? Charity will; Alms will
increase his fortune, and a good conscience shall charme all his cares and
sorrows into a most delicious slumber; well may a full goblet wet the
drunkards tongue, and then the heat rising from the stomack will dry the
spunge, and heat it into the scorchings and little images of hell: and the
follies of a wanton bed will turn the itch into a smart, and empty the reins
of all their lustfull powers; but can they do honour, or satisfaction in any
thing that must last, and that ought to be provided for? No: All the things of
E this world are little, and trifling, and limited, and particular, and
sometimes necessary because we are miserable, wanting and im­perfect, but they
never do any thing toward perfection, but their pleasure dies like the time in
which it danced a while, and when the minute is gone, so is the pleasure too,
and leaves no footstep but the impression of a sigh, and dwells no where, but
in the same house where you shall finde yesterday, that is in forgetfulnesse,
and [[Page 256]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=136)
annihilation, unlesse its onely childe, sorrow, shall marry, and breed A more
of its kinde, and so continue its memory and name to eter­nall ages. It is
therefore the most necessary part of prudence to choose well in the main
stake; and the dispute is not much; for if eternall things be better then
temporall, the soul more noble then the body, vertue more honourable then the
basest vices, a lasting joy to be chosen before an eternall sorrow, much to be
preferred before little, certainty before danger, publike good things, before
private evils, eternity before moments, then let us set down in re­ligion, and
make heaven to be our end, God to be our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the
Holy Ghost the earnest of our inheritance,B vertue to be our imployment, and
then we shall never enter into the portion of fools and accursed ill-choosing
spirits. Nazianzen said well, Malim prudentiae guttam quàm foecundioris
fortunae pela­gus: One drop of prudence is more usefull, then an ocean of a
smooth fortune; for prudence is a rare instrument towards hea­ven; and a great
fortune is made oftentimes the high-way to hell and destruction. However, thus
farre, prudence is our duty; every man can be so wise; and is bound to it, to
choose heaven and a co­habitation with God, before the possessions and
transient vanities of the world.C

2\. It is a duty of Christian prudence to pursue this great end, with apt
means and instruments in proportion to that end. No wise man will sail to
Ormus in a cock-boat, or use a childe for his interpreter; and that Generall
is a Cyclops without an eye, who chooses the sickest men to man his Towns, and
the weakest to fight his battels. It cannot be a vigorous prosecution unlesse
the means have an efficacy or worth commensurate to all the difficulty, and
something of the excellency of that end which is designed. And indeed men use
not to be so weak in acquiring the pos­sessions of their temporals; But in
matters of religion they think D any thing effective enough to secure the
greatest interest; as if all the fields of heaven, and the regions of the
Kingdom were waste ground, and wanted a Colony of planters; and that God
invited men to heaven upon any terms, that he might rejoyce in the multi­tude
of subjects. For certain it is, men do more to get a little mo­ney, then for
all the glories of heaven: Men rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the
bread of carefulnesse, to become richer then their neighbours; and are amazed
at every losse, and impatient of an evil accident, and feel a direct strom of
passion, if they suffer in their interest: But in order to heaven they are
cold in their religi­on,E indevout in their prayers, incurious in their
walking, unwatch­full in their circumstances, indifferent in the use of their
opportu­nities, infrequent in their discoursings of it, not inquisitive of the
way, and yet think they shall surely go to heaven: But a pru­dent man knows
that by the greatnesse of the purchase, he is to [[Page
257]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=136) A make an
estimate of the value and the price: When we ask of God any great thing; As
wisdom, delivery from sicknesse, his holy Spirit, the forgivenesse of sins,
the grace of chastity, restitution to his fa­vour, or the like, do we hope to
obtain them without a high opi­nion of the things we ask? and if we value them
highly, must we not desire them earnestly? and if we desire them earnestly,
must we not pray for them fervently? and whatsoever we ask for fer­vently,
must not we beg for frequently? and then because prayer is but one hand toward
the reaching a blessing, and God requires our cooperation and endeavour; and
we must work with both B hands: are we not convinced that our prayers are
either faint, or a designe of lazinesse, when we either ask coldly, or else
pray loudly, hoping to receive the graces we need without labour? A prudent
person that knows to value the best object of his desires, will also know that
he must observe the degrees of labour, accord­ing to the excellency of the
reward: Prayer must be effectuall, fervent, frequent, continuall, holy,
passionate, that must get a grace, or secure a blessing: The love that we must
have to God must be such as to keep his commandements, and to make us willing
to part with all our estate, and all our honour, and our life for the
te­stimony C of a holy conscience. Our charity to our neighbours must be
expressive in a language of a reall friendship, aptnesse to for­give,
readinesse to forbear, in pitying infirmities, in relieving ne­cessities, in
giving our goods and our lives, and quitting our pri­vileges to save his soul,
to secure and support his vertue. Our re­pentance must be full of sorrows and
care, of diligence and hatred against sin, it must drive out all, and leave no
affections towards it; it must be constant and persevering, fearfull of
relapse, and watch­full of all accidents: Our temperance must sometimes turn
into ab­stinence, and most commonly be severe, and ever without reproof: D He
that striveth for masteries is temperate (saith Saint Paul) in all things; he
that does all this, may with some pretence and reason say, he intends to go to
heaven: But they that will not deny a lust, nor refrain an appetite, they that
will be drunk when their friends do merrily constrain them, or love a cheap
religion, and a gentle and lame prayer, short and soft, quickly said, and soon
passed over, seldome returning, and but little observed, How is it possible
that they should think themselves persons disposed to receive such glorious
crowns and scepters, such excellent condi­tions, which they have not faith
enough to believe, nor attention E enough to consider, and no man can have wit
enough to under­stand. But so might an Ar [...]adian shepherd look from the
rocks, or thorow the clefts of the valley where his sheep graze, and won­der
that the messenger stayes so long from comming to him to be crowned King of
all the Greek Ilands, or to be adopted heir to the Macedonian Monarchy. It is
an infinite love of God, that we have [[Page
258]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=137) heaven upon
conditions, which we can perform with greatest di­ligence; A But truely the
lives of men are generally such, that they do things in order to heaven,
things (I say) so few, so trifling, so unworthy, that they are not
proportionable to the reward of a crown of oak, or a yellow riband, the
slender reward with which the Romans payed their souldiers for their
extraordinary valour. True it is, that heaven is not in a just sense of a
commutation, a reward, but a gift, and an infinite favour: but yet it is not
rea­ched forth but to persons disposed by the conditions of God; which
conditions when we pursue in kinde, let us be very carefull we do not fail of
the mighty price of our high calling, for want of B degrees, and just
measures, the measures of zeal and a mighty love.

3\. It is an office of prudence so to serve God that we may at the same time
preserve our lives and our estates, our interest and reputation for our
selves, and our relatives, so farre as they can consist together. Saint Paul
in the beginning of Christianity was careful to instruct the forwardnesse and
zeal of the new Christi­ans into good husbandry, and to catechize the men into
good trades, and the women into useful imployments, that they might C not be
unprofitable. For Christian religion carrying us to heaven, does it by the way
of a man, and by the body it serves the soul, as by the soul it serves God;
and therefore it endeavours to se­cure the body and its interest, that it may
continue the opportu­nities of a crown, and prolong the stage in which we are
to run for the mighty price of our salvation: and this is that part of
pru­dence, which is the defensative and guards of a Christian in the time of
persecution; and it hath in it much of duty. He that through an indiscreet
zeal casts himself into a needlesse danger, hath betrayed his life to tyranny
and tempts the sin of an enemy,D he loses to God the service of many yeers,
and cuts off himself from a fair opportunity of working his salvation (in the
main parts of which we shall finde a long life, and very many yeers of reason
to be little enough) he betrayes the interest of his relatives, (which he is
bound to preserve) he disables himself of making provision for them of his own
house, and he that fails in this duty by his own fault, is worse then an
infidel, and denies the faith, by such unseasonably dying, or being undone,
which by that testimo­ny he did intend gloriously to confesse; he serves the
end of am­bition and popular services, but not the sober ends of religion, he
E discourages the weak, and weakens the hands of the strong, and by upbraiding
their warinesse, tempts them to turn it into rash­nesse or despair; he
affrights strangers from entring into religion, while by such imprudence, he
shall represent it to be impossible at the same time to be wise and to be
religious; it turns all the whole religion into a forwardnesse of dying or
beggery, leaving [[Page
259]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=137) A no space for
the parts and offices of a holy life, which in times of persecution are
infinitely necessary, for the advantages of the insti­tution. But God hath
provided better things for his servants: Quem fata cogunt, ille cum veniâ est
miser, He whom God by an inevitable necessity calls to sufferance, he hath
leave to be un­done, and that ruine of his estate or losse of his life shall
secure first a providence, then a crown.

At si quis ultro se malis offert volens.

seque ipse torquet, perdere est dignus bona

B Queis nescit uti.

But he that invites the cruelty of a Tyrant by his own follyes or the
indiscretions of an unsignificant and impertinent zeal, suffers as a wilful
person, and enters into the portion and reward of fools. And this is the
precept of our Blessed Saviour, next after my text: Beware of men: use your
prudence to the purposes of avoiding their snare.  [...] Man is the most
harmful of all the wilde beasts: ye are sent as sheep among wolves, be
therefore C wise as serpents; when you can avoid it suffer not men to ride
over your heads, or trample you under foot; thats the wisdom of Ser­pents; and
so must we; that is by all just complyances, and tole­ration of all
indifferent changes in which a duty is not destroyed and in which we were not
active, so to preserve our selves that we might be permitted to live, and
serve God, and to do advantages to religion; so purchasing time to do good in,
by bending in all those flexures of fortune, and condition, which we cannot
help, and which we do not set forward, and which we never did procure; and
this is the direct meaning of Saint Paul;Eph. 5. 16. see then that ye walk D
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, Redeeming the time because the dayes
are evil; that is, we are fallen into times that are troublesome, dangerous,
persecuting and afflictive, purchase as much respite as you can: Buy or redeem
the time by all honest arts, by humility, by fair carriage and sweetnesses of
society, by civility, and a peaceful conversation, by good words, and all
honest offices, by praying for your persecutors, by patient sufferance of what
is unavoidable: And when the Tyrant draws you forth from all these guards and
retire­ments, and offers violence to your duty or tempts you to do a dishonest
act, or to omit an act of obligation, then come forth into E the Theater and
lay your necks down to the hangmans axe, and fear not to die the most shamful
death of the crosse or the gallows; for so have I known angels ascending and
descending upon those lad­ders; and the Lord of glory suffered shame and
purchased honour upon the crosse.Col. 4. 5. Thus we are to walk in wisdom
towards them that are without redeeming the time: for so Saint Paul renewes
that per­mission, or commandment: Give them no just cause of offence; [[Page
260]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=138) with all
humility and as occasion is offered represent their duty,A and invite them
sweetly to felicities and vertue, but do not in ruder language upbraid and
reproach their basenesse: and when they are in corrigible, let them alone,
lest like cats they run mad with the smell of delicious ointments; And
therefore Pothi­nus Bishop of Lyons being asked by the unbaptized President,
who was the God of the Christians? answered  [...]; If you be disposed with
real and hearty desires of learning, what you ask you shall quickly know; But
if your purposes be in direct, I shall not preach to you, to my hurt and your
no advantage. Thus the wisdom of the primitive Christians was careful not to
prophane B the temples of the heathen, not to revile their false Gods, and
when they were in duty to represent the follies of their religi­on they chose
to do it, from their own writings and as rela­tors of their own records they
fled from the fury of a persecuti­on, they hid themselves in caves, and
wandred about in disguises, and preached in private, and celebrated their
synaxes, and com­munions in grots and retirements, and made it appear to all
the world, they were peaceable, and obedient, charitable, and patient, and at
this price bought their time.C

[...]

[...]

As knowing that even in this sense, time was very pretious and the
opportunitie of giving glory to God by the offices of an excel­lent religion,
was not too deare a purchase at that rate. But then when the wolves had entred
into the folds and seized upon a lamb the rest fled, and used all the innocent
arts of conceal­ment. Saint Athanasius being overtaken by his persecutors, but
not known, and asked whether he saw Athanasius passing that D way; pointed out
forward with his finger, non longè abest Atha­nasius; the man is not far off;
a swift foot-man will easily o­vertake him. And Saint Paul divided the
councell of his Judges, and made the Pharisees his parties by a witty
insinuation of his own belief of the resurrection, which was not the main
question, but an incident to the matter of his accusation. And when Plinius
se­cundus in the face of a Tyrant court was pressed so invidiously to give his
opinion concerning a good man in banishment and un­der the disadvantage of an
unjust sentence he diverted the snare of Marcus Regulus by referring his
answer to a competent ju­dicatory E according to the laws; being prefled
again, by offering a direct answer upon a just condition, which he knew, they
would not accept; and the third time, by turning the envy upon the
im­pertinent and malicious Orator, that he won great honour, the honour of a
severe honesty, and a witty man, and a prudent [[Page
261]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=138) A person. The
thing I have noted, because it is a good pattern to represent the arts of
honest evasion, and religious, prudent honesty: which any good man may
transcribe and turn into his own instances if an equal case should occur.

For in this case the rule is easy; If we are commanded to be wise and redeeme
our time, that we serve God and religion, we must not use unlawful arts which
set us back in the accounts of our time, no lying Subterfuges, no betraying of
a truth, no treachery to a good man, no insnaring of a brother, no secret
renouncing of any part or proposition of our religion, no de­nying B to
confesse the article when we are called to it. For when the primitive
Christians had got a trick to give money for certificates, that they had
sacrificed to idols, though in­deed they did not do it, but had corrupted the
officers and ministers of state, they dishonoured their religion and were
marked with the appellative of libellatici, Libellers; and were excommunicate
and cast off from the society of Christians and the hopes of Heaven, till they
had returned to God by a severe repentance; optanduum est ut quod libenter
facis diu fa­cere possis. It is good to have time long to doe that which wee C
ought to doe; but to pretend that, which we dare not doe, and to say we have,
when we have not, if we know we ought not, is to dishonour the cause and the
person too; it is ex­pressly against confession of Christ, of which Saint Paul
saith, by the mouth confession is made unto salvation. And our Blessed
Saviour, he that confesseth me before men. I will confesse him be­fore my
Heavenly Father; and if here he refuseth to own me, I will not own him
hereafter: it is also expressly against Chri­stian fortitude and noblenesse;
and against the simplicity and sincerity of our religion, and it turnes
prudence into craft, D and brings the Devil to wait in the temple, and to
minister to God; and it is a lesser Kinde of apostacy: and it is well that the
man is tempted no further; for if the persecutors could not be corrupted with
money, it is ods but the complying man would, and though he would with the
money hide his shame, yet he will not with the losse of all his estate redeeme
his religion  [...]: some men will lose their lives rather then a faire
estate: and doe not al­most all the armies of the world (I mean) those that
fight E in the justest causes, pretend to fight and die for their lands and
liberties: and there are too many also that will die twice rather then be
beggers once: although we all know that the second death is intolerable.
Christian prudence forbids us to pro­voke a danger; and they were fond persons
that run to perse­cution, and when the Proconsul sate on the life and death,
and made strict inquisition after Christians, went and offered them­selves
[[Page 262]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=139) to die;
and he was a fool that being in Portugal run to A the Priest as he elevated
the host; and overthrew the mysteries and openly defied the rites of that
religion: God when he sends a persecution will pick out such persons whom he
will have to die, and whom he will consigne to banishment, and whom to
po­verty: In the mean time let us do our duty when we can, and as long as we
can, and with as much strictnesse as we can; walk­ing  [...] (as the Apostles
Phrase is) not prevaricating in the least tittle; and then if we can be safe
with the arts of civil, innocent, inoffensive, compliance, let us blesse God
for his permissions made to us, and his assistances in the using them. But if
either we turne B our zeal into the ambition of death, and the follies of an
un­necessary beggery; or on the other side turn our prudence into craft and
covetousnesse; to the first, (I say) that God hath no plea­sure in fooles, to
the latter, If you gain the whole world and lose your own soul: your losse is
infinite and intolerable. C D E

[[Page 263]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=139)

## 21\. A Sermon. XXI.SER. XXI. B Of Christian Prudence.  
Part II.

C 4\. IT is the office of Christian prudence so to order the affaires of our
life as that in all the offices of our souls and con­versation, we do honour
and reputation, to the religion we professe. For the follies and vices of the
Professors give great advantages to the adversary to speak reproachfully, and
does aliene the hearts and hinder the complyance of those undetermined
per­sons, who are apt to be perswaded, if their understandings be not
prejudiced.

But as our necessary duty is bound upon us by one ligament more D in order to
the honour of the cause of God: so it particularly bindes us to many
circumstances adjuncts and parts of duty which have no other commandment, but
the law of prudence. There are some sects of Christians which have some one
constant indisposition, which as a character divides them from all others, and
makes them reproved on all hands: some are so suspitious and ill natured, that
if a person of a facile nature and gentle disposition fall into their hands he
is presently sowred and made morose, unpleasant, and un­easy in his
conversation: Others there are that do things so like to what themselves
condemn that they are forced to take sanctua­ry E and labour in the mine of
unsignificant distinctions, to make themselves believe they are innocent: and
in the mean time they offend all men else, and open the mouths of their
adversaries to speak reproachful things; true, or false; (as it happens) And
it re­quires a great wit to understand all the distinctions and devices
thought of, for legitimating the worshipping of images: And those [[Page
264]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=140) people that
are liberal in their excommunications make men think A they have reason to say
their Judges are proud, or self willed, or co­vetous, or ill natured people.
These that are the faults of Govern­ours, and continued, are quickly derived
upon the sect and cause a disreputation to the whole society and institution.
And who can think that congregation to be a true branch of the Christian, who
makes it their profession to kill men to save their souls against their will,
and against their understanding? who calling themselves dis­ciples of so meek
a Master, do live like bears upon prey, and spoil and blood? It is a huge
dishonour to the sincerity of a mans purpo­ses to be too busie in fingring
money in the matters of religion: and B they that are zealous for their rights
and tame in their devotion, furious against sacrilege, and a companion of
drunkards; implaca­ble against breakers of a Canon, and carelesse and patient
enough with them that break the fifth or sixth Commandments of the Deca­logue,
tell all the world their private sense is to preserve their own interest with
scruple and curiosity, and leave God to take care for his.

Thus Christ reproved the Pharisees, for straining at a gnat and swallowing a
Camel; the very representation of the manner and matter of fact discovers the
vice by reproving the folly of it. They C that are factious to get a rich
proselyte and think the poor not worth saving dishonour their zeal and teach
men to call it cove­tousnesse, and though there may be a reason of prudence to
de­sire one more then the other, because of a bigger efficacy, the ex­ample of
the one may have more then the other; yet it will quick­ly be discovered if it
be done by secular designe: and the Scri­pture that did not allow the
preferring of a gay man before a poor Saint in the matter of place, will not
be pleased that in the matter of souls, which are all equal, there should be a
faction and designe, and an acceptation of persons. Never let us pollute our
religion D with arts of the world, nor offer to support the arke with
unhal­lowed hands; nor mingle false propositions with true, nor make religion
a pretence to profit or preferment, nor do things which are like a vice;
neither ever speak things dishonorable of God, nor abuse thy brother for Gods
sake, nor be solicitous and over busie to re­cover thy own little things▪
neither alwayes think it fit to lose thy charity by forcing thy brother to do
justice; and all those things which are the outsides and faces, the garments
and most discern­ed parts of religion, be sure that they be dressed according
to all the circumstances of men and by all the rules of common honesty,E and
publick reputation. Is it not a sad thing that the Jew should say, the
Christians worship images? or that it should become a proverb, that the Jew
spends all in his passeover, the Moore in his mar­riage, and the Christian in
his law suits? that, what the first sacri­fice to religion, and the second to
publick joy, we should spend [[Page
265]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=140) A in malice,
covetousnesse, and revenge? Pudet haec opprobria nobis & dici potuisse, & non
potuisse refelli. But among our selves also, we serve the Devils ends, and
minister to an eternal dis-union, by saying and doing things which look
unhandsomely. One sort of men is superstitious, phantastical, greedy of
honour, and tenaci­ous of propositions to fill the purse, and his religion is
thought no­thing but policy, and opinion. Another sayes he hath a good
re­ligion, but he is the most indifferent and cold person in the world, either
to maintain it, or to live according to it; the one dresses the images of
Saints with fine clothes, the other lets the poor go B naked, and disrobes the
priests that minister in the religion. A third uses God worse then all this,
and sayes of him such things that are scandalous even to an honest man, and
such which would undo a good mans reputation: And a fourth, yet endures no
governour but himself, and pretends to set up Christ and make himself his
lieute­nant. And a fifth hates all government, and from all this it comes to
passe that it is hard for a man to choose his side, and he that chooses wisest
takes that, which hath in it least hurt; but some he must endure, or live
without communion: and every Church of one denomination is, or hath been too
incurious of preventing in­famy C or disreputation to their confessions.

One thing I desire should be observed, that here the Question being concerning
prudence, and the matter of doing reputation to our religion, it is not enough
to say, we can with learning justi­fie all that we do, and make all whole with
3. or 4. distinctions; for possibly the man that went to visit the Corinthian
Lais, if he had been asked why he dishonoured himself with so unhandsome an
entrance, might finde an excuse to legitimate his act, or  [...]t least to
make himself beleeve well of his own person; but he that in­tends to do
himself honour, must take care that he be not suspect­ed, D that he give no
ocasion of reproachful language; for fame and honour is a nice thing, tender
as a womans chastity, or like the face of the purest mirrour, which a foul
breath, or an unwhole­some air, or a watry eye can fully, and the beauty is
lost although it be not dashed in pieces. When a man or a sect is put to
answer for themselves in the matter of reputation, they with their
distin­ctions wipe the glasse, and at last can do nothing but make  [...]
ap­pear it was not broken; but their very abstersion and laborious excuses
confesse it was foul and faulty: We must know that all sorts of men, and all
sects of Christians, have not onely the mistakes E of men and their prejudices
to contest withall, but the calumnies and aggravation of Devils: and therefore
it will much ease our ac­counts of dooms-day, if we are now so prudent that
men will not be offended here, nor the Devils furnished with a libell in the
day of our great account.

To this rule appertains that we be curious in observing the [[Page
266]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=141) circumstances
of men, and satisfie all their reasonable expectations,A and do things at that
rate of charity and religion which they are taught to be prescribed in the
institution. There are some things which are undecencies rather then sins,
such which may become a just Heathen, but not a holy Christian; a man of the
world, but not a man professing godlinesse. Because when the greatnesse of the
man, or the excellency of the Law, engage us upon great severity, or an
exemplar vertue, whatsoever is lesse then it renders the man unworthy of the
religion, or the religion unworthy of its fame: Men think themselves abused,
and therefore return shame for pay­ment. We never read of an Apostle that went
to law; and it is B but reasonable to expect that of all men in the world
Christians should not be such fighting people, and Clergy men should not
command Armies, and Kings should not be drunk, and subjects should not strike
Princes for justice, and an old man should not be youthfull in talk, or in his
habit; and women should not swear, and great men should not lie, and a poor
man should not op­presse; for besides the sin of some of them, there is an
undecen­cy in all of them; and by being contrary to the end of an office, or
the reputation of a state, or the sobrieties of a graver or sub­limed C
person, they asperse the religion as insufficient to keepe the persons within
the bounds of fame and common reputation.

But above all things those sects of Christians whose professed doctrine brings
destruction and diminution to government, give the most intolerable scandal,
and dishonour to the institution; and it had been impossible that Christianity
should have prevailed over the wisdom and power of the Greeks and Romans, if
it had not been humble to superiours, patient of injuries, charitable to the
needy, a great exactour of obedience to Kings, even to heathens, that they
might be won, and convinced; and to persecutours that they D might be sweetned
in their anger, or upbraided for their cruel in­justice: for so doth the
humble vine creep at the foot of an oak, and leans upon its lowest base, and
begs shade and protection, and leave to grow under its branches, and to give
and take mutu­all refreshment, and pay a friendly influence for a mighty
patro­nage, and they grow and dwell together, and are the most remark­able of
friends and married pairs of all the leavie nation. Reli­gion of it self is
soft, easie and defenselesse, and God hath made it grow up with empire, and to
leane upon the arms of Kings, and it cannot well grow alone; and if it shall
like the Ivy suck E the heart of the oak upon whose body it grew and was
support­ed, it will be pulled down from its usurped eminency, and fire and
shame shall be its portion. We cannot complain if Princes arm against those
Christians, who if they are suffered to preach will disarm the Princes; and it
will be hard to perswade that Kings are bound to protect and nourish those
that will prove mi­nisters [[Page
267]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=141) A of their own
exauctoration: And no Prince can have juster reason to forbid, nor any man
have greater reason to deny com­munion to a family, then if they go about to
destroy the power of the one, or corrupt the duty of the other. The
particulars of this rule are very many; I shall onely instance in one more,
be­cause it is of great concernment to the publike interest of Christen­dome.

There are some persons whose religion is hugely disgraced, because they change
their propositions according as their tempo­rall necessities or advantages do
return. They that in their weak­nesse B and beginning cry out against all
violence as against persecu­tion: and from being suffered, swell up till they
be prosperous, and from thence to power, and at last to Tyranny; and then
suffer none but themselves, and trip up those feet, which they humbly kissed,
that themselves should not be trampled upon; these men tell all the world that
at first they were pusillanimous, or at last outragious▪ that their doctrine
at first served their fear, and at last served their rage, and that they did
not at all intend to serve God: and then who shall believe them in any thing
else? Thus some men declaim against the faults of Governours, that themselves
C may governe; and when the power was in their hands, what was a fault in
others, is in them necessity; as if a sin could be hallowed for comming into
their hands. Some Greeks at Florence subscri­bed the Article of Purgatory, and
condemned it in their own Dio­cesses: And the Kings supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, was ear­nestly defended against the pretences of the Bishop of
Rome, and yet when he was thrust out, some men were, and are v [...]olent to
submit the King to their Consistories, as if he were Supreme in defiance of
the Pope, and yet not Supreme over his own Clergy. These Articles are mannaged
too suspitiously.

D Omnia si perdas famam servare memento.

You lose all the advantages to your cause, if you lose your repu­tation.

5 It is a duty also of Christian prudence that the teachers of others by
authority, or reprovers of their vices by charity, should also make their
persons apt to do it without objection.

Lori pedem rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus.

E No man can endure the Gracchi preaching against sedition, nor Verres prating
against theevery, or Milo against homicide: and if Herod had made an oration
of humility, or Antiochus of mercy, men would have thought, it had been a
designe to evil purposes. He that means to gain a soul, must not make his
Sermon an osten­tation of his Eloquence, but the law of his own life. If a
Grama­rian [[Page
268]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=142) should speak
solaecismes, or a Musician sing like a bittern, he A becomes ridiculous for
offending in the faculty he professes: So it is in them who minister to the
conversion of souls: If they fail in their own life, when they professe to
instruct another, they are defective in their proper part, and are unskilfull
to all their purposes; and the Cardinal of Crema did with ill successe tempt
the English priests to quit their chaste marriages, when himself was
deprehended in unchaste embraces. For good counsel seems to be unhallowed,
when it is reached forth by an impure hand, and he can ill be beleeved by
another, whose life so confutes his rules, that it is plain he does not
beleeve himself. Those Churches B that are zealous for souls, must send into
their ministeries men so innocent, that evil persons may have no excuse to be
any longer vitious. When Gorgias went about to perswade the Greeks to be at
peace, he had eloquence enough to do advantage to his cause, and reason enough
to presse it: But Melanthius was glad to put him off, by telling him that he
was not fit to perswade peace, who could not agree at home with his wife, nor
make his wife agree with her maid; and he that could not make peace between
three single persons, was unapt to prevail for the reuniting fourteen or
fifteen Common-wealths: And this thing Saint Paul remarks by C enjoyning that
a Bishop should be chosen such a one as knew well to rule his own house, or
else he is not fit to rule the Church of God. And when thou perswadest thy
brother to be chaste, let not him deride thee for thy intemperance; and it
will ill become thee to be severe against an idle servant, if thou thy self
beest use­lesse to the publike; and every notorious vice is infinitely against
the spirit of government, and depresses the man to an evennesse with common
persons,

—Facinus quos inquinat, aequat, to reprove, belongs to a Superiour; and as
innocence gives a man D advantage over his brother, giving him an artificiall
and adventi­tious authority; so the follies and scandals of a publike and
Go­verning man destroyes the efficacy of that authority that is just and
naturall. Now this is directly an office of Christian prudence, that good
offices and great authority, become not ineffective by ill conduct.

Hither also it appertains that in publike or private reproofs, we observe
circumstances of time, of place, of person, of disposi­tion. The vices of a
King are not to be opened publikely; and Princes must not be reprehended as a
man reproves his servant; but E by Categoricall propositions, by abstracted
declamations, by repre­hensions of a crime in its single nature, in private,
with humility, and arts of insinuation: And it is against Christian prudence
not onely to use a Prince or great Personage with common language, but it is
as great an imprudence to pretend for such a rudenesse, the [[Page
269]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=142) A examples of
the Prophets in the old Testament. For their case was extraordinary, their
calling peculiar, their commission special, their spirit miraculous, their
authority great, as to that single mis­sion, they were like thunder or the
trump of God, sent to do that office plainly, for the doing of which in that
manner, God had given no commission to any ordinary minister: And therefore we
never finde that the Priests did use that freedom, which the Pro­phets were
commanded to use, whose very words being put into their mouthes, it was not to
be esteemed an humane act, or a law­full manner of doing an ordinary office;
neither could it become B a precedent to them whose authority is precarious
and without coërcion whose spirit is allayed with Christian graces and duties
of humility, whose words are not prescribed, but left to the con­duct of
prudence, as it is to be advised by publike necessities, and private
circumstances, in ages where all things are so ordered, that what was fit and
pious amongst the old Jews, would be incivil and intolerable to the latter
Christians. He also that reproves a vice should also treat the persons with
honour, and civilities, and by fair opinions, and sweet addresses place the
man in the regions of modesty, and the confines of grace, and the fringes of
repentance. C For some men are more restrained by an imperfect, feared shame,
so long as they think there is a reserve of reputation which they may secure,
then they can be with all the furious declamations of the world, when
themselves are represented ugly and odious, full of shame, and actually
punished with the worst of tempor [...] evils, beyond which he fears not here
to suffer, and from whence because he knows it will be hard for him to be
redeemed by an after [...]game of reputation, it makes him desperate and
incorrigible b [...] frater­nall correption.

A zealous man hath not done his duty, when he calls his bro­ther D drunkard
and beast, and he may better do it, by telling him he is a man, and sealed
with Gods Spirit, and honoured with the title of a Christian, and is, or ought
to be reputed as a discreet person by his friends; and a governour of a
family, or a guide in his countrey, or an example to many, and that it is huge
pity so many excellent things should be sullied, and allayed with what is so
much below all this: Then a reprover does his duty, when he is severe against
the vice, and charitable to the man, and carefull E of his reputation, and
sorry for his reall dishonour, and obser­vant of his circumstances, and
watchfull to surprize his affections and resolutions, there where they are
most tender, and most tena­ble; and men will not be in love with vertue
whither they are forced with rudenesse and incivilities; but they love to
dwell there whither they are invited friendly, and where they are treated
ci­villy, and feasted liberally, and lead by the hand and the eye to honour
and felicity.

[[Page 270]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=143) 6\. It
is a duty of Christian prudence not to suffer our souls to A walk alone,
unguarded, unguided, and more single then in other actions and interests of
our lives, which are of lesse concernment. Vae soli & singulari, said the Wise
man, Wo to him that is alone: and if we consider how much God hath done to
secure our souls, and after all that, how many wayes there are for a mans soul
to miscarry, we should think it very necessary to call to a spirituall man to
take us by the hand, to walk in the wayes of God, and to lead us in all the
regions of duty, and thorow the labyrinths of danger. For God who best loves,
and best knows how to value our souls, set a price no lesse upon it then the
life-blood of his B Holy Son; he hath treated it with variety of usages
according as the world had new guises, and new necessities; he abates it with
punishment to make us avoid greater; he shortned our life that we might live
for ever; he turns sicknesse into vertue; he brings good out of evil; he turns
enmities to advantages, our very sins into repentances, and stricter walking;
he defeats all the follies of men, and all the arts of the Devil, and layes
snares, and uses violence to secure our obedience; he sends Prophets and
Priests to invite us, and to threaten us to felicities; he restrains us with
lawes, and he C bridles us with honour and shame, reputation, and society,
friends, and foes; he layes hold on us by the instruments of all the
passi­ons; he is enough to fill our love, he satisfies our hope, he affrights
us with fear, he gives us part of our reward in hand, and enter­tains all our
faculties with the promises of an infinite and glori­ous portion; he curbs our
affections: he directs our wills, he in­structs our understandings with
Scriptures, with perpetuall Ser­mons, with good books, with frequent
discourses, with particu­lar observations, and great experience, with
accidents and judge­ments, with rare events of providence, and miracles; he
sends his D Angels to be our guard, and to place us in opportunities of
vertue, and to take us off from ill company and places of danger, to set us
neer to good example; he gives us his holy Spirit, and he becomes to us a
principle of a mighty grace, descending upon us in great variety, and
undiscerned events, besides all those parts of it which men have reduced to a
method and an art; and after all this he forgives us infinite irregularities,
and spares us every day, and still expects, and passes by, and waits all our
dayes, still watching to do us good, and to save that soul which he knowes is
so preci­ous, one of the chiefest of the works of God, and an image of
di­vinity.E Now from all these arts and mercies of God, besides that we have
infinite reason to adore his goodnesse, we have also a de­monstration, that we
ought to do all that possibly we can, and ex­tend all our faculties, and watch
all our opportunities, and take in all assistances to secure the interest of
our soul, for which God is pleased to take such care, and use so many arts for
its security. If [[Page
271]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=143) A it were not
highly worth it, God would not do it. If it were not all of it necessary, God
would not do it. But if it be worth it, and all of it be necessary, why should
we not labour in order to this great end? If it be worth so much to God it is
so much more to us: for if we perish, his felicity is undisturbed, but we are
undone, infinitely un­done. It is therefore worth taking in a spirituall
guide, so far we are gone.

But because we are in the question of prudence, we must con­sider whether it
be necessary to do so: For every man thinks him­self wise enough as to the
conduct of his soul, and managing of B his eternal interest; and divinity is
every mans trade, and the Scriptures speak our own language, and the
commandments are few and plain, and the laws are the measure of justice, and
if I say my prayers, and pay my debts, my duty is soon summed up, and thus we
usually make our accounts for eternity, and at this rate onely take care for
heaven; but let a man be questioned for a portion of his estate or have his
life shaken with diseases, then it will not be enough to employ one agent, or
to send for a good wo­man to minister a potion of the juices of her country
garden, but the C ablest Lawyers and the skilfullest Physitians & the advice
of friends and huge caution, and diligent attendances and a curious watching
concerning all the accidents and little passages of our disease, and truly a
mans life, and health is worth all that, and much more, and in many cases it
needs it all.

But then is the soul the onely safe and the onely trifling thing a­bout us?
Are not there a thousand dangers, and ten thousand dif­ficulties, and
innumerable possibilities of a misadventure? Are not all the congregations in
the world divided in their doctrines, and all of them call their own way
necessary and most of them call all the D rest damnable? we had need of a wise
instructor and a prudent choice at our first entrance, and election of our
side: and when we are well in the matter of Faith for its object, and
jnstitution; all the evils of my self and all the evils of the Church and all
the good that happens to evil men, every day of danger, the periods of
sicknesse and the day of death are dayes of tempest and storm, and our faith
wil suffer shipwrack unlesse it be strong and supported and directed. But who
shall guide the vessel when a stormy passion or a violent imagination
transports the man? who shall awaken his reason and charm his passion into
slumber & instruction? How shal a man make E his fears confident, and allay
his confidence with fear, and make the allay with just proportions, and steere
evenly, between the ex­tremes, or call upon his sleeping purposes or actuate
his choices, or binde him to reason in all the wandrings and ignorances, in
his pas­sion and mistakes? For suppose the man of great skil and great
learn­ing in the wayes of religion, yet if he be abused by accident, or by his
own will, who shall then judge his cases of conscience, and awa­ken [[Page
272]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=144) his duty and
renew his holy principle, and actuate his spi­ritual A powers? For Physitians
that prescribe to others, do not mi­nister to themselves in cases of danger,
and violent sicknesses; and in matter of distemperature we shall not finde
that books alone will do all the work of a spiritual Physitian more then of a
natural, I will not go about to increase the dangers and difficulties of the
soul, to represent the assistance of a spiritual man to be necessary. But of
this I am sure; our not understanding, and our not consider­ing our soul make
us first to neglect, and then many times to lose it. But is not every man an
unequal judge in his own case? and there­fore the wisdom of God and the laws
hath appointed tribunals and B Judges and arbitrators and that men are partial
in the matter of souls, it is infinitely certain, because amongst those
milions of souls that perish, not one in ten thousand but believes himself in
a good condition; and all sects of Christians think they are in the right, and
few are patient to enquire whether they be or no: then adde to this, that the
Questions of souls, being clothed with circumstances of mat­ter and particular
contingency, are or may be infinite, and most men are so infortunate, that
they have so intangled their cases of conscience, that there where they have
done something good, it may be, they have mingled half a dozen evils; and when
interests C are confounded and governments altered, and power strives with
right, and insensibly passes into right, and duty to God would fain be
reconciled with duty to our relatives, will it not be more then necessary that
we should have some one that we may enquire of, af­ter the way to heaven,
which is now made intricate by our follies and inevitable accidents? But by
what instrument shall men alone and in their own cases be able to discern the
spirit of truth from the spirit of illusion, just confidence from presumption,
fear from pu­sillanimity; are not all the things and assistances in the world
little enough to defend us against pleasure and pain, the two great foun­tains
D of temptation? is it not harder to cure a lust then to cure a fea­ver? and
are not the deceptions and follies of men, and the arts of the Devil and
inticements of the world & the deceptions of a mans own heart, and the evils
of sin more evil and more numerous then the sicknesses and diseases of any one
man? and if a man perishes in his soul, is it not infinitely more sad then if
he could rise from his grave and die a thousand deaths over? Thus we are
advanced a se­cond step in this prudential motive; God used many arts to
secure our souls interest; and there is infinite dangers, and infinite wayes
of miscarriage in the souls interest; and therefore there is great ne­cessity
E God should do all those mercies of security, and that we should do all the
under-ministeries we can in this great work.

But what advantage shall we receive by a spiritual Guide? much every way. For
this is the way that God hath appointed who in e­very age hath sent a
succession of spiritual persons, whose office is [[Page
273]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=144) A to minister
in holy things, and to be stewards of Gods houshold, shep­herds of the flock,
dispensers of the mysteries, under mediators, and ministers of prayer,
preachers of the law, expounders of questions, monitors of duty, conveiances
of blessings, and that which is a good discourse in the mouth of another man
is from them an ordinance of God; and besides its natural efficacy and
perswasion, it prevails by the way of blessing, by the reverence of his
person, by divine institution, by the excellency of order, by the advantages
of opi­nion and assistances of reputation, by the influence of the spirit who
is the president of such ministeries, and who is appoin­ted B to all
Christians according to the despensation▪ that is ap­pointed to them; to the
people in their obedience, and frequent­ing of the ordinance, to the Priest in
his ministery and publick and privat offices; To which also I adde this
consideration, that as the Holy Sacraments are hugely effective to spiritual
purposes, not onely because they convey a blessing to the worthy suscipients,
but because men cannot be worthy suscipients unlesse they do many excellent
acts of vertue in order to a previous disposition; so that in the whole
conjunction, and transaction of affaires there is good done by way of proper
efficacy and divine blessing; so it is in fol­lowing C the conduct of a
spiritual man, and consulting with him in the matter of our souls; we cannot
do it unless we consider our souls and make religion our businesse and examine
our present state, and consider concerning our danger, and watch and designe
for our ad­vantages, which things of themselves wil set a man much forwarder
in the way of Godlinesse; besides thath naturally every man will lesse dare to
act a sin for which he knows he shall feel a present shame in his discoveries
made to the spiritual Guide, the man that is made the witnesse of his
conversation.Sophocl. [...]. Holy men ought to know all things from God, and
that relate to D God, in order to the conduct of souls: and there is nothing
to be said against this, if we do not suffer the devil in this affaire to
abuse us, as he does many people in their opinions, teaching men to suspect
there is a designe and a snake under the plantain? But so may they suspect
Kings when they command obedience, or the Levites when they read the law of
tithes, or Parents when they teach their children temperance or Tutors when
they watch their charge. However, it is better to venture the worst of the
designe, then to lose the best of the assistance; and he that guides himself
hath much work, and much danger; but he that is under the conduct of another,
his work is E easy, little and secure; it is nothing but diligence and
obedience, and though it be a hard thing to rule well, yet nothing is easier
then to follow and to be obedient.

[[Page 274]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=145)

## 22\. Sermon. XXII.SER. XXII. A Of Christian Prudence.B  
Part III.

7\. AS it is a part of Christian prudence to take into the conduct C of our
soules a spiritual man for a guide, so it is also of great concernment that we
be prudent in the choice of him whom we are to trust in so great an interest.

Concerning which it will be impossible to give characters and significations
particular enough to enable a choice without the in­terval assistances of
prayer, experience and the Grace of God; He that describes a man can tell you
the colour of his hair, his stature and proportions, and describe some general
lines, enough to di­stingush him from a Cyclops or a Saracen, but when you
chance D to see the man you will discover figures or little features of which
the description had produced in you no Phantasme, or expectati­on. And in the
exteriour significations of a sect there are more semblances then in mens
faces and greater uncertainty in the signes: & what is faulty strives so
craftily to act the true and proper images of things, and the more they are
defective in circumstances, the more curious they are in forms; and they also
use such arts of gain­ing Proselytes which are of most advantage towards an
effect, and therefore such which the true Christian ought to pursue, and the
A­postles actually did, and they strive to follow their patterns in arts of
perswasion, not onely because they would seem like them, but be­cause they can
have none so good, so effective to their purposes; that it follows that it is
not more a duty to take care, that we be not corrupted with false teachers,
then that we be not abused with false signes; for we as well finde a good man
teaching a false pro­position, [[Page
275]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=145) A as a good
cause managed by ill men, and a holy cause is not alwayes dressed with
healthful symptomes▪ nor is there a crosse al­wayes set upon the doores of
those congregations, who are infected with the plague of heresy.

When Saint John was to separate false teachers from true, he took no other
course but to remark the doctrine which was of God, and that should be the
mark of cognisance to distinguish right shep­heards from robbers and invaders:
every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God: He that denieth it is not of God By this he bids his schollers to avoid
the present sects of Ebi­on, B Cerinthus, Simon Magus and such other persons
that denied that Christ was at all before he came, or that he came really in
the flesh and a proper humanity. This is a clear note and they that con­versed
with Saint John or believed his doctrine were sufficiently in­structed in the
present Questions. But this note will signify nothing to us; for all sects of
Christians confesse Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and the following sects
did avoid that rock over which a great A­postle had hung out so plain a
lantern.

In the following ages of the Church men have been so curious to C signifie
misbelievers, that they have invented and observed some signes, which indeed
in some cases were true, real appendages of false believers; but yet such
which were also, or might be common to them with good men, and members of the
Catholick Church; some few I shall remark and give a short account of them
that by remo­ving the uncertain, we may fix our inquiries and direct them by
cer­tain significations; lest this art of prudence turn into folly and
facti­on, errour and secular designe.

1\. Some men distinguish errour from truth by calling their ad­versaries
doctrine, new, and of yesterday; and certainly this is a good D signe if it be
rightly applyed; for since all Christian doctrine is that which Christ taught
his Church, and the spirit enlarged, or ex­pounded, and the Apostles
delivered, we are to begin the Christi­an aera for our faith and parts of
religion by the period of their preaching: our account begins then, and
whatsoever is contrary to what they taught is new and false, and whatsoever is
besides, what they taught, is no part of our religion (and then no man can be
prejudiced for believing it or not) and if it be adopted into the con­fessions
of the Church, the proposition is alwayes so uncertain, that its not to be
admitted into the faith; and therefore if it be old in E respect of our dayes,
it is not therefore necessary to be believed: if it be new it may be received
into opinion according to its proba­bilitie, and no sects or interest are to
be divided upon such accounts. This onely I desire to be observed, that when a
truth returns from banishment by a postliminium, if it was from the first▪
though the Holy fire hath been buried, or the river ran under ground, yet that
we do not call that new; since newnesse is not to be ac­counted [[Page
276]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=146) of by a
proportion to our short lived memories, or to the A broken records and
fragments of story left after the inundation of barbarisme and war, and change
of Kingdoms and corruption of Authors; but by its relation to the fountain of
our truths and the birth of our religion under our Fathers in Christ, the holy
Apostles, and Disciples: a Camel was a new thing to them that saw it in the
fable; But yet it was created as soon as a cow or the domestick creatures, and
some people are apt to call every thing new, which they never heard of before,
as if all religion were to be measured by the standards of their observation,
or country customs. What­soever was not taught by Christ, or his Apostles
though it came B in by Papias, or Dionysius, by Arius or Liberius, is
certainly new as to our account; and whatsoever is taught to us by the Doctors
of the present age if it can shew its test from the beginning of our period
for revelation, is not to be called new though it be pres­sed with a new zeal
and discoursed of by unheard of arguments; that is, though men be ignorant and
need to learn it, yet it is not therefore new or unnecessary.

2\. Some would have false teachers sufficiently signified by a name or the
owning of a private Appellative as of Papist, Lutheran, Calvenists Zuinglian,
Socinian; & think it is enough to denominat them C not, of Christ if they are
called by the name of a man. And indeed the thing is in it self ill: but then
if by this mark we shall esteem false teachers sufficiently signified we must
follow no man, no Church, nor no communion: for all are by their adversaries
marked with an appellative of separation and singularity, and yet themselves
are tenacious of a good name, such as they choose or such as is permitted to
them by fame, and the people, and a natural neces­sity of making a
distinction. Thus the Donatist called themselves the flock of God, and the
Novatians called the Catholicks traditors, and the Eustathians called
themselves Catholikes and the worship­pers D of images made Iconoclast to be a
name of scorn, and men made names as they listed, or as the fate of the market
went. And if a Doctor preaches a doctrine which another man likes not, but
prea­ches the contradictory, he that consents and he that refuses have each of
them a teacher by whose name, if they please to wrangle, they may be
signified. It was so in the Corinthian Church with this onely difference that
they divided themselves by names which signi­fied the same religion. I am of
Paul, and I of Apollo and I am of Peter, and I of Christ; these Apostles were
ministers of Christ; and so does every teacher new or old among the Christians
pretend himself to E be; Let that therefore be examined; if he ministers to
the truth of Christ and the religion of his master, let him be entertained as
a servant of his Lord; but if an appellative be taken from his name, there is
a faction commenced in it; and there is a fault in the men if there be none in
the doctrine; but that the doctrine be true or [[Page
277]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=146) A false, to be
received, or to be rejected because of the name is acci­dental and
extrinsecall; and therefore not to be determined by this signe.

3\. Amongst some men a sect is sufficiently thought to be re­proved, if it
subdivides and breaks into little fractions, or chan­ges its own opinions:
indeed if it declines its own doctrine, no man hath reason to beleeve them
upon their word, or to take them upon the stock of reputation, which
(themselves being judges) they have forfeited and renounced in the changing
that which at first they obtruded passionately. And therefore in this case
there B is nothing to be done, but to beleeve the men so farre as they have
reason to beleeve themselves: that is, to consider when they prove what they
say: and they that are able to do so, are not persons in danger to be seduced
by a bare authority, unlesse they list them­selves: for others that sink under
an unavoidable prejudice, God will take care for them if they be good people;
and their case shall be considered by and by. But for the other part of the
signe; when men fall out among themselves for other interests or opini­ons, it
is no argument, that they are in an errour concerning that doctrine, which
they all unitedly teach or condemn respectively; C but it hath in it some
probability that their union is a testimony of truth, as certainly as that
their fractions are a testimony of their zeal, or honesty, or weaknesse (as it
happens): and if we Christi­ans be too decretory in this instance, it will be
hard for any of us to keep a Jew from making use of it against the whole
religi­on which from the dayes of the Apostles hath been rent into
innu­merable sects, and under-sects, springing from mistake or interest, from
the arts of the Devil, or the weaknesse of man. But from hence we may make an
advantage in the way of prudence, and be­come sure that all that doctrine is
certainly true, in which the ge­nerality D of Christians (who are divided in
many things, yet) do constantly agree: and that that doctrine is also
sufficient since it is certain that because in all Communions and Churches
there are some very good men, that do all their duty to the getting of truth,
God will not fail in any thing that is necessary to them that honestly and
heartily desire to obtain it: and therefore if they rest in the heartinesse of
that, and live accordingly, and superinduce nothing to the destruction of
that, they have nothing to do but to rely up­on Gods goodnesse: and if they
perish, it is certain they cannot help it, and that is demonstration enough
that they cannot perish, E considering the justice and goodnesse of our Lord
and Judge.

4\. Whoever break the bands of a Society, or Communion, and go out from that
Congregation is whose Confession they are baptized, do an intolerable scandal
to their doctrine and persons, and give suspicious men reason to decline their
Assemblies, and not to choose them at all for any thing of their authority, or
out­ward [[Page
278]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=147) circumstances:
and Saint Paul bids the Romans to mark A them that cause divisions and
offences. But the following words make their caution prudent and practicable,
[contrary to the do­ctrine which ye have learned and avoid them] they that
recede from the doctrine which they have learned, they cause the offence, and
if they also obtrude this upon their congregations, they also make the
division. For it is certain, if we receive any doctrine con­trary to what
Christ gave, and the Apostles taught, for the autho­rity of any man, then we
call men Masters, and leave our Master which is in heaven; and in that case we
must separate from the Con­gregation and adhere to Christ; but this is not to
be done, unlesse B the case be evident and notorious. But as it is hard, that
the pub­like doctrine of a Chruch should be rifled, and misunderstood, and
reproved, and rejected, by any of her wilful or ignorant sons and daughters:
so it is also as hard that they should be bound, not to see when the case is
plain and evident. There may be mischiefs on both sides; but the former sort
of evils men may avoid if they will; for they may be humble and modest, and
entertain better opini­ons of their Superiours then of themselves, and in
doubtful things give them the honour of a just opinion: and if they do not do
so, that evil will be their own private: for that it become not publike,C the
King and the Bishop are to take care: but for the latter sort of evil it will
certainly become universal; If (I say) an authorita­tive false doctrine be
imposed, and is to be accepted accordingly; for then all men shall be bound to
professe against their conscience, that is, with their mouthes not to confesse
unto salvation, what with their hearts they believe unto righteousnesse. The
best way of reme­dying both the evils is, that Governours lay no burden of
doctrines or lawes but what are necessary, or very profitable: and that
In­feriours do not contend for things unnecessary, nor call any thing
necessary that is not: till then there will be evils on both sides; and D
although the Governours are to carry the Question in the point of law,
reputation, and publike government, yet as to Gods Judica­ture they will bear
the bigger load, who in his right do him an in­jury, and by the impresses of
his authority destroy his truth. But in this case also, although separating be
a suspicious thing and in­tolerable, unlesse it be when a sin is imposed, yet
to separate is also accidentall to truth: for some men separate with reason,
some men against reason; therefore here all the certainty that is in the
thing, is when the truth is secured, and all the security to the men will be
in the humility of their persons, and the heartinesse and sim­plicity E of
their intention, and diligence of inquiry. The Church of England had reason to
separate from the Confession and pra­ctises of Rome in many particulars, and
yet if her children sepa­rate from her they may be unreasonable and impious.

5\. The wayes of direction which we have from holy Scripture [[Page
279]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=147) A to
distinguish false Apostles from true, are taken from their doctrine or their
lives. That of the doctrine is the most sure way if we can hit upon it; but
that also is the thing signified, and needs to have other signes. Saint John
and Saint Paul took this way, for they were able to do it infallibly. All that
confesse Jesus incarnate are of God said Saint John; those men that deny it
are hereticks; avoid them: and Saint Paul bids to observe them that cause
divisions and offences against the doctrine delivered. Them also avoid, that
do so. And we might do so as easily as they, if the world would one­ly take
their depositum, that doctrine which they delivered to all B men, that is, the
Creed, and superinduce nothing else, but suffer Christian faith to rest in its
own perfect simplicity, unmingled with arts, and opinions, and interests. This
course is plain and easie, and I will not intricate it with more words, but
leave it directly in its own truth and certainty, with this onely direction.
That when we are to choose our doctrine, or our side, we take that which is in
the plain unexpounded words of Scripture; for in that onely our religion can
consist. Secondly choose that which is most advantageous to a holy life, to
the proper graces of a Christian, to humility, to charity, to forgivenesse and
alms, to obedience▪ and C complying with governments, to the honour of God and
the exal­tation of his attributes, and to the conservation and advantages of
the publike societies of men; and this last, Saint Paul directs, Let our be
carefull to maintain good works for necessary uses, for he that heartily
pursues these proportions cannot be an ill man, though he were accidentally
and in the particular applications decei­ved.

6\. But because this is an act of wisdom, rather then prudence, and supposes
science or knowledge rather then experience, there­fore it concerns the
prudence of a Christian to observe the practise, D and the rules of practise,
their lives, and pretences, the designes, and colours, the arts of conduct,
and gaining proselytes, which their Doctors and Catechists do use in order to
their purposes, and in their ministery about souls. For although many signes
are uncertain, yet some are infallible and some are highly probable.

7\. Therefore those teachers that pretend to be guided by a pri­vate spirit
are certainly false Doctors. I remember what Simmias in Plutarch tels
concerning Socrates, that if he heard any man say he saw a divine vision, he
presently esteemed him vain and proud▪ but if he pretended onely to have heard
a voice or the word of E God, he listened to that religiously, and would
enquire of him with curiosity. There was some reason in his fancy; for God
does not communicate himself by the eye to men but by the ear: ye saw no
figure, but ye heard a voice, said Moses to the people con­cerning God: and
therefore if any man pretends to speak the word of God, we will enquire
concerning it; the man may the better [[Page
280]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=148) be heard,
because he may be certainly reproved if he speaks amisse:A but if he pretends
to visions and revelations, to a private spirit and a mission extraordinary,
the man is proud and unlerned, vicious and impudent. No Scripture is of
private interpretation (saith S. Peter) that is, of private emission or
declaration. Gods words were delivered indeed by single men, but such as were
publikely designed Prophets, remarked with a known character, approved of by
the high Priest, and Sanhedrim, indued with a publike spi­rit, and his
doctrines were alwayes agreeable to the other Scriptures. But if any man
pretends now to the spirit, either it must be a pri­vate or publike; if it be
private, it can but be usefull to himself B alone, and it may cozen him too,
if it be not assisted by the spirit of a publike man. But if it be a publike
spirit, it must enter in at the publike door of ministeries, and divine
ordinances, of Gods grace, and mans endeavour, it must be subject to the
Prophets, it is discernable and judicable by them, and therefore may be
reje­cted, and then it must pretend no longer. For he that will pretend to an
extraordinary spirit, and refuses to be tried by the ordinary wayes, must
either prophecy, or work miracles, or must have a voice from heaven to give
him testimony. The Prophets in the old Testament, and the Apostles in the New,
and Christ between C both had no other way of extraordinary probation: and
they that pretend to any thing extraordinary, cannot, ought not to be
beleeved, unlesse they have something more then their own word. If I bear
witnesse of my self, my witnesse is not true, said Truth it self, our Blessed
Lord. But secondly, they that intend to teach by an extraordinary spirit, if
they pretend to teach accord­ing to Scripture must be examined by the measures
of Scripture, and then their extraordinary must be judged by the ordinary
spi­rit, and stands or falls by the rules of every good mans religion, and
publike government; and then we are well enough. But if they D speak any thing
against Scripture it is the spirit of Antichrist, and the spirit of the Devil;
For if an Angel from heaven (he certainly is a spirit) preach any other
doctrine, let him be accursed.

But this pretence of a single and extraordinary spirit is nothing else but the
spirit of pride, errour, and delusion, a snare to catch easie and credulous
souls, which are willing to die for a gay word and a distorted face; it is the
parent of folly, and giddy doctrine, impossible to be proved, and therefore
uselesse to all purposes of religion, reason, or sober counsels; it is like an
invisible colour, or musick without a sound, it is, and indeed is so intended
to be, a E direct overthrow of order, and government, and publike
ministe­ries; It is bold to say any thing, and resolved to prove nothing; it
imposes upon willing people after the same manner that Oracles and the lying
Daemons did of old time, abusing men not by pro­per efficacy of its own, but
because the men love to be abused; [[Page
281]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=148) A it is a
great disparagement to the sufficiency of Scripture, and as­perses the Divine
providence for giving to so many ages of the Church an imperfect religion,
expressely against the truth of their words who said, they had declared the
whole truth of God, and told all the will of God: and it is an affront to the
Spirit of God, the Spi­rit of wisdom, and knowledge, of order and publike
ministeries. But the will furnishes out malice, and the understanding sends
out levity, and they marry, and produce a phantastick dream, and the daughter
sucking winde instead of the milk of the word, growes up to madnesse and the
spirit of reprobation. Besides all this, an extra­ordinary B spirit is
extremely unnecessary, and God does not give immissions and miracles from
heaven to no purpose, and to no necessities of his Church; for the supplying
of which he hath given Apostles and Evangelists, Prophets and Pastors, Bishops
and Priests, the spirit of Ordination, and the spirit of instruction,
Catechists, and Teachers, Arts and Sciences, Scriptures and a constant
succession of Expositors, the testimony of Churches, and a constant line of
tra­dition, or delivery of Apostolical Doctrine in all things necessary to
salvation. And after all this, to have a fungus arise from the belly of mud
and darknesse, and nourish a gloworm, that shall C challenge to out-shine the
lantern of Gods word, and all the can­dles which God set upon a hill, and all
that the Spirit hath set up­on the candlesticks; and all the starres in
Christs right hand, is to annull all the excellent, established, orderly, and
certain effects of the Spirit of God, and to worship the false fires of the
night. He therefore that will follow a Guide that leads him by an
extraordi­nary spirit, shall go an extraordinary way, and have a strange
for­tune, and a singular religion, and a portion by himself, a great way off
from the common inheritance of the Saints, who are all led by the Spirit of
God, and have one heart, and one minde, one faith, D and one hope, the same
baptisme, and the helps of the Ministe­ry, leading them to the common
countrey, which is the por [...]ion of all that are the sons of adoption,
consigned by the Spirit of God, the earnest of their inheritance.

Concerning the pretence of a private spirit, for interpretation of the
confessed doctrine of God (the holy Scriptures) it will not so easily come
into this Question of choosing our spirituall Guides; Because every person
that can be Candidate in this office, that can be chosen to guide others, must
be a publike man, that is, of a holy calling, sanctified or separate publikely
to the office; and E then to interpret is part of his calling, and imployment,
[...]nd to do so is the work of a publike spirit; he is ordained and designed,
he is commanded and inabled to do it: and in this there is no other caution to
be interposed, but that the more publike the man is, of the more authority his
interpretation is; and he comes neerest to a law of order, and in the matter
of government is to be observed: [[Page
282]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=149) but the more
holy and the more learned the man is, his inter­pretation A in matter of
Question is more likely to be true: and though lesse to be pressed as to the
publick confession yet it may be more effective to a private perswasion,
provided it be done with­out scandal, or lessening the authority, or
disparagement to the more publick person.

8\. Those are to be suspected for evil guides, who to get authority among the
people pretend a great zeal, and use a bold liberty in re­proving Princes and
Governours, nobility and Prelates; for such homilies cannot be the effects of
a holy religion, which lay a snare for authority, and undermine power, and
discontent the people B and make them bold against Kings, and immodest in
their own stations, and trouble the government. Such men may speak a truth or
teach a true doctrine; for every such designe does not unhal­low the truth of
God; but they take some truthes and force them to minister to an evil end; but
therefore, mingle not in the com­munities of such men, for they will make it a
part of your religion to prosecute that end openly which they by arts of the
Tempter have insinuated privately.

But if ever you enter into the seats of those Doctors that speak reproachfully
of their Superiours, or detract from government,C or love to curse the King in
their heart, or slander him with their mouths, or disgrace their persons,
blesse your self and retire quick­ly; for there dwells the plague, but the
spirit of God is not presi­dent of the assembly; and therefore you shall
observe in all the characters which the B. Apostles of our Lord made for
describing and avoiding societies of hereticks,2 Tim. 3. 4. 5. false guides
and bringers in of strange doctrines, still they reckon treason and rebellion;
so S. Paul, In the last dayes perillous times shall come, the men shall have
the form of Godlinesse, and denie the power of it; they shall be Traitors,
heady, high minded: 2 Pet. 2. 10. thats their characteristic note. So Saint
Peter▪ the Lord D knoweth how to deliver the Godly out of temptations and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be punished. But chiefly them
that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleannesse and despise government;
presumptuous are they, self willed they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities. vers. 8. ep. Jude. The same also is recorded and observed by Saint
Jude, likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion
and speak evil of dignities. These three testimonies are but the declara­tion
of one great contingency; they are the same prophesy decla­red by three
Apostolical men, that had the gift of prophecy: and by this character the Holy
Ghost in all ages hath given us caution E to avoid such assemblies, where the
speaking and ruling man shall be the canker of government, and a preacher of
sedition, who shall either ungirt the Princes sword, or unloose the button of
their mantle.

9\. But the Apostles in all these prophecies have remarked lust to [[Page
283]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=149) A be the
inseparable companion of these rebel prophets: they are fil­thy dreamers, they
defile the flesh; so Saint Jude: they walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleannesse, so Saint Peter they are lovers of plea­sure more then lovers of
God, incontinent and sensual. So Saint Paul and by this part of the character,
as the Apostles remarked the Ni­colatians, and Gnosticks, the Carpocratians
and all their impure branches which began in their dayes and multiplied after
their deaths, so they prophetically did foresignifie al such sects to be
avoided who to catch silly women laden with sins preach doctrines of ease and
licenciousnesse, apt to countenance and encourage vile B things, and not apt
to restrain a passion, or mortifie a sin. Such as those; that [God sees no sin
in his children: that no sin will take us from Gods favour; that all of such a
party are elect people: that God requires of us nothing but faith: and that
faith which justifies is nothing but a meere believing, that we are Gods
chosen: that we are not tied to the law of commandments: that the law of grace
is a law of liberty: and that liberty is to do what we list; that di­vorces
are to be granted upon many and slight causes: that simple fornication is no
sin: these are such doctrines, that upon the belief of them men may doe any
thing, and will do that which shall sa­tisfie C their own desires and promote
their interests and seduce their shee disciples: and indeed it was not without
great reason that these three Apostles joyned lust and treason together;
because the for­mer is so shameful a crime and renders a mans spirit naturally
a­verse to government that if it falls upon the person of a Ruler, it takes
from him the spirit of government, and render, him diffi­dent, pusillanimous,
private, and ashamed; if it happen in the person of a subject, it makes him
hate the man that shall shame him and punish him: it hates the light and the
Sun, because that opens him, and therefore is much more against government
because that D publishes and punishes too. One thing I desire to be observed,
that though the primitive heresies now named and all those others their
successors practised and taught horrid impurities, yet they did not invade
government at all, and therefore those sects that these A­postles did signifie
by prophecy, and in whom both these are con­centred, were to appear in some
latter times; and the dayes of the prophecy were not then to be fulfill'd;
what they are since, every age must judge,Eloquia Domi­ni casta eloquia by its
own experience, & for its own interest. But Christi­an religion is so pure and
holy that chastity is sometimes used for the whole religion, and to do an
action chastly signifies purity of inten­tion, E abstraction from the world
and separation from low and secular ends, the virginity of the soul, and its
union with God; and all de­viations and estrangements from God and adhesion to
forbidden objects is called fornication and adultery. Those sects therefore
that teach, incourage, or practise impious or unhallowed mixtures and shameful
lusts are issues of the impure spirit and most contrary to [[Page
284]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=150) God who can
behold no unclean thing.A

10\. Those prophets and Pastors that pretend severity and live loosely, or are
severe in small things and give liberty in greater, or forbid some sins with
extreme rigour, and yet practise or teach those that serve their interest or
constitute their sect, are to be sus­pected and avoided accordingly. Nihil est
hominum ineptâ persuasio­ne falsius, nec fictâ severitate ineptius. All ages
of the Church were extremely curious to observe when any new teachers did
arise, what kinde of lives they lived: and if they pretended severely and to a
strict life, then they knew their danger doubled: for it is certain all that
teach doctrines contrary to the established religion, delivered by B the
Apostles, all they are evil men. God will not suffer a good man to be seduced
damnably, much lesse can he be a seducer of others: and therefore you shall
still observe the false Apostles to be furious and vehement in their reproofs
and severe in their animadversions of others; but then if you watch their
private, or stay till their numbers are full, or observe their spiritual
habits, you shall finde them indulgent to themselves, or to return from their
disguises, or so spiritually wicked, that their pride, or their revenge, their
envie or their detraction, their scorn or their complacency in themselves,
their desire of preheminence and their impatience of arrival, shall place C
them far enough in distance from a poor carnal sinner, whom they shall load
with censures and an upbraiding scorn; but themselves are like Devils, the
spirits of darknesse the spiritual wickednesses in high places. Some sects of
men are very angry against servants for recreating and easing their labours
with a lesse prudent and an unse­vere refreshment; but the patron of their
sect shall oppresse a wicked man and an unbelieving person; they shall
chastise a drun­kard and entertain murmurrers; they shall not abide an oath
and yet shal force men to break three or four. This sect is to be avoided,
be­cause although it is good to be severe against carnal or bodily sins, yet D
it is not good to mingle with them who chastise a bodily sin to make way for a
spiritual, or reprove a servant, that his Lord may sin alone, or punish a
stranger and a begger that will not approve their sins, but will have sins of
his own. Concering such persons Saint Paul hath told us that they shall not
proceed far, but their folly shall be mani­fest. [...] said Lysias. Cito ad
naturam ficta reciderunt sua. They that dissemble their sin and their manners,
or make severity to serve loosnesse, and an imagi­nary vertue to minister to a
real vice; they that abhor Idols and would commit sacrilege: chastise a
drunkard and promote sedition,E declaime against the vanity of great persons,
and then spoil them of their goods, reform manners and engrosse estates, talk
godly and do impiously, these are teachers, which the Holy spirit of God hath
by three Apostles bid us to beware of and decline as we would run from the
hollownesse of a grave or the despaires and [[Page
285]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=150) A sorrows of
the damned.

11\. The substance of al is this, that we must not chose our doctrine by our
guide; but our guide by the doctrine, & if we doubt concern­ing the doctrine
we may judge of that by the lives and designes of the Teachers: By their
fruits you shall know them, and by the plain words of the scripture, by the
Apostles Creed, and by the commandments, and by the certain known and
established forms of government; These are the great indices, and so plain,
apt and easy; that he that is deceived is so because he will be so; he is
betrayed into it by his own lust and a voluntary chosen folly.

B 12 Besides these premises there are other little candles, that can help to
make the judgement clearer but they are such as do not signifie alone, but in
conjunction with some of the precedent characters which are drawn by the great
lines of scripture. Such as are 1. when the teachers of sects stir up
unprofitable and uselesse 1 Questions, 2. when they causelesly retire from the
universal customs 2 of Christendom, 3. And cancel all the memorials of the
greatest 3 mysteries of our redemption, 4. When their confessions and
Cate­chismes 4 and their whole religion consist  [...] in speculations and C
ineffective notions, in discourses of Angels and spirits▪ in abstractions and
raptures, in things they understand not and of which they have no revelation
5. Or else if their religion spends it self in ceremonies,5 outward guises and
material solemnities and imperfect formes drawing the heart of the vine forth
into leaves and irregular fruitless suckers, turning the substance into
circumstances, and the love of God into gestures, and the effect of the spirit
into the impertinent offices of a burdensom ceremonial: For by these two
particulars the Apostles reproved the Jews and the Gnostics, or those that
from the school of Pythagoras pretended conversation with Angels D and great
knowledge of the secrets of the spirit; chosing tutelar Angels and assigning
them offices and charges,Colos. 2 as in the Church of Rome to this day they do
to Saints: to these adde, 6. that we ob­serve 6 whether the guides of souls
avoid to suffer for their religi­on, for then the matter is foul, or the man
not fit to lead, that dares not die in cold blood for his religion: will the
man lay his life and his soul upon the proposition? If so, then you may
consider him upon his proper grounds, but if he refuses that, refuse his
conduct sure enough, 7. You may also watch whether they do not chose their
proselyts amongst the rich and vitious; that they m [...]y serve 7 E
themselves upon his wealth, and their disciple upon his vice, 8. If 8 their
doctrines evidently and greatly serve the interest o [...] wealth or honour,
and are ineffective to piety, 9. If they strive to gain 9 any one to their
confession, and are negligent to gain them to good life, 10. If by pretences
they lessen the severity of Christs precepts,10 and are easy in dispensations
and licencious glosses: 11. If they in­vent 11 suppletories to excuse an evil
man and yet to reconcile his [[Page
286]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=151) bad life with
the hopes of heaven, you have reason to suspect the A whole and to reject
these parts of errour and designe which in them­selves are so unhandsom
alwayes, and somtimes criminal. He that shal observe the Church of Rome so
implacably fierce for purgatory and the Popes supremacy, from clerical
immunities, and the Superi­ority of the Ecclesiastical persons to secular, for
indulgencies and precious and costly pardons, and then so full of devises to
recon­cile an evil life with heaven, requiring onely contrition, even at the
last for the abolition of eternal guilt; and having a thousand wayes to
commute and take off the temporal; will see he hath reason to be jealous that
interest is in these bigger then the religion, and yet B that the danger of
the soul is greater then that interest; and therefore the man is to do
accordingly.

Here indeed is the great necessity that we should have the pru­dence and
discretion, the  [...] of serpents,

—ut cernamus acutum

Quam aut aquila aut serpens Epidaurius.

For so serpents as they are curious to preserve their heads from contrition or
a bruise, so also to safeguard themselves that they be not charmed with sweet
and enticing words of false prophets; who charm not wisely, but cunningly,
leading aside unstable souls; against C these we must stop our ears or lend
our attention according to the foregoing measures and significations; but here
also I am to insert two or three cautions.

1\. We cannot expect that by these or any other signes we shall be inabled to
discover concerning all men whether they teach an errour or no. Neither can a
man by these reprove a Lutheran, or a Zuinglian, a Dominican or a Franciscan,
a Russian or a Greek, a Muscovite or a Georgian, because those which are
certain signes of false teachers, do signifie such men, who destroy an article
of faith or a commandment; God was careful to secure us from D death by
removing the Lepers from the camp, and giving certain notices of distinction,
and putting a term between the living and the dead: but he was not pleased to
secure every man from innocent and harmlesse errors, from the mistakes of men,
and the failings of mortality. The signes which can distinguish a living man
from a dead, will not also distinguish a black man from a brown, or a pale
from a white: It is enough that we decline those guides that lead us to hell,
but not to think that we are inticed to death by the weaknesses of every
disagreeing brother.

2\. In all discerning of sects, we must be careful to distinguish the E faults
of men from the evils of their doctrine; for some there are that say very
well, and do very ill,  [...].

Multos Thyrsigeros, paucos est cernere Bacchos: Many men of holy cal­ling and
holy religion that are of unholy lives; homines ignavâ operâ [[Page
287]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=151) A Philosophâ
sententiâ: But these must be separated from the instituti­on: and the evil of
the men is onely to be noted, as that such per­sons be not taken to our single
conduct, and personal ministery; I will be of the mans religion if it be good,
though he be not; but I will not make him my confessor  [...]. If he be not
wise for himself, I will not sit down at his feet lest we mingle filthinesse
instead of being cleansed and instructed.

3\. Let us make one separation more & then we may consider and act according
to the premises: If we espie a designe or an evil mark up­on one doctrine let
us divide it from the other that are not so spot­ted, B for indeed the publick
communions of men are at this day so ordered, that they are as fond of their
errours as of their truthes, and somtimes moct zealous for what they have
least reason to be so: and if we can by any arts of prudence separate from an
evil proposition and communicate in all the good, then we may love colleges of
religious persons, though we do not worship images, and we may obey our
Prelates, though we do no injury to prin­ces, and we may be zealous against a
crime, though we be not im­perious over mens persons, and we may be diligent
in the conduct of souls though we be not rapacious of estates, and we may be
mo­derate C exactors of Obedience to human laws though we do not dis­pense
with the breach of the divine; and the Clergy may represent their calling
necessary though their persons be full of modesty and humility, and we may
preserve our rights and not lose our charity. For this is the meaning of the
Apostle, Try all things and retain that which is good: from every sect and
communitie of Christians take any thing that is good, that advances holy
religion, and the Divine honour; For one hath a better government, a second a
better con­fession, a third hath excellent spiritual arts for the conduct of
souls, a fourth hath fewer errours, and by what instrument soever a ho­ly D
life is advantaged use that though thou grindest thy spears and arrows at the
forges of the Philistines; knowing thou hast no Ma­ster but Christ, no
religion but the Christian, no rule but the Scri­ptures, and the laws and
right reason, other things that are helps, are to be used accordingly.

These are the general rules of Christian prudence which I have chosen to
insist upon; there are many others more particular indeed, but yet worth not
onely the enumerating, but observing also, and that they be reduced to
practise. For the prudence of a Christian does oblige and direct respectively
all the children of the institution; E* that we be careful to decline a
danger, * watchful against a tempta­tion, * alwayes choosing that that is
safe, and fitted to all circumstan­ces, * that we be wise in choosing our
company * reserved and wary in our friendships, * and communicative in our
charity, * that we be silent and retentive of what we hear and what we think,
* not credulous, * not unconstant, * that we be deliberate in our election
[[Page 288]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=152) * and
vigorous in our prosecutions, that we suffer not good nature to A discompose
our duty but that we separate images from substances, and the pleasing of a
present company from our religion to God, and our eternal interest: for
sometimes that which is counselled to us by Christian prudence is accounted
folly by humane prudence, and so it is ever accounted when our duty leads us
into a persecution. * Hither also appertain; that we never do a thing that we
know we must repent of, * that we do not admire too many things, nor anything
too much, * that we be even in prosperity * and patient in adversity; but
transported with neither into the regions of des­pair or levity, pusillanimity
or Tyranny, dejection or Garishnesse, * al­wayes B to look upon the sear we
have impressed upon our flesh, and no more to handle dangers and knives, to
abstain from ambiti­ous and vexatious suits, not to contend with a mighty man,
* ever to listen to him (who according to the proverb) hath four ears, Rea­son
Religion, wisdom and experience, * rather to lose a benefit then to suffer a
detriment and an evil, * to stop the beginnings of evil, * to pardon and not
to observe all the faults of friends or enemies; * of evils to choose the
least, * and of goods to choose the greatest, if it be also safest; * not to
be insolent in successe, but to proceed according to the probability of humane
C causes and contingencies, * ever to be thankful for benefits, * and
pro­fitable to others and useful in all that we can, * to watch the sea­sons
and circumstances of actions, * to do that willingly which can­not be avoided,
lest the necessity serve anothers appetite, and it be lost to all our
purposes, Insignis enim est prudentiae, ut quod non facere non possis, id
facere ut libenter fecisse videaris, * not to pursue dif­ficult uncertain and
obscure things with violence and passion. These if we observe we shall do
advantage to our selves and to the religi­on, and avoid those evils which
fools and unwary people suffer for nothing, dying or bleeding without cause
and without pity. I end D this with the saying of Socrates. [...] ‘Vertue is
but a shadow and a servile imployment unlesse it be adorned and instructed
with prudence which gives motion and conduct,Plat. Phaedon spirits and
vigourousnesse to religion, making it not onely humane and reasonable but
Divine and caelestial.’ E

[[Page 289]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=152)

## 23\. A Sermon. XXIII.SERMON XXIII. B OF CHRISTIAN C SIMPLICITY.

Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16.‘And harmlesse as doves.]’

OUR Blessed Saviour having prefac'd concern­ing D Prudence, addes to the
integrity of the precept, and for the conduct of our religion, that we be
simple as well as prudent, inno­cent as well as wary: harmlesse and safe to
gether do well; for without this blessed uni­on, prudence turns into craft,
and simplicity degenerates into folly. Prudens simplicitas, is Martial's
character of a good man: a wary and cautious inno­cence, a harmlesse
providence, and provision: Verâ simplicitate bonus, a true simplicity, is that
which leaves to a man arms de­fensive; E his castles and strong forts, but
takes away his swords, and spears, or else his anger and his malice, his
peevishnesse and spite. But such is the misery, and such is the iniquity of
mankinde, that craft hath invaded all the contracts and entercourses of men,
and made simplicity so weak a thing, that it is grown into con­tempt,
sometimes with, and sometimes without reason; Et homi­nes [[Page
290]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=153) simplices,
minimè malos, the Romans called parum cautos, saepè A stolidos, unwary fools,
and defenselesse people were called simple: and when the innocency of the old
simple Romans in Junius Bru­tus time, in Fabritius, and Camillus began to
degenerate, and to need the Aquilian law to force men to deal honestly,
quickly the mischief increased, till the Aquilian law grew as much out of
power, as honesty was out of countenance. And there, and every where else men
thought they got a purchase, when they met with an honest man, and  [...]
Aristotle calls  [...], and  [...]. A fool is a profitable person, and he that
is simple is little better then mad: And so it is, when simplicity wants
pru­dence.B He that because he means honestly himself, thinks every man else
does so, and therefore is unwary in all, or any of his en­tercourses, is a
simple man in an evil sence, and therefore Saint Gregory Nazianzen remarks
Constantius with a note of folly, for suffering his easie nature to be abused
by Georgius,Orat. 21. [...]. The Prin­ces simplicity, so he calls it for
reverence, but indeed it was folly, for it was zeal without knowledge: But it
was a better temper, which he observed in his own father,  [...], such a
simplicity which onely wanted craft, or deceit, but wanted no C prudence or
caution, and that is truly Christian simplicity, or the sincerity of an
honest; and ingenious, and a fearlesse person; and it is a rare band, not
onely of societies, and contracts, but also of friendships, and advantages of
mankinde.

We do not live in an age in which there is so much need to bid men be wary, as
to take care that they be innocent: Indeed in re­ligion we are usually too
loose, and ungirt, exposing our selves to temptation, and others to offence,
and our name to dishonour, and the cause it self to reproach, and we are open
and ready to every evil but persecution: from that we are close enough, and
that D alone we call prudence; but in the matter of interest we are wary as
serpents, subtil as foxes vigilant as the birds of the night, rapa­cious as
Kites, tenacious as grapling hooks and the weightiest anchors, and above all,
false and hypocritical as a thin crust of ice, spread upon the face of a deep,
smooth, and dissembling pit; if you set your foot, your foot slips, or the ice
breaks, and you sink into death, and are wound in a sheet of water, descending
in­to mischief or your grave; suffering a great fall, or a sudden death by
your confidence and unsuspecting foot. There is an uni­versal crust of
hypocrisie, that covers the face of the greatest part E of mankinde. Their
religion consists in forms and outsides, and serves reputation or a designe,
but does not serve God: Their pro­mises are but fair language, and the
civilities of the Piazzas or Ex­changes, and disband and unty like the air
that beat upon their teeth, when they spake the delicious and hopefull words.
Their [[Page 291]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=153) A
oaths are snares to catch men, and make them confident: Their contracts are
arts and stratagems to deceive, measured by profit and possibility; and every
thing is lawfull that is gainfull; and their friendships are trades of
getting; and their kindnesse of watch­ing a dying friend, is but the office of
a vulture, the gaping for a legacy, the spoil of the carcasse; and their
sicknesses are many times policies of state, sometimes a designe to shew the
riches of our bed-chamber; and their funeral tears are but the paranymphs and
pious solicitors of a second Bride; and every thing that is ugly must be hid,
and every thing that is handsome must be seen, and B that will make a fair
cover for a huge deformity; and therefore it is (as they think) necessary that
men should alwayes have some pretences and forms, some faces of religion, or
sweetnesse of lan­guage, confident affirmatives, or bold oaths, protracted
treaties, or multitude of words, affected silence, or grave deportment, a good
name, or a good cause, a fair relation, or a worthy calling, great power, or a
pleasant wit; any thing that can be fair, or that can be usefull, any thing
that can do good, or be thought good, we use it to abuse our brother, or
promote our interests. Leporina C resolved to die, being troubled for her
husbands danger, and he resolved to die with her that had so great a kindnesse
for him as not to out-live the best of her husbands fortune. It was agreed and
she temperd the poyson, and drank the face of the unwhole­some goblet, but the
weighty poyson sunke to the bottome, and the easie man drank it all off, and
died, and the woman carried him forth to funeral, and after a little illnesse
which she soon recovered, she enterd upon the inheritance and a second
marriage.

Tuta frequensque via est—

D This is an usual and a safe way to cozen, upon colour of friend­ship or
religion, but that is hugely criminal; to tell a lie to abuse a mans belief,
and by it to enter upon any thing of his possession, or his injury is a
perfect destruction of all humane society, the most ignoble of all humane
follies, perfectly contrary to God, who is Truth it self, the greatest
argument of a timorous and a base, a cowardly and a private minde, not at all
honest, or confident to see the Sun,Dissett.  [...]. de regno. a vice fit for
slaves;  [...], as Dio Chryso­stomus calls it;  [...]; for the most timorous
and the basest of beasts E use craft, and lie in wait, and take their prey,
and save their lives by deceit, and it is the greatest injury to the abused
person in the world; for besides that it abuses his interest, it also makes
him for ever insecure, and uneasie in his confidence, which is the period of
cares, the rest of a mans spirit; it makes it necessary for a man to be
jealous and suspicious, that is, to be troublesome to himself [[Page
292]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=154) and every man
else; and above all, lying, or craftinesse, and un­faithful A usages, robs a
man of the honour of his soul, making his understanding uselesse and in the
condition of a fool; spoiled, and dishonoured, and despised:  [...]: Said
Plato, Every soul loses truth very unwillingly: Every man is so great a lover
of truth, that if he hath it not he loves to beleeve he hath, and would fain
have all the world to beleeve as he does; ei­ther presuming that he hath
truth, or else hating to be deceived, or to be esteemed a cheated and an
abused person. Non licet suf­furari mentem hominis etiam Samaritani, Can. Eth.
said R. Moses, sed veri­tatem loquere atque age ingenuè, If a man be a
Samaritan, that is,B a hated person, a person from whom you differ in matter
of reli­gion, yet steal not his minde away, but speak truth to him ho­nestly
and ingenuously. A mans soul loves to dwell in truth, it is his resting place;
and if you take him from thence, you take him into strange regions, a place of
banishment and dishonour. Qui ignotos laedit, latro appellatur, qui amicos,
paulò minus quam parri­cida. He that hurts strangers is a thief, but he that
hurts his friends is little better then a parricide: That's the brand and
stigma of hy­pocrisie and lying: it hurts our friends, mendacium in damnum
potens, and makes the man that owns it guilty of a crime, that is,C to be
punished by the sorrows usually suffered in the most exe­crable places of the
cities; But I must reduce the duty to particu­lars, and discover the contrary
vice, by the several parts of its proportion.

1\. The first office of Christian simplicity consists in our reli­gion and
manners: that they be open and honest, publike and justifiable, the same at
home and abroad; for besides the ingenu­ity and honesty of this, there is an
indispensable, and infinite ne­cessity it should be so, because whoever is a
hypocrite in his reli­gion, mocks God, presenting to him the outside, and
reserving D the inward for his enemy: which is either a denying God to be the
searcher of our hearts, or else an open defiance of his omniscience, and of
his justice: To provoke God that we may deceive men, to defie his
Almightinesse, that we may abuse our brother, is to de­stroy all that is
Sacred, all that is prudent, it is an open hostility to all things humane and
divine, a breaking from all the bands of all relations, and uses God so
cheaply as if he were to be trea­ted, or could be cozened like a weak man, and
an undiscerning and easie merchant: But so is the life of many men:E

Vita fallax, abditos sensus gerens,

Nimisque pulchram turpibus faciem induens.

It is a crafty life that men live, carrying designes, and living up­on secret
purposes; Pudor impudentem celat, audacem quies, pietas [[Page
293]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=154) A nefandum,
vera fallaces probant; simulantque molles dura. Men pretend modesty, and under
that red vail are bold against Supe­riours, saucy to their betters upon
pretences of religion, invaders of others rights by false propositions in
Theology, pretending humility they challenge superiority above all orders of
men, and for being thought more holy, think that they have title to govern the
world; they bear upon their face great religion, and are im­pious in their
relations, false to their trust, unfaithful to their friend, unkinde to their
dependants;  [...], turning up the white of their eye, and seeking for B
reputation in the streets; so did some of the old hypocrites, the Gentile
Pharisees, Asperum cultum, & intonsum caput & negligen­tiorem barbam & nitidum
argento odium, & cubile humi positum & quicquid aliud ambitionem viâ perversâ
sequitur: being the soft­est persons under an austere habit, the loosest
livers under a con­tracted brow; under a pale face, having the reddest and
most spritely livers; these kinde of men have abused all ages of the world,
and all religions, it being so easie in nature, so prepared and ready for
mischiefs, that men should creep into opportunities of devouring the flock
upon pretence of defending them, and to raise C their estates upon colour of
saving their souls.

Introrsum turpes speciosi pelle decorâ.

Men that are like painted sepulchres, entertainment for the eye, but images of
death, chambers of rottennesse, and repositories of dead mens bones. It may
sometimes concern a man to seem reli­gious; Gods glory may be shewed by fair
appearances, or the edifi­cation of our brother, or the reputation of a cause;
but this is but sometimes; but it alwayes concerns us that we be religious,
and we may reasonably think, that if the colours of religion so well do
advantage to us, the substance and reality would do it much D more. For no man
can have a good by seeming religious, and another by not being so; the power
of godlinesse never destroys any well built fabrick that was raised upon the
reputation of religi­on, and its pretences: Nunquam est peccare utile qu [...]
semper est turpe, said Cicero. It is never profitable to sin because it is
always base and dishonest: and if the face of religion could do a good turn,
which the heart and substance does destroy, then re [...]igion it self were
the greatest hypocrite in the world, and promises a bles­sing which it never
can perform, but must be beholding to its ene­my to verifie its promises. No.
We shall be sure to feel the blessings E of both the worlds if we serve in the
offices of religion devoutly and charitably, before men and before God: if we
ask of God things honest in the sight of men,  [...] (as Pytha­goras gave in
precept) praying to God with a free heart and a publike prayer, and doing
before men things that are truly plea­sing to God, turning our heart outward
and our face inwards, that [[Page
294]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=155) is, conversing
with men as in the presence of God, and in our pri­vate A towards God, being
as holy and devout, as if we prayed in publike, and in the corners of the
streets. Pliny praising of Ariston, gave him the title of an honest and hearty
religion. Ornat hunc ma­gnitudo animi quae nihil ad ostentationem, omnia ad
conscientiam re­fert: rectèque facti, non ex populi sermone mercedem, sed ex
facto petit. And this does well state the question of a sincere religion, and
an ingenuous goodnesse; It requires that we do nothing for osten­tation, but
every thing for conscience; and we may be obliged in conscience to publish our
manner of lives, but then it must be, not that we may have a popular noise for
a reward, but that God may B be glorified by our publike worshippings, and
others edified by our good examples.

Neither doth the sincerity of our religion require that we should not conceal
our sins, for he that sins and dares to own them pub­likely may become
impudent: and so long as in modesty we desire our shame should be hid, and men
to think better of us then we deserve, I say for no other reason, but either
because we would not derive the ill examples to others, or the shame to our
selves, we are within the protection of one of vertues sisters, and we are not
far from the gates of the kingdom of heaven; easie and apt to C be invited in,
and not very unworthy to enter.

But if any other principle draws the vail, if we conceal our vices because we
would be honoured for sanctity, or because we would not be hindered in our
designes, we serve the interest of pride and ambition, covetousnesse, or
vanity; if an innocent purpose hides the ulcer, it does half heal it; but if
it retires into the secrecy of sin and darknesse, it turns into a plague, and
infects the heart, and it dies infallibly of a double exulceration. The
Macedonian boy that kept the coal in his flesh, and would not shake his arm,
lest he should disturbe the sacrifice, or discompose the ministery be­fore D
Alexander the Great, concealed his pain to the honour of pa­tience and
religion. But the Spartan boy who suffered the little fox to eat his bowels
rather then confesse his theft when he was in danger of discovery, payed the
price of a bold hypocrisie; that is, the dissimulation reproveable in matter
of manners, which conceals one sin to make way for another;  [...]; Lucian
notes it of his Philosophical hypocrites, dissemblers in mat­ter of deportment
and religion, they seem severe abroad, but they enter into the vaults of
harlots, and are not ashamed to see a na­ked E sin in the midst of its
uglinesse, and undressed circumstances. A mighty wrastler, that had won a
crown at Olympus, for con­tending prosperously, was observed to turn his head
and go for­ward, with his face upon his shoulder, to behold a fair woman that
was present; and he lost the glory of his strength, when he [[Page
295]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=155) A became so
weak, that a woman could turn his head about, which his adversary could not.
These are the follies and weaknesses of man and dishonours to religion, when a
man shall contend nobly and do handsomly and then be taken in a base or a
dishonorable action; and mingle venome with his delicious ointment.

Quid quod olet gravius mistum dia pasmate virus.

At (que) duplex animae longius exit odor.

When Fescenia perfumed her breath that she might not smell of wine, she
condemned the crime of drunkennesse: but grew ridi­culous when the wine broke
thorow the cloud of a tender perfume B and the breath of a Lozenge; and that
indeed is the reward of an C hypocrite; his laborious arts of concealment
furnish all the world with declamation and severity against the crime which
himself condemnes with his caution: But when his own sentence too is pre­pared
against the day of his discovery.

Notas ergo nimis fraudes, deprensa (que) furta

Jam tollas, & sis ebria simpliciter.

A simple drunkard hath but one fault, But they that avoid dis­covery, that
they may drink on without shame or restraint adde hypocrisy to their vitious
fulnesse: and for all the amazements of their consequent discovery have no
other recompence, but that they pleased themselves in the security of their
crime, and their un­deserved reputation: Sic quae nigrior est cadente moro;
Cerussata sibi placet Lycoris: for so the most easy and deformed woman, whose
girdle no foolish young man will unloose, because shee is blacker then the
falling mulbery; may please her self under a skin of Cerusse, and call her
self fairer then Pharaohs daughter, or the hinds living upon the snowy
mountaines.

One thing more there is to be added as an instance to the simpli­city D of
religion, and that is that we never deny our religion, or lie concerning our
faith, nor tell our propositions, and articles deceit­fully, nor instruct
Novices or catechumens with fraud, but that when we teach them, we do it
honestly, justly, and severely, not alwayes to speak all, but never to speak
otherwise then it is, nor to hide a truth from them, whose soules are
concerned in it, that it be known, nequè enim id est celare cum quid reticias,
sed cum quod tuscias▪  [...]d igno­rare emolumenti tui causâ velis eos, So
Cicero. lib. 3. offic. quorum inter est id scire: So Cicero determins the case
of prudence and simplicity. The discovery of pious frauds, and the disclaiming
of false but profitable and rich pro­positions; E the quitting honours,
fraudulently gotten, and unjustly detained; the reducing every man to the
perfect understanding of his own religion so far as can concern his duty, the
disallowing false miracles, legends and fabulous stories, of cosening the
people into awfulnesse, fear and superstition, these are parts of Christian
simpli­city which do integrate this duty: for religion hath strengths enough
of its own to support it self; it needs not a devil for its advocate; [[Page
296]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=156) it is the
breath of God, and as it is purer then the beams of the A morning, so it is
stronger then a tempest, or the combination of all the windes though united by
the prince that ruleth in the aire: And we finde that the Nicene faith
prevailed upon all the world though some Arian Bishops went from Ariminum to
Nice, and there de­creed their own articles, and called it, the faith read at
Nice, and u­sed all arts and all violence, and all lying, and all diligence to
dis­countenance it, yet it could not be, it was the truth of God and therefore
it was stronger then all the gates of hell, then all the pow­ers of darknesse:
and he that tells a lie for his religion or goes a­bout by fraud and imposture
to gain proselytes, either dares not B trust his cause or dare not trust God.
True religion is open in its articles, honest in its prosecutions, just in its
conduct, inno­cent when it is accused, ignorant of falsehood, sure in its
truth, sim­ple in its sayings: and (as Julius Capitolinus said of the Emperour
Verus) it is morum simplicium & quae adumbrare nihil possit: it covers indeed
a multitude of sins by curing them, and obtaining par­don for them, but it can
dissemble nothing of it self, it cannot tell or do a lie: but it can become a
sacrifice; a good man can quit his life but never his integrity. Thats the
first duty; the sum of which is that which Aquilius said concerning fraud and
craft, bona fides C the honesty of a mans faith and religion is destroyed cum
aliud si­mulatum aliud actum sit, when either we conceale what we ought to
publish, or do not act what we pretend.

2\. Christian simplicity or the innocence of prudence relates to laws both in
their sanction and execution; that they be decreed with equity and
proportioned to the capacity and profit of the sub­jects and that they be
applied to practise with remissions and rea­sonable interpretations agreeable
to the sence of the words and the minde of the lawgiver; but laws are not to
be cosened and abused by contradictory glosses, and phantastick elusions as
knowing that D if the majesty and sacrednesse of them be once abused and
subjected to contempt and unreasonable and easy resolutions, their girdle is
unloosed and they suffer the shame of prostitution and contempt When Saul made
a law, that he that eat before night should die, the people perswaded him
directly to rescind it, in the case of Jo­nathan, because it was unequal and
unjust that he who had wrought their deliverance, and in that working it, was
absent from the pro­mulgation of the law should suffer for breaking it, in a
case of violent necessity and of which he heard nothing upon so faire and
probable a cause: and it had been well that the Persian had been so E rescued
who against the laws of his country killed a Lion to save the life of his
Prince; in such cases it is fit the law be rescinded and dispensed with all,
as to certain particulars, so it be done ingenu­ously with competent
authority, in great necessity, and without partiality: But that which I intend
here is, that in the rescission or [[Page
297]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=156) A dispensation
of the law the processe be open and free, and such as shall preserve the law
and its sacrednesse as well as the person and his interest. The laws of Sparta
forbad any man to be twice Admi­ral, but when their affaires required it, they
made Araeus titular and Lysander supravisor of him, and Admiral to all real
and ef­fective purposes; this wanted ingenuity and laid a way open for them to
despise the law which was made patient of such a weak evasion; The
Lacedemonian Embassador perswaded Pericles to turn the tables of the law,
which were forbidden to be removed, and an other ordained in a certain case
that the laws should sleep B 24\. hours; A third decreed that June should be
called May, because the time of an election appointed by the law was elapsed;
these arts are against the ingenuity and simplicitie of laws, and lawgivers;
and teach the people to cheat in their obedience, when their Judges are so
fraudulent in the administration of their laws. Every law should be made
plain, open, honest, & significant, and he that makes a de­cree and intricates
it on purpose, or by inconsideration, layes a snare or leaves one there, and
is either an imprudent person, and therefore unfit to govern, or else he is a
Tyrant and a vul [...]ur. It is too much that a man can make a law by an
arbitrary power. But C when he shall also leave the law so that every of the
ministers of Justice and the Judges shall have power to rule by a loose, by an
arbitrary, by a contradictory interpretation, it is intolerable. They that
rule by prudence, should above all things see that the patrons and Advocates
of innocence should be harmlesse and without an e­vil sting.

3\. Christian simplicity relates to promises and acts of grace and favour; and
its caution is, that all promises be simple, ingenuous, agreeable to the
intention of the promiser, truly and effectually ex­pressed and never going
lesse in the performance, then in the pro­mise, D and words of the expression:
concerning which the cases are several. 1. First all promises in which a third
or a second person hath no interest, that is the promises of kindnesse and
civilities, are tied to passe into performance, secundum aequum & bonum: and
though they may oblige to some small inconvenience, yet never to a great one:
and I will visit you to morrow morning, because I promised you, and therefore.
I will come etiamsi non concoxero, although I have not slept my full sleep,
but Si febricitavcro if I be in a feaver or have reason to fear one, I am
disobliged. For the nature of such promises bears upon them no bigger burthen,
then can be expoun­ded E by reasonable civilities and the common expectation
of kinde, and the ordinary performances of just men, who do excuse and are
excused respectively, by all rules of reason proportionably to such small
entercourses: and therefore although such conditions be not expressed in
making promises, yet to perform or rescind them by such laws is not against
Christian simplicity. 2. Promises [[Page
298]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=157) in matters of
justice or in matters of grace as from a superiour to A an inferiour must be
so singly and ingenuously expressed, intended and performed accordingly, that
no condition is to be reserved or supposed in them to warrant their non-
performance, but impossi­bility, or that which is next to it, an intolerable
inconvenience; in which cases we have a natural liberty to commute our
promises, but so that we pay to the interested person a good, at least equal
to that which we first promised. And to this purpose it may be added that it
is not against Christian simplicity to expresse our promises in such words
which we know the interested man will understand to other purposes then I
intend so it be not lesse that I mean, then that he B hopes for. When our
Blessed Saviour told his disciples, that they should sit upon twelve thrones,
they presently thought they had his bond for a kingdom, and dreamt of wealth,
and honour, power and a splendid court: and Christ knew they did, but did not
disin­tangle his promise from the enfolded and intricate sence of which his
words were naturally capable; but he performed his promise, to better
purposes, then they hoped for; they were presidents in the conduct of souls,
Princes of Gods people, the chief in suffer­ings stood neerest to the crosse,
had an elder brothers portion in the Kingdom of grace, were the founders of
Churches, and dispen­sers C of the mysteries of the kingdom and ministers of
the spirit of God and chanels of mighty blessings, under mediators in the
Priest­hood of their Lord and their names were written in heaven; and this was
infinitely better, then to groan and wake under a head pressed with a golden
crown and pungent cares, and to eat alone, and to walk in a croud and to be
vexed with all the publick and ma­ny of the private evils of the people, which
is the sum Total of an earthly Kingdom.

When God promised to the obedient that they should live long in the land,
which he would give them, he meant it of the land of D Canaan, but yet
reserved to himself the liberty of taking them quick­ly from that land and
carrying them to a better. He that promises to lend me a staffe to walk
withal, and instead of that gives me a horse to carry me, hath not broken his
promise, nor dealt deceitfully. And this is Gods dealing with mankinde; he
promises more then we could hope for; and when he hath done that, he gives us
more then he hath promised. God hath promised to give to them that fear him
all that they need, food and raiment; but he addes out of the treasures of his
mercy; variety of food and changes of raiment; some to get strength and some
to refresh, something for them E that are in health and some for the sick. And
though that skins of buls and stagges and foxes and bears could have drawn a
vail thick enough to hide the apertures of sin and natural shame and to
de­fend us from heat and cold, yet when he addeth the fleeces of sheep and
beavers, and the spoiles of silk worms, he hath proclai­med [[Page
299]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=157) A that
although his promises are the bounds of our certain ex­pectation, yet they are
not the limits of his loving kindnesse; and if he does more then he hath
promised, no man can complain that he did otherwise, and did greater things
then he said: thus God does, but therefore so also must we; imitating that
example, and transcribing that copy of divine truth, alwayes remembring that
his promises are yea and Amen And although God often goes more, yet he never
goes lesse; and therefore we must never go from ur promises, unlesse we be
thrust from thence by disabi­lity, or let go by leave, or called up higher by
a greater intend­ment B and increase of kindnesse: And therefore when Solyman
had sworn to Ibrahim-Bassa that he would never kill him so long as he were
alive, he quitted himself but ill, when he sent an Eu­nuch to cut his throat
when he slept, because the Priest told him that sleep was death. His act was
false and deceitful as his great prophet.

But in this part of simplicity we Christians have a most especiall obligation,
for our religion being ennobled by the most and the greatest promises, and our
faith made confident by the veracity C of our Lord, and his word made certain
by miracles and pro­phecies, and voices from heaven, and all the testimony of
God himself, and that truth it self is bound upon us by the efficacy of great
endearments and so many precepts; if we shall suffer the faith of a Christian
to be an instrument to deceive our brother, and that he must either be
incredulous or deceived, uncharitable or deluded like a fool, we dishonour the
sacrednesse of the institution and become strangers to the spirit of truth,
and to the eternall word of God. Our Blessed Lord would not have his disciples
to swear at all (no not in publick Judica­ture) D if the necessities of the
world would permit him to be obeyed: If Christians will live according to the
religion, the word of a Christian were sufficient instrument to give testimony
and to make promises, to secure a faith, and up­on that supposition oathes
were uselesse, and therefore forbid­den, because there could be no necessity
to invoke Gods name in promises or affirmations if men were indeed Christians:
and therefore in that case would be a taking it in vain; but be­cause many are
not and they that are in name oftentimes are so in nothing else, it became
necessary that man should swear E in judgment and in publick courts; but
consider who it was that invented and made the necessitie of oaths, of bonds,
of se­curities, of statutes, extents, judgements and all the artifices of
humane diffidence and dishonesty; These things were indeed found out by men;
but the necessity of these was from him that is the father of lies, from him
that hath made many faire promises but never kept any, or if he did, it was to
do a [[Page 300]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=158)
bigger mischief, to cozen the more: for so does the Devil: He A promises rich
harvests and blasts the corn in the spring, he tells his servants they shall
be rich, and fills them with beggerly qua­lities, makes them base and
indigent, greedy and penurious, and they that serve him intirely, as witches
and such miserable persons never can be rich: if he promises health, then men
grow confident and intemperate and do such things whereby they shall die the
sooner, and die longer they shall die eternally. He deceives men in their
trust, and frustrates their hopes, and eludes their expecta­tions; and his
promises have a period set, beyond which they cannot be true; For wicked men
shall enjoy a faire fortune but B till their appointed time, and then it ends
imperfect and most accomplished misery: and therefore even in this performance
he deceives them most of all, promising and performing coloured stones, and
glasse-gems that he may cozen them of their glorious inheritance. All
fraudulent breakers of promises dresse them­selves by his glasse whose best
imagery, is deformity and lies.C D E

[[Page 301]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=158)

## 24\. A Sermon. XXIV.SERMON XXIV. B Of Christian Simplicity.  
Part II.

C 4\. CHristian simplicity teaches opennesse, and ingenuity in Contracts, and
matters of buying and selling, covenants, associations, and all such
entercourses, which suppose an equality of persons as to the matter of right
and justice in the stipulation,  [...] was the old Attick law: and nothing is
more contrary to Christian religion, then that the entercourses of justice be
direct snares, and that we should deal with men, as men deal with foxes, and
wolves, and vermin; do all violence, and when that cannot be, use all craft
and every thing whereby D they can be made miserable.

[...].

There are men in the world who love to smile, but that smile is more dangerous
then the furrows of a contracted brow, or a storm in Adria; for their purpose
is onely to deceive; they easily speak what they never mean, they heap up many
arguments to perswade that to others, which themselves beleeve not; they
praise that vehemently which they deride in their hearts, they declaim against
a thing which themselves covet, they beg passionately for E that which they
value not, and run from an object which they would fain have to follow and
overtake them, they excuse a per­son dexterously, where the man is beloved,
and watch to surprize him where he is unguarded; they praise that they may
sell, and disgrace that they may keep. And these hypocrisies are so
inter­woven and imbroidered with their whole designe; that some nati­ons
refuse to contract till their arts are taken off by the society of [[Page
302]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=159) banquets, and
the good natured kindnesses of festivall chalices, for A so Tacitus observes
concerning the old Germans, [De asciscendis principibus de pace & bello in
conviviis consultant, tanquam nullo magis tempore ad simplices cogitationes
pateat animus, aut ad ma­gnas incalescat: as if then they were more simple
when they were most valiant, and were least deceitfull, when they were least
themselves.

But it is an evil condition that a mans honesty shall be owing to his wine,
and vertue must live at the charge and will of a vice. The pro­per band of
societies and contracts is, justice and necessities, religion and the laws;
the measures of it are equitie and our selves and our own B desires in the
dayes of our need, natural or forced; But the instru­ments of the exchange and
conveyance of the whole entercourse is, words and actions, as they are
expounded by custome, consent, or the understanding of the interested person;
in which if simplicitie be not severely preserved, it is impossible that
humane society can subsist, but men shall be forced to snatch at what they
have bought, and take securities that men swear truly, and exact an oath, that
such is the meaning of the word, and no man shall think himself secure, but
shall fear he is robbed if he has not possession first; and it shall be
disputed who shall trust the other, and neither of them shall C have cause to
be confident upon bands or oaths, or witnesses, or promises, or all the honour
of men, or all the ingagements of religion,Lib. 8. instit. [...], said Cyrus
in Xenophon. A man though he desires it, yet cannot be confident of the man
that pretends truth yet tells a lye and is deprehended to have made use of the
sacred name of friendship or religion, honesty or reputation to deceive his
brother.

But because a man may be deceived by deeds and open actions as well as words;
therefore it concerns their duty, that no man by an D action on purpose done
to make his brother believe a lie abuse his persuasion and his interest, When
Pythius the Sicilian had a minde to sell his garden to Cannius he invited him
thither, and caused fisherman (as if by custom) to fish in the chanell by
which the gardens stood, and they threw a great store of fish into their
ar­bours, and made Cannius believe it was so every day, and the man grew
greedy of that place of pleasure, and gave Pythius a double price, and the
next day perceived himself abused. Actions of pre­tence and simulation are
like snares laid, into which the beasts fall though you pursue them not, but
walk in the inquiry for their ne­cessary E provisions; and if a man fall into
a snare that you have laid, it is no excuse to say you did not tempt him
thither: to lay a snare is against the ingenuity of a good man and a
Christian, and from thence he ought to be drawn, and therefore it is not fit
we should place a danger which our selves are therefore bound to hinder,
be­cause [[Page
303]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=159) A from thence
we are obliged to rescue him. Vir bonus est, qui prodest quibus potest, nocet
nemini, when we do all the good we can, and do an evil to no man, then onely
we are accounted good men. But this pretence of an action signifying otherwise
then it looks for, is onely forbidden in matter of contract, and the material
interest of a second person. But when actions are of a double signification,
or when a man is not abused or defeated of his right by an uncertain signe, it
is lawfull to do a thing to other purposes then is com­monly understood.
Flight is a signe of fear; but it is lawfull to fly when a man fears not.
Circumcision was the seal of the Jewish re­ligion, B and yet Saint Paul
circumcised Timothy though he inten­ded he should live like the Gentile
Christians, and not as do the Jews. But because that rite did signifie more
things beside that one, he onely did it to represent that he was no enemy of
Moses law, but would use it when there was just reason, which was one part of
the things which the using of circumcision could signifie: So our blessed
Saviour pretended that he would passe forth beyond Emaus, but if he intended
not to do it, yet he did no injury to the two disciples, for whose good it was
that he intended to make this offer: and neither did he prevaricate the
strictnesse of simpli­city C and sincerity, because they were persons with
whom he had made no contracts, to whom he had passed no obligation, and in the
nature of the thing it is proper and natural, by an offer to give an occasion
to another to do a good action; and in case it succeeds not, then to do what
we intended not, and so the offer was con­ditional. But in all cases of
bargaining, although the actions of themselves may receive naturally another
sense, yet I am bound to follow that signification which may not abuse my
brother, or pollute my own honesty, or snatch, or rifle his interest: Because
it can be no ingredient into the commutation, if I exchange a thing D which he
understands not, and is by errour lead into this mistake, and I hold forth the
fire, and delude him, and amuse his eye: for by me he is made worse.

But secondly, as our actions must be of a sincere and determi­nate
signification in contracts, so must our words: in which the rule of the old
Roman honesty was this: Vter (que) si adeloquendum venerit non plus quam semel
eloquetur; Every one that speaks is to speak but once; that is, but one thing;
because commonly that is truth; truth being but one; but errour and falsehood
infinitely va­rious and changeable; and we shall seldom see a man so s
[...]iffned E with impiety, as to speak little and seldome, and pertinaciously
adhere to a single sense, and yet that at first, and all the way after shall
be a lie. Men use to go about, when they tell a lie, and devise circumstances,
and stand off at distance, and cast a cloud of words, and intricate the whole
affair, and cozen themselves first, and then cozen their brother, while they
have minced the case of conscience [[Page
304]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=160) into little
particles, and swallowed the lie by crumbs, so that no A one passage of it
should rush against the conscience, nor do hurt, until it is all got into the
belly, and unites in the effect; for by that time, two men are abused, the
Merchant in his soul, and the Con­tractor in his interest; and this is the
certain effect of much talking and little honesty: but he that means honestly,
must speak but once, that is, one truth, and hath leave to vary within the
degrees of just prices, and fair conditions, which because they have a
la­titude may be enlarged, or restrained according as the Merchant please,
save onely he must never prevaricate the measures of equi­ty, and the
proportions of reputation, and the publike. But in all B the parts of this
traffick let our words be the significations of our thoughts, and our thoughts
designe nothing, but the advantages of a permitted exchange. In this case, the
severity is so great, so ex­act, and so without variety of case, that it is
not lawfull for a man to tell a truth, with a collateral designe to cozen and
abuse; and therefore at no hand can it be permitted to lie or equivocate, to
speak craftily, or to deceive by smoothnesse, or intricacy, or long
discourses.

But this precept of simplicity in matter of contract hath one step of severity
beyond this: In matter of contract it is not law­full C so much as to conceal
the secret and undiscernable faults of the merchandize; but we must
acknowledge them, or else affix prices made diminute and lessened to such
proportions and abate­ments as that fault should make. Caveat emptor is a good
caution for him that buyes, and it secures the seller in publike Judicature,
but not in court of conscience; and the old lawes of the Romans were as nice
in this affair, as the conscience of a Christian. Titus Claudius Centimalus
was commanded by the Augures to pull down his house in the Coelian mountain,
because it hindred their observa­tion of the flight of birds; he exposes his
house to sale, Publius D Calpurnius buyes it, and is forced to pluck it down;
But com­plaining to the Judges had remedy, because Claudius did not tell him
the true state of the inconvenience. He that sels a house in­fected with the
plague, or haunted with evil spirits, sels that which is not worth such a
price which it might be put to if it were in health and peace: and therefore
cannot demand it but openly and upon publication of the evil. To which also
this is to be added, that in some great faults and such as have danger, (as in
the cases now specified) no diminution of the price is sufficient to make the
Merchant just and sincere, unlesse he tels the appendant mischief; E because
to some persons in many cases, and to all persons in some cases, it is not at
all valuable, and they would not possesse it if they might for nothing. Marcus
Gratidianus bought a house of Sergius Orata, which himself had sold before;
But because Sergius did not declare the appendant vassalage and service, he
was recompenced [[Page
305]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=160) A by the
Judges; for although it was certain that Gratidianus knew it, because it had
been his own, yet Oportuit ex bonâ fide denun­ciari said the law; it concerned
the ingenuity of a good man to have spoken it openly. In all cases it must be
confessed in the price, or in the words; But when the evil may be personal,
and more then matter of interest and money, it ought to be confessed, and then
the goods prescribed, lest by my act I do my neighbour in­jury, and I receive
profit by his dammage. Certain it is, that in­genuity is the sweetest and
easiest way, there is no difficulty or ca­ses of conscience in that, and it
can have no objection in it but that B possibly sometimes we lose a little
advantage, which it may be we may lawfully acquire, but still we secure a
quiet conscience: and if the merchandise be not worth so much to me, then
neither is it to him; if it be to him, it is also to me; and therefore I have
no losse, no hurt to keep it if it be refused: but he that secures his own
profit, and regards not the interest of another, is more greedy of a full
purse then of a holy conscience, and prefers gain before justice, and the
wealth of his private, before the necessity of pub­like society and commerce,
being a son of earth whose centre is it C self, without relation to heaven
that moves upon anothers point, and produces flowers, for others, and sends
influence upon all the world, and receives nothing in return, but a cloud of
perfume, or the smell of a fat sacrifice.

God sent justice into the world, that all conditions in their seve­ral
proportions should be equall; and he that receives a good, should pay one, and
he whom I serve is obliged to feed and to de­fend me in the same proportions
as I serve; and justice is a rela­tive terme, and supposes two persons
obliged, and though fortunes are unequal, and estates are in majority and
subordination, and men D are wise or foolish, honoured or despised; yet in the
entercourses of justice God hath made that there is no difference, and
therefore it was esteemed ignoble to dismisse a servant when corn was dear, in
dangers of shipwrack to throw out an unprofitable boy and keep a fair horse;
or for a wise man to snatch a plank from a drown­ing fool, or if the Master of
the ship should challenge the board up­on which his passenger swims for his
life, or to obtrude false mo­neys upon others, which we first took for true,
but at last discove­red to be false; or not to discover the gold which the
merchant sold for alchimy: The reason of all these is, because the collate­ral
E advantages are not at all to be considered in matter of rights; and though I
am dearest to my self, as my neighbour is to him­self, yet it is necessary
that I permit him to his own advantages, as I desire to be permitted to mine.
Now therefore simplicity and ingenuity in all contracts is perfectly and
exactly necessary, because its contrary destroys that equality which justice
hath placed in the affaires of men, and makes all things private, and makes a
man [[Page 306]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=161)
dearer to himself, and to be preferred before Kings, and repub­licks,A and
Churches; it destroyes society, and it makes multitudes of men to be but like
heards of beasts, without proper instruments of exchange, and securities of
possession, without faith and without propriety, concerning all which there is
no other account to be gi­ven, but that the rewards of craft are but a little
money and a great deal of dishonour and much suspicion: and proportionable
scorn; watches and guards, spies and jealousies are his portion; But the crown
of justice is a fair life and a clear reputation, & an inheritance there where
justice dwells since she left the earth, even in the king­dome of the just,
who shall call us to judgement for every word, and B render to every man
according to his works: and what is the hope of the hypocrite though he hath
gained, when the Lord taketh away his soul, Tollendum esse ex rebus
contrahendis omne mendacium. That's the sum of this rule:Cicero. no falshod or
deceit is to be endured in any contract.

5\. Christian simplicity hath also its necessity and passes obligati­on upon
us towards enemies in questions of law or war. Plutarch commends Lysander and
Philopaemen for their craft and subtilty in war; but commends it not as an
ornament to their manners, but that which had influence into prosperous
events; just as Ammianus C affirms, nullo discrimine virtutis ac doli
prosperos omnes laudari debere bellorum eventus: whatsoever in war is
prosperous, men use to com­mend: But he that is a good souldier is not alwayes
a good man. Callicratidas was a good man and followed the old way of
down­right hostility,  [...]: But Lysander was  [...], a crafty man, full of
plots but not noble in the conduct of his armes. I remember Eu­ripides brings
in Achilles commending the ingenuity of his breed­ing and the simplicity and
noblenesse of his own heart  [...]. The good old man D Chiron was my Tutor,
and he taught me to use simplicity and ho­nesty in all my manners. It was well
and noble; But yet some wise men do not condemn all souldiers that use to get
victories by deceit:Quae. 10\. super Joshuam lib. 1. de sacerdotio. Saint
Austin allows it to be lawful; and Saint Chrysostome commends it. These Good
men supposed that a crafty victory was better then a bloody war; and certainly
so it is, if the power got­ten by craft be not exercised in blood: But this
businesse (as to the case of conscience) will quickly be determined. Enemies
are no persons bound by contract and society, and therefore are not ob­liged
to open hostilities and ingenuous prosecutions of the war; E and if it be
lawful to take by violence, it is not unjust to take the same thing by craft.
But this is so to be understood, that where there is an obligation either by
the law of nations or by special contracts, No man dare to violate his faith
or honour, but in these things deal with an ingenuity equal to the truth of
peaec­full [[Page
307]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=161) A promises,
and acts of favour and endearment to our relatives. Josephus tells of the sons
of Herod, that in their enmities with their Vncle Pherora and Salome they had
disagreeing manners of prosecution, as they had disagreeing hearts; some
railed openly, and thought their enmity the more honest, because it was not
con­cealed, but by their ignorance and rude, untutor'd malice lay open to the
close designes of the elder brood of foxes.Hist l. 16. cap. 6 In this because
it was a particular and private quarrel, there is no rule of conscience but
that it be wholly laid aside, and appeased with charity; for the opennesse of
the quarrel was but the rage and indiscretion of the B malice: and the close
designe was but the craft and advantage of the malice: But in just wars on
that side where a competent authority and a just cause warrants the arms and
turns the active opposition into the excuse and licence of defence, there is
no restraint upon the actions and words of men in the matter of sincerity, but
that the laws of nations be strictly pursued and all parties; promises,
andcon­tracts observed religiously & by the proportion of a private &
Chri­stian ingenuity. We finde it by wise and good men mentioned with honour,
that the Romans threw bread from the besieged Capitol into the stations of the
Gauls, that they might think them full of C corn: and that Agesilaus
discouraged the enemies by causing his own men to wear crowns in token of a
Navall victory gotten by Pisander who yet was at that time destroyed by Conon,
and that Flaccus said the city was taken by Emilius, or that Joshua
dissem­bled a flight at Ai, and the Consul Quinctius told aloud that the left
wing of the enemies was fled, and that made the right wing fly; or that
Valerius Levinus bragged prudently that he had killed Pyr­rhus, and that
others use the ensigns of enemies colours and gar­ments, concerning which sort
of actions and words Agesilaus, in Plutarch said  [...]. D It is just and
pleasant, profitable and glorious, but to call a parley and fall in upon the
men that treat; to swear a peace and watch advantage; to entertain Heralds and
then to torment them, to get from them notices of their party; these are such
which are dishonorable and unjust, condemned by the laws of nations and
essential justice, & by all the world and the Hungarian army was destroyed by
a divine judgement at the prayer & appeal of the Ma­humet an enemy for their
violating their faith and honour and pro­phaning the name of Christ by using
it in a solemn oath to deceive their enemies,  [...]: that is to di­spise E
God when men first sware by him, and then violate their oathes or leagues,
their treaties or promises. In other cases liberty hath been taken by all men
and it is reproved by no man, since the first simplicity of fighting & down
right blows did cease by the bet­ter instructed people of the world: which was
as is usually compu­ted, about the end of the second Carthaginian war; since
that time, [[Page
308]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=162) some few
persons have been found so noble as to scorn to steal a A victory, but had
rather have the glory of a sharp sword, then of a sharp wit; But their
fighting gallantry is extrinsecal to the Questi­on of lawful or unlawful

6\. Thus we see how far the laws of ingenuity and Christian simplicity have
put fetters upon our words and actions and direct­ed them in the paths of
truth and noblenesse, and the first degrees of permission of simulation is in
the arts of war, and the cases of just hostility. But here it is usually
inquired whether it be lawful to tell a lie, or dissemble to save a good mans
life, or to do him a great benefit? a Question which Saint Austine was much
troubled B withal, affirming it to be of the greatest difficulty: for he saw
gene­rally all the Doctors before his time allowed it; and of all the fa­thers
no man is noted to have reproved it but Saint Austin alone, and he also (as
his manner is) with some variety: those which fol­lowed him are to be
accounted upon his score: and it relies upon such precedents which are not
lightly to be disallowed; for so Abra­ham and Isaac told a lie in the case of
their own danger to Abime­lech; so did the Israelitish midwives to Pharaoh and
Rachab con­cering the spies, and David to the King of Gath, and the prophet
that anointed Saul, and Elisha to Hazael, and Solomon in the sen­tence C of
the stolen childe; concerning which Irenaeus hath given us a rule that those
whose actions the Scripture hath remarked, & yet not chastised or censured, we
are not without great reason and certain rule to condemn: but whether his rule
can extend to this case is now to be enquired.

1\. It is certain that children may be cozned into goodnesse, and sick men to
health, and passengers in a storm into fafety; and the reason of these is,
because not onely the end is fair and charitable and just, but the means are
such which do no injury to the per­sons which are to receive benefit: Because
these are persons who D are either naturally or accidentally ignorant and
incompetent judges of affaires: and if they be also wilful as such persons
most commonly are, there is in art and nature left no wayes to deal with them
but with innocent, charitable, and artificial deceptions; they are not capable
of reason and solid discourses, and therefore either must be exposed to all
harms like Lions whelps when their nurse and sire are taken in a toile, or
else be provided for in wages proportionable to their capacitie.

2\. Sinners may not be treated with the liberty we take to chil­dren and sick
persons, because they must serve God with choice E and election; and therefore
although a sick man may be cozened into his health, yet a man must not be
cozened into his duty, which is no duty at all or pleasing to God, unlesse it
be voluntary and cho­sen: and therefore they are to be treated with arguments
proper to move their wills by the instrument of understanding specially,
[[Page 309]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=162) A being
persons of perfect faculties and apt to be moved by the wayes of health and of
a man. It is an argument of infirmity that in some cases it is necessary to
make pretences; but those pretences are not made legitimate, unlesse it be the
infirmity of the interested man with whom we do comply. My infirmity can not
make it lawful to make colours and images of things: But the infirmity of him
with whom I deal, may be such, that he can be defended or in­structed no other
way: But sinners that offend God by choice must have their choice corrected,
and their understandings in­structed or else their evill is not cured nor
their state amen­ded.

B 2\. For it is here very observable, that in entercourses of this nature we
are to regard a double duty; the matter of justice, and the rights of charity:
that is, that good be done by lawful instruments; for it is certain it is not
lawful to abuse a mans understanding, with a purpose to gain him 6. d. it is
not fit to do evil for a good end, or to abuse one man to preserve or do
advantage to another: and therefore it is not sufficient that I intend to do
good to my neigh­bour; for I may not therefore tell a lie and abuse his
credulity; be­cause his understanding hath a right as certain as his will
hath, or as C his money; and his right to truth is no more to be cozened and
de­frauded, then his right unto his money; and therefore such arti­ficial
entercourses are no wayes to be permitted, but to such per­sons over whose
understandings we have power and authority. Pla­to said it was lawful for
Kings and Governours to dissemble, be­cause there is great necessity for them
so to do: but it was but crude­ly said, so nakedly to deliver the doctrine for
in such things which the people cannot understand and yet ought to obey, there
is a liberty to use them as we use children, who are of no other condition or
capacities then children; but in all things where they can and ought D to
choose, because their understanding is onely a servant to God, no man hath
power to abuse their credulity and reason, to pre­serve their estates, and
peace. But because Children and mad peo­ple and diseased, are such whose
underdandings are in minority and under Tuition, they are to be governed by
their proper in­struments and proportions;  [...] said Proclus, a good turn is
to be preferred before a true saying, it is onely true to such persons who
cannot value truth, and prefer an intellectual before a material interest. It
is better for children to have warm clothes then a true proposition, and
therefore in all senses they and E their like may be so treated: But other
persons who have distinct capacities have an injury done them by being abused
into advan­tages; and although those advantages make them recom­pence, yet he
that is tied to make a man recompence, hath done him injury and committed a
sin, by which he was obliged to restitu­tion; & therefore the man ought not to
be cozened for his own good

[[Page 310]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=163) 4\. And
now upon the grounds of this discourse, we may more A easily determine
concerning saving the life of a man by telling a lie in judgement  [...] said
Pericles of A­thens when his friend desired him to swear on his side; I will
as­sist my friend so far as I may not dishonour God, and to lie in judg­ment
is directly against the being of government, the honour of Tribunals and the
commandement of God, and therefore by no accident can be hallowed; it is
[...] as Aristotle said of a lie, it is a thing evil in it self, that is, it
is evil in the whole kinde, ever since it came to be forbidden by God: and
therefore all those instances of crafty and delusive answers which are
recorded in scrip­ture B were extra judicial and had not this load upon them
to be a de­ceiving of authority in those things where they had right to
com­mand or inquire, & either were before or besides the commandment, not at
all against it: and since the law of Moses forbad lying in judge­ment onely,
by that law we are to judge of those actions in the old testament which were
committed after its publication: and because in the sermons of the prophets
and especially in the new testament Christ hath superadded or enlarged the law
of ingenuity & hearty sim­plicity, we are to leave the old scripture
precedents upon the ground of their own permissions, and finish our duty by
the rules of our re­ligion:C which hath so restrained our words, that they
must alwayes be just and alwayes charitable, and there is no leave given to
preva­ricate, but to such persons where there can be no obligation, persons
that have no right, such with whom no contract can be made; such as children
and fools and infirm persons, whose faculties are hindred or depraved. I
remember that Secundus extremely com­mends Arria for deluding her husbands
fears concerning the death of his beloved boy, and wiped her eyes and came in
confidently and sate by her husbands bed-side, and when she could no longer
for­bear to weep, her husbands sicknesse was excuse enough to legiti­mate D
that sorrow, or else she could retire; but so long she forbore to confess the
boy's death til Caecinna Paetus had so far recovered that he could go forth to
see the boy and need not fear with sorrow to re­turne to his disease. It was
indeed a great kindnesse and a rare pru­dence as their affaires and laws were
ordered; but we have better means to cure our sick; our religion can charme
the passion and en­able the spirit to entertain and master a sorrow; and when
we have such rare supplies out of the store-houses of reason and religion we
have lesse reason to use these arts and little deviees, which are argu­ments
of an infirmity as great as is the charity: and therefore we are E to keep our
selves strictly to the foregoing measures; Let every man speak the truth to
his neighbour, putting away lying, for we are mem­bers one of another: Ephes.
4. 25. and be as harmlesse as doves saith our blessed Sa­viour in my text:
which contain the whole duty concerning the mat­ter of truth and sincerity; in
both which places truth and simplicity [[Page
311]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=163) A are founded
upon justice and charity: and therefore wherever a lie is in any sense against
justice, and wrongs any thing of a man, his judgement and his reason, his
right or his liberty, it is expres­ly forbidden in the Christian religion:
what cases we can truly suppose to be besides these, the law forbids not and
therefore it is lawful to say that to my self which I believe not, for what
inno­cent purpose I please and to all those over whose understanding I have or
ought to have right.

These cases are intricate enough, and therefore I shall return plain­ly to
presse the doctrine of simplicity which ought to be so sacred B that a man
ought to do nothing indirectly which it is not lawful to own; to receive no
advantage by the sin of another, which I should account dishonest if the
action were my own; for whatsoever dis­putes may be concerning the lawfulnesse
of pretending craftily in some rare and contingent cases, yet it is on all
hands condemned that my craft should do injury to my brother. I remember that
when some greedy and indigent people forged a will of Lucius Mi­nutius
Basilius and joyned M. Crassus, and Q. Hortensius in the inheritance that
their power for their own interest might secure the others share, they
suspecting the thing to be a forgery, yet be­ing C not principals and actors
in the contrivance alieni facinoris mu­nus culum non repudiaverunt, refused
not to receive a present made them by anothers crime; but so they entred upon
a moiety of the estate and the biggest share of the dishonour: we must not be
crafty to anothers injury so much as by giving countenance to the wrong; for
Tortoises and the Estrich hatch their egges with their looks one­ly; and some
have designes which a dissembling face or an acted gesture can produce; but as
a man may commit adultery with his eye so with his eye also he may tell a lie,
and steal with one finger and do injury collaterally and yet designe it with a
direct intuition upon D which he looks with his face over his shoulder: and by
whatsoever instrument my neighbour may be abused, by the same instrument I sin
if I do designe it antecedently, or fal upon it together with some­thing else,
or rejoyce in it when it is done.

7\. One thing more I am to adde, that it is not lawful to tell a lie in jest.
It was a vertue noted in Aristides and Epaminondes that they would not lie
[...] not in sport: and as Christian sim­plicity forbids all lying in matter
of interest and serious rights: so there is an appendix to this precept
forbidding to lie in mirth: for of every idle word a man shall speak he shall
give account in the day of E judgment: and such are the jestings which S. Paul
reckons amongst things uncomly; But amongst these; fables, apologues, parables
or figures of Rhetorick, and any artificial instrument of instruction, or
innocent pleasure are not to be reckoned; But he that without any end of
charity or institution shall tell lies onely to become ridiculous in himself
or mock another, hath set some thing upon his doomsday [[Page
312]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=164) book which
must be taken off, by water or by fire, that is, by re­pentance A or a
judgement.

Nothing is easier then simplicity and ingenuity, it is open and rea­dy without
trouble and artificial cares, fit for communities and the proper vertue of
men, the necessary appendage of useful speech, without which language were
given to men as nails and teeth to Lions, for nothing but to do mischief; it
is a rare instrument of institution, and a certain token of courage, the
companion of good­nesse B and a noble minde, the preserver of friendship, the
band of so­ciety, the security of merchants, and the blessing of trade; it
pre­vents infinite of quarrels and appeals to Judges, and suffers none of the
evils of Jealousie: men by simplicity converse as do the An­gels, they do
their own work and secure their proper interest, and serve the publick and do
glory to God: But hypocrites and liars and dissemblers spread darknesse over
the face of affaires and make men like the blinde to walk softly and
timorously: and crafty men like the close aire suck that which is open, and
devour its portion and destroy its liberty; and it is the guise of devils, and
the dishonour of the soul, and the canker of society, and the enemy of
justice, and truth and peace, of wealth and honour, of courage and
merchan­dise, He is a good man with whom a blind man may safely converse C
dignus quicum in tenebris mices to whom in respect of his fair treat­ings, the
darknesse and light are both alike: But he that bears light upon the face and
a dark heart, is like him that transforms himself in­to an Angel of light.
when he means to do most mischief. Remem­ber this onely; that false colours
laid upon the face besmear the skin and durty it, but they neither make a
beauty nor mend it.

Apocal: 22. 15.

For without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and D Murderers and
idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. E

[[Page 313]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=164)

## 25\. A Sermon. XXV.SERMON. XXV. B THE MIRACLES C OF THE DIVINE MERCY.

Psalm. 86. 5‘For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plente­ous in
mercy to all them that call upon thee.’

D MAN having destroyed that which God de­lighted in, that is, the beauty of
his soul, fell into an evil portion, and being seized upon by the divine
justice, grew miserable, and condemned to an incurable sorrow. Poor Adam being
banished and undone, went and lived a sad life in the mountains of India, and
turned his face and his prayers towards E Paradise; thither he sent his
sighes, to that place he directed his devotions; there was his heart now, and
his felicity sometimes had been; but he knew not how to return thi­ther, for
God was his enemy, and by many of his attributes op­posed himself against him.
Gods power was armed against him; and poor man, whom a fly, or a fish could
kill, was assaulted and [[Page
314]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=165) beaten with a
sword of fire in the hand of a Cherubim. Gods eye A watched him, his
omniscience was mans accuser, his severity was the Judge, his justice the
executioner. It was a mighty calamity that man was to undergo, when he that
made him, armed himself against his creature, which would have died or turned
to nothing, if he had but withdrawn the miracles and the Almightinesse of his
power. If God had taken his arm from under him, man had pe­rished; but it was
therefore a greater evil when God laid his arm upon him and against him, and
seemed to support him that he might be longer killing him. In the midst of
these sadnesses God remembered his own creature, and pitied it, and by his
mercy re­scued B him from the hand of his power, and the sword of his justice,
and the guilt of his punishment, and the disorder of his sin, and placed him
in that order of good things where he ought to have stood: It was mercy that
preserved the noblest of Gods creatures here below; he who stood condemned and
undone under all the other attributes of God, was onely saved and rescued by
his mer­cy: that it may be evident that Gods mercy is above all his works, and
above all ours, greater then the creation, and greater then our sins; as is
his Majesty, so is his mercy, that is, without measures, and without rules,
sitting in heaven and filling all the world, cal­ling C for a duty that he may
give a blessing, making man that he may save him, punishing him that he may
preserve him: and Gods justice bowed down to his mercy, and all his power
passed into mercy, and his omniscience converted into care and watchfulnesse,
into providence, and observation for mans avail, and Heaven gave its influence
for man, and rained showers for our food and drink, and the Attributes and
Acts of God sat at the foot of mercy, and all that mercy descended upon the
head of man: For so the light of the world in the morning of the creation was
spread abroad like a cur­tain, and dwelt no where, but filled the expansum
with a dissemi­nation D great as the unfoldings of the airs looser garment, or
the wilder fringes of the fire, without knots, or order or combinati­on; but
God gathered the beams in his hand, and united them in­to a globe of fire, and
all the light of the world became the body of the Sun, and he lent some to his
weaker sister that walks in the night, and guides a traveller and teaches him
to distinguish a house from a river, or a rock from a plain field; so is the
mercy of God; E a vast expansum and a huge Ocean, from eternall ages it dwelt
round about the throne of God, and it filled all that infinite di­stance and
space, that hath no measures but the will of God; un­till God desiring to
communicate that excellency and make it re­lative, created Angels, that he
might have persons capable of huge gifts, and man, who he knew would need
forgivenesse; for so the Angels our elder Brothers dwelt for ever in the house
of their Fa­ther, and never brake his commandements; but we the younger [[Page
315]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=165) A like
prodigals, forsook our fathers house, and went into a strange countrey, and
followed stranger courses, and spent the portion of our nature, and forfeited
all our title to the family, and came to need another portion: for ever since
the fall of Adam, who like an unfortunate man spent all that a wretched man
could need, or a happy man could have, our life is repentance, and
forgivenesse is all our portion: and though Angels were objects of Gods
bounty, yet man onely is (in proper speaking) the object of his mercy. And the
mercy which dwelt in an infinite circle, became confin'd to a little ring, and
dwelt here below, and here shall dwell be­low, B till it hath carried all Gods
portion up to heaven, where it shall reigne and glory upon our crowned heads
for ever and ever.

But for him that considers Gods mercies, and dwels a while in that depth, it
is hard not to talk wildly and without art, and or­der of discoursings: Saint
Peter talked he knew not what, when he entered into a cloud with Jesus upon
mount Tabor, though it passed over him like the little curtains that ride upon
the North-winde, and passe between the Sun and us: And when we converse with a
light greater then the Sun, and tast a sweetnesse more de­licious C then the
dew of heaven, and in our thoughts entertain the ravishments and harmony of
that atonement which reconciles God to man, and man to felicity, it will be
more easily pardoned, if we should be like persons that admire much, and say
but little: and indeed we can best confesse the glories of the Lord by dazeled
eyes and a stammering tongue, and a heart overcharged with the miracles of
this infinity; For so those little drops that run over, though they be not
much in themselves, yet they tell that the ves­sell was full, and could
expresse the greatnesse of the shower no otherwise, but by spilling, and
inartificiall expressions and run­nings D over. But because I have undertaken
to tell the drops of the Ocean, and to span the measures of eternity, I must
do it by the great lines of revelation, and experience, and tell concerning
Gods mercy as we do concerning God himself, that he is that great fountain of
which we all drink, and the great rock of which we all eat, and on which we
all dwell, and under whose shadow we all are refreshed. Gods mercy is all
this, and we can onely draw great lines of it, and reckon the constellations
of our hemisphere instead of telling the number of the stars: we onely can
reckon what we feel, and what we live by; And though there be in every one of
E these lines of life enough to ingage us for ever to do God service, and to
give him praises, yet it is certain there are very many mer­cies of God upon
us, and toward us, and concerning us, which we neither feel, nor see, nor
understand as yet; but yet we are bles­sed by them, and are preserved and
secured; and we shall then know them, when we come to give God thanks in the
festivities [[Page
316]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=166) of an eternall
sabbath. But that I may confine my discourse into A order, since the subject
of it cannot, I consider;

1\. That mercy being an emanation of the Divine goodnesse upon us, and
supposes us, and found us miserable; In this account concerning the mercies of
God, I must not reckon the miracles and graces of the creation, or any thing
of the nature of man; nor tell how great an endearment God passed upon us that
he made us men, capable of felicity, apted with rare instruments of discourse,
and reason, passions, and desires, notices of sense, and reflections B upon
that sense, that we have not the deformity of a Crocodile, nor the motion of a
Worm, nor the hunger of a Wolf, nor the wildenesse of a Tigre, nor the birth
of Vipers, nor the life of flies, nor the death of serpents.

Our excellent bodies, and usefull faculties, the upright moti­on, and the
tenacious hand, the fair appetites, and proportioned satisfactions, our speech
and our perceptions, our acts of life, the rare invention of letters, and the
use of writing, and speaking at distance, the intervals of rest and labour,
(either of which if they were perpetual would be intolerable) the needs of
nature, and the provisions of providence, sleep, and businesse, refreshments
of the body, and entertainment of the soul; these are to be reckoned as C acts
of bounty rather then mercy; God gave us these when he made us, and before we
needed mercy; these were portions of our nature, or provided to supply our
consequent necessities; but when we forfeited all Gods favour by our sins,
then that they were continued, or restored to us, became a mercy, and
therefore ought to be reckoned upon this new account; for it was a rare mercy
that we were suffered to live at all, or that the Anger of God did permit to
us one blessing; that he did punish us so gently: But when the rack is changed
into an ax, and the ax into an imprison­ment, and the imprisonment changed
into an enlargement, and the D enlargement into an entertainment in the
family, and this entertain­ment passes on to an adoption, these are steps of a
mighty favour, and perfect redemption from our sin: and the returning back our
own goods is a gift, and a perfect donative, sweetned by the ap­prehensions of
the calamity, from whence every lesser punishment began to free us; and thus
it was, that God punished us and visi­ted the sin of Adam upon his posterity.
He threatned we should die, and so we did, but not so as we deserved; we
waited for death and stood sentenced, and are daily summoned by sicknesses and
uneasinesse; and every day is a new reprieve, and brings a new E favour,
certain as the revolution of the Sun upon that day, and at last when we must
die by the irreversible decree, that death, is changed into a sleep, and that
sleep is in the bosom of Christ, and there dwels all peace and security, and
it shall passe forth into glories and felicities. We looked for a Judge, and
behold a Saviour; we [[Page
317]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=166) A feared an
accuser, and behold an Advocate; we sate down in sor­row, and rise in joy; we
leaned upon Rhubarb and Aloes, and our aprons were made of the sharp leaves of
Indian fig-trees, and so we fed, and so were clothed: But the Rhubarb proved
me­dicinal, and the rough leaf of the tree brought its fruit wrapped up in its
foldings; and round about our dwellings was planted a hedge of thornes, and
bundles of thistles, the Aconite, and the Bri­ony, the Night-shade, and the
Poppy, and at the root of these grew the healing Plantain, which rising up
into a talnesse, by the friend­ly invitation of a heavenly influence, turn'd
about the tree of the B crosse; and cured the wounds of the thorns, and the
curse of the thistles, and the malediction of man, and the wrath of God. Si
sio irascitur, quomodo convivatur? If God be thus kinde when he is Angry, what
is he when he feasts us with caresses of his more tender Kindnesse? All that
God restored to us after the forfeiture of Adam grew to be a double Kindnesse;
for it became the ex­pression of a bounty which knew not how to repent, a
gracious­nesse that was not to be altered, though we were, and that was it
which we needed. That's the first generall: all the bounties of the creation
became mercies to us, when God continued them to us C and restored them after
they were forfeit.

2\. But as a circle begins every where, and ends no where, so do the mercies
of God: after all this huge progresse, now it began anew: God is good and
gracious, and God is ready to for­give. Now that he had once more made us
capable of mercies God had what he desired, and what he could rejoyce in,
something upon which he might pour forth his mercies; and by the way, this I
shall observe, (for I cannot but speak without art, when I speak of that which
hath no measure) God made us capable of one sort of his mercies, and we made
our selves capable of ano­ther: D God is good and gracious, that is, desirous
to give great gifts; and of this, God made us receptive, first by giving us
naturall possibilities, that is, by giving those gifts he made us capable of
more; and next, by restoring us to his favour, that he might not by our
provocations be hindered from raining down his mercies. But God is also ready
to forgive] and of this kinde of mercy we made our selves capable, even by not
deserving it; Our sin made way for his grace, and our infirmities called upon
his pity; and because we sinned, we became miserable, and because we were
miserable, we became pitiable, and this opened the other trea­sure E of his
mercy; that because our sin abounds, his grace may su­perabound. In this
method we must confine our thoughts;

  * 1\. Giving,
  * 2\. Forgiving, 
    * Thou Lord art good.
    * and ready to forgive, 
      * plenteous in mercy to all them that call upon thee.

3\. Gods mercies, or the mercies of his giving, came first upon [[Page
318]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=167) us by mending
of our nature: For the ignorance we fell into is A instructed and better
learned in spirituall notices then Adams morning knowledge in Paradise, our
appetites are made subor­dinate to the spirit, and the liberty of our wills is
improved, ha­ving the liberty of the sons of God, and Christ hath done us more
grace and advantage then we lost in Adam; and as man lost Para­dise and got
Heaven, so he lost the integrity of the first, and got the perfection of the
second Adam: his living soul is changed into a quickning spirit; our
discerning faculties are filled with the spirit of faith, and our passions and
desires are entertained with hope, and our election is sanctified with
charity; and his first life of a B temporall possession is passed into a
better, a life of spirituall ex­pectations; and though our first parent was
forbidden it, yet we live of the fruits of the tree of life. But I instance in
two great things in which humane nature is greatly advanced, and passed on to
greater perfections; The first is, that besides body and soul, which was the
summe totall of Adams constitution, God hath su­peradded to us a third
principle, the beginner of a better life; I mean,Vide Serm. II. the Spirit; so
that now, man hath a spiritual and celestial nature breathed into him, and the
old man, that is, the old consti­tution is the least part and in its proper
operations is dead, or dy­ing,C but the new man is that which gives
denomination, life, mo­tion, and proper actions to a Christian, and that is
renewed in us day by day. But secondly, Humane nature is so highly exalted,
and mended by that mercy which God sent immediately upon the fall of Adam, the
promise of Christ, that when he did come, and actuate the purposes of this
mission, and ascended up into hea­ven, he carried humane nature above the
seats of Angels; to the place whither Lucifer the son of the morning aspir'd
to ascend, but in his attempt fell into hell. For (so said the Prophet) the
son of the mor­ning said, I will ascend into heaven, and sit in the sides of
the North, D that is, the throne of Jesus seated in the East, called the
sides, or obliquity of the North: and as the seating of his humane nature in
that glorious seat brought to him all adoration, and the Majesty of God, and
the greatest of his exaltation: So it was so great an advancement to us, that
all the Angels of heaven take notice of it, and feel a change in the appendage
of their condition: not that they are lessened, but that we, who in nature are
lesse then An­gels, have a relative dignity greater, and an equall honour of
being fellow-servants. This mystery is plain in Scripture, and the reall
effect of it we read in both the Testaments.Judges 13. When Manoah the E
father of Sampson saw an Angel, he worshipped him; and in the old Testament it
was esteemed lawfull; for they were the lieute­nants of God, sent with the
impresses of his Majesty, and took in his Name the homage from us, who then
were so much their infe­riours. But when the man Christ Jesus was exalted, and
made the [[Page
319]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=167) A Lord of all
the Angels, then they became our fellow servants, and might not receive
worship from any of the servants of Jesus, espe­cially from Prophets and
Martyrs and those that are ministers of the testimony of Jesus. And therefore
when an Angel appeared to Saint John, and he according to the Custom of the
Jews fell down and worshipped him, as not yet knowing or not considering any
thing to the contrary,John Revel. 22. 9. de bono patientiae the Angell
reproved him, saying, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant and of thy
brethren the prophets and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship
God; or as Saint Cyprian reads it, worship Jesus. God and man are now onely
capable of wor­ship: B but no Angel; God essentially; Man in the person of
Christ and in the exaltation of our great Redeemer; but Angels not so high,
and therefore not capable of any religious worship: and this dignity of man
Saint Gregory explicates fully.Homil. 8. in Evange. Quid est quod ante
Redemptoris adventum adorantur ab hominibus [Angeli] & tacent, postmodum vero
adorarirefugiunt: why did the Angels of old receive worshippings and were
silent, but in the new testament decline it and fear to accept it? Nisi quod
naturam nostram quam prius despexe­rant, postquam hanc super se assumptam
aspiciunt prostratam sibi videre pertimescunt, nec jam sub se velut infirmam
contemnere ausi C sunt, quam super se viz. in caeli Rege venerantur: the
reason is, be­cause they seeing our nature which they did so lightly value
raised up above them they fear to see humbled under them, neither do they any
more despise the weaknesse which themselves worship in the King of heaven. The
same also is the sense of the Glosse, of Saint Ambrose, Ansbertus, Haymo,
Rupertus and others of old; and Ribera, Salmeron, and Lewis of Granada of
late; which being so plainly consonant to the words of the Angel and consigned
by the testimony of such men, I the rather note, that those who worship Angels
and make religious addresses to them, may see D what priviledge themselves
lose and how they part with the ho­nour of Christ who in his nature relative
to us, is exalted far above all thrones and principalities and dominions. I
need not adde lustre to this; It is like the Sun the biggest body of light and
nothing can describe it so well as its own beams: and there is not in nature
or the advantages of honour any thing greater then that we have the issues of
that mercy which makes us fellow servants with Angels; too much honoured to
pay them a religious worship, whose Lord is a man, and he that is their King
is our Brother.

4\. To this for the likenesse of the matter I adde, that the divine E mercy
hath so prosecuted us with the enlargement of his favours, that we are not
onely fellow ministers and servants with the An­gels and in our nature in the
person of Christ exalted above them, but we also shall be their Judges; and if
this be not an honour a­bove that of Joseph or Mordecai, an honour beyond all
the mea­sures of a man, then there is in honour no degrees no priority or
[[Page 320]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=168)
distances, or characters of fame and noblenesse. Christ is the great A Judge
of all the world, his humane nature shall then triumph o­ver evil men and evil
spirits, then shall the Devils, those Angels that fel from their first
originals be brought in their chains from their dark prisons and once be
allowed to see the light, that light that shall confound them; while all that
follow the lamb, and that are ac­counted worthy of that resurrection shall be
assessors in the judgment.1 Cor. 6. 3. Know ye not, (saith, S. Paul) that ye
shall judge Angels? And Tertul­lian speaking concerning Devils and accursed
spirits [de cultu foemi­narum] saith, Hi sunt Angeli quos judicaturi sumus, Hi
sunt Angeli qui­bus in lavacro renunciavimus. Those Angels which we renounced
B in baptisme those we shall judge in the day of the Lords Glory, in the great
day of recompences: And that the honour may be yet greater the same day of
sentence that condemns the evil Angels shal also reward the good, and increase
their glory: which because they derive from their Lord and ours, from their
King and our elder Brother, the King of glories, whose glorious hands shall
put the crown upon all our heads, we who shall be servants of that judge­ment
and some way or other assist in it, have a part of that ho­nour, to be judges
of all Angels, and of all the world. The effect of these things ought to be
this, that we do not by base actions dis­honour C that nature that sits upon
the throne of God, that reigns o­ver Angels, that shall sit in judgement upon
all the world. It is a great undecency that the son of a King should bear
water upon his head, and dresse vineyards among the slaves; or to see a wise
man and the guide of his country drink-drunk among the meanest of his
ser­vants; but when members of Christ shall be made members of an harlot, and
that which rides above a rain-bow stoopes to an impe­rious whorish woman, when
the soul that is sister to the Lord of An­gels, shall degenerate into the
foolishnesse or rage of a beast, being drowned with the blood of the grape, or
made mad with D passion, or ridiculous with weaker follies, we shall but strip
our selves of that robe of honour with which Christ hath invested, and adorned
our nature, and carry that portion of humanity which is our own, and which God
had honoured in some ca­pacities above Angels, into a portion of an eternal
shame, and be­came lesse in all senses, and equally disgraced with Devils. The
shame and sting of this change shall be, that we turned the glo­ries of the
Divine mercy into the basenesse of ingratitude and the amazement of suffering
the Divine vengeance. But I passe on.E

5\. The next order of Divine mercies that I shall remark is also an
improvement of our nature or an appendage to it: for where­as our constitution
is weak, our souls apt to diminution and impe­dite faculties, our bodies to
mutilation and imperfection, to blind­nesse and crookednesse, to stammering
and sorrows, to baldnesse [[Page
321]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=168) A and
deformity to evil conditions and accidents of body, and to pas­sions and
sadnesse of spirit, God hath in his infinite mercy provi­ded for every
condition rare suppletories of comfort and useful­nesse to make recompence and
sometimes with an overrunning proportion for those natural defects which were
apt to make our persons otherwise contemptible and our conditions intolerable;
God gives to blinde men better memories. For upon this ac­count it is, that
Rufinus makes mention of Didymus of Alexan­dria, who being blinde, was blessed
with a rare attention and sin­gular memory, and by prayer, and hearing, and
meditating, and B discoursing, came to be one of the most excellent Divines of
that whole age. And it was more remarkable in Nicasius Machlinien­sis, who
being blockish at his book in his first childhood fell into accidental
blindnesse, and from thence continually grew to so quick an apprehension and
so tenacious a memory, that he became the wonder of his contemporaries, and
was chosen Rector of the College at Mechlin, and was made licentiate of
Theology at Lo­vaine, and Doctor of both the laws, at Colein, living and dying
in great reputation for his rare parts and excellent learning. At the C same
rate also God deals with men in other instances; want of children he
recompences with freedom from care, and whatso­ever evil happens to the body
is therefore most commonly single and unaccompanied, because God accepts that
evil as the punish­ment of the sin of the man, or the instrument of his
vertue, or his security, and is reckoned as a sufficient cure, or a sufficient
Antidote. God hath laid laid a severe law upon all women th [...] in sorrow
they shall bring forth children, yet God hath so attempe [...]ed that sorrow,
that they think themselves more accursed if they want that sorrow, and they
have reason to rejoyce in that state, the trouble of which D is alleviated by
a promise, that they shall be saved in bearing chil­dren. He that wants one
eye hath the force and vigorousnesse of both united in that which is left him;
and when ever any man is afflicted with sorrow his reason and his religion,
himself and all his friends, persons that are civil, and persons that are
obliged, run into com­fort him, and he may, if he will observe wisely, finde
so many cir­cumstances of ease and remission, so many designes of providence
and studied favours, such contrivances of collateral advantage and certain
reserves of substantial and proper comfor [...], that in the whole sum of
affaires, it often happens that a single crosse is a double blessing, E & that
even in a temporal sense it is better to go to the house of mourn­ing, then of
joyes and festival egressions. Is not the affliction of  [...]o­verty better
then the prosperity of a great and tempting fortune? does not wisdom dwell in
a mean estate and a low spirit▪ retired thoughts and under a sad roof? and is
it not generally true that sicknesse it self is appayed with religion and holy
thoughts with pi­ous resolutions and penitential prayers, with returns to God
and [[Page 322]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=169) to
sober councels? and if this be true, that God sends sorrow to A cure sin, and
affliction be the hand-maid to grace, it is also certain that every sad
contingency in nature is doubly recompenced with the advantages of religion,
besides those intervening refreshments which support the spirit, and refresh
its instruments. I shall need to instance but once more in this particular.

God hath sent no greater evil into the world, then that in the sweat of our
brows we shall eat our bread, and in the difficulty and agony, in the sorrows
and contention of our souls we shall work out our salvation. But see how in
the first of these God hath out done his own anger and defeated the purposes
of his wrath by B the inundation of his mercy; for this labour and sweat of
our brows is so far from being a curse that without it our very bread would
not be so great a blessing. It is not labour that makes the Garlick and the
pulse, the Sycamore and the Cresses, the cheese of the Goats and the butter of
the sheep to be savoury and pleasant, as the flesh of the Roe-buck or the milk
of the Kine, the marrow of Oxen or the thighs of birds? If it were not for
labour, men neither could eat so much, nor relish so pleasantly, nor sleep so
soundly nor be so healthful, nor so useful, so strong nor so patient, so
noble, or so untempted, and as God hath made us beholding to labour for C the
purchase of many good things, so the thing it self ows to labour, many degrees
of its worth and value: and therefore I need not reck­on that besides these
advantages, the mercies of God have found out proper and natural remedies for
labour; Nights to cure the sweat of the day, sleep to ease our watchfulnesse,
rest to alleviate our burdens, and dayes of religion to procure our rest: and
things are so ordered that labour is become a duty, and an act of many
vertues, and is not so apt to turne into a sin as is its contrary, and is
therefore necessary, not onely because we need it, for making provisions of
our life, but even to ease the labour of our rest; there D being no greater
tediousnesse of spirit in the world then want of im­ployment, and an unactive
life: and the lasie man is not onely un­profitable, but also accursed, and he
groans under the load of his time, which yet passes over the active man light,
as a dreame or the feathers of a bird, while the disimployed, is a desease,
and like a long sleeplesse night to himself, and a load unto his country: And
therefore although in this particular God hath been so merci­ful in this
infliction that from the sharpnesse of the curse a very great part of mankinde
are freed, and there are myriads of peo­ple, good and bad, who do not eat
their bread in the sweat of their E brows, yet this is but an overrunning and
an excesse of the divine mercy; God did more for us then we did absolutely
need; for he hath disposed of the circumstances of this curse, that mans
af­fections are so reconciled to it, that they desire it, and are delighted in
it; and so the Anger of God is ended in loving Kindnesse, and [[Page
323]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=169) A the drop of
water is lost in the full chalice of the wine, and the curse is gone out into
a multiplied blessing.

But then for the other part of the severe law and laborious impo­sition, that
we must work out our spiritual interest with the la­bours of our spirit, seems
to most men to be so intolerable, that rather then passe under it they quit
their hopes of heaven, and passe into the portion of Devils; and what can
there be to alleviate this sorrow, that a man shall be perpetually sollicited
with an impure tempter, and shall carry a flame within him, and all the world
is on fire round about him, and every thing brings fuel to the flame, and B
full tables are a snare, and empty tables are collateral servants to a lust,
and help to blow the fire and kindle the heap of prepared temptations, and yet
a man must not at all tast of the forbidden fruit, and he must not desire what
he cannot choose but desire, and he must not enjoy whatsoever he does
violently covet, and must ne­ver satisfy his appetite in the most violent
importunities, but must therefore deny himself, because to do so is extremely
troublesome; this seems to be an art of torture and a devise to punish man
with the spirit of agony, and a restlesse vexation. But this also hath in it a
great ingredient of mercy, or rather is nothing else but a C heap of mercy in
its intire constitution: For if it were not for this we had nothing of our own
to present to God, nothing proportio­nable to the great rewards of heaven, but
either all men or no man must go thither; for nothing can distinguish man from
man in order to beatitude but choice and election, and nothing can enoble the
choice but love, and nothing can exercise love but difficulty, and nothing can
make that difficulty but the contradiction of our appetite and the crossing of
our natural affections; and therefore whenever any of you is tempted violently
or grow weary in your spirits with resisting the petulancy of temptation, you
may be cured if you D will please but to remember and rejoyce, that now you
have some­thing of your own to give to God; something that he will be pleased
to accept, something that he hath given thee that thou may­est give it him:
for our mony and our time, our dayes of feasting and our dayes of sorrow, our
discourse and our acts of praise, our prayers and our songs, our vows and our
offerings, our worship­pings and prostrations, and whatsoever else can be
accounted in the sum of our religion, are onely accepted according as they
bear along with them portions of our wil and choice of love and appen­dant
difficulty.

E Laetius est quoties magno tibi constat honestum.

So that whoever can complain that he serves God with pains and mortifications,
he is troubled because there is a distinction of things such as we call vertue
and vice, reward and punishment, [[Page
324]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=170) and if he will
not suffer God to distinguish the first he will certain­ly A confound the
latter; and his portion shall be blacknesse without variety and punishment
shall be his reward.

6\. As an appendage to this instance of divine mercy, we are to ac­count that
not onely in nature; but in contingency and emergent events of providence, God
makes compensation to us, for all the evils of chance, and hostilities of
accident & brings good out of evil, which is that solemn triumph which mercy
makes over justice, when it rides upon a cloud and crowns its darknesse with a
robe of glorious light. God indeed suffered Joseph to be sold a bondslave into
Egypt, but then it was that God intended to crown and re­ward B his chastity;
for by that means he brought him to a fair con­dition of dwelling and there
gave him a noble trial; he had a brave contention and he was a conqueror: Then
God sent him to prison, but still that was mercy, it was to make way to bring
him to Pha­raohs court; and God brought famine upon Canaan, and troub­led all
the souls of Jacobs family, and there was a plot laid for ano­ther mercy; this
was to bring them to see and partake of Josephs glory: and then God brought a
great evil upon their posterity and they groaned under task-masters, but this
God changed into the miracles of his mercy, and suffered them to be afflicted
that he C might do ten miracles for their sakes, and proclaim to all the world
how dear they were to God. And was not the greatest good to mankinde brought
forth from the greatest treason that ever was committed; the redemption of the
world from the fact of Judas, God loving to defeat the malice of man and the
arts of the Devil by rare emergencies and stratagems of mercy? It is a sad
calamity to see a kingdom spoiled, and a church afflicted, the Priests slain
with the sword, and the blood of Nobles mingled with cheaper sand, re­ligion
made a cause of trouble, and the best men most cruelly per­secuted, Government
confounded, and laws ashamed, Judges de­creeing D causes in fear and
covetousnesse, and the ministers of holy things setting themselves against all
that is sacred, and setting fire up­on the fields, and turning in little foxes
on purpose to destroy the vineyards; and what shall make recompence for this
heap of sor­rows, when ever God shall send such swords of fire? even the
mer­cies of God which then will be made publick, when we shall hear such
afflicted people sing Inconvertendo captivitatem Sion with the voice of joy
and festival eucharist, among such as keep holy day; and when peace shall
become sweeter and dwell the longer; and in the mean time it serves religion,
and the affliction shall try the chil­dren E of God, and God shall crown them,
and men shall grow wi­ser, and more holy, and leave their petty interstes, and
take sanctuary in holy living and be taught temperance by their want, and
patience by their suffering, and charity by their persecution, and shall
better understand the duty of their relations, and at last [[Page
325]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=170) A the secret
worm that lay at the root of the plant, shall be drawn forth and quite
extinguished. For so have I known a luxuriant Vine swell into irregular twigs,
and bold excrescencies, and spend it self in leaves and little rings, and
affoord but trifling clusters to the wine-presse, and a faint return to his
heart which longed to be refreshed with a full vintage: But when the Lord of
the vine had caused the dressers to cut the wilder plant and made it bleed, it
grew temperate in its vain expense of uselesse leaves, and knot­ted into fair
and juicy bunches, and made accounts of that losse of blood by the return of
fruit: So is an afflicted Province, cured B of its surfets, and punished for
its sins, and bleeds for its long riot, and is left ungoverned for its
disobedience, and chastised for its wantonnesse, and when the sword hath let
forth the corrupted blood, and the fire hath purged the rest, then it enters
into the double joyes of restitution, and gives God thanks for his rod, and
confesses the mercies of the Lord in making the smoke be changed into fire,
and the cloud into a perfume, the sword into a staffe, and his anger into
mercy.

Had not David suffered more if he had suffered lesse, and had he not been
miserable unlesse he had been afflicted? he understood C it well when he said.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted. He that was rival to Crassus,
when he stood candidate to command the Legions in the Parthians warre was much
troubled that he mis­sed the dignity, but he saw himself blessed that he
scaped the death, and the dishonour of the overthrow, by that time the sad
news arrived at Rome. The Gentleman at Marseilles cursed his starres that he
was absent when the ship set sail to sea, having long waited for a winde, and
missed it; but he gave thanks to the provi­dence that blest him with the
crosse, when he knew that the ship perished in the voyage, and all the men
were drowned: And D even those virgins and barren women in Jerusalem, that
longed to become glad mothers, and for want of children would not be
comforted, yet when Titus sacked the City, found the words of Jesus true
Blessed is the womb that never bare, and the paps that never gave suck. And
the world being governed with a rare va­riety, and changes of accidents, and
providence; that which is a misfortune in the particular, in the whole order
of things becomes a blessing bigger then we hoped for, then when we were angry
with God for hindring us, to perish in pleasant wayes, or when he was
contriving to pour upon thy head a mighty blessing. Do E not think the Judge
condemns you when he chides you, nor think to read thy own finall sentence by
the first half of his words; Stand still and see how it will be in the whole
event of things; let God speak his minde out; for it may be, this sad
beginning is but an art to bring in, or to make thee to esteem, and entertain,
and understand the blessing.

[[Page 326]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=171) They
that love to talk of the mercies of the Lord, and to recount A his good
things, cannot but have observed that God delights to be called by such
Appellatives which relate to miserable and afflicted persons: He is the Father
of the fatherlesse, and an avenger of the widowes cause, he standeth at the
right hand of the poor to save his soul from unrighteous Judges, and he is
with us in tribulation: And upon this ground, let us account whether mercy be
not the greater ingredient in that death and deprivation, when I lose a man
and get God to be my Father; and when my weak arm of flesh is cut B from my
shoulder, and God makes me to lean upon him, and be­comes my Patron and my
Guide, my Advocate and Defender: and if in our greatest misery Gods mercy is
so conspicuous, what can we suppose him to be in the endearment of his loving
Kindnesse? If his vail be so transparent, well may we know that upon his face
dwels glory, and from his eyes light, and perpetuall comforts run in channels,
larger then the returns of the Sea, when it is driven and forced faster into
its naturall course, by the violence of a tempest from the North. The summe is
this, God intends every accident should minister to vertue, and every vertue
is the mother and the nurse of joy, and both of them daughters of the Divine
goodnesse, and therefore, if our sorrows do not passe into comforts, it is
be­sides C Gods intention; it is because we will not comply with the act of
that mercy which would save us by all means, and all varieties, by health and
by sicknesse, by the life and by the death of our dear­est friends, by what we
choose and by what we fear; that as Gods providence rules over all chances of
things, and all designes of men, so his mercy may rule over all his
providence.D E

[[Page 327]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=171)

## 26\. A Sermon. XXVI.SERMON XXVI. B The Miracles of the Divine Mercy.  
Part II.

C 7\. GOD having by these means secured us from the evils of nature and
contingencies, he represents himself to be our Father, which is the great
endearment, and tye, and expression, of a naturall, unalterable, and
essentiall kindnesse, he next makes provisions for us to supply all those
necessities which himself hath made. For even to make necessities, was a great
cir­cumstance of the mercy, and all the relishes of wine, and the
sa­vourinesse of meat, the sweet and the fat, the pleasure and the
satis­faction, the restitution of spirits, and the strengthening of the heart,
are not owing to the liver of the vine, or the kidneys of wheat, to D the
blood of the grape, or the strength of the corne, but to the appetite, or the
necessity; and therefore it is, that he that sits at a full table and does not
recreate his stomack with fasting, and let his digestion rest, and place
himself in the advantages of natures intervals, he loses the blessing of his
daily bread, and leans upon his table as a sick man upon his bed, or the lion
in the grasse, which he cannot feed on; but he that wants it, and sits down
when nature gives the signe, rejoyces in the health of his hunger, and the
taste of his meat, and the strengthening of his spirit, and gives God thanks
while his bones and his flesh rejoyce in the pro­visions E of nature, and the
blessing of God. Are not the imperfe­ctions of infancy, and the decayes of old
age, the evils of our na­ture, because respectively they want desire, and they
want gust and relish, and reflections upon their acts of sense? and when
de­sire failes, presentlyEccles. 12. the mourners go about the streets. But
then, that these desires are so provided for by nature and art, by ordi­nary
[[Page 328]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=172) and
extraordinary, by foresight and contingency, according A to necessity, and up
unto conveniency, until we arrive at abun­dance, is a chain of mercies larger
then the Bowe in the clouds, and richer then the trees of Eden, which were
permitted to feed our miserable father: Is not all the earth our orchard, and
our granary, our vineyard, and our garden of pleasure? and the face of the Sea
is our traffique, and the bowels of the Sea is our viva­rium, a place for fish
to feed us, and to serve some other collate­rall appendant needs; and all the
face of heaven is a repository for influences and breath, fruitfull showers
and fair refreshments; and when God made provisions for his other creatures,
he gave it B of one kinde, and with variety no greater, then the changes of
day and night, one devouring the other, or sitting down with his draught of
blood, or walking upon his portion of grasse: But man hath all the food of
beasts, and all the beasts themselves that are fi [...] for food; and the food
of Angels, and the dew of heaven, and the fat­nesse of the earth; and every
part of his body hath a provision made for it, and the smoothnesse of the
olive, and the juice of the vine refresh the heart and make the face
cheerfull, and serve the ends of joy, and the festivity of man, and are not
onely to cure hun­ger or to allay thirst, but to appease a passion, and allay
a sorrow.C It is an infinite variety of meat with which God furnishes out the
table of mankinde; and in the covering our sin, and clothing our nakednesse,
God passed from sig-leaves to the skins of beasts, from aprons to long-robes,
from leather to wool, and from thence to the warmth of furres, and the
coolnesse of silks, he hath dressed not onely our needs, but hath fitted the
severall portions of the yeer, and made us to go dressed like our mother;
leaving off the winter sables when the florid spring appears, and assoon as
the Tulip fades we put on the robe of Summer, and then shear our sheep for
Winter; and God uses us as Joseph did his brother Benjamin, we D have many
changes of raiment, and our messe is five times bigger then the provision made
for our brothers of the Creation. But the providence and mercies of God are to
be estimated also according as these provisions are dispensed to every single
person. For that I may not remark the bounties of God, running over the tables
of the rich, God hath also made provisions for the poorest person: so that if
they can but rule their desires they shall have their tables furnished; and
this is secured and provided for by one promise and two duties, by our Own
labour, and our Brothers charity; and our faith in this affair is confirmed by
all our own, and by all the E experience of other men. Are not all the men and
the women of the world provided for, and fed and clothed till they die? and
was it not alwayes so from the first morning of the creatures? and that a man
is starved to death, is a violence and a rare contingency, happening almost as
seldom as for a man to have but one eye: [[Page
329]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=172) A and if our
being provided for be as certain as for a man to have two eyes, we have reason
to adore the wisdom, and admire the mer­cies of our Almighty Father. But these
things are evident. Is it not a great thing that God hath made such strange
provisions for our health? such infinite differences of Plants, and hath
discovered the secrets of their nature by meer chance, or by inspiration?
either of which is the miracle of providence, secret to us, but ordered by
certain and regular decrees of heaven. It was a huge diligence and care of the
divine mercy that discovered to man, the secrets of Spagyrick medicines, of
stones, of spirits, and the results of 7. or B 8\. decoctions, and the strange
effects of accidental mixtures, which the art of man could not suspect, being
bound up in the secret san­ctuary of hidden causes, and secret natures, and
being laid open by the concourse of 20, or 30. little accidents, all which
were orde­red by God, as certainly as are the first principles of nature, or
the descent of sons from fathers in the most noble families.

But that which I shall observe in this whole affair is, that there are both
for the provision of our tables, and the relief of our sick­nesses, so many
miracles of providence that they give plain demon­stration what relation we
bear to heaven: and the poor man need C not be troubled that he is to expect
his daily portion after the Sun is up: for he hath found to this day he was
not deceived, and then he may rejoyce because he sees by an effective
probation that in hea­ven a decree was made, every day to send him provisions
of meat and drink; and that is a mighty mercy, when the circles of heaven are
bowed down to wrap us in a bosome of care, and nourishment, and the wisdom of
God is daily busied to serve his mercy, as his mercy serves our necessities.
Does not God plant remedies there where the diseases are most popular, and
every Countrey is best provided against its own evils? Is not the Rhubarb
found where D the Sun most corrupts the liver, and the Scabious by the shore
of the Sea, that God might cure as soon as he wounds, and the inha­bitants may
see their remedy against the leprosie, and the scurvy, before they feel their
sicknesse? And then to this we may adde, Natures commons and open fields, the
shores of rivers, and the strand of the Sea, the unconfined air, the
wildernesse that hath no hedge, and that in these every man may hunt, and fowl
and  [...]sh re­spectively; and that God sends some miracles and extraordinary
blessings so for the publike good, that he will not endure they should be
inclosed and made severall: Thus he is pleased  [...]o dis­pense E the Manna
of Calabria, the medicinall waters of Germany, the Musles at Sluce at this
day, and the Egyptian beans in the ma­rishes of Albania, and the salt at Troas
of old; which God to de­feat the covetousnesse of man, and to spread his mercy
over th [...] face of the indigent, as the Sun scatters his beams over the
bosome of the whole earth, did so order that as long as every man was
permit­ted [[Page
330]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=173) to partake,
the bosome of heaven was open; but when man A gathered them into single
handfulls, and made them▪ impropriate, God gathered his hand into his bosome,
and bound the heavens with ribs of brasse, and the earth with decrees of iron,
and the bles­sing reverted to him that gave it, since they might not receive
it, to whom it was sent. And in general, this is the excellency of this mercy,
that all our needs are certainly supplied, and secured by a promise which God
cannot break, but he that cannot breake the lawes of his own promises, can
break the lawes of nature, that he B may perform his promise, and he will do a
miracle rather then for­sake thee in thy needs: So that our security and the
relative mercy, is bound upon us by all the power and the truth of God.

8\. But because such is the bounty of God, that he hath provi­ded a better
life for the inheritance of man, if God is so merci­full in making fair
provisions for our lesse noble part, in order to the transition toward our
Countrey, we may expect that the mer­cies of God hath rare arts to secure to
us his designed bounty, in order to our inheritance, to that which ought to be
our portion for ever. And here I consider, that it is an infinite mercy of the
Almighty Father of mercies that he hath appointed to us such a religion that
leads us to a huge felicity, through pleasant wayes.C For the felicity that is
designed to us is so above our present ca­pacities and conceptions, that while
we are so ignorant as not to understand it, we are also so foolish as not to
desire it with passions great enough to perform the little conditions of its
pur­chase; God therefore knowing how great an interest it is, and how apt we
would be to neglect it, hath found out such conditions of acquiring it which
are eases and satisfaction to our present appe­tites. God hath bound our
salvation upon us by the endearment of temporall prosperities; and because we
love this world so well, God hath so ordered it, that even this world may
secure the other.D And of this, God in old time made open profession, for when
he had secretly designed to bring his people to a glorious immortali­ty in
another world, he told them nothing of that, it being a thing bigger then the
capacity of their thoughts, or of their Theology, but told them that which
would tempt them most, and endear obedience: If you will obey, ye shall eat
the good things of the land: Ye shall possesse a rich countrey, ye shall
triumph over your ene­mies, ye shall have numerous families, blessed children,
rich gra­naries, over-running wine-presses; for God knew the cognation of most
of them was so dear, between their affections and the good E things of this
world, that if they did not obey in hope of that they did need, and fancy, and
love, and see, and feel, it was not to be expected they should quit their
affections for a secret in another world, whither before they come they must
die, and lose all desire and all capacities of enjoyment. But this designe of
God which [[Page
331]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=173) A was bare-
faced in the dayes of the law, is now in the Gospel inter­woven secretly (but
yet plain enough to be discovered by an eye of faith and reason) into every
vertue, and temporal advantage is a great ingredient in the constitution of
every Christian grace for so the richest tissue dazles the beholders eye when
the Sun reflects upon the mettal, the silver and the gold weaved into
phantasti [...] imagery, or a wealthy plainnesse, but the rich wire and
shining fila­ments are wrought upon cheaper silk, the spoil of worms and
flies: so is the imbroidery of our vertue; the glories of the spirit dwell
upon the face and vestment, upon the fringes and the B borders; and there we
see the Beril and the Onyx, the Jasper and the sardyx, order and perfection,
love and peace and joy, mor­tification of the passions and ravishment of the
will, adherencies to God and imitation of Christ, reception and entertainment
of the Holy Ghost and longings after heaven, humility, and chastity,
tem­perance, and sobriety; these make the frame of the garment, the cloaths of
the soul that it may not be found naked in the day of the Lords visitation;
but through these rich materials a thrid of silk is drawn, some compliance
with worms and weaker creatures, some­thing C that shall please our bowels,
and make the lower man t [...] re­joyce: they are wrought upon secular
content, and material sa­tisfactions, and now we cannot be happy unlesse we be
[...]ious, and the religion of a Christian is the greatest security and the
most cer­tain instrument of making a man rich, and pleased, and healthful and
wise and beloved in the whole world.Life of H. Jesus. part 3 Disc. 14. I shall
now remark onely two or three instances; for the main body of this truth I
have other where represented.

1\. The whole religion of a Christian as it relates to others is no­thing but
justice and mercy, certain parents of peace and benefit: D and upon this
supposition what evil can come to a just and a merci­ful, to a necessary and
useful person? For the first permission of evil was upon the stock of
injustice: He that kills may be killed, and he that does injury may be
mischieved; he that invades ano­ther mans right, must venture the losse of his
own; and when I put my Brother to his defence he may chance drive the evil so
far from himself, that it may reach me; Laws and  [...]udges, private &
publick judicatures, wars and tribunals, axes and wheels were made, not for
the righteous, but for the unjust; and all that whole order of things and
persons would be uselesse, if men did do as they would E willingly suffer. 2.
And because there is no evil that can befal a just man unlesse it comes by
injury and violence, our religion hath also made as good provisions against
that too, as the nature of the thing will suffer; for by patience we are
reconciled to the suffe­rance, and by hope and faith we see a certain
consequent reward; and by praying for the persecuting man we are oured of all
the e­vil of the minde, the envy and the fretfulnesse that uses to gall the
[[Page 332]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=174)
troubled and resisting man; and when we turn all the passion into A charity,
and God turns all the suffering into reward, there remains nothing that is
very formidable. So that our religion obliges us to such duties which prevent
all evils that happen justly to men, (and in our religion no man can suffer as
a malefactor, if he follows the religion truely) and for the evils that are
unavoidable and come by violence, the graces of this discipline turne them
into vertues and rewards, and make them that in their event they are desirable
and in the suffering they are very tolerable. 3. But then when we con­sider
that the religion of a Christian consists in doing good to all men, that it is
made up of mercies and friendships, of friendly con­ventions B and assemblies
of Saints, that all are to do good works for necessary uses, that is to be
able to be beneficial to the publick and not to be burthensome to any, where
it can be avoided, what can be wished to man in relation to others, and what
can be more be­neficial to themselves then that they be such whom other men
will value for their interest, such whom the publick does need, such whom
Princes and Nobles ought to esteem, and all men can make use of according to
their several conditions; that they are so well provided for that unlesse a
persecution disables them they cannot onely maintain themselves, but oblige
others to their C charity.

This is a temporal good which all wise men reckon as part of that felicity
which recompences all the labours of their day, and sweetens the sleep of
their night, and places them in that circle of neighbour-hood and amity where
men are most valued and most secure. 4. To this we may adde this material
consideration. That al those graces which oblige us to do good to others are
nothing else but certain instruments of doing advantage to our selves. It is a
huge noblenesse of charity to give alms not onely to our Brother, but for him,
It is the Christian sacrifice, like that of Job who made D oblations for his
sons when they feasted each other, fearing lest they had sinned against God;
and if I give almes and fast and pray in behalf of my prince, or my Patron, my
friend or my children, I do a combination of holy actions, which are of all
things that I can do, the most effectual intercession for him, whom I so
re­commend; but then observe the art of this, and what a plot is laid by the
divine mercy to secure blessing to to our selves. That I am a person fit to
intercede and pray for him must sup­pose me a gracious person, one whom God
rather will accept; so that before I be fit to pray and interpose for him; I
must first be­come E dear to God, and my charity can do him no good, for whose
interest I gave it, but by making me first acceptable to God, that so he may
the rather hear me; and when I fast, it is first an act of repentance for my
self before it can be an instrument of impetrati­on for him. And thus I do my
Brother a single benefit, by doing my [[Page
333]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=174) A self a
double one, and it is also so ordered that when I pray for a person for whom
God will not hear me, yet then he will hear me for my self though I say
nothing in my own behalf, and our pray­ers are like Jonathans arrows, if they
fall short, yet they re­turn my friend or my friendship to me; or if they go
home, they secure him whom they pray for, and I have not onely the comfort of
rejoycing with him but the honour and the reward of procur­ing him a joy; and
certain it is that a charitable prayer for another, can never want what it
asks, or instead of it, a greater blessing. The good man that saw his poor
brother troubled because he B had nothing to present for an offering at the
Holy communion (when all knew themselves obliged to do kindnesse for Christs
poor members with which themselves were incorporated with so mysterious union)
and gave him mony that he might present for the good of his soul as other
Christians did, had not onely the re­ward of almes but of religion too; and
that offering was well hus­banded, for it did benefit to two souls; for as I
sin when I make another sin: so if I help him to do a good, I am a sharer in
the gains of his talent, and he shall not have the lesse but I shall be
rewarded upon his stock. And this was it which David rejoyced in, Partic
[...]ps C sum omnium timentium te; I am a partner, a companion of all them
that fear thee, I share in their profits. If I do but rejoyce at every grace
of God which I see in my Brother, I shall be rewarded  [...]or that grace; and
we need not envy the excellency of another; It be­comes mine as well as his:
and if I do rejoyce, I shall have  [...]ause to rejoyce; so excellent, so
full, so artificial is the mercy of God in making and seeking and finding all
occasions to do us good. 5. The very charity and love and mercy that is
commanded in our religion is in it self a great excellency, not onely in order
to heaven, but to the comforts of the earth too, & such without which D a man
is not capable of a blessing or a comfort; & he that sent charity and
friendships into the world, intended charity to be as relative as justice, &
to do its effect both upon the loving and the beloved per­son. It is a reward
and a blessing to a kinde Father, when his children do well, and every degree
of prudent love which  [...] bears to them is an endearment of his joy; and he
that loves them not, but looks upon them as burdens of necessity, and
[...]oads to his fortune, loses those many rejoycings, and the pleas [...]es
of kind­nesse, which they feast withal who love to divide their fortunes,
amongst them, because they have already divided out large and E equal portions
of their heart. I have instanced in this relation; but it is true in all the
excellency of friendship; and every man rejoyces twice when he hath a partner
of his joy; A friend shares my sor­row and makes it but a moi [...]ty; but he
swells my joy and makes it double. For so two chanels divide the river and
lessen it into rivulets, and make it foordable and apt to be drunk up at the
first [[Page 334]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=175)
revels of the Sirian star; but two torches do not divide but increase A the
flame; and though my tears are the sooner dryed up, when they run upon my
friends cheeks in the furrows of compassion, yet when my flame hath kindled
his lamp, we unite the glories and make them radiant like the golden Candle-
sticks that burn before the throne of God, because they shine by numbers, by
unions, and con­federations of light and joy.

And now upon this account which is already so great I need not reckon
concerning the collateral issues, and little streams of comfort which God hath
made to issue from that religion to which God hath obliged us; such as are
mutual comforts, visiting sick people, in­structing B the ignorant and so
becoming better instructed and forti­fied and comforted our selves by the
instruments of our Brothers ease and advantages; the glories of converting
souls, of rescuing a sin­ner from hell, of a miserable man from the grave the
honour and noblenesse of being a good man, the noble confidence, and the
bra­very of innocence, the ease of patience, the quiet of contented­nesse, the
rest of peacefulnesse, the worthinesse of forgiving others, the greatnesse of
spirit that is in despising riches, and the sweet­nesse of spirit that is in
meeknesse and humility; these are Christi­an graces in every sense; favours of
God and issues of his bounty C & his mercy; but al that Ishal now observe
further concerning them, is this, that God hath made these necessary; he hath
obliged us to have them under pain of damnation, he hath made it so sure to us
to become happy even in this world, that if we will not, he hath threa­tened
to destroy us, which is, not a desire or aptnesse to do us an evil, but an art
to make it impossible that we should For God hath so ordered it that we cannot
perish unlesse we desire it our selves, and unlesse we will do our selves a
mischief on purpose to get hell, we are secured of heaven, and there is not in
the nature of things, any way that can more infallibly do the work of felicity
upon creatures D that can choose, then to make that which they should
naturally choose, be spiritually their duty, and that he will make them hap­py
hereafter, if they will suffer him to make them happy here; But hardly stand
another throng of mercies that must be considered by us, and God must be
glorified in them, for they are such as are in­tended to preserve to us all
this felicity.

9\. God that he might secure our duty and our present and con­sequent felicity
hath tied us with golden chaines and bound us not onely with the bracelets of
love, and the deliciousnesse of hope, but with the ruder cords of fear and
reverence, even with all the E innumerable parts of a restraining grace. For
it is a huge aggravati­on of humane calamity to consider that after a man hath
been instructed in the love and advantages of his Religion, and knows it to be
the way of honour and felicity, and that to prevaricate his holy sanctions is
certain death and disgrace to eternal ages, [[Page
335]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=175) A yet that
some men shall despise their religion, others shall be very weary of its laws,
and cal the commandments a burden, and too ma­ny, with a perfect choice shall
delight in death, and the wayes that lead thither, and they choose mony
infinitely, and to rule over their Brother by al means, & to be revenged
extremely, and to prevail by wrong and to do all that they can, and please
themselves in all that they desire, and love it fondly, and be restlesse in
all things but where they perish; if God should not interpose by the arts of a
mi­raculous and merciful grace, and put a bridle in the mouth of our lusts,
and chastise the sea of our follies by some heaps of sand or B the walls of a
rock, we should perish in the deluge of sin uni­versally as the old world did
in that storm of the divine anger, the flood of water. But thus God suffers
but few adulteries in the world in respect of what would be if all men that
desire to be a dul­terers had power & opportunity; and yet some men and very
many women are by modesty and natural shamefacednesse chastised in their too
forward appetites: or the laws of man or publick repu­tation or the undecency
and unhandsome circumstances of sin check the desire and make it that it
cannot arrive at act: for so have I seen C a busie flame sitting upon a sullen
cole turn its point to all the angles and portions of its neighbour-hood and
reach at a heap of prepa­red straw, which like a bold temptation called it to
a restlesse mo­tion and activity, but either it was at too big a distance or a
gentle breath from heaven diverted the speare and the ray of the fire to the
other side, and so prevented the violence of the burning, till the flame
expired in a weak consumption, and dyed turning into smoak and the coolnesse
of death and the harmlesnesse of a Cinder: and when a mans desires are winged
with sailes and a lusty wind of pas­sion and passe on in a smooth chanel of
opportunity, God often D times hinders the lust and the impatient desire from
passing on to its port, and entring into action, by a suddain thought, by a
little re­membrance of a word, by a fancy, by a sudden disability, by
unrea­sonable and unlikely fears, by the suddain intervening of company, by
the very wearinesse of the passion, by curiosity, by want of health, by the
too great violence of the desire, bursting it self with its fulnesse into
dissolution & a remisse easinesse, by a sentence of scrip­ture, by the
reverence of a good man, or else by the proper inter­ventions of the spirit of
grace chastising the crime and representing its appendant mischiefs and its
constituent disorder and irregularity; E and after all this, the very anguish
and trouble of being defeated in the purpose hath rolled it self into so much
uneasinesse and un­quiet reflections, that the man is grown ashamed and vexed
into more sober counsels.

And the mercy of God is not lesse then infinite in separating men from the
occasions of their sin, from the neighbour-hood and temptation; for if the
Hyaena and a dog should be thrust into the [[Page
336]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=176) same Kennel,
one of them would soon finde a grave, and it may A be both of them their
death; so infallible is the ruine of most men, if they be shewed a temptation:
Nitre and resin, Naphtha and Bi­tumen, sulphur and pitch are their
constitution, and the fire passes up­on them infinitely, and there is none to
rescue them. But God by removing our sins far from us, as far as the East is
from the West not onely putting away the guilt, but setting the occasion far
from us, extremely far; so far that sometimes we cannot sin and many times,
not easily, hath magnified his mercy, by giving us safety in all those
measures in which we are untempted, It would be the matter of new discourses,
if I should consider concerning the va­riety B of Gods grace, his preventing
and accompanying, his invi­ting and corroborating grace; his assisting us to
will, his enabling us to do, his sending Angels to watch us, to remove us from
evil com­pany, to drive us with swords of fire from forbidden instances, to
carry us by unobserved opportunities into holy company, to mi­nister occasions
of holy discourses, to make it by some means or other necessary to do a holy
action, to make us in love with ver­tue, because they have mingled that vertue
with a just and a fair interest, to some men by making religion that thing
they live upon, to others, the means of their reputation, and the securities
of their C honour, and thousands of wayes more, which every prudent man that
watches the wayes of God cannot but have observed. But I must also observe
other great conjugations of mercy, for he that is to passe through an infinite
must not dwell upon everie little line of life.

10\. The next order of mercies is such, which is of so pure, and unmingled
constitution, that it hath at first no regard to the capaci­ties and
disposition of the receivers, and afterwards when it hath, it relates onely to
such conditions, which it self creates and produces in the suscipient, I mean
the mercies of the divine predestination. D For was it not an infinite mercy
that God should predestinate all mankinde to salvation by Jesus Christ, even
when he had no other reason to move him to do it but because man was miserable
and nee­ded his pity? But I shall instance onely in the intermediall part of
this mysterious mercy. Why should God cause us to be born of Christian
parents, and not to be circumcised by the impure hands of a Turkish Priest?
What distinguished me from another, that my Father was severe in his
discipline and carefull to bring me up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, and I was not exposed to the carelesnesse of an irreligious guardian,
and taught to steal,E and lie, and to make sport with my infant vices, and
beginnings of iniquity? Who was it that discerned our persons from the lot of
dying Chrysomes, whose portion must be among those who never glorified God
with a free obedience? What had you done of good, or towards it, that you was
not condemned to the stupid ignorance [[Page
337]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=176) A which makes
the souls of most men but a little higher then beasts, and who understand
nothing of religion and noble principles, of parables and wise sayings of old
men. And not onely in our cra­dles, but in our schools, and in our colledges,
in our friendships, and in our marriages, in our enmities, and in all our
conversation, in our vertues and in our vices, where all things in us were
equal, or else we were the inferiour, there is none of us but have felt the
mercies of many differencies. Or it may be my brother and I were intemperate,
and drunk, and quarelsome, and he kill'd a man, but God did not suffer me to
do so: He fell down and died with a B little disorder, I was a beast and yet
was permitted to live, and not yet to die in my sins: He did amisse once and
was surprized in that disadvantage: I sin daily and am still invited to
repentance; he would fain have lived and amended; I neglect the grace, but am
allowed the time. And when God sends the Angel of his wrath to execute his
anger upon a sinfull people we are encompassed with funerals, and yet the
Angel hath not smitten us: what or who makes the difference? We shall then
see, when in the separations of eternity, we sitting in glory, shall see some
of the partners of our sins carried into despair and the portions of the left
hand, and roaring C in the seats of the reprobate; we shall then perceive that
it is even that mercy which hath no cause but it self, no measure of its
emanation but our misery, no natural limit but eternity, no beginning but God,
no object but man, no reason but an essential and an unalterable goodnesse, no
variety but our necessity and capacity, no change but new instances of its own
nature, no ending or repentance, but our absolute and obstinate refusall to
entertain it.

11\. Lastly, All the mercies of God are concentred in that which is all the
felicity of man; and God is so great a lover of souls that he provides
securities and fair conditions for them, even D against all our reason and
hopes, our expectations, and weak dis­coursings. The particulars I shall
remark are these. 1. Gods mercy prevails over the malice and ignorances, the
weaknesse [...] and follies of men, so that in the convention and assemblies
of hereticks (as the word is usually understood for erring and mistaken
people) although their doctrines are such that if men should live according to
their proper and naturall consequences, they would live impi­ously, yet in
every one of these there are persons so innocently and invincibly mistaken,
and who mean nothing but truth, while in the simplicity of their heart they
talk nothing but error, that in E the defiance and contradiction of their own
doctrines, they  [...]ve ac­cording to its contradictory. He that beleeves
contrition alone with confession to a Priest, is enough to expiate ten
thousand sins, is furnished with an excuse easie enough to quit himself from
the troubles of a holy life; and he that hath a great many cheap wayes of
buying off his penances for a little money, even for the greatest [[Page
338]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=177) sins, is
taught a way not to fear the doing of an act, for which he A must repent;
since repentance is a duty so soon, so certainly, and so easily performed: But
these are not [...]ious doctrines in the Ro­man Church, and yet God so loves
the souls of his creatures that many men who trust to these doctrines in their
discourses, dare not rely upon them in their lives. But while they talk as if
they did not need to live strictly, many of them live so strictly as if they
did not beleeve so foolishly. He that tels, that antecedently God hath to all
humane choice decreed man to heaven or to hell, takes B away from man all care
of the way, because they beleeve that he that infallibly decreed that end,
hath unalterably appointed the means, and some men that talk thus wildly live
soberly, and are over-wrought in their understanding by some secret art of
God, that man may not perish in his ignorance, but be assisted in his choice,
and saved by the Divine mercies. And there is no sect of men but are furnished
with antidotes and little excuses to cure the venom of their doctrine; and
therefore although the adherent and constituent poison is notorious and
therefore to be declined, yet be­cause it is collaterally cured and over-
poured by the torrent and wisdom of Gods mercies, the men are to be taken into
the Quire that we may all joyn in giving of God praise for the operation of C
his hands. 2. I said formerly that there are many secret and un­discerned
mercies by which men live, and of which men can give no account till they come
to give God thanks at their publication; and of this sort, is that mercy which
God reserves for the souls of many millions of men and women concerning whom
we have no hopes, if we account concerning them by the usuall proportions of
revelation and Christian commandements, and yet we are taught to hope some
strange good things concerning them by the analo­gy and generall rules of the
Divine mercy. For what shall be­come of ignorant Christians, people that live
in wildnesses and D places more desert then a primitive hermitage, people that
are baptized, and taught to go to Church, it may be once a yeer, peo­ple that
can get no more knowledge, they know not where to have it, nor how to desire
it; and yet that an eternity of pains shall be consequent to such an ignorance
is unlike the mercy of God, and yet that they should be in any dispositions
towards an eternity of intellectuall joyes is no where set down in the leaves
of reve­lation; and when the Jews grew rebellious, or a silly woman of the
daughters of Abraham was tempted, and sinned, and punished with death, we
usually talk as if that death passed on to a worse; E but yet we may arrest
our thoughts upon the Divine mercies, and consider that it is reasonable to
expect from the Divine goodnesse, that no greater forfeiture be taken upon a
law, then was expres­sed in its sanction and publication. He that makes a law
and bindes it with the penalty of stripes, we say he intends not to afflict
the dis­obedient [[Page
339]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=177) A with
scorpions and axes; and it had been hugely neces­sary that God had scar'd the
Jews from their sins by threatning the pains of hell to them that disobeyed,
if he intended to inflict it; for although many men would have ventured the
future, since they are not affrighted with the present and visible evil, yet
some persons would have had more Philosophical and spiritual appre­hensions
then others, and have been infallibly cured in all their temptations with the
fear of an eternall pain; and however, whether they had or no, yet since it
cannot be understood how it consists with the Divine justice to exact a pain
bigger then he B threatned, greater then he gave warning of; so we are sure it
is a great way off from Gods mercy to do so. He that usually impo­ses lesse,
and is loth to inflict any and very often forgives it all, is hugely distant
from exacting an eternall punishment, when the most that he threatned and gave
notice of, was but a temporall. The ef­fect of this consideration I would have
to be this, that we may pub­likely worship this mercy of God which is kept in
secret and that we be not too forward in sentencing all Heathens, and
prevarica­ting Jews to the eternall pains of hell, but hope that they have a
portion in the secrets of the Divine mercy, where also unlesse ma­ny C of us
have some little portions deposited, our condition will be very uncertain, and
sometimes most miserable. God knows best how intolerably accursed a thing it
is to perish in the eternall flames of hell, and therefore he is not easie to
inflict it: and if the  [...]oyes of heaven be too great to be expected upon
too easie termes, cer­tainly the pains of the damned are infinitely too big to
passe lightly upon persons who cannot help themselves, and who i [...] they
were helped with clearer revelations would have avoided it▪ But as in these
things we must not pry into the secrets of the Divine Oeconomy, being sure
whether it be so or no, it is most just, even D as it is; so we may expect to
see the glories of the Divine mercy made publike in unexpected instances at
the great day of manife­station: And indeed our dead many times go forth from
our hands very strangely and carelesly, without prayers, without Sacra­ments,
without consideration, without counsel, and without com­fort; and to dresse
the souls of our dear people to so sa [...] a parting is an imployment, we
therefore omit, not alwayes because we are negligent, but because the work is
sad and allay the affections of the world, with those melancholy
circumstances; but i [...] God did not in his mercies make secret and
equivalent provisions for them, E and take care of his redeemed ones we might
unhappily meet them in a sad eternity, and without remedy weep together and
groan for ever. But God hath provided better things for them, that they
without us, that is, without our assistances, shall be made perfect.

[[Page 340]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=178)

## 27\. Sermon. XXVII.SERMON XXVII. A The Miracles of the Divine Mercy.B  
Part III.

THere are very many more orders and conjugations of mer­cies,C but because the
numbers of them naturally tend to their own greatnesse, that is, to have no
measure, I must reckon but a few more, and them also without order; for that
they do descend upon us, we see and feel, but by what order of things, or
causes, is as undiscerned as the head of Nilus, or a sudden re­membrance of a
long neglected and forgotten proposition. 1. But upon this account it is, that
good men have observed, that the pro­vidence of God is so great a provider for
holy living, and does so certainly minister to religion, that nature and
chance, the order of the world, and the influences of heaven are taught to
serve the D ends of the Spirit of God, and the spirit of a man. I do not speak
of the miracles that God hath in the severall periods of the world wrought for
the establishing his lawes, and confirming his promi­ses, and securing our
obedience; though that was all the way the overflowing and miracles of mercy
as well as power: but that which I consider is, that besides the extraordinary
emanations of the Di­vine power upon the first and most solemn occasions of an
instituti­on and the first beginnings of a religion, such as were, the wonders
God did in Egypt and in the wildernesse, preparatory to the sancti­on of that
law, and the first covenant; and the miracles wrought E by Christ and his
Apostles, for the founding and the building up the religion of the Gospel, and
the new covenant: God does also do things wonderfull and miraculous, for the
promoting the or­dinary and lesse solemn actions of our piety, and to assist
and ac­company them in a constant and regular succession. It was a strange
[[Page 341]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=178) A
variety of naturall efficacies, that Manna should s [...]nk in 24. hours if
gathered upon Wednesday and Thursday, and that it should last till 48. hours
if gathered upon the Even of the Sabbath; and that it should last many
hundreds of yeers when placed in the San­ctuary by the ministery of the high
Priest; but so it was in the Jews religion; and Manna pleased every palate,
and it filled all appetites, and the same measure was a different proportion;
it was much and it was little; as if nature, that it might serve religion▪ had
been taught some measures of infinity, which is every where and no where,
filling all things, and circumscribed with nothing, measured B by one Omer,
and doing the work of two; like the crowns of Kings, fitting the browes of
Nimrod and the most mighty Warri­our, and yet not too large for the temples of
an infant Prince. And not onely is it thus in nature, but in contingencies and
acts depend­ing upon the choice of men; for God having commanded the sons of
Israel to go up to Jerusalem to worship thrice every yeer, and to leave their
borders to be guarded by women, and children, and sick persons, in the
neighbourhood of diligent and spitefull ene­mies, yet God so disposed of their
hearts and opportunities, that they never entered the land when the people
were at their solem­nity; C untill they desecrated their rites, by doing at
their Passeover the greatest sin and treason in the world; till at Easter they
crucified the Lord of life and glory, they were secure in Jerusalem and in
their borders; but when they had destroyed religion by this act, God took away
their security, and Titus besieged the City at the feast of Easter, that the
more might perish in the deluge of the Di­vine indignation.

To this observation the Jews adde, that in Jerusalem no man ever had a fall
that came thither to worship; that at their solemn festivals there was
reception in the Town for all the inhabitants of D the land; concerning which
although I cannot affirm any thing, yet this is certain, that no godly person
among all the tribes of Is­rael was ever a begger, but all the variety of
humane chances, were over-ruled to the purposes of providence, and providence
was mea­sured by the ends of the religion, and the religion which promised
them plenty, performed the promise till the Nation and the re­ligion too began
to decline, that it might give place to a better ministery, and a more
excellent dispensation of the things of the world.

But when Christian religion was planted and had taken root, and E had filled
all lands, then all the nature of things, the whole creation became servant to
the kingdom of grace, and the Head of the reli­gion is also the Head of the
creatures, and ministers all the things of the world in order to the Spirit of
grace: and now Angels are ministring spirits, sent forth to minister for the
good of them that fear the Lord, and all the violences of men, and things of
nature▪ [[Page 342]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=179)
and choice, are forced into subjection and lowest ministeries, and to A
cooperate as with an united designe to verifie all the promises of the Gospel,
and to secure and advantage all the children of the king­dom, and now he that
is made poor by chance, or persecution, is made rich by religion, and he that
hath nothing, yet possesses all things, and sorrow it self is the greatest
comfort, not only because it ministers to vertue, but because it self is one,
as in the case of re­pentance; and death ministers to life, and bondage is
freedom, and losse is gain, and our enemies are our friends, and every thing
turns B into religion, and religion turns into felicity, and all manner of
ad­vantages. But that I may not need to enumerate any more particu­lars in
this observation certain it is that Angels of light and dark­nesse, all the
influences of heaven, and the fruits and productions of the earth, the stars,
and the elements, the secret things that lie in the bowels of the Sea, and the
entrails of the earth, the single ef­fects of all efficients, and the
conjunction of all causes, all events foreseen, and all rare contingencies,
every thing of chance, and every thing of choice, is so much a servant to him
whose greatest desire, and great interest, is by all means to save our souls,
that we are thereby made sure, that all the whole creation shall be made to
bend in all the flexures of its nature and accidents, that it may C minister
to religion, to the good of the Catholike Church, and every person within its
bosom, who are the body of him that rules over all the world, and commands
them as he chooses.

2\. But that which is next to this, and not much unlike the de­signe of this
wonderfull mercy, is, that all the actions of religi­on, though mingled with
circumstances of differing and sometimes of contradictory relations are so
concentred in God their proper centre, and conducted in such certain and pure
channels of reason and rule, that no one duty does contradict another; and it
can never be necessary for any man in any case to sin. They that bound
them­selves D by an oath to kill Paul were not environed with the sad
ne­cessities of murder on one side and vow-breach on the other, so that if
they did murder him they were man-slayers, if they did not they were perjured;
for God had made provision for this case, that no unlawful oath should passe
an obligation. He that hath gi­ven his faith in unlawfull confederation
against his Prince, is not girded with a fatall necessity of breach of trust
on one side, or breach of allegeance on the other; for in this also God hath
se­cured the case of conscience, by forbidding any man to make an unlawfull
promise, and upon a stronger degree of the same rea­son,E by forbidding him to
keep it in case he hath made it. He that doubts whether it be lawfull to keep
the Sunday holy, must not do it during that doubt, because whatsoever is not
of faith is sin; But yet Gods mercy hath taken care to break this snare in
sun­der, so that he may neither sin against the commandement, nor [[Page
343]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=179) A against his
conscience; for he is bound to lay aside his errour and be better instructed;
till when, the scene of his sin lies in some­thing that hath influence upon
his understanding, not in the omis­sion of the fact; No man can serve two
Masters, but therefore he must hate the one and cleave to the other. But then
if we consider what infinite contradiction there is in sin, and that the great
long suffering of God is expressed in this, that God suffered the
contradiction of sinners, we shall feel the mercy of God in the peace of our
consci­ences and the unity of religion, so long as we do the work of God. It
is a huge affront to a covetous man that he is the further off from B fulnesse
by having great heaps & vast revenues; and that his thirst increases by having
that which should quench it; and that the more he shall need to be satisfied,
the lesse he shall dare to do it; and that he shall refuse to drink because he
is dry; that he dyes if he tasts, and languishes if he does not; and at the
same time he is full and empty, bursting with a plethory, and consumed with
hunger, drowned with rivers of oyle and wine and yet dry as the Arabian sands;
but then the contradiction is multiplyed and the labyrinths more amazed, when
prodigality waits, upon another C curse, and covetousnesse heaps up, that
prodigality may scatter a­broad; then distractions are infinite, and a man
hath two Devils to serve of contradictory designes and both of them exact
[...]g obedi­ence more unreasonably then the Egyptian task-masters then there
is no rest, no end of labours, no satisfaction of purposes, no me­thod of
things, but they begin where they should end, and be­gin again, and never
passe forth to content or reason, or quietnesse, or possession. But the duty
of a Christian is easie in a persecution, it is clear under a Tyranny, it is
evident in despite of heresy, it is one in the midst of schisme, it is
determined amongst infinite D disputes, being like a rock in the sea which is
beaten with the tide and washed with retiring waters, and encompassed with
mists, and appears in several figures, but it alwayes dips its foot in the
same bottom and remaines the same in calms and storms, and survives the
revolution of ten thousand tides, and there shall dwell till time and tides
shall be no more: so is our duty, uniform and constant, open and notorious,
variously represented, but in the same man­ner exacted; and in the interest of
our souls God hath not exposed us to uncertainty or the variety of any thing
that can change, and it is by the grace and mercy of God put into the power of
every E Christian to do that which God through Jesus Christ will accept to
salvation; and neither men nor Devils shall hinder it unlesse we list our
selves.

3\. After all this we may sit down and reckon by great sums and conjugations
of his gracious gifts, and tell the minuts of eterni­ty by the number of the
Divine mercies: God hath given his laws to rule us, his word to instruct us,
his spirit to guide us, his [[Page
344]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=180) Angels to
protect us, his ministers to exhort us; he revealed all our du­ty A and he
hath concealed whatsoever can hinder us, he hath affrigh­ted our follies with
feare of death and engaged our watchfulnesse by its secret coming; he hath
exercised our faith by keeping private the state of souls departed, and yet
hath confirmed our faith by a promise of a resurrection and entertained our
hope by some gene­ral significations of the state of interval: His mercies
make contemp­tible means instrumental to great purposes, and a small herb the
remedy of the greatest diseases; he impedes the Devils rage and in­fatuates,
his counsels, he diverts his malice, and defeats his purpo­ses, he bindes him
in the chaine of darknesse and gives him no pow­er B over the children of
light; he suffers him to walk in solitary places and yet fetters him that he
cannot disturb the sleep of a childe; he hath given him mighty power & yet a
young maiden that resists him shall make him flee away; he hath given him a
vast knowledge and yet an ignorant man can confute him with the twelve
articles of his creed, he gave him power over the winds and made him Prince of
the air and yet the breath of a holy prayer can drive him as far as the utmost
sea; and he hath so restrained him, that (ex­cept it be by faith) we know not
whether there be any Devils yea, or no: for we never heard his noises, nor
have seen his affrighting C shapes.] This is that great Principle of all the
felicity we hope for, and of all the means thither, and of all the skill and
all the strengths we haue to use those means he hath made great variety of
condi­tions and yet hath made all necessary, and all mutual helpers, and by
some instruments and in some respects they are all equal in order to felicity,
to content and final and intermedial satisfactions: He gave us part of our
reward in hand that he might enable us to work for more; he taught the world
arts for use, arts for enter­tainment of all our faculties, and all our
dispositions; he gives eter­nal gifts for temporal services and gives us
whatsoever we want,D for asking, and commands us to ask, and theatens us if we
will not ask, and punishes us for refusing to be happy. This is that glorious
attribute that hath made order, and health, and harmony and hope, restitutions
and variety, the joyes of direct possession, and the joyes, the artificial
joyes of contrariety and comparison; he comforts the poor, and he brings down
the rich, that they may be safe in their humility and sorrow, from the
transportations of an unhappy and uninstructed prosperity; he gives
necessaries to all, and scatters the extraordinary provisions so, that every
nation may traffick in cha­rity, and commute for pleasures; He was the Lord of
hosts, and he E is stil what he was, but he loves to be called the God of
peace, be­cause he was terrible in that, but he is delighted in this. His
mer­cy is his glory, and his glory is the light of heaven; his mercy is the
life of the creation, and it fills all the earth, and his mercy is a sea too;
and it fills all the abysses of the deep; it hath given us [[Page
345]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=180) A promises for
supply of whatsoever we need and relieves us in all our fears, and in all the
evils that we suffer; his mercies are more then we can tell, and they are more
then we can feel; for all the world in the abysse of the Divine mercies is
like a man diving into the bottom of the sea, over whose head the waters run
insensibly, and unperceived, and yet the weight is vast and the sum of them is
unmeasurable, and the man is not pressed with the burden, nor confounded with
numbers; and no observation is able to recount, no sense sufficient to
perceive, no memory large enough to retain, no understanding great enough to
apprehend this infinity, but B we must admire and love and worship, and
magnify this mer­cy for ever and ever; that we we may dwell in what we feel,
and be comprehended by that which is equal to God, and the parent of all
felicity.

And yet this is but the one half. The mercies of giving I have now told of,
but those of forgiving are greater, though not more. [He is ready to forgive]
and upon this stock thrives the interest of our great hope, the hopes of a
blessed immortality; for if the mer­cies of giving have not made our
expectations big enough to enter­tain C the confidences of heaven; yet when we
think of the gracious­nesse and readinesse of forgiving, we may with more
readinesse hope to escape hell, and then we cannot but be blessed by an
e­ternal consequence: we have but small opinion of the Divine mer­cy, if we
dare not believe concerning it, that it is desirous and able and watchful and
passionate to keep us or rescue us respectively from such a condemnation the
pain of which is insupportable, and the du­ration is eternal, and the
extension is misery upon all our fa­culties, and the intension is great beyond
patience or na­tural or supernatural abilities, and the state is a state of
darknesse, D and despair, of confusion and amazement, of cursing and roaring,
anguish of spirit, and gnashing of teeth, misery universal, per­fect and
irremediable. From this it is which Gods mercies would so fain preserve us:
This is a state that God provides for his ene­mies, not for them that love
him, that endeavour to obey though they do it but in weaknesse, that weep
truely for their sins though but with a shower no bigger then the drops of
pitty, that wait for his coming with a holy and pure flame, though their lamps
are no brighter then a poor mans candle, though their strengths are no greater
then a contrite reed or a strained arme, and their fires E have no more warmth
then the smok of kindling flax; if our faith be pure and our love unfained, if
the degree of it be great God will accept it into glory: if it be little he
will accept it into grace, and make it bigger. For that is the first instance
of Gods readinesse to forgive: he will upon any termes, that are not
unrea­sonable and that do not suppose a remanent affection to sin keep us from
the intolerable paines of hell. And indeed if we consider the [[Page
346]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=181) constitution
of the conditions which God requires, we shall soon A perceive God intends
heaven to us as a meer gift, and that the duties on our part are but little
entertainments and exercises of our affecti­ons and our love that the Devil
might not seize upon that portion which to eternal ages shall be the
instrument of our happinesse. For in all the parts of our duty it may be there
is but one instance in which we are to do violence to our natural and first
desires. For those men have very ill natures to whom vertue is so contrary
that they are inclined naturally to lust, to drunkennesse and anger, and pride
and covetousnesse, and unthankefulnesse and disobedience: Most men that are
tempted with lust, could easily enough entertain the B sobrieties of other
counsels, as of temperance, and justice, or re­ligion, if it would indulge to
them but that one passion of lust, & persons that are greedy of mony are not
fond of amorous vani­ties nor care they to sit long at the wine and one vice
destroyes a­nother, and when one vice is consequent to another, it is by way
of punishment and dereliction of the man, unlesse where vices have cognation,
and seem but like several degrees of one another; and it is evil custome and
superinduced habits that make artifici­all appetites in most men to most sins;
But many times their natu­rall temper vexes them into uneasie dispositions and
aptnesses one­ly C to some one unhandsome sort of action; that one thing
there­fore is it in which God demands of thee mortification and self de­niall.

Certain it is; There are very many men in the world that would fain commute
their severity in al other instances for a licence in their one appetite; they
would not refuse long prayers after a drunken meeting, or great almes to
gether with one great lust; but then consider how easie it is for them to go
to heaven; God demands of them for his sake & their own to crucifie but one
natural lust, or one evil habit, (for all the rest they are easie enough to do
themselves) & God will D give them heaven, where the joy is more then one, and
I said it is but one mortification God requires of most men; for if those
persons would extirp but that one thing in which they are principally tempted
it is not easily imaginable that any lesse evill to which the temptation is
trifling should interpose between them and their great interest. If Saul had
not spared Agag, the people could not have ex­pected mercy; and our little and
inferiour appetites that rather come to us by intimation and consequent
adherences, then by di­rect violence, must not dwell with him who hath crossed
the vi­olence of his distempered nature in a beloved instance; since E
therefore this is the state of most men and God in effect demands of them but
one thing, and in exchange for that will give them all good things, it gives
demonstration of his huge easinesse to redeem us from that intolerable evil
that is equally consequent to the indul­ging to one or to twenty sinful
habits.

[[Page 347]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=181) A 2\.
Gods readinesse to pardon appears in this, that he pardons be­fore we ask, for
he that bids us alk for pardon hath in designe and purpose done the thing
already: for what is wanting on his 2 part in whose onely power it is to give
pardon, and in whose desire it is that we should be pardoned, and who commands
us to lay hold up­on the offer; he hath done all that belongs to God; that is
all that concerns the pardon: there it lies ready, it is recorded in the book
of life, it wants nothing, but being exemplified and taken forth, and the Holy
spirit stands ready to consigne and passe the privy sig­net, that we may
exhibit it to devils and evil men when they tempt B us to despair or sin.

3\. Nay God is so ready in his mercy that he did pardon us even 3 before he
redeemed us: for what is the secret of the mysterie, that the eternal Son of
God should take upon him our nature, and die our death and suffer for our sins
and do our work, and enable us to do our own? he that did this is God: he who
thought it no rob­bery to be equal with God: he came to satisfie himself, to
pay to himself the price for his own creature: and when he did this for us
that he might pardon us, was he at that instant angry with us? C was this an
effect of his anger or of his love that God sent his Son to work our pardon
and salvation? Indeed we were angry with God, at enmity with the the Prince of
life: but he was recon­ciled to us so far, as that he then did the greatest
thing in the world for us: for nothing could be greater then that God, the Son
of God, should die for us: here was reconciliation before pardon: and God that
came to die for us did love us first before he came this was hasty love. But
it went further yet.

4\. God pardoned us before we sinned; and when he foresaw our 4 sin, even mine
and yours, he sent his son to die for us; ou [...] par­don D was wrought and
effected by Christs death above 1600 years ago; and for the sins of to morrow,
and the infirmities of the next day Christ is already dead, already risen from
the dead, and does now make intercession and atonement. And this is not onely
a favour to us who were born in the due time of the Gospel, but to all
mankinde since Adam; For God who is infinitely patient in his justice, was not
at all patient in his mercy; he forbears to strike and punish us, but he would
not forbear to provide cure for us and remedy; for as if God could not stay
from redeeming us, he  [...]ro­mised the Redeemer to Adam, in the beginning of
the worlds sin; & E Christ was the lamb slain from the begining of the world;
and the co­venant of the Gospel though it was not made with man yet it was
from the beginning performed by God as to his part, as to the mi­nistration of
pardon; The seed of the woman was set up against the dragon as soon as ever
the Tempter had won his first battle; and though God laid his hand, and drew a
vail of types and secresy before the manifestation of his mercies, yet he did
the work of re­demption, [[Page
348]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=182) and saved us
by the covenant of faith, and the righte­ousnesse A of believing, and the
mercies of repentance, the graces of pardon, and the blood of the slain lamb,
even from the fall of Adam to this very day, and will do, till Christs second
coming.

Adam fell by his folly and did not perform the covenant of one little work, a
work of a single abstinence; but he was restored by faith in the seed of the
woman; and of this righteousnesse Noah was a preacher; and by faith Enoch was
traslated, and by faith a remnant was saved at the flood: and to Abraham this
was imputed for righteousnesse and to all the Patriarks, and to all the
righteous B judges, and holy Prophets, and Saints of the old Testament, even
while they were obliged (so far as the words of their covenant were expressed)
to the law of works, their pardon was sealed & kept with in the vail within
the curtains of the sanctuary, and they saw it not then, but they feel it ever
since; and this was a great excellency of the Divine mercy unto them: God had
mercy on all mankinde before Christs manifestation, even beyond the mercies of
their covenant: & they were saved as we are, by the seed of the woman by God
incarnate by the lamb slain from the beginning of the world; not by works, for
we all failed of them; that is, not by an exact obedience, but by C faith
working by love, by sincere, hearty endeavours & believing God and relying
upon his infinite mercy, revealed in part, and now ful­ly manifest by the
great instrument and means of that mercy Jesus Christ. So that here is pardon
before we asked it; pardon before Christs coming, pardon before redemption,
and pardon be­fore we sinned: what greater readinesse to forgive us can be
imagi­ned? yes: there is one degree more yet; and that will prevent a mis­take
in this.

5 5\. For God so pardoned us once, that we should need no more pardon; he
pardons us by turning every one of us away D from our iniquities; thats the
purpose of Christ, that he might safely pardon us before we sinned; and we
might not sin upon the confidence of pardon, he pardoned us not onely upon
condition we would sin no more, but he took away our sin, cured our cursed
inclinations, instructed our understanding, rectified our will, forti­fied us
against temptations, and now every man whom he pardons he also sanctifies, and
he is born of God, and he must not, will not, cannot sin, so long as the seed
of God remains within him, so long as his pardon continues. This is the
consummation of pardon. For if God had so pardoned us, as onely to take away
our evils which are E past, we should have needed a second Saviour, and a
redeemer for e­very month, and new pardons perpetually. But our blessed
Re­deemer hath taken away our sin not onely the guilt of our old, but our
inclinations to new sins: he makes us like himself and com­mands us to live
so, that we shall not need a second pardon, that is, [[Page
349]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=182) A a second
state of pardon: for we are but once baptized into Christs death, and that
death was one, and our redemption but one, and our covenant the same, and as
long as we continue within the cove­nant, we are still within the power and
comprehensions of the first pardon.

6\. And yet there is a necessity of having one degree of pardon 6 more beyond
all this. For although we do not abjure our cove­nant and renounce Christ and
extinguish the spirit, yet we resist him, and we grieve him: and we go off
from the holinesse of the covenant, and return again, and very often step
aside, and need B this great pardon to be perpetually applyed and renewed: and
to this purpose: that we may not have a possible need without a cer­tain
remedy, the Holy Jesus, the Author, and finisher of our faith and pardon, sits
in heaven in a perpetual advocation for us, that this pardon once wrought may
be for ever applyed to every emer­gent need, and every tumor of pride, and
every broken heart, and every disturbed conscience, and upon every true and
sincere return of a hearty repentance: And now upon this title no more degrees
can be added: it is already greater, and was before all our needs, C and was
greater then the old covenaut, and beyond the revelati­ons, and did in Adams
youth antidate the Gospel, turning the pub­like miseries by secret grace, into
eternall glories. But now upon other circumstances it is remarkable and
excellent, and swels like an hydropick cloud when it is fed with the breath of
the mor­ning tide, till it fills the bosome of heaven, and descends in dews
and gentle showers, to water and refresh the earth.

7\. God is so ready to forgive that himself works our dispositi­ons 7 towards
it, and either must in some degree pardon us before we are capable of pardon,
by his grace making way for his mer­cy, D or else we can never hope for
pardon. For unlesse God by his preventing grace should first work the first
part of our par­don, even without any dispositions of our own to receive it,
we could not desire a pardon, nor hope for it, nor work towards it, nor ask
it, nor receive it; This giving of preventing grace, is a mercy of
forgivenesse contrary to that severity by which some de­sperate persons are
given over to a reprobate sense; that is, a lea­ving of men to themselves, so
that they cannot pray effectually, nor desire holily, nor repent truly, nor
receive any of those mer­cies which God designed so plenteously, and the Son
of God pur­chased E so dearly for us. When God sends a plague of warre up­on a
land, in all the accounts of religion, and expectations of rea­son, the way to
obtain our peace is to leave our sins, for which the warre was sent upon us,
as the messenger of wrath: and with­out this, we are like to perish in the
judgement. But then consi­der what a sad condition we are in, warre mends but
few, but spoils multitudes; it legitimates rapine, and authorizes murder,
[[Page 350]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=183) and
these crimes must be ministred to by their lesser relatives, by A
covetousnesse, and anger, and pride, and revenge, and heats of blood, and
wilder liberty, and all the evil that can be supposed to come from, or run to,
such cursed causes of mischief. But then if the punishment increases the sin,
by what instrument can the punishment be removed? How shall we be pardoned and
eased, when our remedies are converted into causes of the sicknesse, and our
antidotes are poison? Here there is a plain necessity of Gods preventing
grace; and if there be but a necessity of it, that is enough to ascertain us
we shall have it: But unlesse God should begin to pardon us first, for
nothing, and against our own dispositions,B we see there is no help in us, nor
for us. If we be not smitten we are undone, if we are smitten we perish: and
as young Da­marchus said of his Love, when he was made master of his wish;
Salvus sum quia pereo, si non peream plane inteream, we may say of some of
Gods judgements: We perish when we are safe, because our sins are not smitten,
and if they be, then we are worse undone; because we grow worse for being
miserable; but we can be re­lieved onely by a free mercy; for pardon is the
way to pardon: and when God gives us our peny, then we can work for another,
and a gift is the way to a grace, and all that we can do towards C it, is but
to take it in Gods method; and this must needs be a great forwardnesse of
forgivenesse, when Gods mercy gives the pardon, and the way to finde it, and
the hand to receive it, and the eye to search it, and the heart to desire it;
being busie and effective as Elijah's fire, which intending to convert the
sacrifice into its own more spirituall nature of flames and purified
substances; stood in the neighbourhood of the fuell, and called forth all its
enemies, and licked up the hindering moisture, and the water of the trench­es,
and made the Altar send forth a phantastick smoke before the sacrifice was
enkindled: So is the preventing grace of God, it D does all the work of our
souls, and makes its own way, and in­vites it self, and prepares its own
lodging, and makes its own entertainment, it gives us precepts and makes us
able to keep them; it enables our faculties and excites our desires, it
provokes us to pray, and sanctifies our heart in prayer, and makes our prayer
go forth to act, and the act does make the desire valid, and the desire does
make the act certain, and persevering; and both of them are the works of God:
for more is received into the soul from without the soul, then does proceed
from within the soul: It is more for the soul to be moved and disposed, then E
to work when that is done: as the passage from death to life is greater then
from life to action, especially since the action is owing to that cause that
put in the first principle of life.

These are the great degrees of Gods forwardnesse and readi­nesse to forgive,
for the expression of which no language is suf­ficient [[Page
351]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=183) A but Gods own
words describing mercy in all those dimen­sions which can signifie to us its
greatnesse and infinity. His mercy is great, his mercies are many, his mercy
reacheth unto the heavens, it fils heaven and earth, it is above all his
works, it endureth for ever, God pitieth as a Father doth his children; nay he
is our Fa­ther, and the same also is the Father of mercy, and the God of all
comfort: So that mercy and we have the same relation; and well it may be so,
for we live and die together; for as to man onely, God shews the mercy of
forgivenesse, so if God takes away his mercy, man shall be no more, no more
capable of felicity, or of B any thing that is perfective of his condition, or
his person. But as God preserves man by his mercy, so his mercy hath all its
ope­rations upon man, and returns to its own centre and incircum­scription,
and infinity, unlesse it issues forth upon us. And there­fore besides the
former great lines of the mercy of forgivenesse, there is another chain, which
but to produce and tell its links, is to open a cabinet of Jewels, where every
stone is as bright as a star, and every star is great as the Sun, and shines
for ever, unlesse we shut our eyes, or draw the vail of obstinate and finall
sins.

1\. God is long-suffering, that is, long before he be angry, and 1 C yet God
is provoked every day, by the obstinacy of the Jews, and the folly of the
Heathens, and the rudenesse and infidelity of the Mahu­metans, and the
negligence and vices of Christians; and he that can behold no impurity is
received in all places with perfumes of mush­romes, and garments spotted with
the flesh, and stained souls, and the actions and issues of misbelief, and an
evil conscience, and with accursed sins that he hates, upon pretence of
religion which he loves; and he is made a party against himself by our
voluntary mistakes, and men continue ten yeers, and 20. and 30. and 50. in a
course of sinning, and they grow old with the vices of their D youth; and yet
God forbears to kill them, and to consigne them over to an eternity of horrid
pains, still expecting that they should repent and be saved.

2\. Besides this long-sufferance and for-bearing with an unwea­ried 2
patience, God also excuses a sinner oftentimes and takes a lit­tle thing for
an excuse, so far as to move him to intermediall fa­vours first; and from
thence to a finall pardon. He passes by the sins of our youth with a huge
easinesse to pardon, if he be intrea­ted and reconciled by the effective
repentance of a vigorous man­hood; he takes ignorance for an excuse, and in
every degree of its E being inevitable, or innocent in its proper cause, it is
also inculpa­ble and innocent in its proper effects, though in their own
natures criminal. But I found mercy of the Lord because I did it in ignorance,
saith S. Paul; he pities our infirmities and strikes off much of the account
upon that stock; the violence of a temptation and rest­lesnesse of its motion,
the perpetuity of its sollicitation, the wea­rinesse [[Page
352]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=184) of a mans
spirit, the state of sicknesse, the necessity of secu­lar A affairs, the
publike customs of a people have all of them a power of pleading and
prevailing towards some degrees of pardon and diminution before the throne of
God.

3 3\. When God perceives himself forced to strike, yet then he takes off his
hand and repents him of the evil; It is as if it were against him, that any of
his creatures should fall under the strokes of an exterminating fury.

4 4\. When he is forced to proceed, he yet makes an end before he hath half
done; and is as glad of a pretence to pardon us, or to strike lesse, as if he
himself had the deliverance and not we▪ When B Ahab had but humbled himself at
the word of the Lord, God was glad of it and went with the message to the
Prophet himself, saying, Seest thou not how Ahab humbles himself? What was the
event of it? I will not bring the evil in his dayes, but in his sons dayes the
evil shall come upon his house.

5 5 God forgets our sin and puts it out of his remembrance, that is, he makes
it as though it had never been; he makes penitence to be as pure as innocence
to all the effects of pardon and glory: the memory of the sins shall not be
upon record, to be used to any af­ter act of disadvantage, and never shall
return unlesse we force C them out of their secret places by ingratitude and a
new state of sinning.

6 6\. God sometimes gives pardon beyond all his revelations and declared will,
and provides suppletories of repentance, even then when he cuts a man off from
the time of repentance, accept­ing a temporal death instead of an eternal:
that although the Di­vine anger might interrupt the growing of the fruits, yet
in some cases, and to some persons, the death and the very cutting off shall
go no further, but be instead of explicite and long repentances. Thus it
happened to Uzzah, who was smitten for his zeal, and D died in severity for
prevaricating the letter, by earnestnesse of spi­rit to serve the whole
religion. Thus it was also in the case of the Corinthians that died a temporal
death for their undecent circum­stances in receiving the holy Sacrament. Saint
Paul who used it for an argument to threaten them into reverence, went no
further, nor pressed the argument to a sadder issue then to die temporally.

But these suppletories are but seldom, and they are also great troubles, and
ever without comfort, and dispensed irregularly, and that not in the case of
habituall sins that we know of, or very great sins, but in single actions, or
instances of a lesse malignity; E and they are not to be relied upon, because
there is no rule concern­ing them; but when they do happen they magnifie the
infinitenesse of Gods mercy which is commensurate to all our needs, and is not
to be circumscribed by the limits of his own revelations.

7 7\. God pardons the greatest sinners, and hath left them upon [[Page
353]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=184) A record: and
there is no instance in Scripture of the Divine for­givenesse, but in such
instances, the misery of which was a fit in­strument to speak aloud the
glories of Gods mercies, and gentle­nesse, and readinesse to forgive: Such
were S. Paul a persecutor, and S. Peter that forswore his Master, Mary
Magdalene, with se­ven Devils, the thief upon the crosse, Manasses an
Idolater, David a murderer and adulterer, the Corinthian for incest, the
children of Israel for ten times rebelling against the Lord in the
wildernesse, with murmuring, and infidelity, and rebellion, and schisme, and a
golden calf, and open disobedience; and above all, I shall instance B in the
Pharisees among the Jews, who had sinned against the Holy Ghost, as our
Blessed Saviour intimates, and tels the particular, viz▪ in saying that the
Spirit of God by which Christ did work was an evil spirit; and afterward they
crucified Christ, so that two of the Persons of the most Holy Trinity were
openly and solemnly defied, and God had sent out a decree that they should be
cut off; yet 40. yeers time (after all this) was left for their repentance,
and they were called upon by arguments more perswasive and more excel lent in
that 40. yeers, then all the Nation had heard from their Prophets, C even from
Samuel to Zecharias: And Jonas thought he had reason on his side, to refuse to
go to threaten Nineveh; he knew Gods tendernesse in destroying his creatures,
and he should be thought to be but a false Prophet; and so it came to passe
accord­ing to his belief.Jonah 4. 2. Jonah prayed unto the Lord and said, I
pra [...] thee Lord was not this my saying when I was yet in my countrey;
there­fore I fled for I knew thou wert a gracious God and mercifull, s [...]ew
to anger, and of great kindnesse and repentest thee of the evil: He told
before hand what the event would be; and he had reason to know it; God
proclaimed it in a cloud before the face of all Israel, and D made it to be
his Name,Exod. 34. 6. Miscrator & misericors Deus. The Lord, the Lord God,
mercifull and gracious, &c.

You see the largenesse of this treasure; but we can see no end, for we have
not yet looked upon the rare arts of conversion [...] nor that God leaves the
naturall habit of vertues, even after the accep­tation is interrupted; nor his
working extraregular miracles be­sides the sufficiencie of Moses and the
Prophets, and the New Te­stament, and thousands more which we cannot consider
now.

But this we can, when God sent an Angel to pour plagues upon the earth, there
were in their hands Phialae aureae, golden phials: E for the death of men is
precious and costly, and it is an expence that God delights not in; but they
were Phials, that is, such vessels as out of them no great evil could come at
once; but it comes out with difficulty, sobbing and troubled as it passes
forth; it comes thorow a narrow neck, and the parts of it croud at the port to
get forth, and are stifled by each others neighbourhood; and all strive to get
out, but few can passe, as if God did nothing but threa­ten, [[Page
354]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=185) and draw his
judgements to the mouth of the Phial with a full A body, and there made it
stop it self.

The result of this consideration is, that as we fear the Divine judgements, so
that we adore and love his goodnesse, and let the golden chains of the Divine
mercy tie us to a noble prosecution of our duty and the interests of religion;
For he is the worst of men whom Kindnesse cannot soften, nor endearments
oblige, whom gratitude cannot tie faster then the bands of life and death: He
is an ill natur'd sinner if he will not comply with the sweetnesses of heaven,
and be civill to his Angel guardian, or observant of his Patron God, who made
him, and feeds him, and keeps all his fa­culties,B and takes care of him, and
endures his follies, and waits on him more tenderly then a Nurse, more
diligently then a Client, who hath greater care of him then his father, and
whose bowels yern over him with more compassion then a mother; who is
boun­tifull beyond our needs, and mercifull beyond our hopes, and makes
capacities in us to receive more. Fear is stronger then death, and Love is
more prevalent then Fear, and kindnesse is the greatest en­dearment of Love;
and yet to an ingenuous person gratitude is greater then all these, and
obliges to a solemn duty when love fails, and fear is dull and unactive, and
death it self is despised: but the C man who is hardened against kindnesse,
and whose duty is not made alive with gratitude, must be used like a slave,
and driven like an ox, and inticed with goads and whips, but must never enter
into the inheritance of sons: Let us take heed: for Mercy is like a rain­bowe,
which God set in the clouds to remember mankinde; it shines here as long as it
is not hindered; but we must never look for it after it is night, and it
shines not in the other world; if we refuse mercy here, we shall have justice
to eternity.D E

[[Page 355]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=185)

## 28\. A Sermon. XXVIII.SERMON XXVIII. B A FVNERAL SERMON, Preached at the
Obsequies of the Right Honorable and most vertuous Lady, The Lady FRANCES
Countesse of CARBERY C Who deceased October the 9th. 1650. at her House
Golden-Grove in CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.

### 28.1. To the right Honorable, and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl
of Carbery, Baron of Emlim and Molinger, Knight of D the Honorable Order of
the Bath.

My Lord,

I Am not ashamed to professe that I pay this part of ser­vice to your Lordship
most unwillingly: for it is a sad office to be the chief Minister in the house
of mour­ning, and to present an interested person with a branch of Cypresse
and a bottle of tears. And in­deed, my Lord, it were more proportionable to
your E needs to bring something that might alleviate your sorrow, th [...] to
dresse the hearse of your Dear Lady, and to furnish it with such
circumstances, that it may dwell with you, and lie in your closet, and make
your pray­ers and your retirements more sad and full of weepings. But because
the Divine providence hath taken from you a person so excellent, a woman fit
to converse with Angels, and Apostles, with Saints and Mar­tyrs, [[Page
356]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=186) give me leave
to present you with her picture; drawn in little and in A water-colours,
sullied indeed with tears and the abrupt accents of a re­al and consonant
sorrow; but drawn with a faithful hand, and taken from the life: and indeed it
were too great a losse, to be deprived of her example and of her rule, of the
original and the copy too. The age is very evil and deserved her not; but
because it is so evil, it hath the more need to have such lives preserved in
memory to instruct our piety, or upbraid our wickednesse. For now that God
hath cut this tree of Paradise down from its seat of earth, yet so the dead
trunk may sup­port B a part of the declining Temple, or at least serve to
kindle the fire on the altar. My Lord, I pray God this heap of sorrow may
swell your piety till it breaks into the greatest joyes of God and of
religion: and remember, when you pay a tear upon the grave, or to the memo­ry
of your Lady (that dear and most excellent soul) that you pay two more: one of
repentance for those things that may have caused this breach; and another of
joy for the mercies of God to your Dear de­parted Saint, that he hath taken
her into a place where she can weep no more. My Lord, I think I shall, so long
as I live, that is so long as I am

Your Lordships C most humble Servant TAYLOR.

D E

### 28.2.

[[Page 357]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=186)

A 2 Samuel 14. 14.‘A For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the
ground which cannot be gathered up again: neither doth God re­spect any
person: yet doth he devise means that his banish­ed be not expelled from him.’

WHen our blessed Saviour and his Disciples viewed the Temple, some one amongst
them cryed out, Magister aspice, quales lapides! Master behold what fair, what
great stones are here! Christ made no o­ther reply but foretold their
dissolution and a C world of sadnesse and sorrow which should bury that whole
Nation when the teeming cloud of Gods displeasure should produce a storm which
was the daughter of the biggest anger, and the mother of the greatest
calamitie which ever crushed any of the sons of Adam [the time shall come,
that there shall not be left one stone upon another.] The whole Temple and the
Religion, the ceremonies ordained by God, and the Nation be­loved by God and
the fabrick erected for the service of God, shall run to their own period and
lie down in their several graves. What­soever D had a beginning can also have
am ending, and it shall die, un­lesse it be daily watered with the pu [...]s
flowing from the fountain of life and refreshed with the dew of Heaven and the
wells of God. And therefore God had provided a tree in Paradise to have
sup­ported Adam in his artificial immortality: Immortality was not in his
nature, but in the hands, and arts, in the favour and superad­ditions of God.
Man was alwaies the same mixture of heat and cold, of drynesse and moisture;
ever the same weak thing, apt to feel re­bellion in the humors, and to suffer
the evils of a civil war in his body natural: and therefore health and life
was to descend upon E him from Heaven, and he was to su [...]k life from a
tree on earth; himself being but ingraffed into a tree of life, and ad
[...]pted into the condition of an immortal nature: But he that in the best of
his dayes was but a Cien of this tree of life, by his sin was cut off from
thence quickly, and planted upon thorns, and his portion was for ever after
among the flowers, which to day spring and [[Page
358]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=187) look like
health and beauty, and in the evening, they are sick, and A at night are dead,
and the oven is their grave. And as before, even from our first spring from
the dust of the earth, we might have died if we had not been preserved by the
continual flux of a rare provi­dence: so now that we are reduced to the laws
of our own nature, we must needs die. It is natural, and therefore necessary;
It is become a punishment to us, and therefore it is unavoidable, and God hath
bound the evill upon us by bands of naturall and inseparable propriety, and by
a supervening unalterable decree of Heaven: and we are fallen from our
privilege, and are retur­ned to the condition, of beast, and buildings, and
common B things: And we see Temples defiled unto the ground, and they die by
Sacrilege: and great Empires die by their own plenty and ease, full humors,
and factious Subjects: and huge buildings fall by their own weight, and the
violence of many winters eating and con­suming the cement which is the marrow
of their bones: and Princes die like the meanest of their Servants: and every
thing findes a grave and a tomb; and the very tomb it self dies by the
bignesse of its pompousnesse and luxury.

—Phario nutantia pondera saxo

Quae cineri vanus dat ruitura labor,C

and becomes as friable and uncombined dust as the ashes of the Sinner or the
Saint that lay under it, and is now forgotten in his bed of darknesse: And to
this Catalogue of mortality Man is in­rolled with a [Statutum est] It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes judgement; and if a
man can be stronger then nature, or can wrestle with a degree of Heaven, or
can escape from a Divine punishment by his own arts, so that neither the power
nor the providence of God, nor the laws of nature, nor the bands of eternal
predestination can hold him, then he may live beyond the fate and period of
flesh, and last longer then a flower: But if all D these can hold us and tie
us to conditions, then we must lay our heads down upon a turfe and entertain
creeping things in the cells and little chambers of our eyes, and dwell with
worms till time and death shall be no more. We must needs die] That's our
sentence. But that's not all.

We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up a­gain] Stay.
1. We are as water, weak and of no consistence, alwaies descending, abiding in
no certain place, unlesse where we are de­tained with violence: and every
little breath of winde makes us rough and tempestuous, and troubles our faces:
every trifling E accident discomposes us; and as the face of the waters
wafting in a storm so wrinkles it self that it makes upon its fore-head
fur­rows deep and hollow like a grave: so do our great and little cares and
trifles, first make the wrinkles of old age, and then they dig a grave for us:
And there is in nature nothing so contemptible, [[Page
359]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=187) A but it may
meet with us in such circumstances, that it may be too hard for us in our
weaknesses: and the sting of a Bee is a weapon sharp enough to pierce the
finger of a childe, or the lip of a man: and those creatures which nature hath
left without weapons, yet they are armed sufficiently to vex those parts of
men which are left defenselesse and obnoxious to a sun beam, to the roughnesse
of a sower grape, to the unevennesse of a gravel-stone, to the dust of a
wheel, or the unwholesome breath of a star looking awry upon a sinner.

2\. But besides the weaknesses and natural decayings of our bo­dies,2 B if
chances and contingencies be innumerable, then no man can reckon our dangers,
and the praeternatural causes of our deaths. So that he is a vain person whose
hopes of life are too confidently increased by reason of his health: and he is
too unreasonably ti­morous, who thinks his hopes at an end when he dwels in
sickness. For men die without rule; and with, and without occasions; and no
man suspecting or foreseeing any of deaths addresses, and no man in his whole
condition is weaker then another. A man in a long Consumption is fallen under
one of the solemnities and pre­parations to death: but at the same instant the
most healthful per­son C is as neer death, upon a more fatal, and a more
sudden, but a lesse discerned cause. There are but few persons upon whose
foreheads every man can read the sentence of death written in the lines of a
lingring sicknesse, but they (sometimes) hear the pas­sing bell ring for
stronger men, even long before their own knell calls at the house of their
mother to open her womb and make a bed for them. No man is surer of to morrow
then the weakest of his brethren: and when Lepidus and Ausidius stumbled at
the thre­shold of the Senate and fell down and died, the blow came from heaven
in a cloud but it struck more suddenly then upon the poor D slave that made
sport upon the Theatre with a praemeditated and foredescribed death: Quod
quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis cau­tum est in horas. There are sicknesses
that walk in darknesse, and there are exterminating Angels that fly wrapt up
in the curtains of immateriality and an uncommunicating nature; whom we cannot
see, but we feel their force and sink under their sword, and from heaven the
vail descends that wraps our heads in the fatal sentence. There is no age of
man but it hath proper to it self some posterns and outlets for death, besides
those infinite and open ports out of which myriads of men and women every day
passe into the dark E and the land of forgetfulnesse. Infancie hath life but
in effigie, or like a spark dwelling in a pile of wood: the candle is so newly
light­ed, that every little shaking of the taper, and every ruder breath of
air, puts it out, and it dies. Childhood is so tender, and yet so unwary; so
soft to all the impressions of chance, and yet so for­ward to run into them,
that God knew there could be no security [[Page
360]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=188) without the
care and vigilance of an Angel-keeper: and the eyes of A Parents and the arms
of Nurses, the provisions of art, and all the effects of Humane love and
Providence are not sufficient to keep one childe from horrid mischiefs, from
strange and early calami­ties and deaths, unlesse a messenger be sent from
heaven to stand sentinel, and watch the very playings and the sleepings, the
eatings and the drinkings of the children; and it is a long time before
na­ture makes them capable of help: for there are many deaths, and ve­ry many
diseases to which poor babes are exposed; but they have B but very few
capacities of physick; to shew, that infancy is as liable to death as old age,
and equally exposed to danger, and equally uncapable of a remedy: with this
onely difference, that old age hath diseases incurable by nature, and the
diseases of child-hood are incurable by art; and both the states are the next
heirs of death.

3 3\. But all the middle way the case is altered. Nature is strong, and art is
apt to give ease and remedy: but still, there is no secu­rity; and there, the
case is not altered. 1 For there are so many diseases in men that are not
understood. 2 So many new ones eve­ry year. 3 The old ones are so changed in
circumstance, and inter­mingled with so many collateral complications. 4 The
Symptoms C are oftentimes so alike. 5 Sometimes so hidden and fallacious. 6
Somtimes none at all (as in the most sudden and the most dange­rous
imposthumations.) 7 And then, the diseases in the inward parts of the body,
are oftentimes such, to which no application can be made. 8 They are so far
off, that the effects of all medi­cines can no otherwise come to them, then
the effect and juices of all meats, that is, not till after two or three
alterations, and decoctions, which change the very species of the medicament.
9 And after all this, very many principles in the art of Physick are so
uncertain, that after they have been believed seven or eight a­ges,D and that
upon them much of the practise hath been establish­ed; they come to be
considered by a witty man, and others establish­ed in their stead; by which,
men must practise, and by which three or four generations of men more (as
happens) must live or die. 10. And all this while the men are sick, and they
take things that certainly make them sicker for the present, and very
uncer­tainly restore health for the future: that it may appear of what a large
extent is humane calamity; when Gods providence hath not onely made it weak
and miserable upon the certain stock of a vari­ous nature, and upon the
accidents of an infinite contingency; but E even from the remedies which are
appointed, our dangers and our troubles are certainly increased: so that we
may well be likened to water; our nature is no stronger, our aboad no more
certain; If the sluces be opened, it falls away and runneth apace; if its
cur­rent be stopped, it swells and grows troublesome, and spils over [[Page
361]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=188) A with a
greater diffusion; If it be made to stand still it putrefies: and all this we
do. For,

4\. In all the processe of our health we are running to our grave: we open our
own sluces by vitiousnesse, and unworthy actions; we pour in drink, and let
out life; we increase diseases and know not how to bear them; we strangle our
selves with our own in­temperance; we suffer the feavers and the inflammations
of lust, and we quench our souls with drunkennesse; we bury our
understand­ings in loads of meat and surfets: and then we lie down upon our
beds and roar with pain and disquietnesse of our souls: Nay, we B kill one
anothers souls and bodies with violence and folly, with the effects of pride
and uncharitablenesse; we live and die like fools, and bring a new mortality
upon our selves; wars and vexatious cares, and private duels, and publike
disorders, and every thing that is unreasonable, and every thing that is
violent: so that now we may adde this fourth gate to the grave: Besides Nature
and Chance, and the mistakes of art, men die with their own sins, and then
en­ter into the grave in haste and passion, and pull the heavy stone of the
monument upon their own heads. And thus we make our selves like water spilt on
the ground: we throw away our lives as C if they were unprofitable, (and
indeed most men make them so) we let our years slip through our fingers like
water; and nothing is to be seen, but like a showr of tears upon a spot of
ground; there is a grave digged, and a solemn mourning, and a great talk in
the neigh­bourhood, and when the dayes are finished, they shall be, and they
shall be remembred no more: And that's like water too, when it is spilt, it
cannot be gathered up again. There is no redemption from the grave.

—inter se mortales mutua vivunt

Et quasi cursores vitäi lampada tradunt.

D Men live in their course and by turns: their light burns a while, and then
it burns blew and faint, and men go to converse with Spi­rits, and then they
reach the taper to another; and as the hours of yesterday can never return
again, so neither can the man whose hours they were, and who lived them over
once, he shall never come to live them again, and live them better. When
Lazarus, and the widows son of Naim, and Tabitha, and the Saints that appeared
in Jerusalem at the resurrection of our blessed Lord, arose; they came into
this world, some as strangers onely to make a visit, and all of them to
manifest a glory: but none came upon the stock of a new E life, or entred upon
the stage as at first, or to perform the course of a new nature: and therefore
it is observable that we never read of any wicked person that was raised from
the dead: Dives would fain have returned to his brothers house; but neither
he, nor any from him could be sent: but all the rest in the New Testa­ment
(one onely excepted) were expressed to have been holy per­sons, [[Page
362]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=189) or else by
their age were declared innocent. Lazarus was A beloved of Christ: those souls
that appeared at the resurrection were the souls of Saints: Tabitha raised by
Saint Peter was a cha­ritable and a holy Christian: and the maiden of twelve
years old, raised by our blessed Saviour, had not entred into the regions of
choice and sinfulnesse: and the onely exception of the widows son, is indeed
none at all; for in it the Scripture is wholly silent; and therefore it is
very probable that the same processe was used, God in all other instances
having chosen to exemplifie his miracles of B nature to purposes of the
Spirit, and in spirituall capacities. So that although the Lord of nature did
break the bands of nature in some instances, to manifest his glory to
succeeding, great and ne­ver failing purposes; yet (besides that this shall be
no more) it was also instanced in such persons who were holy and innocent, and
within the verge and comprehensions of the eternall mercy. We never read that
a wicked person felt such a miracle, or was raised from the grave to try the
second time for a Crown; but where he fell there he lay down dead, and saw the
light no more.

This consideration I intend to you as a severe Monitor, and an advice of
carefulnesse, that you order your affairs so that you may be partakers of the
first resurrection, that is, from sin to grace, from the death of vitious
habits, to the vigour, life and efficacy of C an habituall righteousnesse: For
(as it hapned to those persons in the New Testament now mentioned, to them (I
say) in the lite­rall sense) Blessed are they that have part in the first
resurrection, upon them the second death shall have no power: meaning that
they who by the power of Christ and his holy Spirit were raised to life again,
were holy and blessed souls, and such who were written in the book of God; and
that this grace happened to no wicked and vitious per­son: so it is most true
in the spirituall and intended sense: You one­ly that serve God in a holy
life; you who are not dead in trespasses D and sins; you who serve God with an
early diligence and an un­wearied industry, and a holy religion, you, and you
onely shall come to life eternall, you onely shall be called from death to
life; the rest of mankind shall never live again but passe from death to
death; from one death to another, to a worse; from the death of the body, to
the eternall death of body and soul: and therefore in the Apo­stles Creed
there is no mention made of the resurrection of wicked persons: but of the
resurrection of the body to everlasting life. The wicked indeed shall be haled
forth from their graves, from their everlasting prisons, where in chains of
darknesse they are kept un­to E the judgement of the great day: But this
therefore cannot be cal­led in sensu favoris, a resurrection, but the
solennities of the eternall death; It is nothing but a new capacity of dying
again; such a dy­ing as cannot signifie rest; but where death means nothing
but an intolerable and never ceasing calamity: and therefore these words
[[Page 363]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=189) A of my
Text are otherwise to be understood of the wicked, other­wise of the godly:
The wicked are spilt like water and shall never be gathered up again; no not
in the gatherings of eternity; They shall be put into vessels of wrath and set
upon the flames of hell; but that is not a gathering, but a scattering from
the face and pre­sence of God. But the godly also come under the sense of
these words. They descend into their graves, and shall no more be reckon­ed
among the living; they have no concernment in all that is done un­der the Sun.
Agamemnon hath no more to do with the Turks armies invading and possessing
that part of Greece where he reigned, then B had the Hippocentaur, who never
had a beeing: and Cicero hath no more interest in the present evils of
Christendome, then we have to do with his boasted discovery of Catilines
conspiracie. What is it to me that Rome was taken by the Gauls? and what is it
now to Camillus if different religions be tolerated amongst us? These things
that now happen concern the living, and they are made the scenes of our duty
or danger respectively: and when our wives are dead and sleep in charnel
houses, they are not trou­bled when we laugh loudly at the songs sung at the
next marriage feast; nor do they envy when another snatches away the gleanings
C of their husbands passion.

It is true they envy not, and they lie in a bosome where there can be no
murmure, and they that are consigned to Kingdoms, and to the feast of the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, the glorious and eternall Bride-groom of holy
souls, they cannot think our marria­ges here, our lighter laughings, and vain
rejoycings considerable as to them. And yet there is a relation continued
still. Aristotle said, that to affirm the dead take no thought for the good of
the living is a disparagement to the laws of that friendship which in their
state of separation they cannot be tempted to rescind. And the D Church hath
taught in generall that they pray for us, they recom­mend to God the state of
all their Relatives, in the union of the intercession that our blessed Lord
makes for them and us: and Saint Ambrose gave some things in charge to his
dying brother Satyrus, that he should do for him in the other world: he gave
it him (I say) when he was dying, not when he was dead. And certain it is that
though our dead friends affection to us is not to be estimated accor­ding to
our low conceptions, yet it is not lesse, but much more then ever it was; it
is greater in degree, and of another kind.

But then we should do well also to remember, that in this world E we are
something besides flesh and blood; that we may not without violent necessities
run into new relations, but preserve the affecti­ons we bear to our dead when
they were alive: We must not so live as if they were perished, but so as
pressing forward to the most intimate participation of the communion of
Saints. And we also have some wayes to expresse this relation, and to bear a
part in this [[Page
364]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=190) communion, by
actions of intercourse with them, and yet pro­per A to our state: such as are
strictly performing the will of the dead, providing for, and tenderly and
wisely educating their chil­dren, paying their debts, imitating their good
example, preser­ving their memories privately, and publikely keeping their
me­morials, and desiring of God with hearty and constant prayer that God would
give them a joyfull resurrection, and a mercifull judge­ment, (for so S. Paul
prayed in behalf of Onesiphorus) that God would shew them 2 Tim. 1. 18. mercy
in that day, that fearfull, and yet much to B be desired day, in which the
most righteous person hath need of much mercy and pity, and shall find it. Now
these instances of du­ty shew that the relation remains still; and though the
Relict of a man or woman hath liberty to contract new relations; yet I do not
finde they have liberty to cast off the old; as if there were no such thing as
immortality of souls. Remember that we shall con­verse together again: let us
therefore never do any thing of refer­ence to them which we shall be ashamed
of in the day when all se­crets shall be discovered, and that we shall meet
again in the presence of God: In the mean time, God watcheth concerning all
their inte­rest, and he will in his time both discover and recompense. For
though, as to us, they are like water spilt yet to God, they are as C water
fallen into the sea, safe and united in his comprehension, and inclosures.

But we are not yet passed the consideration of the sentence: This descending
to the grave is the lot of all men. [neither doth God respect the person of
any man] The rich is not protected for fa­vour, nor the poor for pity, the old
man is not reverenced for his age, nor the infant regarded for his
tendernesse; youth and beauty, learning and prudence, wit and strength lie
down equally in the di­shonours of the grave. All men, and all natures, and
all persons re­sist the addresses and solennities of death, and strive to
preserve a D miserable and an unpleasant life; and yet they all sink down and
die. For so have I seen the pillars of a building assisted with artificiall
props bending under the pressure of a roof, and pertinaciously re­sisting the
infallible and prepared ruine,

Donec certa dies omni compage solutâ

Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium,

till the determined day comes, and then the burden sunk upon the pillars, and
disordered the aids and auxiliary rafters into a common ruine and a ruder
grave: so are the desires and weak arts of man, with little aids and
assistances of care and physick we strive to sup­port E our decaying bodies,
and to put off the evil day; but quickly that day will come, and then neither
Angels nor men can rescue us from our grave; but the roof sinks down upon the
walls, and the walls descend to the foundation; and the beauty of the face,
and the dishonours of the belly, the discerning head and the servile [[Page
365]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=190) A feet, the
thinking heart, and the working hand, the eyes and the guts together shall be
crush'd into the confusion of a heap, and dwell with creatures of an
equivocall production, with worms and serpents, the sons and daughters of our
own bones, in a house of durt and darknesse.

Let not us think to be excepted or deferred. If beauty, or wit, or youth, or
Noblenesse, or wealth, or vertue could have been a defence, and an excuse from
the grave, we had not met here to day to mourn upon the hearse of an excellent
Lady; and God one­ly knows for which of us next the mourners shall go about
the B streets, or weep in houses.

[...]

[...].

Il.  [...].

We have lived so many years; and every day and every minute we make an escape
from those thousands of dangers and deaths that encompasse us round about: and
such escapings we must reckon to be an extraordinary fortune, and therefore
that it cannot last long. Vain are the thoughts of Man, who when he is young
or health­full, thinks he hath a long threed of life to run over, and that it
is violent and strange for young persons to die; and naturall and C proper
onely for the aged. It is as naturall for a man to die by drowning as by a
fever: And what greater violence or more unna­turall thing is it, that the
horse threw his Rider into the river, then that a drunken meeting cast him
into a fever; and the strengths of youth are as soon broken by the strong
sicknesses of youth, and the stronger intemperance, as the weaknesse of old
age by a cough, or an asthma, or a continuall rheume: Nay, it is more
na­turall for young Men and Women to die, then for old; because that is more
naturall which hath more naturall causes; and that is more naturall which is
most common: but to die with age is an D extreme rare thing; and there are
more persons carried forth to buriall before the five and thirtieth year of
their age, then after it. And therefore let no vain confidence make you hope
for long life. If you have lived but little, and are still in youth, remember
that now you are in your biggest throng of dangers both of body and soul; and
the proper sins of youth to which they rush infinitely and without
consideration, are also the proper and immediate in­struments of death. But if
you be old you have escaped long and wonderfully, and the time of your
escaping is out: you must not for ever think to live upon wonders, or that God
will work mira­cles E to satisfie your longing follies, and unreasonable
desires of li­ving longer to sin and to the world. Go home and think to die,
and what you would choose to be doing when you die, that do daily: for you
will all come to that passe, to rejoyce that you did so, or wish that you had:
that will be the condition of every one of us; for God regardeth no mans
person.

[[Page 366]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=191) Well!
but all this you will think is but a sad story. What? we A must die, and go to
darknesse and dishonour; and we must die quickly, and we must quit all our
delights, and all our sins, or do worse, infinitely worse; and this is the
condition of us all from which none can be excepted; every man shall be spilt
and fall into the ground, and be gathered no more. Is there no comfort after
all this? shall we go from hence, and be no more seen, and have no recompense.

Miser, ô miser, aiunt, omnia ademit

Vna die infausta mihi tot praemia vitae.

Shall we exchange our fair dwellings for a coffine, our softer beds B for the
moistned and weeping turf, and our pretty children for worms, and is there no
allay to this huge calamity? Yes, there is There is a [yet] in the Text: [For
all this, yet doth God devise means that his banished be not expelled from
him.] All this sorrow and trouble is but a phantasme, and receives its account
and degrees from our present conceptions and the proportion to our relishes
and gust.

When Pompey saw the Ghost of his first Lady Julia, who vexed his rest and his
conscience for superinducing Cornelia upon her bed within the ten moneths of
mourning, he presently fancied it, ei­ther C to be an illusion, or else that
death could be no very great evil.

Aut nihil est sensus animis in morte relictum,

Aut mors ipsa nihil—

Either my dead wife knows not of my unhandsome marriage, and forgetfulnesse of
her; or if she does, then the dead live.

—longae, canitis si cognita, vitae

Mors media est—

Death is nothing but the middle point between two lives between this and
another: concerning which comfortable mystery the holy D Scripture instructs
our faith, and entertains our hope in these words. God is still the God of
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob; for all do live to him: and the souls of Saints are
with Christ: I desire to be dissolved (saith S. Paul) and to be with Christ,
Vide 1 Cor. 15. 18. for that is much better: and, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord; they rest from their labours, 1 Thess. 4. 16. and their works
follow them: Revel. 14. 13. For we know, that if our earth­ly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, John 5. 24. we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 8. & 6. eternall in the heavens: and this state of
separation S. Paul calls, a being absent from the body, and being present with
the Lord: This is one of Gods means which he hath E devised, that although our
Dead are like persons banished from this world, yet they are not expelled from
God: They are in the hands of Christ; they are in his presence; they are, or
shall be clothed with a house of Gods making; they rest from all their
labours; all tears are wiped from their eyes, and all discontents from their
spirits; [[Page
367]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=191) A and in the
state of separation before the soul be reinvested with her new house the
spirits of al persons are with God, so secured and so blessed, and so sealed
up for glory, that this state of interval and imperfection is in respect of
its certain event and end, infinite­ly more desirable then all the riches and
all the pleasures, and all the vanities, and all the Kingdoms of this world.

I will not venture to determine what are the circumstan­ces of the aboad of
Holy Souls in their separate dwellings; and yet possibly that might be easier
then to tell what or how the soul is and works in this world, where it is in
the body tanquam B in alienâ domo, as in a prison, in fetters and restraints:
for here the soul is discomposed and hindered, it is not as it shall be, as it
ought to be, as it was intended to be; it is not permitted to its own freedom,
and proper operation; so that all that we can under­stand of it here, is that
it is so incommodated with a troubled and abated instrument, that the object
we are to consider cannot be offered to us in a right line, in just and equal
propositions or if it could, yet because we are to understand the soul by the
soul, it becomes not onely a troubled and abused object, but a crooked
in­strument; and we here can consider it, just as a weak eye can be­hold C a
staf [...]e thrust into the waters of a troubled river; the very wa­ter makes
a refraction, and the storm doubles the refraction, and the water of the eye
doubles the species, and there is nothing right in the thing, the object is
out of its just place, and the medium is troubled, and the organ is impotent:
At cum exierit & in liberum coelum quasi in domum suam venerit, when the soul
is entred into her own house, into the free regions of the rest and the
neighbour­hood of heavenly joyes, then its operations are more spiritual,
proper, and proportioned to its being; and though we cannot see at such a
distance, yet the objects is more fitted if we had a ca­pable D understanding;
it is in it self in a more excellent and free condition.

Certain it is, that the body does hinder many actions of the soul: it is an
imperfect body, and a diseased brain, or a violent passion that makes fools:
no man hath a foolish soul; and the reasonings of men have infinite difference
and degrees by reason of the bo­dies constitution. Among beasts which have no
reason, there is a greater likenesse then between men, who have: & as by faces
it is ea­sier to know a man from a man, then a sparrow from a sparrow, or a
squirrel from a squirrel: so the difference is very great in our E souls;
which difference because it is not originally in the soul (and indeed cannot
be in simple and spiritual substances of the same spe­cies or kind) it must
needs drive wholly from the body, from its accidents and circumstances: from
whence it follows, that be­cause the body casts fetters and restraints,
hindrances and impedi­ments upon the soul, that the soul is much freer in the
state of se­paration; [[Page
368]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=192) and if it hath
any any act of life, it is much more noble and A expedite.

That the soul is alive after our death, S. Paul affirms [Christ died for us, 1
Thes. 5. 10. that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.]
Now it were strange that we should be alive, and live with Christ, and yet do
no act of life: the body when it is asleep does many: and if the soul does
none, the principle is lesse active then the instrument; but if it does any
act at all in separation, it must ne­cessarily be an act or effect of
understanding; there is nothing else it can do. But this it can. For it is but
a weak and an unlearned proposition to say, That the Soul can do nothing of it
self, no­thing B without the phantasmes and provisions of the body. For 1. In
this life the soul hath one principle clearly separate, abstracted &
immaterial, I mean, the Spirit of grace, which is a principle of life and
action and in many instances does not all at communicate with mat­ter, as in
the infusion, superinduction and the creation of spiritual graces. 2. As
nutrition, generation, eating and drinking are actions proper to the body and
its state: so, extasies, visions, raptures, in­tuitive knowledge, and
consideration of its self, acts of volition, and reflex acts of understanding
are proper to the soul. 3. And therefore it is observable that S. Paul said
that he knew not whether C his visions and raptures were in or out of the
body: for by that we see his judgement of the thing, that one was as likely as
the other, neither of them impossible or unreasonable; and therefore that the
soul is as capable of action alone as in conjunction. 4. If in the state of
blessednesse there are some actions of the soul which doe not passe through
the body, such as contemplation of God, and conversing with spirits, and
receiving those influences and rare immissions which coming from the Holy and
mysterious Tri­nity make up the crown of glory; it follows that the necessi­ty
of the bodies ministery is but during the state of this life, and D as long as
it converses with fire and water, and lives with corn and flesh, and is fed by
the satisfaction of material appetits; which necessity and manner of
conversation when it ceases, it can be no longer necessary for the soul to be
served by phantasmes and material representations. 5. And therefore when the
body shall be re-united, it shall be so ordered that then the body shall
confesse it gives not any thing, but receives all its being and opera­tion,
its manner and abode from the soul, and that then it comes not to serve a
necessity, but to partake a glory. For as the operati­ons of the soul in this
life, begin in the body, and by it the object is E transmitted to the soul: so
then they shall begin in the soul and pass to the body; and as the operations
of the soul by reason of its de­pendence on the body are animal, natural and
material: so in the resurrection, the body shall be spiritual by reason of the
preeminence, influence, and prime operation of the soul. Now between these
[[Page 369]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=192) A two
states, stands the state of separation, in which the operations of the soul
are of a middle nature, that is, not so spirituall as in the resurrection, and
not so animal and natural as in the state of con­junction.

To all which I adde this consideration. That our souls have the same condition
that Christs soul had in the state of separation; because he took on him all
our nature, and all our condition; and it is certain, Christs soul in the
three dayes of his separa­tion did exercise acts of life, of joy and triumph,
and did not sleep, but visited the souls of the Fathers, trampled upon the B
pride of Devils, and satisfied those longing souls which were Priso­ners of
hope; and from all this we may conclude that the souls of all the servants of
Christ are alive, and therfore do the actions of life, and proper to their
state; and therefore it is highly probable that the soul works clearer, and
understands brighter, and discourses wiser, and rejoyces louder, and loves
noblier, and desires purer, and hopes stronger then it can do here.

But if these arguments should fail, yet the felicity of Gods Saints cannot
fail. For suppose, the body to be a necessary instrument but C out of tune,
and discomposed by sin and anger, by accident and chance, by defect and
imperfections, yet, that it is better then none at all; and that if the soul
works imperfectly with an imperfect bo­dy, that then she works not at all when
she hath none; and suppose also that the soul should be as much without sense
or perception in death, as it is in a deep sleep which is the image and shadow
of death, yet then God devises other means that his banished be not expel­led
from him. For,

2\. God will restore the soul to the body, and raise the body to such a
perfection, that it shall be an Organ fitt to praise him up­on; D it shall be
made spiritual to minister to the soul, when the soul is turned into a Spirit,
then the soul shall be brought forth by An­gels from her incomparable and
easie bed, from her rest in Christs Holy Bosome, and be made perfect in her
being, and in all her operations; And this shall first appear by that
perfection which the soul shall receive as instrumental to the last judgement:
for then she shall see clearly all the Records of this world, all the Register
of her own memory. For all that we did in this life, is laid up in our
memories: and though dust and forgetfulnesse be drawn upon them, yet when God
shall lift us from our dust, then shall E appear clearly all that we have
done, written in the Tables of our conscience, which is the souls memory. We
see many times▪ and in many instances, that a great memory is hindered and put
out, and we thirty years after come to think of something that lay so long
under a curtain; we think of it suddenly and without a line of deduction, or
proper consequence: And all those famous me­mories, of Simonides and
Theodectes, of Hortensins and Seneca, of [[Page
370]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=193) Sceptius
Metrodorus and Carneades, of Cyneas the Embassadour of A Pyrrhus, are onely
the Records better kept, and lesse disturbed by accident and desease. For even
the memory of Herods son of Athens, of Bathyllus and the dullest person now
alive is so great, and by God made so sure a record of all that ever he did,
that assoon as ever God shall but tune our instrument, and draw the curtains,
and but light up the candle of immortality, there we shal finde it all, there
we shall see all, and all the world shall see all; then we shall be made fit
to converse with God after the manner of Spirits, we shall be like to Angels.

In the mean time, although upon the perswasion of the former B discourse it be
highly probable that the souls of Gods servants do live in a state of present
blessednesse; and in the exceeding joyes of a certain expectation of the
revelation of the day of the Lord, and the coming of Jesus yet it will concern
us onely to secure our state by holy living, and leave the event to God; that
(as S. Paul said) whether present or absent, whether sleeping or wa­king,
whether perceiving or perceiving not, we may be accepted of him: that when we
are banished this world, and from the light of the sun, we may not be expelled
from God, and from the light of his countenance, but that from our beds of
sorrows, our souls may C passe into the bosome of Christ, and from thence to
his right hand in the day of sentence: For we must all appear before the
judge­ment seat of Christ, & then if we have done wel in the body, we shal
never be expelled from the beatifical presence of God, but be do­mesticks of
his family, and heires of his Kingdom, and partakers of his glory. Amen

I Have now done with my Text, but yet am to make you ano­ther Sermon. I have
told you the necessity and the state of death; it may be too largely for such
a sad story; I shal therefore now D with a better compendium teach you how to
live by telling you a plain narrative of a life, which if you imitate and
write after the copy, it will make, that death shall not be an evil, but a
thing to be desired, and to be reckoned amongst the purchases and advanta­ges
of your fortune. When Martha and Mary went to weep over E the grave of their
brother, Christ met them there and preached a Funeral Sermon, discoursing of
the resurrection, and apply­ing to the purposes of faith, and confession of
Christ, and glori­fication of God: We have no other, we can have no better
pre­cedent to follow: and now that we are come to weep over the grave of our
Dear Sister, this rare personage, we cannot chuse but have many vertues to
learn, many to imitate, and some to ex­ercise.

I chose, not to declare her extraction and genealogy. It was indeed fair and
Honorable; but having the blessing to be descended from [[Page
371]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=193) A worthy and
Honoured Ancestors, and her self to be adopted and ingraffed into a more Noble
family, yet she felt such outward ap­pendages to be none of hers, because not
of her choice, but the purchase of the vertues of others, which although they
did ingage her to do noble things, yet they would upbraid all degenerate and
lesse honourable lives then were those which began and increased the honour of
the families. She did not love her fortune for ma­king her noble; but thought
it would be a dishonour to her if she did not continue her Noblenesse and
excellency of vertue fit to be owned by persons relating to such Ancestors. It
is fit for all us to B honour the Noblenesse of a family: but it is also fit
for them that are Noble to despise it and to establish their honour upon the
founda­tion of doing excellent things, and suffering in good causes, and
despising dishonourable actions, and in communicating good things to others.
For this is the rule in Nature: Those creatures are most Honourable which have
the greatest power and do the greatest good: And accordingly my self have been
a witnesse of it, how this excellent Lady would by an act of humility, and
Christian abstracti­on strip her self of all that fair appendage of exteriour
honour which C decked her person and her fortune; and desired to be owned by
no­thing but what was her own, that she might onely be esteemed Ho­nourable
according to that which is the honour of a Christian, and a wise person.

2\. She had a strict and severe education, and it was one of Gods graces and
favours to her. For being the Heiresse of a great fortune, and living amongst
the throng of persons in the sight of vanities and empty temptations, that is,
in that part of the Kingdom where greatnesse is too often expressed in great
follies, and great vices, God had provided a severe and angry education to
chastise the forward­nesses D of a young spirit, and a fair fortune; that she
might for ever be so far distant from a vice, that she might onely see it and
loath it, but never tast of it, so much as to be put to her choice whether she
would be vertuous or no. God intending to secure this soul to himself, would
not suffer the follies of the world to seize upon her by way of too neer a
trial, or busie temptation.

3\. She was married young; and besides her businesses of religion seemed to be
ordained in the providence of God to bring to this Honourable family a part of
a fair fortune, and to leave behinde her a fairer issue worth ten thousand
times her portion: and as if this had E been all the publick businesse of her
life; when she had so far served Gods ends, God in mercy would also serve
hers, and take her to an early blessednesse.

4\. In passing through which line of providence, she had the art to secure her
eternal interest, by turning her condition into duty & expressing her duty in
the greatest eminency of a vertuous, prud [...]nt and rare affection, that
hath been known in any example. I will not [[Page
372]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=194) give her so
low a testimony, as to say onely that she was chast; She A was a person of
that severity, modesty, and close religion (as to that particular) that she
was not capable of uncivil temptation; and you might as well have suspected
the sun to smell of the poppy that he looks on, as that she could have been a
person apt to be sul­lyed by the breath of a foul question.

5\. But that which I shall note in her, is that which I would have exemplar to
all Ladies, and to all women. She had a love so great for her Lord, so
intirely given up to a dear affection, that she thought the same things and
loved the same loves, and hated according to the same enmities, and breathed
in his soul, and lived in his presence,B and languished in his absence: and
all that she was or did, was onely for and to her Dearest Lord,

Si gaudet, si flet, si tacit, hunc loquitur.

Coenat, propinat, poscit, negat, innuit, unus

Naevius est:—and although this was a great enamel to the beau­ty of her soul,
yet it might in some degrees be also a reward to the vertue of her Lord: For
she would often discourse it to them that conversed with her; that he would
improve that interest which he had in her affection to the advantages of God,
and of religion: and she would delight to say, that he called her C to her
devotions, he encouraged her good inclinations he directed her piety, he
invited her with good books: and then she loved religion, which she saw was
not onely pleasing to God, and an act or state of duty, but pleasing to her
Lord, and an act also of affection and conjugal obedience; and what at first
she loved the more forwardly for his sake; in the using of religion left such
re­lishes upon her spirit, that she found in it amability enough, to make her
love it for its own. So God usually brings us to him by instru­ments of nature
and affections, and then incorporates us into his in­heritance, by the more
immediate relishes of Heaven, and the secret D things of the Spirit. He only
was (under God) the light of her eyes, and the cordiall of her spirits, and
the guide of her actions, and the measure of her affections, till her
affections swelled up into a religi­on, and then it could go no higher, but
was confederate with those other duties which made her dear to God. Which rare
com­bination of duty and religion, I choose to expresse in the words of
Solomon: Prov. 2.  [...]7. She forsook not the guide of her youth, nor brake
the Co­venant of her God.

6\. As she was a rare wife: so she was an excellent Mother. For in so tender a
constitution of spirit as hers was, and in so great a E kindnesse towards her
children, there hath seldom been seen a stricter and more curious care of
their persons, their deportment, their nature, their disposition, their
learning and their customs: And if ever kindnesse and care did contest, and
make parties in her, yet her care and her severity was ever victorious; and
she knew [[Page
373]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=194) A not how to
do an ill turn to their severer part, by her more ten­der and forward
kindnesse. And as her custome was, she turned this also into love to her Lord.
For she was not onely diligent to have them bred nobly and religiously, but
also was carefull and soli­citous, that they should be taught to observe all
the circumstances & inclinations, the desires and wishes of their Father; as
thinking, that vertue to have no good circumstances which was not dressed by
his copy, and ruled by his lines, and his affections: And her pru­dence in the
managing her children was so singular and rare, that when ever you mean to
blesse this family, and pray a hearty and a B profitable prayer for it, beg of
God, that the children may have those excellent things which she designed to
them, and provided for them in her heart and wishes, that they may live by her
purpo­ses, and may grow thither, whither she would fain have brought them. All
these were great parts of an excellent religion as they con­cerned her
greatest temporal relations.

7\. But if we examine how she demeaned her self towards God, there also you
will finde her, not of a common, but of an exemplar piety. She was a great
reader of Scripture, confining her self to great portions every day; which she
read, not to the purposes C of vanity, and impertinent curiosities, not to
seem knowing, or to become talking, not to expound and Rule, but to teach her
all her duty, to instruct her in the knowledge and love of God and of her
Neighbours; to make her more humble, and to teach her to de­spise the world,
and all its gilded vanities; and that she might en­tertain passions wholly in
designe and order to heaven. I have seen a female religion that wholly dwelt
upon the face and tongue; that like a wanton and an undressed tree spends all
its juice in suc­kers and irregular branches, in leafs and gumme, and after
all such goodly outsides you should never eat an apple, or be delighted with D
the beauties, or the perfumes of a hopefull blossome. But the religion of this
excellent Lady was of another constitution; It took root downward in humility,
and brought forth fruit upward in the substantiall graces of a Christian, in
charity and justice, in chastity and modesty, in fair friendships and
sweetnesse of society▪ She had not very much of the forms and outsides of
godlinesse; but she was hugely carefull for the power of it, for the morall,
essen­tiall, and usefull parts; such which would make her be, not seem to be
religious.

8\. She was a very constant person at her prayers, and spent all E her time
which Nature did permit to her choice, in her devoti­ons, and reading and
meditating and the necessary offices of hous­hold government, every one of
which is an action of religion, some by nature, some by adoption. To these
also God gave her a very great love to hear the word of God preached; in which
because I had sometimes the honour to minister to her, I can give this certain
te­stimony, [[Page
374]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=195) that she was a
diligent, watchfull and attentive hearer: and A to this had so excellent a
judgement, that if ever I saw a woman whose judgement was to be revered, it
was hers alone: and I have sometimes thought that the eminency of her
discerning facul­ties did reward a pious discourse, and placed it in the
regions of ho­nour and usefulnesse, and gathered it up from the ground, where
commonly such homilies are spilt, or scattered in neglect and
incon­sideration. But her appetite was not soon satisfied with what was
usefull to her soul: she was also a constant Reader of Sermons, and B seldome
missed to read one every day; and that she might be full of instruction and
holy principles, she had lately designed to have a large Book in which she
purposed to have a stock of Religion tran­scrib [...]d in such assistances as
she would chuse, that she might be rea­dily furnished and instructed to every
good work, But God preven­ted that, and hath filled her desires not out of
cisterns and little aquae­ducts, but hath carried her to the fountain, where
she drinks of the pleasures of the river, and is full of God.

9\. She alwayes lived a life of much Innocence, free from the violences of
great sins: her person, her breeding, her modesty, her honour, her religion,
her early marriage, the Guide of her soul, and the Guide of her youth, were as
so many fountains of restraining C grace to her, to keep her from the
dishonours of a crime. Bonum est portare jugum ab adolescentî: it is good to
bear the yoak of the Lord from our youth; and though she did so, being guarded
by a mighty providence, and a great favour and grace of God from staining her
fair soul with the spots of hell, yet she had strange fears and early cares
upon her; but these were not onely for her self, but in order to others, to
her neerest Relatives. For she was so great a lover of this Honourable family
of which now she was a Mother, that she desired to become a chanel of great
blessings to it unto future ages, and was extremely jealous lest any thing
should be done, or lest any D thing had been done, though an age or two since,
which should in­tail a curse upon the innocent posterity; and therefore
(although I do not know that ever she was tempted with an offer of the crime)
yet she did infinitely remove all sacrilege from her thoughts, and de­lighted
to see her estate of a clear and disintangled interest: she would have no
mingled rights with it; she would not receive any thing from the Church, but
religion and a blessing: and she never thought a curse and a sin far enough
off, but would desire it to be in­finitely distant; and that as to this family
God had given much ho­nour and a wise head to govern it, so he would also for
ever give ma­ny E more blessings: And because she knew that the sins of
Parents de­scend upon Children, she endeavoured by justice and religion, by
charity and honour to secure that her chanel should convey nothing but health,
and a fair example, and a blessing.

10\. And though her accounts to God was made up of nothing [[Page
375]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=195) A but small
parcels, little passions, and angry words, and trifling dis­contents, which
are the allayes of the piety of the most holy per­sons, yet she was early at
her repentance; and toward the latter end of her dayes, grew so fast in
religion as if she had had a revelation of her approaching end; and therefore
that she must go a great way in a little time: her discourses more full of
religion, her prayers more frequent, her charity increasing, her forgiveness
more for­ward, her friendships more communicative, her passion more un­der
discipline, and so she trimm'd her lamp, not thinking her night was so neer,
but that it might shine also in the day time, in the Tem­ple, B and before the
Altar of incense.

But in this course of hers there were some circumstances, and some appendages
of substance, which were highly remarkable.

1\. In all her Religion, and in all her actions of relation towards God, she
had a strange evennesse and untroubled passage, sliding toward her Ocean of
God and of infinity with a certain and silent motion. So have I seen a river
deep and smooth passing with a still foot and a sober face, and paying to the
Fiscus, the great Ex­chequer of the Sea, the Prince of all the watry bodies, a
tribute C large and full: and hard by it a little brook skipping and making a
noise upon its unequall and neighbour bottom; and after all its talking and
bragged motion, it payed to its common Audit no more then the revenues of a
little cloud, or a contemptible vessel: So have I sometimes compar'd the
issues of her religion to the solem­nities and fam'd outsides of anothers
piety. It dwelt upon her spi­rit, and was incorporated with the periodicall
work of every day: she did not beleeve that religion was intended to minister
to fame and reputation, but to pardon of sins, to the pleasure of God, and the
salvation of souls. For religion is like the breath of Heaven; D if it goes
abroad into the open air, it scatters and dissolves like cam­phyre: but if it
enters into a secret hollownesse, into a close con­veyance, it is strong and
mighty, and comes forth with vigour and great effect at the other end, at the
other side of this life, in the dayes of death and judgement.

2\. The other appendage of her religion, which also was a great ornament to
all the parts of her life, was a rare modesty and hu­mility of spirit, a
confident despising and undervaluing of her self. For though she had the
greatest judgement, and the greatest expe­rience of things and persons that I
ever yet knew in a person of E her youth, and sex, and circumstances; yet as
if she knew nothing of it she had the meanest opinion of her self; and like a
fair taper when she shined to all the room, yet round about her own station
she had cast a shadow and a cloud, and she shined to every body but her self.
But the perfectnesse of her prudence and excellent parts could not be hid; and
all her humility, and arts of conceal­ment, made the vertues more amiable and
illustrious. For as pride [[Page
376]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=196) sullies the
beauty of the fairest vertues, and makes our understand­ing A but like the
craft and learning of a Devil: so humility is the greatest eminency, and art
of publication in the whole world; and she in all her arts of secrecy and
hiding her worthy things, was but like one that hideth the winde, and covers
the oyntment of her right hand.

I know not by what instrument it hapned; but when death drew neer, befor it
made any shew upon her body, or revealed it self by a naturall signification,
it was conveyed to her spirit: she had a strange secret perswasion that the
bringing this Childe should be her last scene of life: and we have known, that
the soul when she is B about to disrobe her self of her upper garment,
sometimes speaks rarely Magnifica verba: mors propè admota excutit; sometimes
it is prophetical; sometimes God by a superinduced perswasion wrought by
instruments, or accidents of his own, serves the ends of his own providence
and the salvation of the soul: But so it was, that the thought of death dwelt
long with her, and grew from the first steps of fancy and fear, to a consent,
from thence to a strange credulity, and expectation of it; and without the
violence of sicknesse she died, as if she had done it voluntarily, and by
designe, and for fear her expectation should have been deceived, or that she
should C seem to have had an unreasonable fear, or apprehension; or ra­ther
(as one said of Cato) sic abiit è vitâ ut causam moriendi nactam se esse
gauderet, she died, as if she had been glad of the opportunity.

And in this I cannot but adore the providence and admire the wisdom and
infinite mercies of God. For having a tender and soft, a delicate and fine
constitution and breeding, she was tender to pain and apprehensive of it as a
childs shoulder is of a load and burden: Grave est tenerae cervici jugum; and
in her often discourses of death, which she would renew willingly and
frequently, she would tell, that she feared not death, but she feared the
sharp pains D of death: Emori nolo, me esse mortuam non curo: The being dead,
and being freed from the troubles and dangers of this world, she hoped would
be for her advantage; and therefore that was no part of her fear: But she
believing the pangs of death were great, and the use and aids of reason
little, had reason to fear lest they should do violence to her spirit and the
decency of her resolution. But God that knew her fears, and her jealousie
concerning her self, fitted her with a death so easie, so harmlesse, so
painlesse, that it did not put her patience to a severe trial. It was not (in
all appea­rance) of so much trouble, as two fits of a common ague; so
care­full E was God to remonstrate to all that stood in that sad attendance,
that this soul was dear to him: and that since she had done so much of her
duty towards it, he that began would also finish her redemption, by an act of
a rare providence, and a singular mercy. Blessed he that goodnesse of God, who
does so careful actions of mercy [[Page
377]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=196) A for the ease
and security of his servants. But this one instance was a great demonstration
that the apprehension of death is worse then the pains of death: and that God
loves to reprove the unreasonable­nesse of our fears, by the mightiness, and
by the arts of his mercy.

She had in her sickness (if I may so cal it, or rather in the solemni­ties,
and graver preparations towards death) some curious and well-becoming fears,
concerning the final state of her soul. But from thence she passed into a
deliquium, or a kinde of trance, and as soon as she came forth of it, as if it
had been a vision, or that she had con­versed with an Angel, and from his hand
had received a label or B scroll of the book of life, and there seen her name
enrolled, she cried out aloud, [Glory be to God on high: Now I am sure I shall
be saved.] Concerning which manner of discoursing we are wholy ignorant, what
judgement can be made: but certainly there are strange things in the other
world; and so there are in all the immediate preparation to it; and a little
glimps of heaven, a minutes conversing with an An­gel, any ray of God, any
communication extraordinary from the spi­rit of comfort which God gives to his
servants in strange and un­known manners, are infinitely far from illusions;
and they shall then be understood by us, when we feel them, and when our new
and C strange needs shall be refreshed by such unusual visitation.

But I must be forced to use summaries and arts of abbreviature in the
enumerating those things in which this rare Personage was dear to God and to
all her Relatives.

If we consider her Person, she was in the flower of her age, Ju­cundum cum
aetas florida ver ageret; of a temperate, plain and natural diet, without
curiosity or an intemperate palate; she spent lesse time in dressing, then
many servants; her recreations were little and seldom, her prayers often, her
reading much: she was of a most noble and charitable soul; a great lover of
honourable actions and D as great a despiser of base things; hugely loving to
oblige others, and very unwilling to be in arrear to any upon the stock of
cour­tesies and liberality; so free in all acts of favour, that she would not
stay to hear her self thanked, as being unwilling that what good went from her
to a needful or an obliged person should ever re­turn to her again; she was an
excellent friend, and hugely dear to very many, especially to the best and
most discerning persons, to all that conversed with her, and could understand
her great worth and sweetnesse: she was of an Honourable, a nice and tender
repu­tation; and of the pleasures of this world which were laid before E her
in heaps she took a very small and inconsiderable share, as not loving to glut
her self with vanity, or to take her portion of good things here below.

If we look on her as a Wife, she was chast and loving, fruitful and discreet
humble and pleasant, witty and complyant, rich and fair, & wanted nothing to
the making her a principal and a precedent to the [[Page
378]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=197) best Wives of
the world, but a long life, and a full age.A

If we remember her as a Mother, she was kinde and severe, careful and prudent,
very tender, & not at al fond, a greater lover of her chil­drens souls, then
of their bodies, and one that would value them more by the strict rules of
honour and proper worth, then by their relation to her self.

Her servants found her prudent, and fit to Govern, and yet open-handed and apt
to reward; a just Exactor of their duty and a great Rewarder of their
diligence.B

She was in her house a comfort to her dearest Lord, a guide to her children, a
Rule to her Servants an example to all.

But as she related to God in the offices of Religion, she was even and
constant, silent and devout, prudent and material: she loved what she now
enjoyes, and she feared what she never felt, and God did for her what she
never did expect. Her fears went beyond all her e­vil; and yet the good which
she hath received was, and is, and ever shall be beyond all her hopes.

She lived as we al should live, and she died as I fain would die—

Et cum supremos Lachesis perneverit annos,

Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos.

I pray God I may feel those mercies on my death-bed that she felt,C and that I
may feel the same effect of my repentance which she feels of the many degrees
of her innocence. Such was her death that she did not die too soon; and her
life was so useful and so excellent that she could not have lived too long.
Nemo parum diu vixit qui vir­tutis perfectae perfecto functus est munere: and
as now in the grave it shall not be enquired concerning her, how long she
lived, but how well? so to us who live after her to suffer a longer calamity,
it may be some ease to our sorrows, and some guide to our lives, and some
securitie to our conditions, to consider that God hath brought the piety of a
yong Lady to the early rewards of a never ceasing, and D never dying eternity
of glory. And we also if we live as she did, shall partake of the same
glories; not onely having the honour of a good name and a dear and honoured
memory, but the glories of these glories, the end of all excellent labours,
and all prudent coun­sels, and all holy religion, even the salvation of our
souls in that day, when all the Saints, and amongst them this excellent Woman
shall be shown to all the world to have done more, and more ex­cellent things
then we know of or can describe. Mors illos consecrat, quorum exitum & qui
timent, laudant: Death consecrates and makes sacred that person whose
excellency was such, that they that are not E displeased at the death, cannot
dispraise the life; but they that mourn sadly, think they can never commend
sufficiently.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=53465&page=197)

The end.

[Home](/)

Taylor, Jeremy, 1613-1667.. Date: 1651  

