## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins hue and cry after Good House-Keeping, or, A dialogue betwixt
Good House-Keeping, Christmas, and Pride shewing how Good House-Keeping is
grown out of date both in city and country, and Christmas become only a meer
name and not to be found by feasting in gentlemens houses but only by red-
letters in almanacks : and how the money that should go to feast the poor at
Christmas is spent upon the maintenance of Pride, with how many trades are
maintained by Pride, and how many undone for want of Good House-Keeping.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=1)

POOR ROBINS Hue and Cry AFTER GOOD HOUSE-KEEPING.

OR, A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Good Houſe-Keeping, Chriſtmas, and Pride.

Shewing how Good Houſe-Keeping is grown out of Date both in City and Country,
and Chriſtmas become only a meer name, and not to be found by Feaſting in
Gen­tlemens Houſes, but only by Red-Letters in Almanacks.

And how the Money that ſhould go to Feaſt the Poor at Chriſtmas is ſpent upon
the maintenance of Pride, with how many Trades are maintained by Pride, and
how many undone for want of Good-Houſe Keeping.

Good Houſe-Keeping is Baniſhed, And Pride is come up in its ſtead.

This may be Printed, Dec. 17\. 1687. R. P.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1687.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A DIALOGUE Betwixt Good Houſe-Keeping and Pride.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=2)

## 1\. A DIALOGUE Betwixt Good Houſe-Keeping and Pride.

Good-Houſekeeping.

WEll! I ſee I muſt be gone, there is no Remedy.

Pride.

Why what is the matter Good-Houſekeeping?

Good-Houſekeeping.

Pox take thee (if thou haſt it not already) 'tis long of thee that I muſt
trudge, for when Pride came up Good-Houſekeeping went down; when Pride came in
Faſhion, Good-Houſekeeping was Baniſht the Nation.

Pride.

Ha, ha, ha, why thou inconſiderate fellow, doſt thou not know that I am
reſpected and eſteemed by the whole Nation, from the Lord to the Lout, from
the City-Madam to the Country-Milkmaid, and how thou art ſhut out of doors to
make room for me.

Good-Houſekeeping.

Now the foul ill light upon thee for ſo diſplacing me, who for­merly was
reſpected and entertained by the chiefeſt and beſt of all the Nation, when a
Laſty Old Knight, and a boon brave Squire went attended with ten, twenty, or
thirty proper Serving-men, all now Epitomized to a two or three Animals, viz.
a Butterfly-Page, a trotting Footman, and a ſtiff-drinking Coachman; when my
Lady Minikin takes ſuch a thrifty Order, that all the meat in the Kitchin
ſhall be cheaper than the waſhing and Painting of her Viſage; when you may ſit
a cold by the Kitchin-Fire, and the Hooks of the Buttery-door grow ruſty for
want of opening. Well fare the heart of Poor Robin, who in his Almanack of
1684. plainly deſcribed this change from better to worſe.

Good-Houſekeeping alas is dead,

And Pride is come up in its ſtead;

The Cook and Butler turn'd to Graſs,

Being uſeleſs as the times now paſs;

And a Footboy kept in their place

In every Seam bedawb'd with Lace:

Four Horſes kept to draw a Coach,

And doors faſt barr'd that none approach

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=2) The
Buttery-door as needs it muſt

The Hinges Eaten up with Ruſt.

The Kitchin that a cold may be,

For little Fire you in it ſee;

Perhaps a pair of Cards is going

And that's the chiefeſt matter doing.

Here you ſee, you Butterfly Upſtart, that this Author (well known all England
over, and who I warrant you would entertain me kindly, had he but an Eſtate to
maintain me) imputes the cauſe of my expulſion only to you, for Pride's
intruſion is Good-houſekeepings confuſion, and the Money that ſhould go to buy
Beef, Pork, and Mutton, to feaſt the Poor at Chriſtmas, is employ'd on
Ribbons, Knots, and Towers, to make the Baby Pride a pretty Puppet.

Pride.

Why thou Techy Envious Out-caſt, know'ſt thou not how many Trades live by me,
and have all or moſt of their dependency from me? were not I ſo much in
requeſt, the Mercer, Silkman, Silk-weaver, Taylor, Embroiderer, Perriwig-
maker, Feather-maker, and moſt of your Tradeſmen in the Exchange, might ſhut
up ſhop and keep Holy-day for any thing they would have to do.

Good-Houſekeeping.

And thou foreman of the Seven Deadly Sins, how many thou­ſand poor People fare
the worſe for want of me: beſides the de­triment done to Butchers, Cooks,
Poulterers, Fiſhwives, Butlers, Serving-men, and hundreds more beſides, who by
my Baniſhment are ſome of them quite undone, and the reſt much Empoveriſh'd in
their Trades? But here comes my old friend Chriſtmas, I know that he will take
my part.

Chriſtmas.

Why how now Good-Houſekeeping! you and I have been great ſtrangers of late;
what Fantaſtick is this you are talking with?

Good-Houſekeeping.

Why this is the great Favourite of the times, Monſieur Pride.

Chriſtmas.

Ah Good-Houſekeeping, what brave times have thou and I known formerly, when
men kept not only great Houſes but large Kitchins, and thoſe Kitchins gave
employment for three or four Cooks; the Maſter of the Houſe being one that
wore no other Shirts but of the Flax that grew on his own Ground, and of his
Wives, Daughters, or Servants ſpinning; whoſe Stockings, Hoſe, and Jerkin,
were [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=3) of
the Wool of his own Sheeps backs; who never by his Pride of Apparel, cauſed
Mercer, Draper, Silkman, Taylor, or Haberdaſher, to break and turn Bankrupt;
and yet this plain home-ſpun fel­low, would keep and maintain half a hundred
Servants or more, and every day relieve three or fourſcore poor People at his
Gate; and every year when Chriſtmas came to Town, invite three or four hundred
of his Neighbours to dinner, where they ſhould not only feed but feaſt, and
not feaſt but banquet.

Where Pig, Gooſe, Turkey, Capon, Cunney,

What might be had for his Money;

Plum-Pudding and Furmity,

Mutton-Paſties, Chriſtmas-Pye;

Nappy-Ale a full Carrouſe

To the Maſter of the Houſe:

Syder, Perry, and Strong Beer

For to waſh down their good Cheer.

Theſe were men whoſe greateſt care was to practiſe the Works of Piety,
Charity, and Hoſpitality; and not the conſuming Art of Faſhionleſs Faſhions:
They never tried their ſtrength to carry four or five hundred Acres of Land at
their Back at once: Then was ſoft Cloathing only in Kings Courts, but now you
know not my Lady from her Maid; and it would make a Horſe to break his Crupper
with laughing to ſee Jone Fiddle-Faddle, whoſe Portion a­mounts not to two
Groats and two Pence, yet deckt up with Rib­bons and Towers as fine as a
Bartholomew-Baby, after ſhe is come from Church (whither ſhe went only to ſhew
her fine Cloaths) with a Swill-Pail in her hands ſerving of Hogs.

Pride.

Marry and they are to be commended; to go brave is the only way to get them
Husbands, and when they are Married let their Husbands look after it to
maintain them.

Good-Houſekeeping.

That man who is ſped with ſuch a Wife, had far better to mar­ry one made of
Gingerbread, for when he is an-hungry ſhe will ſerve to fill his Belly, and no
more then need, for ſince ſo much is laid out upon the Tail, there is little
Proviſion made for the Mouth.

Chriſtmas.

Much leſs to entertain Neighbours at Chriſtmas, at which time formerly you
might ſmell the ſcent of Roaſt Beef and Minc'd-Pies [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=3) a Quarter of a
Mile off from a Gentlemans Houſe, and hardly get to the Gate for the Crowd of
Beggars; when the Porter would welcome ye to the Houſe with a Pray walk in
Sir: But now you may catch you a heat with knocking at the Gate, for all the
Fire in the Kitchin Chimney will ſcarcely do it. So now Cooks are out of
Employment, Butlers turn'd out of Doors, a Servingmans Dinner two Sprats and a
half, and the Trencher-ſcraper no work to do, becauſe there no Trenchers are
foul.

Good-Houſekeeping.

A very thrifty way, like the man that ſtarv'd his Cattle to ſave Provender.

Pride.

I'le juſtifie it, there has been more ſpent in exceſs at one Chriſt­mas, then
would maintain all my Children in fine Cloaths a whole Year after.

Chriſtmas.

Your Children with a Murrain! and who knows not that the Off-ſpring of Pride
comes from the Lineage of Lucifer, a goodly Pedigree indeed, which if rightly
conſidered,

Then Jack and Jill, and John-a-Drones his Iſſue,

Would not be trapped thus in Gold and Tiſſue.

Then ſhould Men be Honoured and Reverenc'd for their Boun­ty, Liberality,
Good-Houſekeeping, and other Vertues befitting a Gentleman, and not for a
tawdry out-ſide.

For is it not a fooliſh vile miſtaking

To honour things that are a Taylors making?

Good-Houſekeeping.

Well, for all this Upſtart Pride is now in ſuch requeſt, I hope to ſee good
days once more, and Chriſtmas come in faſhion again, and Cooks be employed in
their Old Trade of Boyling, Broiling; Roaſting, Toaſting, Slicing, Brewing,
Baking, Frying, Mincing, Cutting, and all to employ People in eating: for a
Cook is then a Man of great repute, as being Monarch of the Marrow-Bones, Duke
of the Dripping-Pan, Marquis of the Mutton, Lord High Regent of the Spit and
the Kettle, Baron of the Gridiron, and Sosle Commander of the Frying-Pan.

Chriſtmas.

Now I'le be judge by all the poor People in England, if to ſpend two hundred
Pound in good Houſekeeping at Chriſtmaas, be not more becoming a Gentleman,
then to carry five hundred Acres of [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=4) Land on his back
in a Suit of Cloaths, for which he gains no other praiſe but only to be ſaid
to be more Proud then wiſe.

Good-Houſekeeping.

This Sin of Pride we find the Engliſh to have been formerly too much addicted
unto, as we may read in the Book called Eulogium, ſet forth about the time of
King Edward the Third. The Commons (ſaith that Author) were Beſotted in exceſs
of Apparel, in wide Sur­coats reaching to their Loins, ſome in a Garment
reaching to their H [...]els, cloſe before and ſtrouting out on the ſides, ſo
that on the Back they make Men ſeem Women, and this they call by a ridiculous
name, Gown: Their Hoods are little, tyed under the Chin, and Button'd like the
Womens, but ſet with Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones: Their Lirripipes reach
to their Heels all jagged. They have another Weed of Silk which they call a
Pal­tock; their Hoſe are of two Colours, or Pied with more, which with
Latchets which they call Herlots, they tie to their Paltocks without any
Breeches. Their Girdles are of Gold and Silver, ſome with 20 marks, their
Shooes and Pattens are ſnowted and piked, more then a Finger long, crooking
upwards, which they call Crackows, reſembling the Devil's Claws, which were
faſtned to the Knees with Chains of Gold and Silver, and theſe (ſaith my
Author) were Lyons in the Hall, and Hares in the Field; too fine for to fight.

Chriſtmas.

But this Pride was only uſed by Rich men, for Poor People could not go to the
coſt of it: but now every Tom-Ladle, and Jill-Flurt do ſo flaunt it with
Towers, Ribbons, and other gew-gaws, that you do not know Jack from a
Gentleman, nor Minks the Maid from her Lady or Miſtreſs.

Good-Houſekeeping.

I wiſh all Skip-Jacks who are of that proud humour, were ſerved as Sir Philip-
Calthrop ſerved one John Drakes of Norwich. This Knight bought on a time as
much fine French Tawney Cloth as ſhould make him a Gown, and ſent it to the
Taylors to be made. John Drake coming to the Taylors, and ſeeing the Knights
Gown-Cloth lying there, liking it well, cauſed the Taylor to buy him as much
of the ſame Cloth and Price to the ſame Intent, and bad him make it of the
ſame Faſhion that the Knight would have his made of. Not long after the Knight
coming to the Taylors to take meaſure of his Gown, perceiving the like Gown-
Cloth lying there, asked of the Taylor whoſe it was? Quoth he it is John
Drakes the Shooemaker, who will have it made of the ſelf-ſame faſhion that
yours is: In good time [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=4) (ſaid the Knight)
I will have mine made as full of Cuts as thy Shears can make it, to which the
Taylor agreed; and in ſhort ſpace made them both up, it being againſt
Chriſtmas Day: but when John Drake ſaw his Gown ſo full of Cuts, he began to
ſwear at the Taylor for making his Gown in that ſort. I have done nothing
(quoth the Taylor) but that you bad me, for as Sir Philip Calthrop's is, ſo
have I made yours. By my Latchet quoth John Drake, I will never wear
Gentlemans faſhion again.

Chriſtmas.

Indeed he was ſerved right in his kind, for Engliſhmen know not what faſhion
to follow: as was well intimated by Doctor Bourd, who painted for an
Engliſhman a Proper fellow naked with a pair of Taylors Shears in one hand,
and a piece of Cloth on his Arm with theſe Rhimes.

I am an Engliſhman, and naked I ſtand here,

Muſing in my Mind what Garments I ſhall wear;

For now I will wear this, and now I will wear that:

And now I will wear I cannot tell what,

All new Faſhions be pleaſant to me. &c.

Pride.

Say what you will, and do what you can, yet ſtill ſhall I be re­ſpected. Do
not you know that many will pinch their own bellies to maintain me, and make
Lute-ſtrings of their Guts to clad their backs in Bravery! and can you think
that thoſe who will ſtarve themſelves to uphold me, will feaſt others for the
name of good Houſholders; ſurely your over-feeding hath made you forgetfull:
how many young Worthies will pawn their Honeſty to maintain their Finery, and
to make their Tail fine, will make uſe of their Tail, although they be whipped
for it at the Carts Tail.

Good-Houſekeeping.

Indeed Pride and Leachery are two fit Companions,, and both e­qually
deſtructive to Good-Houſekeeping: to maintain which two Vices Good-
Houſekeeping is laid aſide, and Chriſtmas grown quite out of date, nay they
cannot afford ſo good a Fiſh Dinner as was at the Counter-Scuffle.

Eels boyl'd and broil'd; and next they bring,

Herring, that is the Fiſhes King;

And then a Courtly Poul of Ling,

and Muſtard.

Pride.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=5)

Ha, ha, ha, I had thought my coſtly Miſtreſs Good-Houſekeeping, had my dainty
Dame Chriſtmas, had been vaniſhed away in a Fume of Tobacco, or hurried out of
England in a Coach, for ever ſince they were known, the other came to be
inviſible.

Hereupon Good-Houſekeeping vaniſhed away, and Chriſtmas became a meer Skeleton
or ſhadow, having little more left then the bare Title and Name: with the
thought whereof the Spits and Drip­ping-Pans in moſt Houſes grow ruſty; and
the Caldrons which u­ſed to be filled with Beef, Pork, and Mutton to feaſt
Good Fellows, now grow Canker'd; upon conſideration of which, that thoſe
ne­ceſſary utenſils belonging to Good-Houſekeeping might not be ſpoil'd for
want of uſe, the Author thought good to ſend a Hue and Cry after the ſaid
Good-Houſekeeping as follows.

The Hue and Cry.

Whereas an Ancient, Reverend, Late Worſhipful Gentleman, formerly a great
retainer to Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, and much reſpected amongſt the
Honeſt Yeomen and wealthy Far­mers of the whole Country, known by the Name or
Appellation of Good-Houſekeeping: hath by the ſly inſinuations and bewitched
perſuaſious of an upſtart Skip Jack called by his true name Pride, but by his
Friends and Adorers by the name of Decency and Hand­ſomeneſs: Moſt unjuſtly
and unworthily hath juſtled, perſecuted, and made to fly the ſaid Good-
Houſekeeping from his Ancient Habitations, and Places of reſidence, together
with his old friend Chriſtmas, with his four Pages, Roaſt-Beef, Minc'd-Pies,
Plumb-Pudding, and Furmity, who uſed to be his conſtant Attendants, but now
are grown ſo inviſible they cannot be ſeen by poor People, nor good Fellows as
formerly they uſed to be. Theſe are therefore to deſire, will, and require
you, if any Perſon can tell where this Good-Houſe­keeping doth reſide, that he
will deſire him perſonally to appear this Chriſtmas in Noblemens, Knights,
Gentlemens, and Yeomens Houſes as formerly he uſed to do, whereby he will gain
great Cre­dit to all the aforeſaid Perſons, and ſhall be Entertained with the
Ringing of Bells, Sounding of Trumpets, Beating of Drums, and Acclamations of
all Good People.

And Fidlers ſhall ſtrike up their Pipes and Play,

And every one for joy keep Holyday.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100498&page=5)

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1687  

