## (unknown project)

# The batchellors fore-cast, or, Cupid unblest being an answer to Cupids
trappan or up the Green Forrest Though many zelots do in love seem holy yet be
accounts it all to be but folly. To the tune of Cupids trappan.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Batchellors Fore-caſt, OR, Cupid unbleſt being an Anſwer to Cupids Trappan or up the Green Forreſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=137605&page=1)

## 1\. The Batchellors Fore-caſt, OR, Cupid unbleſt being an Anſwer to Cupids
Trappan or up the Green Forreſt.

Though many Zelots do in Love ſeem holy

Yet he accounts it all to be but folly.

To the Tune of Cupis Trappan.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

ONce did I love and a very pretty Girl,

Thinking to make her my own,

Although ſhe did look like the mother of Pearl,

Yet now am I fledg'd and flown brave Boys.

yet now am I fledg'd and flown.

I wooed her and ſued her yet ſhe did deny,

She anſwered ſhe would have none,

The humor of love I defie,

But now am I fleg'd and flown brave Boys,

I try'd my Art to make her to me ſure,

And ſtill I did call her my own,

At laſt ſhe'd indure to ſtoop to the lure,

But now I am fledg'd and flown brave Boys,

Since ſhe doth ſo ſcorn me, with Sack i'l Adorn me

I will be out witted by none,

Theſe feminine creatures are abſolute theaters

But now am I fleg'd and flown brave Boys.

But ſince I forſook her, what fancy hath took her

In the Foreſt ſhe ſéeks for her own,

She hoops & ſhe howls like woodcocks or Owls

Her bonny Birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys

My humour ſome Love, I could not approve,

Her humor was ſingle alone;

Now I have another that better than tother,

Her bonny Birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys

_[figure]_

ANd now I do here ſhe fain would draw near,

For now ſhe doth call me her own,

I care not for that i'l kéep out of her trap,

Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys,

Why ſhould I be tyed her humour to hide.

I'l never be linkt to one;

Count Maidens and Mauthers twenty to ten,

Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave Boys

I always did wait on my pretty Love Kate,

Intending my Love for to marry,

But ſince ſhe is no better, I'm none of her debtor,

The Devil ſhall have her for Harry brave Boys.

I might have had all, and have given her the fall,

Ther's nothing that would me hinder,

But ſomething that worſe Child, Cradle, & Nurſe,

I never would light the tinder brave Boys.

If any one tax me of falſhood in Love.

And ſay i'l prove true to none,

I pul'd out my Sickle becauſe ſhe was Fickle,

Her bonny birds fledg'd and flown brave boys,

If Love hath bewitcht her, what is it to me,

I wonder blind Cupid would let her,

Since ſhe is not ſmutcht nor her honeſty tutcht.

Why ſhould ſhe betyde in the fetter brave boys.

So long as ſhe is frée, ſhe cares not for me,

Her Maiden head is her honor,

If ſhe ſing and laugh i'l merelly quaff,

And ne're ſpend an idle thought on her brave boys

If ſhe ſing and ſwagger, i'l drink till I ſtagger,

The humor of Love, I defie it,

Turn Willow to wine therein I will pine,

Better live with it, then by it brave boys.

I'm come from the wars without any ſcars,

Although I was moſt in the Action,

My mony doth think, and I muſt have ſome drink,

And a pox on this fooliſh love faction, &c.

Though I am no Cripple yet well I can Tipple,

I ſcorn for to bauk[?] my Liquor,

The Iuice of the Grape taſts better than Kate,

To the Tavern I am a cloſe ſticker.

But yet I adviſe, let's be merry and wiſe,

To ſhun many future diſaſters,

Though young men may find that Maidens are kind

Yet never let Love be your maſters.

If I'd not marcht off, ſhe at me would ſcoff,

I'd rather at Sea for to venture,

If I looſe Leg or Arm 'tis not ſo much harm,

As ſteering out Love to the center, &c.

'Tis better for you to live as you be,

Then a falſe hearted maid for to marry,

Not all the deceit of Beſ [...] Sue and Kate,

Could never Trappan honeſt Harry.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

With Allowance.

## Appendix B

Printed, by P. L. for R. Burton at the Horſe-ſhoe in Weſt-ſmith-field.

[Home](/)

Date: 1697  

