## (unknown project)

# The faithful farmer, or, the down-right vvooing betwixt Robin and Nancy When
he had told her of his store, she could not him deny; alas, what could she
wish for more, then goods and loyalty. To the tune of, O mother, Roger, &c.
This may be printed, R.P.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Faithful FARMER, OR, The Down-right VVooing betwixt ROBIN and NANCY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=133133&page=1)

## 1\. The Faithful FARMER, OR, The Down-right VVooing betwixt ROBIN and
NANCY.

When he had told her of his ſtore,

ſhe could not him deny;

Alas, what could ſhe wiſh for more,

then Goods and Loyalty.

To the Tune of O Mother, Roger, &c.

### 1.1.

This may be Printed,

R. P.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

M [...] [...]ittle pritty youthful Nancy,

prithee ſit down by my ſide,

There is none but thee I fancy,

for to make my Lawful Bride:

I will make it well appear,

There's no Farmer far or near,

Has ſuch dainty curious Geer,

Is I have for thee my Dear:

Then prithee Nancy be not Coy,

Then alone ſhalt be my joy.

Give me thy Love, or elſe an Anſwer,

thou! art ſhe whom I adore,

Did not you know my good old Grandſir,

he has left me all his ſtore:

Love, I do proteſt and vow,

I have got a Cart and Plow,

Seven Pigs, beſides a Sow,

Deareſt, can you love me now?

Then prithee make no more ado,

If thou canſt love me tell me, true.

I have not told you half my treaſure,

love, my portion is not ſmall,

I have riches out of meaſure,

thou ſhalt be the Dame of all:

There's a Coffer cram'd with Gold,

Beſides Silver ſtill untold,

Alſo Sheep and Lambs in fold,

Moſt delightful to behold;

If thou to love art now inclind,

I prithee let me know thy mind.

He loved me his darling Robin,

making me his only heir,

Likewiſe left me Roan and Dobbin,

with his little bob-tail Mare,

When my Graudſir dy'd in peace,

Here he left me ten years leaſe,

With a flock of Ducks and Geeſe,

Which does daily ſtill increaſe,

And therefore now before you go,

If thou canſt love me tell me ſo.

Beſides, this is not all my Riches,

there's his good old Coat of Buff,

Mounteer Cap, and Buff-Skin Breeches

beſides all his Houſhold-ſtuff:

Pot and Pans, with Piggans too,

All I have i'le give to you,

Let us make no more ado,

For I hau't much time to wooe:

And therefore now before I go,

If thou canſt love me tell me ſo.

But Robin, wherefore ſhould you ſettle,

love upon ſo mean a Bride?

Here you talk of Corn and Cattle,

and of twenty things beſide:

Therefore when your friends ſhall know

That you do your ſelf beſtow,

On a fortune mean and low,

They will ſeek my overthrow,

Foe rather be a poor mans wife,

Then live a diſcontented life.

Sweet love, my Father and my Mother,

they to this will now agree,

For they ſay above all other,

thou wilt make a Wife for me:

Therefore deareſt be not coy,

_[figure]_

Let me now thy love enjoy,

As I am an honeſt Boy,

There is none ſhall thee annoy,

I'le tender thee both day and night,

And thou ſhalt have thy hearts delight.

I prithee Nancy don't deny me,

why are you ſo mild and mute,

If you are reſolv'd to try me,

let us make no more diſpute;

Love though I have this Eſtate,

As I freely do relate,

If thou wilt but be my Mate,

I'le forſake both Jone and Kate;

though they have Houſe & Land withal,

Yet thou art more to me then all.

The Damſel then that very hour,

her dear Robin did adore,

For ſhe then had not the power,

to deny him any more:

Then his Nancy he did lead

To his Fathers houſe with ſpeed,

Then their Parents all agreed,

That they ſhould in Love proceed:

Now they no more diſputing ſtand,

Reſolve to Marry out of hand.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

Printed for I Blare, at the Sign of the Looking-Glaſs on London-Bridge.

[Home](/)

Date: 1685-1688  

