## (unknown project)

# A briefe catechisme concerning church-governemnt. By that Reverend Divine
Mr. Iohn Robinson, and may fitly be adjoyned to Mr. Perkins six Principles as
an appendix thereto.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=1)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=1) A BRIEFE
CATECHISME CONCERNING CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT BY That Reverend Divine Mr. IOHN
ROBINSON, and may fitly be adjoyned to Mr. PERKINS ſix Prin­ciples as an
Appendix thereto.

‘1 TIM. 3. 14.Theſe things I write hoping to come unto thee ſhortly.’ ‘1 TIM.
3. 15.But if I tarry long, that thou mayſt know how thou oughteſt to behave
thy ſelfe in the houſe of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
pillar and ground of the truth.’

LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1642.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. AN APPENDIX TO Mr. PERKINS HIS SIX PRINCIPLES Of Chriſtian Religion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=2)

## 1\. AN APPENDIX TO Mr. PERKINS HIS SIX PRINCIPLES Of Chriſtian Religion.

VNTO the former Principles publiſhed by that Reverend man Mr. William Perkins,
fully containing what every Chriſtian is to beleeve touching God and himſelfe,
I have thought it fit for the good, eſpecially of thoſe over whom I am ſet,
(the younger ſort of whom I have formerly catechiſed in private, ac­cording to
the ſame Principles) to annex a few other, touching the more ſolemne
fellowſhip of Chriſtians, Rev. 2\. 7. 2 Cor. 6\. 16. Rom. 9\. 4. Act. 2\. 47.
Mat. 18\. 17. 18. 20. 2 Cor. 6\. 16. the Church of God, as being a divine
inſtitution, the ſpirituall Paradiſe and Temple of the living God; in which
his moſt ſolemne Services are to bee performed: and to which he addeth daily
ſuch as ſhall be ſaved; promiſing to dwell in the middeſt of them by his moſt
powerfull and gracious preſence.

### 1.1.

Queſtion. VVHat is a Church?

Anſ. A company of faithfull and holy people (with their ſeed) called by the
Word of God into publick co­venant with Chriſt, and amongſt them­themſelves
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=3) for mutuall
fellowſhip in the uſe of all the meanes of Gods glory and their ſalva­tion.

### 1.2.

Qu Of what ſort or number of people muſt this company conſiſt?

A. It is all one whether they be high or low, few or many, ſo as they exceed
not ſuch a num­ber, as may ordinarily meet together in M. 3. 28. Matth. 28\.
17. 19. one place for the worſhipping of God, and ſan­ctification of the Lords
day.

### 1.3.

Qu. What are the reaſons why the Church muſt conſiſt of faithfull and holy
perſons?

A. 1\. Firſt the 1 Cor. 11\. 17. 18. 20. &c. 14\. 23. Act. 20\. 7. Scriptures
every where ſo teach.

2\. The Levit. 20\. 26. Rom. 17\. 8. 1 Cor. 1\. 2. Phil. 1\. 1. to verſ. 9\.
[...]h Eoh. 1 22.  [...]col. 1\. 18. Church is the body of Chriſt, all whoſe
members therefore ſhould be conforma­ble in ſome meaſure to him their head.

3 Onely ſuch Iohn 4\. 23 Prov. 15\. 5. Hob, 8\. 8. 10. &c. worſhippers pleaſe
God as are accepted of him and have right to the covenant of grace and ſeales
thereof.

### 1.4.

Qu But are not hypocrites mingled with the faithfull in the Church?

A. None ought to bee by the word of God: and where ſuch are they are not truly
added by the Lord to the Church, but doe Iude. v. 2\. Eze. 44\. 7. creepe in
through their owne hypocriſie, and not with­out the Churches ſin alſo, if they
may bee diſ­cerned to be ſuch.

### 1.5.

Qu. By what meanes is the Church gathe­red?

A. Mat. 28 19. 20. Act 2\. 14. &c. & cap. 11\. 19. 20. 21. Rom. 1\. 5. 1 Cor.
15\. 1. By the word preached and by faith re­ceived of them that heare it.

### 1.6.

Qu. Is every beleever a member of the viſi­ble Church?

A Act. 19\. 1. and 5. 13 14. No Act. 2\. 21. 47. & Cap. 8\. 37. & 19\. 1. 9.
16. & 9\. 26 27. Act. 17\. 1, 2, 3, 4. with 1 Theſ. 1\. 1., but he muſt alſo
by his perſo­nall and publick profeſſion adjoyne himſelfe to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=3) ſome
particular fellowſhip and ſocietie of Saints.

### 1.7.

Qu. How prove you the Seed of the faithfull to be of the Church with them?

A. By the Gen. 17\. 7. &c. Luk. 1\. 72. 73. Gal. 3\. 8. 16, 17. covenant which
God made with Abraham and his ſeed: which was the co­venant of the Goſpell and
confirmed in Chriſt; the Rom 4\. 11 ſeale thereof circumciſion, being the
ſeale of the righteouſneſſe of Faith.

### 1.8.

Qu. What are the eſſentiall markes of the Church?

A. Col. 2\. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2\. 5. with 5. 1. 2. Faith and Order, as the Church
in them may be ſcene and beheld to walke in Chriſt Ieſus whom ſhee hath
received: Faith profeſſed in word and deed, ſhewing the Matter to bee true:
and Order in the holy things of God, ſhewing the Forme to bee true, which are
the two eſſentiall parts of the Church. As true matter and Forme, or two
eſſen­tiall parts of other things. As of a houſe, Temple, Taberna­cle. Exod.
2\. 6. 1. to 7.

### 1.9.

Qu. Are not the preaching of the word and adminiſtring of the Sacraments
certain marks of the true Church?

A. No: for the word may (and that rightly) be preached to aſſemblies of
unbeleevers for their converſion Mat. 28\. 19. Mar. 16\. 15. Act. 14\. 7. 14.
& 17\. 22. &c.: as may the Sacraments alſo (though unjuſtly) bee adminiſtred
unto them Gen. 34\. 24. Siche­mites. 2 Kings 17\. 25. 27. &c. Hoſ. 1\. 9. with
Pſal. 50\. 16. Rom. 9\. 4. 5., and ſo be made ſying ſignes. Beſides, the true
Church may for a time want the uſe of divers ordinances of God, but hath
alwayes right unto them; as may alſo the falſe Church uſurpe and abuſe them
but without right.

### 1.10.

Qu. What are the meanes in and by which Chriſt and the Church have fellowſhip
together?

A. 1 Cor. 12\. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1\. In the gifts of the Spirit of Chriſt. 2\. In
the offices of miniſtery given to the Church. 3\. In the workes done in and by
thoſe gifts and offices.

### 1.11.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=4)

Qu. Wherein ſtandeth this communion of the Spirit?

A. Eph. 2\. 12. & chap. 4\. 15. 16. Col. 3\. 19. In the in-dwelling and
operation of the gifts and graces thereof conveyed from Chriſt as the head,
unto the Church as his body, and mem­bers one of another: Whence ariſeth that
moſt ſtreit and divine conjunction, by which, as by the civill bond of
marriage, the man and wife are one fleſh: ſo they who are thus joyned to
Chriſt are one ſpirit 1 Cor. 6\. 17. Eph. 5\. 23. to 30, 31, 32..

### 1.12.

Qu. How many are the offices of miniſtery in the Church?

A. Five: (beſides the extraordinary offices of Apoſtles, Prophets and
Evangeliſts, for the firſt planting of the Churches, which are ceaſed, with
their extraordinary gifts.)

### 1.13.

Qu. How is that proved?

A. Partly by the Rom. 12 7. 8. 1 Ti. 3\. 1. 8 with 5. 3. 9. 17. Scriptures,
which both mention them expreſly, and deſcribe them by their principall gifts,
and workes: and partly by Reaſon agreeable to the Scriptures.

### 1.14.

Qu. Shew me which thoſe officers bee, with their anſwerable gifts and workes.

A. 1\. Eph. 4\. 11. Or the Ex­horter. Rom. 12\. 8. Or the Ex­horter. 1 Cor.
12\. 8 Rom. 12\. 7. 1 Tim. 5\. 17. The Paſtor, to whom is given the gift of
wiſedome for exhortation. 2. The Teach­er, to whom is given the gift of
knowledge for doctrine. 3. The governing Elder, who is to rule with diligence.
4. The Deacon, who is to adminiſter the holy treaſure with ſimplicitie. 5. The
Widow, or Deaconeſſe, who is to attend the ſick and impotent, with compaſſion
and cheerefulneſſe. Act. 6\. 1. 3 1 Tim. 3\. 8.  [...]0\. & cap. 5\. 3. 9. 10.
Rom. 16\. 1.

### 1.15.

Qu. What is the Reaſon for the proving of theſe miniſteries?

A. Becauſe all theſe are uſefull and neceſſary, and theſe alone ſufficient for
the Church; as be­ing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=4) the moſt
perfect ſocietie and 1 Cor. 12\. 27. Eph. 12\. 12.  [...] verſ. 19.  [...].
body of Chriſt, which neither faileth in that which is neceſſary, nor
exceedeth in any thing ſuperflu­ous.

### 1.16.

Qu. Whence ariſeth the uſefulneſſe and ſuffi­ciency of theſe miniſteries in
the Church?

A. From the condition partly of the ſoules, and partly of the bodies of the
members.

### 1.17.

Qu. How doth that appeare?

A. 1\. In the ſoule is the facultie of underſtan­ding, about which the Teacher
is to be exerciſ­ed Rom. 12\. 7. 8. for information by doctrine. 2. The will
and affections: upon which the Or Ex­horter, Ibidem. Paſtor is eſpecially to
work by exhortation and comfort. 3. Becauſe that doctrine and exhortation
with­out obedience, are unprofitable, the diligence of the ruling Elder is
requiſite for that pur­poſe.

### 1.18.

Qu. How are the other two Miniſteries to be exerciſed?

A. As the Church conſiſteth of men, and Act. 6\. 1. 3 and 4. 35. Gal. 6\. 6.
[...]. 1 Tim. 5\. 18. they of ſoules and bodies, ſo are the Deacons out of the
Churches treaſure, and contribution to provide for the common uſes of the
Church, reliefe of the poore, and maintenance of the Of­ficers; as are the
widowes to afford unto the ſick and impotent in body (not able otherwiſe 1
Tim. 5\. 3. 9. to help themſelves) their cheerefull and comfor­table ſervice.

### 1.19.

Qu. Wherefore call you thoſe Offices by the name of Miniſteries, or Services?

A. For two cauſes: 1. For that they are no Lordſhips, but ſervices of Chriſt,
and of the Mat. 20\. 25, 26, 27. 2 Cor. 4\. 5. 1 Cor. 4\. 1. & cap. 3\. 21,
22, 23. Church.

2\. Becauſe they conſiſt in adminiſtring only of thoſe things which are
Chriſts, and the Churches under him.

### 1.20.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=5)

Q. By whom are theſe Officers to have their outward calling?

A. By the Church whereof they are members for the preſent, and to which they
are to ad­miniſter.

### 1.21.

Q. How doth that appeare?

A. 1\. The Apoſtles who taught onely Chriſts Commandements, ſo directed the
Churches Act. 1\. 15. 23. & cap. 6\. 1. 2. 3. 5. & cap. 14\. 23. Greek. Act.
1\. 21. & 6\. 3. 1 Tim. 3\. 2, 3, 4, 5..

2\. The people amongſt whom they have been converſant can beſt judge of their
fitneſſe, both in reſpect of their Perſons and families.

3 It furthereth much the diligence and ſaith­fulneſſe of the Miniſter, that
they whoſe Mi­niſter hee is have freely choſen him, as un­to whom under Chriſt
they commit the moſt pretious treaſure of their ſoule: as alſo it binds Heb.
13\. 17. the people to greater love and conſcience of o­bedience of him and
his miniſtry, whom them­ſelves have made choyce of.

4\. The Church being a moſt free Corpo­ration ſpirituall under Chriſt the
Lord, is in Eph. 2\. 12. 19. all reaſon and equity to chuſe her miniſters and
1 Co. 12\. 27. 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Tim. 5\. 17 18. 1 Cor. 9\. 7. 9. Heb. 5\. 4, 5
ſervants under him unto whom alſo ſhee is to give wages for their ſervice and
labour.

### 1.22.

Qu. Is this outward calling of ſimple neceſ­ſity for a true Church officer?

A. Yea, as for the Magiſtrate in the City and Common-wealth; or ſteward in the
family: without which they uſurp their places, how excellent ſoever, whether
in their gifts or workes.

### 1.23.

Q. What if the Officer bee found unfaithfull in his place?

A. He is by the Church to bee warned to take heed to his miniſtery hee hath
received, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=5) to
fulfill it; which if he neglect to doe, by the ſame power which ſet him up, he
is to be Col. 4\. 17 put downe and depoſed. Being dealt with as a Bro­ther,
Math. 18\. 15. 17.

### 1.24.

Q. VVhat are the outward workes of the Churches communion with Chriſt

A. Theſe ſix: 1. Prayer. 2. the reading and opening of the VVord. 3. the
Sacraments. 4. ſinging of Pſalmes. 5. Cenſures. 6. con­tribution to the
neceſſity of the Saints.

### 1.25.

Qu. Wherefore put you prayer in the firſt place?

A. Becauſe by it all the reſt are ſanctified to the faithfull. For prayer ſee
the end of the 1\. Tim. 2\. 1. & 4, 5. fifth Principle with the expoſition:
onely adde this, that in the act of our ſpeaking unto God by prayer, wee are
not to uſe the helpe of Iude verſ. 20\. Zach. 12\. 10. Rom. 8\. 15. 26. any
booke, beades, crucifixes or the like, to teach or provoke us, but onely the
helpe of the ſpirit of adoption, and prayer, working in our hearts
effectually, and teaching us both what and how to pray as we ought.

### 1.26.

Qu. What believe you touching the word?

A. Beſides the things obſerved in the fifth Principle and Expoſition; that the
whole writ­ten Word, and it alone is to be read and opened in the Church.

### 1.27.

Qu. Wherefore are the whole Scriptures to be read and opened?

A. Prov. 30\. 5. Rom. 15\. 4. 2 Tim. 3\. 16 Becauſe the whole Word of God is
pure, written for our learning and comfort, given by divine inſpiration, and
is profitable for doct­rine, reproofe, correction and inſtruction, and from
which nothing may be Deut. 4\. 2. Rev. 21\. 19. diminiſhed,

### 1.28.

Qu. How prove you that the Scriptures on­ly are to be read, and opened in the
Church?

A. ſ Becauſe they alone are ſufficient for faith,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=6) 2 Rom. 16,
17. Heb. 11\. 6. Ioh. 20\. 31. 2. Tim. 3\. 16, 17. and the obedience which is
of Faith, and able to make the man of God perfit, throughly fur­niſhed unto
all good workes, and unto which nothing may Prov. 30\. 6. Deut. 4\. 3. Rev.
21\. 19. be added.

### 1.29.

Qu. Who are to open and apply the Scrip­tures in the Church?

A. Principally the Biſhops or Act. 20 17, 28. Tit 1\. 5, 7. Elders, who by the
Word of life are to feed the flock, both in teaching and government. Secondly,
ſuch as are out of office, in the exerciſe of Pro­pheſie.

### 1.30.

Qu. How is that exerciſe proved in the Scriptures?

A. By Luke 2: 42. 46, 47, & cap. 4\. 16, 17, 18. Act. 8, 4, & cap. 11\. 19,
20, 21, & cap. 13, 14, 15, 16. & cap. 18\. 24, 25, 26. examples in the Iewiſh
Church, where men though in no office, either in Tem­ple or Synagogue, had
liberty publiquely to uſe their gifts.

2 Luke 9\. 1. & cap. 10\. 1. g Rom. 2\. 6. 1, Pet. 4\. 10, 11. 1. Cor. 14\. 1.
By the Commandement of Chriſt and his Apoſtles.

3 By the prohibiting of 1\. Tim. 2\. 11, 12, 1, Cor, 14\. 34, 35. 11. Pet. 4\.
10, 11. women (not ex­traordinarily inſpired) to teach in the Church: herein
liberty being given unto men their huſ­bands, or others.

4 By the excellent ends, which by this meanes are to be obtained: as 1 Theſ.
5\. 19. 1 Tim. 3\. 2. 1 Cor. 14\. 35. The glory of God in the manifeſtation of
his manifold gra­ces. 2. That the gifts of the ſpirit in men be not quenched.
3. For the fitting and triall of men for the Miniſtery. 4. For the preſerving
pure of the doctrine of the Church, which is more endangered, if ſome one or
two alone may onely be heard, and ſpeake. 5. For debating and ſatisfying of
doubts, if any doe ariſe. 6. For the edifying of the Church, and converſion of
others.

### 1.31.

Qu. VVho is a Prophet in this ſence?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=6) A. He that
hath the gift of the ſpirit to ſpeake Act. 2, 42. Luke 4\. 22, 23. 1. Cor.
14\. 4. 24, 25. 1 Cor. 14\. 3. 37. Act. 13\. 15. unto edification, exhortation
and comfort.

### 1.32.

Qu. VVhat is the order of this exerciſe?

A. That it be performed af [...]er the publique Miniſtery by the teachers, and
under their di­rection and moderation: whoſe duty it is, if any thing be
obſcure to open it: if doubtfull to cleare it: if unſound to refuſe it: if
unperfit to ſupply what is wanting, as they are able.

### 1.33.

Qu. What believe you touching the Sacra­ments further then is obſerved in the
former Principles?

A. That they are to be diſpenſed according to the tenure of the Covenant of
grace, where­of they are ſeales: in reſpect both of the perſons to whom, and
of the ends for which they are to be adminiſtred.

### 1.34.

Qu. VVhich are thoſe perſons?

Gen. 17\. 7. 1 Cor. 7, 14. A. The faithfull and their ſeed.

### 1.35.

Qu. May all the faithfull partake in the Sacra­ments?

A. Act, 2, 41, 42. 47. Act. 5\. 13. 14, Rom, 9\. 4, Deut. 12, 5, 13. No,
except they be alſo added to ſome particular congregation, unto which the
pub­lique ordinances and Miniſtery doth apper­taine.

### 1.36.

Qu VVhich are the ends and uſes of the Sa­craments?

A. The firſt is from God to the Church, opened in the expoſition of the fifth
Principle, where it is ſhewed what a Sacrament is. The Gen. 17, 9, 10. ſecond
is from the Church to God, in which it teſtifieth the acceptance of the
Covenant, and bindeth it ſelfe to the performance of the conditions. The third
is in reſpect of the members themſelves mutually, as being bad­ges 1 Cor, 12,
13. Iudg. 14\. 4. of their aſſociation. The fourth in re­ſpect
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=7) of all other
Aſſemblies,Iudg. 14\. 4. betweene whom and the Churches, they are notes of
diſtin­ction.

### 1.37.

Qu. VVhat is required touching ſinging of Pſalmes in  [...]he Church?

A. That they be ſuch as are parts of the word of God, formed by the Holy Ghoſt
into Math, 26, 30. Eph. 5, 19. Col. 3\. 16. Pſalmes or Songs, which many may
conve­niently ſing together, exhorting and admoni­ſhing themſelves mutually
with grace in their hearts.

### 1.38.

Qu. VVhat believe you touching the cen­ſure of excommunication?

A. That it is to be uſed by every particular Church, according to the rules of
Chriſt.

### 1.39.

Qu. How prove you this power to be in e­very particular congregation?

A. 1\. By the donation and gift of Chriſt the Lord. 2. The particular Church
of Co­rinth Math. 18\. 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 5\. Rev. 2, & 3. had this power, for
the neglect whereof it is reproved by the Apoſtle. 3. Every par­ticular Church
hath right to the VVord, Sa­craments and Prayer, within it ſelfe, which are
greater, and therfore to this which is leſſer then they.

### 1.40.

Qu. VVhat are the rules of Chriſt for ex­communication?

A. 1\. The ſin thus to be cenſured muſt be Math. 18\. 15. 1 Cor. 5\. 11. Math.
18\. 15, 16, 17. 19. 1 Cor, 5\. 4. 5. 11. ſcandalous, and the perſon obſtinate
after due conviction and patience uſed.

2\. The Church excommunicating muſt bee that particular congregation gathered
together in the name of Chriſt, whereof the ſinner is a member.

### 1.41.

Qu. How prove you that by the Church Math. 18\. is not meant the Biſhop, or
Presbyte­ry [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=7)
repreſenting the body?

A. 1\. One man cannot be a Church, which as Chriſt teacheth, verſ. 19\. 20.
muſt be a com­pany, how ſmall ſoever, gathered together in his name.

2\. The word there uſed never ſignifieth in the Scriptures, an Officer or
Officers, excluding the people.

3\. The Apoſtle 1. Cor. 5\. expounds Chriſts meaning to be of the whole body
come toge­ther.

4\. The Elders being publique Officers, are to exerciſe the ſolemne workes of
their Office, and particularly the worke of rebuking them that ſinne, openly
and before the Church, both that others may feare, and the Church of Faith 1
Tim. 5\. 20. conſent to the excommunication: and there­fore cannot repreſent
the Church being actual­ly preſent.

5\. A Repreſentative Church in a caſe of faith and conſcience without the
conſent of the repreſented in the particular decree eſtabliſheth the Popiſh
doctrine of implicit Faith.

### 1.42.

Qu. What is the order of proceeding in this Cenſure?

A. That the Brother offending privately be admon [...]ſhed privately, and
after (without his Mat. 18\. 15. repentance) with a witneſſe or two who may
give teſtimony both of the offence and admo­nition and laſtly, that by the
brother admo­niſhing with his witneſſes, the ſinner (remai­ning obſtinate,)
complaint be made to the Church: which laſt complaint alone is ſuffi­cient in
publike offences.

### 1.43.

Qu. VVhat Order is to be obſerved after complaint thus made?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=8) A. The
Elders as the govenours of the Church, are by the Scriptures clearely to
convince, and ſeriouſly to admoniſh and exhort the offender: and upon his
impenitency (with due convicti­on and patience:) to decree againſt him the
ſentence of Excommunication: and laſtly, with the peoples free conſent to
pronounce and execute the ſame.

### 1.44.

Qu. How appeareth the neceſſity of this or­dinance?

A. Many wayes. 1. By the commandement of Chriſt, and practiſe of the
Apoſtolicall Mar. 18\. 15 1 Cor. 5\. 4. Churches.

2\. For the glory of Chriſt, which is much impeached by the prophaneſſe of
thoſe who pro­feſle Rom. 2\. 24. his ſervice.

3\. For the humbling of the ſinner, and for the ſalvation of his ſoule. 1 Cor.
5\. 5. verſ. 7. 8.

4\. To prevent the infection of others. Heb. 12\. 15.

5\. That by the zeale and holineſſe of the Church, they without may be gayned
to the Goſpell.

### 1.45.

Qu. How is the Church to walke towards a perſon excommunicated?

A. So as they may make him aſhamed by 2 Theſ. 3\. 6. 11. withdrawing from him
in all ſpirituall Com­munion, and ciuill familiarity alſo, ſo farre as may be,
without the violation of any naturall 1 Cor. 5\. 11 or civill bond.

### 1.46.

Q What is to be obſerved for the Chur­ches contribution?

A. That in their publique meeting every 1 Cor. 16\. 1. firſt day of the week,
they contribute, as God hath proſpered them, to the publique Treaſury, by the
Deacons to be received and diſtributed, as there is need, to the reliefe of
the poore, main­tenance Act. 5\. 1. Gal. 6\. 10. Rom. 15\. 26.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119633&page=8) of the
Miniſtery, and other neceſſary uſes of the Church firſt, and after of others
alſo, as need requireth.

‘And whoſoever will walke according to this rule, peace be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Iſrael of God, Galath. 6. 16.’‘1\. CANT. 6, 7, 8. Looke
not upon me becauſe I am black, becauſe the Sun hath looked upon me: my
mothers Children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vine­yards, but mine owne vineyard have I not kept.’‘Tell me (O thou whom my
ſoule loveth) where thou feedeſt, where thou makeſt thy flock to reſt at
noone: for why ſhould I be as one that turneth aſide by the flocks of thy
companions?’‘If thou know not (O thou faireſt amongſt women) go thy way forth
by the footſteps of the flocke, and feed thy kids beſide the ſhepheards tents.
Iſa. 60. 12, 13.’‘The Nation and Kingdome that will not ſerve thee, ſhall
periſh.’‘I will beautify the place of my ſanctuary, and will make the place of
my feet glorious. Pſal. 27. 4.’‘One thing I asked, &c.’

I. ROBINSON.

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1642  

