## (unknown project)

# The Rump roughly but righteously handled, in a new ballad to the tune of
Cook Lorrel.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE RUMP Roughly but righteouſly handled, In a New BALLAD:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163645&page=1)

## 1\. THE RUMP Roughly but righteouſly handled, In a New BALLAD:

To the tune of Cook Lorrel.

MOre ſacks to the Mill, here comes a freſh Wit,

That means without Mittens (as you ſhall ſee

To hundle a RUMP that's all to be ſhit,

Sir reverence of the company.

2\. And let other ſinners that love a whole Skin,

Keep out of my reach, for fear of a Stone;

For I'm like the Hang-man, who (when's hand was in)

Said he had as good truſs up fourty as one.

3\. Firſt I'le tell you whence this Rump-regnant came,

When England to Faction and Schiſm was bent,

By means of long peace to ſettle the ſame,

Our noble King ſummon'd a Parliament.

4\. A Parliament which may make old men grieve,

And Children that ne're ſhall be born complain;

I mean ſuch as dy'd before they did live,

Like Harrington's Rota, and th' Engin of Vane.

5\. This Parliament, like a wild skittiſh Tit,

Unman'd and unback't, and unapt to obey,

Would let neither Prince, Peer, nor Prelate ſit,

Yet ſtammell nos'd OLIVE [...] ſmelt out a way.

6\. With Piſtol and Muſquet he brought the Beaſt under,

And aw'd [...]it ſo much, and ſo far did prevail,

That camely he dock't it, and (to all mens wonder)

He caſt off the Colt, and ſadled the Tail:

7\. Which ſhortly began to kick at's Command,

And reſtive it grew, and left its true pacing,

Which made him reſolve on his own Legs to ſtand,

And turn the RUMP out of the Stable a graſing.

8\. The Red-coats, with breath like my Ladys Bum-blaſt,

This Parliament-ſnuff blew twice out and in:

But North and Weſt-winds will ſo out it at laſt,

That nought but Hell fire ſhall out it agen,

9\. Though now they tempt Monk with a thouſand per annum

In hopes that to worſhip, his face hee'l fall flat on;

Yet he's wiſe enough to reſiſt and diſdain 'em,

And cry, Get behind me, thou Bob-tail of Satan.

10\. Right pat with St. Georg's this ſtory will jump,

Poor Englands the Damſel appointed for ſlaughter,

And Monk the St. George to kill Dragon RUMP,

And ſafely reſtore to the King his fair Daughter.

11\. The RUMP thus in groſs no more ſhall be plaid on,

But now I will whet my Pen (if it pleaſe ye)

To joynt it, and ſhew what foul parts it is made on,

God grant that your ſtomachs prove not over-queaſie.

12\. Here's Lenthall once Mouth to the Parliament's mind,

Though he at length acted the Fundaments part,

Whoſe ſpeech was not breaking of ſilence, but Wind,

And's giving the Thanks of the Houſe, but a Fart.

13\. 'Tis ſaid he's now ſick, and if't be the POX,

I'de wiſh him in time his Diſeaſe to diſcloſe,

And call Dr. Ba [...]s, who's ex'lent at Nocks,

Although his skil failed him in his own Noſe.

14\. Or let Jeſuitical  [...]ri [...]an be got,

Of whoſe crabbed Humors the Doctors come ſhort all

And as for Sir Walter Py [...], he had not

Dy'd under his hands, had he been immortal.

15\. But if his Gold-greedy Soul wil be gon

Out at Poſtern Gate, he hath 'mong his Wayters

At Cat-in-pan Pedant the way to make known

To th' General Rendezvous of all Traytors.

16\. But many I find this Opinion are firm in,

That he has no real diſtemper at all,

But feigns it; and like a prophetical Vermin,

Runs from an old Houſe that is ready to fall.

17\. If Ludlow the ſtate of Grace had been in,

And kept himſelf ſafe fro' th' Committee of Safety,

For's Fathers ſake, Deputy Fart he had been,

Inſtead of the F [...]rſt, they call  [...] the G [...]afty.

18\. Next comes the Rump's God-flye, the John-like driver,

King-abjuring ARTHUR; Sir, you (if I ken you)

O'th' Biſhop's Vriah-like fall were Contriver,

To get the fair Berſheba of their Revenue.

19\. But 'twas a more carnal concupiſcence

That at Briſtol-Vicaridge ſet you a neighing,

Which you enjoyd and occupyd in the ſence

Which puts-pretty Maids to piſhing and fying.

20\. Nay you like the Trojan-Adulterer ſwore

To thoſe that once ſaved you from the Kings Fury,

That rather then Helen of Dureſm reſtore,

Their Troynovani in its own aſhes you'd burn.

21\. But I dare no farther his paſſion provoke

For fear of a prejudice which it may do me,

For with his own Choler ſhould he chance to choke,

The Hang-man in Action of Treſpaſs might ſue me.

22\. Then have at Sir Harry the Int'reſt Refiner,

Who's not of the Church, but Society of JESUS,

And can make Divinity's ſelf-Diviner,

And model new Heavens and new Earths to pleaſe us.

23\. Twas he that injected the ſublimed matter

To late-Lady Lambert, and ſhe to th' Squire,

Which made him Protector and Parliament-hater,

And to be Fift Monarch devoutly aſpire.

24\. Like Grub from Sheeps tayls ſince the Rump doth him throw,

He'le creep to ſome placket of Sanctification,

And come forth a Fleſh-flye next Summer, and blow

New Maggots in's Church, of more whimſical faſhion.

25\. Methinks in his eyes the Waters do gather,

As if the Lord Staffords Duſt troubled his ſight;

Perhaps he repents, and intends (like his Father)

Ev'n in his own Garter to do his Ghoſt right.

26\. There goes the twice treacherous Banquerout Sallaway

From Weſtminſter Wolves, to Tow'r Lions bound,

Cauſe he from one Treaſon to another did fall away,

And wil fall again, but not quite to the ground.

27\. The next is a politick pen-man that got-land

By [...]s Knavery more then his birth, and 'tis his-hope

That Laembeth ſhal ever and ever be Scot-land,

And Seat of an Arch-one, but not of a biſhop.

28\. Here's Nevil, (who to be made in Scot's ſtead,

A State-Secretary) did practice a New art,

To th' Office, by Letters (unto the Houſe read)

He courted himſelf in the name of Charls Stuart.

29\. Now ſee with a POX, where Martin comes on,

The Seed of corrupt and ſinful Loyns,

Who a Worthy had been, if as neer Solomon

In Wiſdom, as number of Concubines.

30\. If in utter darkneſs there ſhould be a failing

of Horror, the RUMP may furniſh it with

Squire Fleetwood to help out the weeping and wailing,

And Sir William Brereton for gnaſhing of teeth.

31\. Now Mildmar, and Whitlock, and L [...]ſ [...] I might call in,

And Maſter Lord Salesbury (from noble houſe,

Who ſeems not deſcended, ſo much as down fallen)

And others, which well may ſerve a freſh Muſe.

32\. And now the RUMP's ſet in the Salt, and Monk▪

Hath offer'd full fairly his own for to make it,

But finding himſelf by the Devil out-drunk,

He honeſtly cryes, Nay then let him take it.

33\. But for 'em when hence they go, (ſuch were their follies

Above nor beneath, there no quiet place is,

King Charls is in heaven, in hel tyrant NOL is,

Who (as God us'd Fleetwood) wil ſpit in their faces.

34\. Now mark what ſweet Morſels Hel ſwallowed of late,

Theres Cromwel, and Prideaux, and Bradſhaw, and theres

He that made Old Nick (when he enterd his Gate)

Cry, Oh my Son Pride, are you there with your Bears?

35, And now I no longer wil rake in this ſink,

But ſhortly the RUMP is for Tiburn, and then

Ile tel you mo [...]e of it; but you (as I think)

Do now ſtop your Noſes, and Ile ſtop my pen.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

