## (unknown project)

# The Rump serv'd in with a grand sallet. Or, A new ballad, to the tune of the
blacksmith.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Rump ſerv'd in with a Grand Sallet. OR, A NEW BALLAD,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163727&page=1)

## 1\. The Rump ſerv'd in with a Grand Sallet. OR, A NEW BALLAD,

To the Tune of the Blacksmith.

1.

POetical Muſes have fallen heavy as a Mallet,

Upon the Poor RUMP for diſguſting their Pallet,

To cure the Diſrelliſh take now a Grand Sallet.

Which no body can deny.

2.

This RUMP is deriv'd by lineal deſcent,

As the undoubted Heir, and excrement,

Of the yet perpetual Parliament.

Which, &c.

3.

This was ſuch an Idol, as the Zelots did ſtrain

Their Purſes and Conſciences for to maintain,

Though it prov'd both of Church and Kingdome the Bane.

Which, &c.

4.

The Tail of the Dragon's not ſo bad as this RUMP,

Which hath three ſuch Kingdomes woren to the very Stump,

And muſt leave them for the time a confuſed Lump.

Which, &c.

5.

Our Laws, Lives, Lands, Liberties, were upon ſale

By this everlaſting RUMP, Fag-end, or Tail,

Yea to ſave our very Souls they refus'd to take bail.

Which, &c.

6.

A Tail which was eaten up almoſt of the Pox,

That ſtunck more like Carion, than ever did Fox,

Or that which was roſted of late at the Stocks.

Which, &c.

7.

A RUMP that the People did hate, ſcorn, and curſe,

As a Devil incarnate, or of ſomewhat that's worſe,

Of Schiſme and Rebellion both Mother and Nurſe.

Which, &c.

8.

The Orthodox Clergy they forc'd for to fly,

They were plunder'd, and ſequeſter'd without reaſon why,

But only becauſe that they could not comply.

Which, &c.

9.

Then as guilty of Popery the Common Prayer Book was dam'd,

And with all kind of News-books the Churches were cram'd,

Venting Lyes, Non-ſence, Blaſphemy, and what's not to be nam'd.

Which, &c.

10.

Then the ancient order of Biſhops went down,

Which in the Church Chriſtian was ever of Renown,

The Proverb proves true, No Miter, no Crown.

Which, &c.

11.

In whoſe ſtead were planted Elders and Presbyters,

Which impowr'd, break Princes, and people in fitters,

And with their Claſſes and Aſſes them all to beſquitters.

Which, &c.

12.

They call'd then a Synod which ſcarce could agree

I'th'ſpace of three years whether there be a TRINITIE,

From ſuch pur-pure-blind Levites GOD bleſs you and me.

Which, &c.

13.

That Aſſembly was juſt like the Members that choſe it,

Without Learning and Honeſty, all the World knows it,

Fit Jakes-farmers for the RUMP, they could twang and noſe it.

Which, &c.

14.

They combin'd with the Scots to bring in a Directory,

Tending neither to our Good, nor yet to Gods Glory;

'Tis a ſhame that Tom Fuller ſhould name't in Church-ſtory.

VVhich, &c.

15.

For whereas a Chriſtian ſhould be taught how to pray,

And both rightly to believe, and humbly to obey,

Nor Lords Prayer, nor Creed, nor Decalogue have they.

Which, &c.

16.

Then curſe ye Meroz, in each Pulpet did thunder,

To perplex the poor people and keep them in wonder,

Till all the Reins of Government were broke quite aſunder.

Which, &c.

17.

Then Saint Pauls the Mother-church of this City and Nation,

Was turn'd to a Stable, O ſtrange profanation!

Yet this was one of the beſt fruits of their Reformation.

Which, &c.

18.

Of all that is Chriſtian they make no great matter,

So they may but gather, they care not who ſcatter;

Their Triers would approve none but ſuch as bribe and flatter.

Which, &c.

19.

In ſtead of an Uſe of Divine Conſolation

Theſe Hypocrites publiſht a late Exhortation

To trepan and beggar this City and Nation.

Which, &c.

20.

If they be eſtabliſh'd, bid England farewell,

And rather than live here i'th' Suburbs of Hell,

Chooſe Turkey, or Tartarie, or any where to dwell.

VVhich, &c.

21.

This Form will ne're ſuit with the Engliſh Complexion

Which is free and too Heroick to yield baſe Subjection,

Or to take from a Pope in each Pariſh correction.

Which, &c.

22.

Who ever did Lord it like theſe Self-ſeeking Elves,

Which have forc'd us on Covenants, Vows, Oaths, & other ſhelves,

That ſhould warn us for the future to look to-our ſelves.

VVhich, &c.

23.

All ſober Men know that 'tis a miſchievous Fate,

A Kingdome to turn into a popular State,

And Epiſcopacy into a Presbyterate.

Which, &c.

24.

Yet the Parliament ſet up the pure Members five,

Both of Church and Kingdome the Downfall to contrive,

That by the Ruins of our Sion this their Babel might thrive.

Which, &c.

25.

The Presbyters Three Years were long ſince expir'd,

And yet, as if they had not our Patience quite tir'd,

To ſpur-gall us ſtill they have afreſh conſpir'd.

VVhich, &c.

26.

Then why ſo many Bonfires of late in the City?

Why ſuch ringing of Bells, and rejoycing? 'Tis pity

That ye ſhould be ſo gull'd by the Rump, that do's out-wit ye.

VVhich, &c.

27.

For the Houſe is like Hydra, if one Head ye kill,

Another ſtarts up, and another full as ill;

So, though one Rump is gone, yet another ſits ſtill.

Which, &c.

28.

They have alter'd the Scene, the People to pleaſe,

Becauſe in Commotions they muſt them appeaſe;

We have thus chang'd our Bed, but not our Diſeaſe.

VVhich, &c.

29.

Their ſhifting and ſhuffling is but to decoy us,

While Spiders do ſpin, their Cob-webs annoy us,

If the Houſe be n't ſwept clean, ere long they'l deſtroy us.

VVhich, &c.

30.

If they mean as they talk of a Parliament free,

How comes it that ſuch Qualifications we ſee,

That no one known ROYALIST can choſen be?

VVhich, &c.

31.

The beſt things corrupted do ever prove worſt,

Then that the next, Parliament make amends for the firſt,

Let's chooſe no more Zelots, leſt in peices we burſt.

VVhich, &c.

32.

For when as the Schiſmaticks 'th' Houſe do prevail,

Then the Head and all the Members are led by the Tail,

So that all parts in doing their Duty needs muſt fail.

VVhich, &c.

33.

Let the Militia be ſetled ere you part with your Money,

Elſe you'l find them gall and wormwood whom you take for honey,

And the Souldiers will inſult o're as ſoon as they 've undone ye.

VVhich, &c.

34.

'Tis believ'd the three Generals, Fairfax, VValler, and Brown,

Are ſorry now for what they once helpt to pull down,

And 'tis hop'd they'l redeem it by Deeds of Renown.

VVhich, &c.

35.

We are ſenſible now that there is no one thing

Can full Satisfaction to all Intereſts bring

But onely CHARLES the Second, our known lawful KING.

VVhich, &c.

36.

Let's dally no longer, but like Brittains let's ſtand

For GOD and KING CHARLES, and the Laws of the Land;

Let's up and be doing, let's do't out of Hand.

Which no body can deny.

## Appendix A

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

