## (unknown project)

# Strange news from Ireland, or, A true and perfect relation of a famous fish
taken at Kingsale the manner of its taking, and description of its horrible
shapes / as it was certified in a letter from one Mr. Robinson, living in
Kingsale, (an eye-witness) to Mr. John Davie a relation of his, living in
Westminster.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=1)

STRANGE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, A true and perfect RELATION Of a Famous FISH
Taken at KINGSALE.

The manner of its taking, and deſcription of its horrible Shapes; as it was
certified in a Letter from one Mr. Robinſon, living in Kingſale, (an Eye-
witneſs) to Mr. John Davis a Relation of his, living in Weſtminſter.

With Allowance.

Ro. L'Eſtrange.

London: Printed for C. N. 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=2)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=3)

## Table of contents

  * 1\. STRANGE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, A true and perfect Relation Of a famous FISH Taken at KINGSALE.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=3)

## 1\. STRANGE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, A true and perfect Relation Of a famous
FISH Taken at KINGSALE.

ON the 26th of July laſt, one Thomas Davis and Andrew Simpſon being at Four a
Clock in the Morning about their ho­neſt [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=4) vocation of
Fiſhing, in which they laboured an hour to no purpoſe; but at length they
perceived afar off ſomewhat move in the water, of an unu­ſual ſhape and
bigneſs; upon which they made unto it, but as ſoon as it ſaw them it dived
down into the water: ſo that after a tedious and vain ſearch, they returned
back to the Town and informed one Mr. Rocke, a reſponſible Inhabitant there,
of what they had ſeen; who with Three of his Servants came forth with Muskets
char­ged, one ſtanding on the ſhore, and the other two in the Boat with the
Fiſher-men, with whom alſo was Mr. Rocke. They [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=4) had not long
rowed about the River, but they again perceived its head popping up and down,
at which they diſcharged their Pieces, but to little effect: For it dived
again out of their view, and did not appear in an hours time after; but upon
its riſing again they ſhot it into the back; whereupon it made with all
poſsible ſpeed towards land, where (though with great dif­ficulty) it was
taken.

The deſcription of its parts is as follows.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=5) On the
head of this wonder­ful Creature (which can be no nearer reſembled to any
thing, than the head of a man) was long black Hair: its Face had the exact
ſhape of a Lion; ſo terrible and grim, that it ſtruck terrour on all that
beheld it. It had two fore-feet like thoſe of a Bull, cloven; its hinder feet
being like unto an Eagles Talons, with very long and ſharp Nails; ſo that
where Na­ture commonly orders Fins, there were perfect Feet of o­ther
Creatures of a clean con­trary Element. His mouth was guarded with three long
ſharp Horns, with which when he [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=5) was on Land he ſo
dangerouſly wounded one of the foreſaid Mr. Rock's ſervants in the thigh, that
he remains very ill of the ſame, inſomuch that his Reco­very is much doubted
by all, notwithſtanding the Advice and Aſsiſtance of the moſt skil­ful
Chirurgeons in thoſe parts. On its Back was the perfect re­ſemblance of an
Hour-glaſs, and the appearance (as ſome fancied) of a Spade and Deaths head,
to the amazement of all its Spectators.

It is in length Twelve Foot, and Five in bredth.

On each ſide its Breſt are two Paps, like unto thoſe of wo­men.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=6) Its Belly
is ſmooth, being be­ſpeckled with ſpots of divers colours.

When this Letter came away it was not quite dead, though it had been much
wounded; but is with much ado brought into the aforeſaid Town of Kin­ſale,
where it now remains the Wonderment of all its nume­rous beholders.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=152429&page=6)

[Home](/)

Robinson, Mr.. Date: 1677  

