## (unknown project)

# A pleasant new song between a seaman, and his love. Shewing, though at the
first in misery his time he spent he met his love at last, with joy and sweet
content. The tune is Robin the devil.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A pleaſant new Song between a Seaman, and his Love. SHEWING, 

[[Page 481]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=183171&page=1)

## 1\. A pleaſant new Song between a Seaman, and his Love. SHEWING,

Though at the firſt in miſery his time he ſpent

He met his love at laſt, with Joy and ſweet content.

The Tune is Robin the Devil.

_[figure]_

WHen Sol could caſt no light,

but darkned over,

And the dark vayles of night

the Sky doth cover:

A River running by

where Ships were Sayling,

A pretty Maid I ſpy'd,

weeping and wailing.

I ſtept unto her, and ſaid,

ſweet-heart what grieves thee?

She quickly anſwer made,

none can relieve me:

My Dear by force, quoth ſhe,

in Wars doth wander,

Long abſence makes me mourn,

death is Commander.

This ſeven long years and more

he me affected,

We parted on the Shore

with hearts Contracted:

He promiſed to turn again,

if God life lent him,

Which makes me ſigh and mourn

death hath prevent him.

A Man then comming by,

ſtruck her amazed,

Gave her a Token rare,

on which ſhe gazed:

Is my Love come, quoth ſhe,

doth he come near me?

But ſtill the Man reply'd,

be pleaſed to hear me.

Your Love and I did fight

under one Banner,

Maintaining England's right,

purchaſing Honour:

Till he receiv'd a blow,

your hopes being  [...]ur [...]ed,

There he got his deaths ſtroke,

not to be Cured.

Witneſs I can afford,

no Man ſtood néerer,

I ſaw him ſingled out,

here ſtands the Bearer:

Preſſing among the throng,

with Reſolution;

His enemies ſo ſtrong

wrought his confuſion.

[...]Dear receiv'd a ſtroke,

and his brain broken,

theſe words then he ſpoke,

carry this Token

[...]o ſhe whom I affect,

and none more dearer,

[...]ſhing her to reſpect,

and love the Bearer.

[...]our Dear in Grave doth lye

in ſumptuous manner,

Where we will let him lye,

in Beb of Honour:

[...] his Right I am ſent,

[...]our Love to crave it,

his laſt Teſtament,

ſweet ſhall I have it.

Mad, like one in deſpair,

fuming and fretting,

She mourns and tears her hair,

on her breaſt beating:

My D [...]ſteny I may ban,

and all that hears me,

Still crying to the Man,

do not come near me.

This for an anſwer take,

what ever chances,

I will mourn for his ſake,

and mine offences:

Sad black ſhall be my weed,

like to my fortune,

[...]ence it doth cut the thread,

and my life ſhorten.

Like to Phenelephe's joy,

or the ſad Queen of Troy,

So ſhe cry'd out this day,

I am bereft of joy,

And never man again,

ſhall company bear me,

Still crying with diſdain,

Do not come near me.

Of all his former Love,

he me aſſured,

By all the Powers above,

he me conjured:

Of all his promiſe made,

when we laſt parted,

To me he gave his Right,

be not faint-hearted.

His Garments he threw off,

which him diſguiſed,

That when ſhe knew her Love,

Lord how ſhe praiſed:

Betwixt ſad joy and mirth

roſe ſuch a paſſion,

Which caus'd no great deni [...]

unto the Queſtion.

Sweet heart come tell m [...]

ſince our firſt meeting,

How I did Act my part

in counterfeiting?

Neat and brave, Sir,

you might gain Ri [...]

If you could Dol [...]

as well as Spe [...]

Thrice happy be the W [...]

that hither broug [...]

More happy be the  [...]

on ſhore did land  [...]

Welcome to me, ſhe  [...]

then fair Alexander,

Or ever Hero was

unto Leander.

Like to Penelope [...]

to wanton Venus,

My Love, kind heart, to thee

ſhall be ingenious:

Welcome to me, ſhe ſaid,

then fair Amarillis,

Or ever worthy Guy

was to fair Phillis.

When paſtime it was done,

and all things neatly,

With joy they came along,

ſ [...]inging this Ditty;

Singing moſt jovely

till they were weary,

Thou haſt been long away,

wellcome home Deary,

By Cuthbert Birket.

Finis.

[Home](/)

Birket, Cuthbert.. Date: 1670  

