## (unknown project)

# Cupids tragedy: Eibng [sic] Corydon's courtship; or, Philomels exaltation.
Tothe [sic] tune of, The new Bory; or, Will you be a man of fashion.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Cupids Tragedy: EIBNG Corydon's Courtſhip; Or, Philomels Exaltation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=181814&page=1)

## 1\. Cupids Tragedy: EIBNG Corydon's Courtſhip; Or, Philomels Exaltation.

To the Tune of, The new Bory; Or, Will you be a Man of Faſhion.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

[...]

[...]

PRitty Phillomel was ſo Charming,

ſo much ſweetneſs grac'd each part:

All her actions ſo allarming,

ſo much goodneſs in her heart:

That who ever ſaw this fair one,

needs her Votary muſt be:

She, ah! ſhe, is Natures dear one,

and I fear no leſs to me.

Every ſmile was ſo betraying,

in each look a Plot ſhe laid:

This I knew, yet was obeying,

though I ſaw each Ambuſcade.

And, to ſhew my forward duty,

needs muſt venture in her ſight,

Till her Centinels of Beauty

ſtruck me blind with too much light.

In this Tranſport, like a creature,

with too ſudden joy o'recome,

Gaz'd upon this lovely Creature,

till with extaſie ſtruck dumb:

Yet my poſture did diſcover

that I was her humble Slave,

And I found ſhe lik'd her Lover,

by a Signal that ſhe gave.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

WHen I ſaw my Pardon granted.

ſtreight I did approach her han [...]

Kiſt and ſigh'd, and ſigh'd and panted,

all my ſences were at ſtand:

Then ſhe laught, and plainly told me

I more manly would appear:

And carreſs a Nymph more boldly,

if that Phillis were but there.

But if Corydon will leave her,

Phillis need not to deſpair,

Young Alexis will receive her,

and your Choice will be leſs fair.

Search the Groves and every Bower,

ſet the Nymphs all on a row:

Phillis is of a [...]l the Flower,

and does bend the ſharpeſt Bow.

Ah, ſaid I, divineſt Creature,

that the Powers above e're made:

Do not wrong the Gods and Nature,

but repent of what you've ſaid:

Phillis does not think ſo vainly,

for to give the Maid her due:

Oft ſhe's ſaid the Gods that made you,

does admire themſelves in you.

Coridon, quoth ſhe, your praiſes,

if you love do not diſpleaſe:

But I know a Shepherds phraſes

can diſſemble a Diſeaſe:

If my Beauty has the power

to attract to brave a Swain:

Walk with me to yonder Bower,

I will gratifie your aim.

Strephon all this while lay panting

in a Cave, where he could hear

Her too eaſie heart conſenting,

what he begg'd for many a year.

Out he ruſht from forth the Thicket,

with his Iavelin he run

In poor Coridon did ſtrike it,

dye, ſaid he, thou happy Man.

When poor philomel ſaw him bleeding,

ſtretcht along upon the ground:

From her eyes the tears ſucceeding,

with which ſhe waſht the bloody wound.

Wrung her hands, and tore her hair,

ſigh'd that ever ſhe was born:

Coridon, quoth ſhe, my Dear,

do not leave me thus forlorn.

Thus poor philomel in diſtraction

call'd on her lov'd Coridon:

Pray'd the Gods for ſatisfaction,

thorough her heart a Poniard run.

Thus, ſaid ſhe, the Gods deliver

thoſe that in true love do joyn:

Thine, dear Coridon, thine for ever,

thou in life and death art mine.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-ball, in Weſt-ſmithfield.

[Home](/)

Date: 1670-1696?  

