## (unknown project)

# Have-at a venture. The charms of love so powerful are, what mortal can
withstand, or, who can say oppose they dare where Cupid bears command. This
damsel quickly she did yield the youngsters skill to try, the twinkling archer
won the field, and then she down did lye. Tune of, Hey boys up go we.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Have-at a Venture.

[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=183371&page=1)

## 1\. Have-at a Venture.

The Charms of love ſo powerful are,

What mortal can withſtand,

Or, who can ſay oppoſe they dare

Where Cupid bears command,

This Damſel quickly ſhe did yield

The youngſters skill to try,

The twinkling Archer won the Field,

And then ſhe down did lye.

Tune of, Hey boys up go we.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

A Countrey Lad and bonny Laſs

they did together meet,

And as they did together paſs

thus he began to greet:

What I do ſay I pray mind well,

and thus I do begin:

If you would have your Belly ſwell

Hold up, and I'l put in.

Oh! Sir, (quoth ſhe) I love the ſpo [...]t,

yet am afraid to try,

And for your love I thank you for't,

find but conveniency:

My mind I'le tell you by and by,

your love my heart doth win,

And preſently I down will lie,

Oh! then Boy put it in.

He claſp'd this Damſel round the waſte,

and ſoftly laid her down,

Yea, wantonly he her imbrac'd

and her delights did Crown:

Thruſt home (quoth ſhe) my brisk young Lad,

'tis but a venial ſin,

For I ſhould ſoon have run quite mad

had you not put it in.

The ſport he did ſo cloſe purſue

that he was quickly tired,

But when he did her beauty view

his heart again was fired:

He came on with ſuch freſh ſupplies,

he did her favour win,

And finding Babies in her eyes,

he bravly thruſt it in.

_[figure]_

What pleaſure is there like to this,

this Damſel then did cry,

I've heard them talk of lovers bliſs,

Oh! what a foole was I

So long to live a maid, e're I

did this ſame ſport begin;

This death I now could freely dye:

I prithee thruſt it in.

She held this Youngſter to his task

till he began to blow;

Then at the laſt he leave did ask

and ſo ſhe let him go:

Then down he panting lay a while,

and rouzing up agen

She charm'd him with a lovely ſmile,

again to put it in.

To work he went moſt earneſtly,

her fancy to fulfill;

Till at the laſt ſhe loud did cry,

I do't with ſuch good will,

I pleaſure feele in e'ry Vein;

my joys do now begin,

Oh Deareſt quickly to't again,

and ſtoutly thruſt it in.

She ſeem'd at laſt to be content,

and glad at heart was he,

His Youthful ſtrength was almoſt ſpent,

ſo brisk a Laſs was ſhe:

He vow'd he never was ſo match'd,

nor ne'r ſhall be agen:

And for that time they both diſpatch'd,

though he had put it in.

But when ſhe from him parted was

thus ſhe began to cry,

Was ever any wanton Laſs

in ſuch a caſe as I:

He that hath got my Maiden-head

I ne'r ſhall ſee again,

And now my heart is almoſt dead,

to think he put it in.

But yet it had the ſweeteſt taſte

that ever mortal knew,

Our time we did not vainly waſte,

believe me this is true:

Should I e're ſee my bonny Lad,

I'd venture once again,

And let the world account me mad,

again I'le put it in.

## Appendix A

Printed for J. Wright, J. Clark, W Thackery and T. Paſſenge.

[Home](/)

Date: 1681-1684?  

