## (unknown project)

# Love in the blossome: or, Fancy in the bud. Containing a pretty, pleasant
and delightful courtship, betwixt two very young (but truly amorous) lovers,
being persons of very eminent quality, (at their first entrance into Cupid's
school.) To the tune of, Amarillis told her swain. / J.P.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Love in the Bloſſome: Or, Fancy in the Bud.

[[Page 315]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=183459&page=1)

## 1\. Love in the Bloſſome: Or, Fancy in the Bud.

Containing a Pretty, Pleaſant and Delightful Courtſhip, betwixt two very Young
(but truly Amorous) Lovers, being perſons of very Eminent Quality, (at their
firſt entrance into Cupids School.)

To the tune of, Amarillis told her Swain.

J. P.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

ONe Summer evening freſh and fair,

Walking out to take the Ayre,

Near to the Court, where Gallants ſport,

I carefully did wander,

VVhereas in State, two Lovers ſate

Like Hero and Leander.

It was under a pleaſant ſhade,

VVhere this prety Couple plaid

They did not fear to be betray'd

Nor had not yet eſpi'd me,

To hear them prattle down I laid,

And cloſely I did hide me.

They were both of tender age,

In loves affairs for to ingage,

Yet Cupids craft, with feather'd ſhaft

Had wounded them at diſtance,

No humane art can cure the ſmart,

In vain was their reſiſtance.

This young Gallant▪ stripling ſate

By his loving Lady-mate,

And amorouſly began to prate

He had both time and leiſure,

VVith kiſſes ſweet, their lips did meet,

VVherein they took great pleaſure.

She in Cloth of Gold did ſhine,

And her Beauty ſeem'd divine,

I often wiſht ſhe had been mine

Fain would I be his Taſter;

But not one bit, that I could get,

Twas meat fit for my Maſter.

Having now both time and place

Lovingly for to imbrace,

This Gallants care, was to prepare

The Art of Love to ſhow her:

Then near I ſtept and cloſely crept,

And thus I heard him woe her.

DEareſt Love and Lady mine,

Let our hearts in one combine,

VVithin your breſt, my ſoul doth reſt

Great Cupid hath betray'd me:

To kill or cure, 'tis in your power

Your Captive he hath made me.

At your mercy now I lie,

Grant me Love or elſe I die,

By virtue of your eye;

Dear heart in love I languiſh,

Then be not coy my only joy

But heal me of my anguiſh.

_[figure]_

Then ſhe made this ſweet reply

A ſtranger unto Love am I,

Good Sir forbear, let me not hear

Of bondage at this ſeaſon:

The Ciprian Boy ſhall not deſtroy

My freedome and my Reaſon.

But if ever I ſhould prove,

Subject to the God of Love,

Methinks my mind is ſo inclin'd

Your Courtſhip is ſo moving,

No one but you, whom I do know,

Shall teach me th' art of loving,

Then he was quick to ſpeak again,

Whileſt his hopes afreſh remain;

He ſometimes kiſt, and ſometimes miſt

According as ſhe ſtrugled.

But had they ſtai'd, i'me half afraid

His  [...]o [...]es he would have doubled.

Now to break off their delight

They ſaw coming in their ſight

Another pair, both freſh and fair

Of ſpruce and amorous Lovers;

And being met, they made no let

But all their love diſcovers.

Then they walked hand in hand,

Subject all to loves command:

I could not lye but up got I

To ſee ſome further ſport Sir,

'Twas almoſt dark, when ore the Park

I ſee them paſs toth' Court Sir.

Then I wiſht that I had there

Such a pretty Lady near

To court and kiſs, to hit and miſs,

As others had been wooing;

But all in vain I might complain,

For I could not be doing.

[Home](/)

Playford, John, 1623-1686?. Date: 1670  

