## (unknown project)

# Robin Hood's rescuing Will Stutly, from the sheriff and his men, who had
taken him prisoner, and were going for to hang him, &c. To the tune of, Robin
Hood and Queen Catherine, &c.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. ROBIN HOOD's Reſcuing WILL. STƲTLY, From the Sheriff and his Men, who had taken him Priſoner, and were going for to Hang him, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=174586&page=1)

## 1\. ROBIN HOOD's Reſcuing WILL. STƲTLY, From the Sheriff and his Men, who
had taken him Priſoner, and were going for to Hang him, &c.

To the Tune of, Robin Hood and Queen Catherine, &c.

Licenſed and Entered according to Order.

_[figure]_

WHen Robin Hood in the green wood ſtood,

derry, derry, down,

Vnder the green wood tree,

Tydings there came to him with ſpeed,

Tydings for certainty,

hey down, derry, derry, down:

That Will. Stutly ſurprized was,

And eke in priſon lay,

Three Varlets that the King had hir'd,

Did likely him betray:

Ay, and to morrow hang'd muſt be,

To morrow as ſoon as 'tis day;

But before they could this victory g [...]t,

Two of them did Stutly ſlay.

When Robin Hood he heard this news,

Lord he was grieved ſore,

Ay and to his merry Men he ſaid,

Who altogether ſwore,

That Will. Stutly ſhould reſcued be,

And be brought back again,

Or elſe ſhould many a gallant Wight,

For his ſake there be ſlain.

He cloathed himſelf in ſcarlet then,

His Men were all in green,

A fairer ſhow throughout the World,

In no place could be ſeen.

Good Lord, it was a gallant ſight,

To ſee them all on a row,

With every Man a good broad ſword,

And eke a good yew-bow,

Forth of the green wood they are gone,

Yea, all couragiouſly,

Reſolving to bring Stutly home,

Or every Man to d [...]e:

And when they came the Caſtle ne [...],

Whereas Will. Stutly lay

I hold it good, ſaid Robin Hood,

We here in ambuſh ſlay;

And ſend one forth ſome news to hear,

To yonder Palmer fa [...]e,

That ſtands under the Caſtle wall,

Some news he may declare.

With that ſteps forth a brave young Man,

Which was of courage bold,

Thus he did ſay to the old Man,

I pray thee, Palmer old,

Tell me if that thou rightly  [...]en,

derry, derry, down.

When muſt Will. Stutly dye;

Who is one of Bold Robin's Men,

And here doth Priſoner lye;

hey down, derry, derry, down.

Alas, alas, the Palmer ſaid,

derry, derry, down,

And for ever woe is me,

Will. Stutly hang'd will be to day,

On yonders gallow-tree;

hey down, derry, derry, down.

O had his Noble Maſter known,

He would ſome Succour ſend,

A few of his bold Ycomandre

Full ſoon would fetch him hence.

Ay, that is true, the young Man ſaid,

Ay, that is true, ſaid he;

Or if they were near to this place,

They ſoon would ſet him free.

But fare thou well, thou good old Man;

Farewel, and thanks to thee;

If Stutly hanged be this day,

Reveng'd his death will be.

He was no ſooner from the Palmer gone,

But the gates was opened wide,

And out of the Caſtle Will. Stutly came,

Guarded on every ſide.

When he was forth of the Caſtle come,

And ſaw no help was nigh,

Thus he did ſay unto the Sheriff,

Thus he ſaid gallantly,

Now ſeeing that I needs muſt dye,

Grant me one boon, ſaid he,

For my Noble Maſter ne'r had Man,

That yet was hang'd on tree:

Give me a ſword all in my hand,

And let me be unbound,

And with thee and thy Men i'll fight,

Vntil I lie dead on the ground.

But this deſire he would not grant,

His wiſhes were in vain,

For the Sheriff had ſworn he hang'd ſhould be,

And not by the ſword be ſlain.

Do but unbind my hands, he ſays,

I will no weapons crave,

And if I hanged be this day,

Damnation let me have.

O no, no, the Sheriff, he ſaid,

Thou ſhalt on the gallows dye;

Ay, and ſo ſhall thy Maſter too,

If ever in me it lye.

O daſtard Coward, Stutly crys,

Thou faint-hearted Peaſant-ſlave,

If ever my Maſter do thee meet,

Thou ſhalt thy payment have.

My Noble Maſter thee doth ſcorn,

And all thy cowardly Crew,

Such ſilly Imps unable are

Bold Robin to ſubdue.

But when he was to the gallows come,

And ready to bid adieu,

Out of a buſh ſtepts Little John,

And ſteps Will. Stutly too,

I pray thee Will, before thou dye,

Of thy dear Friends take leave:

I needs muſt borrow him a while,

How ſay you, Maſter Sheriff?

Now as I live, the Sheriff ſaid,

That Varlet will I know,

Some ſturdy Rebel is that ſame,

Therefore let him not go.

With that Little John ſo haſtily

Away cut Stutly's hands,

And from one of the Sheriff's Men

A ſword twicht from his hands,

Here Will, take thou this ſame,

Thou canſt it better ſway,

And here defend thyſelf a while,

For Aid will come ſtraightway.

And there they turn'd them back to back;

In the middle of them that day,

Till Robin Hood approached near

With many an Archer gay.

With that an arrow by them flew,

I wilt from Robin Hood:

Make haſte, make haſte, the Sheriff he ſaid,

Make haſte, for it is good.

The Sheriff is gone, his doubtleſs Men

Thought it no boot to ſtay,

But as their Maſter had them taught,

They run full faſt away.

O ſtay, O ſtay, Will. Stutly ſaid,

Take leave e're you depart;

You ne'r will catch Bold Robin Hood,

Vnleſs you dare him meet.

O ill betide you, ſaid Robin Hood,

That you ſo ſoon are gone,

My ſword may in the ſcabbard reſt,

For here our work is done.

I little thought, Will. Stutly ſaid,

When I came here to this place,

For to have met with Little John,

Or ſeen my Maſter's face.

Thus Stutly was at liberty ſet,

And ſafe brought from his Foe:

O thanks, O thanks to my Maſter,

Since here it was not ſo.

And once again, my Fellows dear,

derry, derry, down.

We ſhall in the green woods meet,

Where we will make our bow-ſtrings twang,

Muſick for us moſt ſweet;

hey down, derry, derry, down.

## Appendix A

London: Printed by and for W. O. for A. M. and ſold by the Bookſellers of Pye-
corner and London-bridge.

[Home](/)

Date: 1700  

