## (unknown project)

# Robin Hood's delight: or, A merry combate fought against Robin Hood, little
John and Will. Scarlet, and three stout keepers in Sherwood Forrest. To the
tune of, Robin Hood and Queen Katherine, or, Robin Hood and the shepherd.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Robin Hood's Delight: OR, A merry Combate fought againſt Robin Hood, little John and Will. Scarlet, and three ſtout Keepers in Sherwood Forreſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=181985&page=1)

## 1\. Robin Hood's Delight: OR, A merry Combate fought againſt Robin Hood,
little John and Will. Scarlet, and three ſtout Keepers in Sherwood Forreſt.

To the Tune of, Robin Hood and Queen Katherine, or, Robin Hood and the
Shepherd.

_[figure]_

THer's ſome will talk of Lords and Knights

down a down a down,

And ſome of Yeomen good,

But I will tell you of Will. Scarlet,

Little John and Robin Hood.

They were Outlaws, as 'tis well known,

down a &c.

And men of a noble blood;

And many a time was their valour ſhown

In the Forreſt of mercy Sherwood.

Vpon a time it chanced ſo,

down a &c.

As Robin would have it be,

They all three would a walking go,

Some paſtime for to ſee.

And as they walkt the Forreſt along,

down a &c.

Vpon a Midſummer day,

There was he aware of three Forreſters

Clad all in green array.

With brave long Faulchions by their ſides,

down a &c.

And Forreſt-Bills in hand,

They call'd aloud to thoſe Outlaws

And charged them to ſtand.

Why who are you, cry'd bold Robin,

down a &c.

That ſpeaks ſo boldly here?

We three belong to King Henry,

And are Keepers of his Deer.

THE Devil thou art ſaid Robin Hood,

down a &c.

I am ſure it is not ſo:

We be Keepers in this Forreſt,

And that you ſoon ſhall know.

Your Coats of green lay on the ground,

down a &c.

And ſo will we all three,

And take your ſwords and bucklers round,

And try the Victory.

We be content the Keepers ſaid,

down a &c.

We be three and no leſs,

Then why ſhould we of you be afraid,

And we never did tranſgreſs.

Why if you be the Keepers in this forreſt,

down a &c.

Then we be three Rangers good,

And we'l make you know before you do go

You met with bold Robin Hood.

We be content thou bold Outlaw,

down a &c.

Our valour here to try,

And will make you know before we go,

We will fight before we will fly.

Then come draw your ſwords you bold Outlaws,

down a &c.

And no longer ſtand to prate,

But let us try it out with blows,

For Cowards we do hate.

Here is one of us for Will. Scarlet,

down a &c.

And another for little John,

And I my ſelf for Robin Hood,

Becauſe he is ſtout and ſtrong.

So they fell to it full hardy and ſore,

down a &c.

It was on a Midſummers day,

From eight a clock till two and paſt,

They all ſhew'd gallant play.

There Robin and Will. and little John,

down a &c.

They fought moſt manfully,

Till all their wind was ſpend and gone,

Then Robin aloud did cry.

O hold, O hold, cries bold Robin,

down a &c.

I ſee you be ſtout men,

Let me blow one blaſt with my beagle horn,

Then i'le fight with you again.

That bargin is to make bold Robin Hood,

down a &c.

Therefore we it deny:

Though a blaſt upon thy beagle horn

Cannot make us fight nor flye.

Therefore fall on or elſe be gone,

down a &c.

And yield to us the day,

It ſhall never be ſaid that we were afraid

Of thee nor thy Yeomen gay.

It that it be ſo, cryes bold Robin,

down a &c.

Let me but know your names,

And in the Forreſt of mercy Sherwood

I ſhall extoll your Fames.

And with our names one of them ſaid,

down a &c.

What haſt thou here to do?

Except that thou will fight it out,

Our names thou ſhalt not know.

We will fight no more, ſays bold Robin,

down a &c.

You be men of valour ſtout,

Come and go with me to Nottingham,

And there we will fight it out.

With a Butt of Sack we will bang it out,

down a &c.

To ſee who wins the day,

And for the coſt make you no doubt,

I have gold and money to pay.

And ever hereafter ſo long as we live,

down a &c.

We all will brethren be,

For I love thoſe men with heart and hand,

That will fight and never flee.

So a way they went to Nottingham,

down a &c.

With Sack to make amends,

For three days ſpace they wine did chaſe,

And drank themſelves good friends,

down a down a down a down.

## Appendix A

Printed for William Thackery at the Angel in Duck lane.

[Home](/)

Date: 1685  

