## (unknown project)

# Robin Hood, Will. Scadlock and Little John or, A narrative of their victory
obtained against the Prince of Aragon, and the two giants: and how Will.
Scadlock married the princess. Tune of, Robin Hood; or, Hey down, down a down.
Licens'd and enter'd.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Robin Hood, Will. Scadlock and Little John OR, A Narrative of their Victory obtained againſt the Princ• of Aragon, and the two Giants: and how Will. Scadlock married th• Princeſs.

[[Page 358]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=183105&page=1)

## 1\. Robin Hood, Will. Scadlock and Little John OR, A Narrative of their
Victory obtained againſt the Princ [...] of Aragon, and the two Giants: and
how Will. Scadlock married th [...] Princeſs.

Tune of, Robin Hood; or, Hey down, down a down.

Licens'd and Enter'd.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

NOw Robin Hood, Will. Scadlock and Little John,

are walking over the plain,

With a good fat buck which Will Scadlock

with his ſtrong bow had ſlain.

Iog on, jog on, cries Robin Hood,

the day it runs full faſt,

For though my Nephew me a breakfaſt gave,

I have not yet broke my faſt.

Then to yonder lodge, let us take our way,

I think it wondrous good,

Where my Nephew by my bold Yeomen,

ſhall be welcom'd unto the green-wood.

With that he took the bugle-horn,

full well he could it blow:

Streight from the woods came marching down

one hundred tall Fellows and mo.

Stand, ſtand to your arms, crys Will. Scadlock,

lo the Enemies are within ken.

With that Robin Hood he laugh'd aloud,

crys, They are my bold Yeoman,

Who when they arriv'd, and Robin eſpy'd,

[...] cry'd, Maſter, What is your will?

We thought you had in danger been,

your horn did ſound ſo ſhrill.

Now nay, now nay, quoth Robin Hood,

the danger is paſt and gone,

I would have you to welcome my Nephew here,

that hath paid me two for one.

In feaſting and ſporting they paſſed the day,

till Phoebus ſunk into the deep;

Then each one to his quarters hy'd,

his guard there for to keep.

Long had they not walked within the green-wood,

but Robin he was eſpy'd

Of a beautiful Damſel all alone,

that on a black palfrey did ride.

Her riding-ſhit was of ſable hew black,

[...]preſs over her fa [...]e,

Though which her roſe-like cheeks did bluſh

all with a comely grace

Come tell me the cauſe, thou pritty One,

quoth Ro [...]in, and  [...]e [...]l me a right,

From whence thou comeſt, and whither thou goeſt,

all in this mournful plight?

From London I came the Damſel reply'd,

from London upon the Thames,

Which circled is O grief to tell,

beſieg'd with forraign Arms:

By the proud Prince of Aragon,

who ſwears by his martial hand,

To have the Princeſs to his Spouſe,

or elſe to waſte this Land:

Except that Champions can be found,

that dare fight three to three,

Againſt the Prince and Giants twain,

moſt horrid for to ſee:

Whoſe griſſy looks, and eyes like brands,

ſtrike terrour where they come,

With ſerpents hiſſing on their helms,

inſtead of feathered plume.

The Princeſs ſhall be the Victor's Prize,

the King hath vow'd, and ſaid,

And he that ſhall the conqueſt win,

ſhall have her to his Bride.

Now we are four Damſels ſent abroad

to the Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South,

To try whoſe fortune is ſo good,

to find theſe Champions forth.

But all in vain we have ſought about,

yet none ſo bold there are,

That dare adventure life and blood,

to free a Lady fair.

When is the day  [...] quoth Robin Hood,

tell me this, and no more.

On Midſummer next, the Damſel ſaid,

which is  [...]une the twenty four.

[[Page 359]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=183105&page=1)

With that the tears trickſed down her checks,

and ſilent was her tongue,

With ſighs and ſobs, ſhe took her leave,

away her palfrey ſprung.

This News ſtruck Robin to the heart,

he fell down on the graſs,

His action and his troubled mind,

ſhew'd he perplexed was.

Where lies your grief? quoth Will. Scadlock,

O Maſter tell to me;

If the Damſels eyes have pierc'd your heart,

I'll fetch her back to thee.

Now nay, now nay; quoth Robin Hood,

ſhe doth nor cauſe my ſmart,

But it is the poor diſtreſſed Princeſs,

that wounds me to the heart.

I will go fight the Giants all,

to ſet the Lady frée.

The Devil take my ſoul, quoth Little John,

if I part with thy company.

Muſt I ſtay behind? quoth Will. Scadlock,

no, no, that muſt not be;

I'll make the third Man in the fight,

ſo we ſhall be three to three.

Theſe words cheer'd Robin at the heart,

joy ſhone within his face,

Within his arms he hugg'd them both,

and kindly did unbrace.

Quoth he, We'll put on mothly gray,

with long ſtaves in our hands,

A ſcrip and bottle by our ſides,

as  [...]ome from the Holy Land:

So may we paſs along the high-way,

none will ask from whence we came,

But take us Pilgrims for to be,

or elſe ſome Holy-men.

Now they are on their journey gone,

as faſt as they may ſpeed,

Yet for all haſt, e're they arriv'd,

the Princeſs forth was led,

To be deliver'd to the Prince,

who in the Liſt did ſtand,

Prepar'd to fight, or elſe receive

his Lady by the hand.

With that he walkt about the liſts,

with Giants by his ſide,

Bring forth, quoth he, your Champions,

or bring me forth my Bride:

This is the four and twentieth day,

the day perfixt upon;

Bring forth my Bride, or London burns,

I ſwear by Acaron.

Then cries the King and Queen likewiſe,

both weeping as they ſpeak,

Lo, we have brought our Daughter dear,

whom we are forc'd to forſake.

With that ſtept out bold Robin Hood,

crys, My Liege, it muſt not be ſo,

Such Beauty as the fair Princeſs,

is not for a Tyrant's  [...]ow.

The Prince he then began ſtorm,

crys, Fool, Fanatick, Baboon,

How dares thou ſtop my Valour's Prize?

I'll kill thee with a frown.

Thou Tyrant, Turk, thou Infidel,

thus Robin began to reply,

Thy frowns I ſcorn, lo here's my gage,

and thus I thee defie:

And for thoſe two Goliahs there,

that ſtand on either ſide,

Here are two little Davids by,

that ſoon can tame their pride.

Th [...] did the King for armour ſend,

for lances, ſwords and ſhields;

And thus all three in armour bright

came marching to the field.

The trumpets began to ſound a charge,

each ſingled out his Man,

Their arms in pieces ſoon were hew'd,

blood ſprang from every vain:

The Prince he reacht Robin a blow,

he ſtruck with might and main,

Which forc'd him to re [...]l about the field,

as though he had been ſlain.

God-a-mercy, quoth Robin, for that blow,

the Quarrel ſhall ſoon be try'd

This ſtroke ſhall ſhew a full divorce,

betwixt thee and the Bride.

So from his ſhoulders he's cut his head,

which on the ground did fall,

And grumbling ſore at Robin Hood,

to be ſo dealt withal.

The Giants then began to rage,

to ſee their Prince lie dead;

Thou's be the next, quoth Little John,

except thou well guard thy head:

With that his faulchion be wherl'd about,

it was both keen and ſharp.

He clove the Giant to the belt,

and cut in twain his heart.

Will. Scadlock well had play'd his part,

the Giant he brought to his knee,

Quoth he, The Devil cannot break his faſt,

unleſs he have you all three:

So with his faulchion he run him through,

a deep and gaſhly wound,

who dam'd and foam'd, curſt and blaſphem'd,

and then fell to the ground,

Now all the liſts with ſheets were fill'd,

the skies they did reſound,

Which brought the Princeſs to herſelf,

who was fal'n in a ſwound.

The King, and Queen, and Princeſs fair,

came walking to the place,

And gave the Champions many thanks,

and did them further grace.

Tell me, quoth the King, whence you are

that thus diſguiſed came,

Whoſe valour ſpeaks that noble blood

doth run through every vain?

A boon, a boon, quoth Robin Hood,

on my knees I beg and crave.

By my Crown, quoth the King, I grant,

ask what, and thou ſhalt have.

Then pardon I beg for my merry Men,

which are within the green-wood,

For Little John, and Will. Scadlock,

and for me bold Robin Hood,

Art thou Robin Hood then? quoth the King,

for the valour you have ſhown,

Your pardons I do freely grant,

and welcome every one.

The Priceſs I promiſed the Victor's Prize,

ſhe cannot have you all three:

She ſhall chuſe, quoth Robin; ſaith Little John,

Then little ſhare falls to me.

Then did the Princeſs view all three,

with a comely lovely grace,

Who took Will. Scadlock by the hand,

quoth, Here I make my choice.

With that a noble Lord ſ [...]ept forth,

of Maxfield Earl was he,

Who lookt Will. Scadlock in the face,

then wept moſt bitterly:

Quoth he, I had a Son like thee,

whom I lov'd wondrous well,

But he is gone, or rather dead,

his name is young Gamwell.

Then did Will. Scadlock fall on his knees,

cries, Father, Father, here,

Here kneels your Son, your young Gamwell,

you ſaid you lov'd ſo dear.

But, Lord! what inbracing and kiſſing was there,

when all theſe Friends were met:

They are gone to the wedding, and ſo to bedding,

and ſo I did you good night.

## Appendix A

LONDON: Printed by and for W. O. and are to be ſold by the Bookſellers.

[Home](/)

Date: 1700  

