## (unknown project)

# The vvitty damsel of Devonshire: or, A dialogue between a mother and her
daughter, concerning Robin the miller whom the daughter hated, and resolved to
marry William the plowman whom she dearly loved. Tune of Here I love, there I
love: or, The two English travellers. Licensed according to order.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE VVitty Damſel of Devonſhire:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=182070&page=1)

## 1\. THE VVitty Damſel of Devonſhire:

OR, A Dialogue between a Mother and her Daughter, concerning Robin the Miller
whom the Daugther hated, and reſolved to marry William the Plow­man whom ſhe
dearly Loved.

Tune of Here I Love, there I Love: Or, The two Engliſh Travellers.

Licenſed according to Order.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

DEar Daughter come hither and hear what I ſay,

VVhen do you intend to be Married I pray,

Poor Robin the Miller lies ſick fo [...] your ſake,

Some pity of him I would have you now take.

He vow [...] that he loves you as dear as his life,

And has a deſire to make you his wife;

Then do not be cru [...]l dear Daughter, ſaid ſhe;

For why, he lo [...] none in the Nation but thee.

I  [...]ill not believe him dear Mother ſhe cry'd,

Th [...]e's Prudenc [...] young Bridget, nay Suſan beſide,

Nay Nelly, and Nancy, likewiſe Bonny Kate,

All theſe youthful Lad [...]es he courted o [...] late.

As ſoon as their Innocent Hearts were betray'd,

He never regarded the Vows that he made;

Now if he do's languiſh, i'faith let him dye,

I know he is given to flatter and lye.

My d [...]ar loving Daughter I an't of that mind,

I'm certain he never can prove ſo unkind;

Afford him all kindneſs and love that you can;

you'll find this poor Miller a right Honeſt Man.

His life I would have you endeavour is ſave,

For why ſhould you ſend him with Sighs to the Grave;

Poor heart he doth languiſh and cry day night,

That you are reſolved to ruin him quite.

His ſtrange Proteſtetions I vow and declare,

Are none but ſelf-notions young Maids to enſnare;

Therefore I'll have nothing to do with him then,

Theſe Millers I know to be falſe hearted Men.

His death I am certain we need never fear,

For Loyal to any he ne'er did appear;

Young Laſſes he now courts a Store and above,

Then hang him dear Mother he'll ne'er dye for love.

Beſides I muſt tell you his calling I hate,

And never deſire to live at that rate,

Before the Toll-diſh my Apparel ſhall give,

I will ſtay a Maiden as long as I live.

I wonder dear Daughter you ſhould be ſo coy,

Both Riches and Pleaſure you ſoon would enjoy,

Beyond your Three Siſters Kate, Dolly and Joan

For Robin you know has a Mill of his own.

Likewiſe he has three or four Acres of Land,

And al [...]o good Silver and Gold at command,

He tells me that you ſhall be Dame of his ſtore,

Now think of this Daughter, what man can ſay more.

I care not a Fig for his ſilver and Gold,

Tho' he had as much as my Apron could hold,

Nor yet do I value his owning a Mill;

If ever I wed it ſhall be honeſt Will.

His living he gets by the ſweat of his Brow,

Sometimes by his Thraſhing then Harrow and Plow,

By honeſt hard labour he lives true and juſt,

But Millers you know they are Thieves as the beſt.

I value not Robin, nay Richard nor Ralph,

If  [...] am with William m [...] thinks I am ſafe,

For why to his Honour, nay Glory and Fame,

We now have a right valiant King of his Name.

But as for the Robins it never was know,

That they were thought worthy to come near the throne,

Then Heavens preſerve all the Williams therefore

It being the Name which I dearly adore.

Her Mother immediately made this Reply;

Let Robin the Miller with languiſhing dye,

With theſe prety ſayings my Heart you have won,

I will have a William likewiſe to my ſon.

## Appendix A

Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and I. Back.

[Home](/)

Date: 1688-1692?  

