---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A defence of the doctrine propounded by the synode at Dort against Iohn
Murton and his associates, in a treatise intituled; A description what God,
&c. With the refutation of their answer to a writing touching baptism. By Iohn
Robinson.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=1)

A DEFENCE OF THE DOC­TRINE PROPOVN­DED BY THE SYNODE AT DORT: AGAINST IOHN
MVRTON AND HIS ASSOCIATES, IN A Treatise intuled; A Description what God, &c.
WITH THE REFVTATION OF their Answer to a Writing touching BAPTISM. By IOHN
ROBINSON.

Printed in the year, 1624.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=2)

## THE PREFACE.

THE record which the Apostle bare the Iews Rom. 10. 2. in his time; such as
either reade these mens wri­tings, or know their persons may bear them; which
is, that they haue a zeal of God, but not accor­ding to knowledg, I add
touching them, nor in modesty neither. Which if it held any place in their
hearts, as were meet, would moderate and restrain both their causlesse
presumption in themselvs, and gracelesse licentiousnesse which they fear not
to use, both towards God, and other men.

They would seem very zealous for the Scriptures purity and perfection:
vvarning all to take heed they presume not aboue Epistle to the Reader▪ what
is written; nor to add to, or diminish from the perfect law of the Lord
contained therin: And yet they themselvs presume so frequently, and
notoriously in this their book, to corrupt the ve­ry words of the Texts which
they cite, by adding to, and taking away, and altering, for their advantage;
as I suppose, the like hath not been seen before in any, of any sect
whatsoever: and as if, in truth, they meant not to use a gift to interpret the
holy Scriptures, but a pri­viledg to correct them. A taste of this they giue
us in their very Epistle, where answering an objection taken from the learning
of the Synode at Dort, by Es. 29. 14, & Math. 11. 25. 26, they, in­stead of
wise and prudent, which are Christs words, put learned, and that in small
letters as part of the Text, both wronging therin that lawfull and helpfull
learning in others, which themselvs want, and corrupting the Lords words,
which they ought religiously to keep; and obtruding another meaning then ever
came into his mind: which they doe usually in this Treatise, by neglecting the
main scope of the place cited, and catching at a word or phrase in it▪ which
is the highest way, that can be, to all heresie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=3)And for men,
how uncharitable are they towards them in their persons, judging them as
perishing without remedie, if they receiv not their new Gospell of Anabatistry
and Free-will? How injurious in relating their own mis-formed collections, for
their opinions? And lastly, how contemptuous of their gifts and graces, how
eminent so­ever? As if the word of God came out from them, or to them 1 Cor.
14. 38. alone. It is true, we ought not to pin our faith on the sleevs of any,
nor to call any Master, as Christ speaks and means, but him alone: and no
lesse true, that Christ hath given gifts to some men, for the edifying of
others; and that we ought not to look on our Eph. 4. 8. 11. things alone, as
if we alone had knowledg and conscience, and zeal, and soules to saue: but
every man also of the things of others (though in some things differing from
them) as having thesePhil. 4. 4. things, as well as we: and therwith
considering, that many eies see more then one, and that specially having, as
so many spectacles, the advantages of knowledge of Tongues, and Arts, with
daily tra­vail in the Scripture, which in us are wanting. And thus serving
God, in all modesty of minde, and being sincere in the truth Act. 20. 19 Eph.
4. 15. in loue, we shall be much sitter, both to help others, and to be helped
by them in the things agree­able thereunto.

## Table of contents

  * THE PREFACE.
  * 1\. CHAP. I.
    * 1.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.2. DEFENCE.
    * 1.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.4. DEFENCE.
    * 1.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.6. DEFENCE.
    * 1.7. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.8. DEFENCE.
    * 1.9. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.10. DEFENCE.
    * 1.11. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.12. DEFENCE.
    * 1.13. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.14. DEFENCE.
    * 1.15. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.16. DEFENCE.
    * 1.17. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.18. DEFENCE.
    * 1.19. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.20. DEFENCE.
    * 1.21. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.22. DEFENCE.
    * 1.23. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.24. DEFENCE.
    * 1.25. ADVERSARIES.
    * 1.26. DEFENCE.
  * 2\. CHAP. II.
    * 2.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.2. DEFENCE.
    * 2.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.4. DEFENCE.
    * 2.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.6. DEFENCE.
    * 2.7. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.8. DEFENCE.
    * 2.9. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.10. DEFENCE.
    * 2.11. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.12. DEFENCE.
    * 2.13. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.14. DEFENCE.
    * 2.15. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.16. DEFENCE.
    * 2.17. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.18. DEFENCE.
    * 2.19. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.20. DEFENCE.
    * 2.21. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.22. DEFENCE.
    * 2.23. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.24. DEFENCE.
    * 2.25. ADVERSARIES.
    * 2.26. DEFENCE.
  * 3\. CHAP. III.
    * 3.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 3.2. DEFENCE.
    * 3.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 3.4. DEFENCE.
    * 3.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 3.6. DEFENCE.
    * 3.7. ADVERSARIES.
    * 3.8. DEFENCE.
  * 4\. CHAP. IIII.
    * 4.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 4.2. DEFENCE.
    * 4.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 4.4. DEFENCE.
    * 4.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 4.6. DEFENCE.
  * 5\. CHAP. V.
    * 5.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 5.2. DEFENCE.
    * 5.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 5.4. DEFENCE.
    * 5.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 5.6. DEFENCE.
  * 6\. CHAP. VI.
    * 6.1. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.2. DEFENCE.
    * 6.3. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.4. DEFENCE.
    * 6.5. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.6. DEFENCE.
    * 6.7. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.8. DEFENCE.
    * 6.9. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.10. DEPENCE.
    * 6.11. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.12. DEFENCE.
    * 6.13. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.14. DEFENCE.
    * 6.15. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.16. DEFENCE.
    * 6.17. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.18. DEFENCE.
    * 6.19. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.20. DEFENCE.
    * 6.21. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.22. DEFENCE.
    * 6.23. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.24. DEFENCE.
    * 6.25. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.26. DEFENCE.
    * 6.27. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.28. DEFENCE.
    * 6.29. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.30. DEFENCE.
    * 6.31. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.32. DEFENCE.
    * 6.33. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.34. DEFENCE.
    * 6.35. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.36. DEFENCE.
    * 6.37. ADVERSARIES.
    * 6.38. DEFENCE.
  * Appendix A Courteous Reader, take knowledge that (the Author being absent) through oversight these faults (mostly materiall) haue escaped, which I pray thee correct as thou readest: if more thou findest, impute them to hastie oversight.

# [[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=3)A DEFENCE
OF THE DOCTRINE PROPOVNDED BY THE SY­NODE AT DORT.

## 1\. CHAP. I.

Of Predestination.

### 1.1. ADVERSARIES.

WEE hold, that before the foundation of the Pag. 3. world, the most holy God
predestinated to make the world, and man. &c.

### 1.2. DEFENCE.

NEither the Scriptures so speak; neither is it sensibly said, that God
predestinated to make the world and man &c. To predestinate, is to
predetermine, or to destinate, or ordain before hand, a person, or thing to
its end. God indeed pur­posed from eternity to make the world, and man; but
desti­nated it, and him, considered as (to be) made, to their ends. Christ as
God was preordained or predestinated before the foun­dation 1 Pet. 1. 1 [...]
▪ 20. of the world, and manifested in the last times for our redemption; yet
is he not of the number of persons or things [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=4) made or created.
Again, the glory of the grace of God, shine­ing in mans salvation, is a
created thing, and yet not predesti­nated of God, nor preordained to any end,
being it selfe the utmost end of all things. We see then something
predesti­nated, and yet not made; and something again made, and  [...]ot
predestinated. With like incongruity they adde, that God predestinated to make
man a reasonable soule, to giue him a righte­ous Law, and lastly, to send his
sonne to purchase the very wicked, &c. which last words haue neither truth in
them (in their meaning;) nor sense, as they lay them down.

Secondly, the Synode at Dort, against which these Adversa­ries deal, and all
others, speaking distinctly of things, apply the decree of predestination, to
reasonable creatures: and that Synode specially to men, and the same
considered, as faln its Synod Dor. Art. 6. 15, of divine providence. Adam, and
thereby made guilty of eternall death; referring the decree of creation, and
permission of the fall, to a more general work of divine providence.

Their description of the elect, and reprobate may be admit­mitted, in a good
sense: namely, that the receiving of grace by some, argues Gods eternall
election of them, as the effect doth the cause. The not receiving of this
grace by others, to whom it is offered, his eternall reprobation; that is, his
not-electing, but refusing or passing by of others, as the consequent, the
antecedent. Of which, more hereafter.

In setting down the difference between them and us, theyPag. 4. 5. insinuate,
as if we made God the Authour, yea, the principall Authour of all the evill of
sin in the world. But as the Synode disclaims that prophane errour, so doth it
justly complain of this ungodly slander: which in these men ariseth from their
want of skill, to put difference between Gods working of the sinne, as authour
therof; and his appointing, and orde­ring both of sin, and sinner, to his own
holy ends.

### 1.3. ADVERSARIES.

THe first particular against which they deal, is our affir­mation, that God
decreed the sinne of Adam, and that of [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=4) necessity to come
to passe, and consequently, all other sinnes, in their time, taking upon them
with all to manifest, that herein wee not onely contradict the truth, but our
own affirmation elsewhere, quoting for example, Theses Genevenses, pag. 26,
where it is af­firmed, that Adam in innocency, had free-will or power, from
the creation of God, not to haue sinned: which matter they also pro­secute in
many words, with great disorder, making the head of their discourse,
Predestination; and the body sin.

### 1.4. DEFENCE.

AS the contradiction is not in our Assertions, but in their misunderstanding:
So might I, by good right, forbeare to meddle about Adams sin, in the case of
predestination; con­sidering the determination of the Synode at Dort
hereabout, which I take upon me to defend: which considers man as fallen in
Gods account, as the object of the Predestination in question. But I will not
use all my lawfull liberty; but as he that will overtake and hold a
malefactour, must follow him, not onely in the high and beaten way, whilst he
keeps it, but in all the out-leaps also, and turnings, which he makes: So, God
assisting me, purpose I (though it be troublesome) to follow and prosecute
these Adversaries in this, and other their particular straglings, if any way
pertinent to the gene­rall controversie.

I affirm then, that Gods decree, and ordination about Adams fall was such, as
that the same could not but follow therupon; not as an effect, upon a cause
working it (God forbid); but as a consequent upon an antecedent; or as an
event necessarily following upon a most holy, wise and power­full providence;
so ordering and disposing, that the same should so come to passe infallibly,
though performed by Adams free, and freely working will. If any demand how
this can be, that God who forbiddeth and hateth sinne, yet should so order
persons and things, by his providence, and so from eternity purpose to order
them, as that the same can­not but be? I answer, by free acknowledgment, that
the [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=5) manner
of Gods working herein is to me, and to all men, un­conceiueable; and withall
avouch, that he, who will not confesse, that God can (and could in Adams sin)
by his in­finite wisedom and power, most effectually, and infallibly, in
regard of such event, order and dispose of things, without violation to his
holinesse, or violence to the creatures will, as no mortall man is able to
conceiue the manner therof, is himselfe in a high degree, guilty of that
pride, which was Adams [...]uine, by which he desired to be as God in
know­ledge.Gen. 3. Who is able to understand the manner of Gods work­ing, in
giving the Holy Ghost to men, and in directing the tongues and pens of the
Prophets infallibly, and so as they could not erre? Much lesse discernable is
Gods manner of working in, and about the creatures sinfull actions. And
because many take great offence at this doctrine of truth, and work of God, I
will (the Lord assisting me) plainly, and briefly, as I can, proue, that all
events, even those most sin­full (in regard of the creatures work in, and of
them) come to passe necessarily, after a sort, in respect of Gods provi­dence,
as being a hand steady, and which swarveth not in or­dering the creature in,
and unto the same.

My first proofe is from Act. 2. 22. 23, & ch. 4. 27. 28. Him Act. 2. 22. 23, &
ch. 4. 27. 28. (to wit Christ) being delivered by the determinate counsell,
and foreknowledge of God, ye haue taken, and by wicked hands haue crucified,
and slain. And again, Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of
Israel, were gathered together to doe what­soever thy hand, and thy counsell
determined before to be done. What words could the Holy Ghost make choise of
more liue­lily to expresse Gods effectuall work, according to his eternall
purpose? Here is expresly mentioned, not onely his fore­knowledge (upon which
the event necessarily followeth, ex­cept God goe by guesse onely) but his
determinate counsel, yea his hand, as the effectuall instrument of working: as
if the Holy Ghost should haue said, That which the heart of God unchangeably
purposed s [...]ould be done, touching the killing of h [...]s Son by wicked
men, that his hand powerfully ordered to be done accordingly.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=5)

### 1.5. ADVERSARIES.

THeir evasions else-where are, that God decreed to sufferPag, 28. 29▪ them to
doe that which they did, but decreed not that they should so doe, and that God
might haue appointed some to sacrifice his sonne Christ, as he did Abraham to
sacrifice his son Isaac. And againe, that although God determined certainly
that his sonne should be slain, yet he might haue been slain without sin▪

### 1.6. DEFENCE.

THat God suffered, and so decreed to suffer the wicked to kill his sonne, is
plaine. If he had not decreed to suffer them, he had not suffered them; if he
had not suffered them, they could not haue done it: but that he onely suffered
them, is against the expresse words and meaning of the text, which sayth, the
wicked took him, being delivered by Gods determinato counsell. Is to deliver
by determinate counsell, to suffer onely? So where it is sayd, that Gods hand
determined that which was done, it shewes that God was a doer in the
businesse, and not a sufferer onely. If God onely suffered them, (that is,
hin­dred them not) he had no hand in it at all, but with-held his hand from
medling in it. How then could his hand and coun­seli determine before
whatsoever was done? Besides, if God one­ly suffered the death of his sonne,
all the worth of our re­demption by his death, vanisheth away: seeing that
which God suffers onely, is onely evill, and not good. Also by this perverse
exposition, neither the Father gaue his sonne, nor the sonne himselfe for us
to the death, which the Scriptures every where affirme. Lastly, hee that
considers the end of theIoh. 3. 16. Gal. 2. 20. 1. Ioh. 4. 9. Rom 5. vers 25.
29. Churches prayer, Act. 4\. will plainly see how they meant therein to
ascribe unto God more then the sole suffering of those things. The end was to
comfort themselues and other Gods servants against the threatnings and rage of
the wicked in all their persecutions. But what comfort (I marvail) can the
servants of God draw from this consideration, that God suf­fers the wicked in
rage to persecute them, and hinders [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=6) them not. This
were indeed rather matter of discourage­ment and dispaire, then of comfort
unto them. But herein stands their comfort firme, that God by the hand of his
pro­vidence orders all these things according to the fore-determi­nation of
the counsel of his will. Neither wil their vain imagi­nation helpe them, that
Christ might haue been slain, and become our sacrifice, yet without sinne. For
howsoeevr it bee not for them, nor me, to determine what was possible to Gods
abso­lute power; yet we know, considering the declaration there­of both by the
Scriptures and event, that in regard of Gods decree, it was necessarie that
Christ should dye, as he did, by the conspiracie and rage of wicked men; as
both the expresse words, and plain drift of the places proue. Lastly, it is an
er­roneous presumption, that God might haue appointed some to haue sacrificed
his sonne Christ, as he did Abraham to sacrifice his sonne Isaac, to wit, in
obedience to Gods commandement, conside­ring how expresly the Scriptures did
even before his death, teach the contrary: and that the sonne of man must
suffer many things, and be killed by the Elders and chiefe Priest. Also
thatMark. 3. 31. Luk. 24. 20.▪ 26. Ioh. 12. 32. 33. Gal. 3. 13. Christ ought
to suffer, to wit, what he had suffered, by the Priests and Rulers which had
delivered him to bee condemned to death, and had crucified him: which manner
of death, by being hanged upon the tree, so becoming a curse for us, that he
might free us from the curse of the Law, was as well foretold by the
scrip­tures, as his death it selfe. If that cannot but be, which the
Scriptures fore-tell, and that the Scriptures fore-told that Christ must thus
be killed and crucified by the hands of wic­ked men, then was it necessary
(and could not otherwise be) in regard of Gods decree, that Christ should die
as he did, and not without sinne in them that killed him.

To conclude this place: These men granting, that God de­creed the death of his
sonne, but denying that he decreed the meanes and manner thereof, make the
most wise God like weak man, who often resolues of a thing to bee done, but
takes time to consider of the manner of doing it.

Neither yet doe we, by all this, make God the appointer of [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=6) evill in their
meaning, that is, either the commander, or wor­ker, or approver thereof; but
onely the supreme governour of the whole world, and of all persons and actions
therein, how sinfull soever; using and ordering the covetousnesse of Iudas,
the envy of the Priests, and injustice of Pilate to this e­vent of Christs
death; in regard of them most wicked, but of God, most gracious; and to us,
most profitable.

Take we one other instance, for this purpose, from God [...] threatning of
David by the Prophet, for his sinne against Vriah. Now therfore the sword
shall never depart from thy house, 2\. Sam. 12. 10. 11. 12. &c. Behold I will
raise up evill against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wiues
before thine eyes, and giue them unto thy neighbour, and he shall ly with thy
wiues in the sight of the Sunne, &c. Whence it appeares, that Absoloms
practises against his fa­ther, as necessarily followed, by the work of Gods
provi­dence, as Gods threatnings going before, were necessarily true. Will
they say, that God onely suffred this, and so gain­say God himselfe, saying, I
will doe this, v. 12\. Is to do to suffer with these men? Tell me, you poore
seduced soules, doth not the Lord here threaten a judgement from him to come
upon2 King. 29▪ 19. Psal. 119. 160, 164▪ David for his sin? Are not all Gods
judgements good and righ­teous? Doth the Iudge onely suffer the punishment of
the ma­lefactors, and not inflict or procure it? The scriptures teach, and
these men acknowledge, that whatsoever is good, commeth from the father of
lights: Are not Gods judgements (wherof this is one) good in truth, though
both evill to mans sence, as this was to Davids; and worse sometimes in the
instruments both intention and action, as it was in Absoloms? It is therefore
evi­dent, that the same thing, in divers respects, was both the hor­rible sin
of Absolom, and the severe punishment of David, and the just judgment of God.
Take a familiar similitude for the explaining of this matter. The water is of
it selfe apt and prone to flow to and fro. The husbandman by h [...]s
artificiall ditches and trenches, brings it to this or that place, in this or
that measure, at this or that time, and so for other circumstan­ces: yet doth
not he at all work the disposition of flowing in [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=7) the water, but
finding it there, makes use of it for his purpose, and by his skill leads the
water whither seems good unto him. So neither did the Lord infuse at all
corrupt on into Absolom, but finding it there by the Divels and his owne work,
ordered it to that his holy end, the glory of his justice in punishing the
heynous sins of David: of which punishment he was the authour.

These men grant, that God foreseeth all evill to come. This foresight of God
they will not deny to bee certain, and that wherein God cannot be deceived.
Whereupon it followes, that such evils so foreseen, necessarily and
unavoydably come to passe. If any object, that Gods foresight is not the cause
of the evill. I answer, no more is his decree or work of provi­vidence about
it. It sufficeth for the purpose in hand, if it follow by way of event or
consequence upon the antecedent, though not of effect upon the cause. Let us
yet a little fur­ther open this poynt. This knowledge, or fore-knowledge of
God, is two-fold: naturall and indefinite, by which God knowes all possible
things, and whatsoever in any respect, or upon any supposition, can possibly
be: or definit [...], and deter­minate, by which of things possible he knowes
what shall and what shall not be. Now howsoever this fore-knowledge (as all
other things in God) be one, and that infinite and eter­nall; yet in our
conception, the former of those acts of Gods fore-knowledge, goes before the
decree, the latter presuppo­seth it. For therefore God certainly and
infallibly forsees a thing shall be, because he unchangeably decrees it shall
be in and according to its kind: if good, by his working it: if evill, by his
suffering it, and governing the creature in wor­king it.

But you will answer, that God from eternity certainly and infallibly fore-saw
Absoloms incest, because Absolom would certainly and undoubtedly practise it
in time. But I would further know, whence this certainty and undoubtednesse of
Absoloms such practise should arise, so as it could not possibly but be, nor
God be deceived in that his prescience or fore­knowledge? [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=7) It was not of any
absolute necessitie of it self, that Absolom should be born: or being born,
that he should be preserved, and surviue to that time: or being till then
pre­served, that he should haue naturall ability, and opportunitie therewith
to practise that sin: seeing it was not impossible, but that David might haue
taken his wiues with him, or they haue fled els whither, and haue hid
themselues. In all these things God was not a meere sufferer, but a powerful
worker by his providence. But suppose the being of all these things as they
were; and withall, Absoloms heart by the Divels work, and his owne, fraught
with lust, and impiety this way; yet was Absalom a changeable creature,
haveing in himself free­dom, or libertie of will to haue forborn that act at
that time, or to haue exercised his lust upon some other object. How then
could that particular event follow unchangeably from his changeable will? How
necessarily and inavoydably, from his choyce of will which was free in it self
either to that act, or to another of that kinde, or to neither? Either
therefore Gods decree from eternitie (and so his work in time) must be
acknowledged for the disposing and ordering of all events unavoydably, or his
knowledge be denied in foreseeing them infallibly.

Lastly, to affirme that any thing, great or small, good or evill, comes to
passe in the world, without Gods providence ordering and governing it and them
that doe it, is to set the creature from under the Creators rule and dominion
there­in; and to shut God out of the earth, whilst men doe what they list in
it, he letting them alone, and not medling with them.

How Adam had power from the creation of God not to sin whichPag. 5. they urge
in the nextplace, we shal shew hereafter. In the mean while, their addition,
that Gods cōmanding him not to sin, and yet his decreeing that he should sin,
are contrary, as light and darknes, is faulty both in regard of our assertion,
and their own. For us, we do not hold, that God decreed Adams sin, as they
con­ceiue, [[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=8)
that is, either to approue it, or command it, or compell unto it, nothing
lesse: but this we affirm, that God decreed to leaue Adam to himself in the
temptation, and not to assist him with that strength of grace, by which he
could (if he would) haue upheld him; and so to order both him, and all things
about him, in that his temptation, as that, he, by the motion and sway of his
own free-will, following his naturall appetite to the pleasant, but forbidden
fruit, and that false perswasion wherewith his understanding was by Sathan
o­verclouded, should both choose and eat the forbidden fruit. Neither are
these two things contrary, that God should for­bid a thing, and yet decree
that it should come to passe in theGen. 22. manner fore-mentioned. God
commanded Abraham to kill his son, as it was a tryall of his obedience: and
yet decreed that the event of killing should not follow, as we know. God
commanded Pharaoh, by Moses, to let Is [...]l goe; and yet sayd Exod. 4. 21.
22. Luk. 12. 50. &. 22. 42. before, I will harden Pharaohs heart, that he
shall not let the peo­ple goe. That which he sayd, he decreed and pu [...]pos
[...]d. Christ our Lord desired to drink of that bitter cup appointed him, and
to be baptised with that bapt [...]sme, and was pained till it were
accomplished: and yet desired in an other respect, that the same cup might
passe from him, and he not drink of it, if it were possi­ble. These things may
well stand together in their severall re­spects, and are not as light and
darknesse to any, but to them, whose light is darknesse.

Next, they take upon them to impugne the received distin­ctionPag. 5. of Gods
revealed and secret will; and demand, If it be Gods secret will, how we come
to know it? I answer, by his re­vealing it afterwards, either by his word, or
by his work. When a thing comes to passe in this or that manner (though before
not so much as insinuated in his Word, and therfore secret) we then know that
it was the will of God it should so come to passe, either by his working it
according to its kinde, if it be good; or by his suffering and ordering it,
and the worker therof, if evill.

It is true which they adde, that Gods revealed will, was not [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=8) revealed but
hidden, before it was revealed. But what then? There was then, say they, two
hidden wils in God contrary to each other: wherof the one willed; yea, decreed
Adam to sinne, and the other willed him not to sin, and so by consequence, a
good will, and an evill will.

I answer, that the will of God in him, and its selfe, is but one, and the same
most simple; but by us conceived of, as divers, according to the diversity of
objects upon which it is set. Secondly, we doe not say, that God willed Adams
sin immediately, but that he willed the suffering and orde­ring of both the
sinne and sinner in sinning. Thirdly, the willing and nilling of the same
thing in divers respects, makes not two contrary wills, as the Scriptures last
cited manifest; but the willing and nilling of the same thing i [...] the same
respect, makes the contrariety.

### 1.7. ADVERSARIES.

THey make us further to say, that God willeth justice for itsPag. 6. selfe,
and sin, not for sin, but that he might either haue praise in pardoning or
punishing sin: and thereunto frame answer, that to pardon or punish sinne, is
not to will sinne; and that if God willeth sinne in any respect, why doth he
punish it in Adam, and all his posterity?

### 1.8. DEFENCE.

BVT who hath sayd, that God wils sin, though not for sin? We know that the
object of mans will is onely good in appearance, and of Gods in truth. We doe
not then say, that God wils sin properly, though he will the thing which in
re­gard of the creature is sin: but in regard of him either a most holy and
wise tryall of the creature, or just punishment of for­mer sins, either their
own that practise it, or others: so Abso­loms 2 Sam. 12, & 15, & 16\. Rom. 1.
wicked sin, was Gods just punishment upon David. So the reprobate minde, vile
affections, and all unrighteousnesse of the Gentiles, was a meet recompence
from God of their error, in not glo­rifying him as God in the things which
they clearly saw in the crea­tion [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=9) of the world.
They cannot here hide themselues in their burrow of Gods bare suffering,
considering how expresly it is sayd, that God gaue them up to vile affections,
and as a just Iudge recompenced thereby their former sins, to wit, as
other­wise, so by ordering that corruption which was in, and of themselues, to
this fearfull event of a reprobate mind.

The things which they ad about mens, how much more Gods Pag. 6. 7. speaking
the truth from his heart; and their bold charge of o­thers with blasphemie, in
making God (to be blessed for ever) an hypoorite, I passe by as a fruit of
that spirit which makes men presumptuous, self-willed, and not afrayd to speak
evill of the things which they know not themselues, nor will learn of
others.2\. Pet. 2. 10. Iude 10. The Lord, who taught Paul, that he, who being
a Pharisee, and in his ignorance had accounted Christs doctrine blas­phemy,
had himselfe blasphemed; shew these men the like mercie: for they know not
what they speak.

### 1.9. ADVERSARIES.

IN the next place, to shew how free Adam was from all neces­sitie of sinning,
they at large relate how God furnished him with all things that might support
him in the estate in which hee created him.

### 1.10. DEFENCE.

THE particular helps mentioned, I acknowledge with them, but with limitation
of some of them, which they set down at a large adventure. Whereas in the
third they af­firm, that Adam had a meet help and comfort for him, his wife
Hevah. This is true of her created state, but not of that which followed, she
(being first seduced by the serpent, taking advan­tage upon her womanly
weaknesse, and the absence of her husband) becoming the onely imediate
instigator of him to sin. So for the 7th. and last, which is, that God gaue
Adam will and power not to haue eaten, we confesse it, but not as they mean
it, in their more overly considerations, and peremptoric deter­minations, then
is meet, in this deep mystery. Let us there­fore [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=9) a little more
distinctly consider, how it may and ought to be granted, that God furnished
Adam with all necessarie and sufficient grace and helps, against sin, and for
perseve­rance in holinesse.

First then, we confesse, that God making him a reasona­ble creature, bestowed
upon him withall whatsoever grace was sufficient and necessarie, on his part;
that is, as much (and more) then he was bound to giue him. Secondly, that God
gaue him whatsoever was sufficient for his preservation in that state of
holinesse and integritie in which he was created, out of the case of
temptation. Thirdly, I grant, that whatso­ever grace he wanted for the
resisting of the temptation, when it came, it was by his own default, and that
if hee had not failed himself, the grace of God would and should haue
sustained him therein also. Notwithstanding all this, the e­vent manifested,
that Adam had not the grace to withstand the temptation of the serpent by the
woman, but was seduced thereby. It was nothing but want of grace in him not to
withstand it: and this grace he could not haue but by his gift, from whom
every good gift, and every perfect giving commeth Iam. 1. 17. down, even the
father of lights. God gaue him will actually one­ly to good, but changeably;
and power to understand and do whatsoever concerned him if he would: But now
that con­stancie of will upon clear understanding and unchanged pur­pose of
heart, which was requisite in so great a temptation (by so subtile an
adversarie in an object so pleasing to nature, and good in it selfe, together
with the perswasion of his wife, so neere unto him) this grace, I say, Adam
received not of God, as the event in the changing of his will upon deceitfull
information of his understanding, blinded by an appearing good, made it too
manifest; though as before I sayd, through his owne default, in not depending
upon God as he ought.

The things which they annex, that God gaue not Adam a Pag. 7. 3. 9. 10. Law to
ensnare him; but that that law was holy and good; that Adam was the son of God
by creation; that if men, who are evill, do good unto their children, and
would not beget them to misery; how [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=10) much lesse hath
the good God created his Sonne to sinne and misery? As also, that sinne is the
defacing of Gods image in man, we willingly acknowledge; and withall
whatsoever can be right­ly gathered therefrom.

We beleeue that the end of Adams creation in regard of himselfe was holinesse,
and happinesse; in regard of God, the glorious manifestation of his power,
wisedom, holinesse and goodnesse; and that sinne came in by accident, and
misery by sin; man by his free, but corrupted will, willing the sin; and God
by his just and holy will, the punishment; and that sin was in no sense the
destinated end of Gods creation; nor misery, but by accident, as to come for
sin. Yet must the difference here be held (howsoever these men tumble all
to­gether) between God (Adams, and all mens father by crea­tion and his
children) and between naturall parents, and their children. God was Adams
absolute father, and Lord▪ though not for the use of any unjust power; men are
but fa­thers as it were by borrowing, and with a power limited by Gods will. 2
God workes, and orders all things for himselfe, yea, even the wicked for the
evill day, and of him, and through Prov. 16. 4. Rom. 11. 36 him, and to him
are all things. So doe not earthly parents be­get and order their children for
themselues, as their utmost, and highest end. 3 Earthly parents are bound not
to suffer their children to sinne, if they can hinder it; but to doe
whatsoever they possibly can, being lawfull, to keep them from sin and misery.
Will these free Burgesses, of their own chusing, make a Parliament-law to
binde God to doe what­soever he possibly can to keep from sinning men and
Angels? Lastly, earthly parents would rather (had they before known it) never
haue begotten their children, then that they should (though meerly by their
own default) haue come to sin and misery therby without remedy. But God (even
our Adversa­ries being Iudges) foreknew these things of men, and yet crea­ted
them notwithstanding.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=10)

### 1.11. ADVERSARIES.

HEre, upon question moved, whether God could not hauePag. 10. made Adam so as
he could not haue been deprived of his state of righteousnesse; and whether
any thing can be done against Gods will: they undertake to manifest two
things; 1 in what state God made Adam; 2 that many things are done against the
will of God. For the first, they in their bold ignorance, hold it an ignorant
conceit, that God could haue made Adam unchange­able: that is, so haue made,
and kept him as he should not, nor could haue been deprived of his state of
righteousnesse, in which he was made. For this, say they, had been to haue
made him God like himselfe: and so conclude, that God could not haue made man
otherwise then he made him, a reasonable creature, yet changeable: 2 that then
it had been to no purpose, to haue set a penalty to the Law: 3 that then the
most holy attributes of God, his justice to punish sin, and mercy to forgiue
it, had been voyd.

### 1.12. DEFENCE.

THey, who here desire, that what they say may be well obser­ved, should
themselues better haue observed what they say, then thus, as they doe, to
deceiue both themselues, and others, by an equivocation of words.

Here then in the first place, a distinction must be put, which is, that a
thing is unchangeably good, either in, and by it selfe, and so God onely is
unchangeable (and so onely hath immor­tality, 1 Tim. 6. 16 1 Tim. 1. 17▪ and
is onely wise, &c.) or a thing unchangeable by the grace and power of God
communicated with the creature; and so God could, if he would, haue made Adam
un­changeable, or kept him unchanged, which is the same, in the present
consideration: as he hath made the Angels and soules of men immortall, and
both Angels and men wise in their kinde, by communication of the effects of
his being, and wisedom with them. God then is onely unchangeably good by
nature, and of hims [...]lfe; yet by his grace and power, it was possible for
Adam to haue been kept un­changeably [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=11) good, so as he
should not haue sinned, which is the unchangeablenesse in question.

And this answereth their first reason. To the second also, I answer, that God
making Adam changeably good by created nature, might (had it seemed so good to
his infinite wisedom) haue kept him by grace from possibility of break­ing his
righteous Law, in our meaning, notwithstanding tho annexing of the penalty,
and that to great good purpose; viz. both to shew how God hates all
transgressing of his Law, against the breach whereof he denounceth such
judgement; and also, as a meanes (by his blessing and grace) effectually for
the keeping of Adam from breaking it: which use also it should haue had, if
Adam had done his duety in constant obedience, and that God, by his most
powerfull grace had so preserved him, that he had not sinned.

For the third Reason: First I demand, what necessity there was that God should
haue use (as they speak) towards men of the attributes of his justice to
punish sin, and of his mercy to par­don it upon repentance? Would it haue been
any diminution of his perfection, and happinesse if he had not so done? Doth
not the glory of God also even most brightly shine in the elect Angels, which
haue been and shall be kept un­changeably holy and without sin for ever? and
in regard of whom those holy Attributes, of justice in punishing, and mer­cy
in pardoning haue no use. But obserue (good Reader) how these men are taken
inavoydably in their own snare. It is not mans being made changeable, and such
as might sin, by which their could come to be use of Gods attributes of
ju­stice for the punishing of sin; and mercy for the pardoning of it; except
withall man become actually changed, and sinfull. Can there be use of justice
for punishing, or of mercy for fore­giuenesse of sin, but where sin is? Their
reason therfore (if it bear weight) proues not onely that man might possibly,
but that he must sin necessarily. Which I lay down and apply for­mally thus.
That without which the Attributes of Gods ju­stice to punish sinne, and of his
mercy to pardon it, had been [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=11) utterly without
use towards men, that must necessarily be: but without mans sinning, the
attributes of Gods justice to punish, and of his mercy to pardon, had been
utterly with­out use towards men: ergo, man must necessarily sin, by just
consequence upon their antecedent.

Their reasons thus answered, I will plainly proue that God could, if it had so
pleased him, haue kept Adam un­changeably good; as the Angels, and soules of
men are, and bodies shall be (at the resurrection) unchangeably im­mortall.

And first, the Scriptures teach us to giue this honour to the power of God, as
to beleeue, that our God in the heaven Psal. 115. 4. doth (and therefore can
doe) whatsoever pleaseth him: and so could (had it pleased him, and been his
will) haue preser­ved Adam from sinning against him. Of their distinction of
Gods will we shall speak by and by. If in the mean while they except, that God
could not so will; I would know the reason of their such presumption. If they
say, there are some things which God cannot doe, as to lie, to deny himselfe,
to make the same thing to be, and not to be, at the same time, and the like,
inferring either impotence in the Creatour, or contradiction in the creature.
I demand, what had there been herein against the nature either of the Creator,
or crea­ture, if God by his grace, had kept the understanding of Adam from
being overclowded with errour, or false opini­on, and therewith his will and
affections in the integrity of obedience? This had not been (as some imagine)
to destroy; but to perfect his nature. Hath not God so kept the elect Angels
without all change from their primitiue purity? Was not the Lord Iesus in his
Manhood so kept upon earth? And shall not all the elect be so kept for ever in
heaven? These are, were, and shall be unchangeably righteous; and yet were
not, nor are, nor shall be made Gods.

They themselues confesse, that the devils are unchangeable Pag. 11. in evill;
And why then might not both Angels and men be unchangeable in good? that is,
so kept by the power of God [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=12) as they never
turn from their goodnes. Or what barre would these men haue put against the
power of God, if his will had been so to haue preserved and kept Adam? I
demand, whe­ther the Apostles, in their time, could possibly preach any thing
but the truth, being immediately and infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost? All
these instances serue to proue, that it is possible to God, if it please him,
so to assist and confirm by his Spirit, a reasonable creature (though of a
changeable nature in its selfe) as that in regard of the same divine
assistance, it is not possible it should be changed from good to evill, or sin
against God. Lastly, if God could not haue so made and ordered Adam, as that
he could not haue sin­ned, then God did not so much as suffer him to sinne,
seeing none can be said properly to suffer a thing to be done, saue he that
could hinder it, if he would. It were absurdly said, that I suffer the wind to
blow, or sea to swell, though I hinder them not, seeing it is not in my power
to hinder them.

### 1.13. ADVERSARIES.

THey add from Ezech. 18, & 33, Gods asseveration, thatPag. 11. 12 as he liues,
he would haue no man transgresse, and so come un­der the exequution of his
justice: making withall, a short descrip­tion of the will of God, as they call
it: and ever confounding these two things; necessity and compulsion: and Gods
not decree­ing, with his forcing men to sinne,

### 1.14. DEFENCE.

FOr better answering, and understanding of the answer un­to these things, it
must be considered; first, that the will of God, though simple, and one in its
nature, yet exerciseth it selfe diversly, in regard of divers objects. The
first and weakest degree of Gods willing (to speak of God as man is able to
conceiu of him) is that by which he wills the permis­sion or suffering of sin,
as sin. For if God suffer it, he suffers it willingly, seeing he both takes
knowledge of it, and could hinder it by his omnipotent power, if he pleased.
The [[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=12)
second degree of Gods willing, is that by which he commands a thing to be
done, and approues of it, if it be done. The third and last degree is, that
according to which he workes all things by his omnipotent power. And if a man
whose will is finite, yet can will things according to those degrees; how much
more both possible and easie is it to Gods infinite will, to exercise it selfe
more intensly or remisly, according to those degrees? I may be willing, in
cases, to suffer that in another which I approue not of: so may I command my
servant or child to doe a thing, and approu of it, if it be done, and yet not
so will it, as to use all the power that possibly I can, to haue it done. Some
things, again, there are that I so will, as that I doe, or am bound to use all
my possible skill and power to haue them effected. These things are much more
rightly said of God, considering the infinite largenesse of his will, compared
with my straitnesse. The same may be said of the Spirit of God which is one
(for there is one Spirit) whose1 Cor. 12. 4. operation yet is divers, and the
same sometimes more, and sometimes lesse forcible: as we see in the knowledge
of an Apostle, compared with the knowledge of an ordinary Mi­nister or Christ
[...]an; and many other waies.

And these differences of the will of God in the exercising of itselfe towards
the creature, I desire the Reader here care­fullyPag. 12. to obseru for after
use. Their short definition, as they unskilfully call it, of Gods will, by
which he either wils what man is to doe, or what he will doe in himselfe, is
short indeed, as cutting off all that God will doe and doth out of himselfe,
and in the creature, as are all his workes ad extra, as they are called.

It remaines, that in the next place, we shew the difference between necessity
and compulsion; and Gods decreeing in our sense, and his forcing of things,
(which our Adversaries with great errour confound as the same) and withall,
that things may, after a sort, be done necessarily, and freely too. Freely,
yea contingently also, in regard of men, and necessarily in regard of Gods
work of providence according to his decree. [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=13) I mention Gods
work according to his decree; because to speak properly, Gods decree or will,
works not things, but his power according to his will. There is indeed a
necessity which takes away freedom and voluntarinesse from men; but then they
rather suffer then doe. For example, the striking or thrusting of a man with
such violence, as that he is compel­led thereby to stagger or fall: this
necessity of compulsion depriues me of all freedom to this bodily motion, so
as I stagger or fall unwillingly; but this comes from an externall principle
or beginning working violently, and from without me. But this is nothing to
that other necessity in regard of God, causing and effecting the good, in and
by the creature, according to its kinde; and suffering and ordering the evill
person and thing, according to its kind; with which mans freedom may well
stand.

And first, whatsoever God doth, he doth it both most freely, and most
necessarily well. So the elect Angels doe the [...] Tim. 5. 21 Esay 6. 2. will
of God most voluntarily, and yet most necessarily. So did Christ, as man, the
will of his Father so freely, as noneMat. 16. 11. Ioh. 4. 34. Act. 20. 28. can
doe any thing more; and yet as necessarily, as it was ne­cessary for God not
to sinne. On the contrary, the devils doe evill, both most necessarily (being
by these mens own grant, unchangeably evill) and yet most willingly, as
carryed there­unto withall their power. Christ saith, it must needs be that
Mat. 18. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 19 offences come; and the Apostle, that there must be
heresies in the Church. If then freedom of will can stand with no manner of
necessity, the authours of these heresies and offences sinne not therin: for
all sinnes specially of this kinde are volunta­ry. I add in the last place,
that the better any man, or An­gell is, he doth good the more, both
necessarily and willing­ly: and the worse any, evill, both waies.

Neither will it seem strange unto us, that one and the same action comes under
so divers considerations, as in one regard, to be voluntary, contingent and
casuall; and in another, ne­cessary: if we consider, how divers agents concur
and meet together in producing it. No work of man, is so mans alone, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=13) as that God hath
not some hand in it, in sustaining and orde­ring the person and work, yea in
effecting that which is good in it, as all that is, which hath in it any
created being or order. What hinders then, but that the same thing may in
regard of man as the particular and immediate cause, be voluntary and
contingent; and yet in regard of God the highest and ge­nerall cause,
necessary? We daily see the truth of this in pro­portion amongst men; the
meeting of Ahab and Eliah was1 King. 2  [...] ▪ in respect of Ahab, casuall;
but in respect of Eliah, of de­stinate counsell.

These things thus cleered, we will come to the exposition of the words of
Ezechiel, so oft and vehemently urged by these men, and others; which are,
that God takes not pleasure Chap. 12. 23 & 33\. 11▪ in the death of a sinner,
but that he turn from his way and liue.

I answer; first, that the Lord takes no delight in the death of a sinner, that
repents, and turns from his wicked way: but otherwise, if the sinner repent
not, the Lord takes delight in his death; not for the misery of the creature,
but for the glory of his justice shining therin. Of such the Lord
testifies,Prov. 1. 2 [...] that he wil laugh at their calamity, & mock when
their fear cometh. And considering, that the death, and destruction of the
wick­ed is Gods own just and holy work, for their sins, who will deny that God
delights in it? Secondly, for sinne, who was ever so wicked as to imagine that
God takes pleasure in it? It pleaseth him for his holy ends, to suffer sin,
and to order the creature sinning by his own freewill, & election of evil, as
hath been formerly proved. Thirdly, it must be noted that the Prophet speaks
there of such sinners onely, as to whom the word comes; saying, Turn yee, turn
yee from your evill waies, Chap. 33. 1 [...] ▪ for why will yee die, ô house
of Israel? Whence we doe gather evidently these two particulars. First, that
the Prophet doth not here speak of all men universally, (as they conceiu) but
onely of the house of Israel, or of such, as to whom he [...] sends his
Prophets to call them to repentance: secondly, that he speaks not of that
decree of the Lord willing, which is accompanied with the powerfull work of
his grace, by which [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=14) hee will giue
repentance to wicked men, instructed in the truth by 2 Tim. 2. 24. 25. 26. his
servants: but onely of that degree of his will which stands in commanding that
which is good, and in approving of it, if it be performed. And so we grant it
to be the Lords pleasure and will, that all repent to whom the Word is
preached.

It is true which they add: that Adam and others sinned a­gainst the will of
God, but not that any ever sinned against the se­cret will of God, as they
affirm. The will of God is no law to man till it be revealed; and where there
is no law, there is no trans­gression. It is also truely sayd, that the Iewes
unwillingnesse to be gathered to Christ, was against Gods and Christs will:
that is, his commanding will: for he would, that is, commanded, and they would
not, but disobeyed: but that it was against that de­cree of Gods willing,
which sets his almightie power awor [...], that I deny. For God could, if thus
he would, haue giuen them repentance, and drawn them to his son. Whatsoever he
thusIoh. 6. 44. wills, he can do.

That which they add (as an eye-salue to cure our blindnes) namely, that we
haue nothing to do with Gods secret wil, not revea­led in his word, is true in
regard of our obedience to God, & ex­pectationPsal. 135. 6. from him▪ but not
absolutely, as they conceiue. The particular events of things in the world,
though not so much as insinuated in the scriptures, concern us when they come
to passe, so as we may and ought to say, it was the will of God they should so
be: either his will to work them, if good: or to suffer and order them and
their doers, if evill.

### 1.15. ADVERSARIES.

NExt comes into consideration a speciall distinction ofPag. 12, 13. 14. ours,
which is, that God is the author of the action, or fact, but not of the sin of
the fact or crime. Over which they insult, and in it over all learned men,
though they mention Calvin onely, with high contempt and great triumph before
the victory; calling it a merely fabulous ridle, and marvellous
sophistication; telling us that a spade is a spade, &c. but in truth shewing
them­selues [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=14) sitter to medle
with a spade and a mattock, then with those high mysteries. Let us see their
reasons. In the first whereof they make us say; that God is the author of the
very fact and deed of Adams sin, yea of adultery, theft, murder, &c.

### 1.16. DEFENCE.

WE deny their charge, and answer by distinction; that Adams taking and eating
the forbidden fruit, Davids adultery, Ioahs murther, and the like, are to be
considered two waies: First, naturally, and as they are motions in nature,
performed by mans natural & created faculties and powers of soul and body:
secondly, morally, as those motions are misap­plyed, and abused to wrong
objects, by mans blinde mind and corrupt will. In the former respect, &
materially, as we speak, they are of God and created nature; in the latter and
formal­ly, of mans proper corruption. Now the sinne is not the na­turall
action of motion, but the pravity and abuse of the action. The subtilty of our
riddle, they, as if they had plowed with our heyfer, find out to be this, that
in our account sinne is nothing, and that God, though the authour of all
things, is not the authour of sin, for sin is nothing; and so the thiefe, and
other malefactors, is punished for nothing by the Iudge: and the wicked for
nothing in everlasting fire.

First, I demand of these men, whether, if God command something to be done,
and men doe it not, they deseru not to be punished for their doing of nothing?
Is it not sinne not to doe that wee should doe; and to doe nothing when we
should doe something? These witty men could teach the goats  [...]t Christs
left hand, at that day, to answer himMatth. 25. to the full, that bee
condemned them to hell fire for nothing; for not to doe is to doe nothing. We
then answer, first, that we call not sin nothing negatiuely, but privatiuely,
as a want of that which should be; secondly, that sin is not nothing morally,
that is not nothing against Gods Law, for sin onely is something against it,
but nothing naturally; that is, nothing which hath a created being in nature.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=15)So, for
their next Argument, that by authority of Scripture, & our own description,
sin is a thought, word or deed, contrary to the will of God, and therefore
that the deed is sin; they should consi­der, that neither the Scriptures nor
writers meaning is, that th [...] sin stands not in the naturall deed or
motion, but in the con­trariety which the same deed▪ or motion hath in it to
the law of God. Darknes, or a shadow, are nothing positiuely, but onely the
want of light. The voydnes, darknes, and unformed­nes on the earth and deep,
in the beginning, were nothing that hadGen. 1. 1. 2. reall being; but onely
the want of that form, furniture, and light, which God afterward made, and
furnished them with­all. When the candle is put out, and it becomes dark;
shall we think that any reall thing comes into the house, and causes the
darknes? or when I make a shadow by standing in the light, or Sun-shine; do I
put any reall thing in the place where the shadow is? or do I not onely keep
the light and Sun-shine from it? Likewise, when a man or beast halts in going,
shall we imagine that the halting is the very motion of going, or the fault of
the motion onely? So is sin onely the absence & want of that conformity and
agreeablenesse which ought to be in the thought▪ word, or work of the
reasonable creature to the Law of God; which as none of understan­ding and
sincerity will deny; so for further satisfaction of the doubting, and
conviction of the refractory, I will annex cer­tain most plain and undoubted
proofes of Scripture to con­firme the same.

First, the Apostle quoting and confirming the saying of the [...]. 17. 28
heathen Poet, witnesseth to the Athenians, that in God we liue and moue, and
haue our being. Our being then, that is, our souls and bodies, and our life
arising from their union; and so our motions arising from our life we haue of
God; yea which is more, after a sort, in him, who filleth all things with his
pre­sence. Where let it also be noted, that he speakes of the being, life, and
motions of the very prophane and heathenish Idolaters, as well as of any
others.

Secondly, God, as it is in the Psalm, made the heavens and [...]. 146. 6▪
[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=15) earth,
and sea, and all that in them is. If sin then be any thing, (viz. any thing
having being) God made it, and so it is his creature. And surely if it haue a
being, it is either a created or uncreated being. Not the latter, for that is
onely God; and therefore the former by their ground. If God created all things
that are, sin if it be in their sense, must be Gods crea­ture.

Thirdly, the same naturall motion of man in which great sin is committed, if
it were exercised upon another object, might be without sin, and lawfull; and
therefore not the very action or motion, but the misapplying of it, is the
sin; from which the action hath its morall, but not its naturall being. For
example; the very same naturall motion which Adam used in takeing and eating
the forbidden fruit, upon any o­ther fruit, had been no sin. The same naturall
act in which David practised adultery with Bethsaba, with his lawfull wife,
had been no adultery: the very same naturall act and motion whereby Ioab
killed Abner, and Amasa, if exercised upon a malefactor at the magistrates
command, had been no murther, but a work of iust execution. The sinne
therefore is not in the very act, but in the misapplying it, or other vitious
ad­junct.

Fourthly, considering that there is no sin in deed or action of body, which
was not first in the faculties of the soule, the understanding, will and
affections: (for onely the things Mat. 15. 1 [...] which come from the heart,
desile the man) the outward sin in fact and deed can no more more make the
outward action in itselfe not to be of God; then the inward corruption can
make the created faculties in which it is, not to be of God. It is sencelesse
to doubt but that when a wicked man sleepeth, and so practiseth no wickednesse
one way or other, he is notwithstanding a wicked man. And where now resteth
his wickednesse, but in his heart? And what is his heart but the faculties of
his understanding, will and affections, which sin possesseth and corrupteth?
And yet nevertheles these na­turall faculties remain Gods good creatures; so
do their mo­tions [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=16) naturall,
notwithstanding sins possessing them. There is in our sinfull nature, the
faculty, and the sin or disorder in it: and in our sinfull works, the action
from the faculty, and the outward sinne in it, from the inward sinne in the
other.

Lastly, I thus argue unresistably: That which God blesseth is good, and of
himselfe: This none will deny. I assume. But God blesseth the natural action,
or motion, in which hor­rible sin is practised. This is most evident (amongst
a thou­sand daily instances) in the sinfull commixture of Iudas and Thamar,
being on his part whoredom, and on hers incest,Gen. 38. though with a better
minde: Yet this action (considered na­turally) God blessed with a childe; yea,
with two sonnes; yea, with him, on whom Christ came according to the flesh,
who is blessed for ever. Here is plainly the action blessed, and therfore good
(in our sense) and of God; and yet the sin in the action, evill and accursed.

The meaning of Mr. Knox, in saying, that what Ethnicks Pag. 14, 15▪ 17.
ascribe to fortune, we acknowledg to come from God, as the appoin­ter of the
things, they mistake and pervert, neither under­standing the Ethnicks meaning,
nor his. The Heathens speak­ing of fortune did not conceiu that there was any
such divine power causing things to be, but the contrary, and that things come
to passe without any divine Providence ordering them, and meerly by blinde
chance or fortune: when they spake of good fortune, or ill fortune, they meant
onely the good or ill hap of persons, or things. His and our meaning then is,
that which Christ our Lord also teacheth, that Not a spar­row Ma [...]. 11. 29
falls to the ground without Gods providence. And where hee speaks of God as
the Authour, by his counsell appointing all things to the one part, and to the
other; it is plain hee intends it onely of the ordering and governing of them,
which they that deny, doe in effect, pluck God out of heaven, by deny­ing his
Soveraignty, and power over all his creatures in orde­ring them, and all their
actions, to his own supernaturall ends. The bitter curses which here they
break into in their [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=16) ignorant zeal
against him, and Calvin, and with them, all others, the worthy instruments of
restoring the Gospels light, after the darknesse of Popery (into which these
men are slidden back in no small measure) are like stones thrown upward by
them, which without their answerable repentance will fall down upon their own
heads.

Their proofe, that God is gracious and mercifull, of whom Pag. 17. all good
things come, and none evill, are needlesse, seeing wee grant as much; onely
wishing them to consider these three things. First, that the most of these
Scriptures cited, mean onely the mercy and loue of God to his Church and
people. Secondly, with what mind they put once and again, moving for tempting,
Iam. 1\. Thirdly, that 2 Pet. 3\. 4, is not to be ex­tended to all, as it is
by those prodigall Stewards of Gods grace, but to the elect onely, whom the
Apostle opposeth to the mockers mentioned v. 3, and therefore saith, that the
Lord which hath promised, is patient towards us, and so deferres that his
comming till the number of the elect be accomplish­ed, by their effectuall
calling.

Of Gods suffering, and doing things, and how they comePag. 17. to passe
thereupon, I haue spoken before, answering what they object therabout. Onely I
may not passe by, without giving warning therof, the stumbling stone of most
grievous errour and impiety, which they (pur-blind people) cast in their own
way, making Gods purposes and promises no bet­ter, in effect, then the vizzard
of Stage-players, which they put on, and off again, at every turn.

### 1.17. ADVERSARIES.

THeir affirmation, that God from the beginning of the world Pag. 18. knoweth
all things, yet that all things come not to passe therfore necessarily;
alledging for that purpose, Math. 26\. 35, is dangerous, if they speak to the
matter in hand, and with re­spect to the Text, whose word, for the most part,
they bring: Known unto God are all his workes from the beginning of the world.
Act. 15. 18. Their instance in Christs asking twelu Legions of Angels, Mat.
[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=17) 26,
Ananias his keeping his possession, and the saving of the ship in which Paul
sayled: These Scriptures, together with Sauls Pag. 19. coming to Keilah, and
the men of Keilahs delivering David into his hands, 1 Sam. 23, they bring to
proue, that although God doe foreknow things will come to passe, and also
foretell them, yet they may be prevented: adding hereunto▪ that the Lord
know­eth, and pronounceth, that the wicked shall be damned, and yet there
lyeth no necessity upon their damnation, but that it may be preven­ted by
repentance.

### 1.18. DEFENCE.

FIrst, these examples of the Lords sending the twelue Legi­ons of Angels, and
of Sauls comming to Keilah, and the like, are not to the purpose in hand. The
question is (as they themselues put it) of things coming not of fortune, but
by Gods providence, and of Gods willing things that come to passe, both good
and evill. To what end then mention they things that never did, nor shall come
to passe, either good or evill; And so to cover their craft the better alter
the words of the Text, All Gods workes, into All things. And what are all
these things with them? Christs obtaining 12 legions of Angels, Ana­nias
retaining his possession; the saving of the ship in which Paul sayled towards
Rome: Sauls coming to Keilah, and the destruction of the Ninivits within 40
daies: which were neither works of God, nor man; nor never were nor shall be.
So then by all Gods works, as the text saith, and matter in hand requireth;
and by all things as they say, they must mean plain nothing, and that which
never was, nor shall be.

Secondly, the Scriptures cited by them, rightly under­stood; are to them as
Goliahs sword to him; cleerly cutting off the head of their errour. Take for
instance one or two of them, upon which they most insist.

For Math. 26, it was a thing in itselfe possible, considering Gods loue to his
Sonne, and his faith in him, that he should haue obtained those Legions of
Angels to haue reskued him: So was it also, not onely possible in it selfe,
for Saul, but al­so [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=17) in his minde to
haue come to Keilah &c. And whence then was it, that these things came not so
to passe, and had not their answerable events? Even from the decree and
providence of Gods ordering things the other way inevitably. In the for­mer
instance we haue Christs own testimony, who, after men­tion of his such
praying, if he would, v. 53, adds v. 54, But then how shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? As if he should haue sayd, it agrees well
with the interest which I haue in my Fathers loue, that I should obtain from
him an invincible Army of heavenly Souldiers for the reskuing of me out of
mine enemies hands: but the Scriptures (manifesting the purpose and decree of
God) haue foretold the contrary; and that I should thus be oppressed, and
afflicted, and made an Esay 53. 7▪ 10. offering for sin: which before he also
professed to be the will of his Father, v. 39. 42. So for Sauls coming to
Keilah, it was a thing in it selfe possible, and also Sauls purpose, and this
the Lord saw, and foretold, but hindred by his providence in sending away
David, as he had fore-purposed in his counsell to doe, and therby to hinder
Sauls coming thither. These men should haue said thus, that God, alwaies fore-
seeing, and sometimes fore-telling, what in regard of the nature of the things
might be, and in respect of the disposition of the persons would be, if they
were not prevented; yet doth pre­vent them effectually by the work of his
providence interpo­sed, according to the decree of his will. And this, so
farre as it looks towards the thing in hand, makes against them, avow­ing a
most powerfull work of Gods providence, according to a most constant will,
over-ruling all dispositions of persons, and events of things. But for them to
say bluntly, as they doe, that God fore-knows and fore-tels that things will
come to passe, and yet that those things may be prevented, is to accuse the
Lord himselfe, both of want of wisedom in discerning; and of truth in
speaking, and of power in working.

If any object, that God saith, Saul will come to Keilah, I easily answer, that
God therin onely fore-tels what was in Sauls will and purpose; which compared
with the event, [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=18) shews that Sauls
purpose of will was alterable, not Gods, in whom there is neither change, nor
shadow of changing; neither is Iam. 1. 17.  [...] Sam. 14. 29. he as man that
he should repent. So the threatning of the Ni­nivits, as divers other
particular, both threatnings and promi­ses, are but upon condition, sometimes
expressed, and some­times understood. It is ignorantly said, that a thing will
be which is promised or threatned conditionally, except it be presupposed that
the condition will be first. Alike impious (as accusing God, both of being
deceived and deceiving) is that which followeth, that God knows, and
pronounceth, that the wicked shall be damned, and yet that there is no
necessity of it, but that it may be prevented by repentance. This is to say,
that God knowes, and saies a thing shall be, when it may not be; yea, when he
knows it shall not be, as in them that doe repent afterwards.

If they say further, that wicked men may and shall be sa­ved if they repent,
they say but as the truth is: but if there­upon they conclude of all simply,
that therfore they may ei­ther repent, or be saved, they erre, not knowing the
nature of a conditionall proposition: in which it is sufficient, if the
consequence or latter part follow truely upon the antecedent or former part;
though it may be, that neither consequent nor antecedent can possibly be. For
example, 1 Cor. 15. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 19, If there be no resurrection from
the dead, then is Christ not risen, and your faith is also in vain, &c. The
con­sequence is firm, If this, then that, and yet neither this nor that apart,
nor both together could possibly be.

### 1.19. ADVERSARIES.

THese men having, as they list, vilified Gods infallible Pag. 20. knowledg,
and unchangeable truth, come to his counsell, against which (say they) things
may be done, as Luk. 7. 30, the Pharises did against the counsell of God:
adding, that Christ knew those he admonished should perish, if they repented
not; yet there lay no necessity of their perishing because Christ knew it, for
as be testifieth, repentance might help it.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=18)

### 1.20. DEFENCE.

IN the former place they commit the fallacie of equivoca­tion, taking the word
counsell there for the internall and eternall decree of God in himself; When
by it, Act. 7\. is meant onely the outward instructions and exhortations
mi­nistred by Iohn Baptist.

Of salvation upon condition of repentance, I spake even now that which is
sufficient, to which the Reader may look back.

Comming to answer certaine scriptures, they begin withPag. 20, 21▪ 22. Prov.
16\. 4. which they set down thus, God created all things for his owne sake,
yea the wicked for the day of destruction, and so corupt the text whilst they
pretend the opening of  [...]t: for it is not sayd, that God created, but that
he made, that is, wrought, or did all things, as Psal. 11\. 3. & 15\. 2. and
generally where­soever the word is used. They therefore like unskilful
work­men make themselues labour, and loose it when they haue done, in proving
that God created all men good, and none bad. Neither is it wholly true, much
lesse the whole truth, which they conclude as the meaning, that man becomming
evill, God made the day of destruction for him, or him for the day of
destructi­on, as a iust recompence. For first, is it not all one (as they make
it) to say, that man is made for the day of destruction, and the day of
destruction for man; seeing the one imports the Lords work in or upon the
person for the thing, and the other in or upon the thing for the person.
Secondly, they misse the meaning of the place; which is, that all things in
the world, yea wicked men▪ who seem to liue without all compasse, yet come
under the divine ordination; and that as there is nothing so casuall in regard
of men, no not the casting of a lot, nor falling of a Prov. 16. 23 Mat. 10. 29
sparrow upon the ground, but comes under the Lords disposition and providence:
so there is no person, nor thing in the world so evill, but he rules and over-
rules it, as it may serue for the manifestation of his glory.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=19)

### 1.21. ADVERSARIES.

VNto the instances brought by us to proue Gods holyPag. 23. &c work, in and
about mens sinfull works, and Satans with them: for example, Gods bidding
Shemei curse David; His stretching out his hand upon Iob, and taking away all
that he had; His moving David to number Israel; sending a lying spi­rit upon
Ahabs Prophets, and the like: to all these they haue their ready and round
answer, that God onely suffered all these things, and that Satan and evill men
were the workers of them.

### 1.22. DEFENCE.

BVT first let the godly Reader, who will not oppose his own fleshly reason
against the wisdom of God, wel weigh the most effectuall and significatiue
terms that possibly can be used by the Holy Ghost every where, to shew the
Lords po­werfull work in those matters, and not his bare sufferance; as if he
were onely an idle looker on, letting men alone without medling with them, in
a great part of the greatest, even all the evill works of their liues: For
example, that God sent Ioseph into Egipt, and not his brethren; that he
hardened Pharaohs heart, Gen. 45. Exod. 4. & 9\. Iob. 1. 2. Sam. 16. 2. Sam.
24. 2. King. 22 Esay 10. 2. Thess. 2. and raised him up to shew in him his
power, &c. that the Lord gaue, and that the Lord took away from Iob; that God
bade Shimei curse David; that he moved David against Israel, to say, Go
num­ber Israel and Iudah: that he put a lying spirit in the mouth of A­habs
prophets: that Asshur was a staffe in the Lords hand, and the rod of his
anger: that he sent strong delusions upon them that recei­ved not the loue of
the truth; and lastly, (to let passe infinite o­ther places) that God by his
determinate counsell and foreknow­ledge, delivered Christ into the hands of
wicked men; and that they did what Gods hand and counsell had determined
before to be done.

Now, can we conceiu it to be for no more but a simple suf­fering, that the
Holy Ghost, who knew right well how to speak, should not once, nor twice, but
I may safely say, a thou­sand times in the Scriptures, use words and phrases
importing [[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=19)
so effectuall operation and working? Is to send men, to take away things, to
raise up, to use men as a staffe in the hand, and bid them goe, onely to
suffer them, and let them be still, and alone? Surely the Art of Chimists is
nothing to these mens, in evaporeating; who can reduce those most just and
power­full works of God to a very nothing; for no more is a bare suffering
then a not doing.

But we will briefly, as may be, handle the particulars, fol­lowing their foot-
steps, who beginning with Shemei, allowPag. 23. God onely the poore pittance
of sufferance, for Davids tryall: 2 Sam. 16. 10. But David himselfe will teach
them better, in saying, the Lord hath sayd to him, Curse David: who shall then
say, wherfore hast thou done so? For first, if God did onely suffer, that is,
not hinder Shemei, then God did not try David, but onely suf­fered Shemei to
try him, which  [...]s false: Secondly, this was no [...] onely a tryall, but
specially a punishment, or correction of his former sinnes, and therfore laid
upon him by God: but whether it were tryall, or correction, or both, it was in
that respect good, and of God as the Authour. Gods suffering of Shemei could
not be his tryall of David. It was Shemei who was suffered; but David who was
tryed and punished, who therfore bore it with the perceings of a tender and
humble heart, as Gods just work in ordering the malice of Shemei to become his
rod of correction.

Of Iobs afflictions, it is also presumptuously said by them, that God onely
suffered them. Iob speaking of his nakednesse, and misery, saith expresly,
that as the Lord had given, so the Lord Iob 1. 21. had taken away. They may as
well say, the Lord onely suffe­red the giving, as that he onely suffered the
taking away of Iobs substance. He ascribeth both alike to the Lord, in regard
of his providence ordering things according to their kinds. Neither is there
sense to imagine, that Iob so blesseth God for onely letting the divell, and
wicked men alone, to work their malice upon him, and his; but as by the eye of
faith he saw the hand of God (to be blessed for ever) ordering and
de­termining the same to his own holy ends. Can any man blesse [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=20) God meerly for
suffering the divell to hurt him? So God in 2 Sam. 24. 1 moving David to
number Israel, did not onely suffer him and Satan to do their work, but did
his own also by them, though they thought not so, in ordering the malice of
the one, and pride of the other, to a just occasion of punishing Israel,
against whom his anger was kindled; and this agrees well with both the
proportion of faith, and generality of the Scriptures.

The same in effect is to be said of the lying spirits seducing Pag. 24. 1
King. 22. Ahabs Prophets, in which God neither puts malice into the divell,
nor flattery into the hearts of false Prophets; but finding them there before,
and that of themselues, useth them by a most powerfull and skilfull hand to
the furthering of the deserved destruction of a wicked King. And where they
say, the controversie is, who was the first cause of this cursing, envie,
pride, and deceit, they miserably deceiue themselues and others. We abhorre
from saying that God is either first or last cause of any wicked thing; but of
the tryall or punishment, or other good in the ordering of the wicked thing;
as the just Iudg may use the malice or cruell disposition of the Exequu­tioner
for the exercising of just punishment upon the male­factour.Pag. 25. Neither
doe we say (as they dream) that cursing, envie &c. are good in God, and wicked
in the devill, and man; This is impossible: but we say, that the ordering of
them, and of the persons in whom they are, is good in God, either for tryall,
or punishment. For example, of such as goe to war, and take meanes, one is
moved therto, because he would not work; another in hope of booty and prey; a
third being weary of wife or friends; and so others, in the like corrupt
respects: And yet the King, or Captain may use and order them all, and all
their corrupt ends and intend­ments to his most just and lawfull ends, and
intentions, either in offensiue, or defensiue warres. And if one frail man can
make this lawfull use of the lawlesse and sinfull lusts of other men, should
proud flesh quarrell at Gods most infinite power and wisedom in his just and
holy works? Or will they (vain men) conjure him herein within the narrow
circle of [[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=20)
their understanding? Denying him at all to haue any hand in working, where
they (blinde molles) cannot discern how he works? O the depth of the riches
both of the wisedom and Rom. 11. 3 [...] knowledge of God? how unsearchable
are his judgements, and his waies past finding out? cryed he, who yet could
farre better discern of them, then they, or we. In opening Esa. 10\. 5. 6,
they speak the truth, and that which we intend, though presently after they
devoure the hallowed thing. They say well, thatPag. 26. one wicked Nation was
sent to punish another, which thing (say they) was good from God; namely, to
punish the wickednesse of some by others as wicked, and that this is Gods
justice, though they thought not so. Very well said; God justly punisheth the
Iewes by the Assirians; and how doth he that his just work? By the Assirians
invading and spoyling them; and no other way: ThisEsa. 10. 6. 7 12. 13. &c.
invading, spoyling, and murdering of Israel, was the Assirians horrible sin,
which therfore the Lord hated with great h [...]tred, and punished
accordingly. Here then we haue plainly the sinnes of men (and therfore wicked,
in regard of them the doers) avowed for the judgments of God, and in that
regard just and holy: Their daring any tongue to say, that the delusion
mentoned, 2 Thess. 2, comes from God otherwise, then by suffe­ring the divell
to delude, is but the fruit of th [...]i [...] bold ignorance, with which they
abuse unstable minds. As the divell and menss [...]lues, are the onely
authours of these delusions in them­selues considered; so are there divers
effectuali works of God in and about them. The first thing indeed is, Gods
per­mission or sufferance of the Divell to exercise his malice to hurt, wherin
(as they rightly say) he and his children takes delight; but this is rather a
not-work of God then a work; namely, a not restraining, or hindering him. Gods
next work is to or­der & direct Satans malice upon the persons so deluded,
that so they may receiue a punishment proportionable to their sins, both for
quality and quantity. A third work of God is in them, in depriving them of the
knowledge and discerning of the truth, which they formerly had, without the
loue therof, as the Scriptures testifie. What should I say more? These
Ad­versaries [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=21) elsewhere, being
set upon the rack, by the evidence of the place, thus speak, God will haue
them to be seduced, ther­by to punish them: confessing therin, their seduction
to be a punishment, and therin good and Gods work, and that which God wils
also, as they expresly affirm. The divell wills theirPag. 31. seduction as a
hurt to them; they will it, as a thing pleasing to them; God wils it as a
punishment of them: which last, to wit, a punishment, nothing is in it selfe,
but by way of re­lation put upon it, by the Iudge.

### 1.23. ADVERSARIES.

AND here, to thrust God from the government of the Pag. 27. world, they take
upon them to proue, that in this, and the like cases, Gods sending is nothing
but suffering: their proofe is, for that the holy Evangelists making relation
of the devils pos­sessing and drowning the swine, where one of them saith that
Christ sent them, another saith, that he suffered them to enter into them▪
Math. 8. 31. 32, Mat. 5. 12. 13, Luk. 8. 32.

### 1.24. DEFENCE.

BVT first I would know how they can proue, that though in one place, where no
punishment is directly intended, suffering and sending be all one, therfore
they are all one in all other places, where the Lord properly and professedly
in­tends a punishment? Secondly, I deny, that sending and suf­fering are here
all one: but as we find in many other places, so in this, that which one
Evangelist relates, though truely, yet not so fully, that another sets down
more throughly with all the parts. Luke saith, He suffered them, and this is
true; Mat­thew saith, He sent them, and this is the same which Luke saith, and
more; namely, together with the suffering of them, the directing and
determining also of their malice this way, for the Lords most holy, though
unknown ends. And if the Lord in this case onely suffered them, and let them
alone, then it should follow, that the creature doth some actions, wher­in he
is wholly left to himselfe without Gods medling with [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=21) him, or ruling
of him. But to come neerer the matter, I would know of these men, when two
Evangelists or Prophets set down the same thing in divers words, the one in
more sparing and strait, and the other in more large termes; whe­ther we be
not to expound the strayter by the larger, and not the larger by the strayter,
except there be some apparant re­straint; The Evangelist Matthew, relating the
miracle done by Christ upon Peters mother saith, He touched her hand, and Mat.
8. 15. Mark. 1. 31 the fever left her: Marke saith, He took her by the hand
and the fever left her. Should we now say, that to take her by the hand, and
lift her up, were nothing but to touch her hand? Or say we not truely, that
Mark said the same thing which Mathew doth, and more also: so is it in Christs
suffering and sending the divels. More plainly yet. We reade, how upon the
death of Absolom, Ahimaz the Priest being very desirous2 Sam. 18▪ 22. 23. to
be the messenger therof to David, importunes Ioab greatly to let him run, and
again to let him run. Ioab at the last condi­scends, and saith to him run, and
so v. 29, Ahimaz expresly af­firmes that Ioab sent him to David. He therfore
both suffered him to goe, and sent him. He suffered him, as having a desire of
himselfe; and sent him also, as his messenger to the King. So Christ both
suffered the devils, as desiring to possesse the swine rather then to be cast
into the deep; and also sent them, as ordering their malice to that object,
and none other, for the tryall of the Gergesenes.

In the next place, followeth to be considered of, the send­ing of Ioseph into
Aegypt, touching which, let these two things onely be added to the things
spoken, for the opening of the former instances. First, that Ioseph expresly
saith, not onely that God sent him into Aegipt, but that he sent him thither
to Gen. 45. 5. 7. 8. preserue life, which was Gods end, and not his brethrens,
and therfore depends upon Gods work, not upon theirs: but withall, that it was
not they that sent him thither, but God. Io­seph here makes God (in a respect)
a greater doer then his brethren: these men shut God quite out, and makes him
onely a sufferer, or one that left others alone, and meddles not [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=22) with them. His
brethren sold him, but God sent him; that is, used their envious injury to his
own gracious work, both towards him and them, and much other people, whom by
his meanes he kept aliue. Secondly, and for conclusion, let this be observed,
that Ioseph speaks of Gods sending him, to comfort his brethren in their
sorrow and fear, for the evill they had done to him. But I would know, what
comfort it could be to their perplexed hearts, to think, that God suffe­red
them to doe wickedly, that is, hindred them not? Can any man having grace, yea
common sense, take comfort in this, that God leavs him to himselfe to doe
wickedly, and hinders him not? A miserable comforter would this misera­ble
exposition haue made Ioseph to haue been. Whereas by the other and true sense,
though their sin were nothing the lesse, yet Gods providence appeares the
greater, and more gracious, in ordering their envy and malice to such an event
as it had, whence no small comfort did accrew unto them.

Of the death of Christ, and Gods work in giving himPag. 30, thereunto, even to
the cursed death of the crosse, by the hands of the wicked, I haue formerly
spoken at large, and will notPag. 4, 5. 6. 7. 8. repeat the same things.
Onely, I cannot but tax their allega­tion of Vrsinus as most vain, who in the
place not [...]d by them opposeth Gods permission, to his willing, and working
of sinne, as sinne, and so God indeed onely permits, and neither wils, nor
works sin, as sin. Otherwise, all that haue but once lookt  [...]nto Vrsinus
know, how vehemently he impugneth that ima­gination of bare permission,
avowing the effectuall work of Gods providence in and about sin: as both
working the acti­ons themselues, which he cals the materials of sin, and
with­drawing [...]ee Vrsinus of the di­vine Provi­dence. his grace; and
withall, destinating, directing, and bring­ing to their ends, the same
actions.

That of Amos 3. 6, is misapplyed (if by any alledged) and so easily answered.

The last place which they take upon them to answer is Ioh. 12, 39. 40,
Therfore they▪ (to wit, the Iewes, before whom Pag. 31. 32 [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=22) Christ had done
so many miracles) could not beleev, because that vers. 3 [...]. Esaias had
said, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts that they should
not see, &c.

### 1.25. ADVERSARIES.

THeir answer, after divers incongruous forms of speech, and some truths among,
is, that this, and the like places affirm, that they winked with their eyes,
lest they should see, for which cause, God gaue them up to this reprobate
sense.

### 1.26. DEFENCE.

THat is, (they being interpreters) for winking with their eyes lest they
should see, God gaue them up to wink with their eyes, lest they should see.
Thus, by this un­toward construction, the same thing is the cause and effect
of it selfe; their winking with their eyes, of their winking with their eyes.
It is certain, that this reprobate minde in wilfull ignorance, and obduration
was their proper sin; and as certain that it was Gods just judgement upon
their former sins, by his ordering therunto their corruption; and therfore
Christ spake to them in parables (which were dark without ex­position)Mat. 4.
10. 11. and expounded them when he was alone to them, which were about him:
rendring thereof this reason, because it was Mat. 13. 1 [...] given to them,
namely to his Disciples, to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but unto
them that were without, all things were done in parables, that seeing they
might see, and not perceiv, &c. and so Mathew saith, this was given to the
one, and not ch. 11. 26▪ given to the other: wherof also, elsewhere, he
rendreth the highest reason, because so it seemeth good in Gods sight: who
hath mercy on whom he will haue mercy, and whom he will, hee Rom. 9. 8
hardeneth.

Their alledging of Austin against the heathenish desteny, which they held to
come from the starres, is frivolous, and im­pious against Gods infinitely wise
and powerfull providence, in governing all things in heaven and earth. In
regard wher­of, the same Father saith, that the things which are done against
[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=23) Gods
will, are not done without his will: viz. ordering, and directing them to
their ends. And if the penners of this book were not voyd, either of all
knowledg of the Authours judg­ment, whom they cite, or modesty in themselues,
they would never alledg Austin and Ursinus as patrons of their errours about
the divine Predestination, and other points ther­upon depending: then whom the
Synode at Dort hath none (the one of former, and other of later times) more
clearly witnessing with it, and all the best Reformed Churches, in those
matters.

## 2\. CHAP. II.

Of Election.

THeir first head of Predestination being ended, theyPag. 34. 35 come next to
Election: which they consider, not as a part of the former with the
Scriptures, and all good Authours; but as clean another thing. But what, may
rather bee guessed, then gathered from their words.

And first, in laying down the supposed errours of their Ad­versaries
concerning Election, they doe us and the truth, mani­fold injuries, as the
Reader may evidently see, who pleaseth to compare with their calumnies, the
Confession of the Sy­nodeOf divine Predestina­tion, Art. 7. thereabout, which
is, Electio autem est immutabile Dei  [...]rop [...]stium &c. Election is the
unchangeable purpose of God, by which, before the foundation of the world were
laid, out of all man­kind, faln from its primatiue integrity into sin, and
destruction, by i [...]s own fault, according to the most free good pleasure
of his will, he out of his meer grace, hath chosen to salvation in Christ, a
certain multitude of such as were neither better, nor more worthy then others,
but lying in the common misery with others: vvhom (to wit Christ) he hath
appointed from eternity for Mediator and [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=23) Head of the
elect: and accordingly to giue them to him to be saved▪ and to call and draw
them effectually to fellowship with, him by his word and Spirit: or hath
decreed to bestow upon them true faith to justifie, sanctifie, and at the
length being powerfully kept in the fellowship of his Son, to glorifie them,
for the declaration of his mer­cy▪ and praise of the riches of his glorious
grace, as it is written: He hath chosen us in Christ before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy and without blame in his sight, with loue;
having predestinated us to the adop­tien of children, by Iesus Christ to
himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in that be­loved one.
Eph. 1\. 4. 5. 6. And elsewhere; Whom hee hath predestinated, them also he
hath called; and whom he hath called, them also he hath justified; and whom he
hath justified, them also he hath glorified, Rom. 8\. 30.

And by this joynt Confession, all equall Readers will judge of the faith of
the Evangelicall Churches in this point, and not by the partiall and perverse
relations of such Adver­saries, as catch here and there a piece divided from
the rest▪ and ometimes altering the words, alwaies perverting the meaning,
therby cast stumbling stones in their own, and others way.

### 2.1. ADVERSARIES.

THese things premised, the particulars follow: the first whereof is a
similitude brought, as they say by us to exem­plifyPag. 34.  [...] 36. our
opinion by, of a phisition entring into the house of sick men and curing some,
and that for nothing; who are bound to thank him; and not cureing others who
haue no cause to com­plain of him, because he ows them nothing. This
similitude they except against as that in which comparison is made between a
phisition, who hath litle mercy in him in healing but a few, and  [...]aving
infinite numbers unhealed and God and Christ, who are [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=24) most mercifull,
saying Come unto me (all) that are laden, and I Mat. 11. 28 will ease you.
They therfore to correct this, will haue Christ compared to a Phisition truely
mercifull, that going into the house of sick men, proclaims, that he will heal
all that will take a medi­cine; which some taking are cured, others refusing,
because it is bitter, as to Deny a mans self, Take up his crosse and follow
Mat. 11. 24 Christ, remain uncured.

### 2.2. DEFENCE.

FIrst, the Scripture by them cited for their catholike cure, is violently
stretched aboue it reach. For, neither are all in the world, no nor a handfull
(in comparison of the rest) laden, as Christ there speaks; that is, feeling
and groaning under the intollerable burthen of sin, and of the wrath of God
due therunto. This did very few of the other Iews, and fewer of the Pharises,
who thought themselues righteous: nei­ther doth Christ so call (and therefore
not offer to cure) by the preaching of the Gospell, every particular person in
the world, from the beginning to the end therof. This truth­lesse, and
shamelesse assertion we shall haue occasion hereafter to confute at large. In
the mean while, the place alledged proues onely thus much, that Christ, the
good Phisition of­fers to cure all that come to him, by the preaching of the
Gospell, with feeling of their sins, and faith in his death, and no more.

Secondly, even for them that come to Christ, and are ef­fectually healed by
him; these men erre (not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God for the
conversion of sinners) in affirming that he doth no more but provide the
medicine of grace, and outwardly perswade to the receiving of it: or that
there is (which they take wrongfully for gran­ted) the same natural power in a
wicked man to receiv grace offered by the Gospel, that there is in a sick man
to take the medicine offered him by the Phisition. This capitall errour of
theirs is in this place to be refuted, and the contrary truth to be cleared;
namely, that for the effectuall converting of [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=24) men, God not
onely provides the medicine (Christ and his benefits) and by the Gospell
exhorts to the rece [...]t thereof; and so leavs men to their own freewill
indifferently without further doing: But that w [...]thall, and aboue the
former, hee, by the inw [...]id work of h [...]s holy Sp [...]it given them,
makes ef­fectuall the outward means, in opening the heart to attend to the
things spoken, with reverence; in inlightning the understan­ding to discern
and assent unto the same things, as true and good, and that with particular
applications; in bending the will efficaciously to consent to the same; and
all the affecti­ons of the soule to loue and like them.

But before this be done by us, it is meet we answer an ob­jectionPag. 3 [...]
▪ or two, rather insinuated, then expresly made by them. Their words are,
which also, as appears by the mark in the margent, they would haue accounted
remarkeable, that Christ is willing and able to cure men by the means by which
they are curable, and not by the means by which they cannot bee cured: for
that his power herein is subject to his will, and his will is, that they
should take the medicine.

The substance of their objection is, that God will not, and therefore cannot
cure men otherwise then by their recei­ving the med [...]cine offered, Christ
and his benefits. Very true, God w [...]ll not, nor can so doe by his revealed
will, which to us is the rule of his power. But where they say; that Gods
power is subject to his will, this must be otherwise understood, then as they
do; conceiving it to be of that work of his will, by which he appoints others
what they shall doe: whereas it is to be understood of that work of his will,
by which he ap­points in himselfe what he will doe, in or about others. As
where it is said, The Lord is in heaven, and doth whatsoever Psal. 15.  [...]
pleaseth him; (that is, whatsoever he wils:) the meaning is not, that he doth,
or that his power is ruled by what he com­mands others to doe, but by his will
or purpose of doing himselfe what pleaseth him. God so wils the conversion of
all, to whom the Gospell comes, as to command the same, and to approue it
where it is: but hee wils the conversion of [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=25) some, namely the
elect, with another and further intention of will, setting a work the power of
his Spirit in their hearts ef­fectually, and as they speak irresistably to
convert them; by Ezech. 11. 19, & chap. 36. 26. 27. taking away their stony
heart, and giving them an heart of flesh, and by putting his Spirit within
them, and causing them to walke in his statutes. Gods power then is not
subject to his comman­ding will alwaies to work alike, where he commands
alike: but it is subject to his purpose of will in himselfe, according to the
good pleasure thereof to work, or not to work by means of his commanding will.
The Arguments of proofeMat. 25. 26 Rom. 8. 30 Ephes. 1. 9. distinctly follow.

  * 1 Arg. To receiv Christ and his grace, is to beleev in him; this beleeving, or faith by which we are saved, is the gift of God,

Ioh. 1. 12. Eph. 2. 8.

and not of our selues: So as not onely the medicine it selfe, and offer of it,
but also the hand to receiv it with (which is faith, and a beleeving heart) is
Gods gift. The Phisition offers and giues to the receiver the medicine, but
not the heart and hand  [...]o receiv it: but God giues these also to them
that doe receiv Christs justification and sanctification and salvation by him.
If it be said, that God giues faith by preaching, and exhor­tation to receiv
it, though he add no further work: I answer, that then God giues this gift and
grace of faith, as well, and as much to them that receiv it not, but remain
still unbelee­vers, as to them that beleev: yea more to many unbeleevers, as
having more, and more excellent outward means, then ma­ny that receiv it. It
is therefore absurd to say, that God giues faith, or to beleev, unto him that
never beleevs; specially faith being such a gift, as hath no existence, but in
the heart of him that beleevs.

  * 2 Arg. The Apostle elsewhere pronounceth all men, ei­ther

[...] Cor. 2. 14 15.

spirituall or naturall: Of the naturall man he testifieth; that he doth not,
nor can discern of themselvs the things of God, but that they are foolishness
unto him; but of the spirituall, that he discerns of such things and receivs
them. The naturall man he neither doth nor can, the spiritual he both can and
doth. What is it then that of the natural makes the spiritual man, that [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=25) can doe these
great things; the bare publishing and proclai­ming of this spirituall and
gracious medicine in and by Christ? Not so: for too many alas, remain naturall
still, to whom the Gospell of grace is very plenteously preached. What then.
Is it his freewill to receiv it, to whom it is preached? Not so, neither: for
his will is but the will of a naturall man, who neither doth, nor can discern
and receiv the things of God, till he become spirituall. It is then Gods holy
Spirit, which he giues to one that hears the Gospell, and not to another;
which makes one hearer spirituall, and not another: thereby changing both the
will, and whole man of him to whom he giues it.

  * 3 Arg. A third is taken from 1. Cor. 3. 6. 7. Paul plants,

1 Cor. 3. 6. 7

Apollo waters, but God giues the increase. And, Neither he that plan [...]eth
is any thing, nor he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase. The
Corinthians did too highly advance the Mini­sters by them factiously adhered
unto, as is evident; setting them in Christs, and Gods place: the Apostle
thereupon puls them down, and sets them in their owne place, shewing that
except God▪ and a further work then their preaching, how sound and excellent
soever, all  [...]s nothing. But by these mens device, there needs no further
work of grace from God, then the gracious proclamation made by preaching, to
be received by mans free-will: and so Gods further work of giving the
in­crease, is quite shut out.

  * 4\. Arg. When the Iewes, Ioh. 6\. murmured at Christs

Ioh. 6 44.

words, he to stop their mouths, and to prevent his Disciples offence-taking,
sayth, that No man commeth unto him, except the father, which sent him, draw
him. If any say, that God drawes men to Christ by the preaching of the
Gospell, it is true, but not to the purpose of the place: for so the Iewes
were drawn that came not, as well as they that came and be­leeved. There is
then requisite that men may come to Christ,

Vers. 47.

or beleeue on him, a further drawing, then that by the out­ward preaching
onely. Not that God drawes men, as horses draw a cart, or by any violence, or
compulsion against, or [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=26) without their
will; but that he makes them by the inward work of his Spirit (joyned with the
outward word) of un­willing, willing, effectually driveing away ignorance and
re­bellion; and so enlightening the minde, as to as [...]ns, and the will, to
consent.

  * 5 Arg. Lastly, these adversaries suffering their mercifull

2 Tim. 2. 24. 25.

Phisition to go no further then the proclaiming & offering of the medicine of
grace to the sick of sin, do therein make many despisers of all grace and
goodnes, (so living and dying▪ and perishing for ever) more bound and beholden
to God, and his grace, then many other the most faithfull, holy, and happy
servants of Christ. The reason is plain; for that many liveing and dying
impenitent, haue had the Gospell in a far more full and plenteous manner and
measure published and preached unto them, with all other outward motives and
pro­vocations of grace; then many that truely beleev and repent. These
adversaries to the grace of God, would make the faith­full servants of God
more Pharisaicall then the Pharisees themselues; with whom they consort in
divers poynts of their faith. The Pharisee that went up with the Publican into
the Tem­ple

Luk. 18. 10  [...]1.

to pray, yet thanked God that he was not like other men as ex­tortioners,
unjust, &c. nor as the Publican: But by these mens doctrine, we should thank
our selues,  [...]f we be not like the wicked and gracelesse men, and not God:
for God, by their saying, hath not done so much for many of us, as for many of
them, who haue enioyed more excellent outward means of grace offered, then
many of the others. Oh you the followers of these guides; yea, you the guides
your selvs, call to remem­brance the dayes of your ignorance, and prophanenes,
(spe­cially divers of you) before your first conversion to the Lord [...] and
consider whether you were not deeper rooted in sin, then many others, who yet
haue not received the grace which you haue done, to beleev, and repent; and
giue the glory to Gods grace, and not to your own free-will, that you beleev,
repent, and obey, rather then they. Be not unmindfull of this un­speakable
mercie of God towards you aboue others, equal and [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=26) aboue you in the
enioying of outward means, least it come to  [...]o appeare in time, that you
were never indeed partakers thereof.

### 2.3. ADVERSARIES.

NExt, they come to shew what Election is, laying down forPag. 36. 37. 38. 39.
&c. that end, at large, the Parable of the mariage of the Kings son, Math. 22.
and infisting specially upon the Lords conclu­sion, vers. 14. Many are called,
but few are chosen: inferring thereupon, that it was the Kings will and
pleasure, that all (the bidden guests) should come and bring their wedding
garment.

### 2.4. DEFENCE.

THE Scripture we acknowledge, and their inference: but both affirm and haue
proved, that, besides and aboue this will of God in bidding, and inviteing the
guests (common  [...]o those that came not, and that came; and to those that
came with, and without the wedding garment) there was a further work of Gods
pleasure, and will towards the Elect vessels of mercie, setting awork his
powerfull spirit in their hearts, to make them willing to come, and that
furnished, as they ought. And so oft as these men (as they doe it very often)
doe urge the will of God, that men should beleeve, repent, and be saved, so
oft the Reader must call to mind this distinction. First, that this will of
God extends but to such persons, as to whom the Gospell (the onely means of
inviting men) is preached. Se­condly, that towards those that do effectually
beleeve and re­pent, there is also a further degree of Gods good will and
pleasure, according to which he reveales unto them effectual­lyMat. 11. 25
Act. 16. 14 Act. 13. 18 2. Tim. 2▪ 25. heavenly things; opens their hearts to
attend to the things spo­ken, and gives them to beleev and repent upon their
hearing; as the peculiar fruit of their eternall election.

Their spiritual sense also of the parable I acknowledge. But whereas Ereunetes
sees, that Election consists in the wedding gar­ment, and righteousnesse of
Christ, which is Christ himself, whom the faithfull do put on by faith and
obedience: He sees that which [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=27) is not to bee
seen, and sees not that which is plain enough. Who having common sense, will
say, that Christ and his righ­teousnesse; and the chusing of a man, or his
election, are all one? Christ is not our election, but he in whom we are
chosen, or ele­cted. Neither is our putting on of Christ by faith and
obedience, Ephes. 1. 4. our election; as they unskilfully make it. Election is
Gods work, not ours; for it is God that clruseth us, and not we our selues:
but the putting on of Christ by faith and obedience, is our work by Gods
grace, and not Gods. God doth not be­leeve and obey, but we by his grace.

Now before we come to refute their opinion about Electi­on, hereafter layd
down more plainly, but here more confu­sedly, with certain scriptures, rather
heaped together then orderly brought for their purpose; it is expedient we
exa­mine a distinction brought by them of this divine Election, by occasion of
an objection from Ephes. 1. 4. which is, that ele­ction is either in the
decree or purpose of God onely; or else effectual­ly Pag. 42. 43 and
particularly made, as they speak. This distinct on in a good sense (but not in
theirs) is good and true. For God e­lects men before the world, or before they
be, in his decree and purpose onely. But it must withall be considered, that
this election is also (in Gods purpose) actuall and particular be­fore the
world. Nothing in God is potentiall, b [...]t all actuall. Otherwise there
should be imperfection in God, as all poten­tials are, being to be perfected
by their actualities. They should therefore say, that Gods election of some
particulars, was onely in his decree before the world, and is by him in time
brought into actuall execution. And here also it must be minded, that whereas
all the question (in effect) amongst all, is about election as before the
world, and in Gods eternall decree: they (in effect) passe that wholly by, and
onely treat of it, as God in time puts that in decree in actuall exe­cution.

Now though their reasoning of election here be full of con­fusion and
contradiction, as any judicious Reader may see,  [...]d such as out of which
their meaning can hardly be picke [...] [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=27) yet this is
plain, that they will haue it to depend upon the condi­tion of faith and
repentance going before, affirming expresly, that those persons in whom God
findeth faith and obedience, them he ele­cteth to salvation in his son, of
meer mercie, for the quality which he findeth in them. But now wherein this
election properly stands, they neither shew us, nor understand themselues, as
is plain by their crosse and unconstant assertions of and about it; wherein
yet they are so peremptory and bold, as if they car­ried all by plain
demonstration of undoubted truth. What course then are we to hold with them?
Considering it is with them as Salomon speaks of the harlot, who was lowd and
stub­born, whose feet aboad not in the house, but she was now without, Prov.
7. now in the streets, and laying wayt in every corner. I haue no o­ther way
but to pursue them into, and hunt them out of eve­ry corner, where they lye in
wayt to deceive.

First then for Math. 22. Many are called, but few chosen, It must be noted,
that there are three degrees of mens calling to Christ. The first, when the
Gospel is preached, but the so called refuse wholly to answer & come: so were
the first guests Vers. 3. called. The second is, when men are perswaded to
come after a maner, and in some shew, but without truth of faith and
re­pentance; and so he came who wanted the wedding garment. Vers. 11. The
third is, when men come in true faith and obedience, as they ought; and so the
rest of the guests came. Of this third and last degree of calling the Apostle
speakes, saying, Whom Rom. 8.  [...] [...] he predestinated them also he
called; whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified them
also he glorified. This cannot be sayd of either of the two former sorts of
called, but of the latter onely.

And for the Election here spoken of, it may well be under­stood of the
eternall election in Gods decree; the fruits and wholsome effects whereof this
unprepared guest shews him­self not to be made partaker of, though he
participated of the outward calling, even to the making of some shew of that
which in truth he wanted. And as the Apostle affirms of theEph. 1. 3. 4. 5.
13. Ephesians, that they were elect of God in Christ before the foun­dation
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=28) of the
world, in regard of the faith and holines appearing in them: so might the Lord
well say of this, and other (his like) hypocrites, and unsanctified ones; that
they are not of the number of the elect, or chosen in Gods eternall decree, so
far as their present state manifests. Neither is it the meaning of the Lord in
those words simply to reprove him for not ha­ving on a wedding garment; but
for coming thither and not having it on. Friend, how comest thou hither, not
having on a Math. 22.  [...]. 12. wedding garment? and so to warn others to
make sure their e­lection, and not to content themselues with the shew of
obe­dience, without inward truth. And taking the words thus, they make for
our, and against their opinion.

Or take the words as meant of the actual execution of electi­on, and that in
the largest sense, so as in the same be cōprehen­ded whatsoever God doth in
time, for the effectual procuring of a mans salvation; as of the giving of
Christ for him, of the Gospell to him, and by it faith and holinesse, and the
spirit of adoption; and so glory in the end: and we say, all this he doth
according to his eternall purpose of election, effectuall onely in those who
are made partakers of the inward calling, and wedding garment thereby, and not
in all that are called out­wardly. For known unto the Lord are all his workes
from the be­ginning of the world. Whatsoever God doth in time, that heAct. 15.
18 purposed to do from eternitie, as he doth it. But take electi­onPag. 39. 42
43. 44. as these men do in most places, and which seems likewise to be their
meaning upon best advise; for that first work of mercie in God by which he
actually and particularly, as they speak, chuseth persons to salvation; they
erre with great error in holding that this election is for the qualitie which
God findes in persons, and upon the condition of faith and repentance going
before, and that God onely chuseth and electeth where he finds faith and
o­bedience to his son.

For first, the Apostle teacheth, Eph. 1. 4. that we are chosen Ephes. 1. 4. in
Christ (to wit, as the mediator and meanes of communica­ting all spirituall
blessings with us) before the foundation of the world was layd, that we might
be holy and unblameable in loue be­fore [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=28) him. This is
meant (our adversaries granting it) of the de­cree of election: the meaning
therefore must needs be, that God hath from eternity decreed to elect or chuse
us in time actually, not because we should or would be holy, as these men
perversly imagine, but that we might be holy. As God from eternity purposed to
chuse men, so hee chuseth them actually in time: But he purposed from eternity
to chuse men that they might be holy, and therfore actually in time chuseth
them, that they might be holy, and unblameable before him; and therfore not
because they are holy, or beleev and obey. Gods actuall chusing therfore goes
before our actuall faith, holinesse, repentance, and obedience, as the cause;
and fol­lows them not, as an effect, as they mis-judge. The same is confirmed
from v. 5, where we are said to be predestinated to Vers. 5. the adoption of
children by Iesus Christ: With which joyne that, Rom. 8. 30, Whom he
predestinated, them also he called, and whom he called, them also he
justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified. To be elected, to
wit, in decree, and to be predestinated (in the good part, as here) are the
same in sub­stance: onely, we are said to be predestinated in respect of the
supernaturall ends, (and means leading therunto) unto which God in time
bringeth us; and to be elect, or chosen in respect of others, from whom God
selecteth us. Now, if we be predestinated of Christ to the adoption of
children, then not because we are children or beleev, which are the same, Ioh.
1\. 12. To this purpose it is, that the Lord so oft by Moses beats upon this,
that he chose the Israelits to be his people, out of his loue to them, and
loue and promise to their Deut. 4. 35. ch. 7. 7. 8, ch. 14. 2. Fathers:
excluding all other motiues, and placing the cause of his chusing them in
himselfe alone, and his loue, and the sta­bility of his purpose and promise.
Moses testifyeth, that God chose them that they might be a holy and peculiar
people unto the Lord: But these men will make God begin at the other end, and
chuse men because they are an holy and peculiar people, that is, having faith,
and repentance going before.

Ioyn we with this, that in the Psalm: Blessed be the man [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=29) whom thou
chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may Psal. 65. 4. dwell in
thy courts; we shalbe satisfied with the goodnesse of thy house, of thy holy
Temple Faith then and holinesse are not the fore found conditions for which
God chuseth a man: but the actuall conferring and giving of them, according to
an eternall purpose, is the very actuall chusing of him: even that by which
God severs, elects, selects, and chuseth him out of the masse of the wicked.
Every mans common sense will teach this. All are of themselues, and by nature,
sinners, and subject to wrath. Now what is it for God actually to chuse some
from the rest, but to bestow that upon them actually and effectually, by which
they differ actually from the rest, which is faith and repentance. God doth
not therfore (as these ad­versaries imagine) chuse, upon condition of faith
and repentance going before: but doth, by the very bestowing of these graces
of faith and repentance, which others want, chuse, elect, se­lect and sever
actually from others, the elected from eternity in his decree.

Lastly, by the crosse doctrine of these men, we should chuse God, before God
chuse us; for by beleeving and obey­ing, we chuse God to be our God; and for
this (by their crooked rule) God after chuseth us to be his people. Thus proud
flesh will needs be before hand with God. But Christ our Lord leads us another
way, saying; You haue not chosen Iob. 15. 16. me, but I haue chosen you, to
wit, first: which he speaks, not onely of their Apostolicall, but of their
Christian state also, as the words following make it plain, that whatsoever ye
shall Iam. 1. 6.  [...] Iob. 3. 22. aske of the Father in my Name, hee may
giue it you; Vnto the state of faith and obedience onely doth this promise
apper­tain.

Their assertion thus disproved, wee will come to their proofs, which are
partly impertinent, and partly against them­selues. The first is, The Lord
chuseth to himselfe a righteous man. The place, which is Psal. 4\. 3, they
note not, for what purpose they best know: but all may know it is grosly
perverted, a [...] not being meant of Davids election to salvation, but to the
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=29) Kingdom
of Israel; whose glory that way his adversaries would haue turned unto shame,
but all in vain, v. 3. But con­sider we this choise in proportion to the
other, and see what followeth. Gods actuall chusing of David to the Kingdom of
Israel, was that by which he had first actuall right to that Kingdom, to which
he had right before, onely in Gods de­cree, and of which afterwards he had
possession. So Gods actuall chusing of a man to the Kingdom of heaven, is that
by which he hath first actuall right to that Kingdom, to which he had no right
before, saue in Gods decree. Gods chusing a man therfore actually (as they
speak) to the Kingdom of heaven, is the very giving of him faith and
holinesse; for by these he hath this actuall right to eternall life and glory.
If therfore Gods chusing men actually (opposed to his chu­sing them in decree)
be his giving them actuall faith and re­pentance, then their faith and
repentance goes not before Gods choise, but on the contrary, his chusing
before their beleeving. The giving of the grace by God, must needs goe before
the having of it by men.

With like successe, they quote, Rom. 9\. 25, and  [...] Pet. 2\. 10▪ &c. which
haue no shew of ground, whereon to build their assertion, that God chuseth men
actually and particularly be­cause they beleev and repent: but most firm
foundation for the contrary truth; Men become Gods people, and beloved
actually, by actuall faith and repentance: which before were his, and beloved
onely, in the purpose of his will, according to election, Rom. 9. 11. 13, and
elect, according to Gods foreknow­ledge, 1 Pet. 1. 2, God therefore actually
chusing men, and making them his people, and beloved (which are all one)
byEphes. 2. 8▪ 2 Tim. 2. 2 [...] giving them to beleev and repent: their
beleeving and repen­ting cannot goe before his chusing them, but the
con­trary. The giving of the gift, is in nature before the having and using of
it by him to whom it is given; and therefore  [...]ods chusing them, which is
his giving them faith and re­pentance, is before their beleeving, and
repenting.

The next place, being Rom. 11\. 5. 7, they set down craftily [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=30) thus: v. 5, If
they seek righteousnesse by faith, and these are th [...] the elect according
to the election of grace. The words of the Apostle are; So then at this time
also, there is a remnant, accord­ing to the election of grace: and v. 7, the
election hath obtained it, and the rest were hardened. The thing obtained was,
the righte­ousnesse chap. 10. 3. 6 of God, and of faith; the wedding garment,
the righ­teousnesse which Israel obtained not, because they went about to
stablish their own righteousnesse: but the election obtained it by be­leeving;
[...]. 4. even that remnant wherof Paul was one, according to the election of
grace. What can be more plain against these men? Or how can any more directly
crosse the Apostle, then they doe? The Apostle saith, we obtain the
righteousnesse of faith, which is the wedding garment, according to the
election of grace: They say, we obtain the election of grace according to the
wedding garment, and righteousnesse of faith and obe­dience. The Apostle
saith, the election obtains the righteous­nesse of Christ by faith: they say,
the righteousnes of Christ by faith, obtains the election: turning Gods work
upside down, that they may establish their own. Besides this proud
exalta­tion, and Babylonish building of mens works against Gods grace (for if
it be of obedience, as they say, then of works, to wit, the works of
obedience) the Apostle v. 6, clean over­turns, saying. If by grace, then it is
no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace: but if it be of works,
then it is no more grace, otherwise works is no more works.

In alledging from 2 Pet. 1\. 10, that this election must be made sure, they,
as before, craftily conceal part of the Apostles words, which being laid down,
as the Text hath them, over­throw plainly their errour. The words are, Giue
diligence to make your calling and election sure. He joyns calling and
electi­on together: they leav calling out. And herein I commend them, as the
master did the unrighteous steward, for doing wisely▪ [...] Pet. 1. 2. Iam. 2.
5. Eph. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 2.  [...] Pet. 1. 3. though not honestly. For who
knows not, that Gods cal­ling us, goes before our answering him by faith, and
obedi­ence, as the cause therof? God cals (and also elects) men to faith, and
obedience, and not for them. The Apostles mean­ing [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=30) is, that the
faithfull should use all godly care for the esta­blishing and confirming of
themselvs in the grace of God, to which they were formerly called and chosen.

The like prophane boldnesse, they use towards, 1 Thess. 1\. 4, where for the
Apostles text, Knowing beloved your electi­on of God; or, Knowing, beloved of
God, your election, they put their own glosse, The houshold of faith, the
Church of God, are the elect of God. The Apostle, v. 4, mentions his knowledg
of their election, and v. 5. 6, the ground of that his knowledg▪ and
perswasion, which was their faith and obedience by re­ceiving the Word by him
preached. They were not therefore made elect of God, by faith and obedience,
but therby known for such by men.

Col. 3\. 12, makes against them also; where their election is mentioned as a
reason to moue them to put on bowels of mercy, and all goodnes. As indeed the
gracious purpose of Gods election, with his effectuall calling followeth, and
manifest­  [...]th, is the onely Evangelicall motiue to all earnest study of
obedience.

Their assertion following, that Election is not of particular Pag. 39.
persons, but of qualities, is monstrous, and most crosse to the Scriptures,
which never mention election of qualities, but al­waies of persons. Is the
meaning of Christ, Math. 22\. Many are called, but few chosen, that many
qualities are called, and few chosen? What quality but of sin, and misery,
sees the Lord in them whom he calleth? Or how can qualities be either called,
or chosen to grace or glory? Christ tels his Disciples,Ioh. 15. 19▪ that he
had chosen them out of the world. If they were chosen1 Ioh. 3. 13▪ & 5\. 19.
out of the world, which lyeth in wickednesse, and hates the good; for what
good qualities, trow we, were they chosen? If they were chosen out of the
world, and so were of the world before they were chosen out of it; how had
they faith and obedience, for which these men wil appoint God to chuse them,
or else not? That we are Gods generation, viz. by crea­tion, is true, but
impertinent. Of  [...]ods working good quali­ties in men by his word, and
spirit, and of their resisting, or not [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=31) resisting, we
haue spoken, and shall speak else where. Rom. 8, 29, makes for them as the
former places; shewing plainly•, that our predestination or election goes
before our calling, our calling before our justification, our justification
before our glorification.

The note in the English Testament upon Ephes. 1, is the samePag. 40. which the
Synode at Dort, and all Evangelical Churches pro­fesse. Onely these mens
errour is, in their not putting a diffe­rence between Gods decree to saue, and
his actual saving of them that beleev, whether by justifying or glorifying
them. Gods chusing a man, (whether in decree from eternity, or by actuall and
effectuall calling, and calling of him out of the state of sin, by giving him
the spirit of faith and grace) goes before his beleeving; for hee cannot
beleev before hee haue faith, nor haue it before God giue him it: but his
actu­all saving by justification and glorification, follows after faith.

The discourse which here they fall into touching Gods de­liberating, Pag. 40.
41 and decreeing to make man, &c, is impertinent, con­sidering that our
question is onely of that decree which is E­vangelicall, and of mercy, and so
presupposeth man faln, and in misery by reason therof: So is the deliberation
which they imagine in God, incompetent to his infinite wisedom and
pro­vidence. They make God like a weak man, contriving his purposes with ifs &
ands; as though he stood in a mammering, and unresolved, what to doe, till hee
found by experience, what men would doe first.

And here I demand of these men, what if some of those so actually, really, and
particularly chosen to salvation (as they speak) upon their faith and
obedience, and to whom God hath so fully purposed, without ifs or ands, to
impart the Kingdom of heaven, doe afterwards wholly fall away (as they hold
any may, and many doe) then all this actuall, reall, and particular chusing,
and setled purpose of God, is voyd and frustrate; and God must unpurpose what
he had former­ly purposed really, actually and particularly; and undecre [...]
[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=31) what he
had formerly decreed. They should therfore haue learnt in this place, from
their more learned Masters, to haue added the condition of their persevering
to the end, without which it is certain, none shall be saved. But then they
must needs rush upon the same deperate rock, with the other; which is, that
none are thus actually and particularly elect or chosen, till they be dead,
seeing they deny all certainty of perseverance, to the living; not
acknowledging any thus elect, either before the world, or in it, but after the
world, and in heaven.

The Scriptures here produced to proue that men are notPag. 41. 42 43. 44.
actually, really, and particularly Gods people, and partakers of the grace of
Christ before the world, and they also be, and before they haue learned
Christ, might well haue been spared, as proving that onely which no man doubts
of. Onely they must learn, that it is one thing for a people to become
actually Gods people, and partakers of his grace, and another thing for God
actually to purpose in himselfe from eternity, in time to make them such.
Nothing in God is potent all, but all actuall.

Their proofs of an universall calling in the means of sal­vation, we will
presently examine; not [...]ng onely by the way, their apparant contradiction
of themselues, and unjust insi­nuation against us. They contradict themselues
in saying, that God chuseth all men, good and bad upon condition of faith and
obe­dience, the partition wall being broken down. To chuse, is to take some
from the rest, and not to take all. He that takes all alike, chuseth none.
Besides, by this, the same persons are both elected and reprobated, chosen,
and refused: and every one alike either of both. Then which nothing is more
absurd. The insinuation is, that we make God an accepter of persons, inPag.
43. 44 saying, that he chuseth men that haue not put on Christ. Nothing lesse.
To accept persons in the Scriptures, is to judge of, or doe to a person,
better or worse, for some by thing in or about him: whereas God in chusing one
before another, whe­ther in the decree, or actuall application, of grace
respect­eth [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=32) nothing in the
chosen, but onely the good pleasure of his Ephe. 1 4. 5 Math. 11. 25. 26. own
will, in himselfe. This is the highest cause that God would haue us take
knowledge of; though wee also know in the generall, that God is no way wilfull
in his will, though hee be most free, but alwaies most wise and holy. To
remoue a little further out of the way this stone, at which divers stum­ble.

First, we know, that all by nature, and of themselvs, are subject to sin, and
condemnation, and so might in justice haue been left of God, without remedy of
redemption. If then it had been but just with God to haue left all in that
state of sin and misery, into which they haue cast themselvs, it is then meere
mercy, that he hath chosen any in his Son, or given him for any. Now if of all
men, indefinitely considered as faln. God haue purposed in himself from
eternity, to raise up some, by working effectually in them faith and
obedience, so to saue them; and not to work the same in others, but to leav
them to their own affected and effected pravity, and sin, and so in justice to
condemn them for that their wickedness by them freely committed, and
obstinately continued in; I would know, in regard of whether of these two
works we can be said to make God, a respecter of persons? The one being a pure
work of his mercy, and the other of his justice. Why God should thus chuse
some, and passe by others, in the generall, we see reason, both by the light
of nature, and the Scriptures; namely, that the glory of his power, and
justice might be seen Rom.  [...]. 21.  [...]2\. 23. in the one, and of the
riches of his mercy in the other. But why in particular, the Lord God should
rather chuse this man, or woman, then that, we leav unto himselfe to know,
till the day of revelation of hidden things. Onely, let our care and diligence
be in the mean while, first, to know assu­redly, that we are our selvs of that
blessed number, and by such marks, as cannot deceiv; and so knowing, both to
haue in our hearts, and to expresse in word and deed all thankful­nes unto our
good God, and most gracious Father, who hath vouchsafed unto us, aboue many
others, such singular mercy.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=32)

### 2.5. ADVERSARIES.

IT now remains, we come to examine, whether (to use theirPag. 44. own words)
the wicked that come to damnation, had by this purpose of God (spoken of
before) means of salvation, if they had not refused it.

### 2.6. DEFENCE.

FIrst, if this of outward means were granted them, it would not help them to
proue the purpose of God to saue all; ex­cept they could also proue, that
there needed nothing on Gods part, but the outward means. This, as they cannot
doe, so haue I formerly proved plainely the contrary: and that though God so
provide, that even Paul plant, and Apollos water, in the most full, and free
offer of the outward means that can be; yet except the same God, by the inward
and ef­fectuall work of his Spirit, giue the increase also, all is nothing.
Secondly, I deny, that the wicked who perish, all, and every one of them, haue
had, or haue the outward meanes of sal­vation offered them.

### 2.7. ADVERSARIES.

BVT here, before they come to that which they promise,Pag. 44. 45 46, &c▪ they
offer, and enterprise the proving of another thing, which is, that Christ dyed
unfeynedly for all without exception; by whose death all might be saved, if
they did not reject it.

### 2.8. DEFENCE.

FIrst, I here acknowledge, that the death of Christ (beingAct. 20. 2 [...].
Rom. 5. 10. God) is in it selfe sufficient for all, and every person in the
world; and so might haue been an effectuall price for all, if it had pleased
the Father, and him so to haue ordained. But that it was the Fathers purpose
in giving his Son, or his in giving himself to the death, to pay the price of
the sins of the whole world, and of every particular person therin, and to
satisfy Gods justice for the same, we deny, and they in vaine [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=33) go about to
prov. That Christ dyed for sinners, and the ungod­ly, and such as were dead,
Rom. 5\. 6. 8, we grant, as being the Apostles assertion; but that he dyed for
all such, is their bold addition; and (which is worse) plainly against the
drift of the place. The Apostle having before treated at large of
justi­fication by faith, shews in this chapter the singular benefit acrewing
therby to the faithfull, as peace with God, accesse into grace, rejoycing in
hope of the glory of God, and that also in tribulation: that their tribulation
working patience, their pati­ence experience of Gods power, and grace in
sustaining them; that experience, hope that they should never be confounded,
as ha­ving such assurance of the loue of God in their hearts by the Holy Ghost
given of God unto them. The ground of all which hee layeth, v. 6. 8, for that
Christ dyed for them being ungodly and sin­ners: and thereby appropriates this
dying of Christ unto these sinners, who are in their time thus justified by
faith, haue peace with God, &c. which limitation the Apostle most plainely
makes, where he sai [...]h; For when we were yet without strength, Ver. 6. 8.
God commendeth his loue towards us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
dyed for us. He speaks of them, and them alone in this plaee, as dyed for by
Christ, who were justified by him. And let me here turn into the very bowels
of these mens er­rour, the sword of the spirit, which the Apostle, in this
place, puts into mine hand; and proue briefly, but evidently, that Christ dyed
not for all and every person, as is said; but onely for them, and for all them
who in the end are saved, and ob­tain eternall life by him. These men (and
rightly) in this very place, make it all one, for Christ to die for sinners,
and toPag. 45. be their reconciliation: as the Apostle makes them all one who
are justified by faith, and for whom Christ dyed. Shall we then make doubt to
conclude with the Apostle, that they which are justified by Christ bloud
(which are the sinners for whom hee dyed, v. 9,) shall be saved from wrath
through him, v. 9, or that they which are reconciled to God by the death of
his Son (that is, say they, for whom he dyed) shall much more be saved by his
life? For which purpose also hee after enters into compa­rison [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=33) of the first,
and second Adam, shewing, that as by the offence of one all were dead: so by
the righteousnesse of one, the gift Ver. 15. 16. 17. of grace should abound to
many, or to all: by which gift after­wards he shews himselfe to mean both
justification, and reigning in life. He puts the two Adams as two common
roots, the former as a naturall root, and the latter as a spirituall; and
af­firms, that all that were, and are, in the former, and na­turally growing
of him dyed by his sin: and proportionably, that all in the latter, liue by
his righteousnes. I say, that were in the first Adam; for Eve, though she were
of mankind, yet dyed not by Adams sin, because she was not in him, when he
sinned; neither yet Christ, as man, not coming of him by naturall generation,
but by miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost. So on the contrary, they (and
onely they) who by faith are planted in Christ, and justified by his bloud,
shall be sa­ved Vers 9. Vers. 17. from wrath through him, and receiving of the
gift of righte­ousness, shall raign in life by him.

The Apostles meaning therefore is not, that Christ died for all particulars,
but that all for whom he dyed, shall be saved by him: which seeing all are
not; it followeth that he dyed not for all, as they mean.

For the right interpretation of 2. Cor. 5. 14. 15. For the loue of Christ
constraineth us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were
all dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth
live unto themselues, but unto him which dyed for them, and r [...]se again:
and of many the like places, the com­mon and true rule must haue place; that
note of universalitie, as all whatsoever, and the like, must be restrained to
the matterIoh. 14, 13. 1 Ioh. 5. 14 Math. 23. 3 Act. 2. 4 [...]. in hand: as,
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will doe: that is, whatsoever
according to my will. So, whatsoever they (the Pharisees) bid you doe, that
doe: to wit, accord [...]ng to Moses. So, they that beleeved, had all things
common that is, all things law­full, and for nec [...]ssitie. Likewise, Luk.
4. 1. All the world should be taxed, that is, a [...]l under Caesar: which a
great part of the world was not. So All things are lawful for me, and I become
all to all: that is, not all absolutely, but all things in themselves [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=34) indifferent, and
of that kinde, of which the Apostle speakes. I then answer, that by all in
this place, he means all of that sort, of whom he speakes: all, whom the loue
of Christ constrai­ned: all, that so judge of Christs death: all, that were
dead; that is, were dead, but are aliue by grace, and so should not henceforth
live to themselues, but unto him which died for them: Christ that one
Mediator, died for all them.

To 1. Tim. 2. 6. Christ gave himselfe a ransom for all. We an­swer, that by
all is not meant all particulars in the world, but all sorts of people, as
well Kings (which many Christians, considering their cruell hatred of Christ,
and other enormi­ties, thought rather to be prayed against, then for) as
others. The Apostle here informes them better, and that Christ dyed for all,
and would haue all, that is, men of all sorts saved, e­ven Kings as well as
others. It is not possible for any Christi­an to pray for every particular
person in the world: norLuk. 13. 23. 24. 1. Ioh. 1. 15 Math. 7. 6. 2. Tim. 4.
14. lawfull to pray that God would saue all in generall: seeing we know by the
Scriptures, that all shall not be saved, and are also forbidden to pray for
some in particular.

The Apostle 1 Tim. 4. 10. speaks not of Christs dying for all men, but of Gods
saving of all men, specially them that beleev, If he speak of salvation by
Christs death, God should save unbeleevers so living and dying: for he sayth
not that God would be, but that God is the saviour of all men. He speaks
ap­parantly of Gods providence over all, preserving good and bad; yea saving
man and beast; specially them who suffer re­proch, Psal. 36. 7. because they
trust in the living God. To conclude, Those for whom Christ died, he died
alike for: and therefore not specially for any, aboue others, but alike for
all, for whom he dyed.

To 1. Ioh. 2. 2. I answer, that he speakes not onely of Christ, as dying for
us, but also as he is our Advocate in hea­ven Vers. 1. 3. with the Father,
propitiating, or pacifying his anger to­wards us in procuring actually the
forgivenesse of our sinnes, and acceptance with him. By the whole world
therefore he un­derstands such as confess their sins, such as whose sins God
forgivs, Chap. 1. 9. [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=34) cleansing them
from all unrighteousness, such as have Christ their Advocate with the father,
for whose sins he is a propitiation, &c. which are onely the faithfull, and
that not onely of the Iewes intended in these words, and not for ours onely,
but of the Gen­tiles also, as the whole world, here and els where by Christ
and the Apostles opposed to the Iewes. Mark. 16. 15. Iohn 3. 16. specially
Rom. 11. 12. where (as here) by the world, is meant the beleeving Gentiles
obtaining salvation, opposed to the Iewes. And this our limitation in just
proportion, the very next place cited by our adversari [...]s, confirmeth: The
whole world lyeth in wickednesse, 1\. Ioh. 5. 19. that is, all such Iewes and
Gen­tiles as are not born of God, v. 20. not Iohn, or other beleevers, one or
other.

The Apostle Peter, 2\. Epist. 3. 9. speaks not at all of Christs death, but of
Gods patience, that none might perish, but all re­pent. By which all he means
all the elect which were in their time to repent, and so to be saved: for
whose sakes, and not in slackness, as the mockers accounted, he deferred his
judg­ments. Reve. 6. 11. we haue this poynt notably exemplified. And it was
sayd unto them▪ that they should rest yet for a little sea­son, untill their
fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed, as they were
should be fu [...]filled. For which purpose it must be minded, that Peter
sayth, The Lord is long suffering to­wards us, not willing that any should
perish, opposing us as the elect, to the reprobate Scoffers at God, both in
his word and works.

The last place being 2. Chron. 36. 16. is impertinent, as neither meant of
Christs death (of which the question is) nor of mans salvation by it; but of a
bodily and visible judgement: in which kind of works God tieth himself to no
certain form of proceeding.

Against their error of universall redemption by Christs death, I thus argue:
Them whom God and Christ love (to wit,Ioh. 13, 1. with that speciall loue of
mercy) they love unto the end; andIoh. 3. 16. therefore never come to hate
them as they do the wicked and damned. But, for whomsoever Christ dyed, God in
giving his Rom. 5. 6. [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=35) Sonne, and he in
giving himselfe to the death for them, love with the most speciall love of
mercy that can be: Therefore they for whom Christ died, never perish, but in
time haue wrought in them faith and repentance, and are kept in the same, by
the power of God to life. Christ therefore dyed effectually, and in his, and
his fathers intention of love, for them onely that are saved, and perish not.
This is also more manifest Ioh. 17. whence may be drawn many arguments to
prove that all for whom Christ died, are saved, seeing all that are given to
Christ of the Father, keep the word of God, and haue eternall life gi­ven them
by him, Now it cannot be denyed, but that all for whom Christ dyed, are given
him of the Father, that he might redeem and save them by his death.
Furthermore, the death and bloodshed of Christ is every where called the price
of our redemption, and a ransome for sinners. Vpon this holy foundation most
clearly layd in the Scriptures, these men, and1 Cor. 6. 20▪ 1 Tim. 2. 6. Mat.
20▪ 25▪ Ephes. 1. 7. others would build a more hatefull Babell then that of
old in the East: by which they would, as it were, scale heaven, and depriue
God of divers his most glorious Attributes; by name, his Wisdom, his Power,
and his Iustice. His wisdom they  [...]m­peach in affirming, that he would buy
with so rich & precious a price as the bloud and death of his onely begotten
Son, that, and them whom he certainly knew before, he should never possesse by
it, for that end, for which he bought them, their justification,
sanctification, and salvation. Secondly it impea­cheth Gods power, and makes
him unable, doe he what he can, to save any more then he doth save, though he
desire it never so much. For look, for whom he would do the greatest thing
that possibly he could, which was the giving of his onely begotten and beloved
Sonne to the cursed death of the crosse, for them and their salvation (without
all doubt) hee he will doe whatseever other good (as lesse) that possibly he
can. Whereupon it should follow that God cannot possibly give the Gospell to
more then he doth, and by it convert and confirm them to and in his grace,
which are lesse things then the former; it being the foundation, they, but the
buil­ding [[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=35)
upon it: it being the meritorious, and deserving cause [...] and they effects
thereof. Thirdly, this conceit makes God unjust, in taking a full price and
ransom for mens sins, at the hands of their surety Christ (as was his death
and obedience) and yet not resting satisfied with it, but exacting the debt of
their sinnes at their hands, by eternall punishment; which is the condition of
many thousands in the world.

### 2.9. ADVERSARIES.

OTher things follow, tending to prove Gods purpose to save Pag. 45. all, even
such as slew Christ, blasphemed and resisted the spirit of God, to their
condemnation, &c. Act. 3. 25. 26. & 5\. 30. 31. & 7\. 51. & 13\. 46. & 15\. 6.

### 2.10. DEFENCE.

I Answer, that the persons of whom those Scriptures speak, were the peculiar
people of God, and not yet wholly cast off by him. The argument therefore from
Gods will and work for the saving of them, is stretched beyond its reach, to
prove such purpose, will or work of God to save all which are not his people,
as they were. Secondly, I grant, that where the Gospell is preached, there the
Lord truely wills, that is, commands the conversion of sinners, and their
turning from iniquity, as the text hath  [...]t; approving and rewarding the
same with salvation, in them, in whom it is found, as it is ordinarily in some
of them to whom the Gospell is preached; and so was in some of the persons to
whom the men of God spake in those places; who before were elect of God, and
re­deemed of Christ, and were in their time effectually called to that grace,
whatsoever before they had done, or been. Now the Apostles not knowing which
in particular were elect, and redeemed in the secret purpose of God, and
Christ, were to sow the seed of grace upon all grounds, and to preach to all
indifferently, as they had occasion; hoping in charity that this, and that,
and any one particular, might be of the elect ves­sels, and good ground in
Gods destination: by whose preach­ing [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=36) such as were
preordained to life, beleeved actually. The LordAct. 13. 48 Act. 18. 10 tels
Paul, abiding in Corinth, that he had much people in that Ci­tie, and that
therefore he should speak the word there, and not hold his peace. He sayth
not, as they would have him, that all in that Citie were his people in that
sense, but much, or many. Now Paul not knowing which were they, which not,
preach­eth1\. Cor. 3. 6. 7. Chap. 6. 20. indifferently to all; and the Lord by
giving an increase to his preaching, shews in time which of them were bought
with the price of Christs blood: they becomming members of Christ▪ and joyned
to the Losd; which he notes as singular privileges of the elect from eternity,
aboue others. And in this I haue been something the longer, because being well
noted and applyed, it may serve for answer to all the Scriptures brought by
them for the establishing of their universall grace ftom the preach­ing of the
Gospell, though it were as universall as they erro­neously make it.

More particularly, to their first proof from the similitude of Pag. 46.
marriage, Math. 22. I answer, that it makes nothing for them either in drift,
or words. The drift of the parable is not to shew that all and each person in
the world are called, but that few of them that are called, doe rightly obey.
Neither sayth Christ, that all are called, but many. I add, that this place by
rebound utterly overthrowes them: as shewing plainly, that the Gentiles (as
the latter guests) were not called, till the Iews (the first guests) refused
to come. Many thousands therefore of them in former ages, lived and died being
uncalled by the Gospell. The places, Math. 28. and Mark. 16. speak also of the
time after Christs ascension, and not before, and so over­throw an universall
calling of all, at all times: God shewed his word to Iakob; but dealt not so
with any other nation. Besides, theirPsa. 147. 19  [...]0. meaning is not,
that the Apostles should preach to every par­ticular person in the world: for
that neither could they possi­bly doe, ne [...]ther can they be imagined,
without madnesse, to have done it, but to shew, that as God had formerly by
the Prophets taught that one nation of the Iewes; so now hee would have all
other nations taught, as there was opportu­nity [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=36) and occasion. By
that Rom. 10. 18. the Apostle means not, that the Gospell was preached in all
ages to every person in the world. He quotes Psal. 19. which speakes
apparently of the creatures preaching, specially the heavens and firmament,
which the Holy Ghost here applieth to the Apostles preach­ing in their age,
either by way of argument, or allusion. And yet even this very Apostle in this
Epistle, shews that then there were places, where Christ was not named, nor
spoken of, andRom. 15. 20. 21. wheremen had not heard of him.

To the other places brought, the former answers suffice. Where it is sayd, the
Gospel is now preached to all nations, and through the whole world, ▪ and to
every creature, and the like, first, the note of distinction now, is to be
minded, intimating, that before now the Gospel was not preached to nations,
but to that one nation of the Iewes onely. Secondly we are not to imagine,
that by all nations, and the like, is meant eve­ry particular nation without
exception, much lesse, every par­ticular person in every nation, but to take
the words as inde­finitely spoken (as opposed to the preaching to that one
na­tion) as there was occasion for the Apostles or other reachers to come unto
them. Where it is sayd, Act. 2. 5. that there were dwelling in Ierusalem
devout men out of every nation under hea­ven, shall we imagine that there must
needs be English and I­rish, and Iappanians there? The particular enumeration
of many, v. 9. 10. 11. shewes what is meant by all. When the Iewes of▪ Asia,
Act. 21. 28. accused Paul to teach all men every where against the people, and
Law, and holy place, shall we be so senselesse as to think their meaning to
have been, that he so taught every particular person in the world? What is it,
if this be not, for the unlearned and unstable to pervert the Scriptures to
their own destruction?

Lastly, their passionate out-cry against our doctrine, as blas­phemy, and as
making God to dissemble in all these his sayings, as having left the greatest
number in sin, without reconciliation, because Pag. 46. 47▪ he would have them
damned, is to be taken as a fit of their ra­ving, by reason of that spiritual
burning feaver which posses­seth [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=37) and distempereth
their hearts, and brains, and whole man. We doe not say that God doth any
thing at all either tend­ing to, or in the condemnation of men, because he
would have them damned, but that he performs all his most just, though
fearfull works about Reprobates, to shew his wrath, and make his power known
against sin and sinners to the gloryRom. 9. 22. of his Iustice, in their
deserved condemnation. Which his un­searchable iudgements and works, we do not
furiously oppugne, as these their, and our adversaries doe, but admire with
fear and trembling, as we are taught by the Apostles exclamation, O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Rom. 11. 33▪ how
unsearchable are his iudgments, and his wayes past finding outs And what if
the holy & iust God had left all men universally (as having defaced his image
in which they were at first created & made) without any means or hope of
remedy, as he did the 2\. Pet. 2. 4. Iude 6. Angels that sinned, had it been
any more then justice in him so to have done? And will these male-parts then
sue him at the law, if he have held that course of justice towards some, which
was due to all? Will they make the grace of the Gospell a debt from God to
men, or a matter of meer grace, and mer­cie? Is it not of meer mercie that he
calls any to life? and but just if he leave all to themselves, and their own
affected ig­norances and lusts? We doe not then impute either dissimu­lation
or cruelty to God in any thing which he sayth or doth▪ but deny him to say or
do as they dream.

Vpon the objection here framed in our name, that there are many which never
heard of Christ, we doe not demand as they fondly make us, how then the
Scriptures (cited by them) are ve­rified? Pag. 47. but doe affirme that the
same Scriptures are by them perverted against their right meaning. But now,
how do they satisfie this objection put into our hands by the Apostle
him­selfe, Rom. 15. 20. Do they set themselves, as is meet, to a plain and
direct answer? Nothing lesse. But as a crafty guide meaning to deceive his
inexpert passenger, leads him by many turnings, and the same perplexed, and
hard to find, in which he may easily loose his aym: so doe these deceivers
here, and [[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=37)
in many other places, in stead of giving a direct answer, fetch compasse
about, by bringing in by-things, some true, some false, none pertinent, in
which the weaker sort of Readers cannot but loose themselves, and forget the
force of the Ar­gument brought. And by this means they rather escape
Argu­mentsPag. 47. 48▪ 49. &c. then answer them.

The discourse about the Law, into which they here wan­der, may be admitted;
onely one particular greatly weighty in it selfe, and as greatly by them
mistaken, excepted.

### 2.11. ADVERSARIES.

Adams posterity, as they came to understanding, had a law. And again, the law
is given to a man when he comes to understan­ding, and when his conscience
gives him peace by keeping it, and war for breaking it, and not till then:
which qualities (say they) are not in babes: for they discern not earthly
things, and how then should they discern heavenly, &c. seeing there must be a
conscience, unto which the Law is given, which infants haue not.

### 2.12. DEFENCE.

THis errour in the latter part of their speech, must the more carefully be
observed, and cleerly refuted by us, because it is laid down as the ground of
divers other errours, and the same not small, as will appear hereafter.
Neither needs there in truth more, nor can there be any thing more cleere
against them, then that which themselvs bring from Rom. 2, their words are;
The law is written in the hearts of men in na­ture, Pag. 4 [...]. who haue a
conscience to excuse them, if they doe the things of the Law, &c. This form of
speech, used by the Apostle of the Law, as written in mens hearts, is borrowed
from Gods wri­ting the Law in tables of stone, which had first, and by
crea­tion, been written in mens hearts, out of which it was almost quite
blotted by sin. Now what is it for the Gentiles, to haue had the Law written
in their hearts, in or by nature, as the Apo­stle speaks? This must needs be
in nature created: for in na­ture, as corrupted, there is no writing in, but
blotting out of [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=38) the Law. If by
nature created, then as infants haue this na­ture, so haue they this naturall
manuscript, or writing of Gods hand. This also the very word nature imports,
signifying that which is born with a man, or with which hee is born; com­ming
of a word in Greek that signifies to beget, or produce, as parents doe
children, and each living creature its kind: And seeing the Apostle here
speaks of a Law by which men discern the differences between right and wrong;
good and evill; ho­nest and dishonest, in morall and main matters; whence, and
with what hand, should all, and every man and woman living in the world, even
there where is no Law otherwise written or preached, haue this law and
conscience thus written in their breasts, saue by the finger of God in
creation? This know­ledg and conscience being the remainders of that image of
God, in which all men, in Adam were made. By all which it appears evidently,
that infants bring into the world with them this law of nature, and those
foot-steps of Gods image in their reasonable soules; who having in them the
fa­culties of understanding and will, cannot possible be devoyd of all law for
the ordering of the same; to wh [...]ch  [...]aw, they are necessarily either
disposed, or indispos [...]d▪  [...] it  [...]not be, that the reasonable
faculties of understanding and  [...]ll,  [...] any of mankind, should be voyd
of all vertuous, or vitious  [...]s­position, and inclination at least, to the
things of the law of nature, that is of God, the effects whereof they sh
[...]w forth actually in their time. And this truth themselues, elsewherePag.
117. confirm undenyably, though they think it not; where they say, that Adams
posterity (originally, for of that state they there speak) haue weak natures,
by the which when the com­mandement comes, they cannot obey. This originall
weakness then, is a contrary disposition to the Law of God, and to that which
they were created: else it could not hinder them from obeying God actually
afterward; at least, internally, and in their hearts. Surely nothing but the
Law of sin is contrary to the Law of God, warring against it, and against the
law of the mind Rom. 7. 22. 23. 25. agreeing with it, as the Apostle speaketh.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=38)Neither
follows it, that Infants haue no Law, because they haue not peace or warre of
conscience in them; nor can discern of earthly or heavenly things. The shewing
the workes of the Law, and doing the things contained in the Law, and so the
having a conscience excusing or accusing for the contrary, as the Apostle
speaks, are not simply requisite for the having of the Law, nor for being
conformable to it, but for the actuall obedience therunto, in particular
actions. Persons are in three respects conformable to the law of God; first,
in habite, and so a godly man is a godly man, and conformable to Gods law when
hee sleepeth; secondly, in disposition or inclination, and so in­fants
considered, either in state of creation, or regeneration, are conformable
thereunto; thirdly, in performance of par­ticular acts of obedience, by men of
discretion, for which the conscience excuseth and accuseth for the contrary.
As well may these men deny, that infants are reasonable creatures, as that
they are lawlesse. They can perform the works of nei­ther; but haue the
faculties and dispositions of, and to both, which in time, and in their
effects they manifest.

### 2.13. ADVERSARIES.

IN the next places follows their promised proofs, that ChristPag. 50. 51▪ 52.
&c. hath been, and still is offered to all that haue sinned, and that they
haue put him away, and that the fault is their own, and con­demnation from
themselvs; and Good freed from partiality.

### 2.14. DEFENCE.

BElike then, if God shew that mercy to one in calling him to his grace in
Christ, which hee doth not to another, it is partiality with them: from which,
to free him they take this pains, as if the Lord stood in need of their
patronage; wher­as in truth, they but forge lies for God, as Iobs friends did,
and talk deceitfully for him. Let us consider of their proofs, ad­mitting of
such as haue in them either apparant truth, or pro­bability, and reproving the
rest as there is cause.

And first they erre, in saying, that the generation of Adam [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=39) and Eve took
notice of Christ, as they took notice of their sin▪ seeing the notice of sin;
specially of that which is more grosse, is naturall, and the effect of the law
of nature written in all mensRom. 2. 14. 15. hearts; whereas the notice of
Christ, is by supernaturall reve­lation.

The like vain presumption, and apparant falsifying, is in the words following,
that all the sonns of Noah could doe no lesse, but take knowledg of Christ, to
convey it by tradition to all their generations. If it be meant, that indeed
they did so. How many 1000 thousands are there at this day, which never so
much as heard of Christ, at least, as God and man; and Redee­mer of mankind by
his death?

For this their presumption of the ages before Christs coming in the flesh,
they bring not any shew of reason, or te­stimony, divine or human. Onely they
alledg the sacrifices of the Gentiles, which (say they) they either had from
their ancestors, in their generations; or as being moved by a troubled
conscience, which must be quieted by sacrifice. And these sacrifices, they
tell us, were remembrances of Christ, and kinds of acknowledgings of him;
though in the end, they account them no better then re­membrances of a false
Christ in stead of him.

As their opinion is not unprobable, touching the generall beginnings of the
Gentiles sacrifices; so considering them in their particulars, their own words
will judge them guilty of grosse errour in instancing them, as they doe. The
question is, of Gods offering of the means of salvation to all, even to the
ve­ry Heathens before Christs coming in the flesh: Their proofe for the
affirmatiue, is, the sacrifices which the Gentiles had; which yet they grant
to haue been remembrances, and acknow­ledgments of a false Christ. And are
remembrances of a false Christ means of salvation? Is there any other name
under hea­ven by which men are saved, then by the name of (the trueAct. 4. 10.
12 1 Cor. 15. 2. 3. 4. Christ) Iesus the Son of God, crucified by the Iews,
and rai­sed again by God from the dead? If the remembrances of a false Christ
be means of salvation, then is salvation had by a false Christ. The Apostle
maketh the sacrifices of the Gentiles, [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=39) means of
fellowship with devils; these men make them means1 Cor. 10. 20. 21. 22. of
fellowship with God: The Apostle teacheth, that they cannot stand with the
remembrances of Christs body and bloud, the cup of the Lord, and the Lords
Table; these men make them the same in effect, and remembrances of Christ. The
Apostle means of provoking the Lord to anger, and so of condemnation; they,
means of pacifying God, and of saving men. Else where, these men in their hote
zeal, will haue all, Mystery of Iniqui. p. 91 even the most zealous Ministers
in the Church of England, preach and pray, and doe all other things by none
other spirit, but the spirit of the man of sin, and that all the effects of
their so preaching and praying is, but the false enlightning and heat of a
Deu. 32. 1 [...] 1 Cor. 10 20 false spirit. And yet here, in their hote
charity towards the heathen, they will haue their sacrifices, in which they
offer to Psalm. 106. 35.  [...]7\. Pausaniasin Ach. i [...]is▪ M [...]crob. 1.
Saturn, &c. & ali [...]. devils, and not to God; yea, those in which they
sacrificed their sonns and daughters unto them, and that as histories mention
by the devils speciall direction in his Oracles; these they will haue means of
salvation, by which God cals his guests to the marriage of his Sonne, and as a
good Phisit on, offers to heal the fick of sin. Thus t [...]ansforming God
into the devill; the true Christ into a false, the Gospell into heynous
Idolatry; and the means of salvation into the high way, and most effectual
cause of utter p [...]d [...]tion.

To conclud [...] this point. If in Religion, that which is false be none,
(which elsewhere they make the ground of their re­baptizing) how had or haue
the Heathens any means of sal­vation, which haue only the means of knowing,
and acknow­ledging a false Christ?

For the time since Christs coming in the flesh, their first p [...]oofPag. 53.
is Luk. 3. 6, All flesh shall see the salvation of our God: But I demand, of
what sight of Christ Iohn here speaketh? Not of bodily, without doubt; neither
availed it them, if he did. Of spirituall then. But so to see, is to enjoy, as
Ioh. 3. 35, Psal. 69. 49, & 99\. 15, 1 Ioh. 3. 6. Neither doth the bare
offe­ring suffice to giue sight of Christ and of salvation by him, except
there be withall an opening of their eyes to whom he [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=40) is offered, so
as they discern, and acknowledge him and his salvation, in the means so
offering him, to wit, the Gospell. But to let passe them that never heard of
Christ, how many are there that understand not the Gospell preached to them;
yea,Mat. 13. 13 14. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 23 to whom it is meer foolishnes? And how
doe these see the sal­vation of God in Christ? The meaning then of the words
is, that the Gentiles indefinitely, as well as the Iews, and in grea­ter
number then they, should beleev in Christ to salvation. By all Nations is
meant, as we haue formerly shewed, not eve­ry particular Nation without
exception, much lesse every particular person, but commonly the Gentiles with
the Iews. The Sun and Moon teaching God, was as well before, as since Christ,
but never taught Christ the Mediator, but onely God the Creator, and governour
of the world. Neither is the Gospell, which is not known but by supernaturall
revelation of the spirit, so common as the Law, which is naturall and
writtenEph. 3. 5. by creation in the heart of every man. Neither should it be
a fault, if God offered not Christ to all, as they most absurdly
insi­nuate.Pag. 53. He ows not the offering of him to any, more then the
giving of him for any. All is of mercy, and therfore no fault, but justice
onely where no such offer is.

Where they affirm afterwards, and truely, that some to whom Pag. 54. Christ is
offered, put him away quite, as Iews, and Turks. I de­mand, how then they keep
and practise any remembrances of him, or make any acknowledging of him, which
even now they affirmed every man in the world to doe? Or if the fathers put
him quite away, how can the children haue, or make any re­membrance, or
acknowledgment of him, having no new offer of him? Can that which is quite put
away be still continued?

That Christ might haue been manifested to every particular per­son whatsoever,
to wit, if God had so pleased; is true: but both besides the question, which
is not, what God might haue done, or doth, but what hee hath done, or doth;
and also against themselvs; for to say, God might haue done a thing, is to
insinuate that he hath not done it.

In adding, that if the means of salvation haue not been offered Pag. 55.
[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=40) to every
particular soule of reason, and understanding, the Scriptures are not true,
they are like themselvs; but the Scriptures are true, and their glosse upon
them false. God is true, and all men lyars; even such as tell a lye for God,
as they doe, whom God will reproov therefore.

The two last kinds of their proofs are strange, and either brought by them in
cunning, to deceiv the undiscerning Rea­der; with the truth in it selfe, but
nothing to the ma [...]n pur­pose, yea plain against it; or in weaknesse and
want of judg­ment in themselvs to discern what makes for them and what against
them. Let us consider the particulars.

They professe and promise proof, that Christ hath been offe­red Pag. 54. in
mercy to every particular man (to whom the Law, either written in mens hearts,
or in tables of stone hath come) for reconciliation: But in steed hereof (as
Balaam blessed when he meant to curse) they both affirm and prov the plain
contra­ry, and that God hath not vouchsafed this mercy to many, but in just
judgment hath kept it from them. Sundry true grounds they here lay down, and
prove; to which we willingly assent: as first, that God by creating the heaven
and earth, and by their teachings, sends men to seek out the worke-master.
This we grant;Rom. 1. and that the Heathens should by this light (not of
Christ to salvation, of which our question is, but) of Gods power and Act. 17.
27▪ Godhead, haue gr [...]ped after God, and the further revelation of h
[...]s will: as he that lying in a dungeon, sees some little glimpse of light,
and groaps aft [...]r it, by the wall, hoping to come in time to some dore or
window. A second is, that the terrours of conscience accusing them for sin,
should haue caused them to seek after God with earnestnesse, for
reconciliation. And to this, we assent also. A third is, that it is not Gods
fault, but their own, that they are ignorant of the means of reconciliation
and salvation. And of this also we are perswaded, as they, so far as there is
a fault. But now what did those Heathens in this case? They became vain in
their thoughts, and their foolish hearts were full of darkenesse, so as they
turned the glory of the incorruptible God to Idols: satisfying themselvs in
their own inventions: And this also, [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=41) as consonant to
the Scriptures, we willingly admit of? And what then? God for this (say they)
delivered them up to a repro­bate minde, that they never knew more: for, what
should he that is not faithfull in a little, be trusted with more? Luk. 16\.
10, and gaue them up to their own hearts lusts, and so they became past
feeling. And to consent with them herein also, the Scriptures leade us very
directly. But what now follows of all this for conclusi­on? Namely, that all
Nations, Citties, houses, &c. that is, eve­ry Pag. 57. particular man, and
woman, hath had the mercy of God in the offer of Christ affoarded them; that
all were bidden to the marriage. Nay, the plain contrary; and that all were
not bidden: but that many in stead of this mercy to be bidden, were in justice
left to themselvs, and given up to their own vain imaginations; the Lord
suffering all the Nations to walk in their own waies, asAct. 14. 16. the
Apostle saith, and refusing (as themselvs confesse) to trust them with much,
which had not been faithfull in a little, so as they never knew more. And
whereas they cunningly shuffle in, now and then, that men might haue had
Christ given unto them, or of­fered them, and that Christ might haue been
manifested to every one if they had would (how congruously to the Scriptures
they speak therein we now dispute not) is not onely besides the matter in
controversie; which is, what was, and is, and not what might haue been done;
but to their own prejudice, feeing that which onely might haue been, is not,
specially that bar be­ing put by mens own default, which effectually hinders
the being of it, as in this case.

Having thus shewed that these men either fight busily with their own shadows,
in proving at large things never called in­to question by us; or may easily
haue their weapons turned upon themselvs, in the main matter: I will even now
proceed, after that I haue briefly observed some particular mistakings by
them. And first, they both add to the Text, and err in ap­plying that which is
written, Rom. 11. 32. The Scripture is, God hath concluded them all in
unbeliefe, that he might haue mer­cie upon all, they add, of their own, every
person: whereas the Apostle neither speaks of every person; but onely of the
[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=41) Gentiles
indefinitely at one time, and of the Iews at another, which he there opposeth
the one to the other: neither speaks he of the offering of grace and mercy
onely, as they deem; but of the actuall conferring of it upon all, of whom
there he speaks, who beleeved and obtained mercy; the other remain­ing in
unbeleef. And this, both the drift and words of the place expresly manifest,
v. 30. 31. 32. Neither doth that other place alledged, Tit. 2. 11, speak of
all, and every particular person, but of persons of all sorts, servants as
well as masters, or any others. The Apostle v. 9, & 10, provokes beleeving
servants to obedience to their masters; rend [...]ing this reason of
encouragement, v. 11, for the grace of God which bringeth salva­tion unto all,
hath appeared, as if he should say, that even they, though poor bond-slaves,
if they continued in faith, and faithfull obedience, should haue their part in
the salvation of God, as well as any others. Secondly, as I will not simply
deny, that God punished the Heathens other sins with the want of preaching
Christ unto them; so is it certain, that greater sinners, and deeplyer drowned
both in idolatry, and other lusts, none in the world were, then the
Corinthians, Athenians, Ephesians, and others to whom Christ was preached, and
faith thereby given to many unto salvation. The Lord tels the Prophet, that
though the house of Israel, to whom he was sent, would not Ezech. 3. 6. hear,
yet if he had sent him to the Heathens, surely they would haue heard him: So
the Lord Iesus upbraids the cities of Chorah, Mat. 11. 2 [...] 21\. 23.
Bethsaida, and Capernaum, where he both preached, and wrought most of his
mighty works, that they were deeper in the contempt of God, and further from
all disposition to use aright the means of salvation, then the Heathenish
Cities of Tyre and S [...]don, yea, of Sodom it selfe: unto whom yet he
vouchsafed not the means of repentance, and revelation of grace, which he did
to the former. By which, it doth appear, that the Lord doth not observ the
order prescribed unto him by these men, for the dispensing of his favours this
way, in trusting them with most, who are of their faithfull in a little; (that
is, wholly faithlesse indeed;) but as the wind blows where it lists, soIoh. 3▪
[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=42) doth he
by the sweet gusts of his Gospell, and spirit, according Mat. 11. 25 Eph. 1.
3. 4. 5. to the good pleasure of his own will, (and not according to the good
pleasure of mens will, in their use of naturall light and conscience) dispense
supernaturall grace, both for means, and efficacy. Lastly, as they here
contradict their mainPag. 57. ground of universall calling, in supposing some
Nation to haue no means of knowing Christ: so I would learn of them, how the
Gentiles (wholly voyd of faith) could rightly examine all things, touching the
offence of God, an accusing conscience, and the satisfying of Gods justice, as
they would haue them: or in so doing, could promise to themselvs the
revelation of Christ by one means or other, as they liberally undertake for
them? They tell us, He that seeks shall find, Math. 7. But we answer them,
that Christ there speaks not of a seeking by blind, and unbeleeving Gentiles,
but by his faithfull Dis­ciples.Mat. 5. 1. 2.

Now, albeit the eternall and unchangeable election of God doe not manifest it
selfe, in time, in the bare outward calling of the so elected, common to many
others with them; but as the same hath joyned with it the effectuall work of
true faith and repentance in the heart, peculiar to them alone: Yet seeing
these adversaries labour upon presumption of an uni­versall grace offered to
all in the preaching of the Gospell, to establish an uniuersall election of
all, (that is, in truth, to over­throw all election) I will here annex, to the
things formerly laid down, two or three plain testimonies for th [...] further
conviction. The first  [...]s from the Psalm: He shewed his word Psal. 147.
19. 20. unto Iacob, his statutes and his judgements unto Israel: He hath not
dealt so with any Nation, and as for judgements, they haue not known them. The
Heathens therfore (if we will giue credit to the word of God had not the
knowledg of Gods word, & so not of the Gospel, which is most hidden, as being
of super­natural revelation onely. Of the same Gentiles the Apostle
te­stifieth, that God in times past suffered them all to walk in their own
wayes: that is, did not manifest Christ unto them for faith inAct. 14. 16 1
[...]. his bloud, and repentance through him, but onely his po­wer [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=42) and God-head,
giving them rain from heaven, and other bo­dilyRom. 1. blessings to witnesse
the same. With this accords that els­where: The times of this ignorance (which
had been amongstAct. 1 [...]. 3 [...] the Gentiles before Christ) God regarded
not, or winked at: but now commandeth all men every where (as well Gentiles as
Iewes) to repent. The Apostle opposeth the time now, in which he preached, to
the former times: and shews that God now, and not in times past, called all to
repentance by the preaching of the word. To conclude, the same Apostle
ex­presly teacheth, that there is no salvation but by beleeving in the Rom.
10. 14. 15. name of the Lord Iesus, by the preaching of the word and Gospell,
by preachers sent of God, for that end. But now for any to say, that every
particular person in the world hath had, or hath the word of the Gospell
preached unto him by a preacher sent of God for that purpose, were an
assertion of him whose impu­dencie better deserved a club, then any grounds
that possibly he could lay, a refutation; considering both the infallible
ex­perience of all ages, and testimony of scripture to the contra­ry,Rom. 15.
20. 21. and that there were places even in the latter end of the last Apostles
time, where Christ had not been named, nor spoken of.

Next follows to be examined their exposition upon Rom.Pag. 57. 58 9, in the
introduction whereunto▪ they mingle truth with er­rour. They deal craftily in
bearing the Reader in hand, that the disputation of Paul herein is hard, and
the matter darkly handled, that so they may turn the thoughts of the Reader
from it; or at least dim them with prejudice against that plain and evident
truth of Gods free election, and reprobation joyned therewith; Both which
things he sets down most clearly (though the reason of the Lords different
dealing to­wards them, that are in themselves alike, he makes unsearcha­ble,
and determines in the free purpose of his will) if men did not trouble the
pure and cleare water of Gods sanctuary with the foul feet of their corrupt
glosse. They also erre in make­ing this one of the places in Pauls Epistles,
of which the Apostle Peter speaketh, 2\. Pet. 3. 16. Peter doth not say,
neither wil the Greek text beare it, that there are things hard in Pauls
Epistles; [[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=43)
but that in those matters in his Epistles (to wit, about the day of the Lords
comming, and the dissolution of the heavens and ele­ments, and the new heavens
and new earth promised) were things hard to understand, &c. Their perverting
of the Scriptures, (which they lay to the charge of others) both in the
Epistles of Peter and Paul, and every where else, wee haue formerly disclosed.
Neither do we affirm, as they here charge us, that God reprobates either the
greatest number, or any, as they under­stand, and elsewhere expound
themselves, that is, predestinates them to condemnation without any condition.
Hee predestinatesPag. 90. none to condemnation; or which is all one purpose,
to con­demne none, but for sin freely by them to be practised, as the fore-
going cond [...]tion, and onely deserving cause of condem­nation. Neither say
we (as they slander us) that God denieth means of salvation to men, because he
would haue them perish; but as the Apostle reacheth, that he hardens (by that
and other his holy dispensations) whom he will, that he might shew his wrath,
and make his power known upon the vessels of wrath fitted to de­struction.
Rom. 9.  [...]8\. 22.

### 2.15. ADVERSARIES.

LEt us now come to their exposition. The scope (say th [...]y) as of the whole
Epistle, so of this chapter, is, that not the Law, but the Gospell is the
power of God to salvation: and that we are not justified by the workes of the
Law, but by faith, even that faith which Abraham had.

### 2.16. DEFENCE.

AS the proper and particular scope of divers parts of this Epistle, is divers;
so do they misse of the drift of this particular chapter, which is not (as
they conceive) to prove ju­stification not to be by the workes of the Law, but
by the faith of Christ in the Gospell: But to shew that the first and highest
cause, why, of all mankinde faln in Adam, one is cleared, and another not, is
onely the good pleasure, and free wil of God, and not mans deservings: and yet
that God in so choosing, or [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=43) electing one
before another, doth nothing unjustly, as shall appeare in the particulars
hereafter to bee explained: and may in the mean while be gathered by these
three generall reasons.

First, for the Apostle, when of purpose he handles the matter of justification
by faith, chap. 3\. & 4\. doth so oft and a­gaine iterate and inculcate the
terms of Faith, and Iustifi­cation, almost in every verse whereas here, he
never so much as once mentions either of them in the disputation it selfe.
which is to the end of vers. 24. where he descends from the matter of election
to the calling of the elected, both of Iewes and Gentiles.

Secondly, it is unreasonable to conceive, that the Apostle, having in the
third and fourth chapter so fully handled, and so expresly concluded that
matter of Iustification by faith, and not by works; and chap. 7. the effect
and end thereof, Peace with God, and perseverance to salvation; and chap. 6.
the matter of sanctification; and chap. 7. the imperfection of that
sanctification in this life; and chap. 8. the afflictions of the faithfull,
and their perseverance notwithstanding to the death; should now again without
any occasion, and against all order, return to the same matter of
justification, so fully handled and ended before. This might wel agree with
these mens wandrings in this their treatise, but agrees not with the wisdom
either divine or humane wherewith the Apostle was furnished. Much more absurd
is it to imagine, that having formerly handled that subject matter of
justification so plain­ly as he hath done, chap. 3, and 4. he should returne
to handle the same matter so darkly and obscurely, as all the adversa­ries to
the truth, and fautors of this conceit, are compel­led to confesse he hath
done in this place.

Thirdly, if this were the Apostles proper drift, what nee­ded he to have made
such deep protestation of his hearty sor­row for the Iewes as he did, more in
this place then in the former, where he handled that matter more clearly then
here? It was in truth no other thing that moved the man of God [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=44) to these sad and
sorrowfull protestations, then to remov the offence which might be taken at
the Iews rejection, and cal­ling of the Gentiles in their stead; of which, and
the highest cause thereof, hee was now to speak in the 9. 10. and 11.
chapters.

Lastly, we shall (God willing) make it appear in sundry particulars, that
these Adversaries, by wresting of some things, and omitting of others, pervert
the Apostles words to a strange sense, how soever they think to get advantage
by striking others first with that imputation.

And first, though they account it plain, and without difficulty, that the
Apostles meaning v. 5, & 6, is, that not all the Israelits, not all the
children of Abrahams flesh specially, not such as boa­sted of the observation
of the Law, were therefore in the state of sal­vation, or should be saved: yet
in truth, he plainly means ano­therPag. 60. thing; namely, that all Israel,
all that were the seed of Abra­ham, and children of the flesh, were not that
Israel, that seed, those children to whom the promise was made: that is, were
not they touching whom God by his promise declared his purpose of election
mentioned, v. 11. For though all are saved that re­ceiv the promise by faith,
and none by the works of the Law, yet the Apostle in this place, neither
speaks a word of salva­tion (as the effect of the promise) but of election (as
the cause therof:) nor yet of mens receiving the promise by faith; but of Gods
making it, according to election; that so the pur­pose of God, and promise
manifesting it, might stand accord­ing to election, v. 11, that the word of
God might take effect, v. 6. even the word of promise; At this time will I
come &c. v. 9, they are then called children of the promise, not because they
recei­ved, but because the promise (Sara shall haue a Son, &c.) was made unto
them, according to the election of grace, and stableness of Gods purpose, v.
8. 9. 11, which promise also, they did in time, receiv by faith, according to
the election of that rem­nant from the rest, the promise following the purpose
of election; and faith, and salvation by it following the purpose and promise.
Though Israel, that is, all which were of Israel, [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=44) obtained not
that which he seeketh for, yet the election hath obtained it; even the remnant
of Israel, to whom Gods promise is, ac­cording Chap. 11. 5. 7. to the election
of grace: in regard of which remnant ac­cording to election, the word of God
is effectuall, and the promise fulfilled touching the yonger son of Rebeca: of
whose two sonns, it was said before they were born, or had done either good or
evill, the elder shall serv the yonger.

And as they truely affirm, that neither birth nor works did prefer with God:
so I demand here, what those works were, by which Esau sought for
justification? The Scriptures ex­preslyHeb. 12. 16. Gen. 25. 32. 33, &c. term
him a prophane person; that is, a despiser of good­nes; yea, of his very
birth-right, which was a speciall legall priviledg: How then sought he to be
preferred with God, and justified for birth or works? Or how doth this example
of Esau fit their imagined plain exposition? specially to proue that the
children of Abrahams flesh were not in the salvation, who so much boasted of
being Moses disciples in the observation of the Law: when as the Law of Moses
was not yet given, nor the Law-giver born.

Their words following, that God purposeth to prefer those that seek it by his
free election, through faith in Christ, are true in themselvs, but not in
their sense. Their meaning is, that God purposed to saue them effectually that
should beleev in Christ Iesus: whereupon should be meant in this place onely,
such a purpose of God as was no more towards Iakob then towards Esau: for God,
by their doctrine, purposed to chuse Esau if he beleeved; and not Iakob but
upon his beleeving first. But the Apostle speaks more then evidently of such a
purpose of God, as was towards Iakob particularly and alone, excluding Esau.

Besides the standing of this purpose, and election, are here no­ted as two
distinct things; of which, election is the former, and that according to which
this purpose of God stands: where­as they make them one and the same,
accounting election no­thing but the purpose of bestowing salvation upon them
that beleev.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=45)Thirdly,
the Apostle cannot mean such a purpose and ele­ction as presupposeth faith in
Christ, (which they would haue) seeing he expresly affirms it to haue been
when the chil­dren had done neither good nor evill. Is to beleev in Christ, to
pu [...] on the wedding garment by faith, and obedience, to submit to the
righteousnesse of God (which they will haue the condition upon vvhich election
depends, and the quality for which God elects the Pag. 39. persons in whom he
finds it) are these to doe no good with with these men? and is the doing of
the contrary to doe no evill?

Lastly, he saith not, that the purpose of God, according to ele­ction might
stand, not of vvorks▪ but of faith, as they say: but not of vvorks, but of him
that calleth; that is, as followeth, that vvill haue mercy on whom he vvill
haue mercy. By which it isVers. 15. plain, that Paul doth not in this chapter
(as chap. 3. and 4, and Gal. 4,) oppose works and faith; but vvorks, and Gods
calling: He should haue said for their purpose; that the pur­pose of God
stands not of works but of faith, or of him that beleeveth: and not, as hee
doth for the purpose of the Holy Ghost, of him that calleth: Shewing thereby
his mean­ing to be in this whole discourse, that the obtaining of
righte­ousnesse, or standing of Gods purpose in its actuall effect, depends
upon God alone, according to three degrees here expressed: first, his gracious
purpose of election in himselfe towards some: secondly, his free promise
manifesting his purpose: thirdly, his effectuall calling, in which his vvord
of promise hath effect, and his purpose stands firm and undisappointed,
notwithstand­ing the unbeleif of the body of Abrahams seed.

Their making Iakob and Esau types as they doe, is like the rest, or worse. The
Scriptures are not to be drawn from their natural & simple sense, without
apparant warrant. It is the high way to heresie, to be bold in framing typical
expositions. And with what spirit these men are led this way, appears by their
expounding the parable, Luk. 15, making the Iews the elder bro­ther, Pag. 64.
vvho sought salvation by vvorks; and the Gentles, the yonger in the offer of
the Gospell, seeking salvation onely by the free promise [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=45) of God: wheras
the plain meaning of Christ is, onely to avow his preaching to the Publicans
and sinners resorting unto him, against the pride and envy of the Pharisies;
those Pub­licans and sinners being Iews as well as the other.

Secondly, I demand, what it was, in which Iakob typed out beleevers, seeking
righteousnesse by God? and in which Esau ty­ped out workers, seeking
justification by their own works? The contrary in Esau is expressed in the
Scriptures.

Lastly, seeing it cannot be denyed, but that Iakob as a faith­full and godly
man was in time actually beloved of God, and Esau, as godlesse and prophane,
actually hated; it must needs follow, that God before the world was, purposed
in himself accordingly, to loue the one and hate the other: seeing what­soever
God in time doth, by way of emanation or application to, and upon the
creature, that he purposed to do, as he doth it, from eternity.

If the Apostle, v. 13, Iakob haue I loved, and Esau haue I hated, confirm his
former doctrine, as they say, then he confirmsPag. 64. 65 the doctrine of Gods
eternall and stedfast election from eter­nity. And their boldnesse is
excessiue in calling them perver­ters of the words of Paul, which will haue
this to be before Iakob and Esau were born: seeing the Apostle adds this
Scripture out of Malachy, to shew the reason of that contained in the for­mer,
which both Moses and Paul with him, expresly affirm to haue been before the
children were born: namely, that theGen. 25. 23▪ Vers. 11. highest cause of
the elder, (to wit, Esau) his serving the yonger, (to wit, Iakob) was Gods
loue to Iakob, and hatred of Esau.

That following is partly true, namely, that v. 12. & 13, is not shewed for
what cause God loved Iakob and hated Esau: for that is shewed so far as God
would haue us see, v. 15. 18. But fals, where they say, that they shew not
when this was. For this loue and hatred was (and before) when God said, The
elder shall serv the yonger: and this he said, when the children were not yet
born: the effect of which was, that the purpose of God accord­ing to election
might stand in after time, and that both in respect of the two persons
themselvs, and of the bodies of the Na­tions [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=46) to come of them,
though not of every particular. And so indeed they are to be considered both
as instances in their persons, and heads of their Nations; the Scriptures
accord­ingly every where testifying, that God loved, and chose from the rest,
the Israelits in their fathers Abraham, Isaak, and Ia­kob, Gen. 1 [...]. 7. 8
Exod. 3. 6. 7 Deut. 7. 7. 8. & 29\. 12. 13. 14. according to the tenour of his
gracious promise and co­venant of being their God, and the God of their Seed,
expres­sing his eternall, and most stedfast purpose of will.

That which they adde in the last place of Gods not hating (to wit actually)
and destroying without desert, is most true. ButPag. 65. when we speak of Gods
loving or hating any before the world, we mean onely of his decree of loving,
which he actually exer­ciseth in time for Christs righteousnesse by faith
applyed upon the so loved; and so of his decree of hating, which hatred he
comes not to exercise actually, but for sin deserving it. God from eternity
purposed in time to glorifie his justice in the de­served destruction of Esau,
and not of Iakob. Of this diffe­rent decree of God, touching Esau, and not
Iakob, and his leaving him in and to his own corruption, and hardning him in
the same, rather then Iakob, our reason is, the will of God; but of Gods
actuall hating and destroying of him rather then the other, the Scriptures
shew sufficient reason, to wit, his ob­stinacy in sin, the onely cause of his
destruction.

Vers. 14, upon the premises, that God of two alike in themselvs, and without
respect of good or evill, in the one, or other, had loved the one, and hated
the other, an objection is framed, that by this, injustice might seem to be
with God: which the Apostle denyes, with God forbid. This objection our
Ad­versariesPag. 65. understand to be upon Gods rejecting the fleshly
Israelites, for contemning their salvation offered them by faith in Christ, as
Esau was rejected for contemning his birth-right. But herein (as children
skip, where they cannot reade) they leav out the principall part of the
objection, which is not onely moved upon Gods rejecting some, but withall upon
his recei­ving of others. The Apostle in the words before going (which
occasion the objection) mentions not onely Esau the [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=46) elder hated, and
serving; but also Iakob the yonger loved, and ser­ved: so in answering the
same objection, he speaks first, and most of Gods shewing mercy and
compassion, and last and least of his hardning any. Now whether they have
omitted this part of the objection in cunning or inconsideratenesse,
them­selves best know. This is certain, that the adjoyning it, qutie overturns
their exposition. For comparing together two such persons, as whereof the one
glories in his own righteousnesse, as perfectly answering to the holinesse and
righteousnesse of the Law; justifying himselfe, when the Law condemnes him;
despising the grace and mercy of God in Christ offered, and making him a lyar
in not receiving the testimony which he gives of 1\. Ioh. 5. 10. 1 Tim. 1. 13
Gal. 4. 29. his Son and joyning with these, blasphemy and persecution, and all
injurious dealing against them that doe receive this grace of Christ all which
those proud justiciaries, and carnall Israelits did: and the other, as
honoring Gods justice and holinesse, in the sense, and confession of sin, and
misery due therefore; flying to the mercie of God in Christ, and by receiving
the te­stimony Ioh. 3. 33▪ of his Sonn, setting to his seal that God is true;
and there­with repenting with all his heart, which every true beleever doth
that God now should shew mercie upon the latter of these, and not upon the
former, cannot minister to any man, indued with common sense, occasion of
objecting injustice to God; seeing the light of nature teacheth every naturall
man the reason of a difference. And if any should be so senselesse, as to
object injustice to God in such a case (as they conceive the objecter to be)
yet was not the Apostle so witlesse, as to fly for answer to the absolute will
of God, and to plead, that God will doe so, because he will or pleaseth to doe
it, as v. 15. 18. I will haue mercie on whom I will have mercie, &c. Which
answer of the Apostle also ministers matter of further and more difficult
objection, as appeares v. 19. 20. Whereas if the objection had been cast in
their mould, a child could have answered it and sayd, that it had been a most
just and equall thing for God to have received and loved the one rather then
the other; considering how the one honored the holy­nesse, [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=47) justice, truth,
and mercy of God; which the other dis­honored and despised. They erre
therefore in applying to this purpose Rom. 2. 4. 5. Neither doth the Apostle
there speak of a mercy and bounty, to be shewed to them that be­leeve, and
repent, as they conceive; but of that which goes before repentance, as a means
to lead unto it: But here he speaks of a higher work of Gods shewing mercy;
namely, the pur­pose of his will according to election to glory; and the means
there­unto.

And truely, these mens boldnesse is too great in putting, for, God hath mercy
on whom he wil have mercy; God hath mercie on them that seek him by the means
that he himselfe appoynts. For though it be most true, that God hath mercie on
such; yet the Apostle here speaks no more of Gods appoynting or com­manding
will for his shewing of mercy, then of his ap­poynting or commanding vvill for
his hardening, v 18, whom he will he hardens. He speaks of that will,
according to which he himselfe works in loue or hatred: not of that according
to which he commands and appoints men to worke. These men in truth confound
all things, setting mans will wherePag. 67. Gods should stand. God saith, on
whom I will: they say, on him that himselfe wils, or seeketh as he ought, &c.
The same Idol of mans wil they advance & set up, v. 16, where in stead, of
Gods shewing mercy; they put, mans beleeving mercy. The Lord by willing, and
running, v. 16, excludes whatsoever is of, or in man, and either within, or
without him: and draws all to himselfe alone. In the stead of God shewing
mercy, they put themselvs, and their free-will receiving mercy by God
offe­red, as the proper cause of difference between man, and man.

The 17 vers. For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, &c, they handle very
sleightly: saying something (such as it is) about Gods hardening Pharoahs
heart; but not medling at all with the place, according to the coherence which
it hath with the words going before: unto which, yet the Holy Ghost strong­ly
tyeth them, in saying▪ For the Scripture saith, &c. And [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=47) herein they are
in truth, wise in their generation. These words must needs answer to the
latter part of the objection of un­righteousnesse with God in hating; that is,
as they interpret it, in rejecting such as seek righteousnesse by the works of
the Law, as did the fleshly Israelits. But wherein, I wonder, did Pharaoh so?
How sought he justification by the works of the Law? Who so professedly
despised the God therof, saying, Who is the Exod. 5.  [...]. Lord that I
should obey his voyce? Did they see, that this exam­ple of Pharaoh, and their
exposition of the place could not stand together; and therfore chose to cut
off the coherence so firmly tying the words together, rather then to let fall
their preconceived erroneous exposition? Whatsoever they intend herein, we
know it is brought for an example of Gods absolute (but righteous) power of
hardening (rather then another) whom he will; and not whom he finds most
deser­ving it; (for whom finds he not too much deserving it, if he would deal
in like manner with all?) as it is said, whom (that is, which rather then
other) he will, he hardneth, v. 18.

And let it be diligently minded, that the Apostle here op­poseth Gods shewing
mercy to some, and his hardening of o­thers; and not his shewing mercy to
some, and his condem­ning of others. The adversaries, by Gods shewing mercy,
would haue us understand his saving of such, as beleev and repent. And then,
on the contrary, by Gods hardening, should onely be meant his not shewing
mercy to, but punishing & condem­ning such as doe not beleev, nor repent. But
we know, that the not hearing God voyce, not beleeving, and repenting
followHebr. 3. 7. 8 15. 18. 19. Rom. 2. 1. Ezech. 11. 14 & 33\. 21. 26. Exod.
4. 7, 8, &c. upon hardnesse of heart. Wherupon the Lord promiseth, that in the
day of his mercy, and pittie, he will take from his people their stony and
hard hearts. And so touching Pharaoh, the Scrip­tures expresly shew, that his
hardnesse of heart was the cause of his unbeliefe, and disobedience. Whereupon
I conclude evi­dently, that the Apostle here speaks not of such a mercy
one­ly, as follows faith (as the Adversaries would haue him) but as goes
before it also: as he speaks of such a hardening as go [...]s before unbelief.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=48)Note we
here also, that the Apostle in this place propounds Gods will as the cause of
his dealing diversly with divers per­sons; and not of his saving such as are
to be saved, after a divers manner from that, which some, namely the carnall
Israelites imagined.

### 2.17. ADVERSARIES.

NOW to return to them. They lay down a question thus. What is the meaning of
the hardening of Pharaoh? Pag. 68. And in their answer wholly passe by God, as
no doer in the businesse. They make Pharaoh a doer in hardening his own heart,
which is true; and Satan a doer in hardening Pharaohs heart, and this is true
also; but God no doer, but a sufferer on­ly, in giving him up, that is, as
else where they expound it, in leaving him to himselfe, and to Satan, to be
hardened.

### 2.18. DEFENCE.

BVT first, the Text imports a further thing in God, whom it brings in thus
speaking. For this same purpose haue I raised thee up, that I might shew my
power in thee, and that Exod. 9. 16. Rom. 9. 17. my name might be declared
through all the earth. Is Gods raysing up (which is his hardening, v. 8,)
nothing but his letting a man lie still, and fall down lower then he was
before? Besides, the end, which was the glory of Gods power and name, shews
God to be a worker. Every end must haue an efficient or working cause. The
glory of God was not the end of Satans work, nor of Pharaohs work; and
therefore of Gods work in it. Thirdly, God hardened Pharaohs heart, by sending
Mo­ses and Aaron unto him, as by an occasion, though not a cause; as the Law
is the occasion of sin; and the Gospell the occasionRom. 7. 8. Mat. 10. 34 35.
of strife and variance. Fourthly, God deprived Pharaoh of the use of common
sense and reason; otherwise it could not haue been, that after so many
experiments by him taken of Gods powerfull hand against him, and for the
Israelits, he should so furiously as he did, haue followed them into the
middest of the Sea. Lastly, besides, and aboue all these, God, in whose [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=48) hands the hearts
of Kings are, as the rivers of waters, to turn them Prov. 21. 1. whether he
will, hardened Pharaohs heart, by ordering his pride, cruelty and contempt of
God to this effect of obstinacy, ap­pearing in his most desperate course;
without which power­full, and unerring hand of God (all the former
notwithstan­ding) it might haue come to passe that Pharaohs heart might haue
been softned by the miracles and means used; and so Gods word, which before
had foretold his hardening, might not haue taken effect; which is, contrary to
the truth, and driftVers. 6. of the Apostle in this place. God therefore was
not onely a sufferer, but a doer in the hardening of Pharaoh.

### 2.19. ADVERSARIES.

THeir next question is, How consider you these words: Who Pag. 69. hath
resisted his will? v. 19. Vnto which they frame this untoward Answer, viz.
that those Iews seeking salvation by those works of the Law did not resist
Gods will, and so gaue him no cause to complain.

### 2.20. DEFENCE.

NOthing lesse, as we haue shewed, and shall further mani­fest by and by, from
the Apostles answer, v. 20. The meaning is plain. The words v. 19, Thou wilt
then say unto me, why doth he yet finde fault, for who hath resisted his will?
are an objection against that which immediately went before; whom he will, he
hardeneth. Now against this, it may colourably bee objected, that if God
hardens whom he will, hee hath then no reason to complain of mens being
hardened in disobedience; for Who can resist his will, if he will harden them?
A piece of an eie is sufficient to see the plainnesse of this exposition, and
coherence. Their discourse then following, that God would saue all, and haue
all repent, amend, and beleev, is frivo­lous. The objection is of Gods will to
harden men; their an­swer is of Gods will to soften them by repentance.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=49)

### 2.21. ADVERSARIES.

HEre they lay against their Adversaries (Gods friends) Pag. 70. two false
accusations: First, that they make God hate Esau, and Pharaoh, and the
Reprobates before they be born: from which hatred he decreed their damnation:
and that, by his secret will, which cannot be resisted: to which the will of
God, declared in the Scripture, is contrary: secondly, that▪ God compelled
Pharaoh to trespasse, and so to suffer.

### 2.22. DEFENCE.

BY the Law, the false accuser must be done by, as he would doe Deut. 19. by
his brother. These mens slanders therefore being false, are as odious in them,
as were the opinions odious in us, if true.

First, we know that God hates none before the world, otherwise then they are,
and that they are no otherwise then in Gods decree, and foreknowledge. He
hates none actually, or by application of hatred, till they haue actuall, yea
sinfull being; but hates them before in decree onely, as they are one­ly in
decree and foreknowledge. This decree of God we con­sider according to two
objects, Sin and Condemnation: For sin▪ we say, that God decrees to suffer the
sin, which he could hin­der by his almighty power, if he would, and to order
both sin and sinner, both before he sin, and in sinning, and having sinned, to
his own holy ends. For damnation, we hold, that God decrees it towards none,
but for their sin, by him infallibly foreseen, and by them freely to be
commit­ted and continued in without repentance. For though God be moved onely
from within himselfe, and the loue of his ho­linesse, to decree the
condemnation of a sinner; yet doth lie not so decree to condemn him, but for
sin, as the deserving cause, foreseen, and by him to be practised. Neither yet
doe either of these decrees passe forth from God for themselvs, but both the
one, and the other for the glory of his power and justice to be made known to
men and Angels, v. 22. Nei­ther [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=49) is the secret
and revealed will of God held by us, contrary one unto another, as they mis-
judg [...] no not though he will that by the one, called revealed, which can
be resisted▪ and will not, but will that by the other, called secret, which
cannot be re­sisted, I say, though God will the same thing by the one, which
he nils by the other: for some things God wils by both: for example, the
repentance of Paul and Peter, and of all that doe repent. It is his revealed
will which requires it; but his secret and unknown will to giue it, till he
make it known by giving it. Neither doth the willing and not willing, (no nor
nilling, which is more) of the same thing, make two con­trary wils, saue as
they crosse one another in the same respect, else they are but divers in
respect of divers objects in consi­deration.

To open this a little further. It was the revealed, or com­manding will of
God, that Pharaoh should let Israel goe: but so it was not his secret, or
working will; that is, God did not so will this, as that he would use his
omnipotent power, and doe what he could to bring it to passe. God, who
turnedGen. 31. Act. 9. Prov. 21.  [...]. the heart of Laban, persecuting
Iakob, and of Saul, persecu­ting the Christians; and in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings as the rivers of waters, which hee turneth whethersoever hee
wils, could (had it so pleased him) by his irresistable power haue softned
Pharaohs heart towards his people Israel. It was Gods revealed will (wherewith
Moses acquainted him) that he should let the people goe: his secret will,
which he knew not, till he felt the woefull effects of it, to harden his heart
for the de­claration of his power in his deserved destruction. So for Abrahams
offering up his son Isaak, it was Gods revealed will,Gen. 22▪ that he should
offer him up for a burnt offering, as is plain, in that he commanded him so to
doe, v. 1. 2; yet withall, it was Gods secret will, that he should not offer
him, nor lay his hand upon him, nor doe any thing unto him; as he also
revealed unto him in due time, but purposed in himselfe before: God being
without variablenesse, or shadow of turning, and not to be con­ceivedIam. 1.
17. to haue changed his mind, as vain man doth; yet were [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=50) not these two
wils contrary one to another, but divers, not in God, in whom all things are
one (even one God) but in re­spect of divers objects and ends. God willed
Isaaks offering, so far as the commanding will reached, for the tryall of
A­brahams faith and obedience, and this he revealed: But now God would not
haue him offered, in regard of the event of the thing: but this as secret for
the present, and till God re­vealed it in its time. Neither doe we (or the
Apostle whose steps we tread in) by teaching that God hardens men by a will
that cannot be resisted, say (as they ignorantly accuse us and him) that God
compels men to trespass, and so to suffer. There is no com­pulsion of any, but
of him that is unwilling: but he that is hardned, is willingly hardned, as
well as necessarily. His hardning of himselfe in a course of sin, is as
voluntary, as is Gods hardning him by way of punishment, necessary and
ir­resistible.

The Apostle teacheth, how it is impossible for these who were Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6.
once enlightned, & have tasted of the heavenly gift, &c. if they fall away to
renue them again to, or by repentance. If it be impossible for them to repent,
then they remain impenitent necessarily by Gods just judgment upon them, and
yet I suppose, voluntari­ly also, even our adversaries being Iudges. Their
impeniten­cy therefore and hardnesse of heart, though in regard of men a sin,
and therefore voluntary: it is in regard of God a pu­nishment, and therefore
necessary and irresistable, except we will say, that men can resist Gods
judgments: and doe that which the Apostle affirmes to be impossible.

Neither needs this deep and divine mystery of Gods judg­ments trouble any that
considers aright of these three things. First, that as the Sun puts no ill
savour into the dung-hill, though the stink therof be increased by its
shining: so neither doth God add any hardnesse, or impenitency to any, but
one­ly leaves unrestrained, occasions, stirrs up, and orders the corruption
which he finds in men to this event. Secondly, that man is more willing to be
impenitent, and hard-hearted, then God is to have him so. Thirdly, that this,
in regard of man is [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=50) a sin: in regard
of God, a punishment of former sins.

The Apostles answer to the objection now followeth, v. 20. Nay, but O man, who
art thou that disputest with God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor?
Wherein first, he represseth mans insolency, who being but man, yet dare
presume to call Gods doing into question. 2. He justifies the Lords doing by
his absolute power over the creature, as the potter hath power over his clay.

And by this answer of the Apostle it appeares, how these men mistake his
meaning in the question. His answer is not at all of this or that manner of
saving men, (as they imagine and maintain) but of the saving of this person
rather then that: they being both alike in themselves, and as the clay of the
same lump. If Pauls answer should be shaped according to their misformed
question, then the meaning must be; that the pot­ter might chuse which way he
would make a vessell of honor,Pag. 71. 72▪ whether by the workes of the Law,
or by faith and obedience to the Gospell: and so not of the same lump, but of
two contrary lumps: the one beleeving and obeying; the other, not turning from
hi [...] wicked way▪ and yet seeking salvation by his worke [...]. The Apostle
here plainly pleads the Lords power over the crea­ture, to make him a vessell
of honor or dishonor: they plead the Lords power over the means onely, by
which he will do this. He, the Lords power over the clay of the same lump: but
they, over clay of clean contrary qualities. Besides, if Paul meant here to
bring in the Iewes defending themselves, that God had no cause to complain
that they stuck to the Law, that is, looked to be justified by it, seeing Gods
will was that men Pag. 69. should obey his Lawes, and so live in them, what
needed he to haue sought so farre for an answer, as the absolute power of God?
seeing he had an answer at hand which might have stop­ped all mouthes, and
which he ever presseth when question isRom. 3. 23. & 4\. 15. Gal 3. 9. 10 &c.
of justification by the works of the Law? which is, that they could not
fulfill the Law, and therefore could not pos­sibly [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=51) be justified by
it.

Lastly, their exposition of these words, Why hast thou made me thus? that is,
that I cannot obtain salvation by the workes of the Law, directly crosseth the
Apostle, who grants that God made men, as is there▪ objected, and justifies
him in so making or framing them, both in his decree, and work of holy
pro­vidence, by the power which he hath over men, as the potter over his clay,
Hath not the potter power over the clay? &c. Be­sides,Vers. 21. men make
themselves uncapable of salvation by the Law, in that they keep it not. But
the Apostle here speaks of Gods making men, vessels unto dishonor, and not of
mens making themselves; and of the potter making the vessell, and not of the
vessels making it self thus, or thus. It is plain Paul grants the objection,
that no man can resist Gods will; and yet justifies his complaining,
considering his power over his creature to decree, and so to bring unto most
contrary estates by just and convenient meanes, persons in themselves alike,
and as the clay of one lump, v. 21. 22. 23.

### 2.23. ADVERSARIES.

IN the opening of these verses they follow their usuall, but ill custome of
carrying the Reader away to other places, and things: and enter upon a tedious
discourse upon Ier. 18. from whence they affirme, the Apostle hath these
words, and so speaks of the same making of a vessell of dishonor with the
pro­phet in that place.

### 2.24. DEFENCE.

I Deny their peremptory assertion, and require their proof. If they say the
same words are there; first, that is not simply true; for part of them onely
are there to be found, and so are they in other places, by name Esay 45. 9.
where it is evident, the Prophet speaks of another matter. It is too weak a
col­lection, that because the like phrase or form of speech in part, is to be
found in two places, that therefore the one is taken out of the other, and
that to the same purpose. And to put [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=51) the matter out
of doubt, it is evident that the Prophet, and Apostle speak of clean divers
things: the Prophet speaks of marring the vessell, and making it again; that
is, of destroy­ing persons or peoples, if they repent not; or doing good to
them which repent: The Apostle, of making the vessell out of the masse, or
lump, honourable or dishonourable. The Prophet speaks of the making or marring
of one and the same vessell: the Apostle of divers vessels, and the making of
one to honour, and another to dishonour. Lastly, the Apostle here speaks of
the Lords purpose and work, without respect to good or evill done by the
persons, and considering them as clay of the same lump: the Prophets, of Gods
deal­ing with persons, according to the good or evill which hee finds in them,
and so being divers, yea clean contrary lumps. And where they insinuate, that
we hold the making of the clay to be in creation, which they affirm to be in
vocation; they speak untruely in both. No man ever held that God in, or by
crea­tion made any vessell to dishonour; neither can they ascribe this, as
they doe to vocation. Gods calling men is not to dis­honour, but to honour
onely. It is the divell, and his instru­ments, and not God, who call men to
dishonour, which these men also proue against themselvs at large, in the two
pages fol­lowing;Pag. 72. 73 and therin pull down with the one hand, what they
haue built with the other, as children use to doe with their cob-castles.

That which followeth, v. 24. 25 &c. is not to the thing in hand. The
disputation about election ends, v. 23, and that of vocation followeth: which
latter is an effect of the former, declaring indeed the persons, but not
confounding the things.

And thus, if these men may be their own Iudges, and may haue the praise which
their own mouth giues them, they haue very sufficiently explaned the ninth
chapter to the Romans, and to full satisfaction of him that doubts, resolving
him in every difficult place therof, as they blow the trumpet, or rather the
bladder of their own praise: But if the Scriptures in their [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=52) true sense, and
scope may be judge, and giue sentence, they will be found neither to know
them, nor the power of God over his creature. Which power, yet v. 22, is
declared not to be tyrannicall, but most just, never punishing, but after the
induring of the vessels of wrath having sinned: as is his mercy also richly
glorious in the salvation of the vessels of mercy, v. 23.

### 2.25. ADVERSARIES.

THE last place which they take upon them to answer is, Act. 13, So many as
were ordained to eternall life beleeved; that is, say they, So many as beleev,
and obey the truth, are ordai­ned Pag. 75. to eternall life.

### 2.26. DEFENCE.

A Strange perverting of the Scriptures, setting the head in the feets place,
and the feet in the heads. For although the thing which they affirm, be in it
selfe true, yet is it not the Evangelists meaning. Luke descends from the
cause to the ef­fect; they crosly ascend from the effect to the cause. The
Evangelists meaning is, that Pauls preaching in Antioch had a divers event
with divers: of whom so many as were pre-appoin­ted, or ordained to life
beleeved, that is, of unbeleevers, which they were before, became beleevers in
Christ: according to that Rom. 8. 30, whom he predestinated them also he
called: that is, he gaue them to beleev and repent. Their preordination or
predestination to life therefore, went before their effectu­all calling and
beleeving, as the cause before the effect.

Their assertion in the application of their Similitude, of a Pag. 76.
mercifull rich man, offering mony to so many as come, that they who proudly
refuse the rich mans gift were ordained to haue it, as well as any that
received it, is most erroneous, being applyed to the matter in hand, and
strikes directly against the Text, which saith, that so many as were ordained
to life did beleev; thatIob. 1. 12. 1 Iob. 5. 1 [...] 12. is, did come and
receiv eternall life by beleeving in Christ. If all, or so many as were
ordained received it, then they that recei­ved it not, were not ordained.
Neither doth v. 46 (as they af­firm [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=52) for a
conclusion, that their end may answer their begin­ning) testifie any such
thing: but onely that they who thought themselvs unworthy of eternall life,
had the word of God preached unto them: but that they were therfore ordained
to eternall life, is not the testimony of the Text, but their unskilfull
glosse. The Holy Ghost expresly opposeth unto them to whom Paul speaks, v. 46,
them that were ordained to life, v. 48.

## 3\. CHAP. III.

Of falling away.

### 3.1. ADVERSARIES.

THE third Head questioned is, according to their or­der,Pag. 78. whether a man
may full from life eternalls but is more plainly and fully thus laid down;
Whether a man truely and effectually called, justified, and sanctified, may
wholly fall away from the grace of Christ? They hold the affirmatiue; and that
a man may thus fall away: though they set down their opinion both in unproper,
and doubtfull terms, where they say, that the promise of Gods election is
con­tinuedupon continuance in the condition of faith, and obedience to Christs
Gospell.

### 3.2. DEFENCE.

FIrst, the Scriptures speak not of the promise of Gods election, as they here
doe again, and again. Election, or gods pur­pose of electing is before the
world: the promise not, till men actually be. Gods purpose must needs be
before his promise, for he but promiseth in time, what he purposed from
eterni­ty. If they had spoken of Gods purpose of, or according to ele­ction,
Rom. 9. 11 it had been something: but what the promise of election means, I
understand not; nor, I suppose themselvs. All [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=53) election is to
somewhat▪ and this, of which they speak, to Pag. 39. 42 45. 75. salvation, the
Kingdom of God, and eternall life▪ In their mean­ing then, God promiseth to
chuse to eternall life, and con­tinueth to promise to chuse to eternall life,
upon condition of continuance of the condition of election, faith and
obedience▪ Now a promise made upon a condition to goe before, is not to be
performed till the condition be performed: and so, by their doctrine, God doth
not elect any till they haue continued to the end, in faith and obedience,
that is till they be dead. And so actuall and particular election, is not of
men living, but dead: To which absurd assertion, these mens Masters, the
Ar­minians are driven. It is true, that God neither purposeth nor promiseth to
saue any, but such as persevere in faith and repen­tance unto the end: So is
it also true, that this perseverance in grace depends upon election, which is,
both to the end, and means, Christ Iesus, and perseverance in faith in him,
andEphes. 1. 3. 4. 5.  [...]. obedience unto him.

### 3.3. ADVERSARIES.

THeir Arguments are of two sorts: the former drawn from such Scriptures as
teach (as they say) that the godly may fall away: the latter from such, as
exhort and admonish godly men to keep them-from falling away. The latter of
these two they prosequute  [...]n the first place, upon this ground; that if
there were not danger, and great need of warning, the Lord, who saith not in
vain unto his people, Seek yee me, Esay 45. 19, would not so oft move them to
take heed, beware, and the like.

### 3.4. DEFENCE.

AS they are deceived, by the translation which they fol­low, Esay 45, the Lord
not speaking of his not saying in vain to his people; Seek yee me: but of
their not seeking him in vain; seeing all his words tend to righteousnesse: So
the ground which they lay is true in its selfe; namely, that were there no
danger any way, then it were in vain, to warn to take heed, which to affirm of
God, derogates from his wisedom. We are ther­fore [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=53) in the first
place, by way of distinction, to consider a faithfull man, either in respect
of himselfe, as sustaining him­selfe: or in respect of the grace of Christ
sustaining him. Considering him in himselfe, we willingly grant, that a
faith­full man may as easily fall away, as did the Angels in heaven, and Adam
in paradice, being left to themselvs: grace not be­ing (as is reason) an
inseparable property, but that which isCol. 2. 9. Ioh. 17. 6. 8 Eph. 2. 22. 1
Pet. 1. 5. separable from mans nature. But now considering the same faithfull
person, as a living member of Christs body, receiving nourishment from him the
head; and given to Christ by the Fa­ther, that he might saue him; as having
the spirit of Christ dwel­ling in him; and as kept by the power of God,
through faith to salvation: in that regard we deny, that it can come to passe
possibly, that such a one should wholly fall away from the grace received. And
this divers consideration of one, and the same person, is founded in the
Scriptures, and light of reason. The Apostle teacheth, that both he and all
others are insufficient of themselvs, to think any thing, as of themselvs: but
2 Cor. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 10. sufficient, as of God; that the
faithfull may be weak in them­selvs, and haue God perfecting his strength in
mans weakenesse; that not a mans selfe, but the grace of God in him may labour
aboundantly, that is, he by  [...]t, and not by his own strength. Thus (to
open the distinction yet full [...]er) might Christs flesh haue seen
corruption, considered in it selfe, as being made of the same mould with ours:
but so could it not possibly in re­gard of Gods purpose, promise, and work of
providence to the contrary. So considering his bones in themselvs, and
theirPsal. 16. 1 [...]. naturall strength, it was as possible they should haue
been bro­ken, by the souldiers, as the bones of the two theevs, crucifi­ed
with him: but yet this was impossible in respect of GodsNum. 9 12 Ex. 12. 46.
Psal. 34. 21. Ioh. 19. 36▪ precedent word and prediction, Not a bone of him
shall be bro­ken; and of his present work of most powerfull providence,
according to his word.

If now with this consideration, that a beleever may of himselfe fall away, we
conjoyn this other, that the exhortati­ons, and admonitions in the Scriptures,
are means sanctified [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=54) of God to keep,
and preserv all his from such apostasie, how should it seem strange unto any,
that God should infallibly ob­tain his own end (the perseverance of his
Saints) by his own means, which these exhortations are? Is it a good argument
that God may fail of his end, because he useth effectuall means wherby to
obtain it, as exhortations and warnings are, to perseverance? Is it a good
argument, that the conduit may want water, because a man (skilfull in water-
works) layeth the conduit pipes with all diligence, and Art, between the
Spring-head, and the Conduit? Or that the childe (whom his father holding him
fast by the hand, in a slippery way, and bidding him look that he fall not)
can fall out of his fathers hand? Nay, though left to himselfe, he may, yea
cannot but fall; yet considering his Fathers strength (supposing him one that
cannot fall himselfe) wherof the childe is made parta­kers for his
supportance, he cannot fall: Such a holding, and helping hand of God are these
exhortations, made effec­tuall by his Spirit in the hearts of his children,
true beleevers. Vnto whom, as the Lord suith, Seek yee my face; so they
an­swer, Psal. 27. 8. Thy face, Lord doe we seek: The Lord saith in his word,
Take heed, Stand fast, Beware that ye fall not away, and the like. Vnto which
their godly hearts answer, Lord wee doe take heed, doe beware, &c. For by
these the servant of God is war­ned: Ps. 19. 11. Luke 8. They are as seed sown
in good ground, which brings forth frui [...] with patience to the harvest. So
as in truth, the clean con­trary doctrine to these mens collection, is true;
that therfore the truely faithfull cannot fall away, because they (they I say,
being faithfull, obedient, and of honest hearts) are by such exhortations, and
admonitions, armed against such evill of apostacy.

To conclude this point. The Lord Iesus giues his ApostlesMat. 28. 19 20. in
charge to teach all Nations whatsoever he had commanded them: adding
thereunto, the promise of his presence with them, if they so did, to the end
of the world: against whom also a Woe was denounced if they did not preach the
same Gos­pell. [...] Cor. 9. 16 I would now know whether it could so come to
passe, [[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=54)
that these Apostles should not, and that willingly, preach this Gospell, and
the truths thereof? This to affirm were to blas­pheme the holy Spirit of God,
by which they were immedi­ately and infallibly guided in their Ministery.
Promises ther­fore and threatnings are not in vain for the provoking of men
unto those duties, which by reason of the Spirits power­full work in them, it
is not possible but they should perform.

### 3.5. ADVERSARIES.

THE Scriptures brought by them for their Asserti­on,Pag. 79. follow. The first
is, Hebr. 11. 15. whence they ga­ther, that as Esau lost his earthly
inheritance, to which hee had right, so may the Saints loose their heavenly
inheritance, which they haue right to.

### 3.6. DEFENCE.

THE Apostle doth not so conclude, but exhorts them onely to take head thereof:
and of that matter we spakeGen. 25. 23. 27. even now at large. Esau was a
prophane person before he sold his birth-right, and never other; No doubt but
a prophane person, or hypocrite, nourishing in himselfe the root of
bitter­nes, though living in the Church, may loose whatsoever right he had;
and of such the Apostle here speaks. If it be further objected, that Esau had
right indeed to the birth-right (by them unskilfully called the inheritance) I
answer, that he had never right to it spiritually, nor in Gods appoyntment,
but onely in outward course, and in regard of men: and such a right to the
heavenly inheritance may be, and is, by too many lost, as the Apostle here
insinuates. Lastly, who sees not the difference between the inward grace of
faith and holines in the heart of a true beleever; and the carnall right to
that which is com­mon to good, and bad?

In Math. 5\. 15. Christ sayth not as they accuse him, that salt may loose his
savour: but if the salt loose his savour, as he sayth. If it be possible, let
this cup passe from me: which yet (all thingsMat. 20. 39▪ considered) could
not be. Of which form of speech we haue [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=55) lately treated,
and shall more hereafter. I suppose it was never seen, that salt wanted
saltnesse: and if it doe, how is it salt? Besides, Christ calles not his
Apostles salt, and light, in regard of the grace of faith in their hearts; but
of their preaching the Gospell, therewith to season and inlighten the world.
2. Pet. 2. 20. they pervert as the former places: making that abso­lute which
is but conditionall, and with an If. They (say they) which are washed, may
return with the sow, to wallow in the myre, and their latter end be worse then
the beginning. The Apostle sayth, If after they be washed, &c. These forms of
speech, whe­ther in scripture, or other where, If this, then that, do not
ne­cessarily prove, that either this or that is so indeed; but onely, that if
this be so, then that also. Both this and that in them­selves may be
impossible, and yet the consequence good: as if I should say at mid-night, If
it be day, the Sun is rising; or at mid-day, If it be night, the Sun is set:
so in the Scriptures, Luk. 19. 40. 1. Cor. 15. 13, 14. 15. 16. &c. Gal. 1. 5.
10. and in in­finite other places. It is sufficient for the truth of a
conditio­nall proposition, that the latter part follow infallibly upon the
former; if it be; but requires not that it should be. These men and others
herein labour of the same mistaking with the Disciples, Ioh. 21. 22. 23. who
upon Christs words to Peter touching▪ Iohn, If I will that he tarry till▪ I
come, what is that to thee? concluded, that Iohn should not dye, but should
survive till the second comming of Christ; which fancy also continu­ed a long
time in the mindes of many. But the Evangelist inVers. 23. the same place
teacheth them that will learn, not to inter­prete conditionall speeches, as
absolute? Iesus sayd not unto him, he shall not dye; but, if I will that he
tarry till I come, or dye not.

If it be further replyed, that the Apostle aimes at certaine particular
persons, which denyed the Lord that bought them, whose pernicious wayes others
followed, & unto whom it did happen according to the true proverb▪ The dog is
turned to his vomit again: Vers. 4. which same persons Iude also chargeth to
haue turned the grace of God into wantonnesse; I willingly grant the thing so
to haue [[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=55)
been; but deny the conditionall form of speech to proue it absolutely. And for
the thing, I answer, that the Apostles there speak of mens being purged and
washed, and the like, according to the outward profession onely, which they
for­merly made, and which the Church took knowledge of: and not according to
the inward truth of the heart, which they knew not, but God alone. I add, to
put the matter wholly out of question, that these Apostles thus speaking, doe
in the same places both gather themselves by the event, and teach us that
these persons, of whom they speak, were never truely and effectually
sanctified, but onely in their own, and other mens opinion: as where Peter, v.
7. 8. 9. opposing righteous Lot to the wicked Sodomites, addeth, that as God
delivered him, so fo he knoweth, that is, can and will deliver the godly out
of temp­tations, and to reserve the unrighteous to the day of judgment for
punishment. Likewise v. 21. The dog is turned to his own vomit again: and the
sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the myre. They were alwayes then, in
truth, but Dogs and Swine, though sometimes vomiting dogs, and washed on the
out-side as swine are in the waters. And yet more plainly, of the same persons
Iude sayth, v. 4. that they were ungodly men, and be­fore of old ordained to
that condemnation, and such as crept in un­awares. They were at the best but
hypocrites, in truth, and such as had crept in unawares, though seeming for a
time to others (and it may be to themselves also) sanctified and pur­ged, by
their outward profession which profession formerly by them made, the Apostle
upbraids them with, to their grea­ter confusion.

To Heb. 10\. 29. the same answer serveth. The form of speech is but
conditionall, If we sin wilfully, &c. v. 26. which proves, that if any so sin,
then there remaines no more sacrifice for him: but proves not that any truly
justified and sanctified, doth so sin. If it be asked, to what end then serves
the fear­full denunciation used? I answer, first, to keep the truely faithfull
from so sinning: 2. to awaken even the secure, if not not desperate. 3. to
paint out the fearfull state of incurable [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=56) hypocrites and
Apostates. And as the particular persons unto whom the Apostle there hath
reference, could not by him certainly be discerned ever to haue been truely
and inwardly sanctified (for what man knoweth the things of a man, saue the 1
Cor. 2. 11. spirit of man, which is in him?) so by their after course of
Apo­stasie from Christ, he seemeth not obscur [...]ly to gather, and pronounce
of them, that at their best they were but hollow­hearted; as v. 38. 39. making
an opposition between the tru­ly just that liues (and perseveres
notwithstanding all temptati­ons) by faith; and those with-drawers to
perdition. So chapt. 6. speaking of the same, and like persons, If they fall
away, v. 6. he insinuates against them, v. 8. that they were never other then
thorny earth, opposed to good earth, bringing forth hearbs meet for him that
dresseth it. As also, v. 9. 10. he makes it a poynt of Gods righteousnes not
to forget the work and labour of loue of the truely faithfull, or beloved;
viz. so as to suffer them to fall away from the things which accompany
saluation. With which accords that else-where, Faithfull is he that calleth
you, 1▪ Thess. 5. 22▪ 23. which will also doe it; that is, will preserv the
truely faithfull blamelesse unto the comming of the Lord Iesus Christ: as doth
that also in the parable, where onely the seed sown in the stony, or thorny
ground withered, and was choked before the harvest; butMatth▪ 13. Luk. 8. not
any one corn sown in good ground.

To 1. Tim. 1. 19. where it is sayd, that some, as Hymenaeus and Alexander by
name, haue put away a good conscience, and made shipwrack of faith, I answer,
(letting passe other things) that Paul speaks no more of them then he knowes:
and so not knowing their heart, and inward man, (which onely God doth) he
speaks of their faith, and good conscience, not as considered in their hearts,
which he knew not; but in out­ward profession, whereof he had taken knowledge.
The same answer serveth to 1. Tim. 5. 12. if by the first faith there be not
meant these womens former promise of serving the Church, in the widowes or
Deaconesses office; and then it is nothing to the matter in hand.

It is not sayd Exod. 32. 32. 33. in the text, but in their [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=56) glosse, that
some written in the book of life may be blotted out, Mo­ses onely desires-
there, that if God would not pardon his peoples sin, and bring them into
Canaan, he would blot him out of his book. But the Lord answers him in the
same place, that that cannot be, but that he that sins against him, him he
will blot out. Is it to be conceived, that Moses for the sin of others;
whereof he was altogether innocent, yea for his holy zeale and loue to­wards
Gods people, should be blotted out of the book of life? If you say, that yet
some (to wit sinning) may be blotted out, I grant it in Gods sense, but not in
theirs. For first, this is meant of temporary, and not of eternall life, of
the blotting Deut. 9. 14. their name from vnder heaven; of the destroying
them, and making of Moses a nation greater then they. Of that of which God is
sayd to repent upon Moses his prayer, v. 14. which was onely in regard of
their temporall state and life. 2. It is not onely vanity, but impiety also to
affirm that these persons were ever truely justified and sanctified. Not onely
Moses and Aaron, but God himselfe upon this very occasion testifies the
contra­ry, v. 9. 22. Deut. 9. 7. 13. To Psal. 69. 29. I answer, that Da­vid
means▪ no more, then that his adversaries should no lon­ger be continued in
the Church and fellowship of Gods peo­ple, the latter part of the verse
expounding the former, Let them not be written with the righteous: which the
Prophet Eze­ch [...]el termes, not being vvritten in the vvriting of the house
of Is­rael. Ezek. 13. 9. And seeing David here speaks of certain particular
per­sons his adversaries, let these men shew the markes by which he knew
certainly that they were once truely justified and san­ctified, or by which
they know them so to have been. They take that for granted, in which the maine
question lyeth; and laying such foundations, what can their building bee?

As the Black-more changeth not his skin; so neither doe they their bold
manner, in putting their glosse for the Scrip­ture: as appeares in the next
place cited by them, Rev. 3. 5. Christ there teacheth, that some (namely they
that over-come) shall not haue their name blotted out of the book of life.
They bring [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=57) him in saying,
that some vvritten in the book of life may be put out. God blots not out their
name that overcome: and if any over­come not in the spirituall warfare, it
shewes his name was ne­ver written there. All that dwell on the earth shall
vvorship the Rev. 13. 8. Vers. 11. beast, vvhose names are not vvritten in the
book of life of the lamb. On the contrary, the Saints indeed, and elect, get
victory over the beast, by faith and patience. Rev. 15. 2.

That by the Talents given to the servants, Math. 25, is meant the graces of
justification and sanctification; and not the gifts of the Spirit given for
the edification of the Church, as 1. Cor. 12. 7. & Eph. 4. 8. is their
presumption. Iustification & sanctification make men the servants of Christ at
first these talents were given to them that were servants already: and that
according to their severall ability for their speciall places. Besides, the
taking away of the talent here spoken of, is not in this life, but at the day
of judgment: and therefore is unskilfully brought for their purpose.

Touching Pauls affirming that the Saints at Rome were justi­fied by faith,
Rom. 5, and yet threatning, that if they continued not in the bounty of God,
they should be cut off, ch. 11. 21. I an­swer, as before; first, that the
threatning is conditionall, as Gal 1\. 8, If we, &c. Was it possible that Paul
should preach any other Gospell? Or were he an Angell from heaven, or of God
that should so doe? I suppose no, ch. 4. 14. But an An­gell from hell rather,
and of the divell. The question is not whether if any should not abide in the
bounty of God, they were to be cut off or no? But whether any with whom hee
hath dealt so bounteously, as indeed to justifie and sanctifie them, haue not
also a promise, by his power, to be kept in that his bounty, by the means
which he hath appointed? Secondly, Paul pronounceth those Romans justified,
not from the judgement of certainty, but of charity. Of whom as some were
undoubtedly sincere, whom God did by this, and the like warnings, preserv and
keep in his grace: so for the hy­pocrites mingled amongst them, it was but
that which we say, if in their time they were broken off from that which
for­merly [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=57) they seemed to
others by their profession (and it may be to themselvs also) to haue had.

And indeed, this very place, if it be well minded, mini­sters full answer to
the most of their Arguments. This warn­ing (though immediately given to the
Romans) concerns all Christians as well as them: And being founded upon an
ex­ample of the Lords dealing with the Iews, must be expounded, and applyed
accordingly. Who then were these exemplary Iews, formerly cut off by the Lord
from the oliue tree? Were they such as had once truely beleeved, but had after
made defection? I suppose not even in these mens judgment; but such as
occupying a place in the Church, yet were, in truth, faithlesse hypocrites,
and as chaff in the Lords flore, whichMath.  [...]. 1 [...]. the Son of man
comming with his fan in his hand purged out. And in these we may see, what
kind of branches they are, which in time come actually and visibly to bee
broken off from the Oliue.

The instances following of Elies house loosing the Priesthood, Saul the
Kingdom of Israel, and the Israelites Canaan, serv one­ly to fill up room.
That Priesthood, Kingdom, and Canaan, were not the graces of faith, and
sanctification in the heart: nor the losse of them sin, but punishments onely.
Onely the last place Math. 18. 32, where debt forgiven is, as they say
re­called, were something to the purpose, if the drift of the pa­rable were to
shew, that God indeed forgivs sins, and after unforgives them: which were
lightnesse unbecomming any graue, and honest man. But the scope of the parable
being no more, then that we ought to forgiue such as offend us, and that
otherwise God will not forgiue us: to draw more from it, is to forget that it
is a parable, and to take the high way to to most grievous errour. Besides,
there is in this parable no colour for falling away from grace, and true
godlinesse, for­merly had; but onely (even their exposition being admitted)
that a man may haue his sins pardoned, who yet wants all brotherly loue and
goodnesse, which the Scriptures every where deny, Math. 6. 14. 15, Mark. 11.
24. 25, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. 15, [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=58) Rom. 8. 1, Ps.
32. 1. 2. Thirdly, by these grounds, no man can certainly know, that his sins
are indeed pardoned, whilst he liues in the world, because he may still fall
away, and so haue his pardon recalled, though sealed up unto him by the very
spirit of God it selfe. And so all our faith must be but adven­tureEph. 1. 13.
whilst we liue in the world, whether our sins past be in truth pardoned, or
no; contrary to the Scriptures. Lastly, this impeacheth both the justice of
God, and his truth. His justice in making him require double satisfaction for
the same debt; first, of his Son, even the price of his bloud, and the same
also by faith, applyed to the person that hath sinned and beleeveth; and after
of the person himselfe. Of his truth, and that both of his word absolutely
promising forgiuenesse of sins to him that beleeveth, and also of his spirit,
by whichRom. 3. 25. Eph. 1. 13. he seals up the same unto their hearts.

Their second and third reason, taken from the fall and sin Pag. 80▪ 8. 1 of
Adam, and all mens falling, and sinning in and by him, are wholly besides the
question: which is onely of falling from the grace of God in Christ▪ from
election in him, from the loue Ephes. 1. 4. Rom. 5. 8. & 9\. 15. of God
towards us, when we were enemies, from mercy which presupposeth sin, and
misery, and is properly Evangelicall. God gaue Adam his portion in grace by
creation, and left it in his own keeping, which hee soon mispent: but hath
dealt more mercifully with us in making his Son our feof [...]er in trust,
that he as our head, might keep and improue the grace of God belonging to us,
as is meet for us: lest we having  [...]ll at once, and that same left in our
own hands, should mispend all, as Adam did.

To that which they alledge from Eph. 1. 4, compared with Rev. 2. 4. 5, I
answer, first that Paul stiles those Ephesians elect onely as he knew them so
to be; which was by outward ap­pearance of holinesse. Secondly, that the
leaving of their first loue was not a total falling from grace, but onely a
decaying of their former zeal. Thirdly, the threatning of the Candlesticks
removing, was to the truely called, an effectuall means of draw­ing them to
repentance. When these men can make it appear, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=58) that any one of
the truely elect and sanctified Ephesians did wholly despise this and the like
means of their bettering, I will then grant their proof strong. It may as well
be conclu­ded, that therefore the fire goes out, because it hath good and
fresh fuell put unto it, and is diligently blown. For these ex­hortations and
admonitions are as fuell and blowing to pre­serv from going out, the spark,
and fire of grace in the hearts of beleevers.

That onely he that continues to the end, and overcomes shall be Pag. 81. 8
[...] ▪ saved; and that the promise of acceptance, and salvation (by them
miscalled the promise of election) is no otherwise intended to us, then upon
our abiding in the faith, and obedience of Christ. Wee beleev and confesse
with them, according to the Scrip­tures: but withall are taught, and beleev
according to the same Scriptures, that God keeps all his holy ones unto the
end,Ier. 32▪ 40▪ and giues them to overcome; that he puts his fear in their
heart, Mat. 13. 23 that they shall not depart from him; that the seed sown in
good ground shall neither wither by persecution, nor be choaked by cares of
the world, or deceitfulnesse of riches, or otherwise; but shall grow up to the
harvest; that the gates of hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18 against the
Church, or any one member thereof, built upon the 1 Cor. 10. 13 1 Pet. 1. 5.
rock of Peters confession; that God is faithfull, who with the temptation will
giue a way to escape, for all his; that they are1 Ioh. 3. 9. 10. kept by the
power of God, through faith to salvation; and that be­ing born of God, they
doe not sin nor can (to wit, as the children of the devill doe) because his
seed remaineth in them. Pag. 82. 83▪

Their objections following, that by our doctrine men need not fear falling
into condemnation, though they fall into notorious sin, nor repent having
committed such sins; are of no weight: seeing God, though he promise salvation
to the truely called, certainly, yet he neither promiseth it, neither are they
to be­leev it immediately; but by means of fearing to sin, and ofIer. 32. 40.
repentance when sin is committed, which hee also promisethIer. 25. 12, & 29\.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. to work, and put in their heart that they shall not depart
from him. The Lord prom [...]sed by the Prophet Ieremy that after 70 years of
the Iews captivity accomplished at Babylon, he would vi­sit [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=59) them, and cause
them to return to Ierusalem. And whereas it might be objected against the
certainty of this promise and event: What? Shall they return though they
repent not, nor seek the Lord, but remain rebellious, as they haue been, and
their fore-fathers before them? He answers, that then they shall call upon
God, and pray unto him, and seek unto him; and he will hearken unto them, be
found of them, and return their cap­tivity. He promiseth both the end and the
means; and hee that promiseth is faithfull in performing, and providing for
both temporall and eternall deliverance, and the meanes thereof.

Their Argument taken from exhortations, and admonitions Pag. 38. in the
Scriptures, that we receiv not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1, and the
like, hath formerly been fully answered. They are not in vain, either in
respect of elect or reprobate: neither yet will we own their absurd answer
here fathered up­on us, that the whole Scriptures are given to keep both elect
and re­probate from falling into grosse sins; yet that neither the elect can
be damned by transgressing them, nor the reprobate saved by obser­ving them.
The Scriptures haue divers ends; and amongst others, are given to keep all,
not onely from grosse, but from all sins. Neither doe we affirm, that the
elect cannot be dam­ned by transgressing them; or that the reprobate cannot be
saved by observing them, as they like deceitfull proctors, plead for us, or
rather for their own advantage. But this we say, that the elect and truely
sanctified are so kept by the power of God in his feare, that they never
transgresse as the wicked do; nor can, because his seed remaineth in them:
that they conti­nually renue their repentance; particular, for sins known,
in­to which through infirmity they fall; and generall, for sinns unknown, as
David did; and that even by means of those2 Sam. 12. 13▪ Psal. 50. Ps. 19. 12.
Act. 16. 14. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7 exhortations and admonitions; which God opens
their hearts to attend unto, and giues increase accordingly. And the
con­trary, the reprobates, being left to themselvs of God, haue by their own
and satans malice, their eyes so blinded, and hearts hardened, as though those
means of exhortation come [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=59) unto them, they
either understand them not, or beleev them not, or despise them; but never
observ or obey them aright.

Their curses of the doctrine in this point received in all Reformed Churches,
as Atheisticall and damnable; and their blessing themselvs from it, is here as
every where, the fruit of that wilde zeale, wherewith their ignorant hearts
are pos­sessed.

Their answers follow to the Scriptures brought againstPag. 84. them. The first
is, Math. 24. 24. If it were possible they (the false Teachers) should deceiv
the very elect. Whence we conclude (as they say) that it is not possible the
elect should perish. And here first they shew, who are the elect of God;
noting indeed the persons, but perverting the order of grace. If in saying, as
they doe, that the elect of God, are those that receiv and obey the truth of
Christ, and abide in him unto the death, they meant, that such as are chosen
of God in his decree before the world, and actually and effectually, chosen
and called in time by the Word and Spirit, to beleev and obey, did so abide to
the death, it were but the truth, which the Scriptures teach and we professe:
But intending, as they doe, that men haue one­ly the promise of actuall and
particular election till then, but are not absolutely elected; and that
absolute election follows this abiding in Christ till death; they are like the
foolish buil­der, which would lay the foundation upon the roofe of the house.
By their comment upon Christs words, men should be in danger to be seduced by
false Prophets, when they haue abiden in Christ unto death; for till then they
will haue none elect: and the elect are here said to be in danger to be
se­duced.

That which they gather from the manifold warnings in thePag. 85. Scriptures to
the elect, that none deceiv them &c. is true; name­ly that the elect may fall
from their election (or rather from the grace received) if they take not heed.
But they should withall proue, that God doth ever, so far leav and forsake any
truely justified, and sanctified in Christ, as that they take no heed at all,
as they ought. It is certain, that if the very elect Angels [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=60) in heaven, or
Christ Iesus upon earth▪ had taken no heed to Gods commandements, they could
not haue observed them.

That which is added, that many fall away, not by being decei­ved▪ but
willingly forsaking the truth: and again, that many fall away willingly, not
being deceived, is neither pertinent, seeing the place in question speaks
onely of such as are deceived: nor true, seeing a man cannot will any evill,
but under a shew and appearance of good, so presented to the will, by a
deceived, and e [...]ing understanding. And so the Scriptures every wherePsal.
95. 5. Es [...] ▪ 53. 6. Pro [...]. 14. 22 Hebr. 3. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 17, &c.
ascribe all manner of defection from God, and his holy com­mandements, to
errour, either in the generall ground, or par­ticular case.

The next place is Ioh. 10. 27. 28, My sheep hear my voyce, and they know me,
and follow me, and I giue unto them eternall life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any take them out of mine hand. My Father which hath
given them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Fathers hand.

They here conceiv the purpose of Christ to be, to confirm his Pag. 86. sheep,
so long as they continue his sheep, &c. But herein they draw violently Christs
purpose to their own. For Christ, as may be seen, by comparing herewith v. 16.
26. 27, is to shew how it came to passe, that some of his hearers beleeved and
obey­ed his voyce, and some not. Many of the Iews beleeved not, because they
were not his sheep: some did, being his sheep, to wit, by destination of God.
Christ saith not, that they are not his sheep, because they beleev not; but
that they beleev not, because they are not his sheep; that is, not being of
the elect of God, they are left to their own impenitent, and unbeleev­ing
heart, which they also willingly harden against Christs voyce. Where v. 16, he
saith, Other sheep I haue which are not of this fold, whom also I must bring
&c, hee means the elect amongst the Heathens destinated to that one Sheep-
fold, under him that one Shepheard, and by his voyce to be brought ther­to.
This is yet more plain v. 15, where he saith, I giue my life for my sheep.
Christ dyed for the ungodly, Rom. 5. 6. 8. By his sheep, therfore in this
place, are meant the elect from eternity▪ [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=60) for whom he
dyed: the fruit of which election of God, and death of Christ, sheweth forth
it selfe in their timeous faith and obedience.

Further, note we for the thing in hand, that Christ giues Vers. 28. unto his
sheep, that hears his voyce and obey him, eternall life: as elsewhere also he
saith, He that beleeveth on the Son hath ever­lasting Ioh. 3. 36. life. If
this life which they haue given them, and haue (in the beginnings of it) even
in this life, be eternall and ever­lasting; how can it be broken off
afterwards? Or if it can be interrupted and broken off, how is it everlasting
and eter­nall?

Lastly, if none be able to pluck Christs sheep out of his, and his Fathers
hand: then no sinfull person, or temptation, no malice of Satan can turn them
from God: for if they can, then they can pluck them out of Gods hand. Is not
the de­stroying and corrupting of mens faith and obedience, the plucking them
out of the hand of God? V. 12, the same word is used, the wolfe catcheth and
scattreth the sheep, that is, corrup­teth them, as Math. 7. 10, Act. 20. 29,
where the same word is used also. As they are elsewhere too prodigall of
Christs benefits to all the goats in the world, so are they here too
nig­gardly of them to his own sheep: Although in truth they grant, though
unawares, as much as we plead for, in saying, that those sheep, so long as
they continue his sheep, haue spirituall peace and safety &c. Spirituall peace
and safety is against all assaults of all spirituall enemies, labouring to
subvert the spi­rituall state of Gods people.

To the Scriptures here alledged by them for their purpose, the answers
formerly given touching conditional threatnings, and Gods people in
appearance, must be applyed.

Of the former of the two Scriptures following, which isPag. 87. Ioh. 13. 1,
Whom he loveth, he loveth to the end, they speak as the thing is, of Gods
loue: but as loath to be too much behol­den to him for it, and desirous
Pharisaically to justifie them­selvs, they pull down what they formerly built,
in saying, that the question is not of Gods and Christs loue unto his, but of
the [[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=61)
continuance of our loue unto him: wherein they both gainsayPag. 78. 80. 81.
82. 83. 85. 90. 3 [...], &c. Eph. 1. 4. 5. Rom. 5. 8. 10. Gal. 1. 15. Rom. 9.
11. Mat. 11. 25 Rom▪ 3. 24. Gal 4. 5. 6. Rom. 8. 15. Eph. 2. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 25.
1▪ Cor. 10. 13. 1 Thess▪ 5. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 14 Rom. 5. 5. themselvs in this
whole Treatise, and the Scriptures through­out. They put the question
themselvs of Gods election, and of the promise of election. And is election,
and the promise of ele­ction a work of our loue to God, or of Gods to us? The
Scriptures also ascribe the whole work of our salvation, as election,
redemption by the bloud of Christ, vocation, revelation of heavenly things,
justification, sanctification, adoption, faith, repen­tance, and the giving of
the Spirit, issue out of temptations, and continuing blamelesse to the comming
of the Lord, unto the good pleasure and loue of God alone. It is true, that we
must also loue God, as they say: But we must know▪ withall, that this our loue
of God depends upon his loue of us first, and the same shead abroad into our
hearts by his Spirit, which giues te­stimony therof to our spirits: which, as
it were, forceth loue again from us to God, and the continuance of it the
conti­nuance of our loue; according to that of the Apostle, The loue of Christ
constraineth us. For as the beams of the Sun shed into the bosome of the earth
first heat it, and so cause it to reflect heat again towards heaven: so by the
loue of God shead into our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us, our
hearts are most effectually drawn, and perswaded to loue God againe, and men
for, and according to him. Which I further also manifest thus. Our loue,
whether to God or man, ariseth from 1 Tim. 1. 5. faith unfeyned. Faith stands
in the assured perswasion of the heart, by the Holy Ghost, of Gods loue to us:
Wherupon I conclude, that our salvation depending immediately upon our faith,
loue, and obedience, as conditions requisite by Gods ordination, and they upon
Gods loue (and the same known) to us, and so the continuance of them upon the
continuance of it; the question is properly, and principally of the loue of
God to us, and the unchangeablenesse therof.

For Rom. 11. 29, they dream waking, that the meaning isPag. 88. 89 that God
will never repent of saving all persons at all times, in all places, that seek
salvation by faith in Christ, and continue ther­in. If this were all, what
needed the Apostle v. 33, to break [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=61) out into that
admiration of the riches of the wisedom, and know­ledge of God, and of the
unsearchablenes of his judgments? What strange thing is it, that God should
not repent of so gracious a purpose and promise, as is that of saving such as
beleev in his Sonne. Secondly, it is more then evident, that he speake not
here of saving all at all times, but of the saving of some at sometimes;
namely, of the Israelites in their time, and ofVers. 25. 26 30. 3 [...]. the
Gentiles in theirs. Thirdly, the Apostle speaks not of sa­ving them that
beleev, but of giving the election to obtain mer­cy, to beleev. Lastly, the
words are a reason of that which goes before, the Israelites touching
election, are beloved for the Fathers sake, v. 28. For, or because the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance; as if he should haue said: though
for the present, the body of the Israelites be enemies for the Gospell, that
is, in not beleeving it, till the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in; yet the
election, such as are that Israel, according to election, and Gods people
which he foreknew, v. 2, them he loues in his de­cree unchangeably, for their
father, Abraham, Isaak, and Iakobs sake, and without repentance; and so will
in their time make them actually partakers of his most gracious gift and
calling. They here add certain Scriptures (and may doe many moe) proving that
God denies the effect to conditionall promises, men breaking the conditions
first: But as the Scriptures cited by them, speak not all of salvation in
Christ; so neither doe any other shew, that God ever alters purpose, or
promise of saving any, whom he once loved in Christ, whether in decree, or
application of loue.

The last place which they labor to elude is, 1 Ioh. 2. 19. They Pag. 90. 91▪
92. 93. went out of us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would, no doubt, haue continued with us, but they went out, that they
might be manifest, that they were not all of us. And here, in stead of
answering directly to the place, they make out-leaps, as their manner is:
making us to affirm that God hath predestinated some persons to salvation, and
some to damnation without any conditi­on: and that these persons (the elect)
making never so great shew of wickedness, and walking in the wayes of Belial,
are still elect, [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=62) and can by no
means fall out of their election: the other persons ha­ving never so many
testimonies of godl [...]nesse, and walking in the Church of Christ, yet can
never but be reprobates, and if ever they fall away from the Church, or truth,
that they were never truely of it.

We affirm, that God predestinates none to salvation but with condition of the
death of Christ, and the persons (coming to years of discretion) faith, and
repentance, and continuance therin to the end, to goe before that their
salva­tion: nor to damnation, but with condition of sin, and im­penitency
therein to goe before that their damnation. But our Adversaries being bold and
presumptuous, speak evill of the things which they neither know, nor are
walling to under­stand. Onely, these two things we further hold in this case.
First, that the former conditions (Christ, and faith in him) are Gods free
gifts also, infallibly and effectually obtained by the former persons: the
latter condition (impenitency in sin) the certain effect of Satans malice, and
their own corruption, being left of God thereunto. The second is, that other
reason, why God hath, of two alike corrupt in themselvs, preordai­ned the
former to salvation, by the former means; and the latter to condemnation, by
the latter; the Scriptures doe not acquaint us with then the meer pleasure of
him, who hath mercy on whom he will haue mercy, and whom he will, hee
hard­neth: Rom. 9. 11. 15. 18. and who hath loved Iakob, and hated Esau, to
wit, in de­cree, the children not bing yet born, neither having done either
good or evill. Secondly, we say not that the elect so remain, though walking
in the wayes of Belial; but deny, that ever they so walk after their effectual
calling, though through the remainders of corruption (in some more strong then
in others) they haue not onely their common slidings, but often their greater
fals, from which they recover themselvs by repentance: the spirit alwaies
lusting against the flesh, and they in regard of the Law Rom. 7. 15. 17. 23.
of their minde, and spirituall man, not allowing, but hating the evill, which
through the sin dwelling in them, they doe.

Neither, on the other side, doe the Reprobates ever shew any [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=62) one (much lesse
many) true testimonies of godlinesse; though many seeming such oftentimes,
both in their own judgments of themselvs, and other mens of them. He that
should chal­lenge a man for affirming, that it could not but be light at mid-
day, nor but be dark at midnight, in comparison; that he affirmed, that it
could not but be light at noon, though the Sun should not be up: nor but be
dark at midnight, though the Sun were not set; should but use slaunderous
cavillati­on: even such, and no better, is their collection upon our
assertion.

Where they add, that as all mens estates are one by creation, Pag. 90. and one
by transgression, all being dead in sins; and that, as all are shut up in
unbeliefe, so he hath mercy on all, to wit, every particu­lar person alike,
they mis-interpret the Scripture, as hath been formerly shewed; mistake the
proportion of nature (whe­ther by creation, or corruption) with that of meer
grace; and are most impious against Gods mercy, which they make all one
towards Pharaoh and Moses; Herod and Paul: Besides, it should follow hereupon,
that God hath mercy actually on allRom. 11. 30. 31. 26 27. and every person in
the world, in taking away their sinnes, and saving them; for the Apostle whose
words they cite, speaks ex­presly of such an all as obtain mercy that way.

With like truth do they after affirm, from Math. 13, thatPag. 91. the sower
soweth the seed of salvation upon all. It cannot with mo­desty be denyed, but
there are, and haue been many millions, unto whom the Gospell (the onely seed
of salvation) was ne­ver preached. And as they begin, so goe they on with this
pa­rable; as being of them; in whose mouth a parable is like the Prov. 26. 7.
9. legs of the lame that are lifted up, and like a thorn that goes up in­to
the hand of a drunkard. As first, where by the good seed they understand the
seed of salvation, or Gospell, and by tares, false doctrines: as if they know
the minde of our Saviour, better then he himselfe: who expresly teacheth, that
the good seed are the children of the Kingdom (so called, because they are the
heyres of their Fathers Kingdom) in which the righteous are to shine forth as
the Sun, v. 43, and the tares the children of the wic­ked [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=63) one, which doe
iniquity, are to be gathered by the Angels in the Vers. 38. 39. 40. 41, &c.
end of the world, and cast into the furnace of fire, &c. And if the good seed
were the Gospell, and the tares false doctrines, as they (transforming persons
into things) would make them; yet is it untruely affirmed by them, that the
persons of them who receiv the good seed were no better then the other, nor
the persons of them who receiv the tares any worse then the other. That both
are alike, to wit, dead in sin, when God offereth the Gospel, we willingly
grant, and are glad to hear them confess: but to say they are both alike, when
the one receivs the Gospell, and the other refuseth it, and receivs the tares
contrary unto it, is to say that the good ground, and the bad, are both alike.
For what makes them that are alike, when the Gospel comes alike unto them, not
to remain alike stil? And what is the reason why the one receivs it, and not
the other? They say, because the good­nesse of the Sower first sowed it, and
therfore he hath cause to Pag. 91. praise him onely. But, say I, this
goodnesse is alike to both the two in sowing, or offering the Gospels seed:
Whereupon it must follow, that he who receivs this good seed, hath no more
cause to praise God the Sower, then he that receivs it not: for it is sowen
alike on both, in regard of outward offer; but for the ones receiving of it,
rather then the other, he hath cause to thank himselfe alone, and his own
freewill. And in­deed this is the mark at which all those Adversaries arrows
are shot. But the Scriptures teach us a further thing, then these ungratefull
persons will acknowledge; which is, that besides, and aboue the offer common
to both, God giues the encrease 1 Cor. 3. 4. to some (without which, all
preaching is nothing:) even by opening of the heart to attend unto it, as he
did the heart of Lydia. Act. 16. 14 And as persons receiv the word of God into
their hearts by his opening them first, so in that his gracious work in them,
hee makes them which were before alike, in spirituall consi­deration, to
become unlike, and better then other; and so more beloved then others for the
godly qualities, as they call them, which he hath wrought in them. Neither
doth the Lord hate onely the works of wicked men, as they say; but also [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=63) the workers of
iniquity: not with a passion of the mind, as ha­tredPs. 5. 5 6. is in man, but
with a holy will to punish the violation of his righteous Law. And though with
a generall loue of the Creator to the creature, he alwaies, after a sort, loue
the per­sons of men, as being his generation, yet he loues, (as is meet) the
honour of his holinesse, more then the happinesse of his creature, having
violated and prophaned it without repen­tance.

They further bewray their ignorance, where they think toPag. 92. mend the
matter, in saying, that God hates the persons, as wea­pons and instruments of
those wicked qualities. Where hath God ever so spoken, or any other man before
them? The godly qualities, or graces of knowledge, faith, loue, patience, and
the like,2 Cor. 6. 6. 7 Eph. 6. 13. &c. Rom. 6. 13. are the spirituall armour
and weapons of godly men; the mem­bers also of men are called the weapons of
righteousnesse, or unrighteousnes, for that with them they practise▪ & perform
the works thereof: But to say, the persons are weapons and instru­ments of the
qualities, is to put the person in the hand of the weapon to be used by it;
wheras on the contrary, all know, that the weapon and instrument is in the
hand of the person, and to be used and exercised by him. They here, in
desiring the Reader well to observ what they haue said, as being a most
blessed truth, are loath that their nakednesse should not be seen in their
spirituall drunkennesse.

### 3.7. ADVERSARIES.

NOW for the words of the Apostle, to which they re­turn after so long
wandring; their comment is, They Pag. 92. 93. went out from us, &c. that is,
say they, Those lying spirits, those persons who had once the spirit of truth
in them, went out from the Apostles and other Saints. And again, those lying
spirits and An­tichrists in mens persons, went out &c. and were never of the
truth: the summe of all being, that lying spirits, and Antichrists in mens
persons, went out of the truth.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=64)

### 3.8. DEFENCE.

A Riddle, better fitting H. N. then the professours of the truth in
simplicity. It behoues us therefore a little to in­sist upon the Text, opening
it according to the Apostles mean­ing, and ours with him; and first proving
against them, that by those that went out, are not meant the lying spirits in
the persons, but the persons themselues.

And first, these words, They went out from us, or better, from out of us,
shew, that those out-goers were formerly of them in a respect; else how could
they haue gone out from them? But lying spirits were never of the Apostles and
Saints; but the persons sometimes were. Secondly, hee saith not, as they
corrupt the Text, If they had been of the truth, but of us; nor they would
hane continued with it, but with us, nor, but they are not of it, but they
were not of us: all carrying it to persons so, and so qualified. Thirdly, Is
it to be conceived, that the Apostle would complain (as heere he doth) that
lying spirits did not continue with the Churches? Fourthly, in saying, They
went out of us, that it might be manifest that they were not all of us, he
shews that by their out-leaps, something was manifested which was hid before.
But it was plain before, to the Apostles and Saints, that lying spirits were
not of the truth. He speaks therefore of the persons of hypocrites, whom by
this their professed defection, God discovered. Fithly, in saying, they were
not all of us, he insinuates that some of them were; What? some lying spirits
of the Spirit of truth? No, but that not all the persons that formerly
professed the truth with them, were true members of Christs body, which they
were. Lastly, v. 20, He makes an opposition between them of whom hee writes,
and to whom. But yee What? yee spirits, and so v. 28, little children, that
is, little spirits. All may see with what spirit these men are led. He then
speaks of the going out of persons, not of spirits, as they mean; but being
indeed Anti­christs, as v. 18, in regard of their spirits, and doctrines, for
which they pretended the spirit of Christ.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=64)That
which they add of the spirit of Hymeneus, together with Pag. 93. his person,
being in fellowship with Paul, is like the rest. By his Spirit it seems they
mean his faith, in saying faithfull Hymene­us was of the truth; erroneous
Hymeneus was never of it. Hath the faith of a person fellowship with the
Saints? Or did Hy­meneus his faith sometimes hold faith and a good conscience,
and1 Tim. 1. 19 20. after put them away? Or are not these things plainly
spoken of the person of men? Paul speaking that of Hymeneus, and others, which
hee knew in regard of outward appearance, and not that which he knew not of,
the inward truth in the heart.

The meaning of Iohn is plain enough, that these Antichrists went out of the
Church, not by making any seperation, or schism from it, as some thinke (for
they still continued in the outward fellowship, preaching, and prophesying and
deceiving;)Chap. 2. 26. Chap 4. 1. but in it, by heresie and prophanenesse,
contrary to that out­ward profession of faith, and holinesse, which they had
for­merly made: by which their defection they shewed, that they were never
truely regenerate, and inwardly and indeed living members of the body: but
having been hypocrites, at their best, God so ordered, that they should hereby
discover them­selvs. For had they been indeed of the number of the faith­full,
they had so continued to the end. Which truth this Apo­stle confirms further,
ch. 3, very evidently, saying; whosoever 1 Ioh. 3 9. is born of God doth not
commit sin: For his, that is, Gods seed re­maineth in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. He doth not say, as some would haue him, he cannot
sin, or com­mit sin, that is, giue himselfe to sin, as the wicked doe, whilst
the seed of God remains in him, or whilst hee is born of God; but for, or
because, this seed of the new birth remaineth in him.

One observation I will here annex, and so conclude this Head. It cannot be,
saith Christ, but offences will come. And ofMath. 18. all offences, none is
greater, and which more wounds the ten­der heart of a weak Christian, then
when he sees such, as by their former profession and appearances, haue
purchased to [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=65) themselvs the
opinion of piety and godlinesse, to apostate, and fall away from that their
former profession, either to grosse errour, or prophanenesse. This occasions
him to sus­pect (Satan by suggestions of unbelief, furthering him here­in)
that there is not in the course of Christianity, that power of grace,
stablenesse, and true comfort, which it promiseth. This stone of offence,
which Satans malice casts in the way, Gods spirit removeth, in providing, that
where there is in the Scriptures, either mention, or insinuation of mans
falling away from the grace of God, there is withall commonly an item given in
the same place, that such persons were never effectually sanctified, but
hypocrites, at their best, whatsoever they seemed either to others, or to
themselvs. Thus, where some at the first, receiving the word with joy, are
after when tri­bulation▪ or persecution ariseth▪ offended; others haue made
some growth, yet become unfruitfull by the cares of the world and
de­ceitfulnesse Math. 13. of riches: the Lord would haue us take knowledg,
that such were never better then stony and thorny ground. Thus, that Iudas
being lost, was none of them whom the Father had Ioh. 17. given unto Christ,
but a child of perdition. Thus where, Israel did not obtain that which it
sought for, but was broken off, yet thatRom, 11. 1 Cor. 10. the election
obtained it: the gifts and calling of God being without repentance. Thus, that
they, which fall, are such as think (that is presume, that) they stand, rather
then ever doe so indeed. Thus, that though some come to err concerning the
truth for­merly2 Tim. 2. professed by them▪ yet the foundation of God stands
steady, having this soul, The Lord knoweth who are his. Thus, that if some
inlightned, and tasting of the heavenly gifts &c. fall away, Heb. 5. & 6▪ it
is they that are dull of hearing, like the earth, that beareth but thorns, and
bryars, notwithstanding the rayns falling upon it. 2 Pet. 2, with Iude. Thus,
that false Teachers, and such as follow their pernicious wayes, were at first
and best, but men creeping in unawares. Lastly, that such as went out of the
fellowship of the Apostles and Churches, in the outward profession of faith,
and holinesse, were never truely, and inwardly of them, as was made mani­fest
in due time.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=65)

## 4\. CHAP. IIII.

Of Freewill.

AFTER a lowd blast in the beginning, as formerly, of their full and sufficient
dealing in the former point, our Adversaries begin this with a false, and foul
accusation.

### 4.1. ADVERSARIES.

THE Calvinists hold, that wicked men are compelled to sinnPag. 94. 95. by Gods
power; and again, that men are compelled by the power, force and compulsion of
Gods predestination to all wicked, and cruell crymes. Against which they
alleag out of Bastingius, and Thes. Genev. that Man by evill was spoyled not
of his will, but of the soundnesse of his will. Therfore that which in nature
was good, in quality became evill: and that, as Bernard teacheth, there is in
us all power to will, but to will well, we had need to profit better; to will
evill we are able already by reason of our fall: as also, that there remains
freedom in all good, naturall, civill, morall, and judi­ciall things, but not
in spirituall. These things, they say, if we wil stand to, they require no
more.

### 4.2. DEFENCE.

BOth we will stand to them, and they must fall by them, as they might
evidently see, if they considered, that all our question is about freedom of
will in spirituall things; which alone we deny.

The ground of their errour here is, that they unskilfully confound necessity &
compulsion; and conceiv not how a thing, both free and casuall in it selfe,
may be the over-ruling hand of Gods providence be determined necessarily this
way, or that. The difference between necessity and compulsion I haue [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=66) formerly both
proved and opened at large: shewing how mansPag. 20. 21. freewill in chusing
that which is evill, and Gods power­full hand in governing him in that his
choise, according to his wise counsell, to his holy ends, may well stand
together. And for that which is good, God works it by inclination, by his Word
and Spirit; which inclination cannot be compulsion, seeing compulsion and
violence is onely against the inclinati­on of the thing, and not the inclining
of it. God herein first takes away the former corrupt inclination, that
[...]t reign not, which is the coard wherewith a man is tyed, as they speak,
and then giues a new inclination contrary to the former, not hale­ing up a man
by main force, as they mishape a similitude forPag. 98. us, but giving inward
will and strength of grace for the man to raise up himselfe by. And if all
kinde of necessity abolish all kind of freedom, then in truth a man doth
nothing free­ly; for whatsoever he doth, he doth it necessarily, when he doth
it.

They doe here in vain heap up Scriptures like medicinesPag. 96. upon a sound
stomack, to prove that election, and choyce can­not be but in, or rather with
liberty. We acknowledg that whatso­ever good or evill a man doth outwardly, or
inwardly, where the will comes to work (for there may be acts of the
under­standing, and motions of the affections before and without the wills
working) he useth liberty and freedom in chusing, or refusing: that is, he
doth it not by any violence or compul­sion, but from the inward principles of
his mind; the un­derstanding directing, and the will consenting; though yet
the wicked, being left of God, cannot but doe wickedly, any more then the
Aethiopian can change his skin, or the Leopard his Ier. 13. 23. spots: nor the
godly but doe godlily, by the grace of God ef­fectually inclining him
thereunto. Neither doth our affir­mation make voyd, or unmoveing the
threatnings of God; but makes both threatnings, and promises, and precepts,
and all, most effectuall; God by the inward work of his spirit giving an
encrease to the outward preaching; and open­ing the heart to receaue the same.
One man can move another [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=66) by outward
motives, words, and the like. Will these menNumb. 11. 25. 26. Iudg. 14▪ 5. 19.
Ps. 51. 11. 12. Ezech. 11. 19. & 36\. 26. 27. Luk. 1. 15. Act. 1. 8. & 2\. 17.
18. Rom. 8. 9. 18. 26. 27 Pag. 95. affoord God no more, or other work? Will
they deny any in­ward work of Gods spirit at all, above the words work, though
in, and by it? What mean then the holy Scriptures speaking so frequently of
this Spirits work in men, with means, without means; for ordinary, and
extraordinary operations, both gifts, and graces? Or if there be such a spirit
of God dwelling, and working in men, why doe they deny unto it, a prevailing
power, wheresoever it pleaseth God to bestow it? And for those that cannot
repent, as they plead for some; God, and their own consciences will plead
against them, that they will not repent: and so are not tyed with a coard by
others, and violently with-held, as they plead for them, but doe wil­lingly
cast, and keep the coards of iniquity, and rebellion up­on themselvs.

We acknowledg also (and they therefore prove in vain)Pag. 100 101. that to
whomsoever the word comes, them God would have gathered unto him, hearken unto
his voyce, repent that they might live and not dy, to wit, in that degeee of
willing, which stands in commanding those things, and approving them if they
follow; and that the fault is onely in mens obstinacy, if they repent not.

Neither doe the Calvinists, as they surmise, make either Gods decree, or the
defect of his grace in fault, if men repent not; be­cause they affirm that God
decreed not to give them the grace to repent, nor doth give it them; except
eyther God may not require repentance of all, or be bound to give it to all.
It is not my fault, that a drunkard fals and lyes in the street, though he
cannot but both fall, and ly there, except I hold, and help him up; except
withall I be bound so to help him: nor my fault that a prodigal spend-thrift
comes into debt, and is cast into prison, and cannot escape the one, or other,
unlesse I pay his debts; except withall I be bound to pay them: so neither is
it Gods fault that men remain and peri [...]h in that im­penitency, out of
which they neither will, nor can come with­out Gods speciall gift of
repentance, except it be Gods [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=67) bounden duty
(as these men seem to make it) to bestow that grace upon them.

The two places Esa. 5. 1. 2. 3, &c. and Math: 11. 21. 22, we will a little
more particularly examine. In the former where God saith, he could doe no more
to his vineyard then he had done, he speaks onely of outward means, as the
text makes it plain, I fenced it &c. I would ask these men, whether there be
not requisite, that the naturall vineyard may bring forth fruit, something
besides the fencing, gathering out of the stones, and the rest there
mentioned? It cannot be denyed, that, except be­sides, and above all these,
God give the encrease by an in­ward blessing, all planting, & watering, and
outward dressing whatsoever is nothing: so is it in the spirituall vineyard
much more though planted by Paul himself, yea by Christ himself in the outward
ministery. And where God saith, He expected sweet grapes, but it brought forth
wild v:4. we must not imagine (as our adversaries seem to doe) that God is
deceaved in his expectation, as men often are: but onely, that the Israelites
did not perform that which God required, and they ought.

Touching the repentance of Tyre & Sidon. First I would know how they prove
that Christ speaks of other then legall repentance, such as Ahab manifested in
sack-cloth? which was1\. King. 21. 26. not from a godly sorrow for sin; but
from a servile fear of pu­nishment. Secondly eyther this repentance should
haue been wrought by those mighty works alone, or by them with other helps.
Mighty works alone cannot work faith, & repentance, Rom. 10. 17 2. Tim. 2. 25.
Mar. 16. 20 which must come by hearing, & instructions of the word, which they
serve to confirm unto men. If Christ speak of his mighty works, as means
though not sufficient of themselvs, yet availe­able, with other requisite
helps, he excludes not the spirits work, but includes it. But, in truth, the
meaning of Christ seems to be no more, but to reprove the obstinacy of Corazin
in a form of speach like unto that Luk. 19. 40. If these should hold their
tongue, the stones would imediately cry out. And as it were a vain thing hence
to dispute about the speaking of stones; so is it, to gather any thing thence
of the Tyrians re­pentance. [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=67) The meaning of
the Lord here is not to commend the Tyrians at all, but to upbraid the
Chorazites, and to shew their hardnes of heart to be greater then the others.
The like form of speach we haue to the like purpose Ezech: 3. 6. And if so be
there were in these Tyrians this pronenes to repentance▪ if they had enjoyed
the means which the others did, but they wanted; & withall, that God so
desires the repentance & salva­tion of all; how came it to passe, that God did
not afford those helps unto them that were so prone and willing to have used
them aright? It seems, the former case is now altered, and that men might say
to God, that they would, but he would not.

### 4.3. ADVERSARIES.

THeir invincible Argument servs onely to bewray their in­curablePag. 101.
disease in heaping together many Scriptures to prove that, which no man doubts
of; namely, that the works wrought in us by God are attributed to us also; as
the cleansing of our hearts &c: wherein yet they mingle with Gods truth their
own errours, and that in particular, in affirming, that God takes Pag. 102. it
to himself as a proper title, to justify a sinner: and yet that Da­saith, he
justified his heart.

### 4.4. DEFENCE.

FIrst, if it be proper to God to justifie a sinner, how is it common to David
with him? Secondly, They slaunder David in making him say, he justified his
heart. Could David forgiue the sin of his heart? which God doth in justifying
a sinner. David Psal. 73. speaks of sanctification, not of justifi­cation.

They ignorantly apply the Scriptures, Psal. 108. 12. & Psal.Pag. 103. 118\.
13. to Gods working grace in men, being meant onely of his working deliverance
for them.

They vainly, and deceitfully affirm, from Acts. 7. 51. & Pag. 103. 104. 13\.
46. that man may resist the grace of God, wrought by his word and spirit. The
places speak not of any grace wrought by ei­ther of them. The former speaks
onely of resisting the spirit; [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=68) as the Authour
of the word in the Prophets and others. The latter of resisting the word of
God, not working, but offering grace onely. Besides, they notably abuse those
Scriptures ci­ted,Pag. 104. in making them plainly to shew that man hath free
choise (to wit alike) to work with God, or against God in the work of his
grace. It is true, that men whether receiving or refusing grace, doe it
freely, and without compulsion: but the latter freely of themselvs, being left
of God to themselvs; the former freely▪ by Gods speciall grace, and spirit,
giving them, and effectually drawing them to Christ. I say more effectually▪
Ioh. 6. 44. though not violently, then any one creature can by violence draw
another. Oh, that any made partakers of this free grace of Gods spirit
dwelling in them, should deny the powerfull work of it, to establish their own
freewill!

After Scriptures, they come to experience. And first,Pag. 104. they erre in
thinking, that liberty and necessity of sinning in wicked men cannot stand
together. It is certain, that the more wicked either man or devill is, he
sinneth both the more free­ly, and the more necessarily. Their similitude, of
a mans drink­ing poyson, is against themselvs, so far as it is pertinent. I
would know of them how the drinking of poyson by any is un­avoydable? If they
say, because hee knows it not to be in his drink, therin they grant that sins
of ignorance are done un­avoydably, and yet not by compulsion, as they
conclude. Se­condly, who would think, that any, after the profession of the
knowledg, and obedience of the Gospell, which these men haue made, so many
yeares, both in the Church of Eng­land, and else where, should so far apostate
therefrom to Po­pery, and Pha [...]isaism, as to think it as easie a thing,
for a man, yea, though never so wicked, to keep himselfe from all sin, as from
drinking of poyson, which he knew to be in his cup? For he that knows it not
cannot avoyd it. How grievously erre they, in affirming, that all men are able
to keep the Law, toPag. 105. wit, without the least fayling, all their life
long, in thought, word or deed? For this they plead in this whole Section,
that except it be possible for every man thus to keep the Law, nei­ther [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=68) his conscience
can accuse him, nor God justly punish him for breaking it.

Neither doe the Calvinists hold, as they barbarously speak.▪ & unjustly
slander, that men commit evill by force of Gods provi­dence, or are decreed to
doe evill, or compelled to sin by power. But they beleev, as the Scriptures
teach, that all men in Adam haue Rom. 5. 12. 15. Rom. 8. 3. sinned, and by sin
lost the Image of God in which they were made; so as the Law is impossible
unto them by reason of the flesh, and so cannot possibly but sin, by reason of
the same flesh raigning in the unregenerate, and dwelling in all: (which these
light persons, expresly confesse in the sequel of this book:) andPag. 117.
119. that this so comes to passe by Gods holy decree, and work of providence
answerable, not forceing evill upon any, but or­dering all persons in all
actions, as the supreme Governour of all: and that the wicked, being left of
God; some desti­tute of the outward means, the Gospell; all of them of the
effectuall work of the Spirit, from that weak flesh, and na­turall corruption,
daily increased in them, sin, both necessari­ly as unable to keep the Law; and
willingly, as having in them­selvs the beginning and cause thereof, the
blindnesse of their own minds, and perversenesse of their will and affections;
and so are inexcuseable in Gods sight.

Here, with the lowd boasts of their large and undenyable Pag. 106. 107.
proofs, they joyn sundry errours. As first, in making the good things of
creation to come from Gods grace, viz. for salvation, of which our question
is. The good things of creation the Scrip­turesGal 5. 4. Ephes. 28. Rom. 7. 5.
account our own, and of our selvs, ever opposing them to the good things of
grace, to salvation. Secondly, they err egregiously, in saying, that what Adam
had in creation, and lost by transgression for himself and his posterity, that
is restored through Christ, to wit, to all; for so the question is. By this,
all should be restored actually into Gods favour, haue his image repaired in
them, and be wholly free from that weak flesh, making the Law impossible unto
them. With like perversnesse doe they misapply to all Adams posterity without
difference, that which the Apostle speaks of himselfe, and other godly
Ministers, and [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=69) Christians
onely, Rom. 8. 3. 4, 2 Cor. 3. 5, Phil. 4, 13, as any that pleaseth to peruse
the places, may see. Lastly, they mostRom. 1. 6. 15. & ch. 8 1. 8. 12. 13.
Gal. 5. 17. 24. absurdly affirm, that the flesh through Christ is able to
fulfill the Law; wheras we fulfill the Law no further, then as we kill,
crucifie, and destroy the flesh, and lusts thereof, by the Spirit.

### 4.5. ADVERSARIES.

TO the question, Whether a man can doe any thing in the Pag. 107. 108. work of
his regeneration, they answer, after much froath of words, that faith and
repentance is regeneration, and that it is most plain (as what is not to their
peircing eye) that even in the work of regeneration, man may submit to it, or
hinder it.

### 4.6. DEFENCE.

AN ignorant assertion, shewing the ground of their errour in not putting
difference between Gods work, and mans. They may as rightly say, that the life
and motion of the childe is its begetting. To regenerate is nothing else, but
to beget anew. Doth the child beget it selfe? Or doth not the parent onely
beget it? So God begets by the Ministery of the Word, and man is begotten by
him: according to that of the Apostle, Every one that loveth him that begat,
loveth him also Ioh. 5. 1. that is begotten of him. So Iam. 1. 18. Of his own
will begat he us, by the word of truth. By these mens doctrine we should beget
our selvs of our own will. Begetting in creatures, is both in nature and time,
before the being of the begotten. Men then before they be, must beget
themselvs, by their saying. And as God regenerates, and not man; so doth man,
being rege­nerated, beleev and obey, and not God. Wheras, if faith and
obedience be regeneration, then God beleevs and repents; seeing God
regenerates. Besides, as the outward means of re­generation may be, and are,
by too many hindred from work­ing, and made unprofitable: So where God
pleaseth to add to the outward means, and motives of the Gospell, the inward
work of the Spirit, of which Spirit, we are born or begotIoh. 3. 5. 6. 8 1
Pet. 1. 23. anew; of the Spirit, I say, though by the Word; by the same [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=69) Spirit which he
puts within them, he takes away first what mightEzech. 11. 19. Ier. 24. 7. &
31\. 33. Ezech. 36. 27. Eph. 2. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 25 hinder thier regeneration,
even their stony heart; and giving them a heart of flesh, a heart to know God,
and putting his fear in their hearts, and by putting his Spirit in them,
causing them to walk in his statutes; he thereby regenerates them, or giues
them faith, and repentance, which they must haue before they can beleev or
repent: as the childe must haue life before it can liue, or doe acts of life,
and must be generated, or be­gotten, before it haue life, or being.
Regeneration therefore goes before faith, and repentance.

This Head they shut with answering three Scriptures. The first Math. 22, but
mistaken, for Luk. 14. 23, which as it is frivolously objected (if by any) so
is it easily answered.

The second is, Ioh. 6. 44. No man can come to me except the Father draw him.
This is not meant (say they) of violent compul­sion. Pag. 109. True, nor yet
onely (as they would haue it) of outward teaching by heavenly doctrine: For
thus the Father drew many that came not to Christ; whereas hee speaks here, of
such a drawing as is peculiar to them that come to him; who shall ne­ver
hunger, v. 35, and whom he will in no wise cast out, v. 37. He speaks not
therefore of the outward teaching onely, but withall, and principally, of the
inward teaching of the spi­rit, as Esa. 54. 13, Ier. 31. 33. 34, 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
The most of them whom the Father drew by heavenly doctrine, that is, to whom
Christ preached, murmured at him, v. 41: this hee re­proues, vers. 43, & vers.
44, takes away the offence which might arise, at the consideration of the
small effect which his words had with many, considering what he testified of
him­selfe, v. 39. 40, shewing that such was mans perversenesse in spirituall
things, as that except God, to the outward word, adjoyned the inward work of
the Spirit, thereby drawing him, his obstinacy could not, nor would not be
tamed, nor he turned to God.

Lastly, to Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in you both the will and deed,
after much impertinent discourse, and many er­roursPag. 110. 111. 112. mingled
among, they answer, that God doth this in men [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=70) by reasons, and
perswasions, that they would chuse life, and avoyd death.

And first, they conclude without and against reason, that if the regenerate
haue power to resist, they haue power not to resist: which is, as if a man
should say, if a fool can doe foolishly, then he can doe wisely, or the like.

Secondly, it is a slander upon the Calvinists, that they are di­vided in this
point; or that any of them affirms, that the elect though unregenerate, cannot
resist good. Whilst they are unrege­nerate they can doe nothing else but
resist in spirituall things: But God in time (as he hath decreed) by the
spirit of regene­ration, overcomes their corruption, and works in them, not to
resist, but willingly to follow him, that calleth them.

Thirdly, I would know what they mean by these phrases, of Gods sending his
word and spirit to work our regeneration: and again, of God by the power of
his word and spirit, shewing man the benefite of life &c. If they consider the
spirit onely as the Authour of the word, speaking in the men of God, why doe
they not say the Spirit and the Word, rather then, as they do, the Word and
the Spirit? Or how doth God send the spirit, thus understood, to work
regeneration in men? If they answer, that God is ready to giue the spirit, and
so doth to them that will receiv it: first, to be ready to giue, is not to
giue or send: se­condly, they should understand, that to be willing to receiv
spirituall things, is a main fruit and effect of regeneration, and therfore
not a cause, as they mistake. For the will, thus holily bent, presupposeth the
understanding divinely enlight­ned, whose direction it follows, and without
which going before, it is blind and brutish. Neither can a man possibly will a
thing, but as he understands it to be good for him. If the understanding be
divinely inlightned, and the will holily bent, then the whole man is before
regenerated, that is, be­gotten before of God by the spirit of regeneration.
In truth, they but speak of Gods sending his Spirit to work in mans
rege­neration, as Senacherib by Rabsakah spake of Gods sending him 2 King. 18.
25. against Ierusalem. He to cover the pride of violence; and they [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=70) to cover the
pride of free-will, in bending it selfe, of itself, to receiv grace offered.

To conclude this Head▪ referring the Reader to the Argu­mentsPag. 44. 45. 46.
47. of conviction formerly laid down, I onely add thus much: that if God onely
bend the will by perswasions of promises and threatnings, and works not
otherwise, then by force of rea­sons, Pag. 108. 109. 111. Mat. 11. 25 1 Cor.
1. 26. 27. and by using strong arguments and perswasions, as they ex­presly
affirm; then, that, whose contrary, both the Scrip­tures and experience
confirms, would ordinarily come to passe; namely, that the wise and prudent
should haue heaven­ly things revealed unto them, and discern them much more
easily and effectually, then babes and weak persons; and so should be
converted sooner then they: specially sooner then harlots and light persons,
considering how much better they mind and understand; arguments and reasons of
all sorts; then the other. We therfore conclude with the Apostle, that God
works in us both the will and the deed: not onely by his word working on us,
but by his Spirit working in us: not onely by sending Paul to plant, by
propounding strong arguments of perswasion, but also by giving the increase by
the most effectu­all work of his Spirit, inlightning the eyes of the
understanding Eph. 1. 18. to see the force of those arguments, opening the
heart to attend unto them, and so writing them in the same heart, and most
inward Act. 16. 14. Ier. 31. 34. parts, as they cannot be blotted out.

## 5\. CHAP. V.

Of the Originall estate of Mankinde.

THE main question here to be discussed is, whether all Infants sinned in Adam,
and so be guilty of death, and condemnation naturally, and without mercy in
Christ, or not? This I will proue (God willing) against them; answering, and
disproving what they bring [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=71) to the
contrary, and that in their own order, as followeth.Pag. 113.

### 5.1. ADVERSARIES.

INfants had no life, nor being, as Adam had, at that time, when God gaue the
Law to Adam; and therfore no Law was given unto them; and therfore sinned not,
nor were guilty of condemnation.

### 5.2. DEFENCE.

I Grant, that infants had then no life and being, as Adam had, to wit,
actuall, and distinct: but affirm, that they had both, after a sort, and as
the branches in the root. Odegos (the guide of the blinde, as Rom. 2. 19,)
affirms, pag. 114, that mankind was in Adam in bodily substance; they had
therfore be­ing in Adam after a sort, namely, so far as they were in him. If
they had being in Adam any way, they had life also in him: for nothing in Adam
was dead, but all living: their being therefore so far, as it was in him, was
a living being.

We reade Hebr. 7. 9, that Levi payed tithes to Melchisedeck in Abraham. But
how could this be, might one say, seeing Le­vi had then no life and being? The
Apostle answers, that he was in the loyns of his father Abraham, when
Melchisedeck met him. And reason teacheth, that none can doe any act, but he
must first be, nor doe it otherwise, then as he is. Levi therefore then had a
kind of being, and that living, and reasonable also, as he performed that act
of paying tithes. He in Abraham as a particular root: Mankind in Adam, as in a
generall root.

2 That Infants had a Law given them, I thus proue. First, the word of God,
Gen. 2. 17. In the day, that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good, and
evill, thou shalt die the death; shew, that whom God threatneth with death, to
them he gaue the Law. The punishment Gen. 3. 17. 18. 19, reacheth to all
A­dams posterity, and so the threatning, and by consequence the Law. Secondly,
the Apostle teacheth, Rom. 2. 15, that the Law is written in the hearts of the
Gentiles, according to which Law of nature written in their hearts (though
they had it not written in tables of stone, as the Iews) they shall be judged
at [[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=71) the
day of the Lord, v. 15. 16. 17. These Gentiles cannot be imagined to haue this
Law thus written any other way, then as God in the beginning created Adam, and
all mankind in him, after his Image, in righteousnesse and holinesse; in which
respect also they are said, to doe by nature the things contained in the Law,
having also a naturall conscience in them, which without a Law were vain:
Vnder which generall Law, bind­ing the reasonable creature to faith and
obedience in all things (in disposition before use of discretion, and in act
af­terwards:) the particular Law, Gen. 2, is conteyned, and to be referred
unto it. Thirdly, if infants haue reasonable soules, then haue they the
faculties of understanding and will, though not the actuall use of them, as
men haue. This understand­ing cannot be conceived by any to be without all
disposition and pronenesse, either to the knowledg of God, or to ig­norance,
errour, and doubting of him; nor this will to bee without all disposition, and
inclination to will according to, or against Gods will. As the yong whelps and
cubs, of Ly­ons, Beares, and Foxes, haue in their naturall and sensitiue
fa­culties, a pronenesse and inclination to raven; and every beast pronenesse
to the things of its kind, after, actually performed, and practised by them:
so haue infants necessarily in their rea­sonable faculties, a disposition, one
or other, to understand and will things, specially such as concern God, by
reason of the most naturall, necessary, and indossolible relation, between the
reasonable creature, and the Creator, and that specially in those most noble
faculties.

The objection from Rom. 7. 1, hath in it no colour of truth: for neither are
there any such words, that the Law is given (especially onely, which must be
added) to them that know it: neither doth the Apostle there intend at all, to
shew to whom the Law was given, or not: but onely, that the Christian Church
at Rome (specially many of them being Iewes, as appears chap. 16,) to which he
wrote, was not ig­norant of the Law, whether generall or particular, to which
he had reference in that place.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=72)To Deut.
11. 2, besides things answered by Mr. Ainsworth, I adde, that Moses there
excludes not onely infants, but many grown men as appears, v. 3. 4. The other
two places Matth. 13. 9, and 1 Cor. 10. 15, exclude too many mens of years
also, considering how few haue ears to hear, or understanding to judg aright
of spirituall things.

For the third head, and that all sinned in Adam, it is so plain from Rom. 5,
as they haue nothing at all to answer,Vers. 12. though they object the place:
onely they bring certain other Scriptures, in such a manner, as if they would
disproue one Scripture by another. And indeed what exposition can be given, or
evasion found, considering the expressenes of the words? As by one man sinne
entred into the world, and death by sinne, so death passed upon all men, for
that (or as the originall hath it) in whom all men haue sinned. So v. 19, As
by one mans disobedience many were made sinners, &c. If they say, as some doe,
that all are made sinners by imitation onely, they are clearly confuted;
first, by daily experience, in which it is plain, that children comming to
some discerning, will lie, filch, and revenge themselvs, though they never
heard lie told, &c. It is alas too evident, that they bring this corruption
in­to the world with them. Secondly, by the Apostles words, v. 19, For as by
ones mans disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. If wee bee made unrighteous onely by imitation
of Adams sin, and not by his performing it, as our root naturally; then we are
made righteous onely by imitation of Christs righteousnesse, and not by his
performing righteousnesse, and fulfilling the Law for us, as our spirituall
root, in which wee are grafted by faith.

Lastly, these Adversaries grant, that by Adams sin all his Pag. 117. posterity
haue weak natures▪ by which when the commandement comes, they cannot obey, and
liue▪ but sin, and so die, Rom. 8\. 3.Rom. 8. 3. Can they which are accustomed
to doe evill▪ doe well? Or will these men never leav their godlesse custom of
corrupting the words of the text, for advantaging of an evill cause? For
flesh, which [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=72) the Text hath,
they put nature: wheras it is without all questi­on, that by flesh, the
Apostle there understands properly, sin and sinfull flesh: as he expresly
calleth it, and as is plain in the whole context, v. 1. 2. 4. 5. 6. 7, &c. In
all which hee opposeth the flesh to the spirit, and the sinfull life of the
one, to the righ­teous life of the other.

And I would know of these deep Divines, what but sin could possibly make Adams
posterity unable to keep the Law? This flesh, or nature, as they will haue it,
must be con­trary to this good and holy Law, and resist it. And is not
thatRom. 7. 12. properly sinfull and unholy, which resists, and is contrary
toSee Rom. 7. 17. 18, &c. & Gal. 5. 17. that which is good and holy; Lastly,
this enemy to the Law of God in a man, must be in his soule. And what else can
it be, then a disposition in the understanding, to ignorance and errour,
touching God and heavenly things; and an inclinati­on in the will and
affections to evill? Which is as properly sinne, as their acts and effects are
properly sinfull. Infants therefore bring sin properly into the world with
them.

Two things they here object: First, that Christ often accounts children,
innocents, as Math. 18. 3. 4, & 19\. 14. I answer, first, not as they mean;
that is, such as haue in them nothing vertu­ousMat. 18. 4. & ch. 19. 13. 14.
Mark. 10. 14. 15. 16. or vitious; good, or evill; but as being humble, and
with­out pride; and such, as unto whom the Kingdom of God, and his blessing
did appertain. Secondly, He speaks not of all chil­dren, but of those, of, and
in the Church.

Their second objection is, that our soules being the subjects of sin, are
created of God imediately. But to this objection, they that referrs the soules
originall, imediately to Gods super­naturall, and indeed miraculous work, do
giue divers answers, which these Adversaries should haue refuted. Amongst
others, Mr. Ainsworths answer is worthy the consideration. But let us consider
their proofs for the soules immediate creation. The first is, Act. 17. 26, Of
one bloud God made all mankind, &c. But this place makes rather against them;
seeing the bo­dy alone makes not mankind, but the soule with it, by which
specially the man is. The next place is Heb. 12. 9, whence [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=73) they gather
that Adam is the Father of our bodies, and God the Father of our Spirits. But
first, the Text neither mentions Adam, nor can agree to him in the state of
creation: seeing in that estate there was no use of correction. Secondly, it
saith not, the fathers of our bodies, but of our flesh: nor the father ofSee:
Com. pub. & pri­vate pa. 107 our Spirits, but of Spirits. And the meaning
seems unto me (with due respect had to other mens different judgment) one­ly
to be this: that if we giue honour to men (our carnall or fleshly fathers)
chastening us, as they think good: how much more owe honour to our spirituall
father, chastening us for our eternall good? And surely God, in his kinde, is
the father of the whole man, not of the soule onely: So is man, in his kinde,
the father of the whole man, and not of the body one­ly. Lastly, seeing the
drift of the place, is to shew, that God as a father, chasteneth his sons
which he loveth, and on the con­trary, that they that are not chastened, are
not sons, and soVers. 6. haue not God for their Father, I see not how the
Apostle can speak of the creation of soules, seeing in that respect, wicked
and godly, children and bastards, haue God alike their father. The Preacher,
ch. 12. 7, speaks of the manner of the creation of the first man Adam onely:
but no more proues that our soules or spirits are created by God imediately,
then that our bodies are made of dust immediately. That ch. 8. 8, hath no
colour of proof in it.

Against our fourth and last assertion, that all by Adams sin are guilty of
death, Rom. 5. 12, they cavill, that we were not in Pag. 114. 115. Adam to
bring any soule to hell for the breach of that commande­mant, Thou shalt not
eat.

Where, first (to passe by their incongruity of speech) they free Adam himselfe
from the guilt of condemnation of which our question is, as well as his
posterity, by that his sin; seeing it brought not him himself to hell. But
secondly, & for the thing it selfe: They grant, acording to the Scriptures,
thatPag. 116. death, as a part of the curse, came over all Adams posterity for
his sin: And will they then deny, that eternall death was also due by the same
law of justice? Is not the justice of God in­finite, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=73) and so
requiring infinite satisfaction? To what reasonable creature soever, the
smallest punishment is due from God; the greatest is due also in rigour of
justice. And so the curse (as they grant) extending to Adams genera­tion Pag.
116▪ by his sin; eternall condemnation, as the principall part of it,
extendeth unto them necessarily, except mercy be shew­ed them.

Neither will it help our Adversaries, that other creatures die Pag. 116. 122.
also; seeing their absolutely mortall condition limits their punishment to
this present life: But such is not the estate of infants; but their immortall
soules, unto which their bodies at that day are to be reunited, makes the
whole capable of a more full declaration of Gods justice, if he deale in
severity therof without mercy, as he may. Besides, the Apostle saith, that
death passed upon all, for that all haue sinned, viz. in thatRom. 5. 12. one
man Adam. Doth death come over bruit beasts, because they haue sinned in Adam?
They are brutish that see not the difference, which these men will not
acknowledge. It is said else-where, that in Adam all die. Doe beasts die in
Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 22 as his posterity doth? As all that are Christs, are in
Christ, and made aliue by him; so all Adams posterity were in him, and die in
him: Which death also the Apostle makes no lesse, then judgement to
condemnation, to wit, if redemption be not ob­tained:Rom. 5. 16. 21. Pag. 117.
to which he opposeth justification, and eternall life. Ioyn herewith, these
mens confession, that all mankind by Adams fall are made unable to keep Gods
precepts, when he giues them, and so all fall under the wrath of God, and are
therfore said to be children of wrath, Eph. 2\. 3, and there is sufficient for
their conviction, as hath been shewed. But I add, that the Apostle means
plainly a further matter, and that all are born children of wrath: for to be
so by nature, and to be born so, are the same. We are children of wrath by sin
onely: If therefore all be children of wrath by nature, it is by the sin of
nature, which we call originall sin, and not by actuall sin onely, as they
surmise.

Lastly, I demand whether, if Adam had not sinned, hee [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=74) should not haue
transferred to his posterity the Image of God after which he was created, and
a pronenesse to keep it. (as notwithstanding sin, he doth some feeble
remainders thereof)Rom. 2. 14. 15▪ and therewith right to eternall life? If
yea, why not then sin, and the guilt thereof, by proportion, having sinned?

To Ezech. 18, I haue formerly answered. He speaks of the sins of immediate
parents, not of the first sin of our first fa­ther; which was naturall:
whereas the other but personall; yea, not onely other mens, but his after sins
also. Secondly, it is plain, he speaks of such children, as seeing all their
fathers sins, consider, and doe not the like, but doe that which is lawfull,
and Ezeeh. 18. 14. 15, &c. right, keeping, and doing all Gods statutes. To
such God imputes no sin.

Their affirmation following is strange, that Infants shall Pag. 118. 119.
receiv no judgment, because they haue done neither good nor evill, according
to which all judgment passeth. By this, they should nei­ther be saved, nor
damned: for what else is it to receiv judg­ment of salvation, but to be saved?
and so for the contrarie. They doe ignorantly exclude Infants from a state
one, or other, for wanting that condition, which is required of men of years
onely. They might as probably say, that Infants shall be damned; seeing Christ
saith, He that beleevs not shall bee Mark. 16. 16. 2 Thess. 3. 10. damned: or
should not eat, because it is said, He that will not work shall not eat.

To the place, Ps. 51. 5, Behold I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceiv me; they answer not directly, but by many Ifs, & ands:
chusing many uncertain vanities, ra­ther then one certain truth: which is,
that David in this whole context confesseth his transgression and sin. And as
men as­cend by the stream to the fountain; so doth he in those words to the
fountain of all evill. As if he should haue said; Lord, I am not onely stayned
with, and guiltie of these particular evils; but I am even wholly corrupt by
nature from the very womb, and haue brought a fountain of sin into the world
with me, from whence these particular mischiefs haue issued.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=74)

### 5.3. ADVERSARIES.

THeir Answers follow. The first is, that David confesseth that he is made, as
Ps. 103. 14, of weak flesh, and unable to resist the Tempter, being dust, &c.

### 5.4. DEFENCE.

DOth mans being made of dust make him unable to resist the Tempter? Then God
making Adam of the dust made him unable to resist the Tempter also; which both
crosseth the truth, and their own assertion. The Prophet, Psal. 103. 14,
speaks of bodily weaknesse and frailtie onely, which is no­thing at all to the
matter in hand; and which, if it had been greater in David, would haue been
more advantageable against that sin into which he fell.

Next, for their advantage, they corrupt the Text, Rom. 8,Pag. 119. in saying,
Christ came in sinfull flesh: where the Text saith, hee came in the similitude
of sinfull flesh. He came in nothing sin­full, but all holy, and pure from
sin. So doe they that, 2 Cor. 5. 21, leaving out for us: which shewes, how
Christ became sin for us: that is, as our Surety, and lyable to the curse due
to our sinns; but not in sinfull flesh, as they erroneously say. Thirdly, they
absurdly affirm, that the sin of his mother, whether Hevah, or that bare him,
is that sin or punishment layd upon her, which he here confesseth, in saying,
I was conceived in sin. David confesseth a sin as evill, wheras all
punishments are Gods good work: yea his own sin onely of which he desires
forgiuenesse. Neither doe the words here at all agree with those, Gen. 3. 16,
as they say. The Reader that will, may see them opened at large by Mr. A
[...]nsworth.

They add, that it is frequent with the Holy Ghost to call pu­nishments Pag.
120. for sins, by the name of sins. But first, not so frequent by a 1000
times, as to call the transgression of the Law sinn: secondly, the phrase in
sin: is never taken but properly, as to be in sin, to liue in sin, to continue
in sin, to die in sin; and specially to be born in sin; as Ioh. 9. 34, the
Pharisees in so [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=75) judging,
followed the errour of the Pythagorean Philoso­phers: thirdly, where Christ is
sayd to bear our sins, it is prima­rily in regard of the guilt, as he was our
Surety. Of what sin of his mother was David guilty?

They unjustly accuse us, as saying, that David sinned in being Pag. 120. 121.
born and conceived; or that the very matter and substance wherof David was
made, was sin. Vayn are they, in imagining such vain things of us. David was
meerly a patient in being born, and sinned not therin; neither yet did his
mother sin, either in conceiving or bearing him, though shee conceived and
brought him forth in sin. But he having sinned in Adam, as in a generall root,
was so conceived and brought forth, by his mother, in sin.

Secondly, it is one thing to be conceived and born in sin, ano­ther thing to
be made of sin. The former, David affirms of him­self; the latter, they vainly
impute to us, and refute in us, with many words.

That Infants are under condemnation; that is, naturally guil­tyPag. 122. 123.
thereof, hath been formerly proved: that actuall faith in Christ is required
for their reconciliation to God, doth not follow hereupon. Actuall, I say, for
the seed of faith they haue, and of all graces: (for but by Gods holy Spirit
in them, which carries all graces with it, they cannot be holy; and so not bee
glorified, if they be not holy first:) but that hereupon they need actuall
faith, is their saying, without proof. Actuall sins indeed require actuall
faith: but for sin in disposit on (called originall) why may not faith in
disposition suffice, through the mercy of God, for the applying of it?

About the Infants of Sodom and Gomorrah, they discoursePag. 123. marvellously,
as first, in ranking them in their deaths with unreasonable creatures in
theirs: secondly, in making them not onely innocent, but godly also. The
Scriptures teach, that besides the temporary death, those Cities suffer the
vengeance of Iude 7. eternall fire. Let them proue children not to haue been
of those Cities. If God exempted them, or any of them, from that vengeance, it
was not for any condition cōmon to them with [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=75) bruit beasts,
as they insinuate, but with respect to Christ; be­sides whom, the Scriptures
acknowledg no other Saviour, nor no other salvation, but by him.

### 5.5. ADVERSARIES.

TO a question moved by themselves, What need InfantsPag. 123. haue of Christ,
if they be not under condemnation: they an­swer, that through his redemption
they liue, and moue, and haue their being, and injoy all other earthly
blessings, with resurrection from the dead, and glorification, 1 Cor. 15. 12.

### 5.6. DEFENCE.

THus they make Christ and Infants amends. But how proue they, that by Christs
redemption they liue, moue, &c? The Scripture Act. 17, to which they haue
reference is meant of the naturall life of all, by Gods work of creationMath.
10. 28. Hebr. 9. 26, &c. Eph. 1. 6. 1 Tim. 2. 6. Tit. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13. 1
Cor. 15. 45 and providence (which is nothing but continuation of crea­tion)
and nothing at all to Christ as Redeemer. The redemp­tion for which Christ
came is from sin, and so from the curse due for sin, as the Scriptures every
where testifie. The first Adam was made a living soule, the last Adam a
quickning spirit. We haue therfore our naturall life, motion, and being
(com­mon to Heathens with Christians) by the first Adam; our spirituall, and
glorious life, by the second.

Lastly, the Apostle saying, 1 Cor. 15. 22, In Christ shall all be made aliue,
speaks onely of all beleevers, as is evident, v. 14. 17. 18. 19, who haue
Christ for the first fruits, and are Christs, v. 20. 23. Are any Christs but
Christians? Is not the lump and the first fruits one? Men should haue risen
again, though Christ had never come, or been promised; but to condemna­tion:
Our resurrection, onely in regard of the glory of it, is from Christs glorious
resurrection. And if Infants haue glo­rification from Christ, then they haue
the pardon of sinne from Christ also, 1 Cor. 15. 17. 23, and therewith his
Spirit dwelling in them for sanctifying and quickning them, Rom. 8. 9. 10. 11.
These men divide Chrst, making him a King to some [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=76) for
glorification, to whom hee is not a Priest for redemption1 Cor. 1. 13. by his
bloud.

Next, to a question by themselvs moved, How wee must Pag. 126. haue the Son,
they answer, by keeping his commandements; for­getting faith, by which alone
we receiv Christ: from whichIoh. 1. 12. 1 Tim. 1. 5. Act. 15. 9. followeth
loue, purity of heart, and obedience. Which faith hath more properly the
consideration of a condition, as a hand to receiv a promise; then of an act of
obedience to a commandment.

It is true (being rightly understood) which they add, thatPag. 127. repentance
is of all sin: to wit, particularly of all sins known; and generally of sins
unknown. For, Who can understand his Psal. 19. 13. errours? Cleanse thou me
from secret faults, said he, that ob­served, and knew his wayes better then
either these men, or I. Doe they think nothing amisse slips from them, in
thought, word, or deed, or ever hath done, whereof they doe not, or haue not
repented particularly? Is their knowledge so perfect as they need not pray for
further enlightning, as Eph. 1. 17. 18? Are they certain they are ignorant of,
and erre in nothing in the Scriptures, written for their bearning? This their
bookRom. 15. 4. sufficiently reproues their Pharisaicall dream of perfection.

Where speaking of Idolatry they affirm, that God cannot bee Pag. 128.
worshipped after a false manner, they expresly contradict the2 Chr. 32. 17.
Scripture, saying, The people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto
the Lord their God onely. Here was worshipping the true God, and him onely,
and yet after a false manner in a respect. The same the Apostle teacheth the
Athenians, The God whom Act. 17. 23 you ignorantly worship, declare I unto
you. When Papists direct their prayers to God, the maker of the world, and
father of Iesus Christ, hoping the rather to be heard by means of the Virgin
Maries intercession, who doubts but they worship the true God, but in a false
manner? Neither doth Deut. 18. 20, proue the sin one, of speaking in the name
of a false God, and speaking falsehood in the name of a true God, but divers;
though both deserving death.

Next, they in their wilde order, come to treat of Faith: Pag. 128. [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=76) where they
affirm, that no man can haue faith to justification, be­fore he haue repented.
If they had sayd, that no man hath the grace or habit of faith before the
grace of repentance, it had been true: (God, by the spirit of regeneration,
infusing the habits of all graces at once:) But that the act and exercise of
faith in beleeving, is before our repenting, appears both by Scripture and
common sense. We liue the life of Christ (wher­ofGal. 2. 20. Act. 15. 9. Rom.
4. 5. our repenting is a part) by the faith of the Sonne of God. God purifieth
the heart by faith: and justifies the ungodly by his faith. In all which it is
plain, that faith hath the preheminence and first work. So 2 Cor. 7. 10, Godly
sorrow workes repentance. Re­pentance then presupposeth godly sorrow. Godly
sorrow, or whatsoever is truely godly, must needs please God, which without
Heb. 11. 6. Rom. 14. 23. faith no man can doe; but even every thing is sin.
Faith work­ing that which worketh repentance, must goe before it. Se­condly,
godly sorrow is not onely for the fear of punishment (for so the devils are
sorrie) but for the offence of God spe­cially. Now none can be sorrie for his
offending God, except he loue God; nor loue him, except he know first that he
bee loved of him in Christ, in which faith consisteth. We beleev therefore,
before we repent, in the truth of the thing, and order of causes; though we
can hardly discern this order in our own sense.

## 6\. CHAP. VI.

Of Baptisme.

IN the next place they come to Baptism, in which they think themselvs in their
element, as a fish in the water. And beginning with Iohns Baptism, they will
haue it soPag. 129. called, as Paul cals the Gospell his, Rom. 1. 16, But they
mistake. It was so called, because Iohn was (under God) the first, both
instituter, and exerciser of it. By their rule Iohn [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=77) Murton, might
be called Iohn Baptist. Secondly, they err in saying, Baptism is repentance
for the remission of sins, &c. Repen­tance goes before Baptism: Repentance is
inward; the Baptism Act. 2. 38. 2 Tim. 2. 25 outward, of which our question
is. God giues repentance; Men confer Baptism: Repentance is mans work; for it
is man that repenteth by grace: Baptism (considered as inward) is Gods work;
as outward, the Ministers under God. They affirm, p. 169, that the baptizing,
or washing, of which we speak, is an action of the hand. Is repentance so with
these men? Indeed that repentance upon which they rebaptize, is rather the
work of their hands, then of Gods.

The Scriptures alledged, pag. 129. 130, shew what is requi­redPag. 129. 130.
of men of years, before they be baptized: but are mis­applyed, as a bar, to
the Infants of beleevers. Divers of them might more colourably, though alike
untruely, be brought to proue, that no infants could be saved; as else-where
hath beenRelig. Com. Pag. 71. 72. shewed them.

Their answer to the objection, pag. 130, is but the fencing of their own
stroak. We willingly acknowledge, that the do­ctrine and practise for
baptizing men of years, brought to be­leev by preaching, and unbaptized
before, is perpetuall. This was the state of the persons instanced; and this
alone the pla­ces cited doe proue.

### 6.1. ADVERSARIES.

AGainst the baptizing of Infants, they alledg, that there is neither
commandment, nor example, nor true consequence for Pag. 131. it in Chrsts
Testament, which is perfect, &c.

### 6.2. DEFENCE.

THE perfection of Christs Testament we avow, and that the estate of the Church
under the Ministery, and Insti­tution of the Apostles, those great Maister-
builders, was most perfit, as otherwise, so in respect of Ordinances. But in
say­ing, that we grant, that there is neither commandement, nor exam­ple for
baptising infants, they take their own presumption for [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=77) our grant. We
grant that the Scriptures no where say in ex­presse terms Baptise infants, or
that Infants were baptised: But withall they should consider with us, that
whatsoever can by just consequence be drawn out of the Scriptures, expounded
in their largest extent, is conteined in them first: els how could it truly be
drawn out of them? whatsoeuer then can be drawn by true consequence out of a
commandement, is com­manded in it, though not expresly, yet truly, and aswell,
as if it were expressed. Else how could all duties towards God and our
neighbour be commanded in the decalogue, called the ten commandements? Surely
not; except things be com­manded which are not expressed, if by consequence
they can be gathered. Else how could Christ say frō Deuteronomy. It is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt Math. 4. 10
thou serue? Whereas the word onely, upon which the speciall weight of Christs
answer lyeth, is not expressed, but the thing onely included, & thence to be
truely, & necessarily collected.

But let us trace their foot-steps in disproving manifestly our consequences,
and taking away clearly all our objections to every mans conscience, in the
sight of God: If bold promises may bee taken for due performances.

And first, in observing what Baptism is, they again untoward­lyPag. 132. 133.
confound the inward and outward Baptism. Which though they ought not to be
separated by Gods appointment, yet are too oft by mans default, and should
alwaies by us be distin­guished: the outward, as the work of mans hand, as
themselvsPag. 169. elsewhere confesseth; from the inward, as the work of God
alone: the former being with water, the latter with the Holy Math. 3. 11 Ioh.
1. 31. 33. Ghost; as Iohn expresly distinguisheth his baptizing, and Christs
that came after him.

The meaning of the English Primer, and of Vrsinus, they mistake. They speak of
the inward and outward Baptism joyntly: wheras our question is, of that which
is outward, and in mans power to giue, or with-hold. So the faith and
repen­tance, which they require in persons to be baptized, is actu­all indeed,
in men of years, but in Infants onely in disposition. [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=78) Neither doth
Ursinus simply say, that the Sacraments are no Sa­craments in an unlawfull
use▪ as they cite him, but that they are not Sacraments, but to them that
receiv them with true faith, one­ly they haue benefit by them. In like manner,
the Apostle tels the Corinthians; that their comming together, was not to eat
the 1 Cor. 14. 20. Lords Supper; that is, not for the better, as v. 17; else
they did eat the Lords Supper outwardly. So elsewhere, Hee is not a Rom. 2.
28. Iew, which is one outwardly; neither that circumcision, which is outward
in the flesh, that is, not, that wherein God took de­light; else, he was a
Iew, and that was circumcision, after a sort.

I demand of these Rebaptizers, whether Simon Magus, be­ing baptized by
Phillip, and yet remaining in the gall of bitternes, Act. 8. and without all
part in the ministration of the Gospell: and so whe­ther those false brethren
creeping in unawares, and being (with­outGal. 2. 4. Iude 4. doubt) baptized by
the Apostles, or others, had that in­ward, and greater Baptism or no? If not,
as is plain, how were their Baptism a Sacrament in the lawfull use? And if God
gaue any of them repentance afterward, were they to be bap­tized anew as being
unbaptized before, because they wanted the inward and greater Baptism, when
they received the other? I suppose no, even in these mens judgments. If any
object, that the fault here was onely in the baptizeds unfitnesse in Gods
sight, he saith truely, but must withall remember, that notwithstanding, the
inward and greater Baptism wanted, which by their ground should haue made a
meer nullity of the other. And note heerewith as of speciall consideration,
that Baptism is most corrupted by an unworthy receiver: since both the Baptism
is ministred, and the baptizer ministreth for the baptizeds sake; who being
impure himselfe, all things are impure unto him: and that his baptism, no
baptism of the LordTit. 1. 15. to him in right use, but rather a prophane
usurpation, till by his faith and repentance, God afterwards giving them, it
be­come the Lords baptism to him, for the confirmation of hi [...] faith, in
the bloud-shedding of Christ for his sins.

Neither is it requisite, that we proue, as they require of us, [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=78) that Infants
haue faith and repentance: but let them proue, which they presume, but proue
not, that the actuall having, and manifesting of these graces (being
conditions requisite for men of years) are to be exacted of Infants, if they
be ad­mitted to Baptism. May they not as reasonably, and charita­bly,
conclude, that Infants are not to eat, because they worke not, from 2 Thess.
3; and are to be damned, because they beleev not, from Mark. 16. 16. And was
there not that required at Abrahams hands for his circumcision, which was not
requi­red at Isaaks for his? Or not more of such Heathenish men of yeares as
became Proselytes, then of their Infants, to be circumcised with them? The
ground of this errour in so ma­ny is, that they understand not the true nature
of the Gospell, and Ordinances thereof. The Gospell aymes not at the exacting
upon man (as made after Gods own image) obedi­ence due, as a naturall debt
from the creature to the Creator, as the Law doth, but considers him as a most
miserable crea­ture▪ drowned in sin, and altogether unable to help himselfe:
neither yet servs it, and its Ordinances, primarily to declare and manifest,
what man in right owes, and performs to God; but what God in mercy, purposeth,
& doth, and will perform to man: being  [...] a joyfull message, or glad
tydings of salvation by Christ. So, to apply this for the baptizing of
In­fants, albeit they on their part, can for the present, make no
manifestation or declaration of obedience or thankfulnesse, or any other
goodnesse: yet sufficeth it for Evangelicall dis­pensation, that God,
according to the Covenant of grace, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, can and will make ma­nifestation and declaration of his gracious minde
of washing them, with the bloud and spirit of his Son, from the guilt and
contagion of sin: they also, being bound in their times, to reciprocall
duties. Let us not think scorn, as proud free­willers doe, of Gods taking,
both of us, and our infants, to be his people, going before our, or their
taking of him to be our God: But let us rather magnifie his mercie in this
regard, both towards us, and them.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=79)

### 6.3. ADVERSARIES.

NExt, they undertake to proue, that Infants are not rege­nerate, and so not to
be baptized. Their reason is, becausePag. 134. they haue not faith and
repentance. This Regeneration they de­fine to be a turning from sin to God:
which they would proue from Rom. 6\. 11.

### 6.4. DEFENCE.

THE Apostle, Rom. 6, speaks not of regeneration it self, which is Gods work:
but of our living to God, as an effect therof. For as our naturall life is an
effect of our first genera­tion, or begetting by our parents: so is our
spirituall life an effect of our regeneration by God, and his Word, and
Spirit. Turning from sin is mans work, by Gods grace: Regenerati­on is Gods
work, not mans. So for Repentance, they roav about it on all sides, but scarse
touch the true nature of it. Repentance, to wit, Evangelicall, required for
Baptism in men of years, is neither a sight, and knowing of sin by the Law,
for that the wicked also doe: nor a confessing of sin, for that is outward,
and follows repentance in the heart: nor a sorrow for sin, for that goes
before it: nor a promise to forsake sin, for [...] Cor. 7. 10 that follows
after it, as an outward effect: no, nor yet pro­perly, an endevour to forsake
it, though that come nearest. Re­pentance is properly, a growing wise
afterwards, and changing of the minde from sin to God, in the purpose of the
hea [...]t [...], having an effectuall endevour to forsake sin accompanying
it, as the effect thereof.

Now their argumentation in this place, that because Infants haue not faith,
and repentance, to wit, actuall, and that in manifestation also (which are the
conditions required in men of years for their Baptism, and the inseparable
fruits of re­generation) therefore they are not regenerate, and so not
ca­pable of Baptism, is, as if some idiot would affirm, that in­fants are not
born, nor to be reputed reasonable creatures, nor endued with the faculties of
understanding and reason, be­cause [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=79) they make no
manifestation thereof, no more then bruits doe.

Their proofs against the Regeneration of Infants thus dis­proved, I manifest
the contrary, as followeth.

Christ the Lord teacheth, that except a man be born, or (as theIoh. 3. 5▪ word
more properly imports) begot again, hee cannot enter in­to Gods Kingdom.
Either therfore regeneration is to be granted Infants, or Gods Kingdom to be
denyed them. If any say, this is meant of men of years onely, the Text
convinceth him; which opposeth the first birth, or generation, (which is of
Infants) to the second regeneration: The first, as v. 6, being of the flesh,
making them so born uncapable of Gods Kingdom, without the second, by the
spirit.

Secondly, they confesse, else-where, that all, by Adams Pag. 123. fall haue
that weak flesh, Rom. 8. 3, by which they cannot keep the Law, &c. Now I
demand, whether Infants to be glori­fied, carry this weak flesh, (hindring
thus effectually true holinesse) into heaven with them, or no? If not, as is
certain, then it must be purged out of their soules, and hearts, as the seat,
and subject therof. But nothing can purge out that which is contrary to
holinesse, saue the holy Spirit of God, the Spi­rit of regeneration, which
lusts against the flesh, and is contrary Gal. 5. 17. unto it: either therfore
they must be regenerated, or not glo­rified.

Thirdly, the Scriptures teach, that by the spirit of Christ, which is the
spirit of life for righteousnesse, dwelling in us, our bodies Rom. 8. 10. 11.
Pag. 123. shall be quickned, and raised up unto glory. Children therefore, by
their grant, being to be raised again, and glorified by Christ, must haue
Christs spirit, which is the spirit of sanctification, and regeneration,
dwelling in them.

Lastly, joyn with these things, that all are by nature, I say by nature, with
the Apostle, not by act alone, as say the Ad­versaries, children of wrath,
having right to wrath, as childrenEph. 2. 3. to their fathers inheritance; and
therewith, that baptism is the lavacher, or washing of regeneration; it will
follow, thatTit. 3. 5. children, if to be freed from the wrath to come, and
glori­fied, are to be regenerated and baptized also. Christ saues, and [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=80) so glorifies,
his body onely, which is the Church; which he san­ctisies Eph. 5. 23. 26. Eph.
44 5 with the washing of water, and the word: and there is one body, and one
baptism.

### 6.5. ADVERSARIES.

THeir Answers to the Scriptures, brought for the baptizing Pag. 134. 135. of
the Infants of beleevers follow. To Act. 2. 38. 39. Repent, and be baptized
every one of you &c. for the promise is un­to you, and to your children, and
to all that are a farre off, even as many as the Lord shall call: they answer,
that this is meant of such fathers of the Iews, and their children, and
fathers of the Gen­tiles, and their children, as beleev, viz. both fathers and
children, and that by children are oft meant men of yeares, in the Scriptures,
specially Abrahams children.

### 6.6. DEFENCE.

THat such are sometimes meant, wee grant: but deny that meaning in this place.
And first, by them a far off, are not meant the Gentiles far off in state, as
Eph. 2, but the Iews, far off in time, as the originall carries it. Besides,
nei­ther [...] was Peter himselfe, as yet, sufficiently perswaded of the
calling of the Gentiles, Act, 10: neither if he had, was it, as yet,
seasonable to mention that matter to the Iews.

Secondly, in saying, the promise is made to you, and your chil­dren, hee
speaks of some solemn promise made to them all, and the same to haue its fruit
and effect in them, and their children with them, upon their repentance. This
could be no other, then that promise made to Abraham, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, in that blessed seed Christ.

Thirdly, he exhorts the Iews to repent, and to be baptized, for that the
promise was unto them and their children; and there­in shews, that he speaks
not of a promise made to Abrahams children, upon their faith and repentance,
as they mistake: but on the contrary exhorts to repentance, upon a promise
made. The promise is the ground of the exhortation, and presuppo­sed by the
Apostle, as going before it. Hence also it is, that [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=80) hee cals the
Iews, which had denyed and killed the Lord of life, Chapt. 3. 25 and not yet
repented, as appears, v. 19, Children of the Pro­phets, and of the Covenant,
which God made with the fathers: with which accords that, Act. 13. 32. 33.
They were not ther­fore here called, the children of the promise because they
repen­ted; for that they did not: but because they came of Abraham, Isaak and
Iakoh, and so had Christ promised unto them as their King and Saviour: and so
were by faith and repentance to receiv the fruit of the same promise, and the
confirmation or seal thereof by Baptism to them and their children. Of which
here, and every where, they are exhorted not to de­priue themselvs and theirs.
Neither is this exhortation to re­pent, and be baptized, made to the children,
but to the parents for the obtaining of the benefite and confirmation by
Bap­tism, of the promise both to parents and children.

If any demand, Was not Christ promised to the Gentiles also? I answer, not as
to the Iews: He was promised to theMat. 21. 5. 43. Luk. 19. 12 14. Eph. 2. 19.
Iews (indefinitely, as the Church of God, and Abrahams seed) as being their
King; but to become the King of the Gentiles: the Iews were his Citizens; the
other were, by faith, to become his Citizens, and of the houshold of God.

### 6.7. ADVERSARIES.

TO 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your children unholy, but now are they clean: they
answer, that the beleevers children were no otherwise holy, then as their
unbeleeving wiues were holy, namely, to be used by their parents.

### 6.8. DEFENCE.

HEre first, as commonly, they treasonably clip the Lords coyn in leaving out,
for their advantage, to the beleeving husband, and to the beleeving wife. The
Apostle saith simply, The children are holy; so saith he not simply, that the
unbelee­ving wife is holy; but holy to her beleeving husband; and the
un­beleeving husband sanctified, or holy, to the beleeving wife: asTit. 1. 15.
all things are pure to the pure.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=81)Now for
the better clearing of this place, the Apostles drift is to be considered:
which was to teach beleeving hus­bands, that they might lawfully, and without
scruple, keep, and converse with their unbeleeving wiues, (and so beleeving
wiues with their unbeleeving husbands) as being sanctified to them, though not
in themselvs. This he proues by an Argu­ment taken from their children, Else
were your children unclean, but now are they holy: that is, if the beleeving
husband might not lawfully retain his unbeleeving wife, then the children so
born should be unholy: but they are holy. Whereupon it fol­lows, that he may
lawfully keep and converse with her. This word  [...], else, or otherwise,
ever includes in it a casuality: as Math. 18. 32, because thou desiredst me: &
ch. 27. 6, because it is the price of bloud. So 1 Cor. 5. 10, Else, or for
then you must goe out of the world: As if he had said; seeing Christians are
not to goe out of the world, but to liue in it, they may ther­fore eat with
the fornicators of the world: So here, seeing your children thus born are not
unclean, but holy; therfore you may and ought to retain your (though
unbeleeving) wiues. The Apostle therfore making the children holy, and their
holinesse a ground of the husbands lawfull keeping, and conversing with his
wife, can haue respect to no other thing then the Covenant with Abraham, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; as a known and received ground by
the Co­rinthians, and all other Churches. This will yet be the more plain, if
we bear in mind, that the question propounded to Paul by the beleeving
Corinthians was, not whether they might keep their children or no, but their
wiues. Hee had therfore no occasion of mentioning the children, as he doth,
but to fetch from them an Argument for the retaining of the wiues. Now, if his
meaning were, as they say, that the chil­dren were holy to the beleevers use,
as the wife was, then he should haue argued from the holinesse of the wife, to
proue the ho­linesse of the children: But thus he doth not, but the clean
contrary. Besides, if the Apostle had argued as they would haue him, where had
he laid the foundation of his proofe? [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=81) Or how had he
removed the scruple out of the Corinthians hearts?

They add, that the Corinthians made no question of their chil­dren. True; and
that overthrows their exposition; as shew­ing, that the Apostle argues not
from the wiues to the chil­dren, as they make him; but from the children to
the wiues: Secondly, the Apostle disputes not from the Corinthians
sup­position, or perswasion, but from the truth of the thing, the holinesse of
their children. But now are (your children) holy.

They object, that these children must be holy, either as the beleeving, or
unbeleeving part is holy. We say they are holy as the beleeving part, in
regard of that foederall holinesse, and the spirit of regeneration. Then, say
they, They are separated from common uses in which they were used, and are set
now apart to Gods Pag. 137. use. We say they are, as were the Infants in
Israel, set apart, or severed, from the world, and taken into the number of
Gods people. They themselvs affirm, a few lines before, that Israel was
sanctified and set apart from common and prophane uses, to the service of God.
And were not the Infants part of Israel, thus set apart, and sanctified? And
yet could they not testifie any purity of heart, or other grace. That which in
the very same period they build with one hand, they pull down with another.
Secondly, if (as they say) Infants bee no otherwise sanctified, then to the
use of others, and as un­beleevers are, then can they not be saved: except the
unholy can enter into Gods Kingdom.

They object further, that then all the children of beleevers, though of age,
and unbeleevers, should be holy also. But why ra­ther holy, then Innocent,
which they will haue all Infants to be? By their unbelief, they are cut off
from Gods Covenant, as theRom. 11. Iews were, and from all holinesse therby.

The next objection is ill framed, as they set it down; andPag. 138. the answer
worse. The errour in both is, that they consider not Iohns Baptism, and
Christs according to their distinct parts; Iohns as outward, Christs as
inward: Iohns outward Baptism, [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=82) and Christs
outward Baptism were the same: for Christ was baptized by Iohn, thereby
sanctifying Baptism to us, as cir­cumcision to the Fathers by his being
circumcised. The in­ward Baptism is not common to all, but peculiar to the
elect: the outward, whether by Christ, or Iohn, is not peculiar to the elect
onely, but common to others with them: witnesse Simon Magus. The outward
Baptism by Iohn, and all other Ministers was, and is, onely with water,
opposed to Christs, as the inward with the Holy Ghost. Which Baptism with the
Holy Ghost, being understood of extraordinarie gifts, sometimesMath. 3. Ioh.
1. went before the other, as Act. 10. 47, but commonly fol­lowed upon it: But
understood of ordinarie graces, did, or should, alwaies goe before it in right
order of things.

Next follows, 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2 &c. The meaning of the H. Ghost Pag. 140. herein
they take upon them to explain to others, not under­standing it themselvs, as
is evident, in that they will haue this baptizing unto Moses in the clovd, and
sea, &c. to haue been onely for bodily deliverance, and the offer of Christ.
But the Apostle looks upon those things with a more piercing and spi­rituall
eye: as appears, first in that, v. 1, he cals the Israelites indefinitely, his
and the Corinthians fathers. Morever brethren I would not haue you ignorant,
that all our fathers &c. As if hee should haue said, Let not the children look
for more privi­ledg from punishment, if they sin, then their fathers haue
in­joyed. He therfore considers the Church of israel here, as in the state of
a spirituall fatherhood to the Corinthians. Se­condly, hee expresly saith,
that they were all baptized to Moses, and that the meat was spirituall which
they eat, and the rock, or water, which they drank spirituall, even Christ
himselfe, to wit, sacramentally, and mystically. Thirdly, the Apostles
ar­gument, that it may goe in full force, must thus be framed. They that are
alike for substance in Gods benefits, shall alike be punished, if they sin
alike: But you Corinthians now, and Israel of old were, and are alike in those
spirituall benefites mentioned; Therefore, if you sin, as they did, you shall
sure­ly be punished, as they were. If the Apostle had propounded [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=82) unto the
Corinthians, the tokens of Gods loue and protection onely for bodily things,
as they carnally conceiv, there had been no force in his reason against the
security of the Corin­thians, especially occasioned by their enjoying the
Lords Or­dinances of Baptism, and the Supper as signes, and tokens of Gods
loue for spirituall blessings in heavenly things. Might they not easily haue
answered Paul, that the Israelites indeed might well perish, and be destroyed
for such things as they practised, having onely Gods loue-tokens for bodily
delive­rance: but for them, they were better secured against danger, as having
the tokens of Gods loue for spirituall and eternall deliverance, by the body
and bloud-shed of Christ?

I conclude therefore, that all Pauls, and the Corinthians fa­thers, being
baptized with the Baptism signifying deliverance by Christ, and many of them
being Infants, the Infants of Israel now are to be baptized also.

### 6.9. ADVERSARIES.

THey object, that the meaning of the Holy Ghost is not, that Moses did at all
wash them with water in the cloud and sea.

### 6.10. DEPENCE.

NEither say we he did; but with the Apostle, that they were baptized to Moses
in the cloud and sea: God not one­ly preserving them bodily thereby from
Pharaoh; but also moystening them with the cloud arising out of the Sea, and1
King. 18. 44. 45. Psal. 77. 18. showering down waters upon them, as the Lords
peculiar people, and for spirituall use (the Apostle himselfe in this place
bear­ing witnesse) under the Ministerie of Moses their Pastor or Shepheard;
procuring with this, the other blessings, even of the meat which was
spirituall from heaven; and drink which was spirituall, even Christ mistically
out of the rock.

Besides, our Adversaries hold back the better part of Gods loue, in saying, he
offered them Christ in the drink out of the rock. If the rock were Christ, and
they drank of the rock, then God not onely offered, but they also received,
and drank of [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=83) Christs bloud,
as the Corinthians did, in mysterie. Second­ly, the Apostles argument, as they
put it, had been too blunt to haue peirced the Corinthians consciences; who
might ea­sily haue answered themselvs and him, that the Israelites in­deed had
Christ in their time offered; but for themselvs they received him also, and so
were better fenced against Gods plagues; yea, though they sinned, then the
other were.

Thirdly, it is neither true, which after they affirm, that Noahs Ark is called
the figure of Baptism, but that the saving of eight soules by water (to wit
bearing up the Ark) had Baptism, that now saveth &c. for a like figure, or
antitype: much lesse is it said, that Noah and his family were Baptized in the
Ark, or water, as it is expresly said, that the Israelites were baptized in
the cloud, and Sea. Every type of Baptism, is not Baptism, but hath onely
something necessarily, which resembles it. But the more agreement there is,
between Noahs Arke, and the Bap­tism now, the more firm Argument may be
gathered for the baptizing of Infants. It is evident, that Noah through faith
Hebr. 11. 7. prepared the Ark for the saving of his houshold, and not of
him­selfe alone.

To their objection, that there is as much warrant to enjoynPag. 142. Infants
to suffer persecution, because it is called by the name of bap­tism, as to
baptize them, because the cloud and sea is called Bap­tism: I answer (passing
by their incongruities of speech) that Infants may be persecuted, as well as
men of yeares. Witness Christ himself, persecuted in his mothers lap by Herod.
Be­sides, the Israelites (and their Infants with them) are heere said to haue
been baptized by water in spirituall use, and con­sideration.

### 6.11. ADVERSARIES.

THeir next answer to such Scriptures, as shew that whole housholds haue been
baptized, and therefore Infants, as a partPag. 143. of the houshold, is, that
there are many housholds in which there are no infants; and that therefore
except we proue such housholds to haue had Infants, it is nothing. Secondly,
that it is most true, [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=83) that as the
Apostles practised in one houshold, so they practised in all: and that
therfore they baptizing in the laylors house such as beleeved, did not baptize
infants.

### 6.12. DEFENCE.

WEE grant, that the Apostles practise was the same, where there was the same
reason: but as some Fami­lies had in them infants, and some not; so all of
years in some beleeved, and in some not: according to which diversity of
persons, they administred Baptism diversly; and not alike in all housholds.
Secondly, if these men would haue taken any sound course for the clearing of
things, they should here haue given answer to such Scriptures, as else-where
haue beenRelig. Com. pag. 88. 89. brought against them, to shew, how the
tenour of the Lords promise, and blessing, runnes upon godly Governours, and
their Families with them: and more specially to that about Lydia, Act. 16, of
whom it is testified, that she having her heart opened to attend and beleev
the Gospell, both she and her hous­hold were baptized. But it is easier for
these men to repeat over the same things many times, then once to justifie
them.

### 6.13. ADVERSARIES.

TO the Scriptures record, that little children were brought to Christ, that he
might lay his hands on them, and pray, or blesse them; and that wheras his
Disciples would haue hindred them from him (even upon the same ground, without
doubt, upon which these men excludes them) he being therewith dis­pleased,
bids suffer them to come unto him, for that of such is the Kingdom of heaven;
and takes them in his armes and blesseth them: and to our collection hence,
they answer; first, that He saith Pag. 134. 135. not, that Infants are of the
Kingdom of heaven, that is, obeyers of the Gospell; but that they that will
enter into the Kingdom of hea­ven, must become as little children, for of
such, &c. And that his mayn end was to declare the innocent estate of Infants,
and to teach all to be like unto them by conversion: and withall, that Christ
[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=84) baptized
them not: and lastly, that his blessings are manifold to Infants in their
creation, life, and bodily benefits.

### 6.14. DEFENCE.

LET us examine the particulars: First, they presume, but cannot proue, that
onely such are of the Kingdom of hea­ven, as obey the Gospell. Shall Infants
(which they affirm else-where) be glorified in the Kingdom of heaven, and
yetPag. 123. are they not of it? There are not two Kingdoms of heaven; but
one, begun in grace, and perfected in glory. Secondly, they to make more
colourable their erroneous construction of the Evangelists words, and Christs
work about those In­fants, cite for Math. 19, and the like places, Math. 18;
that so the slight Readers, such as their Disciples are, might conceivMat. 19.
14 Luk. 10. 13 & chap. 18. 15. that Christ had no other meaning in the other
places by us alledged, then in that by them; and that he spake not of a child
personally, but in condition, as David was, Ps. 131. Wher­as in that place,
Christs meaning was to reprov the ambitious contentions amongst his Disciples,
by the contrary disposition in a childe, which he therfore took, and set in
the midst of them; but in the other, his purpose was to shew what interest the
chil­dren of the Church had in him, and in his blessing, for which they were
brought unto him by their parents. Against these depravers, both of the word,
and work of God, I thus argue. That which the parents, which brought their
infants desired, that the Lord did for them: But it is plain, that their
desire in bringing them was, that he might pray for them, and blesse them, as
the Scriptures expresly teach he did.

But, say they, he baptized them not. True; for hee baptized none, though
actuall beleevers. It sufficeth, that he did thatIoh. 4. 2. by which he
declared that they had right in him, and in his blessing, and that it was his
will they should come unto him. Let them shew a way, how they can now come to
Christ, saue by Baptism? Or how they can haue right in his blessing, and yet
haue no right in his bloud-shed, and in Baptism, for the signifying and
applying it?

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=84)They add,
that Christ healed the sick, and gaue bodily blessings of life, growth in
stature, and the like. But as it is meer­ly, and vainly imagined, that these
children were brought for the healing of any bodily diseases: so are we taught
expresly by the Holy Ghost, that Christs blessing them was not for bodily
benefits, but because, the Kingdom of heaven was of such: that is, appertained
to them, and to such as they were.

### 6.15. ADVERSARIES.

TO our next Argument, taken from the circumcision of A­brahams infants, they
answer: First, there is no command­mentPag. 145. for baptizing of Infants now,
as there was for circumcising them then: Secondly, that that commandement was
for males onely, children, or servants, though unbeleevers: Thirdly, that
circumcision was to be performed onely on the eight day: so as there is no
proportion between Circumcision and Baptism.

### 6.16. DEFENCE.

HEE that pleaseth to reade the former passages betweenRelig. Com. them and us,
which they haue in their hands, but answer not, shall see how weightlesse this
exception is; and how we haue proved against them, that the Church of Israel,
and ours, is one in substance; the covenant the same which God made with them
in Christ to come, and with us in Christ come in the flesh: and withall, how
our Baptism succeeds their Cir­cumcision. They trifle in objecting the Legall
difference ofGal. 3. 28. & 4\. 10. Esa. 66. 21. daies, and sexes, which the
Scriptures expresly teach to bee abolished. Are not Pastors now the Lords
Ministers, as the Levites were of old, and their successors therein: and yet
are they not tyed to any certain Tribe, as they were? Is not our Lords Supper
the same in effect with their Passeover? Both the one and the other, the
mysticall eating of the Lamb of God: Which yet is not tyed to any certain day
or month, as was the former.

Lastly, they err grievously in saying, that unbeleeving ser­vant, and children
were commanded to be circumcised. The Lord [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=85) would haue all
the wicked cut off from his people: and wouldDeu. 17 12 Ps. 101. 8. 2 Chro.
15. 12. 13. Gen. 17. 7. 10. Rom. 4. 11. he haue unbeleevers received unto
them? Hath God entred Covenant with unbeleevers to be their God, as he hath
done with all to whom Circumcision appertained? Was it the seal of the
righteousnesse of faith; and yet due to the faithlesse? Ra­ther then these
Adversaries will admit the seed of the faith­full to be of Gods people now,
they will haue very Infidels and Vnbeleevers of old, to haue been of his
peculiar ones. If their heresie were detestable, who made the God of the Law
worse then the God of the Gospell; surely, theirs is not light, nor small, who
thus contumeliously speak of him in his people, which he took neer unto
himselfe, and whose God he became; and of that speciall Ordinance, by which he
differenced them from the prophane world, as holy unto him; in which they
interest the unbeleevers, and unholy.

### 6.17. ADVERSARIES.

NOW followeth our main foundation, that as the in­fants of Abraham, and of the
Israelites his posterity, were taken into the Church-covenant, or covenant of
life and salvation, as they call it (and rightly in a true sense) with their
parents, and circumcised: so are the infants of the faithfull now, and to
re­ceiv accordingly the seal of Baptism: to which they say, and proue (as they
say) that neither Circumcision was, nor Baptism is a sealPag. 145. of the
Covenant of salvation, but the spirit of promise which is ever the same.

### 6.18. DEFENCE.

THeir dispute from the seal of the Spirit, to proue that there is no other
seal, is as if a man should deny all teach­ing, direction, and comfort by the
Word and Sacraments; because the Spirit teacheth, directeth and comforteth the
faithfull. This point I haue else-where proved at large againstRelig. Com.
pag. 90. 91. them; neither are they either able, or doe they goe about to giue
any shew of answer; and yet, without modesty, they re­peat their former bare
sayings, fully answered, and refuted. [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=85) Where the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1, and Eph. 1, & 4, speaks of the seal of the spirit, means
he, that the Spirit makes a materiall print in the soule, as a seal doth in
Wax? Or not this onely, that it helps to confirm, and comfort a Christian
inwardly in the loue of God, and hope of salvation? And are not the Sacraments
outward helps of comfort and confirmation of a beleevers heart in the same
loue of God, and hope of glo­ry? Vpon the same ground, that the Apostle cals
it a seal in­wardly, we call them seals outwardly.

### 6.19. ADVERSARIES.

TO shew that the Covenant in question was the Covenant ofPag. 146. 147. the
Law, and old Testament, and not the covenant of salva­tion: and so
Circumcision the seal thereof, and not the sign and seal of life and
salvation; they discourse at large upon Gal. 4, and of the two seeds of
Aoraham, the one after the flesh, unto which the covenant appertained,
whereunto circumcision was an­nexed.

### 6.20. DEFENCE.

FIrst, they err greatly, in denying the very Covenant of the Law to haue been
the Covenant of life and salvation. ForRom. 7. 10. Lev. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 12. the
commandement was ordained to life. And the man that doth the workes of the Law
shall liue in them. And if the Law pro­mise not life and salvation, then
neither doth it threaten death and condemnation. The Covenant then is of the
same things, but the condition divers: The Law exacting perfect obedience of,
and by our selvs: the Gospell requiring true faith, and re­pentance, which it
also worketh in the elect.

Secondly, it is most untrue, that Circumcision was the sign or seal of the old
Testament, or Law, taking it properly, as theyRom. 4. 11. Gal.  [...]. 16. 17.
8. 9. doe. The Apostle expresly cals it, the seal of the righteousnesse of
faith, opposed to the righteousnesse of works, or of the Law; of which more
hereafter: else where shewing, that the same Law was given foure hundred and
thirty years after the covenant or promise to Abraham and his seed, confirmed
before in Christ, [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=86) through the
peaching of the Gospel, that they which are of faith might be blessed with
faithfull Abraham. How preposterous are these mens waies, who will haue the
seal so long before the Covenant?

Thirdly, Circumcision was the seal of that Covenant, by which Abraham, and his
posterity became the Lords peculiar people, seperated from all the
uncircumcised heathen unto him for his inheritance, and therein blessed: For
blessed is the nation, Psal. 33. 12. Ps. 144. 15. whereof the Lord is God, the
people that he hath chosen for a pos­session to himself; and blessed is the
people, whose God is Iehouah. Now will these gainsaying spirits have men
blessed by the law whether God will, or no? Saith not the scripture, that by
the law all are accursed? and that as many, as are of the works of the law are
accursed; as being unable to keep it? The Covenant then by which Israel became
Gods people, and therein blessed, of which Circumcision was a sign, and seal,
was not the Co­venant of the law, but of the gospell, and so of grace, and
salvation by grace.

Lastly, how wyde, and wilde are they in expounding the al­legory of Abrahams
two sons? Gal. 4 makeing Abrahams chil­dren after the flesh, the Infants of
the faithfull: never considering the Apostles generall scope, unto which the
particulars are to be applyed. Doth he in that place deal against the Infants
of the Galatians, or against the men of yeares, though children in knowledg?
who had begun in the spirit, but would be made perfit in the flesh: that is,
would be justified by the law, speciallyGal. 3. 3. vers. 11. ch. 5. 2. 3. 4.
ch. 4. 21. 29 30. by circumcision in the flesh: by which they made Christ of
none ef­fect and fell from grace. Were they Infants to whom he saith, Tel mee,
ye that desire to be under the law &c. So where he addeth He that is born
after the flesh persequutes him, that is born after the spirit, doth he mean
that Infants are persequuters? Or is not his meaning plain, that such as glory
in the flesh, and in circumcision and other fleshly prerogatives, and so
despise the free promise of grace in Christ, and them that rest under it (as
Ismael did both in truth of person, and type of others) are these
persequuters, at all times, to be cast out, with Isma­el; [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=86) as having no
right to the inheritance of grace or glory. Are the Infants of beleevers to be
cast out for their persequu­tions? Out of what, I marvail, and for what
persequutions? These men in opening this Allegory, or Parable verify that of
the Wise-man, As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, Pro. 26. 9. so
is a Parable in the mouth of fooles.

That the Covenant Gen. 17\. whereof circumcision was a sign, Pag. 147. was the
same, which we haue now in the Gospell, we haue notRelig. Com. p. 76. 77. 78.
onely said, as they say we haue done; but proved by so clear arguments, as
that, had they onely set them down, there had needed no further confirmation
of them, notwithstand­ing any thing that they could haue excepted, But they
haue cunningly passed them by in silence, as if no such thing were in the
book; and doe onely repeat over, and again, the same things with great
irksomnes, specially to those, that haue for­merly confuted them.

### 6.21. ADVERSARIES.

BVT they tell us, that the Covenant under the Gospell is a new and better
Covenant then the old, &c.

### 6.22. DEFENCE.

WE grant it: but affirm withall, that the Covenant with Abraham was not the
Covenant of the law, or old testament, as they mean. The Covenant with Abraham
was Gal. 3. 17. 19. 10. 14. confirmed of God in Christ, that the blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles thorow Iesus Christ. The Covenant of the
Law, or old Testament was 400 and thirty years after, and was added for
transgression til the seed should come, to whom the promise was made: that is,
to detect and manifest mens sins, and cur­sed state thereby; that so they
might fly the more earnestly to the promise of Christ (the blessed and
blessing Seed) made formerly to Abraham. Neither do the Scripture in this
mat­ter ever oppose Abraham and Christ; but Moses and Christ.Ioh. 1. 17. Heb.
10. 28 29. The Law was given by Moses; but grace and truth by Iesus Christ. So
Hebr. 10, the Law of Moses, and Covenant of the Son of God, [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=87) are opposed:
and Moses made the Mediator of the old testa­ment, and Covenant, established
in the blood of bulls and goats: Hebr. 9. and Christ the mediator of the new
by his own blood. And I would know of these men where the law is ever called
the law of Abraham, as it is every where, the law of Moses: which law or old
testament (opposed to the new) was written and engraven in Tables of stone,
and had therefore, not Abra­ham, 2▪ Cor. 3. 7. but Moses the mediator of it.

Lastly, for the ceremoniall part of the Law, old Testament, or Covenant, the
Authour to the Hebrews makes it plain, that it was received under the
Leviticall Priesthood, having a Heb. 7. 11, & 9\. 1. 2. 10. 13. worldly
sanctuary and ordinances, and divers washings for the pu­rifying of the flesh,
but not of the conscience from dead workes: whereas by the promise and
Covenant to Abraham, and his seed, the blessing of justification came, both
upon the Iews in theirGal. 3. 11. 14. 16. 17. time, and Gentiles in theirs,
through Christ Iesus, in whom it was confirmed.

In adding, that the Old taught that Christ was not come in the flesh, nor into
their hearts at their Circumcision: They make the Lords Covenant negatiue, as
teaching what is not, and not what is. A Covenant is a promise upon condition;
and a Testament, or Will, that, in which Legacies are given. But by this
doctrine, here should be nothing either given or pro­mised. It is, besides,
very ungodlily said, that Abraham, (in whom principally we are to consider
both of the Covenant, and seal thereof Circumcision) had not Christ in his
heart, when he was circumcised. Both Moses in Abrahams historie, and the
Apostles, who well understood it, affirm the contrary, and that he was
justified in uncircumcision, by beleeving in Christ: In which respect he is
called the father of them that be­leev, Rom. 4. 9. 10. 11. not onely
circumcised, but uncircumcised also. Haue his children that which he for
substance had not; even in that wherein he was their father? This thing they
grant in the ve­ry next page; and that Abraham had the covenant of grace
pro­mised him, by which promise he had salvation in the Messiah to Pag. 148.
come▪ and therein, that the Covenant made with Abraham, [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=87) whereof
Circumcision was a seal, was the Covenant of the Gospell, and the same with
ours now. It is strange that these men, who so magnifie Baptism, as they will
haue men made Christians by it; should so vilifie Circumcision, as to make it
of right to appertain to godlesse and wicked men: for such were and are all,
at all times, since Adam sinned, that had, and and haue not Christ in their
hearts. Was it not an holy Ordi­nance of God? and therfore not to be
prostituted to the un­holy, and unpure, as all unbeleevers; that is, all into
whoseTit. 1. 15. hearts Christ is not come, are: and unto whom nothing isGen.
17. 7. 11. Rom. 4, 11. 1▪ Sam. 17. 16. 36. Iudg. 14. 3. pure or holy. Could it
be to any a sign that God was their God; a seal of the righteousnesse of
faith; a pledg of Gods protection; and note of distinction between Gods people
and others: And yet belong to such as were wholly without Christ, and so
without God in the world? When any of the Heathens be­came Proselytes, they
chose God to be their God, came to trust Ruth 1. 16 & 2\. 12. Neh. 10. 28
under the wings of the Lord God of Israel, and separated themselvs from
Idolaters to the Law of God: and of all this, they made solemn profession by
Circumcision: which they must either do without faith, and so not please God
therein (which is absurdHebr. 11 6. to say they did, which did it, lawfully:)
or else with faith, by which Christ, though not come in the flesh▪ was come
into their hearts.

Of the Ceremonies of Moses, and so of Circumcision which Moses took of the
fathers into the body of the CeremoniallIoh. 7. 22. Law; and of their divers
considerations, I haue elsewhere;Relig. Com. p. 84 85 86. written at large,
and doe refer the Reader thither for satis­faction in that point.

That none of the Church of Israel (called by them affec­tedly Abrahams seed in
the flesh) had the Ordinances of the new Covenant, is not true. They had Iohns
Baptism, which even now these men avowed as the Baptism of the new Testament;
and Christs also, who baptized more Disciples then Iohn; and with them, the
twelv had the Lords Supper also, and all these, whilst the Iewish Church and
Ordinances stood in their full strength. It is true, that Iohns was not in the
Kingdom of God, [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=88) as Christ
speaks, Math. 11, that in the state of the Church and Ordinances dispensed
under Christ glorified: Otherwise, the Iews had the Kingdom of heaven, which
else could no [...] haue been taken from them and given to others: neither
couldMath. 21. 43. 5. Christ haue been, as he was, the King of Sion. So the
Patri­arks received not the promise, that is, Christ come in the flesh;Gal. 3.
23. to which purpose the Apostle saith, Before faith came, &c. Shall we
therfore say, that before Christs comming in the flesh none had true faith to
salvation; or that true beleevers received not Christ, though to come, as we
now receiv Christ come in the flesh? They, Christ promised and prefigured, by
the Word and Ordinances then: we, Christ manifested and remembred by the Word
and Ordinances now; properly called the New Hebr. 9. 16. 17. Testament, as
founded in the actuall death of the Testator.

### 6.23. ADVERSARIES.

HEre follows an exception against me in particular: which is, that by the old
Covenant mentioned Ier. 31, & Hebr. S▪ is not meant, as I affirm, that which
was made on mount Sinai, Exod. 19, but the Covenant mentioned, Exod. 3. v. 6,
&c. Their reason is, for that God made that Covenant with them, when hee took
them by the hand to bring them out of Aegipt, which is men­tioned Exod. 3, and
not Exod. 19. For then, say they, did God appear to Moses, and commanded him
to take them by the hand, and lead them out of Aegipt, where the Covenant is
mentioned, I am the God of thy fathers, Abraham, &c.

### 6.24. DEFENCE.

FIrst, to let passe, that though they bid, mark the words, yet they cite them
not: I answer, that these words, in that day, as the Text hath it, cannot be
restrained to that particular day when God appeared to Moses; seeing the Lord
did not that particular day take them by the hand to bring them out, but
divers daies after, as is expresly affirmed, ch. 12. 51, Psal. 77. 12, & 105,
27. 43. By that day therfore is not meant, any particular day, but
indefinitely the time of their transporting [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=88) out of Aegipt
into Canaan: as, elsewhere, by the day of their Ezech. 16. 4. 5. birth, is
meant the whole time of their fore-going misery. So, many hundred times, in
the Scriptures, by the day, or that day, is meant indefinitely the time in
which a thing happeneth, or is done. Besides, where the Prophet speaks of the
day in which God took them by the hand; they speak of the day in which God
appeared unto Moses, and commanded him to take them by the hand; which was,
whilst he was in the land of Midian. God indeed then shewed his will to Moses,
but stretched not out his hand for their deliverance, till many daies after.

They say further, that Exod. 3, the Covenant is mentioned, I am the God thy
father Abraham &c. But is every mentioning of a Covenant, the making of it?
And did God make a Covenant with, and become the God of Abraham, Isaak, and
Iakob, at that time? That is, when they were now dead divers hundred years
before. What can be more plain, then that the Lord doth not there make a new:
but remembers the old Covenant made before with Abraham, &c. of which the
bringing his posterity out of Aegipt into the promised land, Gen. 45. 13. 14.
15. was an appurtenance? God promised to be Abrahams God, and the God of his
Seed, that is, all-sufficient for the good things, not onely of this world,
but also of the world to come, as Christ expounds his fathers words, Math. 22.
32. 33, and so gaue them accordingly the land of Canaan, as a store-house of
earthly good things; and figure of heavenly. These men therfore, in this
place, unskilfully transform the fulfilling of an old promise into the making
of a new. Which they also confesse, in effect, in the very same place, in
saying, that the promise (that is, the Covenant on Gods part) was made to
Abraham, Gen. 17.

The word everlasting Gen. 17. I urge not further to proue the Covenant with
Abraham perpetuall; then as the nature of the same Covenant carries it. It was
that by which God be­came Abrahams God; and more he is, or can be to none: and
that which Christ himselfe extends to the very resurection ofMath. 21. 31. 32.
the bodies of Abraham &c. whose God the Lord was, and is.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=89)Two
reasons I will annex to justifie mine exposition of the Prophet Ieremy, and
Apostle after him; and to proue that by the old Covenant, they meant the
Covenant of the Law given on mount Syna. The former from the opposition,
between the old and new Covenant, expresly made in the generall; and
particularly insinuated in these words, I will write my Law in Ier. 31. 31.
32. 33, &c. their hearts, and will forgiue their iniquity, and remember their
sins no more: which was, not according to, but most unlike to the old
Covenant, or Law given on mount Syna, written in Tables of stone, and by which
sin, and transgression was not for­given,Rom 7. 8. Gal 3. 19. Hebr. 9. 1. 2.
3. 4. but quickned and encreased. A second reason is, for that the old, and
first Covenant (opposed to that in Christ) had or­dinances of divine worship;
and a worldly Sanctuary, or Taberna­cle, wherein was the Table, and
Candlestick, &c. which no man that beleevs the Bible, can make doubt to be
meant of the Law, and Covenant given on mount Syna▪ to and by Moses. By the
old Covenant is meant, that of the Law by Moses on mount Sina, unto which the
other is opposed.

Their exception, that Abrahams children of 8▪ daies old could Pag. 149. 150▪
151. make no covenant, nor agreement, is too childish to exclude them from it:
and that, by which they should haue been in no covenant at all with the Lord,
nor hee with them; new, nor old; Legall, nor Evangelicall: for they could make
none. It is not required, that every one comprehended in a Cove­nant, should
actually stipulate, or promise. Witnesse the Co­venant with Noah, in which,
both all his seed, and every living Gen. 9. 9. 10▪ creature, both foule and
cattell, were included. It was there­fore sufficient to bring Abrahams seed
into the Lords Cove­nant, that God in grace made, and Abraham by faith
received, the promise that he would be his God and theirs.

That every faithfull man and his seed, is (as) Abraham Rom. 4. 12. 16. Gal. 3.
6. 9. and his seed, the Scripture proue, in teaching, that every be­leever is
of the faith of Abraham, and walks in his steps. For if Abraham did by faith
receiv the promise, that God would be his God, and the God of his seed,
without which, no promise had belonged unto them: then, where the same faith
is for [[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=89)
substance, there is the same promise for substance to every be­leever; though
a son of Abraham as following his example▪ yet as Abraham himselfe in
beleeving as hee did. And this is most manifest, in that by this very covenant
God was not one­ly the God of Abraham, and his seed Isaak; but of Isaak, and
his seed Iakob; and of Iakob, and his seed the Patriarks, and so successiuely:
not by fleshly descent of the children from their parents (as they absurdly
cavill) but by spirituall and divine promise of grace: which they ungraciously
despise for their children, because they cannot be doing something to God
again▪ by their free-will, to require him withall.

Next comes to be examined that notable place, Rom. 4. 11. Abraham received the
sign of Circumcision, the seal of the righ­teousnesse of the faith which he
had being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all that beleev▪
though uncircumcised, that righteousnesse might be imputed to them also.

### 6.25. ADVERSARIES.

THeir evasion is, that by faith here, is not meant faith in the Messiah, by
which he was, and we are justified: but, say they, Circumcision sealed up
Abrahams fatherhood of the faith­full; that is, was a seal of his faith in
beleeving God, that he should be the father of many Nations.

### 6.26. DEFENCE.

AND this faith, say we, was the faith of the Gospell, and faith in the
Messiah, which the Apostle expresly saith, was imputed to him for
righteousnesse, and by which he was ju­stified; as is plain, from v. 17, I
haue made thee a father of ma­ny Nations, compared with v. 22, where he infers
therupon, even upon that faith, And therfore it was imputed to him for
righteousnesse: Which also, that it was the same in substance with ours now,
the words following manifest. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that
it was imputed to him; but to us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
beleev in him that raised up Iesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered
for our sins &c. v. 23. 24. 25.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=90)This will
yet the more clearly appear, if we consider what is meant by these promises, I
haue made thee a father of many Nations, and so shall thy seed be, recited by
the Apostle for the purpose in hand: In these words, I haue made thee a father
of many Nations, he opposeth many Nations to that one Nation of the Iews. Of
these many Nations, hee was the father, even of all that beleev, though
uncircumcised, v. 11. And how a father? By way of example, that, as hee was
justified by faith in the promise of God, and of the promised seed Christ,
even when he was uncircumcised: So they, beleeving the same promise of God in
Christ, now come of him, though uncircumcised, should in like manner, be
justified as he was. Which is yet further confirmed, where it is said, that he
is the father of all them, though not of the circumcision, that walk in the
steps of the faith of Abraham, which he had yet being uncir­cumcised. Whence I
gather, that if we be justified by the same faith that Abraham was justified
by, and that he was justi­fied by faith in that promise▪ that then that
promise was made of, and in the Messiah Christ, the blessed and blessing Seed:
as it is said: So shall thy seed be: and Abraham beleeved, and Gen. 15. 5. 6,
& ch. 12 3, & ch. 18▪ 18. Rom. 4. 17. 18. he counted it to him for
righteousnesse: And again, In thee shall all Nations, or families of the earth
be blessed. Now of this faith the Apostle here speaks, and of it he testifies
circumci­sion to haue been a seal to Abraham. It cannot be denyed, but that
the Apostle in this whole discourse, speaks of faith to ju­stification;
proving partly, by the example of Abraham, and partly by the testimony of
David, that we are justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of
the Law. And to what end, or with what order should hee thrust in an
impertinent dis­course of any other faith? To affirm this, is no better then
to defame the Holy Ghost with equivocating. Or to what pur­pose should he
mention the sign of Circumcision, as a seal of faith, if not of that faith, of
which he treats? For wheras it might be objected, that if Abraham were
justified by beleeving before he was circumcised, as is said, v. 3. 9. 10,
then what needed hee after to haue been circumcised? The Apostle answers, v.
11, [[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=90) that
hee received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righte­ousnesse of
faith vvhich he had yet being uncircumcised, which faith v. 9, vvas reckoned
to him for righteousnesse: that by it the covenant of grace between God & him
might be confirmed, as covenants among men formerly agreed upon are, by the
seals thereunto annexed.

Lastly, who endued with common sense, and modesty can deny, that by the
righteousnesse of faith, wherof Circumcision was a seal, is meant the
righteousnes which is by faith, as v. 3, Abraham beleeved God, and it vvas
imputed to him for righte­ousnesse, and v. 9, faith vvas reckoned to Abraham
for righteous­nesse: which righteousnesse of faith, in this whole discourse,
he opposeth to the righteousnesse of works by the Law, as is expresly to be
seen, v. 3. 14. 15. 16.

But now what say our Adversaries to these things? as men in a maze, and not
knowing how to finde the way out, goe sometimes backward, sometimes forward,
and sometimes leap unorderly from one place to another: so doe they in
expound­ing this Scripture. In their out-leaps about Abrahams fleshly
children, I shall not need heere to follow them. Where, after, they say, that
Circumcision was a seal of Abrahams faith in be­leeving God that he should be
the father of many Nations, and that this was imputed to him for
righteousnesse; they say as much as wePag. 151. do, or desire they should. But
where they say, in the very same place, that hee received not circumcision to
seal up his faith in the Messiah, they goe backward most dangerously, to bring
in a faith to justification, imputed for righteousnesse, which yet is not in
the Messiah. Was righteousnesse ever, or is it imputed to any for
justification, but by faith in Christ, then promised, now exhibited? The
reason insinuated by them is a pleasant one; namely, for that Abraham had
faith in the Messiah 24 years before he was circumcised. Whereas on the
contrary, it could not haue been a seal of such faith, except hee had had the
faith before, whether longer or lesser time, it matters not, but is, as it
pleaseth him who bestow [...]th both the one and other. Signes and Seals are
not to be set to blankes, neither [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=91) doe they make
things that were not before, to be? but serv onely to confirm things that are.

These things thus cleared, the Reader must be requested, not to measure our
arguments from Abraham and Isaaks cir­cumcision, to the Baptism of Infants, by
the crooked line which these men draw between them: but by the right rule of
sound reason, applyed as followeth in three parti­culars.

First, that the Covenant unto which Circumcision was an­nexed, was the
Covenant of the Gospell, and not of the Law and old Testement, as they take
it. For then it could not haue been to Abraham the seal of the righteousnesse
of faith, any way: but of unrighteousnesse and condemnation every way: for
righteousnes is not by the Law, which worketh wrath, Rom. 4. 15 & ch. 7. 9.
13. and by which sin revives, and becomes exceeding sinfull. And surely it is
more then strange, that any beleeving the Scrip­tures, should beleev that the
Lords Covenant made with Abraham, and so with Israel in him, by which he took
them to Deut. 4. 37. & 7\. 6. 7. 8 Psal. 33. 12 be his peculiar people, from
among all other peoples, because hee loved their father and them; by which
they were a blessed Na­tion, having Iehovah for their God; in remembring of
which co­venant Lev. 26. 42. with Abraham &c. he so often shewed them mercy,
and did them good; and in time, gaue his Son Christ to saue them from their
enemies: and lastly, by which Covenant theyLuk. 1. 71. 72. Rom. 11. 25 26. &c.
shall again be called when the fulnesse of the Gentiles is come in: and so all
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Syon a
Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodlinesse from Iakob. For this is my
Covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins. As concerning the
Gospell they are enemies for the (Gentiles) sake: but as concerning the
election, they are beloved for the fathers sake: for the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance: that this covenant of loue and mercy, making them
blessed which are taken into it, and procuring the giving of Christ, and of2
Cor. 3. 6. 7. Rom. 4. 15. Gai. 3. 19. 20. salvation, should be the covenant of
the old Testament and Law: Of the Law, I say, and old Testament, which is the
ministery of death; the letter that killeth: which worketh wrath, [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=91) was added for
transgression; by which sin reviveth, and all die, Rom. 7. 9. and are
accursed. What is this else but to bring the currant of gracious mercy, into a
channell of severe justice, and to curse where God blesseth, as Balaam
purposed to haue done?

Secondly, we conclude hence, that the Church of the Iews, and Church now is
one in substance, though diverslyEsay 5. 1. Ier 2. 21. Math. 21. 33. 34.
ordered: one Uineyard (in which there are both grown trees, and yong plants;)
one Kingdom which was taken from them, and given to us; the branches of one
oliue tree, holy in the same holy root Abraham, from which most of them were
broken off for unbelief, and we by faith planted in their place; one body,
Eph. 3. 6. and therefore having Infants in it now, as then, and the same
therefore to be baptized (there being also one Baptism, as one Eph. 4. 4. 5.
Relig. Com. pag. 62. 63. body) as they were circumcised of old: Baptism (as
elsewhere I haue proved at large, to their silencing in that point) com­ming
in the place of Circumcision.

Thirdly, that all their disputes against Infants Baptism, be­cause they cannot
manifest faith and repentance, are but the same quarrels which might haue been
picked of old against Infants Circumcision.

That there was something in Abrahams circumcision extra­ordinary, is true: for
he first received it for his posterity; and for the Proselytes with them,
which joyned themselvs to the Lord: so was there also in his faith, as he was
the father (by example) to all that should beleev after him.

Their prophane assertion, that faith was required of none (toPag. 152. wit men
of years) for circumcision, I haue formerly disproved. How can it come into
the hearts of reasonable men, that the Lord in whose eies the prayers,
sacrifices, and all other services of ungodly men were so abominable, should
like of their circumcision?

Lastly, for Abrahams children of the flesh (according to their
misunderstanding of them) they were by nature children of wrath as well as
others, and had thereby no more right to circumsion, then the Infants of
Sodom. It was of grace, and [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=92) not of nature,
that they were within Gods Covenant. Of Gal. 3. and Rom. 9. we haue spoken at
large formerly, and of their misconstructions of the Apostles meaning.

Lastly, we neither run, as they say, nor goe to the old Testa­ment, Pag. 153.
Law, or Moses for the baptizing of Infants; but to the Covenant of the Gospell
solemnly made with our father Abraham long before the Law was given, the old
Testa­ment established, or Moses born.

Their discourse about Rome is vain, except they can proue that the outward
baptism there administred (though unlaw­fully) is not to be reteyned by such,
as unto whom the Lord afterward vouchsafeth the inward baptism of his spirit;
and so answer our Reasons to the contrary, which they haue, and haue had so
long time in their hands.

These things thus cleared, it remaines we come in the next & last place to
examine their defence of that their own unhal­lowed baptism in use amongst
them: formerly proved by me a mere nullity by their grounds, and practise set
together. Their ground is, that baptism unlawfully ministred is no bap­tism,
their practise, that he who ministring his gift (poorely as their manner is)
doth convert (in truth pervert) another: may also baptize him without any
speciall calling.

For foundation of my proofs I laid down these two Rules. 1. There is no
lawfull baptism, but by him that hath a lawfull cal­ling to baptize. 1\.
Thess. 4\. 11. Heb. 5\. 4. 5. And unto this they assent. 2. Onely he hath a
lawfull ordinary calling to baptize (and extraordinary they challeng not) who
is called therto by the Church. This their first rebaptizer Mr. Smith had not,
ney­ther haue they, that now administer baptism amongst them; neither doe they
account, that more is requisite for power, and right to baptize, then a
personall gift of teaching, and making thereby one of their Proselites, and
supposed con­verts. Whereupon it follows, that they themselvs being bap­tized
by such, as want a lawfull calling, are not lawfully bap­tized; and so by the
verdict of their own quest, unbaptized persons.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=92)Their
defence they begin with the perverting both of my words, and meaning, very
unhonestly, in setting down the state of the question; which yet seems not
strang unto me, considering their licentious dealing in like sort, with the
Holy Ghost in the Scriptures. They frame the question; whether any but Pastors
or Elders may baptize? and my charge upon them; that they are unbaptized,
because, they want Pa­stors.

But where haue I so spoken? or how gather they that to haue been my meaning?
had it so been, why could I not as easily haue said, that none but Pastors
(for of baptism by others Elders which labour not in the word and doctrine, we
ap­prove1 Tim. 5. 17▪ not) may lawfully baptize; as, that none but such as are
lawfully called by the Church may baptize? which are my words. My meaning was
not to deny, that a Church wanting Pas­tors may appoint a member able to teach
(though out of of­fice) to baptize: for which much may be said, and hath been
by some so minded. Which though I doe not simply ap­prove of; yet neyther did,
neither had I occasion ro deal thereagainst, but onely against the wilde
course of these All­alikes; of whom any that can wrest a few Scriptures
(inten­ded of men of yeares onely) against the baptizing of Infants, to the
corrupting of some simple man, or woman, thinks himself another Iohn Baptist,
as their practise and profession manifests. Now whether they haue thus altered
my words, and perverted my meaning out of bold rashnes, as being more hasty to
answer, then to understand their adversarie; or out of cunning for their
advantage, the Lord and themselvs bee Iudges. Onely this any may see, and I
shall make appeare, that the most, and most colourable of their Arguments are
a­gainst their misconceaved, and not mine intended sense: which gives occasion
to suspect, that they haue rather been cunning, then carelesse in the thing.

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=93)

### 6.27. ADVERSARIES.

LET us come to the particulars: and first to their first and main ground, and
foundation of their course which is, that members, and Churches of Christ are
made both by faith, and baptism, and not by the one onely.

### 6.28. DEFENCE.

THIS their foundation in respect of baptism is sandy: see­ing it servs but to
signifie, and confirm what was before; but makes nothing to be that was not.
The Scriptures (being many) cited by them are partly impertinent, and partly
a­gainst them, some of them expresly, and the rest truely.

Some of them indeed speak of being baptized into Christ, Gal. 3. 26. 27. Rom.
6. 1. Cor. 12. 13. Heb. 6. and into his death, and into one body with him, and
make bap­tism a foundation: but mean not  [...] to shew, that men are made
Christian soules by baptism, as ignorant persons think and speak; but onely
that they are confirmed, and furthered thereby in that which they were before.
Some of the places joyn with baptism the Lords Supper, others the laying on of
1\. Cor. 12 13. Heb. 6 hands (which yet rather is meant of the doctrine, then
minis­tration of those things). Now doe they conceaue, that such as were no
true Christians before, are in part made Christi­ans by the Lords Supper, and
laying on of hands? When the Scriptures affirm any thing of an ordinance, they
must be in­terpreted according to the nature of the ordimance. As where Christ
saith of the bread, This is my body; or of the rock, And the rock was Christ:
or the Apostle here, that we are baptized into Christ, and draw neer unto
Christ by baptism, and the like; we must understand the speaches as
sacramentall, so far as they are applied to ordinances; that is, as intending
those things, for signes, and seales, and means of confirmation; and not
otherwise.

Others of the Scriptures brought by them are so plainly against them, as it is
marvail that in setting them down, they thought not of the Lords answer to the
evill servant Luke 19. [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=93) 22\. For
example, Math. 28. 19. Go teach, or as they well turn it, make all nations
disciples baptizing them &c. The Apostles then were first to make, to wit, by
their teaching, disciples, that is Christians; and after to baptize them. Is
it not the Scrip­turesActs 11. 26 constant voice, and these mens plea (true in
it self, but to a wrong end) that men must first beleeue, and repent, and upon
manifestation thereof, be baptized? Are not they that beleev, and repent
Christians with them? Otherwise, How doe they baptize them? But thus it is
with men in all sects, that are lead by passion, and appetite, more then
reason: they doatupon some one thing truly or apparantly good: and labor aboue
measure, to magnifie it, esteeming all things without it, as nothing. Thus
these men esteem of baptism, others of Church government, others of
seperation, others of imposition of hands by Bishops; And so, according as men
haue advantage by particulars, or suffer for them, or are otherwise prejudiced
towards them, they set high valuation upon them. But as grace teacheth us to
acknowledg better things in Christians then any outward ordinances; so must
wisdom warn us not to ascribe too much to any one, as fond folks use to doe to
the person, or thing which they affect.

Math. 18. 20, is against them. To be gathered together in Christs name there,
presupposes a Church state. So is Io [...]. 4. 1. Christ made and baptized
disciples: they were made dis­ciples by preaching, and after baptized. Ioh. 3.
5, speaks of regeneration by the spirit compared in that place to water, as
elswhere to fire for its property in purifying. And admit, it speak of the
ordinance of baptism: yet must it follow rege­neration, as a means of
confirmation.

As therefore Christians are not made by the ordinance of baptism; so much
lesse are Churches. This I haue elswhereRel. Com. p. 47. 48. proved against
them by many firm Arguments: to which see­ing they neither giue answer, nor
shew thereof: (though this be a main matter in question between them and us)
what should I say more to them? These they may answer, if they be able, as I
am sure they are not: nor, I think, will ever goe [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=94) about it.
Onely, I here add this one thing. If members, and Churches be made by Baptism,
I demand, when I. M. alone baptiseth one of his converts alone, what Church,
or member of what Church is here made? And if one alone may receiv or make
members of the Church, why not also cast them out, and excommunicate them
without the Churches presence or privity? Such is the confused course of these
men.

Here they cite sundry Scriptures, but proving onely thatPag. 156. which we
willingly grant: viz. that men and women conver­ted from Heathenism, and
Iudaism, to the faith of Christ, and so to be added to the Church, and being
before unbap­tised, were to be baptized. But how proues this, that they were
made either Churches or Christians by Baptism? When any of the Heathens became
Iews, that is, embraced the Iew­ishEsth. 8. 17. Nehem. 10. 28. Ruth. 2. 11
Religion, and separated themselvs from the other Idola­ters of the land to the
Law of God, and came to put their trust under the wings of the God Israel, and
were to be circumcised: did their Circumcision make them such? Or did it not
one­ly, declare and confirm that state of grace, in and unto which God had
called them? Neither yet could the things fore­mentioned be performed by their
infants: and yet were they made partakers of Circumcision with them.

### 6.29. ADVERSARIES.

BVT minde here a futher matter. They say, The Church at Ierusalem was the
first Church of Christ; and by faith, and Baptism made a Church: and in the
next words, that the twelue were so made also.

### 6.30. DEFENCE.

IF the Church at Ierusalem were the first Church of Christ (as in a sense it
may be so called) I would know how the Baptism of Christ before that time, and
of Iohns before Christs (having also joyned with them faith in the baptized)
made Churches? Were any made before the first? Or what, [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=94) and which were
the Churches which they so made, and ga­thered? Both the one, and other
living, and dying members of the Iewish Church. I add, considering how it is
said of Iohn, that Ierusalem and all Iudea, and the region round about Ior­dan
Mat. 3. 5. 6 Ioh. 4. 1. were baptized of him, confessing their sinnes: and of
Christ, that he made and baptized moe Disciples then Iohn; it is very
evi­dent, that thousands, afterwards made members of the Churches in
Ierusalem, Iudea, Samaria, and Galilee, were bap­tized long before, by Iohn
and Christ: and were made mem­bers of the Church, in our sense, long after
their Baptism. Here then we see Baptism administred, and yet no Church made:
and again, Churches made, and yet many the members thereof, not then, but long
before baptized.

We grant (as they say) that Rome is that Aegipt, Sodom and Babylon, in
mysterie, mentioned in the Revelation: but deny (which they adjoyn) as being
both untrue and uncharitable, that all in that Church are in Gods account as
the worst pagans, &c. God hath his people (considered in their persons) in
Babylon, unto whom he saith, Come out of her my people, &c. being held captiue
there, by her craft and cruelty. Neither is Babylon called an habitation of
Divels, for that the devill pos­sessethRev. 18. 1. men; but to shew its
desolation after the day of theEsay 13. 18 20. 21. & 21\. 9. 10. Ier. 10. 2. 8
39. 40, &c. fall thereof: the Evangelist in that speech, alluding to the forms
of speech used by the Prophets before against Baby­lon Civill, in regard of
her utter ruin, and desolation shortly to follow.

Neither is the Baptism in Rome, a Babylonish, or Aegyptian Pag. 157. washing,
as they calumniate; no more then the doctrine of Baptism, in the name of the
Trinity is a Babylonish doctrine; but it is as a vessell of the Lords house,
though prophaned there. Much lesse can that vitupery agree to the Church of
Eng­land, where the faith is sound for justification and salvation, and
effectuall for obtaining the same in those that truely pro­fesse it. The
Circumcision of Gods people (though too much infected with their sinns) in
Aegipt, and Babylon, were no [...] Ezek. 23. 8. Aegyptian and Babylonish; no
more is the Baptism in Aegypt [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=95) and Babylon
spirituall: specially in regard of Gods people there; as not a few also shew
themselvs to be by comming out thence at the Lords call: though some more
slowly then other; as of old they did out of Babylon Civill, as Esra, and
Nehemiah testifie.

That the everlasting Gospell commands beleevers to be bapti­zed; Pag. 158. to
wit, if unbaptized before, we grant: but that men become an habitation of God
by his spirit, and water; is as if they said; water dwels in men, as the
spirit of God doth? It is hard to say, whether Papists bread, or these mens
water, be made the greater Idoll. Neither doe we in retaining the Bap­tism
received in Rome, take a corner stone out of Babylon, either for foundation,
or wall, but bring thence a vessell of the Lords house there captived with the
Lords people. I know not but that the very circumcision of the Shechimites
might haue beenGen. 34. retained, if any of the males had survived and
embraced the truth of religion: which yet was far from being lawfully
ad­ministred.

Lastly, though all were true which they say for anabapti­zing in the generall;
yet were their particular practise not ju­stified thereby, nor our exception
cleared, being against their manner (and the same singular, from all other of
their Sect, in all places) of baptizing, by persons uncalled thereunto, either
by God immediately, or mediately by the Church,  [...] or otherwise then by
their own particular and personall mo­tion.

To their objection arising from the supposed proportionPag. 159. between
Baptism, and the Ministery; and to their Demand, Why I cast away my Popish
Priesthood, and retain my Popish washing for my Christianity (as they please
to speak) I haue an­sweredIustificat. &c. pag. 390. 391. &c. elsewhere at
large: neither haue they been able, to this day, or now are, to say against
mine answer any thing at all, either true, or colourable: and yet neither haue
they the humility to suffer themselvs to be taught better; nor the mo­desty to
hold their tongues in the matter: but doe irksomely demand a new the things of
old answered. For the present, I [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=95) will onely note
these three differences. First, it is absurdly said, that a man is made a
Christian by his Baptism, as he is made a Minister by his outward calling. He
that is not a Christian be­fore he be baptized, becomes not one thereby: But
by the outward calling of the Church, hee that was no Minister be­fore, become
such properly and imediatly. Secondly, a man is to be baptized but once: and
God adding to the outward2 Chron 30 18. 19. 20. washing with water that which
is inward, and by his spirit, sanctifies the former, and covers many faylings
in the man­ner of administring it: but a man may on the contrary, upon
occasion, be called divers times to a Ministery, in divers Churches, one after
another. Thirdly, the Ministery is the1 Cor. 3. 21 22. 23. & ch. 12. 28.
Churches, and depends upon it as the adjunct upon the sub­ject, so as if the
Church dissolue, the Ministerie ceaseth: which the same Church also that giues
it, may take away, and make him that was a Minister no Minister: Besides, that
in the mean while his Ministery is bounded within the precincts of that Church
wherof he is an officer. But in the ordinance of Baptism the case is clean
otherwise. For neither can the Church which hath given it, take it from him;
neither cea­seth he to remain a baptized person, though alone, and with­out
either Church, or other Christian in the world with him; neither is he in any
Church where he comes, to bee barred from the priviledges of his Baptism, or
use of any thing de­pending upon it.

### 6.31. ADVERSARIES.

FOR the justifying of the manner of their rebaptizing,Pag. 161. and to proue
that the Disciples of Christ, though no Pastors (they must add, nor having any
Church-calling) may bap­tize: their first instance is from Iohn Baptist, who
was no Pa­stor, and yet baptized.

### 6.32. DEFENCE.

WEE grant it; No more was Christ himselfe a Pastor in our sense, nor his
Apostles. But we say Iohn, as [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=96) they, had an
immediate and extraordinary calling, not onely to exercise, but also to
introduce the ordinance of Baptism: being expresly prophesyed of before by
Esay and Malachy: Esay 40. 3. Mal. 4. 5. 6 Luk. 1. 11. 13. 14. 15, &c.
promised to his father Zachary, by an Angell of the Lord, and filled with the
Holy Ghost from his mothers womb. Will these men compare their conceited gift
of converting, with Iohns di­vine, and extraordinary charter and endowments?
We say, with Christ our Lord, that Iohn was a Prophet, and more then a Mat.
11.  [...]. Prophet: They answer us, that the least disciple, or that hath
Iohns doctrine, in the Kingdom of God is greater then he. But we reply, that
Christ doth not there mean the least disciple, but the least able Minister of
the new Testament, wherof these Ana­baptizers are none. When Christ asked the
Iews, if they went out to see a Prophet: Think we, he meant of any ordinary
Iew, having a poor gift of expounding the Scriptures, like these mens? Or not
rather of some, both of singular abilities, and speciall calling? So, by the
least in the Kingdom of heaven, he means the least Minister of the new
Testament, furnished with speciall abilities, and calling. Besides, his
meaning is, not that the least Minister, no nor the greatest neither, was
greater then Iohn the Baptist in respect of power of ministring Baptism: for
none was comparable to him this way, being under God the instituter of it, and
the Baptist, which neither Peter nor Paul was: But the greatnesse here, is in
regard onely of the more full knowledg of Christ, not onely come in the flesh,
and entred upon his Ministery, as in Iohns time; but having finished his work
upon earth, and being dead for our sins, and risen again, and ascended into
the heavens; whence he did, and doth most graciously, and powerfully
administer his Kingdom amongst men. Is it not enough for Iohn Murton, and his
con­sorts, to be equall with Iohn Baptist in the power of bapti­zing, but they
will needs perck aboue him therein, and bee greater then he. But it is no new
thing for the bramble to ad­vance Iudg. 9. it selfe aboue all the trees, even
the vine, oliue, and fig-tree. But such pride will haue a fall. The Lord grant
it may be by, or with repentance, to prevent the down-fall to perdition.

[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=96)To their
instancing the disciples of Christ, and Ananias hisPag. 161. 162. baptizing,
what shall I say more then I haue done in the very writing which they
undertake to answer? Wherein I haue proved, that these instances are so far
from helping them, as that they make plainly against them, as the Reader that
will, may see. To my proofs they answer nothing at all, nor con­firm their own
tenent further, by any circumstance of the Text. Onely they tell us in the
generall, that these things were written for our learning: We grant it, and
therewith affirm, that amongst other things, we are to learn this from them;
that such as are to baptize, are to be furnished with (besides, and aboue the
gift of teaching) a speciall warrant and calling from Christ, either
extraordinary and immediate, as had these disci­ples, and Ananias; or
ordinary, and mediate by the Church: which alone is delegated by Christ the
Lord, with authority to call men to the ministering of his solemn Ordinances;
wherof Baptism is one, and not the use of a gift, as bare teaching is.

In opening Math. 28, Goe teach all Nations, &c. they shewPag. 102▪ 163. a
strange streyn of wit; in gathering from thence, that any disciple of Christ
may baptize, from whence all others of lear­ning or judgment (of all Sects)
doe gather the contrary, and that none, but such as haue speciall calling to
teach may bap­tize. Let us examine things particularly.

And first, I affirm, that the Lord in that place giues an Apostolicall
commission properly; which I thus proue. First, because he bids them Goe, or
goe forth and teach all Nations: opposing the Apostles going forth, and
teaching all Nations then, to the Prophets tarrying, and teaching that one
Nation of the Iews formerly. Doe or can these men (though their feet abide not
in the house, Prov. 7\. 11,) goe to, and teach all Nations? Their answer is
frivilous, that every Disciple is to doe this according to his best abilitie,
seeing the Lord calls none to a state or work, but such as he furnisheth with
answerable abilities. By such answers, the calling of any how unfit so­ever,
to any place or state how excellent soever, might be [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=97) justified.
Secondly, if not in this place, I would know when, and where Christ gaue the
commission properly Apostolicall.

Where they add, that the Apostles haue left their power whol­ly behind them,
and that nothing is dead but their persons: they erre not a little; For not
onely their persons are dead, but their office also is ceased. If any now haue
the power of A­postles, they haue then the office of Apostles first, from
which the power is, and in which it is to be exercised. If they say, they are
Apostles; they are not, but are easily found lyars by plain direction of the
Scriptures. Besides, they expresly con­tradictGal. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 9. & ch▪ 4.
9. themselvs in the same place, in saying, The commission was given to such,
as whose persons remains to the end of the world. If their persons be dead,
how remain they? But they add, as their corner stone, that this commission was
given to the succee­ders of the Apostles in their doctrine from time to time,
with whom Christ promiseth to be present alwaies, even to the end.

If I should answer (as I know not but I might lawfully,) that these words of
Christ, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world, are to be
expounded as those of the Apo­stle, 1 Thess. 4. 15. 17, Wee which are aliue,
and remain unto the comming of the Lord, and that the meaning of both is, that
all should so walk, as if that day of the Lord were to come every day of their
liues, what would they reply?

But admit this be spoken mediately to the successours of the Apostles (not in
their power Apostolicall, for that ceaseth with their office Apostolicall, and
their office with their persons; neither is there left in the Church any
authority or direction for the chusing of Apostles, but) in the performance of
such ordinary works, in lawfull order, as the Apostles were to exercise
themselvs in, specially of teach­ing and baptizing, there mentioned: I thus
proue, that by those successors are not meant, as they conceiv disciples, but
such as haue speciall commission, and authority, and so speci­ally Pastors.

And first, Christ here opposeth them to whom he speaks, as the makers of
Disciples (as the words are) to Disciples to be [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=97) made by them.
Secondly, if every disciple of Christ, then why not women also, which are
disciples as well as men, and wherof there are diverse to be found better
gifted then any of this fellowship? Neither can they object the Apostles
pro­hibition of women, 1 Cor. 11, & 1 Tim. 2, seeing they hold Baptism no
Church action, but personall onely; and so ad­minister it as privately, as
Midwines use to doe. Thirdly, if Pastors be most rightfully the Apostles
successors in other works of their Apostolicall commission here given; by
name, in administring the Lords Supper, and over-seeing the flock, and
defending the same in the truth, which they grant: why not in teaching, and
baptizing also, which alone are expressed? Math. 28.

### 6.33. ADVERSARIES.

BVT this they account a meer fiction, seeing converting and baptizing is no
part of the Pastors office, which is to feed, watch and oversee the flock of
Christ, and defend the same in the truth: then which they deny further charge
to be laid upon him by his office: quoting for that purpose, Act. 20. 28, Tit.
1. 9, pro­ceeding also to challenge it as an imagination, that he is to preach
Pag. 163. by vertue of his office: yea, adding that any disciple having
abi­lity is authorized, yea commanded to preach, convert, and baptize, as
well, and as much, if not more, then any Pastour. To this height of usurpation
are these Chorites come.

### 6.34. DEFENCE.

FIrst here, as alwaies, they alter the state of the question, which between
them and me is not whether onely Pastors, but whether onely such as haue a
speciall Church-calling, may baptize? Secondly, it is true, that Pastors in
the right state of things, are not to be set over heards of goats and swine,
but over flocks of sheep: yet doth it not follow thereupon that Pastors in no
sort convert. For first, there may be in the Church hypocrites undetected, or
after detection, yet un­censured, which they may by Gods blessing effectually
con­vert. [[Page
190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=98) Secondly, the
Pastor as Pastor of the flock, and feed­ing it, may convert a stranger comming
in: and why then not baptize him by their own ground? The person so converted
publiquely, may and ought to be baptized publiquely; and should not the Pastor
doe it (by whom also hee is converted) rather then a private member? Thirdly,
it is not all one (though they confound them) to convert, to wit, from being
wicked to become godly, and to make a disciple. Children born in the Church
may be made Disciples, yet not so con­verted; as it may be never having been
such, as of whom it could be said, that they were wicked. Fourthly, it is
their ignorance to make converting of men, and the baptizing them, actions of
the same nature: seeing onely men and wo­men before converted, and repenting,
are to be baptized.Act. 2. 38. Lastly, in granting, according to the
Scriptures, that the Pa­stor 1 Cor. 4. 15 & 9\. 14. Iam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23
is by office to feed the flock: they cannot deny, but that hee is to baptize
thereby: seeing baptism is a part of that feeding properly, serving to confirm
the faith of beleevers in the wash­ing away of their sinnes by the bloud of
Christ; Begetting is by the seed of the word, the word of truth: and so
whatsoever means follow thereupon, is but for feeding and nourishing the so
begotten.

### 6.35. ADVERSARIES.

BVT that which followeth is admirable, viz. that the Pa­stour is not required
to preach, nor doth perform it by vertue of his office, when he doth it.

### 6.36. DEFENCE.

MAny men (and these with the rest) haue spoken many absurd things in religion:
but these in this exceed them all, yea and themselves. They from Act. 20,
affirm that the Pa­stours are to feed the flock by their office. And can the
flock be fed as it ought without preaching, and where the bread of life is not
broken unto it? They also graunt in the same place from Titus 1. 9. that he is
to defend the flock in the truth against [[Page
191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=98) all gainsayers,
But why to defend the flock &c. as their cunning and corrupt glosse is, rather
then as the words of the text are, by sound doctrine both to exhort, and
convince the gain­saier. Are exhortations and convictions by sound doctrine no
preachings with these men? yea, are they not directly for the conversion of
gainsayers? And how then belongs it not to Pastours, to whom these things
belong, to convert? So where it is required that the Bishop (to be called) be
apt to 1 Tim. 3. 2. teach, is he not by his office to doe that which is
requisite in him for his enabling unto it. I say for the enabling of him unto
his office, and not for the adorning of it onely, as hos­pitality is: which
though he wholy want ability to perform, yet that disables him not; as the
want of aptnes to teach doth.

Ioyn with these the Apostles exhortation, that the Elders that rule well be
had in double honour; specially they that labour in 1 Tim 5▪ 17. the word, and
doctrine; for the labourer is worthy of his reward: and what can be clearer,
then that the Pastour is to preach by his office, and that as being the
speciall work, for which his wages are due unto him. Is not to labour in the
word and doc­trine here spoken of, for him to preach, and that as an El­der;
as the former rule, as Elders? Strange it is that, a Pastour Ephe.  [...]. 11.
or Teacher by office should not teach and preach by office; that is, not
exercise their office or ministery, the Teacher in teaching, and Exhorter, or
Pastour in exhortation. And see weRom. 12. 5. 7. 8. not here what new Patrons
dumb ministers haue gotten; of whom the old almost every where are ashamed? If
it be not re­quired of the Pastour to preach by his office, then though he
never preach at all, yet it cannot be said to Archippus, fulfill thy Col. 4.
17 ministery, which thou hast received in the Lord. The Pastour might, by
their Canon, most faithfully perform and fulfill his office though he never
preached one sermon all his life long.

But as all errours haue some truth either in them, or nigh unto them, and so
are raised upon mistaking of one thing for another, with which it hath some
affinity: So is it in this case. For first the ability or gift to teach is not
by the office, but before it, and meerly personall, and so remains even in the
[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=99) officer;
and the same greater in one then in another, though the office be the same in
both. Yet because the gift fits for the of­fice, and enables to the performing
of it many unskilfully confound them. Secondly, there is both a liberty, and
duty of using the same gift in time & place, before and without the of­fice.
But herewith (the office concurring) is joyned, and added a bond of authority,
and speciall charge upon the of­ficer to wait upon his office, the Teacher in
teaching, the Exhor­ter, or Pastor in exhortation, as the Apostle speaks.

Here amongst sundry Scriptures, not so much as lookingPag. 164. towards the
matter in hand, but speaking of the generall li­berties of Christians, and
graces of Christianity, common to women with men, and to such men as want all
gifts of teach­ing with others, they alledg, 1 Cor. 14. 1, and the Apostle
then commanding every beleever to covet to preach.

But first, why put they preaching, and not prophesying, as the Text, and all
translations haue it? Secondly, it is their presumption, that he speaks of
every beleever. Was every beleever to covet spirituall gifts, to wit, all both
extraordi­nary and ordinary there mentioned? And are there not many in all
Churches, who, without a miracle, cannot possibly at­tain to any competent
ability to teach publiquely in the Church? But let them stretch the words to
their own size, what follows hereupon? All are to desire the gift of
exhor­tation, &c. and such as haue it, to use it in time and place: Er­go, it
is not required of Pastors by vertue of their office to ex­hort. Why not then
thus? It is required of every member of the Church in his place, to watch for
the good of the whole, and to defend the same against gain-sayers in the
truth: and therfore it is an imagination, which these men in the page be­fore
going affirm, that the Pastour is by his office to watch, and defend the flock
against gain-sayers: Or thus. It concerns everyRom. 12. 13 Christian, being
able, to distribute to the necessities of the Saints, and therefore not to the
Deacons by vertue of their office; which yet for the very thing are called
Distributers in the sameVers. 8. place. Every citizen and subject is bound to
defend his citie [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=99) and country
against the enemy in his place and standing; and therefore by their
consequence, not the Magistrate by vertue of his Magistracy. Their conclusion
therefore, that a Pastor is not bound to teach by his office, because hee
mightafter a sort, and in an order, teach without it; it is, as if they should
tell us, that he who is bound to a post with one coard, cannot be bound with
two.

### 6.37. ADVERSARIES.

THey add, that the Church may receiv in members, without officers, or when
they are sick, or in prison, and so baptize them, as the primitiue Churches
were gathered by faith and bap­tism, and that being without Pastors a good
while, which the Apostles afterwards placed amongst them.

### 6.38. DEFENCE.

THey oft say, but never proue, that Churches are gathered by baptism. Baptism
is an ordinance and service given toRom. 9. 4. Ps. 147. 19. Ioh. 7. 22. the
Church, as were the statutes and services of old, given to Israel, and
Circumcision amongst the rest. If the Church re­ceiv in men by baptizing them;
then it is to cast them out by unbaptizing them. For they are to be put out or
excommuni­cated by the undoing of that, by the doing of which they were taken
in.

Besides, receiving in, and casting out of members are dis­pensations of
Christs Kingdom; Baptism of his Propheti­call office.

Thirdly, as both infants might be born in the Church, and men of years
received into it, and both the one and other be be baptized afterwards, as God
affoarded fit and lawfull means: so can it not be proved, specially in the
plenty that1 Cor. 3. 1 Tim. 1. 3 Tit. 1. 5. then was, that the Apostles still
left not behind them some extraordinary Officers, Prophets, or Evangelists to
water, where they had planted, and to order things unperfected.

Lastly, let be observed, how in this place, they make it aPag. 164. work of
the same power, to baptize, and to receiv members in­to [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=100) the Church:
and wherupon it must follow inavoidably, that Baptism administred by one
alone, and without a Church power (which theirs was, and is,) is unlawfull:
seeing one alone is not a Church, nor hath power to receiv in, or cast out
members.

To conclude the point about the Apostles successors. The Apostle Paul, calling
unto him at Miletus the Elders, or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus, and
charging them to feed the flock Act. 20. 17. 18. 19,—28 &c. wherof they were
made Over-seers by the Holy Ghost; and for their direction therin, propounding
unto thē his own Aposto­licall example to be followed by them in so many
particulars, shews who are the Apostles ordinarie successors in their
seve­rall charges. The same also doth the Apostle Peter, in calling himselfe a
Sympresbyter, or fellow-Elder with the ordinarie1 Pet. 5. 1. Elders. And truly
what man, not at utter defyance with com­mon sense, will denie that a Pastor
in his charge is more pro­perly an Apostles successour, then a private
brother.

In answering mine exceptions, they build amisse upon myPag. 165. 166.
foundation, and father their bastards upon me: knowing that I both put, and
haue proved against them, elsewhere, a dif­ference between no Baptism, and
Baptism unlawfully administred, in divers respects; and that the latter,
though it ought not so to haue been administred, or received; yet ought not to
be iterated; specially, if God haue added therunto the inward Baptism of the
spirit of regeneration.

Now my proofs, howsoever by them vilified, confirm,1 Proof. that besides and
aboue the personall abilitie to teach, a speciall calling is requisite for him
that dispenseth the ordinance of Baptism. This speciall calling ordinarie is
by the Church, which alone hath Christs delegated power for Ordinances.1 Cor.
3. 21 22. 23. Math. 18. 17. 18. 19. 20. The Argument I thus frame. That which
by many proofs of Scripture appears to haue been done by speciall calling, and
commission from Christ, and never otherwise; that not be­ing done by such
speciall calling, and commission, is unlaw­fully done: But by the proofs by me
brought, it appears that Baptism hath still been ministred by speciall
calling, and com­mission, [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=100) and not
otherwise▪ therefore, these mens Baptism not so administred, was, and is,
unlawfully administred; and so they by their own grounds (which they vainly
make mine) unbaptized persons.

Neither can they make an escape by saying, that they inPag. 166. whom I
instance had no calling by the Church, nor were Pastors of particular flocks:
Seeing our question is not of Pastors, but of such as haue a Church-calling:
and that Iohn Baptist, Christs disciples, Phillip, and the rest, had a calling
extraordi­narie, These Adversaries neither haue the former, nor chal­lenge the
latter. And indeed, by this defence, so oft renewed by them, they make it
evident to all the world, that they nei­ther consider of their own practise
seriously, nor of mine ex­ceptions.

Of the difference between teaching and baptising, I shall speak in the fourth
Rule: as I haue also formerly, both in this Treatise, and else-where, at large
cleered their exception about ordination: which they cunningly dissemble. Here
I one­ly demand of them, whether one man alone, without either presence, or
preceding election of the Church, may ordain a Pastor, as is their manner of
baptizing. And for me, doe they not know in their consciences that I was
ordained pub­liquely upon the solemn calling of the Church, in which I serue,
both in respect of the Ordainers, and Ordained? Whilst then they account me
wilfully blinde in putting difference be­tween my Church ordination & their
Baptism; they shew them­selvs witlesly blinde in making them alike.

To my proof, from Math. 3, that Christ in comming to Iohn Pag. 168. to be
baptized of him, fulfilled all righteousnesse, &c. they an­swer, That this is
still done, when any disciple, &c: Wherein first, they make both Iohn and
Christ, disciples of Christ: Se­condly, if Christ had herein considered Iohn
as an ordinarie disciple onely, what needed he to haue come from one coun­trey
to another, even from Galilee, to Iordan in Iudea, to haue been baptized of
him? Why might he not as well haue used some ordinary disciple neer at hand?
Christ therefore, in be­ing [[Page
196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=101) baptized by
Iohn, fulfilled all righteousnesse, in consecra­ting unto us Baptism, as
Circumcision to the fathers, in his own person, who of God is made unto us
righteousnesse: and1 Cor. 1. 30 that by Iohns ministery, who had a most solemn
and singular calling thereunto. Lastly, it is not likely, which they take for
certain, that Iohn in these words, I had need to be baptized of thee, meant
not (to wit at all) of the baptism with water, considering that the quest on
between our Lord and him, was about that Baptism and none other. The words
therefore insinuate, that some special state and calling is required in the
Baptizer aboue these mens common disciple-ship.

Heer first in answering Ioh. 1. 19. 25, for their own credite3 Proof. they
disgrace the Priests and Levits, as blind and ignorant Pha­risees, for
demanding of Iohn, by what authority he baptized. But considering both their
places, and Iohns practise in bringing a new ordinance of Religion into the
Church, they did no­thing herein not well sorting with their office.

Secondly, their answer, that Iohn proovs his authority to bap­tize, by proving
his authority to preach, from Esaias the Prophet: Esa. 40. 3, shews, how short
their wits are in gageing the depth of the Scriptures. He doth not proue his
authority to baptize, by a common authority or liberty to teach, which any of
Israel (gifted) might use; but he justifies his whole mi­nistery, in all the
parts of it, by his speciall calling, as the har­binger and fore-runner of
Christ, plainly foretold by Esay and Malachy. Doe they think, that the
Prophets words, The voyce of one crying in the wildernes, appertained to every
Israelite that could teach; as they ascribe power to baptize to each of their
teaching disciples? Or might Iohn, without a special calling, haue instituted
and brought into the Church, as he did, a new ordinance? Yea I would know,
which of Iohns disciples ever offered to baptize? Of whom yet it can­not be
doubted, but divers were able to teach.

As Cowards most vilifie in words, where in deed they dare4 Proof. Pag. 169.
doe least, so doe these men account this proof most vain, against which they
haue nothing to bring, saving an equivocation in [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=101) the word
Ordinances, and a cunning course in leaving out that which I alledg from Rom.
12. 3, which would discover the fallacie. The different nature of baptism and
teaching (meerly by a personall gift) is evident. A man becomes a Prophet, and
able to teach, by the gifts of the Spirit, knowledge and utte­rance. 1 Cor. 1.
5▪ But I would know by what gift of the Spirit any becoms a Baptizer, or able
to baptize? 2 Besides the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 1. 12, the light of nature, and
generall law of loue, shews, that he who knows any thing profitable for
another, should in his place, & upon occasion declare it to him: so as
teaching by him that hath abilitie, hath its plain foundation in nature: But
so is not Baptism by the light of nature; but meerly ordained and instituted
of God by supernaturall revelation; in which re­spect I call it an ordinance▪
And this consideration alone, if there were nothing else, wil with reasonable
men, oversway all their presumptions▪ Actions of religion are some of them
per­formed immediately from a personall gift, and grace of the spirit in the
heart, as preaching, or prophesying, and prayer, out of a speciall state or
office; others, by no speciall gift of the spirit at all, but by authoritie
conferred upon some speciall person; as the ministration of Sacraments,
censures, ordination, & the like: & lastly, some others by both, as pastoral
preaching, prayer, &c: the gift ministring abilitie; and the office charge to
use the gift, for feeding of the flock committed to the officer.

In answering my fift Proof, the alledg things partly imper­  [...]n [...]nt,5
Proof. Pag. 169. and partly unreasonable. Of the former sort is their
discourse about the Eun [...]chs being a member of Christ, and his remaining
in any particular Church: Whereas they should haue answered directly, whether
by his faith and baptism hee had been made a member of any particular Church,
or not? But they seeing what would follow upon a direct answer, haue rather
chosen an indirect evasion. Of like hue is that which they add of Israels
renewed covenant, (conceiving Israel as a true Church) which we meddle not
with in this businesse.

Absurd it is in it selfe, and a slandering of our practise,Pag. 170. which
they affirm of one casting out another, where there [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=102) are but two of
a Church. Which of us ever so held or prac­tized? One man, or woman either,
may upon just ground, se­parate from a whole Church: may he, or she therfore
excom­municate a whole Church? Or hath I. M. excommunicated the whole Church
of England? Separation, where lawfull, onely shews the liberty, which every
Christian hath to keep himselfe pure from the sins of others: Excommunication
im­ports a judiciarie power and state of authority to execute a solemn censure
and punishment: which appertains onely to the Church gathered together in
Christs name; which one cannotMath. 18. 19▪ 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5 be. Two may
joyn together, and so receiving one another mutually may become a Church: or
may, upon just occasion, part a sunder, and so dissolv: but cannot receiv in,
to speak properly, or cast out one another, by solemn ordinance: this imports
authority; the former, liberty onely. But thus it be­comes the new builders of
Babylon, to use brick for stone, and lime for well tempered morter.

Their answer to my sixt proofe about witnesses of the bap­tism,Proof. 6. Pag.
170. that Phillip baptized the Eunuch, and Ananias, Saul, none else being by,
is presumptuous. It is apparant, Act. 8, that the Eunuch had divers in his r
[...]tinue, and most probable, that some of them were godly also, and baptized
with him, though the story mention him alone. Neither is it like, that Ananias
in that citie, where so many Christians were, was not accom­panyed with some
or other of them. Besides, those Baptisms were administred by extraordinarie,
and miraculous direction, and assistance; and therefore not to be drawn, for
the man­ner, into ordinarie example. Lastly, these instances over­throw their
main ground, which is, that all particular Chur­ches, are gathered by Faith
and Baptism. One alone cannot be a Church: Neither is a Church gathered by
that which may lawfully be performed without a Church-gathering. Pauls own
manifestation of the grace of Christ received, was suffi­cient testimonie of
his conversion; and the Churches weak­nes it was, to stand need of further
witness.

In their answer to mine other demand, that any disciple Pag. 161. [[Page
199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=102) present,
though no instrument of conversion, may baptize, they raze their own main
ground (which how sandie soever, yetPag. 162. is theirs) from Math. 28. 19,
that Every Disciple, that can teach, or make disciples, according to his best
abilitie, may baptize; and whosoever makes a disciple may baptize; and that
Christ hath coupled them together, and that no man should se­perate them, &c.
yet here themselvs seperate them, in affirm­ing that any disciple, though
making no disciple, nor being in­strument of conversion, may baptize. Their
instances of Christs baptizing none, but leaving that to his followers, and
Pauls bap­tizing few in Corinth, are too presumptuous. It is too much vanity
for base persons to play on stages the parts of Kings: what is it then for
Iohn Murton, to play Christ and Paul (if yet Paul had not Evangelists in his
companie) in commanding others of his disciples to baptize his converts, as
Christ our Lord did his?

About womens baptism, they are like a bird in a net, seek­ing many holes to
get out, but finding none. First, they an­swer, that women may neither teach
nor baptize in the Church: True: But why not, as they doe? which is, not in
the Church; but out of it, and in a corner, where, it may be, none is pre­sent
but the baptizer and baptized? They say further, that women haue been, and may
bee, worthy instruments of converting of others. I grant it, and that even of
men. But may they ther­fore baptize them? This they dare not say, nor doe; and
yet except they say it, they must unsay their so oft repeated lesson, They
that may convert, may baptize.

Their dispute from my former plea out of Mr. Perkins, that where God giues the
word, he giues the power also, helps not: For first, both Mr. Perkins, and I,
speak of a Church having1 Cor. 1 [...]. 19. this power of the Lord, and not of
a single person. If all the body were one member, where were the body, or
Church, saith the Apostle? These men make all the body, and one mem­ber the
same. One and all, and all and one, is all one with them. Secondly, we speak
of having and using the power of the Lord, according to the Lords order; and
not in their con­fused▪ [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=103) fashion. Which
order of the Lord is, that men first be called (ordinarily) by the Church, and
so minister baptism as the stewards of the mysteries of God.

Lastly, they most wrongfully accuse Peter Martyr, and me from him, as pleading
for womens baptism: the Reader that pleaseth, may see the contrary.

I doe not, as they here challenge me, in answering their ob­jection,Pag. 172.
that because men, by vertue of their gift, without other calling, may doe the
greater which is teaching, they may doe the lesse, which baptizing is: wrong
them; as saying, having no cal­ling, but no other calling but by their gift.
If they haue any other calling, though not Pastorall, let them shew it; and so
renounce their former plea raysed from their personall gifts alone.

Their proof that he that may doe the greater may doe the lesse, Pag. 173. is
taken from Mathew 23. 16. 17. - 19. 20. &c. Wherein they say, Christ proveth
plainly, that either it was not lawfull for them to swear by the gold, and the
offerings, which were lesser: or that it was lawfull for them to swear by the
temple, and altar.

Nothing lesse. It was lawfull to swear by none of themLev. 6. 13. & 10\. 20,
all, but by the Lord onely: The meaning of Christ was to reprove the hypocrisy
and coveteousnes of the Pharisees, that bare the people in hand, that if they
sware by the altar, and temple, it bound them not, at least, in comparison;
but if they swore by the gold, or offering, that oath bound them to
performance; that by this means, they might pos­sesse the peoples minds with
an high opinion of the offrings, and gold, which turned to their proper
advantage and profit. If from hence they would conclude any thing as lawfull
from the greater to the lesse, they must argue thus. If it be lawfull to swear
by the greater, then by the lesse much more: But it is lawfull to swear by the
greater, and greatest, God him­self, that dwelleth in the temple: Therefore it
is lawfull to swear by the temple, altar, sacrifice, heaven, earth, &c. If
they would be ashamed of this conclusion, so may they be of their
argumentation.

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=103)My plea
for the power of calling ministers, and censuringPag. 174. offenders by the
Church where officers are wanting (which here again they bring in) is in their
hand, like a sword in a childs hand, wherewith he sooner hurts himself, then
his enemie. For (to let passe the difference between the power of receiving
in, and casting out of members, and so of chu­sing of ministers, on the one
side; and of baptizing on the other, elswhere manifested) they here strike
thorow their own course, in confessing that these things must be done by the
Churches power and right; by which they baptize not, but merely by a personall
liberty: by which yet they them­selvs, I suppose, would be loath to avow the
calling of mi­nisters, and censuring of offenders.

That my collection from Scripture is their conviction, & makes plainly against
their corner stone, that he which may doe the greater may doe the lesse, they
may see, if they please to consider it. For if the Prophets in Israel (not
being Levites) though preaching Gods word, might not carry the ashes from
under the altar; but the Levites onely; then their rule holds not ab­solutely,
that he that may doe the greater, may doe the lesse; and so they must
confesse, except they will deny the preaching of Gods word to be a greater
thing then the carrying of the ashes out of the Temple.

The former part of their first answer; that the preists onely Num. 4. 13 (they
should say the Levites) were appointed to this, makes a­gainst them, as
shewing, that we are not to measure our li­berty or power by the greatnesse or
smalnesse of the thing, but by Gods appoyntment, who hath allotted to every
one his portion. Their second answer is of admirable devise, that as the
preists might meddle with all the services of the old Testa­ment; So all the
saints being preists unto God (no men excepted) may meddle with all the
services of the new Testament.

But why might, and may; and not ought, and must? The Preists under the Law
were bound (leaving unto the high Preist his function, and to the Levites,
theirs) in their courses, to all the services of the Tabernacle, and Temple
[[Page 202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=104) So by
their crooked rule, every Christian (no men excep­ted) not onely may, in
liberty, but must in duty, minister not onely baptism but the Lords Supper
also, and all other or­dinances, in his turn: and so all must be alike for
publicke ministrations; for all are Preists to God alike. All the
con­gregation Num. 16. 3. are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among
them, and you Moses and Aaron, take too much upon you; said Ko­rah of old.
They err grosly therefore in making all Preists, for all publique ordinances
in the Church: whereof some ap­pertayn to Christs Propheticall administration
as the sacra­ments, which are seales of the Covenant dispensed by preach­ing:
others to his kingdom, as the appointing of officers, and censuring of
offenders. Our Christian Preisthood stands onely in our offering of spirituall
sacrifices to God, our selvs first, and so consequently the sacrifices of
prayses, and prayer from a broken heart, works of mercy, and the like.

That baptism is a service of the Temple, that is, an ordinance of the Church,
we haue formerly proved: And surely strange it is, that I should need to
proue, that there is any ordi­nance of religion which the Church is not to
administer. Paul and Apollos, and Cephas are the Churches, and is not their
baptism theirs? This whilst they compare to the hewing of stones in the
mountains, they lay in common for ministrati­on to very unbeleevers, with
disciples: for the Zidonians, or other of the Heathens, as well as Israelites
might either square 1 King. 7. 18. stones, or hew wood for the Temple.

Lastly, touching my similitude. As it cannot be denyed, but that the setting
of the seal unto the Kings pardon granted to a malefactour, is a matter both
of more solemnity, and authority, then the bare manifestation and making known
of the same pardon; which any, ordinarily, may do to any, as oportunity servs:
So haue I proved long agoe against these Adversaries, by many Arguments,
hitherto by them unanswe­red, and I assure my self unanswerable, that the
outward bap­tism, of which we speak, is an outward seal of the Cove­nant of
grace: that is, an holy outward signe ordained of

[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14749&page=104)God, as
a means by the work of the spirit, to confirm the faith of the Church in her
washing, both from the guilt and contagion of sin, by the bloud of Christ
Iesus. More then this, we mean not in calling the Sacraments Seals, with the
Apostle;Rom. 4. 11▪ and lesse none can yeeld them, that hath learnt their
right use, either from his own fruitfull experience, or the Scrip­tures
information. Glory be to God, and good to men.

FINIS.

## Appendix A Courteous Reader, take knowledge that (the Author being absent)
through oversight these faults (mostly materiall) haue escaped, which I pray
thee correct as thou readest: if more thou findest, impute them to hastie
over­sight.

PAge 24 line 5, for sin stands not in &c. reade, sin stands in, &c. pag. 40,
lin. 1, for are done, read, are not done: p. 44 l. 3 [...], for of themselvs
the, r. of the: p. 45. l. 20, for and, r. add: p. 56, l. 12, for calling, r.
calling: p. 72. l. 6, for falsifying, r. falsitie: p. 80. l. 11, for purpose,
r. purposes: p. 81. l. 8, after vers. add comma: p. 93. l 4, for but will, r.
but nil: p. 134, l. 4, for regenerate, r. unrege­nerate: p. 137. l. 25, for
indossolible, r. indissolible: p. 156, l. 12, for casuality, r. causality: p.
168, l. 22, for or Will, that, in r. or Will in [...] p. 175, l. 15, for
things, as, r. things? As.

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1624  

