---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Seven additional quæres in behalf of the secluded Members, propounded to the
twice-broken Rump now sitting, the cities of Westminster, London, county of
Middlesex, all other counties, cities, boroughs, in England Wales, and all
English freemen, whose members are secluded: and also to Scotland and Ireland.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Seven Additional Quaeres in behalf of the ſecluded Members, propounded to the twice-broken Rump now ſitting, the Cities of Weſtminſter, London, County of Middleſex, all other Counties, Cities, Boroughs, in England Wales, and all Engliſh Freemen, whoſe members are ſecluded: and alſo to Scotland and Ireland.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=1)

## 1\. Seven Additional Quaeres in behalf of the ſecluded Members, propound­ed
to the twice-broken Rump now ſitting, the Cities of Weſtminſter, London,
County of Middleſex, all other Counties, Cities, Bo­roughs, in England Wales,
and all Engliſh Freemen, whoſe members are ſecluded: and alſo to Scotland and
Ireland.

1 WHether their inhuman, uncivil, unchristian, and injurious forcible
excluſion of the 22. worthy eminent Mem­bers of the Houſe, who on the 27 of
Decemb. laſt reſort­ed thither to claim their own, the other Members, and
Peoples Rights, and diſcharge th [...]ir Truſts for the Peace and Settlement
of our Churches and Kingdoms, miſerably rent, and almoſt irrecoverably ruined
by their exorbitant Jeſuitical Ʋſurpations, Innovations, and Councils; giving
expreſs Orders both to their Serjeant, Door­keepers, and Military Gards, to
keep all the old ſecured, or ſecluded Members, (be­ing above 200. yet living,
had they been all preſent with thoſe 22. repair­ing ſuddenly thither, upon the
rumour of their clandeſtine ſitting, concealed from all but their engaged
Confederates:) not only out of the Houſe it ſelf, but th [...] [...]ry Lobby,
into which the meaneſt Commoner, Waterman of England, and all others have, and
then had free acceſs; and ſhutting them out of both, by loc [...]g and bolting
the Doors againſt them, and ſending them all thence with higheſt neglect,
after two hours att [...]ndance, without deigning to take the leaſt notice of
them (as * they have at large rela [...]ed,) paralle [...]'d with their former
ſecluſions in May 7th▪ and  [...]th. laſt, by force of Arms, and levying war
a­gainſt  [...] elſewhere, as Traytors, only for raiſing  [...] again, by
their command [...] [...] [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=2) all the old
Members; be not a more direct, profeſſed levying war againſt the Parliament,
far higher Treaſon, and more tranſcendent breach of Privilege and Truſt, than
ever the late King▪ the Lord Capel, or other Perſons beheaded or ſequeſtred by
them were guilty of, in levying War againſt the Parliament and their forces
only at a great diſtance from the Houſe, not at the Houſe doores againſt their
Members: or the Exact Col­lection, P. 37, to 78. Kings comming in Perſon to
the Commons Houſe, with his Gard and Attendants armed only with Halberts,
Swords, and Piſtols, (not with armed Troops of Horſe and Bands of Foot as
they) Jan. 4. 1641. and placing them in the Lobby, ſoly to demand 5. Members
impeach­ed by him of High Treaſon three daies before, without ſeiſing or
ſecluding them, or any other Members; expiated by his ſubſequent
acknowledgement and Re­tractation of this his breach of Privilege, only
through miſtake, by two ſpe­cial Meſſages, January the 13th. and 14th. by
giving ſatisfaction for it to both Houſes; and promiſing aſſurance to the
Parliament, and both Houſes, to be for the future, as carefull of their
Privileges, as of his Life, or his Crown; They having even after this his
ingenuous Satisfaction, the Appren­tices tranſitory unarmed force, July 26\.
1647. which they voted Treaſon; and Cromwels, and Lamberts ſucceſſive forcible
excluding of themſelves April 20▪ 1653▪ and October 13\. laſt, which they
branded to be Treaſonable, and Tyrannical, outſtripped them all, by their
ſpecial Orders to their Guards, and Officers, to exclude all old ſecluded
Members, and avowing it, when acted and complained of by the Members, without
the leaſt Retractation, Re­dreſſe, or Notice taken of this, or any former
forcible Excluſion [...], Impri­ſonments, and Reſtraints of above 200▪ Members
at once, beſides the whole houſe of Peers, when themſelves are not yet above
43▪ in Number, and 7. of thoſe no legal Members of the old Commons Houſe. And
whether this doth not render them Enemies to the Commonwealth, and to the
Peace and State of this Kingdom, by the Houſe of Commons expreſſe Declaration,
Jan. 5 1641?

2\. Whether it be not a moſt impudent and inſolent Preſumption in them, to
raiſe the Militia of Weſtminſter, and Middleſex to guard themſelves in the
Houſe, and yet forcibly to keep out Serjant Glyn, and Mr. Bell, their own two
Burgeſſes for Weſtmi [...]ster, and Sr. Gilbert Gerard, the ſole ſur­viving
Knight of the S [...]ier for Middleſex, and the Militiaes of 2 of whoſe 3.
Citizens, Sir Thomas Some, and Mr. Vaſſal are for­cibly▪ ſeclu­ded, as are
both the Knights of He [...]tfordſhire, Surry. Gloce­ſterſhire,
Northamptonſhire, and moſt other Counti [...] ▪ London, and moſt other Cities,
Boroughs, and Counties of England, to exclude their own Knights, Citizens, and
Burgeſſes of the old Parliament out of the Houſe, that they may Tax, Oppreſſe
and Domineer over them, at their Pleaſure; And a Treachery, beyond all
Preſident, for them to imploy the Army, firſt Raiſed, Commiſſioned, Intruſted,
Engaged by their Commiſſi­ons, Parliament Ordinances, Votes, Declarations, the
Proteſtation [...], League and Covenant, to defend  [...]nd protect the
Members and Privileges of Parliament, from all force and violence whatſoever,
to ſit and Act fr [...]ely in the Houſes, without diſturbance: to keep three
Parts of four of their fellow Members out of the Hou [...] and the whole Houſe
of Peers, by meer force and will, without any hearing or impeachment; and to
impoſe intollerable unceſſant Taxes, both on the Lords, and ſecluded Members,
and all Counties, Cities Boroughs, for which they ſerve; only to keep
themſelves in forcible poſeſſion within the [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=2) Houſe; and
ſeclude them forcibly out of it? Whether it be not a moſt Sottiſh, Brutiſh
Servility, Baſeneſs, Treachery, Infatuation for theſe Counties, Cities,
Boroughs Militias and Mercinary forces, thus to Guard this Trayterous, (& now
Infamous, Odious) Rump, to domineer over themſelves, and the Majo­rity of the
excluded Members and Lords in the Houſe, and to keep them by their Treaſonable
armed force, & Void Orders, out of it? Whether it be not both their Duty,
Honour, Honeſty, Intereſt, and only means of Eaſe, Peace, Settle­ment, Revival
of Trade, and reſtoring the loſt Honour of our Nation, Reli­gion, and the
Rights, Freedom, Privileges, Liberties of our Parliaments, and King­dom; Now
to joyn all their Forces and Endeavours, to reſtore all the ſeclu­ded Members,
Diſhouſe theſe Forcible Ʋſurpers, and bring them to publick Juſtice▪ for their
preſent and paſt high Treaſons, ſince they obſtinately per­ſevere in them,
without the leaſt Shadow of Repentance or Satisfaction to the People, or the
ſecluded Members: witneſs their new Oath of Abjuration, Jan. 2. And to obey
the ſecluded Lords and Members, Orders, and deſires, be­ing the Parliament)
rather than their treaſonable and illegal Votes?

3\. Whether all the ſecluded Members for this their laſt forcible
contemp­tuous ſecluſion, without any Anſwer or Reparations from the ſitting
Rump, have not a juſter cauſe, and more reaſon now to adjorn themſelves, into
the City of London, and to ſit there as a Committee or Houſe by the Cities
invitation, Garded by their Militia and the Militiaes of Weſtminſter,
Middleſex, Herfordſhire, Eſſex, & other Counties, whoſe Knights and Burgeſſes,
are now forcibly excluded; til this higher force, & breach of their Privileges
than in any age be redreſſed by publick Declarations againſt it, and exemplary
puniſhments, the fo [...]ce at Weſtm. quite removed, and they enabled to ſit
and act there in † Exact col­lection, p. 37▪ 38, &c.Peace and ſafety; then
both Hauſes had to adjourn into London by the Cities invitation * Jan. 5\.
1641. upon the Kings coming to the Houſes to demand the 5. Impeached Mmbers,
and Lord Kymbolton, without ſ [...]izing them, or ſe­cluding others, a ſmall
breach of Privilege in reſpect of theirs? And whe­ther Sr. Arthur Haſlerig
(one of the 5. impeached Members then, Ring-leader of the Rump, and their
forces now) can in Juſtice, Honour, or Conſcience, op­poſe them and Denzil
Hollis (another of the impeached and ſecluded Mem­bers) therein now; it being
warranted by the preſident of both Houſes then, as an incumbent duty on them
and the City too (who gained much honor and reſpect from the Parliament and
Kingdom thereby;) pointed out unto them by their own Vote December 27\. To
take into Conſideration the caſe of all abſent Members, on the 5th. day of
January next, being the very day of the Month both Houſes 1641\. upon the
Kings breach of their Privileges in demanding the Impeached Members, made a
Particular Declaraeion againſt it as a high breach of the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and Inconſiſtent with the Freedom and Liberty
thereof; and thereupon adjourned themſelves into the Guild-Hall in London, to
ſit and act as a Committee, which they did till both the breach of their
Privileges was fully vindicated, their Members repaired, and brought back to
the Houſe by the City & Watermen, in Triumph, to ſit in Safety, without
ſecuring, or ſecluding afterwards. This their Vote by a Miraculous providence
referring to this very day, and occaſion, full 18 years after it, and the
Remonſtrance on it, declaring them Publick Enemies, and to be pro­ceded
againſt as ſuch for this high breach of Privilege.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=3) 4\.
Whether it be not the extremity of Tyranny, Injuſtice, and Violation of
Parliament Rights and Privileges, for a few guilty Members who have viola­ted
all Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Vows, Declarations, Truſts, Privileges in
the ſuperlative degree, by meer armed force & will, to exclude above 3▪ times
their number of untainted Members, before the leaſt legal accuſation,
impeachment, bearing, tryal, evidence, or calling them into the Houſe, or to
the Bar there­of, to hear or anſwer any Charge againſt them? When as by the
Laws of God, Nature, Nations, the Great Charter, the fundamental Laws of the
Land, the uſual courſe of Juſtice in every Judicature whatſoever, and the Law
and Cuſtom▪ of Parliament, no perſon whatſoever, much leſs any Member of
Parliament, leaſt of all the Majority of the Members, may or ought to be
tryed, convic­cted, judged, ſentenced, disfranchiſed, or deprived of his
perſor al, much leſs his publick Parliamentary Franchiſe, Liberty and
Privilege, without a lawfull Summons, Accuſation, Indictment, Impeachment,
Tryal, hearing, Convic­tion, by his own confeſſion or evidence, upon his
Perſonal appearance in Court, or at the Bar of the Houſe: It being reſolved in
the Parliaments of 28 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 7, &c. & 29 E. 3. n. 29. that the
Judgement given againſt Roger Mortymer in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. n. 1. upon
14. particular Articles of Impeachment of High Treaſon in murdering King
Edward the 2d. after his depoſing, forcing the Parliament at Salisbury,
driving away ſome Lords from thence, and other Great Crimes, was erroneous and
illegal, and there­upon nulled and reverſed; becauſe, though the Articles were
true and notori­ous, yet he himſelf was never brought perſonally to the Bar to
anſwer them, nor heard before or when they gave judgement against him.
Therefore much leſſe ought ſo many innocent, eminent Members to be forcibly
ſecluded, and kept out of the Houſe before any Articles exhibited, hearing, or
tryal in the Houſe, by a few guilty Members, thus prejudging and excluding
them, and the whole Houſe of Peers, (over whom they have no colour of
Juriſdiction) for ſear of being legally impeached by them if admitted, for
their enormous Crimes?

5\. Whether theſe peccant Members high Treaſons, in uſurping and ingroſ­ſing
to themſelves alone the divided and united Supream Authority of the King,
Lords, and whole Commons Houſe aſſembled in Parliament, in vo­ting down,
ſecluding, and engaging againſt the King, and houſe of Lords, contrary to the
expreſs tenor of the Kings Writs, Indentures, Oaths, and the Act of 17Car. by
which they pretend to ſit; and their former and late levying war againſt the
ſecluded Membets and Lords Houſe, in impriſoning ſome, and keeping others of
them out of the Houſe by armed Gards, againſt their Rights, Privileges, and
the Declaration of the whole Houſe, 5 January 1641\. upon the Kings demanding
the 5. impeached Members, and their own vo­tes, in the caſe of their own
Secluſions by Cromwell, Harriſon and Lambert, be not the higheſt breach of
their Truſts, and all Parliments Privileges, Rights, and Freedom, for which in
Law, Juſtice, Reaſon, and Conſcience too, they have abſolutely for feited
their Memberſhips, and future ſitting in the Houſe▪ from which they may and
ought to be perpetually disfranchiſed by judgement of the ſe­cluded Members,
it being againſt the Duty of a Citizen, Burgeſs, and Mem­ber of Parliament, to
the prejudice and ſubverſion of the Parliament, Houſe, (yea Cities and
Boroughs too,) whereof they are Members, and to their [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=3) Oaths,
Proteſtation and Covenant which they took as Members, according to the
Reſolutions in James Baggs Caſe, Cook 11. Rep. f. 98, 99. Littleton, Sect.
378, 379. Cooks 1 Inſtit. f. 233, 234. & 4 Inſtit. p. 23, 43? Whether ſome for
le [...]ſer Treaſons and Crimes than theſe, have not had their Heads and
Quarters ſet upon the top of the Parliament houſe, inſtead of ſitting as
Members in it; and the late King loſt his head by their own Judgement for
ſmaller breaches of Privileges, and leſs dangerous Wars againſt the
Parlia­ment and Members than themſelves are guilty of? Whether it will not be
juſter, equaller, and more beneficial to the People and Army, for the
ſeclu­ded Lords and Members to confiſcate and ſequeſter all their real and
perſo­nal Eſtates for diſcharge of all publick Debts and Souldiers Arrears,
which they have contracted, only to keep up and maintain their uſurped
Antipar­liamentary Conventicles, and exclude the greateſt part of the Members
and Lords out of the Parliament by force: than to confiſcate and ſequeſter Sir
Geo. Booths, or other Members and Commoners real and perſonal Eſtates, for
endeavouring to remove the force which keeps them out; and to impoſe il­legal
Taxes, Exciſes, Militiaes, Oaths, both on the Lords, the ſecluded Mem­bers,
and all Counties, Cities and Boroughs whom they repreſent▪ to exclude them out
of Parliament?

6\. Whether the Declaration of Auguſt 26\. 1647. made upon the Speaker
Lenthals, and other Members clandeſtine departure to the Army, upon the
Apprentices unarmed tumult, and his leading up the Army, firſt of all to the
Houſe, to commit a greater force upon it, by driving away, ſecuring,
impriſoning and ſecluding ſundry eminent Members, (for which he de­ſerves to
be their preſent General) Whereas there was a viſible, horrid, inſolent and
actual force upon the Houſes of Parliament, on Monday the 26\. of July laſt,
whereupon the Speakers, and many Members of both Houſes of Parliament, were
forced to abſent themſelves from the ſervice of the Parliament, and whereas
thoſe Members could not return to ſit in ſafety before Friday the 6. of
Auguſt: It is therefore declared, by the Lords and Commons, in Parliament
aſſembled, that the Ordinance of Monday the ſaid 26\. of July, for the
repealing and making void the Ordinance of the 23\. of the ſaid July, for the
ſetling of the Militia of the City of London, being gained by force and
violence: and all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, paſſed in either, or both Houſes
of Parliament, ſince the ſaid Ordinance of the 26\. of July, to the ſaid 6th.
of August, are Null and Void, and were ſo at the making thereof, and are
hereby declared ſo to be; the Parliament being under a force, and not free;
Doth not abſolutely declare, adjudge and reſolve, all the Rumps Votes, Acts,
Orders, Ordinances, Proceedings touching the Militia of London, Weſtminſter,
and other Counties; Exciſes, Customs, Monthly Contributions, Indem­nities,
Pardons, and all other Matters; or for ſec [...]uding or ſuſpending any
Member, and whole Houſe of Peers from ſitting, their Treaſonable perju­rious
Ingagement, and Oath of Abjuration▪ to be all Null and Void, at the mak­ing
thereof; and ſo no waies obliging the City, Kingdom, Nation, ſecluded Peers,
or Members in the leaſt degree, ſince the force upon both Houſes, ſecuring,
ſecluding of above 200. Commons, yet living, continued from Dec. [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=4) 6\. 1648. till
Apr. 20\. 1653. and from May 7\. 1659. till Octob. 13\. and now again by the
Rumps ſpecial Order and Command, from Dec. 27\. till this instant▪

And that upon t heſe Conſiderations, and parallels of the force then, with the
ſucceſſive forces ſince upon the Houſe and ſecluded Members.

1\. The Apprentices force July 26\. 1647. was without arms: theirs by armed
Gards and Souldiers. 2ly. Tranſitory, but for 2. or 3. hours: theirs permanent
for ſundry whole Months and years. 3ly. That without the privity or
approbation of the Houſe: theirs by the Rumps privity, order and command. 4ly.
That upon juſt provocation, to repeal an Ordinance, to alter the Militia of
London, gotten by practice and ſurprize of ſome Ar­my Officers, without the
Cities privity, to betray and ſever it from the Parliament, and reduce both
under the Armies power: Theirs upon mere deſign and will without provocation,
to deſtroy the King, Lords, KIng­dom, Parliament, alter the Government, and
uſurp the perpetual Parlia­mentary and Supream Legiſlative, Civil and Military
Power of our 3. Kingdoms into their own hands. 5ly. They ſecluded never a
Lord, nor Commoner by force: theſe not only exclude, but vote down, debar and
engage againſt the whole Houſe of Lords, and three parts of four of the
Commons Houſe (above 200. of them ſtill living) againſt their Proteſta­tion,
Vow, League, Covenant, former Votes, Orders, Ordinances, the Act of 16 Car.
ch. 1. & 17 Car. c. 6\. the Writs and Indentures by which they pretend to ſit.
6ly. The Members pretended to be forced away by the Apprentices, were not
above 25 or 30 who went not away til 3. daies after the force, by an
invitation from the Army-Officers, againſt the Houſe will and privity, the
Members forcibly ſecluded and then ſecured 300. and now above 200. beſides the
Peers, are kept out againſt their wills, both by the Rumps privity and
command, from diſcharging their Duties. 7ly. That force was never reiterated
by the Apprentices: this acted ſix times actu­ally over and over againſt the
ſecluded Members. 8ly. That was accompani­ed only with a pretended terror in a
few Members: this with an actual for­cible ſecluſion of above 200. an
impriſonment of more than 45. Members ſundry weeks, months, and cloſe
impriſonment of others ofthem in remote Caſtles without hea [...]ing or tryal
divers years: and with ſubſequent impri­ſonments, and cloſe impriſonments
ſince for refuſing the Engagement, and a proclaiming others of them Traytors
in all Counties, Cities, Corporati­ons, Churches and Chapels, only for raiſing
forces to bring in all the ſeclu­ded Members, and procure a FREE PARLIAMENT,
for which ſome are now cloſe Priſoners, and their Eſtates ſequeſtred. 9ly. The
Ordinances, Votes, and Orders, declared nul and void by this Ordinance, were
made and paſſed by near three hundred Commoners, without any▪ Gards or Or­der
to keep out the Speakers, and thoſe fugitive Members who voluntarily repaired
to the Armie: and ratified by the Houſe of Lords then ſitting without Gards to
ſeclude any Peer or Member; Their Orders, Votes, Ordinances from Decemb. 26.
1648. till Apr. 20. 1653. and May, 7 til Octob. 13. were ſeldom made by above
40 or 50 Commoners at moſt without the Houſe of Peers; and thoſe now ſitting
under a force to keep [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=4) out the ſecluded
Members & Peers, when they made their laſt Votes, Acts, Orders Decem. 26, and
27. were but 43. at moſt, whereof 7. or 8. were no legal Members. Therfore
upon all theſe conſiderations both by the Speakers own printed Letter, July
29. and this Ordinance, all Votes, Orders, Ordi­nances▪ and Acts of the Rump▪
(the Parliament being under ſuch a horrid, actual, viſible, reiterated,
approved, commanded armed force, and ſo many Members forcibly ſecluded and
reſtrained) muſt needs be void and null to all intents at their very making,
and no waies to be owned or obeyed (as the ſecluded Houſe of Lords, and
Majority of the ſecluded Commons Houſe, have oft publickly declare to our 3.
Nations, and the world) and nothing is or can be valid or legal which they
ſhall order or impoſe before all the ſecluded Members be reſtored, without any
new teſt or reſtriction to ſit, act, and vote with that ancient freedom and
ſafety, which of right belongs unto them.

7\. Whether their preſent Speaker, now▪a monſtrous Plurality, Monopoly, Medly
of ſundry inconſiſtent Greateſt Offices of Honor, Power and Truſt, being both
ſole Lord▪Keeper of their Great Seal, ſole Lord General of the Armies by Land,
ſole Lord Admiral of the Navie by Sea, ſole Lord Warden of the Ports, ſole
Gardian of the Liberties of England, ſole Maſter of the Rolls, ſole Speaker of
the Commons Houſe at firſt, and of the two Rumps ſince its diſſolution, and
ſole viſible Head of their Ʋtopian and Harringtonian projec­ted Commonwealth
in his political, and as ſtrange a Compound in his ethical capa­city, though
but a ſingle Perſon in his natural; be not a ſutable Speaker for that
monſtrous Rump now ſitting, compacted moſtly of Members of the Old Parliament,
elected and ſitting by vertue of the Kings Writs, for the defence of Him and
his Realm of England, and to do and conſént to ſuch things as by the common
advice and council of the Prelates, Lords, and Great men of the Realm ſhould
be ordaiued; and yet deſtroying, engaging, and now ſwearing againſt both King,
Kingſhip, Kingdom, Peerage, and Houſe of Lords, and ſeclud­ing all Members
engaging not with them therein: cre [...]ting and ſtiling themſelves the
Supreme Authority of the Common▪wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland too,
by what chymistry and Right is yet unknown, being at fir [...] by the Writs,
Indentures and Act by which they ſit, but Members of the Com­mons houſe in the
Parliament of the King and Realm of England: Next of ſome new additional
Members, by writs in the name and under the Seal of the Gardians of their yet
unſhaped Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ire­land; who peece together
with the former, like the feet and legs of Nebuchad­nezzars Image, which were
part of Iron, and part of Clay; and laſtly, the rear of this Rump, is made up
of the doating old Earl of Salisbury, and lunatick young Earl of Pembrook, who
have degraded themſelves of their Peerage, and be­come baſer than the baſeſt
Commoners, to be the Tayl of this ſtrange hetero­general Monſter. Whether
their continuing obſtinate, and incorrigible in their Tyrannies, Treaſons,
Ʋſurpations, forcible Excluſions of the Lords, & theſe their fellow Members,
notwithſtanding all their former and late Diſſipations by the Army-Officers,
the unſafety of their preſent Condition, the General diſ­pleaſure of the whole
Kingdom, ſecluded Lords, Commons, and moſt part of the Officers and Souldiers
againſt them; the wonderful Providences and [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=115519&page=5) Rebukes of God
himſelf from Heaven; the Admonitions, Intreaties, deſires of their friends;
the ſecluded Members, City, Country, and our 3. Nati­ons, and their adding
drunkenneſs to thirst, in voting a New Oath of Abjuration Jan. 2. to keep out
all the ſecluded Members, and aggravate their former for­cible ſecluſion in
the higheſt extremity, inſtead of repairing, or repenting it, and deprive them
of all poſſibility of re-admiſſion to ſit and vote together with them in
freedom and ſafety, Be not a certain ſymptom that they are now ripe for
another total and final ejection, by ſome wonderfull Divine Providence or
other, to the deſerved ruine of their uſurped Anti-Parliamentary power,
Perſons, Families, Eſtates, if not of their very ſouls; ſeeing God himſelf
hath ſpoken, Nay ſworn, and will moſt certainly perform it; That thoſe who
fear not God, nor the King, and are given to Change, and being often reproved,
harden their necks and hearts too, ſhall ſuddenly be deſtroyed, and that
without re­medy: and ſhall never enter into his reſt, Prov. 24. 21, 22. ch.
29. 1. Pſal. 98. 8, 11.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Prynne, William, 1600-1669.. Date: 1660  

