---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Of religious communion private, & publique With the silenceing of the
clamours raysed by Mr Thomas Helvvisse agaynst our reteyning the baptism
receaved in Engl: & administering of Bapt: vnto infants. As also a survey of
the confession of fayth published in certayn conclusions by the remaynders of
Mr Smithes company. ... By Iohn Robinson.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=1)

Of Religious COMMVNION Private, & Publique. With the silenceing of the
clamours raysed by Mr Thomas Helvvisse agaynst our reteyning the Baptism
receaved in Engl: & administering of Bapt: vnto Infants. As also a Survey of
the confession of fayth published in certayn Conclusions by the remaynders of
Mr Smithes company.

The simple beleeveth every vvord: but the prudent looketh vvell to his goeing.

Prov. 14\. 15.

By IOHN ROBINSON.

Printed Anno 1614.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=2)

## The Preface.

THere passed out, some while since, a defamatory libell vnder the names of
Charles Lawn, & three other his brethren in evill; but certainly penned by
some other persons, whose greater knowledg did arm their cruell hatred the
more to hurt: makeing them fathers of that generation, whose teeth are as
swordes, & their iawteeth as knives to Prov. 30. 14▪ devour the afflicted from
of the earth, & the pore from among men. Agaynst whom, & whose freinds durst I
vse the same liberty, in publishing to the world their personall corruptions,
which I know, & could soon learn by the testimony of honester men, then these
informers, they who have written of others, what hath pleased them, should
read that which would not please them, of their own, if not of themselves. But
God forbid. My desire is rather to pacify, then further to alienate
affections: remembring Christs instruction vnto his Disciples, to blesse those
Math. 44. that curse them: to do good to those that harm them: & to pray for
those that persequute them. Besides, in following their course, I should for
the faults of a few corrupter persons, wrong the credits of many honest, &
innocent men: for whose sakes I would rayther cover the others faylings, then
for them, blemish the credit of the rest. But herein speciall respect is to be
had to the common truthes of the Lord Iesus by them & vs, acknowledged: vppon
the honour whereof had they been but half so bent, as vppon our disgrace, they
would not thus have gratifyed the common adversaryes thereof, even theirs, &
ours: & with them, the Atheists & Epicures in the land; by whom their book is
most affected: blessing themselves in their professed contempt of God, & of
all religion, by the faylings of those (whether truely, or falsely suggested,
they regarde not) who professe his more speciall fear, & service: &
concludeing, that all others are as ill as themselves, though more covertly.
It is the spiders disposition, so she may entangle the silly flyes in her web,
to weav out her own bowels.

This libell it hath pleased divers persons of note for learning, & Zeal, to
countenance with their wryteings of divers kyndes. Amongst the rest, Mr W:
Ames, fearing be­like, lest eyther it should want credit, or I discredit by
the accusations in it against the per­sons of other men in other Churches
(which though they were all true, as I know some of them to be wholy false, &
others impudently published by such as were themselves cheif agents in them,
yet did no more concern me, & the Church with me, then did the abu­ses in the
Ch: of Corinth, the Ch: at Rome; or those in some of the 7 Churches in Asia,
the rest, which were free from them) hath published to the world, in the body
of that book, without my consent, privity, or least suspition of such dealing,
certayn private
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=3) letters
passing between him, and me, about private communion betwixt the members of
the true visible Ch: and others, though he take advantage, and occasion by
certain gene­rall wordes of myne to alter the state ef the question. The
occasion of which passages if I should also publish, I am sure he would not
like it, nor had cause.

Now as I neyther am, nor would he thought in sensible of this vnchristian
enmity, and [...] violent opposition by them against vs in the practise of
those things, which themselves, as their wryteings testify, do so far approve;
so think I it a Preface very convenions for my present purpose, to communicate
with others such grounds, as vppon which they seem to rayse the same.

And first, all oppositions in religion are caryed vsually with violence, as
wherein men have speciall perswasion they please God, in that their speciall
work of Conscience and Zeal for him, and his truth. And as men are in daunger
to mistake errour for truth, so to prosequute the same with wrath, and
indignation, instead of true Zeal of God. And I do much entreat, & warn those
men in the fear of the Lord, to beware that in-stead of Zeal against our
supposed errours, they nourish not in their hearts, wrath, and hatred against
[...] our persons. Which is a great iniquity where it is found, and most
contrary vnto love, and so vnto God who is love; & the breaking of the whole
law, which love fulfilleth.

But besides this generall, they take more speciall occasion of offence at vs,
& our sepa­ration, by which we cary our differences; as wherein we do not
onely in word, but even really & indeed reprove their state, & standing, as
vnlawfull: & such, as we rayther chuse all calamityes, by losse of country,
freinds, riches, credit, liberty, yea & life is self, then by continuance
therein, to withould the truth of God in vnrighteous­nes, & vphould the chayr
of Apostacy, and so to pull down wrath from heaven vppon our heades. Which our
sequestration is yet the more offensive vnto them, by how much the nearer we
were, & yet are, in many things, vnited: the contentions of brethren being as
the barres of a castle: as also for that their party for the reformation of
[...]ov.  [...]. 19. their pretended nationall Iudah is thereby weakened. And
as any (accordeing to the proverb) may easily fynde a staffe, to beat a dog
withall, so do men easily take occasion to lay load vppon vs, who are for our
fewnes in number, & mean-nes of condition, so con­temptible in their eyes: &
against whom they have all advantages for treading vppon vs (save the truth)
which they can desire. But the L: Iesus in teaching, that the way to life is
narrow, which few fynde: & that to the pore the gospell is preached, [...]ath.
7.  [...].  [...]. 11. & 6. & therevppon, that he is blessed who is not
offended at him, doth plainly fore­warn all his servants of this offence.
Others there are also, who whatsoever they boast of the Scriptures, have for
the most parte, a traditionall faith, & religion: & as Naaman the Assirian
would not beleev that there could be any better waters then the rivers
[...]King. 12. of Damascus, so neyther do they think it possible, that there
should be any purer man­ner of worshipping God, then that, to which they have
been alwaies vsed: vnto which they are so superstitiously addicted, as they
are ready to think it an hereticall way for any man to step out of the beaten
trod of their teachers traditionary religion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=3) There are also
beside all these, that have their politique ends, & respects, for which
[...]hey affect vpposition against vs. Some, (of the Prelats faction) to
gratify their Lords. and Maisters, at whose devotion they stand, and against
whom we principally witnes:  [...]thers, though they like not the Byshops, yet
think it a point of their wisdom to take, and  [...]ould vp professed
opposition against vs, that vnder it as a buckler they may cover their own
irregularity, and make their iealouse Maisters beleev, that they cannot but
[...]e indifferently well affected towards them, being so vehemently bent
against vs. Yea, others perceaving that their own grounds do in the iudgmēt
of others wise, & vnpartiall, directly lead to the way, in which we walk, and
yet seing it not to be for their purposes  [...]o have the world so to esteem
of them, do vndoubtedly, streyn, & wring the neck of theyr Consciences, and
courses, to look the coutrary way, that they may not be thought to have their
faces towards vs.

Lastly, there are, who fearing belike to be overcome of the truth we professe,
if with  [...]uiet, & calm thoughtes they come to consider of it, & not
haveing hearts to embrace it, do set themself against it tumultuously; like
those cowards, who fearing the force of  [...]heir adversaries, do think by
debaseing, & revileing of them, to encourage their own faint, & feeble hearts
against them.

But good had it been for the truth, if at it offences had onely been taken by
the ad­versaryes thereof, and not also given by them, who have professed it:
and those both so publique, as they cannot be concealed, and so great, as they
can receav no suffi­cient excuse. Yet are there notwithstanding divers things
(and those such as will seem, I doubt not, of weight, to the wise in heart)
which both iustly may, and ne­  [...]essarily must be observed about those
matters: whether offensive contentions, or  [...]ther personall evilles, layd
to our charge, and published to the world against  [...]s.

First then, and in the generall; the publishers of those accusations cannot be
vn­suspected of any reasonable man: being such generally, as are both enemyes
to our pro­  [...]ession, and have eyther for their vnfaythfull Apostacy, or
other scandalous sins, or  [...]oth, been cast out of the Church and
excommunicated. Now as, for the former,  [...] is truely, and commonly sayd,
that no person running away from his May­ster, will easily speak well of him:
So doth experience confirm it, for the latter,  [...]hat scarce any condemned
in any court (how iustly soever) but will complayn eyther of the mallice of
the evidence, or ignorance of the Iury, or iniustice of the Iudg. Condemned
persons must repayr their own, by ruinateing the credits of  [...]heir iudges.

More specially: and first, of the contentions which have faln out amongst the
pro­fessours of this way. As Paul complayneth, that sin takeing occasion by
the law, Rom. 7 8. wrought in him all manner of concupiscence: so indeed hath
the mallice of Sa­  [...]han, and mans corruption taken occasion to work much
evill of this kynde, by sundry good things specially found in the professours
of this truth: as 1. by their know­iudg,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=4) 2\. Zeal, &
3\. liberty of the Gospelly.1\. Cor. I [...]dg, [...] 3\. 1. Ch. 1. 5. 7. 11.
Ch. 3. 3. Knowledg, saith the Apostle, puffeth vp: & hence was it, that the
same Church to which he so wrytes, exceeding other Churches in knowledg, did
also passe them in contentions, & strifes: So the Churches this way (which I
may truely speak, & without boasting) goeing before other ordinary assemblyes
in knowledg, are the more in daunger of contentions, without special [...]
modesty, & watchfulnes. Ignorant persons, & peoples, are for the most parte,
easily ruled, as being content to trust other men with their faith, &
religion: neyther was there eve [...] so great peace in the Christian world
(as it is called) as in the deepest darknes of popery. 2dly, as the greatest
Zeal for God is rightly found amongst Gods people, so is peace, & agreement
greatly endaungered thereby, if it be not tempered with much wisdom,
mode­ration, & brotherly forbearance: & that they consider not aright, that
both themselves & others, are frayl men, & compassed about with much
ignorance, & infirmity other­wise: who are therefore to study not onely how to
have that which they like, but also how to bear that in other men (if not
intollerable) which they like not: otherwise, whilst men think by their Zeal
to warm the house, they will burn in over their own, & other mens heades. 3ly,
& lastly, they onely, who enioy liberty, know how hard a thing it is to vse it
aright. And when I see them in Engl: wondering at the dissentions in this way,
methinkes I see two prisoners (being themselves fast chayned & manicled
together by feet, & handes) wondering to see that other men (at liberty) walk
not closer together thē they do. Theyr thraldome makes them vnequall
Censurers of the abuse of our liberty. How many thousands are there, whose
very hearts are fretted with the chaynes of their spirituall bondage? Yea how
many severall factions of ministers are there, whose diffe­rences, if by
servile fear they were not nipped in the bud, would bring forth no small both
dissensions & divisions: as at this day wofull experiēce teacheth in the
reformed Church­es, whose dissentions do infinitely exceed all that ever haue
been amongst is? As igno­rance begot, so tyranny mainteyned the greatest
peace, & vnity, when pope: sh iniquity most prevayled.

Now for personall offences; as we professe, & avow before all men, that, for
our selves, we neyther receav, nor keep amongst vs any persons not sanctifyed
in their measure ( [...] our discerning:) so do we not think our selves any
way priveledged, eyther from the common infirmityes of Gods more worthy
servants in all ages, or from the mallice of Sa than in thrusting vppon vs
false brethren vnawares: whose hypocrisy, & prophan [...] [...]ude 4.
vsurpation of the Lords Covenant, & holy things, vnto which they have no
right, he often punisheth with scandalous sins, & so leadeth them out amongst
the workers of iniquity. Which scandalles we could yet cover from the eyes of
the world in a great measure, if we durst (as others do) eyther let sin rest
vppon our brethren: o [...] Lev. 19. 7. sm [...]ther in a Consistory such
offences, as are eyther publique, of their own nature, or  [...] made by the
offenders private impenitency: which because we dare not do, nor but re­buke
[...]. Tim.  [...]. 20. him openly, which so sinneth, & so iudg both his sin,
& person (in which our pr [...]ce [...]dings, & dealings, new offences are
also added often tymes) we do thereby
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=4) lay open our
own shame in the eyes of the world: & so walking in our simplicity, because we
dare not be wise against the Lord Iesus Christ his order, & ordinances, we
have in so great a measure our faults written in our foreheads, & are a
wonder, & offence vnto others, who are far better acquaynted with our
faylings, then with their own.

But besides, if not above the rest, great offence hath been taken by many at
our ex­tream streytnes in respect of the order wherein we walk: & more
specially for refuseing communion in the private, & personall exercises of
religion with the better sorte in the assemblyes; as wherein we have not onely
made a separation from the wicked, & from the godly also in things vnlawfull,
or vnlawfully performed, but even in their lawfull  [...]actions. This Mr Ames
calles the bitternes of separation: & for it, as it seems, thinkes it lawfull
to cast vppon me the reproach of the sins of other Churches & persons, whether
truely, or falsly layd to their charg, he knoweth not; as also to insinuate
against  [...]e, that I despise the wryteings of Iunius, & so of other learned
men: as iustly asGrot [...] agayn [...] the Eng [...] Puritan [...] as he
cal­les thē. others have layd to his charg the contempt of all antient
wryters: wherein if men deal vniustly with him, & his freinds, let him see
whether God deal not iustly, in rewarde­ing him as he hath served others.

For the matter of his letters, if I would strive with him about the Arguments,
with whom I agree in the question, I could manifest (I doubt not) how he hath
not dealt sufficiciētly in it. Whither or no there were in the assemblyes
faythfull, & godly persons, & the same so appearing vnto men, I never called
into question, nor could without sin­ning greatly against myne own Conscience:
the thing I feared, was the violation, &See fo [...] this A Iustific [...]
Pag. 432. 433. [...]reach of order in the communion between the members of the
true visible Church, & [...]hers out of that order, or in the contrary. Myne
obiection hereabout Mr A: an­swereth not, but onely makes light account of it,
as a straung order, which is bro­ken by saying Amen to a godly mans prayer.
But all men know, that to set light  [...] an Argument is no sufficient answer
vnto it. And many cases may be put in which  [...]rder may be sinfully broken
in communicateing even with a godly mans prayers; eyther  [...]rivately, as if
he will professedly offer vp the prayers of an excommunicate, detected
[...]eretique, or other vngodly person: or publiquely if he perform the same,
without a  [...]ue, or by a false calling. Here was vse of a distinction of
religious actions, into  [...]ersonall, & Church actions: which if eyther Mr
A: had observed vnto me, orSee pag 1. my self then conceaved of, would have
cleared the question to my conscience: & with which I did wholy satisfy my
self in this matter, when God gave me once to observ it.

My iudgment therein, & the reasons of it, I have set down in the first parte
of the  [...]ook: vnto which I bynde no man further to assent, then he sees
ground from the Scrip­  [...]es. In it I oppose no Article of our confession:
neyther was it the Authours  [...]eaning, as it seemeth, further to conclude &
professe separation then from communionArt. 31 [...] the publique worship, &
administrations there: neyther do I herein oppose any  [...]t order of any
Church this way, to my knowledg. I my self, & the people with me
[...]enerally, did separate from the formall state of the parrish assemblyes,
in this persw­sion,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=5) & so practised
all the while we abode in Engl: as some there continuing,  [...] done to this
day: there haveing been also sundry passages between Mr Smith, & me about it:
with whom I also refused to ioyn because I would vse my liberty in this point:
& for which I was by some of the people with him excepted against, when I was
chosen into office in this Church. Indeed afterwardes fyndeing them of other
Churches, with whom I was most nearly ioyned, otherwise mynded for the most
parte, I did thorough my vehement desire of peace, & weaknes withall, remit &
loose of my former resolutions & did (to speak as the truth is) forget some of
my former grounds; & so have passed out, vppon occasion, some Arguments
against this practise. Which yet notwithstand­ing I have in the same place so
set down, as all may see I was therein far from that, cer­taynty of
perswasion, which I had & have of the common grounds of our separation: of
which I think this no parte at all. But had my perswasion in it been fuller,
then ever it was, I professe my self alwayes one of them, who still desire to
learn further, or better, what the good will of God is. And I beseech the Lord
from myne heart, that there may be in the men, (towards whom I desire in all
things lawfull to enlarg my self) the like readines of mynde to forsake every
evill way, & faythfully to embrace & walk in the truth they do, or may see, as
by the mercy of God, there is in me; which as I trust it shalbe myne, so do I
wish it may be their comfort also in the day of the Lord Iesus.

IOHN ROBINSON.

## Table of contents

  * The Preface.
  * 1\. Of private Communion.
  * 2\. Of publique Communion.
  * 3\. Of flight in persequution.
  * 4\. The outvvard Baptism receaved in Engl: is lavvfully reteyned.
  * 5\. Of the Baptism of Infants.
  * 6\. A Suruey of the Confession of faith published in certain Conclusions by the remaynders if Mr Smithes Company after his death.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=5)

## 1\. Of private Communion.

THE Apostle vvriteing to the Church at Colossus with much ioy for theyr
stablenes in the grace of God receaved, reduceth the whole matter of that
hisColos. 2. 5. reioyceing to two generall heads: Fayth, & Or­der. Of which
two, fayth (though set after in pla­ce) is before, both in nature, tyme, &
dignity: as makeing men in theyr persons severally fit for, & capable of that
order, wherein they are ioyntly to be vnited.

Now from these two spring heads (as it were) thus distinguished, do  [...]sue,
& arise two sorts of externall religions actions, or exercises: which  [...]e
may not vnfitly, for distinction sake, call, Personall, & Church Actions. By
personall actions I do vnderstand such as arise from, & are performed
immediately by the personall fayth, & other graces of God, in the hearts of
holy men. Of which sorte are, private prayer, thanksegiveing, & singing of
Psalmes, Profession of fayth, & confession of sins, reading, or opening
[...]he Scriptures, & hearing them so read, or opened, eyther in the family,
or  [...]s where, without any Church-power, or ministery comeing between. Of
[...]he 2d: sorte are the receaving in, & casting out of members, the
electing,  [...] deposeing of officers, the vse of a publique ministery, & all
communion  [...]herewith. For which workes, howsoeverHebr. 1 [...] 6. fayth, &
other personall graces  [...]e required that men in them may Please God, yet
are not these graces suffi­  [...]int for the doeing of them, except withall
there concur, & come between, Ch: state, & order: in, & by which, they are to
be exercised, as by theyr most immediate, & proper cause: from which, by the
rule of reason, they  [...]re to have theyr denomination, & so to be called
Church-Actions.

And that the actions of the first kynde, (& more particularly) private
[...]rayer (of which I am specially to speak) may, & ought to be performed
[...]y godly persons (though out of the order of a true visible Church) both
[...]heMath.  [...] 8\. 9. 10. & cap. 19 22. &c. Act. 10.  [...] 23\. 34. 35.
Scriptures, & common reason teach: and that not onely by them se­
[...]erally, & one by one, but ioyntly, & together also, as there is occasion:
[...]hey being ioynt members of the mistical body of Christ by fayth, & ioynt­
[...]yRom. 8. 26. & cap 10 10  [...] pertakers of the same Spirit of adoption,
& prayer; from which common  [...]ayth, & vnion of the spirit dwelling in
them, this communion ariseth, they  [...]hereby being priveledged ioyntly to
say, Our Father: as was also Practised1\. Cor.  [...]. 7. [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=6) by Cornelius, & his
holy family, though out of a true visible Church. Neythe [...] is it a matter
worthy the proveing lawfull for a godly housband, & wife ioyntly to sanctify
theyr meat, & drink by prayer, & thankesgiveing, & so [...] to beg together at
Gods hands, or to give thankes for other good things vppon themselves, &
theyrs, though they be out of the order of a tru [...] Church. Neyther indeed
do the members of the visible Church perfor [...] private prayer, or the like
exercises, whether severally, & by one, & one or ioyntly; by vertue of that
theyr Church state, or with any referenc [...] vnto it, but merely as a duety
of the Christian person, or family: (which must be before the Christian Church
as the parts before the whole:) & which they were also as well, & as much
bound vnto, though they were o [...] no visible Ch: at all: no more then was
Cornelius, & his family, & friends which notwithstanding was his, & theyr
fault.

These things thus premised, I come to the thing I aym at in thi [...] whole
discourse, which is, that we, who professe a separation from the Engl:
Na­tionall, Provinciall, Diocesan, & Parochiall Church, & Churches, in the wh
[...] formall state, & order thereof, may notwithstanding lawfully communicate
in pri­vate prayer, & other the like holy exercises (not performed in theyr
Church Com­munion, nor by theyr Church power & ministery) with the godly
amongst them (though remayning (of infirmity) members of the same Church, or
Churches) excep [...] some other extraordinary bar come in the way, between
them, & vs.

And since the subiect, & ground of this Communion, is holy persons & the same
so discerned mutually, & on both sydes, I think it needfull for the clearer
passage of things, & better information of divers both ad­versaryes, & freinds
(haveing greatly misinterpreted our wryteings, & testimony) here breifly to
note down what our iudgment hath alwaye [...] been of the sincere fayth, &
holines of many particular person in the asemblyes, notwithstanding our
testimony agaynst the body of the same as semblyes, in theyr communion, order,
& ordinances.

And first, our witnessing agaynst the Church of Engl: (so called) a Babilon,
in her degree, both in respect of the confusion, as of persons good & bad, of
all sortes. so of things Christian, & Antichristian, covering all [...] as
also of that spirituall bondage, wherein the Lords people are kept vnde [...]
the spirituall Lordship of the prelacy, there reigning, doth witnes for  [...]
agaynst all men, that we acknowledg the Lords people, & godly per sons there:K
[...]v 15. 4. out of which they are thefore called by the voyce of the Lor
[...] from heaven, to build vp themselves1\. Pet. 2. 5. as lively stones into
a spirituall temple for th [...] Lord to dwell in: as were the Lors people of
ould called out of Babilon C [...] vile, to build the materiall temple in
Ierusalem, although as then was,  [...] Es [...]. 1. & cap. 7. now is too
slack obedience yealded to the Lords call herein.Neh. 2.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=6) More
particularly. Mr: H. Barrow in that his letter written a litle before his
death, (& so the more advisedly, especially in that poynt, in which a snare
was layd for his life) to an honourable Lady yet liveing, as he
[...]cknowledgeth her in her person, to have been educated, & exercised in the
[...]ayth, & fear of God, so professeth he further, that he gladly embraceth,
& [...]eleeveth the common fayth receaved, & professed in the land as good, &
sound: [...]hat he had reverend estimation of sundry, & good hope of many
hundred thou­  [...]ands in the land, though he vtterly disliked the present
constitution of the Church, &c.

Vnto which his testimony as the Authours ofPag. 11 114. the Apology do assent,
[...]o do they further professe theyr perswasion that of many the Lords people
[...]n the Realm, belonging to the Lords election of grace, & pertakers of his
mercy to  [...]alvation in Christ, some are further called, & some still
remayn in defection: fur­  [...]her instanceing in sundry Preists, & Fryars,
that have been Martyrs of  [...]esus, witnessing the truth they saw agaynst
the Romish Anti-Christ & yet reteyn­  [...]ng theyr Popish functions, &
communion with that Church, which stands subiect  [...] the wrath of God: Both
Mt: Barrow, & they accordingly in another  [...]lace, commending the fayth of
the Engl: Martyrs, & deeming them saved, notwithstanding the false Offices &
great corruptions in the worship they exercised: & so professing the same
iudgment of others in the realm, where the same precious  [...]ayth in
sincerity, & simplicity is found, (they neyther neglecting to search out the
[...]ruth, nor despiseing it, when they see it) the mercy of God thorough
theyr sincere  [...]ayth to Iesus Christ, extending, & superabounding above
all theyr sins seen, & [...]nseen.

Lastly Mr: Penry a litle before his exequution, acknowledgeth in  [...]is
Confession, that both of the teachers, & Professours of the assemblyes have so
[...]mbraced the truth of doctrine in the land established, & professed, that
the Lord  [...] his infinite goodnes hath graunted them favour, to shew out
wherein, in regard  [...]f Gods election, he iudgeth them members of the body,
whereof the sonne of God  [...]esus Christ is the head: onely herein praying
the Lord to be mercifull vnto them,  [...] as vnto himself in regard of his
sins) that they are not ordered in that outward  [...]rder, which Christ Iesus
left in his Church, but instead thereof, &c.

All these, we see, as they rightly distinguish between fayth & order, (though
even order also be a matter ofKom. 1. 23. fayth, if it be not a matter of sin,
& without  [...]arrant from Gods word) so do they planly acknowledg the
personall  [...]ayth, & grace vnto salvation in many though remayning (of
ignorance, & infirmity) members of that Church agaynst whose constitution,
order, & ordinances, they witnessed, divers of them, vnto death: & not onely
[...]hat such people were there, in the generall, but also that they did so
[...]steem, & iudg of many of them in particular. And surely if the Lords
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=7) people be
there, it is no difficult thing for the spiritual man, conversein [...] with
them, to discern, & iudg ordinarily, which they bee. The spirit of God in one
of his people will own it self in another of them though disfigure [...] with
many faylings, especially in outward orders, & ordinances: &Iam. 2. 17. 18.
fayt [...] (if it be not dead) may be seen by works, of him that hath a
sprituall ey [...] thorough many infirmityes.Luce 6.  [...]4. The tree, sayth
Christ, is known by the fruits: [...] may the good trees truely planted by
fayth into Christ, & haveing in the [...] the heavenly sap, & iuyce of his
spirit (though growing for the present out of the Lords walled Orchard, the
true visible Church, & in the wild [...] wildernes of the prophane assemblyes)
ordinarily be known by the good fruits of fayth, & of the spirit evidently
appearing in theyr persons. who [...] whilst the world can in all places so
far discern, as to hate, despise, & perse­quute them, as none of hers, it were
marvayl, if we should not discern them to be children of the same common
Father with vs, & so know, & acknow­ledg one another (though1\. Ioh. 3. 1 the
world which knowes not him knew neyther o [...] both.) And passing this
iudgment one vppon another mutually, though not by the rule of certaynty,
which a man can have onely of him self ordi­narily, as onely knowing his own
heart, yet more then in hope, which ex­tends it self to the apparently
prophane, (for we are to hope that they wh [...] are not to day, may be to
morrow) & even by that goulden rule of love or1\. Cor. 13. 5. 7. charity,
which thinketh not evill, nor is suspitious, but beleeveth all things & taketh
them in the best parte:1\. Pet. 4. 8. covering (especially vnder the graces o
[...] Gods spirit, where they appear, though in never so small a measure) a
mul­titude of sins; we shall walk in love, after Christs example, & fulfill
the law of Chris [...] Eph. 5. 2. Gal 6. 2. Mark. 4. 24. by bearing one
another burthen: thereby also procureing the like mercifull mea­sure to be
meeted out to vs agayn both by God, & men, in respect of our in­firmityes.

Lastly if men were to iudg vs (even whilst we abode in the assemblyes  [...]
ignorance, or infirmity) men fearing God, & sanctifyed in our persons, b [...]
the profession, & appearance which we made: then are we also in equit [...] to
make the same estimate of the persons of others, though abydeing i [...] the
assemblyes, as we did, makeing the same manifestation, & appearance [...] (&
it may be greater then) the most of vs have done. And as we our selve [...]
then haveing receaved of God the grace of sanctification in our measure &
makeing manifestation thereof, accordeing to that, we had receaved; & being to
be iudged by others accordeing to the manifestation we made did, & might
iustly look, that they should deem vs truely faythfull, & san­ctifyed, though
never so weakly: so are we to have agayn the like estima­tion of others
accordeing to theyr measure receaved, & manifested: rem [...] ­bring alwayes
that most equall rule of Christ our Lord, that whatsoever [...] [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=7) would men should do
vnto vs, even so to do to them, which is the Law, & the Prophets.

I will therefore conclude this poynt with a double exhortation: the former
respecting vs our selves, who have (by the mercy of God) with theMat. 7. 12.
fayth of Christ, receaved his order, & ordinances: which is, that we please
not our selves therein too much, as if in them, piety, & religion did chiefly
consist: which was not the least calamity of the Lords people of ould, for
which he also sharply reproved, & severely punished them: of which evill, &
overvaluation of these things (housoever great in themselvs) we are in
thePsal. 40 6. 7. 8. more daunger, considering our persequutions, & sufferings
for them: but  [...]hatas we believ these things are necessarily to be done,
so we considerHeb. 10. Psal.  [...] 16\. 17. Ier. 7. 21. 22. Hos 6. Mic. 6. 7.
8. that other things are not onely not to be left vndone, but to be done much
more. The grace of fayth in Christ, & the fear of God, the continuall renueing
of our repentance, with love, mercy, humility, & modesty, toge­ther with
fervent prayer, & hearty thanksgiveing vnto God, for his vnspeak­cable
goodnes, are the things wherein especially we must serv God: nourish­ing them
in our own hearts, & so honoring them in others, wheresoever they appear to
dwell. And if God wilbe known, & honoured in all his crea­tures, yea even in
the sillyest worm that crawleth vppon the earth, how much more in the holy
graces of his spirit vouchsafed to his elect; notwith­standing theyr faylings
of infirmity, especially in outward ordinances. Which personall graces whilst
too many have vndervalued in other men, & neglected in themselves, in
comparison, God hath been provoked to suffer so many amongst vs to fall, some
into such personall sins, & evilles (not­withstanding theyr advantage in the
Lords ordinances) as from which without these helpes) many thousands of them
have been preserved: & [...]thers both from the conscience of Gods ordinances,
& of the personall  [...]leutyes of holines, & honesty; as is generally to be
seen in such, as have made apostacy from theyr former profession with vs.

The other exhortation I direct vnto them about whom I deal: which is,
[...]hat they content not themselves with that fayth, & grace in theyr
persons, which they have receaved, reiecting, or neglecting vnder any
praetext, or ex­cuse whatsoever, the order, ordinances, & institutions of the
L: Iesus: in, by  [...]he vse whereof, theyr fayth should be nourished in it
self, & manifested vnto others: much more, that they continue not theyr
submission to the contrary, which is of Anti-Christ: lest God (besydes greater
evilles) pu­nish them with yet greater confusion, & bondage therin: that,
vnder which  [...]hey are being such already, as (I suppose) I may truely
affirm, that never Church in the world, in which so many excellent truthes
were taught, stood  [...]n such confusion both of persons, & things, & vnder
such a bondage spiri­  [...]uall, as that of Engl: doth at this day.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=8) Now before I
come to prove the thing I aym at, I think it fit to satisfy the principall
obiections, which I have taken knowledg of agaynst the thing, I entend.

And it will fust be demaunded of me, considering my iudgment of the par­rish
OBI. assemblyes, as Anti-Christian, & of sundry the practises there as
idolatrous, & withall, what iudgments the Scriptures denounce agaynst such
estates, & practises, how I can deem any the membres of such assemblyes, & so
practiseing, as truely Chri­stian? or how I can without pollution communicate
with them, who are by the touch­ing of so many vnclean both persons, & things,
themselves made vnclean?

For answer. First, it is true, that vppon the true Church the Scriptu­res
[...]NSW. do pronunce most excellent blessings; as they do also denounce
fear­full curses vppon the false: as it is also true, that whatsoever is
spoken of the whole body, the one, or other, ioyntly, belongs to ech member of
ey­ther, severally: provided, that in both, things be in theyr right state, &
or­der: which is, that there be none, but faythfull, & holy persons in the
true Church, & none but vnholy, & prophane persons in the false: for none
other should be, in the one, or other. But if now it come to passe other­wise,
& that thorough the Churches want of Vigilancy or Zeal, & the par­tyes
hypocrisy (which hath been alwayes, & is too too common) there be in the true
Church vnfaythfull, & prophane persons, shall we say, that those pretiouse
promises made to the true Church in which they wrongfully are, do apperteyn
vnto them, & vnto theyr persons? & that they are elect of God, saynts by
calling, & sanctifyed in Christ, to the hope of life, &c.? So if, on the
contrary it come to passe, thorough her craft, & cruelty, & theyr own weaknes
(which is too too common also) that godly, & fayth­full persons be in the
false Church where they should not be, shall we now lay vppon theyr persons
all the curses, & condemnation, which the Scrip­tures denounce agaynst the
estate of the false Church, & the superstitions thereof? were not this to
iustify the wicked, because he is in the true Church: where he should not be?
& to condemn the righteouse because he is in the false Church, where he should
not be neyther? Or are not all godly wis [...] men in these, & the like
disordered states of things, to have vse of Chri­stian discretion for the
putting of difference between person, & person notwithstanding theyr common
Church state, & order, the wicked with the godly in the true Church, & vnder
Christs ordinances, & the godly with the wicked in the false Church vnder the
forgeryes of Anti-Christ? Otherwise our iudgment wilbe as confused, as is
theyr estate. Neyther is it a more difficult thing for a spirituall, &
vnpartiall ey to discern a godly man in a false Ch: where the falsenes ariseth
not from the falsity of fayth, but  [...] order, & ordinances, then to discern
a wicked man in a true Church.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=8) And this
consideration had, may serv for answer to the cheif part of the obiection:
which is also no more in effect, then hath been answered by the Authours of †
the Apology, before me, in theyr defence agaynstPag 11 that vniust accusation
layd vppon them by theyr adversaryes, that they af­firmed the whole Realm to
be drowned in confusion without assurance of salvation.

Theyr answer is, that there is difference to be put between PERSONS
them­selves, & between theyr ACTIONS or ESTATE otherwise. The person
some­times is blessed, when the action, or standing in an other behalf, may be
such as is subiect to curse: &c. As on the contrary also, sometymes the person
is subiect to curse, Qwhenas yet the action, or standing may be blessed in
another respect. And both those parts of theyr distinction they prove by
sundry instāces from the Scri­ptures. Some whereof I will here note down,
adding also some others therevnto, for the confirmation of the first head of
the distinction, which more directly concerns the present question, which is
about godly per­sons performing of, or standing in some corrupt, & cursed
actions, or estate otherwise. Thus were Simeon, & Levi, Gen. 49. 7. 28. both
Blessed in theyr persons, & Cursed in theyr outragious fact agaynst the
Shechemites: thus was the Canaa­  [...]itish woman, & her daughter both dogs,
or whelpes, in respect of theyrMat.  [...] 26\. 27. [...] [...]ation, &
people, & Children of Abraham in theyr persons: thus was* Peter both a
faythfull, & beloved disciple, in his person, & yet in his coun­sayl to
Christ, Sathan: thus wereMat. 16. 1 [...] 17\.  [...] the Corinth: both
vnlevened, & holy, in  [...]heyr persons, & levened, or impute in the lump of
theyr communion, with  [...]he incestuous man vncensured amongst them: as also
the same Corinth:1\. Cor.  [...] 6\. 7. [...]oth spirituall (though butCap.
[...] 1\. 3. babes in Christ) & yet in respect of theyr strife, & divisions,
not spirituall but carnall. Where the Apostle also noteth out the
[...]riginall cause of these contraryetyes in, & about the same persons: &
[...]ow it comes to passe, that one, & the same man doth works so contrary
[...]ne to another, & so is subiect, in respect thereof, to two so contrary
esti­mates, & Censures. The reason then is, because every regenerate man, in
[...]his life, hath in him two men:• the ould man, not yet fully cast of; &
the new  [...]an, though prevayling, yet not perfitly put on, & renued: &
these two (els  [...]here called)Eph. 4. 22. 23. 24. the flesh, & the spirit;
contrary the one to the other, & lusting the one  [...]gaynst the other. And
so forceible is this lusting sin, & flesh in the best, as thatGal 5. 17.
[...]t not onely keeps them from knoweing much truth which they should
[...]now, & from doeing much good which they would do, & from doeing  [...]hat
good they do, as they both should, & would; but also misleadeth them  [...]nto
sundry aberrations, & evils, (besydes theyr falles, into greater mi­scheifs,
at tymes, out of which they are restored by particular repentance) & therin
cōtinueth them to theyr dying day. The Apostle professeth of him­self that
he1\. Cor. 13. 12. knoweth but in parte: & how small a parte of his knowledg,
is ours? [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=9) The
ProphetPsa. 19. 2. David teacheth, that no man can vnderstand his errours, &
[...] prayes God to cleanse him from his secret sins. And amongst, & above
those  [...] all other kindes, the servants of God are still endaungered by
the errours, & evilles of the tymes: whose corrupt customes do often eyther
dim they [...] eyes, as a mist: or carry them along as a strong stream: or
otherwise op [...] ­presse them with a thousand tyrannyes. Examples of this
mischief we hav [...] too many in the Scriptures. In Abrahams, Iakobs, Davids,
& many mo holy Patriarks, & Prophets, takeing at once more wives then one,
contrary to the institution of mariage, which was, that^  [...] two (& not
more) should be  [...] flesh. Likewise in † Asa, Amasiah, & Azariah theyr
faylings, in not takeing Gen 2. 4 away the high places, though the H: Ghost
give testimony of the vprightnes of theyr hearts, & works otherwise, in the
sight of the Lord. Also in many of theMatt. 19. Ch: of Corinth: cotinueing
theyr accustomed fellowship with their friends [...]. King. 5. 14.  [...].
King. 4. 3 4 8 15. 3.  [...]. & kindred in theyr superstitious feastings in
the Idoll temples, in honour o [...] the Idols, to which they offered Lastly,
we have a playn proof of this evil in the Apostles themselves, whom the common
errour of the tymes that th [...] Messiah should be a great worldly prince, &
exercise a temporary kingdom did so possesse, as that it could not be rooted
out of them, by all that they had heard of Christ, & seen touching him; but
that it still abode with them [...]erodot.  [...] Clio. Cor. 8.  [...]0\. &
cap. 10 3. 14 20 1. till the death of Christ, yea some while aster his
resurrection. Which consi­deration as it must work in all the servants of the
Lord a godly yealousy o [...] the customes of the tymes, that they be not
captived in theyr evilles: s [...] must it also teach them, who by the mercy
of God have escaped them, much moderatiō towards such (being otherwise godly)
as are still too much abu­sed by theyr craft, or vlolence.Cor. 6. 4. 15. 6 &c.
lat 16. 2. & 20 1.

To apply this then to the present purpose. Considering the many excel­lent
truthes taught in divers of the assemblyes, & that with so great fruit i [...]
the knowledg, Zeal, & other personall graces of many; the constant suffe­rings
of divers Martirs for the truthes there professed, agaynst that Anti­christ of
Rome; the knowledg we had of our selves in that estate; togetherMark 9. with
the iudgment of other Churches abroad touching the Ch: of Engl:  [...]
[...]uke. 14. 1. it is called (though indeed ignorant of her estate, save in
such general [...] heads of fayth, wherein we also assent vnto her) as also
the manifould af­flictionsAct. 1. 6. vppon, & great offences (& those, many
too iust) at such as hav [...] made separation, from that Church; it is no
marvayl, that so many (thoug [...] otherwise learned & godly) by reason of the
ignorance, & infirmity ye [...] cleaving to the best overmuch, are abused by
the tymes for the succourin [...] of Antichrist in his declyneing age, for
whose furtherance in his risein [...] (thorough the corruptions of tymes then)
so many, howsoever otherwis [...] learned, & godly have (though vnwittingly)
put to theyr hands, as a [...] [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=9) men soundly mynded,
if but a litle exercised in theyr wryteings, & the  [...]oryes of the tymes,
will confesse.

Now for the 2d parte of the obiection touching the idolatrous practi­  [...]es
of the assemblyes, I do answer, that every idolatry makes not an idola­
[...]er any more then every ignorance, or other sin of ignorance, an ignorant,
[...]r wicked person. To make an idolater there is requyred an idolatrous
di­sposition which we may not lay to theyr charg, of whom we speak. Besy­
[...]es, by this ground we should chaleng, the reformed Churches generally
[...]o be idolaters; for the most of them vse a stint form of prayer, lesse or
[...]ore, though they be not bound vnto it; & so consequently should ex­
[...]lude them from Gods kingdom: for no Idolater hath any inheritance in the
Eph. 4. kingdom of heaven. And if any further obiect, that the Scriptures
teach ex­presly, that they whoRev. 1 [...] 4\. ch. 1 [...] 9\. 10. partake of
the sins of Babilon, shall receiv of her plagues: & that every man worshipping
that beast, & his image, & receweing his mark in his forehead or in his hand,
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, &c. I answer  [...]s before, that
that estate, & those practises are indeed vnder that curse in  [...]hemselves;
& further also, that every person so walking (as I am perswa­  [...]ed every
member of the Church of Engl: doth) is vnder that condem­  [...]ation without
repentance: which repentance, as it must be particular for­  [...]ns known, so
doth the Lord, in mercy, accept of the generall repentance of his servants,
for theyr sins vnknown, & secret, & which they discern not to  [...]e such:
Otherwise no flesh could be saved. Lastly, as I cannot excuse them,Psal. 1
[...] 12. [...]or they themselves from great sin in ioyning themselves with
the pro­phane parrish assemblyes, with which God hath not ioyned them, & that
[...]n the practise of theyr superstitions, especially in such a bondage
spirituall  [...]nder the prelacy, as makes them cease to be the Lords free
people, & de­  [...]rives them of all power for the reformation of publique
evilles eyther of  [...]ersons, or things; so these being (as I hope) but
theyr sins of infirmity,  [...] by them vnseen, though we discern them, (as it
may be, they also di­  [...]cern some evilles in vs, which we see not in our
selves) they no more dis­  [...]lv the bond of the spirit between theyr, & our
persons, then they de­  [...]roy the work of the same spirit in themselves:
neyther can these theyr  [...]ns pollute me, if by the default of my place, or
person I leav no means  [...]awfull vnvsed, for theyr reformation: who if they
eyther purposely  [...]eglect to search out the truth, or vnfaythfully with-
hould it in vnrigh­  [...]eousnes, for any fleshly fear, or other corrupt
regarde, shall not for our  [...]ore respective iudgment of them, or practise
towards them, receav the  [...]ore easy iudgment at the hands of the Lord in
the day of the revelation  [...]f the secrets of all hearts.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=10) As he that
hath hould of one member of the body is not separated from the body, OBI. nor
any parte thereof, but hath hould of the whole body by the naturall coherence
of the parts: so he that communicates with one member of the Ch: communicates,
& ioyn [...] with the whole, & every member thereof by answerable coherence of
the parts of that misticall body.

In communicateing with the godly there in private prayer, & the likeNSW.
exercises, we do not communicate with them, as members of the Ch: but merely
as Christians: private prayer being (as hath been shewed) no Ch: action at
all, nor performed eyther by them, or vs, by vertue of any Ch: state, or
membership, or with any respect therevnto: but merely as by per­sons, made
pertakers (by the grace of God) of the spirit of adoption, & prayer, mutually.
[...]. 8.  [...]. 26. 27

If we may thus communicate,OBI. with them in private, & they with vs, why not
also in publique?

It followeth not, that because I may pertake with godly men in things lawfull,
& lawfully done, therefore in things vnlawfull in themselves, a [...] NSW. are
many things; or vnlawfully done, as are all things in theyr publique
communion. More particularly. In communicateing with the godly  [...] publique
(even in things good in thēselves) I pertake with all the prophane parrish
also: the minister being the minister of the whole parrish, & (to speak as the
truth is) the parrish preist: & so in his publique administration of­fering vp
the soules, & bodyes, & the prayers withall, of the parrish Church, in the
name of Christ; & therein, with a few clean, many vnclean beastes, vppon the
Lords altar: whereas the private communion I entend, is re­streyned to the
godly onely, though wicked persons be in the place. 2dly whereas in private I
commicate onely with the persons, & personall graces of holy men; in publique,
I communicate with theyr Ch: state, & order, as also with the publique
Ministery, & in, & with it, with the prelacy, whenc [...] it is: of which more
hereafter. Neyther yet may we admit them into com­muniō of the publique
ordinances with vs, till they be actually members of a true, & lawfull
publique body ecclesiasticall, or visible Church. As they are private
Christian persons, so we may pertake with them in private Chri­stian duetyes;
but may not admit them to publique Church communio [...] (though never so holy
persons) till they have a true, & lawfull Ch: state, & calling therevnto. And
here that generall Rule hath place, that whatsoeve [...] is done by any person
(though both he, & it in themselves never so holy) without a  [...] calling,
is sin vnto him.

But with men vncircumcised, & which might not enter into the Temple, the Iewe
[...] OBI.  [...]ct. 11. 2 & 21. were forbidden all Communion by the law of
God.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=10) But they
of whom we speak are not vnbaptised but such as with the out­ward baptism,
(the same with our own) though both vnlawfully admini­stred,ANSW have also
receaved the inward baptism of the spirit: though they cannot have in that
theyr estate, all the right ends, & vses of baptism. 2dly,  [...] fynde not
where the law of God so sayd: but rayther think it may be pro­  [...]ed, that
the Circumcised Israelites comeing out of Egipt, had communion  [...]n the
wildernes, (though not in all things) with the vncircumcised bothExod. 38.
[...]sraelites, & others. But admit the law so forebade. It must be
considered,Num.  [...] 4. [...]hat the matter of Peters trouble was, his
goeing in to men vncircumcised, & [...]ating with them: & it will then appear,
that there was a legall, & ceremo­  [...]iall restreint, & bondage, vnder
which the Iewish Church was, as a childe [...] his non-age, from which the Ch:
now as a man of fuller age, is free. AndGal. 4 [...] 2\. 3. 4. [...]y the
Iewes not communicateing privately, or not eating with any vncir­
[...]umcised (if so by the law they were forbidden, & that it were not rayther
tradition, as Calvin thinketh) & by theyr not admitting any such into  [...]he
Temple, which is evident, we are taught, not to communicate with, nor  [...]o
receav into the Ch: any vncircumcised in heart, so by vs discerned: but
[...]re not forbidden all private religious communion with vnbaptised per­
[...]ons (if appearing holy) much lesse, to goe in, & eat with them, no nor1
Cor. 27. [...]et to receav such neyther into the now Temple, the Church of
God: into  [...]hich indeed they must be receaved, before they can be
baptized. And for  [...]he Instance Act: 11. considering that Christ at his
death had broken down  [...]e partition wall, & in his flesh abolished the
emnity of the law of commaundements, Eph. 2. 15. [...]anding in ordinances; &
that Peter by his Apostolicall Commission was toMat. 2 29. [...]ach all
natious; & how his opposites had heard that the Gentiles had receaved  [...]e
word, & there with the spirit, of God, it could be none but they of the Cir­
[...]mcision, that is such as being thēselves Circumcised, did think there
could  [...]e no grace without it (with which mischeif Sathan laboureth
alwayes to ossesse the hearts of such as enioy Gods ordināces, as theyrs, on
the other­  [...]de, who enioy them not, to vndervalew them) who would thus
contend,  [...]r quarrell with the Apostle of Christ, & the same, (to speak as
the truthAct. 10 14. [...]) manifesting himself to be too † Iewishly affected,
for that his practise. AndGal. 2.  [...] 12\. 14. [...]ethinks by the Lords
charg vnto Peter, not to call that prophane which God  [...]ad purifyed Act:
10. 15. & with it, by Peters testimony afterwards v: 34 35.  [...]hat they
that fear God, & work righteousnes are accepted of God, whither circum­
[...]sed, or not circumcised, baptized, or not baptized, so there be no
con­empt of Gods ordinances, but onely humayn fraylty hindering, as it was
[...]ith Cornelius, in his not being Circumcised formerly; & so ought to be
[...]ccepted of his people, so far as God accepteth of them: & that by
Christes  [...]xample in receaving the prayers of, & therein communic
[...]ting with the [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=11) faythfull ‡
Centurion (though out of the visible Ch: & vncircumcisedMath. 8  [...]. &c.
personally, & privately, with whom he would not have communicated i [...] the
temple, into which for order sake he might not have been admitted we also have
warrant for communicateing with godly persons privately with whom for theyr
disordered estate that way, we can have no lawful [...] publique communion.

But thus to acknowledg any in the assemblyes for our brethren, & pertakers of
the5\. OBI. same common grace, & f [...]yth with vs, vnto life, is to confirm
them in theyr evill wayes & as if we should tell them, that to do more, or
otherwise, then they doe, were in vayn.

This exception is vnworthy of any godly wise man, who hath learnANSW. aright
eyther to worship God, or to converse with men. Exception migh [...] as iustly
have been made agaynst the Apostles doctrine, & practise forRom. 14  [...].
re­ceaving, & applying vnto the weak in things lawfull, for theyr edification,
& gayning, & the discharg of his own duety: & as iustly might men have tou
[...] [...] Cor. 9.  [...]1. him, that he had taken a course to continue, &
harden them in theyr sin [...] for that theyr weaknes was theyr sin. The
equity of the Apostles doctrine & practise is generall, & directs all Gods
people, at all tymes, towards all that are weak in the fayth any manner of
way, as are those that fear God in th [...] assemblyes, (how strong soever
otherwise) in respect of theyr Church state & ordinances.

The same Apostle wryteing to the Corinth: whom he was in the body o [...] his
Epistle to reprove for many evilles amongst them, doth in the first plac [...]
give them theyr due with the most, acknowledging them1 Cor. 1  [...] 4\.
[...]. sanctifyed in Ch [...] Iesus, saynts by calling, enriched with the
grace of God by Christ Iesus, in all vtter and & in all knowledg. The same
māner of proceading also the Apostle Iohn vset [...] being directed by the
same good spirit, towardsRev. 2. 1  [...] 34\. v. 12 13. 14. v. 18. 19. 20.
the Churches in Asia, vppo [...] the like occasion. And as theyr practises are
(in theyr common equity) o [...] instructions, so doth both the law of love, &
rule of reason direct vs th [...] same course. When mē see vs ready, to take
knowledg, & in acknowledging of the good things in them, they will much more
willingly listen to our in reproofes of theyr evilles, as deeming vs equally,
& loveingly affected to­wardes them: which good things, if on the contrary, we
neglect, or vnde [...] value any manner of way, they will, & that iustly, be
preiudiced agaynst vs  [...] vnequall, & looking at thē onely with the left
ey. Besydes, there are no A [...]guments so forceible eyther for admonition,
or exhortation, to them th [...] have any spark of grace in them, as those,
which are takē fromRom. 12 the mercyes God, whereof they are made pertakers.
Neyther will any of Gods childre [...] indeed, make that vse, eyther of the
knowledg, which themselves have, or a [...]knowledgment which others make of
the grace of God in them, to be en [...] boldened thereby to go on in evill;
(for this were to [...]ude v.  [...]. turn the grace of God i [...] [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=11) wantonnesse,
which onely the reprobates do) no more thē will a good childe, when he knowes
by himself, or hears by others, that his father hath made sure his inheritance
vnto him, take thereby liberty to despise his commaun­dements, & no further to
regard him: this were a bastardly practise, & from which a childe naturally
disposed would abhor.

To conclude then; this our iudgment, & answerable practise, touching  [...]he
better sorte in the assemblyes, as faythfull persons, & vnder the assurance of
salvation, is no hinderance to the further manifestation of theyr fayth in
withdrawing theyr feet from every evill way, & the planting thē in the Lords
house; but on the contrary, a reall exhortation, & provocation of them to keep
safe that theyr precious1\. T [...] 1\. 19. fayth in a good conscience in all
things, as the passenger in the ship: & in theMat [...] 28\. 19. obedience of
all Christs cōmaundements, to2\. Pe [...] 10. make [...]heyr election more
sure, to themselves, & so to1\.  [...] 2 12. work out theyr salvation with
[...]ear, & trembling: alwayes provideing for themselves the Prophets
assurance, which was that he should not be ashamed, when he had respect to all
Gods com­maundments. And this may serv not onely for an answer to the
obiection,6 O [...] but also for an argument for the thing intended.

But Christ hath left an order for the reformation of every Math [...] 18\. 1
[...] 16\. 17. BROTHER falling  [...]nto SIN, which cannot be observed towards
any of them; whom we cannot therefore  [...]hus acknowledg, & communicate with
accordeingly.

This indeed sheweth that they are without the order of Christ in his Ch [...]
[...]n which they ought to be;ANSW but doth not therefore conclude them not to
be  [...]ur brethren, or Gods children, or that there is no bond of fayth, &
the spi­  [...]it between theyr, & our persons. And by this ground we should
not repute  [...] godly person though actually separated, our brother, nor
keep private cō ­munion with him: nor any at all with the reformed Ch:, or
with any theyr members; with are too too much wanting in this order. But as we
may cō ­municate with thousands in Engl: as with holy persons, in private
exhorta­  [...]ions, & admonitions, so may we also in private prayer, though
in neyther  [...]he one, nor other publiquely, as hath formerly been shewed.
And this I al­  [...]o conceav to have the force of another argument for the
practise.

The L: Iesus hath promised so far to hear mens prayers, as they7\. O [...]
Math 18. 19. AGREE TO­GETHER in the things they ASK: which cannot be between
them, & vs, seing they  [...]re to pray for the prosperous estate of theyr
Church Communion, governement, & Mi­  [...]istery, agaynst which we both pray,
& witnes.

There are thousands in the assemblyes, who, (whatsoever thorough hu­maynANSW
fraylty, theyr practise be) pray for little more, in effect, in the Ch: of
Engl: then we do And 2dly though there be between them, & vs some diffe­
[...]ences yet may the same be so carryed by Christian discretion, &
moderatiō mutuall, as that our prayers be not interrupted. And though we must
agree [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=12) in the
particulars, which we expresly pray for, yet if we may not ioyn in prayer with
them, with whom we have particular differences, how shall we pray with almost
any the members of the reformed Churches? yea what two Ch: or persons in the
same Ch: should not at one tyme, or other refuse [...] prayer together? But
divers inconveniences will (I doubt not) arise in thi [...] practise, as there
do many in all our doeings: which we must therefore la­bour to prevent, or
moderate by godly wisdom, & not abandon for the [...] things otherwise
lawfull.

It this practise may be warranted with them, why not with sundry Papists
also,OBI. & much more with many excommunicants out of the Church, for some
particular sin?

The fayth of Rome, & so of Papists indeed, cannot by the word or GodANSW. be
proved true iustifying fayth, nor the spirit receaved by that fayth, the
spirit of prayer, which God hath promised to hear. But the fayth published in
the name of the Ch: of Engl: & professed by many there personally, is to be
esteemed such by the word of God. Neyther are we now come to a di­vers fayth,
but to a divers order from that there prevayling: in submission wherevnto we
think our selves bound to make further manifestation of our fayth, then there
we did, or could do. And for excommunicates, there in this apparent
difference, that whereas we are to apply our selves to the other, not yet come
so far, what we may, for theyr further provocation, we are on the contrary to
withdraw our selves from them, what we may fo [...] Cor. 3.  [...]. theyr
humbling, both in spirituall communion, & civill familiarity: theyr estate in
the one, & other, putting a speciall barre between them, & vs.

But this will endanger the bringing in of great confusion when one man will th
[...] OBI. esteem of, & walk towards one, a 2d another, & a 3d wilbe otherwise
mynded to­wards them both.

The very same might habe been obiected agaynst Pauls doctrine of
ap­plicationANSW. to the weak: & it might have been sayd; one will iudg this
man but weak, another that man, but a 3d neyther of them, but both obstinate
[...]m. 14. what confusion will here bee? So for our walking towards the
members of the Dutch, & French Churches. Have we not administered publiquely t
[...] Cor. 9.  [...]. some of eyther, which vnto some others of them we would
not do? The same course we hould in our private walking. Yea do we not sundry
tyme [...] fall into the same difficultyes in our publique communion, being
divers [...] mynded in the receaving in, & casting out of members? In all
which cases we must have vse of Christian discretion in our selves, &
moderatio [...] one towards another: & must study not onely how to effect that
which our selves think best, but how to bear the contrary, with the least
offence,  [...] it be not intollerable.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=12) And thus
much for the obiections agaynst this practise: the Reasons1\. ARG [...]
iustify it, follow.

And. 1. (the former grounds being held, & more specially, that private
[...]rayer is no Ch: action, nor done by any Ch: power, or order, but merely
[...]ersonall) both Mr Bernards Argument, that we are taught by our Saviour
Matth.  [...] 6\. Gal 3. 2 [...] 1\. Ioh. 1. [...]hrist, to ioyn in prayer, &
to say OVR FATHER, with them whom we iudg the  [...]hildren of God; as also Mr
Amisses, that we may have visible communion with  [...]em, whom we rightly
discern to have communion with Christ, are of force, to wit  [...]ccordeing to
the limitations, & distinctions formerly made.

As all communion in actions presupposeth an vnion of persons, so doth2\. ARG
[...]ery vnion of persons necessarily draw with it communion in workes, as a
[...]turall effect thereof. Which as it is true in Christ the head first, with
who­  [...] merits,Ioh. 15.  [...] 5. & grace no man can communicate, till by
fayth he be vinted to  [...] person, & with which all so vinted do necessarily
partake: so is it in theTit. 1. 3. Philem.  [...] Eph 4.  [...] [...]embers
mutually, who must first be knit together by that one fayth, & [...]e spirit,
& so being vinted must preserv the vnity, & walk in the commu­  [...]n
thereof. We are to walk in the common workes of humanity with  [...]ery man,
accordeing to that common bond: in the works of kindred, or  [...]eindship, as
with a friend, or kinsman: of common Christianity, with a  [...]ristian: & so
in the works of Ch: communion with the members of the  [...] Church. As then
God hath vnited vs in our persons by fayth, & the  [...]rit, vnder one head
Christ, with many in the assemblyes, so are we also to  [...] our selves in
the exercises of those our personall graces, notwithstan­  [...]g the humayn
infirmityes, especially about outward ordinances, appea­  [...]g in vs, or
them.

There was between them in the assemblyes who feared God, & vs, be­  [...]e our
separation a bond of the Spirit, & we might lawfully pray together3\. ARG
[...] lawfull things, personally. And hath our growth in the knowledg, &
[...]edience of the will of God, dissolved that bond, they remayning the
[...] they were, & it may be growing further also therein? Surely such is the
[...], & so great the strength of this bond of the spirit, to them who duely
[...]nsider it, with that reverence, which is meet, as that many, & great in­
[...]mityes cannot break it. And by reason of it, & of many other so excel­
[...]t things there to be found, it deeply concerneth vs to weigh with our
[...]ves, in what respect, & how far we make our separation: that as we make
[...] the good things there as snares to entangle our soules in the things
[...]ich are evill, so that neyther for the evilles (vnavoydable in the
publique  [...]inances there) we throw away all at a venture, as some ill-
advised do.  [...] if two godly persons of them may lawfully pray together
privately for  [...]full things, why not we with eyther, or both of them? Do
we loose any [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=13) lawfull liberty
in a common Christian duety, by breaking of our vnlaw­full course, & standing?
If not, then neyther can this course be iustly re­proved, neyther should we
debar our selves of our Christian liberty herein. [...]. 5. 1.

As we are not for infirmityes, & corruptions to refuse the fellowship [...]
[...] ARG. a true Christian Ch: in things lawfull, but by all good means to
endeavo [...] her reformation, whilst there is any hope: so neyther are we to
refuse th [...] fellowship of a true Christian person (so appearing)▪ in
things lawfull,  [...] his infirmityes & corruptions, especially till he
appear vnto vs obstinate, & irrecoverable therin.

Lastly, to repute them holy persons, & pertakers of the same pretiou [...]
[...] ARG. fayth with our selves, as I have shewed before, we have alwayes
done (not [...]withstanding theyr Ch: state) & yet not to ioyn with them in
the person [...] workes of fayth (no extraordinary bar comeing between)
seemeth a de [...]niall of that in deed, which in word is professed: & all
one, (if not worse as if one mā should professe of another, that he held him
his speciall freind but would neyther perform to him, nor receav from him any
duety  [...] speciall freindship: or that he deemed him a very honest man, but
ye [...] would neyther trust him, nor have otherwise to deal with him for a
far thing.

For conclusion thenPhil. 3. let vs follow the counsayl of the Apostle, to pr
[...] ­ceed by one rule, wherevnto we are come: vnder hope that God will
further reve [...] the truth in those particulars vnto them, who are otherwise
mynded: as al [...] following his example, in becomeing all to all in the
things which are law [...]full. And above all things let love abound in vs,
which will teach vs (a [...] many other good lessons so this amongst the rest)
not to cover the goo [...] [...]rov. 10.  [...]. graces of God in men vnder
theyr infirmityes, but contrarywise, theyr i [...]firmityes vnder the graces
of Gods spirit in them.Pet. 4. 8

But lest this practise, & the grouds thereof be further streyned, the
[...]entend, or then it will reach, I think it here meet to ad a few things,
for th [...] iust, & lawfull bounding of it.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=13)

## 2\. Of publique Communion.

AS vve are then to ioyn our selves vvith them, wherein God hath ioyned vs; so
are we, wherein he severeth vs, to sequester & sever our selves. And this I
verily beleiv he doth in theyr, & our Church Communion, Service, Order of
Government, Mi­nistery, & Ministrations. If the parrish assemblyes gathered by
compulsion, of all the parrishioners promiscuously: the Provinciall, Diocesan,
& Lord­ly government: the Ministery thence derived, with  [...]e service-book,
& administrations accordingly, be of God; then is our  [...]lowship, onely of
persons sanctifyed (at least outwardly) ioyning them­  [...]ves by voluntary
profession vnder the government, & Ministery of an  [...]ership; cōceaving
prayers & thankesegivings, according to the Churches  [...]esent occasions) by
the teachings of the spirit, & so administering the  [...]craments accordeing
to the simplicity of the gospell, not of God, nor  [...]m heaven. If on the
contrary, ours be of God, & of his Christ; then is  [...]eyrs of Anti-Christ,
Gods, & Christs adversary. Eyther the one or other  [...] plantings, which God
hath not planted, & shalbe rooted vp. We will breifly con­  [...]er of the
particulars.

And first, the word, kahall, in Hebrew; in Greek Ecclesia, in English, Church;
[...]nifyeth a company of people called out; & that in respect both of the
[...]ce, or will of the Caller, & obedience of the Called: & so, restreyned to
[...]gious vse, signifyeth a company of people called, & come out of the
[...]e of nature, into the state of grace; out of the world, into the kingdom
[...] Christ. Who are therefore entituled,1\. Cor.  [...] 2\. Eph 2. 19 20.
21. 1. Tim. 3. 15. Math. 13 24. & 2 [...] 43\. Act. 1. 3. Saynts by calling, &
sanctifyed, or se­  [...]ated, in Christ Iesus: the temple, house, & houshould
of God, & kingdom of hea­  [...], & of God. And since the Church is neyther a
naturall, nor a civill, but  [...]pirituall state, it must not be gathered,
nor consist, of naturall, or civill,  [...]other then spirituall persons. And
this will yet better appear, if we con­  [...]er it (as the scriptures direct
vs) asEph. 1 [...] 22\. 23. & 4 15. 16. Col. 1. 24 Eph 4. 16 the body of
Christ, vnder him the head; to which therefore it must be conformable in every
part, by the indwelling of  [...] spirit, effectually workeing in the measure
thereof.

2dly, vnto the true ChurchRō. 9. 4. 1 Cor 3 [...] 21\. 22. apperteyn the
Covenant, & promises, the  [...]nistery, sacraments, & services of God, with
all the holy things of God of Christ: which must therefore be gathered, &
consist of such persons, vnto which these things belong in communion, & by
common right. [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=14) And both the
Scriptures, & common reason teach, that whomsoever th [...] Lord doth call, &
vse to, & in any speciall work, & imployment, he doth in a speciall manner
separate, & sanctify them therevnto. And so the C [...] being to be imployed
in the speciall service of God, to the glory of his  [...] ­ciall love, &
mercy in theyr happines, & to shew forth his vertues, must be [...] such
persons, as by, & in whom, he will, & may thus be worshipped glorifyed: & as
are by him both in theyr persons, & fellowship, sepa [...]ted, & sanctifyed
therevnto.

But here the Authours of a certayn treatise published agaynst Mr Ch [...]
charg A sheild  [...]f Defē ­ce &c.  [...]ag. 8 [...]. him with much
falsehood, for affirming all true Churches from the begin­ning of the world to
have been established by this separation, which we (whom the [...] call
Brownists, as the Church of Engl: calles them Puritans) do desyre. A [...] for
this they desyre it may be shewed, how the Church of God before the flood
[...] gathered by such a separation, to wit, of the godly, from the prophane;
[...] this is the separation, we desyre. And know they not that God in
establish­ingANSW. the first Church of the GospellGen. 3.  [...]5 & 4\. 12.
[...]6\.  [...]oh 8. 44. put emnity (which is more then sepa­ration) between
the seed of the woman, Christ & the faythfull in him: & the se [...] of the
Serpent, Sathan, & the wicked with him theyr father? Which separa­tion also
stood so firm, as the sons of God, might not so much as take th [...] wives of
the daughters of men. Or if these men will have mariage (as byGen. 6. 2.
[...]. 45. theyr practise they make it) a Church action, then they see an
expresse se­paration for Ch: Communion before the flood.

And where they further alledg that the Dutch, & French Churches which we
acknowledg for true Ch: were not established by such a separation, as we make
they accuse them vniustly, to excuse themselves.

They were at the first established of a sanctifyed people by voluntar [...]
profession separateing themselves into particular Churches from the pro [...]
­phane multitudes in the places, & parrishes where they lived, (& th [...]
with great persequution:) & so do still continue a separated people [...]
though thorough continuance of tyme, & peace, they (as all othe [...] Churches
vse to do) have lost of theyr first purity, & Zeal. Were, or an [...] any
commpelled into them by penall lawes? Or do they consist of all [...] the
parrish inhabitants, as the Engl: Parrishionall Churches were, & do [...] Doth
not Mr Cluse, & we all, & these men themselves know, that scar [...] one of
ten in the parrish, is of the Church in the whole cuntry through out? How do
they then reproach the Churches of God (contrary t [...] theyr own, & all mens
knowledg) as not being a separated people fro [...] the prophane multitude?
The thing is, they would by casting dirt, & myr [...] in other mens faces,
make theyr own seem the fayrer.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=14) That the
Dutch, & French Churches condemn our separation, as schism, is ney­  [...]her
to the purpose, nor true: neyther can they name one Church that ever
[...]assed any such Censure vppon vs: neyther hath any one learned, & godly
[...]an amongst them (to my knowledg) ever gone about to refute our pra­
[...]tise, or confession (though published both in Dutch, & Latin vnto them)
[...]hich notwithstanding they have done in theyr publique wryteings ge­
[...]erally agaynst such Heretiques, & Schismatiques, as have been amongst
[...]hem. It is more both pertinent, & true, that the Ch: of Engl: (for which
[...]hese men plead) condemns them her proctours as Schismatiques, & excom­
[...]unicates, for theyr wicked errours.

If Mc Iohnson confesse (as they tell vs) the Ch: of Engl: a true Church, he
[...]ust be able to prove it established by separation, & a seperated body, in
the  [...]onstitution. He with the rest have formerly defyned a true visible
Ch: a com­  [...]any of people called, & separated from the world by the word
of God, &c: & provedApol. 3 [...] Posit. Confe [...] of fay [...] Art. 17.
[...]he same by many scriptures.

And to conceav of a Church (which is the body of Christ, & houshould of God)
not separated from the prophane1\. Ioh. 19. world, which lyeth in wickednes,
is  [...]o confound heaven, & earth, & to agree Christ, with Beliall: & in
truth, the  [...]ost prophane, & daungerous errour, which, this day, prevayles
amongst  [...]hem, that fear God: & by which Christianity is more exposed to
the con­  [...]empt of Turkes & Iewes then by any other evill.

But here a defence by many made, & much set by, must be consideredOBI. [...]f;
which is, that the wicked, & prophane in the parrishes (though frequenting the
[...]ame place with the rest) are not of the Church; but onely they who fear
God, & make  [...]onscience of theyr wayes.

It they sayd, no other should be of the Church: though comeing intoANSW
[...]he same place, it were true: but to argue from that which should be, to
[...]hat which is, when that is not, which should be, is vnsound, & presump­
[...]uous: as is that indeed of all other defences, most frivolous. Thus might
[...]he Cor: have answered Paul, that the incestuous mā was none of the Ch:
though 1\. Cor.  [...] [...]e frequented the same place with them. And if this
defence were good, the greatest part of the Ministers of the Church should not
be of the Church:  [...]or the greatest part from the Prelate to the Paritour,
are (God knoweth) irreligious, & vnconscionable persons. For conclusion then:
we all know,  [...]hat the Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, or Curats, are
appoynted, & so called  [...]he Parrish Preists, & are accordeingly to
Minister: Offering vp the Parrish Prayers, & Sacrifices: & of the Parrishes to
receav tithes, & offerings,  [...]s theyr duetyes: to Marry, Church after
Childe-byrth, Baptize, & bury  [...]ll that are maryed delivered of Childe,
born, & do dy in theyr parrishes: & so to give the Lords supper to every one
of them at sixteen years ould. [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=15) If it be sayd,
the Minister may suspend, & so procure (if they reform not the excommunication
of all vnworthy persons: admit it; & even this pro­ves, the whole parrish yea
the most wicked with the rest, to be the Church▪ For otherwise what needed
they be suspended, or how could they be ex [...] communicated; since the Ch:
is not to iudg them, which are without, but the [...] which are within?

Let all them then who fear God, know, & consider, that when th [...] come to
worship in the parrish assemblyes, they ioyn themselves where C [...] hath not
ioyned them: & acknowledg that society for the true Ch: of God & communion of
Saynts, which he hath not sanctifyed for that purpose [...] that, they offer
theyr solemn sacrifices out of the true temple, made of liv [...] ­stones:
where alone they should present them: that in [...]. Pet 2. 5 Deut. 1 [...].
5. 6. 7.  [...]1\. Cor. 10. 17. eating of one brea [...] they make themselves
one body with them: & them members of Christ, wh [...] are (for the present)
apparent lims of Sathan: & that in saying Our Fath [...] with them, they
acknowledg them for the children of God, who in th [...] perswasion of theyr
own consciences, areIoh. 8.  [...]4. of theyr father the divell, & do  [...]
lustes.

And (which is most of all to be observed, & wherein those parrish as­semblyes
do differ from all true Churches in the world) this mischef is no [...]
casuall, & falling in by occasion, but of the very first frame, & constitution
into which,Gal. 2. 4 Iude. 4. false brethren, & wickedmen have not crept
privily, as into th [...] Churches of God of ould, & of late also; but have
been, & are, by bodily punishments publiquely, & openly, into them
constreyned, & in the [...] continued. Neyther in this confusion, did the
wicked intrude, & thru [...] themselves into the fellowship of holy
assemblyes, as in true Churches  [...] too commonly to be seen: but on the
contrary, the godly (few as they were, & yet are in comparison) did vnite, &
mingle themselves (after they [...] dispersion in popery) in, & into the
prophane parrishes, where theyr ou [...]ward estates, & occasions lay. And
2dly, whereas the trueMath.  [...]8\. 17. 1. Cor. 5.  [...]. 5. Heb. 12.
[...]5\. Gal. 5. 11. 1. Thess. 3 14. Churches  [...] Christ enioy his
presence, & power, for the purgeing out of persons ap [...] ­pearing vngodly,
& incorrigible; these parrishonall assemblyes want no [...] onely all such
power in them, or theyr Ministers (which the Prelates, & theyr substitutes
have seazed into theyr hands, & for the stablishing  [...] whose state, &
advantage of whose honour, & profit it is, to have them n [...] better) but
even all possibility of reformation, except they cease to be g [...]thered by
theyr parrish perambulation, as they are, instead of holy, volu [...] ­tary, &
personall profession of fayth, & confession of sins as, they should be.

Now touching theyr solemn, & set book-service, thus much. Since th [...] Lord
hath no where commaunded, or requyred in his word (which is th [...] [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=15) onely Rule for
his worship) any humayn, & apochripha wryteings to be  [...]sed in his Church
to worship him by, much lesse to be read, by stint, for prayer, it is
vnlawfull for any of Gods servants toCol.  [...] 23. submit vnto any such
voluntary religion, through humblenes of mynde, or for any other cause: or to
partake in the holy things of God by it administred: lestMath.  [...] 9. they
worship in  [...]ayn, & God reprove them saying, who hath requyred these
things at your  [...]ands?

But they tell vs, that Christ hath taught his disciples when they prayed, to
[...]y Our Father &c. True, but I deny it to be Christs meaning to bynde
themOBI. [...]o these very words: as the ministers are bound to say theyr
Certayn. ForANSW. [...]eyther do the two Evangelists vse the very same words:
neyther, if that were Christs meaning, were it lawfull to vse any other form
of words.

For he sayth when you pray that is, whensoever you pray, say: & he whoLuke. 1
[...] 2. [...]rayes not, as Christ there teacheth, offers strang fyre before
the Lord. He  [...]hen there teacheth to pray without hypocrisy, & vayn
babling, & with fayth, & perseverance: though I doubt not, but these words
also, being applyed  [...]o present occasions, & without opinion of necessity,
may be vsed. But ad­  [...]it Christs meaning were to ty his disciples to a
form of words: will the Byshops therefore presume to impose vppon men, another
form of words,  [...] so an other form, & manner of worship? which (if Christ
tyed his di­  [...]ciples to worship him by a certayn form of words, they
appoynting an  [...]ther form of words for his worship) they vndenyably do.
Will they thus  [...]alk cheek by iowl with Christ in his house, & set vp
theyr threshoulds by Gods, Ezech. 4. 8. [...] appoynt a new manner of
worshiping God, & so a new will of God, as  [...]deed they do?

Mr Cluses forenamed adversaryes demaund touching a prayer of his in  [...]he
end of his book, whether any of his flock in reading of that his prayer, may
lift A sheil [...] &c. pag. 38\. 39. [...]p theyr heart, & say Amen to his
petition. If not, then (say they) it is a sorry  [...]ayer &c: if they may,
then according to our doctrine, he sets vp a goulden Calf,  [...] erects an
Idoll, by setting down this form of prayer: & they, which in the reading
[...] it, lift vp theyr hearts in prayer to desyre the same thing, commit
Idolatry.

Nothing is absolutely, or in it self, an Idoll: but in relation to, & re­
[...]ectANSW. of the end, to which it is appoynted, & vsed. And we do
therefore re­  [...]ute the service book an Idoll, because it is, & is
appoynted to be read by the Minister, for his, & the Churches prayers. But
what proportionable to his hath Mr Cluses prayer? Is it appoynted by him to
this end, or by the  [...]h: with him so vsed? It is published by him for the
manifestation vnto  [...]thers of his desyre, that they by reading the same
privately, might be ad­monished of, & provoked vnto theyr duety. It is his
prayer, but theyr in­  [...]ruction, & provocation: & so by them to be read, &
vsed. And for the [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=16) inward listing vp
of the heart, is nothing to the question in hand; which is about the outward
exercise, & manifestation of prayer. A man in reading or hearing read, Pauls
Epistles: or in singing, or hearing sung Davids Psa [...] ­mes, or in opening,
or hearing opened those, or any other Scriptures i [...] the Church may say
Amen to any truth, or desyre in his heart that th [...] good things in them
conteyned may be accomplished, & come to passe [...] Are therefore these
scriptures, & sermons the prayers of the Church?  [...] (which is the very
poynt) is the reading, singing, preaching, & hearing o [...] them the Churches
exercise of prayer, or praying? we doubt not but it i [...] lawfull to read
privately the prayers, or sermons of any godly men th [...] come to our hands
for instruction, & provocation in & vnto any good du [...] [...]ty, & to have
the heart therewith affected accordeingly: but to conclude [...] that
therefore it is lawfull to bring the some into the Ch: & to read the [...]
publiquely for that end, & (which is more) that the so reading of them  [...]
the preaching, & praying which the Ministers of Christ are to give themselv
[...] Act. 6. 4.  [...]. Cor. 12  [...]. 7. 8. vnto: & for theyr furnishing
wherevnto, he giveth them the speciall gifis  [...] his spirit, is to make
ropes of sand: both will hould alike, & are indeed  [...] like childeish. But
let vs a litle further wey theyr words. They call it De­cluses prayer, because
he penned it: acknowleding therin that theyr Chur [...] Service is the prayers
of the Byshop or Chaplin that penned them: & th [...] manifestation of the
spirit given to him, that is dead, & rotten. Whereas the Ministers of Christ
have receaved theyr proper measure of the manifesta­tion of the spirit to
profit withall: by which theyr infirmityes are holpen, & the [...] [...]
taught to pray, as they ought, & as are the Ch: necessityes, & occasions.

They further call this the reading of Decluses prayer: & therein confes [...]
Rom. 8.  [...]8. theyr Ch: praying to be reading. And is reading praying? or
are not these two distinct exercises, & for divers ends? Do men read to God,
(whic [...] if to read be to pray) they must do? In praying, we powr matter
out  [...] the heart: but in reading we receav matter in: as common reason
teach [...]eth. How ignorant then or obstinate soever men are in theyr custome
[...] & traditions receaved from theyr auncestours, theyr set service read f
[...] prayer is but an humayn devise for Gods worship (& that vnreasonab [...]
also:) & so an Idoll & agaynst the 2d Commaundment; with which  [...]
fellowship is to be had. Which whilst these men, & others will not lea [...]
of God, by vs, whose persons they despise, but will still plead for it,  [...]
they do; most iustly do they provoke God to punish them, & theyr f [...] lowes
by it, as he doth, It is iust, that whilst one kindleth, & another blo
[...]eth & a third offereth this strange fyre, they should together be scorch
[...] with the flame of it.

It now remayns I ad a few things touching the government Ecclesia [...] [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=16) [...]all, &
Ministery. But for that it becometh all honest, & modest men to be more
forward in defending theyr own, then in reproveing other mens  [...]oeings; &
that many lowd clamours of Anabaptistry, & Popularity are  [...]aysed agaynst
our government, I think it meet breisly to insert a few things  [...]ouching
our profession, & practise therein.

The government of the Church then, as it is taken most strictly for the
outward ordering, directing, & guidance of the same Ch: in her affayres  [...]
for in a more generall sence the whole administration of Christs kingdom
[...]y himself, or others, inwardly, or outwardly, publiquely, or privately,
[...]ay be comprehended vnder the government of the Church) we place in
[...]e Byshops, or Elders thereof, called by Christ, & the Ch: to feed, that
is to  [...]ach, Act 20. 17. 20. 1 Tim. 5 17. & rule the same. Which theyr
government, & the nature thereof, I  [...]ill playnly lay down in such
particulars, as wherein the peoples liberty is  [...]reatest: which are
reduced to these three heads; 1. Exercise of prophecying:  [...]. Choyce of
Officers: & 3\. Censureing of offendours.

And 1. for the Exercise of prophecying; wherein men though not in of­
[...]ce) have liberty to move, & propound theyr questions, & doubts for satis­
[...]ction,Luke 2. 46. as also haveing receaved a gift, to administer the
same, vnto edification, ex­  [...]rtation, Rom. 12.  [...] & comfort. As then
Paul, 1\. Pet. 4. 10. & Barnabas comeing into the Synagogue of the  [...]wes
(where they were no Officers) the Rulers of the Synagogue sent vnto  [...]em
after the lecture of the law, 1\. Cor. 1 [...] Act. 13. 14. 15. if they had
any word of exhortation to the people, to  [...]y on: (which order the Iewes
also observ in theyr Synagogues at this day)  [...] with vs, the Officers
after theyr ordinary teaching, signify, & exhort vnto  [...]e vse of, the like
liberty, in that, & the other particulars formerly named:  [...]so (as there
is occasion) open, & explayn things obscure, & doubtfull:  [...]prove things
vnsound, & impertinent: & so order moderate, & derter­  [...]ine the whole
exercise by the word of God. And in this I suppose it ap­  [...]ears to all
men, that the Officers govern.

For the choyce of Officers, we do take for our directions the practises of the
[...]ostles, & Apostolicall Ch: Act. 1. & 6\. & 14\. grounded vppon a
perpetuall  [...]uity, that men should chuse them vnder Christ, vnto whose
faythfulnes,  [...]der the same Christ, & by his appoyntment, they are to
commit themsel­  [...]s, & theyr soules: & them, as Christs, & theyr servants
to maynteyn: in  [...]y one of which examples the conscience of a godly man is
better esta­  [...]ished, then in all the Canons of Popes, or Prelates, or
other devises of Politique  [...]en whatsoever, departeing from the
Apostolicall simplicity. I will instance  [...] one example where this poynt
is most largely, & clearly set down; vnto  [...]hich therefore the rest must
be referred, & by it other places (handling the  [...]me matter more breifly)
explaned, & opened. We do read. Act. 6. how the  [...]postles call together
the multitude; shew them the necessity of Ch [...]esing Deacons, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=17) what theyr work
is, & how they must be qualifyed, & how many they woul [...] have chosen:
whom, being chosen accordingly, by the multitude, they ordey [...] sanctifying
the whole action with prayer. Where it is evident, that though the calling did
cheifly depend vppon the multitude, yet did the government of the whole action
ly vppon the Officers. Conformable wherevnto is on [...] practise, so near as
we can, vppon the like occasion.

Lastly, for our direction in the publique vse of the Censures, we pro­pound to
our selves the Rule of Christ Math. 18. 17. touching sins privat [...] in
themselves, but to be made publique by the sinners refuseing to hear
ad­monition: & with it, the practise thereof, by the doctrine of his Apostle
[...] 1\. Cor. 5. about a sin of publique nature. For the not Censureing where
[...] he sharply reproveth the Church; vehemently exhorting them, that bein
[...] come together in the name of the Lord Iesus, they would by his power
(for the vse whereof he shewes his iudgment, for his parte severally, &
promiseth hi [...] ioynt assent in theyr publique assembly) excommunicate the
offendour. For neyther could the Apostle being but one, be the Church, or
Congre­gation, which consists of two or three that is a company (though never
s [...] small) gathered together in Christs name, [...]ath. 18  [...]. as he
expounds himself: neyther di [...] he seaze into his own hands the liberty of
the Corinth: for theyr neglecting it; as oppressours vse to deal with theyr
tenants, & debtors, takeing the ad­vantages of forfaytures agaynst them:
neyther indeed could the Apostl [...] with any equity, or iustice proceed to
any Censure agaynst the offender,  [...] not being before sufficiently
convinced of, & rebuked for his sin, as he shoul [...] have been. [...]. Tim.
5.  [...].

Answerable to the course by Christ & the Apostle there directed, & by the
Corinth: observed, as appeareth 2. Cor: 2. 6. we desyre our practise may be.
In which, sins scandalous (if in themselves of publique nature) a [...]
brought to the Ch: by one of the Officers: or (if private, & to be mad [...]
publique by the sinners impenitency) by the brother offended, & his
wit­nesses, at the Officers appoyntment. Where, the sin (being manifested,
[...] (for fact orderly proved agaynst the offender) is by the elders
condem­ned, & rebuked by the word of God, & the sinner exhorted to repentance
accordeing to the quality of the sin. In which conviction, & admonitio [...]
lawfully, & sufficiently made, the Ch: resteth: the men manifesting they
assent therevnto by some convement word, or signe, & the woemen by
[...]lence. And so the admonition which before was Christs, & the Officers
becomes the Churches: following the other as theyr governours, & no [...]
otherwise.

Vppon which admonition if it please God to give the sinner repent  [...]
[...]. Tim. 2.  [...]. answerable, & that he so manifest, God thereby
receaveth glory, who wa [...] [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=17) [...]ishonoured
by his sin, & men who were offended, satisfaction: & so all  [...]urther
proceeding is stayed, & the person exhorted (& others by his ex­  [...]mple)
to sin no more lest a worse thing happen vnto him. But if he remayn ob­
[...]inate, & refuse to hear the Ch: & in it Christ, admonishing him, then
with  [...]orrow for the hardnes of his heart, (all long sufferance, &
patience in the  [...]ean while vsed, accordeing to the nature, &
circunstances of the offence,)  [...]y the power of the L: Iesus (not given to
his Ch: in vayn) the impenitent  [...]nner is, for his humbling, to be cut of,
& excommunicated from the fel­  [...]owship of the Church: the Elders as
governours goeing before in decre­  [...]g the sentence, & so one of them
(vppon the peoples assent, as in admo­  [...]ition) pronounceing it in the
name of Christ, & his Church.

But for that the Officers are frayl men, & those1\. Pet. 3. nor Lords over
Gods he­  [...]tage, as are Princes, & Magistrates over theyr Subjects, but1\.
Cor.  [...]. 1. & 2\. cor. 4. 1 Ministers,  [...] Servants of Christ the
housband, & the Church the wife, whom the thing  [...]oncerns in theyr places,
as well as them) we think it lawfull for the bre­  [...]hren eyther doubtfull
of any thing in the Officers administrations, to pro­  [...]ound theyr doubt
for satisfaction; or seing them fayling in any materiall  [...]hing, to
admonish them of theyr duety & that theyCol. 4. 17. look to their Office,
[...]r (if need stand) to supply the same for the further clearing of things.
[...]nd this whole proceedings we make, & vse ordinarily on the Lords day,
[...]s being properly the L: work, a work of religion, directly respecting the
[...]ul, & conscience: & of spirituall nature, as being an administration of
Christs kingdom, which is not of this world. And this also when the whole Ch:
[...] gathered together, as which it concerneth many wayes.Ioh 15. 36. 1\.
Because the Ch: which is offended by publique sins, must be publiquely
satisfyed.1\. Cor. 4 4. 5. 2\. A  [...]le leven, leveneth the whole lump (to
wit of the Ch:) being vnpurged out.  [...].  1 Tim. 5. 20.They that sin must
be rebuked openly, that the rest may fear. 4\. The Elders, or  [...]sh [...]ps
are to feed the flock by government publiquely, as well as by doctri­  [...]e;
& being by them, over whom they are, to be highly loved for theyr work
[...]ke, 1\. Thi.  [...] 12\. 13. theyr work of government must be seen by the
Ch: which is for the  [...]me so to esteem them. And thus we beleiv, &
practise accordingly, though  [...] we confesse) with great weaknes. By which
our weaknes it cometh also  [...]o passe, that this comely order is sometymes
interrupted, & humayn frayl­  [...]es intermingle themselves, eyther by the
Officers fault in not govern­  [...]g, or the peoples in not obeying as they
ought: so as we are at tymes  [...]vertaken with some things both disorderly,
& difficult to determine; as  [...] also cometh to passe in all societyes, &
governments of, & by men, what­  [...]oever. And as in nature, the corruption
of the best thing is the worst, so  [...]n the breach of the most comely
order, there is the greatest both vncome­  [...]nes, & disorder. But things
are not to be defined by theyr abuses (as the [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=18) phylosophers
teach, & all wise men know: (so neyther must the L: ordi­nances be esteemed by
the disorders personall incident vnto them, but as they are in theyr right
state, & lawfull vse.

The order of our government then being such, as I have described it, let every
indifferent Reader iudg, whether or no, in respect of outward or­der, it be
popular, & wherein the people govern, as many please to repro­ach us, & it.
But if men will still shut their eyes agaynst the things we playn­ly, & simply
lay down, & yet open theyr mouthes agaynst vs for populari­ty, & Anabaptistry,
we can but (makeing this & the like our iust defences) commit both our selves,
& cause to God.

And thus much of our order of government. I will now go on where I left, to
shew, that the L: people may not communicate with the Church of Engl: in
regard of the government Ecclesiasticall, & Ministery thence de­rived.

I And 1. the Scriptures teach vs, that the1\. Act 20.  [...]. 20. 14. 23
[...] 1\. 1. Tim. 5. 7. H: Ghost hath appoynted sundry, Overseers, or Byshops
over one flock to feed, that is, to teach, & govern it: of which it also
standeth in need. It is then the vnholy Ghost of Anti-Christ, which hath
devised one Byshop over many flockes, which he cannot possi­bly feed, if he
would. Onely for his government he hath this help, that he is a Lord over
them, & not a Minister, & servant vnto them, & so bears more sway over the
prophane multitude, [...]t. 1. 5. whereof those Churches most what consist, by
Lording it with his imperious Canons, & purse penaltyes, then many true
Byshops could do, by theyr faythfull ministery, & service, accor­ding to
Christs testament.

It is written Eph: 4. 8. 11. 12. 13. that Christ when he ascended on high, II.
gave gifts to men: some Apostles, & some Prophets, & some Evangelists, & some
Pastours, & Teacher: for the work of the Ministery, &c. vntill all the Saym
[...] were met together vnto a perfit man, &c. Where the Apostle teacheth, how
[...] Christ the king of his Ch: hath set in it certayn orders of officers
(answe­rably gifted extraordinarily, & ordinarily) & those also there to be,
[...] continue in their tyme, till the same Ch: & body of Christ were
complete, both for number of persons, & measure of graces. Now if the Byshop
[...] be Pastours, or sheepheards, & Teachers, (as some would make them) over
their Provinces, & Diocesses, how will they answer the Lord for not teaching
them? Or how hath the Lord appoynted such a Ministery (be­ing an office of
trust, & wherein the personall ability, & faythfulnes o [...] the Minister is
requyred) as which he that receaved it, cannot possibly fulfill if he would?
Or if the Byshops be of the order of Pastours, & Teach­ers,Col. 4. 17. (which
are he lowest Ministers) of what order are the parrishion [...] Ministers,
which are below them? And for the first three, Apostles, Pro­phets, [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=18) & Evangelists,
they were extraordinary, for the firstMath.  [...]. 19. 1. Cor. 6. planting, &
wa­  [...]ering of the Churches. The Apostles, & Prophets laying the
foundation, by doctrine infallibly true: & the Evangelists employed by the
Apostles dire­ction, here, & there, for the perfiting of their work, as there
was need. Neyther were they, one, or other, tyed to any particular flock,
Diocesse,Eph. 2  [...] 1\. Cor. 10 11. Math 19. Province, or Nation; but were
generall men, & for all places; being there­  [...]nto furnished with the
knowledg, & vse of all tongues, as there was oc­casion. So that whilst our
Engl: Byshops plead their Provinciall, & Dio­cesan Iurisdiction from the
commission of the Apostles, & Evangelists,Act. 16 23. Rom. 1. 21. 1 cor. 10.
2. Cor. 6. 16. 2 & ch.  [...] 28\. 2. Tim. 5. 21. Tit. 1 5 [...] & 3\. 1 they
are found to be of their number, whoRev. 2 sayd they were Apostles, & were
not. They then, in their order of ministery, are not of the gifts, which
Christ the king of his Ch: gave, when he ascended on high, but of the gifts of
Anti-Christ in his ascent to the throne of his Apostacy: Of whose body also
they are naturall members, without which it cannot consist: as may all other
bodyes, whether Civill, or Ecclesiasticall. And since the Of­ficers of the Ch:
are. members of the body of Christ, as the eyes, mouth, hand, &c. he who ads
to, or takes from the Ch: an order of Ministery, or Office, presumes to ad to,
or take from Christs body, a member: & so abolishing a member of the body, he
doth also abolish a gift, & grace of the spirit, working effectually
accordeing to the measure, or proportion of every part; or adding a member, he
must be able to quicken, & furnish  [...]t with a proportionable gift of that
same spirit, who distributeth to every mem­ber, as it pleaseth. v. 11.1 Co
[...] 12\. 1 [...] 27\. 28. And so where the Apostle sayth, v. 4. 5. that
there are Diversityes of gifts, but the same spirit: & diverstyes of
ministeryes, but the same Lord: he playnly teacheth these two things. 1. That
all lawfull Mi­nisteryes in the Ch: are of Christ: 2dly, that none may appoynt
a Ministery  [...]n the Ch: but he who can bestow an answerable gift of
qualification: which is not in the power of any man, or angell.

The Lord by his Apostle hath ordered, that the Elders, or Byshops III which
labour in the word, & doctrine, should have double honour, spe­cially,1\. Tim.
17. 1. Tim. 1. & above them that Rule, though well: & that vppon a ground of
perpetuall equity, that since the Byshops, or Elders office is a work, the
cheif work, which preaching is, should have the cheif honour. But this order
of Christ, & of nature it self is clean subverted by the order of the Prelacy,
& Ministery in Engl: where ten-fould honour is given to ruleing, though not
well, above the most paynfull labouring in the word, & doctrine. It well
suites with the spirit of Anti-Christ that im­perious Lording over the soules,
& consciences of men should be ad­vanced above the base, & burdensom work of
Preaching Gods word.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=19) Lastly,
the rights, & libertyes, wherewith Christ the Lord hath in  [...] word endowed
his Church (the Elders for theyr government, & the people [...] for theyr
liberty) for the calling of Officers, & Censureing of offenders these
oppressours spirituall have seazed into theyr own hands, as theyr
pe­culiars:Cor. 5. Act. 1. & [...] in, & vppon which theyr vsurpation (which
is specially to be no­ted) theyr very office, & order is founded. [...]er. 22.
Wo be so him (sayth the Lord) that buildeth his house by vnrighteouses, & his
Chambers by wrong: how much more then vnto them, who build theyr high pallaces
by such spirituall in­jury agaynst the Lord, his house, ministers, & people,
as they apparent­ly do.

For conclusion; the tree is known by the fruits: & too evident it is by they
fruits, vppon what root the Prelates tree groweth. Theyr preferring ( [...]
that in theyr most folemn Constitutions) the wearing of a surplice, or
ma­keing a Crosse in a Babes forehead by the Minister, before the preaching of
the gospell: of bowing the knee by the people to, or at the Lords supper
before the most worthy receaving otherwise; the reading, & hearing o [...]
theyr (rayther then Gods) service, by the one, & other, above the per­formance
of any part of Gods worship appoynted in his word, by eyther o [...] them, do
declare them to be no mean members of that man of sin, & adver­sary, who
exalteth himself above all that is called God. [...] Thes. 2.  [...]4.

Theyr constreyning the Ministers to receav from them, & by theyr sol [...]
authority, theyr order of preisthood, & institution to theyr cures, with theyr
licences to preach: enforceing them to subscribe, & that from they hearts, to
theyr devised government, Service, & Ceremonyes, & even  [...] swear
Canonicall obedience to them therein; & both them, & the people to obey theyr
Summons, & Citations, running, & rydeing to, & fro,  [...] sue, & serv in
theyr Courts: to take the oath ex Officio, to accuse them­selves, & theyr
freinds, & that often for well-doeing: to submit to they Censures of all
sortes, & not so much as to dare to speak agaynst theyr ty­rannyes, &
superstitions, vnder Peyn of Excommunication, ipso facto, [...] proclaym vnto
all men that have ears to hear, that they are in a great mea­sure, spirituall
Babilonish Lords, causing all both small, & great, rich, & pore,  [...] receav
theyr mark in theyr right hand, or forehead, & otherwise not suffering them
ey­ther to buy, or sell. [...]ev. 13.  [...]. 17.

Theyr sale of Orders, & Institutions, & that most what vnto person vtterly
vnworthy: (to the destruction of how many thousand soules fo [...] whom Christ
dyed, eyther by starving them thorough ignorance, or poy­soneing them by
profane example?) of dispensations for pluralityes,  [...] non-residencyes, of
licences to preach vp, & down the cuntry, & to man [...] at tymes by theyr
Canons prohibited: of pardons, & absolutions, whe [...] [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=19) [...]en are
excommunicated, & sometymes when they are dead, before they  [...]an have
Christian buryall: with theyr extorted fees, & purse-penaltyes the very
sinewes of theyr kingdom) do clearly pronounce agaynst them,  [...]at they, &
theyr subordinates are merchants of that great Citty Babilon, traf­
[...]ueing for all manner of ware, & for the soules of men. Ch. 18. 1 11. 12.
1

Now touching the Parochiall Ministers I have proved agaynst Mr Ber­  [...]rd,
that neyther theyr office, nor calling by which they administer it, is of
[...]hrist.1\. Ti [...] 3\. 1. The office of the Byshop is a work: & this work
stands in Act. 2 [...] 28. feeding the  [...]ck; & this feeding in preaching,
& ruleing. Now as the government of  [...]heyr flockes is not so much as
permitted vnto them, so neyther is preach­  [...]ng  [...]g any naturall, or
necessary part of theyr office: but an accessory, & ca­  [...]all ornament: &
which may be, or may not be, as the persons can, or  [...]ill. And for theyr
calling, whether to theyr preisthood at larg, by the  [...]rch-Deacons
presentation, & Byshops ordination; or to theyr speciall  [...]harges; eyther
by the Patrons presentation, Byshops Institution, & Arch- [...]eacons
Induction, or by the Byshops sole licence; the very nameing of  [...]e means
by which it is had,Luke 2 4. sufficiently proves it not to be  [...] from
heaven, [...]ut of mans, even the man of sin his vayn devise. But I will for
the present  [...]sist onely vppon this consideration, that the parishionall
Ministery is a  [...]ranch of the prelacy; & so all communion with the one, as
other, to be  [...]oyded, by Gods people.

And for the better discerning of things, it must be observed, that as the
[...]hole Nation is devided into two Provinces, vnder the two Arch-Byshops,
[...] the two Provinces into Sundry Diocesses, vnder the Byshops, & they in­
[...] theyr severall parrishes vnder the Ministers thereof; so do the Arch-By­
[...]hops, & Byshops share out vnto the parrish Preistes in theyr ordination a
[...]art of theyr Charg, to wit, so much as concerns the ordinary service of
the  [...]arrish: as they do also vnto theyr Chauncelours, Commissaryes, &
[...]rch-Deacons, an other part for inferiour government: reserving vnto
[...]hemselves the Lordship over both, for the best advātage of theyr own ho­
[...]our, & profit. So that the Chauncelour in the consistory, & the preist in
[...]he Pulpit or Desk, doth administer by one, & the same power: namely
[...]hat of the Prelate; which, from, & by him, both the one, & other doth
[...]eceav. And as Christ tould the twelv, when he sent them to preach, that
[...]e who receaved them, Mat 10. 4 [...]. receaved him, & that he, who
receaved him, receaved him  [...]at sent him: so he that receavs or
communicates with the Minister in any  [...]arrish of the land, receavs the
Byshop, that sent him, & so indeed origi­  [...]ally, the Pope, that sent him;
& of whose sending the Pope is, they, & we  [...]ake no question. The Prelacy
then being to be rooted out, as a plant, which God hath not planted, & the
ministery in the order, & office, (of which we [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=20) speak) being a
braunch of it, can the braunch survive, if the root be plucked vp? or shall
any of Gods people by their mayntenance of it, submission vnto it, or
communion with it, give therevnto any life, or pre­servation?

But here sundry defences are made by them, who in iudgment, word, & wryteing,
& some practises, dislike the prelacy: as that they are not sub­ject to theyr
government: that the Ministers do not stand by the ordination, & power
receaved from, & by them, but by the peoples acceptation: that these things
are but matters of outward order, & government, which though they may
so­mething concern the Ministers themselves, yet are they litle, or nothing to
private persons.

We will breifly consider of these defences: & let them who make them,
consider, & beware, they be not of them, who will not be reformed, but seck
excuses aster theyr own heart.

And, first, they who thus disclaym in word the Byshops government, confesse
themselves therein to be vnder no spirituall externall govern­ment at all: &
so be lawles persons, & inordinate walkers, & such as have neyther that
conscience, which is meet, of the Commaundements of Christ,1\. Tim. 5. 17.
Hebr. 13. 17. by his Apostles, to give due honour to them who rule well: & to
sub­mit themselves to these, who are over them in the Lord: nor of their own
frayl­ty, & in what need they stand of the Lords ordinances, & of this in
spe­ciall, for their guidance, & conservation in his wayes. 2dly, the dayly
practise of these men (every one of them lesse or more) in the sight of the
Sun, is a sufficient conviction of their vnhonest excuse. Their Obe­dience
vnto the Summons, & Citations (vnto their spirituall Courts) of the Prelates,
& their Deputyes; their sueing, or appearing there by them­selves, or their
proctours; the submission of the Ministers to their suspen­sions, &
deprivations, & both of Ministers, & people to their excommu­nications, do
really plead their spirituall subjection to their Iurisdiction. Yea so far are
the people from freing the Ministers by theyr acceptation, from the Prelates
iurisdiction, as on the contrary, they enthrall them much more vnder the same:
not onely by accepting them at the first vnder their mark of Institution, or
licence, but even ever after, year, by year, by chuseing a Church-warden, or
Side-man, (as they call him) to present both their own, & Ministers defaults
in & vnto their Consisto­ryes, & Visitations: as doth the Minister also chuse
another for th [...] same Purpose: for the performance of which presentations,
they are t [...] bynde themselves by oath, & so ordinarily do. So that,
howsoever many are ashamed of their Lords, & Maysters; both Ministers, &
people (n [...] actually separated, from the parrish assemblyes) stand in
spirituall sub­jection [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=20) to the Prelates,
& receiv theyr mark, though some in theyr forehead, & more professedly; &
others as effectually, though more covertly, in theyr right hand.

Now for the outward government, & ordering of the house of God, the Church; &
the outward calling of the Ministers thereof, they are not so sleighty
matters, as Politique men, out of theyr fleshly hearts would per­swade
themselves & others. The Apostle vnto Tim: treating at larg of these things
tels him, how the cause why he so wrytes is, that in his absence, 1 Tim. 3. v.
15. 16. he might know how he ought to behave himself, in the house of God,
which is the Ch: of the liveing God, the piller, & ground of truth. Where he
adorneth the Church with most honourable titles, for this very end, that he, &
all other Gods Ministers, & people might be admonished more carefully to
preserv vnviolated that sacred oeconomy, & Ch: government there prescribed: Ch
5. 21 obetesting, & chargeing him before God, & the L: Iesus Christ, & the
elect An­gels, to observ these things, vnpartially: as also wryteing vnto the
Corinth: he propounds the matters of outward1 Epist. 14 37. order, vnto them,
as the Commaund­ments of the Lord Iesus: which areMath. 28. 20. all to be
observed by his Disciples in their places: in whose eyesHebr. 3. 3. &c. he is
worthy of more honour in his own house, & in the or­dering of it, then was
Moses a servant in his Maysters house: according to whose direction
notwithstanding, all things were to be ordered. I ad, that the same Apostle,
(whatsoever other men despiseing (it seems) his simplicity, think or say)
testifyeth of the Colossians, that they had receaved Christ, as well in their
order, as fayth: Col. 2. 5. 6. & reioyceth as well in their continu­ance in
the one, as other: as on the contrary he sharply reproveth the Corinthians,
for the breach of order, & neglect of Discipline, as well, as for any other
evill. And see how vnequall these men are.1\. Cor. 5. & 14. The Popes
arrogateing to himself to be vniversall Byshop, is in it self but a matter of
order, & government: & yet they generally who are soundly mynded, deem him
properly Anti-Christ therein: alledging that of Gregory agaynst Iohn of
Constantionople, for that purpose. And if the vniversall Byshop make Anti-
Christ in the head, surely the Byshops of Diocesses, & Arch-Byshops of
Provinces, & Metropolitans of Nations, may well chaleng the pars of arms, &
shoulders of that body.

Now touching the Ministers outward calling: of such force it is, that he is by
it alone (if at all) properly, & immediately, a true Church of­ficer; as is
the Magistrate in the Common wealth, the Captayn in the army, the steward in
the family, by the outward calling of those,  [...]n whom that right is, a
true & lawfull Magistrate, Captayn, or  [...]teward: & without, which, all, &
every of them, are mere vsurpers, [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=21) howsoever
qualifyed in theyr persons, & serviceable in theyr administr [...] ­tions.
Noman (sayth the Apostle) takes vnto himself this honour, but he, th [...] is
called of God, as Aaron. And let them who think it a small matter t [...]
vsurp, [...]ob. 5. 4. (or being vsurped, to communicate with) a calling
without order by Gods word, consider what befell them, who vsurped, (or
communi­cated in the vsurpation of) the preistly honour not being therevnto
called, as was Aaron. Numb. 11. 16. And how it lyeth all the Ministers of Chri
[...] in hand to be able to justify theyr outward calling to theyr offices, th
[...] Apostle teacheth by his own example, & specially in his Epistle to the
Ch:  [...] Galatia, where it was most called in question: which they also that
canno [...] do, are to be served, as where they, who could not fynde the
wryteing of they [...] genealogy, [...]al. 1. 1. &c. & were therefore put from
the preisthood. Neh. 7. 64.

And, as they know who have experience thereof, what confort it mi­nistereth
agaynst the manifould tryals incident to the lawfull Ministers of Christ, that
they are called by them therevnto, whom vnder the Lord i [...] most
concerneth, as over whose Soules they are to watch: so on the con­trary, I
verily suppose, it cometh to passe, that even the best Ministers in the
assemblyes, do so easily, & vnworthily forsake theyr flockes, for theyr
grea­ter ease, profit, or credit; & which not, for fear of a litle
persequution? be­cause they want this testimony, & comfort of good conscience,
that they have been lawfully called to minister vnto them.

To conclude then this poynt also: the same Scriptures, & ground [...] which
prove the order of prelacy, & so of preisthood, (being a braunch o [...] it)
not to be of God, do also prove it vnlawfull for the people of God t [...]
partake in the administrations of the one, or other, & therein to submi [...]
themselves vnto them.

For 1. theyr very administrations by an vnlawfull calling are theyr sins I &
so to pertake with them in theyr administrations, is to pertake with them in
theyr sins, contrary to 1. Tim. 5. 22. Rev. 15. 4.

2dly, the ground of submission vnto the Officers of the Ch: is, that they ar
[...] made Overseers of the stock by the H. Ghost, & are over it in the Lord:
which sub­jection II therefore neyther the Prelates,Act. 10. 17.  [...]8 1
Thess 5. 1 [...]. nor preists being appoynted b [...] theyr Ghosts, can
chaleng, neyther can the people by fayth yeald the sam [...] vnto them. The
Apostle Rom. 13. vrgeing submission to all sorts of Ma­gistrats doth it vppon
this ground, that they are of God, & his ordinances: s [...] the ground of our
submission to any office of Ministery in the Ch: & stay o [...] our fayth, is
this, that it is of Christ the mediatour of his Ch: & one of hi [...]
ordinances.

III 3dly, In the 2d Commaundment of the first table are commaunded  [...]
externall spirituall ordinances, & so the externall spirituall ministery,
[...] [[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=21)
government of the Church: neyther can the same be referred to any other of the
ten Commaundements: wherevppon I infer that every such govern­ment, &
ministery not commaunded by God, & Christ, is as an Idoll, there forbidden, &
all subiection vnto it, as the bowing down vnto an Idoll.

4thly, they who iudg the Prelacy not to be of Christ, but of Anti-Christ, IIII
& so speak, & wryte, (to whom more principally I direct my speach) & yet stand
members of the parrish assemblyes vnder the government, & mi­nistery thereof,
do really, & indeed vnderprop, & vphould that, which in word, & wryteing they
would overthrow: they would blow or dash it down with their mouthes, & pens, &
yet vphould it with their shoulders. Far are they frō giving vnto Christ his
due honour in his officers, & orders, whilst they thus submit vnto the
officers, & orders of his adversary Anti-Christ, as is that whole Hierarchy &
every order in it, from the Pope vnto the Sumner. If any traytour, or rebell
should now rise vp, & strive with the king for any the dignityes or
prerogatives royall of the kingdom, & should so far prevayl with any able men,
as that they should be content to take vp­pon them, by his commission, &
sending, to administer iustice publiquely, were it lawfull for any the kings
subiects to ioyn with, or submit vnto them  [...]in their ministrations,
though in themselves never so iust? or were they not all, vnder peyn of
disloyalty, bound to abondon them, & their Courts, or assemblyes, & to adioyn,
& submit themselves vnto the kings lawfull Offi­cers, how few, or feeble so
ever? Even so must all the loyall subiects of Ie­sus Christ the king of his
Ch: withdraw themselves wholy from the powers of Anti-Christ (striveing with
Christ whether shall rule by his Officers, orders, & lawes:) whatsoever
truthes they teach or administer: & must adioyn themselves to the officers of
Christ, lawfully called, & sent to teach, & guide his Church by his word: &
therein must shew, as in other things, their loyalty, to their Lord, & king.

But here Mr Cluses forenamed Opposites step in, & plead for submis­sion vnto
vnlawfull Ministers,A shei [...] of Defē  [...]ce &c. Pag. 24\. 25. 1\. that
in Christs tyme there were divers Officers whose names had not been heard of
in the primative Ch: of the Iewes, nor ever were in­stituted by any example of
former tymes, in that Church, as the names of Lewyers, Scribes of the People,
& Rulers of the Synagogues, or Archy-Synagogues. 2. if the godly may lawfully
submit vnto the government, & guidance by private admonition of such or vate
brethr [...]n, who for their sects, factions, & superstitious observations
have had such names as were formerly vnknown vnto the Ch: of God; who also in
respect of their wekednes d [...]sirved to be cast out of the Church, & are
vniustly reteyn [...]d (as it was in th [...] Communion of the godly with the
Scriubes, & Pharisees) then is it also law­full to stand vnder  [...]dance, &
government of vnlawfull officers.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=22) In whose
defence I observ, first, that they yeild the Ministers of Eng [...] to be
vnlawfull, & to have had their names of Primates, Metropolitans,  [...] Arch-
Byshops L: Byshops, Deans, Arch-Deacons, Chauncelours, Commissarye [...]
Preistes, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, given vnto them for their sects, factions,
& s [...] perstitious observations: & yet all of them make suit, take, pay
for, & answe [...] to some or other of these names, with the orders to which
they appertey [...] 2dly, I note how vayn a pretext it is that the persons,
whose names are pr [...] fixed, are the authours of the book, as if Iohn
Fowler, & his fellowes dur [...] take vppon them to set down what names of
Officers had been heard o [...] or not, in the Iewish Ch: from the first
institution, till Christs tyme. 3 [...] where in their former Reason they make
the Scribes of the people Ch: Off [...]cers, in the 2d Reason they make the
Scribes & Pharisees, private breth [...] 4thly, they graunt one private
brother to be vnder the guidance, & govern­ment of an other, & so establish a
popular government, in a sence expresly & by iust consequence, as far as we
intend, & do: howsoever they reproa [...] vs for popularity. Now for their
Arguments, First, I deny that, which the [...] take for graunted, & vppon
which they build, to wit, that the names  [...] Lawyers, Scribes of the
people, & Rulers of the Synagogues, were not in the Iewi [...] Church, before
Christs tyme.

And 1. the Lawyers were such as were skilfull in the law of God, & th [...]
Scribes such as gave themselves eyther to expound, or wryte it, or both [...]
(being also Levites for the most parte) in which respects these their names as
honourable (& not for their factions) were most fitly given them: & no [...]
first in Christs tyme, as is affirmed, but long before, as appeareth Ier: 8.
[...] & Ezra 7. 6. 11. 12. where Ezra is called a scribe prompt in the law of
Mo [...] which Tremelius, [...]egis pe­  [...]um. & Iunius translate a Lawyer,
or one skilfull in the law [...] as indeed these Scribes, & Lawyers were the
same, as is testifyed, Math. 22 [...] 35. [...] compared with Mark 12. 28. &
so the Hebrew word may indifferent [...]ly be turned & is. And if there were
nothing els, that which we read 1. M [...] chab. 5. 42 reproves these mens
peremptory affirmation, that the names  [...] Scribes of the people were not
in the Ch: of the Iewes, before Christs tyme. But bo [...] better, & more
auncient testimony may be brought agaynst it: take th [...] one (amongst many)
in the Greek Bible, Numb. 11. 16. where the LX [...] Interpreters have it,
[...]. So for the n [...]mes of Archi-Synagogues, or Rulers of the Synagogues
sproken of Mark 5 22 & [...] the same Interpreters vse the same words Exod:
34. 31. Numb. 31. 1 [...] &c. which the Evangelistes do wryteing in Greek, &
herein without doub [...] following them, as in other things. And there being
Synagogues of ou [...] amongst the Iewes, there must needs be Rulers  [...]n &
the same  [...] called.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=22) Touching
the 2d Argument: I deny the proportion vppon which they build it. In receaving
an admonition from an vnlawfull brother, (as they speak) I do submit onely to
that which is good in it self, & of God: but in submitting to an vnlawfull
Officer, Prelate or Preist, I submit to that which is evill in it self & not
of God, to wit, his very Office, or Order. The vnlawfull brother, though in
sin, yet doth not perform the admoni­tion by vertue of his sin, but out of his
personall knowledg, & Zeal (at least in appearance) agaynst the sin he
reproves in particular, but the vn­lawfull Officer doth administer the
publique doctrine, (as the Sacraments) by vertue, or rayther by vice, of his
very sin immediately, & properly: wherein I may not pertake with him. These
men have refused to submit to Mr Iohnsons publique Ministery, & so professe:
do they therfore think it Vnlawfull to receav any information, or admonition,
or reproof by the word of God for their sins, from him, or any the people with
him priva­tely, & vppon occasion? And by their larg grounds it should be
lawfull to submit to the ministery of any hereticall Minister: for from such a
one it is not vnlawfull to receav a private admonition for sin, vppon
occasion. But how much better were it for these men, & their freinds to
advance by all good means a lawfull Ministery, then thus to supporte that
which is vn­lawfull, by pleading for submission vnto it. But if they needs
will, (as they plead in their book submit their soules to theeves, & robbers,
& to such Ministers, as were the Scribes, & Pharisees in Christes tyme, (in
whom they instance) notorious Heretiques denying both the nature, Offices, &
Person of the Messiah, teaching iustification by the works of the law, & power
in man to keep it, let them reioyce in their Mi­nisters, & let their Ministers
also reioyce in them, as Iotham sayd of the men of Schechem, & Abimelech: but
for vs, we have learnt to give more honour to Gods ordinance, & to have more
care of Christs pre­tious purchase, our souls, then to commit the same to such
watch­mens keeping.

Thus have I breifly noted down, & confirmed the principall grounds of our
separation from the Communion, & order of the Ch: assemblyes, notwithstanding
the admission of the personall communion before men­tioned. And I have of
purpose taken in, & answered the cheif Reasons brought by Mr Cluses accusers,
agayust our practise, that it may appear, both how they fayl of that they
promise in the Preface of their book; as also that it is a far more easy
thing, to reproach mens persons, then iust­ly to evince their profession. And
would the king but give toleration, & with-hould from bodly violence agaynst
their persons & estates, I doubt not, but we should have many thousands in the
land concurring with is, [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=23) for substance of
practise, as they do now in opinion: who would speedily vnite themselves in
other spirituall societyes, then the prophane parrishes: leaving the service
book, & Ceremonyes, to the Prelates, with theyr dumb prcists, & formall
Clergy: withdrawing from their, & their Chauncelours, & Officials spirituall
jurisdiction, neyther obeying their Summons, nor regardeing their Censures:
neyther would the Ministers sue to them for their Orders, & Licences; not the
people receav them of their makeing, nor present them by their Ch: wardens to
their Courts, nor keep them by their leav, & vnder their correction: but both
Ministers, & people would fynde other, & better Rules of direction in Christs
testament, for their walking, & worshipping of God, then the Byshops Canons, &
Iniunctions. Which so being,Psal. 72. he, who indeed † iudgeth his people with
iustice, & his portaff [...]cted ones with iudgment, be iudg between them, &
vs; & whither, we (submit­ting ourselves, so near as we can discern, to all
the Commaundments, & or­dinances of Christ in his gospell) reiect them; or
they vs, who raythe [...] chuse the vnhollowed Ch: state, order, & ordinances
in, & vnder which they stand, then that, & those by themselves esteemed more
agreable t [...] the will of God, with persequution: but specially whether we,
for thes [...] things, do deserv that cruell hatred, & those most hostile
cariages, which many of them, who would be thought to mourn for reformation,
do bear, & vse towards vs: makeing it their glory to cast shame vppons vs, &
the [...] great matter of reioyceing to ad to our afflictions,Isa. 51.
[...]3. & who ‡ say to our souls  [...] the day of our sorrow, bow down, that
we may go over.

There is yet another danger, into which men may easily fall by occasio [...]
of the former doctrine: which is, in takeing liberty to with-hould, or
with­draw from the Church of God, & Ministery thereof: satisfying themsel­ves
in that their private fellowship with the better sorte of people: wit [...]
whom by this means they may converse with more cōfort to themselves, &
contentment to them. For the preventing of which evill, I will here anner
[...] few Reasons to enforce the necessity, & cōscience of liveing, & walking
wit [...] the Ch: of God, & so vnder the ministery therevnto given, if it can
be had [...]

And 1. the Scriptures calling1\. Tim.  [...]. 15. the Church, the house,
Temple, & Tab [...] ­nacle of the liveing God, where he hath promised that
most full presence of hi [...] grace, [...]. Cor. 6.  [...]6. & to dwell with,
& amongst men, & in the middest of them, as theyr Go [...] do therein
effectually admonish the people of God to beware,Rev. 2 [...]. 3. that by the
[...] own default they do not any way deprive themselves of the fruit of thi
[...] Gods so gratious promise,Math. 18  [...]0. & presence, in the true
visible Church, his house [...] & temple: [...]. Cor. 5.  [...]. eyther by not
adioyning themselves therevnto, as members or being members, by with-drawing
from her actuall Communion: there in makeing themselves (to speak as the truth
is) but Idoll members, & [...] [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=23) eyes which see
not, ears which hear not, & feet, which walk not, at least, in respect of the
body, whereof they are. And if we look to the most worthy servants of God, for
our examples, we shall fynde them alwayes to have had a most ardent desyre
vnto, & vehement delight in this visible presence of God in his Church, &
ordinances: the necessary vse, & sweet fruit whereof they so sensibly found in
their own experience. Take we David for an instance: Whose love was such
toPsal. 4. & 2 [...] the mansion of Gods house, & place of the habitation of
his glory, as that it was the onely thing he desyred, in comparison, that he
might dwell in the Lords ho [...]se all the dayes of his life, & there behould
his glory: Profes­sing in his absence from it, thatPs. 4 [...]. 2. the thirsty
hynde did not more bray after the ri­vers of waters, then did his soul for
Gods presence, & that he might appear before his face in his Tabernacle:
deeming them most happy, who did alwayes, byde in Gods house; & himself in
that his sequestration more miserable thenPs 84 [...] 2\. &c. the sparrewes, &
swallowes, which could nestle, & lay theyr young were Gods Altars. And yet was
he a most excellent Prophet himself, & so could aboundantly instr [...]ct both
himself, & them with him. It is likewise testifyed of Moses the servant of
God, that he rayther chose to suffer affliction with the people of God, Hebr.
1 [...] 25\.  [...]6. then to enioy the pleasu­res of sin for a season:
esteeming the reb [...]ke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egipt. A playn, & lowd testimony agaynst them who because they would not bear
their part in the rebuke of Christ, & afflictions of his people, do ray­ther
with-draw or with-hould themselves from Christs Church, & ordinan­ces; or
(which is worse) defyle themselves with the pleasures of sin in Egipt
spirituall: Of whom without their repentance,Luke 9 [...] 26. Christ Iesus
wilbe asha­med, before his father, & the holy Angels.

That which the wise man speaketh more generally,Eccl. 9. 10. & [...] we be to
him that is alone, for he falleth, & there is not a second to lift him vp; but
if two be together, the other lifteth vp his fellow, when he falleth, is of
speciall vse, this way. And con­sidering how subiect even the strongest are to
fall, by occasion,1\. Cor. 12. it is most necessary all so walk in the
Communion of saynts as that others vppon such occasion, may by the hand of
their godly admonitions, & exhortations re­ached out vnto them, agayn restore
them: or if need so requyre, that they may have vse of the stronger hand of
the Church, & Ministery, strengthe­ned with Christs power, for theyr recovery:
thorough the want whereof, how many fall, & perish: which by it, & the
blessing of God therevppon, might be restored, as we doubt not but we may
truely affirm from expe­rience? And if any man think himself to have receaved
that steength of grace, that he stands in no great need of these helpes, let
him that thinks be stands, take heed, lest he fall: & let him also in love
consider, that the lesse need he hath of the Ch: by reason of his greater
measure of grace, the more need the Ch: hath of him, & it, vnto which, & whose
service, they of due belong.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=24) † When the
L: Iesus ascended on high, he gave gifts to men (to wit, his Mini­sters III
gifted accordeingly) for the edification of the body, & help of the ioy of the
faythfull, & furtherance of theyr salvation: vnto whom they are bound
therefore to submit, & them in the Lord to obey, for theyr own so great good
Frō whom, [...]ph. 4. 8 &c. Cor. 1. & whose ministrations whilst men without
iust, & necessary cause,Tim 4. with-draw themselves, they break Christs
Commaundment, loose this fruit of his ascension, & fayl their own edification,
[...]br. 13  [...]. & salvation many wayes.

This duety yet lyeth more specially vppon them that have familyes, & children
about them: whom they shall hardly govern at home in private, V as they
desyre, if they have not publique encouragement, & help from a­broad, but they
shall have them still in daunger to be corrupted with the superstitions of the
tymes, or with greater evils, or both. Which daungers yet wilbe the greater (&
that of the first kynde almost inevitable) if the Parents dy, whilst theyr
children are young, & vnestablished in the truth; whereas liveing with the Ch:
they might much more easily dispose of them for theyr education, &
establishment in the wayes, & ordinances of the Lord: into the fellowship
whereof together with themselves, [...] 17\. 10. they are VI taken.

Lastly it is a great offence to all, who have known men formerly zea­lous
hearers of Gods word in the parrish assemblyes, to see them hear the same in
no assemblyes, or where no publique ministery is in vse: & this more specially
to the better sorte of people, who will run, & ryde to hear a sermon, if they
want at home, though they go but a borrowing of him, who hath indeed no right
himself so to dispence it publiquely, or any other holy thing of God, as he
doth.

But it will here be obiected, that the Ch: ministery, & ordinances,OBI. are
in­deed to be desyred, if men could enioy thē in theyr own cuntry, & amongst
theyr freinds; otherwise it seems better to witnes the truth, & suffer
persequution at home, though with­out them, then for the vse of them to fly
into a strang Cuntry. [...]NSW.

It must here be known that the truth of the Lord is witnessed two wayes: first
when men walk in the obedience of it, & of all the ordinances thereof,
roundly, & holily: & 2dly, when men (being called therevnto) suffer
persequution for the same. [...]ut. 28. And of these two, the former is the
more necessary,Math 28  [...]0\. &c.  [...]0\.  [...]s. 119.  [...]. 6. as
being commaunded of God, & by men to be desyred, & prayed for: the latter not
so. For neyther doth God commaund perse­quution, neyther are we to desyre it,
or to pray for it, but to avoyd it by all good means; & being layd vppon vs by
the Lord, with patience to be [...] it. Yet they that desyre to please God, &
to walk roundly in his appoynt­ments, shall not want persequution of sundry
kyndes: neyther if th [...] world thought we did, would so many with-hould, or
with-draw fro [...] [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=24) vs, as do, some
vnder one, & some vnder another pretext, besydes those who are perswaded
indeed of the vnlawfulnes of flight.

Now touching our Cuntry, & freinds, our answer is, that we deem the want of
them a greivons losse, which we would also redeem at a great rate. Yet for our
Cuntry, we do not forsake it, but are by it forsaken & expelled by most
extream lawes, & violent proscriptions contrived, & exequuted by the Prelates,
& on their behalf. And for private freinds thus we iudg: that the wife is no
way to leav her housband, but to give him, as the head, the honour of chuseing
probabely, the place of they cohabitation: nor Children, & Servants theyr
Parents, & Maysters to their preiudice, without their consent, or an apparent
impossibility of doeing them service: nor at all, where thorough their
absence, they shall want necessary help, & com­fort. But for those, who are
eyther the governours of others, or free, we think they may vse greater
liberty.

## 3\. Of flight in persequution.

ANd here, being therevnto forced by the vnreasonable provocations of Mr Thomas
Helwis, who in great confidence, & passion,In h [...] book  [...]tituled A
shor [...] Declar [...]tion, & pag. 20. &c. layeth load of reproaches both
vppon our flight in persequution, & also vppō out persons for it, I will (God
assisting me) by the Scriptures, approve the same, as lawfull, & so answer
what he hath written to the contrary.

For which purpose we will consider for our instruction, what the prac­tise
hath been of the holy Patriarks, Prophets, & Apostles, with other godly men in
their tymes, in cases of daunger for well-doeing, & what approba­tion therein
they have had from the Lord.

We will begin with the Patriark Iacob, whose two notable flights, for fear of
daunger the Scriptures mentiō: the former from his prophane brother Esau,
Gen. 2 [...] 42 43. &c. 31. 20 &c [...] the other from his Churlish vncle
Laban. Touching whose flights these 3. things are more specially to be
observed. 1. that he fled from one Cuntry to another. 2. that in his very
flight, the Lord did aboundātly cōmunicate him­self with him, comforteing &
blessing him. 3. that it was he which thus fled, who had power and strength,
to wrestle with God, & by wrestling to prevayl.

Next vnto him isAct. 7. 25. Ex. 2. 1 [...] 14\. 15. Ch. 3. 4. 18. Moses the
servant of the Lord, who haveing entered vppō the exequution of his office in
killing the Egiptian, & perceaving that the thing was known, fled out of
Egipt, for fear of Pharaoh into Midian (another country also) & there dwelt, &
took him a wife: dureing whose tyme of exile, & abode there, the Lord also did
marvaylously communicate himself with him, & called him to the greatest
dignity in the earth: which was to be the deliverer, & guide of his peculiar
people.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=25) Discend we
next vnto David, whose flights (though he wanted no tr [...] courage) how many
were they (& those also from the tabernacle, [...]am. 17 31. the one­ly place
of Gods speciall presence) by reason of Sauls persequution, not one­ly in his
own cuntry, where he was driven to hyde himself in wildernesses, [...]m. 19 &
21\. 10. & [...]. 1. 3.  [...]s. 56. 8 & caves, & desert mountayns, but even
into straung, & prophane countryes: as to Gath of the Philistines, & to Mi
[...]pah in Moab: all whose wandrings God d [...] count, putting his tears in
his bottell: & directing him gratiously in his slights, & that of tymes, even
for such meditations, as are left for the instruction, & comfort of Gods
people in their slights, & other tryals, [...]er. 36. to the worlds end.

We do also read of † Ieremy, & Barach theyr hydeing themselves from daunger:
[...] King  [...]. 3. & [...]. 10 & 3\. 5.  [...]. & of ‡ Eliah the Prophets
hydeing himself, by the Lords appoynt­ment, from Ahabs cruelly: & how the Lord
did extraordinarily furnish him for his further flight in the wildernes, by
the ministery of his Angell.

Yea we have even  [...] Christ our Lord himself (when Herod thought to ki
[...] him, in his infancy) caryed into Egipt by Ioseph, with Mary his mother,
Math. 2 14. 15 Phil. 3.  [...]. whether they fled to keep the babe from being
destroyed, & there abode, till the daunger was over: & therein, as our head,
sanctifying flight in his mothers arms, to all his members in their tyme: who
are  [...] patakers of the fellowship of his affli­ctions, & of this amongst
the rest.Mark 3. 7. Which liberty he did also sundry tymes in his riper years
vse himself, (& so ratify vnto vs) by † avoyding the places of daunger, where
his enemyes were, who sought to destroy him: [...]ke 4.  [...]. 30.  [...]h.
4. 1. & 7\. 1.  [...] 10\. 39 & thereby escapeing out of theyr hands, till his
hower were come, vnto him certaynly, & infallibly known: directing his
disciples also, that  [...] when they were persequuted i [...] one Citty th
[...]y should fly into another: & to beware of men, & to look to themselves.
Which liberty they also vsed tyme after tyme, as appears in many
particu­lars:Math.  [...]0\. 23. Act. 8. 1  [...] 11\. 19  [...]0\. 21 & 12\.
3. 4. 7 & 4\.  [...]. 5. 6. Act. 9. 23 4 25.  [...]. Cor. 11  [...] as first,
in  [...] all the Ch: at Ierusal: scattered abroad, & dispersed, (save th
[...] Apostles) by means of persequution: with whom the L: also was, blessing
the [...] wheresoever they came. So in  [...] Peter being freed from Herods
tyranny, get­ting him to another place. Likewise in Paul, & Barnabas flying
from Iconium t [...] avoyd violence, vnto L [...]stra, as Paul had done before
from Damascus: where to avoyd the laying-in-wayt of the Iewes the was let down
by night thorough the wall of th [...] Citty, by a rope in a basket. In which
his base flight he doth also reioyce after­wardes, as being one of his
infirmityes or sufferings for Christ.

Ad we in the last place, that which is written of the servants of Go [...] els
where, that they of whom the world was not worthy, did by fayth wander vp,
Hebr. 11.  [...]7\. 38.  [...]9. & down, in sheep skins, & goat skins, & that
in wildernesses, & mountayns, & den [...] & caves of the earth.

And for not onely flight, but even banishment also, we have Iohn the se [...]
vant of Christ in the  [...]le called Patmos for the word of God & for the
witnessing of Ies [...] Christ: that is, banished, & confined to that Ile,Rev.
1. 9. by the Romayn Emperour [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=25) with which also
that in Isaiah consorteth, where the Lord requyres of Chap. 16. 4. Moab, to
let his banished dwell with her. Considering then how playnly, & expresly the
Scriptures speak in the poynt, it is marvayl, that any, makeing them their
direction, should abridg eyther themselves, or others ordinari­ly of the
liberty of flight in persequution. But we will come to Mr Helwise his
oppositions agaynst it.

And as he hath a better faculty in revyleing mens persons, then in re­futeing
their iudgments, so begins he his plea with a bitter accusation agaynst false
hearted leaders, who (as he sayth) to be sure not to loose their lives for
Christ, M. Hel [...] flee into straung cuntryes, & free states, & draw people
after them, to support their kingdom; &c. seeking the kingdom of heaven, as
far they may with their safety.

If we principally sought out earthly good, or safety, why did we not a­byde at
home,ANSW. or why return we not thither, applying our selves to the tymes, as
so many thousands do? that I may not alledg, that by seeking such a kingdom of
heaven, or Church, as out of which we should throw our children, (as he hath
done) which we might do safely enough, if without sin, we could procure to our
selves much more earthly help, & furtherance, in the cuntry where we live, as
he knew well. And for drawing over the people, I know none of the guides, but
were as much drawen over by them, as drawing them. The truth is, it was Mr
Helwisse, who above all eyther guides, or others, furthered this passage into
straung countryes: & if any brought oars, he brought sayles, as I could shew
in many particulars, & as all that were acquaynted with the manner of our
comeing over, can witnes with me. Neyther is it likely, if he, & the people
with him at Amsterdam, could have gone on comfortably, as they desyred, that
the vnlawfulnes of flight would ever have troubled him: but more then likely
it is, that have­ing scattered the people, by his heady, & indiscreet courses,
& otherwise disabled himself, that naturall confidence, which abounded in him,
tooke occasion, vnder an appearance of spirituall courage, to presse him vppon
those desperate courses, which he, of late, hath run. By which he might also
think it his glory do dare, & chaleng king, & state to their faces, & not to
give way to them, no not a foot: as indeed it far better agrees with a bould
spirit, & haughty stomack, thus to do, then with the Apostle in the base
infirmity of Christ to be let down thorough a wall in a basket, & to run away.

But we will weigh his Reasons agaynst our flight. And first, he accuseth vs,
that, for instifying of it we pervert Christs saying Math. 10\. 23. which is,
when they persequute you in one citty, flee into another: & that Christ there
bids his disciples, when th [...]y are persequuted in one citty, go to
another, to preach the gospell: because they should not goe ever all the
Cittyes of Israell, till the son of man came.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=26) The truth
is, it is he that too bouldly both alters the words, & perve [...] ANSW: the
meaning of Christ, in putting goeing to preach, for fleeing from persequution
[...] which liberty if he may lawfully vse agaynst the Scriptures, there will
the [...] be for vs no lawfull liberty of flight indeed. But as the word is
properly▪ & necessarily turned [...]. flee, so Christ, saying vnto them, when
they persequ [...] you, flee, sayth vnto them, flee, to avoyd their
persequution, as they also after [...]wards did Yet because he directs his
speach immediately to the twel [...] Apostles designed, who were by their
office to preach, as to all the world [...] [...] 1\. 2. 6. so first to the
Iewes, he chargeth them not to think themselves freed by thei [...]
persequution from preaching, nor so to fly as to forget, or neglect thei [...]
office of Apostleship, but that still in their flying they should remembe
[...] their speciall calling: telling them both for their provocation, &
comfort [...] that before they could passe thorough all the Cittyes of Israell
he would come, to wi [...] by the more glorious work of his spirit for the
advancement of his king­dom. So that in the words of Christ to his Apostles,
two things are con­teyned: the former a liberty of flight in persequution, &
the same so e [...]i [...]dently, as that an Angell from heaven teaching the
contrary, were not t [...] be beleived; the other, a charg so to fly, as that
for any persequution, the [...] ceased not to preach whethersoever they were
driven. And so the answe [...] is easy to that which followeth, namely, that
we flee to Cittyes of a strang eu [...]try to whom we can not preach, &c. For
1. it is the fulfilling of our office  [...] we preach to the particular
flockes over which we are set, not being Apost­les, as they were: though I
could also alledg, that we have so preached t [...] others in these Cittyes,
as that, by the blessing of God workeing with  [...] we have gayned more to
the Lord, then Mr Helw: his Ch: consists of An [...] 2dly, I would know, how
he, & the people with him have preached to th [...] Citty of London? Surely
not as the Apostles did, in the Synagogues, & pub­lique places: much lesse do
they f [...]y being persequuted, (or go, if so they wi [...] have it) from
Citty, to Citty, to preach, as did the Apostles.

Where he further obiecteth that our fleing is to save our selves from being
[...] M. Helw sheep in the middest of wolves, & from being deliver [...]d vp
to counsels, &c: & that  [...] med not take thought what to speak, &c: I
answer, that as these tryals did  [...] nessarily follow vppon the Apostles
callings as being to be imployed  [...] ANSW: mongst vnbeleeving Iewes, &
Gentiles, in their ordinary ministration, so d [...] they not in like manner,
or measure of necessity, ly vppon vs, who are ap [...]poynted to feed the
particular flockes of beleevers, over which we are  [...] Act. 20. 17. 28.
Onely they teach, that, if God so dispose of vs, & that we cannot by goo [...]
1\. Pet. 5. 1 means avoyd the same, we then patiently, & in fayth give
witnesse to Chris [...] truth, & testament, by suffering these, & all other
kynde of evilles. The Sc [...]ptures in many places exhort vnto poverty,
hunger, nakednes, losse  [...] goods, & lands for Christs sake; must now the
servants of God theref [...] [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=26) necessarily be
pore, & destitute of outward necessaryes? Some indeed vp­pon these ground have
vowed wilfull poverty: as did this man vppon the  [...]ike, vow (it seems)
wilfull persequution.

Toching the practise of the Apostles, Act. 5. 19. 20. 40. 42. & 8\. 1. I
an­swer that at other tymes those very Apostles did fly persequution; as did
also Paul, though of both as great courage, & zeal, as any other. But for that
present they were tyed to that very place, & might not depart thence, but
were,Luke  [...] 47. at Ierusalem first soundly to publish & plant the gospell
of Christ: as also thence to send, or go to other places, as they were
occasioned. And (excepting the extraordinary occasion of the Apostles) the
latter of theAct. 1. 8. & 5\. 19. 20. & 8\. 14 & 11\. 22. Scriptures he
brings, is directly agaynst him: where it is sayd that the whole Ch: at
Ierusalem was scattered abroad, & dispersed, by reason of persequution. And
for their preaching to their cuntrymen the Iewes, where they came; & as they
had occa­sion, to the Gentiles, it is that we also do, & desyre to do, as we
have occasion, & means: this being alwayes remembred, that we are distinct, &
entyre congregations, in our selves, which they were not.

Where in the next place he notes, for his purpose, the assault made agaynst
Paul, & Barnabas in Icon [...] ̄ Act. 14 5. he should also have noted, for the
truthes sake, that v. 6. they being aware of it, fled to L [...]stra, & Derbe.
And for their retur­ning agayn into the places where they had beē
persequuted, v. 21. 22. first, their perse­quutiōs in those places had been
but by the tumultuouse multitude (by the provocation of the Iewes) which like
a tempest, were soon over, & not by any stablished lawes, or setled course of
iustice; & 2dly, it was but the Apostles duetyes, as being vniversall men, &
haveing vppon them the care of all the Churches, & not being tyed to any
certayn congregation, as we are.2\. Cor. 11 28.

The commendations given of the Churches of Thess. 2\. Thes. 1. 4 & of Pergamus
M. Helw Rev. 2. 13. for their patience in affliction, & that dwelling where
Sathans throne was,  [...]hey kept Christs name, evē whē Antipas was
martyred, do not reprove our practise at all: the like cōmēdatiōs being els
where givē of others, as I have shewed,ANSW. Heb. 11. 1 2. 37 38. for keeping
the fayth with holines, in their wandring flight from one place, & cuntry to
another. The Apostle 1. Cor. 7. commends them, who keep themselves single to
avoyd trouble in the flesh, & that they may be the more free for the Lord:
doth he therefore condemn thē that marry in the Lord to avoyd fornication? Or
doth he not commend both, as doeing well? & eyther in doeing  [...]etter, in
divers regards? He that is in daunger of vncleannes doth better to marry: & he
that is without that daunger, & cā more freely in a single state, give
himself to the Lord, doth better in that respect, so to abyde. So is it in
flight, which is allowed, nay requyred, agaynst naturall fear, & many other
[...]oth incōveniē  [...]es, & eviles, ordinarily, in persequutiō, as is
mariage agaynst fornicatiō Besydes, as those Ch: knew not; happily, whether
to go to be bet­ter, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=27) in those dayes,
so neyther was their persequution such, but that they might enioy their
mutuall fellowship & ministers, & bring vp their children & familyes in the
information of the Lord, & his truth (though with great persequution even of
some particular men vnto death, at tymes, & by occa­sions) which in Engl: all
men know, we could not possibly do.

That which he ads of Christes enioyning the man dispossessed of the divell, to
g [...] home to his freinds, & shew them what great things the Lord had done
for him, makesM. Helw as much agaynst themselves as vs. For why go not they
home every one to his freinds, for that end, but abide in London where fewest
of their freind [...] ANSW. are? It is then his ignorance to ty all by that
speciall commaundement. At another tyme Christ would not fuffer one, so much
as to go home, & [...] his frenids farewell: nor another to bury his father,
before they followed him; asLuke 9. 59. 60. 61 62. here on the contrary he
would not suffer this man to follow him, but send [...] him back to his
freinds: but doth not at all there-in for-bid him flight i [...] persequution,
as Mr Helw: gathereth.

That we should not fear men, which can kill the body, but deny our selves, &c▪
we do acknowledg, & by the grace of God, so practise. We have not fear
[...]men, that is, so feared them, as for their persequutions to deny any
parte  [...] the truth of Christ knowen vnto vs, or any way to sin agaynst the
same▪ but do keep (as frayl men) a good conscience in the obedience of all th
[...] parts thereof: haveing also (the glory be the Lords, who hath shewed
[...] this mercy, & enabled vs therevnto) learnt to deny our selves, though
with much weaknes, in our cuntry, freinds, possessions, riches, credits,
liberty▪ yea & in our lives also in resolution, & will, for Christes sake, &
truth: & withall to suffer those kyndes of afflictions, for the avoyding of
which▪ many have withdrawn from the same truth, for wich they have offered
thei [...] lives to the Magistrate, as resolvedly, as this man hath his, for
his errours.

Where he sayth further, that the Cittyes where we are, neyther recea [...] vs,
nor the word we bring, otherwise then they receav Turkes, & Iewes,  [...]
speaks very vntruely both of them, & vs, as (were it of vse) I could she [...]
evidently. And lastly, to his demaund, when we will shake of the dust of our
[...] for a witnes agaynst the Citty, or house, that will not receav vs, &
departe thence,  [...] the Apostles did? I answer, when we are Apostles, as
they were: & do agay [...] ask, why did not he,  [...] why do not his
companions shake of the dust o [...] their feet agaynst London, which recavs
not them at all? And if the Churche [...] of Christ be thus to shake of the
dust of their feet agaynst the Cittye [...] which receav not their doctrine,
how could the Ch: of Pergamus be com [...]mended for dwelling, & continueing
in that Citty, which receaved not  [...] truth, but had on the contrary,
Sathans throne established in it, & persequu [...] the Martyrs of the truth
vnto death?

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=27) For flight
then, thus much. As we read that Christ our Lord, the Pro­phets, & Apostles,
did at some tymes & ordinarily avoyd & flee persequu­tion, & at other tymes,
not: so are we to know, that there are tymes, & occasions seasonable for both.
Neyther are the words of Christ, when they persequute you, flee, an absolute
commaundment, as he thinketh, any more then those of the Mayster to his
servant Luke 17. 8. when thou hast served me, eat thou, & drink thou. They are
a graunt of liberty, & a direction, how to vse it. As we then shall perceav
eyther our flying, or abydeing to be most for Gods glory, & the good of men,
especially of our family, & those nea­rest vnto vs, & for our own furtherance
in holines; & as we have strength to wade thorough the daungers of
persequutions, so are we with good con­science to vse the one, or other. Which
(our hope & comfort also is) we have done, in these our dayes of sorrow: some
of vs comeing over by ba­nishment, & others otherwise.

And thus have I answered whatsoever in his book hath any colour of reason
agaynst our flight in persequution. His rash & vngodly Censures both vppon our
practise, & persons, yea vppon the very secret intents of our hearts, I do of
purpose passe by, as being the fruits of his stout sto­mach, & heart fowred
with his own leven; assureing my self, that no wise man, will for the same,
eyther think vs the lesse, or him the more truely Zealous.

But for that divers weak persons have been troubled & abused by some other
things in the same book: in which also he much insulteth, & that over my self,
amongst, & above others, I think it fit in this place to annex an answer to
that part of it, which is directed agaynst vs, whom he (with others) miscalles
Brownists, & agaynst our (falsely called by him, false) profession.

## 4\. The outvvard Baptism receaved in Engl: is lavvfully reteyned.

ANd to Prove our Profession of Christ false; & vs the teachers, false
Pro­phets, M. Helw he takes his first ground out of our Apology; where a true
vi­sible Church is described, a company of people called, & separated from the
world, by the word of God, &c: & therevppon concludes peremptorily, that we
all are merePag. 12 [...] 124\. Ioh. 7. 7 & 14\. 17 & 16\. 9 & 17 25 1. Ioh.
5. 1 [...]. Infidels, vnbeleevers, & without Christ: & takeing it for our own
graunt, that before our separation we were of the world, that is, of them that
h [...]e Christ; & cannot receav the spirit of truth; & that beleev not in
Christ, but ly in [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=28) wickednes: he
goes about to prove, that if then we were of the world, we are so still,
because we have not been ioyned to Christ, by amending our lives, & by being
baptized, & so by putting on of Christ, by baptism. Act. 2. 38. Gal. 3. 27.

The effect then of all is, that, because we have not taken vp a new out­ward
washing, or baptism (for that of amendment of life, he but ads for fashion) as
he hath done, therefore we are, of the world, Infidels, haters of Christ, &
what not?

For answer then, first we graunt that remayning in the assemblyes, weANSW.
were not separated from the world, to wit, in our fellowship; but doth it
follow therevppon, that till our separation we were of the world, name­ly in
our persons? which is, as if he should conclude, that because in a con­fused
heap (as are the assemblyes) the good stones are not severed from the rubbish,
therefore even they, as the rest, are rubbish also. Were such of the Corinth:
as thorough errour, or evill custome, or other infirmity, continued communion
with the Idolaters in their idolatrous feastings in the [...] Cor 6. Idoll
temples, (whom the Apostle therefore exhorts to separate themselves, & to come
from among them,) were they, I say infidels, & darknes? or doth not the same
Apostle their expresly call them beleevers, light, righteousnes,
not­withstanding that their great fayling, & evill, of ignorance, or humayn
fraylty, out of which the Lord did call them? Or was Mr Helw: himself all the
whyle he was vnseparated, an Infidell, without Christ, & his spirit, & hateing
him? If so he were, (considering the great shew he made of fayth, & love in, &
to Christ, & the singular manifestations of the spirit) he was a notorius
hypocrite as the earth bore: but if on the contrary, he did not then hate
Christ, but had fayth, & grace, (though in never so small a measure, his proof
is of no force, but he himself proved a vayn man, that would deny the grace of
God in himself, to advantage an errour agaynst other men: Which is a kynde of
blasphemy agaynst the H: Ghost, though not of mal­lice, as was that of the
Pharisees, yet of preposterous, & pervers Zeal: ofIoh. 1.  [...]. which I wish
all the Lords people may beware.

2dly, it is not true he sayth, that none can come, & be ioyned to Christs
with­out Rom. 11  [...]0. Baptism. The Scriptures testify, that so many as
beleiv in Christ, receav him: areGal. 2.  [...]0. ingrafted into him: haveing
himEph. 3.  [...]7. liveing in them, & dwelling in theyr hearts. Which fayth
is before Baptism in some men a longer tyme, in some a shor­ter, &Mat. 28
[...]9 in some also dying vnbaptised. Math. 8. 10. & 15\. 28. Act. 10. 4. 35.
Luke 23. 40. &c. And according to this was the tenour of Christs commis­sion
to his Apostles by teaching toAct 11.  [...]6. make disciples or Christians, &
to bring men to beleiv, & after to baptise them. And to baptize any of years,
but being before ioyned to Christ by actuall fayth, & so makeing
manifesta­tion,Mark. 16  [...]6. were to prophane Gods ordinance. Neyther is
it Pauls meaning [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=28) where he tels the
Galatians, that they which had been baptized into Christ, had put on Christ,
that they were not ioyned to Christ before their outward baptism, but to shew,
that their baptism was a lively signe of their vnion with, & incorporation
into Christ, & participation of the washing of his blood, & spirit, as also an
effectuall means more, & more, to apply theRom:  [...] 14. same vnto them:
being all their life long to † put on the L: Iesus Christ, & the new man, as
the same Apostle teacheth. And for Act. 2. 35. it shewesEph. 4 24. indeed,
that they who believ, & repent, are to be baptized, to wit, being vnbaptized
before as they then were, & as we now are not; God haveing also added to the
outward washing, or baptism, though in the false Ch:, the inward washing of
the spirit to repentance, & amendment of life.

To his inference, that if Engl: be Babilon, out of which the Lords people are
to M Hel [...] come, Pag. 12 [...] 128. & baptism the seal of the Covenant of
grace, as we teach, then we reteyn the bap­tism of Babilon thereby to be
sealed vnto the convenant of grace. I answer, that we reteyn the seal of the
Covenant of grace, though ministred in Babilon: &ANSW not the baptism of
Babilon, but the baptism of the Lord in it self, & by the Babilonians
spirituall, vsurped, & prophaned: but by fayth, & the spirit now sanctifyed to
our vse. Which we therefore reteyn, as we do the same gospell, or Covenant, by
the same men, & means there taught, & ad­ministred vnto vs: bringing both the
one, & other thence, as were the holy vessels of the Lords house, of ould,
brought out of Babilon civill,Dan. 5  [...]. 2. 3. 4. &c. with Es [...] 17\. 8
9 &c. after their prophanation there. And as well may the doctrines of fayth
there ministred, & thence brought by vs, be called the stoln bread of
Babi­lon, as he in wantonnes of wit calles the Baptism, the stoln waters of
Babilon.

So that it is neyther true he sayth, that we were Infidels, & without Christ,
till our separation: nor that men are made Christians by Baptism: nor that we
reteyn the Baptism of Babilon. Neyther yet, though we ought to receav a new
outward washing (which we neyther think, nor he proves) it being but our
fayling of ignorance in an outward ordinance, were we thereby debarred from
being true Christians, no nor from being a true visible Church.

And as I have els where proved agaynst others (with whom these men consort, &
both of them herein, with the Papists, that the Ch: is not gathered,
Iustificat [...] pag 283▪ 384. nor men thereinto admitted by Baptism, so will
I here for the same purpose fur­ther ad these Reasons.

And 1. the Ch: is not given to baptism, but bapt: on the contrary I to the
Church: as are all other the Lords publique ordinances, & oracles. Rom 3. 3
[...] Psal. 14 [...] 20. And since bapt: is a publique action, it cannot be
performed but by publi­que authority in, & of the Church: which Church thefore
must be presup­posed; & before it.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=29) II 2dly,
Iohn the baptist did, as we know, baptize many, but yet neyther gathered
Churches, nor receaved men into them: but lived, & dyed him­self [...]th. 3.
6. a member of the Iewish Church. Math. 11. 11. Therefore the Ch: is not
gathered by baptism.

III 3dly, If men be receaved into the Ch: by baptism, them must they, as
occasion is, be cast out, by being vnbaptized: & so if God agayn give them
repentance, they must be receaved in by a 2d baptism, & so by a 3d, or 4th, if
occasion be. The truth is, such men must renue their Covenant with God, & his
Ch: by which they were at the first receaved; but not their outward baptism,
vnto which these, & other mens fancy leadeth.

IIII 4thly, to receav in, & so to cast out members, are dispensations of
Christs kingly office; whereas bapt: is a work of his Prophesy: which is
indeed to be ioyned with mens admission into the Ch: & to follow vppon it
imme­diately, if the persons be not before baptized.

V Lastly, if the Ch: be gathered by baptism, then will Mr Helw: his Ch: appear
to all men to be built vppon the sand, considering the bapt: it had, & hath:
which was, as I have heard from themselves, on this manner. Mr Smith, Mr Helw:
& the rest, haveing vtterly dissolved, & disclaymed their former Ch: state, &
ministery, came together to erect a new Ch: by ba­ptism: vnto which they also
ascribed so great vertue, as that they would not so much as pray together,
before they had it. And after some strey­ning of courtesy, who should begin, &
that of Iohn Baptist, Math: 3. 14. mis­alledged, Mr Smith baptized first
himself, & next Mr Helwis, & so the rest, makeing their particular
confessions. Now to let passe his not † sanctifying 1\. Tim.  [...] 4\. 5. a
publique action by publique prayer: his takeing vnto himself that hono [...],
which was not given him, Heb. 5. 4. eyther immediately from Christ, or by the
Church: his baptizeing himself, which was more then Christ himself did: I
de­maund into what Ch: he entered by baptism? or entering by baptism intoMath.
3.  [...]4. no Ch: how his baptism could be true, by their own doctrine? Or Mr
Smithes bapt: not being true, nor he by it entering into any Church, ho [...]
Mt Helw: his baptism could be true, or into what Ch: he entered by it? These
things thus being, all wise men will think that he had small cause ey­ther to
be so much enamoured of his own baptism, or so highly to despis [...] other
mens, for the vnorderly, or otherwise vnlawfull administratio [...] of it.

The next clamour he rayseth is agaynst our Prophets (whom he so bef [...]seth,
as it by oft, & much so calling them, he would make them such)  [...] that to
draw people to separate, we call, & prove Engl: Babilon, Sodom, & Egipt,
[...] M. Helw of which Gods people must come: but after, when we would
perswade to the retey [...] of the baptism there receaved, we call it
rebellions, & apostate Israell, whose circumcis [...] [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=29) was not to be
repeated, when vppon theyr repentance, they came vnto the passover. For the
reproof of which our doctrine, he affirmeth some, & inferreth sundry other
vntruthes. As 1. that we teach men to reteyn the first, & cheif badg or mark
of Babilon which is theyr Baptism, the seal of the Covenant of grace, as we
say.

This Chaleng I answered even now; & shall further hereafter iustify (the L:
assisting me) the reteyning our outward washing without repeti­tion:ANSW▪ as I
have also disproved that his 2d affirmation, that there cannot be a Ch: of
vnbaptized Christians.

Besydes it is not true he sayth, that we have no other seal for our whole
Chris­tianity, then the Baptism we receaved in England. We have (besydes the
in­ward seal of the spirit, & fayth) the promises of the gospell, & supper of
the Lord, with many experiments of the love of God, sealing, & confirming vnto
vs, that we are Christs.

His peremptory affirmation the we might have cryed long enough, Come from
Israell, & separate your selves from Israell, before any fearing God, or
haveing vnderstanding of his truth, would have followed vs, is but his wilde
guesse, with­out warrant. And the fear of God being the same, in the hearts of
his people now, & of ould, yea greater conscience of sin being requyred now,
according to the greater measure of revelation, why should not the con­science
of the like estate of Engl: as well perswade men to separate them­selves from
the apostacy thereof to the true Ch: & ordinances; as it did such of all the
tribes of Israell, as set theyr hearts to seeke the L: God of Israell, to
sepa­rate 2\. Chr.  [...] 13 16. themselves, with the Preists, & Levites, from
Ieroboams apostacy, to Iudah & Ierusalem?

Of like truth with the former is his after-affirmation, that if we were M.
Helw true Israelites before our separation, then all we left behynde vs are
true Israelites: for so all the ten tribes vnder Ieroboam were true
Israelites: & all we in the assemblyes be­fore our separation were in one
estate, &c.

It is true that the ten tribes in their apostacy, were true Israelites,
na­turally,ANSW & so were the Ismaelites, & Edomites Abrahams true naturall
seed. But what is this to our question, which is not about mens naturall
estate, but about their religious, & Church-state? The Ch: is not a naturall
estate, neyther was Abraham & Israell Gods peculiar people, & Church, by
na­ture (for they wereEph. 2.  [...] Deut. 7. 6. 7. 5. Rev 20. 26. by nature
children of wrath, as well as others) but by grace, & because God loved them
above other people, & separated them into Covenant with himself. Our question
then being about religion, & mens religious estate. & as they are worshippers
of God, Christ our Lord teacheth vs inIoh. 1. 4 [...] Natha­naels person, who
are true Israelites; namely they in whom there is no guile. And Paul telleth
vs, that he is not a Iew, who is a Iew outward, nor that Circumcision, which
is outward in the flesh, but that he is a Iew, who is  [...] within, & that
Circum­cision, [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=30) which is of the
heart, &c. But for the ten tribes, or other Abrahams nat [...]rall seed, in
their rebellion agaynst the Lord they were † of true plants, dege [...], rate,
& changed into the plants of a strang, or false vyne. They were true
Israelites,Ier. 8 1. as a theif is a true man, to wit, naturally: but not he
morally: much less [...] they spiritually, or in the consideration of
religion, of which we speak.

And for vs: it followeth not, that because we came from the parrish
assem­blyes, therefore all that we left behynde vs were true Israelites, as
we. For then th [...] mayn cause of our separation had been taken away. We did
even there (by the great mercy of God) receav grace to be in our measure
Nathanaels,  [...] without guile: & so to serv God, & walk with men, though we
were igno­rant of many of Christs ordinances, (as was Nathanaell without
guile, whe [...] he was ignorant of his person) which to say of all in the
assemblyes, & th [...] they are Nathanaels, were false, & foolish. Neyther
could Mr Helw. with­out being reproved by his own heart, say, that, when he
was a Professour i [...] Engl: there was no difference between him, & the
Atheists, & Epicures i [...] the parrishes, though in that confused state of
things they, & he were o [...] one, & the same visible Church.

Lastly (to passe by his mis-putting the words, & misinterpreting th [...]
meaning of them that wrote the Apology, by takeing that as meant of th [...]
members of the assemblyes, which was spoken of such as were separated;  [...]
also his bitter vpbrayding them with ignorant dissimulation, & flattery,
through his own rash ignorance,) that which he affirmeth of Iudahs never deny
[...] Israell to be her sister, is his saying without proof, or explanation.

What Iudah thought of her, appears by the speach of Abijah the king 2. Chr.
13. 4. 5. 6. 7. &c: & what the Lord thought of her, we shall she [...]
hereafter; howsoever they are calledExe. 13.  [...]. 3. 4 sisters sometymes in
respect of they [...] ioynt estate before the division, (& soNumb.  [...]0 14.
Obed. 10. 12. Ezech.  [...]6. Edom also was called Israels bro­ther, in
respect of their first fathers:) sometymes in respect of their concur­rence in
iniquity, & so Sodom also is called a third sister with them. And  [...] were
not their estates alike, no not the two likest of them, though bot [...]
evill. For there is, besydes good, & evill, (as was Iudah in her integrity,
[...] Israell in her apostacy,) evill, & worse, both in persons, & things
(thoug [...] both evill) compared together. And so as the evilles in Engl: are
of dive [...] degrees, & kyndes, we do proportionably, by way of resemblance,
term i [...] Apostate Israell, Babilon, Sodom, & Egipt, spiritually so called.
In respect of th [...] Spirituall externall government there, not in the hands
of the son of  [...] [...]. Chr. 23. 8. Christ, the king of Saynts, but of his
vsurping adversary, the Prelacy, & of th [...] apostate preisthood thence
derived: of the will worship, though of the tr [...] God; of the forged
holydayes, & other the like defections, we call it Apost [...] Israell; in
regard of the great, & monstrous confusion there both of person [...] &
things, with the spirituall bondage of the Lords people to the Prelacy,
[...]ilon: [[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=30)
in regard of the same bondage, together with the Egiptian darknes spirituall,
with other the spirituall botches, & plagues, vppon the soules of the body of
that Church, Egipt: & lastly Sodom, in respect ofEzech. 1449\. See Mr Perk:
Exposit vppon Iude pag 147\. Apol. pag 11 [...] the iniquity of So­dom
abounding there, as Pride, fulnes of bread, idlenes, & want of mercy towards
the pore: with contempt of heavenly admonition. Gen: 19. 9. 14.

The next thing he reproveth is our distinction of ‡ Churches, & so of
Sacra­mēts into true, false, & none. And haveing in the first place liberally
reproached vs, he inveighs greatly agaynst our distinctiōs in generall, & the
severall respects we put of things: bewraying playnly therein his tumultuons
ignorance, by which he would confound, & blunder all things together: whereas
there is nothing more necessary for the iust knowledg of things, & ending of
cōtro­versyes, then distinctions, & respects, rightly, & seasonably put:
which are in disputations, like that distributive iustice in many suits of
law. For whereas both partyes would have all, for some right, which eyther
hath to a parte, a iust distinction gives vnto eyther his severall right, &
satisfyeth both.

And haveing spent his breath in reproaching our distinctions of true, false &
none, he for our conviction begins with a distinction of worldly things: in
which he graunts a difference between false & none: as that there is a false
hower-glasse, Pag. 134 & no hower-glasse, a false looking-glasse, & no
looking-glasse, &c. whereas, in the  [...]rdinances of God (sayth he) as the
Church, & Baptism, there is no such difference; & in so saying he doth indeed
offer to the veiw of all  [...] wisemen, who have theyr Eccle.  [...] 24. eyes
in theyr heads, a looking-glasse, wherein both the il-favoured face of his own
distinction, & the vanity of his exception may appear.

The vse of  [...] a looking-glasse is to shew what manner the native face of a
man is. Iam. 1. 23. 24. And the reason why we call such a one false, is,
because it doth not that in truth, which it makes shew of, but deceaves him
that looks in it, for the fa­shion, & portrature of his countenāce. So the
vse of an hower-glasse is to shew when the hower is iust come about: which we
therefore call false, when it doth not so indeed, but deceavs him that looks
vnto it, eyther by running short, or over. Hence common sense teacheth, that
if there may be a Ch: or assembly, of people makeing a profession, & shew of
Christ, & Christian bap­tism, & religion, but not being, & haveing that
indeed, which in shew, & ap­pearance it seems to be, & have, & so but
deceaving him that regards it, then may there also be, & so rightly be called,
a false Ch:. If reply be made, that this false Ch: is no Ch:, it may as truely
be answered, that that false hower-glasse is no hower-glasse: as in truth, &
indeed, it is not an hower-glasse, but a three, or five-quarters-glasse, or
over, or vnder. It is evident by the same common Reason of both, that there
may be as well a false Church, which is not no Church, as a false looking, or
hower-glasse, which are not none: & other conviction needs he not, then by his
own instance.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=31) The
Scriptures he brings for his purpose, which are, They sayd they  [...]
Apostles, & were not, & Iewes, & were not. Rev. 2. 2. 9. & 3\. 9. he
corrup­teth very audaciously, though, (I hope) much of ignorance: instead of
not, putting none: whereas between these there is great difference. For  [...]
onely denyeth that which they sayd they were; whereas none, extendeth
fur­ther, as he also intends it, & denyes them to be Apostles, or Iewes at
all, or of any sorte. They sayd they were Apostles, that is true Apostles,
sent, & set a work by Christ immediately; but they were not, that is not
these, or such, as they pretended themselves to be. They were false Apostles,
setting them­selves [...]. Cor. 1. 13. a work, & deceiptfull workers, (not no
workers) as els where the Apostle calleth them. They sayd they were Iewes, &
were not, that is not Iew [...] within, nor the Circumcision of the heart, as
Paul expounds the phrase of speach [...]om. 2.  [...]8\. 29. more at larg. For
Iewes, (without doubt) they were, & circumcised in the flesh; for which
circumcision, with other Iewish ceremonyes, they conten­ded. It is vsuall with
the Scriptures to speak of things in religion, as if they were not at all,
when they are not, as they should be; & the reason is, be­cause God doth not
accept of them, nor they themselves receav the right fruit thereof. Thus it is
sayd of the inhabitants of Samaria that they feart not the Lord, though it
besayd immediately before, they feared the Lord: thu [...] [...]. King.
[...]7\. 34.  [...]2\. 33. Paul sayth that he is not a Iew, which is one
outwardly, nor that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: as he also
tels the Corinth: that they cannot dri [...] the cup of the Lord, & the cup of
divels. They did drink of both outwardly, but [...] Rom. 2.  [...]8.
vnlawfully, & of the better without fruit: as he also tels the same Corinth
[...] [...] 1\. Cor.  [...]. 21. ch. 11. 17. 18. 20. 21. that by reason of
theyr contentions, & other abuses, their eating the Lords supper, was not to
eat the L: supper, that is, as he ex­pounds himself, not with profit, or for
the better, but for the worse. Even so these were not Apostles, that is sent
of Christ, & whom the Churches ought so to receav; nor Iewes, that is such as
whom God would prayse. Rom. 2.  [...]29.

The same I answer to Eph. 4 4. 5. which is after obiected, of one body,  [...]
Church, one fayth, one baptism: that is one true fayth, Church, & baptism. And
to hould that besydes that one true iustifying, & saveing fayth, there are not
other false faythes, is it self a speciall poynt of a false fayth, &
perswasion. The Apostle 1. Tim. 1. 5. speaks of fayth vnfeyned, from which
love spring­eth: shewing therein, that there is a feyned, or false fayth,
which Iames cal­leth a dead fayth, for the want of this love, & the fruits
thereof, the works  [...] mercy. Yea the Divels themselves beleiv, & have a
kynde of fayth, as hav [...] Ch. 2. 17.  [...]0. also some wicked men such a
fayth, [...]. 19. as by which they cast out Divels, [...] Mat. 7.  [...]2
[...]. 23. & [...] many miracles in Christs name. And both the Scriptures, &
experience teach that wicked men have a fayth, or perswasion of Gods favour, &
salvatio [...] which is no true fayth, & therefore a false fayth, or
perswasion, & so right [...] [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=31) called. The same
may be sayd of the Church, & Sacraments, & much more. The consideration of one
God, & one Christ, is something different, but di­rectly agaynst these men:
for there may be, & are assemblyes of false wor­shippers, of this one God, &
one Christ: & therefore false Churches, & so their Sacraments accordingly
false Sacraments.

And thus much to shew how vayn his distinction is between Gods or­dinances, &
wordly things (though even they be also Gods ordinances) as he applyeth it: &
to prove, that false may as well, & by the same reason be applyed to the
outward ordinances of the Church, as vnto worldly things: as also to answer
the Scriptures he brings to disprove that part of our distinction, touching a
false Church. It now remayns I prove by the Scriptures, & good Reasons
grounded therevppon, that there are false Churches, & false Ch: ordinances: &
that such a Church the ten tribes were in their defection, & division from
Iudah.

And first, since false is nothing but that which deceaveth vnder a shew,I &
appearance of that which it is not, (as the knowledg of three Latin words
would have taught Mr Helw:) & that such Churches, or assem­blyes there are too
many, which vnder a profession of the name, & sundry truthes, & ordinances of
Christ, do deceav; it followeth necessarily, that there maybe, & are, false
Churches. And thus much in effect he graunts els where, viz that a false
Church are they, that say, & make shew, they are a true Ch: & are not. Onely
he labours vppon his ordinary disease in misinterpreting these wordes, & are
not, as if they were & are none; whereas they onely deny the thing affirmed,
which is, a true Church, & no more.

2dly, in his enterance agaynst vs, & every where, he condemns our
pro­fession,II as a false profession, & vs as false Prophets, (as he doth also
the profession & Prophets of the Prelates, & Puritans, as he calleth them:) &
therein yeal­deth necessarily, that the Churches makeing this false
profession, vnder these false Prophets, (by him so deemed) are false Churches.
Neyther can he turn of the matter, as his custome is, by saying we are no
Churches, & no Prophets; for he knowes the Prophets, or teachers teach, & the
people with them, pro­fesse the mayn truthes in the gospell: which he
therefore cannot say to be no Prophets, or to make no profession.

3dly, the Apostle 2. Cor. 11. 26. complayns of his perils amongst false III
brethen, & Gal 2. 4. that false brethren were crept into the Church. Now if
there may be (as the Apostle expresly teacheth) false brethren, & the same
also baptized outwardly, then is a Ch: consisting of such in the body
there­of, a false Church, & their baptism answerably, false Baptism.

The Scriptures, & common sense teach, that there are false worshippers, IIII
of God. Christ our Lord sayth of the Samaritans, who feared the Lord, & [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=32) worshipped the
God of Iakob, after a manner, & had a temple in mount Geriz [...], that they
worshipped they knew not what: opposeing them to true worshippers, King.
[...] 32. & therein calling them false worshippers, [...] 4\. 12. & their
assembly a false Church. And when a Papist prayeth vnto God in an vnknown
tōgue, or in the name, [...] [...]2\.  [...] 3. or merits of the virgin Mary;
[...]at. 15  [...]. or when any other man draweth nigh vnto God with his
mouth, [...]rov.  [...]. 8. & honoureth him with his lips, but heaveing his
heart far from him: or teacheth for doctrines, mens commaundements; he
worshippeth, though in vayn, & his prayers are Prayers, & Sacrifices, though
abhominable. He is not then no worshipper, but a false worshipper; & so by
consequence, a company, or congregation of such, so combyneing, & continueing,
are falsely called no Chnrch, or Congregation, but most truely, a false
Church, Congregat: or assembly, which are all one.

Lastly, that Israell in Ieroboams apostacy, was a false Church, (though others
V Ains. have done it sufficiently) I will playnly prove, (God assisting me)
agaynst myne adversary; answering, in the first place, what he obiecteth to
the con­trary. [...] Helw Which is, that the ten tribes then apostate, were
the true seed of Abraham, seperated from the world, vnder the Covenant of God,
which was the Covenant of Cir­cumcision. Gen. 17. 7. 15. as well as Iudah in
Hezechiahs tyme, when they came to the passover.

If the Ch: of God had been in those dayes a naturall state, & the Covenāt
[...]NSW: a naturall Covenant, & Circumcision a naturall signe, or seal, then
had the ten tribes indeed been within that Covenant, & of the true Ch: into
what apostacy, idolatry, or other wicknednes soever they did, or could fall: &
with them the Ismaelites, & Edomites also, for they all were alike Abrahams
natural seed: yea with the one, & other, the whole world; for there is one
common state of nature, & the Iewes by it, children of wrath, as well, as
others. But since the Lords Covenant with Abraham, & his seed, was no
naturall, or vniversall Cove­nant, [...]h. 2. 3. Gen. 17.  [...]7. but a
Covenant of Gods speciall love, & promise with his peculiar people: in which
he bo [...]nd himself to be their God, that is, all happines, vnto them: &
them to perfit, or vpright walking before him; haveing Circumcision an­nexed,
[...]sal.  [...]4\. 15.  [...]. 4.  [...]. as a seal of the righteousnes of
fayth, it is ignorāce too grosse thus to mea­sure then by naturall respects:
or to think that any had a part in that Co­venāt by nature, or naturall
generation: by which, as before hath been pro­ved, & shalbe hereafter, more at
larg, all are vnder Gods curse, & children of wrath. Neyther is it true, that
the ten tribes (in their apostacy) were separated from the world vnder the
Covenant of God, which was the Covenant of Circumcision. [...]1\. Ioh. 5
[...]. They were by, [...]ph. 2. 2.  [...] & in their apostacy separated from
God, his Church, ordinā ­ces, & worship.2 Chr.  [...]. 15. 2\. Chr. 15. 3.
And since the world lyeth in wickednes, haveing the Divell for the prince
thereof, how were they separated frō the world, who served Divels in all
idolatry, & wickednes? Neyther is the consequence of [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=32) any force,
because faythfull, & obediēt Abraham, with his seed in his tyme, & so
successively continueing in his fayth, & obedience, were in that the Lords
Covenant, & had right to all the gratious promises thereof, that therefore
vnfaythfull, & rebellious Israell, (the fathers with the children) so
remay­ning incorrigible, were in, & vnder the same Covenant, & promises of
grace; of which more hereafter.

But (sayth he) if they had been the false seed of Abraham, then had theyr
Cir­cumcision M. He [...] been false, & they a false Church. I answer, that,
comeing of Abraham naturally, & pretending the same fayth, & religion with
him, & so the sameANS [...] right to the gratious Covenant of God, & seal
thereof, but being indeed without eyther the one or other; both beleeving, &
worshipping after a false, & feyned manner; they were (though his true seed in
respect of nature) yet in refped of fayth, religion, the Covenāt, & worship
of God, his false, & adul­terous I seed, & evē bastards, & the children of
whoredomes, as the Prophet speak­eth,Hos. 2.  [...] 2\. Chr.  [...] 11\. 15.
[...] yea the children of the Divell, doeing his workes, & serving him, & so
by his own confession, & vndeniable truth, a false Church, to the deceaving of
them­selves, & others.

2dly, every true Ch: is truely, & rightly gathered, & constituted (for II
thereby it is, that which it is:) whereas Israell considered in her apostacy,
& separation from Iudah, & as we now speak of her, was not truely, nor rightly
gathered, but by most sinfull schism, & rebellion both agaynst God, & man: &
therefore was no true visible Church.

The Lord expresly testifyeth by his Prophets, that he had for her wicked­nes,
& rebellions, wherein she was incorrigible,Ier. 3.  [...] given her a bill of
divorce, & III put her away: thatHos. 1.  [...] & 2\. 2. she was not his
people, nor wife, nor he her housband: in which respect also it is,Eze. 23.
that he called Samaria, Ahola, that is, her own tabernacle: as on the
othersyde, he calleth Ierusalem Aholiba, which is my tabernacle in her.

There was at that tyme but one onely true visible Ch:: one temple, one IIII
preisthood, one altar, one sacrifice, one kingdom of the Lord, in the hands of
the sons of David. And so, the ten tribes in this their apostacy, & devision,
being neyther this Ch:, nor any part of it, but actually devided frō it, &
thatDeut. 1 [...] 5\. t. &c. 1. King.  [...] 2 Chr. 1  [...]. 6. &c. 2. Chr 1
4. also by a speciall hand of the Lords providence, for the punishment of
both, could not be the true visible Ch: of God, nor any part of it, whatsoever
good eyther person priveldg, or thing, it still reteyned above other peoples.

Lastly, the Covenant with Araham on Gods part was, that he would be his God, &
the God of his seed, Gen. 17. 7. & thereof their Circumcision was a signe: v.
8. 9. 10▪ Now we read 2. Chr. 13. 5. that Israell had been a long tyme V
without the true God. By which it appeareth, that Israell, was without the
Lords Covenant: & that vnto them Circumcision could not possibly be a signe,
that God was their God. It was by them merely vsurped, & in [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=33) that their
vsurpation, a false, & lying signe, & like a seal set to a blank, y [...] like
the kings broad seal treacherously vsurped, agaynst his expresse will.

Wicked men, & such asPsal. 50  [...]. 17. hated to be reformed, & cast Gods
word behynde them, had nought to do with Gods Covenant, nor with Circumcisiō
the seal there­of: nor with any other of Gods ordinances. Their ‡ sacrificeing
of a lamb, [...]s. 66. 3. was as if they had cut of a dogs neck: & so
consequently their circumciseing their children, as if they had cut the
foreskin of their dogs: notwithstan­ding they were true Israelites, yea true
Iewes, naturally. They were ex­presly forbidden by the Lord to medle with his
Covenant; & in that their abuse of it, it was a lying signe in the ends, &
vses thereof, & no way af­foarding that, which it pretended: neyther could
they so vseing it, be by it, at all confirmed, that God was their God. And yet
was not the out­ward cutting afterwards to be repeated, if God gave
repentance: neyther is the outward washing in the name of the trinity now,
though merely vsur­ped by them, who are forbidden to medle with it. Neyther
matters it, whether such persons be in true Church, or false, which Mr Helw:
calles none. Both prophane, & vsurp it, & have the bare outward lying signe,
as it is sayd of Ephraim, or Israell, that she compassed about the Lord with
lyes, & deceipt: whereas Iudah ruled with God, & was faythfull with the most
Holy. Hos 11. 2.

But for conclusion of this poynt. If any of the heathen ioyned them­selves
vnto Israell in her Apostacy, & so were Circumcised, they being ney­ther
Abrahams true seed, by nature, nor by fayth, but merely false, & coun­terfayt,
their Circumcision must be false Circumcision by Mr Helw: his own graunt:
which notwithstanding was not afterwards to be repeated, if God gave them
repentance, & to come to Iudah to eat the passover. There was one law for the
eating of the passover, to him that was home-born, & to him that Exod. 12.
[...]9. was a straunger, or soiourner. And here appeareth a direct warrant for
our re­teyning the outward Baptism, receaved, & vsurped, in the like apostate
estate, & assemblyes, wherein they, & their familyes, & synagogues were.

I ad, that eyther the outward baptism receaved out of a true Ch: must be
reteyned, or els all other Churches must be able certaynly to discern, what
day, & hour a true Ch: falling by degrees, into notorious heresy, idolatry, or
other impiety, (& still baptizeing notwithstanding) becomes a false Ch: (as we
hould) or (as Mr Helw: will have it) no Church. For except other Churches can
certaynly know, & discern this, they cannot with fayth receav such members, as
vnto whom God may give grace, to leav th [...] apostate synagogue, & to come
vnto them. Such of them, as were baptized, whilst it remayned a true Ch: they
must not rebaptize: but such  [...] were baptized after it ceased to be a true
Ch: must (say our adversaryes,  [...] be receaved in by baptism. But it being
impossible for other Church [...] [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=33) thus to discern
of the day, & hour of the removeing of a Churches Candle­stick, especially for
such as are far of, & have had litle, or no medling with her, it followeth
necessarily, that the outward baptism administred in a Ch: or assembly
degenerated from a true Ch: into a false, (which they call no) Church, must be
reteyned vppon the partyes repentance, without reite­ration.

For conclusion then of this poynt also, I demaund, whether a man cast out of
the true Ch: for some notorious sin, & for impenitency therein, have true
baptism, or no? They will not, neyther can they, say, he hath, wryte­ing of
it, as they do: neyther indeed hath he true Bapt: in the ends, & vses thereof.
He must then eyther have a false baptism, or none. Not none, for then vppon
his repentance, & readmission into the Ch: he must be rebap­tized: he hath
therefore vppon him a false baptism. There is then (con­trary to their
doctrine) false Baptism, which is not none, & the same also to be reteyned, &
by the persons repentance becomeing true Baptism. Neyther matters it, that
such a man was baptized in a true Ch: at the first, since by hisRom  [...] 25.
transgression his Circumcision is made vncircumcision. In his obstinate
ini­quity he cannot enioy the fruit, or benefit of his baptism: which serveth
onely to make him the more inexcusable, & a more prophane Covenant­breaker
with God. He hath onely remayning the outward washing, & that much more
without right, then many thousands in Engl: have, or in Rome eyther.

And thus much for the iustifying of the difference in the Apology, be­tween a
true, false, & no Church, & Sacraments; as also for the applying of the same
distinction to our present occasion.

The particulars following in his book do more specially concern my self, &
wryteings: agaynst whom, & which, (thorough high perswasion of his own
knowledg, & most vnmortifyed affections, together with that Zeal of God▪ which
I bear him record he had, though not accordeing vnto knowledg) he let­teth
loose his tongue into most intemperate rage

And first he reproacheth me for the vse of that, for the want whereof I have
iust cause to blame my self: which is my Logick, & Philosophy as beingPag. 13
[...] none of the gif [...]s, wherewith Christ endued his Apostles: wherein he
verifyeth the ould saving, that, k [...]owledg hath no enemy but ignorance.
Logick is nothing but the right vse of reason: as is Philosophy the love of
wisdome divine, & hu­mayn. And did the Apostles want these? Or doth M• Helw.
envy vnto me my small pittance in them? Would he have me a new Nebuchad-
nezzar, with an  [...]x [...]s heart in a mans body? Indeed this his iudgment
agaynst those arts of wisdom, & reason, well agrees with his ignorant, &
bruteish deal­ing agaynst me, & the truth. And for my terms of art, (which he
also blameth) [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=34) they are neyther
many, nor without cause: nor yet so dark, but that an or­dinary Reader may, as
they are explaned by me, vnderstand them.

But I come to the poynts themselves, agaynst which he dealeth: the first
whereof is a double consideration I put of Baptism: the one takeing it, in
[...] self, & as I speak, n [...]k [...]dly, & in the essentiall causes, or
parts, to wit w [...]shing with water in the name of the Father, Son, & H.
Ghost: the other in respect of the manner of administering it: namely, the
Minister by, & the person vppon whom, & the communion wherein it is
administred. In the former respect I affim the Bap­tism true, both in Engl: &
Rome: but not so in the latter, but on the contrary false, & idolatrous, as
being agaynst the 2d Commaundment, which for­bids nothing but idolatry, &
false worship.

Agaynst the former of these respects Mr Helw: speaks angerly, as himself
confesseth, & ignorantly, as I shall manifest, God assisting me. Yea I did so
manifest in the same place of my book, by the holy vessels of the temple,
carryed  [...] Babilon: & yet still remayning such in theyr nature, & right,
though in theyr vse,  [...] [...]. Chr. 36. 7. Ezra 1. 7 D [...]n 53. Gen. 34.
25. 22. rather abuse, they became Belshazzars quaffing bowles. Likewise the
Circumcision of the Schechemites was in it self, true Circumcision, & they
circumcised in the f [...]sh,  [...] Iakob, & his sons were circumcised. But
to call this true circumcision in the right ends, & administration, were to
call darknes, light; & prophane hy­pocrisy, the true worship of God. So is
there also a true outward baptism, or washing with water in the name of the
Father, Son & H. Ghost, both in Engl: & Rome also, notwithstanding the
vnworthy prophanation of th [...] ordinance, in the one, or other place.

The things he obiecteth, for substance, are these. That, Baptism i [...] [...]
M. Helw spirituall ordinance; which water, w [...]shing, & words are not:
That, they that are bap­tized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal: 3. 27.
That, there is one Baptism of Christ, Eph: 4. 5. That, the baptism of Christ
is the bapt: of amendment of life, for the remission of sins. Mark. 1. 4.
That, except a man be born of water, & the spirit he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God: Ioh: 3. 5. Hebr: 10. 22. That,  [...] ought to have our hearts
pure from an evill conscience, & to be washed in  [...] bodyes with pure
water: & that, here is the true matter wherewith men must be washed, which is,
water, & the H. Ghost: & that, we cannot devide the water, & the spirit in
this baptism, being ioyned together by Christ: & that, he that deny [...]
washing, or is not washed with the spirit, is not baptized: & that, he that
denyes wash ing, or is not washed with water, is not baptized.

That which must be first, & cheifly considered for answer, & as tw [...]
ground of the rest, is, that, that one Baptism mentioned Eph: 4. hath in it t
[...] ANSW: parts: the signe, & the thing signifyed: eyther of which is also
in the Scrip­tures called Baptism: the one, the baptism with water, wherewith
Iohn baptize [...] Math. 3.  [...]1. & wherewith all Ministers do baptize;
which is the outward baptism,Mark 1.  [...] [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=34) signe of the
inward: the other the Baptism with the H. Ghost, wherewith onely Christ, & God
do baptize: as there is in like manner, an outward teaching by the word, & an
inward teaching by the spirit: an outward eating of the Lords supper in the
vse of the signes, & an inward eating of the thing, by fayth in the heart. And
even this outward washing with water in the name of the Trinity, (which he
calles water, washing, & words) is in it self a spirituall or­dinance (though
he take the contrary for graunted) as being properly sub­ordinate to mans
spirituall estate, & appoynted of God to signify, & con­firm the inward
washing of the soul by the blood, & spirit of Christ.

And this ground layd, I graunt, first, that the outward, & inward bap­tism are
ioyned together by Christ, & so ought not by men to be separated, but ioyned
together in their tyme, & order: but deny, that therefore where the inward
baptism by the spirit is not actually manifested, as in the Infants of
beleevers, there the outward is not to be ministred: or that being
admi­nistred vnlawfully in apostate Churches, it is no outward Baptism at all,
nor spirituall in it self, (though carnally vsed) nor to be held vppon
repen­tance, without repetition.

The outward Circumcision of the flesh, & the inward Circumcision in the heart,
which it signifyed, & whereof it did admonish the Circumcised, wereDeut. 10.
16. ioyned together of God, & so were to be by men, & might not be severedIer.
4. 4. without great iniquity: were the Infants therefore of the true Church
de­barred it? Or being prophanely administred amongst the idolatrous, &
apostate Israelites, or to the idolatrous Proselites amongst them, did their
abuse chaung the nature of it in it self? Or was it no Circumcision at all, &
so to be repeated, when the Lord vouchsafed to ad the Circumcision of the
heart?

Rom. 7. 14. The law of God, (& these wordes, thou shalt not lust, & so all the
rest) is spirituall in it self, though receaved, & vsed never so carnally: so
isCh. 1. 16 the gospell withall the ordinances thereof much more: & the power
of God, in it self to salvation, whatsoever vse men make of it, or them. The
Apostle teacheth vs, that all the Israelites comeing out of Egipt were
Baptized in the 1\. Cor 10 1. 2 3. 4. 5 cloud, & in the sea, vnder Moses, that
is vnder his ministery, & that they all ate of that spirituall meat, namely
Man [...]a: & all drank of that spirituall drink, na­mely the rock, or water
flowing out of it, which was Christ. And yet with many of them God was not
pleased: neyther were they baptized with the H. Ghost, or effectually made
partakers of Christ. Where also these two things are playn­ly manifested. The
one, that the outward ordinance, or signe, may be Spiri­tuall, to wit, in it
self, though the inward power, & thing signifyed be w̄ating. 2dly, that there
is sometymes an outward baptism, & the same so to be repu­ted, where there is
not the inward baptism by the H. Ghost: as there is also [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=35) sometymes an
outward [...]Ch. 11▪  [...]. 27. 9. eating of the Lords supper vnworthily,
that is without discerning the L: body, or any inward participation thereof,
or profit thereby. The same Apostle, as I have formerly noted, complayns els
where of false brethren creeping into the Church: who (being vnbaptized
before) were also [...]al. 2. 4. baptized at this their entry. TakeAct 8.
[...]3\. 23. Simon Magus for one: who being convinced of the truth of the
gospell, & beleeving after a sort, did deceav Phillip, thorough hypocrisy, &
was by him baptized: remayning notwith­standing in the gall of bitternes, &
bond of iniquity, all the whyle, as Peter after­ward perceaved. And I would
know of these double-washers, whether if a man professing the same fayth with
them in holines outwardly, but in hy­pocrisy, should be baptized by them: &
that afterwards his heart should strike him, & God give him true repentance,
(let it be the person they know of, that fled from vs vnder admonition for
sin, & ioyning to, & being baptized by them, was presently after by themselves
found in the same sin, & so Censured) whether, I say, they would repeat their
outward washing formerly made, as none, because there was not ioyned with it
the inward washing of the Spirit? Or if they think it none, & so the fore
mentioned person not indeed receaved in by baptism, as they speak, wherefore
did they then excommunicate the same person?

I conclude therefore, that there is an outward baptism by water, & an in­ward
baptism by the spirit: which though they ought not to be severed, in their
tyme, by Gods appoyntment, yet many tymes are by mens default: that, the
outward baptism in the name of the Father, Son, & H. Ghost, admini­stered in
an apostate Church, is false baptism in the administration, & yet in it self,
& own nature, a Spirituall ordinance, though abused: & whose spirituall vses
cannot be had without repentance: by which repentance, & the after baptism of
the spirit it is sanctifyed, & not to be repeated.

The 2d parte of the distinction followeth, which respects the manner of
administering the outward ordinance of Baptism: & namely the person  [...]y
whom, the subiect vppon which, & the communion wherein it is to be dispensed.
I [...] which respects I approve it not as true, eyther in Rome, or Engl: And
here M• Helw: falles into one of his hoat fits of raveing agaynst me after an
outra­giousM. Helw manner, for iustifying such a Baptism: where also to make
it worse, he ads as m [...] wordes, these of his own, that the spirit of God
is not there.

I answer, that there is a great difference between the iustifying of theANSW.
manner of doeing a thing (good in it self:) & the houlding the thing done
(though vnlawfully) not to be nothing. Zipporahs wrathfull circumciseing Ex 4
25.  [...] 0 16 I [...]ai 1. 11  [...]. 13. &c. of her son, & the Israelites
prophane circumciseing of their children haveing nought to do to medle with
the L: Covenant, could not be iustifyed; & ye [...] they were not no
circumcision, nor to be reiterated vppon them.  [...] [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=35) Magus his
receaving baptism, being in the gall of bitternes, & the Corinth: re­ceaving
the L: Supper, one hungry, & another dru [...]ken, could not be iustifyed, &
yet the Baptism of the one, & L: Supper of the other, was not no Bapt: & no L:
Supper: nor such as whereof there could be no right vse vppon the repentance
of the persons haveing so prophanely vsurped them. The Apostles Peter, & Paul
teach no such thing, but exhort the one, & other to repentance, that so they
might have the sanctifyed vse of those very holy things by them formely abused
so vnholily. These our adversaryes do not iustify their mariages in the
assemblyes, celebrated by the parish preist, as a parte of the solemn worship
of God: & in that respect agaynst the 2d Commaundement, & idolatrous: neyther
yet account they them no ma­ryages at all, nor cast them away as Idols of
Babilon: though they can esteem them no other, in the administration there.

But sayth he, if this ground were true, then a Turk baptizeing a Tu [...]k
with wa­ter, M. Hel [...] & these words, in any assembly whatsoever, it is the
true baptism of Christ.

It is true outward baptism prophaned, & abused, as is also that of mid­wives,
& children. Also touching stageplayers, of which he speaks in the nextANSW
leaf, I affirm, that if any parts of the Scriptures, or ther particulars
agreable therevnto, or any forms of prayers conteyned therein, be by them
vttered vppon the stage, they still remayn in themselves, & own nature, the
truthes of God, & forms of prayers conceaved by holy men, yea their prayers,
not­withstanding that sinfull prophanation of them: although that vttering of
them be nothing lesse, then true preaching or true praying. So may there be, &
is too commonly, true outward baptism, that is, the very outward thing for
substance done, where there is no true baptizeing, that is, no true, & lawfull
manner of administering it. And if the w [...]shing with water in the name of
the Father, Son, & H. Ghost, of a fit person, by a lawfull Minister, in a
lawfull Communion, & manner, be true baptism truely, & lawfully ad­ministered;
then is w [...]shing with water in the name of the Father, Son, & H. Ghost, by
an vnlawfull Minister, of an vnfit subiect, & in an vnsanctifyed commu­nion, &
manner, true baptism vnlawfully, & falsely administered. The thing done is the
same in both: the difference is onely in the manner of doeing it.

But between the baptism of a Turk vppon a Turk, & of a midwife, I put this
difference: that whereas that of a Turk is not done as a religious action, but
merely in mockery, (as is that of a Childe, in sporte) the latter by a midwife
is performed as a religious action vppon a member of an apo­state Church: of
which there is therefore another consideration to be had, then of that which
is done in sporte, & mockery, which common sence teacheth to be as nothing: as
we may see in an oath, which being taken in [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=36) ieast byndeth not
at all, but if taken in earnest, & for a thing lawfull, (though prophanely)
byndeth him that took it.

For the shutting vp then of this poynt, let the Reader observ, that the
Baptism which we repeat not, is that, which hath been ministered vppon the
members, & accordeing to the order (how corrupt soever) of such a Church, as
wherein the Lord hath his people, & for their sakes, many his truthes, &
ordinances, which he so far blesseth vnto his elect, as by them
(notwithstanding all the confusion there,) he doth communicate, & confirm his
saveing grace vnto them. Of the number of which his elect, we have also (by
his grace) testifyed our selves to be, as otherwise, so in particular, by
comeing as his people out of Babilon, or confusion, at his call. And we
rayther think it our duety to acknowledg the great goodnes of God towards vs,
in passing by the sins of our ignorance, & in blessing vnto vs, what was of
himself, & his own there: then vnthankfully to disclaym the least eyther
inward work of his grace, or outward means by which he wrought it.

In the next place Mr Helw: rayseth himself vppon his tiptoes, & in vayn
confidence of his mighty strength, threatneth teribly to strike me with a rod
of iron, & to break me in peices like a potters vessell. And because he
chuseth as his ground of best advantage, a poynt of our profession, viz: that
Bap­tism comes in the stead of Circumcision, which yet neyther he, nor they
with him, will in an other case acknowledg, I will therefore in the first
place prove that ground, by the Scriptures, & reasons vnto them agreable, & so
come to warde his so sore threatned stroak.

And, first, the Apostle disswadeing the Colossians from Iewish Ceremo­nyes,
[...]h. 2. v. 8 10. 11. & in speciall from Circumcision, teacheth them, that
in Christs person dwelleth all fulnes: & that in him as the head thereof, the
Church hath all perfe­ction: who by his Circumcision hath abolished the
former, as the shadow by the substance: by whom also, & whose circumcision the
faythfull have their hearts circumcised. But whereas it might be obiected,
that faythfull Abra­ham had his heart circumcised, & yet he had withall the
outward signe, & seal annexed; the Apostle answereth v. 12. That they are
baptized into Christ: (the effects of which bapt: he also noteth down in the
same place) & therefore needed not circumcision, as the false Apostles bore
them in hand: therein directly teaching, that our Bapt: is instead of their
circumci­sion: as is also our L: Supper instead of their passover: which
supper no vn­baptized person may eat of, as could no man vncircumcised eat of
the pas­sover. Their circumcision was not to be repeated, nor our baptism now,
though our eating the L: Supper be, as their passover also was Likewise the
Israelites in the wildernes wanting the ordinary Sacraments of Circumcis:
[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=36) & the
passover, & haveing instead of them the extraordinary Sacraments of baptism in
the sea and cloud, & of Manna, & the rock; 1\. Cor. 1. 2. 3. &c. & that
baptism signifying our baptism now, & that Manna, & water of the rock, the the
Sacrament of the body, & blood of Christ now: it is evident that our baptism
cometh instead of their circumcision. Besydes Circumcision was their first, &
solemn ordināce of initiation, or enterāce, by which (say our adversaryes)
they were receaved into the Ch: So is Bapt: our first, & solemn ordināce of
initiation, by which also (say they) men are receaved into the Ch: now. How
then do not they succeed one another, as doth the Ch: now the Ch: then?

Lastly their Circumcision then was a signe or seal of the Covenant of God; so
is our Baptism now of the same Covenant, as shalbe proved here­after: their
circumcis: admonisheing them of that originall corruption of all that came
naturally of Adam, not to be purged but with the shedding of the blood of the
promised seed: as doth also our baptism admonish vs of our originall
spirituall filthines, not to be washed away but by the blood of Christ powred
vppon vs: the same outward circumcis: yet further signi­fying the inward
circumcis: of the heart, as doth our bapt: with water the inward baptism of
the spirit; which circumcision was also vnto them a note or badg of
distinction from the world, as is also bapt: now; though by many vsurped, as
that also then was.

This ground then being cleared, I come to that which must strike this stroke
so terribly threatned: which is, that in my graunteing, & proveing in my M.
Hel [...] ▪ book, that Rome, & England were never in the Covenant of God, as
Iudah was, I do therefore debar my self from bringing my baptism from apostate
Israell; & therefore must prove, that Circumcision, (& so Baptism) receaved in
a Babilonish assembly, by a Babilonian, vppon a Babilonian, might be reteyned:
& a man so circumcised, eat the passover ▪ to disprove this he quotes Ezra 10.
3. & Nehem: 13. 23. 24. 25. for the putting away of childrē (though
circūcised) born of the strange wives in Babilon.

I professe, as before, that neyther the Catholick (so called) Church ofANSW.
Rome, consisting of many cuntryes, & nations, nor the nationall Ch: of Engl:
was ever within the Covenant of the gospell, or new Testament, (as was Iudah,
& with her Israell before the division) notwithstāding eyther the particular
holy persons that are, or particular Churches which happily have been there
Neyther of both therefore sayth Mr Helw: can be apostate Israell, which was
before her apostacy the true Ch: or of it, by our graunt. I deny the
consequence; & his ignorāce it is to think, that onely they can be apostate
Israell; who were formerly of Iudah. For then such of the heathen, as ioyned
to Israell in her apostacy, were not of apostate Israell, because they or
their parents were never of Iudah. And by his ground neyther the nationall
English, nor Catholick Romish Church should be Anti-Christian, [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=37) for neyther of
both were ever the temple of God, in which Antichrist at first raysed himself.
But as they are Apostolick Churches, which have receavedThess 2 & do keep the
fayth, & order delivered by the Apostles, though the Apostles did not gather
them personally: so are they answerably Apostaticall Churches, which have
taken vp, & receaved an Apostaticall state, & condition from others, though
they were never true in themselvs: the rule of nature here haveing place,
which is that the accessory followeth the nature of the principall. We do
likewise most properly, & immediately call that a schismaticall Church, which
was once eyther of, or a true Church, & hath causelesly made a division: but
yet if any other assembly (though haveing never been of, or a true Church) do
take vp a schismaticall profession, & walking, even it is also, though
secondarily, a schismaticall Ch: & so to be reputed. So that, though Engl:
never was eyther in the whole Nation, or severall parrishes, a true visible
Church, or Churches, yet haveing taken vp the Apostate Communion, worship,
government, Ministery & order of Rome, with the doctrines which defend them; &
Rome of that particular Church, which was once planted there, haveing
degenerated by degrees from the primative constitution, it is truely called by
vs Apostate Israell, for the pur­pose in hand: & that outward baptism there
receaved, rightly by vs re­teyned, as was the outward Circumcision in Apostate
Israell of ould.

The Scriptures he brings, which are Ezra 10. 3. Nehem. 13. 23. 24. 25. make
much agaynst him in the generall cause, & nothing for him in the par­ticular.

For to let passe other oversights. 1. They prove, that to be of Abrahams seed
carnally was not enough to make one a member of the Church, & within the L:
Covenant of Circumcision. For these very children thus put away (as haveing no
parte therein) were, & so are by Mr Helw: acknow­ledged, the males of the
Israelites. 2\. If any of them thus put away, had after­wards chosen the L:
God of Israell to be theyr God, should they have been recircumcised? Or is
there in the Scriptures any sillabe tending that way? 3. He is vtterly
deceaved in saying those children were born in Babilon: vppon which
notwithstanding he layeth all the weight of his Argument. They were born in
Canaan, & of the wives of the peoples nere adioyning, as in the same places is
expressed: & so their Circumcision nothing at all to the Circumcision
ministred in Babilon: & yet is he more peremptory in this his errour, then a
wise man would be in the truth. And thus all may see how his rod of iron is
proved a broken reed, whose shivers have peirced his own hands

The next thing he comes to, is, that other ground of ours (for with his by-
bablings, & revyleings I will neyther trouble my self, nor the Reader) [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=37) thus by him
related, that Baptism is the vessell of the Lords house; & as when the house
of the Lord was destroyed, & the vessels thereof together with the people
caryed into Babilon, they remayned still the vessels of the Lords house, in
nature, & right, though prophaned by Baltezar, & being brought agayn out of
Babilon to the house of the Lord, were not to be new cast, but (being
purifyed) might agayn be vsed to holy vse: so this holy vessell of Bapt:
though prophaned, in Babilon, being brought agayn to the house of the Lord,
remaynes still the holy vessell of the L: house.

Agaynst this he alledgeth. 1. That our baptism (seing it was administredM.
Helw▪ vppon vs all in the assemblyes) was formed, moulded, & made, in Babilon.
2dly, That the true doctrine, or ordinance of Baptism eyther caryed to Rome,
or Engl: was by way of comparison the vessell of the L: house, & so to be
brought back, & vsed.

The administering of Bapt: is not the frameing, or moulding of it, butANSW▪
the applying, & vseing of it being formerly moulded, & made: & this com­mon
sence teacheth: otherwise there should be a new vessell made & moul­ded, or a
new ordinance brought into the Church every tyme that bapt: is administred.
The outward washing then with water in the name of the Fa­ther, Son, & H.
Ghost, was first framed & moulded in the true Churches, by Iohn Baptist,
Christ & the Apostles, & there at the first rightly applyed, & administred: &
was afterwards vsurped, & misapplyed by, & in the Apo­state Churches, & so is
in Engl: amongst the rest: whence we also by the grace of God, have brought it
into the L: house built of liveing stones, order­ly layd together, for a
spirituall building vnto him: & there have the rightfull1\. Pet. 2.  [...] vse
of it being purifyed by repentance.

More particularly. If the true doctrine of Bapt: be the vessell of the Lords
house, then cannot this vessell of the Lords house be brought out of the
mother Babilon, which Rome is: because the doctrine of Bapt: there is most
false in it self: as that, Bapt: doth by the very work done, confer grace, &
wholy abolish originall sin: that it imprinteth in the soul of the baptized a
character, or mark indeli­ble, by which even the damned in hell, which have
been baptized, are differenced from the vnbaptized: that it is of absolute
necessity to salvation: that such infants are to be baptized as neyther of
whose parents are sanctifyed, or faythfull: & that it is onely to be
administred by the popes annoynted ones, save in case of necessity, & that
then the midwife may do it, with the like. How then can the vessell of the
doctrine of true baptism be brought from Babilon, where it is not? And so far
as the doctrine is true, so far the baptism is true also, being administred
accor­deing vnto it.

The truth then is, that as there were in the materiall temple both the
vessels, & doctrine, teaching their vse, so is there by proportion in the Ch:
now, the vessell of baptism, or thing ordeyned, (which is most properly called
theLev. 3▪ 17. ordinance) & the doctrine ordeyning, & teaching it: whichRom.
13▪ 1. 2. [[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=38)
are two severall things in all mens eyes which have sight in them. And since
baptism administred, besydes the doctrine which teacheth it, is ap­poynted of
God, as a means, to signify, & apply the blood, & spirit of Christ thereby
signifyed, it is very absurd to deny it to be a vessell for the service of the
Lords house, & of the holy things therein: rightly vsed in the temple: vsurped
in Babilon, or els where.

Lastly, Mr Smith, & Mr Helw: with him in their Character, confesse,Pag. 58.
that if the Anti-Christians had baptized persons, confessing their sins, &
theyr fayth into the name of the sonne of God, & the trinity, it had been true
baptism, though in the hands of the Anti-Christians, as the vessels of the L:
house in the hands of the Chaldeant, & therefore needed not repetition, as the
vessels needed no new casting: therein acknowledging, not the doctrine, but
the outward washing in the name of the trinity to be the vessell of the L:
house in Babilon: as also that there might be baptism so far true without
eyther lawfull commu­nion, minister, or subiect, (for all are Anti-Christian)
as that it might be reteyned without repetition: which is also iustly proved
from Circumci­sion, administred in a prophane vsurping family (though
naturally Israeli­tish) eyther in Babilon, or Canaan, or els where, it matters
not, & not to be repeated vppon repentance.

In the things following, being partely more generall, & partely already
handled, I wilbe the breefer.

He first tels vs, that if we be Iudah, & come from Israell, then we must not w
[...] M. Helw [...]. King.  [...]2\. 24. agaynst her as agaynst Babilon, since
shee is the ten tribes our brethren, which were not false Israelites, but the
true seed of Abraham.

Edom also was Israels brother, & the true seed of Abraham naturally,ANSW. Num
29. 14. 21. Deut. 2. 4. 5. &c. agaynst whom he was forbidden to war, as
agaynst Canaan: was Edom therefore the true Church or interessed in the L:
Covenant, as well as Israell then? And though Iudah was at that one tyme by
speciall re­streint, to forbear fighting agaynst the ten tribes, (as there was
a tyme also, when she might not fight agaynst Babilon) yet not so at other
tymes; but shee was contrarywise2\. Chr.  [...]3 3. 14. 15. 16. 17. holpen of
the Lord, to make a very great slaughter amongst them. But for our fighting
agaynst Engl: it is onely by the spirituall weapons of our testimony, the word
of God, our practise of Christes ordinances, & sufferings agaynst the
confusion, clergy▪ & superstitions there: & thus we must war agaynst all
iniquity, whether o [...] apostate Israell, or Babilon, it matters not.

His Reasons to prove Iudah as well as Israell a false Church, are of no [...]
weight. And 1. it is not true he sayth that the Calves set vp at Dan, &
Bethell did no more make them a false Church (for in speaking of false
Israeli­tes, as he doth, he bewrayeth too great ignorance) then the setting vp
[...] [[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=38) the
Calf in Horeb. For that Calf was forthwith taken down agayn, burnt in the
fyre, & beaten to powder, the cheif authors of the idolatry destroyed,Num 32▪
& 33. & the rest brought to repentance, by which the wrath of the Lord was
pacifyed: whereas the ten tribes continued their idolatry, & with & for it,
their schism from the true Church Iudah, & Ierusalem: & so were for their
obstinacy, & irrepentance ioyned with their sin, cast out of Gods favour.

Alike frivolous is his 2d Argum: from Salomons following Ash [...]aroh,
Milcam, & other Idols: of which he also repented, as appears by his wryteing
the book of the preacher, besydes other arguments, & whom Iudah is no where
sayd to have followed in his idolatry, as did the ten tri­bes Ieroboam, in
his. And not onely so, but they went on also from evill to worse: adding to
the false worship of the true God the worship of false1 King. 16. 25. 3 [...]
▪ Gods, Baal & others.

3dly, though Ierusalem was at a tyme (in the body) called by the Prophet, an
harlot, & her sins sayd to be greater then eyther Samarias, or Sodoms, to wit,
considering her estate, & means of bettering (for other­wise her sins in
themselves were not comparable to theirs) yet were there many in her abydeing
faythfull in the Lords Covenant, & the other brought agayn into the bond
thereof, by repentance, after the rod of the L: correction had passed over
them, & that he had taken the cheif rebels from Ezech.  [...] ▪ 37. 38.
amongst them; & in those the true Church consisted; the rest not being true
members thereof: butIer. 2.  [...] ▪ a false seed, the plants of a straung
vyne, by right to have been cut of from the L: people: whereas the ten tribes
went on in their sin, without repentance, or return out of their captivity,
into the land of Canaan, the proper seat of the Church. But of these things I
have spoken before at larg, as also of the outward baptism receaved in Engl:
which he here calles the mark of the beast, & vs for it, what he pleaseth;
whereas (though he, that receavs any doctrine, or ordinance of God ministred
by the power of Anti-Christ, may therein be sayd to receav the mark of the
beast, yet) that doctrine, or ordinance is not in it self, the mark of the
beast, but an holy thing of God, how vnlaw­fully soever administred.

His mistakeing the speach in the Apology of the 7000 in Israell, I have
formerly manifested. The peremptory doom which here he passeth vppon all in
Engl: & vs with them, as out of the state of gra [...]e, & salvation, is a
fruit of his rashnes. Well is it for vs, that he is not our iudg: & better
much had it been for him, if he had iudged himself more severely, & others
more charitably.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=39) Touching
Gal: 5. 1. & 2\. Cor: 3. 17. teaching, that, where the spirit of Christ is,
there is liberty: & that we must stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ
hath freed vs, I do answer, that as for our selves, we stand for, & enioy the
liberty of Christ in all things, to our knowledg, & power: so doubt I not but
there are thousands in Engl: truely partakers of the liberty of Christ, both
from the guilt, & tyranny of sin in their measure, notwithstanding that
spirituall externall bondage in their Ch: order, & ordināces, thorough humayn
fraylty. Wherein if they, or any of them, eyther affect ignorance, or pretend
it, being condemned of theyr own hearts, because they would avoyd the crosse
of Christ, or for any other carnall respects, God which is greater then [...].
Ioh. 3.  [...]. theyr hearts, & searcheth, & knoweth them, will condemn them
much more, though we thorough love be perswaded better things of them.

It is true he addeth, that all who come not out of Babilon, or receav the
least mark, or print of the beast, that is yeald the least submission vnto
Anti-Christ, are threatned with her plagues, & vnder the L: curse. Which
shewes how great­ly the Lord abhorreth, & how all his people ought to abhor
from those sins, and also vnto what wrath they stand subiect without
repentance. But withall it must be remembred, that as God requyreth particular
repentance for sins known, so doth he pardon the vnknown sins of his servans
vppon their generall repentance aryseing from true fayth in Christ, & haveing
ioyned with it, an honest, & earnest desyre, to know, & do the whole will of
God: otherwise no flesh could be saved: for noman knoweth how oft he
offen­deth. [...] 19\. 1 [...] And he who beleevs not, that as other men may,
so God doth know much evill by him even agaynst all the Commaundmens which he
knowes not by himself, (of which he can onely repent in generall) neyther hath
learnt to know God aright, nor other men, nor himself, how much soever he
presume of his knowledg, which, alasse, was too too much this vayn mans
malady.

His other two affirmations, that, if the fayth of the Ch: of Engl: be true M.
Helw then the Ch: is a true Church; & that, if the Ch: be not a true Church,
then is it a company of Infidels, have alike truth in both, & indeed none in
eyther. Cornelius, ANSW:  [...]ct. 10. & his family shew the falsity of both:
who had true fayth, & there­fore were not a company of Infidels, & yet were
not a true visible Church, of which we speak. True fayth maketh a true
Christian person: but the Covenanting, & combyneing of a company of such into
Christian order doth immediately make the Church.

And for Iohn 15. 19. & Math. 12. 30. I do answer, that a man may truely in his
person be chosen out of the world, & for Christ, in his measure, though he be
not of a true visible Church. There must be true fayth, & ho­lines before the
true Church; for of faythfull persons the Ch: must be [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=39) gathered: & in
reason, the the partes must be before the whole to be made of them, & the
stones, & timber before the house.

But he ads, that since all in the Ch: of Engl: drink of one Cup, 1\. Cor.
11.M. Helw they are all one body, & so no double respect to be had, nor
putting of difference of persons.

It is true, they are all one body, & there should be no such contrary
spi­rits: but all the members of one body should be lead by one spirit in a
mea­sure:ANSW for there is (to wit, in right)Eph. 4.  [...] ▪ one body, & one
spirit: but who haveing in him any light of the spirit seeth not the contrary;
& that in that one body of the nationall, & parishonall Church, & Churches,
two contrary spirits rule? By right there is none but led by the spirit of
Christ in the true Ch: & body of Christ: nor any led by that spirit out of it,
or in any other society. But that good, whether in persons, or things, which
Sathan hath not had power to destroy, he hath laboured to confound, & mingle
with evill, what he possibly could, both by thrusting false brethren into the
true Ch: & by keeping godly persons out of it. So that the servants of God
stand in great need as first of spirituall discerning to know good, & evill,
so after of true Zeal on the one syde, that they be not for the goods sake,
en­tangled with any evill: as also of godly moderation, & sobriety, on the
other syde, no way to wrong that which is good for the evilles sake, ming­led
with it: as this man hath done in the frowardnes of his heart, in stead of
Zeal: makeing no difference between himself, & others so walking, in his, &
their best profession, in Engl: & the most desperate crew of Atheists, &
Epicures in their professed contempt of God.

His plea which followeth that the Pope, & Papists are not true belee­vers, we
do receav: & professe withall, that no infants of such, or of anyGen. 17. 7.
other parents, the one whereof is not faythfull, is to be baptized: &
prac­tise accordeingly, as he knew well. And his accusation that we hould all
in­fants, 1\. Cor. 7 [...] ▪ 14. whether of beleeveing, or vnbeleeveing
parents to be baptized, & so practise, is vniust, & but a mere presumption
inferred vppon our not rebaptizeing the baptized formerly in the assemblyes.
Which our practise, I hope, is suffi­ciently iustifyed, agaynst his lowd, &
licentious clamours, (although by them he have affrighted two, or three simple
people, from that their bap­tism so receaved,) as also, that his peremptory
position, that what­soever is not done aright, is to be accounted as not done
at all, & is to be cast away, notwithstanding any after-repentance, is but a
short cut of his haste, & fruit of his ignorance: which two being coupled
together, cannot but gender many monsters.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=40)

## 5\. Of the Baptism of Infants.

HE proceedeth to the baptism of Infants; a poynt of great both dif­ference
between vs, & weight in it self: & which concerneth all Churches, at all
tymes, whereas the former respects onely such Churches as come out of a state
of Apostacy.

And to prove Infants vncapable of baptism, he begins with the Cove­nant of the
gospell, or new Testament, which he rightly makes one, as in­deed they are in
substance, (though the new Testament may be taken in a stricter sence, for the
gospell more clearly dispensed since Christ come in the flesh:) touching which
Covenant he speaketh thus.

This is the Covenant, (sayth the Lord) that I will make with the house ofM.
Helw Israell, I will put my law in theyr inward partes, & write it in theyr
hearts, & I wilbe theyr God, & they shalbe my people Ier: 31. 33. Hebr: 8\.
10. And our Saviour Christ declares this more fully, Mark 16\. 16. where he
sayth, Go yee into all the world, & preach the gospell: he that shall beleiv &
[...]e baptized, shalbe saved. And here (sayth he) is the new Covenant set
down both on Gods behalf, & theyrs with whom it is made. On Gods that he would
write his law in mens hearts, by the power of his spirit in the preaching of
the gospell, & wilbe theyr God, & save them: & [...] the peoples behalf, to
beleiv the gospell, & to be baptized. And herevppon he in­fers, & concludes,
that children are not within the Covenant of the new Testament, or gospell, &
therefore not to be baptized.

Let the Reader in the first place observ,ANSW: that the word Covenant in the
Hebrue, [...]. as Ieremy hath it, signifyeth any compact, or agreement vppon a
difference, between two, or more. Which the LXX in the Greek Bible, & so the
Apostle after them, turn by a word signifying a will or Testament properly. So
that he who aright vnderstands, & well weighs the very word, will playnly see,
how Mr Helw: erreth in makeing the wryteing of Gods law in mens hearte, the
Covenant on Gods behalf: or baptism any part of it on mans be­half. The
Covenant is the very agreement & promise by mutuall accorde, for the things to
be done, & not the doeing of the things, which is the keeping of the Covenant,
or promise made. And so all that can be conclu­ded hence is, that God
receaveth none into his Church but such as i [...] whose hearts he promiseth
to write his law: Which he promised to do to the infants of the faythfull, in
promiseing Abraham to be the God of his s [...]ed: & more particularly in
promiseing to circumcise (which is all one with wryteing his law in) the
hearts of the seed of his people. By which itDeut. 30.  [...]6. is also
evidently proved, that the infants of faythfull parents are together with
them, within in the L: Covenant.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=40) But to
answer more fully: the intent of the prophet (& so of the ApostleExod. 3 [...]
▪ 18. 1. Cor. 3▪ 3. following him) is to oppose the ould Covenant, or
Testament of workes written with ink in  [...]les of stone & the new
Testament, or Covenant of grace written in the hearts of men by the finger of
Gods spirit. Now the persons with whom the Lord made these Covenants
primarily, & expresly both the one, & otherEzech. 3 [...] ▪ 26. 27 were men of
years; but in whom their infants were included, & so within these the L:
Covenants, though secondarily, & as was agreable to their estate.

These men professe every where, & truely (although not vppon good grounds)
that the Israelitish infants were within the ould Covenant, or Testament: &
yet when God eyther proclaymed it vppon mount Sina, or writ it in the tables
of stone, they knew not what it meant, neyther could they have the same vse of
it with their parents, & others of discretion, as may appear in the
particulars conteyned in the Scriptures Exod: 19. 10. 11. 15. 21. 25. & Ch. 20
1. 2. 8. 12. 18. 19. amongst others, where it is set down: doth it therefore
follow that those infants were not within the compasse of the ould Testament,
or law? So neyther followeth it, because the infants of the faythfull now
cannot for the present, observ the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, or
reap all the fruits thereof, & particularly, to have the law written in theyr
hearts by the ministery of the gospell, & work of the H. Ghost, that therefore
they are excluded from the Covenant of Grace, or Testament of Christ, Children
may with far better reason be denyed, to have been within the Covenant of the
ould Testament, or law, vppon whichGal. 3.  [...] ▪ the curse followeth, then
to be shut out of the new Covenant of grace, & mercy. And vppon this ground
Infants should not be within eyther the naturall Covenant or bond with their
parents, or the civill Covenant with their Magistrates, because they cannot
for the present Honour Father, & Mother, which is the condition of these
Covenants on their behalf. His exception then that infants cannot by the
preaching of the gospell, have Gods law written in theyr heart, this being but
a condition of the Covenant, which re­spects men of riper years, is of no
force.

When the Lord sayth to Israell, I am thy God, his meaning is not to exclude
their infants, though he spake not vnto them, but to exclude other peoples, &
nations: so where he makes this new Covenant with those in whose hearts he
writes his lawes, he doth not debar their children, but wicked men destitute
of the spirit of God, & from vnder his promise. So for Mark 16. 15. 16. which
he also alledgeth, where Christ sends his Apostles into the world to preach
the gospell, & ads that he who beleeveth & is baptized, shalbe saved, he no
more entends to exclude the infants of the faythfull from baptism, because
they beleev not, then frō salvatiō because they beleev not: [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=41) which is yet more
playn in the words following, but he that beleeves not shalbe damned. Shall
children now be damned because they believ not? There is hence more colour for
that, then that they shall not be baptized because they beleev not: for Christ
sayth not, he that beleeves not, shall not be bap­tized, but shalbe damned.
The thing then is: Christ neyther excludes the children of beleevers from
baptism, nor from salvation, for want of fayth, but vnbeleevers, & such as
refuse the gospell from both. So that the stone vppon which these men stumble,
is the ignorance of the opposition in the Scriptures they bring; which is not
between beleevers, or sanctifyed per­sons, & their children, but between them,
& vnbeleeveing & prophane per­sons: who are shut from the Lords Covneant,
Baptism, & Salvation. But where in shareing this Covenant on mans behalfe into
fayth, & baptism, he makes the one parte thereof, his being baptized, he
speaks he knowes not what, & yet wonders that all men beleiv him not. For as
Bapt: is indeed no parte of the Covenant, but a signe, & seal of further
confirmation, so is it prin­cipally, & in the mayn end performed, not on mans
behalfe towards God, but on Gods behalf towards man; (God by the outward
washing of the body with water, signifying, confirming, & applying the inward
washing of the soul, by the blood, & spirit of Christ:) & for the further
testification of the admission of the party baptized into the family of God,
the Father, Son, & H. Ghost, into whose name he is baptized: whereas in a 2d,
& inferiour re­spect it is a work of man vnto God, for the profession, &
exercise of fayth, repentance, & thankfulnes in them who receaved the former
covenant, & promise with the confirmation thereof, on Gods parte, towards
them, & theirs: as it is also thirdly a signe of vnion between the members of
the Church: & in the 4th, & last place, a badg of Christianity, & signe of
dis­tinction between the true Church, & all false Churches. The same
confide­rations are to be had of the L: Supper. And they who know not these
things,Hebr. 6. 1 had need have the foundation of the doctrine of baptism, &
other princi­ples of Christian religion layd agayn: & yet the want of the
knowledg of this & in speciall, that the Sacraments are in their first, & mayn
end workes of God to men, by which he can both declare, & effect his goodnes
to­wards infants, though for the present, they neyther know it, nor can do any
thing agayn to the Lord in answer therevnto, is a mayn ground of that offence,
which these men take at our receaving, & baptizeing of Infants. And if the new
Covenant or Testament consist so much in baptism, as these men think, then
could not Adam, & Abraham, & other the holy Patriar­kes, & Prophets
vnbaptized, have been within the compasse of the Cove­nant, & promise of
grace, or have had their partes in the Testament of Christ, the promised seed.
Also if baptism were (especially so great) a [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=41) parte of the
Covenant, so oft as any eyther person, or Ch: renued their Covenant,
especially after any greater sin, they should so oft renue their baptism also.

These things thus layd down by way of answer, it remaynes I prove by the
Scriptures, & further Arguments, that the infants of the faythfull are within
the compasse of the new Covenant here spoken of.

And since all children comeing naturally of Adam,Ps. 51. 5▪ are conceaved, &
born in sin, Eph. 2.  [...] ▪ & by nature the children of wrath; if these men
beleev (as they do of all) that their children so dying shalbe saved by
Christ, then must they have a parte in his Testament, or in this new Covenant,
which are all one. There are not two new Covenants, or Testaments established
in the blood of Christ but one. And since Christ is propounded vnto vs as the
saviour of his body, Eph. 5. 2▪ which is his Church it is more then strange,
that these men will have all infants saved by Christ,Col. 1. 1▪ & yet none of
them to be of his body, or Church.

It pleased God in his speciall love to send his sonne to take vppon him our
nature, & so our childehood, that as the head thereof, he might sancti­fy even
that estate for his body the Church: with which he did also in the dayes of
his flesh, visibly communicate his grace, consecrateing vnto his Father, as
their true high preist, the infants of the Iewish Church, by lay­ing his hands
on them, † Mark. 10. 13. 1▪ & blessing them.

I ad, if any, eyther children, or men of years, be to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, they must be born agayn: & this new birth must be by the spirit of
God workeing in eyther, accordeing to their kinde, & writeing Gods law in
their hearts: in those of years distinctly, & by the preaching of the gospell,
in infāts otherwise, accordeing to the efficacy of the power, & grace of God.

Lastly it is evident that the children of the faythfull are within this
Covenant of the Gospell or new Testament by that Covenant which God made with
faythfull Abraham, Gen 17. & his seed, adding the seal of circumcision to
ra­tify it. But that this was the Covenant of the Gospell, or new Testament Mr
Helw: denyeth, & opposeth, I will therefore answer what he obiec­teth, & then
prove myne exposition, & affirmation by the Scriptures.

And first, he layes down this Covenant Gen. 17. on the L: behalf, thus. I will
establish my Covenant between mee, M. Helw & thee, & thy seed after thee, &
theyr ge­nerations for an everlasting Covenant to be God vnto thee, & to thy
seed after thee, v. 7. & on Abrahams behalf, & his seeds, in these words, This
is the Covenant that thou, & thy seed after thee shall keep,. Let every
manchilde among you be circum­cised: you shall circumcise the foreskin as well
of him that is born in the house, as of him that is bought with mony: adding
for exposition, that thus the L: decla­res in every particular his Covenant
with his people, as well what he will do for them, as what he requyres them to
do in obedience to him.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=42) A great
vntruth, & full of ignorance. Is the land of Canaan all thatANSW: the L:
Covenants & promises to give vnto Abraham & his seed? What is this but to make
the L: people an heard of oxen which are promised to be brought into a fat
pasture, there to feed at ease? And is circumcision of their males all in
particular which God requyres of his people by Covenant, which any prophane
Schechemite might do, & did as well, & as diligently as they?Ps. 1. 11.
[...]2\. &c.  [...]ebr. 11. & which being done without fayth, & repentance,
doth no way please but offend God.

The L: promised to be a God (even all-sufficient, as v: 1.) vnto Abraham, &
his seed v: 7.Ps. 144. & [...]5. that is, to be all happines, & blesse vnto
them: for blessed are the people that have the Lord for theyr God. And except
we will say they had onely bodyes, & no soules, God in promiseing to be their
God, pro­miseth not onely to be the God of their bellyes, & backes, but of
their soules most; as the soul of a man is most the man. And so Christ himself
teacheth agaynst the Saducees,Exod. 3. 6  [...]. 18. that God in calling
himself the God of Abrahā, Isaac, & Iakob, & so of their seed the Hebrewes,
means, that he is the God of their soules (& that most specially) which lived
whē their bodyes were dead.Mat. 22.  [...]2.

The Apostle Paul, who well vnderstood the Lords meaning, doth inter­pret the
promises of this Covenāt with Abraham, as meant of better things then Canaan,
& indeed as comprehending in them (though more darke­ly, accordeing to the
dispensation of those tymes) Christ himself, & in him all spirituall
blessings. And so speaking of this Covenant, or Promise, with, or to Abraham,
Gal. 3. 15.  [...]6. & his seed, avoucheth, that by his seed is meant Christ,
viz as the head with his body, the Church of the Iewes, & Gentiles also in
their tyme made one in him. Eph: 3. 6. as he also proveth Rom: 4. 3. 18. &
Gal: 3. 6. that Abrahams beleeving the Promise of God for the multiplying of
his seed Gen: 15. 5. 6. & 17\. 4. was imputed to him for righteousnes to
iustification: there­in teaching evidently, that in this Promise was
comprehended Christ, & spirituall things: otherwise, how could Abraham be
iustifyed by beleeving it? And how carnally soever these men are conceyted of
this Covenant, & Promise,Ioh. 8.  [...]6. Abraham in it saw Christes day, &
seing it, reioyced.

And for the land of Canaan, albeit in it self, & naturally, but like other
lands, yet was it by the Lord sanctifyed to spirituall ends, & vses: as, to be
the peculiar inheritance of Gods peculiar people, vnto which it was alotted
from the firstDeut  [...]. 2. 8. division of the Sons of Adam, & distribution
of theyr pos­session by the most high whetherExod. 15. 17. he would bring his
people, & there plant them in the mountayn of his inheritance, in the
sanctuary, which his hands had established: where he would have his tabernacle
piched, & temple built, for his most solemn presence, & worship: out of which
land when the ten tribes were caryed captive, he is sayd to have2\. King. 17.
18. put them out of his sight: the very land being  [...]ign­rateively [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=42) holy,Heb 3. 1
[...] & a Sacrament of Gods presence, & the resting of Gods people there a
signe of their eternall rest in heaven:Ch 4. 5.  [...] into which not Mose
[...], but Ioshua or Iesus, the type of our & their true Iesus, was to bring
them. Neyther did the L: indeed promise eyther enterance into, or continuance
in that land,Hebr. 3▪ 17. 1 [...]. 1 [...] ▪ with 4  [...] Liv 20.  [...] 2 &c
& 26 39. Deut [...]. 1 [...] 12 13. with 11▪ 1. 8. 9 2 [...] ▪ 23 24. 1 Cor. 1
[...] 5\. 6 7 but vppon the conditions of eternall life: true fayth in the
gospell, with the love, & fear of God, & faythfull obedience of hes
commundements: godlines haveing then as it hath now, & alwayes, the premise of
good things for this life, & the life to come: of earthly things then, more
distinctly, & fully, but of heavenly things more generally, & spareingly:
where now on the con­trary, there is a more clear, & full revelation of
heavenly things, but the promise of things earthly more generall, & spareing.
It is therefore an ill collection he makes, that because God promised earthly
Canaan, therefore not heavenly things: the promise of them was conteyned in
the other, which all amongst them but hypocrites vnderstood, & tasted of.

The like folly with the former sheweth he, in affirming that the circumci­sion
of theyr males, 1\. Tim▪ 8. 9. Rom. 4. 11. was all the obedience, which God
requyred of Abraham, & his seed, for the k [...]eping of the Covenant on theyr
parte towards him. For 1. Circumcision (which must well be considered) was not
appoynted of God principally for a work of their obedience towards him, but
for a signe or seal of confirma­tion, on his parte, towards them, of the
righteousnes of fayth imputed to Abraham, the root, Gen. 1 [...] ▪ 3. 6 7. &
ch 13▪ 14 15. 1 [...] & 15 1 [...] 4\. 5. 18. in the promised seed. 2dly, it
is evident that this Covenant vnto which the land of Canaan was an
appurtenance, was contracted, & made, with Abra­ham, many years before
circumcision was once mentioned. Which Cove­nant God also renued with the
Israelites his seed in the wildernes, the most of them being vncircumcised. By
which it is evident, that Circumcision was so far from being the substance of
the Covenant, as that it was not so much as any substantiall parte of it,Deut.
29▪ & 30\. compa­red with Ios. 5. 2.  [...] ▪4 5. 6. but onely a signe of
ratification, & that spe­cially on Gods parte, as was Canaan an accessory vnto
it. 3dly, the Apostle Rom. 4. proveing at larg, iustificatiō by fayth,
without workes, & so specially with­out circumcision, of which as of a
speciall work the Iewes made account, takes Abraham for an instance, & shewes,
that he was first iustifyed by beleeving Gods free promise touching his seed,
Christ, & so the Ch: in him, as well of vncircumcised Gentiles in their tyme,
as of circūcised Iewes: & ads that after this, he receaved the seal of
circumcision, for the confirmation of this bond of promise, on Gods parte,
haveing the promise it self before. Which Circum­cision therefore whosoever
presumed to vse (whether vppon himself, or his infant) not haveing before the
promise of Christ, & fayth for iustification, with Abraham, he did
treacherously vsurp the great seal of the king of heavē, & earth. The lawfull
vseing then of circumcision did presuppose both Gods promise & his fayth, who
was to vse it, eyther vppon himself, or his childe. [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=43) And since without
fayth no man eyther can, [...]. 4. 4.  [...]ith Heb. 1. 4. 5. or ever could
please God, especially, in the matters of his worship, whereof circumcision
was one; & that God appoynted his people so to worship him in it, & all other
things, as they might please him therein, [...]ath. 3.  [...]. it followeth
necessarily, that he requyred true fayth in all, whom he enioyned, or rayther
priveledged to circumcise their infants.Cor. 10  [...]. Neyther indeed do the
Scriptures of those tymes, more plenteous­ly testify any one thing, then that
the Israelites did most heynously [...]eb. 3. 17 Ps. 24. 5.  [...]. 11. 10
[...]os. 8. 1. trans­gresse, & break Gods Covenant with Abraham, & them, when
they did vse, & observ circumcision very diligently: which had the Covenant on
their parte stood in circumcision, they had not done. And (for conclusion)
that the L: God should separate a people, as his own peculiar, above all the
peoples in the earth, into Covenant with himself, to worship him, & to enioy
his speciall presence, & yet should requyre no more of them for the keeping of
this Covenant, then the cutting of their foreskins, is a mere mockery,
vn­worthily blemishing Gods great maiesty, & from the imagination whereof all
godly wise men do abhor.

Now though this which I have spoken, be more then enough, yet will I for more
clearnes, annex a few other Reasons to prove this Covenant with Abraham, & his
seed, the Covenant of the Gospell, & the same with ours now for substance; &
established in Christ to come, as ours in Christ come in the flesh.

And 1. the Apostle to the Galat: expresly teacheth, that the Gospell was
preached vnto Abraham, [...]b. 3. 8. IN THEE SHALL ALL THE GENTILES BE
BLESSED, & v: 17. that the Covenant with, & in ABRAHAMS SEED, was confirmed of
God in respect of Christ, & that 400, & 30 years before the law, or ould
Testament was given. And here also the Apostle answereth M^ Helw: M. Helw his
obiection, & removeth that great stone of offence, which he, & others cast in
their own way; which is, that the ould Testament, or Cove­nant with the
ordinances thereof is disanulled Hebr: 7. 18. & that, we ought not to frame
the new Covenant like the ould, as we do, in the baptizeing of infants,
because infants then were circumcised. The Apostle answereth directly (to let
passe other things) that the Covenant with Abraham was confirmed in respect of
Christ: & that it was not the law or ould Testament, which was added 400, & 30
years after for transgression, & so is abolished indeed, but could not
disanull the former Covenant of the Gospell.

And because these men (whose recovery I do from myne heart desyre of the Lord)
do especially stumble at this, that the Covenant made with Abraham, & his
seed, was the Covenant of the law, or ould Testament, I will (& that breifly
as I can) shew the clear, & evident difference betweén these two Testaments.
Which had such of our laterCalvin.  [...]ucer.  [...]ucanus wryters as have
been most [[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=43)
followed,Ph. M [...] lanct; Chem­nitius. Sohniu [...] Armi­nius &c [...]
observed, & put distinctly, as others have done, much light had been given for
the preventing of this errour.

And 1. this difference appears notoriously, in the tyme. For this ould, &
canceled Covenant was made with the people of Israell in the day, when the
Lord took them by the hand, & brought them out of Egipt. Ier: 31. 32. which
was 400, & 30 years after the Covenant made with Abraham, as the Scri­ptures I
formerly cited teach.

The law, or ould Testament was given in mount Sina Exod: 19. whereas II the
Covenant with Abraham was first drawn in Vr of the Caldeans, Gen 11. & 12\. &
15\. & 1 [...] & afterward confirmed, & renued in Canaan.

The law was given with great terrour of burning, fyre & smook, & blacknes, III
& tempest on the mount, Ex. 19. 1 [...] ▪ 18. Hebr. 12▪ 18. with the loud
sound of the trumpet, as became the glory of Gods iustice: but the Covenant
with Abraham was free from all terrour, & replenished with all sweetnes of
love, & mercy, & comfort agaynst sin.

The ould Testament had Moses for the mediatour: whereas Abraham him­self IIII
receaved the other from God, in the mediation of Christ, as I have for­merly
shewed.Exod. 19 14. 19.

TheExod. 24. 6. 7. &c. Hebr. 7. 11. law was dedicated in the blood of beates,
Gal. 3 19▪ & established vnto the people vn­der the preisthood of the Levites:
where the Covenant with Abraham was esta­blished V in the promisdGal. 3. 16.
seed Christ, & in his blood: himself being both preist, & sacrifice.

Lastly the Covenant of the law, or ould Testament had indeed the promise of
good things heavenly, & earthly, but vnder the condition of perfit obe­dience
to all the Commaundements: & vnder the threatning of the con­trary curse to
the least breach of any of them. Wherevppon (respecting mans corruption, &
inability to keep it, Act. 13. 38. & 15\. 10. Rom. 8. 3. VI 7.) it is sayd to
be weak, Lev. 18.  [...] ▪ Gal 3. 12 Deut. 27 26. Gal. 3  [...] &
vnprofitable, yea generateing to bondage Gal. 4. 24. & the power of sin 1\.
Cor. 15. 56. causing wrath, & death Rom. 4. 15. & 7\. 5. the letter which
killeth, & administration, of death, & condemnation 2\. Cor. 3. 6. 7. But of
the Covenant, & promise which God made with, & to Abraham, the Scriptures do
not so speak, neyther can any man haveing wisdom, & grace. It was profitable
every manner of way, & the means both to beget, & nourish fayth in him, & his.

The confounding then of the Covenant given to Abraham with that given by Moses
is in it self a great errour, & the ground of this amongst other evilles, that
it curseth where God blesseth. For where God promised vnto Abraham, & his seed
a blessing in that Covenant, this other of the law bringeth all flesh, as
vnable to keep it, vnder Gods curse: being given prin­cipally for
transgression, that is, to discover mens trangressions, & sins, that
despayring in themselves they might fly to the gratious promise made to [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=44) Abraham, & in it,
vnto Christ to come, & so fynde mercy with God tho­rough repentance. Which
Covenant therefore the Lord vppon their re­pentance, so oft renued with the
seed of Abraham: whereas the Covenant of the law admits of no repentance for
mercy by it, but stands perempto­ry in, & vppon Do this, & live: & Cursed be
he that abydeth not in all things writ­ten in the book of the law to do them.
And this so oft renovation of the Cove­nant II made with Abraham doth playnly
shew it not to be the Covenant of the law, [...]ark 1. but of the Gospel,
whose two generall vertues are, fayth in Christ, & repentance.

But it wilbe demaunded how the Covenant made with Abraham could be called the
new Covenant, DEI: & that by Moses 400 years after, the ould Covenant, or
Testament.

First,ANSW: in respect of the obiect, vppon which the law worketh proper­ly,
which is the ould man, or parte vnregenerate: which it convinceth,
suppresseth, condemneth, & killeth: whereas the gospell, or gratious pro­mise,
(as was that to Abraham) respects properly the new man, which it begetteth, &
nourisheth.

2dly, even the same law in substance with that given to Moses in tables of
stone (vnto which the Ceremoniall, & Iudiciall lawes considered aparte frō
Christ, were Subordinate, the one for explanation of the first table, the
other of the latter, & so as accessoryes following the nature of the
princi­pall) was in substance before the Covenant of the Gospell, & as ould,
as Adam: in the table of whose heart it was engraven by creation: as being
that image of God in which he was made:Coloss. 3.  [...]0\.  [...]ph. 4.
[...]4  [...]om. 2.  [...]4\. 15. & which is renued in vs by the spi­rits
wryteing the same law in our hearts, in wisdom, righteousnes, & holines: which
is yet more evident in the remnants of the same law vnblotted out in all Adams
naturall posterity: which Covenant of the law was therefore be­fore the
Covenant of the Gospell with Abraham, yea or with Adam eyther.

3dly, & lastly, the whole body of the Scriptures may be devided into two
partes: the law or ould Testament, & the Gospell or new. Now of the ould
Testament Moses is propounded vnto vs as the minister, & mediatour: as is
Christ for the minister, & mediatour of the new. For the law was given by
Moses, & grace, & truth by Christ Iesus. Not as though Moses preached not the
gospell, [...]oh. 5. 46. Heb. 4. 2. (for he wrote of Christ: & preached the
gospell to the Israelites in the wildernes:) nor as if, on the contrary,
Christ taught not the law, (for we may see the contrary, as els where, so
especially Math: 5. where he both openeth, & inforceth it agaynst the corrupt
glosses of the pharisees) but because the ministery of Moses was cheifly
legall, & the ministery of Christ cheifly Evan­gelicall, or of the Gospell. In
which respect also it is, that we (though the Scriptures never so speak) vse
to call the wryteings of Moses, & the Prophets [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=44) the ould
Testament, & those of the Evangelists, & Apostles, the new Testament. Now vnto
those two generalles, 1. the law most fully, & solemnly published by Moses: &
2\. the gospell by Christ, all the particulars of what kynde soe­ver dispersed
throughout the whole Bible must be referred immediately: & so the Covenant
made with Abraham being referred to that clear, & full revelation of Christ
come in the flesh, as a parte to the head, is after the law given to, & by
Moses: whom the Scriptures do every where in that re­spect oppose vnto Christ,
but never Abraham. I proceed.

The Virgin Mary speaking of the fruit of her wombe, Christ, testifyeth, III
that God therein remembred his mercy, Luke 1. 4 [...] ▪ 42. 54. 5 [...] ▪ Ch.
2 67 72. 73. as he spake to Abraham, & his seed for ever: & Zachary in the
same consideratiō, that he performed his mercy promised to theyr forefathers,
& remembred his holy Covenant, & the oath he sware to theyr father Abraham.
Mary, & Zachary filled with the H. Ghost do teach that God in his Covenant
with Abraham, & his seed promised Christ: & in giveing him remembered the same
Covenant;M. Helw with what ghost then do others af­firm that in that Covenant
he promised nothing but the land of Canaan? or how can godly men put out this
clear light of the Scriptures shineing in their hearts?

The Apostle Rom: 4. 11. calles Circumcision, which was the signe of that IIII
Covenant, the seal of the righteousnes of the fayth in, or of that of the
vncircumcision, that is, of the fayth which he being vncircūcised had, that
in his seed Christ should be iustification for beleeving vncircumcised
Gentiles, as well as cir­cumcised Iewes. Wherevppon it followeth, (if the
Covenant, & seal agree in one) that the Covenant it self was of the
righteousnes of fayth, which the gospell bringeth: opposed to the righteousnes
of the law, which Moses de­scribeth, where he sayth, The man that doth these
things, shall live in them. Rom: 10. 5. 6. In which place the Apostle playnly
teacheth, that the Covenant renued with Israell Deut: 29. & 30\. was the
Covenant of the Gospell, & righteousnes of fayth in Abrahams promised seed.

Lastly, the Sriptures do most playnly, & plentififully teach, that the
Co­venant V with Abraham, & his seed, the Israelitish Church, was the same
with ours in nature, (though diversly dispensed) & therefore the Cove­nant of
the Gospell. I will note some specially places.

We are taught by Christ Math: 21. 41. that the vyneyard, which the Iewes had,
should be taken from them, & let out to other housbandmen: & more playnly v:
43. that the kingdome of God should be taken from them, & given to a nation,
which should bring forth the fruits thereof. Here is the very same kingdom of
God, or Ch: whereof they were, & we are subiects: as they els where are called
ChristsLuke 19 14 Citizens, & he theirZach. 9. 9. Math. 2 [...] [...]. king.
Likewise Paul teacheth, that the Gentiles, which be­fore, were wilde olives,
are by fayth grafted into the same root, from which the Iewes, [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=45) the naturall
branches,Rom. 11.  [...]9\. 18. &c.  [...]. 23.thorough vnbeleif, were broken
of: & into which, they should, if they abode not in vnbeleef, be grafted in
agayn: makeing the Church of Iewes, & Gentiles one tree growing vppon the same
root Abraham, Isak, & Iacob. The same Apostle also compareing the Ephesians
before their calling, with the Iewes, Eph. 2. 11 12.  [...]. 17. sayth, they
were in tymes past without Christ, haveing no hope, & without God in the word:
therein shewing that the Iewes in their right estate, & cal­ling, had all
these: as they also were near before, the Ephesians being of far of, Ch 3. 4 5
[...]. made near by the blood of Christ: vnto which ad that the Gentiles were
to be made by the preaching of the gospell, coheyres, & one body, with the
Iewes, who were beforeHebr. 6.  [...]7. the heyrs of promise: & haveing all
been baptized, & all eaten of the same spirituall meat, & drunken of the same
spirituall drink, Christ.

And such is the clearnes of those places to prove the Covenant, & Church with,
& of Abraham, & his seed, the same in nature with ours, & so the Covenant, &
Church of the Gospell, as that he who goes about to darken their light, would
cover the sun with a ragged clout. And as eve­ry by-way, & false profession
(notwithstanding any other likely things in it) hath some or other such
notorious errour, as that all haveing spiri­tuall eyes (not dazled too much
some way, or other) may discover it: so would the Lord mark out this
profession of Anabaptistry, as not from heaven, by this errour, that the
Covenant with Abraham, I wilbe thy God, & the God of thy seed, is the Covenant
of the law, & not of the gospell. Vppon which notwithstanding doth depend the
reiecting of Infants from the Ch: & baptism: as also the repeating of the
bapt: receaved in false Churches, as may appear to him, who well observes
their pleading for apostate Israell, as a true Ch: because it was Abrahams
carnall seed, & so had circumcision as a seal of a carnall Covenant.

And here I think it a fit place to lay down such Scriptures, & grounds, as
vppon which we admit the Infants of the faythfull into the Church & to the
baptism thereof: & so after to answer what is obiected, interming­ling also
amongst myne answers other proofes, as occasion is.

Now 1. these men graunt, that accordeing to the Covenant mentio­ned I Ier: 31.
& Hebr. 8. the Church is to be gathered, & bapt: to be admi­nistred: & that
the Infants of the faythfull, (for they hould it of all) are vnder a Covenant,
or promise of salvation, by Christ: whence I conclude, that, since there is
but one new Covenant, or Testament established in the blood of Christ,
therefore these Infants (& of others hereafter) have in­terest in the Church
gathered accordeing to this Covenant, & in the bap­tism thereof.

If the Covenant made with Abraham, & his seed, whereof Circumci­sion II was a
seal, were the Covenant of the Gospell, or new Testament, as [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=45) have formely
proved, then standeth it good to all the faythfull, & their seed to the worlds
end, notwithstanding the different ordinances accorde­ing to the
considerations of Christs being to come, & being come in the flesh. And so
these men denying our seed this Covenant, & priveledg of enterance, do deny
the Gospell, & new Testament. And if the kingdom of God, Math. 2 [...] 43\.
Eph. 3. 6. or Churchstate of the Iewes (which did comprehend infants with
their parents) be given to vs, & we made one body with them, then must the Ch:
now comprehend infants also with their parents: otherwise we are not the same
body, & kingdom with them And if with the vnbeleeving Iewes their infants were
broken of, Rom. 10. 17. (who are otherwise vnbroken of at this day) then must
our infants be planted in with vs, whom God hath given to beleev: otherwise we
are not planted in theyr place. And if the Iewes shalbe grafted in agayn
(which agayn shewes it to be of them who had been grafted in before) if they
continue not in beleif,v. 23. then must the infants be grafted in with their
parents at the first, & so our seed with vs.

That God did out of his speciall love separate from the world the in­fants III
with their beloved parents into his Church, & Covenant vnder the seal
thereof,Gen. 17. 7▪ Lev. 20. 24. 26. Deut: 29. 10. 11. &c. before Christs
comeing, the Scriptures expresly teach, & every one will graunt. Except these
men can shew where God hath cast the in­fants of those beloved parents out of
the Church into the world, & taken that his love from them, they must remayn
in the Ch: to the worlds end. For what God hath once established. God onely
can repeal: & that this Covenant with Abraham was not the ould canceled
Covenant, or Testa­ment, I have proved before. They bid vs prove that children
are of the Ch: & to be baptized: but we requyre of them proof how they are
cast out of the Church, & baptism thereof: & how the grace of God is so
shor­tened by Christs comeing in the flesh, as to cast out of the Ch: the
greatest parte of the Ch: before, the infants of beleevers?

The L: Iesus sent out his Apostles Math: 28. 19. to teach, or make disci­ples
IIII all nations, & to baptize them: opposeing all nations to that one nation
of the Iewes: as if he should have sayd thus. I have formerly declared my will
to that one nation, & circumcised it: go you now, & teach all nations, &
baptize them. Now if Christs meaning had been, that they should not with the
parents (being made disciples, & baptized) baptize the children, as before
they had with the parents (being made disciples, & circumcised) circumcised
the children, it had been needfull he had given them a caveat to leav the
children of the faythfull out in the world, though they had for­merly been in
the Church. If it be obiected, that they who were taught, & beleeved, were to
be baptized, therefore not Infants, I deny the consequence: which should be,
if it were true, & therefore not Infidels, & such as refuse [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=46) the Gospell. And
this is the opposition which the Scriptures make, set­ting impenitent, &
vnbeleeving persons, agaynst the penitent, & belee­vers, & not children
agaynst their parents, which is childeish to ima­gine.

The Apostle Peter Act: 2. 38. 39. exhorts the Iewes to repent, & to be V
baptized, vppon this ground, that the promise was made to them, & theyr
chil­dren, & to all afar of as many as the Lord should call. As if he should
say, God hath promised vnto Abraham, that he would be his God, & the God of
his seed, Iuke 1.  [...]. in that blessed seed Christ. He hath now remembred
his holy Covenant, or promise, & Christ is come to you his own. Do not by your
vnbeleif, & im­penitency deprive your selves,Ioh. 1. 13. & your children of
the fruit of this gratious promise: but that it may be profitable to you, &
them; repent, & so be baptized for your confirmation: & let the seal be set to
the Covenant in which you, & your children are.

To elude this place alledged in my former book, Mr Helw: M. Helw comments
vppon it in these words. The Apostle sayth to & of all the vnbeleeving Iewes,
& Gen­tiles, the promise is made to you, & to your children, even as many as
the L. shall cal: & so takeing his own imagination both for text, &
exposition, he bids me prove that by children there are meant Infants.

1\. These words,ANSW: to them that are afar of, (which he leavs out in his
accustomed bouldnes with the Scriptures) with the words following, are not
meant of the Gentiles at all, but of the Iewes far of in tyme, as the
originall greek beareth it. For neyther was Peter himself yet so well
in­formed of the calling of the Gentiles, neyther (had he so been) was it then
a fit tyme to speak of it to the weak Iewes. He speaks then inde­finitely of
the Iewes as the seed of Abraham, & within the Lords Cove­nant, or Promise:
whom therefore Ch: 3. 25. he calles the Sonnes of the Covenant: & to the Iewes
alone, as is evident, where v. 14. 16. 22. 29. he quotes the Prophesyes of
Ioell, & David: which to vnbeleeving Gen­tiles had been in vayn. Yea that of
the Promise he directs distinctly to such Iewes onely, as had the work of
grace begun in them: being pricked in theyr hearts for the crucifying of
Christ, & earnestly set to know, & do the will of God. v. 37. 39.

That by children here are meant Infants, I have by the drift of the place, &
conference of other Scriptures proved; & that the H. Ghost speaks of the
Covenant with Abraham, neyther was there otherwise cause of nameing their
children.

Where he further bids me prove that the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven
goes by succession of generation, as the land of Canaan did, he begets
ba­stardly errours of his own, & thē would have me nourish them. For neyther
[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=46) did the
land of Canaan come by succession of generation, but by Gods promise made
vppon condition of fayth, & holines, as I have formerly proved: much lesse
doth the kingdom of heaven: but by Gods gratious promise, & gift, both to
young & ould. These men think the kingdom of heaven comes to all Infants so
dying; & doth it therefore come by car­nall generation? If it come otherwise
to all, & by the free grace of God in Christ, as they suppose, can they see no
other way, but it must needs come to the Infants of the faythfull, by carnall
generation? as if their estate were worse then the estate of all the rest?

Ad to this Scripture that which we read Act: 16. 14. 15. that God haveing
opened the heart of Lydia, to attend to, & beleev the worde of Paul: Shee was
baptized, & her family. Shee beleeved, & the fruits, & effect thereof was,
shee, & her family were baptized. With these things doth agree Christ our
Lords his takeing the litle children Mark 10. 14. 16. (to wit of the Iewish
Church) in his armes, his blessing them, that is his communicateing his grace
with them, & pronouncing that of such is the kingdom of heaven: as also his
commaunding the bringing of such vnto him. In blessing them visibly, he shewes
them to be lawfull members of his visible Church or body; & more playnly in
pronounceing the kingdom of heaven (which is his Church vppon earth) to be of
such. In commaunding such to be brought vnto him, he commaunds them by
consequence, to be baptized; since they cannot be brought vnto him personally,
as then, nor otherwise outwardly, or by men, save by baptism. And if Infants
be to pertake of Christes blood, & spirit, there must be some ordinary means
to apply them, God workeing ordinarily by ordinary means, & the same none
butTit. 3. 5. VI. baptism, that lavacher of the new birth, as the Apostle
calleth it.

Lastly Paul testifyeth 1. Cor. 7. 14. that if one of the parents be a
beleever, the children are holy, viz: with the holines of the Covenant
(se­cret things being left to God) who otherwise, are vnholy. Neyther is it
truely answered, that they are onely holy to their parents vse, as is the
vnbeleeving wife to the vse of her housband. For 1. they must eyther be holy
in their persons, or they cannot be saved. 2. he sayth the vnbe­leeveing wife
is sanctifyed in, or to her beleeveing housband: but he sayth not that
children are sanctifyed to their parents, but simply that they are sanctifyed,
or holy. 3. It is not true that children are sanctifyed to the parents there
spokē of: the one of them beingTit. 2. 1 [...]. vnbeleeving to whom no
[...]hing is sanctifyed. Lastly, the very drift of the place proves, that the
Apostle hath reference to the Covenant of Abraham, I wilbe thy God, & the God
of thy seed. The thing he intends, is, to prove it lawfull for a beleeveing
housband, [[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=47)
or wife to abyde with an vnbeleeving wife, or housband. This he proves by the
Covenant made with Abraham, & with every faythfull sonne, & daughter of
Abraham, that he wilbe the God of his, or her seed: & so en­dow them with the
holines of the Covenant: & that therefore they should not make scruple of
liveing with their (though vnbeleeveing, if otherwise lawfull) wives, & hous
bands. And in this interpretation is force of Ar­gument, both for the Apostles
meaning, & Corinth: satisfaction. And so the seed of the faythfull being holy
with the holynes of the Covenant are necessarily within the same Covenant
which halloweth them.

Now whereas some marvayl, why the H. Ghost speaks not more playn­ly, &
expresly of the admission of infants into the Ch: & bapt: thereof; they must
remember, 1. That none must presume to teach the L: how to speak, but that all
are with reverence to search out his meaning. 2. That they may with as much
reason marvayl, why there is no expresse mention made of the casting out of
the Iewish infants with their vnbeleeveing pa­rents. In the very same places
the H. Ghost speakes of the takeing the king­dom of God from them, for not
bringing forth fruit; & of giveing it to the Gentiles: who would bring forth
fruit: of breaking of the naturall branches for vnbeleef; & of planting in the
Gentiles by fayth. Now here is no mention of the infants of ey­ther. Both the
one, & other are comprehended for those outward prero­gatives, & dispensations
in their parents, as the branches in the root: The in­fants of the godly, in
their godly parents, accordeing to the tenour of Gods mercy: the infants of
the vngodly in their vngodly parents, in the tenour of his iustice, of which
more hereafter.

And here, for the better clearing of things following thereabout, it is of
Speciall vse to observ the diverse considerations, & respects, in which the
Scriptures speak of the Iewish Ch: & ordinances: which are in num­ber three.

First considering the Israelites in their iust constitution, & calling of God,
they wereRom 11 26. Lev. 24. 25. 26. Deut. 7. 6 7. 8. Num 23. 25. Rom 9. 4 Is.
63. 16 Exo 4 22 Gal. 4. 1. Heb. 6. 17 Ier 31. 20 Rō 11. 21 Gal 2. 15 Ioh 1.
11. Eph. 2. 12 Act. 26. 6. 7. the first fruits, & root, with the masse, &
branches, holy: Abra­ham, Isaac, & Iacob, faythfull persons, & their posterity
an holy people vnto the Lord theyr God: separated vnto him from all other
peoples: beloved of him, & out of his love chosen to be a pretious people vnto
himself; above all the peoples on the earth: in whom God saw none iniquity,
nor transgression: to whom belonged the adop­tion, glory, Covenants,
constitution of the law, worship, & promises: Gods children haveing him theyr
Father: being the heyr, & heyres of promise: his dearest son,  [...] the
childe of his delight: naturall branches, & in the same regarde, Iewes by n
[...] ­ture, & not sinners of the Gentiles: Christs own: in Christ: without
whom the Gen­tiles were: & the twelv tribes worshipping God instantly, day, &
might, in hope of the promised Christ. So for their ordinances in their
institution, & right vse [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=47) theirRō 4 Heb. 4
Lev. 4 31. 3 [...] Numb 24. 25. Circumcision was a seal, or signe of the
righteousnes of fayth: their offerings asw [...] favour vnto the Lord, for the
forgivenes of sins, as leading to Christ by fayth: their washings applying the
blood of Christ, which they figured: vn­to which David had respect, when he
prayed, that for the forgivenes of his adultery, & murther, God would w
[...]sh him thoroughly from his iniquityes, & purg him with hyssop. Psal. 51.
v. 4. 9. with Lev. 14. 4 &c: that he might be clean. Thus were theAct.  [...]
38: Rom. 7 12. 14 1. Cor 3 4. Gal. 4 2. 4. Oracles given lively, the law
spirituall: the manna, & rock Spirituall, & Sacramentally Christ.

Secondly, the Scriptures sometymes speak of that Church, & ordinan­ces by way
of comparison with the Ch: & ordinances after Christs death, & ascension. And
in that respect the Apostle, compareing not person with person, but Ch: with
Church, calles it (though the heyr, yet) a childe, in the non-age: & the
ordinances tutours, & governours, vnder which it was: but the Church now a man
of full age, & so freed from them vnto greater liberty. The person is the same
both a childe, & a man grown: though not to be trayned vp after the same
manner: even such is the difference between them, & vs. They as a childe, had
a harder hand held over them, & were stinted sun­dry wayes, where we are free.
They were taught by signes, & hand-wryte­ings, & poyntings with the finger, as
it were: where our institution is more manlike, & simple. They had earthly
things more distinctly, & fully; we heavenly. In which respect, the Ch: since
Christs ascension, & posses­sion of heavenly glory, is called more
speciallyMat [...] 11\. 11 the kingdom of heaven, which he dispenseth, with
more then kingly bounty in the largesse of his spirit. They had the Gospell by
the Prophets shineing as a light in a dark place: we by Christ, & the
Apostles, as the dawning of the day, & morning star. 2 Pet 19. Heb. 10 1 Cor.
24. They had the Prophetyes, & Shadowes of good things to come: we the
storyes, & remem­brances of the same good things come, even Christ exhibited
accordeing to the promise of the Father. In which respect it is also sayd Gal.
3. 34 35. that fayth was not come to them: but that th [...]y were shut vp
into the fayth to be re­vealed: Hebr.  [...]34. & that they dyed, & receaved
not the promise, to wit, Christ come in the flesh. And in this consideration,
& comparison, neyther Abraham, nor David receaved the promise, or had fayth
come vnto them, or were made p [...]r­fit, v. 4 [...]. as the Apostle
speaketh.

3dly, the Scriptures do oft speak of the Iewish Church, & ordinances, in
respect of the degenerate estate of the one, & corrupt abuse of the other, in
that estate. Which (as at other tymes, so) were the one, & other very notable
in the dayes of Christ, & his Apostles: the leven of Pharisai­call hypocrisy
(besydes the worse errour of the Saducees) haveing so far infected,Rom 1 [...]
as that the greatest parte of the Israelites being ignorant of the
righteous­nes of God, & goeing about to stablish theyr own righteousnes did
not submit themsel­ves [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=48) to the
righteousnes of God, in receaveing Christ. They did not consider the law as
given for transgression, [...] 3\. 19  [...]. 7. & to kill them, as revealing
the will of God in the rigour of iustice, & his eternall, & vnchangeable
iudgment agaynst sin: vnto which also the sacrifices, & ceremonyes served in
their legall, & literall vse, that so despayreing in them selves, they might
fly to the free promise of grace in that promised seed of Abraham now come;
but take­ing the law, & ordinances thereof, to be for outward disciplyne
onely, they imagined they might by outward obedience satisfy it, & therein be
iustifyed before God: & so did glory in the outward workes, & ceremo­nyes
thereof: [...] especially in their circumcision in the flesh. And as the most
of them conceaving carnally or fleshlily of the Lords Covenant did glory in
the flesh, [...] 3\. 3. & that they were Abrahams seed, & Circumcised, & so
despi­sed the free promise of grace in Christ, so others of them receaving him
in parte, did mingle with the righteousnes of fayth the righteousnes of the
law: sowering also with that leven many of the Gentiles especially in the
Churches of Galatia. Wherevppon it was, that the Apostle wrote to the Hebrues,
& Galations as he did, both of the persons, & things we speak of.

The persons, whether Iewes, or Iudaizeing Christians glorying in the workes of
the law, especially in their circumcision in the flesh, he calles [...]il. 3.
3  [...]l. 3. 3.  [...]. 1. 3. Abra­hams seed accordeing to the flesh;
carnall, & vnder the yoak of Ismaelitish bondage: of whom [...]n. 16.  [...].
34. 21. 9.  [...].  [...]l. 4 22  [...] 29\.  [...]. 31.  [...].  [...]1.
Ismaell was a figure: who being the son of the bond-woman, & born after the
flesh, or ordinary course of nature, mocked at him, who was born after the
promise, & was therefore cast out of Abrahams house: & so is propounded as a
figure of all them, Iewes, or Gentiles, who in the confidence of workes,
reiect the promise of grace, & persequute them that embrace it: bringing
themselves also therein vnder the bondage of the whole law. And thus all
whether Iewes, or Gentiles, then or now, despiseing the free promise of grace,
& looking to workes for iustification, were & are rank Ismaelites, & of
Abrahams seed accordeing to the flesh, as the Apostle expresly taxeth the
Galatians, desyreing to be vnder the law, though not discending naturally of
Abraham.

Now (that I may apply these things to the present purpose) what is all this of
Abrahams seed accordeing to the flesh in the Apostles meaning to the infants
of the faythfull, whether of the Iewes formerly, or Gen­tiles now? Did, or do
they, as Ismaell, glory in the flesh, & mock at Gods promise, or any way
reiect Christ? Did, or do they establish the righteous­nes of the law, & of
works, or persequute him that is born after the spirit, as all they who are
born after the flesh, in the Apostles meaning, did, & alwayes do? Onely they,
who thus Ismael-like, glory in workes, & persequute the true be­leevers,
[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=48) are by the
Apostle called Abrahams seed, according to the flesh, & of Ismaell. So for the
ordinances, & workes of the law thus abused, & per­verted for iustification,
they were base, & beggerly, vnprofitable, vnho­ly, vnhallowing, yea drosse &
dung: yea pernitious, & hurtefull, curse­ing, & killing them, who so wrought,
or deemed them. And thus conside­red, the Apostle to the Galatians,
Phillipians, & Hebrues speaketh of them; (giveing them as Luther vsed to say,
ignominious names) haveing to do with those, who eyther did, or were in
speciall daunger, thus to pervert them.

And these grounds thus layd, vnto that his obiection, thatPag. 1 [...] &c. the
Co­venant made with Abraham was a carnall Covenant, because it had a worldly
sanctua­ry, & preisthood, & carnall rites purifying the flesh, but not
purgeing the spirit, I do answer, that those ordinances were no parte of the
Covenant made with Abraham, but accessoryes vnto the law given 430 years
after: though there might be a spirituall vse of them, & was, by fayth, as of
any ordinances now & as of the morall law it self, to them that beleev, &
re­pent: but in, & accordeing vnto this lawfull vse of them the Apostle
speaketh not, but in respect of their abuse, as eyther severed from Christ, as
their end; or ioyned with him for iustification.

His assertion, so oft repeated, that God in his Covenant with Abraham,
promised but worldly things, & so requyred onely carnall obedience, I have
formerly refuted, as a notorious ground of Iudaism & Pharisaism. Neyther was
it the more a carnall Covenant, because the signe was set in the flesh, then
is ours now, because baptism is administred vppon the flesh, or bodyes of the
per­sons baptized.

But where he ads, that the iudgment for the breaking of the Covenant of
Cir­cumcision was a worldly iudgment, & that no iudgement of condemnation vs
pronoun­ced agaynst any, though presumptuously breaking the ordinances, & law
of Moses, but bodily death, quoteing for that purpose Gen: 17. 14. Numbr. 15.
30. Hebr: 10. 28. he proceeds on indeed from Pharisaism which made the
pro­mises, & Messiah carnall, to playn Sadusaism, which denyed a
resurrec­ction, especially vnto the Iewes, which (as it is written of them)
hath been the perswasion of divers Anabaptists in former tymes. For if
eter­nall death were not threatned the Iewes for breaking the law, &
com­maundments given by Moses, though presumptuously, & blasphemously, of
which he speakes Numb: 15. 30. nor for the worshipping of false Gods, of which
sin Paul speakes Hebr. 10. 28. compared with Deut. 17. 2. 3. 6. then for no
sin whatsoever, & so there is no iudgment to come, nor needs be no Christ to
save from it.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=49) The
Scriptures quoted speak indeed of bodily death, but includeing in it
spirituall death, without repentance, as did theyr bodily blessings promi­sed
include spirituall. The Apostle Paul speaking of the last iudgment, Rom: 2.
12. sayth that the Iewes sinning, in, or vnder the law, should be condem­ned
12\. 16 (to wit eternally) by the law. It is true he addeth, that they who so
sinned, might thorough repentance be saved: (& so may they that sin agaynst
the Gospell now, except theyr sin be agaynst the H: Ghost, which was then
vnpardo­nable, as now) & in so saying, he graunts, though he observ it not,
that the sin then was in it self, & without repentance, damnable.

He ads, that by our ground we must baptize all our houshould, & infants, both
born in the house, & bought with mony. [...]. Helw I answer 1. That it
followeth not, that if we succed the Iewes in the Covenant of the Lord; & our
bapt:ANSW: & L: Supper, their Circumcision, & passover, therefore there must
be an agree­ment in all the particulars about them. The substance of the L:
Covenant with Abraham, was, that he would be his God, & the God of his seed: &
this about his bond servants was an accessory vnto it. And of it there was a
more speciall reason for them, then for vs: because they were to be separa­ted
even Civilly in a more speciall manner from vncircumcised persons, then we now
from persons vnbaptized, as appeareth Ezra 10. 3. 11. &c. Neh: 9. 2. & 13\. 3.
23. 23. 25. 30. Dan. 1. 8. Act. 10. 9. 10. 11. & 11\. 3. &c. 2dly, even the
familyes, & houshoulds of the faythfull now, if they be in the estate of
Abrahams family, are to be baptized also.

And for this purpose, [...]en 18.  [...]. & 23  [...]. 3. 12.  [...]6\. 27 &c
Gen. 12  [...]. ch 17.  [...]3\. ch. 35  [...]. it shalbe vsefull to consider,
what the Scriptures both promise, & testify of familyes, & houshouldes. The L:
promised Abraham the Father of the faythfull, that in him [...]s. 24 15
[...]sal. 111  [...]. 7. Luke 19. 9  [...]. all the familyes of the earth
should be blessed: bids him circumcise all the males of his family, which he
knew before he would commaund to keep the way of the Lord. Gen. 18. 19. As
Iacob also pur­ged his houshould from idolatry, & all vnclean-nes, that he
might sacrifice vnto God with them. Thus Ioshua professeth for himself, & his
houshould, that they will serv the Lord: & David, that he who walked in a
perfie way should serv him: & that none workeing deceipt, should dwell in his
house. Accordeingly the L: tould Zacheus, when he became a son of Abraham,
that that day salvation was come into his house. We read likewise of
Cornelius, that he was a devout man, & one that Act. 10 2 Ch 16. 32 33. 34,
[...]er 31. 31 Heb 8. 8. feared God with all his houshould: as was the layer
also converted, & baptized, with all his family. And lastly in the places
brought by Mr Helw: for the gathering of the Ch: vnder Christ, the L:
promiseth to make his Covenant with the house, or family of Israell, & with
the family of Iudah. In all which with other Scriptures, we see how the tenour
of the L: promise, & blessing runs vppon godly governours, & their familyes.
Not but that it comes oft to passe otherwise, & that faythfull governours have
vnbeleevers in their hous­houlds: [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=49) but that this is
the ordinary, & orderly state of things: & where it falles out otherwise in
the family, it is at the least the governours Crosse, if not their sin. Now in
this, as in all other particulars, we must consider of the dispensation of the
L: ordinances, accordeing to the orderly state of things. But to conceav, that
Abraham would circumcise any vnbeleeving, or vnholy person, so appearing, or
seed of such, on both sydes, is to accuse the father of the faythfull of
vnfaythfull dealing with the seal of the L: Cove­nant, in setting it vppon
them, who had no parte in it, nor promise of God to be theyr God: though I
doubt not but they vnder godly government in the family, may be admitted into
the Ch: vppon the manifestation of a ve­ry small measure of grace, with
promise of submission vnto all good means of growth, publique, & private; as
might they yet with a lesser measure have been admitted into the Israelitish
Church, haveing a far lesse measure of revelation of grace, then we now.

He addeth,M. Helw that Bapt: is by Iohn taught to be the baptism of amendment
of life, & remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. the burying into the death of Christ,
that men might walk in newnes of life. Rom: 6. 4. & the putting on of Christ
by fayth, Gal: 3. 26. 27.

I answer that these are preparations vnto,ANSW: & ends, & vses of baptism for
men of years: & should not be alledged to the preiudice of infants: no more
then their want of fayth, by which men of years are iustifyed, or of works, by
which they are to be iudged, to the preiudice of the salvation of infants,
which have them not. Christ our Lord had the same outward Cir­cumcision with
the Iewes,Luke 2. 21. Math. 3. 16. & the same Baptism with vs, & yet neyther
the same preparation vnto, nor ends, or vses of the one or other, with them,
or vs.

Besydes,Rom. 4. 3 11. vppon this ground, any might have excepted agaynst the
cir­cumcision of infants of ould. Abraham beleeved before he was circumcised:
so the ends, & vses of circumcision were, to be a seal of the righteousnes of
fayth, & to confirm, that God was the God of the person circumcised: as also
to teach,Gen. 17. thatIob. 14. 4. nothing clean could come of the vnclean seed
of man: to admonish ofDeut. 10. 16. the circumcision of the heart: to confirm
fayth in the tyme of daunger especially agaynst the vncircumcised: & to be a
signe of distinction, & separation from the sameIudg. 14. 3 Act. 11. 3.
vncircumcised Gentiles. These were the ends, & vses of cir­cumcision,Ier 4. 4.
1. Sam. 14. 6. & 17\. 36. which notwithstanding infants could not possibly
propound, or have. Were they therefore to be kept from it? So reasons this man
agaynst the baptism of infants: which followeth in the room of the other, as I
have formerly proved. It is sufficient, that the infants of beleevers are
ca­pable of the manifestation of Gods goodnes towards them, in being baptized,
as of ould they were circumcised, accordeing to the Covenant. The [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=50) other particular
ends were, & are to follow, & to be atteyned in their ty­mes. Where let it
also be noted, that whereas, in the L: Supper there are requyred for the act
of partakeing▪ sundry workes implying vnderstanding & knowledg in the
partaker; as his being put in mynde, that it is Christe [...] body, & blood
given for him that, he take, eat, & drink it in remembrance of Christs death:
there is no such thing in the act of the administering of Bapt: but onely the
person baptized in the name of the Father, Son, & H Ghost. The same difference
may be also observed to have been of ould, between Circumci­sion, & the eating
of the passover, inhibited them who were not capable of the meaning of the
mistery. Exod: 12. 26. 27.

That we hould, M. Helw & professe that Christians bege [...] Christians, &
that onely we (whom he calles Brownistes, because we are not Anabaptists)
beget infants that are heyrs of salvation, & vnder the Covenant of grace, is
but his rash, & vn­honest accusation of vs.

All men know we hould the reformed Churches in all places,ANSW: the true
Churches of Christ, & so within the Lords Covenant, the faythfull parents with
their seed. The like also we think of such in Engl: in their persons, (& seed
with them) as are made partakers of the fayth of Abraham. 2dly, we hould, that
our (asEph. 2. 3 all other mens) children are by naturall generation the
children of wrath: & that it is by the grace of God, that we, & they with vs,
are within this the L: Covenant, as was Abraham & his seed.

Agaynst our doctrine, that Baptism is a seal of the Covenant of the Gospel, he
obiecteth, that then washing with water is a seal in the flesh, & makes a pr
[...], or impression. I answer (noteing in the first place, how he calles the
very outward washing with water, baptism) that even that washing by Gods
appoyntment, is an outward seal, or signe of confirmation, of the new
Testament in the blood of Christ: for that we mean by a seal: & to requyre a
print, or impres­sion, is but to quarrell about the word, or letter: when even
circumcision it self (to speak properly) was no print. Where Christ teacheth.
Ioh: 6. 27. that the Father sealed him, doth he mean that he set any print
vppon his soul or body,Is. 8. 16. or more then this, that he designed him to
the office of the mediatour? Where the L: bids the Prophet seal vp the law
among his disci­ples, would he have a print set in their flesh, or more, then
that he should more fully declare, & comfirm the law vnto them? When Paul tels
the Corinth: that they are the seal of his Apostleship, doth he mean any mor
[...] then that their conversion from Paganism both by doctrine, & signes, & w
[...] ­ders of an Apostle amongst them, 1\. Cor. 9. 2. 2. Cor. 3. 5. 10. 2
Cor. 12  [...]3. was a comfirmation there of? So, sin [...] Baptism is, by
Gods appoyntment, a declaration, & confirmation of th [...] inward, &
effectuall washing by that blood & spirit of Christ, from th [...] guilt, &
contagion of sin, it is rightly, & truely called a seal, or signe o [...]
[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=50)
confirmation of Christes Testament established in his blood; as is also the L:
Supper, of the breaking of his body, & shedding of his blood for our sins. And
for this sealing, & confirming of Christes Testament in his blood those
ordinances especially serv, & are by his servants to be vsed.

He tels vs, that in the new Testament there is no seal, but the seal of the
spirit: & quotes Eph: 1. 17. & other Scriptures speaking of that inward seal,
& proveing it indeed: but not disproveing the outward seals, but playn­ly
establishing them. For if Gods teaching of, & testifying vnto vs inward­ly by
his spirit, that we are his in Christ, be an inward seal, then is his teaching
of, & testifying vnto vs, the same thing outwardly, by the Gos­pell, &
Sacraments, an outward seal, or seals, & so rightly called. And not onelyIoh.
5. 8 the spirit, which is inward, but water, & blood, which are outward, do
bear record of Christ, or confirm, & seal vp his death vnto vs. In respect of
which water, & blood issueing out of his syde, our Sacraments are sayd to have
flowen thence. Lastly, Abraham, our Father, when he beleeved, wasIoh. 19. 34.
also sealed by the Spirit of Promise: & yet this hindered not, but that both
he, & his seed had the outward seal of circumcision added; even so our good
God, knowing how frayl, & feeble in fayth we are, hath to his gra­tious
Covenant, & Promise in word, & wryteing, annexed (besydes the inward seal of
the spirit) the outward seales, which we call Sacraments, for the confirmation
thereof, not in it self, but vnto vs: which we are therefore accordeingly to
vse, with reverence, & thankfulnes.

His assertion, that Infants are not in the Covenant of the new Testament, &
therefore not vnder the seal, I have formerly disproved. If they be vnder the
Pro­mise of salvation, they have a parte, or legacy in the will, or Testament
of Christ, or new Covenant, which are both one: & so in this seal of
initia­tion, or enterance, baptism.

To his affirmation that parents cannot set the seal vppon theyr infants now,
as they could the seal of circumcision of ould, vppon theyrs, I do answer,
that they can­not indeed set the inward seal, no more could they then: but the
outward they can now, as then they could: vnto which God also setteth the
inward  [...]n due tyme, as he hath promised, if they make not themselves
vnworthy  [...]hereof.

He obiects in the last place agaynst a ground in my book;Pag. 282. 283. the
former parte whereof is this. The Scriptures every where teach, that parents
by theyr fayth, bring theyr childrē into the Covenant of the Church, & entile
them to the promises. This  [...] proved from Gen: 17. 7. Act: 2. 37. which
proofes I have also confir­med agaynst his vniust exceptions. He here obiects
further,M. Helw that I bring in a meritorious fath, where my fayth is litle
enough to bring myself vnder the Covenant of God, were it not for his
mercifull acceptance in Christ.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=51) A vain, &
ignorant collection: & by which the Apostle teaching iustifi­cation [...]NSW:
by fayth, might as truely have been accused for bringing in a meruo­rious
fayth, &c: I do not then make fayth a meritorious cause to deserv, but an
instrumentall means, or hand, as it were, to receav Gods gratious pro­mises in
Christ to the faythfull, & their seed: as Abraham when God pro­mised him to be
his God, & the God of his seed, did by fayth, lay hould of, & receav this
promise, & so interessed himself & his in it, & the seal thereof: which
promise had he not beleeved, he had visibly, or before men, deprived himself &
his of all interest in it. The same I iudg of all other faythfull pa­rents,
leaving merit to freewillers, who hould particular election to arise from
fayth forseen: & (as this man affirmed vnto me, & others) that if God shewed
to him any more favour, or mercy, then to the prophanest man in the world, it
were partiallity in him.

He ads that Abrahams fayth & earnest prayer could not bring Ismaell his childe
of 13 years ould, nor his other children by Keturah vnder the Covenant v: 18.
21.M. Helw Where meaning, as he must, the Covenant of Circumcision, he
overthro­wesANSW: one errour, as he that enterfeers, strikes down one ill leg,
by another. For 1. since Ismaell, & the children by Keturah were circumcised,
& yet had no promise of the land of Canaan, his mayn foundation, which is,
that God in the Covenant of Circumcision, promised nothing on his parte, but
the land of Canaan is raised, & so all falles, which he buildes vppon it.
2dly, since the Covenant there spoken of was the Covenāt of Circumcision, &
that Ismaell with the rest were circumcised, how sayth he, that he, & they
were not in the Covenant, to wit outwardly? Besydes the L: tels Abraham v: 20.
that he had heard his prayer touching Ismaell: though he meant to stablish his
Covenant with Isak, as the root; of which both the Church, & promised seed
should come, & vnto whom Ismaell (with the rest) should have sub­mitted, &
adioyned himself; whom because he despised, & in him, Christ, he was cut of
from the Ch: & Covenant afterwards. Which things till they were revealed made
no difference between Isak, & Ismaell: neyther can the like difference in Gods
secret knowledg, or purpose, till the tyme of revelation, exclude one of the
children of the faythfull now, more then another.

Of Act: 2. 39. I have spoken formerly, & therefore come to the latter parte of
the ground, which he putteth down thus. God takes occasion by the sins of
parents to exequute his iustice to condemnation, vppon the children. Where
(sayth he) I double my sin, in that as before I made the parents fayth the
cause of blessing to salvation, so here, their infidelity a cause of Gods
iudgment to condemnation, to their children. Where the truth is, he both
doubleth, & trebleth iniury vppon me, & iust blame vppon himself. For first, I
neyther mention, no [...] [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=51) medle with eyther
the salvation, or condemnation of infants, though he falsify my words, as if I
did: our question being onely about the outward, or visible Covenant of the
Church, & Priveledges thereof: secret things being left to God, as I there
expresly speak, alledging Deutr. 29. 29. for that pur­pose. 2dly, as I make
not the fayth of parents a cause meritorious, as he ima­gineth, of that good
vnto their children, but onely a means of embraceing Gods gratious offer, &
promise: so neyther do I wryte, as he chalengeth me, that the Fathers
infidelity is a cause of the childrens damnation, but an occasion, which God
vseth for the exequution of his iustice, vppon the children, being by nature
the children of wrath. That then, which I have writtē, & do avouch, is, that
God ordinarily includeth in the parents, the infants, as branches in the root,
eyther for blessings, or iudgments visibly, or in respect of men, reserving to
himself the secret dispensation of things, accordeing to the tenour eyther of
his mercy, or iustice. That the children of the faythfull are with their
parents in the visible Covenant of Gods love, I have at larg proved by the
Scriptures, & might alledg for that purpose many more: & those not figurative,
& shadowish, but conteyning in them promises of eter­nallDeut.  [...] 37.
truth: howsoever these men can have no more comfort in those pro­mises for
their children, then if they were the children of Turkes, & Pa­gans.Psal 37
35. 26.

The other parte touching the administration of Gods iustice I proved in myPag.
282 283 book by sundry Scriptures: which because he passeth by, as vnseen, I
will here insert, as there I wrote, word for word.Gen.  [...] 16\. & 6\. Hos.
2.  [...] Cain goeing out from the presence of the Lord, caryed his posterity
with him: so did Ismaell, & Es [...] theyrs, the Ismaelites & Edomites. And if
the Lord disclaym the mother for an harlot, not re­puteing her his wife, he
accounts the children no better then bastards, on whom he will have no pitty.
And if the children of the Iewes be not broken of with their pa­rents, for
their vnbeleif, they are successively within the L: Covenant every one of them
to this day. To the same purpose we may consider how in the drowing of the
ould world: the burning of Sodom, & Gomorra: the plagueing of Egipt, Gen. 6 7
&c. 1. Pet 3 20. 21. Gen 19. 24 25. 2 Pet. 2.  [...] Exo. 11.  [...] & 12\. 2
[...] Numb. 16 27 3 [...] I [...]sh 7. 24 25. especially in the death of the
first born: the swallowing vp of Dathan, & Ab [...]ram: the stoneing of Achan:
the destruction of the Canaanites, & Amalikites: the re [...]ing out of Elys,
Ieroboams, & Baashans familyes, how I say in all these, & many mo, though most
greivous, yet most iust iudgments of God, the children were enwrapped in their
fathers iudgments: drowned, burned, swallowed vp by the earth, & otherwise
destroyed with them. With which examples ioyn the testimony of Iob ch: 5. 3.
4. The habitation of the fool is cursed: his children are far from safety:
they are crushed in the gates, & there is no rescue: & that of Da­vid Ps: 21.
10. The Lord will destroy the fruit of his enemyes from the earth, & theyr
seed from among the children of men: & agayn, Ps: 37. 28. The seed of the
wicked [[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=52)
shalbe cut of. Yea what need we seel further for this dispensation, then
Da­vid himself, though a godly man, because of whose sin, the childe born in
adultery, dyed the death. What reason then this man had in his blynde Zeal
thus to [...]am.  [...]. 14. 18 revile this doctrine, as a doctrine of divels,
& mee for it as a false Prophet, let all wise men iudg.

But sayth he, I propound this doctrine for a generall rule. I do, for the
ordi­nary course of Gods iustice of which we speak. Which notwithstanding
hinders not, but that his extraordinary mercy may, & doth oft, & much, reioyce
agaynst his iudgment. But let vs see, what he obiecteth. 1. that Abyah the
sonne of wicked leroboam, though young, yet was not cursed for his fathers sin
1\. King [...] 4\. First, I speak no where of any such curseing, as he casts
out. 2. Abija, was not so young but he disliked his fathers courses: & had
good found in him towards the Lord. 3\. It is evident v: 10. that the L:
punished hisv. 13. fathers sin, in his death v: 11. That in Ezech: 18. 14. 17.
is impertinent, being spoken of a son forsakeing his fathers sin, & doeing the
contrary; with whom the Lord doth not deal in the course of his iustice, but
of his mercy. † So for Iosiah, at 8 years ould, he forsook the wicked wayes of
his father Ammon, & sought after the God of his father David. And yet even for
him, it2\. Cor.  [...] 1\. 2. 3 appears in the Scriptures, that the L: in
giveing him into the hands of the King of Egipt, had respect to the sins of
Iudah, & so of his father, amongst, & above the rest. In his last example, he
affirmeth vntruely, that the Lord did not punish the people of Israels
children for theyr great transgression Numb: 14. 26. 27. &c. It is expresly
affirmed v: 33. that their children should wander in the wildernes 40 years, &
bear theyr whoredomes: though respecting their forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, &
Iacob, & his Promise to them, he brought the most of them into the land of
Canaan, at the last: which Mr Helw: graunts to have been Gods mercy, &
therein, that in his iustice he might have taken them away also. And so v: 12.
the L: playnly sheweth, that his iustice moved him to the destroying of them
altogether, save that his singular mercy did reioyce agaynst iudgment. And so
this instance is clear agaynst himself.

Where he further confesseth with me, that all are by nature, children of
wrath, conceaved, & born in sin; & then demaunds whether I hould not all
children alike [...]. Helw children of wrath: or that some parents confer
grace by generation, more then others: or if not, which he assures himself we
will confesse, how I can prove, that God should exequute his iustice to
condemnation vppon some children, for the sins of theyr parents, & shew mercy
vppon others, for the fayth of theyr parents, seing God hath sayd, that every
one shall receav salvation, or condemnation, accordeing to that, which he hath
done in the flesh, & not accordeing to that his parents have done, I answer
sundry things.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=52) And 1. as
before, that I do not say, that infants are saved, or con­demned for the
fayth, or sins of their parents, as he most vntruely accu­seth me. The infants
saved are saved by the grace of God in Christ: Which their faythfull parents
also beleev, accordeing to Gods Promise, I will be thy God, & the God of thy
seed. Those that perish, (though I desyre, if such were the will of God, & so
could gladly beleev, if the Scriptures taught it, that all were saved) do
perish for that originall guilt, & corruption, wherein they are conceaved, &
born, being the children of wrath by nature, & therein lyable to Gods curse,
every way. But for that parents are in a sorte in their children, & so
punished in their punishments, their sins also may, & do concur, as concauses,
or causes with other, of Gods iudg­ments: both the Scriptures, & reason
teaching, that many causes may meet together in one effect. Yet must it be
here, & alwayes remembred, that our question is not about the peremptory
salvation, or condemna­tion of any, but about their admission, or not
admission into the visible Church. And straung it is for this man to make it
all one, to be saved, & to be of the visible Church; & to be condemned, & to
be out of it, specially for children; since he will have them all saved, & yet
none of them at all to be of the Church. 2. if he were assured, as he sayth,
that we would confesse, that no parents do confer grace by generation more
then others, I am assured he shewed the lesse grace, in accuseing vs in
another place agaynst his conscience, to hould that Christians beget
Christians by genera­tion. Pag. 172 3\. Since all are by nature alike children
of wrath, I would know of these free-willers, how some become the children of
God, & beleevers, & some abyde vnder the wrath of God? To make the thinges, or
per­sons, which are altogether alike in themselves, vnalike, there must come
something from els where, & that not alike, vnto them both. For ey­ther let
them alone which are alike, or ad alike vnto them both, & they will remayn
alike still It must not then be any vniversall grace alike com­mon to all,
which makes them who are alike, to become vnalike one to another.

Mr Helw: els where, & rightly, disclaymes all freewill, or power in a mans
self to work out his salvation, but teacheth, that this grace, which is his
mercy in Christ, God hath given to all, though all receav it not: for which he
quotes Phil: 1. 10. 11 Act: 13. 46. Act: 7. 51. Where first he layes a
notoriouse errour, for his foundation, in makeing all, & every person in the
world par­takers of the grace of God in Christ. For they to whom God gives
grace in Christ, must themselves be in Christ: & so all the vnbeleevers, &
wicked in the world should be in Christ, which is expresly contrary to theRom.
8.  [...] Gal 5. 24 Eph 2. 1 [...] Ioh 3. 3.  [...] Scriptures [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=53) So that wicked, &
vnregenerate men have neyther power in themselves, nor in Christ, (in whom
they are not) to work out their salvation. They indeed, who are in Christ by
fayth, & have receaved his spirit, are thereby enabled to work out their
salvation: which Phil: 1. 10. 11. proveth: as the rest also are able & have
power to despise, & reiect the grace of God of­fered to condemnation, & this
the other two Scriptures Act: 13. 46. & 7\. 51. do prove. Which yet a great
parte of the wicked in the world do not: as not haveing so much, as heard of
Christ, at least in any competent mea­sure for salvation by him: but shalbe
iudged accordeing to the law of na­ture written in the creatures, & in their
naturall consciences. Agayn he [...]. 1. 8. speaks contradictoryes in saying,
that all have this grace, or power in Christ, & that God giveth it to all, &
yet confessing, that all receav it not. For though there may be a purpose,
will, & offer to give, yet there can be no giveing, so as the person have the
thing, especially that thing, which none can have agaynst his will, (as none
can have grace) except there be also a receaving. Since then all men are not
in Christ, & so not partakers of the grace of God in him: nor yet, if they
were, could a common, vniversall, & equall grace make them vnequall, who were
formerly equall, it followeth that there is a speciall, & peculiar grace,
which God in Christ giveth vnto some, & not to others: by which they are
enabled to vnderstand, & beleev the Gospell, & to repent: & so by consequence,
a speciall, & particular election of those persons before the world: since
Gods workes are known vnto him of ould: ney­therAct. 15. 8 doth he any thing
in tyme, which he did not purpose to do before tyme.

Lastly since all children are by nature children of, or subiect to wrath, &
which God might in iustice destroy, why should it seem harsh vnto these men,
that he should exequute his iustice vppon some, & shew mercy vppon others, &
save them? If he might in iustice have condemned all, (which they must needs
graunt, if they beleev that all are by nature children of wrath, & that God
gave his sonne in his mercy, & that it had been no iniustice, if he had given
him for none, no more then he did for the angels that sinned) will they sue
God at the law because he hath not given him effectually for all, or saved all
by him? Will they have him give them account why he ta­kes some into the arm
of his mercy, when he might have left all to the hand of his iustice? If he
condemn any, they have their due: those whom he saveth, he doth it of free
mercy, vnto which he is not bound. And is any mans ey evill, because his is
good? or because men know no reason, why God should rayther chuse, & save
some, then others, all deserving condem­nation, will they yeald him to be no
more wise, & no more holy then they? The depth of the riches both of the
wisdom, & knowledg of God, & the vnsearchable­nes [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=53) of his iudgments
appears in this, if in any other thing: as doth also mans intollerable
presumption, who will yeald him no more, then he sees reason for.

Now though I have done it fully before, yet will I further clear by the
Scriptures, that, though all children are by nature alike, yet in respect of
the grace of adoption, they are not alike, especially vnto vs, & in that
iudg­ment, which we are to passe vppon them, leaving vnto the L: his secrets.

And 1. who will say, that Isaak, being separated from the infants of the
heathen into the Covenant of Gods love, & so signed, as one of the L:
pe­culiar people; & those infants of the world, from whom he was separated,
(for example, the infants of the Sodomites, about his tyme, who were in Gods
feirce wrath destoyed with fyre, & brimstone from heaven) were alike in Gods
acceptance? We have Isaak set forth as a an example of Gods mercy, & love; &
them, with their parents, of his iustice, & vengance. Iude 7. And who will say
that the Israeliteish children receaved into solemn Co­venant by, & with the
Lord, Neh: 10. 28. 29. & the children of the hea­thenish woemen, which were
shut out with their mothers, & separated, be­fore the other could enter it,
were to be accounted alike acceptable? TheChap. 9.  [...] Prophet Malachy
testifyeth for the Lord, that he loved Iakob, & hated Esau, (to wit in the
decree of his love, & hatred, by iust means to be applyed) before they were
born: & this the Apostle Rom: 9. applyeth to the question of election, &
reprobation, touching the two partyes, primarily, & distinct­ly; & their
posterity, secondarily, & indefinitely, both for persons, & things And lest
any should say, that God thus decreed, in respect of any thing, which he
forsaw they would do, or prove, the Apostle prevents this shift, & shewes that
this was not in respect of works, but that the purpose of God might stand,
accordeing to election, v: 11. Besydes had this been primarily in respect of
fayth, or workes forseen, & for that the one would receav the grace of God, &
not the other, the Apostle needed not to have broken out as he did, speaking
of the reason of this his love, or hatred, But what art thou o man, who
pleadest with God, &c. The answer had been easy for a childe tov 20. have
given, namely that the reason why God purposed to love Iakob was because he
forsaw he would receav of himself the grace to be offered, & beleev: & so to
hate Esau for his sin in not receaving the same grace to be offered as
effectually on Gods parte, as vnto his brother.

It is also noted of Iohn Baptist, that he was filled with the H. Ghost even
Luke 1. 15. Mat 19 [...] 13\. 14. 1 [...] Chap. 15 22. &c. from his mothers
wombe: which to affirm of all children were a vanity not worthy the refuteing.
Lastly, Christ our Saviour blessed the infants of the Israe­lites, being of
the Church, when they were brought vnto him: but with the litle daughter of
the Canaanitish woman he refused to communicate his grace. [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=54) accounting her as
a dog, or whelp, till her mother by her faythfull, & zea­lous confession, had
obteyned for her, interest in the childrens bread. And thus it appeareth
(besydes the things formerly layd down) that though all children be alike in
nature, yet are they not all alike in respect of Gods adoption, especially
outwardly manifested, of which we speak.

He ads, that every one shall receav salvation, or condemnation accordeing to
that, which he hath done in the flesh, &c. And for answer, I would know of
him, how any infants (so dying) who have done neyther good, nor evill, shall
eyther be saved, or damned? He must answer, that the Scriptures he brings
con­cern not infants at all, but men of years; & therefore are by him
misap­plyed to them, whom they nothing concern.

And here note, that as the Ch: in heaven, or of glory, & this in earth, or of
grace, is one in substance; this, the begining of that, & that the
con­summation of this, so they, who come into the Ch: here, must enter by the
profession, which themselves make: & they that come into the Church there, by
the profession, which Christ shall make of, & for them, accordeing to their
workes. Math: 24. But as it were absurd to say, that infants can­not enter
into the Ch: & state of glory, because Christ cannot professe of them, that
they have fed the hungry, &c: so is it as absurd to exclude them from the Ch:
or state of grace, because they cannot themselves make pro­fession of fayth, &
repentance. This man by one, & the same errour, which is the perverting, &
misapplying of the Scriptures to infants, which are pe­culiar to men of years,
debars them of both.

These things considered, I hope it will appear to the godly, & wise rea­der,
that the things for which he chalengeth me in this (as in other poynts) are
onely false, wherein they are by him falsifyed. Yea & if there were no­ting
els, two of the three last Scriptnres, which he brings agaynst me, do
vndenyably prove as much as (yea more then) I speak: which is, that wicked
parents do enwrap theyr children in the same evilles visibly, (for so I speak)
with themselves, adding in the same place, that this is not so, as though the
chil­dren were without fault, but as being by Adams transgression, & theyr
naturall, & originall corruption children of wrath, & lyable to all Gods
curses, which he also takes occasion by the sins of the parents to exequute
vppon the children, in whose punishments he also punisheth the parents
themselves after a sorte. The former Scripture is Rom: 5. 14. which proves by
his own exposition, that all infants are by the sin of their common father
Adam, vnder the reign or tyranny of death: the guilt, & contagion of which sin
is by their next parents immediately con­veyed vnto them, by naturall
generation. And that God hath vsually pu­nished the sins even of the next
parents both in the death of their children & otherwise, is so evident in the
Scriptures, as that no modest man will [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=54) gaynsay it. Yea
even for them of years, that other Scripture which he brings Exod: 20. 5.
teacheth playnly, that the Lord visits not onely their own sins, who hate him,
vppon them, but the sins of theyr fathers also. That in Ezech: 18. 14. 17. as
before I have answered, is not of an infant, but of a childe of years,
forsakeing his fathers sins, & doeing the contrary: with whom therefore the L:
deales not in the course of his iustice, but of his mercy: & so is not
pertinent to the question in hand: which is about infants, & those such, as
with whom the L: deales in the course, & tenour of his iustice.

And thus have I answered all the particulars in his book, which eyther respect
myne own wryteings, or our speciall cause, & practise. My purpose also was to
have shewed, how whilst he pretends the discovery of the mistery of iniquity,
himself is deep plunged in many poynts of Popish iniquity. But for that I have
drawn out the thread of myne Answer further then I intended; & that most of
the particulars will come, for substance, vnder consideratiō, in the Survey
of Mr Smithes confession, I will here conclude for the matter of his wryteing:
adding especially for the manner thereof, onely thus much; that in him, & some
others I have had great cause to observ, & bewayl in a speciall regarde, mans
misery, in lying open to this amongst other of Sa­thans daungerous practises:
which is, when men have escaped his snares of grosse ignorance, & prophanes, &
are come to some measure of know­ledg, & conscience of godlines, & have
suffered something for the truth, then to bring them into love with
themselves, & their own knowledg Zeal, & other graces: & withall into the
contempt of the knowledg, iudgment, Zeal, & graces of all other men: that, so
soaring aloft vppon the wings of vayn presumption, & behoulding all others
afar of, & as scarse creeping vppon the earth, whilst they mount on high, they
might fall, by riseing, & that their fall might be great. But let all Gods
people be exhorted, & ad­monished to serv him in modesty of mynde, & meeknes
of wisdom, with reverence, Iam. 3. 13. Heb. 1 [...] 28\. Col. 8. & fear:
avoyding, as the sands of humble hypocrisy, in pinning their fayth, &
obedience vppon the sleeves of others, so much more the rock of proud
presumption: which is so much the worse then the other, as it is more
daungerous for any to overvalve himself, then an other man.

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=55)

## 6\. A Suruey of the Confession of faith published in certain Conclusions by
the remaynders if Mr Smithes Company after his death.

IN honour of the trueth, & love of them who vnfeynedly seeke it, and more
specially of the persons, vnder whose names this Confession pas­seth out, I
have thought my self even called to examine, & censure by the word of God,
such errours, as by the light thereof, I do discerne in it, as also in the
other writing annexed vnto it: purposing herein to passe by (as approving it)
what I fynde agreable to the Scriptures, albeit not set down in so convenient
termes: to explane, & clear what may seem doubt­full, & so to evince by the
same Scriptures, what I deem contrarie to the wholesome doctrine of godlines &
forme thereof. In all with I desire my endevours may so far be blessed of God,
& accepted of men, as they con­tayn in them his simple trueth, & proceed frō
him, who entyrely loveth all that seeke the same trueth in holines.

And first the 7th Conclusion with is. That to vnderstand & conceive of God in
the mynde is not the saving knowledge of God, but to be like to God in his
effectes & propertyes, to be made conformable to his divine & heavenly
attributes: this is the true saveing knowledge of God. 2\. Cor: 3. 18. Math:
5. 48. 2. Pet: 1. 4. where­vnto we ought to geve all diligence, standes need
of explanation. For takeing the former parte of the sentence eyther
exclusively, that salvation standes not in these thinges alone, or
comparatively, that it standes not therein principally, according to that
forme of speach Rom: 1. 19. 1. Co: 1. 17. it is true, & the Scriptures brought
do prove it: but not so, if the wordes be taken negatively, as though it stood
not in these thinges at all. For † without faith (with is wrought in the
mynde, & vnderstanding) no man can Heb. 11. please God: nor come vnto him. ‡
And this (saith Christ) is eternall lyfe to know Ioh. 17. God the father, &c.
and every where the Scriptures teach, that by faith Christ is received, &
salvation obteyned: as is also that renewing of Gods Image in vs, [...]h. 1.
12  [...]om. 3.  [...] [...]oll. 3. 10 first in the vnderstanding, in which we
are first ioyned to God by true know­ledge; and 2dly, in our harte by sincere
love: & so after in the other affec­tions, & partes of soule & body.

The 9th Position where it is said that God before the foundation of the world
did foresee, & determyne the issue & event of all his workes. Act. 15. 18
comethCon­  [...]usion. much shorte of the trueth though there be no vntruth
in it. For God hath not onely foreseen, & determined the issues, & events of
his workes, but hath also decreed & purposed the workes themselves before the
founda­tion of the world. And so much the place in the acts proveth: where
Iames teaching that all the workes of God are knowen vnto him from eternity,
purposeth [[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=55)
to prove that the calling of the Gentiles, of with worke he speakes, is not a
thing newly come into the thoughtes of God, but that with he hath pro­mised, &
purposed before. Which the other place also after alleadged plain­ly proves:
where it is said, that God worketh all things according to the counsell Eph.
1.  [...] of his will. And to conceive that God doth any thing in tyme, with
he did not from eternitie purpose to do, as he doth it, is derogatory to his
infi­nite wisdom & power: & indeed to deny him to be God, & to make him
finite: in whom there is a chaung wrought, & a begining, & grouth of
counsayls. And this I note for two purposes. First that we may know that the
condemnation of wicked men by God, for sin by their freewill to be wrought,
was purposed of God before the world: it beinge a good worke of God, &
effected by his infinite power for the holynes, & glory of his iu­stice: 2dly,
that since every good geveing, & every perfect gift is from above aescen­ding
Iam. 1. 1 from the father of lightes, & that, to know God, to beleve in him,
to love, & obay him, to receive Christ, & the Gospel of salvation offered, are
the good giftes of God, we may also know, that God not onely foresees, that
those graces will be in men, but also fore purposes frō eternity himselfe to
worke, & effect them: that if any should tell vs (as many do) that God hath
in­deed predestinated such men vnto salvation, as he foresaw would beleve in
Christ, & receive the grace in him offered, we may answer them, that God
foresees indeed those graces in those men, but it is because he fore
purpo­seth to work them. He workes them in tyme, because of his free grace he
purposed to worke them before tyme was: without which his purpose, he could
not have foreseen them. And as the Lord in the begining saw that the things he
had made were all good when he had made them such: so did he foresee all other
good graces in men, because he forepurposed so to worke & effect them.

The begining & end of the 10th Position: viz: That God is not the Au­thour, 10
Co [...]clusion or worker of sin: & that he geves no influence, instinct,
motion, or inclinatten to the least sin, I embrace: But the middle parte
thereof, viz: That God one­ly did foresee, & determyne what evill the free
will of men, & Angels would do, I except against, as derogatory to the
infinitenes of Gods power, & wisdom: neyther indeed is it senseible to say,
that God determyned, what the will of others would do.

But what the forethoughtes & purposes of God have been from eter­nity about
sin (so far as the knowledge thereof concerneth vs) will best appear, if we
consider, what the worke of his providence is, in, & about it in tyme, & when
it is wrought by men, or Angels.

And first since sin is the worke of men & Angels, it followeth that sin is
from them, who are themselves from God: though the si [...] be not, but of
[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=56)
themselves: yea not onely the natures, & persons, but even the naturall
powers, faculties, and instruments together with their naturall motions, &
actions, in, & by which sin is wrought, are of God also: by him susteyned, &
vpheld, & acted by his almighty power, which is the cause of every
crea­ture,Act 17.  [...]1. & vpholdeth all things, & so of every action, as an
action: Sin not be­ing created of God, not any part or power of man, or Angel,
nor any mo­tion,Rom. 11.  [...]6. or action, but onely the depravation,
corruption, crooked & inordi­nate abuse & application of the same created
part, power, or motion.Colle. 1. 7. For example: the very power, & vse of
seeing the forbidden fruit, [...]ob. 1. 3. the naturall desire of it, as a
pleasant thing, the power & ability of taking, as also of eating it, were of
God in themselves: But the sin stood in the inordinate­nes, & abuse of the
sence, appetite, & power vppon that, which was forbid­den by God. And this
will yet appeare more playnly, if we consider that the very same sence,
appetite, & worke both of body, & mynd set vppon an other fruit not forbidden
by God, had been no sin at all.

II 2dly, God doth administer the occasions by which the creature through his
own defalt, is provoked, & incited vnto sin: as in the creation of the
forbidden fruit very pleasant to the eyes, & of the Serpent, subtile, [...].
3. and fit to be vsed by Sathan for temptation. Thus even the law of God is
the occasion [...]om. 7. 8. of all lust, & sin, the gospell of fyre, & sword,
& all variance, & debate. Mat. 15.  [...]. 8 34.  [...] c. Thus Gods
commuandement to Pharaoh to let his people go, the Miracles which Moses did in
his sight, his conviction of Conscience, & remorse of harte,Exod. 5.  [...] c.
which by them the Lord wrought in him, were occasions of sin vnto him, by his
own rebellion, & Gods iudgment: & did harden his hart, and God by them, not as
by causes, but occasions, which are also vsed of God, as all other the like
occasions, to all men, for the tryall, discovery, & conviction of his
creature, & to make way for his own further worke of mercy, or iustice.

III Thirdly God doth permit, & suffer sin, & that both willingly, & wise­ly,
not by geving the creature leave to sin, for that is impossible: but by not
putting the effectuall impediments which might hinder sin, as he both could
and lawfully might, if he would. He could, & might (had he so pleased) not
have created men & Angels, with have sinned: or by irre­sistable grace,
restreynt, or other disappoyntment have prevented their sin. He therefore
permitteth it willingly, & when he could, hinder it, if he would, otherwise it
were no permission, though he did not hinder it: no more then a man can be
said to permit, or suffer the sun to shyne, or rayne to fall, that hinders
them not. And thus sin (though it be alwayes agaynst the degrees of the
commaunding, approueing, & effecting will of God) yet is not at all, agaynst
his permitting will, or agaynst that degree [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=56) of manifestation
of that one in it self, & simple will of God: neyther is it wrought, he
absolutely nilling it. For be being in heaven doth whatsoe­ver he pleaseth.
His counsayle shall stand, & he will do whatsoever he will, Psal. 115 3. sayth
the Prophet. This sin he doth also suffer, not (as men oft sufferIsa 46 [...]
10, thinges to come to passe) without care, or consideration of it, but of
purpose & with infinite wisdom, as knowing how to bring light out of darkenes,
& by the creatures sin, to effect his most holy worke, according to his
vnsearchable counsayle: the depth whereof may swallow vp the mind, but can not
be sounded by it, & in the meditation whereof, the best bound, & bottom is for
man to consider, & confesse, that God is both more wise, & more holy then he.

And so in the 4th place, God doth most wisely, & most powerfully IV determine,
order, & direct the sins of men, & Angels, in respect of the continuance,
extent, & vse thereof by him to be made: bringing light out of darkenes, by
his almighty power, & wisdom: & effecting by the creatures vnrighteousnes his
own most holy, & righteous purposes. And thus he sometymes punisheth one sin
with another, in the same persons Rom. 1▪ 18. 29. geving them over to
reprobate myndes, for wuhholding his truth in vnrigh­teousnes: 2\. Thess. 2.
10. sending vppon them the efficacy of delusion to beleve lyes, that they
might be damned, who have not received the Love of the truth, that they might
be saved: Searing with an hote iron their Consciences, who have spoken lyes in
hypocrisie, and punishing the neglect of former conviction, with want of
feeling, & numnes of heart afterwardes: & sometymes the sin of one man by the
sin of another: and thus he punished Davids adulterie, &2\. Sam. 11 & 12 15. &
1 [...] & 18. murder, by Absoloms treason & incest: and the Israelits
idolatries, & other iniquities, by the pride, & cruelty of the Assirians, &
Babilonians. Sometymes also he vseth (or rather abuseth) the sins of wicked
Angels2\. King. 17. & 24 & 25. & men for the tryall of the faith, & patience
of his servants, as we see in the storie of Iob: and sometymes to make way for
his own most excellent workes: as the Redemption of mankynd by the death of
his sonne, for which he vsed the envy of the Pharises, the malice of Sathan,
the treason of Iudas, & the iujustice of Pontius Pilate. And in this
ordination of evill, God geveth vs to see, that nothing is absolutely, &
infinitely evill, as he is absolutely, & infinitely good: who also in these
ordinations triumph­eth over sin & iniquity: which he surely would never
suffer, save as he is able to serve his most holy purpose of it, & of them
that worke it: and in this respect especially God is said to do these thinges,
which indeed are done by wicked Angels, & men, and by him ordered, &
determyned to his most  [...]oly purposes.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=57) And
lastly God doth eyther mercyfully pardon, & so abolish in Christ, or punish in
the course of iustice, sin, & sinners, as the Scriptures every where teach.

And by these the workes of God in & about sin, it appeareth what the purposes
of God were touching it from eternity: for whatsoever God doth in tyme,
whether about sin, or otherwise, that he purposed to do before tyme, ere the
world was: & so for the contrary.

The 16th Conclusion: That Adam dyed the same day that he sinned: Gen:6 Cor.
[...]usion. 2\. 17. for that the reward of sin is death. Rom: 6. 13. and that
his death was losse of innocency, peace of Conscience, & of the comfortable
presence of of God. Gen: 3. 7. 11. must be further opened & better cleared
then (I suppose) the Authour intendeth it.

For by Death threatned Gen: 2. 17. is not onely ment spirituall Death standing
in losse of innocency, peace of Conscience, and Gods comfortable presence, but
withall eternall death, whereof the other is but the begining: as one of the
noted Scriputres proveth. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eter­nall life in Chr: Iesus our Lord. Where the Apostle opposeth vnto Death,
eternall [...]om. 6.  [...] lyfe, & therefore intendeth eternall Death of
soule & body. In which Death threatned was included bodily death also, with
all the meanes, & miseries, which lead vnto it. And this appeares in the last
Scripture alleadged. Which is Gen: 3. where, God, after many bodily calamities
both vppon the wo­man [...]n 3. 16  [...] 18\. 19 man & man for that sin,
denounceth as their end, and consummation, death, & dissolution of body into
the Earth from which they were taken.

It is true, that the body being made of corruptible creatures, was sub­iect in
it self to corruption, & mortality: yet must it be remembred, that even the
heavens themselves were made of one & the same first common matter, that rude
lumpe & vnformed Chaos, and so are also in themselves [...]. 1. 1. subiect to
dissolutiō. Yea whatsoever hath a begining, & is a creature, is sub­iect to
come to an end naturally: as with which is cōmunicated but a finite power &
vertue; and so the very soules of men, and the Angels are in them­selves
subiect to death, & mortality, save as they are by the continuall in­fluence
of the Divine power & providence, susteyned, & preserved. But God now haveing
enobled the whole man soul & body with his Image & ioy­ned them together in
one person: the soul to informe, & quicken the bo­dy, & the body to be
quickned, & vsed by it, as an active, & lively instrument for her operations,
& workes: the separation of these two (with death is) being a dissolution of
so great a worke of God, & of the habitation of his own Image, could not come,
but by sin. Not that I thinke Adam should allwaies have continued in that his
naturall estate, in tilling, & kepeing the garden of Eden, in eating,
drinkeing, procreating of children, governing [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=57) the familie, &
the like: or should alwayes have had an earthly, heavy, grosse, & dark body,
but that in the Lordes appoynted tyme, there should have bene a change of all
those earthly imperfections, as, there shalbe in the bodies of all the
faythfull, who shalbe alive at Christes second comeing: but1\. Cor. 1 [...]
51. the same without all greif, & payn: much more without all separation of1\.
Thes.  [...] 17. soul, & bodie: most of all without the bodies corrupting, &
rotting in the grave: which are the proper fruits of sin. And therefore as God
gave him a living sonle, so he gave him the tree of life in the garden, as an
effectuall Sacra­ment of life: he made all things good in themselves, & for
him: subject vnto him, & serviceable to his vse. So that though his bodie were
in it self capable of violence by fyre, water, & otherwise, yet should the
providence of God, the ministery of Angels, & his own perfect wisdom so have
directed, & ordered both them, & himself, as that no hurt, but good every way
should have come vnto him, by them.

Wherefore (sayth the Prophet) doth the liveing man complayn? he answer­eth,
man complayneth for his sins? So that all the sorrowes of this life,Lam. 3.
39. all the grevous pangs & passions of the minde: all the turmoylings of the
body, by hunger, thirst, wearysomnes, sicknes, diseases, & so death vnto which
they lead, & which is the extremitie of them all, are for sin, inflicted by
God, & by man borne: which the Scriptures every where testify, & that in
ex­amples so well knowen, as in vayn it were to trouble the Reader with
note­ing them down.

To conclude: the Apostle Rom: 5. 12. 14. speaking of bodily death, affirmeth
expresly that for sin it reigned even before the law was given by Moses, &
that over them who had not sinned as Adam, that is actually: & more playn­ly,
1. Cor: 15. where speaking of the bodily resurrection, after bodily death, he
teacheth, that by man & in Adam, all dy: and that even this bodily death is
one of Christs enemyes to be destroyed at the last: which these men
themsel­vesvers. 22. v. 25. do also confesse, (though they observe it not)
Conclus: 34. and that death & the grave are vanquished by Christ vppon the
crosse. And since Christ suffered nothing but for our sins, if bodily death
had not been a punish­ment of sin, why should Christ have suffered it, as he
did, & that for our sin­nes, according to the Scriptures? But it will here be
demaunded, if God threat­ned1\. Cor 3. bodily death vppon Adam, the day, he
sinned, why he did not accor­dingly exequute it? I answer that the threatning
was legall, & according to the course of iustice, and therefore did not hinder
but God in mercy might fynde a remedy, as he also did: & so the L: meaning was
no more, but that in the day wherein Adam ate, he should be subject to, &
guilty of death, & the curse of God. In the verie same forme of speach,
Salomon threatneth Shimei, that the day he went out of Ierusalem any whether,
he should su­rely 1\. Kng 37. [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=58) dy: that is
beguilty of death: for neyther did (neyther almost possi­bly could) he
actually kill him that very day. The truth then is, that God threatned not
onely spirituall, and eternall death (which is the consumma­tion of the
former) but bodily also, & with it, all bodily, & temporary ca­lamityes
leading vnto it. And of this it is most needfull the servantes of God should
be firmely persuaded, & continually myndefull, that in their sorrowes both of
life, & death, they might be lead to the remembrance of their sins,1\. Kin. 17
28. & for them be humbled vnder the hand of God, of which fruit of their
afflictions these mens doctrine bereaveth them.1 Cor. 11 29. 30. 17
Con­clusion.

The 17th Conclusion: that Adam being faln did not loose any naturall power, or
facultie, which God created in his soul, because the work of the Devill, which
is sinn [...], cannot abolish Gods workes, & Creatures: and therefore being
fallen he still retey­ned fredom of will. Gen: 3. 23. 24. is in parte
doubtfully set down, and in parte, vntrue.

That Adam had as well freedom of will after, as before his fall, is, as true,
as that he was a man after, as before. For take away will from a man, & he
ceaseth to be a man: and take away freedom from the will, in that which it
willeth, & it ceaseth to be will. But here is the difference, that the same
na­turall power of freewill, which before, was rightly ordered, & disposed
one­ly to good actually, (though changeably) was afterwards corrupted,
disor­dered & clean cōtrarily disposed, till by supernaturall grace it was
rectifyed, & renued. It is true then, that sin destroyeth not the naturall
powers, or parts of soul, or body, but onely corrupteth, infecteth, &
disordereth them: whence also ariseth in the mynde, ignorance, errour,
doubtinges, & vnbe­leef; & in the will, & affections, perversnes, & disorder,
with manifold lusts, to the fullfilling & execution whereof, the bodily
instruments are di­sposed. But the reason brought, that sin can not abolish
Gods work, or Creatures, is frivolous: For God suffering sin to enter,
suffereth therein an abolition of his own work & creature. It is confessed,
Propos: 11. That Adam sinning, dyed the death, & lost innocency, peace of
Conscience, & the comfortable presence of God. Now was not this spirituall
death which Adam dyed, an abolition, & de­struction of his spirituall life,
innocency, &c: works of God, & his creatu­res? the same may be sayd of the
whole Image of God. What were these but workes of God, creatures, & created
graces, & endowments, wrought in him, & bestowed on him by the hand of the
Creatour, which sin abolished both in him, & in his posterity by naturall
propagation? as will appear in the refutation of the 18th Conclusions: which
is,

That Originall sin is an idle term, & that there is no such thing as men
intend by [...] 8 Con­clusion. the word. Eze: 18\. 20. Because God threatned
Death onely to Adam. Gen: 2\. 17. not to his posterity, & because God created
the soul. Heb: 12\. 9.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=58) That
Originall sin is an hereditary evill, I shall prove hereafter, (God assisting)
and do answer to the Scriptures; & frist to that in Ezech: The soul that
sinneth shall dy, the sonne shall not bear the iniquitie of the father. The
Prophet speakes of such children as forsake sin, & repent, as the whole
context sheweth, which was to reprove the hypocrisy of the Iewes, who
complay­ned of injustice from God in punishing them, who were holy, for their
fa­thers sins. Besides, all Adams naturall posterity were souls sinning in
him: whom in that his sin, we must not consider as a private person, but as
the common father of mankinde, communicateing with the nature, the sin (which
was not merely personall, but naturall) with his naturall posteritie: both
which are also their own, as on the cōtrary, the second Adam Christ, & his
righteousnes is so communicated with the members of his body, as every
faithfull person may truely say, that both he, & it are his. And hence was it,
that in the punishment of this sin, the earth was cursed; not to him alone,
but to his ensueing posterity: neyther was Eve alone to suffer the sor­rowes
of conception, & childbirth, but all her daughtes after her: neyther were the
Cherubims set to keep them two alone, but all their after posterity out of the
gardē of Eden: & so is it for death it self, & all the passages which lead
vnto it: according to that of the Apostle, as by one man sin entered into the
world & death by sin, even so death went over all men, in whom all have
sinned. Rom 5. 12. Where they further alleadge, that because God created the
soul, that is doth immediate­ly create the soul of every particular person:
Hebr: 12. 9. ther, is therefore no  [...]riginall sin they take too much
liberty both for the exposition of the Scrip­ture, & their inference vppon it,
shewing no reason for the one, or other.

First then by [...]. flesh. Heb: 12. 9. (for so it should be turned, & not
bodyes) is not ment the bodyes of men without soules, which the parents do not
cor­rect, that is [...]. correct with instruction, as the word signifyeth: nor
by spirits, soules without bodyes, since God is the father of the bodyes of
mē, & of all creatures, Iob: 38. 28. Luk. 3\. 35. but as by flesh is oft in
the Scriptures ment earthly things (for which our naturall parēts trayn vs
vp, & correct vs) & as God is our spirituall Mayster, & guide, to the meaning
may well be, that if for the conveniency of this life, we submit to the
chasticemēt of our earthly father, much more ought we to humble our selves to
the discipline of our heavēly father, for spirituall things. 2dly since they
generally who think the soul to be created immediately, & infused, do not
onely hold Originall sin, but also shew how they conceiv it to be propogated,
it is but presumption in these men (without answering what others so ordinary
bring to the contrary) thus to conclude, that because the soul is thus
immediately created, therefore there  [...]s no originall sin. But as I see
small reason to persuade me, that the dead  [...]ody, before the soul be
vnited with it, can be the proper subject of sin, [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=59) or meanes to
traduce it, or indeed any way sinfull, more then after it be separated from
the soul: and lesse reason, that the same body can infect the soul, being of
spirituall nature, with any contagion of sin, though it might hinder, or fayl
it, in some outward exequution; so seemeth it to me much more agreable vnto
truth, that the blessing of God to encrease, & multiply did as well geve
vertue, & power vnto mankynde, as vnto other kyndes, to beget,Gen. 1.
[...]2\. 28. & generate their like: & not onely a dead carkas, & livelesse
body, inferiour to the issue of bruit beasts, which do procreate their kynde,
both body & soule, or life. Neyther see I how Adam could be sayd to have
begotten a sonne after his own Image, Gen: 5. 3. opposed to Gods Image v: 1.
that is, sinfull, and corrupt, if he onely had begotten the body, & not the
soul also: which I think he did, even the whole, the whole; after a maner
convenyent to ey­ther nature. And if these two Positions can not stand
together, that God createth the soul immediately: & that there is originall
sin: where these men conclude, that there is therefore no originall sin, I
conclude contrary wise, that therefore the soul is not immediately created,
nor the place to the Heb: so to be expounded; since the proufes for originall
sin are so certayn, & evident.

And that it is no idle term, (as is imagined) but a miserable calamity
possessing all the posterity of Adam by naturall generation, & ever by them to
be bewayled, & purged out, I hope playnly to prove, & with all, that by reason
of it they are naturally vnable to chuse, or will any thing spiritually good,
or truely pleasing God.

And for this, (remembring what I have formerly noted from Rom: 4. 12. about
all mens sining in that one & first man) observe we, that these men confesse
every where, & truely, thatIoh. 3.  [...]3\. 5. a man must be regenerate, or
borne anew, before he can enter the kingdom of God. wherevppon it followeth
necessa­rily, that by the first birth, & generation all men are excluded from
the kingdom of God. And if by the first birth men be not corrupt, then is not
the second birth simply necessary: but all are rather to indevour to pre­serve
the purity of the former. And this myne argument is further confir­med, where
Christ our Lord teacheth, that, that which is borne of the flesh,  [...]
flesh, that is sinfull, which he therefore opposeth to the spirit: and so the
se­cond,Ioh. 3. 6. or new birth by the Spirit, required for that entring the
kingdom of heaven, to the first, or old birth, by which all men are naturally
excluded. And theRom 3. 23. same it is which we read, Ioh: 1. v: 12. 13. that
the sonnes of God are borne  [...] of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man. In which respect also  [...] treating of man borne of a
woman, sayth, that no man can bring a clean thing  [...] Ioh. 14. 4. of
filthines. Hence also was it, that David bewayling his sins of adultery  [...]
murder in particuler, & leading both himself, & others from the stream [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=59) to the fountayn,
doth confesse that he was born in iniquity, & conceived in sin. Psal. Ioyn
with all these that, which the testifyeth both of Iewes, & Gentiles, that they
were by nature children of wrath, that is born such, as the word nature
importeth. Hence is it that Iude speaking of such deceavers, as had crept
intoEph. the Church, & taken vppon them the profession of Christ, & after
turned that grace of God into wantonnes calles them corrupt & rotten trees, &
twice dead, v: 4. 12. who had they not been first dead in Adam in trespasses,
& sins. Eph: 2. 1. how could they have been twice dead? Ad we vnto these the
conside­ration of the Circumcision of the Lords people of ould, livelily
teaching, that nothing comeing of mans vncleane seed naturally, could be
clean, as Iob sayth, which was also further declared in the vncleannes, & so
in the purification of every woman after Child birth, by burnt offeringes, &
sin offerings.

Lastly even common sence, & experience, which teacheth the most sim­ple,
confirmeth this doctrine of originall sin. Who seeth not in children even from
their cradels, the fruit of this bitter root? crying (as Austin confes­seth of
himself) to be avenged of their nurses, being naturally prone to ly­ing, for
complaints, or excuses, though so brought vp, as they hear no ly tould: also
prydeing themselves in any gay, or gorgeous thing, & despise­ing others which
want the like: and so evident is this to sence, & experien­ce, as that the
fyre is warme, & a stone heavy.

Now the same Scriptures which prove this naturall, & originall sin, serv also
to disprove all originall, & naturall freedom of will or other power to any
good thing truely spirituall, or pleasing God. I will apply some of the
forenamed Scriptures, & ad some others to that purpose.

And first, since all must be regenerate, or begot, & borne anew, before they
can enter, or see, the kingdom of heaven, Io [...] [...] this wholy difarmeth
the naturall man of all power vnto spirituall things, without a supernaturall
regeneration, [...] or new birth by that incorruptible seed of the word of God
[...] & spirit of life: which must also be of the whole, & of all the parts,
as is the first generation. Agreable wherevnto is that Eph: 2. 1. where all
are sayd to be dead in tr [...]spasses, & sins. These mē graunt it of Adam,
by his offence: & that Scripture, with others, teach the same of all men by
nature, & through that his one offence. And as no motion, or action of
naturall life, can possibly be made, or performed, [...] by a man naturally
dead; so neyther any spirituall motion, or action, by any dead spiritually,
till God breath into him anew that his quickening spirit, the spirit of lyfe.
And as of things vnknowen there is no desyre, or will, so is it not possible
that the naturall or animall man (for that title is geven him of his more
noble parte the soul) which knowes not, [...] 8\. 5. nor is capable of the
things of the spirit, being discerned spiritually, should will, or desire
them. Yea being [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=60) offered by the
preaching of the Gospell, they are foolishnes vnto him, & things which he
savoreth not: the very wisdom, or myndeing of the flesh being enmity against
God, with is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be. If it be asked
why doth God then require it should be, or punish men where it is not? it is
easely answered, that this inability cometh by mans own defalt. God made all
men in Adam able to keep the law: & the obedience there­of is due debt vnto
God: now the inability of the debtour, & his heyrs (especially by their own
default) is no sufficient discharge of the debt vnto the Creditour who lent
it: so neyther doth mans inability preiudice the Lords right, but that he may
in the course of iustice, require that obe­dience to his holy law, vnto which
by creation he enabled mankynde. And for fayth in Christ, & repentance, (which
are the summe of the Go­spell) God doth not requyre them, as due from the
creature, to a Crea­tour, by order of iustice, but as conditions convenient
vnto man, dead in sin & misery, if he wilbe made partakers of that Life &
light come into the 19. world; & offered by Christ: which whilst men dispise,
loueinge darknes more then light because their works are evill: their
condemnation followeth vp­pon their impenitency, & vnbeleif, as doth the death
of a wounded man vppon his wilfull contempt of the sovereign salve offered for
his healing.

To conclude then, they of whom God requires this fayth, repentance, &
obedience, eyther yeald it him answerably, or not? If not; as they can not, so
their own hearts & consciences will witnes agaynst them, that they will not;
but do on the contrary willingly withstand, & with draw from the Lords
commandements: who are therefore inexcusable, & have no cause to complayn,
save vppon themselves. And for them who yeald submission by the effectuall
work of Gods spirit writing faith & the law in their harts, much lesse have
they cause of complayning agaynst God, but onely of thankesge­veing for the
grace received, [...]. 10.  [...] 3. by which he hath even created them anew
as his workmanship: not being fit of themselves, as of themselves, so much as
to think a good thought, but haveing God workeing in them both the will, &
deed, accord­ing to his good pleasure.

It is added, [...]on­  [...]on. that if Originall sin might have passed from
Adam to his posterity yet is the issue thereof stayed by Christs death, which
was effectuall, & he the lamb of God slayn from the begining of the world.
Apoc: 13\. 8.

I answer that he was indeed from eternity that lamb of God, v. 29 in tyme to
be slayn: but to take away the sins of the world, as Iohn witnessed of him:
and so his death was effectuall. It is confessed, & truely, Conclus: 30. That
Christ is become the Mediator of the new Testament, & Priest of the Church.
This new Testament, is established in his blood: and he a Priest for vs, as he
offered, [[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=60)
and gave him self a Sacrifice, & Ransom for vs: and this bloodshed was for the
washing away of sins: this Sacrifice for procureing Pardon: and this Ransom
for the freing of them, that are taken captive by sin, and Sathan. This
stopping then of the issue of sin, as it is intended, is but a fiction.

That Infants are (as is further affirmed) conceived, & born in innocency
without sin is contrary to the Scriptures:20 C [...]clusi [...] as, that they
are all vndoubtedlie saved, is a peremptory affirmation, but without ground.
Vnto the Scrip­tures brought to prove it, which are Gen: 5. 2. & 1\. 27.
compared with 1. Cor: 15. 49. I answer that by the Image of the earthly Adam,
in the last Scrip­ture is not meant the Image of God, in wisdom, righteousnes,
& holynes, accord­ingCol. 3 Eph. 4 to which Adam was sayd to be created in the
former places: but that corruptible, & ignoble state of the body in death,
from with at the resur­rection of the iust it shalbe freed: which therefore
vers. 50\. is called flesh & blood, which cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven: and corruption, which cannot inherit incorruption. It should rayther
be mynded, that Moses speaking of Adams estate in innocency, sayth he was
created after Gods image & likenes: Gen. 1 27 & Gen.  [...] but speaking of
him after his fall, & of his estate then, sayth that he begat a sonne in &
after his own likenes & image, that is sinfull & miserable. It is further
ob­jected, from Rom. 4\. 15. that Where there is no law there is no
transgression, or sin. and agayn from Rom: 5. 13. Math: 13. 9. Neh: 8. 3. that
the law was not gi­ven to Infants, but to them that could vnderstand. I
answer, that the law is eyther given vocally, & in the letter spoken, &
written, & so it is not given to In­fants, no nor to thousands of men, &
woemen in their persons: or written in the heart by creation with the finger
of God: & so all Infants have it gi­ven, as both experience, & also the
Scriptures testify, where they teach that the very Gentiles, to whom it was
never vocally preached,Rom.  [...] 15. shew the effects of it written in their
harts: Vnto the fullfilling of which law all Infants by nature corrupted are
averse, & disposed to all disobedience, even as the whelpes, & cubs of foxes,
& wolves, are disposed to pray, & raven from the first, though they cannot
actually so practise. Besides in Adam the cōmon father of man­kynde all his
posterity (being in his loynes) received, as the Image of God, & Lordship over
the creatures, so the law of God; as † Levi, long before he wasHeb. 7 born,
did in Abrahā his father (in whose loyns he was) pay tithes to Melchizedek.

That all actuall sinners bear the Image of the first Adam in his innocēcy,
fall & resti­tution 21 Co [...]clusion in the offer of grace. 1 Cor: 15. 49. &
so passe vnder this threfold estate, is vn­sound sundry wayes. The great
misinterpreting of the Scripture, I have shew­ed in the last Conclusion: as
also Concl: 18\. that neyther all, nor any of his natu­rally conceived
posterity bear the Image of his innocency: neyther yet all of them in the
offer of grace; though the offer of grace not received, [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=61) is a very naked
Image of restitution. How many thousands never had the Gospell (the onely
meanes of their restitution) offered them? but sinning agaynst the law of
nature written in their harts, & in the creatures, & with­holding that truth
of God in vnrighteousnes, have been given over of God to re­probate myndes, &
so perished in their sins, as the Apostle teacheth; Rom: 1. & 2.

That Adam being faln, God did not hate him, but loved him still, & sought
hisCon­sion. good, Gen: 3\. 8. 15. Neyther doth he hate any man, that falleth
with Adam, but that he loveth mankinde, and from his love sent his onely
begotten sonne into the world, to save that which was lost, Ioh: 3. 16. And
that God never forsaketh the creature till there be no remedy, neyther doth
cast away his innocent creature from allCon­sion. eternity but casteth away
men irrecoverable in sin. Esa: 5. 4. Ezech: 18. 23. 32. & 33\. 11. Luk: 13. 6.
9. And that as there is in all creatures an inclination to their young to do
them good, so in the Lord towards man infinitely: who therefore doth25
[...]nclu­  [...]. not create, or predestinate any to destruction, no more
then a father begets his childe to the gallowes. Ezech: 33. 11. Gen: 1. 21.
15. 49. Gen: 5. 3. must be received with sundry limitations.

For first it is true, that God hateth nothing that he hath made, so far as it
is his worke: but as sin comeing in hath destroyed the worke of God, though
not in respect of the nature, or being, yet of the integrity, & holy being of
the creature; so God, through his vnchangeable holynes, hateing sin, doth also
most fervently hate, & abhor from the sinfull creature, in whom it reigneth,
in respect of it, as the † Scriptures do expressely, & plen­tifully [...]al.
2. 3  [...]l 5. 6. teach. And God loveing himself, & his own holynes in the
first place, & most, and the creature, & his good, but in the second place,
the love of the creature must give way to the love of himself, and so he
necessa­rily [...] 16\. 5  [...]. 1. 16. hate the obstinate sinner. And this
it is most needfull for all men firme­ly to beleve, & continually to bear in
mynde, that they may alwayes be­wayle their sins, & nourish in themselves the
hatred of that, which God so hateth, & for it, the creature; & for which he
punisheth it with most horri­ble curses, & punishments for ever.

And yet even in the very exequution of his most fearefull vengeance vppon the
reprobate, men, & Angels, he retayneth the generall love of a Creatour; & out
of it preserveth the being of the creature, which in it self, & in respect of
the vniversall is better then not to be, though not so in the sence of the
person: & also moderateth the extremity of that torment, which he both could,
& might in iustice inflict.

Secondly though God do love all men even sinning, as he did Adam sinning, yet
not with the same degre of love wherewith he loved him: ney­ther doth he seek
their good, as he did his. When he had sinned, & so fled [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=61) from God, as his
enemy, he notwithstanding followed after him, & for hisGen 3. recovery,
preached vnto him the Gospell of salvation in the seed of the wo­man: and not
onely so, but gave him also an heart to beleve his promise; & repentance, to
turn vnto him: whereas many thousands in the world (even the bodie of the
Gentiles to speake of, before Christ, & how many now?) never had the Gospell
so much as once published vnto them, nor Christ named amongst them, but had, &
have onely the sound, & preachingPsal 14 [...] 19 20. Isa. 52.  [...] Rom. 19
20. 21. of the creatures, & of their naturall consciences (too much corrupt)
by which they were, & are taught, that there is a God, and he the maker &
governour of the world, and Iudge of all persons, & things: and to be
ho­noured, & inquired after, that his will being knowen, he might be
worship­pedAct. 14. 16. accordingly: for the neglect whereof, & the with-
holding of that trueth offered, in vnrighteousnes, they were (& are) given
over of God to reprobate myndes, Psal. 19. 5. & to all vile affections, &
filthy lustes of their own hartes, that so sinning without the law (to wit
which the Iewes had, much more without that clearer revela­tionRom. 1 [...] 10
& chw 1. 1 [...] 19\. 20. &c. chap 12. 14.  [...] 16. of Christ vouchsafed to
many others) they might perish by Gods iudge­ment: much lesse doth God seek
after all for their recovery, as he did after Adam, by giveing them his †
spirit in their hearts, & by it faith, & repentance, to beleve, & to be saved,
as he did him. And for the love of God in sending his sonne into the world to
save that which was lost. Ioh: 3. 16. it is determined in the same place, to
those that beleve on him. But for those that beleve not, but†Mat. 1. 25. & 1
[...] 11. continue in vnbeleif, God did not love them vnto salvation, so as to
give his sonne effectually to redeem them from their sins, of which more
heare­after.Ioh. 3.  [...] 1\. Cor.  [...] 10\. 11. &c.

Secondly it is also true that God doth not cast away his innocent creature nor
hath created or predestinated any man to destruction, to wit eyther remayning
as he created him, or because he would destroy him: and this, some of the
Scriptures, Conclus: 25 do prove, the rest being impertinent: but that GodPhy
1.  [...] 2 Tim. 2 25. hath from eternity decreed the condemnation of some for
sin, forepurpo­sed by him to be suffered, & so foreseene to be wrought by man,
is evident, both by the word of God, as Iude testifyeth of of certain worked
men that they were ordeyned of ould to condemnation: & God is sayd to have
hated Esau, before he was borne: that is to have purposed the hatred of him
for his sin, fore­seene,Iude 3. 4. Mala. 1. 3 Rom 9. 11 13. & forepurposed to
be suffered: and also by the worke of God, in that he doth in tyme, cast away,
& condemn impenitent sinners: forAct. 15. 18. all Gods workes are knowen vnto
him from the begining of the world: and Gods very doing a thing in tyme, is an
vnanswerable proof that he purposed the same thing before tyme, & from
eternity.

And for Gods forsakeing, or leaving a man vnto himself; as he vsually doth it,
for a punishment of former sins, so did he thus leave Adam with­out [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=62) out any such
respect. He could (if he would) eyther have kept him from being tempted, or
have delivered him out of his temptation, by his al­mighty power, & grace, &
the irresistable efficacy of his spirit: but God, for the tryall of the will
of man, & to manifest how weak the most excel­lent creatures are not
dependeing wholy vppon the Creatour, & not seek­ing their good & happynes, by
cleaving vnto him, the cheif, & vnchange­able good: as also to make way to the
further declaration of his mercie, & iustice, did suspend, & withhold from
Adam in his temptation, that effi­cacy of grace, by which he could (if he
would) have established him vnte­sistably vnto perseverance.

So also could God by his alsufficient power (if such his good will were)
recover thousandes, that perish in, & by their sins: otherwise he were not
almighty: not that true, which is sayd of him in the Psalm, He doth
whatsoe­ver Ps. 115. 3 pleaseth him. Besides, it should els sollow, that sin,
& Sathan were stron­ger then he: & which he could not possibly defeat, &
withstand: which is, as impossible, as that God should not be God. He is able
by his almightyLuk. 3. 8. power, if such his good pleasure be to rayse of the
very stones children vnto Abraham: and by takeing away the stony heart, to
geve an heart of fi [...]sh, tenderEzech. 11 19. & sensible, & to write in it,
his will, & law.

And what the Lords power is, in remedying, & recovering of most despe­rate
sinners, may be seen in some particulars. In the recovery of Manasseh 2 King
21 12. 16. an hortible, & apostate Idolatour, a vile sorcerer, & witch, & most
cruell murtherer, filling the streetes with innocent blood: of Mary Magdelen
possessedwhich 2 Chro 33. 12 13 &c. 1 Tim  [...]. 13. with 7 Divels: & of
Saul, a persequuter, blasphemer, & oppressour, & that when the fyre of most
violent persequution burned hottest in his brest: causing him to breath out of
his mouth threatnings, & slaughter, as smoake, Act. 9 1. And since all men are
by nature children of wrath, & dead in sins, so that they who are the Lords,
have new life put into them, yea are borne, yea whichEph 2. 2. is more,
created anew, it sheweth, that the whole being, & life of the spi­rituall man,
with all the motions, & inclinations thereof, are of Gods spe­ciall &
supernaturall grace; as also that though men in themselves be vtter­ly
remedilesse, & irrecoverable, yet are they by Gods grace, & power
reco­verable, if such his good will be.

The Scriptures Isa: 5. 4. Ezech: 18. 23. & 33\. Luk: 13. 6. 9. speak of the
Lords dealing with his Church in the outward ministery of the word, & other
common motives to repentance: as is also further manifest Math: 21. 33. 34.
&c. & so are neyther to be vnderstood (as here they are) of the Lords dealing
with all men, nor at all of the vttermost effica­cy of his spirit, when he
pleaseth to worke by it what he can for the recove­ry of sinners.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=62) Lastly
touching the similitude brought from a naturall father, I must vse two
limitations: the former that a naturall father would not suffer his sonne to
come to the gallowes, or desert thereof, if he could possibly in his vt­most
power hinder it: he would rather wish not to beget him at all, or that he
might never be born: but so is it notwith God, who both willing­ly produceth,
& preserveth the creature, whom he purposeth to destroy for sin, which he
foreseeth the creature will work, & suffereth him to fall into, though he
could (would he vse the vtmost of his power,) hinder both the sin, &
punishment. And 2dly, the hanging of the childe is no way to the honour of his
naturall father, but to his greif, & shame every way:Prov. 10. 20. but on the
contrary, the destruction of the wicked for their sins is to the great glorie
of the iustice of the Creatour, which then it should not be ma­gnifyed, better
all men & Angels perish.

Touching this Conclusion, God hath not onely determined before the 26
Con­clus. world, that the way of salvation shalbe by Christ: and foreseen who
would follow it, (as they teach) but hath also determined in particular, whom
he would effectually call to the participation of that grace: which being his
own worke in tyme, he hath therefore purposed before tyme. It is he thatMath.
11. 26. revea­leth this way vnto man from heaven: which flesh & blood cannot
do: who also mustEph. 1 [...] 5 [...] 9\. 1 [...] Rom 9. 11. 15. drew them,
who come vnto it. And this he doth first by sending his Gospell of Salvation
to such, as are his (in his decre) Act: 13. 47. 48. & Ch: 18. 9. 10. then by
opening the heart (as of Ldia) to listen vnto it. Act: 16. 4. & so workeing in
their hearts by his spirit to beleev & obay it, he perfecteth their happynes
in glory. Rom: 8. 30. 31. So that God foreseeth that such, & such will beleve,
& chuse the way of life, because he forepurposeth to give them this grace,
knowledg, will, & power to beleve, & to chuse the good way: & all this of his
good & gracious pleasure towards them, on whom he will shew mercie. And this
the places brought by those men. Eph: 1. 4. 5. 2. Tim: 1. 9. do most directly
prove: so also doth Iude, 4. expressely teach, not that God foresaw who would
follow the way of infidelity & impenitency, for which they alleadg it: but
whom God hath foreordeyned to condemnation for their wickednes. The
Scriptures, then do no where prove any such idle foresight in God, as is
imagined by these men, & others: as if God were in truth, but a
progno­sticator, & reader of mens destinyes: who could onely fortell, what
should be done by, & become of these, & these men.

Touching 27th Conclus: That as God created all men according to his Image, so
hath he redemed, all that fall by actuall sin, to the same end: & that God in
his redemption Concl. 27, 28, hath not swarved from his mercy, which he
manifested in his creation: & that part of Concl: 28. where it is sayd, that
God in his love to his enemies gave Christ to dy, & so bought them that deny
him; sundry things are to be observed.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=63) And
first, that God did not manifest any mercy, but onely goodnes, inANS. the
creation: for mercy presupposeth misery in him towards whom it is shewed.
Secondly it is no swarving at all of Gods goodnes, if he extend not the grace
of redemption to as many as he did the grace of creation: for then Christ
should have redeemed the Angels, (who were partakers of a greater grace of
creation:) which he in no sorte did. And if God, did inHeb. 2. 16. iustice
paste by the Angels that sinned: might he not in the same iustice have passed
by men also? And if he might in iustice have passed by all, (where he could
not in iustice, nor possibly create one man vnjust) as no man will deny but
our redemption by Christ, was a worke of Gods mercy, & not of his iustice) is
it injustice in him to passe by some, who also on their parte take pleasure in
vntighteousnes, & to continue in their estate of impenitency, & vnbeleef,
loveing darkenes more then light, because then workes are evill?

Of the Scriptures brought: first, that of Ioh: 1. 3. shewes that by Christ, to
wit, as God, all things were made, or created, which is nothing to the present
matter. And where vers: 16. he sayth, of his fulnes we all have re­ceived, &
grace, for grace, he speaks not of all men, but onely of all those, who
receive Christ, & beleve in his name, as vers: 12\. & are borne of God. vers:
13\. So 2. Cor: 5. 19. by the world which God reconciled to himself in Christ,
are not meant all that actually sin, but such as by the word of reconciliation
preached vnto them, & beleeved by them, have their sins forgeven them.

By all men 1\. Tim: 2. 6. is meant all sortes of men, as well Kings, &
Ma­gistrates, whom, because they were for the present, persequutours of the
Saints, it seems some thought they were not to pray for, as for others, vers.
1\. he exhorts to pray for all men: & vers: 2\. he shewes his meaning to be
for all sorts, as Kings, & them in autority vnder them, whom vers: 4\. he
sayth God would have saved as well as others: as for whom Christ dyed, & so
redeemed them, as well as others. Of Ezech: 33. I have spoken formerly, as
also of Ioh: 16.

By the enemyes spoken of Rom: 5. 10. are meant onely such, as are in tyme
actually reconciled to God, & saved: as appears plainly, if the place be well
considered; whom God is sayd to love, & that not which the com­mon love of a
Creatour towards the creature, but with the love of a Rede­mer, in respect of
his decre of love, (& not of the actuall application of it) as he is sayd to
have loved Iacob, & hated Esau, before they were borne: Actually he did not
hate, or love the one, or other, neyther doth or can God love actually wicked
men so remayning Psal: 5. 5. 6. Lastly Christ is sayd. 2. Pet: 2. 2. to have
bought those deceaveers, in respect of the former profession of ho­lynes,
which they made: by which in the judgement of Charity, they were [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=63) so esteemed: as
appears evidently in Iude, who speaking of the same per­sons sayth vers: 3\.
they were vngodly men crept into the Church.

Now for Christs Redemption, it must be knowen, that the word  [...]
Redemption, vsed in the Scriptures, is borrowed from the custome of freeing
prisoners, taken in war, from death, or bondage, by paying a iust price, or
ransom for them. And so to affirm that Christ hath reaeemed all that fall by
actuall sin, is to affirm, that he hath payed a price to the iustice of God,
for all such, & freed them from the guilt, & bondage of sin, & Sathan: & so
consequently, that all who have sinned actually, have fayth, & repen­tance:
without which they cannot have forgivenes of sins, nor freedom from the
bondage, & guilt thereof. It is confessed (& truely) Conclus: 35. That the
efficacy of Christs death is onely derived to thē which mortify their sins,
&c.Ioh. 3. Act. 10 43. 2. Cor. 17. and therein directly graunted that Christs
death is not effectuall for all mē: and that it is in it self sufficient for
all, (being the death of him that was God, Act: 20. 28.) we acknowledg: as
also that no particular person (not haveing sinned agaynst the holy Ghost) can
be excluded eyther by himself, or vs, from the number of them, for whom Christ
dyed. It were agaynst fayth to pray that God would save all the men, that are,
& shalbe in the world to the end thereof: but love teacheth me to pray for any
person par­ticularly, vppon occasion.

Now for that these men alledg Rom: 5\. to prove that Christ redeemed all who
sin actually: and Mr Helw: & others much insist vppon the same place, to prove
that he redeemed all, who sinne in Adam: and so would have a fre­will though
not by nature, which they dislike, but by grace given to all: as if Turkes,
and Pagans, and all the wicked world were in Christ, and so free from
condemnation Rom: 8. 1. and they who had crucifyed the flesh and the lusts
thereof: Gal: 4. 24. which they must be, before they can be partakers of the
grace of God through Christ, or of any frewill through him: Ioh: 15\. 5. I
will playnly, and briefly prove (the Lord assisting me) that the Apostle
intends neyther the one, nor the other, but the contrary.

The Apostles meaning there is to shew the priviledges of the faythfull: that
notwithstanding all their afflictions, They have peace with God: accesse vers.
2. 3 [...] vnto his grace and hope of glorie. having by fayth assurance of the
love of God shed into their hearts by the holy Ghost. This love of God he
confirmeth vnto them, by the work of their redemption: and proveth that since
out of the love of God, Christ dyed for them when they were sinners, &
instifyed them by his vers. 1.  [...] blood, much more should they be saved
from wrath through him, and that if when vers. 10 they were enemyes, they were
reconciled to God by the death of his sonne, much more be­ing reconciled they
should be saved by his lyfe: and agayne, That they who had re­ceived vers. 17
that abundance of grace, & gift of righteouses, should reigne in lyse by Iesus
[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=64) Christ:
and in the last place, that, that Grace should reign through righteous­nes
vnto eternall lyfe by Iesus Christ our Lord. Which grace he also amplyfieth,
and confirmeth by comparing Christ as the 2d Adam, with the first Adam:
teaching that both the one, & the other did, & do propagate to all theirs,
what theirs was: the first Adam, sin, & death to all comeing of him
natu­rally: the 2d Adam Christ, righteousnes, & eternall lyfe to all that are
in him spiritually, & for whom he died. The meaning thē of the Apostle seems
vnto me plainly to be this: that for whomsoever Christ did indeed and
ef­fectually dy, they should certainly be saved: & that whomsoever God did
reconcile by his death, he will much more save by his lyfe, notwithstand­ing
their afflictions & all other the enemyes of their salvation: & so to be the
same in effect with that which the same Apostle hath Rom: 8. 28. that all
things shall worke together for the best vnto them that love God even vnto
them who are called of purpose: & that those who are predestmate are also
called, & iustifyed, & glorifyed: & vers: 32. 39. that to them, for whom God
hath not spa­red to give his sonne, he will give all things with him: and so
victorie over sin, & Sathan, & their own flesh, with all temptations, so as
nothing shall separate them from the love of God.

From Rom: 5 then, may be more truely (& I am persuaded vndeniably.) concluded,
these two things. 1. that Christ did not effectually dy for, or re­concile by
his death all men in particular: for then all should be saved by his lyfe: &
2dly, that whomsoever he so died for, & effectually reconciled, they shall be
kept by the power of God, & of his grace, vnto eternall lyfe: yea He that
beleveth in the sonne, sayth Iohn Baptist, hath eternall lyfe: & drinke­ing
[...]. 3. 36.  [...]. 4. 14 once of the water which Christ giveth, he shall
never thrist agayn, but it shall be in him a well of water, springing vp to
eternall lyfe. A wellspring (we know) is never wholy dry, though a ditch be:
as it is also one thing to drink of this water of lyfe: and another thing
onely to tast of it: which they that do, may fall [...]eb. 6. 4. 6. away, as
never haveing had their thirst indeed quenched in them, nor ha­veing drunk in
the rayn of grace, as vers: 7\. And it is well to be observed by vs, how
carefully the Holy Ghost in this, & in other places, pre­venteth both the
offence at, & errour about mens falling away from their holy profession.

We read of some in the parable of the sower who receiv the seed of the word
with ioy, & in whom it hath also got some kyndeof growth, and yet theyMath. 13
[...]5\. 7. & [...]. 21. 22  [...]. 23. come to nothing: but we fynde in the
same place, that the soyl of those mens hearts, was never indeed good: but at
the best, as stony & thorny ground: But the seed sowen in the good ground
indeed, decayes not, but growes vp, and is fruitfull to the harvest.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=64) So Paul
2. Tim. 2\. sheweth that some there are, who have their fayth vers. 1. 19. 20
destroyed by heresyes, & evill lyfe: but he geves vs to vnderstand in the same
place, that these men were never indeed vnder the seal of Gods election, nor
knowen of him, nor vessels of honour, of silver, & of gould.

The Apostle Peter likewise speaketh of some, who denyed the Lord2\. Pet. that
bought them, to wit, being iudged by their former profession, but in the same
place he shewes that the same persons were but indeed dogs and swine, at the
best, though outwardly washed, and disburdened of such sins,vers.  [...] as
clogged their Consciences, as is the dog by vomiting of his surchargure. And
Iude vers. 4\. speaking of those verie men expressely chargeth them, but to
have crept in, at the first, &c.

Lastly Iohn speakeing of many Anti-Christs who went out from the true1\. Ioh.
18. 19. Church and Christians, sayth plainly that they were not of them, that
is not of the number of Gods truely annoynted ones: and that by their not
con­tinueing with them it appeared, they were never of them. For they that are
borne of God cannot commit sin, because the seed of Gods word abydeth in them,
as it followeth in same Epistle: Chap: 3\. 9. and thus much in effect these
men confesse, when they teach (as the truth is & Scripture proveth) Concl: 47.
That the regenerate man shalbe a piller in the house of God, & shall goe no
Rev. 3. more out. And if men truely iustifyed, & sanctifyed should wholy fall
away, they could not possiby be recovered, but were as trees twice dead, and
soIude 1 [...] to be plucked vp by the roots: neyther can there be two new
birthes, any more then two first birthes: and if there might, then must there
be also an answerable repeating of Baptism, which is the lavacher of the new
Tit. 3. birth.

To conclude this poynt  [...] they who eyther hould that Christ ef­fectually
redeemed all from their naturall corruption, or that any truely iustifyed, and
sanctifyed, may wholy fall away and perish, do devide Christ from himself, and
make him a party Saviour: and a Preist for some to redeem them by his death,
to whom he is not a King to save them by his lyfe: & a Saviour in parte to the
very dam­ned at the last day: freeing all of them from the guilt of their
origi­nall sin: and many of them, even from one part of their actuall sins,
namely, so much as they wrought, before the tyme of their falling away, but
not from the rest. Which how vayn a thing it is to imagine, and how
derogatorie to the excellency, & perfection of Christs sacri­fice, and
mediation, needs not be shewed. All who have any parte in Christ, are in
Christ, & so free from condemnation: & vnto whomsoever heRom. 8 shall appear a
Saviour they are his people & he shall save them from all their sins, & not
from some part of them onely.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=65) That the
sacrifice of Christs bodie, & blood offered vnto God his father vppon the
crosse, though a sacrifice of sweet savour, & that God be well pleased in him,
doth not reconcile God vnto vs, who did never hate vs, nor was our enemy, but
reconcileth vs vnto God, 2\. Cor. 5. 19. & slayeth the enmitie, & hatred,
which is in vs agaynst God, Eph. 2. 14. 16. Rom. 1. 30. is most vntrue, and
indeed a very pernitious do­ctrine, destroying the mayn fruit of Christs
sacrifice, & death.

As one of the Scriptures quoted, which is Rom. 1. 30. speakes of wicked mens
hateing of God, so are the rest meant of Gods hatred towards wic­ked men:
which they also fully prove. And if the sacrifice of Christs bodie, & blood
vppon the crosse were a sweet smelling savour vnto his father, is it not
evident that we did formerly stinck in Gods nostrils by reason of our sins?
Where he gave himself a sacrifice for vs, was it not to appease the fa­thers
wrath towards vs? In which respect he is sayd to be our propitiation, Ioh. 2.
[...]2. & advocate if we sin: being as our eternall high priest (sprinkled
with the blood of his crosse) entered the most holy place, the heavens, &
there ap­pearing continually to pacify the wrath of his father, & to procure
for vs all grace. Who also to redeem vs from the curse of the law vnder which
we, with all [...]ll. 3 10 Cor. 6.  [...]. flesh, were, was made a curse for
vs: paying a price for vs to satisfy the iustice of his father. And if God be
well pleased in him, doth it not follow that he is displeased without him? So
by the reconciliation of the world vnto God through Christ. 2\. Cor. 5. 19. is
not meant our laying aside of hatred, & enemitie [...]ath. 3.  [...]. agaynst
God (though that follow vppon the other) but the takeing away of his hatred &
enmitie towards vs, as is evident in that the Apostle in the for­mer verse
placeth this reconciliation in Gods not imputing our sins vnto vs: the end of
his exhortation vers: 20. being to provoke vs to the growth of fayth for the
applying of the same. Neyther speaketh he Eph: 2 of the slay­ing of the
enemitie & hatred in vs agaynst God, as is sayd: but first of the slaying of
the hatred betweē Iewes, and Gentils, by breaking down the partition wall of
Ceremonies: and 2dly, & more principally, of slaying the hatred wherewith God
hated both, for sin, being the one, & other by nature children of wrath vers:
3. that is vnder the wrath of God, as their deserved inheritance. So that the
chief, & first work of our redemption by Christ is the freeing of vs from the
guilt of sin, & most fearefull wrath of God, by paying the price of his
pretious blood for a ransom to the iustice of his father, thereby pro­curing
him of a most severe, & fearefull Iudg to become vnto vs a gracious father,
and to love vs vnto life: which love of his being shed into our hearts by the
holy Ghost, & we being thereof persuaded, doth effectually allure vs to love
him agayn, who hath so loved vs in his sonne.

Now whereas in Conclus: 57. & so foreward many things concerning56\. 57.
Conclu­sion. fayth, repentance, the regenerate man, & new creature: are set
down both vnsound­ly [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=65) & vnorderly. I
thinke it best breifly to note down in the first place, the trueth, & order of
those things: & so to compare therewith the particu­lars in the confession.

This worke of grace then in the generall God beginneth ordinarily by the
Ministerie of his word, & first of the law: which (through mans inabi­litie to
keep it) convinceth, & condemneth him, & so leaves him vnderRom 8. 3. & Chap.
7. 7. Gal. 3. 1 [...] Gods curse: from whence also aryseth in the minde a
servile fear of God, & his iudgments, with greif & sorrow in respect thereof,
which is com­monly called legall repentance, or (better) penitency, & so a
dispayting of all remedie in a mans self. Then cometh the Gospell of glad
tydinges, offe­ring gace, & mercie vnto those who being weary & heavy laden do
come vnto Math 1. 28. Act 13. 48. 2 Cor 3 2. Cor. 2. 10. 11. 1 [...] &c.
Christ for ease, & rest, by beleveing in him; which so many do as are ordeyned
of God to eternall lyfe: God with & by the same Gospell Ministring, &
convey­ing the graces of his spirit into the heart, (by which a man becomes of
a naturall man, a spirituall man) and of these graces first, & principally
fayth, by which Christ is received. Ioh: 1. 12. and the lyfe of grace begun,
as Paul testifyeth. Gal: 2. 20. that he lyved by fayth in the sonne of God.
From which fayth, and assurance of the forgivenes of sins, and so great love
of God shed into the heart of a miserable sinner, ariseth, by reflexion, as it
were, a love agayn towards God, & from this love, a godly sorrow for sin
wroughtLuk  [...] 4 2. Cor.  [...] 10. agaynst so good a God: and from this
sorrow, true repentance, and the turn­ing of the heart from evill to good,
with an hatred, feare, and earnest en­devour to avoyd sin in respect of Gods
mercy: as on the contrary a love, desire, & constant endeavour of and vnto
whatsoever pleaseth him. Now allPs 103. 4 [...] & 130\.  [...] 1 Cor. 1 [...]
4. these, and all other truely spirituall graces, howsoever wrought by that
one Spirit, and at one tyme, yet are in the order of nature, & manifestation,
one before another, & so fayth the cause of the rest.

Where then it is sayd Conclus: 56. that the new creature followeth
repen­tance, it is not so in trueth (nor the Scripture brought which is Luk:
3. 6. any thing pertinent) though to our sence, and manifestation, it seeme so
to be. For this repentance is a worke of man immediatly (though for­merly
wrought in him of God: 2. Tim: 2. 25.) & so followeth the worke2\. Cor. 7
[...] 10. of our regeneration, or recreation, which is Gods work. Repentance
arisethMath. 7. 18. from a godly sorrow which can onely be in a godly man, as
a fruit of a good tree: and this godly man (all being vngodly by nature) must
be a new creature, or regenerate of God: though for the perfiting of our new
crea­ture, and till the ould man be wholy crucifyed, repentance be required,
as a cause, or meanes thereof. So neyther doth repentance go before fayth,
as58 Con­clus. Heb. 11.  [...] Act. 15.  [...] it is put Conclus: 58. but
followeth it as a fruit thereof: without which no man can please God; and so
not repent aright: our repentance arising from a [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=66) sorrow for the
offending of God, this sorrow from the knowledg of his love towards vs, which
is faith: which faith purifieth the heart, & is the begin­ingAct. 15. 9. of
all spirituall lyfe in vs, as I have formerly proved.

That man (viz. naturall) hath power to reiect the motions of Gods spirit, (as
is affirmed) I acknowledg, and the two Scriptures Math: 23. 37. Act: 7. 51.
besides woefull experience, prove it: but deny, that he hath power to receav
these motions, till God by the supernaturall gift of grace open his eyes, and
change his will therevnto, as hath formerly been proved in the 18. Conclus:
The 3d Scripture which is Acts 6. 10. speakes of no such thing, but onely
shewes how mightely Steven confuted his adversaries in disputation.

The last place which is Rom: 10. 14. sheweth that none can beleve without
preaching: & vers: 18. that the Gentiles had God preached vnto them from the
beginning, by the sound of the creatures, as Psal: 19. 5. neyther can more be
thence proved. Lastly in the 58th Conclusion, the new creature is ill, and
daungerously made a parte of our iustification before God, Rom 3.  [...]4\.
25.  [...]8. which the Scriptures do ascribe onely to faith: and the free
grace of God, through that redemption that is in Christ Iesus. Our redemption
then, or in­stification properly taken, is in Christ, & not in our selves, as
it should be, if it stood in our sanctification, or the new creature, which is
affirmed. Our sanctification, or renovation is an inseparable work of that
fayth by which we are iustifyed, Act: 15. 9. but doth not answer the rigour of
Gods iustice, nor can present vs innocent, before his iudgement seat, be­ing
imperfect in this world, by reason of the roote of sin yet abyding in vs,
which we can not pluck vp out of our hearts, as is confessed Proposition 67.
though els where denyed. That onely the righteousnes of Christ can do, being
imputed by grace, and by fayth receaved: Who was made sin for vs, [...]. Cor.
5.  [...]1. that we might be made the righteousnes of God in him. Now as
Christ became sin for vs, not by haveing our sin dwelling in him, but imputed
vnto him, so we become the righteousnes of God (that is perfectly righteouse
be­fore God) by his righteousnes imputed to vs, and not by that which dwelleth
in vs: which was also livelily figured in, and is effectually pro­ved by the
sacrifices vnder the law, by the offering whereof, as the vn­clean person, or
he that had sinned, was legally cleansed, and purifyed, and his sin forgeven:
so by the merit, and purity of that one oblation ofLevit. 5. 10. 13. 16 18.
Christ offered once for all, and applyed by fayth, are we cleansed from the
guilt of sin, & reconciled to God for ever.Ch [...]p. 12.  [...].

That God doth not in our regeneration vse the helpe of any creature, nor doth
it by the doctrine of faith & repentance, but immediatly in the soule, is an
ould59\. Con­clusion. errour of the Anabaptists condemned expressely by the
Scriptures brought [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=66) to iustify it.
The first whereof is Iam: 1. 15. where God is sayd to have begotten vs by the
word of truth: which word therefore we are to be swift to hear. vers: 19.
which is els where called good seed, and the word of life. which word even
that which was preached by the Apostles. vers: 25. is al­soMath. 13 3. called
1. Pet: 1. 23. the immortall seed, which falling in good ground neverPh. 2. 15
Mat. 13 [...] 8\. 23. perisheth, but bringeth forth fruit to eternall lyfe.

Not to trouble the Reader with many Scriptures for the proufe of that which
every regenerate mans experience doth confirm, the Apostle calling him self
the father of the Corinthians, who had in Iesus Christ begot them by the 1\.
Cor. 4. 15. gospell, and them his children in the same respect vers: 14. and
Onesimus his sonne, whom he begot in his bonds: and Titus his naturall sonne,
according to the Phil. 10. Tit. 1. 3. Common faith, expressely teacheth the
vse of mans ministerie for the regene­ration of the elect, & ministration of
the spirit of lyfe. 2. Cor: 3. 6.

Alike, if not more deceiptfull, and daungerous is that other Propo­sition.

That the new Creature, which is begotten of God, needeth not the outward
scriptures, creatures, or ordinances of the Church to support him, but is
above60 61 62 63 Concl. them. 1. Cor: 13. 10. 1. Ioh: 2\. 27. seing he hath in
him self 3. witnesses, the Father, the Word, & the Holy Ghost, which are
better then all scriptures, or creatures, though such as have not atteyned the
new Creature need them, for instruction, comfort; & to stir them vp, &c. 2.
Pet: 1. 19. 1. Cor: 11. 26. Eph: 4\. 12. 13.

Let the Scriptures brought be judge, and they will plead theyr own dignitie
agaynst them, by whom they are thus vilely debased. In 2. Pet: 1. 19. The
Apostle doth not compare the inward spirit with the outward Scriptures, but
the Scriptures with themselves, the writings of the Pro­phets, which he
compares to a light shineing in a darke place, vnto the writinges, and
preachinges of the Apostles, which revealing Christ come in the flesh, he
compares to the dawning day, and morning star. Besides even they whom Peter
exhorts to attend vppon the Scriptures, had ob­teyned the new Creature: as
haveing obteyned the same pretious faith with Pe­ter, and all things b
[...]nging to lyfe, & godlynes by the divyne power: who are2\. Pet. 1.  [...]
3. also expressely sayd to be regenerate vnto a lovely hope. 1 Epis: 1. 3. &
vers: 23. to be borne anew, by the immortall seed, the word of God. So were
the Co­rinthians also borne anew, in that they were (though but) Babes in
Christ, 1\. Cor. 3. 1. and having much flesh yet abyding in them: who were to
vse the Lords Supper, to shew forth his death till he came, that is till his
generall come­ingPhil 1. 6. 1. Thess. 5 2. to judgement, or speciall, at their
death. 1. Cor: 11. 26. which is the 2 d Scripture.Act. 1. 11 Revel.  [...].
15.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=67) So for
the 3d Scripture: Eph. 4. 12. 13. the Apostles meaning is not that the godly
should have no further need of the Ministerie for their edi­fication, when
they were come to a perfit man, as there he speakes, that is when they ceased
to be as children, wavering mynded, & caryed about with every wind of
doctrine, but that they should so vse it, as thereby to bring them to that
per­fit, & manly estate, and therein to establish them. Neither doth the
par­ticle Vntill importe a ceasing of the vse of the Ministerie when men
become perfit, and growen past that childish waveringnes there reproved, but a
not ceasing before then: as it is also vsed sundry tymes in the Scriptures,
as, 1. Tim. 4. 13. Revel, 2. 25. & els where.

In 1. Cor. 13. 10. 12. the Apostle doth not speak of the estate of per­fection
[...]ers. 8. 9.  [...]0\. 11. in this lyfe, but in that to come, when the
measure of our knowledg shalbe perfit, which is now but in parte, and but as a
childes in comparison of a mans: as it shall also be immediate, & we see God
face to face: when there shallbe no vse of the glasse of the word, and
ordinances, when prophecying & tounges shall cease, yea when even fayth, &
hope shall cease: (the things belee­ved & hoped for being fully attayned) &
onely love shall abyde, which is therefore called the greatest of the three
vers. 13.

The Apostles meaning also 1. Ioh. 2. 27. is greatly mistaken: which is not
that the anoynting, or spirit which they had received, set them above the
Scriptures, and all outward teachings: but that he needed not teach them, as
ignorant of these things, which by that anoynting, or spirit, were sealed vp
vnto their Consciences: as where Paul tels the Thessal: that he needs not
wryte vnto them of brotherly love, because they were taught of God one to love
another, [...]. Thes. 4. 9. his meaning onely is, that they were not without
that grace, but did prac­tise it: yet doth he in the very same place vers: 10.
exhort them to encrease more & more. So doth Iohn also write that his Epistle
to teach and admonish those anoynted ones to beware of false Prophets & Anti-
Christs of whom they were in danger, as of other evilles.

Two other Scriptures are intended, but so misput, as I can not fynde which
they are, and therefore passe them by; being also assured they can geve no
confirmation to this vayn presumption deceaving vnder a shew of Angelicall
perfection.

The reason to prove the Scriptures vnnecessarie from the inward witnes of the
Father, Word, & Spirit, is verie deceitfull: since the inward grace doth not
abolish but establish the outward meanes, by which it is wrought, & encreased.
David had this witnesse in his heart (being a man after Gods heart) and was
regenerate, and yet he desires God to teach him the way of his Psal. 119. 33.
vers. 18.  [...] 16. statutes: and that he would open his eyes that he might
see the marvayles of his law: which he professes he will not forget. And being
driven from the Taber­nacle, [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=67) & visible
ordinances of God: how did he bewayl his want, & mise­ry? Far was he from this
imagined spirituality. The Apostle calles the Gospell the power of God to
salvation: and exhorts Timothy to continue in it, to theRom. 1. 17. saveing of
himself & others: by the Ministerie whereof, he also laboured to present the
Corinthians a pure Virgin vnto Christ. All which places prove the
ne­cessary1\. Tim 16. vse of it till death, even for the most perfit.2\. Cor
2.

And see whether these things lead. The naturall, vnregenerate, and
vn­sanctifyed man, can have no right vse of the Gospell, and holie things:
and1\. Cor. 14. the spirituall, regenerate, and new creature, needes them not.
To whom then are they geven: or by whom can they be rightly vsed? And
beholdTit. 1. 1 [...] here, the malice, and craft of the Divell, who assayling
Gods people con­tinually with his temptations: from which, Peter, and Paul
were not free, noLuk. 2 31. nor Christ himself, who was tempted in all poynts,
like as we are, but without sin, would yet persuade them, they had no need of
their spirituall armor, in spe­ciall,2\. Cor. 7. of the sword of the spirit,
the word of God: whereof evē Christ himself also in his temptations had vse,
yea need, to drive away Sathan, as he had need ofHeb. 4. Eph 6 Matth 1. 4. 7.
1. Ioh. 4. meat and drink to drive away hunger, and thrist: though he could by
his divyne power have resisted both, without meanes. Our victorie sayth Iohn
is our faith: and the foundation of our fayth, are the writings of the
Apostles, & Prophets: & is the foundation of no vse for the standing of the
building? or will not the enemy of our salvation easily overthrow the
building, whenEph. 2 he hath vndermyned the foundation?

Ad to these things, that the Scriptures, the law & gospell shalbe the Iudg of
all, to whom they come. And is any man above his iudge? or if this beRom
[...] 12\. 16. 2. Thes 2. 4. 1. Pet. 18. not, what is it for man to exalt
himself above all that is called God?

Lastly the regenerate are continually to grow in grace, & for that end to
de­sire the sincere milk of the word to grow thereby. 1\. Pet. 2. 2.

But lo here another mischeif: the perswasion of perfection in holynes; which
these men would also have vs think Mr Smith had attayned, a litle before his
death. And it made well for the credit of the doctrine, that he did not
survive: for then the imperfections of his lyfe, would have disco­vered the
errour of the doctrine. Yea verely if this were his fayth here published, it
is too evident how far he was from perfection. And for the help of those who
are in danger of this great, & deep seduction, I will here insert a few things
touching perfection.

And first we acknowledg all the faythfull perfit, and that perfitly, by
Christs perfit obedience, and righteousnes imputed vnto them for their
iustification: for † by one oblation he hath perfited or consecrated for ever
them that are sanctifyed. 2dly, we acknowledg in them an inherent perfection
ofHeb. 1 [...] 14. righteousnes, and holines, which is their sinceritie,
integritie, & vpright­nes [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=68) of heart in all
things before God: vsually called the perfection of par­tes: as a childe,
though new born is a perfit man in all the parts: & thus Iames sayth that, he
who sins not in word, is a perfit man, that is, he is able to bridle all the
body. And this commendation the Scriptures give of men, notwith­standing
[...]. 2. 3. their frayltyes, that are not hypocrites, & hollow harted:
theKing.  [...]. 14.  [...]. 1. whole man being sanctifyed, though not wholy.
3dly, we acknowledg also in some men a perfection in degre, not absolute, but
in comparison of others, though godly: and that, whereas some are but as
children, and babes in grace, others are as grown, and perfit men in
comparison, both for know­ledg, stablenes of fayth, and all grace. Which two
sorts of men are vsually opposed as strong, and weak, in the Scriptures: vnto
which perfection all [...]eb. 5. 12 3. 14.  [...]h 4. 1 [...] [...] 13\.
[...]hil. 3. 15  [...] 15\. 1 must strive to attayn, & not continue alwayes
children, & babes, which is both shamefull & dangerous.

But for any such perfection in this world, as wherein a man stands not need
continually to renue his repentance, and to purg him self of the rem­nants of
sin, casting of the ould man, and putting on the new man, and to grow in the
knowledg, and grace of God by the vse of the Scriptures, and other Gods
ordinances leading thereunto, it is none other but a most daunge­rous delusion
of that Prince of darknes transforming himself into an Angel of light.

And to let passe the common infirmities, yea (by occasion) the greater falles
(noted in the Scriptures) of those holy men, of whose perfection the same
Scriptures testify: as also the dayly, monthly, & yearely sacrifices
or­dinarily to be offered of ould, for all & every one of the congregation, as
evidences of their guilt, Solomon teacheth. 1. King. 8. 46. that there is us
man, that sinneth not; according to which is that in the preacher. Ch: 7. 20.
There is not a wise man vppon earth that doth good, & sinneth not. And who can
sayrev. 20. (sayth the wise man) I have made my heart clean, I am clean from
my sin? And if any man do say that he hath no sin, be deceaveth himself, &
there is no truth in [...]Ioh. 1. 8  [...]h. 3 6. vers. 4. 8. him. For though
he who is born of God sinneth not, that is commits not, or wor­kes not sin,
makeing it his course, & trade, as it were, which onely he doth, who is of the
Devill, yet puts Iohn himself in the number of them, who can not say without
lying, that they sin not. Thus David acknowledgeth in ge­nerall, [...]sal. 19.
3. that no man can know his errours, & so doth pray to be freed from secret
saultes: & so doth the Apostle professe of himself in particular that he is
not per­fect: but onely followes after, & presses hard toward the mark: & how
ever in that [...]hil 3.  [...]. 13.  [...]eb. 12. 1  [...]om. 7. his race, he
was so cūbred with that his clogging, & pressing sin, as that like a law it
forced him both from the good which he would have done, & to the evill which
he would not have done, & that when he would have done well, evill was present
with him: though in his inward man, that is, so far as he was regenerate
(which was far beyond any now) he delighted in the law of God, & served it.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=68) Lastly,
if any in this lyfe come to the perfection of leaveing sinning, they must also
leav praying, & so leav being Christs Disciples; for he hath taught all his
Disciples every Day to aske the forgivenes of their trespasses: yea they must
be past being Godly: for, for this (because God is mercifull in forgeving
sins)Matt.  [...]. 12. Every godly man shall pray vnto him in an acceptable
tyme. And lastly they must be past hope of Christs comeing in glorie: for
every one that hath this hope in Psal. 32 him, purgeth himself, as he is pure.
So long therefore as we are absent from1\. Ioh. 3. Christ, & till our glorie
in him appear, we must still be purging our selves: which if the filth of sin
were not still in vs, lesse, or more, we need not be: as we must also grow in
grace, & edify our selves in our most holy faith, being (as we are from the
truth) so far from the vaine presumption of any such per­fection, as is by
these men intended.

That the outward, or visible Church consists of penitent persons, & beleeving
onely (opposing them to impenitent and vnbeleevers) and that such one­ly64 71
Concl. are to be baptized, I acknowledg, and the Scriptures brought confirm:
but deny it, opposing beleevers to their infants, which are neyther
vnbe­leevers & impenitent, nor innocent, as is affirmed. The Vineyard, and
Kingdom which was taken from the Iewes, is let out, and geven to vs,Mat. 2
[...] 43. in which though no bryars, nor brambles, nor fruitlesse trees might
grow, yet young plants, and impes, not yet bringing forth fruit actual­ly,
both might, and may: as children might and may be in Gods King­dom, though no
rebels.

In Conclusion 65 the visible Church, is vnfitly called, a figure of the
invi­sible; 65 Conclus. as is the invisible vntruely sayd to consist onely of
the spirits of iust, & per­fit men. He who hath in him true fayth, and
holines, is a member of the invisible Church, and the same person makeing holy
profession thereof outwardly, in the order left by Christ, a member of the
visible Church: and the whole man of both, (and not the soul of the one, and
bodie of the other:) though of the invisible in respect of the inward fayth
seen of God: and of the visible in respect of the outward manifestation before
men, ariseing from the former. The Scriptures brought which are Revel: 1. 10.
with Chap. 21. 2. 13. 27. speak of the visible Church onely, & so are
impertinent.

The particulars which I deem amisse Conclus: 68. I have noted in the68
Con­clus. 56\. Proposition: & refer the reader thither.

That the Sacraments have the same use that the word hath, & teach to the ey of
them that vnderstand, as the word teacheth the eares of them, that have74
Con­clus. eares to hear, Prov: 2\. 12. & that therefore they perteyn no more
to Infants, then the word doth; is neyther true in all poynts, nor well
applyed in any.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=69) For 1.
the word serves to convert men Psal: 19. 7. and is to be mini­stred to
vnconverted, and prophane persons: which vse the Sacraments have not, nor must
be administred to such. 2dly, if this (applyed to In­fants) were true, then
should not circumcision have been administred to the Israelitish Infants, who
had not eares to hear. Yet is the ground good being rightly layd (vnto which
that also Conclus: 73. is agreable, though the Scriptures be brought hand over
head to confirm it.) For as God by promising Abraham that he would be his God,
& the God of his seed, preach­ed to his ear, so by giveing him, & his seed
circumcision, he preached to his ey, for the ratification of the same promise.
And so is it now with vs, who have received grace to be of the fayth of
Abraham, haveing the same covenant, promise, or Gospell preached by doctrine
to our ear, & confirm­ed by baptism to our ey, for ourselves, & our seed.

To the 82. Conclus: that there is no succession in that outward Church but
that all the succession is from heaven, & that the new Creature onely hath the
2 Con­clus. thing signifyed, & substance, whereof the outward Church, &
ordinances are shadowes, Col: 2. 16. 17. I answer, 1. That the Apostle Colos:
2. speaks onely of the Iewish ordinances, which are abolished, and not of the
Church ordinances now. 2dly, If it be meant that all succession is from heaven
im­mediately, it is a fantasy: if mediately, then must the outward succession
(to wit of Ministerie) be in the outward Church, whereof it is an ordi­nance.
And whereas the Church, and new creature are opposed, it is amisse, since the
Church is to consist onely of such men as are in their measure renewed by the
Holy Ghost, and sanctifyed: and if by the new creature they mean any other
thing, it is a new creature of their own makeing.

In Conclus: 83. Where the office of the magistrate, is called a permissive
ordi­nance [...]3 Con­clusion. of God, is both a contradiction, and evill
speakeing of them in authoritie. Where it is called an ordinance of God, it is
confessed good, for every creature of God is good, and all his ordinances are
his creatures; and so, many things are ascribed to the office of Magistrates
in this, and the other Conclus: about it, which prove it to be good, and
lawfull in it self: but where it is made per­missive, it is condemned as
evill: since onely evill is permitted, or suffered of God.

And where it is objected Prop: 85. that Christs Disciples must love their
enemyes, & not kill them: pray for them, & not punish them, &c. I answer, that
the godly Magistrate may do both. Doth not God punish with tempora­ry death
those that he loveth? and why may not Gods deputyes, the Gods Psal. 82.
[...]. 6. vppon earth, be mynded as God herein? When the godly Kings, and
go­vernours in Israel were commaunded to exequute judgment and iustice vp­pon
the people for their transgressions, were they commaunded not to [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=69) love them, & not
to pray for them? When Mr Smith in his sicknes, tels his children (as it is in
the end of the booke) that if he live, he must correct, & be at them, not
because he hates them, but because he loves them, as God did him, doth he not
answer the objection, & shew the those two may well stand together, as in the
private father, so in the publique father, the Magistrate? Where agayn it is
sayd that Christs Disciples must with him be persequuted, afflicted, mur­dered
&c: & that by the authority of the Magistrate. I do answer; that those things
are not simply necessary for all persons, but as God calles men vnto them. And
2. both the Scriptures, & other Stories do testify that godly Magistrates
themselves, have suffered these thinges for the Lord & his trueth, & for well
doeing: sometymes the inferiour Magistrates, by the Superiour, & sometymes the
Governours by the people vnder them. In­stancesEx. 3. 1 [...]. 12. 15. vvith
Act. 7. 25 & 1 2. 3 we have hereof in Moses, David, Gedeliah, Daniel,
Shadrach, Mi­shael, & Abed nego, with Nicodemus, & others many mo. And much it
is that these men should acknowledg that Magistrates are to be prayed for, &
geven thanks for, as the Scriptures teach. 1. Tim: 2. 1. 3. & that their
ordinance is of God, & for the good of mankynde, Rom: 13. in the wor­kesNum. 1
[...] 2\. 10. & 16\. 1. 2. &c. whereof they may please God. 2. King: 10. 30. &
in all these that it is a good & lawfull thing, (for no vnlawfull thing is of
God, nor pleaseth him, nor is to be prayed, or geven thankes for) & yet for it
should exclu­de them from the Church, as not being Christs Disciples. Doth any
good1\. Sam. 18. 8. 9. 12. & lawfull thing hinder a man from being Christs
Disciple, vnto whom all creatures, & ordinances are sanctifyed, & pure? or are
men to be kept outDan. 6.  [...] 2\. 3. & 3 12. of the Church for weldoeing?
Surely even as lawfully as to be receaved in for evill doeing. They ad that
the Magistrate is not to medle with religion, or matters of conscience, nor to
compell men to this, or that forme of religion, because Ioh. 7. 82 Tit. 1. 5
Christ is the King, & lawgiver of the Church & conscience. Iam: 4. 12. I
answer that this indeed proves that he may alter, devise, or establish nothing
in re­ligion otherwise then Christ hath appoynted, but proves not, that he may
not vse his lawfull power lawfully for the furtherance of Christs Kingdom &
lawes. The Prophet Isaias speakeing of the Church of Christ, foretels that
Kings shalbe her noursing fathers, & Queens her noursing mothers: which if
they medle not with her, how can they be? And where these men make this
theIsa. 49. 23. Magistrates onely worke, that iustice, & civility may be
preserved amongst men, the Apostle teacheth an other end, which is, that we
may lead a peaceable lyfe vnder them in all godlynes. It is true they have no
power agaynst the lawes, doctrine,1\. Tim.  [...] [...]. & religion of Christ:
but for the same (if their power be of God) they may vse it lawfully, &
agaynst the contrary And so it was in speciall foretold by Iohn, that the
kings of the earth should make the where absolate, & naked, & [...] her flesh,
& burn her with fyre. [...]

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=70) This Mr
Helwisse frivolously interprets of their spirituall weapons: which are no
other then the spirituall weapons of all other Christians: besides that it is
contrary to the clear meaning of the H Ghost, which is, that these kings
should first vse their civile power for the beast, & whore, & after agaynst
them to their destruction.

To conclude this poynt then: both these men, & Mr Helw: especial­ly, in his
whole discourse about this matter labours of the common disease of all
ignorant mē in pleading agaynst the vse of the ordināce by the abuse: which
standes eyther in prohibiting any thing which God hath comman­ded, or in
commanding any thing which he hath forbidden: as indeed he hath whatsoever he
hath not commanded, eyther expresly, or by conse­quence, in his religion, &
worship.

Lastly it is not truely affirmed that Christians must iudg all their causes of
difference amongst themselves, & may not go to law before Magistrates, nor vse
an oath. For the first head is alleadged 1. Cor: 6. 1. 7.

I answer that Paul doth not there simply forbid the Saints goeing to law, but
goeing to law vnder Infidels: & that wronging, & oppressing one another, when
they should rather have suffered wrong: or at least have ap­poynted some able
men for arbitratours, to have ended things. Which course when doubtfull
differences of weight do arise, the members of the Church ought to take, & so
to rest in their equall determinations. But what if none of the Chuch can
sufficiently iudg of the things: or setle them in peace for after posteritie?
(as it may well come to passe in cases of inheri­tance especially) the matter
may & ought quietly, & peaceably to be re­ferred to the Magistrates
determination. His office being of God, Gods people may have the sanctifyed
vse of any lawfull worke thereof.

Touching an oath. It is not the meaning of our Saviour. Math: 5. 34. 37. nor
of his Apostle Iam: 5. 12. absolutely to forbid the vse of it: & to restreyn
all speach to yea & nay: for then Christ had broken his own rule in his so
vsuall asseverations of verily, verily: or amen, which are more then bare,
yea, & nay.

The meaning of Christ was to free the law from the corrupt glosse of the
pharisees, who taught, that  [...]it was no byndeing oath, in which the name
of God was not expresly mentioned, but the creatures onely: as it was both
his, & his Apostles meaning to reprove needles swearing in ordinarie
communication. Christ our Lord professeth of himself, that he came not to
destroy Matth. 5. 7. the law, or ten words, but to fullfill it: & haveing
taken away the curse there­of by his Death, to write the same in our hearts,
that we might also observe it, & so vse Gods name holily, as a parte thereof.
We read how God him­self [...] 31\. 32 swore sundry tymes for mans
confirmation & assurance. And is  [...] [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5430&page=70) man eyther more
holy, or better to be trusted then he, that an oath should be eyther vnholy or
greivous to him? We have also for our warrant the examples of the holy
Patriarks & Prophets, Abraham, Isack, Iacob, & the rest, sometymes giveing
vnto others, & sometymes takeing oathes of them,Iere. 1.  [...] Isa 45. 23.
which being done religiously, was also a part of, & sundry tymes put for the
whole solemn worship of God; & the same not ceremoniall, & shado­wish;Iere.
12. 16. wish; but morall & eternall. And since strifes will alwayes be
amongest men, & those many tymes such, as in which no sufficient testimony by
men,Psal. 6▪ 10. or other proofe can be had, an oath (wherein God is called to
witnes the truth, & to avenge the contrary) is alwayes of vse: which the
Apostle direct­ly teacheth Heb: 6. 10. An oath for confirmation is vnto men an
end of all doubts. The lawfulnes whereof the same Apos [...]le doth plainly
confirm, by his own practise, takeing God for his witnes. Rom: 1. 9. & agayn.
2. Cor: 1. 13. take­ing God for a record vppon his soul (that is to be
revenged vppon him therein) that he lied not vnto them.

And thus much for this Conclusion, wherewith I will also conclude the book:
entreating of God through Christ, that all who seek his trueth in sincerity,
that in the knowledg, & obedience thereof, they may please him, may both fynde
the same, & with myself, mercy & forgivenes in all our errours, & faylinges of
this life, which how many they are no man knoweth, nor can know, whilst he
knoweth but in parte, as all men but do, whilst they live in this world, & are
absent from the Lord.

THE END.

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1614  

