---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Erubhin or Miscellanies Christian and Iudaicall, and others Penned for
recreation at vacant houres. By Iohn Lightfoote, Master in Arts, sometimes of
Christs Colledge in Cambridge.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=1)

ERVBHIN OR MISCELLANIES Christian and Iudaicall, and others. Penned for
Recreation at Vacant Houres.

By IOHN LIGHTFOOTE, Master in Arts, sometimes of Christs Colledge in
CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON. Printed by G. MILLER for Robert Swayne and William Adderton, and are
to be­sold at the  [...] head in Pauls Church­yard. 1629.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, right learned, and right ver­tuous Knight, Sir
ROVVLAND COTTON. I. L wisheth all present and future felicitie.

Euer Honoured.

MY creeping & weake studies neither a­ble to go, nor speake for themselues, do
(like Pyrrhus in Plutarch) in silence craue your tuition. For they desire,
when they now come to light, to refuge to you
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=3) who next to
God first gaue them life. Your incourag [...]ment and incitation did first set
mee forward to the culture of holy tongues, and heere I offer you the first
fruites of my barren haruest. Your tried learning and tried loue, assure me
that you both can iudge soundly, and yet withall will not iudge too heaui­ly
of my weake endeauours; and such a Patron my booke desi­reth. This hath caused
to you, this present trouble, and in mee this present boldnesse. I know it had
beene more secure to haue beene obscure, and not to haue come thus to publike
Hazzard; for as the Romane said well,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=3) it is hard
when the world shall shew me mine infirmi­ties vnder mine owne hand: yet haue
I had some reason, to manifest my selfe thus openly to the view of all. Some
there bee that haue hardly censured of me for idlenesse and sloath) as they
make it) because (it seemes) I intrude not euery moment into the supply of
other mens Mini­steries, since it hath not yet plea­sed God, to preferre and
promote me to a charge of mine owne. I know well the saying of the Apo­stle
Romans. 1.14. belongs to all Ministers, To Greekes and Barbarians, to the wise
and foolish they are all deb­tors,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=4) and (as the
Syrian addes) leakrez, they are debtors to preach: The Syri­an to that verse
adds a wo [...]d which may well serue for a Com­ment mebhaichh­euo leakrez▪ I
am a debtor, or I ought to preach. And who so is neces­sarily called, and
refuseth, is as bad as the false Prophets were, that would run before they
were sent, nay, hee may seeme rather worse, that when he is sent will not goe.
From this censure how farre I am free, my conscience tells me; though I must
con­fesse that I am not so hasty as many bee, to intrude my selfe, where is no
ne [...]essity: This hath among some purchased mee the skarr of slothfulnesse:
to vindicate which I haue here ventured as children doe, to shoot another
arrow to find one
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=4) [...] is lost▪
so haue I hazzar­  [...]ed my Credit one way to saue it  [...]nother. I know
mine owne  [...]eakenesse, and that this my  [...]aines, to schollers, may
seeme  [...]t idle: yet had I rather vnder­  [...]e any censure, then the blot
of  [...]e other Idlenesse, the begetter  [...] all euil, and of
vnthankfulnes,  [...]e hinderer of all good. This  [...] the cause that brings
mee to a  [...]ke, and my booke to you. That the one I may testifie to the
[...]rld that I loue not to bee idle,  [...] by the other witnesse to you,
[...] I loue not to be vnthankful.  [...]ept I beseech you of so small
[...]esent, and so troublesome a  [...]nkfulnesse, and what I want
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=5) in tongue and
effect, I will an­swer in desire and affection: su­ing alw [...]yes to the
Throne of Grace, for the present prosperi­tie of your selfe and your nobl
[...] Lady, and the future felicitie of you both hereafter.

From my studie at Horn­sey, neere LONDON. March 5. 1629.

Yours deuoted in all seruice, Iohn Lightfoote.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=5)

## To the Reader.

Courteous Reader (for such a one I wish or none)

I May well say of writing books as the wise Greek did of marriage, for a yong
man it is too soone, & with an old man his time is out. Yet haue I ventured in
youth to be­come publike, as if I were afraid that men would not take notice
of my weakenes and vnlearnednesse soone enough. If I fall farre short of a
Schollar (as I know I do) my youth might haue some plea, but that mine
at­tempt can haue no excuse but thy charitie. To that I rather submit my selfe
then to thy Censure. I haue here b [...]ought home with me some gleanings of
my more serious stu­dies, which I offer to thee not so much for thy
instruction, as for thy harmelesse recre­ation. I beare in mind with mee the
saying of Rabbi Iosihar Iebudah in Pirke Abboth. He that learnes of young men,
is like a man that eates vnripe grapes, or that drinkes wine out of the
wine­presse: but he that learneth of the Ancient, is like a man that eateth
ripe grapes, and drinketh wine that is old. For feare thy teeth should be set
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=6) on edge, I
haue brought some varietie: I haue not kept any method, for then I should not
answer my title of Miscellantes. I haue vpon some things beene more copious,
then other, and (as Rab. Salomon obserues of Ruth) I haue sometime but stood
to gleane, and sometime sitten downe. I hope thou wilt not censure me for
Iudaizing, though I cite them, for it is but (as the Musician in Plu­tarch
did) setting a discord first, that you may better judge of the consort: and
see­ing error, you may the more embrace the truth. If this my youthfull
attempt shall prouoke any one that is young to emulati­on in the holy tongues,
I shall thinke I haue gained▪ Adjourne thy seuere censure till ei­ther future
silence, or some second attempt either lose al, or make some satisfaction. For
the present: Quisquis haec legit, vbi pariter certus est pergat mecum, vbi
pariter haesitat, quaerat me­cum, vbi errorem s [...]um cognoscit, redeat ad
me, vbi meum reuocet me. Aug. de Trinit. Lib. 1\. Cap. 3.

Thine ready and willing, but vnable.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, right learned, and right vertuous Knight, Sir ROVVLAND COTTON. I. L wisheth all present and future felicitie.
  * To the Reader.
  * 1\. OF KNOVVLEDGE OF GOD. CAP. I.
  * 2\. CAP. II. Of the Names of GOD vsed by Iewes and Gentiles.
  * 3\. CAP. III. Of the Phrase The Sonnes of God, Gen. 6. and Iob. 1.
  * 4\. CAP. IIII. Of the Phrase Sonnes of Man.
  * 5\. CAP. V. Of Iaphets plantation by his sonne Iauan.
  * 6\. CAP. VI. Of Iewish Learning.
  * 7\. CAP. VII. Of the Talmud.
  * 8\. CAP. VIII. Talmudisme.
  * 9\. CAP. IX. Of the Cabalists.
  * 10\. CAP. X. Gedeons Armie. Iosh. 7.
  * 11\. CAP. XI. A Ierusalem Tenet, ex Kimchio in Praefat. to the small Prophets.
  * 12\. CAP. XII. Nun inuersum 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Num. 10. & 11.
  * 13\. CAP. XIII. Of the Massorites.
  * 14\. CAP. XIIII. Of the marginall readings.
  * 15\. CAP. XV. Ex Kimchio in Ionah 1.
  * 16\. CAP. XVI. Of sacrifice.
  * 17\. CAP. XVII. A Iust Iudgement.
  * 18\. CAP. XVIII. Of the name of the Red Sea.
  * 19\. CAP. XIX. Of the word Raca. Mat. 5.22.
  * 20\. CAP. XX. Wit stollen by Iewes out of the Gospell.
  * 21\. CAP. XXI. Saint Cyprians nicety about the last Petition in the Lords Prayer.
  * 22\. CAP. XXII. Septuaginta interpreters.
  * 23\. CAP. XXIII. The Septuagint ouer-authorized by some.
  * 24\. CAP. XXIIII. Phrases taken from Iewes in the New Testament.
  * 25\. CAP. XXV. Niniuehs conuersion: Ionah 3.
  * 26\. CAP. XXVI. Of the Iewes Sacraments, Circumcision, and Passeouer.
  * 27\. CAP. XXVII. Of the Passeouer.
  * 28\. CAP. XXVIII. Of the Confusion of Tongues.
  * 29\. CAP. XXIX. Of letters.
  * 30\. CAP. XXX. Of the Hebrew tongue.
  * 31\. CAP. XXXI. Of Vowels.
  * 32\. CAP. XXXII. Of the Language of two Testaments.
  * 33\. CAP. XXXIII. Of the New Testament Language, or the Greeke.
  * 34\. CAP. XXXIIII. Of the Chaldee and Syrian Tongues.
  * 35\. CAP. XXXV. Of the Arabian Language.
  * 36\. CAP. XXXVI. Of the Latine Tongue.
  * 37\. CAP. XXXVII. The Language of Brittaine neere a thousand yeares ago. Ex Beda lib. 1. de Hist. Angl. Cap. 1.
  * 38\. CAP. XXXVIII. Ionathan the Chaldee Paraphrast his conceit of Leuies choosing to the Priesthood: translated out of his Paraph. on Gen. 32.24.
  * 39\. CAP. XXXIX. Of the Iewes abbreuiature. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
  * 40\. CAP. XL. Mazkir neshamoth: or the Remembrancer of soules: in the Iewes liturgy: printed at Venice.
  * 41\. CAP. XLI. Of the Latine translation of Mat. 6.1.
  * 42\. CAP. XLII. An Embleme.
  * 43\. CAP. XLIII. Mahhanaijm. Gen. 32.2.
  * 44\. CAP. XLIIII. The booke of Psalmes.
  * 45\. CAP. XLV. Of the Creation.
  * 46\. CAP. XLVI. The time and manner of the Creation.
  * 47\. CAP. XLVII. Of the fall of Adam.
  * 48\. CAP. XLVIII. Ophitae Euia.
  * 49\. CAP. XLIX. Of the Greeke Translation of the fifth of Genesis.
  * 50\. CAP. L. Vpon the words: The seede of the woman shall breake the Serpents head.
  * 51\. CAP. LI. Iewish hypocriticall prayers, reproued by our Sauiour, Mat. 6.5. Because they loue to stand praying in the Synagogues and corners of the streets.
  * 52\. CAP. LII. Israels affliction in Aegypt.
  * 53\. CAP. LIII. Israels Campe: according to the Chaldee Paraphrast his description: Num. 2.
  * 54\. CAP. LIIII. Of Iob.
  * 55\. CAP. LV. Egyptians Deities, ex Athenae. Deipn. Lib. 7.
  * 56\. CAP. LVI. Of the Law broken by Adam.
  * 57\. CAP. LVII. Of the Law giuen at Sinai.
  * 58\. CAP. LVIII. Why the Law was published then and not before.
  * 59\. CAP. LIX. Of the place where it was giuen, and manner.
  * 60\. CAP. LX. Of the effects of the Law.
  * 61\. CAP. LXI. Of the Ten Commandements.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=6)

## 1\. OF KNOVVLEDGE OF GOD.  
CAP. I.

OMNE tempus te puta perdidisse, &c. saith one: All time is lost that is not
spent in thinking of GOD. To bee full of  [...]houghts of him, is a lawfull
and holy  [...]rodigality: And to spend time in such  [...]editations, a
gainefull lauishing. For  [...]is end were the Scriptures giuen to  [...]ade
vs to meditate of God, by medi­  [...]ting in them day and night, Psal, 1.2.
[...]erein those faile that neuer thinke of [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=7) God at all, and
those also that thinke not of him aright. The Prophet makes this the marke of
wicked men, that God is not in all their thoughts. That like the Iewes they
murder (Zechariah) the remembrance of God euen betweene the Temple and the
Altar.

Commendable in some sort was the deuotion of the Philosopher, that in so many
yeares spoke more with the Gods then with men. Had his religi­on beene towards
the true God, what could haue beene asked of him more? I would Christians
hearts were so re­tired towards their Creator, that so hee that made the
heart, might haue it.

The Heathens thought there was a God, but knew not what to thinke of him. They
prayed and sacrificed and kept a stirre to something, but they might well haue
marked their Church­es, Altars and Prayers, with the A­thenian Altar motto
[...] to the vnknowne God, Act. 17.

Plato attained to the thought of on [...] [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=7) [...]ely God, the
Persians thought hee  [...]uld not be comprehended in a Tem­  [...]e, and
Numas thought he could not  [...] represented by an image: and for  [...]is
(saith Clem. Alex.) hee was hel­  [...]ed by Moses: [...] &c. Clem. Alex.
Strō. 1\. p. 131. yet came all these farre  [...]ort of the knowledge of God.
Na­  [...]re when shee had brought them  [...]us farre, was come to a non
vltra, [...]d could go no further. Happy then  [...] wee, if wee could but
right-prize  [...]ur happinesse, to whom the day spring  [...]om an high hath
risen, and the Sonne of  [...]ghteousnesse with healing in his wings, [...]on
whom the noone-tide of the Gos­  [...]ell shineth, and the knowledge of God
[...] its strength. Euen so O Lord let it be  [...]ill told in Gath, and
published in the  [...]reets of Ascalon, to the rankor and sor­  [...]ow of
the vncircumcised, that God is  [...]nowne in Brittaine, and his Name is
[...]reat in England.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=8)

## 2\. CAP. II. Of the Names of GOD vsed by Iewes and Gentiles.

NO Nation so barbarous saith Tull [...] that hath not some tincture of kno
[...] ledge that there is a Deity. And yet many, nay most People of the world
fa [...] short of the right apprehension o [...] God, through three reasons.
First when they cannot carry their minde further then their senses:Aug de
Trin. lib. 1\. cap. 1. and so think [...] God hath a body as they haue that i
[...] coloured, &c. Secondly, when the [...] measure God by themselues & so
mak [...] him passionate like man. For men no [...] able to conceiue what God
is, what his na­ture, Arnob con. lib. 7. what his power, &c. fall into such
opinions, that they frame Gods of them­selues: and as is their owne humane
na­ture, so they attribute to God the like▪ for his will, actions &
intentions, saith Arno­bius. Thirdly, when they mount aboue [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=8) nature and sense,
and yet not right, feigning that God begat himselfe, &c. Hence came the
multitude and diuersi­tie of Deities among the Heathen, minting thousands of
gods to finde the right, and yet they could not. Hence their many names, and
many fames made by them, that it seemes, thought it as lawfull to make gods,
as it was for God to make them.

At first they worshipped these their deities without any representation on­
[...]y by their names: Caelites, Inferi, Heroes,  [...]umani, Sangui, and
thousands others,  [...]he naming of which is more like con­  [...]uring then
otherwise. Nature it selfe  [...]aught men there was something they  [...]ust
acknowledge for supreame super­  [...]tendent of all things. This light of
[...]ature, lead them to worshippe  [...]mething, but it could not bring
[...]em to worship aright. Hence some  [...]dored bruit beasts, some trees,
some  [...]rres, some men, some Deuils. Some  [...] images, some without, some
in [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=9) Temples,
some without. Thus was Gedeons fleece, the heathen peece of the world all dry:
set in the darkenesse of the shadow of Death: But in Iury was God knowne, and
his Name great in Israel: By his name Iehouah he exprest himselfe when he
brought them from Aegypt, and his glory hee pitched a­mong them. They knew him
by his names and titles of Elohim, Adonai, El, Shaddai, Elion, and his great
name Iehouah, as the Iewes do call it. There the Scriptures of the Law and
Pro­phets did teach them, yet they thus neerely acquainted with the true God,
forsooke him, so that wrath came vpon Israel.

The Rabbinicall Iewes beside Scrip­ture words haue diuerse Phrases to
ex­presse God by in their writings. As fre­quently they cal him Hakkadhosh
baruchhu, the holy blessed he, in short with foure letters  [...]. Sometime
they vse El iithbarech, the Lord who is, or be bles­sed. Sometimes Shamaiim,
Heauen, by [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=9) a
Metonomy, because there hee dwel­leth. The like Phrase is in the Gospell,
Father I haue sinned against heauen Luk. 15.18. The like Phrase is frequent in
England, The heauens keepe you. Sheki­nah they vse for a title of God, but
more especially for the Holy Ghost. So saith Elias leuita in Tishbi. Our
Rabbins of happy memorie call the Holy Ghost Shekinah gnal shew shehu shaken
gnal hannebhiim, because he dwells vpon the Prophets. Accordingly saith our
Nicene Creed, I beleeue in the Holy Ghost who spake by the Prophets. Shem, a
name or the name they vse for a name of God, and Makom a place they place
[...]or the same, because hee comprehen­deth all things, and nothing compre­
[...]endeth him. Gebhurah Strength is in  [...]he same vse. They are nice in
the vt­  [...]erance of the name Iehouah: but vse  [...]iuerse Periphrases for
it, as Shem shel  [...]bang, the name of foure letters. Shem  [...]aminhhadh
the proper name and o­  [...]ers. One in Eusebius hath eloquently [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=10) expressed it thus:

[...]

[...].

[...]

[...].

Seuen sounding letters ring the praise of me

Th' immortall God, th' Almighty Deity:

The Father of all, that cannot weary be.

I am th' eternall violl of all things

Whereby the melody so sweetly rings

Of Heauens musicke which so sweetly sings.

What these seuen letters are, that do thus expresse God, is easie to guesse
that they be the letters of the name Ie­houah, which indeed consisteth but of
foure letters, but the vowels must make vp the number. Of the exposition of
this name Iehouah thus saith Rabbi Salo­mon vpon these words: I appeared to
them by the name of God omnipotent, but by my name Iehouah I was not knowne to
them, Exod. 6.3. Hee saith vnto him (saith the Rabbin) I am Iehouah,
faith­full in rendering a good reward, to those that walke before me: and I
haue not sent thee for nothing, but for the establi­shing of my words which I
spake to their fathers: And in this sense we finde th [...] [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=10) word [Iehouah]
expounded in sundry pla­ces, I am Iehouah faithfull in auenging, (when he
speakes of punishing) as, and if thou profane the name of thy God, I am
Iehouah. And so when hee speaketh of the performing of the Commandements, as,
And you shall keepe my commande­ments and do them, I am Iehouah faith­full to
giue to you a good reward: thus farre the Rabbin.

The Alchymisticall Cabalists, or Cabalisticall Alchymists haue extrac­ted the
name  [...] or number whether you will, out of the word Iehouah after a
strange manner. This is their way to do it:

[...]

[...]

[...] which great mystery is in En­glish thus. Ten times ten is an hundred,
fiue times fiue is twenty fiue, behold 125\. Six times six is thirtie six,
behold 161\. and fiue times fiue is twenty fiue, behold  [...] or 186\. Thus
runneth their senselesse multiplication, multiplying number­lesse [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=11) lesse follies in
their foolish numbers, making conjectures like Sybills leaues, that when they
come to blast of triall, prooue but winde. Irenaeus hath such a mysticall
stirre about the name Iesu: which I must needs confesse I can make nothing at
all of, yet will I set downe his words, that the reader may skan what I
cannot. Nomen Iesu (saith he) secundum propriam Hebraeorum lin­guam, &c. The
name Iesu according to the proper speech of the Hebrewes consi­steth of two
letters and an halfe, as the skillfull amongst them say: Signifying the Lord
which containeth heauen and earth: For Iesu according to the old He­brew
signifieth heauen, and the Earth is called Sura vsser. Thus that father in his
second booke against Heretickes, Cap. 41. on which words I can criticke onely
with deepe silence. Onely for his two letters and ½, I take his mea­ning to
bee according to the Iewes wri­ting of the name Iesu: [...] who denie him the
last letter of his name  [...], be­cause [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=11) they deny him for
a Sauiour. So the Dutch Iew Elias Leuitae saith in ex­presse words. The
Christians say that their Messias was called  [...] by the commandement of the
Angell Gabriel, because he should saue all the world from Gehinnom, but
because the Iewes doe not confesse that hee is a Sauiour, there­fore they will
not call him  [...] Ieshu­ang, but they leaue  [...] the last letter out, and
call him  [...] Iesu. After this kind of wri­ting as Irenaeus saith, the word
con­sisteth of two letters  [...] and halfe a let­ter, that is, which may be
so called, be­cause it is so little.

The Chaldee writes the name of God with two Iods aboue, and a vow­ell vnder
thus  [...]. From hence some haue picked an expression of the Tri­nity: In the
two letters, the Father and the Sonne, and in the vowell, the Holy Ghost
proceeding from both: And from the aequidistance of the let­ters and vowell,
they gather the di­stinction of the Persons, and by the [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=12) neerenesse of
all, the vnity of Essence. Such another conceit hath Bonfinius in his
Hungarian Historie. When the He­resie of Arrius (saith he) had got head almost
ouer all the world, and was dila­ted as well by persecution as by
disputa­tion: a towne in Gaule was besieged, be­cause it held the Orthodox
faith of the Sons coequalitie with the Father: God to confirme this their
faith shewed this mi­racle. As the Priest was at high Masse at the Altar,
behold three drops of blood fell from heauen vpon the Altar; lying a while in
an equall distance one from a­nother, to shew the distinction of the three
Persons, at last, in sight of all the People, they met together, to shew the
vnity of Es­sence, so the story. But we haue a more sure word of Prophecie:
That there are three that beare record in Heauen, the Father, the Word, and
the holy Spirit, and these three are one.

The Chaldee sometimes vseth the word  [...] Dehhila and  [...] Dahhalah, feare
or terror, for God: because of the [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=12) feare that is due
to him. So Iacob com­ming from Syria, and being to sweare to a Syrian, sweares
according to this Syrian or Chaldee Phrase, By the feare of his father Isaac:
Gen. 31.53. or by the God that Isaac feared: as Onkelos and Ionathan render
it.

## 3\. CAP. III. Of the Phrase The Sonnes of God, Gen. 6. and Iob. 1.

ALL take this Phrase in Iob, to meane the Angells, and truely: in which sense
while they haue taken it in the sixt of Genesis, they spoile all: For hence
they think, that Angels lay with women and begat children. So can Iarchi
almost find in his heart to think, and so Tertullian, Lactantius and o­thers.
Some tell what euill Arts these Angells taught women, and how they begat
mighty children of them. How [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=13) farre this
conceit is from true Philoso­phie, let Aristotle censure. Merlin in Geffry
Monmouth is recorded to be such another hatch, beleeue it who list. His veine
of Prophecying can make Alanus de Insulis thinke it is so, but I must needs
confesse, it comes not into my Creed. As some conceit that the fallen Angels,
or Deuills here be­gat children of women; so the Iewes most wickedly fable,
that Adam begat children of Deuills. Those hundred and thirtie yeares say they
that Adam was separated from Eue, Deuills came to him and he ingendred with
them, and begat Deuills, and spirits, and fiends. And againe: Foure women are
the mothers of Shedhim or Deuills, Lilith, Naamah, Ogereth and Mahlath. I
beleeue both these alike, for I beleeue that neither is likely. Both the
Chaldees Onkelos and Ionathan render the sonnes of Elohim the sonnes of the
Potentates or Iudges, taking the word Elohim in the same sense that it is
taken, in the middlemost verse of [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=13) the booke of
Exodus Cap. 22.28. Thou shalt not curse Elohim, or the Iudges. This opinion is
farre better then the former, but Christians haue a better then this. That the
house and proge­nie of holy Seth, are the sonnes of God or the Church: and the
brood of Cains females were the Daughters of men. Cypriano di valera in his
Spanish translation of Gen. 4. and the last verse, translates it thus,
Entonces commencia­ron llamarse. Then begun men to be cal­led by the name of
God, or by the name of the Lord: And in the margin hee ex­planes himselfe
thus, that then the men of Seths house, began to bee a publike Church, and to
be distinguished from Cains family, and to be called the sons of God: Gen.
6.2.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=14)

## 4\. CAP. IIII. Of the Phrase Sonnes of Man.

THis Phrase is frequent in Scrip­ture, and Rabbin Hebrew, but most frequent in
Chaldee and Syrian. Bene Anasha: & Bar nosho: In the latter of which the
Syrian vsually wri­teth  [...] but leaueth out the first letter: as that
tongue doth frequently in o­ther words vse the like ecclipsis, writing not as
they reade, as it is said of the French: Ezekiel in his Prophecie in Scripture
Hebrew is frequently called sonne of man. Why so often he and no other Prophet
should be so stiled, rea­sons are giuen by diuerse: To mee (though farre
inferiour to all them) the groundworke seemeth to bee, be­cause his Prophecie
was written in Chaldean captiuitie, hee vseth the Chaldean Phrase, Sonne of
man, that is, O man. The same Phrase Daniel vseth in Chaldaea, Dan. 10.16.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=14)

## 5\. CAP. V. Of Iaphets plantation by his sonne Iauan.

IAuan is generally held to be Greece. And the Greeke tongue is by all
He­brewes called the speech of Iauan. The Arabians do so stile the same
language. The Syrian in Romans the first chapter verse 16. calls the Grecians
[...] vpon what reason I cannot imagine. Iauan the sonne of Iaphet is held to
haue planted or peopled this country, in me­morie of whose name the Iones are
fa­mous monuments: Moses saith hee had foure sonnes, Elisha, Tarshish,
Cit­tim, & Dodonim: which it is likely plan­ted all the country of Greece as
farre as into Italie. Elisha and Dodonim dwelt at first neere together, and so
did Tar­shish and Cittim, but their posteritie scattered farre and neere. The
Ierusa­lem and Babilon Targums doe almost [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=15) resolued vs of
these foure mens planta­tion: For Ionathan reades the fourth verse of the
tenth of Genesis thus. And the sonnes of Iauan, Elisha, Elis, Tarsus, Acacia
and Dardania. Ieruselamy thus: And the sonnes of Iauan, Elisha, and the names
of their Prouinces, Alasta­rasom and Dodonia. Which last word Alastarasom I
take to be mistaken, by joyning two words together and mis­sing the last
letter  [...] Mem for  [...] Sa­mech, which is easily done they bee so like.
The word Alastarasom should without doubt, be Alas or Elis Tarsus. Elis
frequent in all Authours: Eilision in Homer in Baeot. Elensine in Plutarch in
Theseo, are places in Greece bearing the name of their old planter Elisha.
Dodonim is registred in the name of old Dodona. Tarshish left a memoriall of
himselfe in Cilicia: in the Citie Tarsus. Which was as Pliny saith vrbs libera
a free Citie, nat. hist. lib. 5\. and Saint Paul is free of that Citie: Act.
22.

Tarshish in Gen. 10\. is the name of a [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=15) man, in Ionah
13\. in Chald. Par. it is vsed for the sea. In Exod. 28\. for a The pearle
tar­shish in Ex. 28.20▪ is rendered in English a Beril: in the Chalde
translati­ons it is kermū iam­ma, a pearle of the sea: Pliny speakes of
keramides a pearle neere that name Te­rus: Targū thinkes Tarsh [...]sh was
Ashers stone: but Ionathan that it was Zebu­lons: And more like­ly, for a
pearle of the sea is not vnfit for Zebulō a dweller by the sea, Gē. 4
[...].1 [...]. pearle; in Act. 22 the name of a Towne. I thinke I may safely
suppose that the towne tooke the name from the man, the sea from the towne,
and the pearle from the sea.

Cittim got into the Ile Cyprus neere his brother Tarshish: from him that Iland
in old time was called Cethin as Ant. di Gueuara nameth it in Relox de los
princip. And the men of Cyprus acknowledged Cythnon quendam, one Cythnus (or
Cittim) for their predeces­sor as saith Herodotus lib. 7. That Iland sent out
colonies further to replenish the Westerne world: who bare the memorie and
name of their father Cit­tim with them all along as they went. Macedon or
Macetia is called Cittim, 1. Mac. 1.1. At last they ariued in I­taly which is
called Cittim. Num. 24.24. and so rendered by the Chaldees. Thus Iauans
posteritie grew great in Greece and Italy, and at last sent vs [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=16) men ouer into
these Isles of the Gen­tiles.

## 6\. CAP. VI. Of Iewish Learning.

THe Iewes chiefe studies are about the Scriptures or about the He­brew tongue,
but some haue dealt in o­ther matters. Their tongue is their chiefe learning,
which is indeed the ground of all sacred knowledge. In it some are most
ignorant, and some a­gaine as accurate. They value it so highly, that the
mistaking of a letter in it say they, destroyes the world. He that in this
verse En kadosh caihouah, [...] rea­deth Beth for Caph makes it there is no
holinesse in Iehouah, and destroyeth the world. He that will may see most
copi­ous worke of this nicety in Tauch. on Gen. 1\. How nimble textualists and
Grammarians for the tongue the Rab­bins [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=16) are, their
Comments can witnes. But as in Chaucer the greatest Clarkes are not the wisest
men, so among them, these that are so great textualists, are not best at the
text. In humane Arts some of them haue practised Kimchi and Leuita for
Grammar, Rabbi Simeon for logicke, and others in other things, as Buxdorfius
in his collection of Iew­ish Authors will fully satisfie.

## 7\. CAP. VII. Of the Talmud.

WHo so nameth the Talmud, na­meth all Iudaisme, and who so nameth Mishneh, and
Gemara, hee na­meth all the Talmud: And so saith Le­uita Hattalmudh nehhlak,
&c. The Tal­mud is diuided into two parts, the one part is called Mishneh, and
the other part is called Gemara, and these two together, are called the
Talmud. This in the Iewes [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=17) Councell of
Trent, the foundation and groundworke of their religion. For they beleeue the
Scripture as the Tal­mud beleeues, for they hold them of e­quall authority:
Rabbi Tanchum the sonne of Hanilai saith, let a man alwaies part his life into
three parts. A third part for the Scriptures, a third part for Mishneh, and a
third part for Gemara. Two for one, two parts for the Tal­mud for one for the
Scriptures. So highly doe they, Papist-like, prize the vaine traditions of
men. This great li­brary of the Iewes is much alike, such another worke vpon
the old Testa­ment, as Thomas Aquinas his Catena aurea is vpon the new. For
this is the summe of all their Doctors conceits and descants vpon the law, as
his is a collection of all the Fathers explicati­ons and comments vpon the
Gospells. For matter it is much like Origens bookes of old, vbi bene nemo
melius, &c. and where they write well, none better, and where ill, none worse.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=17)The word
Talmud is the same in Hebrew, that Elias Leu. in Tisbi. Doctrine is in Latine,
and Doctrinall in our vsuall speech▪ It is (say the Iewes) a Commentary vpon
the written law of God. And both the law and this (say they) God gaue to
Moses, the law by day, and by writing, and this by night and by word of mouth.
The Law was kept by writing still, this still by tradition. Hence comes the
distinction so fre­quent in Rabbins, of Torah she bacca­thubh, and Torah she
begnal peh, the law in writing and the law that comes by word of mouth, Pi
[...]k. Ab­hoth Per. 1. Moses (say they) receiued the law from Sinai, (this
traditionall law I thinke they meane) and deliuered it to Ioshuah, Io­shuah to
the Elders, the Elders to the Prophets, and the Prophets to the men of the
great Synagogue. And thus like fame in Virgil, creuit eundo, like a snow-ball
it grew bigger with going. Thus doe they father their fooleries vpon Moses,
and Elders, and Pro­phets, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=18) who (good men)
neuer thought of such fancies, as the Romanists for their Traditions, can find
bookes of Clemens, Dionysius, and others who neuer dreamed of such matters.
A­gainst this their traditionall, our Sa­uiour makes part of his Sermon in the
mount, Matth. 5\. But he touch­ed the Iewes freehold, when he touch­ed their
Talmud, for greater treasure in their conceits they had none: like Cleopatra
in Plutarch, making much of the Viper that destroyed them.

## 8\. CAP. VIII. Talmudisme.

TO omit the time when it was written, and the distinction of Ie­rusalem and
Babilon Talmud: the chiefe end of them both (as they thinke) is to explane the
old Testa­ment. The titles of the bookes shew [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=18) their intents
Pesachin about the Passe­ouer, Sanhedrin about the high Courts: Beracoth about
thankesgi­uing. Sometime they comment, sometime they allude, sometime
con­trouert, sometime fable▪ For this booke containes their common law and
ciuill, and commonly some things aboue all law and ciuility. To in­stance in
one or two, that by Hercules foot ye may guesse his body.

Iudges 9.13. It is said by the vine, shall I leaue my wine which cheereth God
and man? How doth wine cheere God? Rabbi Akibhah saith, because men giue God
thankes for it.

There also they question or con­trouert, whether a man should giue thankes, or
say grace for his meate and drinke before he taste it?

And otherwhere, whether a man may blesse God for the sweet smell of in­cense
which hee smells offered to Idols?

Whether a man may light a candle at another candle that burnes in a [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=19) candlesticke that
hath images on it.

Whether a man at his Deuotions, if a Serpent come and bite him by the heele,
may turne and stoppe to shake her off, or no? which question Rabbi Tan­chum
answers very profoundly, that they must not so much as shake the foot to get a
Serpent off, and giues a huge strong reason: For (saith he) such a one was
praying, and a Serpent comes and catcheth him by the heele: Hee holds on his
Deuotion, and  [...]tirrs not, and presently the Snake falls away starke dead,
and the man not hurt: Legenda aurea hath not the Art of this coy­ning beyond
them.

For their allusions, take a piece out of the booke Mincha, which I haue
transcribed and translated into our owne tongue full of true Talmu­disme.

Our Rabbins teach, Israel is beloued, because God hath fauoured them with the
commandement of Philacteries, vp­on their heads and vpon their armes, [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=19) fringes vpon
their garments, and marks vpon their doores. And concerning them, Dauid saith:
Seuen times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous Iudgements: At
the time that Da­uid went into the bath, and saw him­selfe stand naked, he
said, woe is me that I stand naked without the Heb. Mit­suah or without my
Phi­lacteries. Commande­ment, but when hee remembred the Cir­cumcision in his
flesh, his mind was at quiet. Afterward when hee went out, he made a song of
it, as it is said: To him that excelleth vpon Sheminith (or an eight) a Psalme
of Dauid: because of the circumcision that was giuen on the eight day. Rabbi
Eliezer the sonne of Iacob saith, whosoeuer hath Philacteries vpon his head,
and Philacteries vpon his arme, and fringes vpon his garments, and a marke on
his doore, all this will From this con­ceit it ap­peares they were called
Philacte­ries, that is keepers. keepe him from sinning, as it is writ­ten, A
threefold coard is not easily bro­ken. And he saith, the Angell of the Lord
pitcheth round about those that feare him to deliuer them, &c. [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=20) Qui Bauium non
odit, amet, &c.

## 9\. CAP. IX. Of the Cabalists.

THese should be men of great ac­count, for their trading is chiefly in
numbers: but the effect of their stu­dies proue but fetches nullius numeri, of
no reckning. Their strange tricks & sleights of inuention, how to pick out a
matter of nothing, out of a thing of no matter, is so intricate, that I do not
much care if into these secrets my soule do not come. Their Atbash is a
strange crotchet beyond the moone: it is described by the great Buxdorfius in
his Abbreuiaturae.

Their Rashe & Sophe tebhoth, their Notericon, and Geometria, whether to call
them Cabalisticall, Masoreticall, or Phantasticall I know not: they haue paid
the margin of the Bible [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=20) with such
conceits. I could giue ex­amples by hundreds, but it were but  [...] a present
worse then none at all.

## 10\. CAP. X. Gedeons Armie. Iosh. 7.

GEdeons Armie represents the Church visible and inuisible: for as in his Armie
all the companie marched alike, and vsed the same mi­litarie discipline, and
yet two and twenty thousand were cowards, and returned from him for feare, at
the well Harodh, which it may be was cal­led Harodh, or feare, from their
feare­fulnesse; so in the Church visible, men vse the same word, the same
sa­craments, and the same outward pro­fession, yet are many of them but
cowards in Christs warfare when it comes to the triall. Gedeons triall of
[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=21) his
souldiers by lapping water, and kneeling to drinke was a good peece of
militarie discipline: for those that lapped in their hands, shewed their
nimblenesse in march, who could drinke and not stay, but those that kneeled
downe, made a stop in their marching.

Gedeons fight is much like Ierichoes fiege, that with trumpets, this with
trumpets and lampes, his conquest like Abrahams, with 300. men he o­uerthrowes
an Armie as Abraham did with 318. Saint Austen keepes a deplorable stirre
about allegorizing this number 300. by the Greeke let­ter T tau, to make it
resemble the signe of the crosse: And so he runnes both besides the language
and the matter: charitie to the good man makes me ambiguous and doubtfull
whether that fancie be his or not.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=21)

## 11\. CAP. XI. A Ierusalem Tenet, ex Kim­chio in Praefat. to the small
Prophets.

OVr Rabbins of happy memory say, (saith he) that euery Prophet whose name and
his fathers name is set downe in his Prophecy, it is certain that he was a
Prophet, and the sonne of a Prophet. He whose name, and not his fathers name,
it is certaine that he was a Pro­phet, and not the sonne of a Prophet. He
whose name and the name of his City is set downe, it is certaine that he was
of that City. He whose name and not the name of his City, it is certaine that
hee was a Prophet of Ierusalem. And they say, that he whose father and fathers
fa­thers name is set downe in his Prophe­cie, was a greater man of Parentage,
then hee whose father is onely named. As in Zephaniah. Cap. 1. ver. 1.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=22)

## 12\. CAP. XII. Nun inuersum  [...] Num. 10. & 11.

IN the tenth of Numbers and the thirtie fifth verse, in these words,  [...]
And when the Arke went forward, the letter Nun is written wrong way, or turned
backe thus  [...], to shew (say the Hebrewes) the louing tur­ning of God to
the People: And in the eleuenth chapter and first verse, in these words,
[...] And the Peo­ple became as murmurers, &c. The let­ter Nun is againe
written wrong or turned backe thus,  [...] To shew (say they) the peruerse
turning of the People from God: and thus are these two Places written in euery
true Bible in the world. If the Iewes doe not here giue any one satisfaction,
yet doe they (as Erasmus speakes of Origen) set Stu­dents on worke to looke
for that which els they would scarce haue [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=22) [...]ought for.
Such strange passages as  [...]hese in writing some words in the Bi­  [...]le
out of ordinary way (as some let­  [...]ers aboue the word, some letters
lesse,  [...]nd some bigger then other) obserued  [...]onstantly by all
coppies and bookes,  [...]annot sure be for nothing: If they  [...]hew nothing
els, yet this they shew vs, that the Text is punctually kept, and not decayed,
when these things (that to a hasty ignorant beholder might seeme errors) are
thus precisely obserued in all Bibles.

## 13\. CAP. XIII. Of the Massorites.

THese men are held to be the Au­thors of the vowells and Accents: which
opinion receiued by some (and those no ordinary men neither) I must needs
confesse, I am not so fully sa­tisfied for, as to beleeue it. I doe in­deed
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=23) admire the
Massorites paines i [...] obseruation of them in the Bible, but I cannot
guesse by that, that they haue done more then obserued: when a word, either in
letter or vowell, goe [...] from ordinarie rules of Grammar, they haue marked,
that it does so, which a meane Hebrician may do, but why it does so, there is
either a right Iewish reason, or none at all giuen. To exemplifie in one, Gen.
14.5. the word kederlaomer, [...] is so strangely pri [...] ­ked, that one
cannot passe it: I my selfe obserued it before euer I saw the Massoreth: and
when I came thitherto them for a reason, they haue done no more but obserued
it: viz. Tebhah hha­tha &c. that Camets is written with two çeuaes: and so of
others they sel­dome say more. Admirable is their paines, to prooue the text
vncorrupt against a gaine saying Papist. For they haue summed vp all the
letters in the Bible to shew, that one haire of that sacred head is not
perished. Eight [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=23) [...]undred eight
and fourty marginall  [...]otes are obserued and preserued for the more
facility of the text. The middle verse of euery booke noted, the number of the
verses in euery booke reckoned: and (as I said be­fore) not a vowell that
misseth ordi­nary Grammar which is not marked. So that if we had no other
surety for the truth of the old Testament text, these mens paines (me thinks)
should be enough to stop the mouth of a da­ring Papist.

## 14\. CAP. XIIII. Of the marginall readings.

THat the margin should so often helpe the text (as I may so say) as in 848.
places, may seeme to taxe the text of so many errours. But the learned can
find a reason why it is so. I hope I may satisfie my selfe without [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=24) any hurt, with
this reason, till m [...] learning will affoord mee a better▪ Namely, that
when they tooke i [...] hand to reuiew the Bible, after the captiuity (as all
hold Ezra did) that they did it by more coppies then one: which when they thus
varied, they would not forsake either, because they were loath to add or
diminish therefore they tooke euen their vary­ing, one in the text, and the
other in the margin. Yet doe I not thinke it was done onely thus, without some
more speciall matter in some places: for the writing of Nagnarah so often
Nagnar, [...] does make mee thinke (if I had nothing els to perswade me) that
these marginals are not only humane corrections.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=24)

## 15\. CAP. XV. Ex Kimchio in Ionah 1.

KImchi questioning why the book of Ionah should bee Canonicall, &c. giues one
most comfortable rea­son, which vpon reading I could not but muse on. His
words are obserua­ble, and they are these. It is questiona­ble why this
Prophecie is written among the holy Scriptures, since it is all a­gainst
Niniueh, which was Heathen­nish: and in it there is no remembrance (or
mention) of Israel, and among all the Prophets besides this, there is not the
like. But we may expound it, that it is written to be a Heb. Mu­sar.
Instruc­tion. checke to Israel, for loe a strange People which were not of
Isra­el, was ready to repent, and euen the first time that a Prophet reproued
them, they turned wholly from their euill: But Israel whom the Prophets
reproued ear­ly and late, yet they returned not from [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=25) their euill.
Againe (this booke was written) to shew the great miracle, that the blessed
God did with the Prophet, who was three dayes and three nights in the belly of
the fish, and yet liued, and the fish cast him vp againe. Againe to teach vs,
that the blessed God sheweth mercy to the repentant of what nation so­euer,
and pardons them though they bee many. Haec Kimchi. Vpon whose last words I
cannot but enter into these thoughts. Could wee looke for a truth from a Iew,
or comfort from a Spaniard? And yet here the Spanish Iew affoords vs both:
comfortable truth, and true comfort. God will par­don the Repentant, there is
a com­fortable truth, and hee will pardon them of what nation soeuer if they
re­pent, there is most true comfort. When a Iew thus preaches repen­tance, I
cannot but hearken, and helpe him a little out with his Sermon. That as God is
ready to forgiue the Repentant of what Nation soeuer, so [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=25) for what sinnes
soeuer, if they be truly repented. Here, I except the impar­donable sinne, the
sinne against the Holy Ghost: which what it is, the Scripture conceales in
close words, partly because we should not despaire, if wee fall our selues,
and partly be­cause wee should not censure damna­bly of our brethren, if they
fall into a sinne that is nigh this, so that not into it. To maintaine the
Iewes words and mine owne, for pardon of Nati­ons and of finnes, I haue as
large a field as all the Countries and all the sinnes of the world to looke
ouer. I will onely for Countries confine my selfe to Niniueh, and for sinnes
to Mary Magdalen. Niniueh a heathen towne, built by a wicked brood, inha­bited
by a wicked crew, yet repenting Niniueh is pardoned. Mary Mag­dalen a manifold
sinner, a customary sinner, a most deadly sinner, yet re­penting Mary Magdalen
is forgiuen, The Iew brings me into two christian [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=26) meditations about
Niniueh, or into two wholesome Passions: Feare and Hope. God sees the sinnes
of Nini­ueh, then I know mine are not hid, this breeds in me feare of
punishment: But God forgiues the sinnes of Nini­ueh, then I hope mine are not
vnpar­donable: this breeds hope of for­giuenesse. Col debhaurau she amar
le­hareang libhne Adam (saith the Rab­bin) bithnai im lo jashubhu. All the
euills that God threatens to men, are threatned with this condition, if they
doe not repent. As before the Iew spake comfort and truth, so here hee linkes
comfort and terrour. God threatens euill, there is terrour, but it is with
condition, there is comfort. Niniueh finds both in the story, Fourty dayes and
Niniueh shall be destroyed, there is a threatned terrour: But the Lord
re­pented of the euill that hee spake to doe vnto them, and did it not, there
is a comforting condition. So that as Dauid does, so will I hopefully and
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=26) yet
fearefully sing of mercy and judge­ment: First mercy, then iudgement: Mercy
vpon my repentance, lest I bee cast downe: and Iudgement vpon my sinnes, lest
I be lifted vp. Mercy in Iudgement, and Iudgement in mercy. Is there any one
that desperatly reiects Niniuehs exhibited mercy? let him feare Niniuehs
threatned iudgment, or is there any that trembles at Niniuehs threatned
Iudgement? let him com­fort himselfe by Niniuehs obtaining mercy. But in the
mouth of two wit­nesses, let the mercy bee confirmed. Let mee take Mary
Magdalen with Niniueh, and as I see in it the forgiue­nesse of a multitude of
sinners, so I may see in her, of a multitude of sinnes. Those many sinners
pardoned as one man, those many sinnes made as none at all. Saint Bernard
speaking of her washing of Christs feet, saies, shee came thither a sinner,
but shee went thence a Saint: She came thi­ther an Aethiope and a leopard, but
[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=27) shee went
thence with changed skin, and cancelled spots. But how was this done? She fell
at the feet of Christ, and with sighs from her heart, she vo­mited the sinnes
from her soule, Pro­sternere & tu anima mea, as saith the same Bernard. And
cast thou thy selfe downe, oh my soule, before the feet of Christ, wipe them
with thine haires, wash them with thy teares, which teares washing his feet
may also purge thy soule. Wash his feet, and wash thy selfe with Mary
Magdalen, till hee say to thee as hee did to Ma­rie Magdalen, thy sinnes are
for­giuen.

## 16\. CAP. XVI. Of sacrifice.

SAcrifice is within a little as old as sinne, and sinne not much younger then
the world. Adam on the day of [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=27) his creation (as
is most probable) sin­neth and sacrificeth: and on the next day after
meditates on that wherunto his sacrifice aimeth, euen Christ. Cain and Abel
imitate the matter of their fathers piety, sacrifice; but Cain comes farre
short in the manner. A­bel hath fire from heauen to answer him, and Cain is as
hot as fire because he hath not. Noah takes an odd cleane beast of euery kind
into his Arke for this purpose, to sacrifice him, after his Deliuery. And so
hee does: but for the Chaldee Paraphrasts fancie, that he sacrificed on the
very same Altar, whereon Adam and Cain and Abel had sacrificed so long before.
I referre it to the beliefe of a Iew, who by the Poet seemes to be of a large
faith, Cre­dat Iudaeus apella. Decencie and order was obserued of the Fathers
before the Law, for this holy peece of wor­ship. God makes Moses in his
Leui­ticus to bring it into writing. While the Iewes Temple stood, or while
[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=28) they might
stand in the Temple, they had their dayly sacrifice, till the great Sacrificer
offering himselfe, caused sacrifice and oblation to cease. Now are the Iewes
content, and as it ap­peares in their Common Prayer booke, they beseech God to
be so too, with prayers without sacrifice, be­cause they haue not now accesse
to their sacrificing place. Their distresse (as they thinke it) for this very
thing, might teach them that Messias Na­gidh or Christ the Prince hath done
what Daniel to them, and an Angell to Daniel had prophecyed of him.

Whether the Heathens borrow­ed their custome of sacrificing from the Iewes or
from nature, it is not materiall. Sure I am, that the Iewes borrowed some of
their abhominable sacrifices from the Heathen: Sacrifi­cing of men is
Heathenish, in Moses his language: yet was this too fre­quent among the Iewes,
vsed also in old time by the Athenians and Car­thaginians, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=28) as witnesse
Plutarch, Lac­tantius and others: and in these times by the Indians, as in
Cortes, &c. Of this bad vse (that the Heathen had got) I cannot tell what
should be the reason, vnlesse they thought that cru­elty was the best
offering, or that their gods were more cruell then mer­cifull. Or this reason
may bee giuen. They had learned either from the Iewes, or from their Oracles,
or from the Deuill himselfe (who cares not to giue men some light, thereby to
leade them to the more darkenesse) that a man should once bee offered, who
should appease the wrath of God (as Christ was) and therefore they in
re­membrance of this man, did sacrifice men, either to see whether they could
light on this man, or els in remem­brance of him till he should come.

Some condemne Iephthae of this cruelty of sacrificing his owne daugh­ter; who
yet in Heb. 11\. is commen­ded for his faith: Austen doubts [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=29) whether it is to
bee counted Gods Commandement, that hee slew his owne child. But I thinke no
such doubt is necessary, since there is no such strictnesse of the words in
the text. A Heathen man in Plutarch when he was told that he must either
sacrifice his owne child to such a God­desse, or else his affaires and
enterpri­ses would not prosper, could answer, that he would offer with all his
heart such sacrifice as the Goddesse would ac­cept, but that she would desire
or would be pleased with the bloud and murder of his child, he could not be
perswaded. I am sure Iephta had reason to bee farre better instructed in such
things as these, then any Heathen in the world.

Varro holds that it was not fit that any sacrifice at all should be offered.
His reason in Arnobius is: Quiae Dij ve­ri neque desiderantea, neque
deposcunt; ex aere autem facti, testâ, gypso, vel marmore multò minus haec
curant. For [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=29) saith he, the
true Gods desire not, nor exact any such matter, and those false gods that are
made of brasse, mortar, marble &c. care lesse for them. The Heathen man in his
owne sense saith truly, for his meaning doubtlesse is, that the Gods that are
true Gods are not delighted with this cruelty of slay­ing beasts, nor do they
for their owne sustentation or prouision desire men to be at this charge. And
so the true God which is truth it selfe, though he commanded sacrifice, yet
was it not meerely in respect of himselfe that he did it, any further then
this, that men should by this manner of worship, ac­knowledge their submission
and humi­lity and obedience to him. For what cares he for beast or bullocke,
since the world is his and all that is in it, Psal. 50.12. And Lyranus does
set downe the speciall ends wherefore God doth command Israel so many
sacrifices.

As first to weane them from Idola­try: for their seruice of the true God
[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=30) required
so much, that they could haue hardly any time to thinke of I­dols. And the
very beasts they sacri­ficed, might teach them the vanitie of the Idols of
Aegypt which they once serued: Slaying of a bullocke, a ramme, a goat, might
tell them that the Aegyptians Apis and Hammon which they worshipped in these
formes, were but vanity.

Secondly: by their sacrifices, they acknowledged that they had nothing but
what they had receiued from God, and therefore of their beasts, corne, wine,
&c. they offered him in thankfulnesse some of his owne.

Thirdly: these sacrifices were to beare Christ in their minds till hee should
come and make a full attone­ment for them. And so saies Lyra, the very beasts
sacrificed, represent Christ, an oxe for patience, a sheepe for innocence, and
an ill smelling goat, for his likenesse to sinfull flesh.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=30)A fourth
reason might be giuen: that the people standing and seeing these beasts slaine
and fired, might re­member their owne deseruings, and call to mind their
sinnes for which this beast was thus vsed. Their put­ting of their hands (the
right hand saith the Chaldee) vpon the head of the beast, seemes to import
some such a matter as their acknowledgement, of their deseruing of that which
the beast was ready to suffer, death and fire. Whosoeuer desires to be taken
vp with Allegories about this piece of Gods seruice, Flauiacensis will furnish
him: and if he will not do, the Fathers are copious enough, and it may be too
much this way.

The Heathen Mariners in shippe with Ionah, are said to sacrifice and vow
vowes: which the Chaldee helpes out (as thinking the ship and a tempest vnfit
time and place for sa­crifice) thus, they promised they would sacrifice: viz.
when they should [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=31) come ashore, and
vowed vowes to be­come Proselytes, saith Iarchi, or to giue Almes to the
poore, saith Kim­chi. Endlesse it were to trace the Hea­thens, and to see how
neere or how farre they be to or from the sacrifices of the Iewes.

## 17\. CAP. XVII. A Iust Iudgement.

CRantzius the Denmarke Historian as he hath many delightsome pas­sages of
storie, so this especially I could not but coppy out at my rea­ding of it,
wherein I see God iust, and murder heauy. One was hired for a summe of money
to murder an inno­cent Dane. He does the bloudy fact, and presently receiues
in a purse his wages of iniquity. A heauy purse of gold for a while, makes a
light heart, but where the guiltinesse grones hea­uy [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=31) too, the gold is
worth nothing. At last the murderers conscience accu­seth and condemnes him
like both witnesse and Iudge for his bloudy fact. His heart and eyes are both
cast downe, the one as farre as hell, whi­ther the fact had sunke, and the
other to the earth, whither the bloud. He is now wearie of his owne life, as
ere-while he was of anothers. He ties his purse of gold (which had hired him
to kill the other) about his necke, and of­fers it to euery one he meets as
his re­ward if he would kill him. At last hee is paid in his owne coine, and
hires his owne murderer with that price wherewith he himselfe was hired. And
so perish all such whose feet are swift to shed bloud, and he that strikes
with an vnlawfull sword, be strucken with a lawfull againe. This mans case
makes mee to thinke of Cain the old grandsire of all murderers. Of his heauy
doome and misery, and burden and banishment. Dauid once groaned [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=32) vnder the burden
of blood-guiltinesse, but God at his repenting eased him: Psal. 51\. Iudas
takes a worse course then euen Cain did to bee released of the sting of
bloudshed: Mat. 27\. God grant I neuer know what it is to bee guilty of
shedding of bloud, but onely by reading.

## 18\. CAP. XVIII. Of the name of the Red Sea.

IN Hebrew it is called Suph: the sea of weeds: Because (saith Kimchi) there
grew abundance of weeds vpon the sides of it. In Greeke Latine and En­glish,
and other Westerne tongues, it is commonly called the Red Sea: Di­uerse
reasons are giuen by diuerse per­sons why it is so called, the best seemes to
me to be, from the rednesse of the ground about it. And so Herodotus speakes
of a place thereabout called [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=32) Erythrobolus or
the red soile. It is thought our country tooke the name of Albion, from the
like occasion, but not like colour. As from the white rocks or clifts vpon the
sea side. The Iewes hold that Whale that swal­lowed Ionah, brought him into
the Red Sea: and there shewed him the way that Israel passed through it, for
his eyes were as two windowes to Io­nah, that he looked out and saw all the
sea as he went. A whetstone, yet they will needs haue some reason for this
loudly, and this is it, because Ionah in Cap. 2.5. saith Suph hhabhush
leroshi, which is, the weeds were wrapped about my head: which they construe,
the Red Sea was wrapped about my head. And to helpe the Whale thither, Rab­bi
Iaphet saith, that the Red Sea meets with the sea of Iapho, or the
Mediter­ranean: vnlesse the Rabbin meanes that they meet vnder ground, guesse
what a Geographer he was: and if hee find a way vnder ground, guesse [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=33) what a deepe
scholler. A long iour­ney it was for the Whale to go vp to Hercules pillars
into the Ocean, and from thence to the Red Sea in three dayes and nights: but
the fabling Iewes must find some sleight to main­taine their owne inuentions:

## 19\. CAP. XIX. Of the word Raca. Mat. 5.22.

WHosoeuer shall say vnto his bro­ther Raca, shall be worthy to bee punished by
the Councell. The word is a Iewish nick-name, and so vsed in the Talmud for a
despitefull title to a de­spised man, as Our Rabbins shew a thing done with a
religious man that was praying in the high way, by comes a great man, and
giues him the time of the day: but he saluted him not a­gaine: He stayed for
him till he had fi­nished his prayer; after he had done his [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=33) prayer, he said
to him Reka, is it not written in your law, that you shall take heed to your
selues? Had I strucke off thy head with my sword, who should haue required thy
bloud &c. And so goes the angry man on. Irenaeus hath a Phrase nigh to the
signification of this word, qui expuit cerebrum, a man that hath no braines,
and so Raka sig­nifies a man emptie, whether of vn­derstanding or goodnesse:
so the Greeke word  [...] is frequently taken.

## 20\. CAP. XX. Wit stollen by Iewes out of the Gospell.

### 20.1. Gospell.

OVR Sauiour saith to His Disciples, the har­uest truly is great, but the
labourers [[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=34)
are few, Matth. 9.38.

Whosoeuer hea­reth these sayings, and doth them, I will liken him to a man,
that built his house vpon a rock: And the raine de­scended, and flouds came,
&c.

And euery one that heareth these sayings, and doth them not, shalbe likened to
a foo­lish man that built his house vpon the sand. Mat. 7.24, 25. &c.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=34)Of euery
idle word that men speake, they shall giue account ther­of at the day of
Iudgement. Mat. 12.36.

With what mea­sure you mete, it shall be measured to you againe. Mat. 7.2.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=33)

### 20.2. Iewes.

RAbbi Simeon saith: today is the haruest, and the worke is much and the
labourers [[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=34)
idle, and the re­ward great, and the Master of the house vrgent, Pirk Abhoth
Per. 2.

He that learneth the law, and doth many good works, is like a man that built
his house, the foundatiō of stone and the rest of bricke, and the waters
beate, and the stone stood, &c.

But hee that learneth the law, and doth not ma­ny good workes, is like a man
that built his house, the foundation of brick and the rest of stone, &c. and
[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=34) the brick
wasted, &c. Abhoth Rab­bi Nathan.

The very same words almost in Orehhoth hhajmi.

Rabbi Mair saith: with the measure that a man mea­sureth, they mea­sure to him
againe. Sanhedrin.

The whole Lords Prayer might al­most be picked out of their workes, for they
deny not the words though they contradict the force of it. The first words of
it they vse frequently, as Our father which art in heauen: in their common
prayer booke, fol. 5\. and Humble your hearts before your fa­ther which is in
heauen in Rosh [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=35) hashaua. But they
haue as much de­uotion toward the Father while they denie the Sonne, as the
Heathens had which could say  [...] Frequent in Homer. Our father Iupiter, and
worshipped an vnknowne god, Act. 17\. They pray almost in euery other prayer,
Thy kingdome come, and that Bimherah be­jamenu quickly, euen in our dayes, but
it is for an earthly kingdome they thus looke and pray. They pray, lead me not
into temptation, fol. 4\. liturg. while they tempt him that lead them in the
wilder­nesse, as did their father, Psal. 95\. By this Gospell which they thus
filch, they must be judged.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=35)

## 21\. CAP. XXI. Saint Cyprians nicety about the last Petition in the Lords
Prayer.

SAint Cyprian it seemeth is so feare­full of making God the Author of euill,
that he will not thinke that God leadeth any man into temptation. The Petition
he readeth thus: Ne nos patiaris induci in tentationem, suffer vs not to be
lead into temptation, but deli­uer vs from euill, leauing the ordina­nary
current and truth of the Prayer, because hee will not bee accessary to imagine
that God should lead man into temptation: whereas all men as well as he do
thinke, that God doth not leade man into euill temptations as Sathan doth, and
yet that God doth tempt men. So hee is said in plaine words to haue tempted
Abra­ham: And Rabbi Tanchum wittily [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=36) obserues that
Abrahams two great temptations begin both with one straine,  [...] Get thee
gone. The first, Get thee gone out of thy country from thy kind [...]ed and
fathers house, Gen. 12\. the second Get thee gone to the land of Moriah, and
offer thy sonne Isaac vpon one of the mountaines, Gen. 22.

May we not safely say here that God lead Abraham into temptation? But as it
followes, liberautt à malo, God deliuered him from the euill of the
temptation, which is being ouer­come. And Saint Iames saith sweetly, (though
at first he may seeme to croste this Petition)  [...]: Bre­thren account it
all ioy when ye fall into diuerse temptations, Iac. 1.2. to be in temptation
is ioy, for God chastiseth e­uery sonne that he receiueth, and yet pray lead
vs not into temptation, but de­liuer vs from euill: let the latter com­ment
vpon the first, lead vs not into the euill of temptation, which in the
Apostles Phrase is, suffer vs not to bee [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=36) tempted aboue our
strength.

## 22\. CAP. XXII. Septuaginta interpreters.

I Will not with Clemens, Iosephus, Austen, Epiphanius, and others, spend time
in locking them vp seue­rally in their closets, to make their translation the
more admirable: I will onely mind that: They did the worke of this translation
against their will, and therefore we must expect but slipperie doing: And that
appeares by them. Their additions, variations, and (without doubt) ouersights,
may well argue with what a will they went about this businesse. It were easie
to instance in thousands of places. How they adde men and yeares, Gen. 5\. and
10. and 11. and 46. How they add mat­ter of their owne heads: as how they
helpe Iobs wife to skold, Iob: 2. adding [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=37) there a whole
verse of female passion. I must now (saith she) go wander vp and downe, and
haue no place to rest in: and so forth: And so Iob 1.21. Naked came I out of
my mothers wombe, and naked shall I returne thither, the Lord hath giuen and
the Lord hath taken a­way, euen as pleas [...]th the Lord, so come things to
passe, blessed be the name of the Lord, which clause (euen as plea­seth the
Lord so come things to passe) is not in the Hebrew but is added by them, and
so is it taken from them in­to our common prayer booke, in that pa [...]t of
the manner of buriall. To trace them in their mistakes is pretty, to see how
their vnpricked Bible de­ceiued them. As to instance in one or two for a tast.

### 22.1. Hebrew.

Gen. 15.11. It is said, that the birds light vpon the car­casses, and Abra­ham
droue them [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=37)
away: in He [...]rew  [...] vaijashhebh.

Iudges 5.8. The Hebrew saith, they choose new gods, then  [...] lah­hem
shegnarim, was warre in the gates.

Iudges 7.11. The Hebrew saith, and hee and Phurah his seruant, went downe to
the quar­ter (or side) of  [...] Hhamushim the armed men.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=37)

### 22.2. Septuag.

They reade in stead of  [...] vajash­hebh hee droue them away,  [...]
vajeshhebh, hee sate [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=37) by them: and of
this Saint Austen makes goodly Al­legories.

They say, they chose new gods, as  [...] lehhem segnorim, [...]. barly bread.

They say: he and his seruant Pharah went downe to the quarter of  [...]
Hhamishim, fi [...]ty men.

Thus doe they vary in a world of places, which the expert may easily see and
smile at. I omit how they va­ry names of men and places. I will trouble you
with no more but one, which they comment as it were to helpe a difficulty.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=38)

1\. King. 12.2.

It is said of Ierobo­am that hee dwelt in Egypt,  [...] vaijeshhebh
bemit­zraijm.

2\. Chron. 10.2.

It is said that he re [...]urned from Ae­gypt  [...] va­ijashobh
mimmit­zraijm.

The septuagint heales this thus▪ thus translating 2. Chron. 10.2.  [...]: And
he (had) dwelt in Aegypt, and he retur­ned out of Aegypt.

Such is the manner of that worke of the Greeke: Now to examine the Authoritie
of this wee shall find it wonderfull: That some of the Iewish Synagogues read
the old Testament in Greeke and not in Hebrew, Tertul­lian seemeth to
witnesse. But those were Iewes out of Canaan: for they were not so skilfull in
the Greeke tongue in Canaan, for ought I can find, as to vnderstand it so
familiarly: if they had beene, I should haue thought the septuagint to bee the
booke that was giuen to Christ in the [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=38) Synagogue Luke
2.17. Because his text that he reades, does nearer touch the Greeke then the
Hebrew: But I know their tongue was the Meslado­ed Chaldee.

The greatest authority of this tran­slation appeareth, in that the holy Greeke
of the new Testament doth so much follow it. For as God vsed this translation
for a Harbinger to the fetching in of the Gentiles, so when it was growen into
Authority by the time of Christs comming, it seemed good to his infinite
wisdome to adde to its Authority himselfe, the better to forward the building
of the Church. And admirable it is to see with what sweetnesse and Harmony the
New Testament doth follow this translati­on, sometime euen besides the letter
of the old, to shew that he that gaue the old, may and can best expound it in
the new.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=39)

## 23\. CAP. XXIII. The Septuagint ouer-authorized by some.

SOme there were in the Primitiue Church, like the Romanists now, that
preferred this translation of the Greeke (as they do the vulgar Latine) before
the Hebrew fountaine: Of these Saint Austen speakes, of their opinion herein,
and withall giues his owne in his fifteenth booke de Ciuita­te Dei, Cap.
11.13.14- where treating of Methushelahs liuing foureteene yeares after the
flood, according to the Greeke translation: Hence came (saith he) that famous
question, where to lodge Methuselah all the time of the flood: Some hold
(saith he) that he was with his father (Enoch) who was tran­slated, and that
he liued with him there, till the flood was past. They hold thus, as being
loath to derogate from the [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=39) [...]uthority of
those bookes, quos in autori­  [...]atem celebriorem suscepit ecclesia, which
the Church hath entertained into more renowned Authority: And thin­king that
the bookes of the Iewes rather then these, do mistake and erre. For, they say
that it is not credible that the seuentie Interpreters, which translated at
one time, and in one sense, could err, or wouldly or erre, where it concerned
them not: But that the Iewes, for enuy they beare to vs, seeing the Law and
Pro­phets are come to vs by their interpreta­tion, haue changed some things in
their bookes, that the Authority of ours might be lessened. This is their
opinion. Now his owne he giues Cap. 13\. in these words. Let that tongue be
rather beleeued, out of which a translation is made into another by
Interpreters. and in Cap. 14\. The truth of things must be fetched out of that
tongue, out of which, that that we haue, is inter­preted.

It is apparent by most of the Fa­thers [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=40) both Greeke and
Latine, how they followed the Greeke, though I thinke, not so much for
affectation as for meere necessity, few of them being able to reade the Bible
in Hebrew.

I will conclude with Clemens Alex. his reason, why God would haue the Bible
turned into Greeke. [...] [viz.  [...]. Strom. 1. Pag. 124. That is, For this
were the Scriptures interpreted, in the Grecians tongue, that they might haue
no excuse for their ignorance, being able to vnderstand ours (scriptures) if
they would.

## 24\. CAP. XXIIII. Phrases taken from Iewes in the New Testament.

THese Phrases are by the great Broughton called Talmudicke [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=40) Greeke, when
Iewish and Talmudi­call Phrases are vsed in holy writ: Such is Gehenna
frequent in all Rab­bins. Maranatha 1\. Cor. 16.22. the bitter
excommunication. The world to come, so often vsed in the Gospell, and nothing
more often among the Iewes and Chaldees. Raka Mat. 5.22. of which see Cap. 19.
Iannes and Iam­bres, 2\. Tim. 3.8. whose names I find in the Chaldee
Paraphrast with very little difference, and a goodly legend of them. As in
Exod. 1.15. Pharaoh slept and saw in his dreame, and behold all the land of
Egypt was put in one scale and a Chal. Ta­lia bar ime­ra. young lambe in the
other scale, and the lambe waighed downe the scales of himselfe, Chal.
Mi­iadb. out of hand: a Phrase most vsu­all in Iewes Au­thors, and the very
same in Eng. out of hand. out of hand he sends and calls all the sorcerers of
Egypt, and tells them his dreame: Out of hand Ianis & Iimbres chief of the
sorcerers opened their mouthes and said vnto Pharaoh: there is a child to be
borne of some of the congregation of Israel, by whose hands all the land of
Egypt shalbe wasted, ther­fore [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=41) the King
consulted with the Iewish midwiues, &c. And in Exo. 7.11▪ He cals them Ianis
and Iambres. And that you might the better vnderstand who these two were, the
Hebrew comment vpon the Chaldee text saith, they were schol­lers for their art
of enchanting to the no­ble wizard Balaam: and so he fetches Zophar for
authority to maintaine them▪ And to proue Ianis and Iam­bre [...] [...]her
very constant enemies and opposers to Moses, or else very good dutifull
schollers to Balaam, the Chal­dee saith that these two were the two seruants
that went with Balaam, Num. 22.22. when he went to curse Israel.

Beelzebub, or as the New Testa­ment Greeke calls it Beelzebul, is a wicked
phrase vsed by the Iewes of Christ, Mar. 3.22. and elsewhere. Now whether this
change of the last letter were among the Iewes acciden­tall or of set purpose,
I cannot deter­mine. Such ordinary variation of letters, without any other
reason, euen [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=41) vse of euery
country affoords. So Reuben is in the Syrian called Rubil, Apoc. 7.5. So the
Greeke and La­tine Paulus, is in the Syrian Phaulus, in Arabian Baulus. But
some giue a witty reason of l in Beelzebul, that the Iewes in derision of the
Ekronites god Baalzebub (which was a name bad enough, the god of a flie) gaue
him a worse, Baalzebul, the god of a Sir-Reuerence, for so  [...] signifies in
Chal­dean.

To omit any more Iewish Phrases honoured by the New Testament vsing them, this
very thing does shew, the care is to be had for the right rea­ding of the
Greeke, since so many idi­omes and so many kinds of stile are vsed by it.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=42)

## 25\. CAP. XXV. Niniuehs conuersion: Ionah 3.

THe booke of Ionah is wholly composed of wonders. Some hold Ionah to be
wonderfull in his birth. As that he should be the sonne of the Sa­repta widow,
whom Eliah raised to life: And because the mother of the child said, Now I
know that the word of God in thy mouth is true, therefore he is called Ben
Amittai, the sonne of my truth: whether the story may be cal­led Ben Amittai,
or a true storie, let the reader censure, by the two townes of Sarepta and
Gath-hepher. Howso­euer Ionah was wondrous in his birth, I am sure he was
wondrous in his life. A Prophet, and a runnagate, before his shipwracke, a man
drow­ned, and yet aliue, in his shipwracke, and a Preacher of repentance, and
yet a Repiner at Repentance, after. The [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=42) least wonder in
the booke is not the conuersion of Niniueh. It was a great wonder (as D.
Kimchi saies) that Io­nah was in the belly of the fish three daies and three
nights and yet liued. And it was another wonder that he was not stupid but
continued in his senses and intellectuals and prayed: And do but well consider
it, and it will ap­peare almost as great a wonder, that Niniueh so great a
town, so long wic­ked, in so short time should be con­uerted. To say as Rabbi
Ioshuah doth, that the men of the ship were got to Ni­niueh, and had told all
the occurrence a­bout Ionah, how they had throwen him ouer hatches, and yet he
it was that was among them, and therefore they belee­ued the sooner, as it is
without Autho­rity, so doth it lessen the wonder of the townes conuersion.

Ionah an vnknowne man, of a for­raigne people, to come into so great a City
with a Fourty dayes and Nini­ueh shall be destroyed, was strange. But [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=43) for the King vpon
so short a time, to send a cryer to proclaime repentance, is as strange if not
stranger. Ionah proclaimes the towne shall bee de­stroyed, the King (in a
manner) pro­claimes, the towne shall not bee de­stroyed, by proclaiming the
meanes how to saue it, Repentance. To say as Aben Ezra giues 2 reasons of
poore force to proue, that Nini­ueh feared God in old time. 1 Because
otherwise he would not haue sent his Prophet to them, and so hee lessens the
wonder of Gods mercy.2\. Because wee reade not that they brake their ima­ges,
there­fore they had not any. How f [...]r the Fa [...] is beside the
[...]ushion both for construc­tion and reasō one of small skill may iudge.
Aben Ezra does, that because the City is called Gnir gedholah leelohim, a
great citie of God, that therfore they fea­red God in old time, but now in
Ionahs time began to do euill, is still to lessen the wonder, about their
conuersion: a stranger repentance then which the world neuer saw. The old
world had a time of warning, of yeares, for Ni­niuehs houres, and yet eat and
drunke till the flood came, and then in the flouds of many waters, Repentance
and Prayers would not come neere God, Psal. 32\. Faire warning had Sodome by
the preaching of Lot, whose righteous soule they vexed, and would not re­pent,
till their Hell (as it were) began [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=43) from heauen, and
fire and brimstone brought them to the lake of fire and brimstone: and when
the wicked seed of him that derided his fathers naked­nesse, perished for
their naked beast­linesse, and their flames of lust brought them to flames on
earth and in hell. The men of Niniueh shall rise vp in iudgement against the
gene­ration of the Iewes, and condemne them, because these at the preaching of
Ionah repented, and they not for the preaching of a greater then Ionah, that
was among them. When the Master of the vineyard sent his ser­uants, nay his
owne sonne, they put him to death. In the conuersion and deliuerie of Niniueh
I cannot but ad­mire a double mercy of God, who (to vse a fathers words) sic
dedit peniten­tibus veniam, qui sic dedit peccantibus penitentiam: who was so
ready vpon their repentance to grant them par­don, who was so ready vpon his
threat­ning to giue them repentance.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=44)Other kind
of entertainment (then Io­nah had) had he, that came from Grego­rie Bishop of
Rome, to preach to our Realme of England. The passage of which story our
countriman Bede hath fully related. That when Austen had preached the Gospell
to the King, and dehorted him from his irreligious re­ligion: your words
(saith the King) are good, but I haue beene trained vp so in the religion I
now follow, that I cannot forsake it to change for a new. This argument too
many superstiti­ous soules ground vpon in these dayes, choosing rather to erre
with Plato, then to follow the truth with another. Desiring rather to be, and
be­ing as they desire, of a false religion, then to forsake the profession of
their Parents and Predecessors. Not refu­sing (like good fellowes) to go to
hell for company, rather then to heauen a­lone. Such a boon companion was
Ro­chardus king of the Phrisons: of whom it is recorded, that whereas a Bishop
[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=44) had
perswaded him so farre towards Christianity, as that he had got him into ye
water to baptize him: the king there questions, which way his fore­fathers
went, which died vnbaptized, whether to heauen or hell? The Bi­shop answers,
that most certainely they were gone to hell. Then will I go the same way with
them (saith the wicked king) and pulls backe his foot out of the water, and
would not bee baptized at all. Hoc animus meminisse horret luctu (que)
refugit.

## 26\. CAP. XXVI. Of the Iewes Sacraments, Cir­cumcision, and Passeouer.

BOth these Sacraments of the Iewes were with bloud: both in figure: the one to
carrie the memo­rie of Christ till he came, and the o­ther the passion of him
being come. Abraham receiued the signe of Circum­cision, [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=45) the seale of the
righteousnesse of faith which he had when he was vncir­cumcised: Rom. 4\. The
Israelites re­ceiued the institution of the Passeo­uer in Aegypt: Exod. 12\. I
will not stand to allegorize these matters, of the time and manner of
receiuing these two, but onely of the things themselues.

Circumcision giuen in such a place is not for nothing: but in the place of
generation, it is giuen Abraham, as a seale of his faith, that he should be
the father of all those that beleeue, Rom. 4\. And especially a seale to him
of Christs comming from those loines neere to which his circumcision was. And
appertaining to this I take to be the oath that Abraham giues his seruant, and
that Iacob giues Ioseph, with their hands put vnder their thighes As the Iewes
think. not to sweare by their cir­cumcision, but by Christ that should come
from those thighes. Circumci­sion was also vsed for distinction of an [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=45) Israelite, at the
first: and hence were they distinguished; but in time, Is­mael had taught his
race so much, and Aegyptians, Phaenicians, Arabians, and the countries about
them grew circumcised. So was Pythagoras cir­cumcised, that he might haue
accesse to the recluse misteries of the Aegyp­tians religion.

Circumcision was also vsed with the Iewes as Baptisme with vs, for ad­mission
into the Church of Israel. And it was Gods expresse command that the child on
the eight day should be circumcised. And on that day more then any other
(saith Saint Au­sten) to signifie Christs resurrection, who rested the weekes
end in the graue, and rose on the eight day: And if A­ristotle say true, one
may giue a rea­son, why not before the eight day: because a child for the
seuen dayes is most dangerous for weakenesse. A stranger was so admitted to
their congregati­on: Exod. 2.48. And of this does [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=46) Rabbi Eliezer
fantastically expound that verse in Ionah 1.16. Then the men feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offe­red sacrifice: whereupon the wan­dring Iew saith thus.
As soone as the mariners saw (when they drew neere to Niniueh) all the wonders
that the bles­sed God did to Ionah, they stood and cast euery one his gods
into the sea. They re­turned to Ioppa, and went vp to Ierusa­lem, and
circumcised the flesh of their fore-skin, as it is said. And the men feared
the Lord exceedingly, and sacrifi­ced sacrifices: what sacrifice? but this
bloud of the circumcision which is as the blood of a sacrifice: And they vowed
to bring euery one his wife and children, and all that he had, to feare the
Lord God of Ionah: and they vowed and per­formed.

This was indeed the way to admit proselytes, by circumcision, but in Sa­lomons
time, when they became Pro­selytes by thousands, they admitted them by Bap
[...]sme or washing as [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=46) [...]ome Iewes
doe witnesse.

Whether the neglect of Circum­cision (as I may so tearme it) in the
wildernesse, were meerely politicke, because of their more fitnesse, for any
moments remoouall, and march, or whether some mysterie were in it I will not
decide. Nor need I relate how the Iewes vse to circumcise their children, for
the great Buxtorfius hath punctually done it: Nor can I relate how highly the
Iewes prize their Circumcision, for one might gather volumes out of them vpon
this subiect. For they consider not, that he is not a Iew, which is one
outward: neither is that circumcision which is out­ward in the flesh. But he
is a Iew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the
spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=47)

## 27\. CAP. XXVII. Of the Passeouer.

THe Passeouer was a full represen­tation of Christs passion: though to the
Iewes the Passeouer was more then a meere shadow. To run through the parts of
it might bee more then copious: A word and away.

At the Passe­ouer the begin­ing of the yeare is chan­ged.

So

At Christs Pas­souer the be­ginning of the week is chan­ged.

The Passeouer was either of a lamb, to signifie Christs innocencie, or of a
Kid, to signifie his likenesse to sinfull flesh: as Lyranus.

The Lambe, or Kid was taken vp and kept foure dayes, to see whether he were
spotlesse: and (it may be) to scoure and cleanse himselfe from his grasse.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=47)

The Passeo­uer slaine at euen.

So

Christ slaine at euen.

His bloud to be sprink­led with a bunch of hy­sope.

CHRISTS bloud sprinkled: And of this I thinke Da­uid may bee vn­derstood:
Psal. 51\. Cleanse me with Hysope. That is, besprinkle mee with the bloud of
the true Pas­chall Lambe Ie­sus Christ.

He was to bee rosted with fire.

So Christ tried with fire of af­fliction.

These parts were to be roasted.

His Head

So was CHRIST tortured.

His head with thornes.

His legs

His hands & feet with nails.

His inward parts.

His inwards, with a speare.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=48)Their
eating of him, as it concer­ned the Israelites in their estate, so may it
instruct Christians for the ea­ting of the true Passeouer, the Lords Supper.

The Passe­ouer eaten

Without leauen

So the Sacra­ment of the supper to bee eaten

Without leauen of malice.

With bit­ter herbs.

With bitter repen­tance.

With loins girt.

With resolution of amendment.

With feet shod.

With preparation to walke better.

With staf in hand.

Lea [...]ing on the staff of true faith

In hast.

Hasting to leaue this worldly Aegipt.

Thus was the Passeouer first eaten in Aegypt: after which all Aegypt is
strucke, with death of the first borne, and the Aegyptians are now punished
with death of their Children for murthering Israels children. This night was
ill to them, but the night in the Red Sea was worse.

At the death of a lambe

Aegypt is de­stroyed Israel deliuered.

So by the death of a lamb

Hell is de­stroyed.Mankinde deliuered

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=48)When Israel
comes out of Egypt, they bring vp with them Iosephs bones, and so as hee
brought them downe thither, so they bring him vp thence.

So when Christ comes vp out of his graue, hee brings dead bones with him, by
raising some out of their graues: I cannot thinke it idle, that the Passeouer
was at night, and that S. Paul saith, the Israelites were bap­tized in the
sea, which was also by night, and in the cloud: but to shew that these
sacraments of Israel looked for a dawning when the true light, which they
foresignified should ap­peare.

The Iewes do find thirteene pre­cepts negatiue and affirmatiue about the
keeping of the Passeouer.

1\. The slaying of it.

    Exod. 12.6.
2\. The eating of it.

    8.
3\. Not to eate it raw or boiled.

    9.
4\. Not to leaue ought of it.

    10.
5\. The putting away of leauen.

    15.
[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=49)6\. The
eating of vnleauened bread.

    18.
7\. That leauen be not found with them.

    19.
8\. Not to eate ought mixt with leauen.

    20.
9\. An Apostata Iew not to eate it.

    43.
10\. A stranger not to eat it.

    45.
11\. Not to bring forth the flesh of it.

    46.
12\. Not to breake a bone of it

    46.
13\. No vncircumcised to eate of it.

    48.

How variously they comment vp­on these as they doe vpon all things, and how
ouercurious they be in ob­seruing these as they doe all things, their writings
do witnesse. Their fol­ding of their bitter hearbes, their three vnleauened
cakes, their water, and salt, their searching for leauen, their casting forth
of leauen, and their cursing of leauen, their graces ouer their tables, their
prayers ouer their [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=49) hands as they
wash them, their words ouer their vnleauened bread, their re­membring how they
liued in Aegypt, and came out, their words ouer their bitter hearbes, their
Passeouer Psalmes the 113. and 114. all these and their o­ther Ceremonies are
set downe accu­rately in their Common prayer booke, which I would not haue
deni­ed to the reader in English, both for his recreation, satisfaction, and
some instruction, but that I know not whe­ther I should actum agere: doe that
which some one hath done before. And besides I write these things not as
[...] but  [...], not set studies, but stolne houres, employing my idle houres
to the writing of these studies, that I may witnesse to some, that my whole
time is not idle. But it may be I may seeme more idle in thus wri­ting, then
if I had beene idle indeed: to them that thinke thus, I can onely answer: It
is youth: Age may doe better.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=50)

## 28\. CAP. XXVIII. Of the Confusion of Tongues.

THat the world from Babel was scattered into diuerse tongues, we need not
other proofe, then as Dio­genes proued that there is motion, by walking: so we
may see the confusion of languages by our confused spea­king. Once all the
Earth was of one tongue, one speech, and one consent, for they all spake in
the holy tongue where­in the world was created in the begin­ning (to vse the
very words of the Chaldee Paraphrast and Targ. Ieru­sal. vpon Gen. 11.1.) But
pro peccato dis [...]entionis humanae (as saith Saint Austen) for the sin of
men disagreeing not onely different dispositions, but also different languages
came into the world. They came to Babel with a disagree­ing agreement, & they
come away pu­nished with a speechles speech. They [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=50) disagree among
themselues, cum quis­que principatum ad se rapit, while eue­ry one striues for
dominion (as the same Austen) They agree against God in their Nagnauad lan
Siguda, &c. We will make our selues a Rende­vouz for Idolatrie (as the same
Ieruse­lamy.) But they come away speaking each to other, but not vnderstood of
each other, and so speake to no more purpose, then if they spake not at all.
This punishment of theirs at Babel, is like Adams corruption, heredita­ry to
vs, for we neuer come vnder the rod at Grammar schoole, but we smart for our
Ancestors rebellion at Babel.

Into how many countries and One in Epi [...]hanius saith, this is easie to
find, but he doth little to­wards it. Epiph cont. Haeres. tom. 2 l. b. 6.
tongues those Shinaar rebells were scattered is no lesse confused worke to
find out, then was theirs at the tower. So diuerse is the speech of men, about
the diuersitie of speech, that it makes the confusion more confused.  [...]
&c. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. Eu­phorus and many other Historians say, [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=51) that the nations
and tongues are 75\. li­stening to the voice of Moses, which saith, all the
soules that came into Egypt out of Iacob were 75\. But in truth the naturall
Dialects (of speech) ap­peare to be 72\. as our Scriptures haue de­liuered.
Thus saith Clemens Alexan­drinus: of whose conceit herein I must for my part
say, as Saint Am­brose saith of Aaron about the gol­den calfe. Tantum
Sacerdotem, &c. So great a scholler as Clemens I dare not censure, though I
dare not beleeue him. The Iewes with one consent main­taine, that there are
iust 70. nations & so many tongues. So confident they are of this, that they
dare say, that the 70. soules that went with Iacob into E­gypt were as much as
all the 70. nati­ons of the world. Ierusalems schooles rang with this
Doctrine, and the chil­dren learned to high-prize themselues from their
fathers. A stately claime was this to Israel, but the keeping of it dangerous.
Men of the 70. na­tions [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=51) would not be so
vnderualued by one people. Therefore when Israel wanted strength to keepe this
chal­lenge, they do it by sleight. And so it is the thrice-learned Master
Brough­tons opinion, that the Septuagint when they were to translate the
Bible, and were to speake of the seuenty soules of Iacobs house, they durst
not put downe the iust number of seuenty, least tales should haue beene told
out of their schooles (concerning their scornefull doctrine) and when the
ru­mour and the number should both come to the King of Egypt, the meet number
might maintaine the truth of the rumour, and by both they might incurre
danger, therefore they added fiue more, to spoile the roundnesse of the
summe,So in Gē. 10. the Septuag. put in 2. Cainans: and so spoile the
roundnes of that 70 and Saint Steuen followes their translation: Then Ioseph
sent and called his father Iacob, to him and all his kinred, euen 75\. soules.
Act. 7.14.

As the Iewes seeke to retaine this their assumed dignity ouer the se­uenty
[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=52) nations by
this sleight, so doe they maintaine their tenent of iust se­uenty nations by a
double reason. First, they count polls in the plaine of Shinaar, as Moses did
in the wilder­nesse, and they find in the tenth of Genesis iust seuenty men,
and therefore by necessarie consequence, iust seuen­ty nations. The Chaldee
vpon these words of God, Gen. 11.5. Come let vs go downe: Iulian the Heretick
bo [...]h de­nies the Trinity to be meant in this place, and saith God alone
was vnable for this work Cyril. tom. 3\. l 4. looses the sweet mysterie of the
Trinitie, but finds I know not how many strange fancies: for thus he descants.
The Lord said vnto the seuenty Angells that are before him, come now let vs go
downe, and confound there their tongue, that a man shall not vnderstand his
fellow. And a little af­ter he saith, And with him (that is, with God) were
seuenty Angells ac­cording to the seuenty nations. I doubt not but the tenth
chapter was his ground for so many men, but I know not where he should find so
many An­gels. Seuenty men are indeed named [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=52) in the tenth
chapter, but were all those at Babel? And if they were, must those seuenty
needs speake seuen­ty tongues? A whole dozen of them, Canaan and his eleuen
sonnes sit down close together, in, or (at least) not farre out of the small
compasse of Ca­naan: where they all differed not, (if any at all did) in
language, being seated so nigh together. That E­domites, Moabites, Amalekites,
and Ammonites spake not Hebrew, is Quaest. 60\. on Gen. Theodorets opinion,
but that all these, and Canaan differed in mater­nall tongues, before Israel
planted it, I cannot conceiue. Nay, that Canaan spake Hebrew before Ioshua
came there, I could be perswaded to beleeue for three reasons.

First: the old names of Canaan townes are significant in Hebrew: Ie­bus,
troden downe, by Heathens then, as it is now by the Turkes, Kirjath­arbang,
the City of arbang: Iosh. 14.15. Iericho, he shall smell it, the City [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=53) of Palme-trees.
The sinfull City Ze­boim hath in the text a faire Hebrew name, Zebhiim, that
is, the Roes, a name too good for so bad a towne, therefore the margin giues
it another name, Zebhojim. Infinite it is to trace all Hebrew-Canaanitish
names, who will may trie at pleasure and lea­sure.

S [...]condly: Sure I am, that one chief towne in Canaan (if not then also as
afterward the chiefest) that is Ierusa­lem, was Hebrew when it was gouer­ned
by Melchizedek or Sem: who were all one, as the See the Targums on Gen. 10.
Chaldees, Vid. Mr Brough [...]ons Melchiz. Iewes, and most Christians do hold.
Then did Sem make Canaan a seruant [Gen. 9.26.] vnder his rule, and I doubt
not but vnder his tongue also.

Thirdly. I see that a woman Ra­hab, vnderstands the Hebrewes at the first
sight, and speakes to them (for ought wee finde) without interpre­ter.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=53)I find the
Amorites and Sidonians differing in the name of Hermon, one calling it Sirion,
and the other She­nir, Deut. 3.9. But I see not, but both the Hebrewes, and
some Canaanites agree in the name Hermon. This groundworke then of seuenty
mens being named in the tenth of Genesis to import necessarily seuenty tongues
in the eleuenth chapter, I cannot enter­taine: yet referre my selfe to better
iudgement.

The second reason  [...]or seuenty tongues they fetch out of Moses: Deut.
32.8. from these words: when the most high diuided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sonnes of Adam, he set the bounds of the
people, according to the number of the children of Israel. What all Iewes
thought and gathered from that place, let two speake for the rest: Those be
Ionathan ben Vzziel, and Ra­si. Ionathan reades the verse in Chal­dee thus,
when the highest gaue posses­sion [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=54) of the world to
the people that de­scended of the sonnes of Noah: when he deuided letters and
tongues to the sons of men, in the age of the diuision, &c. at that time he
sets the bounds of the nations, according to the number of the soules of
Israel that went downe into E­gypt. Thus the Chaldee. Rasi com­ments to the
same purpose in these words: when the holy-blessed-he gaue to those that
prouoked him, the portion of their inheritance, he ouerwhelmed and drowned
them. When he scattered the generation of the diuision, it was in his power to
haue passed them out of the world, yet did he not so, but sets borders of the
people. He reserues them, and does not destroy them. (According to the number)
for the number of the children of Israel, which were to come of the sons of
Sem, and according to the number of the seuenty soules, of the sonnes of
Israel that went downe into Egypt: (Hee set bounds of the People) Seuenty
tongues. Thus farre the Rabbin: Who is so [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=54) confident of this
number of seuenty languages, that he saith, there were men of the seuenty
nations in the ship with Ionah, Ionah 1\. Thus is the Iewes current for
seuenty, the Clem. Alex. Epi­phanius Comestor. &c. Greekes for seuenty two,
vpon what ground I know not, vnlesse the two Cainans in Gen. 10\. in the
Greeke Bible, make vp this number to them. Some lin­guists haue summed vp the
vsuall tongues and Dialects, but seuenty or seuenty two maternalls I neuer
saw. Moderne tongues are like the old ship Argo, patched vp with so many
pee­ces, that it is hard to tell which is a peece of old Argo.

## 29\. CAP. XXIX. Of letters.

THat the Hebrew tongue was from the foundation of the world, none denie, but
whether the letters [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=55) be so ancient,
some question. Some hold that those letters that God wrote with his owne hand
in the two tables, were the first letters that euer were written. The studious
Pliny thinkes, that among the Assyrians, letters haue beene alwayes, but
Gellius thinks they were inuented in Egypt by Mercury, and others think among
the Syrians. If we examine Pliny well, we shall find him true in the first and
last, howeuer in the middle. If the Assyrian tongue were the Chaldee tongue
(as most like it was) then were those letters from the beginning of the world:
the Hebrew and Chaldee letter, being all one, vnlesse the Assyrian differed
from both. If you take Syrian in the sence that Theodoret does for Hebrew,
then Pliny speakes true, that letters were first among the Syrians. For
Theodo­ret calls the Hebrew tongue Syrian, as the Gospell calls the Syrian
tongue Hebrew, Ioh. 19.20. But Pliny con­cludes that Cadmus first brought
let­ters [[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=55)
into Greece out of Phaenicia. Iustin Martyr saith, that Greece thinkes so her
selfe. Athanasius hol­deth the Phaenicians for the first in­uentors of
letters. That the Phaenici­ans and Syrians first found out letters, is a
receiued opinion in Clemens A­lexandrinus. Eupolemus thinkes that the
Phaenicians receiued Grammar from the Iewes, and the Greeks from the
Phaenicians. And Euphorus thinks that Cadmus was hee that conueyed them.
Chaerilus in Eusebius makes Phaenicians and Iewes all one. For he nameth Iewes
in Xexes armie, and names their tongue the Phaenician, his words be these:

[...]

[...]

[...].

In English thus.

A wondrous people marcht behind along:

Their Dialect was the Phaenician tongue.

On hill of Solymae they dwelt: thereby

A spacious lake not farre remote doth lie.

These Phaenicians (if you will call [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=56) them so) or
Iewes, were the first that had letters. But the Iewes were not Phaenicians
indeed nor their tongue the same, yet for bordering of their Countries, the
Poet makes them all one. The Phaenician is not now to be had, vnlesse the The
Sy­rian translating of the word Phaenicia in the new Te­stament, seemes to
confirme this for true.Punick or Carthagi­nian, and Phaenick or Phaenician,
were all one (which most like they were) And then some few lines of the tongue
are to be found in Plautus his Paenulus, which as Paraeus saith, can little or
nothing be made off. Eusebi­us speakes of Sancuniathou, that wrote the
Phaenician history in the same tongue, but more of the language he saith not:
But to the matter. That letters were so long in vse before the giuing of the
Law, I am induced to beleeue vpon these reasons.

First Iosephus is of this mind, that letters were before the flood. And the
Scripture cites Enochs prophecie, which whether it were written by him or not,
is vncertaine: yet if there [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=56) were any such
thing, those many pla­ces which we find of it in Tertullian, Clemens, and
others, do argue, that so much could not punctually bee kept by word of mouth.

A second reason to mooue mee to thinke of letters before the giuing of the Law
is, to thinke of Iosephs ac­counts in Egypt, which seeme almost impossible
without writing.

Thirdly: But omitting that, I can­not see how all arts and sciences in the
world should then flourish, as (consi­dering their infancy) they did with­out
the groundworke of all learning, letters.

Fourthly: Againe for the Iewes, vpon the writing of the law to be put to
spelling (as they that had neuer seene letters before) and not to be able to
reade it, had beene a law vpon the law, adding to the hardnesse of it.

Fiftly: Nor can I thinke, that when Moses saith, blot me out of thy book that
hee taketh the Metaphor from [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=57) his owne bookes
(which it is proba­ble he had not yet written) but from other bookes which
were then aboun­ding in the world.

Sixtly: the Egyptian Chronicles of so many thousand yeares in Diodo­rus and
Laertius, I know are ridicu­lous; yet their carefulnesse of keeping Records I
haue euer beleeued. The Greekes were boyes to them, as it is in Plato, and
Moses was scholler to them or their learning. Act. 7.

Now I cannot thinke that this their exceeding humane learning was kept onely
in their braines, and none in writing. Nor do I think that if it were written,
that it was de­cyphered onely in their obscure Hie­roglyphicks, but that some
of it came to ordinary writing of familiar letters

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=57)

## 30\. CAP. XXX. Of the Hebrew tongue.

WHo so will goe about to com­mend the Hebrew tongue, may iustly receiue the
censure, that he of Rome did, who had made a long booke in the praise of
Hercules: This labour is in vaine, for neuer any one dis­praised Hercules.
Other commenda­tions this tongue needeth none, then what it hath of its selfe,
namely, for Sanctitie it was the tongue of God, and for Antiquitie it was the
tongue of Adam: God the first founder, and A­dam the first speaker of it. In
this tong were laid vp the mysteries of the old Testament. It begun with the
world and the Church, and continued & in­creased in glory, till ye captiuitie
in Ba­bel, which was a Babel to this tongue, and brought to confusion this
lan­guage, which at ye first confusion, had [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=58) escaped without
ruine. At their re­turne, it was in some kinde repaired, but farre from former
perfection. The holy Scriptures veiwed by Ezra, a scribe fit for the kingdome
of heauen, in whose treasure were things new and old. In the Maccabean times
all went to ruine, language and lawes and all lost: and since that time to
this day, the pure Hebrew hath lost her fami­liaritie, being onely knowne by
schol­lers or at least not without teaching. Our Sauiours times spake the
Syrian, Kepha, Golgotha, Talitha, and other words do witnesse; In aftertimes
the vnwearied Masorites arose, helpers to preserue the Bible Hebrew intire,
and Grammarians helpers to preserue the Idiome aliue; but for restoring it to
the old familiaritie, neither of them could preuaile. For, the Iewes haue at
this day no abiding citie, no Com­mon wealth, no proper tongue, but speake as
the countries wherein they liue. This whereof they were once [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=58) most nice is
gone, and this groat they haue lost. As the man in Seneca that through sicknes
lost his memorie, and forgot his own name; so they for their sin haue lost
their language, and for­got their own tongue. Their Cain-like wandring, after
the murther of their brother, according to the flesh, Christ Iesus, hath lost
them this precious marke of Gods fauour, and branded them with a worse marke:
Cauterio conspirationis antiquae, as saith Saint Bernard in another case.
Before the confusion of tongues all the world spake their tongue and no other,
but since the confusion of the Iewes, they speake the language of all the
world, and not their owne. And that it is not with them so, onely of late, but
hath been long; Theodoret beareth witnesse in these words▪ Other nations
(saith he) haue their children speaking quickly in their owne mother tongue.
Howbeit, there are no children of the Hebrewes who naturally spake the Hebrew
tongue, [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=59)
but the language of the countrie where they are borne. Afterward when they
grow vp they are taught the letters, and learne to read the holy Scripture in
the Hebrew tongue. Thus Theod. in quaest. on Gen ▪ 59.60.

About this their training vp of their children, and growth of men, in their
owne tongue and learning: a Rabbin hath this saying in Pirke Auoth. Perek. 1.
Ben He He saith. At fiue yeares old for the Scripture, at ten for Mishneh, at
thirteene Or Phi­lacteries. &c. for the Commandements, at fifteene for the
Talmud. At eighteene for Mariage, at twentie for Seruice, at thirtie for
Strength, at fortie for Vnderstanding, at fiftie for Counsell, at sixtie for
Old age, at seuentie for Gray haires, at eightie Or for­titude (of mind) or
God. for Profoundnesse, at nintie for Meditation, at one hundred he is as dead
and past and gone out of the world. The Iewes looke for a pompous kingdome,
when Messias the Sonne of Dauid shall come, whom they watch for euerie [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=59) moment till he
come, as it is in the 12. Article of their Creed, in their common prayer
booke. Hee shall re­store them (as they hope) a tempo­rall kingdome (and of
that minde, till they were better taught, were the A­postles, Acts 1.6.) and
then their tongue shall reuiue againe, as they surmise. But the diuine
Apocaliptick writing after Ierusalem was ruined, might teach them what the
second Ie­rusalem must be, not on earth but from heauen, Apoc. 21, 2. But to
re­turne to their tongue.

The characters, we now haue the Hebrew tongue in, Scaliger thinkes are but of
a latter hatch, and not the same that the Iewes vsed from Moses, till the
destruction of the temple. For, that they vsed the Phaenician or Ca­nanaean
character, which now is cal­led the Samaritan. How truely I re­ferre to the
Readers iudgement.

The character wee now haue is ei­ther a set or a running letter: the first,
[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=60) the Bible
is ordinarily Printed in, in the latter the most of the Rabbins.

The whole tongue is contained in the Bible, and no one booke else in the
world, containes in it a whole language. And this shewes that the Scripture
speakes to all sorts of peo­ple, since it speakes of all sorts of things. This
language is (as God said the Iewes should bee, if they would keepe his Law.) A
lender to all, and a borrower of none. All tongues are in debt to this, and
this to none. The Easterne most especially must ac­knowledge this. Some men in
the East (saith Origen) reserue their old speech, (meaning by likelihood the
Hebrew) and haue not altered it, but haue continued in the Easterne tongue,
because they haue continued in the Easterne countries. No Easterne tongue that
I haue heard of, is Hebrew now, so that what to say to Origen I cannot tell,
vnlesse he meane that those that haue continued in the East, haue kept neerest
this holy [[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=60)
tongue, because neerest the holy land: this to be true is knowne to the
meanest learned. In their speech it is apparent, and by their writing
con­firmed. All of them haue learned from the Hebrew, to write from the right
hand to the left (or as we vsuall call it in England, to write, and reade
backward:) The China and Ia­pan writing excepted, which is indeed from the
right hand to the left, but not with the lines crossing the leafe as other
tongues doe, but the lines downe the leafe. A strange way by it selfe.

Againe, most of the Easterne tongues do vse the Hebrew character for quicke
writing, or some other end. The Chaldee letter is the verie fame. The Syrian
though it haue two or three kinds of its owne, yet is content sometime to take
vpon it the Hebrew character. The Arabian doth the like, especially the Iewes
in Turkie vse in hatred of Mahumetans, to write [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=61) downe their
matters of Religion; in the Hebrew character, though in the Arabian tongue. So
do the Christian Arabians for the same cause in their holy things, vse the
Arabian tongue, but Syrian letter. And I take a place in Epiphanius to be
meant to this pur­pose, also about the Persian tongue. His words out of
another are these. The Persians besides their owne letters do also vse the
letters of the Syrians: as in our times many nations vse the Greeke, though
almost euery nation hath a proper character. I referre to the Rea­der to iudge
whether hee meane not that the Persians (as other countries about them did,)
did vse the Hebrew character for their quicke writing: which is called Syrian
by Theodoret.

To speake of the grace, and sweet­nesse, and fulnesse of the Hebrew tongue, is
to no purpose to relate, for euen those that cannot reade this tongue haue
reade thus much of it.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=61)

## 31\. CAP. XXXI. Of Vowels.

EAsterne tongues, especially the Hebrew and her three Dialects, Chaldee,
Syrian, and Arabian, are written sometimes with vowells, som­times without:
with, for certainty, without, for the speedier writing: we haue Hebrew Bibles
of both kinds. The Septuagint it seemes translated by the vnpricked Bible, as
S, Hierome in his commentary vpon the Pro­phets seemeth to import, & as to any
one that examineth it is easie to find. Instead of all other places in Gen.
4.7. it is apparant: where the seuenty Translators reseruing the letters haue
strangely altered the vowels.

The Hebrew hath it thus.  [...] Halo in te­tibh Seeth, weim lo tetibh,
lappethahh robhets, which is is in English thus: [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=62) If thou do well
shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sinne lieth at the doore:
they translate it as pointed thus:  [...] Halo im tetibh seeth, weim lo tetibh
lephatte­ahh hhatatha rebhats. Which is: If thou do well in offering and do
not well in diuiding thou hast sinned, be quiet. This, follow with one
consent, the Greeke and many of the Latine Fa­thers: They could not thus
translate, because they knew not the text, or because they wanted pointed
Bibles, but on set purpose to hide pearles from swine (as the best learned
think.) But that they did alwayes misse on set purpose (where they missed)
their many lapses seeme to deny: but som­time they mistooke the vnpricked
text, and so misconstrued. A vowel­led Bible they might haue had but would
not.

Some there bee that thinke the vowels of the Hebrew, were not in­uented for
many yeares After Christ. [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=62) Which to mee
seemeth to be all one, as to deny sinewes to a body: or to keepe an infant
vnswadled, and to suf­fer him to turne and bend any way till hee grow out of
fashion. For mine owne satisfaction I am fully resolued, that the letters and
vowels of the He­brew were as the soule and body in a child, knit together at
their concepti­on and beginning: and that they had both one Author.

1\. For, first a tongue cannot bee learned without vowells, though at last,
skill and practice may make it to be read without. Grammar and not nature
makes men to do this, and this also helped out with the sence of the place we
read.

2\. That Masorites should amend that which the Septuagint could not see, and
that they should read righter, then the other (who were of farre greater
Authority) I cannot be­leeue.

3\. Our Sauiour in his words of one [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=63) Iota and one
small kerai not perishing from the law, seemes to allude to the least of the
letters, Iod, and the least vowell and accent.

4\. Lastly, it is aboue the skill of a meere man to point the Bible; nay,
scarsely a verse as it is. The ten Com­mandements may puzzle all the world for
that skill.

## 32\. CAP. XXXII. Of the Language of two Testa­ments.

THe two Testaments are like the Apostles at Ierusalem (when the confusion of
tongues at Babel was re­recompensed with multiplicitie of tongues at Sion)
speaking in different languages, but speaking both to one purpose. They differ
from each o­ther onely in language and time: but for matter the new is veiled
in the old, [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=63) and old old
reueiled in the new. Isaiah in his vision,Isa. 6.2. heard the Seraphins cry
Zeh elzeh, one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of tsebhaoth. So the two
Testaments like these two Seraphins, cry Zeh el Zeh, one to another, the old
cries to the new, and the new ecchoes to the old. The old cries, Holy is the
Lord that hath promised, the new an­swers, Holy is the Lord that hath
per­formed. The old saies, Holy is the Fa­ther that gaue the Law, the new
saith, Holy is the Sonne that preached the Gospell, and both say, holy is the
Ho­ly Ghost that penned both Law and Go [...]pell to make men holy. The two
Cherubins in Salomons Temple stood so that with their outmost wings they
touched the sides of the house,2\. Chrō. 3. and their other wings touched
each other. So the two Testaments, one way touch the two sides of the house,
and the other way touch each other. In their extent they read from the
begin­ning of the world to the end, from in [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=64) the beginning,
to come Lord Iesus. In their consent they touch each other, with He shall
turne the Heart of the Fathers to the children, Mal. 4.6. and He shall turne
the heart of the fathers to the children, Luke 1.17. Here the two wings ioyne
in the middle. Ter­tullian calls the Prophet Malachy, the bound or skirt of
Iudaisme and Christianity, a stake that tels that there promising ends, and
performing be­gins, that prophecying concludes, fulfilling takes place: there
is not a span betweene these two plots of holy ground, the old and new
Testament, for they touch each other. What do the Papists then when they put
and chop in the Apocripha for Canoni­call Scripture, betweene Malachi and
Matthew, Law and Gospell? What doe they, but make a wall betweene the
Seraphins that they cannot heare each others crie? What do they but make a
stoppe betweene the Cheru­bins that they cannot touch each [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=64) others wing?
What do they but make a ditch betwixt these grounds that they cannot reach
each to others coasts? What do they but remooue the land-marke of the
Scriptures, and so are guilty, of, Cursed be he that re­mooues his neighbours
marke, Deut. 27.17. And what do they but  [...]orce the mariage of the
Testaments, and so are guilty of the breach of, that which God hath ioyned
together let no man put a­sunder. These two Testaments are the two paps of the
Church from which we suck the sincere milke of the Word. One pap is not more
like to another, then are these two for substance, but for language they varie
in colour. The old (as all can tell) is written in Hebrew, but some forraigne
langua­ges are also admitted into Scripture, besides the Hebrew, as forraigne
nati­ons were to be admitted also to the Church besides ye Hebrewes. A great
peece of Ezra in Chalde, because takē from Chalde Chronicles. Those parts
[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=65) of
Daniels visions that concerne al the world, are written in the Chaldee, the
tongue then best known in the world, because the Chaldeans were then Lords of
the world. The eleuenth verse of the tenth of Ieremie is in the same tongue,
that the Iewes might learne so much of their language, as to re­fuse their
idolatrie in their owne lan­guage. Other words of this Idiome are frequent in
the Scripture: as I take two names giuen to Christ (as Bar the sonne in Psal.
2.10. and Hho­ter the rod of Iesses stemme,Hhutra v­sed by all the Tar­gums
[...]o in diuerse places. Isa. 11.) to be natiuely Chaldee words, and for that
they do shew the greater my­sterie: viz. that this Sonne and this Rod should
belong to Chaldeans and Gentiles, as well as to Iewes or He­brewes: Infinite
it is to trace all of this nature and language. The Arabi­an is also admitted
into Scripture, es­pecially in the booke of Iob a man of that country: whether
Philistin Phrases, and other adiacent nations [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=65) Dialects, be not
to be found there al­so, I referre to the Reader to search, and (I thinke) he
may easily find: of the eloquence of some peeces aboue others, and the
difficultie of some bookes aboue others, those that can euen read the English
Bible can tell. I would there were more that could reade it in its owne
language, and as it were talk with God there in his own tongue: that as by
Gods mercy Ia­phet dwells now in the tents of Sem, or the Gentiles haue gained
the pre­heminence of the Iewes for religion, so they would water this graffing
of theirs into this stocke, with the iuyce of that tongue, thereby to prouoke
them the more to Ielousie.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=66)

[...]

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=66)

[...]

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=67)

## 33\. CAP. XXXIII. Of the New Testament Lan­guage, or the Greeke.

THe Greeke tongue is the key which God vsed to vnlocke the tents of Sem to the
sonnes of Iaphet. This glorious tongue (as Tully cals it) is made most
glorious by the writing of the New Testament in this lan­guage. God hath
honoured all the letters by naming himselfe after the first and the
last:Thucyd. lib. 1. as Homer shewes the receit of all the Grecian ships, by
shewing how many the greatest, and how few the least contained, Iauan is held
both by Iewes and Christians to haue planted the Country. The tongue is likely
to be maternall from Babel: The Iewes vpon Genesis the forty ninth, thinke
that Iacob curseth his sons Simeon and Leuies fact, in one word of Greek
Macerothehem, that is, [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=67) [...] their
swords: but all the Chaldees and other Translations render it better, their
habitations, Gen. 49.5. The ancientest Heathen Greek aliue is Homer, though
the tongue was long before, and Homers subiect of Ilias treated of in Greeke
verse by Euanders Wife of Arcadia, as some haue related. Homer watered the
tongue, and in succeeding ages it flourished till it grew ripe in the New
Testament. The Dialects of it famili­arly knowne to be fiue. The Attick, the
Ionick, &c. The Macedonian was something strange, as appeares in Cle­mens
Alexandrinus, Strom. 5. Espe­cially their deuout Macedonian, or a­bout their
oraisons: How God scat­tered and diuulged this tongue of the Greekes ouer the
world, against the comming of Christ, and writing of the New Testament, is
remarkeable. Alexander the great with his Mace­donians, made the Easterne
parts Grecian. The Old Testament at Pto­lomaeus [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=68) his request,
translated into Greek, was as an Vsher to bring in the New Testament, when
Iaphet should come to dwell in the tents of Sem. The Iewes vsed to keepe a
mournefull fast for that translation, but as Iewes mourne, so haue Gentiles
cause to re­ioyce. In like sort, for the preparation for the Gospell of late
(which as farre as Antichrist his power could reach, lay depressed, but not
ouerwhelmed;) the Greeke tongue at the sacking of Constantinople by the
Turkes, was sent into these Westerne climates; that we might heare Christ
speake in his owne language, without an Ae­gyptian to interpret to vs, as
Ioseph had to his brethren: What need we now to rely vpon a Latine
foundati­on, when we haue the Greeke purity? Neuer did the Turke any good to
Chri [...]tianity, but this, and this against his will, but God worketh all
things for his owne glory: And we may say of the poore inhabitants of Grecia,
as [[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=68) of the
Iewes, by their impouerishing we are inriched.

As Athens in old time was called the Grecia of Grecia, so the New Te­stament
for language may be stiled the Greeke of Greeke. In it (as vpon the crosse of
our Sauiour, in the ti­tle) are three tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latine.
Greeke the foundation, the other two but little additions. In the Greeke
Master Broughton hath giuen learned rules and examples of the kinds of it,
viz. Septuagint, Tal­mudick, Atticke and Apostolicke. The Hebrew or Syrian
(for so that word Hebrew in the title of the crosse must bee vnderstood) is
easily found out euen in translations. Latine there is some in the Gospells,
but not much.  [...], Census for tribute.  [...] a ward or watch: Matthew.
28.11.  [...] spiculator, Marke 6.27. which word is vsed by Targum Ieruse­lamy
in Gen. 37\. of Potiphar, that hee was Rabh Sapulachtaria: Princeps
spi­culatorum. [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=69) And some other
words of the Latine tongue, which language in our Sauiours time the conquest
of the Romans had scattered in Ierusalem: and in the parts adioyning, and so
may one finde some Latine in the Sy­rian Testament: and abundance of Greeke.

## 34\. CAP. XXXIIII. Of the Chaldee and Syrian Tongues.

THe Chaldee and Syrian tongue was once all one, as appeareth in Genesis 31.47.
Ezra 4.7. Dan. 2.4. In Character indeed they differed, they of Babilon vsing
one kind of letter, they of Syria another: This was that that nonplust the
Babilonian wizards about the writing of the wall, so that they could not read
it, though it were in their owne language, because it [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=69) was not in their
owne letter. In af­ter-times the very languages them­selues began to vary: as
the Chaldee in Daniel, and Onkelos and Ieruselamy and Ionathan, and the Syrian
in the Testament doe witnesse. The Para­phrafts do much differ between
them­selues for purity of speech, and all far short of the Bible Chaldee. They
are very full of Greeke words, and so the Syrian: a relique of Alexanders
conquests: some thinke they finde some Greeke in Daniel. Montanus himselfe
renders Osphaia [...] all along. Foure kind of characters is the Chal­dee to
bee had in, or if you will the Chaldee in two, and the Sy­rian in two. Our
Bible and Pa­raphrasts and Rabbins Chaldee is in the Hebrew letter, and the
other kind of letter is the Samaritan. The Syri­an hath either a set letter,
such as we haue the New Testament imprinted in, or their running hand, such as
the Maronites vse in their writing for [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=70) speed: there is
no great difference be­twixt them, as you may see by their Alphabet.

## 35\. CAP. XXXV. Of the Arabian Language.

THis is the most copious of the Hebrew Dialects, and a tongue that may brag
with the most of tongues from fluencie, and continu­ance of familiaritie. This
tongue is frequent in Scripture, especially in Iob, a man of that country: How
o­ther parts of the Bible vse it, I thinke may be iudged by the neerenesse of
Iudaea and Arabia, and of the two lan­guages. In this one thing it differs
from its fellow-Dialects and its mo­ther tongue, that it varieth terminati­ons
in declining of nownes, as the Greeke and Latine do, and that it re­ceiueth
duall numbers, in forming [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=70) verbs, as doth
the Greeke. Of the largenesse of the Alphabet, and diffe­rence from other
Alphabets, and quiddits of the tongue, or indeed any thing of the tongue, I
cannot say, which I haue not receiued of the most industrious and thrice
learned (both in this and other the noble tongues) Master William Bedwell,
whom I cannot name without a great deale of thankfulnesse and honour: To whom
I will rather be a scholler, then take on me to teach others. This tongue was
Mahomads Alcoran written in, and is still read in the same Idiome vn­der paine
of death, not to mistake a letter, which is as easily done in this tongue as
in any.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=71)

## 36\. CAP. XXXVI. Of the Latine Tongue.

THis is the first Idiome of our Grammar Schooles: A tongue next the sacred
tongues, most necessa­rie for Schollers of the best profession. Whether Latine
were a Babel lan­guage I will not controuert pro et con­tra. Sure I dare say,
that what Latine we read now, was not at Babel: if we may beleeue Polybius who
saith that the Latine tongue that was vsed in Iu­nius Brutus time was not
vnderstood in the time of the first Punicke warre, but onely by great
schollers. So much in few yeares it had degenerated. The old Poets compared
with smooth Ouid and Tully shew much alteration. This spacious tongue once
almost as big as any, and as large as a great part of the world, is now
bounded in schooles and studies. The Deluge of the [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=71) North (the
treasurie of men) ouer­whelmed the Romane empire, scatte­red the men, and
spoiled the Latine. Goths, Vandalls, Lombards, and the rest of the brood of
those frozen Cli­mates, haue beaten the Latine tongue out of its owne fashion,
into the French, Spanish, and Italian. But some sparkes of their hammering are
flowne into other languages of the West: So that most countries here­about may
owne Rome for a second Babel for their speech confused.

## 37\. CAP. XXXVII. The Language of Brittaine neere a thousand yeares ago. Ex
Be­da lib. 1. de Hist. Angl. Cap. 1.

BRittania in praesenti iuxta numerum librorum, &c. Brittaine in my time (saith
Bede) doth search and con­fesse [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=72) one and the same
knowledge of the high truth, and true sublimity in fiue tongues, according to
the fiue bookes wherein the Law of God was writ­ten: namely, in the English,
Brit­taine, Scottish, Pict and Latine tongues: And in the ninteenth chapter of
the same booke he saith, that when Austen the Monke came from Gregory the
great to preach the Gospell in England, he brought with him Interpreters out
of France to speak to the English: That language it seemes was then vsuall in
England, but whether the French that France speakes now, is a question.
William the Conqueror tooke great care and paines to haue brought in his
tongue with his conquest, but could not preuaile.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=72)

## 38\. CAP. XXXVIII. Ionathan the Chaldee Paraphrast his conceit of Leuies
choosing to the Priesthood: translated out of his Paraph. on Gen. 32.24.

ANd Iacob was left alone beyond the foord, and an Angell in the like­nesse of
a man stroue with him and said, Diddest thou not promise to giue tithe of all
that thou hadst, and behold thou hast He had but ele­uen sons as yet: but the
Hebrew comment vpon the Chaldee text helps out at this dead lift, and saith,
that Rabel was great with child of Benia­min, and so he is coun­ted before he
be borne. twelue sonnes, and one daughter, and thou hast not tithed them: Out
of hand he sets apart the foure first borne to their foure mothers (for saith
the margin, they were holy because of their pri­mogeniture) and then were
eight left: He begins againe to count from Simeon, and ended in Leui, for the
tenth or tithe. Michael answereth and saith, Lord of the world this is thy
lot: &c. thus the Chaldee. On whose words, if they [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=73) were worth
commenting on I could say more.

## 39\. CAP. XXXIX. Of the Iewes abbreuiature.  [...]

THis short writing is common in all their Authors. When they cite any of the
Doctors of their schooles, they commonly vse these words, Ameru rabbothenu
Ziccero­nam libhracah, in foure letters thus:  [...] thus say our Doctors of
blessed me­morie. But when they speake of holy men in the old Testament, they
vsu­ally take this Phrase Gnalau hashalom, on him is peace, in briefe thus,
[...]. Thus when they mention Moses, Salo­mon, Dauid, or others, this is the
me­moriall they giue them. The Arabi­ans haue the like vse in their
Abbreui­ation of Gnalaihi alsalemo: on whom is peace. The words in Hebrew want
a [[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=73) verbe,
and so may be constru [...]ed two wayes: On him is peace, or on him be peace.
The learned Master Broughton hath rendered it the former way, and his
iudgement herein shall bee my law. To take it the latter way, seemes to relish
of Popish superstition, of praying for the dead: which though the Iewes did
not directly do, yet in manner they appeare to do no lesse, in one part of
their Common Prayer booke, called Mazkir neshamoth, the remembrancer of
Soules: which being not very long, I thought not amisse to translate out of
their tongue, into our owne, that the Reader may see their Iewish Poperie, or
Popish Iudaisme, and may blesse the Crea­tour, who hath not shut vs vp in the
same darkenesse.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=74)

## 40\. CAP. XL. Mazkir neshamoth: or the Re­membrancer of soules: in the
Iewes liturgy: printed at Venice.

THe Lord remember the soule (or spi­rit of Abba Mr. N. the sonne of N. who is
gone into his world: where­fore I vow (to giue) Almes for him, that for this,
his soule may be bound vp in the bundle of life, with the soule of Abraham,
Isaac and Iacob, Sarah, and Rebecca, Rahel and Leah, and with the rest of the
righteous men and righteous women, which be in the garden of E­den. Amen.

The Lord remember the soule of Mris. N. the Daughter of N. who is gone to her
world. Therefore I vow: &c. as in the other before. Amen.

The Lord remember the soule of my father and my mother, of my grand­fathers
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=74) and
grandmothers, of my vn­cles and aunts, of my brethren and sisters, of my
cosens and cosenesses, whe­ther of my fathers side, or mothers side, who are
gone into their world. Where­fore I vow, &c. Amen.

The Lord remember the soule of N. the sonne of N. and the soules of all my
cosens and cosenesses, whether on my fa­thers or mothers side, who were put to
death, or slaine, or stabd, or burnt, or drowned, or hanged for the
sanctifying of the name of God. Therefore I will giue Almes for the memory of
their soules, and for this let their soules bee bound vp in the bundle of
life, with the soule of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, Sarah and Rebecca, Rahel and
Leah, and with the rest of the righteous men and righteous women which are in
the garden of Eden. Amen.

Then the Priest pronounceth a blessing vpon the man that is thus charitable,
as it followeth there in these words.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=75)Hee that
blessed our father Abra­ham, Isaac and Iacob, Moses and Aa­ron, Dauid and
Salomon, he blesse Rabbi N. the sonne of N. because he hath vow­ed Almes for
the soules whom he hath mentioned: for the honour of God, and for the honour
of the law, and for the honour of the day: for this the Lord keepe him, and
deliuer him from all af­fliction and trouble, and from euery plague and
sickenesse: and write him and seale him for a happy life, in the day of
Iudgement: and send a blessing and prosper him in euery worke of his hands,
and all Israel his brethren, and let vs say Amen.

Thus (courteous Reader) hast thou seene a Popish Iew interceding for the dead:
haue but the like patience a while, and thou shalt see how they are Popish
almost entirely, in claiming the merits of the dead to intercede for them: for
thus tendeth a prayer which they vse in the booke, called Sepher Min hagim
shel col Hammedi­noth, [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=75) &c. which I haue
also here tur­ned into English.

Do for thy praises sake, Do for their sakes that loued thee, that (now) dwell
in dust. For Abraham, Isaac, and Ia­cobs sake. Do for Moses and Aarons sake.
Doe for Dauid and Salomons sake. Doe for Ierusalem thy holy Cities sake. Doe
for Sion the habitation of thy glo­ries sake. Do for the desolation of thy
Temples sake. Do for the treading down of thine Altars sake. Do for their
sakes who were slaine for thy holy Name. Do for their sakes who haue bene
massacred for thy sake. Do for their sakes who haue gone to fire or water for
the hallowing of thy Name. Do for sucking childrens sakes who haue not sinned.
Doe for weaned childrens sakes who haue not offended. Do for infants sakes who
are of the house of our Doctors. Do for thine owne sake if not for ours. Do
for thine owne sake and saue vs.

Tel me gentle reader  [...] &c. whether doth the Iew, Romanize or [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=76) the Roman
Iudaize in his deuotions This interceding by others, is a shrewd signe they
haue both reiected the right Mediator betweene God and man, Christ Iesus. The
prophane Hea­then might haue read both Iew and Papist a lecture in his,
Contemno mi­nutos istos Deos, modo Iouem propitium habeam, which I thinke a
Christian may well English: let go all Diminu­tiue Diuinities, so that I may
haue the great Iesus Christ to propitiate for me.

## 41\. CAP. XLI. Of the Latine translation of Mat. 6.1.

ALmes in Rabbin Hebrew are cal­led  [...] Tsedhakah righteousnesse, which word
the Syrian Translator vseth, Mat. 6.1. Act. 10.2. and in other places. From
this custome of speech, the Roman vulgar Translateth, At­tendite ne iustitiam
vestram faciatis: [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=76) One English old
manuscript Testa­ment, is in Lichfield Librarie, which hath it thus after the
Latine: Takith hede that you do not your rigtwisnes be­fore men to be seyne of
hem, ellis ye shul­len haue no mede at your fadir that is in heuenes. Other
English Translation, I neuer saw any to this sense; nor any Greeke coppie. It
seemes the Papist will rather Iudaize for his owne ad­uantage, then follow the
true Greeke, The Septuagint in some places of the old Testamēt, haue turned
Tsedhakah Righteousnesse,  [...] Almesdeeds, to little or to no sense. As the
Papists haue in this place of the new Testa­ment, turned  [...] Almesdeeds, by
[...] Righteousnesse, to as little purpose. In the Hebrew indeed, one word is
vsed for both: Tsedhakah for Almesdeeds, which properly signifies
Righteousnesse; vpon what ground I know not, vnlesse it be, to shew that St.
Chry­sostome hath such a touch. Almes must be giuen of rightly got­ten good,
or else they are no ri [...]hte­ousnesse: [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=77) or they are
called zadkatha in Syrian, Hu ger Zadek lemehwo, they are called
righteousnesse, because it is right they should be giuen, and giuen rightly.
The Fathers of the Councell of Trent speake much of the merit of Almes; whom
one may answer in the very words of their vulgar, Attendite ne iustitiam
vestram faciatis. Take heed you do not make them your Iu­stification.

## 42\. CAP. XLII. An Embleme.

A Wall in Rome had this picture. A man painted naked with a whip in one hand,
and foure leaues of a booke in the other, and in euery leafe a word written.
In the first, Plan­go, I mourne; In the second, Dico, I tell; In the third,
volo, I will; and in the fourth, facio I do. Such a one in the [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=77) true repentant.
He is naked, because he would haue his most secret sinnes laid open to God: He
is whipped, be­cause his sinnes do sting himselfe: His booke is his
repentance; His foure words are his actions: In the first hee mournes, in the
second he confesses, in the third hee resolues, and in the fourth, hee
performes his resolution. Plango, I mourne, there is sight of sinne and
sorrow, Dico, I tell, there is con­trition for sinne and confession; Volo, I
will, there is amending resoluti­on: Facio, I do, there is performing
satisfaction.

## 43\. CAP. XLIII. Mahhanaijm. Gen. 32.2.

ANd Iacob went on his way, and the Angels of God met him: And Ia­cob said when
he saw them, This is the Host of the Lord, and he called the name of the place
Mahanaim.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=78)The word
is duall, and tels of two armies and no more, what these two armies were, the
Iewes according to their vsuall veine, do finde strange ex­positions. To omit
them all, this seemes to me to be the truth, and rea­son of the name. There
was one com­panie with Iacob, which afterwards he cals his armie; and there
was another companie of Angels, which he cals the Armie of God. These are the
two Armies that gaue name to Mahanaim; two armies, one heauenly, and the other
earthly: and from this I take it, Salomon compares the Church,  [...]nt. 6.
[...] to the companie of Mahanaim: for so the Church consisteth of two Armies,
one heauenly like these Angels, which is the Church triumphant, and the o­ther
trauailing on earth like Iacobs armie, which is the Church mili­tant.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=78)

## 44\. CAP. XLIIII. The booke of Psalmes.

THe Psalmes are diuided into fiue bookes, according to the fiue bookes of
Moses: and if they bee so diuided, there be seuentie bookes in the Bible; the
vnskilfull may finde where any one of these fiue bookes end, by looking where
a Psalme ends with Amen, there also ends the booke. As at Psal. 41.72.89.106.
and from thence to the end.

These may euen in their verie be­ginnings be harmonized to the books of the
Law.

Genesis. The first booke of Moses telleth how hap­pinesse was lost, euen by
Adams walking in wicked counsel of the Ser­pent and the wo­man.

Psal. 1. The first booke of Psalmes tels how happines may be regained, if a
man do not walke in wicked counsell, as of the serpent & woman, the diuell and
the flesh.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=79)This
allusion of the first booke Ar­nobius makes

Exodus. The se­cond book of Mo­ses tels of groa­ning affliction in Egypt.

Leuiti. The third booke of Moses is of giuing the law.

Numbers. The fourth booke of Moses is about numbring

Deutero. The last booke of Moses is [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=79) a rehearsall of
all.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=79)Psal. 42.
The se­cond booke of Psalmes begins in groaning afflicti­on. Psal. 42 43.

Psal. 73. The third booke of Psalmes tels in the begin­ning, how good God is
for giuing this law. This allu­sion Rab. Tanch. makes very neere. Ps. 90. The
fourth booke begins with numbring of the best Arithmetick: numbring Gods
mercie, Psal. 90.1. and our owne dayes, ver. 12.

Psa. 107. So is the last booke of the [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=79) Psalmes from
Psa. 107. to the end

In the Iewes diuision of the Scrip­ture, this peece of the Psalmes, and the
bookes of the like nature, are set last: not because they be of least
dig­nitie, but because they be of least de­pendance with other bookes, as some
of them being no storie at all, and some, stories and bookes of lesser bulke,
and so set in a fourme by them­selues. The old Testament books, the Iewes
acrostically doe write thus in three letters  [...] or  [...], euerie letter
stan­ding for a word, and euerie word for a part of the Bible.  [...] or
[...] for Aora­jetha, or Torah, the law:  [...] for Neb­hijm the Prophets:
[...] for Cethubhim, or bookes of holy writ: this diui [...]ion is so old,
that our Sauiour himselfe vseth it in the last of Luke, and ver. 44. All
things written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets and the Psalmes. By
the Psalmes meaning, that part of Cethubhim, in which the Psalmes are set
first.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=80)

## 45\. CAP. XLV. Of the Creation.

TWo waies we come to the know­ledge of God; by his workes and by his word. By
his works we come to know there is a God; and by his word wee come to know
what God is. His workes teach vs to spell; his word teacheth vs to read. The
first are as it were his backe parts, by which we behold him a farre off: The
latter shewes him to vs face to face. The world is as a booke consisting of
three leaues, and euerie leafe printed with many letters, and euery letter a
lecture. The leaues heauen, the aire, and earth with the water. The letters in
heauen, euery Angel, Star, and Planet. In the aire, euery meteor and foule. In
the earth and waters, euerie man, beast, plant, fish, and minerall: all these
set together, spell to vs that there is a God, and the Apostle saith [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=80) no lesse though
in lesse space, Rom. 1▪ 20. For the In the Syrian trā ­slation it is the hid
things of God. inuisible things of him, that is, his eternall power and
Godhead are seene by the creation of the world, be­ing considered in his
workes. And so Dauid, Psal. 19.1. It is not for no­thing that God hath set the
Cabinet of the vniuerse open, but it is because he hath giuen vs eyes to
behold his treasure. Neither is it for nothing that he hath giuen vs eyes to
behold his treasure, but because he hath giuen vs hearts to admire vpon our
beholding. If wee marke not the workes of God, we are like stones that haue no
eyes, wherewith to behold. If wee wonder not at the workes of God, when wee
marke them, we are like beasts that haue no hearts wherewith to admire. And if
wee praise not God for his workes, when we admire them, we are like deuils
that haue no tongues wherewith to giue thankes. Re­markeable is the storie of
the poore old man, whom a Bishop found, most [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=81) bitterly
weeping, ouer an vgly toad: being asked the reason of his teares, his answer
was, I weepe, because, that whereas God might haue made mee as vgly and filthy
a creature as this toad, and hath not, I haue yet neuer in all my life beene
thankefull to him for it. If the works of the creation would but lead vs to
this one lecture, our labour of obseruing them were well bestowed. How much
more when they lead vs farre further.

## 46\. CAP. XLVI. The time and manner of the Creation.

MOSES in the first verse of the Bible refutes three heathen opi­nions: namely
theirs, that thought the world was eternall, for he saith, in the beginning,
&c. Secondly, theirs that thought there was no God, for he saith, Elohim
created. Thirdly, [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=81) theirs that
thought there were many gods, for he saith, Euen those that haue not Hebrew,
can tell there is a mystery of the tri­nity in E­lohim, ba­ra ▪ but few mark
how sweetly this is an­swered with the same Phrase in manner, in the Haphtara
which is read by the Iewes to this portion of Moses ▪ viz. Esa 42.5. Iehouah
bore hasha­maiim, ve­notehē Ie­houah be­ing singu­lar, and notehem plurall.
which might be rendred, Deus creās coelos, & Deus ex­tendentes eos. Elohim he
created heauen and earth. The first word in the beginning may draw our mindes
and thoughts to the last thing, the latter end, and this thought must draw our
affections from too much loue of the world, for it must haue an end as it had
a beginning. I will not stand to comment vpon the word Be­reshith in the
beginning, for then I know not when to come to an end. To treat how the
diuerse expositors la­bour about the beginning of the world, is a world of
labour. How the Ierus. Targ. translates it, In wisdome, and is followed by
Rabbi Tanchum, and many Iewes: How Targ. Ionath. vseth an Arabian word, Min
A­wwala, a primo; Onkelos, in primis or in principio: Iarchi in principio
creatio­nis creauit. How Basil the great, Saint Ambrose, and hundreds others
do in­terpret this, is a worke endlesse to ex­amine. Satisfied am I with this,
that [[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=82) the
world and all things had their be­ginning from God, that in the begin­ning
created heauen and earth. Some of the Iewes do inuert the word Bereshith, and
make it Betisri that is in the moneth Tisri was the world crea­ted. This month
is about our Septem­ber, and that the world was created in this moneth (to let
other reasons a­lone) this satisfies me, that the feast of Tabernacles which
was in this moneth, is called the end of the yeare, Exod. 23.16. And this I
take to bee the reason, why the Iewes began to reade the Bible in their
Synagogues, at the feast of Tabernacles, viz. that they might begin the
lecture of the Creation, in Gen. 1\. at that time of the yeare that the world
was created.

The manner of the Creation shewes the workeman powerfull and wise: The making
of the Angells con­cealed by Moses, lest men should (like those hereticks in
Epiph.) thinke they helped God in the Creation. [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=82) For if their day
of their Creation (Rab. So­lō. holds they were made the second day. Many
Di­uines hold for the 4th. which was in most likelihood the first) had beene
named, wicked men would haue bene ready to haue taken them for actors in this
worke, which were onely spectators. There­fore as God hides Moses after his
death, so Moses hides the Creation of them, least they should be deified, and
the honour due to the Creator giuen to the creature. God in framing the world,
begins aboue and workes downeward; and in three dayes hee layes the parts of
the world, and in the three other dayes, he adornes those parts.

The first day hee makes all the hea­uens, the matter of the earth, and comes
downe so low as the light. The second lower, and makes the firma­ment or aire.
The third lowest of all, and makes distinction of earth and water. Thus in
three dayes the parts, or body of the world is laid, in three dayes more, and
in the same order [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=83) they are
furnished. For on

The fourth day the Heauens which were made the first day are deckt with
starrs. The fifth day the Firmament, which was made the second day, is filled
with birds. The sixth day, the Earth, which was laid fit the third day, is
replenished with beasts, and lastly man The 70. Interpre­ters on Gen. 2.2.
instead of God had finished on the seuenth day, reade he finished on the sixth
day. Thus God in the sixe dayes finished all his worke of Crea­tion. Chaldee
Paraph. on Num. 22 and Jarch. on Deut. 34. and Pirke Abhoth. For the ten
things that the Chaldee Paraphrast saith God, crea­ted on the euening of the
Sabbath, after the world was finished: I referre them to their Authors to
beleeue them.

R. Iarchi on Gen. 2. obserues, that God created one day superior things, and
another day inferior: his words are to this purpose. On the first day he
crea­ted heauē aboue & earth beneath. On the second day, the firmament aboue.
On the third, let the dry land appeare beneath. On the fourth day, lights
aboue. On the fifth day, let the waters bring foorth be­neath. [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=83) On the sixt, hee
must create both Superior and Inferior, as he had done on the first, least
there should bee confusion in his worke, therefore he made man of both, his
soule from aboue, and his body from beneath.

R. Tancuman shewes how the ma­king of the Tabernacle harmonizeth with the
making of the world: The light of the first day answered, by the candlesticke,
for light the first worke; and the spreading of the Firmament, like a
curtaine, answered by the cur­taines the second worke, and so of the rest.
Euery one knowes the old con­ceit of the worlds lasting sixe thousand yeares,
because it was made in sixe dayes: and of Elias Prophesie among the Iewes, of
the world ending, at the end of sixe thousand: which Prophesie of his is flat
against the words of Christ: Many beleeue these opinions, yet few prepare for
the end which they thinke is so neere.

God hath taught vs by the courseAllegory. [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=84) of the Creation
of the old world, what our proceedings must be, that wee may become a new
creation, or new heauens, & a new earth, renewed both in soule and bodie. On
the first day he made the light, so the first thing in the new man must be
light of knowledge, so saith S. Paul, Heb. 11. He that com­meth to God must
know that he is.

2\. On the second day he made the Firmament, so called, because of its  [...]
in Hesi­od.  [...] Hom. O­dys 3. surenesse, so the second step in mans new
creation must be firmamentum fidei, the sure foundation of faith.

3\. On the third day, the seas and trees bearing fruit: So the third step in
the new man is that he become wa­ters of repentant teares, and that hee bring
foorth fruit worthy of these teares. Bring foorth fruit worthy of re­pentance,
saith the Baptist, Mat. 3.

4\. On the fourth day, God crea­ted the Sunne: that whereas on the first day
there was light but without heat; now on the fourth day, there is [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=84) light and heate
ioyned together. So the fourth step in the new creation of a new man is, that
he ioyne the heate of zeale, with the light of his know­ledge: as in the
sacrifices fire and salt were euer ioyned.

5\. The fifth dayes work, was of fishes to play in the seas, and the foules to
flie toward heauen: So the fifth step in a new creature is, to liue and
reioyce in a sea of troubles, and to flie by prayer and contemplation to
heauen.

6\. On the sixth day, God makes man: and all these things performed, man is a
new creature. To reckō them altogether then, as S. Peter does his golden
chaine of vertues. 2. Pet. 1. Adde to your light of knowledge, the firmament
of faith, to your faith, seas of repentant teares, to your teares, the
fruitfull trees of good workes, to your good workes, the hot Sunshine of
zeale, to your Zeale, the winged foules of prayer and contemplation; Et ecce
omnia facta sunt noua. Behold you are become a new creature.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=85)As the
Bible begins, so it ends with a new creation, of a new heauen and a new earth,
and a new paradise, and a new tree of life, Apoc. 21. vnto all which, O thou
whom my soule loueth, say come.

## 47\. CAP. XLVII. Of the fall of Adam.

THe fall of Adam was the death of himselfe,Cypriano di valer. the death of vs,
and the death of Christ. At his fall were three offenders, three offences, &
per­sons offended. Three offenders, Satan, Adam, Eue: three offences,
Igno­rance, weakenesse, and malice: three persons offended, Father, Sonne, and
holy Ghost, Eue sinned of Ignorance, and so sinned against the Sonne, the God
of knowledge, and she was forgi­uen; and so S. Paul sinned, and was for­giuen.
1. Tim. 1.13. Adam sinned of [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=85) weakenesse, and
so sinned against the Father, the God of power, and he was pardoned; and so S.
Peter sinned, and he was pardoned. Mat. 26. But Satan sinned of set malice,
and so sinned a­gainst the holy Ghost, the God of loue, and he was not
forgiuen: For he that speaketh against the holy Ghost, shall neuer bee
forgiuen, Marke 3.29. And in Gods censuring of these three, Gen. 3. He
questioneth Adam & Euah before he sentenceth, because he had mercie for them,
nay more, he promi­seth Christ before hee inflict punish­ment: but for the
Serpent, hee neuer questioned, because hee would shew him no mercie. God left
Adam to his owne freewil, and suffered him to fall, quia sciebat se, &c.
because hee knew how to turne that fall of his, to his sal­uation When Lazarus
died, Christ was not there, that the raysing of La­zarus by Christ might be
the more glorious. So when Adam fel (as I may say so) God would not be there
(for [[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=86) he
left Adam to his owne freewill) that the repairing of Adam through Christ
might be the more glorious. Hereupon one sings, O foelix lapsus. Vnhappy was
the fall of Adam, since by his fall we all fell, but yet happy was that
vnhappy fall, since it must bee recured by Christ. Ioseph suffered his brother
Simeon to go into prison for a while, that at last he might bring him out with
greater comfort. So God suffered Adam to go into Satans Newgate for a while,
that at last he might bring him out with grea­ter comfort. The day thou eatest
hereof thou shalt dye, there is the prison, And the man tooke and ate, there
Adam goes into prison: the seed of the woman shall breake the head of the
Serpent, there Ioseph deliuers Simeon out of pri­son, God brings man out of
hell through Christ. Whereupon a Doc­tor in admiration questions: vtrum
mirabilius, homines iustos creare, an iniustos iustificare: whether is more
[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=86)
admirable, that God created man righteous, or that hee iustified man, when he
had made himselfe vnrighte­ous? Whether was more miraculous, for God to make
man of nothing, or to repaire him from worse then no­thing? Wonderfull he was
in both, in his first and his second creation, for Iustificatio est secunda
hominis creatio, mans Iustification is his new cre­ation.

## 48\. CAP. XLVIII. Ophitae Euia.

SOme Heretickes in Epiphanius thinke themselues beholden to the Deuill, for
his paines that he tooke to ouerthrow Adam: for they vsed to worship a
serpent, because (say they) hee brought knowledge into the world. Clemens
Alexandrinus doth partly thinke, this conceit was got [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=87) among the
Heathens: who at their feasts of Bacchus vsed to carrie a ser­pent, as it were
in procession, and to crie Euia Euia. [...] &c. And Euia (saith Clemens) if it
be aspe­rated Heuia, it signifies in the He­brew tongue, a female serpent▪
Where the good man calls the Chal­dee tongue, the Hebrew: For in the Hebrew I
do not find such a word for a serpent: But all the Chaldee tran­slations of
the Bible in the third of Genesis and diuerse other places, doe vse the word
[...] Hiuia for a serpent: which I take to bee the word hee meanes.

## 49\. CAP. XLIX. Of the Greeke Translation of the fifth of Genesis.

HOw the Septuagint does adde hundreds of yeares to mens ages [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=87) before and after
the floud, few schol­lers but they know. This bred the dif­ference of
computation of the times, while some followed the Hebrew, some the Greeke.
Hence came two notorious doubts. About Methuse­lah liuing after the flood, who
died a moneth or two before. And of Sem his death before Abrahams birth, who
liued as long after Abraham came to Canaan, as Abraham was old when he came
thither, viz. seuen­ty fiue yeares. And so might well be Melchizedek. The
Greeks had a great deale of stirre where to put Methushe­lah all the floud-
time for feare of drowning: At last some laid him on the top of Noahs Arke,
and there hee was all that watry yeare. The Iewes lay Og the giant there also
(as the Chaldee Paraphrast vpon the foure­teenth of Genesis ridiculously
obser­ueth:) Whose words (for your fuller sport) I will not spare to set down.
The thirteenth verse hee renders thus in [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=88) Chaldee. And Og
came who was left of those that died in the floud: for hee rode vpon the Arke,
and was as a coue­ring vpon it, and was nourished with Noahs vittailes, but he
was not preser­ued for his owne sake or merit, but that the inhabitants of the
world might see the power of the Lord, and say: Did not the Gyants in old
time, rebell against the Lord of the world, and he destroyed them from the
earth, yet assoone as these Kings make warre, behold Og is with them Og saith
with himselfe, I will go and shew Abraham, Lots case, that hee is taken
prisoner, that so he may come to rescue him, and may himselfe fall into their
hands: He goes and comes to him about the Passeouer day, and finds him making
vnleauened cakes, then hee told Abram the Hebrew, &c. Thus far the Chaldee: of
whose conceits here, and in one thousand of places more, and so of his nation
the Iewes; I know not whether to say, Risum or fletum te­neatis amici? But to
returne to my [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=88) purpose. The
Greeke Bible makes Methushelah liue fourteene yeares af­ter the floud, their
reason of this their addition of yeares, many render, which I omit. But S.
Austen saith, some fall short of this mans age.The Chal­dee Para­phrase of
Ionathan. does also mistake in the age of Mathu­shel [...]h, but I thinke it
only false Printing. In three Greeke bookes, saith he, and one Latine, and one
Syrian booke, all agree­ing one with another, Methusalem is found to die sixe
yeares before the floud. So Austen in Ciu. dei lib. 15\. cap. 13\. Such
differences may incite men to apply themselues to the Hebrew text, where is no
falsifying nor error.

## 50\. CAP. L. Vpon the words: The seede of the wo­man shall breake the
Serpents head.

THe new Testament affords a rich Commentarie vpon these words, in the Gospell
of Saint Luke, who in his third Chapter, shewes how [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=89) through seuentie
fiue generations,Ierus: and Babilon: targums do both apply these words to the
Messi­as. Christ is this seed of the woman, and in the fourth Chapter, how
through three temptations this seed began to bruise the head of the Serpent:
where the Reader may obserue, how the di­uell tempts Christ, in the very same
manner that he had temped Eue, though not with the same successe. Al the sins
of the world, are brought by Saint Iohn to these three heads, Lust of the
flesh, lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1\. Iohn 2.15. By these three
Eue falls in the garden: She sees the tree is good for meate, and the lust of
the flesh inticeth her; she sees it faire to looke on, and the lust of the eye
pro­uokes her; and she perceiues it will make her wise, and the pride of life
perswads her to take it. By these three the deuill tempts Christ; when he is
hungrie, he would haue him turne stones into bread, and so tries him by the
lusts of the flesh: He shewes, and promiseth him all the pompe of the [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=89) world, and so
tries him by the lust of the eyes, and he will haue him to flie in the aire,
and so tempts him to pride of life. But as, by these three, the Ser­pent had
broken the head of the wo­man, so against these three the seed of the woman
breakes the head of the Serpent. Dauid Prophecied of this conquest, Psal.
91.13. The Dragon thou shalt tread vnder thy feet: The verie next verse before
this, the deuill vseth to tempt Christ withall, but to this he dare not come,
for it is to his sor­row.

## 51\. CAP. LI. Iewish hypocriticall prayers, reproued by our Sauiour, Mat.
6.5. Because they loue to stand praying in the Syna­gogues and corners of the
streets.

THis Sermon vpon the mount, is much in reproofe of the Iewes [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=90) Talmudicall
traditions, by which they made the word of God of none effect. This verse
reproueth one of their tenets, for their high-way Oraisons: for which they
haue this tradition in their In Sepher Berachoth. Talmud. Rabbi Iosi, saith:
On a time I was walking by the way, and I went into one of the deserts of
Ierusalem to pray, then came Eliah, Heb Za­cur lattobb Remem­bred for good. of
blessed memorie, and watched me at the gate, and stayed for me, till I had
ended my prayer: after that I had ended my pray­er,Heb. Mori which in the
Chal­dee and Syrian  [...]ignifieth a Lord or Master: hence is Maran a­tha,
our Lord cō ­meth, the great ex­commu­nication, 1\. Cor. 16.22. he saith vnto
me, Peace be vpon thee Rabbi; I said vnto him, peace be vpon thee Rabbi, and
master. Then said he to me, my sonne, wherefore wentest thou in­to this
desert; I said vnto him, To pray, Hee said to mee, thou mightest haue prayed
in the way. Then said I, I was afraid, least passengers would interrupt me: He
said vnto me, thou shouldest haue prayed a short prayer. At that time I
learned of him three things: I learned that wee should not go into the desert:
and I learned that we should pray by the [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=90) way, and
learned, thet hee that prayed by the way must pray a short prayer. Thus farre
their Talmud maketh them these letters patents for Hypo­crisie; fathering this
bastard vpon blessed Elias, who was not a high-way prayer, or one that
practised his owne deuotions in publike: for hee was Iohn Baptists type for
retired­nesse.

## 52\. CAP. LII. Israels affliction in Aegypt.

OF Israels being in Egypt, many Heathen Authors doe touch, though euery one a
seuerall way, and all of them the wrong Iose­phus against Appion is angrie at
their fables about it. Of the famine that brought them thither (if we take
[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=91) the want
of Nilus flowing to bee the naturall cause,Nilus the wonder of Affrick the
riuer of Egypt flowes e­uery yeare once ouer his banks: and if it flow not at
all, or not to his right height, it causeth famine, for Egypt hath no raine
Frō this riuer, vnder God cōes their plen­tie or fa­mine: and it is
re­markable that the fat and leane kine in Pharoah his dreame (which betokened
the plentie or scarsitie of the countrie) came out of the Riuer. Of the reason
of the flowing of this Riuer, Pigaffetta especially is large. And I wonder
that Iordan was not as much wondred at: for it did so also, Iosh. 3.15. Cheon.
1\. ch. 12\.  [...]. 15. as most like it was) there seemes then to be some
remem­brance of those seuen yeares in Sene­ca, in his naturall questions,
where he saith: Per nouem annos Nilum non as­cendisse superioribus saeculis,
Callima­chus est Author: that is: Callima­chus writes, that in old time Nilus
flowed not of nine yeares together: where hee outstrips but two of the number.
But of Israels affliction in Egypt, I finde the Heathens silent. God had told
Abraham of this their hardship long before, and shewed him a token of it, by
the fowles lighting vpon his carcasses, Gen. 15\. A type of Israels being in
Egypt, and of Pharo­ahs being plagued for their sakes, was, when Pharoah
suffered, for taking Sarah from her husband, and keeping [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=91) her in his
house: as it is, Gen 12\. How long they were in that land, few there bee but
know: but how long their affliction lasted, is vncertaine. Probable it is,
that it was about an hundred and twenty yeares, the time of the old worlds
repentance, and Moses his age: This is to be search­ed by Leui his age, which
within a little one may find certaine. All the generation of Iosephs time die,
be­fore they are afflicted: as all the ge­neration of Ioshuahs time die,
before they fall to Idolatry, Iudges 2.10. The reasons why God should thus
suffer them to suffer: whether it were to fit them for the receiuing of him
and his Law, or whether it were to whip them for their Idolatry: or for some
other cause, I dare not enter too neare to search: this I see, that when the
foun­dation (as it were) of the visible Church is laid thus in affliction,
that that the Church cannot but looke for affliction, whilest it liues in the
Egypt [[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=92) of
this world. But as Israel increa­sed vnder persecution: so does the Church:
for euen when sparsum est semen sanguinis Martyrum, surrexit seges Ecclesiae:
Nec frustra orauit Ec­clesia pro inimicis suis crediderunt, & qui
persequebantur: Aust. Ser. de temp. 109\. To omit the Iewes fancie, that the
Israelitish women bare sixe at a birth, and to omit questioning whe­ther
faetifer Nilus, the drinking of the water of Nilus, which (as some say is good
for generation) did conduce to the increasing of Israel, I can onely looke at
God, and his worke, which did thus multiplie and sustaine them in fornace
affliction. Si Deus nobis­cum quis contra nos? God had pro­mised this increase
to Iacob, as he fled to Haran, Gen. 28\. in a dreame from the top of Iacobs
ladder. And here he proues faithfull who had promised.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=92)

## 53\. CAP. LIII. Israels Campe: according to the Chaldee Paraphrast his
de­scription: Num. 2.

THe Chaldee is precise about pitching Israels Campe: I haue not thought much
to translate a whole chapter out of him, that the Reader may see (at the
least) his will, if not his truth.

Numb. 11.1. And the Lord spake to Moses and to Aaron saying.

2\. Euery one of the children of Is­rael shall pitch by his standerd, by the
ensignes whereto they are appoin­ted, by the standerds of their fathers shall
they pitch ouer against the Ta­bernacle of the Congregation Chald. Round.
Round.round about.

3\. The Camp of Israel was twelue miles long, and twelue miles broad, and they
that pitched Eastward to­ward [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=93) the Sun-rising,
the standard of the Campe of Iudah foure miles square, and his ensigne was of
three party colours like the three pearles that were in the brestplate (or
ratio­nall) the rubies, topaz, and carbuncle, and in it was deciphered and
expres­sed the names of three Tribes, Iudah, Issachar, Zebulon, and in the
middle was written  [...] ‘ [...]’ Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, and let them that hate thee flie before thee. And in it was drawne
the picture of a Lions whelpe, for the Prince of the children of Iudah,
Nah­shon the sonne of Aminadab.

4\. And his hoast and the number of them, seuenty foure thousand and sixe
hundred.

5\. And they that pitched next him, the Tribe of Issachar, and the Prince that
was ouer the Armie of the Tribe of the sonnes of Issachar, Nethaneel the sonne
of Tsuar.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=93)6\. And
his Army and the number of (his) Tribes, 54400.

7\. The Tribe of Zebulon, and the Prince that was set ouer the Army of the
Tribe of the sonnes of Zebulon, E­liab the sonne of Hhelon.

8\. And the Army and their num­ber of his Tribe, 57400.

9\. All the number of the hoast of Indah were The Chald. numbers otherwise but
it is misprin­ting: ther­fore I take the Hebrew. 186400\. by their Ar­mies
they went first.

10\. The standard of the hoast of Reuben shall pitch Southward, by their
Armies foure miles square, and his ensigne was of three party colors, like the
three stones in the brestplate, the Emeraud Saphire and Diamond, and in it was
deciphered and expres­sed the names of three Tribes, Reuben, Simeon, Gad, and
in the middle was written thus:  [...] Heare O Israel the Lord our God is one
Lord. And in it was drawne the pic­ture of a yong Hart: but there should haue
beene drawne in it a Bullocke, [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=94) but Moses the
Prophet changed it, because hee would not put them in mind of their sinne
about the calfe: And the Prince that was set ouer the hoast of the Tribe of
Reuben, was Elitzur the sonne of Shedeur.

The Chaldee misseth the 11. & 12\. verses.12\. And his hoast and the number of
his Tribe, 59300.

13\. And the Tribe of Gad and the Prince that was set ouer the hoast of the
Tribe of Gad, Eliasaph the sonne of Deuel.

15\. And his hoast and the number of his Tribe The Chaldee commeth so short of
the right number. 45600.

16\. All the number of the hoast of Reuben, 151450\. by their Armies: they
went second.

17\. Then went the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the hoast of the
Leuites in the Camps, and their Campe was foure mile square, they went in the
middle, as they pitched, so they went, euery one in his ranke, according
[...]o his standard.

18\. The standard of the Campe of [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=94) Ephraim by their
hoasts, pitched Westward, and their Campe was foure mile square, and his
ensigne was of three party colours, like the three stones in the brestplate, a
Turkie, an Achat, and an Hamatite, and in it was deciphered and expressed the
names of three Tribes, Ephraim, Ma­nasseh, and Beniamin, and in the mid­dle
was written:  [...] &c.  [...] And the cloud of the Lord was vpon them by day,
when they went out of the Campe, and in it was drawen the pic­ture of a child.
And the Prince that was set ouer the Army of the Chil­dren of Ephraim, was
Elishama the sonne of Ammihud.

19\. And his hoast and the number of his Tribe, 40500.

20\. And next him the Tribe of Manasses, and the Prince which was set ouer the
hoast of the Tribe of the children of Manasses, Gamliel the sonne of Pedah
tzur.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=95)21\. And
his hoast and their num­ber of his Tribe, 32200.

22\. And the Tribe of Beniamin and the Prince that was set ouer the hoast of
the Tribe of the children of Benia­min, Abidan, the sonne of Gideoni.

23\. And his hoast and their num­ber of his Tribe, 35400.

24\. All the number of the Campe of Ephraim, 180100\. by their Ar­mies, and
they went in the third place.

25\. The standard of the Campe of Dan Northward, and their Campe foure miles
square; and his ensigne was of three partie colours according to the three
stones in the brestplate, a Chrysolite, Onyx, and Iasper, and in it were
deciphered & expressed the names of three Tribes, Dan, Naphta­li, Asher, and
in the middest was writ­ten and expressed  [...] And when it rested, he said,
returne O Lord to the 10000\. of Israel, and in it was drawne the figure
[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=95) of a
serpent, or arrow-snake, and the Prince that was set ouer the hoast of the
children of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammishaddai. From thence to the end of
the chapter, he goes on iust with the Hebrew text, so that I wil spare further
labour about transla­ting: onely I must tell the Reader thus much, that the
Pearles he speaks of, I haue not punctually followed the Chaldee in rendring
their names, but haue followed the Geneua Bible, which was at that instant the
onely English Bible about me. As also for perfect and future tense, I finde
the Chaldee confused, and for this I haue beene the lesse curious.

## 54\. CAP. LIIII. Of Iob.

ABout Israels being in Egypt, Iob liues in Arabia: a heathen man [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=96) and yet so good:
and so Saint Grego­ry saith, his Countrey is purposely na­med, that the
goodnesse of the man may be the more illustrated. His times may be picked by
the genealogie of him­selfe, and his friends that come to see him. And God in
the first and second chapters saith, that there was not a man on earth like
him for goodnes: which is a signe that Abraham Isaac and Ia­cob and Ioseph
were not aliue, nor Mo­ses: but in the times twixt Ioseph and Moses, Israel
corrupt themselues with Egyptians idols, and in Israel (the likeliest place to
finde a good man in) is not one to be found like Iob. Thus when Israel
idolizes, and the Church, begins to faile in Iacob, God hath one in Arabia
that hath a little Church in his house. It is not amisse for eue­ry one for
his more watchfulnesse to marke, that Satan knowes Iob as soone as euer God
speakes of him.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=96)

When ye An­gels appeare be­fore God, Satan the Deuill is a­mong them.

So

When the Dis­ciples are with Christ, Iudas a Deuill is a­mong them.

Pharoah in E­gypt is afflicted by God.

Iob in Arabia is afflicted by the Deuill.

His afflictions harden him a­gainst God.

His afflictiōs har­den him against the Deuill.

Iobs children feasting ouer­whelmed by an house.

The Philistins sporting, ouer­whelmed by an house, Iudg. 16.

Iob is afflicted as the souldiers, 2. King. 1\. by fire.

As the Ziklagites, 1\. Sam. 30\. by captiuity

As the Egyptians with losse of children, Exod. 12.

And as the Egyptians with boiles, Exod 9.

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=97)And which
was not his least crosse, like Adam, with an ill counselling wife.

Iob hath 3. with him when hee is changed by affliction.

So

Christ hath three with him when he is changed in his transfigurati­on: which
three as they were by Christ when Moses and Elias, Law and Prophecie told him
in the mount of his departing which hee should accomplish at Ierusa­lem, Luk.
9.31. So these three were with him when hee began to accom­plish these things,
Mat. 26.37.

## 55\. CAP. LV. Egyptians Deities, ex Athenae. Deipn. Lib. 7.

A Naxandrides in his booke of Ci­ties, turning his speech to the Egyptians,
saith thus:

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=97)

[...]

[...]

[...].

[...].

[...].

[...].

[...]

[...]

[...].

[...]

[...].

[...]

[...].

[...].

Thus does one Heathen Idolater deride another, because hee worships▪ (as the
other thinks) the more ridicu­lous Deities. The very Heathen could deride and
scoffe at their vaine gods. Dionysius was most notorious this way: and knauish
in this kinde was the Painter, who when hee should haue drawne the picture of
such a goddesse for a Grecian City to wor­ship, hee drew the portraicture of
his owne sweet-heart, and so made her to bee adored: And indeed what man
[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=98) could
haue held laughing, to haue seene (as my Poet saith here) an Egyp­tian on his
maribones adoring a dog, or praying to an oxe, or especially to see him
mourning and howling ouer a sicke cat: fearing least his scratch­ing God
should die?

## 56\. CAP. LVI. Of the Law broken by Adam.

THe Law was Adams lease when God made him tenent of Eden: The conditions of
which bond when he kept not, he forfeited himselfe and all vs. God read a
lecture of the Law to him before hee fell, to be The Iewes in their wri­tings
vse this phrase frequētly for the Law, as in Pirk [...] Abboth. a hedge to
him to keepe him in Paradise, but when Adam would not keepe with­in compasse,
this Law is now become as the flaming sword at Eden gate to keepe him and his
posteritie out: A­dam heard as much in the garden, as [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=98) Israel did at
Sinai, but onely in fewer words and without thunder. The L [...]w came more
gently to him before his fall, but after his fall, comes the thunder with it.

Adam at one clap breakes both the tables and all the commande­ments.

1\. He chose him another god when he followed the Deuill.

2\. He idolized and deified his own belly, as the Apostles phrase is, his
belly he made his god.

3\. Hee tooke the name of God in vaine, when he beleeued him not.

4\. Hee kept not the rest and estate wherein God had set him.

5\. He dishonoured his father which was in heauen, therefore his dayes were
not long in that land which the Lord his God had giuen him.

6\. Hee massacred himselfe and all his posteritie.

7\. From Eue he was a Virgin, but [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=99) in eyes and
minde he committed spiri­tuall fornication.

8\. Hee stole that (like Achan) which God had set aside not to bee medled
with, & this his stealth is that which troubles all Israel, the whole world.

9\. Hee bare witnesse against God, when he beleeued the witnesse of the Deuill
aboue him.

10\. Hee coueted an ill coueteous­nesse (like Amnon) which cost him his life
and all his progeny.

What a nest of euills here were committed at one blow? The pride of heart and
desire of more know­ledge (like Hamans ambition) ouer­threw vs. This sinne was
hatched in heauen by the wicked Angels, but throwne out with them, and neuer
will come in there againe. Hence is this sinne so lofty because it affects its
first nest. It is not for nothing that Blessed are the poore in spirit, are
the first words in Christs Sermon: Mat. [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=99) 5.3. but because
the proud in spirit were the first sinners.

## 57\. CAP. LVII. Of the Law giuen at Sinai.

WHen Israel is got from the hard seruice of Egypt, God bindes them apprentise
to a new Master, himselfe. Their Indentures he drawes vpon mount Sinai: a
place where Moses before had kept a flocke of sheepe, now he keepes a troupe
of men. In the Deliuerie of the Law there, if you will stand with Israel in
your place you may consider many passages.

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=100)

## 58\. CAP. LVIII. Why the Law was published then and not before.

AT Sinai was deliuered no new thing, the Law in some kinde was knowne before.
Sacrifice was vsed by Adam in the garden, when ye body of the beasts went for
an offering for his soule, and the skinnes for a couering for his body: Cain
and Abel learne this part of worship from their father. The diuision of cleane
and vncleane beasts is knowne to Noah, when they come to him for their liues
as they had done to Adam for their names. Abraham when God made a So sayes the
Gene­ua Bible in marg. but Rab. Salo­mon long before saith thus It is the
custome of those that make couenāts, to diuide beasts in­to two parts, and
passe be­tween the parts: as Ier. 24.18. And God passes be­tweene these in
this smoking furnace and fire brand, for making couenāts in like kinds Ho­mer
speaks neere this. co­uenant with him, Genesis. 15\. Di­uides and diuides not
his beasts and fowles, iust as God commands, Leu. 1.6.17. and so of the rest.
Fathers could teach their children these things as they themselues had learned
them [[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=100) of
their fathers. But when men be­gan to multiplie, and multitude to be more
wicked, then would they not be so easily bridled by a Law, whose au­thor they
knew no more of, but their fathers: And when men liued but a short time in
comparison of the first men, and so could not see the full set­ling of the Law
in their houses: And when God had fetched him a people out of Egypt, and laid
the foundation of a glorious Church, with signes and wonders, then hee thought
it fit for their restriction, as also Vid. Ia [...] ­chi on Ruth cap. 1. for
their distinction from the Heathen, to giue the Law from his owne mouth, the
more to procure reuerence to him: For heauen and earth must needs hear­ken
when the Lord speaketh, Isa. 1.2. And thus did Numa: Minos, &c. the Heathen
faine they receiued their lawes from a Deity that was neuer seene, and yet
their lawes were the better obserued for that reason.

[[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=101)

## 59\. CAP. LIX. Of the place where it was giuen, and manner.

GOD gaue the Law in Arabia: so wicked Mahomet gaue his law in Arabia; A worse
and a better thing no one countrey euer affoor­ded. God gaue his Law in Sinai,
a bushy place as it seemes by Seneh signifies a bush, Ex­odus 3. the name,
agreeable to the giuing of so perplexing a matter. Carry along with thee
(gentle Reader) as thou readest the Scripture, thus much care (at my request)
as to marke that the Law of Moses was giuen in two pla­ces, S [...]nai, and
the Tabernacle, as also to consider that some part of this Law did onely
concerne the Iewes, and some part did also concerne all the world. The
Ceremoniall Law that concerned onely the Iewes, it was gi­uen to Moses in
priuate in Leuit. 1. the Ta­bernacle, [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=101) and fell with
the Taberna­cle when the vaile rent in twaine. The Morall Law concernes the
whole world, and it was guien in sight of the whole world on the top of a
moun­taine, and must endure as long as any mountaine standeth. The Iudiciall
Law (which is more indifferent, and may stand or fall, as seemes best for the
good of a common wealth) was giuen neither to publike as the one, nor so
priuate as the other, but in a meane betweene both.

The Law on Sinai was with fire and trumpets, so shall Christ come with fire
and trumpet at the latter day, to take an account how men haue kept this fiery
Law, as it is called, Deut. 33.2. Fiery, because giuen out of the fire, as the
Ierusalem and Babilonian Targums hold: though I think there is more meant by
the words then so: for it is Esh dath, which may bee ren­dred the fire of a
Law.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=102)

## 60\. CAP. LX. Of the effects of the Law.

THe letter of the Law is death▪ but the spirit giueth life. The Iewes stand
vpon the letter, and thinke to gaine life by the works of it, but them the
Apostle frequently con­futeth. And I take the aime of Christs Parable, Mat.
20\. about the penny to extend to no lesse.Vide Hil­lar. & Hie­ron. in loc.
Some came into the vineyard at the Daw­ning of the Day or the Age before the
flood, and some at the third houre, or in the time before the Law, and some at
the sixth and ninth houre, or vnder the heat and burden of the Iewish Law, and
some at the last, vnder the Gospell: Those vnder the Law plead for merit, we
haue borne the heat and burden of the day: that is, costly sa­crifices, sore
ceremonies, &c. To whom the Master answers that his [[Page
191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=102) penny is his
owne, and if he giue it, it is not for their merit, but his good will. S. Paul
calls the law a Schoole-master, and so it is indeed: and such a Schoolemaster
as that, that Liuy and Florus speake of in Italy, who brought forth his
children that were trusted with him, to Hannibal, who if he had not beene more
mercyfull then other­wise, they had all perished. So they that rely vpon the
works of the Law, are in fine constrained by the Law to come to Christ, who
more mercifull then the Law, does deliuers them. And if you well weigh it, you
shall find that as the whole Law, so euery part from one to another, brings vs
to Christ. The Morall Law shewes vs what wee should do, and with the same
sight we find that we cannot do it: This makes vs to seeke to the Ceremoniall
for some sacrifice or ceremonie to answer for our not doing it: There wee see
that burning a dead beast is but poore satisfaction for the sinnes of men
[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=103) liuing,
and that outward purifyings of mens selues can auaile but little to the
cleansing of a soiled soule: this then deliuers vs to the Iudiciall Law, and
by it we see what we deserue, and thus in fine wee are constrained to seeke to
Christ It was Iesus or Io­suah, and not Moses or the Law that brought Israel
in­to the land of Canaan. Iesus, for there is no other name whereby wee must
be saued. The Parable that our Sauiour propounds in the tenth of Luke, I
thinke tends something to this purpose. A man (saith he) went from Ierusalem
to Ieri­cho and fell among theeues, and they robbed him of his raiment, and
wounded him, and departed leauing him halfe dead. A certaine Priest came that
way, and when he saw him, he turned a­side. A Leuite came that way, and when
hee saw him, he passed by on the o­ther side. But a good Samaritan came, (as
the text imports) and pittied him, and salued him, and lodged him, and paid
for him. Such a one is man fal­len among Satan, Sinne, and Death, and by them
stopt, stript, and striped. [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=103) Satan dismounts
him off his Innocen­cy that should sustaine him: Sinne strips him of all
Righteousnesse that should array him: Death strikes him with guiltinesse and
wounds him. Here is a man in a wofull case, and none to aide him. By comes a
Priest, that is, first come the sacrifices of the legall Priesthood, and they
may passe by him, by they do not, nor they can­not helpe him. By comes a
Leuite, that is, the Ceremonies of the Leuiti­call Law, and they may passe by
him, but they doe not, they cannot helpe him. Or by comes a Priest, that is,
the Angells may see him thus, but they let him lie, for they cannot helpe him.
By comes a Leuite, that is, men and the world may see him thus, but they let
him alone for euer, for they cannot succour him. But by comes a good
Samaritan, that is, our Sauiour him­selfe, who is called a Samaritan, and is
said to haue a Deuill, and hee pities him, salues him, lodges him, and paies
[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=104) for him.
Hee pities him in very bow­ells, therefore hee saies, as I liue I would not
the death of a sinner. Hee salues him with his owne blood, therefore tis said,
By his stripes wee are healed. Hee lodges him in his owne Church, therefore
the Church saith, He brought me in the winecellar, and loue was his banner
ouer me. And he paies for him what he deserued, there­fore he saith, I haue
trod the winepresse alone.

It is said in the Booke of Kings that when the Shunamites dead child was to
bee raised, Elisha first sent his staffe to bee laid vpon him, but that did no
good: but when Elisha came him­selfe, and lay vpon him, with his mouth to the
Childes mouth, his eyes to his eyes, and his hands to his hands, then the
child recouered. So when man was dead in trespasses, and sinne as it is, Eph.
2\. God layes his Psal 23. staffe or Rod of the Law vpon him, but what good
did this toward his [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=104) recouery? Euen
make him to long the more for Elisha or Christ, who when he came, and laid his
mouth to mans mouth, and kissed humanity in his incarnation, and laid his eyes
to his eyes, and his hands to his hands, and suffered for mans actions at his
passion, then is man recured. God in the booke of Isay when hee is to send a
Prophet to Israel, saies thus: Mieshlah: whom shall I send, or who will go for
vs? Isa. 6▪ 8. Vpon which words the Iew Kimchi paraphrases thus: Shalahti eth
Micah, wehem maccim otho, Shalahti eth Amos, wehem korin otho Amos in Heb.
sig­nifies one that is heauie tongued which Kimchi calls Pese­lusa from the
greek  [...] Blaesus. Pesilusa, I haue sent Micah, and him they smote, I haue
sent Amos, and him they called a stammerer. Whom shall I send or who will goe
for vs? Then saies Esay, Behold I am here, send me. Imagine that (vpon the
fall of man) you saw God about to send the great Prophet not to Israel a­lone,
but to all the world, nor onely to teach, but also to redeeme. Sup­pose [[Page
196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=105) you heard him
thus questioning, whom shall I send to restore fallen man? and who will goe
for vs? Should I send Angells? they are crea­tures, and consequently finite,
and so cannot answer mine infinite Iustice. Should I send man himselfe? Alas,
though hee once had power not to haue fallen, yet now hath he no power to
raise himselfe againe. Should I send beasts to sacrifice themselues for him?
Alas can the burning of dead beasts satisfie for the sinnes of all men aliue?
Whom shall I send, or who will go for vs? Our Sauiour is ready to answer with
Isay, Behold I am here, send mee. Here am I that am able to do it; send me,
for I am willing. I am able, for I am God; I am willing, for I will become a
man. I am God, and so can fulfill the Law which man hath broke. I will become
man, that so I may suffer death which man hath de­serued. Behold I am here,
send mee. Then as one of our country Martyrs at [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=105) his death, so
may all wee sing all our liues: None but Christ, none but Christ: None but
Christ to cure the wounded trauailor, None but Christ to raise the dead,
Shunamite, None but Christ to restore decaid mankind, None but Christ that
would, None but Christ that could. No Angell, no man, no creature, no
sacrifice; no ce­remonie, that would and could do this for vs, which wee could
not doe for our selues, and say for vs I haue troad the winepresse alone.

When the Ceremoniall and Iudi­ciall Law haue thus brought vs to Christ, wee
may shake hands with them and farewell, but for the Mo­rall, as it helpes to
bring vs thither, so must it helpe to keepe vs there. For Christ came not to
disanull this Law. but to fulfill it. He does not acquit vs from this, but
furthers vs to the kee­ping of it. What else is the Gospell, but this in
milder tearmes of Faith and Repentance: which is, since wee [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=106) cannot keepe
this Law, yet to striue to keepe it as we can, and to repent vs for that wee
haue not kept it, and to relye vpon his merits that hath kept it for vs. Thus
as loue to God and to our neighbours was the summe of the old, so true faith
and vnfained repen­tance is the totall of the new. This was the tenour of
Christs first words after his baptisme, Marke 1.15. and of his last words
before his ascension, Marke 16.16.

## 61\. CAP. LXI. Of the Ten Commandements.

THe ten Commandements may be called the word of the word of God: for though
all Scripture be his word, yet these in more speciall bee his Scripture, to
which he made him­selfe his owne scribe or pen-man: vp­on these Commandements
hang all [[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=106)
the Law and the Prophets, and these Commandements vpon two duties, to loue God
and to loue our neigh­bour. A shorter and yet a fuller com­ment needes not to
be giuen of them, then what our Sauiour hath giuen, Luke 10.27. Thou shalt
loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbour as thy selfe. The foure
commande­ments of the first table he expounds in foure words.

The Lord thy God, there is the Preface, I am the Lord, &c.

Thou shalt loue the Lord, &c. with all thy

  * Heart. for the First Comman­dement.
  * Soule. for the Second Comman­dement.
  * Strength for the Third Comman­dement.
  * Mind. for the Fourth Comman­dement.

If wee need any further exposition vpon this exposition of our Sauiours, it is
easie to find: as, thou shal [...] [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=107) loue the Lord
thy God with all thine

  * Heart. For it he hath Created,
  * Soule. For it he hath Redeemed,
  * Strength. For it he hath Preserued,
  * Mind. For it he hath Inlightned.

And therefore thou shalt loue him with all thine

  * Heart: without Onely talking and no more.
  * Soule: without Dissembling.
  * Strength: without Reuolting.
  * Mind: without Erring.

This is the first and the great Com­mandement, and the other is like vnto
this, thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. This adds great light to the
second table, for halfe of the comman­dements of that table want an obiect
whereupon to fasten the duty. The first hath one, Honour thy father, &c. the
last but one, hath one, thou shalt not witnesse falsely against thy [[Page
201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=107) neighbor: And
so the last hath, Thou shalt not couet ought of thy Neighbours: But Thou shalt
not kill, steale, and commit adulterie, these haue no obiect, viz. none named
whom, from whom, and with whom wee must not kill, steale, nor adulterate:
because wee must make our selues al­so the obiect here: and reflect the
Commandements vpon our selues, as thus: Thou shalt not kill, first not thy
selfe, and secondly, not thy neighbour, and so of the rest. The Iewes haue
beene too bold in ad­ding too strict an obiect, as you may see in their
explaning these three precepts. And some Hereticks haue beene too nice in
giuing some of them too For Mar­cion held it vnlaw­full to kil a beast,
because the com­mand non occides, hath no set obiect: Aug. de Ciu. Dei, lib.
1\. cap. [...] large a one.

The fifth Commandement in the Tenne, is with a promise, and the fifth Petition
in the Lords Prayer is with a condition.

I omit the exquisitenesse of the pricking of this peece of Scrip­ture [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=108) of the
Commandements extra­ordinarily: Some speciall thing is in it.

The Iewes do gather sixe hundred and thirteene Precepts Negatiue and
Affirmatiue to bee in the whole Law, according to the sixe hundred and
thirteene letters in the two Tables, and so many veines and members in a mans
body. The order of these Pre­cepts they haue set downe in the mar­gin of the
Pentateuch with the three-fold. Targum printed at Hannow, and in Sepher
Hahhinnuch. I had translated some hundreds of them into English, which I
thought to haue finished, and presented to the view of the Reader, but I
finde, that without the Iewes Comments vpon these their Diuisions, they can
hardly bee vnderstood: which to bring withall, is a paines of no small time
and labour. These my obseruations and collections in my Reading, accept gentle
Reader [[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9004&page=108)
and the slips passe ouer with a gen­tle eye, as slips of youth: which more
mature yeares may recure, if God prosper and second. To whom I commit my
selfe, and commend thee, and to whom be all honour and glory for euermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Lightfoot, John, 1602-1675.. Date: 1629  

