---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Choice and experimented receipts in physick and chirurgery as also cordial
and distilled waters and spirits, perfumes, and other curiosities / collected
by ... Sir Kenelm Digby, Knight ...

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=1)

Choice and Experimented RECEIPTS IN Physick and Chirurgery, AS ALSO CORDIAL
and DISTILLED Waters and Spirits, Perfumes, and other Curiosities. Collected
by the Honourable and truly Learned Sir Kenelm Digby Kt. Chancellor to Her
Majesty the QUEEN-MOTHER. The Second Edition Corrected & Amended. LONDON:
Printed by Andrew Clark, for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West-End of St.
Pauls. 1675.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=2)

## To the Right Honourable GEORGE Duke of Buckingham, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of His MAJESTIES most Honou­rable Privy Council.

My LORD,

I Had formerly the Happiness of wearing an humble Relation to Sir Kenelm
Digby, and to his Business; by means of which In­terest and Favour, there came
to my hand divers of his Excellent Curiosuies and Receipts: In truth, it is so
choice a Col­lection, that in the first place I made it a mat­ter
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=3) of Conscience
to recommend it to the Pub­lick: And (having permission from his inge­nious
Son Mr. John Digby thereunto) my next care was, so to do it, as to render all
pos­sible Honour and Right to the Memory of that eminent Person. Upon which
Consideration, I have taken the boldness to make a Dedication of it to your
Lordship, as the most competent Judge and Patron of Learning and Vertue. From
which presumption, I shall now descend to my self again, and vanish with this
Prote­station, That without pretending to the Honour of being any way known to
your Lordship, No man living bath a greater Reverence for your Person and
Faculties, than

My LORD,

Your Graces most Humbe and Obedient Servant, GEORGE HARTMAN.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Honourable GEORGE Duke of Buckingham, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of His MAJESTIES most Honourable Privy Council.
  * 1\. An approved Remedy for all sorts of Agues.
  * 2\. Another for the same.
  * 3\. An approved Cure of Tertian Agues.
  * 4\. For the Tedious Agues.
  * 5\. A most excellent Sudorifick Cordial, which cureth all sorts of Agues, and all Burnings or Purple Fevers, as also all sorts of Fluxes and Pyles. It is also excellent for the hot Gout.
  * 6\. A Diaphoretick of Antimony to be used with this Medicine.
  * 7\. A Julep to cool in Fevers.
  * 8\. Cuchinile for a Purple Fever.
  * 9\. A Remedy for a Burning Fever.
  * 10\. A Cooling Drink in a Fever.
  * 11\. An often approved Remedy for an Ague.
  * 12\. A present Remedy for all kinds of Colicks whatsoever.
  * 13\. For violent Coughing by a sharp thin tickling Rheum.
  * 14\. For a Cold in the Head, to draw Rheum from the Head.
  * 15\. For all sorts of Fluxes.
  * 16\. For a Bloudy-Flux often approved.
  * 17\. For any Loosness.
  * 18\. For Fluxes.
  * 19\. For a Loosness.
  * 20\. An Anodyne Clyster.
  * 21\. An Excellent Clyster to cure any painful Flux or Scowring.
  * 22\. For the greatest Flux or Loosness.
  * 23\. An approved Remedy for the Obstractions of the Spleen or Liver.
  * 24\. An excellent Lime-water for Obstructions and Ulcers, &c.
  * 25\. An excellent Bemedy for the Dropsie.
  * 26\. Another Remedy for the Dropsie.
  * 27\. Another.
  * 28\. Another.
  * 29\. A great and approved Care of the Dropsie.
  * 30\. Another Drink.
  * 31\. For Legs or other parts of the Body swelled coming by abounding of bad Tumors, or by the Dropsie.
  * 32\. Another for the Dropsie.
  * 33\. For the Haemorrhoids. For Aches. Probat.
  * 34\. Another for the Piles.
  * 35\. For the Tooth-ach.
  * 36\. Water for the Teeth.
  * 37\. For the Teeth and Gums.
  * 38\. For familiar washing the Mouth, which confirmeth and fastneth the Teeth much, and preserveth the Gums sound, is thus:
  * 39\. For the Tooth-ach.
  * 40\. Vinegar of Squills for the Teeth and Gums.
  * 41\. To fasten loose Teeth. Probat.
  * 42\. An excellent Powder for the Eyes.
  * 43\. An excellent Eye-water.
  * 44\. A Remedy for Defluxions and all Diseases of the Eyes.
  * 45\. To take away the Redness of Bloud-shot Eyes.
  * 46\. To stanch Bleeding.
  * 47\. Another for the same.
  * 48\. A Cure of Bleeding, either at the Nose, or by a Bloudy Flux.
  * 49\. Against Poison inward or outward, or for the stinging of venemous Beasts in Men or Beasts.
  * 50\. An approved Remedy for Spitting of Bloud.
  * 51\. Remedium ad Fluxum immoderatum Sanguinis Menstrualis.
  * 52\. Contra Fluorem album. Probat.
  * 53\. A Remedy for the Jaundise of any kind, Black or Yellow.
  * 54\. For the Mother.
  * 55\. For the Sinews and the Head.
  * 56\. For Deafness.
  * 57\. Another for the same.
  * 58\. For the Small Pox.
  * 59\. To drive the venemous Vapors from the Heart and Head in the Small-Pox, Measles, &c. with great success, with a familiar Julep or Emulsion, take the following.
  * 60\. An infallible Remedy for the same.
  * 61\. To prevent Marks of the Small-Pox.
  * 62\. An Experimented Remedy for the Falling-Sickness.
  * 63\. Another for the same.
  * 64\. For the Falling-Sickness and Convulsion-Fits of Children.
  * 65\. To cause a good Delivery.
  * 66\. A Receipt of the Labour-Powder.
  * 67\. To bring away the After-burthen, or any Foulness, or a dead Child, and to cure the After-throws and Griping, after a Woman is delivered.
  * 68\. For torn Bladders.
  * 69\. To bring down a Womans Courses.
  * 70\. For the Brest and Belly of Women lying in.
  * 71\. An admirable Sear-cloth for a sore Brest; Impostumes, Fellons, green and old Cuts.
  * 72\. An Anodyne Pultis for Cancered Brests.
  * 73\. For Hardness in Women's Brests.
  * 74\. For hard Brests in Women.
  * 75\. Another Medicine for the same is thus:
  * 76\. For the Tetters.
  * 77\. For Aches in any part of the Body, even in Womens Brests.
  * 78\. A Remedy for the Piles or Hemorrhoids.
  * 79\. Another for the same.
  * 80\. A Plague Cordial.
  * 81\. For the same.
  * 82\. Another Excellent Remedy for the Plague.
  * 83\. Another Antidote.
  * 84\. An excellent Plague-Water.
  * 85\. For Worms in Children.
  * 86\. For Worms in the Belly or Stomach.
  * 87\. An Excellent Plaster for the Stomach, that hath done such notable Cures, is thus:
  * 88\. To take Warts away.
  * 89\. Another for the same.
  * 90\. For Phrensie.
  * 91\. For Head-achs, sore Eyes, Fellons, &c.
  * 92\. For Leprosie and Squinansie.
  * 93\. An experimented Remedy for the Stone.
  * 94\. Another excellent Remedy for the Stone.
  * 95\. Another for the same.
  * 96\. Another for the same.
  * 97\. Another for the same.
  * 98\. A Compounded Hydrosaccharum for the Stone.
  * 99\. Another excellent one for the same.
  * 100\. A certain Remedy for Retention of Urin.
  * 101\. Another for Retention of Urin.
  * 102\. Another approved Remedy for the Stone and Gravel.
  * 103\. Another for the Stone and Gravel, and for Strangury of Urin.
  * 104\. A Frier in France, much troubled with stoppage of Urin and Viscosities; (which they called the Stone.)
  * 105\. An approved Remedy for the Pleurisie.
  * 106\. A Remedy for the Sciatica or Rheumatism.
  * 107\. To Cure the Hot and Cold Gout.
  * 108\. An excellent Plaster for the Gout.
  * 109\. Another excellent Plaster for the Gout.
  * 110\. For the Kings-Evil.
  * 111\. An approved Remedy for Ruptures.
  * 112\. Another for the same.
  * 113\. An excellent Remedy for the Cankers in the Mouth.
  * 114\. For a Fellon.
  * 115\. An Ointment for Burning.
  * 116\. A most excellent red Balsam or red Salve.
  * 117\. Another Excellent Ointment for Wounds or Sores in Man or Beast.
  * 118\. Another excellent Green Ointment to be made in May, which cureth all sorts of Strains, Swellings, Aches, Bruises, Kibes, Cuts, Cramps, Burnings and Scaldings. It easeth the Sciatica. It is also excellent for all Swellings in the Face and Throat, yea though they look red and have an Ague in them.
  * 119\. An approved Remedy for Biting of a mad Dog.
  * 120\. A most precious Ointment for all manner of Aches and Bruises; and also for the Redness of the Face.
  * 121\. A most excellent Ointment for a Gangrene and all foul Diseases of the Skin.
  * 122\. A most excellent Water for a Gangrene, to be used with the aforesaid Ointment.
  * 123\. The manner of Using those foresaid Ointment and Water, is thus:
  * 124\. A Purge which he used to give the Patient during his Cure.
  * 125\. Another Excellent VVater for a Gangrene, with which Monsieur D'Alance doth such wonderful Cures in Gangrenes.
  * 126\. Monsieur Belieur cured the Gangrene, and all old Ulcers, Cankers, Pocky Sores, and Cancers, &c. with the Oil of Gold made thus:
  * 127\. A Cure for a Gonorrhea.
  * 128\. An expedite Cure for a Gonorrhea.
  * 129\. A Way to cure Venereal Cankers.
  * 130\. For Contusions or Bruises.
  * 131\. For any kind of Tetters, Herpes, &c.
  * 132\. Monsieur Trear's Excellent Medicinal Stone of great Virtues.
  * 133\. To dry up Sharp Humors with ones own Water.
  * 134\. An Experimented Vulnerary Potion or Wound-Drink.
  * 135\. An excellent Ointment for Wounds and Ulcers.
  * 136\. A Digestif.
  * 137\. To cure any Sore Leg, or old contumacious Sore or Wound.
  * 138\. For Fistulas and Ulcers.
  * 139\. A most Excellent Plaster of very great virtues, called the Plaster of Norimberg.
  * 140\. A Plaster very Excellent for many things.
  * 141\. An Excellent Astringent Plaster for the Back.
  * 142\. The Excellent Balsam of Doctor Salvatore Winter, given me by him, and made by my Chymister, with an Addition of his own of more Ingredients.
  * 143\. His Addition.
  * 144\. For the Kings-Evil.
  * 145\. Doctor Salvatore Winter's Spirit, as my Man made it for me.
  * 146\. Distillation of Tobacco.
  * 147\. For the Falling of the Uvula.
  * 148\. Cornacchius his Medicinal Powder.
  * 149\. Spirit of Salt Armoniac.
  * 150\. Balsam of Sulphur for the Brest, &c. and for Tetters.
  * 151\. A Panacea of Antimony.
  * 152\. Another Panacea.
  * 153\. A Medicinal Powder.
  * 154\. A great Medicin which hath don great Effects, from an intimate Friend.
  * 155\. A Menstruum of Citron-Pills to dissolve Bodies of Metal and Coral.
  * 156\. A Menstruum to open any Body, but chiefly the Body of Gold.
  * 157\. A Remedy which cureth Fevers by a Lunary Emetic, which is an Vniversal Medicin, even for the Morbus Gallicus and Leprosie.
  * 158\. To make an admirable Sudorific of this, that will cure the Venereal Disease, and the Leprosie, is thus:
  * 159\. Spirit of Verdigrease.
  * 160\. To Corporifie the Salt of Spirit of Wine, &c.
  * 161\. To volatilize the fixed Salt of Tartar.
  * 162\. Another way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar.
  * 163\. An Excellent Mercury Vitae of a singular Preparation.
  * 164\. A great Corroborant.
  * 165\. To make Aurum potabile.
  * 166\. To make the Tincture of Bezoar.
  * 167\. To make the Tincture of Ambergris.
  * 168\. To make the Aqua Regis for this Aurum potabile.
  * 169\. To make the Philosophical Oil of Vitriol for the foresaid Aurum potabile.
  * 170\. To make an Excellent Oil of Pearl for Health, and for the Face.
  * 171\. An Excellent Tincture of Gold.
  * 172\. An Excellent Physical Salt, which is very efficacious in all Fevers, either Simple or Malignant any ways, or spotted: In the Small - Pox or Measles, in all the Progress of them, from before their coming out till the end, and preserveth the Heart from hot and putrid Fumes, and purifieth the Blood.
  * 173\. The way to make the Spirit of Vrin is thus:
  * 174\. The best way to make the Oil of Myrrh.
  * 175\. A great Cordial made out of English Saffron.
  * 176\. A great Electuary.
  * 177\. A great Confortative.
  * 178\. A Restorative and Cordial of Dates, which is much celebrated.
  * 179\. Cordial and Pleasant Tablets.
  * 180\. A great Venereal.
  * 181\. Another great Venereal.
  * 182\. An Excellent Plaster to put upon the Stomach.
  * 183\. An Excellent Ointment for the Stomach, or for any Pain about the Heart.
  * 184\. An approved Remedy for a Sprain in the Back or any Weakness.
  * 185\. A most precious Diet-drink for any weak and consumed Body with Sickness, Pox or any Aches or cold Humors.
  * 186\. An Excellent Remedy to procure Conception.
  * 187\. An Excellent Bolus for the Stomach and Liver.
  * 188\. A Cordial Drink for weakness of the Stomach and want of Digestion.
  * 189\. For Trembling of the Heart or a weak Stomach.
  * 190\. Ladanum Opiatum.
  * 191\. An excellent Panchimagogue that Purgeth all Humours.
  * 192\. An excellent Laxative Tisanne to take, when one hath a need.
  * 193\. Bezoardicum Theriacale.
  * 194\. The Balsam Compounded is made thus.
  * 195\. The best Rose-water is made thus.
  * 196\. The Purge which the Author makes use of in Fevers, is this following.
  * 197\. But to make a most rich Cordial proceed thus.
  * 198\. The best fashion to make Conserve of Roses is this following.
  * 199\. The Author doth Tartarise his Spirit of Wine thus
  * 200\. A Tincture of Coral.
  * 201\. A Cordial to Rest, and for Surfeit.
  * 202\. An excellent Poppy-water for Surfeits.
  * 203\. Another excellent Stomachical Surfeit-water.
  * 204\. A Cooling Stomachical Mint-water.
  * 205\. An excellent Cordial Water.
  * 206\. Another great Cordial VVater.
  * 207\. VVater of Rue for the Head and Brain.
  * 208\. An excellent Cordial or Palsie VVater.
  * 209\. A most excellent Balsom for the Palsie, and Apoplexy, &c.
  * 210\. An often approved Remedy for the Dead Palsie.
  * 211\. The best way to make the Spirit and Oyl of Clary, Mint, Rosemary, Roses, &c.
  * 212\. The Emperour Charles's Cephalick Capital VVater, of great Vertues.
  * 213\. The Great Duke of Florence his excellent Coelestial or Imperial VVater of great Virtues.
  * 214\. An excellent Cordial VVater for Dizziness and Swimming in the Head.
  * 215\. An excellent VVater for Surfeits and for the Ague.
  * 216\. An Excellent Julip of Limons for Calentures or Fevers.
  * 217\. An excellent Orange VVater or Spirit.
  * 218\. To make Spirits of Herbs, &c.
  * 219\. A Cordial Water of Wall-nuts. Monsieur Bressieux, a Physician in Paris maketh the water of walnuts thus:
  * 220\. About the Diet of Milk.
  * 221\. To Digest a large Meal.
  * 222\. Cinamon VVater, or Spirit.
  * 223\. Lignum Casiae makes a much finer Spirit than Cinamon.
  * 224\. Cordial Water of Clove-Gillyflowers.
  * 225\. An Extract of Poppy Flowers.
  * 226\. Limon Water.
  * 227\. An excellent Cordial Water of Sweet Marjoram, exceeding good for the Head and Memory.
  * 228\. To make Hipocras presently.
  * 229\. To make a Coagulated Spirit of Ambergris.
  * 230\. To make Sweet Water.
  * 231\. Another.
  * 232\. Another.
  * 233\. To Preserve Fruit all the Year.
  * 234\. To make Perfumes to Burn.
  * 235\. Cassolettes.
  * 236\. •o make an Odoriferant Ball.
  * 237\. Rose Pastils to Burn.
  * 238\. To make Mouth Pastils.
  * 239\. To make a Pomos like those that are made in Spain.
  * 240\. To make the Sweet Water, called in French L'eau d'ange.
  * 241\. A pleasant and wholesome Perfume for Tobacco taken in a Pipe.
  * 242\. Another.
  * 243\. To convert Water into Ice in Summer, without the help of either Ice or Salts.
  * 244\. To Convert Water into Ice with Snow or Ice Immediately.
  * Appendix A A Table of the Receipts contained in this Book.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=3)

## 1\. An approved Remedy for all sorts of Agues.

TAke thirty grains of the species of Hiera Picra, put this with half a pint of
the best Aqua Vitae into a glass­bottle, too big to contain it, which cork
well, and set so near a fire, that it may feel a gentle, and but a very gentle
warmth for ten or twelve hours, sha­king the bottle very often: then let it
stand and settle; and an hour or two before the patient ex­pects his fit, pour
off gently five or six spoonfuls, and let him take it: he may after it walk,
and do what moderate exercise he pleases; perhaps it may give him a stool or
two: repeat this thrice; in Quartans and Quotidians five or six times, but no
oftner: it opens obstructions if the constitution be not too hot.

## 2\. Another for the same.

TAke four spoonfuls of the juyce of Red-nettles, and eight of the best strong
Ale you can get, mingle them well together and give it warm to the patient, as
soon as he feeleth the first emotion that always precedeth his fit, which
useth to come an hour before the formal fit seiseth him; and let him lie warm
in bed, with bottles of hot water at his feet, and under the arm-pits, to
cause sweat, which he will do abundantly.

You need not give so much of the juyce to a [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=4) child, as to a
very big man, proportion it accor­ding to their bulk: this here set down is
for mid­dling persons.

The juyce is best in the Spring, but is good all the year long.

## 3\. An approved Cure of Tertian Agues.

TAke a good handful of the leaves of Ribwort, (in the Summer green, in the
Winter dry) boil them in a large draught of clear posset-drink, so that it be
strong of the herb. Give this to the patient to drink warm, as soon as he
findeth such alteration in his body as warneth him of the ap­proaching fit;
and then let him lie conveniently warm to sweat: if this cure him not the
first time, it may the second.

## 4\. For the Tedious Agues.

TAke a good pint of the best White-wine, put into it half a handful of
Camomile-flowers; set these upon the hot embers in a vessel close co­vered:
let them stew simpringly at the edge for an hour or thereabouts, till the Wine
have drawn out all the vertue of the flowers; then pour off the li­quor, and
put into it thirty grains of the fixed Salt of Tartar, drink it warm as soon
as you find any emotion of the approaching fit, and lie warm, and it will make
you sweat. Do so the next fit, ad­ding five grains more of the Salt of Tartar,
so that you take thirty five grains; at the third fit take forty grains, and
so rest there till you are well, not exceeding that quantity, though you
repeat the Medicine.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=4)

## 5\. A most excellent Sudorifick Cordial, which cu­reth all sorts of Agues,
and all Burnings or Purple Fevers, as also all sorts of Fluxes and Pyles. It
is also excellent for the hot Gout.

TAke Salt of Tartar one ounce, put it into a pint of French Aqua Vitae, let it
stand in gentle warmth a day, then filter it through a gray paper.

Take then good Opium well chosen, cut it into thin slices, and dry it very
gently till it be a little friable; then cut it very small, and put it into a
glass-bottle, and pour upon it a quart of Aqua Vi­tae; stop the bottle well;
and tie it with a bladder, and set it in the Sun in Summer, in the Winter in
some gentle warmth to digest twenty four hours, or till the tincture be of a
reddish brown, and the Opium be dissolved; then strain it through a gray
paper, and put to it the dissolution of the Salt of Tartar, and infuse half an
ounce of Saffron in it, then let it stand in a gentle heat six hours or more,
then strain it through double paper so often till there remain no feces in the
straining of it, then will the Opium be purified from all its venom, and is of
great; vertue in the foresaid diseases, then let the patient take the
following purge.

Take the powder of the root Jallop twenty or twenty four grains, Cremor-
Tartari ten or twelve grains, mixt with syrop of Roses for a dose in the
morning. But when there is any looseness or bloody-flux, you need not purge,
but take the fore­said prepared tincture, or Cordial; the dose of it is a
spoonful and half, or two spoonfuls for strong [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=5) persons, and for
little children three or four drops mixt with the milk of the Nurse; then let
the pa­tient sweat in his bed. This medicine will make sweat sometimes a day
and night, or only some hours. The manner of using this remedy is thus: Purge
(for example) Munday morning, Tuesday night take the Sudorifick Tincture,
drink nothing all night, unless the heat of your mouth perswade you to take a
spoonful of Wine. In the morning when your sweat is over, take a Tost of Wine
with Sugar, and lie yet, to see if you shall sweat again; which being quite
past, eat and drink moderately of good things. Thursday morning take the purge
again. Friday night take the Tincture again, or if you will (and that the day
of the fit falls out pro­per for that) take a dose of Antimony Diaphore­tick
upon Thursday in stead of the purge, and Fri­day night take the Tincture
again. In fine, go­vern your self for purging, or taking either of the
Diaphoreticks as you shall find best; and continue the Diaphoretick of
Antimony as long as you think fit, after you have done with the other
Diaphore­tick, and with purging.

This excellent medicine hath done great mira­cles upon persons that have had
the Ague three years; it restoreth the spirits and strength lost; and
comforteth the heart. It cureth likewise the Colick, the Tooth-ach, the
Catarrhs, the violent Cough, the Griping in the Belly, and stayeth Vo­miting.
The use of it for the Tooth-ach is, to take half a spoonful, and hold it on
the side where your Tooth aketh in your mouth, the space of a quarter of an
hour, then spit it out, and take some fresh; if it needeth for the Gout, dip a
feather in it, and foment the dolent part with it.

When they rave and are frantick in their Fever, [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=5) you may put eight
or ten grains of Salt of Pearls into every dose of this Medicine.

## 6\. A Diaphoretick of Antimony to be used with this Medicine.

TAke one part of Regulus of Antimony and six of Nitre. Burn them well in a
Crucible, rever­berate them an hour after they are melted. Then have an
earthen Pitcher full of Conduit-Water; upon the mouth of it set a Crucible
with a hole in the bottom: pour through this into the cold wa­ter your melted
Antimony and Saltpetre. It will make a strange noise, as if all would break in
pie­ces, but it will not do so. Most of the Salt will be dissolved in the
water, and the Antimony will settle to the bottom in white Powder: pour off
the water when all is throughly settled, and dulcifie yet more with often
ablutions in fresh waters the remaining powder, till all saltness be gone:
then dry it in due manner, and keep it for use.

## 7\. A Julep to cool in Fevers.

NOthing doth more hinder the fermentation of sharp humors and their flying up
to the head, than the use of dilute Oxymel, such as Hippocrates and the
antients used. Make it thus,

Take two parts of Honey and twelve of Water; boil them very gently together,
till you have scum­med away all the Scum that will rise, and have cla­rified
it with Whites of Eggs. Then take it from the fire, and put to it one part of
Vinegar, and let it run twice or thrice through an Hippocras bag. Drink three
or four spoonfuls at a time of it, mor­ning, evening, night, or when you will.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=6)

## 8\. Cuchinile for a Purple Fever.

TO persons above twenty years of age, give thir­ty or forty granes of
Cochinile in some fit Cor­dial-water or in Wine, if you have no Cordial-water
at hand. If they be younger, proportion it to their age; as, seven granes to a
Child of three years old, eighteen granes to one of six years. After twice or
thrice doing this, and keeping the Patient very warm, the Disease will break
out in spots. But fail not to give it once or twice after they are strucken
out.

## 9\. A Remedy for a Burning Fever.

TAke of Honisucle leaves a good quantity, stamp them in a Mortar; put as much
fair Water to it as will make a Clyster, then strain it, and put it into the
Bladder or Syringe, and give it the Pa­tient not quite cold. It opens the body
and cooleth the Veins.

## 10\. A Cooling Drink in a Fever.

TAke a Gallon of Spring-water, five Spoonfuls of French Barly, half a pound of
the best blue Currants, let it boil softly till a quart be consumed; then take
two handfuls of Wood-Sorrel, as much of Roman Sorrel; bruise them well, and
let them infuse one hour, then take it off and strain it through a Sieve;
drink of this with the juice of an Orange, and a little fine Sugar.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=6)

## 11\. An often approved Remedy for an Ague.

TAke three drams of Venice or London Treacle: put it into a quarter of a pint
of White Wine, and put it into a little Pot very close covered, let it stew
simpringly for half an hour, stirring it some­times. When the Patient feeleth
any emotion of the approaching Fit, let him take this, shaking it well
together; let him go to bed and cover him­self warm to sweat. Repeat it
thrice.

## 12\. A present Remedy for all kinds of Colicks whatsoever.

TAke Mint, Sage, (both of them dry) of each two handfuls, and of the best
Spirit of Wine a Pottle, digest it in a Cucurbite eight days. Then distil it
in Balneo Mariae, taking but a third part of it; the rest is good, but in a
weaker degree. Of this first Spirit take a dram and half; and two ounces of
White Wine: Mingle and drink them.

## 13\. For violent Coughing by a sharp thin tickling Rheum.

TAke old Conserve of Roses, and work into it by strong rinding and beating as
much as you can of pure fine Olibanum in most subtile powder, that the
Consistence be very stiff. Of this take as much as a good Hasel Nut in a Spoon
with a little Syrop of Violets about it, in the morning and at night, and the
like sometimes in the day, if you have need.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=7)

## 14\. For a Cold in the Head, to draw Rheum from the Head.

PAre very thin the yellow Rind of Orange, roul it up conveniently, to thrust
up into the Nostril, turning the innermost side outward, to be next your flesh
within the Nose; put a roul into each Nostril. It will cause sneesing, and
will make much water run down out at the Nose, and comforts the Brain.

## 15\. For all sorts of Fluxes.

TAke two quarts of new Milk, two sound Nutmegs sliced thin, eighteen blackest
Pepper-corns, eighteen largest Cloves, five pennyworth of Stick-Cinnamon, of
the outward Bark of an old Oak (the rough part a little scraped off) twice as
much as of the Cinnamon, both which must be sliced thin: boil this to between
two and three Pints, then pour the Milk from the Spice, and divide it into
four parts, which will be about a Porringer-full apiece. Give a draught of
this as hot as the Pa­tient can drink it, early in the morning fasting,
another at Ten a Clock, a third at Four in the afternoon, and the last going
to bed, and make fresh every day. The Patient may dine and sup as he hath a
mind. The first draught will take away the pain and griping, and then
afterwards it is not necessary to take it so very hot.

It doth not bind it suddenly, but smoothneth and healeth the guts, and
strengthneth the stomach, and he shall have at the first two, three or four
gentle stools a day. And if he have lost his Appe­tite, so that he can eat
nothing, as usually hapneth in great Fluxes, this Milk gives him sufficient
nou­rishment.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=7)

## 16\. For a Bloudy-Flux often approved.

TAke four drams of Diaphaenicon, and half a scruple of Pulvis sanctus fasting,
in White-wine made warm, that the Diaphaenicon may be dissol­ved; and keep the
Patient from sleeping, until it have wrought, and an hour after they have
taken it, give them some Chicken Broth; if it be given alone without Pulvis
sanctus, it riddeth the Belly and Guts from all raw and crude humors, and
easeth the Belly from gripings and pain proceeding of Wind and cold causes.

## 17\. For any Loosness.

TAke one dram of the seeds of Plantane, bruise them and take them in a draught
of Broth (which is best, if a little tops of Plantane be boiled with it) in
the morning fasting. Continue this three mornings together.

## 18\. For Fluxes.

TAke the herb Swallow-wort when it is in the flower, (it must be gathered in
dry and fair weather) the whole herb or plant, i. e. the root, stalk, leaves
and flowers; make it clean without wash­ing it; let it lie a day in a dry
Chamber in the open Air; but so that the Sun come not to it, then chop it
small, or bruise it, (without deperdition of any juice) and put it into a
Cucurbite of Glass, and put upon it some good Aqua vitae (such as comes from
France) as much as will be above it a fingers breadth or two, and cover it
close with a Blind-head, and let it digest three or four days [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=8) (best, near a
little warmth) then change the head, putting on one with a Limbeck, and distil
with gentle heat of Sand, till you have drawn off so much of the humidity as
may not endanger Burning. This Liquor will have some little strength in it,
but not by a great deal so much as the Aqua Vitae: The Dose is a little Wine-
glass full at a time. I have found it admirable for the Brain, the Eye-sight,
the Heart, the Stomach, and all languishing Diseases and Decays of Nature, and
causeth a little gentle breathing, scarce amounting to sweat: When you take it
in a morning, it gives you a wonderful severity of brain and chearfulness of
humor in lan­guishing Diseases; if bad humors abound, it must be given with
Purges of Gambogium, one morning the one, the next the other; thus, three
times each.

It must be given seven, eight or nine granes of Gutta Gamba or Gambogia for a
Dose, either in Pow­der, in Wine, or other fit vehicle; or make it up into a
Pill with a drop of Syrup of Roses: This quantity will purge gently watry
humors, and give a gentle Vomit if the Stomach be foul.

## 19\. For a Loosness.

TAke a Pint of Claret Wine, and put into it two penyworth of bruised Cinnamon,
and as many Cloves; boil this gently upon Embers (covering the Pot) till half
be boiled away: In the mean time tost a Tost or two of light Bread, and cover
them sufficiently with Sugar, then pour (through a Lixor) the Wine upon them:
Eat those sopped Tosts for all the Dinner, and the like for the Sup­per,
eating no other sustenance that day; and it useth to cure in a day.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=8)

## 20\. An Anodyne Clyster.

TAke six ounces of thick Barley Cream (Cremor Hordei) and the Whites of three
new-laid Eggs beaten into an Oil, and about two spoonfuls of lump kitchin
Sugar (not brown Sugar used in Clysters, nor Loaf-Sugar, but the best
sweetning Sugar, and that is in lumps) and as much Rose-water as may reduce
the whole into a fit consistence for a Cly­ster (which may be three or four
good spoonfuls) then warm it sufficiently for a Clyster, and so take it. You
may with ease keep it three or four hours or more. It cooleth and tempereth
the Bowels exceedingly, and healeth much any excoriation or fretting in them
and easeth the pain arising thence.

The best Rule to discern if there be Sugar or Rose-water sufficient in the
Clyster, is to tast it; for it should be so as to be most pleasant to your
tast if you were to eat it.

## 21\. An Excellent Clyster to cure any painful Flux or Scowring.

TAke a convenient handful of Barly-meal that hath all its Bran in it, as much
Bran of Wheat, and as much dried Roses. Put these to boil gently in three
pints of water, in a glazed Pipkin cove­red, for about three quarters of an
hour; then strain hard through a linen-cloth all the liquor with the slimy
substance that comes out with it. This is enough for two Clysters when
needfully done. Take half this Decoction, and put into it the yolks of two
new-laid Eggs, and one ounce of Mel-rosate. Give it the Patient duly warm. He
may keep it a long time (two or three or four hours) without [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=9) trouble, because
the quantity is less than of an or­dinary Clyster, and that it is of a
Balsamic and comforting quality to the excoriated Guts. This is an excellent
Remedy to any sharp tormenting Flux, where the Guts are enflamed, excoriated
and ulcerated, either through ordinary causes (as eating fruit or the like) or
by taking Mercury to Flux one by Salivation. You will presently find ease, at
the first taking it, but it is well to repeat it twice or thrice a day.

## 22\. For the greatest Flux or Loosness.

TAke a right Pomwater the greatest or two little ones, roast them very tender
to pap, take away the skin and the coar, and use only the pap; and the like
quantity of Chalk finely scraped: mix them together before the fire, and work
them well to a Plaster, then spread it upon a linen-cloth warmed very hot as
may be suffered, and so bind it to the Navel twenty four hours, use it two or
three times till the Flux stay off.

## 23\. An approved Remedy for the Obstractions of the Spleen or Liver.

TAke the Whites of eight Eggs, and beat them very small, two good handfuls of
the leaves cal­led Vervein (in Latin Verbena) stamp it very well: mingle these
two together and add as much Barly­flower to it as will make it a Pultis;
which spread upon a coarse cloth and apply it, leaving it on twice twenty four
hours.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=9)

## 24\. An excellent Lime-water for Obstructions and Ulcers, &c.

TAke one pound of Stone-Lime hot from the Kiln, and pour upon it a gallon of
fair water, let it stand eight hours, and then pour it off clear, and put into
it of English Licoris, Aniseeeds and Sassafras, of each four ounces, large
Mace two drams; let these infuse in the water twelve hours, then pour it off
from the Ingredients, and keep it for your use.

Drink of this Water twice or thrice a day, half a pint at a time. It is very
excellent for all manner of Obstructions and Ulcers, either inward or
out­ward, and likewise to be used by way of injection.

## 25\. An excellent Bemedy for the Dropsie.

LEt the Patient swallow every morning three or four whole Cloves of Garlick
without taking any other thing with them, but you must first prick them with a
needle in four or five several places, out of which will issue a sharp biting
water which you must wipe away: And a little while after swallowing theGarlick
he must drink a good draught of Wormwood Ale; and then do upon it as much
exercise as conveniently he can; at dinner eat what you will of wholesom diet,
but at night sup not, or but very little, and at going to bed, take the Cloves
of Garlick and Wormwood Ale as in the morning. Continue this till the Patient
be well, which usually  [...]s in twenty or thirty days. Take the best Worm-
wood Ale and strongest of the Wormwood, by put­ting. over-night a sufficient
quantity of Wormwood into quick good midling Ale; but during the Cure, you
must every morning and night use the follow­ing Bath or Fomentation.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=10)

Take three gallons of Conduit-Water, and boil in it five or six handfuls of
Mallows, and two pound of fresh Mutton-suet, (that which is next the Kidneys)
stript from the skin and chopped small, and half a peck of Wheat-bran; boil it
till the fat be throughly melted, and the virtue of the Mallows drawn out into
the liquor, then you must strain it to cast away the dregs, and this both hot,
foment the legs, very well for one half hour or an hour, setting the feet in
the Boul where the Deco­ction is. This will draw much water from the Legs: For
after you have taken the Garlick and Wormwood Ale a while, it will drive the
humors into the Legs and Feet, which will be much swel­led with it, and pit
much.

## 26\. Another Remedy for the Dropsie.

TAke three or four pound or thereabouts, of Mountain-Sage, (a bagful above a
foot, or fourteen or fifteen inches high, and eight or nine, or ten
overthwart) bruise it in a Mortar, and put it into a Bag of Boulter-cloth, and
put it into a Kilderkin of middling Ale as soon as it is tunned, putting into
the Ale the Juice that may have run out of the Herb upon beating it: and as
soon as it is fit to drink (which may be in a week or five or six days)
continually drink of it at meals and all times you have occasion, and drink
nothing else: Have still a new Vessel coming on under the former, so to have
always some ready. A Kilderkin is the fourth part of a Barrel, and may hold
about nine gallons.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=10)

## 27\. Another.

GAther ordinary Wormwood in May, when it is in greatest vigour, and distil it
in an ordi­nary Still that serveth for Rose-water: Put the wa­ter that cometh
over upon fresh Wormwood as before, and distil it as you did: Put this Water
upon another like Paviel of fresh Wormwood, and so distil a third time: you
must have a care never to distil to perfect driness, but still to leave a
little behind, which is the very gross part. Drink of this Water in the
morning fasting, and in the afternoon about four or five of the clock.

## 28\. Another.

TAke four handfuls of the inner green rind of Elder, after the outward gray
bark is pared off, and one handful of Wormwood: Put them to two gallons of
liquor composed thus: Let two parts of it be Beer and Ale, of convenient
strength, and one part White-wine: Let the proportion of Beer and Ale to one
another be according to the best liking and taste, and the White-wine half as
much as both they together: Let the Vegetables  [...]ie in this liquor close
stopped three or four days, that it may imbibe into itself all the virtue of
them: After which time bottle it up into Quart-Bottles, which stop close; it
will soon grow very quick and pleasant. Drink only of this at meals and all
times, when you have need to drink.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=11)

## 29\. A great and approved Care of the Dropsie.

FIrst purge well with some fit Purge (as of Jallap, Manna, Sene,) to carry
away warry humors. Then take the following Diet of Garlick. Make some moderate
Broth of Mutton, Chickens and Ga­pon or Hen, but not Veal. It must not be too
strong of the Meat, nor too weak; but such as you may drink all the day, for
you should drink no other Li­quor. You must make but about a pottle of Broth
at a time, for it will not keep. And for this quantity you must take a gallon
of Water, into which put above a handful of Garlick and Rosemary, Peniroial,
Thyme, sweet Marjoram, Fennel-roots, Parsly-roots, or any other fit Roots or
Herbs; as also Currants and a sufficient quantity of Salt. And after some days
taking the Broth, put into every draught you take of the Broth a Spoonful or
more of the crude juice of Garlick stamped and strained out. But if you cannot
bear it always to drink this Broth, then use the following Decoction. Take
Sarsaparilla twelve ounces, China Roots five ounces, Sassafr as three oun­ces.
Cut all these very small, and pour upon them Fountain Water, to three fingers
breadth above the Ingredients, and: let them infuse over a soft fire the space
of four hours, then throw away this water; and stamp the Ingredients well in a
Mortar with a wooden Pestle; then pour upon them tea quarts of Fountain Water,
and boil it in a Vesle close stopped till four quarts of it be consumed.

Of this Decoction drink without any other drink but the Garlick Broth.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=11)

## 30\. Another Drink.

TAke all the foresaid ingredients in the same man­ner prepared and stamped:
then take a clean vessel and fill it with Beer, then put all the ingre­dients
in a Bag, and hang it in the Beer. One ounce of the ingredients is sufficient
for a quart of Beer.

Either of these drinks is only in case you cannot bear the use of the Garlick
Broth; which alone will dispatch the Cure much the sooner. After twelve or
fourteen days the Patient will begin to piss in great abundance, and very
stinking noisom roping matter. Continue your diet till you are perfectly
cured.

Then to strengthen and secure your Liver, take the following Electuary. Take
of Powder of Tur­merick a sufficient quantity, make with it and Su­gar an
Electuary, add to every ounce of it th [...]e [...] drops of Aniseed Oil made
by Distillation. And if you put a little of Ambergris to it, it will be the
bet­ter to strengthen.

Take of this Electuary two or three times a day, the quantity of a Hazle Nut;
but take not above one ounce in a day.

Besides this to strengthen the Stomach, use the following Stomacher: Take
Wormwood, Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, ana one handful; Cloves, Cinamon, Mace, ana
one ounce; bruise these Spices, and mix them with the Herbs; of these make a
Stomacher, and apply it. And you may likewise anoint your Stomach and region
of the Liver with Oil of Nut­meg and Oil of Roses.

This course of the Garlick-Broth is for all Ob­structions and superfluity of
Cold, raw Humors clogging the Brain or any other part, as well as for the
Dropsie.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=12)

## 31\. For Legs or other parts of the Body swelled coming by abounding of bad
Tumors, or by the Dropsie.

TAke yellow Amber, the worth of three or four pence, mix it with a quart of
good Wine-Vi­negar. Then take a Stone or Brick, and make it hot, but let it
not be red hot, and put it into a Tub, then pour upon the Stone or Brick the
mixture of the Vinegar and Amber, and hold the swelled Leg over the smoak of
it, covering the Tub well with Sheets or Blankets, to the end that none of the
smoak may come out: And immediately the water will come out of the Leg
powerfully, and it will be cured. An eminent Person of Quality was exceedingly
overgrown with the Dropsie, and his belly swoln to a prodigious bigness: He
sate in a great Pipe, such as men use to sweat in, and used this remedy,
pouring the Liquor upon hot Bricks laid upon ashes to save the wood from
burning and smoking (which he changed as their heat was deaded, and could
raise no more smoak of the Vinegar and Amber) and in a little while it had
melted him away to an unbelievable pro­portion: but whilst he was in that
steam, he felt a wondrous active heat piercing into his body. The Tub was
covered close at the top with a Sheet and Blankets, leaving only his head out
in the air, with the cloaths fastned about his neck. Once sweating thus served
his turn; all his Servants with fresh hot Napkins could not suffice to wipe
dry the sweaty water that ran out of his body.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=12)

## 32\. Another for the Dropsie.

TAke a gallon of White-wine, and put into it a handful of Roman Wormwood, and
a good piece of Horse-Radish, and a good quantity of Broom-ashes tied in a
cloth; then take a good bunch of Dwarf-Elder, beat it in a Mortar, and strain
out the juice, and put it into the Wine when you will drink it; but if the
Dwarf-Elder be dry, you must steep a good quantity in the Wine. Take of this
half a pint morning and evening.

## 33\. For the Haemorrhoids. For Aches. Probat.

TAke six Figs, and cleave them along through the middle, lay them in a
Porringer, and pour upon them some good Brandy-wine to cover them a fingers
breadth or two over; set the Brandy on fire by a flaming Paper, and let it
burn as long as it will; the Figs will then be very tender and soft (that they
may be so, you must chuse the best plain ordinary yellowest Figs, that are
sound and pulpy.) Apply one of these halfs as hot as you can endure to the
swelled Haemorrhoid that comes out, and let it lie on till it grow cool, which
will be in less than half a quarter of an hour; then ap­ply another half Fig
as before, and so continue till you have used all the twelve halfs; and to
that end, you must keep them hot by a fire. This will give you perfect ease,
though the pain were never so great before, and take away all the swel­ling
and knobs upon the veins, and make them retire orderly into the body. For the
inner Piles, make an Unguent of Pilewort and Butter thus: Stamp Pilewort (in
May) with fresh Butter, working [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=13) into it as much
of the herb as you can make it well take in, so that the Butter be highly
green; then melt it over the fire, and let them boil gently till the Butter
have taken in all the juice and vir­tue of the Herb, and the superfluous
moisture be evaporated. In a word, you are to make the But­ter as strong as
you can of the Herb, and that it be of a deep perfect green colour, and no
fleg­matic moisture remaining with it: (I conceive it were well to digest it a
while in Horse-dung, before you melt and strain it:) Then strain it into
Gally­pots through a strong Cloth; when it is cold, it will be firm and hard:
This will keep many years. With this anoint the Piles, putting it unto them.

The best Brandy is excellent good for Aches and Pains by Rheums or Colds in
Legs, Knees or Shoulders. Rub the part with a hot hand before a good fire with
the Spirit of Wine, chafing it in a good while; then wet a Paper in the
Brandy, and lay it on, and bind it to: Repeat this as often as you see
occasion.

## 34\. Another for the Piles.

A Person had once the Piles in the greatest extremity that could be, and he
was cured by this following Medicine.

TAke Flower of Sulphur one part, fine Sugar three parts; make this into
Tablets of one dram a­piece with Gum Tragacanth soked with red Rose­water into
a mucilage. Eat of these four or five times a day one at a time: Doing thus,
it gave him three or four Stools a day, and in a little while he was perfectly
cured of his Piles.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=13)

## 35\. For the Tooth-ach.

When there is great pain of the Tooth-ach, by a deflu­xion of a sharp Rheum
upon all one side of the Jaw, this is a certain Remedy.

TAke some green Parsley, and work it in the palm of your hand, with the other
finger and thumb, pressing and squeezing it till you mortifie it all, and
mould it up together, and the juice be ready to squeez out: Then take as much
of it with its juice (if any should chance to be pressed out) as may
conveniently be thrust into the Ear, and six or seven fair corns of Bay Salt.
Mingle them well together, and so put it into the Ear on the aking side; it
will soon take away the pain: Nevertheless let this Medicine remain three or
four hours in the Ear (though the Patient be well long before) that so it may
continue the Cure. If the pain come again, repeat the Medicine.

## 36\. Water for the Teeth.

An excellent Water for the Teeth, to harden, fasten and whiten them, and to
strengthen the Gums, is fol­lowing:

TAke of ordinary Lime-water one pound, crude Alum one dram; burnt Alum, roots
of Flower de-luce, of each half a dram, mingle them together, and when the
Alum is dissolved, and the tincture drawn out of the Flower-de-luce; let the
liquor run through a linen, that it may be clear. Then put half a spoonful of
Orange-flower water to it to make it more grateful, and wash the Mouth and
Teeth with this.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=14)

## 37\. For the Teeth and Gums.

To preserve the Teeth and Gums, wash them often with a Liquor thus made:

MAke a Decoction of Lentisce, Lignum Guaiaci, and a little Rosemary; into a
fitting pro­portion of this put some of the best distilled Wa­ter of Rosemary
and Sage, in which some common Salt is dissolved, as also a good proportion of
Spi­rit of Wine that hath dissolved Myrrh (or extracted the Tincture of Myrrh)
and is very strong of it, and the like of Spirit of Wine, that hath in like
manner extracted the Tincture of Mastick.

Or use Alum dissolved in some of the Waters a­bovesaid or in Claret-wine.

Or put some Oil of Myrrh made per Deliquium in Whites of Eggs, and some Oil of
Sage made by Di­stillation, quaere of adding also Oil of Rosemary into Canary-
Sack in which is dissolved some Salt (rather than into Claret-wine.) To fasten
the Teeth and preserve the Gums, wash your Mouth every morning, and in the day
with the Pickle that Limons are kept pickled in, a little warm'd: Those that
have the Scurvy in Holland use it much. It is singularly good.

## 38\. For familiar washing the Mouth, which con­firmeth and fastneth the
Teeth much, and preserveth the Gums sound, is thus:

PUt one dram of Alum, and two drams of pure Oriental Bole-armoniac, both in
subtile Pow­der, into a pint of Claret-wine; shake it well and use it. Quaere
of adding Myrrh in Powder, or dis­solved in hard Whites of Eggs.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=14)

## 39\. For the Tooth-ach.

ONe that had the Tooth-ach in great extre­mity, and had tried many Medicines
in vain, took a little Cotton and imbibed it with Lucatella's Balsam, and so
put it into the hollow Tooth, with­in a little while the pain ceased, but came
again about a week after: Then he applied the same Remedy a second time, and
the pain soon ceased, and never came again, though before he was very often
subject to this pain.

## 40\. Vinegar of Squills for the Teeth and Gums.

TAke Vinegar of Squills, to settle loose Teeth and cure ulcerated Gums, and
the Tooth-ach, all which it doth powerfully. Use it thus; Dip well a bit of a
soft linen cloth in it, and hold it a pretty while upon the Gum that needeth;
repeat the dipping still as the moisture of the mouth, mingling with the
Vinegar upon the cloth, takes away the force of it: If the water be cold, you
may warm it a little.

## 41\. To fasten loose Teeth. Probat.

YOu will find a secure and certain Remedy, when any of your Teeth are loose
with the Scurvy, or by other abounding humors, if you take some Alum (a great
proportion) and put it into water (which you may warm to dissolve the more)
and rub well every day once or twice the Gums and Teeth with that. Fill the
glass almost half full of Alum before you put the Water upon it; when that
Water is used out, you may put more upon the remaining Alum.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=15)

## 42\. An excellent Powder for the Eyes.

TAke Camphire in fine powder one ounce, put it into a pot and put upon it four
ounces of Vitriol, in powder also: cover the pot with double Paper, and lay
upon it a Porringer with some weight in it; then calcine it with a gentle
fire, and when it is hard, take it off, and let it cool; then beat it into
fine Powder with four ounces of Bole-armoniac, then sift it finely. Take of
this Powder half an ounce, put it into a quart of water, boil it together,
then put it in a glass and keep it for your use.

Dip a little green Sarcenet in it and shut your Eyes, washing only the Eye-
lids, except they be very ill and inflamed, and then you may drop some into
them; and if you find it too strong of itself, put to a spoonful of it, two
spoonfuls of Rose-water, and so use it.

## 43\. An excellent Eye-water.

TAke white-wine and red Rose-water, of cach half a pint, put them in a Glass,
then take Aloes Epatic. Lapis Tutia, and fine hard Sugar, of each four ounces;
beat them severally into fine powder, and put them into the Glass, and stop it
very close; then set it in the Sun in the heat of summer for a month, and
shake it three or four times a day that it congele not.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=15)

## 44\. A Remedy for Defluxions and all Diseases of the Eyes.

TAke the Herb called Pied de Pigeon in French, stamp it into a Cataplasm, and
put a little Salt to it, and apply it to the Wrist of the contrary Hand; as if
the right Eye were sore, put it to the left Wrist, and chang it mor­ning and
night. It is wonderfully efficacious. A Gentlewoman had three great white
Excrescen­cies in one of her Eyes after the Small - Pox; this Remedy cured it
perfectly in a moneths space, but she added washing the Eye at every dressing
with a drop of Spirit of Urine.

## 45\. To take away the Redness of Bloud-shot Eyes.

PUt a little Hyssop in a little Bag of Sarcenet, and dip it in warm water, and
therewith foment the Eye three or four times a day.

## 46\. To stanch Bleeding.

A Very desperate and continual Bleeding at the Nose had often been stanched by
making the Party hold in their Hand, or any where about their Body, a little
of the Herb Shepheards. Pouch; wear it continually, and it will prevent
Bleeding.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=16)

## 47\. Another for the same.

TO stanch the bloud of a Wound, even though an Artery be cut; Strew thick upon
it the Powder of certain Balls, that in French are called Visses de Loup. And
if you have the whole Ball, put over the Powder some of the fungose part of
the Ball (which is that next the stalk under the Powder) and bind it on. If it
stop not the Bleed­ing presently, repeat it with more Powder. By his
description I judge these Vesses de Loup to be our Fuz-Balls.

## 48\. A Cure of Bleeding, either at the Nose, or by a Bloudy Flux.

TAke two parts of the Moss growing on the skull of a dead man (pulled as small
as you can with the fingers) and one part of Mastick (in Powder) mingle them
well together; then make them into the consistence of a soft Plaster, with Gum
Tragacanth brought into mucilage by steep­ing in Plantane and red Rose-water.
Of this make a Plaster upon Linen or Leather, an inch and a half, or two
inches long; and not so broad, to lay upon the veins of the Forehead at the
joining to the Nose and along the Eye-brows, for bleeding at Nofe. But for a
Bloody-Flux it must be as large as the palm of a hand, and round, to lay upon
the Navil and all round about it. This last must be applied warmed a little.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=16)

## 49\. Against Poison inward or outward, or for the stinging of venemous
Beasts in Men or Beasts.

TAke the Leaves of black Corants in Powder one dram, give it in Wine or any
thing. You may gather the leaves in Summer, and keep them dry all the year.

## 50\. An approved Remedy for Spitting of Bloud.

TAke Cumfry-roots freshly gathered six ounces, Plantan-leaves twelve handfuls:
Beat all well in a Mortar, and express the juice strongly by a Press; and with
such quantity of Sugar more or less, as you intend to keep it long, or else
use it quickly, make Syrup of it.

Take of this often in the day a spoonful or two at a time.

If you make the Syrup to be used presently, you need take but equal parts of
Syrup and Juice: But if you would keep it the year about, then you should take
two parts of Sugar to one of Juice.

You need not let the Juice settle to separate the the gross parts from it
(which may be the best in this case.)

## 51\. Remedium ad Fluxum immoderatum Sangui­nis Menstrualis.

TAke the Scull of a man, scrape of it one dram, put it into a glass of White-
wine, let it infuse a night, and in the morning take it fasting. In two or
three times taking it every two days, it will cure it.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=17)

## 52\. Contra Fluorem album. Probat.

AFter due Purging give the Ceruss of Antimony twice or thrice a day, about
fifteen granes for a dose in White-wine.

## 53\. A Remedy for the Jaundise of any kind, Black or Yellow.

TAke eight ounces of chosen Corants well wash­ed and picked from all the
little Stalks; put to them one ounce of Rhubarb in most subtile Powder; beat
them together in a Mortar seven or eight hours. Take of this every morning
fasting, and at night about the quantity of a Walnut. It purifieth the Blood
and strengtheneth the Liver wonderfully, and (continued) carrieth away the
peccant humors of the body.

## 54\. For the Mother.

TAke twenty grains of the fixed Salt of a Plant called Stinking Orach, in
White-wine or in Mugwort water, if the Patient be of a hot com­plexion.

## 55\. For the Sinews and the Head.

TAke of the Chymical Oil made by Distilla­tion, of Sweet-Marjoram, of Nutmegs,
of each three parts, and of Cloves one part. If you will have it liquid, leave
it thus: but if thick, to be portable; make these into an. Ointment with the
ordinary Oil of Nutmegs made by expres­sion; With this rub the Soles of the
Feet, twice [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=17) a week: As also
the Perinaeum between the Anus and Scrotum, and the Scrotum and the
Emunctories outsides of it.

This strengthneth Nature exceedingly.

## 56\. For Deafness.

TAke Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Spiknard, of each fix drams, Juice of
Onions, Juice of Rue, of each two drams, Black Hellebore half a scruple,
Coloquint half a dram, Oil of Exceter two drams; boil this till the Juices be
consumed; then take Wool, dip it in, and put it in the Ear. Be very cautious
when and how you use this Medicine.

## 57\. Another for the same.

TAke of wild Mint, mortisie and squeez it in the hand till it rendreth Juice;
then take it with its Juice, and put it in the Ear, change it often; this will
help the Deafness, if the person hath heard before.

For Deafness through Cold and humors clogging and benumming the Ears, causing
sometimes pain in them; you may drop into the affected Ear one drop (no more)
of Oil or Quintessence of Rosemary (which will not burn or pain them) and
after it is soked in (by lying with that Ear up) stop the Ear slightly with
Cotton or black Wool dipped in the Spirit of Rosemary. Repeat the drop after a
day still as often as you find need.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=18)

## 58\. For the Small Pox.

TAke two or three granes of Saffron, and dry it well by the fire, then make a
little Bag of it in fine Linen, and infuse and press it in Posset-ale, Mace-
ale or White-wine, till all the tincture and vir­tue be drawn out: give that
to the Patient, and keep him warm. If he have soreness in the Throat, do thus:
Boil a quarter of a spoonful of dried Saffron (in a little Bag) in half a pint
of Milk till it be very yellow; in this boil a broad stay of Linen till it be
throughly tincted, and put it warm and moist un­der the Throat, as if you
pinned it to keep on a Coif. When this stag is cold and dry, take it off, and
put on a new one, to which end you must have at least two, that one may heat
in the Milk, whilst the other is pinned about the Throat. This will certainly
take away all pain of the Throat in six or eight hours: you must not use
Ointment or Grease to anoint the Scabs, but only plain ordinary un­guentum
Album, when the Pustules begin to dry; and this hath preserved all my Children
from any marks. Yet in this Disease the less you meddle, the better it is
commonly for the Patient.

## 59\. To drive the venemous Vapors from the Heart and Head in the Small-Pox,
Measles, &c. with great success, with a familiar Julep or Emulsion, take the
following.

TAke Seeds of Citron one ounce, Seeds of Car­duus Benedictus one ounce and an
half: beat them well, and draw out all their Pulp with two pound of some fit
Cordial-water, as of Scabious, [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=18) Card. Bened.
Marigold, or the like; and sweeten it with two or three ounces (as much as
will serve) of Syrup of Citron: Drink of this as often as you have a mind to
drink, a reasonable glass-full; to make it more Alexipharmacal to take now and
then, make a Julep conteining Confect. Hyacinthi, or of Alkermes and Treacle-
water, and diapho­retic Antimony, and prepared Pearl, and what else you think
fit, and put a spoonful or too of this into a draught of the Emulsion. Use
this with caution.

## 60\. An infallible Remedy for the same.

IN a Wine-glass full of Sack dissolve as much Sheeps-dung newly taken out of
the Sheeps­gut warm, as will make it pretty thick, yet so, that the Patient
may drink it: Let him drink this, and lie quietly in his bed reasonably warm
covered. This will make him sweat, and cause the Pox or Measles to come out
kindly, and finish the cure very speedily.

## 61\. To prevent Marks of the Small-Pox.

TO prevent pitting in the Small-Pox, boil Cream to an Oil, and with that
anoint the wheals with a feather as soon as they begin to dry, and keep the
Scabs always moist herewith: Make your face be anointed almost every half
hour, not before they begin to be crusted.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=19)

## 62\. An Experimented Remedy for the Falling-Sickness.

TAke of the Scull of a man, of Parings of Nails of Man, of each two ounces,
reduce this to fine Powder, and grind it upon a Marble-stone, then take of
Polypody of the Oak, Misletoe of the Oak, Misletoe of the Hasle-tree, Misletoe
of Tile-tree, of each two drams, Peony-Root dried half an ounce; beat this all
into fire Powder: Then take six ounces of fine Sugar, boil it to the
consistence of Rose-Sugar; then mix all the Pow­ders with it, and let them
well incorporate over the fire, stirring them well together, then take it from
the fire, and make it into little Tablets, of which give one in the morning
fasting, and ano­ther two hours after dinner, and one two hours after supper.
Continue this whiles the Tablets last. Probat.

## 63\. Another for the same.

Many persons have been cured of the Falling-Sickness by the following Remedy:

TAke Misletoe of an Oak, the Leaves, the Ber­ries, the sprouting Stalks and
the solid Bran­ches; dry it gently in an Oven, then beat it into fine powder,
of which give as much as will lie upon a shilling, for one of ripe years; for
middle aged, a six pence; for a child, a groat; give it morning and evening in
Cowslip-water, three days before and three days after the full of the Moon.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=19)

## 64\. For the Falling-Sickness and Convulsion-Fits of Children.

TAke Peony-roots fresh digged, scrape of them with a Knife, and apply it to
the soals of the feet.

## 65\. To cause a good Delivery.

TAke a good large white Onion, or two lesser, peel and slice it, and in a
Frying-pan, fry it with two or three spoonfuls of the best Sallet-oil till it
be tender; then put all into a little Pipkin with half a glass-full of Water,
and boil it well together, then strain it out, and drink that in the morning
fasting. Continue this for a fortnight or three weeks immediately before the
time expected for delivery. In a word you prepare this Broth just as if you
would make a Pottage of Onions, ex­cept you put in no Salt; and that you use
Oil in­stead of Butter: This course will so dispose the parts of the Woman
with Child, that she shall be brought to bed with security and very little
pain: And if the Child should be turned in the Mothers Belly, it will bring it
to rights before labour. Wo­men that have had most dangerous labours till they
took this, have had no difficulty afterwards.

For want of white Onions ordinary ones will do well.

## 66\. A Receipt of the Labour-Powder.

TAke Date-stones, Amber, Saffron and Cumin-Seeds, beat and searse them all
severally into very fine Powder; take of each as much as will [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=20) lie upon a
groat; but double so much of the Cu­min-Seed, mingle them all together, and
when the Woman is in her greatest extremity give her a spoonful of it in Mace-
ale: This is also very good to bring away the After-burthen.

## 67\. To bring away the After-burthen, or any Foulness, or a dead Child, and
to cure the After-throws and Griping, after a Woman is delivered.

TAke the inner skins (that are wrinkled) of Gizards of Hens that are laying of
Eggs; wipe them clean and lay them by to dry: When you have need to use them,
beat them to subtile Powder, of which give one dram for a dose in a little
White-wine: you will see the effect in a short time. If it be needful you may
repeat the dose once or twice the same day.

## 68\. For torn Bladders.

A Person of credit told me, that he hath hung about the neck of women, who
have had their Bladder dilacerated by unskilful Midwives in their Delivery,
and made always their water with great torment, a little Bag containing some
Powder of Toads calcined; so that the Bag lay al­ways upon the pit of the
Stomach next the skin; and presently it took away all pain and inconveni­ences
from that accident, as long as it hung there: but if you left off the Bag, the
pain returned. A Bag continueth in force but a month; after so long time you
must wear a fresh one.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=20)

## 69\. To bring down a Womans Courses.

MAke the Sulphur of Antimony in this man­ner: Take Antimony, crude Tartar;
beat them to small Powder and mingle them well: put them into a strong
Crucible, and give fire by de­grees, at last extreme strong, in six hours all
is done: Take out the matter and powder it small; pour store of warm water
upon it, that it may dis­solve all that is dissolvable of the Calcination:
filter it, and then pour upon it enough of distilled Vi­negar to precipitate
all the Brimstone. Then (when it is well settled) pour off the supernatant
Liquor, and dry the remaining Sulphur. Put a little of it to burn upon a
Chafing-Dish of coals, and over it a Funnel with a long neck, which makes it
enter up the body, and it will make the Courses come down.

## 70\. For the Brest and Belly of Women lying in.

TAke Whales Spawn and pure white Virgin-Wax; melt the Wax first gently, then
put the Sperma Ceti to it and incorporate them well toge­ther, at last put a
little Spirit of Wine to them, and stir all well together, and take it from
the fire, and dip in a linen cloth of the bigness of the Brests and of the
Belly, to cover them completely all over: Those for the Brests must have a
little hole in each, for the Nipples to come out. As soon as a Woman is
delivered, she must put on these, and upon the Plaster of the Brests she must
put some Flax picked loose, to cover all the Pla­sters over, and some Flax
under the arm-holes, then cover the Flax upon the Plasters with other [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=21) Linen: The
Plaster on the Belly is to cover it all over, then she swatheth her body well:
All this must be opened every morning, and turneth the Plaster on the other-
side (for it is a Sear-cloth, and consequently both sides Plaster alike) and
at the end of eight days take fresh Plasters for eight days more; after which
time there needeth no more.

## 71\. An admirable Sear-cloth for a sore Brest; Im­postumes, Fellons, green
and old Cuts.

TAke half a pound of the best Virgins-Wax, half a pint of the Oil of Roses,
half a pint of the Oil of Olives; melt them altogether, and let them stand
till they are cold, then take half a pound of white Lead beaten fair; put it
into the Oil and Wax, then set it over the fire, and let it boil half an hour;
then take two ounces of Mastick, two ounces of Frankincense, two ounces of
Myrrh, two ounces of Gum Olibanum, beat all the ounces very small; put them
into the other Ingredients, and let them boil half an hour more: Then take a
quarter of an ounce of Camphire, and put it in, stir it over the fire, and dip
the Cloths thereih, and make it up in Rolls for use.

## 72\. An Anodyne Pultis for Cancered Brests.

The first cataplasm that Mr. Bressieus applied to Mrs. Brents Cancered Brest
when it began to break, was this,

TAke an old mellow Pippin, cut off a Cap at the top of it; and then take out
the Core, leaving the sides of the Apple whole, that the melted Grease may not
get out; fill that hole with Hogs-Grease, then cover it with the Cap, and set
the Apple to rost, when it is well rosted to Pap (by [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=21) which the Hogs-
Grease will be imbibed into the substance of the Apple) take it and pare off
all the Paring, and break and mingle perfectly all the Pap, that it may spread
well, and be an uniform Pulp: Spread it thick upon Linen, and lay it warm upon
the Sore, putting a Bladder over it. This is an excellent Cataplasm, to take
away and cool, and dissolve the swelling and hardness, if it be dis­solvable;
and if not, to make it break and sepa­rate with ease and without sharpness.
This is to be changed every twelve or twenty four hours, ac­cording as it
groweth dry.

## 73\. For Hardness in Women's Brests.

FOr a month take continually a Purge of Jallap, and always put over all the
Brest a Linen-Cloth that hath loose flocks of Flax stitched upon it, in such
sort that there may be no hardness felt any where; let it be very thick and
warm.

The way to take Jallap is to reduce a pound or more in one parcel of the wood
into Powder, and mingle it well together, and keep it in a Glass close
stopped: Then take half a dram or one dram or four scruples of it for a dose
in White-wine and Sugar; and by this you may know certainly how all the whole
quantity will work, that so you may encrease or diminish the dose to the need.

With this a Lady of great Quality cured her self.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=22)

## 74\. For hard Brests in Women.

An adnirable Pultis that cured many Women of hard and sore Brests, is thus
made.

TAke Turneps and boil them well in water, so that they be very tender, then
take then out and squeeze out the water clean from them, beat them to mash,
and mingle with them some good quantity of fresh Butter unsalted, and apply
this warm to the Brest Pultis-wise upon a thick cloth very large; and change
it morning and night. In three days it perfectly cureth, though before the
pain and hardness hath been very great.

## 75\. Another Medicine for the same is thus:

TAke Boars-grease and Aqua-vitae, melt them together, with that foment the
Brest well; then take a Pewter large broad Porringer, or very large deep
Saucer, or deep little Dish, that may enclose and contain the Brest, and warm
it well, and so put it upon the Brest, and tie it on all night. In the day-
time it is inconvenient to keep on the Porringer; but if you could have it
always there, it were much the better; Dress it with this Oint­ment morning
and evening. No metal but Tin will-serve.

## 76\. For the Tetters.

TAke Venice Turpentine one ounce, make it to an Ointment by washing in Rose-
water; then melt two pennyworth of white Virgin-wax over a Chafing-dish of
coals; put the Turpentine to it, and add one ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds to
it, [[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=22) take
it from the fire and beat it to the consistence of an Ointment. Anoint your
Tetters with it.

## 77\. For Aches in any part of the Body, even in Womens Brests.

CAuse a Dyer to dye you some thick spongy Flannel of the blue color called
Coventry-blue. When it is dry, dye it again; dye it thus five times, at last
the Dye will be so deep, that it will look almost black, lay of it on a good
deal beyond the pained part on all sides; keep it thus conti­nually covered,
and warm with it.

## 78\. A Remedy for the Piles or Hemorrhoids.

When the Hemorrhoids are exceedingly swelled, (chiesty outwardly) the Cure of
them is thus:

TAke a little Cotton-Wooll, dip it in Oil or Quintessence of Rosemary, and
with that wipe gently over the swelled Vein, (which sometimes will be as big
as a large Cherry) and after an hour or two, moisten the Vein again with the
faid Oil; doing thus three or four times at like intervals: It smarts a little
for the present. After two or three or four times fomenting thus, the swelled
Vein will break and much foul matter run out, and he shall have present ease,
and in a little while it will grow whole; and after the breaking, it hindreth
not his going abroad about his business: The Patient needeth the Oil no more,
after the Sore is bro­ken: for it will then be too sharp.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=23)

## 79\. Another for the same[?].

TAke about a spoonful of the sa of Eel, and near as much of the yolk of a new-
laid Egg, and beat them very well together to an Ointment: In this roll a
Tent, so as to make it take up as much as you can, and put it into the
Fundament, and lay also a Pledget covered with the like Ointment up­on the
outward swelling, and this will give some case presently. Change your Tents
and Pledgets as they grow dry and hot, and in a small time the Veins will open
and run, and it will be well.

The fat of Eel is made by boiling one or more Eels in water, and then skimming
off the fat that swimmeth at the top: Or if you rost an Eel, take the fat that
droppeth from it, so it be mixed with nothing else.

## 80\. A Plague Cordial.

TAke a pound of the Leaves of Wood-Sorrel, and pound them by themselves half
an hour; then take three pound os fine Sugar beaten small, and mix these
together, and keep it stirring into the Wood-Sorrel for three hours more,
keeping still pounding, and then take four ounces of Mithri­date or London-
Treacle; pound them altogether half an hour longer, which makes four hours
toge­ther, then keep them close stopt in a Gally-Pot. In time of Infection in
a morning fasting: Take as much as a great Nutmeg; and if stricken with any
disease at the heart, or pain in the stomach, take the same quantity, and go
to bed, and put your self into an easie sweat for one hour; and you will find
excellent effects by it. Prob.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=23)

## 81\. For the same.

TAke the best Brandy-wine, and leaves of red Poppy that grows among the Corn
(Papaver Rheas) of each one pound, you are to extract the Tincture of the
Poppy with the Brandy; but you must not put all together at once, but thus:
Put four ounces of the Poppy-leaves to the whole pint of the Spirit of Wine,
and let them infuse toge­ther till you judge it hath extracted all the
tin­cture, and then the leaves themselves will be in some degree dissolved:
Then press out all the Li­quor, and throw away the remaining feces. Into this
thick liquor put four ounces of fresh Poppy­leaves, and do all as before: so
do twice more till you have the tincture out of the whole pound of the Leaves,
which if you should do at once, would not proceed well, because the Leaves are
light and take much room: Into this Liquor put two ounces of good old Venice-
Treacle, and make it dissolve therein; take two or three spoonfuls of it in a
little Sack or Mace-Ale: It driveth out the Infection powerfully.

To preserve one in time of Infection, eat a little of the tops of Rue with
Bread and Butter, in a morning: Or, eat a little old strong Cheese with Bread
and Butter (and a little Rue with it, if you please) and drink a glass of
stomachal Claret-wine, or Wine and Water after it.

## 82\. Another Excellent Remedy for the Plague.

TAke a pound of the Leaves of Wood-Sorrel, and pound them by themselves half
an hour; Then take three pound of fine Sugar beaten small, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=24) and mix these
together, and keep it stirring by little and little into the Wood-Sorrel for
three hours more, pounding them all that while: Then take four ounces of
Mithridate, and pound it with the rest half stopped in a Gally-Pot. In time of
Infection take in a Morning fasting as much as a Nutmeg; and if you fear you
have taken any Infe­ction, take almost as much more, and go to bed, and
procure sweat for an hour.

## 83\. Another Antidote.

TAke a little, almost half a Glass-full of your own water, (of the mornings
water) heat with two or three spoonfuls of it a little Rue and a little
Smallage, not half a handful of each; squeez out all their juice hard. Drink
this Wine and Juice fasting.

## 84\. An excellent Plague-Water.

TAke Rue, Egrimony, Wormwood, Celandine, Sage, Balm, Mugwort, Dragons,
Pimpernel, Marigold, Fetherfew, Burnet, Sorrel, Scabius, Wood-Betony, Brown-
mugwort, Avens, Tormentil, Carduus Benedictus, of each one handful, and as
much more of Rosemary as any of these, Angelica, Burdocks, green Walnuts:
Shred all these very small; then pour upon them as much White-wine as will
cover them; then slice into a glass a quarter of a pound of Enula Campana
Roots: Let all these infuse three days, stirring them every twelve hours,
cover them close, then still them in an ordinary Glass-body, but lay it not
above an inch thick in the bottom. Save the first running by itself.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=24)

## 85\. For Worms in Children.

TAke one dram and half of the best running Mercury, put it into a Bolts-head,
and spit fasting-spittle upon it (from a wholsom mouth) and shake it well:
Then pour off the spittle from it, and wash the Mercury clean with warm milk
seve­ral times, casting away the milk as long as it con­tracts any stain or
soulness or fullying from the Mercury: Then let the Child swallow this Mercury
in a spoon with a little warm milk upon it, and drink a little more warm milk
after it. Do thus twice or thrice, intermitting two or three days be­tween
every dose.

## 86\. For Worms in the Belly or Stomach.

TAke an Apple of Coloquintida, and split it in the middle into two halfs: fry
one of them very well in good store of the Gall of an Ox, till it be very
tender and pappy, and have imbibed into itself a good quantity. Then apply it
warm (as hot as he can well endure it) to the Navel of the Child or Man at the
hour of their going to bed, and tie it on fast with a convenient Bandage, that
it may keep it on fast from stirting all night: When they rise, they may take
it off: Next e­vening repeat the same again with fresh materials. Do thus
three nights in all: This will kill any Worms in the guts or maw, be they
never so ma­ny or dangerous. Often approved.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=25)

## 87\. An Excellent Plaster for the Stomach, that hath done such notable
Cures, is thus:

SPread Mithridate pretty thick upon thin Lea­ther, and lay upon it all over
some grated Nutmeg, laid also pretty thick on; and cover this with another
Leather like the former, sowing them together round about, and lay this to the
pit of the Stomach, and keep it on. One Plaster will serve many days. Use to
cut off the upper part of a white Kids-skin Glove, about a good hands bredth,
and sow it together at one end; then spread the Mithridate upon it; then strew
on the Nutmeg, then turn the Glove, so that the Plaster is between two
Leathers, then sow the other end together, and so apply it: The bigness of the
Plaster is to be about a hands bredth round. It is excellent for all
Indigestions and Weakness of the Stomach; which cause Loosnesses.

## 88\. To take Warts away.

TAke green Leaves of Marigold, and beat them to mash in a Mortar, so that upon
pres­sing it the Juice be apt to come out. With this Juice-mash rub your Warts
well three or four times a day.

## 89\. Another for the same.

TAke some fat Bacon, and rub the Warts with it; and then hang it in the Sun to
dry.

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=25)

## 90\. For Phrensie.

I Was assured by a Person of credit, that one cu­red a Woman that had been mad
some years, by giving her a draught of the Juice of the Herb Ground-Ivy or Gil
go by ground, at once taking: And they tried it afterwards upon several
others, and it had always the same infallible effect.

## 91\. For Head-achs, sore Eyes, Fellons, &c.

BOil a good handful of the Leaves of Ground-Ivy (it may be had fresh all the
year) in a quart of Ale to a pint, give half in the morning fasting, and half
at night going to bed: It is admirable to cure all Head-achs, Pains,
Inflam­mations and Defluxions in the Eyes, Jaundises, Coughs of the Lungs,
Consumptions, Spleen, Stone and Gravel, and all Obstructions. The Herb
stam­ped and applied to a Fellon like a Plaster or Cata­plasm, cureth it
marvellously and speedily. It is admirable for old Sores, in which you may add
a little Copperas and Honey, if they need clean­sing: you may make an Ointment
of it.

## 92\. For Leprosie and Squinansie.

TAke a Pint of the Juice of Housleek, and half a pint of Verjuice, with these
and a pint and a half of Milk make Posset-drink: of which give half a pint in
the morning and as much at night: but to do better, be drinking of it all day
long; so that you drink up this proportion in twenty four hours. It cureth the
Leprosie, the Squinansie, the painful white Swellings in the Knees, and any
Aches.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=26)

## 93\. An experimented Remedy for the Stone.

A certain Person at Rome was sick of a great Stone in his Bladder, who after
many Remedies taken in vain, was resolved to be Cut; having agreed with the
Operator: This following Remedy was proposed to him by a Priest, of whom he
received the Sacra­ment, who had made trial upon himself and many others. It
is thus:

TAke a good quantity of Millepedes, wash them with white Wine, then put them
into a glased Pot, lute and close it well, and set it in an Oven to dry the
Millepedes: Then reduce them to fine Powder; then put to this Powder as much
white Wine as it will drink up; then put it in the Oven again as before, which
repeat three times; then take this Powder, and mix it with Strawberry­water,
and a scruple of Oil of Vitriol, and dry it once more in the Oven; then keep
it in a Glass close stopped. Of this Powder the Patient took four scruples,
and half an ounce of Aqua Vitae mixt with some fit Broth or other appropriated
Vehicle, in the morning fasting; the effect of it was thus: The Patient found
himself in great pains, and was much tormented, for the space of two hours;
and after five hours past he made a little Urin, but ve­ry thick: The second
day having taken this Medi­cin again, his Urin was much thicker than the
first. The third day he avoided a great deal of Sand; but the seventh day he
avoided so much Sand that his Urin was full of it: And the nineth day the
Patient was perfectly cured from his Stone.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=26)

## 94\. Another excellent Remedy for the Stone.

TAke the Berries of Hawthorns, and dry them; then beat them to Powder, and
searse them finely; take a spoonful of this Powder in a glass­full of White-
wine in the morning fasting.

## 95\. Another for the same.

TAke Parsnips, boil them in fair Water; drink of this water one glass-ful in
the morning fast­ing, and one at night going to bed, and all the day long
drinking nothing else. Continue this six weeks.

## 96\. Another for the same.

TAke the White of a new-laid Egg, beat it in­to an Oil, then let it stand a
quarter of an hour to settle; then take away the Scum and mix the White with
two spoonfuls of White-wine, four spoonfuls of red Rose-water, then put to
this one ounce of white Sugar-candy in Powder, stir it well together and take
it in the morning fasting, and another at night going to bed. Continue this
six or seven days.

## 97\. Another for the same.

TAke the Juice of sowr Limons, Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire, of
each one ounce; beat the Oil and the Juice together; then mix it with half a
pint of White-Wine. Take of this a glass-full or half a glass, according to
the age or force of the Patient, three days before and as many after the full
of the Moon.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=27)

## 98\. A Compounded Hydrosaccharum for the Stone.

TAke four Gallons of Running-Water, four pound of fine Sugar in powder; Eringo
Roots sliced one pound, Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound, a branch of fresh
Rosemary. Boil these all together till half be consumed; then work it up with
a little Yest, then tun it, and put the Peel of a fresh Limon into it: After
it hath done working, you may bottle it, if you please. Of this drink morning
and evening, and whensoever you are a dry.

## 99\. Another excellent one for the same.

TAke a spoon-full of Oil of sweet Almonds, three spoonfuls of Juice of Limons,
two spoon­fuls of Aqua Vitae, three spoonfuls of fine Sugar mix all these well
together by shaking them in a Bottle, then take it in the morning fasting. It
hath done great effects.

## 100\. A certain Remedy for Retention of Urin.

TAke two handfuls of Water-Cresses, twenty four of the Seeds of Alkakingi, two
great white Onions cut in four quarters, two good hand­fuls of Cremor Tartari;
put all these together into a leaded Pot, pour upon it a good quart of
White­wine, let it boil till half a pint be consumed. Take of this a glass-
full in the morning fasting, and another at night, and you shall be cured.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=27)

## 101\. Another for Retention of Urin.

MAke a strong Decoction of Horse-radish roots in White-wine, put to it a
little Hares Wooll dried in powder. Drink of this Decoction morn­ing and
night. You will see the effects of it spee­dily.

## 102\. Another approved Remedy for the Stone and Gravel.

TAke a spoonful of Virgin-Honey, the whitest you can get, and mix it with a
glass-full of Juniper-berry water; take this in the morning fasting, and
continue taking it for some time, and it will bring away the Stone and Gravel,
and will open the passage of Urin wonderfully.

## 103\. Another for the Stone and Gravel, and for Strangury of Urin.

TAke the Fat of a Buck-Rabbet, melt it and anoint the Back and Reins with it.
This will open the Passage of Urin wonderfully. A Child was cured with this;
so that in twenty four hours it made four Pots full of Urin.

## 104\. A Frier in France, much troubled with stoppage of Urin and
Viscosities; (which they called the Stone.)

WAs taught to take one dram of Carrot-seeds (he said the wild Carrot-seeds are
better) and bruise them a little, and put upon them a draught of White-wine in
a Bottle close stopped. [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=28) Run the clear
next morning through a Linen, and drink that. This once preserved him from all
inconveniences of Urin for half a year. When the Disease grew again upon him,
he took again this Remedy.

## 105\. An approved Remedy for the Pleurisie.

TAke an Apple, and open it at the top to take out the Coar, then fill it with
white Frankin­cense; then stop it again close with the same piece you cut out
at the top, and rost it in hot Ashes; then beat it to mash, and give it the
Patient to eat.

## 106\. A Remedy for the Sciatica or Rheumatism.

TAke Storax liquid, yellow Wax, new Pitch, Honey, of each four ounces;
Cinamon, Pep­per, of each one ounce; put all these (in Powder) together into a
new Pot, and let it boil but one walm, stirring it carefully all the while:
then take it from the fire, and put into it four ounces of Aloes, and one
ounce of Oil of Lilies, stir them well together to make them incorporate; then
put the Pot again upon some hot Ashes, and stir it until it be of the
consistence of an Ointment, which spread warm upon Leather and apply it; but
if your Disease be in a whole Thigh, then you may spread it upon a whole Lamb-
skin.

You may leave it on seven or eight days, if it requireth. If the Disease come
again, put the Plaster on again.

This Medicin will keep a long time.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=28)

## 107\. To Cure the Hot and Cold Gout.

TAke a good quantity of the Insect called Cock­chaffers, in the month of May,
upon which (in Powder) put rectified Spirit of Salt to be two or three fingers
bredth over the Powder; digest till the Spirit be tincted deep red; then pour
off that, and put on more, which digest again. Re­peat this till the Powder
giveth no more tincture, doing in such sort that you employ no more Spirit
than is necessary to extract the Tincture; which filter so often till it
leaveth no more feces. Then dissolve two ounces of Salt of Tartar in a
sufficient quantity of Spirit of Salt, then filter it, then mix these two
tinctures together, and digest them eight days in a gentle heat, then separate
it from the feces by filtration, and keep it in a Glass close stopped. The
manner of using this liquor, is thus; Begin with a little dose, as two or
three drops, so little a one that it may cause no sharpness of Urin. Take it
in Hydromel or Small-Beer. The next day take one drop more, so increasing till
you find a little sharpness; which you will do the third or fourth or fifth
day. The next day rest and take some Diaphoretic, the next day purge. The next
take again the same dose of the liquor as you did the last day; continue that
three days. Then as the for­mer time, resting and purging. Repeat this course
till you are well; continuing always the same dose of the liquor, which by a
little pricking of Urin you found to be the due one.

The Purge which the Patient is to take, is thus; The day before, take Reifin
of the Root of Jallap twenty or twenty four granes, Crystal or Cremor of
Tartar ten or twelve granes; mix these with Sy­rup [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=29) of Roses, and
take it in the morning. This will purge both the hot and cold Gout by Stools.

During this course the Patient is to eat no salt meat nor fish; besides he
should drink nothing but Tisanne or Small-Beer that day he taketh the Li­quor
or Tincture.

## 108\. An excellent Plaster for the Gout.

TAke Rosin of Pine, common Rosin, yellow Wax, of each four ounces, Colophona
half an ounce, Stags or Does-grease five drams; melt all these together, and
then take Cloves two drams, Croci Orient. one dram and half, Olibani one
ounce, Mace two drams; reduce all these to Powder, and stir it in with the
rest: Then take it from the fire, and mix with it by little and little a pint
of Alicam Wine, and make it well incorporate together. Spread this upon
Leather of such a bigness as you will have it, and so apply it, leaving it on
until it grow loose of itself.

## 109\. Another excellent Plaster for the Gout.

TAke the whitest part of Pigeons-dung, Mu­stard, of each a like quantity,
temper this with White-wine Vinegar; then take the Grease of a Puppy-dog, so
much as will make it an Oint­ment or Salve, set it over a gentle Fire, and put
into it a handful of shred Parsly; let it stew easily the space of an hour;
then take Garden-Snails, and stamp them in a Mortar, then squeez out all the
Juice of them through a Cloth, which mix with the Ointment and apply it.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=29)

## 110\. For the Kings-Evil.

A most contumacious foul inveterate Kings-Evil (seve­ral times touched by the
King, and wrought upon by the best Chirurgeons; and given over as desperate)
was perfectly cured thus:

TAke Garden-Snails that have white or gray Houses upon them, and beat them in
a Mortar with a little Parsly into the consistence of a Plaster, and so apply
it to the Sore or Sores, and change it every twenty four hours. This is also
good to take away the raging Pain of the Gout.

## 111\. An approved Remedy for Ruptures.

TAke Solomon's Seal, Agrimony, Milt-wast, Maiden-Hair, (which is the Capil.
Veneris) Roots of Straw-berries, of each one handful: Pick and wash them well,
then stamp them, and boil them in two quarts of good White-wine the space of
two hours; but let the Vessel be well stopped, that nothing may expire. Then
strain the liquor, pressing it hard through a Linen, and drink of this Tisanne
a good glass-full in the mor­ning fasting, and an hour after drink another;
and continue this (taking two glass-fuls every mor­ning) till you are cured.
The use of this cured a Lady of a great Rupture in a fortnights space; and
likewise several others.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=30)

## 112\. Another for the same.

A Child was cured of a Rupture thus: Take Cow-Dung, warm it well before the
fire, and so lay it as a Cataplasm upon Leather, and strow upon it some
Cummin-Seeds, and so apply it hot to the Rupture: When it is grown cold, put
on a new one. This Course they continued two days (in Bed,) and the Child was
perfectly cured, and also many others. It is excellent, especially when it is
a windy Ru­pture.

## 113\. An excellent Remedy for the Cankers in the Mouth.

TAke nine leaves of Succory, and as much of long Plantan, and as many leaves
of Rue; boil these in fair water with a spoonful of Hony the space of a
quarter of an hour. Then take it off, and with the liquor gargarise your
Mouth, and likewise drink of it, and with the Herb rub the inside of your
Mouth.

## 114\. For a Fellon.

TAke Garden-Snails, and beat them in a Mor­tar, shells and bodies and all,
till they be smooth and like an uniform Unguent; then ap­ply this like a
Pultis, and when it beginneth to stink, (which it will do in few hours) change
it.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=30)

## 115\. An Ointment for Burning.

TAke Cows-Dung, and put to it a sufficient quantity of Sein doux (Hogs-Grease)
fry or boil them together till they are well incorpora­ted: Then strain the
Liquor through a Napkin; and when it is cold, you will have a green Oint­ment,
which is excellent for Burnings.

## 116\. A most excellent red Balsam or red Salve.

TAke the best Sallet-Oil three pound, Venice Turpentine one pound, yellow Wax
half a pound, Red Sanders two drams, Dragons Blood six penny-worth. Wash the
Turpentine well in Rose-water, and the Oil in Sack; then boil the Oil,
Turpentine and Wax, to the Consumption of the Sack; then put in the red
Sanders and San­guis Draconis; boil it a while, keeping it stirred
continually, then take it off and strain it.

It is excellent for any Bruises or Inflammation.

It will draw Bones, Slivers or Thorns, dead flesh, or whatsoever festereth.

It is excellent for Aches in the Bones or Sinews.

It is excellent for Burnings.

It helpeth the Head-ach by anointing the Tem­ples and Nostrils with it.

It is also admirable for the Colic and Stitch in the side, being applied with
hot cloths.

A dram of it being taken inwardly in a little warm Milk, is excellent for any
inward Bruises, Cough of the Lungs, for Surfeits and any inward grief.

It is very good against any Poison.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=31)

## 117\. Another Excellent Ointment for Wounds or Sores in Man or Beast.

TAke Rosin, yellow Wax, of each a like quan­tity: Melt it with a soft fire,
then put into it half a pound of Hogs-grease, which being mel­ted, put into it
a spoonful of Honey, and half a pound of Turpentine, stir it well together
half a quarter of an hour. Then take it from the fire, and put into it one
ounce of Verdigrease in most subtile Powder; stir it well together a pretty
while, then put it over a soft fire again, but take heed it boil not: As soon
as it beginneth to sim­per, take it from the fire and strain it through a
Cloth; then put it into an Earthen Pot and keep it for use.

This is also a most sovereign Ointment to mundi­fie and heal any foul
inveterate Wound, be they never so festered with dead, proud, spongy or
naughty Flesh. It healeth suddenly and abun­dantly.

It draweth Thorns, Nails, Splinters, Slivers and all things in the flesh.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=31)

## 118\. Another excellent Green Ointment to be made in May, which cureth all
sorts of Strains, Swellings, Aches, Bruises, Kibes, Cuts, Cramps, Burnings and
Scaldings. It ea­seth the Sciatica. It is also excellent for all Swellings in
the Face and Throat, yea though they look red and have an Ague in them.

TAke young Bay-leaves, Wormwood, of each half a pound, red Sage, Rue,
(gathered in the heat of the day) of each one pound; beat them very small in a
Mortar. Then take four pound of Sheeps Suet new killed and picked from the
skin. Work this well together with your stamped Herbs, till they be well
incorporated, then put to them a Pottle of good Sallet-Oil; work it well with
your hands, till it become all of one softness and colour; then put it into a
new earthen Pan, and let it stand covered eight days; then boil it over a soft
fire the space of four hours, stirring it well all the while; then put into it
four ounces of the Oil of Spike and let it boil about four hours more. You
will know when it is boiled enough by putting a drop upon a Plate, when it
appeareth of a very fair green. Then take it from the fire and strain it
through a new Canvas. Keep it close stopped in a Gally-Pot. It will last seven
or eight years.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=32)

## 119\. An approved Remedy for Biting of a mad Dog.

TAke a quart of Ale, and a dram of Treacle, a handful of Rue, a spoonful of
shavings or filings of Tin. Boil these all together, till half be consumed.
Take of this two spoonfuls in the mor­ning, and at night cold.

It is excellent for Man or Beast.

## 120\. A most precious Ointment for all manner of Aches and Bruises; and
also for the Redness of the Face.

TAke Violet, Primrose, Elder, Cowship, Leaves and Flowers. Sage, Mugwort,
Ragweed, white Lilies, St. John's wort, Ncp, Smallage, Marjoram, Lavender,
Sothern­wood, Rosemary, Rose-leaves, Rue, Fetherfew, Tan­sie, Lovage, Mint,
Camomil, Thyme, Dill, Clary, Oak of Jerusalem, Pemroial, Hyssop, Balm, white
Mint, Marigold, Peony-leaves, Bay-leaves, Saffron, of each one handful. Stamp
all these in a Stone-Mortar, as you get them, then put them into a Pottle of
Sallet-Oil, and so let them infuse there till you have all the rest together;
for you cannot get them all at one time, but get them as fast as you can. Then
put to them and the Oil, a quart of White-wine, and set it over the fire, and
boil it to the Consumption of the Wine; then take it off and strain it; then
put it into a Glass and keep it for use.

When you anoint any Sore with this, do it by the fire-side, chasing it well
in; and then lay a Hogs-bladder next to it, and a Linen upon that.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=32)

## 121\. A most excellent Ointment for a Gangrene and all foul Diseases of the
Skin.

TAke good yellow Wax, Gum of Pine, or in­stead of that, take Colophony, Rosin,
of each one pound in powder. Melt the Wax first, and when it is well melted,
put into it your Rosin, stir it well the space of two hours over a gentle
fire; then put your Colophony into it, and keep it still stirring with a
wooden Spatule to make it well in­corporate over a gentle fire that it may not
burn your drugs: When you see that they are well in­corporated, keep it still
stirring the space of an hour; then take it from the fire, and put a pound of
fresh Butter into it, that hath no Salt in it, which work well into it without
fire, stirring it continu­ally the space of a quarter of an hour, after which
put half an ounce of Verdigrease into it in most subtil Powder, work it well
in also by stirring it continually the space of an hour and half. When you see
that all is well incorporated, which you will know when you see that the
Verdigrease ap­peareth green; then put it upon hot ashes, and stir it well for
half an hour, but take heed it boil not, for so it would be spoiled. Then
strain it, and keep it in a leaded Pot for use.

## 122\. A most excellent Water for a Gangrene, to be used with the aforesaid
Ointment.

TAke fine Sugar four ounces, round Aristoloch cut in Rolls, pare off their
shells, and wash them three or four times in White-wine, then take two quarts
of the best White-wine, and put it together with the Sugar and Aristoloch into
a [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=33) Vessel;
which lute very close that the Spirits may not expire. Let it boil very gently
till a third part be consumed; then take it from the fire, and when it is
cold, strain it through a Linen Cloth, pressing it well to have the substance
out of it, which put into a Fiol, and keep it for use.

## 123\. The manner of Using those foresaid Ointment and Water, is thus:

PUt some of the Water in a dish, and warm it over a Chafing-dish of Coals;
then dip some fine Linen or Cotton in it, and bathe the sore part with it, and
three or four fingers bredth about the inflammation of it; then spread a
Plaster of the Ointment, and lay it on; then lay a Linen sour double dipped in
the Water upon that. Dress it thus every six hours. When you see that a
Cir­cle forms itself between the good and bad flesh (which is a sign that the
Gangrene looseneth itself from the sound flesh) then take away by little and
little the mortified flesh, continuing dressing of it till you see a perfect
cure.

The foresaid Water is also excellent for all old and rotten Ulcers, the
swelling of any member or sinews, rubbing them with it, and chafing it in
be­fore the fire, and putting a Linnen four double dipped in it upon the Sore.

It is also excellent for any interior grief or pain being taken inwardly; but
for that, it will not serve above eight days, for it groweth too bitter; but
for any other operation it is always good. It is an excellent Preservative
against the Plague, and for any Poison, taking three spoonfuls of it mor­ning
and night going to bed.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=33)

It is also excellent for any Bruises by a stick, stone or by a fall.

It is an excellent Remedy for the Biting of a mad Dog, for stinging of
Scorpions, Vipers and Ser­pents, opening the wound if it be not large enough,
and bathing it with it, and dressing it with the fore­said Ointment, as you
are directed above.

You may give the Patient (in the beginning) three or four spoonfuls of it
inwardly during three or four days.

This Water and Ointment are also excellent for a Horse sarcys.

Monsieur Trear the famous Chirurgeon at Paris hath done great and admirable
Cures with the fore­said Ointment and Water.

Sir Kenelm Digby transcribed them (with several other rare Receipts which are
in this Book) out of his Book that his Widow lent him.

## 124\. A Purge which he used to give the Patient during his Cure.

TAke two quarts of White-wine, four ounces of Sena well cleansed, two ounces
of Thyme or Serpiles, one ounce of Pithemus': put all these to­gether in a
glazed Pot, which stop well, and let it infuse the space of forty hours. This
quantity will serve for nine times taking. You may take some Broth after it.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=34)

## 125\. Another Excellent VVater for a Gangrene, with which Monsieur D'Alance
doth such wonder­ful Cures in Gangrenes.

TAke Frankincense, Mastick, Cloves, Galangle, Cinamon, Cubebs, of each two
ounces, Lignum Aloes one ounce, Venice Turpentine two ounces: Put all these
into a Retort, and let them infuse the space of twenty four hours: then distil
it in Balneo Mariae till you have two Waters; the first will be clear, the
second whitish. The clear Water is admirable in a Gangrene; bathing the Sore
with it warm, and laying a Linen four double dipped in it upon the Sore, and
so changing it every six hours. But because the clear water keepeth not so
well alone, you may mingle it with the second, and so use them both together.

## 126\. Monsieur Belieur cured the Gangrene, and all old Ulcers, Cankers,
Pocky Sores, and Cancers, &c. with the Oil of Gold made thus:

TAke Spirit of Salt two parts, Spirit of Salt-Peter one part; in this dissolve
as much Gold as it will dissolve: distil off very gently the liquor in Balneo
Mariae till the Gold remain in a Crystalline Gum or Salt, then let it resolve
to liquor in the air of itself; then distil again and resolve. Repeat this
till it congele no more, but remain a deep high coloured liquor. Dip a Straw
in this Oil, and touch all round about the borders of the Sore with it. With
this he cured a very malignant Ulcer in a [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=34) Leg (that had
been there above three years) in the space of ten days; and also a Cancer in a
Wo­mans cheek in fifteen days space, that other Chirur­geons (without hope of
cure) had given over. With this he cured also a Woman (that had 17 Cankers in
her private parts, that had been so some years, and without hope of Cure) in
fifteen days.

## 127\. A Cure for a Gonorrhea.

THe next day after the Purgation of Sena, Clary, Diaprunae laxativae, in
White-wine, as you know. Take this following: Take Trochisci Ala­hand. half an
ounce in most subtil Powder. Infuse it in a pint of good Spirit of Wine in a
large Bolts­head close stopped, set it in bloud-warm Ashes or Sand, or rather
a little hotter, the space of twenty four hours, shaking it well as often as
you can; then pour it from the feces, and let it stand till it be very clear.
Take of this one ounce after your Purge, continuing taking it two days
together; but if it be too hot, mix it with a little pure Canary-Sack. The
third day take the Purge again. Re­peat till you are well.

## 128\. An expedite Cure for a Gonorrhea.

PUrge the Patient very well three or four times, and give him smoothing
Emulsions. Then take Venice Turpentine, wash it well with Rose-water, and make
it into a reasonable thick body for Bolus's with subtil Powder of Mastick;
about the fourth part will serve. Take of this every morning fast­ing two or
three drams, and drink upon it a good draught of new milk, if you fup not. Do
the like at night going to bed.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=35)

## 129\. A Way to cure Venereal[?] Cankers.

APply to them the ordinary Suppurative, which is Basilicon, with a fitting
proportion of Mer­cury dulcis ground to most subtil Powder, mingled with it.
This will suppurate it, and draw out all the Venereal venom, and heal it
without any scar or hardness: whereas if you touch the Cancers with Spirit of
Vitriol or Sulphur, it will make a scar, and then the venom not being able to
run out, it will work inwards, and may make the Pox, and will make hardness in
the place of Sores. If you cannot come to anoint or lay a Plaster upon the
sore parts, syringe it with Rose and Plantan-water, in which you have put a
good quantity of Mercury dulcis in most subtil Powder, and make the Syringe
suck up the Powder of Mercury. This will quickly allay the Inflammation and
Pain, and kill the Poi­son, that you may afterwards finish the Cure with your
Basilicon and Mercury dulcis.

## 130\. For Contusions or Bruises.

AFter Mr. Craquenel's broken Leg was knit, he wore all the day during some
time a laced Stockin of Dogs-skin, and at night (to discuss the humors and
swelling, and to strengthen the part) he spred very thick upon stupes some
Honey, and laid that to it, after he had first bathed the part with Spirit of
Wine, and sprinkled also the Honey with Spirit of Wine. This is a great
discussive of humors. A Boy fell upon his face, and a knob as big as an Egg
swelled presently upon his Forehead and Temple: they laid this Remedy to it,
and by next morning it was well. It is for Contusions and [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=35) Swellings
thereupon; but not where there is solu­tion of continuity.

The Spirit of Wine is much better for this, if it be first well impregnated
with the Tincture of Hypericon.

## 131\. For any kind of Tetters, Herpes, &c.

DIssolve two ounces of running Mercury in four ounces of the best Aqua fortis,
pour upon the solution a quart of fair water, in which is dissolved two
handfuls of Salt, and then filtered. This will make the Mercury fall down to
the bottom in a white Calx. When it is well settled, pour off the clear water;
which keep for your use. Pour the remain­ing milky thick substance upon one
pound of Hogs­grease melted in an earthen Pot. The Grease must be very hot
when you pour in the dissolved Mercury; but take the Pot from the Fire when
you pour the Mercury to it; and stir it well all the while you are pouring it
in, and when it is all in, set the Pot upon the fire again to boil the Grease,
till all the moisture of the Mercurial Substance and Solution is evaporated
away; but be sure you stir it very well all the while; as also after you take
it from the fire (which you do as soon as the moisture is gone) till the
Grease is cold and hardned.

The way of using this Ointment and Water to cure all sorts of Tetters or
Herpes, or any scabby Itches, or inflamed red Faces or Noses is thus: First,
if the evil be very great, purge and let bloud very strongly. Then begin with
the Water: rub the Tetters and all about it with Linen dipped in the Water
made as hot as you can endure it; and when you have rubbed and bathed it well,
lay up­on it Compresses wetted in the Water. Do thus [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=36) twice a day for
two or three days or more, till you see it hath drawn out the Salt humor
abundantly, and that the part is much inflamed and very sore, and hath little
holes or ulcers eaten in it. Present­ly after the first washing it will grow
very sore and inflamed; therefore you must not afterwards rub it so hard as at
first, but very gently. Some Sores will require that you use the water five or
six days, others more, tender ones two or three days. When you judge that the
Water hath drawn out sufficiently the violent matter; then anoint with the
Grease as hot as you can endure it, and lay on it a Plaster of the same
Ointment, binding it on.

This Ointment will presently asswage the pain, and take away the Inflammation.
Dress it with it twice or thrice a day. Much matter will run from the Sore as
from an Ulcer; and by little and little it will heal up. And that which is
wonderful is, that whereas one would think that such deep holes as the Water
will have eaten, should leave Scars, there will not appear the least mark of
them; but a fine new tender natural skin will come over it all.

## 132\. Monsieur Trear's Excellent Medicinal Stone of great Virtues.

TAke white Vitriol half a pound, green Vitriol one pound, Alum one pound and
half, com­mon Salt three ounces; Salt of Tartar, Armoise Mugwort, Cichory,
Plantan, Arsmart, of each half an ounce; Myrrh, Frankincense, of each four
oun­ces; Salt of Wormwood half an ounce. Reduce all these to most subtil
Powder. Then put them into a new glased Pot, and pour upon them a good
quantity of Rose Vinegar. Then put it up­on [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=36) a soft fire, and
stir it continually, till you see that it begin to thicken; then put into it
half a pound of Cerussa Veneta in subtil Powder; keep it stirring over a
gentle fire till it grow to a Stone. Then take it off and keep it for use.

This Stone (a piece of it) being dissolved in Rain or River-water (warmed, and
the affected part bathed with it, and a Linen laid on four double dipped in
this water) will cure any foul inveterate Wound, or any old and rotten Ulcer.

It cureth any Defluxion, and comforteth the sore part.

It cureth any Ulcer or Canker in the mouth.

It fastneth loose Teeth, and hindreth putrefa­ction of the Gums.

It cureth the Noli me tangere, or any Ulcer in the Throat, warming a little of
this water, and garga­rising your mouth with it.

It cureth any Fistula's and Chilblains on Feet.

It is an exceeding good Remedy for all sorts of Impostumes.

It is exceeding good for any Burning or Scal­ding.

It is an excellent Remedy for any Cancer in the Brest. In fine, its Virtues
are innumerable.

## 133\. To dry up Sharp Humors with ones own Water.

A Certain Lady had an humor broke out at the lower part of her heel, which
neither Physicians with Purgings and Diet-drinks, nor Chi­rurgeons with
Ointments could heal and dry up: it was healed in three or four Fomentations
with her own Urin newly made and some white Salt dissolved in it, all warmed,
and then with Linens [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=37) doubled foment
the place by the fire-side, for a quarter of an hour; then bind on a clean dry
Li­nen and compress to it. Do thus morning and night. This is also excellent
for Kibes and Chil­blains, even after they are broken; and if used be­fore
they are broken, it will prevent them.

It is exceeding good to wash and bath ones feet and back-sinews with ones own
water warmed. It strengthneth and suppleth them.

## 134\. An Experimented Vulnerary Potion or Wound-Drink.

TAke leaves of the large Comfrey, Agrimony, Armoise Mugwort, of each two
handfuls; herb Robert 3 handfuls, Mumia half an ounce, Pauls Betony or
Speedwel six handfuls; make a Decoction of this with White-wine and Water in a
Vessel close stopt.

Then pour off as much as you can of the clear; then distil the remaining
matter. Then add the distilled Water to the Decoction. Take of this a little
Glassful in the morning fasting, and as much at four of the clock in the
afternoon.

This hath cured a Gentlewoman of an Ulcer in the Reins, in six weeks space.

This cured also a Frier, who being Cut of the Stone, could not be healed.

## 135\. An excellent Ointment for Wounds and Ulcers.

TAke eight ounces of the Oil of Nuts, Ceruss, Minium, of each four ounces, two
ounces of Bole-Armoniac, one ounce of burned Alum, eight ounces of white
Honey. Put your Oil of Nuts in­to a Basin, and make it hot; then put into it
your Ceruss, Minium, and Bole-Armoniac, by little and [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=37) little, being
first well pulverized: and stir it well for an hour or two; then add to it the
Honey, and the Alum brought into a Powder: All this you are to boil for two
hours over a gentle fire, and have a care of too great an ebullition; and as
soon as you see, that it is boiled to the consistence of an Ointment, take it
off from the fire, and stir it so long till it be cold.

It is a most excellent Ointment in all fresh Wounds, in Nerves cut, Fractures
and all Ulcers.

## 136\. A Digestif.

TAke of Venice Turpentine the worth of two pence, and wash it well with water,
the yolk of an Egg, and a pennyworth of Oil of Roses: beat all together, and
use it in fresh Wounds, dip­ping Cherpibint in it and laying it on, and a
Pla­ster of the said Ointment; and a Compress wetted with Spirit of Salt and
Water upon it, and tie up the Wound.

The Proportion of the Spirit of Salt is, to be so much as to make the Water
pretty sharp, a lit­tle sharper than to drink. This Digestif and Com­press are
to be used only when there is an Inflam­mation or Erysipelas about the Wound;
else the Ointment alone serves.

## 137\. To cure any Sore Leg, or old contumacious Sore or Wound.

TAke the Leaves of the Herb called Garden Night-shade (the leaves of it have
teeth, the buttons or flowers are yellow) and beat them in a Marble or wooden
Mortar; then open the edge with your Fingers to make it light and spongy,
[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=38) that it
may take up his juice again to it. Then lay it pretty thick upon the Sore, and
a double Linen over it then over that a Leaf of red Cabbage boiled till it be
tender, that may cover the Leg all round about the Sore (for this takes away
all Intlammation and angriness in the flesh) then bind up over that. Dress it
thus morning and night. If there be any rotten or dead flesh in the Sore, that
must be first eaten away and cleansed before you apply the Night-shade, that
the Sore be clear and red. With this have been cured strange Ulcers on Legs.

## 138\. For Fistulas and Ulcers.

GEt Pauls Betony one handful; Agrimony, Sanicle, Mouse-ear, Bugle, Self-heal,
Win­ter-green, Wood-Rue, Saracens Consound, Corss­wort, Scabius, Sweet-
Maudlin, Avens, Spatling-Poppy, Plantan, each half a handful; of Roots of
Licoris, Scorsonera, wild Angelica, red Beets, gol­den Rod, of each an ounce
and half; of the inner green Rind of woody Night-shade and Tamarisk, each a
handful and half; Harts-horn four ounces, Crabs Eyes bruised three ounces,
China two ounces, Sarsaparilla four ounces, cut, bruise, chop all small;
infuse them in a pottle of White-wine; a quart of Elder-flower water, Wormwood
and Ladies-man­tle water, of each three pints. Let them stand in warm embers;
but not boil more than twelve hours. Then boil all in a covered Vessel, till
al­most half be consumed: strain it lightly, clarifie it with Whites of Eggs,
pour it off, leaving the dregs behind; then add Honey of Roses one pound and
an half, Syrup of juice of Scurvy-grass six ounces. Give it the boil only till
it mingle; scum and bottle it close. Take five spoonfuls at once [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=38) first in the
morning, and at four in the afternoon, and at going to bed; adding to every
dose six granes of Salt of Vitriol, and two granes of Salt of Tin.

Where there is Fracture of Bones, put to the other Ingredients three ounces
weight of Savin dried and powdered, and one ounce Lapidis ossi­frag.

Use no Unguent to the Ulcer, nor Plaster, un­less that of the juice of
Tobacco, and juice of Bit­ter-sweet or Wood Night-shade, boiled to a
con­sistence, and made into the form of a Plaster with a little Wax and
Turpentine.

## 139\. A most Excellent Plaster of very great virtues, called the Plaster of
Norimberg.

TAke half a pound of Litharge of Silver and a pint of very good Wine-vinegar;
mix these together, and let it stand so three days. Then pour oft the clear,
and add to it half a pound of Minium, and as much of Water of Frogs Spawn. Let
it stand again three days, stirring it often every day with some stick or
other. After three days stan­ding pour it out quickly into a broad Brass
Bason; adding to it of Oil of Olives or Walnuts, one pound, and three ounces
of common Salt. Let it boil, stirring it very well to the consistence of a
Plaster, adding in the end a little Camphire.

## 140\. A Plaster very Excellent for many things.

TAke a peck of Garden-Snails, and pick them clean from the shells unwasht,
which stew in a close pot with a quart of Muscadine; and be sure they do not
boil. When they are tender stewed, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=39) take them out of
the Muscadine and stamp them: and as they are stamping, take of the tender
tops of Rosemary, Rue, Elder-tops or buds, red Sage, of each of these a
handful; chop them small, and put them into the Muscadine, where the Snails
are stewed in, and boil them very soft and tender; then put in the Snails
again, and with them six pennyworth of Saffron, five spoonfuls of Neats­foot
Oil, and an ounce of Mithridate: Boil all these together, till they be very
thick and fit to spread; then put it into Pots, and keep[?] it for your use.
This will keep good a year. When you apply it, spread it upon Leather to the
grieved place, and renew it once in four and twenty hours. The best time to
make it, is in May or June. It will cure any Ach or Sinew, Strain or Grief, in
the Sinews or Muscles, and the dead Palsie, as hath been of­ten proved.

## 141\. An Excellent Astringent Plaster for the Back.

TAke Comfry Roots, Knotgrass Roots, Cinque­foil Roots, Budweed or Baudweed, of
each two good handfuls. Stamp all these, and put to them a quart of the best
Sallet Oil; then let it boil softly till the Oil hath extracted the virtues of
the Roots; then strain it; then put to it four ounces of Venice Turpentine,
and as much of Virgin-Wax, and two ounces of Pitch.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=39)

## 142\. The Excellent Balsam of Doctor Salvatore Winter, given me by him, and
made by my Chymister, with an Addition of his own of more Ingredients.

TAke Linseed Oil two gallons; Colophony, Rosin, Bees-wax, of each three pound;
Sto­rax, Pitch, of each one pound, Venice Turpentine two pound, Oil of
Turpentine four ounces [to these he added, by his own judgment, Oil of Bricks
half a pound.] Put your Linseed Oil in a Kettle, and when it is very hot, put
into it your Colopho­ny, Rosin and Wax, in little pieces: then put in your
Turpentine and Pitch, and Storax, and the Oil of Turpentine, stirring it as
long as it is on the fire.

## 143\. His Addition.

Now put into it half a pound of the Oil of To­bacco, and four ounces of the
juice of Orpin (that is, the Herb stamped and the juice strained out; and
permitted to settle till the thick feces be sunk to the bottom; then pour off
the clear juice) also four ounces of Saccharum Saturni, and one ounce of
Borax. Let them incorporate on the fire half a quarter of an hour. Then take
the Kettle from the fire, and keep it stirring till it be just cold, lest some
of the Ingredients should be so heavy as to sink whilst it is liquid. When it
is through cold, put it into Gally-Pots.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=40)

## 144\. For the Kings-Evil.

MElt one dram or two of the Balsam, and put as much of the following Spirit
unto it, ta­king it immediately from the fire: mix them well together, and
anoint the Swelling with it; as also the Sore if there be any broken out, (for
it causeth no pain, but gives rather ease to any raw part) and continue this
bathing or anointing twice a day, and keep the affected part warm. But it is
con­venient to purge and sweat in this case. The like mixture of Balsam and
Spirit is excellent for the running Gout or other Gout; also for any Strain or
Bruise or Swelling, or Pain whatsoever, and for Stitches, and any Strain in
the back, and for any Wounds, new or old. They are great Searchers and
penetrate mightily; yet without all pain.

A Maid had been much troubled with a Tetter on her Arm above four years, much
matter run­ning out of it. Some of the matter being taken upon a rag, was
dressed with some Sympathetic Powder, and some of the Balsam applied to the
Tetter; and so dressed twice a day for three days, and the Maids Arm was
perfectly cured, and con­tinued well and firm.

## 145\. Doctor Salvatore Winter's Spirit, as my Man made it for me.

TAke common good Brandy seven gallons, Flowers of Camomil four handfuls;
Leaves of Plantan, Leaves of Rue, of each three handfuls, Leaves of Rosemary
twelve handfuls, Leaves of Betony two handfuls. First dry all these Herbs, and
then put them into the Brandy, and set them [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=40) in a gentle heat
to digest for eight or ten days; and then press it out and distil it from the
feces, and then put it in a long body, and to every pint of this liquor put
the following Ingredients, Myrrh half an ounce, Saffron, Castor, Amber,
Benjamin, of each half a dram, Storax one dram; beat all these grosly
together, and then put them into the Spirit, and let it stand in digestion
eight or ten days more; and then distil off the Spirit in a gentle Bath,
taking only that which will burn all away.

[This addition of Myrrh, &c. was done by my Man upon his own conceit that it
would make the Spirit the better; and the truth is, it had very good effects
in the cases afterwards set down. But methought it was weaker after the second
Distilla­tion and Addition, than the Authors Spirit; which peradventure may
be, because peradventure the latter Ingredients did retain some of the chief
Spi­rits. Therefore if this Addition of Ingredients be judged good, I should
choose to put them in at the first with the Herbs, and so make but one
Distilla­tion.]

This Spirit I found excellent in Fits of the Mo­ther. Smell strongly to it,
and drink a little of it down. You can take but a little down, it is so
strong; some drops or half a spoonful or so. Use it after the same manner for
Giddiness, or any Pain in the Stomach, and against all Fumes offen­ding the
Head, either hot or cold; any swouning Fits or Faintings. For Deafness and to
help the Hearing, dip a little Cotton in it, and put it into the Ear, and
likewise smell strongly to it, that the strength of it may penetrate through
all parts, and pour a little of the same upon the head.

This Spirit alone is excellent for Burnings.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=41)

## 146\. Distillation of Tobacco.

FIrst, distil the Stalks of Tobacco with three heads of Glass, and three
Receivers, the one after the other. In the first you will have a Balsam, in
the second a yellowish Oil, in the third nothing but Water.

The next trial I made was with one head only; but changing the head, as soon
as it was hot, for one that was cold, I found in the Receiver Balsam, Oil and
Water altogether, which separate at several Distillations.

The Balsam alone being laid upon an Ulcer in a mans Leg, did presently fume
into his Head, and provoked both Stool and Vomit, and healed the Ulcer.

It is of an extreme light quality. It healed the Thumb of a Skipper, that was
cut to the bare bone, in twenty four hours.

It cured also a Tetter or Ringworm in a Gentle­womans forehead.

If you dip a little Lint or Cotton in this Balsam, and put it to the Tooth, it
will cure the Tooth­ach.

It is also very medicinal, being taken inwardly (from eight to ten drops) in
White-wine. It is excellent to open Obstructions of the Lungs, &c. but more is
a Vomit.

The Stomach anointed with the Balsam or with the Oil, provoketh Vomit; but
anointing with it about the Navil, worketh downwards.

You may draw the Salt out of the Remainder, which is excellent to cleanse all
impurities of the Lungs and Liver: It purgeth the Head and Brain, as also the
Bloud. It provoketh Appetite, and [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=41) causeth good
Digestion. It is also good to drive away the Dropsie. The Dose is six granes
in a dram of the Balsam of Sulphur.

This Salt being lapt in a rag, and held between the Teeth, draweth abundance
of Rheum, and cu­reth the Toothach.

## 147\. For the Falling of the Uvula.

IT is an infallible Remedy for the falling of the Uvula to do thus: Gag your
self with the Joint of your Thumb, whose one end joineth to the hand, and the
other is the middle juncture of the thumb: let your two rows of teeth rest
upon these two ends of that Joint, so as to make you gape wide: Keep your self
gaping with this Joint in your mouth as long as you can, all the while sucking
in your breath. When you are weary of continuing in this posture, take out
your Thumb aud rest. After you have reposed sufficiently, repeat again all the
same action: and when you are weary pause again. You shall not have done so
thrice, but your Uvula will be restored to its due place.

## 148\. Cornacchius his Medicinal Powder.

TAke Regulus of Antimony four ounces, pure Saltpeter four ounces, mingle them
well toge­ther in subtil Powder, and cast them into a red hot Crucible, and
make them burn by casting in a firy coal, which repeat as often as it
consumeth; for without that the Saltpeter will not burn, there be­ing no more
Sulphur in the Antimony to set it on fire. Keep it thus in fusion in a
reverberating heat for at least an hour, stirring the matter often with an
Iron Rod; then let it cool. Give of this with [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=42) the Scammony and
Cremor Tartari, of each ten granes. Be sure that the fixed Salt of Saltpeter
do not dissolve nor be separated from the Antimony; for in that consisteth the
virtue against Fevers.

The best way is to make the Regulus of Anti­mony, to put first into the
Crucible the Saltpeter and Tartar, and when they are well melted, put in the
Antimony, and proceed in the rest in the usual manner: Thus you shall have six
or seven ounces or more, of every pound of Antimony. Likewise to make a
martial Regulus, put the Anti­mony first into the Crucible; and when it is in
perfect susion, then put in the Mars.

The use of the Spirit of Tartar, is also good for all Obstructions,
particularly of the Spleen, and keeps the body open.

The Dose is from fisteen to thirty granes.

It doth also good in Fevers and Agues, and like­wise in the Venereal Disease,
it is a good cleanser of all parts.

## 149\. Spirit of Salt Armoniac.

TAke Sulphur, Salt Armoniac, of each five ounces, very strong quick Lime six
ounces: Powder them all apart very finely, then mix and grind them well
together, and put them into a Retort, and distil in Sand, giving very strong
fire, at last a very strong Spirit will come over.

The yellowness of it, and tinging black the fin­gers, or silver, sheweth there
is of the Sulphur in it.

Make thus the Spirit of Salt Armoniac to smell to which is exceeding subtil
and penetrant. Put into the bottom of a body Retort about three fin­gers
thick, more or less, a bed of strong quick [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=42) Lime ground into
subtil Powder. If but coarsly broken it will serve,  [...] [...] water  [...]
dissolve it. Pour upon it  [...] [...] [...] is dissolved Salt Armoniac, as
[...] [...] the water can dissolve. The quantity of this solution, which you
must pour up­on the quick Lime, is so much as to soke it well, and swim a
little half a ringers bredth over it. Di­still this in Balneo, keeping the
subtil Spirit by it­self. If any flegm should be come over with it, re­ctifie
it once from the flegm in Balneo. This is not only good for benummed heads to
smell into, but also to take inwards. The former is a great healer of inward
Ulcers.

## 150\. Balsam of Sulphur for the Brest, &c. and for Tetters.

MAke Spirit of Turpentine thus: Distil it in a Cucurbite by itself (without
Water or ought else) in Balneo Mariae. Then rectifie it by itself four or five
times. The measure to know when it is enough rectified, is that it unites
per­fectly with the pure Spirit of Wine. Put this up­on flowers of Sulphur
sublimed five or six times per se (unless it be so after sublimed, it will not
do) and digest them a while together, and the Spirit will dissolve all the
Sulphur (which if there be not enough of the Spirit to do at once; pour off
the solution, and put on fresh Spirit.) Put this solution with eight or ten or
twelve times as much pure fair water (if it be distilled it is the better)
into a Cu­curbite, and distil it in Balneo till there remain in the bottom a
Substance like a Colophonia; which when it is cold, will be brittle and
transparent red like a Ruby. The water will have carried over with it all the
Spirit of Turpentine, and only the [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=43) Sulphur will
remain behind. Beat this friable Sub­stance into subtil Powder, and pour pure
Spirit of Wine upon it. All will dissolve in the Spirit of Wine, excepting a
very little feces of the Spirit of Wine, leaving the Sulphur in a mucilaginous
Balsam.

This is excellent in all inconveniences of the Brest and Lungs. Also if you
anoint any Tetter, Itch or Scabs with it, it cures them in three or four
times, doing it morning and night or oftner.

The Balsam of Sulphur made the ordinary way with the Oil of Walnuts, is also a
certain cure of Tetters, Scabs or Itch: also the Oil of Toads.

If all the Oil of Turpentine be not come a­way at this once putting of Water
upon the Solu­tion: put more Water upon it before it be di­stilled dry (for
before that, you may judge whe­ther all the Spirit be, or will come away this
bout) and distil as before. When you see the Water come away without bringing
any Spirit over with it, and yet some Water remaining behind, it is a sign all
the Spirit of Turpentine is severed from the Sulphur; then distil to driness.
Till this sign put on still new Water.

## 151\. A Panacea of Antimony.

TAke Antimony, reduce it to Powder, and im­bibe it by little and little with
good Oil of Vitriol; then put it to digest in Sand fifteen days; then imbibe
it again, and put it to the Sand again, and digest it fifteen days more with a
moderate heat; then put it into a Retort, and with a strong fire make all the
Spirit come over; then break the Retort and your Panacea will be fixed.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=43)

## 152\. Another Panacea.

FUlminize Saltpeter with Charcoals; then give it strong fire for two hours;
then dissolve it in fair water; filter and evaporate to driness; then give it
strong fire for two or three hours more, till it become like green.

Take two parts of this Saltpeter, and one part of Antimony in Powder, put it
in an earthen Pot, and put upon it a sufficient quantity of water, which being
evaporated, give it a strong fire for two hours, then put your matter in
water, and let it settle a night, and it will draw the Tincture of Antimony,
which you will find at the bottom; pour the water from it and dry your Powder.
The Dose is from ten to twenty granes. It purgeth gently by stools.

## 153\. A Medicinal Powder.

IT is to be done two several ways; for the one sublime Mercury for it seven
times (beginning with the best Venice Crystalline Mercury) revivi­fying it
after every Sublimation, and then subli­ming it again with new Sulphur and
Salt. To six ounces of this purified Mercury revivified, put one ounce of
Leaf-Gold, making an Amalgame after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths, which
wash with many waters, till no more blackness comes from it; then (being very
well dried) put it in a large Oven, and stop it but slightly with Cotton, and
so digest it in Ashes or Sand without ever stirring the Fiol, till it be a red
Precipitate (all but a very little, which will continue running Mercury)
putting [[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=44)
down with a Raker from time to time what shall sublime to the sides of the
Glass (but without shaking it) but you must have a care not to give too great
heat to sublime much, but to be still in the next degree to Sublimation. The
Mercury thus prepared, grows presently hard with the Gold, soon after it is
put to digest.

In the other way take a good Mercury distilled from Cinnabar, and make an
Amalgame as a­bove, with a sixth part of Leaf-Gold, and wash it very well;
then put it to digest in a little Bolts-head for three or four days; then take
it out, and wash it very well from new blackness that will grow in it: When
the Water comes off clear, put it again to digest three or four days; then
wash as before, and more blackness will come away. Continue these sharp
Digestions and Wash­ings, till no more blackness come away with washing, but
your Amalgame is in a permanence of whiteness and clearness, which will take
up five or six or seven months to bring it to that pass. Then put it to
digest, as is said above. It will be five or six or seven months after your
washings be­fore the Mercury precipitate, be completely made, more or less,
according as you govern the fire dexterously. Now the first washings (in the
first method) before the Amalgame come to be clear without blackness, will
take up six or seven months; so that it will be fifteen or sixteen months
before the work be completely finished that way; and six or seven the other
way. After the Mercury pre­cipitate is made, continue it some time in the fire
(increased as much as you may without danger of subliming or revivifying the
Mercury) to accustom it to greater heat, and to dispose it a little to some
degree of fixation, or at least of less volatility or [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=44) churlishness,
and violence in Salivation: and that it may stay the longer in the body to
work other­wise more radically, when the wild Spirits are a little tamed.

## 154\. A great Medicin which hath don great Effects, from an intimate
Friend.

DIssolve six drams of Silver in Aqua fortis (the purest and best Aqua fortis
that can be had) using no more Aqua fortis than is just necessary for the
solution (which will be about one ounce and half, i. e. two parts to one.)
When you see that it is all perfectly dissolved (without fire) cast into the
Matras an Amalgame made (after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths) of one dram
of pure Gold, and two ounces of Mercury; you will presently see a Pelagus
conturbationis made. Let the Matras stand still upon a Table, or in some
corner, till you find the matter at that pass as you desire. You will see many
beautiful colours appear. After for­ty days standing, you will see a kind of
roughness appear upon the Superficies of the Mercury, which will daily grow
and sprout out more. In twenty days more (sixty in all) it will be shot out
into lit­tle spears or needles and twigs. When you see it groweth or shooteth
out no more, pour off all the liquor, and the Mercurial matter will soon dry
of itself. Then with some little piece of Glass break off these Excrescencies
or Needles from the mass, (whereof you may have about one dram or better) and
grind them to Powder, which will be very white. Of this give twenty four
granes, or more (according to the complexion) in a Cherry, or Yolk of an Egg.
In the morning very early, or at night going to bed, or rather after the first
sleep [[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=45) at
three or four in the morning, and in this last case sleep after it. It is
seven or eight hours be­fore it useth to work.

Sometimes the first Dose will not work at all, otherwise than by strengthning,
and then he gi­veth a second Dose two or three days after; which will work
either by Stool or Vomit or Sweat, as Nature shall require, and in due
proportion.

It cureth Quartans and other Agues, and worketh admirably in all desperate
Diseases. He used to take it once a month. When there is no peccant humor in
the body, it worketh not by evacuation, but strengthneth. The Mercury
encloseth and shutteth up the Metals, like a Rose of Jericho, from whence he
calleth it Sigillum Hermetis. The part of the Needles next the Mass worketh
rough­er than the ends. Out of the Mass you may draw most of the Gold and
Silver with loss of about an eighth part of the first, and less proportion of
the Silver. He thinketh this to be a Philoso­phical Mercury, and to be useful
in the great work.

One hath made a Work of Projection with Gold or Silver and Mercury,
amalgamated with Antimony, that hath been impregnated by the Universal Spirit
cast into it from the Sun-beams by a Burning-Glass, which increaseth the
weight of it, though in calcining of it, much of its humi­dity do evaporate
away.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=45)

## 155\. A Menstruum of Citron-Pills to dissolve Bodies of Metal and Coral.

PRovide sufficient of the thin rinds of Citron Pills, the yellow part only,
that gives the Oil. Expose them (freshly cut) in Glass or Porcellane Plates
(being very thin) to the open Dew, setting them out about midnight, and taking
them away an hour or two before Sun-rise. Distil the Oil of these rinds thus
impregnated with dew. You will find it much more active and yet more benign,
then if it were not rectified. You may reiterate this course with new chips,
as often as you please, during the season of the Dew; so to have what quantity
you will of this Spirit.

## 156\. A Menstruum to open any Body, but chiefly the Body of Gold.

TAke Salt of Tartar and Saltpeter, grind them very well together; then set
them in a moist place to dissolve. When they are dissolved, put them in
digestion in a Bolts-head for three weeks in a gentle heat. Then take out the
liquor, and evaporate it till it be dry; then mix it with three parts of Bolus
Armenus, and distil it in an earthen Retort, first with a soft fire, then with
a strong: Have a great care that no Spirits break out, for they are very
subtil. When all is come over, put it into a Glass-Retort, and rectifie it in
Sand. Then you will have a mighty subtil Spirit, which will dissolve almost
any metal, and it will draw a Tin­cture out of Calx of Gold. It hath a
pleasant smell and tast. All the Salt of Tartar will come over with the
Saltpeter.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=46)

## 157\. A Remedy which cureth Fevers by a Lunary Emetic, which is an
Vniversal Medicin, even for the Morbus Gallicus and Leprosie.

DIssolve Silver in Aqua-fortis made of Vitriol and Saltpeter, and precipitate
it with Spirit of Salt, then dry the Calx.

Take of this Calx and Antimony, of each a like quantity, distil it as a Butter
of Antimony, and you shall have a Butter white and transparent, which will
dissolve Gold. Precipitate one part of this Butter with common water,
edulcorate with bloud-warm water, and you will have an Emetic Remedy, which
will purge and cure all sorts of Fevers, and is a Catholicum for ill humors;
the Dose is from one grane to three in some fit thing, and stay four or five
hours after it before you eat or drink. This must be given with great caution.

## 158\. To make an admirable Sudorific of this, that will cure the Venereal
Disease, and the Leprosie, is thus:

TAke the other part of this Butter, and put upon it some Spirit of Saltpeter,
cohobating three or four times; then wash it with Water, and burn some Spirit
of Wine upon it; and you shall have a Sudorific, which will do admirable
Effects; taking from eight granes to sixteen: And after the sweating you must
well rub over the whole body with warm clothes; observing a reasonable diet,
and some Purge before: as also the use of some fit Decoction.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=46)

## 159\. Spirit of Verdigrease.

DIstil a Spirit from Verdegris; rectifie it once by itself, it will leave some
feces and Me­talline terrestreity behind.

Take one part of this Spirit, and three of fair Water; put it upon Litharge
finely searsed, as much as it will dissolve. Deflegm it in Balneo, and then a
pure and powerful Spirit will come over in Sand, without acrimony, and tasting
a little sweetish, as in the making of Saccbarum Sa­turni. It is excellent for
Convulsions of little children, in some fit vehicle; a drop or two for sucking
Infants; but to Men you may give ten or twenty drops. It is very good for the
Epilepsie, Colic, Spleen, &c.

Quaere of using this Spirit of Venus, to extract the Tincture of Vitrum
Antimonii, from whence ex­tract it afterwards with Spirit of Wine. Note that
in making that extract, the Spirit of Wine will hardly tinge itself with the
extract made with this Spirit or with distilled Vinegar, if you eva­porate
that Menstruum to driness; but if you leave it moist, then it presently
tingeth itself, and leav­eth the Salt and precedent Menstruum, without any
Tincture of the Antimony.

If you dissolve the pure part of Verdegris in di­stilled Vinegar, filter and
congele, as Zuelfer tea­cheth; then dissolve again in new distilled Vine­gar,
and work all as before. This repeat three or four times; so to have your
Verdegrease per­fectly pure, before you draw the Spirit from it. Quaere of
dissolving it in Rain-water rather than in distilled Vinegar.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=47)

## 160\. To Corporifie the Salt of Spirit of Wine, &c.

TAke the best and purest old Wine, distil the pure Spirit from it; then distil
away all the Flegm, till there remain a black viscous substance. Take this
black viscous substance, and put the Spi­rit of Wine upon it, so much as to
dissolve it all. Digest it five or six or seven days, then distil; first in
Balneo, till the Spirit come away; then di­stil this in Sand to driness, and
there will come away a white milky Oil or Spirit (which Lully calls Aqua
secunda) receive this by itself, and keep it carefully. Upon the dry Caput
mortuum put a good quantity of Spirit of Wine to dissolve it all, and digest
it seven or eight days; then distil as before, and keep the milky liquor or
Aqua secunda with the former. Repeat these Distillations still with new, or
the same Spirit of Wine poured upon the earth, and digested; then distil it
till there come no more milky liquor, and the Earth be dry and in powder. Then
reverberate the dry Earth twenty four hours between two Crucibles or Pots, to
make it exceeding dry. Then imbibe it with a tenth part of the Aqua secunda,
and digest it two or three days; then distil it in Balneo, and the Li­quor
will come off insipid, leaving all his virtue in the Earth. Add new Aqua
secunda to it, and do as before, repeating this till you have imbibed all your
Aqua secunda into the Earth. Then take a seventh part of pure Spirit of Wine,
and imbibe the Earth with it, and digest it two or three days; then distil it
in Balneo, and the Liquor will come off like Flegm. Then imbibe the Earth with
a sixth part of the Spirit of Wine, and do as be­fore; then with a fifth, then
with a fourth part; [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=47) all which
proportion continue, repeating the Im­bibations with the fourth part till the
Earth will take no more, but that the Spirit of Wine comes off as strong as
you did put it on. Then put this impregnated Earth to sublime for twenty four
hours or more; at the last, making the Vessel red hot, a pure white Salt will
sublime up, which is the Salt of the Spirit of Wine. All is not yet gon out of
the Earth; therefore you may repeat the Imbibations with new Spirit of Wine,
till the Earth will take no more in. Then sublime as before new Salt. Repeat
all this till the Earth will corporifie no more Spirit of Wine; and then it is
an Earth damanta. Take all the sublimed Salts, and put upon them three times
as much pure Spirit of Wine, and distil them over together. This is Lully's
great Menstruum; and dissolveth radically all metals, even Gold: and draweth
the essential Tin­ctures of them all. After you have drawn the Tincture of
Gold with this, boil the remaining bo­dy some time in Spirit of Urin, and it
will resolve into running Mercury.

To have a less Menstruum that will draw out the Tincture of Vegetables
exceeding well, you may take the Earth after it is impregnated with the Aqua
secunda, and the Spirit of Wine, as much as it will take in, and before you
sublime any Salt from it, being in that state, pour upon it three times as
much as it is, of pure Spirit of Wine, and digest them two or three days
together; and the Spirit of Wine will dissolve all the volatil Salt that is in
the Earth. Dicant it off clear, and use this Menstruum.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=48)

## 161\. To volatilize the fixed Salt of Tartar.

CAlcine it in a close Vessel to blackness (for if all the Sulphur be driven
away it will not do) Then put upon it a pure Spirit of Wine, and after some
digestion distil it off. Cohobate the same Spirit of Wine upon the calcined
Tartar, and do all as before. Repeat this till you find that the Spirit of
Wine be exceeding sharp, and have car­ried over with it all the Salt of the
Tartar.

## 162\. Another way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar.

TAke Salt of Tartar very white, dissolve it in distilled Vinegar; philter it
and then evapo­rate to a Pellicule, put to it twice as much of white Sand;
then reverberate it together twelve hours in an earthen Vessel, not glazed.
Take this Salt reverberated with the Sand, and dissolve it again in distilled
Vinegar, philter, evaporate, reverbe­rate and dissolve, so often till the Salt
of Tartar be as white as snow. Take this Salt and dissolve it again in
distilled Vinegar, evaporate in Balneo, dissolve again, repeating till the
distilled Vinegar become acre or sharp; then dry the Salt gently. Then take
this Salt, and put upon it its weight of well rectified Spirit of Wine, digest
and distil it gently; then put new Spirit of Wine upon it; and repeat this so
often, till the Spirit of Wine come from it as strong as it is put on; then
evaporate it gently in a Retort: Then sublime by degrees of fire; take the
sublimed Salt, (which is the vo­latil Salt of Tartar) and keep it carefully in
a Glass. It will dissolve Gold and all Metals.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=48)

## 163\. An Excellent Mercury Vitae of a singular Preparation.

TAke Mineral Antimony very clean six ounces, that hath never been melted, and
as much of good Saltpeter, grind them to subtil Powder, then mix them
together, and put them in a Crucible, and cover it with another Crucible that
hath a hole in the bottom. Calcine it with a wheel fire by degrees; when you
see that it su­meth no more through the hole, take it out and grind it very
small. Then take three Ducats of Gold, and six times as much of this Powder;
put the Powder first in a Crucible, and melt it; then put in one of your
Ducats, and stir it with a stick till it be melted; and then put in the other
two one after another; and when they are all melted; leave it yet a while in
the fire. Then take it out, aud when it is cold, beat it into fine Powder, and
searse it. Then put to it its weight of Mercury sublimate in subtil Powder,
mix them well together, and put them in a Re­tort well luted; then put it in a
Fornace, and put a Receiver to it filled with common Water, so that the end of
the Retort lie in the Water; but you must not lute the Joints: Increase the
fire by degrees, and the matter will distil into the Water; but the most part
of it will stick a­bout the neck of the Retort, which you may draw forth, and
make it fall into the Receiver; when you see that nothing more comes over by
force of fire, let it cool, break the Retort, and take out the matter that
sticketh about the neck, and likewise that which is in the Water. Keep the
[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=49) Water,
for it is exceeding good to cure all sorts of Ulcers. Pour clean Water upon
the matter which was settled in the Receiver, and shake it sometimes; then let
it settle; then pour off the Water, and put fresh upon it; Repeat this seven
or eight times; then separate the Mercury from it, and put warm Water upon the
Powder, and let it stand till the next day; then repeat the lotion as the day
before. Continue this six days, on the seventh day, wash the Powder with fresh
cold Water, and let it settle: pour off the Wa­ter, and dry the Powder, which
keep for your use. The Dose is from one grane to two for little Children; but
for Persons of Age seven or eight granes. It will cause a gentle Vomiting, and
wor­keth likewise by Stools. It hath done miracles in Fevers, and in the
Venereal Disease, and of the Gout. You will find in the Caput mortuum the
grea­test part of the Gold.

This Mercury vitae is not white like the ordinary, but of a brownish gray. It
appears by this to have some of the Mercury in it, that if you rub Gold or
Venus with the Powder, it will make it white, which common Mercury Vitae will
not do.

If you take the remaining Salt, after you have distilled the Water Athletica
of Saltpeter and Salt Armoniac, and distil that by strong fire as you do Aqua
fortis; the Water that cometh so, will carry Gold over the helm, much more
powerfully than the Water that cometh first, and which ordina­rily is used.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=49)

## 164\. A great Corroborant.

MAke an Amalgame of Gold and Mercury in due manner; which grind well with
flowrs of Sulphur, and set it upon Coals, and so make Calx of Gold according
to art. Repeat this Calcination two or three times. Then take your Calx of
Gold, and grind it exceeding well with twice as much pure decrepitated Salt;
put these into a Crucible, which cover well, and set it to cement or
reverberate during six hours or more in a For­nace, where the heat may be
increased by degrees, so that in due time the Crucible become red. Con­tinue
so a pretty time, but have a care the Salt melt not. When it is cold, take out
the matter and grind it well, and pour hot water upon it to dissolve the Salt,
and philter it off, and pour on more water, doing so till you have severed all
the Salt from the Gold (as also a white earthy substance that will swim upon
the water) then dry the Gold: which grind again with double its quantity of
pre­pared Salt (the same Salt will serve again when the Water is distilled
from it) and cement it, and work all as before, having a care always that the
Gold settle well to the bottom, after you have stir­red it in the water.
Repeat this six or eight times (the more the better) till the Gold become to
be all gray or white Powder. Then cement it with double its quantity of pure
Salt of Tartar, in the same manner as you did with the Salt, and do all as
before. Repeat this two or three or four times, dulcifying it every time very
well from the Salt. Then put upon it (being very dry) the Menstruum of Spirit
of Urin mentioned hereafter, and it will be tincted bloud-red in twenty four
hours: pour [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=50) off that and put
on more, till you have drawn out all the Tincture; which distil in a Cucurbite
with a very gentle fire, till it become a Gum; of which put one dram into a
pint of Sack, and give a spoon­ful for a Dose. It is a mighty Corroborant; as
also Sudorific, where Nature requireth it. It will make one sweat twenty four
hours. The Menstruum is thus made: Take pure Spirit of Wine, and pure Spirit
of Urin: Put them together into a long Cucurbite with a narrow mouth, on which
put a head fitting it in the Orifice, and so distil of this Spirit of Wine
with a very gentle heat; there will remain a slegmatic liquor in the bottom.
Cohobate the same Spirit upon it till there remain only perfect Flegm in the
bottom, and that all the Spirits and volatil Salt of the Urin be in the Spirit
of Wine. This is a great Dissolvent and A'cahest; but it will be stronger if
you work it again with new Spirit of Urin; and so you may make it as strong as
you will.

## 165\. To make Aurum potabile.

TAke one ounce of Gold, dissolve it in eight ounces of the Aqua Regis set down
hereafter; then pour upon it a quart of common Water; and then pour upon it by
little and little two or three quarts of a Lixivium made of common Water and
Tartar, which will precipitate the Gold; Conti­nue pouring till the Ebullition
cease: then let it stand till you see all the Gold precipitated; then pour off
the Water, and put on fresh. Repeat this till it be well dulcified; then
philter it, and let it dry of itself without fire; then put it in a white
Porringer, and pour upon it by little and little, and by divers times, two
ounces of the Oil [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=50) of Vitriol
mentioned hereafter; and presently it will begin to boil, and all will become
as black as Ink. Let it stand three or four days, during which time it will
work continually upon the Gold, which you shall perceive by the little
Ebullitions. Then pour upon it by little and little four or five gallons of
common Water, which will be of a Violet co­lour, and will carry with it all
the Gold; which put into a large Vessel, and let it stand to settle; within
two days the Gold will appear like spongi­ous Atoms; and-when it is well
precipitated, pour off the Water and put on fresh. Repeat this three or four
times, then dry the matter gently in Sand. Then pour upon it distilled Vinegar
four fingers bredth over it and digest the distilled Vinegar, it will extract
all the remaining Oil of Vitriol and Tartar; then pour it off, and dry the
Powder: Then put it in a Crucible, and dry it again by a moderate fire. Then
put it in a Matras, and pour upon it eight ounces of good Spirit of Salt,
digest it in hot ashes till it be tincted of a high Gold co­lour; then pour it
off and put on fresh. Repeat this till the Spirit hath drawn out all the
Tincture. Then put it into a Cucurbite, and distil it to a con­sistence of
Honey, cohobating the distilled Spirit six or seven times, and the last time
distil to dri­ness. Then put upon the Gold eight ounces of Spirit of Saturn,
digest it twenty four hours or more, and it will extract all the Tincture of
the Gold. This may be used so alone, taking some drops of it in some fit
Vehicle. But you may make it more efficacious in mixing it with the Tincture
of Bezoar, of Coral, of Pearls, and of Ambergris, made as followeth.

Dissolve Pearls and Coral in distilled Vinegar, then evaporate away the
Liquor, and put upon the [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=51) remaining matter
some Aqua vitae acuated with the fourth part of Spirit of Salt: Digest it and
then pour off the tincted Liquor, which evaporate; then take the remaining
extract and dissolve it in as much of Carduus Benedictus water.

## 166\. To make the Tincture of Bezoar.

GRind Bezoar, and put upon it pure Aqua vitae impregnated with Spirit of Salt,
it will be tincted of a deep red: then pour it off and put more on. Repeat
this till you have drawn out all the Tincture of it, evaporate the Menstruum,
and dissolve the extract in Rose and Carduus Benedictus Water.

## 167\. To make the Tincture of Ambergris.

TAke Ambergris, and put upon it good Spirit of Wine or Spirit of Honey; digest
it in the heat of the Sun, or with a gentle heat in Ashes.

## 168\. To make the Aqua Regis for this Aurum potabile.

TAke one ounce of decrepitated, dissolved and coagulated Salt, distil it with
eight ounces of Spirit of Nitre.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=51)

## 169\. To make the Philosophical Oil of Vitriol for the foresaid Aurum
potabile.

TAke eight ounces of good Jupiter, melt in a Crucible, and whilst it is in
fusion; put in­to it eight ounces of Antimony, and presently put it into a
Stone - Mortar, and grind it very small. Then take one pound of good Venice
Sublimate, and grind it well with the first A­malgame, till it turn black, and
greasie sticking to the Pestil. When you have reduced it to a black Liquor;
put it into a white Porringer, and set it in a moist place; and the Oil will
swim upon the Liquor: which take off gently, and put it in­to a Fiol, and let
it settle.

Note, That to make this Oil well, it must be done in moist or rainy Weather,
or in a Cellar.

## 170\. To make an Excellent Oil of Pearl for Health, and for the Face.

TAke Pearls in Powder, and pour upon them distilled Vinegar; digest it in
Balneo, till you see the Pearls be all dissolved. Then eva­porate it with
gentle heat; then edulcorate the Substance of Pearls several times in fair
Water, till the Water come from it insipid: Then wash the matter once or twice
with Rose-water; then pour upon it distilled May \- Dew, or fresh May-Dew only
philtered: Then distil it; but let it boil strongly in the time of
Distillation, and you will find in the Receiver the Water and Oil, which
separate.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=52)

You may also putrifie the macerated Pearls with Spirit of Wine in Horse-dung
nine or ten days or longer, after you have washed the mat­ter: Then separate
the Spirit that must be se­parated; then distil with the same Dew, as
afore­said.

## 171\. An Excellent Tincture of Gold.

CAlcine Gold with the three Salts boiled with it in Water, in such sort as
Zuelfer teacheth: When the Water is evaporated away, and that you have an
Aureal Salt, grind it with double its weight of Flowers of Sulphur, then put
it in­to a Crucible, and burn it away in a reverbera­tory Fornace: Take out
the Calx of Gold, and grind it again with new Flowers of Sulphur, and burn and
reverberate again: Repeat this burn­ing with Sulphur twelve times, and
reverberate it well at last; then put a well rectified Spirit of Wine upon it,
and digest them together and the Spirit of Wine will be tincted very yellow.
Of which few drops for a Dose in a fit Vehicle, hath wrought great effects.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=52)

## 172\. An Excellent Physical Salt, which is very efficacious in all Fevers,
either Simple or Malignant any ways, or spotted: In the Small - Pox or
Measles, in all the Pro­gress of them, from before their coming out till the
end, and preserveth the Heart from hot and putrid Fumes, and purifieth the
Blood.

TAke Nitre, Sulphur, of each one pound, Cam­phora two ounces, mingle them well
together, and cast them by little and little into an earthen Cucurbite red
hot, which shut close immediately with a just stopper of Brick that closeth it
firmly; the Cucurbite must have two arms, unto which are fastned two Ballons
of Glass, each conteining about two quarts of Spirit of Urin (to the quan­tity
of Ingredients here named) which draweth unto it the Spirits which will fly up
and pass by the two arms on each side. When all is cold, take out the fixed
matter that remains in the Cucur­bite, and grind it small, and dissolve it in
simple Spirit of Urin, and when that is filtered and con­geled, dissolve it in
the acid Spirit of Urin, that was in the Ballons, and hath the Spirit of Nitre
and Sulphur and Camphire in it; and distil and cohobate this, till the Salt
have reteined in it all the Spirits that were in the Urin; which will be very
grateful, and not tast or smell at all of the Camphire, nor is Saturnine or
Antivenereal in its effect; and of this dissolve thirty or forty granes (at
discretion) in about two ounces of Rose and Plantan-water, and a pint or two
of fair Water [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=53) (in fine, so
much Salt as to make the Water grateful acid) and of this let the Patient
drink three or four times a day, and when he is thir­sty.

## 173\. The way to make the Spirit of Vrin is thus:

LEt the Urin stand eight or ten days, in which time it will putrifie and
ferment. Then distil very gently; and that which cometh first is the Spirit.
When it beginneth to come weak and insipid, (which you will know by tasting a
drop) then cease, for all that is good is passed over. Thus you shall have
near half your quantity of Urin in good Spirit.

## 174\. The best way to make the Oil of Myrrh.

HAve a moderately low Cucurbite of Copper, (for Earth will imbibe the Spirits
of Myrrh) in the midst of which have a Circle of Wire fast­ned to the sides by
Grampons, that may suspend in the air a Glass like a large drinking Glass
with­out a foot. To the Cucurbite have a large chap of Glass with a Nose or
Limbeck; and let there be in it a hole at the top, in which set a Glass­funnel
with a long Pipe, which correspondeth just to the suspended Glass, and so like
an internus to the helm or chap. Lute the pipe of the Funnel on the outside
fast to the hole of the helm, so that nothing can expire. Likewise stop the
nar­row neck of the Funnel within, with an exact fit stick of hard Wood; and
for more security, lute a double Bladder wetted, over the mouth of the Funnel,
that no Spirits may expire. Put your Myrrh into the Cucurbite; fill the Glass
with fair [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=53) Water, and set
the Cucurbite in an Iron pot full of Sand; which set in a Wind-Fornace. Distil
by degrees of fire, and the smoke of the Water in the Glass will rise and
mingle with the fumes of the Myrrh, and go over together into the Re­ceiver,
and so preserve the Oil of the Myrrh from Empyreume. You increase the fire,
till in the end the bottom of the Iron Pot with the Sand be red hot. And as
you perceive (by looking in at the Helm with a Candle) that the Water
consumeth in the Glass, pour in more (but warm) by the Fun­nel at the top of
the Helm, taking off the Blad­der, and out the wooden Stopper; but close them
again presently. By this method you will draw half an ounce of pure clear
yellow Oil (when it is severed from the Water, from one pound of Myrrh. Close
fast the Nest of the Limbeck to the Receiver, that no Spirits may expire. When
all is come over into the Receiver, you sever the Oil from the Water with a
Funnel.

## 175\. A great Cordial made out of English Saf­fron.

TAke Saffron freshly gathered, and picked from the Whites or other things that
grow upon or about it. Shred it on a smooth stone, that you may save the
moisture that comes from it in the shredding of it. Then put four pound of it
into a new glazed Pipkin or Pitcher, (put it in very slightly, not pressing it
down, you must not fill the Pitcher above half full) and then bury it deep in
the ground, and put the Earth loose and slightly about it; lay a cover over it
upon sticks, so as to lie two fingers bredth above the Pitcher, [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=54) that the air
may come in: let it stand so six weeks: Then take the Saffron out of the
Pipkin or Pitcher, and put it into a large Retort, put a Receiver to it close
luted, and distil in Balneo Mariae by degrees of fire; you will first have a
clear Water, which keep by itself; as soon as you see a yellow Tincture or
reddish Oil come, change the Receiver, putting on a new one, and that is the
great Cordial; but when you see that none of it will rise in Balneo Mariae,
take out the Glass, and wipe it; then set it in ashes, and put a Receiver to
it; if any flegm or nutry part distil from it there, put it to the first; but
as soon as the fore­said yellow Tincture comes, change the Receiver, and so
continue the fire gently, as long as there comes any of this Tincture. But you
must have a great care, that you give not so strong fire, as to make any fumes
or burning matter to rise; after you have distilled a good quantity, or the
most of your Tincture, change the Receiver, for fear of spilling the first
Liquor, and then you may distil till it be almost dry, what is left; out of
which you may extract the Salt of Saffron; then rectifie the yellow Tincture
once or twice, and keep it in a Glass close stopt.

The Dose of it is two or three drops. It is ex­ceeding good in all Diseases
wherein a Cordial can do good.

It restoreth and comforteth the Spirits and ex­pelleth Poison.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=54)

## 176\. A great Electuary.

TAke of Sarsaparilla two ounces, China Root, Root of Turbith, of each one
ounce and half, Cortex Guajaci one ounce; Sassafras, yellow San­ders, of each
three ounces; Jallap, Sena, of each two ounces and half; Hermodactyles one
ounce and half: Reduce all these to most subtil Pow­der, every one by itself,
and searse them through the finest Searse that can be: Then mix them all
together upon a large Sheet of Paper; then to four parts of this Powder, put
three parts of the best Honey well clarified, putting first the Powder into a
Skillet, and pouring in the Honey by degrees, stirring it continually till it
be well incorporated; then beat it well in a large Mor­tar to a perfect
Electuary: Then put it into Gally-Pots, stop them close and keep them in a dry
place.

Take of this one ounce or five drams, dissolved in a little warm Posset-drink;
or take it with a little Virgin Honey in the Bed, and sleep after it. You may
drink now and then some warm Posset drink; but eat not till two or three
hours, after it hath don working.

The Sarsaparilla must be only the mealy part of it, which flies up beaten in a
close Mortar, on the sides; you will hardly have two ounces out of a pound,
unless it be mealy and large Sarsa: The rest is good for Diet-drinks. The Sena
must be fresh, and all the Stalks picked out, nothing but the Leaves. If the
China Root be not per­fectly good (as oftentimes it is not in England) take as
much more of the Sarsaparilla in stead of it.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=55)

The excellent Success of this Medicin, de­pendeth upon the exceeding Beating
and Sear­sing the Ingredients into most subtil Powder, and you must weigh out
the Proportions when they are in Powder, and not when they are in their gross
bodies. In mixing the Powders with the Honey, you use no Fire; and you must be
four or five hours beating the Mass in a Mor­tar, to incorporate all perfectly
and uniform­ly.

This Electuary cureth the greatest Pox, Go­norrhea's, Cankers, and all
Venereal Diseases, u­sing this method. For a great Venereal Disease, begin
with two or three Doses of Mercury vitae, intermitting one day between: but
for Gonor­rhea's begin with the Purge of Sena in White-wine with Diaprunis:
The next day take a Dose of this Electuary; the third day repeat the Purge;
the fourth the Electuary; the fifth purge: then con­tinue the Electuary for
ten or twelve days, by that time the Patient will be well: If then it needs,
give an injection of Limewater with Mel rosat. and Mercury dulcis: Purge also
then again with Sena, and take again the Electuary five or six days more. This
Electuary is also excellent to be used Spring and Fall, though there be no
Venereal Disease or Inconveniences, but only to carry away viscous tough
Humors, and it preser­veth the Body in health and clean: And if one have any
Ulcer in the Legs, or Aches or Rheu­matism in any part of the Body, it will
cure them, if it be continued for a while.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=55)

## 177\. A great Confortative[?].

TAke Cochenele in Powder six ounces. Put it in a broad Glass, and pour Spirit
of Wine upon it four fingers bredth above it; shake it very often every day
during six or eight days, the Ves­sel close stopped: Then pour it off, and put
on new Spirit of Wine, and do as before. Repeat this till you have extracted
all the Tincture, then put the Extractions together, and evaporate it till it
be thickish. To this quantity, take Diasatyrion Nicolai majus gratam one
pound, of Magistery of Coral made by solution of distilled Vinegar, and
precipitated with Oil of Tartar, in fine Powder, of Magistery of Pearl, made
the same way, of each half an ounce, of Syrup of Sassafras four ounces, of
Lime-water philtered and evaporated the quan­tity of a Pottle to a thickish
substance; of Confe­ction Alkerms half an ounce, Ambergris one ounce. Take of
this a quarter of an ounce morning and night; but eat nothing between meals,
and drink but little Wine at meals.

## 178\. A Restorative and Cordial of Dates, which is much celebrated.

DAtes are a great Cordial and Comforter of Nature in all kinds, and
Restorative in Con­sumptions and to old men; but they are hard of digestion.
And this Inconvenience is taken away, and their good qualities lightened by
preserving them with Sugar, in such sort as they may become very tender and
digestible. Do thus then; first [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=56) pare off the
rough hard outward skin; and like­wise pick away all their inner hard filmy
white thick skin that is next to the stone; and cut into quarters the pulpy
middle fleshy substance. Boil this tender and preserve it in the best manner
with Sugar, so as you may lose none of the sub­stantial part that boileth out
of them. Eat of these the quantity of three or four Dates in a mor­ning after
your first sleep, and sleep an hour or two upon it before you rise.

Then if you will add a further Restorer of Spirits, do this as soon as you
rise out of your bed.

Take four ounces of the purest best spiritful Canary Sack or Greek Muscadine,
and sop in it a Tost of light pure Bread, till it be throughly drunken with
the Wine; and so large a one that it have drunk up the better part of the
Wine: Then lay the Tost upon a Plate, and strew it o­ver on both sides with a
little fine Sugar, but a large proportion of scraped Nutmeg (which is a great
friend to the Kidneys and Bladder and Head, and smoothneth much, and gives
Spirits) then eat your Tost and Sugar and Nutmeg; and drink upon it the
remainder of the Wine, and do some moderate exercise after it, besides ma­king
you ready. Repeat the same at night in­stead of a Supper.

## 179\. Cordial and Pleasant Tablets.

TAke three ounces of pure refined Sugar; boil it up with Orange-flower water,
into a consistence for Manus Christi; when it is at the due height, put into
it two drams (or three) of [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=56) pure Confection
of Alkermes, and drop into it two drops of the Quintessence of Cedri. Stir it
well together, and drop it into Tablets. They are very pleasant and very
Cordial.

If you will not use fire, you may make Tablets or Pastils of the same
Ingredients, with Gum Tra­gacanth dissolved in Orange-flower water. You may
add a little Ambergris and a little Musk, if you please.

## 180\. A great Venereal.

TAke Opii Thebaici colati with Spirit of Wine, one part; Ambergris three
parts: Grind them very well together with Syrup of Flowers of Sage, till they
come into the consistence of an Opiate: of which give four or five or six
granes in some fit Liquor for a Vehicle, at going to bed.

The preparing of the Opium is thus.

Dissolve it in Spirit of Wine, then percolate it through some fit Cloth that
it may leave the Dregs behind: Then distil away the Spirit of Wine till the
Opium become of a due consistence.

## 181\. Another great Venereal.

TAke Consol. Flor. Anthos, Boragin. Caryophyll. of each half an ounce, Elect.
Diasatyr. one ounce, Ering. Condit. six drams, Theriac. Vet. two drams, Sem.
Erucae, urticae, of each half a dram, Spec. Diamosch. dulcis two scruples,
Syrup. Stoechad. s. q. f. Elect.

After taking as much as a Nutmeg of this Ele­ctuary (morning and night, or
when you will) drink a little of the following Decoction:

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=57)

Take Fol. Salviae, Origani, Rosmarini, Calaminth urticae, of each one handful,
Chamaedr. Chamaepit Stoechad. of each half a handful, Sem. Erucae, Ur­ticae,
Foenic. of each three drams, Rad. Pyrethri half an ounce. Boil all these in a
quart of Foun­tain-Water; then add a pint of Malaga Sack to it.

You may anoint the Perinaeum, and that Region, with the following Ointment.

Take Unguent. Martiat. two ounces, Oleum Suc­cini two scruples, Oleum Euphorb.
two drams, Mos­chi three granes, Ambergrisae Misce f. Unguent.

## 182\. An Excellent Plaster to put upon the Sto­mach.

TAke Storax in powder, and Aloes also in fine powder, of each one ounce. Boil
these together with half a pint of Rose-water till the Rose-water be consumed,
then let it cool. Then take as much of very good Honey as will make it to a
Past; which spread upon Leather, and put it upon the Stomach. It will
strengthen the Stomach extremely, and will free it from all Corruption and
Flegms, and will give it a natural heat not superfluous.

It hath saved the life of many, even those that already had lost their speech.
This Past is very odoriferous and incorruptible, it will last for e­ver.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=57)

## 183\. An Excellent Ointment for the Stomach, or for any Pain about the
Heart.

TAke wild Thyme, red Mint, Wormwood, Hyssop, Balm, of each one handful, of
red-Rose Leaves two handfuls, of Bayberries beaten, Ginger grosly beaten, of
each one ounce, Mace half an ounce; chop the Herbs, and mix them with the
Spices. Then put all together into a large Gally-Pot, and pour upon them a
quart of the best Sallet Oil; then close the Pot well with Paste, and set the
pot into a Skillet of Water; then let it boil the space of five hours: Then
take it off and strain without pressing or squeezing the Herbs too hard. Then
put it into a Dish, and put into it of Essence of Orange-flowers two ounces,
Oil of Cinamon half a quarter of an ounce, Oil of Cloves a quarter of an
ounce, Ambergris ten granes, of the finest yel­low Wax thin sliced: then set
it over a Chafing­dish of Coals, stir them well to make them well incorporate
together. Then put it into Gally-Pots, and keep it for use.

## 184\. An approved Remedy for a Sprain in the Back or any Weakness.

TAke a quarter of a pint of good Muscadine, a spoonful of Mader, incorporate
them well together; then give it the Patient to drink for three mornings
together; and if need requireth, you may use it often in a day. This will
streng­then the Back exceedingly.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=58)

## 185\. A most precious Diet-drink for any weak and consumed Body with
Sickness, Pox or any Aches or cold Humors.

TAke White-wine, old strong Beer, of each seven gallons, Sena one pound,
Cortex Guaiaci two pound, Licorice one pound, Coloquintida one dram,
Sarsaparilla one pound. Put all these toge­ther into a deep large Pot, stop
and lute it close: Then set it in a great Kettle full of water, and so let it
boil highly the space of four hours; then strain it, and when it is almost
cold, put into it one ounce of the best and strongest Mithridate.

Drink of this twelve times in a day, about three ounces at a time; continue it
for twenty or twen­ty four days together (almost twenty will do it) but you
must neither eat nor drink any thing else during that time; and after three or
four days the Patient will have no mind at all to eat. And in twenty four days
he shall be cured and restored to health, and to good bloud, and shall be
lusty and fat, and all diseases will vanish.

The Author said, that if the Patient were pres­sing to eat something of
nourishment and solidity, he allowed him some Partridge, with Bisket or well
baked fine Bread; but no other Sustenance at all: The Drink itself giving
sufficient in this case, I conceive that Raisins and Bisket were not amiss.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=58)

## 186\. An Excellent Remedy to procure Conception.

TAke of Syrup of Motherwort, of Syrup of Mug­wort, of each half an ounce, of
Spirit of Clary two drams, of the Root of English Snakeweed in fine powder one
dram, Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rocket-seed, all in subtil Powder, of each
two drams. Candied Nutmegs, Eringo-Roots, Satyrion-Roots preserved, Dates,
Pistaches, Conserve of Succory, of each three drams; Cinamon, Saffron in fine
powder, of each a scruple; Conserve of Vervein, Pine-apple Kernels picked and
pilled, of each two drams. Stamp and work all these Ingredients in a Mortar to
an Electuary: Then put it up into Gally-Pots, and keep it for use.

Take of this Electuary the quantity of a good Nutmeg in a little Glass-full of
White-wine, in the morning fasting, and at four of the clock in the afternoon,
and as much at night going to bed; but be sure not to do any violent exercise.

## 187\. An Excellent Bolus for the Stomach and Liver.

TAke green Ginger and Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of each one part; Conserve
of Wood-Sorrel two or three or four parts (more or less, as you conceive your
Liver shall require) beat them together into a Pulp. You may make the
Conserves by beating the Herbs raw with two or three parts of fine Sugar.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=59)

## 188\. A Cordial Drink for weakness of the Stomach and want of Digestion.

TAke three pints of Claret-wine, half a pint of Mint-water; of Cinamon,
Nutmeg, of each one dram and half, of fine Sugar four ounces. Put all these
into an earthen Pot, and let it stand close covered over a gentle fire to
digest twenty four hours; but let it not boil: Then take it off, and strain it
through a Hypocras Bag. Take of this three or four ounces at a time.

## 189\. For Trembling of the Heart or a weak Stomach.

TAke Lignum Aloes and Ambergris, and mingle them with the best yellow Wax
melted: Make a thin Cake of it, and apply it to the Heart and Stomach.

## 190\. Ladanum Opiatum.

TAke Opium Theb. cut very small, three ounces, Salt of Tartar, Crystal of
Tartar, of each one dram. Mix all these well together in a Mortar; then put
them in a Glass body, and pour upon them a pint of distilled Vinegar, and an
ounce of Spirit of Salt. Digest them till there rise no more scum upon it;
then boil it to the consistence of an Electuary: Then pour upon it a quart of
fair water, and boil it again till all the Opium be dissolved; Then philter it
and boil the feces again with water till all be dis­solved. Then philter it,
and put all together; which boil to an Electuary with one ounce of the juice
of Licorice. Then add to it of the Tincture of Juniper-berries, and Powder of
Saffron of each two ounces, Castor one dram; boil it again with a [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=59) gentle fire to
a due consistence; then work it well in a Mortar with Oyl of Anniseeds, Oyl of
Nutmeg, Oyl of Cloves, of each one scruple. Then put it up close.

The Dose is from three grains to eight.

## 191\. An excellent Panchimagogue that Purgeth all Humours.

TAke of black Ellebore four ounces, Coloquint, Aloes, of each two ounces,
Saffron one ounce: Extract the Ellebore and Coloquint with Cicory­water
acuated with Salt of Tartar: Then extract the Aloes by it self with the same
Menstruum without Tartar, and the Saffron with good Spirit of Wine. Then mix
all your Extractions together, and eva­porate it to a consistence of Honey;
then add to it four ounces of Reisin of Scammony, two ounces of Reisin of
Jollop, and one ounce of Mercury subli­mate dulcis in most subtil powder; stir
it well toge­ther to make it incorporate, leaving it upon the sand fire till
it be a past for Pills.

The Dose is ftom twelve to eighteen grains.

## 192\. An excellent Laxative Tisanne to take, when one hath a need.

TAke a good handful of Pimpernel; of Sena, of green Annise, of Licorice, of
Salt Prunelle, of each half an ounce, of Rhubarb one ounce, two penniworth of
stick Cinnamon, the juyce of two Limons.

Take of this Tisanne a good Glass full in the mor­ning, another a little
before dinner; and (if it needed) a third in the afternoon.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=60)

## 193\. Bezoardicum Theriacale.

TAke a Viper, which hath been newly caught, and hold her fast by the neck with
your thumb and the next finger, so that she cannot stir or wag at all, and
with a Pen-knife cut her throat open, so that you may be able to tear out her
tongue, which you lay by. Loosen also the skin round about the neck, joyning
the head, and skin it all; afterwards cut the body an inch above the Navil,
and throw a­way the tail. Then take out all the entrails, putting the grease
by it self, and the heart and liver like­wise; and cut the body or bulk
upwards joyning the head, and cast away the rest. Prepare a great many Vipers
after this fashion. After this, put the bulks of the bodies upon some Plate
apart, and the hearts and livers by themselves upon another likewise; and the
tongue upon another, without washing them at all; and put them to be dried
gently in a fur­nace that is but a little warm. All this must be ob­served in
the beginning; afterwards a little more heat is required, that so the humidity
may be the sooner dried up, which otherwise might be the cause of their being
spoiled. But after this first time, which may be perhaps a night; one needs
not but to keep them in a dry place with so little a heat, that they may fully
be dried, and hardned, to be fit for to be pounded; which will be done within
eight or ten days. When they are fully dry, put all the parts to pounding,
dropping upon them now and then a drop of Opobalsamum, or white oriental
Balsam, or for want of the same, of the Peruvian Balsom; and sometimes a drop
of a compounded Balsom. But all this with so much discretion and heed, that
the Balsoms may dry immediately, and [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=60) be sucked in by
the powder, that is, a pounding, without discerning of any liquor; for this
would make it come to be a paste, and will not afterwards be fit for to be
pounded: But putting in the Balsom by little and little at a time, the heat of
moving the Pestil dries it, makes it to be imbibed, and the su­perfluous
humidity to evaporate.

Mark this, That there must be far less used of the natural Balsom, than of the
compounded; be­cause the greatest part of the humidity of this, doth evaporate
through the heat of the pounding; where­as on the other side, the other
Balsom, being vis­cous remaineth: For example; To one pound of the substance
of Vipers, one ounce, (or at the most, two ounces) of the natural Balsom may
suffice: But of the other you may make to enter as much as you can; as for
example, if you could spend a whole pound, it would be the better for it,
provided the powder do not grow wet by it, nor like a paste. It must be now
and then sifted what will pass through a hair cloth; but what will not, must
be pounded again, dropping upon it from time to time of your Balsoms. And if
so be there be any likelihood of any quantity of the powder, let it run again
through the Sieve, what will go through, and pound again the rest with the
Balsoms; doing this so long till all be passed through.

The Author told me, that all will not pass, but that at the end there will
remain a white powder, which cannot be pounded any more, which are the bones;
and he throweth it away as useless: besides that there is but little of it,
and your powder is pre­pared.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=61)

## 194\. The Balsam Compounded is made thus.

Take of Myrrhe, Ligni Aloes, yellow Sanders, of each one ounce. Specier.
Aromat. Rosat. two drams. Draw the tincture of these things with good Spirit
of Wine tartarized. Myrrhe is drawn by it self in a Vessel, the rest, that is,
the other three things be­ing mixed together in another Vessel. When the
Spirit of wine is well tinged, pour it off, and pour other Spirit upon it,
till it be no more coloured; then take an ounce of the tincture of Myrre; and
an ounce of the tincture of the other three ingredi­ents, and one ounce of
excellent water of Odorife­rous or Damask Roses; mix these three ounces
to­gether, and this mixture will be like a Balsom and of a grey colour. And
this is the compounded Bal­som.

## 195\. The best Rose-water is made thus.

LEt your pale Roses putrifie, and when they have fermented enough, distil your
Rose-wa­ter; which you are to put upon new or fresh fer­mented Roses, and
distil as before: The water that cometh first is the best. He sets it
afterwards into the Sun.

Of this Bezoardique Theriacal powder you are to give four or five grains for a
dose in some Broth or Wine, either to be freed of a Disease, that hath left
great weakness behind it, or else for a preservative against the Infection of
the whole nature, or bad air, and to keep ones self in good health, by
continuing the same for some days. The Author doth command a continual use of
this powder, for the keeping of one in good health. It is also excellent good
for [[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=61) the
small Pox. But as for the intermittent Fevers, (even in Quartains, but not so
certain as in others) the dose is half a dram, immediately before the fit; but
in those that are continuae, it is given on the Cri­tical day. And if so be,
the Fever doth not go away after twice or thrice taking, then let the Patient
take a Purge convenient, immediately after the fit is over.

## 196\. The Purge which the Author makes use of in Fevers, is this following.

TAke Antimonii Diaphoretici, (that is in the Ce­russ of Antimony) Diagridium
prepared ac­cording to Cornachinus, & Tartar. Vitriolat. of each 8 or 10
grains, mix them.

It is also necessary to prepare the body by Purge before one begin to take of
this Powder.

## 197\. But to make a most rich Cordial proceed thus.

TAke Conserve of red Roses, Conserve of flow­ers of Oranges, of each one
ounce, of the Confect. de Hyacinth. and of the above mentioned Be­zoardique
Theriacal Powder, of each two drams, Confection of Alkermes one dram, of
Powder of Gold one scruple. Mix all these well together in the form of an
Opiate; and if the composition be too dry, add to it some Syrup of red Corans,
as much as is needful. Take of this Composition every morn­ing the quantity of
a Nut.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=62)

## 198\. The best fashion to make Conserve of Roses is this following.

TAke the Leaves of Roses, being very well clean­sed of the white at the ends
of them. Put them into a Cucurbite well stopped; place it in Balneo Mariae,
and keep it boiling for an hour or two, till the flowers be perfectly
mortified; then take them out and pound them, and add to them double the
quantity of very fine Loaf-Sugar, and pound them well together: then put it up
in pots to keep.

The Heads, Skins, and Grease of the Vipers, which you have separated for to
make your Bezoardick powder, are kept, because they are endowed with sundry
virtues. Dry gently the Heads and Skins, and keep them by themselves. Melt the
Grease, and keep it as an Oyl. The head being worn near to ones throat, is
excellent against the Quinsie and o­ther Diseases of the Throat. The Skin laid
upon the Kidneys of a Woman being in Travel, will promote her deliverance. And
if the After-birth doth not come away after the Child, put the Skin upon the
Thigh of the Woman, and it will come away with­in a short time after.

The fat is most excellent for the anointing of a red face.

The skin being dried and cut small, and mixed with Oats, and given to a Horse
that hath the Farcy, cureth the Horse, if it be continued for a while.

The Bezoardique Powder cureth the Pox, being taken for fifteen or twenty days.

(The Author told me since, eight or ten days) in some good Vehicle, (as Wine;)
having first of all prepared the body by taking of a due Purge. It [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=62) will make one
sweat mightily, if one putteth him­self upon it, which ought to be done.

## 199\. The Author doth Tartarise his Spirit of Wine thus

PUt some pure Salt of Tartar into your Spirit of Wine, and let it stand till
the separation be well made; then pour off the Spirit of Wine, and leave the
flegmatick solution of Tartar; from which eva­porate the water to driness.
Then put your purified Salt of Tartar again into the Spirit of Wine, and do as
before: Repeat this till the Salt of Tartar dissolve no more in the Spirit of
Wine, nor no part of it.

## 200\. A Tincture of Coral.

TAke Honey, and deflegm it in an open Vessel upon the fire, till it be as
thick as Pitch; then mingle one part of that with two parts of Sand, and
distil it in a Glass body, in Sand fire as long as it cometh clear, and till
the Oyl be ready to come. Then put off this distilled water upon Coral, and in
twenty four hours you will see the Spirit of Honey tincted of a deep yellow
colour: then pour off that, and put on more of the Spirit of Honey, and digest
as before. Repeat this till it tinge no more. Then philter the extracts, and
distil the liquor away, that the tincture remain dry, upon which pour good
Spirit of Wine, and digest, and it will be tincted deep red; pour it off, and
put on fresh Spirit of Wine, and do as before: Repeat this till you have
extracted all the tincture. Then philter the ex­tracts, and distil away the
Spirit of Wine; then put new Spirit of Wine upon the remaining mat­ter; [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=63) repeating this
till you have the pure tincture, and that the solution set off no more faeces.

This will be as red as the deepest red Wine, and transparent.

The dose of it is twenty or thirty drops in a fit Vehicle.

It worketh all the good effects that are said of a perfect tincture of Coral,
and particularly it hath done wonderful effects in all the Diseases of the
Matrix.

## 201\. A Cordial to Rest, and for Surfeit.

TAke Diascordium one dram, Confection Al­chermes one dram and half, Syrup of
Clove­gilly-flowers, a good spoonful. Mix these very well with about two
ounces and half of Dragon-wa­ter, or red Poppy-water, or in Carduus-water, as
the Diseases require.

It is excellent to cause rest and sleep in a Fever, or when one is oppressed
with pain; as also in a Surfeit, and an excellent Cordial.

I conceive you may increase the Dose a good deal to large bodies.

## 202\. An excellent Poppy-water for Surfeits.

TAke two large mouthed Glasses of some six quarts apiece, and put into each of
them five quarts of the best double stilled Anniseed water: then thrust in as
many red Poppy leaves as will fill them top-full, and let them infuse twenty
hours; then strain them out, and put in fresh, and let them infuse as long;
then strain them again, and put in others, and let them infuse six or seven
days: which strain well from the liquor, and then strain the liquor from
[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=63) the
dregs. Then put into each Glass six ounces of stoned Raisins of the Sun, and a
pound of stoned Cherries, and half a pound of refined Sugar; then tie up your
Glasses very close.

## 203\. Another excellent Stomachical Surfeit-water.

TAke Mint, and Carduus Benedictus, of each four parts, Angelica one part,
Wormwood two parts; chop and bruise them a little; put a suffici­ent quantity
of them into an ordinary Still, and put upon them enough new Milk to soak
them; but not to have the Milk swim much over them. Distil this as you do
Rose-water; stirring it sometimes with a stick to keep the Milk from growing
to a Cake.

I judge the best way of making Poppy-water to be thus: Macerate Poppy-buds,
with Caraway­seeds, Anniseeds, &c. in Sack, and distil a good Spirit from
this, in which infuse fresh Poppy-buds, and proceed as in the ordinary
Receipt. Or you may sweeten your tincted Spirit, or Poppy-water, instead of
Sugar, with the Syrup of Poppy made by putting Poppy leaves and Sugar, into a
flagon, and set that (close luted in the Joynture) in a kettle of boil­ing
water, &c. which is the way of making Syrups of Flowers.

## 204\. A Cooling Stomachical Mint-water.

TAke two parts of Mint, one part of Worm­wood, and two parts of Carduus; put
these into as much new Milk as will soak them: let them infuse five or six
hours; then distil as you distil Rose-water: but you must often take off the
head, and stir the matter well with a stick. Drink of this water a Wine Glass
full at a time, sweetned with fine Sugar to your tast.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=64)

## 205\. An excellent Cordial Water.

TAke Angelica, Carduus Benedictus, Pauls- Betony, Juniper-berries, of each one
handful, of Wormwood two handfuls. Mix them, and put them into a wide mouthed
Bottle; and pour upon them as much Spirit of Wine as will cover them an inch
over them; stop the Bottle close, and digest it so fourteen days; then pour
off the Spirit, and keep it for your use.

The Dose is ten or twelve drops (or more, if there be occasion) in a Glass of
White wine.

It is good in all distempers of the Stomach, a­gainst Worms, and all gripings;
and admirable a­gainst all Infections. It cannot be given amiss.

## 206\. Another great Cordial VVater.

TAke Sage, Celendine, Rosemary, Rue, Worm­wood. Mugwort, Pimpernel, Dragons,
Scabi­ous, Agrimony, Balm, Rosa Solis, Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, Centory,
Betony, St. Johns-wort, Mari­gold, of each one handful; Roots of Gentian,
An­gelica, Tormentil, Zedoaria, Petasites, Peony, Li­corice, of each three
quarters of an ounce. Wash the Herbs well, and shake them in a dry Cloth; then
shred them small: the Roots are to be scraped and sliced. Then mix all these
well together, and put them into an earthen Pot, and pour upon them three or
four Gallons of very good white Wine. Let this stand well stopped three or
four days, stirring them once or twice a day. Then distil this with an
ordi­nary Still with a gentle fire, keeping the cover of the Still cool with a
wet Cloth upon it, often wring­ing and renewing it with fresh water: Let your
Still [[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=64) be
well luted with Rye-flower, whites of Eggs and Vinegar. You may have ended
your Distillation in two days and a night; and of this quantity you may have
four or five quarts of water, which divide into two or three several Glasses;
the weakeft is chiefly for Children. You may use this water in all occasi­ons
where Cordial Water is required; and parti­cularly for Surfeits; and to
strengthen the Stomach, and comfort weak persons.

## 207\. VVater of Rue for the Head and Brain.

WHen Rue is in its prime and vigour, pick the leaves, and put them into a
Glass body with a head, and distil off the water in Balneo Mariae, which put
upon fresh Rue, and distil again as before. Re­peat this distillation three or
four times. Then take all the water, and distil it again by it self, taking
on­ly two third parts of it, and leaving one third part in the body
undistilled. Then put again the two thirds already distilled into the body,
and distil it again by it self, taking only one half of it, and lea­ving the
rest undistilled in the body.

This last water is most pure, excellent, spiritful, and well tasted, and full
of virtue. Drink of this a Wine Glass full in the morning fasting, and at
night.

It is excellent for the Head and Brain preserving against Apoplexies, and
Paralysis, and the like; and for that end, eat often in the morning fasting
some Conserve of Rue, as much as a Walnut, made by beating very well two or
three parts of fine Su­gar with one of Rue.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=65)

## 208\. An excellent Cordial or Palsie VVater.

TAke Lavender flowers, Borage flowers, Buglos flowers, flowers of Lil.
Convall. every one ga­thered in their season. Pour upon them good Aqua­vitae,
and let them digest six weeks close stopped in a warm place; then distil it
off. Put this distilled Spirit into a large Glass, and infuse in it flowers of
Sage, flowers of Rosemary, and flowers of Betony, of each one handful. Then
take Balm, Mother­wort, Spikenard, Bay-leaves, all cut or chopped; Limon
Pills, Peony seeds hulled, of each six ounces; Cardomum, Cubebs, Cinamon,
Nutmegs, Mace, yellow Sanders in Powder, of each half an ounce: Lignum Aloes
one dram: Pour upon these good Aqua vitae, and let them digest also six weeks.
Then put this to your first Ingredients, and distil it off to driness. Then
take of fine dissolved Pearls two drams, prepared Smaragd-stone one scruple,
Am­bergris, Musk, Saffron, of each half a scruple; red Rose-leaves dried,
yellow and red Sanders, of each one ounce: Mix them well together, and put
them into a Sarsenet bag, hang it in the distilled water, and keep it close
stopped.

This Water is of exceeding virtue in all Swoon­ing of the Head, and weakness
of the Heart, decay­ing of the Spirits; also in all pains and numness of
Joynts coming of cold. In all bruises outwardly, ba­thing them with it. It
strengthneth and comforteth all Animal, Vital and Natural Spirits, and
chear­eth the external Senses. It strengtheneth the Me­mory, restoreth lost
Appetite; it is exceeding good for weakness of the Stomach. It is also good
for Deafness. The Dose is a quarter of a spoonful, in the morning and at
night.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=65)

## 209\. A most excellent Balsom for the Palsie, and Apo­plexy, &c.

TAke of Imperatory one pound, Sarsaparilla, Castoreum, of each half an ounce,
Bruise them a little; then take Lavender-flowers, Rosemary-flowers, Sage-
flowers; put all these together into an earthen Pitcher, and pour upon them
good Aqua­vitae; stop it close, and let it digest in a warm place four days,
shaking it five or six times a day; then put it in a Cellar to cool. Then put
into it nine oun­ces of Camphire, dissolved in half a pint of Spirit of Wine,
mix them well together; then strain it three times through an Hypocras Bag,
and keep it in a cool place close stopped.

For the Palsie, rub the Mould of the Head and Nape of the Neck with this.

It is also excellent for all Contraction of the Si­news, or debility of the
Nerves, rubbing and chafing it well in.

It is also good for the Gout or any Crick or Aches; as also for the Head-ach,
rubbing the Tem­ples with it.

## 210\. An often approved Remedy for the Dead Palsie.

TAke white Onions, shred them small, and put them into an earthen pot or dish;
cover them but slightly, and set it in an Oven, stirring the Oni­ons
sometimes. Let them bake till they are become pappy; Make a thick Cataplasm of
this and lay it upon the benummed part. Change it every twenty four hours, and
continue it till you are well. If it be an universal Paralysie, you must use
your Cataplasm all over.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=66)

## 211\. The best way to make the Spirit and Oyl of Cla­ry, Mint, Rosemary,
Roses, &c.

DIstil a pure water of Mint, or flowers of Clary, or Rosemary; in a pint
thereof dissolve as much pure refined Sugar, as to your taste will seem to
sweeten the whole composition when put toge­ther; put to this one fourth part
of a pint of pure Spirit of Wine, and half as much Rose-water, and some drops
of Spirit of Ambergris, with an eighth part of Musk, or lay in it a little bag
of Amber and Musk.

The proportion of the Spirit of Wine, Amber, Sugar, and Rose water, are to be
varied to your tast.

Distil the water thus: Fill large Glass Cucurbites a third part with Mint, or
Clary flowers, or Rose­mary flowers, and in Balneo with moderate heat (not
boiling) distil off the water till you leave the Herb almost dry, but not
quite dry; for if you di­stil off all that will come, you will have a great
bit­terness at the last; therefore taste the drops to­wards the latter end,
and when you feel them come bitter, cease. Put this water upon as many new
Flowers or Herbs, as it was distilled from, and di­stil as before to near
driness. Repeat this four or five times, pouring upon fresh Flowers or Herbs
all that is come over; for this repeating of Distillation (of the same water)
actuateth and enliveneth the Spi­rit exceedingly. When you have water enough,
put the water alone in the large Cucurbite, and distil gently till there
remain in the Cucurbite about one third part of the water; which throw away.
Then take the two third parts that are distilled over, and distil them again
as before, leaving one third part of them in the Cucurbite, which also throw
away; [[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=66)
and that which is now come over, is pure and per­fect without any bitterness,
and is very pleasant, and to be used as is taught above. If any Oyl swim up­on
the water, either before the latter Rectifications or after, separate it, and
keep it for other use.

## 212\. The Emperour Charles's Cephalick Capital VVater, of great Vertues.

TAke Lilly Convalleys three pound, Lavender flowers one pound, Rosemary
flowers half a pound, red Rose buds three pound, Marjoram five handfuls, Rue
four handfuls, Betony six handfuls, Sage three handfuls. Because you cannot
get all these herbs at one time, gather them as they come in season; and as
you get them one after another, put them to infuse into four quarts of Brandy;
let them remain there (close stopped) till you have all the rest. Then take
Cinnamon one pound, Cubebg four ounces, Paradis Cornes five ounces,
Caraway­seeds, Mace, Cloves, Amber, of each three ounces, Nutmeg four ounces,
Ambergris half an ounce: Bruise all these, and then put them to the first
In­gredients, and pour upon them all, eighteen quarts of Rhenish Wine, stop it
close, and let it infuse three or four days more; then distil it off to near
dri­ness: taking the strongest Spirit by it self; the rest is good for
ordinary drinking.

This Spirit is excellent for Dizziness and Swim­ming in the Head, and for the
Head-ach. It strength­eneth the Memory, and the Eye-sight, &c.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=67)

## 213\. The Great Duke of Florence his excellent Coe­lestial or Imperial
VVater of great Virtues.

TAke of the white and Gummish Thubit two ounces, Mastick, Nutmegs, Cinamon,
Cubebs, of each half an ounce, yellow Sanders two ounces: Bruise all these,
and then put them together into a Glass-body, and put into them two ounces of
Ve­nice Turpentine, and two pound of white Honey: Then pour upon them four
pound of good Spirit of Wine; stop the Vessel very close, and digest it two
days, Then distil it off in Balneo, till it begin to come whitish; then take
the Vessel out of the Bal­neo, and set it in Sand, changing the Receiver, and
distil by degrees, and you will have a whitish water; unto which add half a
pound of newly drawn Spike­nard, Salt of Pearls, Salt of Coral, of each half
an ounce, and one ounce of Crystal of Tartar; stop it close and keep it for
your use. Then increase the fire, and distil to driness, and you will have a
red­dish Oleaginous water; which keep also by it self.

The first clear water is excellent for the Cholick Nephritick, and for any
pains of the Stomach. It is also very good for Surfeits, and excellent for
Ob­structions of the Spleen or Liver. It purifieth the Blood. It is a sure
remedy for the Fits of the Mo­ther; as also for the Convulsion and Falling-
fits.

It comforteth the Brain, and strengtheneth the Memory. The Dose is half a
spoonful, mixt with as much Fountain water.

The second whitish water is an excellent Reme­dy for the Stone and Gravel. It
is also very good for Sores and Wounds, It will cure the Noli me tan­gere; and
if you mix some of the first Water with it, it will be the more efficacious.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=67)

The third reddish Water is an Infallible cure of the Hemorrhoides and Piles.

It is also excellent for the Gangreen and Wounds.

## 214\. An excellent Cordial VVater for Dizziness and Swimming in the Head.

TAke four pound of black Cherries, bruise the stones of them, and then put
them with the Cherries into a Glass body, and put into them a good handful of
Balm, and a handful of Rosemary tops, Cinamon, Nutmegs, of each half an ounce;
then pour upon them all two quarts of Sack, stop it close and let it digest
twenty four hours. Then di­stil it off in Balneo; distil so much of it, that
it be weak like weak Aqua Mirabilis. Sweeten it with white Sugar-candy to your
taste, and drink a little wine glassful of it in the morning fasting, and at
night going to bed.

This cured a Lady of a great Dizziness and Swimming in her Head; and many
others have found the like effect of it.

## 215\. An excellent VVater for Surfeits and for the Ague.

TAke three Gallons of Aqua-vitae, put into it half a bushel of red Poppy
flowers, let them infuse twenty four hours in a Glass close stopped; then
strain it well, and put the clear liquor into the Glass again; into which put
half a pound of Figs, and as much Raisins of the Sun stoned, and three ounces
of Anniseeds beaten, all tied up in a bag; set this in the Sun for ten or
twelve days. In two or three spoonsfuls of this water dissolve well the
quan­tity of a Hasle-nut of London-Treacle, and give it [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=68) the Patient an
hour before his fit of the Ague, and let him do what moderate exercise he can,
and fast four or five hours after it.

## 216\. An Excellent Julip of Limons for Calentures or Fevers.

TAke the thin rind pared from Limons, then squeeze out all the juyce. Let this
settle twen­ty four hours; then pour off the clear aud filter it, which put
into Glass bodies to digest in exceeding gentle warmth of Balneo for ten or
twelve days; and more faeces will settle: Pour the clear from the faeces and
filter it; then digest again. Repeat this so often till no more faeces settle.
In the mean time calcine the thin yellow Pills, and with flegm of Wine (in
want thereof with distilled Rain water) extract the Salt, which put to the
purified juyce. Digest these a while in Balneo; then sever it into Glasses,
containing one ounce, which is a dose for an ordi­nary Person. Give it in the
hot burning of a Calen­ture; two doses will cure. It is best to take it pure
thus; but if the taste displease, you may put a lit­tle Sugar to it. This is
much better than Syrup made by boiling, which evaporateth much of that which
is best in the juyce of Limons. This will keep well four or five years.

## 217\. An excellent Orange VVater or Spirit.

PUt the thin parings or chips of the rind of two hundred Oranges into a
Cucurbite, so large that they fill it not above a third part full. Pour up­on
them six quarts of good Aqua vitae, let them di­gest with a Blind-head close
stopped during three or four days; then change that head for one with a [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=68) Limbeck, and
distil in Balneo. Keep the first two quarts by themselves; for they will be
excellent good. Then change your Receiver, and the Oyl will come over with the
rest of the liquor; towards the last it will be too weak, both of the Orange
and of the Spirit of Wine. Mingle one quart of excel­lent Syrup of Clove-
gilly-flowers, with the two first quarts; and it will be an excellent Cordial-
water. You may Aromatise it with Ambergris; and then it will be much better to
those that love Amber.

## 218\. To make Spirits of Herbs, &c.

TAke four ounces of dried leaves of Mint, or tops of Clary and flowers, or any
other such Herbs, and put upon them a pottle of the best Aqua vitae that
cometh from France. Digest them a while together; and then distil it off, and
you shall have a quart of singular good Spirit: the rest will be weak. In the
same manner you may do with other Herbs or Citron Pills dried. Of Caraway
seeds you must take but two ounces to a pottle of Aqua vitae, more will be
bitter and unpleasant. Sweeten this with the Syrup of Sugar that you have from
the Sugar-ba­kers. It is a Syrup that runs down from Sugar-loaves as they
stand to dry. This will never congeal; and will keep above a year without
sowring. There is of two sorts; the first which is of ordinary Sugar; the
second, which is of the finest, or double refined: this I used. Less then a
pint will serve for a pottle of Spirit. It is pure, clear and white, like
Rock-water: put it into the Spirit, and wake them together. If you will
Aromatise it vith Amber, put half an ounce of Spirit of Amber to this
proportion. Make the Spirit of Amber thus: Digest one ounce of Am­bergris and
one dram of Musk in a pottle of good [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=69) Spirit of Wine,
till all be dissolved that will be. Use this. I conceive it will be much
stronger of the Amber, if you distil and cohobate the Spirit seve­ral times
from the Amber; but then have a care of keeping the Junctures close shut that
no Spirits ex­pire, and do it in Balneo.

## 219\. A Cordial Water of Wall-nuts. Monsieur Bressieux, a Physician in
Paris maketh the water of walnuts thus:

THe first thing that buddeth out of these trees, is a long green excrescence,
like slender Pine Apples, which is called their Flower. Distil the water of
these, and keep it, throwing away the Caput-mortuum. Then when the Nuts are as
big as Hasle-nuts, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain out the juyce; which
distil till you have the Caput-mortuum of a thick consistence, like an
extract; which keep, as also the water. When the Nuts are growing big and have
but a gelly instead of a ker­nel, and would be half ripe within ten days, or a
fortnight: then stamp them as before, and di­stil their juyce to a like
consistence, as the other. Mingle your three Waters together; and this is his
Water of Walnuts, which is a great Cordial: and when he will make Cinamon-
water, he useth this only, without Wine or any other liquor to the Ci­namon,
and holdeth it for a great Cordial. The two thick consistences (remaining
after distilling the two juyces) he putteth together, and when he hath
evaporated them to a fit heighth for making of Plaisters (if they were not so
already by their di­stilling) he putteth to them (removed from the fire) a
little Venice Turpentine (an eighth or tenth [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=69) part, or a
little more) and a little Powder of Ci­namon and Cloves, and a little Wheat-
flower to thicken it, also a little Salt; and keep it in a Pot all the year
(where it fermenteth) to make a Plaister of it for the Stomach, from the
Sternum to the Na­vil, and six or eight fingers breadth; which let re­main on
as long as it will stick, taking it off some­times to wipe a little water that
sometimes it draweth.

This comforteth and strengtheneth the Stomach wonderfully, when it digesteth
not well. If you have none of this Composition ready, take two or three
condited Wall-nuts (conserved black; not green, or white) and stamp them to a
Pulp, and mingle with them about as much Turpentine as a Hasle Nut, and some
Wheat-flower to thicken it and a little Salt, and a little Powder of Cinamon
and Cloves; and make a Plaister of this for want of the other.

You should so proportion your substances or Nuts, as to have about a like
quantity of juyce of each; as also so much of the Flowers as to have as much
distilled water as out of either of the Juyces. For crudities and Indigestions
of the Stomach, when a Looseness followeth (which usually cometh from eating
more than one can digest) he prescri­bed two or three days very slender diet;
and then to eat on mornings three or four condited Walnuts, and to drink a
little Wine after them, eating a mouthful of Bread; this setteth the Stomach
very right.

The Nuts are conserved black, for those have all their bitterness and virtue
in them (whereas, the white are pared; and the green are boiled in seve­ral
Waters to make them sweet; and so lose their virtue) only rubbing off a little
thin skin with a [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=70) Napkin, after
they have been boiled; then thrust­ing a Clove and a little stick of Cinamon,
cross­wise through them.

He had a good maxim to cure Diseases in men, rather by fitting and easie Diet,
than by strong Physick.

## 220\. About the Diet of Milk.

MOnsieur du Clos, giveth the Diet of Milk to many Patients, as well as he hath
taken it constantly these many years himself: and in all, he observeth the
following circumstances. To those who digest it not well, and out of whose
Stomach it goeth not scon enough, he gives a grain or two of Salt with it: To
those with whom it curdleth, he giveth a little Sugar; and to those who are
bilious, and in whom it turneth to choler, he putteth a lit­tle quantity of
fair water.

He takes it often; as four or five times a day: about two Paris pints a day in
all or better. If all day he taketh nothing but Milk, he finds it weakens him
at length: therefore about noon, he eateth a man­chet of fine light Bread, of
about a penny price. But neither that strengtheneth him sufficiently; but he
useth withal to eat then two dozen of good Damask Raisins (or more) eating
first half his Bread, then twelve Raisins; then drinks a Porringer full of
Milk upon it: Then he eats the rest of his Bread and Raisins, and drinks
another Porrenger of Milk. With this course he groweth strong, fat and full of
blood: but without Bread and Raisins, he becometh very faint, and cannot walk
far: but with them he is fain to do much exercise, he finds his health require
it, and he performs it with great ease. Every night at going to Bed, he takes
a Pill [[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=70)
of five or six grains of his Composition of Aloes and Juyces of Herbs, in a
spoonful of Milk, and drinks three or four more upon it: which giveth him but
one Stool the next morning; after which he is free for all day: but without
his Pill, his milk would constipate him much.

## 221\. To Digest a large Meal.

WHen one hath eaten a great meal, and that it lieth heavy and dead upon the
Stomach, and digesteth not, but would hinder one from sleep­ing at night: It
will digest presently and trouble you no longer, if you drink a great draught
of Cla­ret Wine made as hot as you can well drink it; heat it so, that you may
not lose the Spirits of it, in a Silver Tumbler with a close cover sinking
down, so that it may press upon the Wine, and conse­quently no Spirits rise
into the void place between the Wine and the cover; which hindering of their
motion, keepeth them fixed homogeneally through the whole body of the Wine.

## 222\. Cinamon VVater, or Spirit.

TAke chosen Cinamon bruised one pound, spi­ritful white Wine three pound, pure
Rose-wa­ter two pound. Let them digest a day or two close stopped, then distil
it in a Refrigeratory: The first pound (or neer so much) will be pretty good;
and the last, milky and sweet of the Cinamon, but strong of the Spirits. You
may distill this, till you perceive it cometh no more strong of the Cinamon.
Keep every one of these three Waters in a Vessel a part, close stopped,
Instead of white Wine, you may use a weak Spirit of Wine, or Aqua vitae: but
[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=71) then you
must take at least two parts of Rose-water to three of Spirit of Wine.

## 223\. Lignum Casiae makes a much finer Spirit than Cinamon.

PUt three or four pound of it well bruised to a gallon of Malaga Sack. Digest
them together three or fout days in Balneo, then distil with very gentle heat.
If you will rest there, sever the first, second, and third running, as the
custom is; but, if you will have it richer of the Wood, distil off all
together as long as it cometh with vigor, and put that liquor upon fresh
Cassia (the same is to be done with Cinamon) and digest as before. Repeat this
till it be as strong as you desire, Then either sepa­rate the runnings as long
as you will put new wood to the liquor distilled over, you distil till it
comes with no more strength; but the last time you put fresh wood, you may
keep three runnings each a part; or if you distil all over together, you may
re­ctifie the liquor by it self, and then make your sepa­rating of stronger
and weaker, so as to have some of such strength as you wish: or take a high
Spirit of this, and mingle it with Rosewater in which Sugar is dissolved, and
put Ambergris to it. Or do it with three parts of Wine, and two of Rose-water
at the first putting upon the wood, and repeat it as of­ten as you think fit;
and then dulcifie that without putting more Rosewater to it.

The best way of distilling pure Spirit of Wine, is, to digest the Wine first
eight or ten days close stop­ped in Balneo: But you must have a care that the
Balneo be but luke-warm. Then distil it. You shall have thus twice as much
Spirit of Wine as the or­dinary [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=71) way. You may
keep such a heat as is requi­site for this, with Sawdust, which is a slender
ex­pence.

## 224\. Cordial Water of Clove-Gillyflowers.

PUt Spirit of Wine, or Sack, upon Clove-Gilly­flowers; digest it two or three
days: put all in a Glass-body, laying other Clove-Gill flowers at the mouth of
it upon a Cambrick or Boulter cloth (that the Spirit rising and passing
through the flow­ers, may tinge it self of a beautiful colour) add a Head with
a Limbeck and Receiver: Then distil the Spirit as strong as you like it; which
sweeten with Syrup of Gillyflowers or fine Sugar. Quaere, of laying Cinamon
and Amber with the Flowers.

## 225\. An Extract of Poppy Flowers.

PUt Spirit of Wine upon red Field Poppy-flow­ers, digest it till the Spirit of
Wine is highly tincted. Dicant, if it be not high enough, put it up­on new
flowers. When it is tinged enough, dicant and philter, and distil of the
Spirit of Wine to the consistence of an extract, of which eight or ten grains
is a Dose. This is to be used instead of a La­danum; and with better success,
in causing rest, and in Surfeits, causing a gentle Sweat, and thereby
dis­charging the Stomach of what oppresieth it.

## 226\. Limon Water.

PAre off the yellow rinds of Limons, thin as to make chips, which will be as
low as the Pores go; and put them into a Glass body with a Head and Limbeck,
and distil them in Bal [...], with gentle [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=72) heat. You shall
have a very sprightful water (with Oyl swimming upon it; which conserves it)
where­of a little will Aromatise Wine or any liquor, and make it very
pleasant. It is a very pleasant Cordial­water to dissolve Sugar in Orange-
flower-water, and then mingle Spirit of Wine with it; both of them to your
taste, for sweetness and strength.

If you distil Raspes in a cold Still, as you do Ro­ses, and put a little of
that water into Sack or other Wine, or into Claret or White wine and Water; it
will Aromatise it very strong of Raspes (without changing the colour) and make
it very pleasant; two or three spoonfuls is sufficient to a quart of Sack.

## 227\. An excellent Cordial Water of Sweet Marjo­ram, exceeding good for the
Head and Me­mory.

FIll a Cucurbite, reasonable lightly, with Sweet Marjoram duly dried; set it
in an iron pot full of water, which is over actual fire, and fill it up with
Brandy, and after a days digestion distil it gently. Keep the strong Spirit by
it self; then change the Receiver, and keep the flegm by it self, ceasing
distilling when it cometh insipid, weak both of Wine and Herb. In neer a quart
of this flegm dissolve one pound of pure double refined Sugar, and let it stew
some hours in boiling Balneo to make them incorporate well. If the liquor be
not perfectly pure, heat the Solution to almost boiling, that the dross may
rise for you to scum it off. A quart of this Syrup will serve to sweeten near
two quarts of the first Spirit, to most tastes. You may either put more Syrup,
or make the Syrup stronger of Sugar, if you are afraid of making the [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=72) Composition too
weak. You may make your first Spirit stronger of Herb, by drawing it again
from fresh (dry) Herb. You may add Ambergris to make it more Caphalick and
virtual. You may do the like with Rosemary tops and flowers.

## 228\. To make Hipocras presently.

TAke twelve drops of Oyl of Cloves, eight of Oyl of Nutmegs, and five of Oyl
of Cinamon. Put them into a large strong drinking Glass, and mingle well with
them two ounces of the purest double refined Sugar in Powder. Then take
twen­ty drops of Rose-water in a spoon, and in it a lit­tle Ambergris, and a
little Musk; and then pour that to your former Composition, and work all well
together; and if you find the matter too moist, knead some more Sugar amongst
it. If you put a little of this Composition into a quart of Wine, and make it
sweet with Sugar besides, it will taste like excellent Hipocras.

## 229\. To make a Coagulated Spirit of Ambergris.

PUt one ounce of Amber bruised into little pie­ces, into the head of a
Refrigeratory. Let there be eight or ten ounces of pure Spirit of Wine in the
Refrigeratory; close the Joynts very well. Distil over the Spirit of Wine, and
in passing over boiling hot, it will impregnate it self strongly of the Amber.
Do the like with excellent Orange-flower­water made carefully of pure flowers,
(and often rectified upon fresh flowers) and other fresh Am­bergris. Put one
part of the ambered water to three parts of the ambered Spirit of Wine, and
they will instantly coagulate (to a drop) into a [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=73) consistence of
Butter: which is, both very plea­sant for the odour and taste, and also a very
great Cordial. You may add an eighth part of Musk to the Amber. And when
Orange-flower water cannot be had, use a pure and spiritful Rosewater instead
of it.

Dissolve Ambergris and Musk (one part to eight) in sufficient quantity of pure
Spirit of Wine (as six­teen or twenty parts to one) so that all the Amber may
remain dissolved (after twenty or thirty days digestion) when the Glass is
through cold. Dicant or philter it from remaining dregs. Put it into a
Re­tort, or rather into a Body with a Head and Lim­beck, and distil it off in
Balneo, with as gentle warmth as may be, so that (for example) there be
sixteen or twenty measures between every drop. Cease when you find the body
dry, and like a soft Gum. This will be of an excellent odour and taste, and
the Spirit of Wine will have carried over very little of the virtue or Spirits
of Amber: Or put Spirit of Wine upon Amber, to be three or four fingers
breadth over it. Digest it in Balneo till it be highly tincted: Pour off that
and pour on fresh Spirit of Wine. Digest as before till it be tincted. Repeat
this till you have all the tincture; then evaporate the Spirit of Wine to a
Gum or Butter.

## 230\. To make Sweet Water.

TAke Rose leaves, Bay leaves, Lavender, Sweet Marjoram, Eglantine, Pinks, of
each two handfuls, Cloves, Cinamon, of each one ounce: bruise all these, and
pour upon them two quarts of strong Ale, (that is near the grounds) let them
in­fuse twenty four hours, then distil it, and draw it till the Ingredients
remain almost dry.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=73)

## 231\. Another.

TAke Damask Roses at discretion, Basil, Sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Wall-nut
leaves, of each two handfuls, Rosemary one handful, a little Balm, Cloves,
Cinamon, of each one ounce, Bay leaves, Rosemary tops, Limon and Orange Pills
of each a few; pour upon these as much white Wine as will conveniently wet
them, and let them infuse ten or twelve days; then distil it off.

## 232\. Another.

Take juyce of Cloves three ounces, Calamus Aro­maticus, Cypress, of each two
ounces, Orchis half a pound, dry Rose leaves, dry Spike flowers, of each two
handfuls, Bay leaves one handful; beat all these to powder, and put them in a
pot and pour upon them three gallons of fair water; and let them infuse five
or six days stirring it every day se­ven or eight times. Then distil it. Then
take out the Bay leaves and use the rest for Sweet-bags, you may hang a little
Musk in the water

## 233\. To Preserve Fruit all the Year.

PUt the fruit into a fit Case of Tin, and soder it together, so that no air
can get in; then lay it in the bottom of a cold Well of running water.

## 234\. To make Perfumes to Burn.

TAke half a pound of Damask Rose-buds (the whites cut off) Benjamin three
ounces beaten to powder, half a quarter of an ounce of Musk, and [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=74) as much of
Ambergris, the like of Civet. Beat all these together in a Stone-morter. Then
put in an ounce of Sugar, and make it up in Cakes, and dry them in the Sun, or
by the fire. There is no diffe­rence in making the Bags, but that they must be
red Roses, and you leave out Sugar.

## 235\. Cassolettes.

TAke Benjamin four ounces, Storax two ounces, Lignum Aloes half an ounce,
Ambergris two drams, Musk twenty four grains, Civet one dram, twenty Cloves,
Cinamon in powder two drams; the Peels of two Limons, (cut small without
touch­ing them with your hands.) Mix all these together with Rose-water, and
make a paste of it with your hands; and never use it without Rose-water or
other Sweet water. You may steep Gum Tragacanth in Rose-water till it become a
Mucilage, and with that work the other Ingredients into a paste, and form it
to Cakes for use.

## 236\.  [...]o make an Odoriferant Ball.

TAke Benjamin two drams, Storax, pure fine La­danum, of each one dram, Bark of
Cedar, the thin rind of Orange and Limon, Violets, Odorife­rant Roses,
Rosemary, red Sanders, Calamus Aroma­ticus, of each half a dram, Cloves,
Cubebs, Ireos of Florence, of each two scruples. Reduce all these in­to
powder, and make Paste of it with Gum Traga­canth steeped in Orange-flower or
Rose-water. Then, heat a little the inside of a Mortar, and put a spoonful or
two of Orange-flower or Rose-water in it, and upon that put one scruple of
Civet, and half a dram of Ambergris, aud grind it well together [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=74) with a warm
Pestil. When it is well incorporated, put half a scruple of good Musk to it,
which incor­porate also; dropping into the Composition thirty drops of Oyl of
Lilly Convally, when it is all cold. Then mix this Composition with the first
Paste, working them well together; and lastly, add to it ten drops of perfect
Oyl or Quintessence of Cina­mon made by Distillation. Then form this into
Balls of such a bigness as you will have them, and dry them in the shadow.

## 237\. Rose Pastils to Burn.

TAke Benjamin three ounces, Storax two ounces, Alexandrine or Damask Rose-buds
one ounce; grind the Roses by themselves, and the rest also: Then take Lignum
Aloes, Amber, fine Sugar, Ci­vet, powder of Cypress, of each half a quarter of
a pound; grind all these well together. Then mix it with Gum Tragacanth
disiolved in Orange-flowers or Rose-water, and make them up.

## 238\. To make Mouth Pastils.

TAke fine Sugar well sifted one pound, Amber­gris two drams, Musk half a dram,
grind the Amber, and Musk with a little Sugar, putting it in by little and
little till all be well incorporated. Make paste of this, thus: Take some
Kernels of Quinces, bruise them, and put them to steep in fair water twelve or
fifteen hours; then strain the water through a Linen, and it will be gluant;
with this make up your paste, and let them dry in the shadow, putting a sieve
upon them to keep it from the flies.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=75)

## 239\. To make a Pomos like those that are made in Spain.

TAke Benjamin half a pound, steep it in Rose-water, expose it to the Sun the
space of six weeks, stirring it three or four times a day; and when you see
that it groweth dry, add still more Rose-water to it. Then grind it well with
four Cloves, and a little Cinamon in powder, and one ounce of Storax, half an
ounce of the thin rind of Limon shred very small, half an ounce of Amber­gris,
a quarter of an ounce of Civet, half an ounce of the perfumed Italian Powder,
one ounce of Rose powder, a dram of Musk; boil this together in as much Rose-
water as will just cover it till it be well incorporated together. This
proportion will serve for eight Pomos. In using it you must keep it always
covered with Rose-water.

## 240\. To make the Sweet Water, called in French L'eau d'ange.

TAke three pints of Rose-water, half a pint of Orange-flower water, Musk,
Ambergris, Lig­num Aloes, of each twenty five grains, Civet fifteen grains,
Benjamin four ounces, Storax one ounce, all in fine powder; mix all these well
together, and put them in a brass Pot, covering it very close with Linen, and
set it to boil in a kettle full of water the space of three hours; then pour
off the clear, and put upon the remaining matter the same quantity of fresh
Rose and Orange-flower water, and five or six grains of Civet. Then of the
rest you may make Pastils or Cassolettes.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=75)

## 241\. A pleasant and wholesome Perfume for Tobac­co taken in a Pipe.

TAke one ounce of the hard Balsom that is in Nuts, Ambergris half a dram, Oyl
of Anni­seeds six drops, Oyl of Cinamon six or seven, or ten drops, Oyl of
Thyme, five drops, Oyl of Nutmegs, Oyl of Lavender, of each two drops, Oyl of
Cloves three drops; work all these well together by long malaxation in a
Mortar warmed a little, into an uni­form gummy substance: whereof as much as a
Pep­per-corn pressed in at the top of a Pipe of Tobacco, will make it taste
exceeding well, and perfume the mouth and Room very pleasantly, by taking it
in smoke.

## 242\. Another.

TAke Balm of Peru half an ounce, seven or eight drops of Oyl or Quintessence
of Cinamon, Oyl of Cloves five drops, Oyl of Nutmegs, of Thyme, of Lavender,
of Fennil, of Anniseeds, (all drawn by Distillation) of each a like quantity,
or more or less as you like the odour, and would have it strong­est.
Incorporate with these half a dram of Amber­gris. Make all these into a Paste,
which keep in a box. When you have filled your Pipe of Tobacco, put upon it
about the bigness of a great pins head of this Composition, and it will make
the smoke most pleasingly odoriferous, both to the takers and to them that
come into the Room; and ones breath sweet all day after. It comsorts the Head.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=76)

## 243\. To convert Water into Ice in Summer, without the help of either Ice
or Salts.

PUt boiling Water into an earthen Pitcher or Pipkin, that it be full; cover
the mouth of it and shut it very close; and so hot hang it in a deep cold
Well, in the Water; after a while, the boiled Water will be all become Ice, so
that you must break the Pitcher to get it out.

## 244\. To Convert Water into Ice with Snow or Ice Immediately.

SEt a Glass of water in a Bason of Ice or Snow, as you do an Egg in Salt; and
set a quick fire under the Bason, and it will presently drive the cold of the
Snow or Ice into the Water; and make it Ice.

If you put Snow and Saltpeter into a quart Pot, and set the Pot upon water
spilled upon a Table, and stir well the Snow and Salt with a stick; the Pot
will presently stick to the Table.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=76)

## Appendix A A Table of the Receipts con­tained in this Book.

A

FOr all kind of Agues,

    Page 1, 2, 3, 5, 7
Agues and Fevers,

    3
Aches in any part of the body, &c.

    39 58
To make Aurum Potabile,

    94, 96 97

B.

For Bleedings,

    25, 26
Burnings,

    55
An excellent red Balsom, or Salve of great ver­tue,

    55
Biting of a mad Dog,

    58
Balsom of Sulphur, for the Breast, Lungs, &c. and for Tetters,

    79
Balsom of Dr. Salvator Winter,

    73
Bolus for the Stomach and Liver,

    111
Bezoardicum Theriacale,

    114
Ball odoriferant,

    142

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=77)

C.

For Coughing,

    7
Colicks of all kind,

    7
Cold in the head to draw Rheume from it,

    8
Cancers in the Mouth, Breast, or any part,

    36, 37
Cankers in the Mouth,

    54
Cancered Breasts,

    36
Contusion or Bruises,

    64
Conception, to procure it,

    111[?]
Cornachinus powder,

    77
Corporified Salt of Spirit of Wine,

    88
A great Corroborant,

    93
Confortative,

    105
Cordial Tablets,

    106
Cordial to rest and for Surfeit,

    120
Cooling 'tomachal Mint-water,

    121
Cordial water,

    122
Cephalick Capital water,

    127
Celestial or Imperial water,

    128
Cordial out of English Saffron,

    101
Cordial water of Sweet Marjoram for the Head and Memory,

    138
Coagulated Spirit of Ambergris,

    139
Cassolettes,

    242
Cordial water of Walnuts,

    132
Cinamon water or Spirit,

    135
Cordial water of Clove-Gilliflowers,

    137

D.

Deafness,

    29
To cause a good Delivery,

    33
Dropsie,

    13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 19
Dizziness and Swimming in the Head,

    129
Diet Drink,

    110
The Diet of Milk,

    134
To Digest a large Meal,

    135

E.

For the Eyes,

    24, 25
Eyes red or bloudshot,

    25
A great Electuary,

    103
Extract of Poppy Flowers,

    137

F.

For all kinds of Fevers,

    5, 6
Fluxes,

    8, 9, 11, 12
For Fistula's and Vlcers,

    70
Felons,

    54
For the Falling-sickness:

    32, 33
Fruit to preserve all the year,

    279, 306

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=78)

G.

Gowt hot or cold,

    51, 52
Gangrene, and all foul diseases of the skin,

    59, 60, 61, 62.
Gonorrhaea,

    63

H.

Haemorroides,

    19
Hardnefs in Womens Breasts,

    37, 38
Head-ach, &c.

    45

I.

For Imposthumes, Fellous, &c.

    36
Jaundise of any kind,

    88[?]

K.

For the Kings-Evil,

    53
Kibes and Chilblains,

    133

L.

A Receipt of the Labour-Powder,

    33
For a Loosness,

    9, 10
For the Leprosie,

    45
Ladanum Opiatum.

    112
Lime water,

    137
Leau d'ange

    204

M.

For the Mother,

    28
Menstruum of Citron Pills,

    85
Menstruum to open any Body, but chiefly the Body of Gold,

    85
Mercurius vitae,

    91
Medicinal Stone of great vertues,

    66
Medicine which hath done wonderful great effects,

    83
Medicine from Antimony and Mercury dulcis,

    174

O.

For Obstructions,

    12, 13
An excellent green Ointment of great vertues to be made in May,

    57
Ointment for Wounds and Sores in Man or Beast,

    56, 58, 68
Ointment for the Stomach,

    109
Orange Water or Spirit,

    130
Oil of Pearl for health, and for the face,

    97
Oil of Myrrbe,

    100

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=79)

P.

For the Piles,

    20, 39, 40
Poyson inward or outward,

    27
Plague,

    40, 41, 42
Plurisie,

    50
Palsie,

    124, 125
Phrensie,

    45
Plaister for the stomach,

    44, 108
Plaister of Norinberg,

    711
A Panacea of Antimony,

    80, 81
An Excellent Plaister for the Ba [...]k,

    72
Pachimagogue,

    113
Purge in Fevers,

    117
Physical Salt

    99
Perfumes to burn,

    241
Pastils of Roses,

    143
Pastils for the Mouth.

    ibid.
Pomos,

    144

R.

For Retention of Urine,

    48, 49
Ruptures,

    53, 54
Restaurative and Cordial of Dates,

    105

S.

For the Stone and Gravel,

    46, 47, 48, 49
Strangury of Urine,

    49
Squinsie,

    45
Spitting of Bloud,

    27
Sinews and Head,

    28
Small-pox,

    30, 31
Sciatica and Rheumatism,

    50
Sharp humours to dry them up,

    67
Sprain in the Back, or any weakness,

    109
An Excellent Spirit of Dr. Salvator Winter,

    74
Spirit of Sal Armoniac,

    78
Spirit of Verdegris,

    87
Sale of Tartar Volatile,

    90
Surfeit Water,

    121, 129
Spirit of Clary, Mynt, &c.

    126
Spirits of dried Herbs, &c.

    131
Spirit of Lignum Cassiae,

    136
Sweet Water;

    240, 241

T.

For the Toothach,

    21, 23
Teeth and Gums,

    21, 22, 23
Tetters or Herpes,

    38, 65
A pleasant and wholsome Perfume for Tobac­co taken in a Pipe,

    145
Trembling of the Heart or a weak Stomach,

    112
Tincture of Ambergris,

    96
Tincture of Bezoar,

    ibid.
Tincture of Coral,

    119
Tincture of Gold,

    98
Tisanne Laxative,

    113

U.

Venereal Cankers,

    64
Venereal Disease,

    86
Vulnerary Potion or Wound drink,

    68
A great Venereal,

    107

W.

For Women in Labour,

    33
Women in Childbed,

    34
Womens reast and Belly lying in

    35
Womens Torn Bladder,

    34
Womens Flowers to bring them down,

    35
Womens immoderate Fluxes,

    27
Womens Whites,

    28
Worms in Children,

    43
Worms in the Belly or Stomach,

    ibid.
Warts to take them away,

    44
Water of Rue for the Head and Brain,

    123
To convert Water into Ice in Summer without the help of either Ice or Salt.

    146

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=58478&page=80)

## Appendix B

Digby's Receipts.

[Home](/)

Digby, Kenelm, Sir, 1603-1665.. Date: 1675  

