---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Greenes carde of fancie Wherein the folly of those carpet knights is
deciphered, which guiding their course by the compass of Cupid, either dash
their ship against most dangerous rocks, or else attaine the haven with pain
and perill. Wherein also is described in the person of Gwydonius a cruell
combate between nature and necessitie. By Robert Green, Master of Art, in
Cambridge. — Gwydonius

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=1)

GREENES CARDE OF FANCIE.

Wherein the Folly of thoſe car­pet Knights is deciphered, which gui­ding their
courſe by the compaſs of Cupid, either daſh their ſhip againſt moſt dangerous
Rocks, or elſe attaine the haven with pain and perill.

Wherein alſo is deſcribed in the perſon of Gwydonius a cruell Combate be­tween
Nature and Neceſſitie.

By ROBERT GREEN, Maſter of Art, in Cambridge.

At London Printed by H. L. for Mathewe Lownes, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop
in Paules-churchyard 1608.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=1)

## TO THE RIGHT HONO­rable, Edward de Ʋere Earle of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbeck,
Lord of Eſcales and Badleſmire, and Lord great Chamber­lain of England: Robert
Green wi­ſheth long life with increaſe of Honour.

THat poor Caſtilian Frontino (Right Honourable) being a very vnskil­full
Painter, preſented Alphonſus, the Prince of Aragon, with a moſt imperfect
picture, which the king thankfully accepted, not that hee liked the work, but
that he loved the art. The paltering Poet Cheril­lus, dedicated his duncing
Poems to that mightie Mo­narch Alexander, ſaying that he knew aſſuredly if
Alex­ander would not accept them in that they were not pi­thie, yet he would
not vtterly reject them, in that they had a ſhewe of Poetrie. Caeſar oft times
praiſed his ſoul­diers for their wil, although they wanted skil: and Cicero as
well commended ſtammering Lentulus for his payn­full induſtrie, as learned
Laelius for his paſſing eloquence. Which conſidered (although wiſdom did wil
me not to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=2)
ſtraine further then my ſleeue would ſtretch) I thought good to preſent this
imperfect Pamphlet to your Ho­nours protection; hoping your Lordſhip will
deigne to accept the matter in that it ſeemeth to be proſe, though ſomething
vnſauorie for want of skill, and take my well meaning for an excuſe of my
boldneſſe, in that my poore will is not in the wane, whatſoever this imperfect
work do want. The Emperour Traian was never without ſu­ters, becauſe ſo
curteouſly hee would heare every com­plaint. The Lapidaries continually
frequēted the Court of Adobr indinus, becauſe it was his chief ſtudie to
ſearch out the nature of ſtones. All that courted Atlanta were hunters, and
none ſued to Sapho but Poets. Wherſoeuer Mecaenas lodgeth, thither no doubt
will ſchollers flocke. And your Honour being a worthie fauourer and foſterer
of Learning, hath forced manie through your exquiſite vertue, to offer the
firſt fruits of their ſtudie at the ſhrine of your Lordſhips curteſie. But
though they have wa­ded farre and found mines, and I gadded abroad to get
nothing but Mites, yet this I aſſure my ſelf, that they ne­uer preſented vnto
your honor their treaſure with a more willing minde, than I do this ſimple
traſh: which I hope your Lord hip wil ſo accept. Reſting therfore vp­pon your
Honours wonted clemencie, I commit your Lordſhip to the Almightie. *⁎*

Your Lordſhips moſt dutifully to command, ROBERT GREENE.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=2)

## TO THE GENTLEMEN Readers, health.

[...]AN blowing vpon an Oten pipe a little homely Muſick, and hearing no man
diſ­praiſe his ſmall cunning, began both to plaie ſo loud, and ſo long, that
they were more wearie in hearing his muſick, than he in ſhewing his skill;
till at laſt to clawe him and excuſe themſelues, they ſaid his pipe was out of
tune: So Gentlemen, becauſe I haue before time raſhly reacht above my pitch,
and yet your curteſie ſuch as no man hath accuſed me, I haue once again
aduentured vp­pon your patience; but (I doubt) ſo farre, as to be rid of my
follie, you will at the laſt ſay, as Auguſtus ſayde to the Grecian, that gave
him oft times many rude verſes: Thou haſt need (quoth hee) reward mee well;
for I take more paines to read thy works, than thou to write them. But yet
willing to abide this quip, becauſe I may coun­teruaile it with your former
curteſie, I put my ſelfe to your patience, and com­mit you to the Almighty.
Farewell. *⁎*

Robert Greene.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=3)

## AD LECTOREM in laudem Authoris.

PVllulaten ſtirpi ſimilis ſpecioſa propago

Aureoluſ (que) novo revireſcit ramus amoris

Vere: (tuo verèiam VERE dicandus honori:)

Iſta ſalus Iuueni, Comiti ſit gloria noſſe,

Accepiſſe decus: Comites vbi paſſibus aequis

Ales amor virtuſ (que) ſagax decurrere nôrunt.

Ventilat iſte faces, reſtinguit at illa furentes

Taedas. Nec taedet Pueriſic taedia caeci

Fallere, qui caecis conuoluit viſcera flammis.

Ergo refer grates qui deuitare cupiſti

Spumoſos Veneris fluctus, ſcopuloſ (que) minaces

Qui fragilem tumidis cymbam merſiſſe procellis

Poſſent. Hàc iter eſt, hàc dirige, tutior ibis.

Richardus Portingtonus.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Edward de Ʋere Earle of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbeck, Lord of Eſcales and Badleſmire, and Lord great Chamberlain of England: Robert Green wiſheth long life with increaſe of Honour.
  * TO THE GENTLEMEN Readers, health.
  * AD LECTOREM in laudem Authoris.
  * 1\. THE CARDE OF FANCIE.
  * 2\. The Debate betweene Follie and Loue, tranſlated out of French by ROBERT GREEN, Maiſter of Artes.
    * 2.2. The ſecond Diſcourſe.
    * 2.3. The third Diſcourſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=3)

## 1\. THE CARDE OF FANCIE.

THere dwelled in the City of Mity­lene, a certaine Duke called Clero­phontes,
who through his proweſſe in all martial exploits wared ſo proud and tyrannous,
vſing ſuch mercileſſe crueltie to his forraigne enemies, and ſuch moodleſſe
rigor to his natiue Citi­zens, that it was doubtfull whether hée was more
feared of his foes for his crueltie, or hated of his friends for his tyrannie:
yet as the worſt weed ſpringeth vp more braue­ly then the wholſommeſt hearbe,
and as the crookedſt trée is commonly laden with moſt fruite, ſo this rigorous
duke was ſo fauoured and foſtered vp by fortune, his eſtate be­ing ſo
eſtabliſhed with honor, & ſo beautified with wealth, ſo deckt with the Diadem
of dignity, and endued with for­tunate proſperity, hauing in warres ſuch
happie ſucceſſe againſt his foes, and in peace ſuch dutifull renerence of his
friends, (although more for feare than fauour) as he ſéemed to want nothing
that either fortune or the fates coulde al­low him, if one onely ſore which
bred his ſorrowe, coulde haue béen ſalued. But this griefe ſo galled his
conſcience, and this curſed care ſo cumbred his minde, that his happi­neſſe
was greatly ſurcharged with heauineſſe, to ſée the cauſe of his care could by
no meanes be cured. For this Clerophontes, was indued with two children, the
one a daughter named Lewcippa, and the other a ſonne called Gwydonius: this
Lewcippa, was ſo perfect in the com­plexion
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=4) of her bodie,
and ſo pure in the conſtitution of her minde, ſo adorned with outward beautie,
and endued with inward bountie, ſo poliſhed with rare vertues and exqui­ſite
qualities, as ſhée ſéemed a ſéemly Venus for her beauty, and a ſecond Veſta,
for her virginite: yea, Nature and the gods had ſo beuntifully beſtowed their
gifts vpon her, as ſame herſelfe was doubtful whether ſhe ſhould make grea­ter
report of her excellent vertue, or exquiſite beautie. But his ſonne Gwydonius,
was ſo contrarie to his ſiſter Lew­cippa, (though not in the ſtate of his
bodie, yet in the ſtaie of his mind) as it made al men maruaile how two ſuch
con­trarie ſtemmes could ſpring out of the ſelf ſame ſtock: His perſonage
indéed was ſo comely, his feature ſo wel framed, each limb ſo perfectly
couched, his face ſo fair, and his coun­tenance ſo amiable, as he ſéemed a
heauenly creature in a mortall carcaſſe.

But his minde was ſo blemiſhed with deteſtable quali­ties, and ſo ſpotted with
the ſtaine of voluptuouſneſſe, that hee was not ſomuch to bee commended for
the proporti­on of his bodie, as to bee condemned for the imperfecti­on of his
minde. Hee was ſo endued with vanitie, and ſo imbrued with vice, ſo nurſed vp
in wantonneſſe, and ſo nulled vp in wilfulneſſe, ſo careleſſe to obſerue his
fathers commaund, and ſo retchleſſe to regard his counſell, that neither the
dread of Gods wrath, nor the feare of his fathers diſpleaſure, coulde driue
him to deſiſt from his deteſtable kinde of liuing. Nay, there was no fact ſo
filchy, which hée would not commit, no miſchiefe ſo monſtrous, which hée would
not enterprſſe: no danger ſo deſperate, which hée woulde not aduenture: no
perill ſo fearefull, which hée would not performe: nor no action ſo diueliſh,
which hée would not execute. So immodeſt in his manners, ſo rude in his
geſtures, yea and ſo prodigall in his expences, as mines of golde were not
able to maintaine ſuch witleſſe prodigalitie. This loathſom life of Gwydonius,
was ſuch a cutting coraſiue to his Fathers carefull conſcience,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=4) and ſuch a
hapleſſe clog to his heauic hart, that no ioy could make him enioy any ioy, no
mirth could make him merry, no proſperity could make him pleaſant: but
abandoning all delight, & auoiding all companie, he ſpent his doleful daies in
dumps and dolors, which he vttered in theſe words.

NOw (quoth hée) I proue by experience, the ſaying of Sophocles to be true,
that the man which hath many children ſhall neuer liue without ſome mirth, nor
die with­out ſome ſorrow: for if they be vertuous, he ſhal haue cauſe whereof
to reioyce, if vicious, wherefore to be ſad: which ſaying I trie performed in
myſelfe: for as I haue one child which delights me with her vertue, ſo I haue
another that deſpights me with his vanity, as the one by dutie brings me ioy,
ſo the other by diſobedience bréeds my anoy: yea as the one is a comfort to my
minde, ſo the other is a fretting coraſiue to my heart: for what griefe is
there more griping, what pain more pinching, what croſſe more comberſome, what
plagne more pernitious, yea, what trouble can tor­ment me worle, then to ſée
my ſonne, mine heir, the inheritor of my Dukedom, which ſhould be the pillex
of my paren­tage, to conſume his time in royſting and ryot, in ſpending and
ſpoiling, in ſwearing and ſwaſhing, & in following wil­fully the furie of his
own frantike fancie. Alas, moſt miſe­rable and lamentable caſe, would to God
the deſtinies had decreed his death in the ſwadling cloutes, or that the fates
had preſcribed his death in his infancie. Oh that the daie of his birth had
béen the daie of his buriall, or that by ſome ſiniſter ſtorme of fortune he
had béen ſtifled on his mothers knées, ſo that his vntimely death might haue
preuented my enſuing ſorrowes, and his future calamities: for I ſie that the
young frie will alwaies proue olde frogs, that the croo­ked twig will proue a
crabbed trée, that the ſower bud will neuer be ſwéet bloſſome, how that which
is bred in the bone will not eaſily out of the fleſh, that he which is
careleſſe in youth, will be leſſe carefull in age, that where in prime of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=5) yéeres vice
raigneth, there in ripe age vanity remaineth. Why Clerophontes, if thou ſéeſt
the ſore, why doeſt thou not apply the ſalue? and if thou doeſt perceiue the
miſchief, why dooſt not preuent it with medicine? take away the cauſe & the
effect faileth: if Gwydonius be the cauſe of thy ruth, cut him off betimes,
leaſt hee bring thee to ruine: better hadſt thou want a Son then neuer want
ſorrow. Perhaps thou wilt ſuffer him ſo long, til he fall ſick of the Father,
and then hée wil not only ſéek thy lands and liuing, but life and all, if thou
preuent not his purpoſe: yea, and after thy death he will be through his
laſciuious life the ouer throw of thy houſe, the conſumer of thy Dukedome, the
wracke of thy Common­weale, and the very man that ſhall bring the ſtate of
Mity­lene to miſchief & miſerie. Sith then thy Son is ſuch a ſink of ſorrowes,
in whoſe life lies hid a loathſome maſſe of wret­ched miſhaps, cut him off as
a graceleſſe graft, vnworthy to grow out of ſuch a ſtock. Alas Clerophontes,
ſhalt thou be ſo vnnaturall as to ſeek the ſpoile of thine owne childe, wilt
thou bee more ſauage then the brute Beaſtes in com­mitting ſuch crueltie? no,
alas, the leaſt miſfortune of our children dooth ſo mooue vs, that as the
Spider féeleth if her web bee prickt but with the point of a pinne, ſo if they
bée toucht but with the leaſt trouble, we féele the paines there­of with
pricking grief to pinch vs. Why hath not Nature then cauſed loue to aſcend as
well as to deſcend, and placed as dutifull obedience in the childe, as louing
affection in the father: and with that he fetcht ſuch a deep ſigh, that it was
a ſigne of the extreame ſorrowe he conceiued for his ſonnes witleſſe folly.
But as hée was readie againe to enter into his dolefull diſcourſe, to
aggranate his griefe the more, and increaſe his care, certaine complaints were
brought him by ſundry Citizens, of the outragious behauiour of his Sonne
Gwydonius, which béeing attentiuely heard he in great choller called for his
ſonne, againſt whom hée thun­dred out ſuch threatning reproaches, laying
before his face the miſery that would enſue of ſuch reckleſſe miſchiefes,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=5) and promiſing
that if hee directed not his courſe by a new compaſſe, and leuelled his life
by a new line, hee would not onely repay his folly with the penalty of the
law, but alſo by conſent of his commons, diſinherite him of his Duke­dome:
that Gwydonius, greatly incenſed with the ſeuere cenſure of his father,
broyling with furious rage, ſturdily burſt forth into theſe ſtubborne tearmes.

SIr, (quoth hée) if Terence his Menedemus were aliue, and heard theſe your
fond and fantaſticall reaſons, hee would as readily condemn you of
crabbedneſſe, as he accu­ſed Chremes of curriſhneſſe: for as he by too much
auſte­ritie procured his ſonnes miſhap, ſo you by too much ſeue­ritie ſéeke to
bréed my miſfortune. You olde men moſt in­iuſtly, or rather iniuriouſly,
meaſure our ſtayleſſe moode by your ſtayed minds, our yoong yeares by your
hoary haires, our floriſhing youth by your withered age, thinking to di­rect
our doings by your doatings, our wils by your wits, our youthfull fancies by
your aged affections, & to quench our fierie flames by your dead coales and
cinders: yea, ſup­poſing that the Leueret ſhould be as skilfull in making of a
head, as the olde Hare, that the yoong Cubs ſhould aſſoon tapiſh, as the old
Fox, that the yoong Frie ſhould as well auoid the net as the old Fiſh, and
that the yoong wantons ſhould be as warie as the olde wiſards. But this ſir,
is to make fire froſt, to chaunge heate to colde, mirth to mour­ning, ſinging
to ſadneſſe, pleaſure to paine, and to tye the Ape and the Bear in one tedder.
Sith then young ſtemmes will not bee ſet on a withered ſtocke, that the yoong
twig lieth not vnder ye old trée, that the toyiſh conceits of youth are vnfit
for the teſtie cogitations of age: I mean for your ſatiſfaction and my ſolace,
to depart fram the Court, and to ſpend my dayes in trauell.

Clerophontes no ſooner heard this determination of his ſonne Gwydonius, but
his ſorrowe was halfe ſalued, and his care almoſt cured, thinking that by
trauell hée [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=6)
ſhould eyther end his life, or amend his lewdneſſe, & there­fore both heartned
and haſtened his ſonne in this his new courſe, leaſt delay might bréed danger,
or time by ſome toy cauſe him turn his tippet, furniſhing & finiſhing all
things neceſſarie for his ſonnes iournie: who readie to goe (more willing to
trauell, than his father to intreate him) had this friendly farewell giuen him
by Clerophontes.

SOnne (quoth hee) there is no greater doubt which doth more déeply diſtreſſe
the minde of a young man, then to determine with himſelfe what courſe of life
is beſt to take: for there is ſuch a confuſed Chaos of contrarie conceits in
yong wits, that whiles they look for that they cannot like, they are loſt in
ſuch an endleſſe labyrinth, as neither choice nor chance can drawe them out to
their wiſhed deſires: for ſo many vaines ſo manie vanities: if vertue draweth
one way, vice driueth another way: as profit perſwades them, ſo pleaſure
prouokes them: as wit weigheth, will wre­ſteth, if friendes counſell them to
take this, fancie forceth them to chooſe that: ſo that deſire ſo long hanges
in doubt, as either they chooſe none, or elſe chance on the worſt. But in my
opinion, the fitteſt kind of life for a young gentleman to take (who as yet
hath not ſubdued the youthfull conceits of fancie, nor made a conqueſt of his
wil by wit) is to ſpend his time in trauell, whearin hee ſhall finde both
pleaſure and profite: yea, and buy that by experience, which o­therwiſe with
all the treaſure in the world he cannot pur­chaſe. For what changeth vanity to
vertue, ſtayleſſe wit to ſtayed wiſedome, fond fantaſies to firme affections,
but trauell: what repreſſeth the rage of youth, and redreſſeth the witleſſe
furie of wanton yéeres, but trauell: what tur­neth a ſecure life to a carefull
liuing, what maketh the foo­liſh wiſe, yea, what increaſeth wit and augmenteth
skill, but trauell? inſomuch that the fame Vlyſſes wonne, was not by the tenne
yéeres he late at Troy, but by the time he ſpent in trauell. But there is
nothing Gwydonius, ſo pre­cious,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=6) which in ſome
reſpect is not perilous, nor nothing ſo pleaſant which may not be painfull:
The fineſt Golde hath his droſſe, the pureſt wine his lees, the braueſt Roſe
his prickles, each ſweete hath his ſower, each ioy his an­noy, each weale his
woe, and cuerie delight his danger.

So trauaile, Gwydonius, is a courſe of life verie plea­ſant, and yet very
perillous, wherein thou maieſt practice vertue if thou take heed, or purchaſe
diſcredit if thou béeſt careleſſe: where thou maieſt reape renowne if thou
béeſt vertuous, and gaint reproach if thou be vicious: whereout do ſpring
wiſedome and folly, fréedome and bondage, trea­ſure and traſh, fame and
diſcredit, honour and ſhame, accor­ding to the diſpoſition of him which either
vſeth it to his profit, or abuſeth it to his diſcemmoditie. Sith then thou
ſhalt beare ſaile in ſuch perillous Straightes, take heede leſt thou daſh thy
Ship againſt moſt dangerous Rockes. It is a ſaying Gwydonius, not ſo common as
true, that he which will heare the Syrens ſing, muſt with Vlyſles, tye
himſelfe to the maſt of the ſhip, leaſt happily he be drowned. Whoſo means to
be a ſuter to Circes, muſt take a Preſer­uatine, vnleſſe he will be inchanted.

He that will fiſh for the Torpedo, muſt annoint his hand with the oyls of
Nemiphar, leaſt he be charmed, and whoſo meaneth to enter combat with vanitie,
muſt firſt ſurelie defence himſelfe with the target of vertue, vnleſſe he
meane to be a captiue to care or calamitie. I ſpeake this Gwydo­nius by
experience, which afterward thou ſhalt know by proofe: for in trauell thou
ſhalt finde ſuch ſubtill Syrens, as will indanger thée, ſuch ſorcering Circes,
as will inchaunt thée, ſuch poyſoned Torpedos, as will not only charme thy
hand, but thy heart, if by my experience and other mens pe­rils thou learne
not to be ware. Firſt Gwydonius, be not too ſumptuous, leaſt thou ſéem
prodigall, nor to couetous, leaſt they count thee a niggard: for by ſpending
in exceſſe, thou ſhalt be thought a vaine glorious foole, & by too much
ſparing, a couetous pelant. Be not wilfull in thy doings,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=7) that they
count thée not witleſſe; nor too raſh, that they think thée not deuoid of
reaſon: be not too merry, that they count thée not immodeſt; nor too ſober,
leaſt they call thée ſullen, but ſhew thy ſelf to be an old man for thy
grauitie, and a yoong youth for thy actiuitie: ſo ſhall all men haue cauſe to
praiſe thee for thy manners, and commend thee for thy modeſty. Be not too
curious Gwydonius, yt they déem thée not proud, nor too curteous, leaſt they
call thée coun­terfaite. Be a friend to all, and a foe to none, and yet truſt
not without tryall, nor commit anie ſecret to a friendly ſtranger, leaſt in
too much truſt lie treaſon, & thou be forced by repentance to crie Peccaui.
The ſwéeteſt Muſke is ſo­wer to be taſted, the fineſt Pilles moſt bitter to be
chew­ed, and the flattering friend moſt tickle being tryed: then beware leaſt
faire wordes makes fooles fayne, and glozing ſpéeches cauſe Had I wiſt to come
too late. Lend not, Gwy­donius, a liſtning ear to the alarums of Loue, nor
yield not thy fréedome to the aſſault of luſt, be not dazeled with the beames
of ſading beautie, nor daunted with the deſire of e­euery delicate damſell:
for in time ſuch bliſſe will proue but bane, and ſuch delightfull ioy, but
deſpightfull annoie. Luſt Gwydonins will prooue an enemy to thy purſe, and a
foe to thy perſon, a canker to thy minde, and a coraſiue to thy conſcience, a
weakner of thy wit, a moleſter of thy minde, a beſofter of thy ſenſes, and
finally, a mortall bane to all thy body; ſo that thou ſhalt finde pleaſure the
pathway to perdition, & luſting Loue the load ſtone to ruth and ruine. Séek
not then Gwydonius, gréedily to deuoure that bait, wherein thou knoweſt a
hurtfull hooke to bee hidden: frequent not that pleaſure which will turne ſo
thy poy­ſon, nor couet that companie which will conuert to thy confuſion,
leaſt through ſuch folly thou haue cauſe in time to be ſad, and I to
beſorrowfull. Now Gwydonius that thou haſt heard the aduertiſment of a louing
Father, fol­low my aduiſe as a dutiful childe: and the more to bind thée to
perform my former precepts, that this my counſaile
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=7) be not drowned
in obliuion, I giue thée this ring of golde wherein is written this ſentence,
Praemonitus, Praemuni­tus. A poeſie pretie for the words, and pithie for the
matter, ſhort to be rehearſed, and long to be related; inferring this ſenſe,
that he which is forewarned by friendly counſaile of imminent dangers, is
forearmed againſt all future miſ­hap and calamitie, ſo that he may by
forewarning prenent perils if it bee poſſible, or if by ſiniſter fortune hee
cannot eſehew them, yet hée may beare the Croſſe with more pati­ence and leſſe
griefe. Keepe this King Gwydonius care­fully, that thou mayeſt ſhew thy ſelfe
to reſpect thy owne caſe, and regard my counſaile: and in ſo dooing thou ſhalt
pleaſe me, and pleaſure thy ſelfe.

CLerophontes, hauing thus ended his diſcourſe, embracing his ſonne with
fatherly affection, and giuing him his bleſſing, went ſecretly into his
Chamber, the more to couer his griefe which hée conceiued for his ſonnes
departure: vnwilling his ſonne ſhould perceiue by his ſor­row how vnfeinedly
he both liked and loued him.

VVEll: Gwydonius, hauing taken his leaue of his Father, furniſhed both with
counſaile and coine, with aduiſe of wiſedome and ayde of wealth, paſſed on his
iourney very ſolemnly, vntill hee was paſt the boundes of his Fathers
Dukedome: and then as merry as might be, he trauelled by the ſpace of ſeauen
weekes without a­nie reſidence, vntill he came to a Cittie called Barutta,
where (whether hee were delighted with the ſituation of the place, or deluded
with the perſwaſion of ſome Para­ſiticall perſons) hée ſecurely ſettled
himſelfe by the ſpace of a whole yeare: in which time he ſo careleſly floated
in the ſeas of voluptuouſneſſe, and ſo reckleſly raunged in li­centious and
laweleſſe libertie, thinking himſelfe a pea­ſant if he were not prodigall,
counting nothing comely, if not coſtly, nothing ſeemely if not ſumptuogs,
vſing ſuch [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=8)
monſtrons exceſſe in all his actions, that the Citizens of Barutta noted him
for a myrrour of immoderate life, and a very patterne of witleſſe
prodigalitie: yea, his exceſſiue expences daily ſo mercaſed, that mines of
gold had not bin ſufficient to maintaine his pompons magnificence; inſo­much,
that the Magiſtrate of Barutta. not only maruel­led where hee had coine to
counteruaile his expenſes, but alſo began to ſuſpect him eyther for ſome
skilfull Alcumiſt, or that he had ſome large commiſſion to take vp thoſe
pur­les that fell into lapſe, for want of ſufficient defence: wher­vpon béeing
called before the Magiſtrates and ſtrictly exa­mined what trade hee vſed, why
he ſtayed ſo long in the Ci­tie, and how hee was able to maintaine ſo princely
a port as he carried: Gwydonius, vnwilling to haue them priuie to his
parentage, began to coine a ſcuſe, yet not ſo cunning­ly but hee was trapt in
his own talk, and ſo caſt in priſon, where he lay clogged with care and deuoid
of comfort, ha­uing not ſo much as one truſtie friend, amongſt all thoſe
trothleſſe flatterers which in proſperitie had ſo frequented his companie: the
ingratitude of whom ſo perplered his mo­leſted mind, as ſurcharged with
ſorrow, he burſt forth into theſe tearms.

ALas (quoth hee) now haue I bought that by hapleſſe experience, which if I had
béen wiſe, I might haue got by happy counſell: Now am I taught that with pain
and peril, which if ſelfeloue had not beſotted my ſenſes, I might haue learned
with profit and pleaſure, that in the faireſt Sandes is moſt fickleneſſe, out
of the braueſt Bloſ­ſome moſt commonly ſpringeth the worſt fruite, that the
fineſt floure ſeldome hath the beſt ſmell, that the moſt gli­ſtering ſtone
hath oftentimes the leaſt vertue, and that in the greateſt ſhew of good will,
lyes oft times the ſmalleſt effect of friendſhip, in moſt flatterie leaſt
faith, in the faireſt face the falſeſt heart, in the ſmootheſt tale the
ſmalleſt truth, & in the ſwéeteſt gloſes, moſt lower ingratitude: Yea, I ſée
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=8) now (quoth he)
yt in truſt lies treaſon, that fair words make fools fain, and that the ſtate
of theſe fained friends are like to the Marie-gold, which as long as the Sunne
ſhineth ope­neth her leaues, but with the leaſt cloud beginneth to cloſe, like
the Violets in America, which in ſommer yéeld an o­doriferous ſmell, and in
winter a moſt peſtilent fauour: ſo theſe Paraſites in proſperitie profeſſe
moſt, but in aduerſi­tie performe leaſt: when Fortune fauoureth, they laugh,
when ſhee frowneth, they lowre; at eueryfull ſea they flou­riſh, but at euery
dead Neape they fade: like to the fiſh Pa­lerna, which being perfectly white
in the calme, yet turneth paſſing black at euery ſtorm: to the trées in yt
deſarts of Af­frica, that flouriſh but while the South winde bleweth, or to
the Celedonie ſtone, which retaineth his vertue no longer than it is rubbed
with gold.

Sith then Gwydonius (quoth hée) thou findes ſuch falſe­hood in friendſhip, and
ſuch faithleſſe déedes in ſuch paynted ſpéeches, ſhake off theſe fawning curs
with the flag of de­fiance, and from henceforth trie ere thou truſt I, but
(quoth he) it is too late to apply the ſalue when the ſore is incura­ble, to
crie alarum when the Citie is ouerrunne, to ſéeke for couert when the ſtorme
is paſt, and to take héede of ſuch flattering mates, when alreadie thou art
deceiued by ſuch fawning merchaunts: now thou wilt crie Cave when thy coin is
conſumed, and beware when thy wealth is wrac­ked: when thou haſt nothing
wherof to take charge, thou wilt be charie, and when follie hath alreadie
giuen thee a mate. thou wilt by wiſedome ſéeke to auoide the check: but now
thou tryeſt it true that thy father foretolde thee, that ſo long thou wouldeſt
be careleſſe, as at laſt repentance would pull thee by the ſléeue, and then
Had I wiſt would come too late.

Well Gwydonius, ſith that which is once paſt can ne­uer be recalled againe, if
thou haſt by folly made a fault, ſéek by wiſedome to make amendes, and heap
not care vppon care, nor adde not griefe to ſorrowe, by theſe pitifull
com­plaintes, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=9)
but chéere vp thy ſelfe and take heart at graſſe, for the ende of woe is the
beginning of weale, and after mi­ſerie alwaies inſueth moſt happie felicity.

Gwydonius hauing thus dolorouſly diſcourſed with himſelfe, remained not aboue
ten dayes in priſon, but that the Senate taking pittie of his caſe, and ſéeing
no accuſa­tions were inferred againſt him, ſet him frée from his pur­gatory,
and gaue him good counſel, that hereafter hée ſhould beware by ſuch witleſſe
prodigalitie to incurre ſuch ſuſpi­cion. Theſeus neuer triumphed more after he
had eſcaped the danger of the perillous Labyrinth, than poore Gwydo­nius did
when he was ſet frée from this pernitious Limbo: now the bitterneſſe of
bondage made his fréedome ſéeme farre more ſweete, and his danger ſo happily
eſcaped, cau­ſed his deliuery ſéem farre more delightfull. Yet he concei­ued
ſuch diſcurteſie againſt the Citizens, for repaying his liberal good will with
ſuch loathſome ingratitude, that the next morning he departed frō Barutta,
not ſtored with too much mony for moleſting his minde, nor ouercharged with
coine for cumbering his cōſcience with too much care: but hauing remaining of
all his treaſure onely that ring which his father gaue him, trauelled very
ſolemnely to­ward Alexandria.

Where at that time ther raigned a certaine Duke na­med Orlanio, who was ſo
famous and fortunate, for the peaceable gouernment of his Dukedome,
adminiſtering iuſtice with ſuch ſinceritie, and yet tempering the extrea­mitie
of the law with ſuch lenitie, as hee both gayned the good will of ſtrangers in
hearing his vertue, and wonne the harts of his ſubiects in féeling his bounty,
counting him vnworthy to hear the name of a Soueraigne, which knew not
according to deſert, both to cheriſh and chaſtiſe his ſub­iects.

Fortune and the fates willing to place him in the pa­lace of earthly
proſperity, endowed him with two children,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=9) the one a
ſonne named Therſandro, and the other a daugh­ter called Caſtania, either of
them ſo adorned with the gifts of Nature, and be antifled with good nurture,
as it was hard to knowe whether beautie or vertue helde the ſupremacie. But
leaſt by this happie eſtate Orlanio ſhould be too much puffed vp with
proſperitie, Fortune ſparing him the mate, yet gaue him a ſlender checke, to
warne him from ſecuri­tie: for before his daughter came to the age of
fouretéene yeares, his wife dyed, leauing him not more ſorrowfull for the
loſſe of her whom he moſt intirely loued, than carefull for the well bringing
vp of her whom hee ſo dearely liked: Knowing that as his Court was a ſchoole
of vertue to ſuch as bridled their mindes with diſcretion, ſo it was a nurſs
of vice to thoſe tender yeares that meaſured their willes with witleſſe
affection, eſteeming libertie as perillous to the ſtaie of youth, as precious
to the ſtate of age, and that nothing ſo ſoone allureth the minde of a young
maide to va­nity, and to paſſe her youth without feare in ſecurity. Fea­red
with the conſideration of theſe premiſſes, to auoyde the inconueniences that
might happen by ſuffering Caſta­nia to leade her life in lawleſſe libertie,
hee thought it beſt to chooſe out ſome vertuous Ladie to kéepe her companie,
who might direct her courſe by ſo true a compaſſe, and le­uel her life by ſo
right a line, that although her young years were verie apt to be intangled in
the ſnares of vanity, yet by her counſaile and companie, ſhee might ſteadily
tread her ſteps in the trace of vertue: and none he could find more fit for
the purpoſe, than a certain olde widow, called Ma­dame Melytta, honoured for
her vertuous life throughout all Alexandria, who being ſent for to the Court,
he ſaluted on this manner.

MAdame Melytta (quoth hée) the report of thy honeſt conditions, and the
renoume of thy vertuons qua­lities are ſuch, as thereby thou haſt not onelie
pur­chaſed great praiſe, but wonne great credit throughout all
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=10) the Countrie.
In ſomuch that, incenſed by this thy ſingu­lar commendation, I haue ſelected
thée as the onely wo­man to whome I meane to commit my chiefeſt treaſure: I
mean, Melytta, my daughter Caſtania, to whom I will haue thee bee both a
companion and a counſellour, haping thou wilt take ſuch care to traine her vp
in vertue, & trace her quite from vice, to winne her minde to honeſtie, and
weane her quite from vanitie, that ſhe in her ripe yeares ſhall haue cauſe to
thanke thee for thy paines, and I occa­ſian to regard thée as a friend, and
reward thee for thy dili­gence.

FIrſt Melytta, ſee that ſhe leade her life both charily and chaſtly. Let her
not haue her owne will, leaſt ſhee proue too wilfull: or too much libertie,
leaſt ſhee become too light. The palme tree preſſed downe, groweth
notwithſtanding but too faſt. The heath Spattania, though troden on, grow­eth
verie tall: and youth although ſtrictly reſtrained, will proue but too
ſtubburne.

The veſſell ſauoureth alwayes of that licour wherwith it was firſt ſeaſoned
and the minde retaineth thoſe quali­ties in age wherein it was trained vp in
youth. The ten­der twig is ſonner broken than the ſtrong branch, the yong ſtem
more brittle than the old ſtocke, the weake bramble ſhaken with euerie wind,
and the wanering will of youth toſſed with euerie paſte of vanitie, readie to
bee wracked in the waues of wantonneſſe, vnleſſe it be cunningly guided by
ſome wiſe and warie Pilot.

Then Melytta, ſith youth is ſo eaſily entrapped with the alluring traine of
fooliſh delights, and ſo ſoone entangled with the traſh of pernitions
pleaſure, ſuffer not my daughter to paſſe her time in idleneſſe, leaſt happily
being ta­ken at diſcouert, ſhee become a careleſſe captiue to ſecuri­tie: for
whan the minde once floateth in the ſurging ſeas of idle conceits, then the
puffes of voluptuous pleaſures and the ſtifling ſtormes of vnbrideled fancy,
the raging [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=10)
blaſtes of alluring beautie, and the ſturdie gale of glozing vanitie, ſo ſhake
the Shippe of reckleſſe youth, that it is dayly in doubt to ſuffer moſt
dangerous ſhipwracke. But let her ſpend her time in reading ſuch auncient
authors as may ſharpen her wit by their pithie ſayings, and learne her
wiſedome by their perfect ſentences. For where na­ture is vicious, by learning
it is amended, and where it is vertuous by skill it is augmented. The ſtone of
ſecret vertue is of greater price if it be brauely poliſhed, the gold though
neuer ſo pure of it ſelfe hath the better colour if it be burniſhed, and the
minde though neuer ſo vertuous, is more noble if it be enriched with the gifts
of learning. And Melytta, for recreation ſake, let her vſe ſuch honeſt ſports
as may drine away dumps, leaſt ſhe be too penſiue, and free her minde from
fooliſh conceits, that ſhee bee not too wanton.

Thus (Madame) as you haue heard my fatherly aduiſe, ſo I pray you giue my
daughter the like friendly aduer­tiſement; that hereafter ſhe may haue both
cauſe to reue­rence me, and to reward thee.

Melytta hauing heard with attentiue héed the minde of Orlanio, conceiued ſuch
ioy in this new charge, and ſuch delight in this happy chance, as with
cheerefull counte­nance ſhe repayed him this anſwere.

SIr (quoth ſhe) although in the largeſt ſeas are the foreſt tempeſts in the
broadeſt waies moſt boiſterous windes, in the higheſt hilles, moſt dangerous
happes, and in the greateſt charge the greateſt care: yet the dutie which I
owe you as my Soueraigne, and the loue I beare you as a ſubiect, the care I
haue to pleaſe you as my Prince, and to pleaſure you as a Potentate, the truſt
you repoſe in my trueth without ſufficient tryall, the confidence you put in
my conſcience without ſure proofe, the curteſie your Grace doth ſhewe me
without anie deſert, haue ſo inflamed the forepaſſed fire of dutifull
affection, and ſo incouraged
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=11) me to
encounter your Graces curteſie, with willing con­ſtancie, that there is no hap
ſo hard which I woulde not hazard, no danger ſo deſperate which I woulde not
aduen­ture, no burthen ſo heauie which I would not beare, no pe­rill ſo huge
which I would not paſſe, no charge ſo great, which both willingly and warily I
woulde not performe. For, ſince it hath pleaſed your Grace to vouchſafe ſo
much of my ſimple calling, as to aſſigne me for a companion for your daughter
Caſtania, I will take ſuch care in the charie performance of my charge, and
indenour with ſuch dili­gence both to counſaile & comfort Caſtania, as your
Grace ſhall perceiue my dutie in pleaſing you, and my diligence in pleaſuring
her.

THe Duke hearing the friendly & faithfull proteſtation of the good Lady
Melytta, tolde her that although it were great trouble for one of her age to
frame her ſelf as a companiō to ſuch yong youth, and that ſome care belonged
to ſuch a charge, yet hee would ſo counternalle her painful labour with
princely liberalitie, that both ſhe and all Alex­andria ſhould haue cauſe to
ſpeak of his bountie.

MElytta, thanking the Duke for ſuch vndeſerued curte­ſie, ſetting her houſhold
affaires in good order, repay­red to the Court as ſpéedily as might be. But
leauing her with Caſtania, again to Gwydonius: who now being arri­ued in
Alexandria, pinched with pouerty, & diſtreſſed with want, hauing no coine left
wherewith to counteruaile his expences, thought it his beſt courſe, if it were
poſſible, to compaſſe the Dukes ſeruice: repairing therfore to the court hée
had not ſtaied there thrée dayes before he found fit opor­tunitie to offer his
ſeruice to Orlanio, whom very dutiful­ly he ſaluted in this manner.

THe report (right worthie Prince) of your incompara­ble curteſie and pearleſſe
magnanimity is ſo blazed a­broad
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=11) throughout
all Countries, by the golden trumpe of Fame, that your Grace is not more loued
of your ſubiects which taſt of your liberall bountie, than honoured of
ſtran­gers, which only heare of your princely vertue. Inſomuch that it hath
forced me to leaue my natiue ſoile, my parents, kindred, and familiar friends,
and pilgrimlike to paſſe into a ſtrange Country, to try that by experience
héer, which I haue heard by report at home. For it is not (right worthy Sir)
the ſtate of your Country that hath altured me (for I deeme Bohemia, wherof I
am, no leſſe pleaſant than Alex­andria) neither hath want of liuing or hope of
gain intiſed me, for I am by birth a Gentleman, and iſſued of ſuch pa­rents as
are able with ſufficient patrimonie to maintaine my eſtate: but the deſire,
not onely to ſée, but alſo to learne ſuch rare curteſie and vertuous qualities
as fame hath re­ported to be put in practice in your Court, is the onely
oc­caſion of this my iourny. Now if in recompenee of this mytrauaile, it ſhal
pleaſe your Grace to vouchſafe of my ſer­uice, I ſhall think my ſelf fully
ſatiſfied, and my pains ſuf­ficiently requited.

Orlanio, hearing this dutifull diſcourſe of Gwydonius, marking his manners,
and muſing at his modeſtie, noting both his excellent courteſie, and exquiſite
beautie, was ſo inflamed with friendly affection toward this yoong youth, that
not only hee accepted of his ſeruice, but alſo preferred him as a companion to
his ſonne Therſandro, promiſing that ſince hee had left his Country and
Parents for this cauſe, he would ſo counteruaile his dutifull deſert with
fa­uour and friendſhip, as he ſhould neuer haue cauſe to ac­cuſe him of
ingratitude.

Gwydonius repaying heartie thankes to the Duke for his vndeſerued curteſie,
being now brought from woe to weale, from deſpaire to hope, from bale to
bliſſe, from care to ſecuritie, from want to wealth, yea, from helliſh miſery,
to heauenly proſperitie, behaued himſelfe ſo wiſely and warily with ſuch
curteſie in conuerſation, and modeſtie in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=12) manners, that
in ſhort time hee not onely purchaſed credit and countenance with Orlanio, but
was moſt intirely li­ked and loued of Therſando.

Now, there remained in the Court a young knight, cal­led Signior Valericus,
who by chance caſting his glancing eies on the glittering beautie of Caſtania,
was ſo fettered in the ſnare of fancie, and ſo entangled with the trap of
af­fection, ſo perplered in the Labyrinth of pinching loue, and ſo inchanted
with the charme of Venus Sorcerie, that as the Elephant reioiceth greatly at
the ſight of a Roſe, as the Bird Halciones delighteth to view the feathers of
ye Phoe­nix, and as nothing better contenteth a Ro-Buck, than to gaze at a red
cloth; ſo there was no obiect that could allurc the wauering eyes of
Valericus, as the ſurpaſſing beautie of Caſtania: yea, his only bliſſe,
pleaſure, ioy, & delight, was in féeding his fancy with ſtaring on yt Heauenly
face of his goddeſſe. But alas her beautie bred his bane, her lookes his
loſſe, her ſight is ſorrow, her exquiſite perfections, his ex­treame paſſions,
that as the Ape by ſéeing the Snaile is infected, as the Leopard falleth in a
traunce at the ſight of the Locuſt, as the Cockatrice dyeth with beholding the
Chriſolito, ſo poore Valericus was pinched to the heart with viewing her
comely countenance, was griped with galling griefe, and tortured with
inſupportable torments, by gazing vpon the gallant beauty of ſo gorgeous a
dame: yea, he ſo framed in his fancie the forme of her face, and ſo imprinted
in his hart the perfection of her perſon, that the remembrance therof would
ſuffer him to take no reſt, but he paſſed the day in dolour, the night in
ſorrow, no minute without mourning, no houre without heauineſſe, that falling
into penſiue paſſions hee began thus to parle with himſelfe.

Why how now Valericus (quoth hée) art thou haunted with ſome helliſh hagge, or
paſſeſſed with ſome frantike furie? art thou inchaunted with ſome magicall
charme, or charmed with ſome bewitching Sorcerie, that ſo ſo­dainly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=12) thy minde is
perplexed with a thouſand ſundry paſ­ſions, alate frée, and now fettered,
alate ſwimming in reſt, and now ſinking in care, erewhile in ſecuritie, and
now in captiuitie, yea turned from mirth to mourning, from plea­ſure to paine,
from delight to deſpight, hating thy ſelfe, and louing her who is the chiefe
cauſe of this thy calamitie. Ah Valericus, haſt thou forgot the ſaying of
Propertius, that to loue, howſoeuer it be, is to loſe; and to fancie, how
charie ſo euer thy choice be, is to haue an ill chance? for Loue though neuer
ſo fickle is but a Chaos of care; and fancie, though neuer ſo fortunate, is
but a maſſe of miſerie: for if thou en­ioy the beautie of Venus, thou ſhalt
finde it ſmall vantage: if thou get one as wiſe as Minerua, thou maieſt put
thy winnings in thine eye, if as gorgious as Iuno, thy ac­counts being caſt,
thy gain ſhalbe but loſſe: yea, be ſhe ver­tuous  [...]e ſhe chaſt, be ſhe
curteous, be ſhe conſtant, be ſhee rich, be ſhe renowmed, be ſhee honeſt, be
ſhee honourable, yet if thou be wedded to a woman, thinke thou ſhalt finde in
her ſufficient vanitie to counteruaile her vertue, that thy happineſſe will
bée matcht with heauineſſe, thy quiet with care, thy contentation with
vexation: that thou ſhalt ſowe ſeede with ſorrowe, and reape thy corne with
ſadneſſe, that thou ſhalt neuer liue without griefe, nor die without
Repentance: for in matching with a Wife there are ſuch miſchiefes, and in
marriage ſuch miſeries, that Craterus the Emperour wiſhing ſome ſiniſter
fortune to happen vpon one of his foes, prayed vnto the gods that hée might
hée married in his youth, and die without iſſue in his age, counting marriage
ſuch a cumberſome croſſe, and a Wife ſuch a pleaſant plague, that he thought
his foe could haue no worſe torment, than to bée troubled with ſuch noyſome
traſh. Oh Valericus, if the conſideration of theſe premiſſes bée not
ſufficient to perſwade thee: if the ſentence of Propertius cannot quench thy
flame, nor the ſaying of Craterus coole thy fancie, call to minde what
miſeries, what miſchiefes, what woes, what wailings,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=13) what miſhaps,
what murthers, what care, what calami­ties haue happened to ſuch, as haue
béell beſotted with the balefull beautie of women, enioying more care than
com­moditie, more paine than profite, more coſt man comfort, more griefe than
good: yea, reaping a tunne of droſſe for e­uery dramm of perfect gold.

What careleſſe inconſtancie ruled Eriphila? What cur­riſh crueltie raigned in
Philomela? How inceſtuous a life led Aeuropa? and how miſerable was that man
that mar­ried Sthuolea? VVhat gaines got Tereus in winning Progne, but a
loathſome death for a little delight. Aga­memnon in poſſeſſing the beautie of
Creſida, cauſed the Greeian armie moſt grieuouſly to be plagued. Candaules was
ſlaine by his murthering wife, whom ſo intirely hée loued. Who was thought
more happie than the husband of Helena, and yet who in time leſſe fortunate?
What hap­leſſe chaunces inſued of the chaſtitie of Penelope? What broiles in
Rome by the vertue of Lucretia? The one cau­ſed her ſutors moſt horribly to
bée ſlaine, and the other that Tarquine and all his poſteritie were rooted out
of their re­gall dignities. Phaedra in louing killed her hapleſſe ſonne
Hippolitus, and Clitemneſtra in hating ſlewe her louing husband Agamemnon.
Alas Valericus, how dangerous is it then to deale with ſuch dames, which if
they loue, they procure thy fatall care: and if they hate thee, thy finall
ca­lamitie?

But ah blaſphemous beaſt that I am! thus reckleſly to raile and rage without
reaſon, thus curriſhly to exclaime againſt thoſe, without whom our life though
neuer ſo luc­kie, ſhould ſéem moſt loathſome? thus Tymon like, to con­demne
thoſe heauenly creatures, whoſe only ſight is a ſuf­ficient ſalue againſt all
helliſh ſorrowes: Is this right, to conclude generally of particular premiſes?
Is it iuſtice to accuſe all for the fault of ſome? Is it equitie to blame the
ſtaie of vertuous women, for the ſtate of vicious wantons? Doeſt thou thinke
Valericus to ſhake off the ſhackles of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=13) fancie with
this follie? Or to eſchue the baite of beautie, by breathing out ſuch
blaſphemie? No, no, aſſure thy ſelf, that theſe thy raging reaſons, will in
time be moſt rige­rouſly renenged, that the gods themſelues will plague thée
for braying out ſuch iniurious ſpéeches. Alas, Loue wan­ting deſire, maketh
the minde deſperate: and fixed fancie bereaued of loue turneth into furie. The
loyall faith I beare to Caſtania, and the loathſome feare of her ingrati­tude,
the déep deſire which inforceth my hope, & the dead­ly deſpaire which
infringeth my hap, ſo toſſeth my minde with contrarie cogitations, that I
neither regard what I ſay, to my harme; nor reſpect what I doo, to my own
hurt: yea, my ſenſes are ſo belotted with pinching loue, and my minde ſo
fretted with frying fancie, that death were thrice more welcome, than thus to
linger in deſpairing hope.

And with that to paſſe away thoſe penſiue paſſions, hée flung out of his
chamber with his Hawke on his fiſt, thin­king by ſuch ſport to driue away this
melanchollie humor, which ſo moleſted his minde.

But as hée was paſſing through the Court, hee was luckilie encountred by
Melytta and Caſtania, who minding to haue ſome ſport with Valericus before hée
did paſſe: had the onſet thus pleaſantly giuen him by Caſta­nia.

II is hard Signor Valericus (quoth ſhee) to take you eyther without your Hawke
on your fiſt, or your heart on your halfepenie: for if for recreation you bee
not re­triuing the Partridge with dogges, you are in ſolemne meditation
driuing awaie the time with dumpes, ney­ther caring for companie to ſolace
your ſadneſſe, norplea­ſantlie diſcourſing of ſome amorous Parle: which makes
the Gentlewomen of this Court thinke, that you are either an Apoſtata to loue,
as was Narciſſus, or haue diſplayed the flagge of deffance againſt Fancie, as
did Tyanaeus. If theſe their ſurmiſed coniectures bèe true,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=14) Valericus, I
warne thée as a friend to beware by other mens harmes, leaſt if thou imitate
their actions, thou bée mangled with the like miſerie, or maimed with the like
miſfortune.

Valericus hearing his Saint pronouncing this ſuge­red harmonie, feeling
himſelfe ſomewhat toucht with this quipping talke, was ſo rapt in admiration
of her e­loquence, and ſo rauiſht in the contemplation of hir beau­tie, that
hée ſtood in a maze not able to vtter one word, vn­till at laſt gathering his
wits together, hée burſt forth in theſe ſpéeches.

MAdame (quoth he) what it pleaſeth the gentle women of this court to ſormiſe
of my ſolitarines I know not: but if they attribute it to curiouſnes, or
coineſſe, to ſtrange­neſſe or ſtatelineſſe, either that I am an enemy to loue,
or a foe to fancie, that I deteſt their bountie with Nar­ciſſus, or contemne
their beautie with Tiancus, they offer me great iniurie ſo raſhly to
coniecture of my diſeaſe, be­fore rightly they haue caſt my water. But to put
your La­diſhip out of doubt what is the cauſe of my dumpes, ſo it is, that of
late raunging the fieldes, my heart (my hawke I ſhould ſaie Madame) houered at
ſuch a princely praie, and yet miſt of her flight, that ſince ſhee hath
neither pruned her ſelfe, nor I taken anie pleaſure. Marie if the fates ſhould
ſo fauour mee, or fortune ſo ſhroud me vp in proſperitie, that my deſire might
obtaine her wiſh, I would not onely change my mourning to mirth, my dolor to
delight, and my care to ſecurity, but I would thinke to haue gotten as rich a
praie as euer Caeſar gayned by conqueſt.

SVrely Signor Valericus (quoth Melytta) no doubt the praie is p [...]ing
princely, ſince the value thereof is rated at ſo preciou [...] a price, and
therfore we haue neither cauſe to condemn your hawk of haggardnes, for want of
pruning, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=14) nor
you of fooliſhneſſe for want of pleaſure. And if your heart (your Hawke I
ſhould ſay, Signior Valericus) hath reacht farther with her eye, than ſhe is
able to mount with her wing, although I am no skilfull Fawlkner, yet I think
you had better kéep her on the fiſt ſtil, and ſo féede her with hope, than let
her miſſe againe of her flight, and ſo ſhe turnetaile and be foiled.

Indeede Madame (quoth Valericus) your counſaile is very good, for as there is
no better confect to a crazed mind, than hope, ſo there is no greater coraſiue
to a careful man, than deſpaire, and the Falkners alſo iumpe with you in the
ſame verdite, that the Hawke which miſſeth her pray, is doubtfull to foare
aloofe and proue haggard. Yet if ſhe were ſo tickle, as ſhe would take no
ſtand, ſo ramage as ſhe would be reclaimed with no lure, I had rather hap­pely
hazarde her for the gayning of ſo péerleſſe a pray, though I both loſt her,
and wanted of my wiſh, than by keeping her ſtill in the Bines, to proue her a
kite, or mee a coward.

Indéed Sir (quoth Caſtania) Fortune euer fauoureth them that are valiant: and
things the more hard, the more haughtie, high and heauenly: neither is any
thing hard to bee accompliſht, by him that hardily enterpriſeth it. But yet
take heede that you fiſh not ſo faire, that at length you catch a Frogge, and
then repentance make you mumble vp a maſſe with Miſerere.

No Madame (quoth he) it is neuer ſéene that hée which is contented with his
chance, ſhould euer haue cauſe to re­pent him of his choice.

And yet (quoth ſhe) he that buies a thing too deare, may be content with his
chaffer, and yet wiſh he had been more charie.

Trueth Madame (quoth Valericus) but then it is traſh and no treaſure, for that
which is pretious is neuer ouer­priſed, and a bad thing though neuer ſo cheap,
is thought too chargeable.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=15) Oh Sir (quoth
Melytta) and is it not an olde ſaying, that a man may buy golde too deare, and
that iewels though neuer ſo pretious, may be ſet at too high a price? I ſee if
you had no better skill in manning of a Hawke, than in making of a bargaine,
you would proue but an ill Faulk­ner. But ſince we haue ſo long troubled you
with our talk, we will nowe leaue you to your ſport, and ſo bid you fare­well.

Valericus with a courteous Conge, repaying their cur­teſie, and with a
glauncing eye giuing his goddeſſe the dolefull A dio, went ſolitarilie into
the ſecret woodes, where laying him downe in the ſhade, he fell into theſe
mu­ſing meditations:

VVHat greater proſperitie (quoth he) can happē vn­to any earthly wight, than
if he be croſſed with care, to finde a confect to cure his calamity: than if
he be pin­ched with pains, to get a plaiſter for his paſſions: if hée bée
drenched in diſtreſſs, to finde a means to mitigate his mi­ſerie? which I ſée
by proofe performed in my ſéelie ſelfe: for the ſight of my goddeſſe haue ſo
ſalued my forepaſſed ſor­rowes, hir ſweet words hath ſo healed my heauie
wounds, that where before I was plunged in perplexitie, I am now placed in
felicitie: where before I was oppreſſed with care, I am now refreſhed with
comfort. O friendly for­tune, if from henceforth thou furiouſly frowne vpon
mee, if thou daunt mee with diſaſter miſhappe, or croſſe mée with perpetuall
care, yet thus thy friendly courteſie ſhall bee ſufficient to counteruaile all
future enormi­ties.

But alas, I ſee euery proſperous puffe hath his boy­ſterous blaſte, euery
ſwéete hath his ſower, euery weale his woe, euery gale of good lucke, his
ſtorme of ſiniſter fortune: yea, euery commoditie his diſcommoditie annex­ed:
the bloud of the Viper is moſt healthfull for the ſight, and moſt hurtfull for
the ſtomacke, the ſtone Celonites is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=15) very precious
for the back, and very perilous to the braine: the flower of India pleaſant to
be ſéene, but whoſo ſmel­leth to it, féeleth preſent ſmart: ſo as the ioy of
her preſence procureth my delight, the annoy of her abſence bréedeth my
deſpight: yea, the feare that ſhe will not repay my loue with liking, and my
fancie with affection, that ſhe wil not conſent to my requeſt, but rather
meanes to ſtifle mee with the raging ſtormes of repulſe, and daunt me with the
doome of deadly dentals, ſo fretteth my hapleſſe minde with hel­liſh furie,
that no plague, no paine, no torment, no torture can worſe moleſt me, than to
be diſtreſſed with this dread­full deſpaire.

Alas, her calling is too high for mée to climbe vnto, her royall ſtate is
farre aboue my reach, her haughtie minde is too loftie for mée to aſpire: no
doubt if I offer my ſute vn­to her, ſhée will proue like the ſtone of Silicia,
which the more it is beaten, the harder it is: or like the ſpices of Ionia,
which the more they are pounded the leſſe ſauour they yield; like to the
Iſiphilon, which yieldeth forth no iuice though neuer ſo well bruſed: ſo,
though I ſhould with neuer ſo great deuotion offer vp at her Shrine, prayers,
promiſes, ſighes, ſobs, teares, troth, faith, fréedom, yea, and my heart it
ſelfe, as a pledge to plead for pittie, yet ſhe would make ſo ſmall account of
theſe my cares, and as little regard my ruth and ruine, as Eriphila did her
faithfull friend Infor­tunio.

But oh vile wretch that I am! why doo I thus without cauſe condemne Caſtania?
Why do I accuſe her of cru­eltie, in whom raigneth nothing but curteſie? Why
doe I appeach her of coineſſe, in whom bountie ſheweth ſmall curiouſneſſe?

How friendly, how familiarly, yea, how faithfully did ſhe talke with me, what
a chéerefull countenance did ſhée carry towards mee, what ſodaine glaunces,
what loue­ly lookes? which no doubt are ſignes, that though ſhee repulſe meat
the firſt, ſhee will not refuſe mée at the laſt:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=16) though ſhe be
ſtraight in words, ſhée will not bée ſtrange in minde: though ſhe giue me ſome
bitter pilles of denyall, it ſhall bée but for the better tryall. And ſhall I
then béeing fed with this hope proue ſuch a mecocke, or a milkeſop, as to be
feared with the tempeſtuous ſeas of aduerſitie, when as at length I ſhal
arriue at the hauen of happy eſtate? ſhall I dread to haue my ſhip ſhaken with
ſome angrie blaſtes, hoping to bee ſafely landed on the ſhoare, and ſo haue my
ſhare of that, which the ſhowers of ſhrewd Fortune for a time haue denyed mee?
No, no,

Dulcia non meruit, qui non guſtavit amara.

Hée is not worthy to ſucke the ſwéete, which hath not firſt ſauoured the
ſowre: hee is not worthy to eate the kernell which hath not crackt the ſhel,
he deſerueth not to haue the crown of victorie, which hath not abid the brunt
of the bat­taile: hee meriteth not to poſſeſſe the pray, which will not
willingly take ſome part of the pains: Neither is he worthy of ſo heauenly a
Dame as Caſtania, that would not ſpend the moſt preti [...]us bloud in his
body, in the purſuite of ſo peereleſſe a piece.

VAlericus thus mitigating his paine with the milde medicine of hope, and
rooting out the dead fleſh of deſ­paire with the playſter of truſt, determined
to ſtrike on the Stith while the yron was hot, and ſo purſue his pur­poſe
while his miſtreſſe was in her good moode. And ther­fore leauing his ſport for
this time, highed him to the court in haſte: where inſinuating himſelf into
the ſocietie of the Ladies and Gentlewomen, hee ſhewed himſelfe in ſport ſo
pleaſant, in talk ſo witty, in manners ſo modeſt, in conceits ſo cunning, in
parle ſo pithie, and in all his conuerſation ſo comely, that wheras before he
was ſpecially loued of none, now he was generally liked of all: inſomuch that
for a time there was no talk in the Court but of the Metamorphoſ [...]s of
Valericus minde. Who oftentimes determining in plain tearms to preſent his
ſuits to Caſtania, when he came to the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=16) point, fear
of offence, and dread of deniall, diſappointed his purpoſe, that hée remained
mute in the matter: but at laſt perceiuing delay bred danger, ſéeing his
miſtris ſit alone in his preſence, houering betwéen fear and hope, he began
the aſſault with this march.

MAdame (quoth hee) for that I ſée you ſitting thus ſo­litarie in dumps, I am
the bolder to preaſe in place, although the moſt vnworthy man to ſupply it.
Hoping you will pardon my rudeneſſe for troubling thus raſhly your muſing
meditations, and count my company the leſſe offenſiue in that I ſée you buſied
with no ſuch ſerious mat­ters whereunto my preſence may be greatly
preiudiciall. Cyneas the Philoſopher, Madam, was of this minde, that when the
gods made beautie, they skipt beyond their skill, in that they framed it of
greater force than they themſelues were able toreſiſt. If then there is none
ſo wiſe or worthy whom beauty cannot wrack, nor none iſſued of ſuch prince­ly
birth whom beauty cannot bend, though I haue béene intangled with the ſnare of
fancie, and haue liſtned to the lure of beauty, I am the more to be borne
with, and the leſſe to be blamed. For I muſt of force confeſſe Madame, that
the gifts of nature ſo aboundantly beſtowed vpō you, your excellent beauty
and exquiſite vertue, haue ſo ſcaled the walls of my fancie, and ſacked the
fort of my fréedom, that for my laſt refuge I am forced to appeale vnto your
curteſie, as the onely medicine which may cure my into­lerable diſeaſe. Nay
incurable I may well call it, for (I ſpeake with teares outwardly, and drops
of blood inward­ly) vnleſſe the mizling ſhowers of your mercie mittigate the
fire of my fancie, the droppes of your princely fauour quench the flame of my
affection, and the guerdon of your good will giue a ſoueraigne plaiſtor for my
ſecret ſore, I am like to paſſe my life in more miſerie, than if I had ta­ken
the internall torments. But I hope it is not poſſible, that out of a ſugered
Fount would diſtill a bitter ſtreame,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=17) out of a
fragrant flower a filthhy ſap, and from ſuch diuine beautie ſhould procéed
hate and helliſh crueltie.

It is Madame, your beautie which hath wrought my wo, and it is your bountie
which muſt work my weale. It is your heauenly face which hath depriued me of
libertie, and your curteous conſent muſt bee the meanes to redéeme me from
captiuitie: for as he that eateth of the Brain leaſe, and is infected, can by
no meanes be cured, vnleſſe he taſts of the ſame roote: as hée which is
wounded of the Porcu­pins, can neuer bee healed vnleſſe his wounds bée waſht
with the bloud of the ſame beaſt: as there is nothing better againſt the
ſtinging of a Snake, than to be rubbed with an Adders ſlough, and as he which
is hurt of the Scorpion ſéekes a ſalue from whom he receiued the ſore, ſo loue
onely is remedied by loue, and fancie by mutuall affection: you Madame, muſt
miniſter the medicine, which procured the maladie, and it onely lies in your
power to applie the play­ſter which inferred the paine.

Therfore I appeale to your good grace and fauour, and at the barre of your
beautie I humbly holde vp my hands, reſting to abide your ſentence, either of
conſent vnto life, or deniall vnto death.

CAſtania hearing this ſolemne diſcourſe of Valericus, was driuen into a maze
with this vnlookt for motion, muſing that hee would ſo farre ouerſhoote
himſelfe, as to attempt ſo vnlikely a match, and therefore with diſdainfull
countenance ſhe gaue him this daunt:

AS your preſent arriuall Signor Valericus dooth not greatly preindice my
muſes, ſo I think it will as litle profit your motion: and as your company
pleaſeth mée re­garding the perſon, ſo it much miſliketh me, reſpecting the
Parle: that your counts being once caſt you ſhall find your abſence might haue
more pleaſured you, and better conten­ted me. For tis vnpoſſible Valericus, to
call the Fawlcon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=17) to that Lure
wherin the pens of a Chameleon are pricked, becauſe ſhe doth deadly deteſt
them, it is hard to traine the Lyon to that trappe which ſauoureth of
Diagredium, be­cauſe he loatheth it. And it is as impoſſible to perſwade me to
enter league with fancie, which am a mortall foe to af­fection, and to vow my
ſeruice to Venus, which am alrea­die addicted to Diana. No, no ſir, I mean not
to loue, leaſt I liue by the loſſe, nor to chooſe, leaſt my skill being ſmall,
I repent my chance. Shee that is frée and willingly run­neth into fetters is a
foole, and whoſo becommeth captiue without conſtraint, may be either thought
wilfull or wit­leſſe. It is good by other mens harmes to learn to beware, and
to looke before a man doth leaps, leaſt in skipping be­yond his skill, he
light in the mire. Whoſo conſidereth the fickleneſſe of mens affections, and
the fléeting fondneſſe of their fading fancie, who carefully looketh at the
lightneſſe of their loue, and marketh the inconſtancie of their waue­ring
minde, who readeth the records which make mention of their deepe diſſembling,
faithleſſe proteſtations, falſe vowes, periured promiſes, fayned loue, and
forged flattery: how poore Ariadne was abuſed, how Medea was mocked, how Dido
was deceiued, how Oenone was reiected, and how Phyllis was forſaken, and yet
would be allured to the traine with ſuch filthie ſcraps, I would count her
chaunce too good, were her choice neuer ſo bad. But leauing theſe neceſſarie
doubts, Valericus, I tel you for troth, if I meant to loue, it is not you I
mean to like: if affection forced me, it is not your perſon I mean to fancie,
your patrimony is not ſufficient to counteruaile my parentage, nor your
bringing vp my birth, and therfore I would wiſh you to ſow the ſéede of your
ſute in a more fertile ſoile, for in me you ſhall finde no grafts of grant to
growe, nor no conſent to be cropped, for I neither like of your vnlikely loue,
nor mean not to be framed to your fancie.

Valericus beeing puſhed with this pike, thought it a ſigne of ſmall courage to
yeeld at the firſt foyne, and there­fore
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=18) looking more
narrowly to his ward, and gathering himſelfe within his weapon, he ſtood to
his tackling with this reply:

MAdame (quoth he) if you condenm me of folly for clim­bing a ſtaffe too high,
or accuſe me of fondneſſe far lay­ing my loue on a perſon of ſuch princely
parentage, it I ſeeme to make an ill market in cheaping ſuch precious chaffer,
as the price thereof is far aboue my reach, yet my offence is too ſmall to
beare anie waightie penance, ſith where the fault proceedeth of loue, there
the pardon inſu­eth of courſe, but your beautie ſhall beare all the blame, as
the onely ſpurre of this my raſh enterpriſe. For as it is impoſſible for the
yron to reſiſt the operation of the Ada­mant, or the ſilly ſtrawe the vertue
of the ſucking teat, ſo as impoſſible it is for a louer to withſtand the brunt
of beautie, to freeze if he ſtand by the flame, or to peruert the lawes of
Nature. So that Madame if you knew what a breache your beautie hath made into
my breaſt, and bow déepely I haue ſhrined the idoll of your perſon in my
hap­leſſe heart, I aſſure my ſelf though my perſon and paren­tage, my birth
and bringing vp be far vnfit for ſuch a mate yet you would deeme my loue and
loyaltie to deſerue no leſſe. Loyaltie I call it Madam; for as all things are
not made of one mould, ſo all men are not of one minde: as the Serpentine
powder is quickly kindled, and quickly out, ſo the Salamander ſtone once ſet
on fire can neuer bee quenched: as the ſoft ware is apt to receiue euerie
impreſ­ſion, ſo the hard metall neuer changeth form without mel­ting. Iaſon
was neuer ſo tr [...]uthleſſe as Troylus was tru­ſtie: Paris was neuer more
fickle then Pyramus was faith­full: Aeneas was neuer ſo light as Leander was
faithfull And ſure Madame, I call the gods to witneſſe, I ſpeake without
faining, that ſith your beautie and vertue eyther by fate or for time is ſo
déeply ſhrined in my heart, if it pleaſe you to accept mée for your ſlaue or
ſeruant, and admit
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=18) mée ſo farre
into your fauour, as that I may fréely enioie the ſight of your ſweet face,
and féed my fancie in the con­templation of your beautie; in liewe therof, I
will repaie ſuch dutifull ſeruice, as the betrothed faith of Eraſta to his
Perſida, ſhall not compare with the loue of Valericus and Caſtania.

CAſtania hearing theſe perplexed paſſions proceed from wofull Valericus,
pricked forwarde to take ſome re­morſe of his torments, felt within her minde
a carefull con­flict betwéen fancie and the fates, loue & the deſtinies: fancy
perſwaded her to take pittie of his paines, the fates forced her to giue him
the repulſe: loue wiſht her to return his goodwil with gaine, the deſtinies
draue her to deny his requeſt: toſſed thus with contrary cogitations, at laſt
ſhe burſt forth into theſe doubtfull ſpéeches.

VAlericus, as I am not altogether to reward thy good­will with hate, ſo I
cannot repaie it with loue, be­cauſe fancie denies me to like: to marry I
meane not, to retaine ſeruants I may not. Marie, to let thee eyther to loue,
or looke, take this for an anſwere, I neyther can nor will.

And with that ſhée went her way, leauing Valericus greatly daunted with this
doubtfull anſwere, with feare and hope ſo fiercely aſſayled, that being left
alone, he began thus to conſider of his amorous conceits.

IF euer wofull creature had cauſe to complain his wofull eaſe, then
vndoubtedly may I preace for the formoſt place: for there is no ſorrow more
ſower, no torment more terri­ble, no grief more grieuous, no heauineſſe more
hurtfull, than to haue deſire requited with deſpight, and good will with hate,
then to like vpon hope of curteſſe, and to finde no­thing but hate and helliſh
crueltie.

Alas poore Valericus, is thy true loue thus triflingly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=19) accounted of,
is this the guerdon for thy good will? Deoth thy deepe deſire merite no better
deſert, then haſt thou no choice, but eyther to dye deſperately, or elſe to
liue loath­ſomly? Why fond foole doeſt thou count her cruell, that at the
firſt giues not a frée conſent? Doeſt thou think her coie that commeth not at
the firſt call, wouldeſt thou haue the match made at the firſt motion? She
that is wonne with a word will bee loſt with a winde, the Hawke that bates at
euery caſt of the Lure, will neuer bee ſtedfaſt on the ſtonde, the woman that
frameth her will to euery wiſh will proue but a wilde wanten. No, no,
Valericus, let not her denials daunt thée, let not the ſower taſte of her
talke quat thy queaſte ſtomacke, conſter all things at the beſt, though her
cenſure was very ſeuere, yet ſhee knit vp her talke with a curteous cloſe. The
hound which at the firſt default giueth ouer the chaſe, is called but a curre.
The Knight that finding the firſt encounter comberſom, giueth ouer the queſt,
is counted but a coward, and the louer that at the firſt denyall is daunted
with deſpayre, is neyther worthy to obtaine his deſire, nor to enioy his
deſert. And with that he flung out of his Chamber, both to auoid the
melancholy which tormented his minde, and ſée if he could haue a ſight of his
goddeſſe.

But Caſtania altogether vnwilling to parle with her new patient, kept herſelfe
out of his ſight: which Valeri­cus eſpying, was no whit amazed, but like a
valiant ſouldi­our gaue the fort a freſh aſſault with a new kinde of
batte­rie, ſéeking to obtaine that with writing, which he could not gaine with
words, and therefore ſpéedily framed a let­ter to this effect.

# Seignor Valericus, to the Lady Caſtania, health.

THere is no creature (Madame Caſtania) ſo bereaued of reaſon, or depriued of
ſenſe, which being oppreſ­ſed with direfull calamities, findeth not by méere
inſtinct of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=19)
nature, a preſent medicine for his maladie, man onely ex­cepted, who by reaſon
of this want, may iuſtly accuſe the iniurious gods of iniuſtice. The Tiger
though neuer ſo deadly wounded, taſteth the roote of Tamariſke, and is
pre­ſently cured: The Deare being ſtrooken, though neuer ſo déep, féedeth on
the hearb Dictamnum, and forthwith is bealed: the Lyon ſalueth his ſickneſſe
by eating the Sea Woolfe, and the Vnicorne recouereth his health by
ſwal­lowing vp the buds of a Date trée. But man being croſſed with care, or
oppreſſed with griefe, pinched with fancie, or perplexed with loue, findeth no
hearbe ſo wholeſome, nor medicine ſo milde, no plaiſter ſo perfect, nor no
ſalue ſo ſo­ueraigne, which by their ſecrete vertues can appeaſe his paſſions.
Which Madame, I know by proofe, & now ſpeak by experience: for your diuine
beautie and ſecret vertue, the perfection of your bodie and the bountie of
your minde, hath kindled ſuch a flaming fire in my hapleſſe heart; that by no
meanes it may be quenched, but will turne my body into drie earth and cinders,
vnleſſe by the droppes of your pittie it bee ſpéedily redreſſed. Then Madame,
ſith your beautie is my bale, let it be my bliſſe: ſince it hath wrought my
woe, let it worke my weale, and let not my faithfull ſeruice and loyall loue
be recompenced with ſuch rigerous refuſals. Striue not for my life, ſince you
haue my liber­tie, ſéeke not my death, ſince you are the Saint to whom I offer
vp my deuotion. But good Madame, let the ſwéete Balme of your beneuolence
ſalue the ſore which ſo pain­fully afflicteth my carefull conſcience, and with
the deawe of your grace redéeme him from moſt helliſh miſerie, whoſe life and
death ſtandeth in your anſwere, which I hope ſhall be ſuch as belongeth to the
deſert of my loue, and the ſhew of your beautie.

Yours, if he be Don Valericus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=20) Valericus
hauing thus finiſhed his Letter, ſent it with as much ſpéede as might be by
his Page to Caſtania, who fin­ding her at conuenient leaſure, with moſt
reuerent dutie deliuered it. Caſtania at the firſt ſight coniecturing the
con­tents, with ſcornful looks and diſdainfull countenance vn­ripped the
ſeales, where ſéeing and reading his déep deuo­tion ſhee perceiued that his
affection was no leſſe in déede, than he profeſſed in word: ſhe
notwithſtanding would take no remorſe of his torment, but to driue him more
into dole­full dumpes, ſhe returned him this damp.

# Caſtania, to Signior Valericus.

AS it is impoſſible (Signor Valericus) to ſtraine moiſt licour out of the drie
flint, to procure ſlaming heate in that which alreadie is nipped with chilling
colde, to force the ſturdie ſtreames to run againſt their common courſe, ſo as
hard it is to win vnwilling loue, eyther with teares or truth. For if thy
birth and patrimony could counter­uaile my parentage, if my Father were
content to knit vp the knot, yet neither his commaund nor thy intreaty ſhould
make mee to chooſe without my owne loue and liking. Sith then thou art the man
whome I rather loathe than like, ceaſe from thy ſute, make a vertue of
neceſſitie, and aſſwage the flame thy ſelf which no other will quench. By
importunate perſiſting in thy purpoſe where no hope is, thou proueſt thy ſelfe
rather a deſperate ſot than a diſcréete ſouldſour. To hop againſt the hill is
extreame fondneſſe, to ſtriue againſt the ſtreame, méere folly: then
Valericus, auoyde the one, and eſchew the other, for if thou wilt ſeeke to
gayne my good will, thou ſhalt turne the endleſſe ſtone with Siſiphus, and
therefore take my naye for anſwere. For if I would I cannot, and if I could I
will not. And ſo farewell.

No way yours, Caſtania.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=20) VAlericus
hauing receiued this rigorous Letter from ruthleſſe Caſtania, ſéeing with what
great diſdain ſhe reiected his dutifull deuotion, and how with coy
counte­nance and lowring lookes, ſhe rewarded his loyall loue, hée began with
reaſon ſome what to repreſſe his rage, and with wiſedome to redreſſe his
witleſſe folly: for comparing her crueltie with his owne curteſie, and her
wilfull diſdaine with his willing duty, his diſordinate deſire began not only
to decay, but his extreame loue turned to extream hate, in­ſomuch that forced
with deſpight, he ſent her (in reuenge) theſe raging lines.

# Valericus the deſpiſed, to deſpightfull Caſtania.

DIogenes being demanded why ſo extreamly hee hated women, anſwered, becauſe
(quoth hée) they be wo­men: ſo if thou aske of mée why ſo rudely I raile
againſt thy reckleſſe folly, I anſwere, becauſe thou art Caſtania, whoſe
mercileſſe mind is ſo miſledde with ingratitude, & whoſe curriſh nature is
foyled with careleſſe inconſtancie, that like Menechmus Subreptus his wi
[...]e, thou doeſt not begin to loue ere againe thou ſéekeſt to hate. Thou
plaieſt, Caſtania, like the yong Eagles, which being hatched vp by the bird
Oſyphaga, neuer ſéek to peark on loftie Mounts, but to ſit in durtie Dales,
and like the gréedie kite which leaueth the ſwéete fleſh, to praie on the
ſtinking carrion. But why do I ſo farre forget my ſelfe? Is ſhe to be blamed
that leaueth her choyce to haue a better chaunce? or is the Faulcon to bee
accuſed of baſtardie, that leaueth the ſtar­ling to pray on the Larke? No: and
no doubt ſuch is thy caſe: for if it be true that all ſpeaketh, or at the
leaſt ſuſpec­teth, thou art like by thy louers parentage to become a great
Potentate: for if armes be the bewrayer of aunci­ent deſcents, no doubt he is
come of an olde houſe. Yea,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=21) thy father
Orlanio may roioyce if hée liue to ſée the day that his daughter ſhall bee ſo
well wedded as to ſuch a wrang­ling wiſard. But Paſiphae preferred a Bull
before a King, and Venus a ſmeared Smith before Mars the god of bat­taile.
Tuſh, Pſomneticus was father to Rhodopes chil­dren, whoſoeuer begat them: and
that cloake is of a courſe ſpinning, that cannot kéep off the raine. Farewell.

Liuing he hopes to reuenge thy iniuries. Wofull Valericus.

CAſtania no ſooner had read theſe deſpitefull lines of Valericus, but her
minde ſried with the flames of fu­rie, and her breaſt broyled with raging
wrath, in ſuch ſort, that ſhe could not be in quiet nor take any reſt, ſhée
buſied her ſelfe ſo carefully in ſtudying with what kinde of re­uenge ſhée
might beſt wreake her wrath vpon him, and re­quite his ſpitefull ſpéeches. At
laſt womanlike, ſhee found her tongue the beſt weapon, and with that ſhe
plagued him in this ſort.

# Caſtania, to Valericus, neither health nor good hap.

THe Maſtiffe Dogge (Valericus) can neuer queſt like a Spaniell, but he muſt
alwaies barke like a Curre: it is natural for the Pie to chatter, for the Iaye
to iangle, and for thee to raile and rage like a frantike foole. Dooeſt thou
think (Valericus) by brawling like a beggar to be­come a King, or by thy
moodleſſe folly to obtaine my fa­uour? no, as I know thy knauery, ſo I paſſe
not for thy brauery: neyther can thoſe vaunts ſtand for payment, where the
partie is prickt for a péeuiſh paltering patch. It is no maruaile if thy
doggiſh Letters ſauour of Diogenes doctrine: for in troth thou art ſuch a
Cinicall kind of dunce,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=21) that thy
fonde felicitie is in biting bitterly thoſe, whome otherwiſe thou canſt not
reuenge. Indéede, gentle Bala­ams Aſ [...]e, if I had béene ſo light as to
haue loued you, I might iuſtly haue béene accuſed to haue béene a curre or a
Kiſtrell: for in faith ſhee that féedes her fancy on thy face, may onely reape
this profite, to fill her eyes full with the figure of a foole. For my louers
arms, Valericus, they are imblazed in ſuch a coate, as it is hard for thée to
controll. But, I know thou boaſteſt that thou haſt gotten thy anti­quitie by
conqueſt, and kéepeſt thy Letters patents in the beggers boxe. Thus adieu ſir
dunce: the more you miſlike me, the better I loue my ſelfe.

Thy deteſted foe, Caſtania.

VAlericus his heart was ſo hardened with hate, as he was nothing diſmaied with
this rigorous reply, but thought himſelfe halfe ſatiſfied, that hee had thus
kindly toucht her to the quicke, praying the gods, that ſith it was not in his
poſſibilitie to make any ſufficient reuenge, they would by ſome ſiniſter
meanes requite her cruelty. But leauing him to his dumps, at laſt to
Gwydonius, who be­ſides the beautie of his body, and the bounty of his minde
(wherat all Alexandria wondered) had by good gouern­ment and perfect practice,
obtained ſuch a dexterity in all things, as in feates of arms no man more
forward, in ex­erciſe none more actiue, in play none more politicke, in parle
none more pleaſant: amongſt the Auncients verie wiſe, amongſt the youthfull
who more merry? ſo that there was no time, perſon, nor place, whereto aptly
hee applyed not himſelfe: inſomuch that hee entred into ſuch fauour and
familiarity with Therſandro & Caſtania, that he was the onely man whoſe
company they deſired to en­ioy. But eſpecially Caſtania, who by caſting a
gazing glaunce ſometime vppon the beautie of Gwydonius,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=22) felt a
certaine reſtraint of libertie in her affections, an al­teration of minde, and
as it were a ciuile aſſault within her ſelfe: but hauing ſmall practice in the
panges of loue, ſhe could not coniecture the ſecret cauſe of theſe her ſodain
paſſions, thinking that as it was a toye lightly taken, ſo it would as lightly
be left: and vpon this, ſtill ſhee reſted, conceiuing onely an ordinary kinde
of liking towardes Gwydonius.

Who bathing thus in the ſtreames of bliſſe, and ſafe­ly harboured in the hauen
of happineſſe, wanting nothing which might content his minde, eyther for
pleaſure or profit, thought it a point of mecre folly eyther to ſéeke or wiſh
for more than inough, knowing that to ſtraine further than the ſléeue would
ſtretch, was but to make the arme bare, and to skippe beyond a mans skill, was
to leape, but not to knew where to light: to auoide therfore haſti­neſſe in
hazarding, he fell a ſlumbering in the careleſſe ſeat of ſecuritie.

But as it is impoſſible for a man to ſléepe by the Viper and not bée
inuenomed, to gaze vpon the Cockatrice and not be infected, to ſtare vpon the
Sunne and not bee daze­led, to looke vpon Meduſas head and not be tranſformed,
to wade in the waues and not be drenched, to handle coalss and not be
ſcorched: ſo it was as impoſſible for yong Gwy­donius to gaze vpon the beauty
of Caſtania and not be gal­led, to ſixe his eyes vpon her feature and not be
fettered, to ſée her vertuous qualities and not be inueigled: for her curteſie
had ſo encountred him, her modeſty had ſo ama­zed him, and her chary chaſtity
ſo inchaunted him, that whereas he came to Orlanio his Court frée from
affection, he was now become a ſeruile ſlaue to fancie; before a foe to luſt,
now a friend to loue; yes, he felt ſuch an alienation of his ſenſes, and ſuch
a ſtrange Metamorphoſis of his minde, as reaſon was turned to rage, mirth to
mourning, ioy to annoy, delight to deſpight, weale to woe, bliſſe to hale: in
fine, ſuch contrary paſſions ſo perplexed this doubt­full
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=22) Patient, as
maugre his face hée yéelded the forte to fancie, and puld in the former flagge
of defiance, intreated for truce, and began to enter parle with Cupide on this
manner.

O Gwydonius (quoth hée) what ſtrange chaunce, nay what rare chaunge, what
ſolemne motion, nay, what ſodaine madneſſe, what fooliſh frenzie, or rather
what frautike affection hath poſſeſſed thee? Is thy lawleſſe li­berty turned
to a ſlauiſh captiuitie? Is thy fréedome fet­tered? Are thy ſenſes beſotted?
Is thy wit inueigled? Wert thou of late a defier of Venus, and art thou now a
defender of vanity? Didſt thou of late renounce beauty as a foe, and wilt thou
now embrace her as a friend? Is this the carefull kéeping of thy fathers
commaundement? Or is this thy diligent duty in obſeruing the counſaile of thy
olde ſire Clerophontes? Haſt thou ſo ſoon forgot his father­ly precepts, or
committed to obliuion his friendly aduer­tiſement? Did hee carefully warne
ſhee to beware of loue, and wilt thou careleſly wed thy ſelfe to luſt? Did hee
ſhewe thee what poyſoned bane is hidden vnder the painted baytes of beauty,
and wilt thou bee haled to the hooke?

O hapleſſe caſe: nay rather, if the chary charge thy fa­ther gaue thee, will
bée no conſtraint, if his counſaile will not commaund thée, if his warning
will not make thee wary, nor his aduiſe be thy aduiſement: yet let imminent
perils, and inſuing dangers be a precious preſeruatiue a­gainſt future
calamities. Cōſider with thy ſelfe Gwydo­nius, what difference is betwéen
fréedom and bondage, be­twéene liberty and captiuitie, mirth and mourning,
plea­ſure and paine, reſt and care, happineſſe and heauineſſe: and ſo far doth
hee which is frée from affection, differ from him which is fettered in fancie.

Why but Gwydonius, why doeſt thou thus reckleſ­ly rage, againſt reaſon? Why
dooeſt thou thus fondly ex­claime
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=23) againſt thine
owne welfare? Why dooeſt thou condemne thy ſelfe of that crime whereof thou
art not guil­tie?

Thy Father warned thee to beware of ſickle fancie: but this thy liking is firm
affection. His counſaile was to perſwade thee from lewd luſt, but not from
lawfull loue, from vanitie, not from vertue: yea, his will was to wiſhe thée
from liking ſuch a lewd miniō, who had neither birth, wealth, nor vertue, but
a little fading beauty to be either her credite or thy countenance, not to
warne thee from lo­uing ſuch a chaſt maiden, nay, a péerleſſe Princeſſe, whoſe
birth may countenance thy calling, whoſe power may pro­mote thee, whoſe
liuinges may inrich thée, whoſe vertue may aduance thée: yea, in obtaining
whom, thou ſhalt gain both honour, and perhappes the inheritance of a
Duke­dome.

Doeſt thou thinke then Gwydonius, in winning ſo wor­thy a péece, to purchace
thy fathers diſpleaſure? nay aſſure thy ſelfe hee will not onely be content
with thy chance, but hee will thinke thou haſt runne a happier race, than
Hyppomanes did in winning Atlante. Content thée wc thy chance. Why Gwydonius,
art thou ſo fond a foole, as to count the Caſtle conquered, that as yet thou
haſt not com­paſſed: to ſuppoſe the Citie ſacked, which thou haſt not
be­ſieged: to think the Bulwarke beaten, which as yet thou haſt not battered:
or to count the Lady wonne, whome as yet thou haſt not wooed? Nay Gwydonius,
if thou weigh thy caſe in the equal ballance, thou haſt more cauſe of feare
than of hope; of doubt than of aſſurance, of miſſing thy pre­tence, than of
obtayning thy purpoſe.

The Faulkon (Gwydonius) ſeldome pearketh with the Merline, the Lyon ſeldome
lodgeth with the Mouſe, the Hart ſeldome féedeth with the Pricket, Aquila non
capit Muſcas, and a Dame indued with Nobilitie, vouchſafeth not to match with
a man of meane gentility. Of meane gentilitie Gwydonius? Yea truely, for
Caſtania rather
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=23) thinketh thee
ſprong of ſome poore peaſant, than of anyprincely perſonage.

Beſides, alas, Fortune her ſelfe denieth me any ſuch fauour: my good will as
yet hath deſerued no ſuch guerdon, my deſire is farre aboue my deſertes, my
ambition aboue my condition, and the poor ſtay of wandering Gwydonius, farre
vnfit for the princely ſtate of worthy Caſtania. But put caſe ſhe did will as
I did, wiſh that ſhee were pricked in the ſame veine, caught in the ſame
ſnare, trapped with the like traine, and fired with the like fancy, yet the
Duke her father will neither condeſcend to her minde, nor con­ſent to my
motion, neither thinke well of her liking nor of my loue: nay if he ſhould but
once heare of ſuch reckleſſe folly, as he hath wrought my promotion, ſo he
would work my confuſion, as he hath béen my friend, ſo he woulde bée my foe,
and in troth Gwydonius, not without cauſe. For art thou ſo voyd of vertue, or
vowed to vice, ſo nurſed vp in vanity, or nulled vp in villany, as to require
his libe­ralitie with ſuch diſloyaltie, to returne the truſt which he repoſeth
in thée, with ſuch treaſon. Tuſh, Loue is aboue Lord or Lawe, friend or faith.
Where Loue leadeth, no maiſter is made account of, no king cared for, no
friend forced of, no duty reſpected, but all things done according to the
qualitie that is predominant. Why Gwydonius, what doubts are theſe that thou
thus dreameſt on? Why doeſt thou caſt beyonde the Moon, and fear before thou
art in daunger to fall? knowing that Loue and fortune deſi­reth not them that
are daſtards, nor careth for them that are cowardes. The Captaine that
retyreth from the walles before hée hath the repulſe, ſhall neuer returne a
conquerour, the Souldiour that fainteth before the bat­taile be fought, ſhall
neuer vaunt himſelfe of victorie. Hée that feareth euery tempeſt is not fit to
be a trauailer. Hée that doubteth euery waue ſhall neuer proue a perfect
Pi­lot, and he that in loue dreadeth euery chip of miſchaunce, may well
encoounter, but neuer obtaine the conqueſt.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=24) Sith then
Gwydonius, hardy venturing is a ſigne of hap­py victory, ſound out the march
with the trumpet of truſt, begin the aſſault, giue the onſet. Laie the
battering pée­ces of Loue, againſt the bulwarke of beautie, and no doubt thy
ſucceſſe ſhall be ſuch as thou ſhalt triumph with Caeſar and ſay, Veni, Vidi,
Vici. And art thou ſo preſumptuous fond foole, as to promiſe thy ſelfe the
conqueſt? knoweſt thou not that the path of loue is perilous? And with that he
fell into ſuch melancholie paſſions, ſuch contrary cogi­tations, ſuch
doubtfull thoughts, ſuch fearefull ſuppoſes, that as hée which eateth of the
Goorde roote loſeth his me­morie, and as the Elephant when he eateth of the
Helitro­pion leafe, is then very ſléepie; ſo Gwydonius was ſo per­plexed with
theſe vnacquainted paſſions, that contrarie to his cuſtome he had driuen myrth
into mourning, pleaſant conceits into painfull cares, laughing into lowring,
ſin­ging into ſorrow: and being thus beſotted, to ſolace himſelf he went into
a Parke adioyning to the Dukes Palace, where ſitting vnder the ſhade of a
Béech trée, leaning his head on his hand, he lay as one in a ſlumber. But
Fortune willing ſomewhat to fauour this young nouice, brought it to paſſe,
that Therſandro, Valericus, Caſtania, and Me­lytta, with diuerſe other
Gentlemen, were for recrea­tion ſake ranging in the ſame Park: who eſpying
ghoſtly Gwydonius, ſitting as one in a trance, Caſtania paſſing be­fore the
reſt, pulling him by the ſléeue, draue him thus out of his dump.

VVHy how now Gwydonius (quoth ſhee) are you dreaming or doubting, or is your
mind muſing vpō ſom metaphyſicall motions, that you ſit thus as a man half
mortified? Your ſolemn geſture makes me remember the picture of Pigmalion,
which once I ſawe portraied out by a ſkilfull Painter, who leaning his head on
his Marble miſtres (that ſo vnfainedly he loued) ſat with his eies as one in a
ſlumber, hauing his face notwithſtanding ſo bedewed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=24) with brutiſh
teares, as his outward plaints did ſufficiently bewray his inward paſſions. In
truth Gwydonius, I had taken thee for Pigmalion, if thou hadſt had tears, as
thou wert in a trance; for thou doeſt not greatly differ from him neither in
countenance nor colour: well if it were but a dreame Gwydonius, that thus
cumbred thy conſcience, or a doubt that made thée thus dumpith, I will diuine
the one if it be not too dark, or decide the other if it be not too ſecret:
marry if the caſe bee cumberſome, I leaue it to the iudge­ment of theſe
Gentlemen.

GWydonius, wakened out of his muſing ſlumber with this ſugred harmony, ſéeing
before his eyes his gorge­ous goddeſſe, the very ſaint, at whoſe ſhrine hee
was offe­ring vp ſcalding ſighes, far fetcht ſobs, plaints, prayers, and
proteſtations, was ſo appald with her preſence, that as the Baſiliſk loſeth
his ſenſes with the ſight of a naked man, as the Toretoiſe ſéeing yt North
ſtar is benummed, & as the Hermeline looking on the ſtone Echites is greatly
amazed; ſo Gwydonius ſéeing the incomparable beauty of his beſt beloued
Caſtania, was ſo aſtoniſhed, yea ſo inchanted with the rare perfectiō of this
heauenly Pallas, that as one beſot­ted he ſate ſenſeleſſe, not being able to
vtter one word; vntil at length reuiued with the view of hir chéerful
countenance he repaid her with this pleaſant anſwere.

MAdame (quoth hee) whereas ieſtingly you ſay, that at the firſt ſight you had
taken me for perplexed Pigma­lion by my pittifull plaints and carefull
countenance, but that I wanted trickling tears to decipher my ſorrow; I
an­ſwer, that wo may very well be without watry waylings: for when the ſtone
Garatides fryeth without, it fréezeth within, the Germander leafe when it is
moſt full of moy­ſture, looketh then moſt drie, where the ſtreame is moſt
déepe there it is moſt ſtill, and where is the ſmalleſt ſhewe of teares, there
is the greateſt ſigne of ſorrowe. And alſo
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=25) I call the
heauens to witneſſe, that when you wakened me out of my dreame by your diuine
eloquence, I took you either for beauty to bée Venus, for comelineſſe to bee
Pallas, or for port and honour to be Iuno, ſo that both your preſence and
curteſie daunted my minde; your preſence in dazeling my eyes ſo ſodainly with
ſo ſolemn a ſight, your curteſie, in that your Ladiſhip without curioſitie
would vouchſafe to talk with ſo meane a Gentleman. But Madame, ſith that I
perceiue your skill in diuination to bée great, in that you made ſo cunning a
coniecture, and without anie great ayming, ſo rightly hitte the marke; to put
you out of doubt, I confeſſe I was both in a dreame and a doubt, wherein ſith
it pleaſeth your honour to take ſo much paine, I will craue your ayde to
diuine the one, and decide the o­ther.

### 1.1. The Dreame.

I Was walking (Madame Caſtania) in my dreame (as I ſuppoſed) ſolitarily by the
Sea ſide, wheras I tooke de­light to ſée the Dolphines leape, (which as the
Mariners ſay, is a ſigne of imminent tempeſt) I forth with eſpied a rocke in
the Sea, whereupon ſtood a Lady arrayed with roabes of burniſht golde, ſo
formed and framed, ſo adorned and decked with the gifts of Nature, as at the
firſt I took her to be Thetis, that had ſo gorgeouſly clad her ſelfe, to
welcome home her louer and Lord Neptunus. But view­ing her countenance more
narrowly, I perceiued her to be a mortall creature (though vnworthie ſuch
diuine beautie ſhould be ſhrouded in the ſubſtance of an earthly carcaſſe)
which ſo inflamed my affection, ſo fired my fancy, and ſo kindled my deſire,
that the torments of Tantaius, the tor­ture of Ixion, the ſorrow of Siſyphus,
were not halfe com­parable to the perplered paſſions that pinched my hapleſſe
heart, when I ſawe all hope cut away from inioying this
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=25) earthly
goddeſſe, the ſea which compaſſed the rocke was ſo déepe and dangerous, the
cliffes ſo ſtéep-down and fear­full, as to deſcend was no leſſe daunger then
death it ſelfe: thus as I ſurged in griefe, and wandred vp and downe in woe, I
ſpied a bridge afarre off, whereby was a paſſage to the rocke: which ſight ſo
ſalued my forepaſſed ſorrow, and ſo reuiued my daunted minde, as I was driuen
into an ex­taſte for ioy, to ſee ſo good meanes to enioy my wiſhed de­ſire.
Comming to the bridge, I found it built of glaſſe ſo cunningly & ſo curiouſly,
as if nature her ſelf had ſought to purchaſe credit by framing ſo curious a
péece of workmā ­ſhip. But yet ſo ſlēderly, as ye leaſt waight was able to
paſh it into innumerable péeces, and vnderneath the bridge did runne ſo
terrible a ſea, ſuch bouncing billowes, ſuch tumb­ling waues, ſuch fearefull
ſurges, ſuch roaring ſtreames, ſuch hideous gulfes, as it made the paſſage
ſéeme a thou­ſand times more perilous. This terrible ſight was ſuch a cooling
card to my former conceits, as hope was turned to feare, bliſſe to bale, and
ſuppoſed happineſſe to aſſured heauineſſe. And yet my fancy was not quenched,
but ra­ther far the more inflamed, my deſire was not diminiſhed, but
augmented, and my liking no leſſe, but rather inlar­ged; ſo that to liue in
loue without hope was loathſome: to ſéek redreſſe was loſſe of life: to want
my wiſh, was hor­ror: to inioy my wil, was hel [...] to liue in care without
cōfort, was calamity: to ſéek for cure, was more than miſery: not to poſſeſſe
the pray, was helliſh danger: to venture for the prize, was haples death. Thus
croſſed with cares, & daūted with ſuch diuers doubts, deſperate hope ſo
repulſed direful feare, that encouraged by ventrous deſire, I had either
ob­tained my wiſh, or wanted of my wil, if your Ladiſhip had not ſo ſodainly
wakened me out of my ſlūber. Thus Ma­dame Caſtania, you haue heard my dreame:
now the doubt is, whether it had been better to haue ventured vppon the
brittle bridge, and ſo either deſperately to haue ended cares with death, or
elſe valtantly to haue enioyed deſire with
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=26) renowne, or
ſtill like a fearefull daſtard to haue ended my dayes in lingering loue with
miſery.

Caſtania, hearing the ſurmized dreame of Gwydonius, both ſmelled the fetch,
and ſmiled at the folly of this young youth, knowing that theſe fantaſticall
viſions and preſup­poſed paſſions, would in time (if hée tooke not héed) proue
but too true: to preuent therfore ſuch imminent perils, ſhée nipt her yong
nouice on the pate with this parle.

GGydoniu [...] (quoth ſhee) I haue liſtened to thy drouſie dream, with déep
deuotion; by ſo much the more deſi­rous atttentiuely to heare it, by how much
the more I find it ſtrange and wonderfull: yea, ſo ſtrange, as if I my ſelfe
had not wakened thee out of thy ſlumber, I would eyther haue thought it a
fained viſion, or a fantaſticall inuention: but ſith theſe Gentlemen here
preſent, and mine owne eyes are witneſſes, and thine owne tongue a teſtimony
of thy talk; ſuffice I beléeue it, though I cannot diuine it: to giue a
verdite where the euidence is not vnderſtood, is vanity: to yéeld a reaſon of
an vnknowne caſe, is meere folly: and to interpret ſo ſtrange a dreame without
great practice, is but to skip beyond my skill, and to lie faſt in the mire.
Yet, leaſt I might ſéeme to promiſe much & per­form nothing, I wil decide your
doubt, if you pleaſe to take my doom for a cenſure.

It is a ſaying Gwydonius, not ſo common as true, that the haſty man neuer
wants woe, and that hee which is raſh without reaſon, ſeldome or neuer
ſloepeth without re­pentance. To venture amidſt the Pikes when perilles cannot
bée eſchewed, is not fortitude but folly: to hazarde in daungers, when death
inſueth, is not to bee worthily minded, but wilfully mooued. Vertue alwaies
conſiſteth betwéen extreamities, that as too much fearefulneſſe is the ſigne
of a quaking coward, ſo too much raſhnes be tokeneth a deſperate Ruffian.
Manhood Gwydonius conſiſteth in meaſure & worthineſſe, in fearing to hazard
without hope. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=26)
But to giue a verdit by thine owne voyce, I perceiue thou art guilty of the
ſame crime: for when the brittleneſſe of the bridge portended, and the ſurging
ſeas inferred loſſe of life, yet deſire draue thée to aduenture ſo deſperate a
dan­ger.

Better it is Gwydonius, to liue in griefe, then to dye deſperately without
grace: better to chooſe a lingering life in miſery, then a ſpéedy death
without mercie: better to be tormented with hapleſſe fancy, then with helliſh
fiends: for in life it is poſſible to repreſſe calamity, but after death neuer
to redreſſe miſery. Tully Gwydonius in his Tuſcu­lans queſtions, diſcourſing
of the happineſſe of life and hea­uineſſe of death, ſayth, that to liue we
obtaine it of the lo­uing gods, but to dye, of the vnlucky deſtinies: meaning
hereby, that life though neuer ſo loathſome, is better then death, though
neuer ſo welcome: whereby I conclude Gwydonius, that to liue earefully, is
better then to die de­ſperately.

Gwydonius perceiuing that Caſtanias parle was no­thing to the purpoſe, and
that ſhée toucht not that point wherof he deſired moſt to be abſolued, but
meant to ſhake him off with a ſléeueleſſe anſwere, began to drawe her to the
Trap with this traine.

MAdame Caſtania (quoth hée) I confeſſe that raſhneſſe neuer raigneth without
repentance, nor haſtie ha­zarding without hapleſſe harmes, that hée which
aduentu­reth deſperate dangers is a foole, and he that paſſeth ineui­table
perils is worſe then an Aſſe: yet from theſe ſo gene­rall rules, Madame, I
exempt theſe particular exceptions, namely Loue and Neceſſitie, which two are
tyed within no bounds, nor limited within no law, for whom the diuell driues
hée muſt néedes runne, be the paſſage neuer ſo peril­lous: and whom Loue or
Neceſſity forceth, hee muſt ven­ture bee the daunger neuer ſo deſperate: for
as there is no enterpriſe ſo eaſie, which to an vnwilling man ſeemeth not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=27) very hard to
be atchieued, ſo there is no encounter ſo cum­berſome where will wiſheth, that
ſéemeth not paſſing ea­ſie to bee performed: now this will is with nothing
ſooner pricked forward, than eyther with the force of loue, or ſting of
neceſſity. So that whoſoeuer aduentureth in a daunger, though neuer ſo
deſperate, is not to be blamed, if inforced by fancy, or incouraged by
affection; and eſpecially where the perill is in poſſibility to bee paſſed
without death, and in the performance thereof, the poſſeſſion of ſuch a prize
as the paſſionate perſon more eſtéemeth than lands, limbs, or life it ſelfe,
be it neuer ſo ſwéet. In which caſe (Madame) my cauſe conſiſteth. For the Lady
who was an heauenly obiect to my gazing eyes, was ſo beautified with the
giftes of nature, and ſo perfectly poliſhed with more than natu­rall
perfection, that with the onelie view of ſuch diuine beautie, my ſenſes were
ſo beſotted, my wit and will ſo inueigled, my affection ſo inflamed, and my
fréedome ſo fet­tered: yea, loue alreadie hath made ſo great a breach into the
bulwarke of my breaſt, that to obtaine ſo gorgious a Goddeſſe, I thought death
no daunger, though neuer ſo direfull, nor loſſe of life no torment, though
neuer ſo terri­ble.

Indéed Gwydonius, (quoth Therſandro) I agrée with thée in this point, that
there is no carpet Knight ſo co­wardly, that would not paſſe more perillous
pikes to poſ­ſeſſe ſo liuely a Dame as thou doeſt decipher, nor no da­ſtarde
ſo daunted with dreade, which woulde not greatly indanger himſelfe to enioy ſo
louely a damſell, in the fruiti­on of whome conſiſteth nothing but ioy,
bliſſe, reſt, con­tentation of minde, delight, happineſſe, yea, all earchly
felicity.

And yet Sir (quoth Gwydonius) your Siſter Caſta­nia condemnes me of folly, in
venturing for ſo precious a prize; when as hope perſwaded me, that no hazard
could be hapleſſe, and aſſured me that Loue and Fortune fauou­reth them that
are bolde: that the gods themſelues ſeeing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=27) my perplexed
paſſions, wold of pitty defend me from thoſe perilous daungers. For if Theſeus
by Diuine power, were ayded againſt the force of the monſtrous Minotaure; or
if Iaſon, who conſtrayned with a couetous deſire to ob­taine the golden
Fléece, arriuing at Colchos, was preſer­ued by the gods, from the dint of the
deadly Dragons, no doubt Iupiter himſelfe would eyther haue made the
flag­gering bridge more ſtrong (conſidering that no hope of wealth, no deſire
of riches, no gréedineſſe of gaine, no loue of luere, but beauty her ſelfe was
the victorie I meant to vaunt off) or elſe if I had ſowled in the roaring
Seas, hee would haue prouided ſom happy Dolphin, that Arion like, I might
arriue at the deſired Rock: and then my daungers ſhould haue béene turned into
delight, my perils into plea­ſures, my hazarding into happineſſe: yea, I
ſhould haue poſſeſſed that heauenly paragon, and enioyed the loue of that
louely Venus, whoſe onely ſight were a ſufficient ſalue againſt all forepaſſed
ſorrowes.

Stay there, Maſter Gwydonius, quoth the Lady Me­lytta: for I ſée, to graunt
one falſe propoſition, is to open a doore to innumerable abſurdities, and that
by ſuffring you too long, of theſe ſuppoſed premiſes you will inferre ſome
cauilling concluſion to your former reaſons: thus I reply, That I confeſſe
neceſſity to haue no law, but I grant not the ſame of Loue: for if it be
lawleſſe, it is lewde: if with­out limits, laſciuious: if contained within no
boundes, beaſtly: if obſerued with no order, odious: ſo that lawleſſe Loue
without reaſon, is the very Load ſtone to ruth and ruine.

Sith then Maſter Gwydonius, as your ſelfe affirme, this was the pricke that
puſht you into perill, how can the effect be good, when the cauſe was naught?
or how can you clarkely defend your deſperate motion, proceeding of ſuch a
fond and fooliſh occaſion. But it was the perfection of her comely perſon, her
exquiſite feature, and rare beautie, that ſo kindled thy deſire, and ſo
bewitched thy ſenſes: for who
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=28) is ſo
fearefull, that beautie will not make bolde? who ſo doubtfull, that beauty
will not make deſperat? yea, what ſo hard that a man will not hazard, to
obtaine ſo diuine a thing, as beauty.

Oh Gwydonius, haſt thou not heard that the Fiſh Re­mor [...] liſtening to the
ſound of a Trumpet is caught of the Fiſhers, that while the Porcupine ſtandeth
ſtaring at the glimmering of the ſtarres, hée is ouertaken with dogges, that
the Deere gazing at the bowe is ſtriken with the bolt, that the Leopard
looking at the Panthers painted skinne, is taken as a praie, and that hee
which taketh too much de­light to gaze vpon beauty, is oftentimes galled with
griefe and miſery? Yea, his pleaſure ſhall inferre ſuch profit, and his good
will ſuch gain, as if he reapt the beautifull apples of Tantalus, which are no
ſooner toucht, but they turne to aſhes.

Beauty, Gwydonius, no ſooner flouriſheth but it fadeth, and it is not fully
ripe before it begin to rot: it no ſooner bloſſometh, but it withereth, and
ſcarcely being toucht it ſtaineth, like to the Guyacum leafe, that hath the
one halfe parched, before the other halfe be perfect: to the bird Acan­this,
which hatched white, yet turneth blacke at the firſt ſtorm: or like to the
ſtone Aſtites, that chaungeth colour with the onely breath of a man.

If then Gwydonius, beautie bée ſo fading, ſo fickle, ſo momentary, ſo mouing,
ſo withering, ſo waning, ſo ſoone paſſed, and ſo ſoone parched: is this the
Iewell, which you count more deare than life? and the Gemme which you think
worthy to bée purchaſed with the danger of death? No doubt Gwydonius, if you
won the victory, you might vaunt of a great conqueſt, and if your long hope
were re­payed with a great hap, it ſhould be much like to his, which thinking
to embrace Iuno, caught nothing but a vaniſhing cloude.

You do well Madame (quoth Caſtania) to put an If, in it, becauſe he that
vaunteth of victory before he hath wonne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=28) fielde, may
proue himſelfe a foole: hee that brags of gaines before the accounts be caſt,
may perhappes put his win­nings in his eies: and he that bloweth the Mort
before the fall of the Buck, may verie well miſſe of his ſées: ſo he that
countes himſelfe a ſpéeder before hee be a wooer, ſheweth himſelfe a vaine
perſon or a vaunting patch.

Might it not be I pray you Maſter Gwydonius, that paſſing the bridge, ſcaping
the dangerous ſeas; and happily arriuing at the deſired Rocke, yet you might
miſſe of your purpoſe? Yes forſooth: for many a man bendeth his bowe, that
neuer killeth his game, layeth the ſtrap that neuer catcheth the fowle,
pitcheth the Net that neuer getteth the fiſh, and long time are heauie wooers
that neuer proue hap­pie ſpéeders.

So perhaps Gwydonius, you might be croſſed with a chip of the ſame miſchance,
and the gorgious Dame whom you adore for a Goddeſſe, might repaie your liking
with loathing, your loue with hate, your good will with deſpite, and your
fixed fancie with ſmall affection, either that ſhee liked you too little, or
loued another too much. All theſe doubtes Gwydonius, are carefully to be caſt,
& wiſedome it is to feare the worſt, and finde the beſt: but you ſir, like a
luſtie champion, thinke a Ladie wonne at the firſt looke, and the good wil of
women gained at the firſt glance, think­ing the Gods themſelues are to be
accuſed of iniuſtice, if they be not ayders to your enterpriſe, inſomuch that
if in ventring ouer the perillous paſſage, you had by diſaſter Fortune fallen
into the dangerous Seas, you doubtes not but that Iupiter would haue ſent a
Dolphin; that Arion like, you might eſcape the fearefull ſurges: but
Gwydoni­us be not ſo ventrous, leaſt though you harpe verie long, you get not
the like hap. Theſe premiſſes conſidered, if my cenſure might ſtande for a
ſentence, I déeme it better to be counted a daſtardly coward, than a deſperate
caitife, better to forſake your Goddeſſe, than your God, better to liue
pinched with a fewe momentarie paſſions, than with
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=29) deſperate
death to deſtroy both ſoule and bodie: for there is no ſore ſuch, which in
time may not be ſalued, no care ſuch which cannot be cured, no fire ſo great
which may not be quenched, no loue, liking, fancie, or affection, which in
time may not either be repreſſed, or redreſſed.

Valericus hearing this rough reply of Caſtania, ſuppo­ſed that although ſhe
leuelied at Gwydonius, yet ſhe ſhot at him: and ſcaring the fort ſhould be too
much ſhaken with this fierce aſſault, hee ſtifly deſended the walles with this
freſh alarum.

Madame (quoth he) I ſée you will ſit nigh the walles creyou be thruſt out for
a wrangler, and that you will ſpeake againſt your owne conſcience, but you
will haue the con­queſt: for my owne part Madame, howſoeuer I ſéeme to like
it, I will not ſaie I miſlike it, but I am ſorie you Ma­dame Melytta ſhould ſo
blaſphemouſly imblaze the armes of beautie, and ſo reckleſly raile againſt the
ſacred lawes of loue: take héed for croſſing Cupid ſo crabbedly; for thogh he
forgiue and forget, Venus is a woman, and will ſeeke reuenge.

Valericus (quoth ſhée) take no care what daunger I incurre for ſpeaking the
trueth. If I chaunce to bee har­med, it is mine owne miſhappe, and for Venus
reuenge I care for it the leſſe, becauſe I feare it not: if I ſpeake a­gainſt
my ſelfe, you may ſée I am the fitter to be a Iudge, becauſe I am not
partiall, nor haue any reſpect of per­ſons.

Theſe quips Madame (quoth Gvvydonius) are nothing to the purpoſe: therfore in
the behalfe of my ſelfe and beau­tie, thus I anſwere; That as there is nothing
that ſo ſoone procureth a man to loath, as deformitie, ſo there is nothing
which ſooner procureth a man to loue than beautie: for the moſt precious ſtone
is choſen by the moſt gliſtring hew, the pureſt gold by the moſt perfect
colour, the beſt fruit by the braueſt bloſſomes, and the beſt conditions by
the ſwée­teſt [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=29)
countenance: ſo that where beautie raigneth, there vertue remaineth, and vnder
a faire face reſteth a faithfull heart▪ Sith then beautie and bountie cannot
bee parted, what man is he ſo brutiſh, whom the leaſt of theſe will not breake
or bend?

And whereas you condemne me of vanitie in vaunting before the victorie, I
ſaie, that if Fortune had ſo fauoured me, that I had gained the preſence of my
Goddeſſe, I wold neuer haue doubted to haue obtained my deſire: for if ſhee
had ſéene the deſperate daunger which I aduentured, and the fearefull perils
which I paſſed for her ſake, ſhee could not but of conſcience, repaie my loue
with vnfained loyal­tie, and my good will with trobble gaine. And in troth I
thinke it vnpoſſible, that ſuch heauenly beautie ſhould bée eclipſed with
crueltie, and ſuch perfect comelineſſe bee ble­miſht with curious coyneſſe.

Why Gwydonius (quoth ſhe) doeſt thou call it crueltie not to condeſcend to the
requeſt of euerie one that wooeth? or doeſt thou tearme it coyneſſe, not to
yéeld to the aſſault of euerie flattering louer? Then in my iudgment, it were
good for euerie woman to be both cruell and coie, that by crueltie ſhe might
auoide the traine of trothleſſe wooers, & by coyneſſe eſchue the troupe of
faithleſſe ſutors.

And ſo Madame (quoth Valericus) ſhe ſhould reape ſmall comfort and leſſe
credit.

Tuſh Signor Valericus (quoth Gwydonius) it pleaſeth her thus merilie to ieſt,
whereas I know ſhe doth account more of a curteous dame, than of a curious
damſell, and that her Ladiſhip ſo deteſſeth the name of crueltie, that ſhe
would be loth to be thought to haue a mind deuoid of mer­cie. And in troth to
leaue theſe particular inſtances, wo­men in generall, or for the moſt part,
are bountifull, curte­ous, ſober, chaſte, demure, not imbrued with vice, but
in­dued with vertue: ſo that by how much womens bodies are weaker than mens,
by ſo much their mindes are more ſtrong and vertuous.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=30) What
Gwydonius, (quoth ſhee) doe you thinke to be a frée man in Wales. for affering
a Léeke to Saint Dauie, or to bring PAN into a fooles Paradiſe by prayſing his
Pipe?

Not ſo Madame (quoth hee) but I hope in extolling a ſouldiours life to haue
Saint George to my friend, and in giuing verdit with Venus, to gaine her good
will, and to reape the reward that Paris had for his cenſure.

Mary ſir (quoth Caſtania) if you haue no better gettings you may gaine long
inough, and yet liue by the loſſe: for in obtaining one friend, you ſhall
reape two foes, as Paris did, who was more plagued by Pallas and Luno, than
plea­ſured by flattering Venus.

And yet Madame (quoth hée) his miſhap ſhall not make mée to beware: for if
Venus would grant me but one La­dy in the world, whom moſt intirely I loue, I
would ney­ther reſpect Pallas, luno, nor Diana her ſelfe, were ſhee neuer ſo
deſpitefull.

Yes but you would (quoth ſhée) if ſhe pinched you but with Acteons plague, to
peſter your head with as many horns as a Hart: It would cauſe you coniecture
your new miſtreſſe were too much giuen to the game, or that you were come from
Cornet [...]o by deſcent.

Tuſh Madame (quoth hée) doe you count Acteons hap ſuch a great harme? ſhe
onely ſight in ſéeing Diana naked, was a recompence for all his inſuing
ſorrowes: and if my ſelfe might inioy my wiſh, and obtaine the heauenly dame
that ſo heartily I deſire, the plague of Acteon, nay, the griping griefes the
ghoſtly ſpirites doe ſuffer, ſhould not counteruaile the ioy I ſhould conceiue
in inioying ſo péer­leſſe a iewell.

Truly (quoth Therſandro) thou art worthy Gwydo­nius, to bée a Chapman, that
thou bidſt ſo well for thy chaffer: and in my mind ſhee is not in Alexandria,
who for her beautie is ſo to bee loued, or at the leaſt would déeme thee not
worthy to be liked. But leauing theſe amorous
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=30) diſcourſes,
let vs hie vs in haſt to the Court, leaſt in tary­ing, Orlanio miſſe vs, and
ſo we bée ſhent. The company obeyi [...] the minde of Therſandro, paſſed as
ſpéedily as might be to the Palace, were being arriued, they departed euery
man to his own lodging.

Caſtania had no ſooner conuried her ſelfe cloſely into her chamber, but her
mind was moued with a thouſand ſundry motions, and ſhe felt ſuch a cruell
conflict in her happeleſſe heart by the aſſault of diuers contrary paſſions,
that how ſtoutly ſoeuer ſhée defended the walls, ſhée found her force too
weake to reſiſt the rage of ſo reckleſſe a tyrant. Nowe the prayers Valericus
powred forth came to effect, nowe Venus meant to be reuenged for the cruelty
ſhe vſed to hir valiant captaine Valericus, who ſo valiantly had fought vnder
the flagge of affection, & yet could by no meanes pre­uaile. For Caſtania
hearing the ſugred eloquence, which ſo ſwéetly flowed from the ſappie wit of
Gwydonius, fra­ming in her fancie the form of his face, and printing in her
heart the perfection of his perſon, was ſo intangled in the ſnares of loue, as
ſhe could by no reaſon redreſſe her miſe­rie, but wil ſhe, nil ſhe, fell into
theſe bitter complaints.

ALas witleſſe wretch (quoth ſhée) that I am, what flry flames of fancie doo
frie within mée? VVhat deſire, what luſt, what hope, what truſt, what care,
what deſpair, what feare, what furie? That to be pained with theſe per­plexed
paſſions, to me that neuer felt the force of them be­fore, is no leſſe dolour
than death it ſelf, be it neuer ſo dire­full. O gods, where are now become
thoſe lofty lookes I vſed to Valericus? Where is the diſdainfull dealings, the
coy countenances, the curious congies, the cauſeleſſe cru­elty, yea the hard
heart, which ſo rigorouſly reiected the loue of him, which ſo intirely liked
mée? Coulde I fond foole that I am, valiantly withſtand the aſſaultes of a
worthie Gentleman, and ſhall I cowardly yeeld to an vn­knowne ſtranger? Did I
loath him, whoſe parentage was
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=31) little
inferiour to mine, and ſhall I loue another of baſe and vile birth? Did I
diſdaine to looke at the lure, and ſhall I now ſtoope without ſtall, come
without call, yea and to ſuch an emptie fiſt▪ O lawleſſe Loue, O witleſſe
will, O fancie, fraught full of frenzie and furie! Alas if I ſhould be ſo
careleſſe as to conſent to this frantike toie, what will they ſay, that
praiſed me for my vertue? Will they not as faſt diſpraiſe me for my vanitie?
Will not my father fret, my kinsfolkes crie out, my friends be ſorrie, my foes
and eſpecially Valericus, laugh me to ſcorne, and triumph of this my miſhappe?
Yea, will not all the world wonder to ſée me alate giuen to chaſtitie, and now
ſhake hands with virginitie, to yéeld my deareſt iewell and chiefeſt treaſure
into the hands of a ſtragling ſtranger, who came to my fa­thers court without
countenance or coine, wealth or wor­ſhip, credit or calling: yea, who by his
owne report is but a perſon of ſmall parentage, Seek then Caſtania to aſſwage
this flame, and to quench this fire, which as it commeth wthout cauſe ſo it
will conſume without reaſon. For the greateſt flowe hath the ſooneſt ebbe, the
ſoreſt tempeſt hath the moſt ſodaine calme, the hotteſt loue hath his coldeſt
end, and of the deepeſt deſire oft times inſueth the deadlieſt hate: ſo that
ſhee which ſettles her affection with ſuch ſpeede as ſhe makes her choiſe
without diſcretion, may caſt her corne ſhe knowes not where, and reapes ſhe
wot not what, and for her haſtie chooſing, may perhaps get a heauy bargaine.
Alas, I know this counſaile is good, but what then? Can I deny that which the
deſtinies haue decréed? Is it in my power to peruert that which ye Planets
haue pla­ced? Can I reſiſt that which is ſtirred vp by the Starres? No: what
neede I then make this exclamation? ſich I am not the firſt nor ſhall not bee
the laſt, whome the frantike frenzy of flickering fancy, hath with more wrōg
& greater vantage pitiouſly oppreſſed. What though Gvvydonius be not wealthy,
yet hée is wiſe: though hee be not of great parentage, yet he is of comely
perſonage. It is not his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=31) coine that
hath conquered me, but his countenance: not his vading riches, but his
renowmed vertues, and I far more eſtéeme a man than mony. I, but the Duke my
father is not ſo baſe minded, as to beſtow me vpon ſo meane a gen­tleman, he
neuer will conſent that poore Gwydonius ſhold inioy that which he hopeth ſome
péereleſſe Prince ſhall poſſeſſe. What then? Shall I preferre my Fathers will
before mine owne will, his liking before mine owne loue? no, no, I will chooſe
for my ſelfe whatſoeuer my choiſe be. Why but perchance Gwydonius wil no more
eſtéeme thee than thou didſt Valericus, and repay thee with as ſmall fancie,
as thou him with affection. Tuſh, doubt it not Ca­ſtania, thou art the dame
which hee ſo deciphered in his dreame, thou art that Venus which hee ſaw in
his viſion, thou art that Goddeſſe, whoſe beautie hath ſo bewitched him thou
art that iewell to poſſeſſe, the which there is no hap ſo hard which he would
not hazard, no danger ſo deſpe­rate which he would not aduenture, no burthen
ſo heauy which he would not beare, nor no perill ſo huge which hée would not
paſſe. And ſhall not then Gwydonius be my ſer­uant, ſith I am his Saint? ſhal
not I like him which loueth me? ſith he is my ioy, ſhal I not inioy him? yes,
Gwydonius is mine, and ſhall be mine in deſpite of the fales & fortune.

Caſtania hauing thus pitifully powred out her plaints, would gladly haue giuen
Gwydonius intelligence (with modeſtie if ſhe might) of her good will towards
him, and God knowes how fain Gwydonius wold haue diſcouered his feruēt
affectiō, if too much feare had not aſtoniſhed him, and too great baſhfulnes
ſtaied her. She therfore honering betwéen feare & hope, perſeuered ſo long in
her penſiue paſ­ſions  [...]nd carefull cogitatiōs, that by couert concealing
of her inward ſorrow, the flame ſo furiouſly fried wthin her, yt ſhe was
conſtrained to kéep her bed. Whereupon, Melytta coniecturing the cauſe of her
care by the colour of her coū ­tenance, thought to fift out the occaſion of
her ſorrow, that by this meanes ſhe might apply a medicine to her malady,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=32) and finding
fit opportunitie, ſhée brake with her in this wiſe.

Madams Caſtania (quoth ſhée) ſince I haue by the Duke your father béen
aſſigned to you as a companion, I haue in ſuch louing wiſe both comforted me
counſailed you, as I hope you haue iuſt cauſe to ſay, that I haue moſt
carefullie tendered your eſtate: for perceiuing how willing you were to follow
my direction▪ I counted your wealth my weale, your pleaſure my profite, your
happineſſe my ioy, and your proſperitie my felicitie. Which freindly care if
it were not to be conſidered if I ſhould ſhew you what great ſorrow I ſuſtaine
by your heauineſſe, you would iudge my wordes to procéed either of folly or
flattery: but if your ſore be ſuch as it may be ſalued, if your care may bee
cured, if your grief may be redreſſed, or your maladie mitigated by my meanes,
commaund me good Caſtania, in what I may to pleaſure thee, & thou ſhalt find
me ſo charily to perform my charge, as my willing minde ſhall euidently bewray
my well meaning. I ſee Caſtania, of late, ſuch a ſtrange me­tamorphoſis in thy
minde, as for pleaſant conceites thou doeſt vſe penſiue cogitations, thy
chéerfull countenance is chāged into lowring looks, thy merry deuiſes into
mourn­full dumps, and yet I cannot cōiecture the cauſe of this ſo­dain
alteration. If want of riches ſhould worke thy woe, why, thou ſwimſt in
wealth: if loſſe of friends, thou baſt in­finite of noble parentage, which
loues thée moſt intirely. If thou meaneſt no longer to leade a ſingle life, no
doubt thy father will prouide thee of ſuch a princely match, as ſhall content
thee for his perſon, & countenance thee with his parentage. But if in all
theſe ſuppoſes I haue miſſ ſhe marke, and haue not toucht the caſe of thy
calamitie, vn­fold vnto me Caſtania, what the paine is that thus doth pinch
thee, and aſſure thy ſelfe I will be ſo ſecret in thy af­faires, as euer
Lampana was to her Ladie Cleophila.

Caſtania hearing this friendly diſcourſe of Melytta, thought for all this
faire gloſe, the text might hee too in­tricate,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=32) and that
theſe painted ſpéeches would proue but rot­ten pillers: fearing therfore the
fetch, and doubting yt worſt, if ſhe bewray her mind, ſhe framed her this
anſwere.

MAdame (quoth ſhe) the incomparable curteſie and vn­fained friendſhip which
ſince your firſt comming I haue found in you by experience, will neither
ſuffer mée to ſuſpect your Ladiſhip of flattery, nor my ſelfe willingly to be
accuſed of ingratitude: for your diligence hath béene ſo great, and my
deſertes ſo ſmall, that if I might but liue to requite ſome part of your good
will, it were the ſecond feli­citie I looke for in this life. But touching the
penſiue paſſi­ons which thus diuerſly perplexed me, I anſwer that as he which
is wounded of the Bores tusk, if his ſores take aire is very hardly healed, as
hee which is ſtriken with a Scor­pion, if his wound take wind can neuer be
cured: ſo Madam many inward maladies carry this nature, that if they bee once
diſcouered, they are far ye more hardly recouered, that it is better to
conceale them with griefe, than reueale them in hope of releefe.

Not ſo Caſtania, your principle is not true: for if your paſſions procéeded of
loue, which of all other inward ſores requireth greateſt ſecrecie, yet
vndoubtedly the more it is diſcouered, the ſooner it is cured. For as the
ſtone of Arme­nia being couered with Sand, burneth moſt extreamely, and no
ſooner taketh aire, but it cooleth: ſo the firie flames of loue raked vp in
ſilence, fry moſt ſuriouſly; but being by diſcourſe diſcloſed, they ſoone
conuert from flame to fume and ſmoke. Wherfore good Caſtania impart vnto mée
the matter which doth import thée ſo néere, and I ſweare vnto thee by the
ſacred rites of Ceres, which is ſo honoured in Alexandria, that if thou doeſt
loue where thy friends doe not like, and thy wiſh be contrary to their will,
yet I will ſake all meanes poſſible to redreſſe thy ſorrowe.

Alas good Madame, rather than you ſhould thinke mee ſo incredulous or
ſuſpicious, as not to beléeue your oath, or
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=33) doubt of your
ſecret dealing, I will without delay make you priuy to the cauſe of my paine,
what perill ſoeuer I incurre by reuealing it. So it is Melytta, that the
perfec­tion of Gwydonius, his exquiſite qualities, & excellent ver­tues, haue
ſo fiercely aſſaulted the fort of my fancy, as I am perforce conſtrained to
reſigne my liberty captiue vnto his curteſie, & to make his perſon the priſon
of my heart. This luckleſſe & vnlikely loue, Madam, is the cauſe of my care, &
the ſum of my ſorrow, this frantike affection hath driuen my drooping heart to
ſhew forth theſe drouſie leekes, this is it which hath made me an enemy to
myſelfe, a foe to all good company, and to delight in nothing but ſorrow and
ſolitari­neſſe: yea, this is the ſore, which if in time it be not ſalued, will
preuent by death all other miſeries.

And is this (quoth Melytta) the pain that ſo greatly per­plexeth you? Is this
the care that ſo cumbers your conſci­ence? Is this the danger which driues you
into ſuch déepe diſtreſſe? Do you think ſo ſuperſtitiouſly of Gwydonius, or ſo
abiectly of your ſelfe, that you déem this matter impoſſi­ble to be brought to
paſſe? no, no, doubt not Caſtania, I my ſelfe dare abſolutely promiſe thee,
that thy loue ſhall ſort to ſuch happie ſucceſſe, as thou thy ſelfe doeſt
ſéeke for.

And with that Melytta ſtayed by a ſodaine ſight ſhe had of that Saint that
Caſtania ſo hartily ſerued: for Gwydo­nius was entring in at the chamber deere
with a diſh of de­licates, which Orlanio hearing his Daughter was ſo ſick, had
ſent her. Melytta ſéeing that Cupid began to ſauor the cauſe of his Clients,
in giuing them ſuch fit opportunitie to diſcouer their cares, went her waie,
leauing Gwydonius the firſt man to play his part in this tragicall comedy, who
ſéeing his goddeſſe thus ſurpriſed with ſickneſſe, was ſo gallen with griefe,
ſo pinched with helliſh paſſions, and ſo tortured with extreame torments, that
his colour began to change, & he fetcht a déep ſigh or two, which Caſtania
hea­ring, ſhe perceiued without touching his pulſes, the cauſe of theſe his
ſodain paſſions. In fine, ſuch melancholike mo­tions
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=33) ſo amazed his
minde, that he was almoſt mute in his meſſage, yet at length incouraging
himſelfe, hée preſented it vnto her in this wiſe.

Madame (quoth he) the Duke your Father hearing of your ſodaine ſickneſſe, in
token of his fatherly affection, a­mongſt all his dainties, hath ſent you this
diſh, which hee thinks moſt méet for your diet, wiſhing your Ladiſhip to let
no doubtfull motions diſtreſſe your minde, nor no care­full thoughts cumber
your conſcience: for you ſhall lacks nothing if you reueale to him your want,
which either your will or wiſh can deſire. And truly Madame, to mani­feſt my
willing duety (if the praiers of a poore Gentleman may be heard of the
heauenly Gods) I wiſh that before you taſte of this feede it may turne to
Nectar, whereby not only your ſickneſſe ſhould be ſalued, but your diuine
beautie and vertue according to deſert ſhould be crowned with im­mortalitie.

Caſtania perceiuing with what fernent affection Gwy­donius vttered thoſe
wordes, began to chéere vp her ſelfe, in hope that her good will ſhould not be
repaied with ingra­titude: taking therefore the preſent at his handes, and
li­king it neuer the worſe for his ſake that brought it, ſhe re­turned him
this replie.

Gwydonius (quoth ſhe) as I haue cauſe moſt reuerent­ly to accept of my fathers
louing curteſie, and to repay his naturall affection with moſt dutifull
obedience, ſo I haue cauſe to thanke thee for thy paines, and to thinke well
of thée for thy wiſh, promiſing in recompence of thy good wil, if in any
reſpect I may pleaſure thee, to ſéeke and ſue to my father for preferment.

Madame, I account the performance of my meſſage no paine, but pleaſure, and I
thinke my ſelfe as much honored by this office, & thrice more happy than if I
ſhould in Gani­medes place preſent yt cup to Iupiter. But Madame, ſith yt to
ſtop the ſtreame, is to make the floud flow more fierce­lie, to repreſſe the
fire, is to make it flame more furiouſly,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=34) and to
reſtraine the force of loue, is to kindle a greater flame, leaſt too long
delaie ſhould bréede too great daunger, and by concealing my ſorrow I ſhould
make the ſore incu­rable, I thought good either preſently to heare the
curte­ous ſentence of my life, or the cruell doome of my death. So it is
Madame, that too long gazing vppon the beames of your heauenly beautie, and
too narrowly conſtruing ouer your vertuous conditions, I remaine ſo caught in
ye ſnare of your bountie, and ſo thralled in the thréede of your ver­tue, that
the ſtaie of my life hangeth in your hands, either to driue mee downe to
helliſh miſcrie, or to boiſt mee vp to heauenly felicity. For although I haue
not heretofore by dutifull ſeruice made manifeſt the loyaltie of my loue, yet
ſince I firſt framed in my fancie (as in a mirrour) the ſhape of your
ſurpaſſing beautie, my heart hath béene croſſed with ſuch cruell Camizados for
your ſake, as if with the Target of hope I had not wi [...]hſt ſtood the
furious force of ſuch raging furies, I had by deſpaire béene daſhed againſt
moſt dangerous rockes. Sith then Madame, the ſight of your ſwéete face hath
faſt fettered my fancie in the links of loue, ſo as without your means I can
neither be redreſſed nor releaſed: I humbly deſire you neither to reſiſt the
mo­tion of my well meaning, nor to reiect the deuotion of my good will, but to
accept your poore Gwydonius as a faithfull ſeruant.

Caſtania hearing diligentlie the faithfull diſcourſe of diſtreſſed Gwydonius,
perceiuing by his ſighs the pinching ſorrow of his thoughts, and ſéeing him ſo
faſt fettered in follie, on a ſodaine to giue her the ſlip had that ſhee
deſi­red: and now her louing lookes were turned to lowring glances, her
delightfull curteſie, to diſdainfull coineſſe, and ſhe thought to repaie the
ſwéete meate wherewith before ſhe fed him, with moſt ſowre ſauee: not that ſhe
miſliked of his loue, for it was the onelie thing ſhe deſired, but to make him
the more feruent in affection, vttering theſe or ſuch like words to her ſelfe
ſecretly.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=34) And is not
(Caſtania) the victorie moſt accounted of, where the conqueſt is moſt
doubtfull? Is not the Caſtle which abideth the longeſt batterie, thought the
richeſt boo­tie? Are not thoſe pearles which are ſcarcely founde and hardly
gotten, euer of greateſt value: whatſo is gained by perill, is thought alwaies
precious, hardly come by, wari­ly kept. The maide that by long ſute and much
trauell is obtained, by how much the more ſhe was hard in the win­ning, by ſo
much the more ſhe will be ſwéet in the wearing: ſhe which in her virginitie is
charie of her chaſtitie, in her mariage wil be as warie of her honeſtie:
therfore I wil qualifie the hotloue of Gwydonius with a colde potion, and with
that ſhe made him this waſpiſh anſwere.

Why Gwydonius, ſhall the old Prouerbe be verified in thee, that the Prieſt
forgets himſelfe that euer hee was a clarke, that too much familiaritie
bréedes contempt? I ſée well if Apelles that cunning painter ſuffer the
greaſie Souter to take a view of his curious worke, he will grow ſo malapert,
as to meddle with his picture: if the proude Centaure Ixion be bidden to the
feaſt of the Gods, no leſſe than Iuno her ſelfe will ſuffice him for his
choiſe.

Set a beggar on horſebacke they ſaie, and he will ne­uer alight. Extoll one of
baſe ſtocke to any degrée of dig­nity,  [...]d who ſo proude and haughtie? I
ſpeake this Gwy­donius to thy reproofe: is thy ſtomake alate waxen ſo
quea­ſie, that no dyet will downe but my fathers owne diſh? Wil no meaner mate
ſuffice thee, vnleſſe thou match with a Princeſs? Is there no Ladie wil like
thee, but my loue? Is there no courſer Dame to couet, vnleſſe thou court vnto
me? Did my father promote thée to this thou art, from the ſtate of a beggar,
and wilt thou now preſume to be my bet­ter? Haue my lookes béene ſo louing, my
countenance ſo curteous, my glaunces ſo full of good will, as to promiſe ſo
much as thou doeſt preſume? No: but one onely coun­tenaunce in a ſeruile minde
is too much incouragement. Doeſt thou thinke Gwydonius, that I account ſo
meanly [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=35) of my
perſon, as to match with a man of thy pitch? Shall I ſo far cracke my credit,
as to cumber my ſelfe with one of thy calling? Shall I ſo ſtraine my ſtate, as
to ſtoope to thy lure? No. Where is thy coine to maintaine my coun­tenance?
Where is thy wealth to vpholde my worſhip? Where is thy patrimonie to
counteruaile my perſonage? But put caſe I accepted of thy ſute doeſt thou
thinke euer to gaine my fathers good will? Doeſt thou thinke it is poſ­ſible
to compaſſe his conſent? Doeſt thou hope euer to take him in ſuch a vaine, as
he will bee willing to giue his ver­dite on thy ſide? No Gvvydonius: but if he
were priuie to this thy preſumption, he would repaie thy follie with too much
furie, he would vnplume thee of all his feathers, that like Aeſops Crow thou
mighteſt receiue the reward of thy raſhneſſe. If therefore thou loue thine
owne welfare, kéep thy ſelfe within thy boundes, and ſtriue not farther than
thy ſléeue will ſtretch, leaſt in climing too high, thou catch the ſorer fall.

Caſtania hauing thus ſharply ſhaken vp my yong youth Gwydonius, thought ſhe
had giuen him a ſufficient cooling Card: but he no whit diſmaied with this
deniall, like a luſty champion entered pell-mell with her in this wiſe.

Madame (quoth he) the poore ſhoomaker was not bla­med for viewing Apelles
picture, but becauſe in finding fault he went beyond his ſhooe: the Centaure
Ixion was not reproued for his familiaritie with Iuno as he was a gueſt, but
in that his ſute tended to the ſacking of her ho­neſtie: familiaritie neuer
bréeds contempt in a good mind, neither am I to be accuſed of that crime: for
the moſt ſeruile ſlaue in Alexandria (I call the heauens as witneſſes of my
words) doth not with more louing dutie reuerence & honor your perſon &
parentage, than doth your poore ſeruāt Gwydonius. Well Madame, though my
nature and nurture be ſuch in your ſight, as they bewray my bringing vp and
birth to be ſo baſe, as if I meane to drawe my deſcent, I muſt (as you ſay)
imblaze mine armes in the beggars coat,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=35) yet thus much
I anſwere in reſpecte of my Parents, and without arrogancie thus farre I ſtand
on my pantofles, that the credite I haue in your fathers Court, is not
coe­quall with the calling I haue in mine owne Countrie, if I did not count it
more greater credite and honour, in that I haue ſometime enioyed a curteous
countenance of your ſwéete ſelfe ſince my comming. But it I were the moſt
fa­mous Prince in the world, I ſo eſtéeme your diuine beau­ty and exquiſite
vertue, as I would thinke my ſelfe farre vnworthy to poſſeſſe ſuch heauenly
perfection: which if I could obtain, the diſpleaſure of your Father could no
whit diſcourage mee, his thundering threats coulde no whit a­maze mée: no,
death it ſelfe could neuer daunt my minde, were it neuer ſo deſpightfull. But
who (ſay you) can lay their loue where is no deſert, and where want breedes a
flat deniall?

Ah Caſtania, Nature by her ſecret motion hath indued all creatures with ſome
perfect qualities, to ſupply yt want which bréeds miſliking. The Moule
depriued of ſight hath a wonderful hearing: the Hare being very fearefull is
moſt ſwift: the Fiſh hauing no eares, hath moſt cleare eyes: ſo though want of
dignitie diſgrace me, though want of coin diſcountenance me, though lacke of
wealth impaires my credit, yet Nature hath giuen me ſuch a loyall and louing
heart, as I hope in the perfection of that, ſhee hath ſupply­ed the want of
all the reſt: So that Madam though I want coine, I do not want conſtancy,
though I haue no lands, yet I lack not loyaltie, though I want wealth yet I
want not will to end my life to do you good, or ſpende my time to do you
ſeruice.

GWydonius hauing thus pithily replyed, draue Caſta­nia into a great doubt,
whether ſhee ſhould preſently conſent to his demand, or ſtill driue him off
with delayes, whether ſhee ſhould yeelde the fort at the firſt skirmiſh, or
ſtand to the doubtfull euent of battayle: at length leaſt ſhee
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=36) ſhould
digreſſe from the courſe of woman kind, ſhe thought beſt to deuie that ſhee
moſt of all deſired, and therefore then gaue him this anſwere.

GWydonius (quoth ſhée) in what ſtate you came to my fathers Court I knowe,
what you are by diſcent I knowe not, nor I care not, and if I did it auaileth
not: but this I ſay, that it is hard taking of Fowle, when the net is
deſcried, and il catching of fiſh, when the hook is bare: impoſ­ſible it is
Gwydonius, to infer beléefe, when no credit will be giuen, and to deceiue her
that ſpieth thy fetch: when the ſtring is broken, it is hard to hit the white,
and when a mans credit is called in queſtion, perſwaſions can little preuatle.
It is a religion amongſt louers to ſweare and forſweare, to promiſe mountains,
and to perform moule hils, to be ripe without and rotten within, to carrie a
ruſty blade in a vel­uet ſcabberd, and a ſiluer bell with a leaden clapper.
Ther­fore Gwydonius, I had rather miſtruſt too ſoone, than miſtike too late, I
had rather feare my choice than rue my chance, I had rather ſtop at the brim,
than at the bottom: for the ſignet being ſet, it is too late to break the
bargain, and fancy being once fixt it is too late to reclaime affection. For
the loue of a woman is like the Oyle of Flint, which being once congealed will
neuer be diſſolued: like the Diamond, being once rubbed with the gum of a Pine
trée, will neuer be broken: ſo if I fancy any, ſith I mean not to fléete, it
ſhall be ſuch a one, as I néed not repent mée.

And whereas you ſay, Gwydonius, that in deſpight of Fortune, Nature hath giuen
you a louing heart, I my ſelf ſurely did neuer déem any leſſe, but thought you
of the crue of thoſe louers that loue too much, hauing as manie Ladies as they
haue wits, and that is not a fewe, who count that euery face muſt haue a newe
fancie, and if they ſée a thou­ſand they muſt be all viewed with a ſigh: which
conſidered Gwydonius, I mean not to like nor to loue neither you nor any
other.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=36) ANd ſhall
theu Madame (quoth hée) my merite bée re­payed with no meede? Shall my good
wil be requited with no gaine? ſhall I haue in lieu of my life no liking? will
you ſo ſwaru [...] from iuſtice, as not to giue euery one according to his
deſert? at the leaſt, recompence not deſire with deſpight; and hearty loue,
with loathing hate: for as the Poet ſaith: Quis  [...] ſuccenſet amanti?

Well Gwydonius, as I will not be thy priuie friend, ſo I will not be thine
open foe, and as I cannot be ſo curte­ous as to requite thee for thy pains, ſo
I will not be ſo cru­ell as to deſpight thee for thy preſumption, and where as
thou craueſt gaines for thy good will, I am content to re­maine thy unwilling
debter.

Yet Madame (quoth hée) where ſhe debt is confeſt, there remaineth ſome hope of
recouery: for though the creditor bee neuer ſo vnwilling to pay the debt being
due, hée ſhall by conſtraint of law and his own confeſſion, (maugre his face)
be forced to make reſtitution.

Truth Gwydonius (quoth ſhée) if he commence his ac­tion in a right caſe, and
the plea he puts in, proue not im­perfect. But yet take this by the waie, it
is hard for that plaintife to recouer his coſtes, where the defendant béeing
Iudge, ſetsdowne the ſentence.

Gwydonius féeling himſelfe pincht to the quicke with this prettie quip, made
no further reply: but leaſt his long tarrying might bréed ſuſpicion, wiſhing
his Miſtris wel­fare, tooke his leaue very ſolemnly and ſorrowfully, of
Caſtania, who ſéeing him gone and her ſelfe alone, began thus to muſe and
meditate vpon the ſharpe anſweres ſhee had giuen her beſt beloned Guydonius.

VVHy Caſtania, what franlike fully hath made thée thus far to forget thy
ſelfe? Is ſhe  [...]ird inti [...]d to the ſtrap by the ſhewe of the nets, is
the For allured to the train by the view of the trap? wil the Mauſe march
vnder [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=37) that
Enſigne, where the Catte proclaimeth her ſelfe Cap­taine? will the ſiltie Doue
laie her Egges in the Fawl­cons neaſt? or is it the meanes to haue him to thy
friend, whom with bitter blowes thou doeſt rebuke? is there no other call for
curteſie, but crueltie? doeſt thou finde no fit­ter meanes to obtaine a
ceaſonable requeſt, but by a rigo­rous repulſe? or is it the nature of women
to defie that outwardly which they moſt deſire inwardly, to loath that in
their mouth, which they loue in their minde, to reiect that with their hand,
which they moſt willingly would re­ceiue in their heart? Doeſt thou thinke
Caſtania, to drawe Gwydonius to thy deſire, by deteſting him? Doeſt thou think
to allure him to thy loue, by loathing him? Doeſt thou ſuppoſe to win him to
thy will by theſe waſpiſh an­ſweres? No: and what, doeſt thou know what perill
will en­ſue of this repulſe, what daunger will follow of this deni­all? Is it
like he will put it vp patiently? No ſure, either looke to haue his extreame
loue turned to extreame hate, or that he will perſiſt no longer in the purſute
of his purpoſe. Oh would to God Gwydonius, thou wert againe to begin thy
demaund, and I to frame mine anſwere: then would I ſalue thy ſores with ſwéete
ſtrops, not with cutting co­raſiues: then would I mitigate thy maladie with
eaſie me­dicines, not with pinching plaiſters: then would I com­fort thee with
conſent, not daunt thee with denials. But alas, Had I wiſt now comes too late:
and therefore Caſta­nia, if thou haſt made a faulte, ſeeke to make amendes,
and recompence this his iniurie with moſt friendly cur­teſie.

And with that came Melytta: who comforting Caſta­nia, paſſed away the reſt of
the day in parle.

But Gwydonius, who all this while had a flea in his eare, was dr [...]en into
aquandarie with the tauting qu [...]p [...] of his miſtreſſe, fearing that
although his accounts were great, his gaines ſhould be little; and though he
made a ve­rie long harueſt, yet he ſhould reape but a very ſmal crop,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=37) thinking that
vnder ſuch ſowre ſpéeches, a ſugred minde could not bée contayned: yet at laſt
entering into dee­per conſideration with himſelfe, hee fell into theſe
tearmes.

But by the ſweete (quoth hée) how ſhould we knowe the ſower? but by the
blacke, how ſhould wée knowe the white? hée neuer greatly accounteth of
proſperitie which hath not béen before pinched with aduerſitie: which
per­chaunce Caſtania meanes to make me trie by experience, thinking to féede
mee firſt with bitter broaths, that hereaf­ter dainty fare may more delight
mee: to daunt mée with the raging ſtormes of deniall, that the calme of her
conſent may more content mée: to make mée taſte the bitter pilles of annoy,
that hereafter I may inioy the greater ioy: for the chilling colde of winter
makes the ſprowting ſpring time ſéeme farre more pleaſant, the parching heate
of ſom­mer, makes the coole ſhade more delightfull, and the frow­ning looks of
Caſtania, will make her ſmiling countenāce ſéeme more chéerful. Then ceaſe
not Gwydonius, to pur­ſue thy ſuite with endleſſe paine, eyther to enioy her
curte­ſie or taſte of her cruelty, to thy great happineſs or extream
heauineſſe.

GWydonius thus like a valiant Champion, neuer ama­zed with any chip of
miſfortune, neuer feared to giue the aſſault for all the firſt repulſe, but
onely ſought oppor­tunity how he might in cloſe combate once again incoun­ter
with Caſtania; vowing eyther to returne with ſome ſigne of victory, or elſe to
put limme and life in hazard. But fortune meaning pleaſantly to ſport with
this yoong nouice, would neuer miniſter ſuch fit occaſion, yt he might haue
ſolitary acceſſe to his goddeſſe. For, Caſtania of pretē ­ded purpoſe ſo
warily auoyded his company, and with ſuch diſdainfull lookes ſo reiected his
dutie, as Gwydonius was conſtrained to ſéek his courſe by a new compaſſe,
deliue­ring vnto one of her maids a friendly Letter, to this effect.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=38)

# Diſdained Gwydonius to his deſired Caſtania, health.

WHoſo taſteth (Madam Caſtania) of the riuer Licos in India, féeleth ſuch a
continual flame to frie & fret his entrailes, as it is more torture than to
bée tormented with the helliſh furies, and this griefe can neuer bee
redreſſed, but with drinking the bloud of his déereſt friend. And as he that
is venomed with the Phalanga, féeleth ſuch painful paſſions, as he runneth
mad, and is onely cured by means of moſt harmonious Muſicke: So Madame, the
furious heate of fancy, doth ſo ſcorch and ſcalde my hapleſſe heart, and doth
perplexe me wiſh ſuch helliſh pangues, as death it ſelfe were thrice more
deſired, than thus to driue my dayes in dolour. And I haue ſo gréedily
ſwallowed vp the ſugred poyſon of yourdinine beautie, as through the
extre­mity of pinching griefe, which ſo direfully diſtreſſeth mee, I reſt as
one diſtract from his ſenſes, not poſſible to obtain a cure for this my
calamitie, vnleſſe with the deawe of mutuall affection you mitigate my
maladie, or with the pleaſant harmonie of your muſicall conſent, you appeaſe
my miſery.

Sith then Madam, my care procéedeth from your beau­tie, let my ſore be cared
by your bounty: ſith the perfecti­on of your perſon hath wrought my bane, let
the effect of your courteſte procure my bliſſe, and reiect him not ſo
ri­gorouſly which reſpecteth you ſo reuerently: loath him not ſo hatefully,
which loueth you ſo heartily: nor repay not his dutifull amity, with ſuch
deadly enmitie. The pike fa­tally proſecuteth the fiſh Ma [...]gra, as his
mortall foe, and yet ſéeing him ſnared on the fiſhers hooke, he ſpéedily
ſhred­deth the line in ſunder, to deliuer him: the Snake moſt deadly deteſteth
the field mouſe, and yet ſhe heapeth vp in her hole ſtore of prouiſion to
preuent her enemies penu­rie: and ſhall then Madame, your crueltie ſo farre
excéede [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=38) theſe
ſenſeleſſe creatures? ſhall your rigour be ſo voyd of reaſon, as to requite
your friend with paine, when they repaie their foes with pleaſure? to driue
your friends into diſtreſſe, when they redéeme their foes from danger? no
Madame, I hope you will not counteruaile my conſtancy with ſuch diſcurteſie,
nor ſo reckleſly regarde your poore Gwydonius, whoſe loue and loyalty is ſo
great, that as the ſtones which are found in the Riuer Lynceſtis, the lowder
the winde bloweth, and the déeper they are drencht in the water, the more they
burne and blaze: ſo the more you ſéek to coole my fancy with diſdaine, the
more my affection is kindled with deſire: the more you loath, the more I like:
the greater deſpayre you driue me into by denials, yt grea­ter hope,
(incouraged by conſtancie) I haue to obtain my requeſt: in which feruent
affection, I meane to remayne without chaunge, crauing in liewe of this my
loyaltie, that you will ſpéedily fend the meſſenger of preſent conſo­lation,
to him which pineth away, and is yours onely and euer.

Still in hope, Gwydonius.

CAſtania hauing receiued this Letter from her aſſured friend Gwydonius,
although ſhe perceiued by the cō ­tents that his loue was not counterfait,
but conſtant: not light, but loyall: not floting, but faithfull: and that ſhee
ſhould not finde him immutable in proſperitie, which was ſo permanent in
aduerſity; Yet (whether it were for coy­neſſe in conſent, or charineſſe of
choyſe I know not) ſhee once againe thought to ſound him more déeper, to kéep
out ſtill the flagge of deſtance, and to ſpend one Vollee of ſhot in the face
of her enemy, to ſee if a hot skirmiſh woulde make him flie the fielde. And if
like a valiant ſouldier hee did manfully march on, and not refuſe the brunt of
the bat­taile, ſhe would then reſigne the fort of her freedome into his hands,
and yéeld vp the bulwarke of her breaſt, which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=39) ſo long he
had battered, that triumphantly he might ſet vp Trophees in ſigne of moſt
victorious conqueſt. To put therefore the matter in queſtion, ſhee returned
him this anſwere.

# Caſtania to Gwydonius, which hopeth in vaine, health.

MAſter Gwydonius, you Letter being more haſtily re­ceiued then heartily read,
I perceiue by the contents that you are ſtill perplexed with your pen-ſicke
paſſions, and that your diſeaſe is incurable: for if your paines may bes
appeaſed, or your maladie mitigated by no medicine but by my means, you are
like either to pay your due vnto death, or ſtil to linger in diſtreſſe. My
cunning is too ſmall to enterpriſe the compoſition of any ſecret ſimples, and
my calling too great to become a Phyſition to ſuch a paltering patient, ſo
that I neyther can nor wil cure another mans harm by mine owne miſhap. To loue
him whom I cannot like, were but to wreſtle againſt mine owne will, to flatter
him whom I mean not to fancie, is but a méere tricke of extream folly. What
the cauſe is Gwydonius, that thy good will reaps ſo ſmall gain, and that ſo
rigorouſly I re­paie thy loue with hate, I know not, vnleſſe the
conſtella­tion of the Starres by ſome ſecret influence haue ſo ap­pointed it
in the calculation of our natiuety. But this I am ſure, that as no Serpent can
abide the ſmell of a Harts horne, as the Panther eſcheweth the companie of the
Ownce, as the Vulture is mortall enemy to the Eele, and as it is impoſſible to
hatch vp a Swan in an Eagles neaſt, to temper Oyle and Pitch together in one
veſſell, to mixe the bloud of a Lyon and a Woolfe in one bowle, and to
pro­cure amitie betwéene the Fawlcon called Tilo, and the Foxe, ſo hard is it
to procure mee by ruthfull requeſt to be thy friend, which am by inſtinct of
nature thy profeſſed foe; and as hard to winne me to thy Wife, who ſo little
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=39) likes of thy
loue, that the verie remembrance of thy per­ſon makes me fall into moſt
hatefull paſſions. Ceaſe then Gwydonius, to condemne me of crueltie, and leaue
off at laſt to appeale to my curteſie: for thou ſhalt alwaies be ſure to féele
the one, and neuer to finde the other. Yet leaſt thou ſhouldeſt accuſe me of
ingratitude, though I cānot inwardly mitigate thy miſerie, yet I will
outwardly teach thee to apply ſuch plaiſters (as if the experience of them
proue true) ſhall greatly appeaſe thy paine. Plinie, Gwydonius, reporteth,
that he which drinketh of the riuer Aucrna, coo­leth and mortifieth his
affections; but if the water be toucht by any meanes before it be drunke, the
vertue thereof is of no value. He that weareth the feathers of the bird
Eza­lon about him, ſhall euer be fortunate in his loue, but if they be not
puld when the Sunne is eclipſed, they are of no forer: and to conclude, there
is nothing that ſooner dri­ueth away amorous conceites, then to rub the
temples of thy head with the ſweat of an aſſe: which if you can per­forme if,
as no doubt you may put it in practice, I hope you ſhalbe redreſſed from your
intolerable griefe, and I relea­ſed from ſuch an importunate ſute.

Forced by the deſtinies ſtill to denie thee, Caſtania.

GWydonius hauing viewed & reuſewed ouer this Let­ter, ſéeing the rigorous
reſolutiō of his miſtreſſe could­by no meanes be remoued, and that a moſt
ſeuere ſentence was pronounced againſt him by a moſt iniurious Iudge, was
driuen into a doubt whether he ſhould ſtill wt plaints ſue for pittie, or elſe
blaſphemouſly exclaime againſt her brutiſh crueltie, whether he ſhold bewray
his parents and parentage to the Duke and her, or ſtill ſtand to the
doubt­full chance of fortune, to purſue his purpoſe ſtill wt plaints: her
helliſh crueltie perſwaded him to blaſpheme againſt her: the ſinceritie of his
loue, would not let him to bewray
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=40) his birth:
diuers dangers might inſue: to ſtand to the chance of Fortune, was ſtill to
hazard without hope: combred thus with diuers cogitations, at laſt he
determined to breake vp the batterie, and to lay too an inuincible hold, and
to returne with as much ſpéed, as might be to his father Clerophontes Court,
there by abſence to mitigate the malady which ſo grieuouſly moleſted him: yet
he thought before his departure to giue her a friendly farewell, that might
both confirme his conſtancy, and condemne her cruelty, which he framed to this
effect.

# Guydonius to Caſtania, proſperous ſucceſſe in all her affaires.

I Meane not, moſt mercileſſe miſtreſſe, any longer to ſuefor mercie, nor with
pittifull plaints to trouble your pa­tience, ſith to ſtirre that which the
Starres hath ſtayed, is to ſtriue againſt the ſtreame, and to force that which
the Fates haue framed, is to couet to bee counted a foole: but as one whom
Fortune meanes to make a myrrour of miſery, and ouer whom Venus herſelfe
meanes to vaunt as of a moſt hapleſſe vaſſall, I ſorrowfully ſend you this
fainting farewell, as a faithfull token of my feruent affection: for ſéeing
neither my perſon cā pleaſe, nor my liuing like you, nor my baſe calling
content you, nor I myſelfe reape anie guerdon for my good will; to auoide the
remembraunce of theſe paſſions, which renue my paines, and to aſſwage the
rigour of my raging loue, I purpoſe as ſpéedily as winde and weather will
permit mee, to abandon the place of your abode, not incenſed by furie, as one
in deſpight, but infor­ced by the rage of fancis, to depriue myſelfe of all
delight, either to conſume in ſolitary cares without compaſſion, or by abſence
to mitigate ſome part of my martyrdome: for to hope ſtill, I ſée is but to
heape woe vpon wretchedneſſe, and care vpō calamity. Yet Madame, thus much I
ſay, that Dido Quéene of Carthage loued Aeneas, a baniſhed exile,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=40) and a
ſtragling ſtranger. Euphinia daughter to the king of Corinth, and heire
apparant to his crowne, who for her feature was famous throughout all the Eaſt
Countries, vouchſafed to apply a ſouereigne plaiſter to the furious paſſion of
Achariſto, her fathers bondman. The dutcheſſe of Malphey choſe for her husband
her ſeruant Vlrico: and Venus, who for her ſurpaſſing beautie was canonized
for a goddeſſe, diſdained not the loue of limping Vulcan. They madame,
reſpected the man, & not their money, their wils, and not their wealth: their
loue, not their liuings: their cō ­ſtancy, not their coine: their perſon, not
their parentage: & the inward vertue, not the outward value. But you are ſo
addicted to toy• opinion of Danae, that vnleſſe Iupiter himſelfe be ſhrouded
in your lap, vnder the ſhape of a ſhower of gold, he ſhall haue the repulſe,
for all his deitie: ſéeing then it is not in my poore power, eyther to
performe or practiſe it, I ceaſe off to ſéeke for impoſſibilities: promiſing
in what coaſt or Country ſo euer I ſhall remain, to haue my heart wholly
dedicated to your diuine beautie and vertue, both by dutie and ſeruice, and ſo
commending my health to the gods, I bid you farewell.

Yours, while he is Gwydonius, ſans eſpoier.

CAſtania hauing receiued this letter from Gwydonius, perceiuing the conſtant
mind of the yong Gentleman, that theſe his proteſtations were not vanitie, but
veritie: not trifling, but troth: no ſignes of fléeting fancie, but of a firme
affection: ſtanding a while in a dumpe, at laſt ſhe fel into this diſcourſe.

I now (quoth ſhée) both ſée and trie by experience, that there is no fiſh to
fickle, but will come to the bayt: no Doe ſo wild, but will ſtand at the gaze:
no Hawke ſo haggard, but will ſtoope at the lure: no Nieſſe ſo ramage, but wil
be reclaimed to the Lunes: no fruite ſo fine, but the Cater­piller
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=41) will conſume
it: no Adamant ſo hard but will yéeld to the file, no metall ſo ſtrong, but
will bende to the ſtampe: no mayd ſo frée, but loue will bring her to bondage
and thraldome. And doo I call it bondage, fond foole, to be bound vnto beauty?
is it ſlauery to bee ſubiect vnto vertue? is it thraldome to liue in league
with him who will like mee in my youth, and loue me in my age, in whom I ſhall
find no­thing but pleaſure and contentation? who will be the hauen of my
happineſſe, wherein I may reſt: & the port of my pro­ſperity wherein I may bee
ſafe harboured from the tem­peſts of froward fortune, and ſhroud meee from the
bitter blaſts of bale? Shal I repent me, ſith my bargain is good? or complaine
of the loſſe of libertie, ſith I haue a chaunge for farre more worthy chaffer?
Shall I grudge when the gods are agréed? or deferre it, when the deſtinies
driue it? or frowne at it, ſith fortune frames it? No: Gwydonius, is my Saint,
and him will I ſerue; hee is my ioy, and him will I inioy. He hath laid the
ſiege, and hee ſhall ſacke the Citie: he hath abode the batterie, and he ſhall
haue the bul­warke of my breaſt: he hath fought the combat, and he ſhall be
victor in the conqueſt. For I cannot be ſo vnnaturall, to reward his loue with
loathing: ſo without reaſon, to de­fraud him of his right: ſo diueliſh, for
his déepe deſire to giue him a dolefull diſh of deſpaire. No, no, I haue
ſettled with my ſelfe, that if euer I marry, Gwydonius ſhalbe the man I will
match with. And therefore as I haue driuen him off with delayes, and fed him
with folly, ſo nowe I wil ſend him a ſettled anſwere of my good will and
fauour: as I haue giuen him cutting corraſiues, ſo I will ſend him con­fects
of comfort. As I haue béene fearefull to ſhewe my li­king for the better
tryall: ſo now I will be bolde to ſhewe my loue in token of a better truſt.
And with that ſhe wrote him a Letter to this effect.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=41)

# Caſtania to Gwydonius, wiſhing him ſuch hap­pie ſucceſſe, as either fortune
or the fates can allow him.

PLato, Gvvidonius, being demanded why hée would ne­uer condeſcend to requeſts
of his moſt deareſt friends, without great entreatie and long ſuite, anſwered,
ye things lightly granted (though neuer ſo coſtly) are ſmally accoun­ted of:
which ſaying Gvvidonius, I take as a ſufficient ex­cuſe for my folly: for my
ſtraightneſſe in wordes was no ſtraungeneſſe in minde, my bitter ſpéeches were
written with my hand, not wrought with my heart, my deniall was onely for thy
better tryall, and thoſe rigorous repul­ſes were either to rip vp thy fained
fancie, or ſeruent affec­tion: for if thou hadſt retired at the firſt foyle, I
woulde haue thought thy fancie but a flaſh, ready to be quenched with the
leaſt miſling deaw of miſfortune. But ſince thou haſt kept thy courſe ſo
rightly by thy compaſſe, amidſt moſt daungerous rockes, and haſt ſtoode to thy
tackling againſt all the bluſtering blaſtes of Fortune; Aſſure thy ſelfe, in
lieu of this thy loue, thou haſt not héeretofore found mée ſo diſdainfull, as
hèereafter thou ſhalt finde me dutifull, neither did I euer reiect thée ſo
curriſhly, as I will accept thée curteouſly, béeing ready to reſtore the
iniury I haue offered thée, with any curteſie that thou mayeſt either
ho­neſtly require, or I iuſtly affoord. But alaſſe Gwydonius, what curteſie
ſhall I euer be able to ſhew thée, that may counteruaile thy kindneſſe? How
entirely ſhall I loue thée to requite thy loyaltie? What duetie can bee a due
recom­pence to this thy good will? yea, if by any meanes I can quit this thy
loue, I neuer doubt to bee déemed ingrate­full while I liue. Thy worthy
conſtancie (Gvvidonius) hath won the caſtle which many haue beſieged, and thou
haſt obteined that which diuerſe haue ſought to gaine: yet it is not the ſhape
of thy beautie, but the hope of thy loy­altie,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=42) which
entiſeth me: not thy faire face, but thy faithfull heart: not thy comly
countenance, but thy modeſt curteſie: not thy wordes, but thy vertues: not thy
wealth, but thy wit: for ſhe that builds her fancy vpon ſuch fading ſubiects,
tieth her loue to the incōſtant whéele of Fortune. And what though the duke
my father bee incenſed againſt me, for ma­king (in his mind) ſo careleſſe a
choiſe? What care I for his friendſhip, ſo I haue thy fauour? let him fret,
let my friends frowne, let liuings be loſt, hap what hap will, no miſling
ſhowers of miſchāce, no bayſterous blaſts of aduerſitie, no terrible tempeſt
of diſaſter fortune, ſhall make my con­ſtant minde in any reſpect to mooue: no
torments, no tra­uaile, no care, no calamitie, no penurie, no pouertie, no,
onely the loſſe of life, ſhal diminiſh my loue: in lieu wherof remaine thou
but conſtant, and in pledge of my proteſted good wil, haue héere my heart and
hand, to be thine in duſt and aſhes.

Thine, though the Gods ſay no, Caſtania.

THis Letter béeing moſt luckily deliuered into the hands of Gwydonius, I leaue
you to iudge Gentle­men into what a quandarie this yong youth was brought, to
ſée ſuch a ſodaine change, and ſo happie a chaunce, as to haue his helliſh
bale requited with heauenly bliſſe, his de­ſpightfull annoy, with delightfull
ioy: his heauineſſe with happineſſe, and doubtfull deſpaire turned to aſſured
hope: to ſée Fortune which of late deffed him as a foe, nowe to imbrace him as
a friend, and to will that hee did wiſh: to ſée his miſtreſſe crueltie turned
to curteſie, her diſdaine to deſire, her bitter pilles to ſugered potions, her
ſtormie re­pulſes to calme conſent, and her contemptuous proteſtati­ons, to
moſt conſtant promiſes. For if the carefull captiue, who by the doome of the
Iudge expecteth each houre to die, reioyceth when he heareth his pardon
pronoūced, no doubt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=42) Gwydonius ioy
could be no leſſe, ſith denial was his death, and conſent the conſerue to
heale his woundes: the grea­ter care, the greater ioy: the more paine, the
greater plea­ſure: the more helliſh miſerie, the more heauenly felicitie. Yea,
Gwydonius was driuen into ſuch an extaſie for ioy, that he was in doubt,
whether this Letter was preferred to him indéede, or preſented to him in a
viſion: whether he were rapt into a traunce, or rauiſhed with ſome drowſie
ſlumber: but at laſt perceiuing it to be no fained fantaſie, ſuch a déep
deſire inforced his affection, as he thought eue­rie moment a moneth, euerie
houre a yeare, euerie day a thouſand, vntill he might fréely enioy the
preſence & ſight of his loue and Ladie Caſtania. Fortune meaning to ad­uance
him to the toppe of her inconſtant whéele, brought it ſo to paſſe, that before
the wéeke was ended, he ſpied Ca­ſtania walking alone in the garden: which
ſodain ſight ſo reuiued his ſenſes, that without any dread or doubt, he mā
­fully marcht on towards her, and was as haſtily and har­tily incountred by
Caſtania: who embracing Gwydoni­us in her armes, welcommed him with this
ſalutati­on:

As the Whale (Gwydonius) maketh alwaies ſigne of great ioy at the ſight of the
fiſh called Talpa Marina, as yt Hinde greatly delighteth to ſée the Leopard,
as the Lyon fawneth at the view of the Vnicorne, & as he which drin­keth of
the Fountaine Hipenis in Scythia, féeleth his mind ſo drowned in delight, that
no griefe thogh neuer ſo great, is able to aſſwage it: ſo Gwydonius I conceiue
ſuch ſur­paſſing pleaſure in thy preſence, and ſuch heauenly felici­tie in the
ſight of thy perfection, that no miſerie though ne­uer ſo monſtrous, is able
to amaze mée, no dolour though neuer ſo direfull, is able to daunt mée, nor no
miſhappe though neuer ſo perillous, is able to make me ſinke in ſor­row, as
long as I enioy thy preſence, which I count a ſo­ueraine preſeruatiue againſt
all carefull calamities. That
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=43) as he which
taſteth of the hearb Hyacinthus is neuer com­bred with care, and as he that
weareth the ſtone Agathes about him, is ſurely defenced againſt all enſuing
ſorrows: ſo enioying the ſight of thy ſéemely ſelfe, and féeding mine eyes
with the forme of thy feature, I thinke my ſelfe ſuf­ficiently ſhrowded
againſt all the tempeſtuous ſhowers of ſiniſter fortune. And to proue theſe my
promiſes to bee no fained vanities but faithfull veritie, I commit my ſelfe,
my ſtaie, and ſtate into thy handes, to diſpoſe of me at thy pleaſure, wiſhing
rather to liue with thee in moſt diſtreſ­ſed penurie, than to linger héere in
moſt fortunate proſpe­peritie.

Gwydonius liſtening attentiuely to this ſugred harmo­nie, was ſo rauiſhed with
the ſight of her ſwéete face, and ſo rapt into a traunce with the
contemplation of her beauty, that as the Lyon taſting of the gumme Arabicke
becom­meth ſenſeleſſe, as the Bull by browſing on the barke of a Iuniper trée
falleth aſléepe, as the Camell ſtandeth aſtoni­ſhed at y• ſight of a Rat: ſo
Gwydonius ſéeing in his armes the Saint whome in heart he did honour, and
imbracing y• Goddeſſe whom with moſt déep deuotion he did adore, was ſo
amazed, that he was not able to vtter one word, as wit­neſſe of his
happineſſe, vntill at laſt gathering his wits to­gether, he began thus to
reply:

CAſtania (quoth he) it is an axiome in Philoſophie, that the colour ioyned
hard to the ſight, hindreth the ſenſe: the flower put into the noſethrill,
ſtoppeth the ſmelling: the Wine veſſell being full, lettes paſſe no Wine,
though neuer ſo well vented: the waterpot being filled to the brim yéeldes
forth no licour, though hauing a thouſand holes: ſo where the minde is
ſurcharged with ouermuch ioy, or too much pleaſure, there the tongue is both
tyed, and the ſenſes ſo reſtrained, that the heart is neither able to
con­ceiue the ioy, nor the tongue able to expreſſe the pleaſure.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=43) Which,
Caſtania, I now ſpeak by proofe, and know by ex­perience: for I am ſo drowned
in delight by enioying that Princely Gemme, which I eſtéeme the rareſt and
richeſt Iewell, not onely in Alexandria, but in all the world, and ſo puffed
vp in pleaſure by thy diuine preſence: Yea, thy faithfull and vnfeined
affection, the promiſe of thy con­ſtancy, and the hope of thy loyaltie, the
report of thy cha­ſtitie, and the renowme of thy modeſtie, the force of thy
beautie, and the fame of thy vertue: But aboue all thy prodigall bounty, in
beſtowing theſe heauenly perfections on thy poore Gwydonius, béeing by perſon
and parentage moſt vnworthy to poſſeſſe them, ſo ſurchargeth my ſillie heart
with exceſſiue ioie; that my tongue not being able in part to expreſſe the
extreame pleaſure of my minde, I am with Philiſtion the comicall Poet,
conſtrayned by ſilence to vnfolde that affection, which in words the filed
phraſe of Demoſthenes were not able to decipher. But this aſſure thy ſelfe
Caſtania, that if Iuno would aduaunce me to hée Monarch of the worlde, if
Pallas would preferre mée to ex­céede hautie Hercules in valour, if Venus
would preſent me with ſome princely peece of heauenly perfection, yet would I
not ſo gladly receiue their proffers, as I do grate­fully accept the promiſe
of thy loue and loyaltie. No: I ac­count the treaſure of Cioeſus but traſhe,
in reſpect of the guerdon of thy good will: I account the fortune of Caeſar
but follie, reſpecting the fruites of thy fauour: I eſtéeme the dignities of
Priamus as dregges, in reſpect of thy di­uine perfection. Yea, Caſtania, I am
ſo ſnared with thy beautie, and ſo intangled in the trappe of thy bountie, as
I ſhall neuer leaue to loue thée, nor euer begin to like anie other.

IT is eaſie Gwydonius (quoth Caſtania) to purchaſe credite, where the partie
is alreadie perſwaded, and to infer beléefe, where euerie word is counted an
Oracle. There­fore omitting theſe frinolous proteſtations, thus much I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=44) ſay touching
the purpoſe. Cecillius Metellus was wont to ſay, that as it was neceſſary that
old men ſhould be graue in counſaile, ſo it was expedient yong men ſhould be
ſecret in loue: and therfore when the contract was made betwéene Fuluius and
his daughter, hée ſealed vp their lips with his ſignet, meaning that to
violate the ſecret conference of lo­ners, was to commit a ſecond ſacriledge. I
ſpeak this Gwydonius, as one careful of thy ſtaie, and my ſtate: for if
Orlanio my father ſhould but once heare of our loue, or ſu­ſpect our liking,
it would bréed thy miſhap and my miſerie: yea, no doubt hee woulde ſpéedily
preuent our pretence, which would be thy care and my calamity. Diſpoſe our
af­faires at thy pleaſure, but diſouer not our purpoſe: if thou haſt wonne the
Caſtle, vaunt not of the conqueſt: if thou haſt made a good market, bragge not
of thy gaines: leaſt by boaſting of thy bootie, thou looſe thy preie, & be
thought a pratler. And Gwydonius, aboue all men beware of Va­lericus, leaſt
vnder the ſhape of a friend, he proue in time thy mortall foe, leaſt his
fained amitie prooue faithleſſe en­mitie: that in truſting too much without
tryall, thou finde not treaſon: and then though thou repent, yet Had I wiſt
commeth too late, and ſo thou wiſh thou hadſt neuer loued, and I neuer liked.

TVſh Caſtania, (quoth Gwydonius) he that is afraide to venture on the Buck,
becauſe he is tapiſht in the bri­ers, ſhall neuer haue hunters happe, and hée
that puttes his doubt in loue for euery chaunce, ſhall neuer haue louers
lucke. Cannot the Catte catch Mice, without ſhee haue a bell hanging at her
eare? Cannot the Hab­bie ſeize on his preie, but hee muſt checke? Cannot the
Spaniell retriue the Partridge, but hee muſt queſt? And cannot wée deale ſo
warily but all the world muſt wonder as it? Yes, it is a ſubtile bird that
bréedes among the aerin of Hawkes, and a ſhifting ſhéepe that lambes in the
Foxes denne, and be ſhall looke narrowly that ſpies me halting.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=44) Let Orlanio
not onely weigh our workes, but our words, and let Valericus both deeme our
déedes and diuine our thoughts, and yet we hope I will dealt ſo ſecretly in
our affaires, as neither the one ſhall haue cauſe to ſuſpect our familiaritie,
nor the other to detect our affection. And ther­fore Caſtania, leaſt (if we be
ſpied) the time and place giue occaſion of miſtruſt, I will leaue you as I
found you, and ſo farewell.

VVEll, theſe two louers placed thus by Fortune in the palace of earthly
proſperitie, floated ſo ſe­curely in the ſtreames of bliſſe, as they thought
no chippes of milchance might change their preſent happineſſe to fu­ture
heauineſſe, as long as their priuy contract was kept ſo ſecret to thēſelues.
But as they which cannot ſée fire in the ſtrawe are ſtone blinde: ſo hee that
cannot ſée the flame of fancie is a foole. It is hard to couer ſmoake, but
more hard to conceale loue: which theſe two louers in tract of time tried
true. Who as cloſely as they kept their cloake, yet it was moſt eaſie to eſpie
the lining: for fancie ſecretly re­ſtrained, is like the ſparke couered with
aſhes, which at length bruſteth into a great flame. For there paſſed be­tweene
Gwydonius ſuch amorous glaunces, ſuch louing lookes, ſuch curteous congies,
ſuch countenances, and ſuch friendly familiaritie, ſuch often meetings, ſuch
open gree­tings, ſuch ſighes, ſuch ſobs, and ſuch ſtrange paſſions, as not
onele Valericus, but all the Court (though they poore ſoules thought to daunce
in a Net and not be ſéene) percei­ued how entirely they loued and liked each
other. Which as it did not diſpleaſe many which loued Gwydonius as their
friend, ſo it greatly deſpighted Valericus which was his foe, to ſée one of
ſmall countenance preferred before one of his calling, that Guydonius ſhould
win the bulwarke which he ſo long had battered: that hee pitching the fielde,
another ſhould obtaine the conqueſt: that hee laying the ſiege, another ſhould
vaunt of the victorie: that while hee
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=45) beate the
buſh, another ſhould catch the birds, and that the méede of his merite, ſhould
be giuen to one of ſmall de­ſert. Being cumbred with theſe cholericke
cogitations, and perplexed with theſe deſpightfull paſſions, inflamed wt
wrathfull furie, he fell into theſe tearmes:

O Gods (quoth he) what curteſie is there to be found in ſuch Kites of Creſſids
kinde? Or what conſtancie is there to bee hoped for in ſuch daintie diſdaining
Dames? Whoſe wauering willes and ſtaileſſe wittes both waxe and wane with the
Moone, whoſe lunatike minds change with euerie ſodaine motion: yea, whoſe
lightneſſe and leaudneſſe is ſuch, as they delight with the Rauen to féede on
the moſt loathſome fleſh, with the ſhee Woolfe to chooſe the ſonieſt Make,
with Aeſops Cocke to prefer the Bar­ly Corne before a moſt precious Pearle,
and with Glaucus to make a chaunge of his golden armour for braſen Har­neſſe.

Did not Euphinia forſake moſt famous Princes, and embrace a moſt infamous
bondſlaue? Did not Sirithia the Princeſſe of Denmarke reiect a poore peaſant?
Yea, did not Venus her ſelfe, with the Béetle, diſdaine all day to light on
the moſt fragrant flowers, and at night voutchſafeth to lodge in a filthie
cowſheard: I meane, did ſhee not refuſe the renowmed Gods, and chooſe a moſt
deformed Smith?

Why, but Valericus, is it fancie that forceth them to follie? Doth loue leade
them? Do the deſtinies driue them? Doth beautie allure them? Is it their
countenance that conſtraineth them? No, they are clownes: Is it their per­ſon
or parentage that perſwadeth them? No, they are pea­ſants. But like craftie
Calipſos, they thinke by theſe vne­quall matches to rule the roaſt after their
owne diet, to be ſoueraigne miſtreſſes of their owne mindes, with Ve­nus to
let Vulcan poſſeſſe the trée, & Mars enioy the fruit, to haue their huſbands
ſéed the ſhéep, and ſome other reape
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=45) the fléece:
vnder the ſhadowe of his head, to defend them­ſelues from ſuch heate as woulde
otherwiſe greatly ſcorch their credite, to make him follow the bent of their
bowe, al­though hée ſet the Cuckoldes end vpwarde. It is a ſimple cloake that
cannot couer one from a ſhower of raine, and a ſilly husban [...] that is not
able to father that another dooth beget. But to ſée how theſe gallant girles
if they like not the partie, what ſhewe of ſhame faſtneſſe they will make, how
they will vale their face with the viſour of Virginitie, how they will cloke
themſelues with the colour of conti­nency, how chary they will be of their
chaſtitie: whereas if they fancy, who ſo looſe of their lips, and frée of
their fleſhe as they? But Valericus, why doeſt thou thus reckleſly raile and
rage againſt womankinde? It is not Caſtania that thus croſſeth thée with care,
but Gwydonius that brée­deth thy griefe. Is it not ſhée that inferreth thy
ſore, but he that procureth thy ſickneſſe. She is not the meanes of thy
maladie, but he the hinderer of thy medicine. Shee is not the worker of thy
woe, but he is the ſower of thy ſorrowe. And ſhall hée bée puffed vp with
proſperity, and I preſſed downe with miſerie? Shall he ſwim in wealth, and I
ſinke in want? Shall he bathe in bliſſe, & I waile in woe? Shall he be
pampered vp with pleaſure, and I pinde away with penury? No, I will eyther
ſpoyle him, or ſpill my ſelfe, in deſpite of the fates and fortune.

VVHile thus Valericus ſought opportunity to re­uenge his wrath vpō guiltleſſe
Gwydonius, for­tune minding to bewray her mutability, brought it ſo to paſſe,
that wheras Orlanio was accuſtomed to pay a yéerly tribute to the Duke of
Mitylene, which ſurmounted to the ſum of 30000. Duckets, eyther wilfully or
willingly hée withhelde this debt, which Clerophontes claymed as his due,
inſomuch that being demanded by Embaſſage for the payment of this tribute, he
flatly anſwered, that he would not from henceforth diſburſe one denyer, and
hee was [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=46)
ſorrie that in paying it heretofore hée prooued himſelfe ſuch a foole.
Whereupon Clerophontes being fraught with ra­ging fury, was ſo incenſed
againſt Orlanio, that taking counſell of his Nobility, he determined with as
much ſpéed as might be, to wage battaile againſt him, and to obtaine y• by
cōſtraint, which he denied him of curteſie. As thus he was muſing with
himſelf whom he ſhould appoint captain generall of his army, becauſe he meant
not in proper per­ſon to abide the hazard of the battell, the remembrance of
his ſonne Gwydonius came into his minde, which not on­ly amazed him, but ſo
moleſted him, as he was driuen into moſt diſtreſſed dolor: now he called to
mind his mercileſſe cruelty in correcting his faultes, and his moodleſſe
rigour in rebuking his folly: now he bewailed his long abſence, and wiſhed his
ſpéedie preſence: yea, hee was ſo diuerſly perplexed, as hée began thus
dolorouſly to diſcourſe with himſelfe:

ALas (quoth hee) now I ſée the ſaying of Cicero to be true, that who ſo
wilfully peruerteth the lawes of na­ture, ſéemeth to proclaime himſelfe an
enemy to the gods, for that Nature neuer framed any thing amiſſe, wherein I
haue moſt gréeuouſly offended: for in beaſtly rage I haue ſurpaſſed the bruite
beaſtes and in crueltie, the ſenſe­leſſe creatures: I haue beene more deuoyd
of pitie than the Fowles of the ayre, and more vnnatural than the Fiſhes of
the ſea. The Bird called Apis Indica, ſéeing the veni­mous Viper readie to
deuoure her yong ones in the neaſt, preſenteth her ſelf to death, to preſerue
them from deſtruc­tion The Eagle is ſo carefull ouer her yoong, that if it hap
by her default one of them doo periſh, ſhe willingly woun­deth her ſelfe in
many places with her owne beake. The Lyon ſo louingly foſtereth vp her
whelpes, that ſhee neuer faſteth of the preie vntill they bee fully ſatiſfied.
The Foxe is ſo carefull ouer her cubbes, that ſhee willingly falleth into the
Hunters handes to defend her yoong from harme.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=46) But I vile
wretch, as though I had drunke of the Riuer Lincellis in Bohemia, which
preſently turneth whatſoe­uer it toucheth, into ſtones. In ſteade of friendly
courteſie haue abuſed mine own ſon with frowning cruelty, in lieu of mercy I
haue brought him to miſery: the fatherly affec­tion I haue ſhewed him, hath
béen raging furie: yea, my ri­gorous nature, nay rather my vnnaturall rage
hath béene ſuch towardes him, as hee liueth a baniſhed exile in a ſtraunge
Countrie, perhappes pinched with penurie, op­preſſed with pouertie, wandering
in the wilde deſartes, in daunger of deuouring, in perill of ſpoyling,
afflicted not onely with the maladie of the body, but the miſerie of the
minde: ſo that no doubt he wiſheth that I had neuer béene Father to ſuch a
ſonne, or hée neuer ſonne to ſuch a Father.

Alas what ioy can I now inioy when I want mine one­ly ioy? What comfort can I
haue to ſée my childe in cala­mitie? What pleaſure can I take while he toyleth
in pe­nury, who now in mine age ſhould be the ſtaffe whereon to ſtaie, that by
his valiant courage and warlike proweſſe (wherwith from his infancie hée hath
béen indewed) might defend me from mine enimies, and reuenge me of my foes.
But alas, I lament too late: the calme commeth out of time, when the Shippe
hath ſuffered already Stipwrack, and the pittifull plaintes little preuaile,
where the Pati­ent is already puſhed into perill. No, no, my rage hath béene
too great to heare of his haſty returne, my peruerſe furie hath béen ſuch, as
hée dare not abide my preſence: and ſurely my ſorrow is too great euer to be
ſalued.

And with that Clerophontes ſtart vppe, minding to re­uenge theſe his
cholericke cogitations by bloudy battaile vpon the confines of Alexandria, and
therfore in great haſt muſtered all his men, made great prouiſion for the
warre, and cauſed his Nauie to be rigged, for that he meant to cō ­ney his
army by ſea into Alexandria.

VVhile thus there was no worde through the whole
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=47) Dukedome of
Mitylene, but warre, warre, and no newes but of the cruell conflict that
ſhould inſue betwéene the two Dukes; certaine Merchantes of Alexandria, which
then roade in the Hauen durſt not goe a ſhoare to ſell their com­modities, but
as faſt as winde and weather woulde ſerue them, highed them out of the
harbour, and coaſted ſpeedily into their owne Countrie: where they no ſooner
arriued, but they made report thereof to Orlanio, who driuen into a dumpe with
this noyſome newes, whether he doubted of the puiſſant power of Clerophontes,
who was ſuch a wor­thy warriour, and in battaile ſo bold, that no man durſt
a­bide him, or whether he feared his owne force was not a­ble to reſiſt the
furie of his raging enemy; Hee preſently ſummoned all his Lords to a
Parliament, where after ſome conference, it was cōcluded that Therſandro
ſhould bee ſent Embaſſadour to Mitylene to parle of peace with Clerophontes:
which determination was no whit defer­red, but with as much ſpéed as might be,
the Bark where­in hée ſhould paſſe was prouided, the charge of the Embaſ­ſage
was giuen him, and he accompanied with a traine of braue Gentlemen, departed.

But if this newes was dolefull to Orlanio, no doubt it was death it ſelfe to
Gwydonius, who hearing that his fa­ther woulde bend his force againſt the
place, wherein hee was, ſawe all poſſibilitie taken away from obtayning his
purpoſe, for he feared death if he were knowen to Orlanio, and hée doubted
deſpightfull hate at the leaſt, if he bewray­ed himſelfe to Caſtania. Which
double dolour ſo diſtreſſed him, as hée felt himſelfe diuerſly perplexed with
dumpiſh paſſions, his myrth was turned to mourning, his pleaſant conceits, to
painefull cogitations: his wanton toyes, to wayling thoughtes: now he
abandoned all good companie, and delighted onely in ſolitary life, the
wildeſome woodes were his walkes, and the ſecret ſhades the couert he chief­ly
coueted. In fine, hée ſéemed rather a Tymon of Athens, than a Gentleman of
Alexandria, ſo that all the Court
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=47) marueiled at
this ſo ſodaine a chaunge, but eſpecially Ca­ſtania, who coniecturing his
dolefull heart by his drouſie lookes, was aſtoniſhed at this ſtrange ſtate,
caſting in her minde whether ſhe had giuen him anie cauſe of this care, or
whether by her occaſion he was croſſed with this cala­mitie. But alas poore
ſoule, howſoeuer ſhe aymed, ſhe miſt the marke, for Gwydonius kept his diſeaſe
ſo ſecret, as he knew none could but himſelfe diuine the cauſe of his
ma­ladie: which no doubt was ſuch, that it would haue infer­red preſent death,
if hee had not hoped for ſome happie newes by Therſandro:

Who no ſooner luckely arriued at Mitylene, but Clero­phōtes was certified
that the Dukes ſonne of Alexandria was come to impart with his Grace, ſome
waightie mat­ters of importance. Now at this inſtant when the meſſage was
brought him, his daughter Lewcippa was by, who (as the nature of women is,
deſirous to ſee and bee ſéene) thought ſhe ſhould both heare the parle, & view
the perſon of this young Embaſſadour, and therefore found fiſh on her fingers,
that ſhe might ſtay ſtill in the chamber of pre­ſence, whither preſently
Therſandro was ſent for, who curteouſly and curiouſly doing his obeylance to
the Duke, deliuered his Embaſſage in this maner:

VVHereas (right worthy ſir) Orlanio, the Duke of Alexandria, more vnwittingly
then wilfully denied certaine tribute, which he confeſſeth both hee and his
predeceſſours haue payd to you and your aunceſtors: Hearing that héereupon
your Grace meaneth rather to wage battaile, then to loſe any part of your due,
although he feareth not your force, as one able euery way to with­ſtand it,
nor paſſeth of your puiſſance, as a Potentate ſuffi­cient to reſiſt your
power: Yet, the care he hath of his ſub­iects ſafetie, and the loue he hath to
preſerue the life of his Commons, the regard he hath to pay and performe yt
which conſciēce and cuſtome requireth: and laſtly meaning with
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=48) Tully,
Iniquiſſimam pacem iuſtiſſimo bello anteponere. He hath ſent me both to ſue
for conditions of peace, and to paie the tribute: which if your Grace ſhall
refuſe, of force he muſt put his hope in the hazard of Fortune.

THerſandro hauing thus pithily performed his charge, Clerophontes tolde him
that vpon a ſodaine he wold not diſpatch ſo waightie a matter, but meant firſt
both to conſult and take counſaile of his Nobles: which done, within thrée
dayes he ſhoulde haue an anſwere. In the meane time he commanded Lucianus the
Steward of his houſe, verie courteouſly to entreate both Therſandro and his
traine, and to feaſt them with ſuch ſumptuous fare, as they might haue cauſe
moſt highly to extoll his magnifi­cence.

But leauing Clerophontes, to conſult with his learned counſailours, and
Therſandro to accompanie with the lu­ſtie Courtiers, againe to Lewcippa, who
while this yong youth was telling of his tale, neuer markt the matter, but the
man: nor regarded not the parle, but reſpected yt per­ſon: neuer noted the
contentes, but viewed his counte­nance: In ſuch ſort, that ſhe was ſo ſcorched
with the fire of fancie, and ſo ſcalded with the flame of affection, ſo
be­witched with his beautie, and ſo inueigled with his boun­tie, as he was the
onely man that made her checke at the pray, bate at the lure, and willingly
yeelde to the firſt aſ­ſault of fancie. And on the other ſide, Fortune ſo
fauoured, that Therſandro printing in his heart the perfection of Lewcippas
perſon, felt his fredome ſo fettered by yt view of her heauenly face, and ſo
ſnared in the beames of her a­morous glaunces, that he wiſht that either this
diſſenſion had neuer growen, or that he had not béene the deliuerer of the
meſſage: for hee felt his heart alreadie ſo ouer­growen with good will,
towardes this young Princeſſe, as no ſalue but her ſelfe was able to mitigate
his ſorrow, no medicine but her curteſie was able to cure his calami­tie,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=48) and he
thought to preferre his ſute to his profeſſed foe, was folly: to linger ſtill
in loue, was death and miſery: to ſéeke for helpe at her hands, neither would
the preſent ſtate permit him, nor time ſuffer him to proſecute his purpoſe:
daunted with theſe diuerſe doubtes, to auoyde the melan­cholike motions that
moleſted his mind, he preſently went from his lodging to the Court, that by
company hée might driue away theſe dumpes: where, hee founde in the great
Chamber diuerſe Ladies & Gentlewomen, paſſing away the time in pleaſant parle,
amongſt whom was that peer­leſſe Paragon, princely Lewcippa: who (after due
reue­rence done to the Gentlewomen in generall) was ſingled out by Therſandro,
and courted in this wiſe.

MAdam (quoth he) if any creature hath iuſt occaſion to accuſe eyther nature or
the gods of iniuſtice, man on­ly hath the greateſt cauſe to make this
complaint: for there is none other ſo depriued of reaſon, or deuoyde of ſenſe,
which by ſome naturall inſtinct dooth not skilfully preſage of perils before
they come, and warily preuent ere they bée paſt.

The Goates of Lybia, know certainly when the Cani­cular dayes beginne, wherein
commonly they fall blinde, and therefore by eating the hearbe Polypodium, they
pro­uidently preuent their diſeaſe. When the Lyon leaueth his Lawnes, and
raungeth in forraigne deſartes, hée al­waies foreſheweth a drouth. When the
Fiſh called Vra­noſcopos ſinketh downe to the bottome of the Sea, hée
be­wrayeth great tempeſtes to bee imminent. But man is ſo farre from this
ſecret foreſight, that not onely hee cannot diuine of theſe enſuing daungers,
but rather wilfully or willingly, puſheth himſelf into moſt manifeſt perils:
which Madame, I ſpeake, as féeling my ſelfe diſtreſſed with this want. For if
I had béen indued with this ſacred preſcience, perfectly to preſage of inſuing
perils, I had not béen croſſed with ſuch cares as I am like to incurre, nor
had cauſe to re­pent
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=49) this my
preſent arriuall. But ſith lacke of ſuch skill hath procured my loſſe, and
that when the hurt is had it is too late to take héed, though reuealing of my
miſhap cannot heale my miſery, nor repeating of my paines redreſſe my ſorrow,
yet I mean to participate my paſſions to your good grace, that though you
cannot or will not mitigate my maladie, yet you may pitie my eſtate, which wil
ſome what eaſe my heauineſſe. I came to your Fathers Court Ma­dam, a free man
of Alexandria, and am like to return a cap­tiue of Mitylene: I arriued deuoyd
of care, and am like to depart drenched with calamity: I landed frée from
affectiō, but fear to paſſe hence fraught with fancy: my charge was only to
parle of peace, but my chance is to diſcourſe of paſſi­ons. Yea, your beauty
hath ſo fettered my fréedom & ſo ſna­red my heart in the linkes of your loue,
that it ſhall neuer be raced out by any ſiniſter means of Fortune, although I
ſée it is almoſt impoſſible to obtain it.

For I doubt, our Parents are like to proclaime them­ſelues profeſſed foes, and
the vrgent neceſſitie of my af­faires forceth mée to depart ſo ſpéedily, as
want of time wil not ſuffiſe to make triall of my loue, whereby I might claim
a ſufficient guerdon for my good will: yet howſoeuer the matter ſhall hap,
whether my hope bée voyde, or my hap be vaine, I meane Madame to remaine yours
for e­uer.

Lewcippa took ſuch delight in hearing Therſandro diſ­courſe ſo louingly, as
ſhée could ſcarcely kéepe her counte­nance from bewraying the pleaſure ſhe
conceiued in this parle, ſéeing that her loue was requited with liking, and
hir fancie incountred with the like affection. Yet, leaſt Ther­ſandro ſhould
think her too courteous if ſhée ſhould come at the firſt call, and very light
of loue, to like at the firſt looke, ſhée framed him this anſwere:

SIR (quoth ſhee) if of your ſute for Conditions of peace there inſue no better
ſucceſſe than the reuealing of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=49) your paſſions
ſhall reape pittie at my handes, or if the in­treatie for truce be as lightly
reſpected by my Father, as either your perſon or petition is regarded by me,
you are like to carrie home colde newes to your countrey, and to vaunt that
you bad faire, but bought little, that your Har­ueſt was long, but your corne
not worth the cropping: that your venture was much, but your gaines ſuch, as
if your winning proue no better, you are like to liue by the loſſe. For ſir,
do you ſuppoſe mee ſo ſottiſh, as to thinke euerie one that flatters doeth
fancie, or ſo addicted to ſelfe loue, as by a few filed phraſes to be brought
into a fooles Paradiſe? knowing that it is the faſhion of men by their fained
ſub­tiltie to deceiue our fathfull ſimplicitie? No, for if you meane to
counterfaite, take this for a rule, it is ill halting before a créeple. But
ſir, this your ſodaine liking bewraies the lightneſſe of your loue: this your
fond affection, im­portes the ſickleneſſe of your fancie: for ſoone hote,
ſoone colde: eaſilie inflamed, as quickly quenched: like to the Apples of
Arabia, which beginne to rot, ere they behalfe ripe. And if I meant to loue,
had I none to like but my Fathers foe? ſhould I deſire him whome my Father
doth deteſt? And if I ſhould ſo farre forget mine owne ſtay, or my Fathers
ſtate, as to conſent, it were impoſſible either to appeaſe his wrath, or to
get the grant of his good will. So that to deſire that which I can neuer
inioy, were to driue my ſelfe whollie into deſpaire, which would ſmally
profite you, and greatly diſpleaſure me: and therefore ceaſe to ſue for that,
which may well be wiſht, but neuer obtained.

Therſandro although hée heard Lewcippa decide the caſe ſufficiently, yet hee
was ſo wilfull that hee would not take her doome for a verdite, but returned
her this re­plie.

MAdame (quoth hee) where in lieu of hate there inſueth loue, it is alwaies the
ſigne of the grea­ter
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=50) affection:
and that it is a thing either confirmed by the Fates, or appointed by the
Gods. Tereus the Prince of Thrace, being ſent by his father to defie Pandion
the king of Athens, was enamoured of his daughter Progne, wher­by betwéene the
Parentes in ſtéede of fatall enmitie, there inſued friendly amitie. When as
the bloudie warre be­twéene Atis the king of Libia, and Lycabas the Prince of
Aſſur, was moſt hot, young Admetus, béeing ſent Embaſ­ſadour into Libia, was
ſo ſtroken in loue with Alceſt, one­lie Daughter to his fathers foe, and ſhee
repayed his li­king with ſuch loialtie as death it ſelfe could neuer diſſolue
their amitie. If Madame, theſe premiſes may perſwade you to take pittie of my
paſſions, or theſe examples induce you, not to let the hatred of our parentes,
bée a hinderance of our loue, whether your father reiect mee as a foe, or
ac­cept mée as a friend, I doubt not but the deſtinies will drine the bargaine
through, in deſpight of them and for­tune.

Sir (quoth ſhée) I confeſſe, Progne poore wench loued Tereus, but how
wretchedly did hee reward her loyaltie? and Scilla was enamoured of Minos her
Fathers foe, but howe tyrannouſly did hee repay her loue with trecherie?
Tarpeia betraied ye Tower of Rome to one of the Sabines whom ſhe moſt entirely
loued, but the méede of her merite was extreame miſerie. Shall I then
Therſandro ſée the traine and yet fall into the trap? ſhall I ſpie the nettes,
and yet ſtrike at the ſtale? ſhall I ſée the miſhap, and yet wil­fully incurre
the miſchance? no, I meane not for an inch of ioy, to reape an ell of annoy,
for a momēt of mirth, a month of miſerie: for a dramme of pleaſure, a whole
pounde of paine, and by procuring mine owne delight, to purchaſe my fathers
death and deſtruction. But let this ſuffice Therſandro to ſignifie howe I
pittie thy paſſions, and thinke well of thy perſon, that if my Fathers will
might bee framed to my wiſhe, if hee woulde condeſcend as I would conſent,
thou onely art the man who in the way of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=50) marriage
ſhould diſpoſe of me at thy pleaſure. But ſith the frowning ſtate of Fortune
denies our loue to haue ſuch happie ſucceſſe, hope well, and reſt vpon this
point, that I will alwaies like thée as a friend, though not loue thée as my
phéere.

As Therſandro was ready to replie, and to ſeale vp the bargaine of their loue
vpon her ſwéete lips, Clerophō ­tes came in, who marred all their market, and
turned their ſwéet to ſowre: for he gaue Therſandro his anſwere before
Lewcippa, which was this; That he neither meant to ac­cept of the conditions
of peace, nor to receiue the tribute, but to claime his due by the doubtfull
euent of battaile: That he ſhortly pretended in perſon, to viſite Orlanio, and
within the walles of Alexandria to demand his debt, and that he would beſtow
his fathers Dukedome vpon a Lord of his called Lucianus, in dowrie with his
daughter Lew­cippa.

Therſandro was nothing amazed with the firſt part of the meſſage: but when he
heard how Clerophontes meant preſumptuouſly both to depraue him of his liuing,
and de­priue him of his loue, hee was ſo puffed vp with wrath and choler, as
happe what happe would, he fell into theſe tearmes.

I remember (quoth he) that Caligula the Emperour, pro­uiding a mightie armie
to ſubdue great Britaine, when hée was come to the ſea, ready to poſte ouer
his ſouldiers in his Nauie, he left off his endleſſe enterpriſe, and ſet them
to gather Cockles. Siphax boldly boaſting that hee would beſtow the kingdome
of Numidia vpon his ſecond ſonne, was by Maſſiniſ [...]a ouerthrowne, and ſold
as captiue to the Romanes. I dare not ſir inferre compariſons, becauſe they be
odious, nor apply the examples, ſith time and place for­bids mee: but this I
ſay, that to fiſh before the net, is al­waies counted folly, and to vaunt
before the victorie, is but
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=51) vanitie. Yea,
and if I had as good right to your daughter Lewcippa, as I haue to the
ſuppoſed dowrte which you aſ­ſigne her, I would in deſpight of Lucianus and
the diuell himſelfe, diſpoſe her at my pleaſure.

Clerophontes hearing the cholerike concluſion of Ther­ſandro, could ſcarcely
bridle his frantike furie from ra­ging without reaſon againſt this young
youth: yet ſome­what mitigating his moode, hee breathed out theſe cruell
threatnings.

IF the law of armes (quoth he) did not both ſafely protect thée, and ſurely
forbid me to hurt thée in that thou art a meſſenger, I would with ſuch
ſeueritie chaſtice theſe thy preſumptuous ſpéeches, as thou ſhouldeſt learne
hereafter to anſwere with more reuerence: yet I wiſh thée not to ſtand too
ſtiffe vpon this point, leaſt if thou bee ſo reckleſſe as to breake the bondes
of reaſon, I be ſo forgetfull as to paſſe the limits of the law. Thou haſt
receiued a determi­nate anſwer for the Embaſſe, and heere I charge thée this
preſent day to depart out of my dominions.

Therſandro fearing the tyrannie of this cruell Clero­phontes, preſently paſſed
out of the chamber of Preſence, taking his leaue of Ladie Lewcippa, onely with
louing lookes, which ſhe requited with ſuch glaunces of good will, that they
were ſufficient ſignes what inſupportable ſor­row ſhe receiued by his ſo
ſodaine departure: yet knowing that her fancie was incountered with mutuall
affection, ſhe draue away the myſtie cloudes of deſpaire, hoping that the Gods
ſéeing their faithfull amitie, would take pittie of their paſſions, and in
time redreſſe their miſerie.

But Therſandro hauing with ſpéede diſpatcht his af­faires (all his traine
being ſet aboord, and they coaſting the ſtraights with a luckie gale) was ſo
combered with care, and ſo ouer-growne with griefe, that he paſſed no houre,
minute, nor moment, without wofull wailing, ſorrowfull ſobs, and far fetcht
ſighs: ſo that the Gentlemen his compa­nions,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=51) ſuppoſing
that hée was thus painfully perplexed for feare of Clerophontes puiſance,
began both to comfort and incourage him, not to doubt or dreade the force of
the ene­mie, ſith his father was able to repulſe him, without anie daunger to
himſelfe, or anie great damage to his ſubiectes. But theſe their perſwaſions
coulde no whit preuaile to aſ­ſwage his paſſions, this their incoragement
could not cure his care.

But as there is no greater bane to the bodie, than trou­ble of the minde: ſo
Therſandro ſo long continued in theſe penſiue paſſions and carefull
cogitations, concealing his griefe ſo couertly, which ſo much the more
furiouſly flamed within him, that he was conſtrained to kéep his Cabbin till
his arriual at Alexandria. Where being ſet on ſhore, and preſently conueied to
the Court, he remained for the ſpace of thrée dayes ſo ſtrangely perplexed, as
he was not able to make report of his meſſage: which ſo griped Orlanio with
ſuch inſpeakeable griefe, as he wiſhed rather to haue died valiantly with the
force of his enemy, than to put the death of his ſonne in hazard by paſſing ſo
perillous a iorney. But Therſandro ſéeing that ſorrowe would not ſalue his
ſore, but rather increaſe his ſickneſſe: that mourning woulde not appeaſe his
maladie, but rather augment his miſery: began to take heart at graſſe, and
within fewe daies began to recouer his former health. And then hee declared to
his father what he had in charge from Clerophontes, how hée meant ſpéedily to
wage war againſt him, & by force of arms to driue him out of his Dukedom,
which he had already pro­miſed to one Lucianus in dowry with his daughter.

Orlanio hearing this proude preſumption of this brag­ging Duke, thought ye
greateſt barkers were not alwaies the ſoreſt biters, and that it was far more
eaſie with wordes to obtaine the victorie, than with déeds to attaine the
con­queſt. Yet, leaſt he might he taken at vnawares, he made a generall muſter
throughout all his Dominions, pro­uiding in euerie place neceſſary munition
for the defence
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=52) of his
Countrie. And aſſembling his Nobility to giue their verdit, who were fitteſt
to be Captains in this skirmiſh; after ſome conſultation had in this cauſe,
they concluded, that ſince Clerophontes meant to ioyn battaile in his own
perſon, that likewiſe he ſhould be Generall of the field, and Gwydonius who
ſurpaſſed all the reſt in martiall exploits, ſhould be Lieutenant, and conduct
the armie, which he no ſooner heard but he was tormented with inſpeakable
grief, he began to pull downe his Peacockes feathers, to hang his wings, and
crie creake: euerie man hoping to win fame was merry, but he alone mourning:
euery man laughed and he alone lowred: inſomuch that he was generally
ſuſ­pected to be a fearefull cowarde, and that dread of danger draue him into
theſe dolefull dumps. But as they raſhly coniectured the cauſe of his ſorrowe,
ſo they miſt the nature of his ſickneſſe: for Gwydonius ſéeing that of the
cruel cō ­flict his calamity ſhould inſue, and that this bloudy broyle would
bréed his bane, he fel into ſuch ſolitary ſurmiſes, and ſuch muſing
meditations, that Valericus his opén friend, and yet his ſecret foe, ſought by
ſundrie meanes to ſearch out the cauſe of his care: but not beeing able to
wring out any thing, either by flattering promiſes, or fained proteſta­tions,
he ceaſed from his importunate ſute. But froward fortune brought it ſo to
paſſe, that Valericus comming by the chamber of Gwydonius, heard him thus
deſperately diſcourſing with himſelfe.

Alaſſe (quoth he) I ſée the Sunne being at the higheſt de­clineth, the Sea
being at the full tide ebbeth: calme con­tinueth not long without a ſtorme,
neither is happineſſe had long without heauineſſe, bliſſe without bale, weale
without woe, mirth without mourning. For who alate ſo floated in the flouds of
felicitie as I, which now by the ſiniſter meanes of frowning fortune am ſowſed
in the ſeas of ſorrow, eralted alate to the higheſt degrée of happines, am now
driuen to the greateſt extremitie of euill: alate
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=52) puffed vp
with proſperity, and now puſhed downe with ad­uerſitie: yea, alate placed in
Paradiſe, and now plunged in perplexity.

Oh Gwydonius, if thy Fathers friendly precepts might haue perſwaded thee, if
his aduice had béene thy aduertiſe­ment, and thou hadſt carefully kept his
counſaile, then by his fore-warning, thou hadſt béene forearmed againſt all
miſhap and miſerie, The force of fickle fancy had not then giuen thee the
foyle, Loue had not ſo lightly procured thy loſſe, nor the painted ſhewe of
beautie had not ſo ſoone pro­cured thy bane. My bane? Why fond foole, beautie
hath bred my bliſſe: fancie hath not giuen me the foile, but hath yéelded me
the fort: Loue hath not wrought my loſſe, but re­quited me with treble gaine.

Hath not Caſtania requited my loue with loyaltie, and repaied my good will
with mutuall affection? Is ſhée not my Saint, and I her ſeruant? Are we not
contracted toge­ther by loue, and ſhall continue together by law? May I not
diſpoſe of her in the way of marriage at my pleaſure? Yes, but what then? The
more is my griefe, and the grea­ter my care. For if her preſence procureth my
delight, will not her abſence bréed my deſpight? If her conſent preſer­ued my
life, will not her contempt inferre my death? Yes. For alas, ſince the
deſtinies meane to diſſolue that fancie hath decréed, ſince the frowning fates
ſéeke to vnlooſe that which loue hath linked, ſince froward fortune meanes to
breake the bonds wherein beautie hath bounde vs, ſince theſe bloudie broyles
will cauſe Caſtania, (where before ſhe accepted me for a friend) now to reiect
me for a foe: What better lucke can I looke for than a loathſome life, or what
better hap can I hope for than horror and heauineſſe? Yea, which way ſo euer I
turne mee I ſee nothing but woe and wretchedneſſe. For if Orlanio perceiued
our liking, how would he ſtorme at our loue? If he knew my chance, how would
he fret at his Daughters choice? Woulde hée euer conſent, that Caſtania ſhould
match with ſo meane a mate,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=53) that her
Princely perſonage ſhould bee diſgraced with my baſe parentage, that her
calling ſhould be crazed with my ſlender countenance: no, he would no doubt
firſt baniſh me out of all his dominions. Tuſh Gwydonius, would God this were
the worſt, and then thou mighteſt hope in time, by ſome means to redreſſe this
doubt. But if Orlanio ſhuld know thou wert heire apparant to the Dukedome of
Mi­tylene, and only ſonne to Clerophontes his fatall foe what torment were
there ſo terrible, which thou ſhouldeſt not trie? What paine ſo pinching,
which thou ſhouldeſt not paſſe? What hap ſo hard, which thou ſhouldeſt not
hazard? Yea, what death ſo direfull, which at his cruell hands thou ſhouldeſt
not ſuffer? And what if Caſtania were priuy to thy ſtate, doeſt thou thinke
her ſo conſtant as to conſent to her Fathers foe? Doeſt thou thinke ſhee would
wiſhe the ſonnes weale, when the Father wiſheth her miſhap? No, aſſure thy
ſelfe if thy ſtate be once knowen, that Caſtania will moſt deadly deteſt thée,
which will bee more gréeuous to thée than death it ſelfe, be it neuer ſo
terrible. Sith then Gwydonius, thou muſt ſhortly either go in arms againſt
thine owne Father, or elſe loſe both thy loue and thy life, let not delay
bréede daunger, but ſtrike on the ſtith while the yron is hot. Caſtania hath
promiſed to forſake both fa­ther, friends, and her owne Countrie, to paſſe
where and whē it pleaſeth thée, ſhee doubteth no daungers, ſhe forceth of no
miſfortune, ſhe careth for no calamity, ſhe paſſeth for no perils, ſo ſhe
enioy thy deſired companie: and therefore as ſpéedily as may be, conuey her
cloſely into the confines of Mitylene, before either ſhe know thy ſtaie or thy
ſtate. And ſhall I ſo practice her with policies? Shall I ſo ſifte her with
ſubtiltie? Shall I put ſo little truſt in her troth, and ſo ſmall confidence
in her conſtancie, as to conceale frō her any ſecret? No, come woe, come
wretchedneſſe, come death, come daunger, hap what hap will, I will preſentlie
impart vnto her my preſent ſtate, and my pretended pur­poſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=53) Valericus
hearing this doubtfull diſcourſe of Gvvydo­nius, was driuen into an extaſie
for ioy, to ſée that hee had found ſuch fit meanes, whereby hee might not
onely pur­chaſe the Dukes fauour, aſpire vnto honour and dignitie, but alſo
obtaine the loue of Caſtania: for he meant ſpéedi­ly to preuent the pretence
of Gwydonius, by vnfolding to the Duke the ſum of his ſecret purpoſe, aſſuring
him­ſelfe, that after Orlanio knew his parents and parentage, that hée was
ſonne and heire to Clerophontes, no price though neuer ſo precious, no ranſom
though neuer ſo rich, might redéeme him from the moſt deſpitefull death that
could be deuiſed. And of theſe premiſſes he inferd this con­cluſion, that if
the cauſe be taken away, the effect faileth: that Gwydonius beeing reiected,
hee ſhould be receiued: that he béeing deſpighted with hate, hee ſhould be
requited with loue: and vpon this hope he went preſently to bewray this matter
to Orlanio, whome hee found with his ſonne Therſandro, and diuerſe other noble
men conſulting what courſe they had beſt take againſt Clerophontes, whoms
Valericus ſaluted in this wiſe.

PLato (right worthy Prince) that graue and wiſe Phi­loſopher, whoſe ſentences
in all ages haue béene holden as moſt diuine Oracles, portraieth out in his
bookes of his Common wealth, the picture of a perfect Citizen: whoſe
li­niaments béeing firſt leuelled, hée tricketh vp with theſe colours, that he
loue his Prince loyallie, kéepe the lawes carefully, and defend his Country
valiantly, in which thrée pointes (ſaith hée) conſiſteth the chiefeſt dutie of
a truſty ſubiect: This ſaying of Plato throughly conſidered, and calling to
minde the ſundrie good turnes which without deſert your Grace hath beſtowed
vppon mee, I thought if I ſhoulde not repaie your fauour with faithfulneſſe,
and your truſt you repoſe in mee with inuiolable troth, I might bee counted a
vicious vaſſall deuoide of all ver­tues,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=54) a trecherous
citizen, rather then a truſty ſubiect, a care­leſſe ſlaue, then a carefull
gentleman: yea, a graceleſſe mō ­ſter, miſled wt ingratitude. I am come
(right worthy ſir) not to betray my fo, but to bewray my frend, not to
diſcouer ye falt of my enemy, but to diſcloſe his offence which liueth with me
in perfect amitie, in whoſe company hitherto hath béene all my ioy, pleaſure
and delight: but ſince his pretence is greatly preiudiciall to your Graces
perſon, I thought to prefer your profit before mine own pleaſure, and the
com­moditie of my country, before mine owne priuate conten­tation. So it is,
that Gwydonius, whom your Grace hath honoured, and all the Court eſtéemed, is
ſonne and heire to Clerophontes the Duke of Mitylene. who by the péeuiſh
policie of his Father, vnder the pretence of ſeruice, is pur­poſed to procure
your fatall death, and the finall deſtruction of your Dukedome. And the better
to performe this diuel­liſh practiſe, hée hath contracted himſelfe to my Lady
Ca­ſtania, who blinded with his beautie, and inueigled with his wit, hath
conſented not onely to kéep his counſaile to your confuſion, but alſo cloſely
to conuey her ſelfe with him in­to his Countrie. Which pretence if your Grace
doth not ſpéedily preuent, you ſhall find that delay bréedes danger, & that
procraſtination in perils is but the mother of miſhap.

And haue I (quoth Orlanio) brought vp the bird that wil picke out mine owne
eies? Haue I foſtered vp the Serpent in my boſome that will bréede my bane?
Haue I giuen her life, that ſéekes to yéeld me death? Haue I cheriſht her
bée­ing young, and will ſhe conſume mee béeing older? Was there none to chooſe
but Gwydonius, nor none to loue, but the ſonne of her fathers foe? Will ſhee
preferre her luſt be­fore my life? her priuate pleaſure, before the ſafetie of
my perſon? Well, as ſhe forgets the duetie of a childe, ſo I wil forget the
naturall affection of a father, and therefore Va­lericus goe ſpéedily with
theſe noble men to Gvvydonius chamber, and apprehend him, that I may requite
his hate­full trecherie with moſt helliſh torments. And Therſandro
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=54) ſée you that
Caſtania be cloſely kept vntill we haue caught the traitour, leaſt ſhee
vnderſtanding that their deuiſe is diſcloſed, ſhe ſaue her ſelfe by flight.

Valericus hauing this commiſſion giuen him from the Duke, made no delay, but
paſſed to Gvvidonius lodging with as much ſpéede as might be: but fortune who
after e­uerie chip of miſchance, ſendeth ſome lot of good lucke, and after
euerie ſtorme of aduerſitie, ſendeth a quiet calme of proſperitie, ſo
carefully prouided to frée Gwydonius from miſhap, that he was newly gone
towards Caſtania, to im­part vnto her this his pretence: but before hee came
to her chamber, he was encountered by Therſandro, who ſtearn­ly taking
Gvvydonius by the boſome, pulling out his ra­pier commanded him as a traitour
to ſtand, or elſe without any farther doome he ſhould féele the dint of death.

Gvvydonius amazed with this ſodaine motion, ſtoode as one in a traunce,
neither being able to defend himſelfe with worde or weapon, but yéelded
himſelfe into the handes of Therſandro, who ſhakt him vp with theſe bitter
ſpéeches.

THou traiterous wretch (quoth he) as it is impoſſible for the flame ſo cloſely
to be couered, but it will be ſpi­ed: ſo it is impoſſible, but that treaſon,
though neuer ſo ſe­cret, ſhould in tract of time be diſcloſed, which now by
ex­perience is verified in thee: for although thou haſt hether­to falſely
fained thy ſelfe to be a ſtranger of a forraigne na­tion, thou art now known
to be ſonne and heire to Clero­phontes that cruell tyrant my Fathers foe, by
whoſe pée­uiſh policie thou hadſt not onely brought yt commō wealth to
confuſion, but didſt pretend to be preiudiciall to my Fa­thers perſon, if thy
deadly practiſe and diueliſh purpoſe had not by Valericus his meanes béen
preuented. Haſt thou béene ſo trained vp in trecherie, or is thy minde ſo
ſpotted with villanie, as to repay my fathers good will wc ſuch bar­barous
ingratitude, & to deuiſe his deſtruction which ſim­ply foreſought thy
preferment? Yea, to counſell my ſiſter
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=55) Caſtania, not
onely to conſent to thy deſire, but to my fa­thers death? Is this the maner of
Mitylene, or the cuſtome of thy country, to be ſuch cooſening counterfaites?
Well, ſince I haue happily attached thee as a traitour, and as a villanous
rebell, both tranſgreſſing humaine and diuine lawes, thou ſhalt abide the
paine and puniſhment due to ſuch diuelliſh offenders. Now let thy cruell ſire
Clero­phontes, free thee from thoſe torments which thou art like to ſuffer for
thy trecherie, and let the Lordes of Mitylene deliuer thee from his handes,
who meanes in moſt miſera­ble wiſe to martyr thee. Yea, let thy Concubine
Caſtania, who is like for her graceleſſe diſobedience, to ſip of yt ſame
ſorrow, ſée if her teares will now preuaile to mooue Orla­nio to pittie. No,
if Iupiter himſelfe ſent Mercurie to miti­gate his moode, neither the
authoritie of the one, nor the elo­quence of the other might preuaile to
pacifie his furie.

GWydonius ſéeing that not onely his purpoſe was pre­uented, and his ſecrets
diſcloſed, but that alſo Valeri­cus moſt villanouſly had accuſed him and
Caſtania of that which they neuer ſo much as once imagined, was ſo per­plexed,
and driuen into ſuch dumpes, as hee ſéemed by ſi­lence to auerre that which
Therſandro had alleadged, yet at laſt he began thus to reply.

THerſandro (quoth he) as I meane not to affirme that which is falſe, ſo I will
not deny that which is true: but come dolor, come death, come miſerie, come
martyr­dome, come torture, come torments, I will neither accuſe myſelfe
vniuſtly, nor excuſe myſelfe by periurie. I con­feſſe Therſandro, that I am
ſonne and heire to the Duke of Mitylene, and contracted to thy ſiſter
Caſtania, that Clero­phontes, is my father by the law of nature, and Caſtania
my wife by the league of loue: but that I either pretended or purpoſed to be
preiudiciall to Orlanios perſon, or that Caſtania was counſailed or euer
conſented to her fathers
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=55) confuſion, I
not onely deny, but I will proue by combats that Valericus moſt villanouſly
doth accuſe vs of ye where­of we are altogether ſackleſſe.

VVHy Gwydonius, (quoth hée) wilt thou ſéeke to proue thyſelfe loyall, when the
hearers deeme ſhee a lyer? or to make a tryall of thy troth, when thy words
can haue no truſt? Dooeſt thou think my fathers fury will ſuffer thée to
fable? Dooeſt thou thinke his wrathfull rage wil abide thy reaſons, or that he
wil be ſo patient as to hear thée plead thine owne cauſe? No, if thou wert as
cléer from theſe crimes alleadged againſt thée by Valericus as I am: yet in
that thou art ſon to Clerophontes, the coine of Croe­ſus, and Kingdoms of
Caeſar, were not ſufficient ranſome to redéem thée frō death. But Gwydonius,
ſince thy health hangeth in my hands, and thy life or death is in my power, I
will neither bee ſo bloudy minded as to bréede thy bane, nor ſo cruell, as to
be the cauſe of thy confuſion. The guer­don Gwydonius I craue of this my good
will, and the re­compence I claim for this curteſie, is that when thou
com­meſt to Mitylene, thou certifie thy ſiſter and my loue and Lady Lewcippa,
that for her ſake I haue procured thy ſafe­ty, that her perfection hath
preſerued thée from perill, the loue I beare her hath ſaued thy life, the
dutifull deuotion I owe vnto her, hath redéemed thée from death and daun­ger.
And in token of this my vnfeined affection, I will lift my hand againſt none
that commeth from Mitylene, but againſt Lucianus onely.

Before Therſandro was able ſullie to vnfolde his mind, or that Gwydonius had
time to yéelde him thankes for the ſafegard of his life, they heard a great
noiſe, which made Gwydonius flie, and Therſandro hie him haſtily to Caſta­nias
lodging. Now the companie which came, was Or­lanio himſelf, who certified by
Valericus that Gwydonius could not be found, laid not only watch & ward
throughout all his Dukedom to attache him, but went in proper perſon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=56) with his Gard
to apprehend Caſtania, and lay her in cloſe priſon, whom he found all
blubbered with teares, for that ſhe had vnderſtood the cauſe before of her
brother Therſan­dro: Orlanio no ſooner ſpied her thus wéeping, but hée ra­ged
againſt her in this wiſe.

HAth the force of lone, nay rather the furie of luſt (vile wretch) ſo blinded
thine vnderſtanding, that to accom­pliſh it, thou paſſeſt not to peruert both
humane and diuine lawes? Doth laſciuious affection and fleſhly fancy ſo
furi­ouſly frie within thée, as thou wouldeſt procure thy fathers death to
purchaſe thy diueliſh deſire? Could no rules of reaſon, no pricke of
conſcience, no reſpect of honeſty, no feare of God, nor dread of man,
prohibite thée from pretending ſuch a monſtrous miſchiefe, as to conclude with
my mor­tall foe to worke my fatall confuſion? The yong Storkes ſo tender the
olde ones in their age, as they will not ſuffer them ſo much as to flie to get
their owne liuing. The bird called Apis Indica, being young, ſéeing yt olde
ones through age growen ſo weake, as they are not able to waue their wings,
carry them continually from place to place on their backs: theſe ſauage
creatures haue but only ſenſe, and are obedient, thou haſt both reaſon and
ſenſe, and art more vn­naturall: theſe brute beaſtes are moſt dutifull to
their Pa­rents, & thou a reaſonable creature art moſt diſobedient to thy
father: yea, contrarie both to the lawes of nature and nurture, thou ſéekeſt
to bathe thy handes in his guiltleſſe bloud, & without care or conſcience, to
commit moſt cruell murther: which is ſo hatefull to all things, as the
ſenſeleſſe plants and ſtones moſt deadly deteſt ſuch villanie. The O­liue trée
ſo hatefully abhorreth a Paraſite, that who ſo be­ing guiltie of that crime,
attempteth to plant it, doth not onely himſelfe preſently periſh, but the tree
forthwith wa­neth and withereth. The ſtone Epiſtrites, ſo loatheth this
offence, coūting it a fact ſo repugnant to nature, that it wil not vouchſafe
to be worne by a murtherer. And ſhall I then
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=56) lett thee
liue, whome the ſenſeleſſe creatures doe ſo deadly leath? No, this hand which
cheriſht thee béeing a child, ſhal now chaſtiſe thee being ſuch a curſed
caitife. And with that he drew out his Fa [...]ichon ready to haue ſtain her,
but that Therſandro knéeling downe, deſired him that he would not ſo in his
furie forget himſelfe, as without the ſentence of the law put her to death,
but to commit her toward, vn­till the wars betwéene him and Clerophontes, were
hap­pily ended; and then vppon more ſtraight examination, if ſhe were found
faultie, to aſſigne her a puniſhment due for ſuch an offence. Orlanio, ſomwhat
pacified with his ſons perſwaſion, commanded that preſently ſhe ſhould bee
car­ried to priſon, and the Ladie Melytta with her, as an actor in this
Tragedie. And that with all ſpéede they ſhould poſt the countrie for the
attaching of the traytor Gwydonius. Who after that he parted from Therſandro,
ſeeing before his eyes the terrour of torments, and the helliſh horrour of
death, was driuen forward ſo with the dread of danger, and feare of imminēt
perils, that knowing perfectly the coaſt of the Countrey, he paſſed ſo
ſecretly and ſpéedily, as hee was not ſo much as once deſcried by the Poſts
that purſued him, but ſcaped ſafely out of the Dukedom of Alexandria. Being
now without the dint of the Dukes danger, ſéeing that although he had eſcaped
himſelfe, yet hee had left his loue and ladie Caſtania in hazard of her life,
he began thus to exclaime againſt his owne folly.

AH Gvvidonius (quoth he) what foltie haſt thou com­mitted by this fearefull
flight, what carefull calami­tie is like to inſue of this thy cowardiſe? in
auoyding Scilla thou art fallen into Charibdis, in preuenting one danger, thou
art like to be plagued with a thouſand diſcommodi­ties. Had it not béen better
for thee to haue died in Alexan­dria, with honor, than to liue heere with
ſhame & reproche, to haue ſuffered miſhappe with Caſtania, then to linger
héere in miſeris? Doeſt thou thinke that ſhe wil euer count
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=57) of ſuch a
prating Paraſite, as will loue her in proſperitie, and leaue her in
aduerſitie, as preferreth his owne ſafetie before her ſecuritie, his life
before her loue, and draweth himſelfe out of danger to leaue her in diſtreſſe?
No, ſhe will contemne thee as a cowarde, more fit to be mate to ſome countrie
ſlut, than a match for ſuch a courtly Princeſs, ſhe will thinke thy greateſt
faith was but fained fickleneſſe, thy forged loue was but filthie luſt, thy
promiſes were but periuries, and that thy greateſt amitie was but moſt
diſ­ſembled enmitie: ſo that of a profeſſed friend, ſhe will be­come thy
profeſſed foe, her deſire will turne to deſpite, and her loue to moſt helliſh
hate.

Why, alas, would my paine haue pleaſed her, would my martyrdome haue contented
her minde, had my perill pro­cured her profite, or my care her commoditie?
Nay, rather would not my danger haue béene her death, my miſhap her miſery, my
torture her torments, and my fatall deſtiny her finall deſtruction. By ſauing
my life in time wee may en­ioy our loue, but by death no hope had béene left
for obtai­ning our deſire: ſo that I aſſure my ſelfe, Caſtania will ra­ther
allow of my policie by preuenting perills by flight, than miſlike of my
practiſe in procuring mine owne ſafetie. And vppon this point I reſt, hoping
that the Gods ſéeing how vniuſtly Valericus hath accuſed vs, will in tract of
time rid vs from blame, and reward him with ſhame.

Gwydonius was not more diſtreſſed with dolour, than poore Caſtania was combred
with care, to ſée ſo ſtraunge a chaunce, and ſo ſodaine a change, that ſhe who
of late was a royall Princeſſe, was now a ruthfull priſoner, that her fréedome
was turned to fetters, her dignitie to miſerie, & her happie ſtaie, to a moſt
helliſh ſtate: that after flouds of teares which fell from her cryſtall eies,
ſhe burſt forth in­to theſe tearmes.

Alas (quoth ſhée) what poore Damoſell was euer dri­uen into ſuch doubtfull
diſtreſſe? What Princeſs was
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=57) euer
perplered with ſuch dolefull paſſions? what maid was euer croſſed with ſuch
miſhappe? nay, what creature euer was clogged with the like calamitie? Haue
the ſpightfull Deſtinies decréed my deſtruction, or the peruerſe Planets
conſpired my bitter bane? Doth froward fortune mean to make mee a mirror of
her mutabilitie, or is this the re­ward that Cupid beſtowes vpon his Clyents?
Is euery one that doth fancie, maimed with the like miſfortune, or is Love
alwaies accompanied with ſuch hapleſſe lucke? A­las no; for their loue is
lawefull, and mine lewd and laſei­uious: their fancie is fixed vpon vertue,
and mine vppon vanitie: they make their match with conſent of their Pa­rents,
and I my market without my Fathers counſaile? ſo that I am like in chooſing
ſuch chaffer, to chop and change and liue by the loſſe: yea, to buy repentance
at an vnrea­ſonable rate. Had it not been better for thée Callania, to haue
condeſcended to ye requeſts of Valericus, than conſen­ted to the ſuite of
Gwydonius? to haue liked thine owne Countrey man, than loued a ſtraggling
ſtranger: to haue ſatiſfied thy ſelfe with aſſurance, than vainley to fiſh for
hope? Trueth, but what then? Can the ſtrawe reſiſt the vertue of the pure Ie
[...]? Canth flaxe reſiſt the force of the fire? Can a louer withſtand the
brunt of beautie? fréeze, if hée ſtand by the flame? peruert the lawes of
Nature, or eſchue that which is framed by the fates, or flie from the force of
fancie? No, for who ſo eſcapeth the deadly dartes of Cupid ſhall be ſcorched
with his fire, and ſhée that with the dewe of chaſtitie quencheth his flame,
ſhall be ouerta­ken with his winges: ſo that to ſéeke by flight to eſchue
af­fection, is fooliſhly to enterpriſe that which can neuer be at­chieued.

But alas, If I muſt néedes lend a liſtening eare to the allurements of loue,
was there none to like but thy Fa­thers foe? How, fond foole, couldeſt thou
ſhew him curteſie, that intendes to repay thee with crueltie? How couldeſt
thou chooſe the ſonne to thy mate, when the Father ſéekes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=58) thy miſery.
It is not poſſible to mixe the bloud of a Ball and a Beare, togither in one
veſſell. The Lyons whelpes will neuer company with yong Woolues: the Faulcons
called Pelagrae, will neuer fl [...]e with the young  [...]euerets: and if the
Egges of a Crowe and a Curle we be put in one neſt, they both forthwith burſt
in ſunder, becauſe there is ſuch ancient enmitie betwéen the olde ones. And
wilt thou then be ſo wilfull to loue him whom thy father doth loath, or ſo
peruerſe as to place thy ſelfe in that parentage, where there is ſuch mortall
hatred betwéen the Parents? Wilt thou ſo farre forget the dutie of a childe,
as more to reſpecte thy fatall enemy, than regard thy naturall Father? But why
vile wretche doe I thus fondly fable? though Clero­phontes be my Fathers ſo,
yet Gwydonius is my faithful friend: though the one ſéeke to procure my paine,
the o­ther ſéekes to purchaſe my pleaſure: though the olde Sire ſtriues to
ſubuert my Fathers ſtate, yet the ſonne neuer ſought to bee preiudiciall to
his perſon, although that per­iured Paraſite Valericus hath moſt vniuſtly
accuſed him of trecherie. Shall I then hate him who hath alwaies ho­nored me?
Shall I work his wo that wiſheth my weale? Shall I be his bane, who hath bred
my bliſſe? Shall I de­teſt him which ſerueth me with moſt déepe deuotion? No,
I héere heartily powre out moſt pittifull playntes to the gods to preſerue my
Gwydonius from perill, and that for­tune may ſo fauor him as hée may paſſe out
of Alexandria, without death or danger. What though I héere in pryſon pine in
payne? VVhat though I ſink in ſorrow? What though I be diſtreſſed with griefe
& oppreſſed with miſery? What though I be croſſed with care, and cumbered with
calamity? Tuſh, let my father fret and fume in his furie, let my brother rage
and rayle, let that traitor Valericus triumph, and all the Countrie moſt
bitterly curſe mee, yea, let them martyr mee moſt miſerably, let them tor­ment
mee moſt terribly, yet direfull death ſhall not feare mée, as long as I know
Gwydonius is deuoyde of danger.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=58) For I hope
though Fortune frowne, though the deſtinies deny it, though the fates
forſweare it, yea, though the gods themſelues ſay no, yet in time wee ſhall
haue ſuch happie ſucceſſe, as the loyaltie of our loue, and the clearneſſe of
our conſcience by the lawe of iuſtice do deſerue. And therefore Gwydonius
ſhall be the Planet whereby to direct my doo­ings, hée ſhall be the ſtarre
ſhall guide my compaſſe, he ſhal be the hauen to harbour in, and the Saint at
whoſe ſhrine I meane to offer my deuotion.

Caſtania hauing thus diſcourſed with her ſelfe, ſhe de­termined when the wars
were ended, if ſhée could haue no hope to enioy the loue of Gwydonius, to
confeſſe her falts and to ſue for mercy at the barre of her fathers curteſie:
not that ſhe meant to liue without Gwydonius, or to loue or like any other,
but to prolong her daies in dolour, that ſhée might moſt rigorouſly reuenge ye
villany of Valericus, & by bathing in his bloud ſhe might both ſatiſfie her
ſelf, and ſig­nifie to Gwydonius how entirely ſhe loued and liked him. But
leauing her perplexed with theſe paſſions, againe to Clerophontes.

Who frying ſtill in his frantike fury, was not anie whit perſwaded to conclude
peace with Orlanio, but ha­uing muſtered his men, as ſpéedily as might bée,
imbarkt them, and with a lucky gale arriued at the coaſt of Alex­andria, where
the borderers not able to abide his forces, were conſtrayned to ſaue
themſelues by flight. But he as a man hauing exiled from his heart both pietie
and pitie, ba­thed his hands in guiltleſſe dloud, firing euery fort,
batte­ring downe euery bulwarke, ſacking each Citie, racing downe the wals to
ye ground, and commanding his ſouldi­ors vpon pain of moſt grieuous
puniſhment, not to haue a­ny reſpect of perſons, neither to regard the hoarie
hairs of the aged Cittizens, nor the tender yéeres of the ſucking in­fants,
but to imbrue their blades with ye bloud of all men, of what degrée ſoeuer.

Orlanio hearing how Clerophontes had inuaded his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=59) dominions,
and with what barbarous cruelty he had mur­thered his ſubiects, hauing alſo
intellegence by his ſcowts, that his army was paſſing huge, the better to
reſiſt the fu­rious force of his enemy, hired out of other Countries a great
multitude of mercenary Souldiours, ſo that he ga­thered a maruellous great
hoaſt, wherein was an infinite number indued with great skill and long
experience.

Furniſhed thus ſufficiently both with men and mu­nition; like a wiſe and warie
Captaine, ſéeing that hée no waie elſe might reſiſt the puiſſant power of ſo
mightie a Prince, determined without further delay to méet him and giue him
preſent battaile, hauing maruellous affi­ance in the approoued manhoode and
vertue of his ſouldi­ours.

Clerophontes likewiſe béeing of ſuch a valiant and in­uincible courage, as hée
ſéemed from his infancy to be vo­wed to Mars and martiall affaires, manfully
marched for­ward to méete with his enemies: which he performed ſo ſpéedily,
that within few daies, both the armies were with­in view: which Clerophontes
ſéeing, hée began to incou­rage his ſouldiours on this ſort.

ALthough moſt truſty Subiectes (quoth hée) I neither doubt of your proweſſe,
nor haue cauſe to feare your manhood, as hauing mine army fraught with the
moſt cou­ragious Captaines, and bouldeſt blouds of Mitylene, yet I with you to
conſider how deſperately we haue aduentu­red vpon the conqueſt of this
Dukedome, which if we at­chieue, we ſhall not onely gaine perpetuall fame and
re­nowme, but reap ſuch riches & treaſure, as ſhal ſufficiently counteruaile
our trauaile. But to obtaine this victory wée muſt behaue our ſelues
valiantly, neyther dreading any danger though neuer ſo deſperate, nor doubting
any perill though neuer ſo fearefull. Before our face we haue our e­nemie,
behinde our backes the ſurging ſeas; ſo that fight
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=59) we muſt, but
flie wée cannot: in being couragious wee winne the field and returne
conquerours: in prouing co­wards, wee both loſe our liues and the conqueſt: if
wee foile our foes, wee returne with triumph: if we faint and flie, we haue no
hope of ſafetie, but death and deſperation is imminent. Be then hardy to
hazard, and valiant to ven­ture amidſt the preaſe of your enemies, that
daunted with your valour, they may be forced to fly, & wee both triumph and
enioy the treaſure.

CLerophontes hauing thus louingly incouraged his ſouldiers, Orlanio on the
other ſide ſéeing his men began to feare the force of the enemie, and were
amazed wt ſuch a monſtrous multitude, prickt them forwarde with this parle.

THat mightie Monarch Alexander ye great, who for his martiall exploites was a
mirrour to all his poſteritie, whoſe proweſſe was ſuch, as he daūted Darius,
and by his inuincible courage made a conqueſt of the whole worlde: hearing on
a time one of his Captaines to demaund what multitude was in their enemies
campe, anſwered, that it was not the point of a good ſouldier, to inquire how
many the enemies were, but where they were: meaning that to feare the
multitude is rather the ſigne of cowardiſe, than a token of courage. Which
ſaying I wiſh you carefully to conſider; that ye huge armie of Clerophontes
neither amaze your minds, nor abate your valour, ſith that the equitie of our
cauſe doth more than counteruaile his companie. He inuadeth our realme without
reaſon, & wee defend but our owne right: he cruelly ſecketh to depriue vs of
fréedome & we lawfully do maintain our own libertie. He tyrannouſ­ly ſtriueth
to make vs bondſlaues, and we fight to frée our ſelues from captiuitie. If he
preuaile let vs look for no pitty, but yt we ſhalbe murthered without mercy,
we ſhall ſée be­fore our face our wiues rauiſhed, our daughters defloured,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=60) our parents
put to death, our children ſlain, our goods ſpoi­led, our Citie ſacked, and
our ſelues brought to vtter ruthe and ruine. Sith then we are placed betwéen
two extremi­ties, either to poſſeſſe our own with plenty, or to paſſe our
liues in penurie: let vs valiantly venture whatſoeuer wée gaine, let vs fight
without feare: for better it is to die with honour, than to liue with ſhame.

BY that time Orlanio had ended his Oration, the armies met in a plaine, within
thirtie leagues of Alexandria. Where both of them ordering (as became good
Captains) their people, there began in the breake of the daie the moſt cruell
and terrible battaile that earſt was heard of, conſi­dering the number on both
parts, their experience and poli­cie, with the valiant proweſſe and courage of
the captains. Thus continued they in fight, euen almoſt vntill Euen, with
marueilous ſlaughter on both ſides, the victorie yet doubtfull, till in the
end the Alexandrians began to faint and flie, more oppreſſed with the exceſſe
of the multitude, than diſtreſſed for want of manhood: for there weretwo and
fortie thouſand ſlaine, but not one taken priſoner, and of Clerophontes
company eight and twenty thouſand flaine, and ſixe hundered mortallis wounded.
This monſtrous maſſacre, and fearefull ſlaughter, ſo amazed the minds of theſe
two Captaines, that for the better burying of ye dead, and healing of them
which were hurt, they concluded a truce betwéene them for fiftéene daies, in
which time Orla­nio ſent Ambaſſadours to parle of peace with Clerophon­tes,
but in vaine: for hee was reſolued either valiantly to die in the field with
glorie, or to inioy the Dukedome of Alexandria with renowme. Yet as a worthy
Prince pre­ferring the ſecuritie of his ſouldiers before the ſafetie of his
owne perſon, he offered them the combat, which Orla­nio to auoyd the effuſion
of blōud, moſt willingly accepted. Now it was agréed and concluded betwéene
them, that two champions might be choſen, who by the dint of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=60) ſword ſhould
ſtint the ſtrife betwéene theſe two armies. It he of Mitylene remained victor,
then Orlanio ſhould not onely pay his former tribute, but deliuer vp his
Duke­dome into the hands of Clerophontes. But if the Alexan­drian obtained the
conqueſt, the Duke of Mitylene ſhould peaceably depart the Countrie, releaſe
the tribute, and alſo reſigne his ſtate, and become a ſubiect to Orlanio. And
for the better keeping and confirming of theſe conditions, they preſently
diſpatcht Embaſſaders to Fernandus ye king of Bohemia, to intreat his Maieſtie
that he would vouch­ſafe to become iudge in the combat: who for that hee
wiſhed well to both theſe Dukes, graunted to their requeſts, and with as much
ſpéedes might be, came to Alexandria. But in the meane time there was ſome
difference about the champiōs: for Clerophontes ſaid, that ſith in loſing ye
feld conſiſted the loſſe of liuing, life, and libertie, and in getting the
victorie the gaine of a Dukedome, be would in proper perſon fight the combat,
and trie the chaunce of Fortune, and therefore made a challenge to Orlanio.
But her fin­ding himſelfe faire vnfit to reſiſt his  [...]uri [...]us force,
refuſed it. Yet premiſing, that none vnleſſe he were deſcended of Nobilitie,
ſhould enter the l [...]ſts, wherewith Clerophontes was very well contented.
Now while this truce continu­ed, which was prolonged for thirtie daies, it was
law­full for them of Alexandria to come and view the campe of Mitylene, and
for the Mitylenes to goe and ſee the Cittie. Whereupon, Clerophontes deſirous
to ſée Orlanio & his Court, went onely accompanied with his guard to
Alex­andria, where he was moſt royally entertained, and ſump­tuouſly feaſted
by Orlanio, both of them remitting the ri­gour of their malice, till it ſhould
be ſhewed in  [...]ffect, by reaſon of their manhood. But as ſoone as
Therſandro and the other Lordes ſawe Clerophontes, that he was rather a
monſter than a man, hauing each limme ſo ſtrongly c [...] ­ched, each part ſo
proportioned, ſo huge of ſtature. & ſo fierce of countenance, they were ſo
daunted with the ſight of his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=61) perſon, as
they almoſt feared to came in his preſence, ſay­ing: that thrée of the boldeſt
bloudes in Alexandria were not able to abide the force of Clerophontes. Who
now peaceablie departing to his hoaſt, left Orlanio as greatly perplexed for
aſſembling his nobilitie together, amongſt whom he appointed the champion
ſhould be choſen. They not onely with one conſent withſtood his command, but
be­gan to murmure and mutine againſt him, cōdemning him of follie that he
would ſo vnaduiſedly commit his owne ſtate and their ſtaie to the doubtfull
hazarde of one mans hap. Orlanio ſeeing that it was now no time to chaſtiſe
this their preſumption, vnleſſe hee meant to raiſe ciuill diſſenſi­on in the
cittie, which were the next way to confirme the enemie, and bréede his owne
confuſion, he diſſembled his choler, and began to worke a newe way. For firſt
he fréed Caſtania out of priſon, then made generall proclamation throughout
his Dukedome, that what Lord ſo euer with­in his land would trie the combat
with Clerophontes, if he remained victor in the conqueſt, hee would not onely
giue him his daughter Caſtania to wife, let him poſſeſſe peace­ably the
Dukedome of Mitylene as her dowris, but be con­tent to acknowledge him as his
liege, & pay him tribute, as he was wont to Clerophontes.

While he lingred and liſtned how this proclamation would preuaile, Caſtania
hearing this ſeuere ſentence, and dolefull doome pronounced, ſeeing that ſhe
ſhould not one­ly be forced to forſake Gwydonius, but be conſtrained to match
in mariage with one whom ſhe ſhould neither loue nor like, burſt forth into
theſe bitter complaints.

ALaſſe (quoth ſhe) how pinching a paine is it to be per­plexed with diuerſe
paſſions, what a noyſome care it is to be cumbred with ſundrie cogitations,
what a woe it is to hang betwéene deſire a [...] deſpaire, and what a hell it
is to houer betwéene feare and hope? For as to him which is aſſured to die,
death is no dolour, in that he perfectly knows
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=61) there is no
ſalue can cure his ſorow, ſo to him which feares to die, and yet hopes to
liue, death were thrice more wel­come than to linger in ſuch doubt. In which
curſed caſe a­las my care conſiſteth: for as out of the riuer Cea in Sici­lia
but fleſh moſt fearefull flames, and yet the ſtreame is paſſing colde, neither
is ye water able to quench the fire, not the fire cauſe the water to be hot;
ſo the heat of hope flameth out of the chilling fountain of feare, and yet the
force of the one is not able to aſſwage the vehemency of the other, but ſtill
my heauy heart is diuerſly aſſayled with them both.

If my father Orlanio win yt conqueſt, I doubt my deſire ſhall reuer haue happy
ſucceſſe: if Clerophontes triumph as victor, I greatly feare his cruelty is
ſuch, as I ſhall not eſcape moſt hopleſſe death. And yet again, I hope that
then my owne Gwydonius will accept me for his, and with tri­umphant armes
embrace me. But alas, wil Clerophontes ſuffer him to match with his mortall
foe, wil hée not rather preuent it by my perill? Yes no doubt: if he returne
with triumph my father ſhall ſerue him as a ſubiect, my brother ſhall become
his vaſſall, my friendes ſhall bee forelorne, my Citie ſackt, and my natiue
Countrie brought to vtter confuſion. And ſhall I for the loue of a Stranger
wiſh theſe ſtraunge Stratagems? Shall I to féede mine owne fancy, and content
my luſting minde, wiſhe my Fathers death, my Brothers bane, my Friends miſhap,
my Coun­tries confuſion, and perhappes my owne miſerie? For though Gwydonius
loued mée when our Parents were friendes, hée will not now like me being foes:
but to re­uenge the iniuries my Father offered him, will ſubtilly ſéeke to
ſacke mine honour and honeſty, and ſo triumph of my ſhame and diſcredite. Had
I not better pray my Fa­ther may winne the combate, and then ſhall I bathe in
the ſtreames of bliſſe, and flowe in the flouds of felicitie, then ſhall I
dread no daunger, no feare, no perills: then ſhall I ſée my father, friends,
and Country, flouriſh in moſt happie proſperitie: then ſhall I enioy ſome
iollie Gentleman,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=62) who will loue
mée being young; and cheriſh me being olde, and poſſeſſe the Dakedome of
Mitylene for my downe. And canſt thou Caſtania be ſo ingratefull, as to will
his woe which wiſheth thy weale? to deſire his deſtruction which prayeth for
thy proſperity? Canſt thou be ſo coue­tous as to craue that for thy
poſſeſſion, which is thy Gwy­donius patrimonie? or ſo ſuſpicious, as to accuſe
him of trechery, which hath bin but too truſty: to count him a coun­terfaite,
which hath alwaies béene conſtant? No, come what come will, let froward
Fortune fauour whom ſhée pleaſe, ſo I maie ioy and ſafely enioy my only ioy
Gwydo­nius.

As Caſtania had thus ended her complainte, Gwydo­nius who all this while
lurked about the borders of Alex­andria, heard what ſucceſſe Orlanio [...]
affaires had with his Father Clerophontes, how varie fews or none at all durſt
trie the combat with him, that his loue and Lady Caſtania was the priſe that
hée ſhould get that gained the conqueſt. Which things conſidered, ſuppoſing
that Caſtania had caſt him off, and that ſhe plaid, Out of ſight, out of mind,
by a ſecret and truſty meſſenger, hee preſented her with this Letter.

# Gwydonius to Caſtania, health.

THe pure ſpice, Caſtania, the more it is pounded, the ſwéeter ſmell it yéelds:
the Camomill increaſeth moſt béeing troden on: the Palme tree the greater
waight it beareth, the ſtraighter it groweth: the ſtone Terpiſtre­tes, the
more it is beaten, the harder it is, and loyall loue is not weakened by the
ſtormes of aduerſitie, but rather farre the more fortified by the frowarde
ſtate of frowning Fortune: which Madame I ſpeake by proofe and experi­ence:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=62) for ſince I
haue ſupped off the ſowre dregs of ſorrow, and béene peſtered with the bitten
pills of penary, ſin or ſi­niſter fortune hath croſſed me to the miſhaps, and
diſaſter fates haue driuen mee downe to miſery, my fancy hath ſo furiouſly
aſſaulted my minde, and affection hath ſo inceſ­ſantly battered the bulwarke
of my breſt, as the ſparkes of Ioue which kindled in mée in proſperity, are
turned to fierce and fiery flames by adnorſitie. So that Madam, your preſence
did not before procure me ſuch pleaſure, as your abſence doth paine, neither
was I ſo drowned in delight, in frequenting your companie, as I am drenched
with de­ſpight, by leading my life in ſorrowfull calamitie. Alaſſe Caſtania,
what vnſpeakeable griefe hath tormented mée? what direfull dolour hath
diſtreſſed mee? what helliſh horrour hath haunted mee? yea, what wee and
wretched­neſſe hath wracked my wits, ſince thou laſt béen proclai­med a prey
to him whoſoeuer winneth the priſe in the com­bate? How oft haue I wiſhed that
I might bee the Cham­pion to make the challenge, that I might venture my life
to purchaſe thy liberty, that my death might redéem thée from danger?

But alas, I ſée to wiſh is in vaine: to craue of ye geds, that thy father
ſhould vaunt of ye victory, is but to wiſh that our loue ſhould haue hapleſſe
ſucceſſe: to pray that Cle­rophontes ſhould returne with conqueſt, thou wilt
déeme I deſire thy friends miſfortune. Thus aſſayled with diuers doubts, I
driue off my dayes in dolour: hoping howſoeuer fortune frowne, that the fates
wil aſſigne vs a perfect calm of permanent felicity for this ſturdie ſtorme of
pinching miſerie.

Thine, euer exiled Gwydonius.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=63) CAſtania
hauing receiued this Letter, ſéeing that no ſi­niſter chaunce of fortune was
able to change the fixed fancie of Gwydonius, conceiued ſuch aſſured hope in
his conſtancie, as now ſhée thought his troth was filed with no ſpot of
treachery, that his faith was quite deuoide of flatte­rie, & that whatſoeuer
chaunced, ſhe might ſafely repoſe hir ſtay and ſtate in his loyaltie. Inſomuch
that to drine out the euill opinion which ſhe thought her brother Therſan­dro
had conceiued of Gwydonius conſpiracie, ſhe ſecretly ſhewed him the Letter:
which after he had read ouer, and carefully conſtrued euery clauſe, hee began
both to detect and deteſt the villanie of Valericus, deſtring his ſiſter
Ca­ſtania that ſhee would earneſtly perſwade Gwydonius in diſguiſed apparel
ſpéedily to repair to her ledging, promi­ſing with ſolemne vowes and ſacred
oathes, not to be pre­iudiciall to his perſon: Caſtania affying greatly in her
bro­thers faith, and deſtrous to haue a fight of her louing Gwy­donius,
returned him theſe few lines.

# Caſtania, to Gwydonius, proſperity.

VVHoſo taſteth Gwydonius of the heard Mely So­philos is neuer tormented with
the ſting of ad­uerſttie, and ſhée that weareth the ſtone Mephites about her,
neuer ſorroweth at ſiniſter fortune, who ſo fancieth without faining neuer
proueth fickle, and ſhe that loueth loyally may well be croſſed with
calamitie, but neuer iuſt­ly accuſed of incōſtancy. Account thy Caſtania good
Gwy­donius to be in ye ſame predicament: for let diſaſter miſhap driue me down
to moſt deadly miſerie, let the cruell fates compaſſe me with curſed care, let
fortune and the deſtinies conclude my confuſion, yet it ſhall not diminiſh my
fancie, but rather increaſe my affection. I will ſtill in weale, in woe, in
bale, in bliſſe, in mirth & miſery, ſay I loue, and it is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=63) onely
Gvvidonius. For ſhall our fancie be ſuch as it ſhall be foiled with
miſfortune? no, but as Thetis chaunging in­to many ſhapes, at laſt returned
into her owne forme, ſo in­to what miſhap I be driuen by miſerie, yet I will
ſtand in mine old ſtate in deſpight of the fates and fortune. Come therefore
Gwydonius to the Court in diſguiſed apparell, but without care: for thou ſhalt
finde me ſo truſtie, as my troth ſhalbe without ſpot, and thy health without
hazard. Thus wiſhing thy curteſie to conſter well of my conſtan­cie, I bid
thee farewell

Thine, or not her owne, conſtant Caſtania.

GWydonius hauing carefully conſtrued ouer the con­tents of this louing Letter,
although the rigor of Orla­nio might haue giuen him ſufficient cauſe of
ſuſpicion, yet the cléereneſſe of his owne conſcience, and the loue he bare to
Caſtania, would not ſuffer him either to ſuſpect any trea­ſon, or to doubt of
any deceit, but determined without any delay to put the ſafetie of his perſon
and the ſafegard of his life into her handes. But leauing him to bring his
purpoſe luckily to paſſe, againe to Orlanio.

Who ſéeing that his proclamation coulde not preuayle, and that his Nobles
preferred their owne ſafetie before his ſecuritie, was perplexed with ſuch
helliſh paſſions, & gri­ped with ſuch pinching griefe, as the Ghoſtes
tormented with griſly fiends, felt no ſuch hapleſſe furie. To fight with
Clerophōtes, hee felt his ſtrength farre vnfit to reſiſt his force: to denie
the combat, he neither could nor would, al­though he brought himſelfe to
confuſion, & his children to captituitie: ſo yt howſoeuer he turned himſelf,
he ſaw before his face death and deſpaire, woe and wretchedneſſe, miſhap and
miſerie. Combred thus with this cureleſſe care, and ſitting ſolitarily in
ſorrow, ſéeing the diſmall day drewe on, and hearing that Fernandus ye king of
Bohemia was lately
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=64) landed, he
fell into more furious paſſions, vntill he was driuen out of his dumpes by his
ſonne Therſandro: who perceiuing his father thus dolefully daunted, he beganne
moſt louingly to comfort him, promiſing that ſince none durſt venture to deale
with Clerophontes, hée himſelfe would fight the combat, and either worthlly
win the con­queſt with renowme, or manfully die in the fielde with honour.

Orlanio hearing the bold courage of this newe cham­pion, felt his ſorrow
ſomewhat ſalued by this profer, per­ſwading himſelfe that his ſonne was better
able to abide the brunt than he, and hoping that the Gods would fauour the
equitie of the cauſe, and aſſuredly by iuſtice graunt him the victorie.
Reſting I ſay, vpon this hope, and than­king Therſandro for his naturall
affection, and prayſing him for his noble courage, he preſently went to méete
Fer­nandus, whom he moſt princely entertained, conducting him very royally
into Alexandria, where he moſt ſumptu­ouſly ſealled him and all his traine.
But as they paſſed a­way the time in paſtime and pleaſure, ſo poore Therſandro
ſpent the day in dolour, and the night in ſorrowe. For al­though to comfort
his father hee made light of the com­bat, and valiantly offered himſelfe to
trie the chaunce of fortune, yet ſeeing his enemies force far to excéed his
féeble ſtrength, hee began to faint, although like a worthy Gen­tleman he
couered his dreadfull courage with a deſperate countenance, raunging vp and
downe the fields to driue away his melancholie: where by chance in diſguiſed
appa­rell he met Gvvidonius, to whom after ſome parle paſt betwéene them, he
bewrated the whole ſtate of the matter, how he was to enter combat with
Clerophontes, and that he doubted greatly of the euent of the victorie,
fearing the force of his Father, and fainting at his owne unbecillitie. Which
Gwydonius hearing, hee made this ſhort an­ſwere.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=64) THerſandro
(quoth hée) it is vaine with long talke to paſſe away the time when delay
bréeds danger, and folly to hope for faire weather when the Aire is ouercaſt
with cloudes: leauing off therofore all oathes to confirme my faith, thus much
to the purpoſe. If it pleaſe thee to truſt me without tryall, and to giue any
confidence to my words, I héere promiſe both to make manifeſt my loyall loue
to Caſtania, and to repaie thy courteſie; that I wil, re­ſembling thy perſon,
and diſguiſed in thy armour, enter combat with my father Clerophontes, eyther
intending by winning the victorie to obtaine my will, or by loſing the
conqueſt to want my wiſh: if this my profer pleaſe thée, I will paſſe priuily
to the Court: if not, good Therſandro, let me go as I came.

Therſandro, commending the ſubtill deuiſe of Gwydo­nius, carried him as
couertly as coulde be to Caſtania, to whom hée was farre more welcome, than
ſoone come, re­mayning cloſely in her cloſet til the next morning. Caſta­nia
notwithſtanding knowing nothing of their pretence, Fernandus king of Bohemia,
the next day being gone with al his Nobility to the place appointed for the
combat; Or­lanio, Caſtania, and all the Lords of Alexandria, clad in mourning
attire followed him, thinking this diſmall daie ſhould bée the date of their
deſtruction. And Clerophontes as a balefull wretch thirſting after bloud, and
glorying in the hope of his ſuppoſed conqueſt, ſtoode in the liſtes,
expec­ting his fatall foe. To whome Gwydonius his ſonns fur­niſhed with the
armour of Therſandro, preſented himſelfe. Who ſéeing, that forced by the fond
allurements of Loue, he was to fight, not with his mortall foe, but with his
na­turall father, he fell into theſe doubtfull dumps:

Alas poore Gwydonius (quoth he) how art thou combred with diuerſe cogitations?
what a cruell conflict doeſt thou finde in thy minde betwéene loue and
loyaltie, nature and neceſſity? who euer was ſo wilfull, as willingly to wage
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=65) battaile
againſt his owne father? who ſo cruell as to enter combat with his owne ſire?
Alas, dutie perſwades mee not to practice ſo monſtrons a miſchiefe: but the
deuotion I owe Caſtania, drines mee to performe the déede, were it thrice more
dangerous or deſperate. The honour I owe to my father, makes mée faint for
feare, but once to ima­gine ſo brutiſh a fact: the loue I owe to Caſtania,
conſtray­neth me to defend the combat, if Iupiter himſelfe made the challenge.
And is not (fond foole) neceſſitie aboue nature? is not the lawe of loue aboue
King or Keyzar, Father or Friends, God or the diuell? Yes. And ſo I mean to
take it: for either I will valiantly winne the conqueſt and my Caſtania, or
loſe the victory, and ſo by death end my miſe­ries.

With that the Trumpets ſound, and Gwydoniu; lu­ſtily leaping into the liſts,
fell preſently into furious fight with his Father, driuing not onely Fernandus
and Orlanio but alſo both the armies into a great doubt. For although
Clerophontes moſt cruelly proſecuted him, yet he alwaies receiued the ſtrokes,
but neuer ſo much as once returned one blow: til at laſt looking aloft, &
ſpying Caſtania, his cou­rage increaſed, that all feare ſet aſide, he
careleſly ſlang a­way his ſword and ſhield, and ran vpon his Father, not on­ly
tearing from him his Target; but, violently caſting him vpon the ground and
ſpéedily vnlacing his helmet, offered to cut off his head with his owne ſword:
but Clerophon­tes crying out confeſſed himſelfe captiue, and graunted his
enemy the conqueſt. Wherupon they of Alexandria, gaue a mighty ſhowt, and
Fernandus and Orlanio came downe ready to carrie Clerophontes captiue to the
Cittie. But Gwydonius firſt demaunded of Orlanio if he was content to perform
that which he promiſed by proclamation: to whō Fernandus anſwered, that both
hee would and ſhould; or elſe as he was his friend, ſo he would be his fo.
Gwydonius hearing this faithfull aſſertion of the King, pulling downe his
heauer began to ſpeak in this manner.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=65) I Let thee
Orlanio (quoth hée) and the worthy king of Bo­hemia to know, that I am
Gwydonius, ſonne and heire to this conquered Clerophontes, who for the loue of
thy Daughter Caſtania, haue not ſpared contrary to the law of nature to fight
with mine owne Father; hoping the deſti­nies by my meanes haue decréed not
onely of fatall foes to make you faithfull friends, but to finiſh vp your
loue, which otherwiſe could not haue béen performed.

I haue wonne Orlanio my Fathers Dukedome by vic­tory, and thy daughter by
conqueſt: the one I had before by inheritance, and the other by loue, yet I
would willing­ly haue thy good will, which if thou grant, I hope my father wil
both pardon my offence, and think well of my proffer.

Clerophontes kiſſing and embracing Gwydonius, told him his care whas half
cured, in that ſuch a good captain had wonne the conqueſt. Fernandus and
Orlanio ſtoode aſtoni­ſhed at this ſtrange Tragedy, doubting whether they
dreamt of ſuch a rare deuiſe, or ſaw it in effect. At laſt Or­lanio, as one
wakened out of a trance, with trickling tears imbraced Clerophontes, honoring
him as his ſoueraigne, and promiſing not onely to giue Caſtania to Gwydonius,
bus alſo halfe his Dukedome in dowrie. Clerophontes thanking him for his
curteſie, conſented moſt willing­ly to this motion: ſo that before Fernandus
depar­ted, the marriage betwéen Gwydonius and Caſtania, Therſandro and
Lewcippa was moſt ſumptuouſly ſo­lemnlzed.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=66)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=66)

## 2\. The Debate betweene Follie and Loue, tranſlated out of French by ROBERT
GREEN, Maiſter of Artes.

The ARGVMENT.

IVpiter made a great Feaſt, at the which all the gods were commanded to be
preſent. Loue and Folly arriue at one inſtant at the gate of the palace, which
was ſhut hauing nothing open but the wicket. Folly ſeeing Loue readie to enter
in, paſſeth before: which repulſe driueth Loue into choler. Folly auoucheth
that of right ſhe ought to be the foremoſt. Whereupon they enter into
diſputation of their power, dignity and ſuperioritie. But Loue not a­ble to
get the conqueſt by words, taketh his bowe in hand and ſhooteth at hir; but in
vaine: for Folly became inui­ſible, and in deſpight pulleth out Cupids eyes.
And for to couer this deformity, ſhadoweth his face with a vaile, ſo framed by
the Deſtinies, that is was not poſſible to take it away. Venus complayneth of
Folly vnto Iupiter, who appointeth Apollo & Mercury to pleade the caſe of
theſe two Clients: whoſe diſcourſe being heard, hee pronoun­ceth his ſentence.

### 2.1.

FOLLIE.

I Fear greatly that I ſhal be the laſt at yt feaſt of Iupiter, where all the
gods (no doubt) do attend me. And yet me think I ſée the ſonne of Venus which
is as late as I. I will paſſe before him, leaſt they call me ſluggiſh and
ſlothfull.

Loue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=67)

VVHat ſoole, is this that repulſeth mee ſo rudely? Take héede leaſt haſte make
waſte, and that thy raſhneſſe cauſe thée not to cry Peccaui.

Folly.

Oh ſir, blame me not though I make haſte: for I go be­fore, to tell the gods
that you come at leiſure.

Loue.

Nay, that which is eaſily begun, is not alwaies lightly ended: for before you
eſcape me, I wil reuenge this thy in­iurious ieſting.

Follie.

Let mee goe fond Loue, and ſtate mée not: for as it is a ſhame to quarrell
with a woman, ſo it is more diſcredit to take the foile.

Loue.

The foile? What boaſting brags be theſe? Who hath euer aduentured to deſpiſe
me, much leſſe to defie me? But doeſt thou know what I am?

Folly.

Thou art Cupid, the Sonne of Venus.

Loue.

How dareſt thou then vaunt thy ſelfe againſt mée? which how little ſo euer I
bee, am the moſt redoubted of all the gods.

Folly.

Thy words are great whatſoeuer thy works be: but tell me, what or wherein
lieth this thy great power?

Loue.

The heauens and the earth (fond foole) are witneſſes of my words, there is no
place where I haue not left Tro­phées in ſigne of triumph. Looke into heauen,
and demand if anie of the gods haue eſcaped my hands. Begin with olde Saturne,
Iupiter, Mars, Apollo, and end with the de­mi gods, Satyres, Fawnes, and
Syluans: Nay, the god­deſſes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=67) themſelues
will not ſhame to confeſſe ſomewhat. Looke vpon the earth, and ſée if thou
canſt finde one which hath not béene foyled by my meanes. Behold in the
furious Seas, how Neptune & his Tritons doe pield me obeiſance. Yea, and
laſtly looke into Hell it ſelfe, if I haue not forced Pluto that infernall
Prince, to ſteale away Proſerpina the daughter of Ceres. And to yt end thou
doubt not with what engines I haue atchieued theſe victories, behold this bowe
and theſe arrowes only, which haue wonne me theſe wor­thie conqueſts. I haue
no néede that Vulcan do temper my tooles. I am not accompanied with the Furies
& Harpies, to cauſe me to bée feared before the combat. I haue not to do with
Chariots, Souldiours, Captaines, men of armes, nor great troupes of Horſmen,
without the which mortall men cannot triumph. No, I haue no other counſaile,
mu­nition, nor aide, but my ſelfe. When I ſée mine enemies in the fielde, I
preſent my ſelfe with my bowe, and let flie my boltes, and the victorie is
alwaies gotten at the firſt ſtroke.

Folly.

I excuſe thy youthfull yéeres poore Cupide, or elſe I woulde blaze thée for
the moſt preſumptuous patch in the world. It ſéemeth by thy vaine vaunting,
that euery one holdeth his life of thy mercy, and that thou art the onely Lord
and Soueraign both in Heauen, Earth, the Sea, and Hell. But many things are
ſpoken which are neuer belée­ued.

Loue.

And art thou ſo hard of beléefe, to deny that which eue­ry one confeſſeth?

Folly.

I haue not to doo with other mens opinions: but this I am ſure: that it is not
by thy force and proweſſe, that ſo many miracles are wrought in the world, but
by my in­duſtry, by my meanes, and by my diligence, although thou knoweſt me
not. But if thou doeſt cōtinue long in this thy
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=68) choler, I wil
let thée vnderſt [...]nd, that thy bowe and thy ar­rowes wherof thou vaunteſt
ſo much, are more weak than wax, if I bend not the one and temper the other.

Loue.

Doeſt thou thinke by this ſkoffing to pacifie mine an­ger, or by contemptuous
threatning to qualifie my choler? Haſt thou euer (fond fool) handled my bowe,
or directed my bolts? Is it thy proweſſe and not my force which perfor­meth
ſuch valiant conqueſts? But ſince thou regardeſt me, and reſpecteſt my force
ſo little, thou ſhalt preſently féel the proofe thereof.

Folly maketh her ſelfe inuiſible, ſo that Loue cannot hit her.

Loue.

But where art thou become? How haſt thou eſcaped mee? This onely is the
ſtrangeſt caſe that euer chaunced vnto me. I had thought that amongſt all the
gods I only could haue made my ſelfe inuiſible. But now I ſée I am deceiued.

Folly.

Did not I tell thee before, that thy bowe & thy arrows are of no force, but
when it pleaſeth me, and that by my means thou alwaies obtaineſt the conqueſt?
Maruaile not if I be inuiſible: for if I lift the eyes of the Eagle or of the
Serpent Epidaurus, cannot eſpie me; for Chameleon like, take the ſhape of them
which whom I do remaine.

Loue.

Trulie as I coniecture, thou art ſome Sorcereſſe, or ſome Enchauntreſſe, ſome
Circe, ſome Medea, or ſome Fairie.

Folly.

Wel, ſince, thou doeſt thus recleſly rail vpon me, know that I am a godeſſe as
thou art a god: my name is Follie▪
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=68) I am ſhe
which raiſeth thee vp, and caſteth thee downe at my pleaſure. Thou vnlooſeſt
thy bowe, & lefteſt flie thine arrowes in the aire: but I place them where it
pleaſeth me. Thou doeſt addreſſe thy ſelfe againſt Iupiter: but he is of ſuch
puiſſance, that if I both guided not thy hand, & tem­pered thy arrow, thy
féeble force could little preuail againſt his proweſſe. Indéed thou diddeſt
force Iupiter to loue, but I cauſed him to change himſelf into a Swan, into a
Bull, into Gold, into an Eagle. Who cauſed Mars & thy mother Venus to be taken
in bed together by the limping cuckold Vulcan, but I? If Paris had done no
other thing but loued Helena, Sparta had neuer reioyced, nor Troy béen brought
to ruine. But did not I cauſe him to goe to Menelaus, vn­der colour of
Embaſſage, to Court vnto his wife, to leade her away by force, and after to
defend his vniuſt quarrell againſt all Greece? Who had ſpoken of the loue of
Dido, if he had not deuiſed to goe a hunting, that ſhe might haue the better
opportunity to communicate with Aeneas, that by ſuch priuate familiaritie he
might not be aſhamed to take from her that which long before moſt willinglie
ſhée would haue giuen him. I beléeue no mention had beene made of Artemiſia,
if I had not cauſed her drinke the cyn­ders of her huſbāds dead carkaſſe: for
els who had knowne whether ſhe had loued her huſbande more than other wo­men?
The effect and iſſues of things alwaies makes them to be praiſed or
diſpraiſed. If thou makeſt men to loue, yet I am oft times the chiefeſt cauſe.
But if any ſtraunge ad­uenture or great effect chanceth, in that thou haſt no
part, but the onely honour belongeth vnto me. Thou ruleſt no­thing but the
heart, the reſt I gouerne: yea, I leade thee, I conduct thee, & thine eies
ſerue thée to no more vſe than the beames of the Sunne to a blinde man. But to
the ende thou know me from henceforth and that thou maieſt giue me thankes for
conducting thee carefully, behold now how greatly thine eies do profit thée.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=69)Follie putteth
out Cupids eyes.

Loue.

Alas Iupiter, O my mother Venus, what auaileth it to be thy ſonne ſo feared,
ſo redoubted, both in heauen and in earth, if I be ſubiect to be iniured as
the moſt vile ſlaue in the worlde? Alaſſe, haue I thus loſt mine eyes by an
vn­knowne woman?

Follie.

Take héede fond foole another time to raile vpon thoſe, who perhaps are of
more force and puiſſaunce than thou. Thou haſt offended the Quéen of men, thou
haſt outraged her, who gouerneth the heart, the braine, and the minde; vnder
whoſe ſhadow euery one once in his life ſhrowdeth himſelfe, and there
remaineth either long or ſhort time ac­cording to his merite: thou haſt
diſpleaſed her who procu­reth thy renowme, thou haſt contemned her who hath
ad­uanced thée, and therefore hath this miſfortune fallen vpon thy head.

Loue.

Alas! how is it poſſible for me to honour her whome I neuer knew, or to
reuerence that perſon whome before I neuer ſawe: but if thou haſt borne mee
ſuch great good will as then ſaieſt, pardon this my offence, and reſtore me my
ſight.

Follie.

To reſtore thee thine eyes is not in my power: but I will couer the place, to
hide the deformitie.

Follie couereth Cupids face with a Scarfe, and giueth him winges.

And in lieu of this hapleſſe lucke, thou ſhalt haue theſe wings which ſhall
carrie thee whither thou wilt wiſh.

Loue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=69)

But where hadſt thou this vaile ſo readie to couer my deformitie?

Follie.

It was giuen me as I came hither by one of the Deſti­nies: who tolde me it was
of that nature, that if it were once faſtned, it could neuer be vnlooſed.

Loue.

How vnlooſed? Am I then blinde for euer? O vile and traiterous wretch, could
it not ſuffice to put out mine eies, but to take away the meanes that the gods
cannot reſtore them? Now I ſée the ſentence verified on my ſelfe, that it is
not good to take a preſent at the hand of anenemy. O cru­ell deſtinies, O
curſed daie! ſhall not the heauens, ye earth, and the ſeas haue cauſe to
waile, ſith Loue is blinde? But why doe I complaine here in vaine? it is
better for me to ſue to the Gods for reuengement.

### 2.2. The ſecond Diſcourſe.

Loue goeth from the palace of Iupiter, lamenting to himſelfe his miſchiefe.

Loue.

Alas in what miſerable caſe am I? what can either my bowe or mine arrows
auaile me? now can I not cauſe whō I liſt to loue, but without reſpect of
perſons, euerie one is in daunger of my dartes. Hitherto I haue onely cauſed
daintie damſels, and yong youths to loue, I did chooſe out the braueſt blouds,
and the faireſt and moſt well featured men: I did pardon vile and baſe
perſons, I excuſed the deformed creatures, and let olde age remaine in peace.
But now, thinking to hit a young gallant, I light vppon ſome olde doating
lecher: in ſtead of ſome braue Gentle­man, I ſtrike ſome filthie lurden. And
it ſhall happen (I doubt) that they ſhalbe moſt fortunate in their loue; ſo yt
by [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=70) patrimony,
preſence, or wealth, they ſhall ſooneſt winne the fauour of women, and by this
meanes my kingdome ſhall come to ruine, when men ſée in it ſuch diſorder and
cuill gouernment.

Venus hauing long ſought Cupid, now meeteth him.

I Haue carefully long ſought thée my déere ſonne, mar­uelling what the cauſe
ſhould bee that thou haſt not béene preſent at the banket of Iupiter: Who is
greatly incenſed againſt thée, not only for thy abſence, but for the
cōplaints which are powred out againſt thée by ſundrie poore artifi­cers,
laboring men, peaſants, ſlaues, hand-maids, old men, and toothleſſe aged
women, crying all vnto Iupiter, that they loue; thinking themſelues greatly
iniured in this re­ſpect, that the paſſion which is proper to worthy and Noble
men, ſhould be inflicted vpon them which are of the baſe and vileſt ſort.

Loue.

Had not the great miſfortune which is chaunced vnto me happened, I had neither
béen abſent from the banquet, nor their gréeuous complaints had not béene
inſerred a­gainſt me.

Venus.

Why? And art thou hurt? Who hath thus vailed thine eyes?

Loue.

Folly hath not onely pulled them out, but alſo hath put this band before mine
eyes, which can neuer be taken a­way.

Venus.

O curſed enemy of all wiſedome, O hapleſſe wretch, vniuſtly called a goddeſſe,
and more vnrightly tearmed im­mortal, haſt thou depriued me of my chiefeſt
delight and felicity? O diſaſter loue, O diſſolute mother, O wofull
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=70) Venus, who
ſéeſt thy ſonne, thy ioy, and only care, thus cru­elly depriued of his ſight.
Well, ſince thy miſhappe is ſo great, I vowe that euery one that ſhall loue
(what fauour or happy ſucceſſe ſoeuer he ſhall haue) ſhall not be without ſome
care, trouble, or calamitie, that he vaunt not himſelfe to be more happie than
the ſonne of Venus.

Loue.

Ceaſe off good mother from theſe ſorrowful complaints, and redouble not my
griefe by theſe dolorous diſcourſes, ſuffer mee to beare mine owne miſfortune,
and wiſh not euill vnto them which ſhall be my ſubiects.

Venus.

Well, let vs then go to Iupiter, and complaine of this curſed inchantreſſe.

### 2.3. The third Diſcourſe.

Venus.

It euer thou haddeſt pittie of my plaintes, moſt iuſt Iu­piter, when thou
ſaweſt me labour to ſaue my ſonne Ae­neas from the furie of the raging ſeas,
and to defend him from other dangers, in the which hée was preſent at the
ſiege of Troy: If my teares for the death of my deare A­donis moued thee to
compaſſion: The ſurpaſſing ſorrow that I doe conceiue for the great iniurie
offered to Cupid, I hope ſhall mooue thée to pittie. If teares wold ſuffer me,
I would bewray the cauſe of my ſorrow: but behold my ſon in what plight hee
is, and thou ſhalt eaſily perceiue the cauſe of my complaint.

Iupiter.

Alaſſe my béere daughter, what doe theſe teares pre­uaile? knoweſt thou not
what fatherly affection I haue al­waies borne thee? what doeſt thou diſtruſt
that I will not ſuccour thee, or that I cannot?

Venus.

No, I neither doubt the one, nor diſtruſt the other, only
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=71) demaund
iuſtice againſt Follie, the moſt outragious Furie in the worlde, which hath
thus grieuouſly abuted Cupid.

Folly.

Moſt mightie and ſoueraigne Iupiter, behold I am here ready to anſwere to
Venus complaints, and to debate my right againſt Cupid.

Iupiter.

Folly, I will neither accuſe nor excuſe thée, vntill I haue heard the defence
of the one, as well as the plaint of the other, leaſt I ſhould be thought
partiall: neither, for the more auoiding of iniuſtice in the matter, will I
ſuffer you to pleade your owne cauſes, but Venus chooſe you one of the Gods,
and Folly take you another.

Venus.

I chooſe Apollo to defend my cauſe.

Follie.

And I Mercurie, to maintaine my right.

Iupiter.

Then Apollo & Mercurie prepare your ſelues to plead well in your clientes
caſes: and Apollo ſince you take the plaintifes part, let vs heare what you
can ſay.

Apollo.

THe common people, right ſoueraign Iupiter, although their minds be ſotted,
and almoſt ſenſeleſſe, yet they haue alway had loue in ſuch ſacred eſtimation,
that they haue carefully rewarded them with the titles of honor and dignitie,
which haue excelled in that holy affection, eſtée­ming this onely vertue (if
ſo rightly it may bee tearmed) ſufficient, of a man to make one a God. The
Scythians for this cauſe canonized Pilades and Oreſtes, erecting temples vnto
them, and calling them the Gods of amitie. Caſtor and Pollux were made
immortall by this meanes, not in that they were brothers, but in that (which
is rare) their
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=71) loue was
inuiolable. How hath ſame blazed abroad ye loue of Dauid and Ionathan, the
amitie of Pythias and Damon, and of Titus and Giſippus? But the better to make
mani­feſt the force of loue and amitie, I will alledge the ſaying of Darius,
who opening a Pomgranate, being demanded whereof hee would haue as manie as
there were graines wtin, anſwered, of Zopyres: this Zopyrus was his faithful
friend, by the meanes of whom he conquered Babylon. I remember alſo a certaine
Syrian demaunding a mayd in mariage & being willed to ſhewe of what wealth hee
was, ſaid that he had no other riches, but two friendes; eſteem­ing himſelfe
rich inough with ſuch poſſeſſions to craue the daughter of a great Lord in
marriage. Did not loue cauſe Ariadne ſaue Theſeus life, Hypermineſtra redéeme
Lin­ceus frō danger, and Medea frée Iaſon from perill? Haue not many poore
ſoldiers béen aduanced to high dignities by the meanes of loue? Yea, doth not
all pleaſure and pro­fit procéed to man by loue, cauſing him to looke with an
a­miable countenance, to ſpeake pleaſantly, and to bee curi­ous in his
geſtures, although by nature he be dull, ſottiſh, and of a fierce looke? What
cauſeth a man to go braue and fine in his apparell, ſeeking euerie day new
faſhions, but loue? What procureth Gentlewomen to haue their haire frizled,
criſped, & embrodered with gold, to be dreſſed after the Spaniſh, French, or
Italian faſhion, but Loue? Pain­ting their faces, if they be foule, with
liuely colours. But if they be faire, they ſo carefully kéepe their beautie
from the parching heate of ſummer, from the chilling cold of Win [...] ter,
from the winde, raine, and aire, as they remaine al­moſt euer young, not ſo
much as forgetting to haue their­ſhooes made fine and neate (becauſe the
curiouſneſſe of men is ſuch, as they leaue not to looke from the crowne of the
head to the ſole of the foote) to haue their gemmes, iewels, ouches, rings,
perfumed gloues, & what not? In fine, what beautie or brauerie is in the
apparell, either of man or wo­man, all procéedeth of Loue. Shall I ſay that
Muſicke was [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=72)
onely inuented by loue, yea truly: for either it mitigateth the paſſions
wherewith men are perplexed, or elſe aug­menteth their pleaſure, ſo that daily
they inuent diuerſe kindes of inſtruments, as Lutes Citrons, Violls, Flutes,
Cornets, Banderas, wheron they play Madrigalls, Son­netts, Pauins, Meaſures,
Galliardes, and all theſe in re­membrance of Loue, as he for whom men doe more
than for any other. What cauſeth men to iuſt, tourney, runne at tilt, and
combat, but Loue? Who cauſed Comedies, ſhews Tragedies and Maſkes to be
inuented, but Loue? Wher­of commeth it that men delight to rehearſe their
amorous chaunces and ſtraunge paſſions, and to relate them to their
companions? ſome praiſing the curteſie of his Lady, ano­ther condemning his
miſtreſſe cruelty: yea, recounting a thouſand miſhappes which happen in their
Loues: as Let­ters diſcloſed, euill reports, ſuſpicious iealouſie, ſometimes
the husband comming home ſooner than either the louer would, or the wife doeth
wiſh: ſometimes coniecturing without cauſe, and otherwhiles beléeuing nothing,
but truſting vpon his wines honeſty. To be ſhort, the greateſt pleaſure after
Loue, is to tell what perillous dangers are paſſed. But what maketh ſo many
Poets in the world, is it not Loue? The which ſéemeth to bee the plaine ſonge
wheron all Poets doe deſcant: yea, there are fewe which write vppon any
ſerious matter, but they cloſe vp their work with ſome amorous clauſe, or elſe
they are the worſe accepted. Ouid hath celebrated ye fame of Cupid, Petrarke
and Virgill, Homer and Liuius, Sappho, yea, & that ſeuere Socrates wrote
ſomewhat of his loue Aſpaſia. Tuſh, who rightly can denie, that Loue is not
the cauſe of all the glo­ry, honor, profit, and pleaſure which happeneth to
man, and that without it hee cannot conueniently liue, but ſhall run into a
thouſand enormities?

All this happy ſucceſſe came by Loue, aslong as hee had his eies: but now
béeing depriued of his ſight, and ac­cōpanied with Folly, it is to be feared,
nay certainly to be
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=72) beléeued,
that he ſhall be the cauſe of as many diſcommo­dities, miſchiefes and miſhaps,
as hetherto he hath béen of honour, profite, and pleaſure. The noblemen which
loued their inferiours, and the ſubiectes which dutifully ſerued their Lordes,
ſhall be marueilouſly changed by the meanes of Follie: for the maiſter ſhall
loue his ſeruant onely for his ſeruice, and the ſeruant his maiſter onely for
commo­ditie. Yea, there is none ſo addicted vnto vertue, but if once he loue,
he ſhall preſently commit ſome fooliſh touch: and the more ſtraight and firme
Loue is, the greater diſorder there ſhall be by the meanes of Folly. There
will returne into the world more than one Biblis, more than one Semy­ramis,
than one Myrrha, than one Canace, than one Phae­dra. There ſhall be no place
in the world vnſpotted. The high walles and trelliſſed windowes ſhall not
kéepe the Nunnes and Veſtall Virgins in ſafegard. Olde age ſhall turne her
aged affections into fond fancies and wanton de­ſires. Shame ſhall liue as an
exile. There ſhall be no dif­ference betwéene the noble and peaſant, betwéene
the In­fidell and the Moore, the Turke and the Iewe: the Lady, the Miſtreſſe,
and the handmayd. But there ſhall inſue ſuch a confuſed inequalitie, that the
faire ſhall not be mat­ched with the well featured, but ſhall bee oft times
ioyned with foule and deformed perſons. Great Ladies and noble Dames ſhall
fall in loue with them whome before they would diſdaine to accept as their
ſeruants. And when the loiall and faithfull louers haue long languiſhed in the
loue of ſome beautifull Dame, whoſe mutuall good will they haue gained by
deſert; then Follie will cauſe ſome fickle and falſe flatterer to enioy that
in one houre, which in all their life they could not attaine. I paſſe ouer the
continu­all debates and quarrels that ſhall inſue by Follie, where­of ſhall
ſpring woundes, maſſacres, & moſt fearefull mur­thers. And I greatly feare
that whereas Loue hath inuen­ted ſo many laudable ſciences, and brought foorth
ſo many commodities, that now he will bring great idleneſſe, ac­companied
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=73) with
ignorance, that he will cauſe young Gen­tlemen to leaue feates of armes, to
forſake the ſeruice of their Prince, to reiect honorable ſtudies, and to
applie thē ­ſelues to vain ſongs and ſonnets, to chambering and wan­tonneſſe,
to banquetting and gluttony, bringing infinite diſeaſes to their bodies, and
ſundry dangers and perils to their perſons: for there is no more dangerous
company than of Folly.

Behold O ſoueraigne Iupiter, the miſchiefes and miſe­ries that are like to
iuſue, if Folly be appointed compani­on to Loue. Wherfore I, in the perſon of
all the gods, be­ſeech your Maieſtie to graunt that Loue may not bee ioi­ned
with her, and that Folly may grieuouſly be puniſhed for the outrage ſhe hath
done to Cupid.

As ſoone as Apollo had ended his Oration, Mercurie in the defence of Folly
began to ſpeake in this wiſe.

Mercurie.

VVHeras (right worthy Iupiter) Apollo hath with his painted eloquence ſet out
the praiſes of loue. and hath ſought with his filed phraſes to diſcredit
Folly, I hope when your Maieſty ſhall throughly heare the cauſe decided, you
wil commend his eloquence more than his reaſons. For it is not vnknowen vnto
you and all the gods, that Folly is no whit inferior vnto Loue, and that loue
ſhould be of no force without her, neither coulde his Kingdome indure without
her helpe, ayde, and counſaile. I pray you cal to remembrance how Folly
incōtinently after man was placed in Paradiſe, began moſt imperiouſly to
rule, and hath euer ſince continued in ſuch credite, as neuer any goddeſſe had
the like; raigning and ruling a­mongeſt men, from time to time, from age to
age, as the only princeſſe of the world: Inſomuch that who haue béen
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=73) more honoured
than fooles? Who was more ſubiect vnto follie than Alexander the great: which
féeling himſelfe to ſuffer hunger and thi [...]ſt, to be ſubiect to ſorrowe
and ſick­neſſe, not able to kéepe himſelfe from drunkenneſſe, yet would be
honoured for a God.

What kinde of people hath béene in greater credit than Philoſophers, and who
more fooles? Did not Ariſtotle moſt fooliſhly did for ſorrow, becauſe he know
not the eb­bing and flowing of the ſea? Did not Crates in caſting his treaſure
into the Sea, commit a wiſe déede? What follie ſhewed Emped [...]cles, by his
ſtrange coniectures? What ſay you to Diogenes tunne, and to Ariſtippus
flatterie? Whoſo throughly conſidereth their opinions, ſhall finde them
ſubiect to the ſtate of follie. How manie other ſcien­ces are there in the
worlde, which are altogether fooliſh? and yet the profeſſours of them had in
high reputation a­mongeſt men. They which are Calculators of Natiuities,
makers of Characters, caſters of figures, are they not fryers of this
fraternitie. Is it not follie to be ſo curious, as to meaſure the heauen, the
height of the ſtarres, the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the ſea? and
yet yt pro­feſſors héereof are highly eſtéemed, and onely by the means of
follie. Nay, how could the world continue, if the dan­gers, troubles,
calamities, and diſcommodities of marri­age were not couered by folly? Who
would haue coaſted the ſeas if follie had not béen his guide? To commit
him­ſelf to the mercy of the winde and the waues, to liue in dan­ger of
fearefull ſurges, and perilous rockes, to traffique with ſauage and barbarous
people, onely incenſed by the meanes of Follie. And yet notwithſtanding, by
this meanes the Common-wealth is maintayned, know­ledge and learning
augmented, the properties of hearbes, ſtones, Birdes, and beaſtes, perfectly
ſearched out. What folly is it moſt daungerouſly to paſſe into the how­els of
the earth to digge for yron, and ſéeke for gold? How many artes and
occupations ſhould bee driuen out of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=74) worlde if
Follie were baniſhed? Truly the moſt part of men ſhould either beg for want,
or die for hunger? How ſhould ſo many Aduocates, Procurators, Sergeants,
At­turneis, Scriueners, Imbroderers, Painters, and Per­fumers liue, if Ladie
Follie were vtterly exiled? Hath not follie inuented a thouſād deuices to
draw a man from idle­neſſe, as Tragedies, Comedies Dancing ſchooles, fencing
houſes, wraſtling places, & a thouſand other fooliſh ſports?

Hath ſhe not made men hardie and venturous to fight with Lions, Bores, and
Buls, onely to gaine honour and to paſſe other in follie? What did Antonie and
Cleopatra when they ſtraue who ſhould ſpend moſt in beaſtly ban­quetting? What
cauſed Caeſar lament that he had not be­gun to trouble the world in that age,
wherein Alexander had conquered the greateſt part? Why did diuerſe ſéeke to
fill vp the valleyes, to make plaine the mountaines, to dry vp Riuers, to make
Bridges ouer the Sea, as Claudius the Emperour did? What made Rodope builde
the Pyra­mides, and Artemiſia frame the ſumptuous ſepulchre, but Follie. In
fine, without this Goddeſſe, man ſhoulde bee carefull, heauie, and whollie
drowned in ſorrow: whereas Follie quickeneth his ſpirits, maketh him ſing,
daunce, leape, and frame himſelfe altogether to pleaſure. It is not poſſible
that loue ſhould bee without the daughter of youth, which is Follie. For Loue
ſpringeth of ſedaine and ſundrie cauſes, by receiuing an apple, as Cidippe: by
looking out at a windowe, as Scilla: by reading in a Booke, as the Ladie
Francis Rimhi: ſome fall in loue by ſight, ſome by hearing, but all liuing in
hope to obtaine their deſires. And yet ſome haue loued without anie na­turall
cauſe, as Pigmalion, who fell in loue with his Mar­ble picture: and I pray you
what Sympathie could there be betwéene a liuely youth and a dead ſtone? what
was it then but follie that kindled this flame? What forced Nar­ciſſus to fall
in loue with his owne ſhaddowe, but Follie? Yea, what aduenture is paſſed in
loue without Follie?
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=74) For the
Philoſophers define Follie to be a depriuation of wiſedome, and wiſedome is
altogether without paſſions: of the which when loue ſhall be voide, then no
doubt, the Sea ſhall be without waues, and the fire without heats.

Conſider but a young man which onely placeth his de­light in amorous
conceites, decking, dreſſing, and perfu­ming himſelfe moſt delicately, who
paſſeth out of his lod­ging fraught with a thouſand ſundrie fancies,
accompani­ed with men and Pages, paſſing to the place where hee may haue a
ſight of his Miſtreſſe, obtaining for his trauell no gaine but perhaps ſome
amorous glance, making long ſutes, ſpending his time and his treaſure,
conſuming his wit, and waſting his wealth, and yet reaping nothing but
diſdaine and diſcredite. But if it chance that his Miſtreſſe condeſcend vnto
his requeſts, ſhe appointeth him to come at ſome ſuſpicious houre, which he
cannot performe with­out great perill. To come with company, were to bewraie
his ſecrets: to go alone, moſt daungerous: to goe openly, too manifeſt: ſo
that he muſt paſſe diſguiſed, ſometime like a woman, other times like a
peaſant or ſome vile perſon, ſcaling the walles with ladders, climbing vp to
the win­dowes by cordes: yea, continually in daunger of death, if Follie did
not hold him vp by the hand. It is not alſo vn­knowne vnto you how many
ſundrie paſſions do perplexe the poore paſſionate Louers, all which procéed of
Follie: as to haue ones heart ſeparated from himſelfe, to be now in peace and
then in warre, now couering his dolour, blu­ſhing one while, and looking pale
another, fraught whollie with feare, hope, & ſhame, ſeeking that carefully
which hée ſéemeth to flie, and yet doubtfully dreading not to finde it, to
laugh ſildome, to ſigh often, to burne in colde, and freeze in heate, to be
croſſed altogether with contraries, which be ſignes not onely of follie, but
of phrenſie. Who ſhall ex­cuſe Hercules, handling ſo carefully the diſtaſte of
Omphale, or Salomon for combring himſelfe with ſo many Con­cubines, Anniball
in ſubmitting himſelfe to his Loue,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=75) Ariſtotle in
obeying Hermia, and Socrates in yéelding to Aſpaſia, and many other which we
ſée daily to bee ſo blin­ded, as they know not themſelues: and what is the
cauſe hereof, but follie? ſo that we ſee that it is ſhe which maketh Loue to
be ſo feared and redoubted, it is ſhe that honoureth him, exalteth his name,
and cauſeth him to be counted as a God. Further, whoſoeuer loueth, muſt apply
himſelfe to the affection of his miſtreſſe, although it be contrarie to his
naturall conſtitution: if he be quiet, wiſe, and diſcréete, yet if his louer
pleaſe to haue him chaunge his ſtate, he muſt turne his ſtearne, and hoiſe his
ſaile, to goe with another winde. Zethius and Amphion could not agrée, for
becauſe the delight of the one was a deſpight to the other, vntill Amphion
left his Muſicke. If the Ladie whom thou lo­ueſt be couetous, thou muſt
chaunge thy ſelfe into golde, and ſo fall into her boſome: if ſhe be merrie,
thou muſt bée pleaſant: if ſullen, thou muſt be ſad. All the ſeruants and
ſutors to Atlanta were hunters, becauſe ſhe delighted in that ſport. Many
Gentlewomen to pleaſe their louers which were Poets, left the rocke and the
néedle, and tooke in hand pennes & books: now tell mee if theſe ſtraunge
Me­tamorphoſes be not méere points of follie? Doe you thinke that a Souldier
which goeth to the aſſault, marketh the trenches, thinketh of his enemies, or
of a thouſand hargue­buſhes, wherof euerie one is ſufficient to deſtroy him?
No, he onely hopeth to win the conqueſt, and doth not ſo much as once imagine
the reſt. He which firſt inuented ſayling, doubted not of the perillous
daungers: and hee that play­eth, neuer thinketh to become a looſer, yet are
they all thrée in daunger to be ſlaine, drowned, and vndone. But what then?
they neither do ſee, nor will ſée what is hurtfull vn­to them. So we muſt
coniecture the like of louers: for if they did ſée the dreadfull dangers, and
the fearefull perits wherein they are, how they be deceiued and beguiled, they
would neuer honour loue as God, but deteſt him as a Di­uell, and ſo ſhould the
kingdom of loue be deſtroyed, which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=75) now is
gouerned by ignorance, careleſneſſe, hope & blinde­neſſe, which are all the
handmaids of Folly. Remaine in peace then fond Loue, and ſéeke not to break
the auncient league which is betwéen thée and Folly. For if then doeſt, thy
bowe ſhal be broken, thy darts ſhal be of no force, Con­temptęque iacent &
ſine luce faces.

¶ When Mercury had finiſhed the defence of Follie, Iu­piter ſeeing the gods to
be diuerſly affected, that ſome held with Cupid, and ſome with Folly, to
decide the doubt he pronounced this ſentence:

FOr the difficulty and importance of this difference and diuerſitie of
opinions, we haue remitted the deciding of it vntill thrée times ſeuen times
and nine ages be paſt: in the meane while wee ſtraightly commaund you to liue
friendly together, without offering iniury one vnto ano­ther. And Folly ſhall
guide and conduct blinde Loue whi­ther ſhée ſéemeth beſt: and for the
reſtoring of his eyes, after we haue ſpoken with the Deſti­nies, it ſhall be
decréede.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

AT LONDON, Printed for Mathew Lownes. 1608

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=76)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=6139&page=76)

[Home](/)

Greene, Robert, 1558?-1592.. Date: 1608  

