---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Several tracts, by the ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton Coll. &c. Viz.
I. Of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. II. Paraphrase on St. Matthew's
Gospel. III. Of the power of the keys. IV. Of schism and schismaticks, (never
before printed by the original copy.) V. Miscellanies

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=1)

Vera effigies doctiſsimi Viri D. IOHANNES HALES Colleg. Eton. Socii et Eccles.
Colleg. Windesorienſis Canonici.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=2)

SEVERAL TRACTS, By the ever memorable Mr. JOHN HALES Of Eaton Coll. &c. VIZ.

  * I. Of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
  * II. Paraphraſe on St. Matthew's Goſpel.
  * III. Of the Power of the Keys.
  * IV. Of Schiſm and Schiſmaticks, (Never before printed by the Original Copy.)
  * V. Miſcellanies.

Printed in the Year, 1677.

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=1)

A TRACT Concerning the SIN Againſt the Holy Ghoſt.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eton Colledge, &c.

LONDON, Printed for John Blyth, at Mr Playfords Shop in the Temple, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=3)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=3)

### 1\. A TRACT concerning the SIN againſt the HOLY GHOST.

MAny have Writ­ten of the Sin againſt the Ho­ly Ghoſt, and in defining or
deſ­cribing of it, fol­low their own zealous conceits, and not the Canon of
Holy Scrip­tures. The more dreadful the Sin is, the more fearful we muſt be,
in charging it upon any ſpe­cial crime, or particular perſon. In defining a
ſin of ſo heynous a nature, direct and evident proof [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=4) from Scripture is
requiſite. It is not enough to conſider, (as many do) what ſins are moſt
deſperate and deadly, and therefore to conclude ſuch ſins are againſt the Holy
Ghoſt. Thus indeed the School­men have done, who have made ſix differences of
this ſin, V. in fine. without any ground or warrant from Scripture for ſo
do­ing. And Bellarmine is ſo liberal in beſtowing on ſuch as he calls
Hereticks, that his opinion is, that a Man can ſcarce be a learned
Pro­teſtant, without committing the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt. Neither are
the Papiſts the only Men that are miſtaken about this ſin: but too many
Divines of the Refor­med Churches, have ſtarted aſide from the Scripture, and
have gi­ven us ſuch intricate and contra­dictory [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=4) definitions of
this ſin, as tend only to the perplexing the tender Conſciences of weak
Chri­ſtians. To make good this Cen­ſure, I will briefly ſet down ſo much
touching this ſin, as I con­ceive is warranted by the Word of God, and humbly
ſubmit to the judgment of the Learned.

The Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, was an evil ſpeak­ing of, or ſlandering
of the Mi­racles which our Saviour did, by thoſe, who though they were
con­vinced by the Miracles, to believe that ſuch Works could not be done, but
by the power of God, yet they did malitiouſly ſay, they were wrought by the
power of the Devil.

In this Definition, theſe points are obſervable.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=5)1\. I
forbear to call it the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, but the Blaſphemy; for
though every Blaſphemy be a ſin in general, yet our Saviour Chriſt, terms it
the Blaſphemy. And the Evan­geliſts do all agree, to give it the ſame term:
and 'tis now here in ho­ly Scripture called the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt;
and yet it appears both in St. Mathew and St. Mark, that there was juſt
occaſion offe­red to our Saviour to call it ſo; where he compares it with the
ſin againſt the Son of Man; but he forbears to call it any thing, but the
Blaſphemy; thereby, no doubt, to teach us, it conſiſteth only in curſed
ſpeaking and Blaſ­pheming. A ſerious conſide­ration of this point, may teach
us ſo much moderation, as to [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=5) confine our ſelves
to that term which our Saviour in the three Evangeliſts hath preſcribed unto
us. I cannot find that any Man that hath writ upon this Argu­ment, hath made
any obſervati­on, or noted this phraſe and term uſed by the Evangeliſts, in
pro­nouncing the dreadful ſentence of our Saviour againſt the Blaſ­phemy of
the Holy Ghoſt, I will cite theſe Texts, where it is named, Math. 12\. 31.
Mark 3\. 28▪ Luke▪ 12▪ 10.

2\. A ſecond Obſervation is, That Blaſphemy is a ſpeaking againſt another, as
both St. Ma­thew and St. Luke expound the word, for in the Original, it is a
blaſting the Fame, or blaming of another; for from the Greek word  [...] both
the French [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=6)
Nation and our Engliſh by con­traction have made the word blame.

3\. To paſs from the Name to the Thing it ſelf, we may obſerve by the
coherence of the Texts, that Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, was ſpoken of
by our Sa­viour, concerning the Scribes and Phariſees. It was (ſaith St. Mark)
becauſe the Phariſees ſaid, he had an unclean ſpirit, and that he caſt our
Devils by Belze­bub, &c. This ſpeech of the Phariſees, whereby they ſlande­red
his Miracles, wrought by the power of the Holy Ghoſt, is properly the
Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt. How tranſcen­dent a crime it was, to traduce
that power by which our Saviour wrought his Miracles, may ap­pear, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=6) from the end for
which theſe Miracles were wrought; which was, to prove to the peo­ple that ſaw
them, that he was the Meſſias; which is evident from the places of Scripture,
wherein he appealed to his works, 10 Joh. 37\. 38. 14. Joh. 11\. 11 Math. 4\.
4. Joh. 29\. Theſe and other places ſhew, that the working of Miracles, was an
act of the moſt glorious manifeſtation of the power of God, by which at the
firſt view, the ſimpleſt peo­ple were led by their outward ſenſe, to the great
myſtery of inward Faith in Chriſt their Re­deemer.

Therefore, for thoſe men that were eye-witneſſes of thoſe Mi­racles which did
make them know that Chriſt was a Teacher come [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=7) from God, to
Blaſpheme that power, by which theſe Miracles were wrought, and to ſay they
were done by the help of the De­vil, was the moſt ſpightful and malicious
ſlander that could be invented; for thereby they at­tempted, as much as in
them lay, to deſtroy the very principles of Faith, and to prevent the very
firſt propagation of the Goſpel, to the univerſal miſchief of all Mankind. And
though theſe Phariſees were no Chriſtians, and therefore could not fall away
from faith, which they never had, yet they did know and believe that Chriſt
was a Teacher come from God; for ſo our Saviour tells them, 7 Joh. 28\. Ye
both know me, and whence I am. They did not believe him as a Saviour, [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=7) but as a great
Prophet from God; (as the Mahometans do at this very day) they truſted to be
ſaved by their Law, and becauſe he taught ſuch things as did abrogate their
Law, in which they ſo much gloried, they were ſo malicious to his Doctrine,
which they did not believe, that they ſpoke evil of his Miracles which they
did believe; leaſt the people by ap­proving his Miracles, ſhould be­lieve his
Doctrine.

4\. Obſerve, that its ſaid to be Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, becauſe, by
the Holy Ghoſt, the Miracles were wrought Math. 12 28. 1 Cor 12\. 10.

5\. The Blaſphemy againſt the Son of Man was, when men conſidered Chriſt as a
mere man, and did diſgracefully tax his con­verſation, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=8) by ſaying, behold
a glutton, a bibber of Wine, a friend to Publicans and ſinners. But the
Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, was, when Men be­holding Chriſts Miracles,
did enviouſly aſcribe them to the De­vil, which they knew and believed to be
done by Gods power.

6\. The Texts formerly cited out of the three Evangeliſts, being all the
places wherein the Blaſ­phemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt is named; we cannot find
by them, that we have any ſafe rule to conclude, that any but the Scribes and
Phariſees, and their confederates, committed that ſin. I dare not ſay, that
Judas, Julian the Apoſtate, or Simon Magus, or thoſe that ſtoned Stephen, were
guilty thereof.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=8)7\. The
Apoſtles have not in any of their Epiſtles once men­tioned this Blaſphemy, and
yet they were moſt careful and fre­quent in exhortations from all ſorts of
ſin: It were much there­fore if they ſhould omit or forget ſuch a fearful
crime, without of­ten and preciſe admoniſhing to beware of it. And though
ne­gative proofs from Scripture, are not demonſtrative, yet the ge­neral
ſilence of the Apoſtles, may at leaſt help to infer a pro­bability, that the
Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, is not committable by any Chriſtian, which
lived not in the time of our Saviour. As for thoſe Texts in the ſixth and
tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, and in 1 John 5\. 16. (which by late Divines
are▪ [[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=9)
expounded of the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt) I do not find that the Ancient
Fathers did ſo un­derſtand them, excepting only St. Auſtine, who ſo interprets
that one place in St. John, that all men confeſs him to be in an error. There
be three Texts in the Epiſtles, wherein although the Blaſphemy againſt the
Holy Ghoſt be not named, yet, moſt think, it is intended and meant. And
Bellarmine confuting St. Auſtin's opinion, who held, that final impenitency
was the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt) affirms, that it ſeems the three Texts in
the Epiſtles, are ſpoken of that ſin; and yet this great Cardinal forgetting
what he had ſaid in the ſame Chapter contradicts him­ſelf, and ſhews how that
thoſe [[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=9)
three places are not to be inter­preted of that ſin. I will cite the Texts,
and then his inter­pretation of them, according to the expoſition of St.
Ambroſe, Chryſoſtom, Hierom, and other Fathers, as he ſaith.

The firſt is Heb. 6\. It is im­poſſible, &c. The Apoſtle here ſpeaks only of
Repentance, which did go before Baptiſme, for ſo Chryſoſtome and Ambroſe, &c.
expound it; which the Apoſtle intimates in theſe words. Which were once
enlightened, that is, Baptized, for anciently, to be illuminated, ſignified to
be Baptized. Secondly, in theſe words (to renew again) for we are properly
renewed in Bap­tiſme. Thirdly, in theſe (cruci­fying the Son of God afreſh)
for [[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=10) when
we are Baptized, we are conformed to the likeneſs of his death, 6 Rom. And as
Chriſt was only once crucified, ſo alſo we are only once Baptized; and he that
will be again Baptized, ſhould again crucifie to himſelf Ghriſt. Let me add
this, that in the verſes next before this Text, the Apoſtle ſpeaks of the
founda­tion of Repentance, and the Doctrine of Baptiſme. And in this Text, our
new Tranſlation followeth Beza (who hath vari­ed from the Original, by putting
the conditional Si, If, inſtead of the Copulative Et, And, and by adding the
Cauſal Ut.) ſo that whereas Beza and our Tranſlati­on is, si prolabantur ut
crucifigant, The Greek, and vulgar Latine is,  [...], prolapſi [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=10) ſunt
crucifigentes; for the word doth not ſignify to fall away, but to fall
caſually or negligent­ly, ſo  [...] Galat 6\. is tranſ­lated fault, but not
falling away.

The ſecond Text is, Hebrews 10\. 26. For if we ſin willingly or wilfully,
after we have receiv­ed the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
ſacrifice for ſin. Anſwer, I ſay with Chry­ſoſtom, Ambroſe, and other
Fa­thers; The ſence is, we muſt not expect another Chriſt to dye for us, or
that he that dyed once, ſhould come again to dye for us.

The third Text, 1 Joh 5\. 16. There is a ſin unto death: I do not ſay ye ſhall
pray for it; St. Hierom ſaith, that nothing elſe is here meant, but that a
Prayer for a ſin unto death, is very hard­ly [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=11) or difficultly
heard; and this ſeems to be the trueſt ſenſe of this place: for St. John
ſaith, in the verſe immediately before, we know we have the Petitions we
deſire of him; therefore leaſt we ſhould think this to hold true in all
Petitions even for others▪ he adds▪ if any Man ſee his Bro­ther ſin a ſin,
which is not unto death, he ſhall ask, &c. he ſhall ask, that is, let him ask
with con­fidence, for he ſhall obtain; but if it be a ſin unto death, that is,
a great ſin, ſuch an one as is not ordinarily pardoned, but puni­ſhed with
death: I do not ſay, ye ſhall pray for it, that is I dare not promiſe that you
ſhall eaſily obtain, and therefore I do not ſay that you ſhall pray for it,
that is, with that confidence of obtain­ing; [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=11) for often in
ſuch caſes, God doth nothear the Prayers of his Saints; as God ſaith, Jer. 7\.
16. If theſe expoſitions upon the former Texts be ſound, the Definition of the
ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, cannot be grounded upon all or any of them: for as
it is not name­ed, ſo it is not meant in any of them; but if they ſeem to any
to be unſound, let him bring better and more agreeable to the literal meaning
and ſence, cohe­rence and ſcope of the Text, and I ſhall gladly learn. It
ſeems a probable expoſition of the firſt place, Heb. 6\. that a learned
Di­vine, who produceth this Text for proof of his definition of the ſin
againſt the Holy Ghoſt, doth confeſs againſt himſelf, that the Apoſtle in this
place denieth a ſe­cond [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=12) Baptiſme, where
he ſpeak­eth of Repentance, becauſe they are mentioned together in the ſame
place, and have ſome affi­nity and correſpondence. As for the ſecond Text,
Heb. 10\. I muſt ſay, that if St. Paul in this place, meant the ſin againſt
the Holy Ghoſt, that then this were the only deſperate Text in the whole
Bible, for what Man is there that ſins not willingly; for ſo the word  [...]
properly ſig­nifies: Beza tranſlates it ultro, the vulgar Latine, voluntariè,
or willingly, not wilfully, or ob­ſtinately. It is but a miſerable ſhift, when
St. Paul ſaith, if we ſin willingly, for Mr Calvin to tell us, that the Text
doth not mean every willing ſin, but only a ma­litious reſiſting of the Truth.
[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=12) Could not
St. Paul, as eaſily as Mr Calvin, have ſaid, If we ſin malitiouſly, as ſay, if
we ſin willingly? My comfort is, that if the Text be adviſedly conſi­dered,
there is no ſuch thing as the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, or any other
deſperate concluſi­on, to be found in the Text; the ſcope of the precedent
verſes do evidently expound the Apoſtles meaning to be this, to let the Jews
know, that the caſe was not now with them, as it was under the Law; for under
the Law they had daily ſacrifice for ſin, but now under the Goſpel they had
but one ſacrifice, once for all; every Prieſt ſtandeth dai­ly miniſtring and
offering often times the ſame ſacrifice, but this Man after he had offered one
[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=13)
ſacrifice, for ever ſate down at the right hand of God, as it is, verſe 11. of
that Chapter, which may ſerve for a comment upon the Verſe now in queſtion.
And it is worth our noting, that the Text doth not ſay, if we ſin wil­fully,
there is no ſacrifice for ſin; this had been an hard ſaying in­deed; but the
words are, there remains no more ſacrifice for ſin: there is ſome comfortable
diffe­rence, I hope, between theſe two propoſitions; there is no ſacrifice,
and there remains no more ſacra­fice for ſin: So that if we do not believe in
that one ſacrifice, as ſufficient, but look every day for ſome new ſacrifice
for every new ſin, we muſt expect no­thing but judgment.

As to the third place, 1 Ioh. [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=13) 5\. 16. many
would conclude, there is a ſin for which we may not pray; Firſt, becauſe it is
ir­remiſſable, and this they think muſt needs be the ſin againſt the Holy
Ghoſt, meant by St. Iohn, Their beſt argument is, Iohn's not ſaying we ſhould
pray, is a ſaying we ſhould not pray; his ſilence to them is prohibition. This
is bad Grammar, and worſe Logick. For we find, that St. Stephen prayed for
them that ſto­ned him, and yet told them they reſiſted the Holy Ghoſt. And St.
Peter exhorted Simon Magus to Repentance, and yet both he and thoſe that
ſtoned Stephen, are commonly reputed ſinners againſt the Holy Ghoſt. St.
Am­broſe is of that charitable opinion, that he thinks the ſin againſt the
[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=14) Holy
Ghoſt may be pardoned by Repentance, becauſe the people of the Iews, that had
ſaid of Chriſt, that he caſt out Devils by Belzebub, afterwards at the
preach­ing of St. Peter, are ſaid to be converted, Acts 2\. St. Auſtine in a
Retract concludes, we muſt deſpair of no Man, no not of the wickedeſt, as long
as he liveth; and we ſafely pray for him, of whom we don't deſpair. For though
it be expreſly ſaid, That the Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt ſhall not be
forgiven, yet theſe words may juſtly receive a qualification, if we will but
al­low the ſame mitigation of theſe words, which all Men confeſs we muſt needs
allow to the precedent words in the ſame verſe, to which theſe have relation;
where [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=14) it
is ſaid generally, all Sins, and all Blaſphemies ſhall be forgiven, it cannot
be meant of all ſins al­ways, and to all Men, for then no ſin could be
damnable, but the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, which is moſt falſe; and
there­fore the meaning muſt be, all ſins ſhall be forgiven ordinarily, and for
the moſt part; ſo on the contrary, Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt ſhall not
ordinarily, but hardly be forgiven. Even thoſe who are moſt ſtrict to
main­tain the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, to be unpardonable, will yet
acknowledge, that ſome times in Scripture, Impoſſibility is uſed to note a
difficulty, and thoſe things are ſpoken indefinitely to all, which belong but
to a part only. Thus the difficulty of a [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=15) rich Mans
entering into the King­dome of Heaven, is preſented to us by our Saviour,
under the ſimilitude of an impoſſibility.

Having diſpatch'd theſe Texts of Scripture which do either name, or are
thought to con­cern, the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, it remains to examine
thoſe common Definitions of this ſin which are now current; though different
in the terms by which they define it; ſome call it a total or final falling
away from faith, or a wilful Apoſtacy, or a malicious reſiſting of the truth;
yet when they come to explain their meaning, the dif­ference among them is not
conſi­derable. I ſhall chiefly apply my ſelf to Mr Calvin's definition,
becauſe his judgment hath gain­ed [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=15) the greateſt
reputation among the multitude; as alſo, for that he himſelf promiſes ſuch a
true defi­nition, as ſhall eaſily, by it ſelf overthrow all the reſt. In his
Inſtitut. Lib. 3\. Chap. 3\. he ſaith, they ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, Qui
divinae veritati (cujus fulgore ſic perſtringuntur ut ignorantiam cauſari
nequeunt) tamen deſtinata malitia reſiſtunt, in hoc tantum, ut reſiſtant.
Arminius alſo uſeth Mr Calvins words. The Rhe­torical Parentheſis, which might
well have been ſpared in a defi­nition, being reduced to plain and brief
terms; this definition of Calvin may be thus Engliſhed, They ſin againſt the
Holy Ghoſt, who of determined malice, reſiſt the known Truth of God, to the
end only to reſiſt. In this [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=16) Mr Calvin doth
not define what the ſin is, but who they are that commit it; whereas by the
Rules of Logick, Concretes admit of no definition, but only Abſtracts. But
taking the definition as it is, it conſiſts principally upon theſe three
terms. Firſt, Truth; Secondly, Known; Thirdly, Re­ſiſted; or a reſiſting of
the known Truth. The words being gene­ral and doubtful, we will conſi­der them
ſingly.

Firſt, If by the truth Mr Cal­vin underſtands the Word of God, or the whole
Doctrine re­vealed in the Scriptures, then the ſenſe of this Term will be too
large: for even the Phariſees which ſpoke againſt the Holy Ghoſt, did not
reſiſt the whole Truth of God in the Scripture, [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=16) for they
believed in the Law of Moſes, and had confidence to be ſaved by the keeping of
it. And in defence of that Law, (as they thought) they did Blaſpheme the Holy
Ghoſt. Therefore pro­perly by the Truth of God, Mr Calvin muſt confine his
meaning to the Truth of the Goſpel or Doctrine of Faith, for ſo both he
himſelf and others expound themſelves, by terming the ſin againſt the Holy
Ghoſt, a falling away, or turning away from Faith, or Apoſtacy.

Secondly, By this word Known, Mr Calvin muſt mean belief, for Faith is
properly by believing, not knowing the truth.

Thirdly, The Word, Reſiſt­ing, muſt mean unbelieving: for if receiving of the
Truth be by [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=17) belief, then
Reſiſting of the Truth muſt be [...] unbelief. And indeed Mr. Calvin explains
him­ſelf in the ſame Chapter, ſay­ing, there is no place for pardon where
knowledge is joyned with unbelief, Non eſſe veniae locum, &c. So then by this
definition, to reſiſt the known Truth, is all one, as if Mr Calvin had ſaid in
proper terms, for a Man at once to unbelieve that which he doth believe; which
two things it is impoſſible to do together? and if they be not together, there
can be no reſiſtance. It is true, that for ſome reaſons, a Man may be brought,
not to believe that which he formerly believed. This cannotbe in an inſtant,
but ſucceſſively unbelief comes in the place of belief. And this [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=17) may not be
called a reſiſting, for that all reſiſtance conſiſts in a violence between two
at the leaſt; but where two ſucceed one another, and are never to­gether, it
cannot poſſibly be. I confeſſ a Man may reſiſt the Truth, when it is a Truth,
in it ſelf only, or in the underſtanding of ſome other; but to reſiſt the
Truth which is known, and believed by the re­ſiſter himſelf, is a direct
contra­diction; for the nature of Truth is ſuch, that if the underſtand­ing
apprehend it for Truth, it cannot but aſſent unto it. No Man can force himſelf
to believe what he liſts, or when he liſts. Sometimes a Man knows not what to
believe, but finds a ſuſ­penſion of his Faith, or trepida­tion [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=18) of his
underſtanding, not knowing which way to turn. This cannot be called a
reſiſting of the Truth, when the Truth is not known, but doubted of. Again,
ſome Truths there be, though they be aſſented to by the underſtanding for
Truths, yet they are not deſired as good; for truth is one degree nearer the
Soul of Man than goodneſs. The Phariſees did apprehend the Mi­racles of our
Saviour as true, but not as good; becauſe they ten­ded to the derogation of
their Law, which they eſteemed a bet­ter Truth. And for this cauſe, they
Blaſphemed that Truth, which in their hearts they belie­ved for Truth. For the
truth of words, or ſpeech, is, (as the Schools ſay) nothing elſe but the
[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=18) ſign of
truth, not truth it ſelf; for truth it ſelf is ſeated in the underſtanding,
and not in the ſpeech. That Truth which the underſtanding aſſents to, the
ſpeech may affirm to be falſe; there are many things believed in deed, which
are denied in word: but ſuch a denial is not reſiſting, but only making ſhew
of reſiſting, the Truth; for re­ſiſtance muſt be in the ſame place where Truth
is; Truth being ſeated in the underſtanding, re­ſiſtance muſt be placed there
al­ſo; the underſtanding can reſiſt no Truth, but by unbelieving of it. If Mr
Calvin had intended of the Truth only in word, he had come one ſtep nearer to
the Truth of Scripture, but he was not ſo happy in the expreſſion of [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=19) his meaning: nay
his terms of Incredulity, Apoſtacy, falling away, &c. relate to a real, not
verbal, Apoſtacy, and Un­belief. It remains then to my un­derſtanding, that Mr
Calvin makes the reſiſtance of the Truth to be a not believing of what we do
believe; which being a con­tradiction, he defines the Sin againſt the Holy
Ghoſt, to be ſuch a Sin, as no Man poſſibly can commit. And yet in the other
extream, in expounding his own definition, he makes it ſuch a Sin, as no Man
living but commits; for by his Doctrine, (as I take it) any Sin may be the Sin
againſt the Holy Ghoſt. His words are theſe, Quorum convi­cta eſt conſcientia
verbum Dei eſſe quod repudiant & impugnant, im­pugnare [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=19) tamen non
deſiſtant, ill [...] in ſpiritum blaſphemari dicuntur. What Man is there that
doth not daily, in ſome Point or other, for ſake the word of God, and cea­ſes
not to impugne it, and is convinced thereof in his Con­ſcience: I know Mr
Calvin was far from thinking, that St. Paul, did Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt,
and yet St. Paul it ſeems was convinced in his Conſcience, that it was the
Word of God he fought againſt, and yet ceaſed not to fight againſt it, when he
ſaith, he delighted in the Law of God, yet another Law war­ring againſt the
Law of his mind, brought him into Captivity of the Law of Sin. What dange­rous
conſequences weak Con­ſciences may draw to themſelves, [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=20) out of this
unbridled, unlimited propoſition of Mr Calvins, let others judge. There is a
juſt cauſe I. preſume to except againſt Mr Galvin, and all others, who in this
concurr with him, to omit the term of Blaſphemy in their de­finitions; for
this is perpetually obſerved by our Saviour in his ſpeech concerning this Sin,
by the Evangeliſts with one conſent: but inſtead of the word Blaſphe­my, he
hath brought in the word, reſiſt, for a Genus of this Sin; but by what
Authority I know not; I cannot find it, or the equivalent to it, in any of
theſe places, which are thought to touch this Sin I find only falling away
mentioned, Heb. 6\. which phraſe is uſed by Mr Cal­vin, for reſiſting; whereas
fal­ling [[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=20)
away, and reſiſting, are no more alike, than fighting and run­ing away, which
are little leſs than contraries. The laſt point I ſhall touch in Mr Calvins
de­finition, is, where he ſaith, the Sinners againſt the Holy Ghoſt reſiſt, to
the end only that they may reſiſt; and yet withall he tells, they reſiſt out
of a deter­minate malice. If they reſiſt out of malice, then the end for which
they reſiſt, is for the ſatiſ­faction of their malice. The Phariſees here
condemned by our Saviour, had an other end than bare reſiſting. The defence of
the Law of Moſes, was the end for which they Blaſphemed, and not any pleaſure
they could have in the bare and ſimple act of reſiſtance. We find three old
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=21) opinions,
concerning the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, but they were long ſince exploded;
I will but only name them. Ori­gen thought, all Sins committed after Baptiſme,
were Sins againſt the Holy Ghoſt: his reaſon was only a witleſs conceit of his
own, That God the Father was in all things, the Son only in all rea­ſonable
Creatures, the Holy Ghoſt in all regenerate Men. Therefore when Men Sin
againſt the Divine Perſon, which is in them, if they be Heathen, they Sin
againſt God the Father, or Son; if they be Chriſtians, they Sin againſt God
the Holy Goſt; but this opinion is falſe. The Novatian Hereticks agreed with
Origen in opinion, for they denied remiſ­ſion of Sins to any that fell,
think­ing [[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=21)
all falls of Chriſtians to be Sins againſt the Holy Ghoſt; but this opinion is
falſe; elſe all Sins were unpardonable to Chriſtians. Yet we find St. Paul, to
remit the Sins of the inceſtuous Corinthian.

Our Saviour alſo chargeth the Phariſees with this, who were no Chriſtians. St.
Auſtin thought final impenitency to be the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt; but
final impe­nitency is no Blaſphemy, but only a general circumſtance, that may
accompany any Sin: beſides, our Saviour intends, that this Sin may be found in
this life. And the Phariſees were alive when they were accuſed of it Pet.
Lumbard, and Tho. Aquinas, thought Sins of Malice, to be Sins againſt the
Ho­ly Ghoſt, and Sins of infirmity againſt the Father, and Sins of ig­norance
[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=22) againſt
the Son. This opi­nion is falſe, becauſe the Sin a­gainſt the Holy Ghoſt, muſt
be a Sin of ſome certain Blaſphemy, but malice is no certain Sin, but a
General, and 'tis not always a Blaſphemy.

The ſix differences the School­men make of the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, are
theſe;

1\. Envying of our Brothers Graces; 2. Impugning of the Known Truth; 3.
Deſperation; 4. Obſtinacy; 5. Preſumption; 6. Final Impenitency.

In this determination of the point of Blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, and
the inquiry made into Mr Calvins and others new definition; I hope I have
deli­vered nothing contrary to the Ar­ticles of the Church of England.

FINIS.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=22)

A TRACT Concerning the SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, &c.

Printed, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=23)

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=23)

### 1\. A Tract on the Sacra­ment of the LORDS SUPPER.

Kind SIR,

IN peruſal of your Letters▪ together with the Schedule incloſed, no
Circumſtance did ſo much move me as this, that ſo ordinary Points as are
diſcuſt there, and that in a bare and ordinary manner, ſhould amuſe either
your ſelf or any man elſe, that pretends to ordinary Know­ledge in
Controverſies in Chriſtian Religion. For the Points therein [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=24) diſcuſt are no
other than the ſub­ject of every common Pamphlet, and ſufficiently known (that
I may ſo ſay) in every Barbers Shop. Yet becauſe you require my Opinion of
matters there in queſtion, I wil­lingly afford it you, though I fear I ſhall
more amuſe you with tel­ling you the Truth, than the Diſ­putants there did, by
abuſing you with Error. For the plain and ne­ceſſary (though perhaps
unwel­come) Truth is, that in the greater part of the Diſpute, both parties
much miſtook themſelves, and that fell out which is in the cōmon Pro­verb,
ſc. Whilſt the one milks the Ram, the other holds under the Sieve. That you
may ſee this Truth with your Eyes, I divide your whole Diſpute into two Heads;
the one concern­ing the Euchariſt, the other con­cerning [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=24) the Churches
miſtaking it ſelf about Fundamentals.

For the firſt, It conſiſteth of two parts; of a Propoſition, and of a Reply:
The Propoſition expreſ­ſes (at leaſt he that made it intend­ed it ſo to do,
though he miſtakes) the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, concerning the
preſence of Chriſt in the Eucharist. The Reply doth the like for the Church of
Rome in the ſame Argument. Now that you may ſee how indif­ferently I walk, I
will open the miſtakes of both parties, that ſo the truth of the thing it ſelf
(being unclouded of Errors) may the more clearly ſhine forth.

The firſt miſtake common to both is, That they ground them­ſelves much upon
the words of Conſecration, as they are called, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=25) and ſuppoſe,
That upon the pro­nouncing of thoſe words, ſome­thing befalls that action,
which otherwiſe would not; and that without thoſe words the action were lame.
Sir, I muſt confeſs my ignorance unto you. I find no ground for the neceſſity
of this do­ing. Our Saviour inſtituting that Holy Ceremony, commands us to do
what he did, leaves us no Pre­cept of ſaying any words; nei­ther will it be
made appear, that either the bleſſed Apoſtles, or Pri­mitive Chriſtians had
any ſuch Cuſtom: Nay the contrary will be made probably to appear out of ſome
of the antienteſt Writings of the Churches Ceremonials. Our Saviour indeed
uſed the Words, but it was to expreſs what his meaning was; had he barely
act­ed [[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=25)
the thing, without expreſſing himſelf by ſome ſuch Form of Words, we could
never have known what it was he did. But what neceſſity is there now of ſo
doing? for when the Congrega­tion is met together, to the break­ing of Bread
and Prayer, and ſee Bread and Wine upon the Com­munion Table, is there any man
can doubt of the meaning of it, although the Canon be not read? It was the
farther ſolemnizing, and beautifying that holy action which brought the Canon
in; and not an opinion of adding any thing to the ſubſtance of the action. For
that the words were uſed by our Saviour to work any thing upon the Bread and
Wine, can never out of Scripture or Reaſon be deduced; and beyond theſe two, I
have no [[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=26)
ground for my Religion, neither in Subſtance nor in Ceremony. The main
Foundation that up­holds the neceſſity of this form of action now in uſe, is
Church-Cuſtom and Church-Error.

Now for that Topique place of Church-Cuſtom, it is generally too much abuſed:
For whereas na­turally the neceſſity of the thing ought to give warrant to the
pra­ctice of the Church; I know not by what device matters are turned about,
and the cuſtomary practice of the Church is alledged to prove the neceſſity of
the thing; as if things had received their Original from the Church-Authority,
and not as the truth is, from an high­er Hand. As for the Churches Er­ror, on
which I told you this Form of action is founded, it conſiſts in [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=26) the uncautelous
taking up an un­ſound ungrounded concluſion of the Fathers for a religious
Maxim. St. Ambroſe, I trow, was he that ſaid it, and poſterity hath too
ge­nerally applauded it, Accedat ver­bum ad elementum, & fiat Sacramen­tum. By
which they would per­ſwade us, againſt all experience, that to make up a
Sacrament, there muſt be ſomething ſaid and ſome­thing done; whereas indeed to
the perfection of a Sacrament, or ho­ly Myſtery (for both theſe are one) it is
ſufficient that one thing be done whereby another is ſigni­fied, though
nothing be ſaid at all. When Tarquinius was walking in his Garden, a Meſſenger
came and asked him, what he would have done unto the Town of Gabij, then newly
taken? He anſwered no­thing▪ [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=27) But with his
Wand ſtruck off the tops of the higheſt Popies; and the Meſſenger
underſtanding his meaning, cut off the Heads of the chief of the City. Had
this been done in Sacris, it had been forth­with truly a Sacrament, or holy
Myſtery. Cum in omnibus Scientiis vo­ces ſignificent res, hoc habet proprium
Theologia, quòd ipſaeres ſignificatae per voces, etiam ſignificent aliquid,
ſaith Aquinas; and upon the ſecond ſig­nification are all Spiritual and
my­ſtical ſenſes founded: So that in Sacris, a Myſtery or Sacrament is then
acted, when one thing is done and another is ſignified, as it is in the Holy
Communion, though nothing be ſaid at all. The ancient Sacrifices of the Jews,
whether weekly, monethly, or yearly, their Paſſover, their ſitting in Boothes,
[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=27) &c. Theſe
were all Sacraments, yet we find not any ſacred forms of words, uſed by the
Prieſts or People in the execution of them.

To ſum up that which we have to ſay in this Point, the calling upon the words
of conſecration in the Euchariſt, is too weakly found­ed to be made
argumentative, for the action is perfect, whether thoſe words be uſed or
forborn: And in truth to ſpeak my opinion, I ſee no great harm could enſue,
were they quite omitted. Certain­ly thus much good would follow, that ſome
part (though not a lit­tle one) of the ſuperſtition that ad­heres to that
action, by reaſon of an ungrounded conceit of the ne­ceſſity and force of the
words in it, would forthwith pill off and fall away: I would not have you
un­derſtand [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=28) me ſo, as if I
would pre­ſcribe for, or deſire the diſuſe of the words; only two things I
would commend to you, Firſt, That the uſe of the Canon is a thing indifferent.
And, Secondly, That in this knack of making Sa­craments, Chriſtians have taken
a greater liberty than they can well juſtify: Firſt, In forging Sacra­ments,
more than God (for ought doth or can appear) did ever in­tend: And Secondly,
In adding to the Sacraments inſtituted of God many formalities, and
cere­monial circumſtances upon no warrant but their own; which cir­cumſtances
by long uſe, begat in the minds of men a conceit, that they were eſſential
parts of that to which indeed they were but appen­dant; and that only by the
device of [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=28)
ſome who practiſed a power in the Church morethan was convenient.

Thus much for the firſt com­mon miſtake.

The Second is worſe than it; You ſee that both parts agreed in the
acknowledgment of the real preſence of the Body of Chriſt in the Euchariſt,
though they differ in the manner of his Preſence, and application of himſelf
to the recei­ver; though the Proteſtant Diſpu­tant ſeems to have gone a little
be­yond his Leader: Had he expreſt himſelf in the point of Bread and Wine,
what became of it, whe­ther it remain'd in its proper nature yea or no, I
could the better have fathom'd him: Now theſe words of his, that the Bread and
Wine after conſecration are truly▪ and really the Body of Chriſt, howſo­ever
[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=29) they are
ſuppled and allayed with that clauſe, not after a carnal, but after a
ſpiritual manner, yet ſtill remain too crude and raw, and betray the Speaker
for a Lutheran at leaſt, if not for a favourer of the Church of Rome; for as
for that Phraſe, of a ſpiritual manner, which ſeems to give ſeaſon and
moderation to his concluſion, it can yield him but ſmall relief: For firſt, To
ſay the fleſh of Chriſt is in the Bread, but not after a car­nal manner, is
but the ſame non­ſence, which the Divines of Rome put upon us on the like
occaſion, when telling us, that the Blood of Chriſt is really ſacrificed, and
ſhed in the Sacrament, they add by way of Gloſs, that it is done incruente,
unbloodily▪ by the like Analogy they may tell us, if they pleaſe, [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=29) that the body of
Chriſt is there in­corporated unbodily, Fleſh not carnally may paſs the Preſs
jointly the next Edition of the Book of Bulls. Again, in another reſpect, That
clauſe, of a ſpiritual manner doth your Proteſtant Diſputer but little
ſervice, if any at all; for the Catholick Diſputant contriving with himſelf
how to ſeat the Body of God in the Euchariſt, as may be moſt for his eaſe,
tells us, that he is there as Spirits and glorified Bodies (which St. Paul
calls ſpiri­tual) are in the places they poſſeſs; ſo then, the one tells you
the Body of Chriſt is there really, but ſpiri­tually; the other, that he is
there really, but as a Spirit in a place; and what now, I pray you, is the
difference between them? By the way, in the paſſage you may ſee [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=30) what account to
make of your Ca­tholick Diſputer. Ariſtotle, and with him common ſenſe, tells
us thus much, That he that compares two Bodies together, muſt know them both;
Doth this Gentleman know any thing concerning the ſite and locality of
Spirits, and Bodies glorified? if he doth, let him do us the courteſy as to
ſhew us, at what price he purchaſed that de­gree of knowledg, that ſo we may
try our Credit, and ſee if we can buy it at the ſame rate; Tertius è Coelo
cecidit Cato? Is he like a ſe­cond Paul, lately deſcended out of the third
Heavens, and there hath made us the diſcovery? for by what other means he
could at­tain to that knowledg, my dul­neſs cannot ſuggeſt. But if he doth not
know (as indeed he neither [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=30) doth nor can,
for there is no means left to make diſcovery that way) then with what
congruity can be tell us that the Body of Chriſt is in the Bread, as Spirits,
and glorified Bodies are in their places, if he know not what manner of
locati­on and ſite, Spirits and glorified Bodies have? I ſhall not need to
prompt your diſcretion thus far, as that you ought not to make dainties of
ſuch fruitleſs and deſpe­rate Diſputers; who, as the Apo­ſtle notes, thruſt
themſelves into things they have not ſeen, and up­on a falſe ſhew of
knowledge, a­buſe eaſie Hearers, and of things they know not, adventure to
ſpeak they know not what.

To return then, and conſider a little more of this ſecond miſtake common to
both your Diſputants, [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=31) I will deal as
favourably as I can with your Proteſtant Diſputer; for though I think he
miſtakes himſelf (for I know no Proteſt­ant that teacheth, that the common
Bread, after the word ſpoken is re­ally made the Body of Chriſt) yet he might
well take occaſion thus to erre out of ſome Proteſtant Writings: For generally
the Re­formed Divines do falſly report that Holy Action, whether you re­gard
the Eſſence or Uſe thereof.

For firſt, if in regard of the Eſ­ſence, ſome Proteſtants, and that of chief
note, ſtick not to ſay, That the words of Conſecration are not a meer Trope,
and from hence it muſt needs follow, that in ſome ſence they muſt needs be
taken li­terally, which is enough to plead authority for the Gentlemans
Er­ror. [[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=31)
But that which they preach concerning a real preſence and participation of
Chriſts Body in the Sacrament; they expound not by a ſuppoſal that the Bread
be­comes Gods Body, but that toge­ther with the Sacramental Ele­ments, there
is conveighed into the Soul of the worthy Receiver, the very Body and Blood of
God, but after a ſecret, ineffable, and won­derfull manner. From hence, as I
take it, have proceeded theſe crude ſpeeches of the Learned of the Re­formed
parts, ſome dead, ſome li­ving, wherein they take upon them to aſſure the
Divines of Rome, that we acknowledge a Real Preſence as well as they; but for
the man­ner how, con, or trans, or ſub, or in, [...], we play the Scepticks,
and determine not. This conceit, be­ſides [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=32) the falſhood of
it, is a meer novelty, neither is it to be found in the Books of any of the
Anti­ents, till Martin Bucer roſe. He out of an unſeaſonable baſhfulneſs, and
fear to ſeem to recede too far from the Church of Rome, taught to the purpoſe
now related, con­cerning the Doctrine of Chriſt's Preſence in the Sacrament;
and from him it deſcended into the Writings of Calvin and Beza, whoſe
Authority have well-near ſpread it over the face of the Reformed Churches.
This is an Error which, as I ſaid, touches the Eſſence of that holy Action;
but there are many now which touch the end and uſe of it, which are practiſed
by the Reformed parts; for out of an extravagant fancy they have of it, they
abuſe it to many ends, [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=32) of which we may
think the firſt Inſtituter (ſave that he was God, and knew all things) never
thought of: For we make it an Arbitrator of Civil buſineſſes; and imploy it in
ending Controver­ſies; and for Confirmation of what we ſay or do, we common­ly
promiſe to take the Sacrament upon it; we teach, that it confirms our Faith in
Chriſt, whereas in­deed the receiving of it is a ſign of Faith confirmed, and
men come to it to teſtifie that they do be­lieve, not to procure that they may
believe: For if a Man doubt of the truth of Chriſtianity, think you that his
ſcruples would be remo­ved upon the receiving of the Sa­crament? I would it
were ſo; we ſhould not have ſo many doubt­ing Chriſtians, who yet receive
[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=33) the
Sacrament oft enough: We teach it to be Viaticum morientium, whereby we abuſe
many diſtreſſed Conſciences, and ſick Bodies, who ſeek for comfort there, and
find­ing it not, conclude from thence (I ſpeak what I know) ſome de­fect in
their Faith. The partici­pation of this Sacrament to ſick and weak perſons,
what unſeemly events hath it occaſioned, the vo­miting up of the Elements
anon, upon the receipt of them, the reſurg­ing the Wine into the Cup, before
the Miniſter could remove his hand to the interruption of the action? Now all
theſe Miſtakes and Errors have riſen upon ſome ungrounded and fond practices,
crept long ſince (God knows how) into the Church, and as yet not ſufficiently
purged out. I will [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=33) be bold to
inform you what it is, which is  [...], the main fundamental fallacy, whence
all theſe abuſes have ſprung. There hath been a fancy of long ſubſiſt­ance in
the Churches, that in the Communion there is ſomething given beſides Bread and
Wine, of which the Numerality given, men have not yet agreed; Some ſay it is
the Body of God into which the Bread is tranſubſtantiated; Some ſay it is the
ſame Body with which the Bread is conſubſtantia­ted; Some, that the Bread
re­maining what it was, there paſſes with it to the Soul the real Body of God,
in a ſecret unknown man­ner; Some, that a further degree of Faith is ſupplied
us; Others, that ſome degree of Gods grace, whatever it be, is exhibited which
[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=34) otherwiſe
would be wanting: All which variety of conceits muſt needs fall out, as having
no other ground, but conjecture weakly founded. To ſettle you therefore in
your Judgment, both of the thing it ſelf, and of the true uſe of it, I will
commend to your conſideration theſe few Propoſiti­ons.

Firſt, In the Communion, there is nothing given but Bread, and Wine.

Secondly, The Bread and Wine are ſigns indeed, but not of any thing there
exhibited, but of ſome­what given long fince, even of Chriſt given for us upon
the Croſs ſixteen hundred years ago, and more.

Thirdly, Jeſus Chriſt is eaten at the Communion Table in no ſence [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=34) neither
Spiritually, by virtue of a­ny thing done there, nor really, neither
Metaphorically, nor Lite­rally. Indeed that which is eaten (I mean the Bread)
is called Chriſt by a Metaphor; but it is eaten tru­ly and properly.

Fourthly, The Spiritual eating of Chriſt is common to all places, as well as
the Lord's Table.

Laſt of all, The Uſes and Ends of the Lord's Supper can be no more than ſuch
as are mentioned in the Scriptures, and they are but two.

First, The commemoration of the Death and Paſſion of the Son of God, ſpecified
by himſelf at the Inſtitution of the Ceremony.

Secondly, To teſtify our Union with Chriſt, and Communion one with another;
which end St. Paul hath taught us.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=35)In theſe
few Concluſions the whole Doctrine and Uſe of the Lord's Supper is fully ſet
down; and whoſo leadeth you beyond this, doth but abuſe you. Quicquid ultra
quaeritur, non intelligitur. The proof of theſe Propoſitions would require
more than the Limits of a Letter will admit of; and I ſee my ſelf already to
have exceeded theſe Bounds. I will therefore paſs away to conſider the ſecond
part of your Letter.

In this ſecond Part, I would you had pleaſed to have done as in the firſt you
did, That is, not only ſet down the Propoſition of the Ca­tholick, but ſome
Anſwer of the Proteſtant, by which we might have diſcovered his Judgement; I
might perchance have uſed the [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=35) ſame Liberty as
I have done be­fore, namely diſcovered the miſ­ſtakes of both parties; for I
ſuſpect that as there they did, ſo here they would have given me cauſe
e­nough. Now I content my ſelf barely to ſpeak to the Queſtion. The Queſtion
is, Whether the Church may Err in Fundamentals? By the Church I will not
trifle as your Ca­tholick doth, and mean only the Proteſtant Party, as he
profeſſeth he doth only the Roman Faction. But I ſhall underſtand all Factions
in Chriſtianity, All that entitle themſelves to Chriſt, whereſoever diſperſed
all the World over.

First, I Anſwer, That every Chriſtian may err that will: for if men might not
err willfully, then there could be no Hereſie; Here­ſie being nothing elſe but
wilful [[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=36)
Error: For if we account miſ­takes befalling us through humane Frailties to be
Hereſies, then it will follow, That every man ſince the Apoſtles time was an
Heretick; for never yet was there any Chri­ſtian, the Apoſtles only excepted,
which did not in ſomething con­cerning the Chriſtian Faith miſ­take himſelf,
either by addition or omiſſion, or miſinterpretation of ſomething. An evident
ſign of this Truth you may ſee in this by the Providence of God: the Writings
of many learned Chriſtians from the Spring of Chriſtianity, have been left
unto poſterity, and amongſt all thoſe, ſcarcely any is to be found who is not
confeſt on all hands to have miſtaken ſome things, and thoſe miſtakes for the
moſt part ſtand upon Record by ſome who [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=36) purpoſely
obſerved them. Nei­ther let this (I beſeech you) be­get in you a conceit as if
I meant to diſgrace thoſe whoſe Labours have been and are of infinite bene­fit
in the Church. For if Ariſtotle, and Aphrodiſeus, and Galen, and the reſt of
thoſe Excellent men whom God had indued with extraordina­ry portions of
natural Knowledge, have with all thankful and ingeni­ous men throughout all
Generati­ons retained their Credit entire, notwithſtanding it is acknowledg­ed
that they have all of them in many things, ſwerved from the Truth; Then, why
ſhould not Chriſtians expreſs the ſame inge­nuity to thoſe who have laboured
before us in the Expoſition of the Chriſtian Faith, and highly eſteem them for
their Works ſake, their [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=37) many infirmities
notwithſtanding? You will ſay, that for private per­ſons it is confeſt they
may and dai­ly do err; But can Chriſtians err by whole Shoals, by Armies
meet­ing for defence of the Truth in Sy­nods▪ and Councils, eſpecially
Ge­neral, which are countenanced by the great Fable of all the World, the
Biſhop of Rome?

I anſwer, To ſay that Councils may not err, though private per­ſons may, at
firſt ſight is a merry ſpeech; as if a man ſhould ſay, That every ſingle
Souldier indeed may run away, but a whole Army cannot, eſpecially having
Hannibal for their Captain; and ſince it is confeſt, that all ſingle perſons
not only may, but do err, it will prove a very hard matter, to gather out of
theſe a multitude, of whom be­ing [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=37) gathered
together, we may be ſecured they cannot err. I muſt for mine own part confeſs,
that Councils, and Synods not only may and have erred, but conſide­ring the
means how they are ma­naged, it were a great marvel if they did not err: For
what men are they of whom thoſe great Meetings do conſiſt? are they the beſt,
the moſt learned, the moſt vertuous, the moſt likely to walk uprightly? No,
the greateſt, the moſt ambitious, and many times men, neither of Judgment, nor
Learning; ſuch are they of whom theſe Bodies do conſiſt: and are theſe men in
common equity like­ly to determine for Truth? Qui ut in vita, ſic in cauſis,
ſpes quoque im­probas alunt, as Quintilian ſpeaks. Again, when ſuch perſons
are [[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=38) thus
met, their way to proceed to concluſion, is not by weight of Reaſon, but by
multitude of Votes and Suffrages; as if it were a max­im in nature, that the
greater part muſt needs be the better; where­as our common experience ſhews,
That, Nunquam ita bene agitur cum rebus humanis ut plures ſint meliores. It
was never heard in any profeſſi­on, that Concluſion of Truth went by plurality
of Voices, the Chriſtian profeſſion only excepted; and I have often muſed how
it comes to paſs, that the way which in all other Sciences is not able to
warrant the pooreſt Concluſion, ſhould be thought ſufficient to give authority
to Concluſions in Divi­nity, the Supream Empreſs of Sciences. But I ſee what
it is that is uſually pleaded, and with your [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=38) leave I will a
little conſider of it.

It is given out, that Chriſtian meetings have ſuch an aſſiſtance of God, and
his bleſſed Spirit, that let their perſons be what they will they may aſſure
themſelves againſt all poſſibility of miſtaking; and this is that they ſay,
which to this way of ending Controverſies, which in all other Sciences is ſo
contemptible, gives a determi­ning to Theological Diſputes of ſo great
Authority. And this mu­ſick of the Spirit is ſo pleaſing, that it hath taken
the Reformed Party too; For with them likewiſe all things at length end in the
Spirit; but with this difference, that thoſe of Rome confine the Spirit to the
Biſhops and Counſels of Rome, but the Proteſtant en­largeth this working of
the Spirit, [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=39) and makes it the
Director of pri­vate meditations. I ſhould doubt­leſs do great injury to the
good­neſs of God, if I ſhould deny the ſufficient aſſiſtance of God to the
whoſe world, to preſerve them both from ſin in their Actions, and damnable
errors in their opinions; much more ſhould I do it, if I denied it to the
Church of God; but this aſſiſtance of God may very well be, and yet men may
fall into ſin and errors. St. Paul preach­ing to the Gentiles, tells them that
God was with them in ſo palpable a manner, that even by groping they might
have found him, yet both he and we know what the Gentiles did. Chriſt hath
promiſed his perpetual aſſiſtance to his Church; but hath he left any
Pro­pheſie, that the Church ſhould [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=39) perpetually
adhere to him? if any man think he hath, it is his part to inform us, where
this Propheſy is to be found. That matters may go well with men, two things
muſt concur, the aſſiſtance of God to men, and the adherence of men to God; if
either of theſe be deficient, there will be little good done. Now the firſt of
theſe is never deficient, but the ſecond is very often; ſo that the Promiſe of
Chriſts perpetual pre­ſence made unto the Church, in­fers not at all any
preſumption of Infallibility. As for that term of Spirit which is ſo much
taken up, to open the danger that lurks under it, we muſt a little
diſtin­guiſh upon the Word. This term [Spirit of God,] either ſignifies the
third Perſon in the bleſſed Trinity, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=40) or elſe the
wonderful power of Miracles, of Tongues, of Heal­ing, &c, which was given to
the Apoſtles, and other of the Primi­tive Chriſtians, at the firſt preach­ing
of the Goſpel, but both theſe meanings are ſtrangers to our pur­poſe; The
Spirit of God, as it concerns the Queſtion here in hand, ſignifies either
ſomething within us, or ſomething without us; Without us, it ſignifies the
written Word, recorded in the Books of the Prophets, Apoſtles, and
Evangeliſts, which are meto­nymically called the Spirit, be­cauſe the Holy
Ghoſt ſpake thoſe things by their mouths when they lived, and now ſpeaks unto
us by their pens when they are dead. If you pleaſe to receive it, this alone
is left as Chriſts Vicar in his ab­ſence, [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=40) to give us
directions both in our actions and opinions; he that tells you of another
Spirit in the Church to direct you in your way, may as well tell you a tale of
a Puck, or a walking Spirit in the Church-Yard. But that this Spirit ſpeaking
without us may be beneficial to us, oportet aliquid intus eſse, there muſt be
ſomething within us, which alſo we call the Spirit; and this is twofold; For
either it ſignifies a ſecret Illapſe, or ſupernatural Influence of God up­on
the hearts of men, by which he is ſuppoſed inwardly, to incline, inform, and
direct men in their ways, and wills, and to preſerve them from ſin and
miſtake; or elſe it ſignifies that in us, which is oppoſed againſt the fleſh,
& which denominates us ſpiritual men, and [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=41) by which we are
ſaid to walk accord­ing to the Spirit; that which St. Paul means, when he
tells us, The Fleſh luſteth againſt the Spirit, and the Spi­rit againſt the
Fleſh, (Rom. 7.) ſo that we may not do what we liſt. Now of theſe two, the
former it is, which the Church ſeems to appeal unto in de ermining
Controverſies by way of Counſel: But to this I have little to ſay. Firſt,
Becauſe I know not whether there be any ſuch thing yea, or no. Secondly
Becauſe experience ſhews, that the pretence of the Spirit in this ſence is
very dangerous, as being next at hand to give countenance to impoſture and
abuſe: which is a thing ſuffi­ciently ſeen, and acknowledged both by the
Papiſt and Proteſtant Party; as it appears by this, that though both pretend
unto it, yet [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=41) both upbraid
each other with the pretence of it. But the Spirit in the ſecond ſence, is
that I contend for; and this is nothing but the Reaſon illuminated by
Revelation out of the written Word. For when the Mind and Spirit humbly
conform and ſubmit to the written Will of God, then you are properly ſaid to
have the Spirit of God, and to walk according to the Spirit, not accord­ing to
the Fleſh. This alone is that Spirit which preſerves us frō ſtray­ing from
the Truth; For he indeed that hath the Spirit, errs not at all, or if he do,
it is with as little hazard and danger as may be; which is the higheſt point
of Infallibility, which either private Perſons or Churches can arrive unto.
Yet would I not have you to conceive that I deny that at this day the Holy
Ghoſt [[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=42)
communicates himſelf to any in this ſecret and ſupernatural manner, as in
foregoing times He had been wont to do; indeed my own many uncleanneſſes are
ſufficient reaſons to hinder that good Spirit to parti­cipate himſelf unto me,
after that manner. The Holy Ghoſt was pleaſed to come down like a Dove;
Veniunt ad candida tecta Co­lumbae. Accipiet nullas ſordida Turris Aves. Now
it is no reaſon to con­clude the Holy Ghoſt imparts himſelf in this manner to
none, becauſe he hath not done that favour unto me. But thus much I will ſay,
that the benefit of that ſacred In­fluence is confined to thoſe happy Souls in
whom it is, and cannot extend it ſelf to the Church in publick; And if any
Catholick except againſt you for ſaying ſo, [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=42) warrant your
ſelf and me out of Aquinas, whoſe words are theſe, Innititur fidei natura
revelationi Apoſto­lis & Prophetis factae, qui Canonicos Libros ſcripſerunt,
non autem Revela­tioni, ſiqua fuit, aliis Doctoribus factae. It being granted
then, that Churches can err, it remains then in the ſecond place, to conſider
how far they may err; I anſwer for Churches as I did before for private
Perſons, Churches may err in Fundamentals if they liſt, for they may be
heretical, for Churches may be wicked, they may be Idolaters, and why then not
heretical? Is Hereſy a more dangerous thing than Idolatry? For whereas it is
pleaded, that Churches cannot fall into Hereſie, becauſe of that promiſe of
our Sa­viour, That the Gates of Hell ſhall [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=43) not prevail
againſt the Church, is but out of miſtake of the meaning of that place; and
indeed I have of­ten muſed how ſo plain a place could ſo long and ſo generally
be miſconſtrued: To ſecure you therefore, that you be not abuſed with these
words hereafter, (for they are often quoted to prove the Churches
Infallibility) I ſhall in­deavour to give you the natural meaning of them, for
[...], the Gates of Hell, is an Hebraiſme; for in the Hebrew Expreſſion, the
Gates of a thing ſignifies the thing it ſelf, as the gates of Sion, Sion it
ſelf, and by the ſame proporti­on the gates of Hell ſignifies Hell it ſelf:
Now  [...] which we Engliſh Hell, as in no place of Scripture it ſignifies
Hereſie, ſo very frequently in Scripture it [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=43) ſignifies Death,
or rather the ſtate of the dead, and indifferently ap­plied to good and bad;
Let us then take the Word in that mean­ing, for what greater means can we have
to warrant the ſignificati­on of a Scripture word, than the general meaning of
it in Scripture? So that when our Saviour ſpake theſe words, he made no
promiſe to the Church of perſevering in the Truth, but to thoſe that did
perſevere in the Truth he made a promiſe of victory againſt death and hell;
And what he there ſays, ſounds to no other purpoſe, but this, that thoſe who
ſhall continue his, although they dy yet death ſhall not have the Dominion
over them; but the time ſhall come, that the bands of Death ſhall be broken;
and as Chriſt is riſen, ſo [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=44) ſhall they that
are his riſe again to Immortality: For any help there­fore that this Text
affords, Church­es may err in Fundamentals. But to ſpeak the Truth, I much
won­der, not only how any Churches, but how any private man, that is careful
to know and follow the Truth, can err in Fundamentals: For ſince it is moſt
certain, that the Scripture contains at leaſt the Fundamental Parts of
Chriſtian Faith, how is it poſſible▪ that any Man, that is careful to ſtudy
and believe the Scripture, ſhould be ignorant of any neceſſary part of his
Faith? Now whether the Church of Rome err in Funda­mentals, yea or no? To
anſwer this, I muſt crave leave to uſe this Diſtinction; To err in
Funda­mentals, is either to be ignorant [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=44) of, or deny
ſomething to be fun­damental that is, or to entertain ſomething for
Fundamental, which is not. In the firſt ſenſe, the Church of Rome,
entertaining the Scriptures as ſhe doth, cannot poſ­ſibly be ignorant of any
principal part of Chriſtian Faith; all her error is, in entertaining in her
ſelf, and obtruding upon others, a multitude of things for Funda­mentals,
which no way concern our Faith at all: Now how dan­gerous it is thus to do,
except I know whether ſhe did this willing­ly or wittingly, yea or no, is not
eaſy to define: If willingly ſhe doth it; it is certainly high and damnable
preſumption, if igno­rantly, I know not what mercies God hath in ſtore for
them that ſin not out of malitious wicked­neſs, [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=45) Now concerning
the mer­riment newly ſtarted; I mean the requiring of a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, I need to anſwer no more, but what Abraham tells the rich man in
Hell, Ha­bent Moſen & Prophetas, They have Moſes, and the Prophets, the
Apoſtles, and the Evange­liſts, let them ſeek them there; for if they find
them not there, in vain ſhall they ſeek them in all the World beſides. But yet
to come a little nearer to the Particulars; If the Church of Rome would needs
know what is Fundamental, in our conceit, and what not, the Anſwer, as far as
my ſelf in Perſon am concerned in the Buſineſs, ſhall be no other than this;
Let her obſerve what Points they are, [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=45) wherein we agree
with her, and let her think, if ſhe pleaſe, that we account of them as
Fundamentals, eſpecially if they be in the Scrip­tures; and on the other hand,
let her mark in what Points we refuſe Communion with her, and let her aſſure
her ſelf, we eſteem thoſe as no Fundamentals. If ſhe deſire a Liſt and
Catalogue made of all thoſe, ſhe is at leiſure enough, for ought I know, to do
it her ſelf.

Laſt of all, Concerning the im­putation of Rebellion and Schiſm againſt
Church-Authority, with which your Catholick Diſputant meant to affright you;
all that is but meerly Powder without Shot, and can never hurt you; For ſince
it hath been ſufficiently evidenced unto us, that the Church of Rome hath
adulterated the Truth of God, [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=46) by mixing with
it ſundry Inventi­ons of her own; it was the Con­ſcience of our duty to God,
that made us to ſeparate: For where the Truth of God doth once ſuffer, there
Union is Conſpiracy, Au­thority is but Tyranny, & Church­es are but Routs; And
ſuppoſe we, that we miſtook, and made our Se­paration upon Error, the Church
of Rome being right in all her Waies, though we think other­wiſe, yet could
not this much pre­judice us; For, it is Schiſm upon wilfulneſs that brings
danger with it, Schiſm upon miſtake, and Schiſm upon juſt occaſion, hath in it
ſelf little hurt, if any at all.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=46)

SIR,

I Return you more than I thought, or you expected; yet leſs than the Argu­ment
requir'd: If you ſhall favour me ſo much as to carefully read what I have
carefully written, you ſhall find (at leaſt in thoſe Points you occaſioned me
to touch upon) ſufficient ground to plant your ſelf ſtrongly againſt all
Diſcourſe of the Romiſh Corner-creepers, which they uſe for the Seducing of
unſtable Souls. Be it much or little that I have done, I require no other
reward than the conti­nuance of your good Affection to,

Your SERVANT, whom you know.

# 3\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=47)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=47)

A PARAPHRASE ON S. Matthew's Goſpel.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, &c.

Printed, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=48)

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=48)

### 1\. A PARAPHRASE on St. Matthews Goſpel. CHAP. XII.

Scholar.

SIR,

I Thank you for the pains you have taken in facilitating to my Underſtanding
the ſcope and purpoſe of the XI. of St. Matthew: If I might not be too
troubleſome to you, I would alſo deſire you to take the like pains with me in
the Twelfth.

Maſter.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=49)

I ſhall, with all my heart; provided that you will make your Objections, as
they riſe within you; for peradventure, I may think you underſtand that which
you do not, and not under­ſtand that which you do, and ſo loſe my Labour.

Scholar.

I ſhall obey you readi­ly, and therefore to begin with the beginning of the
Chapter; I pray, Sir, how is it ſaid, 1. that, At that time, Jeſus went
through the Corn, with his Diſciples? when in the very next Chapter before, it
is ſaid, That he ſent all his Diſciples away from him.

Master.

By theſe Words, at that time, is not meant the very next immediate Inſtant of
time, to that, when he ſpake the laſt words going before; but ſuch a
conve­nient [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=49) portion of time,
wherein the twelve Diſciples might have gone about thoſe parts, where­unto
they were ſent, and returned back again: So St. Matthew, ha­ving ſpoken newly
of Chriſts dwelling in Nazareth, when he was a Child of about two years old,
immediately ſubjoyns, In thoſe days came John the Baptiſt, as if John had come
within ſome few days after his coming into Naza­reth, when we know there
paſſed eight and twenty years between.

Scholar.

I believe it as you ſay, and therefore ſhall paſs to that which doth more
trouble me, and that is, What that was, which the Diſciples did, which was not
lawful on the Sabbath day.

Maſter.

How come you to be troubled at that? Is it not ſaid in [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=50) plain Terms,
they plucked the Ears of Corn, & did eat them. Why ſhould not you think that
this was their fault?

Scholar.

I ſhall tell you why: To my thinking, there are three things ſaid, 1. That
they went through the Corn. 2\. That they plucked the Ears. 3\. That they eat
them. Now whether all theſe or one of theſe was their Fault, I cannot tell;
and I ſhall tell you the Reaſon of my doubt.

Firſt, It is true that their very Walking might have been their fault, becauſe
it was not lawful on the Sabbath, to walk above the ſpace of two thouſand
Cubits, and we know not how far Chriſt & the Diſciples might have come that
day; But yet methinks, if that had been it, they ſhould have reproved Chriſt
as well as his Diſciples, be­cauſe 'tis very likely they walk't the [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=50) one as much & as
far as the other.

Secondly, It is true, that their plucking the Ears of Corn might have been
their fault, but yet me­thinks it ſhould not, in regard the Law is ſo clear,
in the 23. Deut. 25\. When thou comeſt into the ſtanding Corn of thy
Neighbour, then thou mayſt pluck the Ears with thine hand, but thou ſhalt not
move a Sickle unto thy Neighbours ſtanding Corn. And, truly why that, which is
ſo plainly lawful at ano­ther time, ſhould be unlawful on the Sabbath (being
it is ſo far from being any kind of labour or ſer­vile work) I cannot imagine.

3\. It's true, that they did eat them, and I cannot ſee what fault there is in
that, unleſs you can ſhew me.

Maſt.

And peradventure I ſhall ſhew you more in that than you thought on. It is true
that the ge­neral [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=51) conſent of
Expoſitors runs on their plucking the Ears upon the Sabbath-Day, as being the
thing condemned by the Phariſees for an unlawful thing: But I think they would
be much troubled to prove it. The cuſtom and manner of the Jews, (eſpecially
ſince the times of the Macchabees) being to allow Acts of greater labour and
pain than the plucking of an Ear, namely, waging War againſt their Enemies,
the Travelling of Car­ryers and Merchants, with ſuch o­thers, even on the
Sabbath-Day. I ſhould rather encline to think, that their Fault was Eating;
eſpecial­ly if that be true, which the very Heathen Poets tax and ſcoff them
ſo with, namely, their Sabbath-Faſts. For if all things be well con­ſidered, I
believe there will more [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=51) be ſaid for
this, than for the other Crime. And if a man will go no further than that
Anſwer which our Saviour makes for them, he he ſhall find ground enough to be
of this opinion. For, if the pre­tended fault had been working or labouring,
our Saviour Chriſt might have eaſily laid his Anſwer upon Joſhua, or upon many
others, who did greater work than this up­on the Sabbath. But laying it as he
doth upon David, and upon his Eating that which was forbidden: He ſeemes to
Anſwer one unlaw­ful Eating with another, when Ne­ceſſity was a ſufficient
diſpenſation for both. I do not oblige you to believe this as a poſitive
Truth, but only tell you that as much may be ſaid for the one as the other;
but if you would be ſure to know what [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=52) their fault was,
you had beſt put them both together and you will not miſs.

Scholar.

I thank you for this Light, I wiſh you could give me as good in my next
Objection.

Maſter.

I ſhall do my beſt, what is that I pray?

Scholar.

Our Saviour ſaith, in the third Verſe of this Chap. that David did eat of the
Shew-Bread, and they that were with him; and the Ho­ly Ghoſt ſaith, 1 Sam.
21\. 1 where this Hiſtory is recorded, That there was no man with him, for it
is ſaid there, that Ahimelech the Prieſt was afraid at the meeting of David,
and ſaid unto him, Why art Thou alone, and why is no man with Thee? How ſhall
I reconcile this Contradiction to my Think­ing?

Maſter.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=52)

The truth is, The Words of our Saviour in St. Matthew, are too plain and
e­vident, than to admit of any other Conſtruction, but that there were ſome
other men with David; and if they could admit of it, yet St. Mark would put
all out of doubt, for he ſaith expreſly, that, David did eat the Shew-Bread,
and gave it to them that were with him, Mark. 2\. 26. And therefore, when the
Prieſt ſaith, that there was no man with him in Samuel, it is beſt to
underſtand that of no man in ſight, becauſe, peradven­ture, David might have
cauſed them to withdraw for the preſent, till he had got relief from the
Prieſt, both for himſelf and them. And this, I conceive the beſt▪ Satisfaction
unto that doubt.

Scholar.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=53)

I think it not improba­ble; but before I leave this ſtory of David, I pray,
tell me how it comes to paſs, that our Saviour ſaith, David entred into the
Houſe of God, in v. 4. of this Chap. when as yet the Houſe of God was not
built, (i. e.) when as yet there was no Temple.

Maſter.

It was well Objected, and the Anſwer to be given is this: That our Saviour
calls that place where the Tabernacle then was, The Houſe of God, which
afterwards became the proper appellation of the Temple.

Scholar.

It is very likely: Now if you pleaſe, let us paſs from this Anſwer concerning
David, to that concerning the Prieſts, in the 5th. V. where Chriſt ſaith, That
the Prieſts on the Sabbath-Day, prophane the Sab­bath, and are blameleſs: What
doth he mean by that?

Maſter.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=53)

In thoſe words, our Sa­viour uſeth another Argument, in behalf of his
Diſciples; which they call an Argument from the leſs to the greater, to
juſtify their Pluck­ing and their Eating on the Sab­bath-Day. Amongſt the
Jews, the Law of the Sabbath was ever ſo to be interpreted, as that it
hin­dred not the Works of the Tem­ple; and therefore it was a kind of Rule in
the Jewiſh Law, that in the Temple there was no Sabbath. From this ſubmiſſion
of the Law of the Sabbath to the works of the Temple; Our Saviour argueth to
that, which is greater than it, The works of a Prophet, who was above a
Prieſt: His Anſwer is in brief this; The Prieſts, by their works in the Temple
up­on the Sabbath, were not thought [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=54) to prophane the
Sabbath; and therefore, there is leſs reaſon that my Diſciples, who are
Prophets, ſhould be thought to prophane it, in doing of that which is a leſs
work than theirs; And that this is the Scope of his Reply, will ap­pear by
that which follows, when he ſaith, That in this place, there is One greater
than the Temple, in the 6th Verſe; For, the truth is, eve­ry Prophet was
greater than the Temple, that is, he was obliged in no caſe to the Laws &
Cuſtoms of the Temple; but might ſacri­fice out of it, when he pleaſed, as
appears in the practice of Eliah. And whereas it may be Objected, That the
Prieſtly Function, on the Sabbath, could not be performed without the Labour
of Offering, but the Prophetical Function of [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=54) the Diſciples
might be performed on the Sabbath, without plucking ears and eating: The
anſwer is, that both our Saviour and his Diſ­ciples were ſo intent upon their
Prophetical Employment, that, as elſewhere, they forgat to take Bread, So
here, they either forgat, or had no time for the proviſion of victu­als before
the Sabbath, whereon to feed on the Sabbath.

Scholar.

I apprehend your mean­ing, and deſire you to make the force of Chriſts third
Argument as evident unto me, which fol­lows in the ſeventh Verſe, where he
ſaith, But if ye had known what this meaneth; I will have mercy and not
ſacrifice, ye would not have con­demned the guiltleſs.

Maſter.

His meaning is no more but this, That when two Laws [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=55) ſeem to claſh
ſo againſt one ano­ther, that both cannot be kept; the better is to be
obſerved, and the worſe omitted; The Law which willeth us to do good to all
men, and to further them in the means of their Salvation, which to a Chriſtian
is a Law Moral, never to be omitted; is better than the Law which willeth us
not to work or eat upon the Sabbath, which is onely a Law Ritual: Chriſt could
not intend to teach, and the Diſciples intend to pre­pare and fit the minds of
the peo­ple to be taught, and withall in­tend the preparing of ſuch things, as
were requiſite to the ſtrict ob­ſervation of the Sabbath; And therefore in
Equity, the Law of the Sabbath ought to give place to the Law of Inſtructing
the World in [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=55) the ways of
Happineſs, and not to have juſtled with it.

Schol.

I conceive this Argument, but yet methinks, there follows ſomewhat like a
Reaſon, which I do not yet conceive, in the next verſe; For the Son of Man is
Lord even of the Sabbath; Pray ſhew me what the meaning is of that.

Master.

They that by the [Son of Man] here, underſtand Chriſt, or the Meſſias, do
miſtake; for in that acceptation of the Words, the Reaſon doth not hold: for
if Chriſt had meant onely, that he as the Meſſias, was Lord of the Sabbath,
and ſo could abrogate it at his pleaſure, then what need­ed all the three
other Arguments, that went before? By the [Son of Man] therefore is to be
under­ſtood every common ordinary [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=56) man, as appears
moſt evidently by that of St. Mark 2\. 27. The Sab­bath was made for Man, and
not Man for the Sabbath. Beſides, at this time, Chriſt neither had preached,
nor would have others to preach, that He was the Meſsiah; and a good while
after this, as you may ſee in Matth. 16\. 20. He charged, that they ſhould
tell it no man, &c. The ſenſe therefore of the words, is this: That which is
ordained for another thing, ought to give place to that thing, for which it is
ordain­ed: But the Sabbath was ordain'd for Man, every Man; therefore it ought
to give place unto Him; namely, when a thing ſo nearly concerning Man, as his
Salvation, ſteppeth in between. For, to be [Lord of the Sabbath] is, to
diſ­poſe and order the Sabbath unto [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=56) his own uſe,
and to have a Right ſo to order, and diſpoſe it.

Scholar.

I thank you for the pains: and becauſe I have put you to ſo much already, I
ſhall trou­ble you with nothing concerning the next Story of the man which had
the withered hand, becauſe, I think I do well enough underſtand it; only, let
me deſire you to give me your opinion, why, when our Saviour Chriſt had healed
him, and divers other men, of their diſeaſes: It is added in the 16th verſe of
this Chapter, And he charged them; that they ſhould not make him known?

Maſter.

Truly, that which was the cauſe of his ſeceſs, or his withdrawing himſelf from
them, in the Verſe before may very well be conceived the cauſe alſo of this
injoyn'd ſilence; namely, that He [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=57) might be fafer
from all violence, and force. But, they which ſay, that He did it out of
charity to thoſe Phariſees who did ſeek his life, ſay not amiſs: as Origen
reports of A­riſtotle, that he withdrew himſelf from Athens, not for his own
ſake; but for the Athenians ſake, leſt he ſhould give them an occaſion of
committing another murther, after the murther of Socrates. Hitherto, as yet,
this Zeal and endeavours of the Phariſees to maintain the Tra­ditions of their
Elders, and the Re­ligion of their Fathers, might ſeem ſomewhat excuſable; and
there­fore, Chriſt adding Miracle to Miracle, did wait for their repen­tance
and amendment: in the mean time, preventing them by eſcapes, and concealing of
himſelf, from doing him any violence or [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=57) miſchief, till
ſuch time, as that, reſiſting the Light and Teſtimony of their own Conſcience
(as ſome of them did, very ſhortly after, as we ſhall ſee anon) they had more
deſervedly drawn upon them­ſelves, the guilt of that innocent blood, which
afterwards fell upon their heads: So, that when Chriſt, charged them that they
ſhould not make Him known; He meant, only that they ſhould not diſcover where
He was, that ſo with the more ſilence, and leſs oppoſition, He might do the
buſineſs of his Fa­ther: and this ſenſe is agreeable to that which follows out
of the Pro­phet Iſaiah, in the 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 Verſes.

Schol.

I take it to be ſo indeed: but in theſe words out of Iſaiah, there is ſomewhat
which does [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=58) much trouble me
how to under­ſtand; and that is, the latter part of the 20. verſe; where it is
ſaid, Till he ſend forth Judgment unto Victo­ry: Pray, what do you take to be
the meaning of thoſe words?

Maſt.

I ſhall run through the whole words of the Prophet, and by that you will
better under­ſtand that part. Theſe words of the Prophet Iſaiah are produced
by St. Matth. for a confirmation of that Meekneſs, Humility, Quietneſs and
Silence, with which the great buſineſs of our Salvation was to be diſpatched:
For, by theſe words [I will put my Spirit on Him] is un­derſtood the Spirit of
Meekneſs, Gentleneſs and Humility, which was emblem'd in the Dove, when it
came upon him; and by thoſe words [and he ſhall ſhew Judgment [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=58) unto the
Gentiles] is underſtood the preaching of the Chriſtian Law; and therefore, if
you mark it in the 42 of Iſaiah, and the 4th verſe, it is added, as an
explication of the word [Judgment] going before; And the Iſles ſhall wait for
his Law. When He comes to preach this Law, or, to ſhew forth this Judg­ment,
ſaith the Prophet, He ſhall not ſtrive, nor cry; that is, He ſhall diſcover no
ſign of anger, or diſ­compoſure in his mind; neither ſhall any man hear his
voice in the ſtreets, ſaith the Prophet; that is, He ſhall cauſe no Tumult or
popu­lar Hubbub; He ſhall not expoſe the vices of Men to the knowledge and
cenſure of the World, of whom He hath but the leaſt Hope that they will amend.
A bruiſed Reed ſhall he not break, ſaith the Prophet; [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=59) that is, the
mind which is afflicted, He ſhall not afflict more: and the ſmoaking flax ſhal
he not quench; that is, where he does but ſee a little ſmoak, He will look for
ſome fire; He will ſo comply with the weakneſſes and infirmities of all
Mankind, that he will not be out of hope to cheriſh them up into Virtues. And
all this he will do, ſaith the Prophet, Till he ſend out Judgment unto
Victory; of which words, whatſoever the ſenſe or meaning be, this is plain,
that they contain the ſucceſs or event of that Meekneſs, Gentleneſs, and
Quietneſs, which went before. Now, taking it for granted, that there is
nothing left out in theſe words, as St. Jerom does ſuſpect, I can imagine but
two ſenſes that can be put upon them: and thoſe two ſenſes ariſe out of the
two ſe­veral [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=59) acceptations of
the word [Judgment.] For, Firſt, If by [Judgment] in this place, be meant the
ſame, which was meant by [Judgment] in the 18th verſe, going before; then the
ſenſe of the words is this; He ſhall preach the Chriſtian Law, with all
Meek­neſs and Mildneſs, maugre all op­poſition and malice of thoſe that do
oppugn it, till that Law have prevailed, or gotten the victory; that is, till
the greateſt part of all the World embrace it: and this ſenſe is no improper
ſenſe, if we look no further. But then, Second­ly, If by [Judgment] be meant,
the diſceptation, or diſcuſſion of a Cauſe (in which ſenſe it is often taken
in the Scriptures) then the meaning of the words is this; He ſhall uſe ſo much
Meekneſs and [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=60) Gentleneſs, in
working upon the minds of all Men in the World, that, let any Man ſit in
Judgment upon that which he hath done, and he ſhall carry the Cauſe, or bear
away the Victory. To this pur­poſe ſaith the Pſalmiſt of God, that, He is
clear when he is judged, Pſal. 51. 6. And in this ſence God ſaith of himſelf,
O ye men of Judah, judg ye, I pray you, between my Vmeyard and Me, Iſa. 5. 3.
And in this Judgment Chriſt got the Victory, when with all Patience and Long-
ſufferance, with all Gentleneſs and Meekneſs, He en­dured the perverſe and
crooked diſpoſitions of the People of the Jews, and ſpared no Time or La­bour
to reform them, if they would have hearkned unto him.

Sch.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=60)

Sir, I confeſs there is much reaſon in what you ſay, but methinks it ſeems a
little ſtrain­ed ſenſe, to be put upon thoſe words, as you read them, Till he
ſhall ſend forth Judgment; for ac­cording to your ſence, we ſhould read them
thus, at leaſt, Till he ſhall carry away the Judgment with Victory, or, to
Victory.

Mast.

You have judged very right, and ſo indeed ſhould we read them; For the word
[...], which we render [ſhall ſend forth] is of the ſame ſignification with
[...], which doth ſignify [to car­ry away.] But you muſt bear with more faults
in the Tranſlation of your Teſtament than this, and I hope you will bear with
me, if I tell you plainly of them when I meet with them.

Sch.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=61)

I beſeech you do, for though I have a very great opinion of thoſe Men who did
tranſlate the Teſtament; yet I would be loth to be a loſer by my reverence.
But if you pleaſe, I will proceed in framing my Objections.

Maſt.

You ſhall not need, for I foreſee whither you are driving, even towards the
great Scruple that affrights the World, the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt, of
which there is mention in this Chapter, upon the occaſion of Chriſts heal­ing
of the blind and dumb man, poſſeſſed of the Devil, in the 22 Verſe of this
Chapter.

Sch.

I was indeed, and there­fore if you pleaſe, let us come un­to that Story.

Maſt.

With all my heart; And firſt, I muſt let you know, that ſo [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=61) ſoon as the
Phariſees ſaw that great Miracle which Chriſt had done; they ſaid, that he
caſteth out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils, in the 24th verſe
of this Chapter; and truly this was no unuſual practice amongſt the Sor­cerers
and Magicians, as is evident by many of the ancient Poets: when they could not
prevail any other way, to uſe the help of the great and chiefeſt Devil (whoſe
name they would threaten him to publiſh, if he did not help them) to expell,
or caſt out other leſs Devils that poſſeſſed Men; In Iamblichus there is
mention of that Form, in which they threatned him; and Porphiry ſays, that his
name was Serapis. But, our Sa­viour ſufficiently refuteth that ca­lumny,
ſeveral ways. Firſt, By [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=62) a common and
known Axiom amongſt themſelves, Every King­dom divided, &c. and the meaning
thereof is this; That the Devils are wiſe, there is no queſtion: but they that
are wiſe, will rather ſeek to eſtabliſh Themſelves and their own Power, which
is done by Concord and Agreement, than to diſtract and diſlocate it, which is
done by Faction and Diviſion; therefore it is not likely that the Devils will
ſo differ and diſagree, as the one to expell the other, as they would perſwade
the World. Secondly, By Retortion, in theſe words, If I by Beelzebub do caſt
out Devils, by whom do your children caſt them out? verſ. 27. And the force of
Chriſts Argument is this: In a like Cauſe, Equity will that men give a like
judgment; when your [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=62) Diſciples do
caſt out Devils, do not you think that they caſt them out by a divine Power?
There­fore ſo ſhould you even think of me, if you thought aright: But I ſhould
take this to be an Ironie rather.

Sch.

I conſeſs I did partly con­ceive the Scope of theſe two Argu­ments before, but
that which fol­lows, I do not underſtand, But if I caſt out Devils by the
Spirit of God, then is the Kingdom of God come unto you: Pray make me
underſtand it, that is, Firſt, What is meant by the [Kingdom of God?]
Secondly, What is the meaning of this Conſe­quence, If I by the Spirit of God
caſt out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come unto you, For I ſee not how
it follows.

Maſt.

By the Kingdom of God [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=63) is meant the
Time of the Meſſiah's being in the World, as in Dan. 4\. 29. and Dan. 7\. 14.
And the Conſequence there inferred, is this, That as God, by ſundry Works and
Miracles, gave his people of Iſrael a Sign of their inſtant Deli­verance out
of Egypt; So the great Miracles of Chriſt, were ordained by him, to be a Sign
unto the World of a greater Deliverance, which was now working for them; and
therefore where they ſaw the one, they ſhould expect the other.

Sch.

I believe you have gueſſed right; But what ſay you to the Verſe which follows,
Or elſe how can one enter into a ſtrong mans houſe, and ſpoil his Goods, &c.
It looks like another Argument, which Chriſt uſeth in his own defence againſt
[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=63) this
Calumny of the Phariſees, but I confeſs, I do not yet appre­hend it.

Maſt.

It is not unlikely, but anon you will. This is indeed a third Argument of
Chriſts, and it toucheth to the quick; for where­as his other two ſerved onely
to convince certain men, this comes to the very thing it ſelf, and quite
overthrows it: There have been, ſaith Chriſt, who have caſt out Devils through
Beelzebub: it may be ſo, but this hath been without any harm or loſs, from the
one unto the other; it hath not come to ſpoiling of Goods, to extirpate out of
the minds of men any of their ſins, but rather to encreaſe them: this hath
been nothing but a meer colluſion and cheat: But when I caſt out Devils, you
may [[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=64) ſee
I ſpoil them to the purpoſe, I rob them of their power; for, I plant in the
minds of men ſuch Doctrine, as will admit of no vice and wickedneſs to be near
it, (wherein the Power of the Devil does conſiſt) and therefore you may well
imagine, that I am in good earneſt; for, I bind him and ſpoil him; which no
one Devil ever yet did unto another, or ever will.

Schol.

I ſhall deſire to put you to no more trouble in this Verſe: If you pleaſe, let
us paſs unto the next.

Maſt.

As I take it, that is this; He that is not with me, is againſt me; and he that
gathereth not with me, ſcattereth abroad.

Schol.

Truly, as the words ſtand alone, I ſhould not trouble [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=64) you at all with
them, for to my thinking, they are eaſie enough; but, as they follow upon what
went before, I ſee not what our Saviour Chriſt might intend by them.

Maſt.

Having declared himſelf to be ſo far from caſting out De­vils in the name of
Beelzebub, that He laboured to bind even Beel­zebub himſelf, and to ſpoil him
of all his power, which he exerciſed in the hearts of wicked men; He carries
the conſideration of this Enmity between the Devil and Himſelf to ſuch a
height, as that He will not admit of any Neutra­lity, in any other Man;
profeſ­ſing, that whoſoever is not the Devil's enemy, is his; according to
that Axiom of the Wars, Me­dii habentur pro Hoſtibus: All indif­ferent [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=65) men are
Enemies. And if all this be not enough to ſhew how far He was from operating
by the help of Satan, ſurely, nothing can be. And therefore having ſaid this,
conceiving he had ſaid as much as Man could ſay, He adds: Wherefore I ſay unto
you, (verſ. 31.) that is, ſeeing it is evident by theſe Reaſons and
Ar­guments, that all the Signs and Miracles which I do, I do by the Power of
God, and not by the help of the Devil: Conſider what a wretched puniſhment you
draw upon your ſelves, that thus do ſlander and bely me. This Con­nexion St.
Mark does teach us plainly, Ch. 3. 30. where he ſays: Becauſe they ſaid, He
hath an un­clean Spirit. And yet it is to be conſidered, that our Saviour
Chriſt [[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=65)
proceeds not meerly upon the ſtrength of his own Arguments; but as knowing
their Thoughts, as St. Matthew tells us, in the 2 [...] th verſe of this
Chapter, that is, He ſaw in unto them, and He knew that They verily believed,
that the Miracle which he wrought, was wrought by the Power of God; but yet he
ſaw, that they would rather invent any Lye, or aſperſe him with any ſlander
(though they knew it well enough to be a Lye and ſlander) then to ſuffer the
People to forſake their Chair, and to follow Chriſt.

Schol.

I thank you, Sir, for this pains which you have taken, to prepare me for the
underſtanding of my great Doubt, which now methinks, I begin to have a little
[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=66) glimpſe
of, but deſire you to give me better Light.

Maſt.

I ſhall: But firſt, I would gladly know what you conceive of thoſe words, in
the 31. verſe. All manner of Sin and Blaſphemy ſhall be forgiven unto men;
becauſe, by underſtanding of what ſin ſhall be forgiven, you will the more
eaſily underſtand me, when I tell you, what manner of ſin ſhall not.

Schol.

Why Sir, I underſtand any manner of ſin whatſoever: and I underſtand the ſin
of the Holy Ghoſt, to be the only ſin which ſhall never be forgiven.

Maſt.

I did fear as much, and therefore I did ask you; But you muſt know that you
are much miſtaken, both in the one and in the other opinion; For Firſt, It is
to be conſidered, that Chriſt ſpeaks [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=66) not of all ſin,
but of that ſin, which is Blaſphemy or Calumny, (for there are many other ſins
which will never be forgiven, as well as the ſin againſt the Holy Ghoſt,) And
therefore in the next Verſe he ſaith, Whoſoever ſpeaketh a word againſt the
Son of Man, that is, whoſoever ſlandereth or calum­niateth any other man, it
ſhall be forgiven him; And in thoſe words he expoundeth what he means by Sin
and Blaſphemy. Secondly, It is to be conſidered, that when he ſaith, All
manner of Sin and Blaſ­phemy ſhall be forgiven, there is an Hebraiſm in thoſe
words, which is often met withall in Scripture; as in the 5 Chap. of St.
Matthew, Heaven and Earth ſhall paſs away, but my Words ſhall not paſs away;
that is, Heaven and Earth ſhall ſooner [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=67) paſs away, than
my words ſhall paſs away; (and ſo St. Luke reads them) not that Heaven and
Earth ſhall ever paſs away, but that, if it were poſſible, they ſhould ſooner
paſs away than his Word ſhal. The meaning therefore of the words is onely
this, All manner of Ca­lumnies and Slanders, are heavy ſins, and ſhall hardly
be forgiven to thoſe that do commit them; but they will be more eaſily
forgiven, than that Calumny, which he knows to be a Calumny, who doth commit
it: and this Chriſt calls Blaſpheming of the Holy Ghoſt; which was the Caſe of
theſe Phariſees, who calumnia­ted the Miracle which our Saviour wrought, as
proceeding from the Devil, which their own Conſci­ence [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=67) told them,
iſſued from the Holy Spirit of God.

Sch.

I confeſs, Sir, this is very plain and eaſie; and I pray, pro­ceed to the 33.
verſe. Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good, &c. ſaith Chriſt: The
dependance of thoſe words, is this: You ſay, I work by the Devil, ſaith
Chriſt: But you do not ſee any other work of mine, beſides this Miracle, which
looks like a work of the Devil: You ſee, I go about doing good; I exhort
People to Repentance, I ſhew them the way to Heaven: Theſe are no works which
the Devils uſe to do: Therefore, ei­ther ſay, that I do all this in the name
of Beelzebub too; or elſe, acknowledge that I do my Mira­cles by the Power of
God: for, Men judge of the Quality of the [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=68) Mind, by the
common Actions, or Habits of their Life, as they do of Trees, by the Fruits
which they produce, be they good or evil. And that this is true, ſaith Chriſt,
you may judge by your own ſelves: For, How can ye, being evil, ſpeak good
things? ſaith He, ver. 34\. That is, you can never do it. A diſſembled and
forc'd Mind will quickly ſhew it ſelf, ſome way or other, and will return unto
its wonted habit; and therefore, as you may judge by your ſelves, that becauſe
you ſpeak and do no­thing but that which is evil, there­fore▪ you your ſelves
are evil: So you ſhould judge of Me, that be­cauſe you ſee, I ſay and do
no­thing but that which is Good, there­fore I am good; and therefore [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=68) that Spirit
which works in Me is good.

Schol.

I apprehend all this; and therefore ſhall ſave you the labour of expounding
that which follows, for I ſee, it all tends to the ſame end and ſcope; only,
methinks I am much ſtreightned in my mind, about the 36th verſe, which forbids
all idle words: for, if we muſt give account of every one ſuch, God be
merciful unto me, and to many thouſand more; Pray, make me to underſtand the
full latitude of this Commination of Chriſt.

Maſt.

Whatſoever is meant by this idle Word here, you may be ſure it hath reference
to that Word which the Phariſees had ſpoke of Chriſt, when they ſaid, He caſt
out Devils in the name of Beelzebub, for Chriſt hath not done with this [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=69) Calumny of
theirs yet; but conti­nues his diſcourſe upon it, till the 38. Verſe of this
Chapter; Now conſidering this [Idle Word] in that reference, it is moſt
reaſona­ble to expound it, not of every Word which a man ſpeaks, of which
there is no profit, or which is good for nought, (for if that Expoſition
ſhould be true, which God forbid, yet it were not perti­nent,) but of ſuch a
Word, where­in there is no Truth; For by Idle, and Vain, in holy Scripture, is
of­ten underſtood that which is falſe: And ſo to take the Name of God in Vain,
in the Commandments, is to ſwear falſely: So that the Scope of Chriſt in thoſe
Words is this, Do you think that you ſhall eſcape for this horrid Calumny
which you have caſt upon me, [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=69) knowing it to
be a Calumny in your own hearts? I tell you nay; for no man ſhall eſcape in
the day of Judgment, for calumniating another man falſely, though he do not
know that that Calumny is falſe; and therefore much leſs ſhall you. By which
we may learn, if not to avoid all idle Words, (which to the nature and
education of man is almoſt quite impoſſible,) yet to beware of calumniating
perſons, not only when we know that Calumny is falſe, (which doubtleſs is a
very grievous ſin) but when we are not evidently aſcertain'd that the thing is
true. And therefore it is the ſpecial Office of a good Chriſtian, to refrain
his Tongue altogether in that Point, for it is a rare thing for a man to give
him­ſelf [[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=70)
the liberty, to repeat that of another which is falſe, and not to wiſh it
true.

Sch.

I thank you for this Satis­faction, and by Gods help ſhall endeavour to frame
my Life and Converſation accordingly; for I perceive it is a Sin, which the
World taketh little notice of; though indeed it be the deſtructi­on of
Charity, without which no man is a Chriſtian: For ſo they avoid doing of that
which is notoriouſly Evil, they care not what they ſay of any man. Now if you
pleaſe, we will proceed to that which follows, I pray, what do the Scribes and
Phariſees mean to deſire a Sign from Chriſt, in the 31th Verſe of this
Chapter, who had ſeen ſo many before; [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=70) for, methinks
it ſeems a very im­pertinent Requeſt.

Maſt.

Some Interpreters are of opinion that theſe Scribes and Pha­riſees were not
the ſame, who ſaw thoſe late Miracles which our Sa­viour did; and they ground
their opinion upon Luke 11\. 16. where it is ſaid, That others tempted him,
ſeeking a Sign from Heaven; But, up­on examination, that opinion will not
hold. The better anſwer is, that they did not deſire a bare ſign, or a
Miracle, of which they had ſeen enough already; but they de­ſired a Sign from
Heaven (as St. Luke ſpeaks) that is, that God by ſome ſtrange Prodigy there,
ſhould declare him to be a Prophet ſent from him, if ſo be he were ſo in­deed:
For, as for thoſe Miracles which he did on Earth, they were [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=71) not ſatisfied
with them, as appre­hending them pendulous between two ſeveral Powers; for as
they they might come from God, ſo they might come from the Devil; but, in
Heaven they thought the Devil had no Power.

Schol.

I like your reaſon well; but, I pray, what doth Chriſt mean by that anſwer
which he gives to their requeſt in the 39, 40, 41, and 42 verſes for I do not
underſtand it perfectly?

Maſt.

The meaning of His An­ſwer is this; You would have a Sign from Heaven, and
then you will believe me: God, that will omit no occaſion to leave you
un­excuſable, hath given you Signs enough, here upon Earth; but he is not
bound to ſatisfie your hu­mours, and give them where and [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=71) when you would
have them, he knows theſe which you have ſeen are ſufficient to perſwade
Belief, if that your Avarice, and Profit, and Places which you hold in the
preſent Jewiſh State, did not make you ſeek all Occaſions and Cloaks for your
Incredulity: And therefore, if thoſe Signs which I have done on Earth, will
not ſerve you; you ſhall have none from Heaven, but if you will, you ſhall
have one from under the Earth, even the Sign of the Prophet Jonas, and that
Sign not a Sign to convert you, who after ſo many Signs and Miracles will not
be converted; but a Sign of my In­nocence, and your Malice, which will
perſecute me even unto the death, for all that Good which I have done amongſt
you.

Sch.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=72)

By this which you have ſaid, I do not only perceive the Scope and Purport of
Chriſts An­ſwer, which he gives them; but the Drift of Verſe 41 and 42 alſo,
wherein he complains, That they who had had ſo many Signs done amongſt them,
never would be­lieve; whereas thoſe of Nineveh, and the Queen of the South,
without any Sign or Miracle▪ wrought, either by Jonas, or Solomon, belie­ved
all that was told them. But, I pray, how comes the next Diſ­courſe in,
concerning the unclean Spirit going out of a man, in the 43 Verſe? And what is
the Scope and Purport of that Diſcourſe?

Maſt.

It is not improbable, That our Saviour Chriſt, being much afflicted with the
evil and incredulous hearts of the people [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=72) of the Jews,
taketh a kind of Survey of that whole Na­tion, even from the time where­in
they were firſt led away captive into Babylon, to the time when they were
utterly deſtroyed by Titus. Before their Captivity, they were full of all
manner of Wickedneſs, as appeareth by the Prophets; Under their Captivity,
they were a little reclaimed, and upon that Amendment, were brought back
again: But then af­ter their Return, in the times not long before our Saviours
coming, they fell into ſuch Vices, as were abominable, even in the Hea­thens
themſelves, as is manifeſt in Story; and to ſhut up all, added thereunto the
Contempt of their own Meſſiah, ſent amongſt them with ſo much power, and yet
with [[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=73) ſo
much meekneſs, as man never came: Whereupon being juſtly forſaken of God, whom
they had thus forſook, they became the moſt wretched and vicious people in the
World, as Joſephus doth de­ſcribe them to be, about their lat­ter times; And
this Contemplati­on of their miſerable Condition, our Saviour ſeems to
inſinuate, even unto themſelves, in this kind of Parable of the unclean Spirit
going out of a man, and return­ing back again. Of which, If that which I have
ſaid be not the Occaſion, (as I do not avow, but only offer it unto you) yet
cer­tainly this is the ſence, That thoſe men, who have once left and for­ſaken
the vicious courſes of their carnal life, if they ever relapſe, and fall back
again into them; [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=73) all their
latter ſins are far more ſinful than their former; Almighty God juſtly
revenging the Con­tempt of that Grace, which he hath offered to them, by
giving them up to all manner of wicked­neſs and uncleanneſs.

Sch.

I think you have gueſſed right, and to the purpoſe; But there are ſome terms,
and phraſes in this Parable or Story, or what­ſoever you will call it, which I
do not underſtand as, First I pray what do you think Chriſt means by walking
through dry places, and ſeeking rest, and finding none.

Maſt.

Dry and ſandy Grounds are no fit places of Habitation, and ſuch kind of places
are all thoſe places where the Devil doth abide when he is out of man, who is
only capable of Vice and Sin, [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=74) wherein the
Devil taketh pleaſure: And the meaning of Chriſt is this, That as a man that
travels, is wea­ried with heavy, ſandy, and dry way, more than with green,
ſoft, and pleaſant Fields; ſo the Devil is not half ſo well ſatisfied, when he
enters into any other Creature, as when he enters into Man.

Schol.

It may be ſo indeed but then, why taketh he ſeven Spirits, more wicked than
himſelf? why is the number of Seven here pitch­ed on, more than any other?

Maſt.

The Number of Seven is the Number of Perfection, or the ſignification of that
which, in its own kind, is grown to full ma­turity, whether it be good or
evil. So St. John calleth the Holy Spirit of God the Seven Spirits, Rev. 1. 4.
[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=74) So the
Barren is ſaid to have born Seven, 1 Sam. 2. 5. that is, to have been as
fruitful as any other Wo­man is, or can be. And there­fore when the unclean
Spirit is ſaid to take Seven other Spirits with him, the meaning only is, that
that man becomes perfectly wick­ed, when that Spirit once returns again, whom
before he had caſt out.

Sch.

I approve your Expoſiti­on of the Word, and think it like­ly. But I pray can
you gueſs what buſineſs the Virgin, and the Brethren of Chriſt might have with
him, becauſe the Scripture ſaith They ſtaied without, to ſpeak with him, in
the 47 Verſe of this Chapter; peradventure you may think me curious, and
therefore if Expoſitors have made no [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=75) Conjecture
thereupon, I will not urge you.

Maſt.

Truly they have, and I ſhall not conceal it from you: They do imagine, that
his Mo­ther and his Kindred, having had ſome Inckling of the Phariſees
conſpiring againſt him, to do him miſchief, deſired to ſpeak with him in
private, and to contrive ſome way, to withdraw him out of danger: This will
ſeem the more probable, if we conſider that which St. Mark ſaith, Chap. 3\.
21. That his Friends would fain have laid hold on him, ſaying, that he was
beſide himſelf; which in all likeli­hood, they ſaid to make the Pha­riſees the
leſs active in contriving any miſchief to him, as conceiving him a fitter
Subject for their pity, than their hate; But it ſeems [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=75) Chriſt would
not hearken unto them, nay would not know them, as appears by the three laſt
Verſes of this Chapter, which are ſo plain and eaſy, that I dare not ſuſpect
your ſenſe, and apprehen­ſion of them.

FINIS.

# 4\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=76)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=76)

A TRACT Concerning the Power of the KEYS AND Auricular Confeſſion.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, &c.

Printed, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=77)

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=77)

### 1\. A Tract concerning the Power of the KEYS, and AURICULAR CONFESSION.

IN opening the Point concerning the Do­ctrine of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Hea­ven, I will follow thoſe Lines, that Tract, which your ſelf hath been
pleaſed to ſet me. Yet firſt, ere I com [...] to your par­ticulars, I will
diſcover, as far as generality will give me leave, what it is which we intend,
when we uſe this phraſe of Speech. At the firſt appearance, it is plain, the
[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=78) form of
words is not Proper, but Metaphorical. Now ſome Truth there is in that which
you learnt in the Books of your Minority, from your Ariſtotle, [...]; and
indeed could we but once agree what it is which that Metaphor doth intimate,
the greateſt part of the Diſpute were at an end. The natural way to diſ­cover
this, is to ſee what the Uſe of Keys, properly taken, is; and after that, what
means they are, which in our endeavours to attain to the Kingdom of Heaven,
have ſome­thing proportionable to the Uſe of Keys: and thi [...] being once
diſcove­red, there can remain no Queſtion What are the Keys.

Now nothing is more known, than that the only Uſe of Keys is to Open and Shut,
to admit us Unto, [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=78) or exclude us
from the poſſeſſion of what we ſeek. Now ſince the Kingdom of Heaven is
compared to a Houſe, from which all the Sons of Adam, by Nature are excluded;
whatſoever then it is that gives us way, that removes all Obſtacle [...] which
hinder us from entrance of that Houſe, that certainly muſt be underſtood by
the Name of Keys. Now all theſe means, or whatſo­ever elſe it is which doth
further us towards the poſſeſſing our ſelves of Eternal Life, they were all
laid down in the Goſpel of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, committed by him fully and
firſt of all to the diſpen­ſation of the bleſſed Apoſtles, to be reported by
them, or their means, all the World over. So that I think I may ſafely lay
thus much for the firſt Ground of the Queſtion be­twixt [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=79) your ſelf and
me, Claves Regni Coelorum ſunt Doctrina Evan­gelii.

Now ſince Keyes are nothing without ſome hand to manage them, we muſt in the
ſecond place diſcover into whoſe hands they are committed. And for this
purpoſe, firſt of all, It muſt not be denyed that principally and properly, (I
might well enough add only, if I liſted, but that I ſpare you) the Hand of God
it is, that manages and applies theſe Keys; For of God and Chriſt it is
written, He hath the Keys, he opens, and no man ſhuts; he ſhuts, and no man
opens. Yet ſince it hath plea­ſed God to uſe the Miniſtry of Men, to the
ſaving of Men, and bringing them into the Kingdom of Heaven; In a ſecondary
ſenſe [[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=79)
the Keys of that Kingdom are ſaid to be put into the hands of Men. In as much
as it hath pleaſed the Wiſdom of God, not to uſe theſe Keys, at leaſt as far
as concerns the beneficial and opening part, ſome act of Man not firſt
premi­ſed; for ſince that Faith in Jeſus Chriſt is the Sum of the Doctrine of
the Goſpel, and Faith cometh not but by hearing, and hearing cometh not but by
preaching, and preaching is the act of Men alone, (for God employs not Angels
in that behalf,) It appears that this Preaching, or manifeſtation of the
Doctrine of the Goſpel not per­formed, the Keys muſt needs be unprofitable. By
the manifeſtati­on of the Goſpel of God, I mean not only the labour of the
lip, in expounding, praying, reproving, [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=80) or the like,
but the adminiſtration of Sacraments, the acting (if any thing beyond this is
to be acted) whatſoever the manifeſtation of the Goſpel requireth. So that I
think I may ſet down for a ſecond Ground towards the ſetling of the Point in
queſtion, thus much, That the managing or application of the Keys, ſo far
forth as men are in­truſted with them, is, The Mani­feſtation of the Doctrine
of the Goſpel. Thus far have we opened in gene­ral the Subſtance of the Keys,
and the Uſe of them. I come now to your Queries.

Firſt, You ask of the quality of the Apoſtles receiving this Pow­er, whether
they had it as Judg­es Authoritativè, or as Meſſengers, Declaratativè, only to
propound, or denounce? You manifeſt your ſelf [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=80) for the former,
and Reaſons you bring, ſuch as they be. Your Rea­ſons I ſhall conſider in
their place, but I muſt firſt tell you that you ask amiſs, for your queſtion
is concerning the whole Power of the Keys, but you anſwer only of a part, that
is, of Sacramental Abſolution only, as if all the Pow­er of the Keys reſided
there. So that here you uſe the Fallacy pluri­um Interrogationum; And I might
well grant you, that indeed that part were Judicativè, but yet contend that
all the reſt were only Declarativè. To reduce you there­fore, I muſt do with
you, as Phy­ſicians in ſome caſes deal with their Patients; ere I can come to
purge the humour you are ſick of, I muſt a little prepare you. The power of
the Keys is expreſt by [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=81) the Learned in
three yokes, or pairs of Words.

  * 1\. To remit, and to retain.
  * 2\. To looſe, and to bind.
  * 3\. To open, and to ſhut.

On the one ſide, to remit, to looſe, to open, which is the one half of the
power, agree in one, and ſignify the ſame thing; ſo do the other three, to
retain, to bind, to ſhut, which contain the other half. To your Queſtion then,
whether the power of the Keys be declara­tive only, I anſwer firſt: For this
latter part or half, it is meerly de­clarative, neither can it be other­wiſe;
which that you may ſee with your eyes, I muſt requeſt you to obſerve, That all
ſhutting of the Kingdom of Heaven, is ei­ther common to all, or caſual,
befalling only ſome. The common [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=81) Excluſion is
that ſtate of Nature, wherein we all are involved, as we ſpring from the firſt
Adam; The ſecond Excluſion is that which befals Chriſtians relapſing into ſin.
The firſt ſhutting was at the fall, and was then Prefigured unto us, by the
barring up of the way unto the Tree of Life. What active, what judiciary part
can a­ny Miniſter of the Goſpel have here? all that the Apoſtles could do
here, was but to open to men this their miſery, a thing, before the death of
our Saviour, either very ſparingly, or not at all reveal­ed. Of this therefore
you muſt needs quit your hands, and ſo you muſt of the other, I mean
excluſi­on upon caſuality and relapſe. For when a man converted to
Chriſtianity, falleth eftſoons into [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=82) ſome mortal
ſin, doth the Gate of Heaven ſtand open to him, till he fall upon ſome curſt
Prieſt, that uſed his Key to ſhut it?

There are in the World a kind of deceitful Locks with ſliding Bolts, I have
ſeen my ſelf and o­thers much deceived by them, when the doors have fallen at
our heels, and lockt us out when we intended no ſuch thing. Sir, Hea­ven door
hath a ſliding Lock, up­on occaſion of mortal ſin, it will ſhut without any
uſe of a Key.

Perchance I do not well,  [...], yet the ſober mean­ing of what I have ſpoken
merrily, is but this, that either you muſt make the Miniſtry of the Goſpel
only Declarative, or elſe it will follow that every impenitent Relapſer, that
hath the good fortune to e­ſcape [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=82) the Prieſts
being privy to his Sin, is like to find Heaven open at the laſt. So then it is
apparent, that notwithſtanding your heap­ing up of Interrogatories, and your
preſſing of Ligaveritis & vos, and telling me what I never knew, that Solvere
and Ligare be Actives; yet in this part of our Power, all your Activity is
loſt, and there remains nothing for you but to report up­on good evidence,
what you find done by your betters to your hand.

Half your Juriſdiction then is fallen: and if I had no other Me­dium but this:
I might with good probability conclude againſt you for the other part. For if
the one half made in the ſame Form, in the like phraſe and garb of ſpeech, yet
enforceth no more but Decla­ration [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=83) and Denouncing:
then why ſhould you think the other half, (which in all likelyhood is
homo­geneal to the former) to be more? Nay, there is far more natural Equity
that you ſhould be here only Declarative than in the other. Politicians tell
us, That it is Wiſ­dom for Princes, who deſire to gain the love of their
Subjects, to adminiſter themſelves all Favours and Graces, but to leave action
of Juſtice and Harſhneſs to be per­formed by others.

Sir, No Prince can be ſo am­bitious of the Love of his Subjects as God is of
the Love of Man­kind: why then ſhould I think him ſo ill a Politician, as to
make himſelf the Adminiſtrator of the Rough, Unpleaſing, Love-killing Offices,
of Binding, Shutting, Retain­ing; [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=83) and then paſs
over to the Prieſt, the diſpenſation of the Fair, Well-ſpoken, Ingratiating
Offices of Remitting, Looſing, and Opening? But I will leave this kind of
Topick and Dialectical arguing, becauſe you are a pretend­er to convincing
Reaſons; I will directly enter even upon that part of your power of Opening,
and Re­mitting, being the other part of your Territory, and by main ſtrength,
take all activity from you there too. Give me leave to ask you one Queſtion,
you may very well favour me ſo far, for you have asked me very many.

The Converſion of a Sinner, is it an act of the Keys, yea or no?

By your Principles it is not; for you make the power of the Keys to be
judiciary, and therefore [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=84) the Converſion
of an Infidel per­tains not to them: The Church of Rome will help you with a
Medium to make this Argument good. Do we not judge thoſe that are within? for
thoſe that are without, God ſhall judge, ſaith Paul: Whence ſhe infers, That a
converted Infidel, not yet admitted to the Church, is a Stran­ger to the
Judiciary Power of the Keys; but being once admitted in­to the Church, he is
now become the Churches Subject, and ſo fit matter for the Prieſt to work on
upon his next Relapſe. What think you of this Reaſon? Do you take it to be
good? Take heed; or elſe it will give you a deadly ſtripe. For the Converſion
of an Infidel, out of queſtion is a moſt proper act of the Keys. For, ſince
the opening of the Kingdom of Hea­ven [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=84) is confeſt to
belong unto the Keys; and Heaven, which was ſhut againſt the Infidel in time
of his Infidelity, upon his Converſion is acknowledged to be opened unto him;
certainly whoever convert­ed him, uſed the Keys; or elſe he muſt pretend to
have either a Pick­lock, or the Herb Lunaria, which, they ſay, makes Locks
fall off from Doors, and the Fetters from Horſes heels. If then the Converſion
of a Sinner be an act of the Keys, and by the Argument of the Church of Rome
it be not judiciary, it fol­lows then, that all Acts of the Keys are not
Judiciary; and if not Ju­diciary, then Declarative only? For betwixt theſe two
I know no mean.

But becauſe to diſpute againſt a man out of his own Principles, [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=85) which perchance
are falſe (for this we know oft falls out, that by the power of Syllogiſms,
men may and do draw True Concluſions from Falſe Premiſes) becauſe, I ſay, thus
to do, in the judgment of Ariſtotle, leaves a man  [...]; and I am willing not
on­ly to perſwade you, but to better you: I will draw the little which remains
to be ſaid in this Point, from other Places.

Firſt, In all the Apoſtles pra­ctice in Converting Jews and Gen­tils, find you
any thing like unto the act of any Judiciary Power? They neither did nor could
uſe any ſuch thing. That they did not, appears by Philip, who having
Catechiſed the Eunuch, and finding him de­ſirous of Baptiſm, immediately upon
profeſſion of his Faith, ad­mitted [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=85) him into the
Church. That they neither did nor could, ap­pears by Peter and the reſt of the
Apoſtles in the Acts, who could never in the ſpace of an afternoon, being none
but themſelves, have converted three thouſand ſouls, had they taken any ſuch
way, as you ſeem to misfancy. Again, imagine with your ſelf all circum­ſtances
you can, which are of force to make a power judiciary, apply them all to the
practice of the A­poſtles, in the Converſion of In­fidels, and if you find any
one of them agree to that action, let me be challenged upon it, and be thought
to have abuſed you with a Fallacy.

To conclude then, ſince your Ligaveritis, which is the one half of your
pretended Juriſdiction, [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=86) pretends to
nothing above Decla­rative: And ſince your Solveritis, in ſo great an act as
is the Converſion of Infidels, lays claim to no more, what act of the power of
the Keys is it, wherein we may conceive hope of finding any thing active or
judiciary? I ſee what you will ſay, There yet remains a part, you think,
wherein you have hope to ſpeed, and that is the reconciling of relapſing
Chriſtians: As you fancy that in every ſinning Chriſti­an, there is a duty
binding him to repair, and lay his ſin open to the Miniſter of the Goſpel, and
in him a power to conſider of the ſins of ſuch as repair unto him, to weigh
particulars, to conſider circum­ſtances, and occaſions, and accord­ing to true
Judgment, either upon penance impoſed to abſolve ſin, [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=86) (which you call
remitting of the ſin) or to with-hold him for a time, from participation of
holy duties with Catholick Chriſtians, which you call retaining of ſins,
ſuppoſing that God doth the like in Heaven, as it is written, What you bind in
Earth, is bound in Heaven, and what you looſe in Earth, is looſed in Heaven.
Now the Rock on which you labour to found ſo ex­travagant a Conceit, is no
other than the Words which I have quo­ted out of Scripture; you preſs
earneſtly the Ligaveritis & vos, all which can yield you ſmall relief; for if
they help you not at all in thoſe weighty parts of the Power of the Keys,
which but now were laid before you; by what Analo­gy can you expect they
ſhould af­ford you any aſſiſtance here? As [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=87) is Ligare, ſo
is Solvere; as is the Converſion of an Infidel, ſo is the reconciling of a
relapſing Chriſtian, for any thing you can make appear; Either all is
Declara­tive, which is very poſſible, and in many caſes neceſſary, or all
Ju­dicative, which in ſome caſes is impoſſible, and in none neceſſary; ſo that
to fit the Scripture to your Fancy, you are conſtrained to diſ­tract and rend
it without any War­rant at all. But you have found out in the Text a ſtronger
Argu­ment againſt the declarative Pow­er, I contend for: You eſpie an
Inſufflavit, a great, a ſolemn, and unwonted Ceremony, undoubted­ly concluding
ſome greater matter than a poor power declarative: What? did our ſerious
Maſter thus ſpend his breath to no purpoſe, and [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=87) like a Hocus
Pocus with ſo much ſhew act us a ſolemn nothing? I pray whoſe words are theſe?
I ſhould have thought them to have been Porphiries, or Julians, (but that I
know your hand) for you ſub­ſcribed not your name to your let­ters:  [...]:
They are the Words of your Pindarus, upon an occaſion not much unlike unto
this

Sir, you have no Skill to judg, or ſet a price upon ſo divine an act; He loſt
not his breath, when he ſpent his Inſufflavit; he opened their wits, that they
might under­ſtand the Scripture; he revealed to them the Myſteries of Jeſus
Chriſt, dying and riſing again for the Worlds ſalvation, the greateſt news
that ever was reported in the World, and till then concealed; [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=88) He commanded
them to be the firſt bringers of this good News, and that they might the more
un­dauntedly perform their Charge, he endowed them with Infallibility, with
infinite Conſtancy and Forti­tude, with Power of working ſuch Wonders as none
could do unleſs God were with them. Appello Con­ſcientiam tuam: Were thoſe
things ſuch nothings, that they deſerve to be thus jeered? But that befalls
you which befalls the Stares that dwell in the Steeple, who fear not the
Bells, becauſe they hear them every day. Theſe wonderful Be­nefits of God have
every day ſounded in your ears, and the fre­quency of them hath taught you to
forget your Reverence to them. Yet all this Inſufflavit, this Ceremo­ny, was
for no other end but to [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=88) further a
Declarative Power; Their undaunted Fortitude, their power of Miracling, their
Infallibility did but add countenance and ſtrength to their Declarative Power,
by by which they went up and down the World, to manifeſt the good tydings of
Salvation. So that e­ven theſe which ſerved thus to ſet off the Goſpel, were
nothing elſe but means of the better manifeſta­tion of it, therefore may they
ve­ry well paſs, if not amongſt the Keys, yet amongſt the neceſſary Wards.
Whereas your Fancy of an active or judicative Power in the Prieſt, concurring
with God in reconciling relapſing Chriſtians, is neither one nor other, but is
in­deed like unto the work of ſome deceitful Smith, who the better to
countenance and grace his work, [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=89) adds to his Key
ſuperfluous and idle Wards, which in the opening of the Lock, are of no uſe at
all.

To your ſecond Query, Whe­ther the Keys were confined to the Apoſtles only?
The Anſwer is in no caſe hard to give, it may perchance in ſome caſe be
dange­rous; for there is a Generation of men in the World (the Clergy they
call them) who impropriate the Keys unto themſelves, and would be very angrie
to under­ſtand, that others from themſelves ſhould claim a right unto them. To
your Queſtion then, no doubt but originally none received the Keys from the
mouth of our Savi­our, but the Apoſtles only; none did nor ever could manage
them with that authority and ſplendor [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=89) as the Apoſtles
did, who were a­bove all moſt amply furniſhed with all things fitting ſo great
a work. For whereas you ſeem to intimate, that the preaching Miſſi­on was
communicated to others, as the ſeventy two Diſciples, as well as the Apoſtles;
you do but miſtake your ſelf, if you conceive that the Keys of the Goſpel were
any way committed to them; for concerning the Myſteries of Jeſus Chriſt, and
him crucified for the ſins of the World (where­in indeed the opening of the
King­dom of Heaven did conſiſt) they received it not, they knew it not. To be
the prime Reporters of this, was an honour imparted on­ly to the Apoſtles: Yet
were they not ſo imparted, as that they ſhould be confined to them. E­very
[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=90) one that
heard and received the Light of the ſaving Doctrine from them, ſo far forth as
he had underſtanding in the waies of Life, had now the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven committed to his pow­er, both for his own and others uſe. Every one, of
what ſtate or condition ſoever, that hath any occaſion offered him, to ſerve
a­nother in the ways of Life, Cler­gie, or Lay, male or female, whatever he
be, hath theſe Keys, not only for himſelf, but for the benefit of others. For
if natural Goodneſs teach every man, Lu­men de Lumine, Erranti comitèr
mon­ſtrare viam, &c. Then how much more doth Chriſtian Goodneſs require of
every one, to his ability to be a Light to thoſe who ſit in darkneſs, and
direct their ſteps, [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=90) who moſt
dangerouſly miſtake their way? To ſave a ſoul, every man is a Prieſt. To whom
I pray you, is that ſaid in Leviticus, Thou ſhalt not ſee thy Brother ſin, but
thou ſhalt reprove, and ſave thy Brother? And if the Law binds a Man, when he
ſaw his enemies Cattel to ſtray, to put them into their way; How much more
doth it oblige him to do the like for the Man himſelf? See you not how the
whole World conſpires with me in the ſame opinion? Doth not every Father teach
his Son, e­very Maſter his Servant, every Man his Friend. How many of the
Laitie in this age, and from time to time, in all ages have by writing for the
publick good, pro­pagated the Goſpel of Chriſt, as if ſome ſecret inſtinct of
nature had [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=91) put into mens
minds thus to do. I ſhame to dwell ſo long upon ſo plain a Theme, yet becauſe
I feel your pulſe, and perceive what it is that troubles you, I muſt ſay
ſomething to an Objection, which I know you make. You conceive that forthwith
upon this which I have ſaid, muſt needs follow ſome great Confuſion of
eſtates, and degrees, the Laitie will ſtraitway get up into our Pulpits, we
ſhall loſe our credit, and the adorati­on which the ſimple ſort do yeild us is
in danger to be loſt.

Sir, Fear you not, the ſufficient and able of the Clergy, will reap no
diſcountenance, but honour by this: For he that knows how to do well himſelf,
will moſt willing­ly approve what is well done by another. It is extream
poverty of [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=91) mind to ground
your Reputation upon another mans Ignorance, and to ſecure your ſelf, you do
well, becauſe you perceive perchance, that none can judge how ill you do. Be
not angry then to ſee o­thers joyn with you in part of your Charge. I would
all the Lords Peo­ple did Preach, and that every Man did think himſelf bound
to diſ­charge a part of the Common Good: and make account that the Care of
other mens Souls con­cerned him as well as of his own. When the Apoſtles took
order to ordain ſome, upon whom the publick burden of Preaching the Goſpel
ſhould lie, it was not their purpoſe to impropriate the thing to thoſe perſons
alone; but know­ing that what was left to the care of all, was commonly worſt
[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=92) lookt
unto, in wiſe and moſt Chriſtian Care, they deſigned ſome, whoſe duty it
ſhould be to wait upon the Goſpel alone, the better to preſerve the Profeſſion
to the Worlds end: It hath been the wiſdom of thoſe, who have taken care of
the propagation of Arts, and Sciences, not only to appoint means, that
multitudes ſhould ſtudy and make profeſſi­on privately, but that ſome ſhould
be conſtituted publick Profeſſors to teach è Cathedra, that ſo all might know
to whom to repair, in the doubts incident to their fa­culties, and this hath
been thought a ſovereign way to preſerve Scien­ces. Sir, we are the publick
Pro­feſſors of Chriſtianity, we ſpeak è Cathedra, which none can do, but ſuch
as are ordained. Let the [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=92) private
profeſſion and practice of Chriſtianity improve it ſelf never ſo much, yet the
honour of the publick Profeſſor, ſo he deſerve his place, can never impair. It
greives me to ſtand ſo long upon ſo plain, ſo unwelcom a Leſſon, I will eaſe
my ſelf and you, and reflect upon your third Que­ry.

In the third place, you require to know, what neceſſity, or what convenience
there is of Confeſſi­on: You mean, I think, that con­feſſion, which is as
fooliſhly as commonly called Sacramental, for it hath nothing of a Sacrament
in it. Did I know your mind a little more in particular, what form of
confeſſion you ſpeak of, whether as it is uſed in the Church of Rome, or in
ſome refined Guiſe, [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=93) as it ſeems
ſome would, who have of late called for it in the Church of England, I ſhould
ſpeak perad­venture more appoſitely to what you deſire. But ſince you have
propoſed Confeſſion only in a ge­nerality, my anſwer ſhall be in like manner.
And

Firſt of all, Confeſſion of ſins is a thing, not only convenient, but
unavoidably neceſſary to Sal­vation, without which none ſhall ever ſee God.
And thus far I ſuppoſe, all Chriſtians do agree. The main Difference is in the
manner of practiſing it, the Que­ſtion being, What Parties are to be
intereſſed in it? Natural E­quity informeth us, that unto e­very Partie,
juſtly offended, Sa­tisfaction ſome way or other is due.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=93)The firſt
party wronged in every offence, is God, againſt whoſe Honour, and expreſs
Command every ſin is committed. To him therefore in the firſt place,
Satis­faction is due, by ſubmiſſion and acknowledgment, ſince there re­mains
no other way of compoſi­tion with God. But there are ſome ſins committed
againſt God, ſome committed againſt God and Men. In the former it is
ſufficient if we pacifie God alone; in the latter, our Neighbour, againſt whom
we have treſpaſt, muſt receive Satis­faction for the wrong done him, at leaſt,
if it be in the power of the Treſpaſſer. Your Primer of Sarum will tell you,
That not to make reſtitution, if you be able, and not to pardon, unavoidably
exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven. Now [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=94) might the
Doctrine of Confeſſion and acknowledgment in caſe of Offence given, have been
per­mitted to run fair and clear, as it deſcends from God, and good reaſon,
the firſt Fountains of it. There needed no more to be ſaid in this argument,
than I have al­ready told you. But I know not what intempeſtive fooliſh
Ambiti­on hath troubled the ſtream, and it hath paſt now for a long time (till
the Reformation altered it) for a general Doctrine in the Church, That in all
kind of ſins, whether againſt God or our Neighbour, there can be no
reconciliation be­twixt the parties offending, and offended, but by
interpoſition of a Prieſt, a thing utterly beſides all reaſon and common
ſenſe, that you ſhould open your private [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=94) imperfections
to one whom they concern not, (for it is granted, that all Parties concerned
in an Of­fence, muſt have reaſon at the hands of the Offender) and who can no
ways help you; For He that is conſcientious of his ſin, (and without trouble
of Conſci­ence I think none would ever re­pair to his Confeſſor) knows ve­ry
well, that there is no ſin ſo great, but upon ſubmiſſion, God both can and
will pardon it; and none ſo ſmall, but pardon for it muſt be ſought, or elſe
he hath been ill catechiſed. And more than this what can any Prieſt tell him:
Plin. Nat. Hiſt. l. 28. c. 10. Your Pliny, ſomewhere tells you, That he that
is ſtricken by a Scorpion, if he go im­mediately, and whiſper it into the ear
of [[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=95) an
Aſs, ſhall find himſelf immediate­ly eaſed: That Sin is a Scorpion, and bites
deadly, I have always believed, but that to cure the bite of it, it was a
Sovereign Remedy to whiſper it into the Ear of an [ ] a Prieſt, I do as well
believe as I do that of Pliny. The Patrons of this Fancy, for defect of reaſon
and common congruity, are fain to betake themſelves to Scripture; and the
miſchief is, there is there no direct Text for it, and therefore they are
conſtrained to help themſelves with a meer conjectural conſequence; For ſince
it is taken for certain, that there is a Power to Remit and to Retain ſins,
how ſhall they who have this Power given them, know how fit it is to Remit or
to Retain a ſin, except they know the ſin, and [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=95) know it they
cannot, but by Con­feſſion. For anſwer to this,

Firſt, We have found and pro­ved, That the Words of Scripture muſt receive
ſuch a ſenſe, as from whence no ſuch Conſequence can be inferred.

Secondly, We have indeavoured to prove, That the Diſpenſation or Application
of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, (being no­thing elſe, but the duty of
ſaving of Souls) is a Duty, which pro Occa­ſione oblatâ, lies upon every
Chriſti­an: Which if it be true, (as in good faith I think it,) and the Clergy
perceive it, I think they would never go about to urge that Text, although we
ſhould yield it them in their own meaning. For they muſt needs ſee, that it
follows, that you may as well [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=96) make your
Muletter, (if you have one) your Confeſſor, as your Pariſh Prieſt. Tell me in
good earneſt, if you can, out of what good intent can this deſire to know
another mans ſin, which concerns you not, proceed? Is it to teach him that it
is a ſin? he knew that, or elſe he had never repaired to you, to confeſs it:
Is it to tell him, that he is to repent, to reſtore, to pray, to give alms,
&c. All this he knew, or elſe he hath had his breeding under an evil Clergy.
Yea, but how ſhall the Phyſician cure the Diſeaſe, if he know it not? Suppoſe
all Diſeaſes had one Remedy, (as all ſpiritual Diſeaſes have) and what matters
it if the Patient be ſick, to know whether it be an Ague, or the Meazels, or
the Pleuriſie, ſince one Potion [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=96) cures them all?
Yea, but if he know not the particulars, how ſhall he judg of the Quantity of
the Doſes? for the ſame Diſeaſe upon ſundry circumſtances, may require Majus
or Minus in the Phy­ſick. This is the pooreſt ſcruple of a thouſand; for in
the Regiment of Patients ſpiritually ſick, there can be but one miſtake, that
is, if you give too little: Be ſure you give enough, and teach your Pa­tients
to think no ſin to be little, (which in men ſpiritually ſick is Error
ſaluberrimus) and you can never err: For natural Phyſick is only Phyſick; but
ſpiritual Phy­ſick is both Phyſick and Diet, and may be indifferently
adminiſtred both to the ſick and the ſound Re­pentance perchance only
except­ed, of which upon occaſion, aſſure [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=97) your ſelf you
can hardly take too much. What reaſon now can you give me, why you ſhould
deſire to dive into any mans Breaſt, & ſcire Secreta Domûs? except it be that
which followes in the next Verſe, indè teneri, as I muſt confeſs, I ſuſpect it
is. The truth is, ſome miſtaken Cuſtoms of the ancient Church, the craft and
power of the Clergy, the ſimpli­city and ignorance of the Laity, theſe begat
the Tragelaphus, of which we now ſpeak. It may be you take the practice of the
anci­ent Church, and the Point of Ex­communication, to make ſome­what for you:
When thoſe Cards ſhall come to be play'd (though that of Church cuſtom is not
great­ly material, which way ſoever it looks) I believe you will not find
[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=97) the Game
you look for. Indeed I was once minded to have conſide­red ſomething of that:
But I think you look for a Letter, not for a Book, and I perceive my ſelf
al­ready to have gone beyond the compaſs of a Letter. Another parley
therefore, if you pleaſe, ſhall put an end to thoſe and other ſcruples, if any
do ariſe. And for the preſent give, I pray you, a little reſpite unto

From my Study, this 8 Day of March. 1637.

Yours, J. H.

# 5\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=98)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=98)

A TRACT Concerning SCHISM AND SCHISMATICKS. WHEREIN Is briefly diſcovered the
Original Cauſes of all Schiſm.

By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge, &c.

Never before Printed by the Original Copy.

Printed, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=99)

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=99)

### 1\. A TRACT Concerning SCHISM.

HEreſie and Schiſm as they are in com­mon uſe, are two Theological  [...] or
ſcar-crows, which they, who uphold a party in Re­ligion, uſe to fright away
ſuch, as making inquiry into it, are ready to relinquiſh and oppoſe it, if it
appear either erroneous or ſuſpi­cious. For as Plutarch reports of a Painter,
who having unskilful­ly painted a Cock, chaſed away all Cocks and Hens, that
ſo the [[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=100)
imperfection of his Art might not appear by compariſon with Na­ture; ſo men
willing for ends to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavour to hinder an
inquiry into it by way of compariſon of ſomewhat with it, peradventure truer,
that ſo the deformity of their own might not appear. But howſoever in the
common ma­nage, Hereſie and Schiſm are but ridiculous Terms, yet the things in
themſelves are of very conſidera­ble moment, the one offending againſt Truth,
the other againſt Charity, and therefore both dead­ly, where they are not by
impu­tation, but in deed.

It is then a matter of no ſmall importance, truly to deſcry the nature of
them, that ſo they may fear, who are guilty of them, and [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=100) they on the
contrary ſtrengthen themſelves, who through the ini­quity of men and times,
are inju­riouſly charged with them.

Schiſm (for of Hereſie we ſhall not now treat, except it be by ac­cident, and
that by occaſion of a general miſtake, ſpread through­out all the writings of
the Ancients, in which their names are familiar­ly confounded) Schiſm, I ſay,
up­on the very ſound of the word, imports Diviſion; Diviſion is not, but where
Communion is, or ought to be. Now Communion is the ſtrength and ground of all
Society, whether Sacred or Civil; Whoſo­ever therefore they be, that offend
againſt this common Society and Friendlineſs of men, and cauſe ſe­paration and
breach among them: If it be in civil occaſions, are guil­ty [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=101) of Sedition or
Rebellion; if it be by occaſion of Eccleſiaſtical dif­ference they are guilty
of Schiſm: So that Schiſm is an Eccleſiaſtical Se­dition, as Sedition is a Lay
Schiſm. Yet the great benefit of Communion not­withſtanding, in regard of
divers diſtempers men are ſubject to, Diſſention and Diſunion are often
neceſſary; For when either falſe or uncertain Concluſions are ob­truded for
Truth, and Acts either unlawful, or miniſtring juſt ſcru­ple, are required of
us to be per­form'd; in theſe caſes, Conſent were Conſpiracy, and open
Con­teſtation is not Faction or Schiſm, but due Chriſtian Animoſity.

For the further opening there­fore of the nature of Schiſm, ſome­thing muſt be
added by way of difference to diſtinguiſh it from [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=101) neceſſary
Separation, and that is, that the cauſes upon which Divi­ſion is attempted,
proceed not from Paſſion, or Diſtemper, or from Ambition, or Avarice, or ſuch
other Ends, as humane folly is apt to purſue; but from well weighed and
neceſſary Reaſons, and that, when all other means having been tryed, nothing
will ſerve to ſave us from guilt of Conſcience, but open Separation. So that
Schiſm, if we would de­fine it, is nothing elſe but an un­neceſſary Separation
of Chriſtians from that part of the viſible Church, of which they were once
Members. Now as in Mutinies and Civil Diſſentions, there are two Attendants in
ordinary be­longing unto them; one the choice of one Elector or Guide in
[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=102) place
of the General, or ordinary Governor, to rule and guide; the other the
appointing of ſome pub­lick place or Rendezvous, where publick Meetings muſt
be celebra­ted: So in Church Diſſentions and quarrels, two Appurtenances there
are, which ſerve to make a Schiſm compleat;

Firſt, The choice of a Biſhop in oppoſition to the former, (a thing very
frequent amongſt the Ancients, and which many times was both the cauſe and
effect of Schiſm.)

Secondly, The erecting of a new Church and Oratory, for the dividing Party to
meet in publick­ly. For till this be done, the Schiſm is but yet in the Womb.

In that late famous Controver­ſy in Holland, De Predeſtinatione, & [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=102) Auxiliis, as
long as the diſagreeing Parties went no further than Diſ­putes and Pen-
combats, the Schiſm was all that while unhatched; but as ſoon as one party
ſwept an old Cloyſter and by a pretty Art ſuddenly made it a Church, by
putting a new Pulpit in it, for the ſeparating Party there to meet; now, what
before was a Contro­verſy, became a formal Schiſm. To know no more than this,
if you take it to be true, had been enough to direct how you are to judge, and
what to think of Schiſm and Schiſmaticks; yet becauſe in the Ancients, (by
whom many Men are more affrighted than hurt) much is ſaid, and many fearful
Dooms are pronounced in this caſe; will we deſcend a little to conſider of
Schiſms, as it were by way of Story, [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=103) and that
partly further to open that which we have ſaid in gene­ral, by inſtancing in
particulars; and partly to diſabuſe thoſe who reverencing Antiquity more than
needs, have ſuffered themſelves to be ſcared with imputation of Schiſm, above
due meaſure; for what the Ancients ſpake by way of cenſure of Schiſm in
general, is moſt true; for they ſaw (and it is no great matter to ſee ſo much)
that unadviſedly, and upon fancy to break the knot of Union be­twixt man and
man (eſpecially amongſt Chriſtians, upon whom above all other kind of men, the
tye of Love and Communion doth moſt eſpecially reſt) was a crime hardly
pardonable, and that nothing Abſolves a man from the guilt of it, but true and
unpre­tended [[Page
199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=103) Conſcience;
yet when they came to pronounce of Schiſms in particular (whether it were
be­cauſe of their own intereſts, or that they ſaw not the Truth, or for what
other cauſe God only doth know) their Judgments many times (to ſpeak moſt
gently) are juſtly to be ſuſpected; Which that you may ſee, we will range all
Schiſm into two ranks.

For there is a Schiſm, in which only one party is the Schiſmatick; for where
cauſe of Schiſm is ne­ceſſary, there not he that ſeparates, but he that
occaſions the ſeparati­on is the Schiſmatick.

Secondly, There is a Schiſm, which both parts are the Schiſma­ticks: For where
the occaſion of ſe­paration is unneceſſary, neither ſide can be excuſed from
the guilt of Schiſm.

[[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=104)But you
will ask, who ſhall be the Judg what is neceſſary? In­deed that is a Queſtion,
which hath been often made, but I think ſcarcely ever truly anſwered; not
becauſe it is a point of great depth or difficulty truly to aſſoil it, but
be­cauſe the true ſolution carries fire in the tail of it. For it bringeth
with it a peice of Doctrine which is ſeldom pleaſing to Superiors. To you for
the preſent this ſhall ſuffice. If ſo be you be Animo de­foecato, if you have
cleared your ſelf from froath and grownds, if neither ſloth, nor fears, nor
am­bition, nor any tempting Spirits of that nature abuſe you, (for theſe and
ſuch as theſe, are the true Im­pediments▪ why both that, and other Queſtions
of the like danger are not truly anſwered) if all this [[Page
201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=104) be, and yet
you ſee not how to frame your reſolution, and ſettle your ſelf for that doubt;
I will ſay no more of you than was ſaid of Papias, St. John's own Scholar, you
are  [...], your abi­lities are not ſo good as I pre­ſumed.

But to go on with what I in­tended, and from which that in­terloping Queſtion
diverted me; that you may the better judge of the nature of Schiſms by their
oc­caſions; you ſhall find that all Schiſms have crept into the Church by one
of theſe three ways; ei­ther upon matter of Fact, or mat­ter of Opinion, or
point of Ambi­tion. For the firſt; I call that matter of Fact, when ſomething
is required to be done by us, which either we know, or ſtrongly [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=105) ſuſpect to be
unlawful; So the firſt notable Schiſm, of which we read in the Church,
contained in it matter of Fact; For it being upon Error taken for neceſſary,
that an Easter muſt be kept; and upon worſe than Error, if I may ſo ſpeak,
(for it was no leſs than a point of Judaiſm, forced up­on the Church,) upon
worſe than Error, I ſay, thought further ne­ceſſary, that the ground for the
time of our keeping that Feaſt, muſt be the rule left by Moſes to the Jews;
there aroſe a ſtout Queſtion, Whether we were to celebrate with the Jews, on
the fourteenth Moon, or the Sun­day following? This matter, though moſt
unneceſſary, moſt vain, yet cauſed as great a Com­buſtion, as ever was in the
[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=105) Church;
the Weſt ſeparating and refuſing Communion with the Eaſt, for many years
together. In this fantaſtical Hurry, I cannot ſee but all the world were
Schiſma­ticks: neither can any thing ex­cuſe them from that imputation▪
excepting only this, that we chari­tably ſuppoſe that all Parties out of
Conſcience did what they did. A thing which befel them through the ignorance
of their Guides, (for I will not ſay their malice) and that through the juſt
judgment of God, becauſe through ſloth and blind obedience Men examined not
the things which they were taught, but like Beaſts of Burthen patiently
couched down, and in­differently underwent whatſoever their Superiours laid
upon them. By the way; by this you may plain­ly [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=106) ſee the danger
of our appeal un­to Antiquity, for reſolution in con­troverted points of
Faith, and how ſmall relief we are to expect from thence. For if the
diſcretion of the chiefeſt Guides and Directors of the Church, did in a Point
ſo tri­vial, ſo inconſiderable, ſo mainly fail them, as not to ſee the Truth
in a Subject, wherein it is the great­eſt Marvel how they could avoid the
ſight of it; can we without im­putation of extream groſneſs and folly, think
ſo poor ſpirited per­ſons, competent Judges of the Queſtions now on ſoot
betwixt the Churches? Pardon me; I know not what Temptation drew that Note
from me.

The next Schiſm, which had in it matter of Fact, is that of the Do­natiſt: who
was perſwaded (at [[Page
205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=106) leaſt ſo he
pretended) that it was unlawful to converſe or commu­nicate in holy Duties
with Men ſtained with any notorious Sin. (For howſoever Auſtin and others do
ſpecify only the Thurificati & Traditores, and Libellatici, and the like, as
if he ſeparated only from thoſe, whom he found to be ſuch; yet by neceſſary
proportion, he muſtrefer to all notorious Sinners) Upon this he taught, that
in all pla­ces where good and bad were mixt together, there could be no
Church, by reaſon of Pollution, evaporating as it were from Sin­ners, which
blaſted righteous Per­ſons who converſed with them, and made all unclean. On
this ground ſeparating himſelf from all whom he liſt to ſuſpect, he gave out
that the Church was no [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=107) where to be
found but in him and his Aſſociates, as being the on­ly Men among whom wicked
Per­ſons found no ſhelter; and by conſequence, the only clean and unpolluted
Company, and there­fore the only Church. Againſt this Saint Auguſtine laid
down this Con­cluſion, Unitatem Ecclesiae per totum Orbem diſperſae propter
nonnullorum pec­cata non eſſe deſerendam; which is in­deed the whole ſum of
that Fa­thers Diſputation againſt the Do­natiſt. Now in one part of this
Controverſie betwixt St. Auguſtine and the Donatiſt, there is one thing is
very remarkable. The Truth was there where it was by meer chance, and might
have been on either ſide▪ any Reaſons brought by either party notwithſtanding.
For though it were de facto falſe, [[Page
207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=107) that pars
Donati, ſhut up in Africk, was the only Orthodox Party, yet it might have been
true, notwith­ſtanding any thing Saint Auſtine brings to confute it; and on
the contrary, though it were de facto true, that the part of Chriſtians
diſ­perſed over the Earth were Ortho­dox; yet it might have been falſe
notwithſtanding any thing Saint Austine brings to confirm it. For where, or
amongſt whom, or amongſt how many the Church ſhall be, or is, is a thing
indiffe­rent; it may be in any Number more or leſs, it may be in any Place
Country, or Nation; it may be in All, and (for ought I know) it may be in
none, without any prejudice to the definition of the Church, or the Truth of
the Goſ­pel. North or South, many or few, [[Page
208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=108) diſperſed in
many places, or con­fined to one; None of theſe ei­ther prove or diſprove a
Church.

Now this Schiſm, and likewiſe the former, to a wiſe Man that well underſtands
the matter in Controverſie; may afford per­chance matter of pity, to ſee Men
ſo ſtrangly diſtracted upon fancy; but of doubt or trouble what to do, it can
yield none. For though in this Schiſm the Donatiſt be the Schiſmatick, and in
the former both parties be equally engaged in the Schiſm; yet you may ſafely
upon your occaſions communicate with either, ſo be you flatter nei­ther in
their Schiſm: For why might it not be lawful to go to Church with the
Donatiſt, or to ce­lebrate Eaſter with the Quartodeci­man, if occaſion ſo
require? ſince [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=108) neither
Nature, nor Religion, nor Reaſon doth ſuggeſt any thing to the contrary: For
in all publick Meetings pretending Holineſs, ſo there be nothing done, but
what true Devotion and Piety brook, why may not I be preſent in them, and uſe
Communication with them? Nay what if thoſe to whoſe care the execution of the
publick Service is committed, do ſome­thing either unſeemly or ſuſpici­ous, or
peradventure unlawful? what if the Garments they wear be cenſured as, nay
indeed be ſu­perſtitious? what if the Geſture of adoration be uſed at the
Altar, as now we have learned to ſpeak? What if the Homiliſt or Preacher
deliver any Doctrine, of the truth of which we are not well perſwa­ded, (a
thing which very often [[Page
210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=109) falls out) yet
for all this we may not ſeparate, except we be con­ſtrained perſonally to bear
a part in them our ſelves. The Prieſts under Eli had ſo ill demeaned
themſelves about the daily Sacri­fice, that the Scriptures tell us, they made
it to ſtink, yet the People refuſed not to come to the Tabernacle, nor to
bring their Sacrifice to the Prieſt. For in theſe Schiſms, which concern Fact,
no­thing can be a juſt cauſe of refuſal of Communion, but only to re­quire the
execution of ſome un­lawful or ſuſpected act; For not only in Reaſon, but in
Religion too, that Maxim admits of no re­leaſe, Cautiſſimi cujuſ (que)
Praeceptum quod dubitas, ne feceris. Long it was ere the Church fell upon
Schiſm upon this occaſion, though of late [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=109) it hath had
very many; For until the ſecond Council of Nice, (in which conciliable
Superſtition and Ignorance did conſpire) I ſay, un­till that Rout did ſet up
Image­worſhip, there was not any re­markable Schiſm, upon juſt occaſi­on of
Fact; All the reſt of Schiſms of that kind were but Wantonneſs, this was truly
ſerious. In this the Schiſmatical party was the Synod it ſelf, and ſuch as
conſpired with it. For concerning the uſe of Images in Sacris, Firſt, it is
acknowledged by all, That it is not a thing neceſ­ſary; Secondly, It is by
moſt ſuſ­pected; Thirdly, It is by many held utterly unlawful. Can then the
enjoyning of the practice of ſuch a thing be ought elſe but a­buſe? Or can the
refuſal of Com­munion here, be thought any other [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=110) thing than
duty? Here, or upon the like occaſion, to ſeparate, may peradventure bring
perſonal trou­ble and danger, (againſt which it concerns every honeſt man to
have Pectus bene praeparatum) further harm it cannot do. So that in theſe
caſes, you cannot be to ſeek what to think, or what you have to do.

Come we then to conſider a little of the ſecond ſort of Schiſm, ariſing upon
occaſion of variety of opinion. It hath been the com­mon diſeaſe of Chriſtians
from the beginning, not to content themſelves with that meaſure of Faith,
which God and Scriptures have expreſly afforded us; but out of a vain deſire
to know more than is revealed, they have attempted to diſcuſs things, of which
we can have no light, neither from [[Page
213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=110) Reaſon nor
Revelation; neither have they reſted here, but upon pretence of Church-
authority, which is none, or Tradition, which for the moſt part is but
figment; they have peremptorily conclu­ded, and confidently impoſed up­on
others, a neceſſity of entertain­ing Concluſions of that nature; and to
ſtrengthen themſelves, have broken out into Diviſions and Factions, oppoſing
man to man, Synod to Synod, till the peace of the Church vaniſhed, without all
poſſibility of recall. Hence aroſe thoſe ancient and many ſeparati­ons amongſt
Chriſtians, occaſio­ned by Arrianiſm, Eutychianiſm, Neſtorianiſm,
Photinianiſm, Sa­bellianiſm, and many more both ancient and in our time; all
which indeed are but names of Schiſm; [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=111) howſoever in
the common Lan­guage of the Fathers, they were called Hereſies. For Hereſie is
an act of the Will, not of Reaſon; and is indeed a Lye, not a miſtake: Elſe
how could that known ſpeech of Auſtine go for true, Errare poſ­ſum, Haereticus
eſſe nolo. Indeed Manichaeiſm, Valentinianiſm, Mar­cioniſm, Mahometaniſm, are
tru­ly and properly Hereſies; For we know that the Authors of them re­ceived
them not, but minted them themſelves, and ſo knew that which they taught to be
a Lye. But can any man avouch that Arri­us and Neſtorius, and others that
taught erroneouſly concerning the Trinity, or the Perſon of our Sa­viour, did
maliciouſly invent what they taught, and not rather fall up­on it by error and
miſtake? Till [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=111) that be done,
and that upon good Evidence, we will think no worſe of all Parties than needs
we muſt, and take theſe Rents in the Church to be at the worſt but Schiſms
up­on matter of Opinion. In which caſe what we are to do, is not a point of
any great depth of under­ſtanding to diſcover, ſo be Diſtem­per and Partiality
do not inter­vene. I do not yet ſee, that Opi­nionum Varietas, & Opinantium
Uni­tas, are  [...], or that Men of different opinions in Chriſtian Re­ligion,
may not hold communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church. Why may I not go,
if occaſion require, to an Arrian Church, ſo there be no Arrianiſm expreſt in
their Liturgy? And were Liturgies and publick Forms of Service ſo framed, as
that they [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=112) admitted not
of particular and pri­vate fancies, but contained only ſuch things, as in
which all Chri­ſtians do agree, Schiſms on Opi­nion were utterly vaniſhed. For
conſider of all the Liturgies that are or ever have been, and remove from them
whatſoever is ſcanda­lous to any Party, and leave no­thing but what all agree
on, and the event ſhall be, that the pub­lick Service and Honour of God ſhall
no ways ſuffer: Whereas to load our publick Forms with the private Fancies
upon which we differ, is the moſt ſovereign way to perpetuate Schiſm unto the
Worlds end. Prayer, Confeſſion, Thankſgiving, Reading of Scrip­tures,
Expoſition of Scripture, Adminiſtration of Sacraments in the plaineſt and
ſimpleſt manner, [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=112) were matter
enough to furniſh out a ſufficient Liturgy, though no­thing either of private
Opinion, or of Church Pomp, of Garments, of preſcribed Geſtures, of Image­ry,
of Muſick, of matter concern­ing the Dead, of many ſuperflui­ties, which creep
into the Churches under the name of Order and De­cency, did interpoſe it ſelf.
For to charge Churches and Liturgies with things unneceſſary, was the firſt
beginning of all Superſtition, and when ſcruples of Conſcience began to be
made or pretended, then Schiſms began to break in. If the ſpiritual Guides and
Fathers of the Church would be a little ſparing of incumbring Churches with
ſuperfluities, and not over­rigid either in reviving obſo­lete Cuſtoms, or
impoſing new, [[Page
218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=113) there were far
leſs danger of Schiſm or Superſtition; and all the inconve­nience were likely
to enſue, would be but this, they ſhould in ſo do­ing, yeeld a little to the
imbecil­lities of Inferiors, a thing which St. Paul would never have refuſed
to do. Mean while, whereſoever falſe or ſuſpected Opinions are made a peice of
the Church Liturgy, he that ſeparates is not the Schiſma­tick; For it is alike
unlawful to make profeſſion of known or ſuſ­pected falſhoods, as to put in
practice unlawful or ſuſpect acti­ons

The third thing I noted for matter of Schiſm was Ambition, I mean Epiſcopal
Ambition, ſhewing it ſelf eſpecially in two heads; one concerning Plurality of
Bi­ſhops in the ſame See, another the [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=113) Superiority of
Biſhops in divers Sees. Ariſtotle tells us, that Ne­ceſſity cauſeth but ſmall
faults, but Avarice and Ambition were the Mothers of great Crimes; Epiſco­pal
Ambition hath made this true: For no Occaſion hath produced more frequent,
more continuing, more ſanguinary Schiſms, than this hath done. The Sees of
A­lexandria, of Conſtantinople, of An­tioch, and above all of Rome, do
abundantly ſhew thus much, and our Eccleſiaſtical Stories witneſs no leſs, of
which the greateſt part conſiſts in the factionating and tu­multuating of
great and potent Biſhops. Socrates Apologizing for himſelf, that profeſſing to
write an Eccleſiaſtical Story, he did oft­times interlace the actions of
ſe­cular Princes and other civil buſi­neſſes, [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=114) tells us that
he did thus to refreſh his Reader, who otherwiſe were in danger to be cloyd by
reading ſo much of the Acts of unquiet and unruly Biſhops,  [...], in which as
a man might ſay, they made Butter and Cheeſe one of another; For  [...], (that
I may ſhew you a caſt out of my old Office, and open you a Myſtery in Grammar)
properly ſignifieth to make Butter and Cheeſe: Now becauſe theſe are not made
without much agitation of the Milk, hence  [...], by a borrowed and tranſlated
ſignifica­tion, ſignifies to do things with much agitation and tumult.

But that I may a little conſider of the two heads, which I but now ſpecified;
The firſt I mentioned was the Pluralitie of Biſhops in one [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=114) Sea. For the
general practice of the Church from the beginning, at leaſt ſince the original
of Epiſ­copacy, as now it is, was never to admit at once more than one Bi­ſhop
in one Sea; And ſo far in this point have they been careful to preſerve unity,
that they would not ſuffer a Biſhop in his Sea to have two Cathedral Churches;
which thing lately brought us a Book out of France, De Monoga­mia Epiſcoporum,
written by occa­ſion of the Biſhop of Langres, who, I know not upon what
fan­cy, could not be content with one Cathedral Church in his Di­oceſs, but
would needs have two, which to the Author of that work ſeems to be a kind of
ſpiritual Po­lygamy. It fell out amongſt the An­cients very often; ſometimes
upon occaſion [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=115) of difference
in Opinion, ſometimes becauſe of difference amongſt thoſe who were intereſſed
in the choice of Biſhops, that two Biſhops and ſometimes more were ſet up, and
all Parties ſtriving to maintain their own Biſhop, made themſelves ſeveral
Churches, ſe­veral Congregations, each refu­ſing to participate with others,
and many times proceeding to mutual Excommunication. This is that which
Cyprian calls Erigere Altare contra Altare: to this doth he impute the
Original of all Church diſorders; and if you read him, you would think he
thought no other Church-Tumult to be a Schiſm but this. This perchance might
plead ſome excuſe; For though in regard of Religion it ſelf, it matters not
whether there [[Page
223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=115) be one or more
Biſhops in the ſame Dioceſs, and ſometimes two are known to have ſat at once
(for Epiphanius reckoning up the Biſhops of Rome, makes Peter and Paul the
firſt: and St. Auſtin ac­knowledgeth, that for a time he ſat fellow Biſhop
with his Prede­ceſſor, though he excuſeth it, that he did ſo by being ignorant
that the contrary had been decreed by the Council of Nice,) yet it be­ing a
thing very convenient for the Peace of the Church to have it ſo; neither doth
it any way ſa­vour of vice or miſdemeanor; their Puniſhment ſleeps not, who
unneceſſarily and wantonly go a­bout to infringe it.

But that other Head of Epiſcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Biſhops in
divers Sees, one claim­ing [[Page
224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=116) Superiority
over another, as it hath been from time to time, a great Treſpaſſer againſt
the Churches Peace, ſo it is now the finall Ruine of it. The Eaſt and the
Weſt, through the fury of the two prime Biſhops, being irre­mediably ſeparated
without all hope of Reconcilement. And be­ſides all this miſchief, it is
founded in a vice contrary to all Chriſtian humility, without which no man
ſhall ſee his Saviour; For they do but abuſe themſelves and others, that would
perſwade us, that Bi­ſhops, by Chriſt's Inſtitution, have any Superiority over
other men, further than of Reverence; or that any Biſhop is Superiour to
ano­ther, further than poſitive order agreed upon amongſt Chriſtians, hath
preſcribed. For we have be­lieved [[Page
225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=116) him that hath
told us, That in Jeſus Christ there is neither high nor low; and that in
giving honour, every man ſhould be ready to prefer another before himſelf;
which ſayings cut off all claim moſt certainly to Superi­ority, by title of
Chriſtianity; except men can think that theſe things were ſpoken only to poor
and pri­vate Men. Nature and Religion a­gree in this, that neither of them
hath a hand in this Heraldry of ſe­cundum ſub & ſupra; all this comes from
Compoſition and Agree­ment of men among themſelves. Wherefore this abuſe of
Chriſtia­nity, to make it Lacquey to Am­bition, is a vice for which I have no
extraordinary name of Igno­miny, and an ordinary I will not give it, leſt you
ſhould take ſo tranſcendent a vice to be but tri­vial.

[[Page 226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=117)Now
concerning Schiſm ariſing upon theſe Heads, you cannot be for behaviour much
to ſeek; for you may ſafely communicate with all Parties as Occaſion ſhall
call you, and the Schiſmaticks here are all thoſe who are heads of the
Faction, together with all thoſe who foment it: for private and indifferent
Perſons, they may be Spectators of theſe contentions as ſecurely in regard of
any peril of Conſcience (for of danger in Purſe or Perſon, I keep no ac­count)
as at a Cock fight. Where Serpents fight, who cares who hath the better? the
beſt Wiſh is, that both may periſh in the fight.

Now for Conventicles, of the nature of which you deſire to be informed, thus
much in general. [[Page
227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=117) It evidently
appears, that all Meet­ings upon unneceſſary Occaſions of Separation are to be
ſo ſtiled, ſo that in this ſenſe, a Conventicle is nothing elſe but a
Congregation of Schiſmaticks; Yet Time hath ta­ken leave ſometimes to fix this
Name upon good and honeſt Meetings, and that perchance not altogether without
good reaſon; For with publick Religious Meet­ings thus it fares: Firſt, it
hath been at all times confeſſed neceſſa­ry, that God requires not only
in­ward and private Devotion, when Men either in their hearts and Cloſets, or
within their private walls, pray, praiſe, confeſs and acknowledge; but he
further re­quires all thoſe things to be done in Publick, by troops and ſhoals
of Men, and from hence have [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=118) proceeded
publick Temples, Al­tars, Forms of Service, appointed Times, and the like,
which are required for open Aſſemblies; yet whilſt men were truly pious, all
Meetings of men for mutual help of Piety and Devotion, whereſoe­ver and by
whomſoever celebra­ted, were permitted without ex­ception.

But when it was eſpied that ill af­fected perſons abus'd private Meet­ings,
whether Religious or Civil, to evil ends, Religiouſneſs to groſs impiety, (as
appears in the Eth­nick Fleuſinia, and Bacchanalia; and Chriſtian Meetings
under the Pagan Princes, when for fear they durſt not come together in open
view, were charged with foul imputations, as by the report of Chriſtians
themſelves plainly ap­pears; [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=118) and Civil
Meetings many times under pretence of friendly and neighbourly Viſits,
ſheltered treaſonable Attempts againſt Prin­ces and Common-weals:) Hence both
Church and State joyned, and jointly gave order for Forms, Times, Places of
Publick Con­courſe, whether for Religious or Civil Ends; and all other
Meet­ings whatſoever, beſides thoſe of which both Time and Place were limited,
they cenſured for Routs and Riots, and unlawful Aſſemblies in the State, and
in the Church for Conventicles.

So that it is not lawful, no not for Prayer, for Hearing, for Con­ference, for
any other Religious Office whatſoever, for people to aſſemble otherwiſe, than
by Pub­lick Order is allowed. Neither [[Page
230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=119) may we
complain of this in Times of Incorruption, for why ſhould men deſire to do
that ſuſpiciouſly in private, which warrantably may be performed in publick?
But in Times of manifeſt Corrup­tions and Perſecutions, wherein Religious
Aſſembling is dange­rous, private Meetings, howſoe­ver beſides publick Order,
are not only lawful, but they are of Ne­ceſſity and Duty; elſe how ſhall we
excuſe the Meetings of Chriſtians for publick Service, in time of danger and
perſecutions, and of our ſelves in Queen Maries days? and how will thoſe of
the Roman Church amongſt us, put off the imputation of Conventicling, who are
known amongſt us pri­vately to aſſemble for Religious Exerciſe againſt all
eſtabliſhed or­der, [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=119) both in State
and Church? For indeed all pious Aſſemblies in times of perſecution and
corrupti­ons howſoever practiſed, are in­deed, or rather alone the lawful
Congregations; and publick Aſ­ſemblies, though according to form of Law, are
indeed nothing elſe but Riots and Conventicles, if they be ſtained with
Corrupti­on, and Superſtition.

FINIS.

# 6\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=120)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=120)

Miſcellanies WRITTEN By the ever Memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, of Eaton-Colledge,
&c.

Printed, 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=121)

[[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=121)

### 1\. Miſcellanies.

#### 1.1. How to know the Church.

MArks and Notes to know the Church there are none, ex­cept we will make True
Profeſſion, which is the Form and Eſſence of the Church to be a Mark. And as
there are none, ſo is it not neceſſa­ry there ſhould be. For to what purpoſe
ſhould they ſerve? That I might go ſeek and find out ſome Company to mark.
This is no [[Page
236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=122) way neceſſary.
For glorious Things are in the Scriptures ſpoken of the Church: not that I
ſhould run up and down the World to find the perſons of the Profeſſors; but
that I ſhould make my ſelf of it. This I do by taking upon me the Pro­feſſion
of Chriſtianity, and ſub­mitting my ſelf to the Rules of Belief, and Practice,
delivered in the Goſpel, though beſides my ſelf, I knew no other Profeſſor in
the World. If this were not the Authors end in propoſal of the Title, it is
but a meer Vanity.

#### 1.2. To the Deſcription of the Church.

The Church, as it imports a viſible Company in Earth, is [[Page
237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=122) nothing elſe
but the Company of Profeſſors of Chriſtianity, where­ſoever diſperſt in the
Earth. To define it thus by Monarchy, under one viſible Head, is of novelty
crept up, ſince men began to change the ſpiritual Kingdom of Chriſt to ſecular
Pride and Ty­ranny, and a thing never heard of, either in the Scriptures, or
in the Writings of the Ancients. Go­vernment, whether by one or ma­ny, or
howſoever, if it be one of the Churches contingent Attri­butes, it is all;
certainly it is no neceſſary Property, much leſs comes it into the Definition
and Eſſence of it. I mean outward Government; for as for inward Government, by
which Chriſt reigns in the Hearts of his Elect, and vindicates them from
ſpiritual [[Page
238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=123) Enemies, I
have no occaſion to ſpeak, neither ſee I any reference to it in all your
Authors Animad­verſions.

#### 1.3. How Chriſt is the Head of the Church.

From the Worlds beginning, till the laſt hour of it, the Church is eſſentially
one and the ſame, howſoever perchance in Garment, and outward Ceremony, it
admits of Difference. And as it was from the beginning of the World, ſo was it
Chriſtian; there being no other difference betwixt the Fathers be­fore Chriſt
and us, but this, As we believe in Chriſt that is Come, ſo they believed in
Chriſt that was to Come. Jeſus Chriſt yeſterday, and to [[Page
239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=123) day, and the
ſame for ever. Reference unto Chriſt is the very Eſſence of the Church, and
there neither is, nor ever was any Church but Chriſt's; and therefore the
Church amongſt the Jews was properly and truly Chriſtian, quoad rem, as we
are. Now as this Church at all times is Chriſt's Body, ſo is Chriſt the Head
of it. For it is as impoſſi­ble for the Church, as for the Bo­dy to be without
its Head; it is not therefore as your Author dreams. Chriſt came not to found
a New Church, or to profeſs a Viſible Headſhip of it. That Re­lation to this
Church, which we expreſs when we call him the Head of it, is one and the ſame,
from the Beginning to all Eterni­ty, neither receives it any altera­tion in
this reſpect, becauſe the [[Page
240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=124) Perſon in whom
this Relation is founded, is ſometimes Viſible, ſometimes not. 'Tis true
indeed, the Head of the Church ſome­times became Viſible, but this is but
contingent and by Concomi­tancy. For Chriſt the ſecond Per­ſon in the Trinity,
becoming Man to Redeem this Church, and ma­nifeſt the way of Truth unto it; It
ſo fell out that the Head of the Church became Viſible. Of this Viſibility he
left no Succeſſor, no Doctrine, no Uſe, as being a thing meerly accidental: I
ask, Had the Church before Chriſt any Viſible Head? if it had, then was not
Chriſt the firſt, as here our Teach­er tells us; If it had none, why then
ſhould the Church more re­quire a Viſible Head, than it did from the
Beginning. To ſpeak [[Page
241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=124) the Truth at
once. All theſe Que­ſtions concerning the Notes, the Viſibility, the
Government of the Church, if we look upon the Sub­ſtance and Nature of the
Church, they are meerly Idle and Imperti­nent: If upon the End, why Learned
Men do handle them, it is nothing elſe but Faction.

#### 1.4. Of Peter's Miniſterial Headſhip of the Church.

In your Authors Paragraphs concerning the viſible Encreaſe, or Succeſſion of
the Church, there is no Difference betwixt us. As for the Proofs of Peters
Miniſteri­al Headſhip, this firſt concerning his being the Rock of the Church,
[[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=125) that
cannot prove it; For Peter was the Rock then; when our Sa­viour ſpake, but
then could he not be the viſible Head, for Chriſt himſelf then was living, and
by our Teachers Doctrine, ſupplied that room himſelf. Pe­ter therefore,
howſoever, or in what ſence ſoever he were the Rock, yet could he not be the
viſible Head, except we will grant the Church to have had two viſible Heads at
once.

Secondly, The Keys of Hea­ven committed to Peter, and Command to feed his
Sheep, im­port no more, than that common Duty, laid upon all the Diſciples, To
teach all Nations; for this Duty in ſeveral reſpects, is expreſt by ſeveral
Metaphors. Teaching, as it ſignifies the opening of the [[Page
243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=125) way to life,
ſo is it called by the name of Keys; but as it ſignifies the Strengthning of
the Soul of Man by the Word, which is the Souls ſpiritual Food, ſo is it
cal­led Feeding. Thus much is ſeen by the Defenders of the Church of Rome, and
therefore they fly for refuge to a Circumſtance: It is obſerved, that our
Saviour delivered this Doctrine to Peter alone (as indeed ſometimes he did) in
this it is ſuppoſed that ſome great Myſtery reſts: For why ſhould our Saviour
thus ſingle out Peter, and commend a common Duty to him, if there were not
ſomething extraordina­ry in it, which concerned Him a­bove the reſt? This they
interpret a Preeminence that Peter had in his Buſineſs of Teaching, which
[[Page 244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=126) they
ſay is a Primacy and Head­ſhip; inforcing thus much, that all the reſt were to
depend from Him, and from Him receive what they were to preach. For An­ſwer,
Grant me there were ſome great Myſtery in it, yet whence is it proved, that
this is that My­ſtery? For if our Saviour did not manifeſt it, then might
there be a thouſand Cauſes, which Mans Conjecture may eaſily miſs: It is great
boldneſs, out of Cauſes concealed, to pick ſo great Con­ſequences, and to
found Matters of ſo great weight upon meer Conjectures.

Thirdly, The Prayer for Con­firmation of Peters Faith, whence it came, the
Courſe of the Story ſet down in the Text doth ſhew, It was our Saviours
Previſion of [[Page
245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=126) Peters danger
to relapſe, which danger he had certainly run into, had not our Saviour
extraordinari­ly prayed for confirmation of his Faith. And the Precept of
con­firming his Brethren, is but that charitable Office, which is exacted at
every Chriſtians hand, that when himſelf had eſcaped ſo great a Wrack, to be
careful in warning and reclaiming others, whom common frailty drives into the
like Diſtreſs.

Theſe Circumſtances, that Pe­ter is firſt named amongſt the Di­ſciples, that
he made the firſt Sermon, and the like, are too weak Grounds to build the
Sove­raignty over the World upon; and that he ſpake Ananias and Sapphira dead,
argues ſpiritual Power, but not temporal. But [[Page
246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=127) that Peter
called the firſt Council in the Acts, is a Circumſtance beyond the Text; for
concerning the calling of the Council there is no word, all that is ſaid is
but this, that the Diſciples and Elders met, no Syllable of Peters calling
them to­gether.

That Peter was 25 Years Bi­ſhop of Rome, is not to be proved out of Antiquity,
before St. Hie­rom, who ſhuffled it into Euſebius Chronicle, there being no
ſuch thing extant in his Story. Yea that he was Biſhop at all (as now the name
of Biſhop is taken) may be very queſtionable: For the Ancients that reckon up
the Bi­ſhops of Rome until their times, as Euſebius, and before him
Ter­tullian, and before them both Irae­neus, never account Peter as Bi­ſhop
[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=127) of that
See: And Epiphanius tells us, that Peter and Paul were both Biſhops of Rome at
once; by which it is plain he took the Title of Biſhop in another ſence than
now it is uſed: For now, and ſo for a long time upward, two Biſhops can no
more poſſeſs one See, than two Hedge-Spar­rows dwell in one Buſh. St. Pe­ters
time was a little too early for Biſhops to riſe.

#### 1.5. Anſwer to the Biſhop of Romes Practice of Supremacy.

To the firſt, That ſo many of the Biſhops of Rome were Mar­tyrs, what makes
that to the pur­poſe? Is Martyrdom an Ar­gument [[Page
248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=128) of the
Supremacy?

To the ſecond, That Victor indeavoured to excommunicate the Aſiatick Biſhops,
is true; but withall it is as true, that he was withſtood for his Labour: For
the Biſhops of Aſia themſelves did ſharply reprove him,  [...], the Words of
Eu­ſebius; and Irenaeus wrote againſt him for it.

To the third, That the firſt four Councils were called by the Popes, is an
open Falſhood, for in the two firſt, the Biſhops of Rome are not ſo much as
mention­ed, ſave only as perſons cited. In the two laſt they are mentioned
only as Petitioners to the Empe­rour. There are extant the Stories of
Euſebius, Socrates, Ruffinus, The­odoret, Sozomenus, the Acts of the [[Page
249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=128) Councils
themſelves, at leaſt ſome of them, the Writings and Epiſtles of Leo Biſhop of
Rome. In all theſe there is not one word of the Pope farther than a
Supplicant, and the whole calling of the Biſhops toge­ther is attributed to
the Emperour. Take for Example but the laſt of them. Leo, Biſhop of Rome, was
deſirous that ſome things done in a meeting of Divines at Epheſus, ſhould be
diſannulled; for this he becomes a Suitor to Theodoſius the junior, to have a
General Council, but could never procure it of him. After his death he
con­tinues his ſuit to Marcianus, Succeſ­ſor to Theodoſius, who granted his
requeſt; But whereas Leo had re­queſted the Council might be held in Italy,
the Emperor would not hear him; nay which is more, the Pope upon good reaſon,
had be­ſought [[Page
250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=129) the Emperor to
put off the day deſign'd for the holding of the Council, but the Emperor would
not hear him. So that Leo could do nothing, neither for the calling the
Council, nor for the Place, nor for the Time. And all this appears by Leo's
own Epiſtles. If the Popes could do ſo little well near 500 years after
Chriſt, how little could they do before, when their horns were not yet ſo
long.

The Plea of the Proteſtants con­cerning the Corruption of the Church of Rome,
which by them is confeſſed ſometimes to have been pure, is no more prejudicial
to Chriſts Promiſe to his Church, that the Gates of Hell ſhall not prevail
againſt her, than the known corruption of the Churches in Aſia in St. Johns
time, or of other Churches after.

The Cloſe of all is a Demonſtra­tion. [[Page
251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=129) A Word
unfortunately uſed by your Author, to bewray his Lo­gick: For indeed a Reaſon
drawn from ſo poor and empty a ſign, falls many bows wide of demon­ſtrative
Proof. Firſt, it is falſe that all the reſt of Patriarchal Sees are extinct.
The See of Conſtantinople yet ſtands, and ſhews her Succeſſion of Biſhops from
St. Andrew till this day, as well as the Church of Rome can from St. Peter:
The See of A­lexandria yet ſubſiſts, and the Biſhop of that place calls him,
[...], Judge of the World, (as my ſelf have ſeen in ſome of his Letters) a
Title to which he hath as good Right, as the Biſhop of Rome hath to be the
Worlds Sovereign. If any reply they are poor, in miſery, in perſecution and
affliction: this can make no difference, ſince with Chriſt there is neither
rich nor poor, [[Page
252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=130) but a new
Creature. And again, their caſe now is as good as was the Biſhops of Rome,
under the Eth­nick Emperors; for their Lot then was no other than thoſe
Biſhops is now. But grant that it had laſted longeſt, what then? ſome of them
muſt needs have conſiſted longer than the other, except we would ſuppoſe that
they ſhould have fallen all together. Peradven­ture the reaſon of her ſo long
laſt­ing is no other, but that which the Cyclops gives Ulyſſes in Homer,
[...], Ulyſſes ſhould be eaten laſt of all. However it be, this Vaunt ſeems
but like that of the wicked Servant in the Goſpel, tardat Domi­nus venire, and
we doubt not but a day of the Lord ſhall overtake him who now eats and drinks,
and revels with the World, and beats his fel­low Servants.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=39371&page=130)

[Home](/)

Hales, John, 1584-1656.. Date: 1677  

