## (unknown project)

# A true declaration of the happy conuersion, contrition, and Christian
preparation of Francis Robinson, gentleman Who for counterfetting the great
seale of England, was drawen, hang'd, and quartered at Charing-Crosse, on
Friday last, being the thirteenth day of Nouember, 1618. Written by Henry
Goodcole preacher of the Word of God, and his daily visiter, during his
imprisonment in the gaole of Newgate.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=1)

A True Declaration of the happy Conuersion, contri­tion, and Christian
preparation of FRANCIS ROBINSON, Gentleman.

WHO FOR COVNTERFET­ting the Great Seale of England, was drawen, Hang'd, and
quartered at Charing Crosse, on Friday last, being the Thirteenth day of
Nouember, 1618.

Written By HENRY GOODCOLE Preacher of the Word of God, and his daily visiter,
during his impri­sonment in the Gaole of Newgate.

_[figure]_

LONDON

Printed by Edw: All-de dwelling neere Christ­church. 1618.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT HO­norable Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chiefe Iustice of
England, grace and Honour bee multiplyed here, and by the mercies of Iesus
Christ, fruition of his glory, and euerlasting Happinesse hereafter.

RIght Honourable, I am in a great straite, betwixt hope and dispaire standing,
your worthines and wis­dome to trouble with such an vn­worthy labour as this
is; for which my ambitious and bolde presumpti­on, I stand at the Barre of
your lear­ned Iudgement, and deeme to bee arraigned, conuicted, and adiudged
of the same. But my hearty desire of the welfare of our now florishing
Hierusalem, and her In­habitants, which I pray God long it may so continue, &
vn­fained zeale, thereunto is constrained thus to breake foorth, thus to
proclaime vnto all her dwellers therein, your great mercy to distressed
soules, desiring to comfort them, & by all meanes possible to saue them, aswel
as your Iustice & zeale to punish and cut of offenders: both which to be
conioyned to­gether in your Noble heart, of late are expressed, In sending to
a perplexed and distressed soule, when time of neede did greatly require the
same (phisicke) by that heauenly Phisiti­on, and Messenger of God Mr. Robert
Pricket, into whose Industrious labour and haruest, I was bolde to intrude my
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=3) selfe, and
thrust in my sickle. And now further desirous to explaine vnto the world, the
good successe and blessing that God in his great mercy gaue to our willing
labours: Hum­bly crauing your Honours patronage and acceptance, which if your
Hon▪ vouchsafe to graunt, will incourage vs to be at your Hon: command in the
like seruice. And being sheltred vnder your fauourable countenance and
acceptance, wil make both the cause & help of our Ministrie, respectiuely
regarded and welcome, to whome wee shall be called. And this La­bour now
published, & conuayed, my only ayme & intent by dispersing of it, is to
vestigiate your Hon: steps, to wish & en­deauour the generall good of all, &
particular hurt of none: The Lord Almighty of his great goodnesse long
continue your Hon: amongst his people for their welfare, to be as e­uer your
Religious courses haue explained, to be Noble, cha­ritable, and Religious, a
defence to such as else would be op­pressed, and an incourager of the good and
vertuous.

Your Honours in all readines, and humilitie, to be commaunded: HENRY GOODCOLE.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=3)

## To the Christian Reader.

LAmentable and perilous, are these times and dayes wherein we now liue, to see
the abounding of sinne and iniquity, and pure religion, to the corrupt hearts,
and vn­stable fantasies of men, to be wrested, as they list, to finde
diuersitie of Religions, Sects and Schismes, as the hearts, quali­ties, and
manners of men differ, thereunto they equiuolate their profession and
reli­gion, the which instability, wherein there should not in the least manner
be any inconstancie, breedes corrupt liues, and vnrecoue­rable downfalls, of
many hopefull young Gentlemen, worshipfully descended, and carefully tutered,
the true meanes of preuenting such horrible wickednesse. Of which duly
considering, and ponde­ring in my minde, it did in some measure perswade me to
a periode of this by mee now published, before I had put penne to paper, to
write, being daily experienced, that where one suckes honey, ano­ther
followeth, and thence sucketh poyson; for it is a thing most im­possible, to
please the humours and fantasies of all men. But when I remembred the cause I
had to handle, which was for the publique good of my Countrey, to admonish
them to take heede by other mens hurts and harmes, and for feare it should
slip out of their mindes, This person Francis Robinson, his haynous act most
remarke­able, and deplorable downefall, becomes my subiect, to write;
insti­gating mee thereunto, and encouraging mee, not to neglect my intended
and good determination to a generality, for feare of the barking and
contradicting spirits of our age, but to performe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=4) the cause and
quarrell which I must write of against God and our enemies, how by a rauening
Wolfe, a Romish Catholike, as he was blinded, became a blind guide to this
poore Gentleman, to make him fall into the same ditch as he did, whereby like
a silly simple inno­cent Lambe by his subtill slie seducings, and inticings,
his destru­ction befell most suddaine and fearefull. I leaue what I shall
relate vnto thee to thy construction, desiring (if I may) to haue a
chari­table censure of thee: Concluding with my hearty affection to thee, &
Christian admonition, howsoeuer thine is to me-ward. Stand fast in thy faith,
profession, and religion, and I pray God, that other mens harmes, may make
thee and all others, fearefull, carefull, and watchfull, that you fall not in
such manner as many before this day haue done: the vndoubted preuention
whereof is, daily to in­uocate Gods grace from aboue, to ayde and assist thee,
that thou fall not into the same mischiefes, who are as weake, fraile, and
subiect to be tempted, as others before thee were. And thus with heartie
prayers to God to assist thee to be a conquerour in the day of battell, and
constant in the time and day of triall: I rest;

Thine in the Lord Iesus, a labourer for thy welfare. HENRY GOODCOLE.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chiefe Iustice of England, grace and Honour bee multiplyed here, and by the mercies of Iesus Christ, fruition of his glory, and euerlasting Happinesse hereafter.
  * To the Christian Reader.
  * 1\. A true Declaration of the happy conuertion, contrition and godly preparition, of Francis Robinson Gentleman.
    * 1.1. Now to confirme you how this Gentleman, as he himselfe related to me, fell, obserue what followeth.
    * 1.2. A relation how we spent Wednesday Euening, being the eleuenth of Nouember.
    * 1.3. Our conference.
    * 1.4. His Progression.
    * 1.5. His great desire of giuing satisfaction so farre as he could, to those whom he had greatly offended.
    * 1.6. The prayers wherein he was exercised day and night.
    * 1.7. Certaine deuout inward comforts by him continually vttered and vsed.
    * 1.8. A Prayer wherein hee was exercised.
    * 1.9. This Prayer he saide at the time of his Death.
    * 1.10. The portions of Scriptures whereon hee continually meditated, after these Prayers were ended.
    * 1.11. His owne relation of the beginning and proceeding in his foule fact, spoken the same morning a little before he went to his execution.
    * 1.12. The conclusion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=4)

## 1\. A true Declaration of the happy conuertion, contrition and godly
preparition, of Francis Robinson Gentleman.

DYing mens wordes are euer remark­able, & their last déeds memorable for
succéeding posterities, by them to be instructed, what vertues or vices they
followed and imbraced, and by them to learne to imitate that which was good,
and to eschew euill. But such is the depraued and corrupt nature of all
Mankinde, and Sathans subtilty (mans mortall enemy) that dayly goeth about,
and labou­reth by all meanes possible he can, to blindfolde vs, stopping vs
out of the way wherein God hath appointed vs to walke, and the example of Gods
children that haue trod out the way before vs. Oh how much do these our daies
wherin we now liue (shew vs the too true experience of the same) that
mul­titudes for company sake, conioyne themselues in all maner of mischiefe,
and runne in heapes with delight, to commit most abhominable sins, presuming
on Gods patience, because he doth not presently punish, saying in the pride of
their hearts, and glory of their wicked sinnes, Doth the Lord sée, marke, or
regard the déeds and actions, of the sonnes of men? No, they say tush, He
regards them not: And thus the De­uill by this meanes, gets holde of
multitudes, and bringes them in the end, to shame, hell, and destruction; for
the re­ward and wages of Sinne is death.

Let me now my worthy Country-men, present vnto your view, the experienced
reward of sinfull delights, which latey
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=5) befell a
Gentleman by name Francis Robinson, well descended, educated, and fostred
tenderly, who happening into euill company, quickly, by the lewde examples,
and dispositions of others, was brought to be as wicked, and as bad as
themselues, for the Deuill doth make wicked men to doe, what he cannot doe
himselfe (that is) to bring men to sinne and shame, by lewd mens inticings,
examples and di­rections, to doe as they doe, to walke in their steps and
wayes of wickednes, merrily to passe away their times and dayes whilst here
they liue, by which tossing, carousing, and iollitie of life, they become
altogether forgetfull of God, and the meanes of their saluation, which to
redéeme from the Iawes of Hell, a whole world and to late repentance then
small auailes.

Remember O yée youthfull Gallants now your Creator in the dayes of your youth,
and cast not off the yoke of God from your necke, when you are young, least he
reiect you, when your strength and eye-sight faile you; that is, in your olde
age: learne to tread now the pathes of his holy wayes, if ye would be assured
to come to the place of his euerlasting happines, for the Lord hateth, and
vtterly abhorreth all the workes and workers of sinne and iniquitie: but those
that loue and feare him he maketh much of them. That you shall see, and say
with the Prophet Dauid, Psalme 58. verse 10. Doubtlesse there is a God that
Iudgeth the Earth, that he is a iust God and loueth righteousnes, and hateth
iniquitie, repay­ing vengeance vnto them that delight in the same, my en­suing
sequell shall declare vnto you: example doth daily testifie, and at this
present confirmes the same. I pray God the wanton and roaring Gallants of this
our Age, may by them be warned, but much it is to be feared they will not: If
they will not, let them take héede as they goe for company, they hang not for
company, wherat, for ought I doe perceiue they make a scoffe and scorne, to
thinke in that manner of dying they dye valiantly, when that it is indéed most
despe­rate, deuillish and damnable, and sauours no whit of the least sparke of
Gods grace, but of contempt of God, and the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=5) ripe fruit of
Sathans bondslaues, which is to commit sinne, and to boast and bragge of the
same, to be the full height of a reprobate soule, from which good Lord deliuer
vs all.

### 1.1. Now to confirme you how this Gentleman, as he himselfe related to me,
fell, obserue what followeth.

SO soone as euer he was brought into the Gaole of New­gate, he looked round
about him, and earnestly entreated those that stoode by him, to take heede of
Papists, and euill company, for they were the cause of his destruction. From
the Lodge he was conuayed by the Keepers into the common Gaole, where he
remained some two houres, on Tuesday the tenth day of Nouember, from which
side he was remo­ued to the Maister side by Warrant, from the right Hono­rable
Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chiefe Iustice of Eng­land, who for the same was
most hartily and humbly thank­full, and counted it, as well it did deserue, a
great fauour from my Lord, there to sequester him, the better to prepare and
fit him for his end. And that no meanes might be want­ing to worke that good
worke in him of repentance, contri­tion, and assurance of his saluation, like
a good Samaritane that Honourable and religious Iudge, as hée had wounded him
by denouncing his iust Iudgement of deserued death, which is to flesh and
blood most fearefull and vnwelcome, yet such was his Honorable care towards
him, which is worthy of remembrance, what lay in his power hee did to comfort
him, and in nothing more appeared the same, then in the sending of my
painefull Brother and fellow labourer in Gods worke (Maister Pricket) who did
most grauely and wisely apply to his distressed soule (such comfort) as that I
doe constantly beléeue, the lost sheepe was brought home againe to the folde
of Iesus Christ.

Whereof most constantly Robinson said, he was assured: for the spirit of God
did inwardly confirme the same to him, vndoubtedly to beléeue it, of which
most comfortable words
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=6) and
effectuall working, we were most glad, and ioyfull, that to our weake meanes,
God rich in mercy, had giuen and sent such a blessing and cooperation. Thus
séeing our industrie and labour begin to prosper to the glory of God, the
sauing and winning to God a sinfull soule, I was bolde to put my Sickle into
another mans Haruest, and bestowed likewise my poore willing paines and
industry: with what they were I haue here published, and what effect they
tooke, I praise God, I laboured not in vaine, but found a hungry and thir­stie
soule, apt and ready, to receiue them from my hands, and the fruites thereof,
repentance, contrition, and faith.

### 1.2. A relation how we spent Wednesday Euening, being the eleuenth of
Nouember.

SO soone as euer I came vnto him, he did like a poore, sicke, and wounded
Patient, desirous of cure, tell his whole griefe, not mincingly or sparingly,
but faithfully and truly, that I might the better apply and endeauour to
comfort him, the beginning of his euils he tolde me, and how hée grew worse
and worse by degrées, the manner he related, and as néere as I can from his
owne mouth spoken, deliuered here the same. Wherein as himselfe obserued we
may sée the na­tureNote this. of Sinne, which if it be not preuented in time,
how it getteth the masterie of vs, and when we would shake off our olde
accustomed and habituall sinnes, we cannot easily doe it, because it cleaueth
fast vnto vs, that of our selues, by no meanes we are able, but by the helpe
of God, who is willing, and ready at all times to helpe and succour vs
therein, if we call and seeke for his sauing health.

### 1.3. Our conference.

HIs lamentable downefall thus begun, the which, ONote this. would to God the
carelesse and loose liuers, within this Citie of London, would take notice of
(namely) that he for­sooke God first, before God forsooke him, at which wordes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=6) he much
lamented, that the Deuill had so blinded and deluded him, to forsake and deny
the profession (and faith of the Church of England) to embrace and cleaue vnto
the Hereticall doctrine of Romish Popery, which are but lying vanities, and
vaine shaddowes, no way substanti­all for the maine ground-worke of a
Christian mans salua­tion. An in-sight, whereinto after it pleased God to be
so mercifull to grant him, hée from the bottome of his heart re­nounced, (that
false and Antechristian Church of Rome) sorrowing nothing more for any thing,
then for that time, that in that Church hée had béene a member, and reioycing
and ioying in nothing more, then that God had opened his eyes to sée his
former errors, and to giue his heart and soule a light, with earnest desiring
and thirsting to be accepted a­gaine, into the company of the true and
faithfull beléeuers of the Church of England, which his soule did assure him
vn­doubtedly was the true Church of God.

### 1.4. His Progression.

VVHen there was warrant out for his apprehension,Note this▪ he then was in
Darby, and hearing that there was waite laide for him, posted thence some sixe
miles, but had not the power any further to trauell, but returned to Darby, to
goe and Iustifie his foule fact, which by the narrow loo­king into, and
examining of a Lawyer there inhabiting, with whome he was at variance, his
designes were discouered.

When he was thus discouered, and sent vp to London to the right Honourable the
Lord Chauncellor of England, by whom he was examined, and vrged to confesse,
that his foule fact of high Treason: stood stoutly in the deniall of the same.
But hée that sitteth in Heauen laughed him to scorne, and most wonderfully
disclosed the secret of his heart, and his foule fact, whereof he thought none
should haue knowne, for being re-examined by the right Hon: Sir Henry
Moun­tague Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of England, to him as for­merly he did,
denyed his foule fact, but behold héere how the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=7) hand of God
laide holde on him, and how the eye of God was watching ouer him, and
disclosed him, by deliuering a Key to Humphrey Smith, to goe to a Truncke,
wherein his coun­terfeit Commission was, and diuers other writings.

It pleased Almighty God, who teacheth all mens hearts wisdome, that the right
Hon: the Lord Chiefe Iustice thus bethought himselfe, to know the truth,
séeing as yet he could get no knowledge, he set spies to watch those that had
accesse vnto him, to finde out by them, this foule fact, which most
miraculously by the carefull examination of Humphrey Smith (by that graue
Iudge Sir Heury Mountague) came soone to light thereof, who tolde his Hon: of
a Truncke of writings: which so strangely discouered, Robinson thereat was
greatly amazed, thinking it a thing impossible to be knowne at all to any; who
when that he saw he was disco­uered, betooke himselfe (of an obstinate denyer)
to become an humble, contrite, and sorrowfull confessor of what he had done,
and implored mercy and fauour at honourable persons hands, of whome he little
deserued the same. But he out of his most Noble disposition, denyed not any
the least of his requests, and humble suites, but buryed all his former
vn­deseruings, in the bowels of pitty and compassion, grieuing to sée what a
most wretched course he had runne, that the Iustice of the King, and his
Lawes, did iustly challenge his deserued deoth.

Nay further note and consider I pray you, for these were the wordes procéeding
out of his owne mouth: how God did make his owne wisdome to be foolishnesse,
therewith to laugh himselfe to scorne, that presuming he had some sound
iudgement and true knowledge in the Law, vp­on which hée too much built and
relyed, for his knowledge therein, was but the flash of pride & presumption:
for when the right Worshipfull, graue, wise and learned in the Law (Sir Henry
Yeluerton his Maiesties Atturney Generall) heard, said, that his intention,
made the Law to take holde on him, he thereat was silenced, and confessed his
blindnes, and ignorance, and that his eyes were shut, and heart infatuated
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=7) euen vnto the
day of his tryall, in which it pleased God to reueale to him, his grosse
mistaking of the Law, and guilt in this his foule fact, which when he well and
plainely percei­ued; he then remembred that portion of Scripture which he
formerly had read in the 3. Chap. of Ieremy, which stroake re­morse of
conscience in him, and that the whole world might take notice that the
Iudgements of God had ouertaken him, aduisedly coated the place recited for
memory, that men should feare to offend in the like case, least they come to
haue in the end the like reward for their paines.

Lastly, he confessed the person, and first occasion that drew him to commit
his foule fact, which was (Couetous­nes) the foundation of all mischiefe. And
lodging at the Swan at Charing Crosse, there he grew acquainted with one
(Morgan a Romish Catholicke) whom he tolde of his thirsting after money, who
then shewed the fruites of his Religion, to bring by his wicked deuice, the
body of this Gentleman to his destruction, and (had not God in his great mercy
preuented the same destroyed) his soule also, for he went the right way
thereunto, by crafty seducing of him to become a Papist. And thus, he leauing
and for saking his God, and Religion, his sodaine downefall afterwards
hap­pened, the which he heartily prayed to Almighty God might teach, warne,
and terrifie others from the like attempt: and thus spake that morning a
little before hée receiued the most holy and blessed Sacrament, of the Supper
of our Lord Ie­sus Christ, (said▪) that Morgan did seduce him first, from his
Religion, and after that, his heart was inclinable to re­ceiue, what Morgans
poysoned tongue of mischiefe would speake, of which kinde of people and their
Religion, hée desi­red all people to beware and to flye their Doctrine, it
tending onely to mischiefe and destruction.

### 1.5. His great desire of giuing satisfaction so farre as he could, to
those whom he had greatly offended.

HIs God and Creator, hée acknowledged most highly by his foule fact to haue
offended, and for attonement
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=8) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=8) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=9) he fully
relyed on the meritorious death and passion of Iesus Christ.

The Kings most excellent Maiestie in a most high nature he had offended, for
which he was heartily sorrie, and craued pardon, willing to render vp his
life, acknowledging his death to be deserued; and further saying, that if he
were ne­uer so much to be tortured, he deserued the same, and con­tentedly
embraced the same, that so his Maiesties iust wrath might be appeased.

Of all the people in generall, he heartily craued pardon, that he had beene a
Runnagate from their blessed Societie, heartily desiring their prayers vnto
Almighty God for him. And those from whom he had, by his deceitfull meanes,
and guiles, gotten away any mony, he to his power (of my know­ledge) laboured
to giue satisfaction, sorrowing that hee altogether was disabled, to doe what
his hearts desire was.

Thus (deare Country-men) I finding a wandring shéepe, and distressed soule,
wanting cure, and care, séeking, and earnestly destring to be brought home
againe, from whence he had strayed, I set vnto him my helping hand, and now
publish vnto thée, how in the sweet Pastures of Gods word, this wandring
shéepe, was directed, fed, and comforted, by praying sometimes, and meditating
at other times, on these sequent portions of Scripture, out of which, I thanke
God, he receiued great comfort, and we Gods Labourers, richly rewarded for the
same: That we confidently beléeue, our labour was not in vaine with him, but
wee haue brought home againe the lost Shéepe to Gods Church here on earth, and
to his triumphant Church in Heauen.

### 1.6. The prayers wherein he was exercised day and night.

O Lord my God, in thee doe I put my trust, let me neuer be confounded. Amen.

OOmnipotent, and most mercifuil God and Creator, great is thy mercy in mans
creation, for thy mercie ex­céedeth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=9) all thy
workes, in the mercifull preseruing of man, who without thy blessed ayde,
would suddainly come, and quickly slide to vtter confusion, didst not thou in
thy great mercy and prouidence daily preuent the same.

Behold me, I humbly pray thée, the worke of thy own hands, and looke vpon me,
with the eye of thy aboundant mercy, that so thereby thy wrath and fury which
iustly by my manifolde sinnes and transgressions I haue deserued, may be
appeased; the remembrance of the multitudes where­of afflicteth me so sorely,
that I can finde no peace or rest at, for they are a weight too heauie for me
to beare: I am ready to faint, and fall vnder them: O send me Lord Iesus power
from aboue, to helpe and support me, that I faint not, and finally fall vnder
them. Come vnto mee, O my swéet Sa­uiour, come quickly, and powre in, into
this distressed soule of mine, thy blessed baulme of thy mercy, O stablish my
vnconstant heart, and wandring thoughts, with the com­forts of thy frée
spirit: for in my selfe, O Lord my God, I finde no comfort at all, my
conscience doth so accuse me, and thy iudgements doe so affright me, that
without thou in thy aboundant mercy helpe (O Lord) I vtterly perish. Haue
mercy vpon me, O Lord, haue mercy vpon me, and accor­ding to the multitude of
thy mercies, doe away mine offen­ces: wash mee, and cleanse mee from all my
sinnes, make me a cleane heart I pray thée, and renue a right spirit with­in
me, and now let my poore distressed soule, with thy hea­uenly grace be
comforted, whose onely stay and refuge O Lord thou art, for whom haue I in
heauen (O Lord) but on­ly thée, and nothing here on earth doth my soule more
desire, or delight in, then in thee, and in thy sauing health. Forsake mee not
therefore, who thus flyeth to thee for succour and comfort, and vnder the
shadow of thy wings to be defended. O shelter me vnder the same, for who shall
worship thée in the pit or graue, then let my soule liue, and it shall for
euer praise thee in the congregation of thy Saints, in the land of the euer-
liuing.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=10)

### 1.7. Certaine deuout inward comforts by him conti­nually vttered and vsed.

GRant vnto me (O God) frée pardon of all my sinnes, and remember not the
sinnes of my youth: as my Ig­norance, pride, wantonnes, and lustes of the
flesh.

Grant vnto me Lord Iesus grace, at no time to dispaire or distrust of thy
fauour and mercy towards mée.

Grant vnto mée O my God, and send into my sad and di­stressed soule, a tast of
thy swéete mercy.

Grant vnto me, O swéete, and gracious Iesus, a willing minde, and heart to
loue thee onely, and grace to pray to thée faithfully.

Grant vnto me Father of mercy, thy gracious assistance, inable me to withstand
all the Deuils temptations.

Grant vnto mée, O thou the wel-spring and fountaine of all good desires,
grace, to put out of my minde, all worldly and vaine cogitations, which may
now hinder me in thy ser­uice, or in the meanes of my saluation.

Grant vnto me, O blessed Bridegroome of my soule, assu­rance heere, that I
shall be with thee this day, in thy King­dome of glory.

Grant vnto me now, O thou the life of my soule, that though now I am to dye
ignomiously, yet that I shall rise againe in the day of Resurrection most
gloriously, and be­holde thée in thy perfect glory.

### 1.8. A Prayer wherein hee was exercised.

O Father of mercy▪ and God of all consolation, whether shall I flia from thée,
oh where shall my poore distressed and sinfull soule féeke for peace, and
comfort thus perplexed? to come to thée the fountaine of all goodnes and
comfort, I dare not, for I haue sinned against thee onely, and committed many
most grieuous offences in thy presence, which maketh
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=10) me
detestable in thy sight, and to flye the same if that I could for feare of thy
heauy displeasure. To approach thy courts O Lord, to pray to thée for mercy,
or to praise thée O Lord I cannot tell how, for I haue béene so accustomed to
walke in all euill wayes, that now to begin to walke in thy wayes, I am not in
the least manner able, for my tongue is still tyed, my heart is still obdurate
and rebellious, my thoughts are wandring whilest I am in this Tabernacle of my
flesh, after the vanities of this world. Turne me O Lord my God vn­to thée,
and I shall be turned, conuert me vnto thée, and I shall be conuerted, call me
home againe vnto thée, and take me to thy mercy: oh teach me thy statutes, and
I will kéepe them euen to the end, vnty my tongue to praise thée, mollifie my
heart to loue and feare thée, direct and enlighten my will, memory, and
vnderstanding to delight and séeke thée, and to loue nothing more then thée,
and in thy seruice to be busied. Thy worke O Lord this onely is, fréely thou
giuest the same to whom thou pleasest, Oh make me my Lord and God I pray thée
in the aboundance of thy mercies, partaker of the same, whose multitude of
sinnes makes me thereof vn­worthy.

### 1.9. This Prayer he saide at the time of his Death.

His continuall prayer and hearty eiaculation.

O Lord haue mercy vpon me and saue mee, for in thee doe I onely put my trust.

O Thou the Sauiour of all Mankinde, and most merci­full Samaritane, to thée I
now flye, in the holes of thy wounds to be sheltred and defended, hearken I
most humbly pray thée, and incline thine eares vnto me, and for­sake me not
euen for thy mercyes sake, for my soule wholly trusteth in thée and thy sauing
health. Thy arrowes O Lord doe sticke fast in me, and of thy terrible
Iudgements I [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=11)
am sore affraid. As thou camest into the world, in the ful­nes of time to be a
Iesus to all Mankinde, come now and be my IESUS for thy ayde I lacke: as thou
camest into the world to be an aduocate for all mankinde, become mine now—I
pray thée. Pleade thou my cause O Lord, and let not my enemies triumph ouer
me, but ridde me and deliuer me out of the handes of my enemies euen for thy
mercy sake. Oh plead for my wickednes thy righteousnes; pleade for my
dis­obedience thy obedience; pleade for my pardon thy meritori­ous Death and
Passion; plead for my blessednes, thy accur­sednes; pleade for my life, thy
death; pleade for my weake­nes, thy all sufficiencie; pleade for my
wretchednes and mise­ry, to haue the long white Roabe of thy Innocency to
couer me withall, that I being therewith roabed, may beholde the glory of thy
Tabernacle and beauty of thy holy Temple, without which I cannot, nor shall
not be able to stand but appeare most vile. Thy former mercyes shewed to many
of thy seruants, O Lord imboldens me, to approach vnto thee and to lye at thy
gates of mercy, expecting thy comfortable answer. O come vnto me my Lord
Iesus, come quickly shew vnto me the light of thy countenance, and then I
shall be whole, accept now of my teares, and vnfained sorrow and contrition,
for that I haue offended so good and gracious a God: abandon and put out of my
minde, loue of the world and feare of death, and fixe my heart and thoughts
onely on thée, and thy sauing health: swéeten this bitter cup of death vnto
me, to make it acceptable and welcome, not fearing or dispairing thereof to
taste, but willingly to drinke it vp: O swéeten it with assurance now to my
soule, when this mo­mentary life of mine is fled away, to inioy thy
euerlasting glory which thou hast prepared for me in Iesus Christ, thy alone
Sonne and my onely Sauiour. O giue me now and sound into my eares, and assure
my heart, of the Théeues paradice, of Stephens vision, which is to see thy
onely Sonne my Sauiour sitting at thy right hand in glory. And now to thée O
Lord, of all Spirits as is most deue, and to thée a­lone belongeth, I am
prepared ioyfully and willingly, to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=11) giue and
render vnto thée this body and soule of mine which are thy due, and which of
thy blessed mercy, I receiued from thy blessed hands: Lord Iesu receiue them,
come Lord Iesus, hast thée vnto me, come O my God and make no long tarrying,
but méete me: I expect thy comming, Lord Iesu receiue me in mercy, Amen. And
these thy mercyes I craue in the mediation of my Sauiour, now faithfully
pray­ing and repeating his forme of prayer.

Our Father which art in Heauen, &c.

### 1.10. The portions of Scriptures whereon hee con­tinually meditated, after
these Prayers were ended.

The 8. Chap. to the Rom. in that he much delighted to read, in the 5. Chap. 2.
Epistle Cor: in the 4. Chap. first ge­nerall Epistle of Iohn, in the 4. Chap.
Hebrewes. 18 Chap. St Luke, the Parable of the poore and humble Publicane.
Plalme 6. 25. 26. 27. 28. 31. 32. 34. 35. 38. 40. 42. 43. 51. 55. 56. 86. Who
so is pleased to peruse these coated Scrip­tures, I hope, as they did yeelde
comfort to the dead, they shall no lesse bee thought worthy of the meditation
of the liuing.

I Must pay two Legacies which I promised vnto him I would, one to the right
Honourable Sir Henry Mounta­gue Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of England, his
humble thankes and hearty prayers to God, to requite and redouble his
blessings here and hereafter, for his Christian and reli­gious care of his
distressed soule, to séeke and send meanes, to comfort and saue the same,
praysing and attributing to God the glory, who by the weake meanes of our
Ministry, hath called and taken home now againe to his most blessed fould, his
wandring shéepe, which Honourable care and christian Industry of his, shall
remaine memorable in this world, and vndoubtedly rewarded by God in his
Kingdoms of glory.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=12)Another
Legacy bequeathed, to the right worthy, lear­ned, graue and Worshipfull Sir
Henry Yeluerton, his Ma­iesties Atturney Generall, to whome Mr. Francis
Robinson acknowledged himselfe very much bounden, in instructing, and
inlightning his vnderstanding in the letter of the Law, wherein he presumed of
his owne wit and vnderstanding to make euasion: but by his grauety and wisdome
he so confu­ted him, that hée to the glory of God being so manifestly
con­uinced, and shewed what a haynous fact he had done, pray­sed God for the
same, and prayed most heartily vnto God, to continue and to increase such
happy Guardians to his Ma­iesties peace, and weale publike of this whole
Realme.

### 1.11. His owne relation of the beginning and proceeding in his foule fact,
spoken the same morning a little before he went to his execution.

NOt long had hee béene acquainted with the fashions or Citie of London, for he
had not béene in London aboue foure times before that time he did put in
practise his dete­stable fact: his suites, places, and persons, were not of
meane degrée, such was his ambition: But to the Kings most excellent Maiestie
and his Royall Court hee wholy a­dressed himselfe, and by petition▪ and helpe
of others his Ma­iesties attendants, moued his Maiestie for a Commission and
protection, vnder his Maiesties hand, and great Seale of England, concerning
the reforming of the diuers abuses, of Uictualers, Maulsters and Usurers,
hauing not long before heard, a Petition was preferred for reformation of some
such abuses. He thereupon conceiued presently, that this was a fitting subiect
for him to worke on, to get thereby money to supply his wants▪ and to satisfie
his greedy minde▪ though he bought it in the end at a most deare price and
rate.

For the better contriuing and effecting of his determina tion and purpose, he
got an accomplice by name Morgan­ with whom he got first acquainted, at the
Swan at Charing­Crosse,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=12) and from
thence both of them remoued to the signe of the Mayden-head at Saint Giles in
the Fields, where hee tolde Morgan his Companion, his Designes were plotted,
and resolued of, what should be by him afterward put in ex­ecution, which
truly so it happened. And presuming too much vpon that small vnderstanding and
knowledge he had in the Law, of himselfe drew the forme of a Commission, and
thereinto inserted to make it beare the more validity, the names of diuers
worthy Attendants about his Maie­sties Court and most Royall person, to them
from his Maie­stie directed, in his Maiesties name to aske, cease, leuie, and
receiue in foure seuerall Shieres in this Kingdome, certaine seuerall summes
of money, according to the tenure of their Commission, to them from his
Maiestie directed.

This forged Commission being by him alone inuented, and trecherously deuised,
brought it to a Scriuener in Lon­don, where hee had the same ingrossed, and
without the knowledge or priuity of any, did put thereunto a counterfait great
Seale, for the true great Seale of England, and so by vertue thereof, though
none at all there was, did aske, leuie, and receiue at seuerall sittings in
Commission, though no lawfull authority he had thereunto, the summe of twenty
eight pounds and fiue pence deceitfully, of the Kings liege people. And this
he did for the space of a moneth continue and procéede, not thinking of the
all séeing eye of Almighty God, that would discouer him, and suddainly
confound him, and his most wicked deuice, whereof when he least imagi­ned, or
suspected, euen then bewrayed his treacherous heart and detestable fact.

After the time of his apprehension for this most detestable and foule fact,
behold how stedfastly he stoode in the Iustifi­cation of the same, and vsed
the name of a worthy Knight, Sir Robert Maxwell, to say he had his priuity and
help ther­in, (of which) he in the least manner was not acquainted; and for
which his most false and vniust aspersion on him, at the time of his death, on
his knées, and salt teares fast trick­ling downe, most humbly, and heartily
craued, his frée par­doning
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=13) of him for
the same: and said, it was the Diuels inticing of him, to doe what he did
(namely) that foule and filthy treacherous déede of his, and that which did
much af­flict and terrifie his soule, more then Death it selfe, whose grim
countenance he did behold so to accuse an innocent guilt­lesse, worshipfull,
and worthy Gentleman, that thereby himselfe who onely was guilty of that foule
fact, might be fréed; whereof God in his Iustice would not approue, nor be so
deluded, but brought him the plotter, contriuer, and actor of villany, to
receiue his iust reward for the same, that the mischiefe by him pretended, to
light on others, did at the last fall on his owne pate. And the net and snare
which hee had priuily layd, and secretly spread abroade to intrap ano­ther,
therein himselfe was ensnared.

And thus he concluded: Let all take héede, and beware of couetousnes, content
themselues with that they haue, la­bour honestly with their hands for their
owne liuing: for the honest and industrious Labourer, God will for euer
blesse, but they that doe trust in lying vanities, to get wealth by
de­ceitfull meanes and wiles, let them know, said hee, that though God for a
while forbeare them, yet his Iustice re­quires to render vengeance to them, as
iustly on me now he hath done.

Like a Lambe going to the slaughter so went he vnto his death, prepared before
to suffer the same, willingly, patient­ly, and ioyfully: and our confidence is
such of him, that he is receiued into the Fold of that most blessed heauenly
Flocke, whereof Iesus Christ, the great Shéepheard of vs all is the keeper and
defender, and into which number, the Lord Al­mighty in his aboundant mercy
giue grace to all, daily so to prepare themselues, that in the end they may be
found wor­thy thereof. Amen.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18873&page=13)

### 1.12. The conclusion.

THus deare Country-men▪ haue I exercised your pati­ence, and boldly presumed
to incurre your censures, for the zeale that I beare to the soules of men,
destring, and dai­ly hartily praying to Almighty God, that his downefall may
make all others wary, and carefull to flye sinne, the reward whereof, and to
the delighters therein, you haue heard. And although God in his mercy deferres
to punish, expecting mens conuersion, which if they doe not in his expected
time, hee payes home in the end, such their neglect of him, with most
fearefull and vnrecouerable downefalls.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Goodcole, Henry, 1586-1641.. Date: 1618  

