## (unknown project)

# Greenes ghost haunting conie-catchers wherein is set downe, the arte of
humouring. The arte of carrying stones. Will. St. lift. Ia. Fost. law. Ned
Bro. catch. and Blacke Robins kindnesse. With the conceits of Doctor Pinch-
backe a notable makeshift. Ten times more pleasant than anything yet published
of this matter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=1)

GREENES GHOST HAVNTING CONIE­CATCHERS. Wherein is set downe,

  * The Arte of Humouring.
  * The Arte of carrying Stones.
  * Will. St. Lift.
  * Ia. Fost. Law.
  * Ned Bro. Catch. and
  * Blacke Robins Kindnesse.

With the conceits of Doctor Pinch-backe a notable Makeshift. Ten times more
pleasant then any thing yet published of this matter. Non ad imitandum, sed ad
euitandum.

LONDON, Printed for R. Iackson, and I. North, and are to be sold in
Fleetstreete, a little aboue the Conduit. 1602.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=2)

## TO ALL GENTLEMEN, MER­chants, Apprentises, Farmers, and plaine countrimen,
health.

IT is most true, Gentlemen, and wo­full experience dayly teacheth vs, that the
more carefull Princes are in erecting & establishing good lawes, for the
rooting out of vice in the common wealth, the more repug­nant (the diuell
altogether predomi­nant ouer them) do euil disposed per­sons, caterpillers,
and the off-scumme of the world (and ther­fore to be reiected and
excommunicated from the fellowship of all honest men) oppose themselues
against God and good gouernement, and in steede of an honest and ciuill
cariage (which the Lawe prescribes them) betake them to a most hatefull,
vicious, and detestable life: Who, as they may well be compared to vipers,
most venimous and spitefull beasts, that for their venime and poison are hated
and shunned of all men, as most preiudiciall creatures: so these base people,
not once thinking of an honest course of life, trusting vpon their owne mother
wits, dayly deuise newe shifts and policies, to fleece the plaine dealing man,
and by that meanes growe in­to more hate amongst honest men, then do the hated
Iewes at this day: and the name of Conicatchers is so odious, that now a dayes
it is had vp, and vsed for an opprobrious name for euerie one that sheweth the
least occasion of deceit. The bookes that were not long ago set forth,
concerning Conie­catching and crosse-biting, and the discouerie of each (if
anie sparke of grace were) might haue beene so manie restraints
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=3) and bridles
to call them from that abominable life, but they that are giuen ouer to their
owne hearts lust, with all their might inueigh both against them and their
Authour.

I haue therefore, Gentlemen, as one inforced (amore patriae) taken in hand to
publish this little Pamphlet (which by a very friend came by a chance to my
hands, and adding somewhat of mine owne knowledge, and vpon verie credible
informa­tion) most necessarie in my mind for the good of the com­mon wealth,
both for all men to see, what grosse villanies are now practised in the bright
Sunne-shine, that thereby they may be forewarned to take heede how they
conuerse with such cosoning companions: as also a iust checke and controll to
such wicked liuers, that they perceiuing their goodnesse set abroch, may with
remorse and penitencie forsake their abo­minable course of life, and betake
them to a more honest and ciuill behauiour. If any with the spider heere seeke
to sucke poison, let such a one take heede, that in practising his villany he
chaunce commence Bachelor in Whittington Colledge, and so in good time take
his degrees and proceede Doctor, and thence with a solemne procession take
possession of do­ctor Stories cappe; to which some of the worshipfull
compa­nie of Conicatchers haue worthily heretofore attained.

In this Treatise (louing countrimen) you shall see what shifts this crue of
helhounds haue put in practise since the bookes of Conicatching came forth
vnder these names. viz. The Art of Humoring. The Art of carrying stones; W. St
Lift. Ia. lame. Ned Br. catch, and Blacke Robins kindnesse: Wher­in are
manifested the nature of Humorists, such as can insinu­ate themselues into
euerie mans companie: & as they see him addicted, so will they verse vpon him,
what policies they haue to purloine goods out of shops vnder the pretence of
plain­nesse, what shifts they haue to cosen poore Alewiues, by the art of
carrying stones, what inconuenience may come by fol­lowing slattering
strumpets, I know not I what should be the cause why so innumerable harlots
and Curtizans abide about London, but because that good lawes are not looked
vnto: is there not one appointed for the apprehending of such hell­moths,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=3) that eat a
man out of bodie & soule? And yet there be more notorious strumpets & their
mates about the Citie and the suburbs, then euer were before the Marshall was
appoin­ted: idle mates I meane, that vnder the habit of a Gentleman or seruing
man, think themselues free from the whip, although they can giue no honest
account of their life. I could wish, and so it is to be wished of euery honest
subiect, that Amasis lawe were receiued, who ordained that euerie man at the
yeares end should giue an account to the Magistrate how hee liued, and he that
did not so, or could not make an account of an honest life to be put to death
as a fellon, without fauor or par­don: What then should become of a number of
our vpstart gallants, that liue only by the sweate of other mens browes, and
are the decay of the sorwardest Gentlemen and best wits? Then should we haue
fewer conicatching strumpets, who are the verie causes of all the plagues that
happen to this flouri­shing common wealth. They are the destruction of so
manie Gentlemen in England. By them many Lordships come to ruine. What dangers
growe by dallying with such vnchast Li­bertines, and what inconuenience
followes by their inordinat Pleasures, let those that haue had wofull
experience and mai­ster Surgeon together testifie: nay, they not onely
indanger the bodie by lothsom diseases, but ingraue a perpetuall shame in the
forehead of the partie, and finally consume his soule and make him fit for the
diuell.

To leaue these base companions (that can by no wholsom counsell, nor aduised
perswasions bee disswaded from their lothsom kind of lise, nor called to any
honest course of liuing) in the dregges of their dishonesty. Would it please
the hono­rable and worshipfull of the land to take order for the cutting off
of these cosoners, and consuming cankers of this common wealth, they should
not only cause a blessing to be powred on this flourishing state, but haue the
prayers of euery good sub­iect for their prosperous health: and welfare. And
thus Gen­tlemen, I conclude with this farewell: God either conuert or confound
such base companions.

Yours to vse, S. R.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=4)

## To the Reader.

VSe and peruse not with a curious eye,

For Truth oft's blamde, yet neuer telleth lie.

I tell not I, what forraine men haue done,

But follow that which others haue begun.

No learned Clearke in Schooles that vse to write,

But Enuie makes their labours some to spite.

What then shall I, that write a homely stile,

Thinke but to haue a homely scoffing smile.

But these and those that either mocke or skorne,

Would they might weare (faire sight) Acteons horne.

But you kind friends, that loue your countries wealth,

Vouch of my labours, good fortune guide your health.

To pleasure most, and profit all's my end,

My greatest care to please both foe and friend.

Reade then kind friends, my trauell heere you haue,

I looke for nought, nought but your loues I craue.

## Table of contents

  * TO ALL GENTLEMEN, MERchants, Apprentises, Farmers, and plaine countrimen, health.
  * To the Reader.
  * 1\. GREENES GHOST haunting Conicatchers.
    * 1.1. How a Cheesemonger had his bag cut out of his Apo••• hanging before him.
    * 1.2. How a cosoning Life stole a cloake out of a Scriuenersshop.
    * 1.3. A slie tricke of Cosonage lately done in Cheapeside.
    * 1.4. How a man was cosoned in the euening by buying a guilt spoone.
    * 1.5. The Arte of carying stones.
    * 1.6. How a Carier of Norwich was made to carie stones.
    * 1.7. A Tale of a whore that crosbit a Gentleman of the Innesof Court.
    * 1.8. How a Curbar was drest with an vnsauourie perfume, and how a notable whore was crosbitten in her owne practise.
    * 1.9. A notable Scholerlike discourse vpon the nature of Dogges.
    * 1.10. How a Countrie Gentleman walking in Poules had his purse cut by a new kind of conueyance, and in the end by the like wilie beguily got it againe.
    * 1.11. A notable exploit performed by a Lift.
    * 1.12. How a Citizen was serued by a Curtizan.
  * 2\. THE NOTABLE, SLIE, and deceitfull pranks of Doctor Pinchbacke.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=4)

## 1\. GREENES GHOST haunting Conicatchers.

THere hath béene of late daies pub­lished two merrie and pithie Pam­phlets of
the arte of Conicatching: wherin the Author hath sufficiently expressed his
experiēce, as also his loue to his Countrie. Neuerthe­lesse with the Authors
leaue, I will ouerlooke some lawe tearmes ex­pressed in the first part of
Conicatching: whereunto, as the Author saith, is necessarilie required thrée
parties: The set­ter, the Verser, and the Barnacle. Indéed I haue heard some
retainers to this ancient trade dispute of his procéedings in this case, and
by them in a full Synode of quart pots it was thorowlie examined and
concluded, that there were no such names, as he hath set downe, nor anie
cheating Arte so christened as Conicatching. Marie, in effect there is the
like vnderhand traffique daylie vsed and experien­ced among some fewe start vp
Gallants disperst about the suburbs of London, who tearmes him that drawes the
fish to the bait, the Beater, and not the Setter: the Tauerne where they go,
the Bush, and the foole so caught, the Bird. As for Conicatching, they cleape
it Batfowling, the wine the Strap, and the cards the Limetwigs. Now for the
compas­sing of a woodcocke to worke on, and the fetching him into the wine
bench of his wracke, is right beating the bush. The good asse is he will be
dealt vpon, stouping to the lure if he be so wise as to kéep aloofe, a
Haggard: and he whom
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=5) he makes
Verser the Reiciuer, and the Barnacle the Pothunter.

But all this breakes no square, so long as we concurre in eodem subiecto: yet
I wish, that as he hath looked into these wicked actions opened therein, so he
had also looked into other grosse sinnes, which are séeded in the hearts of
sundrie persons. Extortion had béene a large theame to haue wrought vpon: and
with the Usurers bagges full of gold he might haue handled another pretie
Treatise: He might haue brought forth Justice weying bread, and the Baker
putting his eares in the ballance to make euen weight. He should haue
personated the Thames most piti­fully complaining, what monstrous hauocke the
Brew­ers make of her water, without all remorse or compassi­on: and how they
put in willowe leaues and broome buds into their woort in steed of hoppes. So
likewise a Christian exhortation to mother Bunch would not haue done amisse,
that she should not mixe lime with her Ale, to make it mightie, or cozen the
Quéenes liege people of their drink, by fubbing them off with these
[...]ender wasted blacke pots and Cannes, that will hold little more then a
[...]ring. A profitable Treatise might haue also béene published for such
companions to looke into, as for good fellowship will not sticke to lend two
or thrée false oathes to defeate the widdow and fatherlesse of  [...]ir right,
[...]ough in short space after they lose their eares for  [...]ir labour. A
perswasion against pride had beene veri [...] profitable: and an exhortati­on
against swearing had béene a thing commondable, if he had in a pleasant
[...]atise shewed the folly of yong. you [...]s and  [...]ole queanes; which
entring into the seruice of sundrie honest persons, continue there no longer
then they can cleanly conuay some sufficient cariage for their present
maintenance. Then had he done well, and perad­uenture giuen such light to
sundrie honest housholders, that they would be carefull what persons they
[...]ad receiued into their hou [...]s or put in trust about  [...]ir
businesse.

There  [...]ght haue also beene co [...]piled a d [...]able and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=5) pleasant Tr
[...]atise of the abuse committed by such as sell bottle ale, who to make it
fly vp to the top of the house at the first opening do put gunpowder into the
bottles while the ale is new. Then by stopping it close, make the people
beléeue it is the strength of the ale, when being truly  [...] ­ted it is
nothing indéed but the strength of the gunpowder that worketh the effect, to
the great heart-burning of the parties that drinke the  [...]ante. I would
haue had him touch the contrarietie of apparell, and set downe reasons to
dis­swade men from wearing French peake [...], because they are good for
nothing but to stab men, as also told the vse of the terrible cut, and the
Swallow tail [...] slash.

To leaue daliance and come to the matter. I will in­forme you what policies
haue béene practised since the books of Conicatching were set forth. These
Batfowlers or Conicatchers hauing lost a collo [...] of their liuing, by
communicating their secrets with babling companions, haue now inuented a newe
tricke to fetch in the pence. They disguise themselues like Apparitors or
Sumners, and come to a young Gentleman, Merchant, or old pinch­crust, as it
maie fall out, that hath gotten a maid, a mans daughter, or this widdow or
ordinarie woman with child, or at least haue béene more neere with them then
they should: and them they threaten with processe, citations, the whip, or the
white sheete at least, vntill they come to compositiō. The timorous soules
fearing to be made a by­word of shame to the whole Citie, bribe them with all
that euer they can rap and rend, to holde their peace, and saue their
honestie. They will vrge the strictnesse of their oath, and the danger of the
law in such cases of concealement, vntill they can sée them come off roundly:
then they will hamme and han [...]ke, and safe they are not euery bodie, and
so take their mony, and returne laughing in their sléeues, to thinke how they
cosoned them.

Within short time after they send another of their copes­mates after the same
sort, and he giues them the like pluck. And  [...] two or thrée one after the
other, shall neuer leaue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=6) a
[...]licting his ghost, till they haue made him as bare as a birds taile, so
as he hath not one pennie more to saue him from hanging, if néede were. A
monstrons abuse of autho­ritie, and hindrance to the courts of Justice, that
haue-the ouersight of such offences.

Other there be that do nothing but ride vp and downe the countrie, like yong
merchants a wooing, and they will marrie euerie moneth a new wife, & then
fleece-her of all she hath, that done run away, and learne where another
[...]ich widow dwelleth, and serue her after the same sort: so rounding
England, til they haue pickt vp their crummes, and got enough to maintaine
them all their life after.

But excéeding all these are the fine sleights of our Ita­lian humourists, who
being men for all companies, will by once conuersing with a man so draw him to
them, that he shall thinke nothing in the world too deare for them, nor once
be able to part them, vntill they haue spent all  [...] haue on them.

If he be lasciuiously addicted they haue Aretines Tables at his fingers ends,
to féede him on with new kinde of fil­thinesse: they will come in with Rowse
the French painter, and shew what an vnlawfull vainehe had in ba [...]drie:
not a whore nor a queane about the towne but they knowe, and can tell her
markes, and where, and with whom shée hosts.

If they sée you couetously bent, they will discourse won­ders of the
Philosophers stone, and make you beléeue they can make gold of goose-grease,
only you must be at some two or thrée hundred pound charge, or such a small
trifle, to helpe to set vp their stilles, and then you néede not care where
you beg your bread: for they will make you do little better, if you follow
their prescriptions.

Discourse with them of countries, they wi [...] set you on fire with tra
[...]elling: yea what place is it they will not sweare they hau [...] béene
in, and I warrant you tell such  [...] sound tale, as if it were all Gospell
they spake. Not a cor­ner in Fraunce but they can describe. Uenice,  [...]y?
It is nothing, for they haue intelligence of it euerie houre, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=6) at euerie
word will come in wi [...] Siado Curtizano, tell you such miracles of Madame
Padilia and Romana Impia, that you will be mad till you be out of England: &
if he sée you are caught with this baite he will make as though he will leaue
you, and faine businesse about the Court, or that such a Noble man sent for
him, when you will rather consent to robbe all your friends then bee seuered
from him one houre. If you request his companie to traueile, he will say, In
faith I cannot tell, I would sooner spend my life in your companie, then in
anie mans in England. But at this time I am not so prouided of monie as I
would: ther­fore I can make no promise: and if a man should aduen­ture vpon
such a iourney without money, it were misera­ble and base, and no man will
care for vs.  [...] monie say you (like a liberall young maister) take no care
for that, for I haue so much land, and I will sell it, my credit [...] is
worth so much, and I will vse it. I haue the kéeping of a Cosens chamber of
mine, which is an old counsellour, and he this vacation time is gone downe
into the countrie, we will breake vp his studie, rifle his chestes, diue into
the bottome of his bagges, but we will haue to serue our turne, rather then
saile we will sell his bookes, pawne his bedding & hangings, and make riddance
of all his house­hold stuffe to set vs packing. To this he listens a little,
and saith, These are some hopes yet, but if he should goe with you, and you
haue monie, and he none, you will do­minéere ouer him at your pleasure, & then
he were wel set vp to leaue such possibilities in Englād, & be made a slaue
in another countrie. With that you offer to part halfes with him, or put al
into his custody, before he should think you meant otherwise then wel with
him. He takes you at your offer, and promiseth to husband it so for you, that
you shall spend with the best, and yet not wast halfe so much as you do. Which
makes you (meaning simplie) to put him in trust, and giue him the purse. Then
all a boone voyage into the lowe Countries you trudge, and so traueile vp into
Italy, but per varios casus, & tot discrimina rerum, in a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=7) towne of
garrison he leaues you, runnes awaie with your monie, and makes you glad to
betake your selfe to pro­  [...]ant and become a Gentleman of a companie. If
he feare you will make after him he will change his name: and i [...] there be
anie Gentleman or other in the countrie, he will borrow his name and creepe
into his kinred, or it shall cost him a fall, and make him paie swéetly for it
in the end, if he take not the better heed. Thus will he be sure to haue one
Asse or other a foote to kéepe himselfe in pleasing.

There is no Arte but he will haue a superficiall sight into, and put downe
euerie man with talke: and when he hath vttred the most he can, make men b
[...]ue  [...] knowes ten times more then he will put into their heads, which
are secrets not to be made common to euerie one.

He will perswade you he hath twentie rece [...]s of loue powders, that he can
frame a ring with such a deuise, that if a wench put it on her finger she shal
not choose but follow you vp and downe she streetes.

If you haue an enemy that you would be  [...] rid of, he wi [...] teach you to
poison him with your verie lookes: to stand on the top of Poules with a burn
[...]g glasse in your h [...]nd, and cast the same with such a force on a mans
face that walkes vnder, that it shall  [...]rike him stark dead, more
violently then lightning.

To fill a letter full of néedles, which shall be laid after such a
mathematical order, that when he opens it, to whom it is sent, they shall
spring vp and  [...]ie into his bodie forci­bly, as if they had béene blowne
vp with gunpowder, or sent from a Ca [...]uers mouth like small shot.

To conclude, he will haue such probable reasons to pro­cure beléefe to his
lies, such a smooth tongue to deliuer them, and set them forth with such a
grace, that he should be a verie wise man did not swallow the Gudgin at his
hands.

In this sort haue I knowne sundrie young Gentle­men of England trained forth
to their owne destruction, which makes me the more willing to publish this
dis­course, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=7)
the better to forewarne other of such Batfowling companions; as also for the
rooting out of these insinua­ting moth-wormes that eate men out of their
substance vnseene, and are the decaie of the forwardest Gentlemen and best
wits.

How manis haue we about London, ye to the disgrace of Gentlemen liue gentleman
like of themselues hauing neither mony nor land, nor any lawful means to
maintain them, some by play, and then they go a mumming into the countrie all
the Christmas time with false dice, or if there be anie place where Gentlemen
or merchants frequent in the Citis, or anie towne corporate, thither will
they, either disguised like to yong merchants, or substantiall Citizens, and
draw them all drie that euer dealt with them.

There are some that doe nothing but walke vp and downe Paules, or come to
shops to buy wares, with bud­gets of writings vnder their armes: and these
will vrge talke with anie man about their sutes in law, and discourse vnto
them how these and these mens bands they haue for money, that are the chiefest
dealers in London, Norwich, Bristow, and such like places, and complaine that
they can not get one pennie. Why, if such a one  [...]oth owe it you (saith
some man that knowes him) I durst buy the debt of you, let me get it of him as
I can. O saith my budget­man, I haue his hand and seale to shewe, looke héere
els: and with that pluckes out a counterfeit band (as all other his writings
are) and reades it to him. Whereupon for halfe in halfe they presently
compound, and after that hee hath that ten pounds paid him for his band of
twentie be­sides the forfeiture, or so forth, he sayes, Faith these Law­yers
drinke me as drie as a sieue, and I haue mony to pay at such a daie, and I
doubt I shall not be able to compasse it: here are all the leases and
euidences of my land lying in such a shire, I would you would lend me fortie
pounds on them till the ne [...]t tearme, or for some sixe moneths, and then
either it shall be repayd with interest, or I will forfeit my whole
inheritāce, which is better worth then a hundred
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=8) marks a
yeare.

The wealthie retailer, citizen, merchant, Gentleman or young nouice that hath
store of crownes lying by him, gréedy of such a bargaine, thinking perhaps by
one clause or other to defeat him of all he hath, lends him the mony, and
takes a faire statute merchant of his lands before a Iudge, but when all comes
to all, he hath no more land in England then seuen foote in the Church yard,
neither is his inheritance either in Posse or Esse, then a paire of gallowes
in a gréene field, nor do anie such occupiers knowe him, much lesse owe him
anie money, whereby the couetous person is cheated fortie or fiftie pounds
thick at one clap.

Not vnlike to these are they, that comming to Ordina­ries about the Exchange
where Merchants do table for the most part, will saie they haue two or thrée
ships of coales late come from Newcastle, and wish they could light on a good
chapman that would deale for them altogether. What is your price, saith one?
What's your price, saith another? He holds them at the first at a very high
rate, and sets a good face on it, as though he had such traffique indéed, but
afterward comes downe so low, y• euerie man striues  [...]o shall giue him
earnest first: and ere he be aware, he hath fortie sh [...]ings clapt into his
hand, to assure the bargaine to some one of them. He puts it vnquietly, and b
[...]ds them inquire for him at such a signe and place, where he neuer came,
signifying also his name, when in troth he is but a co­soning companion, and
no such man to be found. Thus goes he cleare awaie with fortie shillings in
his purse for nothing, and they vnlike euer to sée him againe.

There is a certain kind of cosonage called horsecoursing, which is when a man
goes to the Cariers of Cambridge, Oxford, Burie or Norwich, or anie great
towne of trade, and hires a horse to ride downe with them, as these odde
companions wi [...] doe: and what doth me he, but as soone as he hath him,
[...]eps aside into some blind towne or other, and there lies till he haue
eaten him out lim by lim in wine and capons, and then when he can get no more
on him, he [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=8)
sends  [...] Carier word where he is; who in the end is faine to pay some
fiftie shillings or three pounds for his  [...]uals that hired him ere he can
haue him.  [...]ochester hackney­men do knowe what belongs to this trade, for
they haue béene often times  [...]ced by these ranke riders, who com­ming to a
towne with a cloke-bag of stones caried after them, as if they were men of
some worth, hire a horse to Canterburie, and ride quite away with him.

There be certaine mates called Faunguesis, who if they can find a fit Anui
[...] to strike on, will learne what acquain­tance he hath in the countrie,
and then they will come to him, and say, I am to doe commendations to you from
a friend of yours, and he gaue me this bowed sixe pence to drinke a quart of
wine with you for his sake: and if he goe to the tauerne, they  [...]ill not
onely make him paie for the wine, but for all he drinks in besides.

[...]o was one in Aldergate-stréete lately serued, who drawne to the tauerne
after such a like order called for a pinte of wine, the drawer brought it him,
and a goblet with it, and set them both on the table, and went his way:
[...]hie, quoth this Fawneguest, what a  [...]let hath the fel­low brought vs
here, it wil not hold halfe  [...] draught? So ho (quoth he) no attendance
giuen here?  [...]e carie it to him my selfe, since no body will come: for of
all things I loue not to drinke in these squirting cups, so downe the staires,
forth of the doores he goes with the goblet vnder his cloake, and left his
newe acquaintance and small remembrance to paie thrée pound for a thrée-penie
shot.

Such Fawneguests were they, that méeting a prentise, who had béene to receiue
a hundred pound for his master, sodainly in the middest of Cheapside in the
daie time, and open market stept to him, as if they had bin familiarly
ac­quainted with him, and sodainly cast the hinder skirt of his cloake ouer
his face, making as though they had  [...] with him, and séeming to  [...]ust
their cold hands in his necke, one of them thratled him so sore by the wind-
pipe, that he could make no noise, but sovainly sunke to the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=9) ground mu
[...]ed in his cloke, while the other took from him the bagge with the money
which he had vnder his arme, which done, they ranne away laughing, as if that
the déede were done in  [...]est.

Soone after the market folks and people passing by to & fro perceiuing the
youth lie still on the ground & not stir vp, stepped to him, and séeing in
what state he was, rubbed and chafed him, and gaue him Aqua vitae, so that
soone after he came againe to himself: then looking about him, & séeing the
people so gathered together, he cried vnto them, O, where's my money! They
wondring to heare him talke of mony, told him both how his companions left
him, and they found him, whereby the people knowing how he was deceiued, made
a [...]er them, but they were neuer heard of till this day.

But these are Gentlemen Batfowlers in comparison of the common rablement of
Cutpurses and pickpockets, and no man that sées them but would imagine them to
be Caualiers of verie good sort. Marie there be a band of more néedy mates,
called Terme [...]s, who trauell all the yeere from  [...]aire to faire, and
haue great doing in Westminster hall. These are the Nips and Foists; whereof
the first part of Conicatching entreateth, and these haue their cloyers and
followers, which are verie troublesome to them, for they can no sooner draw a
bung but these come in for their tenths, which they generally tearm snapping,
or snappage.

Now if the Cutpurse denie snappage, his cloyer or follower forthwith boyles
him, that is, bewrayes hi [...], or seazeth on h [...]s cloake, which the Nip
dares not withstand, so Richard Farrie a notable Lift of sixtie yeares of age
was serued, who beeing dogged or followed by a Cloyer called Iohn Gibson, who
hauing séene him pierce  [...] hogshed in the beginning of a faire challenged
him for snappage: which old Farrie denied, because Gibsons wife (as hee then
said) was a pickpocket, and yet would part w [...]th nothing. Then did Gibson
sweare that he shuld not buy one peniworth of ware that day (which is the
right cutpurse  [...]ase of get­ting
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=9) a purchase)
and thereupon he shadowed him vp and downe, and mard his market quite, as hee
had before promised.

In reuenge whereof the said Richard Farrie at Way­hill faire last, hearing
where Gibson had p [...]osned a purse with thirtéene nobles in it, sent
alustie  [...]ellow of his prosession, a yoong dealer in the arte of cloying
or follow­ing named Iames Roades, that was since hanged at Dor­chester, who
being apparelled like a seruingman, came to demaund his mistresse purse of
Gibson, which he said he saw him vnlawfully take awaie, as if indéed he had
béene the Gentlewomans man that had the gléeke. Which Gib­son at the first
vtterly denied, but afterward being further threatned with danger of his life,
yeelded the purchase vn­to Roades, which was immediatelie shared betw [...]ne
him and old Farrie.

This thing s [...]ne after came to Gibsons eare, who was throughly laughed to
scorne for his labour.

Manie there be of these wicked persons, and also lew [...] Officers who like
shadowes or cloyers, do nothing all day long but follow the Lifts vp and
downe, pinc [...]ing them for snappage: and not one of them that hath the
right dex­teritis in his  [...]ngers, but they know, & will conceale and
patronize if néede requir [...]. Marie, if ther [...] be a  [...], that hath
not made hims [...]lfe knowne to their congregation, hée shall soone be smelt
out, and haue no remission, unl [...] [...]ée purchase it by  [...] [...].

These Cutpurses of Sturbridge sell their lugg [...]ge commonly at a towne
called Bot [...]am, where they kéepe their hall at an odde house, bowzing and
quaffing, and ha [...] their tr [...]es attendant vpon them so  [...] as may
be.

### 1.1. How a Cheesemonger had his bag cut out of his Apo [...] hanging
before him.

AT this  [...]a [...]e it was, thougt long  [...] that  [...] [...] monger had
h [...] pocket cut out of his apo [...],  [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=10) all the
whole Colledge of Cutpurses had assayed, which none but one could bring to
passe, and he indéed was a doctor in his arte: for going to the Chéesemongers
boothe to buy a chéese, he gaue him monie for one of the greatest, and desired
him to cut it in péeces, and put it behind him in the cape of his cloake. He
did so, and the  [...] he was thrusting it in, hee cut his rocket with twelue
pounds out of his apron before him: for which dred [...] he liueth re­no
[...]ed in the Cutpurse chronicles,  [...] for his sake they yearely make a
feast, and drinke to the soule of his decea­sed carkasse.

There be diuers sorts of Nips and Foysts both of the citie  [...]d countrie:
these cannot one abide the other, but are at deadly hatred, and will boyle and
discouer one another, by reason one is hindrance to the other. And these the
for­mer bookes haue omitted. There are also sundrie other Lawes, not
heretofore spoken of, namely Iames Fosters Law, or Iames Fosters Li [...]:
which grewe thus.

### 1.2. How a cosoning Life stole a cloake out of a Scriuenersshop.

THis fellow came into a Scriueners shop to haue a letter wr [...]ten to his
wiues mother, signifying that his wife was run  [...]waie with another knaue,
and had  [...] awaie all that he had, and that he had rather be han­ged then
be troubled anie longer with such a whore. But it must  [...]be written in
haste, for his owne father doth carie it, and he goes awaie straight. All the
while he is tel­ling his tale, he cast a l [...]ing  [...]ye about the shop,
to see if there  [...] [...] a cloake vpon a by-settle, or  [...] other  [...]
that he might transport vnséene vnder his owne cloak. By chance  [...] espied
one, so he lea [...] against the wall where it lay, and with his hands behind
him, he gathered it vp cleanly by little and little:  [...]en sodainly
starting vp,  [...] [...] [...] my father that would carie it, and I will
[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=10) he with all
spéed, hauing the cloake vnder his arme, cry­ing, Ho father, father, leauing
the Scriuener yet writing his letter, who mist not his cloake till a great
while after, that he saw him not returne againe.

There is a cunninger kind of List, when a Batfowler walking in an euening in
the stréetes, will faine he hath let fall a ring or a Iewell, and come to a
shop well furni­shed with wares, and desire the prentise of the house to lend
his candle to looke it: he suspecteth no guile, lends it him: and the
Batfowler goes poaring vp and downe by the doores, as if he had lost something
in déed, by and by he lets the candle fal to and it goes out. Now I pray you
good yong man, saith he, do so much as light me this candle a­gaine: so goes
the fellow in to light the candle, while hee steales what he will out of the
shop, and gets him going while the light commeth.

There is a Lift called Will. St. Lift, whose maner is to go vp and downe to
Faires in a blew coate, sometimes in his doublet and hose, and sometimes in a
cloake, which commonly he puts off when he comes thither: this fellow waiteth
diligently when any rich yeoman, Gentleman, or gentlewoman goes into an Inne
to laie vp his cloak, capcase, sauegard, Portmantua or any other luggage, so
following them, marks to whom they are deliuered: then comes he within halfe
an houre after puffing and blow­ing for the cloake, capcase, portmantua,
sword, or such like, and in his maisters name demandeth it, giuing the wife,
maid, tapster, hostler, or some of the house two pence or a groate for laying
it vp. Which hauing receiued, he is soone gone, and neuer returneth. This
fellow will sometime stand bareheaded, and offer to hold a Gentlemans stirop,
and verie diligently attend vpon him when he alighteth at anie great Inne, and
séemeth so seruiceable, as if he were an hostler or chamberlaine belonging to
the house: yea and sometimes follow him out of doores as his man, and attend
vpon him to the Faire very orderly: within halfe an houre after, when he sées
his new maister is so
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=11) bu [...]e in
the Faire, that he cannot hastily returne to his lodging before him, he will
come backe to the Inne run­ning, and tell them his Maister hath sent him to
them for his clokebag or Portmantua in all haste: for he is vpon paiment of
money, and must néeds haue it. They thinking him verllie to be the Gentlemans
man, because at his comming he was so necessarie about him, they deliuer vnto
him whatsoeuer the Gentleman left with them, who notwithstanding when the true
owner commeth, they are  [...]aine to answer it out of their owne purses.

### 1.3. A slie tricke of Cosonage lately done in Cheapeside.

BEsides this, there is a kind of Lift called Chopchain, as when a Gentleman
like a batfowler hath hired a chain for a day or two vpon his credit, or hath
some of his friends bound for the restoring of it againe, goes to S. Martines,
and buyes for a little money another copper chaine, as like it as ma [...]e
be: then comes he to the Goldsmith, and vpon the right chaine offers to borrow
twentie pounds: the Goldsmi [...] toucheth it to sée if it be counterfeit or
no:  [...]en finding it good, he tendereth him his money: which the  [...] he
is doing, and that both money and chaine lies yet vpon the  [...], what doth
me  [...], but  [...]mbles and plaies with the linkes carelesly, as if he
minded another matter, so by a fine tricke of Legerde maine gathers it vp into
his hand & chops the copper chaine in place, leauing him that pawne for his
twentie pounds.

### 1.4. How a man was cosoned in the euening by buying a guilt spoone.

VVHilest I was writing this, I was giuen to vn­derstand of another like
exploit nothing  [...] to any of the former. A fellowe like a clowne that knew
all points in his tables, and had béene maister of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=11) his trade
manie yeares together, walking through Sil­uer stréete in London suddenly in
the dark spurned a faire gilt spoone (as it séemed) being wrapt vp in a paper,
which before he purposely let fall: the people thinking some other had lost
it, and that it had béene his good luck aboue the rest to find it, gan to
flocke about him for to looke on it, and ad­mired his fortune in méeting with
it, hee counterfeiting the simple foole as well as he could: Now a Gods will
what shall I do with such a Gugaw? would some other bo­die had found it for
me, for I know not what it is good for. Why, said one of the standers by, wilt
thou take money for it? I, quoth he, I would I had a crowne for it. And I will
come somwhat néere you, saith the other, for thou shalt haue all the money in
my purse, which is foure shillings, so forth he drewe his purse, and gaue him
the money. And verie well content with the bargaiue, he put it vp, and said I
marie, this money will doe me more good then twentie spoones, and let them
kéepe such toies that list, for I had rather haue one groat in my purse then a
cart loade of such trumperie. So away he went laughing in hi [...] sléeue, to
thinke how he had cosoned him that thought to ouer­reach him: & he that was so
cosoned, as it were triumphing at his bargaine, could neuer looke enough on
the spoone, but went presently and caried it to the Goldsmith, to know what it
was worth. Birlady sir when he came thither, the spoone was found to be but
brasse faire gilded ouer, and worth but seuen pence at the: most, if he should
sell it, which was a heauie cooling card to his heart, and made him sweare,
that for that spoones sake he would neuer be in his plate againe while he
liued.

Thus euerie daie they haue new inuentions for their villanies, and as often as
fashions alter, so often do they alter their stratagems, studying as much how
to compasse a poore mans purse, as the Prince of Parma did to win a towne.
Neither is this  [...]neselling the gainfullest of their artes, although in
one day they made away a dozen so. I but it is a tricke by the waie for a
supper or a breake­fas [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=12) fast, which
no man at the first can descrie. Ouerpassing this catalogue of Lifts and
Cutpurses, Gentlemen, I will acquaint you with a strange newe deuised arte of
stone-carying, wherein is contained the right vse of the chalke and the poast,
as also a necessarie caue ate for vi­ctuallers and nickpots, how to beware of
such insinua­ting companions.

### 1.5. The Arte of carying stones.

FIrst and foremost you must note, that leauing an Ale­wife in the lurch, is
termed making her carie stones,  [...]ich stones be those great Oes in chalke
that stand be­hind the doore: the weight of euerie one of which is so great
that as manie  [...]hillings as there be, so many times shée cries O, as
groning vnder the waight thereof. Now sir, of these Oes twentie shillings make
a lust loade, and tenne pound a bargeful. But here lies the cunning, how to
com­passe an honest A [...]e that will vndertake such a burthen: first this is
a generall precept amongst them, that he must be some odde drunken companion
that they deale vpon, and his wife a good wench, that so she may bee fallen in
wi [...], and wipe off her guests scores, if so he haue no monie to discharge
it: a thing that manie women of that kind will willingly do to haue sport and
saue their honestie. Yet if this cannot conueniently be brought to passe, or
that in, respect of her age she is not worth the taking vp, then will they be
sure their goodman hoast must be a certaine kind of bawd, or a receiuer of
cutpurses, pickpockets, or such like, whereby it so fals out, that if he and
they square about crownes, they may stop his mouth with threatning to be­traie
him to the Beadle of Bridewell, or telling Hind of  [...]ewgate what
hospitalitie he kéepes. Nay further, they will obserue if he a [...] anie time
raile against ante seuere Iustice that hath the punishment of such notorious
per­sons, and if he do (as in some drunken humour or other he will ouershoote
himselfe in that kind) then will they con­ceale
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=12) it, neuer
disccoer it, but do [...]néere ouer them, thro [...] the pots against the
wall, for he and his house is forfeit vn­to them. Againe, it maie so happen
that hospes meus maie be an old seruingman, who hath belonged in his daies to
some famous recusant that hath long since broke vp house, and now being turned
out of seruice, he hath no trade to liue on, but must marie a whore, and kéepe
victualling  [...]i­ther in Westminster, or in the suburbs of London. Then co
[...] a hoope, they are better then euer they were. For if he be of the right
stampe he will be exclaiming against the state, or those that héepe his
maister, or he will enter into commendations of the old Religion: and this is
the onely thing they desire, th [...]y neuer wish a finer fellow to féed on. A
Gods name let him set forth his béefe and brewes, and trudge euerie day to the
market to buy Capons & rabbets: for if they run neuer so much in his debt, if
they tell him of a purseuant, he will neuer threaten thē with a sergeant. A
number more of these obseruations do appertaine to stone carying, as namely at
their first comming to th [...]ir lodg­ing they bee as frée as an Emperour,
and draw all the ac­quaintance that they can procure to spend their money
there before another place, so that the host and hostesse may conceiue great
matter of hope of hauing their house cu­stomed by their lying in it, and eate
no meat but haue ei­ther the good man or the good wife still with him at
dinner or supper, which will plucke the stones on his shoulders the faster, if
so he suffer his guests to run on the score. And this in anie case they set
downe for a generall rule, that they lie not aboue two moneths in one place,
for longer the ale­score is not able to hold out, and the poore man
ouerpressed so excessiuely, in a malecontent humour will rather grow
desperate, and not care for anie danger they can bring him to, then suffer
more then flesh and bloud can endure, or not rather haue his will on them for
vsing him so badly.

How say you my maisters, you thinke there is no de­ceit in a pot of ale, and
that there are no cosoners but Co­nicatchers, but that's not so, for London is
a lickpenis, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=13) euerie man
hash not a mint in his pocket  [...]at lines in it, some must practise
witcraft, that ha [...]e not the gift in kée­ping a lanes end with a sword and
a buckler, or at the least are so crazed with the Italian bone-ache, that they
ar [...] a­fraid to bee crusht in péeces, if they should earne their li­uing
in a crowde. But to be briefe, I will tell you a n [...]rie storie how this
name of Stone-carying first came vp, and thus it followeth.

### 1.6. How a Carier of Norwich was made to carie stones.

A Gentlewoman that made a shew as if she had béene of good credit, came to the
carier of Norwich, and told him shee was to remoue houshold, and went to dwell
in the countrie, wherfore she craued his friendship in safe trans­porting of
her things to Norwich: & so it is (quoth she) that most of my substance
consists in linnen, money, Iewels, and plate, which I put altogether in a
great chest, which she brought thither: As for other trash Ile neuer trouble
my selfe wish remouing. I pray you haue a great care to it that it bee safely
laid in the middest of your cart, wher [...] théeues maie not easily come at
it,  [...] that it be kept from raine or wet in anie case, promising to
content him for the cariage with more then ordinarie  [...]. After it was
séene to come to thrée hundred weight, be laid it vp imme­diately in his
carte, nor would she depart till she saw it safe packed. About an houre after
she came to the carier again, telling him that she was afraid she should be
constrained to haue recourse to her chest, by reason she had a few tri­fles to
buy ere she departed,  [...]d that she wanted som [...] [...]ue or sixe pound.
The Carier loa [...] to vnload for so small a matter, bid her take no care for
money, for what she née­ded she should haue of him, till she came downe into
the co [...]ntrey. So fire pounds  [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] with him she
goes with her man as  [...] [...] [...] [...] be. But com­ming to  [...],
[...] [...] [...] [...],  [...] [...] [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=13) [...]er no
more: Home went the Carier, and laid vp the chest verie safe in his
storehouse, daily looking when the Gentle­woman would come for it. After a
moneth was past, and hearing no words of her, fearing he was co [...]en, he
sent for the Constable and sundrie other of his neighbours, and before them
brake vp the chest, finding nothing in it but small soft fréestone lapped in
straw, mixt wi [...] Flints and such like stuffe, beeing very speciall things
to giue the Ca­rier his loading. Alas, kind man, this was but heauie ti­dings
for him: for besides the money that he had laid out of his purse, he lost the
cariage of other luggage, which would haue returned him greater profit. Yet
could not this nor ten times as much vndoe him, but setting light of it, in a
merie humour he reported to some of his friends the circumstance of all his
cariage of stones. And euer since the iest hath beene taken vp by odde
companions and Ale-knights.

I would bee loth by this my publisht Discoueri [...] to corrupt the simple, or
teach them knauerie by my book, that els would haue béene honest, if they had
neuer séene them: for that were all one as if a Chirurgion that teacheth men
what the plague is, that they might eschew it, should bring his patient that
hath a plague sore, into the market place, and there lance it, whereby all men
that looke on, in stéed of learning to auoid it, should be most dangerously
infected with it. But my meaning in this is, but to chase the game which
others haue rowsed; and execute them outright whi [...] Conicatching only hath
branded: and although I do not spend manie leaués in inueighing against the
vices which I reckon vp, or time and paper in vrging their o [...] ­ousnesse
so far as I might: yet you must not thinke, but I hate them as  [...]dly as
any, and to make manifest my ha­tred to them, haue vnderlooke this Treatise.
But imagine the Reader to be of this wisdome and discretion, that hea­ring
some laid open, he can discerne it to be sinne, and can so detest it, though
he be not cloid with a common place of exhortation. And sooth to say, I thinke
euery man to bee of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=14) my mind,
that when they sée a fellow leape from the subiect he is handling, to disswade
them by stale arguments from the thing they alreadie detest, they should skip
it ouer, and neuer reade it, ga [...]cope him at the next turning point to his
text.

To dismisse this parenth [...]sis and returne to circa quod. I care not since
this occasion of Stone-carying hath brought me from talking of the cosonage of
men to the trea [...]erous sub [...]ie of women if I rehearse you a tale or
two  [...]ore of Cr [...]ngs lately  [...]one by such detesta­ble strumpets.

### 1.7. A Tale of a whore that crosbit a Gentleman of the Innesof Court.

A Certaine queane belonging to a close Nunnerie a­bout Clarkenwell, lighting
in the company of a yong Punie of the Innes of Court, trained him home with
her to her hospitall: and there couenanting for so much to giue  [...]im his
[...]seroome all night. To bed they went together like man and wife. At
midnight a crue of her copel­mates kept a knocking and busling at the doore.
She star­ting sodainly out of her sléepe, arose and went to the win­dow to
looke out: wherewith she crying out to him, said, that a Justice was at the
doore with a companie of billes, and came to search for a seminarie Priest,
and that there was no remedie but she must open vnto them: wherefore either he
must rise and locke himselfe in a studie that was hard by, or they should be
both caried to Bridewell. The poore silly youth in a trance, as one new start
out of sléep, and that knew not where he was, suffered her to leade him
whither she would, who hastily thrust him into th [...] studie, and there
locked him, and went to let them in. Then entred Sim Swashbuckler, Captaine
Gogswounds, and Lawrence Longsword-man, with their appurtenances, made
inquirie as if they had béene Officers indéed, for a young Seminarie Priest
that should be lodged there that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=14) She simpered
it, and made curtesie, & spake reuerently vn­to them, as if she had neuer
seene them before, and that they had beene such as they séemed, and told them
she know of none such, and that none lay there but her selfe.  [...] that
through signes that shee made, they spied where his clothes were fallen downe
betwéene the chest and the wall: Then they began to raile vpon her, and call
her a thous [...]nde whoores, saying they would make her an example, I mary
would they, and vse her like an Infidell for her iying, nor would they stand
searching any longer, but shee should be constrained to bring him forth: And
that they might bee sure he should not start, they would carie away his
clothes with them. As for the closet, because it was a Gentlemans out of the
towne, they would not rashly breake it open, but they would set watch and ward
about the house till the morning, by which time they would resolue further
what to do. So out of doores go they with his clothes, doublet,  [...]ose,
hat, rapier, dagger, shooes, stockings, and twentie marks that he had in his
sléeue, which he was to pay vpon a band the next day for his father, to a
merchant in Can­ning str [...]te, and le [...] Nicholas Nouice staruing and
qua­king in that doghole. The morning grew on, and yet she yong  [...], though
he was almost frozen to death, stood still and durst not stirre, till at
length the good wise of the house came and let him out, and bad him shift for
him­selfe, for the house was so  [...], that it was not possible for him to
escape,  [...] that she was vtterly vndone through his comming thither. Aster
manie words it grew to this vp­shot; that he must g [...]ue her a ring worth
thirtie shillings, which he then had on his  [...]nger, onely to helpe him out
at a backe doore, and in so doing she would lend him a blan­ket to cast about
him. Which béeing perfourmed, like an Irish begger he departed on the
backeside of the fieldes to his chamber, vowing neuer to pay so déere for one
nights lodging during his life.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=15)

### 1.8. How a Curbar was drest with an vnsauourie perfume, and how a notable
whore was crosbit­ten in her owne practise.

A Notable whoore of late daies compact with a hooker,  [...]om conicatching
English cals Curbar, bargained with a countrie Gentleman or Tearmer aforesaid,
to tell her tales in her eare all night: & according to appointment he did so.
The Gentleman hauing  [...]pt, and readie to go to bed, she willed him to lay
his clothes in the windowe, for (quoth she) we are so troubled with rats in
this place (which was in Peticote lane) that wee cannot lay any thing out of
our hands, but they will in one night be gnawne to pée­ces, and made worth
nothing: but her intent was this, that the Curbar with his crome might the
more Conueni­ently reach them; not that she cared so much for his appa­rell,
as for his purse, which she knew was we [...] stored wi [...] crownes, and lay
in the sleeue of his doublet: whereupon he was ruled by her, and so entred the
lists. Within two houres after, he beeing sore troubled with a laske, rose vp
and made a double vse of his chamberpot, which going to throw it out at the
window, he remoued the clothes from before it, and set it in the place till he
had opened the case­ment. At that instant the spring of the window leapt open
of the one accord. Whereat being amazed, he  [...]ept backe with a trice,
leauing the chamberpot standing still:  [...]en fearing the diuell had béene
át hand, by and by he spied  [...] faire iron instrument like a nut came
marching in at the window verie solemnly, which in stéede of the doublet and
the hose that he ferretted for, arrested that homely seruice in the member
vessell, and pluckt goodman Jordan with all his contents down pat vpon the
Corbars head and shoul­  [...]ders. Neuer was gentle Angler so drest: for his
face, his necke and apparell were all besmeared with the soft Sir­reuerence,
so that I warrant you hee stunke worse then a Jakes-farmer. The Gentleman
hearing one crie out,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=15) and séeing
his messe altogether thus strongly taken away, began to gather courage to him,
and looked out to sée what it was: where, to his no small contentment hee
might be­hold the Curbar lying along almost brained, almost drow­ned, and well
neere poisoned with the tragicall euent of the pispot: whereat he laughed
merily, and suspecting his Leman to haue a share in that conspiracy, and that
for ten pounds it was her motion to haue him l [...]e his clothes in the
windowe, to the end he might haue lost them and his money, she being a sléepe
in the bed all this while, he qui­etly remoued his owne apparell, tooke her
gowne and peti­coat and laid them in the steed. Forthwith the Curbar reui­ued,
in came the hooke againe verie manerlie, and clapt hold on those parcels,
which together went downe with a witnesse. All which consorting to his wish,
he went round to bed, and in the morning stole awaie early, neither pay­ing da
[...]e Lecherie for her hire, nor leauing her one ragge to put on.

Here was wilie beguily rightly acted, & an aged Ram­palion put besides her
schoole-trickes. But simply, these Crosbiters are necessarie instruments now
and then to ta [...]e such wanton youths, as will not let a maid or a wife
passe a long the stréetes but they will be medling with her: what they do they
learne of the tumbler, who lies squat in the brakes till the Conie be come
forth out of her burrow, and gone a gossipping ouer the way to her next
neighbors, & then he goes betwéen her and home, and as she returneth with two
or thr [...], fleshly minded Rabbets or Simplers with them, with whom it maie
be she hath made a bargain to go a bucking, then out  [...]ies the tumbler
like y• crosbiter & seazeth on them all for his praie. I maruell that the book
of Conicatching had not him vp in his table, since by his first example he
corrupted the Christian people. But you will say, he is animal irrationale,
and therefore to be borne withall, because he doth but his kind. Kind me no
kind, there is more knauerie in Cauilier Canis then you are a­ware of, as you
shall perceiue by his discourse following.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=16)

### 1.9. A notable Scholerlike discourse vpon the nature of Dogges.

NOw Gentlemen, will you giue me leaue to dallie a little for your further
recreation, & I will proue vnto you that a dogge is a dangerous man, and not
to be dealt withall: yea he is such a kind of creature that he may well be
master and gouernour ouer all ordinary beasts: for first and formost, there is
no man of experience that will denie but dogs do excell in outward sence, for
they will smell bet­ter then we, and therby hunt the game when they sée it
not. Besides, they get the fight of it better then we, and are wonderfull
quicke of hearing. But let vs come to speech, which is either inward or
outward. Now that they haue outward spéech I make no question, although we
cannot vnderstand them, for they bark as good old Saron as may be; yea they
haue it in more daintie maner thā we, for they haue one kind of voice in the
chase, and another when they are beaten, and another when they fight. That
they haue the inward spéech of mind, which is chiefly conuersant in those
things which agrée with our nature, or are most a­gainst it, in knowing those
things which stand vs most in steed, & attaining those vertues which belong to
our pro­per life, and are m [...]st conuersant in our affections, thus I
proue; first and formost he chooseth those things that are cōmodious vnto
him, and shunneth the contrarie: He kno­weth what is good for his diet, and
seeketh about for it. At the sight of a whip he ranneth away like a theef from
a hue and crie. Neither is he an idle fellow that liues like a tren­  [...]her
Flie vpon the sweat of other mens browes, but hath naturallie a trade to get
his liuing by, as namely the arte of hunting and Conicatching, which these
late books go a­bout to discredit. Yea, there be of them as of men of all
oc­cupations, some Cariers, and they will fetch; some water­men, and they will
diue and swim when you bid them; some butchers, and they will kill shéepe;
some cookes, and they turne the spit. Neither are they void of vertue, for if
that be [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=16)
Justice that giues euery one his deserts, out of doubt dog [...] are not
desttrute of it: for they fawne vpon their familiar friends and acquaintance;
they defend those from danger that haue deserued well of them, and reuenge
them of strangers, and such as either haue, or go about to do them iniurie.
Then if they haue Justice, they haue all the ver­tues, since this is an Axioma
in Philosophy, that one ver­tue cannot be separated from another.

Further, we see they are full of magnanimitie, in in­countring their enemies.
They are wise, as Homer wit­nesseth, who entreating of the returne of Vlysles
to his owne house, affirmeth that all his houshold had forgotten him but his
dogge Argus, and him neither could Pallas by her s [...]btill arte deceiue in
the alteration of his body, nor his twentie yeares absence in his beggers
wéeds delude a­nie whit, but he stil retained his forme in his fantasie, which
as it appeared was better then any mans of that time.

According to Chrysippus, they are not ignorant of that excellent facultie of
Logicke, for he saith that a dogge by canuasing and study doth obtaine the
knowledge to distin­guish betwéene thrée seuerall things, as for example,
where three  [...] méete, and of these thrée hash staid at two of them, by
which he perceiueth the game hath not gone, pre­sently without more adoe hee
runneth violently on the third wa [...]e: which doth argue (saith Chrysippus)
as if hee should reason thus. Either hee went this way, or that way, or yonder
waie: but neither that waie, nor yonder waie, therefore this way. Againe, when
they are sicke, they knowe what disease they haue, and deuise howe they may
ease themselues of their griefe; if one strike them in­to the flesh with a
stake, this policy they vse to get it out. They traile one of their feet vpō
[...] ground, and gnaweth the flesh where the wound is round about with their
téeth, vntill they haue drawne it cleane out. If they chaunce to haue anie
vlcer, because vlcers kept foute are hardlie cu­red, they licke the sore with
their tongues, and keepe it cleane. And wonderfull well doe they obserue the
pre­cept [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=17) of
Hippocrates that the onel [...]e medicine for the fo [...]e is to rest, for if
they haue an [...]e hurt in their feete, they beare them vp, and as much as
lies in them, take care they be not stirred: when vnprofitable humours trouble
them, they eate an hearbe, whereby they vomite vp all  [...]hat is offen­siue
vnto them, and so recouers their health againe. How thinke you my masters, are
these vnreasonable creatures, that haue all this naturall reason in them? No,
though they are beasts, yet are they not as other are, inhumane: for they haue
more humanitie then any other beasts what­soeuer. But of them I haue said
enough, & therfore I will proceede to my former argument: wherein for your
better delight, I will acquaint you with a true storie  [...]atelte per­formeo
in Poules Church by a couple of Cutpurses. The matter was of such truth, as I
could for neede set downe the Gentlemans name, and also the names of all the
a­ctors therein, but I craue pardon, because the Gentleman was of good place
and credit, and for more assurance my selfe was present: the whole matter fell
out as followeth.

### 1.10. How a Countrie Gentleman walking in Poules had his purse cut by a
new kind of conueyance, and in the end by the like wilie beguily got it
againe.

ACountrie Gentleman of some credite walking in Powles, as tearmers are wont
that wait on their law­yers, was seene by a couple of light  [...]ngred
companions, that had got some gentlemanship vpon them by priu [...]e bi­ting
in ye dark, to haue some store of crownes in his purse coacht in a faire
trunke slop, like a boulting hutch. Alas, they were mortall, and could not
choose but bee tempted with so glorious an obiect. For what maie not gold doe
with him that hath neither money nor credit? Wherefore in verie zeale of a bad
spirit, they conspired how to make a breach in his pocket, and possesse
themselues of their pray. In the end it was concluded (as necessitie is neuer
with [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=17) out
stratagems) that the one should go behind him, while the other gaue she stroke
that should deuide life and soule. As they determined, so they brought it to
passe, for the good old fellow walking verie soberly in one of the side Iles,
deu [...] ­sing where to dine to saue the odde thrée pence, sodain­ly one of
them stept behind him and clapt his hands be­fore his eyes, saying: Who am I?
Who am I? while the other gaue the purse the gentle  [...]erke, and beguiled
his purse of the gilt: which done, hee went sneaking awaie like a dog that had
wearied a shéep. The good minded Gen­tlemā that was thus muffled, thinking
that it had bin one of his acquaintance, that plaid bo péepe wish him after
that sort, cried to him, Now for the passion of God, who are you? who are you?
Tell me I prate you who are you? For I shall neuer reckon while I liue. O,
quoth the Cauallero Cutpurse, you shall know by and by, and therewith
plue­king awaie his hands, looked him full in the face & laugh­ed, but by and
by starting aside, as if he had committed an errour, God forgiue me (quoth he)
what haue I done, I crie you hartily mercie, I haue mistaken you for my
ac­quaintance, one that is so like you, as one peaze is like a­nother: and
therefore I pray you pardon me. No harme done, no harme done, quoth the
Gentleman, and so they departed. Sinior who was to deuide his bootle where his
companion attended him, and my neighbour Mumpsimus to tyrannize on Buls
pudding-pies for his sire pence: short tale to make, his hungrie bodie being
refreshed, and eue­rie one satisfied, there entred in a dumbe shewe, the
recko­ning with a cleane tren [...]er in his hand verie orderly, as who should
say, Lay your hand on the booke. On him at­tended a well fed Lapster in a
shining sute of well liquo­red fustian, wheron was engrauen the triumphs of
many full platter, with his apron on his shoulder, and his knife vnder his
girdle. At which sight euery man began to draw,  [...] my honest penifather
thought to droppe testers with the rest: but woe alas, his bréeches were like
the bottom­less [...] pit o [...] hell, for ther [...] was not one crosse to
be found. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=18)
Then began he to fume and chafe, and run vp and dow [...] like a mad man,
saying, Well a bay y• euer I was borne! Who am I? who am I? Where at she rest
of the Gentle­men wondring, hc vp and told them the whole stor [...]e of his
misfortune, as is afore recited. And said, now I know who it was that said,
Who am I? who am I? for in troth hè was a cutpurse. But here did he not cease
or spend much time in singing a De profundis ouer his emptie pocket, where was
nought els saue Lent and desolation, but iumbled his braines together like
stones in a bladder, and tost ouer his thoughts as a Tailer doth his shreds
when he hath lost his néedle, to find out some meanes to fetch home his
straied purse, and to be euen with those vndermining Pioners. In the end his
pillow and present pouertie put this poli­cie into his head. The next day
early in the morning he went into Poules in the same apparell, and walking
iust in the same place where he lost the maine chance the day be­fore, hauing
bought him a faire new purse with white strings and great tassels, and  [...]
the same with brass [...] counters, and thrust it into the stop of his hose,
as he was wont, letting the strings thereof hang out for a traine. Well, so it
[...]ell out, that he had scarce fetcht thrée turnes, but a poore woman that
had the shaking ague in her head came to aske his charitie: he glad of anie
occasion to boa [...] his counterfeit wealth, to entrap the eyes of those
hungrie espials, ga [...] her a penie, and there with drew forth a num­ber, of
counters, making shew as if they had béene French crownes: which was presently
perceiued by Timothy touch and take, that had beene in the action the day
before, who sit­ting  [...] a  [...], leaning like one twixt sléeping and wa­
[...]ng, fell into a great longing, how he might haue that purse also to beare
the other compan [...]. Still the olde Snudge went plodding in one path, and
euer looked vnder his ouerhange [...] moss [...]e eye-broines, to sée who came
néere him, or once o [...]er to fustle him. He had bes [...]de at either end
of the Ile on of his men to watch, for feare any more, who am I? shuld come
behind him. At last out step [...] my nimble
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=18) [...], and
running hastily by him like some prentise, that had béene sent of an errand,
he sliced it smoothly away, so as the gentleman neuer perceiued it. But one of
his men who had his senses both of séeing and féeling better then his master,
marked when he gaue him the gentle gléeke, and whither he went when hee had
obtained his bootie: whereupon dogging him to a Cookes shoppe in Thames
sireet; to which place also the Gentlemā followed  [...] off. He there laid
hands on him, and challenged him for a Cut­purse, saying, he had séene him doe
such a thing in Poules, and told him also from whom he tooke it. He swore and
sta­ted, and stood at vtter defiance with him. And the better to outface the
matter, his partner, who being then lodged in the same house, came downe and
fell in tearmes of doing the Gentleman wrong, and that he should answer him,
[...] any man els. And (quoth he) if thou wert well serued thou shouldest be
stabd for offering to discredit him thus at his lodging. Mean while that these
matters were thus dis­puting, and the poore seruingmans death with manie oathe
[...] vowed, in came his master, who spying, who am I? to stand vpon his
pantofles so prondly, straight tooke him aside,  [...] told him a tale in his
eare, that did him small good at the heart, and said flatly hee was the man,
and no other whom he sought for, and either he would haue re­stitution for his
purse at his hands, or they would trie a conclusion at Lyborne. At  [...]
spéech their courage was somewhat abated: and in the end it so fell out, to a­
[...]oid further trouble they restored him both the purses with qu [...]etnes,
and made him a sufficient recompence for the trespasse. Thus at that time they
escaped, and all parties were pleased [...] but shortly after they were taken
for such an other fact, for which they were both condemned and execu­ted at
Lyborne.

Now Gentlemen, haue you not heard a pretie pranke of wilie beguily, where the
cunning Cutpurse was  [...] in his owne practise? sure I thinke neuer was poor
[...] [...] so nipt before. Wherefore I wish all those that are of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=19) that
facultie to be carefull of the right Nip, who if he bee neuer so cunning in
his arte, yet at one time or other bee ma [...]e hap to méete with Bul, and
his sturdie Iade, on whom if he chance to ride with his necke snarled in an
hempen halter, he is like to receiue so sharpe a nip, that it will for cuer
more marre his drinking place.

### 1.11. A notable exploit performed by a Lift.

THere was not long since one of our former professi­on, hauing intelligence of
a Citizen that inuited three or foure of his friends to dinner, came a little
before din­ner time, and marked when the guestes were all come: when they were
all come, as he  [...]hought, knowing the good­man of the house safe (for he
was not yet come from the ex­change) steps vp the staires boldly, and comes
into the roome where the guests were: when he comes in he salutes them, and
askes if his cosen were not yet come from the Ex [...]hange. They told him no.
No (saith he) me thinks he is verie long, it is past twelue of the clocke.
Then after a turne or two, In faith Gentlemen (quoth my new come guest) it
were good to doe something whereat we may be [...] merie against my cosen
comes home, and to that intent I will take this Salt and hide it, that when
hee misseth it, we shall sée what he will say to my cosen his wife: so hee
tooke the Salt, and put it in his pocket, and walked a turne or two more about
the roome, within a while when y• other guests were bus [...]e in talk, he
steps downe the  [...]taires faining to make water; but when he was downe be
tur­ned downe Théenes  [...], and neuer returned againe. The Citizen when he
came home bid his friends welcome,  [...]nd anon he mi [...] the Salt that
should be set on the table, called his wife to know if there were neuer a Salt
in the house: His wife busle about dinner, tooke her husband vp, as women at
such times will do, when they are a little trou­bled (for a little thing
troubles them God wot) and asked him if he had no eyes in his head. No, nor
you wife (quoth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=19) hee) if you
say there be any now: So there past many shrewd and hot words betwéene them.
At length the guests vnwilling they should disagr ée on so small a tri [...]e,
they vp and told how one came in and asked for his cosen, and tooke away the
Salt, meaning to make a little mirth at dinner. But when they saw he returned
no more, they contented themselues with patience, and went to dinner, as men
at such times vse to do, with heauy hearts and cold stomackes.

THere are a certaine band of  [...] Prentises about the towne, that will abuse
anie vpon the smal­lest occasion that is, and such men (whom they neuer came
to the credit in all their liues to make cleane their shooes) these dare neuer
méete a man in the face to auouch their rogarie, but forsooth they must haue
the help of some other their complices. Of this base sort you shall common­ly
find them at Playhouses on holy dayes, and th [...]re they will be playing
their parts, or at some  [...]out, as  [...]he pulling downe of Baudie houses,
or at some good exploit or other, so that if you néed helpe, or you thinke
your selfe not able to make your part good with anie that you  [...] a grudge
to, no more but repaire to one of these, and for a canne of Ale they will do
as much as another for a crowne: & these make no more conscsence to beat or
lame one, whom they neuer before saw nor knew, then  [...]he knights of the
poasts when they are feed out of Poules to sweare  [...]lsly.

There are another sort of Prentises, that when they sée a Gentlewoman or a
countriman minded to buy anie thing, they will fawne vpon them with their cap
in  [...]and, with what lacke you Gentlewoman? what lacke you Countriman? See
what you lacke. The Gentlewoman  [...] diuers commodities, flndeth nothing
that per­haps likes her: then going away, they come off with their ouer worne
frumps. Will you buy nothing Gentlewo­man? Its no maruell you should sée such
choice of good ware. Then they begin to discommend her person to their
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=20) next neighbo
[...], as god as themselues, and at next  [...], Send a  [...] [...] gra
[...]er h [...]r. These ms [...] [...] [...]ke  [...] [...] [...] [...], that
[...]hen  [...] comes into the house will  [...]awne vpon him, but before he
goes  [...], if hee take not  [...]eed, will catch him by the  [...]nnes. But
if they meete with a countrie-man, he is the  [...] man in the world to deale
vpon. They  [...] aske him  [...]ust  [...] so much as the wa [...] is worth.
The plaine simple man offers within a  [...] little of his price, as they vse
in the countrie: which  [...] Apprentise takes, and sweares it was not his for
that money, and so makes the poore man a right Conte. I think few in the
Exchange will account this for a  [...] tricke. But if the countriman leaues
them and goes his wa [...]e without buying anie thing, either for that
[...]ee likes not the ware, or that it is of too high a price: then will they
come off with, Do you heare Countriman, will you giue me  [...] much, and
leaue your blew c [...]te for a pawn for the rest? or they will bid him sell
his sword and buy a paire of shoes for such like sco [...]ing girds, that the
poore man sometimes could find at his heart to giue all the mo­ney in his
[...], that he had the [...]n  [...] fields, that hee might re [...]enge
himselfe on them for abusing him: a verie great abuse to their ma [...]ters
and chapmen.

To  [...]is societie mate be coupled also another fraternity, viz. Water-rat
[...], Watermen I meane, that will be rea­d [...]e  [...] very diligent for
anie man, vntill they can get them to their b [...]ates, but when they come to
[...]and to paie their fare, if you pai [...] them not to their owne
contentinents, you shall be sure of some gird or other, yea and perhaps if
they know they haue an  [...] to deale with, stop his hat or his cloake, till
he haue paid them what they list; but these are most commonlie seruants and
apprentises: for the or­der is, that for euerie twelue pence they earne their
ma [...] ­ster allowes them two pence, so then the more they get, whether by
hook or crooke,  [...]he more think they their gaine comes in. But this sort
now and then méete with their mates, who in stéed of a penie more in siluer,
send them to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=20)
the Chirurgians with two penie worth of sorrow.

But what need I to spend time in deciphering these com­mon companions? These
few I haue particularly named, but thinke you there are no more of this kind?
But I let passe Carmen and Dreymen, as verse knaues as the rest, because these
are better knowne then I can set them forth: I meane not at this time, nor in
this Treatise to set forth the guiles and deceits accustomed in all trades and
my­steries from the chiefest trade to the basest, but will con­tent my selfe
for this time, with that that hath béene alrea­die dilated, intending in some
other Treatise, at one time or other to relate in briefe what hath beene at
large too long put in practise.

In the meane time curteous Citizens, let me exhort you to become good exāples
to your family: for as the ma­ster is, so commonly is the seruant, as witnes
the old ver­ses in the Sheppards Calender in September.

Sike as the Sheppards, sike beene her sheepe.

And be sure, if thy seruant sée thee giuen to spending, and vnchast liuing,
there looke thy seruant, when thou thinkest he is about thy businesse, not
onely spends his time vainly, but that money, which by thy care in staying at
home thou mightest haue saued. Such iollie shauers, that are déepe
[...]ashers of others, mens hides, haue I knowne (more is the pitie) to sit by
all night, some at Cardes and Dice, some quaffing and swillng at the Tauerne,
and other a­mong their tru [...]es, spending in one night some twentie
shillings, and thirtie shillings often: some againe that can maintaine to
themselues a wench all the yeare, and then they must filch and purloine whole
péeces of stuffe for their gownes and peticoats, besides great store of mony:
But these are such that can with a wet finger, and by rea­son of abundance of
ware purloine their maisters goods, & not easily be espied. But be sure at one
time or other such villains wilcome forth: for the pot goes so oft to the
water, that at last it comes home crackt. And take this for a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=21) principle
and general rule, that whosoeuer he be that giues himselfe to this damnable
sinne of l [...]st, let him be assored, as sure as he had it alreadie, that a
great punishment han­geth ouer his head. Therefore it behooues the maister to
be wise in gouerning his seruants, that they may bee as markes for their
seruants to shoote at, to sée how their ser­uants bee addi [...]ed and giuen,
and not to be sterne and se­uere towards them, but rather keepe them in, that
they wander not abroad more then necessitie forceth, remem­bring that rule
that Ouid giueth,

Parce puer stimulis & fortiùs vtere loris.

Spare  [...]he whip, raine them hard: for such as are growne to yeares will
hardly endure blowes, wherefore  [...]he rai­ning them from their desires is
the next way in my mind to bring them to good.

But  [...]ere is the griefe that those that should giue light are darke; those
that should be guides haue néed to be lead; those that should instruct to
[...], are inducers to vani­tie, according to those verses in Ma [...]e,

Those faitors littell regarden their charge,

While they letting their sheep runne at large,

Passen their time that should be sparely spent,

In lustinesse and wanton meriment.

Thilke same be Sheppards for the diuels steed,

That playen, &c.

Againe,  [...]hat conscience they vse in bargaining and sel­ling, witnesse
[...]he whole world, according to Diggon in Septemb.

They setten to sale their shops of shame,

And maken a market of their good name.

The sheppards there robben one another,

And layen baites to beguilde her brother.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=21)And againe,

Or they bine false or sull of couetise,

And casten to compasse many wrong emprise.

In fine, to conclude with that which we haue so long stood vpon, namely with
vncleannesse, how hard it is for men to bee reclaimed from it: and as it is
pernicious to all generally, so particularly to young men that haue newlie set
vp for themselues, and haue as it were new­ly entred into the world, soone
maie they cast awaie them selues, except they looke the better about them: but
most odious for such that haue wi [...]es, with whom they may so­lace
themselues. Pitie it is that such cannot be noted a­boue the rest, it shewes
an inordinate lust. And nowe it comes in my mind, I will impart with a tricke
serued vpon a maried man, and a tradesman by a good wench, as they call them,
reported and heard from her owne mouth not long since. The parties names I
will conceale, be­cause some of them are of some credite, although some­what
blemished by this skarre: and it was on this maner.

### 1.12. How a Citizen was serued by a Curtizan.

THere was one Mounsieur Libidinoso [...] at she signe of Incontinencie, hauing
cast vp his accounts for the weeke past (for it was Saturday night) after
sup­per resolued with himselfe to walke, which way he cared not, but as his
[...] fell, so would he wend: by chance it fell Westward, and Westward he
went, vntill he came to Whitestiers. When  [...] came thither he be thought
him­selfe, and held it a déed of charitie to sée some of his old
ac­quaintance, whom hee had not visited a long time before: But they according
to the ancient custome were remo­ued, for they vse not to stay long  [...] a
place. He hearing that, made no more  [...] but fel aboord with one that came
next to hand,  [...] good as the best, one that had béene tried,  [...] [...]
a one as would not shrinke at a shower: little
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=22) intreatie
serues, and  [...] they goe. When after their  [...]eastly sport and pleasure
Mounsieur Libid. heat of lust was somewhat asswaged,  [...] ready to goe,
féeling his pocket for a venereall remuneration finds nothing but a Lester, or
at least so little, that it was not sufficient to please dame Pleasure for her
hire. He protested and vow­ed he had no more about him now: for (said he) when
I came forth I neur thought what money I had about me. My Ladie would not
belée [...]e Mons. Libid. a great while, but searched and féeled for more
coine, but at that time she was frustrate of her expectation: she seeing no
reme­d [...]e, set as good a countenance on the matter as she could, and told
him she would be contented for that time, hoping hee would bee more
beneficiall to her hereafter. They were both contented: where no sooner hee is
gone downe the staires, but shee whips off her gowne, and puts on a white
wastcoate with a trice, and so dogs M. Libidinos. home to his house, and
taking a perfect view of his house and signe, returnes back againe. On Monday
morning she came to his house verie orde [...]ly in her gown with her
handbasket in her hand, where she found Mons. Libid. and his wife in the shop:
when she came in she cal­led for this sort and that sort of lace, vntill she
had calle [...] for as much ware as came to twentie shillings: when she was
ready to goe, she whispered my Gentleman in the ear [...], and asked him, If
he be remembred how sleight­ly such a time he rewarded her kindnesse, but now
I am satisfied for this time. M. Libid. was in a wonderfull streight, and gaue
her not a word for an answer, fearing his wife should knowe an [...]e thing.
His wife noting her whispering in her husbands eate, and seeing no mony paid,
asked her husband when she was gone, who she was.  [...] verie smoothly told
her, shee was a very honest cutters wife, and that hee knew her a long time to
bee a good paymaister. This answer contented his wife: but ful well I know he
was not cōtented in his mind al the day after.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=22)Sée here how
a man may bee vnawares ouertaken by these  [...] Pitchbarrels. Then let this
example teach th [...]e to forgoe their allurements, least thou in time be
de­filed with the like blot, or ouerplunged in a deeper bog: Remember,

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula ca [...]tum.

For these night birdes not vnlike the Syrens,  [...]he more you frequent them,
the more you shall be intangled, accor­ding to these verses, Diggon in Sept.

For they beene like foule wagmoires ouergrast,

That if thy gallage once sticketh fast,

The more to wind it out thou doest swincke,

Thou mought ay deeper and deeper sincke,

Yet better leaue of with littell losse,

Then by much wrestling to leese the grosse.

These may be motiues to all to auoide such infectiou [...] plague-sores: but
how hardit is to get vp a tyred  [...] when he is downe, especially in the
dirt enery man knowes, and men wil haue their swinge do all what they can,
according to Thenot in February.

Must not the world wend in his common course,

From good to bad; and  [...]rom bad to worse;

From worse vnto that is worstof all,

And then returne to his former fall.

But for my part I am resolued and wish all men of the like mind sticking my
sta [...]e by Peirse in Maie.

Sheppard, I list no accordance make

With sheppard that does the right way sorsake,

And of the twaine if choise were to me

Had leuer my foe then my friend to be,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=23)

## 2\. THE NOTABLE, SLIE, and deceitfull pranks of Doctor Pinchbacke.

ANotable fellow of this trade well stric­ken in yeares [...] one that was frée
of the Nitmongers, trauelled with his boy in­to Yorkeshire. And hauing no mony
in his purse, nor other meanes to rel [...]eue himselfe but plaine shifting,
grewe into vitter despaire of his estate, by reason hee had worne all
cosonages thréed ba [...]e, and made the vttermost of his wit that was
possible. Wherefore complaining himself to his trustie page, that had béene
patner with him bo [...] in weale and woe, and whom hee had brought vp in his
occupation, and taught to  [...]e as subtill as himselfe: ut Maister (quoth
he) take no care, for when all is gone and nothing left, well fare the Dagger
with the  [...]udge­on haft. I am young and  [...] crochets in my head: I
warrant you, while I haue my fiue senses we will not begge. Goe you and take
vp your l [...]dging in the  [...]airest Inne in the towne, and call in
lustily, sparing for no cost, and let me alone to pay for  [...]ll. With
[...] resolution they went into  [...] [...], where  [...] a verse  [...]
Lauern, readie to outface thē, according to the boyes abusse, they put into
it, & called for a roome, and none might content them but the best chamber in
the house. Then  [...]acke of the clocke house summoned the Chamberlaine
before [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=23) him,
and tooke an inuentorie what extraordinarie pro [...]t­sion of victuals they
had for dinner, telling them his maister was no common man, nor would he be
plea­sed with ani [...] grosse kind of fare. The Tapster, who hoping of gaine,
seemed verie seruiceable, and told him he should want nothing. And although
they had at that time sundrie strangers, by reason the chiefe  [...] of the
shire sate there the same day about a Commission, yet promised to giue what
attendance he might.  [...]hus did the Crack-rope triumph, and walking in the
yard while dinner was preparing, hāmered in his head, & cast an eye, about
the house to see if anie occasion were offe­red for him to worke vpon. At last
going vp a paire of stayres, hee spied in a faire great Chamber where the
Commissioners sate, a side settle, whereon good store of plate stood. Yea,
thought he? and it shall go hard but Ile make vp my market. So into the
[...]hamber closely hee stept, not béeing perce [...]uedly by any man,
couertly con­ueyed away vnder his cloake one of the greatest gilt goblets, and
went immediately on the backside of the house, where spying an old well, hee
flung the same, and went his way vp to his master, to whom  [...]ee discouered
what he had done, intreating him the better to furnish out the Pageant, to
change his name, and call himselfe Doctor Pinchbacke.

This done, he went downe into the kitchin to sée if dinner were readie: where
the goodman of the house began to question with him what his Maister was, and
who they called him. Sir, quoth he, Doctor Pinchbacke. What, is he a Doctor of
Physicke quoth the host? Yea marie, quosh the boy, and a speciall good one.
With that answer he cease [...] questioning any further, but sent vp meat to
his dinner, and went vp himselfe to did him welcome.

Dinner being done and the other g [...]ests ready to rise, the Goblet sodainly
was missed, and great inquiry
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=24) made for it,
but at no hand it would be found: all the seruaunts were examined, the house
was thoroughlie searched, none of the Gentlemen had it. This news found Doctor
sware hee sawe it not, the boy den [...]d it also, yet still the goodman and
the good wife kept a great stirre for it, and were readie to weepe for ve­rie
anger that they should kéep such knaues about them as had no more care, but
[...] let a cuppe of nine pounds bée stollen, and no man knew which waie. Then
the host made great offers to haue it againe, which the boy hearing, said, if
they could entreate his Maister to take the paines, he could cast a figure,
and fetch it againe with heaue and ho. But not a word (quoth he) that I told
you so.

The good man hearing that, ranne vp in all hast, and besought Maister Doctor
for the passion of God to stand his friend, or els he was vndone. So it is,
quoth he, that I vnderstand of your great learning and knowledge, and that by
a speciall gift in Astronomie that God hath giuen, you can tell of maruellous
ma [...]ers, and helpe againe to things that are lost. I pra [...]e you as
euer you came of a woman shewe mee a little feate about my cuppe: and though I
haue but small  [...] of mo­ney, yet will I bestow [...] fortie shillings on
you for your labour. Maister Doctor at the first made strange of the matter,
and séemed verie loth to deale in it, by reason of the daunger of the lawe:
yet for that he sée­med to bee an honest man, and it  [...] him that anie such
thing should happen whilest hee was in his house, hee would straine a little
with his cunning to reléeue him in the best sorte, not so much for his mo­ney
as for his friendship, and swore hee would not doe it for any other for a
hundred pounds, therefore hee dest­red him to leaue him to himselfe, and to
take or [...]er that no man came to trouble him for some two houres space, and
he should see what he would do for him.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=24)Two houres
hée stayed alone by himselfe tosting him by a good fire till he sweat againe,
then painting his face with a deadish colour, which hee caried al­waies about
with him for such a purpose, and then calling vp the hoste, told him that hee
had laboured sore for him, and almost indaungered himselfe in vn­dertaking the
action, yet by good fortune hee had fi­nished his businesse, and found where
the cuppe was. Haue you not a well (quoth hee) on the backe side of your house
that stands thus, and thus, for mine owne part I was neuer there (that I can
tell of) to see. Yes that I haue, sayd the Hoste. Well (said Maister Do­ctor)
in the bottome of that well is your cuppe: where­fore goe search presently,
and you shall finde my words true. The goodman with all expedition did as hee
willed him, and drew the well dr [...]e: at last hee spied his Goblet where it
lay. It was no néede to bid him take it vp, for in his owne person hee went
downe in the bucket: and full lightly to Maister Doctour Pinch­packes chamber
bee trudged, and caried him fortie shil­lings, offering him besides a mone
[...]hs boord in requit all of his great curteste. This counterfeit forsooth
would seeme to refuse nothing, but there lay and fed vpon the stocke, whilest
my goodman hoste did nothing but till the countrie with his praise.

Not manie daies passed but a Gentleman of good credite drawne thi [...]her by
the ordinarie report, came to vi [...]t him, who desirous to make triall of
his cunning, he craued to knowe of him (his wife then beeing big with child)
whether it was a man childe or a woman childe she went withall? Hee answered
he could say lit­tle thereto except he saw her naked.

The Gentleman although hee thought it was no vsuall thing for a man to see a
woman naked, yet Physitions haue more priuiledge then others, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=25) they as well
as Midwiues are admitted to any sec [...]ets. Wherefore he perswaded his wife
to disclose her selfe to him, and to dispence with a little inconuenience, so
they may be resolued of so rare a secret. But this was Doctor Pinchbackes
drift, hee thought to haue shifted the Gentleman off by this extraordinarie
imposition, thinking he would rather haue surceased his sute, then anie waie
haue suffered him to sée his wife naked. In conclusion a chamber was prepared
warme and close, in which she shewed her selfe, & twise walked vp and down the
chamber naked in the presence of M. Doctor and her husband, who demanded M.
Doctors answer to his for­mer question, which was as followeth: Quoth he, from
meward it is a boy, and to me ward it is a girle: other answer they could get
none of him. Wherefore the Gen­tleman was greatly offended against him,
calling him Asse, Dolt, Patch, Cockescombe, Knaue, and all the base names he
could deuise. But awaie went maister Doctor as skilfull in those cases as a
blind man when he throweth his staffe: and durst not answer the Gentle­man one
word. And the Gentleman greatly repen­ted him that he had been so foolish to
shew his wife in that sort before so sottish a companion.

About foure dayes after the Gentlewoman fell in la­bour, and was deliuered of
a boy and a girle: where­at the Gentleman remembring the blunt answer of the
Doctor, and finding it to be true, was greatly asto­nished, supposing indéed
hee had mightily wronged the Doctor: to whom he went immediately crauing
par­don for his former follie, shewing himselfe verie sorow­full for his
fault, and offered him in recompence of a­mends all the fauour he might
possibly doe him, gran­ting to him his house at commandement, and his boord
for so long time as he would continue with him. Wher­upon in signe of loue and
amitie he went and soiour­ned at the Gentlemans house: Whereupon the Doctors
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=25) credit still
more and more began to increase, so that all the countrie round about told no
small tales of the great running of Doctor Pinchbacke, to whom they resorted
early ano late.

It fortuned soone after shere was a Faire neere to the Gentlemans house, where
the people diuersly tal­ked of the Doctors skill and cunni [...], and that he
could doe anie thing, or tell anie thing that was done in anie place. Naie
(quosh a plaine Countriman) I will ven­ture twentie Nobles that hee shall not
doe it. I will my selfe goe personally to him, and hold something in my hand,
and if hee tell me what it is I will lose my money. I take you, sayd one or
two, and the wager be­ing layd, awaie they went towards the Gentlemans house:
and passing thorough a meadow, the man tooke vp a Grashopper out of the
grasse, and put it into his hand, so close that no man might perceiue it. Then
for­ward they went, and met with Maister Doctor, and they desired him to satis
[...]e them of that secret which was vpon his credit [...], to tell them what
one of the com­panie held in his hand. Whereunto the Doctor was loth to
answer, considering he had no such skill as peo­ple bruted abroade: neuer the
lesse he cast in his mind, how he might excuse the matter by some pretie
sleight, if he should guesse amisse, and therfore concluded in this  [...]st,
he called to mind that his owne name was Gra­shopper, and if (quoth he) I take
him by the hand, I may say hee hath a grashopper in his hand, and yet I may
[...]ustly defend it for a truth. Whereupon the Doctor ta­king him by she
hand, said he had a Grashopper in his hand: which béeing opened was found
true. Whereat the Cuntrimen wondred, and went their wayes. Some said hee was
but a cosoning knaue: others reported what wonders hee could perfor [...]:
Some said he could
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=26) g [...]e
round about the world in a moment, and that h [...] walked euerie night in the
aire with spirites: some said hee had a familiar: thus the people gaue their
cen­  [...]ure; some liking, and others mi [...]king him. And in a word, so
manie men, so manie mindes, but the grea­ter part of the countrey admired his
deepe knowledge,  [...]nd published his ex [...]ellent learninge, so that he
became  [...]amous amongst the people, and the Gentleman not a little proud of
so worthy a guest: in so much that ha­uing one onely daughter, whom he loued
most  [...]ntier­lie, and as parents most desire their children should match
the themselues with sucg, by whom they hope pre­ferment should come, on a daie
brake his minde to the Doctour in his daughters behalfe, assuring him hee
should not onely finde her a louing and  [...] wife, but would giue him foure
hundred pounds, and make him assurauce of all his land, which was worth (say
[...] hee) better then two hundred markes a yeare after  [...] decease, if so
it would please his worship to accept hi [...] kind offer, which hee assured
him proceeded of  [...] loue. The Doctour a while coylié refused the Ge [...]
tlemans offer, but béeing earnestly entreated of the Gentleman, he answered
him to this effect.

Sir, for your great friendship hitherto and vnex­pected kindnesse, at this
time I cannot but confess [...] my selfe much indebted to you: and because you
are so importunate with me to marie your daughter (al­though I protest it is
not for my profite) I doe willing­ly take her to my wife: for I haue (saith
hée) refuse [...] many faire and personable Gentlewomen in mine owne countrey
with large dowrtes: but to make you part of amends for your  [...] [...], I
here am content to yeeld to your request. The Gentle­man humbly thanked him,
and prolonged not th [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=26) time I
warrant you, but with great expedition ha [...]ed the mariage daie: where with
great feasting and ioy with his friends they passed that day with much
pleasure and musicke.

The Doctour about a moucth after desired the Gen­tleman for his wiues portion,
which the Gentleman willingly paid him. When two or three dayes were passed he
told the Gentleman hee would goe into  [...] owne countrie to see his friends,
and withall prepare and make readie his house (which was let forth to farme)
for himselfe to inhibite, and that he would come againe when all things were
readie and fetch his wife. The Gentleman was verie vnwilling to leaue the
D­ctors companie; but séeing the Doctor so importu­nate, at last yéelded, and
so lent the Doctor and his boy two of his best geldings: who as soone as they
were on horsebacke, neuer minding to returne againe, tooke their iourney into
Deuonshire, and there so long as his foure hundred pounds lasted made merie
with their companions, till at last hauing spent all, beganne to renue his
olde trade, and after being taken in compa­nie with some suspected persons was
apprehended, and by the law (as I heard) was condemned to bee hanged for a
murtherer.

Thus although pexaduenture hee was not guiltie of the murther, yet it was a
[...]ust punishment for his villanie before practised.

The Gentleman after a quarter of a yeare was past, beganne to looke for the
Doctors comming home againe, but in vaine; so hee passed a twelue moneth,
ex­pecting his sonne in lawes returne: at last as happe was one of the
Gentlemans acquaintance hauing beene at his house, and séeing the Doctor
there, brought word home to the Gentleman that hee sawe the Do­ctor
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=19091&page=27) for certaine
executed at Exceter in  [...], for a muder. In what a melancholy humour the
Gen­tleman was in, and what grie [...]e and sorrowe the young Gentlewoman
tooke to heart at these heause tidings, I refer it to the Reader, and none but
[...]hose that haue tasted of those griefes doe sufficiently know.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Rowlands, Samuel, 1570?-1630?. Date: 1602  

