## (unknown project)

# Robin and Kate: or, A bad husband converted by a good wife in a dialogue
betweene Robin and Kate. To the tune of Blew cap. — Robin and Kate.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Robin and Kate: or,
    * 1.2. The ſecond part

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20016&page=1)

## 1\. Robin and Kate: or,

A bad husband converted by a good wife, in a dialogue betweene Robin and Kate.

To the tune of Blew Cap.

### 1.1.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

FArre in the North Countrey (as I haue heard tell)

there lines a blithe couple cau'd Robbin and Kate:

This Robbin doth loue nappy liquor ſo well,

that hée'll be at th'Alehouſe both early and late

The wife to her husband

i'th morning doth ſay,

I prethée ſwéet Robin

at home with me ſtay,

Thou waſteſt thy time,

and ſpendeſt thy chinke,

Turne backe agen Robin,

and ga not to drinke

Man.

I prethee ſwéet honey be patient and quiet,

I'me ſure thou want'ſt nothing thats fit for thy ſtate,

Thou lackſt neither money, apparell, nor diet,

if any thou doſt, doe but ſpeake and thou'ſt ha'te:

Thou haſt all the good

that a wife can deſire,

Tha'ſt ſeruants to 'tend thée,

and I pay their hire:

Then for my good-fellowſhip

doe not thou prate,

For I muſt and I will

have my humour ſweet Kate.

Wife.

Tis chiefly thy company that I doe want,

beſides, though we now haue ſufficient to liue,

Yet if thou the Alehoule thus dayly doe haunt,

we may become fitter to take than to giue:

Swéet husband conſider

and take my aduice,

Let not thy companions

thus lewdly intice

Thy heart from thy Kate,

but vpon my words thinke,

Turne back agen Robin,

and ga not to drinke.

Out, out, hold thy twattle and doe not thus preach,

Ile not be ruld by thée whateuer thou ſay,

Séeke not by perſwaſtons my minde to ouer-reach,

for Ile to the Ale-houſe as faſt as I may▪

If thither thou follow,

thou welcome ſhalt be,

So thou wilt be quiet

and pleaſant with me,

Stay here or ga with me,

tis both of a rate,

But I muſt, and I will

have my humour ſweet Kate.

Wife.

Waes me bonny Robin, that ere I was marrids,

vnto ſike a husband that ſéekes my vndoing,

I wou'd with my mother at home I had tarryde,

or thought vpon this when thou firſt cam'ſt a wooing▪

I thinke in my conſcience,

(and I haue cauſe why,)

That thou lou'ſt ſome other,

farre better than I:

Thou hat'ſt to ſtay with me,

then what may I thinke,

Turne back agen Robin

and ga not to drinke.

Man.

Nay now I finde Kate whereabout thy ſhooe wrings,

by this I perceiue that of me thou art iealous,

But I for my part neuer dreame of ſike things,

I ſéek not for wenches, but honeſt good fellowes:

A pipe of Tabacco,

a Pot or a Iugg,

Theſe are the ſwéet honies

that I kiſſe and hugg:

All wenching delights

are with me out of date,

But I muſt and I will

have my humour ſweet Kate.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20016&page=1)

### 1.2. The ſecond part

To the ſame tune.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

Wife

I Prethée my ioy doe not take at the worſt

the words that I ſpeake in the heat of affection,

No euill conceit in my boſome is nurſt,

I de haue thee be rul'd by my louing direction:

It thinke thou art honeſt

to me in thy heart,

But company ill

may draw thee apart:

To waſtefull expences

thy minde doe not linke:

Turne back agen Robin,

and ga not to drinke.

Man.

Gude wife be perſwaded, and let me alone,

forall thy vaine prattle will proue but mere folly,

I tell thee my heart will be cold as a ſtone,

if I ſtay at home I ſhall be melancholy

Ile make my ſelfe merry

as long as I'ue ſtore

Tuſh Kate neuer thinke on't

wee'ſt neuer be poore:

Shall I ſtay at home

on thy fancy to waite,

No I muſt and I will

have my humor ſweet Kate.

Wife.

Why Robin when firſt thou didſt marry with me,

thou thoughtſt thy ſelf beſt whē thou  [...]idſt with me lō ­geſt,

How comes the caſe thus to be alter'd with thée,

true loue by much uſage will grow to be ſtrongeſt:

But now thou art weary

of my company,

And canſt not be merry,

I prethée Loue why?

Thou giu'ſt me occaſion

ſtrange matters to thinke,

Turne backe agen Robin,

and ga not to drinck.

Man.

Oh who wou'd be troubled thus with a foole,

I prethée ſwéet-heart take one word for thy learning,

I ſcorne that my wife ouer me ſhould beare rule:

why Kate, doe I ſp [...]nd any thing of thy earning?

I loue thée as well

as I did the firſt day,

And yet when I liſt

I will goe or Ile ſtay,

To be at command

of my wife, I doe hate,

For I muſt and I will,

haue my humor ſweet Kate.

Wife

Alas my deare Lui [...] thou miſtakeſt me much,

I doe not command thee, thats not my intention,

For my humble duty vnto thee is ſuch,

that one word of anger to thée Ile not mention

Examine thy heart,

and thou ſhalt vnderſtand

I giue thee good counſell,

I doe not command:

Then with due diſcretion,

vpon my words thinke,

Turne backe agen Robin,

and ga not to drinke.

Man.

Ah now my ſweet Kate I perceiue very well,

thy words doe procéed from a hearty affection,

Now all my delight in thy boſome▪ ſhall dwell,

Ile euer be orderd by thy direction

My former ill husbandry,

I will repent,

And in thy ſwéet company,

reſt well content:

Strong Liquor no more,

ſhall impaire my eſtate,

Now Ile ſtay at home

with my bonny ſweet Kate.

M. P.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

London Printed for Thomas L [...]

[Home](/)

M. P. (Martin Parker), d. 1656?. Date: 1634  

