## (unknown project)

# [...] or, Cupids wrongs vindicated wherein he that Cupids wiles did
discover, is proved a false dissembling lover. The mayd shewes such cause that
none can her condemne, but on the contrary the fault's layd on him. To the
tune of Cupids cruell torments. — Cupids wrongs vindicated.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. 〈◊〉 Cupids wrongs vindicated:
    * 1.1. To the tune of Cupids cruell torments [Figure]
    * 1.2. [Figure]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20000&page=1)

## 1\.  [...] Cupids wrongs vindicated:

Wherein he that Cupids wiles did discover,

Is proved a false dissembling Lover.

The Mayd shewes such cause that none can her condemne,

But on the contrary the fault's layd on him.

### 1.1. To the tune of Cupids cruell torments

_[figure]_

THe guilefull Crocodile

when he his prey would gain,

That none may spie his wile,

A mournfull noyse doth feigne:

So thou false Hypocrite

Thy foule deceipt to couer,

Dost act the part aright

of a distracted Louer.

But raile no more on Loue,

Nor doe young Cupid wrong,

For thou didst never proue

What doth to love belong.

Hienna, like thou feign'st

words of a dying man,

But falsely thou complain'st

with woe I proue it can:

For like a cheating wretch,

thou dost on me exclaime,

But this is but a fetch.

for thou deseru'st the blame.

Why dost thou raile on loue,

Or doe, &c.

Thou knowst I lou'd thée well,

and purposd thee to haue,

Thy conscience this can tell,

thou false dissembling knaue,

But when I did perceiue

thy fickle wauering mind,

Twas time to take my leaue,

and serue thee in thy kind.

Then raile no more on loue,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst neuer proue

What doth to loue belong.

Let any one that will

be judge twixt thee and mee,

Why should I loue thee still,

when thou lou'st two or three.

Dost thinke Ile stand at stake,

to helpe at the last cast?

When all doe thee forsake,

then I must serue at last.

O raile no more on loue,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst never proue

What doth to loue belong.

Thou com'st to me ith morne,

and goest to Madge at night,

Thy mind will quickly turne

to which comes next in sight.

Thou'lt promise and protest

thou wilt haue none but me,

But when thou seest the rest

those vowes forgotten bee.

Then raile no more on love,

Nor Cupids, &c.

Dost thinke I cannot heare

how thou playst fast and loose,

Long Mall gaue thee good cheere.

both Cony Hen and Goose:

Alas man I haue friends

that note thy actions well,

Thou lou'st for thine owne ends,

but I thy knauery smell.

Then raile no more on loue,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst neuer proue

What doth to loue belong.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20000&page=1)

### 1.2. The second part, To the same Tune.

_[figure]_

I Saw last Thurseday night,

when thou wentst to the Swan,

With Kate and Winifrite,

and after you came Nan,

I know what wine you had,

and also what was payd,

Alas poore harmelesse lad,

wilt thou dye for a Mayd!

Fye raile no more on loue,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst neuer proue

What does to loue belong.

I Cannot choose but smile

to thinke how cunningly

Thou wouldst the world beguile

with foule hypocrisy:

For I the wrong sustaine,

and thou from griefe art free,

Yet still thou dost complaine

that I am false to thee.

Fye neuer raile on love,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst never proue

What doth to loue belong.

To either man or Mayd

For censure Ile appeale,

Which of us may be sayd

disloyally to deale;

Did euer I seeme nice

till I was told for truth,

More oft then once or twice,

thou was't a faithlesse youth.

Fye doe not raile, &c.

Thou mak'st the world beleeue

thou for my loue dost pine,

Indeed thou sore dost grieue

with wenches, Cakes, and wine,

For my part tis my lot

to pray for patience still,

Untill I have forgot

thy ouer-reaching skill.

Then doe not raile, &c.

Yet though I suffer wrong

I needs must prayse thy art,

Sure thou hast study'd long

to act the Mad-mans part,

Thou canst not sleep nor wake

for fancies in thy head,

Now I doe thee forsake

I muse thou art not dead.

Fye doe not raile, &c.

That Lasse which shall haue thee

Who ere has that ill hap,

Let her learne this of me,

shee's caught in follies trap.

He that dissemble can

with one in such a way.

Hee'l nere proue honest man,

beleeue me what I say.

Then doe not raile on loue,

Nor Cupids cruell wrong,

For thou didst neuer proue

What doth to loue belong.

FINIS.

M.P.

## Appendix A

Printed at London for F.G.

[Home](/)

M. P. (Martin Parker), d. 1656?. Date: 1633  

