## (unknown project)

# The schoole of musicke wherein is taught, the perfect method, of true
fingering of the lute, pandora, orpharion, and viol de gamba; with most
infallible generall rules, both easie and delightfull. Also, a method, how you
may be your owne instructer for prick-song, by the help of your lute, without
any other teacher: with lessons of all sorts, for your further and better
instruction. Newly composed by Thomas Robinson, lutenist.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=1) In God
reioyce, With Inſtrument and voyce.

THE SCHOOLE OF MVSICKE: WHEREIN IS TAVGHT, THE PER­FECT METHOD, OF TRVE
FINGE­ring of the Lute, Pandora, Orpharion, and Uiol de Gamba; with moſt
infallible generall rules, both eaſie and delight­full.

Alſo, a method, how you may be your owne inſtructer for Prick-ſong, by the
help of your Lute, without any other teacher: with leſſons of all ſorts, for
your further and better in­ſtruction.

Newly compoſed by Thomas Robinſon, Luteniſt.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Este, for Simon Waterſon, dwelling at the ſigne of the
Crowne in Paules Church-yard. 1603.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT VER­TVOVS, HIGH, AND MIGHTIE PRINCE KING IAMES, OVR DRED
SOVERAIGNE, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. long life, happie daies, and moſt
proſperous raigne.

AS there is not any thing in this world more acceptable vnto God, (moſt
gracious Soueraigne) then a contrite heart: ſo I preſume that there is not any
thing in this world (next to the loue of God) more ac­ceptable vnto your
Majeſtie, then a true and loyall ſubject. Thus vſing this perſwa­ſion, for a
ſure argument of your Majeſties gracious acceptance, I preſume to mani­feſt my
ſelfe, a moſt true and loyall ſub­ject vnto your Majeſtie. In token where­of,
I haue gathered the chiefe of my treaſurie, the which in moſt humble and
obedient manner, I preſent vnto your Highneſſe: beſeeching your High­neſſe not
to miſlike your ſubject, for the ſubject, ſith it is for the good of all your
Majeſties louing ſubjects. The Art is deuine, the Jnstrument laudable, my
Meaning good, my Skill drownde in the depth of Catoes wordes (who ſaith) Nec
te collaudes, nec te culpaueris ipſe. And yet I can ſay for my ſelfe, that
once I was thought (in Denmarke at Elſanure) the fitteſt to inſtruct your
Ma­jeſties Queene, our moſt gracious Ladie and Miſtres.

Thus proſtrating my ſelfe at your Majeſties feet, inceſſantlie crauing pardon
for my bold attempt, I reſt. Reſtles in praier, for your Graces wel­fare, both
now and euer.

Your Majeſties moſt loyall and obedient ſubject, Thomas Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=3)

## To the Reader.

RIght courteous Gentlemen, and gentle Readers, your fauourable acceptance of
my firſt fruits from idleneſſe, hath eccited mee further to congratulate your
Muſicall endeauours. And in my conceit, I can no way better fit your good and
willing mindes, then in ſhewing you how you may very ſoone, and very perfectly
inſtruct your ſelues to play (vpon your beſt beloued inſtrument) the Lute,
alſo the Orpharion, Pandora, and Viol de Gamba, any leſſon (if it bee not too
too trickified) at the firſt ſight. But bee it as it bee may, you ſhall haue
rules of reaſon, to ouer-rule vnreaſonable odd Cratchets, giue­ing you to
vnderſtand, that what is beyond the true courſe of Nature, muſt needes bee
without all compaſſe of Art; and withall, nothing out-runneth Nature but
Follie: ſo much for that.

Alſo (for example ſake) I haue ſet ſome leſſons of all ſorts: whereof ſome
being old, I was requeſted to ſet them new after my faſhion, ſome new out of
the fat, ſome neither very new, nor very old, but yet all mine owne ſetting,
and the moſt of them, mine owne inuention.

But Gentlemen, once more I will make you promiſe, that if theſe Ma­ſterlike
rules, and Scholerlike leſſons, doe but any whit content you. I will come
forth, With Cracke mee this Nut, (I meane) onely leſſons for one, two, and
three Lutes, and ſome with ditties, wherein I will ſtriue either (for euer) to
winne your fauours, or ſtarue in the dole of your diſgrace. Vale.

More for you, than for him-ſelfe, Thomas Robinſon.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS, HIGH, AND MIGHTIE PRINCE KING IAMES, OVR DRED SOVERAIGNE, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, &c. long life, happie daies, and moſt proſperous raigne.
  * To the Reader.
  * 3\. Rules to inſtruct you to Sing.
    * 3.1. UALE.

## 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=3)

[...] and Violl de Gamba, Dialogue wiſe, betwixt a Knight, (who hath children
to be taught) and Timotheus, that ſhould teach them.

KNIGHT.

YOV are hartelie welcome into the countrie, and the better welcome, for that
you come at the firſt ſending for, for it is an old ſaying, that cunning men
are curious, eſ­peciallie Muſitions.

TIMOTHEVS.

Sir, if I had thought I ſhould not haue beene welcome, you might haue thought
me vnwiſe to haue taken all this paines: againe, it was my promiſe to inſtruct
your children, and am readie at your pleaſure; but I pray you, why ſhould
Muſitions bee more curious then others.

Kni.

In keeping your promiſe, you haue done well, and ſo well as I can, I will
anſwere your demaund: in mine opinion, I think it impoſſible to be a good
Muſition, except a man be ſeene in all the ſeauen liberall Sciences, for I
know many great clarkes in Diuinitie, Phiſicke, Law, Philoſophie, &c. that
haue ſmall, or no knowledge at all in Muſick; nay, ſome that quite reiect it.
Now ſith it behoueth a good Muſition to bee ſomewhat ſeene in all Arts, I
conclude, that this all (with the help of an od crotchet) is the reaſon why
Muſitions are ſo curious.

Tim.

Trulie ſir, your concluding all, is both ſhort & ſharp, how be it I muſt
graunt you this, that it is behouefull a Muſition that would bee excellent, to
be ſeene in all or the moſt part of the ſeauen liberall Arts, and ſo neere as
I can, I will ſhew you which, and how neceſſarie thoſe are, that a Muſition
ought not to be ignorant off. Firſt hee muſt be a diuine, that is, he muſt be
diuinelie giuen, he muſt aboue all things ſerue God, that God may bleſſe him,
in all his good indeuoures; hee muſt read the ſcriptures, for it is the
fountaine of all knowledge, & it teacheth the diuine harmonie of the ſoule of
man: for Muſicke is none other then a perfect harmonie, whoſe diuinitie is
ſeene in the perfectneſſe of his proportions, as, his vniſon ſheweth the
vnitie, from whence all other, (concords, diſcords, conſonancies, or others
whatſoeuer) ſpringeth, next his vnitie, his third: (which is the perfecteſt
concord that is in all Muſicke) repreſenteth the perfect, & moſt holie
Trinitie; his fift, (the moſt perfect conſonance in all Muſicke, for that it
is the verie eſſence of all con­cords) repreſenteth the perfection of that
moſt perfect number of fiue, which made the perfect atonement, betweene God,
and man; His eight, (which as it is, but as his vniſon,) repreſenteth his
Alpha and Omega: & as what is aboue his eight, is but as a repetition, as from
his vniſon, as it were a new beginning; ſo it ſhew­eth our returne from whence
we came, as it were, in notes of Muſicke, in a long or ſhort time, ſweet or
ſowre compoſition, and thus, (I hope, without offence to that moſt holie Alpha
and Omega) I conclude, the ne­ceſsitie of diuinitie in a Muſition. Now that a
Muſition ſhould bee a Phiſition, I ſee no ſuch neceſsitie, But that Muſicke is
Phiſical, it is plainlie ſeene by thoſe maladies it cureth. As it cureth
melancholie; it much pre­uaileth againſt madneſſe; If a man be in paines of
the gout, of any wound, or of the head, it much mittigateth the furie therof:
and it is ſaid, that Muſicke hath a ſalue for euerie ſore. But of neceſsitie,
a Muſition muſt be a perfect Arethmatition, for that Muſicke conſiſteth
altogether of true number, and proportion, and thus, at this ſo cheefe, and
neceſſarie ſcience of Arithmaticke, I hould it beſt to ſtay the proceſſe of
Muſicke, as tou­ching the neceſsitie of other than theſe, which I haue
mentioned to bee fit in a good Muſition.

Kni.

I like you wel, & loue your Muſicke the better, for your good diſcourſe
therof, and my hope is (in a maner) alreadie ſatisfied, but notwithſtanding,
there remaineth in mee, a little ſpark of feare of an euell that may happen,
after all your paines taken, and my coſt beſtowed.

Tim.

Why ſir, it may bee you feare leaſt your children ſhould die, when you haue
brought them vp well, and beſtowed great coſt vpon them, or if they ſhould
proue vnkinde hereafter, or if they ſhould ſet light by that good qualitie,
which coſt them ſo little, and you ſo much.

Kni.

You ſay well good Timotheus, all this is to be doubted, but I feare none ſo
much as the laſt, which is, that they will be careleſſe and forgetfull, of ſo
excellent a qualitie as is playing vpon the Lute; and my feare is the greater,
for that it was mine owne fault, that in my youth could haue played ſo well,
as any in thoſe daies, and now it is as cleane forgotten, and which is more, I
haue no willing mind in the world, either to practiſe (to recouer that I
loſt,) or to learne a new: for the play that is now, and the leſſons (that are
now a daies) are ſo curiouſlie ſet, that we of the olde mine, are ſmoakt vp
like to ſea cole, and this age, hath the golden ore, and ſparkling diamondes
of diuine Muſitions, that for mine owne part, I am content, to giue place both
to youth, and the time, onelie content to be an auditore, and louer of the
beſt,

Tim.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=4)

Sir, it is verie true, that manie, both men and women, that in their youth
could haue played (for that kinde of play) paſsing well, in their age, or when
they once haue beene married, haue forgotten all, as if they had neuer knowne
what a Lute had ment: and the reaſon I finde to proceed (in the beginning of
their learning) from the ignorance of their teachers, for in older times they
ſtroue (onelie) to haue a quick hand vpon the Lute, to runne hurrie hurrie,
keeping a Catt in the gutter vpon the ground, now true then falſe, now vp now
downe, with ſuch painfull play, mocking, mowing, gripeing, grinning, ſighing,
ſupping, heauing, ſhouldring. labouring, and ſweating, like cart Iades,
without any skill in the world, or rule, or reaſon to play a leſſon, or finger
the Lute, or guide the bodie, or know any thing, that belongeth, either to
skill or reaſon.

Kni.

Now truely Timotheus, I am perſwaded you haue hit the marke, and when it went
ſo hard with them in ſuch eaſie, and ſimple ſtuff, as then they vſed, what
ſhift would they make to play at the firſt ſight (in theſe daies) an
indifferent leſſon ſet, if they were now liuing, but I pray you can you play
any leſſon at the firſt ſight, and alſo teach others to doe the ſame.

Tim.

Yea Sir, that I can, or elſe I were not worthy to be a teacher, for it hath
ben the moſt part of my ſtudie to bring the Lute, Citharen, (and other
inſtruments of Muſick) into a method by generall rules, moſt per­fect and
eaſie, ſo that with my inſtructions, one (that cannot vſe the Lute, or other
inſtrument) may verie readilie attaine to a good habit therof.

Kni.

Well Timotheus, the verie truth is, I haue hard ſo much as you ſay, & therfore
in the name of God, begin with my children when you pleaſe, and God willing)
you ſhall bee pleaſed for your paines, but I will make this condition with you
(good Timotheus) that you ſhall giue me leaue to aske you ſome queſti­ons, by
the way, in your inſtructions, for it doth me good to heare your reaſon, how
ſay you Timotheus, are you content it ſhall bee ſo?

Tim.

With all my hart Sir, for by ſo doing, I ſhall daylie injoy your good
companie, and with all, it will greatlie further the profit of your children,
and with the more eaſe, and comfort paſſe ouer the tediouſ­nes of teaching.

Kni.

I thanke you Timotheus, but what if you did firſt write downe all ſuch rules
(as you vſe for in­ſtruction) that they may from the beginning, (hauing them
by hart) do nothing but that they may haue it in memorie and grounded by
reaſon.

Tim.

You ſay well it ſhall bee ſo, and at your pleaſure aske what queſtions you
pleaſe, and I will ſhew you the reaſon for it to the full, and I hope ſuch as
ſhall ſatisfie you fullie, wherefore in the name of God I thus begin. Firſt it
behoueth a ſcholer to haue a verie good inſtrument verie well ſtrung, faire to
the eie, and eaſie to reach any ſtop whatſoeuer, and verie well-ſounding.

Kni.

Why, mee thinks it were no great matter what inſtrument a beginner hath,
conſidering that for the moſt part, young beginners, ſoone make old
inſtruments, as young ſcholers ſoone make old bookes.

Tim.

Indeede to haue a good inſtrument lieth as much in the habilitie of the
parents or friends, as alſo in their good wils to haue it ſo; but why I think
it good to haue (if it were poſsible) euen the verie beſt inſtru­ment for a
learner at the firſt, is this: a good inſtrument will pleaſe a learner euery
way, for it delighteth them to looke and behold it now & then, likewiſe they
loue eaſie and ſmooth inſtruments, and although they can do but little, yet it
will ſound well, and ſo incourage them to learne with delight, whereas
contrariwiſe, a bad or dull inſtrument will quell their ſpirits quite, ſo that
in a long time, or neuer, will they profit in their forced labours.

Kni.

I promiſe you, it now ſeemeth to mee verie good reaſon that it ſhould bee ſo,
and againe it is an old and true ſaying, that one good thing is euer worth ten
bad, alſo there is ſmall loſſe in a good thing, it euer yeldeth monie with
profit: well here is a Lute according to your deſire in all points, I pray you
goe forward good Timotheus.

Tim.

Now you haue a good Lute, it behoueth you to loue it and vſe it well, for by
the vſage you ſhall ſhew your loue, therfore marke how you ought to vſe your
Lute, aboue all things, keepe it from wet, for wet will ſpoile the ſtrings and
make looſe the ribs, and when you haue done playing vpon it, put it vp into
the caſe, putting the Trebles a little down, but firſt you ſhall learne to
handle your Lute with a comelie grace, readie to play with delight, and to
this purpoſe in the name of God, doe as I ſhall inſtruct you.

GENERALL RVLES.

FIrſt ſitting vpright with your bodie, leane the edge of the Lute againſt the
table, and your bodie againſt the Lute, not too hard for hurting your Lute,
neither to ſoftlie for letting of it fall, for the table, your bo­die, and
your right arme, muſt ſo poyes the Lute, that you may haue your left hand at
libertie to carie to, and fro, at your pleaſure, letting the middle part of
the neck of the Lute, ſlide vp and downe the brawne of the thumb which is
againſt the nayle of the ſaid thumb, houlding out the wreſt of the hand, and
alwaies carrying your thumb againſt your forefinger in any ſtop whatſoeuer,
for ſo ſhall your hand be the more comelie, the more readie, and with the more
eaſe, ſtop any ſtop the cleaner, now for your right hand, called the ſtriking
hand leane vpon the bellie of the Lute with your little finger onelie, & that,
neither to far from the Treble ſtrings, neither to neere, and although you
ought to leane lightlie, yet carie your hand ſteddilie, not ſliding out of his
place, alſo remembring, to leane lightlie vpon your anne vpon your Lute, for
otherwiſe [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=4) it
will paine the ſinewes and hinder your play. All the aforeſaid had, both in
memorie and practiſe; (the houlding of your Lute, carrying of your hand, and
ſitting vpright with your bodie, I mean) then (in the name of God) houlding
the Lute (as is aforeſaid) comelie with your thumb againſt your forefinger (as
it were readie to ſtop, yet but onelie houlding your Lute then with the thumb
of your right hand (houlding the reſt of the fingers ſtraight forth before
your thumb (neither to neere the ſtrings nor too farre off, begin to ſtrik the
firſt ſtring downward with the thumb onelie, and alſo ſtriking with your thumb
behind your fingers ſay: Baſe, Tenor, Contra-tenor, Great Meanes, Small meanes
Treble. This done: then begin at the Trebles and ſo goe vpward viz. backward,
ſtriking them ſtring by ſtring with your forefinger before your thumb, that
is, houlding downe your thumb behind your fingers, and name them in order
ſaying, Treble Small Meanes, Great Meanes, Contratenor, Tenor, Baſe, this
doing ſo oft, downward and vpward, nameing them, and alſo ſtriking them with
the thumb behind the fingers, that you haue it moſt perfect and readie both in
mind & fingers. This perfectlie had: learne to know your frets in order, and
in ſtoping them comelie, cleanlie, & ſtronglie, the firſt ſtring or Treble,
ſtopped in the firſt fret, by the head of the Lute with the fore­finger, is
[...] in the Treble, and ſo ſtopped in the ſmall meanes, great meanes &c. The
firſt fret is  [...] the ſe­cond fret is  [...] the third fret is  [...] and
ſo forth vntill you come to  [...] which is the laſt fret about the neck of
the Lute, but you may glue on more fretts in fit place and ſpace (vntill you
come to  [...]. Againe if you haue 14. 16. or 18. ſtrings, thoſe baſes are
called Diapaſones, now hauing the names & knowledge of the ſtrings and ſtops
perfectly by roate, you ſhall alſo learne to know them by booke (called
Tableture.)

Kni.

Now truely Timoth: I like this method verie well, for I perceiue, great reaſon
in it: But we (in old time) haue bene taught with rigour, not by reaſon, &
that made vs thē run, now vnregarded; for I ſee, that the houlding of the
thombe alwaies againſt the fore-finger, giueth (not onely a great eaſe, &
grace to the player) but alſo, it determineth a certain limitation to the
hand, as of neceſsitie it muſt be ſo: proceed good Timotheus.

Tim.

Sir, by this you ſee, how neceſſarie a thing it is, to know how to hould an
inſtrument, before it is to know how to ſtop it, and likewiſe, how fit it is
to know (both how to hould, & what to ſtop, firſt by roate, before it were fit
to learne by the booke: for quell the ſpirits, & quaile delight. Now you know
how to hold your Lute; alſo, what the ſtrings and ſtops are, vvithout booke:
Now you ſhall learne vvhat they be by the booke; look how you name them vpon
the Lute in order, vpward, and downward, ſo theſe lines, by the like
denomination, ſhall ſignifie vnto you what ſtrings they be by Tableture.
Example.

  * Treble.  [...]
  * Small Meanes.  [...]
  * Great Meanes,  [...]
  * Contra-tenor.  [...]
  * Tenor.  [...]
  * Baſe.  [...]

SOme in the ſteed of (i) put (y) and although you, heere ſee but ſix ſingle
lines, and vpon the Lute eue­rie ſtring double, you ſhall vnderſtand, that two
ſtrings are in one tune, & alſo beare the name but of one ſtring: as Baſe, not
Baſes, Tenor, not Tenors. Now let vs proceede, to learne a leſſon by the
booke. But firſt take this leſſon by the way, offer not raſhly to ſtop or
ſtrike, but be well aduiſed, with what finger to ſtop, & with what to ſtrike,
and for that purpoſe, mark what figure ſtandeth vnder the letter, whether the
figure of 1. 2. 3. or 4. for theſe figures repreſent the 4. fingers of the
left or ſtopping hand. The figure of 1. repre­ſenteth the firſt or fore-
finger. 2. the ſecond. 3. the third, and 4. the little finger. Alſo that
letter which is to be ſtriken downward, and if there be a prick vnder the
letter, that letter muſt be ſtriken vpward: this well noted, begin to play
theſe ſtops and ſtrokes following, ſtriking them by 4. and 4. all in one
length of time, vntill you can play it a pace, or runne it quick.  [...]

Doe theſe points perfectly, not ſtriuing at it, but with ſuch eaſe, as if you
did it careleſly, obſeruing the car­riage both of hand & body; & when you are
weary, leaue it, and to it againe, but go to it with a willing minde.

Kni.

How would you haue them learne this leſſon, not knowing the tymes ouer head?
were it not neceſ­ſarie to teach them that firſt?

Tim.

No, for the time without ſtops or tune, is but an abſtract, & my purpoſe is,
firſt to teach thē the ſtops, & then the times with all afterwards: &
therfore, I haue ſet it with all one time ouer head, as you ſee, vntill the
leſſon be perfectly had, & both the name & nature of that time well cōmitted
to memory, and this leſſon had, than will I inſtruct them in all the varieties
of tymes: as followeth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=5) A young
beginner (although this were Semiquauer tyme) ſhall in the deſpight of his
hart, make euery ſtroke a Semibrefe, & then as he multiplyeth in perfectnes,
ſo he ſhal multiply in faſtneſſe of tyme, wherby is to be noted, that from one
time all other are multiplyed & doubled, as for example. This long ſtroke here
[...] is in Tableture, a Semibrefe, which by adding of one daſh to the top, as
thus,  [...] maketh it double his tyme, that is twice as faſt a tyme as it was
before. And by adding one daſh more to that daſh thus,  [...] maketh it yet as
faſt againe as the ſecond: & by adding a third daſh thus,  [...] maketh it yet
as faſt againe as the ſame. And by adding the fourth daſh thus,  [...]
doubleth the time before him: whoſe names are as followeth.  [...] A
Semibrefe. A Minim. A Cratchet. A Quauer. A Semiquauer.

So that you ſee two Minims go to a Semibrefe, as thus;  [...] two Cratchets to
a Minim, as thus,  [...] two quauers to a Cratchet, as thus.  [...] And two
Semiquauers to a Quauer, as thus,  [...] All which multiply the Semibrefe, as
heere you ſee.  [...]

Heere you ſee, two Minims make a Semibrefe. Likewiſe, foure Cratchets make a
Semibrefe. Alſo, eight Quauers go to a Semibrefe. And laſtly, ſixtene
Semiquauers go to a Semibrefe. This is ſufficient for the knowing of the
tymes; onely, that if there be a little prick, beſide any one of them, thus,
[...] that then that prick doth make the tyme he ſtādeth by, half ſo long
againe as it was before; as a prick by a Semibrefe maketh it a Semibrefe &
half a Semibrefe: & ſo of all the reſt; & this learne by hart.

Kni.

Well when they can run this point or treble (as you call it) by 4. and 4.
together in order, a Qua­uer or Semiquauer time, what is therby to be noted,
or learned, as a profit attained towards the readie play­ing of a leſſon at
the firſt ſight, which they neuer ſee before.

Tim.

It is a verie neceſſarie queſtion which you demaund, and you ſhall vnderſtand,
how neceſſarie, true, and perfect a rule it is, which not knowne, it is
impoſsible that euer one ſhould play a leſſon, either at the firſt ſight, or
cunningly: For firſt, where you ſee a letter or ſtop without any prick vnder
it, you ſhall for euer in the like ſtop, ſtrike it downward, for two reaſons,
the firſt is, if it ſtand alone, that is, if it be a  [...] and the next a
[...] or the firſt a  [...] and the ſecond a  [...] the firſt a  [...] the
next a  [...] going ſo inſe­uerall times, as thus.  [...] Theſe are ſaid to
ſtand alone, that is, not being accompanied with fel­lows, all of one time,
either Cratchets, Quauers, or Se­miquauers: as thus,  [...]

And alſo being of a long tyme, as Semibrefes and Minoms, for it is a generall
rule, that euerie ſtroke, is more naturall to be ſtriken downward, than
vpward; but the ſwiftneſſe of tyme, is the cauſe of ſtriking vp­ward, and the
far­neſſe off, of ſe­conding a point, as thus:  [...] for heere  [...] in the
treble being the firſt of a point, is ſtriken vpward, which if the point were
all of one ſtring, or ſtill the next vnto it, thus:  [...] Going in 4. and 4.
then for euer, the firſt is downe, the ſecond is vp; ſo that if the pricks
were away, this is a generall rule. Now by this rule, you may by occaſion,
ſtrike twice down together; as if you haue a point be­gin thus,  [...] Heere
the firſt is downeward, becauſe it ſtands alone; And the ſecond, is ſtriken
downeward, becauſe it is the firſt of a point; this is one neceſſarie rule,
and alſo profitable. The ſecond rule is, you ſee in the firſt point, how you
vſe but two fingers in all the whole leſſon, that is, the fore-finger & the
ſecond alwaies houlding your thoumb againſt your fore-finger. Now, it is a
generall rule, that where you leaue no ſtop, leaue no finger; and where you
leaue a ſtop, leaue a finger, as this example following ſheweth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=5) [...]

Heere you ſee betwixt  [...] and  [...] no ſtop betweene, therefore you leaue
no finger betweene; againe you ſee, that in the next ſtop where you haue
[...] and  [...] you leaue a ſtop which is  [...], and conſequently you leaue
a finger betweene the firſt and the third, which is the ſecond, and this is
ingenerall, in playing of any Treble whatſoeuer. Now you haue a generall rule
for ſtriking, downeward and vpward, and alſo for leauing a finger and no
finger. Now you ſhall haue a generall rule to grace it, as with paſhionate
play, and reliſhing it: and note that the longer the time is of a ſingle
ſtroke, that the more neede it hath of a reliſh, for a reliſh will help, both
to grace it, and alſo it helps to continue the ſound of the note his full
time: but in a quicke time a little touch or jerke will ſerue, and that onely
with the moſt ſtrongeſt finger. Paſsionate play is to runne ſome part of the
ſquares in a Treble (that is foure and foure) firſt loud, then ſoft, and ſo in
a decorum, now louder, now ſofter, (not in extremitie of either) but as
companie of other inſtruments, or farneſſe off giueth occaſion. And to the
better inſtruction of all ſcholers for the Lute, I will (God willing) ſet
downe ſome, Trebles, which ſhall containe all manner and kinde of points for
the fingering, in their due place of my booke, and the grounds alſo to be
playd with them, when they pleaſe, (and can haue the ground plaid to them.)
And now (God willing) I will proceed to inſtruct my ſcholer how to play, a
full leſſon, what ſtrange inuention ſoeuer it ſhall ſeeme to haue in it.
Notwithſtanding, I haue knowne ſome (which haue bene more curious, than either
cunni [...] or wiſe,) who haue ſtriuen to finde out ſtops, both vnnaturall,
vn­pleaſant, and vnvſuall, (forſooth to be  [...]hought great bugges) that
haue in all their liues, not bene able to play euen but an eaſie leſſon (in
compariſon) at the firſt ſight. But rob, and run by gueſſe, ſeeme gaye, &
goodly &c. But let ſuch looke heere; and they ſhall finde reaſon to guide
them, and truth in Arte. And ſo let them take heede of thould ſaying, Art hath
no enemie but Ignorance. Now to the purpoſe, before: I haue taught you, how to
behaue your ſelfe in all ſingle ſtops, now be as diligent in all ſorts of full
ſtops: for in this lyeth all the whole skill: for that in a full leſſon, all
manner of ſtops, full or ſingle, ſwift or ſlow, are contained; therefore know
this, and know all, all which I will ſhew you in breefe and generall rules
(God willing,) with all ſuch examples as ſhall ſeeme fit.

Firſt, you ſhall vnderſtand, that wee terme the fore-finger, and the little
finger (of the ſtopping hand) two extreames: for that they be the outmoſt
parts thereof; & that in going down­ward with a point, (frō the head of the
Lute) the point is alwaies begun with the forefinger, as thus:  [...]

But contrariwiſe, from the bodie of the Lute, to the head, the point muſt be
begun, with the other extreame, as this example ſheweth.  [...]

All ſuch points, I will ſet downe in a fit place by themſelues, but by this
example of the two extreams, you ſee the firſt gouerneth the vpper part or
frets, and the other, the nether part, or next loweſt: and thus the forefinger
alwaies, in any ſtop wher (b) is, full, or ſingle, except there bee in one
ſtop, 2. (bees,) and an (a) betweene) is to poſſeſſe the ſtop (b) as this
example maketh plaine:  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=6) Note alſo,
that  [...] in any of the Baſes in a full ſtop, wherein is an  [...] (& in the
more Treble ſtrings  [...] is the loweſt of the ſtop) that that  [...] is to
be ſtopped with the ſecond finger alwaies: but if there be (in ſted of  [...]
with  [...] in one of the Baſes) an  [...] than  [...] muſt bee ſtop­ded with
the fore-finger, as thus:  [...]

But in any full ſtop whatſoeuer, wherein ther is neuer an  [...] there lay
your fore-finger along in the higheſt of the ſtop, flat vpon the neck of the
Lute; as thus:  [...]

Heere lay your fore-finger along, in the firſt ſtop, in  [...] in the next, in
[...] in the next, in  [...] in the next, in  [...] &c. Alwaies noting this,
that in any ſtop whatſoeuer, that you pluck away no finger, vntill you needes
muſt. And as before I haue taught you how to relyſh in a ſingle ſtop, with
that finger which is the ſtrongeſt, ſo take this for a generall rule, that you
relyſh in a full ſtop, with that finger which is moſt ideleſt, in any ſtring
whatſoeuer: either a ſtrong relyſh for loudneſſe, or a milde relyſh for
paſsionate attencion.

Kni.

In mine opinion, you haue ſpoke ſo much as may be ſpoken, for the left hand in
all points: but I pray you, are there not the like rules for the right hand,
called the ſtriking hand.

Tim.

Yes Sir, that there be: for what auaileth it to ſtop neuer ſo neate, fine and
cleane, and if it be flubberd with a bad touch, or ſtroke: therefore, let
theſe rules following, be obſerued diligently, without the which, all fine
play of the Lute is ſpoild, and nothing worth. Note, that you ſtrike cleane,
plump together in a full ſtroke of many parts or ſtrings, ſometimes loude,
ſometimes ſoft, letting your right hand, anſwere the left hand at the inſtant,
ſtriuing with no ſtroke: and to conclude, the touch of the one hand, to
anſwere the ſtop of the other hand, in the full harmony of conſent, (called a
Simpathie,) and then to know what ſtrings to ſtrike, with what fingers, mark
all theſe rules following, and let them not be forgotten.

You haue heard, that euery ſtrok is more naturally to be ſtriken downeward
then vpward, which is very true, but aboue all, the Baſes are to be ſtriken
downeward, and for the ſame purpoſe, you ſee how aptly the thumb fitteth that
office, and likewiſe the fingers remaine as readie to ſtrike vpward and meet
the thumbe with their troupes of notes, as who ſhould ſay the one were readie
to aid the other; and ſo they bee, yet ſome­times ſeuerall, one afore the
other, as ſometimes firſt the thumbe, and the fingers after, ſometimes the
fingers firſt, and the thumbe after, and ſometimes both together, as heere
vnderneath you ſee.  [...]

Heere, the Tenor beginneth the point with  [...] open ſtriken downeward with
the thumbe, and  [...] in the Treble followes ſtriken vpward with the third
finger, next  [...] in the Contratenor ſtriken downeward with the thumbe, &
laſt of the 4 followes  [...] in the ſmall Meanes, ſtriken vpward with the
ſecond finger. And novv the reaſon why  [...] in the Treble and  [...] in the
ſmall Meanes, are ſtriken vpward with the third and ſecond fingers, is this,
the more ſtrings are betweene the Baſe and Trebles, the more fingers are left
betweene the the thumb and little finger, and likewiſe the fewer ſtrings the
fewer fingers, as you ſee aboue mentioned.

Againe where you ſee three prickes vnder any letter as thus  [...] you ſhall
ſtrike that letter vpward with the third finger, and ſo when you ſee two
prickes thus  [...] vpward with the ſecond, and one pricke with the fore
finger as thus  [...]. It skils not what letter, or ſtrng it is, but if a
point begin with two letters together, al­though it follow the point either in
the Trebles, Meanes, or Baſes, yet ſhall the ſecond of the point be ſtri­ken
vpward as for example.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=6) [...]

Heere you ſee the forefinger poſſeſſe his due place, as is aboue mentioned,
alwaies obſeruing the diſtance of ſtrings, and this is ſufficient for all ſuch
points or places whatſoeuer.

Kni.

Although this at the firſt, ſeeme hard to vnderſtand, yet it ſtandeth with
very good reaſon, and it muſt be wonne with labour and diligence, and when a
man hath ſaid neuer ſo much, or all that hee can ſay, yet there will ſomewhat
remaine for a learner to finde out and conſider vpon by himſelfe. Yet is there
remaining (to ſpeake of two eſpeciall points behind, which is, when and how to
vſe a fall with a reliſh, and alſo a rule to tune the Lute.

Tim.

You ſay very true Sir, and one more then you thinke off, not leſſe needefull
then any of the reſt, and that is this: remember alwaies to keepe your hands
cleane, and your nailes ſhort, and alſo earely and late to practiſe, Quia
Labor vincet omnia. Now to your fall with a reliſh, or a fall without a
reliſh: take this for a generall rule, that all fals in what ſtop ſoeuer, in a
flat note, muſt bee performed with the neereſt finger to the halfe notes, and
in a ſharp note or ſtop, with the neereſt and ſtrongeſt finger to a full note.
As heere you ſee vnderneath for example.  [...]

Heere the ſtops where  [...] is placed, muſt haue his fall from  [...] in the
ſame ſtring where  [...] is placed, (the finger laid along in  [...].) muſt
haue his fall from  [...] in the ſame ſtrings, in the next where  [...] is in
the Treble, becauſe  [...] is ſharp, muſt haue his fall from the full note
[...], and  [...] hauing had his fall, may ſo bee held ſtill without mouing
the forefinger, and the reliſh continued (with the little finger) in  [...]
which is vn­der halfe note, and ſo of all the reſt.

Now you ſhall learne to tune your Lute, and for a generall rule, firſt ſet vp
the Treble, ſo high as you dare venter for breaking, ſetting them both in one
tune or ſound called an vniſon; then in the like ſort ſet vp the ſmall Meanes,
ſtopping them in  [...], and making them in  [...] agree with the Trebles in
[...], which is like­wiſe an vniſon. Likewiſe make the great Meanes in  [...]
an vniſon with the ſmall Meanes in  [...], the Contra­tenor in  [...] an
vniſon with the great Meanes in  [...], the Tenor in  [...] with the Contra-
tenor in  [...], and like­wiſe the Baſe being ſtopped in  [...] to agree with
the Tenor in  [...] in the vniſon, as appeareth in the forme following.  [...]

Kni.

Now I thanke you Timotheus, for all your paines, I like it paſsing well. Now
ſet downe ſome leſ­ſons, for now there remaineth onely them behind.

Tim.

I hope I haue not erred verie much in my indeauours, and for leſſons, you
ſhall haue ſome of all ſorts, but yet (beſides leſſons) there is this that
followeth remaining, to be ſpoken off.

When you haue learned all the rules ſpoken off before perfectly, and can giue
a good eſſay of any leſ­ſon at the firſt ſight. Yet this one rule more, ſhall
fullie conclude, what hath or can bee ſaid concerning the playing of a leſſon
at the firſt ſight. Therefore whenſoeuer there is a leſſon giuen you to play
at the firſt ſight. Firſt looke it ouer before you offer to play it, for theſe
reaſons following.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=7) Firſt ſee what
manner of leſſon it is, whether it bee a ſet Song, Innomine, Pauen, Galiard,
Almaine, Iigue Lauolta, Coranta, Country dance, or Toy, whatſoeuer, according
to the nature of the leſſon, to giue it his grace with grauitie or quicknes.
Secondly by looking it ouer, you ſhall ſee the faſteſt time in all the leſſon
contained, that accordingly you may ſo begin as you may goe through without
check. Thirdly by looking it ouer firſt, you ſhal ſee whether it be faire &
true prickt, without blots. Laſtly, by hauing once ſeene it, you may the
better remember it when you ſee it againe. All theſe reaſons well conſidered,
you ſhall finde in them ſuch neceſſitie, ſuch truth, ſuch eaſe, with ſuch
content & delight, as you will confeſſe, that it were impoſſible to play well
with out the knowledge therof: For true Art maketh hard things eaſie, labour
maketh hard things perfect, or (to ſpeake more truely) ready. Now, when you
can play vpon the Lute, I will (God willing) ſhew you how your Lute ſhall
inſtruct you to ſing; in ſomuch that you may be your owne teacher, and ſaue
the charge of a ſinging man, and then what by your skill in playing vpon the
Lute, and the knowledge you haue in the prickſong, you may verie eaſilie
attaine to play vpon the Viol de Gambo, either by Tabliture or by prickſong
notes. For the carriage of your left hand vpon the Lute, is likewiſe juſtly to
be obſerued vpon the baſe Viol, as ſhall bee more plainely declared in his due
place after the Lute leſſons.

And thus for a laſt farewell (for this time) I giue you in general charge, to
vſe all inſtruments with a good grace, comelie play, without anticke faces, or
ſhouldrings, except ſuch (which of neceſſitie) the nature of the inſtrument
doth require; as, reaching ſtops vpon the Lute, wher you lay your finger along
& ſtretch out your little finger along at length, as from  [...] to  [...],
and in comming from the Trebles of the Viol, to the Baſe, wher of neceſſitie
you muſt, ſomewhat thruſt the neck of the Viol from you, and ſhrink in the bow
hand, to come fitly vnto it. And now it makes mee ſomewhat ſhrinke, to thinke
that:

PArhaps, there may ſome Chriticke Satire ſad,

(Fraught with the Froth of vulgars excellent)

Hunt for a praiſe, and ſay how that is bad,

Which hee doth know ſo much as Iacke a Lent,

Such Hounds I ſay, when they their mouths haue ſpent,

Let them take heed their hunting be not ſpide,

Leaſt that the Glouer hang them for their hide.

I know, the Enuious, Idle, Ignorant,

Will ſpit at mee the poyſon of their ſplene,

Againe, I know  [...]

Will not miſlike, when they my works haue ſeene,

An Honeſt minde will ſoone know what I meane.

For Countries cauſe a Souldiour ſpends his Blood,

And I my Talent for my Countries good.

Now I haue led the Way and broke the Ice,

Caſt out the Lumps and left the Water cleere:

If any one to follow make it nice,

And yet that they can Better it will ſweare,

To ſuch I ſpeake Aloud that they may heare,

Except they Doe't they will not be Beleeu'd,

And being Caſt, tis hard to bee Repreeu'd.

I doe not Rob the Skilfull of their due,

Nor Patch my Bad, with other Good inuention,

For if Old grounds Falſe ſet, I doe make True,

Therein I ſhew of Art the true intention,

And this (I hope) deſerues no reprehenſion.

But yet I know, how Well I ere intend it,

Some will far ſooner finde a Fault then mend it.

Some Mandrake Mome, diſpoſde to pick a Quarrell,

(Aſſ. if hee doe, it is a thing that drempt I on)

Will ſay I ſpeake too much vpon the Barrell,

And ſo I doe, but yet it is an emptie one,

How ere it is, yet ſo it is that tempt I on,

The Wiſe, to worke his euerlaſting Fame,

The Foole, to worke his euerlaſting Shame.

T. R.

FINIS.

## 2\.

### 2.1.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=7) THe Queenes
good Night.  [...]

Heere followeth the Ground.

### 2.2.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=8) TWenty waies
vpon the bels  [...]

Heere followeth the ground.

### 2.3.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=8) ROw well you
Marriners. Heere keepe your fore-finger along in  [...]

### 2.4.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=9) A Galliard.

[...]

### 2.5.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=9) A Galliard
[...]

### 2.6.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=10) A Plaine ſong
for two Lutes.  [...]

### 2.7.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=10) A Plaine ſong
for two Lutes.  [...] Laborant, [...]

### 2.8.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=11) GRiſſe his
delight.  [...]

### 2.9.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=11) PAſſer
[...]ezo galyard.  [...]

[...] Heere followeth the ground to this Treble.

### 2.10.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=12) A Fantaſie
for two Lutes. All in Vniſons.  [...]

### 2.11.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=12) A Fantaſie
for two Lutes. All in Vniſons.

[...]

### 2.12.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=13) A Toy for two
Lutes.  [...]

### 2.13.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=13) A Toy for two
Lutes.  [...]

### 2.14.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=14) A GALLIARD.
[...]

### 2.15.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=14) MErry
Melancholie.

[...]

### 2.16.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=15) RObinſons
Riddle.  [...]

### 2.17.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=15) GOe from my
Window.  [...]

### 2.18.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=16) A TOY.  [...]

### 2.19.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=16) AGIGVE.
[...]

### 2.20.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=17) AN ALMAIGNE.
[...]

### 2.21.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=17) AN ALMAIGNE.
[...]

### 2.22.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=18) A TOY.  [...]

### 2.23.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=18) A TOY.  [...]

### 2.24.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=19) RObin is to
the greenwood gone.  [...]

### 2.25.

ATOY.  [...]

### 2.26.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=19) THe Queenes
Gigue.  [...]

### 2.27.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=20) VT Re Mi Fa
Sol La 9 ſundry waies: for one Lute.  [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=20) [...]

### 2.28.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=21) MY Lord
Willobies welcome home.  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=21) [...]

### 2.29.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=22) BELL VEDERE.
[...] [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=22) [...]

### 2.30.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=23) THe Spaniſh
Pauin.  [...] [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=23)
[...]

### 2.31.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=24) AGIGVE.
[...]

### 2.32.

AGIGVE.  [...]

### 2.33.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=24) WAlking in a
country towne.  [...]

### 2.34.

BOny ſweet boy.  [...]

### 2.35.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=25) AGIGVE.
[...]

### 2.36.

LANTERO.  [...]

### 2.37.

THree parts in one vpon an old ground.

[...]

Heere endeth the Tabliture for the Lute.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=25)

## 3\. Rules to inſtruct you to Sing.

FIRST, you ſhall vnderſtand, that all that is to be done in ſong, is within
the compaſſe of an eight, called a Di­apaſon, for what is aboue an eight, is
but a repetition of the ſame notes which you vttered before, in the eight
notes of your Gam-vt.

As for example.

[...]

Heere you ſee, that from Gam-vt to G-ſol-re-vt in ſpace, to G-ſol-re-vt in
rule aboue, are the ſame in number, quantitie and qualitie: which according to
the Alphabet, from G. a. b. c. d. e. f. and then G. againe by rule and ſpace,
are expreſſed in the Diapaſon, by fiue termes, words, or notes, as thus. Vth
for vt, re, mi fa, ſol, la, and ſo ſtill the higher you goe, fa, ſol, la, mi,
fa, ſol, la, &c. which is thus expreſſed in tablature.

[...]

Now you haue gotten the way to tune your voice, (note for note) with the Lute
in the vniſon, (that is: all in one tune or ſound, or eight vnder) then you
may rule your voice to the Viol alſo: Firſt knowing the quantitie of tymes,
and their reſts; for the which purpoſe I haue ſet out ſome Pſalmes, both to
the voice, and Lute, and voice & Viol, in the Vniſon, for your ſure guide.
Alſo, I haue ſet them full to the Lute, ſo that you may vſe which you pleaſe
it your pleaſure. The times of prickſong, you may know by the times of the
Lute: as followeth.

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=26) Hould your
Viole ſomewhat ſtrongly betweene your legs, and in all points, carrie your
left hand vpon it, as you doe vpon the Lute.

Hould your bow or ſtick, hard by the Nut of it, with your forefinger, aboue
the ſtick, your ſecond and third fing­er (in the hollow of the Nut) betwene
the heire and the ſtick, and your little finger beneath the heire, ſlack quite
from it.

### 3.1. UALE.

[...] VT Re Mi Fa Sol La La Sol Fa Mi Re Vt Re Vt.

[...]

vt mi re fa mi ſol fa la la fa ſol mi fa re mi vt.

[...]

vt fa re ſol mi la fa fa fa fa la mi ſol re fa vt  [...]

vt ſol re la mi mi fa ſol ſol fa mi mi la re ſol vt.  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=26) [...] v s r l
l r s v f f l l f l  [...]

### 3.2.

[...] A Pſalme. s l s f s f l s s s f l s f f f l f s l f l s s f l l s s
[...]

s f f s l l s l s f s s f f f f l s s f l f s f l l s  [...]

### 3.3.

[...]

A Pſalme. s m l m s l m f f m l s s l l  [...]

l m l s s f s m l s s f s  [...]

### 3.4.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=27) A Pſalme.
[...] [...]

### 3.5.

A Pſalme.  [...] [...] [...]

### 3.6.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=27) A Pſalme.
[...]

### 3.7.

[...]A Pſalme.  [...]

### 3.8.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=28) [...] For the
Viol by ſong.

FOr the Viol by Tableture  [...] [...] [...]

### 3.9.

[...] A Pſalme.  [...]

### 3.10.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=28) [...] SWeet I
E S V who ſhall lend mee wings.  [...]

### 3.11.

[...] A Pſalme.  [...]

### 3.12.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=29) [...] O Lord
of whom I doe depend.  [...]

### 3.13.

[...] O Lord that art my righteouſneſſe.  [...]

Finis

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1719&page=29)

[Home](/)

Robinson, Thomas, fl. 1589-1609.. Date: 1603  

