## (unknown project)

# A third proceeding in the harmonie of King Dauids harp that is to say, a
godly and learned exposition vpon 17. Psalmes moe of the princely prophet
Dauid, beginning with the 45. and ending with the 61. Psalme: done in Latine
by the learned Reuerend Doctor Victorinus Strigelius, Professor of Diuinitie
in the Vniuersitie of Lypsia in Germanie, anno Christi, 1562. Translated into
English, by Richard Robinson citizen of London. An. Christi, 1595. Seene,
perused, and allowed. — Hypomnēmata in omnes Psalmos Davidis. Psalm 45-61.
English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=1)

A THIRD PROCEEDING IN THE HARMONIE OF KING DAVIDS HARP: That is to ſay, A
godly and learned Expoſition vpon 17\. Pſalmes moe of the Princely Prophet
DAVID, beginning with the 45. and ending with the 61. Pſalme: Done in Latine
by the learned Reuerend Doctor VICTORINVS STRIGELIVS, Profeſſor of Diuinitie
in the Vniuerſitie of Lypſia in Germanie, Anno Chriſti, 1562.

Tranſlated into English, by RICHARD RO­BINSON Citizen of London. An. Chriſti,
1595.

Seene, peruſed, and allowed.

Iudith, cap. 16. verſ. 2.

Begin vnto my God with tymbrels; Sing to my Lord with cymbals; Tune vnto him a
Pſalme; exalt his prayſe, and call vpon his name.

AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Sims. Anno Dom. 1595.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=2)

SEMPER EADEM.

Gallia victa dedit Flores, Inuicta Leones

Anglia; Ius belli, in Flore, Leone ſuum:

O ſic, ô ſemper ferat ELIZABETHA triumphos,

Inclita Gallorum Flore, Leone ſuo.

## Briefe contents of the ſaid xvij. Pſalmes in this Booke expounded.

  * Of Doctrine as Pſalme 45. 49, 50.
  * Of Doctrine, and pro­phecie 47
  * Of Prayer, as Pſalme 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, & 59.
  * Of Conſolation, as Pſalme 58.
  * Of Victories or Tri­umphs. 46, & 48.
  * Of Dauids inuectiue to the detection of Doeg. 52.
  * Of Slander conuinced,
  * Of Truth aduanced 53
  * Of Humiliation & ex­altation 60
  * Of Prayer and thankeſ giuing. 61

‘Humilium Deus Auxilium.’Iudith 9. verſ.  [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=2)

## To the right high and migh­tie Princeſſe, moſt gracious QVEENE, and Elect
nurſing Mother of Gods Iſrael, ELIZA­BETH by the grace of God, Queene of
England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith: and (next vnder God) of
the Churches of England and Ire­land, on earth the Supreme head and Goueruour.  
Your Maieſties moſt humble and loyall ſubiect R. R. prayeth vnto God to graunt
your High­neſſe a long, gracious and bleſſed raigne ouer vs, to the
ad­uancement of Chriſts euerlaſting kingdome, the com­fort of the faithfull,
and either to the conuerſion, or ſubuerſion of all inward and outward enemies
to the ſame: by and through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and Saui­our Euerlaſting.

MOST Chriſtian Princeſſe, moſt Gracious QVEENE, and my moſt ſacred Soue­reigne
Lady; if Cicero the moſt learned eloquent Oratour, be­ing deſired to ſay his
minde in matters of importance, anſwe­red, (excuſing himſelfe) that he had
read nothing the day before: and if the Centurion a man of valour and
authoritie diſabled himſelfe asMatth. 8. 8. one vnworthy to receiue Chriſt the
King of kings vn­der his roofe: much more may I being long ſince a ſimple
poore ſcholler from ſeuen to fourteene yeeres of age enfranchiſed in a free
Grammar ſchole, (where­of was Founder and Patrone that learned worthie ſubiect
M. Iohn Magnus, an officer of good accompt to the moſt noble King Henry the
eight, your Maieſties
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=3) deare father
of bleſſed memorie) after that other ſeuen yeeres diſcontinuing from the ſame
in this fran­chiſed Citie of London, and for theſe 31. yeeres here labouring
(as God vouchſafed me ability) to renewe and increaſe my poore and ſimple
talent, not yet attei­ning to perfection of learning, nor maintenance of
li­uing; much more, I ſay, may I ſeeme ſo ſimple a ſchol­ler to excuſe my
ſelfe as altogether inſufficient to pre­ſent or preferre my mind, or any my ſo
ſlender labors vnto your ſo learned and excellent Maieſtie. And much more may
I ſeeme to diſable my ſelfe (a ſubiect of ſuch inferiour eſtate) as vnworthie
to craue or re­ceiue for protection of my vndeſeruing induſtry, the gracious
fauor of ſo ſacred a QVEENE, the peereleſſe Peragon of all earthly Princes at
this day. But becauſe (as Christ the God of Gods, and Kings of kings onely
knoweth, whoſe image and authoritie ſhineth in your roiall Maieſty, and in
whom and for whom according to all duty I honor your moſt excellent Highneſſe)
I come not with Cicero, vttering eloquence plauſible to any Romane Caeſar, nor
with Demoſthenes to admire at prophane King Philip the ſon of Amyntas, but (by
your ſacred Maieſties moſt Gracious pardon, and godly Princely fauour, here
with all ſubmiſſion, craued) I come dutifully addreſſing, dedicating, and
preſenting this my poore vnpoliſhed trauell, and tranſlation of theſe fewe
Pſalmes mo into Engliſh: yeelding them alſo for a deuoted pledge of my loyal
duetie and due­tifull allegeance vnto your moſt excellent Maieſtie, as to the
elect nurſing mother of Chriſtes Apoſtolicke Church, a Royall foſterer of the
right, true, and Euan­gelicall faith, and a magnificent defender of the true
Chriſtian profeſſors of the ſame, Euen ſo, (my moſt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=3) Gracious,
Natural, and dread ſouereigne Lady) in all loyall and dutifull obedience, I
humbly craue and be­ſeech your moſt excellent Highneſſe, albeit with aged
Barzillai I haue herein brought my imperfect2\. Sam. 19. 35. ſence and ſkill
in this muſicall melodie and heauenly har­monie of the Harp ſounding in King
Dauids Court. And though I ſerue in here at the Bridegromes feaſt (where
Chriſt our Sauiour is preſent) meare water with cleare wine, that it would
pleaſe your moſt gracious Maie­ſtie,Iohn 2. 7. of your ſacred cenſure and
Princely beneuolence to conceiue and receiue in good part my true intent,
dutifull zeale, and painfull poore trauell herein: euen as our Sauiour Christ
couceiued and receiued The Iohn 5. 9. petition of that perſon 38. yeeres
grieued with a diſeaſe, and in his mercie cured him. Alſo, As one awaking vp
last of al, Ecclus 33. gathering after others in the vintage, &c. And finally,
as Iohn 2. 10. the Lord Ieſus accepted in good part the ſeruitors beſt wine
kept vntill the laſt ſeruice. Which my preſent poore trauell, as I beſeech the
onely Almightie, true & eter­nall God to frame adapt and coapt to the
perpetuall aduancement of his glorious name and euerlaſting kingdome: So I
humbly craue and heartily beſeech his diuine Maieſtie, long, graciouſly,
victoriouſly and bleſſedly to protect and prolong the dayes of your Royal
Maieſties reigne ouer vs, to defend you king­dome and true ſubiects, with the
happie increaſe of your faithfull friends, either to the ſpeedy conuerſion or
vtter ſubuerſion of all inward and outward ene­mies to the premiſes, by and
through Christ Ieſus our Lord and Sauior euerlaſting. Amen. Sept. 29.

Your Maieſties moſt humble and obedient poore ſubiect Richard Robinſon

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=4)

## ❧ To the curteous Reader.

THis booke hath many and great recommendations; The text is warranted by God
himſelfe; The pen is king Da­uids, as great a Prophet as a Prince. The
origiuall Latine Com­mentarie made by a man of great learning and iudgement,
Vi­ctorinus Strigellius, in the Vniuerſitie of Lypſia in Germanie, which you
ſee; what accompt is to be made of M. Robinſons great paines in the
tranſlating of ſuch a worke ſo well warran­ted, and thereby of moſt aſſured
profit to the Chriſtian and ad­uiſed Reader.

Richard Mulsaſter.

CAn I declare, or any els,

what they deſerue to haue,

That labour much, and paines doe take,

mens ſoules to feede and ſaue?

But whatſoeuer is their hire,

at mans vnthankefull hand,

They ſhalbe ſure for to enioy,

at length the quiet land.

Which God wil giue vnto eche one,

that vertue doth attend.

And alſo here it ſhall appeare,

that he will be their friend.

Worke on therefore ô Robinſon,

ceaſe not thy skill to ſhowe.

For well it will be with the good,

when wicked are in woe.

Tho. Buckminſter.

## Table of contents

  * Briefe contents of the ſaid xvij. Pſalmes in this Booke expounded.
  * To the right high and mightie Princeſſe, moſt gracious QVEENE, and Elect nurſing Mother of Gods Iſrael, ELIZABETH by the grace of God, Queene of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith: and (next vnder God) of the Churches of England and Ireland, on earth the Supreme head and Goueruour. Your Maieſties moſt humble and loyall ſubiect R. R. prayeth vnto God to graunt your Highneſſe a long, gracious and bleſſed raigne ouer vs, to the aduancement of Chriſts euerlaſting kingdome, the comfort of the faithfull, and either to the conuerſion, or ſubuerſion of all inward and outward enemies to the ſame: by and through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord and Sauiour Euerlaſting.
  * ❧ To the curteous Reader.
  * 1\. PSAL. XLV. Eructauit cor meum
    * 1.1. The Title.
    * 1.2. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 1.3. Pſalme. XLV. And expoſition thereof.
  * 2\. PSAL. XLVI. Deus noſter refugium.
    * 2.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 2.2. Pſal. XLVI. And expoſition thereof.
  * 3\. PSAL. XLVII. Omnes gentes plaudite manibus.
    * 3.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 3.2. Pſal. XLVII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 4\. PSAL. XLVIII. Magnus Dominus & laudabilis valde.
    * 4.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 4.2. Pſal. XLVIII. And expoſition therof.
  * 5\. PSAL. XLIX. Audite haec omnes Gentes.
    * 5.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 5.2. Pſal. XLIX. And expoſition thereof.
  * 6\. PSAL. L. Deus deorum Dominus loquutus est.
    * 6.2. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 6.3. Pſal. L. And expoſition thereof.
  * 7\. PSAL. LI. Miſerere mei Deus.
    * 7.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 7.2. Pſal. LI. And expoſition thereof.
  * 8\. PSAL. LII. Quid gloriaris in malicia?
    * 8.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 8.2. Pſal. LII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 9\. PSAL. LIII. Dixit inſipiens in corde ſuo.
    * 9.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 9.2. Pſal. LIII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 10\. PSAL. LIIII. Deus in nomine tuo ſaluum me fac.
    * 10.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 10.2. Pſal. LIIII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 11\. PSAL. LV. Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
    * 11.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 11.2. Pſal. LV. And expoſition thereof.
  * 12\. PSAL. LVI. Miſerere mei Deus.
    * 12.1. The Title.
    * 12.2. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 12.3. Pſal. LV I. And expoſition thereof.
  * 13\. PSAL. LVII. Miſerere mei Deus, miſerere mei, quoniam in te confidit anima mea, &c.
    * 13.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 13.2. Pſal. LVII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 14\. PSAL. LVIII. Sivere vtique iustitiam loquimini.
    * 14.1. The diſpoſition of the Pſalme.
    * 14.2. Pſal. LVIII. And expoſition thereof.
  * 15\. PSAL. LIX. Eripe me de inimicis meis.
    * 15.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 15.2. Pſal. LIX. And expoſition thereof.
  * 16\. PSAL. LX. Deus repulisti nos, &c.
    * 16.1. The Title.
    * 16.2. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 16.3. Pſal. LX. And expoſition thereof.
  * 17\. PSAL. LXI. Exaudi De• deprecationem, &c.
    * 17.1. THE ARGVMENT.
    * 17.2. Pſal. LXI. And expoſition thereof.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=4)

## 1\. PSAL. XLV. ‘Eructauit cor meum’

¶To him that excelleth on This was a certaine tune or an inſtru­ment.
Shoſhannim, a Song of loue to giue inſtruction: committed to the ſonnes of
Korah.

### 1.1. The Title.

TO him that ouercommeth, a learned ſong touching Roſes, ful of loue: ſung by
the ſonnes of Chora.

IN this title, we muſt firſt ſpeake of the Author, next of the kindThree
things handled in the title. of ſong, and laſtly of the Sub­iect, as they call
it: The Au­thors of this moſt ſweete ſong were the ſonnes of Chora, whoſe
father (with the opening of the earth beeing ſwallowed vp) died ſo wretchedly,
as the 16. Chapter of the booke of Numbers mentioneth. But as in puniſhing the
father, Gods wrath appeared againſt thoſe hei­nous offences, ſo in the giftes
of his children is mani­feſted an example of Gods mercy which muſt be
refer­red [[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=5)
vnto Ezechiels ſermon in his 18. Chapter, The1 The Author of the Pſalme. ſonne
ſhall not beare the iniquity of the father  [...]er. 20. For, that the
poſterity of Chora was indued and adorned with excellent giftes of the holy
ghoſt, and eſ­pecially with the gifts of propheſie, the Pſalmes do wel witnes,
which are intituled to the ſonnes of Chora Ve­ry wel then touching this
progeny prophetical may that be ſaid, which Prometheus (as AEſchilus reciteth)
ſpeaketh of his deliuerer.  [...] Inui­ſi patris hoc mihi dulce eſt pignus. In
engliſh, A ſweet pledge is this truly of my father hated before me.

And the kind of ſong is  [...] a ſong of mirth,2 The kind of ſong. iolity &
loue, or it is  [...] a mariage ſong, wher­in the holy Ghoſt is a maker vp of
the marriage be­tweene Chriſt and his Church: For in this kind of matter here
is handled an vſuall commendation of the Bridgrome, ſpouſe, or husband, which
is borrowed from the excellency of his wiſedome and vertue, yea, from the
ſweetnes of his humanity, from his eloquence, his riches, dignity or
comelineſſe of perſonage, or other thinges which are  [...] the leading cauſes
of loue. For euery loue is ſtirred vp by manife­ſtation of ſome good thing
giuen.

But, why is mention made of Roſes? Roſes doe mi­niſter matter of ioy and
gladnes in garlandes made at marriages: therefore they betoken the celebrating
of3 The ſubiect of the matter. marriages with ioy, and that ſweet ſurpaſsing
ſauour of the heauenly doctrine which doth chiefly make vp or accompliſh this
marriage: for with the word, as with a ſweete ſmelling Roſe the mutuall loue
betweene Chriſt & his church is confirmed. And certes let theſe [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=5) ſeeme to be
ſufficiently enough ſpoken touching the Title, novve let vs come to the
Argument of the Pſalme.

### 1.2. THE ARGVMENT.

THoſe things which are ſaid in this Song, The argu­ment borrow­ed of a
com­pariſon of Mariage, and betweene Chriſt and his Church. as touching the
Bridegrome and the Bride, the Spouſe, and his Spouſeſſe, the Husband and the
Wife, doe properly appertaine vnto the Meſsias and vnto the true Church: This
ground of purpoſe in the Pſalme, S. Paules epiſtle to the Hebrews, cap, I.
doth not only confirme, but the confeſsion of the Rabines alſo: For the better
learned and ſounder ſort of the Rabines, (being vtterly vanqui­ſhed with the
circumſtance of the phraſe and compari­ſon of the partes thereof) doe confeſſe
indeed, that this Pſalme was written as touching the Meſsias. Now then this
ground of purpoſe in the Pſalme being thus confir­med (that it ſpeaketh
expreſly of the Meſsias and of the true Church) let vs compare, if it pleaſe
you, the Mariage togither with the league that is betweene Chriſt and his
Church: for there are fiue ſpeciall properties or tokens of ſincere Matrimony:
namely, the firſt, mutuall loue: theFiue ſpeciall ſignes of ſin­cere
matri­mony. ſecond faith: the third ſociety or partaking in weale and in woe:
the fourth procreation of iſſue: and the fift defence from the husband to the
wife. And firſt of all indeede, the loue of man and wife ought to be feruent,
without diſsimulation and compulſion, ſincere without ſuſpiti­ons, and
finally, ſweetely delightfull without bitternesThe firſt mu­tuall loue
be­tweene the husband and the wife. and diſdaine. That ſuch kind of loue was
in the ſonne of God, towards his ſpouſes the church, his taking of hu­mane
nature vpon him doth well witnes: for, ſeeing by that ſecret and marueilous
league he ioyned vnto him­ſelfe this nature, let vs moſt firmely beleeue, that
in Chriſt there is not a fained, but a true and feruent loue [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=6) towards vs: and
here hath that ſentence of the poet The­ocritus his effect:

Quae minime ſunt pulchra, ea pulchra videntur amanti.

Thoſe things indeed which baſe doe ſeeme,

The louer beautifull doth deeme.

For although the Church by reaſon of perſecution is the more deformed, and
alſo in that ſhe carrieth about her the remnants of ſinne; yet is ſhee
vnfainedly loued of Christ, as this Pſalme ſaith, ver. 12\. So ſhal the king
haue pleaſure in thy beuty. Secondly commeth faith in place,The ſecond▪ Faith
vnited of the one to the other. Chriſt loueth the Church onely embracing the
gofpell, he loueth none other ſects, either Mahometicall or Here­ticall: ſo
againe, the Church acknowledgeth onely Chriſt for her Mediator, and embraceth
his doctrine only, and will not be an harlot, ſhe polluteth not her ſelfe with
the opinions and worſhippings which other ſectes doeThe third. Conſociation or
partaking of weale and woe. vſe. Thirdly, there is ordained a Society or
partaking of them both in weale and wo: Chriſt beſtoweth his bene­fits,
righteouſnes, and life vpon his church, & returneth vnto himſelfe the
calamities of the church, and was made a ſacrifice for our ſinnes; ſo againe
the Church be­ſtoweth her benefits vpon her husbande, namely her confeſsion
wherewith ſhee worſhippeth & honoureth her husband, and becommeth a partaker
of the croſſe of her husband: and like as touching matrimoniall fideli­ty this
Pſalme ſaith in the 11. ver. Harken O daughter and conſider, encline
thineeares: forget alſo thine owne peo­ple and thy fathers houſe; euen ſo,
touching ſociety or partaking of proſperity and aduerſity theſe verſes doe
make mention. ver. 14\. The kings daughter is all glorious within, &c. alſo in
the 9 ver. All thy garments ſmell of Myrh Aloes and Caſsia out of the Iuery
pallaces, whereby they haue made thee glad▪ For although theſe ſmels or
ſa­uours▪ [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=6)
are pertinent vnto the royal eſtate of any king or Queene, yet rightly doe
they ſignifie the afflictions, which Chriſt and his Church do ſuffer.
Fourthly, there is a generation or ofſpring in the Church, ſo as Chriſt
gi­uethThe fourth. Generation or procreati­on of Iſſen. his word and holy
ſpirit, wherby daily new mem­bers are borne in the Church, but this comes to
paſſe by the miniſtery of the goſpell in the church, as it were a mother
nouriſhing and bringing vp her child: vnto this property of loue, let that
litle verſe be referred ver. 17\. Inſteed of thy fathers, thou ſhalt haue
children, whom thou maieſt make princes in al lāds, Fiftly, like as it is the
ſpouſe The fift, The Huſbands protection or de­fence of his wife. or husbands
part to defend or maintaine his Spouſes and wife, ſo Chriſt euermore defendeth
his church, ſubduing deuils, Tyrantes and heretickes; and although hee will
haue her a partaker with him of his croſſe and afflicti­on, yet he mitigateth
thoſe afflictions, preſerueth the body of his Church, and in midſt of death
giueth life to thoſe that are put to death. The compariſon of the Mariage, and
the league that is betweene Chriſt and his Church, doth greatly adorne the
reading of the 45. Pſalme.

### 1.3. Pſalme. XLV. And expoſition thereof.

#### 1.3.1.

Verſe. 1.‘My heart is inditing of a good matter; I ſpeake of the things which
I haue made vnto the king.’Verſe. 2.‘My tongue is the penne of a ready
writer.’

LIKE as Orators are placed next vnto Kings, ſo vnto the heart of man are added
the inſtruments of vtterance and ſpeech, that if nature be ſound and vpright
of her ſelfe, there ſhould be an excellent conſent [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=7) or agreement of
heart and tongue: namely, mans heart enflamed with the light and loue of God
ſhoulde manifeſt diuine motions with the tongue honouring God, and in ſpeaking
things iuſt and vpright towardes men the hearte and tongue ſhould agree in
one: Now in this corruption of mans nature, the heart oftentimes diſagreeth
from the tongue as Cicero ſaith, Frons, vultus, oculi perſaepe menti­untur,
oratio verò ſaepiſsime. The face, the countenance, and the eies very often
deceiue men: but the ſpeech of tongue moſt often deceiue them. But yet in
thoſe that are newe borne of the holy ghoſt the conſent of heart and tongue is
reſtored, as in this place the S [...]nnes of Chora do ſay, My heart is
inditing of a ſweete ſong, and that the tongue is the interpreter of godly
cogitations. This prouidence of the almighty worke-maſter in knitting the
heart and tongue togither let vs firſt of all conſider, ſo of­ten as we reade
the beginning of the 45. Pſalme: Next of all, let vs embrace and extoll this
Pſalme, ſeeing the holie ghoſt affirmeth that he ſetteth downe vnto vs a
certain ex­cellentThe circum­ſtance of this Pſalme, is a ſubſtantiall mariage
be­tweene Chriſt and his Church. kinde of ſong. Alſo the thing it ſelfe
ſheweth, that this verſe was largely and plentifully written, and both
re­pleniſhed and adorned with all the moſt choyſe words and moſt graue
ſentences of Rhetoricke. Laſtly, the ſub­iect of the matter (as we in ſchooles
doe argue) doth allure vs much vnto the reading of this Pſalme. For he ſaieth
profoundly that he ſingeth this ſong concerning the King, the Meſsias, and the
mariage which he maketh vp with the true Church.

#### 1.3.2.

Verſe. 3.‘Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy
lips, becauſe God hath bleſſed thee for euer.’

Firſt, here is praiſed the perſon of the Meſsias, and isThe praiſe of the
Meſsias or ſpouſ. preferred before the beauty or comelineſſe of all men,
be­cauſe in very deed, neither is the wiſedome nor vertue of a­ny [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=7) man like vnto the
wiſedome and vertue of Chriſt, of which things, the beauty or excellency is
ſincere and ſpeci­all aboue all other: for in him clearely ſhineth a moſt
firme acknowledgement of his eternall father, and in him is in­flamed a
ſpecial loue towards the eternall father, and other moſt excellent vertues.
Wherefore when we thinke vpon the Meſsias, let vs thinke vpon this ſincere
excellency of perſonage, that is, of the wiſedome ſhining foorth in him, and
all other vertues wherewith he is moſt ſpeciallie ador­ned: and as the Husband
beſtoweth not only his body, but alſo al his worldly ſubſtance vpon his Wife:
So Chriſt the huſband endoweth his wife the Church withall his be­nefits or
bleſſings, namely wiſedom, which is the acknow­ledgement of the mercy of God,
for his ſake in the goſpell promiſed, & alſo righteouſnes & life euerlaſting.
Although therefore we are by nature, deformed and without all fa­uour, that is
in very deed defiled with ſinnes, and therefore guilty before God, and worthy
of all miſeries and calami­ties, yet by reaſon Chriſt imparteth vnto vs his
beauty or excellency, we are receiued by God, as if we were without any
blemiſh, as in the 2\. Cor. 5. cap. it is ſaid. For he hath made him to be
ſinne for vs, which knew no ſinne, that wee ſhoulde bee made the righteouſnes
of God in him. verſ. 21. Chriſt knew no ſinne, for as the Prophet Iſay ſaith,
cap. 53. verſ. 9. He did no ſinne, neither was any guile foūd in his mouth.
And what ſay you to that, where he was not only conceiued and borne without
ſinne, but al­ſo liued and died without ſinne? And yet was hee made ſinne,
that is, a certain guilty thing & a caſtaway into moſt grieuous puniſhmēts.
For God powred forth his diſplea­ſure vpon the Sonne, who was made our
Mediatour and ſacrifice for ſinne, and therefore ſuffered iudge­ment and
puniſhment, that wee might become righte­ouſnes of God, by his meanes, that
is, iuſt and acceptable vnto God for the Mediator ſake, Laſt of all the
eloquence of this King is praiſed, Full of grace is thy lips, as if hee [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=8) ſaid. Thou art not
onely of an excellent mind, but vnto thy eloquent ſpeech there is a ſpeciall
grace alſo annex­ed: And we were went to behold him whom God had a­dorned with
eloquence, as the verſe ſaith in Homer.

Attentique  [...]udire omnes cum dulcia fundit

Verba ver [...]cunde, ciues veriſque gubernat

Conſiliis, longe quos inter hic eminet vnus

In dubiis rebus cum concio magna coacta eſt.

When he ſhould ſpeake they all were bent to heare,

Sweet modeſt words vnto them forth he giues

His citizens, and with counſels ſinceare

He rules, as one in honour high which liues

In doubtfull matters hee's the only man,

To ſpeake for him and his conſtrained than.

What hony ſweet eloquēce is that in Chriſt thē? Certes I beleeue there is no
man of ſo baſe a minde, but (when he heareth theſe words. Come vnto me all yee
which labour and are loden, and I will refreſh you. Math. 11. 28: alſo. So God
loued the world &c. Iohn. 3. 16.) that they areChriſts royall wiſedome and
power incom­parable. ſweeter then the hony or hony combe, he wil eaſily
confeſſe: For no Mother can with more ſweete perſwading wordes call vnto her,
her only and moſt deareſt childe, then Chriſt doth vſe in calling ſinners vnto
him. Touching this elo­quence of Chriſt, ſpeaketh Io. Baptiſt where he ſaith,
Ioh. 3. He that hath the Bride is the Bridegrome, but the friend of the
Bridegrome which ſtandeth and heareth him, reioyceth greatly becauſe of the
Bridegromes voice, This my ioy therefore is fulfilled. verſ. 29.

But although Wiſedome, Vertue and Eloquence are ſingular ornamentes: yet
notwithſtanding without pow­er and ſtrength in doing things they are not much
worth: For, often time Wiſedome is driuen away, and Might ru­leth the matter,
and as the verſe ſaith,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=8)

Spernitur Orator bonus, horridus Miles amatur.

Men do deſpiſe the ſpeaker good,

And loue the ſouldier fierce of mood,

Non doctis dictis certatur, ſed maledictis,

Some, not with learned ſpeech contend:

But with euill tearmes their cauſe defend:

As the Poet Ennius ſaith in thoſe verſes. Therefore, the Pſalme not only
attributeth theſe thinges vnto Chriſt, which I haue ſpoken of, but alſo armeth
as it were this king with diuine power or might, in theſe words: Therefore
hath God bleſſed thee for euer. He expreſly calleth the Meſ­ſias a bleſſed
king, that is, acceptable or pleaſing to God, and ſo furniſhed with diuine
power, as that he is able both to deſtroy ſinne and death, and to giue
righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting vnto all beleeuers: al theſe things doth
the only word of bleſſing there comprehend.

#### 1.3.3.

Verſe. 4.‘Gird thee with thy ſword vpon thy thigh, O thou moſt mighty:
according to thy wor­ſhip and renowme.’Verſe. 5.‘Good lucke haue thou with
thine honour, ride on, becauſe of the word of truth, of meeknes and
righteouſnes; and thy right hand ſhal teach thee terrible things.’Verſe.
6.‘Thy arrowes are very ſharpe, and the people ſhal be ſubdued vnto thee: euen
in the midſt, among the kings enemies.’

The ſworde and arrowes here doe not ſignifie carnall weapons of warfare, but,
the effectual preaching of the goſ­pell,Chriſt an in­uincible war­rior, and
what his weapons are. bringing into captiuity euery thought to the obe­dience
of Chriſt. 2. Cor. 10. 5. For Chriſt fighteth not with weapons, but with the
word: which is the power of God vnto ſaluation, to all that beleeue. I. Rom.
16. And becauſe good ſucceſſe very much auaileth to do notable ex­ploits,
[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=9) the Pſalme
addeth vnto thoſe forenamed orna­ments, good ſucceſſe. Good lucke haue thou
(ſaith he) with thine honour, that is, All things ſhal ſubmit them­ſelues vnto
this King, and all things are ready to obey him. He ſhall take nathing in
hand, but with moſt ſpeci­al ſpeede, and with woonderfull ſucceſſe he ſhall
fully ac­compliſh the ſame: for, he is Schilo, that is, happy and fortunate,
and hee is Porek, that is, a Breaker vp, asCap. 2. 13. Micheas the prophet
calleth him, For he ſo burſteth o­pen the kingdome of the Diuell, that as the
Latin verſe ſaieth,

Vt aggeribus ruptis cum ſpumeus amnis

Exit, oppoſitáſque euicit gurgite moles,

Fer [...]ur in arua furens tumulo campóſque per omnes,

Cum ſtabulis armenta trahit.

As when a ſurging foming floud the broken bankes ouer [...]onnes, And ſo
contrary mighty ſtoppes by great increaſe ouercomes, Of vehement force is
caried forth throgh al the field, euen there, With folde or cotage quite away
the cattell ſo doth beare.

#### 1.3.4.

Verſe 7‘Thy ſeate (O God) endureth for euer: the ſcepter of thy kingdome is a
right ſcepter.’Verſe 8‘Thou haſt loued righteouſneſſe, and hated iniquitie:
therefore God (euen thy God) hath anointed thee with the oile of gladnes aboue
thy fellowes.’

Hitherto hath the Pſa. deſcribed the king armed & figh­ting the greateſt
battels: now doth he paint out as it were the liuely por [...]rature of a
peaceable ruler or gouernor. For, Chriſt is, both a moſt gracious king & an
inuincible warri­our:Chriſt the on­ly Prince of peace. ſithence then iuſtice
or righteouſnes in domeſticall go­uernment is a chiefe vertue, it affirmeth,
that The ſcepter of Chriſt is a right ſcepter: neither let righteouſnes bee
[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=9) vnderſtood
of vs in that ſence, as if it were ment in Chriſt himſelfe, but, as touching
the ſame to be beſtowed vpon o­thers, like as the promiſe ſaith, Gen. 18. 18.
In thy ſeede ſhall all nations be bleſſed. Al other perſons are accurſed, that
is, guilty before God, and oppreſſed with ſinne and death: but this our king
is not only bleſſed, bicauſe he ple­ſeth God, and is endued with diuine
wiſedome, righte­ouſnes, and life; but therefore alſo, becauſe he deſtr
[...]yeth ſinne and death and reſtoreth vnto his people righteouſnes and life:
and the vertue very neare vnto righteouſnes is that Nemeſis or Zeale, that is,
a iuſt diſpleaſure againſt ſinnes: with this godly zeale ought all good
Princes and rulers to be inflamed: wherefore euen this alſo doth he pro­nounce
to be in the Meſſias, in the 8\. verſe. Thou haſt lo­ued righteouſnes, and
hated iniquity. So, in the 69. Pſa. it is ſaid. For the zeale of thy houſe
hath euen eaten me, ver. 9. That is, I bring my life in danger for the
deliue­rance of thy church, which I loue, and to ſuppreſſe thoſe re­proaches
wherewith God is diſhonoured, which bring me great griefe and ſorrow, and doe
thorowly mooue my diſ­pleaſure againſt this blaſphemy. Laſt of al, this our
King is annointed, that is, ordained from the eternall father, vn­to this
kingdome, and endued with the holy ghoſt for accō ­pliſhing of this
marueilous deliueraunce of the Church, which ſhal be gathered out of all
mankinde, and rewarded with righteouſnes and life euerlaſting.

But, why ſaith he in the ſame verſe, [aboue thy fel­lowes? Uerily, becauſe he
may diſcerne the Meſſias from the prophets, and from al men whoſe vertue was
excellēt. As, Moyſes had a glorious calling, he brought the peopleExod. 14.
13. out of Egypt, and ruled them in the wilderneſſe: But yet this calling did
not deliuer the people from euerlaſting death. Alſo the ſame Moſes had in him
a light or acknow­ledgement of God, and a righteouſeneſſe onlie newe begunne,
and as then hee was troubled with a doubting or miſtruſt, which ſhewed it
ſelfe, when hee ſmoate [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=10) the rocke,
twiſe. So may it in like manner be ſaide touch­ingExod. 17. 6. the vocation,
light, and righteouſnes of each other of the Prophets: but Chriſt is farre
aboue all other Pro­phets, in fulnes of the holy ghoſt, and in calling: for as
Iohn Baptiſt ſaith, cap. 3. God giueth not the ſpirite by meaſure vnto his
ſonne Chriſt, ver. 34. Therefore hee a­boundeth in the knowledge and
righteouſnes of God, and hath a greater calling, he deliuereth from ſinne and
death, and giueth righteouſnes and life euerlaſting: and that hee may effect
this, he ſo aboundeth with the holy ghoſt, that he may therewith ſanctifie and
quicken others, inflaming this light in them, namely the knowledge of God,
righte­ouſnes, and life euerlaſting. Let vs therefore hiſſe out of dores thoſe
dreames imagined of the politicall kingdome of the holy Meſſias, and let vs
think vpon the things euer­laſting. Our Meſſias hath ordained a kingdome
euerlaſt­ing, aboliſhing ſinne, deſtroying death, and reſtoring euer­laſting
righteouſnes and life. Theſe benefits let vs craue and looke for from him.

#### 1.3.5.

Verſe. 9.‘All thy garments ſmell of mirh, aloes, and Caſsia, out of the Iuory
pallaces, whereby they haue made thee glad.’Verſe. 10.‘Kings daughters were
among thy houou­rable women: vpon thy right hand did ſtand the Queene in a
veſture of gold, wrought a­bout with diuers colours.’

Although theſe verſes do deſcribe a royal excellent ſtate,The churches
excellent vo­cation feeling both croſſe and conſola­tion. yet ſignifie they
ſomewhat, ſecretly, as touching both the croſſe and the conſolations in the
ſame: Myrh purgeth and is more ſharp in taſte and ſcent, therefore it
ſignifieth croſſe and ſorrowes, but ſuch as are wholeſome. Aloe, though it be
of a grieuous ſauour, and a bitter taſte, yet it comforteth the ſtomacke,
ſtancheth blood, and wonderfully healeth vp [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=10) wounds:
therefore it ſignifieth conſolation, and the prea­ching of the goſpell,
wherewith the woundes of the heart are healed, and in the heart is thereby ioy
and life euerlaſt­ing enlightened. Casſia is much like vnto Cinamon, and with
her ſauour doth comfort the braine: I know there are diuers and differing
opinions which the beſt learned men haue touching the proper names which are
vſed in this place. But in ſo great variety of opinions, I doe follow the
vſuall tranſlation, vntill ſkilfull interpreters in the He­brew language doe
deliuer vs more certaine knowledge.

#### 1.3.6.

Verſe. 11.‘Harken (O daughter) and conſider, encline thine eare; forget alſo
thine owne people, and thy fathers houſe.’

This apoſtrophe (or turning ſpeach to the party abſent) is diligently to be
marked, wherein the holy ghoſt ſpeaketh of the Church which is to bee gathered
from among the Jewes: becauſe it inſtructeth the reader of the greateſt
matters; namely of the kingdome of the Meſſias, of faith, of the abrogation of
the Leuitical ceremony, and extinction of Moyſes law. For inaſmuch as to
heare, and to teach, are two correlatiues, it followeth, that the Meſſias ſhal
not be a king like vnto Alexander, who by art of warre and corpo­rallChriſts
king­dome not like worldly king­domes. ſtrength keepeth his ſubiectes in their
duety, but one which ſhall gouerne his church with his word, and ſhal en­cline
or frame their mindes vnto moſt willing obedience. Furthermore (ſeeing▪ Faith
commeth by hearing, and hearing by the word. Rom. 10. 17.) let vs not ſeeke
for reuelations beſides or without the word of God, but let vs know that we
muſt not ſeeke God any other waies, then by the word and teſtimonies from him
deliuered, neither that we muſt call vpon any other God, but euen vpon the
very ſame God, who ſending his ſonne and giuing his go­ſpel into the world ſo
often times, hath manifeſted himſelf, by aſſured teſtimonies. This doctrine
touching faith (ſet­ling [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=11) her ſelfe in
Gods worde) doth this pſalme deliuer, where it ſaith in this verſe. Harken O
daughter and con­ſider, encline thine eare, &c. And the phraſe of the pſalme
agreeth with the eternal and immutable commaundement of the father crying, of
his ſome. Mat. 17. This is my be­loued ſonne, in whom I am well pleaſed, heare
ye him, verſ. 5. Moreouer becauſe that people in the nation of the Jewes were
not wilde by nature, but as kind and curteous people loued their cuntry
eſpecially, & reuerenced the tem­ple wherein God ſo often manifeſted himſelfe,
and loued the whole order of the Jewiſh pollicy (then which they knew there
was not a more excellent pollicy in al mākind) more than their life,
therefore the Pſalme perſwadethMoſes pollicy extinguiſhed. the Church gathered
of the ſeede of Abraham to forget his people, and to preferre the Meſsias
before the ancient temple and pollicie, and all other things which men in
their order do deſire, as life, poſſeſſions, and peace: It ſignifieth then,
that the pollicie of Moſes muſt be extin­guiſhed,Ceremoniall  [...]ites
aboli­ſhed. and the Ceremonies in the Temple vſed, muſt be abrogated or
aboliſhed.

#### 1.3.7.

Verſe 12‘So ſhal the King haue pleaſure in thy beu­tie: for he is thy Lord
(God,) and worſhip thou him.’

There are many partes in this Pſalme, the conference or compariſon whereof
vanquiſheth the godly ones, that they cannot but acknowledge the Meſsias to be
both Man and God, and yet that the perſon of this Meſsias muſt be diſcerned
from the perſon of the eternall Father. The firſt part is, the worthy praiſe
of the excellenty of the Meſ­ſias his perſon, in the third verſe, Thou art
fairer thanFiue ſpeciall points of glo­ry which the church hath by Chriſt.the
children of men. Herehence is borrowed a manifeſt conſequence: All men ſprung
of the carnall ſeede of A­braham are deformed and polluted with much
[...]hineſſe, as in the third booke of Kings, cap. 8. Salomon ſaieth, [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=11) There is no man
liuing, but hee ſinneth, verſe 46. andThe firſt part. as in the foureteenth
pſalme it is ſaide, They are al gone out of the way, they are altogether
become abhomina­ble, there is none that doth good, no not one, verſe. 4. In
this king and huſband of the church, there is neither a­ny ſinne, deformitie,
nor filthineſſe: Therefore Chriſt is not only man, but God, who is only good
and harmeleſſe. The ſecond part is, that which confirmeth the article
tou­chingThe ſecond part. the diuine nature of the Meſſias, Therefore hath thy
god bleſſed thee. In this ſaying he interpreteth that promiſe giuen vnto
Abraham. In thy ſeede ſhall all na­tions be bleſſed, Geneſ. 12. 3. 17. 8. 22.
17. as if he had ſaid, All men are accurſed, that is, guiltie before God, and
worthy of all miſeries and calamities, becauſe God is vn­fainedly and horribly
angry with ſinnes: The greatneſſe of this diſpleaſure can no power alone
created take away, no nor yet endure. Needeful then it is that the Meſſias be
God, becauſe he taketh away the curſe, that is, Gods wrath, ſin and death, and
giueth the bleſſing, that is, righ­teouſneſſe and life euerlaſting. The third
part confirm­ingThe third part that ſame ſentence is this, Thy ſeate (O God)
endu­reth for euer. The pſalme affirmeth euidently, that the kingdome of the
Meſſias is euerlaſting: for it is moſt ap­parantly ſeene, that no worldly
pollicie is perpetuall, and the thing ſheweth, that the complaint extant in
Ouids verſe is true, where he ſaith:

Sic omnia verti cernimus, atque

Alias aſſumere pondera gentes:

Item, ſummiſque negatum ſtarediu.

So all things turned plainely we do ſee,

And other Nations beare another ſway:

And mightieſt ſtates oft times denied be,

For to endure with any longer day.

Seeing then no gouernements are perpetuall, it is a thing very cleare, that
neither this king the Meſſias is on­lie [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=12) man, nor that
his kingdome is a pollicie which ſhall pe­riſh, ſuch a one as the Jewes doe
looke for. The fourthThe fourth part. part of this confirmation is where this
pſalme ſaieth, Thy God hath annointed thee with oile of gladneſse aboue thy
fellows. In the 34. and laſt chapter of Deuterono­mie it is written of Moſes
thus: But there aroſe not a prophet ſince in Iſrael like vnto Moſes, &c. verſe
10. Therefore this pſalme placeth and preferreth the Meſſias farre aboue
Moſes: Then is there not onely humane, but alſo diuine nature in the Meſſias.
The fift and laſt part ofThe fifth and laſt part. this glory is recited in
this verſe, For hee is thy Lorde god, and worſhip theu him. But the Jewes do
go about to trifle out ſo notable a teſtimony with this cauillation: They ſay
by the word Worſhip is ſignified the geſture of the body which is made before
the preſence of Kings: But this ſophiſticall trifling may be refuted by
conference of other teſtimonies, as in the 72. pſalme it is ſaide: All kings
ſhall fall downe before him: All nations ſhal do him ſeruice verſe 11. In
theſe wordes the pſalme eui­dently affirmeth, that this Meſſias ſhal alwayes
be called vpon, or prayed vnto, yea, when he ſhal not be ſeene with eyes:
Therefore it ſpeaketh not of any bodily geſture the which is made before the
preſence of Kings, but it ſpea­keth of the minde, which craueth of the
Meſſias, that he would haue mercy vpon vs, and be a Mediatour for vs, would
forgiue vs our ſinnes, would giue vs his holy ſpirit and life euerlaſting, and
woulde bee our helper and defen­der, yea, euen in the daungers of this life
againſt the out­rages of the Diuell, and of vngodly perſons, like as hee
himſelfe ſaieth, Iohn 10. My ſheepe heare my voyce: No man ſhall take them out
of my hand, verſe 27. and 28. Such a worſhip doth truely attribute
omnipotencie vnto the Meſſias, and doth witneſſe that he is God. And that the
perſon of the Meſſias is to be diſcerned from the perſon of the eternall
Father, theſe wordes do teach ma­nifeſtly▪ Therefore hath thy God annointed
thee with [[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=12)
oyle of gladnes aboue thy fellowes. For the Father an­nointeth this king with
the oyle of gladneſſe, that is, with the holy ghoſt: which ſaint Iohn in his
firſt epiſtle, and ſe­cond chapter, and twentieth verſe calleth Chriſma, that
is, Ointment; The Meſſias  [...]s Chriſt, that is, your anoin­ted king of the
church. But there is a ſweete conſolation ſet foorth in this ſaying, And the
King ſhall haue plea­ſure in thy beauty. The pſalme praiſeth the beuty of the
church, which ſeemeth (by reaſon of the Croſſe) vnto the iudgement of the
worlde to be fowle and filthy, but alſo in very trueth is yet ſtill
languiſhing, and beareth about her many blemiſhes, ignorance, and vi [...]ious
affects: Although therefore we are indeed weaklings, and defiled with much
filthineſſe, yet let vs beleeue, that for, and through, his great mercy we
ſhalbe acceptable vnto this our King, and we ſhall haue our reputed and
publiſhed beauty, that is, ſome vertues acceptable vnto God, as true
inuocation, aduancement of true doctrine, and the remaining new be­gunne
obedience.

#### 1.3.8.

Verſe 13‘And the daughter of Tyre ſhall bee there with a gift: like as the
rich alſo among the people ſhall make their ſupplication before thee.’

The daughter of Tyre ſignifieth the Church gatheredA deſcription of the church
gathered from out of the na­tions in three points. of the nations: And I haue
often ſaid, touching what, and how great thinges the calling of the Nations
admoniſh­eth vs. For, firſt it witneſſeth that grace aboundeth aboue ſinne:
For who can either comprehend in thought, the greatnes of Gods mercy, or
expreſſe the ſame in words: In which mercy, perſons (polluted with manifolde
madde worſhipping of Images, bloody ſacrifyſing of men filthy Confuſion of
luſtes, and finally with other maſt horrible miſchefes) are called vnto the
ſociety of the bleſſed congre­gations, andre made as Paule ſayeth. 2\. Epheſ.
19. Ci­tizens [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=13) in the Citie of
God and of the common wealth of the heauenly Citizens. Secondly, The calling
of the Nations is a notable teſtimony, that the promiſe touching the goſpell
is vniuerſall and free: For if the pro­miſe, were a priuiledge for certaine
perſons, it ſhould not be tranſlated vnto the nations which are horribly
polluted with wickednes: And that this promiſe conſiſteth not vppon our
worthineſſe, but is freely promiſed, and beſto­weth eternall benefits vppon
true beleeuers, that doth the calling of the nations moſt euidently witneſſe.
For what doe the Nations bring vnto God, but filthy and horrible confuſions of
opinions of worſhippings and of manners? Such Caſt-awayes ſeeing God receiueth
and chuſeth them out, to place them in the fellowſhip of eter­nall bleſſednes,
may we any thing doubt, but rather af­firme that the promiſe of the goſpell
parteineth freely? Laſtly, this gathering of the Church out of the Nations
refuteth the Phariſaicall opinions touching righteouſnes of the lawe. For if
men were righteous by the lawe, the Nations could not without the lawe be made
Citizens and members of the people of God: Seeing then the na­tions without
the lawe, of enemies are made frends, and of ſtrangers are made the moſt
beloued Church of God, it is a thing very cleare that by faith onely, that is,
by ac­knowledgement and confidence in the Mediator, all the e­lect ones are
ſaued.

#### 1.3.9.

Verſe 14‘The Kings daughter is all glorious with­in, her cloathing is of
wrought golde.’Verſe 15‘Shee ſhall be brought vnto the King in raiment of
needle worke: the Virgins that be her fellows ſhall beare her company and
ſhall be brought vnto thee.’Verſe 16‘With ioy & gladnes ſhal they be brought,
and ſhall enter into the Kings pallace.’

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=13)Albeit the
Prophets deſcribing the kingdome of Chriſt, do vſe figures taken from the
glorious eſtate of Kinges Courtes: yet notwithſtanding, bycauſe wee doe knowe
that the Church by Gods aſſured prouidence is in this life ſubiect vnto the
Croſſe, let vs vnderſtand theſe deſcripti­ons, not as touching the externall
pompe, but concerning the inward glorie, whereof there are ſeauen degrees. The
firſt is, the poſſeſſion of Gods word and the ac­knowledgementSeauen de­grees
of excel­lence proper vnto the true church of God. of the true God, as in
Pſal. 147. and in Deuter. 4. Pſa. 50. 15. Pſa. 55. 18. The Second, is true
calling vppon God, and his Deuine hearing vs, as in Deuter. 4. The Third, is
his perpetuall preſerua­tion of the body of this Church, though ſhee bee
perſe­cuted in ſome of her members as in Math. 16. Pſal 129. The Fourth
conteineth Gods onely Deliuerances as the preſeruation of Noah in the Deluge
Gene. 8. 16. Exod. 12. 2. Luke. 9. 56. The fifth, conteineth prophecies proper
to the Church, and miracles accompliſhed in the prophecies, as in Micah. 3. 8
and. 2 Kings 5. 8. 2. Peter. 1. 19. 1. Pet. 1. 10 1 Cor. 12. 10. & 1\. Cor.
14. 3 The Sixth is the ornament of many vertues in the ſuffe­ring members as
in Stephen Actes. 7. 58 others as in Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39. Laurence. Eutrop
lib. 9. The Seauenth, and laſt is the inheritance of life euerlaſting as in
Iohn. 17. 3. Tit. 3. 7. Galath. 3. 18. 22. 1. Pet. 1. 4. Touching theſe 7
degrees of glorie which the true Church hath, I haue ſpoken more largely in a
certaine oration made by mee at Iena on the 28▪ day of May in the yeare of
Chriſt 1562.

#### 1.3.10.

Verſe 17.‘In ſteade of thy fathers thou ſhalt haue children: whom thou mayeſt
make Prin­ces in all landes.’

Notably ſaith Plato in lib. 6. de legibus, as touching marriage. Let this
conſolation be propoſed in marri­age [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=14) that man and
wife ought to be carefull for the perpetuity or continuation of humane nature:
thatPlatos rule as touching pa­rents.they leauing behinde them their childrens
children, may euermore haue ſome worſhippers of God left to ſucceede them.
Parents ought to beget and bring vp children, which may deliuer a direct order
of life, as it were a Lampe of light, vnto their poſterity, ſo as there may
alwayes be ſome worſhipping God, according to his lawe. Theſe hath he ſpoken
(touching matrimony, for the man and the wife) holily and religiouſly. For,
therefore giueth the ſonne of God his worde and holy ſpi­rit vnto the Church,
that he may regenerate many vnto life euerlaſting, and that there might
alwayes be ſome euen in this life truly calling vpon God and worſhipping him.
For he not onely wonderfully reioyceth and delight­eth in the ſaintes or holy
ones which are in heauen, but euen in theſe which are vppon earth, as the 16.
Pſalme witneſſeth, verſe. 3. Al my delight is vpon the Saintes that are in
earth. &c. And he calleth Saintes, the kings and princes of the earth, not in
that they gouerne by po­litike order, but when they vanquiſh the ſnares of the
Deuill, the threatnings and inticements of the world, and the wandring luſtes
of our nature, and doe gather vn­to God an eternall Church.

#### 1.3.11.

Verſe 18.‘I wil remember thy name from one gene­ration vnto an other:
Therefore ſhall the people giue thankes vnto thee world with­out end.’

The laſt verſe preacheth moſt ſweetely as touching the ſtability of the
Church, which ſhall remaine euer a­mong the Downefalles of Kingdomes and it
mentioneth here alſo of the life euerlaſting: For if the Church ſhould be
oppreſſed and extinguiſhed with the Downefall of kingdomes, ſhe ſhould not for
euer be able to remember [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=14) her Spouſe or
huſband: Allwayes therefore ſhall there in this life remaine a Congregation
reteyning the pro­feſſion of the true doctrine, and ſhall after the rayſing vp
of the dead remayne in the eternall ſociety with God, where it ſhall enioy his
wiſdome and goodnes without. end. So be it.

## 2\. PSAL. XLVI. ‘Deus noſter refugium.’

To him that excelleth vpon (Which was either a muſi­call inſtru­ment, or a
ſo­lemne tune vnto which this Pſalme was ſung, Alamoth) a ſong of triumph or
thankeſgiuing for deliue­rance, committed to the ſonnes of Korah.

### 2.1. THE ARGVMENT.

HEere is ſet downe in this Pſalme, a moſt ſweete conſolation touching the
ſtability of the church: For it affirmeth, that there hath alwayes remained,
and for euer ſhall remaine hereafter, a Church or Congre­gation which ſhall
embrace the goſpell of the ſonne of God, yea, though kingdomes practize the
deſtruction thereof: For albeit the calamities of the Church be great, yet
amongſt theſe is ſhe not forſaken of god, who ſaueth her in the middeſt of the
raging floods, and ſo being troubled reſtoreth and healeth her: But other
kingdomes and other religions are vtterly deſtroyed. Therefore let vs alſo
apply this pſalme vnto vs, and let [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=15) vs render vnto
him thankes, that the congregation of his elect ones is amongeſt vs: which
moſt truely is on­ly in the congregation of them that are called, whereas God
will haue the preaching of the Goſpell to ſound forth amongeſt vs; wherewith
hee doeth call and doeth gather vnto him a Church, and that hee gouer­neth,
preſerueth, and defendeth the ſame. Yea, let vs celebrate or haue in honour
euen this ſame benefite of his alſo, that hee vouchſafeth to giue ſome meane
harbours at this day, for the aduancement of the true doctrine. And though the
enemies thereof doe threa­ten, that they will confuſedly ſcatter the
congregation of the Teachers and Schollers; yet let vs hope, that God will
defend ſome places of godly ſtudies, and let vs ſo pray, that he would defend
them.

### 2.2. Pſal. XLVI. And expoſition thereof.

#### 2.2.1.

Verſe 1‘God is our hope and ſtrength; a very pre­ſent helpe in trouble.’Verſe
2‘Therefore will wee not feare, though the earth be moued: and though the
hilles bee carried into the middes of the ſea.’Verſe 3‘Though the waters
thereof rage and ſwell, and though the mountaines ſhake at the tempeſt of the
ſame.’

WE all by natures perswaſion do ſo reaſon: there is no congregation durable
except it haue ſome certaine reſting place and gouern­ments ordained for
defence thereof. The church hath neither any certain abiding place nor is
defended by the amity of kings, but is rather oppreſ­ſed, and diſmembred.
Moreouer ſhee is a miſerable con­gregation, like as the Apoſtles calamities in
times paſt, & [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=15) our daily
miſeries do declare. In theſe ſpectacles or ſhews what other thing may mans
reaſon conceue, but that with­in a while both the true doctrine, and ſtudies
of this ſame doctrine ſhould vtterly be extinguiſhed▪

But againſt this humaine reaſon, this Pſalme com­forteth vs, ſaying verſ. 1.
God is our hope and ſtrength, &c. For although kingdomes do not defend vs, yet
not­withſtanding God himſelfe protecteth and preſerueth vs. Of tais
conſolation the church of God ſtandeth in neede, that we may know ſhee ſhall
yet remaine and be, though ſhee haue no certaine abiding place, or defence of
king­domes. Therefore often is this conſolation repeated, as in Eſay the 51.
verſ. 16. I haue put my wordes in thyChriſt the King onely protecting the
church.mouth, and haue defended thee in the ſhaddow of mine hand, that I may
plant the heauens, &c. That is, I or­daine the miniſtery of the Goſpell, that
ſhall not be defen­ded of kingdomes, but ſhall rather be cruelly aſſaulted or
oppugned; therefore do I my ſelfe promiſe defence there­of, I will protect the
miniſters of the goſpell, the churches ſchooles, and godly ſtudies, yea though
the whole worlde in a rage ſhould bende it ſelfe to deſtroy the goſpell.
Al­though then we haue not any humane helpes or ſafegards at all, as in that
Pſalme. 27. 10. ver. is written, My father and mother haue forſaken me: yet
let vs ſet before vs theſe ſayings, wherewith if we ſhall ſtirre vp our faith
we ſhall vnfainedly feele that God will be with vs, and that we ſhall be by
him helped gouerned and defended.

#### 2.2.2.

Verſe 4‘The riuers of the flood thereof ſhall make glad the citie of God, the
holy place of the tabernacle of the moſt Higheſt.’Verſe 5‘God is in the
middeſt of her, therefore ſhal ſhe not be remooued, God ſhall helpe her, and
that right earely.’Verſe 6‘The heathen make much adoe, & the king­domes are
moued, but god hath ſhewed his [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=16) voyce, and the
earth ſhall melt away.’Verſe 7‘The Lord of Hoſtes is with vs; the God of Iacob
is our refuge.’

Wiſe men ſuppoſe, that in ſo great confuſion of king­domes the ſtate of
religion can neuer long endure in one and the  [...]ame ſafety, but are eft
ſoones otherwhiles ex­tinguiſhed, and otherwhiles ſpringing vp. What time the
Caldeans held the  [...]oueraignety of Babylon, then, andNum. 25. 3.  [...]ut.
4. 3. An. mun. 3628 ſecund. Dau. Chyt. Henric. Pan­taleon. Anno Chriſti. 6
[...]6. there was Baa [...] worſhipped. Afterward Alexanders con­queſt brought
in thither Iupiter Olympus. And the thing it ſelfe ſheweth, that the
deſtructions of kingdomes draw downe with them changes of religions; as when
in Aſia and Africa the doctrine of Chriſt was extinguiſhed, then euery where
raged the furies of Mahomet: with theſe ex­amples many are mooued, that they
ſuppoſe Chriſts do­ctrine euen much alike, and to be extinguiſhed with the
very dreames of the Gentiles. And it is out of al doubt, that the Deuill
fighteth fier [...]ely, and diſquieteth whole kingdoms eſpecially for this
determinate end, euen to de­ſtroy the whole church of God: vnto this ſo great
danger this pſalme oppoſeth a moſt ſweete conſolation in the 4. verſe, The
riuers of the flood thereof ſhall make glad the cities of God, &c. That is,
the miniſterie of the go­ſpel in the church ſhall remaine for euer, becauſe
God dwelleth in her as in his holy Temple, and hath limited the ſea within his
bounds, beyond which it ſhall not poſ­ſibly paſſe: That is, though kingdomes
enuying the church, greatly ſtorme and rage, yet notwithſtanding the power of
the world ſhal not deſtroy the church, which ſhal ſtil remaine, yea though the
whole world fruſhed together fall downe, as elſewhere it is ſaid, Math. 16.
The gates of hel ſhal not preuaile againſt her, verſe 18. Let vs therefore
holde firmely fired in our mindes this conſolati­on, and now ſet the ſame
before vs in our preſent daun­gers.

#### 2.2.3.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=16)

Verſe 8‘O come hither and beholde the workes of the Lord, what deſtruction he
hath brought vppon the earth.’Verſe 9‘He maketh warres to ceaſe in all the
world: he breaketh the bowe, and knappeth the ſpeare inſunder, and burneth the
chariots in the fire.’

Hee adioyneth vnto the Conſolation an exhortation, wherewith he perſwadeth the
vniuerſall Church to conſi­der the wonderfull workes of God, namely the
Downe­falles of Kingdomes, the chaunges of other religions, and the perpetuall
preſeruation of the doctrine deliuered from God, and the ſafety of his ſilly
flock which reteineth this doctrine and endeuoureth to aduance the ſame. For
although the foure kingdomes are diſperſed, and horribleThe churches
ſtabilitie euen amids the ru­ines of king­domes. confuſions and verations of
all things in mankinde haue beene ſeene, as the whole hiſtorie of the world
witneſſeth: yet amiddes ſo great downefalles and deſolations of king­domes,
ſome congregation of God hath remained, other­whiles greater, otherwhiles
leſſer, and the doctrine is eft­ſoones purified and publiſhed by apt teachers:
which the ſonne of God ſitting at his right hand hath ſtirred vp, and giuen as
it were notable gifts vnto his Church. Doubt­les, god ſuffreth for a ſeaſon,
tyrants, fanaticall teachers, and their Champions to rage with cruelty againſt
the Church, and yet in meane time, the Confeſſion of many, and other ſignes
are euident witneſſes of the goſpell: And afterwardes the furyes of vngodly
perſons in notable ex­amples are puniſhed, like as Pharao, the Cananites,
Iewes, and Ethnickes, were deſtroyed, whoſe cruelty was very great.

#### 2.2.4.

Verſe 10‘Be ſtill then, and knowe that I am God, I [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=17) will be exalted
among the heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth.’

This is a precept wonderfull and vnknowen vnto phi­loſophy, but it agreeth
with that ſaying of Iſay. cap. 30, verſe 15 In reſt and quietnes ſhall yee be
ſaued, in quietnes and in confidence ſhall be your ſtrength &c. what is that
reſt and quietnes then, what is that to be ſtill?

Primum tollerare impoſitas aerumnas,

Deinde non accerſere negotia ſine vocatione,

Tertio, non vt ſolet humana diffidentia

Diſcur [...]ere ad varia praeſidia, &c.

Firſt to beare patiently calamities laied vpon vs. Next of all, not to deale
in any buſines beyond our vocation, Thirdly, not (as mans diſtruſt was wonte)
to runne, hither and thether to ſeeke diuers ſafegardes: Like as the kings of
Iuda one while leaned vppon the Egiptians, an other while vppon the Syrian
kings, and an otherRoboam 3. Reg. 14. 15. Ioſphat 1. Paralip. 19. Ioas 2.
Chro. 24. 17, 18. while vpon others: and being intangled with fooliſh
con­federacies were compelled to follow other furies. Againſt this impatience,
vnneceſſarie buſines, and diſtruſt of ſuch as ſeeke helpes without a right
order, are theſe wordes oppoſed. Be ſtill then and knowe, &c. that is, be
ſilent, looke for helpe from God, runne not hither and thither in­to Egypt,
into Syria, to the Turkes, nor to the Afrikes. In a good cauſe be ye of quiet
mindes, and looke for de­fence from God: and if any thing happen otherwiſe, it
is yet better to endure calamities, than with indirect enter­priſes to blemiſh
a good cauſe.

#### 2.2.5.

Verſe 11‘The Lord of Hoſtes is with vs: The god of Iacob is our refuge.’

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=17)The laſt
verſe is a concluſion, containing a teſtimony of Gods preſence in his church:
and of deliuerances in ca­lamities, which are not to be ouercome or vanquiſhed
by mans enterpriſe.

## 3\. PSAL. XLVII. ‘Omnes gentes plaudite manibus.’

To him that excelleth, a Pſalme (exhortatory) committed to the ſonnes of
Korah.

### 3.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis is a notable prophecy touching the calling of the Gentiles, which ſaint
Paul in his Epiſtle the ſecond and third chap­ters to the Epeſians doth
greatly mani­feſt, where he teacheth, verſe eleuen, The Gentiles were in times
paſt without God, without Christ, without his holy Spirite, without promiſe of
the Goſpell, and without hope of eternall life. Then the which miſery none
could bee conceiued greater. For what is man, ignorant of God and of Chriſt,
but the enimy of God? the dwelling place of the Deuill, and a Caſt-away from
God? not yet in trueth ſeeing the wrath of God, but within a while after ſhall
feele it: and when he would eſcape beyonde all courſe of nature, yea and would
be vtterly brought to nothing, and yet cannot, but ſhall be tormented with
ſorrow euerlaſting. This horrible figure muſt we thinke vp­pon, that we may
learne to extoll the gathering of the Church from amongſt the Gentiles. For at
this day, the Gentiles which are called vnto the ſociety of Gods [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=18) people, are
Citizens with the Saintes, and of the houſeholde of God, 2. Epheſ. 19. And
againe, Co­heires of one body, and coparteners of the promiſe touching Chriſt.
Let others therefore be in loue with frayle and momentany benefits, let them
thirſt after vaine honours, let them ſeeke after corrupt pleaſures, and their
inſtruments: Let vs meruel at, and magnifie this benefit, that we are cooptate
into the City of God, and Common wealth of the heauenly Citizens, where,
together with the bleſſed Angelles we ſhall liue for euer and euer, and ſhall
be filled full of lights and righteouſneſſe in God.

### 3.2. Pſal. XLVII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 3.2.1.

Verſe 1‘O clappe your hands together (al ye people) O ſing vnto god with the
voyce of melody.’Verſe 2‘For the Lord is high and to be feared: he is the
great king vpon all the earth.’Verſe 3‘He ſhall ſubdew the people vnder vs,
and the nations vnder our feete.’Verſe 4‘He ſhall chuſe out an heritage for
vs, euen the worſhip of Iacob whome he loued.’Verſe 5‘God is gone vp with a
merry noyſe: and the Lord with the ſound of the trumpe.’

THe kingdome of god (ſaith Paul) is not meate and drinke, but righteouſnes and
peace, and ioy, in the holy ghoſt. Rom. 14. 17. This Pſalme deſcribing this
kingdome of God, and Chriſt, is an exhor­ter vnto all people to clappe their
hands together and to ſing with the voyce of melody, that is, let them ſhew
with geſture and ſpeech their ioyfulneſſe illumined by the holy ghoſt: For
ſeeing ioyfulneſſe is a motion wherewith the [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=18) heart contenteth
himſelfe in ſome good thing, that good thing theweth what is the obiect or
contrary vnto this ioy­fulneſſe. Becauſe Iehouah the high, fearefull and great
king aboue all the earth, that is, bicauſe the Meſſias God and man is the
conqueror of ſinne and death, and beſtow­eth this victory vpon all that
beleeue, according to this ſaying. 1 Cor. 5. 57. But thankes be vnto God,
which hath giuen vs the victory through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Againe Ioh. 16.
Be yee of good comfort, I haue ouercome the world. verſe. 33. Moreouer, I liue
and you ſhall liue alſo. Iohn. 14. 19. Namely, through my merite and
effectuall power: For I by my paſſion haue deſtroyed ſinne and death, and by
my reſur­rection I am ſo effectuall, that I will reſtore vnto you
righteouſneſſe and life euerlaſting. This victory and ef­fectuall  [...]power
of Chriſt raigning doth Paul freely con­feſſe that he had not as yet
comprehended at all, and ſaith further, his ſtrength ſtriueth that he may by
ſome meanes comprehend the ſame. The ſame confeſſion let euery one of vs haue
in mouth and mind, and craue, that with a face vncouered, we beholding the
glory of God, may bee transformed as it were into the ſame image from
brightnes to brightnes as it were of the ſpirit of the Lord. 2. Cor. 3. 18.

But, although this be the ſumme of the verſes, which I haue recited; yet
notwithſtanding let vs (if it pleaſe you) weigh and conſider all the words:
the Meſſias is expreſ­ly called Iehouah: wherefore ſeeing this name diſcerneth
God from creatures and from all idols, no  [...] [...] there is diuine nature
in the Meſſias. Againe vnto the Meſſias is attributed highnes, or greatnes,
which may be vnderſtood two waies, abſolutely and relatiuely: for ab­ſolutely
he is ſo exalted, that hee ſitteth at the right hand of God, and is God of the
liuing and of the dead; like as he himſelfe ſaith. Math. 28. Vnto me is giuen
all pow­er in heauen and in earth, verſ. 18. But, relatiuely, hee [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=19) is exalted in
true acknowledgement, and inuocation, wherein we craue and looke for from him
neceſſary bene­fits for our body and our ſoule: and with a conſtant
con­feſſion, wherein we preferre this Lorde before all other things of our
life, poſſeſſions and peace.

But, why is the epithet or word (Terrible) added? Not vainely nor vnaduiſedly
is our King adorned with this title: for as he is proſperous and wiſhfull vnto
vs, ſo he ſtriketh our enimies with feare, which no creature is a­ble to
expreſſe at full. As for example, the deuils do hor­ribly tremble, becauſe
they know aſſuredly that the ſonne of God wil iudge them: and they ſee before
hand their pu­niſhments wherewith they ſhal be tormented world with­out end.
The fourth particle, (The great king aboue all the earth) diſcerneth the king
Chriſt from all gouerne­ments. For, no Monarchy euer yet contained all the
whole earth. For, it is manifeſt, that the vtmoſt bounds of the Roman monarchy
(I wil not ſay of others) reached not beyond Euphrates; neither did the
Perſians, Parthi­ans nor the other Eaſt people at any time come in ſub­iection
vnder the Romanes. But this king gathereth his Church from out of al mankind,
though the kingdomes of the world ſpight and repugue at the ſame. For, He is
the king of glory, as in the 24\. pſalme. and 10\. verſ. it is ſaid, whoſe
vaſſals and court-keepers are all the kings and Princes of the earth. Let vs
therefore feare this king, and let us preferre his commaundements before the
vngodlie decrees of all other kings, according to the rule, Acts. 5. [...]
[...]st obey God more then men.

But where it followeth, (He ſhall ſubdue the peopleThe Iewes falſe & fabu­lous
dreames of the king­dom of Chriſtvnder vs) that do the Jewes falſly wreſt to
the dreame of the politicall kingdome of the Meſſias. For they imagin that the
Meſſias hauing conquered the gentiles, ſhal only raigne in this world and ſhal
with a iuſt and peaceable go­uernment rule the nations of the world according
to the law of Moſes: but this imagination do, both many other [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=19) things refute,
which here I omit for vreuity ſake, and al­ſo the very firſt verſe of this
pſalme. 7. O clappe your hands togither all yee people, &c. For no man
oppreſ­ſed with thraldome, and caſt vnder other mens feete hath been ſeene to
take any great pleaſure by that eſtate of life. If therfore the Iſraelits only
ſhould rule in the world, ha­uing enthralled the gentiles, ſurely I
vnderſtande not what cauſe ſhoulde poſſibly ſtirre vp other people to ſo great
ioyfulnes. Wherefore caſting away the dreames of Jewiſh dotages, let vs
vnderſtand this verſe touching obedience due to the miniſtery according to the
goſpell. For as S. Paul ſaith, 2▪ Cor. 10. 4. & 5\. verſ. The wea­pons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to caſt downe  [...]oldes.
Caſting downe the imagi­nations and euery high thing, that is exalted againſt
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuity e­uery thought to the
obedience of Chriſt. Further­more, though it be moſt true, that the people of
Iſrael were in time paſt peculiarly beloued of God: yet, after the Jewiſh
pollicy or gouernment was deſtroied▪ let vs know that there was no difference
betweene the Jew and the Grecian, but that the heritage of the ſonne of God,
is in all beleeuers, whether they bee called Jewes or Gen­tiles: like as S.
Peter ſpake in the houſe of Cornelius: Actes. 10. verſ. 34. Of a truth I
perceiue there is no re­ſpect of perſons with God. verſ. 35. But in euery
nati­on, he that feareth him, and worketh righteouſnes is accepted with him.
Let therefore the vaine bragging of the Jewes be quite driuen away, wherein
they ſtriue▪ or contend, that they only are the heritage and peculiar peo­ple
of God: becauſe as S. Paul ſaith, Ro. 9. ver. 8. They which are the children
of the fleſh are not the children of God; but the children of the promiſe, are
counted for the ſeede.

#### 3.2.2.

Verſe. 5.‘God is gone vp with a merrie noiſe: and [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=20) the Lord with
the ſound of a trumpe.’

It is a thing manifeſt, that the pſalme alludeth vnto the repreſentation of a
triumph wherein a multitude of ſouldiers and people carried from place to
place doth gra­tulate and reioice in the victory of their chiefe Captaine,
partly with their voices, & partly with the ſound of trum­pets, extolling his
wonderfull and deuine felicity. But where it is ſaid, that our king is gone vp
on high, it muſt needes be, that he firſt deſcended, or went downe: for ſo
ſaint Paul reaſoneth in the 4\. cap. Epheſ. 9. 10. verſes. Now in that he
aſcended, what is it but that he alſo had deſcended firſt into the lower
partes of the earth? He that deſcended is euen the ſame that aſcended, farre
a­boue all heauens that he might fill all things? That is, he which ſuffered
the horrible feeling of Gods wrath againſt our ſinnes, &c. But of this
aſcending and deſcen­ding ſhall more hereafter be ſpoken in the 68. Pſalme.

#### 3.2.3.

Verſe. 6.‘O ſing praiſes, ſing praiſes vnto our God; O ſing praiſes, ſing
praiſes, vnto our King.’Verſe. 7.‘For, god is the King of all the earth: ſing
ye praiſes with vnderſtanding.’

By the word (Singing) ſo often repeated, hee clearely declareth, and not
obſcurely, what manner worſhippings this king requires ſpecially: for he is
not worſhipped with gorgious ornamentes, nor with tragedies made vpon ſilly
captiues, but he that will ſeeke to pleaſe this king, muſt ſing, yea, and ſing
with vnderſtanding, that is, he muſt embrace true doctrine, with faith and
good conſcience, and muſt profeſſe, and propagate or aduance the ſame. Theu
doe not the enemies or contemners of true doctrine ſing with vnderſtanding,
but they call vpon him with a contra­diction or gain-ſaying. Neither doe
Hipocrites (which breake the commaundementes of God, euen againſt their [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=20) conſcience) ſing
with vnderſtanding, no, though they profeſſe the doctrine, bycauſe The
kingdome of God conſiſteth not in word, but in power. 1 Cor. 4. 20. Therefore
as Saint Paul ſaith. Let vs fight the good1\. Tim. 6. 12.fight, keeping fayth
and good conſcience, that is, let vs not yeld our ſelues to error, ſtriuing
with the foun­dation of articles of fayth, neither let vs fall away againſt
conſcience.

#### 3.2.4.

Verſe 8‘God raigneth ouer the heathen: God ſit­teth vpon his holy ſeate.’

Although the ſonne of God hath alwayes euen from the very beginning gouerned
the natiōs of the earth with a general action: namely, with ſuch wherein he
is preſent with all creatures, ſo as he preſerueth them ſo long as he will
preſerue them, and he deſtroyeth whome hee will de­ſtroy: yet by an other
meanes hee is at this day preſent with the Gentiles called vnto the ſocietie
of the church; namely, wherby he not only preſerueth the liues of them, but
alſo worketh motions in them acceptable vnto him, and beginneth new light and
righteouſneſſe. Touching this gouernement of Chriſt, ſeeing I haue elſe-where
oftentime ſpoken, I come now to the next verſe.

#### 3.2.5.

Verſe 9‘The Princes of the people are ioyned vn­to the people of the God of
Abraham: for God (which is very high exalted) doeth de­fend the earth as it
were with a ſhield.’

In al ages from the beginning of mankind there haue bin, and are, and ſhalbe
ſome Magiſtrates or rulers cho­ſen of God vnto eternall ſaluation, and called
vnto the ſo­cietieKings and Princes are ſhieldes of the earth. of the true
church: Touching this calling of Prin­ces, this laſt verſe makes moſt ſweete
mention. For firſt, it calleth them Shieldes of the earth, that is, defenders
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=21) of good
men and good maners, and reputing their coun­tries benefits to be their
ſpeciall and chiefe commodities. For, good Princes are the preſeruers of peace
and diſci­pline, defending the bodies and goods of their ſubiects a­gainſt
vniuſt violence: thruſting away robberies and ene­mies. Therefore Alfonſus
king of Naples had this pro­per creſt to his Armes, A Pelican ſucking out her
owne blood for to feed her yong ones with. And he put there­vnto this his
poſie or ſentence, Pro lege, & pro grege, that is, for the law, and the
people. And Achilles in the 9. booke of Homers Ilyades ſaith:

Sicut Auis, quae pro pullis implumibus ipſa

Euolat, & paſtum miſeris parat, haud ſecus ipſe

Pro Danais mala multa ferens quot ſaepe peregi

Peruigiles noctes, quot luces marte cruentas

Aſsiduò, dum bella gero, dum praelior ipſis:

Proque viris & coniugibus Dan [...]umque ſalute.

Like as the bird which for her yong ones flies

Forth, meate to get, and there with them to fee de,

So for my Graecians ſuffering harmes likewiſe

How many nights haue I watcht for their neede?

How many daies with martiall cruell might

Haue I made warres, whiles for all theſe indeede

Both men, and wiues, and Greekes welfare I fight.

Furthermore, it ſaieth, that they are ioyned vnto the people of the god of
Abraham, as Noah faith in Gen. 9. 27. They dwell in the Tabernacles of Sem,
that is, they are the companions of the true church of God, and do ſupport and
cheriſh the ſame with godly dueties. Tru­ly it is a great glory to be
accompted and called a Shield of the earth, and a Tree, vnder which ſubiects
are fedde. But it is a farce greater honor to be ſeene in that ſocietie, whoſe
gouernour and head is the Sonne of God, and [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=21) which is
ſanctified with the holy ſpirite vnto life euerlaſt­ing.

Although then there haue beene mighty men and profi­table perſons to their
country, as Fabius and Scipio was: yet, by right we do preferre before theſe
gouernours, Da­uid, Ioſias, Conſtantine, Theodoſius, Iohn Frederike Duke of
Saxony, and ſuch other like, who were not on­ly members of the true church,
but alſo with their godlie duties furthered the aduancement of the doctrine of
God, of inuocation, and of life euerlaſting. Laſt of all, this verſe
affirmeth, that God is very high exalted of the ſhieldes of the earth: Let
this particle be applied vnto the perſons and dueties of Magiſtrates and
Rulers: ForKings and princes wher­in they exalt the Lord. then do the
perſonages of Princes exalt the Lord, when they ſubmit and yeelde themſelues
and all theirs which they haue in poſſeſſion, vnto Chriſt: and doe preferre
the goſpel before their tranquilitie, life, and al worldly goods whatſoeuer:
Such do rightly ſpreade their clothes before Chriſt. But as to duety
appertaineth, the Lord is exal­ted by them in the ordinance of churches and
ſchooles, wherein the worde of God dwelleth plentifully with all wiſedome. Let
godly princes therefore vſe this verſe as a cognuſance or armes, and let them
thinke that they are Shieldes of the earth: and not that indeed onely, but
alſo that they are members of Gods people, and verely euen the chiefe and head
members, whoſe race and courſe of life maketh moſt to the glory of Almightie
God, and the ſaluation of many men.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=22)

## 4\. PSAL. XLVIII. ‘Magnus Dominus & laudabilis valde.’

A Song or Pſalme of deliuerance, committed to the ſonnes of Korah.

### 4.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis Pſalme is a moſt ſweete Sermon as touching the Church, containing
doctrine, conſolation, and precepts: For, firſt it deſcribeth the church, and
diſcerneth her from other ſects. For alThe Church diſcerned from other ſects.
other ſects do onely teach the particle of the lawe touching externall
diſcipline, and others deuiſe other worſhippings of Idolles: but they are
vt­terly ignorant of the Sonne of God and of the goſpell, that is, the promiſe
of the free remiſsion of ſinnes, of reconciliation, and of the inheritance of
euerlaſting life to be giuen by faith in the ſonne our mediator. But in the
church is retained an vpright & ſcund doctrine of the Law and the goſpel, and
the knowledge of the Sonne of God for vs crucified and raiſed from death to
life. And that alone congregation (wherein the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt is acknowledged, who was crucified & raiſed from death to life) is the
church indeede, praiſing and worſhipping God with true in­uocation. This
difference is needeful to be holden by [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=22) vs againſt
Thammerus, Latomus the Louaniſt, Stenchus Heretickes of our time. and ſuch
other like, which do worke infinit confuſion, and imagine that the members of
the church are in all places whether they be Ethnicks or others whoſe liues or
manners are honeſt. After this, the Pſalme propo­neth here a Conſolation very
neceſſary touching the ſtabilitie of the Church: which as a Rock immoueable
ſtandeth faſt in the ſea, according to thoſe verſes.

Vt pelagi rupes magno veniente fragore,

Quae ſeſe multis circumlatrantibus vndis

Mule tenet, ſcopuli nequicquam & ſpumea circum

Saxa fremunt, laterique illiſa refunditur alga.

As rocke or huge ſea bancke, (which ſowſing tide

With roaring waues ruſh-on) doth firme abide:

Nor rocke nor foaming ſtone do fret or fume,

But flagge or reede ytoſte to the ſhoare conſume.

For although, Turkes, tyrannicall Kinges, and Bi­ſhops prepare and practiſe
all their force and indeuor to the deſtruction of the Church: yet the gates of
hell ſhall not preuaile againſt her. Math. 16. 18. neither ſhall the power of
this world deſtroy her vtterly: Finally this pſalme deliuereth vs a precept,
which biddeth vs to loue helpe, and adorne the true Church. This precept, O
that euery man would in his place orAn admoniti­on to loue, help, and a­dorne
the true church. calling obſerue, and woulde not rend the Church with
diſcordes, nor would not ſuffer the Cruelty of thoſe Tyranes to rage: But
becauſe many men are little moued at this exhortation, it is therefore not to
be merueiled at, that in euery place there are ſo many offenders which bleu
[...] the beuty of the Church: But woe be vnto them, by whom offences come.
Matthew 18. 7.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=23)

### 4.2. Pſal. XLVIII. And expoſition therof.

#### 4.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Great is the Lord, and highly to be praiſed: in the city of our God,
euen vpon his holy hill.’Verſe 2‘The hill of Sion is a fayre place, and the
ioy of the whole earth: vpon the north ſide heth the Cittie of the great King,
God is well knowen in her pallaces as a ſure refuge.’

THe Churches proper glory (as I haue oft elſe­whereThe churches proper glorie.
ſaid) is true knowledge of God with true inuocation & worſhiping of him: this
glory doth this pſalme with great exiellē  [...]y of words deſcribe. For it
compareth the Church to a City and a hi [...] wherein God is praiſed, and
worſhipped, partly with doc­trine deliuered from himſelf, partly with
obedience which he requireth. Furthermore he compareth the church vnto a farre
place bringing forth moſt wholſome balme, which healeth woundes without
ſorowe. For the preaching of the goſpell which the Church ſoundeth in the
world is a remedy effectuall, taking away ſinne, and death: But why maketh he
ſo often mention of the hill Sion? Becauſe the Sone of God was in Jeruſalem
crucifyed and raiſe [...] from death to life, and after that diſperfed his gla
[...] tidings of the goſpell throughout the whole world: Like as Iſayias in
his 2\. chap. 3 verſe. and Micheas. in his 4\. chap. 2 verſe. did forſhew the
ſame, Out of Sion ſhall the lawe goe and the word of the Lord out of
Ieruſa­lem. Unto this hill ſhall al the nations runne, that is, they ſhall
embrace the do [...]rme publiſhed out of Sion. They their which altogether
either refuſe and deſpiſe this worde, (the preaching where of is begunne in
Sion) as the Mahometiſis and blaſphemous Jewes do, or they which vngodly &
filthily corrupt the ſame, as the heritikes of all [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=23) ages, and the
ſtubberne Papiſtes do: Let vs knowe, that theſe are not the Church, but the
enemies of the ſonne of God and the chaffe ordayned vnto the eternall fire.

But ſome man will obiect, what difference is there betweene the Church of God
and other Sectes ſeeing all men do acknowledge there is a God the creator and
ruler of the world, and that we muſt obey him, according as there is
difference betwene good and bad: Truly this is ſomewhat to purpoſe, but in
this thing conſiſts not all things. For although other ſects do affirme that
there is one deuine eſſence: yet not with ſtanding they are ignorant of the
three perſons, the Father, Sonne, and Holyghoſt, eternall. For Chriſt ſaith
expreſly in Iohn. 5. 23. Hee that honoureth not the Sonne, honoureth not the
Fa­ther. Againe. Iohn. 14. 6. No man commeth vnto the Father but by mee
Furthermore, although they knowe in ſome part the will of God manifeſted in
the lawe or decalogue, yet the knowledg of the firſt table touching the true
worſhipping of our God, and the vnderſtanding of the ſixt commaundement
touching Chaſtitie is almoſt vtterly extinguſhe with people of other Sectes:
as the horrible Confuſion in their worſhipings and luſtes doth ſhewe. Thirdly,
they are altogether ignorant of Gods will in the goſpell manifeſted, touching
remiſſion of ſines and life euerlaſting freely to be giuen vnto beleeuers for
the Soune of God our Lord Jeſus Chriſt ſake. There­fore they cannot perſwade
themſelues that God is a deli­uerer and helper in their miſeries, but they do
remaine in doubting, and at length fall headlong into deſperation. Theſe
differences betweene the true Church and other ſects let euery one of vs
imprint as ſeales in our minds,  [...]eſt that wee ſtraying from that
Congregation, which is, and is called the true Church, ſhould be entangled
with other Se [...]ts which are condemned by God.

#### 4.2.2.

Verſe 3‘For, loe, the Kings of the earth are gather­red: [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=24) and gone by
together.’Verſe 4‘They marueiled to ſee ſuch things: they were aſtonied, and
ſodainely caſt downe.’Verſe 5‘Feare came vpon them, and ſorrow: As vppon a
woman in her trauell.’Verſe 6‘Thou ſhalt breake the Shippes of the ſe a,
through the caſt winde.’Verſe 7‘Like as we haue harde, ſo haue wee ſeene, in
the cittie of the Lord of hoaſts, in the Cittie of our God, God vpholdeth the
ſame for euer.’

Hetherto hath he deſcribed the true Church. Nowe addeth he vnto her a
conſolation touching her perpetuallA conſolation touching per­petuall
ſtabi­litie of the church. ſtability: And all men vnderſtand that the Church
had great neede of this Conſolation againſt Her [...]tilies, Ty­rantes, and
their champions, yea, againſt Deui [...]s, which rage more cruelly, becauſe
they knowe within a while their iudgement is at hand, where in their filthines
ſhall be plainely manifeſted or laid open before all Angels and men. But to
the end the meaning of theſe verſes may be more apparant, I will breefely
rehearce out of the fourth booke of Theodoretus, the hiſtory of Valence, the
Emperor, whome God not onely reſirained with fearefull famine, but alſo with a
tragicall death de [...]r [...]ied: that he ſhould not be able to vſe cruelty
againſt the Church after the luſt of his owne heart.

When Valens would needes confirme with his ſub­ſcription letters conteyning a
Commaundement to ba­niſh quyte Baſilius, the biſhop of Caſaria, he was not
able to make one letter (no when as God would he had worneVide Polyd. Vi
[...]g. inuent. cap. 6. his penne to the vtmoſt) which when it hapned the
ſecond time, and yet he would needes enforce the confirmatiou of an vngodly
decree, euen then did his right hand ſhake and tremble with feare. There he at
length beeing feare­full troubled ſtraitway cut in peeces the paper, which he
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=24) had taken
betweene both his handes, and he is a modera­tor of all his affects though hee
had ſo done well, and found that others had taſted like vexation by his
ſuffe­rance, and that Baſilius was proued a better man then that he was worthy
of any ſuch iniurie▪ Afterward the GothesGods iuſt iudgement  [...]t [...]
deſtroying Valence the tyrannicall Emperour. hauing taken the ſtreete wherein
Valence purpoſed to hide him ſelfe (beeing knowen by the vproare made by his
owne men) they both ſet fire vpon the place, and with all, burned to death the
very ſame enimy to chriſtian Re­ligion: This puniſhment ſuffered Valence for
his miſchefes, and that euen in this life. But the verſe which foloweth laſt
of theſe (Like as we haue heard, ſo haue we ſeene in the City of our God, &c.)
admoniſheth the Reader of two cheefe things, firſt, touching the efficacie of
Gods word, next of the difference betweene philoſo­phicall and Chriſtian
aſſenting. For the worde of God is not a vayne ſound, and as the Graetians
ſay, No vaine prating or langling, but is approued in purpoſe and e­uent. For
ſeeing God is true, he ſheweth with horrible examples of puniſhments, that his
threatnings are ſure and certaine. Moreouer the promiſes of God are not vayne
delectations, after a ſort pleaſing mens mindes, but are conſolations in very
deede, the efficacy whereof al ſ [...]ch as truly repent and beleeue the
goſpell haue ſure triall of. For as we do heare, that they which are
iuſtifi­ed by fayth haue peace of conſcience: So in true conuer­ſion we feele
peace and tranquilitie of heart to riſe from confidence or ſure truſting in
the Mediator. Againe, like as the promiſes are publiſhed touching ſtabilitie
of the Church, ſo the thing ſheweth that the Church cannot be deſtroyed by the
furies of tyrants and heretikes. Let vs therefore put great difference
betweene the word of God, and the word of creatures, For he ſpake, and it was
done, he commaunded, and it ſtoode faſt, verſe 9. Also this place (as I ſaide)
admoniſheth vs touching difference be­tweene philoſophicall aſſenting and
chriſtian faith: For [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=25) in philoſophie,
aſſent followeth experience, as the  [...]hyſi­tian hauing approoued that
ginger doth warme the ſto­macke, afterwardes affirmeth the ſame. But in diuine
conſolation, we muſt aſſent or graunt vnto the externall word, and then
followeth conſolation. Theſe things muſt we learne in the true exerciſes of
repentance and inuoca­tion.

#### 4.2.3.

Verſe 8‘We wait for thy louing kindnes (O God) in the middes of thy
Temple.’Verſe 9‘O God, according vnto thy name, ſo is thy praiſe vnto the
worldes end: thy right hand is full of righteouſnes.’Verſe 10‘Let the mount
Sion reioyce, and the daughters of Iuda be glad, becauſe of thy iudgements.’

Forſomuch as thy promiſes are not fabulous & vaine, but true, ratified and
effectuall, we looke for mercy, accor­ding to thy promiſes, that is, benefites
neceſſary for the body and ſoule (for mercy is oftentime taken for well-
do­ing) and that indeede in the middeſt of thy Temple, that is, in the
ſocietie of the true church, without the which there is neither any ſaluation
nor life. Unto this acknow­ledgement doth ſpirituall worſhip and ioy
appertaine: for rightly and learnedly ſaide Auguſtine touching the bleſ­ſed
ones: Tantum gaudebunt, quantum amabunt, tantumAuguſtines ſaying touch­ing the
bleſſed ones.amabunt, quantum cognoſcent. They ſhall reioyce ſo much as they
ſhalloue, they ſhal loue ſo much as they ſhall know. For euery affect or
motion riſeth from the knowledge ſhewing the obiect, as it is ſaide, Ignoti
nulla cupido, Men deſire not that they knowe not. To this intent or meaning
the Pſalme ſaith here, O God, accor­ding vnto thy name, that is, thy
acknowledgement, ſo is thy praiſe, that is, the worſhip following that
acknow­ledgement. For ioy vnſpeakeable is the companion both [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=25) of
acknowledgement and worſhipping of God, which he deſcribing ſaieth; Let the
mount Sion reioyce, and the daughter of Iuda be glad, that is, the vniuerſall
church, and all the godly ones, becauſe of thy iudgements, or be­cauſe thou
art Judge. For euen as God ſharply puniſh­eth his enemies, the epicures and
blaſphemous perſons: ſo he exerciſeth lenitie or mercy towardes the godly
ones, and always in his anger thinkes vpon mercy. This great mercy of God
mitigating puniſhementes which we haue deſerued, all mindes and tongues ought
to haue in reue­rence, like as Ieremy ſaith Lament. 3. 22. It is the mer­cies
of the Lord that we are not deſtroyed.

#### 4.2.4.

Verſe 11‘Walke about Sion, and goe round about her, and tell the towers
thereof.’Verſe 12‘Marke wel her bulwarkes, ſet vp her hou­ſes, that ye may tel
them that come after.’Verſe 13‘For this God is our God for euer and euer, he
ſhalbe our guide vnto death.’

Plato ſaieth, Magis amandam eſſe Patriam quam Ma­trem,Platoes ſaying touching
the loue of our countrey.quia paetria ſit diuinum quiddam; We muſt loue our
country more than our mother, becauſe our coun­trey is a diuine benefit. But
our true countrey ought to be the church, and this is diuine indeede: for it
is the tem­ple of God and the congregation of Chriſtes members. Wherfore, to
loue, adorne, help, and preſerue this, ought euery man to beſtow the addition
of their dueties: Let the teachers teach aright, and with good conuerſation
a­dorne the doctrine, and let them bee ſtudious of publike concord, and let
them ſuffer and beare with ſome incon­ueniences, leſt they troble the publike
peace of the church: let the Magiſtrates maintaine peace and diſcipline, and
ſhew themſelues nurſing fathers of the church, and of the ſchooles. Let
ſchollers learne the doctrine neceſſarie tou­ching God, and other good
effectes needefull for man­kind, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=26) leſt the
knowledge of God be extinguiſhed amongſt men, but let the church be preſerued,
and many bee made heires of eternall life, and let diſcipline be kept in vre.
Fi­nally, let euery one pray for thoſe things which concerne the peace of
Hieruſalem, as in the 122. pſalme and ſixt verſe it is ſaide: which thing▪ who
ſhall ſo do, the hoped for harueſt ſhall not diſappoint their good
expectation: for that pſalme promiſeth much peace to them that loue the
church.

## 5\. PSAL. XLIX. ‘Audite haec omnes Gentes.’

To him that excelleth, a Pſalme exhortatory committed to the ſonnes of Korah.

### 5.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe whole Pſalme is an antitheſis or con­traryA contrary deſcription of the
Church and the vn­godly ones. deſcription of the Church, and vn­godly ones
agreeing with the hiſtory of the rich Glutton, and Lazarus full of vl­cers, as
in the ſixeteenth of ſaint Lukes goſpel. The thing ſheweth, that the church is
in this life ſubiect vnto perſecution, and is oppreſſed with the kingdomes of
this world: But contrariwiſe the vngod­ly ones rule all at their will and
carry ſtately counte­nances of credit. This inequalitie of euents ſo troubleth
[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=26) many,
that they deeme the doctrine of the Church to be like a Cypres tree, which
though ſhee be thicke in ſhew, yet is voide and barren of fruit. But the
Pſalme oppoſeth againſt this obiection an anſwer moſt chief­ly agreeing
thereto, which is borrowed of the iſſue or euent, as if he ſaid:

Exitus acta probat, careat ſucceſsibus opto, &c.

Ouid. epiſt. 3.

The end approoues thats done before,

A wiſher may want welfare the more.

Euery man thinketh the deeds are to be marked by their euents. I acknowledge,
that the Church, and all the godly ones for many cauſes are not opreſſed with
a light burthen of calamities, and that the vngodly ones doe (by Gods
ſufferance) now and then flouriſh for a time: but at the time of death there
is a great dif­ference betweene the godly and vngodly ones: For as the dead
which die in the Lord (that is, in true acknow­ledgement and calling vpon him)
are bleſſed, Apoc. 14\. 13. Becauſe they enioy the eternall company of God: So
the death of the vngodly ones is the paſſage vnto e­ternal miſery. For as
touching the godly ones it is ſaid expreſly, God ſhall deliuer my ſoule from
the power of hell, becauſe hee ſhal receiue me, verſe 15\. that is, he ſhall
not leaue me in death and deſtruction. But contrarywiſe, of the vngodly ones
it is ſaide, They ſhall neuer ſee light any more, verſe 19\. That is, they
ſhall not feele con­ſolation and gladneſse repoſed in God, but they ſhall
remaine in torments for euer. Seeing therefore all things are in this life
ſhort and momentany, this Pſalm calleth vs from the loue of brittle fading
things, and ca­rieth vs to the conſideration of death and of the future
indgement, wherein the chaffe ſhalbe ſeparated from the wheate, and the wheate
cornes ſhal for certaine be [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=27) gathered into
the barne of euerlaſting life, but the vaine chaffe ſhall be burned with neuer
quenched fire. If we will regard this iudgement, let vs with mightie courage
ſuffer diſcommodities heere momentany, be­cauſe while we looke and turne vs
about, as they ſay, behold immortality ſhall ſtrait be heere.

### 5.2. Pſal. XLIX. And expoſition thereof.

#### 5.2.1.

Verſe 1‘O heare ye this all yee people: ponder it with your eares, all yee
that dwell in the world.’Verſe 2‘High and low, rich and pore one with
ano­ther.’Verſe 3‘My mouth ſhall ſpeake of wiſdome, and my heart ſhall muſe of
vnderſtanding.’Verſe 4‘I will incline mine eare vnto the parable, and ſhew my
darke ſpeech vpon the harpe.’

THe Pſalme purpoſing to ſpeake of a ſpeci­allOf the diffe­rence betwixt the
godly and the vngodly ones at the la­ter iudgement matter, vſeth a ſtately
beginning: I exhort all perſons without exception to draw neare and take
knowledge, what is to be thought of the difference betweene the godly and
vngodly ones, and of the future iudgment. For ſo it ſhall come to paſſe, that
they ſhal not onely pro­uide for this mortall life, but ſhall with a true
feare and faith, and other duties pleaſing God prepare themſelues vnto that
iudgement which is to come. Beaſts frame themſelues fit vnto that thing onely
which is preſent, and as the time ſerueth, very little regarding either that
is paſt, or that which is to come: But men, becauſe they are partakers of
reaſon and are created to the iudgement of God, let them ſo order the courſe
of their whole life, that [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=27) they go not
aſtray from the Commaundement of God. Whatſoeuer thou doeſt do it wiſely, and
regard theEccles. 7. 36end. And ſurely the end of our life is either eternall
ſoci­ety with God, or otherwiſe eternall miſerie: Let vs ther­fore chuſe the
meane wayes leading vnto the hauen of e­uerlaſting beatitude, and withal
indeuour (as they vſe to ſay) let vs eſchew perpetuall and moſt miſerable
death. Cheled is deriued of the word Chadal, that is, ceſſauit, hath ceaſed.
For, it is a familiar tranſpoſition of theMetatheſis. letters vſed in the
hebrue tongue. This phraſe of ſpeech then ſignifieth, that the world within a
while after ſhall haue his end, as in the I. Corin. 7. it is ſaid The faſhion
of this world goeth away, verſe 31. Neither in deede isThe diffe­rence betwixt
Homo and Vir in ſignification it hupoſtaſis a Forme, not Subſtance, as the
Philoſophers ſpeake, but Emphaſis, that is, a baniſhing away. Further­more the
difference knowen betweene Homo, and Vir, which is oftentimes vſed by the
Prophets and Apoſtles, as in Iohn. I. verſe. 13. Not of the will of the fleſh,
nor of the will of man; For as Homo ſignifieth a baſe and obſcure perſon: So
Uir ſignifieth a great and noble perſonage, excelling others in wiſdome,
power, Juſtice and authoritie. Like as then Saint Paul ſaith, Rom. I and 14\.
verſe. That he is debter both to the wiſe man, and to the vnwiſe: So this
Pſalme calleth vnto this ſer­mon, both high and low, learned and vnlearned
perſons.Doctrine of future iudge­ment.

Finaly, it calleth the doctrine of future iudgement, and of life and death
euerlaſting, wiſedome, vnderſtanding, a parable and darke ſpeech, becauſe this
ſecret wiſdome placed far beyond the ſight of mans reaſon, muſt be diſ­cerned
from Phyloſophy. For the alone doctrine of the church affirmeth, there is a
life remaining after that wee ſhal depart from hence, ſhe alone preacheth vnto
vs touch­ing the iudgment that ſhall be vppon all mankind, and nameth certaine
witneſſes, which ſhalbe the beholders of many that being dead, ſhall liue
againe.

#### 5.2.2.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=28)

Verſe 5‘Wherefore ſhould I feare in the euill day, and when the wickednes of
my heeles com­paſſeth me round about?’Verſe 6‘There be ſome that put their
truſt in their goods, and boaſt themſelues in the multi­tude of their riches.’

Unto the beginning is annexed a Propoſition, which ſetteth downe a conſolation
to be applyed from the exam­ple of one member, vnto the whole body of the
church, as is here ſayd: Like as Lazarus being all full of ſoares ſtraied not
away from God, becauſe he ſawe the rich manA reſemblāce of the Church in
Lazarus, & her enemies, ſuch as Diues. Luke 16. 19, 20 abound with wealth and
pleaſures, and himſelfe placed in an extreame ſtate of miſerable perplexity.
So let not any the other Godly ones be ouercome with the threatnings and
inticements of the world, that they thereby caſt away the goſpell, or doe any
thing againſt the other Commaun­dements of God. This is the effect of the
Propoſition.

#### 5.2.3.

Verſe 7‘But no man may deliuer his Brother: nor make agreement vnto God for
him.’Verſe 8‘For it coſt more to redeeme then ſoules: ſo that hee muſt let
that alone for euer.’

There followeth a Reaſon which appeareth in the An­titheſis or contrarietie,
as in the argument it is ſaide: For theſe verſes agree with that ſaying of
Chriſt Math. 16. verſe 26 What ſhall it profite a man if hee gaine all the
whole world, and loſe his owne ſoule. That is, the whole world is not a
ſacrifice for ſinne, nor for death eternall, no nor yet for the death of the
body. Why then are men ſo greatly carefull for things appertaining vnto this
life? or why with ſuch diſquietnes ſeeke they after thoſe benefits, which can
neither take away ſinne nor [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=28) death? But this
prepoſterous care and greefe which the poet deſcribing crieth out vpon thus (O
Ciues, Ciues, quae­rend a pecunia eſt virtus poſt nummos) riſeth of a blindnes
and ſecurity neglecting or contemning the iudgement of God, which euery one of
vs after this death ſhall abide and ſuffer. Whereas if our whole life ſhould
looke well vpon that Iudgement, truely ambitious honour, wealth, and filthy
pleaſure ſhould leſſe trouble vs, which three the world doth eſteeme as three
gods. But ſeeing this diſ­eaſe is farre more furious, then that it may by our
owne abillityes be healed, or remedied, let vs flee vnto the Sonne of God: and
craue that hee would illuminate our hearts with his holy ſpirit, ſo as vnto
that iudgement we may bring but the beginnings of righteouſnes.

#### 5.2.4.

Verſe 9‘Yea, though hee liue long, and ſee not the graue.’Verſe 10‘For, he
ſeeth that wiſe men alſo die, and periſh together, as well as the ignorant and
fooliſh, and leaue their riches for other.’

In the full poliſhing of the former verſes hee repeateth the ſame meaning:
that, riches, power, and pleaſure are the fading benefits of this mortall
life, and can neither driue away death, nor yet profite thoſe that are dead.
For as we came naked out of our mothers wombe, ſo ſurely ſhall we returne into
the earth either naked, or very thinly clothed. And here the Reader may
repeate that ſaying in the 39\. Pſalme 7. verſe. For man walketh in a vaine
ſhadowe, and diſquieteth himſelfe in vayne, he heap­eth vp riches, and cannot
tell who ſhall gather them. That is, as Cicero in his dialog of Frendſhip
ſayth, Ca­tera cum parantur, cui parantur neſciunt, nec cuius cauſa laborent.
Other things when they are prouided, or for whome they may be prouided, they
knowe not, nor for whoſe ſake they take al that paines.

#### 5.2.5.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=29)

Verſe 11‘And yet they thinke, that their houſe ſhal continew for euer: And
that their dwelling places ſhall endure from one generation to another, and
call the land after their owne names.’Verſe 12‘Neuertheles man wil not abide
in honour: ſeeing he may be compared vnto the beaſts that periſh.’

This is a patterne of the vngodly mens liues which dwell in goodly and
gorgeous buildings, which are gar­niſhed with ſcutchions and pictures, and
furniſhed withA patterne of epicurial pompous perſons ſuch as king Alexander.
things wherein they abound, that are reputed for bleſſed: Such a life we all
doe deſire, which exceedeth in pleaſure and other inſtruments. But the end
ſheweth howe much vainitie there is in this trifling or britle brauery, when
one ſeely houre may bring all topſituruy. All men will know what power and
riches Alexander the great was of, who conſumed the huge treaſures almoſt
incredible of theAnno mun­di 3640. Perſian Kings, after his conqueſt obteined,
and vppon Epheſtions funeral lauiſhed out twelue thouſand talents, that is,
Threeſcore and twelue tunnes of golde, as wee call them. But this ſo mighty a
perſonage when he had drunke too too much wine at the funeral feaſt of
Epheſti­on, and got himſelfe thereby a moſt greeuous burning feuer, died the
28. of June in the xxxii. yeare of his age, twelfth yeare of his raigne, and
in the 323. yere before the birth of Chriſt. This example admoniſheth vs
touching the incanſtancy of humane affaires, and ſetteth out this verſe of
this Pſalme. Man will not abide in honour, &c.

#### 5.2.6.

Verſe. 13.‘This is the way of them, and this is their fooliſhnes▪ and their
poſterity praiſe their ſaying.’

That the chiefe felicity of man conſiſts in the pleaſures [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=29) of the body, not
onely the epicure but the greateſt multi­tude of men doth ſo thinke. But this
perſwaſion doth this Pſalme expreſly cal fooliſhnes: becauſe the obiect of
mans will is not a benefit hauing end, that is, being ſhort and momentany, but
a benefit without end and euerlaſting▪ as elſe-where more largely is ſaid in
refutation of the e­picure, and in the doctrine touching the obiect of mans
will.

#### 5.2.7.

Verſe 14‘They lie like ſheepe, in the hell, death gnaweth vppon them and the
righteous ſhal haue domination ouer them in the mor­ning: their beutie ſhall
conſume in the ſe­pulcher out of their dwelling.’

This verſe diſcribes the laſt degree of puniſhment alot­ted for the vngodly
ones, namely eternall miſery which is a worme for euer gnawing the conſcience
of man, and a fire neuer ceaſing, but without end tormenting them, as Iſayas
ſayeth in his 66. and laſt chapter 24. verſe. TheirThe laſt de­gree of
puniſhments alotted for the vngodly ones.worme ſhall not die, neither ſhall
their fire be quen­ched. But as Neither the eie hath ſeene, nor eare hath
heard, nor mans heart hath conceiued thoſe good things, which God hath
prepared for them that loue him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. So no man can expreſſe either in
thinking or ſpeaking the greatnes of the euerlaſting pu­niſhment ordayned for
the wicked ones. But here ſome man would obiect, I ſee not by what reaſon
Saint Paul being put to death by Nero, ſhould be lord ouer Nero: I anſwere,
though Paul was ſlaine of a moſt cruell Ti­rant, yet was he not vtterly
deſtroyed, neither was he left in deſtruction and death, as Nero is; but he is
ador­ned with euerlaſting rewarde and in the laſt day of the world he ſhal
with Chriſt iudge Nero and al the vngodly ones. Now indeede our life (as in
the 3\. Coloſs. verſe. 3. is written) is hidde with Chriſt in God. When [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=30) Chriſt which is
our life ſhall appeare, then ſhall yee alſo appeare with him in glory. verſe
4. Then ſhall the vngodly ones haue in their minde and mouth the words extant
in the 5. chapter of the booke of Wiſedome: verſe 3. Theſe are they whom we
ſometime had in de­  [...]ion, and in a parable of reproofe. We fooles thought
their liues madnes, and their end without honour, verſe. 4. Beholde how they
are counted among the children of God, and their portion is among the ſaints.
verſe. 5. Therefore we haue erred from the truth, &c. verſe 6.

#### 5.2.8.

Verſe. 15.‘But God hath deliuered my ſoule from hell: For hee ſhall receiue
me.’

Hetherto at large he handled the firſt parte of the Anti­theſis, touching the
vanitie and puniſhment of the vngod­ly ones which put all their full hope and
confidence in their riches: Now doth he hereunto adioyne the other partie, as
touching the godly ones, whoſe hearts are enclined vnto the teſtimony of the
Lord, And not vnto death as in 119\. Pſalme. is ſaid. And it promiſeth plainly
vnto the Godly ones deliueraunce from euerlaſting death moſt miſerable, and
reſtitution vnto life euerlaſting, for becauſe God in the very lawfull act of
adoption receiueth and taketh vs for his children, it cannot be that he will
leaue his deareſt children in death. Like as therefore in this life he giueth
his holy ſpirit as a pledge and token of our inhe­ritance: So when he hath
raiſed vs from death to life, he will doubtles giue vs the full and perfect
inheritance, and hee ſhall then be all in all. He then that hath this hope
ſanctifieth himſelfe like as he is holy, ſaith Saint Iohn. 1. epiſt. 3.
chapter. 3. verſe.

#### 5.2.9.

Verſe. 16‘Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glorie of his
houſe be increſed.’[[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=30)Verſe 17‘For hee
ſhall carie nothing away with him when he dieth: Neither ſhall his pompe
follow him.’

He repeateth a principal propoſition which comforteth the godly ones, leſt
they taking offence at the felicitie and paſſing proſperitie of the vngodly
ones, do ſlide away frō God, but that they would preferre the true and
perma­nent good things before the ſhadowes of fraile and vani­ſhing benefites.
But ſeeing it is needeleſſe here with per­ſpicuous wordes to make any long
interpretation, I wil recite two hiſtories worthy of memorie: which examples
propone vnto the ſentence of the affirmatiue part, that the glory of exploits
done, and other great benefites nothing auaile them that be dead: which things
the blinde nature of man coueteth eſpecially. Saled▪ nus king of Aſia,
Sy­riaSaladine li­ued about the yere of Chriſt. 1176. and Egypt ſaide, hee was
not leſſe wiſe in his death, then when in his life time before, he had done
any notable act: for he commanded that his very linnen garment next to his
ſhert (which he vſed to weare) ſhould be borne vpon a long ſpeares point
throughout all his tents, and he that carried it ſhould cry with a lowd voice
and ſay, Saladine the conquerour of Aſia, of ſo great wealth which hee had
gotten, caried away with him at his death but on­ly this linnen garment. For
wiſely, though lately be­ing admoniſhed of mans miſery woulde hee alſo in ſuch
ſort admoniſh others thereof. There is extant an hiſtorie in the ſeuenth booke
and ſecond chapter of Baptiſta Ful­goſus, touching wiſe ſayings and doings:
and as Dion writeth, theſe wordes are read of Seuerus the emperour:Seuerus
died at Yorke in anno Chri [...] 212\. Anno regni. 18. When as he lying at
Yorke in Britaine neare the point of death, deploring mans miſeries ſaide, I
haue beene all things, and nothing auaileth me.

#### 5.2.10.

Verſe 18‘For while he liued, he counted himſelfe an happy man, and ſo long as
thou doeſt [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=31) well vnto thy
ſelfe, men will ſpeake good of thee.’Verſe 19‘He ſhall followe the generation
of his fa­thers, and ſhall neuer ſee light.’Verſe 20‘Man being in honor hath
none vnderſtan­ding, but is compared vnto the beaſts that periſh.’

Although (ſaieth he) the vngodly ſuperabound in plea­ſures: yet within a while
after they ſhall depart into the country of condemned perſons where is weeping
& gna­ſhing of teethe: for indeed damned perſons ſhall neuer ſee light, that
is, conſolation, ioy and life, which the godlie ones ſhall poſſeſſe. But, as
he ſaid before, Man wil not abide in honour; ſo now he ſaieth here, man is
blinde in proſperitie and doth not acknowledge euen the Author of all
goodneſſe, or the lawful vſe thereof, no, nor yet thin­keth of his owne
infirmitie, which is ſooner changed then the ſwifteſt flie that flieth. But
let vs out of ſaint Paules ſayings learne theſe three things: firſt, from what
foun­taine good things come vnto vs: next, vnto what vſe good things granted
by God are to be beſtowed: and laſt of all, how great our infirmitie is.
Touching the firſt cauſe, let the ſaying be holden, 1\. Corint. 4. 7. What
haſt thou O man that thou haſt not receiued: or if thou haſt recei­ued it, why
doeſt thou boaſt as though thou hadſt not receiued it? Touching the ſecond
cauſe Saint Paul in 1. Cor. 12. 7. ſaith, All theſe things are giuen to the
pro­fit of the church. Touching the laſt cauſe there is ex­tant a memorable
ſentence 2\. Cor, 4. verſe 7. Wee carry about vs this treaſure in earthen
veſſelles, that the ex­cellency of that power might be of God▪ and not of vs.
And here I conclude this expoſition vpon this fortie nine Pſalme.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=31)

## 6\. PSAL. L. ‘Deus deorum Dominus loquutus est.’

### 6.1.

Of the Title; A Pſalme of Aſaph.

THe Title admoniſheth the Reader touching that ſocietie of the Prophetes,
which in the raigne of Dauid aduaunced the lawe and promiſes with ſpeech and
writing: for, thinke with your ſelfe what conflicts and what conferences thoſe
great perſonages Dauid, Nathan, the ſonnes of Chore, Aſaph, He­man,The praiſe
of Dauid and his Muſicians▪Ethan and Idithun had, whoſe Pſalmes light­ſomely
written by them are extant vnto vs. And in this place that I may ſay nothing
of the reſt, who is ignorant what honourable mention is made of Aſaph ſo
oftentimes in the Bookes of Paralipomenon or Chronicles lib. 2. cap. 29. verſ.
25, 26, 27.

And Ezechias commaunded the chiefe of the Le­uites to praiſe the Lord with the
words of Dauid, & of Aſaph the Seer: whereby it appeareth that Aſaph the
Author of this Pſalme was in great honour and reputation, and retained the
very next place vnto Dauid in the Schoole of thoſe Prophets at that time.

And in the ſecond Booke of Paralipomenon 35. chapter, And the Singers the ſons
of Aſaph ſtood [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=32) in their
ſtanding according to the commaunde­ment of Dauid and Aſaph, and Heman and I
dithun King Dauids Seers, verſe 15. Let vs therefore giue thankes vnto the
Sonne of God ſitting at the right hand of the Father, and giuing ſuch giftes
vnto his church: and let vs earnestly deſire the ſocietie of theſe perſons in
the life euerlasting, and in the meane time let vs thankefully receiue thoſe
crummes which fall from their table.

### 6.2. THE ARGVMENT.

THe fiftieth Pſalme is a notable doctrine touching fayth, true inuocation, and
true worſhiping of God, and a refutation of the Ethnickes opinion in heaping
vp ſacrifices. For this error is ſtraggled abroade in all ages amongſt all
nations and people, That ſacrifices and other ceremo­nies are works pacifying
Gods wrath, and merites remiſsi­on of ſinne by the deede done, as they now
ſay. This opi­nion moueth mens minds that they heape vp ſuch cere­monies
without end, it reprehendeth therefore this error deepely fixed in mens
mindes, and ſheweth the true worſhipings of gods, repentance, feare of God,
fayth which acknowledgeth the Mediator, and know­eth that we are for his ſake
receiued, and yet it obſer­ueth ceremonies becauſe they are the teſtimonies of
promiſes, and are ſignes of confeſſion and doe inuite others thereunto.

So the prophet Ieremy in his 2. cap. reprehending the ſame error, ſaith verſe
22. For I ſpake not vnto your fathers nor commaunded them when I brought them
out of the land of Egipt concerning burnt offerings and ſacrifices: But this
thing commaunded I them ſaying, obay my voice. &c. verſe 23. And Chriſt ſaith
in the fourth of Iohn, [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=32) verſe 23. True
worſhippers ſhall worſhip the father in ſpirit and truth, that is, in true
ſpirituall motions of the heart, ſuch as are repentance, feare of God, and
faith, or confidence liuely beholding Chriſt.

Finally, the diuine ſcripture is full of ſuch ſermons which muſt be
conſidered, to the end hipocriſy may be reprehended, and true worſhiping of
God may be illuminated or inlightned in vs. Thus much for the ar­gument, and
now to the expoſition of the Pſalme.

### 6.3. Pſal. L. And expoſition thereof.

#### 6.3.1.

Verſe 1‘The Lord euen the moſt mightie God hath ſpoken, and called the world
from the riſing vp of the Sunne to the going downe there­of.’Verſe 2‘Out of
Sion hath God appeared in perfect beuty.’Verſe 3‘Our God ſhall come, and ſhall
not keepe ſilence, there ſhall goe before him a conſu­ming fire: and a mightie
tempeſt ſhall be ſtirred round about him.’Verſe 4‘Hee ſhall call the heauen
from aboue, and the earth, that hee may iudge his people.’Verſe 5‘Gather my
Saintes together vnto me: thoſe that haue made a couenant with mee with
ſacrifice.’Verſe 6‘And the heauens ſhal declare his righteouſ­nes: for God is
iudge himſelfe.’

THe Exordium or beginning of the PſalmeA firſt and ſe­cond com­ming of the
Meſſias. is very great, wherein this is not onely ſignified, That God will
haue his voyce to be heard of all mankinde, but alſo, a Sermon is ſet downe
touching the twoo [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=33) folde comming of
the Meſſias. For becauſe it maketh mention of the hill Sion, which is the
ſtore-houſe of the goſpell publiſhed throughout all the world, no doubt, but
the kingdome of Chriſt is deſcribed, as he firſt came in the fleſh. So
therefore I vnderſtand the wordes of the Pſalme Iehou [...]h, the ſonne of
God, which is the lord of of all creatures, and Logos the word, by whom the
father hath made himſelfe knowen vnto vs; by his voyce hath di­ſperſed the
goſpell in lury, and as Paul ſaith, Was a mi­niſter of circumciſion. Heb. 8.
2. and being raiſed from death to life, gaue commaundement vnto the Apoſtles,
to gather a church out of all nations by the miniſtrie of the goſpell, which
thing ſheweth the glorie of God, and of his ſonne our Lord Jeſus Chriſt. And
it is that glorie of Chriſt that hee of himſelfe hauing made a purgation or
clenſing of our ſinnes, ſitteth on the right hand of maie­ſtie, in the
heauens, beeing made heire ouer all, and lord aboue all principality, power,
ſtrength, and dominion, is made of God for vs iuſtification, ſanctification,
and re­demption, as in Hebr. 1. 1. Col. 1. 1. Cor. 1. This glorie of Chriſt
doeth the goſpell preach vnto vs. But for aſ much as the greateſt multitude of
mankinde doth with horrible impiety contemne the acceptable comming of Chriſt
full of louing kindnes and mercy, he addeth a ſermon touching the ſecond
comming of Chriſt, which Saint Paul excellently describeth in 1\. Theſſal. 4.
16. For the Lord himſelfe ſhal deſcend from heauen with a ſhowt, and with the
voyce of the Archangell and with the trumpet of God, &c. This comming or
com­ming againe of Chriſt, although it be proſperous and wiſhfull vnto the
godly ones according to that ſaying. Luke. 21. 28. Then lift vp your heades,
becauſe your redemption is nighe. Yet notwithſtanding it ſtriketh the vngodly
ones with horrible feare, who ſhal then behold him whom they haue crucified,
as Zacharias ſayeth cap. 12. verſe 12. For then when all men ſhall be [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=33) rayſed vp from
death vnto iudgement, all diuilles ſhall be caſt away (yea, and all men which
doe not firſt in this life turne vnto God) into euerlaſting torments.

And although it hath beene diuerſly diſputed vppon touching the interpretation
of the 5. verſe, Gather my Saintes together, &c: yet I deeme this to be a moſt
ſimple plaine meaning: There is a great multitude of hipocrits which boaſt
themſelues to be the church, by rea­ſon of their profeſſion and ceremonies,
when as their hearts are without true feare of God, and true fayth. From this
multitude will I diſcerne mine owne people, that is, the right holy ones,
which preferre the promiſe touching the mediator before ſacrifices, and doe
knowe in what order ceremonies are to bee obſerued, and howe they pleaſe me
namely by laying a foundation, that is, by acknowledging the mediator, and for
his ſake in receiuing remiſſion of ſinnes, and beginning a new obedience
mo­rall in their heart, which the commandement of God re­quireth. Such holy
ones are the faithfull keepers of the teſtament or promiſe from me deliuered,
and they are the publiſhers of righteouſnes which is made manifeſt with­out
the lawe, whereof the Lord and the Prophets doe beare witneſſe as in Rom. the
3\. chapter.

#### 6.3.2.

Verſe. 7‘Heare, O my people, and I will ſpeake: I my ſelfe will teſtifie
againſt thee O Iſrael, for I am God, euen thy God.’

This apoſtrophe or turning ſpeech, appertaineth vnto the whole church, wherein
there are not onely new borne members, but alſo many not new borne, but yet
hauing a good opinion touching the true doctrine. Therefore it ſpeakes vnto
them both, and truly it exhorteth thoſe new borne, to goe forwards in the race
of godlines, but others to correct their opinions and affects, heare O my
people (ſaith hee) a ſermon of the firſt commaundement, which [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=34) is the fountain
and foundation of all other commaunde­ments: I am the Lord thy God, that is, I
haue madeExod.  [...]0. my ſelfe knowen vnto thee, not onely by a lawe giuen,
but alſo by a promiſe publiſhed touching the mediator. Thou ſhalt therefore
heare both kinds of doctrine, as well when the law preacheth vnto thee, thou
ſhalt feare me vnfained­ly without hipocriſie: and againe, when the promiſe
preacheth vnto thee, thou ſhalt beleeue that I am thy God, that is, mercifull
for the mediators ſake, looking vpon thee, hearing and ſauing thee, alſo
giuing thee good things neceſſarie for thy bodie and thy ſoule. When thou haſt
this fayth firſt ſhining forth in thee, then vſe the cere­monies which are
ſignes of the promiſes and teſtimonies of thy confeſſion, and doe thou then
[...]uite other perſons to come into the ſociety of the church.

#### 6.3.3.

Verſe 8‘I will not reprooue thee becauſe of thy ſa­crifices, or for thy burnt
offerings: becauſe they were not alway before mee.’Verſe 9‘I will take no
bullocke out of thine houſe: Nor hee goates out of thy foldes,’Verſe 10‘For
all the beaſtes of the foreſt are mine: and ſo are the cattelles vppon a
thouſand hilles.’Verſe 11‘I knowe all the foules vpon the moun­taines: and the
wilde beaſts of the field, are in my ſight.’Verſe 12‘If I be hungry I will not
tell thee: for the whole world is mine and al that is therein.’Verſe
13‘Thinkeſt thou that I wil eate Bulles fleſh, and drinke the blood of
Goates?’

God affirmeth plainely, that hee taketh no delight in any worke done without
acknowledgement and confi­dence in the mediator: But then doth the vſe of
cermo­nies pleaſe him, when the perſon is by fayth imbraced, [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=34) and in the heart
a morall obedience is begunne agreeable with the commaundement of God.

But as wee haue elſewhere often times vſed to com­pare Philoſophie with the
doctrine of the church, becauſe the compariſon ſheweth the doctrine of the
church to bee the more perfect: So euen in this place alſo let vs con­ferr the
ſayings of Philoſophers (which diſcerne morall vertues from ceremonies) with
the deuine prophecy of the Pſalme.

Plato ſaith, Non geſtibus arte compoſitis demulcentesPhiloſophical rules
ſhewing how God is to be worſhippedDeum, ſed vera virtute colentes; which may
thus be en­gliſhed: We muſt not regarde thoſe that flatter God with ſlie and
ſubtill framed geſtures, but ſuch as wor­ſhip him with true virtue. And
Zaleucus the Law-gi­uer of the Locrenſes deliuered this law vnto his citizens;
God is not worſhipped with pompe, nor tragedies o­uer captiued perſons, as an
euill man or tyrants, but he that will pleaſe God, ought to be good, not only
in action, but alſo in the purpoſe of good and houeſt workes.

Theſe ſayings, although they diſcerne learnedly the geſtures of ceremonies
from the proper pointes of ver­tues, yet they ſpeake nothing touching faith
and true cal­ling vpon God, which are the Ladies and Queenes of o­ther
vertues. For other vertues are neither rightly go­uerned, nor yet do pleaſe
God, except faith and true prai­er firſt doe ſhine foorth. But this our
Pſalme, not only preferreth morall obedience before ceremonies, but alſo
ſheweth by what rule God is to be acknowledged, called vpon and worſhipped.
For it affirmeth, that God hath deliuered a commaundement touching true
prayer, and that hee hath promiſed to heare them that call vpon him, for the
Mediator ſake: whereby it appeareth moſt mani­feſt in what maner, euen in this
point, the doctrine of the church is able to excell the doctrine of
Philoſophie. Let vs therefore loue the wiſedome of the Church, and let vs
[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=35) eſteeme
this to be better than al the ſayings and writings of men.

#### 6.3.4.

Verſe 14‘Offer vnto God thankſgiuing, and pay thy vowes vnto the moſt
Higheſt.’Verſe 15‘And call vpon me in the time of trouble: ſo will I heare
thee, and thou ſhalt praiſe me.’

Theſe two verſes beare themſelues correlatiuely with the firſt commaundement,
that there is a mutuall leagueA mutuall league or co­uenant be­tweene God and
his church or couenant betweene God and his church. God for his ſonnes ſake
embraceth thee, and blotteth out thy ſinnes, and ſanctifieth thee vnto life
euerlaſting: Thou againe knoweſt, that this is God indeed, who ſending his
ſonne, and giuing his holy Spirit, hath made himſelfe knowen, and this true
God doeſt thou call vppon in confidence of his ſonne. So is there made a
mutuall couenant betwixt God and his church which are all they that truely
beleeue in him. Offer vnto God (ſaith he) thankeſgiuing: that is, as the
epiſtle of ſaint Paul cap. 13. 15. doth interpret it, The fruites of our
lippes. And as he here ſaith, Pay thy vowes vnto the moſt Higheſt, that is,
exerciſe thoſe vertues, whereunto the promiſe of the firſt commaunde­ment
bindes thee: which then are the vertues of this com­maundement: Touching this
queſtion, this pſalme an­ſwereth; Call vpon me in the day of trouble, ſo will
I heare thee, and thou ſhalt praiſe me: As if he had ſaid, praier in time of
trouble, and Thankeſgiuing for deliue­rance are the chiefeſt and greateſt
vertues of all others, touching which the firſt table enioyneth vs. Forſomuch
then as the verſe of the Pſalme containeth a precept  [...] and promiſe to be
conſidered in time of prayer, and in all the dangers of our life, I do exhort
the godly Reader di­ligently to conſider with himſelfe the doctrine touching
prayer and thankeſgiuing, which is vprightly and plen­tifully [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=35) expounded in
places theologicall.

For there is a ſixe-fold conſideration of things neceſ­ſaryA ſixefolde order
to be conſidered in Prayer. in Praier; firſt, we muſt conſider what we call
vp­on, what maner of God, and where he made himſelfe kno­wen, to the ende thou
maieſt diſcerne thy prayer from the prayer of the heathen: ſo in this place it
is ſaide, CallWhat God we call vpon. vpon, not creatures, but me, the Creator
and preſeruer of all things, made knowne by bringing the people out of Egypt,
publiſhing the law, and ſending my onely begot­ten Sonne into the world.
Secondly, we muſt conſiderThe com­mandement of God vnto vs. the commandement
which is recited in theſe words, Call vpon me in the day of trouble: For, God
will be wor­ſhipped with crauing of his grace, or fauour, and other giftes; to
the end he may be diſcerned from euil natures, and that this honour may be
giuen him, that he is wiſe, good, liberal, giuer of life, wiſdome, and other
good gifts, and that he vouchſafeth to communicate his benefites vn­to vs. And
like as the breaking of that commandement, Thou ſhalt not kill diſpleaſeth
God: ſo alſo the break­ing of the ſecond commaundement, which is the
neglect­ing of praier, diſpleaſeth him, where it is ſaid Ioh. 14. 13. and 16\.
23. Aske and ye ſhall receiue. The third conſi­derationConuerſion of him that
prayeth. concerneth our conuerſion: for ſome man would ſay, what ſhall I aſke,
ſeeing it is written, God heareth not ſinners, Matth. 9. 31. Here we muſt take
holde vp­on the voice of the other Ezech. 33. 11. I liue (ſaieth the Lord) I
will not the death of a ſinner, but that hee bee conuerted and liue. Let not
him that calleth vpon God perſeuer and go forward in miſchiefes againſt
conſcience, but let him be truely conuerted vnto God. And in euerie true
prayer, conuerſion or repentance vnto God is made or increaſeth. The fourth
conſideration is of the promiſePromiſe to him that prai­eth. of grace, and
confidence of the Mediator, that wee may come vnto God according to the
ſaying, Epheſ. 3. 12. By him we dare boldly come by faith in him. Needefull it
is then that we firſt by faith receiue forgiuenes of ſins, [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=36) or
reconciliation, and beleeue that praier pleaſeth God, and is not fruſtrate.
Furthermore alſo other promiſes touching other benefits and the mitigation of
calamities, muſt be looked vppon, as is here ſaide, Call vpon me in the day of
tribulation, and I will deliuer thee. The fift conſideration of faith, here we
muſt knowe, that faithAsking in faith: Beleeuing God. which craueth
forgiueneſſe, reconciliation, life euerlaſting, and gouernment of the ſoule,
ought in forme to craue theſe ſelfe ſame benefites, and looke for them without
conditi­on; becauſe God wil haue theſe to be craued for by name; and not to
haue theſe gifts, is, to remaine an enemie of God, and to reproach God, or to
iniure him according to the ſaying, He that beleeueth not in the Sonne, the
wrath of God remaineth vpon him. Againe, he repro­ueth God of lying. But faith
which craueth corporall good things, as Dauid crauing of God, that he might be
brought againe into his kingdome, required it with a con­dition; if it pleaſed
God: becauſe both things muſt be knowen of vs, that we muſt aſke theſe
benefites, and yet, that the church muſt be ſubiect vnto the croſſe, and oweth
obedience vnto God, according to the ſaying 1\. Pet. 5. 6. Humble your ſelues
vnder the mightie hand of God: and yet the prayer is not fruſtrated: for
either the puniſh­ment is taken quite away, or elſe mitigated. Finally,
needefull it is, that we moſt firmely keepe this rule: yea euen when we haue
loſt our corporall benefits, and when we muſt aſſuredly forgo the life of the
body, yet muſt we needes retaine the promiſe of grace and life euerlaſting,
like as Iob ſaith cap. 13. 15. Yea thoug he ſhal kil me, yet will I truſt in
him, and he ſhall be my Sauiour. The fixt conſideration of things to be
craued, is, as ſaint Iohn ſaith in his firſt epiſtle ch. 5. 14, 15. Whatſoeuer
thingAsking accor­ding to Gods will obtaineth all.you ſhall aske according to
his wil he ſhal giue it you: that is, you may not aſke things forbidden by
God, but ſuch as the manner of aſking them may agree with the table of the
commandements, and with Gods promiſes, [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=36) touching
ſpirituall and corporall benefits. And God will haue Prayer and Faith to be
exerciſed of vs, in crauing, not onely ſpirituall, but corporall benefites,
according to the ſaying in Mathew 6. 11. Giue vs this day our dai­ly bread.

For we muſt alwayes holde faſt the rule; In crauing of corporall benefites,
faith ought to ſhine forth, which re­ceiueth the promiſe of grace: and we muſt
adde hereunto an admonition touching circumſtances; namely, of the time, and
of the maner of our deliuerance: God wil haue his preſence in the church to be
acknowledged, and his help to be craued and looked for: he will haue our
faith, prayer and hope to be exerciſed, and will not haue mens counſels or
mens deuiſes to beare any ſway in gouerne­ment of our life; but hee will haue
it knowen, that the church is gouerned by God aboue. He doth not then giue
ſucceſſe by and by, and by ſuch maner of meanes, as mans reaſon conceiueth:
like as Ioſeph, Ionas, and very many others in all ages were deliuered, far
otherwiſe than they themſelues could deuiſe. Let theſe ſeeme to be
ſufficient­ly well enough ſpoken touching Praier, becauſe there are exerciſed
theologicall places in all mens hands, and other Bookes containing a longer
explication or opening at ful of this vertue.

But like as God requireth of vs a petition in our prai­er, to the end we
ſhould acknowledge that there is a God, and that he is almighty, preſent, and
a helper, that hee might communicate himſelfe in ſuch acknowledgement vnto vs:
So he requireth a giuing of thankes, that this acknowledgement may go forward
in vs. For when the acknowledgement of God is extinguiſhed in vnthankeful
perſons, God then ceaſeth any longer to communicate himſelfe vnto them: like
as moſt part of ſecure perſons after benefites receiued, do trifle it out with
ſuch like co­gitations: perhappes thou art deliuered by chance, &c. ſo they
loſe quite the acknowledgement and preſence of [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=37) God, when with
the following commemoration and pro­feſſion they ought to nouriſh and confirme
the acknow­ledgement of God and faith in him.

Seeing therefore Thankeſgiuing is a neceſſary wor­ſhipping, there are for the
moſt part, precepts ioyned to­gether with Prayer and Thankeſgiuing; becauſe
both of them are neceſſary vnto the acknowledgement of God, as in this Pſalme
it is thus ſaid, Call vpon me in the time of trouble and I wil deliuer thee,
and thou ſhalt praiſe me, Pſal. 50. 15. verſe.

To what purpoſe then is this particle, In the day of trouble? firſt it
ſignifieth that the glory of praier (the che­feſt of all others) ſhineth in
aduerſitie or calamities: for all men in time of proſperity become more
negligent then at other times, as in that verſe it is ſaid, Ouid de art Am.

Luxuriant animi rebus plaerumque fecundis.

Mens mindes moſt licentious be,

In time of their proſperitie.

But in aduerſities and calamities praier is feruent, and not only craueth, but
ſeeketh and knocketh. Furthermore, this little clauſe admoniſheth vs, that we
ſhould earneſtly thinke vpon the publike and priuate perilles, wherein the
church waxing old, and al the godly ones are exerciſed and diſtreſſed: for the
nearer the day of the latter iudgement is at hand, ſo much more outrageous
wrathfull ſtir­reth the deuill againſt Chriſt: namely nowe fearing the
ſentence wherein the exceeding filthines of the moſt prowd ſpirit ſhal be
manifeſted vnto all creatures, and the horrible torments due vnto him ſhalbe
increaſed. Therefore in ha­tred towards Chriſt, he ſtirreth vp the Turkes,
Biſhops, vngodly kings; finally, all his inſtruments againſt the church.

In ſo great dangers let vs not then be careleſſe and [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=37) negligent or
drunken with pleaſures, but let vs obey the commandement of Chriſt, Matth. 26.
41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

#### 6.3.5.

Verſe 16‘But vnto the vngodly, ſaid God, why doſt thou preach my lawes and
takeſt my coue­nant in thy mouth?’Verſe 17‘When as thou hateſt to be reformed:
and haſt caſt my wordes behinde thee.’Verſe 18‘When thou ſaweſt a thiefe, thou
conſen­tedſt vnto him; and haſt bin partaker with the adulterers.’Verſe
19‘Thou haſt let thy mouth ſpeake wicked­nes: and with thy tongue thou haſt
ſet forth deceit.’Verſe 20‘Thou ſateſt and ſpakeſt againſt thy bro­ther: yea,
and haſt ſlaundered thine owne mothers ſonne.’

Hitherto hath he rebuked the people heaping vp ſacri­fices, and hath ſhewed
the true and chiefe worſhippings of God, namely, true calling vpon God, and
thankeſ­giuing: Now doth he ſeuerely rebuke thoſe teachers in the church,
which do either corrupt the doctrine, or defile their profeſſion with euill
kinde of life. And here, to the end, that we being warned by example might be
more cir­cumſpect, and eſchew and abhorre that boldeneſſe of men which forge
and inuent opinions, and of them which cauil at true opinions. I will recite
an hiſtorie of Origen, who when he ſhould beginne his reading in the church of
Ce­ſarea, he ſate a long time ſorrowing and weeping, and at the length cried
out thus, vt ſupra, But vnto the vngod­ly ſaide God, why doeſt thou preach my
lawes? ver. 16 He often repeating this ſpeech, bewayled that he had diſ­puted
many things inconſiderately and raſhly, and craued pardon, not onely of God,
but alſo euen of the church, for [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=38) his errours;
which church  [...]itting hard by the old man,  [...]e­clared with teares,
that ſhe was mooued with his lamen­tation: for there can no other furie nor
ſorrow appeare in a good minde more ſharp or bitter, than that riſing out of a
conſcience which hath corrupted the heauenly doctrine. But to the end a
conſonancie of life and doctrine may bee neceſſary both together, theſe
ſayings witnes 1\. Cor. 9. 27 But I beate downe my body and bring it into
ſubiecti­on, leſt by any meanes after that I haue preached to o­ther, I my
ſelfe ſhould be reproued. Againe, in 2\. Ti­mot. 2. The husbandman muſt labor
before he receiue ehe fruits. Conſider what I ſay, verſ. 6. And becauſe
ex­amples haue in them great force thorowly to moue mens mindes, I will
adioyne vnto theſe ſayings a new or freſh example which declareth what a
miſchiefe the diſſonancie of doctrine and life is. I knew a paſtor of the
church, who for the ſinne of adultery was beheaded; he, when hee was carried
to execution had alwayes in mind and mouth this ſentence of this Pſalme, When
thou ſaweſt a theefe, thou ranneſt with him, and haſt bin partaker with the
adulterers, ver. 18. But although hee was vehemently tormented with thinking
vpon his offence, yet he rendered vnto God praiſe for his mercy, and in this
conſolation at length ſo ended his life Rom. 5. 15. grace aboundeth a­bone
ſinne. Theſe doe I recite, to the end, that all men may vnderſtand with how
great ſtudy and care offences are to be eſchewed which defile the profeſſion
of the goſ­pel. The ſame Sermon appertaineth vnto the vngodly, high Biſhops
and other Biſhops, who when they pro­feſſe thēſelues to be the very chiefeſt
lights of the church, are notwithſtanding filthily ſtained with madde
worſhip­ping of Images, wandering luſts, and murdering of the holy ones. But
in vaine do we preach to theſe deafe Ad­ders. Therefore let vs turne our
tongue to our churches, and let vs exhort the curable perſons, that they
woulde ſpread their names before God and men, that is, not only [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=38) ſay, that is
holy, but, do that is holy: for (as ſaint Au­guſtine ſaieth) To teach well,
and liue ill, is no otherBene dieere & male viuere, ni­hil aliud eſt quam ſua
ſe vo­ce damnare.thing, but a man to condemne himſelfe by his owne ſpeech.
Finally, we muſt here refute the opinion of the Donatiſts, which faineth, that
the miniſtery of the goſpel is not effectuall, except the perſon of the
miniſter be holie and iuſt: for the perſon muſt needes be diſcerned from the
office, and we muſt moſt firmely beleeue, that God is ef­fectuall by his word
and ſacraments: yea, though the mi­niſters life maruelouſly diſagree with the
profeſſion: for [...] neither doth the efficacie of the miniſtery depend vpon
th [...] worthines of the perſon, but vpon the prouidence of God▪ wherefore
let vs ſo vnderſtand the ſermon of this pſalme, that nothing be derogated from
the dignity and efficacie of the miniſterie, by reaſon of the perſons
infirmitie.

#### 6.3.6.

Verſe 21‘Theſe things haſt thou done, and I helde my tongue, and thou
thoughteſt wicked­ly, that I am euen ſuch a one as thy ſelfe: But I will
reprooue thee, and ſet before thee the things that thou haſt done.’Verſe 22‘O
conſider this, ye that forget God, leſt I plucke you away, and there be none
to deli­uer you.’

This is a heauie threatning, denouncing vnto hypo­crites inextricable
puniſhments: for, the ſeruant know­ing his maſter will & doing it not▪ ſhalbe
beaten with double ſtripes, Luke 12. 47, 48. And there is a feare­full figure
of the puniſhment of hypocrites ſet downe in the figgetrèe, which Chriſt did
accurſe, Math. 21. 19.

#### 6.3.7.

Verſe 23‘Whoſo offereth me thanks and praiſe, ho­noureth me: and to him that
ordereth his conuerſation right will I ſhew the ſaluation of God.’

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=39)In
concluſion, he repeateth a principall propoſition touching true worſhippings
of God: and promiſeth them that performe this obedience, both gouernement and
helpe.

## 7\. PSAL. LI. ‘Miſerere mei Deus.’

To him that excelleth, a Pſalme of Dauid, when2\. Sam. 12. 1. the Prophet
Nathan came vnto him: after he had gone in to Ba [...]hſheba.

### 7.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis Pſalme ſhineth moſt brightly (as it were a notable precious ſtone) in the
whole booke of Pſalmes. For firſt of all it conteineth moſt ample doctrine,
which neither the eloquence of angell nor of man can conceiue touching ſinne,
touching grace, touching the gift by grace, difference of wor­ſhipings, cr
touching the Croſſe: After that it diſpo­ſeth and chargeth great matters in
moſt excellent order. For ſeeing the firſt and cheefeſt promiſe is, the
promiſe of grace and life euerlaſting to be giuen freely for the Mediators
ſake, who will denie this prayer is wiſely ordeined, wherein before all things
he craueth forgiueneſſe of ſinne, reconcilation and life e­uerlaſting? [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=39) And becauſe
without acknowledgment and confeſſion of ſinne, forgiueneſſe or abſolution of
ſinne cannot be receiued according to that ſaying of I. Ioh. I. 9. If wee
confeſſe our ſinnes, God is faithfull and iuſt, that he will forgiue vs our
ſinnes, and clenſe vs from all our i niquity: he franckly and openly
confeſ­ſeth his ſinnes, and pointeth his finger vnto the ground of miſchiefe,
namely originall ſinne: But as Saint Paul ioyneth together grace, and the
Giftes of grace, ſo Dauid vn'o the petition the remisſion of ſinnes, next
adioineth a petition of ſanctification, which is wrought by the holy ghoſt,
the gouernour of the minde, will, and heart: finally becauſe it is an vſuall
manner, in crauing any thing, to grant thankfulnes for the ſame, hee promiſeth
that he will giue ſome recompences, which doth make for the glorie of God, and
welfare of the church: And vnto his couenaunt wiſely he ioin­eth betweene
both, the place, and difference of ſacri­fices, whereof ſome are figuratiue,
and others are mo­rall, and the doctrine touching the croſſe. Theſe ſecret and
greateſt matters he ſo adorneth with lights of wordes and ſentences, that
therein nothing want­eth touching moſt profound eloquence. Seeing there­fore
this Pſalme aboundeth not onely with ſtore of moſt excellent matters, but is
alſo notably diſpoſed and adorned no doubt there is, but it may and ought to
be learned euery word thereof, and daily repeated when we doe pray. And let
him knowe that he hath profited much, whom this right golden pſalme ſhall
greatly delight.

### 7.2. Pſal. LI. And expoſition thereof.

#### 7.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Haue mercy vppon me (O God) after thy great goodnes: according vnto
the multitude of thy mercies, doe away mine offences.’[[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=40)Verſe 2‘Waſh me
throwly from my wickednes: and clenſe me from mine ſinne.’

IN the two and thirtieth Pſalme, before, he hath recited a definition of
beatitude or cheefe felicity, in theſe wordes: Bleſſed are they whoſe
iniquities are forgiuen and whoſe ſinnes are couered: Bleſſed is the man vnto
whom the Lord imputeth no sinne. verſe 1. 2. For nothing is more wiſhfull in
true ſorowes riſing from the wrath of God againſt ſinnes, then reconciliation
with God. This benefit therefore with moſt feruent prayers, and with all his
heart craneth he of God, ſaying. verſe 1. Haue mercy vppon me O God, according
to thy mercy, as if he ſaid; I confeſſe vnto thee, that I haue ſinned
horribly, as a moſt wretched ſinner, and I am ſory with all my heart, that I
haue offended thee, forgiue mee my ſinnes, and couer my filthines, and for thy
ſonnes ſake our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, (whom thou wouldeſt haue to be a ſacrifice,
mediator and interceſſor for vs) doe not thou impute vnto mee my manifold
diſobedience. For ſo oft as in the Pſalme mention is made of the mercie of
God, wee muſt ſtraight way couſider of the promiſes touching grace, and of the
mediator, for whoſe ſake the promiſe is ratified: Alſo let there be a
difference in thy ſight betwene the lawe and the goſpell.  [...] lawe truely
hath large and great promiſes, yet conſiſting vppon con­dition of full
obedience: But the promiſes of the goſpell is vniuerſall and free, offering
forgiuenes of ſinnes, for the mediator the ſonne of God his ſake, our Lord
Jeſus Chriſt God and man, not for our owne worthines, nor for our owne
vertues, nor for our owne works, or merits. This promiſe ought to be imbraced
by fayth, becauſe it is the euerlaſting and immutable commaundement of God,
that, in our conuerſion, (that is, in our vnfained ſorowes and feares) wee
ſhould beleeue, we are receiued for his [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=40) ſonnes ſake,
according to that ſaying, I liue (ſaith the Lord) I wil not the death of a
ſinner, but that he wouldEzech. 33. 11repent and liue. But to the end this
true fayth may bee rightly vnderſtood, it is nedefull we alwayes haue in our
ſight that admonition of Barnerd, wherein he ſaieth: Thou muſt, and oughteſt
to beleue, that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee. The deuill knoweth that ſinnes
are for­giuen ſome men, and many men, as Saule and Iudas be­leeue that ſinnes
are forgiuen others. Wherefore let this neceſſarie admonition be faſt fixed in
our mindes. Beleeue that thine owne ſinnes are forgiuen thee. Touching this
fayth ſpeaketh Paul where he teacheth, that the pro­miſe is to be receiued by
fayth. They receiue not the pro­miſe which beleeue that the ſame is offered
vnto others, and not to themſelues, like as in the epiſtles of Saint Iohn it
is written. He that beleueth not the Sonne ac­cuſeth him oflying. When
therefore thou reciteſt this article of the creed, I beleeue in the forgiuenes
of ſinnes, vnderſtand thou, that ſinnes are not forgiuen others, but thee
alſo. Touching this fayth it is ſaid, Being iuſtified by fayth we haue peace.
Rom. 5. 1. Neither muſt we ſeeke for other conſolation, but we muſt ſettle our
ſelues ſatiſfied with this fayth in God, for the mediator ſake. But ſeeing the
doctrine touching iuſtification is in ano­ther place fully handled, I am nowe
more breefe and I exhort the Reader that hee ſhould diligently conſider the
weightineſſe of the words. Hee ſayth not in vaine nor raſhly, According to the
multitude of thy mercy doe away mine offences. But this neceſſarie conſolation
of the immenſe mercy of god doth he ſet before the greatnes and multitude of
our ſinnes. And this forme of words a­greeth with the moſt ſweete ſaying of
Paul. Rom. 5. 15. Grace euer aboundeth aboue ſinne, that is, how great ſo euer
our ſinnes be, yet is it aſſured that the ſonne of God is mightier. Therfore
let vs not vnto other offences adde deſperation, but let vs beleeue that grace
is more a­boundant [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=41) then ſinne, and
that the ſonne of God is more mighty then all the kingdome of the deuill: Like
as in the firſt promiſe it is ſaid, Gen. 3. 15. The ſeede of the woman ſhall b
[...]uſe the Serpents head. Alſo let vs con­ſider what ſweete reſemblences of
forgiuenes of ſinnes are ſet downe in the words Doe away and Waſh. Saint Paul
in 2. Coloſſ. deſcribing the benefits of Chriſt vſeth the ſame metaphore,
Chriſt (ſaith hee) hath cancelled the hand-writing which was written againſt
vs, which was contrarie to vs: he euen tooke it out of the way, and faſtned it
to the croſſe. verſe 14. He alludeth this ſaying vnto trophees or pillers
which were woont to be ſet vp, wherein things done were written for memoriall:
For he ſaith, vpon the croſſe, as it were vpon a piller, the hand writing was
hung vp, that is, the accuſation, where­by our conſcience (as touching the
lawe) accuſeth vs. This accuſation as it were done away, hee ſayeth doth hang
vpon the croſſe of Chriſt, who hath for vs payed the ranſome. Let vs looke
vpon that trophey or piller with fayth, ſo often as wee call vppon God: For
our vn­worthines murmureth againſt vs, thus: why commeſt thou vnto God? why
dareſt thou craue good things, when as for thy ſo many ſinnes thou haſt
deſerued great puniſhment, wrath, and deſtruction, whileſt as yet thou feeleſt
many vile motions in thee▪ Againſt this diſtruſt of minde fleeing away from
God, doth hee ſet vs downe this trophey: Here (ſayth he) behold thou the
accuſation hanging and blotted out, come thou vnto God in confi­dence of the
mediator, and craue his holy ſpirit, and other benefits. The metaphor of
Waſhing away, may be [...] vnderſtood out of the hiſtory extant in the 13\.
Iohn. verſ. 8. If I waſh thee not thou ſhalt haue no part with mee Againe
ibidem verſe 10, Hee that is waſhed needeth not, to waſh his feete, but is
cleane eue­ry whit. Theſe ſayings without doubting do deſcribe iuſtification:
Except he himſelfe waſh vs, that is, except [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=41) hee with his
owne blood doe redeeme vs, and except wee beleeue that we are redemed by the
blood of Chriſt, wee ſhall not be heires of eternall life. Hee that is waſhed
needeth not to waſh his ſeete: that is, hee that is iuſt by fayth and is
ſanctified, is cleane, that is, altogether pleaſing God. But yet in this life,
our feete muſt be waſhed continually, that is, our motions. Weake nature in
this life begetteth many wandring motions. Theſe filthie ſpottes ought
continually to be waſhed: and the in­terpretations are knowen. The beleeuing
perſon is cleane altogether, that is to ſay, by imputation. But in this life
is begunne a newneſſe not yet altogether ful­filled. Theſe things are
elſewhere largely ſpoken of. Now let the Reader gather the paraphraſticall
parts of the firſt propoſition, thus: Eternall God, father of our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt forgiue me my ſinnes paſt, wherein I am wicked and filthily defiled: By
the mercy which is promiſed for thy ſonnes ſake our mediator, doe away both
the moſt ſorowfull accuſation of my conſcience, as it were a hand-writing
againſt me, and in the blood of thy ſonne, waſh away the remnants of ſinne
ſticking in my weake nature, like as it is written. I Iohn 1. 7. The blood of
Ieſus Chriſt clenſeth vs from all ſinne. That is, taketh away, not onely
ſinnes formerly com­mitted, but alſo couereth the remnants of ſinne, which as
yet wee ſeely ſoules and weakelings do beare about with vs. Let therefore this
propoſition be adioyned vnto other teſtimonies which confirme the article of
Juſtification, and let it alwaies ſound in our eares, heart, and tongue:
becauſe we haue euery moment neede of the free forgiue­neſſe of our ſinnes.

#### 7.2.2.

Verſe 3‘For I knowledge my faults, and my ſinne is  [...]uer before me.’

This verſe pertaineth vnto confeſſion, wherewith man [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=42) ſoroweth in Gods
preſence, that he hath ſinnes; and by faith craueth forgiueneſſe of his
offence, and mitigation of puniſhments. And there is a great force in the
worde,The acknow­ledgement of ſinne. The acknowledgement of ſinne.] The
acknowledge­ment is not an idle or vaine conſideration, ſuch as was in Dauid
before his adultery, (when he alſo knew that ad­ultery was forbidden) but it
is a feare and caſting downe of man acknowledging God to be angry; as Dauid
did know his ſinne after the moſt greeuous rebuke which hee had. Furthermore,
in the word Sinne, we muſt conſider a relation, namely, that man, by reaſon of
ſinne, is guilty of Gods euerlaſting wrath and puniſhment, except hee haue
forgiueneſſe for the Mediators ſake. Touching this guiltineſſe in the Lawe it
is ſaide, Deuter. 27. Curſed be euery one which continueth not in al things,
which are written in the Law ver. 26.

#### 7.2.3.

Verſe 4‘Againſt thee onely haue I finned, and done this euill in thy ſight,
that thou mighteſt be iuſtified in thy ſaying, and cleare when thou art
iudged.’

He repeateth a confeſſion amplified with moſt ſorow­fullThe confeſsi­of ſinne.
wordes, as if he ſhould ſay: I come vnto thee, not truſting in mine owne
righteouſneſſe or worthineſſe, but onely bringing a confeſſion of ſinne. To
thee only am I a ſinner, and do euil in thy ſight: for the particle (only) may
not be referred vnto the pronowne, but is a debar­ring of his owne dignitie or
worthineſſe to be referred vn­to the word following, ſinner. So firſt hee
teacheth vs to bring the confeſſion of our ſinne vnto God. This con­feſſion of
ſinne is more feruent, and more perceiued when God encloſeth vs euery where
with ſignes of guiltineſſe in puniſhments, like as when Dauid was driuen into
ex­ilement. But it followeth in the verſe, [That ihou maieſt be iuſtified in
thy ſayings, and ouercome when [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=42) thou art
iudged.] Theſe wordes comprehend both a moſt graue doctrine, that God
puniſheth iuſtly: and a moſt ſweete conſolation touching the promiſe of mercy
which God performeth for his trueth, or, to witneſſe that he is true. Dauid
going forth in his baniſhment ſaide, I acknowledge and confeſse that I am
guiltie, and haue deſerued puniſhments, and I pronounce that thou art a iuſt
God, ſeeing thou doeſt manifeſt thy moſt iuſt wrath or diſpleaſure againſt my
ſinne, and doeſt pu­niſh me: And I pronounce that thou ouercommeſt, when
hypocrites doe iudge thee. As Saul, Cato, and all the vngodly ones do thinke,
that they haue not deſer­ued ſo great calamitiess or ſurely thinke, that God
is too ſeuere, who hath burdened this our weake nature with ſuch a multitude
of miſeries; ſo they accuſe and condemne God, and ſpeake euil of him: But let
vs ren­der the praiſe of righteouſnes vnto God, when he pu­niſheth, as Daniel
ſaith cap. 9. 7. Vnto thee Lorde be­longeth righteouſnes, but vnto vs ſhame.
Further­more, needeful it is, that an other meaning be added tou­ching the
promiſe of mercy, becauſe, when this conſolati­on commeth not hereunto, there
remaineth a fretting and grudging of the heart, ſuch as was in Saul or Cato:
wee muſt therefore adde this, I acknowledge my ſelfe to bee guiltie, and to
haue deſerued puniſhments, I confeſſe, thy wrath is moſt iuſt, and I craue
mercy, not truſting in my worthineſſe, but in thy promiſe. Heare mee, that
thou maieſt be iuſtified, that is, to the end thy trueth may bee publiſhed,
that thou keepeſt promiſes, and, in truth hear­eſt, receiueſt, and deliuereſt
thoſe that call vppon thee: ſhew a teſtimonie and example, wherein it may be
ſeene, that thou art the keeper of promiſes, when thou heareſt me an vnworthy
perſon.

#### 7.2.4.

Verſe 5‘Behold, I was ſhapen in wickednes; and in ſinne hath my mother
conceiued me.’

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=43)He
accuſeth not his parents, nor condemneth the ſelfe worke of generation, but he
bewaileth this miſchiefe, the which with moſt ſorrowfull wordes is of S. Paul
deſcri­bed, where hee ſaieth, Rom. 8. 7. the wiſedome of the fleſh is enmitie
againſt God. For the ſubſtance by God, is one thing, and the diſorder which
commeth afterwards is an other thing, and a deprauing of Gods worke, name­ly,
darkeneſſe, and doubtings in minde towards God, the turning of our wil & heart
from God, and burning flames of motions diuerſly wandering in the heart. But
this is a deſcription of originall ſinne no doubt of it, taken out of Moſes,
who in the eight chapter of Geneſis ſaith, The imagination of mans heart is
euil, euen from his youth, ver. 2▪1. That is, men are not only corrupted by
euil cu­ſtome, but in the very heart it ſelfe le [...]d inclinations are in
children now borne. Let therefore this verſe be eſtee­med amongſt the ſpecial
teſtimonies of original ſinne: that is, of the horrible corruption of humane
nature which is full of blindneſſe, concupiſcence and ignorance of her ſelfe
and of ſinne.

#### 7.2.5.

Verſe 6‘But lo, thou requireſt truth in the inward parts: and ſhalt make me to
vnderſtand wiſedome ſecretly.’

Hee manifeſtly witneſſeth, that God requireth of vs a confeſſion of ſinne, and
that it pleaſeth him, as it were a worſhip glorifing him, and that he hateth
hypocriſie which ſeeth not, nor extenuateth the vncleanes of nature, Heither
will be reproued with the word of God, but blaſphemeth and perſecuteth the
true doctrine. For as Saint Augu­ſtine ſayth notably in theſe words cited by
Proſperus, Melior eſt in malis factis humilis confeſsio, quam in bonis ſuperba
gloriatio. Better is an humble confeſsion in e­uil deeds, then a pro [...]d
braging in good workes. Alſo he teacheth that this is ſecret wiſedome, namely
truely to [[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=43)
accknowledge ſinne, and to take hald of mercy,  [...]nd to be­leeue that God
will not caſt vs away, although we be vn­worthy and haue deſerued his wrath,
but that he will haue mercy, according to his promiſes. This ſecret wiſedome
is vnknowen vnto the world, and abhorreth from the iudgement of reaſon,
neither is that reueiled in the doc­trine of the lawe, but in the goſ [...]el
onely, and is vnder­ſtood of them, who in extreme feares doe comfort
them­ſelues with the conſolation of the goſpel,

#### 7.2.6.

Verſe 7‘Thou ſhalt purge me with Iſop, and I ſhall be cleane: Thou ſhalt waſh
me, and I ſhall be whiter then ſnowe.’Verſe 8‘Thou ſhalt make me heare of ioy
and glad­neſſe: that the bones which thou haſt bro­ken may reioyce.’Verſe
9‘Turne thy face from my ſinnes: and put out all my miſdeedes.’

He repeateth the firſt petition; touching remiſſion of ſinnes; and
reconciliation, and adorneth the ſame with ſignes borowed from the ceremony of
the lawe. For this was the ceremony, wherewith they were clenſed: They were
ſprinckled with hiſop dipped in blood, whereby was ſignified the ſprinckling
of the blood of Chriſt, who was to come, the ſacrifice for ſinne. Thou
therefore (ſaith he) ſhalt purge me with hiſop, and make me cleane, that is,
thou ſhalt pronounce me looſed from ſinne, and cleane, according to thy
promiſes for the blood of thy ſonne. But he ſignifieth by that Leuiticall
ceremony of ſprinckling, that ſinne is not taken away, but that ceremony of
ſprink­ling and waſhing were deſcriptions and ſignes of the fu­ture ſacrifices
of Chriſt, through whoſe blood ſinne ſhould be aboliſhed and clenſed. Wherfore
he oppoſeth this verſe againſt the  [...]euitical miniſterie, as if he ſaid: I
craue that th [...]u wouldeſt purge me, that is, that thou woulde [...] [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=44) clenſe mee with
ſuch ſprinckling wherewith ſinne may truely be taken away, and I may be made
cleane indeede, that is, wherewith my conſcience may be deliuered from
guiltineſſe. But the Prophet himſelfe interpreteth thoſe ceremonies without
figure, what it is to be purged, and waſhed, where he ſayeth in the 8. verſe
Thou ſhalt make me heare of ioy and gladnes: by which words he ſignifi­eth,
that he ſpeaketh touching the conſolation, which is perceiued or felt by the
promiſe: as if he ſaid, bring to paſſe, that in mee there may be conſolation,
whereby I may be deliuered from the terrors of ſinne. And he excel­lently
addeth a deſcription of true repentance or terrors, which the accknowledgement
of ſinne worketh: That the bones which thou haſt broken may reioyce, which
trembled for and by reaſon of the terrors of ſinne: To the ſame ſence
pertaineth the litle verſe folowing Turne thy face from my ſinne. verſe 9. For
hee craueth that Gods wrath may be taken away, that the lawe may not haue any
right cauſe to accuſe and condemne his conſcience, yea though as yet hee had
ſinne in him. So againe theſe verſes doe teach as touching the manner of
iuſtification or reconciliation, namely that we are deliuered from terrors,
and doe obteine forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: ſo as ſinne ſhall not be imputed vnto
vs, which as yet ſticketh in nature, yea euen then when we are reconſiled.

#### 7.2.7.

Verſe 10‘Make me a cleane heart O God: and re­new a right ſpirit within
mee.’Verſe 11‘Caſt me not away from thy preſence: and take not thy holy ſpirit
from me.’Verſe 12‘O giue mee the comfort of thy helpe againe: and ſtabliſh me
with thy free ſpirit.’

Hitherto hath hee craued grace, that is, remiſſion of ſinnes, and
reconciliation or free acceptation for the Son of God his ſake: Now craueth he
the gift by grace, as [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=44) ſaint Paul
ſpeaketh, that is, ſanctification, as the gift of the holy ghoſt, and a
beginning of the life euerlaſting: andThree petiti­ons of Dauid in theſe three
verſes. A cleane hart. he vſeth diuers meanes or proper words; firſt, he
craueth of God a cleane heart and a right ſpirit to be giuen him: a cleane
heart ſignifieth a heart, by faith purified from ſinnes, or from guiltineſſe,
and now rightly beleeuing of God, truely acknowledging God without hypocriſie
and falſe opinions; not fleeing from God, nor careleſly con­tenming God, but
truly fearing God, and beleeuing in God. Like vnto this is the other alſo,
where hee craueth a right ſpirit, that is, not wauering in the word, not
ca­ried about with euery winde of doctrine, nor doubting in the will of God:
But a heart ſtriuing againſt doubting, and ſurely and firmely ſetling it ſelfe
in the promiſe, and which ſurely beleeueth that it hath God merciful, and that
it is heard of God, and in this confidence calleth vppon God, and looketh for
help from God: ſecondly, hee cra­uethThe holy ſpi­rit. the holy ſpirit, that
is, ſanctifying and illumining in our hearts ſuch motions, as he himſelfe is:
for, as the ho­ly ghoſt is a ſubſtantiall loue, and coeternall ioy betwixt the
Father and the Sonne; ſo is he ſent into the heartes of beleeuers, that hee
may inflame in them loue and ioy ſetled in God, like as in 2\. Timoth. 1. it
is written, ForThree nota­ble properties which Dauid attributeth to the
holyghoſt.God hath not giuen to vs the ſpirite of feare, but of po­wer, and of
loue, and of a ſound minde. Hee calleth profoundly the holy ghoſt, the ſpirit
of power, becauſe it helpeth our infirmity: the ſpirit of loue, becauſe he is
a flame of mutuall loue, not onely betweene the father and the Sonne, but alſo
betweene God and the church: the ſpirite of holineſſe or chaſticement, becauſe
it brideleth wandering aſſaults of mindes, or as ſaint Paul ſaith, ItRom. 8.
13.mortifieth the deedes of the fleſh; and ingrafteth in vs better motions
acceptable vnto God, and wholeſome for vs and the whole Church: thirdly, the
pſalme namethComfort of the principal ſpirit. principall ſpirit, that is, the
willing and obedient ſpirite, which may rule and gouerne vs in al our life and
actions, [[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=45)
and in all our counſelles and dangers; and a ſpirit which may bring to paſſe,
that we may willingly obey God, that we may boldely confeſſe the word of God,
and that with a mighty courage we may be able to indure afflictions for the
glory of God. Theſe are the effects of the holyghoſt in the reconciled ones,
or in them which receiue forgiue­nes of ſinnes. Seeing therefore without this
grace there is nothing auaileable in any man, as the church godlily ſingeth.
Abſque Dei numine nihil eſt in homine, &c. Let vs craue from God, this
gouernour of our mind, wil, and heart, which giueth witnes vnto our ſpirit,
that wee are the ſonnes of God, and cryeth vnto God with vnſpeake­able
ſighings for vs, and finally, is a pledge and token of our inheritance vnto
the laſt moſt ioyfull day of our re­demtion.

#### 7.2.8.

Verſe 13‘Then ſhal I teach thy wayes vnto the wic­ked, and ſinners ſhalbe
conuerted vnto thee.’Verſe 14‘Deliuer mee from bloodguiltines O God, thou that
art the God of my health: and my tongue ſhall ſing of thy righteouſnes.’Verſe
15‘Thou ſhalt open my lippes, O God, and my mouth ſhall ſhew thy praiſe.’

I ſaide in the Argument, that the latter parte of this pſalme is a promiſe of
rendering a due recompence, wher­vnto we are naturally bound: but ſeeing we
are not able to giue any ſufficient recompence vnto God, for his bene­fites
moſt great, beſides the propagation and confeſſion of the goſpel, he promiſeth
that he wil performe theſe du­ties moſt holily; whereby both the glorie of God
is made more excellent, and many men are called backe from error and Idolatry,
vnto the true acknowledgement of God, and prayer vnto him. Theſe worſhips let
vs alſo per­forme, that there may be diſcerned a difference betweene the true
church of God and other nations. For other nati­ons [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=45) may haue many
other vertues, as there was a great glory of righteouſnes, chaſtitie, and
modeſtie in Ariſtides and Scipio: yet the true calling vpon God, and
aduance­ment of his doctrine were wanting in them. But the church alone both
vnderſtandeth and performeth worſhip­pings, touching which I haue ſpoken
before. Now as the rules of aſking any thing, and of thankeſgiuing are for the
moſt part ioyned together, ſo in the Pſalmes theſe motions are mixed, whereof
ſome craue from God for the Mediators ſake neceſſary benefits; others giue
thanks to God or the Mediator for benefits receiued. In this place alſo let
there be added vnto the verſe Euchariſticall, or that which concerneth
thankeſgiuing, two petitions: one touching mitigation of puniſhments, the
other, touching help in aduancing the doctrine, and touching confeſſion, I
acknowledge (ſaith he) that I am iuſtly puniſhed, and that I haue deſerued
more grieuous puniſhements; But deliuerme from bloodguiltineſse, O God, that
is, O God deliuer me from guiltines or puniſhment of murder, which is an
vniuerſall deſtruction, and mitigateth thy wrath for thy Mediators ſake, that
I may be a witneſſe and an aduancer of thy doctrine. Touching this mitiga­tion
of puniſhments the Prophets moſt ſweetely preach, as Pſa. 77. 9. He will not
ſhut vp his louing kindneſſe in diſpleaſure. And as Ioel 2. 13. The Lord is
gratious and merciful, ſlowe to anger, and of great kindnes, and repenteth him
of the euil. And he maketh his prayer as if he thus ſaid, I beſeech thee, O
God, to helpe mee in a matter hard and difficult, namely, in teaching and
confeſ­ſing thy true doctrine: for mans weake nature is either ouercome with
inticements, or quailed with threatnings, or with flatteries of friends is ſo
enfeebled, that with vn­iuſt ſilence ſhee may diſſemble her true opinion. Thou
therefore open my lippes, thou helpe my weakeneſſe, that I be not a hireling
ſheepheard, which in the time of peace doeth teach meanely; but when as the
wolfe com­meth, [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=46) either runneth
away, or holdeth his tongue.

#### 7.2.9.

Verſe 16‘Becauſe thou deſireſt no ſacrifice, elſe would I giue it thee: but
thou delighteſt not in burnt offerings.’

He frameth in order vnto Thankeſgiuing a common place touching degrees of
ſacrifices; and morall ſacrifi­ces or morall obedience doth hee preferre
before ceremo­nies. For, the vſuall diſtinction of ſacrifice is knowne, which
is deliuered in the predicament of the deede, and in theologicall places. The
only ſacrifice is, (Ilaſticon) pro­pitiatorie, that is, the whole obedience of
Chriſt. The ſacrifices of al other the godly ones are Thankſgiuings: and theſe
are either figuratiue or morall. But although they ſeeme to bee called
cōntraries: Thou delighteſt not in burnt offerings. Againe, Then ſhall they
offer yong bullockes vpon thine altare: yet notwithſtanding there is an eaſie
coniunction or affinitie betweene them. The firſt ſaying condemneth the
perſwaſion touching the deede done, as they now vſe to ſay: Afterward he
affir­meth, that ceremonies do pleaſe God, whē they are right­ly vſed, that
is, when repentance, the feare of God, & faith (which acknowledge the
Mediator, and know that we are for his ſake receiued) do come hereunto alſo.
But he no­teth ceremonies thus, becauſe they are teſtimonies of promiſes and
are ſignes of confeſſion, and doe inuite others thereunto.

#### 7.2.10.

Verſe 17‘The ſacrifice of God, is a troubled ſpirit: a contrite heart (O God)
ſhalt thou not de­ſpiſe.’

A notable doctrine and conſolation is ſet downe in thisWhat exerci­ſes of
faith ca­lamities are. verſe: for firſt it teacheth, that calamities are not
al­wayes ſignes of any mans reiection, but exerciſes whole­ſome [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=46) for the godly
ones, and obedience which is perfor­med in calamities, he calleth expreſly
ſacrifices, that is, a worſhiping or worke, wherewith God is honoured: After
that it comforteth vs, leſt wee ſhould thinke our ſelues to be forſaken of
God, by reaſon of calamities, but that God rather promiſeth helpe, and
mitigation, yea de­liuerance of and from our miſeries. So in the 57\. cap. and
15\. verſe of Eſay it is ſaid, I dwell with him that is of a contrite and
humble ſpirit, to reuiue the ſpirit of the humble, and to giue life to them
that are of a con­trite heart. And in the laſt chapter of Iſay. v. 2. To him
will I looke, euen to him that is poore, and of a con­trite ſpirit, and tremb
[...]eth at my words. With this con­ſolation, Bernard (being brought low by a
greeuous and deadly ſicknes) comforted himſelfe thus ſaying, Vapulem ſane
quatenus miſeriaris afflicto, qui non inuenis in me bo­num remuneres, tempus
meum perdidi, quia perdite vixi, pro quo quid agam non habeo, niſi quod cor
contritum & humiliatum non deſpicies. I may well be beaten truely, ſo farre
forth as thou haſt mercy vppon the afflicted perſon, who findeſt not any good
at all in mee which thou mayeſt rewarde: I haue loſt my time becauſe I haue
liued graceleſſe, for the which what I my doe I haue not in mee; but that thou
God wilt not deſpiſe an humble and contrite heart.

#### 7.2.11.

Verſe 18‘O be fauourable vnto Sion, build thou the walles of Ieruſalem.’Verſe
19‘Then ſhalt thou be pleaſed with the ſacri­fice of righteouſnes, with the
burnt offer­ings, and oblations: then ſhall they offer young bullocks vpon
thine altare.’

In concluſion is added a common praier for the church, as if hee had ſayed: Be
fauourable O Lord vnto thy church, that ſhe may be deliuered from corrupt
doctrine, [[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=47)
and from offences, and that true doctrine touching for­giuenes of ſinnes may
be made knowen, and true worſhip­pings be performed. For God will haue vs in
our prayer to be moued with care for the whole church, and for others alſo,
like as it is written, Pſal. 122. verſe. 6. O pray for the peace of
Hieruſalem, &c.

## 8\. PSAL. LII. ‘Quid gloriaris in malicia?’

To him that excelleth, A Pſalme of Dauid to giue instruction: when Doeg the
Edomite came and ſhowed Saul, and ſaid to him; Dauid is come to the houſe of
Ahimelech 1. Sam. 22. 9.

### 8.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe reading of this pſalme is not obſcure vnto them, which both knowe the
hi­ſtorie of Dauid, and doe diligently con­ſider the dangers of theſe dayes:
Doeg the conſpirator as 1 Sam. 21\. and 22. declareth, When he was moſt
ſubtilly aquainted with all harmefull ſlights, tolde Saul, that Dauid then
ba­niſhed, was receiued into ſuccour by A [...]imilech the prieſt: And
afterwards when the reſidue of the Kings [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=47) miniſters fled,
and feared the moſt ſorowful ſlaughter of the prieſts houſehould: He, this
ſame Doeg, cruelly raged againſt holy men, no otherwiſe then a Lion, which in
much ſlaughter lyeth as conqueror preying vppon euery beaſt, his iawes al
embrewed with blood, driuing away hunger, neuer reſts raging hither and
thither caſting down bulles, threatens the ſeely calues, ſlow of foote, but
wearie of tooth: And as Seneca ſaith in Thyeſte. Quis Colchus haec quis c
[...]dis incertae Scythae commiſit? aut quae Caſpium tangens mare, Gens iuris
ex­pers auſ [...]? In engliſh thus: What Colchian or what wandring Scythian
did euer committe theſe things? or what lawleſſe nation bordering the Caſpian
ſea durſt euer atempt the like enterpriſe? For I may well with tragicall
wordes deſcribe ſuch beaſtly cruelty: So at this day many godly church men,
are for matrimony only cruelly martired, when as neuer any barbarous nation
hath ſlaughtered men for the like cauſe. Firſt of all then, in this pſalme, he
doth exaggerate and ampli­ſie the wicked enterpriſe of Doeg and ſuch like
[...]yco­phants which ſtirre vp and inflame the diſpleaſures of kings againſt
honeſt and godly perſons. Next of all he denounceth moſt greeuous puniſhments
vnto ſo­phiſters & Sycophants which ſharpen their tong, and frame their
writings againſt that congregation which keepeth the true doctrine. Laſt of
al, he ſetteth downe a conſolation for the church very neceſſarie: namely,
that the whole body of the church cannot be vtterly o­uerthrowen with cruel
counſels and miſcheuous enter­priſes of the enemyes although by gods aſſured
proui­dence ſhe be perſecuted in ſome part of her. For wher­as Dauid in this
pſalme. verſe 8 thus ſpeaketh of him­ſelfe, As for me I am like a greene oliue
tree in the houſe of God, that is aplyed in the 92. pſalme 11, 12, and 13.
verſe, vnto the whole church and euery member ther­of, The righteous ſhall
floriſh like a palme tree, and ſhall [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=48) ſpreade abrode
like a cedar in Libanus. They that be plan­ted in the houſe of the Lord, ſhall
flouriſh in the courts of our God. They ſhall alſo bring forth more fruite in
their age: and ſhall be fat and well liking. With this moſt ſweete conſolation
let vs alſo then comfort our ſelues. The ſtate of our church & ſchools which
by gods bene fits or bleſsing is now ordeined, ſemeth to vs, not long ſo to be
ſetled by the light of the goſpell reſtored: But yet it ſhall remaine and
continue yea though the whole world and all the deuills ſet themſelues againſt
it, Like as Chriſt in an other place ſaith. Math. 16. 18. The gates of hel
ſhall not preuaile againg the church.

### 8.2. Pſal. LII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 8.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Why boaſteſt thou (thy ſelfe O tirant,) thou that canſt doe
miſchiefe?’Verſe 2‘Whereas the goodnes of God indureth yet daily.’Verſe 3‘Thy
t [...]ungue imagineth wickednes, and with lies thou cutteſt like a ſharpe
raſour.’Verſe 4‘Thou haſt loued vnrighteouſnes, more then goodnes, and to
talke of lies more then righteouſnes.’Verſe 5‘Thou haſt loued to ſpeake all
words that may doe hurte, O thou falſe tongue.’

Like as Abim [...]lech that godly and holy man was foul­ly abuſed by Doeg in
this ſlaunder, that hee ſhould con­ſult together with Dauid about ſeditious
enterpriſes, and practize all meanes to the deſtruction of Saul: So the
Prophets, Apoſtles, and their ſcholers are always ouer­charged with theſe two
moſt heinous crimes, namely, blaſphemous hereſie, and mouing ſedition. The
conſi­deration whereof more grieuouſly vexeth modeſt perſons, then all the
cruell puniſhments wherewith the bodyes [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=48) are tormented:
But as they ſpared not (for all their in­dangered eſtate by ſlaunders moued
againſt them) to ſet forth and aduaunce the true and neceſſarie doctrine of
God: So let not vs for the like euil occaſion or cauelings caſt a­way from vs
our confeſſion. And although we ſhall want humane helpes to ſupport our cauſe,
yet notwithſtand­ing let vs craue and looke for defence from God, the
e­uerlaſting father of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, who hath made himſelfe knowen by
publiſhing ſo many promiſes. For as Iſayas moſt ſweetely ſaith, cap. 54. verſe
10. The mercy of God endureth for euer: The hilles ſhal be moued, and the
litle hilles ſhall tremble for feare, but my mercie ſhall not depart from mee,
neither ſhal the couenant of my peace fall away ſaith the Lord, that hath
compaſsion ouer thee.

#### 8.2.2.

Verſe 6‘Therefore ſhall God deſtroie thee for euer. He ſhall take thee, and
pull thee out of thy dwelling: and roote thee out of the land of the
liuing.’Verſe 7‘The righteous alſo ſhall ſee this and feare: and ſhall laugh
him to ſcorne.’Verſe 8‘Lo this is the man that tooke not God for his ſtrength:
But truſted vnto the multitude of his riches, and ſtrengthened himſelfe in his
wickedneſſe.’

Of this moſt ſorowfull threatning here is ſet downe anIudas repre­ſenteth
truelie all heretikes, reuoulters, & treacherous conſpirators. example in
Iudas Iohn 13. 27. who horribly condemned himſelfe and wrought his owne death,
that with great ſorrow he burſt aſunder in the middeſt: But ſeeing Iudas
repreſenteth the heretikes of all ages, alſo reuoulters from the goſpel, and
treacherous conſpirators, which with a crafty outward ſhew, eſtrange the minds
of princes from the goſpel, or being eſtranged, doe confirme them and ſtirre
vp mightily hatreds in them: thereby conſider­ing [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=49) Iudas his
puniſhment, let al men feare gods indigna­tion and eſchue the cauſes of ſo
horrible a puniſhment, Arrius was deſtroyed with his guts but ſ [...]ing out
of his bel­ly, as Iudas had; Iulianus the apoſtata had his chiefeſt per­ſon in
office ended his life with the very excrements of his body comming out at his
mouth, and innumerable others had the like end. Neither lack there examples of
our age. For many vngodly preachers haue beene in their very ſermons ſodenly
deſtroied, let vs therfore feare the iudge­ment of God, and the true opinion
of the goſpel, let vs be content, neither let vs ſuffer our ſelues to be
corrupt with mony, or with diſſembling good willes of princes, or with hope of
honors and authoritie, that we ſhould ſtickle on the furie of ſuch as hate the
goſpel.

#### 8.2.3.

Verſe 9‘As for me I am like a green oliue tree in the houſe of God, my truſt
is in the tender mer­cie of God, for euer and euer.’Verſe 10‘I wil alwaies
giue thanks vnto thee for that thou haſt done: And I will hope in thy name for
thy Saints like it well.’

The deſcription of flouriſhing Oliues moſt pleſant­lyThe Oliue liuely
repre­ſenting the church of Chriſt in three ſimili­tudes. painted out of the
church in her liuely colours: For as the Oliues engrafted vppon the Uine
brings forth both Oliues and Grapes: and age of the Oliue is longer, which
they ſay is able to endure 200 yeares. So the true church is both preſent in
this life, and afterwards ſhall be adorned with euerlaſting glorie. Againe,
like as the oliue proſpereth not neither in the coldeſt nor in the hoteſt
places: So the church eſcheweth both extreames, namely epecuriall contempt of
God, and ſuperſtitions or idola­try, or as ſaint Peter faith 1\. Pet. 2. 5.
She giueth her diligence to ioyne vertue with her faith, and with ver­tue
knowledge. Furthermore like as the Oliue is ſea­ſoned and refreſhed with ſalt
at the roote thereof caſt, for [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=49) auoiding
corruption of fatneſſe: So the croſſe of afliction reformeth ſecuritie and
many lewd motions in men.

The laſt verſe deſcribeth the end, whereunto Thankeſ­giuing muſt be referred.
For with this confeſſion other men muſt be inuited vnto the acknowledgement,
and true calling vppon the true God: that they may alſo aſſuredly beleeue,
that the godly ones are cared for and heard by God, and for that cauſe doe
with all their hearts ſubmit themſelues vnto God, and worſhip him. But becauſe
as touching this ende or purpoſe, moſt often I haue ſpoken in the Pſalme, I am
now more breefe and come to the next pſalme.

## 9\. PSAL. LIII. ‘Dixit inſipiens in corde ſuo.’

To him that excelleth on * Mahalath: a PſalmeWhich was an inſtrument or kinde
of no [...]e. of Dauid to giue instruction.

### 9.1. THE ARGVMENT.

IT is the beſt rule of teaching to ſpeake of the ſame matters, the ſame
methods: For it may not be, that the doctrine can take any roote in our minde,
except we daily ſpeake our ſelues, and both heare, and apply our life
thereunto, wherefore it is not to bee marueiled that [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=50) Dauid repeateth
in this place the ſame ſermon which he ſet downe in the 14. Pſalme: For
nothing ought to be ſo ſounding in our eares, as the preaching of the lawe,
accuſing the roote and fruit of ſinne, and calling vs vnto repentance, by
ſhewing vs the wrath of God and horrible puniſhments, which in a moſt iuſt
order doe accompany ſinne: But that there may be a dif­ference betweene the
church and other ſects, it is nede­full that vnto this ſermon there be annexed
a promiſe of the goſpel for the Mediators ſake: vnto whom they that runne for
ſuccour are deliuered from ſinne, death, the lawe condemning, and from the
tirany of the deuil, and are receiued and rewarded of God with ſaluation and
life euerlaſting, wherein being adorned with new light, wiſdome, and
righteouſnes, they ſhall worſhip God and enioy his ſight for euermore. Seeing
then this pſalme inſtructeth vs of ſo great matters, it is ſurely worthy to be
learned by vs euery word of it: But I wil not ſpeake any thing more of the
Argument becauſe moſt true is that ſaying of Plautus; That which is enough
ſufficeth.

### 9.2. Pſal. LIII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 9.2.1.

Verſe 1‘The fooliſh body hath ſaide in his heart, there is no God.’Verſe
2‘Corrupt are they, and become abhominable in their wickednes: There is none
that doth good.’

LIke as the true acknowlegement of GodKnowledge of God the well­ſpring of all
vertues. is the well-ſpring of other vertues, as for example, of the feare of
God, faith, loue, and true prayer, &c. ſo ignorance or contempt of God is the
roote of all ſins, which rage in the nature of man: for, ex­cept [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=50) the true God be
acknowledged, how can he be calledIgnorance & contempt of God the root of all
ſinne. vpon, feared, or loued. The prophet Dauid therefore ac­cuſeth the
blindeneſſe of mans heart, in that he beareth a­bout him either Epicuriall, or
Stoicall, or Academicall opinions touching God. For the mindes of all men
with­out heauenly light, either thinke al things by chance haue their ruine
without Gods gouernement: like as Chorus in Hypolito of Seneca cryeth out:

Res humanas ordine nullo fortuna regit,

Spargitque manu munera caeca, pe [...]ora fouens,

Fortune deuoide of order rules

each thing, and blindly ſerues,

Rewardes with hand, maintaining oft

him that the worſt deſerues.

Or elſe they thinke, that God is bound vnto ſecond cauſes, and doeth no
otherwiſe than as thoſe cauſes carrie him away or mooue him: either elſe they
doubt whether God will receiue our prayers, and are ignorant why hee receiueth
them, as the barbarous king in Virgil ſaieth:

Ante Genitor, cum fulmina torques,

Ne quicquam horremus, caecique in nubibus ignes▪

Terrificant animos, & inania murmura miſcent?

Which is in Engliſh thus:

O Father, when thou thundereſt forth,

do not we quake for feare?

And when the lightnings in the clouds

at randon flaſh each-where,

Do not they terrifie our mindes

in murmuring vainely here?

But ſeeing our minde is full of darkeneſſe, and doub­tings of God, there
appeare in our will and heart mani­fold▪ [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=51) flames of
wandering luſtes ſtriuing with God, yea, vniuſt loues, and vniuſt hatred. By
theſe flames, ſomeSuch are the baſe people of vnbrideled ſenſualitie in theſe
dayes. are ſtirred vp to confuſions of luſts, others vnto murders, and ſome
others to other miſchefs: yea the verie deuills leape into the minds of the
vngodly ones, and moke many to make horrible ſcattrings in mankinde, and
infinit ſpoil­ings. Theſe ſo great miſchifs (which the pſalme calleth
abhominable corruption) let vs looke vpon and with vn­fained ſighes let vs
deplore, and ſeeke deliuerance from theſe euills promiſed vs in the goſpel.

#### 9.2.2.

Verſe 3‘God looked downe from heauen vppon the children of men, to ſee if
there were any that would vnderſtand and ſeeke after God.’Verſe 4‘But they are
al gone out of the way, they are altogether become abhominable: there is none
that doth good, no not one.’

If we were not altogether iron-hearted, and more hard then the rocks of the
mount Sinay, which trembled whenExod. 19. 18. God ſent forth the preaching of
his commaundement, we would n [...]t only acknowledge our miſchefs, but we
would alſo tremble with feare at the ſight of them, and with thinking vppon
the wrath of God: For what elſe are the blaſing fires of the whole world, the
downefalles of king­domes, confuſion of religions, and domeſticall calamities
infinit (which with great ſorow we behold) but teſtimo­nial admoniſhments
touching ſinne and the wrath of God? Let vs then confeſſe our ſelues to be
guilty, and to haue deſerued great puniſhments, and let vs craue of God both
benefits, namely, forgiuenes of ſinnes, and mitigati­ons of puniſhments. But I
haue before ſpoken more in the expoſition of the 14. pſalme againſt this
figure ſynec­doche, or pars pro toto, wherein ſome men haue a will to trifle
out the whole matter handled in this point, All are [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=51) gone out of the
way: For the ſaying of Saint Paul is moſt true, which no wiſe man can gaine-
ſay Al men haue neede of the glorie of God: that is, of true acknow­ledgement
of God, and of obedience agreeable with the decalogue or table of the
commandements of God, which God eſteemeth for glorie doone vnto him, and
wherewith he is glorified and worſhipped.

#### 9.2.3.

Verſe 5‘Are not they without vnderſtanding that worke wickednes, eating vp my
people as if they would eate bread? they haue not called vpon God.’Verſe
6‘They were afraide where no feare was: for God hath broken the bones of them
that beſieged thee: thou haſt put them to confu­ſion, becauſe God hath
deſpiſed them.’

Hitherto hath he ſpoken of the note, that is, of the ſor­rowfullThe roote &
branches of ſinne in man­kinde. and lamentable corruption of mankinde: now
re­citeth he the fruits of the moſt wicked tree: whereof firſt is vniuerſall
vnrighteouſnes, which filthily in diuers and ſundry maners breaketh the law of
God; an other is, ty­ranny of gouernours, who (as Nazianzene ſaith) beſides
their owne rightfull reuenues, that is, tributes and taxes, doe take with the
hands of Briareus what themſelues lift from the poſſeſſions of their ſubiects.
The third fruit is, either neglecting of prayer, or, a falſe kinde of prayer,
which is the breach of the ſecond commaundement. The fourth and laſt fruit
ſuperſtition, which feareth a fault where no fault is, and maketh more account
of mans tra­ditions then of Gods commandements, but leſt any man ſhould ſlide
into ſuch opinion, that he ſhould thinke tirants and others do ſinne
vnpuniſhed, hee addeth a threatning touching preſent and eternal puniſhment in
the ſixt verſe, he hath broken the bones of them that beſieged thee, that is,
the Lord ſcattreth, confoundeth, and abhorreth ex­tortie▪ [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=52) tortioners, that
is, all ſinners which turne not from grie­uous ſinnes, but do go forwards in
contempt of God and fall he adlong out of ſome miſchefs into others. And
be­cauſe the puniſhments of Tirants are more heinous in ſight, I will recite
certaine tragical ends of ſome enemies of the church, that others looke well
into theſe examples may learne righteouſnes, and not to contemne or deſpiſe
God. Nero who firſt practiſed perſecution againſt ChriſtAnno Chriſti procured
his owne death and deſtruction. Domitian was70 ſlaine of his frends conſpiring
againſt him, euen in his95 owne palace. Maximinus was ſlaine of Pupienus at
A­quilia. Daetius was deſtroyed in the moriſh ground of252 Miſia, when he fled
from the Gothes. Valerian together257 with his brother, was ſlaine at
Inſubres. Airelianus was276 ouerthrowen of his owne Notary at Heraclia. and
Di­ocleſian, died poyſoned at Salonia.

#### 9.2.4.

Verſe 7‘O that the ſaluation were giuen out of Sion vnto Hieruſalem! O that
the Lord woulde deliuer his people out of captiuitie!’Verſe 8‘Then ſhoulde
Iaacob reioyce, and Iſrael ſhould be right glad.’

All the prayers and all the ſighes of the holy ghoſt haue their force and
effects of promiſes, as elſewhere of­ten I haue ſaide: This verſe then is a
promiſe touching the Mediator, whome Simeon in his ſong Luke 2. 30. calleth,
the ſaluation of God. From him, ſaith he, muſt we craue and looke for true
libertie, that is, deliuerance from ſinne and from euerlaſting death, and
reſtitution vn­to righteouſnes and life euerlaſting. This Lord, as Si­meon
alſo ſaith ibid. verſ. 32. is a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory
of the people of Iſrael. Ther­fore as S. Paul ſaith, 2\. Cor. 10. 17. He that
reioyceth let him reioyce in the Lord.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=52)

## 10\. PSAL. LIIII. ‘Deus in nomine tuo ſaluum me fac.’

To him that excelleth on Neginoth, a Pſalme of Dauid to giue instruction: when
the Zephims came and ſaide vnto Saul, is not Dauid hid a­mong vs? 1\. Sam. 23.
19.

### 10.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe hiſtories are knowen, whoſe menti­on is made in the title. For the Ziphims
twice betraied Dauid, as it is written in lib. 1. reg. 23. 26. But although
the hi­ſtory of Dauid doth not admoniſh vs of many things: yet ſurely in this
very place eſpecially, let vs conſider two examples, one of a marueilous
deli­uerance, the other of a rare and vnaccuſtomed pati­ence. For not in all
his hiſtories is there any like ex­ample which may be compared with Dauids
modera­tion in this place. For other men do both vnderſtand, and in effect
proue the ſaying of Pendaerus which is ex­tant in the ſecond Ode or Song of
the Pithians,

Amico volo eſſe amicus, hoſti autem vt hoſtis

[...]u lupus occurram, alias aliunde veniens obliquis viis.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=53)

Vnto a friend, a friend, I will bee,

And an enemy vnto an enemy:

Or euen as a woolfe will I my ſelfe ſet,

By crooked wayes comming elſewhere him to let.

But firſt let vs ſpeake of Dauids wonderfull deliue­rance,Saules two ſe­
[...]erall aſſaults vpon Dauid. 1. Sa. 23. 27, 28. and almoſt incredible. Saul
was by many means letted of his purpoſe that he could not kill Dauid: For at
one time he was called away by the irruption of the Philiſtims; at an other
time by a heauy and not in­deede naturall ſleepe (but by Gods prouidence being
ſo ouercome) hee could not hurt Dauid: for it is ex­preſly ſaide, The Lord had
ſent a dead ſleepe vpon them. 1\. Sa. 26. 7. 12. verſ. 12. Theſe things though
Democritus and the epi­cure would ſay they hapned by chance, yet let vs know
that Dauids ſoule was by God preſerued, as Abigael moſt ſweetely ſaid, Like as
it were bound in the bundle of life with the Lord his God 1\. Sam. 25\. 29.
For, accor­ding to the ſaying in 2. of Pet. 2\. 9. The Lord knoweth to deliuer
the godly out of temptation; ſeeing he doth that which is moſt lawfull, and is
not tied to ſecond cauſes. So at this day in diuerſe maners the practiſes of
the e­nemies of the goſpel and of the church are hindered & letted, and the
ſeely litle flocke keeper of the heauen­lySo in like ma­ner are the practiſes
of the enimies of the goſpel hinde­red at this day doctrine is ſo defended and
preſerued, that theſe de­liuerances may not be referred but vnto God onely.
There followeth an example of Dauids patience farre exceeding the moderation
of philoſophers. For rea­ſon, after a ſort, mooueth them vnto gouernement of
moueable matters, or of externall gifts, that they doe not any thing againſt
iuſtice or other vertues. But this Dauid doth the holyghoſt gouerne and guide,
and as S. Paul ſaith, 5. Galat. 24\. 3. Coloſſ. 5\. mortifyeth the deedes of
the fleſh in him. For though by great right he might haue put Saul to death,
and eſpecially in the very beſt oportunity of all circumſtances, yet he ſpared
his in­trapping [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=53) enimy, and in
that point obſerued the moſt graue rule of S. Paul 1\. Cor. 10. 23. Al things
are law­ful for me, but all things are not expedient: as if he ſhould ſay, we
muſt not alwayes looke for what we may do with great right, but much more what
may bee more profitable by example. For if Dauid vſing the law of defence had
ſlaine Saul, he ſhould haue blemiſhed an excellent cauſe which hee had; and
ſhoulde haue beene the author of an euill example, in the people of God. For
firſt, hee ſhould by his deede haue confir­medThree cauſe [...] why Dauid
(when hee might) did ſpare to kill Saul. the ſlanders of thoſe ſycophants
which cried out, that Dauid was a ſeditious perſon, and one that with force
and armes would inuade Saules knigdome, and ſhould not be vnlike to that
tyrant, which ſaieth in the tragedy:

Pro regno velim patriam, parentes, coniugem,

Flammis dare: Imperia pretio quolibet conſtant bene.

In engliſh thus:

So I might raigne, I would to 'th fire betake

my countrie, parents, and my wedded mate:

Kingdomes by any meanes obtained,

doe ſeeme to be kingdomes well gained.

Furthermore the Philiſtims and other enemies of the church taking offence at
this example had cried out in this manner: In vaine may the people of Iſrael
boaſt, that their kings are giuen them by or from God when the thing and euent
thereof ſhewed, by what ſleights or pollicies ſome perſons had caſt others out
of their kingdome.

Laſt of all, others moe with a certeine miſcheuous practiſe would haue folowed
him: euen as thoſe which blodely doe vſe to ſacrifice men, haue excuſed their
outrage, by Abrahams example in ſacrifiſing his ſonne. To the end therefore he
would refute the ſlaunders of the citizens and enemies, and ſtopp vp and make
voyde that ſame welſpring of their miſ­cheuous [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=54) malice hee vſed
not the lawe of defence wher­of mans lawes doe make mention, but hee
commen­ded his way vnto the Lord, and expected from him a ioyfull end of his
daungers.

But ſeeing theſe are not written for Dauids ſake, but for our ſakes, let vs
looking into Dauids example learne both ſilence and hope, that is, let vs
wiſely iudge what iniuries are to be put away, and what are to bee ſuffered
for the tranquilitie of the church and com­mon wealth. For that is a wicked
impatience when a man will not ſuffer ſorow to do the church good: Al­ſo as
ſaint Peter ſaith, Let vs ioyne with patience godly­nes. 2. Pet. 1\. 6. That
is, let vs call vppon the Lord in the day of tribulation, and let vs craue
from him either deliueraunce or mitigation of euills which ouercharge and
exerciſe vs. Let not our patience bee onely phi­loſophicall moderation, but
let it behold the will of God, and let it bee ioyned with a certeine hope of a
ioyfull end: Theſe exerciſes of fayth. hope, inuocati­on, and patience, in
ſorow ſhall bring more light to the reading of the Pſalmes then large
commentaries ſhall doe.

Now this Pſalme is partely a Prayer, and partely aThe effects of the Pſalme.
thankeſgiuei [...]g. For the church both craueth of God benefits, and giueth
thankes for benefits receiued. Herein Dauid therefore craueth defence from God
againſt the ſubtile ſnare of Saul, and he promiſeth that he will celebrate or
reuerently commemorate this be­nefit both with word and writing. Let vs in
like man­er alſo craue, that God would reſtraine the cruell counſels and
practiſes of the enimies of the goſpell, and after our deliuerance let vs not
be vnthankful: but let vs acknowledge and celebrate the preſence of God in his
church, and with greater zeale let vs aduaunce the doctrine of God.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=54)

### 10.2. Pſal. LIIII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 10.2.1.

Verſ 1‘Saue me, O God, for thy names ſake, and a­uenge me in thy
ſtrength.’Verſe 2‘Heare my praier, O God, and hearken vn­to the words of my
mouth.’

NAme, (as I haue often times elſewhere  [...]aid) comprehendeth cauſes
impulſiue and  [...]all as touching God hearing vs. The mpulſiue is the
promiſe of God, the finall  [...]s the acknowledgment and worſhipping of God.
Hee therefore craueth that he may bee heard and helped, not for his
righteouſnes, but for Gods promiſe ſake which is beliuered to the church.
Therefore alſo craueth he to be deliuered, that teſ [...]imony of Gods
pre­ſence might appeare in the church, with conſideration whereof many might
be ſtirred vp to the acknowledging and wor [...]ipping of God. And let vs alſo
when we areCauſes mo [...] ­uing God to beſtow his benefites. praying alledge
theſe cauſes, ſince it is moſt aſſured that God is ſpecialy moued to giue his
benefits, partly with re­membrance and memorie of his promiſe, and partly in
re­ſpect of his glorie. But where he ſaith [auenge me in thy ſtrength] let it
be vnderſtood according to the He­brew phraſe thus, take o [...] thee the
patronage of my cauſe, declare thou, that I was called by thy commaundement
vnto the kingdome, and that I haue not ſought by ambiti­on to aſpire vnto the
gouernement of Gods people, as the ſyccp [...]a [...]s doe crie out. But why
addeth he, in thy ſtrength? euen to giue God the glory, not onely of
good­neſſe and mercy, but alſo of immenſe and infinit power, as if he ſaid.
Thou not onely wilt, but alſo art able to help and ſaue mee. For needefull it
is that wee in our prayer make mention of Gods fatherly will and power, where▪
[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=55) with he
created all things, and moſt freely gouerneth all things.

It followeth in the text; Heare my prayer O God, and harken vnto the words of
my mouth. I haue oftenA two folde kind of prayer. aduertiſed the reader, that
there is a twofold maner of in­vocation or prayer: one of the heart, the other
of the mouth: For although prayer may be made with feruent ſighing of the
heart, yet the recitall of a certeine forme of praying conceiued without
ſuperſtition is profitable for many cau­ſes. For, firſt, hee admoniſheth them
that pray, of many things; and it is a certeine confeſſion ſeperating vs from
the vn godly and prophane ſects. After that, he ſtirreth vp godly motions in
mens hearts according to Saint Pauls ſaying Rom. 10. 17. Faith commeth by
hearing, and hearing by the worde. Laſt of all, an expreſſe reci­tall ſtriketh
euen very deuilles with feare. For deuilles do not with any Gorgon or ſhield
thruſt forth againſt them more tremble for feare then when they heare true
prayers made vnto God. In reſpect of theſe commodities, let vs inure our
ſelues vnto the expreſſe recitall of ſome forme of prayer, whether it be
deliuered vs from Chriſt, or in the Pſalmes conceiued: and let vs not ſpare
for labours in the reciting of our prayers as many ſlouthfull or negligent
perſons doe.

#### 10.2.2.

Verſe 3‘For ſtrangers are riſen againſt mee: And ty­rants (which haue not God
before their eies) ſeeke after my ſoule.’

The reaſon of this prayer is borowed or taken from a heauie obiect which
moueth God very much vnto deliue­rance: For as the naturall tender hearted
father is moued with the miſery of his young ſonne or daughter, ſo God, in
whome is all fatherly loue, is moued with our miſeries, and feeleth thoſe
motions of the heart, which are deſcribed in the II. of Oſeas, My heart is
turned within mee, my [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=55) repentings are
rowled together. verſe 8. And he am­plifiethTwo ſpeciall points of miſ­chiefe
in the enemy. Pride, the furies of the enimies of the church with notable
words, to whome hee attributeth pride and tyranie. For like as deuils are moſt
proud ſpirits, which are delighted in the deſtruction of Gods warkes. So the
inſtruments of thoſe deuils are full of tyrannicall inſelency, which
in­deedeand Tyrannie riſeth of this ſpring, that they both neglect and
con­temne God, and haue this voice of Niobes in their mouth and minde: Maior
ſum quam cui poſsit fortuna nocere. Greater I am, then whome fortune can hurt
or any way conſume. For the originall of pride is ſecuritie, negelect­ing and
contemning Gods iudgement: But let vs hold faſt that ſaying of Saint Iames 4.
6. God reſiſteth the proude and giueth grace to the humble. and likewiſe the
ſentence by Chriſt pronounced. Luke 16. 15. That which is high eſteemed among
men is abhomination in the ſight of God.

#### 10.2.3.

Verſe 4‘Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that vphold my ſoule.’

This conſideration is an argument which is brought from the things that go
before, as if he ſayd, God hath of­ten times before heard and ſaued mee:
therefore no doubt of it he will ſtill helpe me, becauſe he will accompliſh
the benefits he hath begun, and will finiſh the webbe where­vnto he firſt ſet
his hand. This argument S. Paul vſeth in the 2\. Phil. 13. For it is God which
worketh in you both the will and the deed, euen of his good pleaſure: as if
ſome acceptable things might be done vnto him: that is, whereas God hath
before helped you in your conuer­ſion, and hath drawen you out of euerlaſting
death, no doubt of it, he will gouerne and helpe you in your vocati­on & life,
that you may performe the worſhippings which he requireth. And in the 2\. Cer.
1. 9, 10. Yea, we recei­ued the ſentence of death in our ſelues, becauſe wee
[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=56) ſhould
not truſt in our ſelues, but in God which raiſeth the dead, who deliuered vs
from ſo great a death, and doth deliuer vs, in whom we truſt, that yet
hereafter he will deliuer vs. Let vs therefore learne to confirme and comfort
our ſelues with remembrance of deliueran­ces before paſt, and by theſe,
conceiue a moſt ſure hope of thoſe that are to come: becauſe God is not only
the guide and giuer of his benefits, but alſo the worker of them in vs: as in
Phil. 6. He that hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it vntill
the day of leſus Chriſt.

#### 10.2.4.

Verſe 5‘He ſhall reward euill vnto mine enemies: deſtroy thou them in thy
truth.’

Albeit theſe prayers ſeeme to be contrary vnto the pre­ceptTwo diſtinct
prohibitions in praying or curſing for the enemies. of Chriſt, where he ſayth,
Math. 5. 44. Bleſſe them that curſe you, and pray for them that perſecute you:
yet if we conſider two diſtinctions, which are neither fai­ned nor forged,
there is an eaſie coniunction of theſe pla­ces, hauing an apparant reaſon in
them: for firſt, the matter or cauſe muſt be diſcerned from the perſons:
ther­fore we pray that God would vtterly deſtroy and extirpat the euill cauſe
which our aduerſaries haue taken vpon them to defend. For the enemies counſels
and miſchie­uous enterpriſes with a malignant countenance, are alto­gether
repugnant vnto the ſanctifying or glorifying of Gods name, alſo do ſtriue
againſt the will and kingdome of God. The remoouing of theſe miſchiefs,
without all doubting, muſt we craue and pray for vnto God. After­wards we muſt
diſcerne the degrees of the perſons: for ſome are curable or may be conuerted,
others are blaſphe­mous and incurable. As therefore wee muſt make our prayers
for them that are curable, ſo perſons blaſphe­mous and ſuch as ſtubburnly
defend idolatry, are to be curſed of all men, euen as the very enemies of God
and inſtruments of the deuils. Therefore S. Paul deſcribing [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=56) the enemies of
the Goſpel, vſeth a grieuous word touch­ing thoſe whoſe mindes are vncurable.
If any man loue not the Lord Ieſus Chiiſt, let him be had in execrati­on, yea,
excommunicate to the death. 1. Cor. 16. 22. He calleth the enemies of Chriſt
not onely wicked offen­ders, but alſo he prayeth, that the iudgement of God
may light vpon them aud puniſh them.

#### 10.2.5.

Verſe 6‘An offering of a free heart will I giue thee, and praiſe thy name, O
Lord, becauſe it is ſo comfortable.’Verſe 7‘For he hath deliuered me out of
all my trouble: and mine eye hath ſeene his deſire vpon mine enemies.’

The former part of the Pſalme, is a moſt feruent prai­er, wherein he craueth
deliuerance: the latter part is a ſong of thankſgiuing. For although it be a
thing vſuall in mans life, as Pindarus ſayth: Vetus gratia dormit, & homines
ſunt immemores. The olde grace doeth ſleepe, and men litle in minde keepe. yet
notwithſtanding, the godly ones in the Church are true and iuſt; for they
ac­knowledge, and with a thankefull heart celebrate the au­thour of beneſits,
and confeſſe, that they are bound to per­forme dueties, which are notable
teſtimonies of thanke­fulneſſe. So Dauid in this place promiſeth a
recom­penſe, namely, Thankſgiuing, and aduancement of the true doctrine.
Finally, the Reader muſt be admoniſhed touching the ſignification of this
Hebrew word Raah: for it hath this emphaſis or meaning, that it ſignifieth not
onely to ſee and leaſurely beholde, but with a certeine ad­miration and
pleaſure to looke vpon ſome thing, as Eſay in his 9\. cap. 2. verſ. ſaith: The
people that walked in darkeneſſe ſaw a great light, &c. that is, The Church
gathered from among the nations ſhall be amaſed with admiration at the wiſdome
which in the Goſpel is reuea­led. So Dauid ſaith here, his eye did ſee the
fall and [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=57)
deſtruction of his enemies; not without admiration at ye iudgement of God,
touching which it is ſayd in another Pſalme, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and
righteou, is thy iudgement. Pſal. 119. pars. 14. verſ. 1.

## 11\. PSAL. LV. ‘Exaudi Deus orationem meam.’

To him that excelleth on Neginoth, a Pſalme of Dauid: to giue instruction.

### 11.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis pſalme is a moſt feruent prayer, not indeede againſt enemies whoſe
outrages are manifeſt, but againſt the falſhoode of fained frendes our
ſoci­ats & companions, which flatter vs to our faces, but behind our backe, if
they take occaſion can lay a cold pad in the ſtrawe. ThisA prayer a­gainſt
fained friends. falſe frendſhip is moſt worthie of hatred, and to bee accurſed
of all men. For as fayth is the moſt holy good property pertaining to the
heart of man: ſo no plague greater floweth from the Stygian or helliſh lake
then falſehoode of fayth which is couered with manie [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=57) ſleights of
diſsimulation, and ouerſpred as it were with certaine ſailes. But therefore
doth God ſuffer vs to be forſaken of frendes, or elſe alſo to bee oppugned by
them, to the end hee may put away from vs vaine con­fidence in man, which
leaneth either vppon the iudge­ments or the moſt vncerteine willes of our
alies and ſociats. How often are lewd opinions of men ſpred in the church, or
vnneceſſarie warres in the common welth by confidence in humane helpes?
Wherefore that this miſcheefe may be remedied, and to the end fayth repoſed in
God alone might increaſe in vs, God not onely forbiddeth confidence in man, as
where hee ſaith, Iere. 13\. 5. Curſed is hee that putteth his truſt in man,
but alſo ſuffreth even our very companion of the ſame religion to ſtart backe
from vs, forſake vs, and ſtriue againſt vs: In ſuch a caſe learne wee how much
better and more ſafer it is to truſt in God alone, then for a man to put his
truſt in a thouſand princes: And were it not a thing hatefull, I would here
com­memorate examples of the lightnes and lewd looſe­neſſe of ſome which haue
mu [...]ded and aſſaulted with hoſtilitie, euen their very colleges and
companions of the ſame iourney by ſea: But theſe new examples I o­mit, and I
beſeech God that he would vouchſafe to defend vs with the ſhadow of his hand,
not onely a­gainſt our enemies, but alſo againſt our vnfaythfull and
vnconſtant companions or ſociates. Amen.

### 11.2. Pſal. LV. And expoſition thereof.

#### 11.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Heare my prayer, O God, and hide not thy ſelfe from my petition.’Verſe
2‘Take heed vnto me, and heare me, how I mourne in my prayer.’

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=58) THe
Sonne of God ſaith, True worſhip­persA difference betweene the prayer of the
faithfull, and the prayer of hypocrites.do worſhip God in ſpirit & truth. Iohn
4. 23. as if he ſayd; Hypocrites do pray without vnderſtāding, without
deuo­tion, and with a contradietion: without vn­derſtanding, becauſe they
conſider not the eſſence and will of God manifeſted in his commandements and
promi­ſes; neither doe diſcerne things that are to be aſked of God. Finally,
neither conſider they what a vertue true prayer is, but after the manner of
prating Parots, doe ſound words which they vnderſtand not. Without deuo­tion,
becauſe they feele not ſpirituall motions in time of prayer, as faith, hope,
and patience: but they pray with wrath, and with doubting, that is, they do
fret and fume in miſerie againſt God, and doe doubt of his hearing of them.
Finally, they pray with contradiction, ſpeakingThe threefold praier of the
hypocrites & wicked ones. one thing, and thinking another: for though they
haue theſe words in their mouthes; Sanctified be thy name; Thy kingdome come;
Thy will be done. Mat. 6. 9, 10: yet their heart diſagreeth from their tongue,
foraſmuch as they vehemently deſire and earneſtly with for the deſtrue­tion of
the true knowledge of God, and the ouerthrow of Chriſtes kingdome, and that
many things may be vn­thankfullyThe prayer of the faithful done againſt God.
Such is the prayer, or ra­ther much lippe labor, to little purpoſe, of all
them which defend idolles and manifeſt errours: but the godly ones (as Dauid
in this place) do worſhip the father in ſpiritIohn 4. 23.and trueth; that is,
doe bring with their prayer true ac­knowledgement of the eſſence of God, and a
conſiderati­on of the commandements and promiſes wherein God made his will
knowen: and they knowe what benefits God will giue vs without condition, and
wherein he will require obedience. Furthermore, they acknowledge and bewaile
their ſinnes, & yet with faith they vanquiſh doud­tings, beleeuing, that
though they be vnworthy of them­ſelues, yet for the Mediatours ſake, they are
and ſhall be [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=58) heard. Finally,
in the prayer of the godly ones, there is a conſonancy of the minde, will,
heart, and tongue; then which harmony none can be thought more ſweet. Let this
difference betweene true and hypocriticall prayer be often conſidered in the
Pſalmes, when indeed it bringeth ſome light vnto the reading of the Pſalmes.
Now thinke with your ſelfe how feruent Dauids prayer is, Heare (ſaith he) my
prayer, O God, and with that, he addeth this, as it were, ſtriuing with
doubting: Hide not thy ſelfe from my petition: yea, and he requireth God to
take heed vn­to him, Take heed vnto me, and heare me. And leaſt any man ſhould
thinke that Dauid is colde, or goes about ſome other thing in time of his
praying, he affirmeth ex­preſly, that he will rule his motions in the ſame
prayer; that is, he will craue of God with moſt feruent deſires, and with all
his heart, benefits neceſſary both for his ſoule and his body. But why doth he
make mention of being vexed? berely becauſe he would ſignifie that he felt
out­ward feares, inward fightings. 2. Cor. 7. and did not on­ly ſtriue with
externall dangers, wherein his body was exerciſed, but alſo with feares and
deiections, riſing from acknowledgement of ſinne, and of the wrath of God: for
moſt commonly the enemies threatnings and the conflicts of conſcience,
ſtriuing with ſinne and with the wrath of God, doe come together in one
obiect. But theſe things are often times repeated, and ſet foorth in the
Pſalmes, therefore I am now more briefe herein.

#### 11.2.2.

Verſe 3‘The enemy crieth ſo, and the vngodly com­meth on ſo faſt: for they are
minded to doe me ſome miſchiefe, ſo maliciouſly are they ſet againſt me.’Verſe
4‘My heart is diſquieted within me: and the feare of death is fallen vpon
me.’Verſe 5‘Fearefulnes & trembling are come vpon me: & an horrible dread hath
ouerwhelmed me.’

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=59)We need
not long interpretation in theſe complaints, becauſe they are vnderſtood by
conſidering our owne and others examples: for how much euery man ſuffereth, ſo
much he knoweth, as one of the old writers ſaith notably. But contrarywiſe, he
that is tempted, what things doeth he ſuffer? For there are three inſtruments
or meanes to learne diuine things by; Meditation, Prayer, and Temp­tation: for
the Scripture deliuered from God needeth noThree ſpeciall meanes to learn
diuinitie Meditation, Praier, and Temptation. allegorie, but contemplation and
vnderſtanding. Seeing then we ſuffer ſuch like things, ſuch complaints become
more ſweet in taſte with vs, which are euery where extant in the Pſalmes.

#### 11.2.3.

Verſe 6‘And I ſayd, O that I had wings like a Doue, for then would I flee away
and be at reſt.’Verſe 7‘Lo, then would I get me away farre off, and remaine in
the wilderneſſe.’Verſe 8‘I would make haſte to eſcape, becauſe of the ſtormy
winde and tempeſt.’

He addeth vnto the complaine, a prayer of fleeing a­way: Would to God (ſayth
he) I might be ſeperated afarre off from my falſe and vnfaithfull friends,
which lie in wait for me nights and dayes, and are bent vpon all oc­caſions
whereby they may ouerthrow and oppreſſe mee. After the ſame maner all the holy
ones deſire to be diſ­ſolued and to be with Chriſt. Phil. 1. 23. that is,
deſire a more ſincere beholding of God, and full and perfect deli­uerance from
ſinne: for like as a trauailer making his iourney in the darke, knowing
neither the way nor the place where he goeth, reioyceth when the morning
begin­neth to waxe light; ſo all the godly ones feeling the bur­dens of ſinne,
and ſtriuing with diuers dangers, do deſire to haue fellowſhip with God, and
being called to the end of their life, doe willingly caſt aſide the grieuous
burden of doubtings and the filthineſſe of ſinne, which is in this [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=59) our vncleane
lumpe of fleſh remaining, and do wiſh them­ſelues altogether and alwayes
feruently deſire to haue the loue of God, and gladneſſe in God. Theſe prayers
are neither obſcure nor vnknowen to the godly ones: I paſſe on therefore vnto
the verſes following.

#### 11.2.4.

Verſe 9‘Deſtroy their tongues, O Lord, and diuide them: for I haue ſpyed
vnrighteouſneſle and ſtrife in the citie.’Verſe 10‘Day and night they goe
about within the walles thereof: miſchefe alſo and ſorow are in the middes of
it.’Verſe 11‘Wickednes is therein, deceit and guile goe not out of their
ſtreetes.’

Seeing wee muſt needes be conuerſant in the world, as it were in Medeas
boſome, euen vntill the very laſt end of our life and vocation, let vs bee
content with our ſecond nauigation: and let vs pray vnto God, that hee would
ſtopp and ſtay the cunning deceits and iuggling practiſes of the children of
this world: and that he wouldAgainſt the open enemies of our time. caſt to
them the apple of diſcord, for the which they may like vnto Chadmeis children
fight one with an other: For although the firſt and moſt wiſhfull voiage is
that, which with large ſpread ſayles and proſperous winds brings vs into the
hauen of euerlaſting bleſſednes, yet if this bee not by and by graunted vs,
let vs with a croked courſe quite forſake the windes ond tempeſts which
in­deede was wont to be doone, when God would reſtraine the fradulent
[...]ilchiuous enterpriſes of domeſticall and forreine enemyes.

#### 11.2.5.

Verſe 12‘For it is not an open enemy, that hath done mee this diſhonour: for
then I could haue borne it.’Verſe 13‘Neither was it  [...]ine aduerſarie that
did [[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=60)
magnifie himſelfe againſt mee: for then peraduenture I would haue hid my ſelfe
from him.’Verſe 14‘But it was euen thou my companion, my guide, and mine owne
familiar friend.’Verſe 15‘Wee tooke ſweete counſell together, and walked in
the houſe of God as frendes.’Verſe 16‘Let death come haſtily vppon them, and
let them goe downe quicke into hell: for wickednes is in their dwelings and
amongſt them.’

The greatnes of ſorow (which the ſwaruing or re­  [...]sultingAgainſt the
falſe friend­ſhip of our time. of our friend brings to vs with whome we haue
liued publiquely and priuatly moſt familiarly and moſt frendly, and which was
not onely our companion in coun­ſels and the reſt of our affaires; but alſo of
the ſelfe ſame religion) exceedeth all eloquence of ſpeech or vtterance. For
this falſe friendſhip encreaſeth the enemies outra­ges, and vexeth the holy
ſpirit of the godly ones: For in­deede the weake perſons taking offence at the
diuerſity or difference of mens iudgements, begin to doubt of the cer­teinty
or truth of doctrine. But the enemyes they triumph at it, when the chiefeſt
teachers are catcht away from the church. Finally ſo many and ſo great
offences doe folow this ſwaruing or back-ſliding, that Dauid not vainely nor
vnaduiſedly (being inflamed with the zeale of the holyghoſt) cried out here:
Let death come haſtily vpon them, and let them go quick into hell. &c.

#### 11.2.6.

Verſe 17‘As for mee I will call vpon God, and the Lord ſhall ſaue mee.’Verſe
18‘In the euening and morning and at noone day wil I pray, and that inſtantly:
and hee ſhall heare my voice.’Verſe 19‘It is hee that hath redeemed my ſoule
in [[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=60)
peace, from the battel that was againſt mee: for there were many with
mee.’Verſe 20‘Yea▪ euen God that endureth for euer, ſhal heare me, and bring
them downe: for they wil not turne nor feare God.’

True prayer is a ſpeciall ſafegarde of the godly minde, in ſo great miſeries
of this life: Let vs therefore runne for refuge vnto this tower, and in this
hauen let vs ſettle our ſelues, and let vs not ſeeke for thoſe remedies of our
ſorowes which are not graunted vs. This place alſo teacheth that wee muſt go
forwards in fayth, in praier and hope for Gods helpe: For although by the
aſſured prouidence of God, our deliuerance be deferred: yet this litle
lingring hath great aduantages, becauſe it exerciſeth fayth and prayer, and
ſheweth, that we are not preſerued and defended by mans helpe, but by Gods
helpe: and many wayes adorneth and aduaunceth the glorie of God:Luk. 16. 20.
Matth. 9. 8. Luk. 7. 12. As the raiſing of Lazarus from death to life, was
more glorious, then the reuiuing of the daughter of Iairus, or the widowes
ſonne of Naim.

#### 11.2.7.

Verſe 21‘He laide his hand vpon ſuch as be at peace with him: and he brake his
couenant.’Verſe 22‘The words of his mouth were ſofter than butter, hauing
warre in his heart: his words were ſmoother than oile, and yet bee they very
ſwords.’

This moſt pleaſant deſcription painteth out the pro­perties of falſe brethren
and pointeth the finger vnto theAgainſt the falſe brethren of our time. wel-
ſpring of diſſimulation, fraud, or guile ſubtile deceits and cruelty: for the
originall of theſe miſchiefes is impie­tie, which neither feareth God, nor is
not conuerted vnto God: from this wel-ſpring flow the ſleights of hurting,
[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=61) which
hipocrits moſt ſubti [...]ly are acquainted with, & the [...] flattering
ſpeech, touching which Cicero ſaieth: Frons, vultus, oculi perſaepe
mentiuntur, oratio verò ſaepiſsime:

The face, the countenance, and the eies,

very often deceiue men:

But the ſpeech of tongue

moſt often deceiue them.

And Eurypides ſaith: Dura molliter loquuntur, they ſpeake grieuous things
ſmoothly. Hitherto pertaineth the fable of the little Mowſe, to whome her
mother gaue this commandement: Beware my little one (ſaith ſhe) not of the
crowing cock, but of the ſilent Cat, whoſe ma­ners and geſtures are altogether
ful of craft and ſubtilty. And what ſay you to that which our learned
ſchoolemai­ſter D. Philip Melancthon was wont very merrily to recite in theſe
verſes:

Annis mille i am peractis,

Nulla fides eſt in pactis,

Mel in ore verba lactis,

Fel in corde, nil in factis.

In Engliſh thus:

Theſe thouſand yeares now paſt and gone,

None keepe couenants, no not one:

Hony in mouth, wordes milke proceedes,

Gall's in the heart, and nought i'th deedes.

#### 11.2.8.

Verſe 23‘O caſt thy burthen vpon the Lord: and he ſhall nouriſh thee, and
ſhall not ſuffer the righteous to fall for euer.’

This is a notable and ſweete conſolation, which bid­deth vs ſettle our ſelues
in confidence of the preſence and helpe of God, and to craue and looke for
from him ei­ther deliuerance or mitigation: This conſolation hea­leth not the
ſcarres, but the woundes, as the experience of the godly ones witneſſeth. It
is our part to doe the [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=61) workes of our
vocation diligently and faithfully, and to eſchew the fauouring of offence in
our ſelues. But the care touching the iſſue and euent of our labours muſt be
commended vnto God, who will bring to paſſe that we ſhall not be oppreſſed
with vaine contention, but that our care ſhould be profitable to the glorie of
God, and to the ſaluation of many men. O Lord Jeſus Chriſt, I there­fore
beſeech thee, that thou wouldſt mercifully heare and preſerue vs wretched and
weake ſoules repoſing vppon thy ſhoulders. So be it.

#### 11.2.9.

Verſe 24‘And as for them, thou (O God) ſhalt bring them into the pit of
deſtruction.’Verſe 25‘The bloodthirſty and deceitful men ſhal not liue out
halfe their dayes: neuertheles, my truſt ſhalbe in thee, O Lord.’

He reciteth in concluſion of this pſalme, a curſe, theThe curſed end of the
wicked. which is a prophecie of the holyghoſt touching the tragi­call
deſtruction of falſe brethren, which are not curable of their ſores: for in as
much as God is a louer of trueth and righteouſneſſe, without all doubt he ſhal
and wil de­ſtroy the crafteſ-maiſters of lyings and murders. And I will not be
heere any longer tedious, but I beſeech God, that hee woulde heale our
woundes, and turne the hearts of ſuch as are teachers in the Church vnto a
god­ly and wholeſome agreement in doctrine and conuerſa­tion.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=62)

## 12\. PSAL. LVI. ‘Miſerere mei Deus.’

To him that excelleth, a Pſalme of Dauid, on Mich­tam; concerning the dumb
Doue in a far Country: when the Philistims tooke him in Gath.

### 12.1. The Title.

THe history whereof mention is made in the Title is recited in the 1. li.
Samuel. 29. cap. And though the declaration thereof be briefe, yet painteth it
out the Image of thoſe Kings Courts, wherein Ambiti­on,King Achis & his
courtma­ligning the e­ſtate of King Dauid.Emulation, Enuy, Hatred, Slaunder,
and a thouſand ſleights do beare ſway: for the Gouernours in king Achis Court
burned with very hatred at the glory of king Dauid, and could not rest in
quiet till they had driuen this exile away, whoſe wiſdome and vertue was
excellent. And how like one egge is vnto another, or milke like milke, ſo like
is one Court vn­to another. But why do I ſpeake of Courts, when e­uen in very
ſchooles there are contentions for poore ſuperioritie. Let vs therefore be
Doues, and indeede dumb Doues, without the caſe of our confeſsion, as in the
old verſe is ſaid;

Melius est hoſpitem tacere quam clamare:

Better doth ſilence a ſtranger become,

Than for to be too too tatling of tongue.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=62)For there
is difference betweene allow able ſilence and vniust ſilence, becauſe there
are often probable cauſes why we must keep ſilence, according to the Pr. 25.
20. Like as vineger is poured vpon niter, ſo is he that ſingeth ſongs to an
heauy heart. Alſo ma­ny things doth the thing it ſelfe refute when we hold our
tongues.

Here then a question is asked, when wee muſt keepe ſilence, or when we must
ſpeake? Seeing theAn Apologie of the life and doctrine of true goſpel­lers.
confeſsion of our Religion is knowen wee are able to paſſe ouer reproches:
being accuſed of heinous crimes, let vs purge our ſelues modestly, and let vs
beare with many more ſlender reproches, and ſtoppe their mouthes with ſilence:
and let vs take heede that our aduerſaries may in our life and conuerſation be
refuted, and not with words, as Cicero ſaieth: Ma­le mecum agitur, ſi me
oratio potius quam vita mea purgat. It goeth euil with me if my ſpeech rather
than my life ſhould purge me. And Scipio ſaith in Liuius: Res non verba ad
purgandum ſe paraſſe, he had addreſſed matters, not wordes to purge him­ſelfe
withall:

It is an vniust ſilence when eyther with feare or flattery a true opinion in
caſe of Confeſsion is hid­den or not reuealed: Of this vniust ſilence this our
age affordeth vnto vs very many examples. Christ himſelfe both before Herod
Luk. 23. 9. and againe when he vvas vppon the Croſſe ibid. 34. And vvhen Dauid
heard Semey crying out againſt him 2\. Sam. 16. 7. Come foorth, come foorth
murtherer and wicked man. Let this be inough ſpoken as touching the Title.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=63)

### 12.2. THE ARGVMENT.

THere be three parts of this Pſalme; the firſt is a prayer, wherein he craueth
defence againſt theThe tripartite diuiſion of this Pſalme. malapertnes of his
enemies amongſt whome hee liued in exilement, the ſecond parte is a
decla­ration of his calamitie: For although it be a great miſchief for a man
to be pluckt away from the ſociety of his parents and friends, and to wander
amongſt vn­knowen perſons without honour, and to be caſt  [...]orth to al
dangers of fortune, yet there are greater miſchefs not to bee conuerſant in
the congregation of the true church, and not to haue or enioy the ſweete
conferen­ces with the godly ones, but to heare the blaſphe­mous ſpeeches of
men againſt God. The greatnes of theſe miſchefs exceedeth all cogitations of
minde and eloquence of tongue. The third parte is a thankeſ­giuing for defence
and deliuerance from God. For as Saint Peter ſaith. 2. 2. 9. The Lord knoweth
to deliuer the godly out of temptation &c. and as Saint Paul ſaith 1. Cor. 10.
15. God is faithfull, which will not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue that you
bee able, but will euen giue the iſſue with temptation, that ye may be able to
beare it.

But alwayes in the reading of the Pſalme let vs conſider of the application:
ſeeing the church liues baniſhed in the world, and not vnlike to the Halcyan
The church like the Hal­cian bird. bird building in the ſea rocks, we muſt
craue that God would mitigate theſe calamities in the whole bodie and all the
members thereof, and now and then grant vs after teares gladnes. Alſo let vs
be thankefull vnto God for the mitigation of thoſe calamities, and for his
wonderfull defence of the church againſt the rage of the world and of the
deuils.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=63)

### 12.3. Pſal. LV I. And expoſition thereof.

#### 12.3.1.

Verſe 1‘Be mercifull vnto me O God, for man goeth about to deuoure me: He is
daily fighting and troubling mee.’Verſe 2‘Mine enemies are daily in hand to
ſwallow me vp: for they be many that fight againſt mee, O thou moſt higheſt.’

The cruelty of hatred wherewith the enemies of the godly ones doe burne is in
moſt ſorowfull words deſcri­bed of Saint Paul 1. Corint. 4. 9. The godly ones
are made a gaſing ſtock vnto the world, alſo ibid. 13\. the filth of the
world, the of-ſcowring of all things. For, excrementum, ſignifieth an odious
thing filthily defiled, accurſed, worthie of deſtruction, for which God
puniſh­eth whole nations, except it be vtterly taken away. And as excrementum
is a filthie thing vpon earth, ſo reiecta­mentum, ſignifieth a man, who with
his contagion hurt­eth his companions of the ſame iournie by ſea: and whome it
is needefull that wee caſt into the ſea, leaſt all that are in the ſhip and
the ſhip it ſelfe be ouerwhel­med with the raging flouds. Now thinke what a
heauie and ſorowfull thing it is, to be iudged a plague and de­ſtruction of
mankinde, and to be nights and dayes laied open to all chaunces of ſodaine
dangers. Wherefore we muſt ſufficiently well furniſh and arme our mindes with
true doctrine, prayer, and teſtimonies of the true church that wee be not
oppreſſed with the vniuſt iudgements of the world, or elſe doe ſtart back from
the goſpel through feare of dangers.

#### 12.3.2.

Verſe 3‘Neuertheleſſe though I am ſometimes a­fraide, yet put I my truſt in
thee.’[[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=64)Verſe 4‘I will
praiſe God becauſe of his worde: I haue put my truſt in God and will not feare
what fleſh can do vnto me.’

Unto the hiſtorie he addeth a conſolation which is taken not out of
Philoſophie, but out of the worde of God: For moſt truly it is ſaid in the
119\. Pſalme part  3\. ver. 2. This is my comfort in my affliction, becauſe
thyA refuge in ſorrowes.word hath quickned me. For in ſorow vnfained, when the
minde ſeeketh euery where for comfort, and we find by experience wee are not
helped by mans deuice or imaginations, at the length the godly minde running
downe to the preaching of the goſpell, as it were vnto a fountaine of liuely
water, beginneth to ſetle it ſelfe, and to feele Gods helpe and preſence, and
the reſtoring of life euerlaſting. And here let the nature of faith be
conſider­ed which (as Saint pauls epiſtle Heb. 11. cap. 1. verſe hath ſet
fortth) is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the euidence of
things which are not ſeene: For it is a matter important to beleeue thoſe
things which wee ſee not, to hope well of things deferred, and to reſt at
peace in God, yea, though he caſt a ſterne counte­nance at vs, and ſo to
perſeuer euen vnto the very end. To this purpoſe Iob ſaith cap. 13. verſe 15.
Yea, though hee ſhall kil me, yet will I truſt in him, and he ſhall be my
Sauiour. So Dauid with a great reſpect or regarde of fayth ſaith, I haue put
my truſt in God, and wil not feare what fleſh can doe vnto me: yea although
all feares and all dangers euery where ariſe ouer mee: yet I hold it a thing
both certaine and affirmed, to yeelde and obey to God calling mee, and not to
ſtart aſide no not a naile bredth from his worde: For if God be on our ſide,
who ſhall be againſt vs Rom. 8. 31. O that it would pleaſe God to giue vs in
the great outrage of ſtormes and concourſe of calamities like ſtrength of
faith vanquiſhing feares and doubtings: And without all doubtes he ſhall
[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=64) be
mightie in our infirmitie if we make our prayers vnto him, according to his
promiſe. Math. 7. 11. How much more ſhal my heauenly father giue you his holy
ſpirit, when you pray for it?

#### 12.3.3.

Verſe 5‘They daily miſtake my words: al that they imagin is to doe me
euil.’Verſe 6‘They hold altogether, and keepe them­ſelues cloſe, and marke my
ſteppes: when they lay waite for my ſoule.’Verſe 7‘Shall they eſcape for their
wickednes? thou O God in thy diſpleaſure ſhalt caſt them downe.’

Hee handleth at full the hiſtorie as touching his miſe­ries in time of his
baniſhment. Like as in Eſops fables all beaſts conſpire together to ſpoile the
poore Camel: So (as Tyrteus the muſitian ſaith)

Nemo curat vagos & ledere nemo veretur.

Non exul cur [...] ducitur eſſe Deo.

No man careth for the wandring wights,

to hurte them none doth feare:

Men thinke that God forgetteth quite

pore Exiles liuing here.

But vnto a moſt euident complaint wee neede not to adde any long declaration.

#### 12.3.4.

Verſe 8‘Thou telleſt my flittinges, putte my teares into thy bottell: are not
theſe things noted in thy booke?’

O the vnſpeakable fatherly louing kindnes of God,The vnſpeak­able fatherly
louing kinde­nes of God towards his. numbring the very haires of our head, and
gathering our teares! For I pray you thinke and conſider how great this
gatherer is, namely, the Creator of all things, the King of kings and Lord of
lords. Wee merueile at the [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=65) humanitie of
Theſeus, who waſhed with his owne hands the dead carkaſes of his ſlaine
ſouldiers at the water of Thebes: But much more let vs maruell, yea, and al
a­maſed wonder at this, when we reade and heare that God gathereth our teares.
But whoſe teares I pray you gathereth he▪ not the teares of Angells but of
ſinners, whoſe infirmitie and filthines is great. Surely I can ſcarſe tell
whether any more notable deſcription bee ex­tant of Gods prouidence either in
the hiſtories of the Prophets or of the Apoſtles. Let this therefore be faſt
fixed in our mindes, ſo that it may comfort vs, ſo often as wee are vehemently
diſquieted touching the will of God, and are vexed with a certaine ſpeciall
ſorow. God taketh care, not onely for our bodies and ſoules, but alſo euen for
our very haires and ſeely teares, and keepe them as it were a matter of great
importance and as a treaſure of great priſe. Therefore notably ſaid Saint
Paul, that our light afliction which is but for a moment, cauſeth vnto vs a
farre more excellent, and an eternall weight of glorie. 2. Cor. 4. 17.

#### 12.3.5.

Verſe 9‘When ſoeuer I call vppon thee, then ſhall mine enemies be put to
flight. This I know for God is on my ſide.’

In this verſe let there be conſidered a difference be­tweeneThe doutings of
the Hea­then. the doubting of the Ethnicks and the careful con­fidence of the
church. Cato, although he beleeued thereThe faith of the church. was a God,
yet hee doubted whether he might be hard and by litle and litle was plunged
into deſperation: But the church which embraceth the worde deliuered from God,
ſtriuing againſt doubting beleeueth aſſuredly, that ſhe is receiued and heard
for the Mediators ſake, and the cauſe of his aſſuredneſſe is the worde of GOD,
in which phraſe or ſpeech I comprehend the commaunde­ment, [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=65) promiſe, oath,
and truth of God: But theſe things are elſewhere often expounded.

#### 12.3.6.

Verſe 10‘In Gods word will I reioyce: in the Lords word will I comfort
me.’Verſe 11‘Yea in God haue I put my truſt: I will not be afrayd what man can
do vnto me.’Verſe 12‘Vnto thee, O God, will I pay my vowes: vnto thee will I
giue thanks.’Verſe 13‘For thou haſt deliuered my ſoule from death, and my feet
from falling: that I mayA threefolde concluſion of thankſgiuing. walke before
God in the light of the liuing.’

So often times as I haue now ſpoken of thankſgiuing vnto God, the ſame is to
be referred vnto three concluſi­ons; whereof the firſt is, that the glory of
the power, li­berty, and preſence of God in his Church might be attri­buted
vnto God: and that Epicures, Stoicks, and other blaſphemous perſons (which
crie out that God is either idle or blinde) might be refuted, &c. The ſecond
conclu­ſion is, that true acknowledgement of God might goe forwards in vs, and
that God hencefoorth would vouch­ſafe to communicate himſelfe vnto vs: for God
ceaſeth to communicate himſelfe vnto vnthankefull perſons, which are lyars and
vniuſt: Lyars indeed, becauſe they acknow­ledge not from whence their benefit
is receiued; and vn­iuſt, becauſe they render not due recompenſes whereunto
they are bound. The laſt concluſion is, that others by our example might be
aſſured or woon [...]e to the true ac­knowledging and inu [...]cating vpon
God. Unto theſe fi­nall effects, let vs referre our Euchariſt or thankſgiuing,
and let vs declare our thankefulneſſe, not onely in ſpeech and preaching, but
with all obedience, in our vocation, life, and calamities.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=66)

## 13\. PSAL. LVII. ‘Miſerere mei Deus, miſerere mei, quoniam in te confidit
ani­ma mea, &c.’

To him that excelleth (Destroy not) a Pſalme of Dauid on Michtam: vvhen he
fled from Saul in the caue. 1\. Sam. 24. 4.

### 13.1. THE ARGVMENT.

PLato in Protagora citeth the ſaying of Simonides: Uirum vere bonum naſci
dif­ficile A conſtant perſon in goodnes. eſt, qui manibus, pedibus & mente ſit
Tetragonos, that is, A hard matter it is to finde a right good man borne,
which of his hands, feet, and minde is alwayes vpright and conſtant. Such a
man was Dauid, who could more hardly be withdrawen from an honeſt or good
purpoſe, then the ſhining Sunne may be dri­uen out of his courſe: for although
by great right he might haue ſlaine Saul, yet neither would he vſe the law of
defence, whereof politike lawes do make men­tion, nor yet take occaſions which
miniſtred oportu­nity vnto him to ſlay Saul. For ſeeing he had altoge­ther
conſecrated himſelfe vnto God, and his country, that is, the Church, he would
not be the authour of an [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=66) euill example
amongſt Gods people, in putting kings to death, but in faith craued and looked
for helpe from God: wherefore let vs maruaile at this humility and gentleneſſe
in Dauid here ſet downe, and let vs vſe the like as we may vſe it. Let others
maruaile at Dauids victories, wherein he tare in pieces both Lion and Beare,
and ouerthrew the monſtrous fellow Golias be­fore his owne eyes: let vs
maruaile at and publiſh a­broad the moſt excellent kinde of victory, wherein
our domeſticall enemies, their ambition and deſire of reuenge, are ouerthrowen
and deſtroyed. For in that part of man which is called Furious, namely, in the
heart, there are two moſt trouble ſome and moſt cruell affections, wrath, and
ambition: and theſe are eaſily inflamed in great perſonages; and being
inflamed, do euery where trouble whole kingdomes and the com­mon ſociety of
men: therefore to vanquiſh theſe plagues is more glory then triumph. Let vs
alſo con­ſider in the hiſtory of Dauid, a teſtimony of Gods pre­ſence in the
Church: for although Saul bent and pra­ctiſedGod deliue­reth Dauid out of
Sauls hands. all the whole indeuour of his kingdome to the deſtruction of
Dauid, and that he neuer purpoſed any thing more earneſtly then to deſtroy
Dauid by all meanes that he could, not by iudgement, nor by good aduiſement,
but by violence and greedy aſſault: yet God tooke this ſilly mor [...]ell (if
I may ſo ſay) out of Sauls iawes, and ſuffered not ſo much as a haire to fall
from Dauids head. Let vs, being confirmed with this teſtimony, beleeue that
God is alwayes preſent in his Church, and that the enemies can not be cruell
againſt her, but when he himſelfe ſuffereth them.

### 13.2. Pſal. LVII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 13.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Be mercifull vnto me (O God) be mercifull vnto me: for my ſoule
truſteth in thee: and [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=67) vnder the
ſhadow of thy wings ſhall be my refuge, vntill this tyranny be ouerpaſt.’

IN reading of the Pſalmes, let not the foot goe one way, and the ſtring ſound
another way, as it is ſayd of thoſe which daunce not right meaſure; but let
our affections iumpe in one with Dauids harpe. Let euery man ſay therefore
with true confidence in his dangers and ca­lamities: My ſoule truſteth in
thee, and in the ſhadowOur affections muſt iump with Dauids harpe.of thy wings
will I truſt, vntill this tyranny be ouer­paſt. This application of the
Pſalmes vnto our ſelues, bringeth more light to the Readers then long or large
commentaries ſhall doe: but how hard a matter it is in a true heart to ſound
theſe words, godly mindes doe by ex­perience finde. For two temptations doe
alwayes mur­mure againſt vs; the one of our vnworthineſſe, the other of
particularity: but againſt our vnworthineſſe, let vs ſet downe and oppoſe free
promiſe; and againſt particulari­ty, vniuerſal promiſe, as elſwhere is often
ſayd. Alſo be­fore in the 17 Pſalme is a moſt excellent metaphor taken from
Hennes, largely declared at full. I will not there­fore ſing one and the ſame
ſong ſo often times.

#### 13.2.2.

Verſe 2‘I will call vpon the moſt high God: euen vnto the God which ſhall
perfourme the cauſe that I haue in hand.’Verſe 3‘He ſhall ſend from heauen &
ſaue me, from the reproofe of them that would eat me vp.’Verſe 4‘God ſhall
ſend foorth his mercy and trueth.’

He foreſheweth with notable words the preſence of God in his Church, that he
may confirme vs with his ex­ample and teſtimony; that we ſhould not come
fearefully vnto God, but truſting in the mercy and truth of God we ſhould
crie, that is, as Chriſt ſayth, Math. 7. 7, 8. We [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=67) ſhould aske,
knocke and ſeeke: for euery one that aſ­keth receiueth, and he that ſeeketh
findeth, and to him that knocketh it is opened. But ſo often is mention made
in the Pſalmes of the mercy and trueth of God, to the end we may know and
acknowledge that we are pre­ſerued and defended, not by humane helps or
ſafegards, nor yet for our owne merits, but freely by mercy promi­ſed in the
Goſpel, which is not a deuice of mans opinion, but an eu [...]laſting and
vnchangeable decree of Gods wiſ­dome and trueth. Therefore although we are
vnworthy, yet muſt this glory or praiſe be attributed vnto God, that he is
mercifull, and keepeth promiſe with moſt aſſured faith. Wherefore let vs crie
out with Daniel 9. verſ. 17, 18. We powre out our prayers before thee, not in
our righteouſneſſes, but in thy great mercy; heare vs for the Lords ſake.

#### 13.2.3.

Verſe 5‘My ſoule is among Lions, and I lie euen a­mong the children of men
(that are ſet on fire) whoſe teeth are ſpeares and arrowes, and their tongue a
ſharpe ſword.’

Let this deſcription of the Church be diligently lookedThe church is in the
world like Daniele [...] among the lions, &c. vpon; for the Church alwayes ſo
liueth, euen as Daniel ſitting among the Lyons. Dan. 6 16. The deuils are
al­wayes intrapping vs. Ungodly perſons alwayes giue cruell threatnings vnto
the church. So doth the prophet I ſay in his 11\. cap. verſ. 11. compare the
church vnto an infant playing vpon the hole of the aſpe, and to a weined
childe playing vpon the cockatri [...]e hole. For like as the infant
perceiueth not the greatneſſe of the dan­ger, wherein hee is exerciſed,
neither is furniſhed with any defence againſt the moſt hurtfull ſerpents: So
the church looketh not ſo farre into the ſleights of the deuill and the world,
wherewith ſhe is allured, neither hath ſhe viſible  [...]uc [...]ours
whereunto ſhe may flee for refuge. Then [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=68) reſteth this
one thing, that ſhee with her whole minde and heart be turned vnto God and
from him looke for de­fence in ſo great ſnares of the deuill and in ſo great
mul­titude of dangers. Furthermore, (ſeeing no weapon isThe deſcrip­tion of
ſlaun­derous tongs. more hurtfull then the tongue, if it be prepared to doe
hurt) moſt elegantly doth hee compare ſlaunders vnto fire, arrowes, and ſharpe
ſwords: For indeede ſlaunders doe not onely hurt thoſe whome they diffame, but
al­ſo fooliſh light beleeuing hearers, in whoſe heartes and breaſtes they
leaue the ſtings of ſuſpitions. For, moſt truely is it ſaide of a certaine
ſlaunderer, Calumniare au­dactèr, quia ſemper aliquid haeret. Slaunder ſtil
boldly. ſomething alway ſtickes in thee. Then what remedies muſt be
adminiſtred to the poiſonfull bitings of Syco­phants, the ſeuenth pſalme
teacheth vs: namely, a deni­all, or modeſt refutation and prayer. For, let vs
when we are accuſed of heinous crimes, purge our ſelues mo­deſtly: Afterwards
let vs commend our cauſes vnto God, and let neither our confeſſion nor
patience ſtriue the one with the other, but let either vertue haue his due
place.

#### 13.2.4.

Verſe 6‘Set vp thy ſelfe, O God, aboue the heauens, and thy glorie aboue all
the earth.’

God is moued with nothing more, then with reſpect of his glorie: As in Eſay
48. verſe 11. For mine owne ſake, for mine owne ſake will I doe it. Therefore
notably doth Dauid in his praying alleadge this cauſe: Bee thou a defender of
thy glorie, refute the enemies ſlaunders, which exclame againſt vs that we are
heretiks and Schiſmaticks and falſly lay in our diſh two moſt heinous crimes,
Blaſphemie and Sedition, whereof the one violateth or tranſegreſſeth the firſt
the other the ſe­cond of the commaundements. Theſe poiſonful reproch­es
blemiſhing or defacing thy glory, thou thy ſelfe refute, [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=68) and ſhewe in
purpoſe and euent that the confeſſion of truth pleaſeth thee.

#### 13.2.5.

Verſe 7‘They haue layed a net for my feet, and preſ­ſed my ſoule, they haue
digged a pit before mee, and are fallen into the middeſt of i [...]
themſelues.’

Elder age long agoe made a moſt honeſt lawe for pu­niſhing of a ſlaunderer,
for the cauſe beeing knowen theThe example of gods indgement aud iu­ſtice
vppon ſlanderous perſons. ſlaunderer was ſcurged with the ſame puniſhment
wher­with the other ſhoulde haue beene ſcurged if hee had bene conuinced. So
they that ſlandered Daniel were caſt amongſt the lyons. Dan. 6. 24. And they
that ſlaundered Suſanna were ſtoned to death, Daniel 13. 62. For not a more
iuſt puniſhment is there then that murtherers ſhould be manqelled. Therefore
ſaid Pithagoras viz. Iuſtum eſſe quiddam retaliatum, a  [...]uſt man was a
cer­teine recompenced thing like for like. And as the verſe of Rhadamanthus
ſaith. Iuſta malis haec admiſſo pro cri­mine poena eſt, Si quae fecerunt,
eadem pat [...]antur et ipſe.

A puniſhment iuſt to the wicked men,

This is for crime committed ſo by them:

That if they haue done any wickednes,

They therefore ſhould ſmart all remedile Te.

#### 13.2.6.

Verſe 8‘My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed: I will ſing and giue
praiſe.’Verſe 9‘Awake vp my glorie, awake lute and harpe I my ſelfe will awake
right early.’Verſe 10‘I will giue thankes vnto thee O Lord, amongſt the
people: And will ſing vnto thee among the nations.’

A great part of the Pſalme conſiſteth of prayer and thankſgiuing. Like as
therefore heretofore hee craueth [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=69) defence againſt
the violence and fraude of his enemies: So now with great alacritie or
cheerefulnes of minde heDauids thankſgiuing vnto God for his goodneſſe. giueth
thankes vnto God. And this comfortablenes in thankeſgiuing is ſtirred vp, not
by mans helpe, but by the ſpirit of grace and of prayer. For without his
ſpirit, the old grace ſleepeth, and man litle in mind keepeth as Pin­darus
ſaith. But men being maued with the holy ghoſt, are true and iuſt, that is,
they acknowledge the ſocietie with God, and ſtudie according to their abilitie
to render ſome recompence.

Hereof come thoſe ſayings, My hart is fixed, awake Lute and Harpe, and I will
ſing vnto thee, &c. But, why addeth he that he will giue thnakes vnto the Lord
among the people? Uerily to teach that Thankſgiuing is a publike, and not a
priuate vertue. For Temperance and certain other vertues are mens priuate
induments & ornaments. But Juſtice whoſe outward ſhew is Grati­tude or
thankfulnes reioyceth in communicating her ſelfeGods good­nes muſt be both
acknow­ledged in ourſelues and made knowen vnto others. vnto others, and in
that thing followeth large fountaines which ſend whole riuers out of them.
Therefore it is not nough that wee priuately acknowledge the preſence of God,
but we muſt celebrate gods benefits before others, that euen they alſo may be
called vnto true acknowledge­ment and prayer vnto God.

#### 13.2.7.

Verſe 11‘For the greatneſſe of thy mercy reacheth vnto the heauens: and thy
trueth vnto the cloudes.’

He amplifieth the mercy of God, not with vaine the­torike, but with true
affirmation, ſuch as is extant in the epiſtle of S. Paul to the Romans the 5.
chapter, and 2. verſe grace aboundeth aboue ſinne: for wee muſt moſt firmely
beleeue, that the kingdome of God is moremigh­ty, than the whole kingdome of
the deuill: neither muſt we adde this defperation vnto other our offences;
which [[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=69)
thing Caine added in committing that murder ſaying, Gen. 4. 13. My ſinne is
greater than that it can be for­giuen. This blaſphemous ſpeech which accuſeth
God of vntrueth, and derogateth from him the praiſe of im­menſe mercy, doth
Auguſtine moſt grauely reprehend, ſaying; Thou lieſt Cain, greater is Gods
mercy than the miſery of all ſinners.

#### 13.2.8.

Verſe 12‘Set vp thy ſelfe, O God, aboue the hea­uens: and thy glory aboue all
the earth.’

Like as Rhetoritians in their epilogues or ſhuting vp of their tales will haue
the cheefe arguments repeated: So Dauid repeateth this moſt ſweete litle verſe
in the end of this Pſalme, wherewith hee as it were ſtirreth forth (if I may
ſo ſay) God voluntarily running vppon his ſide: Let thy glorie floriſh, rule,
and raigne, euen to the deſtruction of all epicures ond blaſpheimers. Amen.

## 14\. PSAL. LVIII. ‘Sivere vtique iustitiam loquimini.’

To him that excelleth (Destroy not) a Pſalm [...] of Dauid on Michtam.

### 14.1. The diſpoſition of the Pſalme.

THere are foure parts of this Pſalme: the firſt is, a rebuking of the godly
ones mightily amplified by degrees of miſchiefes, circumſtances, and
fami­litudes: [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=70) The ſecond part
is a prayer, that God would reſtraine and ſubdue tyrants and heretikes. The
third part prophecieth of the puniſhments due to the vn­godly ones, and of
vaine contention, ſo farre as pertai­neth to the effect of the matter. The
fourth part pro­miſeth vnto the godly ones deliuerance. Theſe parts if it
pleaſe you let vs  [...]unne through hereafter.

### 14.2. Pſal. LVIII. And expoſition thereof.

#### 14.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Are your minds ſet vpon righteouſneſſe, O ye congregation? and do ye
iudge the thing that is right, O ye ſonnes of mer?’Verſe 2‘Yea, you imagine
miſchiefe in your hearts vpon the earth: and your hands deale with
wickednes.’Verſe 3‘The vngodly are froward euen from their mothers wombe: as
ſoone as they be borne they go aſtray and ſpeake lies.’Verſe 4‘They are as
venemous as the poyſon of a ſerpent: euen like a deafe adder that ſtop­peth
her eares.’Verſe 5‘Which refuſeth to heare the voyce of the Charmer, charme he
neuer ſo wiſely.’

ALthough mankinde wholly, without theContempt of God in here­tikes and
ty­rants▪ ſight of the Goſpel, and without the holy ſpirit, be both dumme and
deafe, becauſe nature not regenerate, either ſecurely con­temneth Gods
iudgement, or els is full of academicall doubtings, either elſe being
aſtoniſhed with feare, fleeth from God and hateth him: yet in this place
heretikes and tyrants of all ages are by name rebu­ked, when they become
vncurable. For like as Aſpes doe ſtoppe and cloſe vp their eares that they
might not heare the words of the charmers▪ euen ſo heretikes and [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=70) tyrants are ſo
troubled out of their minde and whole bo­dy, that furiouſly they refuſe and
deſpiſe all wholeſome counſels and all godly admonitions: but the cauſes of
this furiouſneſſe are not onely mens willes, couered with an e [...]icuricall
contempt of God, and moſt cruelly ſetting themſelues againſt the preſent
ſtate, of what ſort ſoeuer it be, but much more doe deuils, leaping into the
very hearts of the godly ones, and by their breathings extin­guiſhing light,
and naturall affection in men. Examples of this purpoſe are ſet downe in
Pharaoh, Exod. 14. 8. Antiochus, 1. Mac. 1. 11. the Phariſes, and monks
ofExamples of both. our time, which haue night and day bent and practiſed all
their indeuours to the deſtruction of the true church. But theſe Aſpes at
length by caſting a litle nightſhade or pe­timorell vnto them are therewith
caſt aſleepe. And that I ſay nothing of tyrants, who euer read or heard that
a­ny authour of a lew [...] religion hath bene reuoked from his errour, and
reſtored to a ſound or perfect opinion▪ For like as in the godly ones there
increaſeth ſpirituall light, according to that ſaying in the Prouerbs cap. 4.
verſ. 18, 19. The path of the righteous ſhineth as the light that is brighter
and brighter, vnto the perfect day: but the way of the vngodly is as the
darkeneſſe, they know not where they fall: ſo in heretikes doe in­creaſe
darkneſſe, malepartneſſe and ſ [...]ubburnneſſe, which by no helpe may be
healed. Therfore S. Paul biddeth vs, Titus 3. 16. To ſhunne an heretike after
he hath bene once or twice admoniſhed. Which thing, ſith they ſo  [...]e, let
vs feruently craue of God, that hee would not caſt vs away amongeſt thoſe
veſſelles of wrath, ſuch as haue beene and are all heretikes and tyrants
vncurable. But that he would make vs veſſelles of mercy, whoſe courſe in this
life may edifie to Gods glory, and tend to the welfare of many men▪

#### 14.2.2.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=71)

Verſe 6‘Breake their teeth, O God, in their mouths, ſmite the iaw bones of the
lions, O Lord.’

Hitherto hath the Prophet painted out the image ofDauids pray­er for defence
againſt thoſe his enemies. the vngodly ones, which do all they can to oppreſſe
the manifeſt trueth, and the church it ſelfe. Now he ſets againſt this fury, a
moſt firme defence, namely true prai­er vnto God, whereof Salomon ſaith,
Prouerb. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a ſtrong defence, &c. For, like as
Chriſt vanquiſhed the diuel in the wilderneſſe, not with braſen peeces, but
partly with the word of God, and partly with prayer, Math. 4. So the ſpeciall
weapons of our warrefare are Doctrine and Prayer. Let vs ther­fore craue of
God that he himſelfe would ſubdue the pra­ctiſes of the enemies and vouchſafe
to helpe vs in our ſo great infirmitie.

#### 14.2.3.

Verſe 7‘Let them fall away like water, that runneth apace: and when they ſhoot
their arrowes, let them be rooted out.’Verſe 8‘Let them conſume away like a
ſnaile, and be like the vntimely fruit of a woman: and let them not ſee the
Sunne.’Verſe 9‘Or euer your p [...]tets bee made hote with thornes: ſo let
indignation vexe him, euen as a thing that is rawe.’

In other pſalmes, the vngodly ones and their practi­ſesWhereunto Dauid
com­pareth theſe his enemies in foure kinds. are compared vnto vaine chaffe
which is carried or blowen hether and thether with the winde: againe, vnto
ruſt and vnto graſſe growing vpon the houſe ſide, which before it be plucked
vp, withereth away. Let there be ad­ioyned vnto theſe moſt pleſant ſights of
figures, fiue ſi­militudes recited in this place: whereof, in the firſt hee
compareth the practiſe of his enemies vnto water run­ning away. Which though
now and then it beare great [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=71) ſubſtances, and
ſeemeth to laſt alwaies, yet after a while, being heated of the ſunne, or
blowne of the Eſterly winde runs away ſwiftly. Secondly he compareth the
enemies miſcheuous enterpriſe vnto an arrow or weapon which is broken together
with the bowe, out of the which it is ſent, or els miſſeth quite the mark
whereat it is aimed. Third­ly hee deſcribeth the image of a ſnaile comming out
of the ſhell preſaging ſome harme enſewing  [...]nto him that paſ­eth by, but
ſhee within a while being reſolued into water leaueth her houſe without any
thing in it. Fourthly hee ſetteth downe a ſigure of an vntimely lump or peece
of fleſh, and which is brought forth with daunger of death: For as this
wretched lumpe ſwelleth the wombe, and yet comes not to full ripenes or fulnes
of time: So the con­tentions of the vngodly ones, are burſt off, or euer they
haue halfe effect. Laſtly he compareth the cunning crafts and pleſant
practiſes of the enemies vnto young thornes, which are quite plucked vp by the
trauellers, before they come to their ful ſharpnes: But ſeeing the Hebrew word
Sir, ſignifieth both, the thorne, and the pot, this ſimili­tude may euen in
this ſence be vnderſtood likewiſe. Be­fore your pottes feele the thorne hotte,
or fiery flame, the fleſh as yet rawe, together with the pottes ſhall be
turned vp ſide downe. Now thinke what an Orator the holy ghoſt is, and with
what notable words hee teacheth and comforteth vs▪ that wee ſhould not be
diſcoraged nor enfeebled with the firſt, furious outſhew of our enemies: But
let vs in ſilence and hope looke for preſeruation of the bodie, yea though by
a ſure prouidence of God, ſome members are perſecuted or torne in peeces. Let
vs ther­fore hold faſt this conſolation, and with this hope let vs reuerence
the ſtudies of heauenly doctrine. For, as S. Paul ſaith 1\. Cor. 15. 58. Our
labour ſhall not be vaine in the Lord. but ſhall bring plentifull and
perma­nent fruits vnto vs, and to the church.

#### 14.2.4.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=72)

Verſe 10‘The righteous ſhal reioyce when he ſeeth the vengance. Hee ſhall waſh
his foote­ſteppes in the blood of the vngodly.’Verſe 11‘So that a man ſhall
ſay verely, there is a re­ward for the righteous: Doubtles there is a God that
Iudgeth the earth.’

Theſe laſt verſes conteine a perſpicuous affirmationAn affirmed difference of
Gods iudge­ment in the behalfe of his church a­gainſt her e­nemies. touching
the iudgement of God, diſcerning the godly ones from the vngodly ones. This
affirmation ſhall bee more notable, if in our mindes wee doe behold the
vni­uerſall iudgement, which after a while ſhall followe, wherein the mindes
of all the vngodly ones ſhall be diſco­uered and ſhall bee caſt away damned
into eternall tor­ments, but the godly ones ſhall attaine vnto the long
de­ſired glorie and deliuerance. Then fully and wholly ſhall the church
reioyce beeing deliuered from the guiltie and violence of the deuiles, and
ſhall giue God the praiſe for his iuſt iudgement, yea, ſhal reape and receiue
with great ioy, the fruits of their labours and ſorowes which they haue
ſuſtained in this life. In meane time let vs remem­ber, that the church is for
many cauſes burdened with the croſſe, and that wee muſt not depart from God,
no though deliuerance come not vnto vs by and by. But God ſome­times alſo in
this life ouertaketh the tyrants with puniſh­ment to the end theſe aparant
ſights ſhould be teſtimonies of the iudgement which ſhall folow this life, and
that the church might haue ſome tranquilitie and truces like vnto the Ha
[...]ion dayes.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=72)

## 15\. PSAL. LIX. ‘Eripe me de inimicis meis.’

To him that excelleth (destroy not) a Dſalme of Dauid on Michtam: when Saul
ſent, and they did watch the houſe to kill him.

### 15.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THe application of this Pſalme is afterThe applica­tion of this Pſalme two
folde. two ſorts: One vnto the hiſtorie of Da­uid, touching which the title
ſpeaketh, an other vnto the paſsion of Chriſt, and perpetuall ſcattering of
the Iewiſh nation. For the hiſtorie in the 1. lib. Sam. 19\. ſaith that Saul
beeing vexed and troubled with the flaming fittes or burning pangs of his
furie, as one out of his wits and ſenſes ſent his meſsengers to catch, and
kill Dauid his ſonne in lawe, and one beſt deſeruing in the gouernment of
Iſrael: But Dauid by Gods helpeThe firſt ſigni­fieth the hi­ſtorie of Da­uids
troubles. was deliuered out of thoſe ſnares. Let vs knowe that this hiſtorie
ſetting downe an example of Gods pro­tection was written for vs, that wee (in
dangers which for honeſt and iuſt cauſes doe hang ouer our heades) may craue
and looke for helpe and defence from God, who indeede numbreth all the haires
of our heade. Moreouer, ſeeing the compariſon of familiarity is great betweene
the head and the ſpeciall members of [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=73) the bodie, let
vs reade this Pſalme, as it were a pro­phecyThe ſecond, the hiſtorie of
Chriſts paſ­ſion. of the paſsion of Chriſt our Lord, and of the puniſhment of
the Iewes. For like as Saul perſecuted Dauid with an implacable or
vnpacifiable hatred: ſo the blind and furious Iewes raged with hatred againſt
Chriſt. But as Dauid (when Saul and his familie was extinguiſht, & almoſt
vtterly deſtroied) floriſhed and raigned king of the Iewes, ſo the politicall
gouern­ment of Moyſes lawe beeing vtterly deſtroied, and the Iewes wandering
in perpetuall baniſhment, Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of his Father, and
giueth moſt ample gifts or benefits vnto his church.

### 15.2. Pſal. LIX. And expoſition thereof.

#### 15.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Deliuer mee from mine enemies O God, defend mee from them that riſe vp
againſt mee.’Verſe 2‘O deliuer mee from the wicked doers, and ſaue me from the
blood thiſtie men.’

THe ſame things which Dauid prayed for a­gainſtThe Popes Nero-like crueltie.
Sauls meſſengers, let vs pray for in like maner againſt the popes adherents,
by whom many godly miniſters are for matri­mony cruelly ſlaughtered, when
neuer yet any barbarous nation killed men for the like cauſe. And neither
onely doe they exerciſe Nero like cruelty againſt charchmen, but they kill and
ſlay alſo other honeſt and godly perſons, when they tranſgreſſe any vngodly
law. Theſe bloody perſons, let all godly men (with moſt fer­uent prayers)
craue of God that he would either cal them backe to amendment, if they be
amendable, either els e­uen at the firſt to deſtroy them.

#### 15.2.2.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=73)

Verſe 3‘For loe, they lie waiting for my ſoule; the mighty men are gathered
againſt me, with­out any offence or fault of me, O Lord.’Verſe 4‘They runne
and prepare themſelues with­out my fault: ariſe thou therefore to helpe me,
and beholde.’

Some man peraduenture would aſke, what cauſe ſhould mooue Saul to lie in wait
nights and dayes to ſlay Dauid? Againe, euen ſo, what cauſe ſhould mooue the
pope and his confederates to ſet themſelues ſo cruelly a­gainſt our churches▪
Touching this queſtion, Dauid heere anſwereth, that Saul had no grieuous nor
iuſt cauſe which he might lay for excuſe of his fury: For although Saul burnt
with hatred at the felicity of Dauid, and ſor­rowed ſore to ſee this yongling
to be eſteemed of all men before himſelfe and his ſome Ionathas, euen by Gods
prouidence: yet with no right did he perſecute Dauid, whome to obey he muſt
needes, when God of neceſſity would haue it ſo. Euen ſo our aduerſaries,
although they are diſpleaſed with vs when they are reprooued of their vngodly
opinions and worſhippings, yet can they not but with raſhneſſe and impudency
obiect vnto vs any corruption of doctrine in vs▪ for thoſe things which
weeThat which our Preachers do teach, is a­greeable to the ſcriptures,
Propheticall, Apoſtolicall, and Symbols. [...]eauch touching al the articles
of the Chriſtian doctrine, moſt ſure it is, that the ſame doe agree with the
Scrip­tures propheticall and apoſtolicall, and with the ſymbols or articles of
the Chriſtian bel [...]efe. Therefore like as the Iewes for no iuſt cauſe
hated Chriſt, ſo do papiſts prac­tize (without any cauſe great and iuſt) to
deſtroy chur­ches or congregations religiouſly conſtituted. But tou­ching two
ſorts of iuſtice or righteouſneſſe in the ſeuenth pſalme before it is ſpoken
largely: the one concerning our good conſcience, the other concerning our
perſons. Concerning the righ [...]eou [...]neſſe of our perſon, the pſalme ſ
[...]h 143. 2. Enter not into iudgement with thy ſer­uant, [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=74) becauſe in thy
ſight ſhall no man liuing be iuſti­fied. A two-fold kind of righ­teouſnes.
Firſt, of our perſon. Second, of our cauſe. Againe Pfal. 130, 3. If thou, O
Lord, ſhalt marke ſtreightly what is done amiſſe (O Lord) who ſhall a­bide it?
Touching the righteouſneſſe of the cauſe, let vs holde that ſaying of Paul. 2.
Cor. 1. 12. This is our re­joycing, euen the teſtimony of our conſcience, that
we liue in this world in ſimplicity and godly purenes, and not in fleſhly
wiſedome, but by the grace of God we haue had our conuerſation in this world.
This re­ioycing is needfull before God, when we aſke or craue of God, that he
would helpe a iuſt cauſe, and before men openly, becauſe he confirmeth the
godly ones, and van­quiſheth the victories of the vngodly ones.

#### 15.2.3.

Verſe 5‘Stand vp (O Lord God of hoſts) thou God of Iſrael, to viſite all the
heathen: and be not mercifull vnto them that offend of ma­licious
wickedneſſe:’Verſe 6‘They goe to and fro in the euening, they grinne like a
dogge, and runne about tho­row the city.’Verſe 7‘Beholde they ſpeake with
their mouth, and ſwordes are in their lippes: for who doeth heare?’

Often times in the pſalmes this queſtion is handled; whether we may curſe our
enemies, yea or no? and al­though ſome men make anſwere otherwiſe, yet theſe
three verſes are ſo manifeſt, that they require not long reaſoning of the
matter. For firſt of all, blaſphemy is toA three-fold cauſe why the enemy may
be curſed. be condemned, when immediatly it hurteth the glory of God. Next of
all, blaſphemers are to be accurſed, be­cauſe they ſinne the ſinne vnto death.
Thirdly, wee muſt craue that God would repreſſe errors and their fauou­rers.
Theſe things being thus conſidered, the declaration of the precept deliuered
from Chriſt is eaſily vnderſtoode [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=74) Luk. 6. 28.
Bleſſe them that curſe you; namely, blaſ­phemers which are recouerable, for in
the ſocietie of our enemies ſome perſons there be recouerable.

#### 15.2.4.

Verſe 8‘But thou, O Lord, ſhalt haue them in deriſi­on: and thou ſhalt laugh
all the heathen to ſcorne.’Verſe 9‘My ſtrength will I aſcribe vnto thee: For
thou art the God of my refuge.’Verſe 10‘God ſheweth me his goodnes
plenteouſly, and God ſhall let me ſee my deſire vppon mine enemies.’Verſe
11‘Slay them not leaſt they forget, but ſcat­ter them abroade, among the
people, and put them downe O Lord our defence.’

No doubt of it theſe verſes do prophecie touching theFiue cauſes why Moſes law
was abo­liſhed. remnant of the Jewes people, which after the deſtructi­on of
Hieruſalem, wandered amongſt the nations ſo many yeares. But here let vs
conſider of the cauſes why the politicall lawe of Moſes was deſtroied, than
which, there was none more excellent in al the world. And certs the firſt
cauſe is, for that it pleaſed God to ſet downe1 an horrible or fearefull
example of his wrath againſt the enemies of Chriſt: Touching this cauſe Chriſt
ſaith Luke 19. 44. Becauſe thou kneweſt not the time of thy viſitation. &c.
Therefore in theſe daies let them feare like puniſhments, which either deſpiſe
the pure doc­trine of the goſpel with an Epicuriall contempt, or en­deour what
they can to deſtroy the ſame with an vngodly wilfull ſtubbernes. The ſecond
cauſe is, that the matter2 and euent may ſhew, that the promiſes touching the
Meſ­ſias are not to be vnderſtood conerning a politicall king­dome, but
concerning euerlaſting benefits. The third, to manifeſt that the workes of the
lawe are not righteouſ­nes3 before God. The fourth, that the Jewiſh
prerogatiue4 [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=75) which they had
in their owne nation might be taken away: For if Moiſes his policie, ſhould as
vnto this day haue re­mained, no doubt of this theſe which were conuerted out
of the Jewes would chalenge and take to themſelues a ſingular prerogatiue for
their temple and ceremonies which they had. The fifth cauſe, that the
deſtruction of the ſame policie might witneſſe that Chriſt hath beene preſent
vpon earth. For it behaued that Chriſt ſhould be borne in Bethleem, and in
very deede ſo was he when the policie of Moyſes ſtoode in force. But now more
then a thouſand and foure hundred yeares, the city of Bethleem and the policie
of Moyſes lie ouerhrowen and brought to none effect. Then needefull it was,
that Chriſt ſhould come in the fleſh laug before: All theſe cauſes are moſt
worthie of diligent conſideration.

#### 15.2.5.

Verſe 12‘For the ſinne of their mouth, and for the words of their lippes, they
ſhal be taken in their pride: and why, their preaching is of u [...]ſing and
lies.’Verſe 13‘Conſume them in thy wrath, conſume them that they may periſh:
and knowe that it is God that ruleth in Iacob, and vnto the end of the
world.’Verſe 14‘And in the euening they will returne, grin like a dog, and
will go about the citie.’Verſe 15‘They will runne heere and there: and grudge
if they be not ſatiſfied.’

The cauſe of the perpetuall baniſhment of the Jewes is not any ciuil oſſence,
but a high degree of ſinne, namelyThe cauſe of the perp [...]tuall deſtruction
of the Iewes. Blaſphemie againſt Chriſt and his church: For they call Chriſt a
deceiuer and a malefactor: moreouer they caſt vpp from their hatefull ſtomacks
ſuch bitter railing a­gainſt him, as one ſhippe cannot carrie away. And the
church which embraceth the goſpel touching Chriſt they [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=75) call the people
of Edom, that is crewell and full of blood. For theſe reuilings which they
vſed againſt Chriſt and his church doe they ſuffer greeuous puniſhment and
iuſt puniſhments: For in their baniſhment they wander a­broade as it were
dogges which when the wringing of their belie vexeth them, doe make a horrible
howling. For although they require and looke for doubtfully, a Meſſias, & go
about to ſet vp anew their kingdome; yet neither find they the Meſſias, no nor
yet thogh they burſt themſelues: can they ſet vp againe their ancient
gouern­ment. The hiſtories are knowen touching the ſcoms and out-caſts of the
Jewiſh people, which now and then went about with all indeuor to recouer their
countrie, & reſtore their temple, but their looked for harueſt hath
diſappoin­ted them with a vaine reaping: For other whiles with the Romane
armies, and otherwhiles with horrible prodiges or wonders they were
ouerthrowen and ſcattered abroad as in the 21. Pſalme is before declared.

And that the Jewiſh rabins are not onely blind, but the leaders of blinde,
hereof it may be adiudged whereasThe Iewiſh Rabines, both blinde them­ſelues,
and leaders of the blinde. with a moſt ſcuere decree they forbid, that no man
ſhall deſpute of the time when the meſias ſhall come: whereof indeede God hath
appointed almoſt the time▪ itſelfe in 9. of Daniels prophecie [...]. And how I
pray you do they ſy­cophantically wreſt the moſt excellent prophecies,
touch­ing the natiuitie, paſſion, reſurection, and eternall king­dome of
Chriſt the Meſſias from their natiue and proper vnto a ſtrange and improper
meaning, and ſo all witting and willing do procure darkenes vnto themſelues
and o­thers? Therefore when we reade theſe and other innu­merable ſuch like
things, let vs partly bewaile the blinde ſtubbernneſſe of this moſt wretched
nation, and partely tremble with feare in thinking vpon the wrath of God,
whoſe moſt euident example is ſeene in this out-ſcow­ring or ſcumme of the
Jewes. For, if God ſpared not the naturall branches (as ſaint Paul ſaith) what
ſhall [[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=76)
become of the wilde graffe? Rom. 11. 21. that is, if God poure out his wrath
vpon that people, from amon­geſt whom Chriſt was borne, howe much leſſe will
hee ſpare other enemies and contemners of the Goſpel? Let vs therefore liue in
the feare of God the Lorde, and let vs keepe ſtill the excellent benefit of
the goſpel by the ho­ly ſpirit, leſt the ſame thing happen vnto vs, which
hap­ned vnto thoſe ſame vnthankefull Iewes.

#### 15.2.6.

Verſe 15‘As for me I will ſing of thy power, and will praiſe thy mercy betimes
in the mor­ning: for thou haſt bin my defence and re­fuge in the day of my
trouble.’Verſe 16‘Vnto thee (my ſtrength) will I ſing: for thou (O God) art my
refuge, and my mer­cifull God.’

Two ſacrifices, there are wherein God ſpecially ta­kethTwo ſacrifi­ces
accepta­ble to God: The firſt, thankſgiuing. The ſecond, Mortification
pleaſure and delight: the one is, Thankeſgiuing, the other Mortification, that
is, of true contrition, and of obedience in miſeries, the one and fiftieth
pſalm ſaith, A troubled ſpirite is a ſacrifice vnto God, a contrite and humble
heart, O God, wilt thou not deſpiſe. Of the other kind of ſacrifice wee haue
already often times ſpoken in the Pſalmes, ſo that it would be a thing
vn­pleaſant to ſing that ſong here againe.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=76)

## 16\. PSAL. LX. ‘Deus repulisti nos, &c.’

To him that excelleth vpon * Shuſſhan, * Eduth,Theſe were certain ſongs, after
the note whereof this pſalme was ſung. or * Michtam, a Pſalme of Dauid to
teach: when he fought againſt Aram, Naharaim, and againſt Aram Zobah when Ioab
returned and ſlew twelue thouſand Edomites in the ſalt valley.

### 16.1. The Title.

THere is a great difference betweene2\. Sam. 8. 1. & 10\. 1. 1. Chron. 18. 3.
the gouernment of the kingdome of Iſrael and other gouernements: For though
all good gouernements be or­dained of God, yet this kingdom was by the
expreſſe word of God ordained, and had a ſpe­ciall promiſe touching the
preſeruation thereof vntill the time of the Meſsias ſent into the world. Such
a promiſe hath not any nation now, but after a ſort we know, that God will
giue ſome harbouring places for his church in exile, ſomewhere more, ſomwhere
leſſe. Now think with your ſelf what a benefit it hath bin, that the church of
the people of Iſrael for the ſpace of [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=77) 1500: yeares
and more hath (by Gods prouidence) bin preſerued and defended. How acceptable
a thing were it for vs to know for certaine, & haue it by good proofe
verified, that in theſe countries where the Go­ſpel is now preached, a mean
ſtate of the church ſhuld continue 100. yeares togither? Againe alſo the
ſpeci­allA ſpeciall dif­ference be­tweene the kingdome of Iſrael and o­ther
king­domes. ornaments of other pollicies, wherein ſhineth not true knowledge
of GOD, are laws agreeing with a right rule, iudgements, meane diſcipline,
defence in peace, and wars, and wealth. But theſe things ſerue only for this
life mortall, and do not deliuer a man from ſin and death: But the kingdome of
Iſrael had far greater and more neceſſary and wholſome orna­ments, namely, a
law giuen from God, a promiſe of the Mediator (for which cauſe the truchurch
of God was planted in this people) the ſending of Prophets, the gathering of
the euerlasting Church, manifest testimonies of Gods preſence, ſtudies of the
doctrine of God, and of other good things, true worſhipping of God, and
modesty of diſcipline; theſe benefits exceed all cogitation and eloquence of
man. Last of all we muſt conſider of the finall cauſe of this excellent
polli­cy or gouernment: for although all common-wealths ought to indeuor to
this end, wherof Saint Paul moſt grauely exhorts 1\. Timot. 2. 2. That we may
liue a quiet and peaceable life, with all godlineſſe and honeſtie; yet this
pollicie or gouernment vvas ther­fore ordained eſpecially, that there might be
an Vni­  [...]erſity and Library vvherein the promiſes touching the Mediator
might be preſerued and aduanced, and that the Meſsias might haue a certain
houſhold and [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=77) aſſured lodging
place vvherein he might be borne, wherein he might teach, and being raiſed
from death to life he might beginne a kingdome, whoſe proper be­nefits are to
take away death and giue righteouſnes and life euerlasting. For theſe great
prerogatiues, of right, and worthily is the gouernement of Iſrael compared
vnto a most fragrant Roſe, and a bracelet of gold.

### 16.2. THE ARGVMENT.

LEt vs reading this Pſalme giue God thankes, that as yet, hee gathereth a
church amongſt vs: and let vs craue that hee would preſerue and defend the
harborers of the church. Let vs alſo learne out of this pſalme neceſſarie
doctrine and con­ſolation: For it teacheth, that the wholeſome ſtate of the
church and gouernement is not preſerued or kept in good order, by mans
ſafegards, but by the helpe of God. It alſo promiſeth vnto godly ones, not
onely helpe in great infirmitie, but alſo a ioyfull end of our conflicts and
dangers: For touching theſe things, namely, the helpe of God, and the fruit of
our la­bours, all the godly ones are vehemently troubled with cares. Againſt
this carefulnes hee oppoſeth con­ſolation ſpecially and moſt congruent, where
he ſaith verſe 12. Through God we ſhall do great Acts: That is, God ſhall
helpe vs, and wil bring to paſſe that our la­bours ſhall not be in vaine.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=78)

### 16.3. Pſal. LX. And expoſition thereof.

#### 16.3.1.

Verſe 1‘O God, thou haſt caſt vs out, and ſcatred vs abroade: Thou haſt alſo
beene diſpleaſed, O turne thee vnto vs againe.’Verſe 2‘Thou haſt moued the
land and deuided it: heale the ſores thereof, for it ſhaketh.’Verſe 3‘Thou
haſt ſhewed the people heauie things: thou haſt giuen vs a drink of deadly
wine.’

THeſe verſes conteine a complaint of the croſſe, and dangers of the church:
the church is al­wayes like a Citie which being beſieged round about, is
cruelly aſſaulted of enemies. Alſo oftentimes is it ſharply chaſtized by
reaſon of ſinne, as it was in the Babilonicall ex [...]lement: But amongſt
theſe floods and ſtormes God preſerueth the ſhippe which carrieth his church.
Theſe calamities he here de­ploreth, and withal craueth and aduanceth the
deliueran­ces.

#### 16.3.2.

Verſe 4‘Thou haſt giuen a token for ſuch as feare thee: that they may triumph
becauſe of the truth.’Verſe 5‘Therefore were thy beloued deliuered: helpe me
with thy right hand, and heare me.’

The worde [Token] ſome doe interpret, as touchingA ſignificatiō of the word
Token in tri­umphing. the Arke of the couenaunt which was a teſtimonie of Gods
preſence: For God in that place put forth his oracles where the arke was, and
thoſe not obſcure, doubt­full, wauering wordes, ſuch as were the anſwers of
[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=78) Apollo:
but Oracles aſſured, euident and nothing faile­able touching the greateſt
matters, and heard the pray­ers of thoſe that called vpon him. But other do
apply the worde, Signe, vnto all notable victories and deliueran­ces, which
doe witneſſe, that God hath charge of his church: For the finall cauſes of
deliuerances are to the end the bodie of the church may be preſerued, yea
thoughThe final cauſes and impulſiue cauſes of the deliuering of the church.
ſome members, as ſouldiours fighting in the batle bee ſlaine: againe, that the
preſence of God may be acknow­ledged, and that faith might be confirmed by
ſuch exam­ples. But the impulſiue cauſe in the wil of God is, why he may
helpe: euen that hee may teſtifie of the truth, that is, leſt the light of the
true doctrine ſhould be extinguiſh­ed, and that blaſphemous perſons might be
vanquiſhed and ouercome, which crie out, that the doctrine of the church
differeth nothing from the inuention of their ſects.

#### 16.3.3.

Verſe 6‘God hath ſpoken in his holines.’

The proper glorie of the church is in the preſeruation and propagation of the
true doctrine of God: This marke diſcerneth the ſame from other ſects: For
other ſects are carried about as children with diuers windes of doctrine, and
deuiſe eftſoones newe gods and new wor­ſhipings. But the church reteineth the
true acknowledge­ment, and true prayer vnto God, and according to a cer­teine
rule deliuered from God, directeth all her duties and worſhippings. Hee
therefore that ſpeaketh in the church, let him ſpeake the worde of God, but if
any man teach any other doctrine, let him be accurſed. For like as the rough
arteries in mans body doe ſhunne all things ſauing aire, and doe feare the
ſame, ſo the church with glowing eares abhorreth from all opinions and
worſhip­pings that doe ſtriue with the doctrine deliuered from God: which
onely ſhee heareth, learneth, embraceth, profeſſeth, and alſo ſtudieth to
aduance.

#### 16.3.4.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=79)

Verſe 7‘I wil reioyce and diuide Sichem: and mete out the valley of
Sucoth.’Verſe 8‘Gilead is mine, and Manaſſes is mine, Ephraim alſo is the
ſtrength of my head.’Verſe 9‘Moab is my waſhpot, ouer Edom will I caſt out my
ſhooe: Philiſtia, be thou glad of mee.’

This thankeſgiuing and ſong of victorie, agreeth withA compariſon of Dauids
verſes vnto two ancient pro­phecies of Ia­cob and Eſau. two prophecies,
whereof the one is recited in the 25. of Geneſis, the other in the 49. of
Geneſis. For when as Rebecca had conceiued two twinnes, Eſau and Iacob, God
himſelfe did ſay, Geneſ. 26. 23. the elder ſhall ſerue the yonger. That is,
Eſau the elder or firſt begot­ten ſhall ſerue and obey Iacob the younger: And
in Gen. 49. The moſt holy man Iacob calling to him his ſonne Iuda ſaith verſe
8. Thou Iuda, thy brethren ſhall prayſe thee: Thy hand ſhall be in the neck of
thine enemies: thy fathers ſonne ſhall bowe downe vnto thee, verſe 9. Iuda as
a Lions whelpe ſhalt thou come vp from the ſpoile, my ſonne: Hee ſhall lie
downe and couch like a Lion and as a Lioneſſe: who ſhall ſtirre him vp: But
although theſe prophecies are approoued in purpoſe and euent, when Dauid ſate
at the helme in the gouernment of his people, and ſubdued the Edomites which
were the ſucceſſors of Eſau: yet, the godly ones doe ma [...]ell, and are in
loue with thoſe ſecret prouidences wherewith God gouerneth his church in this
life. For as D. Luther ſaith notably, All the works of God are wrought in
meane contraries. God indeede promiſed it ſhould come to paſſe, that the elder
ſhould ſerue the younger, but a contrarie ſhewe now and then chanced before
their eies. for truely Iacob with­out any certeine abiding place wandred
abroade together with his wiues and children, and yet Eſau in meane time
ſwelling with enuie, and carrying a loftie countenance, [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=79) ruled with
great authoritie in the world: where then re­maineth the euent anſwering vnto
the promiſe: So theThe applica­tion of Saul and Dauid to the foreſaid Iſac and
Ia­cob. firſt King that was ouer the people of God, was not choſen out of the
poſterities of Iuda, but out of the fami­ly of Beniamin, and hee indeuoured
with his whole heart and minde night and day to that end, euen to oppreſſe and
deſtroie Dauid and his familie. Doubtleſſe both theſe ſeemed with a contrarie
countenance to goe quite againſt the promiſe. Therefore let vs learne, that
God by a cer­teine prouidence of his deferre [...]h now and then his
pro­miſes, and at the length tho with an excellent fayth and moſt aboundant
goodnes performeth the ſame, and yet for all that ought wee not to doubt of
his promiſe, no al­beit we ſee a manifeſt contrarie before our eies. For hee
that will ſerue God, it behoueth him to looke for the Lords prouidence, that
is, to beleeue things inuiſible, to hope for things deferred, and to loue God
whether hee ſhew vs a gentle or ſterne countenance, and ſo to
perſeuerExplication of theſe words to the end. It followeth that I now ſpeake
a few words of the place whereof mention is made in the Pſalme. Sichem is
ſituat not farre from the citie of Samaria, norSichem. vnto the hill Garizim,
whoſe name before time was Sa­lem, Sucot. as it is written in the 33\. chap of
Geneſis. Sucot is a place beyond▪ Iordan, at the flood or riuer of
Iaboc.Gilead.Gilead is a hill beyond Iordan towards Arabia Gen. 31. 21. Numb.
32. 1. But therefore maketh he men­tion of theſe places, that hee may admoniſh
the reader touching the teſtimonie of Gods preſence in his church. For God in
Sichem made himſelfe knowen vnto Abra­ham by rehearſing and manifeſting his
promiſe touching the deliuerer which was to come. Ge. 12. 3. Iacob was
comforted & defended at the riuer Iaboc againſt Eſau Ge. 33. 4. At the hil
Gilead, whoſe proper name ſignifieth a heap of ſtones, Laban and Iacob laying
a heap of ſtones together after the ancient faſhion, made a couenant
to­gether. Ge. 31. 44. Touching theſe dangers and deliue­rāces of the church,
the names of the places admoniſh vs. [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=80) Ephraim is the
ſtrength of my head, that is, out of thisEphraim. Tribe, as out of the Troian
horſe, came mighty warri­ours, fuch as haue fought great battelles. luda is
myIuda.Law-giuer, that is, this ſtocke or generation ſendeth forth for my
purpoſe moſt prudent counſellours and go­uernors in thadminiſtration of a
peaceable gouernement. Moab is my waſh-pot. Moab and Edom were coun­triesMoab.
lying neere together in the rocky or mountainy A­rabia, beyond the lake
Aſphaltiten: and he nameth Mo­ab Gen. 19. 37 and 36. 36. to be his waſh-pot,
by reaſon of the watery places: for there is the great flood Arnon, and
certaine other flouds. And Edom that countrey, in the time when Achab
raig­ned,Edom. again reuolted from God. But Iohannes Hucanus when he had
conquered the Moabits or Jdumeans, com­pelled [...]. Mac. 3. 11. them to
imbrace circumciſion and other Jewiſh ce­remonies, out of which nation Herod
afterwards riſing, would be reputed for a very Jew. Theſe changes of
ſer­uitude and reuolting from God amongſt the Jdumeans, did the moſt holy
patriarke Iſac prophecie of long before Gen. 27. 40. Eſau ſhall ſerue his
brother, but at the time appointed he ſhall againe caſt off his yoke. O
woonderfull conſonancy in the propheſies & their euents! which is a notable
teſtimony of Gods prouidence, and a rule of the certeinty of that doctrine
which the church im­braceth and profeſſeth. Philiſtia was a countrey on
thePhiliſtia. Mediterrene ſea ſhore, wherin alſo both thoſe cities Ty­rus and
Sidon were. By this declaration may be vnder­ſtoodCen. 10. 4. and 21. 32. how
farre the borders of Dauids kingdome ſtret­ched, and how truely he
repreſenteth the image of Chriſt: for like as Dauid gaue lawes, not only vnto
his people, but alſo compelled the nere adioyning nations to do that they were
enioyned them; ſo the ſonne of God the eter­nal king gathereth his church from
amongſt both Jewes and Gentiles.

#### 16.3.5.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=80)

Verſe 10‘Who will leade me into the ſtrong city? who will leade me into
Edom?’Verſe 11‘Haſt thou not caſt vs out, O God? Wil [...] not thou, O God, go
out with onr hoſts?’Verſe 12‘O be thou our helpe in trouble: for vaine is the
helpe of man.’Verſe 13‘Through God ſhall we do great acts: for it is he that
ſhall tread downe our enemies.’

He affirmeth clearely, that the cauſe of victory is notThe cauſes of victory
in battels, Gods help, not hu­mane exploits in weapons, nor hoſts of men, but
in the helpe of God: Aiax of whom Sophocles maketh mention, ſayth, Slug­gerds
and daſterds haue need of Gods helpe, but I am able to ouercome, yea, euen
without God. Such a Thraſo or boaſter is not here our prophet Dauid; but he
acknowledgeth all humane helps to be far more vnable, then that they may
defend the policies, or churches. For all wiſdome and vertue of man without
God is vnhappy: and it is not enough to holde the negatiue meaning, tou­ching
the weakneſſe of mans ſtrength: but alſo two aſſir­matiue meanings are to be
holden of vs; one touching the helpe of God, which we muſt oppoſe againſt our
infirmi­ty, the other, touching the wholeſome iſſue of our labors. As touching
helpe, the ſonne of God ſaith, Mat. 10. 20 It is not you which ſpeake, but the
Spirit of your fa­ther ſpeaketh in you. And Paul 2. Phil. 13. ſayth, God
worketh in you to will, and to be able to performe: that is, ſeeing God hath
before helped you in your conuerſion, no doubt of it, he will accompliſh and
finiſh his worke be­gunne. Touching the euents of our labours, moſt ſweet­ly
ſaith Paul 1. Cor. 15. 58. Your labor ſhal not be f [...]u­ſtrate in the Lord.
And in the firſt Pſ [...]l [...]e it is ſaid, All things that they ſhall do,
ſhall haue proſperous ſuc­ceſſe. verſ. 4. And the ſonne of God comforteth vs
ſay­ing, Iohn 15. I am the vine, you are the branches: he that abideth in me
ſhall beare much fruit. verſ. 5. We [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=81) therfore being
confirmed with theſe promiſes, let vs craue of God neceſſary gifts in our
vocation, and let vs ſurely looke for the wholeſome fruits of our labours,
both vnto our ſelues, and to the church.

## 17\. PSAL. LXI. ‘Exaudi De [...] deprecationem, &c.’

To him that excelleth on Neginoth; a Pſalme of Dauid; when he was in danger of
the Ammo­nites, or being purſued by his ſon Abſolon: Here he  [...]rieth to be
heard, deliuered, and confirmed, in his kingdome, and promiſeth perpetuall
praiſe.

### 17.1. THE ARGVMENT.

THis pſalme is a prayer ful of faith, whichThis Pſalme containeth a prayer for
the proſperitie of the ſupreme magiſtrate. the godly minde maketh for himſelfe
and the magiſtrate: For although the godly ones doe feele inwardly feares, and
outwardly fightings as ſaint Paul ſaith. 2. Cor. 7\. 5. yet they being
confirmed by confidence in Gods promiſes, doe craue and looke for benefits
from God. And becauſe the church cannot in this life be without harbours or
ſuccours the prophet here moſt feruently craueth of God, that hee would
pre­ſerue, and defend ſome policies or gouernments which doe harbour and
ſuccour the church. And leſt any man ſhould ſwarue into that opinion, that hee
ſhould thinke praier for the Magiſtrate to bee but a certeine thing
indifferent, let vs ſet downe for vs, and [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=81) in our minde
thorowly perſwade our ſelues touching the commandement which is of God extant
in 1. Tim. 21\. I exhort therefore, that firſt of al ſupplications, prai­ers,
interceſsions and giuing of thanks be made for al men. verſ. 2. For kings and
all that are in authoritie, that wee may leade a peaceable and quiet life in
all godlines and honeſtie. Let vs then obeying this precept, make our praiers,
that it would pleaſe God long to preſerue, protect, and proſper thoſe
gouernours, in flouriſhing and ſound eſtate, which are ſuccourers and helpers
of the church: and that he would gouern them in life, and vocation, vnto the
glorie of his name, and to the pub­lique benefit of his church. Seeing then
God com­maundeth ſo often times, prayer to be made for the Magiſtrate, that
the gouernment may remaine firme, & be fully eſtabliſhed, and that we muſt not
aske that ſinnes ſhould be eſtabliſhed, needeful it is, that poli­tike order
bee a good thing acceptable vnto God, and not to bee ſinne. But I now omit
this diſputation of the inſtitution and approbation of the magiſtrate: Se­ing
all men doe well knowe the good admonition which ſaint Paul gineth vs in the
13. cap. to the Ro­mans form verſe 1. to verſe 7.

### 17.2. Pſal. LXI. And expoſition thereof.

#### 17.2.1.

Verſe 1‘Heare my crying, O God; giue eare vnto my prayer.’Verſe 2‘From the
endes of the earth will I call vnto thee: when my heart is in heauineſſe.’

LIke as phyſicians vſe to ſay, that a mans appetite or ſtomacke by tart or
ſharp ſir­rups is ſooneſt ſtirred vp or gotten; ſo the beſt inſtructer how to
pray, is neceſſity: for in time of proſperity our prayer is colde, but when
all feares and dangers [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=82) doe appeare
imminent, we not onely prepare our ſeluesThe fleſh fea [...]full of the
croſſe, but the ſpirit reapeth comfort ther­by. by all meanes to pray and
deuote our ſelues, but we alſo do crie out. Although fleſh therefore eſchew
and tremble with feare to feele the croſſe, yet the ſpirit reapeth of no­thing
greater profits, then of the croſſe and of calamities, as the 119. Pſalme 5.
part and 7. verſe ſaith, It is good for me, O Lord, that I haue bene in
trouble: that I may learne thy ſtatutes. And in this pſalme Dauid ſaith, When
my heart is in heauineſſe, I will call vpon thee.

#### 17.2.2.

Verſe 3‘O ſet me vp vpon the rocke that is higher then I: for thou haſt bene
my hope, and a ſtrong tower for me againſt the enemy.’Verſe 4‘I will dwell in
thy tabernacle for euer: and my truſt ſhall be vnder the couering of thy
wings.’Verſe 5‘For thou, O Lorde, haſt heard my deſires: and haſt giuen an
heritage to thoſe that feare thy name.’

Seeing nothing is more vncertaine, nor any thingDauids aſ­ſured affiance in
Gods alone defence. more deceiueable then humane helps, I (ſaith he) doe fully
repoſe all the hope of my ſafety in thee the true and liuing God, for thou
both wilt and canſt helpe me: vnto thee therefore, as it were vnto a tower of
defence, doe I flee for refuge, and I doubt not, but dwelling in thy
ta­bernacle, that is, remaining a member of the true church, I ſhall finde &
obteine defence. Of this my carefull con­fidence there are two arguments, in
no point failing: the one an inheritance, which thou haſt giuen to them that
feare thee; that is, the poſſeſſion of the true doctrine, which to aduance and
defend I chiefly deſire: the other, is, becauſe thou haſt often times heard my
prayers at full. Let vs therefore learne out of this place, that wee ſhall
neuer periſh, ſo long as we ſhall godlily and innso­lably keepe ſtill the
excellent inheritance or notable bene­fit [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=82) of the goſpell
giuen from God, and hereunto adioyne our godly prayers, For like as the ſhippe
which carried Paul as paſſenger in her, eſcaping a great wrecke and
ouerwhelming, at length ſaw her wiſhed hauen; ſo no doubt of it, the
congregation which receiueth and h [...]loeth faſt the true doctrine of God,
ſhall yet remaine, yea though all the gates of hell grudge thereat, and,
though they ſend foorth firie flame, and thunder flaſh.

#### 17.2.3.

Verſe 6‘Thou ſhalt grant the King a long life: that his yeres may endure
thorowout all gene­rations.’Verſe 7‘He ſhall dwel before God for euer: O
pre­pare thy louing mercy and faithfulneſſe, that they may preſerue him.’

Hitherto hath the godly minde commended his ſafetyA three fold prayer for the
preſeruation of the ſu­preme magi­ſtrate. vnto God▪ now craues he of God that
the gouernment of the common wealth, for the churches ſake, might be happy,
firme▪ and ſtable. For, moſt true it is, that the poet Euripides ſaid:

Republica male affecta, etiam Res diuinae fiunt lan­guidiores.

The commonwealth once ſicke or ſore,

The churches ſtate doth quaile the more.

Firſt therefore let vs craue of God, that he would grantFor long life and
proſperity vnto our preſent gouernours and rulers long time of life, and helpe
them in gouernment: becauſe, what ſhall come hereafter is vncerteine, and
kingdomes are ofttimes tur­ned into a worſe and worſe eſtate. Againe, that our
Go­uernour may remaine in the ſight of God, both priuately and publikėly, for
ſo farre as to his perſon apperteineth, let him liue in the feare of the Lord▪
and in faith, and let him call vpon God truely, let him ſet forth notable
teſti­monies of confeſſion: and in the rule of his office, let him take away
idolatry and blaſphemies, with godly duties, [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=83) let him further
and help forwards the aduancement of the true doctrine of God: let him be
carefull to ſee youth rightly trained vp and taught in churches and ſchooles,
that there may alwayes remaine ſome holy ſeede. Third­ly, that he may be
mercifull and true, becauſe his throneFor Gods mercifull and true prote­ction.
ſhall with mercy be eſtabliſhed, and not with tyranie. And Salamon ſaith: A
diſſembling tongue beſeemeth not a king. But if any man had rather referre
this mercy and truth vnto God, in this ſence, or to this purpoſe: preſerue,
gouerne, and defend godly gouernours, which are alwayes exerciſed in great
danger and diſtreſſe for thy mercy and truthes ſake; againſt this I will not
diſ­dainfully contend: for both theſe meanings are godly and profitable.

#### 17.2.4.

Verſe 8‘So wil I alwaies ſing praiſes vnto thy name: That I may daily performe
my vowes.’

Saint Paul willeth vs not onelie to make prayers,Prayer and thankeſgiuing but
alſo to giue thankes to God for our magiſtrate: Wherefore here Dauid promiſeth
vnto God, for proſpe­ritie of gouernment, Thankeſgiuing. For ſo much wel­fare
as in gouernment remaineth, that is, by God effec­tually preſerued according
to the ſaying, Pſal. 127. ver. 2. Except the Lord keepe the citie, the
watchman wa­keth but in vaine.

Now vnto the King euerlaſting, incorruptible, in­uiſible1\. Tim. 1. 17. God,
onely wiſe, be honor and glory for euer and euer. So be it.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=18503&page=83)

[Home](/)

Strigel, Victorinus, 1524-1569.. Date: 1595  

